m 

55 

CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 

3 1924 092 570 625 

DATE DUE 

M 

li 

'IS/D \}>^ 

^^^ 

-mtf^^m-wih'- 

PRINTED IN U..S.A. 

(SI PI 

Cornell University 
Library 

The original of tiiis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 

http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924092570625 

POSITIVE POLITY 

LOSDOS : PIUSTED BT 

SPOTTISWOODE ASD CO., NEW-STREET BQDABB 

AND PARLIAMENT STREET 

SYSTEM 

OF 

POSITIVE POLITY 

AUGUSTB OOMTB 

ATITHOR OF 'SYSTEM OF POSITIVE PHILOSOPHY' 

FOURTH VOLUME 

COKTAIKING THE 

THEORY OF THE FUTURE OF MAN 

WITH AN APPENDIX 

consisting of 

MARLY ESSAYS ON SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY 

LONDON 
LONGMANS, GEEEN, AND CO. 

1877 

All rights reserved 

TvtZ 

EEPUBLIC OF THE WEST. 

Order and Progress — Lire for others. 
Live without concealment. 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY, 

OK 

TEEATISE ON SOCIOLOGY, 
Instituting the Religion of HUMANITY ; 

By Augusts COMTE, 

Author of ^System of Positive Philosophy,* 

The principle, Love ; 

The basis, Order, 
The end, Progress. 

FOURTH AND LAST VOLUME, 

Containing THE STKTHETICAL PRESENTATION OF THE FUTITEE OF MAN. 

TIlix cuiichidiiiij rolume ends mUh a GENERAL APPENDIX mldcli rrprmhic 
nil the Early Essays of tlie author on Social Philosojihy. 

PAEIS 
CARILIAN-GOEURY and Vo« DALMONT 

August 1854. 

Sixty-sixth ye;ir of the great revolution. 

339 

NOTICE. 

This volume was published by the Author in August 
1854. 

All the ' Positive Pohty ' has beeu translated by 

ElCHAKD CONGKEVE. 

The General Appendix, published by the Author in 
1854, which contains all the Early Essays ot 
the author on Social Philosophy, has been 
translated by Henry Dix Hutton. 

The Marginal Notes and the Table of Contents have 
been added by the Translators, aided, so far as 
the first part of the volume is concerned, by 
Samuel Lobb. 

The Index is the work of Fredekic Harrison. 

PBEFACE 

TO 

THE FOUETH VOLUME. 

This concluding volume, as its predecessor, has occupied in the 
writing six months of uninterrupted work (January 29 — July 25, 
1854), 

The material difficulties in the way of its publication have 
been met by one of my best disciples, nobly following the 
generous initiative of patronage taken in regard to the first 
volume. As a consequence of the general industrial pressure 
due to the Russian war, my printer felt bound in prudence, 
though with unimpaired confidence, not to advance the money 
required for printing the present volume till the cost of the 
preceding had been fully covered. That volume, however, 
had been too recently published for its sale to be sufficient to 
meet this fair condition, rendered imperative by the force of 
circumstances ; I was obliged, therefore, to apply directly for 
exceptional aid. Once aware of the need, M. Audiffrent lost no 
time in completely meeting it, so that the printing of the 
present volume has proceeded so rapidly that it will appear a 
few weeks after its writing. At first my young patron's 
touching modesty led him to forbid my giving his conduct the 
publicity it deserves ; ultimately, however, by appealing to 
Positivist principles, I obtained the proper authorisation. The 
first and last volumes, then, of my principal work must be 
honourably connected with the names of Messrs. Lonchampt 
and Audiffrent, without ever forgetting the generous anony- 

X PEEFACE TO 

mous supporters who, in 1848, enabled me to publish separately 
the General View. This list of efforts should hand down to 
memory also two similar offers made- me during the other 
phases of my long work, rendered unnecessary though they 
were by the confidence of M. Thunot. 

Thus, beyond my hopes, I see realised the legitimate 
consequences of the resolution, which I adopted and pro- 
claimed in 1850, to devote, viz., for the future the returns 
of aU my writings to meeting the cost of printing, taking 
nothing for personal use. Such anticipation of the habits of 
the future may not have determined the noble advances I 
have mentioned above, but without it I could not have ac- 
cepted them, uniting as it does my patrons with the worthy 
printer whose confidence in me is the main basis on which I 
rest for the free expression of my thoughts. 

Again, this same rule led me finally to a modification of my 
refusal (see the 1st Circular), a refusal warranted by my princi- 
ples, to accept a proposal made to me, as admirable as it was 
exceptional. That Circular adequately expresses the value I 
justly attach to the unparalleled condensation of my funda- 
mental work, the Positive Philosophy, by Miss Martineau. So 
settled is my opinion on this point that, in the last revision of 
the Positivist Library given in this volume, I have definitively 
substituted her work for the original, the study of the original 
for the future being suited only to the theorician properly 
so-called. Without further insisting on this final estimate, 
which merely gives my sanction to the general judgment, I 
must explain my view of the proposal to which the publication 
alluded to gave rise last year. The prevailing literary morality 
is such as to enhance the merit of the scrupulous delicacy 
which decided my noble colleague to assign me the third of the 
net profits of the work ; its printing expenses had been ad- 
vanced by a liberal patron ; of the remaining two-thirds she 
gave one to the publisher, the other she kept for herself. 

At first I felt bound to decline the proposal, as, in its 
original shape, involving a breach of my practice of renouncing 

THE FOURTH VOLUME. xi 

all profit for myself from my books. In the end, however, 
I was able, without infringing this obligation, to meet the 
cordial wish of Miss Martinean, by devoting the money she 
offered to the more rapid clearance of the cost of printing the 
treatise now concluded. My rule thus gains in completeness, 
as all my books are brought, as it were, into one common 
interest, a condition indispensably required and acted on by me 
already, instinctively, in reference to the volumes of the present 
work. 

Over and above its direct object, this explanation, as those 
which have gone before it, is calculated to illustrate the cha- 
racter of the synthesis which presents itself to-day, claiming 
the general direction of this world. In it the conduct of true 
Positivists contrasts, as markedly as their belief contrasts, with 
that of the ill-regulated milieu, the government of which de- 
volves on them — its spiritual government in the first instance, 
then its temporal — as the issue of the whole course of man's 
destiny. For completeness' sake, I must include a reference 
to the posthumous patronage of Wallace and of Lombe, with 
which my readers and those of Miss Martineau must be familiar, 
as also to the protection which M. Vieillard, to his honour, 
procures for the doctrine judged by him the only one capable of 
saving the West. 

The mental indiscipline now prevalent precludes the hope 
that this volume will be always read in its due order, after a 
sufficient study of those which precede it. In itself more 
attractive and more directly practical in bearing, it will bring 
me fresh readers, several of whom will perhaps begin with the 
last chapter, where religion passes into politics. But it is also 
the most systematic ; and so its study will lead to the speedy 
recognition, not merely of the inseparability of its five chapters 
in themselves, but also of their regular connection with the 
whole of my statical and dynamical theories ; it will therefore 
revive rather than lessen the attention paid to the other three 
volumes. I am even inclined to believe that there are students 
of ability waiting (I should do so in their place) for the com- 

xii PREFACE TO 

pletion of a construction which is indivisible before they betake 
themselves to its full examination under all its aspects. They 
were warned of what was coming by the separate publication in 
1848 of the General View. Be this as it may, I do not regret 
the pressure which obliged me to publish each volume sepa- 
rately, and I count on the speedy correction of the imperfect or 
hasty judgments which must often have resulted from an 
undisciplined eagerness. 

As to the style and composition of the work, I must here 
add for completeness something to the explanations on the 
point given in the preface-^ to the first volume. The adverse 
criticisms called forth by the Positive Philosophy, as a literary 
production, had been anticipated by myself ; I was quite aware 
of its defects, though I have never felt otherwise than glad that 
I overcame my scruples on the subject, on grounds the justice 
of which is now indisputable. But, as the necessity for haste 
was past, I exerted myself when entering on the present work, 
to improve the expression, still adhering, however, to my practice 
of re-writing nothing. As yet the most fastidious j udges have 
been satisfied with the increasing success attained by this care, 
and I hope that the last volume will strengthen them in their 
judgment. The literateur has only to clothe the thoughts of 
others, he may concentrate his faculties therefore on perfecting 
his language. He naturally is led by this habit to judge too 
harshly the writer who, compelled to work out new conceptions 
in the old language, can hardly avoid defects in composition, as 
he balances between diffuseness and obscurity. Deeper medi- 
tation, and such requires a first expression as its condition, 
connects the particular creations of the writer with their 
germs in the thought of mankind as represented in its lan- 
guage ; then the defects drop off of themselves, not to speak of 
more preparation on the part of the public. 

To turn to the best account my literary effort, it is desirable 
to state clearly the several rules which in the course of it I 
have imposed on myself, principally in the second half of 
my religious construction, and most especially in the con- 

THE FOURTH VOLUME. xiii 

eluding volume. To avoid too long sentences I have never let 
any exceed two manuscript or five printed lines. The eye 
and the mind require pauses ; this is secured by making seven 
sentences the maximum of a paragraph, nor are these para- 
graphs determined simply by typographical considerations. 
Prose cannot, it is true, aspire to the musical perfection of 
poetry, yet I have exerted myself to approach it by not allowing 
myself any hiatus between even two sentences or two paragraphs. 
Fiurther, I have avoided the repetition of any word whatever, 
not merely in the same sentence but even in two consecutive 
Sentences though in different paragraphs ; allowing always for 
the auxiliary monosyllables. 

Whilst practising these self-imposed obligations, I have always 
felt the importance of applying in all cases Descartes' rule Scru- 
pulously to observe the institutions we create, which he rightly 
likens to laws of nature, however indifferent they may seem at 
first sight. The discipline to which we thus submit is as whole- 
some for the intellect as for the heart, and rests upon a true 
knowledge of the constitution of man, in regard to which im- 
provement depends principally on submission. The literary 
value of this discipline is fully seen in the superiority of poetic 
diction, though more fettered than common language. When 
habit made the new yoke easy I found it a constant source of 
unlooked-for improvements, not merely in style, but even in 
thought. Literary defects are easiest to discover and most 
open to modification, to correct them then is a greater victory 
over the natural inertia of our intelligence, and in correcting 
them we are led to perfect our conceptions as we reflect on their 
expression. 

Taking the volume as a whole, the religious construction 
has become at once more systematic, more moral, and more 
practical, by definitively placing the worship before the doctrine. 
I regret that this correction is subsequent to the composition 
of the Positivist Catechism,^ as it would have increased the 

• This correction has been introduced in the second French Edition and in 
the English Translation. — Ed. 

xiv PEEFACE TO 

efficiency of that work. Without waiting, however, for a second 
edition, the improvement may be effected by dividing into two 
the long conversation on the doctrinal system as a whole. The first 
half, bearing directly on the theory of the Great Being, should 
for the future form a separate chapter and follow on the Intro- 
duction. Then we may pass at once to the study of the worship, 
and after it to that of the doctrine, the general conversation on 
which will thus be limited to its second half, the half which 
alone relates to the encyclopaedic constitution. 

This breaking up of a long chapter allows the adoption of 
the definitive arrangement, the transposition being easy and 
involving no change in the exposition as it exists. I take the 
opportunity to urge the readers of my Catechism to divide 
similarly the last chapter, studying the past, first in its stages 
of Fetichism and Theocracy, which were common to all nations, 
then in the threefold transition which is peculiar to the West. 
By these two changes the small work, which is the organ of 
propagation, should for the future be considered as consisting 
of thirteen chapters instead of eleven. 

So much is sufficient for the explanations peculiar to the 
concluding volume ; I pass to those required by my former 
prefaces. Not tying myself to chronological order, I take the 
second volume first. It leads to remarks which, besides their 
intrinsic importance, tend to systematise and complete the 
general freedom which I have been impelled to assert to the 
full in all my prefaces. 

First, I should state that my third attempt to found the 
Occidental Review has proved a total failure. By making it a 
Quarterly, by renouncing all claim to any payment, either as 
director or as contributor, I had, in 1852, reduced the cost as 
much as possible. Notwithstanding, the money required was 
not forthcoming, either as a collective effort or from individual 
patronage. No one disputed the utility of the undertaking, 
philosophically or politically ; this fresh failure, therefore, has 
led me to abandon the plan for ever, even were some honourable 
patron to remove all financial difficulties. The select public 

THE FOUETH VOLUME. xv 

which I address felt more clearly than I did that there was a 
particular incongruity between the proposal and the general 
tendency of a doctrine, which by its natural action involves the 
suppression of journaHsin. 

The obligation to speak at a given time and within given 
bounds becomes, it is true, less objectionable in proportion as 
the interval is longer, and yet a periodical judgment can never 
be applicable when that which is judged, the spectacle of human 
events, is intermittent. Closing as it does the spiritual inter- 
regnum, Positive religion will naturally put an end to the 
power which, owing to that interregnum, the literateurs of the 
West have occupied. Hence the priesthood of Humanity 
should deny itself all share in an institution which it will 
shortly have to condemn as radically anarchical. The worship 
and its teaching give it opportunities, even now, as much as in 
the normal state, for its oral instruction on the events of the 
day. Beyond general treatises, either original or for didactic 
purposes — ^the work of propagation, and the application, so far 
as they are in writing, require only small works upon particular 
points, and to make them periodical would be an uncalled-for 
incumbrance. Thus was I led to see that the failure, after three 
attempts, of a project which was not based on rational grounds, 
so far from indicating an unwise indifference, was due to the 
secret consciousness that it was intrinsically incompatible with 
the spirit and object of Positivism. I determined, therefore, 
to recall the efforts of all, and the sacrifices those efforts 
involved, to the extension of the sacerdotal fund, the centre for 
the future for aU expenses whatsoever attendant on the instal- 
lation of the universal religion. 

To give its true character to my abandonment of all peri- 
odical publications, I confront it with my anticipation of a 
serious struggle now imminent, in which it would seem that 
the priesthood which is to regenerate the race needs the instru- 
ment I reject. 

The growth of Positivism was long hampered, especially in 
France, by a concerted silence, which still continues in Ger- 

xvi PREFACE TO 

many. Since it has overcome this compression, as a consequence 
of its progress the opposition of the metaphysicians and litera- 
teurs has undergone a transformation. They are incapable, for 
they have no convictions of their own, of resisting the impulse 
towards regeneration ; they therefore try to break its force by 
an attack on my religious construction in the name of its philo- 
sophical basis — not able to see or not williag to own that my 
synthesis is one and indivisible. The very men who long dis- 
puted the possibility of giving philosophy a positive character 
are now doing all in their power to show that the fusion (shown 
to be possible) cannot proceed farther so as to embrace religion. 
The opposition seems the more serious that it has its main 
source in the very quarter, in England that is, where as yet my 
labours have had the best reception. 

But Positivism will overcome the active with more ease than 
the passive resistance, and that without feeling in the one case 
more than in the other the want of a periodical organ. No 
discussion is needed to prove that religion equally with philo- 
sophy, and on the basis of philosophy, can take a Positive cha- 
racter, now that the reconstruction implied in both cases is an 
accomplished fact. All that is necessary is that Positivism 
abandon, and that especially in England, the attempt to convert 
the class which supports the periodical press either by its contri- 
butions or as its readers. Apart from a class which is tran- 
sitional and radically hostile to the separation of the two 
powers, the Eeligion of Humanity will rally the nobler minds, 
whom the constant sense of the paramount importance of social 
objects has not hitherto led to action, solely from the absence 
of a guiding doctrine. The Positive system may become com- 
plete, be condensed, and draw out its conclusions, without any 
opposition from the men of. action; so far from it, they are 
waiting for it thus to qualify itself to direct the necessary close 
of a revolution which the lettered class everywhere tends to 
prolong indefinitely. It was amongst the active class that the 
term Positive religion originated, my own habitual use of it 
being subsequent to my seeing it adopted spontaneously by 

THE FOURTH VOLUME. xvii 

eminent proletaries. Addressing directly its true supporters, 
Positivism will let the partisans of the Parliamentary system 
and of organised hypocrisy continue their futile attacks, never 
allowing them to disturb its normal course. 

As I have definitively abandoned all periodical publications 
I am led to reduce to system the freedom I had adopted in my 
prefaces, and to avail myself of it, as to communications which 
can find no other fitting place. These prefaces are as free as 
any journal or review from any tie of method, and so give me 
the opportunity of fully explaining to my readers such points 
in reference to my whole labours as cannot be embodied in 
the works themselves. So, for the future, this is the plan I 
adopt for occasional communications ; I combine the resources 
offered me by my prefaces with those afforded by my circulars 
and my lectures and shall thus be independent of any periodical 
organ. 

Availing myself of this freedom, I insert in this place an 
important announcement, and then proceed to complete the 
explanations required by my former prefaces. There will 
always be an interval of a year between each of the three 
treatises promised in this volume, a year of rest taken not so 
much to repair my strength as to refresh my conceptions. 
During each of these intervals, a course of lectures will take the 
place of a published volume, the said course never to be repeated. 

In accordance with this rule, I shall devote my period of rest 
in 1855 to the construction of the Concrete Philosophy of 
history, by a full exposition of the dynamical part of the Con- 
spectus of Sociolatry given in this volume (page 141). Prior to 
such exposition of the main constituent of the second philosophy, 
there will come a summary of the first philosophy, and conse- 
quent on such exposition, an aperi^u of the third, the whole 
forming an Esthetic Course of Positive Philosophy. It will 
consist of forty-three lectures, of two to three hours each, three 
days in the week (Tuesdays, Fridays, and Sundays), at noon 
precisely, from Sunday, April 15, to Sunday, July 22, 1854. 

I m.ay now proceed with the explanations required by the 
VOL. IT. a 

XVlU PEEFACE TO 

prefaces of the three preceding volumes, either as corrections or 
completion. 

Those relating to the first two volumes bear more particularly 
on two judgments which have come into closer and closer con- 
nection, though without fusion ; I allude to my estimate of the 
advance of Positivism and the extension of the sacerdotal fund. 
Bringing them at once under view, I must here dispel the 
illusions as to the centres of Pbsitivist action which I involun- 
tarily spread on the faith of incorrect reports. It -will be 
seen that there was never any question as to the Parisian 
centre ; there I could, by direct contact, judge of the complete- 
ness and firm cohesion of mens' convictions. That centre 
alone, offers already but the beginning, it is true, but all turns 
on that beginning, of the true regeneration, a regeneration to 
the full as social in character as it is intellectual, both sexes 
nobly co-operating. Diderot and Condorcet could not have 
hoped that, within a century from the Encyclopaedia, their 
successor would be uniting noble couples in the engagement of 
eternal widowhood, and would be consecrating to Humanity 
children wholly detached from God. Obscure and limited as 
such results may be, their bearing is incontestable, completed 
as they are by the higher moral tone of the families regene- 
rated. They are an announcement, that the capital of the 
human race wiU at no distant period belong to the Positivists, 
when liberty in spiritual matters shaU allow of their prac- 
tising their public worship as freely as their private prayers 
or their domestic sacraments. 

Out of Paris, the supreme centre, the Eeligion of Humanity 
at the present time has but two other nuclei of a satisfactory 
kind ; one, in Holland, is essentially practical in its character, 
the other, in Ireland, is mainly theoretical. This latter, though 
of more recent formation, already shows itself worthy of the 
former by the completeness and coherence of its convictions 
the philosophy with it passing into the religion. Everywhere 
else. Positivism has as yet only isolated adherents, even amongst 
the Anglo- Saxon race, in England or America, where there is 

THE rOUETH VOLUME. xix 

the greatest aptitude for association, and the freest access for 
our propaganda. With the exception of some individual con- 
versions, as rare as they are valuable, the Religion of Humanity 
has not yet reached the southern constituents of the West, and 
yet it is with them that it will ultimately attain its greatest 
popularity. In the provinces of France, it has but three secon- 
dary centres ; contrary to my hopes, these remain purely in ■ the 
nascent state, and have no importance as yet save what attaches 
to their respective heads. 

The extension of the sacerdotal fund, set forth in the Fifth 
Circular, is a measure of the growth of Positivism. With the 
exception of the centre and the two nuclei, that fund is princi- 
pally drawn from individual subscriptions, and there are but 
few of them as yet in the British public, though Positivism is 
widely known. Its English adherents are too abstract, and are 
content to propagate the new philosophy without helping its 
founder to meet the privations he suffers from an infamous act 
of spoliation. Their indifference is thrown into stronger light 
by the conduct of the noble opponents who, in the midst of the 
most anarchical of Western nations, feel it a social obligation 
to assist anyone who worthily devotes himself to the task of 
spiritual reorganisation. In spite of this honourable exception, 
the security due to the continuous increase of the sacerdotal 
fund is owing to its coining mainly from complete Positivists, 
now that the revolutionists have fortunately given me up. 

Their conduct in this respect reminds me of the confirm- 
ation given by two characteristic facts to the anticipations, as 
stated in the preface to the third volume, of the growing 
hostility of the party towards me. The aversion which Posi- 
tivism excites in the minds of the German or British meta- 
physicians may vent itself in discussions, because they consider 
themselves competent to discuss the new synthesis. But the 
revolutionary party in France, too conscious of its incompetence 
for such an effort, can gratify its hatred only by calumnies, the 
object being to lead the people to turn away from me without 
axamination. They have spoken of my address to the Czar as a 

a2 

XX PREFACE TO 

dedication of the third volume ; forgetting that the whole work 
was from the very beginning placed under a patronage which 
excludes any other homage. The same party again I hold 
responsible for the hypothesis — I have no language to express 
it — which assigns misconduct on my part as the ground of my 
persecution at the Ecole Polytechnique : degraded, in its own 
way, as the body which robbed me is, it would not venture on 
such a calumny from fear of its easy refutation. 

Such are the arms to which, in its struggle with the religion 
of order and progress, is reduced the most noxious and the most 
belated of existing parties. It alone denies the need of a 
spiritual reconstruction, which it feels itself incapable of giving;' 
it bends its efforts to concentrate the aspirations of the people 
on the direct attainment of material reforms, and these reforms 
are principally destructive. Unacquainted with the more im- 
portant advances made in the nineteenth century, it would 
solve the .difficulties of the West with the religion of Voltaire, 
the philosophy of Condillac, the moral system of Helvetius and 
the political theory of Eousseau, rejecting Hume, Diderot, and 
Condorcet. 

Little ground is there for surprise if, with the exception of 
younger minds, estimable though mistaken, all men of any 
value are more and more abandoning a party which is under a 
radical misconception as to the work to be done. I am glad to 
say here that, after the hesitation mentioned in the preface to 
Volume III., M. Etex seems to be definitively under the influence 
of the tendencies to synthesis and sympathy which originally 
led him to Positivism. At a time when everyone oscillates and 
rebels, there is a special ground for excuse in the case of artists, 
more impulsive and less fettered than the theoricians and 
practicians. 

Such is a sufficient explanation of the points peculiar to this 
preface. I must use it to discharge an extraordinary obligation 
imposed on me by the manifesto annexed to its predecessor. 
The books intended to be sent were not sent, no answer what- 
ever having been received to the not« which I mentioned 

THE FOUETH VOLUME. xxi 

asking for the proper authorisation, however, this act of 
rudeness from a ruler absorbed in the G^ek Empire does not 
interfere with the communication ; it may be considered to have 
taken place now that my third volume is published. 

I feel no regret at having taken the Czar Nicholas as a type 
of the conservative, who being empirical might become syste- 
matic. The judgment may be too favourable of him ; if so, it 
may suit his successor, adapted as it is to the position which 
they fill. My choice of such a mode for bringing under the 
notice of eminent practicians a complete summary of Posi- 
tivism, shows how completely I have risen above revolutionary 
prejudices and habits. So far as the anarchists are concerned, 
the Eussian war has only enabled them to give free scope to the 
dislike they feel for a manifesto calculated to facilitate the 
propagation of the regenerative doctrine. Be this as it may, the 
letter was a real event, which in its historical character I shall 
be bound always to respect, even if ultimately obliged entirely to 
alter my judgment of the present Emperor of Eussia. 

But blameable as his foreign policy is at present, it may not 
cancel as yet the honourable efforts of a quarter of a century to 
better the internal condition of his immense empire. The 
favourable character of my original opinion warrants me in 
warning the Czar that, by persistence in his error, he will annul 
in the judgment of posterity the claims accumulated by a long 
career. This is the danger to which all practicians are exposed, 
from their services being transitory in nature and limited in 
extent, and therefore seldom of such value as not to be effaced 
by really grave misconduct. Intellectual results, as of wider 
range and greater permanence, alone ensure a distinction which 
no subsequent degeneracy of their authors can effect. There- 
fore it is that the practician can rarely be judged in his life- 
time, whereas the theorician need not wait for death to bring 
him an indestructible glory, supposing his work admits of an 
adequate judgment. 

Were the conduct of Eussia an aberration of the nation, I 
should not be justified in attempting here to set it right. But 

xxil PREFACE TO 

in spite of appearances, I persist in believing that, as indicated 
in my previous preface, the error is the error of the individual, 
and lies in his not withstanding the foolish and guilty impulses 
of his misguided advisers. As a consequence of the disastrous 
policy originated by a misdirected energy, the Czars live in the 
midst of G-erman adventurers ; and it is these adventurers alone 
who are urging the Eussian nation to attempt a conquest, the 
great object of which is to secure for themselves in the south 
more advantageous grants than their northern domains. The 
suggestions of these adventurers, having no root in the popular 
feeling, might at any time cease under an Emperor of energy, 
prior to their occasioning struggles with other nations such as 
those by which they have been hitherto kept down. We must 
hope, then, that wise remonstrances will determine the Czar 
Nicholas to desist from an encroachment at variance with his 
own tendencies, and m.ore unwise than at any former time. 

One conclusive comparison ought to suffice to enlighten the 
Czar on the danger of his attitude, which is in direct opposition 
with the whole current of ideas prevalent in this century. The 
heir of the dictator who disturbed aU Europe for the gratifi- 
cation of his misguided ambition formally acknowledges that the 
age of conquests is closed for ever. Whereas the successor of 
the autocrat who broke by a noble effort the yoke which had 
become intolerable, stains his mature years by an act of usurp- 
ation analogous to that against which he fought in his youth. 
Eetrograde abroad, the latter tends to be retrogade at home ; 
whilst the former, by regenerating his foreign, wUl be shortly led 
to modify his home, policy. Forty years ago, the West coalesced 
against the compression exercised by the French nation ; it is 
now rallying under its leadership to check the encroachments of 
a power which at that time directed the Holy Alliance, the 
avowed object of which was to found miiversal peace. 

The whole past of Eussia should show the Czar the radical 
flaw in his present aberration, and at the same time calm the 
Western nations as to its real danger. Whilst yet heathen, the 
Eastern Scandinavians attempted the conquest of the Greek 

THE FOURTH VOLUME. xxiii 

Empire, and were repulsed by its unaided forces. By embracing 
Byzantine Christianity, they signified their acceptance of the 
law of permanence in regard to their settlement, just as their 
Western brothers did by the adoption of Catholicism. By such 
acceptance they devoted themselves essentially to peaceful 
activity, and they lost at once their enthusiasm and their dis- 
cipline under the influence of an abortive monotheism. Whilst 
Catholicism and Islam sanctioned, the first, the separation, the 
second, the fusion of the two powers, Byzantinism never reached 
any social result, in consequence of the radical contradiction 
between its dogma and its regime. 

To place in its true light the Eussian disturbance, we must 
explain how it runs directly counter to the whole course of the 
international policy, which since the close of the Middle Ages 
more and more secures the status quo. The judicious efforts of 
modern diplomacy have regulated the relations of the different 
nations as far as they could, considering the decay of the 
Western priesthood. Uninterrupted by the great struggles of 
Europe, the influence of diplomacy has always strengthened the 
dispositions and habits of peace by insisting upon a mutual 
respect for the actual situation, whatever it was. With a sound 
instinct, it refers to the Peace of Westphalia, as the decisive era 
from which dates the salutary power which is vested in it, till 
such time as the spiritual power of Positivism shall have defini- 
tively reorganised the West. It was in truth a noble triumph, 
the division then effected of the West between Catholicism and 
Protestantism, by the prevention or repression of all attempts 
to secure by arms the supremacy of any one of the beliefs which 
arose out of the spontaneous decomposition of the mediaeval 
defensive Monotheism. 

These various faiths have been a constant source of division 
not only for nations, but for towns and even families, yet the 
diplomatists have everywhere attained this result: that the 
powers have renounced, as a point of their external policy, all 
attempts to restore unity, its re-establishment being left solely 
to religious efi'orts. A line of action such as this, grounded on 

XXIV PEEFACE TO 

the natural growth of scepticism, has induced a general sense 
of the necessity of looking for spiritual agreement to a doctrine 
which should rise above all the discordant creeds. No govern- 
ment, Catholic or Protestant, has since that epoch tried to 
conquer, in a spirit of proselytism, without being at once 
driven by a league of all the states to abandon so unwise 
an attempt. 

Two centuries before the Peace of Westphalia, a still more 
capital division had in the natural course of events received a 
tacit sanction on analogous grounds. The philosophy of 
history, throwing light on the period anterior to the action of 
diplomacy, parallels the division of the Roman world between 
Catholicism and Islam, with that of the West between Popery 
and Protestantism. Once the Crusaders had definitively se- 
cured the Western nations from a Mussulman invasion, their 
natural dispositions towards the Turks and Greeks had free 
play ; they could allow the social antecedents of the two, as 
a whole, greater weight than the influences of theological 
belief. The Crusades had completely satisfied the Latins that 
the Byzantines were incompetent to the task of self-guidance ; 
through them it became clear that the Mussulmans were 
qualified to be the successors of the Eomans in governing a 
population which could never accept discipline. Vain were 
the entreaties of the Greeks for half a century, the West 
respected the mission of Islam ; the declamations of the poets, 
constant as they were, never prevented the formation of 
alliances between two regimes, each equally suited to its 
peculiar circumstances, and the inference from such alliances 
was unmistakable. 

The indication is sufficient. It shows to what an extent 
the Eussian action disturbs the existing order, when, in the 
name of a faith which is everywhere extinct, it would set aside 
the compromise on which rests the whole of Western policy 
since the close of the Middle Ages. Supposing Austria or 
Prussia to wish to force on one another Catholicism or Protest- 
antism, on the ground of German unity, the Czar, if need 

THE FOURTH VOLUME. XXV 

/I 

were, would assist France and England in enforcing respect for 
the existing religious status quo. Can he hope to be allowed to 
perpetrate a more serious infraction of that status, disputing the 
definitive settlement of four centuries ? It was from classical 
sentiment rather than theological affinity that the Western 
powers decided to destroy the Turkish navy in order to aid the 
Greek insurrection. The error they then committed they are 
now repairing, by respecting the general current of modern 
traditions, with no prejudice to their appealing earnestly to the 
sense of justice inherent in the Monotheism of the dominant 
race. 

I miay hope then that an attempt, in which no success is 
possible, will shortly be abandoned with dignity, avoiding 
further waste of valuable resources — resources which Humanity 
enjoins on all to employ in bettering our condition and raising 
our nature. If this is the event, the Russian incident will have 
brought out, undesignedly, the definitive predominance of the 
habits of peace, and the imanimity of the Western world in its 
wish to preserve undisturbed th©.unparalleled harmony of forty 
years (dating from 1815). Ill-considered aims apart, the 
priesthood of Humanity relies on the wisdom of the diplomatists 
to take measures, that a war, undertaken in a holy spirit against 
war, do not degenerate and violently disturb in some quarter or 
other the political or religious status quo. It hopes that the 
Western governments will feel how important it is not to 
interfere with the natural break-up of a factitious aggregation. 
No one of those governments has its hands sufficiently clean in 
relation to other nations to be justified in taking the initiative 
in rectifications, such as will come at no distant period, in 
obedience to the sociological law of the gradual disintegration 
of the great states. If their action be so limited, the episode 
will have illustrated the fraternity which underlies all Western 
differences, for it displays the heir of the man who wished at 
any cost to destroy the English constituent of the West nobly 
presiding over the alliance between France and England to 
secure the peace of the world. In this way we gain a sense of 

sxvi PREFACE TO 

the soundness of the Positivist anticipation that the army will 
be transformed into a constabulary, for the military power in 
this case accepts as au honour a task which has exclusive refer- 
ence to the police of Europe. 

On the other supposition, that from a foolish obstinacy the 
struggle is embittered and prolonged, it would throughout 
Europe lead to consequences ultimately favourable to the 
intellectual and social' regeneration of the race. If, the regular 
armies proving inadequate, the nations of the West had actively 
to interfere, no power but the Eeligion of Humanity could unite 
them against barbarians invoking Grod. Already, as it is, the 
coalition of Protestants and Catholics, to preserve the Mussul- 
man from the Byzantine invasion, clearly proves that, in spite 
of some ignoble mummeries, the West is acting on purely 
human motives, leaving the theological to the more belated 
nations. Scepticism and hypocrisy are powerless for any great 
or durable inspiration ; therefore if the struggle were to assume 
its largest dimensions, its direct tendency would be to divide 
the world between the theological belief with its sanction of 
war and the Positivist with its systematic organisation of 
peace. The constructive would soon show the destructive 
element what a power there lies in industrial existence to secure 
superiority in war, supposing an exceptional case in which it 
were necessary thus to divert industry from its true purpose. 
But I need not discuss further a possibility which has no pro- 
bability in its favoiur, since the official beliefs are as really 
worked out with the invader as they are with the protector ; 
enthusiasm at the present time being only possible in defence 
of our native land. The affair must remain one of everyday 
character, nor will it leave any other trace than the final ex- 
tinction of the Eussian prestige, the only plausible motive for 
maintaining armies in the West. 

It is in connection with my last preface that I here intro- 
duce these summary remarks on an episodic event, availing 
myself of it to show the competence of a systematic policy to 
form a sound judgment on the most unforeseen cases. The 

THE FOUETH VOLUME. xxvii 

only other correction needed in my manifesto is to place in a 
better light the contrast between the attitude assumed by the 
rulers of the East and the governments of the West respectively. 
The Eastern rulers may be progressive in their internal policy, 
but their tendency to be retrograde in their external, shows 
that such merit as they have is solely due to the fact that they 
preside over nations as yet preserved from the revolutionary 
spirit. Once let the remarkable sect, which for the last half 
century has been decomposing Byzantinism, make a decided 
progress, and the internal policy of the Ozars will be more 
oppressive than their external, unless they have been ade- 
quately regenerated by Positivism. I must express my regret, 
then, that in my manifesto I spoke of the Western statesmen 
as inferior to the Eastern, not taking sufficiently into account 
the anarchical tendencies which compel them in internal 
matters to give a retrograde character to their scepticism, whilst 
it is free from it in external. There is little ground either for 
anticipating, that- any Czar will duly understand the vantage 
ground his position gives him to illustrate and to perfect 
himself by offering Positivism a protection such as that which 
the great Frederic was wise enough to grant to Encyclopeedism. 
The partial sympathies which for thirty years I have not unfre- 
quently awakened in Western statesmen leave me the ulterior 
hope of shortly meeting with an adequate appreciation on their 
part ; an appreciation rendered possible only by the treatise 
lately finished. 

AUGUSTE COMTE. 
(10 Eue Monsieur-lo-Prince.) 

Paris, 15 Dante, 66 (Sunday, July 30, 1851). 

PEEFACE 

TO 

THE SECOND VOLUME. 

The general preface -whicli stands at the beginning of the preceding 
(first) volume required several explanations to complete it. In 
placing those explanations in the preface to the second volume, I add 
no remarks peculiar to it, only making a special claim for a deep and 
sustained attention commensurate with the importance and the difficulty 
of the subject. If the transitional character of the time in which we 
live makes it impossible for most of my readers to bring to the study 
of sociology a sufficient encyclopasdic preparation, nothing can absolve 
them from the duty of approaching it with those dispositions and habits 
which are recognised as necessary for the study of the less complex 
sciences. Such as do not offer these conditions, would do well to 
abstain from speculations which, as a consequence of their eminence, 
must gradually be confined to some few intellects who will afterwards 
make known their principal results. This recommendation applies 
particularly to the present volume, entirely devoted to the most abstract 
theories of the most difficult science. 

Notwithstanding that, in order to diminish the material difficulties 
that beset me, I both publish and sell the four volumes of this treatise 
separately, they are so closely connected that they can never be rightly 
studied or appreciated apart. It is literally impossible that anyone 
should master the present volume who had not first familiarised himself 
with the essential notions of the preceding one. Nor can the concep- 
tions I here state be fully understood until their historical develope- 
ment and their practical destination have been successively explained 
by the two later volumes. 

All the explanations of this supplementary preface concern two 
subjects, henceforth inseparable, my personal position and my social 
mission. Both are made clear by the three ' special communications 

' The circular is suppressed, which is a fourth in the original. 

XXX PEEFACE TO 

which I shall add by way of appendix to this preface, but which will 
require some previous remarks bearing on this twofold subject. 

Since the publication of my first volume, the spoliation begun, 
when, two years ago, my principal office at the Ecole Polytechnique 
was taken from me, has been finally accomplished by my exclusion 
from the subordinate post 1 had continued to hold. This consumma- 
tion of my ruin officially, foreseen and foretold by me irom the begin- 
ning of my persecution, is, as was its first step, the work of the implacable 
hatred which my philosophic works excite in the so-called scientific 
mind, allowing for changes of persons and coteries. Government has 
never taken any active part in it, save when an energetic minister, 
(M. le Mar^chal Soult), exerted himself nobly though unsuccessfully 
to protect me against a misinterpreted legal form. But the cowardice 
of my academic persecutors has ever led them to shelter themselves 
from public blame under the official responsibility of a power which, by 
our pedantocratic prejudices, is obliged, however unwillingly, to act as 
a passive instrument in their hands. In order the better to prevent or 
to remove any unjust judgment, it is my duty to state here, that this last 
iniquity was specially due to the persistent manoeuvres of the worthy 
couple of Algebraists with respect to whom my previous preface guards 
against any involuntary misapprehension. Nevertheless, their vile 
intrigues would not have succeeded, without the decisive aid which they 
found ready to their hand in the ignoble spite of a famous dealer in 
subjective planets, who is invested, in our anarchical situation, with a 
fatal influence in the ficole Polytechnique. In this utterly degenerate 
school, where the pupils themselves have fallen, morally as well as in- 
tellectually, to the level of their teachers, the practical functionaries 
alone, military or administrative, are now worthy of esteem. From 
them, notwithstanding frequent individual changes, I have always met 
with honourable though unavailing courtesy, a fair sample of the con- 
stant disposition of the power they represent. Immediately after this 
last blow, the present noble head of the administration expressly sig- 
nified to me this precious sympathy in a letter which I shall always 
preserve as an invaluable piece of evidence. But in this miserable in- 
stitution, all the practical authorities are more than ever oppressed bv 
the pedants who govern them, the only change in their tyrants being 
the substitution for the rude empiricism of so-called engineers the 
narrow mysticism of algebraists. 

This complete ruin, after nineteen years of irreproachable service, 
atones at last for the grave imprudence which I committed when I placed 
my material existence at the mercy of my natural enemies. Until that 
period, my independent private teaching of the mathematical sciences, 
had procured me a sufficient though precarious livelihood, practically 
out of the reach of academic influences. Following a too worldly advice, 
I abandoned, in 1832, this independent profession for a public office. 

THE SECOND VOLUME. xxxi 

though I had already foreseen the internal struggles to which it would 
expose me. Those whose blind affection induced me thus fatally to 
yield, must have regretted since that the inflexibility with which I 
am reproached did not then assert itself. However, this early fault 
being now involuntarily repaired, it should prevent me from seeking 
and even from accepting any other official situation, in which I must 
always be exposed to the similar animosities which must be aroused by 
the spiritual discipline which my doctrines tend to establish. 

But the works I have accomplished during this long period give 
me now a right to demand openly of the public of the West some 
material protection, sufficient to enable me to complete the great 
construction, in the first place philosophical, afterwards religious, to 
which my life has been constantly devoted. Since this last spoliation, 
I rejoice in having no other shelter against poverty than the noble 
annual subscription originally set on foot as a temporary aid. Although 
hitherto inadequate, I doubt not that, in becoming henceforward per- 
petual, it will reach the requisite sum. In this conviction, I have not 
hesitated to stamp with, the gratuitous character, normally belonging to 
them, all my services. At first confined to my popular teaching, I next 
extended it to my philosophical compositions, and I shall now make it 
embrace the quarterly contributions to be announced in this preface. 
The founder of a new spiritual power should offer, at the risk of some 
temporary embarrassments, a decisive example of the only mode of 
material existence consistent with the true dignity of the priestly office. 
Until the progress of the positive religion has led the munificence of the 
public to guarantee the existence of the priests of Humanity, without 
prejudice to their social independence, they ought always to live by 
the free contributions of their adherents, as was long the case with the 
priests of God. The blind hatred of my wretched enemies has gra- 
dually driven me to this completely normal position, which, without 
some such action, had never perhaps become sufficiently decisive to 
enable me to make the most perfect use of the ten years of full cerebral 
vigour which I may yet consecrate to the real Great Being. 

This final situation is so consonant to my nature and my office 
that, of short date though it is, it has already become profoundly 
familiar to me, owing to its favourable daily influence. The present 
volume, notwithstanding the great difficulties peculiar to it, has just 
been written, without hurry or fatigue, in the first third of the present 
year, excepting only the opening chapter, composed in January 1851, 
and read, in February, to the Positivist Society. I feel myself thus 
able to write a volume each year, in the interval between two of my 
weekly courses of lectures, since my position secures me at last, at the 
age of fifty, such a complete freedom of time and strength, as till now, 
I have never enjoyed. If then, as I am inwardly persuaded, the 
Western public does not forsake me, I may venture to guarantee the 

XXXll PREFACE TO 

worthy execution of the four great works which I promised when ter- 
minating, ten years ago, my fundamental work, and this without 
trenching on the period of rest which ought to separate each of them. 
Even before proceeding to the third volume of the present treatise, I 
count on publishing at the close of the year, an exceptional com- 
position, calculated to facilitate the systematic jiropaganda of 
the Eeligion of Humanity, — the Positivist Catechism. This secondary 
work I bad not thought to accomplish till after the termination of the 
last volume. But whilst writing the present one, I felt that, when it 
should be finished, I should be able to realise this episode, urgently 
called for by the gravity of the "Western situation. This earlier execu- 
tion of so necessary a work is specially due to the decisive maturity 
which the final religion attains in this volume, a maturity surpassing 
the hopes I formed during my oral elaboration. 

To attain the full security which is my just due, it was necessary 
to ensure the immediate publication of all my writings. Now since, 
in accordance with my principles, I have renounced all so-called 
literary property, this last guarantee has followed as a natural fruit of 
the emotions excited in those around me by my exclusive devotion of 
myself, without any reward, to my fundamental office. The preface to 
the preceding volume announced the generous resolution with which a 
noble disciple (M. Lonchampt) had come forward to remove the 
material obstacles which, for a whole year, retarded the publication of 
that volume, I must here complete my announcement by chronicling 
the scrupulous fulfilment of that loj'al engagement, even beyond any 
ordinary expectation, so that the printing expenses of the first volume 
are all paid, though its sale has up to this time produced scarcely one 
third of the amount. At a time when right>-minded practical men are 
at once so precious and so rare, the Western public will rejoice that this 
noble young man, whose exceptional modesty has enabled him to over- 
come the theoretic temptations incident to a brilliant youth, wisely 
chooses an industrial career whence may arise a distinguished Positivist 
patronage. 

Although his decisive intervention seemed limited to the preceding 
volume, it has led to an equivalent security for the three others, un- 
hoped for by me, and, as a consequence, doubtless, for all my future 
works. Scarcely was this example known, when the second volume 
became the object of a similar offer from the noble adherents to whom 
I was indebted, in 1848, for the printing of the first edition of the 
' General View.' Another generous proposition was recently made to 
me in regard to the same volume. But I publish it now without aid 
from either of these sources, which may thus be reserved for ulterior 
difficulties. For my honourable publisher (M. Thunot), though well 
aware of my personal poverty, has, unsought, offered me his valuable 
co-operation, without requiring any other guarantee than my scrupu- 

THE SECOND VOLUME. xxxiii 

lous resolution to apply all the proceeds of the sale of my books to the 
simple payment of their expenses. His printing office, admirably 
directed by a soldier returning to the peaceful citizen life, has just 
accomplished this work with an unexampled promptitude and correct- 
ness, which deserve my special acknowledgments here. 

As will be seen from this twofold explanation of my personal posi- 
tion, to which correspond the ' two first parts of the following appen- 
dix, I may hope that the trials which await ray future life will never 
affect my fundamental office. At the same time, the progress of 
Positivism of late increases my confidence in the efficacy of all my 
eflforts. 

Among the signs of this progress subsequent to the preceding 
volume, I must first note with gratitude a valuable result, arrived at by 
comparing its actual total with the decisive dedication, which five 
years before, was the secret germ of it. All synthetic minds now feel, 
as do all sympathetic hearts, that in this exceptional outpouring of 
emotion were contained all the essential elements of that vast moral and 
religious developement which Positivism has subsequently acquired and 
which is its most marked feature. This characteristic manifestation 
has already given me a foretaste of incomparable satisiaction, by elicit- 
ing from both sexes sympathies of the highest order for my sainted 
patroness, whose individual claims to public veneration will soon be 
^pronounced superior to those of the gentle Beatrice. 

The first volume, whilst establishing the previously contested fit- 
ness of Positivism for its most decisive destination, has equally refuted 
the superficial charge to which the publication of the ' General View ' 
separately gave colour, that I had given up intellectual progress. 
Brilliant additions to theory, especially in Biology, have proved that the 
increasingly sympathetic spirit of Positivism reacts favourably upon its 
synthetic developement, conformably to the sound theory of the brain. 
The fresh steps in all the .sciences accomplished in the present volume 
will henceforth silence this frivolous objection, except in critics, who, 
as being incompetent or hostile, shall never engage my attention. 

At the same time, the natural developement of the Western situation 
has led to fuller manifestations of the characteristic aptitude of the 
Positive religion to meet the requirements, hitherto irreconcilable, of 
order and progress. Last summer I knew of the existence, and since 
then I have had full information, of the valuable Positivist centres which 
have arisen amongst eminent American conservatives, especially at 
Philadelphia and New York. A situation unlike any other forbids in 
America all political recourse to the various forms of material repres- 
sion, and even to theological influences, the principal organs of which 
are necessarily the directors of the metaphysical agitation. Thus pre- 

' See note at p. xxix. 
VOJL. IV. b 

xxxiv PREFACE TO 

served from the double illusion which vitiates our official routine, our 
American brethren have appreciated more justly the real character of 
the Western anarchy, more dangerous with them than in Europe, 
despite appearances to the contrary. Consequently they have earlier 
felt how impossible it is to overcome the communistic tendencies which 
are the natural outcome of all our social impulses except by the free 
rise of Positivism, the only doctrine universally capable of procuring a 
reasonable satisfaction for the various instincts of regeneration. This 
sole issue of our perilous transition is already rightly conceived by 
the noble American citizens, who more and more earnestly invoke the 
Positive religion in the name of an order profoundly undermined, 
whilst they accept beforehand the proper moral discipline which it 
imposes on the rich. 

The tendency of this vast appendage of the West towards 
Positivism may be specially verified in the loyal reception the new 
religion has there met with even from its declared adversaries. One of 
the principal quarterly reviews has published, in the January and 
April numbers of the present year, a valuable appreciation of my 
fundamental work by a worthy antagonist. The generous tone of his 
articles, whilst he freely expresses his dissent, contrasts favourably with 
that of our psychologists, or ideologists, and even with the coldness to- 
wards myself of my too purely theoretic adherents. Such treatment 
led me shortly to take a step foreign to my habits, in order to obtain 
the avowed contributions of such opponents to the voluntary subscrip- 
tion which is as yet insufficient for my material support. J am the 
more glad that I wrote the letter which I subjoin, that it has recently 
brought me an admirable reply, in the handwriting of my noble critic, 
who, though himself straitened in means, generously takes part in this 
voluntary patronage, which he qualifies as a social duty. 

But the progress of Positivism simultaneously in the other camp of 
the West is no less decisive. Of this our recent success amono-st the 
proletaries of Lyons may give the measure. Specially guarded from 
all anti-domestic theories by the peculiar imperfections of its industrial 
constitution, this noble and unhappy population had spontaneously im- 
bibed from its family-life a strong predisposition to Positivism. The com- 
munistic agitation has only prepared it more thoroughly for those social 
questions which the universal religion alone can solve. Hence a few 
eminent apostles have been enough to develope in that city, in less 
than a year, under the fair protection of the temporal authorities a 
Positivist nucleus of the greater value that it will soon become the 
centre of a vast propaganda in the South of Europe. 

This recent quickening into life in two quarters of the religion 
destined finally to reconcile order and progress, is powerfully aided by 
the irrevocable step just made in our republican situation. From its 
futile parliamentary commencement, fit only for the English transition 

THE SECOND VOLUME. xxxv 

our republic passes by its own impetus to the dictatorial phase, the only 
one really suited to France, though equally suitable to the other Catholic 
populations, as may be seen in Spanish America. The approaching 
resumption of my annual lectures has given me an opportunity of 
specially appreciating this promising modification, and the new strength 
it gives to Positivism. I have already treated of this twofold subject 
in a decisive letter, fully sanctioned by my civic patron, a letter which 
forms the second part of the appendix to this preface. It might have 
saved me all further explanations on this subject, but for the serious 
anxiety since occasioned by the deplorable fatuity of an individual. 

Our profoundly negative state leaves a certain scope to any bold 
initiative, whether in the direction of anarchy or retrogression, on the 
part of a man rightly placed for it. But the various perturbations 
which seem possible and even imminent, never occur to their full 
extent, at least not in the most important cases. Although the living 
no longer acknowledge the yoke of the dead, they are none the less 
bound by it, and it is our preservative against the greatest dangers, 
though it fails to preserve us as completely from the fears which they 
arouse. A future conceived so vaguely can only inspire with sufficient 
confidence those intellects whose genius for systematization has 
enabled them to invest it for themselves with a more definite character 
by the help of a sound appreciation of the past, the modern past above 
all. From the very birth of the republic, I proclaimed it to be irrevo- 
cable, though subject to frequent modifications politically, and yet that 
it would long appear precarious, until a common doctrine should give 
unity to our action. This security may be compared to that which 
relates to the peace of the West, which, notwithstanding its unexampled 
duration, never preserves our empirical confidence from the disquiet 
arising from the least shock, though the event always proves the alarm 
groundless. So also we shall see the waves break and disperse which 
threaten our republican situation. For the whole of the French past 
rejects royalty as much as war. Henceforward, true citizens have no 
more cause to fear a monarchical retrogression than a parliamentary 
anarchy. These two opposite forms of constitutional government are 
equally effete in the present day. The republican situation has 
become the primary condition of material order, by the fact of its being 
the only form of government which admits of an energetic dictatorship. 
However I deplore the temporary checks upon discussion in 
France, our deliverance from the anarchical bondage of the arrogant 
and intriguing talkers who disturbed our meditations is a profound 
relief to me, as great as, though more unhoped for than, that when the 
incubus of monarchy was shaken off in 1848. The two burdens are 
in my opinion equally things of the past. A strong personal aberra- 
tion, to which our lack of social faith seems to leave free play, could 
only bring about the realisation, more or less speedy, of the eventuality 

b2 

XXXYl PREFACE TO 

I allude to in the beginning of. my manifesto. Still, though a civic 
foresight must not overlook this possibility, we must avoid such pre- 
occupation with it, as would destroy the vigour of those decisive 
meditations on the true order of the West which the republic under a 
dictator everywhere inspires. The natural play of ofSoial checks, at 
home or abroad, will perhaps stifle these mad tendencies before they 
give rise to any serious disturbance. True it is that a state of chronic 
insurrection of country against town, which is already beginning, will 
characterise in most countries the last phase of the Western anarchy, as 
I predicted at the close of my philosophical treatise. But in our case 
we may avoid this special developement of a very modifiable destiny, 
if the Parisian proletariate, the spontaneous director of the great move- 
ment, will timely act upon the valuable lesson their own political 
anxieties may already teach them. For those anxieties make evident 
the profoundly retrograde character of the negative metaphysics to 
which, discredited though they be, they are still in bondage. The revolt 
of the living against the dead is now leading the West to throw its 
weight into the scale of the most coarse and eiFete influences, from 
which we can only escape by again, and voluntarily, ranging ourselves 
under the banner of the past. Thus the fundamental condition of true 
social progress consists at this time in the complete rejection by the 
central population of all the outcome of revolutionary ideas, whether 
doctrines or men, as henceforth equally retrograde and anarchical. 
When it shall have made order certain by passing from negativism to 
Positivism, following the noble example, already given by some eminent 
workmen of Paris and Lyons, it will have earned the right to forbid its 
■republic, the only real basis in the West for the necessary armistice 
between the poor and the rieh, from being put to the vote. But then, 
I dare assert, in the name of the past and the future of which I am as 
yet sole interpreter, no dictator will retain a trace of monarchical ten- 
dency. For in the clear light of a most synthetic ofBce, the fear of 
anarchy alone could prevent a dictator from discerning that the repub- 
lican situation is as indispensable to real power as to true glory. In 
the statesman who has just happily delivered us from the parliamentary 
regime, it would be an especially glaring and dangerous inconsistency, 
were he, to gratify a childish vanity, to endeavour to re-establish a 
constitutional monarchy. 

This short notice naturally leads nie to the final announcement 
which forms the special object of the last part of the subjoined appen- 
dix. In fact, the foundation of tire Revue Occidentale will dispense me, 
I hope, from the necessity of using the opportunities my prefaces or my 
lectures afford me to give the public various incidental explanations, 
which would be better placed elsewhere. 

The great importance, intellectual and social, and the general 
accordance with my principal elaboration, of this periodical form of 

THE SECOND VOLUME. xxxvii 

teaching, made me desirous, so early as 1845, of establishing it. But 
its utility was not felt widely enough for me to obtain the funds re- 
quisite for the five years' unfettered trial I then judged indispensable. 
The republican situation permitting me, in 1848, to reduce this trial 
period to three years, the same difficulty beset me. But the dictatorial 
phase calling up more serious dispositions and making the urgent need 
of a sound direction of the judgment of the West more evident, I 
feel it my duty to make one more attempt, limiting myself to quarterly 
issues. This last change, with my own renunciation of all payment, 
reduces as much as possible the cost of guoh an undertaking. If then 
it is still unseconded I shall think no more of it, though I shall con- 
tinue to hold myself ready to direct it when its conditions shall be 
fulfilled, and even myself to furnish a fifth or a fourth of each number. 

Though I have sufficiently explained the distinction and character 
of the three parts of my appendix, I must not close this preface with- 
out a pleasing personal detail, the importance of which will soon be 
felt by all complete, that is to say, religious Positivists. 

The ' General View ' and the whole of the present treatise manifest 
equally the profoundly artistic tendency of Positivism and the great 
assistance its establishment must even now receive from those brilliant 
I'unctions which best represent human nature in its unity. Still I have 
never concealed the fact that this inevitable sympathy must develope 
itself later than the valuable aid coming first from the instinct of the 
people and afterwards from the feeling of women. Nevertheless, the 
systematic reason which is to guide the West has obtained earlier than 
I had hoped this complementary sanction, by the decisive adherence of 
an eminent artist, M. A. Etex, predisposed to Positivism by a nature of 
remarkably synthetic power. 

AUGUSTE COMTE. 
(10 Eue Monsieur-le-Prince.) 
Paris, 11 Csesar, 64: 

(Sunday, May 2, 1852.) 

TO 

Dr. J. M'CLINTOCK, 

EDIIOE OP ' THE MBIHODISI EETIEW,' NEW TOEK. 

Paris : 7 Homer, 64. 
(Wednesday, i February, 1852.) 
SlE, 

I have just read in the number of your ' Methodist Review ' 
for January 1852, received last Thursday, an appreciation of my funda- 
mental work by an eminent adversary, a conscientious appreciation, not- 
withstanding some involuntary mistakes, numerous but fortunately 
secondary and therefore such as may be duly corrected later. This 
noble treatment, to which the French press has but too little accustomed 
me, induces me now to extend to such opponents the recent personal 
appeal to the public of the West, which, I may mention, is the com- 
plement of that of 1848, honourably mentioned in this remarkable 
article. Were I acquainted with the anonymous author, I should be 
glad to send it direct to him, with the expression of my sincere grati- 
tude. But I hope, Sir, that you will be sc good as to act as the medium 
between us, and to accept also for yourself one of the two accompanying 
copies of my circular. I congratulate myself, then, on this rare and 
passing infringement of the successful cerebral regime which, for several 
years, makes me systematically abstain from all papers and reviews 
whatever, in order to concentrate my habitual reading on the true and 
always fresh masterpieces of Western poetry, ancient and modern. 

Public morality now requires that this despairing cry of unmerited 
distress should clearly resound across the Atlantic, the better to cha- 
racterise both the persistent lukewarmness of my friends or partizans, 
and the ignoble bitterness of my persecutors of the Academy. And 
irrespective of our common Occidentality, I cannot consider myself 
personally as a stranger in a republic to which, in 1816, I was on the 
point of emigrating at the opening of my philosophical career, under the 
honourable patronage of the kind General Bernard, and, indirectly, of 
the noble President Monroe. Putting that aside, this communication 
wiU make clearly known the deplorable extremity to which he who, 
after founding Positive philosophy, is now constructing on this solid 
basis, and that beyond the promises quoted by my loyal adversary, 
the Eeligion of Humanity, is reduced, in the very scene of his long life 
of social devotion. 

xl PREFACE TO 

Of all the clergies sprung from the decomposition, first spontaneous 
and then systematic, of Western Monotheism, that of the United States 
appears to me, upon the whole, the only one which now possesses a true 
spiritual power, that is to say, an authority at once intellectual and 
moral, always resting on the free assent of a public emancipated fi:om 
all outward constraint. If it is socially not more efficacious in the 
work of modern reonranisation, I impute this failure neither to the 
ministers themselves nor to the population, but chiefly to the irrevoc- 
able weakness of a religion incapable by its very nature of really em- 
bracing the great whole of the existence it ought to systematize, even 
though limiting its sphere to the individual life, essentially inseparable 
from collective life. Endowed with equal advantages, I dare affirm 
that Positivism would ere this have secured the whole of the West 
against anarchy and retrogression, judging from the results which I 
have obtained, in the centre of the agitation, by means, of the small - 
ness of which the present communication may give you a precise idea. 

No American would have imagined that, at the present period of 
my life, it would be impossible, aiter three years' efforts, to place at my 
disposal the moderate sum of 7,000 francs a year, 2,000 francs of which, 
as every one here knows, I scrupulously set apart for the payment of 
an annuity which I regard as incumbent on me. I do not then 
hesitate loyally to invoke the aid of generous adversaries, who will 
perhaps make up for the culpable torpor into which, with some admir- 
able exceptions, French, Scotch and Dutch, my so-called disciples, 
almost throughout the European West, continue sunk, especially those 
of France and England. If the members of the American West should 
shame, by a striking contrast, the anarchical conduct of those of Europe, 
I should doubly rejoice, first, for the good use of the ten years of full 
vigour of brain I can still devote to Humanity, and further for the 
practical consecration of universal Morals, which I have always aspired 
to place on a solid basis by the foundation of a new spiritual power, 
the worthy heir of the admirable Catholicity peculiar to the Middle 

In order. Sir, to reassure you as to the unbroken continuity of 
peaceful activity which such a situation would seem to threaten, I 
should be glad to send you, as well as my noble anonymous adversary, 
the first volume, published in July 1851, of my second great work, 
specially promised when I concluded the first, ten years ago. This 
system of Positive Politics will consist, according to that first and 
accurate announcement, of four volumes. Of these I am now writing 
the second, which will probably appear next July, and the two others 
at the same season of the next two years. If you will be so good as to 
enlighten me on material ai'rangements, of which I am strangely 
ignorant, by informing me how I may best send you all these volumes, 
you shall shortly receive the two copies above mentioned, of the first 

THE SECOND VOLUME. xli 

volume, already known to some Americans. And you may accept this 
little philosophic present, as a small mark of my esteem, without 
scruple, for I am myself the publisher of my book, and may therefore 
distribute all the copies of it at my pleasure. Meanwhile, 1 add to my 
circular the Cerebral Table, which sums up my positive theory of human 
nature, the most available result of this new volume. I send also the 
philosophical programme of the systematic course of lectures I have 
been delivering ibr three years past, to a voluntary audience of both 
sexes, with the honourable authorisation of the only government which 
has hitherto fully respected my just spiritual independence, the laborious 
and tardy conquest of my indeiatigable devotion. You may thus, as a 
philosoplier, obtain a consoling verification of the power of modern 
civilisation entirely to transform the persecuting instinct itself: hence- 
forth it is reduced to attacks on property, life and even liberty having 
escaped its range. 

In consequence of this long and scrupulous career, more homo- 
geneous perhaps than any other known to us, I have acquired a 
iixed hatiit of living entirely as in the eye of the world, according to 
the true republican principle. Therefore, Sir, if you think it would 
be of use to make this circular and even the present letter known, 
I leave to your friendly judgment the degree of publicity to be given 
them, provided the text be strictly reproduced without curtailment. 
Nevertheless, I desire that you will be so good as to consult first, on 
this point, the eminent citizen of Philadelphia, who has now become 
my chief temporal patron, without ceasing to be my noble spiritual 
client, Mr. Horace Binney- Wallace, too well-known to need any further 
address. 

Health and fraternity. 

AUGUSTE COMTE. 
(10 Eue Monsieur-le-Prince.) 

xlii PEEFS.UE TO 

TO 

M. VIEILLAED, 

SENATOK OE IHE FBDNOH EEPUBLIC. 

Paris : 3rd Aristotle, 64. 
(Saturday, 28th February, 1852.) 

Sir, 

When in the month of October last, I gave the last lecture 
of my Philosophical course on the general history of Humanity, which 
I have been delivering, for three years past, under your civic patronage, 
I gave notice that I would deliver the first lecture of the fourth course 
on the same subject, on the first Sunday of April next, according to 
my yearly custom. But before talking with you on this subject, I 
think fit to send you some written explanations, as to the new cliaracter 
it is my wish to give to the whole of this fourth course ; one better 
adapted to the altered situation of our Eepublic. You may regard 
this letter as a previous summary of the political exposition which will 
form the first part of my opening lecture ; in the portion of it which 
relates to morals I shall then describe the final regime as directed by 
the Eeligion of Humanity ; whilst in its philosophical conclusion I 
shall indicate the spirit and the plan of the great historical construction 
upon which this final regime is based. 

Our last crisis has, it seems to me, carried the French Eepublic for 
ever beyond the parliamentary period, suitable only to a negative 
revolution, into the dictatorial period, the only one in harmony with 
the positive revolution, from which, as a consequence of tbe decisive 
alliance of order and progress, the gradual termination of the disorder 
of the West will issue. Even should the abuse of the dictatorial power 
be such as to compel, before the time fixed, a change of its principal 
organ, this sad necessity would not really reestablish the power of any 
assembly, except perhaps for the short period required for the excep- 
tional advent of a fresh dictator. 

The theory of history of which I am the originator, makes it evi- 
dent that through the whole of the French past the tendency has ever 
been to the predominance of the central power. This normal disposi- 
tion would never have been interrupted, had that power not at length 
assumed a retrograde character, in the second half of tlie reign of 
Louis XIV. Hence ensued, a century later, the complete abolition of 
French royalty ; and irom that, in turn, the temporary ascendancy of 
the only assembly which was destined to be ever really popular amongst 

THE SECOND VOLUME. xlii'l 

us. Even its sway was owing to its wise subordination to the energetic 
committee which formed itself within its bosom to direct the heroic 
defence of our Eepublic. The need of a true dictatorship to take the 
place of royalty was soon felt, so fruitless was the anarchy which our 
first trial of the constitutional regime was encouraging. Unfortunately 
this indispensable dictatorship soon took a profoundly retrograde di- 
rection, combining the servitude of Prance with the oppression of 
Europe. It was solely as a recoil from this deplorable policy that 
French opinion tolerated subsequently the only serious trial which 
could be made amongst us of a regime peculiar to the English situation. 
So ill did it meet our wants, that, despite the blessings of peace through- 
out the West, its official existence for one generation was more fatal to 
us than the tyranny of the empire ; perverting as it did the intellect 
by accustoming it to constitutional sophisms, corrupting the heart by 
-venal or anarchical habits^ and degrading the character by a growing 
familiarity with parliamentar}- tactics. 

In consequence of the fatal absence of any real social doctrine, this 
disastrous regime continued to prevail, under other forms, after the 
republican outbreak of 1848. This fresh situation, which was of itself 
the guarantee of progress, and concentrated all serious anxiety upon 
order, under both aspects required the normal preponderance of the 
central power. But on the contrary, it was the opinion of the day 
that the elimination of a futile royalty ought to lead to the complete 
triumph of its antagonist. All those who had taken an active share in 
the constitutional regime, whether in the government, the opposition, 
or the conspiracies of the time, ought, four years ago, to have been 
banished from political life for ever as unable or unworthy to guide our 
Eepublic. But by a blind enthusiasm, to these very raen was confided 
the working of a constitution which was the incarnation of parliament- 
ary omnipotence. Universal suffrage extended to the proletariate 
even those intellectual and moral ravages which had hitherto been 
confined to the upper and middle classes. The central power, instead 
of regaining its due preponderance, was thus deprived of the prestige 
of inviolability and of perpetuity, and yet remained the constitutional 
shadow over which these attributes had previously thrown a veil of 
illusion. 

Eeduced to this extremity, this indispensable power has fortunately 
now asserted itself and risen with energy against an intolerable situa- 
tion, as disastrous for us as it was degrading. The popular instinct 
has allowed the anarchical regime to fall without lifting a hand in its 
defence. The feeling is growing in France that constitutional forms 
are only reconcileable with a so-called monarchy ; and that a dictator- 
ship is what our Eepublic is calculated for and demands. And the 
wisest of the ten constitutions proclaimed since 1789 has moreover 
placed on a regular footing our present republican dictatorship, in such 

xliv PEBFACE TO 

a way that it can be peacefully modified to meet the real wants of 
society, and by the light of normal theory. 

This new phase of politics allows us at length to devote our 
energies to the working out of an universal reorganisation. Previously, 
the only question actively fermenting in the public mind was that of 
progress isolated from that of order, its very root intellectually as well 
as morally. Such a thesis, as irrational as it is immoral, could only 
be entertained by talkers, repelling alike thinkers and the men of 
action. An inane form of metaphysics, feeling itself incapable of deal- 
ing seriously with the immense question of order, had actually attempted 
to stiiie it, by giving a legal support backed by material force to the 
revolutionary dogmas which any really organic doctrine must begin by 
excluding. But this question of order, which can never be dissociated 
from that of progress, having in the republican situation at length 
asserted itself — and no other situation allows and calls for its complete 
solution — nothing can henceforth arrest its growing preponderance, if 
there do but exist in our social environment the doctrine really able to 
direct such an elaboration. Now you. Sir, know better than anyone, 
how truly this competence is possessed by the positive philosophy 1 have 
constructed. 

When, ten years ago, I concluded my fundamental work, I therein 
laid down all the essential bases of a really historical policy, in which 
the conception of the future rested at last on the appreciation of the 
past, in accordance with a sound theory of the whole of the human 
movement. But this policy could not be taken into account by 
practical men until it bore so definite a shape as to be applicable to 
the present Western transition, so as to preside over that indispensable 
intercalation between the preparatory and the definitive stages of 
Humanity. Such was the principal object of the public course of 
lectures I gave in 1847, and which your feeling as a citizen induced 
you to honour with your constant presence. This complementary 
process was then accomplished as fully as was possible, under the con- 
ditions of the monarchical situation ; with an application even then of 
my fundamental motto. Order and Progress. The republican outbreak 
having, the following year, scattered the mists of official falsehood, I 
was at once enabled to work out, and even to make public, this new 
policy, openly destined henceforth to direct the Western movement by 
setting aside for ever all other doctrines theological or metaphysical, 
as both anarchical and retrograde. A great advance, both as to deve- 
lopement and propaganda, characterised the annual course, the per- 
mission to deliver which you so kindly procured for me from the only 
government which has hitherto freely respected my just spiritual inde- 
pendence, the long and laborious conquest of a devoted life. 

But this public exposition and this direct propaganda naturally 
presented two distinct phases. In breaking up the different existing 

THE SECOND VOLUME. xlv 

parties in order to absorb them into the true constructive party, Posi- 
tivism ought equally to attract all those respectable conservatives who 
are not essentially retrograde, and all those honest revolutionists who 
are not radically anarchical. But these conversions cannot be simul- 
taneous in the two classes as a rule. It is the instinct of conservatives 
in general to reject any great innovation, lest they in their inorganic 
state should chance to give in their adhesion to any of those really 
dangerous doctrines which now abound. And yet a thorough reorgani- 
sation requires the renunciation of all those ancient doctrines which, 
whether by their weakness, or by their violence, have been the cause 
of the existing anarchy. Thus the regenerating philosophy is abso- 
lutely obliged to address itself first to the revolutionary party, who alone 
as yet have shown that they are not averse even to a radical change of 
opinion, if only the metaphysical prejudices peculiar to tlieni can be 
overcome. It is therefore to them that I have principally directed my 
action during the three years which have just ended, in a situation too 
very stimulating to the activity, too often ill-regulated, of such minds. 
You are already aware of the signal successes which the Positive school, 
small though it yet is, has achieved in this part of the social camp. 
Still I think it advisable to state here the decisive result which marks 
these successes, and proves that this first operation has been effectually 
carried out, and that the efforts I am now about to make in the oppo- 
site camp are opportune. 

In the fundamental discourse in vrhich, in 1848, 1 gave the ' General 
View ' of Positivism as presented in my course of lectures of 1847, I 
reduced the difference between the new school and all other reforming 
sects to the order in which each separately conceived and treated the 
two great questions of the West, the regeneration of education and the 
systematisation of labour. Positivists are the only men of the time 
■who, putting the spiritual problem before the temporal investigation, 
would make an intellectual and moral renovation the basis of industrial 
reorganisation. All other reformers, despite their innumerable diver- 
gencies, agree in reversing this order, and would proceed to the tem- 
poral reorganisation of society, without any previous discipline of 
opinions and customs. It would be superfluous to insist further to you 
on the glaring opposition of principle and of conduct which such a 
transposition involves. In referring to it here, my object is to give a 
standard by which to measure the value of true conversions from the 
revolutionary party, which to be complete must not stop short of this 
difficult inversion of the point of view. Now this change has actually 
been made by some eminent workmen capable of spreading it by their 
unaided exertions, and so setting me free henceforth from this duty. 
In fact you rightly appreciated, in our pleasant interview of November 
28, 1851, the admirable resolution of the ci-devant communists of 
Lyons recently converted to Positivism. In answer to the metaphysical 

xlvi PEEFACE TO 

sophisms of two representatives on their anarchical tour, they solemnly 
declared that the moral regeneration of the people must precede their 
material enfranchisement. 

Such a success allows, and even obliges the sound philosophy and 
the true religion to devote their chief social efforts henceforth to sincere 
conservatives. The two may now be able so to overcome their in- 
stinctive repugnance ; since crucial experiences have demonstrated 
the inherent power of Positivism thoroughly to discipline the most 
ardent revolutionists, by obtaining from them the acceptance of order 
in the name of progress. I must then, henceforth, specially develope 
the second part of my social mission and obtain the free acceptance of 
progress in the name of order, by making it my chief care to remove 
the misgivings of the conservative party. Such will be the characteristic 
feature of my next course, in a situation which at length ensures the 
question of order its normal preponderance. At a time when progress 
consists especially in construction, I may hope to secure a satisfactory 
appreciation of it as but the necessary developement of order. 

Whatever academic talkers may say, this immense question is 
undoubtedly both stated and conceived in too narrow a sense by those 
honourable practical men who alone treat it seriously. Nevertheless, 
it ought to be easy for me to succeed in showing how wide a field it 
embraces, as a consequence of its eminently synthetic nature. Having 
been able so far to overcome revolutionary prejudices as to convince 
them of the close connection in which, through intellectual progress, 
material and moral progress are held, I shall still more easily demon- 
strate the similar connection that exists between the three corresponding 
manifestations of human order. All who are sincerely bent on pre- 
serving material order in the midst of our intellectual and moral 
disorder, are already feeling that their task will soon become impossible, 
if the spiritual reorganisation be not steadily pursued. This conviction 
even leads them in their want of systematic guidance to invoke as a 
social influence, the Roman Catholic religion, the only quarter from 
which they see any hopes of the discipline they require. But this cry 
of despair disjoined from any sincere belief does not prevent a secret 
feeling of the radical powerlessness of a doctrine which, since the close of 
the Middle Ages, has allowed the break-up of opinions and habits, and 
has not even been able to avoid compromising all that it seeks to protect. 
Experience, private and public, shows us with increasing clearness 
that the state of revolt in which our modern intellect exists can only 
be ended by a completely positive philosophy, the only power com- 
petent in the present day to establish fixedand common convictions based 
upon real demonstrations, and finally to substitute the peaceful deter- 
mination of duties for the stormy discussion of rights. Positivists 
seek, even more zealously than Catholics, to set aside for ever all 
metaphysical influences, which only lead to endless oscillations. Our 

THE SECOND VOLUME. xlvii 

aim is, like theirs, to bring back the West to a universal religion, 
thoroughly competent to guide and unite both our intellects and hearts, 
and failing which our modern anarchy will find no issue. Demanding 
free scope for their doctrine, with the profound veneration which its 
ancient benefits excite in us, we ask an equal freedom for our own 
but without expecting from them an equal justice. When these 
demands are granted, it will be for the practical men, in public and in 
private life, to make a wise choice between the two religions, a choice 
determined by their social efficacy, weighed by reason and observation. 
I may therefore expect that Government will not cease to afford my 
gratuitous apostolate those facilities which all thinkers now deserve 
who respect and support material order, the only essential object of 
official superintendence. No majority of votes can invest the re- 
publican power with the right of prescribing or proscribing opinions 
with regard to which its conistituents are yet more incompetent than 
itself Its proper function in these questions is to put down all really 
anarchical teaching. But in an atmosphere wholly free irom fana- 
ticism, a system which consolidates the various essential bases of society 
will V always have the respect of the temporal power, notwithstanding 
that it find on the earth the fulcrum which heaven no longer affords. 
Eather should the crisis, which has now brought into just preponder- 
ance the question of order and the central power, give additional 
security to my independence as a philosopher, for it manifests yet 
more strongly the opportuneness of the doctrine best adapted to develope 
in our age the respect for order and for the concentration of power. 
Giving its sanction to the authorities who chance to be in power, 
in the name of the past and of the future, it alone can assure them 
sincere veneration, never to be won by a simply material government, 
which secures obedience by brute force, and neither appeals to reason 
nor inspires love. 

You, Sir, who for thirty years, have been carefully watching my 
career as a philosopher, know that, thirty years ago, I had adopted as 
the immediate and avowed aim of my life a satisfactory reconstruction 
of the spiritual power, admirably shadowed forth in the Middle Ages. 
This power, being the only one which acts directly on the will, can 
alone consecrate all others, whilst its true organs, though isolated and 
poor, can, in their own sphere, rise superior to the forces whether 
of numbers or of wealth, because they alone represent Humanity in its 
fulness. But the final reconstruction of the spiritual power, though it 
required a single brain, consisted necessarily of two distinct parts, 
answering to the two aspects, the one intellectual, the other moral, 
of the Western disorder, as to the two elements, faith and love, of the 
leligion which will heal that disorder. The sentiments, despite their 
increasing perversion, are yet the sole supports of our existing society : 
they are essentially only troubled through the medium of the dis- 

xlviii PREFACE TO 

tiirbance of our ideas. Thus, the disease being primarily and chiefly 
intellectual, my first step was, of necessity, to construct, upon the 
scientific bases which the modern evolution has laid down, a philosophy 
able to restore to the West a body of systematic convictions, by sub- 
stitutinj^, and that in the positive order, a large consideration of the 
whole for a minute attention to its parts. Such was, as you know, the 
special aim, and, I venture to add, the actual result, of the fundamental 
work which I completed ten years since. All its vital principles are 
now adopted by the real thinkers of the West in a degree far beyond 
that anticipated by my early hopes. 

But, though the greatest difficulty was thus overcome, this effort was 
but a simple preliminary to the real purpose I had constantly had in 
view. The next step was to prove that the new philosophy, which 
directly reorganised modern thought, could completely carry out its 
normal functions by becoming the foundation of the only religion 
capable of reorganising also our feelings, the supreme motor-power 
in human life. In a word, to the career of Aristotle that of St. Paul 
must succeed, or the incomparable mission I had at the outset ven- 
tured to assign myself would utterly fail. 

True it is that my construction of social science established a 
powerful discipline of the intellect by showing what was the mental 
training and what the scientific acquirements, indispensable for any 
sound sociological elaboration, and thus showing such an elaboration 
to be, in all reason, on the score of proved incompetence, beyond the 
scope of those who at present busy themselves with it. The practical 
instincts also found their sphere limited ; for social phenomena, though 
the most modifiable of all, are by their nature shown to be subject to 
invariable laws, upon which the artificial order must always be based ; 
since the future we would prepare is the essential result of a past we 
cannot alter. Nevertheless these two steps towards the discipline 
indispensable for all organisation could not have been realised in prac- 
tice unless the moral excellence of Positivism could rise to the level of 
its intellectual excellence. For retrograde and anarchical conceptions 
are still in apparent possession of the domain of morality, whence their 
metaphysical theology seemed likely indefinitely to exclude a science 
which, taking its rise in the simplest ideas, appeared for a long while 
unable to deal with the noblest sentiments. 

Nothing then could absolve me from the duty of devoting the 
second period of my career to setting forth Positivism as a really 
complete doctrine, as religious as it was philosophic in spirit, as able to 
touch the heart as to direct the intellect. This decisive work was fully 
characterised by my course of lectures of 1847, in which I directly 
adopted the whole Catholic programme of the Middle Ages, and proved 
that the positive basis was better suited to it than any theological basis. 
But all those who know the first volume, published in July 1851, of 

THE SECOND VOLUME. xlix 

my System of Positive Polity, are now aware that this fundamental 
course was itself the fruit of the exceptional Dedication which I wrote 
for my own use in 1846, led thereto by an incomparable private affec- 
tion. 

It is only in this last stage that Positivism, becoming before all 
things moral and religious, could directly pursue its social destination, 
by leaving the region of philosophy to seek a home with the proletariate 
and with women. In so doing, it instituted an increasing rivalry with 
Catholicism in the reconstruction of the "Western order, and it is this 
which gives a really capital importance to the gratuitous oral teaching 
which you have so nobly protected hitherto. 

But this very object imposes upon me at this time a fresh care that 
I may preserve from any encroachment of the temporal power the 
spiritual independence I have honourably gained. As a consequence of 
the decisive guarantees I have more and more given to public tran- 
quility, it is for me alone to decide, now as formerly, what I shall say 
and what I shall not say. For the government, while sanctioning those 
teachings which it considers inoffensive as regards material order and 
favourable to the reestablishment of moral order, is in general exempt 
from all special responsibility for any of my opinions. If the last 
crisis were to induce it to interfere with an exposition of which it is 
incapable of seeing the philosophic and religious bearing, it would be my 
duty rather to observe perfect silence provisionally, than to accept a 
partial liberty, which would weaken my spiritual influence more than 
it could further my present propaganda. But the happy experience 
of the three previous years ought to relieve me from any such fear 
now, however necessary it was that I should explain myself on the 
point in this place, to avoid all misunderstanding. 

Far from fearing that this fourth course will have more obstacles to 
encounter than the preceding ones, I hope, that by gaining the serious 
attention of true conservatives, it will put a timely end to those general 
restrictions which the present dictatorship has thought fit to impose 
temporarily, in the interests of order, on the normal liberty of exposi- 
tion, or at least of discussion. This measure is in fact only justified 
by the special danger to which the various subversive Utopias of the 
day expose us, because their sophisms, though the public in a vague 
way instinctively shrink from them, find as yet no official doctrine to 
refute them. But this impotence of all theological or metaphysical 
philosophy is now at length fully compensated by the organic power 
of Positive philosophy. If statesmen will but smooth the way for the 
working of this healing doctrine, they may Cease to trouble themselves 
about errors which a thorough discussion alone can remove. 

That I may make quite clear what is the spiritual independence 
which is indispensable to my mission, I must. Sir, in the last place 
mention to you the personal attitude definitively befitting my spiritual 
VOL, rv. c 

1 PEEFACE TO 

office, in order to offer, to government as to the public, a satisfactory 
guarantee of my exclusive devotion to the priesthood of Humanity. 

At our last interview, you, with generous solicitude, were good 
enough to ask me how you could assist in remedying the loss I had 
sustained by the disgraceful withdrawal of my 'post at the Polytechnic, 
just then completed by the unworthy coteries of that institution. I 
now solemnly reply that the only means is to make known amongst 
conservatives as opportunity shall serve, in order that they may join 
in it, that noble public subscription which was exceptionally opened, 
three years ago, in order to neutralise that legal robbery, so as to allow 
me to complete undisturbed my great construction. 

Hitherto chiefly derived from revolutionary sources, this voluntary 
annual subsidy still fell far short of the minimum originally named as 
indispensable. But since the recent spread of Positivism to the 
United States of America, it has been shown by some eminent examples 
that genuine conservatives may yet take part in it. For in the most 
anarchical of the Western populations, the Positive religion is invoked, 
in the interests of order above all, by statesmen who ai-e, by the impos- 
sibility of calling any armed forces to their aid, preserved from aU 
serious illusions as to the true nature of the modem disorder. This 
disposition, though by the nature of things it has first shown itself in 
America, will soon spread to our own statesmen in proportion as the 
situation brings into stronger relief the character of our social malady, 
and the inadequacy of the actual remedies. If then it is your judgment, 
Sir, that the services I have already rendered to the great cause of 
Western order merit such a recompense, I venture to ask you openly to 
urge, as far as you can, sincere and enlightened conservatives to join in 
a subscription which will for the rest of my life be my sole resource 
materially. The most distinguished contributors may with propriety 
add their sums to the smallest mite of the proletariate. For in both 
classes alike I shall only see spiritual clients who have become my 
temporal patrons. 

The new strength which my various works will bring to the side 
of order might, indeed, determine the government to offer me some 
equivalent for that privation of my office at the Polytechnic which a 
defect in the law compelled it under our different changes of regime 
to see me suffer. But even in this case, I have made up my mind 
never to accept any kind of annuity, or official post, even though 
scientific. 

In their blind hostility, my contemptible enemies of the Academy 
have step by step driven me to the mode of existence in most perfect 
harmony with my principal mission, the various services attached to 
which must always be gratuitous. The founder of the Eeligion of 
Humanity ought evidently to be supported by the voluntary yearly 
offerings of all his sincere adherents. In the first place, this' normal 

THE SECOND VOLUME. li 

procedure is the most conducive to the good use of the few years of 
full vigour of brain that I can yet devote to my fundamental office. 
But it must also add another guarantee to that complete indepen- 
■dence socially which my destination demands. In a time when the 
principal disturbance atises from the political ambition of theoricians, 
•erroneously so-called, both governments and peoples have a claim to be 
seemed by the personal position of the new spiritual chief against his 
temptations to usurpations and to concessions. It is, then, my duty, 
though at the cost of some material difficulties, scrupulously to 
preserve the normal attitude in which I find myself. Should I 
-abandon it, it would be impossible for me to obtain the complete moral 
-ascendancy indispensable to the worthy fulfilment of that great enter- 
prise which has been, as you know, from my youth upwards, the 
systematic destination of my whole life. 

When, Sir, you shall have sufficiently studied this necessary 
explanation, I hope you will have the goodness to give me as early an 
-appointment as possible, that we may discuss the resumption of vxj 
annual course. If you should judge it useful to communicate my 
letter to any one, you are at liberty to do so. I myself intend to add 
it, as it stands, to the preface of the volume I hope to publish in July, 
the second volume of my System of Positive Polity. 

Health and Fraternity. 

AUGUSTE COMTE. 
(10, Eue MoDsieur-le-Prince.) 

c 2 

THE OCCIDENTAL KEVIEW; 

OE, 

dontinuous application of Positivism to the natural course of human 
events, contemplated both in the past and in the future, with a 
view to the systematic appreciation of the intellectual and social 
movement of the five advanced populations, the French, the Italian, 
the Spanish, the German and the Britannic, which constitute, since 
the time of Charlemagne, the great Western Eepublic. A quarterly 
publication (at the beginning of each season) founded and directed 
by Auguste Comte, author of the System of Positive Philosophy, 
and of the System of Positive Polity, 

Paris. The first number of the Occidental Eeview will appear at 
the beginning of next winter, if the following project can be carried 
out in time. 

Positivist Subscription in order to found the Occidental Review. % 

1. M. Auguste Comte, founder of the Occidental Eeview, is sole 
director and proprietor of it. His office, whether as director or editor, 
is strictly gratuitous. 

2. When the Eeview shall be sufiiciently established, M. Comte 
will choose a successor in the event of his death, and this successor 
shall, in his turn, make a similar choice, and so on as long as the 
ftmction shall continue. 

3. In order to secure a fair development for this philosophico-social 
experiment, M. Comte asks for an annual sum of 10,000 francs (400?.) 
for three years, to be repaid in the manner hereafter indicated. 

4. This grant is to consist of 100 subscriptions, each of which 
obliges its signatary to furnish 100 francs (4/.) at the beginning of each 
•of the three trial years. 

5. A single individual may take any number of these subscriptions 
Several individuals may unite to take a single subscription, but under 
one name. 

6. All the subscriptions are strictly personal, none are transferable 
without the special consent of M. Comte. 

7. Each subscription secures a copy of the Eeview, even after the 
whole sum is paid off. 

8. Each subscription is for a yearly volume, consisting of four 

liv PEEPACE TO THE SECOND VOLUME. 

quarterly numbers. It costs 10 francs (8«.) for all those parts of the- 
"West to which there are satisfactory means of sending books. 

9. Each number may be procured, for the sum of 3 francs for 
the public, and 2 francs for booksellers, on applying to the Director 
of the Review (10 rue Monsieur-le-Prince, Paris). 

10. At the end of each year, one-half the profits of the undertaking 
is to be devoted to extending it, whether by a larger issue, an increase- 
of remuneration to the contributors, or if possible, by making the 
publication monthly. 

11. The remaining half of the profits is to repay, in an order to be- 
ascertained each time by lot, the original subscriptions, with the- 
interest consequent on their direction. 

12. This interest is to be at a rate fixed at first by each subscriber,, 
but never to exceed 7 per cent, per annum. 

13. At the close of every year's operations, each subscriber shall 
receive from the Director of the Review, a complete printed statement 
of the position of the undertaking. 

14. Each quarterly number contains 10 printed sheets 8vo. imiform, 
in type with the System of Positive Polity (32 lines of 50 letters each 
to the page). 

15. One thousand copies shall be printed at first, including those 
subscribed for. 

16. Every number shall contain 5 articles at least, 7 at most,, 
always relating to the intellectual or social condition of the West, but 
general principles -\vill only be introduced so far as their special and 
opportune application requires. 

17. The remuneration of the contributors is paid pro-yisionally at 
100 francs the sheet for beginners, 150 fi:ancs for those who have had 
experience, and 200 francs for -writers of recognised ability. 

18. Although the articles are published in French, they may be 
written in any other of the five Western languages, the Editor making 
himself responsible for their translation. 

19. No article shall appear without the real and full signature of 
its author. 

General estimate of the quarterly expenses. 

Average payments to the contributors to each number . 1,400 francs. 
■ Expenses of publication (at 25 francs the composition 
of each sheet, 45 francs the printing of 1,000 copies 
of it, and 50 francs for postage) .... 1,100 francs. 

AUGUSTE COMTE. 
(10, Hue Monsieui-le-Prince.) 
Paris, 8 Archimedes, 64 (Thursday, April 1, 1852). 

END OF PREFACE. 

CONTENTS 

OF 

THE FOUETH VOLUME. 

SyNIHEIICAL PkESENIAIION OE the FtrTTTRE OE Majt. 
General Introduction ....... 

PAGE 
1 

OHAPTER I. 

ETTBTDAMBNTAI, THBOKT OF THE 9EEAT BEIUe ; WHENCE A CONSPBCITTS 
01 THE EELieiON OE THE RACE AND OE ITS EXISTENCE IN THE 
NORMAX STATE. 

I. Special Introduction ....... 8-27 

II. Systematic explanation op HtnuANiTY as the Gbeat Being . 27-85 
The priesthood of Humanity may now embrace the future as well as the 

past, becoming prophet as well as judge ..... 8 

Its threefold social function, Counsel, Consecration, Discipline . , 8 

Test of its competence .'..... 8 

Difficulty of reconciling ordei; and progress shown historically . . 8 

Oscillation between the two, the apparent result . . . .9 

The remedy to be found in the true picture of the Future . . .10 

Affinity of Positivism for the previous regimes . . . .10 

All their programmes subordinate to that of the Theocracy . . .11 

Completeness the test of true discipline . ■ . . .11 

Priesthoods of China and India . . . . . .11 

The formula of Theocracy adopted by Sociocracy . . . .11 

Affinity of Positivism with the three partial transitions . . .12 

The Greek 12 

The Roman ......... 13 

The Mediaeval ........ 13 

Its affinity with the modern revolution . . . . .14 

The Fetichist period reserved . . . . . .14 

Eesult of the five comparisons . . . . . .15 

The fusion of the future with the past guarantees stability and offers 

guidance ......... 15 

Ivi CONTENTS OF 

PAGE 

The neglect of this method explains the impotence of modem Utopias . 15 

Properties of the Positive Eeligion(l) Prevision . . . .16 

Prevision most applicable to human phenomena . . • .17 

The true synthesis now estabUshed . . . . . .17 

(2), Innateness of altruism . . . . . . .17 

Its necessity if we would construct a systematic morality . . .18 

Statically and dynamically . . . . . . .18 

The two attributes henceforth inseparable . . . . .19 

Previous recognition of the two in Fetichism, Polytheism, and Monotheism 20 

The hostility of Monotheism confined to its decline . . . 21 
Formation under the old regime of the habits and principle adapted to our 

maturity . ...... 21 

The Habits ....... 21 

The Principle . . ..... 22 

The Family, the Country, Humanity . . . . • .22 

The West intercalated . . . . . . .23 

The determination of the future depends on the explanation of the past 23 

Systematic explanation of Humanity . . . . . .24 

Humanity real and useful .... .24 

Eeality ... . . .24 

Utility ...... . 25 

Successive germs of the conception .... .26 

The three preliminary apergus of Pascal, Leibnitz, and Condorcet . . 27 

Definition of Humanity. Theory . . . . . .27 

(I.) Constitution of Humanity. Distinction between elements and agents . 27 

The elements subordinate to the whole .... 28 

Humanity alone not indistinct nor arbitrary .... 28 

Humanity indivisible ..... . . 29 

Subject to the law of growth and improvement, to be judged therefore in its 

adult state ..... . . 29 

The ministers of Humanity . . . . . . .30 

The problem is, how to combine concert with independence . . 30 

The actual generation dependent on the past and the future . . 31 

Continuity in the Family .... .31 

■Continuity as limited to the past and present . . . .31 

The Dead. The subjective existence . . . .31 

The Dead represent Humanity . . . . 32 

Superiority of the subjective life . . . . . .32 

Necessity of the objective . . . 32 

Incorporation of the animals into Humanity . 33 

(II. ) Situation of Humanity ..... .33 

Her ultimate dependence on the human order . . 33 

Dependent also on the external ... 34 

As Humanity is dependent, so are her individual servants . . 34 

This dependence the source of her greatness . . .34 

(III.) Destination of Humanity. Sphere of her action the Human order 35 

This most applicable to the Future, but true of the Past . . 35 

This Theory the basis of the Positive Construction . . 36 

Its synthetical power . . . . . . . .36 

Its future ef&cacy seen by the results already attained , . .36 
Eelatious of Positive Eeligion with Fetichism and Theologism. The latter 

eliminated ■••-.... 37 

THE FOUETH VOLUME. 

Ivii 

FAQB 

Petichism incorporated ....... 37 

The fusion viewed intellectually, esthetieally, morally . . .38 

'The two extreme ages of Humanity thus combined • . . .38 

No inconsistency in excluding Theologism . . . . .38 

With the aid of Fetichism Positive Religion can construct the ultimate 

unity, abstract and concrete . . . . . .39 

Absteaot View ....... 40-54 

Positivism combines all aspects of human existence . . . .40 

Alone secures the supremacy of Love .... .40 

Realises all previous aspirations . . . . . .41 

(I.) "Unity of Feeling ........ 41 

Diversity of the sympathetic instincts ... .42 

Their training in the preparatory period . . . . .42 

Their fate in modern times ....... 43 

They are the true domain of the Positive spirit . . . .43 

Chief attribute of human Unity : duty and happiness coincident . 43-44 

Feeling to be encouraged for its own sake . . . . .44 

Living for others, others live for us .... . 44 

■Subjective immortality the reward of a noble life . . .45 

(II.) Intellectual Unity, (a) Art . . . . 45 

More sympathetic and more synthetic than science . . . .45 

More closely connected with religion . . . . . .46 

Art in education equal to science, in real life superior . . .46 

Testimony of the past . . . . . . .47 

New instruments of poetry ; subjective milieus . . . .47 

Space hitherto the only instance . . . . . .47 

The philosophy of art in relation to that of science . . . .48 

ib) Science. All positive theories converge towards the science of man . 48 
This convergence as regards the developement of the sympathetic instincts . 49 
Dreams ....... 49 

Positivisin offers science a better field and a better method . . .50 

The aid images will bring to science . . . . . 60 

.(in.) Unity of action, (a) Order . . . . . .61 

Easier to organise Industry than Intellect . . . . .51 

Conservation and increase of the collective treasure of Humanity . . 52 

The two require two distinct services .... 52 

Government and obedience both regulated .... 53 

Influence of the habitual consciousness of usefulness . . . .53 

(6) Progress ......... 63 

Industry so constituted favours feeling and intellect ... 64 

■CoNCKETE View ....... 64-75 

I. Constitution of the Sociocracy. II. Its separate elements . 64 

Principles on which we classify these elements . . . .54 

Women superior in sympathy . . .... 55 

The distinction of the sexes answers to that between private and public 

life 56 

Distinction between practicians and theoricians ... 56 

•Consequences of these distinctions ..... 56 

Distinction of the patriciate and proletariate .... 67 

Function of the proletariate . . . . . . .57 

The animal auxiliaiies of Humanity . . . . . .68 

The character of the sociocratic elements . . . . .68 

Iviii CONTENTS OF 

PAGR. 

Woman's independence .....-• 59' 

Change of view as to the function of Eeproduction . . . .59 

Hypothesis. The reproductive function exclusively female . . .60- 

Conditions of woman's independence . . ' • • .61 

Result of education on woman .... .61 

Value for her of the Encyclopsedie training . . . . .62 

Woman offers less difficulty than the active class ... 62 

The Spiritual Poorer. Conditions of its independence . . .63- 

Character of the priesthood shown by comparing it with "woman . . 63 

Education the great function of the priesthood . . . .64 
The fusion of philosophy and poetry will aid in preserving the true priestly 

character ....... 65 

The priesthood resumes the medical of&ce ... 6S 

An universal language required .... .66 

Italian is the fittest . . .... 67 

The Practical classes. (1) The patriciate the basis of the City . 6T 

The patriciate the seat of human will .... 68 

Will requires power ... ... 68 

Hence the necessity of the concentration of wealth . . . .69 

Internal conditions ... ... 69 

The patrician hierarchy .... 7I> 

Four divisions. (1) Agriculturists. (2) Manufacturers. (3) Merchants. 

(4) Bankers ....... 71 

(2) The Proletariate . . . . . . . .71 

Its homogeneity ..... . 72 

In it are developed the general features of Humanity . . 72 

Means for a systematic direction of the power of numbers . . 73 

The proletariate must restrain its personal instincts . . . .73 

Its external conditions . ..... 74 

Conclusion ....'. . . 75^ 

CHAPTER II. 

GENERAL VIEW OF THE AEFBCIIVE LIFE, OE, DEFrSflTIVE SYS- 
lEMATIBAIION OF THE POSITIVE STSIElt OF WOKSHIP. 

Change of order. The worship precedes the dogma . . . .76 

Eeasons for and against the previous arrangement . . 76-77 

The worship the expression of the synthetical state . . . .77 

Again, the affinity between Fetichism and Positivism . . .78 

Superior synthetic power of the Eeligion of Humanity . . .78 

Eeligion is worship ...... .78 

Prominence of the Future characteristic of the normal state . . .79 

The t-wo arrangements of the doctrine . . . . .79- 

If the worship did not precede the doctrine, it would have to follow the 

regime . . . . , . . . ■ . 80 

Destination and nature of the worship. The sjTnpathetic instincts its chief 

domain . . . . . , , . .81 

It exercises all man's faculties . . . . . .81 

It is the synthetic idealisation of our existence . . . .82 

Comparison of the effects of expression and action . . , .82 

THE rOUETH VOLUME. 

lix 

Moral influenee of the Positive -vrorship (1.) on altruism 

„ „ „ (II.) on egoism 

Its intellectual influence (I.) on Ait . 
Italian as tlie language of worship 
(II.) on Science, (a) Method. (6) Doctrine 
(III.) Its influence on action, -which it purifies 
The worship universal, but systematic only for the more leading phases of 

human existence . 
The sacred sign 

General Theory of the subjective life . 
The assimilation of other existences . 
The wills of tlie beings incorporated necessarily extinct 
The assimilated existences 
Three degrees of subjective existence 
Laws of the subjective life 
Its independence of physical influences 
Superiority of the subjective state 

The fusion of the dead with the living more affective than intellectual 
Limits of physical independence 
The idealisation required 
Direct exposition of the ■wokship 
Tribute to Madame de Vaux . 
Subdivisions of the worship : I. Personal 
The mother 
The wife and daughter 
The normal state of these three types 
The sister 

Deficiency as to the past. Names 
Deficiency as to the future 

Our immortality extends to the types by whose aid it has been deserved 
The immortality of women 
Guardian angels 

Catholic and Mohammedan precedents 
Pefvate peatee. Definition of prayer 
Divisions of the morning prayer 
Degree of subjectivity in prayer 
Oral prayer .... 
Daily prayer a work of art 
Number and duration of daily prayers 
Weekly and annual worship . 
Uniform introduction for the sake of continuity 
Vision suspended .... 
The contemplation of the death of those we invoke 
Influenee of the private culture. Moral 
On the intellect and the activity 
Domestic -woeship. Functions of the head of the family and the mother 
Domestic worship consecrates the phases of family life 
Previous confusion of the temporal and spiritual powers 
Eectified by Positivism . . 

The priesthood must secure freedom . 
The nine sacraments ; six for women , 

Those already administered .... 

84 
84 
85 
86 
87 

89 

90 

9a 

91 
91 
92 
92 
93 
93 
94 
95 
95-142 
95 
96 
96 
97 
98 

99 
99 
99 
100 
lOO 
101 
101 
101 
102 
102 
102 
103 
104 
104 
104 
105 
105 
106 
107 
107 
107 
108 
109 
109 
109 

Ix 

CONTENTS OF 

(I.) Presentation. Its ceremonial 

(II.) Initiation 

(III.) Admission 

•(IV.) Destination 

.(V.) Marriage 

Monogamy the principal result of Western civilisation 

Interval between the civil and the religious marriage 

The vow of eternal widowhood 

Dispensations .... 

(VI.) Maturity 
(VII.) Eetirement . 
(VIII.) Transformation 
{IX.') Incorporation . 
Special modifications of domestic relations 
-Adoption .... 

Wherein lies the power of these sacraments 

Public woeship 

The calendar. What is a date. 

The week .... 

The mouth and the year 

Lunar and solar years. Solar year adopted 

Division of the year into thirteen months. Eeasons 

Apportionment of these months 

The Positive era and the names of the months not fixed 

Idealisation of the days of the week 

•Concrete nomenclature of the week 

Abstract 

■Groups of years 

Direct treatment of public worship 

The Festival of Humanity 

■The other four festivals of the first month 

The Festivals of the second month. Marriage 

Those of the third, fourth and fifth months. The Parental, Filial, and 

Fraternal Eelations 
Those of the sixth month. Domesticity 
The next three months dynamical 
Additional Thursday commemoration . 

The commemoration as suitable for the future as for the present 
The historical portion of the cultus definitive 
The seventh month. Fetichism ■ 
Spontaneous Fetichism : (I.) Nomad : (11.) Sedentary 
Systematic : (I.) Sacerdotal Astrolatry : Festival of the Sun 
(11.) Military Astrolatry. Festival of Iron , 
The eiglith month. Polytheism . , 

(I.) The Theocracy. Caste .... 

(II.) Intellectual Polytheism : (a) esthetic, (6) scientific 
(III.) Social Polytheism .... 

The ninth month. Monotheism 

'(I.) Theocratic or Judaic .... 

(II.) Catholic. ..... 

The Virgin ...... 

■(III.) Mohammedan. Lepanto 

PAGE 

110 
110 
111 
111 
112 
112 
112 
113 
113 
113 
114 
114 
113 
115 
115 
116 
116 
116 
116 
117 
117 
118 
119 
119 
120 
120 
120 
121 
121 
121 
122 
122 

123 
123 
124 
124 
125 
125 
125 
126 
126 
127 
127 
127 
127 
128 
128 
128 
128 
129 
129 

THE FOURTH VOLUME. 

Ixi 

(IV.) Metaphysical ...... 

The thirty-three festivals of the historical months 

The comhination of Fetichism and Positivism 

The last four months ...... 

The tenth month. The moral Providence. "Women . 

The eleventh month. The intellectual Providence. Tlie Priesthood 

(I.) Incomplete ; (II.) Preparatory : the aspirant 

Festivals of art and science ..... 

(III.) Definitive («) secondary: the Vicar; (i) final: the Priest 

The twelfth month. The material Providence. Patriciate . 

(I.) The Bank. (II.) Commerce. (III.) Manufactures. (IV.) Agj-icul 

ture ....... 

Festival of the Knights ..... 

The thirteenth month. The general Providence. Proletariate 

(I.) Complete or active. Festival of Inventors 

(II.) The affective. (III.) The contemplative. (IV.) The passive Proleta 

riate ....... 

Mendicity .... . . 

Festival of St. Francis of Assisi .... 

Festival of all the Dead . . . . 

Festival of Holy Women in Leap year 

Eighty-one festivals. Their relation to private worship 

Temples of Humanity. Their situation 

Their interior ....... 

Artistic adjuncts ...... 

The chapter justifies the postponement of the doctrine 

But the worship needs the support of the doctrine and regime 

Soeiolatrical Table, or Conspectus of the abstract worship 

PAGE 

129 

13a 

130 
131 
131 
132 
132 
132- 
132 
132' 

133 
133 

1.34: 

134 

135 

135 

135 

136 

137 

137 

13S 

139 

139 

140- 

UO' 

HI 

CHAPTER III, 

(JEiraEAL VIEW OP THE INIELLEOTFAL EXISTENCE OP MAH", KESTITfe 
ON THE EBlAirVB CONCEPTION OF THE OEDER OF THE WOELD, 

OE 
DEFINITIVE BXBTBMATISATIOK" OE THE POSITIVE DOCTEINE. 

The intellect must he exercised under the impulse of feeling , 

Disposition with which we enter on the study of the doctrine 

Hypothesis as to the order of the world. Suppose it to cease 

The hypothesis involves a contradiction even if limited to the physical laws 

Various stages of the Hypothesis 

The heart and intellect must concur for synthesis 

So the worship sanctions the dogmatic system 

The heart rules, the intellect advises . 

Discipline of the intellect 

Hitherto inopportune .... 

The discipline of science in relation to the will 

Public opinion °. , . . 

Hence a higher sacredness for science 

Even the lower sciences have a moral reaction 

142- 
142 
143 
144 
144 
145 
145 
146 
146 
147 
148 
148 
149 
149' 

Ixii 

CONTENTS OF 

But this reaction most felt in the higher domains 
Relation of the dogma to the worship most dwelt on here 
■ General nature of the doctrine. Science must be abstract . 
Relations of theory and practice ..... 

Abstraction sanctioned but with precautions .... 
Aids for abstraction in the subjective media . 
The universal principles on which the doctrine rests . 

The FIRST PHILOSOPHT ...... 

The fifteen laws. I. Law of the simplest Hypothesis 

II. Law of Invariability ..... 

III. Law of Modificability ...... 

The distinctness of these three renders an absolute synthesis impossible 
Second group. IV. Subordination of the subjective to the objective 

V. Relation of the image to the impression 

VI. One image must prevail . 

VII. Law of intellectual progress 

VIII. Law of material progress 

IX. Law of moral progress . 
Harmony of the second group 
Third group. Objective 

X. Law of persistence 

XI. Law of compatible action 
Xil. Law of mutual action . 

XIII. Subordination of motion to existence . 

XIV. Law of classification 

XV. Law of continuity ..... 
The Fifteen realise the wish of Bacon for a ' prima philosophia 
The system brought to bear on the construction of the Positive Hierarchy of 

phenomena and conceptions ..... 

Synthetic constitution of the Hierarchy .... 

All phenomena human ...... 

Individual preparation needed t(y attain this synthesis 

The study of the higher will call for new researches in the lower sciences 

in both cases the hierarchy useful 
The Positive scale appreciated (I.) scientifically (II.) logically 
The supremacy of morals ..... 

The hierarchy valuable within the sphere of each science 

The concrete hierarchy ...... 

Here again the hierarchical principle useful for subdivision . 
The First Philosophy in its full sense 
Several arrangements of the analytical dogmatic system 
The seven aeeangements ..... 

Two binary (a) dogmatic. Cosmology. Sociology . 

(5) historical, Natural and Moral Philosophy 
Two ternary (a) Material, Vital, Human order 

(5) Physical, Intellectual, Moral Laws . 
Two quaternary (a) Cosmology, Biology, Sociology, Morals . 
(i) Three couples with Morals as their crown 
One Quinary. Mathematics, Physics, Biology, Sociology, Morals 
Remainder of the chapter elaborates the hierarchy of the seven sciences 
Each essential step to be studied separately .... 

Invariability of laws an inductive principle . 

THE FOURTH VOLUME. Ixiii 

PAGE 

Bow invariability is made completely general . . . .169 

■Chance and Destiny . . . • . . . . i gg 

Though necessary, the study of the seven sciences has its dangers . .170 

How they are to be averted (1) during the period of education . .170 

(2) during active life . . . 170 

Intellectual and physical laws the chief object of our abstract initiation . 171 
Study of each science limited by the requirements of the next above it . 171 

•Such study sufficient for human life, allowing for incidental researches . 172 

Tendency hitherto to accept such limitation ..... 172 
Positivism systematises this instinct. Difficulty and social remedy . . 173 

Constant tendency to specialisation both with theoricians and practicians . 173 
Synthetic discipline established under the invocation of Humanity . . 1 74 

THE SEVEN PHiLosoPHicAi, TREATISES required . . . . 1 74 

The sociological treatise may issue from Vols. II. and III. . . .175 

Announcement of those on Mathematics and Morals . . . .175 

Cosmology in especial requires the Subjective Synthesis . . .175 

Futility of any objective synthesis sufficiently recognised to allow the 

human point of view to prevail . . . . .176 

The Mathematical Synthesis in one volume . . . . .176 

Its composition, title and object ...... 177 

The higher logical processes, though not derived from Mathematics, may be 

illustrated by them . . . . . . .177 

All the logical processes found in Mathematics .... 178 

The Logic of Signs and Logic of Images, both developed there . .178 

The Logic of Feeling requisite . . . . . .179 

Comte's task to introduce this ; accomplished in Synthhe Subjective, Vol. I. . 179 

(1) Moral reactions of mathematical studies . .... 179 

(2) Fusion of Fetichism with Positivism. Its results in these studies . 180 
Subjective milieus . . . . . . .181 

This final state of Mathematics heralded by the practice of the higher minds 

who have cultivated them simultaneously with the lower sciences . 181 

The principle of subjective generality will annul the opposition of the Alge- 
braists ...... . . 181 

The simplicity of Mathematics adapts them for the systematiaation of the 

Positive Logic ....... 182 

nightly placed they grow in dignity and originate an improvement in the art 

of thinking ...... .182 

A species of universal Algebra . . . . .182 

Completing himian language . . . 183 

Scientific influence of Mathematics thus renovated .... 183 

■One volume sufficient . . . . . • . .183 

This appears impossible to most, till done . . . . 1 84 

The second Volume. The Astronomical Synthesis . . . .184 

Its composition similar to that of the rest . . . . .185 

Logical aspects of Astronomy. It offers ^the best type of observation, the 

best model for hypotheses . . . . . 185 

It limits its predecessor most satisfactorily . . . . .185 

■Scientific aspects of Astronomy. It presents us -with^mathematical existence 

uncomplicated ........ 186 

Eelativity marked in Astronomy . . . . . .186 

It shows that a subjective unity is alone possible . . .186 

Its bounds the solar system . . . . . . .186 

Mv CONTENTS OF 

PAGE- 

187 
188 
188 
189 

The planets which influence the earth taken into account 
Petichiam and Positivism easily fused in Astronomy . 
We may, with precautions, animate the heavenly hodies 
Normal destination of celestial Mechanics philosophical 
Volumes III. and IV. of the Abstract Encyclopaedia reserved for Comte's suc- 
cessors ......... 190 

Volume III. Physics. Its constitution ..... 190 

Volume IV. Chemistry. Its constitution ..... 190 

Subjective milieus most effective in the Physico-Chemical couple . . 191 

Volume V. Biology, treated more fully ..... f-dl 

Elimination of the theory of unity and the cerebral synthesis . . .192 

So reduced, Biology not treated disproportionately to Cosmology . .192 

The introduction to the biological volume ..... 192 

Biology but the preamble to the study of Humanity, hence its limits . 193 

The seven chapters of the volume ; I., II., Statical .... 193 

I. Anatomy. II. Taxonomy . ..... 193 

III., IV". Dynamical. Ill- Vegetal. IV. Animal Life . . .194 

V. Law of hereditary transmission .... . 194 

VI. Eelation of the organism to the environment .... 194 

VII. Vital modificability . . . . . . .194 

Synthetic conclusion. Logical appreciation of Treatise . . 194 

Scientific appreciation ....... 195 

The conclusion a preparation for the treatise on Sociology . . . 196 

Complementary remarks . ...... 196 

The Law of Ternary progression added in the first chapter . . 196 

The second chapter reduced to the organic series duly contracted . 197 

Chapter III. The mode of instituting the theory of vegetal life . . 197 
Chapter IV. Biology irrational if we do not keep to the human point of 

view ..... . . 197 

Chapter V. This is true of the seventh law of vitality . . .198 

Chapter VI. The subjective point of view to be adhered to in the theory of 

organic milieus . . . . . . .198 

Chapter VII. Aptitude for modification confined to assimilable substances . 198 

Dissection, even of animals, forbidden the priest . . . 199 
Distinction between the first five and the last two volumes of the Abstract 

Encyclopaedia ........ 200 

The two binary divisions compared ...... 200 

Considered with reference to subjective milieus .... 201 

Separation of Sociology and Morals. The first the subject of the sixth 

volume ......... 201 

Eeligious introduction and synthetical conclusion of this volume . 201-2' 

The seven chapters of the Volume on Sociology .... 202 

The rest of this third chapter devoted to Morals, the seventh volume of the 

Abstract Encyclopaedia ....... 203 

The ' System of Positive Morals ' or ' Treatise of Universal Education ' to 

occupy two volumes, the first abstract ..... 203 

Eeligious introduction ....... 204 

Supremacy of Morals asserted (a) logically, (6) scientifically . . 204 
The double relation — objective and subjective — ^most manifest in the two 

highest sciences .... ... 205 

Comte's share in the work of final systematisation ■ . . . 205 

The seven chapters of the Treatise on Morals .... 206 

THE J-'OUETH VOLUME. Ixv 

PAQK 

Detail on the fourth chapter. The doctrine of vital harmony . . 207 

The main point to systematise the subjective theory of the brain . . 207 

Determination of the number of the senses. Eight senses . . . 207 

A cerebral ganglion admitted for each sense . . . . 208 

■ The ganglia of touch, muscvilation, sight and hearing . . . 208 

The motor functions. Innervation ...... 208 

Spinal cord ......... 209 

The relation of the principal region of the brain to the body . . 209 

Intimate connection of the vessels and nerves in the higher organisms . 210 

Further specification of the relation between the organic life and the brain . 210 
Limitation to the three instincts of conservation . . . .210 

Distinction between the three cases . . . . . .210 

The nutritive apparatus directly connected only with the instinct of nutri- 
tion . ....... 211 

We must not forget the other connections . . . . .211 

Three in number, they suffice to explain the reactions of the physical and 

moral constitution of man . . . . . .211 

The Positive theory of Dreams . . . . . .211 

Sleep .......... 212 

Connection of the vital harmony with the feminine Utopia . . . 212 

The nervous and vascular systems more developed in woman . . .212 

She is the best type of the relations between the brain and the body . .212 

The synthetic conclusion of the volume on Morals . . . .213 

The regeneration of profane science (a) Logically .... 213 

This result expressed in the incorporation of Fetichism . . . 213 

(b) Scientifically ........ 214 

Morals derive their discipline from within . . . . .214 

There alone is the conception of the Universal order decisive and complete . 215 
Physical laws gain in rationality if combined with moral . . .215 

THE THIBD PHILOSOPHY ....... 216 

Connection of the Concrete with the Abstract Encyclopaedia . . . 216 

The idea of such connection traceable in the second volume of the System of 

Morals ......... 216 

Education the first of the arts . . . . . .216 

It is a transition to the other special arts, which require coordination 216-7 

They do not admit coordination in detail . . . • .217 

' System of Positive Industry,' or Treatise of the aggregate influence of 

Humanity upon her Planet . . . . . .217 

Object of this third Philosophy . . . . . .218 

Full conception of the Positive Philosophy given by the chapter . .218 

CHAPTER IV. 

GEITEEAL VIEW Oi' MAS's ACTIVE EXISTENCE, 

OE 

DEFIlflTIVl; STSIEMAIISATIO]Sr OE THE POSIIITE LIFE. 

Objectof the regime to combine sympathy with synthesis . , , 219 

Had we no bodily wants, the worship sufficient . . . .219 

They necessitate a more complex religion .... 219 

VOL. IV. d 

Ixvi 

CONTENTS OF 

PAGE 

Still, oven under these conditions, sympathetic unity is attainable . . 220 

The regime more influential in this respect than the doctrine . . 220 

Hence the doctrine must be subordinated to it . . • • 220 

Action the best guarantee of unity ...... 221 

The theoretical power must systematise the regime . . . .221 

Hence the priesthood must be dwelt on . . . . . 222 

Two preliminary cautions, one as to the numbers given, the second as to the 

assumption made ....... 222 

Constitution of the priesthood. Its numbers limited . . . .222 

Requirements of each Positive school ..... 223 

Twenty thousand priests required for the West .... 223 

One temple for ten thousand families ...... 223 

Mode of recruiting the Positive Clergy ..... 223 

Artistic and scientific pensioners ...... 224 

The High Priest of Humanity . . . . . .224 

His seven assistants ........ 225 

Ultimately forty-nine ........ 225 

The priestly dress reserved ....... 225 

Spiritual concentration ....... 226 

The dependence and ascendancy of the priesthood .... 226 

The priests to derive no profit from their writings .... 227 

Nor from their teaching ....... 227 

Teaching to be free outside their body .... 227 

Educational function of the priesthood ..... 228 

The object of the Positive education ...... 228 

Complete preparatory period 28 years ..... 228 

Education proper limited to 21 years ...... 229 

Wider sense of the term ....... 229 

The period of private education (1-14) ..... 229 

The first seven years most decisive. Moral training. The worship of the 

mother ...... . . 229 

Training of the intelligence ....... 230 

The second seven years. Esthetic training ..... 330 

The universal language. Italian predominant .... 230 

Moral training in second period . . . ■ 231 
Intellectual ....... .231 

Polytheistic character of this period need not survive the first three centuries 

of the normal state ....... 231 

In both these periods some industrial training .... 232 

The child to be taught that feelings are more important than acts . . 232 

PUBLIC INSTRUCTION (14-21). Its general spirit .... 232 

The supremacy of the heart ....... 232 

The worship therefore must institute the study of the doctrine . . 233 

Each professor to teach the seven sciences in succession . . . 233 

The High Priest must watch against intellectualism .... 234 

The noviciate moral rather than intellectual ..... 234 

Demonstration cultivated for submission ..... 234 

The noviciate must teach the Positivist to subordinate his individual to the 

collective intelligence ....... 234 

The course of instruction. The nineteen lectures on the First Philosophy . 235 

The seven years given to the abstract sciences. Number of lectures . 235 

The theoretic noviciate and industrial apprenticeship close together . 235 

Three years of travel ........ 236 

THE FOUETH VOLUME. 

Ixvii 

PAOS 

lEffects of the public education ... . . 236 

Heading discouraged as a habit. Useful reading .... 236 

The Positivist Library ....... 236 

Harmony of the two great divisions of education proper . . . 237 

The importance of the last year ...... 237 

The two phases contrasted socially ...... 238 

Disposition developed by the Positive education .... 238 

Submission and retention of principles, not of their details . . . 239 

•Systematasation of active life. Preliminary observations . . . 239 

tistitution of a religious Utopia ...... 239 

A condensation necessary to a synthesis ..... 239 

Precedent in the Eucharist ....... 240 

Former Utopias. The transmutation of metals .... 240 

Biological Utopia as announced in 'Phil. Pos.' III. p. 432 . . . 241 

The theory of Utopias complementary to that of religion . . 241 

Inductive considerations on the Utopia of the Virgin Mother . . 242 

Subjective considerations ....... 243 

Its reaction on our advance in aU directions (i.) Personal . . . 243 

(ii.) Domestic ; (iii.) Civic ....... 244 

Were this Utopia realised, others might foUo-w .... 245 

Direct examination of the Positive Eegime ..... 245 

'The functions of government. Participation of the two powers . 245 

Positive Morality always social under all its forms . . . 246 

(i.) Personal morality. Physical injunctions .... 246 

Two aspects of personal existence (i.) Negative, (ii.) Positive . . 247 

Por regulating Purity the personal instincts grouped in three couples . 248 

(i.) Negative aspect. Apparent possibility of an egoistic synthesis . . 248 

Eejected on deeper examination ...... 248 

The part played by the instincts of self-preservation and benevolence 

respectively ........ 249 

1. The instinct of nutrition ....... 249 

The two social grounds for the discipline of this instinct . . 250 

No ascetic rules to be applied to it . . . . . . 260 

2. Sexual instinct ........ 251 

3. Instincts of destruction and construction ..... 252 

4. Pride and Vanity . . . . . . . .252 

■Concluding remarks on the negative discipline .... 253 

(ii.) Positive aspect. Altrnism the great regulator .... 253 

(a) Personal existence considered in respect to feeling . . . 253 
"Then to intelligence ........ 254 

(b) Domestic existence ....... 254 

Preamble. Two modes of the altruistic synthesis .... 254 

Home, Greece, Catholicism, Modern Times ..... 265 

Subordination of private to public life ..... 256 

SystematisatioD of the Family by the Country in the name of Humanity . 256 

Three groups in the normal Family ...... 256 

■ Seven members of the family in the proletariate .... 267 

"The rich and the clergy need auxiliaries ..... 257 

Jealousy of this institution overcome by Positive religion . . . 257 

The family thus consists of ten members for the clergy . . . 257 
Of thirteen for the patriciate . . . . . .258 

'The domicile. That of the proletary requires seven rooms . . . 258 

d2 

Ixviii CONTENTS OF 

FAaB- 

The Patricians -will come to see their duty in this respect, the Plebeians their 

claims ......... 269 

Houses of the clergy and the patriciate ..... 2S» 

Coordination of the conceptions relating to the Family . . . 259' 

The two statical conceptions of it as the basis of action, or the source of 

education, must be combined ...... 259- 

Two corrections required in the religious theory of the family . . 260- 

The best conception of the two gained by distinguishing education from 

instruction ........ 260- 

Veneration the principal object, here the mother's influence invaluable . 260 

Her intervention necessary after marriage ..... 261 

Importance of the elder couple . . . . . .261' 

Theory of the mother completed in this chapter . . . .261 

Position of the head of the family in reference to the influence of women 261-2 

The mother the image of the country ..... 262 

No evil to be feared from the wife and mother living together . . 262 

The seven conditions required for the religious theory of the family . 263 

They are not to be made binding by law ..... 264 

Civil marriage. Not a mistaken concession to the temporal power . . 264 

Useful in the appreciation of the relations of the two powers . . 264 

Legal limits for the age of marriage ...... 265 

Legal measures as to wills and adoptions reserved .... 265 

Theory of the family summed up in its normal relations . . . 266 

A constant progress traceable in its constitution , . . 266' 

A sound Utopia should be an anticipation . , . . . . 266 

(c) Civic existence. Preliminary processes . . . . 267 

Decomposition of the great states of the West .... 267' 

Extent of the Positive Republics ...... 267" 

Moral education requires an intermediate between the Family and 

Humanity ........ 267 

Patriotism political ........ 26r 

This original limit first passed in consequence of the Roman conquest . 268 

No exact limit of the Positive nationalities ..... 268 

Political motive for decomposition ...... 268 

Division of the West into 70 republics, the world into 500 . . . 269 

Numbers of the patriciate ....... 269 

Distribution of the proletariate ...... 269 

Ratio of the rural to the town proletariate . . . . 270> 

Distribution of the latter . . . . . , .270 

The type of the average provincial capital [. . . . 270 

The size most suited to our modern wants ..... 270 

The patrician families are to the plebeian as 1 . 30 . . . . 271 

The capitalists to the workmen as 1 16 , . . . . 271 

The civic regime as influenced by the private .... 271 

Under the Religion of Humanity all individual conducthas a collective bearing 271 

Our life as citizens influenced by our guardian angels . . . 272 

Most of all in the priesthood . . . . . 272' 

The still greater influence of domestic upon public morality . . 272 

The domestic aids the civic life by aifording scope for tlie action of the 

priestliood on the individual ...... 273 

The women, as the Roman matrons, must have the civic feelings . . 273 

The relations of one family with others attacli it to the city . . 274 

Influence of salons ........ 274 

THE FOURTH VOLUME. Ixix 

PAGE 
275 

275 
276 

277 

The organs of putlic, opinion ....... 

'The salons of the priesthood ....... 

'Of the Bankers, of the Proletariate ...... 

Eegnlation of the gro-wth of population required .... 

There are indications that Positive institutions will be equal to this diiEcult 

task ... ..... 277 

-ludieation as to (i.) Number, (ii.) Quality ..... 278 

In what consists the difficulty of the Problem .... 278 

Two general solutions offered by Positivism : (a) The Utopia . 279 

(6) Chaste marriage. This negative but useful . . • 279 

Intervention of the priesthood in both cases ..... 280 

-Direct treatment of public life. Its fundamental purpose . . . 280 

The military regime preserved the West from castes . .281 

Distinction between employers and workmen . . . .281 

The bankers need the impulse of the Eeligion of Humanity . . 281 

Industrialism most favourable to social life . . . .281 

Positivism favours in two ways the transformation of industry . . 282 

The task requires the Eeligion of Humanity ..... 282 

Moral advance supreme ....... 282 

Activity must become directly altruistic ..... 283 

Hitherto attempts to organise industry have been national . . .283 

•Socialist attempt . . . . . . . .284 

The supremacy of the proletariate of all nations substituted by it for the 

supremacy of one nation ...... 284 

Human labour must keep Humanity in view, the future not the present . 285 
We must work consciously for posterity, not as hitherto, blindly . . 286 

The aim of industrial activity ...... 286 

The general conditions of industry, moral ..... 287 

Devotion and Veneration the two pillars of the social fabric . . . 287 , 

How the regime encourages them ...... 288 

The patriciate has the function of will ..... 288 

The organisation of the true Providence mainly depends on the patriciate . 288 
Positivist estimate of the vices incident to wealth .... 289 

Avarice preferred to prodigality ...... 289 

Pride more excusable than vanity ...... 290 

Ambition to be checked in the proletariate ..... 290 

The patriciate as condensed as possible ..... 290 

Eule of inheritance . . . . . . . 291 

.Strikes ......... 291 

The priesthood appeals to conscience and public opinion . . .291 

Pinal resource, excommunication . . . . . .291 

Power given by the Sacrament of Incorporation .... 292 

Precautions against the abuse of capital ..... 292 

Industrial chivalry ........ 293 

Precautions against abuse on the part of the priesthood . . . 294 

Junctions of the industrial classes. The directors .... 294 

Private maintenance ........ 295 

■Ownership of the domicile diiierent in town and country . . . 295 

Beneficial effects of such ownership ...... 296 

Its religious effect ........ 296 

Annual expenditure of each proletary family . . . .296 

Wages ......... 296 

A fixed portion ; a variable portion. Inequalities tend to disappear . 297 

Ixx 

CONTENTS OF 

"Wages intended for the maintenance of the proletariate, as the agents of 

Humanity ........ 29S 

Gratuitous character of human labour ..... 298. 

General level of wages, allowing for a difference in town and country 299 

Modern Utopias on wages a dim anticipation of the truth . . . 299 

Peasibility of the rate indicated ..... . 299 

Economy of the Positivist System ...... 30&- 

Public expenditure (i.) Temporal ...... 300 

A central government indispensable ...... 300 

The supreme Triumvirate . . . . . . .301 

The three Ministers of Agriculture, Manufactures, and Commerce . . 301 

Kelations of the Triumvirate to the proletariate .... 302: 

Gratuitous discharge of the functions of government . . 302 

Police and Civil Service ... ... 303- 

(ii.) Spiritual Expenditure. The Sacerdotal Subsidy . . . 303 

The total expenses of nutrition to be met by the patriciate . . . 303- 

The chief function of the banker .... . 304 

The part of the proletariate in civic life ... . 304 

Favourable situation of the proletariate morally .... 30S- 

Its great power to be felt rather than put forth . . 305 

General oilice of the proletariate ...... 306- 

The salons of the people ....... 306- 

Machinery and engineers . . .... 307 

Mendicants ......... 307 

They are under the protection of the proletariate . . . 308 

Beggars — passive proletaries .... . . 308 

Fraternity between the Engineers and other workmen . . . 308 

Relations between States ..... . 309- 

Monopoly prevented by the Country being subordinated to Humanity . 309 

The priesthood will need in this the aid of the bankers and proletariate . 310 

The peace of the world — howpreserved ..... 310 

Uniformity of legislation, of weights and measures .... 310 

Special industrial aptitudes of the several countries . . .311 

The relations of man with the animals . . . . .311 

Condition of his voluntary allies to be ameliorated .... 311 

Domesticated animals : (i.) Those which serve for food . . .312 

(ii.) Those which give us active aid . . . . . .312 

Animals not to be employed when inorganic forces will do . . . 312 

All classes must cooperate in this amelioration .... 313- 

The inorganic world not left out . . . .313 

Materials, as well as products, are to be respected .... 314. 

CHAPTER Y. 

PHILOSOPHICAL ESTIMATE OP THE PRESENT, BY TIMTrE OP THE 
COMBINATION OP THE PtTTITBE WITH THE PAST; 
WHENCE 
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE LAST PHASE OP THE TRANSITION. 

Object of the chapter, the acceptance of the formula of the Positive Religion 315- 
Positivism has to regulate the present, and by overcoming anareliy will win 

assent ......... 315. 

THE FOURTH VOLUME. kxi 

PAGE 

Examination of the state of the West . . . . .316 

The preparatory eTolntion . . . . . . .316 

The peoples which wait for its result . . . . .317 

Fetichism and Theocracy have become passive . . . .317 

Monotheism in its two forms has failed . . . . .317 

The "West becomes the organ of renovation by virtue of its triple transition 317 
Difficulty of the final phase ....... 318 

The revolutionary tendency, once useful, is now noxious . . .318 

Thus the chief task is to regenerate the West . . . .319 

Discredit of the Eevolutionary party . . . . . .319 

Hence it is easy for Positivism to order the transition . . . 320 

Appreciation of the revolutionary principle of private judgment . . 320 

Its results ......... 320 

The wide range of the anarchy . . . . . .321 

Need of an universal doctrine . . . . . .321 

Feeling must be introduced as the complement of reason . . 321 

The feelings have been tampered with ..... 322 

The two tasks of the Positive Religion : To make Generality prevail over 

Speciality, Sociality over Personality ..... 323 

The order of transition as regards the Western nations. Reasons . . 323 

Paris will direct the final transition ...... 324 

The determination of the transition in France to be followed by that which 

concerns the others .... . . 324 

The transition in France. Prefatory remarks . . . 325 

The same influences must preside over the introduction of the normal state 

as rule when it is introduced ...... 326 

No violence to be used in establishing Positivism .... 325 

Attitude of its priesthood ....... 326 

All existing authorities, if socially useful, to be sanctioned . . . 326 

Special application of these dispositions to the opening of the transition . 326 
Two modes of cooperation ....... 327 

Conversion not necessary, but there must be a paramount will to modify . 327 
This condition to a certain extent satisfied in France . . . 328 

Its power to iuodify without converting, a valuable privilege of Positivism . 328 
The two bases of the organic transition. The Dictatorship and Spiritxial 

Liberty. ........ 329 

Fxcuse for the non-recognition of this condition by the Dictator . . 330 

With Positivism the Dictatorship may feel secure . . . .331 

The Liberty opportune . . . . . . .331 

Repression of it more adverse to order than to progress . . .331 

Its conditions. ........ 331 

No restrictions on the Press ....... 332 

Extinction of Journalism. Its substitute, the Placard . . . 332 

Occasional pamphlets ....... 333 

Clubs. Their character ....... 333 

Suppression of the budgets of Theology, Metaphysics, and Science . . 333 

How this measure should be carried out ..... 334 

(i.) In regard to Theology. The opposition of Catholicism . . . 335 

Attitude of Positivism to disestablished Catholicism . . . 335 

Attitude of the dictatorial government to Catholicism . . . 336 

Attitude towards the non-Catholic monotheists of the West . . . 336 

(ii.) In regard to Metaphysics. Abolition of the University . . 337 

Ixxii CONTENTS OF 

PAGE 

Colleges and Schools ......•• 337 

Primary instruction .....••■ 338 

(iii.) In regard to Science. Its budget the most corrupting . . . 338 

The Academy of Sciences .... . • 339 

Pensions to artists, savants, and learned men . . . • 339 

Abolition of copyright after restricting it to seven years • 340 
The author to have the control of his work . . • .340 

Object of the measures to purify the Dictatorship .... 341 

The dictatorial government freed from parliamentary forma . . 342 

A purely financial assembly alone needed . . • . 342 

The triennial election. Modifications of universal suffrage . • 342 

This limitation of the dictatorship only provisional . . . 343 

Formula of the first phase of the transition ..... 343 

Necessity of the adoption of the Positivist political formula: Order and 

Progress ..... ... 344 

The formula of the bourgeoisie ; Liberty and Order .... 344 

The Positivist formula satisfies all the conditions .... 344 

The act which inaugurates the transition. Retiim of Napoleon to St. Helena 345 

The column in the Place Vendome. Charlemagne .... 345 

Efforts of the priesthood to prepare the normal state by the glorification 

of the past . . . . . . . . . 345 

The Positivist Calendar ... . . . 34(! 

Three degrees in this concrete glorification of Humanity . . . 346 

Chronological order of the types ...... 346 

Names of the months ...... . 346 

The Positive era. Provisional era. 1789 ..... 347 

Definitive era, 1855 . ..... 347 

For intellectual purposes the monthly and weekly types suffice . 347 

For moral the daily types required ...... 348 

Supplementary names ....... 348 

Insufficiency of the concrete worship . . . 349 

In the calendar theoretical and practical services prevail over moral . 349 

The calendar purely provisional . . ... 350 

Two provisions required, (1) The days of the week are not consecrated to the 

fundamental ties . . . . ... . . 351 

(2) All reprobation is suppressed ..... 351 

The Positivist Library ..... . Zf-l 

Provisionally it consists of 150 volumes .... 352 

Later modifications of calendar and library . . . 352 

The two institutions imply the judgment of the dead . . 353 

The worship explained during the first phase .... 354 

Mixed marriages. Two conditions . . . . 354 

(1) Conversion of the woman after marriage allowed, not of the man . 354 

(2) The woman must accept eternal widowhood .... 355 

In any case the mother has the education of the children . . . 356 
Public Worship. The Festival of Humanity . . . .356 

Festival of the Virgin Mother . . . . . .357 

A final elucidation of the Utopia ...... 357 

Eise of the cultus of the Virgin, and decline of the Eucharist . 357 

This indicates the tendency to the Positive Utopia .... 358 

Positivism realises the mediseval Utopia by presenting the members of the 

human family as issuing from a spouseless mother . . . 368 

THE FOTJETH VOLUME. 

Ixxiii 

PAGE 

■Connection of the phases of the transition ..... 359 

The intermediate phase more like the first ..... 359 

The final phase ........ 360 

The three briefly characterized ...... 360 

Second Phase. Three measures necessary ..... 360 

(1) The army to hecome a constabulary or gendarmerie . . .361 
The artillery and nayy . . . . . . .361 

This force sufficient for external order . . . . .361 

Also for internal ........ 362 

Character of the force ....... 362 

The transformation not practicable till the second phase . . . 363 

(2) Abandonment of Algeria ....... 364 

(3) Authorisation of Trades' Unions ...... 365 

Two institutions (a) political. Decentralisation .... 36.9 

Erance to be divided into seventeen states ..... 365 

■Schedule of the seventeen intendancies ..... 366 

-(6) Religions. The moral formula adopted : Live for others . 366-7 

Developement of Positivism during second phase .... 367 

Establishment of abstract fetes. Festival of Machines . . 367 

But the second phase mainly concerns the doctrine .... 368 

Causes leading to a regeneration of public instruction . . . 368 

Positive schools established by the government .... 368 

"There must be no monopoly ....... 369 

Experience of the Polytechnic School ..... 369 

Open competition for the public service so far as the lower grade is concerned 369 

The services most in view are those of Justice, Diplomacy, Administration . 370 

The school of most value in medicine .... 371 

Measures for regenerating the medical profession .... 372 

Hospitals ......... 372 

Degrees abolished and all medical corporations, nurses included . . 372 

General organisation of the Positive Schools ..... 373 

•Open to all the Western nations ...... 373 

All will be able to utilise their final certificate .... 374 

The languages to be learnt ....... 374 

A school in each of the seventeen governments .... 374 

The course of study ........ 375 

The professors ....... 376 

The examinations, by whom conducted . . . 376 

Lessons in art ........ 377 

Instruction gratuitous, care most requisite in admission . . . 377 

Two successive tests, one of admissibility, one of admission . . . 378 

•Cost of these schools ........ 378 

Special professional training ....... 379 

The Hospitals may be utilised for clinical instruction . . . 379 

Practical studies ........ 379 

The Hospital ......... 379 

The public health secure under the Director-General of the Positive Schools 380 

Post-mortem examinations ....... 380 

Superseded by a better education ...... 381 

The other careers. Special institutions ..... 381 

(ffi) Technical. Veterinary school . . . . . .321 

Its regimen ......... 382 

Ixxiv CONTENTS OF 

page:- 

(i) Scientific. School of Philology 88* 

(c) Esthetic. The Theatre . . . . . • .38a 

Its constitution .....••■ ^84 

The second phase is not, any more than the first, organic . . .385 

The successive adoption of the two mottoes offers a programme rather than 

a solution .....-•• 385 

Scepticism not constructive .....•• 385 

General insufficiency of the two phases shown . ■ • • 386 

The moral must precede the political renovation .... 386 

Third Phase. The government becomes Positivist, the governed remaining 

sceptical ......■• 387 

The systematic Triumvirate ....••. 387 

It guarantees the government being purely practical .... 388 

Mutual encroachments of the two powers ended by the division of the 

temporal .....-•. 389 

Such division a guarantee of peace in the West .... 389 

The triumvirate secures the political ascendancy of Positivism . 389 

As also the independence of the priesthood ..... 389 

The dictator, propria motu, instals the triumvirs .... 390 

The change effected by modifying the ministerial system . . 390 

Necessity of a common doctrine as the basis of political unity . . 391 

The ministers must not be too numerous ..... 391 

The three required, condensing the existing offices .... 39i 

The High Priest will suggest their names ..... 393 

The admission of a proletary, the only glaring anomaly in the preparatory 

government ........ 393 

It will extinguish Demagogism, and tend to regenerate the patricians . 394 

Personal recommendation of fit men ...... 394 

Not possible all at once to discontinue election . . . 395 

Its mode ........ 395 

The offices to be held on good behaviour . ... 395- 

Two amendments in the original plan with their origin . . . 396 

Not only the triumvirs, but all really political functionaries to be Positivists 396 
Narrowest limits of this obligation to 29 Statesmen .... 397 

Disgust at the existing scepticism ...... 398- 

On the conversion of the statesmen the anomaly which exists as to the prac- 
tical virtues will disappear ...... 398 

Three conclusive instances of success not depending on numbers . . 398 

(1) The Economists; (2) The Encyclopsedists; (3) The Eepublicans . 399 
Hence there is no fear as to the triumph of Positivism . . . 399 
General course of the triumvirate. (1) Its rule of conduct . . . 399 
The third motto : Live without concealment ..... 400 

Appreciation of its bearing ....... 400 

Applicable to the spiritual domain, its chief value is in the temporal . 400' 

Its application in detail ....... 401 

(2) The triumvirate's chief measure. The Intendancies become Eepublics . 401. 
A great triumph to effect this peaceably ..... 402 

Necessity of the change . ...... 402. 

The Catholicism of Paris . . . . . . .403 

Paris must renounce temporal domination ..... 403 

American independence the beginning of the movement . . . 403 

Extension of the process from the Colonies to Europe . . . 403 

THE FOURTH VOLUME. 

IxxT 

Such extension dimly foreseen at the beginning of the French Eevolntion 

Each Intendancy a Eepublic under Triumvirs 

Political and religious course of the final phase 

Political advance internally ..... 

Extinction of the Bourgeoisie .... 

Of Lawyers ....... 

Begeneration of the Positivist portion of the Bourgeoisie 
Freedom of bequest. Adoption .... 

Industrial endowments ..... 

Confiscation ....... 

External policy of the Triumvirate .... 

Independence of Corsica and the French Colonies 

Eolations with nations external to the West . 

Eeligious advance, internally ..... 

Consolidation of government and property ; (1) government 
Eespect for the servants of government 

(2) Property, to be placed under the guardianship of Humanity 
Struggle with Communism ..... 

Different in town and country. Urban communism . 
Eural . . ..... 

Completion of the abstract worship 

Festivals of (1) the Press, (2) the Post, (3) the Police 

Of the seven transitional festivals four permanent 

External influence of the religious policy 

Institution of chivalry ..... 

The provisional committee ..... 

Positive committee ...... 

Contrast between the programme here given and the first sketch in 

View' ....... 

Modification of the organic transition by other nations of the West, 

extension outside ..... 

The seven decisive steps equally applicable to the whole West 
Due subordination to the central movement . 
Italy. Its contribution ; (1) general 

(2) Special. The Epic of Humanity .... 
Description of the poem .... 

Its influence on the universal language 
Italy allowed the second place. Order of the others disputed 
Spain. Her title to the third place .... 
Spain ranks after France and Italy 
Her special contribution. The Spanish Clergy 
The Spanish Clergy alone capable of aiding Positivism 
The clergy in Spanish America .... 

They will welcome the Positivist conception of marriage 
The organic transition easy in the Iberian colonies . 
England ranks above Germany .... 

Acceptance of the Positive Philosophy in England 
Special contribution of England 

The British aristocracy ..... 

If competent it may hold its power without interruption 
Previous modifications of the British patriciate 
It will welcome Positivism when victorious over Communism in France 

General 

and its 

PAGE. 

404 
404 
405 
405 
406 
40& 
407 
407 
408 
408 
409 
410 
410 
410 
411 
411 
412 
413 
413 
414 
415' 
415 
416 
416 
416 
416. 
417 

417 

418 

418. 

418 

419 

420. 

421 

421 

422 

422 

424 

424 

425 

425 

426 

426 

427 

427 

428. 

428 

428 

428 

429 

Ixxvi CONTENTS OF 

PAGB 

But it must be on the alert or it will be superseded by the proletariate and 

some eueceseor of Cromwell ....•• 429 

Its proper foreign policy. Gibraltar . . • *30 
The United States ...... .430 

Different relations of North and South America to the Mother-country . 431 
The chief difficulty in North America the spiritual change . . 431 
The Anglo-Saxon element will need the exceptional intervention of the pro- 
letariate ......... 432 

■Germany, connected -with England through Holland and Sweden . . 432 

By itself Germany offers great difficulties ..... 433 

Opposition of the Metaphysicians ... . . 433 

This class in the several countries ...... 434 

Positivism must appeal in Germany to the chiefs and the masses . 434 

The oppression of Italy by Germany (1854) ..... 435 

Spiritually, the greatest difficulty the worship of the past . 433 

The Calendar scantly welcomed in Germany . . 436 
Eventually it will accept the concrete and has a special aptitude for the 

abstract worship ... . . 436 

A festival to mark the close of the transition . . . . 436 

Transfer of the greatest dead to Paris . ... 437 

The transition in the rest of the world ; a generation sufficient . 437 

Positivism addresses the leading minds ..... 438 

The one generation that is to seethe conversion of the chiefs . . 438 

Conversion of the people the work of a second generation . . 439 

Action of Paris ...... . 439 

Three phases of the general transition, as of the Western . . 439 

Three steps in each phase .... . . 440 

The theory of Islam ...... . 440 

Kespective parts played by Islam and Eoman Catholicism . . 441 
The Monotheism of Mohammed addressed the governors, that of St. Paul the 

governed ........ 441 

Historical relations of the two Monotheisms ..... 442 

Turkey. Its incorporation with the "Western system . . 442 

The general transitition to begin with Turkey . . . 442 

Persia ...... . . 443 

Eussia ...... . 443 

Concluding remarks on the first monotheistic phase . . . 444 

The second phase. Eegeneration of the Polytheists . . . 445 

A transitional doctrine required ... . . 445 

Indication of this doctrine ; three goddesses . . .. . . 446 

This concentration sufficient to develope all the philosophical aptitude of 

theology ..... ... 446 

This systematic Trinity easily superimposed on the various Polytheisms 447 

Their classification (a) India. The Brahmins . . . 447 

Positivism will begin by putting an end to British domination . . 448 

Thus the speculative race throughout subject to the new faith . 448 

(J) China. The active race ; Bouddhism ... . 448 

In China Positivism seconded by the practical wants . 449 

(c) Japan ......... 449 

Complete conversion of Polytheists ..... 450 

The affective race. The Fetichists .... 450 

Their conversion considered (I) Philosophically . . . 450 

THE FOTTETH VOLUME. Ixxvil 

PAGE 

(a) Mentally (i) Morally ....... 45a 

(II) Politically ........ 451 

Classification of the Fetichists (a) Africa . . . . .451 

(c) The third term, Oceania, taken next to Africa .... 462 

(b) America . . . . . . . . . 453 

Modern slavery and the slave trade ...... 45s. 

The American archipelago to be given up to the descendants of the American 

slaves ......... 453 

Conclusion ......... 454 

GENEEAl CONCLUSION OF THE FOURTH VOLUME . . . 455-460 

Object of the volume to establish the relative unity .... 455. 

In the subjective appreciation of the volume lies its value . . . 455 

On what the reality of the positive conception of the future depends . 466 

Humanity thus directly connected with the universal order . . . 456 ■ 

The result intellectually and morally ...... 457 

These results in equal conformity with the principle and the purpose of the 

Relative Synthesis . . . . . . . 468' 

The volume summed up in the inversion of the doctrine and worship . 459 

CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE WORK ..... 460-472 

Connection of the religious construction with Madame de Vaux . . 460 

Conception of his whole career ...... 460 

The two phases connected by the obligation to complete the Positive unity . 461 
The extension of Positivism to Morals not a chance result . . . 461 
Social destination necessary for the triumph of Positivism . . . 462 
The conviction of this triumph announced in the Preface to the Catechism . 463 
Positivism unites the best attributes of Catholicism and Islam . .463- 
Positivism prefers synthetic spiritualism to analytical materialism, retro- 
gression to anarchy ... ... 464 

It will relieve the chiefs from a degrading compliance . . . 464 

The political leaders, but also those of science and art . . . 464 

In the troubled medium it offers a rallying point to all the higher natures . 464 
The danger of presumption met by the religion . . . .466 

To be confident, certain conditions must be fulfilled .... 466 

How Positivists may show the power of their faith .... 46& 

(1) In private life, (2) in public life ... . . . . 466 

The ' Emancipated ' . 

The personal efforts of the Positivists to hold their ascendancy . . 467 

Only the higher natures at present satisfy the requirements of the Positive 
faith ...... 

The classes from which the directing body will be drawn 
Not from the literary class . 

"We must wait for true adherents 
No successor as yet 
Announcement of future works 

THE FINAL INVOCATION 

Appendix, The Library 

. 469 
. 469 
. 470 
. 470 
. 471 
472-481 
483-486- 

GENERAL T-iBLE OF SUBJECTS Contained in the system, of positive 

POLITY ........ 486-489' 

Ixxviii CONTENTS OF 

GENERAL APPENDIX. 

-GENERAL APPENDIX TO THE SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY, 

CONTAINING AIL THE EAELT ESSAYS BY THE AUTHOK IN SOCIAt PHILO 
SOPHY ......... 491 

Speciax Preface ..... 493-496 

FIRST PART. 

{July 1819.) 

SEPAEATION OP OPnnONS PEOM ASPTKATIONS. 

PiOE 
Positive political science is needed . . . 497 

■Opinions and Aspirations are distinguishable .... 497 

SECOND PART. 
{April 1820.) 

A BBTEP ESTTMAIE OF MODERN HISIOKT. 

Science and Industry are destined to replace Theology and War . 499 

Decline of the Mediaeval and growth of the Modem social systems . . 501 

Ftrst Seetes. 

First open struggle hetvreen the Old and New society in the sixteenth century 502 
The Religious and Political revolutions gradually prepared . . . 502 

Growth of the Commons ...... 504 

Discovery of America, Invention of Printing, and Copernican Astronomy 605 
The 18th century ...'.. .506 

General decline of the Ancient System . . . 508 

Second Series. 

The new society based on Science and Industry . . 509 

Influence of Savans, Artists and Artisans, spontaneous not systematic ; 

social not political . • . . . . 511 

Temporal progress of the new social system under the new Leaders . 514 

Spiritual progress of the new social system under the new Leaders . 516 

Progress of the People in reference to the Temporal Power . . 519 

Progress of the People in reference to the Spiritual Power . . 522 

Besum^ of the Second Series . ' . . . 524 

■General Tf&Mm^ of Both Series ... . 525 

THIRD PART. 

{Mmj 1822.) 

plan of the soieniific operations necessap.t foe 
reoeganisine socieit. 

Inteoditoiion. 

"Our Social Anarchy and its sources ..... 527 

Plan of reorganisation misconceived by Rulers and the People . . 528 

THE FOURTH VOLUME. Ixxix 

PAGE 

Errors of Eulers ........ 528 

Errors of the People ........ 530 

Xiberty of Conscience and Sovereignty of the People . . .531 

A Constructiye Doctrine hoth necessary and opportune . . . 533 

General View. 

■ Constitutions do not supply Social Eeorganisation .... 536 

Theory and Practice must be separated ..... 537 

Plan of Social Eeorganisation ...... 639 

Scientific men and Industrial chiefs represent the new Spiritual and Tem- 
poral organisation ....... 542 

Savants must render Politics scientific ..... 647 

Law of the Three States ....... 547 

Classification of the Sciences ....... 549 

FiEST Series op "Works. 

The Creation of Social Science demands that Observation should prepon- 
derate over Imagination ....... 551 

Social organisation is determined by the state of Civilisation . . 554 

The growth of Civilisation follows Laws ..... 655 

The science of Positive Politics is essential for Social Eeorganisation . 558 

Scientific Prevision can avert or mitigate violent Eevolutions . . 660 

The Method of the Science of Positive Politics .... 662 

Conflict of Social Systems ....... 563 

Positive Polity must be based on Observation but propagated by the aid of 

Imagination ...... . 666 

Eeview of the chief eiforts to found Positive Polity . . . . 668 

Montesquieu ......... 668 

Condorcet ......... 570 

Condorcet's Classification of Epochs erroneous .... 571 

Law of the Three States ....... 672 

Mathematical attempts to found the science of Positive Polity — Condorcet . 577 

Physiology and the science of Positive Politics — Cabanis . . . 581 

Social Physics a science based on the direct observation of the collective 

developement of mankind ...... 585 

Social Physics, like Physiology, must advance from the general to the par- 
ticular ......... 586 

FOUETH PART. . 

(Novembm- 1826.) 

PHTLOSOPHICAI CONSIDERATIONS ON IKE SCIENCES AND SAVANTS. 

The Law of the Three States ...... 590 

The Classification of the Sciences ... . . 597 

Social Physics needed to complete the Scientific Series . . 598 

. Social Physics hitherto unattainable, but now inevitable . . . 600 

Ixxx 

CONTENTS OF 

Social Physics the indispensable remedy for our mental and moral Anarchy 605 
The Political History of Savants harmonises Trith the Law of the Three 

States . . . . . . . . .607 

The Theocracies ........ 607 

Greece ......... 610- 

Eome and Catholicism . . . . . . .611 

The Middle Ages ..... . . 612 

Modern History of Science and Savants . . . . .613- 

Positive reorganisation of Savants .... . 614- 

FIFTH PART. 
{March 1826.) 

CONSLDBRAIIOirS OIT THE SPIEITITAI. POWBK. 

Confusion of the Spiritual and Temporal Po"wers in Antiquity 

Separation of the Spiritual and Temporal Po-wers initiated in the Middle 

The Modern Bevolution characterised by a rejection of the Division between 
the Spiritual and Temporal Powers ..... 

The decline of the Spiritual Power the cause of International Wars in 
Europe ......... 

Hence also flow disorders in the Internal Organisation of each People 

1. Mental Anarchy ........ 

2. Absence of Public Morality ...... 

3. Social Materialism ....... 

4. Bureaucracy and Corruption ...... 

The Spiritual Reorganisation must adapt itself to Modern Society . 
Education the chief function of the Spiritual Power 

The moral union of Europe and Humanity the second ofSce of the Spiritual 
Power . . ....... 

The Spiritual Power must regulate Modern Industry, as based on the 
Division of Labour ....... 

National and European functions of the Spiritual Power 

Scientific Faith the true basis of Activity ..... 

Spiritual Guidance needed for personal and social Morality . 

Individual freedom resides in the application of ascertained principles 

The Spiritual Power needed for Direction as well as Repression 

International relations need the guidance of the Spiritual Power 

61S 

618 

621 

622 
623 
623 
624 
625 
625 
628 
629 

631 

632 
635 
636 
636 
638 
641 
642 

THE SIXTH AND LAST PART. 
{August 1828.) 

EXAMDfATION OP BROTJSSAIs' TKBAIISE Olf lEElrAIION". 

Physiology has only lately become a Positive Science . . . 645 

Cabanis and Gall on mental and moral phenomena .... 645 

Futility of the so-called method of Internal Observation . . . 646 

Positive Pathology based on General Anatomy. Bichat and Broussais . 649 

Application of Positive Pathology to the theory and treatment of Madness 651 

I Index to thi! Four Volumes ..... 655 

SYSTEM 

OF 

POSITIVE POLITY. 

SYNTHETICAL VIEW OF THE FUTUBE OF MAN. 

GENERAL INTEODUCTION". 
In the two preceding volumes I have explained, in Vol. II, General cha- 

■*■ -. . . , . racter of the 

what the human order is m its primary constituents ; in ™iume. The 

■^ ■' ' fusion of 

Vol. III. what has been the course which its developement, statical and 

■•■ dynamical 

broadly considered, has necessarily taken. On the basis of sociology 

1 • 1 r forthepur- 

these two explanations, my task in this fourth volume is to poses oi reii- 

gion. , 

construct, once for all, the stand-point from which true wisdom 
may embrace the whole range of human thought and action, 
combiniBg for this purpose, as a last step, in Morals the two 
correlative aspects which scierice was obliged to keep pro- 
visionally distinct. But if Philosophy requires that they should 
be appreciated in succession, not less does Eeligion require that 
they should be habitually united, as so only can they guide our 
active Kfe, whether private or public. 

The fusion finds its natural place in this concluding volume, inteiieotu- 
as throughout it, in order to determine man's future, I have siderei' 
to bring into continuous connection the statical and dynamical 
inquiries hitherto carried on in succession. In every conception 
of that future, we must in fact respect equally the general laws 
of man's constitution, and the great leading series of his an- 
tecedents. Lose sight of these two constant conditions, and. 
prevision in Sociology would be inevitably defective either in 
coherence or in precision, and as such inadequate to fulfil its 

VOL. IV. B 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE EUTUBE OE MAN. 

Prevision as 
admissible in 

The fusion 
cansirlpred 
religiously. 

practical purpose. When we undertake, as ray eminent pre- 
cursor Condorcet undertook, to base political science on history, 
our judgment of the past must be so far reduced to system as 
to enable it to reveal the future. The continuity this implies 
requires as the condition of its attainment that man's progress 
never represent aught but the developement of an unchangeable 
order ; the previous study of this order consequently presides 
over all historical explanations. But conversely, by a judicious 
fusion of the two points of view, we may judge the future with 
as much certainty as the past, so irresistible is the conviction 
inspired by a satisfactory agreement between our statical con- 
ceptions and our historical judgments ; and it is in this ultimate 
determination of the future that we see on the one hand the 
principal aim of the two branches of Sociology, on the other the 
conclusive test of their reality. 

"We are in no way bound to discuss the prejudices by which, 
on empirical grounds, the process is rejected as inapplicable in 
social matters, though there is an unanimous recognition of its 
admissibility in the case of all other phenomena. The incon- 
sistency only proves the non-extension as yet of the Positive 
spirit to the most complex order of events. The true cha- 
racteristic of science in all cases is prevision, as its object at 
once and its test, at least in the eyes of all who recognise the 
subjection of all phenomena to invariable laws. This theoretical 
conclusion holds good in Sociology more than in any other 
science, as its phenomena are at once the most important and 
the most modifiable. Hence it was that Condorcet was led to 
conclude his sketch of the past with an outline of the future, 
and the failure of my spiritual father was solely due to the 
absence of a systematic view of history. 

From the religious point of view, the definitive combination 
of the two previous volumes which this volume is intended' to 
form, consists in the giving full effect to the supremacy in/the 
scale of the sciences of Morals over Sociology properly so called, 
in obedience to the principle established in Vol. II. Ch. I. , Jn 
fact, any really systematic guidance of man, even in his priyiate 
conduct, is impossible without a certain determination of the 
future. This future depends in some degree on our own efifofts, 
and therefore can never admit as exact a judgment as the past. 
But over and above the inutility of such exactness under this 
condition, to be efficacious our interference must adapt itself 

GENEEAL INTRODUCTION, 3 

always on one side to our nature which is unchangeable, on the 
other to the developement of that nature through successive 
ages. It follows that Morals, and this is true even of practical 
morality, are objectively dependent on Sociology — on statical 
(Sociology in the first place, then on dynamical — as determining 
the primary direction of all our tendencies without exception. 
If our advance is to be really positive in its character, it must 
rest on the theory of order and of progress equally, the one in- 
dispensable as . a security against caprice, the other necessary 
to ensure relativity, Without the theory of order the in^ 
adequacy of our conviction of the prevailing unity would 
expose us to indefinite oscillations; without that of progress 
we should have for guidance nothing but inapplicable or vagiie 
precepts in default of any particular adaptation to the given 
situation. 

To ensure the final and complete fusion of the two aspects Dynamical 
of Sociology, its dynamical must, whilst retaining their own ordinatodto 
proper character, be kept in constant subordination to its cepkons. 
statical conceptions. The necessary and systematic elimination 
of time in these latter in no way impairs their reality, either 
from the scientific, or even the practical point of view. The 
paramount importance we justly attach to them is due to this, 
that from them we draw directly our conception of that fun- 
damental imity towards which our nature, individual and social, 
more and more is tending. In imagination we often mix up 
all the ages in order to place more vividly before us the perma- 
nent conditions of existence, witness in particular the greatest of 
all epic poems, the ' Divina Commedia.' The general supremacy 
thus accorded to Statical Sociology is peculiarly appropriate to 
it when dealing, as in this volume we deal, with the future, for 
in that future we have man in his maturity, whereas in the 
past we see merely the gradual and preparatory evolution of 
the type. 

Although, however, as science or as art. Morals must Thehistori- 
always be statical rather than dynaniical, yet if they are to everpnBent. 
be in the full sense of the term Positive, there must be a large 
admixture of the historical spirit and feeling. If deficient in 
this respect, they would fall short of the relativity indispensable 
to the reality of all our conceptions, but nowhere so indispen- 
sable as in the immediate systematic direction of our conduct. 
Individual existence, as national, is so influenced by the situa-i 

B 2 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

The dynami- 
cal apprecia- 
tion as 
presented in 
tins volume. 

Completion 
of the 

method and 
the doctrine. 

tion resulting from its history, that to regulate it as a whole 
we have always to modify the general conceptions of human 
unity by taking into account the actual stage of its develope- 
ment. In no other way can we form the manners and habits 
appropriate to each period, avoiding aberrations traceable to 
misconceptions of the difference of times, such aberrations 
being either the simple result of routine, or due to a false 
system. Hence it is that history remains barren, nay, often 
becomes misleading, for we see in it a mass of examples instead 
of looking for a series of preparations, in the inter-dependence 
of which lies their real utility. 

In the preceding volume the dynamical conception is 
always so presented as to form the complement of the statical, 
on which it rests as its basis ; each period, that is, is regarded 
as intended more fully to embody the type common to all, the 
type gradually, tliough imperfectly, evolved by its predecessors. 
I have now to carry on the succession of the ages — the filiation 
of man — so far as to determine the normal state, the advent 
of which is shown by the whole past to be at hand. Direct 
observation is here unattainable, but as a compensation we 
have the more complete predominance of statical ideas, and 
the more extensive series of historical judgments. To guard 
against illusion, in every step of our argument we have but to 
see that we are in entire accordance on the one hand with the 
nature of man, on the other with the sum of his antecedents. 
Thus doubly checked, we may, in regard to the future, arrive 
at conclusions as demonstrable as, though less exact than, the 
conclusions reached in regard to past periods ; the investi- 
gation of which could not be of equal logical value from the 
want of a sufficient field for observation. 

In accordance with the object of this concluding volume, 
its task is to complete the Positive doctrine and method by 
subjecting them, as it does quite naturally, to a treatment 
hitherto inadmissible, and yet the only one which can establish 
a satisfactory agreement between theory and practice. In it 
the judicious combination of statical and dynamical Sociology 
will define the legitimate position of time in the sum total of 
human conceptions. In it Morals will take their place at the 
head of the encyclopaedic hierarchy as a direct consequence of 
the normal convergence of all positive theories towards the 
regfulation of the conduct of nations and individuals. 

GENERAL INTEODTJCTION. 5 

, This, the definitive constitution of the human Synthesis, may The presi- 
•with advantage be condensed in a form suggested by its in- raisTcoords' 
evitable agreement with the constitution of the human brain, cerebmi^con- 
Whilst ever asserting the complete supremacy of feeling, I have man. 
been compelled hitherto to concentrate the attention mainly 
on intellect and action as the dominant sociological forces. 
But with the growth of these beyond dispute, comes the period 
for their taking their true place in the human system, an 
ultimate destination which leads to the explicit recognition 
of the preponderance of feeling as the independent domain of 
morals. 

After indicating the general character of this fourth volume The object 

~^ , and connec- 

as devoted to the direct construction of the Positive religion, tion of the 

° five chapters 

a statement of the obiect and connection of its five chapters is of the 
required for the completeness of this introduction. 

volume. 

Taken together, their ultimate object is to lay the foundations General ob- 
for a policy capable of directing on system the unsystematic 
advance of each people towards the normal state, the time for 
whicih, as I have shown, is come. But the direct construction of 
this policy miist be reserved for the last chapter, as it requires 
for its basis a sketch of the human order more complete at 
once, and more exact than the primary outline drawn in our 
social statics. In its larger half the volume deals with this 
capital operation, an operation which is of itself the inaugura- 
tion of the state it describes ; for what is the maturity of the 
race but its hitherto spontaneous action reduced to system ? 
A satisfactory conception of the general future of Humanity 
thus attained, the proximate phase of that future will become 
quite intelligible, and as such will make it clear what in detail 
is to be the course of the transitional period of organisation. 

Examine these two consecutive operations, and it will 
appear that the essence of the one is the exposition of the 
definitive religion, of the other its application in the present. 
So real and so complete is the Positive synthesis, that its true 
exposition involves the definite presentation of the adult age 
of Humanity, just as the indispensable preparation for that syn- 
thesis represents its age of initiation. 

For a satisfactory exposition of the religion of Humanity, The objects 
the guide of our maturitv under all aspects, we need first to ohapterssnc- 
grasp it as a whole, then to survey each of its essential con- 
stituents. Hence the first chapter establishes directly the 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Belation of 
Vol. iv. to 
tiie precetl- 
ing volumes. 

Effects ol 
this primacy 
of morals. 

fundamental theory of the Great Being, and as a consequence 
gives a general view of man's normal existence. Proceeding 
from this synthetical basis, we have in the second chaptei* 
the system of worship, in the third that of the doctrine, in the 
fourth that of the life, thus regulating the three elements of our 
nature, feeling, intellect, and activity. Then in the fifth and 
last chapter we intercalate the present between the future and 
the past, in order to close the Western Eevolution, and in order 
to avoid its recurrence or reproduction in the rest of the worldi 
So the volume as a whole, condensed in a general conclusion^ 
on which follows the conclusion of the whole work, is destined 
to inaugurate definitively the Positive Eeligion as a conse- 
quence of its direct exposition of that religion, triumphantly 
applied to practice. 

Such a statement is for the present suflBcient to produce 
the sense that the fourth volume is adapted to fuse and to 
complete the leading conceptions of the three others, iu ac- 
cordance with the spirit of the ' General View.' Iq it my 
religious construction and the philosophy on which it rests 
as its foundation, will be at once marked off from one another 
by the definitive transfer to Morals of the encyclopaedic primacy 
originally assigned to Sociology in the proper sense of the term. 
Sociocracy, the ultimate, must thus be brought into con- 
nection with Theocracy, the initial stage of the race, and closes 
the period of transition which separates the two, a period of 
ever deepening revolution, the leading characteristic of which 
has been the gTowing tendency of intellect to rebel against 
feeling. 

The paramount position thus irreversibly assigned to jMorals 
issues in the subjection of man's life at length to a real and 
complete discipline, a discipline in constant harmony with his 
true wants. The relative character distinctive of that dis- 
cipline does not make it less regular ; far otherwise, it gives it 
strength and vigour, as it eliminates caprice as well as all 
absolute tendencies by allowing for the just influence of time, 
by making, that is, our dynamical conceptions ultimately react 
on our statical principles. Man's emotional nature wears an 
appearance of unchangeability, but this is but an appearance ; it 
is inevitably subject to constant modifications, slower it may 
be, but as regular as those of his intellect and his activity, the 
progress of which again, it should be remembered, bears upon 

(GENERAL INTEO])trCTION/ 7 

the means which feeling employs. The creation of Positive 
Ethics, the work of this volume, will as a natural consequence 
bring into relief the truth, that throughout the phenomena of 
human life, equally as with all other phenomena, movement 
and existence are radically at one. The natural result of 
making the emotional nature finally paramount will be, to es- 
.tablish a complete agreement between theory and practice, as 
the impulse given by either concurs with that simultaneously 
derived from the other, both together aiding us in our system- 
atic conception of the normal state and the last phase of the 
transition. The indispensable convergence of the two will 
appear in this volume to be a necessary deduction from our 
primary principle, that in all cases considerations of progress 
are subordinate to those of order. This law applies equally to 
the art and science of Morals ; we have only to extend to the 
improvements of our own creation a relation originally mani- 
fested in changes over which we had no control. 

In my judgment of the future and the present, I need not 
aim at a greater degree of exactness than that attainable in the 
preceding volumes in the treatment respectively of order and 
progress. Though merely approximative, it is sufficient for 
any immediate want* When succeeding generations come to 
need more detailed rules, they will draw them from moral 
science by the aid of an advance in sociological science, such 
advance at times involving a corresponding progress in Biology, 
perhaps even in Cosmology. 

8 SYSTEM OP POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

CHAPTER I. 

THE rUNDAMENTAL THEORY, THE THEORY OF THE GREAT BEING; 
WHENCE A CONSPECTUS OF THE RELIGION OF THE RACE ADD 
OF ITS EXISTENCE IN THE NORMAL STATE. 

Special In- Its foundations laid in Social Statics, the Positive religion has 

TUODUCTIONj ITT p-Tfc 

pp. 8-23. already irrevocably taken possession of the Past m its whole 
The Priest- range, which never was within the cognisance of the earlier 

hood of Hu- , , , 1 . i ■, ? 

maiiitymiist and absolute synthesis. As a sequel of this decisive step the 

embrace the i r» tx i r» 

future as priesthood of Humanity must now take possession of the J uture 

well as the J i 

past. also, that it may impart to the Present the combined impulse 

of its predecessors and its successors. It will then have com- 
pleted its attributions by the addition of a new and equally 
characteristic function — the function of the prophet — to its 
primary office of judge, and so complete, it will soon overcome 
the existing anarchy, unprecedented though it be, for it wiU 
bring to bear on that object in permanent combination the 
whole intellectual and moral powers of man. 
Functions oJ The Spiritual power of the West in its three social attri- 
hood.^Test butes of couusel, consecration, and regulation has more and 
tence."^"™'"'" more fallen into desuetude since the end of the Middle Ages, 
by virtue of the gradual downfall of the provisional beliefs. 
Eaised to new life by the definitive belief, its future course will 
be one of unceasing and efficient action. The necessity of its 
revival is "now submitted to the most unambiguous of tests, 
viz. its exclusive competence to thoroughly reconcile, order and 
progress. 
Difficulty of For an adequate estimate of the difficulty of this task, we 

ordSVith must place ourselves at the historical point of view, as we are 
shown Ml- enabled to do by the preceding volume. The past is divisible- 
onca y. ^^^^ ^^^ great periods : the one, common in its essential features 
to all nations, includes Fetichism and Theocracy ; the other, 
peculiar to the Western nations, effects as a spontaneous pro- 
cess the transition from Theocracy to Sociocracy. Now the two 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 9 

periods, as successive stages of the education of the race, repre- 
sent the one, order, the other, progress ; and it is the existing 
discord between order and progress that expresses in its latest 
form the inevitable opposition of the East and the West. For 
the order compatible with man's initiation, taken as a whole, 
was really alone attained under the theocratic organisation, in 
which we have the true source of the opinions which in many 
respects still govern the Western mind. On the other hand, 
all the progress in speculation, in action, and in affection made 
by the West during the last thirty centuries has been more and 
more revolutionary in its character, as is most strikingly shown 
in the system of election and the impairment of the sense of 
continuity. If the close of the Middle Ages is always to be 
taken as marking the beginning of the Western revolution, it 
is so taken only because that is the epoch at which the move- 
ment passed into anarcliy, on the exhaustion of Catholicism, 
the latest form of the provisional synthesis. But the three 
partial evolutions which succeeded one another previously had 
been in no real sense organic, save as regarded one particular 
aspect of our nature, to the sacrifice of the other two ; none of 
the three could offer the peculiar completeness which attached 
to the discipline of Theocracy. 

The initiation of the race, then, under the auspices of the oscillation 
theological synthesis, first establishes order, but an order which ord^Md 
has an increasing tendency to become retrograde, sanctioning, applrent ie-° 
though unable to attain, entire fixity ;■ then progress, but a 
progress which grew more and more revolutionary, a progress 
incompatible with unity. It was not till the latest phase of 
modern anarchy that the true principle of the movement of 
society could take a definite form and statement, the entire 
completion of the training process being the necessary condition 
of such statement. Hence its first proclamation had a ten- 
dency to sanction an indefinite agitation more alien to human 
nature, whether in the individual or in the society, than the 
stagnation of Theocracy. If this tendency were to remain un- 
checked, it would seem that in the future the two necessities 
of Humanity, order and progress, far from combining, would 
but stand in more systematic opposition, and so there would be 
renewed, in an aggravated form, the spontaneous divergence 
manifested in the past. Whilst retrograde theologians are 
alarmed at the thought that nothing short of miracle can 

10 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PUTURE OF MAN, 

The remedy 
to be found 
in the true 
picture of 
the luture. 

Affinity of 
Positivism 
for the pre- 
vious re- 
gimes. 

prevent the entire dissolution of society, the metaphysicians who 
advocate progress justify their opponents' alarm by their aspi- 
rations, for the practical issue of those aspirations would be the 
overthrow of all the institutions on which society ultimately 
rests. 

In this state of things, to calm the blind anxiety of the 
former whilst correcting the vague hopes of the latter, what is 
needed is a true picture of the future of Humanity. The 
priesthood of Positivism, connecting directly Sociocracy and 
Theocracy, will represent the intervening period of transition 
as inevitable in the West, and as issuing finally in the modifi- 
cation and completion of the original conception of order by 
the substitution of a relative for an absolute order. The change 
is indispensable, and in no way implies a lower estimate of 
order ; on the contrary, it consolidates and extends the power 
of the principle of organisation, as a consequence of duly suIh 
ordinating movement to existence. This systematic conception 
of the human order tends to make it more complete and more 
stable, as more in conformity with our whole nature. Un- 
questionably the future will witness no retui-n of the series, of 
a stagnant order, a dispersive transition, and as the latest step 
in such transition, an oscillation between retrogression and 
anarchy. What it will see is the continuous developement of a 
relative synthesis, such developement, even when the result of 
man's conscious efforts, consisting essentially in the perfecting 
the unity which constitutes the synthesis. Whilst, however, 
we allow for systematic modifications of order, there must be 
none of the abrupt changes which were fated throughout history 
to be the distinctive features of the second period of the edu- 
cation of mankind. 

The great task of the manhood of the race being the 
discipline of the powers developed in its period of preparation^ 
there is a natural connection between our ultimate condition 
and the complete series of its antecedents. Each singly, looked 
on as a necessary step in our advance, claims and deserves our 
gratitude and veneration, a gratitude and veneration which 
will deepen as our estimate rises of the peculiar difiBculties 
attaching to an evolution which had no guide but experience. 
Each singly offers more than this, it offers a special programme 
which, transitory in its original form, is eternal in its substance. 
Where in the past there was succession, in the fiitm-e there 

Chap. I.J THEORY OF THE GREAT BEING. 11 

must be co-existence, for all the social states of the 'past, though 
apparently contradictory, answered to so many wants or ten- 
dencies of human nature, and as such must be susceptible 
of harmony. So we verify the complete and exclusive com- 
petence of the Positive religion by virtue of its relative cha- 
racter for the ultimate regeneration of Humanity, to which 
all our aspirations will converge, each having lost the peculiar 
features which for the time placed it in opposition with the 
others. 

This afiBnity of Positivism for all earlier states, an affinity 
implied in its idea, has been already conclusively shown in the 
preceding volume, especially in reference to the earliest of all, 
Fetichism. But the full expansion of the idea belongs to our 
general survey of the future, for no religion could gain uni- 
versal acceptance in that future unless able to sanction in a 
certain degree the various tendencies of the past. 

At present I have to show the dependence of all these Authepro- 

^ ^ granimes 

programmes, aU. alike unsystematic, on the programme of the subordinate 
theocratic period, the Theocracy alone being in its way complete *he Theo- 
and coherent. 

True completeness constitutes the main value, as it con- complete- 

^ ' ness the test 

stitutes the great difficulty of the discipline of man ; if it do S-''""? 

o J r ' discipline. 

not extend to our whole nature, it must ever be precarious as 

well as inadequate. For thirty centuries the priestly castes of ^Jqv''"'"^^ 

China, and still more of India, have been watching our Western i""!'"- 

transition ; to them it must appear mere agitation, as puerile 

as it is tempestuous, with nothing to harmonise its dififerent 

phases but their common inroad upon unity. But on the 

advent of Positivism, they will soon come to feel that the series 

of partial evolutions has issued in the most complete and 

most stable order, offering to the East an acceptable union 

with the West, the concert of the race for the developement 

of all the attributes of Humanity. 

In its systematic constitution of this ultimate state, the Jf''t°]j™Theo- 
definitive re-introduction of the basic formula of the Theocracy a^Sesby 
is of itself conclusive evidence of the complete agreement of sodocraoy. 
the sociocratic and theocratic priesthoods. To know in order 
to improve, the motto of our primeval ancestors, will equally, 
with our remotest posterity, be the expression habitually used 
to indicate the bounden duty of the intellect to devote itself 
continuously to the service of society. The intervening period 

12 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUKE OF MAN. 

of transition from one to the other regime has for result the 
perfecting the formula, by inserting prevision between know- 
ledge and action, as in the absence of this link the agreement 
between the extremes could not but rest on merely empirical 
grounds, until the idea of law triumphed over that of will. 
But the Western mind has been so trained by its more recent 
education to look upon prevision as the result of theory and 
the basis of action, that the intermediate term may be sup- 
pressed in the formula, provided that we are ever ready to 
replace it. By this adherence to its original form, we render 
it more apt to express the really important combination, 
making it a better definition of true wisdom without diverting 
the attention in ordinary cases to a progression which is uni- 
versally admitted. 

To appreciate at its true value the indispensable harmony 
of the two priesthoods, we must extend it so as to embrace 
their instinctive agreement as to what is the most important 
sphere of man's effort, of his intellectual no less than his 
practical effort. Sociocracy adopts definitively the great funda- 
mental tendency of Theocracy to claim for Morals the first 
place, equally as science and as art. Whilst the theory of 
human nature controls both in method and doctrine the whole 
encyclopaedic hierarchy, this, the highest branch of study, is in 
turn controlled by the directly practical nature of its object. 
\ Naturally then the ultimate S3rnthesis is destined to con- 
solidate and develope the initial in all its leading featiures, and 
it will enable us to form a juster estimate of the merit and 
difficulty of that effort, even whilst establishing an unity of a 
completer, purer, and more stable kind. 
'Affinity of More unmistakeable still is the natural aflinity of Posi- 

with the tivism for the characteristics respectively of the three periods 
traneitioDs: of transition, each of which, succeeding its predecessor by a 
necessary law, was the direct source of a distinct contribution 
to the solution of the Western problem. 
(1) Greek. Although our final state will subordinate the intellect 

to the heiixt more wisely than any other could, it will offer 
a more favourable field for the true cultm-e of man's mental 
powers than was possible under the undue predominance ac- 
corded to the intellect in the Greek evolution. An integral 
constituent of Positive life, as the normal complement of happi- 
ness and improvement, art will evoke purer and more universal 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 13 

sympathies than it could do when there was a tendency to 
sacrifice to it feeling and activity. As it has become the doctrinal 
basis of religion, science, no longer separable from philosophy, 
will, as disciplined by Soeiocracy, enter on wider fields, and 
acquire a greater power than it could acquire under the 
undisciplined anarchy which, in the course of events, replaced the 
oppressive yoke of Theocracy, 

In the future, Humanity will stamp with a special sanction (2) Roman. 
the two characteristics of the social life of Kome : its decided 
preference of action to speculation, and its constant subor- 
dination of private to public life. Drawing out the naturally 
collective character of human activity, so long of necessity 
individual, the adult age of the race will embody firmly both 
these conditions, which have lost but too much during its 
adolescence, from the inability of Catholicism to accept them. 
Whilst deeply conscious of the superiority of the industrial to 
the military life, Positivist nations will ever recognise that 
war had great moral and political utility as a preparation, 
being as it was the only spontaneous type of temporal organi- 
sation. 

Catholicism was ungrateful to its Greek and Eoman ante- (S) Meai- 
cedents, but the regenerate West, whilst not deterred by this 
action of Catholicism from paying habitual honour to our 
intellectual and social progenitors, will know how to reconcile 
such honour with due reverence for the Middle Ages. Although 
the medisBval or affective transition could offer no real discipline 
for our powers, either of speculation or action, yet from the 
mere fact that it inherited those powers in an advanced state 
of cultivation, it was able to give a better form to the pro- 
gramme of man's action than that of the earlier theocracy. 
The Positivist, equally with the Middle-Age construction, only 
more directly and more unreservedly, asserts the supremacy of 
feeling, but without unduly hampering the intellect or activity, 
and as a natural result of its assertion vindicates the wisdom 
of Catholicism and the soundness of the feudal instinct. 

The relativity, which is its characteristic, enables the final 
religion fully to recognise the advantages accruing to the race 
during the two periods of its childhood, from the fusion of the 
spiritual and temporal powers effected first by the priests, then 
by the military class. Not the less will it deeply honour the 
triumphant effort of its adolescence to establish the separation 

Eeval. 

14 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

of the two as their normal relation. The heart and the intellect 
concur in this conciliatory judgment as indispensable to the 
true love or the true understanding of the Great Being, the 
condition of such love or understanding being the right appre^ 
ciation of the several periods of unsystematic preparation which 
must precede its systematic creation. 
th"mod"n'' Impelled by the same relativity, the Western world wiU 
Bevoiurion. justly extend its gratitude to the singtdar period of anarchy 
which, in the course of events, followed on the above series of 
transitions of a partially organic character. Ultimately, no 
doubt, the whole education of the race in its entirety is tlie 
basis of settlement, but immediately, the settlement must issue 
from the double movement of destruction and construction ; 
from the negative as well as the positive operation peculiar 
to the last five centuries. The true religion has to look for 
its adherents mainly to the conservative, party ; but for its 
origin, it could take its rise nowhere but in the revolutionary 
camp ; there its first germs found a due welcome as heralding 
the satisfaction of an imperious want, the termination of the 
revolutionary movement. 
Fetichjst j[n this introductory recapitulation of the points of afiSnity 

period J i. r j 

reeerrea. between the future and each of the great constituent phases of 
the past, there seems at first sight an omission ; it does not 
include, that is, the regime adapted to the infancy of mankind. 
The readers of the third volume, however, must have felt that 
this solitary exception, far from indicating less sympathy 
between Positivism and Fetichism, is on the contrary a con- 
sequence of their closer connection. The various forms of 
Theologism have wholly to disappear, leaving no other traces 
as a rule but the perpetual celebration of the services they . 
rendered in their day; hence the obligation to recall their 
several contributions, so indispensable as steps in the prepara- 
tion of the ultimate state. Fetichism, on the other hand, 
alone of the series of educational states, by virtue of its un-r 
equalled spontaneity, is destined to incorporation with Posi- 
tivism, and the passage from the one to the other might be 
immediate. I was justified then in reserving any indication 
of this enduring affinity for the occasions which will natul-ally 
arise in the course of the volume for its exposition in detail. 
Eesuitofthe Summing up the five antecedent comparisons, Sociocracy 
plriBo"^.' will combine the synthetic power of the Theocracy with the 

Ch4p. I.] THEOEY OF THE GREAT BEING. 1 5 

threefold stimulus derived from the three successive periods 
oi partial and transitional organisation, and the result of the 
combination will be the carrying out of the true programme 
of the revolution, which it is its task to close. In this way- 
all the stages of the preparatory life of man, all without ex-' 
ception, contribute to inaugurate the definitive form of his 
existence. This convergence of all the epochs of the past to 
the future is but a consequence of the fact that the problem 
for the race has always been in substance one and the same : 
viz. to constitute as far as possible the general unity of our 
nature for the individual and the society. Not to mention 
that each fresh approximation to such an end necessarily rested 
on the succession of previous steps, the entire series is required 
when we come to the special question of the solution, the 
systematic solution, of the problem, for otherwise it were im- 
possible to state it aright. We may add that the sevei-al 
programmes of the past all admit of combination, provided that 
we begin by disengaging them from the perishable forms 
which alone rendered them conflicting. 

Such a fusion of the normal state with the whole of the The fusion 
existence which has prepared it, offers us at once the strongest withaepast 
guarantee for the stability of the future, and the best guide in Sawuty °^ 
determining its general character. As the philosophy of history ™udancS 
rests beyond dispute upon social Statics, these are henceforth its 
most conclusive summary. For there can be no surer mode of 
gaining a right conception of the conditions of unity than by 
tracing it in the consecutive phases of its natural development. 
Hence the dependence of the future on the past, though not of 
our choice, is so far from an obstacle to our meditations on the ' 

- process of reconstruction, that without it they could not be 
sound and fruitful. By its aid we may avoid, in regard to 
them, any Utopian speculation, or retrace our steps if we have 
fallen into one, and this even on the secondary points on which 
the series of our antecedents does not throw light enough to 
supersede the necessity of some additional deductions. 

Nor on any other method could we so present the future as Their neg- 
that its conception, accepted by all the Western nations in the methoVex- 
first place, then meeting, as it is bound to do, the wants of the Fm^tem:e 
less advanced portions of mankind, should gradually, by its free ut^Sasr 
adoption, inaugurate the religion of Humanity. One Utopia 
after another has, during the last three centuries, claimed the 

16 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

guidance of the movemeut towards definitive reorganisation, 
none has ever united in real conviction two human souls. Their 
common failure is simply due to their always having attempted 
to conceive the future independently, and not as deduced from 
the past as a whole, a conception beyond our grasp prior to the 
rise of Positivism. Thus isolated, prophecy was inevitably 
as barren as it was chimerical when dealing with phenomena, 
the complex nature of which involves the highest difficulty for 
the imagination, even with all the aid derived from obser- 
vation. In Biology we can hardly imagine a completely new 
organism free from all incompatibilities. In Sociology the 
difficulty is naturally much greater ; there the freest dreams 
have ever fallen short of actual changes, the most striking 
instance being that of slavery. Yet the persistent recmTence 
in recent times of Utopias, undeterred by their inevitable failm'e, 
was a sign that the time was approaching for satisfying the 
instinct of continuity which has been characteristic of the in- 
tellect of Western Europe ever since its abandonment of a 
heavenly for an earthly future. 
Properties of We are thus led to recognise in the Positive Eeliaion two 

the Positive ° ° 

religion: tbe properties, the one intellectual, the other moral, standing in 

mtroduotioa r r :> ' £> 

of pveyision; close relation to one another, and in their consequences forminff 

the basing *■ ° 

unity on ia- a clue to the leadmg conceptions of the present volume. These 

nate altru- i i 

ism. properties are, on the one hand, the perfecting the constitution 

of our minds by extending prevision to all phenomena without 
exception ; on the other hand, the basing the unity of our 
emotional nature on the innate existence of the sympathetic 
instincts. The two attributes are inherent in true Positivity, 
and follow on the simultaneous substitution of a demonstrable 
faith for belief in the supernatural, of pacific industry for exist- 
ence founded upon war. 

Fii-st attri- It were a waste of time here to prove, that to determine the 

bute — pre- 
vision, future by the past is everywhere the note of a reaUy rational 

method, as establishing the true connection between speculation 
and action. During the last three centuries science has satis- 
factorily exhibited this power, its conclusive test, while industry 
has, as a natural result, popularised the conception. But the 
most powerful minds dare not as yet apply it in its most im- 
portant sphere, owing to their not substituting in that spherp 
laws for causes. 

None the less is it to social and moral phenomena more 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 17 ' 

than others, that rational prevision is applicable, seeing that Pre™ioii 
continuity is the distinctive characteristic of sociological con- piicabTto 
ceptions, and it is to them that, objectively, our thoughts on nomenaf ^' 
Morals must be subordinated. 

It follows that the futiu:e of Humanity offers the best field 
for, the intellect as for the activity of man. To determine that 
future, and to inaugurate it, — for both equally we need the same 
principle of historical filiation, the recognition of the necessary 
dependence of the future on the past in which it has its roots, 
and from which it derives its guidance. The inductions of 
dynamical require, it is true, in all cases to be verified by com- 
paring them with the deductions of statical sociology, but they 
are our sole immediate means for the right construction of that 
synoptical survey of man's future on which alone we can hence- 
forward consent to lean. 

The achievement of this construction will at no distant 
period ensure the universal triumph of the Positive religion, 
putting an end at once to agitation and stagnation, both 
equally noxious — both equally empirical. Theology and Meta- 
physics, from a sense of their common incompetence as regards 
this highest domain of human thought, will doubtless unite 
with the distinct object of resisting the solution offered by 
Positivism. Their ineffectual protest will but serve to display 
more clearly its exclusive competence to satisfy the chief want 
of modern reason. 

The determination of the future, adapted as it is to form a The true 
rallying point for man's instinctive aspirations and his philo- noweatlb- 
sophic tendencies, is the foundation for the direct inauguration 
of the religion of Humanity as the natural sequel of this work. 
The result must be the definitive establishment of the true 
Synthesis, since all sound speculations will converge to regulate 
the general action of the Western nations. Moral science, thus 
tested and found able to stand the test, will be supreme from 
the subjective, dependent from the objective, point of view, and 
the combination of the two constitutes it the immutable basis 
of our unity, both in theory and practice. 

Allowing its just importance to this intellectual attribute innatenees 
of Positivism, we must attach superior value even intellectually ° * ""^°^^ 
to the moral attribute which completes it, and this on the 
grbund of its greater influence on the creation of the true 
Synthesis. For this very reason Theology and Metaphysics reject 
VOL. lY. c 

18 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

Innate al- 
trui'siii ne- 
cessary if 
"we would 
construct a 
systematic 
morality 
statically. 

Dynami- 
cally. 

instinctive altruism more unreservedly than they reject socio- 
logical prevision. The innateness of the benevolent instincts 
and the earth's motion are the most important results of modem 
science, as laying the essential bases, the one the subjective, 
the other the objective, of true relativity. The two prepared 
the way for Positivism, but had to wait for its advent for their 
due influence on man's whole existence. Dimly seen, each 
in its own way, at the very beginning of our advance, they 
could not emerge into full light till Monotheism had lost its 
power. 

Standing in direct connection with the fundamental prin- 
ciple of the Positive synthesis, the doctrine of innate altruism 
alone enables us to establish a systematic morality, which, by 
virtue of its subordination objectively to Sociology, may take 
the presidency, subjectively, of the encyclopsedic hierarchy. 
Before the establishment of this doctrine, in fact. Morals were 
universally recognised as supreme, but that they were so was 
due to the wisdom of the priesthood ; their supremacy was an 
empirical truth not able to stand discussion. Theoricians aimed 
at placing philosophy, practical men politics, above Morals, 
as a branch of study which seemed limited to the individual, 
the social point of view being as yet inaccessible. If the un- 
selfish instincts are not part of man's nature the problem of 
man's life is insoluble, and is not even susceptible of any syn- 
thetical statement. Unity from within, subjective unity, thus 
unattainable by man in consequence of the antagonism between 
the individual and the species, philosophy would have per- 
petually oscillated between the various attempts at an objective 
systematisation. Over and above, then, its value as an aSective, 
the innateness of our sympathies has great importance as an 
intellectual, conclusion, as indispensable to any abstract con- 
ception of social existence. But by virtue of this very con- 
nection, its triumphant demonstration, hampered as it was, 
moreover, by the obstacles offered by theological beliefs and 
metaphysical hypotheses, naturally coincided with the definitive 
advent of Sociology. 

To give its full signification to this indispensable connec- 
tion we must trace it even in social dynamics, though it may 
appear applicable solely in statics. It is easy to see that, were 
it not so traced, we could not form the practical scale of man's 
progress, which, originally material, becomes subsequently in- 

Chap. I.] THEOEY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 19 

tellectual, and finally moral ; for we should, in regard to it, be 
simply coordinating means without taking account of the end. 
Further, on the same hypothesis, any philosophical theory of 
the whole evolution of the race would also become impossible, 
from the want of any natural condensation. The preceding 
volume proves to our satisfaction that progress, in reference to 
the affections, whilst not amenable to any direct impulse, is 
the resultant, the necessary resultant, of the two simultaneous 
movements of the intellect and the activity. Had the advance 
of the two no effect in modifying feeling, it could never be 
more than a preparatory step, and as such could not be brought 
under any really comprehensive law. This necessary adaptation 
of the emotional changes, to be the condensed expression of the 
whole human evolution, cannot be a property of egoism ; it 
resides exclusively in altruism, for it is altruism alone which 
.enables us to represent the entire movement by the gradual 
advance towards ascendancy of the social feelings. Thus it is 
that in the social instincts we find the source of order and the 
aim of progress, and this as a consequence of their non-contact 
with the external world, their dependent position making it, 
however, more difiicult to estimate them, veiled as they are by 
the dominion of egoism. 

Adopting this conclusion, the two leading attributes, moral socioioKioai 
and intellectual, of complete positivity are henceforth to be amiirinate 
held inseparable. So long as social phenomena are not brought henceforLh 

■'- ° ■*■ o iusepiitable. 

within the scope of scientific prevision, the innateness of the 
benevolent instincts cannot be demonstrated so conclusively as 
to overcome the repugnance of theologians and the sophisms of 
metaphysicians. But conversely, the past as a whole remains 
unintelligible if in its study we have not the guidance afforded 
by a full conviction of the innateness of these instincts, they 
alone rendering collective existence a possibility. In their 
origin a protest against an oppressive system, the two doctrines 
will now preside at the inauguration of the second period of 
man's existence, nor could we hope for a better aid at its open- 
ing. But, allowing this, it is still for the peaceful develope- 
ment of our maturity that is reserved the main growth of the 
two attribute's, when all the struggles of preparation and 
installation finally over, the normal powers alone come into 
view. 

Still, in reference to the two, we must not go too far in 

20 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

Previous re- 
cognition of 
the two in 
Fefcichibm 
and Poly- 
ttieism. 

In Mono- 
tiaeism. 

claiming them as exclusive characteristics of the Positive state, 
as that might clash with what has been previously said of the 
general connection of the second life of the race with its first. 
It is only since its inevitable decline that the older Synthesis 
has been really adverse to these attributes. In its period of 
power it naturally lent encouragement to their spontaneous 
growth, which had been impossible without it. Firstly, there 
was no incompatibility between Fetichism and scientific pre- 
vision, the rudiments of which we trace in regard to celestial 
phenomena ; still less was there such incompatibility in regard 
to the direct recognition of the value of the sympathetic in- 
stincts. And although Theologism proved less favourable, yet 
as Polytheism it encouraged both attributes on a decisive scale. 
By the extension of divination, the priestly, as the military, 
period of antiquity fostered the practice of prevision in the 
only form admissible under the then conditions of intelligence 
and action. Altruism could not receive its due recognition in the 
polytheistic Synthesis, but the vague presentation of it which 
that Synthesis allowed, was sufficient to extract their beneficial 
effects from the impulses of practical life, so long as the fusion 
of the two powers concentrated man's attention upon his earthly 
existence. 

Passing to Monotheism, it is its doctrine alone that is re- 
sponsible for its more marked opposition to these associate 
attributes, and the defects in that doctrine were long counter- 
balanced by the wisdom of its priesthood and the influences of 
the social state. In the name . of its doctrine, Catholicism, the 
religion of our adolescence, proscribed the divination appro- 
priate to our childhood, but could not substitute prevision, as 
that was reserved for our adult age, and the proscription would 
have seriously compromised an indispensable branch of mental 
cultivation had not some fortunate inconsistencies tempered 
the compression. Astrolatry, anterior in time and superior in 
value to Theologism, in defiance of the ofiBcial belief, was the 
source of a philosophical impulse which saved our tendency to 
look forward from irreparable disuse, and gained the victory 
over the competing power of revelation. As for altruism, the 
monotheistic period of transition found in its system of life the 
corrective of its doctrinal antagonism. Its purely objective 
immortality gave, it is true, in principle the predominance to 
absolute egoism, but the result, in a social point of view, of the 

Chap. I.] THEOEY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 2l 

doctrine was the separation, however imperfect, of the spiritual 
and temporal power, and the consequence of that separation 
was, throughout the whole Western world, the culture — -the 
indirect it may be, yet the decisive culture — of our moral 
nature. The sympathetic portion of our nature was the su- 
preme province of the divine power, and the defective theory 
of human nature was hereby corrected as far as it could be. 
Moreover, as a,ny moral discipline whatever tends to second the 
spontaneous growth of the benevolent inclinations, they really 
found the greatest encouragement under the empire of the 
beliefs which were least disposed to admit their existence. 

Practically, then, the adverse attitude of the older Syntheses The hos- 
to the two attributes of Positivism must be limited to the Monrtheism 
decline of Monotheism during the "Western revolution, when itTaecMne. 
the priesthood had lost its power of correcting the doctrine. 
But the peculiar circumstances of that period gave the ascend- 
ancy to an intellectual and practical movement, which, in spite 
of the empiricism and egoism that defaced it, led directly to 
the growth of prevision in science and of innate altruism in 
morals. The strongest condemnation of the reaction attempted 
in the name of order is its futile protest against this fuller 
acceptance of the two doctrines, an acceptance ever tending 
towards a complete systematisation. 

The doctrine of historical filiation, the inevitable depen- Formation 
dence, that is, of the ultimate solution on the whole of the oMEegime 

r t TP • 11 t • r °^ *^^ Habits 

preparatory state oi human lite, were mcompletely stated it ana the 
in its consideration we neglected the important point of the adapted to 

_ our matu- 

formation, the instinctive formation of the habits, nay, even rity. 
of the principle adapted to the maturity of mankind. 

The most difiScult point for Positivism in its effort to TheHawts. 
reorganise is to secure in the minds of men the continuous 
developement of the subjective existence. Each generation 
as it passes must ever feel itself by virtue of that existence 
placed between the sum of the generations that have preceded 
it, and of those which are to follow it, so as to give full effect 
to that basic continuity in the name of which it obeys the 
past and serves the future. We shall be bound to keep up an 
intercourse with the dead, and even with those yet unborn, 
more uninterrupted though less intimate than our intercourse 
with our contemporaries. We cannot avoid the difficulty of 
this requirement, and yet it were too great for us were it not 

22 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

for the previous theological training, which yet had no eye to 
this capital result. Fetichism gave life to all around us, but 
in P^etichism we were never in contact with any but actually 
living, though in many cases absent, beings. It was during 
the long period of Theologism that we gained the habit of 
living in the presence of purely ideal beings, in whom, however, 
none the less was our whole destiny bound up. And although 
the rise and growth of this habit — of this subjective life — were, 
necessarily due in larger proportion to Polytheism, it was 
Monotheism which organised it provisionally into a system, 
and by so doing in some degree made amends for the diminu- 
tion of intensity it produced. 

Tbe^Prin- Lastly, when we come to consider the fundamental con- 

ception of the new Synthesis, it is not difficult to see, in the 
light of the last volume, a distinct preparation of it running 
through the whole past. To minds influenced by the existing 
anarchy, every collective being tends to present itself as a 
mere entity, yet none the less is it true that no coherence, no 
dignity have been or are possible for the individual unless in 
subordination to some larger and composite existence. It is 
only in dependence on some such existence that we can satisfy 
our desire to perpetuate this transitory life, for we thus link 
it to an imperishable being. This, the direct mode of satis- 
faction, must be held to have long preceded the indirect mode 
due to the fictions of Theology, since it dates from Fetichism, 
being a conseqiience of the creation by Fetichism of the Family; 
This primal solution was never superseded by the promises of 
supernatural religion, for its promises, though increasing in 
attractiveness, appealed exclusively to man's selfish instincts. 
Unconsciously he was constantly drawn on by his unselfish 
affections to extend his relations, so the better to secure a 
subjective immortality. Prior to the impulse given by Mono- 
theism towards absolute isolation as the true aim of each 
individual. Polytheism in both its forms, sacerdotal and military, 
had already definitively created the Country, and in practice the 
influence of the idea habitually overbore that of the mono- 
theistic theory. 

Humanity. The Family and the Country, these are the two collective 

beings which in due succession were to lead by a natural 
process to the conception and the feeling of Humanity, which 
may be looked on as the common country or the universal 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GREAT BEING. 23 

family. The three complex terms will ever be the successive 
steps of a natural progression indispensable for our heart and 
intellect if we would reach the true Synthesis. On a comparison 
of the two terms peculiar to the earlier period, we see at once 
that the larger union is of a nature to foster our sense of 
dignity, the more intimate to insure fixity of existence. The 
family is the basis of the state, but it requires the influence of 
the state upon it to perfect it. They react one on the other, 
and are thus seen to be both equally connected with the term 
which completes the series of collective existences. 

On a closer consideration of this synthetic progression, we The west 
see in it an announcement, as it were, of the proximate advent 
of the third term, Humanity, by the intercalation, after the 
second, of a new and capital conception. 

Between the Family and the State Theocracy had intro- intercaia- 
duced the Caste, on the ground of its value as a combination of wSt'be-'' 
birth and calling. Similarly Catholicism legitimately avails otyanri^ 
itself of the distinction between the two powers to introduce ""^"''y- 
the conception of the West, the immediate precursor of Hu- 
manity, which it prepares by familiarising us with a purely 
spiritual union. This completes the preparatory process needed 
to enable us to feel and to conceive the Great Being, though 
each subdivision of that process is threatened with absolute 
impuissance by the anarchy of modem times. The survey 
shows us how deeply the reconstruction offered by Positivism is 
rooted in the past — how it will realise all the aspirations of 
that past — only under new forms, as the condition of their 
converging. 

The nature and object of the volume necessitated the special The deter, 

. mination of 

introduction here given. It is sufficient to place us in the the future 

. . depends on 

frame of mind appropriate to the construction — a construction the expiana- 

t „ , , tion of the 

such as has never before been attempted — on which I now past, ob- 

■ stacles not 

enter without further preface. The imminent danger of such a to be over- 

^ , . ° rated. 

construction's sinking into a utopia can only be avoided by 
keeping constantly in view the earlier history of each institu- 
tion, its roots in the past. This we may do by the aid of the 
two preceding volumes, so far at least that the regeneration of 
the world by Positivism may be shown in the present volume 
to be as indispensable as it is inevitable, in that it offers the 
sole issue of the Western Eevolution. The process of deter- 
mining the future will be simply the continuation and develope- 

24 SYSTEM OP POSITIVE POLITY. THE 'FUTURE OF MAN. 

Systematic 
Explanation 
of Human- 
ity. 

Preparation 
for it in the 
previous 
volumes. 

Humanity 
real and 
useful. 

(a) Its 
Eeality. 

ment of the method on which I have throughout relied for 
treating in succession the several phases of the past, each of 
which in turn was, relatively to its predecessor, future. We 
must not attach too great weight to the obstacles presented by 
the spread of disorder. As it spreads, the aspirations after an 
universal order grow stronger as they have ever done ; and the 
vague presentiment of that order simply demands for the satis- 
faction of ardent longings its systematic construction. The 
subversion of the civic and even family ties with which we are 
now threatened cannot conceal an undefined tendency towards 
the regeneration which shall place them on a new, sounder, and 
purer basis, by bringing them into their proper subordination 
to the only tie which has strength enough to overcome collective 
selfishness in all its forms. And although it is the longing for 
order which is above all satisfied by the Eeligion of Humanity, 
its first welcome was from the instincts of progress which it 
undertakes to discipline. 

In entering on the systematic expositiom of Humanity, as 
the basis of the Positive Eeligion, I presuppose in my readers a 
familiarity with the earlier volumes and their successive con- 
tributions, constituting a natural preparation of the subject. 
The first volume dealt directly with the conception in its 
general outline ; the second explained its nature in the abstract ; 
the third treated its historical and concrete developement. The 
three facilitate greatly the detailed construction of the present 
volume, the crowning effort of the work, but they cannot take 
its place. 

Above all, our previous labour warrants us in considering 
the conception of Humanity as having stood satisfactorily the 
two general tests of all positive conceptions, that they should 
be real and be useful. 

Were there solid grounds for contesting the existence of the 
Great Being its kingdom could not be at hand. But at its 
present stage its existence needs no proof; its reality is deeply 
stamped on all its creations, in morals, in the arts and sciences, 
in industry ; in all of which, by positive analysis, we trace the 
co-operation of all ages and nations. The less general, the less 
durable the result, as in industry, the more has this co-operation 
of time and place been ever recognised, as the greater facility 
of attainment throws it open to larger numbers to share in it, 
and this of itself challenges recognition. Where the intensity 

Cbap. I.] THEOEY OF THE GREAT BEING. 25 

of the individual effort masks the influence of the collective, 
the sublimity of the results of that effort removes the mask, as 
is evidenced by the incomparable poem in which Dante, under 
the stimulus of the Middle Ages, has unconsciously embodied 
the whole system of Catholicism. It is a consequence of the 
indivisibility which characterises human nature that each 
particular proof of the highest Unity, Humanity, strengthens 
all the others, and might logically serve in lieu of them, but 
that it is wiser to multiply demonstrations inseparably bound 
up with our noblest emotions. All the current sciphisms, of 
anarchical or retrograde origin, against the accumulating evi- 
dence of the existence of Humanity, are inherently self-contra- 
dictory, in that the very language in which the blasphemy finds 
vent is of all human constructions the most social. And no 
protest has yet been consequent enough to dare to deny also 
the existence of the Family or the Country, both equally with 
Humanity, by their nature composite beings, composite whether 
we regard coexistence or Succession, only more limited in 
extent, and so facilitating our perception of co-operation. 

That the conception of Humanity and the feelings it evokes g) !*« 
are useful — this is a point which the individualist, be he 
theologian or metaphysician, can hardly dispute as he disputes 
their reality. The more sincere among them do not dispute 
it ; they limit themselves to asserting the superiority of their 
Synthesis as regards man's interests in the other world, leaving 
this world to the wise guidance of Positivism, which accepts 
the arrangement. Impracticable, so long as the government of 
the world we know necessarily vested in theologians of some 
denomination or other, this final settlement is inevitable when 
rivals appear, avowing a contemptuous indifference to heaven, 
and concentrating with dignity their interest upon earth. 
Then it is at once generally felt, that to govern the world we 
require on the one hand the knowledge of its laws, on the other, 
a real interest in its destinies. Exiles in a world governed by 
unintelligible caprice, — all who so look on themselves are by 
that very fact incapable of swaying it, for they can as little 
imagine its future as they can interpret its past. But the 
exclusive competence of the Eositivist conception for the direc- 
tion of human affairs may be best shown by reference to the 
question of universality, a question distinctly broached twenty 

26 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

centuries ago, but not answered. It awaits its answer from 
Humanity, the older Synthesis having evidently failed. 
geraiTofTho ^^ vfere needless to dwell longer on these two general pro- 

oonoeption. perties of reality and utility, they will come out more and 
more clearly as we proceed. Before proceeding, however, to 
the direct statement of the theory of the Grreat Being, I must 
here pass in review, in regular order, the germs of that concep- 
tion. It is of importance, in the case of this basic principle, 
to bring out with more than usual distinctness the filiation of 
ideas ; a point always to be attended to in synthetical concep- 
tions. 

The fact of man's living in society led, at an early period, 
Feeling to a rudimentary conception, without any rational basis, 
of Humanity. Pure Fetichisra was unable, it is true, to get 
beyond the family, but within that sphere it gave distinct ex- 
pression to continuity, primarily in reference to the coming 
generation, but extending it subsequently to the preceding, a 
progress dating from the institution of the Elders. But it was 
more especially civic existence, in which alone there could be 
a satisfactory developement of the intellect and activity, which 
originated the tendency, inherent in every human society, to 
consider itself the nucleus of Humanity. Polytheism — Conser- 
vative Polytheism — gave a direct encouragement to this aspira- 
tion after universality by the comprehensiveness of its synthesis* 
The intellectual Polytheism called out the esthetic and scientific 
powers of man, an implicit foreshadowing of the general con- 
vergence of his efforts. The social Polytheism awoke a sense, 
never again to be lost, of this convergence of the Eace, by its 
successful organisation, under the only form then practically 
admissible, of collective action. The last step was taken, and 
.the course of preparation was complete, when Monotheism 
formed a spiritual union between a number of nations politically 
independent. 

In spite of the anarchy of post-Catholic times, this general 
result of the education of mankind tended gradually to assume 
a systematic shape, in consequence of the general adoption of 
the only form of intellectual and practical activity which is 
susceptible of universal acceptance. The utter collapse of the 
theological and military regime was really favourable to this 
tendency, as it evidenced the want of a synthesis based on 
positive science and peace. In the latest phase of the Western 

Cmp. I.] THEORY Of THE GREAT BEING. 27 

revolution, the twofold movement of destruction and reconstruc- 
tion threw up successively the germs from which immediately 
sprang the systematic conception of the Great Being. 

This capital advance, marking as it did the point at which ^^""gii^Y^Jj. 
the intellect at length overtook the feeling of man, was due p^'^^Ldb 
to the undesigned conciurrence of three general propositions, j''^"' ^ '"'■ 
enunciated respectively by Pascal, Leibnitz, and Condorcet. 
Although originating solely in the scientific evolution, the 
first was an adequate expression of the convergence of the 
whole past towards the present, as it likened the developement 
of the race to that of an individual. The second perfected the 
inchoate notion of the progression which concerns man, by 
making the future depend on the present. The two together 
formed the introduction to the third, the logical conclusion 
from which is the direct conception of Humanity, for it conceives 
of the species as one single people* The three are the imme- 
diate precursors of the definitive systematisation reserved for 
me, the systematisation in which one and the same principle 
is to serve as the condensed expression of the feelings, thoughts, 
and actions peculiar to Humanity. 

The Grreat Being is the whole constituted by the beings, Definition of 

o J o 5 Humanity. 

past, future, and present, which co-operate willingly in perfect- 
ing the order of the world. Every gregarious animal race has 
a natural tendency to such co-operation. But it is only the 
paramount race on each planet that can attain unity as a race, 
for its ascent to power necessarily checks that of the lower 
animals. This justifies, in our systematic definition of the 
composite being, our omitting its peculiar species. On the 
other hand, the spontaneity of the co-operation and its external 
end are clearly indispensable conditions, if it is to be consistent 
and permanent. Eliminating, then, what may be understood 
without indistinctness, we confine our definition of the Great 
Being to : the continuous whole formed by the beings which 
converge. In this condensed form I shall often make implicit 
use of the definition, leaving it to the reader to reintegrate the 
terms suppressed. 

Starting from this definition, the theory of the Great Being Theory of 
resolves itself into CI) its constitution, (2) its position, (3) its ™^'^"'''" 
destination. 

And first for ifs constitution. The great point is to dis- (i) Consti- 
tinguish between the peculiar constituent elements, immediate Distinction 

28 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

between or mediate, of the supreme organism, and the agents or repre- 
and agents, sentatives it requires. Every being must be composed of parts 

similar to itself, so Humanity is divisible primarily into States, 

then into Families, never into individuals. 
Theekmenta Our raco was educated under a synthesis at once egoistic 
to the whole, and absolute, succeeded by a period of anarchy. Hence its 

to Human- ,,„ . i,.,i xj 

ity. lack of conceptions and formulas adequate to express a reahty 

which has slowly dawned upon us. The consequence is a 
proneness to look on the parts as more important than the 
whole, though the whole alone, and not the parts, admits of 
completeness and permanence. The true Synthesis will modify 
this frame of mind and enable us to overcome our earlier 
habits, so that the opposite tendency, as alone consistent with 
the Positive spirit, will become natural to us. Familiar as we 
shall then be with the idea of Humanity, in this new state of 
regenerated mental power we shall constantly refer to that 
idea the subordinate ideas of People and even of Family, in 
obedience to the principle of passing from the more definite to 
the less- definite conception. Even now it is not difficult to 
understand this, as it is the course we spontaneously adopt in the 
case of the animals : we refer them to the human type, at least 
in regard to their principal attributes. By a like process in 
the case of our own species, we judge each family by the 
standard of the people of which it is a part. That we do not 
adopt this course with nations is owing solely to the fact that 
we do not adequately realise the highest form of human 
existence. 

Hnmanity That highest form is in fact the only one of which we can 

alone not ^ . p 

indistinct lorm a Conception, free at once from indistinctness and arhi- 

nor arbi- . . . 

trary. trarmess. All partial associations, on however vast a scale, are 

but parts, and parts inseparable, save by a process of abstraction, 
from the whole race. The limits which seem natural to the 
several nations, or even families, are but the expression of those 
relations which have hitherto excited attention. But if we 
take into account all their real relations, direct and indirect, 
we see that the distinctions between them have no real foun- 
dation in nature. At any rate we may assert confidently that 
the contact between the nations has become so extended at the 
present time, that no one is really separable from the others. 
If it seem capable of separate existence, it is to the detriment 
of its true attributes, moral, intellectual, and even physical, all 

Chap. I.] THEOEY OF THE GREAT BEING. 29 

of which, in their different degrees, are affected by the con- 
tinuous reaction of the whole upon its parts. The remark is 
still more applicable to families ; each family is, to begin with, 
inseparable from the people to which it belongs. 

The race alone, then, admits of a clear and precise defini- 
tion ; the subordinate associations prepare that definition by 
their mutual relations and by familiarising us with those rela- 
tions. Each of them has been the nucleus, actual or virtual, of 
Humanity, and will never lose its value as an aid to its less 
systematic conception. The two essential attributes of all 
social existence, solidarity and continuity, are necessarily attri- 
butes of the lower forms of that existence; we meet them there, 
not, it is true, as perfectly developed, but more within our grasp. 
Thus it is that the Family and the Country will always be, to 
the intellect no less than to the heart, indispensable introduc- 
tions to Humanity. But in systematic education, in default of 
which the process is incomplete, we must henceforth invert the 
order ; now that we have reached the full conception of the Great 
Being, we may spread it even to our children, without retracing 
the series of unsystematised efforts originally required for its 
elaboration. The essential point is to use more skilfully the 
power inherent in feeling to outstrip the generalising of the 
intellect, a result ensured in the Positive system of education 
by placing it throughout under the proper natural control of 
the sex in which feeling is predominant. 

The conclusion we have reached is this : we definitively ?™™'y 

•^ mdi risible. 

look on the Family and the State as each in due order an intro- 
duction to Humanity ; we do not consider this indivisible being 
as composed of elements in the proper sense of the word. The 
philosophical conception once sufficiently accepted, the priest- 
hood will abandon any formal definition. It is needed now as 
against the extraordinary pressure brought to bear on any 
movement in a synthetical direction by the anarchical spirit of 
analysis which prevails. 

Further we must not forget that the highest existence, Humanity 

" f^. subjpct to 

equallv with the lower forms of vitality, is subject to the two the law of 

^ •} 11 growth and 

laws of growth and improvement, these phases being more the law of 

1 , TT 11 improve- 

marked in the more complex organism. Hence a new obstacle ment. it 

, must there- 

to our ffrasniner the idea of a being of so pre-eminently relative forebeaduit 

a r a r -i i ■ n before it can 

a- character, so long as we are under the sway oi habits formed be rightly 
under the absolute Synthesis. They lead us to forget that 

30 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUBE OF MAN. 

every living being must be judged by its adult state, whilst in 
the case of Humanity we have as yet before us only its child- 
hood and its adolescence. This explains why it is that the idea 
of the Great Being could not effectually assert itself previously ; 
it marks the opening of our mature existence ; it is an evi- 
dence that its preparatory stages are past. But henceforth, in 
the light of that conception we can appreciate the Normal state 
by the conjoint aid of the previous periods, sufficiently to ensure 
a truly rational, as opposed to an essentially empirical develope- 
ment. 
The minis- The peculiar difficulties attendant on its acceptance once 

ters of Hu- ^ ^ 

mauity. , fairly overcome, the hardest point remaining in the theory of 
the Great Being is the right estimate of individuals as its 
ministers. An uninterrupted service on their part, either as 
agents or even as representatives, is a necessary condition of 
collective existence in any form. No association could act, or 
make itself felt, except through individuals. As this is clear 
for the Family and the Country ; a fortiori must it hold good 
of Humanity. In this condition we find the primary source of 
the attributes and the difficulties which alike inhere in the 
very idea of a composite existence. 
The problem To Combine, and that persistently, concert with indepen- 
combine deuce is the capital problem of society, a problem which reli- 

concert with . i t i • -n , n ^ . , 

indepen- giou aloue cau soivc, by love primarily, then by faith as the 
basis of love. The superiority of Humanity lies mainly in 
this : that its immediate instruments are beings in nature similar 
to itself, though at a lower stage of developement, and appa- 
rently capable of standing alone. On the other hand, as such, 
they tend to separate, losing sight, in an exaggerated sense of 
their own importance, of the absolute dependence of the parts 
on the whole. The danger exists in the best constituted society; 
in periods of anarchy it takes such proportions as at the present 
time to be the main hindrance to the advent of the Great 
Being. And yet the danger to society would be equally great 
if concert could ever succeed in stifling independence. Dis- 
tinctness then, no less than convergence of effort, being an 
essential condition of human co-operation, the great problem 
ultimately comes to this, how to reconcile Order and Progress, 
universally held by Antiquity to be incompatible. Of the two 
dangers, however, the greater is, it must be allowed, the excess of 

dence. 

Chav. I.] THEORY OF THE GREAT BEING. 31 

I independence ; with few and transient exceptions that from 
excess of concert is less urgent. 

It follows from this discussion of the question that the exis- geMratum 
tence of the Great Being requires, as its necessary basis, that oSe p^t 
the .actual generation be in permanent dependence on the two f"tire.^con- 
subjective portions of Humanity, its past and its future genera- *'°"*5'' 
tions. In the past we have the source, in the future the aim, 
of the active service rendered by the present. Man always 
labours for posterity, impelled thereto by the labour of his- 
ancestors, who have handed down to him the materials with 
which, the processes by which, he works. It is his highest 
privilege that the individual can perpetuate himself indirectly 
in a subjective state, if whilst actually living his course has 
left worthy results. Thus, even from the very earliest begin- 
ning, arose the idea of Continuity properly so called, an idea 
more really characteristic of man than mere Solidarity. Con- 
tinuity implies that our successors continue our service as we 
continued that of our predecessors. 

The Family by its very constitution manifests this primary continuity 
attribute of every composite existence, the children represent- Family. 
ing the future, the elders the past, both in immediate depend- 
ence on the members in full vigour. Hence it is that the 
chief historical period, the century, equivalent to the length of 
human life in the normal state, is subdivided into three gene- 
rations, the object being, that the active portion of any society 
may be in close connection with the two which can understand 
it, a conception which had dawned on the old friend mentioned 
in the general preface of the work. 

To simplify this dependence and give greater precision to continuity 
the notion, we should now suppress the second subjective element, the past and 
the element of the future, which indicates the end of human 
co-operation, but does not affect the question of its origin, or 
its exercise. Eeduced to this dual form, the sphere of con- 
tinuity is the connection between the representatives and the 
agents of Humanity. The dead are her representatives, the 
living her agents; since the dead stand pre-eminent in dignity, 
the living are superior in efficiency. 

The direct service of the Great Being is the exclusive The read. 
appanage of our objective life ; but the excellence of Humanity tive exist-"' 
can only be worthily shown by its subjective and eternal exis- ™°^' 
tence. Our nature needs to be purified by death for its higher 

32 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

The Dead 
represent 
Humanity. 
Superiority 
of the sub- 
jective life. 

Necessity of 
theobjective 
life. 

attributes to be seen ; they stand out then clear of the grosser 
accompaniments which previously obscured them. In death 
alone can we attain the sublime transformation towards which 
our animal nature tends. The cerebral life, in constant de- 
pendence on our organic life, seems ordinarily to have no other 
function than to strengthen and perfect this last. And yet the 
higher parts of man's nature, his affections, thoughts, and even 
actions, all have a relative function, all look to the collective 
organism and reject a mere individual purpose, in proportion as 
the animal life attains fuller developement. Social life adf 
vances in the same direction towards that state in which the 
body becomes simply the support of the brain, whilst the 
direct action of the brain becomes the characteristic of our nature. 
The change indicated is not, however, fully realised till we 
reach the subjective life, which at once, by Arirtue of such a 
power, becomes our ideal in the objective. 

In two senses, then, the living are brought more and more 
under the patronage of the dead, the dead being at once their 
protectors and types. The dead alone can represent Humanity; 
they collectively really constitute Humanity ; the living, born 
her children, as a rule become her servants, unless they de- 
generate into mere parasites. Granting it possible to form a 
judgment of the objective life during its course, it seldom is so 
fruitful in results as to secu:re its main achievement from being 
obscured by subsequent degeneration. Till it be ended, even 
in the best men, the true attributes of our nature cannot fully 
assert themselves ; we have to make constant allowance for the 
defects due to the necessities of our physical constitution. The 
true sphere of the soul's superiority is the subjective life ; that, 
apart from exceptional cases of reprobation, belongs exclusively 
to such of its functions as are assimilable by others, the purely 
personal elements no longer interfering. 

No amount of superiority, however, can call the subjective 
life into existence, or give it permanence; for this it is 
dependent on the objective. The living, it is true, ai-e subject 
to the sway of the dead, but, on the other hand, the dead cannot 
exercise their power save through the medium of the living, 
though it is not open to the latter to refuse their co-operation 
even when rebelling against the inevitable yoke. The objective 
life is direct and complete, its chief characteristic is will ; the 
subjective passes imder the empire of fate. The function of 

S' 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 33 

the dead is to form the immoveable foundation, that of the living 
to introduce the secondary modifications of man's destiny. The 
direct service of Humanity, then, has its source in the will, the 
condensed expression of all our brain action ; for the will, in its 
proper sense, combines the impulse given by the heart with the 
light derived from the intellect and the guidance furnished by 
the character. And the will has a natural safeguard against 
caprice, in that its efiBciency depends on the maintenance of the 
subordination of the living to the dead. Emancipated from 
this control the will loses its power for good, and becomes a 
mere soiirce of disturbance. 

Our conception of the constitution of the Great Being re- inoorpora- 
mains defective unless we associate with man all the animal animaisinto 
races which are capable of adopting the common motto of all 
the higher natures : Live for Others. Without the animals, the 
Positive Synthesis could but imperfectly form the permanent 
alliance of all voluntary agents to modify the external conditions 
of our life so far as they are modifiable. Since the close of the 
fetichist period there has been a growing inability on the part 
of the provisional religion to sanction this coalition, though its 
utility has been constantly on tlie increase. It was reserved 
for Positivism to organize it by recognizing as integral portions 
of the Grreat Being the animals which voluntarily aid man, 
whilst eliminating its unworthy parasites in human form. The 
service rendered by the animals is, it is true, indirect, for it is 
in two senses individual, there entering into it no consciousness 
of a social function ; yet as voluntary, we are justified in our 
recognition of it. 

The constitution of the Great Being sufficiently explained, m) situa- 

.11 I' ',11 • i •-,• !• tio° of Hu- 

the next step in elaborating its theory is to examine its situation, manity. 
and subsequently its destination. The first of the three points 
was the hardest, so that I may be briefer in my treatment of 
the two others. 

It is a strict consequence of the reality of its existence that Humanity 
Humanity is more dependent, as more complex, than any other ^pmdent 
being. Freed, so far as the subjective condition is concerned, man order. 
from the laws of the outer world, her never-ceasing subjection 
to the laws of the social or moral world is but the more 
distinctly seen. Although this subjection, owing to its higher 
degree of complication, could not be understood till last, it was 

VOL. IV. D 

34 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN, 

Dependent 
also on the 
external. 

Humanity 
dependent, 
and still 
more so her 
individaal 
servants. 

This depend- 
ence the 
source of 
greatness. 

felt before any other, more particularly in reference to the 
moral laws. 

But Humanity, whilst bound by laws of her own, submits, 
for she has an objective basis, to the laws of our bodily existence, 
the laws that is of vitality ; nay, further, she submits to the 
laws of the outer world, the laws of that material order in the 
midst of which man lives and works. 

The laws of vitality make themselves constantly felt in those 
conditions of organic life on which ultimately depend the extent 
and the exercise of all our faculties, during life in the first 
place, and consequently after death. Nay, more, the G-reat 
Being can never escape the sad fate which often deprives it 
through some flaw in these conditions of its best servants, their 
highest powers yet unexerted. As for the laws of the outer 
world, it is equally impossible not to recognise their power, for 
though less direct, it is more beyond our intervention. 

As the economy of things, then, is such that increase of 
dignity implies increase of dependence, the peculiar eminence 
of the Great Being subjects it to all the necessary conditions of 
existence without exception. Still less independent are its 
servants, indulge what anarchical illusions they may at the 
suggestion of the will, which is the distinct feature of our 
objective life. For with it they are subject to the external 
conditions, whether inorganic or vital, as they are to the statical 
and dynamical laws of the collective existence. But, besides, 
they are always subject to the action of the body upon the 
brain, 'an influence we need not take into account in the social 
economy, neutralized as it there is by individual differences, hut 
which' cannot but deeply affect the economy of the individual. 
Without any break, then, the empire of will is subordinate to 
that of necessity. 

Accept it in a right spirit, and in this very dependence lies 
the chief source of our true greatness. I have shown in the 
last volume, that the attribute of omnipotence introduces a 
radical contradiction into the idea of God, from the impossi- 
bility of reconciling omnipotence with wisdom and goodness. 
Compare the two cases and we see more distinctly the logical 
connection between the dignity and the dependence of the true 
Great Being. The condition of unity for man is complete 
submission ; without it, as I have shown over and over again, 
his feelings would be ill-regulated, his thoughts incoherent^, his 

Chap. I.] THEOEY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 35 

actions a mere source of disorder. We may regret that the 
order of things is not more within man's power to alter. But 
true wisdom forbids our wishing it to be in any part open to 
indefinite modification^ As we advance, so far from shrinking 
from this inevitable yoke, we extend its range by paying to 
human institutions the obedience we cannot refuse to the laws 
of nature. 

These considerations lead me to the concluding part of the (m) Desu- 

y^ T-* 1 • • t* 1 1 nation of 

theory of the Great Being, the examination of the destination Humanity. 
which its situation assigns it. That destination is, in truth, to 
give full effect to the action of will, in modifying, so far as they 
are modifiable, the conditions to which it is necessarily subject. 
Even when beyond its power to modify, they call for constant 
exertion on its part — intellectual and active exertion — the 
better to accommodate itself to them. Its main task, liowever, 
is the effecting the modifications within the scope of human 
will, which the secondary arrangements of the world around us 
always admit, with the exception of the phenomena of the 
heavens. Our power in this respect increases as the phenomena 
become more complex and higher, a compensation, though an 
imperfect compensation, for the disadvantages attendant on the 
increase of dependence. 

On this view, the action of the Great Being has for its main Proper 
object the perfecting the order of man's world, for the indi- action the 
vidual as well as for society. Hence it is that human institu- order, 
tions are so mixed up with the laws of nature, that by a grave 
mistake the dominion of the one is often confounded with that 
of the other two provinces. Now, the rules of man's creation 
depend for thei-r value entirely on their having as their sub- 
stratum natural arrangements, the legitimate sway of which it 
is their function to increase. 

Such a destination is peculiarly that of the future of TUsmost 
Humanity, her systematic existence. Yet so appropriate is it the Future, 
to the Great Being, that even in the past, its age of empirical the Past. 
effort, with admiration we see how largely it achieved it. Its 
instinct led it to create : first, the Gods of antiquity, then the one 
I God their heir, as the respective guides of the second period of 
its childhood and its youth. The praises offered in all sincerity 
to these subjective guardians are so many acts of indirect 
homage to the instinctive wisdom of Humanity. In substi- 
I tuting rational for empirical grounds, the Positive religion will 

36 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PUTUEE OF MAN. 

This theory 
is the basis 
for an ab- 
stract and 
concrete 
view of the 
Positive 
Religion and 
the Life in 
accordance 
■with it. 

Synthetical 
power of the 
theory. 

Its future 
cfflcacy may 
be estimated 
by tlie re- 
sults already 
attained. 

give a new being to this gratitude, and a thorough sanction, 
for that obligation rests upon it to see that no one of the states 
through which the Great Being has passed lacks its due appre- 
ciation. In its full maturity, its direct and deliberate care for 
its true servants will be the object of just admiration. This 
habitual attitude of our minds will naturally deepen the 
respect deserved by its indirect and instinctive efforts to 
raise itself, in its earlier life, when the agents it had at its 
disposal were invariably blind, and often intractable. 

Such is the theory which forms the foundation of our 
construction. Sketched with sufficient precision at the outset 
of this work, in the subsequent volumes it was supported by 
statical, and completed by dynamical considerations, so as to 
demand in the present place nothing more than a definitive 
systematisation. It forms a general basis, from which we must 
now proceed to explain the whole system of the true rehgion, 
and with it the life which that religion is to regulate. The 
full success, however, of this twofold picture depends on this 
condition : that it present two views in succession, the first 
abstract, dealing with human nature in each of its leading 
aspects ; the second concrete, dealing with the actual combina- 
tions of those aspects in their most important forms. 

First, however, the power for synthesis inherent in the pre- 
ceding theory, must be distinctly drawn out. 

Its value in this respect is derived from the fact that the 
Great Being offers, by its very constitution, the best type 
6f uuity ; its composite nature precluding divergence, giving 
full scope to convergence. The offspring of the cooperation of 
the race stimulates and invigorates cooperation as the embodi- 
ment of the idea. In constant submission to the primary order, 
it condenses and consecrates, even whilst modifying, that order. 
' Endowed with equal power to regulate and to unite, its empire 
is the source of unity in its true servants, for it impels them to 
identify themselves with the highest existence. Our personal 
instincts, concentrated in the will peculiar to our objective life, 
find in Humanity a guide free from all capricious tendencies, 
and the more so as all the impulses derived from it are in natural 
accordance with intelligible laws. 

Tlie true providence of man has not yet been reduced to 
system, yet we can even now adequately understand what it 
will be, morally, intellectually, and materially. Besides, the 

Chap. I.] THEOEY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 37 

measure of its efSciency may be taken by looking to the 
sum of the results attained during the minority of the Great 
Being. Superior even then to all real existences, it appears 
originally placed in a circle without issue, needing, that is, a 
competent guide, and unable to find one outside of itself. But 
by its instinctive wisdom it overcame this great difficulty by 
a spontaneous impulse, creating imaginary guides and endowing 
them oue after the other with the attributes adapted to their 
provisional function. Victorious in this trial, the being which 
is destined to regulate everything even then proved its ability 
to give regularity to its own existence, so far as its age and 
situation allowed. So admirable an empirical result contains 
the promise, for the near future, of the great results to be at- 
tained by the wisdom of Humanity when systematised, — when 
she has reached the stage of developement at which she can 
take on herself the guidance of her various servants, using to 
that end all the means accumulated during her past life. Such 
is the primary source whence the theory derives a religious 
efBcacy, which in the rest of this chapter will appear under its 
more general, in the rest of the volume under its more special, 
aspects. 

Previously, however, to entering on this exposition we have Relations of 
to define the normal relations of the Positive religion with the reu?ion to° 
two capital modes of the provisional synthesis. The relations and Tbeoio- 

gism. 

alistic. 

are these : we connect directly Positivism with Fetichism, not 
excluding astrolatrical Fetichism ; we eliminate Theologism, 
monotheistic Theologism more especially. 

It follows from the several explanations which had their Thnoiogism 
place in the last volume, that the function of Theology was aeindmau- 
purely to prepare the way for Positivism in the spontaneous 
evolution of the race, that it can be no element ultimately of 
the normal state, as the two syntheses are incompatible. Nay, 
I went further, and showed that its aid was ceasing to be avail- 
able henceforward wherever an individual or a nation could be 
submitted to wise direction. Of the two modes of causation 
under the provisional synthesis, it is the second or theological 
which, by its introduction of imaginary powers, becomes unsus- 
ceptible of any modifications of the absolute tendencies of that 
synthesis. Then too becomes preponderant its tendency to 
egoism, for its Grods step between man and Humanity, binding 
on him a yoke he cannot shake off, a service at all times 

38 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

inherently of a personal character. Though created in order to 
extend the principle of causation to the world of man, they 
preclude any social conception from their incapacity to emhody 
even the idea of solidarity, much more that of continuity. On 
the contrary, social life is the chosen sphere of the relative 
religion, and therefore it has nothing in common with a purely 
personal religion, which owed its great social utility, in all 
essential points, to the wisdom of its priesthood for the time heing 
— the priesthood of Theocracy and the priesthood of Catho- 
licism. Still, in the most distant future, the servants of the 
Great Being will honour, with just honour, the guardians it 
created to protect its minority. 
FeticViism Far different is the relation of the final synthesis to the 

ated. primeval system of causation. I have already represented 

Fetichism as susceptible of an immediate connection with Posi- 
tivism, with no theological interlude. Nay, I have stated that 
the combination was coming to be indispensable for the attain- 
ment of our definitive unity. The time is come for explaining 
the nature of their accord, 
rnteiiec- As an intellectual question, the primai^y object of this ulti- 

mate fusion is to fill, as far as possible, the unavoidable gaps left 
by the Positive spirit in its empirical no less than in its sys- 
tematic stage. It is essentially to the abstract coordination of 
our conceptions that laws properly apply; they almost invariably 
fail to express adequately the concrete facts, even though we 
use inductions of practice to supplement the deductions of 
theory. In such cases we must have recourse to causes, as in 
the beginning of things, as a provisional colligation of facts, 
bringing Fetichism to the support of Positivism. Not under 
the illusion that such accessory explanation corresponds to any 
reality, we avail ourselves of it to facilitate our necessary 
speculations ; we are justified in acting on an instinctive tendency 
of om- nature, which may always be reconciled with a true 
rational method. A real connection once formed, we throw 
aside the temporary support we gained, for contemplation and 
even meditation, by the fiction of an active will. 
Esthcticaiiy. The value of such a provisional hypothesis is still better 
seen from the point of view of art, for estheticaliy. Positivism 
differs from Fetichism only in that it pays its homage to results, 
Fetichism to materials. They find a point of accord naturally, 
in man's disposition to reverence in each substance or phenome- 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF T^E GREAT BEING. 39 

non the various uses to which it may be put by the Great Being 
in its wisdom. Hence Positivism will offer a worthy field for 
the display of the poetical capacity of Fetichism, a capacity which 
could not pass the rudimentary stage during the infancy of the 
race. 

Lastly, from the moral point of view, the combination of Morauy. 
the two Syntheses is at once easy and fruitful in results. Fetich- 
ism, as loving all things and reverencing all things, will 
always be adapted largely to aid Positivism in its grand func- 
tion of fostering tenderness, and giving cohesion to submission. 

Thus it is that in the final religion we connect directly the The two ox- 
maturity of the Great Being with its infancy. Thus it is that of'Humlnity 
we reconcile, as far as possible, real laws with imaginary wills, ""''""^*- 
so that they supply each others' wants in all respects. Limited 
by its nature to the external world, Fetichism, unlike Theology, 
never claimed to represent the world of man, reserved for Posi- 
tivism to grasp and to' regulate. Fetichism traced the founda- 
tion of man's true wisdom, in practice and in theory, by its 
institution of fatalism. That it made it absolute was simply 
due to its ignorance of modifications, a true view of which was 
left for Positivism. The primeval synthesis and the definitive 
religion rest on one and the same fundamental principle, a 
principle adopted by the instinct of the race and then by its 
reason ; they agree, that is, in proclaiming the constant pre- 
dominance of feeling over thought and action. Such being 
their natural affinities, the two extreme ages of Humanity de- 
served the definitive consecration given by their both sharing 
in the formation of its true unity. Their fusion with a view to 
complete that formation I have just explained — without it 
the true religion could not satisfactorily connect our future in 
all its stages with our remotest past — a past which invariably 
recurs in the spontaneous evolution of each servant of Humanity. 

It might seem, however, that we are inconsistent in thus Nomcon. 
incorporating Fetichism with Positivism and excluding Theo- exciudfng' 
logism, springing as it does from the one, tending to the other. °° °^^^' 
But there is no real inconsistency, since the two extremes admit 
of direct contact, and will frequently be brought into such con- 
tact, especially in individuals. The only ground for the final 
acceptance of Fetichism is its perfect spontaneity. When 
admitted it ceases to have any connection with Theologism, 
which never can accept the position of inferior as regards Posi- 

40 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PUTUEE OF MAN. 

With the 
(lid of the 
Fetichist the 
Positive 
doctrine can 
constnict 
the ultimate 
nnity, ab- 
sti-act and 
concrete. 

Abstract 
View. 

PositiTity 
combines all 
aspects of 
human 
existence. 

Positivism 
alone can 
secure the 
supremacy 
of Love. 

tivistn. In the combination Fetichism, in accordance with its 
nature, still confines itnelf to the external world, and no longer 
strays in the direction of man's world. There is this change, 
however : its domain was of old purely concrete, it is now in the 
main abstract, its application, both in affection and action, will 
concern Phenomena rather than substance, but without ever 
separating the two. 

Its deliciency thus naturally and regularly supplied, tha 
Positive doctrine is able, without further preliminary, defini- 
tively to organise human unity, the unity of which I proceed 
to give the general characteristics, by a description at once of 
the Positive religion and life. That I can describe them thus 
simultaneously, first from the abstract, then from the concrete 
point of view, is in itself an indication of the full completeness 
of that unity. For hitherto such a conjoint presentation has 
been impossible, from the want of sufficient agreement between 
theory and practice. 

It is the best note of true Positivity, — the harmony, 
systematic but also spontaneous, which it introduces as a per- 
manent link between the various aspects of our personal and 
social life. Ever bent on the preservation and amelioration of 
the Great Being, the affections, thoughts, and actions of man, 
are, when so harmonised, brought as far as possible under con- 
trol and into concert. 

The composite nature of Humanity involves its having as 
its principle, love, the sole source of voluntary cooperation. 
The constant supremacy of feeling over thought and action 
thus becomes the fundamental law of the human consensus. 
Love, as the principle of synthesis, had been instinctively recog- 
nised by Fetichism, and deliberately sanctioned by Theocracy. 
But apart from their inadequate estimate of the benevolent 
instincts, these two rudimentary religious were found irrecon- 
cileable with the ulterior progress of our intellectual and active 
powers. Their triumphant advance broke through the earlier 
discipline, but the sense that they needed control gave rise to 
an admirable attempt to reconstruct the supremacy of the 
heart. The ultimate result of the effort was, however, to show 
the increasing loss of power in the fictitious synthesis in regard 
to this capital problem, the true solution of which necessarily 
devolved on the principle which gave to reality the sanction of 
utility. The gradual outcome of the unfettered evolution of 

Chap. I.] THEOEY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 41 

thought and activity, the positive spirit has a natural tendency 
to restore to feeling its ascendancy, the better to place under 
its direction the normal developement of our powers. 

The several aspirations evolved by the successive stages of EeaUsesaii 
the education of mankind thus find a simultaneous satisfaction, pirauons.''^ 
however conflicting they may be in appearance, the result 
simply of the inadequacy, of the provisional synthesis. Ever 
looking to the nature of man in its entirety, the discipline of 
Positivism ought to promote in an equal degree the growth and 
concert of all our functions. More favourable to the intellect 
than the civilisation of Greece, as a social system, it has greater 
power than Eome had to make public life control private, 
speculation depend on action ; whilst more than feudal Catholic- 
ism does it give the primacy to our emotional nature. Com- 
pletely real, profoundly sympathetic, unceasingly active, the 
Great Being is pre-eminently qualified to regulate without 
obstructing. It has a direct tendency to discipline our wills, 
as it forms us to order by love, with a view to progress. Its 
nature asserts at once the subjective origin and the objective 
basis of the true religion. Sanctioning as it does the close 
connection of the three parts of the soul, Humanity as centre 
makes the improvement of each depend on the reaction upon 
it of the two others, founding thereby true unity, an unity as 
stable as it is perfectible. 

Fully to appreciate in the abstract a state which, however 
near at hand, does not admit of direct inspection, I must now 
take it in detail, dwelling separately on feeling, intellect, and 
action. 

And first for feeling. Unity in this respect, as conceived by a) irnity ot 
Positivism, has for its basis the existence in human nature of 
the sympathetic instincts, which found no place in the theo- 
logical synthesis. So only can we state in its true form the 
problem man has to solve, the subordinating egoism to altruism. 
To these instincts we look mainly for the solution of this 
problem, and it is their continuous growth under the influences 
of society which is the one standard by which to measure our 
progress, ever unsatisfactory unless accompanied with this 
growth. Their unceasing search after the true has for its aim 
the attainment of the good under the inspiration of the beauti- 
ful, and their ascendancy is at once the best stimulus and the 
best regulator of all our powers. In no degree oppressive as 

feeling. 

42 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

regards the personal instincts, they offer those instincts the 
legitimate satisfaction of a noble purpose. 
DiTcrsityot The right understanding of this moral unity necessitates 

tho sympa- 
thetic in- our taking into account the inherent differences between the 

instincts of benevolence. Arranged, as the whole hierarchy of 
our conceptions is arranged, ojithe principle of decrease in energy, 
increase in dignity, the first unites, equals, and regulates the 
present; the second regards superiors and consecrates the past; 
tlie third looks towards inferiors and prepares the future. In 
every social relation there is room for the free and simultaneous 
play of the three ; but the proper province of the first is 
private, that of the third, public life, the second alone being 
common to both. From the closest ties to the widest relations 
of man, they form, then, by their union, a complete discipline. 
Attachment secures the growth of the love on which our whole 
system rests, whilst benevolence directs that love to its true 
end, universal love ; veneration institutes subordination, the 
indispensable condition of stability in human relations. 
Theh- train- The preparatory stage of human existence hampered this 

thepreiaia- discipline, in theory as in practice, yet in the natural course 
of things it tended to prevail, though its rational accept- 
ance was reserved for the present century. It had a natural 
origin in the fetichist state, for in Fetichism the feelings of 
man were attributed to all things ; but the doctrine of Fetich- 
ism could give it no sanction, limited as it was to the outer 
world, and the life confined to the Family was too narrow a 
sphere. Subsequently, when theology and war were dominant, 
the benevolent instincts could have but an indirect and partial 
sway, for man's action was destructive, and his creed egoistic. 
Still they grew even then, by virtue of the extension of human 
intercourse due to common opinions and collective purposes. 
When Polytheism was condensed into Monotheism, the latter 
declared them alien to human nature, but in this very rejec- 
tion lay a consecration of them, for it rested on the superiority 
which marked them out as the special province of the divine 
will. The compression of the personal instincts by the religion 
gave a fuller ascendancy at that time to the sympathetic; 
although the denial of them on principle stamped a character 
of selfishness on our whole moral culture. It was under these 
conditions of provisional acceptance that they received a 
triumphant recognition by the devotion to them of the three 

Chap. I.] THEOEY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 43 

finest chapters of the extraordinary poem in which Catholicism 
found its condensed expression. 

The metaphysical philosophy, the prevalence of which is Their fate 
due to the indiscipline of modern times, is more adverse than times. 
Theology to the free growth of sympathy ; and yet sympathy 
has grown with the Positive spirit even whilst the action of 
man wore a purely personal, his speculation a dispersive, 
character. The tendency of science was to demonstrate the 
innateness of our unselfish affections, and industrial life pre- 
pared the way for the universal acceptance of their legitimate 
rule. Since the outbreak of the final crisis the maintenance of 
moral order in the midst of intellectual disorder is due solely 
to the influence of sympathy, nor is there any other possible 
basis for the reorganisation of the West, 

Thus it is that the Positive spirit — the unfailing charac- They nm the 

^ " true domaia 

teristic of which is the combination of the real and the useful ot the posi- 
tive spirit. 

— finds at length its chief sphere, as an intellectual theory 
and a practical system, in the study and the cultivation of 
the benevolent instincts. Tlie true unity of the individual, 
the true unity of the society, springs from their normal pre- 
dominance, as in them, and in equal degree, order has its source, 
progress its end. Ever ready to accept dutifully all that is 
inevitable in our condition, they make a noble resignation the 
basis of our amelioration, whilst they incessantly urge us to 
wise exertion. As a consequence of the omnipresent control 
of Morals, they offer philosophy the soundest discipline and 
the sublimest object, to tlie exclusion of all idle speculations 
and the concentration of our intellectual efforts on the continu- 
ous improvement of our nature. To poetry they throw open 
its noblest field, as by their aid it can idealize all human ties, 
present, past, or even future. Political action, recognising 
them as supreme, is enabled peacefully to carry out the largest 
plans, by bringing all our practical energies to bear on the 
direct improvement of man's condition upon earth, in concert 
with the animal races which, as sympathetic, are justly associated 
with Humanity. These hints give a sufficient idea of the 
general character of the Positive order of things, as a synthesis 
resting on universal love, that love aided by a faith susceptible 
of demonstration. 

And yet the idea were incomplete without a direct examina- cwef attri- 
tion of the chief attribute of human unity, viz., the necessary m"an unity. 

44 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Duty and 
happiness 
coincident. 

Feeling to be 
encouraged 
for its own 

sake. 

Living for 

OthtTlS, 

others live 
for us. 

coincidence of duty and of happiness, both equally placed in 
Living for Others. Complete as is the sanction, and natural 
as complete, given by the sympathetic instincts to every right 
exertion of our intellect, every right exercise of our active 
powers, such efforts are always urged as means to an end, 
the means adapted to the overcoming the difficulties of man's 
position. The highest gratification they can afford is derived 
from their unavoidable and constant ministration to the Grreat 
Being. Set aside these wants, and man's happiness, as his true 
unity, depends on his emotional nature. A woman's pen has 
fitly expressed this prerogative of man, and the admirable 
expression is her chief claim to immortality, ' There is nothing 
real in the vjorld but love.' 

This maxim of Delphine may seem at first sight an exag- 
geration, yet the Positive religion must adopt it, to enforce the 
conviction that it is in feeling that lies the chief value of feeUng. 
Whilst speculation and even action contribute to our happiness 
by their results alone, and results as dependent on external 
conditions often elude us, the gratification we derive from 
affection is always direct and certain a.nd depends on ourselves 
alone. Eeal happiness, then, cannot reside either in our 
thoughts or actions, but exclusively in our sympathies, and 
their highest recompense is their existence. When once by a 
right exercise we have learnt to appreciate this sovereign good, 
we cease to find satisfaction as formerly in the most successful 
intellectual or active exertions. We then see that our opinions 
and our efforts depend for their main value upon om- feelings, 
the only immediate sources of happiness and duty for the 
individual as for the society. 

Thus realising the highest aspirations of theology in its 
dreams, the kingdom of Humanity is a kingdom of love, per- 
fecting our inward satisfaction by cooperation from without. 
Each makes others his chief object, and as a natural result gains 
the support of others in his own need. But he may not gain 
it, and if he gain it, it is not the motive for altruism nor can 
it be its adequate reward. We are liable to set too nduch store 
hj such reciprocity of services, owing to habits contracted under 
the egoistic synthesis, and any over-value of it would endanger 
the unity of our sympathetic, by stimulating our personal, 
instincts. Even in the anarchy of modern times, tlie true moral 
conception found its spontaneous expression in the noble wish 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GREAT BEIXG. 45 

of the great Danton, ' Perish my memory, only let Tny country 
be free.' 

Yet even in this heroic cry we trace the idea that the out- subjective 

1 r- i.p -, ■. • immortality 

ward reward or a great life extends to its subjective immortality, tte fitting 
He who has truly lived for others should hope to live on, in, and "obie liie. 
by others. This subjective return is purer at once and surer 
than the objective, for it carries on the services rendered and 
perfects the judgment of those services. Under the impulse 
given by the Positive spirit, spontaneously and systematically, 
this noble recompense is accessible to all who are capable of 
understanding it and deserving it. The unhappy daughter 
of the old friend before mentioned, a few days before her death 
expressed to me naively her deep sense of the value of such a 
recompense in a touching utterance which connects her memory 
with that of my eternal companion. She said of her — it was 
three years after her death — ' She is fortunate indeed, she is 
sure of immortality.' 

An examination in detail of the emotional aspect of Posi- (ii) inteiiec- 
tivism was obligatory from its immediate connection with the 
fundamental principle of true human unity. In dealing with 
the intellect and even with the activity of man, I may limit 
myself to a clear explanation of their proper subordination to 
feeling. In judging the altruistic synthesis from the intellectual 
side, we shaU take first its esthetic aspect, then its scientific. 

Eising above modern prejudices, the Positive religion decides fa) Art. 
that in dignity art ranks above science, as art is more closely 
connected with feeling, science with action. Hence a synthetical 
hierarchy, embodied in the order of succession of the principal 
phases of education, which, common to all equally, is first the 
education of the affections, then of the esthetic faculties, thirdly 
of the scientific, lastly of the practical capacity. The classifica- 
tion is in conformity with the principle of the encyclopaedic scale ; 
it is a condensed expression of the natural affinities of our 
various powers ; it marks their serial order, and so makes it easy 
to compare them. 

Art satisfies the deeper wants of our nature better than Moreaympa- 

T • n'-i* jij- * thctic and 

science. It is more sympathetic ; it is more synthetic. At more syn- 
the same time it is invariably alien to mere speculation, and science, 
leads directly to action of the noblest kind, viz., the elevating 
our feelings by their ideal expression. No other form of existence 
is as completely in unison with the sacred formula of Positivism, 

46 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE' FUTUEE OF MAN. 

Art, more 
closely con- 
nected with 
Religion. 

Art in edu- 
cation. 

for an all-comprehensive sympathy is its source, the highest 
progress its aspiration, the highest order its basis. Its normal 
developement issues naturally in the combination of independence 
■with cooperation, for its productions are emphatically individual 
whilst the aim of those productions is agreement on the widest 
scale. 

It is a common error to overrate the ultimate importance 
of science from regard to its services as a preparation. So 
long as it was the prime object to call out our several powers, 
the special exercise of our scientific faculties, as weakest in point 
of energy, was of importance ; for though weakest, it was to them 
we had to look for the construction of an objective basis for 
human wisdom. But now that our immediate object is to 
regulate those powers, religion must employ art rather than 
science, art being the nearer to the principle of unity. Although 
art and science alike, tend, if cultivated amiss, to stimulate 
linduly pride and vanity, the pursuit of science exerts, besides 
this, a more noxious moral influence — an influence inseparable 
from it — in that the concentration it demands discourages 
affection. Therefore it is that in the normal state, science 
must, by suitable means, be limited to its strict function ; the 
knowledge of the order of the world sufficient for a dignified 
acceptance and wise modification. Such knowledge is a para^ 
mount necessity solely because of the exigencies of our phy- 
sical condition, binding us to a form of action which at the 
outset is egoistic, whereas, given a situation so favoured by 
nature that we stood in no need of science, art would still have 
an inherent charm and a power to raise us. Even in reference 
to the objective construction we require for wise action, art 
contributed more than science to the intelligence of the higher 
and less obvious phenomena, poetiy hitherto having anticipated 
philosophy in stating, in outline at least, the laws of om' intel- 
lectual, and still more those of our moral nature. 

As a part of the system of Positive education art must hold 
equal rank with science. In real life it passes before science, 
as all that science gives us is the rational basis for action ; its 
guidance does not enable us in practice to dispense with the 
complement of experience. With all classes, the priesthood 
included, the mind will, as a rule, exert itself in the esthetic 
rather than in the scientific direction, so the better to concen- 
trate our efforts on the knowledge and improvement of our 

Chap. I.] THEORY 0:F THE GEEAT BEING. 47 

nature. Scientific works are seldom to be read again even by 
the theorician, whilst the creations of the artist are the objects 
of ever fresh admiration. It were superfluous to dwell longer 
on the strong esthetic tendency of a synthesis, the natural 
result of which will be the prevalence of the intellectual and 
moral dispositions most favourable to poetry. 

The history of the past carries with it the proof, that such Testimony 
is the future which awaits the Positive spirit in the normal 
state, as since the disappearance of the Theocracy the master 
works of poetry have multiplied in proportion as the West dis- 
engages itself from the trammels of Theologism and war. The 
creation of Positivism as a system evidences its afiinity for art ; 
for art already owes to it a philosophy of esthetics, whereas true 
thinkers of the metaphysical school sought one in vain. 

To place in a clearer light the decided superiority, estheti- Newmstua- 
caUy speaking, of Positivism, I would indicate here, in general poetry. 
terms, the introduction of a new series of poetical appliances, 
originating in the perfectly legitimate fusion of the Fetichist 
with the Positivist spirit. 

By the incorporation of Fetiohism, art in its maturity re- subjectiTe 
possesses the external world, which in the full sense it possessed 
only in its infancy, and even then its idealisation of it could only 
be inchoate. Poetry in the Positive state, whilst cultivating this 
its original domain, will extend it so as to include phenomena 
no less than beings, empowered to do so by the general growth 
of abstraction since the Fetichist age. The new field thus 
opened requires, to be available, the previous creation of sub- 
jective milieus ; otherwise, in the cultivation of it, it would be 
difficult as a rule to avoid lapsing into a metaphysical tendency, 
in essential antagonism with art — a tendency to consider events 
independently of beings. 

In its true idea, Space is the first and hitherto the only space Mtb- 

^ _ ^ -J erto the 

perfect example of this logical artifice, which, when interpreted, oniyin- 
in an objective sense, gave rise to so many errors. For Space 
logically is to be looked upon simply as an universal fluid, 
created by man's instinct, in the infancy of his genius, in order 
to enable him to conceive of extension and even of motion 
independently of actual bodies. In default of such a milieu, 
signs without images would be our only resource for the abstract 
developement of geometrical and mechanical speculations. 
The long familiaritj of the western mind with this primeval 

48 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

The philoso- 
phy ot art in 
relation to 
that of 
science. 

(&) Science. 

All Positive 
theories 
must con- 
verge to- 
wards the 
science of 
man. 

institution is a hindrance to our due appreciation of its value, 
yet we may by imagining it in abeyance, measure the void 
actually existing in the case of all other phenomena, owing to 
the want of so powerful an instrument. It follows that we must 
deliberately create for the phenomena of Physics, Chemistry, 
nay even of Biology, the equivalent of the milieu which Space 
offers us without effort in the domain of Mathematics, 

In this way, and in this way only, can art in its maturity 
adequately idealise the world without, by giving life to these 
milieus of man's creation, just as in his infancy he attributed 
life to all the objects of nature. This done, the philosophy of 
art will be as complete as that of science ; as, in accordance 
with its peculiar genius, it will organise its twofold empire, the 
world and man, an empire which it has in common with science, 
though poetically the world is not on the same level with man. 
Thus comprehensive, art will be better adapted than science to 
explain and promote the Positive logic, for art has exclusive 
competence in regard to images, and in Positive logic it is 
images which bring signs into convergence with feelings in 
order to facilitate thought. 

The value of Positivism in regard to science admits of a 
less full statement than its power in regard to art ; since as a 
synthesis resting immediately upon natural philosophy it wiU he 
certain to perfect the whole range of scientific investigations. 
Suffice it here to indicate under its more prominent aspects the 
influence of religion upon science, in which it repays more than 
it received. 

Subject to the inevitable control of moral science, all scien- 
tific theories cleared of misdirected investigations take a sacred 
and synthetical character, as being definitive portions of the 
body of Positive doctrine, which, step by step, in the natui'al 
course of things, has been formed by their contributions. 
Science, thus renovated, regains with greater completeness and 
stability the majestic unity it attained under the fostering care 
of the Theocracy, so justly regretted by the leading thinker of 
the last half-centuiy. The speciality without unity, which has 
hitherto been the great feature of modern scientific enquiry, 
reduces it in truth wellnigh to the level of empiricism, with an 
exception for Mathematics. And even in Mathematics, the 
scientific character is but too often purely superficial, since the 
prevalence of the tendency to substitute the combination of 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 49 

Signs for the higher processes of thought, or at any rate, to make 
the latter subordinate. All the other branches of natural philo- 
sophy are so completely given over to anarchy and consequent 
retrogression, that religion alone, with its power of direction and 
repression, can introduce discipline and prevent the dissolution 
of the whole system. Now, for a state of synthesis, it is impera- 
tive that every Positive theory, normally viewed, become an 
affluent of the science by which man studies his nature in order 
to guide his conduct. For we are still under the dominion of 
analysis so long as the laws of the inorganic world, with their 
complement, the laws of life, are not referred directly to the 
laws of man's social and individual existence, — the domain of 
Humanity, the sole fountain of intellectual unity. 

' I can give no better idea of this convergence than by setting tms conver. 
it forth in detail with reference to the grand problem of moral reference to 

n I ■ 11 J • i^ 1 • thedevelope- 

science, the contmuous developement, viz., of our sympathetic ment of the 
instincts, a problem which of itself alone is large enough to instincts, 
allow for all wise efforts, whether in thought or action. 

To begin with, the end proposed connects with the whole of 
active life, the results of the exercise of our feelings reacting on 
them to raise them. For the present, however, limiting our- 
selves to the purely intellectual question, we see that the growth 
of sympathy depends on the cultivation of the sciences, even as 
regards the external order, in our inevitable submission to which 
we have a check on egoism, and so an encouragement to altruism. 
Without forestalling an examination reserved for the third 
chapter, it must be added, that the contiguity of the organs of 
sympathy with the apparatus of the intellectual afibrds us the 
means generally of modifying the former. Not in contact with 
the world without, not in contact even with the viscera of organic 
life, it is only indirectly through the intellect or activity that 
they can be influenced. - Still, by virtue of their peculiar con- 
nection with the organs of egoism, we can bring to bear upon 
them, by the agency of these latter, the influences derived from 
the nutritive system. So this practical problem, in which 
Morals depend primarily on Sociology, is in connection with 
Biology in its whole extent, and through Biology with the whole 
of Cosmology. Selecting one of the essential elements of the Dreams, 
problem for special consideration, we reduce to system the in- 
stinctive tendency of the ancient world towards the interpreta- 
tion, nay more, the direction of dreams ; for in dreams there is, 

VOL. IV. E 

50 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAX 

The aid 
ini.iges -wrill 
bring to 
science. 

in the conjoint action of physical, intellectual, and moral laws, 
a basis for a valuable influence. 
Positivism These remarks sufBce to show that, if Positivism discinhnp 

offers science -, * t -^^aIj^ucj 

a better field the Scientific spirit to the discouragement of idle enquiries it 
metiiod. is solelv in order to direct it to the more difficult and the more 
important questions, as a more worthy field for its full powers. 
With a nobler object it gives science new means, not merely 
indirectly in the aid derived from the mutual support of the 
several parts of the system, but also directly by the creation of the 
true logic, left inchoate by its analytical treatment. 

Although art on this point will anticipate, and even 
always surpass science, science may benefit largely from this 
definitive reduction to a system of the Positive method. Hither- 
to, scientific meditation has had no help but from signs, the 
use of images was purely subsidiary, except in Mathematics 
under the impulse given by Descartes. When synthesis pre- 
vails, images will lend their powerful aid in aU abstract specu- 
lations, in particular by a larger introduction of subjectire 
milieus, an institution not less adapted to science than to art. 
The discipline of religion, however, must exert its greatest in- 
fluence, logically, in the systematising the reaction of the feelings 
on the intellect, such reaction being due, as is that of the intellect 
on the sympathies, to contiguity of position in the brain. WMlst 
denying the constant part taken in intellectual operations by the 
affective impulses, the anarchical thought of modem times is 
blindly subject to them so far as the self -regarding instincts are 
concerned, their superior energy balancing their greater distance 
from the speculative region of the brain. Their power enables 
us to understand what would be that, purer and more direct 
as it is, of the altruistic instincts, which are certainly better 
qualified to facilitate and stimulate thought than the organic 
stimuli so vaunted by materialists. The admission that venerar 
tion is indispensable to success in teaching, implies that it is 
equally necessary in original thought, and the recognition of 
this fact will lead shortly to ajuster sense than was attained 
in the Middle Ages, of the great power over the intellect of the 
three instincts of sympathy. 

After adequately estimating the capabilities of the Positive 
religion from the intellectual point of view, I have to comple% 
the description of the synthetical state in the abstract by seir 
ting forth in the general its bearing on active life. In these 

(iii) Unity 
in action. 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 51 

final remarks, order must be treated first, then progress, on the 
basis of a study of concert and independence respectively, the com- 
plete combination of the two devolving on the altruistic synthesis. 

The whole question of the regeneration of man's action («) order. 
may be reduced to this : how to shape into a system the spon- 
taneous tendencies of modern industry to assume the collective 
character. Sociocracy in this respect will fulfil the Theocracy ; 
it will, by judicious methods, abolish the irrational and immoral 
distinction, provisionally accepted, between private and public 
functions. A social order in which everyone habitually labours 
for others, affords more scope for social feeling than war, though 
it is in war that such feeling originally finds its sphere. In- 
dustrial life gives it purity and consistence, and it gives more- 
over that which it alone can give, fall room for expansion, by 
extending it from the relations of citizenship to those of man- 
kind. There is no more distinctive note of the Positive religion 
than its power to deal with industrial activity, the sanction of 
which in the theological period was mainly due to the priest- 
hood, and even the priesthood failed when the opposition of 
supernatural religion was aggravated by the condensation of Poly- 
theism into Monotheism, 

The organisation of industry has its own difficulties, but at it is easier 

• • - 1 I'jnii to or^janise 

bottom it IS easier than the intellectual reconstruction to which intastry 
it must look for guidance". The power derived from material, 
is less exposed to illusions than that based on spiritual, superiority ; 
hence pride, nay, even avarice, are more amenable to discipline 
than vanity. To give its new form and direction to human 
activity is, it is true, the chief object of the wisdom of the 
priesthood ; but a far more difficult task for the Positive religion, 
and one far more decisive, if successfully performed, is the for- 
mation of a competent priesthood. The disorganisation of in- 
dustry is more thorough than that of the intellect, but the 
latter is at present the more serious evil, as it affects our 
only available instrument for the reconstruction demanded by 
feeling. Therefore it is, that in the intellectual power of the 
altruistic synthesis we have the guarartee at once and the 
basis of its competence in the sphere of action. Cooperation, 
the cooperation of contemporaries, or even that of successive 
generations, has never been so completely ignored by the 
pride of the temporal, as it has been by the vanity of the 
spiritual power. Consequently, the religion of Humanity once 

E 2 

than intel- 
lect. 

52 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE JTUTUEE. OP MAN. 

fairly constituted, it will not be long before it regulate the 
social milieu most disposed to adojjt as final its fundamental 
formula. 
Consorva- Parasites, as more and more the exception, may be put aside, 

crease of the and, lu the Positive state, all practicians become immediate 
treasuve of scrvants of the Grreat Being, their service' regarding the wealth 
transmitted by its providence to the present generation in trust 
for its successor. As this accumulation of former labour sufifers 
in its transmission by the very fulfilment of its proper purpose, 
the great point in the service is its perpetuation by reproduction. 
Hence the necessity for continuity in industrial action, a con- 
tinuity useless in the case of the intellectual treasm-e of man- 
kind. But in industrial action, more than elsewhere, order 
necessarily implies progress as its complement, for any develope- 
ment of Humanity had been impossible had reproduction not 
been attended by increase, on some scale or other. The habits, 
however, formed by the consideration of the productions of the 
intellect which do not lose by transmission, and in reference to 
which the spreading them should be our great care, leads us to 
overrate the importance of increased production in industry and 
to underrate that of conservation of the products. If reproduc- 
tion, and there is no other means of preserving perishable mate- 
rials, added nothing, their amount would soon be lessened. Yet 
as such necessary augmentation of the capital of the race is but 
a fraction of the whole, a fraction constantly decreasing in value, 
the Positive religion should lay the chief stress on industrial 
conservation, even in the exceptional cases where it results in 
no increase. Conservation is the primary duty ; in this respect 
the requirements of practical life differ radically from those of 
intellectual. Second to this in difficulty stands the accessory 
function, the transmission of the social capital with the deter- 
mination of the share to be allotted to the individual. 

In order to organise industrial action on these two points, 
the altruistic synthesis sanctions two coexistent services, direc-, 
tion and execution, in intimate connection with one another, 
yet so as not to interfere with the normal condition of separa- 
tion, for the capacities they require are distinct, and so is the 
preparation for either. Humanity ratifies, that is, the division 
between the capitalist and the workman, the gradual and spon- 
taneous outgrowth of Western industry, dating from the middle 
of the mediaeval period. The adoption of this dual arrange- 

Tlie two 
require two 
distinct ser- 
vices. 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 53 

ment, with its coiBplement, the hierarchy of the patrician order, 
constitutes the chief actual difficulty of the regeneration of 
activity. 

In this capital operation, the Positive religion will put out its Government 
power as a social system, hy disciplining at once command and dienco hoth 
obedience, as both equally consecrated to the service of the 
Great Being, the highest functions of which have as their basis 
industrial action. The industrial chiefs are the representatives 
of Humanity, in the sense of being indispensable as the ministers 
of its material providence ; the condensation they offer being the 
condition of its right exertion. Individually they may use 
amiss the wealth committed to their charge, but they do not 
therefore lose their sacred character, unless the abuse be in 
degree such as to endanger the conservation of the capital of the 
race. StiU more immediate, still more tan;^ible, is the honour- 
able service rendered by the working classes, though it is in- 
ferior in point of generality and duration. They are the chief 
depositaries of technical skill ; the patrician should especially 
cultivate administrative capacity. In fact, the workmen, in the 
strict sense of the term, are to be looked on as the proper organs 
for connecting in detail industry and science, as they work out 
in a concrete form the theories of abstract science. All their 
legitimate demands, the appeal of veneration, to devotion, are 
made in the name of the Great Being, as is but natural, seeing 
that it entrusts its general representatives with the permanent 
guardianship of its individual servants. 

For patrician and workman alike, the habitual sense of use- influence ot 

n 1 ^ T • ■[• ^^^ habitual 

fulness — an usefulness intelligible to all — ennobles and disciplines conscwus- 

" . . , ness of use- 

industrial existence by keeping it in constant connection with fulness. 

Humanity. , Private life is raised and strengthened by the 
stimulus thus given in all directions to public life, each taking 
that degree of interest in the welfare of the whole which answers 
to his particular function. 

As regards progress, the great point in the organisation of (6) Progress. 
industry is to combine concert with independence, ever respect- 
ing the spontaneous character of the services rendered, as a 
consequence of the inherent gratuitousness of human labour, the 
wages of such labour aiming simply at the replacement of mate- 
rials. The Positive religion leads chiefs and subjects equally, not 
to use force in any dispute whatsoever ; all that is admissible is, 
the refusal of either party to cooperate with the other, a refusal 

54 SYSTEM, OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

InduRtry so 
con?tituted 
fnvours 
feeling and 
intellect. 

Conorete 
Tiew. 

I. Constitu- 
tion of So- 
ciocracy. 

II. Its seve- 
ral elements, 

Principles 
cm which we 
classifj' these 
elements. 

not incompatible with the continuance of their collective service. 
All classes equally, find their main happiness in the uninterrupted 
play of their sympathetic instincts, consequent on their voluntary 
participation in the action of the society. But whilst the source 
of human happiness is identical for all, it admits variety of 
adaptation to the diversities'of capacity and situation, by a wise 
application of the education all have in common. For with 
the inferiors, attachment holds the first place, with the superiors, 
benevolence, the function of the inferiors being favourable to 
private, that of the superiors to public life, whilst veneration is 
common, wealth respecting numbers, numbers respecting wealth. 
All the relations of the two rest on confidence, and involve 
responsibility ; even the material retribution of particular services 
is in every case dependent on the free initiative of the agent. 
The same principle of confidence regulates the transfer of 
functions and of the capital they require for their discharge, and 
so upholds the social continuity ; the retiring functionary choosing 
freely his successor, subject to the assent of his immediate 
superior. 

Such a constitution of industry allows it to attain its fuU 
proportions, without ever weakening the moral source of Positive 
unity or its intellectual basis. Nay, the industrial life so con- 
ceived offers the best guarantee for the sound growth and 
expansion of feeling and intellect, owing to the natural inter- 
dependence of the several kinds of progress, the simplest and 
lowest being always the easiest and least uncertain. This is the 
way in which the Great Being, in its full prime, wiU take posses- 
sion of its domain, the Earth, marking its proprietorship by 
effecting all the improvements compatible with the order of the 
whole, in accordance with the principle that particular action 
must in all cases be subordinate to the general unity. 

The appreciation in the abstract of the ultimate synthesis 
ended, the rest of this chapter must be devoted to an exposition 
of the Positive state in the concrete, thus completing our de- 
scription of human regeneration. The first point in such exposi- 
tion is to determine the constitution of the sociocracy in the 
general, afterwards the peculiar character of each of its elements 
separately. 

In classing these elements, we may have regard either to the 
emotional source of the Positive religion, or its intellectual basis. 
The spontaneous convergence of the two modes, the one synthe- 

Chap. I.] THEOEY OP THE GEEAT BEING. 55 

tical, the other analytical, gives the hierarchy of Sociocraey a 
solidity which nothing can shake. Further, we have a general 
verification of the two in the agreement which, by the nature 
of the case, exists between the constitution of society and the 
nature of the individual. 

From the moral point of view, society as constituted by 
Positivism is the objective presentation of the Great Being. It 
follows that its constituent elements take rank by their aptness 
to represent Humanity ; that is to say, by the degree in which 
their nature is sympathetic. From the intellectual point of 
view, society, or the hierarchy of man, is the highest term of the 
ascending series formed by the aggregate of known existences. 
Thus regarded, the elements of society must, equally with the 
other terms of the series, be classified by their degree of gene- 
rality, the standard by which throughout we measure the ap- 
proach to unity. We may coordinate them, by taking as the 
principle of comparison either sympathy or synthesis. Now the 
two modes are, in fact, equivalent, sympathy being the source 
of any true synthesis. We find in language a presentiment of 
this fundamental agreement; language always offering us a con- 
nection of generality with generosity, the fruitfulness in results, 
common to both, being the ground of the connection. 

Both principles of classification point to the distinction of (0 women 

f. .«(-,. superior m 

the sexes as the primary basis of the constitution of Sociocraey. sympathy. 
For women, the representatives of Humanity, are both more 
sympathetic and more synthetic than her servants. They are, 
then, the higher in dignity ; in power we cannot but reverse the 
order. Thus woman occupies the first rank in Sociocraey, as the 
best personification of the Great Beingj, Though her intellec- 
tual claims have hitherto been less acknowledged than her moral 
advantages, the Positive religion will secure them the recognition 
which is their due, by distinguishing what have hitherto been 
confounded without enquiry, capacity and cultivation. If in 
the disposition to unity we have the best measure of intellectual 
power, evidently woman is superior ; we have only to take into 
account her instinctive tendency to consider morality in all 
cases as paramount, morality being the point to which all our 
conceptions converge. But this natural superiority of woman 
does not admit, generally, of any systematic assertion, from her 
being shut out from collective action, which is adapted only to 
the active sex. 

56 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

The distinc- 
tion of tlie 
eexes an- 
swers to 
thftt between 
private and 
public iif c. 

Distinction 
of practi- 
cians and 
theoricians. 

Consequen- 
ces of the 
previous 
divisions. 

In fact, we must consider this first division of Sociocracy as 
answering to the distinction between private and public life. 
Properly speaking, women do not form a class, since they are 
never to be considered collectively. Each one of them, the 
soul of her own family, whilst taking no immediate part in the 
service of the Great Being, naturally represents that Being for 
those who serve it directly, and her function is to breathe into 
them the dispositions most in harmony with their public duties. 
Whilst the advancement of science or of industry is the result 
of collective effyrts, feeling, the source of unity, is evolved only 
in the individual. Woman, if she is to attain her full intellec- 
tual, still more her full moral, value, must be concentrated on 
private life, whilst man's developement is imperfect unless he 
look to public life as his true sphere. The pre-eminence 
accorded to woman in Sociocracy offers no opening consequently 
for abuse, as, with here and there a well-grounded exception, 
woman inevitably sinks her claims if she step beyond the 
sanctuary of her home. She must restrict herself to the direc- 
tion of private life, as the normal basis of public life, the latter 
alone, with the sex which administers it, being set apart for the 
direct service of Humanity. 

This is the fundamental division, but beyond this the 
sociocratic order requires the division of the servants of Humanity 
into her theoretical and practical servants, whilst no distinction 
is admissible for her representatives. Although the theoretic 
class may never be more than an extremely small fraction of 
the whole body, it has been satisfactorily shown in the two 
preceding volumes that the separate existence of this class, 
imder proper conditions, is the most distinct note of maturity 
in the Grreat Being. Eliminate this constituent, and human 
society remains national and incapable of coextension with the 
race. The superiority of the theoretic servants of Humanity, 
in sympathy as in synthesis, to her practical servants, is as in- 
disputable as the inferiority of both to the affective sex. In 
their normal conception, its theoretic servants are the indispen- 
sable interpreters of the Great Being, for they alone possess the 
requisite knowledge of its nature and its destinies. 

By these two divisions, tlie constitution of society is found 
to develope and to secure at once, the consensus in the individual 
of feeling, thought, and action. The actual generation is, on 

Chap. I.] THEOllY OF THE GREAT BEING. 57 

this view, bound to the two subjective portions of Humanity, 
its past and its future — woman impelling us towards the future, 
the priesthood subordinating us to the past, the active mass 
having the present as its province. The statical relation thus 
indicated finds dynamical confirmation in the course of education 
through which all are to pass in the normal state, with its three 
stages, the education of the affections, the education of the 
intellect, and the education of our powers of action. 

But the constitution above s;i\en would be incomplete Distinction 

,1... P,i oftbepatri- 

without one general distinction, a consequence of the natural date and 

IT... p . . T . , . mi • T proletariate^ 

subdivision or action into direction and execution. I Ins last 
falls in naturally with the two other divisions, since by the law 
of sympathy and generality those who form the plans for the 
Great Being stand higher than the agents who cari-y them into 
effect. Looking upon the whole sociocratic oi'ganisation as the 
seat, objectively, of the true providence, it is vested, for the 
material order, specially in the patriciate, as for the intellectual 
it is vested in the priesthood, and for the moral primarily in 
woman. Love and knowledge, these are the attributes re- 
spectively of the two higher elements, whilst provision, or tlie 
satisfaction of our material wants, is a function which for its 
right discharge must be analysed in its two real elements of will 
and power. In the patriciate is the chief seat of the will, the 
will condensing in itself as it were our whole objective life, as 
societies and as individuals. On this ground it is that capital 
should be concentrated in the patriciate, as the directing class 
on which devolves the provisioning of the other classes, each in 
its appropriate way. As for the abuses inherent in such vast 
power, the Positive religion is adapted to check them by its 
possession of a common ideal, furnished by the Great Being. 
Composite and subjective — Humanity is alien to will, and recog- 
nises only the sway of demonstrable laws. 

Direction being the special function of the patriciate we are Fnnction of 
warranted in assigning the complementary fnnction to the tariSe!*" 
proletariate, as the immediate agent of the power of Humanity. 
Its service, involving merely the responsibility of carrying out 
instructions, leaves the proletariate free both in mind and heart 
to apply the common doctrine and make it felt as a check on 
the abuses attendant on the undue absorption in science or in- 
dustry. The general superintendence of the social system, vested 

58 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

The auxilia- 
ries of Hu- 
manity. 

Tile cliarac- 
ter of the 
Sociocratic 
elements. 

in the class which suffers the most from its disorder, extends 
even to the temporary aberrations to which in private life an 
exaggeration of feeling might easily give rise. 

This then is the ideal constitution of the Sociocracy : the repre- 
sentatives of Humanity preside over the family ; under them as 
supreme, she ranks, first the interpreters of her laws, next the 
ministers of her designs, lastly the agents of her power. Love, 
knowledge, will, and power are the attributes respectively of the 
four indispensable branches of her sei-vice, the separation of 
which, and the coordination of which, mark the f uU maturity of 
the Great Being. To complete, however, this fundamental out- 
line, we must combine with the human population the voluntary 
assistance furnished by the animal races it can associate, which 
bring a moral or intellectual or material contribution to the 
common task of directing the aid involuntarily rendered by 
purely physical forces. 

This statement introduces, as the conclusion of the chapter, 
an examination of the peculiar character of each of the consti- 
tuents of Sociocracy, the lower being, in obedience to the law 
of every objective hierarchy, the more independent. To simplify 
their comparison, we "may reduce the constituents to three, for 
we may regard the service of women as the basis for the indi- 
vidual of his service to society. Subject to this influence in 
private life, public life aims above all at such a transformation 
of action, in whatever form it be predominant, as may strip it 
of its egoistic character, and make it support and expand the 
altruistic synthesis. The three sociocratic forces contribute by 
their own natural action to this general result, each in accord- 
ance with its peculiar constitution. It is, however, on the 
patriciate in particular that this transformation depends, as the 
patriciate alone is competent to give a collective character tn 
individual activity by virtue of the capital it administers. The 
supremacy, however, of the patriciate, necessary as it is, would 
continue to have a purely empirical character and would he a 
source of abuse, were it not for the moderating power vested in 
the priesthood, which, as the special depositary of our intellec- 
tual capital, gives a systematic direction to ordinary life by 
connecting it with our subjective existence. Lastly, the great 
body of the industrial workers, connected, though by a different 
tie, with each of the above classes, is the spontaneous regulator 
of the disputes which arise in the course of events from the 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GEEAT BEING. ,59 

patrician desire of power, and the sacerdotal craving for in- 
fluence. 

Before characterising each of the thi'ee indispensable elements 
of society, it is desirable to examine into the moral stimulus 
constantly imparted to all the servants of Humanity by hex 
representative in the family. 

In some degree, greater or less, the affective sex has at all Woman. 
times accomplished this holy mission ; but, to put out its full j,endence. 
power, woman needs, within proper limits, independence, a con- 
dition for which the initiation of mankind has gradually pre- 
pared the way, though its full realisation is reserved for the 
adult age of the Great Being. The condition is so absolutely 
necessary, that its attainment will be a simple consequence of a 
sound estimate of woman's nature and function, as an inter- 
mediate being between men and Humanity. But the change 
does not merely involve the placing her moral higher than her 
physical function, hitherto coarsely held paramount. It implies 
in addition the previous correction of the existing opinions as 
to this physical function, originally held to be essentin.lly a 
masculine attribute. On this point the permanent direction of 
the current of human opinion may be inferred from a com- 
parison of the theory, on which Apollo in ^schylus justifies 
Orestes before Minerva, with the doctrine enunciated by 
Harvey. 

Admitting, however, this growing disposition to look ' on change ot 
man as the offspring mainly of woman, it is still a point on the function 
which opinion has by no means reached the normal conclusion, tioo. 
Yet in the antecedent movement we have an indication that 
the conviction will soon become general, that in the reproduc- 
tion of the species the larger share by far is the woman's. Even 
already, and amid the actual confusion of biological conceptions, 
the share of the man is allowed to be much smaller than might 
be expected from the activity of his generative system. In the 
third chapter I shall clear up this difficulty by assigning the 
system in question another purpose as its main one. In 
the second place, the conclusive observation of Franklin, that if 
we go back but a few generations we necessarily come to com- 
mon ancestors, is but an expression of the truth that, even 
physically, men are more the children of Humanity than of 
their several families. Over ,and above this community of 
origin, the distinct act of reproduction must also take a col- 

60 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OP MAN. 

lective character, and for this end we need a judicious return to 
the ideas as to the influence of the nervous system, -which, 
though deficient in clearness, were sound, and which were too 
blindly rejected during the recent period of anarchy. If, as 
there is no reason to doubt, the state of the mother's brain 
affects the constitution of the foetus, then the whole environ- 
ment, physical and social, dmlng pregnancy, plays a greater 
part than in the lower races in the production of each child of 
Humanity. 

The physical function of woman becomes then a collective 
one, social in its origin and its accomplishment, social also in its 
result. On this view, and it is one even now susceptible of 
demonstration, woman's high place in the family is placed 
on a solid foundation. But to give definiteness to our con- 
ception of the independence of woman, I think it right to 
place here a daring hypothesis, possibly destined to become a 
reality in tlie course of our advance, though at what time, or 
even in what manner, is not for me to enquire. 
The Hypo- If in human reproduction the man contributes merely a 

i-ep?oauctiTe stimulus, one that is but an incidental accompaniment of the 
ctaiveiy^'' J'cal office of his generative system, then it is conceivable that 
we miglit substitute for this stimulus one or more which 
should be at women's free disposal. The non-existence of such 
a power in the animal races nearest to man, is no sufiicient 
reason for refusing it to man as the most eminent race and the 
most susceptible of modification. In man the privilege would 
be in accordance with other peculiarities of the same function, 
with menstruation for instance, which is a decided advance on 
the rudimentar}' form of it found among the higher animals, an 
advance due to our civilised condition. 

I need not dwell further upon this hypothesis, the sole ob- 
ject of which is to implant a presentiment, as it were, of the 
degree in which woman, even in her physical functions, may 
become independent of men. In social statics, an hypothesis of 
a less warrantable kind enabled me, without objection from any 
quarter, to establish on a surer basis the true theory of propprty. 
I hope therefore that the indication above given will shortly 
prevail over a repugnance which is without rational foundation, 
and will tend to strengthen a theory of equal importance. 
Supposing the independence of woman ever to attain this 
limit, as a consequence of the sum of human progress, moral, 

fem.ile. 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 61 

intellectual, and even physical, then her action on society would 
be increased in an eminent measure. We should then no longer 
hesitate between the coarse view now prevalent and the noble 
doctrine to which Positivism gives its systematic form. The 
highest species of production would no longer be at the mercy of 
a capricious and unruly instinct, the proper restraint of which 
has hitherto been the chief stumbling-block in the way of human 
discipline. The function and all the responsibilities it involves 
would then be vested, as it should be, in its highest organs, in 
.those who alone can overcome the weakness of impulse — and the 
object of the transfer would be the accomplishment of all attain- 
able ameliorations. 

Be this as it may, it is to be remembered that the part conditions 

of woman's 

assigned in the sociocratic institutions to women is independent indcpeud- 

° ^ enoe. 

of this hypothetical improvement. On this point I need not 
enter into details, I may rely on the three preceding volumes, 
and in especial on the General View. Shortly to state it : 
the just independence of the sex may be regarded as resting 
upon two conditions in close connection with one another : the 
exemption of all women from work away from home, and their 
voluntary and complete renunciation of wealth. For women 
suffer more from the aspirations of ambition than they do from 
the pressure of poverty. Priestesses of Humanity in the family 
circle, born to mitigate by affection the rule, the necessary rule, 
of strength, women should shrink from any participation in 
power as in its very nature degrading. 

Support and encouragement to this deepest conviction will Result ot 

mr-i-i -IT Education 

be naturally found m the common education, placed under the on woman. 
presidency of women, when they have learnt to appreciate it, nay 
have themselves received it. Its training will put them on 
their guard most particularly against the instigations of vanity, 
less dangerous, it is true, but more irresistible to women than 
those of pride. Brought into close contact with the whole 
range of real knowledge, they will but the more keenly feel the 
value of affection and the justice of its claim to superiority over 
thought, the true function of which is simply to be the system- 
atic guide of action. In this way, women's aptitude for syn- 
thesis, hitherto wholly uncultivated, will receive due cultivation, 
not such cultivation, however, as to interfere with her mission, 
but one calculated to give a firm cohesion to her superiority in 
sympathy. 

62 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Value of the 
encyclopaB- 
dic training 
for Ler. 

Woman 
offers less 
difficulty 
' thtin the 
aotive class. 

By her constant preference of feeling, woman is naturally 
exposed to mistakes which might be prejudicial to her intel- 
lectual and practical growth, if the increase of her influence 
were not preceded by an improvement in her education. More 
truly synthetical than man as being more sympathetic, she is 
still less systematic than he is, be it as a result of her mental con- 
stitution, or most especially of her absorption in affection, affec- 
tion ever aiming at the immediate attainment of some particu- 
lar object. There is no other corrective for this defect but an 
encyclopedic education, and if uncorrected, it compromises the 
efficiency of women in the Positive society. A sound apprecia- 
tion of the order of things would lead them to see how important 
submission is to dignity. Although confined on good grounds to 
domestic life, women should so far understand public life as to 
be able to direct the power exercised by the heart so as to 
qualify it for its high destiny. Positive education, whilst 
it deprecates the exaggeration of feeling, is also calculated to 
correct the deficiencies in women in regard to character. For 
in this, as in intelligence, their shortcomings are traceable 
rather to the system under which they live than to their 
natural constitution, and may be obviated so far as not to 
hamper an existence, the true purpose of which is as little action 
as it is speculation. 

The above remarks suEBce for the present as to the regenera- 
tion of woman in the sociocratic state. Consolidating, nay, 
even calling into greater activity her spontaneity, the Positive 
religion will enable the sex to attain the coherent existence in 
which as yet it is deficient. This new position, which will as a 
whole realise the highest aspirations of the Middle Ages, wiU 
meet with but little opposition from women when once they 
have grasped its idea ; they will not be daunted by the conditions 
of intellectual and moral capacity which it exacts from them. 
In fact, errors traceable to feeling have this advantage over 
the errors traceable to intellect and activity, that, once recog- 
nised, our feelings are interested in the correction of them, as 
in all cases destructive of the object those feelings cannot but 
propose to themselves. The grand difficulty in the path of 
the Positive religion once overcome, the difficulty, that is, of 
forming the Priesthood of Humanity, the effort needed to 
regenerate women will be less than that required to regenerate 
the patriciate or even the proletariate. 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 63 

This judgment induces the next step, the explanation of TheSpiri- 
the constitution of the spiiitual power of Sociocracy, the natural 
connecting link between the two sexes. 

It was reserved for Positivism to complete what had been Conditions 
left inchoate by Catholicism, viz., the decisive separation of the pcndeuce. 
theoretic from the active power ; on this point I need not here 
enter into further explanation. It is the less obligatory to 
return on ideas which found their proper place in the second 
volume and were completed in the third, in that the. two 
conditions of the independence of the priesthood are similar to 
those, recalled above, which apply to women. These two kin- 
dred elements of the moderating power differ, in regard to inde- 
pendence, only in the mode of their support. Women, the source 
of the spontaneous impulse, are maintained by their families ; 
the priesthood, the organ of systematic influence, is maintained 
by the state, or rather by the race, and this holds good even 
when such maintenance depends on the voluntary contributions 
of individuals. As the priesthood, however, necessarily takes 
part in public life, more precautions are required in its case 
than in the case of women, as regards the second and more 
personal condition of independence ; the aim being to get rid 
of the tendencies to pride which are more fatal to its useful- 
ness than those of vanity. The priesthood, not content with re- 
nouncing wealth, must give all its services whatsoever gratui- 
tously, for, as they lead to no destruction of materials, they 
exclude the idea of wages, the invariable object of which is to 
replace the materials of labour. 

The proper character of the priesthood is naturally and character of 

1... , -r. ■ ii -ijii^ thePriest- 

distmctly seen if we compare it generally with that oi women, hood shown 

■niT ,-1 • 1 ■ XI. 1- bycompa- 

Both elements of the spiritual power are m sympathy and in ring it with 
synthesis superior to the active world which they are to discipline, 
and they differ from one another solely by the different propor- 
tion in which they respectively possess these qualities, sympathy 
being the more feminine attribute, synthesis the more priestly. 
Their difference in this respect corresponds, intellectually, to a 
difference in their respective cultivation of induction and deduc- 
tion, a difference which modifies the power of expression which 
they have in common; morally, to the predominance respectively 
of attachment or benevolence ; both being equally prone, though 
in a distinct form, to veneration. We may even complete the 
parallel and extend it to the character properly so called, since 

Woman. 

6-1 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

The great 
fanctiou of 
the Priest- 
hood, Edu- 
cation. 

courage and firmness should be most prominent in the priest, 
prudence in the woman. This comparison between the nature 
and position of the two moderating elements, represents the 
improvement of either, as mainly consisting in the careful 
cultivation in itself of the special qualities of- the other, by the 
due discharge of its peculiar function. A consequence of this is 
the natural affinity, an affinity ever on the increase, between the 
priesthood and women. It finds at length its recognition in 
Positivism, for, no longer tolerating the fatal anomaly of 
Catholicism, Positivism binds marriage upon the priests of 
Humanity, so to offer the best type of our nature, by a noble 
combination of private with public life. 

This previous condition fulfilled, the life of the priest will 
give ample scope for his power of synthesis so as to make it 
react on the developement of his sympathies, just as, inversely, 
sympathy leads woman to synthesis. The chief function of the 
priest of Humanity is education, the encyclopoedic education 
which is needed to complete the training given in the family ; 
the object being to allow the formation of a sound pubhc 
opinion, calculated to consolidate the consultative influence of 
tlie priesthood throughout our life. Now education, as the 
primary function of the spiritual power, in regard to which it 
admits no competition, requires and fosters the systematic 
predominance of the synthetical spirit, left to its spontaneous 
growth in women. Better than aught else, this spirit tests the 
value of the various theories, which are necessarily idle specula- 
tions if not conducive to this end. To correct the habits formed 
by the long process of elaborating the objective basis required 
by the Positive religion, all we need is, to limit scientific train- 
ing to such knowledge of the order of things as is indispensable 
for wise action. This limitation will flow naturally from the 
completeness of intellectual range characteristic of our public 
education, from which all specialisation must be banished, 
allowing for such developements as the ulterior needs of prac- 
tical life require. Coming after the education of the aflfections, 
the education of the intellect, always, it must be remembered, 
given under the superintendence of women, will never encourage 
the intellect to rebel against the heai't, a result generally trace- 
able to excess of detail in our speculations. 

Trained to comprehensiveness by their chief office, the 
priests of Humanity will carry the same habit of mind into the 

Chap. I.] THEOEY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 65 

scientific labours to which it may give occasion. Their other 
and complementary duties in reference to practical life will be 
an additional check upon, or a remedy for, an excess on the side of 
abstraction. Still, as their action on society requires not merely 
intellectual capacity, but intellectual capacity combined with 
rare excellence of heart and character, we must provide for the 
exceptional cases where the combination is imperfect, and where 
yet it is desirable not to hinder the intellectual developement. 
In such anomalous cases, less frequent than is thought at 
present, Sociocracy relegates to the class of pensioners of the 
priesthood those who, from deficiency in point of energy or 
tenderness, are only fit for science. As for the special inves- 
tigations which may for a time require the concentrated 
attention of true priests, they may be provided for by appropriate 
dispensations, without in any case impairing the legitimate 
supremacy of the disposition to synthesis and sympathy, which 
is the invariable characteristic of those who direct the relative 
religion. 

To the impulse derived from women, and to its own social The fusion 
destination, we may add, as a protection to the Positive priest- phy and 
hood against degenerating from excess of abstraction, the fusion, aid in pre- 
which is an imperative necessity, of philosophy with poetry. If true priestiy 
not combined in close alliance, they are a constant source of 
grave disturbance in the sociocratic order, as science and art, 
natm-ally rivals, claim on equivalent grounds the spiritual direc- 
tion. Their rivalry is prevented if the priesthood absorbs both 
capacities in the complete compreliensiveness which is its note, 
in both its forms — spontaneous and systematic. The distinct 
advancement of either science or art will not call for more than 
exceptional efforts, as above stated, when the Positive religion 
shall have really closed the transitional period, increasingly 
revolutionary in its character, which lies between us and the 
Theocracy, the single instance hitherto of a normal society. In 
the doctrine the oflBce of the priesthood is mainly scientific ; in 
the worship it becomes mainly artistic ; in the regime there is 
equal scope for both powers, for the theoretic in preaching and 
consecration, for the poetic in consultation and discipline. Art 
first shook off the yoke of Theocracy, as interfering with any 
decided growth ; science could not but follow its example, to 
gain power to construct the objective basis of the final religion. 
All sound philosophy, however, with a presentiment of the 

VOL. IV. F 

characl^er. 

resume the 
medical ' ■, 
office. 

66 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

subjective character of the true synthesis, kept constantly before 
it as its aim a return, under proper conditions, to the plenary 
sacerdotal organisation, whenever the twofold effort of art and of 
science should have laid a sufficient basis for its definitive 
shape. 

ho^^iif' Philosophical or poetical, — it is indifferent which term we 

use, — to complete its legitimate attributions, the Positive priest- 
hood must absorb all the other functions, which, as they directly 
regard man, are in their nature indivisible. Such is pre-eminently 
the medical — the provisional isolation of which has gradually led 
to a state of mental and moral degeneration urgently calling 
for its reincorporation with the priestly office. A portentous 
venality, combined with irrational speciality, leads in medicine 
to a blind ignoring of the indivisibility of human nature in the 
individual as in society. But by virtue of its encyclopaedic 
training, the Positive priesthood will resume the medical office 
as the inseparable complement of its principal function, a 
function which connects it with human existence under all its 
aspects whatsoever. Two special precautions, however, are 
necessary in reference to this complement, or the dignity of the 
priesthood might be lowered by mere manual and cruel duties. 
The surgical department, reduced to its original subaltern posi- 
tion, must be handed over to those best qualified for it, must 
belong, that is, to the surgical instrument makers, when qualified 
by an encyclopaedic education to avail themselves of the special 
opportunities afforded by their profession. So again, post- 
mortem examinations will be limited to the functionary who, Iq 
the name of Humanity, performs the terrible duty of executing 
murderers ; their bodies will be sufficient for the real needs of 
science in its renovated state. 

An universal TMs Outline of the constitution of the priesthood would be 

language. 

incomplete unless I pointed out the solution, the natural solution, 
of a serious difficulty; the difficulty, viz., consequent on the neces- 
sity of the extension of the Positive religion to all portions of the 
Earth. Evidently, its universal adoption depends on the exist- 
ence of a common language, as is explained in the fourth chapter 
of the second volume. Its formation occupied the leading thinkers, 
dating from the period at which the Western revolution evoked 
strongly marked aspirations for a definitive reorganisation. But 
the metaphysical spirit led to the mistake of not seeing that ' 
such a construction must be spontaneous, its only possible basis ' 

Chap. I.] ' THEORY OF THE GREAT BEING. 67 

being its elaboration by the people, so that it can only be the 
result of the unanimous adoption of an existing language. Of 
the various languages of the West, that must be the best itaUau 
adapted for universal acceptance which has been most cultivated 
for poetry and music, as soon as appropriate modifications shall 
have qualified it systematically for its position. Sprung, as it 
is, from the improvement, in the natural course of things, of the 
language spoken by the noblest precursors of the definitive social 
order, it is the best fitted to bind worthily the future to the past. 
Shaped by the most peaceful and most artistic of European 
nations, the only one clear of any share in colonisation, it will 
meet the fewest obstacles to its free adoption everywhere, an 
adoption which will be secured by the priesthood of Positivism, 
consecrating it to the worship of Humanity. 

To see the full force of these remarks we must wait for their Practical 
expansion ia the subsequent chapters, but they are sufficient in 
this place to give a distinct idea of the constitution of the 
priesthood as a whole. It remains to ofifer their equivalent as 
regards industrial life, and I begin with the patriciate, the 
power which is to direct the advance of society in this respect. 

The patriciate, as the centre of action and nutrition, is the (p i?atri- 
special basis of the State, or City, as the woman is of the Family, basis of the 
the priesthood of the Church. Peculiar to the intermediate 
association,- the patriciate can find its discipline nowhere else 
but in the persistent influence brought to bear upon it by the 
two others, the influence of love by the closest form, the 
influence of faith by the largest, so that its regeneration must 
be subsequent to theirs. The responsibilities inseparable from 
its position distract it from affection ; its proper concentration 
on the present makes it neglect the cultivation of the intellect. 
It needs then the influence of women to lead it back constantly 
towards the true source of unity ; the influence of the priest to. 
remind it that solidarity is secondary to continuity ; that in its 
care for existing interests it must not neglect those of the 
future. On the other hand, it is no less necessary for the 
harmony of Sociocracy that its industrial chiefs should exercise 
an influence over its moral and intellectual organs. The 
intellect and the emotions would otherwise infallibly be led 
astray into idle enquiries or mystical exaggerations, as their 
nature prompts them to one or the other. Give a collective 
character to human industry, and its habitual predominance, so 

r 2 

city. 

68 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN, 

far from impeding the moral and intellectual progi'ess of the 
race, is on the contrary the indispensable condition of its 
coherence and completeness. 
ThePatri- Sufficient for this reaction. On the assumption of it I have 

date the 

seat of Hu- now to explain the prerogative by which, from the abstract 
point of view, I defined the patriciate, when I said that the will, 
a feature peculiar to objective life, and in which alone that 
life finds its condensed expression, resides properly in the 
patriciate. 

Nothing can show more clearly in what way this directing 
power contributes to the true imity of man, which finds its 
natural presentation in the will as the point of convergence 
for the impulses of affection, the deliberations of the intellect, 
and the virtues of the character. Although the convergence 
be of rare attainment, the necessary condition of its rise and 
duration is the ascendancy of a concentrated power, the only 
means of preventing or repressing the divergences attendant 
on our complex nature. It is on this point that the Great 
Being most needs the aid of its true servants to remedy the 
grand defect of its constitution, the composite and subjective 
constitution, which is the source of tendencies, nay, even of 
designs, but never of will. The dead, as a corporate exist- 
ence, exercise a direct control over the thoughts and feehngs 
of the living, whereas Humanity can only impel us to will 
through the agency of the laws, of her own creation or of 
nature's, which she gradually establishes. These laws, however, 
cannot go beyond the giving a general impulse. They cannot 
inspire us with the steady and definite resolution requisite for 
the details of action in particular circumstances. It is the will 
which is in immediate connection with action, and it is in the 
will that lies the leading difference between the objective and 
the subjective life. 

Will requires But to wiU with effect, the primary requisite is power. 

giveitefleot. Houce effective will is confined to the patricians, as a rule, as 
the indispensable condensers of the material forces of society, 
the immediate end of which is the developement of man's 
activity. Their great duty is to subordinate their particular 
decisions to the general laws, laws free from caprice, which the 
Grreat Being imposes on its collective servants. Wealth leads 
to the non-recognition or contempt of this universal oblig'ation, 
but not the less does it lie under it, and sooner or later the 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GREAT BEING. 69 

aberrations it occasions are corrected by it, so that they do 
not interfere with its essential object. Will is, primarily, 
peculiar to the collective life of man, whence it extends to his 
individual life, from the essential interdependence of the two. 
In fact men are, in large majority, naturally irresolute, and 
would rem.ain so were it not for the injunctions of authority, 
which, with a definiteness lacking elsewhere as a rule, supple- 
ment by a natural process the. decrees of destiny. Provided 
that-it be ennobled by love, and obedience to man meets this 
condition better than obedience to the external order, sub- 
mission promotes individual happiness in as great a degree as it 
does the well-being of society. 

The will, as the characteristic function of the patriciate. Necessity of 
requires in the first place certain material conditions, the uon of 
principal one being the concentration of wealth. The natural ferred. 
tendency of industrial life is, it is true, towards this concen- 
tration, but there are certain leading imperfections in this form 
of existence for which man's providence can and should provide 
remedies, and the remedies are t:wofold. In the first place, the 
manhood of the race will give a systematic form to the ten- 
dencies of its childhood, and will judiciously encourage the 
practice of gifts, gifts both from the state and from individuals, 
as a means of creating patricians fully inclined to accept the 
discipline of the sociocratie order. Secondly, the law which 
makes wealth depend for its efficiency on its concentration 
implies that each patrician, whether created as above, or born so, 
extends his sphere of action till it be commensurate with the 
responsibilities proportionate to his capital. This lessens the 
cost of administration, but it does more, and the great reason 
for the condition is, that we multiply the securities, so much 
needed, for the right use of wealth, in its distribution no less 
than in its production. 

This last result, however, depends more on internal than internal 

T • * t t n _L j_'i 1 conditions, 

on external conditions, and the former are most susceptible 
of modification. The most important point is the emotional 
part of our nature, in regard to which we must remember, that 
the personal instincts alone are habitually able to inspire the 
will with sufficient energy to direct firstly our collective, then 
our indi\adual existence. It is on this ground that the Positive 
religion sanctions in the patrician, whilst it disciplines, pride, as 
the foundation of an authority indispensable to society, whereas 

To SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTTJEE OF MAN. 

in all other classes pride is misplaced or childisli. A competent 
priesthood will find it the easier to put aside the jealous 
objections of empiricism, from the circumstance that the 
patricians, as the ministers of the Great Being, whilst subject 
to the fatalities of our cerebral organisation, display, as a rule, 
a less ignoble egoism than that of the objectors. From avarice 
their wealth protects them ; they ennoble labour by their 
free choice of it as their profession ; and that choice is deter- 
mined by the highest of our personal instincts — ^the instincts 
most closely allied to those of sympathy, and most open to 
social influences. Still, allowing for these natural dispositions, 
the spiritual power will have to exert itself constantly to 
modify by faith and love the energetic will required of the 
patriciate by its mission, with the view of bringing it into as 
close a connection as possible with the benevolent instincts. 
The regeneration indicated finds direct support in the concen- 
tration of wealth, such concentration strengthening the con- 
sciousness of the sway of Humanity, and so evoking generosity 
of feeling as a consequence of generality in thought and act. 
Thcpatri- Thus we introduce regularity into the phenomenon, so 

chj. deserving our admiration, of the constant reproduction, with 

increase, of the perishable portion of human capital. Yet to 
ensure a right appreciation of this general result of human 
providence in its material aspect, I have to show in what way 
the several constituents of the patrician hierarchy contribute 
to it. 

The constituent elements of the moderating power are each 
of them by their nature indivisible ; as appears from the 
uniformity of the action of women ; from the concentration 
which characterises that of the priesthood ; for any division 
weakens it by interfering with synthesis. The patriciate, 
on the contrary, the directing power, is divisible, and 
must be so, from the speciality inherent in its object. All 
spiritual authority necessarily originates in a single brain, and 
radiates thence gradually in every direction whatsoe%''er ; that 
it requires a plurality of interpreters is due solely to its wide 
sphere of action ; in itself it remains homogeneous. Practical 
power, on the other hand, admits of concentration only in a 
very limited degree ; so limited that each department of 
industry, looked at as a whole, requires many chiefs, each 
independent one of the other, each providing for the wants of a 

Chap. I.] THEORY OP THE GEEAT BEING. 71 

small population. Neglecting this secondary division, due to 
our weakness as individuals, what we have to attend to here 
is the main division of the patriciate, based on the differences 
in its industrial action. 

The division consists in distinguishing three essential Threeciosses 

• 1 J -L • , of patricians 

classes, according as industry, becoming more and more (i) Agrioui- 
condensed, produces, manufactures, or transports the objects (2) Manu- 
that supply our wants. Hence, as a consequence, the patrician (?) commer- 
hierarchy, in natural correspondence with the universal principle 
of Positive classification, the principle of increase in generality 
and decrease in independence. So viewed, to concentrate the 
hierarchy in one single chief becomes evidently impossible, not 
merely for our planet as a whole, but even for each inde- 
pendent state, as no single man could be competent simul- 
taneously to direct its agriculture, its manufactures, and its 
commerce. Nevertheless the organisation of industry would Baniiera. 
still be impracticable, were it not that the progress of the most 
concentrated of its forms, commerce, has thrown up a still more 
condensed form, which connects with all the other forms by the 
circulation of values and the developement of credit. This 
supreme degree of industrial abstraction leads to the creation of 
a patriciate on which naturally devolves the leading infl^uence 
in the city, and the further function of bringing into active 
concert all the various states. 

And yet the Bank, however legitimate its superiority when 
compared with commerce, manufactures, and agriculture, can 
offer no discipline for each several population, much less a 
rallying point for the different populations. But though in no 
sense a substitute for the continuous interference of the two 
elements of the spiritual power, its ascendancy smooths the 
way for their influence upon the directing patriciate, by con- 
centrating such influence on its highest branch. In fact the 
encyclopaedic education will lead habitually to close relations 
between the priesthood and the bankers, by virtue of the gene- 
rality which characterises their operations, so that the banking 
class will be the civic organ for inaugurating the more impor- 
tant connections of science with industry. 

After this examination of the patriciate, we may complete The Proie- 
our conspectus of the Sociocracy in the concrete by that of its 
fourth indispensable constituent. Though it have the most of 
a collective character, it connects directly with the first, and 

72 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Its homoge- 
neity. 

In the pro- 
letariate are 
developed 
the general 
features of 
Humanity. 

yet that first has the most of an individual character ; for the 
proletaries do not, any more than women, form a class, properly 
so-called. The proletariate is to be regarded as the general 
milieu from out of which the two special powers take their 
rise, and which should control the action of those powers, 
because it constitutes the object of that action. 

The real character of the popular constituent is best seen in 
its inherent homogeneity, which it maintains under the con- 
tinuous pressure of influences in the contrary direction. The 
hierarchy gradually established in the patriciate does not 
apply to the proletariate, and this in spite of the subordination 
of workmen to capitalists, which has been on the increase ever 
since the close of the Middle Ages. Difference of employ- 
ments, nay, even national differences, are lost in the community 
of position and object. The similarity becomes more easy 
to appreciate if placed in contrast with the habitual tendencies- 
to rivalry of the industrial chiefs. The only point where it 
fails is in the division which exists between the agricultural 
labourers and those of the towns. Now the separation between 
these two depends not so much on difference of work as on the 
moral and intellectual inferiority of the rural population. This 
transitory consequence of the inequality in their advance will 
disappear under a common education, and when it disappears 
all proletaries, in town or country, will awake to a sense of 
their intrinsic uniformity, which has an immediate bearing on 
the success to which they are entitled in realising their common 
aspirations. 

These considerations may show us that the mass of the 
people really has no peculiar features, but offers us only the 
general characteristics of Humanity, masked in its different 
chiefs by their respective functions. The peculiar office of the 
proletariate lends itself best to the rise of a community of feel- 
ing in regard to the harmony of the state, or of the world ; 
given such social arrangements as shall allow it the proper 
leisure requisite for it to avail itself of the advantages of its 
position — the advantages of its disengagement in heart and 
intellect. Owing to the simple character of their special work, 
proletaries are the least synthetic of the constituent elements of 
Sociocracy, whilst their poverty is a hindrance to their being as 
sympathetic as their chiefs may be. For this reason there will 
always be a disposition in the proletariate to protest against the 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GEEAT BEING. 73 

classification by offices here given, and to prefer the classifica- 
tion of individuals by personal merit, independently of social 
position. Herein lies the main source of the attributes which 
characterise, and of the dangers ■which attach to, the influence 
of the people, an influence which is equally adapted to regulate 
or to disturb the common harmony, according to the direction 
it takes. 

It should be a leading aim in the institutions of Sociocracy Means for 
to give a systematic direction to the power of number — a power direction of 
not unfrequently an element of temporary disturbance, but on number. 
which it devolves to give completeness, by its constant interven- 
tion, to the social order, the true foundations of which are wealth 
and wisdom. Such a change in the action of number depends 
rather on the people itself than on the influence of its circum- 
stances. The first requisite is, that the people of its own 
impulse renounce the use of force, in all cases confining its just 
resistance to this or that abuse of authority, temporal or 
spiritual, to the refusal to cooperate or to the withholding its 
assent, the sole form of conte,st admissible in the Sociocracy. 
In the second place, the people must so far shake off class 
selfishness as not to look upon itself as the essential object of 
the whole social economy. The Positive religion will make 
the people feel that, unworthy parasites excepted, all men are 
practically fellow-labourers in a continuous work, a work never 
having for its object any one group, however large, but always 
concerning the whole of mankind. At bottom, the existing gene- 
ration labours for that part of the subjective population which is 
to be, as the part which has been, laboured for it. Continuity, 
by the systematic teaching of the priesthood, once recognised as 
superior to solidarity, the proletariate will, of its own impulse, 
support the priesthood by virtue of the tendency of its form 
of activity to abstraction and unselfishness, bearing, as it does 
mainly, on the future of the race. 

A further and last requisite for the personal regeneration of The proie- 
the proletariate must be a firmer control over their self-re- restrain'^ts' 
garding instincts, a greater cultivation of their social. In fngtoTcts. 
regard to the former, the main eflbrt will concern the love of 
gain, to which their position offers a constant stimulus, while 
it as naturally protects them against pride and vanity, the 
faults of their leaders, whether practical or theoretical. Once 
protected as a body from the pressure of want, they will feel 

74 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

the contradiction involved in the outcry against the selfish- 
ness and idleness of the rich, whilst the poor make it the final 
end and aim of their own exertions to reach the same ignoble 
state. Guided by the priesthood, the proletaries will stigmatise 
any tendency to leave the class as a slur upon the dignity 
of the popular function, and as fatal to the just aspirations 
of the people, those who desert it invariably betraying it. 
In the second place, the plebeians — better placed for the 
attainment of domestic happiness than the patricians and the 
priests — whilst they cultivate attachment, will add to it venera- 
tion for all their leaders, even in the midst of civil or religious 
disputes. Their position as inferiors may seem to deny them 
the exercise of benevolence, for benevolence implies protection ; 
yet in reality there is ample scope for it, as it is the Proletariate 
which presides over the relations of man with the animals. , 
The developement of the life of sympathy, in regard to these 
two instincts, will, more easily vrith the proletariate than else- 
where, be carried on under the constant influence of women, 
the best types of the sex being found in its ranks. 
External Thcsc personal requirements met, those of its position in the 

Sociocracy — the external conditions of its well-being — will be 
satisfied by the due performance on the part of the priesthood 
and the patriciate of the conditions which depend on them. 
These concern first education, next labour, as indicated in the 
Greneral View and to be completely explained in the present 
volume. Destined for the proletaries above all, the encyclo- 
paedic instruction will enable them at once to give greater value 
to their own more special action, by virtue of the several connec- 
tions which exist between industry and science, and at the 
same time to render more effective their general supervision by 
appealing to the common doctrine. As for labotu, its normal 
conditions have been adequately stated in the second volume, 
allowing for the further explanations to be given in the fourth 
chapter of the present volume. At present I need only add 
that the guarantees of labour are not limited to the securing 
the labourer against want, but extend to the moral and intel- 
lectual elevation of the proletariate, the object being to allow 
the universal attainment of family life, in the name equally of 
order and of progress. The several conditions required for this 
purpose will be satisfied when, as a consequence of the volun- 
tary acceptance of the sedentary form of human activity, the. 

Chap. I.] THEORY OF THE GREAT BEING. 75 

quiet of industrial communities will no longer be disturbed by 
a nomad labouring class, an evidence at once of the neglect of 
the superiors, of the degradation of the inferiors. The above 
remarks, however, show that, to attain its complete form, the 
sociocratic constitution of the proletariate must await the 
advent of a patriciate worthy of the name, though the regene- 
ration of the plebeians must precede and even prepare the way 
for that of the patricians. 

If we combine our observations, they give a sufficient pic- conclusion. 
ture of the Sociocracy in the concrete to support the state- 
ment, that the Positive religion in its abstract form is compe- 
tent to regulate human life in all its parts, through its great 
fundamental theory, the theory of the Great Being. In this way 
the constitution of Sociocracy is the continuous developement 
of the sacred formula of Positivism, which consequently iden- 
tifies private with public life. By • the laws of her being, 
woman gives the impulse, acted on by which the patriciate 
becomes the organ of order, the proletariate the organ of pro- 
gress, the priesthood systematically combining order with pro- 
gress. 

On the general basis here laid, and in accordance with the 
original plan, the second chapter is devoted to an exposition 
in detail of the worship which has to govern our affective life 
by forming the regular connection between the objective and 
subjective stages of our existence. 

76 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

CHAPTER II. 

GENEKAL TIEW OF THE AM"ECTIVE LIFE, 

or, 

DEFINITIVE STSTEMATISATION OF THE POSITIVE SYSTEM OF ■WOBSHIP. 

Heasons for 
the previous 
arrange- 

precJieTth? "^^^ nature and object of this chapter -will be set in a clear light 
ttufRegtae ^J ^^® introductory remarks elicited by its heading, in that it 
places, in the system of the Positive religion, the worship not 
merely before the regime but before the doctrine. This un- 
usual arrangement is a modification of the order adopted in the 
second volume in the General Theory of Religion (Vol. II. pp. 
17-20). It requires then a special justification. For this, I 
may confine myself to the simple enunciation of the considera- 
tions which suggested it to me. The statement of them will, I 
hope, show the change to be quite legitimate, and the pro- 
priety of it characteristic of the true religion. 

From an excess of deference for my Catholic predecessors, I 
was led originally to place the doctrine before the worship, 
without asking myself the question : Was this arrangement in 
as full accordance with the genius of the new synthesis as it was 
with that of the older ? An over-estimate of the importance of 
logical sequence induced me subsequently to adhere to it, in 
order that the worship might rest on a scientific basis. But the 
practical application of the original arrangement has gradually 
convinced me that it was defective synthetically. 

In the first place, it is at issue with the fundamental for- 
mula of Positivism, in which love precedes order, as order pre- 
cedes progress ; and love is the domain of the worship, order 
that of the doctrine, progress of the life. In the second place, 
it is contradicted by the general theory of human nature, which 
puts feeling above intelligence and activity, the two indispen- 
sable servants of feeling. Lastly, it is at variance with the 
regular course of Positive education, in which the succession is : 
the education of the feelings, tlie education of the intellect, and 
the education of our active powers. 

Reasons 
against it. 

Chap. II.] THE WORSHIP. 77 

This threefold discrepancy is a sufficient i ustification of the The diBcrn- 

' ■' •' panoy justi- 

new arrangement, implicitly announced in the last chapter, fiesthe 
■when I placed art above science. All who can appreciate 
the natural pre-eminence of questions of order, will be at 
once conscious of the importance attaching to this inversion 
of the previous arrangement, condensing as it does the 
general contrast between Theologism and Positivism. But, to 
clear up the point, I must first enter on a direct investigation 
of the grounds of the original arrangement. > 

The strongest was the fictitious character of the provisional 
religion, when worship was paid to imaginary beings, and there- 
fore must have the doctrines to rest upon as the sole source of 
our knowledge of those beings. This indispensable prerequisite, 
never systematised in Polytheism, was reduced to a system under 
its Monotheistic concentration. But in both stages a custom of 
universal adoption heralded the ultimate predominance of the 
worship, for it was the worship which habitually gave its desig- 
nation to the whole religious system. 

This first arrangement, then, is to be viewed as a temporary The previous 
inversion of the normal order, though the adoption of the latter SporaT™' 
was impossible till such time as our adoration should be paid to 
a being by its nature within the cognisance of all. It is true 
that, as yet, the education of our feelings does not propose the 
knowledge of Humanity as its aim, but the last chapter has 
so far stated the whole Positive doctrine as to warrant our 
proceeding to expound the worship without any violation of 
rational method. 

The worship is the best expression of the state of complete TheWorsUp 
synthesis, the state in which all our knowledge, scientific and sion^/'the" 
practical, finds its condensation in Morals. The grand object state!^''"'' 
of religion being to teach us to live for others, it must essen- 
tially consist in regulating the direct cultivation of our sym- 
pathetic instincts. In fact such would be its sole function, 
were it not that our physical wants necessitate the addition 
both of the doctrine and the regime, so by man's own exertions 
to give an altruistic character to the natural egoism of his in- 
cessant aictivity. 

To complete the justification of the order ultimately 
adopted, it is necessary to give greater precision to the above 
explanation of the provisional arrangement, by presenting it as 
simply coeval with Theologism, properly so called, having no 

78 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Apain the 
affinity be- 
tween 
Fetichism 
and 
^PositiTism. 

Superior 
synthetic 
power of the 
Keligion of 
Humanity. 

Religion is 
Worship. 

antecedent in Fetichism. In point of fact, religion in Fetich- 
ism was worship, and nothing more. It was so absolutely 
spontaneous that its dogmatic element was a mere matter of 
intuition; and its regime was limited to the exercise of our sym- 
pathies, such was the then rudimentary condition of human 
activity. Consequently the definitive order adopted by the 
Positive religion is but the systematisation of the instinctive 
practice of the first- childhood of the race, through the final 
removal of an anomaly peculiar to its second childhood — and 
in an eminent degree harmonising with its adolescence. 

This fresh contact between the two extreme syntheses which 
are ultimately destined to coalesce, is possible, from the fact 
that in both alike the objects of worship are actual beings, and 
come within our immediate cognisance. There is this dif- 
ference, that, in the primaeval state, adoration was objective and 
simple, in the normal state it is subjective and complex; but 
it is a difference which will not affect the character of spon- 
taneity common to the two, when Positive education shall have 
become sufficiently general. The Positivist worships results, 
the Fetichist worships materials ; but both alike invoke the 
protection of the same supreme power, only their conceptions 
of that power are distinct, yet not irreconcilable. 

The two forms, then, the instinctive and systematic, under 
which the religion of Humanity successively presents itself, 
alike disclaim the inversion, necessitated provisionally by the 
intermediate synthesis, but disappearing forever in the ulti- 
mate combination of the extremes. In both forms there is a 
natural correlation between the worship and the life, whereas 
Theologism, even as Polytheism, could never bring the two into 
satisfactory agreement. The definitive order of the three parts 
of religion furnishes a decisive proof of the superiority of 
Positivism in point of synthesis, and justifies the normal con- 
densation of the law of human progress when we state it as an 
increasing tendency to unity. 

In accordance with this indispensable introduction, I have 
now to treat of religion as consisting in the worship ; and in 
fact the worship would suffice for our discipline, could our 
external circumstances become such as to allow it. The hypo- 
thesis can never be in the full sense realised, but the aggre- 
gate progress of mankind is bringing us constantly nearer to it, 
by constantly lessening the relative importance of material 

Chap. 11.] THE WOESHIP. 79 

■wants, this change being a consequence of the accumulations 
due to our foresight, and the increase of power they give us. 

Still, in assigning the worship its legitimate rank, we must 
duly take into account its necessary connection with the doc- 
trine and the life, both at all times indispensable, though in a 
decreasing ratio, to its fulfilment of its moral aim. The agree- 
ment of the three is sufficiently indicated in the Positivist 
formula, if we take its three terms as answering to the three 
divisions of time. For love, the immediate source of the 
worship, in the main has reference to the future ; order, the 
intellectual province of the doctrine, is derived principally 
from the past; progress, the practical object of the life, stands 
in closer relation with the present. Now, it is the future which 
becomes, and rightly, the more prominent consideration in pro- 
portion as man's action becomes more collective in its character. 
During the initiation of the race, man constantly laboured for 
his successors, in the Family originally, then in the State. It 
remains for him, in the period of maturity, to guide this instinct 
systematically, and make it subserve the interests of Posterity 
in the widest sense. 

The paramount importance attached to the future is ade- Prominence 
quate as the distinctive feature of the normal state of Hu- acharacter- 
manity, pointing as it does to deliberate action, and deliberate nomaistate. 
action implies constant prevision. And yet, at first sight, such 
a view, whilst ulteriorly pointing to the supremacy of the 
worship, would seem to make it intellectually dependent on the 
doctrine, as necessary for the interpretation of the past, on 
which rests our conception of the future. The apparent con- 
tradiction disappears if we distinguish between the analytical 
and synthetical arrangements, both of which are admissible for 
the universal doctrine. • 

In fact, it is on the synthetical form that the worship must The two ar- 
rest ; it is this which it idealises, and by idealising developes. of the doo- 
So little is the analytical a prerequisite, that the worship is a 
necessary condition of its right formation. Its actual impor- 
tance is solely an empirical result of the objective character of 
the scientific process required as a preparation for the Positive 
method. In his adult period, man will correct the habits pro- 
visionally formed, and satisfy reason and feeling alike, by con- 
stantly subordinating analysis to synthesis. The two forms of 
the doctrinal system will then, each in accordance with its 

trine. 

80 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. T ; pu'^'-'J^E OF MAN. 

If the objec- 
tion to 
placing the 
Worship 
first were 
valid, it 
would have 
to be placed 
a^ter the 
Begime. 

nature, subserve, the one the worship, vne other the regime. 
This allotment of their provinces answers to the distinction 
between the subjective creation and the objective appreciation 
of the central dogma, or Humanity. For this dogma remains 
one and indivisible so long as it is the immediate basis of 
morality ; its division is allowable only when it is looked at as 
the condensation — a condensation imperatively required — of 
the whole order of the world. 

The explanation shows that the only plausible reasons for 
maintaining the older arrangement of the three parts of reli- 
gion are based on a mistake, viz., on the confusion of the doc- 
trine, which is the foundation of the religion, with the system 
of dogmas properly so called. This latter is really nothing but 
a systematisation of an analytical kind, necessary for our action, 
but by the nature of the case, secondary to the synthetical con- 
struction of which the worship is the natural expression, and 
therefore it is with the worship that the rational study of Posi- 
tive unity must begin. However normal this course may be, 
it would yet have been impossible to take it, had we not made 
it our object in the last chapter to establish directly the funda- 
mental theory of the Great Being. 

To place in stronger relief the unsoundness of the reasons 
for upholding the present position of the worship after the 
dogma, it must be added that, allowing them to be valid, 
they would lead to its being placed after the regime, as there 
must be a general conception of the regime or the worship 
would be a failure. The truth is, the worship can idealise the 
two other parts of the religion when yet undeveloped analyti- 
cally ; all that is required is, a clear synthetical conception of 
them, s"uch a conception as may guide us in their definitive 
systematisation. All the scientific notions, cosmological, bio- 
logical, and, above all, sociological, requisite for the theory of 
the Great Being, have been firmly established in the three pre- 
ceding volumes on the basis of science formed into a complete 
whole. This enabled me, at the opening of the present volume, 
to proceed at once to the construction of the theory itself, a 
construction which involves the conjoint establishment of the 
three divisions of religion, with a view to their ulterior separation, 
under proper conditions, for the purposes of study. Such sepa- 
rate consideration of them is the condition of any satisfactory 
systematisation of the doctrine and the regime, the objective 

€kap. II.] ' "THE WOESHIP. 81 

analysis giving completeness to the subjective synthesis by 
■which alone it could be guided. The outline already given 
qualifies us however for now proceeding directly to the construc- 
tion of the worship, as the principal portion of the religion, 
the portion in which the idea and the feeling of unity find their 
best expression. At no distant period Positivism will correct in 
all the provisional habits which are the result of the existing con- 
dition of things, with its proud sense of revolution, and its con- 
sequent stimulation of the reason of the individual to construct 
a universal synthesis independently of all collective influences. 

The preliminary explanation here ended leads me to ex- « Destiim- 

^ J J. ^ tion, and 

amine, in the first place, the destination of the Positive cultus : C") N^tm-e 
secondly, its nature in the general ; before I give its direct fMp. 
exposition in detail, which must be the great object of the 
chapter. 

We adore Humanity in order to serve her better by the aid The sj-mpa- 
of fuller knowledge j worship then cannot but modify, under all stmcts its 
its aspects, the existence which, as a whole, is represented in main. 
the constitution of the Great Being. But the normal prefer- 
ence of the worship to the two other constituents of the uni- 
versal religion rests on this ground mainly, that it has for its 
principal domain the direct and persistent encouragement of 
our instincts of sympathy, the sole source of the Positive tmity. 
Once grasp this idea of Sociolatry, and we are qualified to ap- 
preciate its influence on thought and even on action. 

The Positive worship depends for its efficacy entirely on worship the 

exercise ot 

the fundamental law by which the continuous improvement of aiimv 

. «i 1 ,„,..!.. . faculties, 

man's faculties is the result of their judicious exercise. In the 
adoration of the Great Being these faculties find a simultaneous 
exercise, as it always expresses our emotions in an idealised 
form. Practically, the idealisation of our altruistic instincts 
consists more especially in their purification from their ordinaiy 
admixture of egoism. So purified, they becorhe in the fullest 
sense communicable, and the communication requires the com- 
bined and persistent exertion of our intellectual and active 
powers. It does not, that is, call into play merely the function 
of language, but also contemplation, abstract or concrete, nay 
even meditation, deductive no less than inductive meditation. 
As, for expression, when perfect, all the muscles of outward 
action are brought into use, it follows that communication 
makes a demand on the whole active life, whether we consider 
VOL. IV. G 

82 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE EUTUEE OF MAJf. 

The syn- 
thetic ideali- 
sation of our 
existence. 

Comparison 
of expres- 
don and 
action. 

it in its instruments, the muscles, or in its organs in the brain. 
Even when the outward manifestation is limited to the voice, 
without the aid of either gestures or attitudes, no part of our 
whole active system escapes its influence, from the close con- 
nection which allows each several part to substitute its cerebral 
influence for that of the other parts. 

It is in this way that the worship becomes the synthetic 
idealisation of the life which it is its function to perfect. It 
consecrates all the parts of that life, by their direct cooperation 
in the adoration of the Grreat Being ; but it does more, it assigns 
them all their proper rank, by vindicating the constant pre- 
eminence of feeling over intellect, of intellect over activity. 
The power to do this is seen, it is true, in a rudimentary form 
in the provisional religion, but it is the peculiar property of the 
definitive cultus, a property derived from its unselfishness no 
less than from its reality. For the synthesis based on imagina- 
tion never gave a sanction to the benevolent instincts, nay it 
even denied their existence when it was condensed into Mono- 
theism, and consequently the worship, in Theology, could but 
indirectly cultivate them. Their direct cultivation, on the 
contrary, becomes the leading object of Sociolatry, from the 
purely sympathetic character of the object of its worship ; and 
the result is, that in the Positive system of cultus we have the 
best source of the just ascendancy of altruism over egoism. 

To complete our view, it is desirable to place in direct 
juxtaposition expression and action, the object of the comparison 
being to obviate any charge of mysticism or quietism. The 
exaggeration of feeling which leads to the neglect of works, ia 
favour of the^ exclusive cultivation of the inward dispositions, 
could have no serious importance except in the theological 
period, and even there it was due rather to hypocrisy than to 
error, as is seen by its not arising till the decline of the system. 
If the sincere culture of sympathy, even when indirect, was cal- 
culated to be a preservative against this excess, it is one which 
will easily be removed by the direct cultivation of benevolence, 
resulting from the whole system of adoration. 

Over and above the particular results which are the proper 
aim of action, action has more power than expression to excite 
altruism through the medium of the brain, inasmuch as it leads 
to an exertion requiring greater effort. It follows that nothing 
will ever equal the practice, even with intermissions, stiU more 

Chap. II.] THE WOESHIP. 83 

the habitual practice, of good works as a means of cultivating 
our sympathetic instincts. Expression has however several 
natural advantages over action, and therefore, weaker though it 
be than action, it will always remain indispensable to the full 
developement of our emotional nature. 

As expression depends on ourselves exclusively, whilst action Expression. 
is dependent on the external world, action is intermittent, 
expression alone can be permanent under one or other of its 
various forms. Again, action is not only less at our command 
than expression, but is often of a more mixed character. In the 
first place it almost invariably demands efforts of the intellect 
or of the body, and these cannot but impair its results in point 
of sympathy. But in action we have, above all, the complication 
habitually arising of selfish motives mingling with our bene- 
volent impulses. The only case in which we avoid these two 
disturbing forces is when the brain devotes all its powers to 
perfect our unity through the direct expression of love, with no 
external aim in particular. 

A cultus of this kind has to discipline our action and there- 
fore can never lead us to despise it. For it fosters the affections 
which urge us to the direct pursuit of the good. If our devo- 
tions seemed to lead to inertness, such a degradation wotild 
necessarily imply a want of sincerity. 

If we analyse the moral influence of Positive worship with ^^^„g'|jj 
reference to the distinction between the three altruistic instincts, 'J;^ Positire 

' worship 

we find that it is greatest as concerns the instinct which by its P;™'"' 
organ and its function is in closest connection with the two 
others. The exercise of the affections which is the direct result 
of adoration more particularly concerns veneration, not merely 
veneration for the Great Being, but for its worthy represen- 
tatives, as is indicated by the prevailing attitude. Now the 
instinct of veneration is the one in most constant use as thp 
normal basis of true discipline, and at the same time it has the 
least strongly marked character as being nearly independent of 
the influences of the selfish instincts. Be it remembered however 
that it cannot act without stimulating by its action benevolence 
and attachment, between which it is the connecting link both 
statically and dynamically. Language bears special witness to 
this connection in the admirable expression piete (pietas), a 
term primarily implying respect, but, by a natural extension, 
embracing all the sympathetic instincts. Again, the two other 

G 2 

84 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

altruistic feelings receive direct encouragement from an adora- 
tion which has gratitude and love for its invariable basis. 
Benevolence, strictly so called, implies, it is true, protection, 
yet it is specially called into play in the Positive worship, most 
particularly towards the Great Being, not merely through imi- 
tation of that highest type, but also as a consequence of the 
nature of Humanity, who can never dispense with the aid of 
her servants. 
(2) Egoism. Sociolatry is by its very conception emancipated from the 

interested motives which were paramount in the worship of 
Theologism, nay even of Fetichism ; yet it grants the self regard- 
ing instincts the culture they require for their due cooperation 
in the practical conduct of life. In the first place, it stamps, 
them with its direct sanction as the permanent basis of the con- 
servation of the individual, and the primary source of the action 
of society. Secondly, their relations severally with the social 
instincts procure them in the Positive worship an indirect 
stimulus in constant dependence on their > influence on our 
sympathies, and therefore not liable to abuse. This combination 
of sanction and discipline is especially applicable in the case of 
the higher personal instincts, pride and vanity, as more amenable 
to social influences. But it applies also to all the other per- 
sonal motors, not excepting the instinct of destruction, each 
and all admitting an altruistic direction. 
?nflSnra!°of '^^^ proper province of Sociolatry is our emotional life, and 

Sociolatry. ^j^ jg ^q ^]jig ^hat this chapter as a whole is devoted ; so that 
having sufficiently explained its influence on that life in the 
general, I must now explain its power in reference to in- 
tellect, first in the domain of art, then in that of science. 
Art. The true definition of the two terms, art and worship, is 

sufficient to show the inseparable connection between them, a 
connection recognised as a matter of experience by Theologism, 
but which it devolves on Positivism to adopt and expand on 
rational grounds, whilst it accepts the spontaneous character it 
wears in Fetichism. In art and worship equally, improvement 
is ever the direct end of all our efforts. In the worship it is 
always moral progress, and therefore the worship alone can 
withdraw art from its natural predilection for physical beauty, 
the beauty most easy to represent as it is most easy to feel. 
Sociolatry, by displaying the charm inherent in the altruistic 
affections, throws open, to poetry its noblest field, one which 

Chap. II.] THE WOESHIP. 85 

under the egoistic syntliesis was necessarily relegated to a 
subordinate place. Besides this general affinity between art 
and the worship of Humanity, that worship lends a special 
sanction to the three modes or degrees of all art of whatever 
kind, imitation, idealisation, expression. For it imitates the 
highest type, and yet ever idealises it in its expression of the 
emotions that type inspires. Conversely, as each act of worship 
of the Grreat Being, indirect or direct, is by the nature of the 
case a work of art, art in its turn is seen to be an essential 
complement of the worship of Humanity, into which it is once 
and for ever incorporated. 

This incorporation, by relieving art from the degrading 
anarchy which was the result of its throwing off the yoke of 
Theocracy, is as calculated to develope as to discipline and 
ennoble it. The absorption of the poetical into the sacerdotal 
function, in conformity at once with our instinct and reason, 
will always obviate the lowering tendency inherent in the 
exclusive devotion of any life to expression. "When the language itaUan. 
of Dante and Ariosto shall have become the universal.language, 
having previously been the sacred language, it will have 
acquired one by one the additional excellences it needs to 
qualify it as the fit organ of the greater poetic achievements 
reserved for the ripe age of human genius. But the use of 
that language will not be limited to such exceptional efforts 
confined to the more eminent members of the priesthood ; it 
will be the language used by all worshippers of the Great 
Being in their daily expressions of their emotions, both in 
private and in public. Its musical capacity will lead as a 
natural result to its adoption as the regular transition from 
the fundamental art to the highest of the more special arts 
which are the complement of poetry, and which in Positive 
education will become familiar to all as a means of perfecting 
our whole worship. Whilst, however, vocal expression assumes 
more and more prominence it must not do so to the detriment 
of the plastic art, the language of form, less sympathetic it may 
be under any of its three forms, but more synthetic, as the eye 
is more synthetic than the ear. Each of the three, and painting- 
more than any, independently of its own peculiar destination, 
will bring its valuable contribution to the Positive culture, and 
will be placed within the reach of all by the normal education. 

Taken together, these hints are sufficient to express the 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Theory or 
Science. 

TMs Influ- 
ence con- 
sidered with 
reference to 
Method and 
Doctrine. 

Method. 

Soctriae. 

influence of Sociolatry upon art, reserving further details for 
the remainder of the chapter. Its influence on theory calls for 
fuller explanation, for, whereas the worship absorbs art, science 
can only be absorbed in the doctrine. 

For a right estimate of the influence in question we must 
apportion it between the method and the doctrine, the two 
being too often confounded, even by philosophers. 

From the logical point of view, the worship exercises 
a greater influence than art, in the proper sense of the term, 
though art again is superior to science, as science hitherto 
has been almost limited to the use of signs, whereas poetry 
combines them with images. In science, the two are found in 
combination only in Mathematics, and even there their com- 
bination is not anterior to the remodelling of that domain by 
Descartes. But, although it is a combination which art cannot 
avoid employing largely, its true origin is to be found in the 
worship, where signs without images can never meet the 
demands of free expression. The spontaneous result of Fetich- 
ism, the object of special attention on the part of Theologism, 
it is in Positivism more than elsewhere that the alliance of the 
two finds its proper place, as the principal objects of Positivist 
adoration are in the fullest sense subjective. Still, logically, 
the superiority of the worship of Humanity lies in its power, a 
power exclusively its own, to perfect the combination of signs 
with images by subordinating it to the feelings. Theologism, 
it is true, and above all monotheistic Theologism, had naturally 
initiated this ultimate convergence of all the general appliances 
which could facilitate our mental efforts, but it could directly 
bring to bear in those efforts- only those afiections which are 
least calculated to assist thought. It is by reducing to 
system, and giving effect to, the instinctive sanction by 
Fetichism of our sympathetic instincts, that Positivism alone 
organises the true logic, in regard to which the worship 
will always be of more ^■alue than the doctrine, by virtue of 
its offering a better coordination of its three constituent 
elements. 

If from the method we turn to the doctrine, the worship 
cannot retain this superiority, for the distinct progi-ess of the 
doctrine must depend on the dogmatic system properly so-called. 
And yet even here the efficacy, as an intellectual stimulus, of 
worship — and this is true in the highest degree of Positive 

Chap. II.] THE WOESHIP. 87 

worship — cannot but be recognised by all but those who confuse 
infornaation with intelligence. In fact the worship alone 
places before us in a thoroughly synthetic form the general 
body of doctrine, a result which flows directly from the funda- 
mental theory of the Great Being. Sociolatry is the medium 
by which Morals transmits that theory to Sociology, as a 
general basis for the analytical investigation which is to furnish 
the guidance of Sociocracy, the aim being to make religion a 
reality. But over and above this most comprehensive object, 
the influence of worship on theory is exerted in a more peculiar 
sense with reference to the highest portion of the scientific 
domain. The initial conception of moral laws, and even 
intellectual laws, practically could not but originate in the 
impulse given by woman, and in the inspiration of the poet, the 
natural point of junction for the two being the worship ; for 
science was reserved the discovery of physical laws following m 
the wake of action. Now the capacity of the worship in this 
respect cannot but be drawn out by Positivism, more real as it 
is and more unselfish than Theologism, since in the elaboration 
of the sociolatrical system it is urgent to keep continually in 
sight its relations to the feelings and the intellect. 

Treating as sufficient this examination in the general of the influence of 

° J. ... the Worship 

efficacy of the Positive worship, first as regards the feelmgs onAotmty. 
then as regards the intellect, I have to complete the process by 
extending it to the activity. 

Although in this last case it is naturally less efficacious than 
in the two other, yet it requires a distinct consideration in this 
place. Attaining supremacy solely in the sphere of feeling, the 
influence of the worship leaves the developement of the intelli- 
gence to the dogma in especial, whilst that of the activity is 
reserved for the regime. Practical life, however, no less than 
the speculative existence, feels the advantage of the training 
given by Sociolatry, fuller discipline being the condition of 
progi-ess in both. 

Human action, even when collective, springing originally q„^'°°p^. 
from personal impulses, requires a constant process of purifica- g^"5°i.™* 
tion, and nothing but the worship can give this. The pride of tiie worship, 
the practician is a less obstacle than the vanity of the theorician 
to the due recognition of this want. Although Theologism on 
empirical grounds met it in some imperfect degree, its syste- 
matic satisfaction devolves upon Positivism as the only religion 

88 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PUTUKE OF MAN. 

The WorsMp 
universal, 
but Bystema- 
tic only in 
reference to 
the more 
leading 
phases of 
human ex- 
istence. 

founded on the trae knowledge of human nature. Not to men- 
tion that the worship of Humanity concentrates all our practical 
faculties on the noble object from which the natural preponde- 
rance of egoism always tends to divert them, it gives a distinct 
stimulus to each of those faculties by constant exercise. It is 
the highest in particular that feels this influence most, since 
adoration without perseverance either never attains, or loses its 
moral effect; long attention being required for the original 
production, as for the continuance, of such effect. The influence 
of the worship extends to courage also, nay even to prudence, 
as may be seen if we consider the energy and circumspection 
often required for private no less than for public effusion. The 
faithful interpreter of all the relations of man, language has, 
since the Middle Ages, borne witness to this triple influence of 
the worship, for it applies the name religious practices to our 
habits of worship, as the exertions which that worship requires, 
by their greater persistence, though inferior in intensity, con- 
stitute a good preparation for active Hfe. 

As the combined result of the three estimates just given, we 
recognise the peculiar competence of Sociology to deal with 
each several part of the life which it idealises, and by idealising 
disciplines. So the domain of the Positive worship is seen to 
be all-comprehensive, as comprehensive as that of the religion 
of which it is the expression and developement ; whereas the 
dogma, on the other hand, and the regime, though not without 
a general influence, are more limited in their functions. If we 
complement the Positive by the Fetichist spirit, the various 
scenes of our individual or our social life admit of effusions or 
consecrations of never-failing value, as the growth of feeling 
depends more on inward culture than on its external results. 
But as a systematic institution, public and private worship can 
only take account of the more important phases and steps of 
life. The secondary incidents, the occasional events, for these 
we cannot provide ; in regard to them the priesthood must 
leave it to the true believers themselves to apply by themselves 
the rules of Sociolatry. In these less important cases, the fun- 
damental formula of Positivism is a sufiScient guide, and the 
act of worship might often be limited simply to the proper 
enunciation of that formula. But as an improvement on this 
mode of expression, signs susceptible of universal adoption may 
be introduced, and these I have now to point out, proving 

Chap. II.] THE WORSHIP. 89' 

thereby that, even in such a secondary detail, the Positive is 
superior to the theological system of worship, to which latter, 
however, we are indebted for the happy thought of this custom. 

The Positivist formula is by its nature an adequate exprfes- Sacrea sign, 
sion at all times of the constitution of man, but to make the 
full use of this its power, it is wise, generally, to enunciate it, 
and whilst doing so, to touch in succession the principal organs 
assigned by our theory of the brain to the three constituent 
elements of the formula. Those of love and order are com- 
pletely contiguous, love finding its best representative in 
benevolence strictly so called, order depending in the main on 
deductive meditation. The organ of progress, in closest connec- 
tion with firmness, comes after them on the median line, biit 
with the organ of veneration between it and them, a position 
involving no confusion in our religious feelings, so intimate is 
the relation of these several attributes. Hence we draw the 
Positivist symbol, more rational at once and more efficacious 
than those of the various Monotheisms, as being a better substi- 
tute for the recitation of the formula which it condenses. Even 
this symbol admits of reduction to the mere enunciation of the 
three numbers (10, 14, 18) which mark the rank of the organs 
in question, for in the cerebral hierarchy function is indicated 
by position. Lastly, the Positivist formula admits of another 
and numerical symbolic statement, one resting on the proper- 
ties of the three sacred numbers, whether ordinal or cardinal. 
In fact we learn from the last volume (III. p. 129), that the 
first, as the symbol of synthesis, represents also sympathy ; that 
the second stands for order, in the distinct sense of arrangement, 
which is invariably binary ; whilst the third, inseparable from 
the idea of evolution, naturally expresses progress. 

Though what has been said is sufficient as determining the Generar 
scope and object of the worship of Humanity, I must not pass thesubjeo- 
to the exposition of Sociolatry, without first stating generally 
the theory of the subjective life, as it is to it that the Positive 
adoration most especially looks. 

The first point is to get a clear conception of this life by ^(''JJP^i'j^™ 
comparing it with the objective, its basis. The fusion of the y^^"^^'^"' 
two can only apply to results, never to faculties, so that the 
most objective of the three constituent elements of our indi- 
vidual being cannot share in the subjective prolongation of 
existence, whereas the other two can, and that in the fullest 

90 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAK. 

sense. For action, properly so called, has as its great object 
the modification of the world without, and therefore can in no 
sense form a part of our being when it has ceased to be in 
direct contact with that world. Intellect and emotion, on the 
other hand, concern exclusively the world within ; their results 
therefore may pass into another brain, so as to be fused with 
the results attained by that other brain itself, supposing the 
two beings to be in sufficient harmony. The fruits however of 
this internal combination, its intellectual or moral influences, 
be they what they may, can appear only in the person who is 
the seat of this fresh combination ; so that, in eliminating action 
from our subjective life, we include under the term that form of 
action which supplies the means of expression. StiU the value 
of the incorporation as an influence on the brain is not limited 
to its more immediate domain, the provinces of feeling and 
thought ; indirectly and by its connection with the two others, 
it should also affect the active faculties. Such a combination 
must always be binary, but it may be repeated ; there may, that 
is, be a succession of combinations with many different beings, 
all in their subjective life contributing to guide the objective 
life of their common organ or representative. 
Assimilation It is in this wav that the souls of many come to take up 

of other , . , , , . , , ... 

existeacea. their abode in one brain, by a natural process, supposing its 
power of sympathy adequately supported by the spirit of synthe- 
sis. And the convergence of the many may at one and the same 
time inspire with life not one brain only, but all which satis- 
factorily fulfil these two conditions of subjective assimilation. 
Nor does the fusion interfere with our distinguishing the indi- 
vidual contributions, by the aid of their peculiar influence, 
though the difficulties attaching to the process must at times 
leave the conclusion doubtful. 

Such are the two phenomena — identification of many with 
one, and conservation of the many in the one — which consti- 
tute the highest privilege of Humanity. The individual brain 
assimilates the feelings and conceptions of all its peers, in a 
truer sense than the body assimilates the different materials of 
its food. On the other hand, he who has left great results 
acquires in others a subjective immortality, so that the work of 
his life is perpetuated and even extended. 
rrbe will of The suppression of action, and limitation of the combination 

ta«)?po"rated to foelings and thoughts, involves as a consequence the suppres- 

Chap. II.] THE WOESHIP. 91 

sion of the •will in the beings incorporated, and confines it ^unf™'^ 
exclusively to the being which incorporates — which offers them eaishea. 
an abode for their indirect existence. For direct action with a 
special purpose demands unity of decision, to whatever extent 
we multiply, and it is often to an extent which defies analysis, 
the motives of each design. During his life, in the ordinary 
sense, each servant of Humanity is the instrument of the pro- 
vidence of Humanity, without detriment to his individuality, 
of which will is the invariable condensation. 

If we turn our attention to the beings incorporated, this ^^^'^^. 
subjective identification with another requires the removal of simiiated. 
every element of divergence, the conservation of assimilable 
qualities exclusively. Thus the process in all cases subjects, as its 
natural result, the being incorporated to idealisation ; an ideali- 
sation which, almost incompatible with the objective state, 
owing to its attendant imperfections, is ordinarily not attain- 
able in a sufficient degree till after death. Poetry anticipated 
philosophy in pointing out this condition : witness the beautiful 
fiction which represents it as the condition of regeneration that 
we drink first of the river of oblivion, then of the river which 
restores only the memory of good. As a consequence of this 
purification, the union in the subjective state gains in intimacy 
and continuity. Supposing the incorporated soul to exert an 
adequate influence for good on the brain in which it lives again, 
it shares in the immortality that brain obtains. Thus, by a 
series of resurrections, subjective immortality, though never 
immortality in an absolute sense, has yet no other limit than 
the limit assigned to the existence of the Great Being by the 
laws of the order of which it is the condensed expression. The 
increase of number, be it of the minds united in one brain, or 
be it of the brains in which they are united, is no obstacle to 
the immortality being shared and extended without impair- 
ment of its value, as it presupposes the abnegation of self and 
the implicit devotion of ourselves to the service of Humanity. 

The series of indications here given, as to the nature and ^^™^^«- 
destination of the subiective existence, would be incomplete subjective 

J ^ J- existence. 

without a notice of its three modes or degrees. The first 
relates to the minds personally known to him who continues 
their existence in his brain. In the second the union is simply 
one of results, without any personal contact with the authors 
of those results. The third calls into existence — subjective 

92 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PUTUKE OP MAS. 

XaTvs of the 

subjective 

Ufe. 

It is exempt 
from pliysi- 
cal, depen- 
dent on in- 
tellectual 
and moral, 
laws. 

:No disturb- 
ance of the 
aiTange- 
xnent. 

existence — beings -who are yet unborn. Such is the normal 
ascending scale of subjectivity demanded by our co-existent 
relations with the present, the past, and the future, when 
Humanity, as a conception and as a feeling, attains the propor- 
tions which shall meet the requirements of her reasonable 
fcervice. Although the subjective or indirect mode of exist- 
ence be also less vivid and less definite than the direct, yet it is 
consistent with reality in such a degree as to be exempt from 
any admixture of caprice, and so is qualified to produce the 
intellectual and moral effects which are in accordance with its 
object as an institution. 

Guided by this series of indications, I have to conclude the 
explanation of the subjective life by determining its peculiar 
laws. 

These laws are a direct result of the relation of dependence 
in which the subjective necessarily stands towards the objective 
existence. As this latter is in subjection to the whole order of 
things, the former is indirectly under the control of that order. 
But, for a correct estimate of its dominion over the subjective 
life, we must distinguish between the laws of man's world and 
those of the outer world. The indirect or subjective existence 
is free from all control of physical laws — the laws of life no less 
than those of matter — whilst it remains in complete subjection 
to the intellectual and moral order, which consequently stands 
out in stronger relief therein. Its emancipation from the laws 
of the outer world applies even to Mathema.tics, the most general 
rules of which, even the laws of space and time, would be 
often found irreconcilable with the subjective state. The full 
extent of this independence is reached when the representatives 
of all countries and of all ages take up their abode simul- 
taneously in one and the same brain. Most universal of all 
are the laws of number, and yet from them too the subjective 
existence is free, for one and the same mind may be assimilated 
by several brains at once, and each of them may reproduce it 
in different forms. 

Still, in the midst of all these changes, order, properly so 
called, that is to say, the arrangement, always remains undis- 
turbed. We never place before, that which comes after, or the 
converse, neither in space nor even in time. All subjective 
changes, with no exception for cases of disease, are then, as are 
all objective changes, a merfe question of degree, in obedience 

Chap. II.] THK "WOKSHIP. 93 

to the general law in regard to modifications, a law indis- 
pensable to the completeness of the dogmatic system of 
Positivism. 

In order to realise more fully the intrinsic independence of imiepona- 

,,..,., p ,. ■"■ ence 01: Tital 

the subjective state, as far as physical laws are concerned, let us influences. 
consider it in reference specially to the laws of life, which, as 
heing nearer to Humanity than those of matter, might be 
expected to have a more durable existence. Although the 
being incorporated is freed from the influences of its own proper 
body by its residence in another brain, it appears subjected to 
the bodily influences to which that brain is subject. The 
apparent contradiction disappears if we call to mind that the 
identification and conservation we are speaking of have nothing 
to do with functions, but only with their products imparted to 
others. It follows that, whatever the modifications, even of a 
morbid kind, introduced by the reaction of the body into the 
operations of the brain, the results so transmitted are not 
affected by them any more than are the results of external 
impressions. "Without independence to this extent, it is impos- 
sible to understand the continuity of the brain's action, the 
fundamental phenomenon of our existence, which no pertm- 
bations can interrupt, not even the perturbation of delirium, 
as a temporary or permanent state, the delirium of sleep or of 
madness. 

So we may recognise the high superiority of the subjective Superiority 
state, which is the realisation, on an ampler scale and with jectivVstate. 
greater purity, of the dream of Theology — souls without bodies. 
In it the dignity of the human order passes out of dispute, 
since in it we find the noblest functions persisting in complete 
independence of the laws of the outer world, he only in whom 
they gain a new life being under their swaj. Homer, Aristotle, 
Dante, Descartes, &c., will thus live again for all time wherever 
there is a brain capable of incorporating them, and the results 
they then produce will not unfrequently be superior to those 
they produced when alive. 

Such is the fundamental mode in which the dead more and The fusion 
more control the living by importing the fixity, which is the withthe* 
note of their existence, as a check upon the mutability inse- a™ati.ve"^^ 
parable from actual life. As order and progress alike demand lectuai! 
the combination, which is ever on the increase in point of 
completeness, it is important to see that it depends mainly 

94 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

upon feeling, even when apparently limited to the intelligence. 
For our instincts of sympathy contribute more towards its 
production than our powers of synthesis, as is seen in the 
education of the individual, where trust is sufficient for the 
imparting most of the more important acquisitions, language 
being the only mental faculty called into exercise. When so 
imparted, they demand, unquestionably, if they are to bear 
, fruit, intellectual efforts on the part of the brain which receives 
the communication. But so entirely is the effect of the trans- 
mitted ideas independent of the source from which they come, 
that those of which we know not the proof often inspire 
greater confidence than the belief resulting from demonstration. 
On this point we may be content with appealing to the doctrine 
of the double movement of the earth, as showing that the 
principal influences of an opinion are not seen in its originators, 
nor even in the brains which admitted it from conviction 
without persuasion. Although the explanation is necessary in 
regard to the intellect, it would be superfluous in reference to 
feeling, and it is this which naturally holds the first place in 
the combination due to affection, where the fusion is often 
carried to the point of leading men, nay even societies of men, 
to exertion, from their devotion to the type they have assimi- 
lated. 

The preceding explanation is, in and by itself, a verification 
of the superiority of the worship in point of synthesis ; as in the 
worship the fundamental dogma of the religion is always taken 
in its unity, and consequently the most thorough and best 
directed study of it is naturally encouraged by its systematic 
adoration. 
How far i3 One last explanation, or the theory might render us liable 

tive life in- to the error of exaggerating the independence of the subjective 
physical" life as regards physical laws. The soul, when absorbed by 
another, shakes off its dependence on the external order, hut 
that order still affects the image of the being to which the soul 
belonged. And though the evocation of that image is never 
absolutely necessary for the securing the intellectual and even 
moral benefits of the combination, such evocation heightens the 
beneficial action of the fusion on the brain, which is, without 
it, limited to the use of signs. Adoration should be as concrete 
as possible, in order that it may be in the truest sense 
synthetical. Therefore it is of importance to introduce images 

laws. 

Chap. II.] THE WOESHIP. 95 

into it, and in introducing them we respect all the physical 
conditions which are calculated to give them distinctness and 
vividness. We may forgive poetry, especially ancient poetry, 
for asserting its independence by disregarding without any 
necessity the laws of matter and even of life. There may be 
occasions in which, in the normal state, we may properly claim 
the same power ; but it inculcates, in regard to the external 
order, a degree of respect in our conception of it which was not 
required during the initiation of the race, when the economy of 
nature was essentially unknown. 

' This supplementary explanation leads to a statement of the The ideaii- 
idealisation in which the subj ective state is, as it were, condensed. q™ea. 
The process consists especially in eliminating defects, not 
in adding excellences. Our artificial order becomes thus, in 
obedience to the Positive rule, simply a judicious prolongation 
of the natural order. Our instinct leads tis, in idealising any 
eminent exemplar Avhom we assimilate, to free him from the 
external laws to which he was subject whilst alive. If we 
would perfect the type, then, we must clear away the several 
imperfections, moral, intellectual, or even bodily, which obscure 
his leading characteristics, respecting, however, all the con- 
ditions of his real subjective existence. Nevertheless such 
idealisation by subtraction is not inconsistent witli a rare 
admission of addition ; we may add some attributes, especially 
external attributes, provided that in all cases they be secondary 
and probable. The judicious combination of the two modes 
allows the introduction of transfers, which enable the heart and 
intellect to attain a better conception of the being we assimilate, 
by supposing events to have happened which never did happen, 
although it was quite reasonable that they should have hap- 
pened. 

On the basis of this construction of the theory of the subjective Direct expo- 
life, I have now to enter on the direct exposition which forms the worsiup. 
main object of this chapter. But at this point, where I enter on ciotiwe de 
the full exposition of the Positive Cultus, I feel a special want, 
which prompts me to glorify the angelic being whose inspiration 
presided over the various steps of its creation. Nine years of 
uninterrupted adoration — of an adoration which became purely 
subjective after one year of chaste initiation — have brought 
with them in their natural course the conceptions which I am 
now to reduce to system, in such a way as to furnish at once an 

Vaux. 

96 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

evidence of the value, the intellectual and moral value, of a 
noble identification, 
of'the^wo""' '^^® worship must be subdivided first into public and 
Si'do- private — public if paid directly to the Great Being; private if 
mestio, Pub- paid to our highest personification of that Being ; the mode in 
which we perform this pious duty, whether as individuals or as 
societies, not affecting the division. Secondly, private worship 
naturally subdivides into personal and domestic, the divisions 
of private life. The result is a sociolatrical series or progres- 
sion, in which each individual soul successively connects itself 
with the Family, the Country, and Humanity, with a view to a 
regular cultivation of those dispositions from which we derive 
a stronger love for, and comprehension of, the Great Being, 
both with the object of better service. Nothing but such an 
initiation can give a charm and even a sanctity to all the acts 
of man, tracing, as it does everywhere, the supreme existence, 
when once the Positive spirit has attained its due completeness 
by its fusion with that of Fetichism. But this extension of the 
sphere of religion — its spontaneous extension so as to embrace 
all the actions of life, our daily avocations not less than more 
occasional events, and that in a degree never attained by any 
of the provisional forms of worship — does not take shape in any 
particular institutions, except for such events as are to a certain 
extent in connection with the regular epochs of our human 

life. 
Personni The immediate basis of Sociolatry, personal worship, is 

■ Adorat?o'ii <>: characterised above all by the heartfelt adoration of the afiective 
.voman. ^^^^ ^^ ^^^ grouud of the inherent capacity of every true woman 
to be a representative of Humanity. As composite, the highest 
form of existence can hardly be appreciated unless personified. 
All its true servants are, in their several degrees, each by virtue 
of his leading attribute, capable of representing it. But as 
sympathy is the great source of unity, and sympathy is strongest 
in woman, woman must be the best personification of a being, the 
foundation of whose existence, as a whole, is love. Woman, the 
spontaneous embodiment of the Family idea, alone can worthily 
represent any collective existence ; the instinct of the race 
made her the emblem of the Country before as yet she had 
gained the estimation which should qualify her for the repre- 
sentative of Humanity. 
Mother. Here, then, we have the private source at which each 

Chap. II.] THE WORSHIP. 97 

servant of the Great Being must habitually renew his vigour, 
the better to fit himself for his social function. The cares of 
daily life, be it one of study or of action, necessitate frequent 
recurrence to the ideal life arising out of the worship of 
Humanity in this concrete form, under pain of sacrificing the 
soundest foundation of duty and of happiness. This want, by 
its nature, requires for its due satisfaction a type chosen from 
the family ; allowing for exceptional cases in which, from the 
family not supplying such type, we are obliged to seek else- 
where a fit representative of the Great Being. Now, in the 
normal order, we have not this difficulty in choice, as it offers 
each one a centre for all his affections in her who is necessarily, 
for each of us, the first embodiment of Humanity. In defiance 
of,, the efforts of Theologism, particularly in its monotheistic 
stage, to turn from its natural course the initiation of mankind, 
the Fetichist spirit, which characterises childhood, always 
directed the earliest worship towards the Mother. Positivism 
sanctions and developes this instinctive tendency, and looks to 
it for the primary basis on which it rears the systematic 
worship of Humanity. Thus it is in the order of nature that 
the mother, as a rule, should take the place of our highest 
patroness by the continuation of her two offices of protectress 
and example — a combination which in French is happily 
indicated in the equivocal term patronne. 

The mother, however, the paramount image of Humanity, The wife 
is not, if she stand alone, sufficient as the habitual represen- ter. 
tative of the Great Being. For she appeals directly only to 
veneration, and she expresses only our relations with the past. 
To represent the future and the present, the mother, as the 
primary object of our worship, must have two adjuncts, both 
equally taken from the family — the wife and the daughter ; the 
wife with the special object of cultivating attachment; the 
daughter for the culture of benevolence. Personal worship thus 
embodies and consecrates the three instincts which constitute 
altruism ; the economy of the family ; and the whole range of 
social relations — our relations to superiors, equals, and inferiors. 
To secure, however, the desired consistency and definiteness for 
this triple representation of the Great Being, the mother's 
image must always be the predominant one. The supremacy 
thus necessarily assigned her shows that in the subjective 
union, even in its simplest and most perfect form, there exists, 

VOL. IV. H 

The 

98 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

equally as in other unions, the need, common to association in 
all its forms, of a hierarchical arrangement. So compleniented, 
the patronage of the mother is equally appropriate for either 
sex, on the condition that each borrow from the other the two 
supplementary types; the object being a more perfect culti- 
vation of tenderness in men, of energy in women, to remedy 
the peculiar deficiencies of each sex. 
The normal The process of the above construction leads me to explain 

these three what is normally the state of each of the three types at the 
period when the worship has attained its complete proportions ; 
this, as follows from the preceding remarks, will usually not 
be tiU the age of full maturity (set. 42). By that time the 
mother is generally removed by death ; the daughter is alive, 
her type therefore is objective ; the wife may be equally either 
one or the other. Now, far from weakening the effect of private 
worship upon the brain, this natural mixture of relations 
strengthens it ; the subjective element purifying, the objective 
vivifying it. 
ScJ'tiona?'^ In exceptional cases, in the first place, the family offers, by 
its very composition, the means of compensating the particular 
failure of one or other of the three general types. For the 
personal worship, as normally constituted, leaves out the sister ; 
the want of definiteness and fixity in her position in general 
not qualifying her to take the place of any of the three more 
natural patrons. But this very ambiguity usually allows the 
sister, the least distinct of the feminine types, to be, as the case 
may require, associated with each of the three others in order 
to strengthen their influence without dividing the affection. 
It follows that she maiy, in exceptional cases of deficiency in the 
mother, the wife, or the daughter, make good that deficiency, 
as equally qualified to take the place of either. Even with 
this substitution, however, we could not meet all the anomalies 
that will occur, even after the complete cessation of anarchy 
in the West. There will be extreme cases in which we shall 
be driven inevitably to seek outside the family for all the types 
essential to our personal worship, if we have a soul equal to the 
right construction of a subjective family. A type of each may 
be found among the protectors, companions, or dependents, 
whether spiritual or temporal, who habitually group themselves 
around each of the three normal patrons, and by whom those 
patrons are linked, through a series of steps, to the whole social 
economy. 

Chap. II.] THE WOKSHIP. 99 

In this system of personal adoration neither the past nor Deficiency as 

, to the Past. 

even the future, but especially the past, are as fully represented Names. 
as is compatible with the nature of the worship, and as is re- 
quired by its object. As a first contribution to its subjective 
completion, we systematically adopt, and carry to a further 
perfection, the plan judiciously introduced by Catholicism as 
to baptismal names, which it wisely turned to useful purpose by 
consecrating them to the special honour of the highest types it 
could. The patronage thus initiated by the priesthood of the 
Middle Ages is yet, in its full power, adapted exclusively to 
Sociolatry, for Sociolatry alone allows its extension to all our 
progenitors. In the sex which has to act and think, each true 
believer is thus provided from the hour of his birth with two 
eminent types ; one chosen from the theoretical, the other from 
the practical order ; these he coordinates and completes by 
himself, choosing a third at the time when his vocation becomes 
sufficiently clear. For the sex in which feeling is predomi- 
nant, its holy uniformity of vocation allows us to confine 
ourselves always to the patroness chosen by the mother under 
the sanction of the priesthood. 

In reference to the future, it is less necessary to extend the Eeflcicncy as 
range of our personal worship ; and after the first generation it ture. 
would seem inevitably to merge in the public worship, which 
alone appears to be competent to embrace all our successors. 
Yet it would leave a serious void in the system of Sociolatry, if 
its most individual form were without any appropriate con- 
nection with the second or future element of the subjective 
portion of Humanity. To supply this is the last step and must 
be the natural consequence of giving its full efficacy to the 
patronage of the past, the fundamental element of the conception. 

Grranting that we are so raised by our personal worship as ourimmor- 
to be worthy servants of the Great Being, the immortality we tSto'tiie 
shall deserve will extend to the great saints by whose aid we through 
have deserved it. They will be consequently incorporated in ^^"bem'^ '' 
the noblest constituent of the future generations, and will re- '^^^"''='^- 
ceive the daily homage of their best members. Now, such a 
prospect allows us, even now, a personal sympathy with all our 
successors, on whom it thus devolves to continue our own most 
inward worship. The greater our sense of its beneficial power 
over us, the more we must desire that it survive us, the more 
affection we must feel for those who shall prolong its existence. 

JI 2 

100 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAK. 

This uni- 
versally ap- 
plicable. 

Theimmort 
alifcy of 
women. 

Our patronsi 
guardian 
angels, or 
household 
goi39. 

The legitimate hope of such prolongation must be our special 
encouragement to the service of posterity, as it is from posterity 
that we expect a reward, the purer as it is not paid to ourselves 
immediately, but to the beings through whom we deserve it. 

At the present day, such a reward would be judged the 
exclusive appanage of exceptional merit, no religion but the 
Positive being able, by systematic appeal to social, gratitude, to 
extend its due influence. But when the habits sprung from a 
selfish worship shall have been overcome by the habits and 
feelings formed by Sociolatry, all true servants of Humanity 
will be warranted in aspiring to this legitimate return, by which 
the grateful recognition of their services goes back to the main 
source of their own glory. The humblest citizen will be con- 
scious that he can give his patrons a degree of immortality 
corresponding to his own merits, a degree summarily expressed 
at times by the fusion of names. 

As the last aid to our full appreciation of this indispensable 
addition to the personal worship, we must not forget that 
woman is an essential constituent of the fundamental patronage. 
More keenly alive to the charm of self-sacrifice, woman feels 
less than man the want of subjective immortality. It would 
even seem that it is essentially denied her, in consequence of 
her exclusion normally from public life, the principal source 
of all immediate claims to honour. But even granting women 
to be wholly insensible individually to the attraction of a noble 
eternity, their instinct of sympathy should make them wish 
their moral providence carried on and not confined to those 
who are its direct objects. Each woman, then, will look beyond 
the immediate return for her holy services, and cherish the 
additional hope of an indefinite extension of those services. . 
This is the normal form of woman's indirect participation in 
the immortality due to the services, whether of the theorician 
or practician, in which she cannot take a direct part. It is to 
the affective sex that the Grreat Being entrusts its most im- 
portant and most difficult function, the function of forming all 
its servants. Each woman will ultimately be judged by her 
work ; she will share the immortality accorded it by the future 
generations, who will know how to distinguish the merit of the 
training amidst the imperfections of the result. 

Such is the normal basis in Sociolatry of private worship, 
the adoration, viz., of our own personal patrons, our guardian 

Chap. II.] THE WORSHIP. 101 

angels or household gods ; either term may be used, according 
as we compare them with one or other of their prototypes. 
Although the more modern term is destined to prevail at the 
present day, the earlier will ultimately he most generally 
adopted, as it answers better the nature of the institution as a 
Positive institution. For the guardian angels of Catholicism 
were but a feeble substitute for the household gods of Fetichism, 
and by Fetichism handed down to Polytheism ; gods who stood 
in a more direct and individual relation to their worshipper, 
gods therefore exercising a stronger influence, nay one which 
appealed more sensibly to the feelings. Admitting this 
superiority, we must remember, that the transition from the 
objective to the subjective effected by Catholicism was an un- cathoiioaaa 
conscious preparation for the definitive form of personal worship, dan preoe- 
Still more capital, however, was the precedent set by Islam 
when it introduced the idea of the homogeneity, in suitable degree, 
of the worshipper and the worshipped. Mohammed left, it is 
true, no formal command on this point, but his august ex- 
ample, as one of the most eminent organs of Humanity, will 
smooth the way for the universal adoption of the Positive 
form. All the types he chose were women; he chose them 
within the family ; and he chose them, some from the living, 
others from the dead ; all this conspires to place him, though 
a noble exception, in as full accordance with our definitive 
systematisation of personal worship, as the similar instances in 
chivalry, where they are the natural result of that system. 

I have now to complete the exposition of the personal ^j^^^^ 
worship by an explanation of the whole system of daily exer- ^^ 
cises, which alone can make it really efficacious. Prayer is the 
proper term for all of them ; restricting this word, which admits 
of no substitute, to the noble sense which it came more and 
more to bear for worshippers of deep feeling, even under the 
selfish influences of Theology. So restricted, it always stands Definition o£ 

_ prayer. 

lor a commemoration followed by effusion. 

In private worship these two essential constituents of Posi- Divisions ot 
tive prayer take, almost in equal degree, a concrete character, prly™".'™"^ 
as directed to an individual object, that object being especially 
the principal patron, the better to concentrate our emotions. 
Although the phase of prayer which calls for exertion on our 
part, has a more immediately decisive influence than that in 
which we are, as it were, passive, this latter is habitually the 

102 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE EUTUEE OF MAK. 

Degree of 
snbjectiTity 
iu prayer. 

Oral prayer. 

Daily Prayer 
a ■work of 
art. 

basis of the former, which would otherwise be inevitably de- 
ficient in depth. Hence, in the principal daily prayer, the 
effusion is only half the length of the commemoration. But 
then we divide the act of commemoration into two equal parts : 
the first, proper to the day of the week, as recalling the associa- 
tions of that day ; the second, common to all the days, in order 
to bring before us the whole of our social relations reviewed ia 
their true order of succession. Though it thus embraces a 
larger field, the latter part need not be longer than the former, 
as in it we use mainly signs, in the other mainly images. 
Thus, two stages of contemplation, one more vivid, the second 
more comprehensive, precede and prepare effusion ; this, invari- 
ably synthetical in character, is directed to the general object 
of our personal worship. Such is the normal distribution of pri- 
vate prayer into three phases of equal length, which together 
constitute a progressive action of the brain, in which images, 
signs, and feelings prevail in succession, the result of the whole 
being the subjective evocation, which shows that the act of 
adoration has attained its end. 

The image evoked, — the triumph of private prayer, — never 
can equal, in clearness or in vividness, the impressions of sense. 
But as this ideal limit of subjectivity is reached, at times 
passed, under the excitement of disease, so in health we may 
come more and more near to it, in proportion as by our assi- 
duous practice of daily prayer we increase its power over our 
brain. Nobler natures may thus procure themselves satisfactions 
unknown to those who leave their hearts uncultivated, nay 
even to those who address their homage to beings of a different 
nature from themselves. 

To give additional energy to our daily exercises, it is a 
great point to introduce a judicious combination of the most 
sympathetic with the most synthetic of our senses, calling in 
sounds to help forms. Though oral prayer seems confined to 
social worship, there has always been a sense that the practice 
tends to perfect solitary adoration, often spoken of as invocation. 
In any case, however, it suits better with the effusion than the 
commemoration, the first phase of which, in particular, should 
be sparing in its use of it. 

It follows from the indications given, when taken in connec- 
tion, that the daily prayer of Positivists is a work of art ; each 
worshipper having to compose his own prayer, as he alone can 

Chap. U.] THE "WORSHIP. 103 

judge what combination of sounds and forms will give the true 
expression of his feelings. This spontaneous combination of the 
two modes of artistic utterance gains in efficiency if, undeterred 
by groundless scruples, we bring in the Fetichist to perfect the 
Positive spirit, and give life quite naturally to all such objects 
as are really connected with oiu- worship. It is indispensable, 
in all cases, that our prayers should be original compositions, 
but we may embellish them by a judicious recourse to the 
poetical accumulations of Humanity. Provided that the 
general forms we there find correspond adequately to our indivi- 
dual feelings, their use in moderation should give increased power 
to our emotions, active or passive equally, thus placed under 
the sanction of a great poet, and besides in sympathy, by the 
power of imagination, with all whom he has influenced. The 
aid from this source will receive an addition from the com- 
pleteness esthetically of Positive education, which will qualify 
us, in subordination to poetry, to employ its two most close allies, 
when singing and drawing shall have become as familiar as 
speech and writing. Their great use in the worship will be to 
■compensate the inevitable uniformity of each prayer ; for once 
formed it should in substance remain the same, so as to gain 
the ease of expression which habit gives ; allowing for the rare 
introduction of improvements when a want has been long felt. 
The only variation admissible being the developement, either by 
song or drawing, of the forms consecrated by use, the two 
special arts will give this greater completeness and life, if, at 
the time, they involve no effort. 

As we have more than one daily prayer, the first point is to Number ana 
xecognise the superior importance normally attaching to the aStV°"° 
morning prayer, devoting as it does the first hour of each day p^^^'^' 
to place the whole day under the protection of the best repre- 
sentatives of Humanity. It is in this first prayer that we make 
the largest use of all secondary means to perfect each of the 
three phases of our personal worship. At the approach of sleep, 
an appropriate prayer, of half the length, protects the harmony 
of the brain from disturbance during the night. Lastly, about 
noon, for the shortest of our daily prayers, we interrupt our 
studies, or our business, in order to recall, by an exertion of 
feeling, the great primary object of our life which our work 
tends to put put of sight. Such are the three daily prayers of 
the true Positivist, and he should be able to graduate duly 

104 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

"Weekly and 
annual wor- 
ship. 

Uniform in- 
troduction 
for the sake 
of conti- 
nuity. 

Tision sus- 
pended. 

commemoration and effusion, as he should be able to avail 
himself in judicious proportion of subsidiary resources, without 
there being any necessity for detailed explanation on such easy 
points. 

But these daily exercises, which should have as their central 
object the chief patroness, are incomplete without a weekly 
prayer, where the mother's presidency, with the two other 
essential types as her assessors, allows us to give suitable expres- 
sion to the respect we owe as individuals to all whom we 
associate with them. The numerical properties which led the 
instinct of the race to institute this subjective period, the week, 
will introduce it into private worship, though in itself more 
adapted to the public services. On some of these weekly 
services each one will lay greater stress than on others, and so 
form for his own use annual festivals, thus completing his per- 
sonal worship by bringing it into regular relation with the 
year, the second objective element in the division of time. As 
a rule, it were waste of labour to institute monthly festivals, as 
the universal adoption of the Positivist calendar, to be explained 
later, will bring the dates of the week and the month, the two 
periods of man's institution, into harmony. In the private, as 
in the public worship, there are in the normal state only three 
degrees : daily, weekly, and yearly prayers in the private ; 
weekly, monthly, and yearly services in the public worship. 

To ensure continuity in Sociolatry, in our chief daily 
prayer we must habitually take precautions to guard against the 
difference arising from its having a different beginning for each 
day of the week. We avoid this break by adopting an uniform 
introduction, consisting of a short invocation, in which the 
principal part is assigned to one of the subordinate associations 
connected with the previous day. Supposing that day to have 
left practically only one memory, we shall soon learn to draw 
the others from the subjective impressions to which the habit 
of worship will of itself give rise ; its more marked influences 
becoming events to us personally. 

In the second place, the power we have of suspending sight 
at will enables us to give to the images we evoka an increase 
of vividness unattainable by the impressions of hearing. It is 
wiser however not to close our eyes in order to secure a cleai'er 
internal vision by the exclusion of external objects, if there 
happens to be sufficient obscurity already. For the effort 

Chap. II.] THE -WOESHIP. 105 

required for such isolation diverts a portion of our brain power, 
whilst that required for the contemplation of external objects 
is an aid in the internal act of evocation, as it places us in a 
situation more nearly resembling that in which we received the 
original impression. 

Nor must we omit — and this applies to all forms admissible "^^^ ™°- 

■^ ^ templdtion 

in personal worship — a precaution suggested by its concrete oithe death 
nature, and as a consequence of the fact that the predominant "^toi^s- 
image, the image of the mother, is usually subjective, as are 
also most of the others. Eemoved as she and they are from 
life, we should not shrink in each case from habitually calling 
up before us the circumstances of their death. The picture of 
their last moments should duly enter into our worship of them, 
the better to represent the natural commencement of the sub- 
jective immortality which, under their assistance, we hope to 
deserve as they have deserved. 

With these subsidiary remarks, we leave as complete the influence of 
explanation of the personal worship, the main source of what- cuitus 
ever value attaches to the two other constituents of Sociolatry. 
The explanation enables us to appreciate more fully the general 
power recognised above as inherent in the Positive worship, to 
promote the continuous amelioration of all the three parts of 
our nature. 

Considered as a whole, private worship familiarises us with asawiioie> 
the process of idealising human existence, for it daily brings 
before us our normal condition : the intelligence and the acti- 
vity voluntarily submitting to the control of feeling. Not paid 
directly to the Great Being, it yet constantly recalls it, for 
each patron whom we invoke has no claim to our homage but 
such as is grounded on his qualification to be a representative 
of Humanity. 

The highest value of this worship has regard to our moral Moral m- 

1 n p 1 r fluence. 

advance, whether as concerns the growth of each of our sympa- 
thetic instincts in particular, or the general result of the three 
in their right combination. It draws its inspiration from 
attachment, and it developes benevolence, as we, the living, 
become protectors of our patrons who are no longer so. But 
above all it cultivates veneration by our worship of them, and 
veneration is the most important of the three social instincts, 
and the most difficult to stimulate, from the absence of any 
direct connection with the personal instincts ; it has an indi- 

106 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE EUTUEE CE MAK. 

Intellectual 
influence. 

Influence on 
action. 

rect connection with the two instincts of personal improvement, 
those of construction and destruction. Thus it is that we best 
realise the value of voluntary submission, which we find to be 
the habitual source of the truest satisfactions. As we subor- 
dinate in our personal worship more and more the subjective to 
the objective, in order to facilitate the evocation of the object 
of our love, it leads us to see that progress, as dependent on 
our own effort, always consists in the developement of natural 
order. 

The influence of the worship on the intellect is incontest- 
able as regards art, each separate act requiring an effort of 
spontaneous idealisation, and the result being a poetical utter- 
ance aided by sound and form. This brings before us 
affection, as evidently the true source of artistic power, by 
virtue of the reciprocal action, developed with such a charm in 
the worship, between the improvement in the pictures we form 
and the expansion of our feelings. But the influence of 
private worship as regards science, though less evident at the 
present day, yet admits of equivalent results, in method 
especially, but also in doctrine. It makes us feel deeply, how 
necessary is the aid of affection in the operations of the 
intellect, in meditation no less than in contemplation, as in 
both equally it guides us in the combination of images with 
signs. At the same time it brings into evidence the principal 
laws of feeling and thought, which it also shows to be in con- 
stant dependence on our bodily constitution, a frequent source 
of disturbance to us in prayer as it is also the som-ce of assist- 
ance ; and, as it is the one or the other, it gives us a means of 
estimating the state of our health. » 

In regard to action, the personal worship tends to direct it 
to the most important phenomena and those most easily modi- 
fied, without in any way concealing their unavoidable depend- 
ence on the more simple. It calls into exercise, for its own 
ends, our three practical virtues, and besides this it gives a 
general stimulus to their growth, as a consequence of the 
natural influences of prayer. The wish solemnly expressed that 
we may grow in courage, prudence, or perseverance, tends of 
itself to make us do so, were it only by the acknowledgment of 
our actual deficiencies. Solitary prayer does not, it is true, 
offer as powerful a stimulus as social prayer, but it is better 
adapted to make us feel the importance of consecrating all our 

Chap. II.] THE -WORSHIP. 107 

active powers to the service of altruism. Its tendency is to 
represent true morality as active rather than passive, disci- 
plining our selfish instincts rather through the cultivation of 
our instincts of sympathy than by any direct compression. 

So far for the basis of Sociolatry, the private worship ; there Domestic 
follows the exposition of its second element. This, at first Respective 

• 1 11 ii'.'iip functions of 

Sight, would seem to be distinguished from the two others the Head of 

11- ^ ■■ T-, -1 -1 1 • the Family 

solely m so far as the Family completes concrete adoration, or and of the 
initiates abstract effusion, the former of which has its proper 
place in the private, the latter in the public worship. Its dif- 
ference from the two in these respects calls for no peculiar institu- 
tions, but it does require fresh prayers adapted to the use of the 
Family, the simplest form of human society. Concrete worship 
takes in the Family a collective and more comprehensive cha- 
Tacter, more particularly as regards the past ; for the father of 
the Family invokes, as household gods, the chief ancestors of the 
Family; and such subjective invocation, with the aid of art, 
ought to rekindle the sense of fellowship. The priestly func- 
tion vested in the mother within her proper sanctuary, — the 
home, — by her position, is a step towards the public worship of 
the Great Being, whom she represents in the Family by abstract 
prayers, to a judicious form of which I 'have directed attention 
already in the general preface of this work. 

But over and above these, the two habitual ceremonies Domestic 

«i 1 IT (^ a ' 1 "^'orship con- 

of domestic worship, the intermediate element of Sociolatry secratesthe 

vanons 

admits of an organisation, with quite distinct institutions, on pisses of 
the principle of the systematic consecration of the several 
phases of domestic life. In the private worship each one places 
himself under the patronage of the Family, whether subjective 
or objective. The next step is for the Family, as an unit, to 
receive from the priesthood, as a religious privilege, the pro- 
tection of the Country. As the final step, in the public 
worship the State itself invokes the supremacy of Humanity. 
Such is the normal progression in which the Great Being sancti- 
fies, in succession, the three indispensable stages of its con- 
tinuous service, personal, domestic, and civic, by placing each 
under the protection of the next above it. 

There never has been wanting the consciousness that it is Previous 

, 1 . r. • I T p confusion of 

necessarv, for the due sanction and regulation oi private life, to the temporal 

■• n r T T Tr ill and spiritual 

bring it under the natural influence oi public iite, as the only powers, 
mode of checking caprice, and ensuring stability. But the 

Positivism 

rectifies tlus 
error. 

1 08 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAS. 

Family being the basis of all other associations must, as such, 
come under the conjoint influence of the Church and of the 
State, respectively represented by the Priesthood and the Patri- 
ciate. Previous to the separation of the two powers, its rela- 
tion to both involved no difficulty, whether the ascendancy in 
society was vested in the priests or in the patricians. It was 
only however by virtue of their priestly character that the 
patricians held such ascendancy, as is indicated most clearly in 
the celebration of marriages, seeing that all authority in society 
has a theocratic origin. In accordance with both these ante- 
cedents, as soon as in Western Monotheism the two powers 
became separate, it was on the priesthood exclusively that it 
devolved to place the Family under the regular action of social 
influences. During the decline of Catholicism this privilege of 
the priesthood was more and more looked upon as an usurpa- 
tion upon the civil authority, to which ultimately the ecclesias- 
tical succumbed in the three principal events of private life, 
birth, marriage, and death. Nevertheless the ascendancy of 
the civil power would still seem provisional, as connected with 
the revolutionary tendency to the absorption by the temporal 
power of the spiritual function. 

Positivism alone is able to introduce the normal condition 
of things in this respect by giving systematic expression to the 
ultimate division of the two powers, both of which equally, each 
in its own way, have to regulate the domestic relations. As 
every important phase of private life has a direct connection 
with civil order, it is for the patriciate to prescribe, in refe- 
rence to it, such legal conditions as are requisite to ensui'e 
harmony in action. But again, as the Family is in connection 
with the Church, it is for the priesthood to develope this con- 
nection, and with this object to maintain the due supremacy in 
the Family of the moral regulations called for by the religious 
consecration of the domestic relations. Higher in their nature, 
more difiicult, and at the same time not so absolutely indis- 
pensable, the conditions prescribed by the priesthood lie 
entirely within the domain of conscience, supported by opinion, 
but rejecting all command. On the contrary, civil obligations, 
as more necessary, and of a less delicate nature, can never be 
optional. The several epochs, then, of domestic life demand a 
twofold discipline, the second of the two presupposing the first, 
the one civil, and alone legally indispensable ; and if men brave 

Chap. II.] THE WOESHIP. 109 

opinion, the only one to which they need submit ; the other 
religious, never to rest on anything but free acceptance. This 
latter discipline is found necessary to give their full moral 
character to our relations ; but, more than this, it is the sole 
condition of securing for the decisions of a purely local power 
the universal influence without which the tie formed would be 
deficient in binding force. 

Thus obligation and liberty have each their legitimate sphere, The Priest, 
and solely by virtue of the determination of that sphere is the FG°cur™toe- 
worship of Humanity enabled to exert its full power to regulate 
the Family, by securing its due submission to conditions which, 
tinless freely accepted, would be oppressive. The better to 
ensure this optional character, the priesthood will apply to the 
patriciate for the institutions required for the twofold disci- 
pline, hitherto liniited to the case of marriages, births, and 
deaths. "Without these general remarks, by way of preamble, 
it would not be possible rightly to appreciate the consecration 
by religion of the several phases of domestic life, and this is 
the only point I have to explain at present. 

From this point of view, life in its entirety stands before us The 
as a series of preparations, with the ultimate object of incorpo- 
rating ns into the Great Being, when our service has been 
worthily paid. Hence the institution of a system of nine social 
sacraments, by which Positive religion sanctifies all the great 
epochs of private life, by bringing each in its turn into a 
distinct connection with public life. The nine are, in their 
natural order : 1st, presentation ; 2nd, initiation ; 3rd, ad- 
tnission ; 4th, destination ; 5th, marriage ; 6th, maturity ; 
7th, retireTnent ; 8th, transformation; 9th, incorporation, 
implying a previous judgment. 

But the function of woman is so uniform and so persistent. Women ais, 
that in her case we dispense with the sacrament which precedes the fourth, 
marriage and the two which follow it. seventh. 

Previous to any explanation, I should state that the more Thosacra- 
important of these sacraments have already been administered, ready adi 
within the very limited circle within which as yet Positivism 
has, in a certain degree, overcome the habits of earlier beliefs 
and revolutionary tendencies. 

Yet, however limited, such experience is an evidence that 
the time has come for a religious reconstruction, the more so if 
we take into account, that the results obtained were originally 

nine 
crameats. 

110 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

(i) Presen- 
tation. 

Tlie cere- 
monial of 
Pressnta- 
tion. 

(U) Initifi- 
tion. 

obtained by a purely oral exposition. In one sad case of 
death, we can even show a full adherence to the vow of eternal 
widowhood, the characteristic feature of Positivist marriage : a 
young mother so married (hers was the first instance) remains 
in consequence, to use her own noble language, a daughter of 
Humanity. 

The iirst sacrament is the solemn presentation by the 
family to the priesthood of the child it devotes to the ever- 
lasting service of the Grreat Being. Sanctioning the judicious 
improvement introduced by Catholicism, the Positive religion 
requires, as the condition of acceptance of the future servant, 
that a second couple offer itself to complete the guarantees for 
his due training, physical, intellectual, and moral. The joint 
action of the natural and artificial protectors is indicated by 
the fact that each couple shares in the selection of the two 
patrons, the one theoretical, the other practical, chosen, under 
the sanction of the priesthood, from the public representatives 
of Humanity in the past. 

So long as war was the great form of human activity, the 
newborn were often rejected, as not properly qualified to take 
their part in war. But modern civilisation finds a use for all 
organisations, and therefore the sacrament of presentation will 
never be refused, with exceptions so rare as to need no provi- 
sion. Delay of this first sacrament would then only be admis- 
sible when the parents, artificial and natural, did not offer the 
proper guarantees. 

This inauguration of a new life is a direct recognition of 
the principle of Sociocracy ; since in it, there is vested in the 
two families by the priest, as the interpreter of the Great 
Being, an august ofEce on behalf of the new child of Humanity. 
The ceremony consists chiefly in a full setting forth of the 
instructions which the discharge of the function in its complete- 
ness requires, its free acceptance being an admission on the 
part of the parents that private life is in the normal concep- 
tion subordinate to public. To render more complete the 
guarantee of society, the priest presents the child to the 
witnesses, and receives from them a written engagement that, in 
the event of failure of its proper protectors, they will supply 
their place. 

In the second sacrament, the child, at the age of fom-teen, 
enters on its initiation into public Hfe, by passing from its 

Chap. II.J THE "WOESHIP. Ill 

education by its mother to the instruction of the priest. On 
this occasion it receives the counsels of religion in reference to 
the whole course of its scientific novitiate, the object being to 
avert the great danger of these seven years, in which the intel- 
lect tends to rise in revolt against the heart. If the maternal 
education has been unsuccessful in training the affections, 
initiation should be put off ; an absolute refusal, however, being 
given only in the extremely rare cases of radical incompetence 
for scientific culture. 

In the third sacrament, admission, at the age of twenty-one, (Ui) Admis- 
on the due fulfilment of his course of intellectual training, the 
child of Humanity receives from the priesthood authorisation 
to serve freely the Great Being ; from which hitherto he has 
received all, giving nothing in retm-n. Since the fall of Poly- 
theism no religious ceremony has consecrated this social 
installation of the individual, owing to the particular incom- 
petence of Monotheism, especially Western Monotheism, in 
regard to public life. Positivism in this sacrament will com- 
plete the regulations of the state as to majority by the addition 
of moral and intellectual conditions, conditions not to be 
imposed by law, but without which there would be no solid 
ground for the confidence which should be given those who are 
to take part as freemen in the general action of society. 

Admission in this general form is sufficient for the woman, (iv) Desti- 
but seven years later the man receives in the fourth sacrament 
the investiture by religion in his own peculiar function. Not 
till that time can we be sure that there is a real vocation for 
the career of the theorician, a point on which there is generally 
a mistake at the close of the course of abstract studies. Mistake 
is not so easy in regard to a practical career, yet the one finally 
adopted is often not that chosen by the father, and to which, 
as so chosen, apprenticeship was served during the encyclo- 
paedic training. The Positive education, while it discourages 
capricious changes, will facilitate such as are desirable, for it 
will qualify the proletary and even the patrician to turn with 
greater ease to another branch of industry. Through a series 
of free trials, then, the young servant of Humanity must form 
his distinct choice during the seven years which follow his 
general instruction. This introductory process will be normally 
sufiScient ; but, notwithstanding, the Positive social order will 
occasionally offer instances of change of career, particularly 

112 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

amongst the proletaries. This fourth sacrament, then, or destina- 
tion, is the only sacrament which, in exceptional cases, may be 
given more than once, although its administration is of itself a 
preservative against the mistaken wish to quit one's class. 

The rudiment of this sacrament may be traced to Theologism, 
nay even to astrolatrical Fetichism. But, except in the Theo- 
cracy, and this is peculiarly true of Catholicism, it was confined 
to the highest public functions, the ordination of priests and 
the coronation of kings. As it is incumbent on Sociocracy to 
fulfil all its theocratic antecedents by giving them a systematic 
expression, it gives the sanction of religion to all professions 
indiscriminately ; each thus taking the social character which 
will render it amenable to moral control in its exercise, what- 
ever be the mode adopted for recompensing its services. 

This sacrament gives the priesthood the opportunity of 
marking the close of education, in the special sense of the 
word, by a solemn appreciation of the duties of the several 
careers. The servant of Humanity is thus qualified to take his 
full share in social life by the foundation of a new family. 
<T) Mar- For such is the object of the fifth and most important 

sacrament, the exact age for receiving which must remain 
undetermined ; only the lower limit may be fixed, twenty- 
eight for the man, and twenty-one for the woman. Nor must 
it be without weighty reasons that the priesthood permit 
marriage beyond thirty-five in the one case and twenty-eight in 
the other. 
Monogamy The reader is already familiar with the Positive theory of 

Tesuitof this fundamental bond, by his acquaintance with the Greneral 

Western - . . . _ 

civilisation. View, and the explanations incident to the second volume, 

explanations to be further developed in the course of the present 

volume. It is known, that the religion of Humanity looks 

on. the establishment of monogamy as the grand result of the 

transition of the Western world from Theocracy to Sociocracy. 

In the thirty centuries of that transition this capital institution 

has approached by degrees its full completeness ; it attains it 

in the Positivist regeneration, for that leads to the voluntary 

acceptance of eternal widowhood without which polygamy still 

continues in a subjective form. 

Interval be- This final and indispensable modification of marriage, the 

IndTeUgtous natural expression in brief of its true theory, offers a general 

marriage. jruidance iu relation to the fifth sacrament. That the promi se 

Chap. II.] THE "WOESHIP, , 11? 

may Ipe well and maturely weighed, it has been already found 
by experience in the new church, that it must not be accepted 
till thcee months after the civil ceremony which allows the 
married pair complete intimacy. A month before that civil cere^^ 
mony, a solemn engagement is taken by the betrothed parties 
to observe chastity during the three months that precede the 
religious marriage. Without this trial neither party could 
sufficiently ensure his own resolution nor rely on that of the 
other, The conclusive test of this novitiate forms a fitting 
introduction to married life, as in it the two are seen, whilst 
legally free, not using their freedom, but preparing for subjective 
marriage by enjoying in its full purity the union of soul with soul. 

Led consequently to look upon mutual improvement as the The vow of 
true aim of marriage, on the procreation of children as only a widowhood^ 
secondary object, they are allowed, in the name of Humanity, to yjf^g^°^°'" 
sign, in conjunction with all the witnesses to the ceremony, the 
sacred engagement of an eternal union. The obligation thus 
voluntarily contracted will, in the face of such guarantees, be 
as a rule irrevocable ; yet there may be exceptional cases, and 
in such the High Priest of Humanity, and he alone, after 
special enquiry, may grant a dispensation. A decision to this 
eifect by the Pontiff is the more grave as it involves the affix- 
ing a stigma on the memory of one of the two parties ; except 
the survivor feel unbound by a vow, taken, and shown to have been 
taken under a hasty impulse, a case hardly supposable with the 
precautions taken. In the normal case, the promise of eternal 
widowhood is to be solemnly renewed six months after the 
expiration of the year of mourning, after which no dispensation 
can be allowed. But even then the engagement must keep its 
purely religious character ; no legal prescription must degrade 
it ; however strong the pressure of public opinion may become, 
the patriciate will not yield the point, and in its resistance it 
will be supported by the urgent representations of the priest- 
hood. 

"When duly trained for complete citizenship by married life, (7£^*"- 
the servant of Humanity, at the age of forty-two, receives the 
sixth sacrament, which marks his attainment of his full matu- 
rity as a man and as a citizen. The true function of woman re^ 
quires no introductory step : it begins with her life ; it developes 
constantly as that life developes ; nay it even gains in efficiency 
after that life has ended. Men, on the contrary, have to act 

VOL. IT. I 

rity. 

114 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. ITHE FUTURE OF^ MAN. 

(Tii) Betire- 
xuent. 

(viii) Trans- 
formation. 

and think, and need therefore a long and complicated prepara- 
tion to fit them fully for their normal function. The period of 
its active discharge is generally but half as long as that of pre- 
paration. This sixth sacrament is the solemn inauguration of 
that period ; more than any other it admits of adjournment or 
even refusal ; whilst but rarely may we anticipate, in any con- 
siderable degree, its proper date. 

In conferritig this sacrament, one peculiar to Positivism, 
the priest warns the servant of Humanity that, whilst previous 
errors have been reparable, such faults as he may now commit 
will be decisive as to his incorporation into the Great Being. 
In it the citizen sees the public announcement of his capacity 
to discharge in full a function, to the lower degrees of which 
he was hitherto confined. And, however uniform the career of 
the priesthood, siich is the training it requires, that the full 
priestly office may not be conferred at an earlier age than that 
appointed for civil offices. 

Through this sacrament we pass to the seventh, in which 
the practical servant of Humanity, at the age of sixty-three, 
enters on a wise retirement from active life ; retaining, how- 
ever, a consultative influence, by virtue of which he is distinctly 
constituted a legitimate auxiliary of a priesthood, traceable in 
its earliest form to the elders. He ends his active career by 
the proclamation, in the face of Humanity, of his final choice of 
his successor, a choice submitted seven years before to puhHc 
opinioU for acceptance or rejection. The office of the priest, 
unlike that of women, requires preparation, btit it approaches 
closely that of women in duration ; so that the seventh sacra- 
ment is confined to practical men, the theoricians of course 
limiting themselves to those duties for which they continue 
well qualified. 

The eighth sacrament is the substitute Positivism offers for 
the inhuman ceremony in which Catholicism, forgetful of its 
aim, but true to its doctrine, made the breaking of all human 
ties the indispensable condition of an eternity as selfish as it is 
chimerical. The priesthood of Humanity associates the regret 
of his fellow-citizens witli the tears of his family, and repre- 
sents to the dying man the existence on which he is entering, as 
the completion after death of the services by which in life he 
has deserved such reward. Whilst bound not to forestall the 
ulterior judgment, the priesthood will, as a rule, hold out the 

Chap. II.] THE WORSHIP. .115 

hope that that judgment will be favourahle, on condition o^ 
sincere repentance, and, where possible, reparation. 

Seven years after the latest consecration of the liviner, a ('^^ J"""'- 

*' o7 poration. 

consecration of the dead perfects the series of objective pre- 
parations, and proclaims, before an appropriate bier, the 
solemn incorporation of its occupant into the Great Being. 
Such an interval combines maturity of judgment on the part of 
the priesthood with the preservation of the various documents 
it requires for its judgment. To bring public opinion to bear 
more satisfactorily, a provisional decision is given in the fourth 
year, a decision susceptible of revision and preparatory of the 
final and irreversible sentence. 

Such is the last sacrament, by which Sociocracy, brought 
into direct connection with Theocracy, completes the process of 
consecrating all the marked epochs of man's mortal life by 
incorporating it with the eternal life of Humanity. The cere- 
mony of the final judgment consists principally in the solemn 
transfer of the noble remains to the sacred grove which should 
surround each temple of Humanity. This act initiates a 
definitive cultus of the man and of the citizen, paid at the 
sacred tomb, which is adorned with an inscription, a bust, or a 
statue, according to the degree of honour accorded. An 
adverse sentence, as a rule, is simply negative ; it treats, that is, 
as final, the civil burial with which the priesthood is never con- 
cerned. In cases where strong reprobation is deserved, the 
body of the condemned is borne in a fitting manner to the 
waste ground allotted to the rejected, there to lie with those 
who have been publicly executed, with suicides and with 
duellists, though not, as they are, subject to anatomical exami- 
nation. 

Taken as a whole, the preceding exposition, in which it has special mo- 
been impossible to explain the worship without anticipating domestic m- 

, . • J- j_ j_i • 1 r b lations, e.g, 

upon the regime, maniiests the inherent competence of Socio- adoption, 
latry to deal with domestic life, all its phases finding their 
appropriate regulation in the nine sacraments. The consecra- 
tion of that life, if it is to be complete, must embrace the 
modifications which, if not universal, are yet so frequent as to 
call for the sanction of the priesthood. Such a modification 
will be, in particular, Adoption, an institution to be largelv 
developed in the Positive state ; its religious ceremonial to be 
connected, as the case may require, either with the sacran^ent 

I 2 

116 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Wh^ein lies 
the power of 
these sacra- 
ments. 

The Series 

Personal, 

Domestic, 

Public 

Worship. 

Public Wor- 
shij). 

Tbe Calen- 
dar., What 
a date is. 

The Week 

of presentation, or it may be, witli those of destination and' 
retirement. 

In estimating the power of these various ceremonies, we see 
that it depends throughout on the habitual practice of personal 
worship, whether prior in order of time or coexistent ; in 
default of such habit the priesthood would be unable by the 
sacraments to excite any but mere transient emotions. But 
they who, by the habit of daily prayer, are ever ready to feel 
and to understand the Great Being, will receive deep impres- 
sions from these consecrations, sanctifying as they do in combi- 
nation the life of each, as connecting it by gradual steps with 
Humanity. Their interdependence is calculated to secure easy 
access for the inflxience of each, as each resumes its predecessors, 
nay even heralds its successors, so as to be a conclusive evidence 
of adhesion to the true religion. 

The family worship rests on the personal, and is a prepara- 
tion for the public, by its introducing, in an elementary form, 
the abstraction and the publicity which are the characteristics 
of public worship. To give an ideal embodiment of Sociology 
and still more of Sbciocracy, such is the aim of our system of 
Sociolatry, and its power to attain it is seen on a comparison of 
its three general forms or stages. For the first, purely statical, 
represents order ; the second, mainly dynamical, represents 
progress; the last, both statical and dynamical, is the expres- 
sion of the combination of order and progress. 

Previous to entering on public worship, the direct worship, 
that is, of Humanity, I must explain the calendar it requires. 
Its introduction gives systematic form to a construction 
begun during Fetichism, and by the necessity of the case 
preserving its empirical character till the advent of Posi- 
tivism. 

To date, is to distinguish each day by the place it holds in 
the whole period elapsed since the beginning of the era chosen. 
If stated directly and simply, it would involve too large 
numbers, even as regards the duration of the life of the indi- 
vidual, much more in reference to that of the society. For 
dates then we must, as in abstract numeration, adopt an 
indirect and compound system by gi'ouping the days, not 
however exceeding three orders of groups, or we necessarily get 
confused. 

Of these periods, or gi-oups of days, which are at once of man's 

Chap. II.] T^E "WOESHIP. 117 

■institution and natural, it is the smallest alone which hitherto 
has gained unanimous acceptance by virtue of the subjective Voi.iii. 
properties of the number seven, pointed out in the last volume. 
Positivism explains the attributes of the week, and by so doing 
places on rational grounds an institution instinctively adopted, 
which goes back to Fetichism, even in its nomad stage. But 
Positivism, whilst referring to the week its whole system of 
public worship, sanctions and regulates the combination of the 
week with larger periods, for otherwise the date would still 
require too high numbers. As far as possible, it connects these 
periods with the week, in order to facilitate numerical com- 
parisons, and most of all with the view of introducing the 
greatest possible concordance into our religious solemnities. 
The two conditions are met by a judicious combination of the 
month and the year, the two periods in common use, regard The Month 

_ . ./ 7 J. . . and the 

bemg had to their true nature ; the month being subjective, fear, 
the year objective. 

All divergences relating to the calendar are to be looked Lunar ana 
upon as traceable, above all, to a want of the due recognition of 
this inherent difference of the two periods. It was from not 
being awake to it that our Fetichist ancestors, when arranging 
their calendar, had recourse to the external world for the two 
higher periods, guided by the apparent movements of the moon 
and sun. The first naturally was in the ascendant during the 
nomad period; that of the sun during astrolatry, properly so 
called, at which time the priesthood made a first attempt at its 
calculation. But the numerical discrepancy between the two 
movements soon became evident, and compelled the abandon- 
ment of an objective agreement, and the acquiescence in a 
subjective connection. Such a connection might assume one 
or other of two forms, each excluding the other, according as 
one or other period became artificial, though the lunar period 
was never artificial enough. Hence the two forms of the 
calendar, the lunar and the solar ; in which at one time the year 
is made to depend on the month, at another the month on the 
year. Whichever form was adopted, the ground of connection 
was always essentially the worship, and the worship, since the 
period of astrolatry, was indissolubly connected with the week. 

It is on the same ground that Positivism rests its definitive Positivism 
arrangement, by at once ratifying the unanimous preference of sola? year! 
the western world for the solar calendar, as the direct combina- 

118 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. "THE FUTUEE 0^ MAN. 

tion of the two simultaneous movements of the Earth. Theo- 
cracy laid the basis of their general agreement by its institution 
of mean time ; an arrangement completed, during the "Western 
transition, by the intercalation of leap year, first by Julius 
Csesar, subsequently by Gregory XI. The Positive religion 
adopts without hesitation this slight alteration of the two 
natural periods, and its consequence, their perfect agreement ; 
and devotes it to the evidencing the fundamental subor- 
dination of the subjective to the objective, a subordination 
which is the basis of the whole belief of mankind in its final 
form. In the solar year thus constituted by the Western 
world, the festivals of Humanity recur with the recurrence of 
the leading phenomena, the cosmological in the first place, and 
then the biological phenomena, characteristic of the planetary- 
milieu which Humanity respects whilst she improves it. Our 
various ancestors having thus coordinated the two natural 
periods, the day and the year, it remains for us to perfect the 
calendar as an institution by bringing into satisfactory agree- 
ment the two periods of man's creation which connect them. 
DiTision of ' AH relation to the moon being set aside, and the month 
into^tMrteen becoming as subjective as the week, we soon come to see that 
four weeks it is necossary to make the month invariably four weeks 
efgMdays. exactly, which leads to the division of the year into thirteen 
months. The complementary day with which, on this system, 
each year ends, will have no weekly or monthly designation, 
any more than will the additional day which follows it in leap 
years. Their names will be derived solely from the festivals 
appointed for them, and in this way we secure the continuity 
of the Positivist calendar, all its months beginning with a 
Monday and ending with a Sunday. "We may add that it 
keeps the present beginning of the "V\'estern year, so placed as 
to represent a renovation, since with it the days begin to 
lengthen in the Northern or principal hemisphere of the Earth. 
Be they what they may, however, it is not the practical ad- 
vantages of this ultimate modification of the calendar, so much 
as the requirements of the worship, which will ensure its 
acceptance. 
Reasons for ' Private worship alone would justify the modification, in 
the change. Qj.^gj. j-q avoid the painful uncertainty to which our affectionate 
memories are often exposed from the existing discrepancy 
between the two artificial dates. Though domestic worship less 

Chap. II.] THE •WOESHIP, 119 

•^irgently demands the agreement of the two, it has its fitness 
here also, as by its help alone we can sufficiently recall the nine 
ceremonies always appointed for the Thursday. It is, however, 
^bove all, the whole system of public festivals which places 
beyond dispute the necessity of the leading innovation, the 
division, that is, of the year into thirteen months. 

No other number in fact can satisfy the several demands Apportion-, 

*' ment of the 

of the abstract cultus, in which we have to celebrate, first, the thirteen 

montlis. 

fundamental nature of the Great Being ; then the stages of itg 
necessarily gradual formation; lastly, its existence in the 
' normal state. From, the first point of view, the month with 
which the year opens must be devoted to the synthetical 
worship of Humanity, resting on the due subordination of its 
several nuclei to its sempiternal whole. But this direct com- 
memoration of the great public bond of unity requires, to com- 
plete it, the particular consecration of each of the private ties 
on which it rests. Now they are five in number : marriage ; 
the paternal ; filial ; fraternal ; and domestic relations ; ranked 
on the principle of decrease of intimacy and increase of gene- 
rality, each has one of the five succeeding months devoted to it; 
The statical portion of the worship thus fully allowed for, the 
dynamical pprtion takes three more months, devoted severally 
to the three grand phases of the preparation of the race 5 
Fetichist ; Polytheist ; and lastly Monotheist. On this statical 
and dynamical foundation, the four last months give ample 
scope for the direct adoration of the true providence in its 
yarious forms : moral ; intellectual ; material ; and general ; 
vested respectively in women, the priesthood, the patriciate, 
and the proletariate. Thus the thirteen months of the Posi- 
tivist year are found indispensable to Sociolatry, if it is ade- 
quately to idealise Sociology and Sociocracy. 

In the calendar of Humanity, in this its final form, two The Positive 
secondary questions for the present must remain imsettled. Axea.nor 
The first is that of the Positive era, for which we cannot in nlmBs at 
anywise adopt that introduced by the monotheistic transition. 
Islamic or Catholic. Naturally the Positive era must have 
reference to the triumph of the true religion, the date of which 
must be as yet uncertain. The second point is the impossibility 
pf adhering in our definitive systematisation of the calendar to « 

the present heterogeneous nomenclature of the months ; not to . _; 

speak; of the confusion resulting from the difference in this 

l20 SYSTEM OF POSITI-tE POLITY, THE FUTUEE OF MAN, 

Idealisation 
of the days 
ofthe week. 

Concrete 
nomencla- 
ture of the 
week, 

Abstract 

nomeucla- 

ture. 

tespect of the different calendars- Yet we cannot at the present 
day decide whether the new names will be taken from the 
subjects to which they are consecrated, or from the order of 
succession, the fortunate circumstance that the two grounds 
coincide leaving the question undecided. 

To complete this theory of the Positivist calendar, I must 
indicate the ultimate form of the idealisation of the several 
days of the week. In the first place, it is drawn from their 
existing names, which we ought carefully to retain, as they 
recall the whole education of the race, instituted as they were 
by Ffitichism, sanctioned by Polytheism, and adopted by Mono- 
theism. Their adaptation to this end is the more valuable, as 
it arises from their representing in succession the various 
heavenly bodies which are in real connection with man's planet, 
for all essential purposes independent of all the others. 

The agreement of Positivism with earlier systems on this 
point — ^its agreement, historically and dogmatically — in tho- 
rough conformity with the whole conception of the week as 
a subjective institution, is yet of too abstract a character not 
to require a concrete addition, such addition to be derived 
from the transition of the West from Theocracy to Sociocracy. 
The addition consists in this, that whilst we adhere to the 
actual names as precious, we consecrate the seven days of the 
week to the memory of the seven principal organs of that 
transition : Homer, Aristotle, Ceesar, St. Paul, Charlemagne, 
Dante, and Descartes. This series of names adequately repre- 
sents the whole of this capital evolution ; an evolution peculiarj 
it is true, to the West, but deserving to be had in familiar 
remembrance in all ages and countries as having been the 
indispensable condition of the final regeneration. The intro- 
duction of these names is a compensation for the inevitable 
imperfection of the abstract worship as regards the concrete 
commemoration of the past, the three months reserved for the 
past being insufficient for such commemoration. Their adop- 
tion vrill be the easier as it merely requires the definitive 
transfer to the days of the week of the highest monthly types of 
the provisional calendar, to be explained in the chapter which 
treats of the last period of the transition. 

Once more, the week admits of an abstract nomenclature, 
as we may dedicate the seven days to the seven fundamental 
sciences : Mathematics, Astronomy, Physics, Chemistry, Bio- 

CHiF. II.] THE- WOKSHII*, 121 

l^SJ' Sociology, and Morals^ This second method is not 
incompatible with the former ; is in harmony with the spirit of 
bur public worship ; and will familiarise us with the encyclo- 
paedic hierarchy and the relative conception of the world in 
which we live. It is a consequence of the concurrence of the 
two forms that the festival at the end of each week will be 
marked by its consecration at once to the highest science and 
to the immediate precursor of the final religion. 

Thus in the calendar of Humanity we have two artificial Groups o£ 
periods, in subordination the one to the other; the two 
occupying an intermediate position between two other periods 
of natural origin and brought into sufficient agreement ; the 
object of the whole system being to make the succession of 
time an expression of all the relations of man with his fellows 
or with the external world. As for groups of years, it is enough 
if we recall the systematic adoption, indicated in the last 
chapter, of the old relation between the century and the 
generation. When, in consequence of the duration of the 
Great Being, higher unities are required, it will be easy for the 
priesthood to form them. 

The theory of the calendar is a preliminary to our more Direct treat. 
direct examination of the public worship, such worship really Public wor- 
being the developement of the system of abstract adoration in ^ *' 
which the whole Positivist calendar issues. "Were it not for the 
fear of excess in the number of festivals, we might decompose 
Sociolatry to the extent of festivals for each day and yet leave 
unimpaired the homogeneity of the presentation. Eespecting 
the limits, however, imposed by the exigencies of daily life, we 
must here devote oiu: attention to the four festivals of each 
month, always fixed for the Sunday. 

Our descendants will begin the year with the most august The iPestiyai 
of all its solemnities, the festival in the immediate honour and those of 
of the Great Being, whose children and servants they will moath. 
acknowledge themselves. The nature of that Being, at once 
composite and subjective ; its existence based upon love ; its 
submission to an order which it improves ; all these conceptions 
will receive an artistic expression in this initial festival, on 
which 'all will dutifully renew their devotion of themselves 
to the work of regeneration. This synthetical inauguration, 
wherein care will be taken to pay fitting honour to the animal 
races which are man's auxiliaries, will have its full signification 

122 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAS. 

Festivals of 
the second 
month. 
Marriage^ 

drawn out by more special festivals, in commemoration of the 
different degrees or forms peculiar to human association, on the 
four Sundays of the first month. The first will glorify the, 
union of the race, built on the foundation of a demonstrable 
faith; the only faith that is in the full sense of the term 
religious, but which is the outcome of a preparation to which 
all the fictitious beliefs of Humanity have contributed. The 
second Sunday commemorates the largest form of partial as- 
sociations, a form which in the main has become a thing of 
the past, but of which a visible trace survives in the language 
common to several populations once subject to one government. 
On the third Sunday, the festival of the Country honours the 
political tie in its most perfect form, with a view to foster 
the feelings of affection between fellow-citizens which wiU then 
be deeply felt, as the nations will be reduced within moderate 
limits. Finally, on the last day of the month of Humanity, 
we pay homage to the primary form in which Families unite, 
the Township, the closest union of man for practical purposes, 
so happily expressed by the French word commune. 

During the second month, the month in which will be con- 
centrated the fifth sacrament. Marriage, the several forms of 
the conjugal union will receive honour. The first Simday will 
be devoted to Marriage in its complete form, showing how 
greatly the harmony of the married couple is confirmed and 
increased by their concert in the due discharge of the holy 
function vested in them as regards the child of Humanity. It 
is, however, the second festival of the month that will represent 
in its truest character the conjugal union, by its recognition of 
the superior perfection of chaste marriage ; where the union is 
the union of the heart only, procreation being formally 
reserved for those best qualified for it. We have in the last 
masterpiece of the great Corneille the anticipation of such an 
union ; and it will lose the anomalous character now attaching 
to it, when Positive education has told sufficiently on the two 
sexes, without waiting for the realisation of the hypothesis of 
the last chapter, by which propagation is limited to the 
woman.. The third Sunday will be devoted to a form of 
marriage which will be a rare exception ; the form in which 
imperfect agreement is all that is attainable, by virtue of a 
deficient parity, a disparity naturally of age rather than of 
^ank, never of wealth, as is evident, since dowries are abolished. 

Chap. II.]' THE WORSHIP, 123 

Closing the marriage month by a ceremony in special honour of 
the subjective union, consequent on the law of -widowhood, it 
•will be shown how indispensable is the perpetuity of the 
marriage bond to the sincere worship of the Great Being, a 
Being composed mainly of the dead. If incapable of living an 
ideal life in communion with the highest object of our love, we 
are by such incapacity disqualified for feeling, nay even for 
understanding, the past which has preceded us — the future 
which is to succeed us. 

One and the same explanation may here sufiBce for the Thetwid, 
three next months, as there is a natural agreement in regard fiftii months. 
to the relations to which they are respectively devoted : the KUai, and 
Parental, Filial, and Fraternal relations. I limit myself then Eeiations. 
to the analysis in detail of the first case, the most important 
and the most strongly marked of the three ; urging the reader 
to adapt to the fourth and fifth months the subdivisions of the 
third. On the first Sunday, we deal with the paternal relation 
in its complete and natural form, its only really normal form, 
the form in which the affection given to the son has its root in 
the tenderness felt for the mother, such an indirect origin 
being necessitated by the weakness of the paternal instinct in 
men. On the second Sunday, we honour the voluntary and yet 
complete tie formed by a judicious adoption, even where the 
person adopted is an adult perfectly unconnected with the 
family. The institution of adoption, emailating from Fetichism, 
was transformed by the Theocrats, but it is only Positivism to 
which it is fully suited ; Sociocracy will spread a deep sense of 
its value, without waiting for human procreation to become 
independent of the father. On the third Sunday, we celebrate 
the incomplete, yet voluntary paternity due to spiritual connec- 
tion; this too waits for its full developement in the system 
in which everyone will be for seven years under the guidance 
of one and the same priest of Humanity. The analogous 
temporal connection cannot be as complete ; still it deserves 
commemoration on the last Sunday of the month, when, under 
both its aspects, will be shown the value of a relation which 
wiU be more common and more permanent in the sociocratic 
regime, by virtue of a degree of liberty which was incompatible 
with the Theocracy. 

To the domestic relation, or that of master and servant, is The sixth 
•devoted the whole of the sixth month, and hereby the worshij) Domesticity. 

124 : SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUT0EE OF MAN. 

The follow- 
ing quarter 
oilers dy- 
namical 
festivals. 

Additional 
Thursday 
commemo- 
ratioQS. 

of Humanity will place in its true light this institution : an 
institution which, meant to perfect the family by binding it to 
society, could not be on its right footing whilst slavery per- 
sisted. Since the establishment of personal freedom it has 
been impossible, owing to the anarchy of the West, to estimate 
aright this indispensable link between man and man ; the 
great misconceiving it in their pride : the inferiors in their 
insubordination. But when all life is viewed as an honourable 
service, it will be but natural to respect the families which offer, 
as their best contribution to the conservation and advancement 
of Humanity, their voluntary services in aid of her individual 
interpreters or ministers. On the first Sunday of the sixth 
month, we shall honour domestic service in its permanent and 
complete form, in which it more particularly applies to patri- 
cians, but never on conditions incompatible with the indulgence 
of conjugal and maternal affection, and to be given only when 
an improvement in habits, feelings, and position shall forbid 
service where it is undeserved. Such a voluntary fusion of 
two families will often be so complete, that the priesthood, 
when proclaiming the glorification after death of one of the two, 
will give the other a share in its consecrated tomb — in order 
that both together may receive the homage of their respective 
descendants and even of their fellow-citizens. The peculiar 
services of clerks call forth less self-devotion, as is indicated by 
their separate dwellings, yet when permanent it is a relation to 
be commemorated on the second Sunday in this month ; the 
other two weeks of which will distinguish in like manner the 
temporary service of pages and apprentices. By its compre- 
hension of these last, Sociolatry will show the universal 
applicability of a position which has been, dating from the 
Middle Ages, connected with the training of the individual, 
even in the case of patricians, and has been at all times calcu- 
lated to develope, on both sides, the three social instincts. 

Thus, in the first six months, the public worship of Hu- 
manity expresses in an ideal form the fundamental nature of 
the Great Being under all its essential aspects; it devotes 
the three months which follow to the commemoration of the 
principal phases of its necessarily gradual evolution. The 
festivals, hitherto, statical in character, now become dynamical, 
but not therefore less abstract ; for were they otherwise, not to 
speak of the impairment of harmony in the system, so short a 

Chap, ir.] THE WOESHIP. 125 

period would not afiford scope for the adequate glorification of 
the past. Still, the better to fulfil this condition, it is desirable 
during these three months, as a preparation for the abstract 
ceremony of the Sunday, to fix a concrete one on the Thursday, 
in honour of the highest representative of the period under 
consideration. 

This commemoration as a whole would appear most appro- The com- 
priate to the opening period of our maturity, to recall it to the, as suitable 
sense of continuity which has been more and more falling into future as for 
abeyance, especially in the West since the advent of Monotheism. 
And yet the most distant future will never, nor in any place, 
cease to commemorate the indispensable initiation of the race, 
limited though it was in its later stages to the nations on which 
devolved the task of shaping the whole social economy. Not 
only will the training of the individual in all cases repeat the 
leading features of the preparation; but the hteart and the; 
intellect will agree in honouring the first life of the Grreat 
Being, the' perfectibility of its nature ever reminding us of a 
beginning which is a title to glory. 

No period of man's existence on earth but must find its Thishistori- 
place in the worship, and yet the historical division of that tSeouitiB 
worship will never receive any considerable addition; hence' noffrea™' 
even now we may give it its definitive form. For, the normal beingpossi- 
state once fully established, its onward movement, continuous- 
though gradual, will necessarily escape the marked changes of 
the preparatory period. The stronger the stimulus given by this 
dynamical period to' the instincts of progress, the more com- 
plete also must be its control of those instincts, by implanting, 
the conviction, that the anarchical advance of our educational, 
age suibsides, in the normal state, into the developement of 
order with the aim of consolidating it. 

The limits then of the historical portion of Sociolatry.are 
irremovably fixed, and I have now to explain in detjail its three 
constituents. , , , , 

The definitive fusion of the Fetichist in the Positive- spirits The seventh 

^. • month. 

does not supersede the necessity of an historical commemora- FeticMsm, 
tion of the infancy of Humanity. In fact, the absorption of 
Fetichism is limited to its principles, and does not extend to 
its institutions, which perished utterly with the state of things 
to which they were adapted. Eegarding Fetichism as sponta- 

126 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Spontaneous 
Feticliism. 

(1) ITomad. 

(2) Seden- 
tary. 

Systematic 
3?etiohism. 

(1) Sacer- 
dotal. 

neous Positivism in its earliest stage, the systematic worstip of 
Humanity devotes to it the whole of the seventh month. 

The nomad period was longer in duration than any other, 
and laid the main foundations of all human education ; this we 
must not forget ; yet as by the nature of the case the docu- 
ments relating to it are inadequate, we only give the first week 
to its distinct commemoration. The object of the Sunday's 
ceremonial will be, to produce a just sense of the benefits, 
transient or permanent, conferred on the race by this initial 
period ; a period with which we shall always feel a sympathy, 
as recalling our natural fondness for the wandering life of the 
hunter and the shepherd. The Sunday, however, were incom- 
plete without the preparatory festival on the Thursday, devoted 
to the capital fact of man's alliance with the sociable animals, 
special honour being paid to the association, in succession, of 
the dog, the horse, and the ox — the three types round which 
the rest may be grouped. 

During the second week, we commemorate the irrevocable 
adoption of the sedentary state, the state, that is, which was 
indispensably requisite as the condition of all ulterior advance, 
intellectual and even moral advance, quite as much as material. 
The ceremony of the Thursday is a special homage to Fire, the 
institution on which depended primarily our progress in all three 
respects ; language perpetuates the memory of its introduction 
by borrowing from it the words which in ordinary use are cha- " 
racteristic of existence and religion. Foyer and Fete. Then on 
the Sunday, agricultural life, the common basis of industry and 
of commerce, has its ideal presentation, greatest stress being 
laid on the charm of its earliest spontaneous beginnings, its 
poetical and moral attraction, where the milieu was favourable 
to a prolongation of the Fetichist state. 

The second half of the month must be given to systematic 
Fetichism, of which Astrolatry is the characteristic, and the 
origin of which is in the sedentary life, for that gave rise to- 
the priesthood as a developement of the earlier institution, the 
elders. Though this period was naturally less durable than 
its predecessor, its commemoration deserves an equal space, 
owing to its being the indispensable source of Theologism, 
under the military form as well as under the sacerdotal. When 
it glorifies the results of Astrolatry, Sociolatry will not fail freely 
to express the lasting regret due to the violent extinction of the 

Chap. II.] TH-E "WOESHIP. ■I2i7 

great, if primitive, astrolatrical societies in Malayia and 
America. The third Thursday of the month of Fetichism 
will prepare the way for the commemoration of its systematic 
form by a festival in memory of the worship of the sun, such a The sun. 
festival as may appeal to the heart in favour of the deep rea- 
sonableness of that worship, purely instinctive though it was. 
So prepared, the ceremony of the Sunday will be the abstract 
glorification of the astrolatrical state, the true source of the 
polytheistic Theocracy; which lasted even throughout Mono- 
theism, down to the rise of the doctrine of the earth's move- 
ment, the immediate basis of Positivism. This first historical (2) Military. 
month closes with the commemoration of military Astrolatry, 
which, when it found a milieu suitable to it, was the preliminary 
of the system of conquest peculiar to Polytheism. On the iron. 
Thursday previous to its commemoration, a special festival is 
allotted to the introduction of iron, the large use of which was 
originally for military purposes, but which was ultimately des- 
tined to play the leading part in our industrial progress. 

All the main aspects of its preparatory period thus re- The eighth 
cognised, the way is clear for the commemoration of the second 
childhood of the race, the period of Polytheism and War ; ,;> ,j.^^^_ 
and to this the eighth month is devoted; setting apart the '"^°^' 
fi.rst Sunday for the veneration of Theocracy, to which we 
ascribe the most decisive influence in our initiation. The pre- 
ceding Thursday commemorates more particularly the institu- 
tion of Caste, the general basis of the theocratic system, and caste. 
destined, notwithstanding constant modifications, to be the 
essential guarantee of order until the advent of the definitive 
Sociocracy. The caste system will be an object of just sym- 
pathy with our most remote posterity, a sympathy finding vent 
in the recognition of the affinities due to similarity of profes- 
sion, though no longer needing the corroboration of hereditary 
transmission. 

Its due honour paid to conservative Polytheism, in the ^u^i^p*f"*°: 
second week, we begin, on the Thursday, the commemoration ti^^ism- 
of intellectual Polytheism, with the festival of its three highest 
artistic organs : Homer, ^schylus, and Phidias. From this ["I -^s*''^- 
introduction we pass, on the Sunday, to the abstract glorifica- 
tion of its whole poetic movement, which, breaking the yoke of 
Theocracy, then become retrograde, worthily inaugurated the 
Western transition, not without a presentiment, even at that 
period, of Sociocracy. As a preparation for the celebration of $1 ^°'™*' 

'128 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF' MAN, 

(Ui) Social 
or Military 
Polytheism. 

The ninth 
month. 

(i) Theocra- 
tic or Ju- 
daic. 

fii) Catho- 
lic 

the, strictly intellectual advance,' the following Thursday is the 
festival of its seven principal representatives ; first its philoso- 
phical types : Thales, Pythagoras, and Aristotle ; then its 
scientific: Hippocrates, Archimedes, ApoUonius, Hipparchus, 
The Sunday will then suffice for our abstract idealisation of the 
intellectual construction, which, though provisional or intro- 
ductory, was yet in the strictest sense decisive ; for the genius 
of the West made it the inauguration of the systematic scien- 
tific creation, needed as the preamble of the Religion of Hu- 
manity. But on the morrow, we must place an extraordinary 
festival in honour of the battle of Salamis, and Themistocles as 
its personal representative, with Alexander to complete the con- 
ception ; thus satisfying the full claims of intellectual Polytheism 
by celebrating the struggle which it could not avoid, and pre- 
paring the way for the glorification pf social Polytheism. We 
enter on this, the following Thursday, with the festival of the 
three great types of the military society : Scipio, Caesar, and 
Trajan, worthy to be the precursors of Sociocracy by virtue of 
the high value they set upon peace. This enables us to con- 
sider the last Sunday as sufficient for the abstract commemora- 
tion of the Eoman system of incorporation, the system under 
which the noblest of our ancestors prepared the way for the 
direct introduction of the normal order, by their preference of 
action to speculation, of public to private life. 

The proper object of the ninth month is the glorification of 
the adolescence of Humanity ; . yet it must begin by honouring 
the peculiar form of Monotheism >vhich arose as an offshoot of 
the true Theocracy ; and that because in the East no less than 
in the West it has been intimately connected with Monotheism 
in its typical form. As a preliminary to its idealisatioUj the 
first Thursday is a festival in honour of its highest types : 
Abraham, Moses, and Solomon, the only personal representa- 
tives of the theocratic state in the imperfect presentation of it 
couseqtient on the monotheistic alloy ; for their noble abnega- 
tion of self allows no pure theocratic types. On the following 
Sunday, the worshippers of the Great Being will, to the end of 
time, recognise with sympathy the services of the devoted Jews, 
not unprepared, as a natural result of their dispersion, for the 
acceptance of the religion of Humanity, as alone able to 
honour and raise their race, by making reparation for the stigmas 
fixed on it by ingratitude. 

For the adequate idealisation of Monotheism in its defen- 

Chap. II.] THE "WORSHIP. 129 

sive period, the entire second week is not more than is re- 
quired, the six days of concrete festivals being allotted to its 
highest individual organs : St. Paul, Charlemagne, Alfred, 
Hildebrand, Godfrey, and lastly St. Bernard, its most perfect 
type. This last festival leads, on the morrow, to an exceptional 
one, embodying in an individual type the systematic glorifica-. 
tion of the Middle Ages, without detriment to its abstract cha- 
racter, by concentrating it on the gentle worship which was the The virgin, 
condensed expression of Catholicism and Chivalry, Accustomed, 
as a result of their whole education, to venerate the Virgin as 
the spontaneous emblem of Humanity, the servants of Humanity 
will, by this concentration, be enabled to feel more deeply the 
emotional period of the Western transition. 

The indispensable preparation of the universal Eeligion, if &i) Mo- 
honoured duly, requires that the following week be set apart 
for a fitting commemoration of Islamic Monotheism, the only 
possible precursor of Positivism in the East. The Thursday 
therefore is the festival of Mohammed, the incomparable 
founder of Islam ; who felt, in a higher degree than all other 
reformers, the provisional character and the limited adaptation 
of the religious construction by which he trained noble nations 
for the final state. For the Sunday is appointed the abstract 
commemoration of Islam ; the setting forth the intellectual and 
moral benefits inherent in the monotheistic fusion of the tem- 
poral and spiritual powers ; benefits not lost by the temporary 
delay that fusion at first enforced upon the Orientals. To com- 
plete the picture of the filiation, an extraordinary festival on the 
Monday commemorates the battle of Lepanto, the last glorious 
efifort of the military instinct, the true complement of Salamis. 
When the descendants of the Mussulmans and the descendants Lepaato. 
of the Catholics shall be united by the Positive religion, it is 
the Mussulman, rather than the Catholic, that will attach most 
value to the day which marked the close of his military career 
and inaugurated his industrial existence. 

Finally, the last week of the three months devoted to history (iv) Meta- 
,must commemorate the Western revolution in its entirety : the 
period, that is, in which political anarchy contributed to the 
elaboration, in both the spiritual and temporal order, of the 
immediate elements of the definitive system. To admit of a 
satisfactory abstract idealisation, on the Sunday, of the move- 
ment, as at once organic and critical, the first requisite is, that 

VOL. IV. K 

physical. 

130 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

The thirby- 
tliree festi- 
vals of the 
historical 
months. 

The combi- 
nation of 
?6tichism 
aad Posi- 

olYism. 

the Thursday be devoted to the most complete representative of 
that movement, the incomparable Frederic. But this capital 
commemoration, in which we have a foreshadowing of the great 
crisis, must be preceded by the glorification in succession of the 
two types of the intellectual movement of modern times, Dante 
and Descartes. 

Such is the ideal presentation in Sociolatry, as each year 
returns, of the whole initiation of the race, in a combined 
series of twenty-one concrete, and twelve abstract, festivals, 
dming the three historical months. The vast picture, the 
artistic expression of the third volume of this work, will be at 
all times quite within the comprehension of all who have duly 
undergone the encyclopedic instruction, and listened conse- 
quently to the exposition of the philosophy of history. The 
inevitable inequality of the division of the thirty-three dy- 
namical festivals between the several phases of the past on 
which we rest, is no element of discordance, where the con- 
spectus is one in which the room given to each phase depends 
not on the length of its duration, but on the amount of 
movement. Thus, although the glorification of the theocratic 
period is limited to two festivals, the very condensation is a 
new homage to the profound stability of the only complete 
order attainable during the whole earlier life of the race. So, 
too, when we limit to two festivals the idealisation of Eome, 
we do but give relief to the admirable homogeneity which is 
stamped on the most decisive of the three phases of the "Western 
transition. Prior to the universal adoption of the Positive 
worship and the Positive education, the system of festivals here 
given will be sufficient to make ready for the Religion of Hu- 
manity all who assist at them, as weU as the young children 
of true believers. Nay, its power in this respect will naturally 
manifest itself so soon as Sociolatry shall be inaugurated in 
Paris, for thither as to the world's capital will come from all 
parts all who thirst after religious culture, so to secure expansion, 
deliberately, for their instinct of continuity. 

Examine the conspectus, and we find the definitive com- 
bination of Fetichism and Positivism solemnly ratified. For 
the infancy of mankind has as many festivals as the whole of 
its childhood, though Fetichism could leave no individual 
name connected with it. Its concrete festivals have a cha- 
racter, from the dogmatical not less than the historical point 

Chap. II.] THE -WOESHIP. 131 

of view, adapted to show how entirely the primeval adoration 
of the external world was in instinctive conformity with the 
ultimate tendencies of Humanity. 

I have now to explain in what way the public worship, ^^'^^on^iig 
having honoured the fundamental nature of the Great Being, 
and exalted its indispensable initiation, idealises its providence 
in its normal form during the last third of the Positivist year. 
As in the first half, so here again, all the festivals, even the 
subordinate ones, have in the main a statical character, the 
dynamical being limited to the intermediate three months. 
Throughout the whole, however, there is an element of his- 
torical feeling mingling with the dogmatic idealisation, so as 
never to leave us without a sense of the series of preparatory 
efforts required for the establishment of each social bond, and 
for the continuous advance towards perfection of each function 
of society. 

The tenth month exalts the moral providence of the Great Thetentii 

^ month. 

Being;, naturally entrusted to the affective sex. In this month women, the 

o' ■' moral Provi- 

all the conceptions imparted by our education as to the para^ <5™<==- 
mount impiirtance of feeling find their legitimate ideal ex- 
pression. At the same time, the public worship gives a direct 
sanction to the system of private worship, which supplies its 
indispensable basis. For each true believer can in the public 
worship make special application to the divinities of his home 
of the abstract and general worship of woman, in her fourfold 
capacity of mother, wife, daughter, and sister, as honoured in 
succession on the four Sundays of this month. No subsidiary 
festival is required ; so rational is the worship, that it is suflB.- 
cient to revive in the minds of all a deep sense of the ever- 
increasing benefits due to the sex; in which affection pre- 
dominates, and of the unremitting duties which this estimate 
imposes upon man. The function of women is fortunately so 
homogeneous, that every true woman will be sufficiently 
honoured by the honour paid to her sex collectively, whilst to 
men are left the persona) distinctions required by their moral 
imperfection. Still, there will be no objection, the normal 
state once fully established, to the clergy devoting the Thursdays 
of this month to types of women of acknowledged eminence, . 
not merely of local, but even of universal eminence, and that 
without having recourse to the exceptional cases originating in 
public life. 

132 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTTJEE OP MAN. 

The eleventh 
month. 
Tho Priest- 
hood. The 
iutellectiial 
Providence, 
(i) Incom- 
plete. 

(ii) Prepa- 
ratory. 
The Aspir- 
ant. 

Festivals of 
Art and 
Science. 

(iii) Delijii- 
tive. 

(a) Second- 
ary. The 
Vicar. 

(6) The 
Priest. 

The twelfth 
month. 
The Patri- 
ciate. The 
Material 
Providence, 
(i) Bank. 

In the eleventh month, set apart for the intellectual Provi- 
dence of Humanity, we begin its glorification from the lowest 
stage ; we begin, that is, by honouring it in its incomplete 
form, as it is seen in the man of science or the artist, dis- 
qualified for the priesthood by their deficiency in tenderness 
or energy. Such cases, hitherto the rule, will become, it is 
true, in Sociocracy as exceptional, or even more exceptional, 
than under the Theocracy ; still, at all times they will be fre- 
quent enough to deserve a separate consecration, one honouring 
them, but marking at the same time their imperfection. This 
homage to the pensioners of the priesthood is paid on the first 
Sunday ; on the second, a public recognition will do honour to 
the preparatory degree, by which the theorician, whose sacer- 
dotal vocation has been recognised, aspires to membership in 
the Positive clergy. 

"With regard to these two preliminary modes, it will he 
well, as a compensation for the discredit attaching to their 
imperfection, to institute on the two first Thursdays in the 
month two accessory festivals, one in honour of art, the second 
in honour of science. 

The third week introduces us to the priesthood in its 
definitive form, when we honour its secondary degree, the 
Vicariate, in which the clerk shares in the intellectual func- 
tions— teaching and preaching — but is not admitted as yet to 
the social functions of consecration or consultation. Vicars 
are, as such, irrevocably members of the priesthood; but there 
is an indistinctness of character attaching to them, which 
makes any additional festival unnecessary, allowing for indi- 
vidual distinctions possibly called for by the developement of 
the universal religion. So ushered in, the direct glorification 
of the full Priesthood occupies the last Sunday of the month, 
the inherent homogeneity of the priestly functions rendering 
unnecessary any distinctions between the priests, even as re- 
gards the High Priesthood. Only on the preceding Thursday, 
there should be a festival in special honour of Old Men, the 
natural precursors, and ultimately the regular assistants of the 
priesthood. 

During the twelfth month in the Sociolatrical system, we 
honour the Patriciate in its four general divisions as the organ 
of the material providence of Humanity. These festivals, as 
a whole, ought to give artistic expression to the feelings of 

Chap. II.] THE "WOESHIP. 133 

veneration and of devotion, of veneration in the inferiors, (ii) com. 
devotion in the superiors ; the feelings cultivated in each re- (lii) Manu- 
spectively by education and by action. The constituents of (iv)"!^-!- 
the temporal power are ranked on the principle of decreasing " ™ ' 
generality, and increasing independence ; and the worship will 
assert the higher dignity of the banking element, which, as the 
great condenser of wealth, is at once less easy to understand aright, 
and more exposed to envy. With the exception of this highest 
Patriciate, from which is drawn the governing Triumvirate, 
each of the three essential classes, by virtue of the difference 
of their functions, admits of distinctions which would seem to 
justify subordinate festivals in numbers sufficient to occupy all 
the days of each week. But not to mention the industrial 
inconveniences of such increase, it would not be without moral 
danger, as giving scope for rivalries amongst the superiors, 
an evil ever at the door ; and as occasioning amongst the 
inferiors contentions at variance with the homogeneous cha- - 
racter of the proletariate. The additional festivals apparently 
required for the due honour of commerce, manufactures, and, 
above all, of agriculture, may find satisfactory substitutes 
in the solemn processions which will close the weekly cere- 
monies. When some considerable time has elapsed after the 
establishment of the normal state, the Thursdays may be set 
apart for the public commemoration of the types which deserve 
an individual honour, such distinction being most commonly 
national, now and then, however, recognised throughout the 
world. 

There is, however, a distinct festival required, if we study the ^^^^^^J^ ^j 
patrician month as awhole ; afestivalin honour of the protectorate p^j™™^'J- 
voluntarily assumed by the nobler industrial chiefs, under a tte Knights. 
special vow, either at the opening of their industrial career or 
after its close. As their prototypes the Knights of military 
chivalry, these Knights of industrial chivalry have for their func- 
tion the prevention or the remedying of the oppression to which 
poverty is always exposed in women, priests, and proletaries, and 
they collectively deserve honour, an honour quite unconnected 
with their industrial capacity. Fixed for the first Thursday of the 
month, the festival of the Knights is an assertion of the general 
obligation on the strong to devote themselves to the service of 
the weak, and the more special tendency inherent in the highest 
class of patricians to recognise this as the legitimate function 

134 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE EUTUEE OF MAN. 

The thir- 

teenth 

month. 

The Prole- 

tariats. 

The general 

Providence. 

(i) Complete 
form or 
active Prole- 
tariate, 

festival of 
Inventors. 

of great wealth, a function which cannot but render its con- 
centration more easy to justify. 

The final step in the ideal presentation of the general 
Sociocratic constitution is the devoting the last month of the 
Positivist year to the honour of the Proletariate, the body in 
which we see, by the necessity of the case, the homogeneous 
and complementary organ of Human providence. Its natural 
tendency to exercise a constant control over the more special 
powers will be so drawn out by the identity of education, that 
varieties of industrial employment, a consideration of minor 
importance yet to be taken into account, will never be able to 
impair its unity. The distinction between the four festivals 
of the month depends not on difference of occupations, but on 
the mode or degree in which the character of the class is 
represented. 

Hence the first Sunday honours the Proletariate in its 
complete form, the form in which industrial activity is found 
in natural conjunction, not merely with the moral developement 
of the citizen or the head of the family, but with the culture 
of the intellect, — its scientific, and even its esthetic culture. 
This, the leading ceremony of the month, to stand in its true 
light, requires, on the preceding Thursday, an introductory 
festival in honour of Discoverers and Inventors in general; 
Grutenberg, Columbus, Vaucanson, Watt, and Montgolfier, 
being taken as special types — types sufficiently diversified to 
represent the class. In taking them all from the first stage 
of existence of the Great Being, we imply that the second 
stage admits of no such personal distinctions. This second 
life has to regulate — this is its great task — the powers which 
the first threw up ; and therefore it is the social function 
of the Proletariate, rather than its industrial service, to which 
attention must be given ; not but that there will be a continuous 
advance in this latter, though less and less importance will 
attach to such advance. The aspirations of the proletaries 
after personal distinction will ' for the most part have their 
source in public life, depending on their right interference as 
indispensable auxiliaries and legitimate controllers of the two 
special powers. The preparatory festival must however make 
it clear that it is as proletaries that the discoverers are honoured, 
even when they seem to be of the Patriciate. It is indeed of 
real importance that when in the worship we give the regime 

Chap. II.] THE WOESHIP. 135 

its ideal expression, we make administrative capacity the 
characteristic of the patricians, whilst we represent industrial 
discoveries as reserved for the plebeians, recognising at the 
same time the diminishing importance in the regime of such 
discoveries. 

To complete the public commemoration of the Proletariate (U) The at- 

■ fecfcive Pro- 

in its completest form, the second Sunday of the popular letariate. 
month must be set apart for the honour of the proletary 
women. In Positive society all women will become strictly 
proletaries, as voluntarily renouncing all inheritance ; still the 
holy uniformity of their great fundamental function will leave 
room for the modifications due to position. Again, notwith- 
standing the identity of education, so adapted is the situation 
of the Proletariate to develope the leading attributes of women 
as to call for this special festival which, at a later period, may 
be prefaced by a commemoration of individual types. 

On the third Sunday, we enter on the commemoration of (m) The 

•^ contempla- 

, the Proletariate in its less complete form, as we then honour tiveProie- 
the dutiful acceptance of their existence as plebeians by those 
members of the class in whom the industrial function suffers 
from tendencies to intellectual action which find but imperfect 
scope. It is true that the Priesthood even more than the 
Patriciate must be recruited mainly from the Proletariate, still 
its necessarily limited numbers will not allow, in the majority 
of cases, full satisfaction of the aspirations aroused by the edu- 
cation. Whilst kept in due subordination to practical duties, 
such aspirations give rise in the body of the people to an 
unfortunate but honourable class, a class which, over and above 
the honour paid to it collectively, may admit of personal dis- 
tinctions, by contributing to perfect the social action of the 
Proletariate. 

Carry out to the full the above case, and we are led to end (iv) The 
the thirteenth month by honouring the life of the proletary letariate. 
when it takes an essentially passive character. This modifica- 
tion may be due either to the predominance in excess of 
intellectual aspirations, or to a situation adverse to the 
developement of the particular talent of the individual. On 
the one or the other ground equally, Mendicity, even when it is Mendicity. 
the life of the individual, deserves a distinct . festival in a 
worship which claims to idealise all actual forms of life, and 
which therefore may not neglect an inevitable result of the 

136 SYSTEM 0F POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

Walter 
Scott. 

Tbe Thurs- 
day before. 
St. Francis 
of Assisi. 

. Festival of 
All tbe Dead. 

sum of imperfections to which Humanity is liable. In the 
Middle Ages, Mendicity received its due tribute of honour, for 
the Priesthood, in its wisdom, knew how to ratify the instinctive 
verdict of mankind ; a fortiori must it receive it in Sociolatry, 
as a more sympathetic and more truly synthetical system. The 
anarchical repugnance to accept this conclusion shown by meta- 
physical empiricism, is but an evidence of an erroneous estimate 
of the social function of the Proletariate. Separate the function 
of the citizen from that of the artisan, and we shall at once 
feel that, in spite of their coexistence as a rule, the first may 
deserve honour when the second is entirely in abeyance. Nay, 
we may consider this festival as already initiated by the 
admirable idealisation which is the salient feature in one of the 
numerous masterpieces of the greatest poetical genius of this 
exceptional century. 

Nor are we limited to this anticipation of a poet's instinct, 
the more conclusive, it must be allowed, as originating in a 
milieu of industrial egoism and Protestantism, for the past 
offers us a direct and collective type of Mendicity in the 
remarkable institution of the Mendicant orders. The admirable 
founder of that institution must have a special glorification, on 
the Thursday before the abstract commemoration of the passive 
element of the Proletariate — the complementary element of 
which he will ever be the patron Saint, as the characteristic 
representative, under the form adapted to the thirteenth century, 
of its social action. From the historical point of view, this 
festival gives us indirectly an opportunity of honouring as it 
deserves— and it is the only one which throughout was honour- 
able — the effort to arrest the irrevocable decay of Cathoh- 
cism, an effort however destined, such were the conditions, to 
failure. 

The Positivist year ends with consecrating its comple- 
mentary day to all the dead, the rulers of the living with an 
indispensable and inevitable sway. This concluding festival 
recalls the similar institution of Catholicism, and in doing so 
evidences the superiority of the Positivist systematisation as 
alone able to make the commemoration completely universal in 
its comprehension. Connected by feeling with the ceremony of 
the eve, it forms a natural introduction to the festival beyond 
compare, which on the morrow must open the new year by the 
direct idealisation of the love of Humanity. 

Worship. 

Chap. II.] THE WORSHIP. 137 

Finally, the system of Sociolatry fills up its last void, by F^fi^ro^' 
placing at the end of each bissextile year a festival in honour ^eif^°" 
collectively of the women who have as individuals attained 
holiness. The affective sex, it is true, neither allows nor 
requires individual distinctions, save such as arise from its 
efficient discharge of its domestic duty, yet the tendency of the 
encyclopaedic education is to increase the number of exceptions 
even in the sphere of action, still more in that of thought. 
There would be incompleteness, then, in the public worship of 
Humanity, did it not remind us, by a supplementary festival 
every four years, of her highest representatives, some of whom 
will attain an individual glorification. 

Such are the eighty-one solemn festivals, secondary or The eighty- 
principal, which constitute the worship annually paid to the vais. Their 
Great Being by its servants assembled in its temples. Well the private 
calculated to compensate th^ effort of abstraction required in 
the direct worship of Humanity, such public assemblies cannot 
but increase the moral effect of the worship by kindling the 
natural sympathies of the worshippers, each looking on the body 
of his fellow-worshippers as representing the supreme existence. 
The influence, however, of such collective worship would be but 
weak, appealing rather to our sense of beauty than to our 
affections, were there not the habit of solitary private prayer. 
Not to dwell on the fact that the personal worship is by its natiure 
the basis of the two others, it alone is in the fullest sense free — 
a circumstance which must largely increase its natural power. 
Although the Priesthood may dissuade the Patriciate from 
compelling, in any degree, attendance on religious worship, it 
cannot prevent public opinion from blaming those who abstain 
from the social sacraments or the public festivals. "We must 
not then, in the splendour of these last, lose the sense of the 
superior value of daily prayer, in which each believer becomes 
his own priest, and labours in freedom for his own moral 
improvement, through the veneration he pays in secret to the 
representatives of the Great Being within his family circle. 
Conversely, however, we must not lose sight of the fact, that it is 
only by regular participation in the collective services that we 
can secure our private worship against a danger to which dt is 
exposed, of evoking tendencies to mysticism, and even selfishness, 
tendencies which would direct to the part the worship due to 
the whole. 

138 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

To facilitate the comprehension of the general arrangement 
of the public worship, I have given it in a summary form in the 
subjoined table (Table A), -where the words in italics and in 
parentheses indicate the subordinate festivals. This series of 
solemnities honouring every aspect of human life, cannot but 
have a powerful attraction for minds capable of grasping the 
conception in its fullness. The test, however, of their having 
had a deep moral effect, will be if each leaves on those who 
have assisted at it a feeling of regret that a year must pass 
before it returns, rather than a desire for the next in order, 
from a craving for fresh artistic emotions, 
ttfe^rtistic'^ In completion of the exposition of Sociolatry two subsidiary 
adjuncts. explanations must be placed here; their earlier introduction 
would have been an interruption. The iirst concerns the 
edifices devoted to the Positive worship ; the second the artistic 
aids it requires. 
of'Hraian-^^ In the ' Grcneral View,' the symbolical representation of 
'*y- Humanity by sculpture and by painting is adequately set 

forth. Its architectural expression it is not possible at present 
to determine with equal clearness, be it because of the slower 
growth of the architectural conceptions proper, or that they 
depend on a much larger cooperation for their execution. 
Positivism is so real, and the times are so ripe for it, that 
suitable temples will rise more quickly than did the churches 
of Catholicism, for Catholicism was in open opposition with the 
world it came to modify. Still at the outset, the worship of 
Humanity in the West must be carried on in the buildings 
consecrated to the public worship of her immediate predecessor. 
They will be more easily adapted to Sociolatry than the 
temples of Polytheism could be to Monotheism. For the 
instruction and preaching introduced by Monotheism required 
a different form of building from that which sufficed for the 
earlier ceremonies, which were mainly in the open air. Posi- 
tivism, then, need not introduce such sweeping changes in 
religious architecture as Catliolicism was obliged to do ; still its 
festivals, from their referring to the external world as well as to 
the world of man, will require alterations not to be specified at 
present. 
Situation o£ Yet ouc TDoiut I mav even now determine, the regular posi- 

tion, viz., of the Positivist temple — nay, even the general 
features of its internal arrangements — both the one and the 

the Temples. 

Chap. II.] THE WORSHIP. 139 

other being implied in the nature and object of the worship of 
Humanity. As it is the dead who deserve to live that ai'e the 
chief constituents of the Great Being, so its public worship 
must be performed in the midst of the tombs of the more 
eminent dead, each tomb surrounded by a consecrated grove, 
the scene of the homage paid by their family and their fellow- 
citizens. In the second place, the universal religion will adopt 
and extend one of the best inspifetions of Islam ; it will direct 
the long axis of the temple and the sacred wood towards the 
metropolis of the race, which, as the result of the whole past, is, 
for a long time, fixed at Paris. This touching convergence, a 
convergence which the Kebla of the Mussulman applies to all 
the attitudes of worship and to the body after death, will 
naturally be similarly extended in the only worship which 
admits of entire unanimity. Later in origin and more social in 
character than the faith of the West, the Eastern faith was 
naturally a better manifestation of the direct aspirations after 
true universality. 

As for the internal arrangement of the temples of Posi- Jh^Tem°fs 
tivism, two directions only can be given at present. In the first 
place, the choir, where stands the pulpit with the statue of 
Humanity over it, must be able to hold a seventh of the 
audience, in order that the interpreter of the Great Being may 
be surrounded by the eminent women who are its best repre- 
sentatives. Secondly, each of the seven side chapels will 
contain the bust of one of the thirteen principal organs of the 
education of the race, in the midst of the busts of his four 
greatest subordinates, the fourteenth chapel being reserved for 
the group of representative women. 

The foregoing exposition shows the boundless field opened by Artistic 
the Positive worship to art, not merely to the fundamental art, 
poetiy, but to the subsidiary arts of sound and form. So 
extensive is the field, that at first sight it would seem to require 
a special class ; the objection is, that such a class, however 
subordinate, would trench on the dignity of the Priesthood, 
and might compromise its unity. But if we emancipate 
ourselves from the peculiar habits of the "West, we shall be led 
to acknowledge that all the needs of Sociolatry may be met, 
without devoting any one to the exclusive and constant 
exercise of the faculties of expression ; for when made para- 
moimt they are no less degrading to the individual than 

140 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN, 

The chapter 
justifies the 
postpone- 
ment of the 
doctrine. 

But the 
■worship 
must be 
supported by 
the doctrine 
and regime. 

pernicious to society. For the Priesthood may produce all the 
compositions, poetical, musical, or even plastic, required for the 
worship, by granting partial and temporary dispensations to 
the priests qualified for the particular work required, just as 
in the case of scientific labours. As for the social execution of 
the dramatic or musical portions of the public festivals, the 
completeness in point of art of the common education will so 
qualify every believer to take his part in it, that the concert of 
all the worshippers will ensure an effectual expression of the 
emotions beyond what was attainable in the Middle Ages. 

This chapter, viewed as a whole, ratifies, as a natural result, 
the systematic anticipations of the introduction as to the 
definitive arrangement of the three constituent parts of Positive 
religion. We can now see that the preeminence of the worship 
over the doctrine is completely in conformity with the nature 
of Positivism, and secures its attainment of its objects. 
Throughout the exposition here ended, there has been no want 
felt of the analytical order which we must adopt in the next 
chapter, in examining the doctrinal basis of the system, the 
synthetic conception of which sufSces in Sociolatry. 

"Were it not that Humanity is so situated, physically, as to 
require the constant exertion of intelligence and activity, the 
direct cultivation, in the worship, of our altruistic instincts 
would enable them to triumph over the egoistic, in spite of 
the greater inherent strength of the latter. But the worship 
which was enough, while the second stage of human existence 
had not as yet called into activity our intellectual and practical 
powers, needs in our maturer period the aid of the doctrine and 
regime, to protect our moral nature against the disturbing 
influences attendant on our advance in thought and action. 
Hence the necessity that now lies upon me to explain how, on 
the basis of the ideal presented by Sociolatry, sociological 
thought and sociocratic action ultimately harmonise, in the 
service of our moral advance, these irremovable conditions, by 
stamping a collective character on an evolution which in its 
earliest stages was individual. 

■J-'-A-t^J-lJU -A.. 

CONSPECTUS OF SOCIOLATEY, 

OK 

SOCIAL WOESHIP. 

Love as the Principle ; Order fis the Basis ; I Live for Others. (The Eamily, Country, 
Progress as the End. | Humanity.) 

Embracing in a series of Eighty-one Annual Festivals the "Worship of Humanity under 

all its aspects. 

("ni-w Tpar'<! Dav i Synthetical Festival oJ 
, JXew x ear s JJay ^ ^^^ ^^j, -g^^^g_ 

^'hUMAOTTY -^Weekly Festivals 

[_ Union 

["complete. 
2nd Month, — J chaste. 

MAEBIAGE 1 unequal. 

\ subjective. 

religious, 
historical, 
national, 
municipal. 

3rd Month.— 

The PATERNAL RELA- 
TION 

4th Month.— 

complete 

incomplete 

The FILIAL EELATION { ^"'"^ ^^^^"^■«'''«'- 
5tli Month.— f 

Thf! FRATEKNAL RELA- ] Same subdivisions, 
TION i 

f natural. 
' t artificial. 

f spiritnal. 
' t temporal. 

6tli Month.— ( «p-™anent 

THE RELA TION OF MAS- \ P-^^^anent 
TEJl AND SERVANT. 

flth Month.— 

FETICHISM 

I spontaneous . . . 

(systematic 

/-conserrativQ . . . < 

8th Month.— 
POLYTHEISM 

f complete. 
( incomplete, 

[ temporary Same stibdivUion, 

f nomad, (Festival of ihe Animals.') 

\ sedentary (Festival of Fire.) 

{ sacerdotal {Festival of ihe Sun,) 

1 military (Festival of Iron.) 

(Festival of Castes.) 

/"esthetic (Flomer, j^schyluSf Phidias.) 

intPllectual (Sa.\ . f C^*"^^*' Pythagoras, Aris- 

7 i- ^ ^*"N scientific and philo-J totle, Hippocrates, Archi- 

^'^^^J sophic 1 medes, ApoUonius, mp- 

\ \ paixhus.) 

social (Scipio, Caesar, Trajan.) 

rtheocratic {Abraham., Moses, Solomon,) 

n.St. Paul.) 
I (Charlemagne.) 
,, ,. 1 (Alfred.) 

|<^^*^°1^^ i (ffildebmnd.) 

i ; (Godfrey of Bouillon,) 

I l^iSt. Bernard.) 

Mahometan (Lepanto) (Mahomet.) 

{ (Dante.) 

metaphysical \ (Descartes.) 

L. i (Frederic II.) 

(mother, 
wife, 
daughter, 
sister. 

/incomplete (Festival of Art.) 

preparatory (Festival of Science.) 

nc r±tiJiOJ.iiuujL/ y ^ *' f secondary 

Intellectual Providence, (definitive j principal (Festival of Old Men.) 

fbankine (Festival of ihe Knights.) 
commerce, 
manufactures, 
agriculture. 
r ((Festival of Inventors: Gu- 

1 active i tevherg, Columbus, Vav- 

[ canson, Watt, Montgolfier.) 
affective. 

9th Month.— 
MONOTHEISM . 

10th Month.— 

WOMEN 

-Moral Providence. 

11th Month.— 
The PRIESTHOOD 

12th Month.— 
The PATRICIATE .. 
Material Providence. 

13th Month.— i 

The PROLETARIATE ....-( 

General Providence. 

contemplative. 

passive (St. Francis of Assisi.) 

COMPLEMENTARY DAY Festival of All the Dead. 

The additional Day in LEAP YEARS General Festival of Holy "Womek. 

Paris, Saturday, 7 Archimedes, GG (1 April, 1854). 

AuGVSTE CoMTE (10 Rue Monsieur-le-Prince.) 

142 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

CHAPTER III. 

GENBHAL VIEW OF THE INTELLECTUAL EXISTENCE OF MAN, EESTINft 
ON THE RELATIVE CONCEPTION OF THE ORDER OF THE WORLD; 

OR, 
DEFINITIVE SYSTEMATISATION OF THE POSITIVE DOCTRINE. 

The mtelleot 
must be ex- 
ercised 
Tznder tlie 
impulse of 
feeling. 

Disposition 
"With which 
■we enter on 
the study of 
the doctrine. 

To subordinate egoism to altruism — such is in its integrity the 
problem for man to solve, and its solution is seen on inspection 
to depend principally on the right use of the intelligence. His 
activity is in all cases neutral, does not distinguish, that is, 
between good and evil ; has no aim beyond itself ; and as such 
may be led to prefer the service of our social feelings as offering 
a wider field than the personal. The intellect has less energy, 
and would willingly limit itself to the efforts imposed on it by 
our personal wants ; it shrinks from the greater exertion de- 
manded by the service of society. Yet this social destination 
alone can satisfy its aspirations, by consecrating it as the 
minister of order, towards which its bent carries it. Such 
consecration, however, is powerless to overcome the natural 
torpor of the intellect, unless feeling have previously drawn out 
the craving for unity. It is on this ground that the love of 
the beautiful must guide us in our search after the true, quite 
as much as in our attainment of the good. The ideal rests 
ever upon the real, but does not therefore require an analytical 
knowledge of the real ; the synthetical conception is sufficient. 

Such is normally the position of the intellect when ap- 
proaching the study of the doctrine under the impulse derived 
from the worship. The regular developement of the emotional 
nature has cultivated the taste for, and the instinct of, order, by 
making us feel its power to confirm love by submission ; sub- 
mission alone being able to preserve love from the mutability 
consequent on the multiplicity of impressions. That this state 
of mind prevail, — this should be the result of the arrangement 
I have definitively adopted for the three parts of the Positive 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTRINE. 143 

I'eligion. For it is a state which represents the still stronger 
tendency in the same direction -which will be the natural out- 
come of the ordinary course of the common education, its 
scientific portion not beginning till after the previous training 
of the feelings, nay, even of the imagination, derived from the 
family life. The young disciple will have already received two 
of the social sacraments, and often gazed with admiration upon 
the public festivals ; above all, however, by the habit of private 
prayer he will have attained the frame of mind requisite for 
the right reception of his abstract education. Thus taught by 
personal experience the importance of the order which he has 
prescribed for himself voluntarily, he is subsequently led by 
the same to respect, nay, even to love the laws which are 
beyond his control, be they the laws of external nature or of 
man's institution. Preserved from the impulses of selfishness 
by having his wants supplied by the providence of others, he 
is so placed as to be able directly to appreciate the value of 
the sympathetic instincts, and to feel deeply their natural 
connection with the habits of synthesis. 

Thus in the normal state, the study of the dogmatic system Tiie Dogma 
will always be entered on in the state of heart and intellect in order to 
most favourable to its producing its full results. The efforts wS^Mp^anl 
now required to place the student at the true point of view Begime. 
intellectually will be then superfluous; he will have reached 
it in the natural course of things. The power of the brain 
may then be brought to bear at once on the study of the 
objective analysis, the object of which is to develope and 
consolidate the subjective synthesis which flows from the fun- 
damental principle and is embodied in the worship. "Without 
fear of any misdirection, the doctrine will always be studied with 
reference to its two objects : the perfecting the worship ; the 
introducing the regime. It will be felt that the great aim of 
om- intellectual existence is the establishment of a more and 
more complete unity, for the individual as for the society, and 
the means, the strengthening the sympathetic instincts, which 
are the source of unity, by the synthetical conceptions which 
are its basis. 

To form a better idea of the true destination of the doctrine. Hypothesis 
we must begin by supposing a sudden interruption of the order order of the 
of the world, so far at least as we can do so without absurdity. supi»seitto 
The hypothesis may take regular shape by availing ourselves 

144 SYSTEM OF POSITIVK POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

of the ordinary distinction of moral, intellectual, and physical 
laws, the conceptions of which come spontaneously and in suc- 
cession, not simultaneously. So necessary are the moral laws 
to the action of the brain that we could not possibly conceive 
of it without them, from our not finding in it any fixed ten- 
dencies. The hypothesis of the suspension of the intellectual 
laws is easier, considering their tardy recognition and its 
imperfect amount as yet, even as regards the higher order of 
minds. Nevertheless, it is especially the physical laws that 
admit with ease of the hypothesis in question, for the sub- 
jective state and the imagination of the poet both frequently 
emancipate themselves from their yoke. 
Even limited Even within these limits, however, the fiction involves a 

to the physi- 
cal laws the contradiction, as soon as we recognise the dependence of the 

hypothesis ' 

is contra- human order on that of the world without. For the most 

dictory, 

individual and most complex phenomena cannot be conceived 
of as \mder law if the most general and most simple are sup- 
posed exempt. But this very contradiction would suffice to 
show how intimate is the connection of order, even physical 
order, with man's whole existence. We must remember that 
the hypothesis suggested has no scientific purpose ; it is simply 
offered as a logical artifice, with the view of showing more 
clearly that the doctrine is a necessary element in the con- 
stitution of the unity, the foundation of which is the worship. 
To serve this purpose, it is enough that, whatever their mutual 
interdependence, the different classes of laws be radically 
distinct ; that they are so, is indicated by the long intervals 
which separate their several recognitions. 
Various '-^^^ hypothesis may have its usefulness enhanced, by consider- 

hypothesis'^" ^^S ^^ succession the degrees of extension it admits, according 
as we imagine the order of things more or less completely sus- 
pended. Eeduce it within the narrowest possible limits, confine 
the order, that is, to the moral laws exclusively, unity could 
never come into being, and still more, could not persist, 
if there were allowed even a low degree of energy to the 
personal instincts. For the unstable character attaching to 
our thoughts and positions would preclude the feelings from 
acquiring any consistency, so that we should swing to and fro 
indefinitely under the impulse of vague sympathies. Nor would 
our state be xeij different, if the laws of the intellect were 
supposed to complete the moral laws without the resumption 

Ch4p. iil] the DOCTEINE. 145 

of its sway by the order of external nature. There would then 
he still an uncertainty in the world outside the brain sufiScient 
to forbid man's attaining harmony ; since in the designs suggested 
by the heart to the intellect there would be no steadiness from 
the impossibility of carrying them into execution ; they would 
but increase our sense of impotence. Again, limit the sus- 
pension of law to the order of inorganic nature, so that the 
organic world, equally with man's world, were supposed subject 
to law ; still there would be a deficiency of harmony, though 
the uncertainty would be lessened. The hypothesis in this 
last form is at once easier to grasp, and more conclusive than 
in its other two forms, and we may perfect it by the further 
supposition that our environment were such as to free us from 
the need of any continuous exertion ; still even then we feel 
that unity would remain precarious at least, if not impossible. 

Not to dwell longer on considerations of this nature, it is ^nd^Meot 
essential here to recognise that the intellect and the feelings must act in 
must act in concert if we would establish and maintain a state synthesis. 
of synthesis, although such state in the main has its source in 
the instincts of sympathy. Our purest affections could not 
ensure harmony were we not under compulsion to submit to 
an order independent of us, and independent even as regards 
the phenomena of our own being. But it is in the pre- 
dominance of the heart over the intellect that lies the essential 
source of our unity, as it compels us to fulfil the intellectual 
conditions of that unity, and disposes us to love a necessity 
which makes us better. 

Thus the worship, by its cultivation of love, gives its sotiiswor- 
sanction to the doctrine, without reference to the requirements sanction to 

p. .,.-,. i-i ■,.. p' the dogma. 

of action as the indispensable condition of our unity, whether tio system. 
as individuals or societies. It is not solely to modify the order 
of the world that we are bound to know it ; the chief reason 
why we study it is that we may submit to it properly, in ac- 
cordance with the fundamental theory of unity summed up in 
the word religion, the construction of which points to the 
without as consolidating the within. -The laws most open 
to modification are the laws which make us most feel that 
such modifications, far from setting us free, do but in reality 
bind us with stronger bonds, in such a way as to bring out at 
once and strengthen our unity. In the normal state love is 
our guide to faith ; we begin, therefore, by reverencing and 

VOL. IT. L 

146 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

cherishing these bonds of our own institution, with their con- 
stant tendency to secure the victory of our higher instincts 
and we soon learn to look with similar feelings on such neces- 
sities as are inevitable. The opposite course may become 
necessary in times of anarchy, but is less noble, and also harder • 
for submission then appears oppressive in its character, and 
as such, we are inclined to restrict rather than enlarge its 
sphere. 
The heart It IS the heart, then, that must ever rule, though the 

intellect intellect alone can indicate in the relations of things those 
which are available. But the sway of feeling can never be 
hostile to the intelligence ; on the contrary, it gives it a 
sanction unattainable under the regime of pure abstraction. 
For as it bases unity on the subordination of egoism to al- 
truism, the Positive religion sanctifies in the name of the 
Great Being the thoughts as well as the actions, which, even 
indirectly, are of a nature to support or develope the instincts 
of sympathy. 
Discipline ot But its sanction is never without the accompaniment of a 
wholesome discipline, a discipline without which the mind 
would shake off its torpor only to follow its natural bent to- 
wards idle speculations. Its preference for them, on the plea of 
their greater dignity, is invariably traceable to its weakness, 
whether it be that it cannot continue its researches without 
losing sight of its true aim, or that it recoils from the more 
important questions as the harder. Such misdirection requires 
for its due control the combination of all the peculiar appli- 
ances of Positivism : the inseparable connection of the cultiva- 
tion of science with the priestly oflSce ; the encyclopaedic 
character of our ordinary speculations ; unceasing watchfulness 
on the part of the public. 
Precautions Such are the appropriate considerations which the prevail- 

qiSed '^°" ing disorder of our time compels me to recall in detail ; my 
encroach- "^ object being, that the study of the doctrine maybe entered 

mentsofthe , t . • -x ■ -a ^ j_i i 

intellect. upon and pursued m a proper spirit, m spite oi the weakness 
of our intellect, which leads it to lose sight of the end in the 
means. Such is our feebleness, that it will always necessitate 
constant precaution to prevent our intelligence from playing 
false to the Great Being, by devoting itself to the service of 
egoism rather than of altruism. There was no real danger in 
this tendency prior to the developement of our speculative 

tune. 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTRINE. 147 

powers ; bat it is' the leading difficulty in the discipline of man, 
now that the intellect is being constantly appealed to, whether 
for action or for regulation. But if the difficulty is in .a high 
sense peculiar to the Positive state, that state has more re- 
sources for meeting it, than were available under the conditions 
of the theological order, when the intelligence found it easy to 
gain a sanction for any deviation. The first foundation for the 
discipline of the intellect was laid when we placed Morals at 
the head of the encyclopaedic hierarchy ; its final completeness 
is given it by placing the doctrine below the worship. When 
the intellect shall be thus consecrated to the service of the 
heart, we shall be justified in considering the problem of man's 
existence as solved, so far as it can be solved. In fact, no 
serious difficulty can then arise as to the proper direction of 
human activity ; errors in regard to it being principally due to 
the intellect's proving false to the feelings. 

Yet however legitimate this discipline, however urgent the suchaisci- 
need of it at the present time, we must still admit that its f inoppor. 
introduction, to be opportune, must coincide in point of time 
with the state of things which makes it practicable. During 
the whole of the first period of human existence, when the 
object was to call into action all our powers, without any pos- 
sibility of duly regulating them, the Positive spirit naturally 
exercised itself on all the theories for which it was competent, 
with a preference of the easier to the more important. Apart 
from the fact that it was beyond its power at that time to 
devote its energies to the construction of a Synthesis, the nature 
of which and the source of which were equally unknown, the 
premature concentration on such an object would have been an 
obstacle to its developing its powers of abstraction by exerting 
them on subjects of logical rather than scientific value. The 
genius of speculative research was unchecked save by the in- 
fluence of the discipline of Theology, a discipline for repression 
rather than guidance, and from its disparate nature at all times 
unable to reach it in the required degree. Science, however, 
in its onward course, empirical and dispersive though it has 
been, has gradually, under the strengthening impulse of Hu- 
manity, grasped more important and more difficult questions. 
This of itself constitutes an advance towards an efficient disci- 
pliue, one which it can the less reject, as itself furnishes the 
intellectual basis for it. The distinct existence of that basis 

I. 2 

148 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE EUTUEE OE MAN. 

The disci- 
pline of 
science in 
relation to 
the will. 

Pablio 
opinion* 

dates from the time when the Positive spirit took definitive 
possession of its chief province by the foundation of Sociology, 
soon followed by the systematic construction of the Eeligion of 
Humanity. 

To complete our conception of the share taken by the 
doctrinal system in the establishment of our nonnal unity, we 
must consider the discipline to which it is ultimately subjected 
as having for its chief object to regulate the wills, in order to 
direct the actions, of men. "We then see that such an object 
requires the persistent consensus of the three parts of the true 
religion, its emotional, its intellectual, and its active elements. 
It requires, first of all, the developement by the worship of our 
sympathetic instincts, as being the principal source of unity. 
But it implies, in the next place, the removal, by the doctrine, 
of our natural indecision in conduct, furnishing as the doctriae 
does, from without, reasons for action free from all aUoy of 
caprice. The discipline suggested by love thus placed on a 
sure foundation of faith, the regime gives it completeness and 
strength by fostering a form of activity leading, as a necessary 
consequence, to the reaction of the whole on each part, a re- 
action which is at once a guidance and a check. Thus each in 
its due degree, feeling, reason, and opinion, take part in the 
spiritual government of man ; the temporal government being 
its indispensable supplement and concerned solely with the 
outward act, with no direct power to modify the will. The 
acknowledgement that the temporal power is indispensably 
needed to secure society from the more signal mistakes, makes 
us feel how important it is that the intellect, which supplies 
the grounds of our determinations, should be in unceasing unison 
with the affections from which they spring. 

The first point, then, is for the heart to govern the intellect, 
in order that the two, by their agreement, may discipline public 
opinion, which issues in a moral force calculated to improve 
our individual impulses. Public opinion as the general com- 
plement of the spiritualty of Positivism, presupposes above all 
suitable feelings, and these easily attain power with the poorest 
order of minds as regards the conduct of others. But the term 
ought of itself to remind us that it is a force which also requires 
community of thought, as a basis for our judgment in each 
case. Where there is not such community, from divergence or 
from misdirection, the best sentiments fail to guide aright our 

Chap. IILj THE DOCTEINE. 149 

conduct, as individuals or as societies. Now the agreement of 
opinions in question remains incomplete and precarious, so long 
as the preconceptions of the public spring from views which 
are essentially subjective, not being able as yet to rest on an 
objective conception of the whole order of things. 

Viewed in this light, science acquires a sacredness hitherto Hence a 

higher sa- 

unattamable, for it places on a firm footing, at one and the crednessfor 
same time, true liberty and true morality. Both in strict re- 
lation with the habitual predominance of good impulses, they 
rest primarily upon love. But love would not be able to up- 
hold them against the disturbing influences of daily life, were 
it not for the submission which it breathes into us as towards 
the order which is beyond our control, and the great laws of 
which alone can secure the victory of altruism by comprebsing 
egoism. The doctrinal system of Positivism may seem to chain 
us to external necessities, but in reality it procures us the only 
possible liberty, nay, the only liberty desirable, by its elimina- 
tion of the element of caprice, ever favourable to the worse 
instincts. Theologism, especially monotheistic Theologism, 
gave ascendancy to a defective type by subjecting the real 
world to wills, which from their very nature could not but be 
capricious. Positivism must correct these anarchical habits ; 
it must complete and systematise the instinctive suggestions of 
Fetichism in reference to an all-embracing Destiny, which, in 
its original conception absolute, ultimately takes a relative 
character. Subject to modifiable laws, we are in the truest 
sense free and moral beings, for their sway is always an aid to- 
wards the triumph of our higher propensities. 

Even whilst limited to the understanding of the inorganic ?™'' "^^ 

° *^ lower 

world, the original domain of science, it already exerts this sciences 

o •' have a moral 

holy influence, the first beginning of which we trace to the reaction, 
study of phenomena which are absolutely beyond our inter- 
ference. They compel submission, and the submission they 
determine represses our self-regarding instincts, the natural 
source of all rebellion, and developes the altruistic instinct 
which of the three is the most in requisition and the least ac- 
cessible. This moral influence — a spontaneous growth in Fetich- 
ism, especially astrolatrical Fetichism— is organised systemati- 
cally in the Positive state, for we then are no longer obliged 
to attribute life to the heavenly bodies, that so we may respect 
an order of things which is the basis of the existence of the 

150 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OP MAS. 

But this 
reaction 
most felt in 
the higher 
domains 
■where the 
phenomena 
are most 
modifiable. 

Belation of 
the dogma 
to the wor- 
ship most 
insisted on 
here. 

Great Being. But our resignation, in the earliest stage purely- 
passive, before long is ennobled, by virtue of the activity sug- 
gested by the regularity of the order, regularity being always 
in proportion to simplicity. We transform our subjection, we 
make it the source of constant advance throughout the whole 
range of our life — physical, intellectual, and even moral — 
for we make it dependent on this unchangeable type, into 
accord with which in particular we bring the institution of 
time. 

Still the theoretic, no less than the practical, power, must 
find its chief sphere in the phenomena most open to modifica- 
tions, these being at once the most important and where the 
order of nature is most imperfect. Since our attainment of 
sufficient knowledge of the law of those phenomena to warrant 
rational prevision, we feel how greatly their study, in a positive 
spirit, may perfect human discipline, by its direct control over 
the internal sources of unity. It is in the continuous amelio- 
ration of the most imperfect, and yet the most important, order, 
that man's intelligence finds its best field both for theory and 
practice, such is the surpassing difficulty of the inquiries and 
so much greater room is there for modifications. But the 
consecration of the Positive spirit to this object necessarily 
implies its discipline, as diverting it from cultivating the in- 
ferior branches of study in a degree unwarranted by their 
legitimate destination. Thus it is, that reason, the immediate 
function of which is to judge everything but itself, finds an 
indirect control in the being devoted, above all, to consolidate 
and foster our emotional nature, without being thereby de- 
barred from proceeding steadily in its advance towards the 
more complex phenomena. Thus we get rid of the main difii- 
culty which attaches to the problem of Positive unity ; founded 
upon the predominance of the heart, it seems to involve a 
pressure on the intellect, whilst unable to dispense with its 
cooperation. On the contrary, it is obvious that in the ma- 
turity of the Great Being the intellect of man enters into 
possession of the domain hitherto reserved for the supremacy 
of God, without neglecting such logical or scientific preparatory 
training as the cultivation of its new domain requires. 

This indispensable introduction justifies us in considering 
the final systematisation of the Positive doctrine as having 
reached the point at which it is easy to preserve it from the 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTEIKE. 151 

misleading analytical inquiries which were naturally thrown 
up by the preparatory period of scientific training. Such 
aberrations would tend to recur, unless the discipline of religion 
were continually turning us from them, as no partial synthesis, 
however vast its scale, is adequate or even possible ; and there- 
fore I was obliged to begin by insisting on the general con- 
nection between the doctrine and the two constituents of the 
religion between which it is definitively placed. True, it is in 
the next chapter that its relation to the regime must be more 
fully explained, but it has been sufficiently stated in the pre- 
sent for us never to lose sight of so clearly defined a destination, 
no further explanation of which in detail is needed. It being 
satisfactorily established that we must know the order we would 
modify, the main point was to estimate the importance of its 
study from another and less recognised point of view, when, 
that is, we solely aim at a wise acceptance. The twofold ob- 
ject must always assign its legitimate limits to our study of 
the several theories, necessarily a waste of time when carried 
farther than is required to guide our submission or our action. 
But both grounds naturally coincide so far as regards the 
highest sphere of our intellectual exertion, for it is the happy 
peculiarity of that sphere that in it the theory is inseparable 
from the application. 

For the construction of the dogmatic system of Positivism 
it is required to determine, first, its general nature ; secondly, 
its universal principles ; lastly, its normal arrangement. 

From the first point of view, it must be borne in mind that omerai 
all real investigations can attain their true object, solely on the the doctrine. 
condition of being abstract in character ; of being directed, must be 
that is, to the coordination of events independently of beings. 
To guide us in our obedience or in our intervention, the laws 
of nature must wear a form of complete generality, for such 
generality is the only possible basis of rational prevision, un- 
attainable in concrete instances. We sway to and fro in con- 
duct so long as we have not established rules without exception ; 
and this implies that for the study of beings we have substi- 
tuted that of events. Phenomena to be manifested must be 
attached to matter ; substances are cognisable only through 
their properties. The twofold connection does not prevent the 
process of abstraction from habitually distinguishing events 
from beings, looking now to the attributes many bodies 

abstract. 

152 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OP MAN. 

Relation of 
theory and 
practice. 

Abstraction 
sanctioned, 
but witli 
precautions. 

possess in common, now to tlie sum of the qualities which con- 
stitute any given existence. To an analysis of this kind may 
be traced the origin of science, when towards the close of the 
first period of childhood, the childhood of the individual or of 
the society, abstract contemplation begins to prevail over the 
concrete. Till then, reason had not power to aid the feelings ; 
not offering the fiixity of conception which is the source of pre- 
visions qualified to guide us in action or in submission, as they 
remove the indecision to which we are naturally liable in all our 
resolutions. 

This first fundamental step in advance is to be regarded as 
establishing the true distinction, and at the same time the 
true agreement, between theory and practice. The generality 
characteristic of theory, the speciality characteristic of practice, 
are owing to the fact that theory is abstract, practice concrete ; 
for theory relates to events, action deals with beings. But the 
contrast between the two is no obstacle to their concert, as our 
action upon bodies aims solely at modifying their phenomena, 
the exclusive object of interest, whether for speculative or 
practical purposes. Abstract laws are, then, the common 
province of science and art — science applying them to the 
discipline of our intellect — art to the regulation of our activity. 
No serious inconvenience arises from ignorance of the concrete 
laws, for it does not prevent our giving both to our practical 
and intellectual life a sufiiciently rational character, by the aid 
of such general indications as the simpler cases afford to guide 
us in the more complex. It might seem that action requires 
a fuller knowledge than does submission ; but all the more 
essential conceptions, by the nature of the case, are available 
both for action and submission ; as the basis of om- conduct 
throughout is the invariability of the order of nature. In fact, 
such modifications as it admits solely affect the phenomena in 
degree, and therefore in effecting them we may find satisfactory 
guidance in an empirical estimate of the limits within which 
variation is allowable in each actual case, without requiring a 
concrete science which is beyond our reach. 

However dangerous then for the heart, and even for the 
intellect, abstraction must receive a definitive sanction as 
indispensable to the systematic service of Humanity. The 
absorption, of withering tendency, to which it invariably leads, — 
the chimerical judgments which ai-e its frequent attendant — 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTKINE. 153 

both these results should but awaken us to the importance of 
restricting intellectual cultivation within its due limits, instead 
of looking upon it as the ideal of human perfection. It must 
be remembered also that its general disadvantages are remedied, 
as far as possible, by the encyclopsedic character of Positive 
speculation, inseparably connected with the sacerdotal office. 
For abstraction decreases as independence and simplicity 
decrease, with this result, that theory is brought nearer to 
practice in proportion as our conceptions become objectively 
less general, subjectively more general. When once abstrac- 
tion has reached the phase in which all the aspects of science 
converge, it necessarily ends, in order that there may be scope 
for the intellectual efforts which are in direct connection with 
practical objects. During its provisional government, it tends 
to engender overweening claims, as it gives free course to the 
deductive faculty. There was a danger in this, so long as the 
cultivation of science retained its partial character ; but the 
danger disappears in the encyclopeedic regime, for that repre- 
sents the perfection of deduction as due principally to the 
absence of complexity in the lower departments, without any 
diminution in the growth of power when the field for its 
exercise rises in dignity. 

Our normal state is as yet so poorly outlined, that abstrac- Aids for ab- 
tion in the Positive sense, however evident the need of it the subjec- 

tive media. 

in natural philosophy, has not been organised except for 
mathematical speculations. Everywhere else, signs without 
images are as a rule our only aid in abstract meditation. The 
institution however of subjective media, mentioned in the 
first chapter of the present volume, has for its object, as it 
extends, to furnish us with appropriate means for representing 
all events whatsoever, apart from the beings in which they are 
seen. Although Theologism had its origin in abstract contem- 
plation, the means it offered were throughout limited to the 
search after causes, with no power to directly promote the 
study of laws, not even if we make it include entities as well as 
Gods. Speculation in Positivism will not have its full aids 
until, by the institution of subjective milieus, images are 
brought into habitual combination with signs, so as to allow 
a permanent influence to the emotions. 

The abstract character of the doctrinal system of Positivism The miver- 
thus established, I proceed to examine the hierarchy which pies on 

154 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OP MAN. 
which the constitutes it, not however without first determinino- the 

■doctrine ' o ^ 

rests. universal principles which are the foundation of the whole. 

First phiio- These principles, dimly anticipated, or rather desired, hy 

^°^'^' Bacon, under the vague name of Philosophia Pnma, form 

three groups of general laws : one group ohj active and suh- 

jective in an equal degree; the second essentially subjective; 

the third mainly objective. 

Pirstgi-onp I form the first group by combining two scientific laws, 

laws. naturally in close interdependence, with a logical law, which 

must precede, though apparently dependent on them. 
Law I. This law consists, and there can be no more fundamental 

hypothesis, principle, in the injunction in all cases to form the simplest 
hypothesis consistent with the whole of the facts to be re- 
presented. This, the sole basis of true rationality, — may be 
considered indifferently as objective or subjective, since it 
immediately controls the subordination of the subjective to the 
objective, as it satisfies at once our inclination and om- duty. 
But in our use of it we must never forget that it is applicable 
to our affections ; this definitive addition to its hitherto ex- 
clusively intellectual form was insisted on in the last volume. 
Complication being as pernicious to the intellect and to the 
heart when due to the feelings, as when due to the thoughts, 
we must clear our hypothesis from ill-will, not less than from 
other superfluities. If the latter, or intellectual, simplification 
is a direct aid to the process of thought, the former or moral 
simplification assists it indirectly ; improving as it does the 
unavoidable participation of moral impulses in intellectual 
action, such impulses exerting a more disturbing, although 
intenser influence, when it is egoism, and not altruism, that 
takes the lead. Nor is the importance of this emotional com- 
plement less as regards the external object of our intellectual 
exertion, any excess of subjectivity interfering with the 
clearness of our vision equally, whether it be traceable to the 
heart or to the intellect. Thus conceived, the precept system- 
atises at once the constitution of the Positive logic and its 
developement, for it introduces the combination of feelings 
with images and signs as an aid to, and even a regulation of, 
the intelligence. 
Law II. The second principle, generally considered of superior 

fSy°3'iaw3. importance to the first, is the invariability of all laws whatso- 
ever which govern phenomena and consequently beings, though 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTEINE. 155 

it is only in regard to phenomena, or in the abstract order, 
that they are cognisable. This dogma is regarded as purely 
objective in character, yet it is no longer incumbent on me to 
demonstrate its subjectivity, really less disputable than its 
objectivity. For the latter character must always rest entirely 
on the inductions of experience, irresistible as the conclusion 
may be, nay has long been, at any rate as regards the lower 
sciences, whereas the subjectivity has a natural basis of theoretic 
grounds. We can demonstrate the necessity there is to estab- 
lish laws as a guide to conduct, but experience alone teaches us 
that those laws represent the order of the world, to the degree 
in which we require to know it. The conviction that they do 
so is, at bottom, direct and instinctive only in reference to man's 
world ; when we go lower it is solely as the residt of a long 
investigation, called for chiefly by our practical wants. The 
degree of certainty we attain can never be entirely satisfactory ; 
such as it is, however, it is indispensable for the creation of the 
doctrinal system of Positivism, which, without it, might gratify 
the mind, but be no reflection of the external world. We see, 
then, why the second principle of the normal Positive doctrine 
is as inferior to the first in dignity as in usefulness ; method, 
from every point of view, having a higher value than doctrine, 
as the will is of higher value than the act. 

The object of the third principle is to complete the second, Lawiii. 
all modifications whatsoever of the order of the world being by bmty.'^*" 
it limited to the greater or less intensity of the phenomena, 
with no alteration in their arrangement. It follows from the 
explanations of the preceding volume, that this law of modi- 
ficability must be kept distinct from that of invariability, for 
this last might be confined to maintaining invariability of 
nature in events, whilst admitting change in their order of 
succession. Inasmuch as, so conceived, the second principle 
would lose its main value, by the conception we give sufficient 
prominence to the independence as well as the utility of the 
third. In theory, the law reacts in the direction of reducing all 
real questions to questions of quantity ; a transformation, how- 
ever, only possible in any high degree in regard to the lower 
phenomena. In practice, the law leads to the subordination, on 
rational grounds, of action to contemplation, for it limits our 
intervention, even our subjective intervention, to a change of 
degree, leaving the order undisturbed. 

156 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

The distinct- Such is the first group of universal laws, as closely connected 
laws renders with the mental process as with the external objects of our 
synthesis speculations. Already, even at this early stage, it is evident 
that their number is sufficient to preclude all hope of con- 
structing an absolute synthesis, either from an objective or 
subjective stand-point, since although convergent, they remain 
The second quite distinct. The second group, directly concerned with the 
intellect, subdivides into two groups ; each comprising three 
laws, the one regarding the intelligence from the statical, the 
other from the dynamical point of view. The sphere of these 
six new laws would seem narrower than that of their three 
predecessors, but it is really as extensive. For by their regula- 
tion of the reason, in itself and in its exercise, they regulate 
implicitly the objects on which that reason is exercised, and 
which, but for it, would remain unknown. 
(a) Statical In the statical group, the fundamental law, established by 

LawT'ctv") Aristotle, developed by Leibnitz, and completed by Kant, is 
ttooftta *^® subordination of all subjective constructions to objective 
to'theobfec- materials. This principle however is inadequate to express 
'*™- the state of reason, since it is equally applicable to insanity, 

whether transient or permanent. Hence for the right statical 
Law 2 (V.) constitution of the understanding, we require a second law, a 
theiina"e°to law wMch represents the internal images as less vivid and less 
sion™^'"^" distinct than the external impressions. Were it not for this 
comparative weakness, which ceases under mental alienation, 
the without never could regulate the within, though it might 
continue to afford it nourishment and even stimulation. Even 
this complementary law, however, would be insufficient to place 
our understanding in its normal condition, were all the co- 
existent images, as is the case in incipient madness, whilst 
weaker than the external impressions, equal in power among 
■Law 3 (VL) themselves. A third law, then, is required, and it lays down 
the necessity of one image predominating over aU that are 
simultaneously evoked by the excitement of the brain. Thus 
complete, the statical theory of the understanding will never 
require any additional laws, since the within is no longer able 
to disturb the sway of the without. 
(6) Dynami- -A.S for the dynamical theory of the understanding, that has 
been satisfactorily laid down in the preceding volume by the 
establishment of the three fundamental laws of human evolution, 
as well individ ual as collective. The three preside, each in its 

cal subdi- 
vision. 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTRINE. 157 

due place, over the contemporaneous movements of the intelli- 
gence, the activity, and the feeling of man. The first law tawKvii.) 
consists in the succession of the three states, fictitious, abstract, tuaipro- 
and positive, through which every understanding passes in all 
its conceptions without exception, but with a velocity pro- 
portioned to the generality of the particular phenomena in 
question. The second is a recognition of an analogous pro- law 2 

. , . or (VIII.) of 

gression in human activity, which in its first stage is Conquest, Material 
then Defence ; lastly Industry. The third law shows that man's ^^w 3 
social nature follows the same course ; that it finds satisfaction, rifprogrffit 
first, in the Family, then in the State, lastly in the Eace, in 
conformity with the peculiar nature of each of the three sym- 
pathetic instincts. These two last laws have no immediate 
connection with the intelligence, but are not the less indispen- 
sable to any clear conception of its movements. For they 
preside over the necessary and persistent relations which exist 
between our scientific conceptions and our practical operations 
on the one hand, our moral impulses on the other, the former 
being the object, the latter the source of the said concep- 
tions. 

In accordance with this threefold progression, the second Harmony'of 
group of universal laws is perfectly harmonious. Its first half, group, 
in. fact, makes order consist in the establishment of unity, 
whilst its second reduces progress to the developement of the 
imity established. So becoming at one and the same time 
more synthetical, more synergical, and more sympathetic, 
human nature tends towards its systematic constitution, con- 
sequent on the growing ascendancy of altruism over egoism. 

I must now complete the whole formed by the universal ThM group, 
laws, by the consideration of the third group, where objec- 
tivity prevails. This group, as the last, is composed of sis 
laws ; as the last also, it subdivides into two equal series ; 
adopting a distinction which accords with a difference in their 
nature, and which is most strongly marked in reference to their 
acceptance. For the first series, more objective in character, 
was originally limited to mathematical phenomena, without 
waiting for the systematic construction of Positivism, though 
they aided in its preparation, and derived from it exclusively 
their claim to real universality. The other series, on the 
contrary, has too large an admixture of subjectivity to gain 
acceptance, so long as Positivism had not yet embraced its 

158 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE ifULlTY.. t±lk a^uTuaa ui-' jman. 

First sub- 
group, a 
generalisa- 
tion of the 
laws of 
motion. 

Law 1 (X.) 
of persist- 
ence. 

Law 2 (XI.) 
of compati- 
ble action. 

Law 3 
(XII.) of 
mutual ac- 
tion. 

Second sub- 
group. 

Law 1 
(XIII.) 
Conversion 
■of existence 
into motion. 

highest domain, although faint germs of its laws are naturally- 
traceable during the period of preparation. The distinction is 
one which tends to disappear in the normal state. Nevertheless 
even then it will always retain a certain importance, from the 
analogy which cannot but exist between the initiation of the 
individual and the preparation of the race. 

Originally discovered by the geometricians, at a time when 
the scientific spirit had already lost its old philosophical cha- 
racter and had not yet acquired its new, the first series of 
objective laws has never hitherto been at all adequately under- 
stood. For it is the outcome of a systematic generalisation of 
the three laws which are thought to be applicable only to 
motion, in the common sense, as an attribute of matter, and 
the Positive conception of which is materially obscured by the 
metaphysical alloy due to academic anarchy. The first law, 
in harmony e(i[ually with the dogma of invariability and with 
our need of permanence, is this : every state, statical or dyna- 
mical, has an inherent tendency to continue as it is without 
change, resisting all disturbance from without. In the second 
law, motion becomes compatible with existence by virtue of the 
power resident in every system to maintain its constitution, 
whether in exercise or at rest, when its constituent parts are 
subject to simultaneous changes, on the condition that the 
changes affect all parts in a perfectly equal degree. Lastly, the 
third law governs all reciprocal influences, as it proclaims the 
necessity of the equivalence of reaction and action, if the degree 
of each is measured in accordance with the peculiar nature of 
each contact. It is not difficult to see that the special laws 
enunciated respectively by Kepler, Gralileo, and Newton, or 
rather Huyghens, in order to form a basis for the theory of 
mechanics, are the scientific germs of these philosophical 
theorems, which are applicable to all phenomena without excep- 
tion. But we also see that for their systematic expression, the 
first step to which was taken in the Philosophie Positive, it 
was indispensably necessary that the Positive spirit should have 
risen by successive stages to the complete generality which it 
requires for its mission. 

The second series of objective laws connects with the first 
through the medium of a law which, as they were, is traceable 
to a mathematical germ, although the origin in its case is not 
so distinctly seen. It is the law by which in all cases we make 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTEINE. 159 

the theory of motion subordinate to the theory of existence, by 
looking upon all progress as the developement of the particular 
order in question, the conditions of such order, whatever they 
may be, regulating the changes which together make up the 
evolution. In the hands of the geometricians, this law is 
limited to the reduction of questions of motion to questions of 
equilibrium ; its generalisation was possible only in Positivism, 
when I traced it in social phenomena, in which it finds its 
chief destination. Still its origin in Mathematics deserves a 
lasting remembrance, as it allows us, over and above any his- 
torical considerations, to form a dogTnatic connection with the 
last law of the first series, a connection indicated by the original 
confusion of the two. This relation, binding as it does more 
closely together the two halves of the third group, will be at 
all times kept in mind by the terms appropriated to the law 
under consideration, the objective character of which should 
thus stand out more fully. 

On examining the next law, we come upon a close connec- Law 2 

(XIV.) Clas- 

tion between this third group and its predecessor, as the second smoation. 
halves of either seem indistinguishable. For it is the funda- 
mental law of Positive classification, the invariable principle 
of which is the increase or decrease of generality — equally, 
whether subjective or objective. Now this principle fuses with 
the law of the three states, and is indispensable as its com- 
plement when applied to the arrangement of our conceptions 
without taking account of the existences of which they are the 
conceptions. That the two were introduced simultaneously in 
the small work which forms the basis of all my subsequent Appendix to 
writings — this fact alone would suflSce to establish their connec- part 3. ' 
tion, a connection familiar to Western thinkers, owing to the 
progress of Positivism. But so regarded, the penultimate law 
of the third group would substantially belong to the second 
group, whereas it must be kept distinct. For this purpose 
then, in our consideration of it, we must insist most on its 
objective character, making it to apply above all to pheno- 
mena, and even to beings, or at any rate to existences. So 
applied, it subordinates nobleness to force, by showing that the 
higher phenomena in every case depend on the coarser attri- 
butes, the sway of these last being recognised as inevitable but 
not allowed to become oppressive, the regularity of its action 
being accepted as a compensation for its inferiority in dignity. 

160 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE 

FUTURE Of MAN. 

Law 3 (XV.) 
of con- 
tinnlty ; the 
subordina- 
tion of the 
mean terms 
to the ex- 
tremes. 

Such are the 
fifteen uni- 
versal laws, 
closely con- 
nected, un- 
changeable 
in order, and 
amply suffi- 
cient for all 
sound specu- 
lation; the 
' Prima 
Philosophia * 
of Bacon. 

The First 
Philosophy 
brought to 
bear in the 
formation of 
the hierar- 
chy of the 
sciences. 

Eolation of 
this hierar- 
chy to the 
synthetic 
and analytic 
dogmatic 
systems. 

I complete the last group of universal laws by the law 
which represents the intermediate state as in all cases subordi- 
nate to the extrenies which it brings into connection. I have 
so frequently applied this law in the volumes of this work, as 
to make it unnecessary for me to dwell on it here. The great 
Buffon seems to me to have had a glimpse of it, but I think 
that I am as fully warranted ultimately in claiming it for 
myself, as I am in claiming the great majority of the fourteen 
previous laws, all more or less conjectures of my various 
predecessors, yet all peculiar to my systematisation. The 
appearance of subjectivity attaching to this law, due especially 
to its finding its application in logic rather than in science, 
must not throw into the shade its objective character. For it 
proclaims the interdependence of the objects studied quite as 
forcibly as it does the connection of their studies. 

"We have thus the ultimate basis of the dogmatic system of 
Positivism in the combination of fifteen laws of universal 
applicability, forming three natural groups : the first of three 
laws ; the two others each of six, each also subdividing into two 
equal series. The various connections above indicated suffice 
to show the perfect interdependence of the whole so formed, 
although the number of such connections will be largely 
increased when we come to use it. Without insisting on this 
at present, I must call attention to the definitive nature of the 
arrangement of these fifteen laws, definitive by the nature of 
the case, no one of them being transposable without a violation 
of the rational order. As for their completeness as a whole, 
this follows from their giving us even now the means of satis- 
factorily regulating all healthy investigation. "We may regard, 
then, as realised the noble aspiration of Bacon, the construction 
of a first, a prime philosophy, qualified to direct us in all our 
scientific meditations, nay even to aid us in the exercise of our 
practical reason. 

The power of this philosophy as an instrument of system- 
atic thought, will become palpable by the construction of the 
Positive hierarchy of phenomena and conceptions, on the basis 
of a relative view of the whole order of the world. 

This hierarchy, the grand result of the course of objective 
investigation which prepared the way for the ultimate synthesis, 
has for its legitimate object the completion of the synthe- 
tic, the direction of the analytic, constitution of the Positive 
doctrine. 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTEINE. 161 

The synthetic form, the direct offspring of the fundamental Thesyn- 
f>n/-i , Th ' i^i'.i thetic con- 

theory of the (xreat Being, finds its complete ideal expression stitntion. 

in the worship, and condenses all the various theories in Morals, 
for in Morals "we study human nature for the government of 
human life. All our real speculations, the most abstract and 
the most simple not excepted, necessarily converge towards 
this human domain, for indirectly they help us to the know- 
ledge of man under his lower aspects, on whicli the nobler are 
dependent. Strictly speaking, there is no phenomenon within Aupheno- 
our cognisance which is not in the truest sense human, and that San? ^^' 
not merely because it is man who takes cognisance of it, but 
also from the purely objective point of view, man summarising 
in himself all the laws of the world, as the ancients rightly felt. 
Yet each class of attributes must be studied with reference to 
the simplest cases ; that is, in beings where it exists, if not 
isolated, at any rate freed from all complication with the higher 
attributes, which we eliminate provisionally by abstraction, the 
better to understand their foundations. Thus beginning with the 
simplest phenomena, we gradually increase the complication of 
our enquiries by the introduction in succession of higher pro- 
perties, so training ourselves by a course of decreasing abstrac- 
tion for the normal state of the scientific reason. When we 
have reached it, we enter on the regime of complete synthesis, 
the regime in which man, viewed directly as indivisible by 
nature, is the constant object of all theories calculated to make 
him more fit for the service of the Grreat Being. Abstraction 
thus loses its scientific preeminence and retains solely its logical 
utility ; we habitually concentrate all our efforts on the most 
important problems, recurring to the lower only to meet the 
wants, in particular respects, of the higher domain. 

Our intellectual life, however, as here sketched, will alwavs Anindm- 

. -^ dual prepa- 

require a training of the individual analogous in kind to the '^"tJoi 

' ° ... . needed to 

initiation of the race ; a training m which objective analysis "■*'ai° this 

provides us with the necessary basis of the subjective synthesis ^^e study oi 
which, in the normal state, is to be paramount. In the second sciences wiu 

call for new 

place, the direct cultivation of the higher domain will often call researches in 

t. ° the lower. 

■ for new researches, logical or scientific, in the various inferior ^^ both 

cases the 

sciences. Now the training and the researches equally must be hierarchy 
guided by the Positive hierarchy which is a consequence of the 
threefold system of universal laws above given. That hierarchy 
realises the confused wish of Bacon as to, the construction of a 

VOL. IV. M 

useful. 

162 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

scala intelleMs, having for its object the enabling us to pass, 
in both directions, without a breach of continuity from any one 
class of researches to any other. This encyclopsedic scale, insti- 
tuted in my philosophy, and become an integral part, by con- 
stant use, of the present work, requires no further explanation 
here except as to its immediate connection with the subjective 
synthesis. 
Scientific The conception of the hierarchy of the sciences from this 

oFthe°Posi-° point of view implies, at the outset, the admission, that the sys- 
ive sea e. ^gmatic study of man is logically and scientifically subordinate 
to that of Humanity, the latter alone unveiling to us the real 
laws of the intelligence and activity. Paramount as the theory 
of our emotional nature, studied in itself, must ultimately be, 
without this preliminary step it would have no consistence. 
Morals thus objectively made dependent on Sociology, the next 
step is easy and similar ; objectively Sociology becomes depen- 
dent on Biology, as our cerebral existence evidently rests on our 
purely bodily life. These two steps carry us on to the concep- 
tion of Chemistry as the normal basis of Biology, since we allow 
that vitality depends on the general laws of the combination 
of matter. Chemistry again in its turn is objectively subordi- 
nate to Physics, by virtue of the influence which the universal 
properties of matter must always exercise on the specific 
qualities of the different substances. Similarly Physics become 
subordinate to Astronomy when we recognise the fact that the 
existence of our terrestrial environment is carried on in perpetual 
subjection to the conditions of our planet as one of the heavenly 
bodies. Lastly, Astronomy is subordinated to Mathematics by 
virtue of the evident dependence of the geometrical and me- 
chanical phenomena of the heavens on the universal laws of 
number, extension, and motion. 
Logical ap- When it has reached this term, the subjective arrangement 

PosMve"' °* of the objective hierarchy is complete, by its termination in 
®™'^" the one science which has no other below it, and which there- 

fore can be the direct object of study on the basis of certain 
spontaneous inductions independent of all deduction. Although 
the encvclopeedic series is here rested solely on the ground of 
scientific relations, yet, as at the outset, the ground so taken 
always coincides with its logical appreciation. For although the 
Positive method is necessarily uniform, nevertheless, it is only 
in the simplest branches of study that its deductive capacity 

Chap. Hi.] THE DOCTRINE. 163 

can find its proper developement. Its inductive properties 
must come into view subsequently, as in due and gradual course 
more complicated phenomena introduce observation in Astro- 
nomy, experiment in Physics and Chemistry, comparison in 
Biology, filiation in Sociology. When induction has thus com- 
plemented deduction, the final science brings the two into 
their normal and direct combination by its construction of the 
subjective method, properly speaking peculiar to Morals. 

Such, under its two aspects, is the connection by virtue of sapremacy 

' r 3 J ot Morals. 

which this supreme science organises, one after the other, all 
the Positive sciences, the culture of which henceforth will be 
controlled by the inseparable relations which exist between 
them and the science of man. Morals, as the synthetical 
terminus of the whole scientific construction, is as superior to 
its various preliminaries in rationality as it is in utility, since 
the phenomena which are its proper subject matter necessarily 
influence us in our examination of all the rest. At first, it is 
true, they must be kept out of view, but as our speculations are 
not in the fullest sense real till this temporary abstraction has 
ceased, we must not continue it longer than is necessary. 

To appreciate at its just value the hierarchy above given, it TheWerar- 
is necessary to recognise its competence to guide us in the sub- ^lunthf^ 
division of each special science no less than in the coordination each'spedai 
of the whole body of distinct sciences. The same principle of ^°'™'^' 
the interdependence and simplification of studies by virtue of 
the degree of generality in the phenomena, will give us in all 
cases our subdivisions of each of the seven fundamental sciences, 
provided that we attain sufficient precision in our classification. 
It follows, from the necessarily homogeneous character of these 
several subdivisions, that in combination they perfect our 
scientific scale, in relation to its most important attribute, by 
developing its continuity. In this way thought may habitually 
pass from the lowest mathematical speculations to the sublimest 
moral conceptions, or vice versa, by a series of intermediate 
steps so easy as to require no effort to a well-trained mind. 
To whatever degree we specialise our enquiry, the unity of 
human science remains intact, the student never losing sight of 
the two or three consecutive subdivisions which connect each 
particular branch of science with the general hierarchy. 

Again, the full appreciation of this Positive scala vntellectus The concrete 
as a logical and scientific institution, involves our looking on it toe'wraM-' 

M 2 

164 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

chy, that is, 
applied to 
Beings. 

Here again 
the hierar- 
chical prin- 
ciple Talua- 
ble for sub- 
division. 

. as equally adapted to represent the interdependence of beings 
or existences as that of phenomena and speculations. Under 
its concrete aspect, when viewed as a whole, it forms a series of 
states which rise in dignity in a direct ratio with their compli- 
cation, each resting upon its predecessor. The result is the 
relative conception of the order of the world, an order neces- 
sarily distributed into seven categories, superimposed one on 
the other in such a way that each modifies that which precedes, 
and commands that which succeeds. This series of modifying 
and commanding influences issues in presenting man as the 
true condenser and spontaneous regulator of the social, vital, 
and inorganic milieu, in dependence on which he developes. 
But his personal action, as it has for its object the modification 
for the better of destiny by will, is efficient and noble only on 
this condition : that it be freely devoted to the constant service 
of the Great Being, the being of which the individual is the 
indivisible element and the necessary product. When his 
activity thus takes its normal direction, man is continually 
improving the order to which he is subject, by strengthening 
the reaction of its vital influences on its material, avaihng 
himself, for this purpose, of the ever-growing cooperation of all 
his voluntary associates. We thus see how our relative concep- 
tion of the economy of the world, by using, both in theory and 
practice, the Positive hierarchy, is able, in an equal degree, to 
give systematic expression to the dignity of the individual, 
and his devotion to society. 

To this concrete application of the encyclopaedic scale I 
must extend the observation above explained when treating of 
the abstract hierarchy, the object of which was to introduce iato 
it greater continuity. The classification on the principle of 
increase of complication and decrease of generality, is as appli- 
cable in the subdivision of the hierarchy of beings as in that of 
attributes, so as to connect, by sufficiently easy steps, all the 
intermediate terms whatsoever. Its power in this respect is 
most sensible in regard to the higher beings, in Biology, that 
is, first, and then in Sociology, whilst it is in the lower domain 
that the abstract subdivision finds its most appropriate sphere. 
Thus we form, in as full developement as our enquiries can 
possibly require, a general scale of co-existent beings, and as 
the completion of such scale, a series of states offered to our 
view by the only being capable of continuous advance. So 

Obap. III.] THE DOCTEINE. 165 

constituted, the Positive hierarchy becomes the condensation of 
all real sciences, and the basis of all practical conceptions, as it 
brings the classification of the arts into coincidence with that of 
the sciences. 

The conclusion here reached is the last step in our explana- The First 

, I p , Philosophy 

tion of the construction of the doctrinal system, which from the in its fuii 
synthetical point of view is now complete. Before, however, I 
enter on its analytical constitution, it is important to throw out 
into relief the threefold preamble just accomplished by affixing 
to it a name adapted to remind us of it as a whole. For this we 
may use the expression First Philosophy, limited by me above 
to the system of the fifteen universal laws, so giving definiteness 
to the vague design of Bacon, after making his aspiration a 
reality. Since this system of laws is but the intermediate and 
principal portion of the basic introduction to the definitive co- 
ordiaation of the Positive doctrine, the denomination which I 
originally reserved for it, being practically at liberty, may be 
applied to the whole introduction. All that is requisite is to 
treat it as inseparable from the institution of abstraction on 
which it rests as its basis, and from the hierarchical construc- 
tion for which it gives the basis. Thus viewed, the First 
Philosophy forms a distinct and definite whole, a whole which 
gives systematic form to the subjective synthesis idealised in 
the worship, and which must be our guide in our objective 
analysis, to enable us to develope the Positive doctrine on a 
scale answering to its destination. I shall bring out the impor- 
tance of this First Philosophy in the following chapter, by 
making it the object of a special study at the outset of our 
encyclopaedic education, where it is our only direct safeguard 
against degeneration into scholastic puerilities. 

There is and can be but one svnthetical arrangement of the Analytical 

^ ^ , " o form of the 

Positive dogma, for such arrangement treats the several sciences dogma ad- 
as branches of moral science, without ffivinsr beforehand any several ar- 

' o o J rangements. 

specific division, but leaving the way open for all suitable sub- 
divisions. The contrary is trae of the analytical arrangement ; 
it admits of several distinct forms, according to the degree of 
connection we introduce between the different terms of the 
encyclopasdic hierarchy. From the objective point of view, it is 
not possible to fix the number of the sciences, since the generali- 
sation of thought is as appropriate for theory, as the specialisation 
of action is requisite for practice. In reality the name attached 

Seven 
analytical 

166 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FDTUEE OF MAN. 

to each science merely indicates the group of investigations 
generally acknowledged to have a certain unity, and this may 
vary at different times and for different minds. From the sub- 
jective point of view', the division of the sciences is equally 
fluctuating, as when so considered it marks the several resting 
places of the intelligence in its encyclopaedic course, and that 
course may always be continuous whatever the number of its 
stages. 

Be this as it may, the seven sciences which we established 
ment?^' ^^ ^^® result of the preparatory evolution of the race, will not 
need, as a rule, subdivision, when the human mind has attained 
greater power of synthesis, allowing always for educational 
requirements. At the same time the number is one that will 
always lend itself to the establishment of a satisfactory con- 
tinuity. But their hierarchical combination, with the object cf 
bringing objective analysis into closer relations with subjective 
synthesis, — this admits of many different forms. Of all the 
forms possible in the abstract, I select for present treatment 
those only which have a real utility both for theory and 
practice. The selection gives the seven analytical arrange- 
ments of the Positive sciences, which I proceed to explain, one 
after the other, in the order in which they are derived from ths 
synthetical arrangement above examined. 
Two Bi- One and the same subdivision of the synthetical arrange- 

(a) Dogma- mcnt givos two binary arrangements, the one more objective 
logy, sodo-" and dogmatical, the other more subjective and historical. The 
f°)^Histori- first sanctions the most marked distinction admissible through- 
Natu- ) Phi- out the whole range of real investigations, the distinction, that 
MoraiJ phy! IS, between the domain of the inorganic world and the system of 
the organic, in other words between the study of the earth and 
the study of man. Cosmology and Sociology. In the second we 
break up the one great whole by separating the external or 
physical order from the human or moral order; hence the 
division of the general term philosophy into natural and moral. 
Thus the two binary arrangements of the doctrinal system of 
Positivism differ only as to Biology, Biology standing in the 
one case as the introduction to Sociology, in the other as the 
complement of Cosmology. This last conception best represents 
the natural course of scientific education, the other is the most 
appropriate for our ultimate studies, as manifesting the imprac- 
ticability of an objective synthesis. If we look to practica]. 

rial 
order. 

2. Vital 
order. 

3. Hu- 
man 

Vorder. 

/I. Phy- 
sical 
laws. 
2. Intel, 
lectnal 
laws. 
S. Moral 

Vlaws, 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTRINE. 167 

results, the two modes have distinct yet equivalent merits. We 
find that the historical arrangement fixes attention especially 
on the highest kind of progress, by marking off into a separate 
class the most modifiable phenomena, those in which invaria- 
bility was but of late recognition. The dogmatical arrange- 
ment on the other hand expresses the systematisation of the 
activity of the Great Being, which consists in bringing all vital 
power whatever to bear on the modification of the world of 
pure matter. 

This last dualism would seem as valuable as the other, yet two Ter- 
it is the other, as more easily divisible, to which we have ,i.' Mate- 
recourse for our ternary arrangements, from which we likewise 
draw the succeeding ones. Subdivide the external order or the «•< 
human order, and the result is two ternary arrangements, each 
endowed with important properties. The first best gratifies 
the craving for continuity, as viewing the order of the world 
in reference to the normal series — material, vital, and human. 
The second is more favourable to the dignity of our studies and 
practical exertions ; in it the Positive hierarchy is formed by 
the subordination of physical to intellectual and both to moral 
laws. This last mode represents the theory of the brain and 
the economy of Sociocracy, whereas the other is the systematic 
expression of the abstract evolution and the concrete series of 
existences. 

As the two are of equal importance, it will be often advisable two Qua- 
to combine them, and form a quaternary arrangement by a sub- *^™*'^" 
division of the human order or of the physical laws. This i. cosmo- 
mode was adopted in the second volume, and makes Positive 2. Bioiogy 
philosophy consist in the normal hierarchy of Cosmology, i- Morals, 
Biology, Sociology, and Morals. It enables us to state clearly 
the main series of the introductory sciences, whilst not con- 
cealing the science which is their ulterior object. 

A second quaternary arrangement may be formed by the ^ 

combination of each term of the encyclopaedic scale with its The three 

^ ^ PI couples with 

successor, so that we rise to Morals by a progression formed of Morals as 

•^ ■*■ ° their crown, 

three couples, inferior, middle, and superior. This mode was in- 
troduced in my discourse upon the Positive spirit, and represents Prefixed to 
the closest degree of connection which exists between the several Popuhure. 
branches of science, since each of the preliminary sciences is 
more nearly connected with the one that precedes it than with 
the one that follows it, as is shown by the order of their genesis. 

168 SYSTEM OP POSITITE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN, 

One Qui- 
nary. 

1. Mathe- 
matics. 

2. Pljysics. 

3. Biology. 

4. Sociolo- 
gy. 

I. Morals. 

Best of the 
chatpter less 
general, 
elaborating 
the hierar- 
chy of the 
seven scien- 
ces. 

Only one quinary arrangement is admissible, drawn from 
the first quaternary arrangement by breaking up its first term, 
on the basis of the distinction between Mathematics and 
Physics as a whole. Although this mode, which is at once his- 
torical and dogmatical, is less convenient for our liltimate inves- 
tigations than for systematic education, it has this advantage, 
that it begins the encyclopaedic series with that branch of 
study which is directly accessible. At this point, however, our 
objective analysis immediately tends to full completeness ; to 
return, that is, by virtue of the twofold subdivision of physics to 
the primary arrangement of the scale, the only one admitting 
of satisfactory continuity. 

Such, amid the possible analytical arrangements, are the 
seven by which we bridge over the space between the complete 
developement of the encyclopaedic series, and the systematic 
unity which it is the object of that series to promote or to 
prepare. Apply them and compare them, and we shall feel 
more fully the value of the subjective synthesis, which alone 
■combines in itself all the several excellences of the various 
stages of the objective analysis. The comparison wiU at the 
same time evidence the main advantages of the Positive scale, 
which, in a more or less developed form, suffices for all our 
intellectual wants. 

To complete the systematisation of the doctrine, the 
remainder of the chapter must be devoted to less general con- 
siderations, to such an elaboration of the basic hierarchy of the 
sciences as may make it an adequate expression of the order of 
the world. Each of the seven sciences which it establishes, 
will always form a distinct branch of human study, an object 
for the speculative and practical reason of man, first during the 
period of education, and subsequently even during the whole 
course of the normal existence. The maintenance of the dis- 
tinction between the sciences is the condition on which the 
objective analysis secures for the subjective synthesis its requisite 
clearness and coherence. But as these distinct sciences always 
tend to divert attention from the general unity, it is important 
to reduce them within the narrowest possible Hmits, according 
to the rule laid down in the first volume of this work. All I have 
to do here is to explain the agreement which necessarily exists 
between this law of restriction and all the grounds on which we 
properly and persistently eliminate all idle speculations. 

Chap. IU.] THE DOCTRINE. 169 

Our aims in studying the order of the world are a noble Eaohessen- 
submission to, and a wise modification of, that order ;, we must theunlTOreai 
therefore examine, singly and by itself, each of its independent bLepSiy 
phases, the phases which, following one another in regular invaria- 
succession, result in a relative, to the exclusion of any absolute, an Muctive 
conception of the whole. Nor is such a separation indispensable ''™'''P'^- 
merely to satisfy om* unintermitting need of speculation and of 
action, it is the sole condition of our attaining an adequate 
conviction of the great primary principle of invariability. 
For that principle will never admit of deductive demonstration, 
inasmuch as by its nature it is itself the common basis of all 
Positive deductions. It will always rest on convictions of an 
essentially inductive character, convictions therefore to be 
formed separately for each distinct class of irreducible phe- 
nomena. Allow its full power to philosophic analogy, and yet 
, the whole course of our scientific initiation shows that human 
reason persists in not recognising the universal applicability of 
the Positive principle, so long as it has not in detail been 
applied to each and all of the natm-al categories. Scientific 
prejudices notwithstanding, it is possible, and that without 
inconsistency, to consider phenomena as generally and in large 
majority subject to immutable laws, whilst one exceptional class 
is left alone under the dominion of arbitrary wills. This is a 
state of mind which is not removed by virtue of the real connec- 
tion which exists between the different laws, for such connection 
is traceable only when the several laws have been separately 
recognised ; its removal can only be the result of a direct and 
special extension of the Positive principle to each distinct pro- 
vince of the domain of science. 

It is concrete knowledge alone that admits of a really de- ^ow inva- 

"^ ^ liability IS 

duetive demonstration of the principle of invariability, nay, madecom- 
without deduction we were here powerless to conceive it as general. 
applicable, for we shall never. know the greater part of the laws 
proper to complex events. But as these depend of necessity 
upon the simple phenomena, we are warranted in looking on 
them as being, equally with those simple phenomena, subject 
to the Positive principle, although the difficulty of the induc- 
tions and deductions is so great, that we cannot in regard to 
them carry it out in detail. From this point of view the word 
chance no longer stands for the empire of caprice ; it comes to chance and 
be simply the general designation for the laws which we do not 

170 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

Destiny, 

However 
necessary, 
the study of 
the seven 
sciences has 
its dangers. 

These dan- 
gers, how 
averted. 

(i) During 
the period of 
Education, 

(ii) During 
active life. 

know, — destiny being the term -which sums up the laws we 
do know. The distinction is one which requires appropriate 
names, since our ignorance of relations is equivalent to their 
non-existence, as equally in either case we can form no pre- 
vision with a view to action. Still, philosophically considered, 
this mental attitude, though never to cease, is no obstacle to 
the complete generalisation of the Positive principle when 
once verified in detail in all the separate classes of irreducible 
phenomena. 

Nothing, then, can ever supersede the necessity for the 
individual to acquire successively, as the race has acquired, the 
knowledge of each of the seven phases which meet him in the 
relative conception of the order of the world. It is only by the 
aid of this series that the fundamental invariability can attain 
the degree of coherence and precision required to give it its 
full value for the intelligence, its full influence on the moral 
nature. But the course is one which risks the narrowing of the 
intellect, and the withering of the heart, as it diverts us from 
our true object, synthesis, by concentrating our powers on analy- 
sis. The risk is the greater as the larger portion of the 
noviciate of seven years is taken up by natural philosophy, the 
two last years only being devoted to the human order. The 
normal state however offers on this head satisfactory safeguards, 
safeguards both of instinct and of reason, as well during the 
period of education as throughout our whole subsequent Ufe. 

Our abstract training does not begin tUl after the develope- 
ment of the affections under the mother's watchful eye and 
with an admixture of esthetic culture. The first step m it is 
the study, above explained, of the First Philosophy, with its 
systematic preference and inculcation of the spirit of synthesis 
and of a social purpose. Throughout the course of scientific 
education, the influence of the worship, public and private, 
tends to prevent or to remedy deterioration from excess of 
intellectual culture. This threefold guarantee ought to suffice 
for the period of education in the strict sense ; as the natm-al 
dominion of feeling is not as yet distm-bed by the cares of life. 
With regard to adult life the remedy, even with the theoretic 
class, lies in the persistent recognition of a paramount social 
purpose. Absorption in science will be looked upon as ex- 
clusively conflned to the childhood of the individual, or the 
race, and held unworthy of human reason in its maturity. The 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTEINE. 171 

care of the priesthood and the vigilance of the public -will 
save those, in whom inferiority of intellect is combined with 
poverty of feeling, from an aberration inconceivable in superior 
natures. 

Without this system of safeguards, it were impossible for inMieotuai 

_ n t y^ T-t • Bud, JriiySiC8il 

the servants oi the Grreat Being to pass with success throuffh laws the 

chief object 

the full scientific preparation requisite for the Positive state, oi om ab- 

Btract initia- 

Throughout the initiation of the race, man found in his absolute tion. 
beliefs a natural means of meeting his permanent need of some 
independent and superior power to which his existence is sub- 
ordinated. But the new Synthesis, a relative, not absolute 
synthesis, can meet this want only by implanting a deep sense 
of the order of the world, the comprehension of which is, if 
traced to its root, based on experience, and only rises into 
unassailable conviction after a halt of sufficient length before 
each distinct group of phenomena to be comprehended. In 
fact, the fundamental dogma of Humanity even when set 
forth at large in the worship can give full expression only to 
moral laws; is inadequate to present intellectual, and a 
fortiori, physical, laws. It follows that these two become the 
principal object of the abstract scientific initiation, which will 
lead us, step by step, to conceive of the Great Being as the 
indispensable condensation of the order in which it holds the 
highest place. 

But, however necessary the preparation maybe: notwith- study ot 

'^ ■*■ * •^ each science 

standing the precautions calculated to guard us against its umiteaby 

or o a therequire- 

abuse : such is the weakness of our intelligence that we shall mmta ot the 

° next above 

ever be liable to neglect the end m our attention to the means, it, in order 

. to avoid ex- 

from our inability to keep the combination of the two sufficiently cess ot devo- 
in mind. The danger is the more urgent, that abstract thought, science. 
though after a certain training easier than concrete, is less in 
unison with our nature and exacts greater efforts, whilst de- 
manding more complete isolation. Therefore it is that it is 
absolutely necessary to restrict, within the narrowest possible 
bounds, the natural prevalence of scientific concentration during 
the age of preparation, and later, to limit analytical work to 
the episodic efforts required to meet the wants of synthesis. 
Far from any exceptional indulgence to the priesthood on this 
point, it is for the priesthood especially, as alone unremittingly 
concentrated on the sum of human wants, to assert for all, 
and for its own members before all, the paramount importance 

172 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Such study 
sufficient for 
human life. 
Incidental 
researches 
allowed for. 

Tendency 
hitherto to 
accept such 
limitation. 

of religious discipline. It attains this end by limiting the 
separate and special cultivation of each preliminary science, 
not excepting Sociology, to what is required for the systema- 
tic treatment of the succeeding science, in order to rise or to 
return, as soon as possible, to the ultimate science — to Morals. 

In accordance with this rule, the relative conception of the 
order of the world is drawn out, step by step, as fully as its true 
destination enjoins. For, granting each category so studied 
as to enable us to enter on the rational study of the next, that 
portion of the economy of nature with which it deals, is, by 
virtue of this result, sufficiently known. In this series of pre- 
parations, our sole aim should be, so to grasp the whole of the 
destinies which rule us, as to be able to appreciate the con- 
nection, both general and special, of our existence with the 
system of the world which it is their commission from the Grreat 
Being constantly to amend. Now, the condition here stated is 
met, when the dogma of Humanity, which feeling and the 
worship present to us at first as isolated, becomes the rational 
condensation of the whole economy of nature, as the result of 
our gradual ascent from the lowest phenomena towards the 
noblest. If carried further, the cultivation of the intellect 
inevitably becomes a mere idle amusement, and is exposed to 
indefinite divergence, giving room for an insurrection of ob- 
jective analysis against the subjective synthesis which it ought 
to promote. But the state of pure speculation is blameable 
only when it becomes persistent, as it is under the dispersive 
regime of the Western transition. Eeligious discipline will 
always sanction the incidental enquiries called for in particular 
cases by the ever present demands of universal advance, moral, 
intellectual, or physical. 

In introducing this system of intellectual cultivation, 
Positive religion is really only giving regular expression to the 
tendencies which the reason of man always instinctively obeyed, 
when as yet the education of its powers was incomplete. Whilst 
the lower sciences were being elaborated, the more eminent 
men of science always felt that, normally, the moral domain was 
supreme, though its systematic study was as yet prematui-e. 
From a dim but strong instinct, the speculations most remote 
from man were pui'sued as a preparation for the doctrines and 
the methods adapted to the highest branch of knowledge, the 
study of which led often to admirable unsuccessful attempts. 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTEINS. 173 

This accounts for the non-discovery of the more important 
conceptions, even in the lowest pair of sciences, prior to the 
time when the wants of society demanded their definitive elabora- 
tion, a point I distinctly proved in the preceding volume with 
regard to the earth's motion. So also we explain the continuous 
decrease in the length of the several encyclopaedic phases, in 
proportion as they approach their terminus, man ; and this 
notwithstanding that, at that point, the domain of speculation 
becomes larger and more difficult. Thus the limitation of each 
phase to what is required for the introduction of its successor, is 
as thoroughly in conformity with experience as with reason acting 
on the inspiration of feeling. The temporary prevalence of 
academic divergences was due solely to our modern anarchy, 
committing as it did the cultivation of the lower sciences to 
men incompetent to work out the higher subjects. 

Thus, the discipline of science which Positivism establishes, PosiUviim 
is simply the systematisation of the instinct which guided all tusinstinot. 
true thinkers more and more during the thirty centuries of the tte taskf ° 
Western transition. But such is the difficulty attendant on this 
systematisation, that it seems at first sight to be a circle 
without issue. For the rule which limits the proper culture of 
each science to the degi'ee required for the rational study of the 
next in succession, must wait for its full efficacy till the com- 
pletion of the encyclopaedic course, as then only is it possible to 
construct the ultimate science, the science from which all disci- 
pline must emanate. Now, on the other hand, this last and 
decisive step is beyond the competence of minds swayed by the 
habits of divergence instilled by the special cultivation of the 
preliminary sciences. The only possible escape from these con- 
flicting difficulties was the reaction in favour of synthesis, which 
sprang from the social convulsion in which Positivism origi- 
nated. It was but natural then, that the new philosophy and 
the religion of Humanity should take their rise in France, 
as the central seat, by virtue of the whole of the past, of the 
ultimate crisis. From their not feeling this connection, most of 
those who at the present day recognise the intellectual benefits 
of Positivism, are guilty of grave inconsistency in blaming me 
for making it inseparable from its social mission, to which alone 
its advent is attributable. 

The relation in which the sciences thus normally stand ^na1^n"'to 
to one another is the indispensable condition of their being speoiausa- 

174 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

tjon both 
among 
theoricians 
and practi- 
cians. 

Synthetic 
discipline 
may be 
made to pre- 
vail by in- 
voking Hu- 
manity. 

The philoso- 
phical trea- 
tise? neces- 
sary to in- 
anp^urate 
this disci- 
pline. 

Seven in 
number. 

brought under discipline, nor will it ever cease to corroborate 
and extend that discipline. The reasonableness of the rule is 
indisputable ; yet as mediocrity of intellect will always be the 
prevailing type in the theoretical class, there will ever be an 
instinctive leaning to the specialisation of science, in order to 
avoid the efforts imposed by synthetical meditation. The 
danger of this tendency is the greater from its being in unison 
with the habits universally formed by practical Ufe. In assu- 
ming the industrial form, action loses the synthetical character 
which it had in the military period. Industrial life confines 
our conceptions of a whole to operations on a very limited scale ; 
any really general views are the exclusive appurtenance of the 
priesthood ; a circumstance, however, not without its advan- 
tages, as it offers the best security for the normal separation of 
the two powers. But the reception, by all without exception, of 
the encyclopsedic education, — this will act as a counterbalance 
to industrial specialisation, and check the divergent tendencies 
of commonplace theoricians. All comprehensiveness in thought 
is, as generosity of feelings, a pleasure even to those who are 
aware that it is beyond them. 

It will always be possible then to secure the acceptance of 
discipline by synthesis as against the disposition to analysis, by 
appealing, in the name of the Grreat Being, to the moral and 
social reasons for its original institution. But, although in 
principle it seems solely a question of doctrine, all the consti- 
tuents of the Positive state will combine to develope it and to 
strengthen it. The worship will lead us to it by its evocation 
of our sympathies ; and the regime will give it a stronger hold 
as a result of the system of precautions to be explained in the 
following chapter. 

The inauguration of this discipline necessitates some ency- 
clopsedic efforts, efforts, be it remembered, of permanent utiUty 
for the education which is to be universal. They must consist 
in the production of types of the true intellectual state ; in the 
construction, that is, for each distinct branch of real speculation, 
of a philosophical treatise, presenting its particular science re- 
duced to its normal limits, and duly incorporated into the 
religion of Humanity. Vast and difficult as such a construction 
may appear, it may be condensed into seven volumes, the books 
in habitual use by the priesthood and the public. 

My career is too far advanced for me to be able to execute 

Chap, m.] THE DOCTRINE. 175 

in all its completeness this capital elaboration of the doctrinal The sooio- 
system of Positivism ; I must limit myself to giving a clear tiStonisiT- 
idea of it. The two preceding volumes have done the work u!ana™i!' 
adequately, so far as regards the last of the preliminary sciences, 
for they are a systematic exposition of Sociology, on the basis 
laid in the Fhilosophie. Of the three works which are to follow Three new 
the present, two are meant to be analogous constructions for the aimomced, 
two extreme sciences of the Positive series, and will systematise, thematot 
the first, Mathematics ; the second. Morals. The renovation of Ss,The'°" 
the intermediate sciences, by a synthetical treatment, has been served?' 
satisfactorily explained in the first volume of this work, more 
particularly as regards Biology. Enough then if I now give a 
sketch of the wpenpjus or the summaries, corresponding to this 
systematic comprehension of the whole range of the intellect, 
adopting the encyclopaedic order. 

In Cosmology — more than elsewhere — it is important to cosmology 
inaugurate the subjective synthesis, as it is in Cosmology that iequtethe 
objective analysis has most consistency, nay most dignity. syntSb^ 
"When we enter on the study of vital phenomena, the indivisi- trary^ten-' 
bility which is the normal characteristic of all real investiga- nSah ^° ' 
tions, so forces itself upon the attention that, in spite of the 
existing anarchy, the most ordinary thinkers are found always 
open to systematic suggestions. For in Biology we are too near 
the terminus of speculation, man, to ignore or despise the true 
aim of Positive theories, each problem soon tending to evidence 
the irrationality of all conceptions from which this aim is 
eliminated. "Whereas the domain of inorganic matter may be 
kept so perfectly distinct as a study, that sound speculations 
could be entered upon and accepted within its limits, whilst in 
all the other departments of human thought, the fictions of 
Theology maintained undisputed empire. Man is, it is true, 
by his constitution, subject to all the laws, without exception, 
of the material world, but the search after these laws has no 
immediate reference to man ; it is always confined to some part 
or other of his environment. Over and above our need of the 
knowledge of this milieu, if success is to be attained in cosmo- 
logieal researches, it is requisite that we pursue them in regard 
to the simpler cases, even when the results have reference 
exclusively to the more complex. Further, the study of matter 
is favourable to dispersion, as dealing with an existence without 
unity, in a milieu which as a whole is beyond our grasp. 

176 SYSTEM OF POSITIVJi; POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

Futility of. This is the explanation of the great persistence of the 

synthesis analytical regime in the study of the material world, even with 
recognised eminent thinkers who would never have endured it in other 
human branches of enquiry. And the same result would reciu: in the 
view to pre- study, if, from inattention on the part of the priesthood and the 
public, it were ever again to be exclusively pursued. Events in 
which man is directly a simple spectator, will always offer scope 
for the aberrations of theoricians, alarmed at the continuity of 
exertion demanded by the subjection of all phenomena to the 
subjective method. The futility of an objective synthesis is 
however by this time so freely admitted, that true thinkers may 
accept, in Cosmology, the human point of view as paramount, as 
alone adapted to connect everything. The divergence natural to^ 
this department of science has gone so far, since the old discipline 
succumbed to the anarchy of scientific academies, that its need 
of coordination, nay even of elimination, becomes undeniable. 
Appealing nobly to moral and social considerations, the priest- 
hood of Positivism will find it no diflScult task to secure 
general respect and love for the only system capable of pro- 
tecting the feeble powers of our intelligence from being wasted 
on puerile investigations. AU that is required is that the 
rationality, as well as the dignity, of our abstract enquiries, be 
always vindicated, as a result of the definitive fusion of science 
in religion. 

The attainment of this result is the great aim of the several 
works above mentioned, and the accomplishment of which is in 
the main reserved for my successors. Taking the most critical 
for myself, I hope soon to show to what an extent mathematical 
science, grown almost out of our grasp as a whole, gains in 
coherence and dignity, under the synthetical discipline insti- 
tuted by the Positive religion. For the present, I must limit 
myself to some hints bearing on this typical result, whilst 1 
explain the plan and the general spirit of my next treatise. 
TheMathe- A single volumc will suJBBce for this work; originally I 

thesis, in^ thought it would require two, an abstract and a concrete 
volume, when I announced it in 1842 at the end of my Philo- 
sophy, and even when I repeated the promise in 1851 in the 
general preface of the present work. So decided a condensa- 
tion will scarcely surprise those who can appreciate the synthe- 
tical determination indicated at the opening of the construction 
I am now ending — the determination to make the modern 

one Tolume. 

"Chap. III.] THE DOCTEINE. 177 

•calculus a component part Of general geometry. By carrying out 
this project, the new volume, which I hope to publish before the pubUshea 
•end of 1856, wiU definitively systematise the philosophy of Ma- terTisse!" 
thematics. Between a religious introduction and a synthetical component 
conclusion, seven chapters will put into their proper shape the work." 
calculus, arithmetical and algebraic ; preliminary geometry ; 
algebraic geometry ; differential geometry ; integral geometry ; 
and general mechanics. The title of this forthcoming work, 
* System of Positive Logic,' or ' Treatise of Mathematical 
Philosophy,' is in itself sufficient to express its chief object, 
which I proceed summarily to explain. 

That object is a deduction from the natural combination of object of 
-two aphorisms, both indisputable: the study of methods is toexhiwt 
inseparable from that of the doctrines ; all important observa- lawa of 
tions must be shown to hold in the simplest cases. Combine these 
two principles and the practical inference is that the general 
laws of the reasoning process are best traced in the abstract study 
of the form of existence common to all objects equally — the form 
in which existence is reduced to its simplest attributes, number, 
extension, motion. Although this systematic delimitation of the vol i, 
province of Mathematics is exclusively due to Positivism, yet '" 
the confusion indicated by its plural name has never concealed 
the fact, that the initial science alone is sufficiently simple in 
character to be suited to the exposition of these laws. 

It would seem, however, that by thus simplifying in the The higher 
highest degree the speculations of Positive Mathematics, we cesses 
preclude ourselves from finding in them well-marked types of derived from 
all the processes of logic, several of which seem exclusively tics may be 
reserved for the higher studies. Alarm may be felt, lest the by them. 
field of Mathematics be sufficient only as regards deduction and 
coordination, the two processes spontaneously developed in 
Mathematics, with a perfection thought to be unattainable 
elsewhere. Induction and generalisation — these, it would appear, 
can be satisfactorily appreciated only in the departments in 
which their several forms successively had their origin. But, 
in establishing the normal state, we must not rest in the blind 
repetition of the course followed during the preparatory period. 
Those on whom the Great Being devolves the task of trans- 
mitting to all its servants the general results of the intellectual 
developement of the race, must more and more emancipate 
themselves from the obligations which were binding during the 

VOL. IV. N 

178 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

original movement. There is coming forward an increasing- 
difference between the dogmatic exposition and the historical 
creation, as human thought becomes more synthetical ; as has 
long been traceable in mathematical teaching, notwithstanding 
its extreme imperfection. Whilst bound ever to respect the 
natural correspondence between the education of the individual 
and the evolution of the race, the intrinsic uniformity of the 
Positive method enables us to introduce its leading artifices in 
simpler sciences than those which originally gave them birth. 
Au the logi- In a special treatise, ' Analytical Geometry,' I have alreadv 

oal processes -^ in- i 

found in showu that it is possible m Mathematics to teach that branch of 

Mathema- • n i t t • t 

tics. inductive logic which seems most peculiar to biology, viz., the 

comparative method and the theory of taxonomy. Its two 
capital forms, the formation of natural groups, and even the 
institution of hierarchical series, are perfectly available for the 
normal classification of surfaces from the point of view of their 
generation. Although the simplicity of this particular case 
naturally disqualified it at first for spontaneously exhibiting 
these general processes, it constitutes a strong ground for 
choosing it as the proper place for their systematic investigation. 
The capabilities of Mathematics are, it is to be noticed, recog- 
nised as regards the less eminent forms of inductive logic, 
observation, and even experiment; which find large scope in 
Mathematics, in spite of the tendency of geometricians to look 
on their science as purely deductive. Lastly, the most exalted 
processes, historical filiation and the subjective method, may 
fitly, by virtue of their evidently universal applicability, be 
introduced into the science of Mathematics, and the use of them 
there is decisive of the matter in hand. 
TheLogicof Admit these capacities, however, and yet they seem in- 
the Logic of adequate to show the logical completeness of Mathematics, if 
well de- we coufront them with the systematisation of Positive logic 
Mathe- " foreshadowed in the first volume of the present work. For, if 
not confining ourselves to the special processes of induction or 
deduction, we press beyond to the general means we use for 
contemplation and meditation, the most instinctive, the most 
ancient, and the most powerful of those means seems to have 
no place in Mathematics. Mathematical speculation is, more 
than any other, adapted to display the logical power of signs, 
and signs are the chief resource to which the prejudices of pedants 
would reduce us in reasoning. Simultaneously with signs, in the 

ma tics. 

Chap. HI.] THE DOCTRINE. 179 

very first beginnings of Mathematics, the use of images is 
spontaneously introduced. After a long separate existence — signs 
prevailing in the calculus, images in geometry — the final and 
irrevocable combination of these two resources was effected by 
Descartes in his capital reform of mathematical science. It The Logic oj 
is the only branch in which the combination has as yet been quMte. 
effected. But it is an inadequate expression of the real system 
of Positive logic, and must remain so till the influence of feeling 
give completeness to the fusion. 

The revolution effected in Mathematics by the most im- Comte's tasi 

• I'll p 1 T ^'^ accom- 

portant of my precursors, carries with it, then, tor me, an obli- pUsh this. 
gation to base the regeneration of science on the power of 
affection as an intellectual instrument. The combination thus 
formed of signs, images, and feelings, must, if it is to be de- 
finitive, be worked out in regard to the simplest sphere of 
science, and the one farthest removed from man. In no other 
way can the pure reason be raised to the level of practical 
reason, for the latter has always been able without effort 
to avail itself of the above combination in its concrete re- 
searches. When this has been done, we shall have removed the 
great danger of abstraction, and be able to use freely its in- 
herent powers for our generalisations and coordinations, with- 
out imperilling the natural alliance of synthesis and sympathy. 
Such a regeneration is destined to be at once the conse- 
quence and the condition of the definitive fasion of science in 
religion. 

Prior to the publication of my forthcoming work, it is im- Tte task ao- 
possible to judge a reform so opposed to the actual tendencies intiie'Syn- 
of scientific men, nay, even of the general public. But minds jective,' 
suitably disposed may even now forecast its practicability, guided 
by the convergence of the observations on this head which have 
found their place in the several volumes of the present work. 
In especial, it should be evidenced by a judicious combination Howaccom- 
between the ultimate fusion of Fetichism in Positivism and the 
moral reaction of mathematical studies. 

Whatever dryness it is sought to retain in Mathematics — (i) Moiai 

° . . . . reactions of 

the necessary commencement of rational Positivity — no efforts matiiemati- 

1 • t n I'p n 1 cal studies. 

can prevent a healthy mind from drawing irom them deep and 
salutary emotions, as it submits to the influence on its affections 
of a demonstrated order. The efficacy of the irresistible convic- 
tions thus formed, their eflScacy in raising and purifying our 

N 2 

180 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAK. 

inclinations, must come to be indisputable even without per- 
sonal experience, for anyone who feels how great need we have 
to subject ourselves to external laws. Of the three species of 
natural laws, physical, intellectual, and moral, the second are 
so suited to the sphere of Mathematics that it is looked on as 
not able to admit others. This is an unwarrantable exagge- 
ration, which disappears when we trace to Mathematics, on 
the one hand, the origin of physical laws, especially in me- 
chanics, or even in geometry ; and when, on the other hand 
we see that the laws of the intellect are only unveiled in 
the speculations of Sociology. Still, after correcting this scien- 
tific prejudice, we cannot but be struck with the inherent 
aptitude of Mathematics to verify and give a true conception 
of intellectual order. If so, we feel that they have a correspond- 
ing aptitude to manifest, and even enlarge the sphere of moral 
laws, so natural is the connection of these last with intel- 
lectual laws. This, then, is the conception we should form of 
the true aim of mathematical education, as furnishing a com- 
plete basis for the system atisation of Positivism, a basis for 
the doctrine no less than for the method. 
(2) Fusion o£ Humau reasou in its maturity will adopt Fetichity as the 
smdPol™ complement of Positivity, and by so doing will open the field 
its results on of mathematical speculation to the familiar influence of the 
tics. ' emotions, inadmissible at an earlier stage of its culture, as it 
was necessary to avoid the risk, the imminent risk, of pernicious 
illusions. The simple fact that Positivism radically precludes 
all objective error as to causes, allows us without scruple to 
enlarge the sphere of subjective vitality, which we instinctively 
attribute to all beings of whatever kind. Far from checking 
this propensity. Positivism sanctions and gives it a systematic 
direction, as a powerful aid not merely in language and art, 
but also in thought, especially in abstract thought, where it 
lends the image the support of feeling. Emancipated from the 
prejudices of science, the Positivist will be more fetichist than 
the Fetichist, for he will extend to phenomena the tendency 
which the Fetichist confined to bodies. Enough if the emotions 
we imagine have in all cases a real resting-place, it is indif- 
ferent whether it be abstract or concrete ; the essential is that 
they be not attributed to fictitious beings. On this single con- 
dition. Positive reason is guaranteed against a relapse into 
Theology, and so is free to act on a tendency as favourable to 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTEINE. 181 

the intellect as it is to the heart. And the regime here in- subjeotiva 

p • • ■ J.T. ■ media. 

dicated is peculiarly adapted to Mathematics, for it is m this 
department that the institution of subjective milieus has its 
origin, by availing ourselves of which we shall be able to ad- 
vance abstraction, by endowing with life curves, and even 
equations. 

We have a foreshadowing of this ultimate condition of the '^^^^^^^'^ 
earliest and best cultivated of human speculations in the ^g^*^™**'"^ 
growing tendency of the most eminent mathematicians to com- ^l^jJ'J^f '^^ 
bine the cultivation of Mathematics with their meditations on minds who 

nave culti- 

higher subjects. In defiance of modern anarchy, Descartes and J^'Jj*^^" 
Leibnitz made it their aim at one and the same time to advance neousiywia 

the superior 

Mathematics and to regenerate Philosophy. Their worthy sue- sciences. 
cesser, Lagrange, would have prolonged this noble spectacle, 
the scale of which was always being enlarged from Thales to 
Pascal, had he not confined his high systematic genius within 
the limits of Mathematics, in the midst of a demolition in 
which it was not for him to take part. And although such co-ex- 
istence cannot take the place of a combination, it heralds if 
and prepares it, by showing us the highest minds, and such 
minds are always favourable to scientific unity, engaged in 
cultivating simultaneously the two extremes of the domain of 
speculation. It cannot be that this tendency should disappear 
at the very time appointed for its systematisation ; so I have 
ground for the hope that my synthesis of Mathematics will be 
rejected only by the geometricians, or rather the algebraists, 
from their incapacity to rise above the existing academical 
regime. 

Unheeding their futile opposition, I will remove its only ^,^^gf^^f" 
plausible ground by the rejection in toto of their troublesome j.^^jjj™/;^''^- 
claim to the intellectual presidency. Since their triumph over ™™ ^^^^ 
the physicians, they invoke, utterly without justification, in 
support of this noxious domination, the principle, in itself in- 
disputable, of generality. Previous to the advent of Positivism 
there was no refuting the academical sophisms from the ina- 
bility to distinguish the two forms, objective and subjective, 
which the rule may wear, and which make it issue in opposite 
modes of discipline. But since the second volume of this work, 
this capital distinction has been too fully and clearly stated for 
me to dread any involuntary mistakes on that point. The 
properties common to many beings do not, by virtue of their 

182 SYSTKM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

The sim- 
plicity of 
Mathema- 
tics adapts 
them for the 

tion of Posi- 
tive Logic. 

In their 
true place 
they will 
gain in dig- 
nity, as the 
source of 
improve- 
ment in the 
art of think- 
ing. 

Syn. Subj. 
p. 755. 

A species of 

universal 

Algebra. 

being common, present difficulties in point of abstraction ; on 
the contrary, the study of them is made easier by this com- 
munity, as it is an evidence of their simplicity. It is only 
when abstraction has to deal with very complicated notions, as 
in the higher sciences, that by the nature of the case it in- 
creases the difficulty and the merit of our inductions, and stiU 
more of our deductions, though the objects which form 
their sphere be fewer in number. So, it is generality in the 
subjective sense that justly claims the intellectual presidency, 
for it is competent to raise in Morals, in Sociology, and even 
in Biology, systematic constructions, in utility, in difficulty, 
and even in perfection, surpassing those of Mathematics. 

But the incorporation of science with religion, by ensuring 
the prevalence of encyclopaedic culture, puts an end once for 
all to discussions which depended for their importance on the 
regime of specialism. It is exclusively by virtue of their 
greater simplicity that the domain of Mathematics ofifers the 
best field for the developement of Positive logic in its final 
systematic form. When cultivated in this spirit, there can be no 
revival of the unreasonable claim to precedence on the part of 
a science which, by its very nature, is confined to the most 
elementary subjects of human contemplation. 

When restricted to its true object, a logical rather than a 
scientific one, this fundamental branch of science acquires a 
dignity which it could not have whilst vainly claiming supre- 
macy. Its capacity for systematising true logic will be shown 
more fully by our drawing from it a general improvement of 
the art of thinking. This conclusive ^sult of the treatise 
under consideration will be explained in detail in its synthe- 
tical conclusion ; for the present I only anticipate so far as to 
give an idea of the nature of the progress contemplated. 

It consists in the creation of a species of universal Algebra, 
calculated to facilitate thought, whatever be the subject on 
which thought is exercised, in as great a degree as ordinary 
algebra facilitates our meditations upon quantity. Without here 
explaining this new algorithm, I simply annoimce that it will 
condense alphabetic writing, as its predecessor condensed 
hieroglyphical writing. So that the writing of Sociocracy will 
thus receive an improvement, the equivalent to that which 
the Theocracy introduced in its writing. By such a creation 
alone will systematic Positivity be able to offer, as it comes to 

•Chap. III.] THE DOCTKINB. 183 

embrace all departments of thought, resources no less perfect 
ithan when confined to the simplest speculations. Then, and Human lan- 
then only, will human language be constituted in its normal pietea. • 
plenitude, for then only will the signs which are the best 
medium for communication have become the best medium for 
mental labour. 

In this way, the losric of Mathematics, made synthetical by scientific 

•" ° 3 J J influence of 

ithe introduction of feeling', will in its turn react upon the* Mathematics 

„ T-. _Li ■ j_-n whentliua 

general advance of abstract reason. lirom the scientmc renoratea. 
point of view, the definitive systematisation of the first step in 
iihe abstract encyclopedia, carries with it results of equal im- 
portance, as it gives us an elementaiy general conception of the 
whole order of things, moral, intellectual, and physical. This 
iiriple system of laws will consequently find recognition, not 
imerely as regards the study of motion, but also in that of 
extension, and even of number, on the ground of the necessary 
relation between the object and the subject, a relation more 
appreciable in the more simple abstraction. The earliest phase 
of our initiation in science will thus elicit from the doctrine a 
moral infiuence of a kind to complete that derived from the 
worship, more particularly from the personal worship. In fact 
the worship developes the fundamental instinct of veneration, 
Tsy its accustoming us to be fond of order : of order imposed 
Tjy will ; of order of our own institution ; of order enforced 
by external necessity. Now the synthesis of Mathematics 
should exercise an equivalent influence, with the terms of the 
progression inverted. Although this reversed course is less pure 
and less noble, it forms irresistible convictions, which tend to 
consolidate the discipline arising from the worship, as they 
bring with them a profound sense of the value of this threefold 
submission, which thenceforth is as precious in the eye of 
reason as of feeling. 

The proximate publication of the work, the character of °°^^]°^^«j. 
which I have been explaining, left it still incumbent on me to ^^^^ 
point out here the nature and the object of the first of the seven synthesis. 
volumes, constituting the ' Abstract Encyclopcedia,' which is to 
condense the definitive system of the Positive doctrine. The 
foundation once duly laid by the execution of this volume, it 
will be impossible any longer to dispute the feasibility of 
reducing the normal exposition of true science to seven volumes, 
each volume devoted to one of the seven sciences of the ency- 

184 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

This realised 
by few tiU 
the task is 
accom- 
plished. 

Condensa- 
tion of Cos- 
mology. 

Second 

Volume. 

Astronomy. 

clopsedic hierarchy, each also composed of seven chapters. Ore 
comparing the volume on Mathematics with the mathematical! 
phase of Positive education, as laid down in the plan given in the 
' General View,' there may seem reason to fear that so short a 
book will be insufficient for such a science. For each chapter of 
the mathematical synthesis offers, on an average, a condensation 
three times as great as that effected in the other volumes. But,, 
"besides that the science, owing to its greater simplicity, admits- 
of more concentration in its written exposition, though its oral 
teaching must be much fuller ; two other reasons combine to- 
explain this exceptional condensation. Easier, older, and more; 
independent, the speculations of Mathematics have naturally 
been more exposed to idle digressions, so as to require expurga- 
tion on a vaster scale. As the end they have in view is to. 
develope method rather than science, their culture demands- 
more time and even effort than any other, but this is no reason 
why their systematic exposition in writing should occupy more 
space. 

Be this as it may, it is only synthetical thinkers duly 
trained, and such at the present day are extremely rare, who- 
will consider practicable so great a condensation, previous to my 
effecting it. But this first step once taken, it will no longer be 
possible to reject the concentration of science requisite if 
feeling is to preponderate, activity to have free play. Hence- 
naturally, I attached peculiar importance to this explanation, as. 
in no other way could I make it clear, to what an extent the 
admirable wish of Diderot comes to be, after the lapse of a 
century, attainable in a satisfactory degree, nay even in a degree 
beyond the hopes originally entertained. 

Such remarks as I have to offer on the rest of Cosmology 
may be more brief. For Biology, though in the first volume I 
treated it in some detail, so as to prepare the way for its 
definitive systematisation, it still requires as much explanation 
as the whole of the inorganic sciences together. But in this 
place, it is Morals to which the fullest developement must be 
given, as soon as I have pointed out the form which Sociology 
will definitively take by the condensation of the present treatise. 

Of the seven fundamental sciences, Astronomy is actually 
nearest its final state, so as to require merely coordination and 
some elimination, for which the way has been prepared by my 
first volume. My treatise on Astronomy, published in 1844, the 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTEINE. ■ 185 

result of a course of philosophical and popular teaching con- 
tinued during seventeen years, completes my justification for not 
irsisting at present on the second phase of the abstract encyclo- 
pisdia. These two preparatory steps should suffice to enable the 
reader to grasp the plan of the second volume of the doctrinal 
system of Positivism. Its seven chapters will organise prelimi- 
nary astronomy; the statics of celestial geometry ; the laws which 
sum up its dynamics ; the application of those laws for legiti- 
mate prevision ; the fundamental law of celestial mechanics ; 
the reaction of that law on the statics of the science ; and its 
dynamical developement. All I have to add here is, some hints 
with the aim of completing my earlier judgment as to the con- 
stitution, the subjective and relative constitution, proper for the 
study of the Earth — its geometrical and mechanical study. 

Such complementary observations can have no place in the The astro- 

^ 'J ■»■ nomical 

seven chapters of the volume on Astronomy, those chapters volume, as 
having alreadv their definite object marked out as a result of wuiiiave ' 

° ^ ^ .a religious 

the work above alluded to, which cannot, however, be a substi- introduction 

and a syn- 

tute for them. But the second volume of the abstract encyclo- theticai con- 
clusion. 
psedia must, as its predecessor and those which follow, open with 

a religious introduction, and be summed up in a synthetical 
conclusion. The introduction is meant to set forth the general 
constitution of the science treated, and its normal relations with 
its predecessor. In the conclusion, we estimate its chief results, 
and its value as a preparatory step to the next phase of the 
encyclopaedic construction. Now it is in reference solely to this 
preamble and this summaiy, both, though in a different way, 
relating to the whole of the science under review, that the 
astronomical volume of the second philosophy can here admit 
some complementary apergus. 

Confined to the most intellectual of our senses, the study of Logical as- 
the heavens creates the best type of observation, which is too Astronomy. 
simple in Mathematics, too complex everywhere else, for us to best type of 
systematise it as satisfactorily as in the second phase of the the best 
encyclopaedia. The same unavoidable limitation makes it the hypotheses. 
destiny of Astronomy to furnish us spontaneously our model, predecessor 
when we would construct hypotheses of a really Positive cha- factoriiy. 
racter, hypotheses, that is to say, always admitting of verifica- 
tion. Again, no other science can so thoroughly regulate the 
extent to be allotted to its predecessor, for nowhere else is the 
connection between two sciences so perfect. These, its various 

186 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

logical advantages, do not however here require any new 
explanations. Conversely to Mathematics, Astronomy, our 
second abstract science, has a scientific rather than a logical 
object : so that it is from the point of view of the doctriae in 
particular that I must now complete its examination. 
scientiflo Although in Astronomy, as in Mathematics, existence in 

Astronomy, the widest seuse is reduced to its lowest attributes, in Astronomy 

It presents i -i r- i • • -i i 

iiswith the laws of those attributes produce a more irresistible con- 

Mathemati- . . -i mi • t /• 

cai existence victiou of the fundamental order. The previous study of these 

uncomplica- ^--.^^ 

ted. attributes, as much a question ot touch as of sight, was better 

adapted to show their universality, but it did so by compelling 
us to set aside the properties which co-exist with them in 
such bodies as are entirely within our reach. Now in conse- 
quence of this abstraction we were unable adequately to 
appreciate numerical, geometrical, and mechanical order, as the 
indispensable basis of the higher economy. Existence, in the 
mathematical sense, must be seen realised in bodies capable of 
offering us no other form of it, if its laws are to serve as the 
direct foundation of the whole of the second philosophy. Such 
is the privilege in regard to synthesis of Astronomy, it affords 
us the advantages of the concrete point of view in our study of 
the most eminent types of material existence, whilst it keeps 
the abstract character required for scientific generality, as we 
only know of these beings under this one aspect. So that in it 
numerical, geometrical, and mechanical existence is no longer 
confined to the subjective milieu created by the instinct of the 
race to facilitate especially the conception by all of such ex- 
istence. When made the object of direct study in the case of 
the heavenly masses which govern the Earth's motions, it traces 
in them an order of the more capital importance in that it is 
entirely beyond the reach of human interference. 
EeiatiTity We are thus led to see that mathematical existence is the 

Astronomy, normal foundation of all other existence, as we cannot withdraw 
that a sub- ourselvos from the dominion of the bodies which present it 
is alone pos- isolated, and in which it implies attributes which we shall 
bounds tiie nevor be able to appreciate. The character of relativity which 

Solaisystem. ,,, .. , ,ij_ j 

attaches to all real enquiries can never be so strongly stampea 
on any other science, as it is on the science which would escape 
us were we to lose the only sense qualified to create it, or 
were the bodies it studies and their milieu destitute of the pro- 
perties it requires for its creation. Since the acceptance of 

Chap. IU.] THE DOCTRINE. 187 

the earth's motion, Astronomy, more than any other science, 
enforces the conviction that a subjective unity is the only one 
within our reach, for any real astronomical knowledge is limited 
to the planetary domain of the Great Being. Were it not for 
this centre, the study of the heavens would become as inco- 
herent as it, would be idle, by tending towards the absolute, 
though with evidently less hope in this particular case than 
elsewhere. In its own nature indefinite, Astronomy can be 
defined only by affecting it to the knowledge of man's planet, 
and the heavenly bodies in connection with it ; a restriction 
which implies the earth's motion. But by the fact of this 
connection the earth's motion is of such importance to relative 
philosophy, that in its maturity human reason requires no 
demonstration of its existence. It was really accepted without 
demonstration, since its acceptance, preceding the conclusive 
evidence for it, took place at the time when the advent of the 
Positive state gave a seasonable opportunity for a change which 
had been in preparation from the very earliest beginning of 
science. 

Whilst, however, we study the heavens in order to know the The planets 
earth, astronomical science must have granted it the whole fluencethe 
field required for the relative conception of the fundamental intoaccount. 
order. Taking no account of the stars external to the solar 
system, we study amongst those which compose it only such as 
can really influence the earth. Those then, which as visible to 
the naked eye, were at all times observed, should constitute 
the real domain of Astronomy ; for the others, as too small or 
too distant, are necessarily alien to us. The field thus marked 
out, is, it should be remembered, sufficient for our practical 
wants ; nay less would suffice, the two bodies, viz., in direct 
connection with the earth, the one as centre, the other as 
its satellite. Nevertheless, the philosophical aims of the science 
require an habitual attention to the old planets, and their study 
finds a consecration in the institution of the week, an in- 
stitution adopted into the Positive worship. Their aggregate 
is needed to give us a suflScient number of worlds to examine, as 
was admirably shown by Fontenelle. If we excluded them, 
our conception of the order which is a fate to us must be de- 
ficient in relativity. 

The same train of philosophical reasoning, if produced, 
sanctions the study of the satellites and even of comets, although 

188 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OP MAN. 

if we regard simply our wants, either intellectual or practical, 
we might entirely eliminate both these appendices. On 
the condition of its constant subordination to the subjec- 
tive construction, the cultivation of the two branches in. 
moderation will give greater completeness, from the logical as 
well as the scientific point of view, to our study of the celestial 
order, as a result of a systematic comparison of the three gene- 
ral cases in which we trace that order. Nothing but this 
comparative study can impress the fact that the regularity of 
the heavenly order is due solely to its simplicity ; as soon as 
the influences become complicated, the economy of the heavens 
tends to less regularity, than do the institutions created by the 
foresight of man. 
of'i'etiohSm Having carried even into the domain of Mathematics the 
f=^Fo=t";'J' definitive fusion of Fetichism with Positivism, so the better to- 

Join CHiSj' 111 ' 

Astronomy, effect the Combination in logic of feelings, images, and signs ; 
au analogous transformation requires no effort in Astronomy. It 
was by the spectacle of the heavens really that Fetichism sur- 
vived through the theological era, and reached its incorporation. 

Psalm xLx.i. with Positivism. The ancient verse, my definitive renderinjj 
of which raised such bitter feeling towards me, could only have 
come from one who was a stranger to Astronomy. In fact, the 
admiration really inspired by the contemplation of the heavens 
is paid directly to the bodies, the regular movements of which 
we watch. It is an ungrateful as well as a blind disposition- — 
the child of fictitious and temporary beliefs — which alone 
diverts us from so natural a movement, by representing to us 
these immense beings as purely passive under wills external 
to them, and eternally impenetrable. But the definitive 
systematisation revives the normal attitude towards them, which 
has been swerved from during the Western transition, or rather 
during the last phase of that transition. If the heavens should 
above all recall to the Positivist the Great Being which re- 
vealed their laws and conformed to those laws its own provi- 
dential arrangements, they may also inspire him, and that 
in a higher degree than the Fetichists, with the involun- 
tary gratitude which corresponds to our appreciation of the 
universal order, an appreciation especially resting on ex- 
perience. 

We may, The doctrine can never on this point run counter to the 

■with due i £ j V 

precautions, disposition Sanctioned by the worship, and to be connrmed by 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTEINE. 189 

the life, as it should never lose an opportunity of enforcing animate the 
the importance of assisting, even hy artificial means, the growth bodies. 
of our sympathies. Putting aside the prejudices of science, we 
admit the impossibility of demonstrating the non-existence of 
the Grods to whose will Astrolatry looked as the continuous 
source of the celestial order. Since we have suppressed the 
idea of cause, the introduction of personal wills into science 
■would tend to disturb the study of laws, to which it served of 
old as a preparation. But there is no reason why we should 
not persist in our natural dispositions, and ,use these wills 
as a logical instrument to facilitate our speculations in 
Astronomy by the due introduction of the emotions. In 
this way the intellect concurs with the heart in justifying 
the sanction definitively given by Sociolatry to Idolatry, in 
direct contradiction with the empirical conclusions of Theology. 
Metaphysics, nay even of Science. If, even in Mathematics, 
we ought to animate space in order to think the better by 
loving more, a fortiori is such a method appropriate in Astro- 
nomy, where it has been usual strongly to recommend feelings 
of a disturbing character. By the adoption of this method, 
the state of synthesis and sympathy become so entirely spon- 
taneous as no longer to require a subjective milieu ; our feelings 
may be directly referred to the objects of our contemplation. 

In Astronomy in its subjective form, the last point is to The normal 

, P . p 1 . T 1 destination 

explain what is the true function of celestial mechanics, of celestial 

I'.ii .1-11 1 .. Mechanics 

Abandoning the irrational hopes entertained by mathematicians isphuoso- 
in their pride on the original discovery of the fundamental 
law of this branch, we recognise that Astronomy will always 
remain essentially a geometrical study ; we have not the 
power, nor do we need it, to reduce everything in it to system. 
The laws of Kepler would always sufiSce for reasonable pre- 
visions, if the six elements of every elliptical movement were 
in each case adapted anew to the case. Although the theory 
of the perturbations in these elements must render easier their 
periodical determination, it can never dispense with the labour 
of a distinct working out of the problem. In celestial me- 
chanics, then, it is the philosophical object that will remain 
predominant, be it the perfecting of the astronomical synthesis, 
be it the better connection of that synthesis with those which 
precede or follow it, by simplifying and adding force to our 
conception of the order of external destiny. 

190 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF JIAN. 

Tola. iii. and 
IT. o£ the 
Abstract 
Encyclopie- 
dia, treating 
Physics and 
Chemistry, 
reserved for 
Comte'3 suc- 

The third 
■ volume. 

The foui-th 

Tolume. 

Chemistry. 

Phil. Pos. iii. 
p. 19, 1st ed. 

Such are the indications, logical and scientiiic, which I was 
bound to place here in order to complete my earlier treatment 
of the second step in the abstract encyclopaedia. The primary 
pair of cosmological sciences thus adequately organised, I need 
not linger on the couple which forms the transition from the 
lower objects of contemplation to the higher domain. For in 
the first volume of this work, the systematisation of Physics 
and Chemistry has been set forth as far as is possible in the- 
present state of the Positive reconstruction, whilst at the same 
time the conditions yet to be met are pointed out. In ac- 
cordance with the fifteenth law of the First Philosophy, the 
intermediate couple is the least near its regeneration, to effect 
which will need the concurrence of the two others. I must 
leave, then, to my successors, the definitive execution of the 
third and fourth volumes of the Second Philosophy, simply 
pointing out the seven chapters into which each is to be divided. 

For Physics, the religious introduction will explain the 
purely subjective unity attainable in the case of a science, the- 
branches of which must always be objectively independent, 
notwithstanding that they subserve in common the study of 
the general constitution of inorganic matter as existing on the 
earth. The order of the seven chapters and their contents will 
be next determined by the senses to which they relate, ranked 
by their increasing speciality, a principle of arrangement which 
is in conformity with the gradual transition between Astronomy 
and Chemistry. Barology comes first, then the study of 
Gustation in the abstract, when founded ; then Thermology, 
followed by the theory of Smell, Optics, Acoustics, and 
Electrology. 

As for Chemistry, it is a science which admits of a more- 
satisfactory coordination ; since, being of narrower extent, it is 
susceptible of a definition in the fullest sense synthetical, a 
definition already given in my fundamental work. The intro- 
duction will first set forth the science as a whole, and it will 
then be possible to effect its definitive systematisation in th& 
seven chapters of the volume devoted to it, assuming that 
sufficient preparation has been made by the elaboration in- 
dicated in the first volume of the present work. The seven 
chapters will organise the study of the elements ; the chemical 
examination of the earth's environment ; the theory of the 
simplest compounds ; the theory of the second and most im- 

Chap. III."] THE DOCTRINE. 191 

portant degree of composition ; the general laws of combination ; 
the examination of the third degree ; lastly, the complement 
relating to substances of unstable composition. 

It is in this intermediate couple that the institution of Theoryof 
subjective milieus, systematised by Positivism on the basis of Miuens 
its rudimentary form in Mathematics, will most fully display tive in this 
its efficiency as an intellectual instrument, not that it may not be couple. 
extended also to the province of life. So adapted is it to geometry 
and even to mechanics, that its peculiar mode in those studies 
came in spontaneously, neither the scientific education of the 
individual or the race permitting us to trace the formation in 
the brain of the idea of space. It is in the physico-chemical 
domain, however, that the institution finds its widest field in 
consequence of the greater variety of the phenomena there 
observed, each class of which requires a milieu suited to its 
abstract study, a milieu but imperfectly indicated by the 
original type. 

Having thus set forth sufficiently the definitive systema- Biology. 
tisation of the existence common to all bodies, in its three 
stages, mathematical, physical, and chemical, I must now enter 
on the special sphere of unity, and so on Biology as a pre- 
paration for it. 

In my first volume I worked out the systematic study of The fifth 
vitality more fully than any other part of natural philosophy, the Abstract 
I carried its organisation so far as to give separately each of aia. 
the forty lessons, which, in the general plan of Positive educa- 
tion, are devoted to Biology. Notwithstanding this, the fifth 
volume of the abstract encyclopsedia must here receive fuller 
explanations than any of its predecessors, in order to give its 
true character to a systematisation of equal difficulty and 
urgency by drawing out into special prominence the necessary 
connection of Biology with the religion of Humanity. The 
slight attention gained, these three years past, by the capital 
conceptions I put forward on the immediate reconstruction of 
Biology, is but one more proof how impossible it is to give any 
science its systematic form, if we isolate it from the whole of 
the doctrine. Never would the theory of life be disengaged 
from the analytical regime which is destroying it, were not a 
social impulse to secure its due submission to the discipline of 
synthesis. 

Eeferring to the treatment of Biology in my first volume, 

192 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAlf. 

Elimination 
from Biology 
of two sub- 
jects : the 
theory of 
Unity, and 
the Ccrehral 
Synthesis. 

With this 
elimination 
the extent 
of Biology 
not dispro- 
portioned to 
that of Cos- 
mology. 

The intro- 
duction to 
the fifth 
volume. 

I am bound in the first place to point out a definitive elimina- 
tion which will place it in a better light. The systematisation 
of Biology stood there between two expositions essentially alien 
to the fifth encyclopsedic phase, but for which I could not then 
find another place and yet which I needed for the exposition 
of Sociology. Both really concern the ultimate science, the 
one for the theory of unity, the other for the synthesis of the 
cerebral functions. 

Assume these two episodes transferred to their proper place, 
and it will be seen that in the Introductory Principles, Bio- 
logy is not treated on a scale disproportioned to that of 
Cosmology. If this is allowed, a few systematic considerations 
are all that is needed here to complete the work then done, and 
their aim will be to mark more strongly the dependence sub- 
jectively of the vital order on the human order. We cannot do 
this better than by stating the object and the connection of the 
seven chapters into which the fifth volume of the Second Philo- 
sophy is to be divided. 

In its religious introduction, the first point will be to show 
the greatness of the step taken by the intellect, when it passes 
from the inorganic world to the world of life. So disconnected 
is mere material existence that the corpuscular theory is 
necessary to determine in Cosmology what is the proper field 
of abstraction, abstraction there always relating to molecules 
even whilst studying masses. In Biology, on the contrary, we 
enter the domain of unity, the unity of simple nutrition in the 
first place, then the unity of action and sensation, in the case of 
beings, whose characteristic is a permanent consensus, which 
allows analysis only as the preparation for synthesis. A law, as 
indisputable as it is inexplicable, connects, in aU cases without 
exception, this contrast between independence and concert with 
the opposition between fixity of composition and renewal of the 
material substance. Thus is established the gi-eat primary 
dualism of relative philosophy ; the preparation for which is the 
dualism introduced by the absolute philosophy, when it sepa- 
rated, as early as the Fetichist period, the external order from 
the human. This instinctive division, which drew no distinction 
between vitality and materiality, was destined under Theologism, 
concentrated as it was on Humanity, to serve as guide to Positive 
science in its gradual ascent, from its first step in Mathematics 
to its final terminus in Morals. By giving over to Positive 

•Chap. III.J THE DOCTKINE. 193 

science the province of life, it impelled it towards the study of 
man, only separate from that of life when we take into account 
the succession of the several degrees of unity. 

In this way, the religious introduction of the biological Biology is 
volume makes us feel the strictly preparatory object of the amweto 
science, a point more appreciable the nearer we get to the goal Hnmanity. 
of our theoretic efforts, which alone allows a true synthesis, all MmitB. 
partial syntheses being futile. As preparatory, the study of 
life in the strict sense tends to be limited to the preamble 
required for the systematic appreciation of Humanity. All the 
gi'eat problems as to Unity can be stated only in an inchoate 
form in Biology, as their solution depends above all on the 
functions of the brain, the essential sources of the consensus, 
which is but imperfectly perceptible till we reach the ultimate 
domain, or Morals. 

We are' thus led to condense Biology in seven chapters, the The seven 
two first of which organise its statical basis, anatomical in the the woiogi- 
first place, then taxonomical ; the others being all devoted to chaps, i. li. 
its dynamical portion. The biotomical chapter gives, in a i. Anato- 
systematic form and in succession, the three normal stages of 
statical analysis ; it treats, that is, of the elements, tissues, and 
organs, thus completing duly the fundamental conception of 
Bichat. Leaving molecular questions to Cosmology, Biology 
must yet begin with the study of the elements, in order to gain 
a right understanding of the harmony between the solids and 
the fluids, since the fluids can contain nothing but the rudi- 
ments of the solids. 

The second chapter arranges the hierarchy of life with the chap. ii. 
view of linking Vegetality, properly so called, to Humanity, 
through the series of degrees admissible for Animality. Scien- 
• tifically viewed, the scale so formed gives at once the succession 
of independent barriers which separate man from the inorganic 
world, and the series of intermedia which transmit to us the 
action of that world. Logically viewed, it throws light upon the 
analysis of life by fixing all its modes in beings which present 
them isolated from the higher degrees, and it allows biological 
synthesis to follow throughout the series the modifications of the 
unity originally expressed in man as its supreme type. These 
two uses of the scale of life admit, nay, demand a subjective 
conception of that scale, in which we put aside on system unpro- 
pitious cases, whilst we introduce such imagirary organisms as 

TOL. IT. 0 

Taxonomy. 

194 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

DynamicEil 
Biology. 

Chaps. III. 
IV. 

Laws of 
vegetal and 
animal life. 

Chap. V. 
Law of here- 
ditary trans- 
mission. 

Chap. TI. 
Relations 
between the 
organism 
and the en- 
vironment. 

Chap. VII. 
Vital modi- 
ficability. 

Synthetic 
conclusion 
of the fifth 
volume. 

Logical ap- 
preciation of 
the treatise 
on Biology. 

may facilitate our transitions and our comparisons. This done 
the vital series becomes unassailable, and connects equally with 
the progression traced in the material order and the evolution 
of man, whilst it secures the continuity of the Second Philo- 
sophy in obedience to the law of classification which it derives, 
from the First. 

With this preparation, dynamical Biology is condensed in 
five chapters, in which animality is distinguished from vege- 
tality, in accordance with the mode of alimentation, for in 
animal life the materials of nutrition must be elaborated in lower 
organisms if they are to be adapted to the higher. The third 
chapter of the fifth volume of the abstract encyclopaedia must be 
devoted, then, to the three fundamental laws of vegetative or 
organic life, to the study, that is, of renewal, of developement, 
and lastly of reproduction. The next chapter proceeds from 
this point to an equivalent treatment of animal Hfe, by examin- 
ing in succession the laws of exercise, habit, and improvement. 

The complement of these two groups of vital laws must 
be given by their connection, the proper subject of the fifth 
chapter, where the seventh law, the special law of hereditary 
transmission, combines the functions of nutrition which are 
unintermittent with the functions of activity which are inter- 
mittent. We are thus enabled in the sixth chapter to examine 
directly the relations which necessarily exist between the organ- 
ism and its environment, which relations are the permanent 
sources of the modifications of either. As the result of this, the 
whole preparatory process issues, in the seventh chapter, in the 
general study of vital modificability, and we base this study on 
the third law of the First Philosophy, the law which connects 
all variations whatever, even the variations of disease, with the 
normal state. 

This construction of the abstract theory of life is summarised 
in the synthetic conclusion of the volume, which states the grand 
results of the biological treatise, and forms the direct introduc- 
tion to the Sociological volume. Under its logical aspect, 
Biology, as the highest portion of natural philosophy, gives 
completeness to the relativity originated by the lowest portion, 
and developed in the intermediate sciences, the ultimate object 
being to form the basis for moral philosophy. Summed up in 
the movement of the earth and the gravitation of the planetary 
system, the astronomical synthesis is a preparation for the rela- 

Chap, in.] THE DOCTRINE. 195 

tive conception of hunaan existence, by revealing the relative 
character of our conception of the environment to which we are 
subject. But the systematisation of Biology extends the same 
process to the constitution of our bodies, on which rests our 
cerebral life. As a consequence, the science of Sociology is 
enabled to effect the decisive revolution in the human under- 
standing, by its direct proof that all opinions whatever are 
relative, by virtue of the laws of their movement. It is, how- 
ever, solely from this final branch of study that we get the 
power of understanding why the change was so long in coming, 
why it was destined to await the close of our initiation, though 
the foundation for it had been laid from the very first begin- 
niags of the scientific developement. If on the one hand, the 
conception of the earth's motion was early accepted ; on the 
other, the spontaneous comparison of the various degrees of 
animal existence was at all times sufScient to establish the 
relative character of our biological conceptions whenever the 
time should be ripe for its acceptance. 

Under its scientific aspect, the treatise on life developes and soientiflc ap- 
consolidates om' primary conception of the order of the world, ^'^^"'^ ""'" 
connecting as it does the intellectual and moral order with the 
material, by laws whose sway is a matter of direct conscious- 
ness. The study of these laws prepares the way for the syste- 
matic conception of a destiny admitting modifications, a concep- 
tion which is the leading characteristic of the Positive dogma. 
For in Biology the phenomena become so complex, as to evidence 
the possibility of modifying, no less than the impossibility of 
withdrawing ourselves from, the natural order. Its imperfection 
is more sensible, its instability more marked, and both tend to 
inspire a deeper sense of the dignity of our nature and the true 
purpose of our existence. Even Cosmology excludes the idea of 
absolute seciu-ity, by its unbroken prospect of material cata- 
strophes, either celestial or terrestrial, catastrophes against 
which we cannot provide. But Biology widens and completes 
our sense of insecurity, by making us aware how precarious is 
the individual existence, which is the foundation of the whole 
social economy. We are thus compelled to connect ourselves 
more closely with the Great Being, whose service gives scope for 
the feelings which give oiu* life a nobility and even a consis- 
tency, which rise above all the fatalities of the inorganic or vital 
order. 

o 2 

196 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PUTUJBE OP MAN. 

Preparation 
for the trea- 
tise on So- 
ciology in 
the syntheti- 
cal conolu- 
Rion. 

Comple- 
mentary re- 
marks. 

Additions" to 
the first 
chapter. 
The Law of 
ternary pro- 
gression. 

Coming now to the logical and scientific preparation for the 
sociological volume, the synthetical conclusion of the biological 
construction effects it directly by its outline of the study of the 
brain, and of the theory of unity, guided thereto by investiga^ 
tion of the lower animals. But this twofold introduction 
becomes negative rather than positive, when we suppress the 
notions derivable from the higher science, although the placing 
them in biology may have its advantages in teaching, if it be in 
subordination to the succeeding phase of abstract education. 
The great object in so placing them must be to show the 
inevitable impotence of the treatise on life, as regards sucli 
speculations ; they have their fundamental type in the sacred 
science, profane science serving as a preparation, and as a pre- 
paration only. Biology represents each animal species as a 
Grreat Being which has aborted, the cause of its failure lying 
rather in its circumstances than in itself, and by this presenta- 
tion it establishes the law which reserves to the preponderating 
race the developement of collective existence, the sole source 
of real unity. Historically derived from the sacred science, 
dogmatically the conception may be transferred to take its 
place at the head of profane science, in order that the prepara- 
tion for the former may end in the demonstration of the 
insufficiency of the latter. 

To give completeness to the new views here advanced on 
the final systematisation of Biology, I must give those which, 
at each stage of the process of revision, I have been obliged 
to put aside in order not to interrupt the general succession of 
ideas. 

In the first chapter, there must be added, first, the application 
to the anatomical series of the law of ternary progression, nay even 
to the coordination of the elements of the organism. The sub- 
jective organisation of Biology — such is the only security against 
the uncertainty which results, in reference to the general 
divisions of statical analysis, from distinctions or connections 
alike arbitrary. If we rightly conceive the object of the pro- 
gression— and it is rightly conceived as essentially logical — we 
determine its limits by the consideration of the scientific wants 
it has to satisfy. In that case we keep only the three terms 
above mentioned, the true conception of which is in reality due 
to Bichat, for he it was who established the middle term, by 
virtue of which the two others, at all times instinctively recog- 

Chap. Ill] THE DOCTRINE. 197 

nised, are at length accepted on system. In like manner we 
must determine the anatomical elements, by looking on them 
as destined to represent the harmony which is indispensable 
between the solids and the flmds of the body, provided always 
that we first separate the elements from the products, with 
which they were often confounded. This destination involves 
our looking on the blood as containing all the rudiments of the 
tissues, and, consequently, of the organs. Now, the tissues are 
necessarily three in number, in order to allow the life of nutrition, 
muscular action, and nervous excitability, and they are three by 
virtue of the structure, cellular, fibrous, or tubular, adapted for 
the discharge of these functions respectively. 

As for the second chapter, all I have to do is to explain the S^apter?""* 
feasibility of condensing therein a study to which academical ™fe^J^iS° 
routine devotes several volumes. Such condensation would <^^^^^<^^<>^- 
still be impossible, or would be found unsatisfactory, had we not 
already, at the very commencement of the Second Philosophy, 
created the general theory of Positive classifications, in accord- 
ance with the principle laid down in the First Philosophy. 
But with these antecedents, we may reduce the taxonomical 
chapter of the treatise on life, almost entirely to the construction, 
a subjective rather than objective construction, of the scale of 
organic beings, and that contracted within the limits appro- 
priate to its legitimate destination. 

The third chapter is calculated to place in a clear light the ^^apte?'^ 
true nature of the systematisation of Biology, by the way in f^l^^°^ 
which it establishes the theory of vegetal life. If it were our ^^^^1^^°^ 
object to systematise Biology, from an objective point of view, 
it must be reduced to this its first province, the only one ad- 
mitting an exact demarcation as regards the higher science 
between which and Cosmology it is the link. Since the abstract 
study of vegetal life is undertaken only with a view to animal 
life, this usage adopted by common consent foreshadows the 
ultimate triumph of the subjective synthesis, which can have 
no other source but the primary type of unity. 

The conclusion here reached, a conclusion at once logical and ab^J^T^ 
scientific, gains its full force in the fourth chapter, where the Sniiu" 
special study of the life of relation never lets us forget the con- ^ep'tJthe 
viction to what a degree biological reasoning remains irrational or^ewf"^' 
when it is isolated from its true human application. It makes 
vain efforts to establish the consensus of the muscular and 

198 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

nervous functions, so long as it misconceives the functions of 
the brain, which alone bring the others into combination. Now, 
the study of these higher or cerebral phenomena, though we 
may enter on it in a certain imperfect degree in regard to the 
lower animals, can be pursued fully only in man, and man is 
inseparable from Humanity. 
tThe fifth The like remark is applicable to the fifth chapter, as it 

forms the only possible connection, biologically, between the two 
preceding chapters. But whilst it evidences the insufficiency 
of this direct connection, at the same time it evidences its im- 
portance and its reality. Although the seventh law of vitality, 
logically speaking, may be deduced from the others, whereas 
they are irreducible, it is wise to distinguish it from them, 
be it to use it as a bond of union for them, or be it above all to 
keep in sight its own particular object, at once a theoretical 
and practical object. 
Thesixtii For the sixth chapter, I have nothing to add at present, 

subfeoSvity savc & particular recommendation, in working out the theory 
meffll?""" of organic milieus, to adhere to the subjective point of view; 
on that theory depend the principal problems of Ufe, and 
it will be characteristic of the efficiency of the synthetical 
method. 
The seventh So again for the seventh chapter at first, since the theory. 

Aptitude for of vital modificability exists as yet only in its general principle, 
Minflned to" an immediate outcome of the First Philosophy. But it needs 
^bSances. a complement here, in the law which applies to all modifying 
influences whatsoever, provided always that they be distin- 
guished from foreign bodies. The law consists in limiting 
an aptitude for modifying to such substances as are assi- 
milable, regarding each as an irritant or a calmative, when 
the dose exceeds or falls short of the point at which it is an 
article of food. This law completes the theory of modificability, 
which ought not to be confined to the organism modified, but 
should include the modifying milieu. Its application in 
science is to establish, between therapeutics and hygienics, a 
subordination analogous to that which the principle of Broussais 
established between pathology and physiology. I have not 
here to bring out its utility ; in practice, it eliminates 
specifics, and offers a satisfactory substitute for them. If 
we inquire into its origin as a part of the system dynamically, 
it is traceable to the connection between nutrition and action, 

•Chap. III.] THE DOCTRINE. 199 

a conneetion, the statical equivalent of which is the connection 
between the vessels and the nerves. 

Besides these special additions to the several chapters of the nisseotion, 

, even of ani- 

'treatise on life, I have one last remark to add here, a remark mais, for- 

■ bidden the 

applicable throughout the whole of Biology. It bears on the priest. 
discipline, established in my theory of the Great Being, of the 
ranatomical examination of the human body. Confined to 
functionaries on whom devolves a terrible office, it must never 
soil the dignity of the priesthood, be what they may the 
^seductions of science, which are always kept in check by the 
antipathy of the public, not to speak of the distaste of individual 
priests. Apart from all moral grounds, the restriction is one 
■which far from hampering thought in Biology, stimulates it to a 
systematic action ; since it tends to ensure the fuller ascen- 
dancy of the subjective method, the most fruitful source of high 
conceptions. An examination whicli would degrade the priest- 
hood is no degradation to functionaries who would welcome 
such means of bestowing their official leisure, whilst all abuse 
is precluded by the fact that opportunities cannot be multi- 
plied by any act of theirs. To such an extent can reasoning 
take the place of observation, that most anatomical laws can 
be deduced from physiological conceptions with as much ease 
as was the duality of the cerebral organs, indicated by the fact 
of double vision, and by our instinct of symmetry. As salutary 
for the intellect as for the heart, the discipline of synthesis 
will make us shrink from the abuse of substituting animals 
for men, the priesthood of Sociocracy more even than the 
priesthood of Theocracy being disposed to insist upon the con- 
stant respect of our auxiliaries. 

Such are the several additions required to coinplete the Theaddi- 
indications of my first volume as to the definitive systematisa- binea-with 
tion of Biology. By combining the two with the third volume work aione 
of my Philosophy, it will be possible to undertake the construe- the woiop- 

T f> 1 • J. J- *^^ volume, 

tion of the treatise on lite, so soon as the more important when certain 
deficiencies yet existing shall have been supplied. The execu- beeniiued. 
tion of the fifth volume of the Second Philosophy being reserved 
for one of my successors, its plans required even now some 
definitive indications, which will dispense with my recurring to 
the subject. 

Before I proceed further with the synthetical construction -me division 
of the seven treatises which are to fix the analytical form of Ave first and 

200 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE EUTUEE OE MAN.. 

the two last 
volumes of 
the abstract 
eucyclopiE- 
dia; between 
natural and 
moral philo- 
sophy ; be- 
tween pro- 
fane and 
sacred 
science. 

The two 
binary di- 
visions com- 

the Positive doctrine, I must dwell on the marked distinction! 
which, without destroying the connection of the whole, wilt 
always make itself felt between the five first and the two last. The- 
historical division of the Second Philosophy into natural and 
moral, is one the utility of which is not confined to the initia- 
tion in science, either of the individual or of the race. As the 
motives which led to its adoption as a natural result stiUi 
operate, we see that it is destined ultimately to become equally 
for theoricians and practicians the binary arrangement of the 
doctrine most in use. The one with which I above confronted 
it is objectively more rational, for it rests upon more marked dis- 
tinctions and more close connections ; but subjectively it. is less 
rational, so as to offer us less aid in our synthetical meditations.. 
We must, then, look upon the chief binary intellectual division 
as a definitive outcome of the distinction, at first spontaneously 
adopted, then systematically, between the human order and 
the external order, two branches of study which are ta be com- 
pared under the expressive names of sacred and profane science. 
In the normal state, whilst due attention wiU be paid to the- 
inevitable contrast between the organism and the environment,, 
the great use of that distinction wUl be to bring out more clearly 
the relativity of all our conceptions, and the futility of all 
objective syntheses. These two results once become familiar to 
all, the historical dualism will prevail over the dogmatical. 

Compare the two under their logical aspect, and we see that 
the first is better adapted than the second to subordinate objec- 
tive analysis to subjective synthesis. For the second seems to 
hand over to analysis a domain in which analysis must ever 
preponderate, as disconnected existences are in question ; whilst 
the former terminates the system of dispersion by a rudimentary 
introduction of unity. Although the organic scale, by its want 
of continuity, tends to give a sanction to the dominion of 
analysis, we have a legitimate resource for anticipating or 
remedying this downward tendency in the subjective aim of om- 
biological studies, directed as they invariably are to an indi- 
visible problem. The dogmatical combination could be pre- 
ferred to the historical only if analysis were destined to be 
finally the general characteristic of the Second Philosophy. 
But as, on the contrary, that philosophy is in its ultimate 
form to be synthetical, the historical dualism, as a better prepa- 
ration for it, is theoretically preferable. Its practical superio- 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTEINE. 201 

rity cannot be doubted, admirably adapted as it is, to represent, 
in its best form, the contrast between the two social powers. 
To guide the reaction of the organic on the inorganic world in 
its full extent, man must rank his auxiliar animals amongst the 
beings to be modified ; so that the external order and the 
human order are the respective departments of the Patriciate 
and of the Priesthood. 

This definitive comparison of the two binary arrangements. The two 
both equally normal, allowable for the Positive dogma, may be withrefer- 
summarised by an examination of the extreme limits assignable jective 
to the institution of subjective milieus, the scientific object of 
which is to facilitate abstractions. Though the institution is 
more available in Cosmology than in Biology, speculation in the 
latter becoming less abstract ; still it ought to be of use in 
perfecting the general study of life, and that by enabling us to 
form a clearer idea of the typical organisms. In Astronomy it 
helps us to realise the movements without the bodies ; a fortiori 
in Biology it can assist our comparisons, too often partial and as 
such, in default of images, limited to the help of signs. But in 
social and moral investigations, the institution loses at once its 
aptitude and its destination, as does analysis which it assists ; 
for at this point abstraction is nearing its end, owing to the 
coincidence of the object and the subject. The scientific value, 
then, of subjective milieus, as well as their BBsthetic power, 
extends as far as the limits of the domain of profane science, 
neither the one nor the other can ever have place in the domain 
of sacred science. 

It remains to complete the construction of the Second separation - 
Philosophy by the exposition of its two last portions ; the irrevoc- ana Morals. 
able disjunction of which expresses in brief the chief superiority the subject 
of my present work over my Philosophy. Though moral volume. 
science is more especially the object we have in view, we 
must first touch on Sociology, to which will be devoted the 
sixth volume of the abstract encyclopaedia. But by virtue of 
the work done in the present treatise, the definitive systemati- 
sation of Sociology may be practically reduced to the combina- 
tion in a single volume of the two in which I have shaped the 
statics and dynamics of the social science. 

So condensed, and the condensation is one attended with Eeugioua 
only minor difficulties, the sociological volume of the Second smd synthe- 
Philosophy will consist of seven coordinate chapters, standing, slon ot'the ' 

202 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

volume on 
Sociology. 

The seven 
chapters of 
the Socio- 
logical 
volume. 

as in every other case, between the religious introduction and the 
synthetical conclusion. The introduction -will delineate the 
general arrangement of the sixth encyclopaedic phase and its 
dependence on the preceding one ; the conclusion will give its 
principal results and its function as regards its successor. These 
two explanations are in Sociology more urgently needed, and 
more difficult than in the previous sciences, as in approaching 
our goal we are tempted to hurry over the intermediate steps. 
When Biology had been created in a certain sense, the 
attempt was made to found Morals v?ithout having formed 
(Sociology, and there will always be a tendency in the individual 
to repeat in his educational period this natural but over hasty 
process of the evolution of the race. The decisive point in my 
career was the construction of the social science, and there will 
never be a time when it will not be essential to give the reasons 
for its intercalation, though the explanation no longer involves 
the efforts and the fullness which it required of me. After 
having studied first the milieu, then the body, we must enter on 
the systematic study of the soul, by unveiling the laws, statical 
or dynamical, of the intelligence and activity of man, as 
verified in the collective existence of man, which has direct 
relation to the Great Being. Its examination leads us to com- 
plete sacred science by studying the true unity in order to 
develope and consolidate the real Providence by regulating the 
emotions, the thoughts, and the acts of its voluntary servants. 

The seven chapters of the sociological volume are devoted 
to establishing the statical theories of property, the family, 
language, and society ; then to the dynamical theories of Fetich- 
ism, Theocracy, and the threefold transition which completed 
the education of the race by the developement of its powers. 
The plan is, as we see, a condensation of the results of the pre- 
sent work, with the introduction of no absolutely new conception, 
but separating off Morals, the existence of which as a distinct 
science began in the course of my construction, and so could 
not have its proper influence upon it. As for the study of the 
normal state in itself, that is reserved for the last of the sciences, 
the science of which Sociology is the immediate preciu-sor. But 
the imperative necessity for this distribution of parts must 
never throw into the shade the strong affinity for one another of 
the two halves of sacred science, as compared with the dif- 
ferent parts of profane science. To make it more evident, we 

■Chap. III.] THE DOCTRINE. 203 

may make a third quaternary arrangement of the system of 
Positive doctrine, we might, that is, separate this highest from 
the two lower pairs of sciences by intercalating Biology, as the 
science in which the profane and the sacred effect a junction. 

All the rest of the present chapter relates exclusively to the The rest of 

. -^ ■*■ the chapter 

£nal science, the science to which all our theories whatsoever devoted to 

Morals. 

normally converge, and from which as from a common source, 
spring all our conceptions of action. Up to this point all inves- 
tigation, not excepting Sociology, preserved its abstract and 
introductory character, as a consequence of the interval, one, it 
is true, constantly lessening, between the subject and the object. 
But in Morals the full coincidence of the two ushers in the 
■definitive state of human reason ; for in Morals the develope- 
ment of objective analysis results in the complete establishrdent 
of the subjective synthesis. In a word, in Morals the doctrine 
unites with the worship in order to systematise the regime. It 
is in Morals that is effected the general transition from the life 
■of thought to the life of action. Nevertheless, the seventh The seventh 

volume of 

volume of the Second Philosophy must still retain the specula- the Abstract 

Encyclopte- 

tive character which has pervaded the whole scheme, the better ffia. 
to mark that it terminates in a synthesis. Such explanations, 
then, as I here give, must bear solely on the theory of Morals, 
that is to say, on the direct study of man, reserving for the 
following chapter their application to practical Morals, the aim 
of which is to regulate human life. 

But the treatise on the supreme science promised above, The system 
will not carry the division between the theory and practice of Morals, or 
Morals farther than to make it distinguish between the two unwersai 
volumes of which it will consist, in agreement with its double -win be in ' 
title : ' System of Positive Morals,' or ' Treatise of Universal nmea, the 
Education.' It was under this second title that I naturally the seventh 
announced it in 1842, at the end of my Philosophy, in which I the abstract 
liad not yet separated Morals from Sociology. Since the dia. 
decisive and irrevocable separation of the two has been effected, 
I have felt more and more that the direct study of the art 
which is emphatically human, must have a special antecedent in 
the construction of the science which is peculiarly human, the 
science which previously had not attained distinct existence. 
This is why, instead of the one volume originally promised, 
the work will be in two, dealing respectively with theoretic 
and practical Morals, as the term. Morals, hj a. happy ambi- 

204 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

The religious 
infcruduction 
of the vo- 
lume. 

Supremacy 
of Morals to 
be asserted, 
(a) Logi- 
cally. 

(b) Sclenti- 
flcally. 

guity lends itself to such treatment, and serves as a repre- 
sentative for our whole synthesis. In the present place, the 
indications I offer must bear solely on the first volume, the 
seventh and last volume of the Second Philosophy, as it con- 
structs the synthetical science, on the bases supplied by the 
hierarchy pf the analytical sciences. 

The religious introduction of this final treatise will he 
directed, as in the other cases, to tracing the general plan of 
the volume, and its proper dependence on the phase next below 
it in the encyclopaedic construction. The difference lies in the 
greater importance and the greater diflSculty of these two 
explanations, owing to the closer affinity evidently existing 
between the two elements of the sacred domain, however 
necessary it may be on systematic grounds to separate them. 
Consequently, it will be requisite to insist on this point of their 
distinction, a distinction no less indispensable to theory than to 
practice, for it is solely in virtue of it that the analytical con- 
struction can have a synthetic conclusion, as it allies the 
doctrine with the worship in order to organise the regime. 

Distinct prominence must be given to the superiority of 
moral science, its logical and scientific superiority, as compared 
with all the others, which are but its necessary preparations. 
Thus only do we grasp in its entire range the Positive method, 
after having appreciated in Mathematics, deduction ; in Astro- 
nomy, observation ; in Physics, experiment ; in Chemistry, 
nomenclature ; in Biology, cornparison ; in Sociology, filiation. 
In point of fact, the subjective method, the appanage of 
Morals, is a seventh step, on which all the others depend for 
the regulation they cannot get elsewhere, a power derived from 
the entire coincidence of the object with the subject, whereas 
hitherto the two were always apart, though tending more and 
more to union. 

This coincidence again is the source of the superiority of 
moral science in point of doctrine, which in no other science 
can attain complete rationality. As the human point of view 
is commingled, as a subjective element, with all the aspects of 
science, their preliminary study can gi\e but incomplete notions, 
waiting for a systematisation derivable only from the knowledge 
of man. Eecognising this as necessary, still the introduction 
formed by the other sciences is none the less objectively indis- 
pensable to the regular elaboration of the system, in obedience 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTEINE. 205 

to the fundamental law which throughout subjects the highest 
phftnomena to the most elementary. 

Subjective superiority, objective dependence, — such is the TheaouWe 
relation between any two consecutive degrees of the encyclo- subjective 
paedic scale, but in no case is it so applicable as in the two last, tive— most 
The goal being neared, we are in their case more alive to the the two 
defective rationality of the preparatory sciences, notwith- sciences. 
standing the greater difficulty of establishing the just distinc- 
tion between the two. Profane science having in its own way 
given us an elementary knowledge of the milieu, and that of 
the body as its complement ; sacred science enters on the syste- 
matic study of the soul, by analysing our collective existence, 
first from the statical, then from the dynamical point of view. 
But, though indispensable as a preliminary, this process is only 
a last preparation, the incompleteness of which we cannot but 
allow. We feel in regard to it that, as the intellect and acti- 
vity are studied by themselves apart from the emotional nature, 
we are left to judge results alone, their origin and their purpose 
being questions for the following science. If, in the present 
■work, the false position in which the mind is thus placed is not 
obvious, it is due solely to this, that the elaboration of Morals is 
therein, by a spontaneous process, blended inseparably with the 
construction of Sociology. Similarly, in my ' Philosophy,' I was 
enabled provisionally to shirk the obligation to create social 
statics prior to attacking social dynamics, by attending inci- 
dentally to existence, as occasion offered, in the course of the 
study of movement. 

Without any illusion as to the character and object of the comte'sown 
twofold mission devolving on me, as the result of the whole wko? flnai 
antecedent evolution of the race, I have always been aware tfon?™" '^^ 
that the full execution of the final construction would belong 
to my successors. What was reserved for me was to lay its 
immediate basis, and to characterise its spirit after having con- 
ceived its plan. In a word it was for me to institute the 
Positive religion, it was not for me to constitute it. Superior 
as is my religious construction in point of system to my 
philosophical creation, the present work- cannot achieve the 
complete rationality which was ever my aspiration. For the 
normal distinction between Sociology and Morals, which is 
capital as regards the synthesis, arose whilst I was effecting a 
construction over which it ought to have presided. The atti- 

206 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

The seven 
chapters of 
the treatise 
on Morals. 

The three 
first chap- 
ters. 

The four 

remaining 

chapters. 

Detailed ex- 
planation of 
the fourth 

tude required for the creation of a strictly dogmatic system 
could be finally taken only in this fourth volume as a result of 
the whole series of preparatory labours ; labours I venture to 
say, as much needed for the public as for myself. What I have 
to do at present then is to complete my exposition of the true 
character of a definitive systematisation, in which, at the actual 
stage of my career, the normal execution of two works only 
falls to me, the two extremes of the Second Philosophy ; between 
them my successors will intercalate five indispensable treatises. 
Enough having been said on the introduction of the last 
volume of the abstract encyclopaedia, I must examine, in more 
detail than in the case of the others, .its seven chapters. 

I shall devote the three first to establishing systematically 
the general doctrines which form the immediate basis of moral 
science as a whole. The first chapter will state the Positive 
theory of human nature, under the guidance of my subjective 
conception of the consensus of the brain. On the basis thus 
laid, the second chapter will construct the theory of the Grreat 
Being, the Being in which alone we can trace on a decisive 
scale the developement of this consensus. Then it will be 
possible in the third chapter, without any preliminaries, to 
establish the definitive theory of true unity, as its nature and 
origin have been already determined. Evidently then the 
present work contains all the great primary principles of the 
one announced, not however in such a form as to dispense with 
their synthetical elaboration. 

In the other four chapters of this last volume, the immediate 
object is the construction of the indivisible science of man, by 
laying down the real laws of human existence in its normal 
form, with full recognition of the external necessities to which 
man is subject. The fourth chapter will deal with the body, 
the study of which in Biology could only be preliminary, even 
as regards the lower animals, from want of the notions relating 
to the brain which are indispensable to a right conception of 
its consensus. After this, the direct and special object of the 
three last chapters will be the study of the soul ; in them we 
shall lay down the general laws of human existence as a synthe- 
sis of the affections in the first place ; then of the intelligence ; 
lastly of activity. 

In regard to the work in question, which alone wiU give 
the full conception of the Second Philosophy as a system, I 

Chap, ni.] THE DOCTEINE. 207 

am bound to explain more particularly the character and object chapter. 
of the middle chapter, that in which we effect once for all of vital 
the normal fusion of the profane with the sacred domain. The *"°°°^' 
right understanding of this chapter is more calculated than 
anything else to set in a clear light the ultimate unity of the 
Positive doctrine, all the several elements of which will thus be 
shown to cooperate in the direct solution of the most important 
problem in the science of man. The aim of this decisive chapter 
is mainly this : to delineate the consensus, the indispensable 
consensus between our bodily existence and our cerebral life, 
the end in view being the perfecting the one and the other by 
the aid of their mutual influence. 

The principal point in the work under consideration is to The mam 
give completeness and system to my subjective theory of the systematise 
brain, proceeding on the logical and scientific bases laid down tiTc theory 
in the first volume of the present treatise. To do this I must 
first deal with the external functions of the central apparatus, 
particularly with the part it plays in sensation, on which point 
my original remarks are not sufficiently clear. As with the 
organs of the soul, so I must determine by the subjective 
method the number and position of the cerebral ganglia which 
preside over the relations of the organism with the milieu, so 
far as it is the source of impressions. 

This inquiry involves, as a preliminary, the enumeration of Determma- 
the senses, properly so-called. Now the ultimate conclusion number of 
which I feel bound to adopt is, that there are eight really dis- They™T" 
tinct senses, one general, the sense of touch, and seven special : 
the muscular sense, the sense of taste, the sense of heat, the 
sense of smell, the sense of hearing, of sight, and of electricity. 
I rank the seven following Grail and Blainville, on the principle 
of increase in speciality, in harmony with that of the pheno- 
mena to which they correspond, and measured by the succession 
of their appearance in the animal series. The first and last 
alone require any special explanation. For the first, I adopt 
substantially the opinion of Blainville, who distinguished it 
from the general sense of pressure and assigned to it the direct 
appreciation of muscular efforts and of the fatigue consequent 
on them. As for the last, its feeble habitual developement in 
man must not prevent our recognising its distinct existence, in 
some animals very strongly marked, and more or less common 
to all the vertebrata. For each of the eight senses we must 

eight. 

208 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

A cerebral 
ganglion 
admitted for 
each sense. 

The ganglia 
of touch, 
muscula- 
tion, sight, 
and hearing. 

The motor 
iunctions. 
Innervation , 

admit separate nerves, nerves not so easily traceable, but quite 
as independent, as those of sight and hearing ; unless we do so 
the functions which the nerves subserve would remain as indis- 
tinct as they would be if we had only the lower organisms to 
draw inferences from. 

The same reasoning leads us to admit for each sense, the 
necessary existence of a cerebral ganglion, in which the nervous 
apparatus terminates, equally when it has a circumscribed sphere 
of action, as when it extends to the whole of the integument, in- 
ternal or external. Since contemplation takesplaceequallythough 
the senses involved differ, its organ must be distinct from theirs. 
Nevertheless these latter must be nearer the speculative region 
of the brain than the two other regions, with which they have 
no direct relation. Neither, again, have they with the organs 
of meditation, so that their position is necessarily under the 
organ of contemplation, so to avoid any disturbance of the 
operations of the intellect by lying athwart their organs. But 
as it is the knowledge of phenomena rather than of beings that 
the senses give us, their analytical character requires a position 
adjacent to that of abstract contemplation. This decision finds 
support in the obligation to place them on the median line, 
in order that the symmetrical impressions may be in sufficient 
agreement. As for the site of each of the eight sensitive ganglia 
in particular, all I can do at present is to give an idea, taking the 
easier cases, of a complementary explanation which has its proper 
place in the promised work. 

Looking at the pre-eminent importance and the greater 
diffusion of the sense of touch, always common to both the ex- 
ternal and internal integument, its ganglion must be nearest 
the organ of contemplation, thus better informed of the general 
state of the envelope, mucous membrane or skin. The gang- 
lion of musculation marches with the active region of the brain, 
in order that its impressions may afifect in an equal degree the 
three portions of the apparatus which regulates movement, 
excited, controlled, or sustained. On a comparison of the 
senses of sight and hearing, the one more intellectual, the other 
more social, we see that the respective ganglia of the two must 
be placed, that of sight nearer the faculty of synthesis, that of 
hearing nearer the instinct of sympathy. 

As for the other division of the external functions of the 
brain our remarks for the present may be less detailed. To 

-Chap. III.] THE DOCTRINE. 209 

avoid all exaggeration on this point, we must consider it the 
function of innervation to stimulate contractions which the 
muscular fibre can effect of itself, and which are effected in 
the animals which are without nerves. The close solidarity 
which characterises the motor apparatus, the various parts of 
which can supply the place of one another reciprocally, does 
not require, and does not even allow of, any special ganglion, 
but does demand a direct relation with the active region of the 
brain. To afford such connection is the great function of the spinai cord, 
spinal cord, which also affords a rallying point for the impres- 
sions of touch. The only serious modification of this connection 
is due to the distinctions relating to the will, which condenses 
the whole cerebral existence. But the division of movements 
into involuntary and voluntary resolves itself into this, that we 
substitute intermittent for continuous action. This done, and 
putting aside spontaneous contractions, we recognise that in- 
nervation is always voluntary in its origin, though it may 
become involuntary in its results by long habit. 

After this introduction with its two divisions, the chapter The relation 
under consideration has for its main subject the relations of oipai region 
the principal region of the brain with the body. The system to the 
of these relations will constitute the theory, a theory in outline 
so adequately sketched by Cabanis, of the general connection of 
the physical and moral nature of man.. But to constitute it we 
must begin by drawing a fundamental distinction between the 
two simultaneous influences constantly exerted by the body 
upon the brain, through the blood-vessels or the nerves, the 
two bonds of union between the life of nutrition and the life of 
relation. Common to all the regions of the brain and indis- 
pensable for all, the action of the blood which oppresses or 
stimulates according to the mode and degree of its supply, only 
so far concerns the affective apparatus more than the others, in 
that this portion of the brain predominates by itself and has 
connections with the other parts. Over and above this general 
influence, the centre of the brain has a particular connection 
with the body through the special nerves of nutrition. These 
nerves perform for nutrition, though with less energy, a service 
in the way of perfecting it, analogous to that which the nerves 
of motion perform for tlie muscular functions. More necessary 
the higher the organism, the relation between the viscera of 
organic life and the brain, a relation which equally, whether 

VOL. IV. p 

210 SYSTEM OP POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Intimate 
connection 
of the ves- 
sels and 

Further 
specification 
of the rela- 
tion between 
the vegetal 
life and the 
brain. 

active or passive, is unconscious, is concentrated by means of a 
triple series of ganglionic communications, which serve the 
further purpose of increasing the solidarity of the motor organs- 
and even of the organs of tact. 

Such are the two sources, the one general, the other special, 

of the relation between man's physical and moral nature. They 

nerves 7n the come into direct combination by virtue of the close connection- 

hisfher or- 

ganisms. peculiar to the higher organisms, between the vessels and nerves, 
which everywhere mutually aid one another, for nutrition and for 
stimulation. But the doctrine of vital harmony, to be suffi- 
ciently precise, demands more detail on the mutual relation 
between the organic life and the cerebral existence. 

In the first volume of this work, I limited the relation to 
the affective region of the brain, since for the two other regions 
we can admit a direct connection solely with the outer world, 
for movements or impressions. By a further application of the 
same principle the relation is restricted to the self-regarding 
instincts, the only instincts which are concerned with the within; 
so that the organs of sympathy are connected with the life of 
nutrition only by virtue of their special relations with the 
egoistic propensities. But with them we must also exclude the 
two noblest personal affections, vanity and pride, as being 
directed on the without equally with the social affections, 
though with a different object. As a last application of the 
same principle, we eliminate, as not within the scope of this 
particular relation, the two instincts of improvement, destruc- 
tive or constructive, for they are in as close connection with the 
environment, as the active region of the brain which they com- 
mand. This suite of restrictions leads ultimately to the 
limitation of the special relations between the body and the 
brain to the three instincts of conservation. 

But again, in regard to these three, a broad distinction 
must be drawn, founded on the nature and function of the several 
organs. In all the higher animals, the two instincts that relate 
to the preservation of the species may be set aside, almost 
as completely as those which directly bear on this external 
world. They have no immediate connection but with their 
respective viscera, the one as regards the germs, the other as 
concerns the offspring. There is a difference in this respect 
between the sexes, especially in the human species, the sexual 
instinct being more developed in man, the maternal in woman. 

Limitation 
to the three 
instincts of 
conserva- 
tion. 

Distinction 
between the 
three cases. 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTRINE. 211 

For the due appreciation of this difference, I must intimate 
that the organic viscera which correspond to these two instincts, 
over and above their direct and special action on the brain, 
affect it indirectly through the blood it receives. In fact the 
fluids they secrete are always susceptible of reabsorption into 
the system when they are not discharged. The reaction of 
these fluids, the more normal the higher the organism, is to 
stimulate or calm, according as it proceeds from the fertilising 
or the alimentary liquid. 

It follows that we raust restrict the special relations Thenutri- 
between the life of the body and the life of the brain to the corre- tuTairSy 
lation between the nutritive apparatus and the instinct of self- oniywiththe 
preservation, both in their own way bound up with the whole nutrition. 
economy of which they are parts. Paramount and unintermit- not forget 
ting however as this connection is, it must never put out of connections. 
sight those which are due to fecundation or lactation. Finally, 
if we would systematise the vital harmony, we must ever com- 
bine these special ties with the general tie furnished by the 
blood. 

In this combination we see the natm-e and the difficulty of Together, 
the theory to be explained in the fourth chapter of the seventh number, 
volume, which deals directly with all the relations whatsoever of toexpwu 
man's physical with his moral constitution. The three influences of the physi- 
just indicated suffice to explain all the normal interactions, moral con- 
and even those originating in disease, whether mental or man. 
bodily ; and as a consequence, medicine re-enters, on system, 
the domain of sacred science. To show more clearly that this 
capital property resides in the three, it will not be out of place 
to instance it in the case of Dreams, where the two distinct 
investigations of disturbance and agreement are found in spon- 
taneous combination. 

When constructing social dynamics, I lamented the disuse ThePosi- 
imposed by Monotheism on the polytheistic inquiries into this of Dreams. 
important phenomenon, and I anticipated the systematic 
resumption of such inquiries in the ultimate state of human 
reason. We have now reached the point at which we can under- 
stand the Positive grounds for such resumption, to be given at 
length in the promised work. By the aid of the three influences 
above mentioned, we can appreciate the direct, nay even the 
indirect, modifications of our internal life, whether bodily ro 
. cerebral, due to the suspension of all relations with the exter- 

p 2 

212 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

Sleep. 

Connection 
of the vital 
harmony 
with the 
feminine 
Utopia. 

The nervous 
and vascu- 
lar syBtems 
more de- 
veloped in 
woman. 
She i3 the 
best type of 
the relations 
'between the 
brain and 
body. 

Utopia of 
the Virgin- 
Mother. 

nal world. This implies, however, that, realising the wish of 
Cabanis, we have previously formed sounder views of sleep than 
those which as yet prevail. According to my theory of the 
brain, sleep never has the character of a purely passive state, 
the affective life persisting during sleep quite as much as the 
vegetal. Neither the one nor the other objects of direct cog- 
nisance, they produce appreciable results by modifying the 
intelligence and even the activity, more profoundly even than 
when their influence is complicated with that of environment. 
Adopting this principle, the sacred science will be enabled to 
reduce to system the subjective interpretation of Dreams, to the 
point of directing their course by means of suitable impressions, 
derived from the brain or the body. 

To complete the exposition of the theory of vital harmony, 
I have to point out its legitimate connection with the bold 
hypothesis I ventured, in the last chapter, on the limitation to 
women of the function of reproduction. 

The higher the organism, the more extensive naturally 
become the inter-reactions of the physical and moral constitu- 
tion, and this as a consequence of the relations between the 
three kinds of nerves and the vessels assuming greater im- 
portance as compared with the purely vegetative functions. 
Now, in this respect, woman is superior to man, by virtue of a 
more complete developement of the nervous and vascular systems. 
Woman is naturally qualified to be the highest type of the 
mutual influence of the cerebral and bodily life. This superiority 
in organisation has been aided, and that increasingly, by the 
social position of woman, for by it she has been, step by step, 
set free from the pressure of active life, and made more and 
more amenable to the influence of the emotions, especially of 
the sympathetic emotions. When the Positive reorganisation of 
opinions and manners shall have given women the first place 
in the Sociocracy, their share in reproduction will be largely 
increased, as a result of their increasing accessibility to the 
combined influences of continuity. 

If so, the Utopia of the Virgin Mother wiU become, for the 
purer and nobler women, an ideal limit, well adapted to stand 
as the concise expression of human progress, carried to the 
point of systematising and so ennobling procreation. This adapta- 
tion of the theory will always be independent of its realisation 
in practice, provided only that it be looked upon as realisable, 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTKINE. 213 

by virtue of the power over its own organisation, even its phy- 
sical organisation, possessed by the species most susceptible of 
modification, a power of which as yet we have only witnessed 
the faint beginnings. As success must depend principally on the 
general developement of the relations between soul and body, the 
persistent effort to solve the problem will place on a sound 
footing the systematic study of the vital consensus, as it will 
supply at once the noblest end and the best instruments. 

Summary as these remarks must necessarily be, they seem Thesyn- 
to me to define with sufficient clearness the character and object ciueion of 
of the most critical chapter in the whole of my elaboration of on Morals. 
moral science. In reference to the treatise in which the Second 
Philosophy receives its complete and systematic form, all that 
remains is to explain its synthetical conclusion, which will be 
' the general summary of the abstract, and the immediate soinrce 
of the concrete, encyclopsedia. 

In natural correspondence with the introduction already Theregene- 

1 .1 T 7 .n . . • J 1 ration of 

examined, the conclusion will give prominent expression to the profane 

1 • r t* t •! • science. 

capital renovation or profane science, due to its amalgamation (a) Logi- 
with the sacred science. From the logical point of view, the 
continuous application of the subjective method will by this 
time have evidenced its intrinsic superiority to the objective 
in all its forms. Whilst the supreme science offers the only 
possible connection of the six preliminary sciences, its method 
alone can systematise deduction and the five modes of induction 
which answer to these sciences. ' Suppress this two-fold service, 
and analysis could never have issued in synthesis, where the 
doctrine allies itself with the worship with a view to the regime. 
And it is in this synthesis only that we can fully appreciate the 
intellectual efficacy of feeling, the sole possible source of any 
systematic construction. In principle, we had an indication of 
its power in this respect in the peculiar prerogative of feeling 
in regard to the continuity of our cerebral life, which it alone 
upholds during sleep and in spite of disease. But for this, its 
general influence, to exhibit the true logic, it is requisite that 
moral science give prominence in particular to the combination 
of feelings with images and signs, the combination which is 
destined to regenerate even Mathematics, as I explained at the 
outset. 

This grand result of intellectual progress finds direct ex- This result 
pression in the systematic incorporation of Fetichism with thetararpoi 

214 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUE^E OF MAN. 

ration of 
Fetichism. 

(6) Scienti- 
fically. 

Morals de- 
rive disci- 
pline from 
within. 

Positivism. Originating in feeling and sanctioned for the 
purposes of art, the fusion of the two is no less applicable in 
science, as aiding it to perfect the lower speculations by 
assimilating them to the higher. In the maturity of human 
reason, the Positivist hands over to the Fetichist spirit the whole 
domain of profane science, reserving to itself that of- sacred 
science, once the property of Theologism, which finally dis- 
appears. 

From the point of view of science, Morals, as the supreme 
science, establishes for all the other sciences a discipline they 
cannot reject, a discipline as useful for guidance as for control, 
in which the intellect and the heart concur. Previously, even 
when best directed, the intellect could only attain an unsatis- 
factory rationality, for its investigations, if they had a basis, 
wanted an aim, in the absence of the persistent subordination 
of analysis to synthesis. On reaching Morals, reason may con- 
gratulate itself on having duly undergone this series of pre- 
paratory efforts, as necessary for its systematisation in its normal 
state on the basis of the instinctive suggestions of feeling. The 
several theories, hitherto provisional and precarious, now appear 
in their true character, as necessary elements of a science which 
is inherently indivisible, a science in which theory is in direct 
contact with practice. Never treated as purely arbitrary, the 
divisions of the sciences assume in Morals the character of 
artifices invented to facilitate a study which must long be 
abstract, previous to acquiring the concrete character which is 
the result of an entire coincidence of subject and object. Ee- 
jecting idle enquiries, the great problems come forward, problems 
which previously escaped the intellect, for this reason, that 
whilst compelled to select its true sphere from an immense 
multitude of questions open to it, it bad no principle to guide 
it in its choice. The nobler theories, no longer hampered by 
the suggestions of empiricism, become the object of systematic 
attention, in proportion as the direct study of the soul demands 
a larger knowledge of the Great Being which it is to serve, of 
the body on which it depends, or of the environment to which 
it is subject. 

The discipline seems to fail in the case of the science to 
which we owe it, and yet which is exposed to an inroad of mis- 
directed enquiries, if studied in too abstract a spirit. But the 
same principle suffices for its regulation by virtue of the direct 

<!hap. III.] THE DOCTRINE. 215 

■correlation which exists in Morals alone between theory and 
-practice. The study which, as its direct teaching, asserts the 
supremacy of feeling can never lead us to ignore the truth, 
-that feeling, as the general motor power of human existence, 
finds a better encouragement in its exertion, whether that 
•exertion take the shape of action or be limited to an artistic 
form, than in any scientific grasp of its own peculiar laws. So 
we find the fundamental law by which the degree of cultivation 
•of each science depends on the requirements of the science next 
above it, embracing even the last science, where we have the 
•completion of the abstract, with a view to the formation of the 
.concrete, encyclopsedia. To suit the formula of the law to this 
extension, all we have to do is, if theoricians, to give the term 
.science as large a comprehension as practicians do ; the instinct 
•of synthesis in practicians including in science all the precepts 
of human wisdom, whether practical or theoretic. 

The conception of the Universal order becomes full and in Morals 
•definitive only in MoTals, for it is there that the laws of the theconcep- 

•^ ... tionof 

lower phenomena are brought into systematic connection with therniver- 

sal order 

those of the higher, as a result of the perfect completeness of become de- 
the methods and doctrines. Condensed in Man, according to the complete. 
admirable anticipation of Antiquity, the whole order at length 
combines coherence and dignity. Its greater relative perfection 
in regard to the lower phenomena is attributed justly to their 
greater simplicity. We feel that the model which they uncon- 
sciously furnish, ought to be, and may be, exceeded by 
the systematic exertion of the true Providence. In fact, the 
existence of man will surpass in regularity the order of the 
heavens, for in this latter the perturbations take the first place 
as soon as there is any complication of the forces at work. But, 
whilst it puts out to the full this superiority, the Grreat Being will 
never cease to reverence the type which was the natural guide 
of its infancy. The fusion of Fetichism in Positivism will 
enable man at all times to evince his just gratitude towards the 
order to which he is subject. 

By their combination with the laws of Morals, the sole im- Physical 
mediate objects of consciousness, a combination effected through rationality 
the medium of the laws of the intellect, laws implied through- binedwitii 
out, if not expressed, physical laws become rational in a degree 
which they could not by themselves attain. The last of the 
sciences should consolidate as well as complete the order which 

iil6 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY, THE FUTURE OF MAN.. 

The Third 
Philoso- 
phy. 

Next point, 
the connec- 
tion of the 
Concrete 
■with the 
Abstract 
Bncyclopse- 
dia. 

The idea of 
such a com- 
plement 
traceable in 
the previous 
programme 
in connec- 
tion with 
the second 
volume of 
the treatise 
on Morals, 

Education 
the first of 
the Arts. 

Then come 
the special 
arts whicll 

began with the first by giving its full effect to this inter- 
dependence, a point hitherto unnoticed, which establishes a» 
mutuality between the several demonstrations of the invariabihty 
of nature. Notwithstanding this, from the independence, a^ 
between themselves, of the laws of Physics, there will always 
attach a certain empirical character to the order to which they 
belong, though its simplicity made it originally the type of 
regularity. But by the absorption of Fetichism by Positivism, 
we are enabled to systematise the solidarity above indicated, as 
we thereby assimilate the external to the human order, thus 
made the subjective source of the universal synthesis. Retain- 
ing for Fetichism its old domain, nay enlarging it so as to, 
include abstract contemplation, Positivity commits to it the 
function of giving the indispensable consecration to the economy 
in which we live, and in which without such consecration our 
gratitude could be paid only to beings whose existence is a. 
chimera. 

The synthetical conclusion of the last volume of the Second 
Philosophy thus adequately treated, the scientific encyclopaedia 
has been duly set forth. In no better way could I present it as 
a whole than by naming separately each of the seven treatises 
which, in hierarchical succession, are to constitute it, the two 
extremes alone being reserved for me to execute. But the full 
inauguration of the definitive systematisation of Positive doc- 
trine requires me to terminate this chapter by pointing out the 
normal aflBliation of the concrete, to the abstract, encyclopaedia.. 

The first trace of this complementary work may be found in 
the treatise of which I have just sketched the plan. For it is 
to consist — by the engagement above taken — of two volumes, 
and as yet I have only spoken of the first. There was no need 
to give any particular attention to the second, sufficiently ex- 
plained in the ' General View,' and as a result of the whole of 
the present chapter, not to speak of the opening of the next. 
But this second volume, as the last of the treatise which con- 
cludes the abstract encyclopsedia, connects it naturally with 
the concrete, as it is the passage from the theory to the prac- 
tice of Morals. Education is in fact the first of the arts, the 
only art which is entirely in the full sense of the term general, 
the art which perfects action by improving the agent. 

Availing ourselves of the transition education offers, a tran- 
sition as spontaneous as it is systematic, we must now bring 

Chap. III.] THE DOCTEINE. 217 

before our minds, as a direct object, the arrangement of the require oo- 

•^ ° ordiuation. 

concrete encyclopaedia, as it regards the whole system of the 
special arts, no longer the arts which concern man, but those 
which deal exclusively with the external world. Their need 
of coordination made itself deeply felt during the last phase of 
the modern revolution, as a result of the near approach of the 
Positive state under the impulse given by Descartes, most 
powerfully seconded by Diderot. But attempts of a necessarily 
empirical character only served to point out, in a confused way, 
the end to be aimed at, with no other definite results save an 
useless accumulation of technical treatises. As every art ought 
to be learnt solely by judicious practice, these books, calcu- 
lated to disturb rather than regulate our advance in skill, are 
of no value except from the historical point of view, so far, 
that is, as they looked to science, as a whole, to supply an 
addition, the nature of which had been hitherto misapprehended. 
And yet, the necessity to abstract in order to generalise, and 
the impossibility of discovering the laws of concrete phenomena, 
even when we combine dogmatism with empiricism, seem to 
preclude the real systematisation of the industrial arts. 

The fact is, they do not admit of coordination in detail, for They admit , 
multiply precepts as we might they would never meet the ordination 
variety of individual cases. But man's action upon the world 
as a whole, can be, and ought to be, systematised on the basis system of 
of the systematisation of his scientific conception of that world, industry. 
This is the proper object of a work which I projected at the 
very beginning of my career, promised afresh at the close of my 
Philosophy, and a second time at the opening of this work. 
Its execution will be my last effort of construction ; its specific 
title will be : System of Positive Industry, or. Treatise of the 
aggregate influence of Humanity upon her Plainet. Here I 
must content myself with an outline of this work, the indis- 
pensable complement of the normal synthesis, and I adopt the 
same method as in the previous treatises. 

It will have, as all the others have, a religious introduction 
setting forth the constant dependence of the concrete on the 
abstract encyclopsedia, setting forth also the synthetical cha- 
racter of the volume, a volume in which all the theories of 
science must constantly converge. As, however, it is the ex- 
ternal order which is exclusively the province of industry, the 
human order can have no place iu the volume, except as being 

218 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Object of 
this Third 
Philosophy. 

FiiU concep- 
tion of the 
Positive 
Thjlosophy. 

necessarily the source of systematic modifications. The two 
first chapters will have, then, to organise this general relation, 
the first explaining the spiritual, the second the temporal eco- 
nomy of Positive industry. On the basis of the two, the five 
following chapters will deal respectively with mathematical ac- 
tion ; astronomical action ; physical action ; chemical action ; and 
biological action, the action of animals as well as that of plants. 
The work will thus develope the homogeneity shown by the 
First Philosophy inevitably to exist between the classification 
of the arts and that of the sciences, allowing for the fact that 
the first is limited to the profane, the second embraces also 
the sacred sciences. To aid us in this construction, the insti- 
tution of subjective milieus must once more be made to do 
service as an instrument of teaching, to give life and definite- 
ness to our practical conceptions, the sphere of which is 
identical with its own. This done, the synthetical conclusion 
of the concrete volume will confirm the religious impression 
created by its introduction, by noting strongly the inadequacy, 
nay even the danger, of this outward art if it forget its sub- 
ordination to the art which concerns man. 

Thus arises a Third Philosophy, and its object is to com- 
plete the Second, in its turn the offspring of the First. Devoting 
a volume to the First, the systematisation of the Positive 
doctrine may ultimately be condensed in ten volumes, volumes 
embodying the essence of human knowledge, practical or scien- 
tific, allowing for special developements, oral rather than 
written. 

The whole chapter issues in a conception of the Positive 
Philosophy, of greater completeness and higher unity than 
could havfe been hoped for. By virtue of the three degrees 
of generality which it brings into combination, the develope- 
ment of this conception forms the gradual transition from the 
sphere of feeling to that of activity, in accordance with the 
true mission of the intellect. Such a result is corroborative of 
my synthetical decision, definitely to subordinate the doctrine 
to the worship, the better to institute the regime, the syste- 
matisation of which is my next task. 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 219 

CHAPTEE IV. 

GENEEAL VIEW OF MAN's ACTIVE EXISTENCE, 

OK 

DEFINITIVE STSTEMATISATION OF THE POSITIVE LIFE. 

In instituting the Positive Eeligion, the great difiBculty consists ^^j^"'^^"' 
in reconciling sympathy and synthesis, severally cultivated in gime to 

o J r J J ^ J combine 

the worship and in the doctrine. The normal combination sympathy 

■*■ with syn- 

of the two is the grand object of the life, which is dependent in wiesis. 
equal degree on the one and the other. It is in this way that 
the three elements of the true religion contribute to the founda- 
tion of Positive unity, by the simultaneous aystematisation of 
love, faith, and action, the triple basis of real virtue. 

Were it not for the exigencies of our physical condition, the Had we no 
worship would suffice to regulate our existence, an existence wants, the 

^ ° Worship 

devoted exclusively, as it would then be, to affection, which wouw suffice 
the worship fosters. Speculation, as a part of our life, would 
be confined to the moral laws which the worship reveals, our 
action to the esthetic exercises in which it is our guide. The 
stimulus of necessity removed, egoism would be sufficiently 
lepressed, so great is the all-pervading charm of altruism. 
Even the instinct of domination would need no discipline, for 
it depends for growth on the promptings of cupidity, in the 
inferiors at least, if not in the governors. Under these condi- 
tions, sympathy would lead directly to the establishment of 
unity, asking for no synthesis beyond that which would be the 
natural offspring of the unbroken supremacy of feeling over 
intelligence and activity. 

As it is, our bodily wants necessitate a more complex Ourboduy 

, . , \ wants ne- 

religion, as they give rise to a form of existence which, first cessitate a 

. . morecom- 

from the practical, then from the theoretic aspect, does not piexre- 
«asily harmonise with our moral existence. The ever present 
obligation to modify an unpropitious milieu developes an 
activity which in its initial form is egoistic. The intellect 
thus driven to the study of the environment has a tendency to 

220 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAH. 

Still, even 
under these 
conditiong, 
sympathetic 
unity at- 
tainable. 

The regime 
more influ- 
ential than 
the doctrine 
in main- 
taining 
unity. 

Hence the 
doctrine 
must be 
subordina- 
ted to the 
regime. 

forget that its normal attitude is one of subordination to the 
heart. 

This same existence, however, at a certain stage of its growth 
has the power of reproducing unity, relative unity, when the 
doctrine and the regime are so far developed as to accord with 
the worship. Our study of the laws of Physics leads us to the 
admission of the laws of the intellect, the link between them 
and the moral laws. Our conception of the universal order, 
originally limited to the moral laws, becomes in this way com- 
plete and systematic, with the effect of subordinating intellect 
to feeling. In like manner, man's active life requires for its 
full developement a collective advance, which of itself cultivates 
altruism. This moral reaction of his activity at first affects 
veneration only, as the basis of discipline, but it includes subse- 
quently the two other social instincts, in proportion as the 
efforts of the individual are found to conduce to the welfare of 
the state, nay even of the race. Thus ultimately the doctrine 
and the regime converge to the worship, the result being a more 
complex, but also a more highly developed unity, than one 
which should rest simply on feeling. The stability of this 
unity is ensured by its affording a legitimate occupation to the 
powers which have a tendency to disturb it, and it employs them 
by devoting them to its own consolidation. 

In the installation and maintenance of this normal state, 
the share of the regime is to be held greater than that of the 
doctrine, considering its more natural and more complete 
affinity with the worship. For the isolation requisite for the 
cultivation of science has a tendency to make ns despise, or at 
any rate neglect, our moral life. Nor is it any security against 
this error, that the intellect is occupied in synthetical investi- 
gations, and that with a directly social aim. Action, on the 
contrary, by its nature, predisposes us to sympathy, as it never 
lets us lose sight of the necessity of others' cooperation. 
Practical life stimulates this moral influence, even when analysis 
becomes the prevailing characteristic of its course, by the ulti- 
mate predominance of the industrial life. 

Taking into account this difference in their influence on 
feeling as the principle of unity, the doctrine must hold a subor- 
dinate position in relation to the regime, as it does in relation 
to the worship, though in order of time the systematisation of 
our intellectual must precede that of our active life, as it is to 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 22 1 

guide the latter. The most important part of the Western transi- 
tion— theEoman — made contemplation the handmaid of action. 
Although later the monotheistic synthesis impaired this relation, 
the practical instinct of man has upheld it, and that avowedly in 
the interest of feeling, as the common superior alike of intellect 
and activity. Eetrograde as are the tendencies of modern anarchy, 
the whole of human existence has so fostered the previous dispo- 
sition as to make it easy for the Positive religion to secure the 
recognition of action as the principal minister of affection. In 
the normal state, it is only in the developement of our esthetic 
faculties that the intellect takes precedence of action, and for 
them we should interrupt at regular intervals the ordinary course 
of practical life. If, on the one hand, the doctrine completes the 
worship by connecting the human with the external order, on the 
other it prepares the way for the regime by systematising man's 
submission to, and interference with, the world without. The 
object thus assigned it regulates the developement of the 
intellect, guarding it against the misdirection to which, if left 
to itself, it is liable, and concentrating it on the great problems. 

Action then becomes the best guarantee of unity, if once Action the 
developed on such a scale as to combine faith and love, teeofunity.' 
Maugre their natural affinity, sympathy and synthesis tend to 
diverge, if sympathy degenerate into mystical affections, syn- 
thesis into speculation for speculation's sake. Such degenera- 
tion, such divergence, find in the influence of action their only 
permanent prevention or remedy. It must be remembered, 
however, that if action is thus to regulate and combine love and 
faith, it can only do so when it takes a collective character, no 
other being compatible with the predominance of the heart and 
the free growth of the intellect. Now, the essential feature in 
the ultimate regeneration is the promotion and consolidation of 
this transformation of activity, as a consequence of the whole of 
the gradual preparation made during the first life of Humanity. 
Thus the solution of the human problem is drawn from the 
working out in full of the very conditions in which the problem 
has its origin. To demonstrate this is the main object of the 
present chapter, which is more than any other adapted to de- 
lineate the genuine system of the Positive religion. 

"Whilst it is the active class that must be most affected by 
the systematisation of the regime, whilst it depends for its 
attainment principally upon women, to inaugurate it and the'r^'imr 

The theo- 
retical 
power must} 

222 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

Hence the 
Priesthood 
must be 
dwelt on. 

Two pre- 
liminary 
cautions, 
one as to the 
numbers 
given, the 
second as to 
the assump- 
tion made. 

Constitution 
of the Priest- 
hood. 

Its numbers 
limited. 

• uphold it belongs exclusively to the spiritual power. It is on this 
ground that, before proceeding farther, I must here explain in 
detail the constitution of the Positive priesthood, and even state 
its fundamental function in reference to the common education. 
These two points determined, we then form a direct estimate of 
the definitive systematisation of human life, in relation suc- 
cessively to the Individual, the Family, and the State. 

So intimate is the correlation between the constitution of 
the priesthood and the system of education, that any clear defi- 
nition of the former is not possible, so long as the latter remains 
undetermined. But in the ' Greneral View ' the education has 
already been explained, so that I may here proceed to examine 
the former question in which are necessarily implicated aU parts 
of the regime. 

First, however, there are two cautions to be given, applic- 
able equally to the other sections of this chapter and even of the 
next. The first relates to the numbers which I have thought it 
right to introduce in order to give precision to our conceptions, 
though any exact determination is as yet unattainable. "When 
the necessary data are obtained, it will be easy, on the principles 
here stated, to effect the requisite corrections in my primary 
estimates. In the second place, in my exposition of the life, 
just as in those of the doctrine and of the worship, I have to 
keep in view the Positive state in its normal plenitude ; I 
assume it, that is, established throughout the world. It belongs 
to the next chapter, the determination of the general course of 
its advent to full power ; the question is as much out of 
place here as it would have been in social statics. For clear- 
ness' sake, however, my detailed statements wiU bear exclusively 
on the West, in the full sense of the term, including therein its 
colonial settlements; this gives a total population of one 
hundred and forty millions, and to this population the regene- 
ration will at first be confined. We must multiply the numbers 
given by seven, when we take the whole race into account (its 
amount at present is quintuple), allowing for the normal 
increase of the nations which at present are below the western 
rate (sixty inhabitants to the square kilometre). 

In order to consolidate the separation of the two powers, the 
general basis of the Positive regime, it is essential to Umit the 
numbers of the contemplative class as far as is consistent with 
its full functions. Without this reduction, it would be im- 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 223 

possible to secure the rare combination of intellectual and 
moral qualities, required for the priesthood of Humanity, the 
extent of which must be determined with especial reference 
to the encyclbpsedic instruction which completes and systematises 
Positive education. I have already stated that this instruction 
will occupy seven years, during which each pupil remains 
throughout under the same teacher, teaching, be it added, both 
sexes, though in separate classes. 

Each Positive school, then, will require seven priests, and in Beqnire- 
addition three vicars, in order that the philosophical presbytery eaohPoai- 
may suffice for the demands of the worship ; of preaching ; and 
of consultation, on moral, intellectual, or even physical questions. 
The scheme already referred to binds each professor, as a rule, 
to two lectures only "in each week during ten months of the 
Positivist year, besides a month of examination. Every school 
is annexed to the temple of the district, as is the presbytery, 
the residence of the ten members of the sacerdotal college and 
of their families, with the senior member for president, and 
with a separation of residence for the vicars from the priests. 

On these data, it seems to me that the spiritual wants of Twenty 

■^ thousand 

the "West may be duly met by a corporation of twenty thousand lequired for 
philosophers, of whom France would have the fourth. This Thetcmpies, 

■*■ ^ one for ten 

rate is equivalent . to havmg a temple for every ten thousand thousand 
families, each family consisting of seven members, in agree- 
ment with a law to be explained later. Positive religion by its 
nature admits of this great reduction of the contemplative class, 
though its duties are more extensive than those of the analogous 
class under any Theologism. Always demonstrable and never 
ambiguous, its precepts will but seldom require explanation from 
the priests, remembering the universal diffusion of systematic 
instruction, which will often enable women and the elders to 
supply the place of the priest in counsel. With a view to 
their more entire concentration on the duties of teaching and 
worship, the philosophical class will be freed from all material 
cares, each temple being placed under the protection of the 
nearest banker, on whom it devolves to maintain the fabric and 
the priests. 

The Positivist clergy must be recruited from all classes, by Modeotre- 

^ , ■ • 1 , , 1 ■ • IT cruitment of 

coaferrinsf, at the age ot twenty-eight, the provisional degree of the posi- 

• i I, ■ 4.1. uf Tc ^ f 1.1. ■ i.1, J tivist clergy. 

aspirant on anyone who is thought qualihed tor the priesthood, 
on a judgment of his scientific noviciate, and of the subsequent 

224 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

period of unfettered action. Equally unfettered is the period 
of training for the priestly office, under the moral and intellec- 
tual surveillance of the senior member of the nearest college ; 
a yearly stipend of one hundred and twenty pounds being 
allowed, but not beyond the age of thirty-five at the farthest, 
that being the normal age for the vicariate. It is with this 
office that begin the functions and obligations of the priest- 
hood, restricted, however, to education and purely private con- 
sultations. From the vicars are chosen at the age of forty-two 
the priests of Humanity, the sole possessors of the full spiritual 
power, under the control of the high priest. Although each 
priest has first been vicar, nay even aspirant, in exceptional 
cases the supreme head of the Positivist clergy may confer the 
vicariate, nay even the priesthood, on any whom he may deem 
to fulfil the essential conditions, without reciuiring the regular 
course, '^ver and above the intellectual and moral tests, 
marriage, at any rate in the subjective form of the institution, 
is binding upon all priests, that they may be under the full 
influence of affection ; they also renounce all property by inherit- 
ance, the better to ensure the complete abandonment of all 
idea of temporal greatness. An official residence being pro- 
vided, for their subsistence the vicar and the priest depend on 
a yearly stipend of two hundred and forty pounds for the vicar, 
four hundred and eighty for the priest, plus their expenses for 
visitations and journeys. 
,4rtistic and Not included in the priesthood, but within the limits of the 

^nsionets. contemplative class, a suitable existence must be offered to 
those who, by the peculiarity of their constitution, are in heart 
and character below the level of their intellect. These pen- 
sioners, artists or savans, without any restriction as to number, 
receive annually, according to each case, the stipends of the 
aspirant, the vicar, or the priest. Moreover, the central priest- 
hood provides for the expenses their works involve, in order that 
they may freely develope the incomplete powers they have, 
without obtaining the consideration which is due to the spiritual 
power. 
The High The whole spiritual hierarchy is immediately and uninter- 

SSanity. mittingly under the influence of the High Priest of Humanity ; 
he names, transfers, suspends, and even discards, on his sole 
responsibility, any of its members. Normally the residence of 
the pontiff must be Paris, as the metropolis of the West, but 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 225 

never with any share in the government of the holy city. But, 
in order to ensure the noble simplicity demanded by such a 
supremacy, his annual income is only fivefold that of the 
ordinary priests, exclusive of the expenses incident to the ad- 
ministration of the central budget. 

The vastness of his office makes it necessary for the Pontiff his seven 
of the West to call habitually to his aid seven national superiors, "^^ *° 
each with a salary the half of his, over and above his necessary 
expenses. Four are allotted, one, to each province, to Italy, 
Spain, Great Britain, and Germany, which will always remain 
distinct by their history, if not in language, after the normal 
disgregation of the actual nationalities. The three others are 
reserved for the colonial settlements of the West, no assistant 
being named for France, to which the High-Priest, as in direct 
contact, can pay sufficient attention. 

But the number will naturally be increased in proportion as The number 
the Positive religion advances towards its normal state ■ of univer- forty-ntoe. 
sality. This eminent branch of the priesthood will, then, furnish 
forty-nine members when mankind is completely regenerated. 
Besides their ordinary duty, on them it will devolve, on the 
death or retirement of the Pontiff, to influence or correct the 
choice he will have freely made of his successor, with regard to 
whom they will consult, if need be, the whole of the senior 
members of the colleges within their respective jurisdiction. 

As for the dress of the priesthood, ia public or private. The dress of 
imitating the judicious reserve of the founders of Catholicism *'^^^™^'' 
and Islam, I prefer to adjourn a determination which if it is 
to be effective, must be completely spontaneous. We may be 
confident, however, that, from the definiteness of Positivism as 
compared with any form of Theologism, the appropriate modifi- 
cations in dress will be of more rapid introduction. The form 
of its clothing will remind people, that the priesthood, by its 
true position intermediate between the sexes, has more affinity 
with the female sex ; and the colour will show that it speaks in 
the name of the past, in the interest of the future. Whilst dis- 
organising costume, the anarchy of modern times has instinc- 
tively respected the distinction of the sexes, and therein lies 
the germ of discipline for the less strongly marked cases. The 
reorganisation of costume should naturally begin with the 
clergy, as, in its social character, more homogeneous and better 
defined than the patriciate or the proletariate. 

VOL. IV. Q 

226 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FtJTtTEE OP MAN. 

spiritnai It is in virtue of its eminently synthetical nature that 

tion. the spiritual power allows, nay, even requires the plenitude 

of centralisation just described. Since the priestly function is. 
essentially one and the same for all priests, it might, as in the 
beginning, so for ever, be discharged by one single person, pro- 
vided that he could make himself felt everywhere. The plu- 
rality of organs in the spiritualty being, if closely examined, 
solely to compensate the deficiency due to the vast extension of 
the service, they should be in such subordination to their head 
that their class image forth the unity entrusted to his charge. 
He is the priesthood, and, at need, could change all its members, 
leaving the spiritual organism intact. The Papacy, at all 
times hampered by the college of cardinals, and often liable to 
Councils, was never able to attain the ascendancy which will 
be allowed the Pontificate of Humanity, as a natural conse- 
quence of the ripeness of things for the separation of the two 
powers. 
The depend- ^^ Order to Consolidate the concentration which is natural 

cendaMy^f ^'^ ^^^ sociocratic clergy, the individuality of its members, 
whilst more strongly marked than that in the theocratic priest- 
hood, must be limited to the requirements of personal dignity, of 
fair emulation, and above all of a just responsibility. Eenouncing 
power in every shape, renouncing even wealth, the priests of 
Humanity are not exposed to the great causes of disagreement. 
Their function is to direct opinion ; they therefore shun 
command, the better to give effect to the powers of conviction 
and persuasion. Devoting himself to the supreme interpreter 
of the Great Being, each priest feels that he shares in the most 
extensive power, a power before which aU temporal greatness 
sinks into the shade, for that is the attribute of the class which 
bends the wills of men without regulating them. The modest 
income on which the priests depend for subsistence is always 
subject to the will of the very chiefs whom they have to dis- 
cipline, and whose capricious action will often leave them no 
resource but the voluntary contributions of sincere believers. 
Nothing, however, can deprive the Positive clergy of its incom- 
parable privilege, that of representing to the actual generation 
the two subjective portions of Humanity. The noble contrast 
the priesthood thus presents between dependence and ascen- 
dancy is most pronounced in the case of the High-Priest, for 
he, a simple citizen of the metropolis of man, with a salary 

the Priest 
hood. 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 227 

inferior to the income of the poorest banker, yet exercises by 
free assent an universal influence. 

With the object of completing the purifying process begun No profit to 
in the renunciation of all inheritance, it is essential that the by the 
priests of Humanity forego any profit to themselves derivable their writing 
from their labours. All intellectual services should be public 
and gratuitous. It is incumbent on the contemplative class to 
offer the others the constant example of a wise moderation in 
the use of speech, writing, and above all of the press, so greatly 
abused during the period of anarchy. The greater part of 
the ideas of everyday application are to be transmitted by 
tradition, by practice and in silence, books being reserved 
for the communication of any real advance in om- abstract 
and general conceptions. Still, all allowance made for its 
habitual duties, the priesthood of Sociocracy will unavoidably 
write more than the clergy of the Theocracy. But the cost of 
printing the works thus produced is met by the pontifical 
treasury ; their distribution being left to the authors, whose 
name is to be given in all cases, and who are under a solemn 
obligation never to sell them. The promise to this effect, 
exacted from the priest at his consecration, and renewed on 
each publication, is so essential to the dignity of the clergy, 
that the High-Priest will revoke the priest who shall have 
thrice broken it, accepting him however as a pensioner, if he 
has sufficient intellectual value. 

The rule must apply further to all their teaching, be it in Nor from 
order to prevent the degradation of the theoretic class, be it in ing. 
order to save the children of the wealthy from private instruc- 
tion, which a foolish pride leads the rich to substitute for 
public. The public teaching ought always to suffice, allowing 
for the explanation which, exceptionally, each priest will give 
gratuitously to the pupils he shall judge worthy of special 
attention. Private teaching, fallen into tlie hands of theori- 
cians who have failed of admission into the priesthood, even as 
pensioners, will be so discredited as to be no disturbance of the 
systematic instruction. 

It is the more important to secure this result, as we have no Teaching 
other protection for the official teaching under a regime which priesthood 
will always keep spiritual discipline clear of all oppressive Jorbiaden. 
temporal action. "Whilst the state furnishes the priesthood the 
means for giving instruction to the full extent to all, it must 

Q 2 

228 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

Educational 
Function of 
tlie Priest- 
hood. 

The object 
ol; the Posi- 
tire Educa- 
tion. 

Complete 

preparatory 

period. 

twenty-eight 

y^ars. 

abstain from throwing difficulties in the way either of indi- 
viduals or societies if they wish to enter into legitimate compe- 
tition with the public schools. Persistent however as must be 
our respect for liberty in teaching, such liberty will exist in 
principle rather than in practice, unless the regular teaching 
become altogether degenerate, a condition of things which the 
spiritual head of Humanity may guard against or remedy by 
remodelling at need his whole clergy. 

Such are the introductory observations I was bound to offer 
here on the special constitution of the Positive priesthood. They 
will be complemented in the natural course of things as I 
explain its regular intervention throughout the regime. But 
without this introduction to the whole, the several particulars 
could not have the requisite precision and clearness. 

The next point to examine is the principal function of the 
Positivist clergy, and for this I delineate the education which it 
reduces to a system. The essential outlines of this exposition 
were given in the ' Greneral View,' so that all that is here 
required is to complete, coordinate, and above all to summarise 
it, with such minor corrections as have been from time to 
time, not unnaturally, suggested by the course of the present 
work. 

Positive education founds the true unity, by teaching us to 
live for others. Its aim being to fit us for the imintermitting 
service of Humanity, it remains above all moral, even when most 
intellectual in character. Eased on the innate existence of the 
sympathetic instincts, it subjects to them the personal instincts, 
during the period of life in which the natural predominance of 
these latter is very largely kept in check, owing to the pro- 
vidential interposition which frees us from the necessity of 
acting. 

This educational preparation, continuing till twenty-one, is 
divided into two parts, the one private, the other public, the 
point of separation being the age of puberty — at fourteen. The 
first part has for its object the cultivation of the affections, the 
second that of faith ; the first under the superintendence of the 
mother, the second under that of the priest ; the two together 
issue in a period of free action dui'ing a complementary period 
of seven years. Twenty-eight years, then, are allotted to the 
training of the individual, and the beginning, two principal 
phases, and close, are distinctly marked in the four first sacra- 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE, 229 

ments, in which the child of the Great Being gradually passes 
into the servant. 

That servant is hy marriage directly consecrated to social Education 

•^ *-' , proper 

existence ; and then enters on a last period of fourteen years, umitea to 

. . . , , twenty-one 

during which the exercise of his activity as a citizen is needed years. 

•^ '' Wider sense 

to complete his preparatory life. As, however, both this last of the term. 
and even the preceding phase are periods of full liberty, I would 
not include them under education properly so called, as that 
always implies a state of tutelage. An additional reason for 
excluding them is their being confined to the active sex, 
whereas the first half of our preparatory life is common to both 
sexes. It is the combination of these two characteristics, 
universality and minority, that must fix the sense of an ill- 
defined term, which in its widest acceptation may embrace the 
whole of our objective life, considered as a course of preparation 
for our subjective existence. In this last sense its use is proper 
only in the work already promised ; there education will be the 
name for every preparation under the guidance, first, of the 
Family, then, of the Country, lastly, of Humanity. 

Eestricting the term here to its more usual acceptation, I "^^^J^^ 
have, in the first place, to explain the private phase of Educa- Education 
tion. The second dentition divides it into two equal portions ; 
the one essentially affective ; th second that in which begins 
the cultivation of the intellect, under the direction of the 
mother, through esthetic studies. Hence the subdivision of 
the whole of education, properly so called, into three septennial 
periods, the distinction between which, clearly indicated in all 
the Western languages, is most strongly marked in Spanish, in 
the names Nino, Muchacho, and Mozo, with their derivatives. 

The first of these periods must be held the most decisive. The first 

septennial 

since then it is that the mother s discipline lays so firm a foun- period the 

f^ most deci- 

dation of morality that the rest of life is seldom able to affect sive. Moral 

^ training. 

it. Then it is that, sheltered from the egoism of action, the worship of 
three sympathetic instincts grow beyond recall, more particu- 
larly veneration, but also benevolence, for which, even in this 
dependent state, there is a sufficient sphere. From the moment 
of birth, all worship during this period is condensed in the 
adoration of the mother, the only Providence which infancy can 
or ought to recognise. The consciousness of the Great Being, 
however, comes instinctively as soon as language begins, for its 
transmission by the mother is an indication of its social origin, 

the Mother. 

230 S'XSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

IntsUigenoe 
trained. 

The second 
period from 
seven to 
fourteen. 
Training 
Esthetic. 

The Univer- 
sal Lan- 
guage. 

an indication speedily confirmed by the whole of the child's 
relations with others. The distinction between the mother and 
Humanity does not interfere with the unity of the child's 
worship, for the mother even at this early age becomes the 
personification of Humanity, in which at that time the Country 
is lost. 

Although the education of the infant is almost exclusively 
moral, the intelligence is awakened by the observation of beings, 
guided by a purely Fetichist synthesis, all interference with 
which must be carefully avoided. Under the influence of this 
synthesis, as emotional as it is intellectual, the first beginnings 
of the true logic are traceable in the combination of feelings 
with images, soon aided by signs. Thus is attained in its 
simplest form cerebTal unity, wherein activity, with no outward 
object to secure, subserves the intelligence to express emotions. 

This form persists during the second period of childhood, 
but with a tendency then to the more complex unity re- 
quired in real life, because the child is now in contact with 
others outside the Family, the only collective being originally 
within its cognizance. This enlarged contact is a conse- 
quence in especial of its esthetic studies, then entered upon 
on the basis of the images derived from the first period. 
Although these studies in the main should be left to the child 
itself, the mother's care prepares the way for the normal dis- 
cipline, by instituting the practice of exercises in poetry, in 
music, and in drawing, even prior to reading and writing. 
When, by the acquisition of these last, full communication 
is established, the child enters at once on the knowledge of 
the Great Being, through admiration of its master works, 
in spite of the diversity of languages, ancient or modern. 
From familiarity with this difference, there dawns the idea of 
Country in the widest sense, hitherto undistinguished from 
Humanity, but henceforward characterised by language, even 
when the difference has become purely a matter of history, in 
consequence of the universal adoption finally of the Positive 
language. Indeed, in the normal state, the study by all of the 
seven languages which presided over the three grand phases of 
the Western transition must never be suppressed. Apart from 
the imperishable monuments which are their consecration, 
their spontaneous concurrence will always remain indispensable 
to the complete creation of the language of mankind, a direct 

Ohap, IV.] THE LIFE. 231 

outgrowth of the fusion of the five modern languages, under 
the presidency of the Italian as the most musical. 

During the second period, the moral education given by Moral tram- 
the fir.st is carried on, by virtue of the influence on the affections second pc- 
exerted by the esthetic culture. From the relation between the 
two we must draw the best criterion of the intellectual advance, 
instinctively directed towards the perfecting of the personal 
cultus, the formation of which comes now to be distinctly trace- 
able. A prayer, a hymn, a drawing, in honour of the mother, 
will evidence, by their gradual improvement, the gradual in- 
crease of power to body forth real feelings, not without aid 
borrowed from the artistic treasures of Humanity. 

Art during this period holds avowedly the first place, but it inteUectaai. 
forms, as it were, a preparation for science, by encouraging the ' 
observation of all events, whereas previously beings and beings 
only had been its object. For art, whether fine art or indus- 
trial, has to do, as science has, solely with phenomena ; it differs 
from science in always referring them to bodies, instead of 
treating them as abstractions. Towards the end of the first 
period of childhood, the child spontaneously forms subjective 
milieus, and 'by their aid combines these two modes of contem- 
plation, by forming images distinct from beings, at least in the 
case of the inorganic world, the primary domain of scientific 
investigation. 

In the ' Greneral View,' I attributed to the second period of me Poiy- 
childhood a polytheistic synthesis, as a natural product of character c£ 
abstract observation and in perfect harmony with the esthetic periodMed 
culture. I would now limit this modification to the three first the tet^™ 
centuries of the normal state, for by that time the historical filia- ries^ot°the ' 
tion of that state should be a matter of universal consciousness, state. 
When, as a result of the fusion of Fetichism in Positivism, Theo- 
logism in all its forms shall be eliminated, the philosophy of the 
earliest period of childhood will persist through the second, to 
be incorporated, in the third, with human reason iu its definitive 
state. The cultivation of the artistic faculties will be found 
compatible with this improvement of the individual initiation, 
which by it is dispensed from servilely reproducing the evolu- 
tion of the race. With one language paramount, Fetichist 
poetry, finding free scope by a large introduction of subjective 
milieus, will evoke master works more in keeping than the 
ancient with the normal age of Humanity. 

232 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAS. 

In both 
thcpe periods 
some indus- 
trial trnin« 
ing. 

The child 
must be 
taught that 
feelings are 
D30re impor- 
tant than 
acts. 

Public In- 
strnction. 

Its general 
spirit. 
The supre- 
macy of the 
Heart. 

In regard to private education, the present is the fitting 
place for a remark, affecting both its periods, but specially 
applicable to the second, on the spontaneous beginning of prac- 
tical life. Though such action as there is at that time should 
be of an esthetic rather than an industrial character, it is well 
to assist the natural growth of the instinct of construction, were 
it only as a counterpoise to that of destruction. The mother 
will easily turn to purpose, if she attenii to the point : intel- 
lectually, the power there is in action to evidence the con- 
ditions and difficulties of effecting any result whatever ; morally, 
its tendency to implant a direct consciousness of the value of 
the voluntary cooperation of men and even of animals. 

Again, these two periods are the time for creating the fun- 
damental habit of mind which should always put forward feel- 
ings as more important than acts, and this is effected by leading 
the child to judge of acts by their bearing upon feelings, be it 
as exercise or as result. Such teaching can only be begun with 
effect at the age when actions, as of no serious consequence, leave 
the motives which inspired them open to view and more intelli- 
gible from their simple character. It is then that the mother 
lays the synthetical basis of Positive morality by making the 
child feel that happiness consists above all in the gratification of 
our kindly affections, acts being only the means by which we 
satisfy and even excite them. 

Having said enough on private education, we must pass to 
the public instruction which is its systematic complement, the 
nature and course of which I have already determined. 

The chief difficulty it presents is this, how to develope the 
intellect without detriment to the supremacy of the heart, 
which indeed it ought to fortify. To bring the two into har- 
mony is the high prerogative of Positivism, which succeeds 
Theologism in the spiritual government of mankind, in order to 
repair the errors, intellectual and moral, inherent in the second 
or indirect causality. For the earlier form sanctioned the pri- 
macy of feeling as well as allowed the search after laws ; so that 
in reality the sole flaw in the Fetichist synthesis was its absolute 
character, inevitable in the beginning of things. When limited 
in its scientific application to the cases in which we cannot 
discover the law, Fetichity, thus made relative, from the esthetic 
point of view should keep and even enlarge its original domain, 
in order to aid Positivity in the intellectual, no less than in the 

Chap. IV.] THE LIEE. 233 

moral, sphere. Theologism, on the contrary, the value of which 
was mainly political, aggravated the main disadvantages of the 
absolute philosophy, by making happiness and perfection consist 
in a life of contemplation. True it is, that the revolt of the 
intellect against the heart reached its full proportions only 
under the impulse of metaphysics, and that more particularly 
during the period of modern anarchy, yet if we trace it to its 
.source we come to the synthesis of Theology, at the time when 
the priesthood no longer controlled the doctrine. But by intro- 
ducing Positivism as the direct successor of Fetichism, the 
normal state enables us to avoid, in the education of the indi- 
vidual, the dangers unavoidable in the evolution of the race, as 
it gets clear of the disturbing influences of unchecked abstrac- 
tion, 

,For this, it is enough if the analytical study of the doctrine Forthis 
be entered on under the synthetical direction of the worship, as worship 

..1 1. 1 1. r*. n t I'l 1 • c • must insti- 

ls mdicated m the everdurmg fusion or the philosophic function tute the 

in the priestly office, to which the scientific elaboration will doctrine, 
always be made secondary. With its foundations laid in the 
developement of the affections, and with the preliminary cultiva- 
tion of the artistic faculties, the study of abstract science closes 
education by establishing the systematic unity which is the only 
possible guide for active life. The effort of analysis required 
for the construction of this unity must always be treated as 
limited to adolescence, and as introductory to the regime of 
synthesis, the only perfectly rational regime, as in it all our 
conceptions converge to the service of Humanity. Such is the 
judgment formally enunciated in the sacrament appointed for 
the inauguration of the public education, a judgment expanded 
on fitting occasions during the whole course of scientific study. 
It is more firmly rooted during that course, by three influences : 
the continuity of the mother's care ; the prolongation of the 
esthetic culture ; the opening of the preparatory stage of prac- 
tical life. 

Bound to teach in succession the seven fundamental sciences, Each profes. 

., J, . 1 J. . Ti J.- r sor teaches 

the professor is preserved from any excessive predilection tor the seven 
any one of them, by keeping constantly before him their synthe- suooeasion. 
tical object, one in full conformity with the priestly character. 
Addressed alternately to the two sexes in the same week, his 
lectures, as a natural result, lead both teacher and learner to 
appreciate the continuous submission of the intellect to feeling. 

234 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

The High 
Priest must 
exercise con- 
stant watch- 
fulness to 
guard 
against in- 
tellectual- 
ism. 

The novi- 
ciate moral 
rather than 
intellectual. 

Demonstra- 
tion culti- 
vated for 
Bubmission, 

The novi- 
ciate will 
lead the 
Positivist 
to see that 
his indi- 
vidual must 

Still in spite of all the safeguards inherent in the encyclo- 
pedic system, the concentration of the intellect acts with such 
force, that nothing but the watchfulness of the High-Priest, 
aided by public opinion, can prevent or remedy its dangerous 
influence on the heart and on the intellect. 

For the right institution of the scientific noviciate, it must 
be always represented as having a moral, rather than an intel- 
lectual aim. Through it faith ought to perfect love, in order 
to regulate activity, the means being, the study from the 
relative point of view of the universal order. In the private 
education, the growth of affection and the culture of the imagi- 
nation have given, as a natural consequence, the sense of moral 
laws, and even of the value of voluntary submission, more par- 
ticularly through the instrumentality of personal worship. But 
this spontaneous result remains insuflacient and precarious so long 
as the order within us is disconnected from the order without us, 
to which it is subject. It is not possible to consolidate the soul 
but by linking it to its environment by the intermedium of the 
body. Hence arises the necessity for a course of abstraction, 
the object being the formation of general conceptions as the 
indispensable condition of fixed convictions shared by all. The 
course must begin, then, with the simplest phenomena, which 
underlie all the others, and must proceed by gradations to the 
phenomena of moral science, where abstraction ceases, and 
where, consequently, the episode of analysis ends in the sys- 
tematisation of the state of synthesis, in its origin purely 
spontaneous. 

The Positive religion triumphs over the tendencies to criti- 
cism encouraged by its scientific introduction and certain to 
recur during the abstract education unless there be a constant 
surveillance. In cultivating demonstration it aims at pro- 
ducing, not barren or divergent discussion, but active and volun- 
tary submission, which is to ennoble even the most physical 
necessities, by connecting them with moral advance. It is not 
a demonstrated faith, but a faith which at all times is demon- 
strable, that suits the maturity of human reason, when it wiU 
be the object to trace consequences, not to discuss principles. 

At the close of his encyclopaedic noviciate, the Positivist 
will feel, more strongly than before, the need of subordinating 
the individual intellect to the intelligence of the race, and of 
keeping speculative powers for the incidental demands of active 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 235 

life in its natural course. Those whom their vocation singles be subordi- 

ij'Tpji .Ti'Tii /» n Dated to the 

out as destined tor the priesthood will share more profoundly collective 
in these two convictions, otherwise they could never become 
the interpreters of the Great Being and the discipliners of 
human life. 

Such is the general spirit which must always preside over The course 
our intellectual education as a safeguard against tendencies tion. 
fatal to the religious aim of that education. Its necessity will ^^^ Sires 
be deeply impresssed by the synthetical preamble to the ency- p^ojop^yf 
clopsedic noviciate, the first three weeks of which will be devoted 
to the eighteen lectures on the First Philosophy, explained in 
the preceding chapter. The object we have in view in this 
extraordinary concentration of lectures will be the better at- 
tained, by addressing them to both sexes at once, met for the 
occasion in the temple, in the presence of the whole presbytery, 
with the chief magistrates and the families of the catechumens 
as assessors. An appropriate introductory discourse having 
been given by the senior priest, one lecture will give the theory 
of abstraction, the fifteen following will be devoted to the 
fifteen universal laws, the two last to the construction of the 
encyclopaedic hierarchy. The efi'ect of these nineteen introduc- 
tory lectures on the pupils, the teachers, and the public should be 
a lasting impression, calculated to ensure a tendency to prefer 
synthesis whilst engaged in analytical studies. 

With this introduction, the Second Philosophy will syste- The seven 
matically develope the Positive doctrine during seven years, to the^ab™ 
forty lectures on one of the seven sciences being given each sciences. 
year to either sex. But Mathematics require a larger number, 
three times as many in fact, sixteen being given to each of the 
five first chapters of the work I have described, and twenty to 
each of the two last. To suit this distribution, the ordinary 
number of lectures must be doubled during each of the two 
first years, an exception limited to the boys ; the girls' teaching, 
though more condensed, must not be curtailed in substance. 

Eemembering the explanations of the last chapter in com- The theo- 
pletion of the indications of the first volume, there is no need ciate ana " 
for further details on the scientific noviciate. It coincides in apprentL- 
time with the industrial apprenticeship, the influence of which together.^ 
is calculated to reinforce its synthetical character and its pur- 
pose. This cooperation is furthered by devoting the three last 
years to travel, according to the judicious practice of the 

236 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Three years 
of travel. 

Effects of 
the Public 
Education. 

Beading 
discouraged 
as a habit. 
What read- 
ing useful. 

The Posi- 
tlvist Li- 
brary. 

Western proletariate, a practice which might be useful to all. By 
long residence in one place their travels may be combined with 
continuous scientific study, considering the homogeneous cha- 
racter of the sacerdotal teaching and its complete regularity, as 
the same lecture will at one and the same time be in course of 
delivery in all schools of the globe. Yet it must not be for- 
gotten that the real preparation for active life should follow, 
not coincide with, that of the intelligence. But it is a conse- 
quence of the free trials which come after the scientific course 
during the seven years between the sacrament of Admission 
and that of Destination. For this period, which alone is, in the 
full sense, practical, the preceding is but the simple introduc- 
tion, and however necessary it may be, it bears rather on the 
intellectual and moral than on active life. 

On this plan, the public education will perfect love by faith, so 
to systematise action, the paramount influence of which latter wiU 
be found the best security for Positive unity, as preserving 
affection and thought equally from the peculiar aberrations of 
either. It is not a foolish pride, but rather profound humility, 
that should be encouraged by our encyclopeedic initiation, such 
is the pervading contrast between the difficulty of the real pro- 
blems and the weakness of man's power to solve them, if we put 
aside idle questions which cloke our incapacity. Limiting the 
process of analysis to preparing the synthetic construction, our 
initiation subordinates speculation to action with a view to afiec- 
tion, whose empire it consolidates by its systematic recognition 
of submission, enforced submission in the first place, then 
voluntary. 

The regime described, so far from encouraging the habit of 
reading, makes all feel to what an extent it hampers medita- 
tion, the only real aid to which is to be found in the inexhaus- 
tible study of the master-works of poetry, invariably in relation 
with the problem of man's existence. 

Guided by the hints I have given, the true Positivist may, 
even if a priest, reduce his library to a hundred volumes. 
Philosophy is condensed into ten, poetry into twenty more; 
another twenty will suffice for the whole of our concrete con- 
ceptions, the data required for industrial purposes, natural 
history, and the knowledge of the past. The second half 
of the collection will be devoted to the monumental works 
which deserve from their original merit to survive the systematic 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 237 

destruction of the accumulations which now compress or mis- 
direct thought. 

To end our examination of the universal education, we must Harmony of 
direct our attention to the harmonious relation of its two periods, great dm- 
public and private, the agreement of which is hidden and even vate and 
impaired by their being consecutive and not simultaneous. In the 
normal state the one prepares, the other completes the definitive 
consecration of each child of the Great Being to the continuous 
service of Humanity, by fashioning him, at first unconsciously, 
then consciously, to a true unity. The first leads us to faith by 
love, the second strengthens love by faith. The first developes 
voluntary submission, the second continues the work by making 
us acquiesce in the involuntary, the two together resulting in 
a discipline as noble as it is stable, where veneration and necessity 
assist one another. The first phase has for its basis the sense of 
moral laws, the second the knowledge of physical laws, the two 
are in concert in reference to the laws of the intellect, which 
are equally connected with the two orders. The one em- 
ploys analysis in the spirit of synthesis, the other consolidates 
synthesis by analysis. But their difference in nature and in 
their processes is manifested in their results, always certain in 
the private period, as in conformity with the normal state ; fre- 
quently missed in the public phase, which merits not the name 
of education when not completed. 

The encyclopaedic noviciate, then, must be held to consist Hence the 
emphatically in its last year, the others being but steps in its ot the last 
preparation. The scientific education which stops short of its 
termination in Morals will be an object of contempt, as it would 
tend to encourage discussion to the exclusion of systematic sub- 
mission ; it would be, that is, a perversion of analysis from its 
true aim, synthesis. It is, then, on the last year that the sacra- 
ment of Admission must directly depend, the sacrament which 
follows and condenses our public education. Still so necessary 
are the preliminary notions, that none may be admitted to study 
Morals, who are found, in the annual examinations, too unversed 
in profane science. Even in these exclusions, however, the 
priesthood must show its liberality ; they are to depend on 
defective appreciation of method rather than on want of know- 
ledge ; and in no case must depend on the question, where the 
candidate got his knowledge ; it is quite open to him to have 
acquired it by his own unaided efforts. 

year. 

238 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

phMe^ran- ^^ ^® Consider them from the social point of view, private 

Sy.*^ """ education and public education represent, the one the Family, 
the other Humanity. But the perfect combination of these two 
extreme terms of the social series is only possible on the inser- 
tion of the middle term. Now the Country is a conception 
which we cannot appreciate previously to the active phase 
which succeeds the affective and speculative phases, for in them 
the bond of citizenship exists only in rudiment, owing to the 
absence of a practical aim. Again, it is through this comple- 
mentary period of freedom that we concentrate and combine 
the ideas and the feelings of order and progress, which sepa^ 
rately characterised the two successive stages of our preparation 
whilst pupils. By showing us the value of an order due to will, 
private education sets on foot our moral progress ; as the result 
of our knowledge of an order due to fate, public education 
gives a systematic direction to material progress. Thus the 
training of the individual reproduces the evolution of the race, 
which in the mediaeval period originated the idea of moral 
progress, and carried forward physical improvement during 
the Western revolution. It is for the complementary period of 
education proper to harmonise these two results, which was, 
historically, the task devolved on the exceptional century which 
was destined to precede the normal state. 
Disposition Supposing the Positive education not to have failed, we are 

the Positive formed by it to live for others by the definitive attainment of 
true unity. We have learnt to respect the external order as 
the basis of the human, but at the same time to look upon it 
as the sphere for a persistent and collective action. The 
empirical character which always cleaves to oux conception of 
it renders us more disposed to modify it ; its regularity, the 
effect solely of its simplicity, stimulates us to make our own 
arrangements, the creations of will, more perfect than the laws 
of destiny. Convinced that by union only can we ease the yoke 
of that destiny, we attach more value to the feelings which 
secure that union than to the results which it produces, for we 
are aware of the instability of our existence, whether individual 
or collective. Ever on the point of sinking under the weight of the 
body or of the environment, the soul never relaxes its exertions, 
never ceases to find in them a stimulus to moral improvement, 
the unfailing source of happiness and dignity. 

Such are the prevalent dispositions due to an education in 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 239 

which reason confirms feeling, at the age at which we are most The disposi- 
' ready to treat egoism as the great defect of our nature. Far by the Poai- 
from encouraging discussion, Positive instruction systematises tion ; sub- 
submission, as the permanent basis for action, which is the real retention of 
end of our being, in order to better our condition and more not of their 
than all our nature. At the close of the encyclopaedic noviciate, tions. 
we feel that what we want is simply to retain the principles it 
has given us, whilst forgetting their scientific proofs, the more 
perfectly to devote our intelligence to the practical applications 
of those principles. 

This general result is characteristic of the system of Posi- conclusion 
tive education in and by itself, even supposing it not derived ject of 
from the clergy, though the clergy alone can secure its universal proper. 
reception. Thus we attain the adoption by all of the disposi- 
tions which make it possible for the priesthood of Humanity to 
systematise the action of man with a view to its consecration to 
the service of the Grreat Being, such systematisation being 
effected by the developement of the unity, the groundwork of 
which was laid by the preparatory period. It is this systema- 
tisation which I have now to consider in its nature and course, 
in relation, first, to the individual, then to the Family, lastly 
to the State. 

Our progress will be the sounder, if I first explain a reli- systemati- 
gious institution, the special object of which is to condense our active He. 
whole advance towards perfection, physical, intellectual, and obser™"*"^ 
moral, by concentrating it - on one capital step. This is, the insMtution 
systematisation of human reproduction, by making it depend irtop^.^™^ 
solely on the woman. But before I examine an Utopia, pointed 
to in the previous chapters, I must set forth clearly its aim, an 
aim traceable to the need of a condensation inherent in every 
synthesis, even when partial, much more when general. 

Such a condensation is the natural consequence and the a condensa- 
necessary complement of the separation of the two powers ; this sary to a 
separation alone makes it possible by calling for systematisa- ^^° ^'^' 
tion, and exacts it when it divides theory from practice. At 
this point it is hopeless to avoid or remedy the divergence of 
feelings and thoughts save by resuming the synthesis in a 
special institution, as a focus for our highest emotions and con- 
ceptions. There are however two distinct ways of satisfying 
the want here indicated, mysteries if the religion be theological, 
Utopias if it be Positive. 

240 SYSTEM OP POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN 

Precedent in 
the Eucha- 
rist. 

Former 
Utopias. 

The trans- 
mutntion of 
metals. 

The sole decisive example of such a complement to syn- 
thesis naturally, then, emanated from Catholicism, instituting, 
as it did, at its origin, the incomparable sacrament of the Eucha- 
rist, to condense at once its worship, its doctrine, and even its 
regime. So completely characteristic of the Western Mono- 
theism was this admirable condensation that the system lost- 
all coherence as soon as it was changed. Although, however as 
the first type of the concentration of a synthesis, the Catholic 
sacrament deserves eternal reverence, in the Positive religion 
we must satisfy the same want in another way. As a fact, the 
Catholic systematisation was, strictly speaking, limited to the 
emotions ; it was not able satisfactorily to include intellect or 
activity, though it managed to evade their demands so long as 
the affective transition lasted. On the contrary, the compre- 
hensiveness inseparable from the Positive synthesis compels 
the institution, which is to serve as its condensation, to be a 
presentment at once of the three constituents of human nature, 
in their true order of dependence. In a word, the synthetical 
conclusion of Positivism must harmonise order and progress, by 
the institution of a progress which is the developement of order 
in the full signification of the term. Now, this is what rightly 
constructed Utopias can effect, and in the increasing produc- 
tion of such Utopias we have the indication, though not the 
satisfaction, of the craving for unity arising from modem 
anarchy. 

There is a necessary correlation between these synthetical 
constructions and the progress of Positivity; hence, as yet, 
they have been confined to the external order, especially the 
inorganic order, but not to the exclusion of the vital. The 
best worked out and the most effective took its rise in the 
Middle Ages, with Chemistry. During the greater portion of 
the Western revolution, the transmutation of metals offered an 
admirable rallying-point for all the efforts, both theoretical and 
practical, du-ected to the improvement of man's environment. 
Its sway lasted till the approach of the final crisis, when the 
spirit of Utopian speculation was ennobled by having a social 
aim given it, as had been foreshadowed, for three centuries, by 
abortive attempts. But the social or ultimate domain of Posi- 
tivity, whether imaginative or dealing with reality, required 
a doctrine of universal application, in default of which an 
Utopia, which ought to be a condensation, remains simply an 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 241 

apergu, an element of disturbance rather than a source of pro- 
gress. Now this great primary condition is adequately met by 
the definitive advent of Sociology, with its consequence, the 
irresistible convergence of the revolutionary movement towards 
the installation of the Positive religion. This religion, as the 
legitimate issue of previous advance, comes forward at once to 
eliminate subversive Utopias, and to substitute a synthetic con- 
ception which shall rally all high aspirations around one im- 
portant progress, representative of the universal supremacy of 
Morals. 

As early as 1838, in the third volume of my 'Philosophy ' Biological 
there was the implicit announcement of a movement in this "pmijpos.' 
direction, in the proposal to introduce, deliberately, in Biology ist'ea.' 
imaginary organisms, in order to perfect the science as a whole. 
But as, in this its earliest form, the suggestion had only an 
intellectual bearing, it could not be taken as a type of Positive 
Utopias, which must be practical quite as much as theoretical. 
Yet, compared with the transmutation of metals, it was an 
advance in the institution of Utopias, for it enlarged their sphere 
by adding to the inorganic the vital order. A better instance of 
progress in the same province, was the suggestion made at the 
beginning of the present work, as to the transformation of 
herbivorous into carnivorous animals, viewed as the limit of the 
improvement of animals. Whilst it opens a wide field for science, 
this Utopia equally interests art, not as regards the animals 
which elaborate our food, for in them an excess of animalisation 
would be an evil, but as regards the companions of our labour, 
which are thereby rendered more active and more intelligent. 
This advance, however, is still inadequate, confined as it is to 
the domain of profane science and not carrying Positive ideali- 
sation into the world of man, which is its true sphere, as being 
at once more important and more modifiable. To direct 
aright, then, the growth of utopias, which are to be the con- 
densations of the final synthesis, we must carry them into the 
domain of sacred science, as the only one in which we can 
condense progress on the basis of order, by a combination of the 
three modes or degrees of amelioration, physical, intellectual, 
and moral. 

Such is the theory, from the historical as well as the dog- The theory 
matical point of view, of utopias in the Positive sense, in which oompiemen- 
poetry and philosophy should be in more perfect concert than o? reugiw!!' 

VOL. IV. K 

242 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

trtopia of 
the Virgin- 
Mother. 

Inductive 
considera- 
tions. 

they were in the Utopias of Theology or Metaphysics, since in 
the Positive the relative takes the place of the absolute. The 
theory, as here stated, becomes the complement of the theory of 
religion, by condensing the real unity in an ideal limit, the 
point of convergence for all the distinct aspirations, plans, and 
attempts bearing on the continuous advance towards perfection 
of our threefold nature. The better to secure this convergence, 
it is necessary to assign it one single object; we may substitute 
others when it has been attained ; a course always open, so 
boundless is the domain of human Providence, though as yet 
scarcely existing in rudiment, even as regards our environment. 

In this way I am led to present the utopia of the Virgin- 
Mother as the synthetical condensation of the Positive religion, 
all the various aspects of which find their place in it. Its 
examination in detail belongs to the work promised for 1859 on 
the theory and practice of Morals. All that I can do here, is to 
coordinate, in regard to it, the main points. 

Eising superior to scientific prejudices, we must first ac- 
knowledge that there is no flaw in the agreement of the institu- 
tion with the whole system of natural laws. Eestricted to the 
most modifiable species, and in that species peculiar to the sex 
which is most perfectible, in that sex it concerns the noblest 
function of organic life, the one in which the brain can most 
influence the body. The reasonableness of the problem has its 
ground in our determination of the real office of the male 
generative system, which has as its chief purpose the supply to 
the blood of a stimulating fluid, capable of invigorating the 
action of all the organs, the organs of animal as well as those 
of vegetal life. When compared with this general function, 
fecundation becomes but a particular case, one more and more 
secondary as the organism is higher. It is conceivable, then, 
that in the noblest species, the liquid may cease to be indis- 
pensable to the fertilisation of the germ, and that this result 
might be attained by many other means, even material means, 
but especially by a better action of the nervous on the vascular 
system. The advance is foreshadowed in the constant growth 
of chastity, an idea peculiar to the human species, at least in 
the male, and which shows the value for that race of a right 
use of the vivifying fluid — its value physically, intellectually, 
and morally. Still more applicable is the observation to 
women, if we take account of the unfailing combination of 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 243 

three special symptoms : the very slight share of the liquid in 
fecundation ; menstruation ; and the influence of the mother 
on the fcetus. 

In support of this objective induction, we may adduce the ^nJfder™ 
subjective consideration of the general course opinion has *'™^- 
followed in reference to human reproduction. In point of fact, 
as shown in the comparison pointed to in the first chapter of 
this volume, the current of opinion is more and more in favour 
of the greater participation of the woman. Now, an advance 
of this kind does not merely tend to smoothe the way for, and 
bear witness to, the advent of the utopia in which it finds its 
completion. All who estimate at its due value the general 
unison between the objective and the subjective, will allow that 
this course of our conceptions may represent the course of phe- 
nomena, in an order which is very modifiable, the earlier steps 
of which are unknown to us, from' the want of a theory of here- 
ditary transmission. If so, it is conceivable that civilisation not 
only predisposes men to a better appreciation of woman, but 
also increases the share of the latter in reproduction, and that 
in the limit, reproduction should be the exclusive appanage of 
the sex. 

Adonting this conclusion, the higher minds can feel no Beactionot 
repugnance to examine, m the general, the legitimate conse- sionon^our 
quences of an improvement, unattainable unless as a result of audireo- 
the aggregate advance of man, his physical and moral amelio- 
ration, fixed in the race by hereditary transmission.. The 
synthetical aim of the institution makes it incumbent upon me,- 
in the present place, to indicate summarUy its several reactions 
on the individual, the Family, the State : with the further 
advantage of enunciating its chief conditions. 

As regards personal morality, the modification is calculated W Personal. 
to improve the constitution, of brain and body alike, of both 
sexes, by encouraging the habit of chastity, the importance of 
which was more and more felt by the general instinct, even under 
the rule of license. In the woman, this result will' be ensured 
by the weakness of sexual desire, any activity of which, in her 
case, usually depends on the wish to become a mother. In the 
man the reverse is true ; but when the pretext for sexual indul- 
gence is gone, education and opinion will not find it difficult to 
make it yield to the need of preserving the vivifying fluid for 

B 2 

244 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PUTUEE OF IVLAN. 

its proper function, the scope of which will be enlarged, the 
value more duly estimated, 
(u) Domes- From the point of view of the Family, the change would 

bring its constitution more into conformity with the general 
spirit of the Sociocracy, as it would complete the just eman- 
cipation of woman, thus rendered independent of man, even 
physically. It would be no longer possible to contest the full 
ascendancy of the affective sex over children which were its 
offspring exclusively. But the most important consequence 
would be the perfecting the fundamental institution of mar- 
riage, its Positive theory becoming, in the case supposed, 
irrefragable. So purified, the conjugal union would experience 
as marked an improvement as when monogamy took the place 
of polygamy ; for it would be the realisation of the mediaeval 
Utopia of maternity compatible with virginity. The full 
developement thus allowed for woman's most eminent quality 
would not, it must be remembered, exclude the sympathetic 
influence of the sexual instinct, the more certain the more 
limited its satisfaction, without absolutely forbidding a plea- 
sure which loses its dignity after the primary concession. 
(iu) Civic. Judged in reference to the State, this institution alone 

allows us to regulate the most important kind of production, 
any satisfactory regulation of which is impossible while accom- 
plished under the delirium of passion, and with no sense of 
responsibility. If restricted to its best organs, the function of 
reproduction would improve the human race, by introducing 
greater certainty into the hereditary transmission of such bene- 
ficial changes as have been effected by the sum of the continuous 
influences, social or individual, to which the race has been sub- 
jected. The main laws of this great phenomenon of transmission 
will probably remain unknown till this simplification has been 
effected. But, as reproduction in its systematic form must 
ever remain more or less the special privilege of the higher 
types, the comparison of the two forms would, besides throwing 
valuable light on the subject, give rise to an important institu- 
tion, conferring on Sociocracy the greatest advantage possessed 
by Theocracy. For the extension of the new method would 
soon give rise to a caste without the hereditary principle, a class 
better adapted than the mass of the population to supply 
spiritual, nay even temporal chiefs, with an authority resting in 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 245 

this case on a real superiority of birth, which would not shrink 
from investigation. 

Combine the above remarks and we can see in its true light were this 
the Utopia of the Virgin-Mother, the aim of which is to furnish Hsea, others 
Positivism with a synthetical condensation, the equivalent of (ouow. 
that given to Catholicism by the institution of the Eucharist. 
Supposing the problem never solved, its utility, morally and 
intellectually, will never cease to be as great as was for material 
progress that of the dream of the transmutation of metals. 
But, supposing it solved, then, so imperfect is man's world, 
another will soon take its place, one not less adapted to be the 
central focus of our advance. Though I may not here broach 
the question, lest I distract attention, I recommend my succes- 
sors to connect the new enquiry with our bodily existence, the 
material and the moral progress between which that existence 
is the link being already occupied. In any case I have now 
laid the groundwork for the systematic employment of Utopias, 
in default of which the religion of Humanity would be incap- 
able of adequately presenting the totality of our highest aspira^ 
tions, poetical, philosophical, and political. 

With this preamble I have it in my power to enter The direct 

■*■ ./ X examination 

properlv on the direct examination of the Positive regime, oithePosi- 

r r J o _ ' tive Berime. 

abstraction made however, in treating it, of the ideal limit just 
constructed, except in so far as I may make implicit use of it in 
order to bring out more clearly the general tendency of human 
progress. 

Though for the regulation of our existence, the concert, the y''^'™°" 
permanent concert of the two powers in society, is a necessity, |'^™™™™* 
the function more particularly belongs to the priesthood, tionottiie 

sr J o 1 two powers 

Giving full effect in the name of Hurdanity to the power, both 
for control and guidance, it derives from the education, the 
priesthood disciplines the wills of men, whether as individuals 
or as corporations, by appealing in succession to feeling, reason, 
and lastly to public opinion. The action of the temporal 
government bears only on the outward act, it can only there- 
fore complete the spiritual discipline, by establishing, for the 
ruder and more urgent cases, a force for prevention or correc- 
tion. But this subsidiary material power, though never to 
disappear, must be constantly on the wane, in proportion as 
civilisation developes the moral power. Its sphere is the larger, 
the more distant and the vaster the relations with which it 

246 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

Positive 
Morality 
always 
social under > 
all its forms. 

(i) Personal 
Morality. 

Physical 
injunctions. 

deals. I have here only to treat it accessorily, in reference 
to each several portion of the direct discipline. The leading 
function of the temporal government is to direct man's activity, 
and the systematic view of human industry is reserved for my 
concluding treatise, promised at the end of the last chapter, for 
1861. 

Social under all its aspects, Positive morality, in distin- 
guishing between the three forms, personal, domestic, and civic, 
of human life, distinguishes them only as the natural gradations, 
of one and the same discipline, in which each is a preparation for 
the next, and is acted upon by the next. Eanked on the principle 
of increase in the extension, decrease in the intimacy of the re- 
lations, a principle from which flows their interdependence, the 
rules applicable to them are always referred to the service of the 
Great Being, the sole source of the true unity which they con- 
firm and develope. It is in the perfect homogeneity thus 
obtained, that should lie the superiority, morally, of Positivism 
over Catholicism, for Catholicism, owing to the egoistic cha- 
racter inherent in the absolute Synthesis, could directly regu- 
late only individual existence. 

Henceforth regarded as the basis of social life, the import- 
ance of individual existence will not be less, and its dignity will 
be increased. But this primary form, even more than the two 
others, ought to be always considered from the point of view of 
the indivisibility of our nature ; we must see, that is, in the 
intellect and the activity the indispensable ministers of feeling, 
on any true estimate, inseparable from it. It is in this way 
that our physical progress, and a fortiori our mental or moral 
progress, wiU be organised synthetically under the perpetual 
invocation of Humanity, who alone can dispel uncertainty of 
convictions, hesitation in conduct. Besides the general cases 
which admit of formal rules, the discipline of Positivism must 
extend equally to the minor events of life, referring them to 
the Great Being through feeling as the source of unity. The 
most trivial resolutions may thus be ennobled and become 
consistent to a degree unknown to the individualistic system of 
Metaphysics or Theology. 

It is especially in regard to physical injunctions that Posi- 
tivism will develope its competence to regulate aright our 
personal existence, when medicine shall be more thoroughly 
incorporated with religion than it was under the theocratic 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 247 

regime. Health, as happiness, consists in unity, whether con- 
sidered as the unity of the body or of the brain. Taking into 
account the close connection of our physical and moral exist- 
ence, disorders in the one can never be treated apart from the 
other, even in the higher animals, much more in man. Civili- 
sation increases this consensus, and therefore requires that the 
function of the physician be more and more absorbed into the 
office of the priest, instead of sanctioning the ever-widening 
divergence of the two, which was applicable only to the 
Western transition. But it is for Sociocracy irrevocably to 
effect the fusion, by virtue of the encyclopaedic character of the 
common education ; everyone by it being qualified to assist the 
priesthood in these accessory duties, always subordinate to its 
principal function. Such aid is particularly to be looked for 
from women, who will know how to recover for the sanctuary of 
the home most of the functions which have been one after the 
other usurped by Western physicians, leaving the clergy only 
the more important consultations. Not to dwell on the facili- 
ties for concentrating medicine in the hands of the priests 
given by its systematisation, we see that, notwithstanding 
their limited numbers and their other avocations, the sick will 
have the advice and the care they require, without any necessity 
for a distinction which is as indefensible on moral as on rational 
grounds. 

Our object being to regulate individual existence, we must t™ aspects 
always consider it under two aspects, distinct yet co-existent, nay, exS™."' 
correlated, the one negative, the other positive. The solution (ii)^Mlti^& 
of the human problem, on which we now enter directly, lies in 
compressing egoism, developing altruism. The first method 
was the one naturally preferred by Catholicism ; the second is 
essentially the more effective, even from the negative point of 
view, since the most powerful check on any instinct is in the 
uninterrupted growth of its antagonists. Instead of sacrificing 
everything to purity. Positivism sanctions the resistance of 
Chivalry, and places it below tenderness in women, below both 
tenderness and energy in men. Still it adopts the term, and 
gives it a wider extension by giving it a systematic definition, 
for it condenses in purity the proper repression of all the seven 
personal instincts, not limiting it to the most troublesome. Still 
the restraint of this last wiU continue to require in the man 
direct efforts, as the sexual impulses are the least amenable to 

248 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUKE OP MAN. 

discipline, from relating to the wants whicli ofifer the greatest 
opening for sophistry. But Positivism will trimnph over them 
more completely than Catholicism could, and transfer its prin- 
cipal effort to the noblest pair of egoistic instincts, so to com- 
plete the process of purification begun by Theocracy when it 
disciplined the instinct of nutrition. 
For reguia- The process has been a gradual one ; the better to make it 

ting Purity ^ . " 

the personal a Systematic one, we should group the personal inclinations by 

grouped in pairs, in the order given in the synopsis of the brain, first 

pies. excluding the maternal instinct as imperfectly developed in 

man, the main subject of the discipline we propose. The 

result is, three couples, lower, middle, and upper, so named 

quite as much in reference to their dignity as to their position. 

The first couple determines the predominant impulses, whilst 

the two others are destined above all to satisfy those impulses, 

the one acting upon things, the other on persons, so to convert 

the without into the instrument of the within. 

(i) Negative Such an Unity of purpose would seem at first sight to imply 

Apparent the possibility of an egoistic synthesis, putting altruism for the 

of an egoistic time out of sight. In fact, on the one hand, the destructive or 

synthesis. ° 

the constructive instinct, on the other, pride or vanity, are ready 
to acquiesce in the supremacy of the first couple, in spite of 
their own inherent energy, for this supremacy finds scope for 
their energy, though the sympathetic synthesis is better in this 
respect. The same arrangement might be available for women, 
provided that in the primary couple the maternal take the 
place of the sexual instinct, the last being as undeveloped ia 
women as the maternal is in men. 
Eejeoted on gut a deeper examination of this coordination strengthens 

deeper ex- -^ ° 

amination. the conviction of the impossibility of forming any directly 
personal synthesis. For, in the system supposed, there would 
be two instincts sharing the supremacy, instincts which are 
often irreconcilable, especially in men. Nearly equal in energy, 
the most constant inevitably prevails, were it only as presiding 
over the continuous gratification of our imperious physical 
wants. Where human foresight adequately provides for these, 
as with the wealthy, the sexual instinct would tend to reign 
supreme over the whole existence, were there not the antago- 
nism of altruism and the intervention of society to check its 
demands. It would never attain a lasting preponderance, for 
such would soon endanger life, by the imbounded desires it 

Cbap. IV.] THE LIFE. 249 

excites. Short of this however, its capricious aspirations would 
always be an obstacle to any decisive triumph of the instinct of 
conservation. The conclusion is : that our personality, if it is 
to be systematized, must be so by subordinating itself to our 
sociality, which alone can discipline the within and connect it 
with the without, for it alone can sanction all our instincts, 
suiting its rule to the nature of each. 

The fundamental instinct is sanctified by the altruistic The part 

, T . . p played by 

synthesis, by the entrusting to its care the general direction of tte instincts 
the bodily life on which rests that of the brain. It is in the servation 

^ , and beneyo- 

fullest sense amenable to discipline, by virtue of a function as lence respec- 

. tiyely. 

definite as it is legitimate, which excess imperils. Thus we see 
the scale of the affections beginning and ending with a propen- 
sity which may be regulated by an appeal to itself. The centres 
respectively of the soul and of the body, benevolence and the 
instinct of self-preservation, organise happiness and health as 
the result of the unity which springs from their concert. But 
whilst each of them tends to sanction the other in the name of 
its own proper object, yet there can be no hesitation as to 
precedence, the general synthesis being only possible on con- 
dition of the second bending to the first, as alone competent to 
regulate the within by binding it to the without. 

By accepting this subordinate position for the instinct of The instinct 

J r a r o( nutrition. 

nutrition, we may discipline it with equal energy and respect, 
without any serious hesitation, whereas all merely personal 
motives leave room for doubt in the struggle between prudence 
and appetite. Physicians but rarely succeed, even as against 
their own inclinations, when they prescribe sobriety in the in- 
terest of health. It was solely by an appeal to an authority 
superior to iadividual j udgment, that Theocracy and Catholic- 
ism obtained on this point their decided success ; that it was 
not lasting is evidence of the inadequacy of supernatural 
motives. We must get rid of personality in every shape, even 
of the personality of an imaginary being, if we would found a 
powerful and enduring discipline, in the name of Humanity, 
Unable to bring altruism into the field against egoism, the old 
regime had a constant tendency to become illusory because it 
involved a contradiction ; curbing self-interest solely by stimu- 
lating it, it left each to judge of the sacrifices to be made. 
The new Synthesis groups systematically around the Great 
Being the social motives which, even in their empirical form. 

250 SYSTEM OP POSITIVE POLITY. THE PUTURE OF MAN. 

The two 
social 

grounds for 
the disci- 
pline of this 
instinct. 

No ascetic 
rules to be 
applied to 
this instinct, 

have been, since the close of the middle ages, the real source of 
the discipline of this instinct, a discipline which has been con- 
stantly gaining strength even in despite of the Western anarchy. 
"Without enlarging here on explanations reserved for my treatise 
on Morals, I must still point out the capabilities of Positivism 
in regard to the discipline of the nutritive instinct, a discipline 
left inchoate by Theologism, from an insufficient knowledge of 
human nature. 

The whole discipline of nutrition rests on the natural com- 
bination of two social grounds : the obligation to husband 
carefully the provisions which have been accumulated by the 
Great Being for the use of its servants viewed collectively ; the 
duty of making the nourishment of the body subserve the 
fimction of the soul. Those who would look on themselves as 
the masters when they are simply the stewards of wealth, may not 
forget that their coarse enjoyment imposes unjustly privations 
upon others. If intemperance involves no evil consequences to 
health, it invariably disturbs the functions of the brain, espe- 
cially the affective functions, but in a degree also its active and 
speculative functions. From these two points of view, nothing 
but our anarchical habits can explain, if it cannot excuse, the 
universal tendency to indulge appetite beyond what is requisite 
for or allowed by its social purpose. But the normal state 
must begin especially with the two classes on which it devolves 
to regenerate the others ; for they, more than the others, ought 
to appreciate the degradation consequent on excess in food and 
have a higher respect for accumulations which exempt them 
from producing. Women and priests will everjrwhere adopt the 
Positive standard of sobriety, accomplishing and perfecting 
that which Islam attempted so admirably, the entire aban- 
donment of wine and other physical stimulants,- when alimen- 
tation has become sufficiently nutritious. Favourable alike to 
sound health and high self-respect, their initiative will soon be 
followed by a population predisposed to place happiness in the 
constant play of the sympathetic affections, the supremacy of 
which must in two ways be fostered by such a regimen. 

There is no need for me to set forth the full appUcation of 
this mode of viewing the subject to all the other questions 
which concern the instinct of self-preservation, in the gratifi- 
cation of which, and that directly, is incurred the larger part of 
our expenditure. If we meet its legitimate demands, we are the 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 251 

better able to control it, in that the moderation inculcated 
allows us to judge more clearly of the impulses traceable to it 
by calling into activity our physical and moral sensibility. 
Judicious control however — not unwise compression — such is the 
dictate of Positive morality in regard to this instinct, for the 
compression would tend to take away from our proper value as 
servants of Humanity. 

As for the second constituent of the principal pair of per- &) sexnai 

■^ ■■ -"^ ■■■ Instinct. 

sonal instincts, the preceding remarks suflBce for the present to 
make us aware that it needs a sterner discipline, especially in 
the man. Useless for the preservation of the individual, in the 
propagation of the species the sexual instinct contributes but 
in an accessory degree, and even that degree is open to question. 
Philosophers really untrammelled by superstition ought more 
and more to look upon it as tending to interfere with the true 
purpose of the vivifying fluid* But without waiting for the 
realization of the utopia as to women, it is possible to effect, if 
not the atrophy, at any rate the inaction of this instinct, now 
stimulated unduly by the brain ; and to attain this result with 
more ease than might be inferred from the ineffectual efforts of 
Theology. Not merely will the Positive education make all 
feel the defects of the instinct and raise a hope of its entire 
desuetude, but the whole tendency of the definitive regime will 
be to institute a revulsive treatment of greater efficacy than 
the austerities of Catholicism. For the universal participation 
in family and public life will develope to such a degree the 
sympathetic instincts, that feeling, intellect, and activity will 
all combine to discredit and repress the most troublesome of 
the egoistic instincts. As we contemplate the thousands of 
instances of chastity found in Buddhism and Catholicism, in 
spite of the dangers of celibacy and of a discipline more calcu- 
lated to irritate than to crush, we cannot but admit the possi- 
bility of taming an instinct of dubious character by appealing 
to the grand aim which it contravenes. 

It were superfluous here to dwell on the direct discipline of an) in- 
the intermediate couple of the personal instincts, seeing that the destruction 
Positive state, by its nature, favours the instinct of construction straction. 
and restrains that of destruction. Notwithstanding its sponta- 
neous energy and its natural connection with the military life, 
the latter was sufficiently disciplined by the education of man- 
kind to cause no further anxiety, save as regards the repair of 

252 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PUTUEE OF MATS. 

the havoc caused by modern anarchy. Duelling, and even sui- 
cide, have already become so opposed to the manners and' habits 
of the West, that in the Positive state a sufiScient corrective of 
these two aberrations of the destructive instinct will be found 
in treating the bodies of those guilty of them as the bodies of 
murderers. A religion which devotes all our powers to the 
uninterrupted service of Humanity, forbids us, more forcibly 
than any other, ever to dispose of the life so consecrated ; none 
but the ministers of the Great Being may take that hfe in 
exceptional cases of incurable perversion. And yet the instinct 
in question will always require careful watching, as it will never 
cease to play a part in all our operations, even the operations 
of our intellect ; implying as they do the incessant destruction 
of the obstacles which impede the gradual construction of the 
means of action. 

Now that the exigencies of our carnivorous nature are con- 
centrated by the institution of a public service, the propensity to 
destroy, even when it sinks into evil speaking, may be kept in 
check without any direct effort, as a simple result of the general 
habits implanted by Positive education, 
(iv) Pride It is iu the highest pair of the personal instincts that Ues 

the great difficulty in the purification of hiunan nature, since the 
ultimate regime has a peculiar tendency to stimulate in aU pride 
and vanity. The perpetual antagonism of the two, grounded on 
the normal separation of the two powers, is a source of irritation 
rather than a basis of discipline in the case of instincts which 
are inseparable from the very idea of the patriciate and of the 
priesthood. At the same time the participation — subordinate 
yet permanent — of the great body of the people in political 
and moral government, a participation indirect in one sex and 
direct in the other, must at once aggravate and spread the 
intrinsic dangers of the over stimulation of these two instincts. 
But an unceasing watchfulness on the part of all may keep 
them within the limits prescribed by their object. Positive 
education teaching us that they are the exclusive attributes of 
the temporal or spiritual chiefs, with whom they impair hap- 
piness whilst easing their work. Again, this education, besides 
encouraging humility, humility in classes no less than in indi- 
viduals, places in so clear a light the conditions of competence and 
the principles of judgment, as to lead to an instinctive rejection 
of pride and vanity by the body which they would discompose. 

and Vanity. 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 253 

Thus we see how the altruistic discipline gives completeness concluding 

■*■ ° ^ remarks on 

and system to the purification of human nature, begun under the neg,tive 
the egoistic. Preparatory though it be, or secondary, the 
negative form of our moral progress will ever retain an import- 
ance disproportioned to its intrinsic efficacy, on the ground 
that it originates the decisive expansion of the moral power 
which, if not so tested, would continue inadequate, nay even 
doubtful whether it existed or not. Its several portions sup- 
port one another, either by virtue of the contiguity of the organs 
or from the interdependence of the functions. Their mutuality 
becomes especially perceptible in the case of the principal pair, 
where we have already seen to what an extent sobriety facili- 
tates chastity, though the converse be not as fully admitted, 
and yet it is equally true, for the need of food is in a direct ratio 
with that of repair of loss. But, over and above the several 
means of repressing personality, the essential condition of 
purification is the exertion of sympathy, which regulates indi- 
vidual existence by the family relations, and these ^gain by 
the civic. 

It follows that, from every point of view, the ultimate syste- ("D Positive 
matisation of human life must consist above all in the develope- Aiu-uism 

■*■ the great 

ment of altruism. No detailed explanations, however, are here regulator. 
needed of this paramount constituent of true morality, for the 
culture of our sympathies is introduced by the personal worship, 
and the completion of the process is an immediate consequence 
of the social ties, to which I shall devote the rest of this 
chapter. Only I must here recommend perfect spontaneity in 
our daily prayers, as ever indispensable for their chief purpose, 
any factitious or premature efforts interfering with its attain- 
ment, as they tend to conceal the evil, not to cure it. 

In regard to our individual existence, in which acts are, (a) personal 
usually, of less importance and less fixed than in domestic or considered 
civic life, I must not pass unnoticed the power it has to encou- Seung^"^ 
rage our altruistic instincts by applying them in the regulation 
of all the ordinary incidents. These are often so unimportant 
that we have no intellectual or practical ground for deciding on 
our course, which the feelings alone can determine, and must 
determine if we are to avoid caprice, which is by its nature 
favourable to the worse suggestions. In these efforts known 
only to himself, and ennobled by their object, each may freely 
aspire to be more regular than the phenomena of the heavens, 

254 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FDTUKE OF MAN. 

Then to in- 
telligence. 

(I) Domes- 
tie exist- 
ence. 

Preamble. 

Two modes 
of the 
altruistic 
synthesis. 

as he may perfect the order he creates by availing himself of 
number, the earliest and most universal of human institutions, 
but which has not yet borne its best fruits. 

Besides feeling, the discipline of the individual embraces also 
the intellect, but not the activity ; that is essentially bound up 
■with social life, domestic or civic, allowing, that is, for the share 
it has, a point previously settled, in the expression of feeling or 
of thought. But the mental discipline which is to complete 
the training of the individual, has been examined sufl&ciently, 
in the course of the preceding chapter. It condenses the 
intellectual capital of man, in art, in science, and in industry, 
into a hundred volumes, the half of which, as historical 
rather than dogmatical, there is little need of reading twice. 
Education ended, all classes, without excepting the priesthood, 
will confine their reading habitually to the masterpieces 
of poetry, which have a constant tendency to recall us to 
the principal field for our understanding. The scientific 
treatises containing the doctrine will be re-perused at times 
solely in Order to revive the general impressions arising from 
the systematic noviciate, and the technical books wiU be con- 
sulted as occasion requires. If at any time some grave neces- 
sity call for really fresh meditations, they will always be con- 
nected with the special purpose which called for them, without 
increasing the abstract encycJopjedia, which should remain 
so condensed as to be of universal use. I have given above a 
decisive example of the discipline indicated, in connecting with 
the regime a question of fundamental importance, the various 
intellectual aspects of which, poetical, scientific, or political, 
are so blended, that it would have been out of place in our 
study of the doctrine. 

In order now to set forth the direct systematisation of 
family life on the basis of the preliminary coordination of the 
existence of the individual, the first point to insist on is, the 
necessity of subordinating the domestic existence to the civic, 
which alone admits of complete unity. 

To attain its full proportions, the altruistic synthesis can 
be developed only in one form ; but practically two are admis- 
sible, differing in the mode of interdependence established 
between the two indispensable ministers of feeling. Action 
rules or seconds the intellect, according as the object in view 
is to modify the external world, or to bring into evidence the 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 255 

world within. But the first mode alone is adapted to real 
life, the other is exclusively suited to the preparatory period, 
whether of the individual or of the race. Now on this point, 
the evolution of the West presented a grave anomaly which has 
a tendency to persist in the family, if its conditions are mis- 
conceived. For the normal mode was worthily presented only Borne. 
by Roman civilisation, when the subordination of speculation 
to action was inseparably connected with that of private to 
public life. This correlation had been completely lost sight of 
in the Greek movement, which with characteristic inconse- Greece. 
quence, even in its Utopias, proclaimed simultaneously the 
superiority of the political and of the contemplative life. 
Inheriting as it did the organisation of Eome, Catholicism in CathoUoism. 
its systematisation only escaped the Greek contradiction by 
unduly exalting feeling at the expense alike of intelligence and 
activity, at the same time that it defined beatitude as specula- 
tion. 

Since the end of the Middle Ages, under the combined Modem 
weight of these conflicting antecedents, the intellectual move- ™^^" 
ment of Western Europe presented in this respect, as in so 
many others, a profound discrepancy between the influence of the 
scientific and that of the practical impulse. The former, more 
in accordance with the mind of Greece than the genius of 
Eome, protracted under a metaphysical form the reactionary 
movement of Catholicism, ignoring the capital step in 
advance taken by the Romans, our true social ancestors, in 
placing action above speculation. The error was the more 
serious as in a certain degree in harmony with the real nature 
of the modern revolution, an intellectual rather than a social 
revolution. And yet all the time, the thinkers, especially those 
with Utopian tendencies, accepted, nay even exaggerated, as 
was the wont of their Greek prototypes, the supremacy of 
public as compared with private life. The main cause, how- 
ever, of the adhesion to this conclusion is to be found in the 
impulse indirectly emanating from practical life, in proportion 
as industry got the upper hand and the prevalent form of 
human action was consequently in incessant contradiction with 
the aspirations of pedantocrats. All the West, with the excep- 
tion of the lettered classes, has undergone this continuous 
influence, so that the normal state, initiated by the spontaneous 
action of Rome, will be established in a sufficient degree, on 

256 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Subordina- 
tion of 
private to 
public life. 

tion of the 
Family by 
the country 
in the name 
of Hu- 
manity. 

Three 
groups in 
the normal 
family. 

the recognition of the natural correlation between the supe- 
riority of action and that of the civic life. Although the 
habits implanted by Catholicism set themselves everywhere 
against this conclusion, the instinct of the proletariate has 
already risen above them in its aspiration after a collective 
existence, and the patriciate with its empirical policy will 
evince a similar disposition, as soon as Positivism shall remove 
its alarm at communism. 

Nothing then, henceforward, can prevent the noble subor- 
dination of public to private life, the aspiration of Antiquity 
transmitted to us by Chivalry, even against the teaching of 
Catholicism. Yet the theory of human unity is so little under- 
stood, that I was compelled to enter on the above explanation, 
an explanation at once historical and dogmatical, before I 
could set forth the life of the family. For such is the attrac- 
tion of this life, that there would be always a risk of our 
returning to the contemptuous attitude of Catholicism in re- 
lation to public life, were not Positivism to obviate the danger, 
by appealing to a truer estimate of the very feeling in which 
the risk originates. But the superiority of speculation to action 
being definitively and universally rejected, none can fail to 
recognise the ascendancy of the civic life, which alone gives 
full scope for activity, the foundation on which rests the whole 
existence of Humanity. The second mode of Positive unity 
will, however, continue to exist in the preparatory period of 
life, when the providence of man dispenses with action, not, 
however, to the prolongation of this preliminary state, even for 
the rich, when education issues in its proper destination, that 
is, in action. 

This introduction enables me to expound the systematisa- 
tion of the Family by the instrumentality of the Country in the 
name of Humanity. I must begin by completing and correct- 
ing the indications of my Social Statics as to the number of 
constituents in the normal family. 

My theory of the family reduces them to two groups ; the 
one consisting of the married pair, the other of their offspring, 
to the number usually of three. Now, the family so consti- 
tuted is adequate in point of solidarity, but defective as regards 
continuity, such continuity as there is only connecting the 
present with the future, not including the past. To remedy 
this defect, the Positive family must admit another couple. 

Chap. IV.] THE LIPE. 257 

formed by the parents of the husband. Without this comple- 
ment, the normal state would on this point fall below the level 
reached by the earlier and preparatory period, through the 
institution of the Old Men. The Family would not be in 
sufficient accord with the City, since its feminine element 
represents only the moral side of the spiritual power, its intel- 
lectual aspect imperatively reC[uires old age to represent it. 
As the mother of the husband combines in her own person these 
two sources of religious supremacy, she will become the goddess 
of the Positivist fairiily, when the conjoint influences of the 
ultimate regime shall have wholly extinguished disputes origi- 
nating in ungrounded pretentions. Equally subjective and 
objective, the unity of the Family thus constituted will form as 
solid a basis for practical duties as for the moral conditions, as 
it will ensure subsistence to the aged sufficiently for them to 
resign voluntarily the capital they cease to administer. 

With this addition, seven members are allotted to the seven mem- 
average Positivist family, formed in this way of three consti- famuymthe 
tuents, representing respectively the past, the present, and the Therichand 
future, and allowing equally for continuity and for solidarity, need auxu- 
But whilst sufficient for the mass of the people, this number 
requires a fresh addition for the directing classes, more particu- 
larly for the capitalist ; the addition by incorporation of the 
complete and permanent servants of the family, as settled in 
the worship. Whatever restrictions be called for by the luxury 
of the rich, it would seriously interfere with the public service, 
if the patricians, nay even the priests, were obliged, as the 
proletaries are, to rely on their own families exclusively for 
their ordinary household arrangements. 

That envy is the source of the democratic objections on this The jealousy 
point, is evidenced by the prevalent inconsistency which denies tution over- 
the rich what it allows the poor, the practice of Catholicism Positive 
sanctioning the servants of the clergy. Such anarchical ten- 
dencies will be easily overcome by Positivism ; for Positivism, 
systematising the habits of the West, which are yet in full 
vigour in the nations which have escaped Protestantism and 
Deism, consecrates Domesticity as an integral part, henceforth, 
of the worship of Humanity. 

Taking into account this supplement, the family will as a The family 
rule comprise ten members, in the two aristocracies which are me"mbera.™ 
to guide the normal state. For the accession of the new 

VOL. IT. s 

258 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

element, if it is to be consistent with self-respect in the 
domestics and stable, cannot involve, their renunciation of 
the leading family ties. Once secure as a general rule the 
existence of the working classes,, and no rich man will be able, 
with rare exceptions, to find a servant voluntarily separated 
from wife and child, especially as that wife and child can 
assist him in his service, no less than in supplying his own 
wants. 

Thirteen for For the clergy the addition of three members is sufficient ; 

class. for the patrician family it must be doubled. For besides the 

requirements of a certain ostentation, in too close connection 
with command, for it to be either desirable or possible for the 
normal habits to put it down, the greater extent and greater 
complexity of service require such increase, which moreover will 
bind the patriciate more strongly to the proletariate. Thus, 
the Positive family, ordinarily of seven members, has ten in 
the case of the spiritual chiefs, thirteen in that of the temporal, 
nor, as a rule, are larger numbers consistent with the habits of 
life and the respective positions. 

The domi- The numbcrs of the family determined, it will be well for 

completeness' sake to point out, though only in the most impor- 
tant case, the arrangement of its domicile. The French term 
ininage fuses the ideas of family and house, and so points to 
a universal recognition of community of abode as the result 
and condition of the intimacy required for the family. It is 
especially by such a common residence that we can clearly mark 
the limits of the elementary association, to the exclusion of 
all bonds of a strength inadequate to support the living 
together. 

The proJe-. From the preceding remarks, each of the three elements of 

di7reqSres the proletary family requires its own separate portion of the 
common apartment, over and above the withdrawing and 
reception room which is usually distinct from that in which the 
meals are prepared and taken. However deep their sympathies, 
however identical their education, the difference of age and of 
situation would prevent the desired harmony between the two 
couples, the one in full activity, the other withdrawn from 
active life, unless it were open to them to separate and meet at 
pleasure, as also to be rid of the children. The children's part 
must be always subdivided in order to isolate the sexes, but 
with no subdivision for number. Lastly, every family requires 

gUs. 

seven' roorfls. 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 259 

an oratory, in which each member may properly develope his 
private worship, and which may serve as sanctuary for the 
celebration in common of the family worship. Normally then, 
the home of the working man consists of seven rooms of unequal 
size, with no useless part in an estimate which can only be 
deemed extravagant because in the existing anarchy the patri- 
cian is prone to neglect his duty, the plebeian to sink his self- 
respect. , 

When, by the spread of the Positive religion the conviction tim patti^ 

11 Tjiip.iTp.p . cians win 

has become general, that lamily lite is of paramount importance come to see 
for all as the best security for public order, and the great source ti'is respect-, 
of private happiness, all the chiefs will accept as a standing aeir claims. 
obligation to establish it for all on a firm basis. Then the 
above determination, resting on indisputable grounds, will be 
generally held to supply a fit standard for the duties of the 
rich, and for the claims of the poor, in the name of the Great 
Being whose ministers the former are, whose agents the latter., 

Eemarking that our rule assigns to the domicile a number Houses of 
of rooms equal to that of the members of the family, it will' be and the 
easy to extend its application from the proletary to the two 
other classes. It is for the reader to see that in the normal 
state the apartment will have ten or thirteen rooms, according 
as the household is sacerdotal or patrician. This law gives us 
a clear standard of luxury, in the true sense, and the object of 
having such a standard is, that whilst stigmatising its excess, 
we may, without violation to our feelings and habits, tolerate it 
— especially in the patriciate — in the degree suited to the 
average imperfection of human nature. 

All the essential conceptions in the constitution of the Co-ordina- 
Positive family have been sufficiently explained' in the previous Mnce°ptions 
volumes, and the explanation has been rendered complete by tL^Famiiy. 
these recent remarks, so that there remains only their ©oordi- 
nation. 

In effecting this coordination I rely principally on the The two 
fusion, the legitimate fusion of the two statical forms of the S^pSbT" 
theory of the Family, which provisionally I disjoined, and the StheT^fs 
combination of which has been gradually prepared by our tL*Sol°r"ce°of 
dynamical studies. Under one form the family was the basis muBtte™' 
of action, and was referred to the Country ; under the other it "'"''"'°'^' 
was the source of education, and was referred to Humanity. 
The two modes must ultimately converge when the State 

s 2 

260 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

Two correc- 
tions re- 
quired in the 
religious 
theory of the 
Family. 

The best 
conception 
of these 
corrections 
gained by 
distinguish- 
ing educa- 
tion and 
instruction. 

Veneration 
the ijrincipal 
object and 
here the 
mother's in- 

receives its systematic organisation from the Cliurcli. Now the 
condition of such convergence is the introduction of the couple 
which I brought in to complete the family organism. In fact, 
this complement by its very nature reconciles the two forms, 
moral and political, of the family organisation, since the two 
differ only as regards the influence of the women of the 
family ; in the one it is essentially the influence of the mother, 
in the other that of the wife which prevails. Uniting once for 
all the two forms, the religious theory of the family issues in 
bringing the regime into complete conformity with the worship, 
where the combination was already effected. But the import- 
ance of this solution demands, in the present place, a special 
though summary examination. 

In its improved form the theory left two lacunje ; it did 
not protract sufficiently the influence of the mother; it did 
not take full advantage of women as educators. These, its 
defects as a statical theory, naturally came into stronger 
relief as the dynamical investigation showed an uninterrupted 
growth of the ascendancy of women and of their peculiar 
aptitudes, such growth being a consequence of the increasing 
influence of civic upon domestic life. 

To unite in one conception these two corrections, we may 
resolve them into the more accurate determination, for either 
sex, of what education really is in its entirety, when properly 
distinguished from instruction. Whilst instruction ends with 
the preparatory stage of life, including its complement of active 
training, education necessarily continues throughout the whole 
of our objective life, which is but one unceasing preparation for 
the subjective, the sole permanent existence. When our acqui- 
sitions of scientific or practical knowledge have lost all import- 
ance, for our feelings there is still both desirable and attainable 
a large advance, an advance, in the normal case, continuing 
until death, more particularly as regards our self-command. 
But our spontaneous progress in this respect can and should be 
furthered by all the influences which incessantly co-operated in 
our moral education. It never ceases to depend principally on 
the action of women, and that action again becomes more and 
more qualified to ameliorate us. 

If we take the growth and confirmation of veneration as 
the expression of the grand object of our moral progress, we 
cannot but feel to what an extent man needs on this point the 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 261 

assistance of woman. No one but our mother could discipline fluenceis 

1.1 11/.1. I'l invaluable. 

US whilst we were unexposed to the feelmgs connected with 
action ; how much more valuable must her watchfulness be 
when we are habitually subjected to the temptations of business. 
The influence of the wife can in no degree, in this respect, take 
the place of the ascendancy of the mother, an ascendancy of 
which ci\ ilisation has increased the efficacy, by the closer union 
it has effected between private and public life. 

Again, the feeling and conception of the Country, cannot, Themother's 
even for the man, become distinctly appreciable before the period necessary 
of practical training, which succeeds that in which he gains his mge. 
knowledge, at first instinctive, then systematic, of Humanity, 
Still more palpably is this the course of events for the affective 
sex, as women are immediately withdrawn from the influences 
originating in active life. Marriage alone can initiate women 
into civic life ; it is from her husband that she gradually gains 
her conception of it, even without the knowledge of either. 
But it is not on the husband principally that reacts this slow 
initiation, it naturally tells most on the son. Its most valuable 
fruit would therefore be lost, if marriage was fated to withdraw 
the son from his mother's advice, when his circumstances render 
it more than ever necessary. 

There is little ground for surprise at the tardy recognition ^l^^^^^ 
of the importance of this last constituent of the normal family ""'^pi^- 
as compared with the others ; it is explained if we take into 
account the coarse instinct which influenced man's judgment of 
women through the whole period of initiation. Its adjunction 
will constitute one of the best features of Positivism, inaugura^ 
ting at length the sound theory of the female sex, by virtue of 
the true knowledge of human nature. 

A general comparison of the first and last volumes of my i?^'""^ ?* 

o i- J the mother 

religious construction, brings out, on this point, a decisive J^™^^^^!^" 
contrast ; the ' Greneral View ' gives in a satisfactory form the 
theory of marriage ; the theory of the mother remained im- 
perfect till the present chapter. Though influenced by the 
thought of a guardian angel, the order adopted is essentially 
the expression of the spontaneous course of the human initia- 
tion, for I might have drawn from my own personal memories 
the venerated type of the mother. 

The better to understand the definitive constitution of the Position of 
family, the grand object of which is always to give full scope thefamiiyin 

262 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE EUTUBE OF MAU, 

reference to 
tlie influence 
of women. 

The mother 
the image of 
the country. 

Patrie 
Ma trie. 

No evil to be 
feared from 
the wife and 
mother 
leeiding 
together. 

for the just influence of woman upon man, we must bring before 
us, by a comparison of ages, the normal position assigned by 
that constitution, as a general rule, to each bead of a family. 
As, commonly, he will be twenty-three years younger than his 
mother, seven years older than his wife, thirty years older than 
his daughter, about the age of fifty he will be under the constant 
influence of their threefold aid, urging him to good, turning 
him from evil. Under the combined weight of the past, the 
present, and the future, he grows as a citizen, having his 
veneration, his attachment, and his benevolence unconsciously 
stimulated, and from henceforward harmonised by the regime 
as they had been in the worship. 

In this way and in this way only can the ultimate regenera- 
tion of the race, in unison with the true programme of the 
modern revolution, reconcile the conditions of the social 
existence of Kome with the tendencies of the civilization repre- 
sented by Chivalry. In the two periods of childhood our mother 
was for us the loving personification of Humanity; in our riper 
years she is the venerated image of the Country, and there can 
be no better image of it ordinarily for each of us. When 
the sense of citizenship has recovered from the attacks of 
Catholicism, the mere change of a letter will suffice to rectiiy 
the usurpation of the male sex. The mother's influence recalls 
us to public life, whilst the wife's has a tendency to confine us 
to the family, from her inadequate sense of its true connection 
with political existence. The antagonism between the two will, 
as a rule, continue till the time of the mother's death, when she 
becomes for ever the subjective image of Humanity, and the 
wife the objective personification, and as such qualified, also to 
represent, as she is then capable of appreciating, the Country* 
Without adopting the utopian scale of human longevity sug- 
gested by my spiritual father Condorcet, we must admit that in 
the ultimate condition of Humanity the continuous improve- 
ment of our physical and mental regime will prolong the normal 
duration of human life to ninety-one, or thirteen septennial 
periods. Now this augmentation should be sufficient to allow 
the influence of woman in all its three aspects to act upon the 
man during the whole course of his full maturity. 

As for the exaggerated fear of the risks attendant on the 
presence in the same dwelling of the mother and the wife, they 
are in the main due to existiQg defects in the system of educa- 

Chap. IV.] TflE LIFE. ,263 

tion and in the family arrangements, which often give rise to 
dissensions impossible in the normal state. Neither having 
power or wealth, by their own act centered in the head of the 
family, they can be rivals only in advice, whilst the wife adminis- 
ters, the mother superintends, the common household, always 
under his government. Thus is effected a proper distribution 
of the consultative influence, which tends ' to preserve the 
husband from the exclusive pressure of either, whilst not com- 
pelling him to check their advice. But the most valuable 
result of the distribution is that it purifies the two elements, 
the intellectual and moral element, of the moderating power 
always called for by the government of the family; and as 
purified they become perfectly compatible. The husband's 
daily worship of his mother leads him to a truer appreciation of 
his wife, and thus secures her from the coarseness which is the 
too frequent accompaniment of man's tenderness. On the other 
hand the mother's ascendancy is strengthened by his deep 
knowledge of woman's nature, the full attainment of which 
requires the intimacy of married life. If, prior to the advent 
of Positivism, man in his ripe age submits but with reluctance 
to the mother's interference, it is that he has no sufficient sense 
of the dignity of the wife. 

"We see thus how the entire constitution of the family is The seven 
condensed in the addition of its third normal element, which JequiredTor 
is meant to bring the regime, as it regards the family, into a^loiyS'ihe 
unison with the worship. "With this addition we may connect, ^'^^'y- 
all the characteristic features of the family, as a Positive insti- 
tution, already enumerated : eternal widowhood ; the superin- 
tendence of education by the mother ; the support of woman by 
man ; the voluntary renunciation by women of dowries ; and of 
inheritance ; liberty in disposing of property by will ; and the 
power of adoption. Each one is indispensable if man is rightly 
to feel the constant influence of woman, as exerted simulta- 
neously by the mother, the wife, and the daughter, with the 
sister acting equally in support of the three, or in case of need 
taking the place of either of the three in her peculiar relation. 
"Without this sevenfold security, the family life were inadequate 
as the preparation for, and the support of, the action of the citi- 
zen, or the devotion of the religious being. But the nature 
and the object of these correlated institutions, in which the 
Positive synthesis gives systematic expression to the instinctive 

Civil Mar- 
riage. 

264 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

tendencies of Western manners, imperatively require that their 

adoption never be other than in the fullest sense voluntary. 

made°bfnd- ^^^^ ^^°^ yielding to the indiscreet ardour of public opinion, 

ingbyiaw. the priesthood will be bound always to dissuade the patriciate 

from any enforcement by law of these seven regulations, for 

each would becomeroppressive, and at no distant period illusory, 

if ever it ceased to be a purely religious obligation. It is to 

ensure liberty in this respect that Positivism sanctions and 

encourages the institution of civil marriage, although in its 

origin, and even in its character, it is revolutionary ; consequently 

without such sanction it could not be universal. 

Notaviciona There is an apparent contradiction in this incorporation of 

cr>nce3f-ion to , ■*■ ^ 

the temporal civil marriage into the system, which I am bound to clear up or 
to anticipate ; our Catholic associations leading us to see in it a 
mistaken concession on the part of the new spiritual power to 
the gradual encroachments of the old temporal power. The 
reproach has not been formally made, but it would in my eyes 
be a serious one, if I were unable completely to clear myself of 
it, as the sacred law of continuity obliges me to uphold or to 
reassert for the Positive priesthood aU the powers justly claimed 
by former priesthoods, without committing myself to any abuse 
of such powers. But I have given such good reasons for the 
sanction of civil marriage by Positivism, as the normal pre- 
liminary to the religious union, that no one, I hope, of my 
theocratic opponents will accuse me of losing sight in it of the 
Catholic or true privileges of the clergy. 
Civil mar- Passiug from this point, I avail myself of the opportunity 

in°fhe'appre- the questiou offers for a juster understanding of the general 
the relations relations of the two powers in society : for the normal 
Powers. division of the two, hitherto impracticable, has not yet been 
able to evoke, anywhere, the dispositions required for their 
habitual accord. By the statical theory of political power, the 
one as much as the other rests upon opinion ; if unsupported by 
opinion it would soon lose all real authority. But each has its 
own proper mode of taking root in opinion, the priesthood 
actively, the government passively. Government can appeal 
only to long-established opinions, whilst the priesthood carries 
out those opinions to fresh consequences, just as it originally 
formed them. The case in question is a favourable one for 
appreciating this difference, for the revolutionary institution of 
civil marriage has, at bottom, for its sole justification the 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 265 

theocratic character which in a confused way will attach to the 
temporal power so long as the West remains unregenerated by 
Positivism. It were impossible otherwise to understand, how 
a subaltern and purely local magistrate becomes capable of 
forming a tie which will be universally respected. The reli- 
gious basis, however, of the credit he enjoys being rotten, 
the institution could not endure, much less spread, were not 
the Positive worship to incorporate it in a subordinate position 
with itself, by the sanction it accords the magistrate as a 
special assistant of the priesthood of Humanity. 

With all respect for the spontaneity in all cases of the ™?jlf|fjj^^ 
observance of the seven conditions required by the religious age for 

^ -J o Marriage. 

theory of the family, the priesthood will yet be compelled to 
ask for some legal measures in regard to them, most particu- 
larly with reference to the age of civil marriage. All Western 
codes allow too early an age, especially for women, who, by the 
French law are sacrificed to the coarseness of men before their 
organisation, even their physical constitution, is sufficiently 
settled. The High Priest of Humanity, then, must prevail on 
the several dictators to decree that the woman never marry till 
she has completed her nineteenth year, not insisting on the 
twenty-first, which will remain the proper age for the religious 
marriage. As for the man, it will be well to prolong till 
twenty-eight, the normal age for the sacrament of destination, 
the veto of the father on marriage. By these two arrangements, 
most Positivist marriages will be between women of twenty-two 
and men of twenty-nine ; so as to keep the disparity of seven 
years, which seems the best. 

With regard to the power of disposing of property by will i-egai mea- 
and to that of adoption. Western legislation requires, and in ^us and 
France more than elsewhere, more profound modifications if it reserved for 

^ nextchapter. 

is to be adapted to the religious constitution of the family. 
But the very importance of these modifications must be my 
justification for not touching on them in detail till the following 
chapter, the chapter devoted to tracing the final transition, for 
which such measures are essentially meant. In regard to the 
normal state, it is enough here if I make the general remark 
that adoption once disengaged from existing obstacles, will still 
be subjected to precautions against mere impulses, and that the 
disposal of property by will presupposes a just attention to the 
interests of the natural heirs. 

266 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN, 

Theory of 
th9 Family 
summed up 
in its normal 
variations. 

A constant 
progress 
traceable in 
the constitu- 
tion of the 
Family, 

A sound 
Utopia 
should be an 
anticipation. 

By a combination of the preceding observations, the ulti- 
mate systematisation of the family stands out so clearly that I 
may pass from it to enquire into the constitution of the state, 
the principal domain of Positivity. But before I enter on it, I 
must point out in what way the theory of the family is summa- 
rised quite naturally by a general estimate of its admissible 
modifications, modifications studied in detail in the , third 
volume. 

At all times thought to have as its aim the developing the 
infiuence of woman upon man, there is traceable in the consti- 
tution of the Family a continuous progress from the coarse 
stimulus which called it into existence, to its ideal limit in the 
Utopia of the Virgin-Mother. Our most remote ancestors were 
even, nearly as the animals are, accessible to sexual desire only 
at certain periods. The women of Oceania even now find long 
stimulation necessary to arouse an ignoble appetite. Such in 
its earliest form is the infiuence of women, nor as yet, admir- 
able as are the improvements introduced, is it regenerated. The 
Positive religion alone can definitively secure the triumph of a 
high estimate of woman, as the normal mediator between man 
and Humanity. The utopia of the Virgin-Mother implies in its 
very statement the desired regeneration, as it frees the sex 
from all coarse dependence, in order to reserve for it, at one 
and the same time, the most important physical function and 
the noblest moral mission. Even should this institution of 
the religion never be other than an ideal, yet when confronted 
with the point of departure it would condense the whole initia- 
tion of the race, to which we limit the dominion of an instinct 
doomed to extinction in the maturity of mankind. 

But a sound utopia can never really be other than in a 
certain degree an anticipation of fact ; whereas unsound ones 
always favour an impossible return upon the past. Thus, the 
anarchical reveries of Plato and of his modern imitators, on 
the community of property and of wives, so far from indicating 
real progress, only tended to the re-establishment of the collec- 
tive property and the promiscuous intercourse, which are dis- 
tinctive of the primitive ages. On the contrary, the admirable 
Utopia of Henry IV., of the Quakers, and of Leibnitz, on per- 
petual peace in Western Europe, did but precede by about two 
centuries, the result of the spontaneous evolution of the state of 
mankind. We may hope then a like issue for the feminine 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 267 

Utopia ; in full agreement with the whole teaching of the past, 
it should serve henceforth as the ideal expression of the future.. 
For the rest, everything tends to the conclusion that the educa- 
tion of the individual, from this time forward systematically 
conducted, will be bound to no servile reproduction, as jegards 
the sexual instinct, of the evolution of the race, since already 
we see the "Western nations becoming in the full sense of the 
word, monogamic, without ever having been polygamic. 

To give clearness to the exposition of civic existence, the (c) cmo 

^ existence* 

first step is to determine the constitution of the social milieu 
under its material aspect. This preliminary operation consists 
of two successive processes : first, the assigning their limits to PreUminaiy 
the nationalities which will become the political elements of 
regenerate Humanity ; secondly, the decomposition of each 
nation into industrial classes. The professional distribution of 
those classes belongs to my promised work on the Positive 
systematisation of human industry. 

In the preceding volume it has been satisfactorily shown, Deoompo- 
that the formation of the great states of the Western world great states 

P . T t 1 J • of tte West. 

was a necessary consequence oi the modern revolution, one 
destined to end with it, in accordance with the principles laid 
down in my Social Statics. In the following chapter, I shall 
explain, more especially in the case of France, the normal plan on 
which these factitious aggregates, even now without solid justi- 
fication, will pass peaceably into free and durable states. Each 
of these Positive Eepublics should have a population of from Extent of 
one to three millions on a territory about equal to that of BepubUcs. 
Belgium, Tuscany, Holland, Sicily, and Sardinia, &c. 

In default of this decomposition, which, in an imperfect Moral Bdu- 
form, was realised in the Middle Ages simultaneously with the quires an 
division of the two powers, our moral education would fail from agg^ate" 
there being no satisfactory intermedium between the Family Family ana 
and Humanity. Meant to be the bond between the closest and "™™ ^' 
the most extensive of human associations, the Country can only 
discharge this its primary function, on condition of its being so 
limited in extent as to allow a real sense of the relations of citi- 
zenship. Language indicates the universal admission of this patriotism, 
principle, when it represents the feelings of patriotism as con- '""""^''• 
fined to the union formed by the grouping of the rural popu- 
lation round one paramount city. 

This original limit was only exceeded as a consequence of 

268 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

This original 
limit first 

consequence 
of the Ro- 
man Con- 
quest. 

No exact 
limit of the 
Positive 
Nation- 
alities. 

Political 
motive for 
decompo- 
sition. 

the compulsory incorporation which resulted from the gradual 
extension of Koman Conquest. In lieu thereof, the Middle 
Ages substituted a voluntary aggregation of nations, politically 
independent but spiritually connected, with a natural tendency 
towards an association coextensive with the race, had the faith 
they held in common been able to impose itself on mankind. 
Such an association with such a faith it is for the religion of 
Humanity definitively to organise, when it has triumphed over 
the state of anarchy, which made the temporary formation of 
great states in the West as indispensable as it was inevitable. 

It is not possible to fix the exact limit of the Positive 
nation, though it may be confidently asserted that it will be 
larger than in the mediaeval period, when social intercourse was 
less general and the want of it less felt. The standard above 
given seems to me one which will long remain appropriate, 
as allowing aggregations in the degree in which concert is 
reconcileable with independence. As the Positive religion will 
have secured the general adoption of the principle of free 
aggregation, new decompositions or combinations may be 
always effected without any struggle, as the progress of society 
may warrant them. And although the definitive civilisation 
will gradually enlarge the political association, I doubt its ever 
being much in excess of the limit just assigned it. For the 
rest, the question has already lost its great importance ; since 
the Positive regime will make government more and more 
spiritual, less and less temporal, thus systematising the natural 
progress of society. 

In the political point of view, not less than in the moral, 
the normal decomposition of the large states is of great value, as 
equally favourable to order and to progress. Each of the three 
general elements of the sociocratic state, will always derive 
important advantages from it. The priesthood of Humanity 
will be better able to modify the government of the nation, 
which under these conditions will be less inclined to encroach 
upon the spiritual functions. But at the same time, the patri- 
cians will find greater respect paid to an authority the origin 
and use of which will be intelligible to all. Lastly, the prole- 
taries will find it easier to deal with a smaller amount of 
oppression, and more opening for the exercise of regular 
control. 

We must consider, then, the Positive regime as having for 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 269 

its social basis the distribution of the Western territory into Division of 

, , , the West 

seventy republics, each, as an average, comprising three hundred into seventy 
thousand families, each of the normal size as above laid down. 
Adopting this basis, we have five hundred states for the whole 
earth, and we find the task easier of their internal distribution 
into industrial classes. 

In reference to this second point, I congratulate myself on Numbers o£ 
having ventured to propose definite numbers in the Posi- tiiciate. 
tivist Catechism published about the middle of October, 1852. 
For the numbers there given have in the natural course of 
things been accepted, explicitly or implicitly, by the most com- 
petent judges, in regard to a point on which the special data 
are as yet insufficient. So supported, I do not hesitate to 
present the Western patriciate in the normal state as consisting 
of two thousand bankers, a hundred thousand merchants, two 
hundred thousand manufacturers, and foiir hundred thousand 
agriculturists. 

Observing that the number of bankers corresponds to the 
number of temples of Humanity, we get a direct connection 
between the temporal hierarchy and the constitution of the 
spiritualty, taking into account the habitual relations of the 
senior member of each presbytery with the patrician invested 
with its financial administration. On this scale, each banker 
on the average will have to meet the wants of ten thousand 
families, an arrangement which, as it seems to me, accords with 
the principle that the sphere of every office is to be as large as 
is compatible with direct responsibility in the functionary. The 
same rule is observed in the case of the lowest number, since 
it assigns, on an average, to each agricultural patrician a domain 
of five hundred hectares, an extent of cultivation to which one 1,235 awes. 
person can attend without strain. For the members of the two 
intervening classes, they seem to me to harmonise sufficiently 
with the law of increased condensation of industrial service, in 
proportion to the increase of generality and abstraction. I 
urge the reader to make himself familiar with this distribution 
as a whole by applying it to France as it actually exists, 
dividing, that is, each of the preceding numbers by four. 

By virtue of these two operations, we can form a clear con- The distn- 
ception of the social milieu in which the Positive religion has p^SetoLte! 
to systematise civic life. But, as the numbers above given apply 
only to the patrician hierarchy, the survey, to be sufficiently 

270 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Eatio of the 
rural to the 
town prole- 
tariate. Dis- 
tribution of 
the latter. 

The type 
chosen re- 
presents the 
average 
provincial 
capital. 

The capital 
taken as type 
is of the size 
most suited 
to our 
modern 
wants. 

exact, requires the distribution of the proletaries also among 
their industrial chiefs. 

Although the special data as regards this first point are 
wanting more than in the case of the patricians, I think I 
may, as a first step, allot agricultural industry a population 
double the amount of that required for all the town industries 
together. The apportioning of these latter will be clearer if 1 
specify it for a capital, in which the number of families should 
be thirty times less than in the State of which it was the capital, 
in accordance with the actual average of France. In a nation 
of the normal size above given, such a capital would be formed 
of ten thousand households, exclusive of the patricians and 
priests. Of these ten thousand I assign seven thousand to 
manufacturers, three thousand to commerce, including, in both 
cases, the various intermediate agents between the capitalist 
and the workman. Multiply these numbers by ten, and the 
sum will meet the case of the nation of which it is the capital, 
the central government of which seems to me to require five 
thousand special functionaries, three fifths military, the other 
two fifths civil. 

The abstract capital which has served as a type, has a popu- 
lation equivalent to that of most of the capitals of the seven- 
teen republics into which France will break up peaceably about 
the end of the present century. This is the average case, but 
there will be many states in which the capital will admit of a 
population double, treble, quintuple, or even septuple of that 
given. The original number must be multiplied by eleven 
when we come to the old capitals of the political aggrega- 
tions, which in some parts of the world, reproduce to a certain 
extent the Western type. For these voluntary associations wiU 
always remain sufficiently important to draw an exceptional 
population to their centres. Finally the number taken as the 
basis must be multiplied thirteen times for Paris, as the metro- 
polis of mankind, in accordance with its present state, and its 
increase is not desirable. 

These are the rates I venture to hazard in order to fix 
attention on an important, though in the present place a subor- 
dinate question. The number selected for the typical capital 
answers to the degree of concentration, in my judgment, 
ordinarily desirable, any notable excess involving moral and 
even political risks when the normal habits, and manners, are 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 271 

once established. The same proportions apply, but inversely, to 
the several cases of the smaller cities, the last case being the 
village or the concentration of the rural community, in order 
to avoid the excessive dispersion, no less than the excessive 
agglomeration of population. 

Summarising these hints, we must combine the two parts of ^he patd- 

° ^ r cian ramiJies 

the preliminary statistical sketch here given by an estimate of are 'o tue 

■*■ -^ o J plebeian as 

the normal proportion of plebeians to patricians. Taking each one to thirty. 
of the five hundred republics of the world by itself, the families 
of the aristocracy will be the thirtieth part of the whole number. 

But, if we bear in mind the laws of the numerical constitu- J^^^^^'^'^'tiie 
tion of the family, the workmen are only sixteen times as ^^ t"s£.^ 
numerous as the employers. Each agricultural patrician *^™- 
directs thirty-five proletaries, each manufacturing seventy, each 
commercial patrician sixty. 

Without pressing further definite arrangements, which, as ™? "'■"<=' 
anticipations, must have a logical, rather than a scientific, jJ'^J'^gp^^. 
value, I have now to delineate the public regime, beginning ™*«- 
with an estimate of the support it derives continually from 
the private life, personal as well as family life. But no further 
explanation is needed of the fundamental preparation formed 
by the education, and developed in the worship ; so that I may 
confine myself to pointing out the influence which the system- 
atisation of private existence exercises directly and continually 
on that of public life. 

At all times men have held a virtuous private life to be the ^'?^V^ *^l 

^ religion of 

first guarantee of true civism, although such life might be the •'^,™j"'*l^ 
offsprina: of mere personal prudence. At the same time that it conduct has 

i o J- A a collective 

is easier to estimate the rules of conduct in the narrower sphere, bearing. 
acts are in that sphere of less importance, and ako more modi- 
fiable, the result being that it ofiers the best test of our moral 
strength, which must incessantly look to it for the renewal of 
its vigour. This, the universal judgment, is in a special 
degree applicable in the final state, where the systematisation 
of individual existence with constant reference to Humanity 
is the consequence of an assiduous culture, both objective and 
subjective, of the sympathetic instincts. Each one then always 
feels that the family of which he is a member, or even the class 
to which that family belongs, though not an immediate organ 
of the Great Being, is an indispensable element of the action 
of the State, which alone is in direct relation with the eternal 

272 SYSTEM OP POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Our life as 
citizens in- 
fluenced by 
our guardian 
angels. 

Most of all 
in the 
Priesthood. 

The Btm 
greater in- 
fluence of 
domestic 
upon public 
Morality. 

whole. All individual conduct, then, becomes social in its des- 
tination, whence principally it derives its nobleness and its 
coherence, qualities, consequently, traceable in the most insigni- 
ficant acts, which are never indifferent in view of the feelings 
which they indicate, or which they evoke. 

The morality of the individual finds its condensation in his 
private worship, and should be a direct aid to his morality as 
a citizen, over and above its indirect influence through' his 
domestic morality. Our three guardian angels, though drawn 
from the family, do not confine their action to the perfecting 
of that- family. Their true and highest function is to guide us 
or to sustain us in the exertions and dangers attendant on our 
social existence, as was admirably felt by Chivalry, even under 
the counteraction of Catholicism. Thus we give reality to the 
fiction of Theology, that man has always by his side a 
superior being, lending him a benevolent assistance, judging him 
without illusion. All our public acts admit this intervention, 
and may become so many continuations of our personal worship, 
in a regime in which the Family is brought into constant rela- 
tion with Humanity, through the intermedium of the Country. 

AU classes feel this influence, but the priesthood above aU ; 
as better able to appreciate it, it will connect it with the 
constant perfecting of the moral qualities required by its most 
important office. The interpreter of Humanity gains strength 
and dignity from feeling himself ever aided by her highest 
personification. Disciplining the present in the interest of the 
future, in the name of the past, his devotedness and his energy 
should be constantly rekindled by the direct invocation of the 
angelic ideal, which concentrates for him, by its very constitu- 
tion the sum of human relations. In his secret communion with 
this ideal, the priest is best able to rise above the vanity, which 
hides from him his deficiencies, a just sense of which is en- 
couraged by the comparison of himself with his ideal. Amidst 
the contests of public life, its holy influence stimulates, or cahns 
him, by its presentation of the past, which he has to explain, 
and of the future which is to be his judge. 

Still, whatever the influence continually exerted by private 
on public morality, it cannot be as direct or as efficacious as 
that of a rightly ordered domestic life, owing to the closer 
resemblance of the Family to the State, especially if it is formed 
on true social principles. It is in domestic life that the funda- 

Chajp. IV.] THE LIFE, 273 

mental maxim : Live for Others begins to take practical com- 
plement : Live without concealment, without -which it would 
soon become inadequate, nay even too often illusory. No 
precautions suggested by the self-interest of metaphysical 
legislators wiU. long bar the instinct of the Western nations 
from regarding full publicity of private conduct as the indis- 
pensable security of right civic action. The natural school for 
command and obedience, family life cannot answer its main 
purpose if withdrawn from the healthy influences of the j udg- 
ment of the priesthood and even of the public. They who refuse 
to live openly wiU be justly liable to the suspicion of not really 
wishing to live for others. To judge of feelings we require acts ; 
if so, the two virtues which are essential to civic life, self- 
devotion and veneration, must be practised daily in family life 
if their existence is to be recognised, the practice of them there 
being easier and more open to all than in public life. We must 
not forget, however, when we sum up social morality in the obli- 
gation of living without concealment, that it must be in subordi- 
nation to the precept of living for others, though it is only times 
of anarchy that allow a regular parade of vicious conduct. 

Quite apart from its power in this respect, domestic life is a ^te do- 

^ lUBSulC 3fl.ClS 

direct support to public life, m that it gives the priesthood an *^^ "™ ''*<* 

„ 1 ptV ^^ affording 

enduring; influence over the servant of Humanity. The educa- ^°'p^ '""^ "'^ 

" n • action of the 

tion and the worship naturally give the priests access to the Priesthood 

^ ^ ■*■ on the indi- 

family, and they are often appealed to to soothe or remedy the ■"dual, 
collisions which, such is the imperfection of our nature, are 
inseparable from the highest ties. Their interference is the 
more effective, as they have a personal knowledge of all the 
members of the family, owing to the rule, the social value of 
which is on a par with the intellectual, that everyone during 
his years of encyclopaedic training is under the same teacher. 
It was to give completeness to this personal relation, by making 
it common to husband and wife, that I fixed seven years as the 
most suitable difference in age for marriage. Allow this, and 
the two priests to whom the two couples owed their initiation 
and who consecrated their union, are the better qualified to 
restore harmony in the family and mutual agreement, as well 
as to replace on a right footing the relations with the children, 
by invoking the common belief. 

A connection of this kind, at once particular and general. The women, 
ought, conversely, to be an assistance to the priesthood, by man ma-" 

VOL. IV. T 

274 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

trons, must 
have the 
Civic feeling. 

The rela- 
tions of one 
family with 
others at- 
tach it to 
the City. 

Influence of 
the Salon. 

ensuring it, in the bosom of each family, the support of the women 
and of the old as against the industrial chiefs on whom the 
social action of the Priesthood is usually brought to bear. But 
to be effectual on extraordinary occasions, such aid must have 
been the object of habitual attention in the ordinary relations 
of life. Now, this implies that women encourage in themselves 
in due degree the true civic feeling, nobly therein imitating the 
Roman type, nay in the normal state surpassing it by its com- 
bination with the instinct of Chivalry. The natural tendency 
of the wife to absorption in the family may, not to speak of the 
influence of the mother, be generally overcome by an increased 
sense of the close connection which exists between self-devotion 
within the family circle and self-renunciation in public life. 
Even granting that the preference of Family to Country were 
not a mere cloak for selfishness. Positive education wiU pre- 
dispose women to acknowledge the instability inherent in such 
conduct, the collective egoism impairing personal tenderness. 

By virtue of this predisposition family life, in its normal 
developement, will be in direct connection with public life, first 
through the relations between the members of each family, se- 
condly, through its daily intercourse with others, whether related 
or not. In such a state of things the full value will be felt of the 
fraternal relation, the main source of noble friendships. The 
influence on society of such friendships should awake the sense 
how important it is for Positivism to re-establish, and even to 
extend, the wise prohibitions by which Catholicism completed 
the admirable discipline instituted by the Theocracy as regards 
incest. Although in the case of marriage the law of widow- 
hood of itself meets the want, yet as a purely religious ordi- 
nance it does not exempt the civil legislation from the duty 
of including all fraternal connections without exception in the 
two prohibitions which are at present limited to fraternity by 
birth. But the largest developement of mutual relations 
between Positive families will be due to adoption and domes- 
ticity, neither of which institutions will be the incorporation of 
merely isolated individuals, but of families, the difference in 
position being compensated by the identity of education. 

The family relations as a whole should offer a direct and 
powerful aid to public life, as an instrument constantly avail- 
able for the formation of public opinion. In defiance of 
metaphysical anarchy, the Positive faith will soon have re- 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 275 

generated the "Western salon, the presidency in which invari- 
ably belongs to women, but to the mother rather than to the 
wife. Including all ranks, adopted by all nations, especially 
when the sacred language shall have come into general use, 
these meetings, traceable in their origin to feudalism, will 
everywhere display their capacity to form the habitual connec- 
tion between private and public life. Under the joint autho- 
rity of sex and age, they will assume a moral rather than a 
political direction, strengthening religious principles by an 
application of them in detail, and that a natural application, 
never degenerating into pedantry. These private assemblies in 
Which women play the principal part, cannot, it is true, super- 
sede the public meetings of men, but they will limit such 
meetings to the general and, above all, the local questions 
which directly concern industrial action. 

Such are the sources normally of public opinion, when the The organs 
milieu is no longer under the dominion of journalism, the opinion. 
peculiar feature of the latest revolutionary phase. Its weekly 
addresses offer the priesthood the best means for explaining 
in due season the less important applications of the principles 
of the doctrine. When a written explanation is necessary, it 
will issue special placards, similar to those of Catholicism, but 
not with a periodical character. Concentrated on their perma- 
nent functions, the theoricians will naturally set an example to 
all of the respect due to the institutions of writing and printing, 
by using them solely for important communications, such as are 
meant chiefly for posterity. Freed from the influence of the 
literary class, be it by its Positive education, or by the incorpo- 
ration of the thinkers of that class into the priesthood, the 
public wiU imitate the reserve of its guides and will look with 
contempt on unnecessary publications, without any attack on 
the liberty of exposition and discussion. Under this regime 
the salons will put out their full power to prepare opinion, 
which again will be more easily judged than when its chief 
organ of expression was an unreliable press. In this way it is 
that women should indirectly share in the current judgment of 
acts and persons, without any detriment to their moral mission, 
the daily accomplishment of which can alone prevent men from 
being carried away by political feeling. 

The reaction of domestic on public life, common as it natu- The saions 
rally is to all classes, should, like that of individual existence. Priesthood. 

T 2 

276 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE EUTUEE OF K&IS. 

Of the 
Bankers. 

Of tlio Pro- 
lefcanate. 

be most powerful in the clergy. The freely accepted supre- 
macy of the salon of the presbytery will imply to all, especially 
to women, the social precedence of the priesthood over the 
patriciate. Notwithstanding their greater power and wealth, 
the temporal chiefs will hold it an honour to be admitted to 
this distinguished society, the venerable president of which 
unites in her own person the dignity of age and sex with the 
consideration attaching to the office of her son. In the capital 
of Humanity, the Salon of the High Priest will thus initiate 
throughout the world conceptions well adapted to second his 
synthetic influence and capable of serving in lieu of more 
formal communications. Spreading from presbytery to presby- 
tery, and radiating thence by a natural process, they will be 
equivalent to a systematic domestic organisation of public 
opinion, as they will stamp an unconstrained uniformity on all 
the salons of the globe, a process facilitated by the progressive 
acceleration of all the means of communication. 

As regards the patricians, the salon should strengthen their 
union as a hierarchy, and moderate their industrial rivalries. 
Its capabilities in these two respects will be most visibly shown 
in the salons of the bankers, the natural centres of meeting for 
all the industrial classes. There, each member of the supreme 
patriciate will create a truer appreciation of his class as the 
common regulator of human industry, by fraternising with 
dignity with all his clients, agriculturists, manufacturers, and 
merchants, to whom his weekly receptions will always be open. 
Whilst admirably calculated to prepare and facilitate particular 
operations, these meetings will not degenerate into mere pro- 
fessional meetings, the safeguard lying either in the diver- 
sity of their component elements, or still more in the presence 
habitually of the more eminent proletaries, who wiU give them 
a more general character. Not in immediate contact with the 
people, as banking, the most abstract form of industry, 
scarcely needs any workmen, bankers worthy of their position 
will be conscious of the value of this personal intercom'se viith 
the class which in the normal state will look to them as its 
natural temporal protectors. 

But, allowing its full efficacy for social purposes to the 
Positive salon in the case of the priest or the patrician, it is 
with the proletary class that the institution will habitually bear 
its best fruits. It supplies the plebeians the best means for 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 277 

preparing, and even extending their due control over all civic 
concerns, under the presidency of women, which by its mere 
acceptance recalls them to great principles, to the suppression of 
incidental passions. Indispensably requisite to complete the 
constitution of the Sociocracy, this function would alone suffice 
to justify my speaking, as above, of the salon as part of the 
working man's apartment. Thus become a regular institution, 
the private meetings of the proletariate will be superior in moral 
dignity and political value to its public meetings, which become 
of secondary importance, though immediately they are so impor- 
tant as to account for the attention paid them in the ' General 
View.' The tendency to disorder of these noisy discussions, in 
which pride and vanity soon get the upper hand even in the 
higher natures, must always be a source of alarm to the patri- 
cian class ; but its only way of escape is the encouragement of 
the institution which rejects them and fills their place. 

To complete the general examination of the direct and The growth 
persistent jeaction of domestic on civic life, it remains for me tion?'" "' 
to put forward a question of more special interest and greater 
importance than the preceding, the question namely of the 
propagation of the race. 

As the necessary seat of the highest form of production, the Eeguiation 
family by it is in most intimate connection with the whole 
system of industrial activity, for which it supplies the agents. 
The paramount importance however of this function is as yet 
masked by the difficulties of its regulation, owing to the non- 
existence of right ideas on the subject and appropriate institu- 
tions. The real commencement of human education takes place 
in a state of brute passion with no sense of responsibility. Such 
being the case, it may be feared that human wisdom will never 
succeed in fully ordering an existence with such a beginning. 
Yet the success obtained in beings less modifiable than man 
aUows the hope that the initial function may be as compatible 
with regular control as are its whole consequences. 

We need not be surprised at the existing contrast between There are 
the importance attached to the propagation of the inferior thatPoSthre 
animals and the neglect of that of man. For the rough and "m'beeqmi 
violent methods adopted for the former are wholly inapplicable cuit tLk. ' 
to the latter. It was a domain which, for two reasons, was 
closed till the advent of Positivism, the only system capable of 
supplying the appropriate theories and institutions, for it alone 

278 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

completes and systematises science and morality. Without the 
normal division of the two powers, characteristic of the religion 
of Humanity, procreation in our race can only be regulated by 
legal measures, and such are as ineffectual as they are unseemly. 
It may seem premature, on scientific and moral grounds, to 
approach the subject, yet two general symptoms warn us that 
it will shortly demand our attention ; such is the inference to 
be drawn from the spontaneous convergence of the questions 
everywhere coming up as to the number and quality of the 
children born. 
Indication A sophistical, perhaps a blameworthy theory, first drew the 

ber. attention of Western Europe, were it only by the indignation 

it excited in the nations which had escaped Protestantism. 
Veiling its metaphysical and empirical character under a var- 
nish of science, it erred, scientifically, by ignoring the general 
law by which, throughout the series of living beings, fecundity 
diminishes in proportion as the race is higher in the scale. It 
erred, practically, in that it was in direct contradiction with the 
constant rate of increase observed in the population of the 
West, during the thirty centuries of the great transition, a rate 
unaffected by the parallel increase of general wellbeing. 
(2). As to Again, the hereditary transmission of the more serious 

diseases, and that frequently in an aggravated form, has 
induced a general sense that it is desirable to regulate, not 
merely the quantity, but still more the quality of man's 
offspring. The Western world in modern times has become 
increasingly averse to the barbarous institutions which aimed 
at compensating this inevitable evil, so that the danger has 
assumed proportions calculated to excite universal attention, in 
proportion as the decline of Theology allowed an examination 
of the question. But the materialistic tendencies of medicine 
have prevented our conceiving of any remedy but one which is 
as illusory as it is oppressive, the prohibition, viz., of marriage 
to all of bad constitution. 
In what con- Still, iu the fact that economists and physicians continue 
dfiHcuity of their joint efforts, however discordant and irrational their views 
may be, we have an historical indication, that the question is 
ripe for settlement, more especially since the advent of the 
religion which is destined to accomplish that settlement. The 
difficulty is this, how to reconcile two wants, both equally 
imperious : the obligation of regulating human propagation ; 

the problem. 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 279 

the duty of respecting the marriage union as the universal 
basis of the Family which in its turn is the basis of the State. 
Now, this is only possible by a moral regulation of marriages, 
to the exclusion of legal checks ; so to make the production of 
children a responsible function voluntarily assumed. 

On this question the Positive religion has two general Two general 
solutions to offer, the one radical but an hypothesis, the other ofeeredby 
real but inadequate ; the two may always act in concert. As I 
have already sufficiently expounded them, it is enough, here, to 
point out their conjoint application to this great problem. The 
two are : the Utopia as to women, and chaste marriage, the 
chief purpose of which I have already stated. 

We should look on the former as supplying the only possible w The 
basis for a definitive systematisation of human reproduction, 
which, by its adoption, becomes voluntary and responsible. So 
long as it is not attained, the evil will never be attacked at its 
source ; all remedies will be but palliative. But the noblest 
vegetative function of Humanity once duly confined to her 
highest organs, the rapid spread of the Positive theoiy of 
hereditary transmission will allow a gradual regulation of that 
function, both as to number and quality. The natm-al laws of 
these two conditions will, at the same time, have become cogni- 
sable by all, by virtue of a considerable evolution of the univer- 
sal Sociocracy. The solution, however, is one which will always 
be limited to the higher natures, for it is essentially of a moral 
kind and, as such, requires the persistent combination of higher 
sensibility and extreme purity. 

Even if realised, then, it will never entirely supersede the (j) chaste 
less important institution, alone feasible at present, and a conse- ™*™'«''- 
quence of the systematic encouragement of chastity in marriage. 
When the Positive faith shall have generally subdued the 
coarse view sanctioned by Theologism as to the nature and 
destination of women, this form of marriage will rapidly spread ; 
already, prior to any theory, decisive instances proclaim its 
approach. A noble use of adoption will allow the completing 
of this exceptional form of marriage, by offering the parental 
relation in its purest form to those in whom the union of soul 
is most perfect, with the additional advantage of relieving the 
married couples who are in the best conditions for reproduction. 

Inadequate, and inadequate because it is negative — this a?hisanega- 
latter solution may even now, over and above its moral efficacy, bilt^efui?" 

280 SYSTEM OJF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

lead to physical results of value by preventing the birth of 
children whose short life could be but a burden both to them- 
selves and to society. As a palliative also, it foreshadows, nay 
even prepares the way for, the grand remedy, as it draws general 
attention to the problem, and gives rise to partial efforts 
towards its solution. 
onh7Mesr Equally in either case, there will naturally be a necessity 
hood in both for the Positivist priesthood to intervene, to point out the end 
and judge of its attainment. But besides its general means of 
access to the sociocratic family, it will have a special introduc- 
tion, with a view to its action on this point, in the body of 
opinions implanted by education and cultivated in the worship. 
That the maternal functions are social functions — this was duly 
if incompletely recognised by Catholicism, — Positivism stamps 
the truth with its definitive sanction, and the free acquiescence 
of the family is evidenced by its asking for and receiving the 
sacrament of Presentation. 

The normal reaction of private life upon public life thus 
sufficiently explained, the next step is to lay down the plan of 
public life, which we do by a systematic statement first, of its 
fundamental object, then, of its general conditions, lastly, of its 
several functions in detail. 

From the first point of view, the difficulty lies in determin- 
ing the permanent end of the collective action in the industrial 
state, industry originally being necessarily individual in its 
character. In spite of the persistent efforts of the Theocracy,— 
no other system has hitherto attempted to organise labour, — it 
has never been able to disengage itself sufficiently from its 
origin. Although the institution of castes in no way recognised 
the anarchical division of social functions into private and public, 
it could not but leave industry its essentially family character, 
it could not make it a really civic function. In fact, for this 
transformation two preliminary conditions are required: the 
separation of the capitalists and workmen ; and the formation 
of the industrial hierarchy. The first alone is conclusive, the 
second, though necessary, has no social efficacy, save in so far as 
it is the spontaneous complement of the first. But, by an in- 
version, the second only was a consideration with the Theocracy ; 
it was unable even to inaugurate the other, in default of a free 
developement of labour, a want traceable to the hereditary trans- 
mission of professions. Such forced inversion of the natural 

Direct treat- 
ment of 
public lile. 

Its funda- 
mental pur- 
pose. 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 281 

order allowed no intercourse between the different castes but 
such as sprang from their respective employments ; the organisa- 
tion of industry was out of the question, whilst each producer 
was capitalist and workman in one. 

When warlike activity emancipated the nation from the The military 
theocratic regime, a radical obstacle to industrial organisation served the 
lay in the necessity of enslaving the industrial to the soldier castes. 
class in order to carry out the system of conquest. But this 
very subjection was ultimately to be the source of the regenera- 
tion of industry, the Western world escaping by its means the 
institution of castes. The true solution arose in the Middle 
Ages, when the change from conquest to defence had led to the 
gradual enfranchisement of the workmen, in the towns first, 
then in the country. From this point onwards, the directors of 
industry have becom.e more and more distinct from the handi- 
craftsmen, with a tendency to found a new patriciate, as a 
result of the progressive accumulation of productive capital. 
At the same time, their regular intercourse with one another 
has constantly led to fresh developement of the industrial 
hierarchy, a process which culminated in the gradual advent of 
the class whose special function it is to systematise man's 
peaceful activity. 

This highest patriciate can neither enter upon nor accom- The bankers 
plish its social mission but under ;the all-pervading impulsion puiseofthe 
of the Positive religion. To judge aright its need of this, it is Humanity. 
not enough to be aware, in the general, that every merely partial 
synthesis is impracticable, so long as the complete synthesis be 
not definitively established. We must go farther, and under- 
stand, in reference to this need, the radical difference that exists 
between the two successive forms of human activity. In its 
warlike stage it is intrinsically synthetical, in its pacific stage 
it is as naturally analytical ; the first being in direct relation 
with the human order, where unity is the paramount idea, 
whilst the second deals exclusively with the external order, and 
here the predominant feature is dispersion. Hence the direct 
tendency of soldiers to develope the state, and the long per- 
sistence of the workers in the isolation of the Family. 

But if this natural difference gave the social superiority Butindus- 
to war, during the whole course of human initiation, it will finally most 
ultimately educe from the industrial existence a higher form to social life. 
of society. For war could only be organised on behalf of the 

282 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAS. 

Positivism 
favours in 
two "ways 
the transfor- 
mation of 
industry. 

Tlie task re- 
quires the 
religion of 
Humanity. 

Moral ad- 
vance su- 
preme. 

Country, whilst industry for its systematisation requires the 
idea of Humanity. All States were naturally rivals during the 
military period, be it that they simultaneously aimed at empire 
which one could only gain, or as they resisted singly the forcible 
incorporation which alone could secure their union. In the 
industrial period, on the contrary, they naturally converge, as 
it assigns to each an aim which may become the aim of all, 
as it is invariably an external aim. All alike seeking to profit 
by the resources the earth offers, there may be a distribution of 
parts between the several Eepublics, analogous to that by which 
we coordinate the several component classes of each EepubUc. 

We thus see that peaceful activity is the natural introduc- 
tion to the union of the race, which alone can give it its 
systematic form, whereas military society could not rise above 
the idea of the State. The distinction explains the ultimate 
superiority of the industrial condition, whilst it explains also 
the inevitable slowness of its triumph. Its rise has been 
possible ordy in the West, after the utter exhaustion, not merely 
of war, whether for conquest or defence, but also of the absolute 
synthesis, whether theological or metaphysical. The organisa- 
tion of labour demanded: the ascendancy of the habits of peace^ 
as alone susceptible of the universality it presupposes, and the 
triumph of the Positive spirit, the only basis for the coordina- 
tion of industry. Such are the two claims of Positivism to 
excluBive competence in regard to a transformation which 
necessarily devolved on Sociocracy, however judiciously it had 
been initiated by Theocracy. 

Its accomplishment demands the establishment of the 
universal religion, which will give systematic precedence to feel- 
ing over both intellect and activity. If in previous chapters 
I have shown that the theoretical class is mistaken in seeking 
for a purely scientific synthesis, the reader must now see that 
practical men are equally wrong in aiming exclusively at the 
discipline of industry. Neither action nor faith can be 
systematised without love, though the coordination of action 
and thought is the indispensable complement of the unity con- 
stituted by sympathy. 

In its industrial form both universal and eternal, practical, 
as theoretic life, must look to feeling for its definitive organi- 
sation, the great outcome of the religion of Humanity. The 
first would degenerate into an useless accumulation of products, 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 283 

the second into a barren collection of truths, were not both, 
over and above their relations with one another, subjected to 
the only power competent to regulate and ennoble them. 
Identifying happiness and duty, Positive religion places them 
once for all in moral improvement, the exclusive source of true 
unity. Under the persistent influence of that religion, all the 
aspects of human existence should become henceforward co- 
herent and pure by virtue of the capital substitution of the 
relative for the absolute. In the last chapter, this substitution 
is effected for the intellect, which for the future will aid feel- 
ing by bringing faith to the support of love. We must now 
similarly regenerate the activity, which is more open to the 
process, as more social by nature. For private life the process 
is accomplished, and we have only to extend it to public life, 
the sole security for the whole discipline. 

It is not enough for this, to conceive of action as equally Activity 

o 3 1 J must become 

competent with faith to be the support of love, from its com- ^jj^°?^j^ 
pleting the sense of order by that of progress. Its influence in 
this respect, necessary as it is, and common to aU its forms, is 
inadequate to a satisfactory organisation of labour, which must 
excel that of war by substituting the union of mankind for the 
political society. To enable Humanity to throw off its egoistic 
character when getting rid of the absolute synthesis, man's 
peaceful activity must become, not merely collective, but dis- 
tinctly altruistic in character. 

Hitherto, the only Occidentals who have made any serious mtherto 
effort to organise industry have been content with the endeavour orgS'e 
to reintroduce, imder a different form, the nationality charac- hlve\een 
teristic of antiquity. Their patriotism was as inimical to other "" '™* ' 
nations as the patriotism of ancient nations, its only aim being 
to substitute industrial for military dominion. Their attempts 
were too conflicting to allow of full developement, yet they soon 
proved to be more oppressive than anterior conquests; these 
latter invariably leading to incoi-poration, compulsory it is true 
in the first instance, but subsequently accepted by free consent, 
whereas the former tended to destruction. Their aim was to 
solve the problem of collective action to the total neglect of 
any moral purpose, and the result at which they arrived was 
the retrograde one of keeping war, in the interest of industry ; a 
result which has brought them into complete discredit after two 
centuries of painful exertions. In the nation, where territorial 

284 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

isolation, official Protestantism, and aristocratic rule, acted in 
spontaneous concert so as to give an appearance of consistency 
to this defective form of industrial organisation, peace and 
liberty have already led to its abandonment. 
attem'^t '^^® revolutionary crisis gave birth in the West to another 

attempt to solve the problem, one more vague in its character 
but less transient, which seems to comply with the condition 
of universality, whereas in reality all it does is to change the 
object of preference. It gained, as was to be expected, most 
adhesion in the central nation, aided thereto by the negative 
metaphysical philosophy which France alone up to the present , 
time has applied to the work of reconstruction ; the initiative 
throughout resting with her, by virtue of the whole of past 
history. But aspirations of a similar nature have already shown 
themselves in all the Western nations, not excepting even 
the nation apparently given over to the craving for industrial 
supremacy. The errors in question, if more respectable, must 
be held to be also more dangerous than the other, as they 
combine the organisation of labour with the regeneration of 
society. Hence it is incumbent on Positivism rather to give 
attention to their examination with the object of correction, than 
to aim at completing and coordinating the investigation entered 
on by the economists with reference to national industrialism. 
The supre- The difference between the two solutions, both equally erro- 

Proietariate neous, may be reduced to this : the one transfers to the prole- 
substitutcd tariate, without distinction of nation, the oppressive dominion 
one nation. wMch the other sought to establish on behalf of one particular 
nation under exceptional conditions. Such is the only form in 
which it is possible for the metaphysical dogmas of the sove- 
reignty of the people to retain a firm and dangerous hold, tiU 
such time as the Positive religion shall have succeeded in 
regenerating the anarchical aspirations which find in it their 
formula. In complete insurrection against the rich, the poor in 
their turn wish to be supreme ; on the ground of their numbere 
they would be, not the basis, but the end, of aU collective action. 
The error may wear a more social aspect than the preceding, 
but at bottom it is not less oppressive, since it exerts a pressure 
within the State instead of outside it, substituting, that is, the 
selfishness of a class for the selfishness of a nation. If it took 
this subversive form, the civism of modern times wovild be a 
contradiction in terms, since it would be the consecration of a 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 285 

system of mutual industrial oppression, whereas its aspiration is 
to emancipate itself from that evil. To say nothing of the 
moral invalidity of the claim resting on mere number which is 
urged in justification of this new form of collective selfishness, 
its practical result could only be a never-ending struggle between 
the various constituents of the proletariate when it had tri- 
umphed over its common enemy, the patriciate. Were it then 
practicable, which it is not, from its anarchical nature, — a circum- 
stance which gives it, as a theory, a longer existence, — we might 
confidently assert that the industrial demagogism would be 
even more ephemeral than national industrialism. 

Treading neither path, for both equally though diversely ^'™^„s"" 
mislead, in our organisation of human labour on the principles ^^^^jj^"^ 
of universality and permanence we must ever keep in view ™^- 
the whole race of mankind without any exclusive preference, 
For the due compliance with this condition continuity must 
consequently take precedence of solidarity, as it did in the truly 
social phase of Antiquity, solidarity being purified in the normal 
state in that its sphere is enlarged by virtue of its better 
form of activity. Labour, as conquest, requires, to be rightly 
•organised, that it be in the interest of posterity ; the two cases 
differ only in that Humanity takes the place of the Country, 
as being the ultimate goal of all social existence. 

Thus it is, then, that the Positive religion constructs the The Future 
system of man's active Hfe by making it subordinate to the Present. 
sympathetic synthesis whose universal supremacy has abeady 
coordinated our intellectual Ufe. Destined respectively to reveal 
order and develope progress, both may really consist in living 
for others. But the consecration to this purpose implies that 
the above destination always regards the future, not the present, 
so to avoid the deterioration of our collective existence in the 
direction of egoism. "With this condition the intellect sponta- 
neously complies, as speculation naturally has a distant range, 
whether in art or science, not as a rule bearing fruit till the 
succeeding generations. It is for action to become as liberal as 
thought by stripping itself of all selfishness in a degree unknown 
to its earlier and introductory forms. Begun by the instinct of 
Fetichism with an eye to the Family descendants, the transfor- 
mation became a conscious process during the military period 
on behalf of the succeeding generations of Citizens, and must 
now learn to embrace Posterity as a whole. No being can 

286 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OE MAN. 

We must 
work con- 
sciouslT for 
Posterity, 
not, as 
hitherto, 
blindly. 

The end of 
industrial 
activity. 

nobly labour for itself save Humanity, her servants for tbe time 
being do but employ in the interest of her servants yet unborn 
the products which they get from the materials collected by her 
servants in the past. 

The organisation of human industry as here presented 
requires no extraordinary enthusiasm in the industrial miUeu, 
it does not even require any radical change in the prevailing 
habits. Here, as elsewhere, the ultimate regeneration is but 
the doing consciously and voluntarily what was hitherto done 
blindly. Traceable in the higher animals in rudiment, this 
disposition to labour for a posterity ever growing larger and 
more remote, was at all times the highest attribute of man. 
Here above all is the point at which the family and the state 
lend each other mutual support, the one preparing and re- 
kindling the impulse which the other perfects and consolidates. 
Had our predecessors treated us, as demagogic selfishness would 
treat posterity. Humanity would never have improved either 
its circumstances or itself. Fortunately solidarity has more and 
more become secondary to continuity, owing to the increasing 
importance of the accumulations of the past as compared with 
the present production. In the maturity of the race our great 
effort being not so much to develope as to regulate our powers, 
it is with the future especially that we must connect our 
exertions, so to rise superior to egoism, which, if it continue, 
even in a collective form, will inevitably end in mere personal 
selfishness. 

Thus conceived, industrial existence is at once social and 
synthetical, by virtue of the concentration of all activity on 
this end of universal applicability: the developement of our 
sympathetic instincts by providing posterity with the means of 
securing their fuller triumph. Each family feels itself con- 
stantly ennobled and bound together by its inevitable coopera- 
tion with the whole of the race in the task of perfecting the 
external order on which all existence rests. Our compatriots 
and our contemporaries appear to us merely as fellow-labourers 
more within our ken, whose work we can second in a higher 
degree, without neglecting our own proper duties, the chief 
ground of our connection with the Great Being. The still 
beginning, never ending, reproduction of material wealth be- 
comes for all the normal source of a growth of sympathy, on 
a scale beyond what the indestructible treasures of the intellect 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 287 

can ever excite, save only in the special class which presides 
over their universal distribution. The non-recognition hitherto 
of this prerogative of industry was solely due to the incom- 
petence of the absolute synthesis on all social questions, the 
ordinary phenomena of which are so complex as to interfere 
more than others with their perception, in the absence of a 
theory which is an adequate presentation of them. 

Assuming this as the fundamental end of human industry The general 

1 iTTi ijii 1 T' conditions of 

when regenerated, I have now to state the general conditions, industry, 
the moral in the first place, then the political, implied in the political. 
collective service of the Great Being:. Peaceful activity looks (DThe 

° -^ moral con- 

no longer to one family, nor to one class, nor to one nation, but aitions. 
to Humanity in its utmost comprehension, so that all the great 
sources of dispute disappear of themselves, leaving only, what 
are inevitable, occasional disorders. In such a state of things 
the priesthood, aided by women and the old men, may well 
succeed in inducing the ministers and the agents of the Great 
Being to exhibit, in their general conduct, the feelings and 
habits best calculated to consolidate and develope the Sociocracy. 

The collective service of Humanity has for its perpetual ceTotion 

•^ -^ *■ and Vener^ 

foundation two correlative dispositions: the devotion of the tionthetwo 

^ pillars of the 

strong to the weak, the veneration of the weak for the strong, social fabric. 
During the whole preparatory stage, the latter naturally pre- 
vailed, for the object then was to concentrate powers whose 
very existence depended on such concentration. But in our 
maturity, the former principle vindicates for itself the legiti- 
mate predominance which I could not but assign it in my 
construction of statical Sociology. They on whom the Great 
Being devolves the permanent direction of its material provi- 
dence should habitually set the example of the dispositions 
required by their office and which legitimise their power. A 
faith which is at all times demonstrable can warrant their 
claim to due obedience on the part of their subordinates, only 
so far as they themselves rest command on abnegation. And 
yet these dispositions on both sides would establish no solid ■♦ 

accord, were not the end both have in common constantly made 
paramount, an end external in equal degree to all the associated 
workers without exception, each of whom, in the vigorous per- 
formance of his own service, ought to assist all the rest. Under 
these conditions, the distribution of the several functions may 
be an object of sincere respect, be the sentiments of the func- 

288 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAK. 

tionaries -what they may; their estimation as individuals 
depending, apart from their service, on a due comparison of 
their classification by the priesthood and their value as 
members of the practical hierarchy, a comparison involving 
no risk to discipline. 
How the re- The whole Positive regime naturally fosters in all alikp 

agestiietwo. devotion and veneration, by virtue of the feelings inspired 
respectively by the future and the past. Implanted by the 
education, consecrated by the worship, these subjective dispo- 
sitions find, in industrial life, their outward object in women 
and priests, whom the patriciate and the proletariate unite in 
protecting and respecting. The way thus doubly prepared, the 
priesthood can easily recall the ministers and agents of the 
Grreat Being to the reciprocal sentiments which they should 
cherish in view of their joint destination. For, on comparing 
the two general divisions of the active class, we see that the 
proletariate and the patriciate, like women and priests, repre- 
sent respectively the future and the past. It is for the priest- 
hood, by its example, to breathe into both these reciprocal 
sentiments, for they are dispositions which its office compels 
it to cultivate simultaneously in itself — by its respect for the 
rich, by its devotion to the poor. 
We attri- As regards the normal state, it were a work of supereroga- 

Patriciate° tiou to expouud the inherent aptitude of the Positive religion 
of Vm.° '"" to sanction and regulate wealth. It is only during the last 
phase of the transition, the subject of the next chapter, that 
the priesthood invested with the task of regeneration wiU find 
any serious difficulty in inspiring rich and poor, in the name of 
Humanity, with that respect and sense of duty which Grod can 
no longer bind upon them. In the maturity of the race we 
concentrate the two obligations, by attributing to the patri- 
ciate the function of will, which, as the expression of the 
objective life, completes the subjective. 
The organis- In acoordauce with this view, the organisation of the true 
trae'provi'-° Providouce must depend above all on the ministers of the 
pends'''' Great Being; for her representatives, her interpreters, and 
Sc'plt™ even her agents are incompetent to impress on the direction a 
°'°*'^' sufficient fixity, and without it the failure would be complete. 

Fatality, whether man's destiny or external necessity, were 
inadequate to regulate our conduct, if the will did not come in 
to complete the order of nature by combining command with 

Chap. IV.] THE LIPE, 289 

arrangement. Now, the introduction of this new but indis- 
pensable element implies the permanent concert of energy and 
power, a concert requiring for its due production a special 
class. Misplaced everywhere else, in this class the will is the 
legitimate instrument for supplementinig the deficiencies in the 
composite and subjective constitution of the Great Being which 
prevent its originating, propria motu, really effective decisions. 
The directing class, when admitted to share its supremacy, 
assumes a burden of responsibility commensurate with its 
elevation. The depositary of a power without which any satis- 
factory discipline of the wills of others would be impossible, 
the patriciate feels the need of discipline for its own will, more 
liable than any to disturbances, which, if more excusable, are 
more pernicious. Hence, if the patriciate is to discharge 
aright its office, and this is the condition alike of its happiness 
and duty, it must in all its commands respect the laws of 
Himianity, which it has only to complete, and from which 
comes its chief claim to the respect of all. 

It follows that to regulate its action, the priesthood has only The vices 

, , . . , . , . incident to 

to appeal, in suitable terms, to the destination which is the wealth— 

d- ' how re- 

eround of its existence. The various faults attendant on the gai-aed by 

I'll-/. 1 /v. Pobitivism. 

possession of riches are to be judged m reference to the office 
of the patriciate, which may be stated as the conservation, 
and reproduction with increase, of the material capital of 
Humanity. If the statement is correct it leads us to complete Avarice 
and systematise the improvement Dante introduced, when his gauty. 
instinct led him to assign the prodigal the same punishment 
and the same expiation as the miser, Catholicism only con- 
demning the latter. Positive morality goes farther, it disallows 
the equality, and definitively considers the miser superior to the 
prodigal; the prodigal being just as selfish as the miser in 
the eyes of all but his parasites, and more noxious to society, 
moreover less estimable from his want of the practical virtues, 
or of self-control. During the military period the facility of 
acquisition led men to confound profusion with liberality. 
Under the industrial regime, on the contrary, when accumu- 
lation is a laborious process, motives of self-interest do not 
destroy the social and moral value of habits of forethought and 
economy. Avarice implies discipline, and all that is required 
is to give that discipline a better direction, whereas the 
VOL. IV. u 

290 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

Pride more 
excusable 
than vanity. 

Ambition to 
be checked 
in the Pro- 
letariate, 

The Patrici- 
ate aa con- 
densed as 
possible. 

indiscipline consequent on prodigality admits of no such trans- 
formation. 

An analogous judgment is even more applicable to the two 
instincts of ambition, especially to pride, more excusable and 
more serviceable in the patrician than vanity in the theorician. 
So deficient in energy are the altruistic instincts, that the 
craving for power is, as a rule, indispensable to the formation 
of real strength of will. But, authority once established, the 
more generous impulses can be and ought to be its sufficient 
support ; they were not strong enough to create it, but they, 
and they alone, can ennoble it and consolidate it. 

It is in the proletary class especially that the priesthood 
will repress ambition, for in that class it is as fatal to happiness 
as to duty, allowing for cases of an exceptional aptitude for the 
patriciate. Habitual submission, in all cases ennobled by 
respect, and often originating in attachment — this is the funda- 
mental condition of its service to society and of its self-respect. 
Provided the patriciate ensures them the secure position which 
is their due, the happiness of the proletaries should be greater 
than that of their chiefs ; for whilst contributing as much as 
the patricians to the common end, they have a fuller enjoy- 
ment of family life, in harmonious connection with their 
existence as citizens. Protected at all times by the interval 
between them and the patricians from the wish to rise out of 
their class, they reject instinctively the instigations of envy and 
distrust on the subject of the concentration of wealth, a con- 
centration indispensable for the progressive improvement of 
their circumstances. Tf Catholicism occasionally succeeded in 
transforming the rich so that they became poor in spirit. Posi- 
tivism will often raise the poor, so that they become rich in 
heart, the free auxiliaries of the capitalists in the conservation 
of capital. 

The moral attitude, however, suitable to the two organs of 
material Providence requires a complement in regard to both, 
based on the political conditions of collective action. To 
command with effect, the patricians have need to concentrate 
wealth and power as much as possible, with no other limits than 
those fixed by actual administration and personal responsibility. 
If the numbers given above for the four orders of the patri- 
ciate are rejected, they should be changed without interfering 
with the principle ; better data only are required, and the 

Ch4p. IV.] THE LIPE. 291 

result could hardly be any very great modification in the 
degree of condensation. 

As for the hereditary transmission of functions and capital, Euieot 

, - . , . inlieritance. 

m the sociocratic sense of the term, all we have here to do is to 
state more fully the fundamental law, laid down in my statical 
volume, of the free choice of the successor, with the sanction of 
the superior. Every functionary should nominate his successor 
seven years before his retirement, in our religious system fixed 
for sixty-three, that the nomination may be duly submitted to 
the control of public opinion, which will be bound to treat with 
respect the decision, whatever it may be. It were a waste of 
time to remind the reader of the regular connection between 
this act and the powers of disposing of property by will, and of 
adoption. 

The education and the . regime of Sociocracy will, of them- strites. 
selves, in combination, inspire the proletariate with the feeling 
of respect justly due to a concentration of power and wealth 
which must raise the conceptions and the feelings of the patri- 
ciate by increasing their means and their responsibility. In 
accordance with the presentiment which finds its expression 
in ordinary language, their offices become charges or burdens, 
inviting pity rather than envy, the true compensation being the 
greater ability, to serve Humanity. But the Sociocratic con- 
stitution demands of the proletariate that it renounce all 
violence as reactionary and anarchical. Where a struggle is 
unavoidable it must be limited to the refusal to co-operate, and 
in this, numbers may triumph over wealth, if their grounds of 
complaint deserve the sanction of the spiritual power, the only 
power which can give the requisite extension and union to the 
plebeian leagues. However great the popular excitement, an 
impartial and respected priesthood will as a rule obtain this 
abandonment of force, on the ground of a disinterestedness 
better appreciated by the inferiors than by the superiors. 

Whilst the dispute is yet unembittered, the priesthood may ^TOd^retis 
often by a wise action prevent an open rupture by a judicious H^^ ^^. 
appeal to the conscience of the two contending parties ; if that andflnau"' 
fail, to public opinion. Conscience, the noblest and the most j'^xcm™™ 
efficient of moral forces, is the result of a combination in due munication. 
proportion of love and faith. Prior to the advent of the true 
religion, a clear conception of conscience was unattainable, as 
no account could be taken of the impulse given by sympathy, 

u 2 

292 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

Power given 
by the Sacra- 
ment of In- 
corporation. 

Precautions 
against tlie 
abuse of 
capital. 

which, when fairly aided by the intellect, acts as a check on 
bad suggestions. But its Positive theory will enable us to make 
a better use of it by an appropriate appeal to each of its two 
constituents, both equally trained in the Positive education. Yet 
whilst stimulating conscience, the priesthood cannot at times 
avoid recourse to opinion, in the family in the first instance, 
then to that of society. When driven to this step, it will invoke 
in succession the women, the elders of the family, even the 
children and the servants ; whilst in the city the priesthood 
will find its natural support in the proletaries. If forced to 
give the blame of society its extreme foim of excommunication, 
so effectual will be its censure by the aggregate support of these 
auxiliaries, that, when it is just, the guilty person will be com- 
pelled, without any attack on his wealth, to depend entirely on 
himself for the supply of all his wants. 

Were it limited to the present or objective life, the action 
of the priesthood, whether on the State or on the Family, 
through conscience or opinion, would still be inadequate, and 
have a tendency to become oppressive. Its principal sphere, 
however, is the subjective life ; there its competence is indis- 
putable ; and hence in the natural course of things it derives 
a supplementary resource for spreading indirectly a somid 
judgment of persons, by a wise employment of the sacrament 
of Incorporation. Yet it must not be forgotten that this final 
consecration demands, more than any other, perfect liberty, if it 
is to have its full efficiency. No one is to be subjected to the 
judgment of the priesthood unless at his own personal request, 
made when receiving the sacrament of Transformation. Nor is 
this personal consent sufficient ; it must be ratified after his 
death by his family. So in most cases we avoid formal rejection, 
and when applied, a more decisive weight attaches to it. The 
full advantage of this moderation will, however, be reaped in 
the cases where the judgment is favourable, as it nullifies 
beforehand the protests raised by family vanity against the 
degree of honour conferred. 

In the second volume, I have sufficiently pointed out the 
complementary legislation in aid of the religion, as against the 
more serious disturbances of order. The intervention of the 
temporal power, though constantly on the decrease, as follows 
from the continuous expansion of the moral discipline, wiU never 
entirely cease to be required, even as regards persons. But I 

Chap. IV.] ' THE LIFE. 293 

must here remind the reader of the tendency of the Positive 
regime to rely rather on the use of contrast than of repression, 
rewarding the good, that is, rather than punishing the bad. In 
reference to the abuse of wealth, it will prefer creating 
capitalists to reducing them to poverty, and therefore will 
extend the practice of gifts, without absolutely renouncing 
coniiscation, even in perpetuity. This mode will become so 
consonant to the general feeling, that, in default of the action 
of government, the donations might, at need, take the shape of 
purely voluntary subscriptions. Still, as this supplementary 
action always implies some defect in the constitution of society, 
it requires as many precautions as confiscation. It will be seen 
below in what way the regular progress of the Sociocracy will of 
itself supersede the necessity of frequent recourse to any such 
extraordinary methods, applicable principally during the last 
phase of the transition. 

More important than either is another supplementary insti- Jj^"^'='' 
tution of an universal character, a moral and political institu- 
tion ; the systematic reconstitution of chivalry, the feudal germ 
of which must receive careful cultivation in industrialism, allow- 
ing for modifications in practice. In Industrialism, the volun- 
tary protectorate, as the wrongs which it repairs or obviates, 
will concern property rather than persons ; and, as such, its 
organisation will be easier and on a vaster scale. Its real 
strength will lie in a central nucleus, a body of patrician 
widowers, solemnly dedicated by their own free act to the 
oflSce, but not therefore ceasing to take part in industrial life, 
except at stated periods of retreat, in buildings set apart for 
the purpose, in order to rekindle their zeal by contact with 
the priesthood. Eound them will rally, before reaching their 
maturity, all such as, possessed of the requisite wealth, aspire to 
be enrolled one day in the protecting corporation. The conse- 
cration of wealth to such an object wiU make all feel the 
great importance of respecting liberty in the eniplo3Tnent of 
capital, even when its holders have no distinct function, for 
such may exceptionally become the most useful members of 
the wealthy class, if they use aright the freedom which their 
position gives them. The central chivalry will in general 
find another source of support in the elder patricians, who will 
•often retain great influence, even after they have transferred 
their capital. Lastly, it will complete itself by the adjunction 

294 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PUTUEE OF 'MAN. 

Precautions 
against 
abuse on the 
part of the 
Pricstliood. 

Functions 
of the indus- 
trial classes. 

The Direc- 
toi-s. 

of the nobler proletaries, their devotion and their energy com- 
pensating their poverty, and offering the body of voluntary , 
protectors an alliance which ensures success. 

Such an aggregate of guarantees should in general suffice to 
guard against the abuses to which the patriciate is liable. For 
the priesthood, the repression of abuse on its part neither 
requires nor admits of any special institution, since the power 
which consecrates all the others cannot be subject to any stand- 
ing external control. So long as its degeneracy, however 
extensive, does not reach the high priest, he has the regular 
remedy in liis power, in the substitution, in case of need, of an 
entirely new clergy. But, if he too, supported by the body, go 
wrong, then the only remedy left would be the refusal of co^ 
operation, a remedy which can never fail, as the priesthood rests 
solely on conscience and opinion, and succumbs, therefore, to their 
adverse sentence. The patriciate would curb it sufficiently by 
suspending its stipend, for in cases of serious error, popular 
subscriptions would not replace it, unless on the supposition of a 
fanaticism scarcely compatible with the Positive faith, where 
there is enthusiasm for the doctrines rather than for the 
teachers. 

The aims of industry and the conditions of industry having 
been explained, it remains for me, in order to complete the 
organisation of labour, to determine, first, the functions of the 
directors of industry, when reorganised, secondly those of its 
agents. 

The patriciate centralises both action and nutrition, but it is 
the latter that will always be its principal function, and that 
increasingly. For, the continual reproduction of materials 
must principally relate to provisions, notwithstanding that 
there is a proportionate increase of the instruments of produc- 
tion; for these, as less perishable, form a prominent part of 
the capital of man without affecting in any high degree 
the ordinary expenditure. In regard to this latter, we distin- 
guish two cases, according as the maintenance allotted is 
public or private, a point which depends on the nature of the 
services rendered, according as they are general or particular. 
The first mode is exclusively applicable to the government, 
spiritual and temporal equally ; it is the second therefore which 
I have specially to examine here, for it is the mode of main- 
taining the families of the people, and as such is the great 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE, 295 

object of the patricians' attention. Wlien I have explained it, 
I shall complete the subject by a consideration of the public 
expenses, which wiU never be anything but a small item in the 
cost of production. 

The plebeian no less than the patrician ought to have, as the ^^^ 
basis of his material existence, a distinct connection with the ™noe. 
planet which is the abode of Humanity. Without it, action is 
deficient in steadiness, continuity is impaired, even solidarity is 
incomplete. Owing to the want of this connection, the earliest 
and most important of the revolutions in the temporal order, 
the passage, namely, from the nomad to the sedentary life, is as 
yet, in no single instance, ended. For in Western industry we 
are often struck by the scandal of vvealthy capitalists who are 
not the owners of the buildings in which their business is carried 
on. But it is in the proletaries above all that we trace the 
imperfect fulfilment of this condition, they but rarely obeying 
the social law enunciated in my second volume. For the 
normal state, it is indispensable that every family become the 
owner of whatever it needs for its exclusive and continual use. In 
the case of the proletaries, we may swax up this in the ownership 
of their house ; beyond this their aiming at property would be 
prejudicial to their happiness no less than to their duty. 

This ownership admits of two modes ; either the possession of ownership 
an apartment or of an entire house, the former required by the oue differ"'" 
concentration of town life, the latter suited to the isolation of Lnd'country. 
the country. The first, besides being most attainable, will offer 
many advantages socially, when the normal habits shall have 
removed causes which might now be occasions of disputes. It 
gives greater homogeneity to the proletariate by giving 
large opportunity for personal intercourse ; it cements the 
mutual relations of plebeians and patricians, as the latter are 
in all cases the proprietors, and at times dwellers in the houses 
which on this scheme are divided into apartments for separate 
sale. The most common arrangement of the whole building 
would be into three stories, the two upper containing each 
three proletary families, the rest reserved for industrial purposes 
and for the patricians' dwelling. A seventh plebeian dwelling 
would belong to the family entrusted with the care of the 
whole, with the maintenance of order, and the facilitating the 
intercourse of the occupants, as the representative of the local 
magistracy of the proprietor. 

296 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTTJEE OF MAN. 

Its religious 
effect. 

?iiecte of '^'^'^^ ownership of the domicile besides its own direct and 

this owner- special value, is susceptible of an indirect influence on the 
heart and on the intellect, by increasing fixity of feeling and of 
thought by a corresponding fixity of habits. It is a confirma- 
tion and extension of the duty now too generally neglected, 
never capriciously to change our connection even with the 
humblest tradesman, so to facilitate prevision in industry. 
Though enforced by Positive morality, this obligation would be 
liable to frequent evasion, particularly on the part of the work- 
ing classes, where it is of peculiar importance, were the instinct 
of caprice not curbed by fixity of abode. 

The form adopted in towns for the working man's dwelHng 
may further exercise a religious influence of a nature to he 
largely developed by the normal state in the children of 
Humanity. In the first place everyone thus connects his 
family's past with the apartment in which he was born ; se- 
condly, the fact that this apartment is an integral part of a 
larger building represents for him the solidarity of the citizen, 
nay even his connection with mankind. For there is an 
analogy , between the distribution of the earth's surface among 
the possessors of the soil, and that of the social dwelling among 
the clients of the common proprietor, in whom, unless wholly 
unworthy, they may see the local representative of the Being to 
whom all belongs. 
Annual ex- In Order to complete the systematisation of the material 

each Family, existence of the proletaries, I have to determine the ordinary 
amount of the annual expenses of each family, and as a 
consequence the average salary of the workman who presides 
over it. First however, we may, by virtue of the previous 
explanation, strike out the rent of his dwelling, the rule being 
that he is owner and not occupier. The regular time for its 
acquisition is when the young agent of Humanity takes the 
sacrament of Destination, or at any rate before that of Marriage ; 
so to provide a secure existence for the new household. The 
best way is a yearly payment, taken during seven years from 
his wages, before his expenditure reaches its full amount. 
Even thus, however, as a rule, the new workman will require his 
father's aid to enable him to become the owner of his house, 
such aid being usually the last instance of parental assistance. 
Wages. It will suffice here if I simply restate the principle enun- 

ciated in my social Statics, which enjoins that wages, in their 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 297 

normal amount, be divided into two unequal portions ; the one 
■ fixed for each workman, whatever the work, the other propor- 
tional to the product of his labour. This law is as indisputable 
as that on which it rests, the necessarily gratuitous character of 
all human labour in a state in which all belongs to the Great 
Being, who entrusts his capital to his ministers to feed his 
agents. But I must now complete its statement by venturing to 
fix the normal ratio of the two portions, whereas in my second 
volume it was left to the patricians to determine it. I have 
since come to feel that, for a right understanding of the prin- 
ciple, the spiritual power must take the initiative and give it at 
once a precise form, allowing for ulterior correction as with all 
the other numerical suggestions of the present chapter. For 
these reasons I do not hesitate to propose, that for each of the ?ixed por- 
thirteen months of the Positivist year, each workman receive a wages. 
salary of a hundred francs, always paid by his employer, whether 
in town or country, so long as the free mutual engagement 
lasts. 

In towns, and towns must be the first organised, it seems to The variable 
me that this amount should, as a rule, be one third of the 
whole salary, the fluctuating portion of which I estimate at 
seven francs for the average day of actual work. Whilst all 
rules as to the festivals observed and even the weekly rest are a 
question of habits and manners, we may yet assume that the 
worship will be scrupulously attended, especially by the prole- 
taries, as for them above all it is meant. If so, the above rates 
give nine francs for the daily maintenance of a working family, 
consisting, as has been shown, normally, of seven members. 

My object in fixing this amount is to give a type, yet it mequauties 
differs but little from the results often attained even in the Sitimfwy 
present anarchical condition of the West. On this point I see ^"^ ^ '* 
no ground for any distinctions between the several branches of 
industry in towns, the difference in their money returns being 
properly a question for the capitalist, as the industrial hierarchy 
was. The homogeneity characteristic of the proletariate will be 
constantly developed and fortified by the spontaneous concur- 
rence of two influences, affecting the whole body equally, the 
one intellectual, the other moral. In the first place, from the 
completeness and uniformity of Positive education the workman 
will have it in his power to turn with such ease to a new trade 
that no serious inequality of wages can persist as between the 

298 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

various labourers of any given town or even of any given re- 
public. Add to this pervading influence the improvement in 
the means of transport and the great increase of intercourse, 
and we can ultimately extend this equality wherever Positivism 
extends, and that has no limits but those of the habitable globe. 
This consequence of the identity of education and of worship, 
an identity perfected by similarity of habits and the universal 
adoption of the sacred language, is further placed on a solid 
footing by the direct and continual intervention of the 
supreme patriciate. By the exercise of active forethought 
on the part of its fourteen thousand bankers, there will be 
throughout the human planet an evenness of prices, which wiU 
be the last of the several securities justly due to the work- 
man against the inequalities and fluctuations arising from the 
incompetence or the neglect of the capitalist. 
Wages in- In the socoud place, the gratuitousness of labour once ade- 

tendedfor i , • t , ,. , -r. . . ,- . 

the maiiite- quately admitted through the agency of the Positive religion. 
Proletariate, wages, in obedieuce to the habits of the normal state, wiU he 

as the agents -.,-,-,* 

of Hu- directed to their true purpose : the maintenance of the agents of 

manity. n 

the Great Being, each of whom in ordinary circumstances wiU 
have to support a household of seven members. This doctrine, 
which is the combination of a moral obligation with an intel- 
lectual conception, has met with no recognition hitherto, solely 
because the absolute synthesis was impuissant in presence of 
social life, even of the family, and that as a consequence of the 
want originally felt to develope powers without attending to their 
control. The morality of Theology could but preach veneration 
to the inferiors, leaving devotedness optional with the superiors, 
as the descendants or the representatives of the Grods, in accord- 
ance with the maxim naturally accepted by Antiquity : jpauds 
nascitur humanum genus. It was reserved for a relative 
religion to extinguish all rights without exception by substi- 
tuting throughout duties, in the name of Humanity, when on 
reaching his maturity man is led to discipline the forces which 
had their rise in his period of preparation. Then the morality 
of Positivism prescribes to all the servants of the Grreat Being 
alike, devotion and veneration, be it in their intercourse with 
one another, or in their common obligations to posterity. 
The gratui- Thus, the doctrine that labour is gratuitous, is an inference 

t^rori™"' from, and an expression of, the social character attaching to the 
"""■ institution of property, under whatever form it exist ; it is 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFK. 299 

always an inheritance handed down to the present by the past, 
with the future especially in view. Every payment is an 
exchange, in which the recipient should receive more than he 
gives; as such, payment is a purely material question and 
never applies to the action of man, where the only equivalent 
is fair reciprocity. In the normal state, the agents of the Great 
Being hold their wages by the same title as its interpreters 
hold their stipends, its ministers their incomes ; that is to say, 
as a condition of existence and the means of action, not as the 
price of their labour. For the obligation to serve, it is common 
to all, the only difference is in the service being more or less 
general and direct, whilst in no case can its nature be esti- 
mated in money. This conception, as accordant with the facts 
of social life as with personal self-respect, — both equally ig- 
nored in the theocratic idea of property, — leads to a uniform 
rate of wages for all families, which, on their part, in the 
public interest, put their requirements as low as possible. 

No difference in this respect is legitimately admissible, a general 

r o J level with a 

save such as is due to an inequality in the cost of living. This certain jif- 

^ •' " ferencefor 

will soon resolve itself into the distinction between the denser toiraaua 

country. 

town population and the more scattered country population, a dis- 
tinction which, however improved the relations between the two, 
will always have an influence on prices in each case. But the 
disparity will be constantly on the decrease, by the tendency to 
equilibrium of the price of materials and that of products. 

These indications, taken as a whole, should make us feel Modem nto- 
that modern Utopias as to sameness of wages have in them, wages a 
notwithstanding their anarchical character, a confused antici- pationofthe 
pation of the social future. Their only radical flaw is their 
dangerous tendency to regulate by legislation what is exclu- 
sively within the competence of moral discipline. But as they 
share this error at the present day with all political schools, all 
equally adverse to the separation of the two powers, true philo- 
sophers should view it with indulgence in the people, as the 
natural receptacle for vague aspirations after the normal order. 

To complete this examination of the principal function of I'easiMutyof 

•■^ '■ '■ the rate indi- 

the patricians, it is necessary to draw out distinctly the prac- eated. 
ticability of giving to all workmen the maintenance above 
settled, an amount actually inferior to what many of them even 
now attain. Such uniform rate of wages is not less feasible than 
is an universal encyclopsedic education. The performance of 

300 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

Economy of 
the Positi- 
vist system. 

Public Ex- 
penditure. 

(1) Tempo- 
ral. A cen- 
tral govern- 
ment indis- 
pensable. 

these two correlated duties of the superiors to the inferiors, 
can alone secure the establishment of a really stable order, as 
substitutes for the two guarantees given, in the Middle Ages, by 
the protection of Feudalism and the discipline of Catholicism. 

Never isolate the two bases, temporal and spiritual, of the 
Sociocratic regime, — in this condition lies a sufficient safeguard 
against the dangers, a sufficient power of overcoming the ob- 
stacles, which would meet us if we rested on one or the other 
exclusively. By constantly subordinating industrial reorgani- 
sation to moral regeneration, it is easy to see how practicable 
will be the reform above traced when habits and feelings, as 
opinions, shall have everywhere undergone a change. For the 
altruistic synthesis is in the highest degree economical, since it 
places happiness in the progressive cultivation by all of the 
instincts which lead to the least outlay. An analysis, with the 
conspectus of the brain before us, of human expenditure will 
soon convince us, that in the larger part, it is undertaken to 
satisfy instincts which in the Positive religion are to be the 
object of increasing repression. Inculcating on all, in the 
name of happiness and duty, the keeping down the nutritive, 
the extinction of the sexual, instinct ; making pride and vanity 
infirmities ; altruistic morality will without difficulty procure the 
adoption of the habits of life consonant with the Sociocracy. 

The next point is to complete our estimate of the general 
cost of man's nutrition by the consideration of the expenses of 
the government, temporal first, then the spiritual, which as 
such are met not by the resources of individuals but by the 
public treasury. 

The patrician exercises as patrician a local power, in its 
extent determined by his capital and credit. As, however, 
industrial operations are essentially of an analytical character, 
even in the case of bankers, this separate power of the several 
patricians cannot regulate the industrial existence without the 
general and persistent intervention of a central power, invested 
with the functions of direction and repression. True it is that 
the government of man tends to be more and more spiritual, less 
and less temporal, yet counsel never can entirely supersede com- 
mand. Each sociocratic republic, though not exceeding in extent 
and population Normandy or Burgundy, requires a government 
properly so called — that is to say a central power, ramifying in 
all directions, and consolidating and developing public life. In 

Chap. IV.] THE LIPE. 301 

the absence of such a power, it would be impossible to ima- 
gine the generality of conception and the elevation of feeling 
requisite to ensure the due convergence of the various indus- 
trial classes. To understand the want, it is enough to remark 
that the most wealthy bankers, even acting in concert, would 
be unequal to the money business of a territory of the above 
extent, as is clear at present from the spontaneous formation 
of branches by the bank of France or of England. Still, this 
more general power, necessary as it is to secure the voluntary 
convergence of three hundred thousand industrial agents, derives 
valuable aid from the local magistracies, the direct creation of 
the patricians, on which devolves the bulk of the administration 
of justice and police. 

Thus simplified, the government, so far as it is political. The supreme 
may be vested exclusively in a supreme triumvirate, emanating 
from the thirty bankers usually found in the republic, as above 
limited. Of the patricians distinguished for breadth of thought 
and generosity of feeling, central power appertains to the three 
most remarkable for these two qualities. But they may not take 
this position till they have received the sacrament of Maturity, 
the normal age for which is forty-two, so as to have given satis- 
factory proof of capacity and to have established their credit. 
When consecrating them, the High-Priest of Humanity, or his 
representative, their national superior, will duly point out to 
them that however important their action hitherto, the duties 
on which they are now entering require a far higher intellectual 
and moral elevation. Such enlargement of views and feeling is 
naturally confined to the priesthood, but the priesthood is bound, 
at any cost, to abstain from aU share in command, so to main- 
tain intact the purity of heart and intellect which the consulta- 
tive office presupposes. 

The number of the dictators in the normal state is deter- The three 

, Ministers 

mmed by this consideration, that the three more special respectively 

•' -^ of Agricul- 

branches of industry should meet on equal terms in the govern- tm-e.Manu- 

1 , , , __-.,.,, factures, and 

ment taken from the more general branch. Withm the Commerce. 
territorial limits above assigned, a banker of ability is competent 
ultimately to grasp the aggregate of commercial operations or of 
manufacturing enterprises, or even that of agricultural industry. 
But no single banker could embrace the three in combination 
with the clear mastery requisite for the central government. 
Normally, then, the dictatorship is vested in the three principal 

302 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

bankers, respectively connected, by predilection, with agriculture 
with manufactures, with commerce, not however exclusively, as 
their business involves habitual relations with all three depart- 
ments. The three dictators are independent of one another 
except so far as they are bound together by the similarity of 
their social function and the influence upon it of a common 
faith. These two securities would render inexcusable any 
antagonism between them, for, obviated, as it is, by the difference 
of their administration, it could only spring from an excess 
of personality, which would be soon liable to the blame 
of the public or of the priesthood. The division of power 
between three would completely ensure us against their 
encroaching on spiritual functions ; but this is a consideration, 
which though of very serious moment during the closing phase 
of the transition, need scarcely be taken into account in the 
normal state, the separation of the two powers being then, from 
every point of view, beyond the reach of attack. 
Beiations oi Thus rooted in the confidence of the patriciate, the socio- 

the Trium- ... ■ t r ^ i 

virate to the cratic tiiumvirato grains that of the people as a natural conse- 

Proletariate. ° '^ ^ 

quence of the constant relations, both private and public, of the 
bankers with the proletariate. Such connection seems at first 
sight inconsistent with the abstract character of the highest 
industry, which, as abstract, is in little need of workmen. But, 
from the personal ties formed in the weekly soirees, the socio- 
cratic arrangement as to the payment of the plebeian will be 
always giving rise to contact between the banker and all the 
workmen of his district. The capitalists will in fact find it 
convenient to look to their bankers for the monthly payment of 
their workmen, thus simplifying their weekly accounts. So 
there will arise a periodical connection of each banker with ten 
thousand proletaries ; the result being that the least plebeian 
branch of industry will have the largest amount of intercourse 
with the people, and though such intercourse may be in itself 
slight, it may be a strong support to the dictatorship taken 
from the class in question. 
Gratuitous The government of the patricians, local as well as central, 

the^taSiom ^i^l ^le always gratuitous, its sole admissible reward being 
meSt™™' public esteem. Were one of its members to abuse his power 
to increase his wealth, public opinion would suffice, in default 
of legal authority, to drive the offender from power. But in 
subordination to the central government the system requires. 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 303 

in addition to a special constabulary, an administrative service, poUoeand 
with its members exclusively devoted to their duties. Herein ' "^'^' 
we have the two great sources of public expenditure. The 
annual total for the two combined, taking the former numbers 
as the basis of an estimate, would, it seems to me, reach the sum 
of twenty millions of francs in each of the sociocratic states, as 
already determined. This sum will ordinarily be increased by 
a half in consequence of the regular institution of a system of 
public works, calculated to meet the evils arising from inter- 
ruptions of private undertakings, and so to obviate or remedy 
the tendency in trades' unions to imperil industrial action. On 
this estimate the annual expenses of each republic will amount 
to thirty millions of francs, to be paid by the patriciate, £1,200,000. 
allowing it the compensation it may derive from including this 
insignificant item in the accounts on which the rate of prices 
wiU depend. 

The only point on which the sociocratic budget is now defec- (u) spiritual 
tive is the determination of the sum of the Sacerdotal income, Thesacer- ' 
long derived from voluntary subscriptions, as I shall explain sidy. 
when treating of the transition, but finally requiring an official 
organisation. Adopting the numbers given in the opening of 
the chapter, I fix this annual payment at three hundred millions £12,000,000. 
of francs for the whole "West, or fifteen francs for each sacer- 
dotal household; this includes all the expenses of the two 
thousand temples, each with a normal congregation of seventy 
thousand. The result is, the addition of a sixth to the national 
budget, reckoning, however, in this amount the sum transmitted 
to the central budget of the priesthood of Humanity to meet 
such expenses as have a general and not a local object. 

Anyone, with these data, can sum up the whole cost of nutri- The total 

« • 1 1 T • n '11 expenses of 

tion which the normal patriciate has habitually to provide, by nutrition to 

be met by 

constituting it a first charge on the produce of labour when thePatri- 
organised on a systematic plan. The temple with its ten philo- 
sophers meets the wants of ten thousand families ; it represents 
one banker, fifty merchants, a hundred manufacturers, and two 
hundred agriculturists. Thus the interpreters of the Grreat 
Being are the thousandth, its ministers the thirtieth, part of 
its agents. The weekly and monthly expenses of the mainte- 
nance of these agents, then, with a very slight exception, 
constitute nearly the whole of the outlay which the patriciate 
has to control by a constant superintendence, both as indi- 

304 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

The chief 
function of 
the banker. 

The part of 
the Proleta- 
r ate in 
civic life. 

viduals and as a government. It is able, then, to estimate the 
amount of increase in the annual production necessary, if the 
generation it directs is duly to transmit to its successor the 
aggregate capital it received from its predecessor, -with the 
anticipated augmentation. The result will be the formation of 
a true system of statistics (the statistics of the present day are 
empirical and unreliable) affording a reliable view of man's 
industrial progress, by aid of the accounts annually published 
by each of the five hundred dictatorships. Their publication 
will at once afford the means of judging whether the expendi- 
ture of the patricians does or does not interfere with the right 
discharge of their functions as regards the present and the 
future ; such judgment constituting the sole financial check on 
the worthy ministers of Humanity within the competence of 
the priesthood and the public. 

We thus see how the subordination of action to nutrition is 
more complete in the collective than in the individual orga^ 
nism ; the end in view becoming external, altruism supplants 
egoism in the direction, and forms a more perfect and less 
unstable unity. The view here taken sets in its true light the 
normal dig-nity of the supreme patriciate, alone competent to con- 
ceive human industry in its entirety, by the light of the theory 
furnished by the religion, and under the impulse of synthesis 
derived from the priesthood. Under these conditions, the chief 
function of the banker is to organise with wisdom such under- 
takings as deserve assistance, whilst aiding in the suppression of 
the less sound. Besides the money derived from the circula- 
tion of values, he will dispose of the capital placed at his com- 
mand by retired patricians, and perhaps even by the sa^dngs of 
plebeians, in both cases freely offered in aid of his financial 
operations, from the wish to avoid the trouble and anxiety 
attendant on inadequate means. It is in my eyes a happy 
omen for the proximate advent of Positivism that my first hints 
on the function of the banker have already led to an adequate 
conception of that function in its fuU extent on the part of a 
young banker, whose adhesion to the true religion is as prudent 
as it is devoted. 

I have now, as the last step required to end the delineation 
of civic existence, to systematise its indispensable complement, 
the complement, at once moral and political, which it finds in 
the proletariate, the sole decisive guarantee of its coherence and 
its dignity. 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 305 

G-raDtinsf the sociocratic conception of wasfes to remain in FavomaWe 

„ , ° ^ ° situatinn of 

lull force, the working classes, shielded as they are from liability t^e Proieta- 
to want, are in a better position than their temporal chiefs, nay moraiiy. 
even than their spiritual, for realising the grand object of the 
common education. Their situation is the one in which a man 
can best attend to his improvement and to his happiness, by 
a wise exercise of all the faculties which are worth cultivating, 
whilst he links his domestic to his citizen life through the instru- 
mentality of the form of action most consonant to our nature. 
In the proletariate, more than elsewhere, is the subordination 
of egoism to altruism on a right footing, as circumstances there 
favour the repression of the former, the growth of the latter. 
The happy mean ought there to render easy the discipline of 
the nutritive instinct, and the plenitude of domestic bliss 
victory over the sexual. Pride and vanity, these are the in- 
stincts which the people must most exert its wisdom to check, 
for they can find there no social destination as in the excep- 
tional instances above given, and so tend usually to be a source 
of trouble both privately and publicly. Looking on them as 
human infirmities, the proletary will exert himself so to shape 
them and limit them that they may act simply as a healthy 
stimulus to emulation in the discharge of his daily duties, 
whether as a workman or as a man. If a real vocation leads 
him to aspire to a share in government, either spiritual or 
temporal, he is aware that its necessary concentration in few 
hands places it out of the reach of most of those who might 
have a claim ; he bends himself to the putting forth of his own 
proper value in such a degree as to deserve the only recom- 
pense accessible to aU. 

Unlike his chiefs, the proletary is not absorbed by his The great 
special business ; as much as they, however, mast he consider Sltarfate^ 
its right performance as the first duty of the true citizen. To rathe'lhan 
feel its nobleness, he has but to consider that a concerted in- ^"' °"*' 
terruption of work would soon derange the whole economy of 
society. But, whilst such a cessation of action by the collective 
proletariate must always be open to it, in order to ensure a 
proper respect for its free cooperation, the proletariate will 
reserve this formidable power as a last resource, to meet serious 
and protracted violations of the sociocratic arrangements. Its 
possibility is destined mainly to obviate the having recourse 
to violence, such a step being intrinsically inconsistent with 

VOL. IV. X 

306 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAN. 

industrial life, and yet at all times imminent, as the people 
has a natural propensity to surmount social difficulties by an 
abuse of the power of number. As a result of the whole educa- 
tion and regime, the peculiar power of the proletariate will be 
generally felt without being called into exercise. For not to 
dwell on the systematic remonstrances of the priesthood, the 
patricians will of themselves be aware that they are not the 
direct agents in reproducing wealth, and that, however large their 
capital from all sources, they would be powerless if the plebeians 
did not turn this instrument to account. Far from encou- 
raging pride in the people, their sense of this truth habitually 
reacts with a sympathetic influence, as it tends to lead the 
proletaries to a juster estimate of their continuous service on 
behalf of posterity in the aggregate, the only legitimate object 
of all their labours of whatever kind. 
General Although it is incumbeut on the proletariate to overcome 

Proletariate, its inherent tendency to neglect its special work and attend to 
its general function, it is still this general function which 
determines its character as a social element, by the contrast 
between the homogeneity of the plebeian and the heterogeneity 
of the patrician body. If the citizen is to pay, as he should 
pay, constant attention to the welfare of the whole, it can only 
be on the condition that his peculiar business do not habitually 
absorb him, but involve simply an easy responsibility. In the 
priesthood even, where the two coincide, the general function 
takes a special character, and so tends to interfere with the 
supervision of the whole by making the priesthood attach undue 
importance to the systematisation of abstract science. The 
exercise of this supervision then, a normal want, devolves on the 
proletariate, disengaged as it is from all prepossessions and 
naturally drawn towards an office involving no responsibility, 
and rendered easy by the limited area of the sociocratic States. 
Whilst listening with respect to the advice of the priesthood in 
regard to it, the plebeians should discharge it with complete 
independence, so to be able, if occasions arise, to wield it 
against the encroachments of the spiritual power no less than 
the abuses of the practical power, invoking against both the 
faith which all alike acknowledge. 
The Salons The salous of the people, then, become the principal labora- 

ottuePeopie, ^^^.-^g ^^ public Opinion not merely as the more numerous, hut 
above all as more apt to check an authority not derived from 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE, 307 

the people, but the misuse of which falls principally on the 
people. The primary condition of the right discharge of this 
function of control is the homogeneity of the proletariate, the 
way for which has heen prepared by the dissolution, in the na- 
tural course of things, of all the trade associations, associations 
only suited to the Middle Ages. Such homogeneity, however, 
of the proletariate will be no obstacle to the rise of a class of 
workmen whose special work brings them into relation with all 
the others, a class therefore holding to the proletariate a posi- 
tion analogous to that which the bankers hold to the other 
capitalists. 

Since the total abolition of slavery, the use of machinery uachmery 
has gradually allowed us to draw from the inorganic world neers. 
the material forces which human beings no longer furnished. 
Machinery, as the general complement of the industrial organi- 
sation, grew in importance everywhere during the latest phase 
of the Western revolution, coincidently with the rise of the 
banking class, prior to which event industrial undertakings 
were limited in extent and deficient in permanence. In the 
normal state and under systematic direction, machinery is to 
the arts what methods are to the sciences ; neither directly pro- 
duces, but both become the great means of prodhction. Of 
universal application, the construction of machines lisads to the 
creation of a distinct branch of industry, in natural connection 
with all other branches, not merely of manufacture, but of 
commerce, nay even of agriculture. Banking alone is inde- 
pendent of it, but the character of generality which attaches to 
both alike should form a bond between the highest directors 
and the highest operatives, once let the haughtiness of the 
patrician and the pride of the plebeian give way to the better 
feelings of the normal state. 

The existence and the fraternal ascendancy of this class, a Mendioaats. 
class composed of the highest and least special working men, 
constitute a natural preservative of the homogeneity of the 
proletariate, the condition of its convergent action, and an 
obstacle to the dissolving tendency of scattered effort. But the 
free acceptance of its supremacy, the sole hierarchical element 
admissible in the popular milieu, requires to complete it at the 
other end of the scale, the incorporation, on suitable conditions, 
of an exceptional class, a class with regard to which Western 
feeling is as yet defective, especially in Protestant nations. 

X 2 

308 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THEFUTUBE OF MAN. 

Under the 
protection 
ol tte Pro- 
letariate. 

Beggars — 

piissive 

proletaries. 

Fraternity 
betwei'n the 
Engineers 
and Worlc- 
men. 

When proclaiming the gratuitousness of labour in order to 
organise the sociocratic existence of the proletaries, the Posi- 
tive religion may not neglect those who, though in spite of 
the common education, are temporarily or even permanently 
incompetent to fulfil their own more peculiar duties. Such 
inability may be due to a defect in their physical, mental, or 
moral constitution ; it may be due to some defect in the col- 
lective organism ; in either case Humanity requires that these, 
her exceptional children, be maintained and made available, not 
however placed on a level with her full servants. The patri- 
ciate, nay even the priesthood, may equally with the prole- 
tariate, furnish, in the natural course of things, recruits to this 
supplementary body, into which fall all who have failed either 
from accident or from defective organisation. Their mainte- 
nance cannot devolve on individuals, inasmuch as they con- 
tribute nothing industrially, but must in all cases rest on the 
free extension to them of a noble fraternity. The Protectorate 
is one which especially pertains to the proletariate, be it that 
the class is more keenly alive to cii'cumstances more akin to its 
own, or rather that it has a clearer sense of the value socially of 
a body with such complete liberty of action. 

All those, whom in our present anarchical state we stigma- 
tise as beggars, may be as valuable members of the poorer class 
as the so-called leisure class is among the rich. By both, the 
name of parasite is deserved only if they fail to use the freedom 
which is their characteristic. Both, though in opposite ways, 
have an existence without any definite purpose, but they may 
equally contribute to the public welfare, by perfecting the pa- 
trician chivalry or the plebeian supervision. It were to attach a 
degrading importance to the reproduction of wealth to think 
that inability to take part in it justifies contempt or oppression. 
Without taking such part, with no definite duty whatever to 
perform, a citizen may be habitually rendering great service, he 
may even attain to honour after death, if he duly put to use the 
capacity as a citizen which is to balance his incapacity as a 
workman. 

Thus arise, at the two extremes of the proletary body, two 
natural appendices, the one normal, the other exceptional, each 
in its own way qualified to concentrate and to complete the 
general supervision exercised by the body. Equally disposed to 
fraternise with all plebeians, and from different motives prone to 

Chap. TV.] THE LIFE. 309 

migratory habits, they will be instinctively led to a special 
intimacy, with the object of increasing the social influence of 
the proletariate, when the normal habits and feelings shall exist 
in any considerable extent. As the highest titles to personal 
consideration are, in the Positive religion, width of intellect 
and generosity of feeling, the most active class of the plebeians 
may rationally fraternise with the most passive, in spite of the 
discrepancy in their characters. 

For the full organisation of human life it remains for me to The reia- 

° tions be- 

pass from the relations between citizens to the relations of the tweenstates. 
States, so to gain a clear idea of the way in which the five 
hundred separate Eepublics of the regenerated globe constitute 
the universal Eepublic, by virtue of a concert, in all cases per- 
fectly free. But, though their convergence, the convergence of 
instinct and of reason, will be the noblest result of the religion, 
and more than in the mediaeval period is the highest of the 
priesthood's tasks, yet its explanation at present offers no 
serious difiBculty. For their agreement rests directly on the 
joint supremacy of the spirit of relativity and of peaceful 
activity, the two foundations of the altruistic synthesis, the 
only synthesis of universal acceptance. All that I have to do is 
to characterise the continual concurrence to this end of the patri- 
ciate and proletariate with the priesthood, that priesthood aided 
throughout by the women and the old men. Although the human 
family in its entirety requires and admits only a spiritual go- 
vernment, with no admixture of temporal rule, unity of sympa- 
thies would be unattainable were not the influence of the 
practical brought to the support of the counsels of the temporal 
power. 

Common education, common feelings, nay even common Monopoly 
language, — with these bases, the free harmonious action of the thrcoimtry' 
several sociocracies of the earth still calls for the habitual dinated'to"' 
intervention of the priesthood, aided by all classes, to anticipate "™™'*y- 
or settle disputes, to prepare the way for or promote cooperation. 
Notwithstanding the universal predominance of industry and 
peace, and the entire abolition of war, there will always be a 
liability to outbreaks of national selfishness, under the form, as 
between nations, of monopoly as the substitute for conquest ; as 
between classes, of the despotism of wealth or numbers. Con- 
sequently it will be often the duty of the priesthood to enforce 
on nations, just as much as on classes, the truth, that the 

310 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

The Priest, 
hood will 
need in this 
the aid of 
the Bankers 
and Proleta- 
riate. 

The peace of 
the world, 
how pre- 
served. 

Uniformity 
of legisla- 
tion— of 
weights and 
measures. 

ascendancy, so universally invoked, of the social over the per- 
sonal instincts can only be permanently secured by our sympa- 
thies being extended from the race. It will be necessary to 
proclaim that it is as indispensable constantly to subordinate 
the Country to Humanity, as it is to subordinate the Family to 
the Country, The limitation of area will support this convic- 
tion, each separate Sociocracy being thus preserved from the 
foolish effort to subsist by its own industry alone and to get rid 
of all dependence upon other nations. 

Yet the checks of intellect and feeling would be inadequate 
in industrial difficulties, without the freely offered assistance of 
the supreme patriciate and of the whole proletariate. But 
with the additional aid of these two classes it will commonly 
be possible to overcome the disturbing action of a disorderly 
activity or ill-directed patriotism. For monopolist leanings 
are peculiarly proper to the capitalists who are directly engaged 
in industry, whether merchants, manufacturers, or even agri- 
culturists. Bankers as a rule are exempt, owing to the extent 
of their operations ; the proletariate from its complete homoge- 
neity. Nay even within the limits of the popular body, I 
should point to the engineer class as particularly predisposed to 
secure the triumph of the social principle both at home and 
abroad, by virtue of its regular relations with all branches of 
industrialists. 

The fourteen thousand bankers who preside over the de- 
velopement of the earth's resources, the millions of proletaries 
with whom they are in habitual contact, will enable the Pontiff 
to maintain, by his hundred and forty thousand organs, peace 
upon the planet. Sanctioning patriotism, as an indispensable 
intermedium between family affection and the love of mankind, 
the Positive religion transforms it into the persistent disposi- 
tion to perfect the State. The true citizen renounces monopoly 
and conquest equally, and will love his country as he loves his 
lady, exerting himself to render his country a better servant of 
Humanity, without concealing from himself her shortcomings. 

Nor is the establishment of peace the sole aim of the spi- 
ritual government of Humanity, it must, with the same auxilia- 
ries, organise, systematically, concert. Exercising a constant 
influence upon the five hundred dictatorships, the priesthood 
alone can institute and maintain uniformity in legislation, 
especially as regards marriage and inheritance, in order to 

Chap. IV.] THE LIFE. 311 

secure complete moral similarity and to facilitate convergence 
in action. From it too must come the universal adoption of a 
suitable system of weights and measures, a natural appendix of 
Positive education. 

From the dynamical point of view, the influence of the special in- 
Church upon the State, industrially, should be directed to the titudesof 
perfecting industrial harmony by directing the local efforts to countries. 
their best use. The continuous developement of general socio- 
cratic feeling will soon determine the true aptitude of each 
country as regards particular branches of agriculture or of 
manufactures which it should pursue. This determined, the 
bankers, guided by the scientific instructions of the priesthood 
and instinctively aided by the engineers, will give the whole 
system of production its right direction, to the avoidance of 
misdirected and duplicate efforts, so as to secure in every case 
the appropriate result. 

The last step in the systematic direction of Human activity The relations 
is the ordering of the largest relations, the relations of the theamwis. 
human species, as a collective personality, with all the animal 
races amenable to discipline, with a view to making the order 
of things in which we live as perfect as possible. 

The standing league of free agents against external ne- The Great 
cessity, the rudiment of which is traceable to the instinct of ameSfoSto 
Fetich] sm, becomes under Positivism the chief sphere of poli- Jj ttf Toiun" 
-tical action in the true sense of the term, so soon as the '^'y*"^^- 
requisite harmony has been introduced into the direction of the 
world. A Being external to the world, which should guide its 
affairs, would follow the course naturally taken by human Provi- 
dence, in first perfecting the highest race, the race most 
susceptible of improvement. This, the basic improvement, is at 
the present day summarily expressed by the definitive victory of 
Eelativism over Theologism, of peaceful industry over war. So 
constituted, the Great Being should inaugurate its maturity by 
the gradual raising of the auxiliary races which with their own 
consent it associated during its childhood. An imperious 
necessity forbids its extending its tutelary sympathy to_ all 
animal races, yet it has, at least, the satisfaction of feeling that 
its enemies are the enemies of its allies, and that by the destruc- 
tion of its rivals in power it guarantees their existence. 

Amongst the races which have been disciplined, we must Domesti- 
distinguish between the laboratories of our food and our active maia. 

312 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PUTUEE OF MAN. 

(i) Those 
which serve 
for food. 

(ii) Our ac- 
tive aim- 
liars. 

Animals not 
to be em- 
ployed 
where inor- 
ganic forces 
will do. 

auxiliars. The first class has long been a creation of human 
foresight, for without it the ruminants would have disappeared 
by this time under the teeth of the carnivores. But that they 
are so is an obligation for us, whilst submitting to the law 
which compels the use of animal food, to submit in a better spirit 
by protecting its victims as far as is consistent with our neces- 
sities. Up to the last moment, we ought with active sympathy 
to exert ourselves by improvements in their circumstances and 
by kind treatment, to make them forget the gloomy prospect 
their predecessors' fate holds out. At the time of death, those 
on whom the terrible office devolves will do their work with the 
seriousness it demands, perfecting the means of destruction in 
order to lessen suffering. Although its encyclopaedic education 
prompts this class to use the opportunity to make experiments, 
experiments which should be disallowed by Positive morality in 
every other case, it will not forget to extend to the innocent 
the merciful treatment customary with the giylty. 

For our auxiliars, the sympathy of man may and should 
take a more satisfactory course, improving not so much their 
external conditions as their nature, physical, intellectual, and 
moral, by the habitual encouragement of true fraternity of 
feeling. The herbivores will be gradually raised by the Grreat 
Being to the dignity of carnivores, so to become more active, 
more intelligent, nay even more devoted, as they more and 
more are assimilated to the direct servants of Humanity. As 
for the animals which are nearest the human type, both in brain 
and in body, it is for Humanity in its maturity to give system- 
atic direction and expansion to its association with them, — 
the association of feeling and often of action, which its well- 
grounded instinct of sympathy led it to institute during its 
childhood. 

The Positive Economy should always consist in the assign- 
ing to every agent the task for which it is fitted, not employing 
for its accomplishment forces which might be turned to a better 
purpose. On this principle, in Western industry we have 
reached the point of considering it barbarous to use men as a 
weight or motive power ; all purely mechanical services, not 
merely statical but dynamical, we project out of ourselves, by the 
aid of a judicious employment of machines. Hence a simulta- 
neous advance both in personal dignity and in social utility, as 
we can avail ourselves of the mental and moral value inseparable 

Chap, rv.] THE LIFE. 313 

from the humblest children of Humanity, but previously lost 
to the race and painful to the individual. Oiu? progress how- 
ever in this respect too often stops short at the substitution of 
animals for man, not sufficiently utilising inorganic forces. The 
more complete introduction of industrial machinery and its 
better use will have as consequences, respect for our voluntary 
assistants and increased use of the blind forces of nature, the 
vast power inherent in which should suffice us did we but know 
how to use it ; for instance, did we know how to employ to 
better purpose the immense force of the tide. From the animals 
as from men, we should demand no merely automatic service, 
as opposed alike to economy and morality. When we have 
learnt to avail ourselves of the heart and intelligence of our 
allies to such a degree as to entrust them with the main super- 
intendence of inorganic forces, we shall find a better use for the 
human agents thus set free, and be able to develope on a larger 
scale the sense of fraternity upon earth. 

The double progress here indicated is one in which all ah classes 
classes of regenerate Humanity ought instinctively to aid, by a rate in tws 
steady influence, at once intellectual and moral. But it more tion. 
particularly concerns the priesthood and the proletariate, both 
alike deriving their inspiration from women. Besides the 
intellectual reaction of Positive education which removes from 
animals the ban of Theology, the sociocratic clergy, on re- 
suming the medical functions, will be careful to include the 
animals in their exercise in a far more satisfactory way than 
was possible under the Theocracy. Taught by its example, the 
proletaries, the immediate directors of the league between man 
and the animals, will ensure the prevalence of true sympathy 
towards our lower brethren, without needing to insist on the 
services they render or to trace the close connection which 
exists between their habits and ours. The two extreme classes 
in the Sociocracy will combine to perfect, by theory and prac- 
tice, the soul and the body of the races already disciplined, as 
also to widen the range of association, which has not been able 
to take a step in advance since Fetichism. 

That the unity based on sympathy may attain its utmost The inorga- 
completeness, we must be able to embrace in it even the inor- not leit out. 
ganic world, in relation to which Construction must always take 
precedence of Destruction ; never must we forget that, here too, 
all caprice is immoral. 

314 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PUTUKE OF MAN. 
Materials, aa The familiar knowledge of human nature will make all feel 

well as pro- ,t , i 

ducts, are to that coutempt and oppression exercised on matter may extend 

be respected. ™,, ■, -i ■, 

lurther, maj' extend to the body and ultimately to the soul. 
Accustomed to respect products, true sociocrats will learn also 
to reverence materials, and thus allow full scope for the moral 
influences attendant on the irrevocable absorption of Fetichism 
in Positivism, especially when aided by the institution of sub- 
jective milieus. The external order ever suggests Humanity, 
for Humanity alone can know that order and improve it, Hu- 
manity therefore consecrates it as condensing it. We ought so 
far to ameliorate the terrestrial regime as to give us just 
ground for regret that the economy of the heavens is wholly 
beyond our intervention, so wholly that we can but use it, not 
correct it. Yet whilst realising all the improvements in our 
power, we never forget that their attainment is based on our 
submission to the order of nature, and that our gratitude is due 
to the laws of nature, as they give us a basis for action. Whilst 
faith reveals to us our dependence upon the whole formed by the 
beings we know, love gives us a sense of our dignity, as aware 
that the destination of our action is to modify the hierarchy 
with which we are connected in the common interest of its 
various elements. The whole wisdom of man, whether theore- 
tical or practical, is condensed in this fundamental law : the 
noblest order perfects the lowest through submission to it. 

The result of the whole chapter is a triumphant verification 
of the announcement with which it opened, of the iuherent 
competence of the regime to fully harmonise sympathy and 
synthesis, the former embodied in the worship, the latter in the 
doctrine. The unity which sympathy gives has stood the 
hardest test, it has disciplined practical life, after having 
reduced to system our intellectual existence. Under the 
guidance of love, under the control of faith, action unites and 
strengthens the union of the two, by the developement of 
industry in its collective mode, thus made the material ground- 
work of human progress, physical, intellectual, and moral. 

This chapter having concluded the work of construction of 
the Positive religion, the next has to organise its imiversal 
acceptance. 

315 

CHAPTER V. 

THE PHILOSOPHICAL ESTIMATE OP THE PKESBNT, BY VIRTUE OF THE 
COMBINATION OF THE FUTURE WITH THE PAST ; 
WHENCE 
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE LAST PHASE OF THE TRANSITION. 

This last volume may be regarded as the systematic expansion obieotoi 

■' " ■' * ^ ^ this chapter 

of the fundamental formula which embodies the Positive —the ac- 
ceptance of 
religion. The first chapter dealt with it directly, putting it t^e formula 

forward as a whole ; of the three following each treated one of tive Be- 
its three indispensable constituents. Its definitive acceptance 
becomes the particular object of this last chapter, in which the 
religion comes into immediate connection with the political 
system. 

The Western revolution, as intellectual rather than social. Positivism 

^ has to regu- 

should naturally enter on its close, at the point where the latethePre- 
intellectual reconstruction vindicated its claim to universal ap- tb™ *<> a«- 

^ duce the Fu- 

pHcability by embracing, for the first time, the whole range of '"%*» 
human interests. Now, this condition is actually satisfied by 
the systematisation which I have just ended, and especially by 
the preceding chapter, where love and faith meet in action. 
But, to evidence its competence, and to complete its service, the 
religion which deduces the future from the past must direct 
the present, so as to bring it into unison with its source and 
with its destination, both objects of general conception. 

It is by thus triumphing over our present anarchy, that Posi- By overcom- 
tivism, at one and the same time, submits to a crucial test and Positivism 
conquers irreversible assent. Its ascendancy must be gained by assent. 
its establishment of a complete discipline in the very midst of the 
most entire disorder, a disorder which threatens human society 
with absolute disintegration. The religion which possesses such 
power will, by virtue of the possession, be called upon to regu- 
late a future, in which the work of organisation will be as difficult 
as at present. In the fullest sense real, in its very essence social, 

816 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

the Positive faith may be brought to bear immediately on the gov- 
ernment of society; whereas Catholicism, as egoistic and chimeri- 
cal, could not influence government till after its acceptance by 
individuals. The heir of five centuries of increasing disorganisa- 
tion, the religion of Humanity will be universally summoned to 
the rescue of order and of progress, when once it is sufficiently 
known. Although destined to regenerate the whole of man's 
existence, its first application must be to public life, as the 
main seat of disorder. It will inaugurate the universal morality 
by regulating the conduct of nations first, then that of families 
and individuals, but without ever failing to draw out the 
essential correlation of the three parts of the Positive regime. 
Examination Our aim being to order the latest phase of the transition, 

ot the state , /. 

of the West, the first point is to judge aright the actual situation of aflairs, 
by combining the knowledge of the previous evolution of man 
with the conception of his normal state as already given with 
sufficient accuracy. In this introduction no portion of Hu- 
manity but is concerned, yet it has more special reference 
to the West, for thirty centuries the seat of the gradual move- 
ment towards the regeneration of mankind. 

Theprepara- The successive phases of our evolution aU co-exist in the 

torj- evo- 

lution. actual condition of man ; all, however, alike giving signs of a 

common tendency to adopt a solution which meets the imme- 
diate wants of each, as realising aspirations both universal and 
persistent. After creating the family, Fetichism in its highest 
form as Astrolatry, undertook to found an universal association 
on the basis of a homogeneous existence regulated by a com- 
mon faith. Theocracy advanced farther in the same direction, 
availing itself of the only belief which at that early period 
could enforce the due amount of subordination. Polytheism 
in its military form might seem to lose sight of the end but 
was really a movement towards it, by its system of conquest 
which resulted in the conquering nation's becoming definitively 
the nucleus of union for the whole. The convergence was dis- 
tinctly traceable under Monotheism, more particularly defensive 
Monotheism, with its overt aspiration after the formation of a 
universal society. The effort failed, but the nations have never 
lost the wish for, never abandoned the hope of, an association 
co-extensive with the race. The establishment of such an 
association as an intellectual conception and as a social fact 
— such is the issue of the revolution, which, by virtue of the 

Chap, v.] THE TEANSITION. 317 

exhaustion of the established order, ensures the simultaneous 
triumph of a demonstrable faith, and of peaceful activity. 

In regard to the common issue of the aspirations arisen Distinction 
during the process of education, we must distinguish between peoples 
the two unequal portions of the race, demarcated by the waiting for tws 
for, or the active endeavour after, this universal society. The 
past teaches us, that the nations, in by far the larger part, whilst 
in heart and intellect bent on the formation of one great human 
family, have one after the other given up the hope of becoming 
its centre. All the dispositions grounded on the various forms 
of the absolute synthesis have neutralised one another, the result 
being to concentrate the process of elaborating the common 
solution on that portion of the world which is the cradle of the 
relative religion. 

On the rise and spread of Theologism, Fetichism altogether peticwam 
abandoned the hope of universal acceptance which marked its cracy have 
latest stage, Astrolatry. But the great Theocracies, which de- siTe°™Mono- 
liberately renewed the attempt, in their turn lost the initiative, two forms 
in consequence of the prevalence of the military regime. Thus 
the two principal forms of the provisional religion became 
essentially passive, and have for a long time been waiting for 
the regeneration which they have no hope of directing. The 
presidency of Humanity was deiinitively vested in the West, 
under the impulse successively of the conquests of Kome, and 
of the defensive form of Monotheism. Catholicism and Islam 
alike claimed universality, and on equivalent grounds, but their 
claims cancelled one another, and the focus of the movement, 
the West, was left to work out the common solution in the only 
possible way, by the preparation for a relative religion to be 
substituted for all the absolute syntheses at once. Whilst en- 
gaged in the necessary preliminaries, the scientific and practical 
groundwork of this construction, the West was rendering its 
acceptance easier by emancipating itself, as was necessary, from 
the beliefs calculated to prevent the various populations from The west 

. becomes tlie 

uniting with their Western centre. By tacit assent, an assent on organ. 
the part of Islam as much as on that of Theocracy and Fetich- 
ism, there devolves on the West, unshackled as it is by theo- 
logical belief, the direct working out of a renovation expected 
by all alike. 

Neither the struggles between the Western nations since the Thisitowes 
close of the Middle Ages, nor their abuse in common of their transition. 

318 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

superiority over other nations, have been able to destroy this 
instinctive convergence, the first step to the ultimate union. 
So unprecedented an agreement is in all cases the result of the 
utter exhaustion of the previous system, combined with a de- 
fective growth of the germs of renovation. The West owes its 
prerogative solely to its triple transition — ^its intellectual, active, 
and lastly affective transition — which, extending throughout 
thirty centuries, issues, in the five latest, in the elaboration, 
negatively and positively, of the universal solution, a result not 
possible elsewhere. 
the flnai^ ° Once let this mission be as fully recognised in the West as 

^ ^°' it is outside, and the Western nations will be disposed to adopt 

gradually the feelings, habits, and opinions consonant to its 
primacy in the race. But such recognition can only be the 
result of a triumphant spread of the doctrine which guides the 
reconstruction, and nowhere will that doctrine meet with 
greater obstacles than in the milieu which is to raise the others, 
for the revolutionary habits there prevalent, once a furtherance, 
are become a hindrance to the fulfilment of its mission. In 
my third volume I have clearly explained by what fatal chain of 
circumstances the transition in the West became more and more 
anarchical in character, even before it had completely lost all 
organic tendencies. Complete organisation has hitherto been 
attainable only under the Theocracy, and there it soon became 
adverse to progress. The effect of opposition between the two 
has been that progress has prevailed, but has prevailed by en- 
couraging, side by side with a partial construction, a general 
revolt against the original system, the substitute for which 
Positivism alone offers. The character of anarchy has been 
strengthened in proportion as the developement of the powers 
of man has evidenced the incompetence of the absolute syn- 
thesis to regulate them without undue compression. The 
revolutionary disposition, long limited to the increasing im- 
pairment of continility, extended to solidarity on the disruption 
of the Catholic unity and the Feudal hierarchy. 
The ten- Such a tendency was of use in furthering the inevitable 

Min ita^' transition from Theocracy to Sociocracy, so long as the process 
an^erti? °™^ of regeneration consisted in the preparation of materials ; con- 
struction at that time being impossible without destruction. 
But when reorganisation proper has become the urgent want, 
the work of demolition being complete, the revolutionary 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION, 31 9 

habits interfere with their own purpose, as they set themselves 
against any synthesis. Thus it is that, in disposition, the more 
active portions of the race are not on a level with the more 
passive; the latter invariably expecting with confidence and 
resignation the construction of an order which shall embrace 
all, the former looking with repugnance on the indispensable 
conditions of such construction. 

Thus the chief task of the Positive religion is to regenerate ^^^*^°^ig 
the nucleus which has prepared its way ; and this accomplished, *°^^|J™' 
its extension to the whole will be effected without hindrance. '^«st. 
Long destined to furnish in all cases leaders, whilst the masses 
remain comparatively unaffected, it must first perform this 
office for the milieu which gave it birth, and which is 
amenable from its increasing anarchy to no other discipline. 
In default of its guidance, the well-grounded anxiety inspired 
by the progressive advance of subversive tendencies, drives 
men provisionally to rally to retrograde beliefs, which are ra- 
dically incompatible with any effective moral or even political 
action. But the advent of Positivism, the work of this treatise, 
enables those who uphold order to assume the direction of 
progress, and progress henceforward consists essentially in the 
systematic discipline of all the powers of man. The medio- 
crities which flourish in the existing anarchy will resume their 
normal subaltern position, and the government of the West 
will shortly be centred in those who shall know how always to 
reconcile renovation with conservation. 

Considering' the nature of the malady from which the West Discredit of 

„. ..-..,,, , theEevoIu- 

is suffermg, it was requisite tor its right treatment to begin tionary 
with the comprehensive conception of human affairs, so to 
found the sole authority capable of guiding the present in the 
name of the past and in the interest of the future. Great as is 
the actual mental indiscipline, men will joyfully replace them- 
selves under the yoke of their antecedents, if its resumption 
hold out to them a prospect of great consequents. Eeassured 
as to progress, they will lend their aid in the construction of 
order, rejecting anarchy as vigorously as they reject reaction. 
The utterly incurable amongst the revolutionists will quietly 
disappear, as an anachronism rather than a source of dis- 
turbance, when once the conservative power shall be armed 
with a satisfactory theory. They have still, it is true, influence 
with the people, in show rather than in substance, and due to 

320 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

Hence it is 
easy for 
Positivism 
to ordcv tlib 
Transition. 

Apprecia- 
tion of the 
revolution- 
ary principle 
of Private 
Judgment. 

Its resultB. 

a certain routine, but their inability to unite except for some 
negative interludes and at wider intervals, disables them from 
offering any effective resistance to an organic policy, however 
limited the number of its adherents. 

The actual disposition of men's minds, a consequence of the 
utter exhaustion of negsitivism, and expressed by the irrevo- 
cable accession of the dictatorship in the central nation, allows 
the Positive religion to organise the transition which is to be 
the proper termination of the Western revolution. The poli- 
tical calm does but bring into relief the spiritual disorder, since 
nowhere does there attach to it any sense of security. Eeaction 
and revolution are alike in discredit, and yet the incoherent 
amalgam of the two, in the absence of any organic teaching, 
still ministers as the basis of public opinion, still furnishes the 
ofiBcial formulae. 

Eightly to understand the nature and extent of the "Western 
disease, we must examine directly the principle of revolution, 
which consists in men acknowledging no other spiritual autho- 
rity but their individual reason, most of all when dealing with 
the most important questions. This anarchical principle has 
become so universal amongst all Occidentals, that it ndes 
supreme even with those who are trying to re-establish the 
discipline the decay of which evoked it. Men avow the con- 
ditions of competence required for the most unimportant 
decisions in natural philosophy, but acknowledge no obligation 
in the domain of moral and social phenomena. 

This intellectual revolt of the individual against the race is 
the more dangerous, in that, an inevitable consequence of the 
impotence of the older beliefs, it was originally indispensable to 
the elaboration of the nevfr. Had Descartes and the thinkers 
worthy to tread in his steps not deliberately set aside all the 
then recognised authorities, the ultimate reconstruction would 
have remained an impossibility. But such emancipation as 
theirs, necessary when the object was to create new convictions, 
is become simply anarchical in minds too weak by their own 
action to get rid of doubt. Such weakness renders errors 
inevitable, unless on the assumption of an indifference fatal to 
morality, when opinions are at stake which concern man's 
whole existence. When the demands of action drive such men 
to delegate the decision to others, without principles to guide 
them they usually misplace their confidence, and the result is a 
more disastrous issue to their blunders. 

Chap. V.] THE TEAKSITION. 321 

Originally it was the higher provinces of thought to which The wide 
the revolt was confined, where the old discipline was more anarchy.** 
oppressive ; but if it persist, it will infallibly extend to the 
lower, so as to endanger the aggregate of our scientific acquisi- 
tions. It would be strange if minds content to make the 
suggestions of their individual reason the sole basis of their 
moral and political convictions were to remain indefinitely sub- 
missive to scientific authority, on points of less importance and 
less difiiculty. A sound estimate of the acceptance by the 
Western world of modern discoveries, shows their general adop- 
tion to have been due, most of all, to habits traceable to the 
previous training, in spite of the decay which had overtaken its 
intellectual groundwork. Suppose — the hypothesis involves, it 
must be allowed, a contradiction — the announcement of the 
earth's motion made for the first time in the fuU tide of revolu- 
tionary feeling, it would find it an insuperable obstacle to 
its reception, as opinion would be directed on a host of incon- 
sistent amendments. The easy success often obtained by the 
coarsest illusions or juggleries ; the revolt which already 
threatens even the province of Mathematics ; are every- 
where two opposite but convergent evidences of the urgent 
need, and of the difficulty, of a true discipline. Even in the 
scientific world, where there is still some regard paid to compe- 
tence, some respect for authority, the feebleness of conclusions, 
consequent on the dispersion of thought, encourages a similar 
anarchy — the strongest evidence of which is the habitual 
triumph of mediocrities. This absence of direction and disci- 
pline extends to the cultivation of art, which, by nature 
inherently synthetic, acquiesces in the general prevalence of a 
degrading specialism, substance being sacrificed to form. 

A doctrine of universal validity — such is the sole remedy, Need of na 

"^ universal 

if the reason of the West is to be freed from its present contra- doothna. 
dictory position, in which destruction of the whole becomes more 
and more irreconcilable with construction in detail. Authority 
recognised in the lower sciences must, on due conditions, be also 
recognised in the higher, or the disorder in which these last are 
perishing will Spread to the lower. On examination, however, 
we see that this regeneration, if it is not to be abortive, must 
be moral quite as much as intellectual. 

After the substitution of a demonstrable faith for beliefs reeiingmust 
insusceptible of verification, feeling will never cease to be the 

VOL. IV. Y 

322 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

complement 
of reason, 

ducedasthe Complement of reason in regard to the majority of admis- 
sible opinions, the special proofs of which would often be 
inadequate to carry conviction, did not confidence come to 
their aid. I have put forward the institution of such a discipline 
as the capital result of the encyclopaedic education, which pre- 
disposes us to follow out consequences rather than to discuss 
principles. Suited to the normal state, even for theoricians, 
such habits have more value during the transition which is to 
usher in that state. Purely chimerical is to be held the hope 
aroused by an undue estimate of logical sequence, when it thinks 
to attain convergence under the exclusive impulse of the intel- 
lect, without the participation of the heart. Even where there 
is the mental ability really to appreciate demonstrations, dis- 
agreement on the most unimportant suffices to neutralise agree- 
ment on the most important points, when there is no veneration 
to overcome insubordination. A partial synthesis then is to be 
looked on as so impossible, that Positivism would have simply 
given a useless pabulum for intellectual exertion, had it re- 
mained a philosophy, stopping short of the full religious con- 
ception. The grave character of the existing anarchy lies 
chiefly in this, that whilst essentially intellectual, it has ended 
in derangement of the feelings. 

Sole stay of the existing order, the impaired power of the 
feelings is particularly sensible in the case of veneration, even 
in private life, where attachment too often fails to conceal a 
defective subordination. Moreover, the harmony of the family 
is imperilled by differences of opinion and the intrusion of indi- 
vidualism- But it is in public morality that the worst change 
has taken place, solidarity being only recognised in relation to 
the most ordinary intercourse, whilst continuity is altogether 
ignored. Reactionists or revolutionists, all Occidentals agree in 
contempt of the past, in neglect of the future, looking exclu- 
sively to antagonism of material interests for any control of 
man's action. In reference to continuity, the great bond of 
Humanity, Catholicism is as much to blame as Protestantism 
or Deism, for it was the first to break the chain of the ages by 
cursing its true ancestors. The Monotheistic faith could only 
rise by the repudiation of authority ; it was inconsistent then, 
when, in its turn, it tried to arrest emancipation by appealing to 
its priority of establishment. Positivism alone can plead all 
the antecedents of man, as the relative character of its synthesis 

Tbe feelings 
have been 
tampered 
■with. 

CHip. v.] THE TUANSITION. 323 

allows it to sanction all, as so many spontaneous tributaries to 
its systematic unity. 

To secure in all cases the triumph of general over special The two 
conceptions, the subordination of the self-regarding instincts to p'ositive reu- 
the social feelings — these are the two services, in intimate Sake gene- 
relation the one with the other, to be rendered by the true Hanover* 
religion in the present day. Its object now and its object in SMiaut7' 
the normal state are identical, and require similar means ; the so™iity!' 
only difference is that the difficulty now is greater, the diffi- 
culty of setting on foot an order which it will subsequently 
have only to maintain and develope. Outside of the Positive 
religion all is retrogradation and anarchy, morally no less 
than intellectually, and no reconstruction is possible but 
through its unity, an unity, by the nature of the case, at first 
confined to its founder, sole interpreter of Humanity. 

The nature and difficulty of the final phase of transition The order oi 
thus made clear, we must at once order it for the West, whence cion ™re- 
it will spread to the race. But to effect this for the West ^In^i^" 
itself, necessitates an important distinction, according as the nauons" 
operation concerns the central nation or the other nationalities ; 
in regard to which latter the first point is to determine defini- 
tively the order of their regeneration, thus completing and cor- 
recting my original statements. 

The determination of this order is in the main, notwith- Reasons for 
standing the modern revolution, in correspondence with the giyw. "^ 
course of Eoman iacorporation, allowing for the modification 
due to the defensive Monotheism. When the Western Eepub- 
lic took the place of the Empire of the West, the political 
centre, previously at one extremity of the system, was defini- 
tively removed to the centre, by the gradual substitution of 
Paris for Eome, a change accomplished before the end of the 
Middle Ages. The change was required to mark the indispensable 
transformation of a compulsory aggregation into a voluntary 
association. But with this modification, the constituents of the 
group kept their original relative position, which had gathered 
force from the Catholico-Feudal initiation. Eound the French 
nationality, as centre, were grouped, first, the two southern 
populations by virtue of a more advanced civilization, then the 
two northern, which had entered later into the movement. 
The focus of the Western world was apparently transferred to 
each of these two in succession during the two centuries after 

y 2 

324 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

Paris win 
direct the 
final traii- 
sitlou. 

The deter- 
mination of 
-the transi- 
tion in 
France to be 
followed by 
that which 
concerns 
the others. 

the disruption of the Catholic unity. None the less did the 
latest phase of the Western revolution replace as a natural 
consequence France in the presidency of the modem European 
movement. 

Disturbed for a moment in consequence of the military orgy 
which stained the final crisis, this relative position was soon 
resumed, on the advent of peace as the permanent condition of 
Europe, under the ascendancy of the common social aspirations 
which had grown and spread since the close of the Middle Ages. 
Originating, as it could not but do, with the nation on which it 
devolved to work out the solution for the rest. Positivism comes 
to the support of its initiative by enabling it worthily to accom- 
plish its mission, as marked out for it by the past, its mission to 
inaugurate the future. It is by organising on sounder bases the 
union of the West, the instinctive creation of the Middle Ages, 
that the French nation, previous to its voluntary disgregation, 
will convert its political centre into the religious metropolis of 
regenerate Humanity. The only capital, the majority of whose 
inhabitants are bom elsewhere, will deserve its presidency of the 
movement by guiding the last phase of the transition with the 
generosity of feeling and the generality of thought demanded 
by so noble a destination. Free from the anarchy of parlia- 
mentarism, it will by degrees transform into a spiritual headship 
its political predominance, in correspondence with the growth 
within it of the triumphant ascendancy of the Positive religion. 

Such then, definitively, is the order in which the aggregate 
of past history places the five constituents of the West for the 
adoption in succession of the normal state ; the first step being 
its elaboration by France, then its completion by the modifica- 
tions introduced by Italy, Spain, Great Britain, and Grermany. 
For the last three, the arrangement difi'ers from that given in 
the Positive Philosophy, as also from the arrangement as 
altered in the ' Greneral View.' When I have set forth the 
principal case, I shall in due course show, implicitly if not 
explicitly, the grounds on which I decide the position of each 
nation, when dealing with the modifying influence it exerts. 
The reader who would enter more deeply into the examination of 
this decision by a comparison of my successive attempts, should 
be warned that originally I did not give sufficient weight 
to the historical order, as determined by the preceding volume. 
Moreover I had attached too much importance to the progress 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 325 

in industry and science, to the undervaluing the moral and 
social advantages of the nations which had escaped Protestantism. 

I have now to enter directly on the task of ordering the Thetran- 
transition in its latest stage and in the centre of the West. France. 
By way of preface, I must point out the general mode of toiyie- 
introduction of the several modifications which, on a com- 
bination of the Future and the Past, I am led to suggest to 
the Present. 

Shortly stated, the theory of the organic transition resolves The same 
itself into this : that in the creation of the definitive system must preside 
the same influences must be brought to bear as it requires when troduotionof 
fully established, the same but with a more intense action and state as rule 
less regularity. Thus only will the fundamental law of continuity existent. 
be duly respected, and in such a way, that the obligation which 
is upon us to organise the present is converted into a con- 
clusive verification of the theory by which we deduced the 
future from the past. We have but to apply this indisputable 
principle and we at once see how we are to introduce whatever 
measures the theory shall suggest. 

In the creation of a regime, the characteristic of which is Novioiei.ce 
the persistent combination of peaceful industry and a demon- estaWisMiig 
strable faith, the first point is to abandon every thought of ofPosi- 
procuring its ascendancy otherwise than by the free assent of 
the public and its leaders. Any recourse to violence would be a 
glaring absurdity in the introduction of a discipline which 
prescribes as a primary and universal obligation the entire 
elimination of force. Far from regretting that their doctrine is 
unable to acquire the popularity which would give them such a 
resource in conducting the transition, true Positivists will bless 
the circumstances which are a constant security against their 
degenerating into revolutionists. They may not hope to see 
the immediate cessation of a fruitless agitation, even in France, 
still less in the neighbouring nations, but they will scruprdously 
abstain from taking part in it, except so far as by advice they 
may obviate, moderate, or turn it to use. Besides that the 
whole system of the statical and dynamical laws of society 
allows success only to such innovations as are peacefully intro- 
duced, the religion of Humanity enjoins on all the servants of 
Humanity to respect and support her ministers, even when they 
are but involuntarily her ministers. 

Most especially is this obligation binding for the Positive 

326 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

A.ttitude of 
the Priest- 
hood. 

All existing 
authorities, 
if socially 
useful, to be 
sanctioned. 

Special ap- 
plication of 
these dispo- 
sitions to the 
opening of 
the tran- 
sition. 

priesthood, for, commissioned hj the Grreat Being to reduce to 
system the constructive transition, that priesthood must even 
now prove its true competence by sanctioning the powers whose 
adviser it is, not abandoning, on extraordinary occasions, its 
power to condemn. Posterity will habitually date the esta- 
blishment of the Positive regime from the epoch at which the 
renovating doctrine was so far complete as to admit its constant 
application to the conduct of States and individuals. The 
priests of Humanity ought, then, to consider themselves as 
already in the Future which they prophesy and prepare, whilst 
they assume towards nations and their rulers, whoever those 
rulers may be, an attitude as far removed from sedition as from 
servility, 

As, in the present religious interregnum, no power can have 
a really normal character, Positivism should avail itself of the 
existing authorities, sanctioning them so far as they evince a 
capacity for social utility, be their origin what it may, revolu- 
tionary or retrograde. To be efficient, power must have con- 
centration and security ; the relative religion, then, will manifest 
its inherent superiority by consolidating powers which rest on an 
insecure basis and are constantly diverted from their purpose by 
the cares of selfpreservation. In renouncing absolute doctrines, 
the Western nations will learn to respect all acquisitions of power 
or wealth, if in unison with the actual requirements of human 
wisdom, whatever the state of that wisdom may be, exceptional 
or regular, a point for which individuals in no case are respon- 
sible. Even where this rule is violated, the religion which 
throughout substitutes duties for rights is more concerned to 
utilise an existing power than to amend its wielder, so to avoid 
barren or agitating discussions. There should be a constant 
sense that, if on the one hand no power can bear fruit unless it 
last, on the other its permanence tends to raise it, by strength- 
ening the social instincts at the expense of the personal impulses, 
without which it had not come into existence. 

I have to show the special application of these general dis- 
positions to the actual commencement of the organic transition, 
the transition reserved for the third generation of the present 
century ; the exceptional century which in the history of Posi- 
tivism is the analogue of that of Constantine and Theodosius in 
the history of Catholicism. The two preceding generations 
■were, by the necessity of the case, the one at first revolutionary 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 327 

and then reactionary, the other both revolutionary and re- 
actionary, that is to say parliamentary. It is true, this last 
state seems yet to continue, in the absence of a theory in con- 
sonance with the facts, but it has undergone a radical change 
since the irreversible establishment of the dictatorship in 
France. Without waiting for the termination of the present 
work, I had publicly urged this concentration of power several 
years before it was effected. And though my advice as given 
in the ' General View ' could in no degree contribute to the 
result, I feel bound to recall it as a proof of the nascent capacity 
of the true philosophy to initiate a sound political system. It 
is not improbable that this agreement of advice with the event, 
an agreement in no wise accidental, will be regarded by pos- 
terity as marking the unconscious opening of the constructive 
transition, in regard to which the spiritual power was naturally, 
in accordance with its nature and its destination, in advance of 
the temporal. The two ought now, by virtue of so capital an 
agreement, so far to cooperate as to inaugurate at once the 
transition which is to terminate the revolution begun at the 
close of the Middle Ages. 

For this concert we must recognise two distinct forms, or Twomoaea 
two successive phases, the one spontaneous, the other systematic ; ?a,tS*" 
according as the regenerating priesthood gives advice to a 
dictator unconverted to the Positive faith, or to chiefs who have 
adopted it. And although the latter case admits of the more 
distinct and more complete influence, it is from the former that- 
the most important measures will come, measures suggested to 
statesmen by the theoretical power under the increasing pres- 
sure of the condition of the West. If at that time the inter- 
vention of the spiritualty meets with more obstacles, it 
remains more true to itself, as more entirely clear of temporal 
support, and has a more conclusive value, in that its advice can 
only be accepted on the ground of its perfect opportuneness. 

Catholicism, as an absolute system, could not act upon the convereion 
political leaders till it had converted them. Positivism, as a 'BaryrBot 

,.. . . . 1'* Tl* there must 

relative system, requires no such preliminary. Looking upon be a para- 
all earlier beliefs as having converged towards its own, it is the to modi^. 
more bound to apply the same conception to its judgment of 
contemporary opinions. In the eyes of the priesthood of Hu- 
manity all men are, and at the present day more than ever, 
instinctive Positivists at various stages of their evolution, all 

328 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

This condi- 
tion to a cer- 
tain extent 

France. 

Its power to 
modify with- 
ont convertn 
ing a most 
valuable 
privilege of 
Positivism. 

that is wanting being completeness. To modify public life, 
Positivism is content if the course of events have thrown up 
a paramount and responsible will. 

The condition is to a certain extent fulfilled in France, since 
the advent of the dictatorship, as that dispenses the organic doc- 
trine from being laid before assemblies, whose constant tendency 
it is, even when reactionary, to perpetuate the revolutionary 
state. The dogmas of Theology or Metaphysics being at the 
present day discredited, the temporal power can find guidance 
only in a sceptical empiricism. Although the absence of prin- 
ciples tends to leave the path open to the ascendancy of 
egoism, it cannot entirely neutralise the altruistic reaction 
which is a rapid consequence of the possession of great power. 
In fact the very want must be painful to those who are by it 
often obliged to invoke the aid of opinions which they despise, 
and which moreover they know are generally given up. It 
is matter, then, for little surprise that the infant dictatorship 
has not yet assumed its proper attitude, in the absence of a 
theory which might enlighten whilst sanctioning it. But its 
actual defects can be no indication of dislike for a doctrine, 
which, free from all temporal ambition, is ready to consolidate 
and encourage the exercise of an indispensable authority, in 
whomsoever vested. Without aiming at his conversion, the 
suggestions of Positivism may enlighten the chief who over- 
cande parliamentary anarchy ; especially if, listening to my 
respectful invitation, he adapt his government to the Ee- 
publican attitude which France has irrevocably taken for the 
last two generations. 

Its aptness to modify political action without having put an 
end to the religious interregnum — this must be held to be one 
of the greatest privileges conferred on Positivism by the 
relativity which is its characteristic. It is in this way more 
than in any other that it will triumph over the empiricism of a 
sceptical milieu, which, whatever its indifference to the future, 
cannot turn with contempt from the solutions offered by 
Positivism of present diflBculties. The more eminent the 
position, the more will its occupier, from his anxiety about 
those difiBculties, be led to appreciate the only theory which at 
the present day offers practical guidance. Without converting, 
then, either the public or its leaders. Positivism is enabled by 
its fundamental reality and its complete adaptation to present 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 329 

needs, to gain such a limited amount of ascendancy as is 
required to institute the final transition, and that without any 
consciousness of it on the part of the chief cooperators in the 
movement. Had it not this competence, so complex is the 
change, that it would require more than the generation which I 
persist in believing sufficient for its accomplishment in the 
West ; by virtue of which its ulterior and consequent extension 
to the race will ask only an equal time, as I shall explain later. 

To inaugurate the transition, all that is wanted is to The two 
reconcile once for all dictatorial government and liberty, in organic 
accordance with the philosophical wish of Hobbes, uncon- th™Diota'tor- 
sciously achieved by Frederic. Positivism succeeds in this by spmtmi 
accepting both conditions in their full consequences, showing ^ ^" 
at the same time the correlation of the two. Could the 
dictatorship of Danton have lasted till the peace he had fixed 
as its limit, its progressive character would have involved the 
removal, in due course, of a compression only justified by the 
defence of the Eepublic. When the military orgy was over and 
with it any real reaction, the refusal of full liberty was owing 
mainly to the weakness of the central power under the parlia- 
mentary regime, a regime incompatible with intellectual and 
moral regeneration. But the definitive triumph of the dicta- 
torial principle in a state of things in which social questions 
are recognised as undeniably paramount, must, at no distant 
period, determine the unalterable acceptance of the complete 
spiritual liberty without which any reconstruction would be 
impossible. 

Entire liberty of exposition, nay even of discussion, is indis- spintua 
pensable as a permanent security against the danger, a danger 
always imminent, of a dictatorship of a purely empirical 
character degenerating into a retrograde tyranny. And yet 
the actual state of things, where order is more at stake than 
progress, should of itself preclude anxiety on this head, by 
imposing the conviction that a real retrogradation is impos- 
sible, when those who call for it do so only as an obstacle to 
anarchy. Complete however as is the discredit attaching to the 
revolutionary spirit, the certainty that the negative state will 
persist so long as the religious interregnum lasts, ought to lead 
to liberty of opinion as the means of overcoming a solvent 
scepticism. Necessary as the foundation of the normal state, 
with a view to constitute a solid basis for its division of the two 

330. 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

powers, ihis liberty will at the present day be claimed most 
especially in the name of order, public and private equally ; no 
mere forcible compression offering any security against the sub- 
versive tendencies of an unbelieving milieu. The more the 
dictatorship enforces tranquillity, the more prominence does it 
give to the irrepressible questions which, with no direct bearing 
on politics, touch the great bases of human society. At the 
same time, the actual calm, under which the French nation has 
already meditated more than it has done since the beginning of 
the great crisis, evidences as a natural consequence the utter 
incompetence of Theologism to deal with these formidable 
discussions, in regard to which Positivism alone can get the 
better of Communism. Free discussion may be open to bound- 
less abuse in a milieu with no convictions ; none the less must 
it be invariably respected as necessary to the advent of the 
intellectual and moral discipline which will guide its ulterior 
course. 

An empirical dictator may be excused for failing to see the 
importance of this condition, so long as from the want of a 
constructive system it was thought impossible completely to 
extirpate anarchical sophism. Theoricians without responsi- 
bility may carry their abstract love of liberty of exposition and 
discussion to the point of insisting upon it, however dangerous 
under actual conditions its encouragement might be to the 
primary institutions of society. But statesmen responsible for 
the maintenance of public order in a time of spiritual disorder 
may well refuse so to sacrifice the present to the future. They 
cannot consent to discussion of the family and property when 
they are in doubt as to whether the two will survive the 
metaphysical attacks made on them. And certainty on this 
point has only been attainable since the decisive advent of 
Positivism ; for Positivism, originating in the revolutionary 
milieu, has already proved its capacity for organisation, by 
disciplining some profoundly anarchical natures, which had 
been given over as incurable by Theologism. 

Eelying on the guarantee of Positivism, the temporal 
dictatorship may safely, nay is bound to, inaugurate the or- 
ganic transition by establishing once for all spiritual liberty, 
which anarchical tendencies had induced it provisionally to 
restrict. Thus acknowledging that the Western malady is 
essentially an intellectual and moral malady, the head of the 

Chap. V.J THE TRANSITION. 331 

French nation looks for its radical cure to the only religion 
whicli has given proofs of its competence. The confidence lead® 
to a definitive alliance of- the two powers, an alliance fraught 
with great consequences, which is an anticipation at once, and 
a preparation, of the normal state. 

To convince us that the measure proposed is opportune, we such liberty 
need only observe that freedom of expression is at present quite 
as much an object of aversion to the revolutionary as to the 
reactionary party. Under the anarchy of parliamentarism, we 
have seen the prohibition by law of discussion of the doctrines 
of Metaphysics, which have become more incapable than the 
doctrines of Theology to stand a searching enquiry. They who 
so misjudged the republican movement as to consider it favour- 
able to the encroachments of demagogues, wished also to impose 
by law a protestant or deistical education, which in some dim 
way they felt to be absolutely incompatible with French habits 
and feelings. 

Everything foreshadows, then; the healthy direction which Eepresaon 
full liberty of expression will take, called for, as it really is, only uberty 'mme 
by the system which is destined to reorganise the West. The order than 
existing restraint injures order more than progress, for it teaches ^'^°^''^" 
the people instinctively to look on the bases of society as not 
defensible by argument, examination of them being forbidden 
in a time of perfect tranquillity. And yet, so adverse is the 
present state of things to the sophisms of Metaphysics, that 
the silence is in no way favourable to them, since it suggests 
thoughts which produce a general craving for an intellectual 
and moral reconstruction. But the work of solitary meditation, 
which followed properly on the turbulent outbreak of the social 
malady, cannot suffice for its cure ; for that there must be the 
avowed and progressive influence of the regenerative doctrine. 
Anarchical Utopias must be free to appear, as so only can Positi- 
vists place them in their true light, whilst it becomes impossible 
for jugglers or dreamers to conceal their radical incompetence 
under an enforced silence, the principal source of what credit 
they still retain. 

I proceed, in my exposition of the two bases on which the xhe condi- 
constructive transition rests, to specify the essential conditions uberty'*° 
of free expression, the basis on which Positivism will reor- '^""^^*^^- 
ganise men's opinions, habits, and feelings, whilst the dictator- 
ship maintains public order. 

332 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

No restric- In the first place we must do away with all restrictions on 

th*e°pr™a. Writings ; the police of the press, even for placards, resolving 
itself into the obligation to sign everything, adding the exact 
address of the author with the date and place of his birth. 
This condition is in full unison with the present state of 
feeling, so that any infringement may be severely punished by 
law, in the shape of a heavy fine, and on the third offence by the 
refusal, provisional or final, of publicity. These precautions 
again would be a satisfactory substitute for the precautions of a 
disgraceful legislation, against the abuses to which is liable 
the discussion — the necessary discussion — of the private life of 
public men, above all of the private life of those who claim 
spiritual power and who are therefore the more bound to give 
proof of morality. 
Journalism The discipline advocated, far from fostering journalism, 

g'uished. Its should rapidly extinguish, and that as a result of the full 
theViacar'd. developemeut of spiritual liberty, this anarchical institution, 
engendered by the impuissance of Theologism, and animated by 
a fruitless hostility to Positivism. Already its principal suste- 
nance is gone, as a natural consequence of the advent of the 
dictatorship by the suppression of the parliamentary regime, 
without which the periodical press can hardly flourish when the 
public it addresses has got clear of all metaphysical illusions. 
But beyond every other means of freeing France from the 
scourge of journalism is a large use of placards, allowing 
addresses to the public whenever they may be thought requisite, 
without any connection with this or that coterie, all equally 
incompetent and oppressive. Not to speak of the imworthiness 
of most of its actual teachers, opinion needs, as the experience 
of Catholicism shows, only one weekly discourse to direct it in 
connecting with the worship the application of the principles 
given by education. And the amount of periodical teaching 
which is enough for the normal state, is stiU more suited for 
the organic transition, when convictions ought above all to 
receive a new birth from solitary meditation, perpetually 
broken in upon by those who undertake to speak with no 
reason for speaking. If we observe the antipathy of literary 
men to a street press, we may infer the inability of the journal 
to compete with the placard, always gratuitous, usually 
seasonable, and often admirable, — the forerunner of the new 
spiritual power, a reminiscence of the old. The liberal jargon 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 333 

of journalists is but a flimsy veil, through which you may per- 
ceive an habitual sympathy with the existing restrictions, the 
foundation of their personal success as well as of their class 
influence. 

A iudicious use of placards, with the addition of a few occasional 

. ^ pamphlets, 

occasional pamphlets, — this is all Positivism requires to rege- 
nerate public opinion, aiding, as it will thus do by special 
publications, the meditations based upon the general treatises. 
Eejecting councils and parliaments, it could really dispense 
with clubs, when preparing a regime in which exposition will cinbs. 
supersede discussion without giving rise to it. And yet Posi- 
tivism must prove that it fears no meetings whatever, by 
claiming for speech, whether in meetings or in private life, the 
same freedom it claims for writings, with analogous precau- 
tions, and, in addition, a respectful surveillance. 

Though clubs are not, in a normal state of things, as healthy Their 

o ' J character. 

an influence as salons, where woman's presidency acts beneficially 
on the pride of man, yet even in the present day the club offers 
less danger than the journal. They may be useful in promoting 
the reorganisation of the West, when in them thought shall take 
precedence of expression, under the influence of a doctrine strong 
enough to overcome the tendencies fostered by metaphysics. 
They are not, as the papers, bound up with the parliamentary 
regime ; on the contrary they are instinctively hostile to it. 
The only experience of clubs has been in French History, and 
that warrants us in asserting, that naturally they lean to the 
support of an able dictatorship, even at a time when a purely 
negative theory could form only a temporary bond. States- 
men who, without respecting it, can accept and direct universal 
suffrage, should be more ready to welcome the club with its 
distinctly social bent, notwithstanding that in the present lack 
of convictions it may be too prone to disorder. With the 
abolition of the parliamentary regime, the great danger of the 
institution has been removed, for its first object was to form a 
popular counterpoise to that regime. Any uneasiness on this 
point would remind one of the childish alarms of the most Louis 
defective of the five Dictators who have succeeded Danton. ' ''"'"'■ 

Full freedom of exposition and discussion thus established, suppression 
and that not on the anarchical ground that it is a right, but as a gets of ° * 
guarantee of order and a means of reconstruction ; we must com- Metaphysics, 
plete the work by the entire suppression of the intellectual budget, """^ sciencs. 

334 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

of all grants, that is, to the clergy, metaphysicians, or science. 
As the temporal power has unreservedly abandoned all claim to 
any spiritual supremacy, so better to discharge its own civil 
functions, it ought always to hand over the reorganization of 
opinions and feelings to the free competition of the doctrines able 
to accomplish the task. If, when tried by this test, the Positive 
religion satisfactorily establishes its intellectual and moral 
superiority, then to it will be entrusted, as part of its regular 
duty, the direction of the common education, without, however, 
reestablishing an oppressive monopoly in its favour, a point 
already distinctly stated. Till then, the clergy of Positivism 
must, after the example of its founder, depend entirely on the 
voluntary contributions of its private adherents. Nay, it is 
most desirable that this introductory arrangement continue 
during the whole duration of the organic transition, first in the 
West, then throughout the world, as a fuller guarantee for the 
independence and the dignity of the priesthood, under these 
conditions respected by the wealthy, beloved by the poor. But 
whilst applying this rule to ths religion which is to terminate 
the modern revolution, it must hold good also for the religions 
which by their weakness and errors occasioned and perverted 
the final crisis. In default of this impartiality, the dictator- 
ship would remain anarchical and reactionary in character, as it 
is intrinsically during its empirical stage, when Positivism 
alone can transform it. 
How this Left incomplete by the school of Danton, the complete 

shmfiYbe abolition of the intellectual budget must now be effected, not 
on economical grounds, but as a result and a condition, with all 
due regard for the parties interested. Such priests or pro- 
fessors as have attained maturity, and therefore cannot adopt a 
new career, will retain their ofiicial salary, as, if withdrawn, 
private contributions would but rarely replace it. Access to a 
better position must be made easy to the rest, by continuing 
their actual salary for seven years, allowing for exceptional 
cases of personal unworthiness, or of the office held being a 
mere abuse. In such a measure, the sole object at which the 
dictatorship should aim, is the withdrawal of the national 
sanction from an anarchical or retrograde teaching, to which, 
taught by the past, we may not entrust tlie future. This con- 
dition implies that all the corporations engaged in this teaching, 
theological, metaphysical, and even scientific, lose all official 

carried out. 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 335 

character, but without in any way being disturbed, if they 
avail themselves of the liberty of meeting accorded to all 
without exception. 

Were Catholicism as powerful as it claims to be, it would, 
under such circumstances, be in a position largely to increase 
its ascendancy, by proving that its apparent influence is not 
due to the legal protection, which it has long been wont 
to invoke in. any difficulty. Some of its defenders, even 
ecclesiastics, have indeed proposed its temporal independence 
as a means of spiritual renovation, in the spirit of con- 
fidence naturally given by a doctrine esteemed competent 
to command the intellects and hearts of men. The Christian 
clergy, however, has not welcomed these temporary illusions of 
individuals, from a deep sense of its intellectual and social 
decline. The religion which allowed the rise of the Western 
revolution cannot be called in to close it ; if appealed to, it can 
only be as a provisional protest against anarchy, prior to the 
advent of a really organic doctrine. Since its reestablishment 
as the official religion, triumphant Catholicism with the 
immense resources at its disposal has disciplined fewer anar- 
chists than nascent Positivism. As true as it is that spiritual 
supremacy is beyond the reach of temporal prohibitions, so 
true is it that it is impossible ever to reestablish the autho- 
rity from which all others must proceed. On these grounds it 
is that the more clear-sighted priests look on the withdrawal 
of all State support as likely to reduce their body to the fourth 
of its actual numbers, not to speak of the destruction of all 
ecclesiastical discipline involved in the measure, such discipline 
at present resting mainly on property considerations. 

Let them, however, accept with dignity the inevitable, and Attitude of 
the last remnants of the mediseval priesthood may still main- to'diST 
tain a noble attitude, may stiU be of real use. In the necessary tiioUcism* 
suppression of that priesthood, none of the rancorous feeling will 
be at work, which inspired our revolutionary ancestors, whether 
atheists or theists. Positivism in presence of expiring Catholi- 
cism feels not as the jealous rival, but as the legitimate heir, 
who, to uphold the law of continuity on which he rests for his 
titles, needs the sanction of his predecessor. I here unhesitat- 
ingly renew the engagement, publicly made in my lectures, to 
subscribe annually a hundred francs to the Catholic fund, so 
soon as I shall have induced the dictatorship to suppress the 

336 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY, THE PEESENT. 

Attitude of 
the dictato- 
ri.ll govern- 
ment to- 
wards Ca- 
tliolicism. 

Che attitude 
towards the 
non-Catholic 
i-ionotheiBts 
of the West. 

Catholic budget. All true Positivists will follow my example 
and aid me in protecting the representatives of the provisional 
spiritualty against the revolutionary oppression instigated by 
the jealousy of metaphysicians. This possibly may be the 
ground on which, in the first instance, I shall be admitted into 
the temple of the Virgin Mother, that I may obtain in the 
name of Humanity that respectful toleration of his nobler 
interpreters, which God can no longer enforce from sceptics. 
It is a grave interest for Positivism to encourage universally 
the moral cultivation of our nature, which in its most belated 
form is, at the present day, preferable to the entire abandon- 
ment usual with Occidentals, even when their emancipation has 
been most happily effected. 

In the very beginning of the organic transition, a systefa 
of mean hypocrisy will, under the impulse of relativity, be 
changed for one of honourable forbearance towards the 
several relics of the mediaeval religion. The French dicta- 
torship, never otherwise than sceptical in character, should 
now take the lead in this transformation ; a conclusive precedent 
for which we have set by the incomparable Frederic in the 
full vigour of the anti-religious movement. Under the increas- 
ing pressure of our social condition, French statesmen were 
always saved from becoming both anarchical and retrograde ; 
except when a mixture of Germanism and Anglomania made 
them eclectics or parliamentarians. But as mere empirics they 
are driven at present to invoke, by turns, anarchy or reaction, 
as a check one on the other, according as they are in opposition or 
in office. Still, even without becoming Positivists, the relative 
religion may make them so far rightly estimate the wants of 
their time as to adopt a bearing as clear of falsehood as of 
detraction. 

Whilst in due measure including all the debris of Western 
jMonotheism, the management advocated, whether it rest on 
instinct or on reason, cannot accord to all without distinction an 
equal respect. It must be proportioned to the greatness and 
duration of the several churches, the two standards by which 
we estimate their intellectual and still more their social value. 
It follows that Catholicism, even as Jesuitism, must take the 
first place in any sound comparative estimate of the moribund 
churches, for Catholicism, as it always recalls the fundamental 
division of the two powers, presents us with the last form of Theo- 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 337 

logism which can in any true sense be called organic. In 
their breach of Catholic unity, the northern nations of Western 
Europe, with a vague sense that they were tending to anarchy, 
exerted themselves to arrest the process of emancipation at the 
particular point they themselves had reached. The consequence 
is, that, at the present day, we have different degrees of religious 
decomposition, requiring a different degree of respect from the 
philosopher and the statesman, according as each phase has re- 
tained more or less of the old intellectual and moral discipline. 
It would however usually be a waste of time to distinguish any 
but two general cases : the Protestantism which has preserved 
episcopacy, and that which adopted presbyterianism. For 
the future, we should relegate to the last rank of theologians 
Deists, Pantheists, and Atheists ; all alike incompetent for 
union or for discipline, they have never been able to form a 
church, and lost any useful function with the century of 
destruction. 

The official reestablishment of the University was the worst (U) imegara 
mistake of Bonaparte ; metaphysical corporations, if less costly, physios. 
being more noxious and less discredited than the clergy. A thetrni. 
dictator of energy, disregarding their noisy opposition, may, at ''^'^*"^' 
the present day, suppress their grants, without awakening any 
resistance in support of an institution which is a source of de- 
gradation and corruption. The whole of modern history teaches 
us to see in the abolition of the University the consequence and 
complement of the abolition of the Parliamentary regime, for 
the latter drew its recruits, as did journalism, from the colleges, 
the constant nursery of our philosophical and political agitators. 

Answering no deep want, the University of France is, more colleges and 
than any clergy, dependent on the protection of the State, and 
could find no substitute for it in voluntary support. Take 
away its budget and its monopoly, and its collective existence 
is gone, whatever the attraction apparently still lingering in 
the study of words and entities. As for the special schools, they 
might all disappear at once, all but the veterinary schools, with- 
out really interfering either with the public service or the wants 
of individuals. Farther on, I shall explain the substitute 
offered in the second phase of the organic transition, with the 
object of strengthening and developing such germs of recon- 
struction as they contain in reference to general education ; the 
existence of the said germs constituting at all times their chief 

VOL. IV. z 

Schools. 

338 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

Primary in- 
struction. 

(iii) In 
retard to 
Scitncc. 
The scien- 
lilic budget 
the. most 
oon upting. 

usefulness. But it is important that the freedom of teaching 
be proved to exist by the large increase of private undertakings, 
subject to a purely moral surveillance on the part of the 
dictatorship, through the agency of the police, more enlightened 
and less oppressive in its action than the judicial body. The 
quasi-monastic schools, at all times and under all forms noxious, 
■will hardly pass away before the termination of the Western 
transition, for it is impossible without its aid to secure the 
general recognition of home education as superior to public 
instruction. The government, however, without in any way 
hampering private educational institutions,*ought never to en- 
courage a practice which is an evidence of, and a stimulus to, 
the neglect by the modern family of its iirst duty. 

Besides substituting, as explained below, the Positive 
School for the whole mass of special schools, the dictatorial 
power in France will prepare the way for the priesthood to re- 
generate the common education by extending and improving 
primary instruction. This instruction, cleared of all the puer- 
ilities of literature and metaphysics no less than of all alloy of 
Theology, will become purely scientific, esthetic, and above 
all moral, by virtue of the simultaneous cultivation of arithmetic, 
singing, and drawing, together with reading and writing. But 
the universal extension of this preliminary instruction should 
nowise exempt the corporation of primary instructors from the 
general suppression of psedagogic associations, which it presents 
in their worst form, both intellectually and socially, as it devotes 
itself to the most futile of the three classical rudiments. In 
primary instruction more than anywhere, it is important to 
secure full liberty, by instituting, for the state-paid masterships, 
an honourable competition, the competitors being in the main 
ill-assorted proletaries. In giving the office its full range and 
due security, its occupants will be warned that it is provisional, 
as being an encroachment on the normal function of the mother, 
a function for which she will be qualified by the end of the 
Western transition. 

I have now to explain the final step in the suppression of 
the intellectual budget; to examine, that is, the indispensable 
witlidrawal of all grants in aid of science and scientific societies, 
from which the dictatorship of Danton had wisely delivered us. 
Although this element in the threefold reaction is less burden- 
some than the preceding ones, it has really been a greater clog 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 339 

on the regeneration of the West, as it corrupts directly its 
source in the intelligence. Neither the clergy, nor even the 
University, equal the Institute, and still more the Academy of 
Sciences in misleading the youth of France, by turning it from 
the synthetical and sympathetic dispositions which its actual 
mission demands. 

A survey of the general intellectual movement during the Academy of 

SCLGllCGS 

first half of the nineteenth century is enough to show the evil 
influence exercised upon it by a corporation, as retrograde as it 
is anarchical, on which I refer the reader to my Positive Philo- '^"^■/i- 4^" 

' _ '' s(i., 1st. Ed. 

sophy. When Dan ton abolished it, it had just lost, in conse- 
quence of the rise of Chemistry, its temporary usefulness, such 
iisefulness, in the nature of things, being limited to the rise and 
growth of Cosmology, and more particularly to the developement 
of Celestial Mechanics. Since its reestablishment, its routine 
preference for analysis has been in a high degree detrimental to 
Biology, for the genius of Biology is properly synthetical, and 
it has therefore been compelled to Form itself outside of the 
official precinct, where Bichat, Broussais, and Grail were never 
admitted. The degeneracy of the Academy would be sufficiently 
clear from the division between two of the office which was the' 
main source of its credit, the society being compelled to appoint 
two half-Fontenelles as it could not tolerate a Condorcet. Had 
the dictatorial government been more clear-sighted, it would have 
mitigated the intellectual and moral evils of this corporation 
by protecting the rival the physicians established, although the 
easier and more advantageous plan would have been to suppress 
both. In the face of experience, it is impossible now to hesitate 
as to the absolute extinction of these organized insurrections of 
mediocrity against superior genius, provided that in withdraw- 
ing their salaries the dictatorship leaves these scientific clubs 
full liberty. Indispensable, however, as is their abolition, 
it involves a measure of compensation, a provision for the 
pecuniary assistance they indirectly furnish to men of real in- 
tellectual value, at present lost amid the nobodies whom they 
serve to screen. 

Without requiring of artists, savants, or men of erudition, penHonsw 
that they should hold useless or worse than useless offices, offices savants, ami 
created principally for the support of their first occupants, the ^""""""^ ™™' 
organic transition will see the beginnings of the institution of 
pensioners, the dictatorship for a time acting for the priesthood 

340 

SYSTEM OJF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

Abolition of 
copyright. 

Copyright 
conceded for 
seven years, 
then abo- 

The author 
to be nia-stcr 
of his work. 

on this point. The great Colbert, with the noble aid of the 
brothers Perrault, originated this plan, and for a long time, at 
•small cost, it seconded the caresr of men of true talent, seldom 
■degenerating into a protection of intriguing or servile medio- 
icrlty. To give it its full extension, I propose the foundation 
of twenty annuities of twelve thousand francs (480L), forty of 
:six thousand, eighty of three thousand. These last would, 
'Originally, be granted for seven years, but might be continued 
till the tirst vacancy in the class above, where the experiment 
'had not been a failure. The two others would always be for 
life, eseept where there was persistent misconduct ; and promo- 
tion xwould depend solely on seniority, though the government 
might nominate directly to the first class, so long as its numbers 
were not full. If besides this, the government bore the cost of 
publication of works of art and science, it would give a more 
wholesome and less expensive protection than that now afforded 
by the lacademicai system. Although these pensions are to he 
ehared hy men of distinction in the West with those of genuine 
celebrity in France, I icould hardly venture at the present day 
to name twenty names worthy of the highest pension, even 
were I to include those who require no pecuniary assistance. 

The full statement of the system of measures which is to 
ensure complete spiritual liberty, the combination of which with 
the dictatorial government is the foundation of the organic 
transition, requires me to explain the necessity of abolishing so 
called literary property. 

Though it is useless at present ito expect of theoricians the 
attitude which their social function demands, we must yet pro- 
mote the natural tendency to it, by depriving venality of a fac- 
titious protection in which mediocrity alone finds its account. 
The sole inconsistency of the dictatorship of Danton, this pro- 
tection of literature is so discredited that no resistance deserving 
of respect would be aroused by its suppression, provided due 
notice were given. The decree w'hich shall proclaim the return 
to the normal state in this respect should limit to seven years 
tlie present privileges of authors, -warning them that then they 
will cease. 

It would be a fit complement to this declaration, if the 
govei-nment engaged to meet the cost of printing works of value, 
when their authors publicly announced their resolution not to 
sell them. As a final token of confidence in the author, a con- 

Chap, v.] the TEANSITION. 341 

fidence of an ennobling tendency, it would leave him, as in the 
normal state, the free distribution of his work, with the excep- 
tion of the copies reserved for tlie public libraries. Any fraud, 
however, on his part or through his agents, must be sternly 
checked by the complete withdrawal of the national munificence 
on the third offence. Thus invested with a social character, the 
writer of merit would keep in his own hands and have fuller 
scope for the control of his publications, in which at present lie 
is hampered by the interference of the bookseller, whom the 
venality of authors gives a function which in no way appertains 
to him. The author ought always, on his own moral responsi- 
bility, to regulate the distribution of his works, he alone being 
competent to judge where they are rightly placed, and he is 
more prone to exaggerate, than to underrate the demand for 
them. 

On a review of the system of measures here indicated as object ot the 

,...-," ^ f* 1 • I •■ •!_ ' measure'^ to 

belonging to the initial phase oi the organic transition, it is purify the 
evident that their great object is to perfect and consolidate the ship. 
dictatorial government by shaping its character into conformity 
with its destination. By the establishment of peace in Europe, 
the reaction which inevitably followed the revolution lost much 
of its intensity. Its justification having lain in the revolutionary 
spirit, it now confined itself to fettering spiritual freedom, the 
freedom of thought and of utterance, by a comliination of direct 
restraint with the reestablishment, as government institutions, of 
all the effete corporations abolished by Danton in his dictatorship. 
Now that Positivism renders it possible to overcome by regular 
means the subversive tendencies, order ought not to continue 
reactionary, progress being no longer revolutionary. A system 
which is, in the fullest sense of the term, constructive, offers the 
conservatives that which they have ever sought, the reconcile- 
ment of Order and Progress, whilst it stigmatizes as an anach- 
ronism those whom the government represses as mere agitators. 
Under these circumstances, the dictatorship may attain the degree 
of consistency and extension it requires, by making its attitude 
definitively an attitude of progress ; the first step being the 
entire abandonment of all spiritual claims in order to concen- 
trate itself on its temporal functions. Such is the leading aim 
of the suite of measures above set forth ; in them we have a 
real substitute for the monarchy, in harmony with the essential 
requirements of the actual republican order. 

342 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEE,SENT. 

The Dicta- 
torship. 

A purely 

financial 

a=u-embly 

alone 

needed. 

The triennial 
election. 

ivrodifica- 
tions of 
universal 
snffraL'e. 

Once disengaged from an empirical and retrograde policy, 
the dictatorial government can, and ought to, assert its legiti- 
mate supremacy, by emancipating itself from parliamentary 
forms, whereas it now tolerates them in substance. Be it in- 
consistency or hypocrisy, the concession, a heavy burden on 
the finances, and one which from the beginning I never hesi- 
tated to blame, carries with it moral dangers by awakening the 
hope of reviving a policy which, thoroughly unpopular as it is, 
yet meets with sympathy in the less advanced politicians. 

The subtle metaphysical distinction between laws and decrees 
was invented, by the legists of the Dantonian school, as a means 
of escape from the tendencies to anarchy inherent in the dema- 
gogic constitution, under cover of which the revolutionary 
government arose. This reason no longer exists, and the dicta- 
torial government, become progressive, ought to take a nobler 
and freer course, assume, that is, on its sole responsibility, full 
temporal power, unimpaired by any childish or foolish formali- 
ties. The only political assembly to be retained should have no 
voice in legislation, but, sitting once in three years, it should 
devote the first month of its session to voting the budget as a 
whole, the two others to a revision of the accounts of the past. 
It should be a purely financial assembly, composed of three 
deputies from each department, one representing the agricul- 
tural, one the manufacturing, the third the commercial popula- 
tion of the department, its industrial population that is. The 
function of deputy shoidd be always gratuitous, but occasionally, 
by voluntary subscriptions, poor men may be entrusted with an 
office naturally devolving on the wealthy. 

At the triennial election, we must treat the latest form of 
the disease under which the West is suffering, by modifying in 
two ways universal suffrage, after first putting an end to one of 
the revolutionary inconsistencies, by making twenty-eight, not 
twenty-one, the age of full citizenship. In the first place, eacli 
vote should be completely public, in order that its due respon- 
sibility may attach to the revolutionary process by which the 
inferiors appoint their superiors. In the second place, by the 
system of delegation, each individual up to the moment of the 
election may name another to vote for him, thus concentrating 
the suffrage without any sense of personal annoyance. The 
arrangement, the mere developement and regularisation of a 
natural custom, will soon throw up, from the ranks of the people. 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 343 

leaders really in possession of its political confidence, leaders 
deserving the attention of the dictator. Under the combined 
operation of these two modifications, the unhealthy revolutionary 
state ■will peaceably disappear, in proportion as the spiritual 
reorganisation shall make intelligible the conditions of compe- 
tence, and shall inspire the sense that concentration of power is 
desirable. 

By this plan, we reduce within its narrowest limits the only Thisiimita-. 

. „ „ ' tionofthe 

influence of a thoroughly abnormal character which by the ex- dictatorship 

° ^ *' only proYi- 

istmg anarchy we are compelled to incorporate with the sionai. 
government of the transition. As, step by step, the leading- 
features of the normal state become visible, under the teaching 
of the directing doctrine, the contrast between them and the 
actual state will lessen the dangers of the transitional regime 
whilst the definitive order is yet out of our reach. Whilst 
bowing to necessity in the restriction imposed on the temporal 
dictatorship by the triennial vote of the taxes, it will be felt 
that the distrust which is reasonable in a time of disorder should 
be laid aside in the normal state, the control of public opinion 
being then adequate. 

To aid our examination of the first phase of the organic Fommia ot 
transition, we proceed to state the motto which characterises phase. 
and the act which is to inaugurate it. 

Of the five successors of Danton in the dictatorship, Louis 
Napoleon alone has originated a sentence really adapted to the 
wants of the situation : To destroy you must replace. Sug- 
gested by the apparent resurrection of what seemed extinct, this 
admirable maxim is an embodiment of the truth that a revolu- 
tion to be decisive must be organic. But it is only philosophical 
wisdom that can confirm and fertilise practical experience, the 
keenest insight of which is no security against inconsistency. 
The sentence quoted has remained barren, or nearly so, with its 
author, and become really effective only when incorporated, and 
on good grounds, into Positivism. Two years have passed since 
the actual head of the government judiciously suppressed an 
anarchical motto, but as yet he has offered us no, substitute. 
This unexpected inconsistency, and that five years after the 
publication of the normal formula, is a fresh instance of the 
truth of the maxim in question. It renders France liable to 
the revival of the revolutionary motto, not forgotten in spite of 
a century of disuse, owing to the absence of any substitute. 

344 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

Necessity of 
the adoption 
of the Posi- 
tivist poli- 
tical for- 
mula : Order 
and Pro- 
gress. 

Liberty and 
Order. 

The Posi- 
tivist for- 
mula satis- 
fies all the 
conditions. 

The act 
which inau- 
gurates the 
transition. 

The omission should teach the dictatorship how important 
it is to adopt the formula Order and Progress, the only 
systematic expression of the persistent aims of all conservatives 
ever since the outbreak of the great crisis. The rise of a 
general formula indicates that the time is come when human 
wisdom, definitively placed at the social point of view, exerts 
itself to understand the whole round of human wants, with a 
view to their appropriate satisfaction. Our revolutionary pre- 
decessors alone could fulfil this condition, after their own 
fashion ; later movements in a counter-direction have always 
been powerless in presence of the fundamental question, and 
have therefore confined themselves to a protest against the 
anarchical tendencies of the French revolution. As they could 
construct nothing, the several phases of reaction have remained 
destitute of motto, hymn, and emblem. When the parliamentary 
government had lasted for half a generation, in the hoiu: of 
danger there arose, as a spontaneous growth, an empirical motto 
expressing the protest of the boui'geoisie against the anarchy 
which was ever imminent. But the formula, whilst pointing 
by instinct to certain conditions and certain existing deficiencies, 
never received the sanction of government, and the class which 
voluntarily adopted it failed in maintaining it, so paralysing to 
any initiative is the reactionary attitude. Self-contradictory 
as is the revolutionary motto, it reappeared without hindrance 
as the only adequate expression hitherto of a crisis, the ter- 
mination of which must be sought, not in protests against its 
conduct, but in its guidance to its destination. 

A general formula is always connected with the advent of 
a new order, and to have its full efficacy it must be at once a 
clear aperpu and a characteristic condensation of the synthesis 
it represents. The political motto of Positivism answers both 
these conditions, when I proclaimed it in my lectures of 
1 847, five years after the complete publication of my philoso- 
phical treatise, the social destination of which it expresses. It 
has been now satisfactorily tested and will soon have overcome 
the prejudices of the revolutionist and the reactionist, when 
the policy of the government is such as to make it worthy of 
such a symbol. 

The guarantee offered by the motto should be strengthened 
by an act of peculiar significance, in which the dictatorial 
power, now altered in spirit, will complete its inauguration of 

Ohap. v.] the TEA]SSITI0N. 345 

the constructive transition by repudiating an ill-omened con- 
nection. By nobly taking the lead in the repression by the 
Western Powers of a military encroachment, the present dic- 
tator brings out more clearly the contradiction involved in the 
sanction given by France to a similar aberration in the past. 
The noble pledge of a decidedly pacific policy thus given 
should, then, be followed up by the voluntary execution of the 
formal decree of Europe as to the tomb of Bonaparte, the 
violation of which was due to weakness on the part of both the 
governments concerned. The grave at St. Helena is more fitting 
for the military dictator than the burial of a parvenu amidst 
the crowd of French kings. The irrefragable announcement of 
a sound policy, internal as well as external — the reversal of this 
act would gain in dignity and significance if accomplished by 
the actual chief of the French nation. 

As a consequence of such a manifestation, the metropolis of The column 

* ^ ^ m tlie plaoe 

Humanity should purify itself of a monument of oppression, vendome. 
inconsistent with a neighbourhood, which recalls the establish- 
ment of permanent peace. For the parody of Trajan's 
column should be substituted a noble statue of Charlemagne, 
the incomparable founder of the Western Eepublic. The great 
Emperor, the highest type of the Middle Ages, has nowhere 
yet been visibly presented, and the act of cultus thus paid to 
him will inaugurate the transition on which devolves the 
preparation of the future by the glorification of the past. If 
the insulting column, when broken up, does not furnish sufii- 
cient materials for the monument of union, the deficiency, 
met by a recourse to other similar sources, will be soon 
made up by the voluntary contributions of the Western 
world. When our brothers of whatever Western nation shall 
pass through the Rue Charlemagne and the Rue de la Paix to 
La place Occidentale, there to pay their homage to the most 
eminent precursor of the civilization of mankind, the feeling 
will arise, that they too in their respective countries should 
follow the example it was for France to give, and atone for 
the anarchy in which all have taken part. 

These suggestions lead me on to close my introductory Efforts oj 
survey of the organic transition by an exposition of the direct hood to pre- 
efforts made by the priesthood which is to regenerate ; efforts nomai "state 
aiming at the preparation of the normal state and the recon- gforiflcation 
struction of the West by a worthy glorification of the past. " ^ ''"^ " 

346 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

The Posi- 
tivist Cii- 
lendar. 

Three de- 
grees in this 
concrete 
glorification 
of Human- 
ity. 

Chrbnologi- 
cal place of 
the types 
fixed by the 
calendar. 

Xames of 
the months. 

As the very essence of the revolutionary principle consists 
in the breach of continuity, it devolves upon Positivism at the 
present day to begin its social action by systematising public, 
commemoration, which is misapprehended by all existing 
schools equally. For this reason, without waiting for the 
termination of the present work, I took pains to inaugurate 
the organic transition by the construction of the Positivist 
Calendar ; its triumphant success attests the reasonableness 
of this initial step. In the very first edition published in 1849 
I explained that the calendar was a provisional institution, 
destined for the present exceptional century, to serve as an 
introduction to the abstract worship of Humanity, the nature 
and plan of which I even then indicated, in perfect agreement 
with their fuller developeraent, as given in this volume. 

For the concrete glorification of the Great Being, I take the 
highest individual types of the preliminary period, and arrange 
them in three ranks, monthly, weekly and daily, beginning 
with the initial Theocracy and ending with the early beginnings 
of the final crisis. In this scheme Fetichism alone is without 
its commemoration, Fetichism never having been able to throw 
up any names. But the definitive amalgamation of Fetichism 
with Positivism will be so clearly indicated in the festivals of 
the organic transition, that its enforced omission can lead to 
no unjust depreciation of the indispensable commencement of 
the whole human evolution. 

; For each degree of our ideal presentation of the past, the 
chronological order removes all uncertainty as to the position 
of any given type ; so that the festivals might in all cases serve 
as dates. But such use of them I have always left optional, 
except in reference to the first degree ; there the best servants 
of the Great Being find their highest honour in giving names 
to the thirteen months of the Positivist year. As early as the 
second edition of the Calendar, published in 1850, in a sepa- 
rate pamphlet, I introduced the indispensable nomenclature, 
now definitively consecrated by use. Its success leads me to give 
an answer now to the question raised in the second chapter of 
this volume, as to the ultimate names of the Positive months, 
for which I think I ought to adopt those given them for the 
transition. Although concrete, the nomenclature is yet so 
general in its character as to be adapted to the abstract 
worship, in which latter I have even used it for the days of the 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 347 

week, in order to restore the familiar sense of the most im- 
portant instance of continuity. 

The case is different for the Positive era, which, imtil the The Positive 
close of the organic transition, must be dated from the begin- 
ning of the French Eevoliition; it being important that all 
Occidentals should have a ready measure of its course. The 
incomparable assembly which guided the Eepublican outbreak 
made a serious mistake on this point, from its not recognizing 
what posterity has recognized, that the Eepublic really began 
with the taking of the Bastille by the people of Paris. I have Provisional 
restored, then, the custom adopted by its predecessor, on this 
single point instinctively its superior, by virtue of an irresistible 
impulse ; that predecessor, moreover, respecting the traditional 
arrangement of the Western year, from a presentiment of fhe 
reasons for it, as given in the second chapter of this volume. 

But the normal state cannot adhere to an era which recalls Beflnitive 

era. ISyfi. 

an anarchical explosion, soon followed by a long reaction. 
And yet the future were not satisfactorily connected with the 
past, if the opening date of the ultimate chronology of the 
world be not fixed in this exceptional century. To comply 
with both conditions, it is enough if we place the Positive 
era at the beginning of the organic transition, the work re- 
served for the last of the three generations which intervene 
between the extinction of Theologism and the establishment of 
Positivism. Chronologically, this gives us the year 1855 as our 
starting point ; sociologically a well-marked point, as we have 
in it the striking coexistence of a definitive dictatorship with 
the complete construction of the Eeligion of Humanity. The 
piovisional and the ultimate era, then, of the Positivist Calen- 
dar must differ by two thirds of a century ; a difference which 
facilitates our habitual comparison of the present with the 
future or the past. 

Were the object of this system of commemoration purely Porintei- 
intellectual, we might stop at the two first degrees, as con- pTses^the' 
jointly offering a sufficient presentation of the philosophy of weekiy'tj^es 
history, so far at least as regards the Western transition as a sSnce. 
whole. After having, in the first month, glorified all the theo- 
cratic ties of the human Family, each subsequent monthly 
type marks a phase of man's education or an essential aspect 
of a phase. The four weekly types, in subordination to the 
monthly type, are above all meant to be the representatives of 

348 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

The daily 
types re- 
quired for 
moral pur- 
poses. 

Supplemen- 
tary names. 

the principal modes or degrees of the phase of evolution with which 
they are connected, and which through them becomes clear. 
So complemented, the succession of the thirteen monthly types 
forms an adequate idealization of the whole past. The two 
series, as the basis of our system of commemoration, will ever 
be an integral part of the normal worship in the three months 
it devotes to history, as these sixty-five names are almost all 
employed in the concrete developement of the abstract festivals, 
as may be seen by reference to the conspectus of Sociolatry. 

Important as it is to impress, by means of art, on the 
Western mind the general conception of the past, the main 
destination of the historical calendar is yet a moral one ; to 
revive, that is, the sense of continuity everywhere in profound 
decay.' To the children of revolution who turn to the future 
in contempt of the past, the priesthood of Humanity steps 
forward to proclaim the Great Being by the honour it pays to 
its best servants. Therefore it is that the concrete worship 
should be instituted on such a scale, that the veneration due 
to our ancestors may issue in devotion to our posterity. The 
past has been misjudged, and its pressure should at the pre- 
sent day be made sensible by a multiplication of individual 
connections, to be condensed later when continuity is firmly 
established. The expansion is no less desirable on another 
ground ; it may help to overcome the selfishness of theological 
and the individualism of metaphysical belief, by awakening in 
all the noble desire of honourable incorporation with the 
supreme existence. For these reasons it is, that the Western 
commemoration should at present include daily types, always 
arranged in chronological order, but chosen indifferently from 
the precursors, rivals, and successors of the weekly type. I 
was thus led, from the very beginning, to make the concrete 
worship still more complete, by adopting for certain days 
secondary names, to be substituted for their principals in leap 
years. 

It is solely in reference to these secondary names, distin- 
guished by italics in the Calendar (see below), that I have 
occasionally profited by the judicious observations not unfre- 
quently made to me during the last five years, with a view to 
improving the Western calendar, by addition or substitution. 
The result of this gradual amelioration is that, as a construction, 
it leaves me no regret on the score of omission, though I hold 

Rs Equally ; 

To face p. 348. 

I STORY. 

'd by the free cohesion of the five leadinff populations — the French, Italian, 

MONTH. 

lESAR. 

CIVILISATION. 

Epaminondas. 

OCLES 

QER 

us 

. Cindnjiaius. 
, .. ..Meguhis, 

. The Gracchi. 

Maecenas. 

, Titus. 

Nerva. 

..Marcus Aurelius. 

Ulpian. 

svems ,. ..Aetius, 

SIXTH MONTH. 

SAINT PAUL. 

CATHOUCISM. 

1 St. Luke Si.James. 

2 St. Cyprian 

3 St. Athanasius 

4 St. Jerome 

5 St. Ambrose 

6 St. Monica 

7 ST. AUGUSTIN 

8 Constantine 

9 Theodosius 

10 St. Chrysostom St. Basil, 

11 St. Pulcheria Ma7-cian. 

12 St. Genevieve of Paris 

13 St. Gregory the Great 

14 HILDEBRAND 

15 St. Benedict St. Antony. 

16 St. Boniface Sf. Austin. 

17 St. Isidore of Seville . .St, Bi-um. 

18 Lanfranc St. Anselm, 

19 Heloise BeatiHce, 

^0 Architects of the Middle ^es . . S. 

21 ST. BERNARD [£ere7W( We Zm. 

22 St. Francis Xavier Ignatius Loyola. 

23 St. Ch. Borromeo Fredk.Borromeo, 

24 St. Theresa *Sf. Catharine of Siena. 

25 St.Yincentde'PaxilAbb^del'Bpde. 

26 Bourdaloue Claude Fleury. 

27 "William Penn Geo?-ge Fox. 

28 BOSSUET 

SBYENTH MONTH. 

CHARLEMAGNE. 

FEUDAL CIVIIilSATIOX. 

1 Theodoric the Great 

2 Pelayo 

3 Otho the Great, Ileni-y tfie Fowler. 
1 St. Henry 

5 Yilliei-s La Valette. 

6 Don John of Austria JolinSoHeski, 

7 ALFRED 

8 Charles Martel 

9 The Cid Tancred. 

10 Richard I Saladin. 

H Joan of Arc Marina, 

12 Albuquerque . . . .Sir W. Raleigh. 

13 Bayard 

M GODFREY 

15 St. Leo the Great Leo IT. 

16 Gerbert Peter DamiuH. 

17 Peter the Hermit 

18 Suger St. EHgius. 

19 Alexander III Becket. 

20 St. Francis of Assisi..S.2)oB-.-.,-i/c. 
31 INIIOCENT m. 

22 St. Clotilde 

23 St. Bathflda, St. Mathilda of Tm- 

24 St. Stephen of Hungary, Mat. Cor- 

25 St. EHzabeth of Hungary \vinvs. 

26 Blanche of Castille 

27 St. Ferdinand III Alfonso X. 

28 SAINT LOmS 

H MONTH. 

RIC II. 

IT POLICY. 

ina 

dici the Elder 

lines, Guicdardini. 

istiUe 

Sixtus V. 

olphus 

THE SILENT 

. . .Oxenstietm. 

Walpole. 

, . . Louis XIV. 
Pomhal. 

. Campomanes. 

Lambert. 

Hampden. 

Kosciusko. 

Madison. 

ssaint V Ouvertwe. 

LL 

THIETEENTH MONTH. 

BICHAT. 

MODERN SCIENOE. 

1 Copernicus Tycho JBraM. 

2 Kepler Halley. 

3 Huygheus Varignon. 

4 James Bemouilh, John Bemouilli. 

5 Bradley Roemer. 

6 Tolta Sauveur. 

7 GALILEO 

8 Vieta Harnolt. 

9 WalUs Fermal. 

10 Clairaut Poinsot. 

11 Buler Monge, 

12 D'Alembert ..Danid liernouiUi. 

13 Lagrange Joseph Fovriei: 

14 NEWTON 

15 Bergraann Scheele. 

16 Priestley Davy. 

17 Cavendish 

18 Guy ton Morveau Geoffrey. 

19 Berthollet 

20 Berzelius Ritfcr. 

21 LAVOISIER 

22 Harvey .... Ch. Bell and Barthez. 

23 Boerhaave Stahl. 

24 LinnseuB .... Bernard de Jussieu. 

25 Haller Vicq d'Azyr. 

26 Lamarck Blainville. 

27 Broussais Morgagni. 

28 GALL 

Q 
<! 
H 
Q 
H 
S 

H 
O 

>< 

o 

»-^'"^* TIm_nL9Lmes_in J±9jipH jirfl t.hnsfi af fbo persons "who, 

POSITIYIST CALENDAR : Adapted to all Years Equally 

To /are p. 348. 

CONCRETE VIEW OF THE PREPARATORY PERIOD OF MAN'S HISTORY. 

EspeciaUa intemlcf! for the frmmtior, throvnh vMclt the Western HepuhUc has to pass; the MepuUic which, since Charlemagne, has been formed hj the free cohesion of the five leadimj pop-dations-the French, Italian, 

Spanish, British, and Qerman. 

itay.5jo£ 
tlic "Week 

Men. . . 
Tues. 
Wed. 
Thurs.' 
Fri. . . 
Sat. .. 
Sux. . . 

Mon . . . 
Tues. 
Wed. 
Thurs. 
Fri. ,. 
Sat. ,. 
SuK. . . 

Mon. 
Tues. 
Wed. 
Thurs. 
Fri. .. 
Sat. .. 
Sun. . . 

ilon. 

Tuea. 

Wed. 

Thurs. 

Fri. .. 

Sat.... 

Sux. . . 

FIRST MONTH. 

MOSES. 

Tflli' INITIAL TnEOClI.\t"i'. 

1 Prometheus . 

2 Hercules .... 

3 Orpheus 

4 TJlysses 

5 Lycurgus 
C Komulus 
7 NUMA 

..ih-stiis. 

Days of 
the week 

Mon. 
Tues. 
Wed. 
Thurs. 
Fri. .. 
Sat. .. 
Sun. . . 

Mon. 
Tues. 
AVed. 
'J'hurs. 
Fri. .. 
Sat. .. 
Sun. , , 

Mon. 
Tues. 
Wed. 
Thurs. 
Fri. .. 
Sat. .. 
Sun. . . 

8 Belus Srmiramh. 

9 SesDStris 

10 Menu 

11 Cyrus 

12 Zoroaster 

13 The Druids Omxii, 

U BOUDDHA 

15 Fo Hi 

16 Lao-Tseu 

17 Meng-Tseu 

18 The Theocrnts of Thibet 

19 The Tlieocrats of Japan 

20 Manco Capac Tmnehumrhu. 

21 CONFUCIUS 

22 Abraham Joseph. 

23 Samuel 

24 Solomon David, 

25 Isaiah 

26 St. John the Baptist; [man III. 

27 Haronn-al-Kasohid. .46(f«7aA- 

28 MAHOMET 

EIGHTH MONTH. 

DANTE. 

MODERN EPIC POETRY. 

Jlon. 
I'ues. 
Wed. 
'i'hurg. 
Fri. .. 
.'^at. .. 
SlJ5. . . 

1 The Troubadours 

2 Boccacio Chancer. 

3 Rabelais Su-ift. 

4 Cervantes 

5 La Fontaine Barns. 

6 De Foe Goldsmith. 

7 ARIOSTO 

8 Leonardo da Vinci Titian. 

9 Micliael Angelo Paul Veronese. 

10 Holbein Rembrandt. 

11 Poussin Lesueur, 

12 Velasquez Mt/rillo. 

13 Tenlers Subelis. 

14 RAPHAEL 

15 Froissart JiAnriUe. 

16 Camoens Spenser. 

17 The Spanish Romancers 

18 Chateaubriand 

19 Walter Scott Fenimore Cooper. 

20 Manzoni 

21 TASSO 

22 Petrarca [nadaandBumjan. 

23 Thos. a Kempis. .Louis of Gra- 

24 Mme. deLafayette,l/mc.rfe<Sftirf. 

25 Fenelou St. Francis of Sales. 

26 Kiopstook Gessner. 

27 Byron, Elisu Mercoeur, ShtUi'ti. 

28 MILTON 

SliCOND MONTH. 

HOMER. 

ANCiKXT POETHV. 

1 .IlGsiod 

2 Tyrtajus 

3 Anacreon 

4 Pindar 

T) Sophoc]cs^ 

(I Theocritus 

7 ^SCHYLUS 

8 Scopa- 
0 Zeuxi-s 

10 Ictimis 
H Praxiteles 
32 Ly^mpn.s 
]r. Apelles 
U PHIDIAS 

,S(q'pJ 

F.uripides. 

Lonaits. 

15 JE^op I'ilpav. 

16 Flautii.^ 

17 Terence Menander. 

18 Phaedrus 
1!) Juvenal 

20 Lucian 

21 ARISTOPHANES 

22 Ennius 

23 Lucretius 

24 Horace 

25 Tibullus 

26 Ovid 

27 Luc ail 

2S VIRGIL 

THIHD MOXTII. 

ARISTOTLE. 

AXCIKNT PHir,OSOi'IIY. 

1 Anaximander 

2 Anaxime]ies 

3 Heraclitus 

4 Anaxagoras 

5 Democritus . . 
(! Herodotus 

7 THALES 

8 Solon 

9 Xenophanes 

10 Empedocles 

11 Thucydldes 

12 Archytas 

13 Apollonius of Tvana 

14 PYTHAGORAS 

. Lf-ucipiius. 

15 Aiistippus 

16 Antistlieues 

17 Zeno 

18 Cicero Pliny the Yoimger. 

1!> Epictetus Arria7i. 

20 Tacitus 

21 SOCRATES 

22 Xenocrates 

23 Pliilo of Alexandria 

24 St. John the Evangelist 

25 St. Justin St. Irenceus. 

26 St. Clement of Alexandria 

27 Origen TertnlUan. 

2S PLATO 

rOURTH MONTH. 

ARCHIMEDES. 

ANC'TEST SCTKNCK. 

NINTH MONTH. 

GUTENBERG. 

MODERN INDUSTRY. 

TENTH MONTH. 

SHAKESPEARE. 

THE MODERN DRAJIA. 

1 Marco Polo Chcirdin. 

2 Jacques Coour Gresham. 

o Yasco de G-ama Magellan. 

4 Kapier Briggs. 

5 Lacaille Delamhiw 

6 Cook Tasman. 

7 COLUMBUS 

8 Benvenuto Cellini 

9 Amontons l^Tieafsione. 

10 Harrison Pierre Leroy. 

11 Dollond Graham. 

12 ArkwrigUt Jacquard. 

13 Conte 

14 VAUCANSON 

15 Stevin Toi-i-keUi. 

16 Mariotte Boyle. 

17 Fapin Worcester. 

18 Black 

It) Jouffroy Fulton. 

20 Dalton TMlorier. 

21 WATT 

22 Bernard de Palissy 

23 Gugiiehninl ' Riquet. 

24 Duhamel (du Monceau).SoM/'^*?to?. 

25 Saussure Bouguei: 

26 Coulomb Borda. 

27 Carnot Tanhan. 

28 MONTGOLFIER 

1 Lopez de Yega Montalvnn. 

2 Moreto Gtrlllein de Castro. 

3 Rojas Guevara. 

4 Otway 

5 Lessing 

6 Goethe 

7 CALDERON 

8 Tirso 

9 Vondel 

10 Kacine 

11 Yoltaire 

12 Metastasio AMeri. 

13 Schiller 

14 CORNEILLE 

15 Alarcon 

16 'Mme. de ^lotteville, Mme. Eoland. 

17 Mme. de Sevignc, Lady Montagu. 

18 Lesage Sterne. 

19 Madame de Staal Miss Edgeworih. 

20 Fielding Hichm-dson, 

21 MOLIERE 

1 Theophrastus 

2 Herophilus 

3 Erasistratus 

4 Celsus 

5 Galen 

6 Avicenna AcerrJicjes. 

7 HIPPOCRATES 

» 

8 Euclid 

9 Aristffius 

10 Theodosius of Bithynia 

11 Hero Clesibhis. 

12 Pappus 

13 Diophautus 

14 APOLLONIUS 

15 Eudoxus Aratm. 

16 Pytheas Nearchvs. 

17 Aristarchus Berosns. 

18 Eratosthenes Hosigenes. 

19 Ptolemy 

20 Albateguius yasir-Eddin. 

21 HIPPARCHUS 

22 Yarro 

23 Columella 

24 YitiiTvius 

25 Strabo 

26 Frontinus 

27 Plutarch 

28 PLINY THE ELDER 

FIF'IMI j\iox:rH. 

C/tSAR. 

JITLITAIiY CI\"IL1SA-J-J0X. 

1 :\LiItiaaes 

2 Leonidas 

3 Aristide.s 

4 Cinion 

5 Xcnoplion 

(i Phocion E pa mi II on das 

7 THEMISTOCLES 

8 Pericles 

9 Philip 

10 Demosthenes 

11 Ptolemy Lagns 

12 Philopccmeu 

13 Polybins 

14 ALEXANDER 

15 Junius Brutus 

16 Camillu^ 

17 Fabricius 

18 Hannibal 

19 Paulus il'^niiiins 

20 ilarius The Gracchi. 

21 SCIPIO 

22 Augustus Mcecenas. 

23 Yespasian , . . Titus. 

24 Hadrian Nerva. 

25 Antonhnis ..Marcus Aurelius, 

26 Papinian Ulpian. 

11 Alexander Severns Aetius. 

28 TRAJAN 

. Cincinnafus. 
Regains. 

ELEYENTH MONTH. 

DESCARTES. 

HODERX nilLOSOPlIY. 

22 Pergolesl . . . 

23 Sacchini . . . , 

24 Gluck 

25 Beethoven . . 

26 Rossini , 

27 Bellini 

28 MOZART 

Palestrina. 

Gr6try. 

Lully. 

Handel. 

Weber. 

Donizetti. 

1 AlbertusMagniis,/oA7i of Salisbury. 

2 Roger Bacon Raymond Lully. 

3 St. Bouaventura Joachim. 

4 Ramus The Cardinal of Cusa. 

5 Montaigne Erasmus. 

6 Campanella ..Sir Thomas More. 

7 ST. THOMAS AQUINAS 

8 Hobbes Spinosa. 

9 Pascal Giordano Bruno. 

10 Locke Malehranche. 

11 Vauvenargues Mme. de Lambert. 

12 Diderot Duclos. 

13 Cabanis George Lerou. 

14 LORD BACON 

15 Grotius Cujas. 

16 Fontenelle Maupertuis. 

17 Yico Herder. 

18 Freret WinckeJmann. 

19 Montesquieu d'Aguesseau. 

20 Buffon Oken. 

21 LEIBNITZ 

23 Robertson Gibbon. 

23 Adam Smith Dunoyer. 

24 Kant Fichte. 

25 Condorcet Ferguson. 

26 Joseph de Maistre Bonald. 

27 Hegel Sophie Germain. 

28 HUME 

SIXTH MONTH. 

SAINT PAUL. 

CATIIOIJCISM, 

1 St. Luke Si.Jamet>. 

2 St. Cyprian 

3 St. Athanasius 

4 St. Jerome 

5 St. Ambrose 

6 St. Monica 

7 ST. AUGUSTIN 

8 Constantine 

9 Theodosius 

10 St. Chrysostom St. Basil. 

11 St. Pulcheria Marcian. 

12 St. Genevieve of Paris 

13 St. Gregory the Great 

14 HILDEBRAND 

15 St. Benedict St. Antony. 

16 St. Boniface St. Amtin. 

17 St. Isidore of Seville ..St. Bruno. 

18 Lanfranc St. Anselm. 

19 Heloise Beatrice. 

20 Architects of the Middle Ages . .S. 

21 ST. BERNARD [Zfmne^^AeZes.;. 

22 St. Francis Xavier Ignatius Loyola. 

23 St. Cli. Borromeo Fredk.Borromeo. 

24 St. Theresa *SV. Cathar-i?ie of Siena. 

25 St. Yincent de Paul Abb6de I'Epee. 
2ii Bourdaloue Claude Fleury. 

27 William Penn George Fox. 

28 BOSSUET 

SEYENa'H MONTH. 

CHARLEMAGNE. 

I'F.UDAL CIVILISATIOX. 

TWELFI'H JIONTH. 

FREDERIC II. 

MODKRK rOLlCY. 

THIETEENTH MONTH. 

BiOHAT. 

MODEllX SCIKNCE. 

1 Marie de Molijia 

2 Cosmo di Mcflici the Elder 

3 Philip de Comincs, Guicciardini. 
i Isabella of C(istille 

5 Charles T Si.vtus V. 

6 Henri IV. 

7 LOUIS XI 

8 L'Hopital 

9 Barneveldt 

10 Gnstavns Actolphiis 

11 De Witt 

12 RuTtcr 

13 William III. 

14 WILLIAM THE SILENT 

15 Ximcnes 

16 Sully O.renstiern. 

17 Mazarin ^Valpole. 

18 Colbert £oa« XIV. 

19 D'Arauda I'ombal. 

20 Turgot Campomanes. 

21 RICHELIEU 

22 Sidney 

23 FrailkUn .. 

24 Washington 

25 Jeiferson . . 
2(i Bolivar.. Tu, 
27 Fra]ici;t 
S8 CROMWELL 

Lambert. 

Hampden. 

Kosciusko. 

Madison. 

isaint V Ouverturc. 

1 Copernicus Tycho BraM. 

2 Kepler llalleij. 

3 Huyghens Varirjnon. 

4 .Tames Bernouilh, John Bernouilli. 

r> Bradley Eoemer. 

G Volta Sauve-ur. 

7 GALILEO 

8 Tieta Harriott. 

9 Wallis Fermat. 

10 Clairaut Foinsot. 

11 Euler Monge. 

12 D'Alembert . .IJaniel Bernouilli. 

13 Lagrange Joseph Fourier. 

14 NEWTON 

1 Theodorio the Great 

2 Pelnyo 

3 Otlio the Great, I/eiiru the Foirler 

4 St. Henry 

5 ViUiers La Valette. 

(> Don .Tohn of Austria JolinSobieski. 

7 ALFRED 

8 Charles Martel 

9 The Cid Tancred. 

10 Hichard I Saladin. 

11 Joan of Arc Marina. 

12 Albuquerque . . . .Sir ^V. Raleigh. 
IS Bayard 

14 GODFREY 

15 St. Leo the Great Leo IV. 

1() Gerbert Feter Daniian. 

17 Peter the Hermit 

18 Suger St. Etigius. 

19 Alexander III Becket. 

20 St. Francis of Assisi.. A?. 2>0Bi;»/c. 

21 INNOCENT III. 

22 St. Clotilde Icany. 
2.<i St. Bathilda, SI. Mathilda of Tus- 

24 St. Stephen of Hungary, Mat. Cor- 

25 St. Elizabeth of Hungaiy \vinvs. 

26 Blanche of Castillo 

27 St. Ferdinand III Alfonso X. 

28 SAINT LOUIS 

Q 
<! 
H 
Q 
M 

E-i 

.Scheele. 
...Datu. 

. Geoffroij. 

15 Bergmann 

16 Priestley 

17 Cavendish 

18 Guy ton Morveau . 

19 Berthohet 

20 Berzelius 

21 LAVOISIER 

22 Harvey Ch. Bell and Barthez. 

23 Boerhaavc Slahl. 

24 Linnasus .... Bernard de Jussieu. 

25 Haller Vicq d^Azyr. 

26 Lamarck Blainville. 

27 Bronssais Moraagni. 

28 GALL 

H 
B 

o 
o 

Note. —In Leap-years the first of Mareli and all suligequrnt day.s Avill coincide with the day following tliatto which they are placed oppcsitc in this Calendar. The names in It.dicj ai'e those of tlie persons vrho, 

in Leap-years, take tlie places of their Principals. 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 349 

myself bound to carefully examine any new proposals, provided 
they be not purely negative in character. I alone as yet am 
at the Western point of view, and I am sufficiently clear of 
partiality towards France to judge all distinguished names 
whatsoever through the veil of national illusions. 

A comparison of the Calendar with the preceding volume insufficiency 
brings out clearly the inevitable defects of the concrete wor- concrete 

. 1 M worship. 

ship, its inability, viz., to embrace the larger portion of man s 
educational stage. Not only is it unable on the grounds already 
assigned to include Fetichism, it pays but scanty honour to 
the Theocracy, the highest types of the Theocracy being lost to 
us, in consequence of the admirable self-denial which was cha- 
racteristic of the system ; and the result is that I have been 
driven to incorporate in the first month some collective com- 
memorations and even some purely mythical names. Throughout 
the remainder of the Calendar, the number of the festivals is 
seldom in proportion to the importance of the phase ; so that 
a synoptical table, the main object of which is to place before 
us the Western transition as a whole, fails as a comparison of 
its principal phases. It gives three months to the intellectual 
movement of Greece, whilst Eoman civilization is condensed 
into one, and half even of that concerns what is but indirectly 
a preparation for it. If two months are reaUy sufficient to 
idealize the nine centuries of the Middle Ages, the evolution 
of modern times would seem not to deserve sis. Of the five 
constituents of the Western world, the Spanish type receives 
but scant honour ; for the superiority of Spain, admirable as it 
is, is a superiority in feeling, and as such cannot be adequately 
appreciated when we are commemorating the developement of 
intellect and activity. These various defects may be, it is true, 
in great measure, remedied by the wisdom of its interpreters, 
still they are inseparable from the concrete worship, and its 
function therefore is simply to prepare the existing generation 
for the abstract glorification of the past. 

This enumeration of the inevitable shortcomings of the intbe 
historical calendar would be incomplete, if we omitted to re- theoretical 
mark that, in it, intellectual or practical services naturally are smyFms"*'"'^ 
of more weight than moral desert, our object being to under- SS'°^^ 
stand aright the developement of the powers of man at a time 
when the discipline of those powers was impossible. The 
calendar is not meant to give us examples of conduct ; for 

350 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT, 

such, in any large numbers, we must wait for the normal state; 
its purpose is to call us back from anarchy — to subordination to 
the past, through the honouring the individual instruments of 
the progress achieved by the race. Although the list should, 
after the transition, serve invariably in our choice of baptismal 
names, that is to say, when it has received its full completeness, 
this is a use of it which will always require the intervention of 
the priesthood, if we would avoid undesirable patrons. Even 
in classifying the intellectual types, in some instances I have 
been obliged to look to the results attained rather than to 
individual merit, such results mainly depending on their 
circumstances, in some cases favourable to their vocation, in 
others adverse. Of the six thinkers ranked under Bacon, three 
were in my judgment his superiors, but their superiority lacked 
the opportunity to evince itself by their giving as great an 
impulse as Bacon gave to the intellectual progress ; the contrast 
is similar between Lagrange and Newton. 
The calendar Such is the Spirit in which the calendar is to be studied 

purely ^ 

provisional, and taught, as a summing up the whole commemoration of 
the past. Though almost entirely devoted to the vast tran- 
sition through which the Western world had to pass from 
Theocracy to Sociocracy, it may be looked upon in the present 
day as representing the whole initiation of mankind, the issue of 
which is furnished us by this transition. The instinct of con- 
tinuity was not really impaired, save in these thirty centuries, 
and as a termination of them. Positivism recalls the Western 
nations, increasingly revolutionary, to the normal attitude of 
the Theocrats and the Fetichists, its aim being the union of 
the race. Putting aside the fact that the general plan of 
the historical calendar indicates by itself its purely provisional 
intention, there are details in the construction which directly 
announce as proximate the advent of the normal cultus ; I allude 
to the abstract character of the two festivals with which it 
ends. For the last day of the year and the additional day in 
leap years are the same festivals as those which stand last in 
the Conspectus of Sociolatry. 
Two pro- So I am led on to complete my exposition by two explana- 

quSto" tions which are indispensable to a clear comparison of the 
atovJf'" ""^ transitional worship in its actual state with its previous state 
in former editions, that in the Positivist Catechism included.' 

' That is to say, in the first French edition. In the second and in the English 
translation it stands as in the present volume. 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 351 

A feeling of kindness, a feeling; quite undeserved, prompted (i) The.days 

J J.- r ■ 1 4. ■ X .1. °i the week 

my recommendation ot a specious proposal to consecrate the not conEe- 
days of the . week to the several fundamental ties of human fundamental 

ties. 

society. Not only, however, is the plan not adapted for the 
normal state, where the months perform this office, but it would 
be useless during the transition, when we have only to consider 
public festivals ; the personal worship, and the domestic sacra- 
ments having already attained their definitive state. The 
abortive attempt will leave no other trace but the touching 
series of prayers to which it gave occasion ; the author, a true 
Positivist, will disengage them from this connection and dis- 
tinguish them by their several objects, adhering to the 
established names. 

A more important explanation regards the day devoted (V suppres- 

r C O J fionofall 

to reprobation, which from the ' General View ' passed into all reprobatioH, 
the editions, of the Calendar, having been introduced into my 
lectures. I was led to a capital modification of it by the ob- 
jections of a lady ; subsequently the honourable remonstrance 
of a British Positivist has led me to reflect and on reflection 
entirely to abandon the idea. I had always so far seen the 
exceptional character of the institution as to limit it to the 
first four bissextile years of the organic transition. But on 
sifting more thoroughly the reasons assigned for this limitation, 
I decided not to divert the complementary day from its normal 
destination, as given above. Recognizing the danger of any 
regular cultivation of . the feelings of hatred even when indig- 
nation is most legitimate, we must especially avoid any stimulus 
to these feelings in a milieu prone to criticism, and in which 
Positivism aims at reestablishing veneration. Eulers, whose 
misconduct is traceable in the main to an ill-governed desire 
for celebrity, find their best punishment in oblivion, the more 
effective by contrast with the honour paid to the higher types. 
A ceremony specially devoted to reproval would risk, with an 
incompetent public, the misapplication of the principles on 
whicli we should be compelled to ground our condemnation. 

The types which occupy the greater portion of the historical The Pod- 
calendar are such as to suggest to the priesthood which presides Library. 
over the reconstruction, the completing the institution by pro- 
posing a system of reading in unison with the organic transition. 
Poets, philosophers, men of science — these form the majority in 
the list of the names commemorated, and the public in honour- 

35 2 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

ing them naturally wishes to know their works, works not in all 
cases iit for its use. Again, it might be thought that all 
authors excluded from this provisional cultus are undeserving of 
perusal, whereas this would be often unjust, in some cases a 
positive evil. To avoid mistakes, either the reading works we 
should not, or the omission of those we should, read, it is neces- 
sary to regulate a propensity which has become both excessive 
and universal, and to do this we must add, as a complement to 
the roll of famous names, the list of the books which deserve to 
live. This is the aim of the Appendix to the present volume : 
with some modifications, it is a reproduction of the Catalogue 
inserted in the preface of the Positivist Catechism ; a separate 
edition appeared in October 1851. 
The Libiary In this provisional collection of a hundred and fifty volumes, 

consists of J 7 

100 volumes, more or less in constant use, — a step towards the normal conden- 
sation of the intellectual treasures of Humanity in a hundred 
volumes formed on system, — we must distinguish the poetical 
and moral works, as alone adapted for habitual reading. If, 
amongst these, we confine ourselves to the real master works, 
the organic transition will be greatly facilitated by our familiar 
intercourse with the highest types of the preparatory life of 
Humanity. The conclusive test of experience induces me to re- 
commend above all the daily reading of the sublime, if incomplete, 
effort of A Kempis and the incomparable epic of Dante. More 
than seven years have passed since I have read each morning a 
chapter of the one, each evening a canto of the other, never 
ceasing to find beauties previously unseen, never ceasing to reap 
new fruits, intellectual or moral. To say nothing of the positive 
advantages of a habit wliich ever reminds us of the great object 
of all human meditation, it has the negative advantage of keeping 
us from useless or bad books, whilst it offers the best corrective of 
such reading. Till such time as Positivism, invoking Hu- 
manity, work out the moral and political synthesis attempted by 
Catholicism in the name of God, the mystical condensation of 
the medieval religion will serve as our daily guide in the 
study and improvement of our nature. As a monument of 
the past, this unrivalled composition (I am happy to think that 
I have already increased its use by true believers) must have a 
value for our most distant successors; but independently of such 
value, it is even at present ranked among our sacred books. 

Later modi- If we treat the Positivist Library as the natural complement 

flcations of 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 353 

of the historical calendar, we use it and judge it in accordance the calendar 
with the synthetical conception, the dynamical character, and Library. 
the provisional destination of the more important table. Both 
lists are peculiar to the West, both are provisional, both equally 
stand in need of revision and completion to fit them for universal 
adoption as definitive institutions. Both ■ speak to the im- 
disciplined in intellect and in morals, and accordingly we must 
judge of their efficacy, not by this or that partial result, but on 
a general survey of the impressions of synthesis and sympathy 
their habitual use conveys. Their services during the transition 
will secure them a certain subaltern value in the normal state, 
when the sacerdotal functions, of which they are the rudimentary 
form, shall be in full and regular action. The Library, in a 
modified form, will then continue to guide our reading ; and 
the Calendar, then complete, will always serve as a basis for our 
choice of baptismal names. 

Calendar and Library — by the aid of the two, the priesthood The two lu- 
of Humanity will lay the groundwork of its ascendancy over the imiiy the 
living by its judgment of the dead, during the first phase of the Se^ad." 
organic transition. It discharged this function freely, — an 
office which everything tends to assist, which nothing can pre- 
vent— prior to the advent of the dictatorship, to the advent, that 
is, of the political condition of its social efficacy. The scale of 
its exercise will be enlarged so soon as liberty in matters of 
opinion is sufficiently secured, not waiting for the adoption of 
the three subsidiary measures which are to ensure it against re- 
trogression. Nevertheless, the direct influence of the Positive 
clergy in the reorganisation of society will not be felt, till the 
attitude of the government correspond fully to the real condition 
of things, break, that is, with the falsehood which involves the 
sanction of three spiritual powers in a scejptical society. But 
whenever, by the complete suppression of the spiritual budget 
— theological, metaphysical, and scientific — the way is cleared 
for the recognition of the persistent need of a spiritual reorgan- 
isation, the religion of Humanity will evoke a general sense of 
its capacity to terminate the great Eevolution. Whilst it 
enunciates definitively the fundamental problem, this measure 
of enfranchisement supplies, moreover, the only means of its 
practical solution, on a large scale, by the open growth of the 
Positive worship, at present destitute of material resources, 
which the law reserves for the deposed faiths. And although 

VOL. IV. . A A 

354 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

The TVoi-sIiip 
explained 
during the 
fli"st pha?e. 

Mixed 
mamages. 

Two condi- 
tions for 
mixed mar- 
riages. 

(1) Conver- 
sion of the 
woman after 

in abolishing the ecclesiastical budget the Catholic churches 
must be always respected, their disuse in the natural course of 
things, in proportion as the real decay of the belated belief 
stands revealed, will peacefully transfer to Positivism some 
temples worthy of the Great Being. 

Katurally devoted to the worship, — for the adoption of the 
worship will precede that of the doctrine, still more that of the 
regime, — the first phase of the constructive transition will insti- 
tute, on some scale or other, the three modes or essential 
degrees of that worship.. Private worship, and even the social 
sacraments — these have already begun for true believers, never 
to disappear, -as their introduction needs only individual con- 
versions, and is (unaffected by public considerations. As the 
dictatorial regime gradually arouses a general sense of the 
necessity for moral reorganisation, the vacillating or the fallen 
will come asking from the worship of Humanity the consolations 
and the protection which the decrepit beliefs can no longer give 
them. More particularly will this be the case in the ties of 
domestic life, most of all in reference to marriage, where the 
weakness of Theology discloses the inadequacy of the mere civil 
union. Some decisive instances already show that, under a deep 
sense of the moral deficiencies in their sceptical milieu, there 
are some who are disposed to strengthen their union by the 
voluntary promise of eternal widowhood, an engagement incom- 
patible with the fallen creeds. 

In view of the approaching increase of Positivist marriages, 
I address myself to a point on which I have often been consulted, 
the difficulty, namely, as to mixed marriages, unknown ulti- 
mately in the normal state, but the commonest case during the 
organic transition. Positivism alone can sanction such marriages 
without inconsistency by virtue of its invariable relativity, this 
enabling it to look upon all the anterior beliefs, without excep- 
tion, as so many preparations for the demonstrable faith. It will 
use such marriages as an honourable means of propagating its 
worship, not merely with the several Monotheists, but with the 
Polytheists, and even the Fetichists. 

Mixed marriages must be allowed only under two general 
conditions, lest we weaken the just ascendancy of the definitive 
religion by hopeless efforts, often issuing in permanent discord. 
Pirst of all, the expectation of conversion must be entertained 
only in reference to the sex which is most susceptible of modifi- 

Chap. V.] THE TBANSITION. 355 

cation, the sex in which attachment to the old forms of worship mamaa;e 

*■ allowc'd, not 

most deserves respect, as determined mainly hy the wants of the otthema.i. 
heart, in opposition to the suggestions of the intellect. Posi- 
tivism will, in a higher degree than Catholicism, avail itself of 
the influence of woman, but at the same time it will uphold 
more firmly the dignity of man, by confiuing to the husband 
the office of teacher, which is unbecoming in the wife. Con- 
jugal harmony would be gravely imperilled, were the wife to 
look to marriage for conversion when she had failed to effect it 
previously. Whereas the man, as a rule, may hope gradually 
to bring over to the Positive faith a companion who is naturally 
predisposed to accept intellectiial guidance, within fair limits, 
and still more to feel, as it should be felt, the moral superiority 
of the true religion. 

So regarded, mixed marriage is allowable in the case of any (2) The wo- 
Positivist sufBciently emancipated from previous religions to be accept eter- 
able to take a passive part in the ceremonies of such re- hood. 
ligions, without any pretence of adhesion. More than once I 
have urged true believers freely to give so fair a proof of their 
personal deference and their respect for the institutions of 
their country. But this initiative of the man should be met by 
a corresponding action on the part of the woman ; she should 
consent, ttat is, to take in the temple of Humanity the formal 
engagement of Positivist widowhood. Such an amount of 
adhesion to the universal religion is consistent, for the time, 
with an harmonious union, whilst it leaves a near prospect of 
complete conversion, one in which the heart will assist the in- 
tellect to feel the indivisibility of the true faith. If the woman 
refuse this concession, the priesthood cannot sanction the 
marriage, and the man must put it off till the condition be ac- 
cepted,, so avoiding a struggle of which the issue is uncertain, 
and which would be as fatal to happiness as to selfrespect. In 
the present state of the Western world, when the older faith 
cannot really inspire a fanatical adherence, such a persistent 
refusal would imply the hope of obtaining undue power, a hope 
but ill-veiled by the pretext that it is impossible to renounce 
a former worship. Such a ground is an illusion in Monotheists, 
for their ancestors must at one time or another have abandoned 
the religion of their fathers ; it is respectable only in the case 
of Polytheist or Fetichist women, and with them the widowhood ' 
of Positivism will be always welcome. 

A ▲ 2 

356 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

In any nnge 
the mother 
has the edu- 
cation of the 
children. 

The Public 
Wor--hip, 

Festival of 
Humanity. 

Whatever the shape the mixed marriage assume, one thing 
is clear, there must be no compromise of the Positivist rule, 
that the mother has the superintendence of the education of the 
children of both sexes. In belief the wife may be behindhand, 
but that does not prevent her being, by virtue of her moral supe- 
riority, more qualified than the husband to preside over education, 
so far as it is given within the family, and even to superintend 
the public instruction, so that in it the intellect may be 
subordinated to the heart. No true Positivist will ever in- 
terfere with this function ; be it from a sound estimate of the 
part really played by the intellect in human education ; be it 
that his strong conviction of the superiority of his faith makes 
him hope that it will ultimately prevail by its own intrinsic 
merit. 

The first two degrees of the worship of Humanity ought 
then, even in the present day, to take their normal shape, the 
milieu only having power to hamper or promote a develope- 
ment which is beyond its control. The case is different in 
regard to the system of public festivals ; and yet in default 
of such a system the Positive religion cannot adequately dis- 
charge its social function, nor even establish on a solid footing 
its power over the individual and the family. The complement 
is one which demands more complete conversions and in larger 
numbers than is feasible during the whole of the constructive 
transition. I was thus led to construct a public worship 
specially adapted to the final stage of preparation, aiming at 
no other results than the encouragement of our tendencies 
to synthesis and sympathy by the establishment of the funda- 
mental doctrine of continuity. Nevertheless, the system of 
festivals organized by the Western calendar issues in two cere- 
monies of an abstract nature, which, as such, prefigure the 
normal cultus. 

That the indication may not be inadequate, we must add 
two festivals of a typical kind and standing in close connection ; 
the one in full agreement with the synopsis of Sociolatry, whilst 
in the other the inevitable admixture of a provisional element 
is no obstacle to our fully realizing what it will finally be, nay 
even serves to connect it better with the past. The first addi- 
tion requires no explanation here, as it is simply the immediate 
celebration of the arch-festival, the festival of the Great Being, 
sufficiently described in the second chapter of this volume. So 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 357 

ripe is the time for it, that I proposed it as early as 1848, in 
the separate edition of the ' General View,' having previously 
stated it in my public lectures in 1847 ; and the suc6ess of the 
proposal has appeared in manifestations of increasing signifi- 
cance, lacking only publicity. For the last seven years, the 
true believers have inaugurated the Positivist year by coming 
of their own accord in a body to offer their homage to the 
founder of the religion of Humanity, recognized by them as 
the systematic interpreter of the Grreat Being. Completed, as 
it soon was, by the presence of women, this spontaneous action, 
the introduction of the only imiversal festival of which the 
present state of disorder admits, will become a solemnity of a 
decisive character when a public temple shall be open for its 
celebration. 

As for the second additional festival, a distinct explanation Festival ot 
is here imperative. Its object is to lay a foundation for the Mother. 
adoration, the collective adoration, of the representatives of 
Humanity, by instituting the abstract worship of woman, 
through the medium of the public festival of the Virgin-Mother, 
a festival in which the organic transition will incorporate the 
best condensation of the Middle Ages. By adhering to the 
day appointed by Catholicism, the true believers will naturally August is. 
awake in their Catholic brethren a sense of the power inherent 
in the relative religion to preserve and allow full growth to all 
the germs emanating from the absolute faiths. In this festival 
Sociolatry will reconcile the three Monotheisms, by pointing out 
to Christian hearts the founder of Islam choosing the eminent 
Jewess as the highest type of the sex when initiating its just 
worship. This festival, about the middle of the year, will be 
the complement of that which marks its beginning, when the 
habitual use of the historical calendar shall have effected a 
sufficient recognition of the Virgin-Mother as the spontaneous 
idealization of Humanity. 

I avail myself of this close connection to introduce one -*. flnai eivd- 

■^ dation of 

last elucidation of the feminine utopia, which enters into all the Utopia. 
parts of this volume, and is most fully set forth in the preceding 
chapter. 

A satisfactory institution of the worship of woman is out of Rise of tiic 
the question so long as the idea ot maternity is incompatible virgin ami 

. 1 . -wT ■ ,1 , /M • 1 1 T T . , decline of 

With purity. Hence it was that Chivalry welcomed and carried the Euohn- 
out to its full consequences the Catholic fiction in which idealiza- indicates tiie 

358 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

tendency to 
the Positiv- 
ist TTtopia. 

PositiYistn 
realises the 
medieeval 
Utopia by 
presenting 
the members 
of the human 
family as 
issuing from 

mother. 

tion endeavoured to supply the deficieneie.- of reality. To feel how- 
far the unparalleled charm of the mystical type of woman is due 
to feudal tenderness rather than to Christian faith, we have only 
to compare its large acceptance in the West with its failure in 
Byzantine Christianity, in spite of the identity of doctrine. 
So far from heralding the universal ascendancy of Catholicism, 
the worship of the Crusaders pointed to the inward exhaustion 
of European Monotheism, for from that time forward there 
was a tendency to substitute the Virgin for Grod, a tendency 
which has become fact with the Catholics of Southern Europe. 
As an irrefragable proof of the antagonism between the two, we 
may remark the coincidence, constantly becoming more evident, 
of the acceptance of the mystery of the Virgin-Mother, with 
the decay of intellectual belief in the Sacrament of the 
Eucharist, the true embodiment of the religion of St. Paul. 
During the century which preceded the Crusades, the doctrine 
of the Eucharist occasioned a marked expression of doubts ; 
doubts which have grown stronger ever since, keeping pace with 
the modifications introduced into the Catholic synthesis by the 
sympathetic conclusions of Cliivalry. No doctrine admitting 
two condensations, however compatible they may seem, the new 
mode of summing up Catholicism was an indication of the 
instinctive tendency of the Western world towards the only 
worship which can in an equal degree satisfy either sex. 

Place in direct juxtaposition the worship of the Virgin- 
Mother by the West, and the worship of Humanity by man- 
kind, and we see the fundamental affinity of the two by virtue 
of which the one is the unconscious preliminary of the other. 
For the Great Being is a realization of the feminine utopia in 
that it needs no external agency for its fecundation. Dreamers 
and charlatans are even now endeavouring, the first to smooth 
the way for the adoption of the new worship, the charlatan to 
delay the death of the old, by an effort to unite Humanity to 
God. But such endeavours, due to the increasing influence of 
Positivism, can be attended with no serious danger, as it is the 
literary class alone, — a class falling more and more into discredit, 
— which can fail to recognize the radical incompatibility of the 
relative and the absolute. This is how Positivism realises the 
Utopia of the Middle Ages, by presenting all the members of 
the great family as the offspring of a spouseless mother. On 
the basis of this conception, the worship of the transitional 

Chai-. v.] the transition. 359 

period will, from the very beginning, definitively systematise, 
and by systematising, give its full effect to the unconscious 
transformation, which, since the twelfth century, has been the 
growing aspiration of the Southern nations, and that more than 
ever since the outbreak of Protestantism. At the same time 
the feminine Utopia becomes an inseparable part of the Posi- 
tive religion, for all whose heart enables them to use it sub- 
jectively, without waiting till it is an objective fact. 

Such is the aggregate of the institutions characteristic of connection 

,■> r- , 1 ? 1 . .,.,., oftheplmses 

the nrst phase or the organic transition, the period m which of the tian- 
the priesthood of Humanity elaborates the regeneration of the 
West by establishing the worship of the Great Being, whilst 
tlie dictatorship, purely empirical in character, maintains the 
requisite political tranquillity. As yet unable to conceive a 
type of order different from that which is passing away, the 
temporal government is guided by its circumstances to respect 
a spiritual power which it considers competent to overcome the 
intellectual anarchy. Free scope, in public and in private, thus 
given to Positivism, it should manifest such a power of con- 
struction as gradually to effect either the spontaneous con- 
version of the older statesmen or the deliberate installation of 
fresh ones. This is how the opening period of the final transition 
will be a preparation for its decisive form, in proportion as the 
natural course of events of all kinds shall present the religion 
of Humanity as the only religion which can terminate the 
Western revolution. It was incumbent on me to bring first 
into contrast the two extreme phases, to the exclusion of the 
mean, but having done so, it is necessary now to acknowledge 
the necessity of intercalating an intermeaiate phase, in which 
the dictatorial power, though not Positivist, has yet adopted 
irrevocably an attitude of progress. 

This intermediate phase is more akin to the first than to The inter-, 
the third; so that it might be accomplished under the same phase more 
ruler if he could be so far modified. Tn a sceptical society, the 
change is one not beyond the limit of advance possible in a 
real statesman during the period of mature manhood. Were 
the example of a philosopher of avail in the case, I might 
venture to cite my own public life, with its two distinct careers, 
distinct and yet connected, the one philosophical, the other 
religious, succeeding one another in legitimate succession, 
without any necessity for two different thinkers, as had been at 

360 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

The final 
phase. 

The three 
phases 
briefly cha- 
racterised. 

Second 
phase. 

Three mea- 
sures neces- 
sary. 

first supposed. ' The practician, it is true, cannot change to the 
same extent, but the difference between the two modes of the 
dictatorial government is so much slighter as to justify my 
quoting my own precedent. The actual head of the French 
nation seems to me, then, capable of presiding over the central 
as well as over the initial phase of the organic transition, if he 
adopt my proposal, before mentioned, and place his government 
formally in unison with the real condition of things, thus 
turning to good account the unexampled acclaim of his power. 
, With regard to the last phase, one, be it remembered, 
longer in duration than the two others together, the prolonga- 
tion of his power would be inexpedient, though there ought not 
to be any breach of continuity between the last and the pre- 
ceding phases, as I shall shortly explain. In fact, the dictator- 
ship, hitherto monocratic, now becomes a triumvirate, as was 
pointed out in the ' General View,' and is to be further ex- 
plained below. By this capital change, the preparatory 
government is brought, to a considerable degree, into harmony 
with the normal regime, the regime explained in the preceding 
chapter, and the change is coincident with the conversion of 
the governors to the reconstructive doctrine of Positivism, in 
default of which conversion the triumviral form would give 
rise to dangerous struggles. 

In this way the organic transition, in appearance one and 
indivisible, breaks up, by two divisions, into three successive 
phases, the serial succession of which phases forms a progression, 
in its first portion instinctive, then systematic, towards the 
complete regeneration of the West. All three equally resting 
on the combination of temporal concentration and spiritual 
liberty, they have their points of difference, both political and 
religious. During the two first, the Positive priesthood directs 
its special attention to the introduction, first, of the worship, 
then of the doctrine, under a monocratic dictatorship, at the 
outset originally retrograde or rather stationary, but subse- 
quently progressive; in the last phase the priesthood works out 
the regime in concert with the triumvirate, which is the cha- 
racteristic feature of that period. 

On this general plan I have now to explain the second 
phase, for the conception of which we required the previous 
conception of the two extremes, in obedience to the fifteenth 
law of the First Philosophy. Eesembling the preceding politi- 

CHii:'. v.] THE TEANSITION. 361 

cally rather than religiously, its temporal aspect takes prece- 
dence here of its spiritual. 

So viewed, the mean phase of the organic transition will see (i) The 
the dictatorial government, now unquestionably progressive, oomoa con- 
carry out its policy by three correlated measures, up to this (jendarmem. 
time impracticable, although they are but the completion of 
the policy of the first period. The most decisive is the defini- 
tive suppression of the French army, the substitute for which is 
eighty thousa.nd gendarmes, a number sufficient for the due 
maintenance of order, both in public and as between individuals. 
This indispensable transformation,— a precedent soon followed 
throughout the West, — will inaugurate everywhere and for ever 
a policy of progress and of peace, not to speak of its twofold 
reaction upon industry. Its direct advantages will, however, 
at the outset, have a set-off, financially, in the obligation to 
extend to military, the rules of indemnization already laid down 
■for civil, offices of more questionable utility. Compensation to 
the private soldiers is uncalled for, as they have long had no 
other wish but to leave a service which is alien to modern 
feeling, so that the only class to be considered would be the 
superior officers ; the increase of the gendarmerie, naturally 
with suitable appointments, supplying a legitimate opening for. 
the subalterns. 

To complete the statement, a distinction must be made for Artiuery 
the artillery (including under the term the engineers) and the ^"^ "^" 
navy, as both require a difficult apprenticeship, and, what is more, 
costly materials. Still, the special schools for the two services 
must be included in the suppression of the whole scientific 
budget ; they are, at bottom, no advantage to the corps, which 
long did without them, any more than to the gendarmerie, which 
never suffered from this incubus on just promotion. Eeducing 
the two special arms to the fourth of their actual amount, it is 
necessary at once to retain their distinct organisation and 
make them a substantive part of the normal militia, in which 
the military character is duly subordinated to the peaceful 
function, on foreign as well as on home service. 

Such a constabulary, military and naval, will sufBce to The force 
guarantee order in Western Europe, when the decisive result of Stemai' " 
the present war shall have put an end to the disquiet, whether °'^'''"^' 
sincere or otherwise, inspired by the retrograde attitude of the 
abortive Monotheists. For France henceforth ought to abandon 

internal. 

362 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

all precautions as against its immediate neighbours ; their op- 
pressive military establishments being maintained cliiefly as 
barriers against her ; and they will everywhere fall as soon as 
by the suppression of its army France takes away what has long 
been a just cause of alarm. Supposing a reactionary coalition 
again to interfere with its noble effort to solve the problem of 
human regeneration, a special appeal on the part of the govern- 
ment of the transition would suffice to ensure its independence, 
as by virtue of the whole past invested with the initiative of 
reconstruction. 

Also for At home, the military force proposed would also be adeqiute, 

notwithstanding the prolongation of anarchy in matters of 
opinion, for, while treble the existing amount, it is double of 
that specified, in the preceding chapter, for the normal state. 
The condition, however, of its efficiency is the absolute suppres- 
sion of the national guard, a force always at variance with 
modern feeling, seldom of real use in earlier troubles, and 
become an element of disorder now that the great Revolution is 
in full career. Unable, at least in France, either to exclude or 
to admit the proletary class, the national guard is at present a 
political danger without any social compensation. In fact, 
socially, its tendency is in direct opposition with the essential 
conditions of industrial reorganisation, a reorganisation in which 
there is no place for the bourgeoisie, hostile as it is equally to 
patrician and to plebeian. Its military conclaves act also as a 
check upon the regeneration of opinion, for the bourgeoisie has 
now, for some time, been the main seat of metaphysical empiri- 
cism and of sceptical egoism, evils which require a solitary 
treatment, and such treatment these assemblies always disturb. 

•Character Eighty thousaud gendarmes, if the only armed force, can 

really maintain order in France in all disturbances whatsoever, 
if they avail themselves to the full of the peculiar advantages 
of an armed force at once voluntary and disciplined, every 
member of which deserves confidence and accepts responsibility. 
The gendarmerie, as the police, has its origin in industrial ex- 
istence, and is intimately bound up with that existence, by 
virtue of the profoundly social character of its siervice, a service 
as independent as it is useful, and always compatible with family 
life. Compulsory enlistment has never been needed for the 
gendarmerie ; its members are soldiers, but soldiers regenerated 
by the enduring sense of duty and selfrespect. During the 

( 

Chap. V.] THK TEANSITION. 363 

whole course of the modern revolution, the force rose by its own 
merits in public opinion, especially in France, side by side with 
the growing alienation of public feeling from the army properly 
so called. Since the developement of the final crisis, their re- 
publican instinct has connected the gendarmes more and more 
closely with the successful issue of a reconstruction, the aim of 
which is to secm-e the general prevalence of a social judgment. 
Such objections as at the present day may be urged with ap- 
parent justice against this constabulary, have in reality no force 
as against its constitution in itself, and had their source solely 
in the general political retrogradation. Under a really pro- 
gressive dictator, the force, as was seen under Danton, will be 
able to give the proper assistance to the government without 
degrading itself by services which are not required when the 
executive is in no fear of public opinion. 

The decisive step just explained would have been premature ti 
in the preceding phase ; the retrograde attitude of the govern- at 
ment at that time precluding such an amount of trust in the ph 
dispositions of the people, too anarchical to tolerate a regime 
which was an object of suspicion. But, in the second stage of 
the organic transition, the dictator's attitude has become pro- 
gressive, and the popularity attaching to it as such is not 
weakened by the vagueness of its aspirations. Under these 
conditions, a force which, originally, would have at times failed 
in maintaining public order, may keep down factious attempts, 
and even restrain the disturbances of society caused by the in- 
decision natural to a policy in which feeling endeavours to 
supply the place of reason. Inadequate as against a real insur- 
rection, the Positivist military force will sujBfice to quell riots ; 
and from riots it is important that the dictatorial regime should 
be guaranteed, otherwise its action is fettered by the necessity 
of concessions to popular prejudices. And although, in the 
present transitional state, we are liable to troubles of a more 
general kind, no military precautions should be taken against 
them, and for this reason, that the government may fi^nd, in the 
sense that it must and can anticipate such troubles by a wise 
policy, a control and a guidance not to be found in its vague 
doctrines. 

Thus it is that the intermediate phase of the organic 
transition will fulfil the hopes that have arisen everywhere, and 
in France above all, duting the last forty years, as a consequence 

364 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

Two comple- 
mentary 
measures. 

(2) Al an- 
donment of 
Algeria. 

of the establishment of peace in the West. Solemnly promised, 
at the close of the extraordinary orgy in which the military 
instinct had revelled, the final transformation of the army into 
a gendarmerie was time after time adjourned on the ground of 
foreign complications and internal disquiet. But, at the period 
now in question, both grounds are so far removed, that the 
dictatorship may without danger gratify the universal wish by 
fulfilling the promise, and the measure will be the best assur- 
ance of its progressive tendencies. 

This transformation of the army into a gendarmerie leads, 
in the middle period of the organic transition, to two comple- 
mentary measures, of capital importance, the one relating to 
external, the other to internal affairs. 

In the first place, to mark the definitive adoption of a 
thoroughly pacific policy, there must be a noble restoration of 
Algeria to the Arabs. Not merely is the continuance of our 
dominion impossible after the suppression of the French army, 
but it is radically incompatible with any reorganisation of 
society. That act of oppression was begun and carried on, at 
great cost, in order to rekindle the warlike feeling ; to cultivate 
outside F'rance a ferocious temper to be used in France ; above 
all to corrupt the French nation, in order to divert it from 
social objects by interesting it in a retrograde tyranny. The 
policy was the more blameable in Louis Philippe, the least 
estimable of the five French dictators, in that when it was in 
his power to reject, and make reparation for, the wrong of his 
predecessor, he made it his own, not from conviction but in 
order to conciliate prejudices which might easily have been 
thwarted. But, over and above the general grounds on which 
the act of restoration has always been desirable, the present 
remarkable episode in our policy ought to hasten its accom- 
plishment ; evincing, as it does, the contradiction involved in 
a policy which upholds, to the south of the Ottoman empire, a 
process of spoliation which is resisted on its northern frontier. 
The accomplishment of this act of justice need not in any way, 
it may be as well to say, be hampered by consideration for our 
colonial establishment in Algeria, consideration quite undeserved, 
as that establishment rests on no solid basis, and has never been 
anything but a feeble compensation for numerous iniquities. 
If the sceptical adventurers who will be handed over to the 
generosity of the Mussulman had had any serious intention of 

Chap. Y.] THE TRANSITION. 365 

forming part of the Arab people, they would have adopted^ 
Islam, not cherished the hope, the futile and culpable hope, of 
gaining a triumph for Catholicism. 

At home, this second phase advances the organic transition, (?' ^"^■'^'': 

' ^ o .9 rifiation of 

industrially, by authorising the coalitions of the workmen as fully S^^"*^; 
as those of the masters. These inevitable leagues require 
nothing, on either side, in the way of legal interference but the 
firm repression of Violence towards those who refuse to join them. 
Under this single condition, the continuous growth of these an- 
tagonist organisations is as useful in the preparation of the 
Normal State as in its consolidation. For thus only can be 
brought home to both sides by experience, the need of a constant 
conciliation, the systematic direction of which is vested in the 
priesthood of Humanity. The experience of England has, it is 
true, taught us the defects and the dangers of these contests, so 
long as they are confined exclusively to material interests, but 
they will be an assistance iii the reorganisation of industry when 
the Positive religion shall regulate their management. 

"With these two measures to supplement the abolition of the 
French army, the dictatorial government in its progressive stage 
will complete its guidance of the second period of the organic 
transition, by the introduction of two institutions, one political, 
the other moral, in a special sense preparatory of the last 
phase. 

It should be, even then, an object to qualify Paris, in the (a) Thepo- 
next century, to take its place as the metropolis of the West ; and sure, pe- 
for this to reduce its political ascendancy over the provinces satioh. " 
of France, now crushed under an excessive centralization. This 
reform, generally and ardently desired, was always promised by 
the retrograde party but never effected ; its inability to accom- 
plish it arising, from its not having the progressive policy in- 
dispensable for the change, if it were not to interfere with the 
social mission of France. Its accomplishment appertains to 
the true conservatives, when Positivism shall have produced 
upon them the impression in detail which must precede their 
conversion to its general doctrine. 

In my systematisation of the organic transition, I met these France to be 
legitimate objections to the present system by the division of swenteen " 
France into seventeen separate governments, — intendancies, — 
each on an average comprising five departments, grouped, as far 
as possible, on a comprehensive survey of their local affinities. 

366 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

The governors, in all cases appointed and removed by the central 
power, will be authorised to decide most of the administrative 
questions now settled at Paris ; and each, governing his capital, 
will name the prefects of the subordinate towns. For the better 
understanding of this measure, the principal object of which I 
shall shortly explain, and wliich will serve as a type for the 
other "Western nations, I feel bound here to give in detail the 
division of France, arranged according to the populousness of 
the capitals. 

Schedule of the Seventeen French Goveenmbnts. 

Paris . 
Marseilles 

Lyons 
Bordeaux 

5. Rouen 

6. Nantes 

7. Toulouse 

Lille . 
Strasbourg 

9. 
10. Reims 

11. 
12. 
13'. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 

Orleans 

Angers 
Montpellier 

Limoges 
Clermont 

Dijon . 

Rochefort 

. (Seine, Seine-et-Oise). 

. (Basses-Alpes, Vaucluse, Gard, Bouches-du-Rhone, 

Var). 
. (Rhone, Ain, Isere, Hautes-Alpes, Crome). 
. (Lot, Dordogne, Gironde, Lot-et-Garonne, Landes, 

Basses-Pyr^n^es). 
. (Eure, Seine-InKrieure, Calvados, Orne, Manehe). 
. (Ille-et-Vilaine, Loire-Inf^rieure, Morbihan, Cotes- 

du-Nord, Finistere. 
. (Tarn-et-Garonne, Gers, Haute-Guronne, Hautes-Py-- 

r&^es, Ari^ge). 
. (Gise, Somme, Aisne, Pas-de-Calais, N"ord). 
. (Meuse, Moselle, Meurthe, Vosges, Haut-Rhin, Bas- 

Rhin). 
. (Seine-et-Marne, Aube, Mame, Haute-Marne, Ar- 
dennes). 
. (Eure-et-Loire, Loiret, Loir-et-Cher, Cher, Indre). 
. (Sarthe, Mayenne, Maine-et-Loire, Indre-et-Loire). 
. (Aveyron, Tarn, H^rault, Aude, PyrSn^es-Orien- 

tales). 
. (Nievre, AUier, Creuse, Haute- Vienne, Correze). 
. (Loire, Ardeche, Puy-de-D6me, Cantal, Haute- 

Loire, Lozere). 
. (Yonne, Cote-d'Or, Saone-et-Loire, Jura, Daubs, 

Haute-Saone). 
. (Vienne, Deux-Sevves,' Vendue, Charente-Inl&ieure, 

Charente). 

(») Thereli- 
^'ious me.v 

From the religious point of view, the middle period of the 
organic transition will be the complement of the first, so far 
as regards the general adhesion then given to the fundamental 
principle of Positivism, by superadding its moral device to its 
political formula, still however without any change in the 
French flag. In adopting the formula, Order and Progress, 

f 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 367 

the first phase expressed the decided determination to end the 
modern revolutionary movement by the entire reconcilement of 
the two ideas, a fusion unanimously called for since the out- 
break of the final crisis. In the second phase, the true nature 
of the regeneration of the West is brought more prominently 
into view, by the announcement that the solution must be in 
its origin a moral solution ; this is done by the formal acceptance 
of the law, Live for others. Then, and not till then, will 
women become an element, as they should be, in the movement 
of modern times ; they are outside of it and alien to it, even 
after it has become constructive, so long as it embraces only 
the intellect and the action of man without bringing both 
alike under the control of feeling. The combination of the 
two mottoes will place the political in direct connection with 
the moral reorganisation, so preparing the way for the 
thoroughly religious character which is to mark the latest phase 
of the Western transition. 

I am thus brought to the point at which, to complete the neveiope- 
ordering of the intermediate phase, it is necessary to trace the Positivism 

- -r, . . . , . 7 during the 

progress of Positivism during its coui'se. second 

^ " . "^ . phase. 

Though this is the period in which the true religion must Estawisii- 
enlarge its sway so as to include the doctrine in addition to "t^trnci 
the worship, without as yet embracing the regime, the priest- '^''^^' 
hood in its work of regeneration even now, and that opportunely, 
enters on an extension of the system of abstract festivals, 
which was begun during the first period by the festivals of 
Humanity, of Women, and of the Dead. These characteristic 
solemnities, with a judicious admixture of concrete types, will 
receive an addition in a fourth annual festival, — suggested by 
the developement of the antagonism between the industrial 
classes, itself a result of the popular unions, — a festival which, 
while in every respect adapted to the transitional, may form 
part of the normal, state. The introduction, towards the end of 
the summer, of the Festival of Machinery by the Positive priest- Festival oi 
hood, will be an effort on its part to anticipate and to mitigate 
all industrial disputes by honouring the main foundation of 
peaceful activity. Om- systematic sanction of the spontaneous 
J'etichism of the race will allow us to idealize these admirable 
instruments, which give to labour its productiveness, to the 
labourer his true dignity. The festival in their honour will 
have a direct tendency to introduce everywhere the normal. 

368 

SYSTEM or POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

But thB 
second phase 
mainly con- 
cerns the 
doctrine. 

Causes that 
will lead to 
a regenera- 
tion of pub- 
lic instruc- 
tion. 

Positive 
schools es- 
tablished by 
the govern- 
ment. 

manners, as being a corrective of the popular errors which, 
owing to our existing anarchy, reappear on every fresh exten- 
sion of the power of machinery. It will show in the strongest 
light the need there is to discipline human activity, as its 
unchecked career soon involves a contradiction, in the utter 
opposition between the end and the means. The festival of 
machines will encourage a brotherly subordination on the pari? 
of all the working classes to the class which is marked out as 
the normal leader, socially speaking, of the proletariate. 

Important, however, as, in a special point of view, is this 
expansion of the abstract worship, it is the establishment, on a 
large scale, of schools for the encyclopedic education that will 
be the spiritual characteristic of the second phase, a phase 
essentially concerned with the doctrine ; this measure I have 
now to explain. 

The abolition of the triple theoretical budget will bring 
about the general recognition of the necessity and the feasibility 
of reorganising public instruction. It will be impossible then 
not to see, how completely the state of the Western world is 
adverse to all theological or metaphysical teaching— how 
favourable it is to all Positive tendencies. At the same time, 
the spread of subversive Utopias will reveal the true nature of 
the evil from which we are suffering, whereas it is now masked 
by the various material palliatives. The conclusive evidence 
of more than one contest will dispose all enlightened and 
honest conservatives to recognize in the Eeligion of Humanity 
the only power capable of disciplining the minds of men. Its 
aid will soon be in such high esteem as to inspire statesmen 
not merely with habitual respect for its counsels, but with the 
desire actively to contribute to its adoption by society. 

The impulse thus given will act on the dictatorial govern- 
ment, before it become Positivist, and lead it to prepare for 
the developement of the true priesthood and the renovation of 
public education by founding schools, analogous in character 
to the schools of the normal state, the general type of which 
will be then familiar. Such schools will of necessity have 
mainly a philosophical result, but the ground on which the- 
government founds them must be that they are to educate the 
various services which remain under its control. Their con- 
nection with these services, calculated as it is moreover to 
obviate or correct scientific vagueness of purpose, is as legiti- 

Chap, v.] THE TEANSITION. 369 

mate in the organic transition as it was in the last phase of 
the revolution. It foreshadows, in the cases where it applies, 
the general connection between the systematisation of practical 
life and the encyclopaedic training. Far from regretting that 
the Positive School is not destined by the dictatorial govern- 
ment to recruit the new priesthood, we ought to congratulate 
ourselves on our escape from such a violation of true principles 
in reference to the spiritual reorganisation. It has ever been 
my endeavour to make it felt, that the Positive education, 
common to all, should suffice for all, the clergy not excepted, 
allowing for the special preparation which is always a matter 
of free individual exertion. And yet notwithstanding, the 
transitional schools, destined to initiate the movement for the 
complete renovation of public instruction, will naturally be 
peculiarly advantageous to the free corporation which presides 
over that movement. 

To ensure the efficiency of these schools, in their particular There must 
as in their general objects, it is important to preserve them monopoly. 
from the corrupting influence of monopoly, the ruin hitherto 
of all such institutions. The empirical limitation, and the 
irrational intermingling of the abstract sciences; the entire L-feoie 
absence of publicity; evils constantly magnified by the aca- nique!" " 
domical system, these causes combined in the irremediable 
failure of a school which since its reestablishment has been 
constantly deteriorating. But the degi-adation of the Poly- 
technic school (its name sounds ironical), its intellectual no 
less than its moral degeneracy, was due, above all, to the fatal 
mistake of its illustrious founders, who thought to ensure its 
success by giving it a privilege which has made it at once 
retrograde and anarchical. 

Enlightened by this blunder, the dictator will shun opencompe- 
conferring any monopoly on the nursery for rightly trained p'uwjo ser- ° 
minds which is to take the place of this abortive institution and Is ae iowct 
all its adjimcts. The various services for which the Positive !^rned?°™' 
school offers a training will always be recruited by open com- 
petition ; the only advantage of its pupils in such competition 
will be its better teaching, and this will not unfrequently be 
counterbalanced in their competitors by natural abilities and 
favourable circumstances. It is by this more than anything 
else, that its establishment will be a decisive prelude to the 
systematic remodelling of general education, as distinguished 
VOL. iv. B B 

370 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

from all special objects. For exactness' sake in regard to this 
fundamental condition, it is necessary at this point to explain 
how we reconcile, — and we are bound to reconcile, — a judicious 
application of the principle of competition with due respect for 
the prerogative of the dictatorship. The universal adoption of 
the competitive method is only possible if limited to the lower 
grade, where, far from hampering the government, it affords a 
better choice and preserves it from all pressure. But, thus 
introduced, its agents must owe all promotion to their actual 
services, without having to stand a contest which is as illu- 
sory as it is degrading where there is a direct test for the 
functionaries. In aU cases the intermediate grade will be 
reached by seniority, allowing for individual exceptions ; and 
the highest grade will be a matter of free choice, such choice, 
in case of need, not limited to the department actually con- 
cerned. 
The services Meant for all branches of the public service, the Positive 

ijaredforare school wiU yet cxert its formative powers most particularly on 
Justice, Dip- behalf of those which are most able to facilitate the transi- 
andAd'mini- tiou of the West; systematically directing, that is, justice, 
diplomacy, and administration. The judicial functions must 
ultimately, under better conditions than in the Middle Ages 
and in Antiquity, be resumed by the industrial patriciate as 
its normal appendage ; but they wiU continue to give rise to a 
special class till such time as the chiefs of industry have risen 
to their true position. This special body, which, since the 
Eoman praetors, has been, as a matter of history, connected with 
the spontaneous growth of a purely human morality, wiU 
welcome the extinction of empirical and declamatory institu- 
tions, and the substitution in their place of schools, in which 
profane science leads up to sacred science, as a preparation for 
the direct professional training of magistrates worthy of the 
name. Diplomatists, as the judges, had their origin in the 
confusion of the two powers during the modern revolutionary 
period, but they are, to a greater degree than the judges, pre- 
disposed to second the impulse of the religion which is to end 
it. Weary alike of scepticism and hypocrisy, they have so far 
tested the inadequacy of purely political measm-es as to be 
ready to welcome a moral regeneration, the offspring of a 
ynthesis which will honour their services and extend them, 
hough ulteriorly it extinguishes the profession. But it is 

Judges. 

Diplo- 
matists. 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 371 

the administrative service which is the most qualified to sym- 
pathise with Positivism, for the regime which it proclaims not 
only does not suppress the class, but will raise it in the estim- 
ation of the patricians, as their permanent auxiliary in the 
discharge of their political functions. These modest and 
laborious servants, on whom rests at the present day the un- 
interrupted maintenance of public order in the midst of 
spiritual disorder, well deserve the infusion of new power they 
will get, when they draw from the Positive schools, by free 
competition, the recruits they want, as sub-prefects, commis- 
sioners of police, and clerks. 

After all however, both from the general and the special tiw school 
point of view, it is the physicians who will be most benefited faiuein 

'^ . T r^ Medicine. 

by the institution, as having, since we shook oft the yoke of 
Theocracy, become, more and more, the natural precursors of 
the Sociocratic priesthood. The tendency of modern science 
to degenerate into academical pedantry shocks at once their 
social aspirations and their predisposition to synthesis, as it 
transfers to the cosmologists, and more especially to the geo- 
metricians, that leadership in science, which, as the result of 
the Middle Ages, normally devolved on the biologists. More 
fully emancipated, more progressive than any other class, the 
physicians, though a provisional class, alone knew how to use 
aright the just censure of Moli^re, being stimulated by it to 
shake off the fetters of Metaphysics and literature, with the 
result of becoming the best support of nascent Positivism. 
Though I have always spoken freely of the materialism and the 
venality of the profession, I always found there valuable sym- 
pathies with the Positive teaching, as a doctrine which raises 
its social importance and its scientific independence by incor- 
porating its function into those of the priesthood of Humanity. 
In this historical judgment, it is not solely nor even chiefly 
the pure biologists that I have in view ; they are already too 
deteriorated by the academical indiscipline to be qualified for 
hearty cooperation in the work of mental and moral reorgan- 
isation. I have more confidence in the higher order of prac- 
titioners, whose apparent contempt of medical theories is but 
the expression of their instinctive sense of the futility of 
partial syntheses. At bottom, they are the most predisposed 
of all to promote the regeneration of their profession, one in 

B s 2 

372 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

Measiu'es for 
the regene- 
ration of the 
medical pro- 
fession, 

Hospitals. 

Degrees 
abolished, 
and all medi- 
cal corpora- 
tions, nurs- 
ing institu- 
tions in- 
cluded. 

which the higher minds have constantly to strive against 
imminent degradation. 

Such considerations as these led me, when planning the 
transitional institution of Positive schools, to treat them as 
especially meant for the medical profession in the ordinary sense 
of the term. Such schools may act directly on the doctors, on 
whom the government confers a legal status by entrusting them 
with a sanitary office, such trust justitying it in exacting certain 
intellectual and moral conditions. The intellectual guarantee 
will be a consequence of their encyclopaedic training, the type 
of which is given in the Positive school ; to satisfy the moral 
will consist in their formally renouncing all private practice, in 
order to devote themselves properly to the service of the public, 
such service of course to be suitably remunerated. Three grades 
in succession, determined, as in other cases, by competition, 
seniority, and choice, will receive annual salaries of three 
thousand, six thousand, and twelve thousand francs, the same 
scale as the priesthood. To encourage hierarchical subordina- 
tion in a class which, in its own nature, is averse to discipline, 
each functionary will superintend the practice, whether it be 
the treatment of persons or the service of public health, of the 
two physicians beneath him in rank who shall be specially 
attached to him. Hospitals are an institution exclusively 
adapted to the Middle Ages and destined to disappear utterly, 
in proportion as the increase of material comfort, coinciding 
with increased selfrespect in the working classes, shall allow us 
to substitute for a degrading assistance the careful attention of 
the family. But the change must be gradual, and it is 
desirable to further it by establishing on a large scale, during 
the whole course of the transitional period, public physicians 
with the duty of directing gratuitously the medical treatment 
of patients at their own homes. 

To complete the regeneration of the medical profession we 
must rid it of a mischievous monopoly, and of alien assistants. 
The legal privilege conferred by the doctor's degree really 
only benefits the charlatan from whom it apparently protects 
the public, whereas there is no real protection for it against 
the practical consequences of our intellectual anarchy, aggra- 
vated as it is by ignorance and credulity. This legal sanction 
is the main support of an useless course of instruction, which 
would ere this have fallen into discredit, were it not for this 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 373 

power of conferrmg a monopoly of medical advice. At issue 
alike with the dignity of the priesthood and with spiritual 
freedom, the rule is a clog at once on the affectionate care ' of 
women and the generosity of the patrician class. But whilst 
we put an end to this oppressive influence at headquarters, we 
must not respect it in the subalterns, with whom its evils are 
often increased by superstition and hypocrisy. Involved in 
the general suppression of the ecclesiastical budget, the cor- 
porations, above all those of women, on which the reactionary 
movement conferred the monopoly of nursing, will thus lose, 
without hope of recovery, a privilege of which all physicians 
feel the inconveniences, both in public and private life. If 
anyone wishes to devote himself to the service of the sick, for a 
time or for a permanence, he should be able to do so freely, 
without joining or being dependent on any brotherhood or sister- 
hood, where pride and vanity are fostered under the cloke of a 
selfdevotion more apparent than real. 

The destination of the Positive schools during the transition General oi- 
having been sufiiciently explained, we must give the general the Positive 
plan of their organisation, which will most differ from that of 
the normal state in that the pupils are secluded during the 
three years of their encyclopaedic noviciate. This exceptional 
measure rests on the necessity of withdrawing a picked body of 
young men from the influences of the sceptical and corrupt 
milieu which they are to be one great means of regenerating. 
If magistrates, diplomatists, administrators, and above all 
physicians are to become, by training, the auxiliaries or pre- 
cursors of the Positive priesthood, it is allimportant that during 
their intellectual and moral instruction they be not exposed to 
the disturbing influences of such milieu. But the risks of the 
scholastic cloister-life will be diminished by the age of the pupils, 
an age allowing in aU cases the previous careful cultivation of 
the domestic affections, none being admitted tiU after the com- 
pletion of their twentieth year. A competent governor, usually 
chosen from the retired practicians, will make it his especial 
aim to encourage in the school the continual subordination of 
the intellect to the heart, in view of a social mission with no 
alloy of monopoly, with the further aid derived from the 
diversity of callings and classes. 

The better to attain the grand object of the institution, it is The school 

open to all 

urgent that the French nation, which is to bear the whole ex- the western 

Nations. 

374 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

All will be 
able to uti- 
lise their 
final certi- 
ficate. 

The lan- 
guages to 

A eehnol in 
each of the 
17 ffoveni- 
ments. 

pense, should use it to evidence the Occidental character of its 
action, by throwing it open within due limits to each of its 
immediate neighbours. During the whole of their existence, 
however, and it has a natural limit in the organic transition, the 
schools must not admit candidates from nations not included 
in the advanced guard of Humanity, a restriction intended to 
preserve the homogeneous character requisite for their success. 
But, as the instruction will always be public, the Eastern 
populations may be represented by out-pupils, most frequently 
volunteers, but at times specially nominated in accordance 
with the wishes of the government whose subjects they are. 

There is no reason to fear that the want of a direct social 
mission will isolate the other pupils from the French, in such a 
way as to diminish energy and the continuity of exertions, 
from a disparity in zeal in two groups of invariably equal 
numbers. The non-existence of any monopoly places both on 
an equality of uncertainty in reference to their future career, 
any claims they may have being derived exclusively from an 
education and a reputation which they share in common. As 
the particular grounds on which the encyclopedic institution 
rests for its justification are of universal application, the pupils 
from the other Western nations, admitted, educated, and judged 
in the same way as the French, will turn to as good purpose as 
these last their final diploma. 

To give freer play to the intellectual and moral influences 
of such intermixture of the nations, the French candidates 
are to know two "Western languages, one Southern, the other 
Northern, and all the pupils will be bound to acquire by their 
own efforts, during their noviciate of three years, the Western 
languages they do not know. This regulation includes also 
the two sources of Western miity, as a consequence of the 
obligation to bring with them a knowledge of Latin and to 
acquire that of Greek. By putting the heavier pressure on the 
nation, which least recognises the common duty, to make it learn 
the languages of its neighbours, the law will be a wholesome 
stimulus to it to promote the formation of one universal 
language, a process at once spontaneous and systematic. 

Considering the nature and aim of the Positive school, its 
normal type must be established at Paris, a hundred French 
candidates being annually admitted, with twenty-five from each 
of the other populations, Italian, Spanish, British and German. 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 375 

At no great interval, however, the . central dictatorial govern- 
ment should form a similar school in each provincial capital, 
with half the above numbers, but in all cases with a total of 
the "Western pupils equal to the total of the French. The 
permanent need of unity of direction and of discipline in these 
seventeen nurseries will natm-ally induce the executive power 
to entrust their government and the choice of all their func- 
tionaries to the head of the Positive priesthood, alone competent 
to the task. The first recognition by the State of the High 
Priest of Humanity will consequently be in his quality of 
Director-Greneral of the Positive schools. By discharging the 
office gratuitously, he will maiatain the independence which 
his nomination to this post implies and facilitates, not letting 
himself be drawn by any seduction to depend for his subsistence 
on aught but the voluntary contributions of the true believers. 

I may here dispense with any explanations as to the ency- course o£ 
clopsedic teaching, the only difference between the transitional ^ " ^" 
and the final state, in regard to it, being the reduction of the 
noviciate to three years, each year devoted to one of the three 
pairs of abstract sciences. The last year alone will have three 
courses of lectures, the object being that Biology and Sociology 
may lead up to and end in Morals, first as science, then as 
art. Each of the seven courses, which are always in succes- 
sion, never simultaneous, will consist, as in the normal state, of 
forty lectures, three a week, with a month for preparation and 
examination between the two subjects of each year, so as to 
leave three months' vacation after devoting ten weeks to the 
final examinations. But in the last year it will be necessary 
to have four lectures in the week, and to suppress the usual 
interval, for which there is not the same necessity, as the period 
of leaving is at hand. In regard to the first pair of sciences, 
the exceptional duplication of lectures is not necessary, owing 
to the knowledge previously acquired by the candidates, who 
are bound to know all the theories of geometry and mechanics 
which are fairly independent of the transcendental calculus. 
The better to ensure the synthetical character of the teaching, 
the courses of lectures, which begin each year after the festival 
of Humanity, will be preceded, in the case of the new students, 
by seven lectures on the First Philosophy. The great guarantee, 
however, that the teaching will not degenerate into mere 
academical pedantry, will, as in the normal state, be the obli- 

376 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

The Pro- 
fessors. 

The exami- 
nations, by 
■whom con- 
ducted. 

gation on each professor to take the same pupils through the 
seven phases of their noviciate. 

The professors by this arrangement being reduced to three, 
provision may be made for their choice, at the very beginning 
of the organic transition, by watching the essays at philoso- 
phical instruction of the people which will follow quite naturally 
on the abolition of the theoretical budget. If, against all 
probability, professors of a really encyclopaedic capacity are not 
thrown up in this way, even for Paris, during the second phase, 
the Pontiff would urge the dictator to adjourn the creation of 
,the school till such time as this fundamental condition were 
satisfactorily met. On its fulfilment must mainly depend the 
extension of the Positive schools to the several provinces, by 
availing ourselves of the best products of the central school. 

As the teaching will occupy less time during the first two 
years, the professors of those two years will divide between them 
the examinations of those who are leaving, examinations on 
the three courses of the last year and, besides this, on the 
whole of their preceding studies, to be conducted with the same 
publicity as the lectures. But the examinations at the end of 
each of the two first years, and all the intermediate examina- 
tions, at which all pupils and the public will always be allowed 
to be present, require two special functionaries, each of the 
two examining the same pupils both years. Besides these 
examiners, to ensure success in study and to superintend the 
moral conduct, there must be two inspectors, on whom devolves 
the duty of questioning in public the three divisions, once a 
week, on the lectures of the preceding months, including the 
knowledge they brought with them at their admission, which 
is now revised from a philosophical point of view. Every 
Positive School, then, will require only seven scientific teachers, 
appointed as elsewhere by competition, seniority, and selection, 
with the salaries of three thousand, six thousand, and twelve 
thousand francs per annum — the scale of the priesthood. All 
must reside within the establishment, for the better performance 
of their office, as much a moral as an intellectual office, and 
the better to deserve the personal respect which their functions 
exact. No one of them may have any employment besides his 
post in the establishment, not even the two inspectors, when 
once definitively installed after three years of probation. It 
is desirable to introduce also, during the transition, the same 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 377 

conditions of age as for the Positivist clergy, conferring the 
three degrees in teaching at twenty-eight, thirty-five, and 
forty -two, with individual exceptions, rarer at this time than 
in the final state. 

The schools are, in the main, schools for scientific teaching, Lessona 
yet it is essential to persevere in the esthetic culture of the 
period before admission; for at their admission the candidates 
will have given proof of sufficient familiarity with singing and 
drawing. For these two arts a master from without will be 
required, with an income of nine thousand francs and the 
obligation to have no other engagement. These functionaries 
will have to direct and judge the graduated exercises, both 
active and passive, in the three divisions, the music master in 
winter, the drawing master in summer ; and besides this, their 
main duty will consist iii giving one weekly lecture to each 
group throughout the duration of the scientific lectures. The 
teaching on these subjects may be made more philosophical in 
character than any other, as it may introduce the study, both 
historically and dogmatically, of the language of music and 
the plastic arts. It will cultivate the sense of unity, statical 
and dynamical unity, by showing the dependence of the special 
arts of sound and of form on their common source in poetry, 
so tempering wisely by idealisation the intrinsic dryness of 
scientific abstraction. 

To secure the full efficiency, intellectual and social, of the instruction 
Positive schools, it is most important that the admission of careta°tiie 
candidates be so managed as that every guarantee be taken caSSwatea" 
against the waste of the very considerable funds they will re- qaiite.' 
quire, when established on a scale in accordance with the wants ' 
of the transitional period. Though the gratuitousness which is 
inseparable from the encyclopaedic instruction must, in the 
normal state, apply in all cases whatsoever, yet here, efforts, 
made at proportionately greater cost, will, at first, be limited to 
such as are capable of actively promoting the systematic re- 
generation of the West. There must therefore be a careful 
selection of them from all ranks in the five advanced popula- 
tions, and the selection must be made by seven officers 
appointed for the purpose, they too named by the director- 
general of the Positive schools, and each receiving an income of 
twelve thousand francs. 

It must be their duty to give two successive judgments, the 

378 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

Two succes- 
sive tests, 
one of admis- 
sibility, the 
other for 
admission. 

Cost of these 
schools. 

one of admissibility, the other for admission, the first in the 
spring, the second in the autumn. For the first, the French 
candidate has simply to repair to the capital of his province, 
the candidates of the other Western nations to Eome, Madrid, 
London, or Vienna, according to their country, European or 
colonial. After having divided amongst themselves the ex- 
amination of Paris, the seven judges will take between them 
the four national capitals and the sixteen provincial capitals 
in order to pronounce on the admissibility of candidates, the 
tests being first a written, then an oral, examination in science, 
combined with exercises in art and testimonials of moral con- 
duct. They will reject without examination candidates after 
three failures, so avoiding, as far as possible, useless attempts 
and ill-considered efforts. The provisional candidates so 
chosen will repair to Paris, at the expense of the French nation, 
there to undergo the examination for admission, three months 
after they have been declared admissible. The seven judges 
will divide this examination between them, each classifying 
the candidates he examines only so far as is necessary for the 
final decision, thus avoiding all mischievous emulation. On 
the termination of their several decisions, the seven will meet 
to complete their work, by naming the particular school out of 
the seventeen, which each of the candidates chosen is to join, 
in order to begin, at the winter solstice, his encyclopaedic educa- 
tion. 

It were well to place the preceding scheme before us as a 
whole, by summarising the extent of the organisation I have ex- 
plained, and its cost. Each Positive school requires only eleven 
officers; two being practical: the governor invested with the gene- 
ral control of the whole ; the steward on whom rest the business 
arrangements. If we assign these two, incomes of twenty thou- 
sand and eight thousand francs, we see, on reference to the other 
salaries, that a hundred thousand francs yearly sufl&ce for the offi- 
cials of each establishment, allowing a satisfactory payment to 
each. Estimating the annual expense of each scholar at a thou- 
sand francs, the seventeen schools together, at their full comple- 
ment of five thousand students, will cost seven millions of francs 
(280,000^.) and require two hundred functionaries, including the 
judges of admission. Such is the cost of an institution which 
is to supply, each year, for the different services in France 
nine hundred weU-trained members, and distributes the same 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 379 

number of rightly cultivated minds among the four adjacent 
nations, at an expense for each noviciate of four thousand francs. 

The professional complement of the institution should in special pro- 
ail cases be practice, under the superintendence of the chiei training. 
concerned, not requiring from him any teaching properly so 
called. This rule must apply even in the case of the medical 
body, in reference to which all who appreciate the above insti- 
tution will not regret the existing schools, hopelessly deteriorated, 
even in France, by ontology or materialism. Doctors may be 
formed everywhere, as they are in England, by practice well 
directed, especially when they have duly passed through the 
encyclopsedic curriculum, and no other at the present day de- 
serves the protection of the government, given with a view to 
the creation of the definitive order. 

For such a preparation hospitals mav be quite dispensed Thehospi- 
With : yet as the institution is to subsist till the end of the utilised tor 

■^ . clinical iu- 

Western transition, we must turn to use its latest form, by struotion. 
connecting it with the professional training in medicine of 
those who adopt that profession after their systematic education. 
The pupils of the Positive schools who aspire to be physicians 
will form pairs, each pair receiving, during three years, clinical 
instruction from one of the four physicians of the second grade 
attached to the hospital. An allowance of fifteen hundred 
francs yearly wiU provide for the maintenance of the candidate 
during this noviciate, at the end of which his position must 
depend on the open competition by which he is to enter the 
public health service. 

His practical studies during the above period will be practical 
systematised' chiefly by the reflections suggested by well- ^ " '^^' 
directed reading, under the general impulse of the theories of 
Biology. But, as an aid, he will have the explanations regularly 
given by the three other functionaries of the hospital. During 
his first year of clinical teaching, one of the two ordinary physi- 
cians will treat, once a week, of the diseases of organic life, in 
a series of forty lectures methodically arranged. Similarly, his 
colleague will examine, in the following year, the diseases of 
animal life properly so called. On the basis of these two series, 
the senior physician will devote the last year to the explanation 
of brain diseases and general pathology. 

I am thus brought to the last point in the complete ap- The hos- 
preciation of the Positive school^ the description, that is, of the ^^^^' 

380 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

latest form of this provisional institution, the hospital, an 
institution which, wisely reorganised, may do good service, 
prior to the adoption of the normal practice towards which it is 
to be a step. Seven physicians carefully chosen, and above 
money considerations, will be devoted exclusively to the hospi- 
tal, each treating forty cases in addition to the gratuitous 
advice given weekly by the physicians of the second grade to 
out-patients. The direction is to centre wholly in the prin- 
cipal physician, his residence and his office being on the ground 
floor, whilst his six assistants occupy an adjoining house. The 
hospital will be in three storeys, each storey with seven wards, 
with no communication between the wards except by a com- 
mon corridor, spacious enough to serve as a walk for the 
convalescents who are unable to go down into the garden. 
Each ward is to be broken up into thirteen rooms by fixed 
partitions, with a window for each of the thirteen. 
The sanitary The chief towu of each province (or intendancy ) will have 

service iiii i 

under the three hospitals thus arranged, so providing for the separate treat- 
Generai of mcut of the sexes, and of children and old men. The depart- 

the Positive 

Schools. ment of public health will be placed, for the whole of France, 
under the control of the Director-General of the Positive 
schools, with complete independence of the government, except 
as to the expenses. This extension of the prerogative he enjoys 
in regard to instruction will betoken the ultimate position of 
the medical function as an appendage to the priesthood of 
Humanity. 

Postmortem By such a regime, the principal abuses now existing are set 

examina- . *' o ^ jr jr ... 

tions. aside at once, more particularly post-mortem examinations, in 

regard to which in the present anarchical state of "Western 
Europe unworthy advantage is taken of the poverty of the 
proletary. The dissection of the liuman body, a practice coeval 
with the modem revolution, ought by this time to have done 
its work of preparation. But, if five centuries of iU-directed 
efforts are not sufiBcient, Positivism will enforce an universal 
respect for the dignity of the poor, which Catholicism in its 
decline was unable to protect. In the hospital, as elsewhere, 
none will be subject to the outrage of an autopsy without his own 
free consent, ratified subsequently by his family. Physicians 
must have but a feeble conviction of the necessity of such 
examination, for those who most loudly advocate it seldom 
direct their own bodies to be submitted to it. 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 381 

Among the physicians supplied by the Positive school. Abetter 
the normal feeling on the subject will soon spring up, under wiiisuper- 
the influence of the habits formed by their encyclopaedic edu- necessity. 
cation, an education in which the rational use of induction 
and deduction will dispense with observations as irrational 
as they are immoral. I congratulate myself on having gone 
through all my studies in Biology without ever lowering my 
dignity as a philosopher by shedding the blood of man, or even 
of any animal. The condition will involve less difficulty for 
those who henceforward will be taught systematically what 
I was obliged to teach myself. 

It were superfluous here to examine in equal detail the me other 
other public careers for which the Positive school will supply °^'^^^'^' 
qualified occupants. The professional noviciate required for 
each will be equally achievable in three years, on a system 
of preparation analogous to the one given in the case of the 
medical profession. By open competition, the aspirant, after 
completing his education, will find himself everywhere in 
possession of a noble function, by the munificence of the 
French nation, on reaching the normal age for the sacrament 
of Destination, and he will present himself of his own accord 
to receive that sacrament from the new clergy which is forming. 

To complete our examination of the influence of Positivism Three spe- 
as a system of doctrine, during the second phase of the organic tutlons?' 
transition, it remains to place before the reader three special 
institutions, one technical in its character, the second scientific, 
the third esthetical. 

I made an exception above in favour of veterinary schools, (a) Teohni- 
exempting them from the suppression which, by the abolition a?y Sd."' 
of the scientific budget, will be the fate of all the provisional 
establishments thrown up, in France more than elsewhere, 
during the latest stage of the revolution of the West. These 
veterinary schools may, in fact, promote not only the re- 
generation of the common instruction, but the adoption of 
the normal habits, if reorganised on system and so connected 
with the Positive school, the model on which they will be 
formed. Each provincial capital will have a veterinary insti- 
tute with three professors, always in relation with the same 
pupils, and teaching them, in three years, the treatment, first 
of the carnivores, secondly of the herbivores, lastly of the 
ruminants. After having thus dealt with all the mammalia 

382 SYSTEM or POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

which are useful to man, — the dog, the horse, and the ox being 
taken as types, — the final course of lectures should complete 
the subject by treating on a similar plan the whole remainder 
of the animal kingdom. It will pay special attention to the 
birds susceptible of domestication, then to the other useful 
vertebrates, followed by some invertebrates, nor should the 
lecturer fail to include in his teaching the pathology of the 
commoner vegetables. Such a course of instruction, at once 
practical and theoretical, requires, in this case too, the seclusion 
of the pupils, which is further justified by the need there is 
to form in them the normal state of feeling as regards the 
auxiliary races. Under the influence of the tme religion, 
the three professors will have but little difficulty in implanting 
the sense of the nobility of a career directly consecrated to 
the furtherance of the most important branch of human policy, 
that in which the Great Being presides over the everduring 
coalition of living powers against death. 
Regime oi To reap the full benefit of these institutions, they must be 

the School. . . 5 , , 1 -n 1 . i- 

maintained on a large scale and with a sound organisation 
during the whole course of their temporary existence, co- 
extensive with that of the Positive schools. Each receives 
annually fifty candidates, chosen by the three professors after 
a scientific examination, only dispensed with where the candi- 
date has passed satisfactorily through the encyclopaedic schools. 
Their internal arrangements, in all essential points identical 
with those of these latter, should be such as to ensure a suc- 
cessful result, and require consequently seven functionaries for 
teaching, besides the governor and the administrator. The 
three grades in the hierarchy of teachers should have the same 
salaries as the corresponding ones in the Positive school and 
the normal hospital, the veterinary institute being a combina- 
tion of both types. Again, it is important, here also, to place 
the whole of these establishments under the direction of the 
High Priest of Humanity, thus more clearly indicating and 
more fully carrying out their great object, intellectually as 
well as socially. His presiding influence will ensure in the 
school a constant respect for the dignity of life, even in the 
lowest auxiliaries of the Grreat Being, and will train the minds 
of the class best adapted for the sound propagation of Positivism 
among the proletaries, by even at this point placing the veterin- 
aries in connection with the engineers. These are the conditions 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION, 383 

which will strongly incline the dictatorial government, in its 
progressive stage, to consolidate the institution, by the creation 
of state appointments for the separate treatment of the useful 
animals, posts analogous to those occupied by tlie normal 
physicians, and the holders chosen, as they are, by open com- 
petition. 

In the second place, the suppression of the chairs of lite- (m Soien- 
rature, and literary corporations, involves an analogous at- 
tention to philological studies during the whole course of 
the organic transition. That there may be a systematic 
furtherance of the spontaneous process in the formation of 
an universal language, the dictator ought to devolve on the 
pontiff the superintendence of a special school of Philology, 
for which an institution at Paris will sufiBce. Three professors 
will, in three years, bring mader the notice of non-resident 
pupils, attached in all cases to the same professor throughout 
their course, first the Fetichist languages, then the Polytheistic, 
lastly the Monotheistic, the prominent characteristics of which 
are, respectively, feeling, imagination, and reason. The con- 
ditions of admission should be, a sufScient knowledge of the 
seven Western languages, already familiar to the students 
drawn from the Positive school. As in such studies it is 
judicious practice, rather than teaching, to which we should 
look, the public course of lectures is, for each year, reduced 
to forty, in as many weeks ; the great aim of the professor 
being to set forth clearly the step by stfep introduction of the 
universal language. Still, the three functionaries deserve 
incomes of twelve thousand francs, as being also directors of 
the central library, the library with which we begin the process 
of weeding out the accumulations of literature, which have 
already become of more harm than use. As destined, above all, 
to aid in the elaboration of the Positive language, and to this 
end modifying the most poetical of existing languages by the 
most philosophical, without neglecting any of the influences 
of the past, the philological school will help forward the 
organic transition by facilitating the transformation of dip- 
lomatists into missionaries. 

Thirdly and lastly I have to treat of the "Western Theatre, w Esthetic. 
to be established on such principles, as that, throughout the ^''^■'^''^'™- 
period of reorganisation, it may throw a lustre on the last days 
of an institution suited exclusively to the modern anarchy. 

384 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

Its developement, equally as a public and a private institution, 
during the last phase of the Western revolution, is a strong 
proof of the powerlessness of Catholicism, in its decline, to curb 
the revolutionary spirit, its most justifiable censures stimu- 
lating rather than conquering that spirit. It is for Positivism 
finally to suppress the theatre, as an institution at once irrational 
and immoral ; and it will do so by reorganising the common 
education, and by founding, by Sociolatry, a system of festivals 
calculated to bring unprofitable satisfactions into contempt. 
Since reading has become so general that all can enjoy by 
themselves the master works of dramatic literature, the pro- 
tection given to theatrical representations is solely an en- 
couragement to mediocrity, and the factitious support in no 
way conceals the fact of their instinctive abandonment. For 
musical compositions alone would a public representation 
remain indispensable, were it not that the Positive worship, 
in a higher degree than in the Middle Ages and in Antiquity, 
offered a legitimate sphere for musical genius by incorporating 
it with the priesthood. 

Nevertheless, during the last generation of this exceptional 
theatre. century, theatrical representations, under due regulation, may 
promote the advent of the universal education and of the normal 
form of existence. The repertory of each of the five Western 
nations supplies a suflScient number of masterpieces, dramatic 
or musical, to allow of one performance a week throughout the 
year, without ever condescending to secondary works and with- 
out a too frequent recurrence of the great works. The order 
in the week, in accordance with the classification of Sociology, 
will familiarize all Western Europe with the more eminent 
productions of the French nation and of its four sister nations, 
the Italian, the Spanish, the British and the Grerman. In the 
capital of each intendancy, the Western theatre will bring 
together, five times a week, all classes, to enjoy gratuitously the 
great dramatic productions, not more than two representations 
of each to be given in the course of the year. In withdrawing 
its other grants, the dictatorial government will act on the 
rich to induce them not to shrink, from pride, from mingling 
with the poor, for we must not concentrate on the poor the 
higher pleasures any more than the higher studies. Acting in 
concert with the Positive schools, the Western theatres wiU every- 
where be an assistance in spreading the kindred languages, in 

Constitution 
of the 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 385 

fostering national sympathies, and in extinguishing national 
prejudices. They too are under the direction of the Pontiff of 
Humanity, and wiU confirm the teaching of the worship as to 
the character of the Positive priesthood, that it is poetical no 
less than philosophical, and as such it will soon be called upon, 
in regard to the public museums, to take the place of oppressive 
or useless regulations. 

Such is the system of provisional institutions, representing Tet these- 
the influence of Positivism, as a body of doctrine, during the is not, any 
second phase of the organic transition, when the dictatorial the first, 
government has taken a progressive attitude but without ceasing organic, 
to be sceptical. If we combine this its spiritual influence with 
the practical measures by which I signalized the opening of the 
intermediate phase, we can appreciate the remarkable modification 
introduced into the situation of the West, so far as concerns 
the nation invested with the initiative of regeneration. On 
the other hand, if we compare this double series of improve- 
ments with the picture of the normal state, we feel to what an 
extent the final transition, in the second phase, still falls 
short of a really constructive character, a character exclusively 
reserved for its final phase. 

During the two first, the adoption respectively of the two The adoption 
mottoes, — the political and the moral — characteristic of the of the two '^ 
Western Eepublic, is equivalent rather to the statement of an ofEers a pro- 
appropriate programme than to a satisfactory solution. The first rather than 
is the expression of the fundamental combination which is to 
close the revolution ; the other points out the necessary source of 
this combination, but cannot effect it. Were this the perma- 
nent state, the only result of the two formulae would be a more 
vivid sense of the indispensable conditions, not the supplying 
the leading deficiencies. In a word, the French people would 
continue to oscillate between anarchy and reaction, as it has 
done since the opening of the present century. In contradiction 
with the spirit of the new mottoes, the attitude of the dictator- 
ship would be a constant source of imeasiness to the people by 
its excessive attention to order, of alarm to the patricians by 
its aspirations after progress. 

Whether it remain hypocritical or become liberal, scepticism Scepticism 
IS ever unable to construct. In spite oi the universal desire to st™ot no- 
eliminate all caprice, that of the people and that of God equally, 
law can only take the place of will, under the condition of a 

VOL. IV. c c 

386 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

Tho general 
insufficiency 
of the two 
first phases 
shown in ex- 
amination. 

The moral 
must pre- 
cede the 
political 
renovation. 

perpetual invocation of Humanity. Both principles, that of 
anarchy and of retrogression, will continue to coexist so long as 
the transition has not taken an essentially religious character, 
if not in the less advanced mass of mankind, at any rate in aU 
the more chosen spirits. 

An examination in detail of the two first phases, first from 
the temporal then from the spiritual point of view, confirms 
the conviction of their defectiveness. By the suppression of 
the theoretic budget and the standing army, it would seem 
that the French nation was moving towards the American 
type, the most prominent representative of the anarchy of the 
West. The spiritual movement is less incomplete, as not essen- 
tially persisting in mere negation, still it is indecisive owing to 
a deficiency of system in its advance. The developement of 
the Positive worship under the first phase, by the aid of the 
historical calendar, wants the full religious character, as its 
public festivals, even when abstract, have not private worship 
for their basis. In the intermediate phase, the institution of 
Positive schools and their various adjuncts does not represent a 
direct reorganisation of the common education, though indi- 
rectly it may be a preparation for this regeneration by 
renovating the leading professions. 

A revolution which, in aU its main features, is intellectual, 
would seem, by the nature of the case, destined to indefinite 
prolongation, so long as it is not avowedly under the guidance 
of that theory to which the whole of the past promises success. 
Till such time as the central dictatorship adopt the religion of 
Positivism, an internal conflict of principles, and indecision, 
will continue to be the characteristic of our Western movement. 
All parties equally will continue to misjudge the nature of the 
modern revolution ; they will only agree in adopting a political 
treatment for a disease which is spiritual. The revolutionary 
party, in especial, is liable to this reproach, for, instead of seeing 
in the effeteness of their own doctrines a reason for embracing 
Positivism, it leads them to aim directly at a political recon- 
struction, and subordinate to that aim the moral regeneration 
which should preside over such reconstruction. The retrograde 
party is less behindhand, for it recognizes the spiritual anarchy ; 
but it too is in a false position, owing to the weakness of its 
doctrine, which inclines them to base the reconstruction of 
belief upon compression by force. 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 387 

The point, then, to which I have brouarht the final transition Thini 
IS this : that in its leading features the actual situation remains 
unchanged, though many valuable if insufficient improvements 
have been introduced. Hence it is evident that the last gene- 
ration of the exceptional century can be truly organic only in 
its third phase, the period which I have now to examine. 

The great distinction between it and the two others is, that Thegovem- 
in it the dictator professes Positivism, not merely respects it or comes Posi- 
assists it. Though the milieu continue sceptical, the govern- governed 
ment, without infringing liberty, avowedly moves towards sceptical. 
the imiversal ascendancy of the religion of Humanity ; conse- 
quently the regime of that religion is placed on the same footing 
of supremacy as its doctrine and its worship. A doctrine, the 
essential characteristic of which is its applicability to the 
government of society, cannot excite strong and effective 
sympathies when men shrink from applying it directly to its 
principal destination, whilst all the time they admit the danger 
or the futility of the other beliefs. If then a really organic 
character is to attach to the direction of affairs in the West, 
there must be no other discrepancy in the provisional attitude 
of the government, but that between its religious advance aijd 
the sceptical state of the public. This should be the distinctive 
character of the phase which I am now to organise, one of 
longer duration than the two others together, as destined to issue 
in the definitive order. For the sake of precision, I venture to 
express the comparison in a numerical form ; assigning seven 
years to the first stage of the organic transition, five to the 
second, twenty-one to the third. It is in this way that the 
philosophy of history, after beginning with the explanation of 
centuries, and then passing to generations, in its latest develope- 
ment, under the impulse of a practical need, ends by demarcating 
the three ages of one exceptional generation. 

The peculiar mark of the last phase of the organic transition The system- 
should be found in the definitive substitution of a triumvirate Tirate""™ 
acting on system for the empirical and sceptical dictator who 
was the natural director of the two others. The primary object 
of so necessary a change is to instil, even at this early period, a 
presentiment as to what should be the normal form of the tem- 
poral government, as explained in the preceding chapter. The 
three chiefs of the Preparatory Grovernment cannot, it is true, 
as yet, wear the definitive character ulteriorly attaching to the 

c e 2 

388 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. .THE PRESENT. 

sociocratic dictatorship, but they should approach it as nearly as 
is possible in so provisional a position of affairs. Their plurality 
following a monocracy, — in its earlier stage a conservative, in its 
later a progressive, monocracy — this of itself announces that the 
temporal power must of necessity be divided. The capital im- 
portance of this indication is enhanced by the contrast naturally 
presented by the spiritual authority ; for this latter, long con- 
centred in the founder of the Eeligion of Humanity, will 
perhaps not be upheld by a competent clergy till towards the 
middle of the period under consideration. 
It affords a But bcsides this legitimate reason for the change, the acces- 

thatthe giou to power of the Positivist triumvirate will be a consequence 

goTernment *■ ^ 

win be pure- of an exceptional requirement, which admits of no hesitation. 
Whilst taking the place of the monarchy, the central dicta- 
torship retains, since the outbreak of the ultimate crisis, the 
confusion of the two powers which has been on the increase 
during the whole course of the Western revolution. Usurpa- 
tion of the functions of the spiritual by the temporal power, — 
be It in the name' of revolution or of reaction — perpetuates both 
alike, and is a direct rejection of the fundamental principle of 
modern civilization. Now, it is in the substitution of the triiun- 
virate for the dictator that lies the only decisive guarantee of 
the purely temporal character which the government has been 
induced to assume during the two preliminary phases of the 
organic transition. Antecedents and prejudices — both equally 
being adverse to the renunciation by the temporal power of 
spiritual authority, such renunciation will always remain in- 
complete or precarious, so long as it has it in its power to 
revoke a concession which, by the nature of the case, must at 
first be a purely voluntary act. Another Frederic might, for a 
time, by his attitude, be a security against this particular 
danger, but there would be nothing to preclude its opposite, 
the more dangerous usurpation involved in the attempt to 
secure by law the ascendancy of the Positive religion, without 
waiting for the conversion of the milieu. Error, in this direction, 
an error in which instinct and system concur, is the more 
serious, in that, so long as the government of the French nation 
is vested in a single chief, it is the High Priest of Humanity 
who more than any one would seem to be deserving of so high 
an office. 

The directing power once finally divided, the two opposite 

Chap. V.]. THE TEAI^SITION. 389 

forms of usurpation become both equally impossible. Spiritual ^™™'"^*':. 
authority is, by virtue of its synthetical character, incompatible two powers 

•J ^ ^ J ' ■*■ on one an- 

with a plurality of organs, notwithstanding the precedents of other ended 
councils and academies, ever revolutionary if not completely sionoithe 

^ *' 1 temporal. 

subordinate. It is on this ground that the spiritual head 
can no more accept a fragment of empire than the industrial 
chiefs can absorb the function of consultation, a function always 
indivisible, as requiring a grasp of the whole, such as no 
committee can have. 

The division of the temporal power finds, then, its iustifica- The division 

r r . ^ guarantee 

tion, in reference to internal government, in the combined de- °'p3S'=Y'' 
mands of order and progress ; whilst, in reference to external 
affairs, it offers a satisfactory guarantee for the maintenance of 
peace in Western Eiu-ope. Not to dwell on the deviation into 
militarism which marked the opening of the nineteenth century, 
the West could not, without grave disquietude, see the dictator- 
ship in France remain monocratic in form, when once its progres- 
sive attitude had conferred on it a real popularity. In the absence 
of an aristocracy strong enough to prevent the misdirection of 
so great a power, the adjacent nations would justly feel alarmed, 
and the personal character of the ruler would be unable- entirely 
to dissipate such alarm. Whereas, on the contrary, the non- 
existence of such an aristocracy becomes a security for tran- 
quillity when a- triumvirate is in power, for such a government, 
however great its popularity, must always lack the consistency 
and the continuity inherent in the policy of a senate. The 
three rulers of France, if convergent, would be so only by virtue 
of their common adhesion to the Positive faith, and this faith 
prescribes respect for the independence of the West quite as 
much as respect for spiritual liberty, both in the name of their 
social mission. 

We see thus, how the installation of a triumvirate in France The twiun- 
is an announcement and a guarantee of the political supremacy rantees^the 
of Positivism at the opening of the last phase of the organic rendinVof 
transition. Had the three leaders not openly embraced the andtheMe- 
religion of Humanity, their quarrels would involve France in the PrS" 
disorder, perhaps in bloodshed ; or, as an alternative, the divi- 
sion of power would be a delusion. On the other hand, the 
division ensures the independence of the Positivist priesthood, 
and proclaims the decided superiority of the moral movement 
over political agitation. It is in this way that the organic 

hood. 

390 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

transition will move forwards to its normal result, putting for- 
ward most unmistakeably the religious character of the Western 
revolution, hitherto masked by social contests, as well at home 
as abroad. The form of government, then, adapted to the 
ultimate state is also the one best suited to the provisional, so 
that the passage from the one to the other may be in a true 
sense gradual, in accordance with the basic law of continuity 
both in thought and action. 
The dictator, As it is the Special mission of Positivism to secure the fuller 
motu, in- triumph of this law, it will protect it against any infringement 
tfiumTirs. wheu once it has the dii-ection of the social movement. A 
fitting opportunity for its exemplification is the passage, — a 
step so momentous, — from the monocratic dictatorship to the 
systematic triumvirate, the installation of which is incompatible 
with all violence, as contrary to its organic mission. In a 
sceptical milieu, a milieu if not hostile, at least indifferent, to 
the regenerating faith, we may not conceive of the change as 
wrought otherwise than by the voluntary initiative of the dicta- 
tor, when alive to its necessity. Since he has already changed so 
far as to become, and that sincerely, progressive, there is no 
reason why he should not, without being completely Positivist, 
so far correctly estimate the general conditions of the phase 
which has for its immediate object the terminating the 
Western revolution. If he have the will, the dictator has 
nothing to do but to use his plenary power to introduce in 
due form this indispensable change, thus earning an undying 
glory, and escaping the blame which attaches to all fruitless 
resistance to the laws of Humanity. 
The change The transformation should be peacefully effected through a 

moditj'in/ last modification of the ministerial system, an institution dating 
iai system, from the second phase of the modern revolutionary movement, 
when the monarchy, especially in France, lost its power to 
wield the dictatorship it had recently obtained. The royal ini- 
tiative became more and more limited to the choice or dismissal 
of the leading men — by the force of our statement more than 
one — between whom were divided the office of government, ia 
accordance with the difference in the services required. Such a 
distribution of power is involved in the activity of modern 
times by its nature, which is essentially analytical ; and it acted 
as a natural guarantee of the division of the two powers, allow- 
ing, as it did, political unity only as a result of a common 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 391 

doctrine, the representative of which doctrine was the official 

dictator. Since the outbreak of the French revolution, the 

dangers have been such as always to call for one central will, and 

the definitive submission of parliamentary anarchy to that will. 

But such condensation of power, necessary as it is at present for 

the maintenance of order, has no real justification but in the 

weakness of the prevailing doctrine, which can only supply 

formulae, not suggestions for our guidance. The power of 

Positivism to direct society once adequately recognised, it will 

be seen that a demonstrable faith constitutes, between the several 

political chiefs, a more complete and stable bond than that 

offered by one paramount will, ever liable as it is to vacillation 

as a natural result of its scepticism. Under these conditions 

the provisional institution of ministers will merge its functions 

in the systematic triumvirate, which it substitutes, by a peaceful 

process, for an empirical dictator. 

A common doctrine as the basis of common political The neces- 
sity of a 
action, — the necessity of this, if more pronounced in the normal common 

doctrine as 

state, holds primarily for all the phases of the preliminary the base oi: 
regime, not merely under the Theocracy, but also after the unity. 
developement of military activity. War is by nature synthe- 
tical in character, and yet it was not war but religion that was, 
at all times, the bond of union with the Roman patriciate, and 
the imperial dictatorship inherited it. Under this aspect 
Theologism and Positivism differ only, in that the first allows 
the temporal chiefs to be the representatives of the directing 
synthesis, whilst the second confines this function exclusively to 
the spiritual chiefs. Therefore it is that the temporal dictator- 
ship, if it remaiu monocratic, must contiaue to be retrograde ; 
it will aim, that is, at spiritual authority, and it can only apply 
for such to the older faith. If it assume a progressive character 
by renouncing this futile claim, then its natural policy is to 
complete the change by raising its ministers into governors 
proper, so to avouch quite openly their practical or industrial 
character, the natural corrective of previous aberrations. 

Still it must be kept in mind that in modem times the con- But the 

ministers 

stitution of the temporal power forbids excessive dispersion no must not 

^ ■'■ . ^ be too 

less than an extreme condensation. The irreversible abolition of numerous, 
the parliamentary regime should have, as its proximate result, a 
diminution in the number of departments, the multiplication 
of which was solely due to a desire to offer more openings for 

392 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT, 

restless ambition. All need of such a concession being removed 
by the progressive attitude of the government, it vrill be felt 
that three ministers are all that it requires, each holding three 
of the present offices. 
The.three In effecting this concentration, with the view of facilitating 

required. the peaceful advent of the systematic triumvirate, it is desirable 
to pave the way, as far as possible, for the normal regime, by 
bringing into relief, even now, the industrial character of the 
temporal government as finally constituted. The three minis- 
ters who are to survive should share amongst them the depart- 
ments of industry ; the minister of the interior taking agriculture, 
the minister of finance manufacture, the minister of foreign 
affairs commerce. As, however, the sole object of this distribu- 
tion at that time is to give, by anticipation, a juster idea of the 
normal constitution of the temporal power, it need involve no 
change in the names at present used ; they will still be the best 
till the close of the organic transition. 
Their con- With the first ministry, the great distinctive attribution of 

the existing which is the police, we must combine the actual department of 
justice, and that of public instruction, now confined, as we have 
seen, to the primary schools, except as regards the superintend 
dence of private establishments. The second ministry will 
absorb the management of public works, a branch of adminis- 
tration which ought soon to become purely financial, when 
the suppression of aU special corporations shall have led to a 
greater degree of freedom in their execution. Lastly, the tlurd 
ministry will annex all the duties, military, naval, or colonial, 
which remain after the transfoimation of the army into a 
constabulaiy. 

Such is the concentration of ministerial functions which 
will prepare the peaceful advent of the systematic triumvirate, 
when the progressive dictator shall be sufficiently amenable to 
the counsels of Positivism. He will make the change easier by 
giving his three ministers the title of governors, as more in 
accordance with their duties, and susceptible of indefinite con- 
tinuance. After a sufficient trial of the ministers he has selected, 
he will inaugurate the latest phase of the organic transition by 
transfeiTing to them the dictatorial government of France, 
thus definitively vested not in one but in a number. 

The change is such as to requii-e that Positivism have so 
far modified its sceptical milieu, as to enable it to throw up 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 393 

three statesmen in whom the supreme ruler may place entire The High 
confidence. Destined as they are to be the first holders of suggest 

-^ , their names. 

offices which will give them the power, allowing for exceptions, 
of choosing their successors, their own nomination can at 
first be due solely to the free suggestion of the pontiff of 
Humanity, who alone is competent to propose them to the 
noble dictator. This exceptional initiative, the first really 
decisive manifestation of the social power of the priesthood of 
Positivism, should, as much as possible, foreshadow the normal 
regime, by its conforming to the systematic distribution of the 
industrial functions. We may at present hope soon to find, 
among French bankers, a competent minister of foreign affairs. 
But as, for the ministry of the interior, it is not yet possible to 
comply with the normal conditions, we must place in it an 
agricultural patrician, one shown by his previous life to have 
the nobility of thought and feeling so important an office requires. 
For the direction of the finances, the most important branch of 
administration so long as the transition lasts, on the same 
principle we should seek for a minister amongst the manu- 
facturing capitalists, were it not that their intellectual and 
moral state prescribes a serious modification. More than the 
others deteriorated by empiricism and egoism, as is seen by 
its more marked leaning to oppressive monopolies, the politi- 
cal incapacity of this class will compel the progressive dictator 
to choose one of their workmen to be entrusted with the most 
important department. 

This admission of a proletary to a place in the systematic tms admis- 
triumvirate is the only really great anomaly imposed on the proletary 
preparatory government. But it has such solid justification in glaring 
the conditions of the moment, that it should awaken no alarm the prepara- 
in sincere and clear-sighted conservatives, not even if it were ment. 
found desirable to extend it to the two other departments. 
As the classes which in the normal state are to govern, are at 
present, in heart and mind, unequal to such charge, our only 
resource is to find in personal merit a guarantee which social 
position does not as yet provide. Now, looking to the whole 
history of the past in modem times, it is amongst proletaries 
that are most likely to be found, in largest proportion, men 
really fitted for political power by their wide range of thought 
and their generosity of feeling. The whole difficulty lies 
in the bringing them forward acceptably, when, under the 

394 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

It will ex- 
tinguish De- 
magogism 
and tend to 
regenerate 
the Pa- 
tricians. 

Personal re- 
commenda- 
tion of 
fit men. 

guidance of a truly organic doctrine, the dictator has made his 
selection. Their accession to power under these conditions, 
without any demagogic influences, can in no wise encourage 
the tendency to declassment, inasmuch as it is avowedly an 
anomaly made necessary by the transitional state of things. 
Suppose it definitive, and it would at once be seen to involve a 
contradiction ; for plebeians, to become chiefs, must abandon 
the position to which they owe their intellectual and moral 
claims ; whilst, in obtaining power, patricians are in keeping 
with themselves. 

Over and above their individual value, the proletary minis- 
ters will bring to the preparatory government the aid of their 
class, at once from a negative and positive point of view. Their 
accession offers a powerful security against demagogues ; for 
they, always sprung from the bourgeoisie and the literary 
bourgeoisie in particular, will thus find superiors in the very 
class on which their ambition leans for support. Not only 
will the people not assist them, it wiU place them in pre- 
sence of invincible competitors, by putting in power the best 
organs of the proletariate, and, as such, qualified to throw dis- 
credit upon rhetoricians and sophists by the mere force of 
contrast. But the chief reaction of this anomaly is the assist- 
ance it gives in regenerating the patrician body; it wiU 
lead, that is, the capitalists to feel what are the intellectual 
and moral conditions of the power normally vested in their 
class. Instead of separating the proletariate from the patriciate, 
the temporary accession of the higher types of the working 
classes will bring the poor and rich into union, with the aim 
of eliminating the bourgeoisie, as the main seat of Western 
anarchy. 

Such is the peaceful process by which the preparatory 
government should be installed in France, at the opening of the 
last phase of the organic transition. For several years I have 
been working at the choice of persons, so to have it in my 
power duly to discharge my function of adviser, when the 
dictator shall be sensible of the value of philosophical sugges- 
tions, inherently free from all admixture of ambition. Apply- 
ing to the judgment of persons principles tested in the estimate 
of events, I hope to find men able to obtain the confidence of 
the dictator and the public, and to find them amongst the 
practicians whom Positivism has already regenerated. "When 

Chap. V.] THE TBANSITION. 395 

complete and definitive, I shall in due time announce my 
choice, in order that a careful examination may render easier 
and simpler their free acceptance. In the normal state the 
action of the Positive priesthood will be limited to the sanction 
of governors chosen by their predecessors ; during the transition 
it should turn to account the authority it derives from general ' 
assent, by proposing for inauguration those on whom it will 
devolve to name their successors. 

Sociocratic continuity cannot as yet wholly supersede the Not possible 
principle of election, the substitute, and more completely so as disoontinue 
time advanced, for the theocratic continuity. But it were well may be ' 
to nullify as much as possible this subversive practice, especially 
as regards the highest governors, whose duty it will be, sub- 
sequently, to choose at their discretion all the government 
functionaries. Though a triumvir cannot, on retirement, name 
unconditionally his successor, he may always propose him to the 
seventeen electors chosen by universal suffrage ; such suffrage 
in this case, as in that of the financial assembly, to be modified 
by delegation and publicity. 

The citizens of Paris, grouped according to the provinces Mode oi 
in which they were born, will name these seventeen special 
delegates, who wiU pronounce upon the choice proposed. If 
they accept the choice, the decision of the metropolis will be 
submitted to the provinces for ratification, the provinces being 
represented by the sixteen capitals, ten of which at least must 
confirm the decision by universal suffrage. If the choice is 
rejected, the triumvir will be boimd to submit a second name 
to the same electors, who will only take the initiative in case of 
a second rejection. 

Any arbitrary limit of time is out of place, where the power The offices 
rests upon confidence and is guaranteed by responsibility. Yet on good be- 
there must always be some means of removing, peacefully, 
unworthy governors, supposing them to take no account of just 
blame, and so not to withdraw when they should. To reconcile 
the two wants, the electoral system just described may be 
brought into play for a judgment on the successor of the governor 
to be removed, such successor to be named by the industrial 
capitalist with whom originates the accusation, an accusation 
approved by nineteen other Parisian capitalists. To avoid 
haste and passion, the nomination, always with the statement of 
some definite grievances and with the signatures of its twenty 

396 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

supporters — must not be legally valid till it has been twice 
placarded, at three months' interval. The discussion before the 
vote, and the possibility that the triumvir attacked may be 
continued in office, will as a general rule lead either to the 
withdrawal of an accusation which is the subject of general 
blame, or to the seasonable retirement from office of the person 
incriminated. 
Two amend- I must here pause a moment in my exposition of the 
programme Preparatory Grovernment, in order to preserve the memory of 
Their ' two incidents, of a nature to strengthen our just confidence in 
the popular instinct when not misled by metaphysical influences. 
My original conception in 1848 on the mode of eliminating 
mischievous governors, involved, in spite of myself, larger con- 
cessions to revolutionary prejudices than the one here given. 
However I was soon able to act on my natm'al instinct, thanks to 
the noble wisdom of two proletaries, worthy associates of mine in 
the Positivist Society, before which I laid the whole conception 
of the organic transition. The capital amendment, the re- 
jection, that is to say, of any purely negative blame, the 
compelling the accuser to offer a substitute, came from the 
plebeian statesman to whom Positivism owes the luminous 
aphorism : Work can never be wanting. Another workman 
subsequently struck out, with equal originality and modesty, 
the happy idea of confining the power of legal accusation to 
the capitalist class. 
Not only the As the last poiut in estimating the degree of social ascend- 
but aiireaiiy aucy attained by Positivism, if it is to be competent to establish 
ftmotion- aright the Preparatory Government, the obligation to adopt the 
PoBiti-rists. system as a whole must be limited to those offices which are of 
a strictly political character. "Were the triumvirs alone adhe- 
rents of the regenerative faith, their ordinary action would be 
hampered by the indifference or hostility of their chief subordi- 
nates, even supposing these last to be simply sceptical. But it 
is as unnecessary as it is impracticable to go further, and require 
the conversion of such agents as are strictly administrative, for 
they are always predisposed to propagate the impulse they 
receive, and which is independent of them. The only pre- 
ference of such agents, as a body, for the Positivist dictatorship 
will be due to their sense of greater security in their offices, with 
a more honourable service. Then, their just promotion will not 
be stopped by the reservation of the higher administrative posts 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 397 

for political adventurers, thrown up by parliamentary anarchy or 
servile obsequiousness to a dynasty. 

Eeduced to the utmost, the obligation of complete adhesion Nanowest 
to the prevailing doctrine may be confined to the two services, obligation. 
foreign and domestic, which are in immediate dependence on 
the triumvirate. If the nine ambassadors and the seventeen 
intendants are true Positivists, their aid will suflBce for the 
Preparatory Grovernment to organize on a proper footing its 
administrative services, whatever the belief of its agents, 
assuming them to be zealous and competent. The ofiBce of sub- 
prefect, nay even of prefect, stripped of its present semblance 
of political power, will be filled habitually by men chosen by 
the governors of theii- respective provinces from the class of 
special administrators. 

So concentred in twenty-nine statesmen, the political Through 

these 29 

direction of France may really fall to Positivism at the period statesmen 
above assigned, at the beginning, that is, of the last phase of ment be- 
the organic transition. In the course of the twelve previous roughly 
years, the Positivist doctrine ought to gain influence, to a degree 
which it would be difficult to estimate, prior to its making its 
way into the milieu most in consonance with its immediate 
destination, one mainly concerning the governors of society. 
For it is they whom Positivism comes forward to rescue from 
the pressure which is the necessary consequence of their scepti- 
cism, now that the prevalent need of society is, definitively, 
reconstruction. In all the West, and in France above all, 
statesmen are obliged to court by turns, and at times together, 
revolution and reaction, because they have not the convictions 
which would enable them to triumph over both. It is to Posi- 
tivism they will owe the fuU realization of what has hitherto 
been a barren though constant wish, — ever since the explosion 
of the French Eevolution, — the combination of Order and 
Progress. Positivism alone can enable them to regain their 
personal selfrespect and to give free play to their social action, 
as no longer compelled to appear to hold views in unison with 
the belated state of those whom it is their object to 
guide. Openly invested, in the name of Humanity, with the 
necessary power, they will appreciate, in the plenitude of public 
life, the holy aphorism suggested, naturally, by private life to 
her who is my eternal companion : What pleasures can carry 
it over those of devotion to the welfare of others ? 

398 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

Disgust at 
the existing 
scepticism. 

On the con- 
version of 
the states- 
men will 
cease the 
existing 
anomaly as 
to the prac- 
tical virtues. 

Three con- 
clusive in- 
stances of 
the political 
success of a 
doctrine not 
depending 
on the num. 
her of its 
adherents. 

Weary of a scepticism daily more and more at variance 
with the actual conditions of the West, minds of the higher 
order cherish in secret the aspiration of freeing themselves 
from its degrading and paralysing influence, in order to devote 
themselves, more than at any other time, to the regenera-- 
tion of the race. But they cannot attain purity and eleva- 
tion save under the guidance of the faith which claims to 
regulate the present in the name of the future as deduced 
from the past. The time is not distant when Positivism will 
have rallied to itself such men, so far as to enable them to 
obtain an honourable ascendancy, in a world where, from the 
absence of complete convictions, there can be no strong re- 
sistance to a systematic action. 

Then at once will disappear the anomaly which at present 
exists, the anomaly, namely, by which certain natures seem in 
exclusive possession of the practical virtues, especially energy 
and perseverance, the commonest of the attributes of man, 
since they are found in all the animals which are in any real 
sense active. The apparent rarity of these qualities is one of 
the most striking features of our modem anarchy, where the 
absence of convictions leads to irresolution. Its tendency to 
neutralize devotion and ■ courage is seen most active in the 
highest natures, as they can find no fitting sphere except in 
public life, and public life has become, in the absence of a 
religion, the privileged appurtenance of vulgar ambitions. 
When the Positive faith shall raise and league together those 
who are born to command, it will be seen, more than ever, 
how superior are the qualities of the intellect, and still more 
of the heart, to those of the character, these latter being rarely 
absent when there is a welldefined and consistent purpose. 
So will disappear of itself the singular error now prevailing, 
of confounding energy with cruelty, an error due to our 
not having the opportunity of observing the full developement 
of energy in men capable of applying it, in the pursiiit of 
great objects, with settled and complete convictions. 

Three successive instances, in the last hundred years, have 
given conclusive evidence that the tendency — and a growing 
tendency — of things in the West, is to give political suprem cy, 
in France, to any doctrine, if even provisionally adapted to the 
mission of regeneration with which it is invested. Twenty 
years after the publication of the Encyclopaedia the last holder 

Ghap. v.] the teansition. 399 

of the monarchical dictatorship confided the government of 
France to the Encyclopaedists, socially represented by the 
Economists. At the openinsr of the final crisis, the Eepublicans (i) The 

•■ '=' ' Economists. 

■were less numerous than the Positivists are now : notwith- (V The Re- 
publicans. 
standing, in four years they became masters, and that without 

any large increase of their numbers. Far from being due to 

the insurrection which manifested it, this consequence of the 

then situation of France would have been reached earlier, had 

the convulsion been prevented according to the hypothesis 

indicated at the end of my third volume. Lastly, when, on (3) The 

■' .J. Bcleotios. 

the reestablishment of peace in Europe, the necessity of com- 
bining Order with Progress was generally recognised, eclecti- 
cism, as apparently meeting the want, was dominant under 
various forms during the greater part of the Parliamentary 
generation, and that in spite of the fact that the number of 
Eclectics was small to a proverb. 

This concourse of examples is so much the more conclusive, Hence there 
in that, in all three cases, the doctrines, though the only ones ';^"o the' 
then acceptable, could in no sense comply with the fundamental posSvism. 
conditions. This being so, they strengthen our confident an- 
ticipations of the advent of Positivism to power, anticipations 
suggested by its peculiar competence to direct Society. The 
age in which any great thing seems hopeless, such is the 
intellectual and moral anarchy, this age promises those who 
labour worthily in the cause of the renovating Faith un- 
paralleled satisfactions, as the aim we set before us is also 
without parallel. 

I have sufficiently treated the constitution, and the advent General 
to power, of the Positivist triumvirate ; and I may now describe theTrium- 
its general course, on an examination, first, of its rule of conduct, 
then, of its most important measure. 

In the last phase of the organic transition, the proximate (i) its mie 

ofoondttot. 

termination of the Western revolution will be announced by 
raising, at its commencement, the normal standard, with all 
the emblems which accompany it, for the statement of which 
in detail I refer to the ' General View.' The two characteristic voi. i. sii. 
mottoes have, it is true, been already adopted ; yet their 
adoption, one after the other, was the expression rather of a 
wish than of a principle, so long as the attitude of the dicta- 
torial government could be but in imperfect unison with them. 
But when Positivism, after modifying the policy, succeeds in 

400 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

Apprecia- 
tion of this 
third for- 
mula. 

Applicable 
to the spirit- 
ual domain, 
its chief 
value is in 
the tem- 
poral. 

changing the form of the government, the two formulas take 
the character of a definitive programme, the triumph of which 
is shown in the change of colour ; a change which, without 
any breach of continuity, disclaims all connection with revo- 
lution. At this juncture comes the third motto of the normal 
regime : Live without concealment, the complement of the other 
pair, as supplying the practical condensation of the system, 
the system, at once moral and political, which is now adopted 
finally and for ever. Meant more particularly for public life, 
this last symbol is peculiarly appropriate as the device for the 
French coins ; this enunciation on them of the means dispensing 
with a statement of the principle and the result, between which 
it is the indispensable connection. 

To see the full bearing of such a formula, we must keep 
in view, that its adoption by the government marks the rise of 
a systematic policy, otherwise the motto were but the announce- 
inent of a moral purpose, not of a political determination. 
Although the mediaeval period nobly asserted it in private 
life, it was unable to extend it duly to public ; this, in spite 
of the aspirations of Chivalry, continued to rest mainly upon 
mystery and intrigue. Without ignoring the evil feelings 
which had a share in this result, we are bound to assign as 
its principal ground, the impossibility of living openly when 
the future is dark and opinion uncertain. The device, then, 
is an indication of the decisive acceptance of a doctrine capable 
of giving systematic expression both to political previsions and 
to the public judgments. As this twofold systematization is 
the mark of the ultimate regeneration, its special announcement 
should be the formula appropriate to human activity, although 
it draws its greatest value as a symbol from its capacity of 
representing the symbols which relate to intellect and feeling. 

Sign and condition of synthesis in thought as of loyalty 
in action — the rule is as suitable for the Positive spiritualty 
as for the pacific temporalty. Prior to formulating it, I had 
always instinctively acted on it, from the very first steps I 
took, the better to prepare the minds of men for my concep- 
tions, and to perfect those conceptions by the results of their 
statement, by their influence whether in connection with others 
or upon myself. I have never ceased to congratulate myself 
on the practice, though it has often exposed me, either to 
mistaken objections or to dishonest plagiarism. But its widest 

Chap. V.] THE TBANSITION. 401 

application is in political action, for there the results are more 
definite and more immediate, and consequently, public dis- 
cussion may be of greater assistance in the execution and 
correction of plans, or even in purifying motives. Hence it 
is, that the Positivist triumvirate will evidence the thoroughly 
organic character of the third phase of the final transition by 
its invariable habit of announcing all its measures in time to 
allow of their examination by all. 

Two, three, or six months, according to the urgency and Application 
importance of the case, — these intervals have always appeared indeuii. 
to me, on this head, to meet all fair requirements. Adopting 
the judicious extension of the principle suggested by one of 
the most eminent of my theoretic disciples, these intervals 
must be observed as much for nominations and dismissals as 
for abstract resolutions, in order to give security to functionaries 
and to avoid intrigues. They are of sufficient length to enable 
the whole of the West, the colonies inclusive, to take part 
in the free expression of opinion to which the dictatorial 
government of France nobly appeals ; the slightest actions of that 
government now being of importance to mankind as connected 
with its high mission. The triumvirs will thus be disen- 
cumbered of their legal advisers, — a source of embarrassment as 
of expense, — their administrative services being better dis- 
charged by a remodelled bureaucracy. But the practice must 
never be allowed to impair the independence of the governors 
or their responsibility, the groundwork of both being always 
a noble character. Not only is it open to them to act against 
the aggregate opinion, even supposing it unanimous, but., in 
case of need, they will not hesitate to decide without waiting 
for its expression, taking of course the risk of legal accusation to 
which such conduct exposes them. To ensure the fuller applica- 
tion of the Positivist rule, each triumvir will decide alone, on 
measures as on men, whenever his own department alone is 
concerned. 

The solemn inauguration of this course of action will be the (2) KscWef 
important proclamation, at the beginning of the last phase, of Thfiiitend. 
the chief measure of the Preparatory Government, viz., the com'fRe-' 
political disgregation of France by the transformation of the 
intendancies into republics. Although this measure, as the 
outcome of the whole organic transition, must mark its con- 
clusion, the prospective familiarity with it will be indicative 

VOL. IV. D D 

publics. 

402 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

of the new human providence which judiciously modifies 
its destinies whilst consciously accepting them. Far from 
weakening the central dictatorship, such an announcement will 
strengthen its rational ascendancy, as supplying sounder reasons 
for the measures necessitated by this great transformation, the 
habitual prospect of which will be a guide to both government 
and people in the developement of the provisional regime. 
A gTCivt tri- Such dismemberments have been frequent during the long 

eiicctit course of the education of mankind, but never without ad vine: 

peaceably. , ' o o 

rise to serious catastrophes, from the impossibility of clearly 
foreseeing and directing them. It must, then, be looked 
upon as a decisive triumph, both for the science and the art 
of politics, this faculty of peaceably effecting the most im- 
portant of all dismemberments, after a wise recognition of its 
necessity, in connection with the whole system of statical and 
dynamical laws which govern society in its normal state. 

Kcccssityfor In my socoud volume T satisfactorily established the fun- 
such change. . 

damental principle, that for a free and lasting association the 
condition is the voluntary grouping of a certain number of towns, 
with their respective country districts, around a city which 
has risen to the rank of a capital. This law, one of whose 
importance the Middle Ages had a just sense, and without 
which the Country cannot link, in any true sense, the Family to 
Humanity, presides, in the preceding chapter, over the normal 
division of the Earth into Sociocracies on the scale of the French 
intendancies. All the reasons for such limitation in the ulti- 
mate state have greater validity at its introduction, from the 
time that the systematic developement of the religion of Hu- 
manity has removed the only justification of later anomalies. 
As a guarantee of order and of progress internally, the break 
up of the greater states ought in all cases to be welcomed, and 
in equal degree, by the priesthood which it emancipates, the 
patriciate which it raises, the proletariate for which it makes room. 
Externally, it ensures general peace by making invasion impos- 
sible, even before the other Western nations have acted on the ex- 
ample of France, for it is the concentration of France that alone 
is formidable and, as such, constitutes a special obligation on her 
to initiate the new policy. Her mission of regeneration ought to 
do away with all hesitation as to the measure, for her political 
decomposition becomes the basis of her religious presidency, 
the bequest of the whole past — especially the more recent 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 403 

past. If we give the word Catholicism its etymological ac- TheCatho- 
ceptation, applicable only to Positivism, the revolution of the Paris. 
West is simply the substitution of the Catholicism of Paris 
for that of Eome, when Paris shall be merely the spiritual 
capital of Humanity. 

This holy city cannot even become the religious centre of Pans must 

^ ^ o renounce 

the French territory, so long as it is not properly purified by temporal 
renouncing its temporal domination, the retention of which 
would raise a fear lest there should be an oppressive combination 
of the two powers. Sadly as the grand result of the mediaeval 
period has suffered from modern anarchy, Metaphysics have yet 
never been able to prevent the general instinct from feeling the 
growing opportuneness of the division of the two powers, as 
more in harmony with our existence than with that of our 
ancestors. And in the alarm lest it be set aside we have the 
latent source of the instinctive antipathies, nay even of the 
idle jealousies, oiten felt by the provinces of France in regard 
to the spiritual leadership of Paris ; they feel themselves 
threatened with an indefinite consecration of the political 
tyranny by which they are at present hampered. 

It is, then, for the most centralised nation, in the name of its American 
human mission, to set a decisive example of a peaceful decom- ence the te- 
position, an example which will soon find imitators everywhere, the move- 
were it only as a consequence of the catastrophes caused else- 
where by obstinate adherence to routine. Not passing, here, 
beyond the limits of the West, I point to American independence 
as having, in the last century, irrevocably initiated the steady 
movement towards the decomposition of the great states. One 
might even go farther back to the Dutch revolution, were it not 
that the political significance of that event is modified by its 
religious character. But when we see the separation for ever of 
two populations, united by language and by faith, not to speak 
of their common and not remote origin, no one can be mistaken 
as to the real source of the political disruption. It was natural 
that the verification of the law of cities should have its first 
instance in the case of the colonies, and they have given it 
additional confirmation in South America, notwithstanding the 
greater closeness of the connection with the mother country 
both in religion and politics. Without waiting for the exten- Extension or 
sion of the process, in these two typical cases, by the inevitable from^th?^'' 
break-up of the secondary nationalities they have formed, bS'o"^'" 

404 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

Such exten- 
sion dimly 
foreseen at 
the begin- 
ning of the 
French Be- 
voiution. 

Each intend- 
ancy to be- 
come a Re- 
pu'olic under 
Triumvirs. 

nationalities in tlieir turn of exorbitant dimensions, all statesmen 
should even now forecast its spread to the European states. If 
so, instead of vain regrets, all should prepare to submit with 
decorum to this destiny, above all in France, as invested with the 
initiative of regeneration, an initiative which precludes such 
regrets. 

At the beginning of the final crisis, there was a dim sense 
of this fatality in the party which was least mistaken as to the 
true character of the Western revolution, its essentially in- 
tellectual character. But in its aspiration after the normal 
disgregation of France, it was wrong by a century as to 
its epoch, nor can we blame the terrible punishment of its 
mistake, when we consider the guilty vanity which made it 
set itself, so mistaken, against a defence as necessary as it 
was difficult. When the heroism, however empirical, of its two 
opponents had secured the independence of the French nation, it 
soon became possible to estimate duly the merit of the Grirondist 
anticipation, by virtue of the disappearance, in the natural 
course of things, of the main justification for a provisional 
concentration. The peace of Europe has strengthened the 
tendency in this direction by removing as well the fear of 
invasion from without, as the dread of coalitions within its 
limits. So it is, that I can judge quietly, with the perfect 
freedom of the true philosopher, a prematxire political concep- 
tion, which cost my spiritual Father, Condorcet, his life, on the 
groundless suspicion that he approved of it. 

As a step to the gradual adoption of this great change, the 
Positivist triumvirate should allow the Intendants, when tested 
by seven years' right exercise of power, the choice of their 
successors, who will on this plan be more identified with the 
population they are to govern. Each Intendancy should be 
made into an independent republic, as soon as it complies with 
the religious conditions of political emancipation, not waiting 
till the other provinces have also earned their independence, 
the essence of which is the substitution of local triumvirs for 
the intendant. Before the general accomplishment of this 
change, it will have abeady attained its great object as regards 
the organic transition in Its totality ; be it by purifying the 
attitude of Paris as the spiritual capital, be it by putting an 
end to the perturbing power of ambition, the great stimulus to 
which lay in the centralisation. 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 405 

It remains for me now to explain at length the course, as a pouucaiand 
political and religious movement, of the principal phase of the courso of the 
organic transition, the phase, that is, the leading features of 
which are given in the two measures just explained. Its very 
predominance, however, renders it impossible for its exposition 
to be on a scale proportionate to that allotted to the two prelimi- 
nary modes ; which, be it remembered, are of more immediate 
interest and derive less light from the normal type. In order 
then not to injure at once this explanation and the whole survey 
of the transition, I feel that it will be better to adjourn it till 
the time be fully ripe for it. If events support the numbers 
given in this chapter, and if my career takes its natural course, 
I will devote a special course of lectures in 1862 to this great 
problem, at the opening, that is, of the second or intermediate 
phase, after I have written all the works I have promised. 
Coinciding with the two decisive decrees for changing the army 
into a gendarmerie, and for foimding the Positive school, this 
oral teaching will be repeated twice, at the interval of a year, 
and with such improvements as may be found desirable, thus 
carrying us on to the opening of the iinal phase. For the 
present, I must limit myself, on this point, to such particular 
remarks as may give a character of completeness to the general 
outline I have sketched of the political and religious features 
of the principal period of transition, that in which Positivism 
inspires the policy of the government. For the political , 
developement and the spiritual movement, we must distinguish 
between the hints here given, according as they refer to the 
internal organisation or to the external influence of the central 
nation. 

From the very beginning of the third phase, the admission Political 
of the proletaries into the Preparatory Government should inteinaiiy. 
stamp its character on the home policy of the Positivist dicta- 
torship, by reducing the public expenditure and by methodising 
the punishment of political offences. As, by that time, the 
compensations granted to the priests and the officers will have 
expired, the poor will find means of retrenchment beyond what 
the rich could even conceive ; for a triumvirate of an energetic 
and progressive character will be strong enough adequately -to 
remunerate all services without multiplying its agents. An 
allowance daily of a hundred, a hundred and fifty, or two hun- 
dred francs to the intendants, ambassadors, or governors, will 

406 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

proclaim to all the definitive adoption of the noble simplicity 
temporarily introduced by the dictatorship of Danton. In this 
way, without overburdening the finances, it will be possible to 
develope, on a large scale, a system of public works, more needed 
at this period than in the normal state, as we have to prevent or 
to compensate the interruptions of industrial operations, and as 
it is necessary to secure the performance of services of immediate 
necessity in the midst of the disturbances arising from the 
trades' unions. At the same time, the triumvirate will, on its 
own direct responsibility, take the necessary measures for the 
repression of political offences, short of the punishment of death, 
then inadmissible from the non-existence of the convictions 
which could alone legitimise it. Not sheltering itself behind 
tribunals— tribunals as incompetent as they are irresponsible — 
the Preparatory Government will proclaim in the normal mode 
the proscriptions it shall judge required, and will know how to 
carry them into effect after a public hearing of the accused by 
one of its members. The sentence may simply be one of 
exclusion from civic functions, or it may add banishment at 
times with the further penalty of confiscation ; in either case it 
will offer guarantees of its justice and moderation of a higher 
kind than are compatible with illusory and degrading for- 
malities. 
Extinction Looked at as a whole, the domestic policy of the systematic 

Bourgeoisie, dictatorship will have as its great object the renovation of the 
patriciate by eliminating the bourgeoisie, which is a barrier 
between it and the proletariate. But the removal of this 
obstacle to union requires the persistent aid of two movements, 
correlated and yet opposed, the one negative, the other positive : 
the extinction of literateurs and lawyers ; the transformation of 
the small capitalists. All the metaphysical classes fostered by 
the Western revolution, are destined ultimately to disappear ; 
on the contrary, the subaltern chiefs of industry as now con- 
stituted, will in the majority of instances become valuable 
workmen, in some instances real patricians. 
Of Lawyers. Journalism and literature will pass away, in the natural 

course of things, as a consequence of spiritual liberty, and the 
entire abolition of the theoretic budget ; but until tlie close of 
the transition the great nucleus of the metaphysicians will 
survive them ; as the services of the various legists will still be 
needed, although in a decreasing extent. In regard to the best 

CiiAi>. v.] THE TEANSITION. 407 

class, the suppression of all trials for opinions or political action, 
the extension of arbitration and industrial courts, will allow of 
the reduction and simplification of the judicial positions, the 
more eminent occupants of which will have been regenerated 
by Positivism. By the suppression of the schools of law, the 
special education of barristers will have been limited to a 
practical apprenticeship, and the class will gradually disappear 
when deprived of its monopoly of defence, thus, in a more 
favourable state of things, carrying into effect the noble attempt 
of the Bantonian jurists. 

These two reforms will give us the means of improving the Regenera- 
administration and the police by availing ourselves of the Positivist 
knowledge and the training of the unemployed lawyers. Still theBour- 
the great question for the transition policy will be the regene- great object. 
ration of the Positive portion of the existing bourgeoisie. The 
concentration of wealth, and the transformation of the greater 
number of the smaller employers into simple workmen — these 
will be results, in the main, of the natural laws of industrial exist- 
ence ; which existence in a more disturbed milieu tends more 
rapidly in their direction, such a milieu only suitable to great 
strength. And yet the spontaneous movement may be aided by 
a wise intervention, with the aim, principally, of anticipating 
or remedying the disasters incident to it. The intervention 
consists, on the one band, in the removal of all the checks 
emanating from a revolutionary legislation, on the other hand, 
in the due developement of the system of industrial endowments. 

An eminent economist, (M. Dunoyer), rising superior to the Abolition of 
prejudices of negativism, has proposed to abolish the factitious dMsum^of 
equality of properties, and the restoration of the full freedom perty.' F^?e'e- 
of bequest. In theory, it is true, he remains individualist, but beqliest. 
in his tendencies he is unconsciously sociocratic ; so that Posi- 
tivism can adopt his views and give them systematic expression 
and completeness. In particular I feel bound to accept the 
amendment he proposes, which is to adhere to the existing law 
in cases of intestacy, though I do not think the case as common 
as he does. There is an advantage in this restriction, in that it 
allows the natural tendency towards a concentration of inherited 
properties to manifest itself freely, as soon as Positivism has 
propagated the conviction, more particularly in France, that 
large fortunes are eminently desirable. But the aggregate Adoption, 
reaction of freedom of bequest would be found insufficient, if 

408 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

Indnst.rial 
Knrtow- 

adoption is still left as difficult a process as our legislation 
makes it. When we set it, too, free from artificial impediments, 
we must merely retain for it, as for the other, the precautions 
calculated to obviate haste, with its frequent sequel of vain 
regret, as also the unjust neglect of the natural heirs. To avoid 
as far as possible both these evils and yet not to fetter a liberty 
which is indispensable, it is sufficient if we restrict the power in 
both cases, by attaching to it the obligation of complete publicity, 
seven years before the formal execution of the resolution. 

Whatever the efficacy of this first mode of the concentration 
of wealth, it is on the second that we must more rely at present, 
inversely to the normal order, because the one depends especially 
upon private habits and feelings, the latter on the intervention 
of the state. A million of francs judiciously employed in each 
Intendancy to found industrial fortunes, under the fall responsi- 
bility of the triumvirate, in each of the twenty-one years of the- 
last phase, would give a sufficient impulse to the regeneration 
of the French patriciate. Directly and indirectly the measure 
would have its influence, but the indirect would be the greater, 
as it would check the wealthy who misused their wealth by the 
contrast with the new patricians thus created, who will never 
shrink from the examination, under due conditions, of their 
industrial administration. Positivism prides itself on having 
amongst its disciples an eminent practician, who, on the basis 
of a sound scientific education, is struggling, as devotedly as 
wisely, with the difficulties thrown in his way by his want of 
.sufficient capital to improve to the full his land. Similar in- 
stances are already sufficiently numerous to indicate to what 
extent a systematic interference may aid the natm-al process of 
renovating industrial existence, by evoking in the nobler patri- 
cians the habits and feelings suitable to Sociocracy, even before 
the end of the transition. 

I may not reckon confiscation amongst the means of hasten- 
ing this result, although it may seem peculiarly appropriate, 
looking to the subversive aspirations which are now in theiT 
full course. It is in the normal state only, and then in 
great moderation, that confiscation, which is but the extension 
of a power inherent in society, will be applicable; when the 
habits and feelings of all classes of society shall be so regulated 
as to obviate the chief abuses to which it is liable. During the 
transition, it is desirable to limit the use of confiscation and 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITIOK 409 

make it a political punishment, needed for the repression of 
disturbances, caused either by individuals or by masses, and 
traceable to the various influences which will oppose the reorgani- 
sation of Western society. Were we to attempt at once to 
employ it as against a bad use of wealth, there is no principle on 
which to control the action of feelings which, even when honour- 
able, and not, as they too generally are, tainted with envy, would 
yet imperil the security which is indispensable for property. All 
we have to do is, to develope with prudence legal interdiction, or, 
restraint of abuse of property, and use aright the facilities afforded 
us by political confiscation, to promote the introduction of the 
normal dwelling for the proletary class, by making it easy to 
sell houses in apartments. 

To gain a clear idea of the foreign policy of the French External 

° & r J policy of the 

triumvirate, I must distinguish its relations with its immediate Trimn- 

virate. 

neighbours from its relations with nations outside the West, in 
the sociological sense of the term. For the former, the Positi- 
vist dictatorial government requires six ambassadors, avowedly 
accredited to the populations of Italy, Spain, Great Britain, 
Germany, Spanish America, and Anglo-Saxon America, with 
the object of promoting the common work of renovation. These 
ambassadors will never be in hostility to the governments, but 
yet not in exclusive communication with them, as not having 
yet become the true leaders of their respective nations. The 
political missionaries of French Positivism will make it their 
primary object to prevent any mistaken imitation of the ini- 
tiative of France and any premature adoption of its leading 
results. Conservative in a high degree, they will make all feel 
that the agitation due to Metaphysics and the scepticism engen- 
dered by egoism are, for the future, the only real obstacles to the 
satisfactory accomplishment of the Western revolution. Whilst 
encouraging the natural tendency towards subordination to the 
metropolis of the race, they will pave the way for the necessary 
decomposition of the overgrown national aggregates, by appeal- 
ing to the noble wisdom which will prevail in France. More 
especially will they exert themselves to terminate, by suitable 
means, all oppression as between the several constituents of the 
Western republic, and this by a free appeal to the public 
opinion of the country which exercises the oppression. 

Prior to the commencement of the final phase, the progressive independ- 

CIIC6 of 

dictator, the immediate predecessor of the French triumvirate, 

410 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

Corsica and 
the Froiich 
colonies. 

Belations 
with nations 
external to 
the West. 

Religions or 

spiritual 

advance. 

Consolida- 
tion of go- 
vernment 

had already set a decisive example of such a policy by restoring 
Algeria to the Arabs. For the voluntary renunciation of domi- 
nion over a non-western people brings into clearer relief the 
shame attaching to the dominion over a portion of the "West. 
Still, the Preparatory Government will be bound to avoid an in- 
consistency which might be a clog upon its fraternal diplomacy, 
by proclaiming the independence of Corsica, nay even of the 
French colonies, before the decomposition of France proper. 

Outside the We^t, the only states to which the Positivist 
triumvirate should send ambassadors are the monotheistic states, 
Turkey first, then Eussia, lastly Persia. The first object of 
these embassies should be to encourage the growing feeling of 
fraternity, which, since the close of the Middle Ages, connects 
the two civilisations respectively formed by Catholicism and 
Islam, both equally amenable to the iniluences of Chivalry, even 
beyond the limits of the Eoman world. Such legitimate pre- 
ference of Turkey however must not in any degree interfere 
with the attention due to the abortive Monotheism of Eussia, 
whenever the directors of the Byzantine faith are capable of 
following the noble example set them by the Mussulman chiefs 
of subordination to the metropolis of mankind. In this, its 
second class of foreign relations, it is the governments that the 
central triumvirate principally addresses, for now they are at 
the head of their respective nations, and those nations are not 
accessible directly to French diplomacy, the interval between 
them being too wide. On the same grounds we appoint purely 
commercial agents, when we get beyond the monotheistic world ; 
though Positivism will be more powerful to modify the Poly- 
theistic nations and above all the Fetichist ; but it will have 
this power as a purely spiritual influence, to be explained later. 

These hints sufficing at present to explain the policy of the 
triumvirate during the last phase of the organic transition, we 
must point out, on a similar plan, that of the Positive priesthood, 
witli a special reference to the case of France. 

Incorporated as an integral constituent of the French regime. 
Positivism must put forth its power — the conclusive test of its 
superiority — to overcome the existing anarchy, with a view to 
pave the way for the definitive adoption of sociocratic habits. 
Its influence, an influence of a directly organic chai-acter, should 
have two special results ; first, the consolidation of the govern- 
ment, then of property ; thus following the natural course of 

Chap, v.] THE TEANSITION. 411 

the inroad of revolution during the two preceding phases, an and pro- 
inroad of more violence in proportion as liberty of opinion and 
expression brought into clearer light the malady of the West. 

The government is the most urgent and the most capital ^^„'j'"'°™' 
point, inasmuch as it is in reference to it that the anarchical 
tendencies are developed with frightful unanimity. Any one can 
now verify the fact, that it is the rich rather than the poor who 
at the present day are in opposition to government, and yet on 
it depends their safety. I venture to affirm that true Positivists, 
and true Positivists alone, are at the present day habitually 
animated with a sincere and disinterested respect for the tem- 
poral government, in whosesoever hands vested. It is not un- 
becoming in me to add, that the founder of the Religion of 
Humanity, even before his complete emancipation from nega- 
tivism, respected all the successive governments of France during 
the last forty years. But this disposition to order would natu- 
rally long be confined to true believers, who if they would 
regenerate the world, must first themselves have overcome the 
habits of revolution, and to do this must have ended by substi- 
tuting a dogmatic belief for their preliminary scepticism. 
During the first phase of the final period of transition. Positivism 
cannot possibly inspire the Conservatives with a sufficient con- 
fidence, as not being yet completely disencumbered of the 
revolutionary environment which was of necessity its cradle. 
And although, in the second phase, the government recognises 
its value so far as to entrust it with the reorganisation of public 
instruction, it is not till the third that it directly invokes its 
aid against the full tide of anarchy. 

The worthy interpreter of the Great Being, the Positive Hespoctfor 

•^ ■*■ ^\ the servants 

priesthood will enforce, on all, respect for its ministers, in spite °' govem- 
of the real imperfections of their origin and their conduct. 
The action of the Religion of Humanity will not be limited to 
the true believers, but will lead all sincere friends of social 
progress to recognise the fact, that the public functionaries are, 
as a rule, the best class, both in heart and intellect, in the 
present disorderly state. Positivism frees them, once for all, 
from a degrading hypocrisy and calls them to the guidance of 
the world, in the name of the Great Being, on condition of 
substituting devotedness for devotion. Nay, it will ensure them 
respect when as yet unconverted, by representing them as alone 
placed at the social point of view, before which mere personal 

412 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PKESENT. 

(2-) Pro- 
perty. 

Property 
must be 
placed 
under the 
jruardian- 
ship of 
Humanity. 

impulses soon disappear, if the tenure of power is suiEciently 
prolonged. As all the criticisms of them are really referable to 
an unreasonable comparison of them with the definitive standard, 
the relative spirit of Positivism will put an end to sophistical 
censures, by limiting the comparison to the several coexisting 
classes. 

Qualified, by its entire renunciation both of wealth and 
power, to vindicate equally the one and the other, the true 
priesthood will enforce general respect for the rich, having first 
taught them to respect the great. The task devolving on the 
third phase will naturally be, the conversion on a decisive scale 
of all wealth to a sociocratic form, a conversion of which we 
have a direct foreshadowing in the Middle Ages, and even a 
preliminary in the spontaneous change of Allodia into fiefs. 
Previous to this first step, which has hitherto been misappre- 
hended, property never lost its theocratic character ; a character 
gradually changed, but never remodelled, during the Grseco- 
Eoman transition. Whereas the last phase of the defensive 
period of Monotheism introduced throughout Western Europe 
the principle needed for its regeneration, as far as was possible 
under a doctrine which was incapable of consecrating feeling 
and of systematising action. Throughout the course of the 
Western revolution, the state of modem society, owing to 
opposite vices in the rich and the poor, has simultaneously 
strengthened the need for consolidating property by its regu- 
lation, and shown more forcibly the nullity of the older sanction. 

In the present time, it is to Humanity that we must turn 
to give wealth, in whatever form it exists, that fundamental 
basis of security which cannot henceforward be derived from 
God. In vain have the prevalent official JNIetaphysics endea- 
voured to confer on property a sanction independent of both 
sources, by their assertion of individualism, a doctrine as retro- 
grade as it is anarchical. The so-called rights it invokes will 
have entirely disappeared before the fuller growth of social 
impulses, earlier than the end of the two preliminary phases of 
the organic transition. In the third phase, a new power will be 
in the ascendant, a power as disinterested as it is systematic, 
and will guarantee the material basis of society, equally in 
danger at present from its defenders and assailants. Whilst 
satisfying the aspirations after reconstruction to a degree im- 
possible so long as they remained simply destructive, the irre- 

Chap, v.] THE TRANSITION. 413 

versible division of the two powers will implant a general 
conviction, that if there is to be a moral discipline of property 
it must be on condition of its political inviolability. Not 
confining its protection to those proprietors who recognise that 
they hold it as a fief of Humanity, the Positive religion will 
teach respect for all allodial properties whatsoever, by showing 
that the worst specimens of the wealthy class cooperate, even 
against their will, in the conservation of the capital of Hu- 
manity. That capital is by its nature perishable, and for its 
preservation active and constant attention is needed ; in this 
attention consists the principal function of the proprietor, 
whatever be the flaws in his administration, and, allowing for 
individual exceptions, his responsibility is in all cases purely a 
moral responsibility. 

This brings me, in order to complete my present remarks on strugsie 
the conservative influence of Positivism, to the mention of the mimism. 
inevitable struggle it will have with Communism, the latest 
embodiment, in a really honourable and dangerous form, of all 
the revolutionary instincts. Its first victory will be over the 
anarchical attitude of the rich towards the great ; this gained, 
the religion of Humanity will consecrate the larger portion of 
the final transition to the transformation or destruction of the 
feelings which, till then, will have more and more raised the poor 
against the rich. Its triumph in this last respect will be a con- 
clusive sign of the near approach of the normal state, proving, 
as it does, that the relative synthesis, already recognised as 
superior for the worship and the doctrine, is equally adapted 
to the life, which has suffered under all forms of the absolute 
synthesis. 

For success in this struggle with Communism, there are Different 

, inea3uro3 to 

required, successively, two systematic operations, with the object, te taken m 
respectively, of curbing the Western anarchy in its two forms, oonntry. 
between which the distinction is profound, though hitherto they 
have been erroneously confounded ; the first form being that 
which it takes in towns, the second, in the country. 

It is the first exclusively, the more honourable and the more uibancom- 

... mrjiism. 

dangerous form, to which the term communism, properly so 
called, applies, especially as regards the plebeians, and it is with 
them that it exercises a real influence. Positivism is the better 
able to regenerate, in the name of the Great Being, the prole- 
tariate of the towns, in that the error in their case is confined to 

414 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

the intellect and does not vitiate their feelings. The priesthood 
of Humanity, stating the social problem in a broader and more 
systematic form, — the problem which now finds no presentment 
but in communism, — will gradually secure the acceptance of its 
normal solution, after it has shown the inconsistencies involved 
in the Utopia of anarchy. When there is complete liberty, the 
revolutionary teachers will be unable to mask impotence by 
persecution, so that the Eeligion of Humanity will soon convince 
the better proletaries that they have been in error in their dis- 
junction of the two ideas, the concentration of materials and 
their appropriation. The latter is the invariable condition of 
the former, especially when the accumulations are by their 
nature perishable, and, as such, require for their preservation 
distinct and responsible agents, who cannot perform their oflSce 
unless they have full security, the sole source of true activity. 
Eurai. Whilst Communism in the towns attaches too great import- 

ance to the concentration of wealth, the anarchy of the country, 
implicating the feelings in the disorder of the intellect, with 
equal, perhaps greater injury to the feelings, urges to absolute 
individualism, the means being the indefinitive division of the 
highest property, the land. The want of a' distinct name for 
this latter error can alone account for its being constantly 
confounded with the opposite utopia ; it is a want which will 
soon be supplied, such will be inevitably the advance of the 
latest form under which the West can tolerate the subversive 
tendencies, traceable, and in the same form, even as far back 
as the Roman period. This extreme of anarchy will find its 
preachers in the teachers of the primary schools, predisposed, by 
the sciolist popularising of scientific knowledge, to avail them- 
selves of their position to veil under an appearance of system 
the sophisms of the country population. By the conversion, 
however, to Positivism of the better communists, particularly 
from the mechanicians, the Positjvist priesthood will gain a 
natural supply of valuable auxiliaries in its critical struggle on 
behalf of solidarity, not less in danger than continuity. I 
think with pleasure that, by urging the encouragement of 
veterinary schools, I have, during the second phase, prepared a 
body of assistants qualified more than any other to promote, 
during the third phase, the triumph of the true believers over 
the anarchical dispositions of the rm-al districts. 

Although, at this period, the attention of the priesthood will 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 415 

naturally be absorbed by the regime, it will be led by that very worship. 
regime to perfect the abstract portion of the transitional of its 
worship, by the addition of. three social festivals to the festival portion. 
which succeeded the three moral ones. The three will be 
annual, and introduced successively, with the interval of a year 
between them, during the first third of the last phase ; the first 
in honour of the Press, the second of the Post, the third of the 
Police. 

Preeminently popular though it be, the first could not pre- J^fp™g°* 
viously be introduced without danger, for the services of the Press 
were as yet of too questionable a character. Essentially an 
institution of the normal state, it does not deserve the sanction 
of religion, till it has been fully purified from the revolutionary 
character which it displayed during the Western revolution. 
Journalism and literature must become extinct at their centre, 
before Sociolatry can be justified in paying honour to the insti- 
tution which, by the power it confers on reflection to surmount 
impulse, enables us to organise an appeal to the public opinion 
of mankind. 

This first festival will incline the French nation to institute o£ the Post. 
a second, in honour of the admirable system of communications, 
then completed, which is destined to develope and consolidate 
writing, now become universal. From the establishment of 
public messengers up to the introduction of the two forms of 
telegraph, the Positive system of worship must give artistic 
expression to all the modes or stages of the Post, the institu- 
tion parallel to the press, and, equally with the press, connected 
with the most eminent type of modern royalty. There can be 
no better culture of social feeling than the annual idealization 
of the concurrence of all human powers in developing the inter- 
commimications of all members of the great human family. 

Duly prepared by these two festivals, the instinct of society of the 
will, in the third, give a conclusive evidence of its regeneration, 
by honouring an institution which is at once more important 
and less appreciated than the other two. Though France 
should justly pride itself on its Police, this valuable creation of 
the monarchical dictatorship is as yet more rightly judged by 
the other nations of the West. But the sociocratic habits and 
feelings will then have been so far formed as that the priest- 
hood of Humanity may glorify, when remodelled, an institution, 
which, at all times animated by a spirit untrammelled by imwise 

416 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

Of the seven 
transitional 
festivals, 
four may be 
permanent. 

External in- 
fluence of 
the religious 
policy. 

Two insti- 
tutions. 

(1) Chivalry. 

Provisional 
ccmaaitbeo. 

prejudices, unostentatiously protects both individuals and 
society. 

Thus we see how, notwithstanding the conflicts incidental 
to the regime, the Sociolatry of the transitional period will be 
completed, towards the middle of the preparatory generation, 
by the adoption of seven festivals adapted to give an idea of 
the abstract worship during the prevalence of the concrete. 
Although more particularly meant for the transition, the four last 
may be incorporated as accessories into the ultimate system, to 
which the three first are a direct introduction. 

With a view to completeness in my sketch of the religious 
policy of the third phase, it remains to consider it in reference 
to external affairs. Of this however we shall be better able to 
judge later, when we come to examine the peculiar modifica- 
tions of the Positive transition in the four Western groups, and 
even amongst the other races of men. For the present I need 
only point to the rise, the rise in succession of two institutions, 
the one normal, the other provisional, by the aid of which the 
Pontiff of Humanity will be enabled gradually to organise into a 
system the unsystematic propagation of the French movement. 

The first is the institution of the Positive Chivalry, an 
institution most needed in the transition, though not then 
capable of so regular a constitution as under the final regime. 
So ripe is the transition for it, that even now its formation has 
begun on a decisive scale, though unperceived even by those who 
cooperate in it. The infamous persecution originating with the 
most degraded portion of my opponents justly gave rise to the 
sacerdotal fund, as a species of collective patronage of my in- 
dividual existence. At no distant period, the systematic ex- 
tension of this spontaneous protectorate will show men that the 
germs of chivalry have not been stifled by our modern anarchy. 
More indispensable now than in the normal state, for the priest- 
hood of Positivism, the Western proletariate, and the affective 
sex, this voluntary guardianship will shortly bring into concert 
its three elements, described in the preceding chapter. 

For the second of the two, I must here remind the reader 
of the provisional committee, first mentioned, in 1842, in my 
Philosophy, and more completely explained at the end of the 
' Greneral View,' or introduction to my present construction. 
Though prior in order of conception, I must now place it after 
the chivalry ; as its historical function cannot be rightly judged 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 417 

till Positivism in France is mainly concerned with external 
questions, whilst the former institution is quite as much con- 
cerned with internal. Nevertheless, there will be seen to be a 
natural connection between the two institutions ; since the 
Positive committee will be taken from the noblest knights, 
when the generosity which is their characteristic is directly up- 
held by eminence in intellect or conduct. 

Such are the various apercus, on the spiritual and temporal contrast 

,.,, ,.11 • r. between tlie 

order, which have their place here as a preparation for the com- programme 
pleter statement to be given in 1862, in a course of lectures on and its first 

- . . . T 1,1 1 sketch in 

the organic transition. I may now sum up the whole preceding the • General 
exposition, by contrasting it— it is a strongly marked contrast — 
as it now stands complete, with the original sketch. Under the 
influence of a republican movement, an influence, which if 
an irregular was a generous one, I conceived in 1848 : first, 
the Preparatory Government, following the clear indications of 
my lectures in 1847 ; then, the Positive School ; lastly the 
Positive Calendar. The ' Greneral View,' written during the oral 
exposition of these three institutions, bears lasting traces of the 
course pursued, the exact opposite of my present course. Now, 
when so contrasted, we may note the profound reality, nay even 
the perfect opportuneness of a social creation, which, suggested 
by the present, issues in a decisive application of the construc- 
tion of the future on the basis of the past. 

I have now to put the finishing stroke to my last chapter by Moruacation 
describing, first, the modifications to be simultaneously intro- gante trans- 
duced into the organic transition by the four constituents of the other west^ 
West; secondly, the mode of its extension, in succession, to the and^tse?-^' 
Monotheistic, Polytheistic, and Fetichist populations. These sweThe*"^' 
two movements, complementary of the French movement, 
though they began before the nineteenth or exceptional century, 
cannot take their definitive character till such time as, by the 
installation of a permanent and systematic dictatorial govern- 
ment, the initiative of France shall have received its full 
developement. 

Though bound, in the primary case of France, to set forth in Theseren 
detail the organic transition, I have always presented it as, in ste^ps'lquauy 
all essential features, common to all the constituents of the t? thTwhoie 
West, in accordance with the intimate connection of France with °^ ""^ ^'^''' 
them, universally recognised at the opening of the French revo- 
lution. At the point we have reached, we can verify the assertion, 

VOL. IV. E E 

418 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

that each of the leading characteristics, in the temporal or 
spiritual order, of the three successive stages of the movement 
of transition, is as applicable to the whole West as to its central 
nation. The full liberty of thought and utterance consequent 
on the abolition of the spiritual budget ; the substitution of a 
constabulary for the army ; even the accession to power of a 
systematic triumvirate ; — these measures are in all cases alike 
indispensable. And the identity becomes still more evident 
in the spiritual transition ; for there, the growth of the his- 
torical worship ; the establishment of Positive schools ; and the 
triumph of Positivism over Communism ; — these are equally 
applicable to all the Western nations. The same holds good 
of the normal decomposition of the larger states, a measure 
which implies both these series of successive changes. For the 
seven decisive steps, the French nation is invested, as the result 
of the whole past, with an initiative calculated to relieve its four 
neighbours of the necessity of repeating the process of transi- 
tion ; its results are all they need appropriate. But their 
adoption of them can in no case be a purely passive process ; 
and therefore I must describe the modifications which, in the 
natural course of things, it will everywhere involve ; modifica- 
tions by which each constituent will contribute its particular 
improvement to the general result. 
Dnesubordi- In every extension of the principal movement, the priest- 
ranS*"*'"' hood which presides over the regeneration, aided by the Positive 
movement, committee, will make it its great object to reconcile two con- 
ditions of equal importance : a proper subordination to the 
central operation ; and a wise respect for national differences. 
Such differences must be made to promote the object of the 
Western effort, which is meant for mankind, by the develope- 
ment of the peculiar capacities of each nation. But the move- 
ment in each must always be subordinated to the initiatory 
movement, and that by an act of voluntary deference, in all 
cases in agreement with the order of reorganisation laid down 
in the opening of the present chapter, as a deduction from the 
whole of the last volume. 
Italy. In this order, the Italian nation is represented as the first 

to join the movement of reorganisation, which it is peculiarly 
qualified to aid as an esthetic developement. The predisposi- 
tions requisite for this mission are the more likely to prevail, 
in that they amount simply to the giving due prominence to 

Chap, v.] THE TEAKSITION. 419 

the principal features of the Italian situation, misconceived by 
the literary class alone. Although the population of Italy is 
more clear than any other of military habits and feelings, its 
spiritual guides have never ceased to regret its ancient domina- 
tion, nay, to dream of its return, and its universality. Eightly 
viewed, the political decom.position of Italy brings it nearer to 
the normal state, whereas they aim at its unity, as retrograde as 
it is anarchical, incompatible too with the necessary degree of 
independence. But it will not be difficult for Positivism to 
overcome these errors, as not rooted in popular feeling, by a 
direct appeal to the instincts of Humanity, more imperfectly 
represented in Italy than elsewhere. Whilst delivering Italy 
from the yoke of the stranger, it will maintain throughout the 
degree of independence demanded by the aggregate of local 
conditions. It will put an end to all factitious state-unions as 
oppressive, partixsularly such as by their plural name sufficiently 
indicate their heterogeneous character, the great instance being 
the confused group formed, in the north of Italy, by the union 
of five discordant states. 

The preliminary conditions fairly satisfied, the population of The oontri- 

T 1 n T • • • • bution of 

Italy will soon be m a position to renounce a separate unity, itaiy. 
the better to fulfil its high function as an eminent contributor ''' a™eiai. 
to the process of unifying mankind. Its language will become the 
common language of all nations, by virtue of its superiority in 
poetry and in music, and inasmuch as, socially, it is clear of all 
propagation by oppressive means. This privilege of Italy, 
already proclaimed by Positivism, is the direct tie which con- 
nects her feelings with the advent of the renovating faith, a 
work in which each of her sons may aid, if he substitute the 
developement of his intellectual and moral nature for political 
agitation. 

Over and above this general contribution, Italy must give a (h) special. 
special one to the advancement of the organic transition ; it 
should complete the concrete worship of Humanity by an 
esthetic creation. Its main contribution will be an epic poem 
of an unprecedented order, the presentation of the close of the 
Western revolution, as the incomparable composition of Dante 
presided over its commencement. The language destined to 
universality will perfect its claims by thus completing its repre- 
sentation of the modern movement, the latest phase of the vast 

£ E 2 

420 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

The Epic ot 
Humanity. 

Is to consist 
of thirteen 
cantos. 

Synthase 
subjective, 
p. 111. 

Description 
of the Poem, 

preparation which step by step was to substitute Sociocracy for 
Theocracy. 

After a sufficient practice of the historical worship, there 
will be felt, and most keenly in Italy, the want of a poetic em- 
bodiment of the past. Foreseeing this want, I am led to describe 
here the poem which is to meet it ; which it is not for me to 
write, but to which I have already endeavoured to call public 
attention in the course of lectures described in the preface of 
the last volume. The composition, as it seems to me, ought, 
about the middle of the organic transition, to come from an 
Italian, a pupil of the Positive school, and so having his artistic 
genius adequately trained by the encyclopaedic education given 
in that school. 

The ideal expression of the philosophy of history, the poem 
of Humanity will picture in succession all the phases of the 
preparatory life of the race, up to the advent of the iinal state. 
The ordering of this epic, as a work of art, is founded on the 
cerebral crisis described at the end of the first chapter of the last 
volume, — the crisis in which I first rapidly descended the 
sociological scale and then slowly reascended. Thus was per- 
formed, following the course of the ages, a double journey, the 
equivalent of the single journey of Dante through the various 
worlds. But a journey such as his, purely statical, and as such 
precluding any retracing of his steps, could offer no contrasts to 
be compared with those presented by the comparison, in my 
dynamical journey, of the three months of descent with the 
five of ascent. My forthcoming work will unfold the subject- 
ive laws which fix thirteen, a trebly prime number, as the 
proper number of cantos for any systematic epic — but, mean- 
while, its adoption may, in the present case, be determined on 
social grounds. 

The introductory canto is statical in character, as the ideal 
representation of the cerebral unity, disorder in which shows 
itself in retrogradation, when the disturbance of our sympathies 
vitiates our synthesis : carrying us back, that is, from laws to 
causes. Then, in three cantos, we have the descent of the 
intellectual and moral nature from the relative to the absolute, 
first in its monotheistic, then in its poljrfcheistic, lastly in its 
fetichist stage, with a constant aspiration towards complete 
harmony, but without the power of attaining it. In the eight 
following cantos, the heart and the intellect reascend, by a grad- 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 421 

Tial course, towards Positive unity, as elaborated by the succes- 
sive eiibrts of Fetichism, Astrolatry, Theocracy, the intellectual 
developement of Greece, the social Polytheism of Kome, the 
defensive Monotheism, Feudal civilisation, and the movement of 
Moderp times. Finally, in the thirteenth canto, is idealised 
man's normal existence, at once affective, contemplative, and 
practical, with equal reference to the race and to the indi- 
vidual. This concluding portion, however, must not be am- 
plified further, lest it interfere with the essentially dynamical 
character of the epic of the transition, so reserving for the 
future the statical poem — which that future alone can call into 
existence. 

By such a production, the genius of Italy, whilst still main- its influence 
taining, and iustly, the preeminence which it assigns to art over universal 
science, will perfect its own education by becoming systematiCj 
in entire conformity with its aptitude for synthesis, an aptitude 
which, as yet, it has been unable adequately to display. So deci- 
sive a creation, destined to evoke in all the enthusiasm required 
for the inauguration of the true human providence, oughtj at the 
same time, to give the universal language the only qualities in 
which it is now deficient; It is in this way that Positivism, at 
the present day, devolves on the Italian constituent of the West 
a high intellectual and social mission, one which touches the 
normal state no less than the whole of the final transition, a 
mission which it alone can accomplish. Under the impulse thus 
given, the most artistic of the nations ought at length to reap 
the choicest fruits of its admirable culture of art, a culture often 
hitherto judged excessive, simply because it had not reached its 
true goal. In proportion as the Positive religion spreads the 
conviction, that the ultimate spiritualty wears a poetical rather 
than a philosophical character, it will be felt that the Italians 
are, from this point of view, the people the most predisposed for 
synthesis through sympathy. 

It is from the dim consciousness of its superiority in this itaiy ai- 
respect, as well as from the interest inspired by a nation which seraLd place, 
has been often the oppressed, never the oppressor, that the tteowie? "^ 
claims of Italy to the second place in the Western world are dispute'! 
more freely admitted than is the initiative of France. Apart 
from these two first cases, the classification of the sister nations 
is open to some doubt, a doubt I have myself felt, and one 
which it is important to remove, because the origin of it, in the 

422 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

moral nature as -well as in the intellect, involves a more serious 
question than its consequences. The dogma of equality, the 
ordinary veil of the instinct of domination, is not less revolu- 
tionary as between nations than it is in individuals ; between 
nations it acts more strongly as a dissuasive to habitual coopera- 
tion. Called, by the whole course of human destinies, to guide 
the regeneration of the race, the Western nations must begin 
by setting persistently an example of a noble intersubordination, 
in the name, always, of their common mission. We may re- 
mark here, as in all other cases of the classification of man, 
that the most advanced are also the most disposed to second 
the action of the centre. But this tendency were insuflBcient, 
if each constituent were willing only to accept the common 
president, whilst disallowing the precedence of the nation 
immediately above it in rank. Although their participation 
in the organic transition must shortly become simultaneous, we 
must clear up all uncertainty as to their hierarchical arrange- 
ment, for it is to serve as the universal type of all voluntary 
aggregations, in which liberty has full play but without 
equality. 
Spain. Its Allowing too much weight to intellectual and industrial 

third place. Considerations, in my first classification I assigned to Spain the 
lowest rank in the Western world. Later, on moral and social 
grounds, I was induced to place her above the northern couple, 
the position she occupied before the eruption of Protestantism. 
This decision finds support in the admirable readiness of the 
most energetic and most persevering of Western nations to 
acquiesce in the indispensable presidency of France. But the 
pontiff of Humanity, clear of all national prejudices, may not 
allot Spain, however eminent, a higher place, though she is not 
as willing to accept the precedence of Italy as she is the initia- 
tive of France. This minor injustice on the part of Spain is 
due, partly to the disturbing influence of past associations, 
mainly, however, to the noble consciousness of her soundest 
claims. In no other Western nation have we so just an appre- 
ciation, both in the family and in the state, of the female sex; 
in no other Western nation have we such a sense of fraternity 
without any impairment of subordination ; nowhere else so un- 
forced an incorporation of the servants into the family. Valid, 
however, as these titles are, as against the two northern con- 
stituents of the West, and valid as they would be even as 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITXON. 423 

against France, were it not that by its central position it is 
taken out of the comparison, they are not valid as against Italy, 
■which is on a level with Spain in these respects, allowance made 
for its antecedents. 

If it compare itself with the protestant nations, the Spanish 
people is justified in asserting its moral and social superiority, 
a superiority in no wise neutralised by its inferiority in thought 
and in industry. Positivism ratifies its judgment, showing that 
the deficiency of the Iberic population may be soon supplied 
under an appropriate stimulus, whereas those of the other Occi- 
dentals require a slow and diflSicult reformation. But from this 
statement Italy must be excepted, as, in her case, if the claims 
which she has in common with Spain are less evidently justified, 
it is due mainly to her aggregate antecedents in more recent 
times, not so favourable as in Spain to the developement of 
civic feeling. Her slight inferiority in this respect is more 
than compensated by her preeminence in art, combined with 
her incontestable superiority in speculation and action. Even 
under the moral and social aspect, Spain should recognise 
the precedence of Italy, with her hands clean of colonisation, 
and more completely clear of all barbarous customs, were it 
only by virtue of her military inferiority, an effect of the 
absence of political centralisation. Errors in policy on the 
subject of temporal unity are, in Italy, confined to the literary 
class, whereas in Spain they are more widely spread and more 
tenaciously held, though not to the point of being really 
popular, as is shown by the fact that the retrograde party has 
gained credit by its opposition to them. Nevertheless, the 
colonial possessions of Spain are the great source of the de- 
terioration of the Spanish character, for her colonisation, as 
more systematically conducted than that of any other nation, 
implanted an oppressive disposition which is yet sufficiently 
strong to mar her cooperation — her indispensable cooperation — 
with the West in its mission. 

These hints, when combined, suffice to justify the rank de- spain ranks 

' after Franco 

finitively assigned by Positivism to Spain, immediately after and itaiy, 
France and Italy, in the ultimate reconstruction of the family 
which is in the van of Humanity. I could not but dwell most 
on the most difficult point in a classification which, like every 
normal arrangement, will summarise the general comparative 
estimate of the groups classified. Whereas the hierarchy of the 

424 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

Spain*s 
special con- 
tribution. 

Incorpora- 
tion of 
the Spanisti 
Clergy. 

Nowhere 
else is there 
hope of the 
clergy as- 
a body. 

two protestant nations will merely require the explicit correction 
of the order originally stated. 

Accepting the decision just given, I have here to indicate 
the special contribution of Spain to the Western effort of con- 
struction, special as distinct from the general influence which 
she will naturally exert upon it. Her proper part is, most 
especially, to promote the organic transition by the voluntary 
adjunction of the only clergy which in Western Europe is 
capable of aiding the movement. 

When the suppression of the spiritual budget shall allow 
the free emergence of the real tendencies of things, I hope 
shortly to be able to rally to Positivism one in a hundred of the 
French priests, who are now kept down under a discipline which 
is rather temporal than spiritual. But I think I may then 
calculate on a larger result in the Spanish priesthood, better 
placed than any other for a sound estimate of the universal 
degradation of the spiritual power. A clergy in its position 
cannot take a hostile attitude, it cannot even remain neutral, 
as regards the advent of the only doctrine competent to raise 
the dignity of the priesthood, on certain intellectual and moral 
conditions, which it may soon fulfil. 

It has always been with regret that I have watched the ex- 
tinction of the Catholic organism without being able to utilise, 
for the final transition, the ruins of a hierarchy which it took 
so much time and effort to construct, for which its real services 
were but a slight return. But after many attempts to connect 
it with the renovation which hitherto it has in vain rejected, I 
have been gradually compelled to abandon all hope of trans- 
forming the French priesthood, its leaders being incapable 
of compliance with the conditions of such transformation. 
Positivism must never hope for more than occasional recruits 
from its ranks, when the pressure of the Episcopacy is to a con- 
siderable degree lightened. Still their aid will be valuable ; for 
by their antecedents they are prepared to uphold more firmly 
the supremacy of Morals, as also to feel greater respect for the 
normal discipline, which they will be able honourably to recon- 
cile with the scientific instruction at present lacking. The above 
remarks apply also to the Italian priesthood ; for as a body it is 
irredeemable, owing to the apathy of the lower and the corrup- 
tion of the higher clergy, the latter clinging to spiritual inde- 
pendence solely as a condition of temporal power. As for the 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 425 

several protestant clergies, their greater political degradation, 
the more systematic character of their hypocrisy, alienate them 
more completely from a spiritualty more hostile to Meta- 
physics than to Theology. Such a spiritualty can expect a 
welcome only from those who, having no state support, really 
possess a certain religious authority, supposing that their per- 
sonal worth preserves them from the deteriorating influence 
which frequently attends on voluntary support in an insurrec- 
tionary society. 

By this process of exclusion, we arrive at the Iberian priest- The Spanish 
hood as the only one capable of aiding Positivism in the general mpfwe' °°° 
conduct of the organic transition. It appears to me really posiu"ifm. 
capable of welcoming the regenerative faith, when once fairly 
adopted by the French dictatorship. For its chiefs have pre- 
served a sufBcient superiority over their own body and even their 
nation, to qualify them for presiding over a transformation 
calculated to place on a sound basis their authority, an 
authority already impaired though not destroyed. From a 
philosophical point of view, their power should show itself in 
the gradual substitution of the encyclopaedic instruction for the 
studies recognised by Theology. Under the religious aspect, it 
may transform the worship of the Virgin into an adoration of 
Humanity. 

But legitimate as these hopes may be as regards the clergy Spanish 
of the peninsula, they seem to me in an especial degree justified . ti" cio?gy 
in regard to the Spanish and Portuguese settlements in America. 
In Spain, the influence of the Papacy may impede the regenera- 
tion of the priesthood, if not by direct influence, — an influence 
long more extinct in Spain than elsewhere — at any rate by 
the indirect ascendancy conferred on it by popular feeling. It 
is otherwise in America ; there the power of the Papacy has 
been a derivative from the power of the monarchy, the real 
creator and upholder of the ecclesiastical hierarchy. Since the 
Catholic colonies gained their independence, the influence of 
Kome is, as a natural consequence, uprooted there. Although 
the temporal rulers as yet have but an uncertain tenure, by the 
nature of the case they have inherited the ecclesiastical pre- 
rogatives of the royal government. These dictators on suffer- 
ance must, though with a purely empirical policy, be more 
prone to respect the independence of a priesthood which is 
the only deeply-rooted institution in such populations as they 

there. 

426 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

govern. There can be no powerful obstacle to the transforma- 
tion of which the colonial clergy is more susceptible than the 
clergy of the mother country, all its ranks being equally acces- 
sible to the religion of Humanity. 
They will It IS the more calculated to make its way there, in that it 

welcome the . 

Positivist gives systematic expression to tendencies which, everywhere in- 

conception ,. .• . ti • * 

of marriage, stmctive, lu ibenau America are more than usually powerful, 
as in unison with the whole social feeling. The Positivist law 
of marriage for the priesthood appeals especially to the clergy, 
as relieving them from the corrupting action of celibacy whilst 
not exposing them to the degradation inflicted on them by 
Protestantism. So long as the doctrine professed sanctions an 
ignoble estimate of women, it is by licence alone, however con- 
tradictory to their vows, that priests can escape the isolation 
which is held up universally as the type of Christian perfection. 
It is the exclusive privilege of Positivism to place the marriage 
of priests on its right footing, by establishing the true theory of 
human nature and the normal union of the sexes. In its regime, 
marriage will be enjoined on the priesthood as a special 
guarantee of moral improvement, instead of degenerating into 
a degrading concession to appetites which religion ought in all 
cases to repress. 

The organic Enlarffo this view and we can realise how gTeatly the 

transition ° a j 

easy in these organic transition will be facilitated in the society consti- 

colonies. ° "^ 

• tuted by the Spanish and Portuguese colonisation in America, 
or even in Oceania. For the dispositions which are peculiarly 
favourable to the political and religious ascendancy of Posi- 
tivism prevail there equally in the temporal as in the spiritual 
order. Preserved by the course of events from the parliamentaiy 
regime, even when France was yet subject to it, the EepubUcs 
there founded will move by a direct path towards Sociocracy, 
so soon as their monocratic dictators shall transform themselves 
into systematic triumvirates. The army will easily become a 
constabulary, when all anxiety on the score of invasion has 
finally disappeared. The abolition of the spiritual budget — 
this, it is true, is a question of serious difficulty, but the neces- 
sity for this provisional measure ceases in a society which has 
escaped universities and academies, if the priesthood by its re- 
generation offer full security for liberty of opinion and speech. 
England Before I consider the two other constituents of the Western 

GamanyT^ world, I must briefly correct my original error as to the order 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 427 

in ■which they will reach the final state. In opposition with 
the whole of past history, I placed England below Germany, 
though I had allowed the superiority of the English governing 
classes, because I attached too much weight to the allpervading 
deterioration due to the national isolation. I have since come to 
see that Germany more justly deserves reproach on this head, 
for she oppresses Western nations who are more advanced than 
herself, whilst the dominion of England is in the main external 
to the West and affects belated populations. Setting aside the 
anomaly relating to art properly so called, the comparison of 
the two nations in action, speculation, and poetry justifies the 
precedence of England, and this is supported by her superiority 
as an industrial society. Of all Occidentals, the Germans are the 
least removed from the military regime, and from the theologico- 
metaphysical state ; so that they will be the last to reach the 
common goal of the modern revolution, a conclusion indicated 
by their inferior participation in the training given by Rome 
and Feudalism. 

An indirect verification of this direct conclusion may be Acceptanco 

•' of the Posi- 

found by comparing the reception of Positivism in the two tiTePMio- 

111 Sophy in 

countries ; in Germany it has hitherto been ignored ; in Eng- England. 
land it meets with more appreciation than in France, at least 
as a philosophy. This contrast appears to me the more decisive, 
inasmuch as, to appreciate Positivism, the English had to make 
a noble effort to overcome the repugnance justly excited by my 
first classification of the constituents of the West. And although 
the religion of Humanity is destined shortly to be more popular 
in the South than in the North, the welcome given in England 
to its philosophical basis seems to me conclusive in the case 
of a doctrine which primarily addresses itself to the higher 
order of minds. 

The fourth element of the West, besides its general co- The special 
operation, should bring, as its special contribution to the tion'of'"' 
perfecting of the organic transition, the staid and regular ■^"s'*"'^- 
movement which is unattainable elsewhere. Of all the debris 
of the older temporalty, the British aristocracy alone seems to 
me capable of transforming itself so as to be competent to 
direct the national reorganisation, thus preserved from the 
stormy irregularities which will occur in the remainder of the The British 
West. The hope corresponds to that which I even now in- ^™^°''">^y- 
dicated, in reference to the spiritualty of Christendom, in the 

428 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

If competent 
it may hold 
its power 
without in- 
ten-aptioil. 

Previous 
niodifica- 
tiou? of the 
British 
patriciate. 

It will 
welcome 
Positivism 
when it sees 
it overcome 
( 'ommunism 
in France. 

case of the Iberian priesthood, the remodelling of which seems 
to me more difficult and less prepared. 

To give definiteiiess to this hope, we must direct our at- 
tention more particularly to the last phase of the transition as 
a political movement ; the two others will be easy in England, 
as will be the three stages of the spiritual transition. The 
Positivist triumvirate, in due time, must obtain in England as 
in other countries ; but in England it may do so without pass- 
ing through the temporary anomaly which in the rest of the 
Western world is inevitable, owing to the degeneracy of the 
old patriciate and the incompetence of the new. If the 
British aristocracy accept the proper modifications, it will avoid 
the transient supremacy of the proletariate, and wiU have the 
imparalleled honour of directing, in an orderly movement, the 
formation and installation of the normal state. 

However difficult, the change is one which cannot but seem 
possible, if we consider the changes already accepted by the 
English aristocracy, the ablest patriciate the world has seen 
since the Eoman senate. After frankly acquiescing, aa a final 
result, in the establishment of peace as the permanent condi- 
tion of Europe, it has wholly abandoned the policy based upon 
war with the aim of hindering the inevitable spread of the 
Eepublican movement. This implies that it has resigned itself 
to the overcoming by appropriate methods communism or 
socialism, the last shape worn by the revolutionary instinct, 
and a more dangerous shape than the Jacobinism so dreaded 
at first. In spite of the over -confidence which the governing 
classes of England place in material remedies, from their want 
of a political theory, they cannot conceal from themselves that 
the malady is essentially cerebral and, as such, imperiously 
demands an intellectual and moral treatment. Too clearsighted 
to look to Theology for this treatment, the decay of belief being 
the primary source of the disorder, they will be soon led to feel 
the power of Positivism to direct society, as a natural consequence 
of their actual recognition of its superiority as a philosophy. 

In vain do the literary classes in England, more than else- 
where, strive to confine the new philosophy to its ptu'ely intel- 
lectual function. Their efforts, prompted by selfinterest, will 
fail against an indivisible synthesis, nor will they long prevent 
the statesmen of England from forming a true estimate of 
Positivism, especially as a social power. The struggle once 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 429 

openly begun in France between it and communism, it will 
rivet their attention in a degree beyond any possible antici- 
pation at present. They will see in it the sole legitimate source 
of a policy competent to obviate or overcome a crisis at home, 
which, if left to take its natural course, would be more stormy 
in England than anywhere. It is not likely that the conditions 
attached to this political regeneration will excite repugnance in 
them, for what are those conditions but the substitution in 
regard to the existing spiritualty of a system of management 
for a system of hypocrisy ? 

Patricians of their stamp cannot but deeply lament the But they 
necessity which obliges them, sceptics as they are, to bend to a the aiei-t or 
degrading theological system, a system which subjects them to superseded 
the dominion of the very people whose rulers they deem them- letariate, 

_ , . . . 1 . 1 1.11 1 and some 

selves. From the false position m which their doubt places successor ot 

■ ■1111 1- PIT Cromwell. 

them, they can be extricated only by the adoption of real reli- 
gious convictions, but by such convictions they will become as 
superior to their environment in heart and in character as they 
already are in intellect. So raised, they will be enabled, to their 
own eternal honour, to the great good of their people, and even 
of the whole world, to avail themselves, to the full, of the more 
striking advantages of their exceptional position, neutralised 
hitherto by their empirical conservatism. If, on the other hand, 
their conversion is too long delayed, they will be outstripped by 
the elite of the British proletariate, led by its own unaided 
studies, to be shortly systematised by Positivism, to place in 
power, by an irresistible effort, the legitimate successors of 
Cromwell. The democratic revolution of the seventeenth cen- 
tury failed, it is true, for it had no theory to direct it and 
the circumstances were unfavourable, but it has left in the 
noblest English spirits imperishable germs, even now on the eve 
of maturity. Compression at home, the diversion afforded 
abroad, both alike have lost their power to keep down tendencies, 
which have as a groundwork the whole of the past, and which 
would be sure of ultimate victory, even if the English evolu- 
tion were to run its course in isolation. They must soon 
become resistless, when the advent of the proletariate in France 
to the systematic dictatorship shall appeal forcibly to the 
popular sympathy throughout Europe. 

If it would avoid a democratic revolution by a sociocratic Their pro. 
evolution, the English aristocracy must revise its external no pouoy^'^'' 

430 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

less than its internal policy. In the first place, it must sweep 
away the last symptoms of a disposition to oppression as re- 
gards the other Western nations, more particularly by putting 
an end to the insulting anomaly which subjects ta England a 
city of Andalusia. I have the more hope of witnessing at an 
early period this evidence of a definitively fraternal policy, in 
that, when I urged the measure, in the name of Humanity, in 
my public lectures in 1849, an English Positivist told me that 
the opinion had been spontaneously broached by an English 
Mr. oobden. manufacturer. The indication is valuable as showing the peace- 
able growth of a true Occidental policy, the general adoption of 
such policy to be secured by the new diplomacy through a noble 
appeal to the nation which holds Gibraltar. It is, however, 
principally with reference to the populations outside the "West, 
that there is needed a complete change in the domination of 
England ; for the partial benefits it confers, even when most 
palpable, are not sufficient to cancel the general sense of op- 
pression. Not to dwell on the truth that material interests are 
not the highest, for nations any more than for individuals, the 
legitimate satisfaction of those interests in no case requires a 
corrupting supremacy, the tendency of which is to perpetuate 
war in the name of industry. W^hen regenerated by Positivism 
the English aristocracy will become thoroughly industrial, and 
will rest its preponderating foreign influence solely on its skilful 
use of its wealth, when all the Western nations will eagerly 
assist it, the better to serve Humanity. 

This summary view of the reform which the existing foreign 
and domestic policy of the British constituent both requires and 
admits, really applies to it in its full sociological comprehen- 
sion, to the Anglo-Saxon world, that is, and especially to the 
United States of America. They have thrown off their political 
connection with England, but they cannot break their filial 
connection, the intellectual and moral tradition which binds 
them, so that they have recourse to it for the names of their 
towns, even, in a greater degree than was the case with the 
Arabs in Spain. Whilst however we enlarge to this extent the 
scope of our previous remarks, one general modification of them 
is needed, otherwise they would seem inapplicable, or their 
application might mislead. 
Difference in The peculiar form of colonisation establishes a permanent 
o{ North and difiference between the North and the South of America, as 

The "United 
States. 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 431 

regards their respective relations with the parent states. Ca- south 
tholicism and royalty directed on system the colonial movement the mother 
of the Spanish and Portuguese, hence it adhered in the aggre- """^ ^' 
gate to its antecedents ; it even allowed, as I have just shown, 
a better developement of the great characteristics of their social 
state. Whereas the British colonisation, originating as it 
did in individual efforts under the sanction of Protestantism, 
weakened the social traditions, and the more so, in that the 
colonists were principally the persecuted and rebels. On both 
forms alike rests the grave blot of slavery, the enslaving of the 
race in which affection predominates ; but this monstrous insti- 
tution places the two in strong contrast, showing the extent to 
which their inadequate discipline, whether spiritual or temporal, 
lowers Protestants in relation to Catholics. The same difference 
reappears from whatever side we approach the subject, and 
owing to it, the British Americans are the most anarchical of all 
Western nations, because they have encouraged the defects and 
repressed the excellences of the English type. 

Still, their particular form of degeneracy should be no insu- Tbe cMet 
perable obstacle to Positivism in availing itself of the advantages America the 
of their situation, so that they, after their manner, may aid in generation, 
the general construction of the final state, which, as a political 
movement, is of easier introduction in America than anywhere 
else. The grand difficulty there is connected with the spiritual 
transition, in reference even to the doctrine, but still more to 
the worship : for the latter, our system of commemoration 
accords ill with a nation without antecedents ; for the former, 
the Positive school is a stumbling-block to the metaphysical 
spirit there in the ascendant, though with a varnish of ency- 
clopeedism. But the uneasiness which is felt as to their political 
condition will, at no distant period, ensure the adoption of an 
indivisible synthesis ; its aid against communism was duly 
invoked by the eminent American whose premature loss I had 
to regret in the preface to the preceding volume. Even as it 
is, the spontaneous spread of Positivism in America offers a 
vague confirmation of the more precise evidence of his appeal ; 
so that we may see, to what an extent the representatives in 
America of the British aristocracy may use the special advan- 
tages of their position in the furtherance of the organic tran- 
sition. Without a standing army, without an established church, 
the American statesmen can have no empirical illusions as to 

432 SYSTEM. OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PKESENT. 

the value of material remedies ; and they are thus better quali- 
fied to diagnose aright the disease under which the West is 
suffering ; in particular they are prepared to accept the inevit- 
able disgregation of all factitious aggregations. 
The Anglo- Still, to wliatever degree the British leaders can be trans- 

mentwiit formed, especially in England, it is certain that the fourth 
to dispense element of the West will require, equally with the others, for 
ceptionai " its reorganisation, an extraordinary intervention on the part of 
of the pro- the proletariate. The transfer of political power to the workins' 

Ictariate ■*■■'■ o 

classes may not be as indispensable provisionally, there as else- 
where, as a means of raising the capitalist, yet the nobler 
patricians will at any rate need the aid of the plebeians to place 
the central power in its due position. The necessity of abolishing 
the parliamentary regime in its proper home' will involve diffi- 
culties, which, without the help of the people, would be insur- 
mountable ; there being no other power able to eradicate the 
organised hypocrisy inseparable from English constitutionaHsm. 
Germany. In proceeding to the last and most heterogeneous constituent 

caiconnec- of the Westcm world, the first point is to distinguish between 
the preoed- Grermauy and its two chief appendages, the links sociologically 
are found in betwecu Grermanv and England, industrial Holland and aristo- 

Holland and 

Sweden. cratic Swedcu. These two nations, though opposed to one 
another, are yet brought together by the circumstance that 
they are both superior, with an equivalent superiority, industrial 
or political, to the Grerman world; both, too, equally accept 
subordination to France as the centre of the West. Were the 
Grerman group as a whole at the level of these two outlying 
portions, it would deserve the rank which I originally assigned 
it in the collective advance of the elite of Humanity. The two 
may have an influence for good on the organic transition far 
beyond what their material power might seem to promise, and 
such, that they may regain the social consideration deserved by 
their services and their excellences. In advance of Grermany 
from the time that they created their admirable country, and 
by its creation nobly submitted to the law of fixity of habitation ; 
always the least selfish of the Western nations in the midst of the 
great political struggles ; the Dutch have developed in a higher 
form the industrial state and have been more successful in 
avoiding its concomitant evils. As for the Swedish aristocracy, 
though its reform is of less importance for the West than that 
of the English, it is easier, from its system of hypocrisy being 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 433 

less organised, as not connected in Sweden with national isolation. 
As the Italians, the Scandinavians have remained untainted by 
colonisation, and would be therefore morally superior to the 
Batavians ; were it not that the latter, besides having attained 
a higher culture, especially a higher esthetic culture, ordered 
their colonies more systematically than the English, more 
liberally than the Spaniards. 

It was necessary, at the outset, to put aside these two noble Apai-tfrom 
exceptions, if we were to estimate aright the organic transition Sweden, 
in the case of Germany, the true character of which will thus be offers pecu- 
less obscured by heterogeneous elements. The ultimate period uities. 
of preparation is as much a necessity for Germany as for the 
others, and from both points of view the process presents more 
difiBculties in Germany, difl&culties which have but a slight set 
off in its special advantages. Still the satisfactory incorporation 
of the fifth element is a condition which we cannot elude in the 
reconstruction of the West, — its necessary reconstruction — the 
decisive step from which we pass to the regeneration of man- 
kind. 

Although the Positive religion is fated to meet with more opposition 
obstacles and less support m Germany than anywhere else, it piiysioians. 
will be most hampered by the influential classes, influential for 
a time, that is, which are the peculiar growth of the modern 
revolution. Nay more, it is from the metaphysicians and them 
only that comes the great opposition to the acceptance of an 
organisation ; for the German legists are more available than 
tliose of other countries as useful assistants in the movement of 
reconstruction. But the disease of ontology, inherent in Pro- 
testantism, has gradually acquired so extensive and so firm a 
hold on the German nation, as to make the success of Positivism 
in Germany the greatest triumph of the system. 

Of all Western nations, the French have always been, and The meta- 
are at the present day more than ever, the least affected by lite- the^severaV" 
rateurs and metaphysicians, and this owing to the two safe- 
guards furnished, under the royal dictatorship, by their social 
aspirations and their scientific tendencies. Such influence as 
the two classes have nad, has been less noxious in France than 
elsewhere, and more in conformity with the national disposi- 
tions, by virtue of the demand there was for their services in 
preparing and inaugurating the great Eevolution. In Italy, 
the excellence as well as the precocity of its poetic developement 
VOL. lY. F F 

countries. 

434 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE ■ POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

swelled the number of its literary class, lowered its character, 
and gave it a widespread popularity, a popularity however not 
so representative of the national tendencies. In Spain, an 
equivalent result was brought about by its deficiency industri- 
ally and scientifically, notwithstanding that the monarchy held 
dictatorial power, and, it must not be forgotten, had a stronger 
hold upon the legists. The English mind is averse to Meta- 
physics, yet in point of fact, they are, through Anglicanism, in 
possession of the ecclesiastical budget ; on the condition that 
they support the existing system of hypocrisy, promoted by 
most English literateurs ever when dissenters, tacitly at least, 
and to the abandonment of the cause of the proletariate. The 
state of Germany gives them less official importance but greater 
spiritual power, but at the same time it makes them worse re- 
presentatives of the popular dispositions. Yet the influence they 
have gained is questionable and precarious, as they are denied 
equally the legal income of the English literary class, and the 
voluntary contributions which maintain their American rivals. 
Positivism Gruidcd by these two indications, Positivism is warranted in 

S'oeraiariy appealing simultaneously to the rulers of Germany and to its 
and the '^ ^ popular massos to set aside the misty obstacle which alone pre- 
vents it from penetrating to the German world and securing its 
appropriate cooperation in the organic transition. I venture to 
say that the new philosophy is not less known there than else- 
where; for my earliest works, so far back as 1825, were fully 
appreciated by certain eminent literary men, and besides there 
has been the stimulus due to its favourable reception in HoUand. 
The same influences, however, which in its own home have so 
greatly retarded the growth of Positivism, still impede it in 
Germany, notwithstanding its contact with England, the efiect 
of such contact being neutralised by the unceasing vigilance of 
the ontologists. Nevertheless, the course of the movement, in- 
tellectually and socially, in the West, will not be long in over- 
riding these partial obstacles, as it evidences the powerlessness 
of the doctrine of Metaphysics, and the need of the true religion. 
Positivism will be, in Germany more than elsewhere, the de- 
fender of order, the organ of progress, in proportion as leaders 
and followers alike, as they watch the oscillation between anarchy 
and reaction, come to feel the necessity of shaking off the yoke 
of Metaphysics, the only aggravation of the natural fluctu- 
ations. 

masses. 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 435 

Over and above their decline as a philosophical sect, Meta- ^'•'^ opp':''^- 

ir r 3 gion of Italy 

physicians are already in discredit in Grermany from their social g^^^^™""^ 
incapacity, as specially displayed during the democratical agi- 
tation. Their governments justly reproach them with being the 
principal fomenters of the most dangerous communism ; the 
people should reproach them with prolonging the oppression of 
Italy, by impelling Grermany to take an attitude of isolation and 
domination. The culture of the fine arts, even where Protest- 
antism prevails, is so strong a bond of sympathy between Italy 
and Germany, that Positivism will honourably put an end to the 
monstrosity of German rule in Italy, by delivering the German 
nation from the sophisms of its pedantocrats. Under this form 
will iirst appear the direct appeal of the Eeligion of Humanity 
to the proletariate of Germany, the political intervention of 
which will be shortly as necessary in the interests of order as of 
progress, there being no other power competent to triumph 
decisively over the subversive agencies at work. And yet it 
will be from the Statesmen that will come the first welcome of 
Positivism, on the ground of its power of organisation ; for their 
position raises them above the cloudy influence which turns the 
people from the renovating faith. 

All the provisional institutions, which throughout the West The greatest 
are to mark its temporal reorganisation as a political movement, spiritually 
will find ready comprehension in Germany, when the religion estabUsSng 
of Humanity is able to reach it in any considerable extent. The of the°past!' 
great difficulties will be in the spiritual domain, not as regards 
the regime, nor even as regards the doctrine, but in relation to 
the worship. The Germans will early appreciate the Positivist 
triumvirate as the only security against an inroad of commun- 
ism ; and the Positivist school will easily take the place of the 
metaphysical Universities. But the regenerating faith will 
find great obstacles to overcome in introducing the worship of 
the past in a milieu deficient in antecedents. Such a milieu 
may have the sense of solidarity, allowing for some exaggeration 
due to the national tendency to mistake vagueness for depth. 
For continuity, the conditions of German history make its full 
appreciation difScult, the German nation not tracing further 
back than ten centuries. Almost alien to the Eoman incorpora- 
tion, and only late subjected to the training of Catholic-feudal- 
ism, Germany has not received even the intellectual develope- 
ment of Greece through the normal channel, whilst its connec- 

F F 2 

436 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

The calendar 
scautly wel- 
comed in 
Germany. 

Eventually 

the concrete, 
and it has a 
special apti- 
tude for the 
abstract, 
■worship. 

tion with the Theocracy rests only on a confused tradition of the 
rudimentary Theocracy of Scandinavia. 

In confirmation of this view, we have the scanty welcome of 
the historical calendar in Grermany, whereas in the rest of the 
West the institution is beginning to be popular. The difference 
is one hardly explicable by its not sufficiently satisfying German 
vanity ; for the pride of Spain has acquiesced in the synopsis, 
though Spain has fewer representatives than any other Western 
nation. The opposition is traceable mainly to the tight fetters 
which press in Grermany on the historical intelligence and sense, 
in spite of the cultivation in detail of an useless erudition and 
of vague conceptions on the philosophy of history. 

Be the national difficulties however what they may, the in- 
it will accept ^ellectual and moral influences at work will have power sufficient 
to spread the concrete worship of Humanity in Grermany, and 
that independently of the reaction of the other nations upon it. 
Moreover we may count on the special ajjtitude of the Grerman 
nation for the abstract worship, the form which is ultimately to 
prevail, and which in its normal rudiments, will, during the 
transition, be combined with the historical commemorations. 
This decisive expansion of the Western worship is foreshadowed 
by the welcome it meets from the two appendices of Grermany, 
from Holland and from Scandinavia, countries better prepared 
by their antecedents for the adoption of the Positive system of 
commemorat ion. 

This leads me to condense the considerations here offered on 
the last period of the Western transition, by instituting a festival 
fitted to denote its termination in principle. The whole tem- 
poral and spiritual construction reserved for the last generation 
of the nineteenth century, has, as its grand object, the recon- 
struction, in a better form than in the Middle Ages, of the 
Western Republic, its reconstruction on the basis of the Positive 
faith, accepted as supreme by the metropolis of Humanity. The 
visible presentation of this result, — the decisive guarantee of the 
regeneration of mankind,- — must be the completion of the con- 
crete worship of Humanity by the solemn installation of her 
highest organs in the central temple of the Goddess of the Cru- 
sades. Adopting a proper cenotaph only in cases of necessity, 
we must in all others, induce, as a fraternal act, the several nations 
to resign the possession of their noble dead, to receive higher 
honour in the chief seat of the Religion of Humanity. Ravenna 

Institution 
of a festival 
marking the 
close of the 
transition. 

Transfer of 
the greatest 
dead to 
Palis. 

Chap. V.] O'HE TEANSITION. 437 

was entitled to refuse repentant Florence the tomb of Dante ; 
but Paris, purified from all temporal sway and become the centre 
of the ultimate spiritualty, will obtain the relics of the incom- 
parable poet, and, in succession, the other treasures for which it 
alone is the proper place. Their solemn and splendid transfer to 
the Holy City will prepare Western Europe for the unprecedented 
ceremony which is to mark the definitive advent of the demons- 
trable faith, and of peaceful activity under the guidance of that 
faith. If the founder of the religion of Humanity reach the 
great age of Fontenelle or of Hobbes, the crowning act of his 
career will be the inauguration of the worship — the abstract and 
concrete worship— of the Great Being, surrounded by deputa- 
tions from all the elements of the West. 

The transition in its most important portion thus accom- ^''^ trimBi. 

^ ^ tion m the 

plished, and its accomplishment coinciding with the end of the ««' "f ^^ 
(sxceptional century, the West so reorgimised may, in the next 
generation, secure the gradual triumph of the Positive faith, 
whilst it carries over the world the flag of Man's Future. At 
first sight it would seem that one generation must be insufficient 
for the extension to the race of the final religion, but two 
general arguments combine to show that such success is 
warranted by the whole system of sociological laws. 

In definitive unison, in noble governance, — both union and Afreneratiou 
governance due to the religion of Humanity, — the Western seeing the 
nations will exercise on the world a decisive influence, free as ciimm- 
they will be from discord, free too from designs of oppression. 
For, as their expansion without was coincident with their 
internal disorder, it has hitherto lacked both the completeness 
and nobleness of which it is susceptible. Their empirical 
attempts to obtain conversions, attempts which were an illusion 
for themselves, an oppression for others, were besides irrecon- 
cilable with the dissensions of men who came to preach a religion 
which claimed universality whilst disputing with one another 
for an ascendancy which was rather temporal than spiritual. 
Quite otherwise will it be, when a faith in the truest sense com- 
mon, a faith acceptable by all, shall preside over the expansion 
of the regenerated West, its intellectual and social communi- 
cation of itself, with no other aim but to aid the spontaneous 
convergence towards the normal state of Humanity. The various 
forms of Monotheism having completely neutralised each other, 
the nations which believed in them turn elsewhere for the uni- 

438 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

Positivism 
addresses 
the leading 
minds. 

The one 

{generation 
that is to see 
the conver- 
sion of their 
chiefs. 

The conver- 
sion of the 
IKople to be 
the work of 
the second 
generation. 

Action of 
Paris. 

versality -which they vainly proclaimed. Amidst the theocratic 
nations the same disposition prevails ; they reject ephemeral 
sects and instinctively aspire after the definitive faith, as the 
general outcome of the preparatory process on which the West 
has been engaged for the last thirty centuries. Finally, the 
Fetichist nations will welcome with gratitude a religion which, 
whilst it delivers them from tyrannical attempts, stamps with 
its approbation their beliefs, as the indispensable cradle and the 
normal complement of the human synthesis. 

Apart from these spontaneous tendencies to the adoption by 
the race of the solution elaborated by the West, we must take 
into account the power there lies in Positivism to gain the 
assent of the governors prior to its acceptance by the governed. 
Qualified as it is, by its very nature, to undertake the govern- 
ment of the world, the Religion of Humanity asks in each case 
solely for the conversion of the chiefs, everywhere at present 
predisposed to substitute an organic synthesis for effete creeds. 
Ill-guided as has been, hitherto, the intercourse of the Western 
nations with the other branches of the human family, it has ia 
an empirical way led to relations which, under right guidance, 
will rapidly propagate a solution which is the object of general 
expectation. 

If we combine these last considerations with the preceding, 
we shall feel that one generation ought to be enough to enable 
the new West to secure the acceptance of its faith by the spiritual 
and temporal leaders of the nations. In naming a much longer 
period, as I did in the ' General View,' I had in view the final 
adoption of the universal religion by the populations those 
leaders govern. This result will in all cases be slow of at- 
tainment ; meantime, the conversion of the higher minds may 
always remove, as in the West, the main source of distui-bance, 
tlie invariable origin of which is the exhaustion of the old 
beliefs and the apparent hopelessness of a substitute. 

It is this propagation of the transition to the populations 
which the West is to direct, during the second generation of the 
normal period, as France was called to preside over the tran- 
sition of the West in the last generation of the exceptional 
century. The preponderance of Paris will be more marked in this 
later process than in the earlier, but it will have a different 
character. Claiming no longer any temporal power, the city 
of the Western tombs will move in direct course towards that 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 439 

presidency of mankind which the Eeligion of Humanity gives it. 
It is by giving its fullest extension to the concrete worship that 
the Positive priesthood must organise at Paris the comple- 
mentary transition, in which political action will be simply the 
assistant of philosophy and poetry now irrevocably identified. 
For this it will be sufficient to develope in an appropriate 
manner the germs of Islam, of Polytheism, nay even of Fetichism, 
which I have placed at the very opening of the historical 
calendar, and gradually to introduce most of the abstract 
festivals, hardly more than rudiments during the principal 
transition. 

This direction implies that the general transition is nor- Three phases 

^ ° ofthegene- 

mally decomposable into three successive phases, analogous, raitransi- 
though not numerically equal, to the phases of the "Western 
transition. From the point of view now presented, I consider 
a period of seven years as sufficient for the action of the re- 
generate West to tell upon the monotheistic East. The other 
two phases wiU each require thirteen years for the satisfactory 
affiliation, to the metropolis of Humanity, first of the Poly- 
theistic nations, then of the Fetichist. But, whilst from their 
dependence they cannot but be successive, the three parts of this 
secondary transition ought to be laboured at simultaneously, even 
during the second half of the Western or principal transition. 
Before its complete accomplishment, diplomatists and mis- 
sionaries, availing themselves in every case of the natural 
course of events, will have developed the direct affinities which 
exist between Positivism and every other form of human 
existence. 

In each phase' of this secondary transition, we must allow for Three steps 

^ in each 

three distmct stages, the analogues of those offered by the P^ase. 
transition of the West, when we group, taking France as the 
centre, the Catholic world and the Protestant world, each as a 
whole, around France. Although in these three stages, just as 
in the secondary transition as a whole, we proceed with our 
action simultaneously, the full results can never be reached but 
in succession — as was seen to hold good of the principal tran- 
sition. Classification being naturally of more importance when 
the objects classified are more distinct, it is in it that lies the 
great difficulty of the sociological question which remains for 
me- to solve. There is no room for hesitation in regard to the 
general transition when we limit ourselves to its three stages of 

440 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

Their classi- 
fication. 

The Theory 
of Islam. 

Monotheism, Polytheism, and Fetichism. But when we come 
to deal with the three subdivisions of each of them, it naturally 
appears more difficult i.t present to classify them than it was to 
classify the three cases of the Western transition, the French, the 
Catholic, and the Protestant, though the distinctions between 
these latter are less marked. 

Taking the first phase of the complementary transition, I 
unhesitatingly solve the problem by representing the Positive 
regeneration as destined to prevail first in Turkey, then in 
Eussia, lastly in Persia. This classification, which, as in every 
other case, sums up the comparisons to which it relates, follows 
from the conclusions we reached in the last volume, on the 
monotheistic or lasi of the three intermediate stages between 
Theocracy and Sociocracy. All I have now to do is, to sys- 
tematise the historical theory of Islam, a theory thus seen to 
issue from the whole past, particularly from its modem period. 

When I created, as I did in my fuiidamental work, the 
philosophy of history, it could not possibly at once attain the 
precision or the completeness requisite for a satisfactory estimate 
of the Monotheism of the East. I ought besides to confess 
that, unwittingly, I at that time shared in the prejudices 
against Islam derived from Catholic sources, and which invo- 
luntarily spread even in the most emancipated minds, the great 
Diderot not excepted. To these two sources I trace the radically 
mistaken judgment which I originally passed on the social in- 
fluence of Islam, as well in the East as in the West of the 
Koman world. But the preceding volume shows distinctly, that 
my definitive view of the two Monotheisms is, that they contri- 
buted equally, each in its way, to the completion of the education 
of mankind. The two transient syntheses, shaped, the eai'Uer 
by St. Paul, the later by Mohammed, differ not in their object ; 
and if both equally are exhausted, both, though in different 
ways, are qualified to aid the advent of the final religion, a just 
presentiment of which is traceable in the noblest organs of the 
Great Being. 

I regard the two systems as destined respectively to rule the 
byisiamnnd fc-^yo great sectious of the Eoman world, on which sections it 

Catholicism. ^ ' 

devolved to elaborate, first, the intellectual, then the social 
movement. Though united under the banner of Monotheism, 
it was the second section alone which could carry on to its full 
effect the rudimentary effort at separation of the two powers. 

Respective 
parts played 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 441 

the end aimed at in the theological concentration and the source 
of its peculiar doctrinal characteristics. But the failure of 
Byzantinism as a social system, the natural result of the whole 
antecedents of Greece, compelled the true Catholicism to call 
itself Eoman, and by so doing early to raise a presentiment, by 
the contradiction the term involved, that its claims to universality 
were in the last resort invalid. 

It was under the influence of this contrast, quite sensible in TheMono- 

' *■ theism ot 

the first phase of the Middle Ages, that Mohammed founded the Mohammea 

^ o ^ addressed the 

Monotheism adapted for the governors, by consolidating the |°™™°J^' 
fusion of the two powers ; as St. Paul had founded the Mono- P^ni the 

^ ' ^ governed. 

theism of the governed on the separation of the two. The aim 
of both is to regulate human life, on the basis of the whole 
earlier advance of man ; the means adopted, in the one case, the 
discipline of command, in the other that of obedience. They 
were suited, then, to the respective wants of the two por- 
tions, the intellectual and social portions, of the world in- 
corporated into one whole by the Eoman Empire. Just as 
the Latins, at all times amenable to discipline, stood in need of 
an independent priesthood, competent to secure the just sway of 
universal morality over the active will ; so the Greeks, who 
never had been disciplined, stood in need of an energetic con- 
centration, such as Islam alone could systematically organise. 
I do not hesitate to look on the Moslems as the natural suc- 
cessors of the Eomans in the government of the Greek nation ; 
sacrificed as that population has been to the culture of the 
intellect, it will never be able to guide itself until regenerated 
by Positivism. 

In the mission thus assigned it we have the only possible Historical 
explanation of the aggregate intellectual and social character- the'twrMo- 
istics of Islam, forming, as it did, a nation of patricians to rule, "° ^'™^' 
through its imperial Monotheism, those whom the Eoman senate 
absorbed into its social Polytheism. As well suited to the 
East as the defensive Monotheism was to the West, it presup- 
posed a conquered population, as the other did a people capable 
of discipline. In this empirical division, however, of the Eoman 
world between the two, long contests were an inevitable in- 
cident, contests naturally originating with the more active and 
more concentrated faith. Equilibrium became possible only 
then, when the crusades had taught the Catholic world the 
impossibility of overcoming a more perfect form of belief ; and 

442 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

Turkey. 
Its incorpo- 
ration with 
the "Western 
systems. 

The general 
transition 
■will begin 
with Turkey. 

Persia. 

had diverted Islam from the conquest of the "West. Hence arose, 
before the end of the first period of modern history, a tacit but 
decisive compromise, which reduced to order the latest phase of 
man's preparation, by leaving the Mussulmen to settle them- 
selves firmly in the G-reek world, to the entire disregard of the 
Byzantine appeals for Latin support. 

This instinctive agreement marks the true beginning of 
conservative diplomacy, which ordinarily is made to date only 
from the disruption of Catholicism, on an untenable view of 
the Western revolution. More and more strengthened by the 
whole course of subsequent events, the division has resulted in 
the Turks becoming more thoroughly an integral part of the 
Western system than the Greeks ever could have been. But at 
the same time, by its dispelling, once for all, all hopes, on either 
side, of a true universality, this concurrent settlement has gra- 
dually made manifest the equal exhaustion of the two Mono- 
theisms, the Monotheism of defence and the Monotheism of 
Empire, both, though in different ways, destined to prepare the 
way for Positivism. 

If we would give greater precision to this judgment, we must 
consider the Tmkish government as in all essential respects 
adapted to the wants of Eastern Europe, though, on empirical 
grounds, opinion would confine it to Western Asia. The Posi- 
tive transition must be far advanced before we can conceive of 
the Q-reeks as without the Turks, any more than the Turks 
without the G-reeks, the Turks not being competent to feed, 
the G-reeks to govern, themselves. But whilst this theory 
rectifies a mistaken policy, the errors of which are now generally 
recognised, it is introduced here, to show at once the danger and 
the impossibility of prolonging the existence of the two Mono- 
theisms. They cannot stand alone and they cannot combine, so 
that, great as is the tolerance — the necessary tolerance — of the 
ruling faith, they must both equally be expecting the universal 
ascendancy of the Positive religion, which in their various ways 
they concurred in preparing. It is, however, from the Tm-ks 
more especially that there will come cooperation in furtherance 
of the organic transition, for they are more predisposed than 
the G-reeks to second a doctrine, which, for the present, addresses 
itself to the governors as Islam did, whilst it effects the division 
of the two powers more completely than Catholicism. 

We must, then, think of Turkey, as beginning, under the 

Chap. V.] THE TEAIJSITION. 443 

impulse of the West, the complementary transition, which, in 
the course of one generation, is to succeed the primary transi- 
tion directed by France with no othei- guide but Humanity. 
But the historical theory of Islam leads equally to the conclu- 
sion, that Persia will be the last of the Monotheistic nations to 
join in the organic transition. For the Mussulmen of the East 
differ radically from those of the West, in that they have not 
had, as the latter, an exceptional mission, the task singularly 
congenial to the conquering faith, of governing populations un- 
susceptible of discipline. In the absence of this vocation, one 
limited to the Grreek portion of the Eoman world, Islam in 
Persia became at once oppressive and subversive, so as to foster 
its natural defects, while the Turks generally managed to turn 
them. It is true, that in Persia, a substitute for the task of 
governing the Greeks seems offered by the care, on a large scale, 
of a population sacrificed to the premature advent of Mono- 
theism, as Greece had been to the exclusive cultm'e of the 
intellect. The two cases, however, never really corresponded, 
in consequence of the unavoidable dispersion which is charac- 
teristic of the Jews since the fall of Polytheism. The unfor- 
tunate race missed, through its blind obstinacy, its single 
opportunity of regaining its nationality, when it rejected tlie 
noble advances of the great Mohammed, who might have be- 
come the Messiah of their vain expectations. 

By the fifteenth law of the first philosophy, it is little to be ^•"''*- 
wondered at, that I thus place in close connection the remarks 
bearing on the two extreme forms of Eastern Monotheism, be- 
fore describing the position of Eussia, the representative of the 
modern developement of the intermediate form. When the 
adoption of Byzantinism had neutralised the Eastern Scandi- 
navians, as the Western had been disciplined by their adoption 
of Catholicism, the former would be sure to retain some of 
their aspirations after conquest, which had been debarred their 
natural course. Their Monotheism, however, was as little able 
to arouse enthusiasm as to inspire discipline ; its doctrinal 
system being constructed to divide the two powers, its regime 
leading to their fusion. Hence a radical contradiction, one which 
should at one and the same time dispel the anxiety of Europe, 
and concentrate the attention of Asia. The three forms of 
Eastern Monotheism are destined simultaneously to pass under 
the sociological law, by which factitious aggregates are to be 

444 sysTKM OF positive polity, the peesest. 

decomposed as a natural process ; and this even before France 
has nobly introduced system into this change among the 
Monotheists of the West. Notwithstanding this destiny, the 
storms occasioned by its empirical accomplishment will be 
naturally more dangerous and more immediate in Eussia than 
in Turkey or even in Persia, as Eussia is far more heterogeneous 
in composition, and its heterogeneity is of a more disturbing 
character. To remedy, as far as possible, the aberrations attend- 
ant on an ill-directed empirical policy, the autocratic govern- 
ment of this confused agglomeration of nations should make its 
policy dependent on the sociological position of Eussia, following 
Turkey, that is, as in closer relations with the Western world. 
Concluding My course of lectures, fixed for 1862, on the whole organic 

th™flrst °" transition, will be the proper occasion for expanding as they 
^ °''^' deserve the preceding remarks ; at present I must limit myself 

to the general conception, a conception embodied in the classifi- 
cation of the Monotheisms. This first phase of the secondary 
transition enables us to foretaste the spiritual and temporal 
advantages, which are in reserve for the belated populations, 
approaching, as they will do, by a systematic process, the 
normal state, the natural outcome of the evolution of the West. 
In reference to the most important case, Turkey, the fusion in 
Islam of the two powers may be looked upon as calculated to 
facilitate for the Turks the establishment of a religion which 
addresses itself primarily to the upper classes. The concentration 
of wealth in Turkey will be a further aid in the introduction of 
the sociocratic regime, as there will be none of the hindrances 
arising from the intermediate position of the bourgeoisie in the 
West, between the patriciate and the proletariate. In the 
lectures above announced, these various considerations, over 
and above their own direct purpose, will throw light upon the 
Western movement, the several branches of which will, though 
in a less degree, admit of similar comparisons. Adapted to 
meet the wants of the latest phase of the central transition, such 
teaching is still more needed when the scale becomes larger, 
the divisions more marked. Above all I must look to those 
lectures for the full explanation of the two last instances of the 
regeneration of mankind, only the most summary statement 
being here admissible, though in regard to them our interven- 
tion may be more thorough and more efficacious. 

In the initial phase of the secondary transition we have only 

Chap. V.] THE TEANSITION. 445 

the influence of the "West to look to for aid. In the second second 

phase. 

phase, we have the additional assistance of the influence of the Regenora- 

tion of the 

already regenerated Monotheists upon the polytheistic nations, Poiytheista. 
with whom they are more peculiarly connected. Islam, in 
particular, possesses an aptitude for this, as, reducing command 
to a system, it enjoins toleration of all nations that have any 
law, be that law what it may. And, although the dominion of 
the Mussulmen, in the main, is exclusively adapted to theGrreeks, 
their empire in India was less of a disturbing element than that 
of the Western Monotheists. More skilful in incorporating 
themselves with theocratic populations, their relations with 
them, when no longer supreme, remain more favourable to the 
advent of the Eeligion of Humanity than those of the passing 
Englishmen. 

Whoever be the "Western apostles, Turks, and, still more, aoimi'doo- 
Persians, who preach the new faith to the Polytheistic nations, qXeiffor 
the system which must always guide them in its introduction is JheiS!'' 
that of a fusion of doctrines. In the principal transition, the 
"Western institutions which are meant to facilitate it, concern 
only the worship and the regime, because the intellectual pre- 
paration of the "West, both negative and positive, is such as to 
allow of the direct introduction of the fundamental doctrine of 
Positivism. The same holds good of the first phase of the com- 
plementary transition, Islam, by virtue of the simplicity of its 
faith, requiring no intellectual modification. But when we 
come to the Theocracies, we feel the need of completing our 
general conception of the organic transition, by introducing 
into it the intermediate element. Then, besides the worship 
and the regime which at first were all that required modifying, 
we must institute a provisional doctrine, by its nature qualified 
to transform Polytheism into Positivism without any interven- 
tion of Monotheism. 

For this I must idealise tlie encyclopaedic hierarchy, first indication 
however contracting it within due limits. And, although transitional 
either of the two ternary arrangements is available for our seeato™ 
object, we must select that in which the vital order fonns the *" ^*'' 
indispensable link between the inorganic and the human order. 
Hence we form the conception of three goddesses, the represen- 
tatives respectively of Materiality, "Vitality, and Humanity. 
"Whilst, from the objective point of view, the three by their 
harmony express the economy of the world, from the subjective, 

446 

SYSTEM OP POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

This degree 
of concen- 
tration suffi- 
cient to de- 
velope all 
the philoso- 
phical apti- 
tude of 
theology. 

This syste- 
matic Tri- 
nity may be 
easily super- 
imposed on 
the various 
Polytheisms. 

that harmony is in agreement with the constitution of the brain. 
For the phenomena of the first class, in consequence of the 
greater regularity which they owe to their greater simplicity, 
are suggestive of the intellect, in particular, by the idea of 
order ; those of the second, point to progress through action ; 
those of the third, build union on the foundation of love. 

Such is the legitimate limit of contraction for the synthesis 
of Theology, if the object be the distinct display of its powers 
as a philosophy, without really taking into account its efficacy 
as a political direction. The real destination of Monotheism 
was social ; and it was oppressive to the intellect as devoting it 
to vague speculations, where there could be no satisfactory pre- 
sentation of the great variety of phenomena. Nor is the 
presentation satisfactory even when we reduce Polytheism to its 
binary form, a form not more adapted to the wants of our in- 
tellect than to those of our moral nature. But the ternary form, 
a threefold causality, meets the demands of Theology, for the 
Positive spirit, though more analytical than Theology, employs 
habitually the three progressive terms which answer to this 
threefold caiisation. By substituting goddesses for gods, we 
sanction the legitimate preeminence of women, without clash- 
ing with our instinctive tendencies, clearly indicated by the 
gender of the word cause. The peculiar character of each 
goddess, and even her ideal conception, may be easily deter- 
mined by the nature of her attributes. Whilst the three 
preserve their independence, their relations to one another 
should embody, ideally, the real subordination of the pheno- 
mena they represent, a subordination at once objective and 
subjective, on the principle of decrease of simplicity and in- 
crease of dignity. 

This trinity of philosophical creation may without difiiculty 
be engrafted upon the several Polytheisms, on that of India 
especially, the object being to prepare the way for the ultimate 
establishment of Positivism. Whilst giving the tendencies to 
synthesis as complete a satisfaction as is compatible with 
Theology, it will excite a stronger desire for the purely subjec- 
tive unity, engendered by the substitution of laws for causes, 
when in the growth of Positive conceptions we reach the only 
universal point of view, a point inaccessible to any absolute 
doctrine. Adapted to the generation which succeeds that for 
which I formed the concrete worship, this provisional faith may 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 447 

last as long as shall be required for the reorganisation of the 
different intellectual states of the several nations, thus prepared 
to receive the encyclopaedic training of the normal state. In 
the evolution of the West, social reasons made Monotheism a 
necessity, otherwise such a condensation of Polytheism would 
have been more favourable to the advent of the final philosophy. 
In this way, then, the nations which have remained theocratic 
may find compensation for the delay, in passing more easily 
than all the other theological believers, through the common 
transition, by the aid of a dogmatic creation which adapts to 
their use the analytical process, for the synthetic result of which 
they are waiting. 

On a comparison of the several cases which properly belong y^^o*";*e 
to the second phase of the subsidiary transition, our sociological Poiytteists. 
theory dispels all uncertainty as to their classification, the past 
being a pledge of the future. As in the preceding phase, so 
here, it is in agreement with the order of their respective 
distance, locally, from the "West. For Positivism must first re- 
generate the Polytheists of India, then of China, lastly those of 
Japan. 

Although it will act simultaneously on the three, whether («) inaia. 
through the direct agency of the West, or indirectly through 
the Mussulman, it is impossible to doubt but that the Theocracy 
which has suffered the least from time will be the most open to 
the regenerative process. Besides my lectures on this subject, 
I must refer to the preceding volume" for explanations, incon- 
sistent with the limits of my present sketch, to show the latent 
predisposition of the Brahmins in favour of the faith which will TheSrah- 
restore their social position whilst perfecting their moral nature 
and their mental organisation. I have announced already that 
the Positive priesthood would shortly be recruited by the adjunc- 
tion of a very small portion of the Catholic clergy ; I may now 
state that the theocratic caste is already disposed, at the fitting 
time, to furnish a much larger contingent. Positivism will 
deliver it from the oppression of the temporal power to which it 
has been subjected for twenty centuries, an oppression which it 
bows to more and more without ever losing its consciousness of 
its spiritual superiority, and the hope of seeing it definitively 
reestablished. Such a restoration, it is true, demands its com- 
plete renunciation of command and eyen of property, but the 
systematic guardians of human order will not be slow to accept 

448 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

PositiTism 
■will begin 
by putting 
an end to 
the Britisll 
douiiuation. 

Thus the 
speculative 
race will 
become 
everywhere 
subject to 
the regene- 
ratiog faith. 

The Active 

race 

(6) China. 

Bouddhism. 

In China 
Positivism 
will be 
seconded by 
the practi- 
cal wants. 

conditions imposed in the name of their social m.ission and of 
their individual dignity. 

Positivism offers, then, to the regenerate Brahmins the re- 
organisation of the Brahminical body, but it offers them besides, 
and nothing else does, the gratification of the noble wish they 
have ever cherished to free their theocratic country from all 
foreign dominion. Appealing in fitting terms to the English 
nation, it will peaceably remove a yoke which, under whatever 
veil of illusion, justly inspires more antipathy than that of the 
Mussulmen. As it will have rendered this service prior to the 
introduction of the Positive faith in its true form, that faith 
will be readily welcomed as the consequence of the provisioaal 
doctrine, the great object of instituting that doctrine being to 
enable the Brahmins who have become Positivists to modify 
their theocratic milieu. 

In this way it is, that Sociocracy should, in the earlier years 
of the next century, incorporate directly with itself the best 
upholders of Theocracy, as realising their invincible aspirations 
after an universal religion, by the preeminence it assigns to 
morality in its synthesis. By their adjunction, the speculative 
or intellectual portion of the race will, in all its branches, be 
subject to the regenerating faith, for it will have extended its 
sway over the Polytheistic complement of that portion. 

The inferiority of the two other theocratic states must not 
be regarded as a direct consequence of a difference of race. It 
is due, principally, to the profound disturbance introduced into 
the caste system by the success of a mistaken effort at reform 
which failed in the country where it began. When driven from 
India, Bouddhism was most successful in China, where the adop- 
tion of the examination system tended to change the Theocracy 
into a Pedantocracy, thus realising, as far as was possible, the 
dream of the Grreek literateurs and their modern imitators. 

The degeneration is one which throws great obstacles in the 
way of the intellectual and social ascendancy of a religion more 
hostile to Metaphysics than to Theology. Its introduction, 
however, into China will be mainly facilitated by practical con- 
siderations, whereas, in India, it will appeal to speculative ten- 
dencies. In disorganising the predominant caste, the Bouddhist 
revolution favoured the growth of industry, in accordance so far 
with the nature of the active race. As in the West, so in China, 
industry allows of direct contact between the Positive faith and 

CsAP. v.] THE TRA.NSITION. 449 

the popular reason. Yet, even in China, the Eeligion of 
Humanity must, at first, be best suited to the rulers, not 
merely the temporal rulers, but also to the spiritual guides, 
provided that it rightly avail itself of the local conditions. The 
metaphysical aberration cannot but be displeasing to the better 
Mandarins, interfering as it does with the full exertion of their 
legitimate action on society. First overcoming the empirical 
habits traceable to the excessive prominence of practical ques- 
tions, they will welcome the only doctrine competent to direct 
systematically the activity of man. 

The like dispositions, and with a stronger hold, are enter- (c) Japan. 
tained by the rulers of Japan, emancipated from Theocracy by 
their military developement, as was the West, whilst they have 
avoided the danger of Pedantocracy, essentially a Chinese error. 
And yet I believe the Japanese to be less prepared than the 
Chinese for the acceptance of Positivism, considering the lower 
degree to which industrial existence has been developed. Al- 
though less tainted by Metaphysics, they have kept more of the 
habits and feelings of the theocratic state, the change from them 
having been more recent ; this is evidenced by their isolation 
as a nation, the more striking from its being as it were in daily 
contrast with the emigrations of the Chinese. Hence it is, that 
the most eastern portion of the Polytheistic world will be most 
difficult of access to the religion of Humanity. Still, its rela- 
tive character will allow of partial contacts there, so soon as the 
Japanese chiefs shall distinguish the Positive faith from the 
various Western creeds which cause them a just anxiety. The 
synthesis which comes forward to efifect the normal division 
of the two powers, is in direct congruity with the society most 
disturbed by their fusion. Such a milieu must early appreciate 
the power Positivism has, to systematise its instinctive prefer- 
ence of action to contemplation and the persistent subordina- 
tion of all special forms of activity to a paramount morality. 

Such is the method on which, as a result of all the previous complete 

, r» i_ • j_i ' 1 T 1 • r» conversion 

preparatory processes, first m the emancipated portion of man- ofPoiy- 
kind, then in the monotheistic, the polytheistic world will be 
regenerated during the intermediate phase of the secondary 
transition ; the world, that is, which comprises, with its various 
appendages, the half of the human race. The movement of 
universal reconstruction, which has already passed from the 
speculative to the active race, will have only, then, to reach the 
TOL. IT. G G 

450 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PEESENT. 

affective, the sociological characteristic of which is its adherence 
to Fetichism. 
The affect- In treating this, the last complement of the organic transi- 

FetiohiBtB. tion, enough that the whole preceding volume points to the 
competence of Positivism to deal directly with the question, 
ulterior explanations being reserved for my special course. 
Where there is incomplete intellectual emancipation, it is likely 
that the case of the affective race may appear to present almost 
insuperable difficulties, but the really regenerate in soul may 
even now feel that it will shortly offer the highest triumph of 
the true faith. The failure of Monotheistic, nay even of Poly- 
theistic, efforts to modify the Fetichists, will but place in a 
stronger light the capacity of the most systematic of syntheses 
to incorporate with itself the most spontaneous. 
Their con- The whole difficulty, intellectual and moral, of the transition 

sidered, ' of mankind is necessarily in Theologism, since it has to disap- 
phicauy " pear entirely. Whereas, the sociological theory, with which 
(") MoraUyf my readers are now familiar, shows that Fetichism, sanctioned 
by Positivism, may enter into direct combination with it, with- 
out imposing any great changes either on the heart or on the 
intellect. The first step, alike in the search after causes and in 
the study of laws, the spontaneous mode of the fictitious syn- 
thesis does not originate the absolute philosophy ; that really 
dates its reign from the introduction of indirect causality. And 
however inevitable this second mode was in the primary evolu- 
tion, when we can direct the process of initiation, we may over- 
leap it, if the mental developement, whether of the individual 
or of the society, be duly systematised. For it is not difficult 
to turn the mind from causes when we reveal laws ; a reduction 
of the general rectification of the Fetichist logic into the dis- 
tinguishing properly activity from life. From the moral point 
of view, the passage is easier still, since all that Positivism does, 
is to adopt on system the superiority of the heart to the intellect, 
which was made by the instinct of Fetichism the permanent 
basis of the human synthesis. The assimilation by imagination 
of the external to the human order is indispensable, if the de- 
finitive religion is to complete our conceptions and develope 
our emotions, nor does any risk attend the process if we bear 
constantly in mind- its essentially subjective character, 
(ii) Poiiti- From the political point of view, the Positive regeneration 

of the Fetichist nations does not offer greater difficulties than 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 451 

under the iBtellectual or moral aspect. In the original evolu- 
tion, Theocracy was absolutely indispensable; and the subsequent 
military transition with its three stages was also necessary for 
the West ; but it is only in regard to the original evolution that 
there are imperative reasons for such a course, for it could not 
otherwise be the preparation for the final state. But when that 
state is once definitively established in any single centre, its 
extension to the race requires, in no case, a repetition of the 
phases proper to the primary movement. The deficiency, socially, 
of the Fetichists, relating as it does to their inadequate de- 
velopement of public life, may be remedied by their direct 
acceptance of the peaceful form of activity under the control of 
the demonstrable faith, without any theocratic or military pre- 
liminaries. This systematic fusion of the primaeval with the 
definitive form of existence has had its way so prepared, that it 
will be easiest to realise in the case of the oldest Fetichism, 
where the Eeligion of Humanity will not have even to modify a 
priesthood, beyond any other, susceptible of transformation. 

The last phase of the complementary transition, as the two ciasaflca- 

~ , 1 1 1 tionofthe 

others, offers three independent cases, ranked again by their FeticMsts. 
distance, locally, from the Western centre, so that we deal with 
the Fetichists first in Africa, then in America, lastly in Oceania. 
But as in the first phase, so here also, we must treat the two 
extremes first, the middle last, as there is an analogous, and 
even more strongly marked, confusion between the tendency of 
the people itself and the influence exercised on it from without. 

Ending once for all a proselytism which is a mockery and a (a) Africa. 
disturbance, Positivism will initiate Africa — the great seat of 
Fetichism — into the only religion capable of fully appreciating 
the affective race and binding it by proper ties to the two 
others. This is the final step towards our realising the extent 
to which Turkey should assist France in the systematic propa- 
gation of the complementary transition. For the Mussulmen, 
when regenerate, will be better qualified than the apostles of the 
West, to convert Africa, especially central Africa, their habits 
giving them an easier access and leading to greater results. The 
moral barriers of which the principal Fetichist nations wisely 
avail themselves in addition to their local isolation, will fall, the 
moment that the central civilisation presents itself in a form 
which they can assimilate. As the great satisfaction of the 
Africans is in domestic life, the aptitude of the new civilisation 

G a 2 

452 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE PRESENT. 

to develope that life will be a direct inducement to them to 
welcome it, when no longer in dread of stupid or culpable at- 
tempts. Preserved from the military regime by their defective 
state-organisation and their territorial isolation, they will be 
quick in adopting a peaceful activity which must never be other 
than free, and which the religion of Humanity subordinates to 
its moral end. Where astrolatry prevails, the greater extent and 
order of the societies will smooth the advent of the new doctrine, 
provided that its apostles know how to use and to respect the 
local priesthood, better prepared than any other for Positivism. 

(c) Oceania. The intercourse of the Oceanians with the "West is of a much 

later date than that of the Africans, jbut it has been on a 
greater scale, from their not being isolated, and it has been 
more fraught with disturbance from the absence of discipline. 
The tribes visited by Cook are now scarcely to be recognised, 
and are rapidly tending to extinction from physical and moral 
degradation, unless Positivism succeeds, while it is yet time^ 
in rousing all emancipated thinkers to reprobate the inter- 
ference of all theologists of whatever order. But the priest- 
hood of Humanity will soon lead the public mind of the West 
to feel, that irreconcilable religions, each discredited at its own 
proper centre, cannot but be wholly incapable of propagating 
the central civilisation, more particularly amongst the Fetichists. 
Besides that commercial or other ordinary intercourse is in 
itself less disturbing-, it will improve in proportion as the in- 
ternal reorganisation of the several states acts as a dissuasive 
to European expansion, during the inevitable break-up of the 
colonial system which has already begun for all the Western 
nations. There is ground, then, for my hope that the religion of 
Humanity will have gained a decisive ascendancy in time to 
prevent the extinction by a natural process of the Fetichists of 
Oceania, and that the tribes thus saved wiU, in the name of the 
G-reat Being, take their part in the right management of its 
planetary home. 

(6) America. There remains for me "only to explain the most difficult case 
in the whole secondary transition, that, viz., which concerns the 
gravest of the anomalies originating in the Western revolution 
the examination of the Positive regeneration in regard to the 
American Fetichists. Their habitation of itself sufficiently 
indicates the position, so sadly exceptional, of the greater 
number, sprung as they are from the principal centre of the 

Chap. V.] THE TRANSITION. 453 

affective race and transplanted to America by a monstrous 
policy, to repair a horrible depopulation. Although Catholicism 
was the first instrument of this European crime, it is Protest- 
antism that must bear the greatest blame for its extension 
and aggravation. As far as it is possible to do so, Positivism 
is competent to make compensation for the aberrations of theo- 
logists, and it does so by_ enforcing a just appreciation of the 
oppressed, by exposing the sophisms of the oppressor. Adopt- 
ing the decisive aphorism, -which came into use at the opening 
of the French Eevolution, it shows how irreconcilable is the 
regeneration of the "West with the existence of this monstrous 
institution, even for nations who have been passive in the 
matter. 

Leaving out of the question the sociological theory of the Modem 
human races, the philosophy of history enables us to brand with th^siare" 
reprobation this anomaly, as directly contrary to the normal "^ ^' ' 
destination of slavery, which is only tolerable as the subjection 
of the labourer to the warrior. Hence, while in Antiquity 
slavery aided the progress both of the master and the slave, by 
bringing them into closer contact, its unnatural modern form 
degrades both by separating them. This is why the cessation, 
in the natural course of the slave trade was sufiBcient to trans- 
form aright the slavery of Antiquity, whilst the systematic 
prohibition of that trade has hitherto only aggravated the 
slavery of modern times. 

Though the anomaly is one which can come to no good end, The Amen- 
the priesthood of Humanity will prepare the elite of the West ^b^"''" 
to facilitate its inevitable extinction, by a right use and due liven^upfto 
extension of the particular centre which the oppressed race has ants S°t"e' 
courageously vindicated for itself. In expiation of the crime slave™™ 
which for the last three centuries has stained indirectly or 
directly the whole West, the West Indian Archipelago must, 
with suitable indemnities, be given up to the free descendants 
of the transplanted Africans. There their own spontaneous 
efforts, already felt in Hayti, the centre of their freedom, to 
clear their Fetichism from the alloy of Theology, will enable 
Positivism to effect their regeneration more satisfactorily than 
that of their brothers in Oceania, by a larger introduction of 
Western influence. 

Thus, after devoting the greater part of this chapter to conclusion. 
France, as the typical case of the final transition, I have charac- 

454 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY.' THE PEESENT. 

terised the thirteen successive stages of its extension, to the 
other nations of Western Europe, to the nations who are yet in 
the theological state, and to the Fetichist nations. As no one of 
its important applications is excluded, I have submitted to a 
conclusive and necessary test the determination of the future as 
based on the explanation of the past, in order to prove that the 
Eeligion of Humanity is competent to direct the present. The 
whole range of human affairs thus grasped in one conception, 
the reign of Humanity is inaugurated ; for it lies in this, above 
all, that it systematises a progress beyond the reach of the 
syntheses which could embrace a part only of time and space. 

GENERAL CONCLUSION. 455 

GENEEAL CONCLUSION OF THE FOUETH VOLUME. 

The presentation of the normal state and of its universal ac- object of 
ceptance — with this we complete the Positive synthesis whose to establish 
foundations were laid, in the two preceding volumes, in the study unity. 
of the human order and its evolution, — an evolution at once 
inevitable and indispensable — such study resting on the unity 
proclaimed in the first volume. Each of the five chapters con- 
structed in the present volume is an essential contribution to 
the direct creation of the relative harmony. Its subjective 
origin is a consequence, in the first chapter, of the fundamental 
theory of the Great Being, a theory which finds immediate ex- 
pression in the conception, first of the Eeligion of Humanity, 
then of the normal existence of mankind. The paramount 
importance of feeling, — such is always the foundation of Posi- 
tive unity ; but it may take one of two forms in succession, 
according to the relative position of thought and action as the 
ministers of affection. I devoted the second chapter to the 
most direct form of the consensus, that in which action con- 
fines itself to helping the intelligence to express emotion ; the 
form required for the period of our education and for the 
system of human worship ; in the former of which the wants of 
life are not suffered to press on us ; in the latter, for the time 
they are suspended. This done, the two next chapters establish 
the most complete unity, as they subordinate thought to action 
in order to modify the external necessities of our condition ; in 
such a way as always to keep sympathy in accord with synthesis. 
Lastly, the concluding chapter consolidates this harmonious 
system, by proving its peculiar competence to be the immediate 
guide of the several nations in their action, and consequently of 
all individuals whatsoever. 

Whatever the objective aim of this present volume, it is itisinthe 
from its subjective appreciation above all that must flow its appreciation 
efficacy as a religious work. Looked at as a whole, the picture nmethatues 

456 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTURE OF MAS. 

it constructs, the conception of a state of things which as yet 
cannot be, displays, on a large scale, with irresistible evidence 
the capacity of our cerebral system for reflecting the universal 
order. A necessary consequence of that dependence of the sub- 
jective on the objective which lies at the root of all our existence, 
this power manifests itself at the very earliest beginning of the 
upward movement of Humanity, in the developement of rational 
prevision, such prevision step by step embracing more and m^ore 
complex phenomena. The simplest astronomical calculation 
presents a marvellous coincidence between the actual chain of 
operations within us and the future succession of events without 
us. Such a result, under whatever fictitious synthesis, must, at 
all times, have foreshadowed the inevitable advent of the true 
harmony, since in such result man is in union with the world with- 
out, becoming the mirror of that world, when law is substituted 
for cause. But whatever the value attaching to the continuous 
enlargement of this faculty, it cannot determine the definitive 
renovation of the human understanding so long as it doas not 
extend to the most important and the most critical order of 
phenomena. Thus judged, the volume but now ended is the 
principal portion of the religious construction which it com- 
pletes, for in it the brain shows itself not less able to reflect 
the human than the external order, and that by virtue of the 
invariability common to both. 

The demonstration of this power is a consequence, as at 
present, from the concurrence in the general of the two elabora- 
tions of unequal length, which in succession occupy the con- 
cluding volume, both uniformly under the guidance of the 
fundamental principle laid down at its opening. However 
satisfactorily the three chapters between the fii-st and last may 
have delineated the three capital aspects of the normal exist- 
ence, if the result at which they arrive is to be conclusive, it 
can only be so by supplying ns with the direct representation of 
its acceptance by the race. Thus, the reality of the conception 
of the future is a consequence, on the one hand, of its being 
deduced from the past, the general explanation of which past 
is irrefragable ; and, on the other hand, of its enabling us to 
understand and regulate the present. 

In this way it is, that the Positive synthesis takes definitive 
possession of its last and chief domain, the mastery over which 
were incomplete, were the theory of the human order confined 

GENERAL CONCLUSION. 457 

to determining its nature and its preparation without under- 
standing its ulterior developement. His failure on this decisive 
point proved the inadequacy of the attempt made by my 
eminent precursor, Condorcet, to lay the foundations of Socio- 
logy. My success on the same point, in this volume, ought to 
be a proof that the essential conditions have been satisfactorily 
complied with as regards the two systems of statical and 
dynamical laws which serve as the basis of the achievement. 

Thus directly linked to the universal order, Humanity finds The result 
herself altogether emancipated from the imaginary guardianship tuauy. 
which during the period of her initiation was her instinctive 
substitute for an external guide. She definitively inaugurates 
her all-embracing providence by applying the whole body of 
the laws, statical and dynamical, which she obeys, to the under- 
standing, in the general, her future and the transition which is 
necessary to introduce that future. This step taken, her priest- 
hood is enabled to reduce to system the real life of man, acting 
on an interpretation of her into which no caprice nor indis- 
tinctness ever enter, with no need for any revelation. Such is 
the type, after which, each wellcultivated brain attains as 
completely the faculty of imaging the world in reference to the 
most complex as in reference to the simplest phenomena. If 
at any time, in application, a more detailed and more exact 
prevision is requisite, it will be accessible, then as now, with 
minds so prepared. For the inward operations of such under- 
standings are as much in agreement with the outward course of 
moral and social events as with that of vital or inorganic 
phenomena. Traceable in rudiment to the earliest beginnings 
of man's initiation, the subordination of the subjective to t}ie 
objective has now reached such completeness, that they who sys- 
tematically exemplify it become, of necessity, the advisers of all, 
in an existence which they alone grasp in its true fulness. 

Viewed, then, as an intellectual creation, the construction (2) iioraiiy 
proper to this volume satisfies the external condition of real 
unity by completing the process by which man is linked to the 
world. But, viewed as a moral creation, it is as conclusive for 
the internal condition, since it makes synthesis a direct result 
of sympathy. In it, feeling is shown to be more qualified to 
regulate the intellect, nay, even the activity, than had been 
asserted in the ' General View,' the introduction to the religious 
construction here terminated. In it, all speculations are directed 

458 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. THE FUTUEE OF MAN. 

to the support of universal love, the only power which can give 
them system, sanction, and discipline. In it again, from the 
same source is drawn the general ordering of practical life, the 
most trivial acts of which become as noble as they are coherent 
by their influence on affection. Thus made the general regu- 
lator, not merely of the worship, but also of the doctrine and of 
the regime, the instinct of sympathy has given full proof of its 
capacity for synthesis. So we see the close of the treatise on 
Sociology realise, beyond all hope, the promises of its opening, 
in that it developes the only form of harmony which at one 
and the same time meets all the wants of human nature under 
all its manifold aspects. 

Such result is in equal conformity with the principle of 
the relative synthesis and with its purpose, since the intellectual 
and moral order constitute the domain of Positivism. The 
absolute synthesis made human phenomena the special object of 
its attention, yet it was unequal to any systematic conception of 
them, because it was unable ever to place itself at the social 
point of view. As incapable of representing composite existence 
as it was of sanctioning the feelings to which that existence owes 
its origin, whatever social value it had, it drew not from the 
capabilities of its doctrine, but from the instinct of its priesthood, 
so long as that priesthood was progressive. The explanations of 
Theology were confined to the external world quite as much 
as those of Fetichism, and they tended to become even more 
illusory than those of Fetichism as regards the intellectual and 
moral world, by exaggerating the importance of man and not 
recognising his subordination to matter. Hence the study of 
the sacred sciences could appertain only to Positivism, though 
it could not enter into possession till it had reorganised the 
profane sciences, by the gradual substitution of laws for causes. 
But however slow of accomplishment, this advent it is which 
marks the true commencement of the normal existence of the 
Great Being, an existence previously hampered by the intel- 
lectual obstacle of a fictitious faith, by the moral obstacle of a 
destructive activity. At the present time we may look upon the 
minority of Humanity as definitively ended, since the full con- 
ception of the final state has been formed, as is shown by the 
contemporaneous and correlated developement of sociological 
prevision and of allcomprehending love, as substitutes for The- 
ology and war. 

GENERAL CONCLUSION. 459 

Condense to the utmost the general estimate of this volume, condenaedto 
and it resolves itself into the decision which perfects the con- tiie volume 
stitution of the religion; the decision, that is, to place the raoterisedby 
worship before the doctrine, in accordance with an ever-re- the worship 
curring wish, realisable by Positivism alone. Such a step in Doctrine. 
advance is the culminating point in, and is characteristic of, 
the formation of the relative unity, the gradual outcome of 
the three preceding volumes. After establishing the doctrine 
on which the whole system rests, the first deduced there- 
from, by the subjective method, the systematisation of Positive 
logic, applying that method directly in the capital con- 
struction of the cerebral theory. This done, it was possible, 
in the second volume, to institute the universal synthesis, on the 
basis of the scientific supremacy of Morals, and to regulate its 
application to social questions by laying the foundations for the 
normal separation of the two powers. The third condensed the 
philosophy of history in the final amalgamation of the two 
states which stand, the one at the beginning, the other at the 
end of man's education, — by the direct combination of Fetichism 
with Positivism. Still the religious series would have remained 
incomplete, had the doctrine maintained its precedence over the 
worship, a precedence irreconcilable with the subordination of 
intellect to feeling. It is this seventh and last step which 
naturally sums up the decisive creation of Positive unity in a 
simple transposition, the whole of the concluding volume amply 
proving, the power both for synthesis and sympathy of such 
transposition. 

460 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE WOEK OF THE 
SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

To appreciate as a whole the religious construction in the four 
volumes now ended, it should be connected with my lectures of 
1847, lectures of capital importance, as in them, on my moral re- 
generation, there arose, by a gradual process, the true synthesis. 
It was but a first outline, of an essentially dogmatic character, 
but it contained, not merely the substance of the ' General View,' 
but also all the germs of the concluding volume. In 1848, my 
teaching became mainly historical and in this form it was re- 
peated three years, according to the programme given in the 
preface to the third volume. I have not gone on with it since 
the publication of my first volume, but still it gave occaaon, by 
anticipation, to the decisive elaboration of the great leading 
conceptions, statical or dynamical, peculiar to the several por- 
tions of the present work. Such is, unquestionably, the filiation 
which links my whole religious construction to the angelic im- 
pulse which was destined to make me feel in its full force the 
true source of Positive unity. 

As early as 1845, 1 saw in its true light, under this holy 
influence, my whole career ; I saw that its second half had to 
transform philosophy into religion, as its first had changed 
science into philosophy. So was coordinated the series of 
efforts which had been the spontaneous outgrowth of my original 
attempt to proceed directly with the regeneration of society. 
The smaller works, reprinted as appendices to this treatise, show 
how, with the aim of reconstructing the spiritual power, T was 
gradually led to the prior formation of a philosophical theory 
capable of inspiring fixed convictions which all might share. 
This foundation once laid by the creation of Sociology, I felt 
that it was inadequate as a means of spiritual reorganisation 
unless duly completed by comprehending feeling no less than 
the intellect and the activity. Hence I undertook the present 

CONCLUSION OF THE "WHOLE "WORK. 461 

work to base the universal synthesis on Morals as paramount, in 
theory as in practice ; giving systematic expression, that is, to 
the wisdom of Theocracy and of Catholicism by the aid of all 
the knowledge acquired by man. 

The close connection between the two phases of my mission The two 

phflSBs of my 

lies in the obligation, if Positive unity is to be efficient and career inti- 
durable, to make it complete. Scientific theories are inadequate neoted by 

,..»,, theobliga- 

and precarious it not colligated in a philosophy; on the same tiontocom- 
ground, that philosophy must be subordinated to the moral Positive 
principle, whence and whence only we can get the subjective 
synthesis, which is by its very nature indivisible. It is in the 
spiritual order above all that the remark applies, though it 
originate in the external order, that every isolated construction 
is unstable. Although the absolute synthesis never embraced 
the practical existence of man, and never was anything but 
unsatisfactory to his intelligence, its capacity to satisfy his 
emotional nature insured its empire, so long as his progress in 
action and speculation was not directly counter to it. But the 
relative unity cannot exist without being complete ; for the last 
advance of Positivity is its entry into the only domain which 
can bind together and discipline all the other sciences. 

This enlargement of the sphere of Positivism has nothing Theexten- 
accidental in it : on the contrary, it is the result of the continuous tiTism to 

^ ' , Morals not a 

upward movement of the scientific spirit, from the simplest chance 
phenomena to the most complex. The causality of Fetichism 
began the study of the physical, order, and the causality of 
Theology entered on that of the moral order. But not till the 
substitution of laws for causes was it possible to enter on the 
study of the intellectual or social order, the Hnk needed to 
connect the two others. When, after a sufficient preparation, 
this new and decisive step was taken, the consequence followed 
speedily, that the whole of man's real knowledge was summed 
up in the dogma of Humanity, the demonstration of its reality 
being drawn from our whole collective existence, and most espe- 
cially from that existence under its dynamical aspect. Now, it 
was inevitable that such a condensation should at once raise the 
conviction of the necessary correlation between the satisfaction 
of our intellectual, and the satisfaction of our moral, wants. 
It was enough if the soul were so stirred as to feel that the Great 
Being to whom we refer all our acts and thoughts is eminently 
qualified to form also the centre of our affections. Then of itself 

462 

SYSTEM OP POSITIVE POLITY. 

The Positive 
Synthesis 
onuld not 
triumph 
were it not 
for its so- 
cial desti- 
nation. 

This social 
mission en- 
ables it to 
overcome all 
resistance. 

arose complete unity, hitherto unattainable, and with its rise ends 
the initiation of man, as it implies the irreversible substitution 
of the relative for the absolute. 

No attractions, however, either intellectual or moral, of this 
new synthesis, could have insured its triumph, had it not been, 
by its constitution, in relation with the -social purpose which 
had evoked it. The Positive religion has not merely to regenerate 
the training of the mind, equally from the scientific and es- 
thetic point of view, which is being degraded and destroyed by 
the increasing indiscipline of the present day. Its chief mission 
is other, and concerns directly the existence of society, deeply 
imperilled, at the very centre of its reorganisation, by the utter 
exhaustion of the kingdom of God, for which no substitute Ib 
possible but the ascendancy of Humanity. This mission is but 
the expression in a new form, under an irresistible impulse, of 
the great primary consciousness of the indivisibility of the 
whole problem ; the indivisibility which, characteristic of all 
vitality, is most characteristic of the highest existence, and 
developes with the developement of that existence. '\\Tien the 
empirical wisdom of practical men aims at mere political 
reconstruction apart from the spiritual, it becomes more irra- 
tional and more disturbing than the empiricism of the theorician, 
when it exerts itself to organise science apart from philosophy, 
or philosophy apart from religion. 

Its connection with this social purpose qualifies Positi\'ism 
to overcome all the resistance, unconscious or concerted, which 
it will naturally meet. For it alone can in each case use the 
language appropriate to the case, appealing alternately to the 
wants of the intellect and the exigencies of society, in the name 
at once of order and of progress, the sole possible combination 
of which it accomplishes. Long centred in its founder, it inspired 
him, by virtue of this plenary comprehensiveness, with unshaken 
confidence in its proximate triumph in a sceptical milieu, for in 
such a milieu disunion neutralises all resistance to or2"anic 
impulses, if sufficiently systematic. But the isolation of the 
founder ceased even before the philosophy issued in the religion, 
and more particularly at the time when the relative synthesis 
was really complete ; without waiting for the termination of the 
work which accomplishes that synthesis. Already Positivists are 
justified in looking on themselves as destined, at no distant 
period, to sway the metropolis of Humanity with a greater power 

CONCLUSION OP THE WHOLE WOEK. 463 

than tlie Encyclopaedists in the last century ; for the difficulties 
have grown and the doctrine is more calculated to meet them. 

In the midst of the construction now ended, this conviction The convict- 
suggested the decisive proclamation, in which I condensed my triumph an- 
course of lectures and which I thence transferred to the Gate- the preface 
chism, the small work announced as intended for the propa- chism. 
gation of the religion. I repeat it here, so duly to connect the 
memorable utterance with its principal source : ' In the name 
' of the past, in the interest of the future, the theoretical and 
' practical servants of Humanity come forward to claim as their 
' due the general direction of this world ; their object being 
' directly to construct the true Providence, moral, intellectual, 
'and material, excluding for ever from political supremacy 
' all the various servants of God, Catholic, Protestant, or Deist, 
' as at once belated and an element of disturbance.' This 
language, ratified by the tacit assent, these two years past, of 
the different parties of the West, indicates, and even assists, 
the irresistible advent of the regenerating doctrine, the only 
doctrine which is exempt from all need of concession, as alone 
able to be always just, by virtue of its plenary comprehensiveness. 

Positivism alone is susceptible of true universality, and positivism 
unites in itself the opposite excellences of the two Monotheisms self the test 
its precursors, for it surpasses Catholicism in its adaptation to cathoucism 
the subject whom it raises, whilst it surpasses Islamism in the ™ ^'™' 
siipport it gives to the just power of the ruler. Its true disciples 
stand forth in relation to both, as the sole representatives of the 
two subjective portions of Humanity to its objective portion, at 
present in blind revolt against its masters and its judges. The 
Eeligion of Humanity will teach the conservatives of the West 
how revolutionary they are ; since Catholicism, when in the 
ascendant, broke the continuity of the race; when in decay, 
extended its baneful social influence even to solidarity. With 
Mussulmen, the true believers will avail themselves of a more 
favourable disposition as regards the aggregate of human bonds, 
by setting forth the capacity of Positivism to satisfy the as- 
pirations of Islam. Throughout the world, it will bring the 
demands of progress into complete unison with the requirements 
of order, representing the ultimate regeneration as consisting 
in the discipline of the forces evoked during the period of 
preparation. 

Its inherent superiority in presence of all other tendencies, 

464 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

intellectual or social, will never assert itself without a just 
appreciation of the differences peculiar to each case. Although 
more Positive than any science, the Eeligion of Humanity will, 
in respect to theory, prefer spiritualism as synthetic, however 
vague it may be, to materialism as analytic, and, as such, more 
alien to the true intellectual regime. So also in the region of 
action, it wiU prefer the retrograde frame of mind to the anar- 
chical, till such time as it can nobly transform the one and the 
other, converting, that is, aristocrats and democrats alike into 
sociocrats. 

Substituting judicious respect for a degrading hypocrisy. 
Positivism, which finds its application primarily and especially 
in public life, undertakes to free the rulers from the oppression 
which tlieir scepticism involves, now that reconstruction and 
not demolition is the order of the day. Such of them as are 
gifted with a real superiority must in secret sigh over their in- 
ability, in the absence of convictions, to attain power without 
lowering their dignity by pandering to anarchical or retrograde 
beliefs which they do not and cannot share. The founder of the 
Eeligion of Humanity stands alone, at the present time, in the 
East as in the West, in never having made even tacitly, any de- 
grading concession, during forty years of an active existence in 
constant opposition to the reigning opinions. 

The privilege was naturally long confined to him exclusively, 
but is only so far exceptional, as originating in a time when the 
intellectual and moral disorder presses heavily upon all genuine 
elevation. It is not in politics only, nor even chiefly, that we 
trace the tendency, as at present, to raise mediocrity above merit, 
owing to the absence of all regulation and calm. The ephemeral 
leaders of science or of art offer habitually a more deplorable 
spectacle than the political leaders, for with the latter, the 
greater importance and greater definiteness of their office is 
more intolerant of incompetence and irresponsibility. 

In this vext milieu, Positivism comes forward to rally the 
higher natures more satisfactorily, than encyclop8edism,in the last 
century, clubbed together the stronger intellects. Placing them 
at the general point of view in regard to human affairs, a point 
hitherto never within reach, it does not shrink from lurging 
them to take the government of a world into which they alone 
bring the requisite degree of synthesis and sympathy. Be their 
rank, nay, their sex, what it may, they stand nobly leagued 

CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE WORK. 465 

together, with a mission of unparalleled grandeur, one which 
allows them the noble expansion of all their powers, whilst it 
disengages them at once and for ever from an intolerable 
oppression. 

It is true that this mission has a tendency to encourage the The danger 
opposite evil, the developement of presumption, often to a tion^'meuiy' 
startling extent, a fault with which, these thirty years, I have ' °^°''^""' 
heard most of my disciples charged and with justice. Their 
error, however, is usually due solely to their deficient religious 
growth ; they have lingered too long on the philosophical 
introduction, and been led thereby to exaggerate their intellec- 
tual advantages, to the neglect of the great purpose they should 
subserve. True Positivists, who always ' make their moral being 
their prime care,' are soon led to feel how sadly they fall short 
of their mission, a mission not of their instituting, one which 
any contempt imperils, though it require, within proper limits, 
an instinct of superiority. 

That this confidence may never degenerate into pre- Tobeconfi- 
sumption, it must rest on the satisfactory fulfilment of the conditions 
. several conditions prescribed for all who habitually take part fuifliied. 
in the work of organisation. Such fulfilment exacts from, the 
theoricians the synthetical disposition in its completeness, for 
without it they cannot at all times grasp the sum of human 
affairs. The generality of thought thus systematically formed 
gives them an irresistible influence in each particular case, 
necessarily dependent on the universal order, of which they 
thus become the sole interpreters. But synthesis requires more 
than the encyclopaedic preparation, its existence and its con- 
tinuance are impossible without sympathy ; so that the intel- 
lectual conditions are found to be inseparable from the moral 
obligations. Theoricians who should make light of these latter 
would be the more blameable in that the correlation of the two 
is a fundamental dogma of Positivism, as a consequence of the 
true theory of unity. If theologians are justly suspected, at the 
present day, of moral inferiority because they persist in denying 
the existence in man's nature of the benevolent instincts, the 
faith which adopts innate altruism leaves its disciples without 
excuse if they hold in slight esteem the cultivation of the 
affections. Not to dwell on the fact that such culture may be, 
more than any other, common to all Positivists, it is on it that 

VOL. IV. H H 

466 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

How Positi- 
vistB may 
show the 
power of 
their faith. 

(1) In pri- 
vate life. 

(2) In pub- 
lic life. 

The ' ■plman- 
oipatetl ' — 
future use of 
the term. 

they mainly depend, and this holds good even of theoricians, for 
their ascendancy. 

The habits and feelings of the normal state, as described in 
this treatise, may begin even now on a decisive scale, among 
true believers, more particularly as regards private life. Com- 
plete Positivists need not wait for the full accomplishment of 
the transition which they ought to guide, they may at once 
recommend their religion by exemplifying in themselves the 
moral improvement to which it ensures, irrevocably, the su- 
premacy. The first evidence of their faith should be that it 
makes them more sober and more chaste, in order to gain, over 
and above such and such particular good results, the power of 
understanding better and turning to greater use the general re- 
action of the body upon the brain. But, whilst they conquer the 
chief constituent of egoism in a direct struggle, it is indirectly, 
in the main, that they should combat their whole personality, by 
the persistent encouragement, that is, of the three sympathetic 
instincts. For this they have, first, the aids offered them by 
domestic life, where alone is fostered the right estimate of 
woman ; and besides, this perfecting of their nature may always 
be a result of the daily practice of private worship, now com- 
pletely in the power of the higher natures. It is in this secret 
intercourse with the best representatives of the Great Being 
that each Positivist should even now cement the unity which 
he will spread around him. This moral culture renders easier 
and more effective the discharge of all other duties, public as 
well as private duties, at all times referred to Humanity. 

To modify public life in an equal degree is not possible, 
swayed as it is by an undisciplined milieu ; but here the 
Positivists should at once manifest the moral efficacy of their 
belief by fulfilling better than their various opponents, the 
special obligations of their several professions. In their re- 
lations with society they can always set a decisive example of 
brotherly feeling to one another, of veneration of all for their 
head. Outside their own body, their habitual attitude should 
be one of goodwill and protection, as towards the reactionist or 
even the revolutionist, both but rarely responsible for their 
degradation, which is generally traceable to the insuperable 
difficulties of their position. 

A designation, already current in the West, a fact of great 
weight, will before long acquire its full force with Positivists, as 

CONCLUSION OF THE "WHOLE WOEK. 467 

expressing their general attitude in a disorderly milieu ; it is the 
term emanci'pated. That force has hitherto been latent, for 
the-naiae could only be applied to the persistent sceptic, who 
is, as such, powerless in a period where reconstruction is the 
dominant need. Nay, worse than powerless, he is involved in 
contradiction, for his position denies him genuine emancipation, 
as he is compelled to flatter by turns the conflicting errors from 
which he deems himself freed. Quite other is the result when 
the most thoroughly emancipated are seen to be also the most 
definite in their convictions, provided that they prove the power 
of those convictions by setting a constant example of complete 
discipline. Then, in accordance with the full acceptation of 
the term, they ought habitually to wield as regards their 
undisciplined milieu, sceptics or theologians alike, a protective 
influence imperatively required during the whole of the organic 
transition. 

So rises an empire -from which the world can only free itself 
by doing as its noble leaders have done, regenerating itself that 
is ; those leaders being ever ready to put an end in due form to 
an extraordinary ascendancy, when it is no longer necessaiy to 
the advent of the normal state. When the empirical conser- 
vatives, recognising their powerlessness in the presence of 
anarchy, shall have handed over the government to the Posi- 
tivists, as alone competent to meet Communism, the Western 
World will have undergone a radical transformation. The 
most complete — the most active faith will distinguish its chiefs, 
negation or doubt will become, as retrogradation is, the symbol 
or the justification of political inferiority. 

But, to gain and to hold such ascendancy, Positivists must Theper- 
at once form a habit of individual exertion ; otherwise, however oiPo.iUnWs 
superior their doctrine, they will remain as much below their how this 
mission as were the Encyclopedists when formerly invested ^^'"' ™''^" 
with power. To them Humanity entrusts at the present day 
the defence of her fundamental institutions, not less imperilled 
by the appeal to God than by tendencies of a directly revolu- 
tionary character. It is for Positivism to make the poor the 
basis for the sole honourable and solid guarantee of wealth, 
implanting in all a just estimate of the concentration of 
material wealth and its security as indispensable to its social 
function. Without giving its sanction to wrongful acqidsitions, 
Positivism will lay the greatest stress on the right use of power 

HH 2 

468 

SYSTEM 01' POSITIVE POLITY. 

Only the 
higher 
niitiires at 
present 
satisfy the 
require- 
menta of 
the Positive 
I'aith. 

of whatever order, adjourning to a future time discussions which 
could only disturb the present. Nor is it merely in reference 
to the family and property that Fositivists should show their 
power of organisation ; they must extend it to the government, 
though not as yet in their hands. When the most completely 
emancipated shall be the most highly disciplined in presence 
of all authority, it will come home to the routine conservatives 
how inconsistent and dangerous is their habitual disposition to 
carp blindly at the power on which their safety depends. Such 
are the moral and intellectual dispositions by which all Fosi- 
tivists will concur to smooth the way for their regenerative 
action and will deserve the ascendancy which that action 
demands; by perpetually combining love with faith on the basis 
of activity. 

Difficult these conditions may appear, but difficult only to 
minds yet strange to the Eeligion of Humanity. Its true be- 
lievers have already felt the charm for the individual of social 
precepts when fully obeyed. Beside their own inherent at- 
traction for the intellect and the moral nature, synthesis and 
sympathy support one another by constituting the true unity, 
always and everywhere the object of men's search, and hence- 
forth unattainable except in Positivism. The coordination of 
the within by love, the binding it to the without by faith, 
this gives the soul calm without apathy, the true constituent 
of happiness, and moreover the guarantee of health, as each 
one feels himself in his proper relation to the Great Being 
who protects all. Become more self-devoted, more energetic, 
and at the same time less egoistic, Fositivists will find in the 
conditions imposed by Humanity a permanent source of un- 
rivalled satisfactions, whilst still struggling with the anarchy 
which they have to overcome. 

Nevertheless, at the present day, the destiny is one suited 
only to the higher natures, and the primary object should be to 
bring forward such natures in the teeth of the existing disorder, 
which pushes into the highest place those whose true position 
would be as subalterns. But difficult as the elimination may be, 
the faith which imposes it as a necessity enables us to perform 
it successfully, by furnishing us with principles of judgment. 
And although the absence of quiet hampers us in their appli- 
cation, such application will before long enable us to unite all 
who are worthy of supremacy, by a judicious estimate of per- 

CONCLUSION OF THE "WHOLE WORK. 469 

sonal merit, in spite of the obstacles due to circumstances, and 
even to education. 

To facilitate the formation and growth of this nucleus, on The classes 
which depends for the future the regeneration of the West, I the'directing 
am bound to recommend that it be not recruited from those drawn. 
who are leaders or abettors of the present agitation. My best 
disciples, both theoricians and practicians, will come from that 
portion of society which hitherto has been passive, though 
not really indifferent, but passive from a dim consciousness of 
the incompetence of all opinions in vogue to deal with the 
problem in its full completeness. Above all, we must abandon 
all hope of any really efficient assistance from the class which at 
present provisionally intervenes between thinkers and the public, 
with the sole object of hindering the spread of the truth, which it 
formerly preached. Ever powerless to construct, the literateurs 
had their place only in destruction, and to their share in that they 
owed their temporary possession of spiritual ascendancy. Their 
instinct of anarchy makes them more adverse to Positivism than 
to Theologism, from their natural dislike to a discipline from 
which they cannot escape and to which they will not submit. 
They cannot be judges, for his superiors alone can judge any 
one ; they think it beneath them to be mere reporters, so they 
always mingle their own views with the conceptions they under- 
take to transmit. One of the most intelligent of their number, 
one too of the best disposed, could not even quote my verse on 
the cerebral organisation without introducing an important 
change for the worse. 

The danger attaching to such interference compels me to The three 
include in the preceding judgment the three literary men, who who awddl" 
in England first, and then in France, have hitherto honourably snbs'e- 
aided in the propagation of Positivism. A celebrated logician abaliaoned 
was the first to proclaim the intellectual superiority of the new 
philosophy, especially from the point of view of method. He 
was soon followed by the able writer, who, living in the centre 
of the regeneration, was more successful in mastering, in its 
entirety, the conception of a mission which was as much 
social as intellectual, and which he relieved from a concerted 
silence. Then came the young Hellenist, who had the saga- 
city, in writing the History of Philosophy, to order it with 
constant reference to the inevitable advent of Positivism. But 
although the three justly added to their own importance by 

the cause. 

470 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

popularising the new doctrine, we may verify, even for writers 
of such exceptional ability, the impotence of the literary world 
as regards the production of true apostles of the regenerative 
faith. 

All three, with some partial afiBnities for the doctrine, affi- 
nities so strong as to seem conclusive, ultimately proved unable 
to shake off the influence of their Protestant origin and revolu- 
tionary habits. After nobly introducing Positivism to the 
knowledge of the public, the first early invented the tactics by 
which, ignoring the indivisibility of my synthesis, the attempt 
is made to establish a contradiction between my. philosophical 
creation and my religious construction. The second, some 
months after I had proclaimed him my chief colleague, left the 
Positive Society, because he could not recognise, in the dictatorial 
crisis, the spontaneous preparation for the systematic triumvirate 
to which he had given his distinct adhesion. Though the least 
incomplete of the three, the third offered a still more deplorable 
example than the others of the inherent inconsequence of lite- 
rateurs, by his definitive adhesion to the most despicable of all 
the systems of theological hypocrisy. This threefold verification 
of a natural incompatibility is the more conclusive warning to me 
not to count on auxiliaries from the literary class, in that Posi- 
tivism was calculated at first to awaken sympathies in some ex- 
ceptional cases in the milieu most adverse to its supremacy. 

We must wait then till the religion of Hrmianity has formed 
organs for its propagation amongst its true disciples ; this will 
be when the whole exposition of it in its fundamental outline 
shall have become sufiiciently familiar. But we may confidently 
affirm that such aid will not fail the faith which is beyond ail 
others calculated to impel to concert without compromising 
independence. In one admirable exception we have already an 
indication of the normal cooperation ; I allude to the work of a 
distinguished lady who might have claimed to judge, but nobly 
limited herself to the function of reporter, discharging it with 
unparalleled success. 

Till such time as Positivism finds complete organs, I am 
compelled to adjourn the accomplishment of a duty which I 
have stated to be incumbent on all leaders, when they have 
reached my age. The sacred law of continuity enjoins the 
founder of the true religion, more than any succeeding Pontiflf, 
to name in time his successor, so that by the due influence of 

CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE WORK. 471 

opinion his choice ■ may be corrected, or the acceptance of that 
successor be facilitated. But the preceding remarks dispense 
with my explaining why it is that I must still adjourn this 
duty, though it has twice inspired me with premature hopes. 
Not as yet able to find a successor, nor even a colleague, I 
declare that if I died without finding one, the growth of 
Positivism would be sounder if it relied on the free exertions 
of my true disciples, than under an incompetent chief. But it 
is permitted to me to hope that the completion of my religious 
construction will soon bring forward some one who may be 
acceptable, or, at any rate, that it will make impossible the 
acceptance of any literateur. 

In terminating this great work, it is but natural that I Future 
should repeat the announcement with which the Philosophie 
Positive concludes, relative to the proper work of my second 
life. Of the four compositions which I had then to announce 
I have now accomplished, in seven years, the most vast, the 
most difficult, and the most important. The three others have 
been sufficiently described in the third chapter of this volume 
to make any recurrence to the subject unnecessary. Thus, 
before the normal period of retirement, I now enter upon a last 
seven years of full intellectual activity, the results of which 
should be : in 1856, the System of Positive Logic, or. Treatise 
of Mathematical Philosophy ; in 1859, the System of Positive 
Idorals, or. Treatise of General Education ; and in 1861, the 
System, of Positive Industry, or. Treatise of the Combined 
Action of Bum,anity upon her Planet. Such a body of works 
forms a complementary construction equivalent in extent to 
that just accomplished. Though less difficult and less important, 
it were to be regretted if death or extreme poverty prevented 
my fulfilling a promise, formally stated so early as 1822, in the seeApper- 
small treatise which is the groundwork of all my subsequent 
writings. I am bound, then, to regard the present work as the 
basis of an indispensable complement, applying to myself the 
motto happily applied to Csesar, a motto as suitable for the 
competent theorician as the great man of action : 

Nil actum reputans si quid superesset agendum. 

Deeming nought done whilst aught remained to do. 

Ldcan, Pharsalia, ii. 658. 

472 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

FINAL INVOCATION. 

(SDE DEDICATION TO TOLITME I.) 

Non h Taffezion mia tanto profonda 
Che basti a render voi grazia per grazia. 

Dante, Par. iv. 122. 

Lite fok othees. Live Openxy. 

Paris : Monday, 9 Dante, 66. (24 Jnly, 1854.) 

Noble and tender-heahted Ladt, my Patroness and Exemplar, 
Eight years liave passed since in gratitude, in regret, 
and in resignation I offered to thy sacred memory an exceptional 
dedication, in the middle of the year of mourning, though it 
could not be published till five years later. What I now write 
is still more alien to general custom, but it will excite less 
surprise, for it is the termination of a construction, the chief 
phases of which justify, and with increasing force, such an act 
of homage. Perhaps thereby I may originate a new practice, 
a complementary institution, which will, with the public sanction, 
henceforth enhance the effect of the dedication proper, when 
worthy of any elaboration involving a succession of efforts. 

The involuntary delay in the publication of my original 
tribute was fortunately not without a compensation, in that it 
at once drew the sympathy of the nobler minds, as during the 
preceding three years the ' General View ' had bepn preparing 
them to ratify the consecration therein announced. An analo- 
gous result is more certain now, when I here complete the holy 
dedication, the justice of which all competent readers have 
fully accepted. In the present state of mental indiscipline, 
this fourth volume will frequently be read, at tirst at any rate, 
when there is no acquaintance with the three others, But it 
suffices to justify this final homage, which will soon recall 
attention to the dedication of the first volume. As more system- 
atic than either of the others, it brings into stronger relief 
the correlation between synthesis and sympathy, and it is to 
thee I owe its acceptance as a paramount influence. 

FINAL INVOCATION. 473 

Each of the seven essential steps in my construction of a 
religion has its own distinct trace of the angelic influence 
acknowledged at its opening. Thy aid is undeniable in regard 
to the three which are distinbtive of the first volume, though it 
be adequately recognised only for the first of the three. My fun- 
damental work, the Philosophie, revealed beyond dispute the 
composite and continuous existence which sways with increasing 
power the course of the world. It had even gradually reached 
the point of proclaiming the supremacy of the heart over the 
intellect, as the only source, spontaneous or systematic, of 
human unity. The Great Being thus revealed in its nature 
and destination, it was enough, to render it possible to create 
the universal religion, that a holy love Should adequately fami- 
liarise me with the basic principle in which my first life was 
seen to issue. So it was that the dogma of Humanity arose, on 
the first anniversary of the fatal event which separated us, in 
the decisive course of lectures from which this whole treatise isii. 
springs. All who justly appreciate the filiation here traced 
must now acknowledge that it should be carried farther back, 
so as to extend to the dedication, which, a few months before, oot.4, ims. 
gave their first formal expression to all the germs of the sub- 
sequent progress. 

That thy participation in the two steps which mark the 
second half of the first volume is less felt, is only because they 
have not yet become as familiar to most of my disciples. When 
I introduced the name Positivist, the public, in its empiricism 
and scepticism, judged it to be as contradictory as it was 
strange. In thirty years I have so raised it, that it is now 
sought, as a pledge of order no less than of progress, by many 
who do not satisfy its main conditions. Of the seven meanings 
which it combines, the last — and fully to feel this last I was 
incapable without thee — is the least appreciated, though it be 
the most decisive, as bearing directly on the sole source of true 
unity. Those who most fully recognise the necessary interde- 
pendence of six of the characteristics of the Positive spirit, at 
once real, useful, certain, exact, organic, and even relative, 
have not gone so far in their regeneration as to link its intel- 
lectual claims to the moral signification of the term. But, 
though I still am the only one in whom Positive, thanks to 
thee, has become equivalent to sympathetic, I doubt not but 
that all my true disciples will soon follow me so far under the 

;474 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

irresistible impulse of the synthesis but now ended. Then the 
Western revolution, as a whole, will find, in familiar use, its 
condensed expression in the complete regeneration of a funda- 
mental term, henceforth destined to connote the highest 
morality, whilst retaining the advantages attaching to its 
originally material connotation. 

As foreshadowing this result I may appeal to the growing 
appreciation of the two complementary steps of the first volume, 
intellectual steps it is true, but yet evidencing directly the 
emotional source of the true synthesis. The systematisation of 
the Positive logic, by virtue of the definitive adoption of the 
subjective method, gives form and expression to the whole of the 
influence on my intellect of thy holy ascendancy. How without 
thee should I have duly felt that feeling alone can combine 
images with signs to elaborate thought, in such a way as to 
bring into direct connection the instinct of Fetichism and the 
reason of Positivism ? When once it is rightly understood that 
thou hadst as large a share in the second step of religious Posi- 
tivism as in the first, there will be little delay in tracing thy 
influence on the third. My construction of the cerebral theory 
is so intimately bound up with the institution of the subjective 
method, that all who by sympathy are qualified for true synthesis 
will feel that thy aid was indispensable in a creation which has 
in it more of the feminine than the masculine element. 

It is at this point that begins the increasing divergence 
between the Positivists, who style themselves intellectual, with- 
out being more intelligent, and the complete, that is to say, the 
religious Positivists. Although the majority of the former limit 
their adhesion to my philosophy, some have already advanced 
so far as to accept the dogma of Humanity, the connection of 
which with the whole of Sociology is hidden only to the sophist. 
Their acceptance, however, as purely intellectual, bears no fruit 
for them; it is not able to form the starting point for farther 
advance, in default of a moral impulse. Hence it is that these 
abortive Positivists have found fault with my dedication, taxing it 
with sentimental exaggeration, and I doubt not that the present 
invocation will clash still more with their feelings, on the same 
ground. In their estimate of the subjective method and of the 
cerebral theory they differ but little from the thinkers who are 
so belated as to reject as ontological or mystical the dogma of 
Humanity, whilst admitting Sociology. 

FINAL INVOCATION. 475 

Wherever there has been a just sense of the rational inter- 
connection of the three steps which form the progression proper 
to my first volume, there -will be no difficulty in appreciating 
the four other stages of religious Positivism. More particularly 
is the process easy in the case of the two gone through in the 
second volume, and principally of that one which, as occupying 
the centre of the regeneration by sympathy, will early be re- 
garded as the most decisive of all. In assigning, at the opening 
of my social statics, the highest place in the encyclopaedia to 
Morals, even as compared with Sociology, I systematically placed 
my religious construction higher than my philosophical creation, 
which is its groundwork, in obedience to the true theory of 
unity. The influence of woman, and of such influence it was 
for thee to ofi'er me the highest type, appears unmistakably in 
this advance, the best distinction between social and intellectual 
Positivism. Nor is it more possible to contest thy cooperation 
in the next step,— in close connection with the last, — which 
completes my second volume by basing the Sociocracy on the 
normal division of the two powers, a division which was 
familiar to thee, owing to thy Catholic instincts, in spite of the 
disturbing influences of scepticism. 

With difficulty should I have brought thee, with thy extreme 
modesty, to acknowledge the large share thou hadst in the whole 
of the third volume, for its province is the most remote from 
thy own special education. But had we been able to accom- 
plish the noble wish thou spontaneously didst express to me, to 
study history synthetically, thou wouldst now feel how greatly 
thou aidedst me in the systematisation of my dynamical con- 
ceptions. It would be enough for thee to understand that the 
historical synthesis necessarily finds its condensed expression in 
ihe establishment of a direct connection between the two ex- 
treme terms of man's initiation, Fetichism and Positivism. The voi.i.p.6i2. 
admirable canzone which I have repeated every morning, these 
last nine years, is as characteristic an utterance of Fetichist 
poetry as thy sacred novel prefigures Positive idealisation. voi.i.p.602. 
Under so spontaneous a form of cooperation, thou couldst not 
have refused to accept thy involuntary share in my construction 
of the philosophy of history, though it is an influence not as yet 
recognised even by the best of my disciples. 

None will question thy influence in regard to the seventh 
step, which in this volume closes the regular upward ascent of 

476 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

religious Positivism, by its removal of the serious discrepancies 
I left in it last year. Had it been permitted thee to contem- 
plate the best fruits of thy eternal ascendancy, thou wouldst on 
thy own promptings have pointed out to me the threefold dis- 
sonance which, perceived but late, was yet recognised in time to 
preserve this last volume from the peculiar defect of the Cate- 
chism. Though all my true disciples at once accepted the 
systematic determination which led me to place definitively the 
worship before the doctrine, no one of them could so completely 
rise above the empiricism of Theology and scepticism as to 
suggest the change. But, with thee, sympathy would have so 
aided synthesis that the improvement would have been realised 
even in the Catechism, the holy work in which thy cooperation 
was purely subjective. Not having thy help, T was near missing 
this final step, which, as condensing my whole religious de- 
velopement, will be naturally a greater shock to incomplete 
Positivists than were its six predecessors. 

Thus, we see how the examination in detail of thy intimate 
cooperation in each phase of my religious construction issues in 
establishing more conclusively the fatal difference there is be- 
tween subjective participation and objective assistance. Several 
years must elapse before Positivism, at length complete by virtue 
of the present work, pass from the most philosophical to the 
most poetical nation, there to receive its ideal expression, the 
decisive step in the progress and the only one beyond my power 
to take. The interval was to have been thine, that in it thou 
mightest prepare the way for the final acceptance of a religion, 
which is esthetic rather than scientific, by the formal sanction 
and intervention of the sex best qualified by sympathy for the 
state of synthesis. 

The moral superiority of woman, with its legitimate com- 
plement derived from her social existence, enables her to move 
directly towards the unity which results from a gradual in- 
corporation with Humanity. With women synthesis may re- 
main unsystematic without detriment to their proper mission, 
a mission which, as never ambiguous and always with an 
immediate aim, transforms each act and each thought into a 
special developement of the true worship, under the persistent 
stimulation of affection. Whereas the practical and intellectual 
duties of man prevent him from condensing the Positive religion 
in its fundamental constituent. Compelled to construct a 

FINAL INVOCATION. 477 

systematic synthesis that he may submit himself to the uni- 
versal order, submit better and modify it more largely, he is 
diverted from the cultivation of the within by the effort he 
makes to connect it with the without. He neglects the end in 
the too constant consideration of the means, and so exhausts his 
intellect, and even his activity on fruitless or disturbing efforts, 
whilst love, ever tending to the good, chooses, amidst the 
number of appreciable relations, those only which can amelio- 
rate us. When a sound estimate of human knowledge prevents 
the philosopher from being puffed up, nothing keeps him from 
drying up, owing to the fatal isolation without which the 
weakness of our understanding would defeat his philosophic 
meditations. Ever imminent, this deterioration cannot be over- 
come but by the due intervention, objective or subjective, of 
woman, aided by the esthetic culture which is naturally con- 
nected with such intervention. 

He who was commissioned by the Great Being to institute 
the true religion by systematising Positive morality, even he 
could not but verify the law in his own person ; for the mental 
contention involved in his labours counteracted the sympathetic 
influence which was the natural result of their synthetic cha- 
racter. Here, when completing the constitution of the true 
unity, I feel an inexpressible satisfaction at being able to con- 
template directly its affective source without detriment to a 
construction which must benefit others more than myself. But 
this reward would have been more efBcacious had it been given 
me to make thee whilst yet living a sharer in it, however highly 
I may estimate the nascent appreciation of ' the noble lady 
whose memory is cherished and venerated by all my true 
disciples.' This harmony of mind and heart becomes the best 
condensation of a construction, the most characteristic feature of 
which is the elaboration of the true theory of the affective sex. 
As representative of this bond, it were enough to bring together 
thy most remarkable sayings, adding to them the only one I 
have not quoted, and which will be considered the most touch- 
ing when the occasion of it is known : ' The bad are often 
more in need of pity than the good.' 

Reduced to a subjective identification with thee, as the 
result of one incomparable year of objective union, I have at 
any rate turned it to the best account, by availing myself to 
the full of the advantages attaching to its immutability. To 

478 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

my public life not less than to my private life, may I apply the 
language whicli, for several years, lias been a part of my daily 
prayers. ' Notwithstanding our separation, my last state sur- 
passes all that I could hope, or even dream, before I knew thee.' 
Our love, which was always holy, made me first chaste, then 
sober ; and the purification of these two instincts, fostered by 
thy subjective influence, enabled me the better to overcome 
the other self-regarding instincts, by the constant encouragement 
of the three instincts of sympathy. Thou wouldst perhaps still 
persist in reproaching me for endangering, by too great kind- 
ness and self-abandonment, a personal ascendancy, so many 
have easily acquired by an artful reserve. And yet I cannot 
regret this disposition of mine, calculated as it is to promote 
my main usefulness, in accordance with the aptness thou 
attributedst to me of becoming all things to all men, an aptness 
more appropriate in the founder of Eelativism than in the 
founder of Catholicism. To thee I owe it that I have returned 
to the holy regime of the Middle Ages, that I have devoted, 
that is, for the last eight years, the first hour of each day to the 
direct culture of the better feelings of human nature. Evident 
as regards my moral, nay even my intellectual growth, the re 
novation extends even to my physical condition, equally with 
the others exempt from the ordinary forewarnings of old age, 
notwithstanding the laboriousness of my career, the prolongation 
of which will be thy doing. 

In this holy patronage, thou wilt be always assisted by the 
unrivalled help of her whom thy great soul recog-nised as its 
worthy sister, in her who since thy death has so fully deserved 
the happiness which, thou didst dream of /or us three. Over and 
above its practical services, the family which she guides offers 
me daily a salutary spectacle, proving to what an extent the 
least cultivated may enjoy, under all forms, what thou calledst 
the pleasures of devotion to others. I am thus led to feel more 
deeply how dignity, happiness, and even health reside in unity, 
as in the impairment of unity lie our chief diseases, moral, 
intellectual, or physical. Thy simple-hearted companion revives, 
unknown to herself, my systematic tendency to judge acts and 
thoughts with special reference to their source in, or their 
influence upon, the affections, these naturally engaging her 
attention as a mother and a wife. Vowed equally with myself 
to moral cultivation, the frequent superiority of her empirical 

FINAL INVOCATION. 479 

suggestions leads me to a sounder estimate of woman's nature, 
and is the objective complement of thy subjective action 
upon me, for my personal improvement, as a man and as a 
citizen. 

She, as thou, never was in personal contact with the 
venerable mother who failed, in spite of her zeal and her 
capacity, adequately to educate my heart ; but as my adopted 
daughter she daily joins with me and with thee in my just 
adoration of her holy and unhappy memory. Thus placed 
under the threefold patronage which I have shown to be normal 
for each true believer, I have now so far set forth its constant 
influence on my public life as to warrant me in here asking 
posterity to connect it directly with my own immortality. 
These five years I daily complete my morning prayers with this 
resolution : ' I will venture to end my religious construction by 
an open injunction to my disciples of both sexes to obtain for 
me one day, as the principal reward of my services, my solemn 
interment in the midst of you three, in the name of the Great 
Being, with whom we shall be for ever incorporated.' 

In this formal expression of my characteristic wish, I hope, 
Iq accordance with our faith, by a noble publicity to facilitate 
its attainment, for such publicity will allow not merely a truer 
sense of its reasonableness, but also an easier victory over any 
opposition. Supposing the venerable remains already dispersed, 
owing to Christian neglect, it will be enough that a noble 
cenotaph be attached to our tomb as in the case of my latest 
patroness. 

The reward I here claim is one too well adapted to express 
the nature and manifest the ascendancy of the religion of 
Humanity to be denied me, even if it were to follow immediately 
upon the publication in its entirety of this holy treatise. Al- 
ready thy angelic influence is appreciated so far that higher 
souls, even from across the seas, sympathise with my continuous 
adoration of thee. This just extension of my inadequate grati- 
tude will shortly penetrate more deeply and spread more widely 
under the impulse of this last and most decisive volume. Thanks 
to the noble confidence of thy aged father, the painter's skill has 
been able to form a sweet image of thee after the sketch by thy 
mother. It is perhaps destined before long to be, to my^ disciples, 
the best emblem of the Great Being, the systematisation of 
whose worship was effected under thy holy influence. 

480 SYSTEM OP POSITIVE POLITY. 

The same pre-eminent patronage which directed the great 
work of my second life must preside over the three works which 
remain to complete it. I shall give a special appreciation of 
this its latest service, when I dedicate the most important of 
the three to her who, in my earliest childhood, implanted in me 
an instinctive anticipation of true morality. This complementary 
labour ended, my last publication will be, in ten years, the dis- 
charge of my solemn promise as to our holy correspondence, to 
be preceded by thy life and even by my own. But feeling, 
which alone consecrates everything, will perhaps justify me in 
ending my second life in the body by venturing on a sketch of 
the third, the full developement of which is denied me by the 
sum of the imperative conditions under which we live, though I 
feel its true character. After passing by a normal course from 
my philosophical foundation to my religious construction, it 
would be well, by an exceptional effort, to complete the latter 
by the poetical creation which alone will be able to procure for 
it universal ascendancy. Irreconcilable with the laws of bodily 
life, such completeness of accomplishment is sufficiently in 
unison with the laws of cerebral life, for me to have been able 
to conceive and propose the eminent composition which I may 
not execute. Whilst renouncing any fruitless attempt, I yet 
hope to complete the volume which concerns us by an outline of 
a poem, in thirteen cantos, on the second life which that volume 
explains in ine through thee. 

I must end this final invocation by referring to its true 
source an utterance in which the founder of the Positive religion 
completes the presentment of the normal manners, by throwing 
private acts open to the inspection and interference, under 
proper conditions, of the public. Over and above the general 
duty of proclaiming in time our last wishes, there is a special 
reason why at fifty-seven I here state three resolutions, which 
cannot be carried into effect without the voluntary aid of all 
Positivists. 

1st. The body of my adherents will continue the annuity of 
two thousand francs mentioned in my fourth Circular, in order 
that I may discharge, up to its natural termination, the obli- 
gation incurred in my youth by my only really grave fault. 

2nd. An annuity of fifteen hundred francs shall be set apart, 
by the gratitude of the true believers, for the adopted daughter 
who, for the last thirteen years, has devoted to me her ines- 
timable services. 

FINAL INVOCATION. 481 

3rd. This eminent proletary will keep, for my successor, in 
its actual state and at the cost of the universal church, the 
sacred residence in which was conceived and worked out the 
creation of the Positivist religion, and in which the sacred 
rites of that religion will continue to be celebrated till the 
acquisition of a temple. 

So soon as this volume is sufficiently known, I wUl com- 
municate directly to each of my thirteen executors the minor 
arrangements necessary to ensure the execution of these three 
resolutions. 

My actions, my thoughts, and my feelings, all equally centre 
around her who presides over my second life, that life in which, 
now for eight years, there has been growing an unexampled 
harmony between the conduct of private and that of public life. 
When my love was sufficiently purified, I saw thee nobly accept 
my plan of legal adoption, which only failed through the cata- 
strophe which befell us. Since thy influence has become exclu- 
sively subjective, veneration has more and more prevailed over 
attachment, without diverting me from benevolence, the culture 
of which has been constant through my just efforts to spread a 
right estimate of an angel who passed unknown. If this fusion 
of all the feelings of man for woman appear to involve a con- 
tradiction, it is only because of the coarseness of man's impulses. 
Anticipated in poetry and in religion, it authorises me to con- 
clude this final invocation by combining the address and the 
wish, so amply characteristic, which I repeat aloud every morn- 
ing, borrowing from the two sublime interpreters of the Middle 
Ages : 

Vergine-Madre, figlia del tuo figlio, 

Amem te plus quam me, nee me nisi propter te ! 

END OF THE FODETH AND LAST TOLrMB. 

VOL. IV. i: I 

APPENDIX 

TO 

THE FOUETH VOLUME. 

{See page 351.) 

POSITWIST LIBBABY IN THE NINETEENTE GENTUBY 

OSTB HTJITDEED AND PIEIT VOLUMES. 

I. POETRY (Thirit Volumes). 

-The Iliad and the Odyssey, in one volume, without any note. 

■ .^schylus, with the King-CEdipus of Sophocles, and Aristophanes, do. 
'Pindar and Theocritus, with Daphnis and Chloe, do. 

■ Plautus and Terence, do. 

■ Virgil, Horace (selections from), and Lucan, do. 
Ovid, TibuUus, and Juvenal, do. 

Fabliaux du Moyeu Age, collected by Legrand d'Aussy. 

■ Dante, Ariosto, Tasso, and Petrarch (selections), in Italian, in one 

volume. 
Select plays of Metastasio and Alfieri, do. 
I proraessi Sposi, Manzoni, do. 

Don Quixote and Las Novelas, Cervantes, in Spanish, in one volume. 
Teatro Espanol escojido, ed. Don Jos« Segundo Florez, do. 
Romancero Espanol escojido, with the Cid, do. 
Select plays of Pierre Corneille. 

- Moliere. 

Select plays of Racine and Voltaire, in one volume. 

La Fontaine, Fables, with some from Lamotte and Florian. 

- Gil Bias, Le Sage. 

The Princess of Cleves. Paul and Virginia. The Last Abencerrage. To 

form one volume. 
The Martyrs, Chateaubriand. 
-Select plays of Shakespeare. 
-Paradise Lost and Lyrical Poems, Milton. 
-Robinson Crusoe and the Vicar of Wakefield, in one volume. 
'Tom Jones, Fielding, in English, or Charon's translation, 

I I 2 

484 APPENDIX TO 

The seven masterpiecea of Walter Scott : Ivantoe, Waverley, Fair 
Maid of Perth, Legend of Montrose, Old Mortality, Heart of Mid- 
lothian, The Antiquary. 
Select works of Byron. Don Juan in particular to be suppressed. 
- Select works of Goethe. 
._ The Arabian Nights. 

II. SCIENCE (Thieit Volttmes). 

The Arithmetic of Condorcet. The Algebra and Geometry of Clairaut, 

the Trigonometry of Lacroix or Legendre (all in one volume). 
The Analytical Geometry of Auguste Comte, preceded by the Geometry 

of Descartes. 
The Statics of Poinsot, with all his Memoirs on Mechanics. 
Lectures on Analysis by Navier, preceded by the Reflections on the In- 
finitesimal Calculus of Carnot. 
Lectures on Mechanics by Navier, followed by the Essay on Equilibrium 

and Motion of Carnot. 
The Theory of Functions, Lagrange. 
The Popular Astronomy of Auguste Comte, followed by the Worlds of 

Fontenelle. 
Mechanical Physics, by Fischer, with Biot'a Comments. 
Alphabetical Manual of Practical Philosophy, J. Carr (Weale's series). 
The Chemistry of Lavoisier. 
The Chemical Statics of Berthollet. 
The Elements of Chemistry, Thomas Graham. 
Manual of Anatomy, Meckel. 
The General Anatomy of Bichat, preceded by his Treatise on Life and 

Death. 
The first volume of Blainville on the Organisation of Animals. 
The Physiology of Richerand with B^rard's notes. 
Systematic Essay on Biology by Segond ; also his Treatise on General 

Anatomy. 
The New Elements of the Science of Man, Barthez (2nd ed. 1806). 
The Zoological Philosophy of Lamarck. 
Natural History, by Dum^ril. 
Guglielmini on the Nature of Rivers (in Italian). 
The Discourses on the Nature of Animals of Buffbn. 
The Art of Prolonging Human Life, by Hufeland, preceded by the 

Treatise on Air, Water, and Places by Hippocrates, and followed 

by Cornaro's work on Sobriety (all in one volume). 
The History of Chronic Inflammations, by Broussais, preceded by Lis 

Propositions of Medicine, and by the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, in 

Latin, without commentary. 
The Panegyrics on Savans, by Fontenelle and Condorcet. 

III. HISTORY (SixiT Volumes). 

Abridgment of Universal Geography, Malte Brun. 

Geographical Dictionary, Rienzi. 

The Voyages of Coolv. The Travels of Chardin. 

THE FOUETH VOLUME. 485 

"•The History of the French Revolation, Mignet, 

Manual of Modern History, Heeren. 

Age of Louis XIV., Voltaire. 

Memoirs of Madame de Motteville. 

Political Testament of Richelieu, and the Life of Cromwell (these in one 
volume). 

Davila, History of the Civil Wars in France (in Italian). 

The Memoirs of Benvenuto Cellini (in Italian). 

Memoirs of Philippe de Commines. 

Abridgment of the History of France, Bossuet. 

Revolutions of Italy, Denina. 

Abridgment of the History of Spain, Ascavgorta. 

History of Charles V., Robertson. 

History of England, Hume. 

History of the Middle Ages, Hallam. 

Ecclesiastical History, Fleury. 
"History of the Decline and Fall of Rome, Gibbon. 
—Manual of Ancient History, Heeren. 
-Tacitus (traHslator, Dureau de la MaUe). 
-Herodotus and Thucydides (to form one volume). 
-Plutarch's Lives (translator, Dacier). 
"Cffisar's Commentaries, and Arrian's Alexander (t(» form one volume), 

The Travels of Anacharsis, Barth^lemy. 

The History of Art in Antiquity, Winckelmann. 

Treatise on Painting, Leonardo da Vinci (in Italian). 

Memoirs on Music, Gr^try, 

rV. SYNTHESIS (Thibtt Volumes). 

- The Politics and Ethics of Aristotle (in one volume). 

- The Bible. 

- The Koran. 

The Citv of God, St. Augustine. 

The Confessions of St. Augustine, followed by the Treatise on the Love 
of God by St. Bernard. 

- The Imitation of Jesus Christ, in the original, and the verse translation 

ofOorneille. . j, , n i. 

The Catechism of Montpellier, preceded by the Exposition ot the Oatho- 

lic Doctrine by Bossuet, and followed by the Commentary on the 

Sermon on the" Mount by St. Augustine. 
The History of Protestant Variations, Bossuet. 
-The Discourse on Method of Descartes, preceded by Bacons Novum 

Oro'anon, and followed by Diderot's Interpretation of Nature, 
Select" Thoughts of Cicero, Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, Pascal, and 

Vauvenargues, followed by Madame de Lambert's Advice of a M other. 
Duclos, Considerations on Manners. 
The Discourse on Universal History by Bossuet, followed by the 

Sketch of Human Progress by Condoroet. 
Treatise of the Pope, De Maistre, preceded by Policy drawn from 

Holy Writ, Bossuet. 
-The Philosophical Essays of Hume, preceded by the two dissertations 

486 APPENDIX TO THE FOURTH VOLUME. 

of Diderot on the Deaf and the Blind, and followed by the Essay 

on the History of Astronomy, by Adam Smith. 
Theory of the Beautiful by Barthez, preceded by the Essay on the 

Beautiful by Diderot. 
The Relations between Man's Physical and Moral Nature, Cabanis. 
Treatise on the Functions of the Brain, Gall, preceded by the Letters 

on Animals of George Leroy. 
Treatise on Irritation and Madness, Broussais (Ist edition). 
—" The Positive Philosophy of Auguste Oomte (condensed by Miss Mar- 

tineau). The Positive Polity, The Appeal to Conservatives, The 

Positive Catechism, The Subjective Synthesis, Vol. I. 

Atjstjste Comib, 10 Hue Monsieur-le-Prince. 

END OF THE APPENDIX TO THE FOURTH AND LAST VOLUME. 

GENERAL TABLE OF THE SUBJECTS 

CONTAINED IN 

THE SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

FIRST VOLUME (July 1851). 

Containing the ' Gbnbeai View ' and the Inieoducioet 
Pbincipi^s. 

FAGR 

Preface . . . . . . . . . ix 

Dedication ........ xxxi 

1. Lucie, a novel . . . 602 

2. Letter on Social Commemoration 613 

3. Pens^es d'une fleur, Canzone . 612 

Complement of the Dedication 

General View oe Positivism. 

Table of Contents 
Introductory Remarks 

I. Intellectual Character of Positivism 
II. Social Aspect of Positivism 

III. Action of Positivism on the People 

IV. Influence of Positivism on Women 
V. The Relation of Positivism to Art 

Conclusion. The Religion of Humanity 

xlvii 

1 

6 

46 

101 

164 

220 

257 

In-ieodtjctokx Peinoiples. 

Scientific mid Logical. 

I. General Indications ...... 325 

II. Cosmology : Indirect introduction, mainly Analytic . . . 869 

III. Biology : Direct, naturally Synthetic . . ■ . . 456 

Appendix to Fiest Volttme. — Funeeal Disootjese on Blainville. 595 

488 GENERAL TABLE OF THE SUBJECTS CONTAINED IN 

SECOND VOLUME (Mat 1852). 

CoNiAiNrNG Social Statics, oe the Abstract Theobt op 
Human Oebeb. 

PAGE 

Preface . . , . . . . . . ix 

For Preface and its Appendices see vol. iv. 

General Introduction ....... 1 

I. General Theory of Keligion, or the Positive Theory of Human 

Unity . ... . . . . . 7 

II. The Problem of Human Life, or Positiye Theory of Property . 120 

III. Positive Theory of the Human Family . . . . 150 

IV. Positive Theory of Human Language .... 182 
V. Positive Theory of the Social Organism . . . . 221 

VI. Positive Theory of Social Existence, systematised by the Priest- 
hood ........ 276 

VII. Positive Theory of the General Limits of Variation in the order 

of Human Society .... ... 346 

Conclusion ........ 383 

THIRD VOLUME (AtreusT I853J. 

Containing Social Dxnamics, ok the Geneeal Teeoet op 
Human Peoseess. 

FMhsophy of History. 

Preface . . . . . . . . . ix 

Appendix to Preface : 

1. Syllabus of a course of Philosophical Lectures on the General 

History of Humanity ..... Tirii 

2. Letter to the Czar Nicholas . . . . . xxiv 

3. Letter to Reschid Pacha . . . . . xli 
General Introduction . . . . . . . I 

I. Positive Theory of Human Evolution, or General Laws of Intel- 
lectual and Social Progress . . . . .8 
II. Positive Theory of the Age of Fetichism, or General Account of 

the Spontaneous Regime of Humanity . . . . 65 

III. Positive Theory of the Theocratic State, or General Account of 

Conservative Polytheism ..... 131 

IV. Positive Theory of the Greek Elaboration, or General Account 

of Intellectual Polytheism . . . . . . 211 

V. Positive Theory of the Roman Incorporation, or General Account 

of Social Polytheism ...... 290 

VI. Positive Theory of the Catholic Feudal Transition, or General 

Account of Defensive Monotheism . . . . . 363 

VII. Positive Theory of the Western Revolution, or General Account 

of the twofold Modern Movement .... 421 

General Conclusion of the Third Volume . . . . . 532 

THE SYSTEM OP POSITIVE POLITY. 489 

FOURTH AND LAST VOLUME (Attgtjst 1854). 

OoNTAIinSrG THE SYNTHETICAL PeESENTATION OP THE FtJITJEE OE 

Man. 

PAGE 

Preface, -with that of Vol. n. and its three appendiceal . . . ix 

General Introduction ....... 1 

I. The Fundamental Theory of the Great Being, whence a Con- 
spectus of the Religion of the race, and of its existence in the 
Normal. State . . . . . . . 8 

II. General View of the Affective Life, or Definitive Systematisation 

of the Positive Worship . . . . .76 

III. General View of the Intellectual Existence of Man, or Definitive 

Systematisation of the Positive Doctrine . . . . 142 

IV. General View of the Active Existence of Man, or Definitive 

Systematisation of the Positive Regime . . . 219 

V. General View of the Last Phase of the Transition . . . 315 

Geneeai. Conclxtsion oe the Foiteth Voltme . . 455 

CoNCLirSION OE THE WhOLE StSTESI OE POSITIVE PoXITT . 460 

Final Invocation . . . . . • • • 472 

Appendix to the Fourth Volume. — The Positivist Library in the 

Nineteenth Century ...... 483 

' I. Letter to Dr. J. M'Clintock. 
II. Letter to M. Yieillard, Senator. 
III. ' The Occidental Eeview,' 

GENERAL APPENDIX 

TO THE 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY 

CONTAINING 

ALL THE EAELY ESSAYS BY THE AUTHOR 
ON SOCML PHILOSOPHY 

PARIS 

1854 

GENEEAI. APPENDIX. 

SPECIAL PREFACE, 

This Appendix fulfils the promise which I made, in 1831, when I commenced 
the treatise now completed, of reproducing all my early Essays on Social 
Philosophy. Collected from periodicals long since forgotten, they may 
assist students disposed to follow my own course of philosophical develop- 
ment in their eflPorts to master Positivism. But their publication is more 
especially intended to demonstrate the perfect harmony which exists between 
my youthful efforts and my matured conceptions. 

This complete continuity of thought is disguised by the exceptional 
magnitude of my task, and obscured by the analytical habits of our day, 
so unfavourable to any comprehensive judgment. All but those who grasp 
the necessary connexion between the philosophic basis and the religious 
superstructure must regard the two portions of my career as divergent. 
The fact, therefore, that my second life simply realised the aim which 
I proposed to myself in early life requires to be made clear. This the 
present Appendix is calculated to do, since it proves, that from the outset, 
I endeavoured to found that new Spiritual Power, of which I now lay the 
basis. As. the final result of my early Essays, I was led to perceive that 
the Social operation presupposed an Intellectual elaboration, since without 
this the doctrine required to terminate the occidental anarchy could not 
be solidly built up. For this reason I devoted the first half of my career 
to constructing, out of the materials supplied by the sciences, a truly 
Positive Philosophy, this being the only possible basis of a universal re- 
ligion. The theoretic foundation being thus laid, the residue of my life 

ii SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

was with good reason devoted to that Social Aim, which at first I had 
imagined was accessible without any intellectual preparation. 

Besides the natural difficulty of comprehending so vast a schem.e, 
antipathies also often interfere with a just perception of the intimate 
relation between my ' System of Positive Polity ' and ' System of Positive 
Philosophy.' Notwithstanding the desire generally felt for the termina- 
tion of the Occidental Revolution, active sympathies exist, especially 
among litUrnteurs, with that absence of discipline which is characteristic of 
our anarchic condition. Individual pretensions are wounded by the insti- 
tution of a Priesthood, bound by its office to insist on the observation of 
rules affecting public and even private life ; rules too which are inflexible 
since they always admit of verification. Hence a disposition to regard my 
religious construction as being at variance with its philosophic basis, the 
intellectual attractions of w-hich were unalloyed by any such drawback. 
This Appendix however will demonstrate the inconsistency of all who 
adopting the Positive Philosophy reject those Social Applications which 
I announced from the outset. Whether their attitude spring from inca- 
pacity to grasp my conceptions in their entirety, or from regret for the 
cessation of the religious interregnum, their speculative adhesion to the 
new synthesis renders it incumbent on them to admit its legitimate de- 
velopment. The Political System far from being opposed to my Philosophy 
is so completely its outcome, that the latter was created as the basis of the 
former, and of this the proof is supplied by the present Appendix. 

Keeping this object in view, those Essays alone are preserved which 
reveal my characteristic aspirations, all such being set aside as betray 
the unfortunate personal influence that overshadowed my earliest effijrts. 
From these artificial productions I only extract two unmistakeable indi- 
cations of my constant tendency towards the Positive Religion. In 1817 a 
publication of mine, otherwise without value, contained the characteristic 
maxim : Everything is relative ; this is the only absolute principle. A second 
indication of the same nature, as decisive but more fully expanded, is 
furnished in an Essay of the year 1818 where I treated the liberty of the 
press as a means of securing to all citizens a consultative influence. Beyond 
these references I find nothing worthy of mention in my Essays composed 
before the six now collected for publication. I therefore disavow any other 
edition, and I have destroyed the unpublished materials. 

The first Essay was written, in July 1819, for the 'Censor' — the only 
French periodical that posterity will deem noteworthy — but was never 
inserted. I publish it here, partly as proving that, even at one and twenty, 
I was tending towards the Separation of the Two Powers ; partly because 
the views presented are still useful. 

, I now, as is just, reclaim possession of the second Essay, written in 
April 1820, the authorship of which, then known only to a few readers, 
was with my tncit consent abandoned to the editor of the journal (the 
' Organiser ') which inserted it. By giving its true title I mark it as the 
first outline of my general conception of Modern History, distinguishing 
that double movement, constructive and destructive, the union of which 

GENERAL APPENDIX— PREFACE. iii 

characterises the revolution of Western Europe. The historical conti-ast 
between France and England, according as central or local government 
prevailed, was there estahlished with sufficient clearness and guided 
several writers, who profited by the conception, without indicating its 
source. 

The third Essay, published in May 1822, and containing the fundamental 
discovery of Sociological Laws, decisively indicated my philosophic and 
social tendencies. Its appropriate title, as here given, sufficiently discloses 
the intimate combination of the scientific and political points of view 
which had hitherto occupied my mind to an equal degree though separately. 
This decisive effort was first only published in one hundred copies gra- 
tuitously distributed as proofs. When reproducing it in 1824, with some 
additions of secondary importance in an impression of one thousand copies, 
I thought it right to add to its special title that of 'System of Positive 
Polity' — a title premature indeed but rightly indicating the scope of 
my labours. The promise in my earliest years of that systematisation 
which the present treatise could alone realise being thus evident, no one 
can ignore the unity of my career. 

Even the title of the fourth Essay, published in November 1825, 
manifests more clearly my tendency to establish a new Spiritual Autho- 
rity in harmony with a Scientific Philosophy. The demonstration of my 
two Fundamental Laws precedes the appreciation of the continuous advance 
of Humanity towards the reorganisation 6f the Theoretic Power. 

Finally the publication of the fifth Essay, March 1826, in the same 
journal (the ' Producer '), decisively established the divisions, both philo- 
sophic and social, between the two elementary Social Powers. 

My persevering aspiration to found a new Priesthood was thenceforward 
so manifest as to draw upon me opposing criticisms; the revolutionary 
school accusing me of theocratic tendencies while the retrograde party 
hailed me as a defender of social order. The widely different appreciation 
of the last mentioned Essay by two writers of repute (Benjamin Constant and 
Lamennais) already revealed the normal attitude of the new party founded 
by me towards the old parties they represented. When the eloquent 
defender of Catholicism, degenerating into a revolutionary declaimer, 
became blindly hostile to Positivism, this contrast could be verified in a 
single mind. 

Anyone comparing these five Essays, but especially the three last, will 
perceive a constant progression, the last term of which reveals the general 
scope of the entire — to reorganise the Spiritual Power by renovating Philo- 
sophy. I thus prepared the way for my Fundamental Treatise, the oral 
elaboration of which began in 1826, although the first volume was not 
published until July 1830. In the course of this philosophical evolution, 
terminated in 1842, I steadily intimated that religious construction which 
its social destination, as originally designed, demanded. 

The sixth and concluding Essay, published by the ' Journal of Paris ' in 
August 1828, manifests the transition from my social dSl^t to my intellectual 
career which began, the following year, with the completion of the course 

IV SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

of lectures commenced in 1826, ^ but soon after suspended by my cerebral 
attack. The insight gained through my personal experience was utilised 
in this review of the memorable work in which Broussais worthily combated 
the metaphyaical influence. This concluding Essay will ever possess an 
historical intei-est since it roused the great biologist to the noble effort 
which produced, at the close of his admirable career, his just appreciation 
of the masterly conception of Gall, till then disregarded by him. 

' I deem it right to preserve the memory of this first effort, by reproducing 
the short programme circulated in a manuscript form at the beginning of 1826. 

COUESB OF PoSITrVE PHILOSOPHY IN 72 LeCTUEES. 

From ihe 1st of April, 1826; to the 1st of April, 1827. 

Genbkal Pbeliminaeibs, 2 lectures 

' i. Exposition of the scope 

of the course, 
ii. Exposition of the plan 
(_ of the course. 

("Calculus. 
Mathematics . . 16 lectures < Geometry. 

|_ Mechanics. 

.1. r^ 

,1. V 

Geometrical, j . ,„ 

Mechanical. ^ Astronomy ... 10 

Science of ("Physics . . . .10 

inorganised bodies. \ Chemistey . .10 

Science of ("Physiology . . .10 

organised bodies. \Soclal Physics . . .14 

GENERAI. APPENDIX— FIEST PAET. 

497 

FIEST PAET. 
{July 1819.) 

SEPARATION OP OPIITIONS PEOM ASPIRATIONS. 

Rulers would gladly have it taken for granted that they alone can see positive 
aright in politics, and consequently are entitled to a monopoly of opinion political 
on such matters. They have doubtless their own reasons for speaking in needed. 
this way, -while subjects have theirs for refusing a.'sent to a principle 
which, under every point of view, is wholly absurd. For, on the contrary, 
rulers, even when honest, are by their position more disqualified from 
gaining a just and elevated view of general politics; since a continual 
preoccupation ■with details incapacitates for correct theory. Should a 
publicist wish to form large political conceptions, let him rigorously refrain 
from political office. How can he be both actor and spectator ? 

But on this question men have run from one excess into another. 
Opponents of the absurd pretension of rulers to exclusive political wisdom 
have fostered among subjects the prejudice, less dangerous but equally 
absurd, that everyone is competent to form, by mere instinct, just views 
in politics ; thus encouraging each citizen to set himself up as a legislator. 
It is remarkable, as observed by Condorcet, that men deem it ridiculous 
to affect a knowledge of physics or astronomy, &c., witKout having studied 
these sciences ; yet believe that anyone can understand political science and 
possess a firm and decided opinion on its most abstract principles without 
any necessity for reflection or special study. 

This arises, as Condorcet might have added, from politics not having 
yet become a positive science ; for, evidently, when it has become such 
everyone will understand that the study of the observations and deductions 
which form its basis is indispensable for its comprehension. 

However, in order to reconcile all, and exclude this prejudice without Opinions 
sanctioning the principle of political indifferentism so dear to rulers, it JJ^^f' 
mi"ht be well to distinguish, more than is usually done, between opinions distinguish- 
and aspirations. It is reasonable, natural, and necessary that every citizen 
should have political aspirations, since all have an interest in the conduct 
of social affairs. It is evident, for example, that all citizens who do not 
belong to the privileged class, and live by the fruit of their labour, must 
desire liberty, peace, industrial prosperity, economy in public expenditure, 
and a just employment of the revenue. But a political opinion expresses 
more than desires. It includes a judgment, for the most part decided and 
absolute, that these can only be satisfied by particular measures and by 
no others. Now on this head it is ridiculous and unreasonable to pro- 
nounce without special study. The question arises ; is such a measure or in- 

voL. IT. k: k 

498 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

Btitution fitted to effect a given end ? Evidently the reply involves a series 
of reflections tliat call for a particular examination, failing which the end 
proposed may be deemed attainable by means capable of producing an 
exactly opposite effect. Thus, many people, who sincerely desire liberty 
and peace, have, nevertheless, notions ns to the means of securing these 
blessings so erroneous that, if put in practice, they must lead to disorder 
and arbitrary power. 

Two important consequences in politics follow, as I believe, from this 
separation of opinions and aspirations. 

Firstly, talcing the view above suggested, and regarding unenlightened 
men as confounding in their political estimates the end and the means, 
it will be seen that a greater uniformity exists than is commonly imagined 
in the political aspirations of a nation. In France for example, among 
those who profess retrograde opinions, there are a few only, belonging to 
the privileged classes, who from conviction truly desire the reestablishment 
of ancient institutions. The majority at bottom, with the rest of the world 
wish for liberty, peace, and economy. The association of this desire with 
the idea of the feudal regime, arises simply from their regarding it as the 
only means adapted to secure the above ends. 

In the second place, the above separation determines, as it appears to 
me, the share in the government which rightly belongs to the mass of the 
people. The public alone should indicate the end ; because though it 
may not always know what is really wanted, it perfectly understands its 
own wishes, and no one else is entitled to dictate the.se. 

When, however, public opinion has once clearlv indicated the end, the 
consideration of the measures for effectingit exclusively belongs to scientific 
politicians. It would be absurd for the masses to reason about them. The 
business of the public is to form aspirations ; that of publicists to propose 
measures; that of rulers to realise them. The failure to distinguish these 
three functions must in a greater or less degree cause confusion. 

In a word, when politics shall have taken the rank of a positive science, 
the public should and must accord to publicists the |,same confidence in 
their department, which it now concedes to astronomers in astronomv, to 
physicians in medicine, &c. ; with this difference however that the public 
will be exclusively entitled to point out the end and aim of the work. 

Such confidence, attended as it has been, with most serious disadvantages, 
while politics have remained vague, mysterious, devoid of principle, in 
a word, theological, will so soon as they have been transformed into a 
positive science, be accompanied by no greater evil than the confidence 
which we daily and fearlessly accord to the physician, even in matters of 
life and death. 

When this transformation has been effected the submission due to 
reason will be perfectly reconciled with the precautions needful against 
arbitrary power. 

geneeal appendix— second paet. 

499 

SECOND PAET. 
{April 1820.) 

A BSIEF ESTIMATE OF MODERN HISTOET. 

The advance of civilisation calls on us to replace a system which was based Science and 
upon the combination of the spiritual and temporal powers; the first being JesSZto ° 
papal and theological, the second feudal and military. replace 

As regards the spiritual element the birth of this system may be traced and wfn 
from the growing preponderance of Christianity in Europe, towards the 
third or fourth century. The origin of the temporal power is referable to 
nearly the same epoch, being that of the tirst great efforts of the Northern 
populations to establish themselves in the South of Europe, and the conse- 
quent dismemberment of the Roman Euipire. 

These two powers were definitely constituted during the eleventh and 
twelfth centuries. At this period Feudalism on the one hand was universally 
established on a settled basis as a National power ; on the other Catholicism 
■was completely organised as a European power. 

Let us pause for a moment to make two important observations on this 
remarkable epoch. 

In the first place this twofold organisation established itself in a short 
time and without much diificulty, because it had been gradually prepared 
during the seven or eight centuries that followed the birth of the two 
powers. 

The establishment of the temporal power resulted from the overthrow 
of the Roman Empire by the Northern populations. Its consolidation 
however was unavoidably deferred until the termination of the irruptions 
by the victories of the earliest invading settlers over the later invaders. 
Such was the object of the wars of Charlemagne against the Saxons and 
Saracens, and afterwards of the Crusades. 

The elevation of the spiritual power had been prepared by the overthrow 
of Polytheism and the establishment of the Christian religion whose nu- 
merous clergy had spread themselves over Europe. 

When the Pope, Hildebrand, in the eleventh century openly proclaimed 
the supremacy of the Papacy as a European power over the National powers, 
he merely asserted a principle the foundations of which were already settled 
in all heads, or, in other terms, embodied a faith of which the elements had 
long been accepted. 

In the second place it is worthy of remark that the two powers coin- 
cided, both in the period of their rise and in that of their consolidation. 
Their decline also manifests the same analogy. This constant corres- 

X li 2 

500 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

pondence of the two powers tends to prove — and that apart from the 
arguments which demonstrate their mutual dependence — that they must 
disappear simultaneously ; that the temporal power cannot be replaced by 
a power of a different nature without an analogous transformation in the 
spiritual power, and vice versd. 

This social system had taken its rise during the preceding one, and 
even at the period when the earlier system had attained its complete de- 
velopment. In like manner when the Catholico-Feudal system culminated, 
the germ of its destruction commenced, as well as the elements of the 
system destined in our day to replace it. 

In truth as regards the temporal power the Emancipation of the 
Commons dates from the eleventh and twelfth centuries. As regards the 
spiritual power, the Positive Sciences were introduced into Europe by the 
Arabs about the same time. 

Let us fix our attention on this fundamental fact, since it forms the 
real starting point for the series of observations by which we now endeavour 
to throw light upon the existing political system. 

The Feudal or military power must be replaced by the Industrial 
capacity. 

So long as War was, in fact, and rightly, considered as the chief source 
of the prosperity of nations, it was natural that the direction of the 
temporal affairs of society should be in the hands of a military power and 
that Industry, occupying a subaltern position, should be only used as an 
instrument. On the contrary when experience has at last convinced 
society that the only road to riches lies through peaceful activity, or works 
of industry, the direction of affairs properly passes to the industrial capacity. 
Henceforward military force, in its turn, can only occupy a subordinate 
position, as a merely passive force, and one in all probability destined to 
become finally useless. 

Now the Emancipation of the Commons laid the foundation for this 
new state of things ; facilitating and even necessitating a change which 
as will presently be shown, ever after developed itself with increasing force. 
This emancipation established the Industrial Capacity as a social organisa- 
tion distinct from the Military Power ; thus conferring on it an independent 
existence. 

Before this epoch not only were the artisans as a body absolutely 
dependent on the military class ; but each of them was entirely at the 
mercy of the individual caprice of his territorial lord. 

The Emancipation of the Commons while leaving in force the first 
or collective kind of subjection, abolished the second or individual, and 
in so doing prepared the way for the destruction of the former. Up to that 
time the artisans possessed nothing as their own. All they possessed, 
and even their persons, belonged to their lords, and they enjoyed onlv what 
these thought proper to relinquish. Their emancipation created an in- 
dustrial property, springing from labour, a kind of property distinct from, 
independent of, and soon rivalling territorial property which in its origin 
and constitution was purely military. 

Thanks to this memorable innovation the Industrial Capacity was 
enabled to develop, perfect, and extend itself, and nations could then 
organise themselves completely on a basis of industry. The ruling powers 
alone, together with the general government of which these continued 
in possession mdntained a military character. 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— SECOND PART. 

501 

Let us next make observations in reference to the Spiritual Power, 
analogous tothose which we have just made on the temporal power. 

The Spiritual Power must, in like manner, be replaced by the Scientific 
or Positive Capacity. 

At the period when all branches of knowledge were essentially con- 
jectural and metaphysical the direction of society in spiritual matters 
naturally fell into the hands of a theological power, since theologians were 
then the only general thinkers. On the contrary as soon as the entire 
range of knowledge became based upon observation, the direction of 
spiritual affairs would rightly be confided to the scientific or positive 
capacity, since this is evidently superior to theology or metaphysics. 

Now the introduction of the Positive Sciences into Europe by the 
Arabs created the germ of this important revolution which in our day 
has embraced all special branches of thought and even reached our general 
conceptions so far as regards their critical or negative aspect. 

No sooner had the Arabs founded, in the portions of Europe conquered 
by them, schools for teaching the sciences of observation, than a general 
enthusiasm for this new enlightenment animated all distinguished minds. 
Schools of a like nature soon arose throughout Western Europe ; obser- 
vatories, schools of dissection, museums ofnatural history were established 
in Italy, France, England, and Germany. Prom the thirteenth century, 
Roger Bacon cultivated the physical sciences with distinguished success. 
The superiority of the positive over the conjectural, of physics over meta- 
physics was so strongly felt from the outset, even by the spiritual power, 
that several eminent members of the clergy, and among others two popes, 
went, about the same time, to complete their education at Cordova by 
studying at that school sciences of observation under Arabian professors. 

Resuming then the preceding observations, we may take it as certain 
that at the moment when the Oatholico-Peudal system assumed its definite 
organisation, the elements of a new social system took their rise. A 
positive temporal capacity, that is to say the Industrial Capacity, sprang aooW sys- 
up beside the existing Military Power, then come to full maturity ; and ''^'"^• 
a positive spiritual capacity, that is to say the Scientific Capacity, arose 
behind the Spiritual Power, at the moment when this began to develop its 
full activity.' 

Before commencing our examination of the special facts, let us observe a 
remarkable difference between the old and new systems which shows itself 
from the very birth of the latter. This diff'erence I have endeavoured to 
render by contrasting the words power and capacity. I do not say : a new 
power arises beside each of the two ancient powers, but : a capacity arises 
beside & power. In other words the action of principles then took its rise, and 
in our day substitutes itself for the action of men; Reason taking the place 
of Will. 

The military character of the ancient system naturally demanded in the 
highest degree passive obedience from the nation. On the contrary the 

' The social distinction between the Spiritual and Temporal Powers mxist sub- 
sist in the new as in the old system. This division which had no existence 
among the Romans is the most fundamental improvement which the Moderns 
have introduced into the organisation of society. By this alone, as permitting 
the separation of theory and practice, it became possible to make politics a 
science. There is however this difference that in the new system the separation 
is no longer between two Powers but between two Capacities. 

DecKne of 
the MediEe- 
val and 
growth of 
the Modern 

502 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

industrial capacity, regarded as tlie rightful guide of the temporal affairs of 
society, is not and should not be associated with arbitrary power, since the 
plans which it may propose for advancing the public good on the one hand 
can be judged, and, on the other hand, can be executed without resorting 
to coercion. 

The spiritual power, in like manner, being in its very essence con- 
jectural, necessarily exacted the highest degree of confidence and mental 
submission. Such submission was an indispensable condition of its existence 
and action. On the contrary the positive scientific capacity, in directing 
the spiritual afi^airs of society requires no blind faith, nor even confidence ; 
at least on the part of all who can comprehend demonstrations ; while as 
regards those who cannot, experience has sufficiently proved that reliance 
placed in the unanimous conclusions of men of science, not being liable to 
abuse, cannot be prejudicial. 

The positive scientific capacity may therefore, in so far as it is a creative 
force, be considered as the source of power; but of a power which replaces 
Revelation by Demonstration. 

Such then is our starting point. In the eleventh century the temporal 
and spiritual powers attained their definite constitution, and at the same 
epoch two positive capacities took their rise, preparing the overthrow of the 
powers which they were finally destined to replace. In a word ; one system 
culminated ; another was born. Since that period the two systems have 
always co-existed in a state of mutual antagonism, at one time secret, at 
another open ; the first however always losing ground while the second 
continually advanced. 

An investigation of the past is, therefore, divisible into two parallel 
series, which respectively embrace the decline of the old and the growth 
of the new system. This division will form the basis of this Essay. 

FIRST SERIES. 

Fii-st open 
struggle 
between the 
old and new 
society in 
the sixteenth 
century. 

The Reli- 
gious and 
Political re- 
volutions 
gradually 
prepared. 

At the period above selected for the commencement of this investigation, 
the two systems — one at its apogee the other just springing into life — were 
so unequal in force that for a long time no direct and apparent struggle 
could arise between them. Accordingly history shows that the open 
conflict only dates from the sixteenth century. The four or five centuries, 
immediately preceding formed the period of greatest splendour of the 
Catholico-Feudal systems; but this splendour rested on a foundation 
already undermined. 

Had historians more deeply analysed and examined the Middle Ages, 
they would not have confined their expositions to the obvious features of 
that period. They would have pointed out the gradual preparation of the 
great events afterwards developed, and would not have represented the 
sixteenth century as a series of sudden and unforeseen explosions. However 
this may be, unquestionably, the open struggle between the two systems 
only dates from that century. 

The Spiritual Power was essentially characterised by its exercising 
a European function, and was consequently in reality subverted by the 

GENERAL APPENDIX— SECOND PABT. 303 

attack of Luther and his co-reformers on the Papal authority. This also 
completely sapped the surviving influence of theological authority by de- 
stroying the principle of blind faith, and substituting for it that of the right 
of free inquiry, which, at first confined within narrow limits, was inevitably 
destined to expand continually and embrace, at last, an indefinite field. 

This twofold change was accomplished as completely in countries that 
remained Catholic, especially in France, as in those which embraced 
Protestantism. 

The two cases however presented one essential difference. In Catholic 
countries, the spiritual power feeling its downfall as a distinct and 
independent body, generally speaking, subordinated itself to the royal 
authority, devoting to its service and support the same doctrines by which 
the church had formerly predominated over the monarchy. 

This change in the role of the clergy had the eifect of prolongins: its 
political influence somewhat beyond its natural duration ; but it damaged 
the cause of royalty by associating its fortunes more closely with those 
of doctrines which had lost all credit among the educated classes. 

The religious Reformation, by reason of the wars it occasioned, occupied 
the entire of the sixteenth and the first part of the seventeenth centuries. 
Immediately after this movement began the assaults upon the Temporal 
Power in Fi-ance and England. 

In each of these countries the Commons, guided by one of the two 
branches of the temporal power, led the attack. Between the two nations 
but one difference existed on this head. With the English Feudalism 
became the ally of the Commons against the royal authority, while in 
France they were headed by Royalty against feudalism. 

This combination of the Commons with • one element of the temporal 
power against the other element had originated in both countries after their 
emaocipation, and had even contributed not a little to produce it. Long 
before the seventeenth century the alliance had produced unmistakeable 
results which prepared the important events of that century. 

In France Cardinal Richelieu laboured for the overthrow of Feudalism ; 
an enterprise terminated by Louis XIV., who reduced the nobility to entire 
insignificance and political nullity, leaving them no other office than that of 
guard of honour to royalty. It is essential to observe that both Richelieu and 
LouisXIV. powerfully encouraged the fine arts, the sciences and the industrial 
arts ; they endeavoured to enhance the political importance of savants, 
artists and artisans, while lowering that of the nobles. This policy was 
most clearly manifested by the minister Colbert, himself an artisan. 
But this fact belongs to our second series of observations and it suffices to 
note it here. 

In England the issue of the struggle was the revolution of 1688, which 
limited the royal power as far as could be done without subverting the 
ancient system. Thus in each of these two countries the attack on the 
Temporal Power, in distinct ways, weakened, as far as was possible, a 
different element of this power; so that the two nations had effected the 
overthrow of the temporal power up to the point where further change 
became impracticable without abandoning the ancient social system. To 
eft'ectuate this final result, it was sufficient that each nation should adopt 
the modification made by the other. This has occurred in France, since the 
Fiench adopted the English Constitution. 

The coalition between the Commons and one element of the temporal 

504 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

Growth power against the other element, and the active assistance which in several 
Commons. countries was accorded by the temporal against the spiritual power, renders 
it impossible, without a thorough investigation, to seize the true nature of 
these attacks. 

Hence has sprung a widespread error which it is important to point out 
and refute. In place of seeing in these events the struggle of the Commons 
headed by certain elements of the Catholico-Feudal system against its 
other elements, historians have only seen a quarrel of kings and popes and 
of the royal and feudal authorities between themselves. The Commons 
have been merely regarded as instruments employed by the difierent powers 
and seldom in any other light. 

Before proceeding to rectify the error just mentioned, it may be well to 
observe that, whatever view be taken, our present series will remain 
unaffected, since its main object is to prove the continuous decline of the 
ancient system. Nevertheless it is very far from being a matter of 
indifference whether we form a just or an erroneous conception of the 
extent to which this decline was wrought by the influence of the artisans, 
artists, and savants who collectively constituted the Commons. 

It may be laid down as a principle that any discordance of elements 
constituting a system is an evident sign of its decay. Thus from the first 
great act of antagonism between the temporal and spiritual powers, the fall 
of both, sooner or later, might have been predicted. 

Antagonism of this sort showed itself at a very early period in the 
ancient system, even anterior to its complete organisation ; but became 
continuous almost immediately after its definitive establishment. Refiec- 
tion shows that it was inherent in this system.. 

Powers are of necessity rivals and jealous of each other, even when 
their common interest manifestly dictates an intimate alliance. These 
powers being, in fact, incapable of a clear definition, it is natural that each 
should aspire to exclusive dominion. A true and enduring combination 
can only exist between positive Capacities. Combination then becomes 
possible, and, so to speak, inevitable, since each of these capacities naturally 
confines itself to its proper office, which is defined as sharply as possible. 
Pretensions to universal influence, which alone could disturb this natural 
arrangement, strike all men as absurd, and, consequently, could never 
muster a sufficient number of followers to make them dangerous. 

The Commons being at their birth manifestly too feeble to struggle 
alone against the ancient system, were forced to attach themselves to the 
heads of the enemy's camp. They endeavoured to profit by the divisions 
that arose within it, and such was their prudence, they did in fact always 
profit by them. Their plan was very simple, and consisted in always 
supporting that power which at each period and in each country was most 
liberal, that is most in harmony with their interests. This plan they 
followed persistently, with an admirable instinct, in all the partial crises 
which preceded the two great struggles of the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries. Thus their conduct in these later periods was by no means 
accidental, but resulted from long established habits. 

Now this explains why in England the Commons sided with the Lords 
against the King, while in France they took part with Royalty against 
Feudalism. At more remote periods the Commons both in France and 
England, had embraced the cause of the Spiritual Power because this was 
then the most liberal. In reality therefore, the Commons were not the mere 

GENERAL APPENDIX— SECOND PAET. 

505 

instruments of the ancient powers; on the contrary the latter, although 
moved by impulses peculiar to themselves, should rather he regarded as 
having been instruments of the former. In fact the attack upon the 
(incient system took place both through and for the Commons. They were 
not dupes, if any such there were, in the transaction. 

Moreover, the Commons, in the struggles of the sixteenth and seven- 
teenth centuries, exercised a direct action peculiar to themselves. Each of 
the two elements of the new system, the Industrial capacity and the Scien- 
tific capacity, contributed to the result. Although these always acted 
concurrently, nevertheless, as was natural, the latter principally concerned 
itself with the Spiritual power as the former did with the Temporal power. 
Each capacity fought hand to hand with the corresponding power and, as is 
worthy of remark, the scientific capacity, while endeavouring to overthrow 
the theological doctrines, felt itself obliged to take its stand upon theology, 
or at least, to accommodate its arguments to the theological method. This 
is mainly observable in the writings of Lord Bacon. This fact in the 
spiritual struggle corresponds to the alliance of the Commons with one of 
the elements of the military power in the temporal conflict. 

It is not necessary to demonstrate the marked influence exercised by the Discovery of 
Sciences of Observation upon the Reformation of Luther ; since no one in the ^ti^if"' 
present day questions it. The best historians of this period have indicated Priiitingand 
the influence, which though less direct and decided, was exercised upon Astronomy. 
this reform by the progress of the Useful Arts ; pointing out the great 
impulse given to commerce and manufactures by the discovery of America 
and the passage to the Indies round the Cape of Good Hope, which indeed 
itself resulted from the progress of the useful arts combined with the 
sciences of observation. 

Two other discoveries of the first rank, made, one in the arts towards 
the end of the fifteenth century, the other in the sciences about a century 
later, confirmed and hastened the decline of the ancient system, and secured 
for the new an advance more direct and certain, more calm and more 
rapid. 

Of these discoveries the first was that of Printing, which if it did not 
cause the Reformation, at least rendered its spread much more rapid and 
complete than it otherwise would have been. But this did not lorm its 
main influence in the overthrow of the ancient system. 

The considerations are well known that prove the immense revolution 
which this discovery efi'ected in social order, by rendering public opinion 
supreme. Passing these over, we shall present the subject in another 
aspect. 

"We say therefore : first, that the discovery of printing secured to the 
new system the means of taking a direct and complete initiative in replacing 
the ancient system independently of any protection from its declining 
elements ; secondly, that it assuaged, in a large measure, the antecedent 
violence of the struggle, by substituting criticism for attack. 

The second of these discoveries is that of the true Astronomical Theory 
devised by Copernicus, proved and established by Galileo. 

Even the best minds rarely estimate at its true value, the vast influence 
which the change of ideas thus wrought exerted in the radical destruction 
of the theological system. So great was this influence that it alone would 
have sufficed'to demolish that system. The following consideration, which 
my readers can develope, will suffice to show this. 

506 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

The entire theological system is based upon the supposition that the 
earth is made for man and the whole universe made for the earth; 
remove this supposition and the basis of all supernatural doctrines gives 
way. Now Galileo, having demonstrated that our planet is one of the 
smallest, is in no respect distinguished from the others, and revolves with 
them about the sun, the hypothesis that nature is made for mankind alone 
so manifestly shocks good sense and contradicts fact, that it must appear 
absurd and collapse, and with it must fall the edifice of faith. In a word 
the theological doctrines are entirely incompatible with the truths of 
modern astronomy ; and are so felt even by those whose astronomical belief 
does not rest on demonstration. 

This consideration, when sufficiently weighed, must satisfy us that the 
Inquisition, in endeavouring to suppress at the outset the theory of Galileo, 
was faithful to its office as the police of the Spiritual Power. 

To resume our previous remarks, it appears that by the end of the 
seventeenth century two attacks had been made on the ancient system; 
one in the sixteenth century on the spiritual power, the other in the seven- 
teenth century on the temporal power. 

At first sight this twofold attack might seem sufficient, but. such was 
far from being the case. The system had been attacked in its elements 
but not as a whole ; beaten in detail it still needed to be beaten as 
a system. Besides, each special struggle had been directed by a single 
branch of the ancient powers and thus was not sufficiently decisive. The 
victory of the new over the old system had not been made sufficiently 
clear ; and this was an additional reason which necessitated a further 
struggle. 

Anyone therefore living at the end of the seventeenth century, and 
well acquainted with the real state of affairs might have predicted with 
perfect confidence that the two antecedent but partial attacks were merely 
preparatory, and would in the succeeding centuj-y be followed by an attack 
directed against the entire old system and destined to effect its final 
destruction. Such events were the inevitable consequence of historical 
events since the eleventh centiu-y, but more immediately of the last two 
centuries. 
The 18th It would be superfluous to consider in detail facts so near to our own 

century. .j-jj^jg ^^^ known to all. In truth, the eighteenth century was, as might 
be expected, the result, the complement, and the resumi of the two pre- 
ceding centuries. 

In reference to the Spiritual Power the principle of the Eight of Private 
Judgment in religion (laid down by Luther though at first very timidly) 
was then pushed to its furthest limits. The boldest applications of this 
right advanced side by side with the efforts made to vindicate its supremacy. 
The theological creeds thus submitted to discussion were entirely over- 
thrown, no doubt somewhat recklessly, precipitately, and superficially, with 
an exaggerated disregard of the past and an inadequate insight into the 
future ; but they were irremediably overthrown, since criticism covered them 
with ridicule even among the least instructed classes. This is an undeniable 
fact ; and we make the observation without discussing its grounds. 

If we examine what were the destinies of the Temporal Power in 
France, where the eighteenth century should be principally studied, we 
shall find that Feudalism having in the preceding century lost all political 
power, forfeited in this all social consideration. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— SECOND PART. 507 

Eoyalty, after having, under Louis XIV., obtained complete dominion 
OYer the temporal power by the support which the Commons lent to it, 
ceased to ally itself with them ; a serious mistake on its part. 

Louis XIV. committed a great error in allying himself with the nobility, 
which — oblivious of its having once held an equal rank with the monarch 
— at last resigned itself to accept, in exchange for money and honors, a 
subordinate and insignificant political role. 

Had not Louis XIV. committed this great error ; had he abandoned to 
its fate a declining power irrevocably doomed, and whose destruction was 
hastened by himself; had he in fine simply continued to follow the 
direction taken by the Commons, he would, without doubt, have saved 
all the misfortunes which afterwards fell on Louis XVI. 

This false step it was which originally discredited Royalty in the eyes 
of the Commons and alienated them from it. The discredit thrown on the 
royal power by the private life of the Regent and the libertinism of Louis 
XV., put the finishing stroke to this declension. At the same time the 
philosophers, having subjected the temporal, as they had the spiritual 
power, to discussion, it also succumbed the more easily because it was, 
since the Reformation, in great part founded on the same doctrines. 

Thus the eighteenth century carried the criticism of the two powers to 
its last limits, and completed the ruin of the Ancient System, both in its 
elements and as a whole. A more detailed examination of the process 
by which its overthrow was effected would here be out of place. 

I shall merely indicate the influence which the immense and ever 
increasing progress of the sciences of observation from the time of Galileo 
inevitably exercised for the de.struction of theological doctrines. Newton's 
discovery of a general physical law, Franklin's analysis of the principal 
meteorological phenomenon, besides his invention for subordinating it to 
human power ; in a word, all the numerous and remarkable discoveries 
made during this century in astronomy, physics, chemistry, and physiology 
contributed to the radical and irrevocable destruction of the theological 
system, more efficaciously than all the writings of Voltaire and his coadju- 
tors, although, these really exercised a prodigious influence. Neither the 
partisans nor the adversaries of the ancient system have adequately appre- 
ciated this fact. 

Thus prepared or, to spealTmore ti'uly, necessitated, the French Revolu- 
tion burst forth. From the outset it took a wrong direction and the Royal 
Power was overthrown. _ t.- j-j 

The royal power speedily raised itself once again. Forming as this did 
both head and heart of the ancient system, the one could only disappear 
with the other; and no system can disappear until afresh one has come into 
beino' and is ready to replace its predecessor. 

From this great movement resulted the abolition of privileges, the 
proclamation of the principle of unlimited liberty of conscience, and finally 
the establishment of the English constitution, granted by the crown. 

The abolition of privileges completed the ruin of Feudalism, reducing 
the temporal power to the single element of royalty. _ . , , ^, 

Unlimited liberty of conscience once proclaimed as a principle, the 
Spiritual Power was wholly and irrevocably abolished. 

1 Its proclamation rendered impossible the establishment of any theological 
authority, either political, or simply moral. Doctrines having been abandoned 

508 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY, 

The establishment of the English constitution should be viewed under 
two aspects, differing from each other and in some degree opposed. 

On the one hand it continued the work of demolition, by limiting the 
Royal Power, now the only surviving part of the ancient system, as far as 
could be done without abandoning this. 

On the other hand, by establishing a Chamber intended to represent 
Public Opinion, this innovation provided the means of transition, through 
which it became possible, peaceably, easily, and promptly, to initiate the 
normal system so soon as this was prepared and ready to take its place. 
General Having thus terminated the first series of observations, I shall briefly 

the Anotent resume the results of my examination. 
System. I set out from this position : 

In the eleventh century the Catholico-Feudal system bad acquired its 
definite constitution both as to the spiritual and the temporal power. 

From the same epoch dates the rise of the elements of the new social 
system. These were firstly the Industrial Capacity sprung from the enfran- 
chisement of the Commons and represented by the artisans ; secondly the 
Scientific Capacity which took its rise with the introduction of the sciences 
of observation into Europe by the Arabs. 

For four or five hundred years these two systems coexisted without any 
open conflict, their forces being so unequal; but during this period the 
struggle was silently prepared. 

From the commencement of the sixteenth century, three grand conflicts 
arose between the new and old system. Two of them were partial, one was 
general ; and each occupied about one century. 

The sixteenth century witnessed the attack on the spiritual, the seven- 
teenth that on the temporal power ; while the general and decisive attack 
on the ancient system took place during the eighteenth, determining the 
fall of the theologico-military system. 

The true condition of the Ancient System may without exaggeration he 
thus described. 

On the one hand, dogmatic faith no longer exists, all the beliefs which 
lay at its root being extinct or nearly so. Thus the spiritual power can 
now only exert an influence upon the lowest orders of society. 

On the other hand, the temporal power stands reduced to one only of its 
two branches — royalty. This is itself reduced to the smallest dimensions 
consistent with the bare subsistence in an inert state of the ancient 
system. 

In flne the ancient system in our day no longer possesses any force but 
such as is rigorously required for the maintenance of order until the estab- 
lishment of the new one ; and its continued efficacy for this purpose would 
be very doubtful were the advent of the latter too long postponed. 

to the good pleasure of each individual, perhapsmo two professions of faith would 
have been identical, and that of each person might vary from morning to evening, 
altering with the ever varying state of his physical and moral sensibilities, and 
the changes in his social circumstances. 

In a word it is evident that, as regards their political consequences unlimited 
liberty of conscience and entire theological indifference come to exactly the same 
tiling. In neither case can supernatural beliefs serve as the basis of morals. 
Far from concealing this fact we cannot repeat it too often, since it proves the 
necessity for reconstructing and building on positive principles (that is to say 
principles deduced from observation) that moraUty which is the basis or rather 
the general bond of the social organisation. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— SECOND PART. 509 

In conformity with this exposition I leave others to judge whether the 
organisation of the new system is urgent ; and whether artists, scientiiic 
men and artisans do not gravely err when they are indifferent on this head. 

Such is the true state of society at this moment with reference to the 
ancient system. The second series of observations will soon show us how 
far our social state is more satisfactory in relation to the new system. 

SECOND SERIES. 

i new 

Ie in the preceding series the march of civilisation has appeared stormy, TheL... 
in that on which we now enter we shall find it calm. Hitherto we have society 
only considered the successive steps in the disorganisation of the ancient science ana 
system of society. But contemporaneously with this decline, a New Social i°d'^''^y- 
Order was completely, though gradually, created. This in our day has 
become suflBciently developed to replace the ancient and already decrepit 
order. It remains to study and explain the gradual developement of the 
new system. 

Let us once more retrace our steps. 

We have seen that in the eleventh century at the very moment when 
the ancient system culminated, the elements of a new social organisation 
had sprung up. These elements were, as regarded the temporal power, the 
Industrial Capacity bom from the enfranchisement of the Commons, as 
regarded the spiritual, the Scientific Capacity resulting from the introduction 
of the positive sciences into Europe by the Arabs. 

If at this epoch some man of genius could have looked with sufllcient 
insight into the then condition of affairs he must infallibly have foreseen, 
from its very beginning, the entire of the great revolution since accom- 
plished; he must have become aware that the two elements just created 
would inevitably tend to overthrow the two powers whose combination 
constituted the system then in vigour. 

He must likewise have foreseen that these new elements would expand, 
more and more, at the expense of the two powers ; so as, little by little, to 
found a system finally destined to replace the ancient one. 

Applying ourselves to verify this fundamental view, we shall find that 
the second series is implicitly contained in its earliest germs. We shall 
next examine the manner in which the new system was effectively orga- 
nised. 

The twofold and inherent tendency of the new system — to destroy the 
ancient S3'stem and to replace it — was the immediate result of the two 
following causes. 

In the first place, from the very nature of things the industrial capacity 
and the scientific capacity are antagonistic one to the military the other to 
the theological power. 

In the second place the source of these two capacities placed them 
outside the ancient system, since they were represented by classes distinct 
from and independent of the temporal and spiritual power. 

This latter feature, while it assured the future of both capacities and 

510 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

their complete development, impressed upon them an indelible character 
of opposition to and incompatibility with the ancient system. 

Up to the present time so little attention has been paid to this essential 
view that it becomes necessary to develope it at some length. 

In the social state -which still subsists in Russia, where all industrial 
undertaking's are directed, in the last resort, by the feudal class, the indus- 
trial capacity does not present itself in natural opposition to the military 
power, or as properly belonging to a distinct state of society. It has not 
yet assumed its characteristic attitude. The artisans are only passive instru- 
ments in the hands of the military rulers. So also with the scientific 
capacity, so long as the sciences are cultivated by the theological powers 
alone, as was the case in the early periods of civilisation in the ancient 
theocracies of the East, and still is so in China. The scientific capacity ig 
then merely an instrument of government in the hands of the priesthood. 

Such in fact was the state of affairs in Europe down to the memorable 
period which we have selected as our starting-point. 

Before the Enfranchisement of the Commons the small amount of agri- 
cultural, manufacturing, and commercial enterprise which then existed, if 
not directed by the temporal chiefs, was, at least, dependent upon them. 

So likewise, before the introduction of the Positive Sciences into Europe 
by the Arabs, the small subsisting aggregate of knowledge was entirely in 
the hands of the spiritual power. 

It is worthy of remark that this state of things, while it lasted, secured 
the perpetuation of the ancient system ; not merely because the main- 
springs of the new one were completely at the mercy of the two ancient 
powers, but also because, for this very reason, the development of the two 
capacities was completely arrested. 

When the sciences and arts are regarded simply as instruments, they 
can never rise above a certain, and that a very low point, as may be seen in 
China and India. 

On the contrary as soon as the Commons were enfranchised, and the 
positive sciences exclusively cultivated by laymen, which happened shortly 
after their introduction into Europe, the face of things was entirely 
changed. 

These two great events first permitted the arts and sciences freely to 
expand ; no other limit being thenceforward imposed on the progress of the 
two positive capacities but that of the duration of the human race. 

In the second place from this date the industrial capacity and the 
scientific capacity, disengaged for ever from the ancient system, established 
themselves in a solid manner outside of it, thus acquiring a separate and cha- 
racteristic existence. But it was impossible they should cease to be instru- 
ments of the ancient system without becoming its enemies ; as the proverb 
says, Qui non est mectim, contra me est. 

This fundamental revolution, therefore, created two new social forces, 
the industrial force and the scientific force. These from their birth, and 
owing to their origin, were externally impressed with a twofold character ; 
being at once antagonists of the ancient political order and elements of a 
new order. 

The contempt and hatred which from that time forward Feudalism and 
Theology persistently manifested, the one towards the Industrial Arts, the 
other tov/ards the Sciences of Observation, only strengthened this antagonism 
and rendered it more decided, 

not politica,!. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— SECOND PART. 511 

Thus the change wrought during the eleventh century contained in 
principle at once the destruction of the ancient system and the creation of a 
new order of things. 

Since this epoch history has heen nothing but the consequence and the 
development of the primitive social dualism above described. Having in 
the preceding series considered this social development in its first aspect, 
we now proceed to examine its progress under the second point of view. 

It would assuredly be absurd to suppose that the new system has been influence of 
organised by Savants, Artists, and Artisans, in accordance with a predeter- fSIs ana*^" 
mined unvarying plan pursued from the eleventh century to our own time. Artisans, 
At no period has the progress of society been regulated by a system con- ^ot'sysll"''^ 
ceived by a man of genius a,nd adopted by the masses.' This would from matio; social 
the nature of things, be impossible, for the law of human progress guides ' " ° 

and dominates all ; men are only its instruments. Although this force 
springs from ourselves, it is no more possible for us to withdraw from its 
influence or control its action than to change at our pleasure the original 
impulse which causes our planet to revolve around the sun. 

Secondary results, alone, are subject to our control. All that we can do 
is consciously to obey this law, which constitutes our true providence, 
ascertaining the course it marks out for us, instead of being blindly impelled 
by it. Here, in truth, lies the goal of the grand philosophic revolution 
reserved for our own times. Nevertheless when the political order presents' 
a series of events connected together exactly as if their human agents had 
framed such a plan, is not such an hypothesis admissible as a means of 
elucidating this connection of events ?^ In doing so we should merely employ, 
with still less departure from the reality, the method adopted in the physical 
sciences, where intentions and design are attributed even to inorganic matter 
in order to afford a clearer view of the phenomena. Besides as regards 
their consequences, a great resemblance subsists between a connected series 
of events and a premeditated plan ; and we shall presently see that the 
evolution of the new system was determined by the original constitution of 
its elements. 

The following may be regarded as the plan adopted by the Commons, 

■ The capital error of the legislators and philosophers of antiquity, in truth, 
lay in their endeavouring to regulate the progress of civilisation by their syste- 
matic views ; whereas the latter should have been subordinated to the former. 
This error was, nevertheless, very excusable and natural, on their part; for at that 
epoch the origin of civilisation was too recent to allow of anyone observing its law 
of progress, or even perceiving the existence of such a law, much less recognising 
that its course lies beyond our control. 

Evidently this truth could only be reached a posteriori, and not a priori. In 
other words politics could not become a science, without a basis of observation, 
and observations could only be made after a prolonged period of civilised existence. 
It was necessary to await the establishment of a social system, which should 
embrace numerous populations consisting of several great nations, and last a long 
while, before a theory could be founded upon this great experiment. 

^ I may bo allowed also to remark that, admitting it to be true that science 
becomes positive only whpn founded on observed and acknowledged facts, it is 
equally certain (as the history of intfiUect in all directions proves) that no branch 
of knowledge acquires a scientific character until an hypothesis has combined all 
its fundamental facts. 

Thus whenever politics shall have become a science, it is certain that it will 
employ hypotheses, as the other sciences do, and that they will be employed in the 
sense pointed out above. 

512 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

from the period of their emancipation, for gradually preparing the re- 
organisation of society on a new and suitable basis : to employ themselves 
solely with operations upon nature in order to utilise her powers for 
the benefit of the human race; and to exercise an action upon men 
only so far as was necessary in order to enlist their co-operation in this 
aim. 

Such in brief was the simple plan invariably pursued from the outset by 
men of science and artisans, who started with a single object, the former of 
studying nature in order to understand her, the latter of applying this 
knowledge to satisfy the wants and desires of mankind. 

This course was so wise that a better could not have been selected, had 
scientific men and artisans framed one advisedly. 

In fine this plan is so perfect that nothing remains for us now but to 
apply it to the general direction of society, in like manner as our forefathers, 
step by step, brought it to bear on each part of the social organisation. 

It is easy to explain why this plan was followed without premeditation 
or even conscious action. After giving this explanation we shall briefly 
indicate the ground of its success. 

The Commons by the very fact of their enfranchisement were freed 
from the state of individual dependence which previously weighed upon 
them ; but the ai'tisans and men of science remained collectively dependent 
upon the military and theological classes. 

At the outset this dependence was so great and the Commons were so 
weak that they were manifestly unable to withdraw from it. But this 
obstacle which at first sight seemed inimical to their interests, really assured 
the success of their efforts. They were thus preserved from being led astray, 
and constrained, by an invincible necessity, to pursue the course which was 
really the wisest. Debarred from the idea of sharing in government, or 
even of withdrawing themselves from the collective despotism, the Commons 
only sought to profit by the degree of individual liberty they had gained 
in such a way as to develope to the utmost the scientific and industrial 
capacities. 

Men of science and artists only endeavoured to act upon nature, the one 
to obtain, by observation and experiment, a knowledge of her laws, the other 
to apply this knowledge to the production of necessary, useful, or agreeable, 
objects. In adopting this course they simply followed a natural tendency 
to ameliorate our lot; for in consequence of their political inferiority this 
action upon nature was the only course which the Commons could adopt for 
improving their social condition. Hence we may clearly perceive the force 
which obliged the Commons to pursue, unconsciously, the plan above 
indicated. 

As a means of showing how conformable to their real interests was this 
plan, let us put a case. Assuming then that the condition of affairs was not 
originally such as I have described it, let us imagine that the Commons had, 
immediately after their enfranchisement, obtained a full share of political 
power, what use would they have made of this power ? what would have 
occurred ? In all probability the result would have been as follows. 

Their participation in political power would have caused them to lose 
sight of their true aim, — the development of the industrial and scientific 
capacities. At all events this development would have been far slower than 
it was, and consequently the Commons would have continued, for a much 
longer period, in subjection to the militai'y and theological powers. For it 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— SECOND PAST. 513 

needed a powerful awakenino: of the senae of, common interests combined 
■with the force of demonstration to enable them to struggle with marked 
success against physical force combined with that of superstition. Accor- 
dingly both in France and in England, the Commons did not, until a 
comparatively recent period, evince any great anxiety to assume those 
legislative functions which were accorded to them in each country during 
the struggles of Royalty and Feudalism by one or other of these branches of 
the temporal power.^ 

Let us now, directly, examine the advantages of the course followed by 
the Commons. 

"Without troubling themselves ns to the way in which the military and 
theological authorities directed society, and putting, as it were, out of view 
the ancient system, the Commons set to work to organise all the special 
departments left to their control, with the single object of operating upon 
nature. By adopting this wise course, they were assured not only of giving 
no displeasure to the existing powers but of being agreeable to them and 
receiving from them every encouragement compatible with their exercise of 
authority. More than that ; they were certain, little by little, through their 
extensive action on nature and the liches and consideration thus acquired, 
to redeem themselves gradually from the oppression that weighed upon 
them. 

Finally they could reckon on being able, by the advance of industrial 
and scientific capacity, to acquire a progressive increase of force, which 
would gradually allow of their treating with their rulers as equals, and 
eventually of obtaining an ascendency over them ; and this has in our day 
really become possible. 

Those who place their happiness in exercising an arbitrary authority 
merely for the pleasure of exerting it are, fortunately, very rare anomalies 
in human- nature. The majority of men desire power, when placed within 
their reach, not as an end but as a means. They value it, less from love of 
authority,' than because their idleness and incapacity disposes them to 

' The alliance of the Commons with one portion of the temporal power against 
the other, in France and England, was really very serviceable to the artisans and 
men of science ; but this coalition should be considered in reference to the 
destruction of the old, and not to the organisation of the new system. In the 
first series of remarks, I have thus considered it. 

The little anxiety evinced by the Commons to profit by the share in the 
legislative power secured for them by their allies in the ancient system, was 
clearlv manifested in England, where, nevertheless, the Commons have pursued 
with greater vigour than elsewhere this kind of political progress. We know that 
previous to the epoch when they began to have a voice in the imposition of taxes, 
they regarded the sending of deputies to Parliament as a heavy burden, because 
the feudal nobility only summoned them in order to ascertain how much the 
Commons could pay, and to plunder them accordingly. 

■^ This love of authority, though certainly indestructible in man, has neverthe- 
less been, to a great degree, nuUifitd by the progress of civilisation, or, at least, 
its inconveniences have almost disappeared' in the new system. In fact, the 
development of our action upon nature has changed the direction of this senti- 
ment, by guiding it towards things. The desire to command men has gradually 
transformed itself into that of modifying nature at our pleasure. 

From this moment the love of power, born in all men, ceased to be hurtful or, 
at least, we may anticipate the time when instead pf doing harm it will do good. 
Thus it is that civilisation has perfected man's moral nature; not merely as 
regards the intellect but also as to the passions. Though, Ly virtue of the laws of 
the human organisation, the latter order of vital functions is not directly suscep- 
tible of improvement, it becomes so through the influence exercised by the former 

TOL. IV. L L 

514 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

Temporal 
progress of 
tlie new so- 
cial system 
under the 
new Leaders. 

employ others in procuring enjoyments instead of themselves joining in this 
lahour. 

The dominant aim of almost all persons is not to act upon man, but 
upon nature. There is hardly anyone who does not eagerly renounce even 
absolute authority, when its exercise excludes the enjoyment of those 
advantages of civilisation which result from our action upon things. The 
English Nabob who has made his fortune in Bengal, and exercises an 
unlimited power over thousands of Hindoos, sighs for the moment when he 
can return to Europe and there possess the enjoyments of life; though he 
well knows that in England he cannot commit the smallest arbitrary act 
against the meanest sailor without risk to himself. We are therefore 
certain to succeed with most men, when it is proposed to sacrifice a 
certain degree of authority by way of exchange for a certain measure of 
dominion over things. 

Thus the success of the plan followed by the Commons from the period 
of their enfranchisement was founded on a law of human nature. 

We are in this way able to explain the cause of all the chief advances 
effected by the elements of the New Social System during their gradual 
organisation. These advances were essentially due to the perseverance of 
the Commons in following the simple and complete plan above expounded. 
Events, independent of this plan, accelerated its success ; but the plan 
itself mainly determined the result. It, therefore, only remains for us to 
recapitulate the various kinds of progress realised. 

In order to avoid confusion in expounding the new system, in reference 
to its Temporal and Spiritual development, it is requisite to distinguish 
between the advances effected by the mass of the Commons and those 
made by their temporal and spiritual Leaders. Moreover, the Social and 
the Political progress of the new system should be separately considered. 
By its social progress we understand its internal development, apart from all 
relations with the ancient system ; by its political progress the influence 
which the latter allowed the new system to exercise in the formation of 
the political order, as well as the share of legislative authority which it 
obtained. 

Let us now consider the social and political progress of the new 
system under their temporal aspects; and amonc; these, first, the social 
progress. 

This is not the place for retracing, even in a summary way, the trulv 
vast improvements effected by art and industry since the emancipation of 
the Commons. Let us simply review them in reference to the organisation 
of the new system. 

Since this epoch the industrial capacity has attained to a development, 
which even the most vivid imagination cannot accurately represent. AH 
the arts previously known have been prodigiously improved, and a far 
larger number of new arts discovered. Agriculture has multiplied its 
products enormously. Commercial relations have been incalculably improved 
and have been, at the same time, largely extended, especially since the dis- 
covery of the New World. In a word the action of the human race upon 
the external world has been, to an inappreciable degree, increased, and, so 
to speak, created. 

As the result of this increased action a much larger portion of the 
human race in civilised countries, is now abundantly and securely provided 
with the necessaries of life, although population has greatly increased. 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— SECOND PAET. 515 

Objects of convenience and luxury have also come into use to a proportionate 
extent. ^ 

Such have been the chief results of this progress in reference to the 
temporal organisation of the new system. 

The Commons have gradually acquired a preponderating influence and 
consideration. All social arrangements have fallen under their control, all 
the real forces of society have come into their hands, and, since the inven- 
tion of gunpowder, even the military power has become subordinated to 
them. 

On the one hand the discovery of powder destroyed the physical superiority 
over the artisans which the possession of arms conferred upon the military 
classes ; and supplied the former with the means of self-protection without 
receiving a soldier's education. On the other hand it placed the entire 
system of war in dependence upon the industrial arts and sciences of 
observation. 

At the same time war having thus become more and more costly, it 
could no longer be carried on without loans, for which the military power 
was dependent upon the Commons. In a word, matters gradually reached 
the stage when war became impossible if the industrial and scientific 
capacities refused their cooperation. 

Under the temporal point of view the political advances of the new 
system were the direct and necessary result of its social progress. In pro- 
portion as the Commons acquired greater riches, with more consideration 
and civic importance, they augmented their influence over the general 
direction of society, and their direct political authority. 

It is in England chiefly that the advance of the Commons in this 
respect should be observed, because it has there been most clearly- 
revealed.' 

The Commons having, in the English Parliament, begun by slowly 
obtaining a kind of consultative voice in the vote on taxation, gradually, 
obtained a deliberative voice, and in the end, the supply was specially 
conceded to them. Their exclusive right on this head was irrevocably 
made a fundamental principle of the constitution in the settlement of 
1688. 

At the same time, the influence of the Commons in the formation of 
the general political plan became increasingly large. At the same epoch,, 
in England it reached such a height that the ancient rulers in principle 
admitted that social prosperity is based upon industry, and consequently that 
the political plan should be conceived in the interest of the Commons. 
Under both these aspects the ancient system has been modified in favour of 
the new one, as far as was possible, so long as society, as a whole, remained 
under the control of the ancient system. 

' Almost immediately after their enfranchisement the Commons were invited, 
in France no less than in England, to cooperate in the formation of the States 
General ; but in Prance this step produced hardly any results. 

I take this opportunity of stating that I have not felt it desirable to consider 
the attempts made soon after their emancipation, at almost all points of civilised 
Europe, hut especially in Germany and Italy, to organise industrial societies. 
These attempts, indicating the birth of the new system, have left no diu-able 
trace. They had not, nor could they have had an organic character. In so rapid a 
review, considerations of this kind, far from enlightening, would have conlused 
the mind. 

L 1 2 

516 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

Thifl progress eB'ected by the Commons was assuredly very important, 
but it is also very important not to exaggerate its significance or to confound 
a mere modification with a total change of system. 

The exclusive right of voting the taxes granted to the Commons, should, 
theoretically, have invested them with supreme political power. But in 
fact, up to the present time this right has benefited them very little, because 
they have not really exercised it The House of Commons has been at 
bottom meirely a sort of appendage to royalty and feudalism ; an instrument 
in the hands of the ancient system. Moreover the yiaxim admitted in 
England by the temporal power that the political plan should be conceived 
in the interests of industry, has, to the present time, but slightly benefited 
the Commons. The reason for this is, that the aneient system, commanding 
the situation and of necessity preserving its position until the new system 
was definitely organised, could only place at the service of the Commons its 
peculiar modes of action — namely, force and cunning. In this way, since 
the famous Navigation Laws, the temporal power has systematically fought 
and plotted, in order to serve the interests of the Commons. 

The establishment of the Parliamentary SSgime in England must, there- 
fore, be regarded as having, as far as was possible, modified the ancient 
system, and supplied a transition to the new system. In this respect only 
was it useful to the Commons, for, considered in itself and absolutely, its 
results were at least as mischievous as they were useful to them. 

France, by her recent adoption of the English constitution, has placed 
herself on a level with England in both of the above respects ; with this 
advantage however, that the change having been effected at a much more 
advanced period of civilisation, it was far more complete. Feudalism having 
been overthrown before the parliamentary regime was adopted the ancient 
system was modified far more deeply in France than in England. The 
principle which proposes the interests of the Commons, as the end and rule 
of political combinations, has there acquired a broader, more general, and 
preponderating character. 

In fine, the parliamentary system having been first established in France 

■at a period when the necessity for a total change in the political system was 

profoundly felt, its transitional character has become much more marked. 

Spiritual Let US next study the social and political progress of the new system, in 

progress of reference to the spiritual power. 

social system Before the introduction of the Positive Sciences into Europe all special as 
under the -meM as general knowledge was either theological or metaphysical. The few 
speculations about nature then suggested were exclusively founded upon 
religious beliefs. But from this memorable epoch the natural sciences, 
more and more, sought for a basis in observation and experiment. Never- 
theless down to a recent period they suffered from an admixture of super- 
stition and metaphysics. It was only towards the end of the sixteenth and 
the early years of the seventeenth centuries that they succeeded in entirely 
disengaging themselves from theological beliefs and metaphysical hypo- 
theses. The epoch at which they began to be truly positive must be 
referred to Bacon who gave the first signal of this great revolution ; to 
Galileo his cotemporary who furnished its earliest exemplification ; and 
lastly to Descartes who irrevocably emancipated the intellect from the yoke 
of authority in matters of science. Then it was that natural philosophy 
arose and the scientific capacity acquired its true character, that of con- 
tributing the spiritual element of a new social system. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— PECOND PART. 517 

From this epoch, the sciences successively became positive in the 
natural order of sequence, that is to say according- as they were more or less 
closely related to man. Thug, astronomy first, then physics, later chemis- 
try and finally, in our own day, physiology, have been constituted as positive 
sciences. This revolution, then, has been completely accomplished for all 
special branches of knowledge,, and evidently approaches its consummation 
for philosophy, morals, and politics. The influence of theology and meta- 
physics on these subjects has already been destroyed in the eyes of all 
educated men, though they are not yet based upon observation. The reali- 
sation of this condition is alone wanting for- the spiritual developement of 
the new social system. 

In proportion as the sciences became positive and consequently advanced 
with increasing rapidity, a multitude of scientific ideas entered into general 
education, while the religious doctrines gradually lost their influence. 
Special schools for the sciences ai-ose, in which the influence of theology 
and metaphysics was almost nothing.. Finally the mental state has under- 
gone such a change in this respect that in our day, the ideas of everyone, 
from the least instructed to the most enlightened, spring, almost entirely, 
from the positive sciences ^ the ancient beliefs occupying, comparatively 
speaking, but a small place, even in the classes over which these beliefs have 
maintained their strongest hold. 

It may be said without exaggeration that the doctrines of religion 
influence men's minds only so far as morality is still associated with them. 
This influence will, of necessity, continue until the epoch when moral philo- 
sophy has undergone the revolution already effected in all special branches 
of knowledge, and become positive. From that moment the dominion of 
theological beliefs, will cease for ever ; since it is manifest that a state of 
things in which the different branches of knowledge have become positive, 
while the ideas destined to combine all remain superstitious, can only be 
transitional, since the contrary conclusion implies a contradiction in the 
order of nature. 

The political advances of the new system in its spiritual aspects, have 
likewise been the inevitable consequence of its social progress. 

Since the establishment of the first schools for teaching the sciences of 
observation in the thirteenth century, the royal power in France and the 
feudal power in England constantly and increasingly encouraged the 
sciences and elevated the status of scientific men. 

In France royalty, more and more, adopted the practice of consulting men 
of science, seeking their approbation in reference to matters they were com- 
petent to decide, thus implicitly recognising the superiority of positive and 
scientific, over theological and metaphysical ideas.. 

Little by little our kings came to regard as a matter of duty acts which 
they originally regarded as praiseworthy, and recognised the obligation of 
encouraging the sciences and deferring to the decisions of scientific men. 
The creation of the Academy of Sciences, instituted under Louis XIV. by 
his minister Colbert, is a solemn declaration of this principle. Ajt the same 
time that institution was a first step towards the political organisation of 
the spiritual element of the new system. 

Since this epoch the mental action of the scientific capacity has greatly 
multiplied the number of Academies in all parts of Europe. This influence 
has been inaugurated in a regular and legal manner. Its political authority 
has proportionably increased; and has exerted a dii'ect and ever increasing 

518 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

influence upon national education. Regarded from tliis point of view, the 
legal attributes with which the first class of the Institute is actually- 
endowed are nearly as extensive as they could be, so long as the body which 
exercises them is not charged with the teaching of morals.^ But this 
cannot take place until morals have become a positive science. In this 
respect then, as in all others previously considered, the ancient system 
has yielded its place to a new one, preparing the way for this as far as 
possible. Further progress can only be effected by organising the new 
system. 

It is essential to observe that while scientific activity has increasingly 
consolidated and extended itself in each European nation, considered apart 
from the rest, the scientific forces of the different countries have also 
become more and more closely connected. The sentiment of nationality has 
been, in this respect, usually set aside, and men of science in all parts of 
Europe have formed an indissoluble league which has always tended to 
make the scientific advances effected at each period European property. This 
Holy Alliance, against which the ancient system has no resource, is more 
powerful for realising the organisation of the new system than the coalition 
of all the bayonets of Europe can be for arresting or even for checking its 
progress. 

Up to a certain point the same combination has taken place between the 
industrial capacities of the various European nations ; but it has been far 
less complete. The sentiment of national rivalship, the inspirations of a 
savage and absurd patriotism, created by the ancient system and by it studi- 
ously kept alive, have still maintained a great influence over the temporal 
element. For this reason the alliance of the various European nations for 
the organisation of the new system can only begin in reference to the 
spiritual element. The coalition of the temporal capacities must arise after, 
and as a result of, the former movement. 

Lastly ; it is important to remark that while the two elements of the 
new system were separately efi'ecting national and European progress 
towards their final political organisation, the combination of the two 
elements and consequently the formation of the system has also been 
accomplished with increasing success. A class, which occupies an inter- 
mediate position between men of science, artists, and artisans, that of 
engineers, sprang up; and thenceforward the combination of the two 
capacities may be considered as having begun. This alliance has increased 
to such an extent that, now, the concurring judgment of scientific men, 
and of artisans (though less decidedly as regards the latter) regards the 
sciences and arts as destined to modify nature for the benefit of man, the 
former by mastering her secrets, the latter by applying the knowledge so 
acquired. 

' As a general proposition it is clear that the supreme direction of national edu- 
cation, and the teaching of morals ought to be in the same liands : it would be 
absurd to separate them. Accordingly so long as morals remain solely based upon 
religious beliefs it is inevitable that the general direction of education should 
appertain to a theological body or at least to the theological spirit. 

^ The men who, in our day, speak su strongly against the Jesuits, the mission- 
aries, and other religious corporations should therefore consider that the only 
way to deprive these societies of their remaining influence is to base morals upon 
the observation of facts. Until this has been accomplished, all such complaints 
must prove almost useless, because they ai'e in great part unfounded. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— SECOND PART. 519 

Numerous estaWisliments, both public and private, chiefly in France and 
England, have given life to this principle by organising the above combina- 
tion. Such are, in France, tlie Conservatory of arts and trades, and the 
various schools connected with it; the Society for the encouragement of 
manufactures ; the School for bridges and roads. 

Thus not only has each of the two elements of the new system in its 
turn advanced towards complete organisation, and finally outstripped the 
corresponding element of the ancient system, but their combination has 
continually perfected itself, thus preparing the way for their joint direction 
of society. 

In the preceding remarks we have only considered the social and Progress ot 
political progress effected by the spiritual and temporal leaders of the new 'n re^|°fn^e 
system. It remains to consider the steps accomplished by the mass of totheTem- 
the people towards the new social organisation. porai Power. 

These steps have been of two sorts ; one the capacity acquired by the 
Masses for living under the new temporal and spiritual order, the other 
their progressive coordination under the new temporal and spiritual 
Leaders. 

A population must have reached a certain degree of temporal and 
spiritual capacity before it can live under a system of social order which 
is not based temporally on force and spiritually on blind faith. That 
man canuot be emancipated who, as to the former, has not contracted 
certain habits of order, economy and love of work, and who, as to the 
latter, does not possess, in a sufficient degree, knowledge and foresight. 
Such a man must continue in leading strings. So also as regards a nation: 
until it has fulfilled these conditions it can only be governed in an arbitrary 
manner. Thus, for example, the Russian serfs who in a time of pressing 
need, eat the seed-corn, are still incapable of enjoying even individual 
liberty. To attempt their emancipation before they had contracted better 
habits would be a real absurdity which could not lead to success. While 
in France, where the entire mass of the nation can endure hunger without 
touching the seed-corn, the people do not require to be governed (that is 
to say commanded). It is sufficient for the maintenance of order that the 
atlairs of common interest should be regulated. 

In like manner, as regards the spiritual function a people who, for 
example, has sufficient confidence in sorcerers to allow themselves to be 
guided by them in affairs of importance, requires to be arbitrarily governed 
by more enlightened men. Such a people could not be abandoned to their 
own guidance without injury to their interests. But it is evident that so 
soon as the mass of a nation is competent to conduct their ordinary aifairs 
by their own knowledge, and thus satisfies the two conditions above 
mentioned, they do not need to be despotically ruled, but may be left to 
follow their own guidance without danger to public tranquillity. We may 
even say that every exertion of arbitrary power, exercised at a period 
when it has become useless tends to disturb tranquillity rather than to 
maintain it. 

Since the enfranchisement of the Commons the mass of the French popu- 
lation has gradually contracted the habits and acquired the degree of enlighten- 
ment requisite for living under the new system. The abolition of slavery 
has of itself rendered all men proprietors, and since that time proletaries, 
in the rigorous acceptation of that word, have 'not existed. It is even 
fitting to observe that the industrial property, sprung from enfranchisement, 

520 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

naturally requires a much greater capacity than territorial property as this 
has existed. For the latter, apart from its cultivation, requires no other 
talent than that of enjoying the income with sufficient moderation not to 
encroach on capital. It is the cultivator and not the proprietor who has 
need of capacity. 

The people having acquired property, have gradually contracted a love 
for order and work, with habits of forethought and respect for property ,i 
and have, at the same time, in France, England, and the North of Germany 
acquired the elements of knowledge. 

Much, doubtless, remains to be done under both these aspects, and 
especially the second. But the progress made has been sufficient to render 
it uunecessary that the people should be governed by force and superstition. 
The masses have acquired suificient capacity for living together under the 
new system, in which the action of government should be reduced to what 
is indispensable for establishing a subordination of work in that general 
action of man upon nature which is the final aim of the system. 

In truth, the maintenance of public tranquillity is, in our times, essentially 
due to these new habits alone ; the military apparatus of the temporal and 
the infernal apparatus of the spiritual power contributing to this end only 
in an accessory manner.'* 

Let us now examine in what way the population gradually organised 
itself under its new temporal and spiritual Leaders. 

Before the enfranchisement of the Commons the only and permanent 
leaders of the masses were the military classes. On the contrary, since 
their enfranchisement the people have gradually detached themselves from 
these leaders and at the same time organised themselves under the 
guidance of the industrial leaders. Towards these the people have con- 
tracted habits of subordination and discipline which, though not strict, 
are quite sufficient for maintaining industrial order and the harmony of 
society. 

To the origin of permanent and paid armies, as instituted by Charles 
VII., we may refer the epoch of the complete separation of the people from 
their military leaders. During the interval, which separated their en- 
franchisement from the birth of this institution the masses were placed, 
pretty equally, under the authority of the two kiuds of leaders. As to all 
usual works of peace they were under the direction of the industrial 
leaders ; but as to military works and exercises they were generally 
speaking under the command of the military leaders. 

Standing and paid armies once established, the business of a soldier 
having thus become the pursuit of a particular class severed from the 
general population, the mass of the people had no longer any relation 
with the military leaders, and no other organisation than an industrial 

' When in tbe terrible famine of 179-t, at the very moment that the lowest class 
of the people was all-powerful, this same class was seen dying by thousands, 
without- any disturbance to public tranquillity, we may well say ttint the French 
people know how to respect property. 

'' The influence of the ancient system is still indispensable for the maintenance 
of order, but in a diiierent point of view from thnt wo have just considered. It is 
only required as a check on the disturbance of public tranquillity by ambitious and 
mtriguing men disposed to troublo it by engrossing powers which must excite 
their avidity until the new system has been definitively organised. But the 
people do not thus aim at power ; those who do so ate the idle and parasitic class 
of society, that is to say the ancient feudalism and the feudalism of Bonaparte. 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— SECOND PART. 521 

one. The soldier no longer regarded himself, or was regarded as belonging 
to the people. He passed from the ranks of the new system into those of 
the old, from the commonalty into the feudal class, and that was all: he 
altered his own character and not that of the system to which he previously 
belonged. 

Thus this institution of standing armies, which in our day has, by the 
progress of civilisation, become so burthensome and useless, was indis- 
pensable as a transitional step towards the organisation of the new system. 

Considering the present condition of the people we shall perfieive that, 
as regards temporal matters, they have no direct and constant relations 
except with their industrial leaders. Follow out in thought the daily 
relations of the workman, whether in agriculture manufactures or com- 
merce, and you will find that he is brought into habitual contact with 
agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial leaders, and not at all, for 
example, with the great lord and landed proprietor, or the sleeping partner 
to whom the manufactory or commercial establishment wholly or in part 
belongs. Any connexion he has with the military leaders of society arises 
from the general relations of the new with the old system : he has none of 
a different kind. 

This is the proper place for observing the fundamental and advantageous 
difference which exists between the present organisation of the people under 
their industrial leaders and their former subjection to their military leaders. 
This difference will bring out one of the most important and happiest con- 
trasts between the old and the new system. 

In the ancient system the people were enrolled under their leaders, in 
the new they are combined -vith. them. The military leaders commartrfeei; 
the industrial leaders only direct. In the first case the people weVe subjects, 
in the second they are partners. Such is the admirable character of in- 
dustrial combinations that all the participants are in fact co-workers and 
partners, from the humblest workman to the richest manufacturer and the 
ablest engineer. 

In a society embracing men who neither bring capacity nor capital, 
there must, of necessity, be masters and slaves ; otherwise the workmen 
would not be so foolish as to consent to such an arrangement if they 
could avoid it : it is impossible to conceive such a society originating in 
any other way than by force. But in a system of cooperation where all 
bring capacity and capital, there is , a real partnership, ,ind no inequality 
exists but that of capacity and capital, both necessary (that is to say un- 
avoidable). The disappearance of such inequality it would be absurd and 
mischievous to expect. 

Each person obtains a degree of importance and advantages pro- 
portionate to his capacity and contribution, and this constitutes the 
highest degree of equality which is either possible or desirable. Such is 
the fundamental character of industrial society, and this the people have 
gained by organising themselves in subordination to the leaders of art and 
industry. Their new leaders exercise no authority over them save what 
is strictly necessary for maintaining good order in their work, and this 
amounts to very little. The industrial capacity is by its nature as averse 
to exercising as to suffering arbitrary power. Besides let us not forget 
that in a society of workers everything naturally tends to order : disorder 
always comes from the idle. 

Finally let us remark that the progress of industry, the sciences, and 

522 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

Progress 
of the People 
in reference 
tn the Spirit- 
ual Power. 

the fine arts, by multiplying the means of subsistence, diminishing the 
number of the unoccupied, enlightening men's minds, and softening manners, 
tend, more and more, to banish the three great causes of disorder— pdverty, 
idleness, and ignorance. 

We have now, in reference to the spiritual element to make observations 
analogous to those which have just been ofl'ered as regards the temporal 
aspects of society. 

Before the introduction of the Positive Sciences into Europe, or to speak 
more correctly, before the sciences had passed from the hands of the clergy 
into those of the laymen — an event which followed the first very closely — 
the mass of the people was spiritually organised under their theological 
leaders. The people believed on their bidding, consulted them on every 
matter and blindly followed their decisions ; such doctrines as it suited 
them to establish became the faith of the masses. In a word, the people 
contracted in relation to them a habit of absolute confidence and of 
unlimited mental submission. But from the moment that the positive 
sciences acquired a certain development this confidence and respect were 
gradually withdrawn from the clergy and transferred to the men of 
science. 

This change was powerfully seconded by the analogous change effected 
in temporal relations. The people, industrially organised, soon perceived 
that their ordinary mechanical labours were in no wise connected with 
theological ideas, that they could not derive from theologians any real 
information about the objects of their daily occupations. Wherever they 
could establish a connexion, direct or indirect, with men of science, they 
lost the habit of consulting the clergy and adopted that of putting them- 
selves into relation with those who possessed positive knowledge. Doubt- 
less this relation is still very far from being as intimate as it might and 
ought to be, but this chiefly springs, not from a deficient love of knowledge 
among the people, but from the want of opportunities and of eftbrts to supply 
them with useful information. On the contrary the people are far more 
desirous of instruction than the idle frequenters of our drawing-rooms, because 
their labours at every moment impress on them their need of it. Whenever 
the people could study they have studied. But although the action of 
scientific capacity on them is still very small, compared with what it may 
become, it is much greater than we usually imagine. Striking and incon- 
testable facts prove that the people in our day accord to the unanimous 
opinion of men of science the same degree of confidence which in the 
Middle Ages they accorded to the decisions of the spiritual power. 

Thus for example, for about one century the people have unanimously 
ceased to believe in the immoveability of the earth, and accepted the 
theory of modern astronomy, with as much confidence as thej' ever accorded 
to the ancient religious beliefs. What is the cause of this revolution in 
popular opinion ? Is it that the people have acquired a knowledge of the 
demonstrations which establish the theory of the movement of the earth ? 
Certainly not, since these demonstrations are probably not understood by 
more than three thousand persons in the entire French population. The 
confidence of the people evidently flows from their having perceived the 
unanimity of men of science on this head. 

Let us examine in like manner all the discoveries in the sciences of 
observation which have been popularised, and we shall find that they have 
become so in the same way. Thus the people have successively accepted 

GENERAL APPENDIX- SECOND PART. 523 

the circulation of the blood, the identity of thunder and electricity, &c. &c. 
Besides, as regards the sciences all who cannot comprehend demonstrations 
belong to the pebple. The same confidence which induced men of the 
world to accept the analysis of air and water, the law of universal gravitation, 
the decomposition of light, and so many other astronomical, physical, 
chemical, and physiological discoveries will induce their acceptance by the 
people somewhat later. 

It is then proved by the plainest facts that the people have now, spiritually, 
confidence in and subordinate themselves to their spiritual leaders, just as 
they do, temporally, to their industrial leaders. Consequently I am entitled 
to infer that in the new system confidence has become organised as well as 
subordination. 

We should likewise here observe that the confidence of the people in 
their new spiritual leaders is, by its nature, quite distinct from that which 
they felt under the old system for their theological leaders. The latter 
consisted in a state of mental submission altogether blind and which 
required from each individual an absolute negation of his own reason. 
Confidence in the opinions of men of science has an entirely difierent 
character. It is the assent given to propositions about matters susceptible 
of verification, and unanimously admitted by men who have acquired and 
established a capacity forjudging them. 

In truth the facts are admitted without proof; but they are thus 
admitted only because the public consider themselves incapable of fol- 
lowing the demonstrations which establish these truths. This confidence 
always, by implication, reserves the right of contradiction in case new 
demonstrations should be produced which show it to be unfounded, or 
the believer should acquire suflicient knowledge to contest the received 
opinions. The people are thus far from renouncing the free exercise of 
their reason. 

This confidence of the people in the opinions of men of science is 
absolutely of the same kind as, though much larger than, that of scientific 
men towards each other. 

Every day mathematicians accept the results of physiologists upon the 
faith of their word, and reciprocally each class of savants in their respective 
spheres do the same. 

In the same science do we not constantly see scientific men provisionally 
put faith in the assurance of the others before knowing and judging the 
demonstrations ? What mathematician for example would refuse to admit 
without examination a proposition certified by Lagrange ? 

This faith produces no inconvenience in the sciences because it is only 
provisional. The confidence of the people in men of science has exactly the 
same character ; only the provisional nature of their assent, though always 
reo-arded as such, is indefinitely prolonged. Thus this confidence is in no 
wi'se humiliating for the people, and could never affect their interests 
injuriously in the least degree, as did their mental subjection to the 
theologians. 

The fear that a despotism founded on science may one day establish 
itself would be a ridiculous and absurd chimera, and could only arise in 
minds entirely foreign to positive ideas. 

The people then being now, spiritually and temporally, organised for 
the new system the most difficult step towards its establishment has been 
accomplished. This great change has simplified, as far as possible, the 

52-t SYSTEM OF POSITIVE lOLITY. 

•n'ork of its definitive establishment, by reducing all that remains for its 
accomplishment to the relations between the leaders of the new and the 
leaders of the old systems. 

The people no longer present any difficulty in solving the question. 

The question will be resolved in the interest of the people, but they will 
remain outside and passive in relation to it. 

The only danger to be feared, the only needful precaution, is that of 
not allowing ourselves to be turned aside from the end by the intrigues of 
ambitious men, who dispute among themselves the falling remnants of the 
ancient system. 

Such, in a general view, are the principal parts of the picture which, since 
the eleventh century, is presented to us by the progress of civilisation, 
considered in refei'ence to the gradual development of the new social system. 
Let us now resume, as briefly as possible, the results of this great organic 
series. 

RESUME OF THE SECOND SERIES. 

We set out from this fundamental fact: the Enfranchisement of the 
Commons and the introduction of the Positive Sciences into Europe in the 
eleventh century created the two elements of a new social system, 
industrial capacity and scientific capacity. 

We next observed ; 

1st. That the two elementary capacities of the new social system were 
established on bases O'f a character different from that of the powers on 
which the ancient system rested. 

2nd. That these two capacities established themselves outside of the 
ancient system and so as to render themselves as independent of it as 
possible. 

3rd. That the Commons, representing the union of the two capacities, 
from the beginning adopted the wise course of not pretending to share 
authority with the old system, but simply sought to profit by the 
independence they enjoyed with a view to exercising the greatest possible 
action upon nature. 

4th. That this plan, persistently followed, had its twofold and natural 
effects. On the one hand the elements of the new system have acquired 
their full and complete development, whence has flowed the preponderance 
of their civil force ; on the other hand they have gradually obtained 
a larger measure of liberty of which they have always made use in the 
same manner; and finally they have naturally acquired a portion of 
legislative authority to which they did not directly aspire. 

5th. That the entire spiritual and temporal forces of society have 
passed into the hands of the Commons ; the military force itself being subor- 
dinated to their influence. 

6th. That the Commons have obtained as great an influence over the 
political plan laid down by the ancient system as was attainable, until they 
could themselves form the plan ; the temporal power having admitted in 
principle that the social organisation ought to be framed in the interest of 
the Commons. 

GENERAL APPENDIX-SECOND PAET. 525 

7th. That the temporal power has established the parliamentary r^tjime 
which, by conceding— at least in principle— to the Commons the exclusive 
right of voting taxes, invested them with as large a share of legislative 
authority as they could virithout destroying their own. 

8th. That this measure of authority more than suffices for enabling the 
Commons in our day to proceed, directly and in a legal manner, to the final 
organisation of the new system. 

9th. That contemporaneously with the progress thus effected by the 
temporal and spiritual leaders of the new system, the mass of the people 
have entirely withdrawn from their military and theological chiefs and 
organised themselves, both under temporal and spiritual aspects, under the 
leaders of the two positive capacities. 

Finally that the ancient has thus yielded to the new system all that 
could be yielded without self-destruction and has smoothed the way for the 
latter to ai'rive at its definitive constitution. 

Such then is the actual condition of the new system as resulting from the 
past since the eleventh century. All the forces of society belong to it. All 
the doctrines necessary for its organisation exist in their germs ; namely the 
sciences of observation. In a word society, in all its parts, is organised for 
acting upon nature. It only remains to organise it as a whole in the same 
way. The means which the Commons required to effect that object now 
exist. 

GENERAL RESUME OF BOTH SERIES. 

When the ancient system had attained its definitive constitution (in the 
eleventh century) the elements of the system destined to succeed it took 
their rise. 

From this epoch two influences of a different nature have been 
simultaneously and uninterruptedly exerted by the new system, the one 
tending to destroy the ancient one, the other to replace it. 

As regards the former influence the Commons allied themselves at first 
with one of the powers of the ancient system against the other, while 
profiting by the divisions which aa-ose between them; and after having 
conquered the power against which they had fought the Commons formed 
a new leao'ue with one of the fractions of the power whose allies they had 
been against another fraction of this same power. 

As reo-ards the latter influence the Commons held themselves aloof 
from the ancient system, limiting themselves to action upon nature. 

Destruction and construction have always been combined so that the new 
system possessed itself, one by one, of all the positions occupied by the 
ancient, according as they were abandoned by it. 

During the period of its unabated vigour, the ancient system guided both 
the general action of society and all special social movements, both spiritual 
and temporal. Little by little all the private relations and special branches 
of knowledge disengaged themselves from the bonds of the ancient system 
and co-ordinated themselves in reference to the new. Finally the new 
system organised itself as to all the details of social life. 

526 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

The ancient system after having completely lost all its influence on 
details, has, step bj' step, lost, in temporal and spiritual matters, the 
greater pari of its command over the general action of society. 

It still holds possession of the general political plan, -which cannot 
be otherwise until the total organisation of the new system. But it is 
admitted as a fundamental principle that this plan ought to be framed in the 
interest of the Commons. 

The temporal power has been reduced to the smallest dimensions com- 
patible with its existence until the entire extinction of the ancient system 
and its replacement by the new one. The spiritual power, as a political 
element, has been completely overthrown. It retains no other influence 
than that derived from the fact that the teaching of morals remains in its 
hands, as being still based upon its doctrines. 

The new system after having obtained the exclusive direction of all the 
details of society, has, step by step, gained in the ordering of the ensemble 
all that the ancient system has lost. 

Under temporal aspects the right of the Commons to modify at their 
pleasure the general political plan has been recognised ; and the legal exercise 
of this right has been regularly constituted, the means of efiecting the tran- 
sition being thus also provided. Under spiritual aspects the Scientific 
Capacity has obtained all the influence it can possess over national educa- 
tion until the teaching of morals has passed into its hands. 

The force of the two systems in relation to the action they exercise upon 
the direction of society, regarded as a whole, is in our day almost identical ; 
any difference being rather in favour of the new than the old system. 

Thus the actual condition of society presents the co-existence of a 
declining and of an adult system, the former of which has lost all its 
influence over details and half of what it possessed-over the ensemble, while 
the latter dominates every part and enjoys a larger share of influence over 
the ensemble. 

The new system then needs to mount but one step more in order to reach 
a complete organisation and entirely to replace the ancient system. It only 
remains for it to complete its temporal and spiritual achievements ; in 
temporal matters by gaining possession of the House of Commons, in 
spiritual by establishing Morals on principles solely deduced from obser- 
vation. In truth all is ready for this step ; the means exist, we only require 
to use them. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 527 

THIRD PART. 

{May 1822.) 

PLAN OS THE SCIENTIFIC OPEEATIONS NECBSSAET FOR EEORGANISING 

SOCIETY. 

Inteoduciion. 

A SOCIAL system in itf decline, a new system arrived at maturity and Our social 
approaching its completion — such is the fundamental character which the ftrSurocs"'* 
general progiess of civilisation has assigned to the present epoch. In 
conformity with this state of things, two movements, differing in their 
nature, agitate society; one a movement of disorganisation, the other of 
reorganisation. By the former, considered apart, society is hurried towards 
a profound moral and political anarchy which appears to menace it with a 
near and inevitable dissolution. By the latter it is guided to the definitive 
social condition of the human race, that test suited to its nature, and in 
which all progressive movements should receive their completest develop- 
ment and most direct application. In the co-existence of these two opposed 
tendencies consists the grand crisis now experienced by the most civilised 
nations; and this can only be understood when viewed under both 
aspects. 

From the moment when this crisis began to show itself to the present 
time the tendency of the ancient system to disorganisation has pre- 
dominated, or rather it alone is still plainly manifested. It was in the 
nature of things that the crisis should begin thus, so that the old system 
might be sufficiently modified to permit the direct formation of the new 
social system. 

But now that this condition has been fully satisfied and the Catholicn- 
Feudal system has lost its power, as far as is possible, until the new system 
has been inaugurated, the preponderance still maintained by the negative 
tendency constitutes the greatest obstacle to the progress of civilisation and 
even to the abolition of the ancient system. Its persistence forms the first 
cause of those terrible and continually renewed shocks by which the crisis 
is accompanied. 

The only way of ending this stormy situation, of staying the anarchy 
which day by day invades society, in a word of reducing the crisis to a 
simple moral movement, consists in inducing the civilised nations to 
abandon the negative and to adopt an organic attitude ; turning all their 
eiforts towards the formation of the New Social System as the definitive 
object of the crisis and that for the attainment of which everything hitherto 
accomplished is only a preparation. 

528 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

Plan of ronr- 
g;iiiisatiuu 
miscon- 
ceived by 
Eulers and 
tile People. 

Errors of 
Killers. 

Such is the prime necepsity of the present epoch. Such also is the 
general scope of my lahours and the special aim of this essay, the object of 
wliich is to set in motion the forces capable of bringing society into the 
track of the new system. 

A brief examination of the causes which have hitherto hindered and 
still do hinder society from frankly assuming an organic attitude, sliould 
naturally precede an exposition of the measures necessary for effecting this 
object. 

The numerous and repeated attempts made by the People and Kings to 
reorganise society prove that the need of such a reorganisation is generally 
felt. But on both aides it is only felt in a vague and imperfect manner. 
These two kinds of attempts are, though for different reasons, equally 
vicious. To the present time they have not, nor could they have produced 
any real organic result. Far from tending to terminate the crisis these 
efforts only contribute to prolong it. Such is the true cause which, in spite 
of so many efforts, by keeping society in the negative track, leaves it a prey 
to revolutions. 

To establish this fundamental proposition, it is sufficient to take a general 
view of the attempts at reorganisation undertaken by Kings and the 
People. 

The error committed by Kings is easier to understand. For them the 
reorganisation of society means the re-establishment pure and simple of the 
feudal and theological svstem in all its integrity. In their eyes no other 
means exist of terminating the anarchy which results from the decline of 
this system. 

It would be unphilosophical to regard this view as if it were mainly 
dictated by the special interests of the governing classes. Chimerical 
though it be, this idea naturally presented itself to minds seeking, in 
good faith, a remedy for the existing crisis. They feel in its entire extent 
the need for a reorganisation; but they have not considered the general 
progress of civilisation, and, viewing the present state of affairs under one 
aspect only, they do not perceive the tendency of society to establish a new 
system more perfect, and not less harmonious, than the ancient one. In a 
word it is natural that this view should be taken by rulers, since from 
their position they must of necessity perceive more clearly the anarchical 
state of society and consequently experience more forcibly the necessity for 
applying a remedy. 

This is not the place to insist on the manifest absurdity of such an 
opinion ; which is now universally recognised by the majority of en- 
lightened men. Doubtless Kings, while seeking to reconstruct the ancient 
system, do not comprehend the nature of the present crisis and are far from 
having measured the magnitude of their enterprise. 

The downfall of the feudal and theological system does not spring, as 
they believe, from recent, solitary, and in some sort accidental onuses. Their 
downfall in place of being the effect of the crisis is, on the contrary, its 
source. The decline of this system has come to pass continuously during 
the preceding centuries, by reason of a series of modifications, independent of 
the human will, to which all classes of society contributed, and of which 
Kings themselves have often been the first agents and most eager promoters. 
In a word it was the necessary consequence of the progress of civilisation. 

In order then to re-establish the ancient system it would not be sufficient 
to push society back to the epoch when the existing crisis began to reveal 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 529 

itaelf. For, even supposing this could be done, -which it could not, we should 
have merely replaced the body politic in the situation which necessitated 
the crisis. Retracing past ages, it would be requisite to repair, one by one, all 
the losses suffered by the ancient system during six centuries in comparison 
with which all that it has lost for the last thirty years is of no importance. 
No other mode of effecting this would be possible but to annihilate all 
the results of civilisation which have caused this decline. 

Thus for example it would be absurd to assume that the eighteenth 
century philosophy — itself the direct cause of the downfall of the ancient 
system considered in its spiritual aspects — could be destroyed unless we 
also assumed the annihilation of the sixteenth century ; of which the philo- 
sophy of the last century is only the consequence and development. But, 
as the Reformation of Luther is, in its turn, simply a necessary result of 
the progress of the sciences of observation introduced into Europe by the 
Arabs, the re-establishment of the ancient system would not have been 
secured unless the positive sciences had been also suppressed. 

In like manner, under temporal aspects, we should be led, step by step, 
to the necessity for replacing the industrial classes in a state of servitude, 
since in the last reaort the enfranchisement of the Commons is the first and 
general cause of the decline of the feudal system. Finally such an enter- 
prise is set in its true light by this reflection, that after overcoming so many 
difficulties, the least of which taken by itself surpasses the power of man, 
we should have gained nothing but the postponement of the definitive fall 
of the ancient system, by thus obliging society to recommence its destruc- 
tion, since the principle of progressive civilisation inherent in human nature 
would not have been extinguished. 

It is manifest that no person could entertain a project which is mon- 
strous, whether we consider its magnitude or its absurdity. Man, in spite 
of himself, belongs to his epoch. Those who oppose, as they believe, the 
greatest resistance to the progress of civilisation unconsciously obey its 
irresistible influence, nay themselves second it. 

Accordino-ly kings in projecting the reconstruction of the feudal and 
theological system, fall into perpetual contradiction ; contributing, by their 
own acts, both to complete the disorganisation of this system and to accele- 
rate the formation of that which must replace it. Facts of this kind offer 
themselves abundantly to the observer. 

To point out, in this place, only a few of the most remarkable, we see 
kino-s esteem it an honour to encourage the cultivation and diffusion of the 
sciences and fine arts, and to stimulate the development of industry. We 
see them creating for this purpose numerous and useful establishments, 
although the decline of the ancient system is ultimately referable to the 
progress of the sciences, fine arts, and industry. 

Thus again kings, by entering into the treaty of the Holy Alliance, 
degraded as much as in them lay the principal basis of the ancient system, 
the theological power, since they established a supreme European council 
in which that power had not even a consultative voice. 

Finally the way in which opinions are now divided as to the struggle 
undertaken by the Greeks offers a still clearer example of this self-contra- 
dictory spirit. On this oecasion,i we see the men who aim at restoring 
1 In order to appreciate the entire significance of this fact we must remember 
that the Pope himself adopted the above view by expressly refusing the young 
Roman nobles permission to go to the assistance of tlie Greeks. 
YOL. IT. MM 

530 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

their former influence to theological ideas involuntarily manifesting the 
decline of these ideas, since they do not fear to utter -wishes in favour of 
Mahometanism which would have drawn down upon them the accusation 
of sacrilege during the ascendency of the ancient system. 

By pursuing the line of observation just indicated everyone can without 
difficulty add fresh instances, that occur continually. Kings, so tn speak, 
do no act and take no step tending to re-estahlish the ancient system which 
is not immediately followed by an act directed in the contrary way; the 
same decree often containing both one and the other. 

Such inconsistency in fundamentals is well fitted to place in the clearest 

light the absurdity of a plan which is not understood, even by those who 

endeavour to realise it with the greatest earnestness. It shows clearly how 

complete and irrevocable is the ruin of the ancient system. It is useless to 

Erro s of enter here into greater details. 

the People. The manner in which the People have hitherto understood the reorgani- 

sation of society, is no less erroneous than that adopted by kings, though 
in a different way. Their error however is more excusable since it lies in 
a misconception of the new system towards which the progress of civilisa- 
tion transports them, though its nature has not, as yet, been clearly deter- 
mined ; while kings pursue an enterprise the entire absurdity of which is 
plainly demonstrable, even by a superficial study of the past. In a word 
Kings are at variance with facts, the People with principles, the last being 
always more difficult to grasp. But it is much more important to eradicate 
the misconception of the people than that of kings, because the former 
constitutes an essential obstacle to the progress of civilisation, and alone 
gives some show of reason to the latter. 

The characteristic view which predominates in the popular mind as to 
the mode of reorganising society indicates a profound ignorance of the 
fundamental conditions necessary to give consistency to any social system. 

It essentially consists in attributing an organic character to the negative 
principles which served to destroy the feudal and theological system : in 
other words, it mistakes mere modifications of the old system for the system 
which has to be established. 

If we attentively examine the doctrines now accredited among the 
people as exhibited in the speeches of their ablest adherents and as ex- 
pounded in the most systematic writings; considered in themselves and in 
their successive growth, we shall find that they are conceived in a purely 
critical spirit, incapable of affording any basis for reorganisation. 

The government which in a regular state of affairs stands at the head of 
society as the guide and agent of general activity is, by these doctrines, 
systematically despoiled of every active influence. Deprived of any impor- 
tant participation in the organic life of the body politic, it is reduced to an 
office of mere negation. It is even thought that the entire action of the 
body politic upon its members ought to be strictly limited to the mainte- 
nance of public tranquillity. But in no active society has this ever been 
other than a subordinate object, the importance of which has even been 
sinpularly diminished ' by the development of civilisation since this has 
made it easy to maintain order. 

Government is, thus, no longer regarded as the head of society destined 
to bind together the component units and to direct their activity to a 
common end. It is represented as a natural enemy encamped in the midst 
of our social system against which society needs to fortify itself by the 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 531 

guarantees already obtained -while maintaininp; a permanent attitude of 
mistrust and defensive hostility ready to break forth at the first symptom 
of attack. 

Passing from the ensemhle to details, the same spirit is still more Liberty of 
apparent. It suffices here to prove this in reference to the principal points and sot™" 
atfecting spiritual and temporal relations. reignty oi 

Under spiritual aspects the principle pervading the popular aim is the *'^^ ^^-v^^- 
dogma of unlimited Liberty of Conscience. Considered iu the sense which 
It originally had, that is to say, in reference to a negative destination, this 
dogma is nothing but the extension of a great general fact, the decline of 
theological beliefs. 

Itself the result of such decline, this doctrine has, by a necessary reaction, 
powerfully contributed to accelerate and propagate it; but by the nature of 
things its influence stopped there. Kegarded simply as a means of combat- 
ing the theological system the dogma in question favours the progress of the 
human mind. But it ceases to do so and loses all its value when conceived 
as a basis for the great social reorganisation reserved for our epoch. It then 
becomes just as injurious as before it was useful, since it constitutes an 
obstacle to reorganisation. 

Proclaiming the sovereignty of each individual reason, this doctrine in 
fact essentially tends to hinder the uniform establishment of any system of 
general ideas, without which nevertheless society cannot exist. For let the 
mass of men become as highly instructed as is possible, it is evident that 
the greater part of the general conceptions currently received can only be 
accepted by them on trust and not as the result of demonstration. Thus 
such a dogma is, by its very nature, only applicable to ideas destined to 
vanish and therefore regarded with indifference ; and in point of fact it has 
only been applied to such at the moment of their decline and in order to 
hasten their fall. 

To apply this doctrine to the new as well as to the old system, still 
more to see in it an organic principle, is to fall into the strangest contra- 
diction. If such an error could last, the reorganisation of society would be 
for ever impossible. 

In astronomy, physics, chemistry and physiology there is no such thing 
as liberty of conscience ; that is to say everyone would deem it absurd not 
to place confidence in the principles established for these sciences by com- 
petent thinkers. If the case is different in politics, this arises from the 
circumstance that, the old principles having been abandoned while the new 
are yet unformed, established principles during this interregnum do not in a 
iust sense exist. But to convert this transitory fact into an absolute and 
eternal dogma and treat it as a fundamental principle, evidently amounts 
to a proclamation that society should always continue deprived of any 
general doctrinal basis. It must be admitted that such a notion justly 
deserves the charge of anarchy brought against it by the ablest defenders of 
the theological system. 

Under the temporal aspect the dogma of the Sovereignty of the People 
corresponds to the dogma just considered of which it is only the political 
application. It was created as a means of combating the principle of .Divine 
Eight, itself the general political basis of the ancient system, shortly after 
the doo-ma of liberty of conscience had been formed to destroy the theo- 
logicaHdeas on which this principle was founded. 

What has been said for one applies therefore to the other. The anti- 

M M 2 

532 SYSTEM OP POSITIVE POLITY. 

feudal, like the anti-theological dogma, having effected its negative aim, has 
reached the natural term of its career. The former can no more furnish the 
political basis of the social reorganisation than the latter its moral basis. 
Both, being devised for purposes of destruction, are equally unfitted for 
construction. 

One of these doctrines, far from furnishing an organic principle, merely 
substitutes individual for papal infallibility ; the other only replaces the arbi- 
trary power of Icings by that of the people, or rather of individuals. The 
' sovereignty of the people ' tends to dismember the body politic by placing 
power in the least capable hands ; while the ' right of private judgment ' 
tends to the complete isolation of thinkers by investing the least enlightened 
men with an absolute right of control over the system of ideas conceived by 
superior intellects for the guidance of society. 

The criticism just developed as to the two fundamental doctrines can be 
easily applied to all the more special notions which constitute the popular 
philosophy. The result will always be the same. It will be seen that all 
of these, like the two principal ones, are merely the formal expression of 
corresponding historical facts relative to the decline of the feudal and theo- 
logical system. It will also be seen that all alike have a simply negative 
destination, which constitutes their only value, and renders them wholly 
unfitted for reorganising society. 

Thus a careful examination of the popular doctrine confirms the antici- 
pations of a philosophic coup cCmil, showing that weapons of war cannot be 
metamorphosed into instruments of construction. This doctrine, purely 
neo-ative, both as a whole and in detail, was most serviceable in seconding 
the natural course of civilisation as long as the main operation was the 
struggle with the ancient system. But when regarded as capable of pre- 
siding over social reorganisation, it is completely inadequate. It forces 
society into a condition of chronic anarchy both in temporal and spiritual 
relations. 

Doubtless it was natural to human weakness that the people should 
begin by attributing an organic character to negative principles, rendered 
familiar to them by continual applications. But it is not the less true that 
the prolongation of such an error constitutes the principal obstacle to the 
reorganisation of society. 

Next, comparing the two distinct modes, — hitherto considered sepa- 
rately— in which the People and Kings conceive this reorganisation, it will 
be seen that each of them, owing to its peculiar vices, is equally powerless 
to launch society on an organic course, and so to secure the future against 
the return of the convulsions that have continually accompanied the great 
crisis which characterises the present epoch. Both are alike anarchical, the 
one by its own nature, the other by its necessary consequences. 

In this respect the only difference between them is that, in the opinion 
of kings the government purposely places itself in direct and continuous 
opposition to society ; while according to the popular view society takes up 
a permanent attitude of hostility to government. 

These two opposed and equally vicious conceptions, by their very nature 
tend reciprocally to strengthen each other and in consequence to maintain 
indefinitely the source of revolutions. 

On one hand the attempts of kings to reconstruct the feudal and theo- 
logical system necessarily provoke on the part of the people an explosion of 
the negative doctrines in all their dangerous energy. It is even apparent 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 533 

that in the ahsence of such attempts these doctrines -trould have already 
lost their main vigour, as no longer possessing any ohject. Now that 
kings have solemnly adhered to their fundamental principle (the dogma of 
liberty of conscience) with its consequences, the irrevocable decline of the 
ancient system is clearly established. But the efforts to resuscitate the 
divine right of kings revive the sovereigntv of the people and give it new 
life. 

On the other hand, owing to the fact that the modifications introduced 
into the ancient system already permit efforts directed towards forming 
the new system, the preponderance which the people still accord to negative 
principles naturally impels kings to re-establish the ancient system as the 
only means of averting a crisis which, under its present aspect, appears to 
lead to nothing but the dissolution of society. And, in truth, such a pro- 
longation of negative philosophy when a social reconstruction is needed 
alone imparts plausibility to the views of kings. For admitting that their 
view, owing to the utter impossibility of realising it, is not really more 
organic than that of the people, in theory at least it is so ; and since some 
system must exist, this circumstance places the kingly conception in some, 
though a very imperfect, relation with the wants of society. 

Let us add to this faithful picture of our social situation the influence 
of the various factions whose projects are so eminently facilitated by such 
a state of things. If we study their efforts to prevent light being thrown 
upon the social problem and to hinder a better understanding and re- 
cognition of their mutual errors on the part of kings and people we shall 
form a just estimate of the melancholy situation in which society is now 
placed. 

The preceding considerations demonstrate that the way of final escape a Construo- 
from this deplorably vicious circle, this inexhaustible source of revolutions, ''7^ ^h'fh 
lies neither in the doctrine of kings nor in that of the people. The forma- necessary 
tion and general adoption by both people and kings of Organic Conceptions 4°^.°^^°'" 
can alone suflnce to withdraw the latter from their retrograde, the former 
from their negative direction. 

Such a doctrine can alone terminate the crisis by forcing society into 
the track of the new system, which the growth of civilisation has prepared 
and now offers as a substitute for the feudo-theological system. 

Bv the unanimous adoption of this doctrine satisfaction will be afforded 
to all that is reasonable in the existing opinions both of the people and of 
kings, their discordant and vicious elements being discarded. The just 
apprehensions of kings as to the subversion of society being dissipated, no 
legitimate motive can any longer urge them to oppose the growth of the 
human intellect. While the people, turning all their aspirations to the 
formation of the new system, will no longer feel irritated against the 
feudo-theological system, but will await its peaceable extinction in the 
natural course of events. 

Havino- thus established the necessity for adopting a new and truly 
organic doctrine, we shall next examine its opportunity. It will suiBciently 
appear from the following considerations that the moment for commencing 
this great operation has at last arrived. 

A careful study of the actual state of the most advanced notions forces 
upon the mind a singular and almost self-contradictory observation. Al- 
though no other political ideas subsist but such as are founded either on 
the retrograde or the negative doctrine, neither of these possesses a real 

534 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

preponderance, and neither exerts an action sufficiently powerful to direct 
society. Tlieae two doctrines which, as above shown, theoretically lend 
force to each other, are notwithstanding employed only to impose reciprocal 
limits or rather to annul one another in the general conduct of affairs. 

The great political movement produced during the last thirty years by 
the spread of negative ideas has destroyed their chief influence. On one 
hand by giving the finishing blow to the ancient system it has terminated 
their natural existence, and has almost completely taken away the ground 
which enlisted popular sympathies on their side. On the other hand the 
application of the modern ideas to the reorganisation of society has com- 
pletely manifested their anarchical character. Since this decisive experi- 
ment negative aspirations have inspired no real passion among the people. 
Consequently, notwithstanding any appearances to the contrary, retro- 
grade passions can no longer exist among kings, since they have distinctly 
recognised the decline of the feudo-theological system and the necessity 
for abandoning it. 

In neither direction is any real action exerted within the sphere of 
government or of society. Kings and people in practice employ the retro- 
grade or negative doctrine in an essentially passive way, that is to say as a 
weapon of defence. Nay more, each side uses the two doctrines by turns 
and almost to the same extent, with however one natural dilterence. 
Kegarded as an instrument of reasoning, the negative doctrine attracts the 
people because they feel more completely the necessity for abandoning the 
ancient system, while kings adhere to the retrograde doctrine, since they 
experience more deeply the need of social order. 

It is easy to verify and elucidate this remark by observing the existence 
of and the credit enjoyed by a Mongrel Doctrine which is nothing but a 
mixture- of retrograde and negative ideas. This phase of opinion, though 
possessing no influence at the outset of the crisis, has now become pre- 
dominant both among rulers and the ruled. Both of the active parties 
unequivocally recognise its ascendency since they equally adopt its 
language. 

The prevalence of such an opinion clearly establishes two facts most 
essential for the correct understanding of the present epoch. In the 
first place it proves that the insufficiency of the negative doctrine for the 
great actual wants of society is felt as profoundly and universally as the 
incompatibility of the feudo-theological system with the present state of 
civilisation. In the second place it furnishes a guarantee against the 
ascendency either of the negative or of the retrograde view. For when- 
ever one of them seems about to acquire a preponderance, the disposition 
of men's minds immediately inclines to the other, and so remains imtii 
this, encouraged by seeming approval, has become sufficiently active to 
cause similar alarms and in consequence experiences a similar revulsion of 
feeling.^ These succeeding oscillations produce themselves sometimes in 

' The merits of this intermediate, or rather self-contradictory doctrine precisely 
consists dn its supplying an organ for the above attitude. Besides it is evidently 
devoid of constructive power, since it has no special character and is compounded 
of opposing views which mutually destroy each other. As experience has already 
clearly shown, its ascendency can have uo other result than that of causing 
society to oscillate between negative and retrograde tendencies. In the existing 
political situation, and while awaiting the establishment of a truly organic 
doctrine, this undecided course is certainly indispensable, as a means of preventmg 

GENERAL APPElsDIX— THIRD PART. 535 

one direction, sometimes in. another according as the natural course of 
events specially reveals either the ahsurdity of the ancient system or the 
danger of anarchy. Such at this moment is the working system of practical 
politics, and such it vpill remain until men's attention is directed towards 
the mode of reorganising society ; and a public opinion has been created 
capable of fulfilling the two grand conditions demanded by our epoch, but 
hitherto regarded as contradictory, namely the abandonment of the ancient 
system, and the establishment of a regular and stable order of society. 

This reciprocal annulling of the two opposed doctrines, observable even 
in opinions, is especially evident in active life. In truth when the im- 
portant events of the last ten years are examined with reference both to 
the negative and retrograde tendencies, we shall discover that they have 
never cpntribiited to the effective progress of the corresponding system 
and that their result has only been to hinder the preponderance of the 
opposing system. 

To resume then ; not only are the popular and monarchical doctrines 
eq^ually incapable of satisfying that fundamental need of reorganisation 
which characterises the present epoch — whence results the necessity for 
a new general doctrine — but the triumph of either in our day is alike 
impossible. Neither in truth can exercise any decided influence; and 
hence we may infer that men's minds are sufficiently prepared to receive 
the organic doctrine. 

The destination of society now come to maturity is neither to inhabit 
for ever the old and miserable hut which its infancy erected, as kings 
suppose ; nor to live eternally without shelter after having left it, as the 
people imagined. Its destiny is rather this, that, aided by acquired ex- 
perience, it should with all the accumulated materials construct an edifice 
fitted for its needs and enjoyments. Such is the great and noble enterprise 
reserved for the present generation. 

GENERAL VIEW. 

The defects in the modes of conceiving the Organisation of Society 
by the People and by Kings having been shown, we are forced to conclude 
that both have pursued wrong methods in framing the plan of reorganisa- 
tion. Such a state of things admits of but one explanation ; but it is 
important to establish this assertion directly and accurately. 

the violent disorders to vfhich the preponderance of either the retrograde or nega- 
tive Bartv would expose society. In this sense aU rational men should be eager 
to forward it But while such a policy renders the revolutionary epoch less 
stormv, it incontestably tends to prolong its duration For a vjew which elevates 
a self-iontradiction to the rank of a system, and induces men carefully to avoid 
thP total extinction of the two extreme doctrines m order that one may always be 
opposed to the other, of necessity prevents the social body from ever attaining a 
stable condition. In a word in our day this pohcy is reasonable and useful if 
maintained as simply provisional, but becomes absurd and dangerous when re- 

^'"''suljrarette reasons why, in my examination of the existing opinions on social 
reorganisation, I have not mentioned the above point of view. 

536 

SYSTEM OP POSITIVE POLITY. 

Constitu- 
tions do not 
silpply 
Social Reor- 
ganisation. 

The inadequacy of the monarchical view and of that of the people 
proves the necessity for a new and truly organic doctrine, alone capable of 
ending the terrible crisis which agitates society. So likewise by examining 
the methods which, on either hand, have led to these imperfect results we 
shall discover the proper mode of shaping and establishing the new doctrine, 
and the social forces destined to direct this great work. 

The general defect of the method pursued, alike by the people and by 
kings, in framing the Plan of Reorganisation lies in the very erroneous con- 
ceptions formed respecting the nature of such a work. Hence it followed 
that they confided this important mission to men who were necessarily 
unqualified for it. This is the primary cause of the fundamental aberrations 
pointed out in the preceding chapter. 

Although this cause has operated as much with kings as with the 
people ; it is useless to consider it specially in reference to the former. 
For kings not having invented anything and having confined their efibrts 
to reproducing the ancient doctrine to meet the wants of the new social 
order, their incompetence to conceive a true reorganisation has, by this fact 
alone, been sufiiciently established. On the other hand for tbe same reason 
their course, though in principle as absurd as that of the people, bas natu- 
rally been more methodical, since it was furnished to their hand in detail. 
The people alone having produced a sort of new doctrine our examination 
should be mainly directed to their mode of proceeding in order to discover 
the source of its defects. It will be easy, afterwards, to apply to kings, with 
suitable modifications, the general remarks made in reference to the people. 

The multitude of the so-called Constitutions produced by the people 
since the beginning of the crisis, and the excessive minuteness of their 
dispositions, manifested more or less in all, would alone suffice to convince 
every capable intellect how entirely the nature and difficulty of forming 
a plan for social reorganisation have been hitherto misunderstood. When 
society shall have been reorganised our descendants will be amazed, by the 
production, within a period of thirty years, of the constitutions, each in 
succession proclaimed eternal and irrevocable, several of whicb contain 
more than two hundred very circumstantial articles without reckoning the 
organic laws thereto annexed. Such verbiage would disgrace the human 
mind in politics, were it anything but a mere phase and an unavoidable 
transition towards the true and final doctrine. 

But society does not and cannot progress in this way. The pretension 
of constructing off'hand in a few months or even years a social system, in its 
complete and definitive shape, is an extravagant chimera absolutely incom- 
patible with the weakness of the human intellect. 

Let us observe the mode which our intellect adopts in analogous but 
far simpler cases. When a science is reconstituted on a new theoretical 
basis, sufficiently prepared, in the first instance the general principle is 
announced, discussed, and verified : subsequently by a long series of efforts 
all the parts of the science are worked out and their coordination established, 
which, at the outset, no one, not even its founder, could have conceived. 
Thus, for example, after Newton had discovered the law of universal 
gravitation a century of arduous labours and the cooperation of all European 
geometers was needed to confer on physical astronomy a constitution in 
harmony with the law. So likewise in the arts. To cite but a single 
example, when the elastic force of steam was conceived as a new moving 
power applicable to machinery, nearly a century was needed for developing 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— THIED PAE,T. 

537 

the series of manufacturing improvements wliich directly resulted from 
this discovery. If such evidently be the necessary and invariable course 
of the human mind in revolutions which, despite of their importance and 
difficulty, are only special, how absurd must appear the presumptuous 
course hitherto followed in reference to the most general, momentous and 
difficult of all revolutions — that which aims at completely recasting the 
social system. 

H we pass from these comparisons, which, though indirect, are decisive, 
to direct comparisons, we shall always arrive at the same result. Let us 
examine the rise of the Catholico-Feudal system, a revolution of precisely 
the same nature as that of our own time. Far from this system having 
been constituted offhand, it did not assume its true and definitive shape 
until the eleventh century, that is to say more than five centuries posterior 
to the general triumph of Christian doctrines throughout Western Europe, 
and the definitive settlement of the Northern populations in the empire of 
the "West. No man, whatever might be his genius could, in the fifth 
century have foreshadowed, with any degree of precision, the plan of this 
constitution, although the fundamental principle, whence it necessarily 
flowed, was then solidly established, both under temporal and spiritual 
aspects. Doubtless, owing to the progress of knowledge and the character 
of the social system — in itself more simple and natural — which has to be 
established in our day, its complete organisation should be much more 
rapidly effected. But the progress of society, depending as this does on 
the permanent nature of mankind, must be at all times essentially the 
same ; the differences consisting simply in greater or less rapidity. Hence 
the above great experiment proves the absurdity of attempting to improvise 
a complete plan for reorganising society down to its smallest details. 

Confirmation of this conclusion, if needed, would be furnished by 
observing the growth of the Negative Doctrine among the people. It is, 
manifestly, nothing but the general development and complete application 
of the individual Kight of Private Judgment asserted, in principle, by 
Protestantism. Now two centuries almost were needed before all the 
main consequences of this doctrine were deduced, and its theory formed. 
No doubt the resistance of the feudo-theological system has greatly 
influenced, the slowness of its advance. Evidently, this could not have 
been the only cause ; the slow progress was due to the very nature of the 
work. Now what is true of a negative doctrine should a fortiori be true 
of one truly organic. 

We must therefore conclude from this first class of considerations that, 
down to the present time, the People have not comprehended the great 
work of Social Reorganisation. 

Endeavouring then to ascertain in what precise way the nature of this 
work has been misconceived, we find that the error consists in regarding 
an enterprise which is essentially theoretical, as purely practical. 

The formation of any plan for social organisation necessarily embraces Theory and 
two series of works as distinct in their objects as in the intellectual efforts ^^^^^ 
they demand. One, Theoretical or spiritual, aims at developing the leading separated 
conception of the plan— that is to say the new principle destined to co- 
ordinate social relations— and at forming the system of general ideas, fitted 
to guide society. The other, Practical or temporal, decides upon the 
distribution of authority and the combination of administrative institutions 
best adapted to the spirit of the system abeady determined by the theo- 

538 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

relical labours. Since the second series reposes on the fir.st, of which it 
is only the result and realisation, the general enterprise must of necessity 
begin by the former. It constitutes its soul and, although merely pre- 
liminary, forma its most important and difficult portion. 

In consequence of their having overlooked this fundamental distinction 
or, in other words, of having exclusively fixed their attention on the 
practical side, the People have naturally been led to conceive Social 
Reorganisation in accordance with the defective doctrine which we have 
examined in the previous chapter. All their errors flow from this profound 
original aberration ; and their derivation from it is easily shown. 

In the first place owing to this infraction of the natural law of the 
human mind the people, while imagining that they were constructing a 
new social system, really continued in the track of the ancient one. This 
was unavoidable, since the aim and spirit of the new one were left un- 
determined. So it must ever be until this indispensable condition has 
become fulfilled. 

Every social system, whether constructed for a handful of men or for 
several millions, aims definitively at directing all special forces towards a 
general result ; for the exercise of a general and combined activity is the 
essence of society. On every other hypothesis there is merely an agglo- 
meration of a certain number of persons upon the same soil. This it 
is which distinguishes human society from that of other gregarious 
animals. 

Hence it follows that the clear and precise ascertainment of the active 
aim constitutes the first and most important condition of a true social order, 
since this fixes the true meaning of the system. 

On the other hand a society, however numerous it may be, can, just as 
an individual, propose to itself only one of two possible active aims. These 
are a violent action upon the rest of the human race, that is to say 
conquest ; and an action upon nature modifying it for the advantage of man, 
or production. Every society which is not definitely organised for one or 
other of these aims, must be mongrel and devoid of character. The military 
aim characterised the ancient, while the industrial aim characterises the 
modern system. 

The first step needed for social reorganisation was therefore to proclaim 
this new aim. Since this was not done, we have not abandoned the ancient 
system even when seeming to diverge from it most widely. Now, this 
strange deficiency in our so-called constitutions has, clearly, sprung from 
the desire to organise a system in detail, before the ensemble had been con- 
ceived. In other words it was the consequence of having directed attention 
exclusively to the practical side of the reorganisation without having first 
decided on the theoretical part or even thought of constituting it. 

As a necessary consequence of this primitive error, mere modifications 
of the ancient system have been mistaken for a complete transformation. 
Its substance has remained essentially unchanged ; all the alterations made 
bearing on the form alone. The only aim has been a redistribution of the 
ancient powers and an opposition between difl'erent branches. Discussions 
bearing upon this object have been and still are regarded as the sublime in 
politics, though in truth they constitute only a very subordinate detail. The 
direction of society and the nature of social powers have been conceived as 
being always the same. 

Moreover it is essential to point out that these mere discussions on the 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— THIRD PAET. 539 

distribution of powers, have, by a further consequenoe of the original error, 
been as superficial as possible. For no account has been taken of that 
capital division into Spiritual and Temporal powers, which was the chief 
improvement introduced by the ancient system into general politics. 
Attention having been wholly directed to "the practical side of social 
reorganisation, men have naturally adopted the absurd notion of a consti- 
tution devoid of a spiritual power, which, if it could last, would in truth be 
a retrograde step leading to barbarism. The temporal aspect has been alone 
considered.^ Nothing has been regarded but its distribution into legislative 
and executive powers, and this evidently forms a subdivision only. 

In order to guide their intelligence through the modified phases of the 
feudo-theological system the people were necessarily obliged to assume as 
organic those negative principles which helped them to struggle against the 
ancient system from the time when its decline became evident and which 
therefore were destined to modify it, We must not omit to observe that, 
while overlooking the separation of theory from practice as a part of the 
general scheme of reorganisation, the people have involuntarily verified the 
necessity for this law, as resulting from the very nature of things, by 
themselves conforming to it in their efforts to modify the ancient system. 

Such is the strict concatenation of consequences, resulting from the 
fundamental error of treating as simply a matter of practice that labour of 
social reorganisation which is in its essence theoretical. In this way the 
people have gTadually come to regard as a truly regenerated social system, 
as the final outcome of a perfected civilisation, that which is only the 
ancient system deprived of all that gave it vigour and reduced to the 
miserable state of an emaciated skeleton. Such is the true origin of the 
fundamental errors pointed out in the preceding chapter. 

Since the want of a true reorganisation always makes itself apparent and 
must do so until it has been satisfied, the spirit of the people is agitated and 
exhausts itself in seeking new combinations. But, being inflexibly confined 
within the narrow circle where their erroneous course originally placed 
them, and from which civilisation vainly urges their departure, the people 
imagine they can reach the goal of their efforts through I'resh modifications 
of the ancient system, and more complete applications of the negative 
doctrine. Thus from change to change, that is to say by destroying more 
and more entirely the feudo-theological system, but without replacing it, the 
people rapidly advance towards complete anarchy which is the only natural 
issue of such a course. 

This conclusion evidently proves the urgent and unavoidable necessity -pi^^ „( g,,. 
for adopting in the great work of Social Reorganisation the plan so clearly cmi Reorga- 
pointed out by the nature of the human intellect. It constitutes the only 
means of escaping from the disastrous consequences with which the people 
are threatened in consequence of having pursued a different course. 

This proposition being of fundamental importance for determining the 
true direction of the great political operations needed in our time, it cannot 
be rendered too clear. It is therefore useful briefly to repeat the direct 
philosophical considerations on which it is based, although it may be 
regarded as sufficiently established by the foregoing investigation of the 
erroneous course hitherto pursued by the people. 

It does little honour to the human intellect to be obliged to prove that 
a separation universally recognised as indispensable in the cases of least 
complexity is indispensable as regards the most general and difficult of 

540 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

undertakings. We admit as an elementary truth that the direction of any 
manufacture, the making of a road or bridge, the navigation of a vessel, &c., 
must he guided by antecedent theoretical knowledge. Yet it is supposed 
that the reorganisation of society can be confided to merely practical men. 

Each entire human operation, from the simplest to the most compli- 
cated, whether executed by an individual or by a multitude, is unavoidably 
composed of two portions ; in other words gives rise to two kinds of con- 
siderations ; one theoretical another practical, one concerning the conception 
another the execution. The former of necessity precedes the latter which 
it is destined to guide. In other words all action presupposes antecedent 
speculation. Even in operations seemingly of the most routine character 
this analytic process is observable ; the difference being only in the correct 
or erroneous conception of the theory. The man who pretends, whatsoever 
the subject may be, to emancipate himself from theories, as is well known, 
merely refuses to admit the theoretical advances effected by his contempo- 
raries, and upholds antiquated theories long since superseded. Thus for 
example those who affect to disbelieve in medicine generally abandon them- 
selves with stupid eagerness to the greatest charlatanism. 

In the earliest infancy of the human mind theoretical and practical 
labours are executed by the same person for all operations ; yet this cir- 
cumstance while rendering the distinction less evident does not affect its 
reality. Soon however these two classes of operations begin to disengage 
themselves, as demanding different, and in some respects contrasted, capa- 
cities and culture. As the collective and individual intelligence of the 
human race developes itself, this separation becomes more and more pro- 
nounced and general, and constitutes the source of new advances. The 
degree of a nation's civilisation, philosophically considered, may be really 
measured by the extent to which theory and practice have been separated 
and harmonised. For the grand instrument of civilisation consists in the 
Division of Labour and the Combination of Efforts. 

By the definitive establishment of Christianity the separation of theory 
and practice was systematically and completely effected in relation to the 
general action of society, as it had already been in relation to all special 
operations. It was vivified and consolidated by the creation of a spiritual 
power, distinct and independent of the temporal power, and which maintained 
towards the latter the natural attitude of a theoretical towards a practical 
authority, modified of course by the special character of the ancient system. 
This great and beautiful conception was the principal cause of the admirable 
vigour and consistency which distinguished the Feudo-Oatholio system 
during its flourishing period. The inevitable decline of this system has for 
the moment obscured this important distinction. The superficial and nega- 
tive philosophy of the last century misconceived its importance. But it is 
evident that the distinction should be carefully preserved, as well as all the 
other acquisitions which the human intellect effected under the influence of 
the ancient system and which cannot perish with it. It should occupy the 
first rank, and govern the spiritual and temporal powers of another sort in 
the system which must be established in our day. Doubtless society ought 
not to be organised with less completeness in the nineteenth century than it 
was in the eleventh.' 

Now if the necessity for the separation of theory and practice demands 

' Tliis great question of the Separation of the Spiritual and Temporal Powers 
will form hereafter the subject of a special essay. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIED PART. 541 

recognition as regards political operations of daily and ordinary occurrence, 
how much more must this division, based as it chiefly is on the wealoiess 
of the human intellect, he called for in so vast an operation as that of the 
total reorganisation of society. It constitutes, in fact, the first condition 
for treating this great question in a way adequate to its importance. 

The indications of philosophical observation are confirmed by direct 
experience. No important innovation has ever been effected in the order of 
society, until the practical efforts which were its immediate object, had 
been prepared by adequate conceptions, fitted to guide and support the 
former. History furnishes two decisive confirmations of this truth. 

The first of these relates to the formation of the theologico-feudal 
system, an event which should be to us a source of inexhaustible informa- 
tion. The ensemble of the institutions which in the eleventh century con- 
stituted this system had manifestly been prepared by theoretical labours 
which date from the elaboration of Christianity by the School of Alexandria. 
The establishment of the Papacy, as the supreme European authority, 
was the necessary consequence of this antecedent development of Christian 
doctrine. The general institution of Feudalism, based on reciprocal duties 
of obedience and protection between the weak and the strong was, in like 
manner, only the application of this doctrine to the regulation of social 
relations incident to the then state of civilisation. Who can fail to see 
that neither of these institutions could have been founded without the 
preceding development of the Christian theory. 

The second confirmation, still more obvious, since it almost falls under 
our own eyes, is furnished by the progress of the modifications which thn 
people have introduced into the ancient system since the commencement of 
the existing crisis. It is manifest that they have been entirely based upon 
the development and systematic arrangements which the philosophy of 
the eighteenth century imparted to negative principles. These labours, 
although being negative they were of subordinate importance, had so 
decidedly a theoretical character and were so distinct from the subsequent 
practical labours, that not one of the men who contributed thereto, formed 
any clear or enlarged idea of the modifications which they might produce 
in the following generation. This reflection ought to have struck any 
person who has attentively compared their works with the succeeding 
changes. Yet, if in the writings and discourses of even the ablest men who 
laboured in framing our pretended constitutions, the ideas directly borrowed 
from the philosophies of the eighteenth century were suppressed, the 
residue would amount to very little. 

The question now before us, if considered from the historical point of 
view, may be easily decided by the following considerations which we 
merely indicate, intending to develop them hereafter. 

In our day society is disorganised under both spiritual and temporal 
aspects. Spiritual anarchy has preceded and engendered temporal anarchy. 
In the present epoch the social malady depends much more on the first than 
on the second cause. On the other hand an attentive study of the pro- 
gress of civilisation proves that the spiritual is now more completely 
prepared than the temporal reorganisation of society. Thus our first efforts 
to terminate the revolutionary epoch should aim at reorganising the 
spiritual power ; yet hitherto attention has only been fixed upon the reno- 
vation of the temporal power. 

The preceding considerations manifestly enforce the necessity of separa- 

542 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

ting the theoretical and practical operations required for our social reorgani- 
sation in the present day ; in other words of conceiving and executing the 
operations which concern the spirit of the new social order and the corre- 
sponding system of general ideas in contradistinction to those which affect 
social relations and administrative results. Nothing essential and durable 
can be effected in practice until the theory is elaborated, or at least far 
advanced. To proceed differently would be like building without a founda- 
tion; putting form before the substance; in a word pei-petuating the 
fundamental error committed by the people. This, as we have just seen, is 
the prime source of their aberrations, the obstacle above all to be overcome 
with a view to the reorganisation of society on a plan fitted to the existing 
state of knowledge. 
Soientiflo Having established the nature of the preliminary labours which must 

Industrial be executed in order to place the organisation of the new social system upon 

chiefs repre- g g^jj^]^ foundation, it is easy to determine what are the Social Forces destined 
sent thfi new . , . ' ^ . . mi ■ - i t i /. 

Spiritual and to fulfil this important mission. Ihis remains to be settled before we 

OTgani'-'"' explain the scheme which has to be worked out. 

sation. Having now demonstrated that the mode of proceeding adopted by the 

people is radically wrong, it would, doubtless, be superfluous to insist much 
on the truth that the men to whom this great work was confided were 
absolutely incompetent. The people having misconceived the nature of 
the work, they could not but deceive themselves in the choice of the men 
destined to execute it. The very fitness of the men chosen for the work, 
as conceived by the people, rendered them unfit to direct it in the way that 
it ought to be conceived. The incapacity of these representatives, or rather 
their incompetence, has then been what might be expected, since no one is 
competent to fulfil two offices essentially opposite in their nature. 

The class of Lawyers has chiefly furnished the men selected to direct 
the elaboration of the so-called constitutions established by the people 
during the last thirty years. Naturally and necessarily they have been 
invested with this function, as hitherto conceived. 

In fact, since the people merely sought to modify the ancient system, 
and the negative principles destined to guide such modifications were 
fully established, the power of eloquence was the force specially needed 
for the work, and lawyers have habitually cultivated it. This sort of 
ability, though of subordinate importance, since it is merely adapted to 
secure the triumph of any given view without reference to its formation 
and grounds, is for that very reason eminently fit for propagandism. The 
principles of the negative philosophy were not elaborated by lawyers but by 
Metaphysicians, who, besides, constitute spiritually the class which corre- 
sponds to that of lawyers under temporal aspects. These principles however 
have been propagated by lawyers. They occupied, for the most part, the poli- 
tical arena during the struggle with the feudo-theological system. On them 
therefore naturally devolved the task of instituting the modifications 
needed to bring this system into harmony with the negative philosophy, 
which they alone were accustomed to apply. 

Manifestly the case is no longer the same as regards those organic 
operations the urgency of which has been demonstrated. The active 
employment of eloquence or the power of persuasion is no longer specially 
called for, but reasoning or the faculty which investigates and coordinates. 
Lawyers are generally endowed with the largest share of ability under the 
first head ; but, for that very reason, they ai-e the least capable as regards 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— THIED PART. 543 

the second. Professing to discover the method of recommending any 
opinion -whatever, the more practised they are in this sort of work the 
more^ unfit they become to coordinate a theory according to its true 
principles. 

Here then is no mere question of self-love ; the entire question resolves 
itself into the necessary and exclusive relation which subsists between 
each sort of capacity and each kind of work. Lawyers directed the forma- 
tion of the plan of reorganisation when this was conceived in a manner 
wholly erroneous. They have done their appropriate work. Invited to 
modify and criticise they did modify and criticise. It would be unjust 
to reproach them with the faults of a direction which they did not choose 
and the rectification of which does not belong to them. As long as the 
direction was useful and even indispensable, so also was their ascend- 
ency. But at the same time we should recognise the necessity for the 
disappearance of this influence when an opposite direction ought to prevail. 
No pretension can be more absurd than that of aiming at the reorganisation 
of society on a purely practical basis and without first executing the in- 
dispensable theoretical works. But a still greater absurdity would be the 
singular hope of effectuating a true reorganisation by an assembly of orators 
strangers to every positive theoretical conception and selected witliout 
regard to any definite condition of capacity by men who are, for the moat 
part, still more incompetent.' 

The nature of the works to be executed, of itself sufficiently indicates 
the class on which their execution must devolve. Since these works are 
theoretical, it is clear that those whose professed aim it is to form theo- 
retical combinations, in other words Savants occupied with the study of 
the sciences of observation, are the only men whose capacity and intellectual 
culture fulfil the necessary conditions. It would be evidently abnormal 
when the most urgent social needs call for a general work of the highest 
order of importance and difficulty, to entrust this work to any but the 
greatest intellectual forces we can command and to men who purijue a 
method of which the superiority is universally recognised. Doubtless in 
other branches of society men may be found equal and even superior in 
theoretical capacity to that of the majority of savants, for the effective 
classification of individuals is far from conforming universally to the 
natural or physiological classification. But in a work so essential we must 
consider classes and not individuals. Besides even as regards such ex- 
ceptional instances, education, that is to say, the system of intellectual 
habits which results from the study of the sciences of observation, can alone 

1 I am far from drawing the inference that the class of Lawyers ought no longer 
to follow any political career. I only wish to prove that their action should take a 
different course. 

According to the views just put forward the present condition of society re- 
quires that the supreme direction of intelligence should cease to appertain to 
lawyers ; but they are not the less called by their vocation to second, in some very 
important ways, that new general direction which others must originate. In the 
first place, possessing as they do, more than any other class, the means of persua- 
sion and the habit of placing themselves at the political point of view, they should 
powerfully concur in the propagation of the organic doctrine. In the second place 
the lawyers, and especially such among them as have profoundly studied positive law, 
exclusively possess the capacity for making regulations ; one of the great 
capacities necessary to the formation of the new social system, and one that will 
be utilised as soon as the purely spiritual portion of the general work of re- 
organisation has been terminated or even sufBoiently advanced. 

544 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

develop their natural theoretical capacity. In a word whenever society 
requires theoretical work of any given sort, it is conceded that this must 
be confided to the corresponding^ class of savants. Hence it devolves on 
the ensemble of the scientific corps to guide the general theoretical work 
the necessity for which has been demonstrated.^ 

Besides, the nature of the case forbids any mistake on this head ; since 
liberty of choice is absolutely interdicted for several reasons which point 
to the class of savants as the only one qualified to execute the theoretical 
labour of social reorganisation. 

In the system to be constituted the spiritual power will be confided 
to the hands of savants, while the temporal power will belong to the heads 
of industrial works. These two powers then should naturally proceed 
to the formation of this system ; just as they will when it is established 
undertake its daily application ; due allowance being made for the superior 
importance of the work now to be executed. This work embraces a 
spiritual portion which ought to be treated first and a temporal portion 
which will follow. Accordingly on the savants devolves the task of under- 
taking the first series of works and on the leaders of industry that of 
organising, on the bases thus established, the administrative system. Such 
is the simple course indicated by the nature of things, which teaches us 
that the very classes which form the elements of the powers of a new 
system and must one day be placed at its head, can alone create it be- 
cause they alone are capable of truly apprehending its spirit, and im- 
pelled in this direction by the combined force of their habits and their 
interests. 

Another consideration places in a still clearer light the necessity for 
confiding to the cultivators of Positive Science the theoretical labour of 
reorganising society. 

In the preceding chapter it has been remarked that the negative 
doctrine encourages in most minds, and increasingly strengthens, the habit 
of setting themselves up as the supreme judges of general political concep- 
tions. This anarchical state of intellect, when erected into a fundamental 
principle, is a manifest obstacle to the reorganisation of society. The 
intellects really competent to construct the true organic doctrine destined 

' In accordance with ordinary practice, we include under the term Savants, 
men who though not devoting their lives to the special cultivation of any of the 
sciences of observation, possess a scientific capacity and have studied the posi- 
tive sciences sufficiently to become penetrated with their spirit and familiar with 
the principal laws that regulate natural phenomena. 

Without doubt the active formation of the new social doctrine, hitherto too 
rare, is essentially reserved for this class of savants. The other savants are t4o 
much preoccupied with their special pursuits, and even stiU too much affected by 
certain erroneous intellectual habits, resulting from this speciality, to allow of their 
being really active in establishing political science. But they will nevertheless 
fulfil, though passively, a most important oflSce in this great elaboration; as 
judges of the work. The results obtained by the men who follow out the new 
philosophical direction, will have neither value nor influence until adapted by the 
special savants, as possessing the same character as their own works. 

I have thought it necessary to offer this explanation, in order to meet an 
objection which naturally presents itself to the majority of readers. It is how- 
over evident that this distinction between two sections of the scientific world, one 
actively and the other passively engaged in elaborating the organic doctrine, is 
wholly secondary and in no wise affects the essential proposition laid down in the 
text. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 545 

to end tlie existing crisis would therefore labour in vain unless from their 
antecedent position their authority was in fact recognised. Deprived of 
this condition and subjected to the capricious control of a policy of 
inspiration their work could never be uniformly adopted. Now casting 
our eye over society we shall soon perceive that this spiritual influence 
in our day lies exclusively in the hands of the savants. They alone as 
regards theory exercise an uncontested authority. Thus, apart from their 
being alone competent to form the new organic doctrine, they are ex- 
clusively invested with the moral force essential to secure its recognition. 
The obstacles to such recognition presented by the negative prejudice 
which attributes a moral sovereignty to each individual as his inborn 
right would be insurmountable by any other than that class. They possess 
the only leverage capable of overthrowing this piejudice, in the habit 
gradually contracted by society since the foundation of the positive 
sciences of submitting to the decisions of the savants as regards all special 
theoretical ideas. This habit the savants will easily extend to general 
theoretical conceptions as soon as they undertake their coordination. 

Thus the savants in our day possess, to the exclusion of all other classes, 
the two fundamental elements of spiritual government, Capacity and Autho- 
rity in matters of theory. 

Lastly, one other essential characteristic, which like the above ex- 
clusively belongs to scientific power, calls for notice. 

The existing crisis is manifestly common to the several nations of 
Western Europe although all do not participate in it to the same degree. 
Nevertheless it is treated by each of them as if it were purely national. 
Yet it is evident that a European crisis demands a European treatment. 

This isolation of the nations forms a necessary consequence of the fall 
of the feudo-theological system, followed by the dissolution of the spiritual 
bonds which this system had established among the people of Europe and 
which it has been vainly sought to replace by a state of reciprocal hostility, 
disguised under the name of a European Balance of Power. The negative 
doctrine is inadequate to restore the harmony it destroyed with the ancient 
fundamental principle ; on the contrary postpones its realisation. In the 
first place the negative philosophy, by its very nature, tends to isolation ; 
in the second place the nations cannot come to a complete understanding 
on the principles of that philosophy, because each of them endeavours to 
modify the ancient system by its instrumentality in a diiferent degree. 

The true Organic Doctrine can alone produce the harmony so impera- 
tively demanded by the condition of European civilisation. This doctrine 
should, perforce, realise it by offering to the nations of Western Europe 
the system of social organisation adapted for all, and which they will 
enjoy in its completeness, sooner or later, according to the special state of 
their intelligence. Besides, it should be observed that this harmony will 
be more perfect than that produced by the ancient system where it only sub- 
sisted under the spiritual aspect ; while in our day it should equally subsist 
vlnder the temporal aspect, so that the nations are invited to constitute, 
in a complete and permanent manner, a true and general social organisation. 
And in truth, if such an investisation were in its right place here, it would 
be easy to show that each of the nations of Western Europe is, by the 
special character of its civilisation, placed in the most favourable position 
for forwarding such or such a part of the general system, whence the 
immediate advantage of their cooperation becomes evident. But this 

TOL. IT. N N 

546 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

consideration proves that all European nations alike should work in common 
to found the new system. 

Considering the new organic doctrine under this point of view, it is 
manifest that the force destined to shape and establish it, havinp; to 
produce the combination of the different civilised nations, should be a 
European power. Now this -office forms, no less than the others already- 
enumerated, the special attribute of the scientific power. It is clear that 
scientific men alone constitute a really compact and active body, all of 
whose members throughout Europe have a mutual understanding and 
communicate easily and continuously among themselves. This springs 
from the fact that they alone, in our day, possess common ideas, a uniform 
language, a general and permanent aim. No other class possesses these 
powerful advantages, because no other fulfils the above conditions in their 
integrity. The industrial classes even, so eminently disposed to union by 
the character of their labours and habits, are still too much influenced by 
the hostile inspirations of a savage patriotism to allow of their establish- 
ing as yet a real European alliance among themselves. Such a result is 
reserved for the active labours of scientific men. 

It is doubtless superfluous to demonstrate that the existing relations 
of scientific men must acquire a far greater intensity when they direct 
their general efforts towards the formation of the new social doctrine. 
This result must follow since the force of the social tie is necessarily 
proportionate to the importance of the aim sought by association. 

In order to appreciate aright and in its entire extent the value of this 
European force which appertains to the savants, it is requisite to compare 
the conduct of rulers with that of nations in relation to this matter. 

It has been above observed that rulers while adopting a plan absurd in 
principle pursue its execution much more methodically than the people, 
because the course they follow is prescribed by the past in the greatest 
detail. Thus under the aspect which we are considering, the rulers 
throughout Europe combine their efforts while the nations remain isolated. 
By this circumstance alone the rulers obtain a relative advantage over the 
people who have no correspondiug way of combating such combination, 
which thus becomes' of extreme importance. 

The leaders of opinion among the people have no otlier resource than 
to exclaim against such a superiority of position which not the less 
subsists. They proclaim, as a general proposition, that the different States 
have no right to interfere in the social reforms of each other. Now this 
principle, which is nothing but the application of the negative philosophy 
to external relations, is, like the other doa-mas that compose it, absolutely 
false ; like them it is only the vicious generalisation of a transitory faet^ 
namely the dissolution of the relations wliich, under the ancient system 
grew up between the European nations. It is clear that the nations of 
Western Europe, by the common cliarauter and connexits- of their civilisa- 
tion, both as regards its gradual development and its actual condition, 
constitute one great community, the members of which possess reciprocal 
rights, less extended no doubt but of the same nature with those be- 
longing to the different portions of a single State. 

Moreover we see that this negative conception, even if true, does not 
promote, but rather hinders its end, since it tends to prevent the nationa 
from uniting. As one force can only be restrained by another, tlie people, 
regarded from a European point of view, will manifestly continue sub- 
ordinate to their rulers, until the scientific foi-ce, which alone possesses a 

GENEliAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 

S47 

European character, presides over the great work of social reorganisation. 
This force alone can furnish to the people the true counterpoise to the Holy 
Alliance, making due allowance for the necessary superiority of a spiritual 
over a purely temporal coalition. 

To ^ resume then ;— the necessity for confiding to Scientific Men the 
preliminary theoretical labours recognised as indispensable for reorganising 
society is solidly based upon four distinct considerations, each of which 
would have sufficed to establish it : Istly. scientific men are by the cha- 
racter of their intellectual capacity and cultivation alone competent tp. 
execute these works ; 2ndly. from the nature of the ease this office i& 
reserved for them as constituting the spiritual power of tlie system to be- 
organised ; , 3rdly. they exclusively possess the moral authority requisite- 
m our day to determine the adoption of the new organic doctrine whem 
formed; 4thly. and lastly, of all the social forces in existence that of 
scientific men is alone European. Such a combination of proofs should, 
without doubt, place the great theoretic mission of scientific men beyond 
question and controversy. 

From all that precedes it follows that the fundamental errors com- 
mitted by the People in their mode of conceiving the Reorganisation of 
Society are in the first instance referable to the mistaken course which, 
they have adopted for attaining this end ; that the error of this course-, 
consists in treating social reorganisation as a purely practical operation, 
though it is essentially theoretical; that the nature of things and the 
experience of history demonstrate the absolute necessity of dividing the. 
entire work of reorganisation into two series, one theoretic the other 
practical of which the former should be first executed and serve as basis 
to the latter ; that the preliminary execution of the theoretical works; 
demands the exertion of a new social force distinct from those which 
have hitherto occupied the scene but have become entirely inadequate 
finally that for various decisive reasons this new force should appertain 
to scientific men devoted to the sciences of observation. 

The ensemble of these views may be regarded as intended to lead Savants 
reflecting minds to that elevated point of view whence both the vices of the 
course hitherto followed for the reorganisation of society and the character 
of that which should, in our day, be adopted may be enj braced at a single 
glance. In the last resort all resolves itself into establishing, through the 
combined efibrts of European savants, a positive theory in politics distinct 
from practice, and one which shall bring our social system into harmony 
with the present state of knowledge. Pursuing this course of reflection we 
shall perceive that the above conclusions may be resumed in a single con- 
ception : scientific men oiight in uur day to elevate politics to the rank of a 
science of obsenation. 

Such is the culminating and definitive point of view at which we 
should place ourselves. From this point of view it is easy to condense 
into a series of very simple considerations the substance of all that has- 
been said in the present essay. It remains to effect this important general- 
isation which can alone supply the means of advancing further by render-- 
ing the march of thought more rapid. _ 

From the nature of the human intellect each branch of knowledge Law of the 
in its development is necessarily obliged to pass through three different '^'^'"^ ^'"■''=" 
theoretical states: the Theological or fictitious state; the Metaphysical or 
abstract state ; lastly the Scientific or positive state. 

N N 2 

must i-eiider 

Politics 

Scientific. 

548 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

In the first state supernatural ideas serve to bind the small numher of 
isolated observations which then constitute science. In other words the 
facts observed fire explained, that is to say, conceived a j>riori, by means of 
invented facts. Such is the necessary state of all knowledge in its infancy. 
With all its imperfections this forms th« .only mode of connecting facts 
possible at that epoch. It furnislies therefore, the only instrument by 
means of which we can reason on facts, thus sustaining our intellectual 
activity which above all requires a ralljing point. In a word this state is 
indispensable as -a condition of further progress. 

The second state is simply destined to serve as a means of transition 
from the first to the third. It has a mongrel nature, connecting facts by 
ideas which rare no longer entirely supernatural and have not yet become 
completely natural. In a word these ideas are personified abstractions, 
which the mind can at will regard as the mystic name for a supernatural 
cause, or the abstract statement of a mere series of phenomena, according as 
it approximates more nearly to the theological or the scientific state. This 
metaphysical -state presupposes that facts, multiplied in number, have at the 
ssvme time become more closely connected by more extended comparisons. 

The third is the definitive -state of all knowledge whatsoever ; the two 
first having 'been destined to prepare it gradually. Then facts become 
connected by general ideas or laws of a completely positive kind, suggested 
or confirmed 'by the very facts, which are themselves frequently only simple 
facts sufficiently general to be elevated to the rank of principles. We 
constantly endeavour to reduce these to the smallest possible number, yet 
without proposing any hypothesis incapable of being sooner or later verified, 
and always regarding these principles simply as a general mode of stating 
the phenomena. 

Men familiar with ithe progress of the sciences can easily verify the 
truth of this general historical resami in referenoe to the four fundamental 
sciences already rendered positive, Astronomy, Physics, Chemistry and 
Physiology, as well as their dependent sciences. Those even who have 
only considered the sciences in their present state can make this verification 
as to physiology which, although it has at last become as positive as the 
other sciences, still subsists under the three states in different classes of 
intelligence. This fact is particularly evident in reference to the phe- 
nomena specially called moral : ivi^ these are conceived by some as the 
(result of a continuous supernatural action ; by others as incomprehensible 
results of the action of an abstract entity ; and lastly by others as connected 
with organic conditions susceptible of demonstration and beyond which it is 
impossible to go. 

Considering Politics as a science and applying to it the preceding re- 
marks, we find that it has already passed through the two first states and is 
now on the point of reaching the third. 

The doctrine of Kings represents the theological state of politics. In 
the last result, this is in truth based on theological ideas. It exhibits 
social relations as resting on the supernatural idea of Divine Right. It 
explains the successive political changes of the human race by an imme- 
diate supernatural guidance, exercised continuously from the first man to 
the present day. In this way alone was political science conceived, until 
the ancient system began to decline. 

The doctrine of the People expresses the metaphysical condition of 
politics. It is wholly founded on the abstract and metaphysical hypothesis 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 549 

of a primitive Social Contract antecedent to all development of the human 
faculties by civilisation. The instruments of reasoning which it habitually 
employs are ' rights,' regarded as natural and common to all men in the 
same degree and guaranteed by this contract. Such is the primitive nega- 
tive doctrine, originally drawn from theology as a means of warfare against 
the ancient system and which has been subsequently erected into an or- 
ganic idea. Rousseau was its chief systematiser, in a work which served and 
still serves as the basis of the ordinary reflections upon, social organisation. 

Lastly the Scientific Doctrine of politics considers the social state in 
which the human race has always been found by observers as the necessary 
effect of its organisation. It conceives the scope of this social state as 
determined by the rank which man holds in the natural scale, the result 
of facts which are not themselves susceptible of explanation. It perceives 
in truth that from this fundamental relation results the constant tendency of 
man to act upon nature in order to modify it for his own advantage. It 
then considers the social order as aiming at a collective development of this 
natural tendency, so as to give the highest possible efBciency to this useful 
action. This being settled, it endeavours, by direct observations on the 
collective development of the race, to deduce from the fundamental laws of 
the human organisation the evolution it has undergone and the inter- 
mediate states to which it has been subjected before reaching its definitive 
state. Guided by this series of observations this doctrine regards the 
improvements reserved for each epoch as necessitated, without resorting to 
any hypothesis, by the stage of development which the human race has 
reached. Thus, in reference to each degree of civilisation, it views political 
combinations as merely intended to facilitate natural tendencies when these 
have been sufficiently ascertained. 

Such is the spirit of the positive doctrine which it is important to 
establish in our day, applying it to the present state of civilised man and 
considering antecedent states only so far as may be necessary in order to 
establish the fundamental laws of the science. 

It is easy to explain at once why polities could not sooner become a 
positive science and why at the present time they are destined to become 
one. 

Two fundamental conditions, distinct yet inseparable, were indispensable 
for that object. 

In the first place, it was essential that all the Special Sciences should 
have successively become positive, for the ememlle could not acquire that 
character so long as the elements were devoid of it. This condition is now 
fulfilled. 

The sciences have become positive, one after the other, in the natural ciassMca- 
order of efi'ecting this revolution. This order is that of the greater or less |S° "'j""-" 
degree of complication in their phenomena, or, in other words, of their 
more or less intimate connection with man. Thus at first astronomical 
phenomena, as the simplest, and then in succession, physics, chemistry, and 
physiology have been reduced to positive theories ; the last of these only 
quite recently. The same reform could not be accomplished for politics 
until it had been effected for the other phenomena, since political pheno- 
mena depend upon these and are the most complicated of all. But if this 
renovation could not be effected sooner, its realisation now has become an 
evident necessity. 

In the second place, it was essential that the Preparatory Social System 

550 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

during which action upon nature was only the indirect object of society 
should have reached its last stage. 

On one hand, the just theory could not arise until then, because it would 
have been too far in advance of practice. The former being destined to 
guide the latter, could not precede it too long. On the other hand it could 
not earlier have obtained a sufficient experimental basis. It was requisite 
that a social order should have been founded and accepted by a very large 
population, embracing several considerable nations, and lasting as long as 
possible, before a theory could be founded upon this vast experiment. 

The second of these conditions is now satisfied no less than the first. 
The theological system, destined to prepare the human intellect for the 
scientific system, has closed its career. This is undeniable since the meta- 
physical system, the only object of which is to subvert the theological 
system, has, generally speaking, obtained a preponderance among the 
nations. A Scientific Polity must therefore arise, for some theory being 
indispensable, we should otherwise be driven to assume the reconstitution of 
a theological polity ; the metaphysical polity being, to speak correctly, not 
a true theory but a negative doctrine suitable only for a transition. 

To resume, — no moral revolution ever existed at once more inevitable, 
more ripe, and more urgent than that required to elevate politics to the rank 
of the natural sciences, through the combined efforts of European savants. 
This revolution can alone introduce into the great crisis of our day a really 
preponderating force, capable of preserving society from the terrible explo- 
sions of anarchj' which threaten it, by putting it on the track of that 
improved social system which the state of our knowledge demands. 

In order to set in motion with the utmost possible promptitude the 
scientific forces destined to fulfil this salutary mission, it was essential to lay 
<3own the general prospectus of the theoretical works required for the re- 
■cTganisation of society, by raising politics to the lank: of the natural sciences. 
I have ventured to conceive this plan which I r>ow solemnly submit to the 
savants of Europe. 

Profoundly convinced that, whenever this discussion commences, my 
plan, be it adopted or rejected, will necessarily lead to the formation of the 
definitive plan ; I do not hesibite in the interests of society now threatened 
with long and terrible convulsions which their intervention can alone avert, 
to adjure all the European savants to express, freely and publicly, their 
well-considered judgment upon the general scheme of constructive opera- 
tions which I submit to them. 

This prospectus embraces three series of works. 

The first series aims at forming a System of Historical Observations upon 
the general progress of the human intellect destined to become the basis of 
a positive polity, thus wholly freeing it from a theological and metaphysical 
character and impressing on them a scientific character. 

The second series seeks to establish a complete system of Positive Educa- 
tion adapted to a regenerated society constituted with a view to action upon 
nature; in other words it aims at perfecting such action so far as this 
depends upon the faculties of the agent. 

Lastly, the third series embraces a general exposition of the Collective 
Action which civilised men, in the present state of their knowledge, can 
exercise over Nature so as to modify it for their own advantage, directing 
their entire forces to this end and regarding social combinations only as 
means of attaining it. 

GENERAL APPEKDIX— THIRD PART. 551 

FIKST SERIES OF WORKS. 

The fundamental condition which must be fulfilled in order to treat The creation 
politics in a positive spirit, consists in determining with precision the limits g^f^^'^jj 
withm which, by the nature of things, the combinations of social order are mands that 
contained. In other words, it is necessary in politics, as in the other °hmUd pre" 
sciences that the oiiices of observation and of imagination should be ren- ponderate 
dered perfectly distinct and the latter subordinated to the former. nltte™"'^'' 

In order to place this leading conception in a clear light, it is necessary 
to compare the general spirit of positive politics with that of theological and 
metaphysical politics. In order to simplify their comparison the two last 
must be considered under one head ; but this cannot alter the results since, 
as pointed out in the preceding chapter, the second is merely a modification 
of the first, differing from it only by having a less pronounced character. 

The theological and metaphysical states of any science possess one 
characteristic in common — the predominance of imagination over observa- 
tion. The only difference which exists between them under this point of 
view, is that in the first the imagination occupies itself with supernatural 
beings, and in the second with personified abstractions. 

The necessary and constant consequence of such a state of the human 
mind is to persuade man that he is, in all respects, the centre of the natural 
system, and consequently endowed with, an indefinite control over pheno- 
mena. This opinion, it is evident, results directly from the supremacy 
exercised by the imagination, combined with the natural tendency which 
disposes men in general to form exaggerated ideas of their importance and 
power. Such an illusion constitutes the most prominent characteristic of 
the infancy of human reason. 

Regarded from the philosophic point of view, the revolutions which have 
led the different sciences up to the positive state have produced the general 
result of inverting this primitive order of our ideas. 

The fundamental characteristic of these revolutions consisted in trans- 
ferring to observation the preponderance hitherto exercised by the imagina- 
tion. Consequently the results have been in like manner reversed. Man 
has been dethroned from his central position and reduced to the rank he 
really occupies. In the same way his activity has been confined within its 
just limits, having been reduced to the office of modifying, more or less, by 
their interaction a certain number of the phenomena which he is destined 
to observe. 

The mere statement of this historical view entitles all who have clear 
notions about the sciences which have become positive to verify it. 

Thus in Astronomy man commenced by considering the celestial phe- 
nomena, if not as subject to his influence, at least as having direct and 
intimate relations with all the details of his existence. Indisputable and 
multiplied demonstrations were needed to induce man to accept with sub- 
mission a subordinate and imperceptible position in the general system of 
the universe. So also in Chemistry he imagined himself competent to modify 
at will the intimate constitution of bodies, before he limited his efforts to 
observino- the reciprocal action of the difl'erent terrestrial substances as 
shown in their effects. In Medicine too, it was only after having long 
hoped to remedy at will the disorders of his organisation, and even to resist 

552 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

indefinitely the causes of destruction, that man finally recognised that his 
action was of no avail until it coincided with the natural working of the 
organisation, and much more when opposed to this. 

Politics have not, any more than the other sciences, escaped this law 
based upon the nature of things. The condition in which it has hitherto 
existed and still remains, presents a perfect analogy with the relation of 
astrology to astronomy, of alchemy to chemistry, and of the search alter a 
universal remedy to medical science. 

In the first place it is evident, from the preceding chapter, that thec- 
ogical and metaphysical politics considered in reference to their method, 
agree in giving a preponderance to imagination over observation. It 
cannot ' indeed be denied that observation has been employed in theo- 
retical politics, but it was so only in a subordinate manner, subject to 
the caprices of imagination, as for example in chemistry during its al- 
chemistic phase. 

This predominance of the imagination in politics necessarily led to 
consequences analogous to those above described for the other sciences. 
We can easily verify this by direct observations upon the common spirit 
of theological and metaphysical politics, regarded from a theoretical point 
of view. 

Down to the present time man has had faith in the unlimited power 
of his political combinations to perfect social order. In other words the 
human race has hitherto been regarded politically as unmoved by any 
inherent forces, and always disposed passively to receive whatever impulse 
the legislator, armed with a competent authority, wished to give. 

By a necessary consequence the absolute has always reigned and still 
reigns in Theoretic Politics, whether theological or metaphysical. The 
common end which they propose is to establish, each in its own way, 
the eternal and most perfect type of social order, without taking into 
account a given state of civilisation. Both pretended to the exclusive 
discovery of a system of institutions capable of attaining that end. The 
only thing which in this respect distinguishes them, is that the former 
formally prohibits any important modification of the plan traced by it ; 
while the latter permits critici.'m provided this moves in the given 
direction. With that diiference they are both alike by nature absolute. 

This absolute character is still more apparent in their applications 
to Practical Politics. Each of them perceives in its peculiar system of 
institutions a sort of universal panacea applicable to all political evils, 
of whatever nature these may be, and whatever may be the stage of 
civilisation actually reached by the people for whom the remedy is 
destined. In lilte manner both judge the regimes belonging to dift'erent 
nations at distinct epochs of civilisation, in reference only to their greater 
or less concordance with, or opposition to their own unvarying types of 
perfection. Thus, to quote a recent striking example, the adherents of 
theological and metaphysical polity have, each in their turn and at 
brief intervals of time, proclaimed the social organisation of Spain to he 
superior to that of the most advanced European nations, without paying 
any regard to the actual inferiority of Spanish civilisation in comparison 
with that of tlie French and English above whom the Spaniards have 
been elevated as to the political rigime. Such judgments, other examples 
of which it would be easy to cite, show clearly how entirely the spirit 
of theological and metaphysical polity disregards the actual state of 
civilisation. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 553 

To complete their characterisation it is important to remark tliat they 
both, generally speaking, though for different reasons, agree in setting 
up a very imperfect state of civilisation as the perfection of social re- 
organisation. We may even see that the most consistent adherents of 
metaphysical polity (such as its coordinator Rousseau) have been led to 
regard the social state as a degeneration from a State of Nature ; the creation 
of their owu imagination and simply the metaphysical counterpart of 
the theological conception of the fall of human nature through Original 
Sin. 

This accurate resume confirms the belief that the preponderance of 
imagination over observation, has produced in political science results 
exactly similar to those it engendered in the other sciences before they 
were rendered positive. The absolute search for the best possible govern- 
ment, taking no account of the state of civilisation, is evidently of the 
same nature as that for a panacea applicable to all maladies and all 
temperaments. 

The general spirit of theological and metaphysical polity being thus 
reduced to its simplest expression, we gather from the preceding remarks 
that it essentially resolves itself into two considerations. Ai regards 
method it consists in the preponderance of imagination over observation. 
As regards general ideas destined to guide the operations, it consists, on one 
hand, in a purely abstract consideration of social organisation, regarded 
as independent of the state of civilisation, and, on the other hand, in 
viewing the progress of civilisation as not being subject to any law. 

By reversing this process we should necessarily discover the point of 
view adapted to Positive Politics, since, as above pointed out, the same 
opposition may be observed between the conjectural and positive state 
of the other sciences. By this mental operation, we shall only extend 
to the future the analogy observed in the past ; and we are thus led to 
the following results. 

In the tirst place, in order to impress a positive character on political 
science we must introduce into this, as into all other sciences the pre- 
ponderance of observation over imagination. In the second place, that 
this fundamental condition may be fulfilled, we must on one hand, con- 
ceive Social Organisation as intimately connected with the state of 
civilisation and determined by it, on the other, consider the Progress of 
Civilisation as being subject to an invariable law based upon the nature 
of things. Politics cannot become positive, or, what comes to the same 
thing, observation cannot obtain a preponderance over imagination until 
these two last conditions shall have been fulfilled. But it is clear, in- 
versely, that if they are fulfilled, if the theory of politics is consistently 
established on this basis, the imagination will spontaneously become 
subordinated to observation and politics be rendered positive. Thus the 
final analysis reduces everything to these two conditions. 

Such then are the two fundamental ideas that should preside over 
positive efforts in theoretic politics. Having regard to their extreme 
importance it is indispensable to consider them in greater detail. It is 
not our business here to demonstrate them, for this is precisely the scope 
of the operations we have to accomplish. We only seek to state them 
with sufficient completeness, in order that competent minds may, in some 
degree, verify them by comparing them with facts generally known. Such 
a verification is sufficient to convince the mind of the practicability of 

554 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

treating politics in the same way as the sciences of observation, and our 
chief object will be attained if we create such a conviction. 

Civilisation properly so called, consists on one hand in the development 
of the human mind, on the other in the result of this, namely the increasing 
power of man over nature. In other words the component elements of 
civilisation are Science, the Fine Arts, and Industry ; this last expression 
being understood in that enlarged sense which I have always assigned 
to it. 

Regarding civilisation from this precise and elementary point of view 
it is easy to perceive that the state of the social organisation essentially 
depends on that of civilisation and should be regarded as its result; whereas 
imaginative polity considers the former as isolated from and even quite 
independent of the latter. 

The state of Civilisation necessarily determines that of the Social 
Organisation, whether spiritual or temporal, under the two most im- 
portant aspects. In the first place it determines its nature by fixing the 
aim of social action ; in the next place it prescribes its essential form bv 
creating and developing the social forces, temporal and spiritual, destined 
to guide this general action. In truth it is clear that the collective action 
of the soci.al body, being nothing else than the resultant of the individual 
action of all its constituent members directed to a common end, cannot 
be constituted otherwise than its elements, which are manifestly determined 
by the more or less advanced state of the sciences, the fine arts, and industry. 
It is still more evident that the prolonged existence of any political system 
is inconceivable, unless it confers supreme power on the predominant 
social forces, the nature of which is invariably prescribed by the state 
of civilisation. Reason points to this conclusion and experience con- 
firms it. 

All the varieties of social organisation which have hitherto existed, 
have only been modifications more or less extensive of a single system, 
the Military and Theological system. The original formation of this 
system was the evident and necessary result of the imperfect condition 
of civilisation at the epoch when it arose. When industry was in its 
infancy, society adopted War as its active aim. It did so naturally and 
reasonably, since such a condition of afl'airs both supplied the resources of war 
and enforced its practice by the most energetic stimulants that can act 
upon man, — the necessity for exercising his faculties and that of living. 
In like manner it is clear that the theological state, which then afl'ected 
all special theories, necessarily impre.ssed the like character on the general 
ideas destined to form the social bond. The third element of civilisation, — 
the Fine Arts — then predominated ; and was in truth the chief instrument 
of founding the primitive organisation. Had it not developed itself we 
cannot conceive how society could have been organised. 

If we next observe the successive modifications which this original 
system has undergone, and which metaphysicians have mistaken lor so 
many different systems, we shall find the same result. In all of them 
we shall see the unavoidable effects of the ever growing expansion of the 
Scientific and Industrial elements, at the outset so insignificant. Thus it 
came to pass that the passage from polytheism to theism, and later the 
Protestant reformation were chiefly produced by the continual, though 
slow, progress of positive knowledge ; in other words, by the action 
exerted upon older general conceptions, by special ideas which gradually 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PABT. 555 

acquired a positive character. In like manner under temporal aspects the 
transition from the Roman to the Feudal State, and, still more mani- 
festly, the decline of the latter through the enfranchisement of the Commons ■ 
and its results, are essentially referable to the increasing importance of the 
industrial element. In a word all the general facts prove the close depend- 
ence of the so?ial organisation upon the state of civilisation. 

The best thinkers, those who approximate most closely to the positive con- 
dition in politics, now begin to perceive this fundamental principle. They 
feel that it is absurd to conceive the political system as an isolated fact, 
and to attribute to it tbose social forces which on the contrary produce 
it. In a word they already admit that the political order is and can only be 
the expression of civil order ; in other words, that the preponderating social 
forces, of necessity, at last, become the directing ones. Only one step more 
is needed to recognise the subordination of the political system to the state 
of civilisation. For if it is clear that the political order is the exponent 
of the civil order, it is, at least, equally apparent that the civil order itself 
is merely the exponent of the state of civilisation. 

Doubtless social organisation in its turn inevitably reacts on civilisa- 
tion in ways more or less marked. But tbis influence which, notwithstand- 
ing its gi-eat importance, is only secondary, cannot overturn the natural 
order of dependence. This reaction itself, rightly considered, proves that 
the order is that above described. For experience always shows that if 
the social organisation be constituted in a sense at variance with the 
coexisting civilisation, the latter in the end invariably gets the upper 
hand. 

It must then be admitted, as one of the two fundamental ideas con- 
stituting the essence of Positive Polity that the social organisation, whether 
past or present, should not be considered apart from the state of civilisation 
whence in truth it necessarily flows. If to facilitate investigation, we 
sometimes find it useful to consider them separately, this abstraction 
should always be regarded as simply provisional, without allowing our- 
selves to lose sight of the subordination established by the nature of 
things. 

The second fundamental idea is this ; that Civilisation progresses ac- The giowth 
cording to a necessary Law. _ _ t'on Mows 

The experience of the past proves, in the most decisive manner, that Laws, 
the progressive march of civilisation follows a natural and unavoidable 
course, which flows from the law of human organisation and, in its turn, 
becomes the supreme law of all practical phenomena. 

In this place it is manifestly impossible to expound the law in question 
with precision, or to verify it historically, even in the briefest manner. 
We only propose to offer some reflexions on this fundamental conception. 

The first reflexion points to the necessity for assuming that such a law 
does exist in order to explain the political phenomena. 

All men who possess a certain knowledge of the leading facts of history, 
be their historical views what they may, will agree in this, that the culti- 
vated portion of the human race, considered as a whole, has made uninter- 
rupted proo'reas in civilisation from the most remote periods of history to 
our own day. In this proposition, the term civilisation is understood in the 
sense explained above, including therefore the social organisation. 

No reasonable doubt can be raised about this fundamental fact as 
regards the epoch which extends from the eleventh century to the present 

656 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

time, in other ■words commencing with the introduction of the Sciences 
of Observation into Europe by the Arabs, and the Enfranchisement of the 
Commons. But the truth is equally incontestable as regards the ante- 
cedent period. Savants are now well convinced that the pretensions to 
advanced scientific knowledge put forward on behalf of the ancients by 
UtUratews are devoid of .all real basis. The Arabians are proved to have 
surpassed them. Such also has been the case, even more decidedly, as 
regards industry, at all events in reference to all that calls for real ability, 
and does not result from mere accident. Even if the tine arts were deemed 
to constitute an exception, their exclusion is susceptible of a natural 
explanation which would leave the main proposition essentially untouched. 
Lastly as regards the social organisation, it is perfectly manifest that this, 
during the same period, made the greatest progress, owing to the establish- 
ment of Christianity, and the formation of the Feudal System, so superior 
to the organisation of Greece and Rome. 

It is therefore certain that civilisation has, under every aspect, made 
constant progress. 

On the other hand, while discarding the disparaging spirit, alike blind 
and unjust, introduced by the metaphysical philosophy, we cannot but 
perceive that in consequence of the state of infancy which has hitherto 
characterised political speculations, the practical combinations that have 
until now guided civilisation were not always those best adapted to promote 
its progress, and, frequently, tended rather to impede than to assist this. 
There have been epochs the main political activity of which was of a 
purely stationary character. Such, generally speaking, were those of 
social systems in their decline; for example, of the Emperor Julian, of 
Philip II. and the Jesuits, and lastly of Bonaparte. Let us also bear in 
mi}id that, as already pointed out, the social organisation does not regulate 
the course of civilisation, but, on the contrary, results from this. 

Frequent cures, eti'ected in spite of a treatment manifestly erroneous, 
have revealed to physicians the powerful action by which every living 
body spontaneously tends to rectify accidental derangements of its organisa- 
tion. In like manner the advance of civilisation, notwithstanding unfavour- 
able political combinations, clearly proves that civilisation is governed by 
a natural law of progress, independent of all combinations, and dominating 
them. If this principle were denied, in order to explain such a fact, and 
comprehend how it has come to pass that civilisation in place of being 
retarded by errors committed, has almost invariably benefited by them, 
we could only have recourse to direct continuous supernatural guidance, 
after the fashion of theological politics. 

Lastly, it is well to remark that too frequently events have been 
regarded as unfavorable to civilisation which were only apparently so. 
The chief cause of this misapprehension has been, the insufficient attention 
paid, even by the best intellects, to an essential law of organised bodies, 
which applies with equal force to the human race acting collectivelv, as 
to a single individual. It consists in the necessity for a certain degree 
of resistance in order that all forces may be fully developed. But this 
remark in no way aii'ects the preceding consideration. For though 
obstacles are needed to develop forces, they do not produce them. 

The conclusion deduced from this fundamental consideration would be 
much strengthened, if we took into account the remarkable identity 
observable in the development of the civilisation of diflerent nations, 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 657 

between whom no political intercommunication can with probability be 
assumed. Such an identity could only have been produced under the 
influence of a natural progress of civilisation uniformly applicable to all 
nations as resulting from the fundamental laws of the human brganisation, 
common to all. Thus, for example, the customs of the early times of 
Greece, as they are described by Homer, are found to be almost identical 
with those which subsist araonsr the savage nations of North America. So 
likewise the feudalism of the Malays closely resembles that of Europe in 
the eleventh century. These points of resemblance, it is clear, can only be 
explained in the way above mentioned. 

A second consideration will render evident the existence of a natural 
law regulating the progress of civilisation. 

If, in conformity with the view above submitted, we admit that each 
phase of the social order is necessarily derived from that of the correspond- 
ing civilisation, we may in our observations lay out of consideration this 
complex element ; and the results arrived at for the residuary facts will 
equally apply to the organisation of society. 

Reducing thus the question to its simplest terms, it becomes easy to 
perceive that civilisation follows a determined and invariable course. 

A superficial philosophy, which would make this world a scene of 
miracles, has immensely exaggerated the influence of chance, that is to say 
of isolated causes, in human affairs. This exaggeration is peculiarly appa- 
rent in reference to the Sciences and the Arts. Among other remarkable 
examples, everyone knows the great admiration excited even in intelligent 
minds by the idea that the law of universal gravitation was revealed to 
Newton by the fall of an apple. 

All sensible men in our time admit that chance plays only a vel-y small 
part in scientific and industrial discoveries ; that in none but insignificant 
discoveries does it rank as chief agent. But to this error has succeeded 
another which, though in itself much less unreasonable^ has nevertheless 
almost the same disadvantages. The oifice of chance has been in like 
manner transferred to genius. This explanation hardly accounts more 
felicitously for the action of the human mind. 

The history of human knowledge clearly proves that all our labours in 
the sciences and arts are so connected, whether in the same or in succeeding 
generations, that the discoveries of one age prepare those of the following, as 
the former had been themselves prepared by those of the preceding. It 
has been demonstrated that the isolated power of genius is greatly less 
than that with which it has been credited. The man most justly dis- 
tinguished by great discoveries almost always owes the largest share of his 
success to his predecessors in the same career. In a word the human m-ind 
follows, in the development of the sciences and arts, a definite course, one 
that transcends the greatest intellectual forces, which arise, so to speak, 
only as instruments destined to produce in due course successive dis- 
coveries. . , „ ,, 

Confining our observations to the sciences whose progress we can follow 
most easily from remote periods, we see, in truth, that their main historic 
epochs— that is to sav their passage through the theological and meta- 
physical into the positive sta.oe,-are rigorously determined. These three 
states succeed each other necessarily in an order prescribed by the nature of 
the human mind. The transition from one to the other takes place accord- 
ing to a course the steps of which resemble each other in all the sciences, 

558 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

The science 
of Positive 
Politics is 
essential for 
Rncial Reor- 
gajiisation. 

nor can the greatest amount of genius dispense with passing through them. 
Turning from this general review to the subdivisions of the scientific or 
definitive state, we observe the same law. Thus for example, the great 
discovery of universal gravitation was prepared by the labours of the astro- 
nomers and geometers of the 16th and 17th centuries, chiefly by those of 
Kepler and Huygens. They were indispensable to its birth, and certain, 
sooner or later, to produce it. 

It appears, therefore, from the preceding remarks that the elementary 
march of civilisation is unquestionably subject to a natural and invariable 
law which overrules all special human divergencies. But as the state of 
the social organisation of necessity follows that of civilisation the same con- 
clusion applies to civilisation, considered as a whole or in its elemeuts. 

The two considerations above announced, though insufficient to furnish 
a complete exposition of the progress of civilisation, nevertheless, prove 
its realit}'. They show the possibility of determining with precision all its 
attributes by a careful observation of the past, and of thus creating positive 
polity. 

Our business is next to fix exactly the practical aim of this science ; and 
its general points of contact with the wants of society ; especially its con- 
nexion with the real work of reorganisation which is so imperiously required 
by the actual state of the body politic. 

To effect this, it is necessary at the outset to ascertain the limits of all 
true political action. 

The fundamental law which governs the natural progi'ess of civilisatii n 
rigoroush' determines the successive states through which the general 
development of the human race must pass. On the other hand, this law 
necessarily results from the instinctive tendency of the human race to 
perfect itself. Consequently it is as completely independent of our control 
as are the individual instincts the combination of which produces this perma- 
nent tendency. 

Since no known fact authorises us to believe that the human organisa- 
tion is liable to any fundamental alteration, the progress of that civili- 
sation which flov.'s from it is in essentials unalterable. To speak more 
precisely, none of the intermediate steps which it prescribes can be evaded, 
and no step in a backward direction can really be made. 

Nevertheless, the progress of civilisation is more or less modifiable, and 
may vary in point of rapidity within ceitain limits, from various causes, 
physical and moral, which can be estimated. Among these causes, are 
political combinations. In this sense only is it possible for man to in- 
fluence the course of his own civilisation. 

This action upon the race is quite analogous to that which is attainable 
in relation to the individual ; the analogy resulting from the identity of 
source. By employing suitable means we can, up to a certain point, acce- 
lerate or retard the expansion of an individual instinct ; but we can neither 
destroy it nor alter its nature. So likewise with the instincts of the race ; 
paying due attention to the varying extent of this modifying power when 
the duration of the race is compared with that of the individual. 

The natural progress of civilisation, therefore, determines with entire 
certainty for each epoch the improvements of which the social stnte is 
susceptible, whether in its parts or as a whole. Such improvements alone 
can be carried out, as in fact they are carried out, by the combinations of 
philosophers and statesmen, at times even in spite of these combinations. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 559 

All men who have exercised a ival and durable action on the human 
race,^ whether in temporal or spiritual matters, have been guided and 
sustained by this fundamental truth, which the usual instinct of genius 
partially revealed to them, although never yet systematically demonstrated. 
They have, at every epoch, perceived what were the changes which the 
stale of civilisation tended to bring about. These they enunciated, and 
proposed to their cotemporaries doctrines and institutions in harmont 
with them. Whenever their conceptions were in accord with the real 
state of affairs, the changes so foreseen were speedily realised or con- 
solidated. The social forces which had long been silently growing, 
suddenly appeared at their voice on the political scene with all the vigour of 
youth. 

History having been, up to the present time, written and studied in a 
superficial spirit, such coincidences and striking results, in place of instruct- 
ing men, as might be naturally supposed, have only astonished them. 
These facts, when misapprehended, even help to keep alive the theologico- 
metaphysical belief in the indefinite power of legislators over civilisation. 
They maintain this superstitious idea in minds otherwise disposed to reject 
it, were it not apparently supported by observation. This untoward result 
arises from the circumstance that in these great events we see only men, 
never the forces which irresistibly impel them. Instead of recognising the 
preponderating infiuence of civilisation the efforts of these farseeing men 
are regarded as the true causes of the improvements effected, but which 
would equally have taken place, though somewhat more slowly, without 
their intervention. No one troubles himself with considering the enormous 
disproportion between the alleged cause and the results ; a disproportion 
which would make the explanation much more incomprehensible than the 
fact itself. People look at the appearance and neglect the reality which is 
behind. In a word, according to the ingenious expression of Madame de 
Stael, we mistake the actors for the drama. 

Such an error is exactly of the same nature as that of the Indians who 
attributed to Christopher Columbus the eclipse which he had foreseen. 

Generally speaking when the individual appears to exert a great 
influence, it is not due to his own forces, since these are extremely small. 
Forces external to him act in his favour according to laws over which 
he has no control. His entire power -lies in the intelligent apprehension 
of these laws through observation, his forecast of their effects, and the 
power of subordinating them to the desired end which he thus obtains, 
provided he employs them in accordance with their nature. The effect 
once produced, ignorance of natural laws leads the spectator, and some- 
times the actor himself, to attribute to the power of man what is really 
due only to his foresight. 

These general remarks apply to political action in the same way, and 
for the same reasons, as to physical, chemical, and physiological action. 
All political' action is followed by a real and durable result, when it is 
exerted in the same direction as the force of civilisation, and aims at 
producing chansres which the latter necessitates. On every other hypothesis 
it exerts no infiuence or a merely ephemeral one. 

The most fatal case, without doubt, is that in which the legislator, 
temporal or spiritual, acts, designedly or otherwise, in a retrograde sense, 
for he then places hinself in opposition to that which alone gives him 
force. But the cq irse of civilisation so entirely regulates political 

6 GO 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

action, that this is resultless, even if advancing with society, when it 
endeavours to pvojjress more rapidly than circumstances permit. Experience, 
indeed, proves that the legislator, however great may be his power, neces- 
sarily fails if he undertakes to realise improvements which, though in 
harmony with the tendencies of civilisation, are too far in advance of its 
actual condition. Thus, for example, the great attempts of Joseph II. 
to civilise Austria beyond what its condition permitted, were as com- 
pletely nullified as the vast efforts of Bonaparte to carry France hack to 
the feudal system ; though both personages possessed the largest measure 
of arbitrary power. 

It follows from the above considerations that the true polity, the 
positive polity should no more seek to govern phenomena than the other 
sciences do. This ambitious chimera, which characterised their infancy, 
they have abandoned for the simple task of observing and correlating their 
phenomena. Political science should do the same. It should exclusively 
employ itself in coordinating all the special facts relative to the progress 
of civilisation and in reducing these to the smallest possible number of 
{.'eneral facts, the connexion of which ought to manifest the natural law 
of this progress, leaving for a subsequent appreciation the various causes 
which can modify its rapidity. 

The practical utility of such a political science of observation may now 
be easily estimated. 

A sound political system can never aim at impelling the human race, 
since this is moved by its proper impulse, in accordance with a law as 
necessary as, though more easily modified than, that of gravitation. But 
it does seek to facilitate human progress by enlightening it. 

There is a great difference between obeying the progress of civilisation 
blindly and obeying it intelligently. The changes it demands take place 
as much in the first as in the second case ; but they are longer delayed, 
and, above all, are only accomplished after having produced social pertur- 
bations more or less serious, according to the nature and importance of 
these changes. Now the disturbances, of every sort, which thus arise in 
the body politic, may be, in great part, avoided, by adopting measures 
based on an exact knowledge of the changes which tend to produce 
themselves. 

Such measures consist in so ordering affairs that the anticipated ameliora- 
tions may be effected directly, instead of being produced by the sheer force of 
necessity athwart all the obstacles which ignorance engenders. In other 
words the es.«ential aim of practical politics is, properly speaking, to avoid the 
violent revolutions which spring from obstacles opposed to the progress of civi- 
lisation ; and to reduce these to a simple moral movement, as regular as, 
though more intense than, that which gently urges society in ordinary periods. 
Now, in order to attain this end, it is manifestly indispensable that we 
should know, as precisely as possible, the actual tendency of civilisation 
so as to bring our political conduct into harmony with it. 

It would, doubtless, be chimerical to hope that the movements which, 
more or less, compromise the ambitious and interested aspirations of entire 
classes, can be effected with complete calmness. But it is, nevertheless, 
certain that hitherto far too much importance has been given to this cause in 
explaining revolutionary convulsions, the violence of which has been, in great 
part, due to ignorance of the natural laws which r gulate the progress of 
civilisation. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIED PAET. 561 

It is only too common to attribute to egotism what essentially springs 
from ignorance, and this mischievous error contributes to maintain irritation 
between men, in their private and public relations. But, in the present 
case, is it not evident that those who have placed themselves in opposition 
to the course of civilisation, would not have adopted this attitude if its 
antagonistic character had been clearly demonstrated ? No one is so foolish 
as kuowingly to place himself in opposition to the nature of things. No 
one has any satisfaction in exerting an influence of which he clearly 
discerns the ephemeral nature. In this way the demonstrations of a polity 
based on observation are capable of acting upon the classes whom prejudice 
and interest would otherwise engage in a struggle against the course of 
civilisation. 

Doubtless, we should not exaggerate the influence exerted by the 
iiitellect over the conduct of men. But, assuredly the force of demon- 
stration is far more important than has hitherto been supposed. The 
history of the human mind proves that this force alone has often decided 
changes in effecting which it had to struggle with a combination of the 
greatest human forces. To cite only the most remarkable example, the 
power of positive demonstration has alone caused the adoption of the theory 
of the movement of the earth. Yet this had to overcome, not only the 
resistance of the theological power, at that period still so powerful, but, 
above all, the pride of the human race, supported by the most plausible 
arguments ever advanced in favour of an erroneous idea. Experience of 
so decisive a kind should enlighten us as to the great power of real demon- 
strations. The absence of such demonstrations has been the chief reason 
why statesmen have allowed themselves to be carried away by serious 
political aberrations. Let demonstrations appear, and the aberrations will 
soon cease. 

Besides, even if we consider the question of interests alone, it is easy 
to see that a positive polity ought to supply the means of avoiding violent 
revolutions. 

In truth, if the improvements called for by the progress of civilisation 
have to struggle with some ambitious and interested aims, others of the 
same kind are favourable to them. Besides, from the very fact that these 
improvements have reached their maturity, the real forces which favour 
them are stronger than the opposing forces, though appearances do not 
always bear out this conclusion. Knowledge of the law of progress enforces 
resi"Tiation, and, still more, guides action. The governing classes, clearly 
perceiving the end which they are called on to realise, can reach it directly, 
in place of wasting their forces on tentative and mistaken efibrts. They 
will by anticipation combine measures for overcoming opposition with others 
calculated to facilitate the acceptance of the new order of things by their 
opponents. In a word the triumph of civilisation will operate in a manner 
at once as prompt and as calm as the nature of things will permit. 

To resume, the course of civilisation does not, properly speaking, advance 
in a right line. It is composed of a series of progressive oscillations, more 
or less ample or slow, on either side of a mean line, which may be com- 
pared with that presented by the mechanism of locomotion. Rut these 
oscillations may be made shorter and more rapid, by political combinations 
based on a knowledge of the mean movement which always tends to 
prevail. Such is the permanent practical utility of this kind of knowledge.' 
It evidently becomes more important in proportion as the chfwges necessi- 
TOL. IV. 0 0 

562 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

tated by the course of civilisation are themselves more momentous. Its 
usefulness has accordingly reached its maximum in our day ; since the 
social reorganisation which alone can terminate the existing crisis, is of 
all the revolutions which the human race ever experienced the most 
comprehensive. 
The Method The fundamental datum and positive starting point of general practical 

ofPosMve"^ politics consists therefore in a determination of the real tendency of 
Politics. civilisation. By ascertaining this we can harmonise political action with 
it and render as mild, and as short as possible, the crisis which the human 
race inevitably undergoes during its successive passages through the dif- 
ferent stages of civilisation. 

Persons who, though intelligent, are unfamiliar with the method which 
suits the human mind, and even those who see that a knowledge of the 
laws which regulate the progress of civilisation can alone furnish a solid 
and positive basis for political combinations, may suppose that this historic 
investigation need not be pushed back to the origin of civilised society, but 
that it will suffice to consider its present condition. Such a view is natural, 
having regard to the narrow way in which politics are now regarded. But 
its delusive character is easily shown. 

Experience has proved that, so long as the human mind advances in 
a positive direction, there are many advantages and no inconveniences in 
rising to the highest degree of generality, because it is far easier to descend 
than to ascend the scale. In the infancy of positive Physiology it was 
supposed that the human organisation could be understood by studying 
man alone ; an error completely analogous to that now under discussion. 
It has been since recognised that the formation of clear and large con- 
ceptions of the human organisation requires us to consider man as forming 
the limit of the animal series ; and even, in a still more general point of 
view, as forming part of the system of organised bodies. Physiology has 
only received its definitive constitution since the comparison of the dif- 
ferent classes of living beings has been carried out on a large scale, and 
systematically employed in the study of man. 

In Politics the various states of civilisation correspond to the different 
organisations in Physiology. But, the reasons which compel us to consider 
all the epochs of civilisation are still more imperative than those which 
have induced physiologists to institute a comparison of all organisations. 

Doubtless a study of the present condition of civili.«ation, considered 
apart, and independently of the states which have preceded it, may furnish 
very useful materials for the formation of positive polity, provided the 
facts are observed in a philosophical spirit. Nay it is certain that, by 
studies of this kind, true Statesmen have hitherto been enabled to modify 
the conjectural doctrines which guided their efforts, so as to render these 
less discordant with the real wants of society. But it is not the less 
evident that such a study is totally inadequate to form a true positive 
polity. It can furnish nothing but materials. In a word, the observation 
of the present state of civilisation, considered by itself, can no more de- 
termine the actual tendencies of society, than the study of any other 
isolated epoch can do. 

The reason for this is, that the existence of a law cannot be established 
by a single term. Three terms, at least, are needed, in order that the 
connexion ascertained by comparing the two first, and verified by the 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 663 

third, may serve to reveal the following ones. Such prevision is the practical 
object of every law. 

When, in tracing an institution and a social idea, or a system of 
institutions and a complete doctrine, from their birth to their present stage, 
we find that, from a given epoch, their iniiuence has always been either 
diminishing or increasing, we can foretell with complete certainty the 
destiny which awaits them. In the first case, it is proved that their 
tendency is at variance with that of civilisation, and hence their final 
disappearance may be predicted. In the second case, on the contrary, we 
may conclude that they will ultimately predominate. The period of their 
fall or triumph may even be calculated, within narrow limits, from the 
extent and rapidity of the variations observed. Manifestly therefore such 
a study is a fruitful source of positive knowledge. 

But what can we learn from the observation of a single State where 
we must embrace, at one view, doctrines, institutions, and classes, both 
growing and declining, without reckoning the ephemeral action which 
only depends on the routine of the moment ? What human sagacity cowld 
avoid confounding these opposed and heterogeneous elements ? How could 
we discover the realities which make so little noise amid the phantoms 
which hurry over the stage. It is clear that, amid such confusion the 
observer could only advance if guided by a knowledge of the past, for 
this alone can teach him to direct his view so as to tee things as they 
really exist. 

The chronological order of historic epochs is not their philosophical 
order. In place of saying : the past, the present, and the future, we should 
say the past, the future, and the present. In truth it is only when we 
have conceived the future by the aid of the past that we can with ad- 
vantage revert to the present so as to seize its true character. 

These considerations, though applicable to every epoch, are so, in a conflict ol 
still higher degree, to the present. In our day three different Systems ^"^s"^'®^^' 
coexist in the heart of society : the theologico-feudal system, the scientific- 
industrial system, and lastly the mongrel and transitional system of meta- 
physicians, and lawyers. In the midst of such confusion it is entirely beyond 
the grasp of the human mind to make a clear and exact analysis, or to 
frame real and precise statistics of the body politic, unless it be enlightened 
by the past. It is demonstrable that sound intellects, which if better 
guided would have risen to a truly positive polity, have continued in a 
metaphysical state because they considered the present condition of affairs 
apart from their antecedents, and even because they did not go back far 
enough in the series of observations. 

We therefore are bound to study, as profoundly and completely as 
possible, all the states through which civilisation has passed, from its origin 
to the present time. We must consider their coordination and connexion 
and how they can be combined under general heads capable of furnishing 
principles ; making manifest the natural laws of the development of civili- 
sation and exhibiting the philosophic picture of the social future as deduced 
from the past, in other words determining the general plan of reorganisation 
destined for the present epoch. Lastly we need the application of these 
results to the present state of things so as to determine the direction which 
ought to be impressed on political action with a view to facilitate the defini- 
tive transition to the new social state. Such are the operations essential 

o o 2 

564 - SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

for giving to political theory a positive basis adequate to the best and urgent 
needs of society. 

The above constitutes the first series of theoretic problems, for the solu- 
tion of which I venture to invoke the combined forces of European savants. 
The considerations above set forth having snificiently indicated the 
spirit of Positive polity, its comparison with Theological and Metaphysical 
polity may, be rendered more precise. 

Comparing tbem in the first place, under the most important point of 
view, in reference to the actual wants of society, the superiority of positive 
polity is easily explained. Its superiority consists in the fact that the 
positive system discovers, whereas other systems invent. Theological and 
metaphysical polity devise plans for regulating the present state of civili- 
sation which accord with the absolute conditions assumed to be the 
highest good. Positive polity proposes measures based on observation ; 
simply as being those Which the course of civilisation tends to produce. 
This difference in method renders it equally impossible for the polity of 
imagination to discover, or for the polity of observation to miss the true 
social reorganisation. The one makes the greatest efibrts to invent a remedy 
without considering the malady. The other, persuaded that the principal 
source of recovery is the vitail force of the patient, confines itself to ascer- 
taining, from observation, the natural issue of the crisis, in order to facili- 
tate it by eliminating the obstacles that spring from empiricism. 

In the second place, a scientific polity can alone furnish men with a 
theory about which it is possible to agree, and this is a matter of the 
first importance. 

Theological and metaphysical polity, aiming at the best possible govern- 
ment, lead to 'interminable discussions, since such a problem cannot be 
reduced to certainty. The political regime should be, and of necessity is, in 
harmony with the state of civilisation. The best for each epoch is that 
which suits it best. Therefore there is not and cannot be any political 
regime absolutely preferable to all others ; there are merely some states of 
civilisation more perfect than others. Institutions good at one period may 
be and most frequently are bad at another and vice versa. Thus, for 
■example, Slavery which is now a monstrosity, was certainly at its origin an 
admirable institution, designed to prevent the strong from destroying the 
weak, constituting an unavoidable transition in the general development of 
civilisation. In like manner, conversely, Liberty which, to a reasonable 
extent, becomes so useful to individuals and nations that have reached a 
certain stage of knowledge, and contracted some habits of foresight, by 
permitting the development of their faculties, is very mischievous to those 
who have not yet fulfilled these two conditions ; and who require for the 
salce of themselves, as well as of others, to be kept in tutelage. It is there- 
fore evident that there can be no common understanding as to what forms 
the absolutely best possible government. To reestablish haviciiny no other 
expedient is admissible but that of entirely proscribing any discussion of the 
plan laid down. This is the course which the theological polity has 
adopted ; more consistent in this respect than metaphysical polity, since its 
actual persistence proves that it fulfilled the conditions of existence. We 
know that metaphysics by giving unrestrained scope to the imagination has 
induced a doubt and even a formal denial of the utility of the social state 
fur the happiness of man, a conclusion which strikingly illustrates the 
impossibility of agreement upon such questions. 

GENERAL APPENDIX-THIRD PART. 565 

The practical aim of scientific politics being, on the contrary, to ascer- 
tain the system which the march of civilisation, indicated by the past, now 
tends to bring about, the problem is altogether positive and can be decided 
by observation. The freest investigation can and should be accorded, 
without any fear of its leading to disorder. After the lapse of a certain 
time competent minds, and finally all men, must ao-ree as to the natural 
laws which govern the progress of civilisation, and" the resultant system, 
whatever may originally have been their speculative opinions ; just as men 
have ended in a common understanding about the laws of the solar system, 
those of the human organisation, &c. 

Finally positive politics furnish the only road by which the human 
race can find an issue from arbitrary courses, under the dominion of which 
it must remain so long as the theological and metaphysical polity pre- 
dominate. 

The absolute, in theory, of necessity leads to the arbitrary, in practice. 
So long as the human race is considered to contain no spontaneous principle 
of movement, but to owe its impulse to the legislator, so long, in spiteof the 
most eloquent declamations, must the arbitrary subsist in the highest 
degree and affect the most essential aspects of life. The nature of things 
imposes this necessity. The human race being thus abandoned to the 
discretion of the legislator, who decides on the- best possible form of govern- 
ment, arbitrary power may be limited as to details, but manifestly can 
never be excluded from the ensemble. Whether the supreme legislative 
office be in the hands of one or of many, whether it be hereditary or elective, 
makes no difference in this respect. Even if the entire body politic became 
the legislator, supposing this were possible, the result would be the same ; 
with this difference only, that arbitrary power being then exerted by 
society on itself, the inconveniences would become greater than ever. 

On the contrary scientific polity wholly excludes the arbitrary, because it 
banishes those absolute and vague conceptions which gave birth to and main- 
tain this. Under such a regime the human race is regarded as subject to a 
natural law of development which can be ascertained by observation, and 
which prescribes for each epoch, in the most unequivocal manner, the 
political course it is possible to pursue. The arbitrary then, of necessity, 
ceases. Government by measures replaces government by men. Then 
arises in politics a true law, understood in the real and philosophic sense 
which the illustrious Montesquieu attached to that phrase. Whatever may 
be the form of government as to its details, in substance, at least, the 
arbitrary cannot then appear. In politics all is settled by a truly supreme 
I>aw, recognised as superior to human forces ; since it ultimately flows from 
the nature of our organisation, over which it can exert no influence. In a 
word, this law excludes with equal efficacy, the arbitrary of theology, or the 
Divine Right of Kings, and the arbitrary of metaphysics, or the Sovereignty 
of the People. 

If some should regard the supreme dominion of such a law, merely as 
another form of the arbitrary, as it now exists, they should in consistency 
also complain of the inflexible despotism exercised over the whole of nature 
by the law of gravitation, as well as of the despotism, — no less real, and 
more analogous as being more susceptible of modification, — exercised by the 
laws of the human organisation, of which the course of civilisation is merely 
the result. 

The preceding remarks naturally lead us to- mark out with precision the 

)66 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

Positive 
Polity must 
be based on 
Observation 
but propa- 
gated by tlie 
aid of Imagi- 
nation. 

respective domains of observation and imagination in politics. This inves- 
tigation will complete our sketch of the general spirit of the new politics. 

In truth it is necessary to distinguish between two sorts of operations. 
The first, constituting properly speaking political science, aims at forming a 
system suitable to the present period, tiie second concerns its propagation. 

In the first class of operations, it U clear that the imagination ought 
only to play a subordinate part, remaining at all times under the guidance 
of the observing powers, as in the other sciences. The study of the past, 
can and should be employed to assist the discovery of means for provisionally 
coordinating facts, until their definitive relations can be deduced from the 
facts themselves, the point always to be kept in view. Even this use of the 
imagination should only embrace secondary facts, any other being mani- 
festly erroneous. In the second place the determination of the system 
according to which society is, in our day, destined to effect its own reorga- 
nisation should be almost wholly inferred from observation of the past. Its 
study will determine not only the ensemble of the system but its most 
important portions, with a precision which will probably astonish the savants 
when they commence the work. It is, nevertheless, certain, that the 
degree of precision obtainable by this method, cannot reach the point at 
which the system could be confided to the leaders of industry for actual use 
by thera in practical combinations as indicated in the preceding chapter. 
Accordingly under this latter aspect also, imagination should play a 
secondary part in scientific politics. This will consist in conferring the 
necessary degree of precision on the outlines of the new system, the general 
plan and the characteristic features of which have been determined by 
observation. 

There is however another sort of operations, equally indispensable for the 
definitive success of the grand enterprise of social reorganisation, though 
subordinate to the preceding, where the imagination finds full scope for its 
exercise. 

In ascertaining what is to be the new system, it is necessary to put 
aside its advantages or inconveniences. The principal, indeed the only 
question should be : what is that Social System indicated by observation of 
the past, which the progress of civilisation must establish. To occupy our 
thoughts about the excellence of that system, would be to confuse every- 
thing and even to miss our goal. We should confine ourselves to the 
simple conception that, inasmuch as the positive idea of goodness and that 
of harmony with the state of civilisation are identical, we are certain to 
obtain the best system now attainable, if we discover that which is most in 
harmony with the present state of civilisation. The idea of goodness having 
as a positive conception no separate existence, and becoming positive only 
when connected with the state of civilisation, we should apply ourselves to 
the latter as constituting the direct object of our researches, and alone 
capable of rendering politics positive. To point out the advantages of the 
new system and its superiority over the antecedent states should be regarded 
as merely secondary and not allowed to exercise any influence in guiding 
our labours. 

It is incontrovertible that by proceeding in this way, we shall found a 
polity truly positive, and in harmony with the grand wants of society. I'he 
new system should be thus ascertained ; but it is clear that to ensure its 
definitive adoption by society, it ought not to be presented under a shape 
which is very far from being the fittest to determine a social adhesion. 

GENERAL APPENDIX- THIED PART. 567 

In order to establisli a new Social System, just conceptions will not 
suffice. It is necessary that the mass of society should feel attracted by it. 
This condition is not merely indispensable to overcome the obstacles, more 
or less serious, which this system must encounter among the classes who 
are losing their ascendency. It is needed above all for the satisfaction of 
the moral craving for enthusiasm inherent in man when he enters upon a 
new career. "Without such enthusiasm he could neither overcome his 
natural inertness nor shake off the powerful yoke of ancient habits; without 
which it is impossible to secure the free and full development of all his 
faculties in^ their new occupation. Since this necessity always manifests 
itself even in the least complicated cases, its absence would involve a con- 
tradiction in the most complete and important changes, in those which 
must most deeply modify human existence. Accordingly all history 
testifies in favor of this truth. 

It is therefore clear that the right mode of conceiving and presenting the 
new system under a scientific polity is not at all fitted to fulfil this indis- 
pensable condition. 

The mass of mankind will never be inspired with a passion for any 
system, by proving to them that it is one which the progress of civilisation 
has prepared and now demands for tlie guidance of society. A truth of this 
nature is accessible to a very limited circle and for them even demands too 
long a series of mental operations, to allow of its inspiring an attachment. 
It can only produce among savants that profound and tenacious conviction, 
the necessary result of positive demonstrations, which offers a stronger resist- 
ance, but, for that very reason, is less active than the lively and captivating 
persuasion of ideas that excite the passions. 

The only way of obtaining this result consists in presenting a vivid 
picture of the ameliorations which the new system should bring about in 
the condition of mankind, regarded under all points of view, and apart 
from its necessity and opportunity. Such a perspective alone, can induce 
men to effect the moral revolution within themselves, essential for establish- 
ing the new system. This alone can repress that egotism, now rendered 
predominant by the dissolution of the ancient system, and which, after 
our ideas have been enlightened by scientific labors, will remain as the 
only serious obstacle to the triumph of the new social organisation. This 
alone can draw society from its apathy, and impress on it that active 
devotedness whicli is demanded by a social state destined to maintain all 
the human faculties in constant action. 

Here then we find a sort of work in which the Imagination should 
perform the principal part. Its activity cau produce no had effect, since 
this will be exerted in the direction pointed out by scientific labors ; and 
it will aim, not at inventing a new system, but at spreading one which 
has been determined by positive polity. Thus set in motion the imagi- 
nation ought to be entirely left to itself. The more open and free 
its attitude, the more complete and salutary will be its indispensable 
activity. 

Such is the part specially reserved for the Fine Arts in the general 
work of social reorganisation. Thus this vast enterprise will obtain the 
cooperation of all the positive forces ; that of the savants to determine the 
plan of the new system ; that of the artists to cause its universal adoption, 
that of the industrial chiefs to put it into immediate execution by establish- 
ing the needful practical institutions. These three great forces will lend 

568 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

Review of 
the chief 
efforts to 
lound Posi- 
tive Polity. 

Hontesquieu 

each other a mutual support in foundinp: the new system, as they will do 
to onsuro its daily application, when estahlished. 

In determining, then, the social system suitable to the present epoch 
the positive polity invests observation with the supremacy now accorded 
to imagination. At the same time it confides to the imagination a new 
and more perfect ofTice than that which the theologioo-metaphysical 
polity assigned to it ; for since the human race has advanced near the 
positive state the imaginative faculty, though supreme, has revolved in a 
circle of obsolete ideas and monotonous pictures. 

Having sketched the general nature of positive polity it is useful to 
cast a rapid glance over the chief attempts heretofore made to raise politics 
to the rank of the sciences of observation. We shall thus gain a twofold 
advantage ; that of demonstrating the opportunity of such an undertaking, 
and of throwing light upon the spirit of the new polity by exhibiting it 
under several points of view differing from those already indicated. 

Montesquieu must have the credit of the earliest direct attempt to 
treat politics as a science of facts and not of dogmas. Such evidently is 
the true aim of the Spirit of Lav.'S (I'Esprit des Lois), as all who under- 
stand this work will concede. The admirable Introduction where the 
general conception of law is presented would alone suffice to establish this 
aim. It is clear that Montesquieu mainly aimed at ranging, as far as pos- 
sible, under a ^certain number of heads all the political facts known to 
him and at exhibiting the laws of their connexion. 

Were it our task to appreciate such a work, its merits should be judged 
relatively to the period of its execution. We would then perceive that 
the Spirit of Laws decisively establishes the philosophic superiority of 
Montesquieu over his cotemporaries. To have emancipated himself from 
the negative spirit at the time when it exerted the most despotic power 
even over the greatest intellects ; to have profoundly felt the worthlessness 
of a metaphysical and absolute polity ; to have appreciated the necessity for 
departing from it at the very time when, in the hands of Rousseau, it 
was assuming its definitive form ; these are decisive proofs of Montesquieu's 
mental superiority. 

But in spite of the supreme ability evinced by Montesquieu, as will 
be, more and more, acknowledged, his labors are far from having raised 
politics to the rank of a positive science. They have not in the least, 
satisfied the fundamental and indispensable requisites for attaining this 
object as above stated. 

Montesquieu did not perceive that great fact which regulates all 
political phenomena, the natural development of civilisation. Hence 
it follows tliat his researches can only be employed as materials, as a 
collection of observations and hints towards the creation of the positive 
.system of politics. For the general views which he employed to connect 
the facts are not positive. 

Notwithstanding the manifest efforts of Montesquieu to disentangle 
himself from metaphysics he did not succeed in doing so. From meta- 
physical considerations he undoubtedly deduced his principal conception. 
This conception has a double fault. Instend of being historical it is 
dogmatic ; in other words it does not sufllc-iently regard the necessary 
succession of the different political states. In the stcond place it attributes 
an exaggi.-rated importance to a fact, which is altogether secondiuy, — the 
form of government. Accordingly the preponderating influence which 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 569 

Montesquieu liaa given to this idea is purely imaginary, and contradicts 
the best established facts. In a word the political facts have not really 
been coordinated as they should be in every positive science. They have 
merely been grouped under hypothetical ideas, contrary, for the most part, 
to their true relations. 

The only important portion of the theoretical works of Montesquieu 
possessing a truly positive character, is that which concerns the political 
influence of outward and local circumstances, acting continuously, desig- 
nated by the term Climate. But it is easy to see that, even in this respect, 
in consequence of the general error of his method, the ideas put forward 
by Montesquieu can only be employed when they shall have been entirely 
recast. 

In truth it is now clearjy recognised by all observers that Montesquieu 
has in several respects greatly exaggerated the influence of climate. Such 
exaggeration was unavoidable. 

No doubt climate exerts over political phenomena a real action which 
it is very important to understand. But such action is only indirect and . 
secondary. It is confined to accelerating or retarding in a certain measure 
the natural progress of civilisation ; but this cannot in itself be affected 
by these modifications. In truth this progress is identical, in all climates, 
except as regards its rapidity ; because it springs from more general laws, 
those of the human organisation, essentially the same for all localities. 
Since then the influence of climate over political phenomena merely 
modifies the natural course of civilisation, which maintains its pre- 
dominance, this influence cannot be studied with advantage and properly 
estimated until the fundamental law has been ascertained. If the indirect 
and subordinate cause were studied before the direct and principal cause, 
such a violation of the laws of the human mind would unavoidably give 
an entirely false idea of the influence of the former and lead to its being 
confounded with that of the latter. This is what happened in the case of 
Montesquieu. 

The foregoing reflexions on the influence of climate manifestly apply 
to all other causes which, without essentially altering the course of 
civilisation, can modify its rate of advance. This influence can only be 
determined with precision when the natural laws of civilisation shall have 
been established, by eliminating all such modifications. Astronomers in 
commencing their study of the laws of the planetary movements omitted 
all consideration of the perturbations. After these laws had been dis- 
covered, the modifications could be determined and finally even reduced 
to the general law which had only been established with reference to the 
principal movement. If the attempt had been made, in the beginning, to 
account for the irregularities, it is plain that no precise theory could ever 
have been constructed. The case is exactly the same as regards the subject 

in hand. 

The inadequacy of the political system of Montesquieu can be clearly 

verified in its applications to the wants of society. 

The necessity for a social reorganisation in the most advanced countries 
existed as truly in the time of Montesquieu as it does now. For the bases 
of the feudo-theological system had already been destroyed. Subsequent 
events, by completing the" destruction of the ancient system, have only 
rendered this necessity more evident and more urgent. Montesquieu, 
however, did not propose the creation of a new social system as the 

670 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

practical aim of his labors. Since he had not coordinated the political 
facta by a theory fitted to render evident the necessity for a revolution at 
the stage which society had then reached, and at the same time to exhibit 
the general character of the new system, he could, as in fact he did, only 
confine himself to indicating improvements in detail suggested by experience, 
which simply constituted modificationa, more or less important, of the 
feudo-theological system. 

Montesquieu no doubt showed a wise moderation, in confininfr his 
practical suggestions within the limits which the facts as imperfectly 
studied by him imposed, when, on the other hand, he could so easily have 
invented Utopias. At the same time, he clearly evinced the inadequaov 
of a theory which was unfitted to meet the most essential demands of 
practical life. 

To resume, then, Montesquieu felt the necessity of treating politics by 
the same method as the sciences of observation ; but he did not form any 
conception of the general operation needed to effect this purpose. Ilis 
researches, nevertheless, were of the utmost importance. They facilitated 
the intellectual combination of political ideas, since they presented a mass 
of facts coordinated by a theory which, though far removed from the 
positive state, approached it much more nearly than all anterior efforts. 

Condorcet it was who grasped the general conception of the operation 
fitted to raise politics to the rank of the sciences of observation. He first 
saw clearly that civilisation is subject to a progressive course, every step 
of which is strictly connected with the rest by virtue of natural laws ; 
discoverable through philosophic observation of the past, and which de- 
termine, in a positive manner for each epoch, the improvements adapted 
to the social state as a whole, and to each portion of it. Not only did 
Condorcet thus conceive the method of impressing on politics a truly 
positive character, but he endeavoured to demonstrate the theory in the 
work entitled ' Sketch of an historical view of the progress of the human 
mind ; ' of which the title and introduction alone should suffice to secure 
for its author the eternal honour of having created this great philosophic 
conception. 

If this capital discovery has hitherto remained wholly barren, has, as 
yet, made hardly any sensation ; if no one ha.s pursued the track pointed 
out by Condorcet ; if, in a word, politics have not become positive, we 
must attribute this, in great part, to the fact that the sketch which Con- 
dorcet traced was executed in a way quite at variance with the scope of his 
undertaking. He completely misconceived its most essential conditions, 
so much so that the work needs to be entirely recast. It is necessary to 
prove this. 

In the first place the Distribution of Epochs constitutes the most im- 
portant portion of the plan in a work of this nature, or, to speak more 
correctly, it alone constitutes the plan considered in its greatest generality ; 
since it determines the principal mode of coordinating the facts observed. 
Now the method of distributing the facts which Condorcet adopted is 
absolutely erroneous since it does not fulfil even the most obvious con- 
dition, that of presenting a homogeneous series. AVe see that Condorcet 
by no means felt the importance of a philosophic distribution of the epochs 
of civilisation. He did not perceive that this distribution should itself be 
the object of a preliminary operation, the most difficult of those which the 
formation of positive politics demands. He imagined that he could ade- 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 571 

quately coordinate facts by assuming, almost arbitrarily, for the commence- 
ment of each epoch some remarkable event, now industrial, now scientific, 
now political. By adopting this plan, he -remained within the circle of 
literary historians. It was impossible for him to form a true theory, that 
is to say, to establish a real connection between the facts, since those 
intended to conneet all the rest were disconnected from each other. 

To the Naturalists, as being of all savants those who are obliged to form 
the most extended and difficult classifications, are due the chief advances 
in the general method of classifying. The fundamental principle of this 
method has been established from the time that botany and zoology produced 
philosophical classifications, that is to say, classifications based on real 
relations, and not on hypothetical groupings. The true principle consists 
in making the order of generality of the different degrees of division con- 
form, as far as possible, to that of the relations observed between the phe- 
nomena to be classed. In this view the hierarchy of families, of genera, 
&c. is nothing but the statement of a coordinated series of general facts, 
divided into different ranks more and more specialised. In a word Classifi- 
cation then becomes merely the philosophic expression of Science, the 
progress of which it follows. To know the classification is to know the 
science, at least in its more important portion. 

This principle is applicable to every science. Accordingly Political 
Science, seeking to attain a solid basis, should profit by this philosophical 
conception as disclosed, employed, and verified by the other sciences, and 
take it as a guide in distributing the different ages of civilisation. The 
grounds for arranging the various epochs of civilisation in reference to the 
general history of the human race according to their natural relations, 
exactly resemble those which naturalists employ in arranging the vegetable 
and animal organisations under one law. In political science, however, 
they are still more urgent. 

For, if an appropriate coordination of facts is of the first importance 
in every science, it is all in all for political science, which if this condition 
vrere unfulfilled would entirely fail in its practical aim. This aim is, as 
we know, that of determining by the observation of the past the Social 
System which the progress of civilisation tends to realise in our day. Now 
this determination can only result from a correct coordination of the anterior 
states, which govern the law of this progress. It is clear from this view, 
that political facts, however important they may be, possess no practical 
value unless coordinated, while in the other sciences the knowledge of facts 
independently of their mutual relations has, for the most part, a certain utility. 

The different epochs of civilisation, then, in place of being distributed, cSssiflca' ^ 
as Condorcet did, without regard to their natural order and merely in *'°"°' 
reference to events of greater or less importance, ought to be disposed in roneous. 
accordance with the philosophic principle already recognised by savants as 
that which should govern all classifications. The principal division of 
epochs should offer the most general view of the history of civilisation. 
The secondary divisions, to whatever degree it may be deemed advisable to 
carry them, should offer in succession views more and more special of this 
same history. In a word the tabular Arrangement of Epochs should be of 
such a nature as to present, in itself, an abridged txprossion of the ensemble 
of the work. The work if it fell short of this would only be provisional, 
and however well executed would have no value except as a collection of 
materials. 

572 SYSTEM OV POSITIVE POLITY. 

It is evident that such a division of epochs cannot he invented, and 
that, even in its most general aspect, it can only spring from a first sketch 
of the synoptic view, a first coup d'ceil over the general history of civilisa- 
tion. Doubtless, however important, and even indispensable, this method 
may be, in the formation of positive polity, its application would be imprac- 
ticable and a provisional work only could be accomplished, if this operation 
were not already sufficiently prepared. But the histories heretofore written, 
and particularly those produced within the last half century, although very 
far from having been conceived in a right spirit, furnish a tolerable equiva- 
lent for the preliminary collection of materials. We can therefore imme- 
diately undertake the task of a definitive coordination. 
Lnwottlie In the preceding chapter I have submitted, though under the spiritual 

state aspect only, a general view which, as it seems to me, fulfils the conditions 

above stated for efiscting the primary coordination of the past. It consti- 
tutes the first result of a philosophic study of the ensemble of the history of 
civilisation. 

I believe that this history may be divided into three grand epochs, or 
states of civilisation, each possessing a distinct character, spiritual and tem- 
poral. They embrace civilisation at once in its elements and its ensemUe ; 
■which, as above pointed out, evidently constitutes an indispensable condi- 
tion of success. 

Of these the first is the Tlieological and Military epoch. 
In this state of society, all theoretical conceptions, whether general or 
special, bear a supernatural impress. The imagination completely predomi- 
nates over the observing faculty to which all right of inquiry is denied. 

In like manner, all the social relations, whether special or general, are 
avowedly and exclusively military. Society makes conquest its one per- 
manent aim. Industrial pursuits are carried on only so far as is necessary 
for the support of the human race. Slavery, pure and simple, of the pro- 
ducers is the principal institution. 

Such is the first great social system produced by the material progress 
of civilisation. It existed in an elementary shape from the very com- 
mencement of regular and permanent societies. In its entirety it becomes 
completely established only after a long series of generations. 

The second epoch is Metaphj'sical and Juridical. Its general character 
is that of possessing no well-defined characteristics. It forms a link and is 
mongrel and transitional. 

Under spiritual aspects it has been already characterised in the preceding 
chapter. Observation is still kept subordinate to imagination, but the 
former is, within certain limits, allowed to modify the latter. These limits 
are gradually enlarged, until, in the end, observation conquers the right of 
examining in everj' direction. At first it obtains this right in reference to 
all special theoretical conceptions, and gradually, by force of exercise, as to 
general theoretic ideas, which constitutes the natural termination of the 
transition. This period is one of criticism and argument. 

Under temporal aspects industry in this second epoch becomes more 
extended, without as yet acquiring the upper hand. Consequently society 
is no longer frankly military and yet has not become frankly industrial, 
either in its elements or in its ensemhh. The special social relations are 
modified. Industrial slavery is no longer direct ; the producer, still a slave, 
begins to obtain some rights in his relations with the military. Industry 
makes fresh advances which finally issue in the total abolition of individual 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 573 

slavery. After this enfrancliisement, the producers still remain subject to a 
collective arbitrary authority. Nevertheless, the general social relations 
soon undergo a modification. The two aims of activity, conquest and pro- 
duction, advance pari passu. Industry is at first favoured and protected as 
a military resource. Later its importance augments ; and finally war is 
regarded and systematically pursued as a means of favouring industry : 
■which is the last term of the intermediate regime. 

Lastly, the third epoch is that of Science and Industry. All special 
theoretic conceptions have become positive and the general conceptions tend 
to become so. As regard the former observation predominates over imagi- 
nation ; while in reference to the latter observation has dethroned the 
imagination, -without having as yet taken its place. 

Under temporal aspects industry has become predominant. All the 
special relations have gradually established themselves upon industrial 
bases. Society, taken collectively, tends to organise itself in the same 
manner, by making production its only and constant aim. 

To resume, the last epoch has ended as regards the elements and is com- 
mencing as regards the ensemble. Its direct point of departure dates from 
the introduction of the Positive Sciences into Europe by the Arabs, and the 
enfranchisement of the Commons, that is to say, from about the eleventh 
century. 

In order to prevent all confusion in applying this general view, we 
should never lose sight of the fact that civilisation necessarily progressed in 
reference to the spiritual and temporal elemmits of the social state, before 
advancing in regard to their ensemble. Consequently the three great and 
successive phases were inevitably inaugurated as to their elements before 
they commenced as to the ensemble, a circumstance which might occasion 
some confusion if we did not make a large allowance for this unavoidable 
difference. 

Such then are the principal characteristics of the three epochs into which 
wp. can divide the entire history of civilisation, from the period when the 
social state began to acquire real solidity until the present time. I venture 
to submit to savants this primary division of the past ; which appears to me 
to fulfil the essential conditions of a good classification of the ensemble of 
political facts. 

If this be adopted we must discover at least one sub-division, in order to 
execute a first sketch of the great historic view. The principal dirision 
will facilitate the discovery of those which succeed it, by supplying the 
means of considering the phenomena from a point of view at once general 
and positive. It is clear also that, in conformity with the fundamental 
principle of classification, these different subdivisions should be conceived in 
the same spirit as the principal division, and constitute simply a develop- 
ment of it. 

Havino- thus appreciated the work of Condorcet as regards the distribu- 
tion of ep'ochs, we must consider the spirit which presided over its execu- 

Condorcet did not perceive that the first direct effort of a work which 
aimed at the formation of a positive polity should be to destroy for ever the 
critical philosophy of the eighteenth century, by turning the efforts of 
thinkars towards the reorganisation of society, as the practical aim of their 
labours. Consequently, he did not feel that the preliminary condition, the 
fulfilment of which was indispensable for executing the important enter- 

574 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

prise, consisted in divesting himself, as much as possible, of tlie prejudices 
introduced into all minds by this negative philosophy. Far from doing so 
he allowed himself to be blindly governed by these prejudice3. In place 
of observing, he condemned the past. Hence his work simply became 
a long fatiguing declamation, from which no positive instruction can be 
derived. 

Admiration and reprobation of phenomena ought to be banished with 
equal severity from every positive science, because all pre-occupations of this 
sort directly and unavoidably tend to hinder or mislead examination. 
Astronomers, physicists, chemists, and physiologists neither admire nor 
blame their respective phenomena. They observe them, although these 
phenomena may afford ample subject for reflections of each sort ; of which 
numerous examples may be cited. Savants, with reason, leave such con- 
siderations to artists within whose sphere they really fall. 

It should be the same in this respect in political science as in the other 
sciences. Such exclusion of admiration or reprobation is, however, much 
more needed for the former, because there it becomes more difficult, and 
affects the investigation more deeply, inasmuch as, in this science, the phe- 
nomeiia are much more closely connected with the passions than in any 
other. Thus, the Critical Spirit to which Condorcet yielded is directly con- 
trary to that which ought to reign in scientific politics, even though all the 
criticisms it makes on the past were well founded. But the mischief does 
not stop here. 

Doubtless, iis has been already remarked in this chapter, the practical 
combinations of statesmen have not always been conceived in a suitable 
way ; and frequently they have even been guided in a sense adverse to 
civilisation. This observation, however, merely amounts to this, that 
statesmen have endeavoured to continue, beyond their natural existence, 
doctrines and institutions no longer in harmony with the state of civilisa- 
tion. Assuredly such a mistake will appear very excusable ; if we consider 
that hitherto no positive mode has existed of discovering that it was an 
error. But to apply to systems of ideas and institutions a view applicable 
only to facts of secondary importance ; to represent, for example, as simply 
an obstacle to civilisation, that feudo-theological system which constituted, 
on the contrary, the most marked provisional progress of society, and 
enabled it to aflect so many definitive conquests ; to hold up the clas.-es 
who during a long succession of ages, led the general movement of society 
(IS engaged in a permanent conspiracy against mankind ; such a spirit, 
equally absurd in its principles and revolting in its consequences, is, I say, 
the irrational result of the philosophy of the last century, and it is deplor- 
able that a man like Condorcet should have been unable to withdraw him- 
self from its influence. 

This absurdity, springing from the inability to comprehend the natural 
connection between the advancing steps of civilisation, manifestly makes it 
impossible to explain them. Accordingly the work of Condorcet, generally 
speaking, is in constant contradiction with itself. 

On one hand it proclaims the state of civilisation reached in the 
Eighteenth Century as being in very many respects far superior to its 
original condition. But the total progress could only be the sum -of the 
partial advances eflfected by civilisation during all the preceding states. 
Condorcet, however, almost always, represents these as having been, from 
the most essential points of view, periods of retrogradation. We are thus 

GENEKAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 575 

landed in a perpetual miracle, and the progressive march of civilisation 
tecomea an effect without a cause. 

In a truly Positive Polity an entirely opposite spirit should prevail. 

We should regard institutions and doctrines as having reached, at every 
period, the greatest perfection compatible with the corresponding civilisa- 
tion, and this must have been the case, at least after a certain time, since 
they were necessarily determined by it. Moreover during their greatest 
vigom-, they always manifested a progressive and never a retrograde cha- 
racter. Otherwise they never could have held their ground against the 
march of civilisation whence their power was derived. Only in the period 
of their decline they usually exhibited a stationary character, a fact easily 
explicable, partly by the repugnance to extinction, as natural to political 
systems as it is to individuals, partly by the state of infancy in which 
politics have hitherto continued. 

We must consider in the same spirit the passions developed at the 
various epochs by the governing classes. During their greatest vigour 
the social forces are necessarily generous, for they have nothing more to 
gain and they have not yet learnt to fear. It is only when their decline 
commences that they become egotistic, because all their efforts are then 
directed to preserving a power the foundation of which is sapped. 

These views are in evident conformity with the laws of human nature, 
and alone furnish a satisfactory explanation of political phenomena. In a 
final analysis, then, instead of regarding the past as a tissue of monstrosities, 
we should, generally speaking, consider society as having been, on the 
■whole, guided with all the -wisdom which the situation allowed. 

If, at first sight, some special facts appear to contradict this general fact, 
it is always more philosophical to endeavour to discover the cause of the 
seeming deviation than at once to allege the existence of a contradiction. 
For it would be a departure from established scientific method to sub- 
ordinate the most important and best established fact to one of secondary 
nature and less frequent occurrence. 

It is evident indeed that this, like every other general idea, should not 
be used without proper limitations. 

Doubtless some resemblance is discoverable between the spirit of positive 
polity thus regarded, and the famous theologico-metaphysical dogma of 
Optimism. The analogy is, in truth, real. But there exists an immeasur- 
able difference between a general observed fact and an hypothetical creation 
of the imagination. The difference becomes still greater when we take the 
consequences into account. 

The theologico-metaphysical dogma by proclaiming as an absolute truth, 
that everything is as well ordered as possible, tends to make the human 
race stationary, since it takes away all prospect of real improvement The 
positive conception that the social organisation for a certain period during 
each epoch is as perfect as the state of civilisation permits, by no means 
checks the spirit of improvement. On the contrary this view imparts in 
practice a more efficacious impulse, since it directs to their true end,— the 
perfecting of civilisation, — efforts which would have remained abortive had 
they been directly applied to social organisation. Besides, such a con- 
ception, beino' neither absolute nor mystical, incites man to reestablish har- 
mony between the political regime and the state of civilisation, in cases 
where that relation has been temporarily deranged. But it throws light on 
the operation, by warning us not to mistake the effect for the cause. 

576 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

In reference to tliia analogy it is useful to observe that, in other matters 
also, the positive philosophy can by a suitable transformation, appropriate 
a general idea originated by the theologico-metaphysical philosophy. True 
general ideas, however erroneous may be the form they assume, never lose 
their value as methods of reasoning. The ordinary progress of the human 
mind consists in adapting them to its different states by transforming their 
character. We can verify this in all the revolutions ■which have conducted 
the different branches of knowledge to the positive state. 

Thus, for example, the mystic doctrine of the Influence of Numbers, 
originated by the School of Pythagoras, has been reduced bv geometers to 
this simpler and positive idea : phenomena which do not oft'er much com- 
plication can be reduced to mathematical laws. In like manner the doc- 
trine of Final Causes has been transformed by physiologists into the principle 
of conditions of existence. The two positive ideas, doubtless, di&'er widely 
from the two theologico-metaphysical ideas. But the latter, no less mani- 
festly, contain- the germ of the former. A well conceived philosophical 
operation sufRced to impart a positive character to these two hypotheses, 
the products of genius in the infancy of the human race. Moreover this 
transformation, far from impairing, has augmented their value as means of 
reasoning. 

The same reflections are exactly applicable to the two general political 
ideas, one positive the other fictitious, above compared. 

Before terminating our examination of the work of Condorcet, it is well 
to deduce from it a third point of view under which we may consider the 
spirit of positive polity. 

Condorcet has frequently been reproached with having ventured to 
terminate his work with a picture of the Future. This bold conception is, 
on the contrary, the only philosophical view of great importance introduced 
by Condorcet into his worlc, and one that ought to be carefully preserved in 
the new history of civilisation, of which such a picture evidently constitutes 
the natural conclusion. 

The reproach which may with reason be addressed to Condorcet is not 
that of having endeavoured to determine the future, but of having deter- 
mined it erroneously. This arose from his mode of conceiving the past, 
which, for the reasons already stated, was completely erroneous. Con- 
dorcet, having coordinated the past in a mistaken way, the future could not 
be deduced from it. This inadequacy of observation obliged him to frame 
the future in accordance with his imagination, and as a neces^sary eonse- 
quenco of this he conceived it wrongl}'. But this want of success, the 
cause of which is obvious, does not prove that, supposing the past to be 
rightly coordinated, we cannot determine, with certainty, the general cha- 
racteigstics of the social future. 

Such an idea onl}' seems strange because we are not yet accustomed to 
regard politics as a true science. For, thus regarded, the determination of 
the future through the philosophic observation of the post, would, on the 
contrary, strike us as perfectly natural, being familiarised to us by other 
kinds of phenomena. 

All sciences aim at prevision. For the laws established by the observa- 
tion of phenomena are generally employed to foretell their succession. In 
truth all men, however little advanced, make predictions, based on the same 
principle, the forecast of the future from the past. All men, for example, 
predict the general effects of terrestrial gravity, and a multitude of other 
phenomena sufficiently simple and usual to reveal their order of succession 

GENERAL :4PPENDIX— THIBD PAKT. 

577 

to tlie least capable and attentive spectator. The power of prevision is 
measured in each person by the extent of his knowledge. The prevision of 
the astronomer who predicts, with complete accuracy, the condition of the 
solar system many years in advance, is absolutely the same in kind as that 
of the savapre who predicts the next sunrise. The only difference lies in the 
extent of their knowledge. 

Manifestly then, it is quite in accordance with the nature of the human 
mind that observation of the past should reveal the future in politics as it 
has done in astronomy, physics, chemistry, and physiology. 

Such a determination of the future should even be regarded as the 
direct object of political science, as of the other positive sciences. It is 
clear, in truth, that the ascertainment of the Social System in which the 
elite of the human race are in our day called on to take part, constitutes the 
true practical object of positive politics, and is nothing but a general deter- 
mination of the future of society regarded as the result of the past. 
' To resume, Condorcet was the first to conceive the true nature of the 
general operation required for raising politics to the rank of the sciences of 
observation ; but his execution of this conception was, under the most 
essential aspects, completely erroneous. The end was entirely missed ; first 
in theory and consequently in practice. Thus this operation must be once 
more undertaken as a whole, in accordance with a truly philosophica 
method ; Condorcet's attempt being considered merely as an indication of 
the real end of scientific politics. 

In order to complete this brief examination of the efforts hitherto made 
to raise politics to the rank of the positive sciences, it remains for us to 
consider two other attempts. These, unlike the two former, do not fall 
within the true course of intellectual progress in political science ; never- 
theless, it is useful to mention them. 

The necessity for rendering Social Science positive is so evident in our 
day; this great enterprise has so completely arrived at maturity; that 
several superior minds have endeavoured to achieve it by treating politics as 
an application of other sciences, already rendered positive, by bringing it 
within their sphere. As these attempts, from their nature, could not be 
realised, they were much oftener projected than followed out. It will 
therefore be sufficient to consider them from the most general point of view. 

The first consisted in the attempt to treat social science by Mathema- Mathemat.- 
tical Analysis, and in especial by the Calculus of Probabilities. This road to found''' ' 
was opened by Oondorcet,^ and mainly followed by him. Other geometers '^pg^^S"™ 
pursued his path and shared his hopes, but added nothing essential to his Pniifv- 
labours, at least under the philosophical aspect. All agreed in regarding; this Condorcet. 
method as the only one adapted to impress a positive character on politics. 

The considerations developed in this chapter seem to me to establish 
sufficiently that the application of mathematical analysis is in no degree 
necessary to render politics a positive science. We cannot, however, stop 
here, for it is easy to see that such a mode of regarding social science is 
purely chimerical and consequently altogether erroneous. 

Were it our business to examine here in detail the works of this sort 

' Such a project on the part of Condorcet proves, as we have seen in mir previoijs 
inquiry, ihat he was far from having clearly conceived the fundamental importance 
of the History of Civilisation. For, had he disocriied in the philosophic obser^aLinn 
of the pa-it the method of rendering social science positive, he Would not have 
sought this elsewhere. 

VOL. IT. P P 

578 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

hitherto executed, we could easily prove that they have added no idea of 
any value to the mass of acquired knovpledge. For example, vre should find 
that the eftbrts of geometers to press the Calculus of Probahilities beyond 
its legitimate scope, have only resulted in offering, after long and trouble- 
some calculations, some almost trivial propositions as to the. theory of 
certainty, the truth of which is perceived at once by every man of good 
sense. But we must confine our examination to the enterprise itself 
regarded in its greatest generality. 

In the first place the considerations by which several physiologist*, 
especially Bichat, have shown the entire impossibility, generally speaking, 
of any real and important application of Mathematical Analysis to the phe- 
nomena of organised bodies, are, in a direct and special manner applicable to 
moral and political phenomena, which are only a particular development of 
the former. 

These considerations are based on the fact that the most indispensable 
preliminary condition of bringing phenomena within mathematical laws is 
that their degrees of quantity be tixed. Now in all physiological phe- 
nomena every result, whether partial or total, is subject to vast changes in 
quantity, which succeed each other with the greatest rapidity and in the 
most irregular manner, under the influence of a multitude of different 
causes not susceptible of any precise estimate. This extreme varinbility i.s 
one of the leading characteristics of the phenomena peculiar to organised 
bodies, and constitutes one of the broadest differences between them and 
unorganised bodies. It manifestly excludes all hope of ever submitting 
them to real calculations, such, for example, as those relating to astronomical 
phenomena ; the best fitted to serve as a type in comparisons of this sort. 

Having laid down this propos-itiou one can easily understand that this 
perpetual variation of effects, — resulting from the extreme complication of the 
causes that concur in producing them, — should reach its maximum in refer- 
ence to the moral and political phenomena of the human race, since these are 
of all physiological phenomena the most complicated. They are in truth the 
phenomena of which the quantitative variations are the greatest, the most 
frequent, and the most irregular. 

Weighing these considerations with due care, we may, without forming 
too low an opinion of human capacitj', imhesitatingly affirm that, not 
merelv in the present state of our knowledge, but when this has reached its 
highest conceivable range, every great application of Mathematics to Social 
Science is, and will remain necessarily impracticable. 

In the second place, even supposing such a hope could be realised, it is 
incontestably true that in order to rejilise it. Political Science must first he 
f-tndied directly, that is to say by endeavouring simply to coordinate the 
series of political phenomena. 

In truth, admitting the high importance of mathematical analysis when 
ri"htly employed, we must not lose sight of the fact that it is nothing but 
a means to an end or a Science of Method. In itself it teaches notliing real ; 
but only becomes a fruitful source of positive discovery when applied to 
observed phenomena. 

Within the sphere of those phenomena which admit of its being 
applied the application can never take place immediately. It always 
assinues, in the corresponding science, a preliminary degree of cultivation 
and improvement, consisting in the knowledge of precise hiws discovered 
b^ observation relating to the quantity of phenomena. So soon as such 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 579 

laws have been discovered, however imperfect they may be, mathematical 
analysis becomes applicable. Prom that time analysis, affording a powerful 
in.«trument of deduction, facilitates the reduction of phenomena to a small 
number of laws, often to a single law ; enables us to bring within its rauge, 
with the .utmost precision, a multitude of phenomena which at first sight 
seem not to fall under it. In a word it establishe.s in the science a complete 
coordination, unattainable to the same extent by any other means. But it 
is manifest that any application of mathematical analysis, if attempted 
before this preliminary condition of the discovery of certain laws of quan- 
tity has been fulfilled, would be entirely illusory. Far from rendering any 
branch of knowledge positive, such a proceeding would only replunge the 
study of nature into the metaphysical domain by transferring to abstractions 
what exclusively belongs to observation. 

Thus for example we can understand why mathematical analysis has 
been i^pplied, with great success, to astronomy, geometrical or mechanical, 
to optics, to acoustics, and quite recently to the theory of • heat, as soon as 
the progress of observation within these various branches of physios estab- 
lished exact and quantitative laws between their phenomena ; though 
before these discoveries, such applications could have had no real basis. In 
like manner, again, even those chemists who are most deeply convinced of 
the possibility of applying, at some future day largely, yet in a positive spirit, 
mathematical analysis to chemical phenomena do not on that account abstain 
from this direct study. For they are well convinced that a long series of 
investigations, based on observation and experiment, are essential for 
arriving at those numerical laws without which such an application of 
analysis would want a real foundation. 

The indispensable condition just indicated is the more difficult of fulfil- 
ment, and demands, in each science, a degree of progress and perfection all 
the greater in proportion as the phenomena are more complicated. In this 
iwa}', astronomy became, at least ;in its geometrical portion, a branch of 
applied mathematics before optics, optics before acoustics, and lastly : the 
theory of heat. So also chemistry in our day is very far from this state, if 
indeed it can ever reach it. 

Estimating thei-efore, by these indisputable principles, the application of 
mathematics to physiological phenomena in. general, and particularly to the 
social phenomena of the human race, we see that, even admitting such an 
application to be possible, it could in no way dispense with a direct study of 
social phenomena, which, on the contrary, it prescribes as a condition pre- 
cedent to any mathematical analysis. Moreover, considering with atten- 
tion the nature of this condition, we shall see it presupposes, as regards the 
physics of organised bodies in general, and social physics in particular, a 
degree of perfection which, even if attainable, could manifestly only be 
attained after ages of cultivation. The discovery of precise and calculable 
laws in physiology would indicate a degree of progress far beyond what is 
anticipated even by those physiologists who entertained the highest hopes 
of the future destiny of this science. In truth, for the reasons above 
pointed out, such a state of perfection should be regarded as being entirely 
chimerical, incompatible with the nature of the phenomena, and quite dis- 
proportioned to the real grasp of the human intellect. 

The same reasons evidently apply, with still greater force, to Political 
Science, having regard to the greater complication of its phenomena. To 
imagine the possibility of one day discovering quantitative relations Letwsen 

p p 2 

580 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

the phenomena of this science assumes that it can be perfected to such a 
degree that, even before it had reached that point of perfection, everythinj; 
really interesting would have been discovered to an extent far exceeding all 
reasonable expectations. Thus, mathematical analysis would only become 
applicable at a time when its application could no longer have any real 
importance. 

It results from the preceding remarks that on one hand the nature of 
political phenomena absolutely forbids all hope of applying to them mathe- 
matical analysis, on the other that its application, assuming it to be pos.^ible, '5 
could not raise politics to the rank of a positive science, since this pre- 
supposes the existence of political science. 

Up to the present time, Geometers have not sufficiently attended to the 
great and fundamental division of our positive investigations, into the study 
of inorganic and of organised bodies. This division, which we owe to phy- 
siologists, is now settled on a basis that cannot be shaken, and is established 
more and more firmly in proportion as it is carefully examined. It limife?, 
in a precise and unalterable way, the true applications of mathematics, even 
when extended as far as possible. We can establish as a principle the 
impossibility of extending mathematical analysis beyond the physics of 
inorganic bodies, the phenomena of which are the only ones which offer the 
degree of simplicity and consequently of fixity requisite for their reduction i _ 
to numerical laws. 

If we take into account how, even in the simplest applications of mathe- 
matical analysis, its progress is embarrassed when we endeavour to bring 
its abstract results sufficiently into harmony with concrete facts, it will be 
seen that its real sphere is rather exaggerated than underestimated by the 
principle above stated. 

The idea of treating Social Science as an application of Mathematics in 
order to give it a political character, had its source in the metaphysical pre- 
judice that outside of mathematics there can be no real certainty. This 
prejudice was natural at the period when all positive knowledge lay within 
the sphere of applied mathematics, and when in consequence everything 
not embraced by them was vague and conjectural. But since the rise of 
two great positive sciences, chemistry and especially physiology, where 
mathematical analysis plays no part, and which are not the less felt to be 
as certain as the rest, such a prejudice is entirely inexcusable. 

Astronomy, optics, &c., are not positive and certain sciences because 
they are applications of mathematical analysis. This character belongs to 
them in their own nature. It results from their being founded on ob- 
served facts, and can only result from that, for mathematical analysis when 
isolated from the observation of nature has merely a metaphysical cha- 
racter. Undoubtedly, in the sciences to which mathematics are inappli- 
.,cable, we sliould keep much closer to the line of simple and direct observa- I 
tion. Deductions cannot be prolonged so far with .safety, because the 
smeans of reasoning are much less perfect. With this single difference 
and within proper limits, their certainty is as grent. We obtain, no doubt, a ,j 
less complete coordination, but one sufficient for the real wants of scientific 4 
application. I 

The chimerical search after an unattainable perfection could have no 
other result but the unavoidable retardation of the progress of the huniiin 
mind ; wasting grent intellectual Ibrces and turning the efforts of savants 
from their tiliL'iicious positive direction. Such is the definitive judgment. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 

581 

■which, I believe, should he passed on attempts, past or future, to apply 
mathematical analysis to social physics. 

A second attempt, and one in its nature infinitely less misleading than ^*[f^^°s^ 
the_ preceding, hut equally unattainable, is that which seeks to give a sdenceof 
positive character to Social Science by treating it simply as a direct con- |°*j^L 
sequence of Physiology. Cabanis is the author of this conception, and Cauanis. 
by him chiefly it was elaborated. It forms the true philosophic aim of 
his celebrated work entitled, 'Relations between the Physical and the 
Moral in Man ; ' and will be so regarded by every person who has con- 
sidered the general doctrine expounded in his work as organic and not 
purely critical. 

The considerations submitted in this chapter on the spirit of Positive 
Polity prove that this attempt, like the one last noticed, was, of necessity, 
misconceived. But we must accurately point out its error. 

This consists in a disregard of that direct observation of the social past 
which should supply the fundamental basis of positive politics. 

The superiority of man as compared with the other animals has, and in 
truth can have, no other cause than the relative perfection of his organisa- 
tion. Therefore everything that the human race has efiected, and can effect, 
must manifestly be regarded as being in the last resort a necessary conse- 
quence of organisation modified in its results by external circumstances. In 
one sense Social Physics, that is to say the study of the collective develop- 
ment of the human race, is really a branch of physiology, or the study of 
man conceived in its entire extension. In other words the History of Civili- 
sation is nothing hut the indispensable result and complement of the Natural 
History of man. 

But if it he important to understand thoroughly and never to lose 
sight of this incontestable filiation, on the other hand it is a complete mis- 
take to draw the conclusion that it is unnecessary to institute any clear 
demarcation between Social Physiology and Physiology properly so called. 

When physiologists study the natural history of an animal species 
endowed with sociability, — that of the beavers for example, — they rightly 
include the history of the collective action exerted by the community. They 
do not consider it necessary to establish a line of demarcation between the 
study of the social phenomena affecting the race and that of the phenomena 
which concern the individual. Such an abseace of precise thought does no 
real harm in this case, although the two orders of phenomena are distinct. 
For, inasmuch as the civilisation even of the most intelligent among the 
sociable races is arrested almost at its commencement, mainly by the im- 
perfections of their organisation, and secondarily by the preponderance of 
the human race, so short a series of connected facts offers no difficulty to 
the coordination of the collective phenomena with the individual phe- 
nomena. Thus the general ground for creating divisions calculated to facili- 
tate study, — namely our intellectual inability to follow too long a chain of 
deductions, — does not here exist. 

On the other hand, let us suppose the species of beavers to have become 
more intelligent, its civilisation developing itself freely, so that a continual 
chain of progress from one generation to another existed, we shall at once 
feel the necessity for treating apart the history of the Social Phenomena of 
the species. As to the earliest generations this study might be connected 
with that of individual phenomena. But in proportion as we receded from 
the commencement, the deduction would become more difficult of verifica- 

582 STSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

tion, and'at last impracticable This is exactly what takes place in the 
highest degree with reference to man. 

No doubt the collective phenomena of the human race, as well as its 
individual phenomena, must, ultimately, be traced to the special nature of 
its organisation. But the condition of human civilisation in each genera- 
tion directly depends- only on that of the preceding, and directly produces 
only that of the followiEg generation. It is possible to tollow this con- 
nection, as precisely as is requisite, from the beginning, if we only attempt 
to establish the immediate relations of the succeeding terms of the series. 
On the conti'ary it would entirely exceed our mental force to connect the 
later and earliest steps of progress if we suppressed all intermediate links. 

The rashness of such an enterprise in the study of the race, may be 
illustrated by a reference to individual phenomena. Assume the case of a 
physiologist who, convinced that the different phenomena of the successive 
periods of life are simply the consequence and necessary development of the 
primitive organisation, should attempt to deduce with precision the history 
of any given vital epoch from the condition of the individual at his birth, 
and discard all direct examination of the different periods as not required 
for the comprehension of the developed state. The error is even more 
serious as regards the race than it would be in reference to the individual, 
seeing that the successive terms of the series are both much more compli- 
cated and much more numerous in the first than in the second case. 

An obstinate perseverance in this impracticable course would not only 
render it impossible to study the History of Civilisation in a .satisfactory 
manner, but unavoidably lead us into fundamental errors. For, owing to 
the total impossibility of directly connecting the different states of civili- 
sation with the original and general starting-point as determined by the 
special nature of man, we should soon be led to attribute to the immediate 
action of secoisdary organic circumstances facts that really are remote con- 
sequences of the fundamental laws of our organisation. 

Thus for example several distinguished physiologists have given an 
exaggerated importance to characteristics of Race as explaining political 
phenomena. They have attributed to them national differences, almost 
invariably due to the inequality of advance in civilisation. Hence the un- 
fortimate error of treating what in truth is but momentary, as if it were 
unalterable. Such aberrations, of which it would be easy to multiply 
examples, and which are all derived from the same primitive error in the 
mode of proceeding, clearly confirm the necessity for separating the study 
of social from that of ordinary physiological phenomena. 

Mathematicians who have attained to philosophical conceptions consider 
the phenomena of the universe, both organic and inorganic, as embraced by 
a small number of immutable laws common to them all. On this phy^i- 
ologists with reason observe tliat, even supposing all these were one day 
perfectly known, the impossibility of making an uninterrupted series of 
deductions would necessitate the maintenance of the division between the 
study of living and that of inert bodies, which is now founded on the 
diversity of laws. The same reason is directly applicable to the division 
between social physics and physiology properly so called, in other words 
between the physiology of the race and that of the individual. The 
separation is, no doubt, much less marked, since the one is a secondary the 
other a primary division. But, allowing for this difJerence of degree, there 
is a similar impossibility of deduction. 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— THIRD PAliT. 583 

Tlie total insufficiency of this deductive mode of proceeding can be 
easily verified, if, in place of regarding it merely in relation to the theory 
of positive politics, we consider its bearing on the Practical Aim of this 
science, that is to say the determination of the system in accordance with 
which society should now be reorganised. 

No doubt we can demonstrate from physiological laws what is the 
general state of civilisation most conformable to the nature of the human 
race. But it is evident from the preceding remarks that we cannot advance 
tarther on this road. Such an idea taken by itself is merely speculative, 
and cannot practically lead to any real and positive result. For it does not 
enable us to know positively, how far the human race at present falls short 
of this point, the course that should be followed to reach it, or the general 
plan of social organisation corresponding thereto ; all matters requiring a 
direct study of the history of civilisation. 

If, notwithstanding, we seek to give a practical basis to this speculative 
and incomplete conceptiou it becomes impossible to avoid the absolute. For 
tlie application of Social Science would thus consist in forming an unvary- 
ing type of vague perfection, without any distinction of epochs, after the 
model of conjectural polity. The conditions by which the excellence of 
this type is determined are certainly much more positive than those which 
serve to guide theological and metaphysical polity. But this does not 
change the absolute character inherent in such a problem, treat it as we ' 
may. Politics therefore can never become truly positive in this way. 

Thus, whether from the theoretical or practical point of view, it is 
equally erroneous to conceive Social Science as simply a result of Phy- 
siology, r 

The true and direct relation between the knowledge of the Human 
Organisation and Political Science, as characterised in this chapter, consists 
in the fact that the former supplies the latter with its point of departure. 

To physiology exclusively belongs the positive demonstration of those 
causes which render the human race competent to develop a constantly 
progressive civilisation, so long as the condition of our planet opposes no 
insurmountable obstacle. Physiology alone can mark out the true charac- 
ter and the general course of this civilisation. Lastly it alone can throw 
light upon the formation of the primitive aggregations of men, and deduce 
the history of the childhood of our race down to the period when this gave 
the first impulse to civilisation by creating Language. 

Here naturally stops the office of directly physiological considerations 
in relation to social physics, which should then be based simply on the 
immediate observation of the progress of the human race. Beyond the 
point thus indicated the difficulty of deduction would surpass our forces, 
because thenceforward the advance of civilisation becomes much more 
rapid, so that the number of phenomena requiring coordination suddenly 
augments. On the other hand the office which physiology should perform 
in the study of the past of society would no longer be necessary, or 
required to supply the want of direct observation. For reckoning from the 
creation of language immediate data for tracing the development of civili- 
sation exist, so that no gap occurs to mar the completeness of positive 
conceptions. 

To obtain a complete view of the true office of Physiology in social 
physics we must add to the preceding remarks another consideration. As 
Condorcet truly felt, the development of the race, — being only the resultant 

584 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

of individual development passing from one generation to another,— should, 
of necessity, present a general likeness to the natural history of the indi- 
vidual. Owing to this analogy the study of man, considered hy himself, 
supplies certain means of verification and reasoning, as regards that of the 
race, of a kind distinct from those above mentioned, and which, though 
less important, have the advantage of embracing all epochs. 

To resume, although the physiology of the race, and that of the indi- 
vidual constitute two sciences exactly similar in kind, or rather two 
distinct portions of a single science, it is nevertlieless indispensable to 
conceive and treat them separately. It is necessary that the former should 
seek its basis and starting-point in the latter, if it would become truly 
positive. But it should then be studied apart, and repose upon the direct 
observation of social phenomena. 

The attempt to place Social Physics exclusively in the domain of Physi- 
ology was natural, when no other way could be found of impressing the 
former with a positive character. But this error would be without excuse 
now that we can easily satisfy ourselves of the possibility of rendering 
Political Science positive by basing it on the immediate observation of the 
history of society. 

In the second place, at the epoch when the study of the intellectual and 
moral functions was transferred from the sphere of metaphysics to that of 
pliysiology, it was difiicult to avoid all exaggeration in ascertaining the 
true domain of physiology and not to include in this the investigation of 
social phenomena. The period of conquests cannot be that for assigning 
.precise limits. Accordingly Cabanis, -who was one of the chief cooperators 
in this great revolution, is specially excusable for his illusion on this head. 
But now when a severe analysis can and ought to succeed to the enthusiasm 
of the original impulse, nothing should any longer prevent our recognising 
the necessity for a division indispensably demanded by the weakness of the 
human intellect. 

No real ground now exists for isolating, in the study of the individual, 
the phenomena specially called moral from the rest. The revolution which 
has bound them all together must be regarded aa the most essential step 
that physiology has made as yet under the philosophical aspect. 

On the contrary, considerations of primary importance demonstrate the 
absolute necessity of separating the study of the collective phenomena of 
the human race from that of individual phenomena ; while establishing, 
nevertheless, the natural relations that exist between these two great 
sections of physiology. The endeavour to dispense with this necessary 
division would be an error, less serious indeed, but of the same sort as that, 
so justly combated bj' true physiologists, which presents the study of 
living bodies as a mere consequence of and appendix to that of inorganic 
bodies. 

Such are the four chief attempts, made to the present time, to raise 
politics to the rank of the sciences of observation, and which, taken to- 
gether, decisively prove the necessity and maturity of this great enterprise. 
Each, when specially examined from a distinct point of view, confirms the 
principles already set forth in this chapter as to the true mode of giving a 
positive character to politics, and consequently of forming with certainty 
the general conception of the New Social System which can alone terminate 
the existing crisis of civilised Europe. 

We may then take it as demonstrated, both d priori and a posteriori, 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 585 

■that this great result can only he attained by considering Political Science Social Phy- 

as a special kind of physics hased upon direct ohservation of the phenomena b^^ed on™" 

relative to the collective development of the human race. Its aim must direct oteer- 

be the coordination of the social past, and its result the determination coUeotived^- 

of the system vyhich the march of civilisation tends to produce in our veiopment of 

.' ^ mankind. 

time. 

This Science of Social Physics is, evidently, as positive as any other 
science of observation, and its certainty quite as real.' The laws which 
it discovers, being based on the ensemble of observed phenomena, their 
application deserves our entire confidence. , 

This science, like all others, possesses general resources for verification, 
even independently of its necessary relation with physiology. These re- 
sources are based on the fact that in the present condition of the human 
race, considered as a whole, all degrees of civilisation coexist on diiFerent 
points of the globe, from that of the New Zealand savages to that of the 
French and English. Thus the connection established by the succession 
of epochs can be verified by a comparison of places. 

At first sight the new science seems to be reduced to simple observa- 
tion, and wholly deprived of the help of experiment ; yet this, as astronomy 
proves, would not prevent it from becoming positive. But in physiology, 
setting aside experiments on animals, pathological cases are really equivalent 
to direct experiment on man, because they change the habitual order of 
phenomena. In like manner and for similar reasons, the various epochs 
when political combinations tended more or less to arrest the development 
of civilisation should be regarded as real experiments in Social Physics,, 
even better fitted than pure observation to manifest or confirm the natural 
laws which preside over the collective progress of mankind. 

If, as I venture to hope, the considerations submitted in this chapter 
convince savants of the importance and possibility of founding positive 
political science in the sense above indicated, I shall offer in greater 
detail my opinion on the mode of executing this first series of operations. 
But I deem it advisable to repeat the necessity for dividing it into two 
kinds, the first embracing general conceptions, the second special investi- 
gations. 

The first kind of investigations should aim at establishing the general 
progress of maukind, putting aside the various causes that may modify 
the rate at which civilisation advances and consequently all the differences 
between nations, however great these may be. The second kind of in- 
vestigations should aim at estimating the influence of their modifying 
elements, thus drawing the final picture in which each nation shall till 
the special position appropriate to its own development. 

Both classes of investigations, but especially the latter, admit of various 
deo-rees of generality, the necessity for which will probably make itself 
apparent to savants. 

The propriety of treating the first order of investigations before the 
second is based on this evident principle, — as applicable to the physiology 

■ Doubtless it is superfluous to refute the exaggerated objections presented by 
different authors, especinlly by Volney, against the certainty of historic facts. 
Even supposing these objections could be adopted to the extent urged by these 
writers, they would not in the least affect the most important and general facts, 
wnich alone need be considered in the study of civilisation. 

586 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

of the race as to that of the individual, — that peculiarities should only be 
studied after establishing general laws. If this rule were disregarded, we 
should be obliged to forego the acquisition of any clear conception. 

The possibility of proceeding in this way results from the fact that an 
adequate number of special points have in our day been 'suHiciently in- 
vestigated to allow of our attempting their general coordination. Physio- 
logists did not postpone the task of framing a conception of the ensemble 
of our organisation until all the special functions were known. It ought 
to be the same in Kocial Physics. 

Stating the foregoing considerations with more precision, we see that 
they tend to establish the necessity for proceeding from the general to the 
particular in forming Political Science. Examining this precept in a direct 
manner, we easily recognise its truth. 

The method pursued by the human mind in the investigation of the 
laws which govern natural phenomena under the point of view we are 
now considering presents an important difference, according as it occupies 
itself with the physics of inorganic or of organic bodies. 

As regards the former branch, man forms an imperceptible portion of 
an immense series of phenomena,' the entirety of which we can never, 
without great presumption, hope to grasp. As soon therefore as he begins 
to study these in a positive spirit, he must consider the most special facts 
in order gradually to raise himself to the knowledge of some general laws, 
which in turn become the starting-point for fresh investigations. On the 
other hand in the physics of organised bodies man is himself the most 
complete type of the ensemble of phenomena. Hence his positive dis- 
coveries of necessity begin with the most general facts, which afford him 
an indispensable assistance in studying a class of details the precise know- 
ledge of which he is, by their nature, for ever precluded from ascertaining. 
In a word, in both cases, the human intellect proceeds from the known 
to the unknown ; but in the first he rises from the particular to the general, 
because the knowledge of details is more accessible to him that that of the 
ensemble ; while in the second, he begins by descending from the general 
to the particular, because he is more intimately acquainted with the whole 
than with the parts. The perfecting of these two sciences, viewed philo- 
sophically, consists in allowing each to adopt the method of the other, 
although the characteristic method must always have the preference. 

Having considered this law from the highest point of view which 
positive philosophy affords, it admits of an easy verification by observing 
the development of the Natural Sciences down to the present day, be- 
ginning with the moment when each of them definitively ceased to possess 
the theological or metaphysical character. 

In the study of inorganic bodies, considering only its main divisions, 
we find astronomy, physics, and chemistry at first quite isolated from each 
other, and afterwards becoming mutually related to such an extent that 
they now tend to become a single science. In like manner, considering 
each branch apart, we trace it springing' from the study of facts at first 
incoherent, and gradually reaching the generalisations now known. It is 
only in astronomy and some sections of terrestrial physics that the human 
mind has as yet succeeded, to any great extent, in following a different 
course. It may even be said that in astronomy the original course has 
only been altered by the law of universal gravitation in a secondary 
degree, as regards the ensemble of phenomena, though in the most iui- 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— THIED PAIiT. 587 

pnrtmit way as regards ourselves. For it has not yet embraced, and, in all 
likelihood, never will bring within the sphere of its applications, the most 
general astronomical facts, namely the relations of the different solar 
systems of which we possess no knowledge. This remark, concerning the 
most perfect branch of inorganic physics, offers a striking verification of 
the principle above stated. 

If we next examine the application of this principle to the study of 
living bodies its confirmation is equally evident. In the first place the 
general relations that connect the component functions of an organism are 
now assuredly better understood than the partial activity of each organ. 
In like manner, considered from a still more general point of view, the 
study of the general relations that exist between the various organisms, 
whether animal or vegetable, is, doubtless, more advanced than that of 
each special organism. In the second place the main branches of organic 
physics were at first confounded under one head. Only in consequence of 
the progress of positive physiology have we succeeded in analysing with 
precision the different general points of view under which a living body 
can be considered so as to found a rational division of the science upon 
these distinctions. Se certain is this, that, having regard to the recent 
date when the physics of organised bodies really acquired a. positive 
character, the distribution of its chief parts has not even yet been clearly 
settled. The above view is still more apparent in reference to savants 
than to the sciences, since physiologists are evidently less special in their 
investigations than the savants devoted to the study of inorganic bodies. 

We may therefore consider it established, by observation and reasoning, 
that the human intellect ordinarily advances from the particular to the 
general in inorganic physics, but on the contrary from the general to the 
particular in organic physics ; that, at all events, the latter science un- 
doubtedly advances for a long while in this direction from the moment it 
assumes a positive character. 

If, hitherto, the second part of this law has been ignored, if it has 
been assumed that, in every kind of research, the human mind, of neces- 
sity, proceeds from the particular to the general, this error admits of an 
easy explanation. The physics of inorganic bodies having been, as was 
natural, first established, the precepts of positive philosophy were naturillly 
based on the observation of its progress. But the continuance of this error 
would be inexcusable, now that philosophical observation can embrace 
both orders of natural sciences. 

Applying, then, to Social Physics, which is only a branch of ph^'siology, 
the principle just demonstrated, it proves that in studying the development 
of the human race we must commence by coordinating the most general 
facts, descending from these to deductions of increasing speciality. But, 
in order that there may be no uncertainty as to this essential point, we 
shall do well to verify the principle directly for the particular case. 

All historical works hitherto written, even the best of them, have 
mer(jly had and could only have the character of annals ; that is to say 
they described, in chronological order, a certain series of special facts, more 
or less important and correct, but always isolated from each other. No 
doubt considerations relating to the coordination and the filiation of 
political phenomena have not been wholly neglected, especially during the 
last half-century. But it is clear that this introduction of new ideas has 
not, as yet, remoulded the character of this sort of composition which still 

588 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

wears the literary stamp.' As yet there exists no true history, conceived in 
a scientific spirit, that is to say aiming at the discoveiy of those laws which 
regulate the social development of the human race ; the object of the series 
of investigations considered in this chapter. 

The distinction thus pointed out suflSces to explain why it was, almost 
universally, believed up to the present time, that in history we should pro- 
ceed from the particular to the general, and why, on the contrary, we ought 
now to proceed from the general to the particular, under the penalty of ob- 
taining no result. 

For when we only endeavour to frame with accuracy general Annals of 
the human race, we should manifestly begin by constructing those of the 
different nations, which in turn can only be founded on provincial and civic 
chronicles or even on simple biographies. In like manner, in order to form 
complete annals of each portion of the population, it is indispensable to 
group a series of separate documents relative to each point of view under 
which they ought to be considered. In this way we ought, unquestionably, 
to proceed in order to collect the general facts that form the materials of 
Political Science, or rather the objects with which its combinations are 
concerned. But a wholly opposite course becomes indispensable, as soon as 
we aim at the direct formation of the science, that is to say, the study of 
the connection of the phenomena. 

In truth, from their very nature, all kinds of social phenomena develop 
themselves simultaneously, and under the influence of each other, so that it 
is absolutely impossible to explain the course pursued by any of them, with- 
out having first formed a general conception of the progress of the whole. 

For example, everyone knows, in our day, that the reciprocal action of 
the different European states is too important to allow of their histories 
being really separated. But the same impossibility is not less apparent, in 
reference to the different kinds of political facts subsisting in a separate 
society. Is there not a manifest connection between the advance of one 
science or art and that of the other sciences or arts? Is not the progress 
of the study of nature related to that of our command over nature ? Are 
not both intimately bound up with the condition of the social organisation, 
and reciprocally ? Therefore in order to ascertain with precision the real 
laws affecting the development of the simplest branch of society, we ought 
to reach the same degree of precision for the rest ; which is evidently absurd. 

On the contrary we should make it our primary aim to conceive, in its 
greatest generality, the development of the human race, that is to say to 
observe and connect with each other the most important advances it has 
successively made in different directions. Next we should endeavour gradu- 
ally to impart to this picture an increasing degree of precision ; subdividing, 
with greater distinctness, the lines of separate observation and the phe- 
nomena to be observed. In like manner in a practical point of view, the 
picture of our social future, at first determined in a general manner, by a 
primary study of the past, will become more and more detailed, in proportion 
a.i our knowledge of the antecedent progress of the human race increases. 
The final perfection of the science,— one which in all likelihood will never 

' I am here only seeking to establish a fact, not to judge it. Besides, I am 
well convinced of the utility, and even of the absolute necessity, of this class of 
"writings considered .as preliminary operations. But it is equally certain that 
annals are no more history than collections of meteorological observations are 
physics. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— THIRD PART. 589 

be completely attained, — would consist, as regards tl)eory, in conceiving with 
precision the Filiation which, from the commencement, connects the advances 
made by each generation with those of the preceding and succeeding gene- 
rations, embracing the entire body politic, every science, art, and portion of 
the political organisation. As regards practice, such perfection would con- 
sist in a rigorous determination, embracing every essential detail, of that 
system which by the natural progress of civilisation ought to prevail as the 
Final Social System. 

Such is the method strictly prescribed by the nature of Social Physics. 

.'590 SYSTEM OF POSITITK POLITY, 

FOURTH PART. 

{Nucemhei- 1825.) 

PHILOSOPHICAL CONSIDEEAIIONS GST THE SCIENCES AND SAVANTS. 

t)'''^Ti^*°* In whatever way we study the general development of the human intellect, 
States. whether according to the rational method or empirically, we discover, de- 

spite of all seeming irregularities, a fundamental Law to which its progress is 
necessarily and invariably subjected. This law consists in the fact that, the 
mental constitution of man, and every portion of it, of necessity, passes 
through three successive phases, the Theological, the Metaphysical, and the 
Positive or physical. Thus man began by considering phenomena of every 
kind as due to the direct and continuous iniluence of supernatural agents; 
he next regarded them as products of different abstract forces, residing in 
the bodies but distinct and heterogeneous ; while he ends by viewing them 
ns subjected to a certain number of natural and invariable laws, which are 
merely the general expression of the relations observed in their develop- 
ment. 

All who have adequately studied the state of the human mind at the 
various epochs of civilisation will easily verify the correctness of this 
general statement. A very simple observation suffices to guide us to this 
verification now that the revolution has been effected in reference to the 
larger portion of our ideas. The education of the individual, so far as this 
is spontaneous, necessarily presents the same essential phases as that of the 
race and vice versa. Now at the present day everyone who is on a level 
with his time can easily see by his own experience, that he was during his 
infancy a theologian, in his youth a metaphysician, and has become a 
physical thinker in his mature age. The history of the sciences proves that 
the same has taken place in reference to the human race. But in addition 
to this fact, it is possible to explain why the formation of human ideas 
necessarily followed this course. 

In order to comprehend this inevitable concatenation, we must consider 
the above law. like all other social facts, from a twofold point of view ; 
under the physical aspect, as being inevitable and flowing from the natural 
laws of human organisation, and under the moral aspect, as being indis- 
pensable, and constituting the only mode adapted to the development of the 
human mind. 

Under the first of these aspects the law is easily intelligible. 

A natural and irresistible instinct disposes the human race to adopt 
theological before reaching physical philosophy. The personal action 
exerted by man on other beings is the imly kind of which he comprehends 
the vKidii.-i operandi; through his consi-ionsness of it. He is thus led to 
conceive in an analogous way the reaction which external bodies exert upon 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— FOURTH PAET. 591 

himself, and likewise the action they exert upon each other, of which he 
can only see the results. At all events he must conceive them in this way 
until the progress of observation has revealed the striking differences that 
separate these phenomena from his own. If, subsequently, he alters his 
conceptions on this subject, it is only because, having been disabused by 
experience and reflecti(m of original illusions, he entirely 'renounces the 
attempt to penetrate the mystery which envelops the mode of producing 
phenomena, — all knowledge of their nature being for ever inaccessible to 
him, — For the mere observation of their effective laws. Even, at the present 
time, after all our advance in positive notions, if we endeavoured, in 
reference to the simplest phenomena to understand how the fact we name 
a cause engenders the other fact we name an effect, we should be unavoidably 
compelled to resort to images analogous to tliose wliich served as the basis 
of the primitive human theories : as Barthez, generalising an idea of Hume, 
has judiciously remarked. 

Man, then, necessarily begins by regarding all the bodies which attract 
his attention as so many living beings, animated with a life resembling his 
own ; but, generally speaking, more intense, by reason of their greater activity. 
Afterwards, continued observation leads man to convert this primitive 
hypothesis into another, less enduring one, that namely of a dead nature 
guided by a larger or smaller number of invisible superhuman agents, dis- 
tinct and independent of one another,corre3ponding in attributes and authority 
to the kind and extent of the phenomena attributed to their agency. This 
theory, originally applied only to the phenomena of external bodies, is at a 
subsequent period extended even to those of social and individual man, so 
soon as our range of thought has embraced these. Then it is that Theo- 
logical Philosophy begins to acquire real consistency and to influence power- 
fully the progress of the human mind. 

But the inevitable and continued improvement of our knowledge of 
nature before long modifies and in the end destroys this system. 

In truth, man has never been entirely in the theological condition. Some 
phenomena have always existed, so simple and regular, that, from the first, 
he could only consider them as subjected to natural laws, in the way which 
Adam Smith has well explained.' But such phenomena were at the out- 
set neither the most numerous nor the most important. As to other phe- 
nomena, it may be said that man had recourse to theological explanations 
only so long as physical conceptions were impossible. Whenever they 
became attainable, he adopted them exclusively. 

The first effect of the progress of observation was to dispose the human 
mind gradually to reduce the number of supernatural agents ; attributing to 
one the operations which originally demanded several, according as the 
relations of phenomena acquired gTeater gener.ility. This result, pusbed as 
far as possible, finally simplified the theological system so far as to reduce it 
to unity. 

From this period, the continuous action of the identical principle which 
at first guided the human mind from Fetichism to Polytheism, and finally 
from Polytheism to Theism, led him to onfine the intervention of the great 

1 See in his Posthumous "Works the ' Philosophical Essay on the History of 
Astrou my.' This work, too little known on the ("ontinent, and generally insuffi- 
ciently appreciited, is more positive in its haracter than the other productions 
of Scottish philosophy, those of Hume excepted. Remarkable in its day it may 
even yet be studied with great adrantage. 

592 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

supernatural cause within limits more and more narrow, always reserving 
its application for those phenomena whose laws remained unknown. As 
to all other phenomena, when the discovery of their laws permitted their 
accurate prediction, and consequently allowed man to regulate them more 
completely than theological theories could do, he discontinued, more and 
more, the employment of these in his habitual speculations and resorted 
increasingly to the conceptions which ministered more completely to his 
two grand necessities, — prevision and action. Finally, from the time that 
natural conceptions acquired sufficient extension and genei'ality (that is to 
say in our own daj'), and embraced in their essentials all the objects of 
investigation really accessible to us, the human intellect, extending analogi- 
cally to all, even unknown, phenomena, what had only been verified for a 
certain number, cons-idered all of them as subject to physical laws, the dis- 
covery of which, witli increasing accuracy, became thenceforward the only 
reasonable object of our speculative labours. From that time the Theological 
Method, which had not entirely ceased to be employed, was considered aa 
inapplicable to our investigations, and the Positive Method began exclusively 
to direct the action of our intelligence. 

Having thus considered this great revolution as inevitable, it is necessary 
to explain why it was indispensable to the development of the human 
reason. The Positive Method has in our day obtained so complete an ascen- 
dancy over the intellect that we find a difficulty in understanding why 
the Theological and Metaphysical Philosophy were at any period useful, far 
less necessaiy, as an instrument of research. They, but especially the 
former, are almost universally regarded as aberrations of the intellect, even by 
the small number of thinkers who perceive that they were unavoidable. It is, 
then, necessary to rectify our conceptions on this important point, since, if 
it be not explained, we could understand the law of the succession of the 
three philosophies very imperfectly and in a way greatly to limit the extent 
and value of its applications. It is, without doubt, important to prove that 
the human mind has not continued down to our time in a state of madness ; 
and that at each epoch it has constantly employed that method which was 
most favourable to its progress, at least as regards the general scope of its 
efforts. 

Assuredly it cannot now be denied that observation of facts is the only 
solid basis for human knowledge. Taking this principle in its most rigorous 
sense, we may say with strict truth that no proposition which does mt 
admit of being reduced to a mere enunciation of fact, particular or general, 
can have any real or intelligible sense. But it is no less certain that the 
development of the Imagination must precede that of Observation. The 
causes which necessitate this order in the education of the individual, render 
it still more indispensable in that of the race. 

The positive method is the safest and even the only safe one ; but it is, 
at the same time, the slowest, and for this reason quite unsuitable to the 
infancy of the human mind. If this be appreciablj' felt even when ouv 
intelligence has long been in full activity, we can easily see that it must 
have been so much more decidedly at the period of our earliest eff'orts. The 
mere possibility of such a method presupposed a series of observations, pro- 
longed in proportion as the most elementary natural laws demand more time 
for their discovery. On the other hand, whatever may be asserted to the con- 
trary, pure empiricism is impossible. Unless man connects facts with .'nine 
explanation, he is naturally incapable not merely of combining and making 

GENERAL APPENDIX-FOUETH PART. 593 

deductions from them, but even of observing and recollecting them. In a 
word it is aa impossible to make coutinuous observations without a theory 
of some kind, as to construct a positive theory without continuous observa- 
tions. It is therefore plain that the human mind would have unavoidably 
remained in a perpetual torpor, had it been compelled to defer all reasoning 
about phenomena until their relations, and the mode of investigating theni, 
could be derived from observation. Accordingly the earliest advances of 
the human intellect could not be effected in any other way than the theo- 
logical method, the only one susceptible of spontaneous development. It 
alone possessed the important properly of presenting from the outset a pro- 
visional theory, vague and arbitrary, it is true, but direct and easy, which 
immediately grouped the primary facts and, by cultivating our faculties 
of observation, prepared the advent of a positive philosophy. 

Were it possible here to enter into some details on this great subject, 
we should see clearly that the Theological Philosophy, as a whole, not only 
was indispensable for preparing the development of the positive method ; 
but that its various improvements, the result of accumulating observations, 
by a necessary reaction contributed much to accelerate these. To mention 
only the most remarkable example, it is evident that unless Polytheism had 
risen to Theism, natural theories could never have developed themselves. 
This admirable simplification of theological philosophy reduced the action 
of the chief supernatural power, in each special case, to a certain general 
direction, the character of which was unavoidably vague. Thus the human 
mind was autliorised, and even strongly impelled, to study the physical laws 
of each class of phenomena regarded as a mode of action of this power. On 
the contrary, before this epoch, since the positive investigation of even the 
simplest phenomena encountered so many special and minute- theological 
explanations, every physical enquirer was unavoidably an irreligious person. 

The necessity for pursuing this course becomes still more evident if we 
consider that the theological philosophy was, not merely the only one 
possible, but the only one adapted to the nature of those researches which 
of necessity first engaged the human mind. 

Except by experience, based on the very exercise of his faculties, man 
could not learn their true limits. Originally he is always disposed to over- 
estimate their extent. This disposition is, at that time, singularly 
strengthened by his ignorance of natural laws, which gives rise to the hope 
of exercising over nature a power, so to speak, unbounded. In this mental 
state the onlv investigations which seem worthy of seriously occupying the 
human intellect are those relating to the origin and end of the universe, and 
all its phenomena. In truth they alone are fitted to do so. At first we are 
amazed to find such temerity united to such profound ignorance. Further 
reflection, however, shows us the impossibility of supplying a motive suffi- 
ciently energetic to engage and sustain the human intellect at its earliest 
stao-e in theoretical researches without the powerful attraction inspired by 
these vast problems, that seem to comprehend all others, and even without 
the chiiiierical hopes of indefinite power connected with their solution. 
Kepler had a lively sense of this necessity as regards Astrology in connexion 
with Astronomy, and BerthoUet has made the same remaric as to Alchemy 
in reference to < chemistry. But let the explanation have what value it may, 
the fact itself incontestable, suffices to prove how completely the theo- 
loo-ical philosophy is alone adapted to the primitive condition of the human 
int^ellect. For the essential feature of positive philosophy is precisely tliat 

VOL. IV. Q Q 

594 SYuSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

of regnrding' all these great questions as insoluMe by the human mind. 
Interdicting our intellisrence from all enquiries into tlie first and final causes 
of phenomena, it confines its operations to the discovery of their actual 
relations. It is therefore evident that, had it even been possible, at the 
outset, to choose between these two metliods, the human mind would not 
have hesitated to reject with disdain that which, promising little and in its 
nature slow, harmonises badly witli tlip extent and eagerness of our intel- 
lectual requirements in their earliest stage. 

The preceding reflections therefore prove that, having regard only to 
the Philosophic Conditions of the development of the human mind, it was 
long necessary to employ the theological method before taking for its 
guidance the positive method. But this necessity becomes still more 
evident, if we also take into account Political Conditions, no less indispens- 
able than the former for the intellectual growth of mankind. 

The spiritual development of man apart from his temporal development, 
as likewise the proaress of the intellect apart from that of society, can 
only be separately studied by a mental abstraction ; for these two move- 
ments, though distinct, are not inde endent, but, on the contrary, exercises 
reciprocal influence indispensable to each of them. 

It is not sufficient to state the general proposition that the cultivation of 
the intelligence is only possible in society, and by society. We should also 
recognise that the nature and extent of social relations at each epoch deter- 
mine the character and rate of our spiritual progress, and reciproca'ly. Pnr 
example, everyone now knows that no real and durable progress of the human 
mind is conceivable in a condition of society where each person is constantly 
obliged to provide his own subsistence. For in that state there can be no 
separation of theory and practice ; the primary condition of mental develop- 
ment. But among pastoral, and even among agricnltmal populations 
whose mode of living has overcome the original obstacle, this fundamental 
condition is often far from being realised. It is further necessary that the 
social organisation should be sufficiently advanced to allow of the regular 
establishment of a class of men who, being freed from the cares of material 
production and of war, can dedicate themselves uninterruptedly to the con- 
templation of nature. In a word, on this head, as on many others of no less 
importance, the formation of human science presupposes a complicated state 
of society. But, on the oiher hand, no real and coherent society can form 
and maintain itself except under the influence of some system of ideas, 
fitted to surmount the opposition of individualising tendencies, always so 
strong at the outset, and to make these concur in maintaining a settled 
order. This essential function could therefore only be fulfilled by a philo- 
sophic theory which should dispense with that slow preliminary elabora- 
tion necessary for the development of real knowledge, but demanding 
the prolonged dnration of a regular and complete political order. Such is 
the admirable character of the theological philosophy, as distinguished from 
all olhers. To it we must naturally ascribe the original establishment of 
all social organisation. Deprived of the powerful and happy influence which 
it alone can exert on men in the infancy of nations, we can imagine no per- 
maneTit social clas>ification fitted to sustain and stimulate, up to a certain 
point, the advance of the human faculties. From the point of view whick 
we are now considering, what other influence but that of theological 
doctrines could, in the midst of a population of warriors and slaves, admit 
of and maintain the existence of a corporation simply occupied with Intel- 

Q-ENERAL APPENDIX- FOUETH PART. 595 

lectuallabours, far less secure to it a preponderance alike indispensable to 
Its earliest operations, and to the stability of society ? 

Thus, having regard to the conditions, whether moral or political, of 
the devplopment of the human intellect, we find that its activity, of neces- 
sity, began with theological philosophy, before reaching positive philo- 
sophy. It is easy to demonstrate, with equal certainty, that the human 
mind could only pass from one to the other by employing the Metaphysical 
Philosophy. 

Iheologioal and positive conceptions are too heterogeneous, nay too 
antagonistic, to allow of our intelligence, — which only advances by almost 
imperceptible degrees,— passing from one to the other without intermediate 
steps. Such intermediate steps have been, and could only be, metaphysical 
conceptions. These", belonging at once to theology and physics, or rather 
being nothing but the former modified by the latter, are' by their very 
nature eminently fitted to second this operation, in which all their utility 
consists. 

Theological philosophy, placing itself at the prime source of all pheno- 
mena, is essentially occupied in unfolding their efficient causes, while posi- 
tive philosophy, — laying aside all search after causes, as being inaccessible 
to the human mind, — is exclusively occupied in discovering lawn, that is 
to say, the constant relations of similitude and succession which subsist 
between facts. Between these two points of view is naturally interposed 
the metaphysical, which regards each phenomenon as the product of an 
abstract force peculiar to itself Tliis method is valuable from the facility 
it give.s for reasoning on phenomena, without directly considering supei- 
natural causes, which the human mind was thus enabled gradually to 
eliminate from its combination.^. 

In point of fact, it is by such a process that this change has been 
eifected in all intellectual departments. As soon as the progress of obser- 
vation enabled man to generalise and simplify his theological conceptions, 
in each class of phenomena the primitive Supernatural Agent was replaced 
by a corresponding Entity, to which thenceforward attention was ex- 
clusively directed. These entities were, at first, a kind of emanations from 
tlie supreme power. But, thanks to their indeterminate character, they 
were finally spiritualised so as to be no longer regarded as anything but 
abstract names for phenomena. This transformation took place in pro- 
portion as the increase of natural knowledge manifested the emptiness of 
such a mode of explaining facts, and at the same time permitted the substi- 
tution of another for it. Thus metaphysics became a mode of transition, at 
once natural and indispensable, from theology to physics. Its triumph is on 
one hand the unraistakeable sign, on the other the direct cause, of the 
decline of the former and the rise of the latter. 

The above considerations clearly prove that theological and metaphysi- 
cal theories constituted an indispensable preparation for the human mind ; 
but they also show that these doctrines could have had no other destination 
since their development has only been a continuous and progressive advance 
towards positive theories. Their very fitness as guides for the infancy of 
human reason renders them powerless aa guides for its mature state. Once 
the intellect abandons a theory, it is never again taken up. The vigour 
and influence of a method should be measured by the number and im- 
portance of its applications. Methods which produce no results are soon 
entirely abandoned. Now, seeing that during at least two centuries those 

Q Q 2 

596 SYSTEM or POSITIVE POLITY. 

theologico-metaphysical methods, which presided over our earliest intel- 
lectual efforts, have become entirely sterile ; seeing that the most ex- 
clusive and important discovenes, those vphich do most honour to the 
human mind, have, since this epoch, entirely resulted from the emplovment 
of the Positive Method, this fact alone clearly proves that to the latter 
must henceforward belong the exclusive direction of human thought.' 

While rendering full justice to the important and innumerable services 
of every kind heretofore rendered by theology and metaphysics, it cannot be 
concealed that our intellect is not destined to compose theogonies indefinitely, 
or for ever to content itself with logomachies. To acquire the moat exact 
and complete knowledge attainable of the laws of nature, and thus to 
discover the influence which the human race is destined to exercise over 
the external world, such are the true and constant objects of the eff^orts of 
human genius when its preparatoiy education has terminated. Positive 
philosophy is, then, the definitive state of man, and should only cease with 
the activity of our intelligence. The interest with wliich it inspires us, its 
perfect harmony with our spiritual wants, are such, that, from the time of 
its earliest formation by the discovery of some great laws, the most dis- 
tinguished intellects renounce, with singular facility, the seductive hopes of 
an absolute and transcendental knowledge oflTered by theology and meta- 
physics, and seek with ardour the pure intellectual satisfaction attached to 
real and precise science. In our day it is doubtless unnecessary to insist 
much on proofs of a tendency which manifests itself at every moment and in 
a tliousand ways, even in the least advanced mind. Wherever positive 
conceptions have been placed in competition with mystical and vague con- 
ceptions, disgust with the latter has speedily manifested itself.* 

From the considerations, then, above indicated, results the demonstra^ 
tion, theoretical and experimental, of the grand fact above enunciated: the 
human intellect naturally passes successively, in every department of its 
activity, through three different theoretic phases — the theological state, the 
metaphysical state, and the positive state. Of these the first is provisional, 
the second transitory, and the third definitive. 

This fundamental Law should henceforth be, in my opinion, the starting- 
point of all philosophical researches about man and societv. 

Inasmuch as the theological and metaphysical doctrines still maintain 
pome activity, or at least considerable influence, it is evident that this 
important revolution is not terminated. To what extent is it so ? What 
remains to comp'ete its accomplishment ? This has now to be investigated. 

The present is not the place for examining by what series of operations 
so great a change has been produced. It is sufficient to fix our ideas by 

' Already at the end of the sixteenth century Bacon eompnied theological con- 
ceptions to virgins consecrated to the Lord, -who had become sterile. In our time, 
ho Mould assuredly have extended the comparison to metaphysical conceptions, the 
sterility of wliich is equally evident. 

' Language which, historically considered, presents a faithful picture of the 
human int-Uect. furnishes us with cli-ar proof of this. The word ' science,' which, 
at first, Mas applied only to theologieo-meftiphysical speculations, and subsequently 
to the I'csuanhes of pure erudition which tliey engendered in our day, when 
employed witlmut qualificiitiou, impurts, even in eonininu acceptation, only the 
positive branches of knowledge. Whenever another signification is sought to be 
impoaed upon tins w >rd, it liecomes uacossary to have recourse to periphrases, the 
u'.e of whicli clearly proves that, in the view of the existing public, true know'edge 
uiuuH consists in positive conceptions. 

GENEKAL APPENDIX— FOUETH PART. 597 

noting a fact. It is to the movement of the human intellect, determined 
by the precepts of Bacon, the conceptions of Descartes, and the discoveries 
ot Galileo,— a movement which was itself only the tiual and inevitable 
result of all the anterior labours,— that we must refer the direct origin of a 
truly positive philosophy, that is to say, of a philosophy disengaged from 
that theologico-metaphysical alloy which had theretofore more or less 
debased natural theories. 

During the two centuries elapsed since this memorable epoch the 
various branches of knowledge have at last reached the positive state. But 
if, for our present object, it is of little consequence how this transformation 
has been effected, it is on the other hand very important to remark care- 
fully in what order our different kinds of ideas have been transformed ; since 
this notion is indispensably necessary for completing our knowledge of the 
law above stated. 

On this head a very simple and natural course is observable. 

Our different conceptions have successively become positive in the same ''"t'o Classia- 
order in which they became, first theological, then metaphysical. This sSra. *'"' 
order corresponds to the degree of facility which the study of the correla- 
tive phenomena presents. It is determined by their greater or less compli- 
cation, their greater or less dependence, their degree of speciality, and their 
more or less direct connection with man — four grounds, which, though each 
exerting its distinct influence, are at bottom inseparable. Here, then, we 
have the classification which is dictated by the nature of the phenomena, 
such as we now know them to be. 

Astronomical phenomena are at once the most simple, the most general, 
and the most remote from man : they influence all the rest without being 
influenced by them, at leiist in any degree appreciable by us; they obey 
one law only, the most universal in nature, that of gravitation. After them 
come the phenomena of terrestrial physics properly so called, which are 
mixed up witli the preceding class aud besides obey special laws more 
limited in their results. Next come chemical pheuomena, dependent on 
both of the preceding, and in which we discover a fresh series of laws, 
concerning affinities, less extensive in their range. Lastly come physio- 
logical phenomena in which we observe all the laws of physics, celestial and 
terrestrial, and ot chemistry, but modified by other laws peculiar to them- 
selves, the sphere of which is still more limited. 

From this simple exposition it follows' that our conceptions, assuming 
one or other of the three general forms above designated, may have acquired 
a considerable extension in reference to the inferior portions of the encyclo- 
pssdic scale without having developed themselves in reference to the higher. 
The former conceptions are independent of the latter; while, on the other 
hand, they cannot have been formed as to the higher phenomena, without 
having first acquired a certain degree of consistency with respect to the lower, 
the influence of which must unavoidably be taken into account in every 
theory. This classification, therefore, inevitably determines the order of 
development of each of the three philosophies. The facts are in accordance 
with this theory, as it is easy to verify. The verification is more particularly 
easy as regards the positive philosophy, the recent formation of which, being 
naturally slower, presents more distinct intervals. 

Observing, from this point of view, the progress of the human mind 
during the last two centuries, we perceive that Astronomy was the first to 
become a positive science ; then Physics ; next Chemistry ; and, lastly, in our 

698 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

own time, Physiology. Such is the present condition of intellectual develop- 
ment. 

In order to ascertain with the necessary precision the exact stage which 
this great revolution has reached, we must, as regards the last science, 
distinguish between the portion which concerns the intellectual and affec- 
tive functions and that which embraces the organic functions. 

The Moral Phenomena were the latest of all to pass out of the domain of 
theology and metaphysics and enter into that of physics. This was, doubt- 
less, conformable to the encyclopaedic scale above laid down. But if this 
circumstance makes the transformation less apparent in reference to these 
phenomena, the fact is no less real, though as yet unobserved by the majority 
of thinking people. All who are truly on a level with their age, are aware 
that physiologists, in our day, study mor.il phenomena exactly in the name 
spirit as the other phenomena of animal life. Extensive labours have been 
undertaken in this direction, and pursued with ardour for the last twentv 
years ; positive conceptions, more or less fruitful, have sprung up ; schools 
have spontaneously arisen to develop and propagate such ideas ; in a word, 
all the signs of human activity have unequivocally revealed themselves in 
reference to moral phy.«iology. It would serve no purpose here to take a 
side for or against any of the views which divide opinion, as to the kind, 
number, extent, and reciprocal influence of the organs assignable to the 
various functions, whether intellectual or affective. No doubt, on these 
points the science has not yet definitively constructed its basis : only some 
generalities, inadequate though valuable, have been solidly established. 
But the very existence of this diversity of theory, evincing an uncertainty 
unavoidable in every young science, clearly proves that the great pliiloso- 
phic revolution has been accomplished for this branch of our knowledge, 
as for all others, at least in the intellectual vanguard of the human race, 
who.se example is, sooner or later, followed by the masses. For, amidst their 
divergencies, the positive method is admitted on all hands to be that alone 
admissible. Everyone recognises that the only legitimate aim is the com- 
bination of the anatomical with the physiological point of view. Theology 
and metaphysics are, by common consent, eliminated from the question ; at 
least they never play any important part, and, whatever may be the final 
result of the discussion, it can only diminish their iniinence. In a word, 
these discussions being confined within the domain of science, philosophy 
has no further concern with them. 

I have particularly insisted on this last philosophical fact for two 
reasons. Fir.>t, because it has hitherto been hardly observed and, not ud- 
frequently, even disputed. Secondly because it furnishes to everyone who 
has rightlj' comprehended my classification of the sciences, at once a new 
proof, indirect indeed but unanswerable, and a clear risume of the entire 
intellectual transformation. 

Having thus shown by facts the point which the formation of positive 
philosophy has now reached, we must consider what remains to be done for 
compirtethe its Completion. 
Serim. ° The natural series of phenomena furnishes, so to speak, of itself the reply 

to this question. 

The four great classes of observation already established do not embrace, at 
least in express terms, all the points of view under which existing beings can 
be considered. We evidently miss the social point of view as regards beings 
which can be so regarded, and especially man. It is, however, equally clear 

Social 
Physicg 
needed to 

GENERAL APPENDIX— FOURTH PART. 399 

that this omission is the only one. Thus we ah-eady possess celestial 
physics; terrestrial physics, mechanical and chemical; Vegetable physics; 
animal physics. We still need one physical science,— social physics,— in 
order to complete the natural sciences. This condition once fullilled, we 
can, resuming all our various conceptions, at last construct a true Positive 
Philosophy, capable of satisfying every real requirement of our intelligence. 
Thencelbrward the human intellect will he no longer obliged to recur on 
any subject to the theological or the metaphysical method, which, having 
lost all their utility, will cease to exist, except historically. In a word, the 
human mind will then have entirely complete.d its intellectual education, and 
can directly pursue its definitive destination. 

Such are the important considerations which it is now my duty to 
develop. 

My present limits do not permit me to characterise, completeh', tJie 
spirit and method which specially appertain to this last branch of natural 
philosophy. To prevent all confusion I simply remark that I understand 
Social Physics to mean that science which occupies itself with the study of 
social phenomena,! considered in the same light as astronomical, physical, 
chemical, and physiological phenomena, that is to say as being subject to 
natural and invariable Laws the discovery of which is the special object of 
its researches. Thus it directly seeks to avplain, as precisely as possible, the 
great phenomena of the development of the human race, under all its 
essential aspects, that is to discover by what necessary chain of successive 
transformations the human race, starting from a condition barely superior to 
that of a society of great apes, has been gradually led up to the present 
stage of European civilisation. The essence of this science consists in 
regarding the thorough study of the past as furnishing the true explanation 
of the present and a general indication of the future. Always considering 
social facts, not as subjects for admiration or criticism, but as subjects for 
observation, this science alone concerns itself with establishing their mutual 
relations, and appreciating the influence which each exerts on human 
development as a whole. In reference to practice, social science, setting 
aside all absolute ideas of good or evil institutions, considers them as being 
always relative to a definite condition of society and varying with it. At 
the same time, it considers them as always capable of springing up spon- 
taneously by the mere force of their antecedents, independently of any direct 
political intervention. Its applications therefore simply aim at a demonstra- 
tion of the various tendencies peculiar to each epoch in accordance with the 
natural laws of civilisation and observation. These general results become 
in their turn the positive starting-point for the labours of the statesman. 
He seeks simply to discover and institute the practical forms which corre- 
spond to the fundamental conditions in order to avoid, or at least, to soften 
as much as possible, the more or less serious crises, that spring out of the 
natural course of events, when this has not been anticipated. In a word, ir. 

' Social phenomena, as belonging to man, are no doubt incluJed under physio- 
loaical phenomena. For this reason social physics muse necesiarily start from 
individual physiology and maintain continual relations with this science. Never- 
theless the former must be considered and cultivated as an entirely distinct 
science, by reason of the progressive influence of human generations upon each 
other. This influence, whicli in social physics is the preponderating consideration, 
cannot he rightly studied from the physiological point of view. 

600 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

Pocial Pliy- 
;-ics hitherto 
niiiittiiitable 
but now in- 
evitable. 

tills as in every other order of phenomena, science leads to forethought, and 
forethought allows us to regulate action. 

In order to make this general view really useful, I must add to the above 
description, unavoidably imperfect, of the nature of Social Science, a succinct 
intimation of the fundamental principle which pervades the Positive Method 
characteristic of this science. It is this — the intellect, in investigating social 
laws, must proceed from the general to the particular, that is to say, must 
begin by apprehending in its ensemble the entire development of the human 
race, distinguishing at the commencement only a very small number of 
successive states. Afterwards it must gradually descend, increasing the 
numbers of intermediate steps, with ever increasing precision, the naturnl 
limit of which would be the interval of a single generation in the coordina- 
tion of the terms of this great series. Such a mode of proceeding is essen- 
tially common to all parts of the physics of organised bodies, but it is 
peculiarly necessary in Social Physics.' 

Such then, so far as lean here point out, is the nature of the new 
physical science, destined to complete the system of our positive knowledge. 
After giving this definition, which I consider indispeni^able in order to lix 
our ideas, it is easy to explain why this last branch of natural philosophy 
could not be sooner constituted, and why also it must inevitably begin in 
our time. 

Social theories, even regarded under a purely philosophical aspect, 
necessarily preserved longer than the rest the theologico-metaphysical 
character, in accordance with the law of formation above established. 'Fur 
their phenomena manifestly occupy the last rank in our encyclopasdic scale, 
as being at once the most complicated, the most special, the most immedi- 
ately connected with man, ajid the most dependent on all the rest. It is 
undoubtedly inconceivable that the human mind should attain to positive 
ideas about social phenomena, without having first acquired a sufficiently 
extended knowledge of the fundamental laws of the human organisation. 
But this knowledge presupposes the previous discovery of the chief laws of 
the inorganic world. And these, moreover, directly influence the character 
and conditions of human societies. 

Readers accustomed to the consideration of natural laws, will easily feel 
the extent and force of this universal and profound relation. To indhate 
only one very marked case, where, however, the relation is least obvious, it 
is easy to convince oneself that astronomical phenomena by their great 
generality exert a preponderating influence over social phenomena. Their 
laws could not be changed, in the slightest degree, without introducini' a 
profound alteration in the nature and development of human societies, Por 
example, who does not see that the movement of the earth, at first ignored 
and afterwards discovered, must have deeply influenced our entire intellectual 
system P It may even be said that the simplest circumstances atl'ecting form 
or position, insignifii-ant as part of astrononoraical order, possess a supreme 
importance in the political order. Let us suppose a variation of some 
degrees in the obliquity of the ecliptic, which would redistribute climate; a 

' Besides, the nature of social physics may be ensily apprehended if we con- 
sider it as establislied by the fundamental Liiw above expounded. For on this 
supposition the science has already come into existence. The discovery of this 
law, its truth being admitted, constitutes the first direct step in social physies, 
since it presents a primary link of the most general description, between the 
phenomena of society. 

GENERAL APPENMX -FOURTH PART, GQl 

slight increase or diminution in the distance of the earth from the sim.changing 
tliu length of the year and the temperature of the globe, and as a probable 
consequence the duration of human life; or let us suppose many othtr 
similar modifications, astronomically speaking of very small moment ; it is 
manliest that the course of human development must then have dittered 
widely from its actual one. We can easily multiply similar hypotheses, of 
every sort, adapted to exhibit the real interdependence of the various order 
of phenomena. TJiey will readily show that the conditions of existence of 
human societies are in a necessary and continuous relation, not only, as is 
evident, with all the laws of our orfianisation, but with all the physical or 
chemical laws of our planet, and those of the solar system of which it forms 
a part. So intimate is this relation that, if any important change arose in 
even one of those numberless influences of every kind under the absolute 
dominion of which our societies exist, the development of the human race 
would be profoundly changed ; assuming even the absence of any variations 
which might affect its existence. 

It is therefore evident that social phenomena by their vpry nature could not 
be reduced to positive theories before a similar revolution had been eifectei 
for astronomical, physical, chemical, and physiological phenomena. Seeing 
that such a transformation has only been effected in reference to these last 
in our time, and is hardly yet commenced for moral phenomena, the 
theory of which is indispensable to social physics, it is easy to understand 
why this science has been hitherto unattainable. 

This explanation becomes still more clear if we 'consider another circum- 
stance altogether peculiar to social phenomena. In truth their positive study 
became possible only when the growth of the human race had reached a stage 
sufficiently advanced to disclose some natural laws of succession. If we 
endeavour to measure the intiuence of this condition it seems to me that 
the experimental basis of social physics could not have been stifficiently 
extensive had it not embraced the entire development of the human race 
down to our time. This conjecture is demonstrable to all who admit the 
law above stated ; for this law could not manifest itself until the revolution 
it involved had been entirely underjione by the human mind, in rel'erenee' to 
the greater part of our ideas. Now this brings us exactly to the epoch 
indicated by other grounds. 

The same considerations which explain the causes that have hitherto 
hindered the positive method from "Extending itself to social theories prove, 
with equal evidence, that this latter part of the great intellectual renovation 
should necessarily be effected in our day. 

The human intellect constantly tends towards unity of method and 
doctrine ; this is its regular and permanent condition, every other being only 
transitory. We cannot employ habitually a certain method in the greater 
part of our combinations, without finally either renouncing it entirely or 
extending it to all the rest. The latter supposition is alone possible rela- 
tively to methods the superiority of which has been established by ex- 
perience. It would therefore be self-contradictory to suppose that the 
human mind, after having raised itself to the power of reasoning in a positive 
way upon all astronomical, physical, chemical, and physiological phenomena 
should always continue to reason theologically and metaphysically, as regards 
social phenomena. Whoever has studied the intellectual nature of man, 
will feel that it cannot be so. Inevitably, therefore, it must happen either 
that astronomy, physics, chemistry, and physiology will again become 

'^602 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

metaphysical, and even theological, an ahsurd supposition ; or that politics 
■will become positive, a proposition assuredly certain. 

A philosopher of the nineteenth century who more than any other 
fathomed the nature of the former condition of the human race, M. de Maistre, 
deeply felt the necessity for this alternative. He clearly saw that the develop- 
ment of the natural sciences tended radically to destroy the rule of theolo(jy 
and metaphysics. He realised that, in order to be truly consistent in his 
regret for the decline of the ancient system, intellectual and social, he must 
boldly ascend to those ancient times when mental unity was achieved by 
subordinating all cur conceptions to supernatural philosophy.' 

Doubtless, seeing that all the positive sciences could not be simultaneously 
constituted, periods, more or less prolonged, must have existed, during which 
the human mind employed at one and the same time each of the three 
methods for a certain order of ideas.'' Metaphysical philosophy, according to 
its practice, converting a transitory stale into an immutable principle, has 
established as a maxim, a fundamental and absolute apportionujent between 
theological and positive method, under the abstract names of Faith and 
Keason. But experience clearly proves that this doctrine has served no 
other purpose than that of extending the domain of reason at the expense 
of that of faith ; and this in truth constituted the natural oifice of this 
principle of transition, itself long useful. In despite of this eternal truce 
between theology and physics the latter has always tended, more and more, 
to invade the entire system of our ideas, and its power in that direction 
has increased in proportion to the conquests already effected. As nothing 
now remains to be mastered by the positive method but social ideas, it is 
evident that it must end by embracing these ^also within its dominion ; and 
that at no distant period, if we consider the immense power it gains by its 
exclusive dominion over all other classes of ideas. 

The inference drawn from this consideration respecting unity becomes 
still more appaient when we examine the formation of the theological or 
metaphysical theory of social phenomena. 

The superficial philosophy of the eighteenth century generally repre- 
sented the theological doctrine of society as the work of uubelieving legis- 
lators, who saw in it an instrument of domination. Without here insisting 
on the revolting absurdity of such an hypothesis, which it is no longer 
necessary to ]-elute, experience shows ua that theological philosophy, in con- 
formitj' with the general law of development established at the beginning 
of this essay, extended itself to social phenomena, and consequently became 
an instrument of organisation simply through the empire which it had at 
first acquired by afibrding an explanation of external nature, and of man 
himself This explanation furnished the origin and fundamental condition 
of the general supremacy obtained by the theological system. The same 

' Among other passages, s6e in the ' Soirees de Saint-Petersbourg,' a very 
remarkable comparison between the character of ancient and that of modern 
science. 

^ This pnssing and unavoidable confusion is the chief diiBculty in verifying the 
law above expounded. But the difficulty -will disappear if we consider the eney- 
clopjedic classification already established, and observe that the three methods 
have never been simultaneously employed in reference to the same order of ideas. 

Within my experience the fact of this coexistence of the three methods is in 
truth the only serious objection hitherto made to this ftinJamentul law. Moreover, 
this objection has never been presented by any but persons who, though intel- 
lectually superior, wero unacquainted with the positive sciences. 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— FOURTH PAET. 603 

relation is always observable in the Tarious forms ■which it suoeesively 
assumes. For example, is it not apparent that, the human intellect having 
once nsen to the idea of one great supernatural cause producing all the pheno- 
mena of the external world and the phenomena of individual man, could not 
but apply the same doctrine to the direction of societies ? The same thing 
occurred when human conceptions became metaphysical. So soon as this 
transformation had taken place as to astronomical, physical, chemical, and 
physiological ideas, its prompt extension to political ideas might be foreseen. 
There is a connection, profound, though indirect, between the conceptions 
of Aristotle about terrestrial and celestial physics, the scholastic doctrines 
of the Middle Ages, and the social contract of Rousseau. The spirit is the 
same, extending itself to a new order of ideas. Therefore, since social 
theories have in fact always stood in close and necessary relation with those 
■which concern other phenomena ; since, again, the transformations that have 
hitherto affected the former have always corresponded to those experienced 
by the latter ; the same course must repeat itself, — and that still more 
decidedly by reason of the greater discordance of methods, — as regards the 
advent of the positive spirit, which having embraced the phenomena of 
nature must inevitably extend itself to political phenomena. 

In truth all the symptoms, general or special, which could mark such a 
revolution, have manifested themselves with an energy which leaves no 
doubt of its speedy accomplishment. 

The absolute preponderance obtained, during the last century, by Meta- 
physical Philosophy in the region of social ideas is an incontrovertible sign 
of the complete decline of theology. On the other hand, the profound 
disgust generally displayed towards a Metaphysical Polity since the experience 
of the French Revolution, without however reviving the ascendancy of 
theological doctrines, is no less certainly an indication of the approaching 
formation of a Positive Polity, alone capable of determining a universal 
assent by minds who 'vrill no more submit to the dominion of abstractions 
than to the authority of oracles, and refuse to yield any longer to aught but 
tlie force of facts. 

We may even say that direct attempts, more or less complete, have 
already been made by the most distinguished thinkers to satisfy this new 
need of the human mind. Such, essentially, is the character of the works 
of the great Montesquieu. First in his work on the Romans, but above all 
in the Spirit of Laws, he endeavoured to connect political phenomena with 
each other and to seize the laws of their interdependence. This attempt 
was, doubtless, too premature to succeed, but the fact of its having been 
made clearly proves the tendency of the human mind. At a later period Con- 
dorcet, moving in the same direction, rose to a direct and final conception, 
proposing to himself the study of the successive developments of the human 
race : and although his work was an entire failure, it shows, no less, how 
deeply the want was felt. From the same point of view we may consider 
the efforts made in England during the last century to perfect history by 
imparting to it the character of scientific explanation, instead of the descrip- 
tive or literary character which had theretofore marked it. In Germany 
the works of Kant' and Herder on the philosophy of history, and subse- 

• Kant, in a small -work written in 1784, of which even the title is remarkable 
(' Introduction to a General History of the Human Race '), expressly laid down that 
social phenomena, like all others, should be regarded as reducible to natural laws. 

604 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

quently the formation among Jurists of a school which regards legislation 
as always necessarily' determined by the state of civilisation, manifest, with 
equal clearness, the general tendency of our age towards positive doctrines 
in politics. Every day a taste for the worlts which display this character is 
increasingly manifested ; dominating even the spirit of party. The men 
who most earnestly endeavour to re-establish the empire of theology, 
unconsciously yielding to the genius of the age, make it a point of honour 
to employ chiefly positive considerations' in establishing their views. 

The period has then at last arrived when the human mind, as the final 
result of all its previous labours, can complete the ensemble of natural philo- 
sophy, by reducing social phenomena, as all others have been reduced, to 
positive theories. The various preliminary ellbrts above pointed out indi- 
cate the necessity for this operation, and render it immediately practicable; 
but they leave it still to be effected. Such is the great philosophic effort 
reserved for the nineteenth century by the natural progress of our intel- 
lectual development. 

When this work shall have been completed, or rather, sufficiently ad- 
vanced to show that the human mind has irrevocably entered upon this new 
path, we can and should proceed to the construction of a general system 
of human knowledge, all the elements of which will then exist. 

Both before and since the Encyclopsedia of the Eighteenth Century, a 
number of attempts were made in tliis direction : but none of them have 
succeeded. Every day we see new ones arise which attain to no greater 
success, and serve no end but that of proving how strongly our intelligence 
needs to reduce its acquirements to order and unity. The worthlessuess of all 
the^e efibrts arises from the circumstance, that, the various branches of humnn 
knowledge being heterogeneous, it was necessarily impossible to combine 
them in a single system. At former periods it was possible to construct a 
theological or metaphysical encyclopaedia. Thus, for example, all the systems 
of the Greek philosophers were, in their age, so many encyclopaedias. When 
social physics have acquired some consistency, it will become possible to 
construct a Positive Encyclopaedia. But to attempt, as has hitherto been 
attempted, the formation of an encyclopEedia at once theological, metaphy- 
sical, and positive, is to aim at constructing an ensemble out of elements 
which mutually exclude each other. It is not surprising that enterprises so 
ill-conceived should have ended in throwing discredit upon such a project 
for all sound intellects. But such ought no longer to be the case when, 
social science having become positive, and theology, with metaphysics, 
having been expelled from their last asylum, the system of our ideas 
will be exclusively composed of homogeneous elements. Then it will be 
sufficient to resume the various kinds of kuowledge corresponding to the 
ditferent classes of phenomena, in order to discover their natural connection, 
and thus to form a true positive philosophy, much more complete and more 
closely united in its parts than was possible for the metaphysical and even 
tlie theological philosophy, which, being by their nature provisional, were 
never strictly universal. 

This vast undertaking, which, without doubt, the present century will 

' For example, the philosophical excellence, unquestionably great, of the work 
' The Pope,' is essentially owing to the circumstance, that, by a grave self-contra- 
diction, the author sought, as far as possible, to employ only positive reasoning, 
and has made a very secondary use of considerations drawn from theological and 
metaphysical philosophy. 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— FOURTH PART. 605 

see carried out, should be regarded as the last act and final aim of the preat ^.''^'^^^?^^7' 
revolution begun "bv Bacon, Descartes, and Galileo. It is indispensable, as ti'fspeis^bie 
beinff the only possible spiritual basis of the new social state towards which ^j'^i'lJi't" 
tlie human race so strongly tends in our day ; for as an ensemble alone can and moral 
any doctrine obtain the leadership of society. So long as positive concep- •*-"''™'^3'- 
tinns remain isolated ; until they offer themselves to the mind as various 
portions of a single and complete system, they may possess a great impor- 
taiic-p in special cases, they may even obtain great advantages in a struggle 
against the political authority of theology and metaphysics; but they can 
never replace these in the supreme direction of social order. Doubtless the 
perfecting of our knowledge indispensably demands the establishment 
within the domain of science of a permanent division of labour, and even 
that the specialisation of each kind of researches should be pushed as far as 
possible. But it is equally incontestable that the social masses, which per- 
petually need all these different results at once, and which neither can nor 
ought to be preoccupied with this internal mechanism, can only be broufiht 
to adopt scientific doctrines as their habitual guides by seeing them pre- 
sented as branches of one and the sanie tree. This condition is no less 
indispensable in reference to the scientific body itself, in order to impart 
unity and homogeneity to its political action, which will always be very 
weak unless concentrated. So long as this state of things shall subsist, 
theology and metaphysics, in spite of their manifest decrepitude, will still 
maintain, simply by virtue of their generality, a legitimate title to moral 
sovereignty. 

This last consideration brings me in another way to the necessity for 
social physics. In the reasonings hitherto employed I intentionally put 
a«ide the point of view of Social Organisation, in order to fix the attention 
solely upon the philosophic movement which alone could determine this ■ 
change. But the conclusion deduced from this peculiar order of considera- 
tions is singularly fortified if we reflect, as we ought to do, on the great 
political wants of our existing society. I shall now confine my>elf to one 
general aspect of this important portion of the question, which I shall here- 
after treat in detail. 

Manifestly, society, regarded from a moral point of view, is in a condi- 
tion of real and profound Anarchy, acknowledged by all observers, whatever 
may be their speculative opinions. This anarchy results, in the last resort, 
fiom the absence of any preponderating system, capable of uniting all 
minds in a communion of ideas. Positive conceptions have acquired an 
extension sufficiently great to annul, in fact, the political influence of 
theology, and even of metaphysics, without having as yet become sufficiently 
general to replace these in the spiritual guidance of society. As a result of 
this fundamental opposition, minds, no longer united by any real bond, 
divero-e on all essential points, with that licence which unregulated indivi- 
dualism must produce. Hence the entire absence of public morality: the 
universal spread of egotism ; the preponderance of considerations purely 
material; and, as a last inevitable consequence, corruption erected into a 
system of government, as being the only kind of order applicable to a popu- 
lation become deaf to all appeals made in the name of a general ideal and 
alive only to the voice of private interest. In order completely to terminate 
tliis disorder which, if it coiild last, must result in the entire dissolution of 
social relations, it is necessary to destroy its source, by bringing society 
back in one way or another, to a state of unity. Now, this can only be 

606 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

arcorapliahnd in one of two modes ; either by restorino: to theological philo- 
sophy— for it is useless to speak of metaphysics, which is merely transitional 
• — all the influence it has lost; or by completing positive philosophy so as to 
make it capable of definitely replacing theology. To these simple terms we 
tan now reduce the great social problem. If then we consider that the 
impossibility of re-establishing theology in the entire extent of its ancient 
dominion is demonstrated — and assuredly no one doubts this — no other 
solution is possible than the definitive formation of the positive philo- 
sophy. Our business is not to enquire whether that is advantageous or 
regrettable; whether the operation is difficult or easy ; whether it requires 
a long or a short time. All such idle questions are put aside by one 
unanswerable observation : society has no other issue, we must then forth- 
with put our hand to the work. Besides, the other considerations here 
pointed out show that the last revolution needed to re-establish society on 
a sure basis of order, far from being beyond the existing forces of the 
human mind, as is supposed, has been so completely prepared by its ante- 
cedents, that it has now become inevitable. 

Thus the formation of Social Physics, which, viewed intellectually, has 
been proved indispensable for a complete philosopliical system, is no less 
necessary from a political point of view, as the condition of a homogeneous 
social education, itself the basis of a fixed and well-ordered hierarchy. 
These two essential conditions are, as is evident, complementary. For 
education and philosophy stand in close and necessary relation ; since it is 
impossible to develop a society otherwise than under the influence of some 
preponderating system of ideas. Social education was first theological, then 
metaphysical, because philosophy passed through each phase in succession. 
In our day it is at once theological, metaphysical, and positive, because 
pliilosophy off'ers these three aspects in reference to difiVrent classes of ideas ; 
or rather, neither education nor philosophy now really exist precisely 
because three systems prevail which naturall)' exclude each other. Lastly 
in the new social era on which the human race is about to enter, philosophy, 
and consequently general education, ought to become entirely positive. 
These two great operations, the first of which should form the basis of the 
second, correspond to the same fundamental wants of our actual civilisation 
considered under two different aspects, the need of a doctrine and that of 
guidance. 

In my judgment this work has already commenced, for I consider social 
physics as having, even now, come into existence ; and this point of view 
will always predominate in my philosophical labours. But I do not ask my 
readers to share immediately my conviction on this head. I merely desire 
to direct their attention to this natural and continuous progress of the 
human race, always more decidedly attracted towards positive philosophy. 
I hope to show them that the period has arrived when this revolution must 
unavoidably extend itself to social theories, and, finally, to satisfy them thiit 
its accomplishment is the only real way of reestablishing moral order in 
society, without attempting to raise any useless discussions as to the oppor- 
tuneness or exact mode of this change. 

The considerations here presented naturally lead us to study the Sciences 
under a new point of view. 

In my estimation they are not simply the ra';ional basis of the action of 
man upon nature. Their importance in this respect, although assuredly very 
great, is only indirect and secondary. It does not adequately account for 

GENERAL APPEN'DIX— FOURTH PART. 

607 

the profound interest which the human mind, guided by an admirable 
inptinct, has always taken in the most abstract scientific theories, without 
any idea of material advantaore ; an interest which still subsists in full force, 
despite of the vicious preponderance accorded during the last three centuries 
to the merely practical point of view. 

I consider that the Sciences, even in their actual condition, are directly and 
mainly destined to satisfy this fundamental need of our intelligence,— a system 
of positive conceptions as to the different classes of phenomena which can 
heoonie thesubject of our observations. 

\iewed historically, the Sciences have emancipated the human mind 
from the tutelage of theology and metaphysics, which, thnngli indispensable 
for its infancy, tended afterwards to prolong this indefinitely. Viewed in 
their present state, the sciences ought, by their methods and general results, 
to determine the reorganisation of social theories. Viewed witii reference 
to the future, the sciences, once systematised, must constitute the permanent 
spiritual basis of social order, so long as our race shall continue to exist. 

This general resmni presents the social existence of men of science under The Political 
a point of view which departs from ordinary ideas. It remains then to savai[ta" 
develop it in order to take a complete grasp of the great moral revolution barinor.ises 
that now tends to realise itself in the human race. Law cf the 

The political history of Savants, regarded as a whole, presents three great I'liree states. 
epochs which correspond exactly to the triple condition — theological, meta- 
physical and positive — of human philosophy that forms the subject of our 
first article. I must here confine myself to a summary exposition of this 
new series of general facts. 

The first social system under which the human mind was enabled to The Thoo- 
achieve real and lasting progress, was fundamentally characterised by the '^'■'''°'"''- 
confusion of the temporal with the spiritual power ; or, more af-curately, 
by the complete subordination of the one to the other. To speak with still 
greater precision, it essentially consisted in the general and absolute pre- 
ponderance of a Philosophic Caste, organised under the influence of theo- 
logical philosophy. 

Every primitive society, so far as its development is indigenous and 
spontaneous, manifests a natural tendency towards such an organisation. 
But this regime could not establish itself completely and acquire a great 
consistency in any countries but those where, by a favourable conjunction of 
climate and position, — which this is not the place to explain, — the theo- 
logical philosophy was enabled soon to attain its complete development, 
and in consequence to gain an irresistible ascendancy over the other parts of 
the social system. These conditions were fulfilled in Egypt, in Chaldsea, 
in Hindostan. in Thibet, in China, and in Japan, to which we may add 
Peru and probably Mexico, some generations before the discovery of 
America. 

Considering this state of society merely from an abstract point of view, 
one is especially struck by this profound character of unity and interdepen- 
dence which then so entirely predominated in the intellectual system. Never, 
since this period, did the esprit d'ensemhle manifest itself to the same extent ; 
and it can never again he realised except by the direct construction of the 
positive philosophy. 

The primary cause of this absolute systematieation doubtless lay in the 
homogeneity of human conceptions, then uniformly theological. But this 
cause thouo-h operating universally, did not everywhere produce the same 

608 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

eflpKct, fit least not in so eminent a dejrree. An orjranisatiun of the scientific 
body peculiar to this social state was aho requisite. 

By the mere existence of a Philosophic Caste it may be said that a 
rep-ular and permanent division had been established between theory and 
practice. But in the first place, this division was incomplete in one very 
important respect, since it did not extend to social combinations ; in the 
second place there existed no precise distribution of labour within the theo- 
retical domain. Such is the special nature of this primitive scientific 
organisation. 

That universality of knowledge, which is now so justly regarded as an 
ambitious chimera, then, on the contrary, constituted the dominant character 
of the members of the spiritual corporation. In the upper ranks of the 
hierarchy each minister of worship was at once astronomer (or rather 
astroloper), physicist, doctor, even engineer, and also a legislator and states- 
man. In a word the names of Priest, Philosopher, and Savant, which have 
since acquired such different significations, were then exact synonyms. 
The combination of these three characters is well marked in the person of 
Moses, whom we may consider as the best known type of this primitive con- 
dition of the human intellect. 

It is easy to explain this pretension to universal knowledge, since it 
directly de) ends upon the same causes which produced the preponderance 
of the leavned caste, and it is at lea^t as inevitable. Granting that a given 
combination of physical causes has permitted human conceptions to attain, 
in certain countries, a development sufficiently rapid to allow of their being 
quickly systematised under theological inspiration, it manifestly resulted 
from this very rapidity that at the period of coordination the different 
branches of knowledge were not sufficiently exteusive to demand or to 
admit of a real and .stable division. 

But this universality of work is not only coincident and necessarily 
connected with the social supremacy of the learned caste, it also forms 
its strongest support. The credit obtained by the Priests as astronomers, 
doctors, and engineers was the basis of their political authority ; and vice versa 
the power they enjoyed was an indispem^able condition for the development of 
their scientific speculations. 

We must seek in the nature itself of this spiritual organisation the true 
and fundamental explanation of the admirable vigour and consistency 
always so characteristic of this primitive social system, as compared with 
nil sncieties that have since existed. In a society whose elements are so 
closely connected that no portion can be impaired without shaking the 
ensemhle ought we to be astonished at the energy of resistance which has 
hitherto triumphed over all known forces ? Accordingly this social state 
should be considered as the glorious epoch of the theological systeni. How- 
ever real may have been its subsequent influence we may say, without 
exaggeration, that after this period it continually declined. To this point 
therefore must the human race recede, if retrogradation were possible. 

While recognising that the theocratic rfi/ime was at once the necessary 
consequence and the indispensable condition of the earliest advances of the 
Ijuman intellect, we cannot disguise from cuirselves the fact that this system, 
by its nature, tended to become a permanent and almost invincible obstacle to 
more extended progress. Whether there be n necessary incompatibility 
between tlie complete consolidation of tlie social system and its perfectibility; 
or whether, rather, the combination of these two qualities was merely a 

GENERAL APPENDIX— POUETH PART. 609 

task wHcli exceeded the means then accessible to man ; it is certain that 
the most strongly organised nations became at last almost stationary. This 
happened in all countries when the theocracy was able to establish itself 
completely. The explanation is easy. 

Without division of labour, the perfecting of the human intellect is not 
possible. Intellectually the theocratic system had no value, except as fur- 
nishing the means of organising, on a regjilar and stable basis, the germ of 
the sepaxation between theory and practice. But this primary division which, 
once fixed, became, by the very nature of the system, unalterable, required 
to be pushed much farther in order to allow of an indefinite development of 
the human faculties. Such was the radical vice of this primitive system. 

The different classes of our conceptions cannot develop themselves with 
equal rapidity. I have already pointed out the necessary succession which 
their development invariably manifests. From this we may perceive that 
the scientific organisation in question, by virtue of which all the various 
theories are cultivated at once by the same intellects, cannot long exist 
without becoming strongly opposed to the perfecting of our knowledge, 
since it admits only of such advances as can be simultaneously made in all 
parts of the intellectual system. 

This view is much strengthened, when we combine with the purely 
philosophical point of view, the political stand-point, characteristic of this 
first social epoch, the fusion of the temporal with the spiritual power. For 
this condition, by itself, renders impossible every great improvement of 
human theories, as tending to the total and immediate overthrow of the 
political order. How could any important progress be expected under a 
regime which converted every great discovery, not only into an act of 
impiety, but into a revolt. The theological philosophy was, in those 
primitive times, and has since continued to be the only sort fitted to 
guide society. Accordingly so long as the temporal power was merely 
a derivation from the spiritual power ; nay further so long as physical 
theories and social doctrines were not entirely separated, the former could 
not advance beyond the theological state without destroying the bases of 
society. 

If then the progress of the human intellect was, at first, only rendered 
possible by means of an elementary stage in the division of labour regulated 
by the theocratic regime, it is evident that its subsequent advance demanded, 
no less imperatively, a much greater subdivision, but one that could only be 
effected under a totally different regime. Above all, it was essential that the 
culture of the human mind should become independent of the immediate 
guidance of society, in order that the division and perfecting of our know- 
ledge might take place without compromising the existence of the political 

order. 

The natural development of the various theories would doubtless, in the 
end have spontaneously determined this separation, even in the theocracies, 
althouo-h from the causes above indicated such a change would in them 
have been much retarded. In fact it would seem impossible but that, how- 
ever slow might be the progress, at the end of a certain time, the ever in- 
creasin-f difficulty of comprehending the totality of human ideas, must lead 
to a continual increase in specialization. We may even observe in the 
learned castes of the different theocracies some beginnings of a perfected 
division. But the course of events did not allow any theocracy to enjoy an 
existence sufiiciently prolonged to allow of oui- observing the development 
TOL. IT. K '^ 

610 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

of such a revolution. Happily for human civiliaation, the new scientific 
organisation established itself in a much more rapid manner. 

It was in Greece that this change, so indispensable for the future des- 
tiny of the human intellect, was effected. Owinpj to the way in which the 
branches of knowledge were introduced from Egypt and the East into that 
country, intellectual aotifity from the outset was wholly external to social 
order. The military activity towards which the Grecian societies neces- 
sarily inclined, rendered the lasting establishment of a pure theocracy im- 
possible in them. At the same time, other causes presented obstacles to 
the free and entire development of this sort of activity, too powerful to 
allow of its exclusively absorbing, as at Rome, all the intellectual forces. 
By this happy combination of conditions the division between theory and 
practice presently became much more complete than it was in the theo- 
cracies, and theory could freely subdivide itself A class of men vyere 
formed, purified from all political ambition and freed from all material 
preoccupation, devoted to a merely philosophical existence. Starting from 
the primitive mental acquisitions of every sort accumulated by the sacer- 
dotal castes, their only and constant aim was to cultivate, as completely as 
possible, the domain of human intelligence. This memorable revolution in 
the organisation of the scientific body is resumed by the marked distinction 
which was thenceforth established between the terms Philosopher and 
Priest. Abstractedly considered, to this new condition of things corresponds 
the metaphysical character which then clearly began to manifest itself in 
the intellectual system. 

At the beginning of this second organisation, the only real progress effected 
consisted in the character imparted to the Spiritual Corporation, which thus 
became purely speculative and completely disengaged from all participation 
in the conduct of public affairs. Moreover, the first Grecian Sages no more 
specialised their theoretical researches than did the sacerdotal castes ; 
except only that from the beginning they assigned to the fine arts, which 
were more developed than other branches, a completely separate domain. 
But despite of this confusion, then inevitable, the capital condition was 
fulfilled, and the division of human sciences was gradually established, 
according as their development increased. 

At first tlie Philosophers hoped to be able to perfect moral and social 
conceptions pari passu with the theories which concern physical pheno- 
mena. The result of their labours, at last, made evident the necessity for 
a complete separation of these two classes of researches. The earliest 
attempts to perfect Social Theories, where we can already observe a certain 
vague tendency to divest them of the theological character, showed that 
such a transformation was still far beyond the forces of the human mind. 
Those philosophic schools, whose speculations had, more especially, taken 
this direction recognised, that, for this reason, and above all -ndth reference 
to the conditions of social reorganisation, it was impossible to go beyond the 
highest generalisation of the theological doctrine, long since reached by the 
superior class of the sacerdotal hierarchie.s. Thenceforward researches 
relating to the external world and the physical nature of man, as being 
naturally susceptible of a more rapid improvement, and at the same time, 
less immediately bound up with political order, were entirely separated 
from social doctrines. The latter continued theological, while the former 
became metaphysical, and in consequence approached more nearly to the 
positive condition. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— FOUETH PAET. 611 

Thus, hj degrees, a spiritual organisation was establislied entirely dif- 
ferent from tliat of the sacerdotal castes. The names of Savant and of 
Philosopher which, at first, when detaching themselves from that of Priest, 
were regarded as equivalent, became, in their turn, entirely distinct. 
Thenceforward the former was applied only to thinkers devoted to the 
cultivation of the physical sciences, whose existence, detached, even in 
theory, from the movement of society, was still more purely speculative 
than that of the early Wise Men of Greece.^ The latter only denoted 
those who, exclusively occupied with moral and social studies, sought more 
and more to take part in the spiritual government, In a word from that 
period the distinction became essentially the same as now. The two 
classes were so completely separated that, in the latest periods of the 
Grecian philosophy, they soon became rivals. About the age of Alexander 
the separation began to show itself clearly. It was profoundly characterised 
by two great series of works, those of Aristotle in the direction of the 
special sciences, those of Plato in the direction properly called philosophic. 
The formation of the Museum of Alexandria, so different from the ancient 
Grecian schools, is an unanswerable testimony to the existence of this 
separation, which it powerfully contributed to develop. 

To this division we owe the ultimate progress of the human mind. The 
Sciences, entirely isolated, were, thenceforward, able to expand, subdivide, 
and perfect themselves, and gradually to become positive, abandoning the 
metaphysical character which they possessed at the beginning of this 
period, without disturbing the social economy. Philosophy concentrating 
its forces on a single point, was enabled to prevail on the majority of 
civilised nations to abandon Polytheism for Theism, and thus to develop in 
all its energy the civilising power of theological doctrines. 

This spiritual organisation, born in Greece, was the first foundation of Rome anfl 
the social system established twelve centuries afterwards, and which was 
essentially characterised by this admirable division between the spiritual 
and the temporal power, by which it acquired such a superiority over the 
theocratic system. The germ of this system doubtless existed in the purely 
speculative activity of the philosophic sects within the Grecian populations. 
In order to allow of its development, it was necessary that the separation of 
the sciences and philosophy should permit the latter to tend freely towards 
the union of the different schools under a theism common to all. This end 
attained one essential temporal condition was alone needed to begin the 
direct foundation of a new social organisation. It consisted in the decline 
of the system of conquest produced by the union of the whole civilised world 
nnder a sino-le dominion, which resulted from the preponderance of Rome. 
So soon as these two fundamental bases had been laid, the course of events 
miii-ht hasten or retard the development of the social system of the Middle 
Ages ■ but in the end, of necessity, it could not but establish itself. 

If' the first commencement of this system is referable to the mental 
organisation of Greece, we may also discover therein the primary cause of its 
decline during the last four centuries. Owing to the absolute separation 

' At this period we see in Archimedes, the perfect type of the scientiflo class 
OTonerly so called. Assuredly the purely speculative activity of this class is 
well characterised by the historic picture of the sublime death of this great man ; 
but still more by the admirable naivete shown in the apology he addressed to 
posterity for having sacrificed, even for a moment, his genius to discoveries of 
practical utility. 

B B 2 

612 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

established between the sciences and philosophy the theological system 
could only harmonise with the special branches of knowledge so long as 
these retained the character they had when this system acquired its defini- 
tive state. It could not by any possibility adapt itself to their further 
progress. When they began to be positive, the intellectual incompatibility 
between theology and physics rapidly acquired a political character, and 
manifested itself, more and more openly, as a fundamental antagonism 
between the spiritual power and the scientiiic class, which had originally 
constituted itself externally to the social system.' Such is the great 
original schism which, somewhat later, became the general source of the 
disorganisation of this regime. 

Plato shut his school against those who were ignorant of geometry, the 
only science which then possessed a definite character. During nearly a 
century his disciples had a large share in the perfecting of this branch of 
our knowledge. But, soon, the impossibility was clearly manifested of recon- 
ciling this kind of researches with the philosophic labor which that sect 
justly regarded as its most important work and special office by virtue of 
its original constitution. Gradually and for ever the Platonists became 
entire strangers to the scientific movement. Archimedes, Apollonius, 
Hipparchus, the three great mathematicians of ancient times, were certainly 
not Platonists. 

During a long period, the fundamental opposition between the sciences 
and philosophy was not suiBciently marked to allow of their antagonism 
compromising the theological system. So soon as this made itself felt, it 
became a danger to science, before proving itself such to theology. St. 
Augustine, it is true, endeavours to refute the reasonings of the astronomers 
of Alexandria as to the sphericity of the earth ; and such an attempt by so 
great a mind clearly shows how far the severance of philosophy and science 
had gone. But it is easy to perceive that this discussion is purely philo- 
sophical and that he, as a member of the spiritual power, by no means 
attaches to it the immense importance which afterwards sprang out of the 
discoveries of Copernicus and Galileo. 
The Middle The reorganisation of the Social State under the auspices of Theism was 

^'^' so important an operation that it almost exclusively attracted the aggregate 

of intellectual forces, and before everything else commanded the attention 
and respect of society. Thus, during its long continuance the sciences 
were, comparatively speaking, 'much neglected, at least in the West" 
Moreover, the very slowness of their progress easily allowed the members of 

' Some distinguished thinkers who feel the true cause of the decline of the 
theological system, desire, in our day, to attempt its restoration by fusing it with 
the sciences. Eut this involves an oversight of the fundamental remark just made. 
Even if the radical disparity between theology and physics did not make their 
combination altogether impossible, its accomplishment would require us to follow 
successively, lu an inverse sense, all the modifications which since Plato have 
taken place in the spiritual organisation of society. '^Yithout doubt, existing 
Europe cannot become once more Eiiyptian. 

^ This abandonment of the sciences is generally regarded as a consequence of 
the inroads of the barbarians ; but it was manifestly long anterior to these. It 
showed itself from the earliest period of Christianity, by the decay into which the 
Museum nf Alexandria fell. Some clear marks of this tendency may even be seen 
from the date when Platonism began to overshadow the other philosophic sects. 
The alienation and even mutual antagonism of Savants and Philosophers properly 
so called developed themselves more and more from that time. 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— FOURTH PART. 613 

the spiritual power to keep pace with the sciences, without in any way 
injuring the theological office. 

But as soon as the new social system had heen definitively developed by 
the labours of the great Pope Hildebrand and his first successors, the germs of 
dissolution, which this system contained from its birth, soon began to make 
themselves apparent. The principal forces of the human mind and the public 
attention, concentrating themselves once more, little by little, upon the 
sciences, produced great and rapid advances in this direction. From that time 
the Spiritual Power rapidly declined, especially when the positive nature of 
the new mental acquisitions began to show itself. 

In vain did the Clergy manifest a commendable eagerness to take posses- 
sion of this new domain. Individual, or even collective, aspirations, how- 
ever powerful, could prevail neither against the inflexible nature of things, 
which created an absolute incompatibility between theology and physics ; 
nor against that severance from the sciences which was so deeply impressed 
upon the theological philosophy of the Middle Ages from its birth, and 
continually developed itself. In the end it was generally felt that the 
culture of the positive branches of knowledge could not properly belong to 
any but minds entirely devoted to these and free from all obligation to 
maintain heterogeneous doctrines.' 

The great eflbrts of the clergy, in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, to 
take possession of positive theories at their birth, were singularly favourable 
to their 'progress, since this corporation was then the only one whose 
members could give themselves up uninterruptedly to speculative activity. 
But they did not, nor could they, change the sacerdotal character. If some 
ecclesiastics devoted themselves entirely to this new class of labours, they 
ceased to be Priests in order to become Savants, and in no degree lessened 
the antagonism naturally subsisting between these two mental systems. 
We now think of Albertus Magnus and Roger Bacon as men of science, 
never remembering that one was an archbishop and the other a monk. 

The incompatibility of the natural theories with theological philosophy 
was not long in clearly manifesting itself at an early period after the epoch ' 

of these two illustrious men, by the indifference which the clergy, generally 
speaking, manifested towards this new study, and even by the kind of in- 
stinctive aversion with which it soon inspired them. An evident proof of 
these dispositions may be found in the necessity, soon and increasingly felt 
by monarchs, of instituting a special system of teaching for the Sciences, 
placed under their immediate protection and made entirely independent of 
ecclesiastical authority. From this period dates the first extension of 
metaphysics to moral and social ideas, as well as the earliest direct efforts 
in opposition to the doctrines of the clergy. Through the influence of 
these various circumstances, the separation and opposition of Science and 
Theology were, thenceforward and everywhere, fully and irrevocably estab- 
lished. The more decided struggles which occurred later only developed 
this antagonism more and more. 

The present is not the place for entering into the details of this view. Modern His- 
It is enough to have proved, that, from the period when the theological *°^J "' 
philosophy of the Middle Ages had completed the corresponding social savants.' 

> At a later period, the new 'Series of efforts by which the Jesuits attempted, 
with so much perseverance and skill, to gain possession of the sciences, but which 
succeeded no better than the earlier attempts, rendered still more evident the 
^radical impracticability of this undertaking. 

614 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITT. 

organisation, its action became entirely defensive ; that a new spiritual 
order sprang up from the growth of natural theories, the culture of which 
more and more attracted the main forces of the intellect ; that positive 
branches of knowledge increasingly became a part of general education; 
in a word that Savants, kept outside of the spiritual power, gradually 
acquired all the influence which the Clergy had by degrees lost. 

What remains to be done by men of science in order to raise them, in 
their turn, into a New Spiritual Power, no less powerful in its way than the 
old power ? It is necessary to complete the system of positive knowledge, 
by creating Social Physics, and so, at last, to construct Positive Philosophy. 
Thus and only in this way can the sciences, investing themselves with com- 
plete generality, replace theology become powerless for the moral government 
of society. 
Positive re- This Conception of the future of the sciences leads us to consider the 

oFsavants!" third organisation of the scientific body which corresponds to the positive 
state of philosophy, as did the Greek organisation to its metaphysical, and 
the Egyptian or Asiatic to its theological state. Savants, having at last. 
constructed their appropriate philosophy, will incorporate themselves anew 
with society in order to assume, once more, its spiritual guidance, but in a 
way completely different from the theocratic method. It remains for me to 
indicate the internal elaboration which for this purpose must be efiected 
within the seieutihc class. The limits of this essay only permit me to 
present this conception very succinctly. I shall, afterwards, treat each of 
its essential portions in more detail. 

The positive mental system, more especially, demand^ and stimulates 
the division of labour. From its birth, the study of natural theories con- 
stantly and increasingly subdivided itself. From the simple fact of its 
indefinite expansion, it will necessarily undergo an increasing subdivision. 
Theiefore there can be no idea of impressing on savants that cbai'acter of 
generality which they still want by a universality of eiforts analogous to 
that of the sacerdotal castes. The design, even if attempted, would be 
impracticable, having regard to the actual extent of each kind of knowledge. 
On the contrary, the indispensable improvement can only be effected by a 
more perfect application of the principle of division of labour. What is 
needed is simply to relegate social investigations and philosophy, rendered 
positive, to a new branch of the scientific body. This class will be distinct 
from all other classes of savants, but only in the same sense that these are 
distinguished from each other. This new class will be compelled by the 
nature of its doctrines to maintain direct and uninterrupted relations with 
the others, as these reciprocally will be in regai'd to it through a general 
education preliminary to special education. 

Observation of the internal formation of the scientific body, proves that 
in reference to organisation, as well as to doctrine, we need only complete 
a revolution which has developed itself with ever augmenting force. This 
is easily conceivable if we consider the encycloptedical order above estab- 
lished. In truth, the different classes of savants, although all special, are 
not so to the same extent. Geometers are naturally the most special, 
because their science rests on no other, being, on the contrary, the basis of 
the entire of natural philosophy. Passing to astronomers, we already find 
greater generality in their science ; because, in addition to the direct study 
of the phenomena it embraces, these are necessarily subordinated to the 
perpetual use of the mathematical sciences. Physicists properly so called, 

GENERAL APPENDIX— FOURTH PART. 615 

are still less special, because the nature of their studies rec[uires a perma- 
neat resort to mathematical methods, and a direct knowledge of the 
general laws of the system of the world. For a similar reason chemists, 
who fulfil the conditions imposed by the nature of the phenomena which , 
they study, necessarily possess a still greater degree of generality. Lastly 
physiologists, engaged in studying phenomena the laws of which are 
bound up with those of all the rest, are naturally the least special of all 
savants; being compelled to possess at least a general knowledge of mathe- 
matical, astronomical, physical, and chemical science. Social physicists will 
simply elevate themselves, in the same direction, one degree above the 
physiologists. Studying a class of phenomena, which by their nature 
depend on the laws of all the preceding, they indispensably require a pre- 
liminary education familiarising them with the methods and main results of 
all other positive sciences, as furnishing the only rational basis of their own 
labours. Thus having continually under their eyes the ensemble of physical 
knowledge, they will inevitably be led to the direct construction of positive 
philosophy, as soon as their special science has advanced suificiently far not 
■to absorb all their activity.' 

Simultaneously with the formation of this new class of savants, an impor- 
tant subdivision should also be effected in the scientific body, indispensable 
to the exactness of its philosophic character and consequently to the effi- 
ciency of its political action. It consists in a new and final improvement in 
the general division between Theory and Practice. This division is still 
incomplete inasmuch as the office of Engineer has always been, more or less, 
mixed up with that of the Savant, on which, even in our day, it exerts a very 
prejudicial influence. In the early history of natural theories this confusion 
was, doubtless, inevitable ; as it was also indispensable, in order to make 
their value appreciated by minds too gross to understand the utility of 
theories which do not allow of immediate applications. But, now, this 
direct and permanent relation is no longer needed. Henceforward the 
sciences should be judged above all by their philosophic value. Accor- 
dingly men of science, far from being bound to place limits on their senti- 
ments of theoretic dignity, should firmly resist every attempt, inspired by 
the exaggerated practical tendencies of our age, to reduce them to mere 
engineers. But an appropriate system of doctrines constitutes the best way 
of definitively extinguishing pretensions which will necessarily continue and 
be, to a certain extent, legitimate, until the relations between theory and 
practice have been organised by the aid of conceptions specially adapted to 
this end. Scientific men can alone construct this system, since it must flow 
from their positive knowledge of the relations that subsist between the 
external world and man. This great operation is indispensable in order to 
constitute the class of Engineers into a distinct corporation, serving as a 

' Moreover, to complete the solution of this problem of universality about 
which so much has been said, it is necessary, as it seems to me, to make a distinc- 
tion between active and passive universality. The former implies the wish to 
perfect all tte branches of human knowledge simultaneously ; and this is evidently 
absurd and chimerical. The latter consists in cultivating a single science by the 
help of a knowledge of all the rest, sufficiently extensive and accurate to allow of 
comprehending their spirit and appreciating their relations with that which is 
specially cultivated. This is not only practicable, but indispensable. What I 
have iust said shows that it is realised, more or less, in the different classes of 
savants. It ought to develop itself completely in the investigators of Social 
Physics. 

616 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

permanent and regular communication between the Savants and Industrialists 
in reference to all special works.* 

Such then, speaking generally, are the different doctrmes essential for 
completing the modern organisation of the scientific body, and previously 
shown to be indispensable for completing the intellectual system adapted 
to the new condition of the human mind. Doubtless these works will not 
be executed by living savants, whose faculties are irrevocably engaged m 
important researches, the interruption of which would be absurd and 
injurious. They could, however, be usefully undertaken only by minds 
educated under the influence of the various positive methods, familiar with 
the chief results of all the phvsical sciences, and subject to the direct and 
continued sanction of the existing scientific body. On the formation, more 
or less rapid, of this new class of savants must depend the development of 
these complementary labours, destined at last to invest the positive system 
with that spiritual supremacy assigned to it by the invariable law of pro- 
gress of the human race. 

As soon as these various works shall have attained sufficient maturity to 
acquire an unmistakable character, we shall see the education of society 
fall, spontaneously and for ever, into the hands of the savants. Already 
every preparation is made for this great revolution. The natural sciences 
have at last, in the eyes of all men, and must more and more, become the 
principal object of instruction. Where the regular system of public educa- 
tion does not suificiently supply this pressing need of existing minds, they 
seek its independent satisfaction and succeed in finding it. Governments, 
assisting, as they have done from the commencement, this special movement, 
create a multitude of special establishments. From the highest branches of 
theoretical instruction to the simplest rudiments destined for the least culti- 
vated intellects, they endeavour by every means in their power, to impress 
a positive character on all minds.^ In a word the political measures which 

' It is easy to recognise in the scientific body as it now exists, a certain number 
of engineers distinct from savants properly so called. This important class of 
necessity arose late, when Theory and Practice, which set out irom such distant 
points, had approached sufficiently to give each other the hand. It is this that 
makes its distinctive character still so undefined. As to characteristic doctrines 
fitted to constitute the special existence of the class of Engineers, their true nature 
cannot be easily indicated because their rudiments only exist. I know but one 
conception capable of giving a precise idea, that of the illustrious ]MoDge on De- 
scriptive Geometry, as constituting the general theory of the arts of construction. 
The doctrines appropriate to Engineers should consist of a series of analogous 
conceptions, relating to all the other great operations of practice rationally 
analysed. Their formation assumes that the construction of po>itive philosophy 
has already reached a certain point, for all important applications to the arts 
ufially demand a combination of various kinds ot scientific knowledge. 

The establishment of the class of Engineers, in its proper character, is the more 
important because this class will, without doubt, constitute the direct and 
necessary instrument of the coalition between Savants and Industrialists, by which 
alone the new social system can commence. 

^ It seems to me that sufacieut attention has not been paid to the series of 
eiforts made, especially during the last thirty years, by the various European 
governments to propagate scientific instraction in all classes of society, by Special 
Institutions, independently of the regular universities. This movement was first 
characterised by the foundation of a school (the Polytechnic School) which offered 
the philosophical innovation of an establishment for theoretical instruction of a 
high degree of generality, yet possessing a positive character absolutely free from 
all theological and metaphysical mixture. Since that period, this movement has 

GKNEEAL APPENDIX— POUETH PART. 617 

can really hasten this regeneration, are already essentially developed. 
Nothing is wanting except the great philosophical condition, without which 
all these partial efforts, however efficiently pursued, could produce no very 
important result — the formation, as ahove pointed out, of generalised posi- 
tive conceptions. 

The views submitted in this essay may be regarded as a first sketch 
of the problem of the Spiritual Power, treated merely from the philo- 
sophical point of view. Having thus laid down the principles of our dis- 
cussion, we can now directly and thoroughly examine this great question, 
the most momentous of our time. This shall form the subject of a new 
investigation. 

maintained itself uninterruptedly and with an ever-increasing intensity. At this 
moment the working classes are immediately called to participate in it by insti'n- 
tions, among the mos^t zealous promoters of which we may name M. Charles 
Dupin in France, and Dr. jBirkbeck in England, which have been powerfully 
seconded by the governments. Even in Kussia similar institutions are contemplated. 
They already exist in Austria and Prussia, and within a few years all Europe will 
be covered by them. Their influence cannot fail to produce the foundation of 
institutions of the same kind, but of a higher order, for the upper classes of 
industry, as may be actually seen in England. 

Perhaps it is, by this direct method that social education can be entirely 
regenerated, when the necessary doctrines shall have been formed. For a recast 
of the existing universities would probably be too difficult. 

618 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

FIFTH PART. 

March 1826. 

CONSIDEEAIIOlfS ON THE SPIEITUAI POWBE. 

All the social systems of antiquity were characterised by the Confusion of 
the Spiritual and the Temporal Powers; whether one of these two powers was 
entirely subordinated to the other, or, as more frequently happened, they 
were joined in the same hands. Thus regarded, these systems ought to be 
divided into two great classes, according as one or the other of the two 
powers predominated. Among those nations where, from the nature of the 
climate and locality, theological philosophy could rapidly arise, while the 
development of military activity was repressed, — as in Egypt and almost the 
entire of the East, — the temporal power was only a derivative from and ap- 
pendix to the spiritual power, which was the supreme and constant regulator 
of the entire social organisation in its minutest details. On the contrary, in 
those countries where, from a concurrence of physical causes, human activity 
was, at an early period, turned to warlike pursuits, the temporal power soon 
dominated the spiritual power and systematically employed it as an instru- 
ment and auxiliary. Under the last head fall, in a nearly equal degree, 
notwithstanding important diiferences, the social systems of Greece and 
Home. 

This is not the place to explain why these two kinds of organisation 
were necessary in the countries and at the epochs of their formation, nor 
how they worked concurrently, each in its own way, towards the o-eneral 
amelioration of the human race. They are now referred to merely in order 
to mark with precision the most important political difference which has 
characterised the entire history of the theologico-military system, separatin"- 
its constitution in Antiquity from its constitution in the Middle Au-es. 

In this last period not only did the theological and military sTstem 
undergo an immense amelioration through the establishment of Catholicism 
and Feudalism; but the grand political result of that foundation, namely 
the Separation of the Spiritual and I'emporal Powers, must be considered as 
having, in a high degree, perfected the theory of the social orgaui^ation for 
the entire duration of the human race, under any conceivable" nyiiiw. By 
this admirable division, human societies were enabled to establish theni- 
selves on a much larger scale, since it rendered possible the union under 
one spiritual government of populations so numerous and so varied as to 
require distinct and independent temporal governments. In a word it thus 
became possible to reconcile, to a degree theretofore impracticable, the 
opposite advantages of political centralisation and dispersion. It has even 
become possible, without falling into any absurdity, to conceive, that at 
some iuture day, distant indeed but inevitable, the entire human race, at aU 

GENERAL APPENDIX-FIFTH PART. 619 

events the entire of the white race, shall he united in one universal com- 
munity,— a supposition involving self-contradiction so long as the spiritual 
and temporal powers were confounded. In the second place, within each 
separate society, the great political problem of reconciling the subordination 
to 9,uthority, essential for the maintenance of public order, with the possi- 
bility of reforming its course whenever this needs rectifying, was solved as 
far as possible by the separation legally established between moral go- 
vernment and material government. Submission, in clothing itself with the 
character of voluntary assent, ceased to be servile ; while remonstrance was 
no longer hostile, at least within certain limits, since it rested on a moral 
power legitimately constituted. Before this period there was no alternative 
between alyect submission and direct revolt. Such is still the condition 
of societies, — for example those organised on the basis of Mahomme- 
danism, — where the two powers were from their origin confounded by the 
law. 

To resume, by the fundamental division between the spiritual power 
and the temporal power, organised during the Middle Ages, human society 
was enabled to become at once more extended and better ordered ; a com- 
bination which all the legislators and even the philosophers of antiquity had 
proclaimed impossible. 

Although the Catholic and Feudal system, effected, as far as the duration 
of its supremacy permitted, all the general advantages just pointed out as 
inherent in the separation of the two powers, and in this way contributed more 
powerfully than all previous systems to the perfecting of Humanity, it is no 
less necessary to recognise that its subsequent decline was at once absolutely 
unavoidable and rigorously indispensable. 

I have already demonstrated ' that theological philosophy and the moral 
power based upon it, by their nature, could only obtain a provisional supre- 
macy, even in the most perfect condition attainable by them, that is to say, 
under Catholicism. I have established that after having guided the 
preliminary educatio of the human race, they must in its maturity be 
necessarily replaced by a positive philosophy, and a corresponding spiritual 
power. It is much easier to prove the corresponding truth as regards the 
temporal power, which, originally founded on military preeminence, must 
finally belong to industrial superiority in that mode of life towards which 
modern society, more and more, tends. Accordingly, great as was the value 
of the Catholic and Feudal system, in relation to the period of its ascen- 
dancy, the development of the human race, in its twofold direction, scientific 
and industrial, necessarily ended by destroying this system, all the more 
rapidly because it was exceptionally favourable to science and industry. I 
have even proved, that under the spiritual aspect, we may at the very com- 
mencement of this system discern the germ of its destruction, which 
developed itself immediately after the epoch of its greatest splendour. This 
remark, the extension of which to the temporal order is easy, (since the 
abolition of slavery and the enfranchisement of the Commons almost coin- 
cided with the complete establishment of feudalism), furnishes a striking 
proof of the provisional nature of the social system of the Middle Ages. 

It is not my intention to give here the history either of the formation of 
this regime, or that of its dissolution. But, in order to place in a clear hght 
the moral condition of existing society,— the special subject ol this essay,— I 

1 See the Philosophical reflexions on the Sciences and Savants. 

g20 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

must offer a general view of the way in whioli the spiritual disorganisation 
S this system has been effected, with the main results hus produced. 

The destruction of one social system and the establishment of another 
are operations too complicated in their nature, and requiring too much time 
to allow of their ever being carried on contemporaneously. In the first 
place, the institution of a new political order presupposes the P'^evious over- 
throw of the preceding social state, both as a condition of reorgamsation by 
putting aside the obstacles which hindered it and a means of proving its 
urgency by manifesting the evil effects of anarchy. But, even under purely 
mental aspects, the human intellect, from the weakness of its resources, 
cannot clearly understand a new social system, until the previous one has 
been almost entirely dissolved. It would be ea^y to venfy this deplorable 
necessity by numerous examples. ■ , v j 

Naturallv, therefore, and inevitably, whenever the human race is obliged 
to pass from" one political re^/ime to another, there arises a period of anarchy,, 
at least of moral anarchy, the duration and intensity of which are deter- 
mined by the extent and importance of the change. Ihis anarchical 
character, of necessity, developed itself, in the highest degree, dunng the 
period of the disorganisation of the Catholic and Feudal system, since the 
revolution then demanded was the greatest in the whole cours^ of human 
history;— the direct transition from the Theological and MiHtary to the 
Positive and Industrial state, compared with which all previous revolutions 
were simple modifications. Accordingly, it prevailed in the 16th 17th 
and 18th centuries, during which this social disorganisation was effected. 

During the entire course of this period, which may be justly described as 
revolutionary, all sorts of anti-social ideas were put forward and reduced to 
dogmas as agencies for the demolition of the Catholic and Feudal system, 
in order to rally against it all those anarchical passions of the human heai-t, 
which, in ordinary times, would be repressed by the preponderance of an 
organised social regime. For example, the dogma of the unlimited Liberty 
of Conscience was first constructed to destroy the theological power ; then 
that of the Sovereignty of the People to overthrow the temporal power, 
and lastly that of Equality to dissolve the ancient social classification ; not 
to mention those conceptions of less importance that compose the critical 
doctrine, each of which has tended to demolish a corresponding piece of the 
ancient political edifice. 

Everything that develops itself spontaneously is necessarily legitimate 
during a certain period, since it thus satisfies some real social want. Accor- 
dingly I am far from overlooking the utility or even the necessity for the 
critical doctrine, during the last three centuries. I believe, moreover, that 
this doctrine will inevitably continue, despite of all contraiT appearances, 
until the direct establishment of a new social system ; and that, during this 
period, it will exert an indispensable influence, since then only can the 
ancient system be regarded as having terminated its existence. But if, 
in this sense, the action of the Critical Doctrine should be considered, to a 
certain extent, indispensable for the development of civilisation, it no less 
constitutes, in a far more important way, the chief obstacle to the establish- 
ment of that new political order whose advent it prepared. 

By an irresistible fatality, the various dogmas which compose the critical 
doctrine, were only enabled to acquire the degree of energy essential for the 
complete fulfilment of their natural destination, by assuming an absolute 
character ; but this renders them necessarily hostile not only to the system 

GENERAL APPENDIX— FIFTH PABT. 

621 

they attacked, but to any social system. Accordingly from the time that 
the demolition of the ancient political order was sufficiently effected, the 
influence of the critical principles produced in society a disposition, some- 
times involuntary, at other times conscious, to repel all real organisation. 
The habit contracted during three centuries, of applying this doctrine to all 
social questions naturally induced men to adopt it as the basis for reorgani- 
sation, when the catastrophes which resulted from the destruction of the 
ancient system proved the necessity for a return to order. Then was 
exhibited the strange phenomenon, inexplicable to anyone who has not fol- 
lowed its historical development,— political and moral disorder elevated into 
a system and presented as the ideal of social perfection. For each of the 
dogmas, of the critical doctrine, when understood organically, comes back 
exactly to the principle, that society under its corresponding aspect ought 
not to be organised. 

It would be easy to demonstrate, as to each of the modern political 
doctrines, that this judgment is noways exaggerated. But I do not now 
propose to undertake the direct and complete examination of the Critical 
Doctrine. I have only sketched it here in order to show clearly the point 
of view under which I regard this theory. For my present purpose I must 
confine myself to the consideration of its most important principle, namely 
its attitude towards the fundamental law of the division between the 
spiritual power and the temporal power. 

Of all Eevolutionary Prejudices, which have sprung up during the 
last three centuries, owing to the decline of the ancient social system, the 
most ancient, the most deeply rooted, the most genei-ally accepted, the one 
that lies at the root of all the rest, is the principle which proclaims that no 
spiritual power should exist in society or, what comes to the same thing, 
that this power should be entirely subordinated to the temporal power. 
Monarchs and nations who are more or less openly at variance upon every 
other portion of the critical doctrine, are entirely agreed about its starting 
point. In the countries where Protestantism triumphed, this annihila- 
tion or absorption of the spiritual power was regularly and openly pro- 
claimed. But the same principle, has been, at bottom, as really, though 
indirectly, established in those states which are still nominally Catholic, 
where we have seen the temporal power completely subjugating the 
spiritual hierarchy, and the clergy aiding this transformation, eager to relax 
the bonds of union with its central government in order to nationalise itself. 
Finally, as an evident and recent proof of the power and universality of this 
opinion, it wiJl be sufficient to mention that we have seen some justly 
esteemed philosophers who, while struggling against this prejudice, found 
only obstinate opponents in their own party. 

After the general explanation above given, I am not afraid of beino' 
accused, in reference to this central idea as well as other parts of the 
Critical Doctrine, of overlooking their utility and even their temporary 
necessity as means of effecting the transition from the ancient to the modern 
social system. But, considering that the demolition of the former system 
inevitably began with the spiritual order, the same course should of necessity 
be followed in the establishment of the latter. I am thus led to a direct 
examination of the fundamental principle of the critical doctrine, in order that, 
to the best of my ability, men may be brought back to the true elementary 
notions of general politics, forgotten for three centuries, so far as these are 
applicable to the present state of society. Such is the aim of this essay, in 

The Modem 
Revolution 
character- 
ized by a 
rejectiou of 
the Division 
between 
the Spiritual 
nnd Tempo- 
ral Powers. 

622 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

which I shall endeavour to prove the necessity for the institution of a 
Spiritual Power distinct from and independent of the temporal power, --'^ 
J^.t».^;.P thP main characteristics of the new moral organisation, ap 

and 
appro- 

The decline 
of the Spiri- 
tual Po\7er 
the cause of 
Internation- 
al Wars in 
Europe. 

to determine the main charactenstics ( 
priate to modern societies. , . „ i „+ „ „„;„+ „f 

I must first prepare reflecting minds for placing themselves at a point of 
view so foreign to existing hahits. For this purpose I think it necessary to 
make a series of observations, which, though not directly affecting the 
question, strike me as adapted to draw attention to it, by showing, empiri- 
cally, that the universal tendency of modern Publicists and Legislators .to 
adopt a political organisation without a spiritual power, leaves a vast and 
deplorable void in social order. ^ t -u 

The experience of the past may be used in two different ways to estab- 
lish the necessity for the division between the spiritual power and the tem- 
poral power, first by comparing the condition of the human race under 
the dominion of Catholicism and Feudalism with its condition under the 
essentially temporal organisations of Greece and Rome,— secondly by show- 
ing the mischief produced, since the beginning of the 16th century by the 
suppression of the spiritual power, or, what is politically equivalent, its 
usurpation by the temporal power. Although it might be possible to draw 
from the former class of observations important instruction directly applic- 
able to the present question, the great diversity of the epochs would render 
such a demonstration too complicated to allow of its producing that inti- 
mate conviction which I especially desire to produce. Besides, I have 
sufBcientiy indicated the basis of such a comparison at the beginning of this 
essay. Thus, in what follows, I shall address myself exclusively to the 
latter order of facts, the consideration of which, as being more direct and 
evident, ought to be more decisive. It therefore remains for me to con- 
eider briefly, in reference to modern society, the principal political evils 
which may with certainty be attributed to the dissolution of the spiritual 
power. So important an investigation would naturally require extensive 
development. But the reader, once placed at the right point of view, can 
himself easily supply details which I cannot here introduce. 

In order to confine this series of remarks to such facts only as are capable 
of determining a clear and irresistible conviction, I purposely put aside all 
con.sideration of the great revolutinnary catastrophes, although these are, 
ultimately, traceable to the spiritual disorganisation of society. I do so 
because, notwithstanding their origin, their return may be reasonably re- 
garded as impossible. I confine my investigation to the habitual state of 
civilised nations during the last three centuries, as now subsisting. 

Considering, first, the most general political relations, we see that, so 
long as the Catholic system preserved its vigour, the relations between state 
and state were subordinated throughout Christian Europe to a regular and 
permanent organisation, which was capable of habitually maintaining among 
them a certain voluntary order, and of inciting them, when circumstances 
demanded it, to a collective activity, as in the vast and important operation 
of the Crusades. In a word, there existed then what M. de Maistre, with 
profound truth, calls the miracle of the European monarchy. Doubtless, in 
consequence of the state of civilisation at that period, the government was 
very imperfect. But in this respect, as in reference to the nation, is not the 
most imperfect government after all very preferable to anarchy ? What 
has happened on this liead since the absorption of the papal power ? The 
various European powers have returned to a state of barbai-ism in their 

GENERAL APPENDIX— PIFTH PART. 

623 

mutual relations. Kings inscribed on their cannons the words — thence- 
forward quite accurate — ultima ratio regum. What expedient has been 
devised for filling up the immense -void -which the annulling of the spiritual 
power left? Doubtless justice should be rendered to the efforts of diplo- 
matists to produce and maintain, in the absence of a real bond, what has 
been called the Balance of Power in Europe : but we cannot forbear from 
smiling at the idea of constituting in this way a real international govern- 
ment. It is manifest that this system of political equilibrium, considered in 
its whole duration, has caused more wars that it has hindered. The shock 
caused by the French Revolution ground it to powder, and every state has 
remained in continual fear of a general encroachment by some great power. 
At this moment is not all Europe in dread, though no doubt without cause, 
of seeing the entire system of international relations put into jeopardy by 
the death of one man ? 

To the foregoing it must be added, in accordance with a judicious 
remark of M. de Maistre, that the action of the Spiritual Power should be 
estimated not only by the obvious benefits it produces, but especially by the 
mischiefs it prevents, thovigh these are not so easily ascertained. A memo- 
rable example pointed out by this philosopher suffices to show clearly the 
importance of his remark. 

In the formation of the colonial system which followed the discovery of 
America, two rival nations, each of whom might envy the other the most 
important colonial possessions of the globe, and who were at many points 
constantly in contact, never engaged in a single war on this ground, while 
all the other European powers, obstinately and bitterly contended among 
themselves for some almost insignificant stations. How was this great 
result produced ? By a single act of the spiritual power, even then shaken 
to its foundation. A simple bull of Alexander VI., which from the outset 
equitably traced a general line of demarcation between the colonial estab- 
lishments of Spain and those of Portugal, sufficed. 

I repeat the assertion, all that has happened has necessarily happened, 
and I can feel no barren regret as to the past. But, let me point out, with 
the great Leibnitz, the fact of the important void left in the European 
organisation by the inevitable dissolution of the spiritual power, and thence 
conclude that, the establishment of a new Moral Government is imperiou.sly 
demanded by the present state of civilised nations. 

Looking next to the interior organisation of each people, the same 
necessity becomes still more apparent for a number of reasons of which I 
shall only point out the moat general. 

The decline of the theological philosophy and the corresponding spiritual 
power has left society without any moral discipline. Hence a series of 
effects which I shall mark in the order of their natural connection. 

1st. A complete mental dispersion. Since everyone endeavours to form 
by bis unaided forces a system of general notions without fulfilling any of 
the indispensable conditions, it has become quite impossible to obtain in the 
mass of men, even between two minds, a real and durable agreement upon 
any social question, however simple. If this anarchy had no other effects 
than its ridiculous side the mischief would be unimportant, and satire would 
suffice to reduce it within reasonable limits. But the facility it aff'ords for 
regarding the majority of the subjects that so eminently concern good 
order, as being open, with almost equal reason, to opposite conclusions 
produces efiects of the most serious nature. 

Fence ^Iso 
flow dis- 
orders in tlie 
Internal 
Organisation 
of each 
People. 

1. Mental 
Anarchy 

624 - SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

In order to estimate rightly the depth and universality of this Intellec- 
tual Anarchy, it is necessary to observe that it does not now prevail merely 
among the partisans of the critical philosophy, who have erected it into a 
fundamental dogma. It is manifested still more decisively, though in a less 
degree, by the partisans of the retrograde doctrine, among whom, being in 
contradiction with their tendencies, it constitutes an involuntary result of 
the general and irresistible progress of the human mind. In the first place, 
we may remarli in that party k fundamental separation, which often degene- 
rates into direct opposition, between the defenders of Catholicism and those 
of Feudalism. Moreover, considering the former only, whose opinions are 
necessarily more homogeneous, we perceive that while converging upon a 
sufficient number of points to be fairly regarded as forming a single school, 
they nevertheless diverge essentially on fundamental questions so widely 
that the practical results would be wholly incoherent if the state of society 
permitted any extended application of their doctrines. This is proved by an 
attentive examination of the theories of this school, advanced by its leading 
thinkers, M. de Maistre, M. de la Mennais, M. de Bonald, and M. d'Eiktein. 
Their various opinions reveal at bottom a marked individuality on the most 
important points.' 

Sndly. The almost total absence of public morality. On one hand the 
social destination of each person, being no longer determined by any maxims 
generally respected, and our practical institutions of necessity conforming 
themselves to this intellectual situation, the growth of individual ambition 
is really no longer under any restraint but that of the irregular and fortuitous 
action of external circumstances. On the other hand since social sentiment 
vainly seeks, whether in private judgment or public prejudice, exact and 
fixed notions as to what constitutes the general good in each ease, it ends 
by gradually degenerating into a vague philanthropic intention, incapable of 
exerting any real influence upon the conduct of life. Owing to this twofold 
influence in the chief relations of society each person is gradually led to 
make himself a centre, and the notion of private interest done remaining 
clear m the midst of all this moral chaos, mere egoism naturally become 
the only movmg power posse.'sed of sufficient energy to guide actiVe life 

This result now so apparent in public morality extends itself, to a certain 
degree, even to private morality. Happily this depends on many conditions 
besides that of holding decided opinions. Natural instinct, which oneaks 
much more clearly in the latter than in the former case; the ever increasing 
power of the habits of order and labour, which so strongly tend to banish 
the idea of vice; the general amelioration of conditions produced by the 
contmua developnaent of industry, which renders temptations less severe 
and less frequent ; the general softening of manners, as the result of advanc- 
ng civilisation; a 1 these causes must, without doubt, greatly conn" iSZce 
theimmorality which the absence of fixed princip es of conduc tendTin 
our day to produce. Nevertheless the want of orgLisation p'od e even 
tano? r ; T "'""'' "" ""'i^i'iWe, though more diilcult to kiTen- 

s:xtiirs^:^^:stLSSa:r"^-'. -^ ^-^ 

suppression,-examine whether real'li?: d^Stt^r Z:^:Z^:^ 

' The most consistent philosonhsr nf nil •.,,1, ■.. ■ ,, ■ 

Mennais has recently been led into n f™^! ■ } } ^"^^ '° ^'^ "-^-'y- M- de la 
formally invoking thVliberty of worsWp '''''"" of fundamental principles by 

GENERAL APPENDIX— FIFTH PAET. 

625 

3. Social 
Materialism. 

condition that affects the larger portion of our ideas of du,ty, whether as 
regards the various domestic relations, or the ordinarj' mutual ties between 
superiors and inferiors, or the relations of producers and consumers, &c. 

Besides, an indirect observation to some extent dispenses with imme- 
diate verification. I refer to the fact of the very general preponderance, in 
practice at least, of moral theories which pretend to explain all human 
sentiments by connecting them exclusively with self-interest. While in 
speculation the moral instinct repels such theories, they have become the 
standing source of explanation for the world in general, and maintain, even 
among philosophers, a credit which but too faithfully indicates the real state 
of society. This observation is corroborated by the view which predomi- 
nates among them, that penal legislation furnishes, in the last resort, the 
only efficacious mode of assuring the morality of the lower classes. 

3rdly. The social prepondeiance which during the last three centuries 
has b«en, more and more, assigned to the purely material point of view, is 
another manifest result of the spiritual disorganisation of modern nations. 
The practical power having, from the sixteenth century downwards, annulled 
or subordinated to an ever-increasing extent the theoretical power, the same 
spirit has gradually penetrated all the elements of society. In every matter 
people have gradually come to consider, almost exclusively, immediate utility, 
or at least to place it in the first rank. Thus, for example, in the systematic 
estimate of the sciences, their philosophic value has been more and more 
overlooked; and they have only been appreciated according to their practical 
results. 

This materialistic spirit is pre-eminently apparent in England, where, 
from a multitude of special causes, a provisional social organisation has since 
the sixteenth century acquired a greater degree of consistency than on the 
Continent It predominates still more completely in the United Stales, 
where spiritual disorganisation has been pushed much farther than in any 
other country. 

When the progress of events introduced the epoch of constitutions, the 
same characteristic strikingly revealed itself in this new sphere of action. 
Public attention was exclusively occupied with the material aspects of this 
great work. It aimed at recasting all practical institutions ; at regulating-, 
even to the smallest detail, the forms of deliberative assemblies, without 
giving a thought to the previous establishment of new social doctrines, 
without so much as attempting to determine precisely the spirit of the new 
political system. Even in our day when, thanks to acquired experience, 
society is entering upon better paths, to the extent at least of definitely 
renouncing metaphysical constitutions, it may be feared that the influence 
of the same habits will long impede a true reorganisation. 

Doubtless it is by re-establishing moral order that this vast operation 
must commence, since mental reorganisation is at once more urgent and 
better prepared than the regulation of social relations. Nevertheless, it is 
probable that the popular disposition — still too pronounced — to demand new 
institutions; in other words, to reconstruct the temporal before the spiritual 
power, will at first present a powerful obstacle to the adoption of this, the 
natural and the only efficacious course. 

4thly. I must point out, as the last general consequence of the dissolution 
of the spiritual power, the establishment of that modern autocracy without cormption. 
parallel in history, and which, for want of a more adequate expression, may 
be styled miuisterialism or administrative despotism. Its peculiar organic 

VOL. IT. S S 

4. Bureau- 

626 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

character is the centralisation of power, pushed further and further, beyond 
all reasonable bounds ; and its usual mode of action is systematic corruption. 
Both inevitably result from the moral disorganisation of society. 

A well-known natural law of political action distinctly establishes that 
the only way to avoid being governed by others is to govern oneself. It 
applies to the masses as well as to individuals, to things as well as to 
persons. In its most extended sense it signifies that, in proportion as moral 
government is weak, material government must be strong, in order to prevent 
the entire decomposition of the body politic. How, for example, can we 
imagine in the case of a population so extensive as that of Fr.ince, whose 
various elements are no longer sufficiently combined by any moral bond, that 
the nation would be hindered from breaking up into separate communities, 
these again subdividing themselves, if, in the absence of a common spirit, the 
central temporal power did not maintain all the social elements in a state of 
immediate and continual dependence. Such a result would only represent 
the continuing influence of the same principle, which, as above pointed out, 
broke up the ancient European System into independent nationalities. 
Accordingly centralisation has increased in proportion as moral disorj?anisa- 
tion has become more complete and obvious. The same cause which made 
this movement indispensable likewise tended to render it unavoidable, sipce 
the annulling of the spiritual power destroyed the one legal barrier to the 
encroachments of the temporal power. 

Corruption, employed as the permanent means of government, follows 
still more clearly from the destruction of the spiritual power. It might be 
foreseen from the growth of this shameful regime in the country where the 
degradation of moral authority was most strongly constituted on a legal 
basis. But it is easy to obtain a direct proof of this proposition. 

In a population where the indispensable cooperation of individuals in 
public order can no longer be produced by voluntary and moral assent 
accorded to a common social doctrine, no other resource for maintaining 
harmony remains than the melancholy alternative between force and corrup- 
tion. The first of these methods is incompatible with the nature of modem 
civilisation, since the temporal action of society, ceasing to be militarv, has 
become essentially industrial. Wealth which, through the institution of 
property, was the original measure of force, as being its permanent result, 
has in modern society more and more become its main and habitual source. 
In this respect it might be accurately described as virtual force. Hence the 
gradual substitution of corruption for force, as a means of maintaining order. 
The more the new state of society repelled the latter, the more did it 
favour the former, from the time that moral disorganisation began clearly 
to reveal itself. 

Governments can only act on individuals by employing on a greater 
scale those means of influence which are recognised as most efficacious in 
daily intercourse. Thus, when personal interest is considered in private 
relations as the only energetic motive adequate to inspire habitual confidence 
need we feel astonished that the central power is led to emplov the same 
means of action ? This sad result should not be imputed to the o-overned 
any more than to rulers, flowing, as it does, from their mutual faults. To 
speak more accurately, it is the painful, though transient, consequence of the 
state of anarchy into which society has been, of necessity, plunged during 
the transition from the theological and military system to" the positive and 
industrial system. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— FIPTH PART. 627 

If the picture just sketched of the general effects gradually produced 
from the sixteenth century by the moral disorganisation of society is con- 
sidered to accord with observation, and if the facts are admitted to result 
from the cause to which I attribute them, it is manifest that the establish- 
ment of a new spiritual power is even more important Nationally than in a 
European point of view. 

_ In order to prevent as far as possible any misapprehension of my concep- 
tion, I now state my opinion that in the former as in the latter point of view 
this state of anarchy, of which I, with all true observers, deplore the melan- 
choly results, was not merely an unavoidable result of the decline of the 
ancient social system, but an indispensable condition for establishino' the new 
one. Examining under this aspect the four general facts above "stated I 
could prove that, though revolting monstrosities when regarded as perma- 
nent conditions (as the critical doctrine, understood in an organic sense, 
requires), they are by no means such when regarded in reference to. a merely 
transitional state. I limit myself, as regards this new investigation, to the 
first fact, which is the basis of all the rest. 

The profound Intellectual Anarchy which now prevails is not merely 
justified by the necessary decline of the ancient social system, but inevitable, 
and even indispensable, until the doctrines destined to found the new 
organisation have been sufiiciently elaborated. On one hand, so lono- as. 
this kind of moral interregnum lasts, it will be impossible to discipline 
minds. On the other hand, if, before this period arrived, a direct attempt 
were made to produce mental unity, which, in the absence of suitable" 
doctrines, could only be accomplished by material and arbitrary measures 
it would of necessity follow, that, the free development of thought being 
forbidden, both as regards the formation of new doctrines and their diffusion ' 
the process of reorganisation must be arrested. 

Thus I appreciate as fully as anyone all that is truly valuable in the 
Critical Philosophy ; but I desire threit all misapprehension as to its real- 
character should henceforth cease. The period has arrived when we can 
give a rational account of the course which has been followed; mere routine 
is no longer indispensable. It is possible to maintain the jnst, thoun-h 
ti-ansitory, influence of negative doctrines without on that ground treating 
them as organic, and in this way allowing ourselves to be lulled into a 
factitious security in reference to the serious dangers with which the 
vicious prolongation of the existing anarchy threatens societj'. Such an 
intellectual attitude, though perhaps above average capacity, should at least 
become the habitual point of view of all thinkers who wish to devote their 
forces to the grand social operation of the nineteenth century. 

By the ensemble of the views above submitted, I hope I have sufiiciently 
prepared all reflecting readers for the direct treatment of this fundamental 
question of the Spiritual Power, which in our day excites so many puerile 
and chimerical fears, and, accordingly, to this I now proceed. 

The existing state of opinion, in reference to the fundamental question 
of the necessity for a spiritual power, offers to the impartial observer a 
singular and even painful contrast. On one hand, those who take up the 
cause of true liberty, of civilisation, who, in a word, specially proclaim tiaem- 
selves progressive, and to a certain extent are so, dominated by the desire, 
legitimate but ill regulated, of avoiding at any price a theocracy, follow a 
course which, were it practicable, must, to avoid anarchy, inevitably lead to 
the most degrading of despotisms, that of force destitute of all moral authority. 

s s 2 

628 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

On the other hand, those who are accused of a retrograde tendency, and do 
in truth, to some extent, deserve this reproach, in respect not of their philo- 
sophical aims, but of the inevitable consequences of their doctrines vpere 
these completely carried out, are at bottom the only persons whose theories 
adequately assert the dignity of human nature, since they make moral 
superiority the corrective and regulator of force or wealth. 
TheSpiri- By the considerations above pointed out, I have endeavoured to prove 

nisaticm'^*''' ^^^* *^^ social Condition of the most civilised nations imperiously demands 
niust adapt the formation of a new spiritual order, as the first and chief mode of ending 
Modem the revolutionary period, which began in the sixteenth century, and thirty 

Society. years ago entered on its last stage. It remains to examine directly the 

nature of the Spiritual Organisation appropriate to modem societies. So 
fundamental a problem, and one intimately connected with all the deepest 
political questions, could only be properly treated in a special work exclu- 
sively addressed to the most serious thinkers. But, although the very brief 
indications to which I must here confine myself are assuredly inadequate 
for the complete treatment which such a question merits, they will perhaps 
call the attention of thoughtful minds to this subject, and this is my pre- 
sent aim. 

In order to obtain a complete general view of the new moral order it is 
necessary to consider separately the Oifice which the spiritual power should 
fulfil, abstracted from its peculiar constitution, next the nature of the 
Organisation requisite for bringing it into harmony with modem civilisation. 
The following explanations are exclusively devoted to the former class of 
considerations, essentially reducible to an analysis of the main reasons that 
render a spiritual government necessary to society. On a subsequent 
occasion I shall examine the second part of the question. This division is 
determined by the natural course of public reason, which, doubtless, will 
attain to a clear perception of the need for a new moral power before it 
accurately comprehends its true organisation. After having thus pointed 
out the ensemble of the new spiritual order towards which modern societies 
tend, I purpose, in a concluding essay, to consider the general course by 
which this great work of reconstruction should naturally be effected, by 
taking its existing stage as our point of departure. 

It would be easy to form empirically a clear idea of the functions of the 
modern spiritual power by a careful study of those which devolved upon 
the Catholic clergy at the period of their greatest vigour and complete 
independence, that is to say, from about the middle of the eleventh to 
nearly the end of the thirteenth century. Doubtless, the philosophical 
bases of these two powers, with the corresponding social relations, and, con- 
sequently, their respective modes of influence differ entirely in their nature 
and are, in many respects, even absolutely opposed. But as regards the 
extent and the intensity of action, which is here the essential point, it may 
be asserted that for every social relation which fell vrithin the province of 
the Catholic clergy, an analogous attribute will be found in the new political 
system as to the modfern spiritual power. Inasmuch as the new S3'stem will 
be founded more quietly than the ancient, and at a more eulio-htened 
period, when its nature can be more easily foreseen and therefore better 
understood, it is even probable that the intervention of the spiritual power 
will be more explicit and complete, because it will encounter less resistance 
in the corresponding temporal power. Nevertheless, although this com- 
pai-ison is invaluable as ofl'ering a degree of precision not easily attainable in 

GENERAIi APPENDIX— FIFTH PAKT. 629 

any other way, it can only profit minds able to put out of sight the extreme 
difference of the two states of civilisation, or rather to make a just allowance 
for it ; and that liave studied the past with a disposition sufficiently emanci- 
pated from the pernicious prejudices generally inspired by the critical philo- 
sophy towards the spiritual regime of the Middle Ages. Such a comparison 
would therefore almost unavoidably lead most readers into erroneous appli- 
cations, which would give a very mistaken idea of my view. Accordingly, 
though I deem it advisable to signalise this point of similitude for "the 
benefit of those who can utilise it, I shall merely undertake, here, the direct 
appreciation of the functions of the modern spiritual power. 

Although it may be useful and, in certain cases, even necessary to con- 
sider the iden of society, abstracted from that of government, it is universally 
recognised that these ideas are in fact inseparable. In other words the 
lasting existence of every real association necessarily supposes a constant 
influence, at times directive, at times repressive, exercised, within certain 
limits, by the whole on the parts, in order to make them converge towards 
the general order from which they always naturally tend to deviate, more 
or less, and from which they would deviate indefinitely could they be 
entirely left to their own impulses. This infiuence embraces two kinds of 
action, one Material the other Moral ; which, though always coexisting, are 
entirely heter9geneous both as regards their bases and their modes of action. 
The first of these concerns actions, enforcing some, preventing others. In 
the last resort it is founded upon force, or, what comes to the same thing, 
upon wealth, which has become its equivalent among modern nations, in 
proportion as the progress of civilisation has transferred to industrial pre- 
eminence the civil power originally attached to military superiority. The 
second consists in the regulation of opinion, sentiment, and will, in a word 
of tendencies. Its basis is that moral authority which in the last resort 
belongs to intellectual superiority and knowledge. In this way the two 
great inequalities on which all society is based, concur to maintain social 
order. 

From the time when civilisation had advanced sufficiently to allow of 
our assigning these two general branches of government to different 
classes — as took place in the Middle Ages — the distinction between them 
became apparent to everyone, and the terms ' temporal power ' and ' spiri- 
tual power ' were created to denote it. For that reason alone it is 
desirable to preserve these terms, at least provisionally, in the new social 
state, although their structure still recals the social state that gave them 
birth. 

The proper destination of the Spiritual Power is, then, the government of Education ,- 
opinion ; that is to say the establishment and maintenance of those principles f^nctton of 
which ought to preside over the various social relations. This general ttie Spiritual 
function is divisible into as many parts as there are distinct classes of rela- 
tions. In truth no social fact can escape the influence of the spiritual 
power when this is well organised, that is to say, in exact harmony with the 
corresponding state of civilisation. Its chief attribute, therefore, is the 
supreme direction of education, whether general or special, of the former 
especially, the word being taken in its most extended and just sense, so as 
to embrace the entire system of ideas .and habits necessary for initiating 
individuals into the social order under which they must live, and for adapt- 
ing, as far as possible each of them to the special office he ought to fulfil 
in this great social function the action of the spiritual power is most clearly 

630 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

marked, as constituting its exclusive attribute ; while, in all other cases, its 
influence is, more or less, mixed up with that of the temporal power. In ■ 
this way, it decisively manifests its power, and, at the same time, lays the 
solid foundation of its general authority. Education would even include 
the national functions of the spiritual power, if by an abusive extension of 
this expression, we included under it, as some philosophers have done, not 
only the preparation of youth, but also that important action exerted on 
adults, which is its necessary complement and inevitable consequence. 
The second cla.ss of functions appertaining to the spiritual power consists in 
putting forward unceasingly for the -regulation of active life, both as regards 
individuals and the masses, the principles which they imbibed in youth, 
and enforcing their application, when neglected or violated, so far as moral 
means are efficacious for- that purpose.^ 

Such, briefly considered, are the general functions of the spiritual power 
viewed in reference to the nation alone. But International Relations assign 
to it a new class of functions, which, however, flow from the former, applied 
to a wider sphere. Abstractedly considered, the jurisdiction of the spiritual 
power should acknowledge no other territorial limits than those of the 
habitable globe, if all portions of the human race had nearly reached the 
same state of civilisation, since a spiritual association is by its nature, 
evidently capable of an indefinite extension. But it embraces, in fact, only 
the nations (for example those in Europe) whose social state'is sufficiently 
similar to allow of their maintaining a certain degree of permanent com- 
munity, and yet so different as to require temporal governments distinct 
from and independent of each other. For as soon as this similitude exists, 
continuous relations inevitably arise, whence result at once the possibility 
and the necessity for a certain common government, destined to regulate 
them by the influence of general and uniform principles. 

We cannot wonder that Catholic philosophers should have made its 
European influence the main and characteristic attribute of the spiritual 
power sirrce, belonging to it exclusively, this constituted its most obvious 
and deaisive office. Without doubt at each social stage, the association of a 
certain number of men under a common spiritual rigime always and neces- 
sarily precedes their union under the same temporal government. That is 
equally true for National as for European order. But this truth can be far 
more easily proved in the latter than in the former case, for in this the 
two powers constantly coexist, while in the other, from the nature of things, 
spiritual association always subsists in full force long before any beginning 
of temporal association. So true is this that in the ancient political system, 

' Besides the above two kinds of functions, tho spiritual power also evidently 
exercises, as a learned corporation, a consultative inriuenee, direct or indirect, in 
all social operations. But this latter ofGce, which our present incomplete and 
erroneous system of education disposes us to exaggerate and overestimate, would, 
in a well-ordered social state, fall within one or other of the two former. For 
this reason I have not expressly mentioned it in my present summary exposition. 
For when education is what it ought to be, individuals or the masses rarely require in 
practice any general principles but those tmder which they have been brought up. 
It is only necessary to remind them of these and to explain their application, 
because they naturally tend to forget and misunderstand them. When the 
general or special needs of society really require New Principles, the spiritual 
power, as the class on whom the cultivation of theoretical knowledge devolves, 
should supply the want and systematically introduce them into general edu- 
cation. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— FIETH PAET. 

631 

the spiritual union alone subsisted, and it is still doubtful, whether the tem- 
poral union -will ever subsist under any system. 

Such then, incontestably, is tbe second great object at which the The moral 
spiritual power aims; the fusing; of all European, and, generally speaking, EuTOpfand 
of the greatest possible number of nations, into one moral communion, humanity 
This last oflSce, which completes its attributions, is, like the preceding, offlreof the 
reducible to the permanent foundation of a uniform system of education for l^!^"™' 
the various populations, and of that regular influence which necessarily 
results therefrom. Thus it is that the spiritual power naturally becomes 
invested, in reference to the several nations and their temporal chiefs, with 
the sort of authority indispensable for inducing them, willingly or un- 
willingly, to submit their differences to its arbitration, and to receive from it 
a common impulse whenever a collective action is needed. 

Thus, to resume, the life of individuals and that of nations is alternately 
composed of speculation and of action, in other words of tendencies and 
results. These two kinds of facts are intertwined in a thousand ways in 
real life. The proper and exclusive object of the spiritual power is to 
regulate the former, that of the temporal to regulate the latter^ Each of 
the two powers acts legitimately so long as it confines itself strictly to its 
natural sphere of action, so far at least as this distinction is humanly 
possible. When either, passing this limit, usurps a function of the other, an 
Abuse occurs ; and though such usurpations, in both senses, have, un- 
deniably, been, or may again become, momentarily inevitable and indispen- 
sable under certain circumstances, they do not, for that reason, constitute 
the normal state. Such is the typical order towards which political combi- 
nations should tend-; although, unquestionably, it may be foreseen that the 
imperfection of the human organisation, whether as regards intelligence, or 
passion, in this as in every other case, forbids the hope of ever reaching 
complete success. ^ 

Having thus, in order to fix our ideas, laid down this general definition 
of the spiritual power for every social state, it becomes easy, by applying the 
preceding considerations, to show that this power, once properly reorganised, 
should exert as gfeat an influence in Modern Civilisation as in that of the 
Middle Ages. I need not specially concern myself with the latter, as to 
which I refer my readers to the works of the Catholic philosophers, and 
particularly to those of M. de Maistre, who in his treatise The Pope, has 
given the most systematic, profound, and exact exposition of the ancient 
spiritual organisation.* We have here, essentially, to consider the spiritual 

' Philosophieally considered, the spiritual and temporal influence will always 
remain, by their nature, perfectly distinct ; but, considered politically, it is not 
always possible to make a distinction, even approximately, because there are a 
multitude of secondary offices — which this is not the place for pointing out — 
where the two powers must inevitably be united, pretty equally, in the same hands. 
The fundamental principle of the division of the two powers simply requires that 
no individual or body of men, should possess both in a high degree, and this is not 
only possible but has long since become inevitable, especially in the modern 
system ot society. 

'' The philosophers of the retrograde school, and particularly M. de JIaistre, 
who may now be regarded as its head, while defending the Catholic system, have 
offered some general considerations of great importance on the Spiritual Power, as 
an element of every conceivable society. But these abstract conceptions, though 
capable of supplying useful hints to persons who desire to embrace this^ funda- 
mental question from its true point of view, are deficient both in the precision and 
in the generality necessary to establish a methodical conviction. In them we may 

632 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

The Sriri- 
tuiU Tourer 
iinist regu- 
late Motlern 
Industry, as 
ba-e'' 

Divif-ion of 
Labour. 

power in the social state peculiar to modern nations, and -wliieh I regard as' 
bping charncteriged, under its temporal aspects, by the entire preponderance 
of industrial activity. 

In the positive "order of society, organisation, whether considered as a 
whole 01- in detail, is nothing but the regulation of the Division of Labour; 
this expression being understood not in the very narrow sense given to it by 
thl the economists,' but in its most extended sense, that is .to say, as embracing 
all the various kinds of coexisting labours, theoretical or practical, which 
cooperate to the same end, including distinct national as well as individual 
functions. The ever-increasing separation and specialisation of distinct 
organs of activity, as regards both individuals and nations, constitute, in 
fact, the general means of perfecting the human race, as, by a necessary 
and continuous reaction they are its permanent result.- In this way society 
naturally tends to enlarge itself more and more, and must, sooner or later, 
comprehend the totality of mankind, if the duration which physical laws 
assign to the progressive activity of our race is sufficiently prolonged. All 
real steps in advance which have taken place, or can take place, in 

remark the radical inconsequence which consists in directly transfeiriDg to 
modern societies considerations exclusively drawn from the obstrvation of 
mediEeval societies so essentially different. Associated, moreover, as they invari- 
ably are, with projects for restoring a system whose destruction, already almost 
completed, is henceforward irrevocable, they tend in the present state of men's 
minds rather to fortify than to uproot the general prejudice against every spiritunl 
power. We may even remark that the sentiment, involuntary though incomplete, 
of total disaccord with their century inspires these philosophers with a hesitation 
and timidity which shoA^'S itself even in their judgments ot the past. 

Philosophically regarded, then, these works essentially possess only an histori- 
cal utility, , IS being eminently adapted to place, in the clearnst light, the true 
general character of the ancient social system, and to secure a just appreciation of 
the immense benefits wliieh tlie human race owes to it. In this respect the con- 
ceptions of the retrograde school preserve all their value, as being fully and 
directly applicable to an order of facts for, or rather from, which they have been 
systematised. But in reference to the modern reorganisation of existing societies, 
the question must be regarded as one absolutely untouched, 

It remains to point out that the political influence of the retrograde school is, 
nevertheless, in this point of view, very useful in our day, and even necessary, 
during a certain period, though only indirectly, and, so to speak, negatively 
useful. For it presents, on ono hand, an indispensable impediment which 
preserves society from the total preponderance of critical doctrines that would 
hinder all real organisation. At the same time it acts as a stimulant, no less 
essential, to compel modern civilisation to produce the moral system iitted to itself, 
and adapted to give it the consistency which it needs in order to become capable 
of replacing the ancient one. In this sense the influence of the retrograde school 
is quite as necessary as that of the negative schoolj though in a different way ; and 
one should naturally subsist as long as the other. 

' The Economists were led, by the imperfect nature of the inves;tigations 
which the general progress ot the human mind assigned to them, to consider the 
social state from a very imperfect point of view. It is, therefore, easy to under- 
stand that they could only embrace the narrowest and least important applications 
of the principle of the Division of Labour, of which they are, properly speaking, 
the inventors. To the credit of Adam Smith, it should be remarked, that not 
only was he the first to conceive this great principle in a clear and positive 
manner, but he presented it in a much broader manner than any of his 
successors. 

'' The considerations submitted in this and the following paragraphs, are, 
naturally, as applicable to theoretical as to practical order. But I have thought 
it best to apply them to the latter, in order to place iu a clearer light the neces- 
sity for the spiritual power, which is now my chief ain^. 

GENERAL APPENDIX-PIETH PAET. 633 

social organisation may he regarded, from this point of view, as producing 
or tendmg to produce a better Division of Labour. For social order would, 
mamfestly, be perfect, whether as regards personal well-being or the har- 
mony, of the whole, if we could in all cases assign to every individual or 
nation that precise kind of activity for which they are respectively fitted by 
natural disposition, antecedents, or special circumstances. This, considered 
from another point of view, would simply constitute a complete division of 
labour. Doubtless such a social order could not at any period exist in per- 
fection. But the human race continually tends to approach this limit, more 
and more, although we can never determine how far we shall fall short of 
it.^ In the social state which among modern nations establishes itself 
with increasing solidity, this tendency is most direct and apparent. For 
industrial activity, compared with military activity, is characterised by this 
admirable property ; that its free and full development, in one individual or 
nation, does not necessarily involve its repression in other individuals or 
nations. On the contrary it not merely permits but, within certain limiti, 
promotes universal cooperation ; whence it naturally follows that men and 
nations are continually impelled to form associations more and more extended 
and pacific. 

But if the Division of Labour, regarded in this light, be the general 
cause of human perfection,' and of the development of the social state; it 
presents uuder another aspect, no less natural, n continual tendency to 
deterioration and dissolution, which would, in the end, stop all progress, 
unless constantly checked by the ever-increasing action of government and, 
above all, of spiritual government. It necessarily results from this con- 
stantly progressive specialisation, that each individual, and each nation, 
■habitually places itself at n, point of view, more and more narrow, and ia 
guided by interests increasingly special. If then, on the one hand, the 
intellect is sharpened, on the other it becopies narrower,^ and so too what 
sociability gains in extent, it loses in energy. In this way, each individual 
and nation, is rendered more and more unfit to grasp, unaided, the relation 
between his special action and the entirety of social activity, which, at the 
same time, becomes increasingly complicated. On the other hsind, each 
feels more and more disposed to detach his particular cause from the common 
cause, every day less easily apprehensible. These disadvantages, incident 
to the Division of Labour, evidently tend, &om the nature of things, to aug- 
ment continually ^;a)'j passu with its advantages. The former then would 
overbear the latter, if they could act unreservedly. Hence the absolute 
necessity for a continuous action, produced by two forces, one moral the 
other physical, specially destined to bring back to the general point of view 

' The imperfection of language obliges me to employ these words — perfection 
and development — of which the former and even t^he latter, though more precise, 
usually recalls ideas of absolute excellence and indefinite amelioration, foreign to 
my meaning. These words are merely used by me with the scientific purpose of 
designating, in social physics, a ee:ftain succession of states which the human race 
reaches in accordance with fixed laws; analogous to their employment by 
physiologists in the study of the individual, to designate a series of transfor- 
mations,' which involve no necessary idea of continuous amelioration or deteriora.- 
tion. 

^ Some economists, and among others, M. Say, have perceived this inevitable 
result of the division of labour when carried very far, but only in reference to 
those subordinate cases which had formed the exclusive subject of their observa-! 
tions. 

634 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

minds predisposed to diverge, and to impose the common interest upon 
individualities wliich constantly tend to deviate from it. While such an 
intervention is indispensable, it becomes possible, and even unavoidable, 
because the natural development of the various inequalities, which neces- 
sarily results from the division of labour, tends, of itself, to establish the 
hierarchy, spiritual and temporal, requisite for this general action. Such, 
from an elementary point of view, is the theory of government, the entire 
essence of which thus consists, at all times, in regulating the hierarchy 
■which forms itself spontaneously in the interior of society so as to diminish, 
as much as possible, the evil, as compared with the beneficial, influence of 
the division of labour. 

These considerations are specially applicable to the system of modem 
civilisation, as much as those very different ones previously pointed out. In 
our social state, where the division of labour is pu.shed farthest, and must, 
inevitably, more than in any previous state, continually augment, both as 
regards individuals and nations, the disadvantages attaching to this division, 
no less that its advantages, are necessarily more pronounced. Under one 
aspect it is as inferior to the social condition of the nations of antiquity, as 
it is superior under the other; and this furnishes ample matter for discussion 
to those who desire to praise or blame either absolutely, and can do so 
according to the point of view at wliich they place themselves. Who, in 
fact, has not remarked, that in mental gi'asp and political energy, the nations 
of antiquity were as superior to the modern as they were inferior in extent 
of knowledge and universality of social relations. From the foregoing 
remarks it ia apparent that there is nothing accidental in this contrast, the 
source of which we should fathom in order to exclude vicious attempts to 
combine in the social order two mutually incompatible sorts of excellence.' 

Be this as it may, the last class of considerations above indicated which 
explain the general function of government, conceived in its largest scope, 
and especially as part of modern civilisation, evidently apply, in a special 
manner, to the Spiritual I'ower, proving that in the new social state the 
action of this power should be more extensive, and less intense, than in all 
the preceding states of society. Since in fact the general disadvantages 
incident to division of labour inevitably increase by the same necessity which 
produces the gradual development of civilisation, society needs, more and 
more, particularly among the modern nations, to feel the influence of a 
speculative corporation, which, specially and permanently devoting itself to 
the general point of view, is destined to recall this both to individuals and 
nations; and which, being at the same time, by its character and social 
independence, disinterested as regards the numerous causes that produce 
divergency and isolation, is eminently fitted to identify its particular interest 
with that common interest, whose peculiar organ it may be considered in 
the majority of cases. But in order to complete this general view it is in- 
dispensable to draw the distinction more precisely, as regards the continuous 
development of the total influence of government, between the spiritual 
direction and the temporal direction of society. 

' In studying the special social eliaracteristies of the ancient nations, we 
should only consider the classes that really constituted society; namely the free- 
men, slaves being generally regarded as a kind of domestic animal. Wiih this 
limitation, which, besides, proves that the state of the human race, as a whole, 
has, since this period undergone a great improvement, the remark made in the 
text cannot be disputed. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— FIFTH PART. 635 

Studying the mechanism of human societies profoundly, we may perceive, 
as above pointed out, that in every political system the formation of the 
Spiritual Power invariably and necessarily preceded the development of the 
Temporal Power, even where these two powers were united in the same 
hand. Thus, to take the most decisive example, the Roman constitutioa 
was originally as essentially theocratic as the Etruscan, and although it 
subsequently assumed so different a character, the patricians always con- 
sidered their authority as a sacerdotal corporation the essential basis of their 
power. In truth, generally speaking, the spiritual association, founded on 
community of doctrine and the resulting harmony of sentiments, must, by 
the iiature of things, precede the temporal association founded on a con- 
formity of interests. The latter can never exist without the former; in- 
terests being never sufficiently homogeneous to dispense with a certain 
similitude of principles. Yet, it is possible to conceive an association exist- 
ing by identity of principle alone, supposing the opposition of interests not 
to be excessive, although society cannot subsist, in a complete and stable 
sense, either between individuals or nations, unless both conditions are, to 
a certain extent, simultaneously fulfilled. In proportion as civilisatioa 
develops itself, each of the two kinds of association augments in extent, 
while diminishing in energy^ as above explained. But the original differ- 
ence flowing from their intimate nature always makes itself felt in one 
respect. The temporal association being incapable of supporting itself 
alone and without the cooperation of the spiritual power, while spiritual 
association can, to a certain extent, subsist by itself and without the help of 
the temporal power, the spiritual power enlarges its sphere amid the growing 
complication of society, whereas the temporal power sees its sphere contract. 
In fact, the temporal power only rules what cannot be governed spiritually ; 
that is to say force g'ovems what is inaccessible to opinion Now in pro- 
portion as men become civilised, they become on one hand more easily 
affected by moral motives, on the other more disposed to a peaceful adjust- 
ment of their interests. For this reason the action of the temporal power 
continually decreases, and ought to diminish in the new state of society 
more than in the preceding states ; while the action of the spiritual power 
augments and should become greater in the modern system of civilisation 
than in any other. Thus we see how profoundly vicious is that disposition 
with which the critical philosophy has imbued nearly all minds, and which 
disposes men to conceive the new social order as subsisting without any 
spiritual power. On the contrary, this power should now necessarily exert 
a much greater political influence within its natural sphere of aoiion than 
can be exerted by the temporal power, which tends to become less and less 
important, and to reduce itself more and more, so long at least as civili- 
sation continues to advance, to a purely civil hierarchy, although probably 
this last result is never absolutely attainable. 

Having thus conceived the general action of the modern Spiritual Power, 
by contemplating its various offices, whether National or European, as a 
whole, it is necessary to complete this view by considering them in their 
main details. 

The first subdivisi-on of this ensemble of functions, to which I must here National 
confine myself, consists, as above remarked, in distinguishing the Spiritual peanfuno- 
Power into two grand classes of offices ; the one National, the other Euro- gp^,."'^^'"' 
pean.^ Let us first consider the former. Power. 

' Obliged to employ one or other of two expressions, European or universal, 
in order to designate that part of the functions of the spiritual power which is 

636 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

Scientific 
Faith the 
true basis 
of Activity. 

Spiritual 
Guidance 
needed for 
personal and 
social 
Morality. 

We have seen that, in this respect, the action of the spiritual power 
essentially consists in creating through education the opinions and habits 
which ought to guide men in active life, and afterwards in maintaining by 
regular and constant moral influence, exercised both over individuals and 
classes, the practical observation of these fundamental rules.' We must, 
therefore, examine the chief grounds which, contrary to existing prejudices, 
necessitate in the new social state, a Moral Government bearing on ideas, 
dispositions, and conduct, both as regards individual and collective order. 

Dogmatic belief is the normal condition of the human intellect, towards 
which it tends naturally, at all times and in every direction, even when 
seeming to deviate most from it. For Scepticism only constitutes a crisis : 
the inevitable result of the mental interregnum which necessarily arises 
whenever the human mind is obliged to change its doctrines, and, at the 
same time, the indispensable means employed, by individuals and the race, 
in order to allow of passing from one doctrine to another ; such being the 
only essential utility of doubt. This principle, which may be verified in 
every class of ideas, is, a fortiori, applicable to Social Ideas as the most 
complicated arjd important of all. Modern populations have obeyed this 
imperative law of our nature, even in their revolutionary period, since, 
whenever it was really necessary for them to act, though for destruction 
only, they were unavoidably led to give a dogmatic form to ideas purely 
critical in their essence. 

Neither individuals nor the humap race are destiijed to consume their 
life in a course of sterile reasoning, continually disserting on the conduct 
they ought to observe. The mass of the human race is essentially called to 
action, except an imperceptible fraction only, who, by their nature, are chiefly 
devoted to contemplation. Nevertheless, every sort of action presupposes 
directing Principles already ascertained, which individuals and the masses 
have, in most cases, neither capacity nor time to establish, or even to verify, 
otherwise than by their results. Such, intellectually considered, is the fun- 
damental consideration that decisively justifies the existence of a class 
absorbed by speculative labours, constantly and exclusively occupied in 
furnishing all the rest with the general rules of conduct, which they can no 
more dispense with than create ; and which, once admitted, allow the masses 
to employ their faculties in applying them to practice, only asking for the 
assistance of ^he contemplative cjass, when deduction or interpretation pre- 
sents too many difficulties. 

This necessity for Spiritual Guidance manifests itself, no less clearly, if 
ijian is considered, not merely as an intelligent, but as a moral being. For, 
even admitting that each individual or collective being could by his unaided 
faculties form the plan of action best adapted to his own welfare, or to 

exerted over international relations, I prefer the former as being the most 
accurate and consecrated by past usage, although probably it is at once too 
large and too narrow. But I employ it without prejudice to the territorial 
extension which the spiritual power shall some time or other attain. 

' In order to simplify this summary exaniination as much as possible, I do 
not extend it to points not generally contested, although they might with 
advantage be presented in a more rational way than is habitually done. For 
this reason I continue here to regard education only on its social side, and 
not that theoretical instruction, general or special, which 'ought to preside over 
industrial activity. This last preparation evidently forms an essential attribute 
of the spiritual power, on the necessity of which I do aot insist because it is, I 
fhink, doubted by no one. 

GENERAL APPENDIX -FIFTH PART, 637 

the harmony of the ensemble, it is certain that this doctrine, being generally 
opposed, more or less, to the most energetic impulses of human nature, 
would, by itself, exert hardly any influence on real life. It therefore needs 
to be, so to speak, vivified by a moral force, regularly organised, which, 
continually recalling it to the remembrance of each in the interest of all, 
can impart the energy that results from such universal adhesion, and is 
alone capable of overcoming, or even adequately counterbalancing, the force 
of the anti-social dispositions naturally preponderant in human nature. 

However great the progress of civilisation may be it must ever remain 
true that if the social state is, in certain respects, a continuous state of indi- 
vidual satisfaction, it is also, under other not less necessary aspects, a 
continuous state of sacrifice. To speak more precisely, each person, in every 
personal act, must experience a certain degree of satisfaction without which 
society could not exist ; and a certain degree of sacrifice without which it 
could not maintain itself, having regard to the opposition of individual 
tendencies which is, in some degree, absolutely inevitable. The relative 
intensity of the former kind of feelings may doubtless increase, and, in 
fact, it does constantly increase, thus creating a progressive amefioration of 
the human condition. But the latter necessity also always exists and its 
absolute strength even augments continually, through that increasing 
warmth of desire which our organisation invariably connects with the 
augmentation of our enjoyments, as an inevitable compensation and an 
indispensable corrective. 

The highest attainable state of social perfection would manifestly con- 
sist in the fulfilment by each person of the particular office for which he is 
best adapted in the general system. Now even in such a state of things — 
itself, purely ideal, though capable of being indefinitely approached — men 
would need a moral government, because no one could of his own accord 
confine his personal dispositions within limits suitable to his condition. Por 
nature and society will, by common accord, ever assign to different persons, 
functions which afford satisfaction in very various degrees. Natural apti- 
tudes and social positions present an infinite variety as regards both kind 
and intensity. On the contrary the instincts that habitually predominate 
are nearly the same under both aspects in all men, or at least they exist in 
all with suificient energy to inspire a wish for the enjoyments that others 
Lave, let their positions differ as they may. Hence the necessity for 
developing, by a special influence, the natural morality of man, in order, as 
much as possible, to bring the impulses of all within the limits required 
for the general harmony, by habituating them from childhood to a voluntary 
subordination of their personal interest to the common interest, and by con- 
stantly reproducing in active life, with necessary emphasis, the consideration 
of the social point of view. Without this salutary influence, which extin- 
guishes the evil in its source, society, being constantly obliged to act on 
individuals, either by violent means or by interest, in order to repress the 
results of tendencies allowed to develop themselves freely, the maintenance 
of order would become impossible, even did this temporal discipline reach 
its utmost limits. But happily, from the nature of things, the absolute 
notion of such a mode of government, at once barbarous and illusory, is, and 
can only be, a mere supposition. In truth temporal repression, never has 
been and never will be, anything but the complement of spiritual repression, 
which, at no time, can wholly suffice for social necessities. If, by the 

638 

SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

Individual 
freedom re- 
' sides in tlie 
application 
of ascer- 
tained prin- 

natural progress of civilisation, .the former unoeasingrly diminishes, this 
diminution unavoidably presupposes a proportional increase of the latter. 

Thus, both under intellectual and moral aspects, it is proved that, in 
every established society, the notions of good or evil intended for the guid- 
ance of each person in his various social relations (and even in his purely 
individual life as far as it can influence these relations), are reducible to 
presciipUons or prohibitions, founded and maintained by Spiritual Authority 
properly organised, and which, as a whole, constitute the guiding social 
doctrine.' In this way, we can explain that ancient estimate of human 
nature, systematised by Catholic philosophy, in accordance with the profound, 
though necessarily empirical, knowledge of our nature, so eminently charac- 
teristic of it. It directly sets forth as a fundamental vii-tue, the immutable 
and necessary basis of private and public happiness, faith, that is to say the 
disposition to place confidence, spontaneously and without previous demon- 
stration, in doctrines proclaimed by a competent authority. This, in fact, 
constitutes the general and indispensable condition on which depends the 
establishment and maintenance of a true intellectual and moral communion. 

In principle, the influence exerted by the Individual upon the regulating 
doctrine is, normally, limited to deducing the Practical Rule applicable to 
each special case ; the spiritual organ being consulted in all doubtful cases. 
But as regards the construction of the doctrine, under every possible aspect, 
no one possesses any legitimate right beyond that of suggesting its partial 
rectification, when experience has proved that it fails, in any respect, to 
fulfil its practical end. To the spiritual power, thus warned, it naturally 
belongs to make suitable changes in the doctrine, after verifying the neces- 
sity for them. Such at least is the normal state of things. On any other 
hypothesis society nmst be considered as being, more or less, in a truly revo- 
lutionary state. This state, necessary also at certain determinate epochs, 
although always transitional, is subjected to special rules of a wholly 
different nature, with which I need not occupy myself in this place since I 
am only prescribing for the normal state.^ 

' In the preceding reasonings, I have specially considered G-overnment as 
exerting rather a repressive than a directing action, in order to make the demon- 
stration harmonise with the habits which generally predominate in political 
speculations. But the same motives evidently apply, with even greater force, 
when we consider government no longer as passive and merely designed to 
maintain order, hut as possessing an active function and destined to make all 
special activities work together for one general end. This last in my judg- 
ment constitutes its principal of&ce, more particularly in the social system of 
modern nations. Headers who have thoroughly understood the two kinds of 
considerations above pointed out, will easily transfer them to this new aspect of 
the question. 

^ The gradual and inevitable tendency of the puldic reason to recognise the 
need for reorganisation naturally presents a tr.insilional stage, already readied 
by a certain proportion of minds in which the need of a social doctrine is 
admitted ; while the necessity is not perceived for a class invested with proper 
authority, destined in a speci:d and permanent way to impart life to it. But 
this half-conviction — which is politically sterile, since it amounts to desiring 
the end without wishing for the means — cannot but attain completeness when it 
shall prevail widely. For aftiT the mental, moral, and political necessity for a 
General Doctrine has been really understood, it must soon be felt, not only that 
every doctrine presupposes Founders, but that, nnder each of these three aspects, 
it imperatively demands Interpreters who, on the other hand, arise spontaneously; 
so that the idea of function and that of organ are by the nature of things as 
inseparable in social physics as they are in physiology. 

GENERAL APPENDIX— FIFTH PART. 639 

The two classes of general considerations above pointed out have a 
special application to the social state towards which modern nations tend 
-for, mthis new state, characterised as it is by a more complete and ever 
increasing separation of the various functions, each person, whatever may 
De nia capacity, can, unaided, grasp but a very small portion of the Doctrine 
which he needs for his guidance, either industrially or socially. On the 
ottier hand his personal interest, having been narrowed, naturally tends to 
aeviate Irom the Common Interest more frequently, though to a less degree, 
ine evident tendency of modern societies towards an essentially indus- 
trial state, and, consequently towards a political order in which the Temporal 
l-ower shall regularly belong to the preponderating Industrial Forces, be-ins 
to be generally felt m our day, and the natural course of events will manifest 
It more and more. The sway unavoidably exercised by the sentiment of « 
truth, so important though partial, disposes men to overlook Or neglect the 
moral reorganisation of society. It tends to keep up the habit, engendered 
by the critical doctrine, and specially encouraged by political economy, of 
assigning the first place to a purely material point of view in social con- 
siderations. By looking too exclusively at the immense moral and political 
advantages which incontestably belong to the industrial state, these are 
exaggerated so far as to suppose that they dispense with a true Spiritual 
Reorganisation ; or at least, that this will only possess a secondary impor- 
tance, when social relations have become purely industrial and are no 
longer deteriorated as is still the case, by institutions and habits derived 
from the military antecedents of society. 

We, who should consider this great fact not sesthetically, .as artists 
attracted by its power over the human imagination, but as observers who, 
neither admiring nor reprobating, admit its existence as a fundamental datum 
in all speculations on modern politics, ought, as much as possible, to study it 
under every aspect. In this attitude we can easily perceive that the regulating 
and directing influence nf the Spiritual Power is not less necessary for in- 
dustrial than for military relations, although not exactly in the same way. 
On this subject I limit myself to some general indications, reserving their 
complete development for another occasion should the question demand it. 

On the supposition, which moreover is impossible, that the temporal 
order corresponding to this new state of society can establish itself com- 
pletely, without the intervention of any spiritual power, it is certain that in 
the absence of this conservative influence, such a social order could not 
maintain itself If, besides those general sources of disorder inherent in 
every society which render a moral government necessary, the military 
system presents some peculiar to itself, the same undoubtedly holds true for 
the purely industrial system ; but the special causes are not the same for 
hoth and consequently do not attain the same degree of intensity.' 

It is no doubt much easier to reconcile individual interests in the modern 
than in the ancient mode of existence. But this happy characteristic which 

' M. Duuoyer, in a work recently published, while proving by luminous 
remarks on the successive stages of civilisation, the tendency of existing societies 
under temporal aspects to a purely industrial state, lias guarded himself against, 
the vulgar exaggeration which represents tliis new mode of existence as abso- 
lutely perfect. He has devoted the last chapter of his book to a conscientious 
and severe analysis of the main defects peculiar to industrial society. Although 
this enumeration is framed with quite a different object from that suggested by 
my present reflexions, and executed in an entirely different spirit, I refer the 
reader to it to supply the developments which I cannot give iu this place. 

640 SYSTEM OF POSlTiVJi; i-UJUiiJ. 

renders the moral rule easier to establish, in no degree dispenses with it, 
since the antagonism, while less intense, has not disappeared, nay haa 
become more extensive, by reason of the multiplied points of contact. 
Thus, to choose the most important example, although hostility between 
the Chiefs of Industry and the Workmen is socially preferable to that which 
existed between the Waii-iors and the Slaves, it is no less real. We should 
hope in vain to destroy it by temporal institulions, which uniting the 
material interests of these two classes more intimately, might reduce the 
arbitrary power they mutually exercise. No stable social state can ever be 
firmly based on mere physical antagonism, the only sort which such institu- 
tions can regularise. Although useful, no doubt, these will always be 
inadequate ; because they necessarily allow the chiefs to entertain the desire, 
and even to exercise the power, of abusing their position, in order to reduce 
wages and work, and permit the workmen to obtain by violence what a life 
of labour cannot procure them. The solution of this grave difficulty neces- 
sarily demands the continuing influence of a Moral Doctrine, which shall 
impose upon both chiefs' and workmen mutual duties in conformity with 
their mutual relations. Now it is evident that this doctrine can only be 
founded and maintained by a Spiritual Authority, placed at a point of view 
sufiiciently general to include the entire of these relations, and at the same 
time suiEciently disinterested in reference to the practical movement to be 
above suspicion of partiality from either of the two hostile classes between 
which it sbould intervene. Similar remarks may be made as to the other 
great industrial relations, such as those of agriculturalists and manufacturers, 
of either class with merchants, and of all with bankers. It is evident that 
in all these respects, interests if left completely to their own guidance, 
without any regulation but such as springs from their antagonism, must 
always end in direct opposition.' Hence the absolute necessity for a moral 
rule, and, consequently, for a spiritual authority, indispensable for retaining 
interests within those limits, where, instead of being antagonistic, they 
converge, yet from which they constantly endeavour to escape. Moreover 
it would be easy to show that this moral action, considered under both its 
aspects, must play an indispensable and leading part in establishing temporal 
institutions destined to complete this regulation of social relations. 

We should attach too great importance to the demonstrations of political 
economy which prove the necessary harmony of the various industrial 
interests, were we to hope that this conformity could ever suffice for their 
discipline.' Allowing even, to these demonstrations the complete logical 

' The commercial and manufaeturing crisis which at this moment afflicts 
the country where industrial activity is greatest, constituting a crisis which may 
at any moment assume a more or less serious political character, is well fitted to 
impress, on impartial observers, the necessity for a certain governmental action, 
exerted on industrial, as, in past times, on military relations. Ko doubt such dis- 
advantages, are from their nature transitory. But social order and individual 
happiness alike demand guiirantecs more direct, explicit, and regular against the 
ever-imminent renewal of these iujurious oscillations, such as would not leave 
each person judge in his own cause, or require the spontaneous and constant con- 
sideration of a general point of view, from minds habitually placed at a vtrv 
special stand-point. 

^ The essential vice of political economy, regarded as a social theory, consists 
in this. Having proved, as to certain matters, far from being the most impor- 
tant, the spontaneous and permanent tendency of human societies towards a 
certain necessary order, it infers that this tendency does not re{juire to be re»u- 

GENERAL APPENDIX— FIFTH PART. 641 

extent, much exaggerated in truth, which economists assign to them, it is 
certain that man does not act only, or even mainly, from calculation, and 
secondly, that he is not always, or even generally, capable of calculating 
wisely. The physiology of the nineteenth century, confirming, or rather 
explaining universal experience, has demonstrated the worthlessnees of the 
metaphysical theories which represent man in the light of a calculating 
machine, solely impelled by self-interest. 

Morality, private or public, will therefore, of necessity, be fluctuating 
and feeble, so long as the exclusive consideration of personal utility is 
taken as the point of departure for each individual or class. Yet the in- 
dustrial spirit naturally leads in that direction, as does every other kind of 
purely temporal influence, when this appears by itself, and without having 
undersone that regrulative moral action, which can only proceed from a 
spiritual power riarhtly orgranised. Even conld we conceive a society 
entirely and exclusively abandoned to the direct impulse of a purely tempo- 
ral activity, the new political order, (if this name could be given to it) would 
have no other real advantao-e over the old one, ("considered likewise under 
the same abstract hypothesis") than that of substituting monopoly for con- 
quest, and a despotism founded on the right of the wealthiest for a des- 
potism founded on the rieht of the stronerest. Such would be the extreme, 
yet inevitable, consequences of a purely temporal organisation, could such an 
hypothesis ever be realised. Happily, however mistaken may be our 
political views, the nature of thinsrs preserves society from the unmitigated 
influence of its own aberrations, and the final order which arises spontaneously 
is alwavs superior to that which human combinations had, by anticipa- 
tion, constructed. 

The necessity for a Spiritual Order in the new social state, manifests itself 
not alone as regards the relations of individuals or classes, but in reference 
to merelv personal morality. In the first place a general consideration, 
derived from the study of human nature, and pointed out by nearly all 
philosophers in every affe, shows that the most solid basis of the social 
virtues is to be found in the habit of the personal virtues, since in this 
wav man can test most severely his power of resisting the vicious im- 
pulses of his natural dispositions. But, apart from this universal ground, 
the inevitable influence which a simply individual activity indirectly exerts 
over society in any svstem of social relations, reveals itself specially in the 
modern system, and, consequently, furnishes a new motive for the moral 
resrulation of society. To cite only one example: since the appearance ot 
Mr. Malthus' works, it is generally admitted, that the contmualtendency 
of population to increase more rapidly than the means of subsistence, a 
tendency which is especially developed in industrial societies, demands a 
certain degree of permanent repression as regards the most energetic of 
human impulses. Now such repression, it is evident, cannot be adequately 
effected by any but a moral authority, whatever may be the incontestable in- 
fluence of temporal measures in restrainins, this ^"^tf =* ^^^^"?/™P''^J;"J*'- t„, gp,„.. 

For the general reason above stated, I have hitherto considered only the ti-|p--. 
Preventive or Eepressive action of the spiritual power in the new t e^ of „eeaMio._^^ 
social relations. Its importance becomes still more evident, when its ^,,,^,^,^ 

, • 3 J pression. 

Directive action is considered. 

to a correct appreciation of its vast importance. 
TOL. IT. ■ T T 

642 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

Even were it hypothetically admitted that in the new social state order 
could be spontaneously maintained without any special regulative influence, 
it is undeniably true that for collective action, such as the nature of the 
system would, in many cases, require, individuals and classes stand in need 
of a direction founded upon common doctrines, established by the spiritual 
power for social education, and afterwards constantly enforced by it in real 
life. The necessity for such a doctrine is the greater in this respect, 
because the classification of individuals being under this system of necessity 
far more variable than in the ancient one, each person is thus naturally less 
prepared for the special function which he should fulfil. So long as em- 
ployments were essentially hereditary domestic education might be con- 
sidered a sufficient preparation. This is no longer the case, now that they 
tend to a distribution comformable to individual aptitude. Public educa- 
tion, general or special, then acquires far more importance, as supplying the 
only rational means of determining these aptitudes, at first so slightly 
marlied in the majority of cases, and at the same time of properly develop- 
ing them. The action of the spiritual power becomes then all the more 
indispensable for establishing and maintaining a social classification in har- 
mony with the spirit of the system. By considering the numbers of failures 
and false positions which now result from the absence of intellectual and 
moral guidance, and endeavouring to estimate their deplorable results for 
individuals and society, we shall comprehend the importance of the pre- 
ceding reflection. 

Such, speaking generally, are the principal grounds which assign a wide 

and fundamental influence to the spiritual power, regarded simply as to its 

national functions. 

liitema- The same general considerations are equally applicable to the necessary 

ti™s Med''" action which the Spiritual Power ought to exert in regulating International 

the gnidmce Relations. I can therefore dispense with any distinct indication of this 

tu 'fpowS-." extension, which every attentive reader can easily make, by keeping to the 

fundamental point of view afforded by the preceding reasonings. 

The only essential difference between the two cases consists in the greater 
generality of the second order of social relations. But if this distinction 
shows that tlie regulative action of the spiritual power is, of necessity, less 
intense in relation to European than to National order, it also proves that 
the spiritual power is even more indispensable (having due regard to the 
importance of the relations), and, especially, that it is still less susceptible 
of being replaced by any other influence. 

International relations being at once more extended and more continuous 
in modern civilisation than in that of the Middle Ages, their regulation 
becomes still more needful. The collective action of European" society 
which in the ancient system only arose at distant intervals, should be- 
come in the new one, if not strictly permanent, at least very frequent. It 
is demanded, either by operations of common utility, which call for the co- 
operation of two or more nations, or by the general influence, partly of a 
repressive character, which the most civilised nations ought to exert over 
those less civilised, in the common interest of all. These various motives 
may possibly prove sufficiently powerful to decide the formation of a certain 
sort of temporal sovereignty, embracing several of the most advanced popu- 
lations. But on any hypothesis, they inconteatably necessitate the estab- 
lishment of a social doctrine, common to the various nations, and, con- 
Bequently, of a spiritual sovereignty fitted to uphold this doctrine by 

GENERAL APPENDIX— FIFTH PAET. 643 

organising a European education, and to apply it properly to the actual 
relations. Until this takes place European order will always stand on 
the verge of disturbance, notwithstanding the action, alike despotic and 
inadequate (although provisionally indispensable) exerted by the imperfect 
coalition of the ancient temporal powers, but which can present no solid 
guarantee for security, since by its very nature it is always on the point of 
dissolution.' 

I must point out here, as in the preceding case, though more briefly, the 
false political conceptions which, in our day, tend to produce an incomplete 
view of the temporal future of society ; representing international relations 
as sufficiently regulated by the mere circumstance of their having reached a 
purely industrial stage. Doubtless this new mode of existence possesses the 
happy property of facilitating the moral association of nations, as well as 
that of individuals or classes; but in the former as in the latter case it does 
not dispense with the spiritual power, rather by multiplying and extending 
relations renders it more necessary. Let us imagine for an instant that the 
temporal order of Europe could completely lose the military character and 
acquire a purely industrial character, without any spiritual reorganisation, 
preceding and determining the change ; though this supposition is assuredly 
self-contradictory. Even on this abstract hypothesis, it is certain that the 
system would possess no solidity if the various nations were systematically 
abandoned to mere temporal impulses, without subordinating them to any 
common moral doctrine, established and maintained by a spiritual power. 
For individual interest, conceived as the only direct basis of a plan of action, 
can afford a solid foundation for the morality of nations in a less degree even 
than for that of individuals and classes. In truth, even supposing that 
action can be exclusively or mainly guided by calculation — a proposition as 
untrue for nations as for individuals — the relation between the well-being 
of each and that of all is both less pronounced and less perceptible in 
European than in National order. It is difficult, and, consequently, rare, for 
the real happiness of an individual to harmonise completely with conduct 
which is decidedly anti-social. Such harmony is much easier, and therefore 
more common, in the case of a nation, even under the industrial regime ; as 

' M. de la Mennais has clearly proved that, from its purely temporal character 
and the total disparity of its constituent elements — the latter being the necessary 
result of the former — the institution of the Holy Alliance can offer neither real 
fixity nor sufficient efficacy, even passively, and much more actively. This 
philosopher has convincingly proved that such an institution, from its very 
nature, cannot offer to modern Europe the true equivalent for the general action 
exerted in the Middle Ages by the ancient spiritual power, and that this can only 
he replaced by another spiritual influence. 

But we should nevertheless considpr the formation of the Holy Alliance as a 
forced result of the unavoidable disorganisation of the ancient social system, 
which has rendered necessary, especially as regards European order, the momen- 
tary absorption of the spiritual power by the temporal power ; and, at the same 
time, as an indispensable, though very imperfect, instrument of preserving a 
.certain state of provisional order in' Europe, as long as the moral interregnum 
shall last. The revolutionary state should not be judged by the same rules as the 
normal state. We may even add that the establishment of the Holy Alliance 
regarded as replacing the Balance of Power in Europe, points to the sentiment, 
vague and imperfect indeed, but real, of the necessity for a European reorganisa- 
tion, while it, to a certain extent, paves the way for this, by accustoming nations, 
contrary to critical prejudices, to consider this class of relations as being properly 
subject to the direct and permanent action of government. 

644 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

experience has too clearly proved since tlie foundation of the colonial ana 
prohibitive system, still supported by the prevailing opinion. In l"fs 
manner, an individual by ceasing to lead an active existence, might perhap s 
mentally place himself at the national point of view and to a certain extent 
grasp it, if he had sufficient capacity. But that is far more difficult when 
we must raise ourselves to the European point of view; and a social 
organisation which permanently demanded such an effort in many men, or 
even in the heads of the temporal order among nations, would be manifestly 
impossible. 

Even if the exaggerated theories of the economists as to the necessary 
and invariable identity of the industrial interests common to the various 
nations were absolutely true, they would inevitably be still more incapable 
of regulating international relations, than those between individuals, by the 
mere conviction they could produce. In vain do the nations endeavour, in 
our day, more or less decidedly, to pass out of the prohibitive regime. "Were 
this result completely attained, the spirit of industrial hostility could not 
fail to reproduce itself under new forms which it could readily create, if 
each nation continued indefinitely to admit no other rule of conduct than 
the satisfaction of its own interest, apart from any moral duty towards 
others. The only power really capable of restraining within proper limits 
this natural rivalry of the nations and of utilising it by limiting it, as a rule, 
to a legitimate emulation, is that furnished by a general doctrine concerning 
the actual relations of nations, established and habitually proclaimed by a 
Spiritual Authority, which speaking to each nation in the name of all, finds 
in such universal assent, the necessary support for asserting its decisions. 

Thus, as the final result of all the preceding considerations, we verify in 
detail, this fundamental proposition above established on general grounds : 
the social state towards which Modern Nations tend, no less than that of the 
Middle Ages, both as to active and passive relations, and for general and 
special reasons, demands a spiritual (that is to say intellectual and moral) 
organisation, at once European and Nationtil. 

I shall on another occasion, investigate, in the same spirit, under its 
chief aspects, the nature of this organisation, which, by a necessary abstrac- 
tion, I have been obliged to leave unsettled, in order to facilitate a demon- 
stration in itself so complicated. This new exposition, besides its great 
importance, will perhaps dispel the obscurity which, to a certain extent, 
unavoidably attaches itself for most minds to the abstract point of view : 
and especially it will destroy the false interpretations which existing habits 
generally dispose people to put upon the conception of a Spiritual Power. 
Such, at least, is my hope. 

GENERAL APPENDIX- SIXTH PART. 645 

THE SIXTH AND LAST PART. 

Atiffmt 1828. 

EXAMrSATION OP BEOTTSSAIS' TEBATISB ON IREITATION. 

Since the termination of tlie sixteentli century, the human intellect has 
imdergone a general and continuous revolution, consisting in the gradual 
and complete recasting of the entire system of human knowledge, hence- 
forward placed on its true bases, obserration and reasoning. This funda- 
mental revolution, prepared by the successive labours of all preceding 
centuries, especially from the commencement of Arabian influence, was 
definitively determined^ and directly commenced by the profound and new 
impulse simultaneously impressed upon the human reason by the concep- 
tions of Descartes, the precepts of Bacon, and the discoveries of Galileo. 
Since this memorable epoch, the human mind, in every branch of knowledge, 
has tended, constantly and increasingly, towards its complete and final 
emancipation from the domination previously exerted by theology and 
metaphysics, by entirely subordinating imagination to observation. In a 
word man has endeavoured to constitute the definitive system of positive 
philosophy. 

AU'the various branches of human knowledge have not undergone this Physiology 
important renovation with an equal degree of rapidity. It necessarily {'a^eiy'be- 
aifected them in succession according to the complexity and mutual depend- comea Posl- 
ence of the phenomena which they embraced. Physiology, as the part of 
natural philosophy which studies the most complex and least independent 
phenomenon, of necessity, remained longer than any other science under the 
yoke of theological fictions and metaphysical abstractions. Accordingly, it 
was only in the second half of the last century, and after astronomy, physics, 
and chemistry had become positive sciences, that physiology began to ex- 
perience, in its turn, this great and salutary transfoi-mation through the im- 
mortal works of Halley, Charles Bonnet, Daubenton, Spallanzani, Vicci- 
d'Azyr, Chaussier, Bichat, Cuvier, Pinel, Oabanis, &c. 

But in order that this revolution might be complete and efficacious, its Cabaafe and 
extension to the intellectual and moral phenomena became necessary; for 2eat°"a„ci 
these unavoidably underwent it later than the other animal phenomena, as ^^°^^>^Pi«- 
being more complex and closely connected with theological and meta- 
physical theories of the constitution of society. Thus the memoirs 
published at the beginning of this century by Oabanis on the connection 
between the physical and moral nature, are the first great and direct efi'ort 
to bring within the domain of positive physiology this study previously 
abandoned entirely to the theological and metaphysical methods. The 
impulse imparted to the human mind by these memorable investigations has 

G46 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

not fallen off. The labours of M. Gall and his school have singularly 
strengthened it, and, especially, have impressed on this new and final portion 
of physiology a high degree of precision by supplying a definite baais of dis- 
cussion and investigation. In our day it may be said, that, this revolution, 
though not yet become popular, is definitely terminated for all intellects 
really on a level with their age, who regard the study of the intellectual and 
moral functions as inseparably connected with that of all other physiological 
phenomena, and as properly investigated by the same methods and in the 
same spirit. 

However, some, misconceiving in this respect the actual and unalterable 
direction of the human mind, have endeavoured during the last ten years to 
transplant among us German metaphysics and to found under the name 
oi puijchohgy a pretended science completely independent of Physiology, 
superior to it, and exclusively embracing the study of the phenomena 
specially termed moral. Although these retrograde efforts cannot stop the 
development of real knowledge, since the passing enthusiasm which they 
excite only results from foreign and accidental circumstances, they un- 
doubtedly exert a mischievous influence, by retarding in many minds the 
development of a true philosophic spirit and wasting much intellectual 
activity. 

This situation has been profoundly appreciated byM. Broussais. With- 
out exaggerating the mischief, he has worthily comprehended the import- 
ance of opposing the vague and chimerical pursuit in which it is sought to 
engage the young generation of France. Accordingly, he thought it right 
to interrupt his great works on general pathology in order to demonstrate 
the emptiness and nullity of psychology. Such is the general and essential 
aim of his new work, as he himself explicitly declares in a very remarkable 
preface, in which he is not afraid of showing himself superior to the pious 
accusations of materialism, which our psychologues, following the example 
- of our theologians, their predecessors, have not ceased to heap on their 
adversaries. In this respect, independently of the eminent merit of his 
work, M. Broussais by its publication has done a signal act of courage 
deserving the gratitude of all right minds. Its value can be fully estimated 
by those only who know to what an extent existing savants, though enter- 
taining for metaphysical theories the profound disdain these inspire in all 
intellects reared in positive studies, carefully avoid combating the supremacy 
they assume in our day by public discussions. 
Pntility at The work of M. Broussais completely attains the author's chief aim. 

*^'^ ™"FH'^* Entering more profoundly into the subject than any physiologist has 
Jiitenial hitherto done, he has directly examined the pretended method of Internal 
Ob,-ervation. Observation put forward by psychologists as the basis of the science of 
man. 

The ascendency which the positive sciences have acquired since the time 
of Bacon is now such that the psychologists, in order to restore the discredited 
authority of metaphysics, felt themselves obliged to represent their labours 
as being also based upon observation. With this object they devised the 
distinction between external facts, forming the subject of ordinary science, 
and internal facts, or those of consciousness, peculiar to psychology. M. 
Broussais shows the inanity of this pretended distinction. In the fifth 
chapter of the first part he institutes a physiological analysis, extremely 
remarkable for its depth and refinement, of the condition of a mind re- 
flecting on its own acts. This analysis renders quite evident the impossi- 

GENERAL APPENDIX— SIXTH PAET. 647 

bility of arriving at any real discovery by a method so illusory. I regret 
that I can only cite a few passages, 

' Let us now examine ' he observes 'what physiologists can find in their 
consciousness by adopting this sort of research. They are sure to meet with 
sensations proceeding from viscera which invariably correspond with the 
brain, not only hunger, amorous desires, cold, heat, specific pains, or pleasures, 
localised in any part of the body. They will further remark a crowd of 
vague undetermined sensations, disposing sometimes to sorrow, sometimes 
to joy, at one time to action, at another to repose, one day to hope, the next 
to despair and even to a horror of existence. They will find all these with- 
out suspecting whence they come, for physiologists are the only persons who 
can inform them about this. If they take all these internal sensations for 
revelations of the divinity which they name consciousness, they can increase 
their treasures by taking, in Oriental fashion, a certain dose of opium com- 
bined with aromatics.' 

Notwithstanding the masterly way in which M. Broussais has treated 
this question, he might, I think, have dealt with it more directly, and 
proved that such internal observation is necessarily impossible. 

Man can observe what is external to him and also certain functions of 
his organs, other than the thinking organ. To a certain extent he can even 
observe himself as regards the different passions he feels, because the cere- 
bral organs on which these depend, are distinct from the observing oi gan 
properly so called, though even this assumes that the emotional state is but 
slightly pronounced. It is, however, evidently impossible for him to observe 
his own intellectual acts, for the organ observed, and the observing organ 
being in this case identical, by whom could the observation be made P 
The illusion of psychologists on this head is analogous to that of the physi- 
cists of antiquity, who believed they could explain vision, by saying that the 
luminous rays painted images of external objects on the retina. Physiologists 
judiciously pointed out to them, that if luminous impressions acted as images 
on the retina, another eye would be needed to look at these. It is the same 
with the pretended internal observation of intelligence. To render this 
possible, the individual would have to divide himself into two persons, one 
thinking, the other observing the thoughts. Thus man cannot directly 
observe his intellectual operations; he can only observe his organs, and their 
results. The former class of observations are embraced by physiology. 
The great results of human intelligence, being the sciences, the latter class 
embraces their philosophy, which is inseparable from the sciences them- 
selves. There is therefore no place for psychology, or the direct study of the 
soul independently of any external consideration. 

In the parallel, otherwise so satisfactory and decisive, which M. Broussais 
establishes between Physiology and Psychology, we could have wished he 
had more clearly shown the inferiority of the latter, which, even admitting 
its pretended methods of exploration, only considers the adult and healthy 
man makino- a complete abstraction of the animals and even of mankind in 
the condition of imperfect development or disordered organisation ; while, 
in every physiological investigation, the point of view presented by normal 
man is always admirably combined with that of the ensemble of the animal 
series, and the pathological state. This opposition which M. Broussais only 
partially notices, indicated with that clearness and vigor of exposition that 
distinguish him, would have presented a useful contrast to the depth and 
profundity on which our psychologists pride themselves. 

648 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

A more serious omission made by M. Broussais is his not having clearly 
pointed out the immense diflerenoe which exists between the physiological 
doctrine of man, intellectual and moral, and the theories of the metaphysi- 
cians of the last century, who saw in our intelligence only the action of the 
external senses, disregarding every predisposition of the internal cerebral 
organs. The well founded objections to the ideology of Condillao and 
Helvetius alone give some justification to the influence of the existing 
psychology, which, moreover, merely popularises, by obscure and emphatic 
declamations, what physiologists such as Charles Bonnet, Cabanis and 
especially MM. Gall and Spurzheim, had long before put forward on this 
subject, much more clearly and precisely. M. Broussais will no doubt be 
anxious to remove this single resource from psychology or what he so judi- 
ciously calls ontology. I suggest to him with confidence this important 
amelioration for a second edition, which cannot fail to be soon demanded 
for such a work. The omission which I point out assuredly proceeded only 
from the rapid way in which his book was manifestly composed, for psycho- 
logists cannot assert that he shows himself anywhere a declared adherent of 
the metaphysics of the eighteenth century. 

A general review of the work of M. Broussais gives rise to a final philo- 
sophical reflexion of great importance ; namely that the author has not 
circumscribed more accurately than his predecessors among physiologists 
the true domain of physiology. 

"When Cabanis, first among physiologists, directly claimed for phy- 
siology the study of moral phenomena, he did not sufliciently separate, 
or rather he confounded the study of individual man with that of the human 
race collectively regarded. Both of them, in his view, belonged to an 
indivisible science, philosophy. This confusion was maintained by MM. 
Gall and Spurzheim ; it still subsists in the mind of nearly all the physio- 
logists who seriously apply themselves to the portion of their science which 
concerns moral phenomena. M. Broussais has made no attempt to dissipate 
it, although from some passages of his work, he seems to have felt its chief 
defect. 

It is clear, in fact, that the study of the individual and that of the race, 
although so intimately related that they must be regarded as constituting two 
parts of a single science, are nevertheless sufficiently distinct and, above all, 
sufficiently extensive, to admit of being separately cultivated, and, therefore, 
conceived as forming two sciences, Physiology properly so called and Social 
Physics. The latter is without doubt based on the former, which supplies it 
both with a positive point of departure, and guidance. But it forms no less a 
separate science, requiring special observations on the history of the develop- 
ment of human society, and special methods. It could not, by possibility, 
be treated sitaply as a direct deduction from the science of the individual ; 
unless indeed as regards animals ; since their social development is so limited 
as not to require a distinct study. If physiology is not yet completely and 
definitively constituted, if its scientific field is not exactly ascertained, this 
mainly springs from the circumstance that the division in question has not yet 
been regularly established and unanimously admitted. The transitional 
condition of the scienfce, even as to the most distinguished intellects, is the 
only thing which, if it were prolonged, could justify the criticisms and pre- 
tensions of the psychologists ; although it is evident that the study of social 
phenomena no more falls within their metaphysical methods than that of 
individual phenomena. 

GENEEAL APPENDIX— SIXTH PART. 

649 

Such are the chief philosophical reflections suggested to me hy the work 
of M. Broussais, regarded from the author's general point of view. 

Notwithstanding the remarks I have thought it right to offer on this 
subject, the work is entirely worthy of its distinguished author. For the 
honour of the public, whose sympathies are now invoked in favour of the 
retrograde path of metaphysics, I hope that it will obtain a success pro- 
portioned to its importance. It ought powerfully to aid the natural pro- 
gress of the human mind, by bringing into general discredit the vague and 
chimerical speculations which retard the progress of real knowledge. Since 
the essays of Cabanis and the works of MM. Gall and Spurzheim no work 
has appeared so well fitted to make clear the worthlessness of that illusory 
science of personified abstractions well described by M. Cuvier in his 
remark, that it employs metaphor for reasoning, and which M. Broussais him- 
.selfhassd happily defined as a work of imagination closely resembling poetry. 
It exhibits in its true light that assemblage of incoherent opinions, of 
necessity varying, not only from one individual to another, but even in the 
same person, with the varying dispositions of his organisation. It dissipates 
for ever that mystical spirit, so flattering to pretentious ignorance, which 
inspires an instinctive repugnance towards every special and positive study, 
by presenting empty abstractions as superior to all real knowledge, and 
replunges us into the state of infancy by reestablishing, in a new form, the 
empire of theological conceptions. 

M. Broussais may be considered as the founder of Positive Pathology, positive 

that is to say of the science which connects the nerturbations of vital phe- Pathology 

• 17 • .. .-n 1- T based on 

nomena with the lesions of organs or tissues, rrom the time when General 

Physiology began to be a real science, towards the middle of the last |jh'°Sd 
century, several of the cooperators in this great movement of the human Bronssais. 
mind, especially Morgagni and Bonnet, directed their attention to the seats 
of disease. But these works did not change the general spirit of pathology, 
which persisted in. representing the majority of important diseases as inde- 
pendent of any change in the normal state of the organs. Such researches 
could not even exert any marked influence on science, until the fundamental 
distinction between organs and tissues had been established by the genius of 
Bichat, because it is in the tissues more particularly ^nd not in the organs that 
lesions should be studied. M. Broussais, stai'ting from the general anatomy 
founded by Bichat, placed pathology on its true basis, presenting it as the 
investigation of deteriorations to which the tissues are liable andof the phe- 
nomena thence resulting. He first clearly recognised and formally proclaimed 
that almost all recognised diseases are only symptoms, and that functional 
derangements cannot subsist without the lesion of organs or rather of tissues. 
Had M. Broussais confined his efforts to establishing this general prin- 
ciple he would, no doubt, have avoided the greater part of the criticisms 
that have been directed against his works ; but he could not thus have 
effected the important scientific renovation which his school has accom- 
plished, and which banishes metaphysics from their last asylum. For that 
it was indispensable, not only- to represent every malady as dependent on 
some organic lesion— a proposition in itself hardly debateable— but to 
determine the precise seat of each of the maladies considered to have no 
special seat. This M. Broussais accomplished, mainly by reducing the six 
alleo-ed essential fevers to inflammations of the mucous membrane of the 
stomach and intestine, theretofore neglected by physicians. I need not 
examine whether M. Broussais has subsequently exaggerated the influence 

650 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

of the gastritis and gastro-enteritis on the production of the different morbid 
symptoms ; though this was almost unavoidable. But impartial minds, if 
disposed to blame such exaggerations, should consider the philosophic neces- 
sity under which M. Broussais laboured of assigning an organ to each recog- 
nised affection, in order to place the discussion on a positive basis. We 
should reflect that, even if he has erred as to the real seat of a particular 
malady, it was better for pathology, and even for therapeutics, to propose 
a seat at variance with the true one than none. M. Broussais has thus 
definitely led thinkers to the true road of observation, where, even while 
combating his ideas, they can only serve the progress of science. 

The first part of the work now published by M. Broussais is a treatise 
on Irritation. It may be considered as an exposition of the highest 
generalities of the doctrine of the author. No one has ever conceived in so 
direct and satisfactory a manner the fundamental relation between physio- 
logy and pathology; and M. Broussais' deep appreciation of this relation 
best characterises his intellect. 

Setting out from the great general truth, partially seen by Brown, that 
Life is only sustained by Stimulation, and making it his own by important 
applications, M. Broussais represents all Diseases as essentially consisting in 
the excess or deficiency of stimulation of the different tissues, either rising 
above or falling below the degree which constitutes the normal condition. 
This conception throws a great light on the nature of diseases, by exhibit- 
ing them as results of mere changes of intensity in the action of stimulants 
indispensable for maintaining health. 

Having established that stimulation of the organs is more frequently in 
excess than in defect, and, even, that a diminution in the action of stimu- 
lants on one organ, generally produces irritation in other organs, — as be- 
tween the stomach and brain — M. Broussais distinguishes three degrees of 
anomalous excitement of organs, — surexcitation properly so called, sub- 
inflammation, and inflammation. He expounds the characters of these three 
states as affecting the chief organic systems, especially the nervous system 
which he, in accordance with the majority of living physiologists, represents 
as the general agent of the sympathies. M. Broussais even pushes the physio- 
logical analysis of the various tissues farther than has yet been done ; for he 
considers the organic elements of which all the tissues are composed. These 
he reduces to three, fibrine, gelatine, and albumen, and examines the phe- 
nomena of irritation in each. This view must, hereafter, introduce a great 
and valuable simplicity into the first principles of physiology and pathology. 

I must not omit to point out, as a marked progress in the physiological 
doctrine of M. Broussais, the disappearance of those Vital Properties admitted, 
or rather retained, by Bichat, and which maintained a certain metaphysical 
character in the fundamental conceptions of physiology. M. Broussais 
replaces these by the uniform property of Irritability that exists in all 
tissues, yet manifests itself in each by different phenomena. This conception 
tends to purify physiology from the residuum of metaphysics which Bichat 
felt it necessary to preserve. At the same time it definitively assigns to the 
physics of living bodies a character clearly distinct from that of the physics 
of inorganic bodies, for the notion of irritation comprises everything that 
belongs to the state of life. This condition was no less indispensable for 
constituting a truly positive physiology, but had not been sufficiently ful- 
filled by the physiologists who endeavoured to free their science completely 
from metaphysical conceptions. 

GENERAL APPENDIX-SIXTH PART. 651 

This first part of the work of M. Broussnis abounds in elevated and new 
views I shall only blame him for a certain obscurity of language, and, 
especially an almost complete absence of method in the arrangement of his 
Ideas. The too frequent intermixture of physiological with 'pathological 
conceptions, introduces a sort of confusion which renders it difficult, even 
tor an attentive and well informed reader to grasp the general spirit of this 
remarkable work. The imperfection may be remedied in a new edition, if 
M. Broussais, as I doubt not, feels the necessity for more fully maturing his 
chiet conceptions, determining their character more precisely, and estimating 
the scope of each more exactly. We ouglit not to lose sight of the serious 
general motive which led to the publication of this work,— the necessity for 
combating ontology, which, once again, endeavours to lay hold of the mind 
ot the existing generation. On this ground we may excuse a vice of 
niethod which the author would assuredly have avoided, if he could have 
devoted the necessary time to meditating his work. Nevertheless, M 
Broussais should not forget that this work contains the leading ideas for 
a general treatise on life, considered either in its normal or its abnormal 
state. His celebrity wiU be advanced if he himself raises a monument, so 
necessary for the future progress of science. 

M. Broussais, when revising his work, will, doubtless, feel that his 
treatment of the Nervous System does not adequately recognise the impor- 

tance of the fundamental distinction between the two nervous systems, 

cerebral and ganglionic. He has not paid sufficient attention to the latter, 
considered physiologically or pathologically. It would also have been 
better had M. Broussais taken more largely into consideration Comparative 
Anatomy, and avowedly sought to bring his views on human organisation 
into harmony with the entirety of the animal series, a condition now 
indispensable to every great physiological conception and which he has no 
doubt implicitly fulfilled. 

I have little to say upon the second part of this work which treats of Appiioatlou 
Madness. It is a natural application of the principles established in the pattwi''™ 
first part to the special case of irritation in the brain. This well executed tothetSory 
application throws a strong light on the principles themselves. The ment?/'" 
execution of this is much more satisfactory than that of the preceding part. Madness. 
It adds nothing of great importance to the existing state of that important 
branch of pathology. But the knowledge already gained on this subject is 
resumed with a clearness and a perfection of method very superior to what 
existing treatises oifer; thus rendering an essential service to science. Its 
perusal is admirably fitted to avert or cure the contagion of pysohology. As 
regards the personal contributions of the author to ideas, I observe that, 
while placing the seat of madness in the brain, in common with all living 
physiologists, M. Broussais characterises much more precisely than they do, 
the state of cerebral irritation which produces madness. He also ofiers 
some new and very judicious views as to the indications derivable from 
dissections. He shows that, since the state of inflammation which disor- 
ganises the tissues, and, in consequence, leaves, after death, the only visible 
traces commonly considered, is simply the highest degree of the state of 
irritation that deranges the normal functions, it is quite possible that this 
derangement may arise from an excessive stimulation, without leaving any 
inflammatory changes discoverable after death. M. Broussais thus in- 
directly de.stroys the only reasonable objection made to positive pathology 
by the metaphysical pathologists of the school of MontpeUier, who, from the 

652 SYSTEM OF POSITIVE POLITY. 

absence, in certain cases, of lesions in tlie dead body, infer the reality of 
diseases termed essential. 

Persons -who, on the faith of vulgar prejudices to which men of science 
should be inaccessible, imagine that M. Broussais subordinates everything in 
the animal economy to the stomach, must derive from the perusal of this 
work a juster idea of the range and elevation of his intellect. He exhibits 
in all its intensity the vast sympathetic influence exerted by the digestive 
viscera on all the organs, and especially on the brain ; an influence which 
has not been always properly appreciated by physiologists specially devoted 
to the study of the nervous system. But in his work no exaggerated idea 
on this head is perceptible, he states nothing but what is well attested by 
observation. 

When treating of Monomanias M. Broussais profits by the opportunity 
to render a deserved tribute to the important works of MM. Gall and 
Spurzheim and of the phrenological school on the brain. I must congratu- 
late him on this act of justice which is, at the same time, an act of courage, 
for it still requires courage in savants to declare publicly in favour of 
doctrines so contrary to oflBcial opinions. In this doctrine, imperfect as it 
still is, M. Broussais recognises the great light which it throws on the study 
of human nature. He seems to have felt how much this important refor- 
mation aids the general tendency of the human mind towards a completely 
positive philosophy. 

M. Broussais, however, offers some objections to the doctrine of M. Gall. 
Of these the greater part appear to me to be without any solid foundation. 
One only is really well founded, that is the reproach of not taking sufBciently 
into account the great influence exerted on the brain by the digestive and 
generative viscera. It is certain that this influence, though a good deal 
exaggerated by physiologists before MM. Gall and Spurzheim, has been far 
too much neglected by the phrenological school, and that, in this respect, 
the fundamental ideas of the new doctrine of the brain require to be sub- 
mitted to a more complete investigation. 

As regards the practical treatment of madness the considerations sub- 
mitted by M. Broussais add little to the mass of acquired knowledge ; but 
the therapeutics of this afiection are conceived and expounded in a much 
more rational spirit than in any other treatise. The author considers the 
ordinary treatment too passive. He thinks, with reason, that, severe bleed- 
ing, judiciously applied at the outset of the disease, is calculated to cut short 
incipient madness, as in the oases of peripneumonia and acute gastritis. 
M. Broussais justly insists, as all writers since Pinel have done, on the 
importance of moral treatment. But it is surprising that, while recom- 
mending Asylums as an indispensable condition for that purpose, he omits to 
point out the extreme negligence with which this essential element of treat- 
ment is generally conducted in these institutions. No doubt M. Broussais 
was not able to observe with sufficient care the mode in which the majority 
of these establishments are kept : he believed them to be constituted and 
administered as they might, and should be. Had he studied them him- 
self he would have been convinced, that, despite of the promises of their 
directors, the entire intellectual and moral portion of the treatment is, in 
fact, abandoned to the arbitrary action of subordinates and rough agents, whose 
conduct almost always aggravates the malady which they should assist to cure. 

Such are the main considerations which I have to offer on M. Broussais' 
new work. My aim has not been to make it known, but only to charao- 

GENERAL APPENDIX— SIXTH PART. 653 

terise its spirit, and to show, to all who interest themselves in the progress 
of phj'siology, the necessity for studying it. I have endeavoured to draw 
public attention to this work, as calculated to aid the general development 
of human reason, and to oppose successfully the mystical direction which 
some writers, themselves strangers to the true spirit of their age, endeavour 
to impress on the study of man. The publication of this important work 
ought to confirm the fame of M. Bi'oussais, and to make known the wide 
range of his conceptions. Hitherto he was only known as a reformer in 
pathology and therapeutics. Now he shows himself to be a physiologist 
and a philosopher. He proves his mental unity, inasmuch as his applica- 
tions connect themselves with homogeneous theoretical conceptions. In a 
word, his works as a whole justify his title to appear before posterity as one 
of the men who, directly or indirectly, have most efficaciously contributed 
to the formation and triumph of Positive Philosophy as the general and 
definitive termination of the great revolution of the human intellect. 

ERRATA AND CORRIGENDA. 
In volumes i. ii. iii. 

Vol. Page Line 
i. 212 31 /or fourteenth «a(^ fifteenth, 
ii. 100 14 after ch. vi. add p. 362. 

ii. 101 17 /or the benevolent instincts rentZ Divine Grace, 
ii. 101 19 /or an entity recK? uniformly selfish, 
ii. 193 31 for i6Z read 5%Z. 
ii. 281 6 & 9 ./'or Damnation read Eeprobation. 
ii. 296 11 /or ' first ' rratf fundamental, 
ii. 296 U for App. 1 read App. 3, p. 563. 
iii. xlv. 23 for aifective read active, 
iii. Ixxiv. 16 for points read point, 
iii. 25 37 /or These rcarf Thus. 

iii. 140 1 for the first sentence, read But however powerful the stars 
are supposed to be, a time comes "when men can no longer 
do without Gods, properly so called, 
iii. 148 27 /or of Order reat^ of Order and Dignity, 
iii. 383 21 for by narrowing read narrowing. 

iii. 383 22 for were able to, read provided for them directly by their 
own labour, that they might. 

INDEX 

TO 

THE FOUR VOLUMES. 

Note.— The numerals in black type (iv. IrSl) referto passases which contaiaa general estimate 
of the subject, or in which it is considered at length. When a topic is continued over many 
pages, these are indicated thus (ii. 73-7d). 

ABD 

ABBERRAHMAN the Third, iii. 404 
Abalard, iii. 408 
Abraham, iv. 128 

Absolute method, i. 6-10, 355, 369- 
373, 456; ii. 311. Sec Subjective 

— synthesis, i. 331 ; ii. 73-79 ; 

iii. lS-33. See Relative 

— — history of, iii. 68, 132, 218, 365, 
^25-435, 483, 603 

Absolution, Catholic, iii. 388 
Abstract and Concrete Laws, i. 30-32, 

343-35ft 

Science, i. 32-35 ; iv. 151 

Method, i. 348, 373, 397, 405, 

474, 580; ii. 21, 282 ; iii. 68, 124 
Academies, i. 270, 382; iv. 517. See 

Colleges, University 

— suppression of, i. 97, 342 ; 

iii. 514; iv. 338-340 
Accumulation, ii. 213. See Capital 
Achaean League, iii. 232 
Acoustics, i. 423, 429. See Ear 
Action and Expression, ii. 204 ; iv. 82. 

See Language 
Actium, battle of, iii. 329 
Active faculties, i. 584-586 ; 

ii. 122-130 ; iv. 206-211 

— existence, ii. 318-336 ; iv. 285 
Activity, i. 297, 551 ; 

ii. 38, 61, 73, 84, 146, 322 

— relation with Structure, i. 521-525; 

ii. 277; iii. 73 

with Feeling, i. 7, 258, 325, 548- 

557; ii. 58-66, 123; iv. 50-54 
with Life, iii. 73, 129; iv. 221 

— three stages of, i. 27, 607 ; 

iii. 44-55 ; iv. 167 
Admission, Sacrament of, iv. Ill 
Adoption, ii. 166, 331 ; 

iv. 115, 279, 407 

— history of, iii. 119, 304 

ALl 

iEaeid, iii. 392 
jEschylus, iii. 236-239 ; 
iv. 59, 127, 483 
Aetius, iii. 392 

Affection, preponderance of, i. 10-15, 
554. See Feeling 

— centre of Positive synthesis, i. 11, 
648; ii. 13, 62; iii. 66; iv. 17 

Affective functions, i. 557-571; 

ii. 12-17; iii. 9-11 

law of progress of, iii. 55-58 

Africa, i. 315 ; ii. 377 ; iii. 83, 126; 

iv. 451 
Age, Normal, iv. 110-115, 223-235 
Agriculture, ii. 236-238 ; 
iv. 71, 133, 269 
— ; history of, iii. 87, 95, 191, 316 
Air, analysis of, i. 460 ; iii. 506 
Albategnius, iii. 404 
Albertus Magnus, iii. 411, 613 
Albigenses, iii. 366 
Alchemy, iii. 458 ; iv. 240 
D'Alembert, i. 400 ; ii. 361 ; iii. 499 
Alexander, ii. 380; iii. 230-232, 
321, 325 ; iv. 128, 485 

— Severus, iii. 335 

— III., Pope, iii. 408, 414 

— VI., Pope, iv. 623 

Alexandria, iii. 264, 287 ; iv, 641, 

611 
Alfieri, iv. 483 
Alfred, iii. 401 ; iv. 129 
Algebra, i. 379-395, 423 ; ii. 197 ; 
iv. 182 

— history of, iii. 147, 182, 251, 277, 
482 

Algeria, ii. 379; iv. 364, 410 
Alienation, Mental, the term, ii. 374; 

iv. 321. See Insanity 
Alimentation, i. 488-490 ; 

ii. 122, 129-132. See Nutrition 

656 

INDEX. 

AliP 

AEI 

Alpliiibet, ii. 198 ; iii. 112, 220 

Alsace, ii. 379 

Altruism, i. 10-18, 263, 502, 558, 

564- 570 ; ii. 123, 135, 146, 165, 

172, 245, 307; iv. 253 

— development of, 

iii, 57, 90, 156-159 ; iv. 83 

— innate, i. 565-570 ; ii. 9 ; iii. 504 ; 

iv. 17. See Egoism, Problem 
Ambassadors, iv. 409 
Ambition, i. 155, 564 ; ii. 244-246 ; 

iv, 290. See Pride 
America, i. 313 ; iii. 114 ; 

iv. 127, 403, 426, 430, 453 

— discovery of, iii. 463 ; iv. 505 
American Revolution, iii. 502 ; iv. 403 
Analysis, i. 369, 381, 580 

— Transcendental, i. 392, 482 

— Chemical, i. 450 ; iii. 506 

— of Language, ii. 190 

— of Society, ii. 223-242 ; 

iv. 267-315 

— of Religion, ii. 17 ; iv. 76-81 

— of Human]ty, ii. 73 ; iv. 27-33 
Anarchy of thought, i. 68 ; ii. 374 ; 

iv, 321, 527, 023 
Anatomy, i. 522-525, 533 ; 

iv. 66, 193, 199, 380, 649 

— of cerebral organs, i. 546-590 ; 

iv. 207-213 

— history of, iii. 149, 257, 437, 468, 
507. 628 

Ancestors, worship of, iii. 92, 197, 228. 

See Dead 
Andalusia, iii. 410 ; iv. 430 
Angel, theological, iii. 344, 384 

— positivist, i. 213 ; ii. 68 ; 

iv. 96. 101, 272 
Anglican Church, i. 203 ; iv. 429 

history of, iii. 464-466, 473- 

475, 492 
Animal life, i. 482-501 ; iv. 193 
Animals, capable of progress, 

i. 85, 489, 512; iv. 286 

Thought, i. 606, 579 

Social life, i. 495, 505 ; ii. 14 

— associated with man, i. 498 ; 

iii. 115; iv. 126 

— part of Humanity, iv. 33, 312 

— worship pf, iii. 87 

— Festival of, iv. 126 

— cruelty to, i. 497 ; iv. 312 

— dissection of, iv. 199 

— ■ domestication of, i. 495, 513 ; 

iii. 86; iv. 126, 312 

— language of, ii. 188 

— destruction of, i. 498 ; iii. 116 ; 

iv. 312 

— carnivorous. See Carnivorous 

— herbivorous. See Herbivorous 
Anomalies, relation of, to the Type, 

ii. 364 

Anthropology, ii. 356-358. See 

Morals 

Antiquary, the, of W. Scott, iv. 136 

Antoninus Pius, iii. 333 

Apelles, iii. 236 

Aphorism. See Motto 

Apocalypse, the, iii. 373 

Apolloniuiii of Perga, iii. 263, 269, 
270, 437 ; iv. 128, 612 

Tyana, iii. 283 

Apotheosis, iii. 165, 300 

Apparatus, Biologic, ii. 241 

Apprenticeship, i. 139, 143 ; 
iv. 124, 235 

Aquinas, Thomas, iii. 411 

Arabian Nights, iv. 484 

Arabian iScience, iii. 404, 411, 437, 458 ; 
iv. 501 

Arabs, the, iv. 364, 410. See Maho- 
metan 

— history of the, iii. 454, 458, 478 
Aratus, iii. 232 

Arbitration, industrial, i. 134; iv. 291 

Archimedes, i. 393. 396 ; iii. 263, 437 ; 

iv. 128, 611 

— work of, iii. 266-270 
Architecture, i. 236 

— Theocratic, iii. 188-190 

— Greek, iii. 240 

— Medieval, iii. 374, 411 

— of Future, iv. 138-140 
Arianism, ii. 94; iii. 205, 396 
Ariosto, i. 176 ; iii. 485 : iv. 85, 483 
Aristarehus of Samos, iii. 271 
Aristocracy, ii. 326-331. See Pa- 
triciate 

— of Birth, iii. 193, 199, 229, 309, 
386 

— of Wealth, iii. 309 

— of Rome, iii. 316-351 

— Feudal, iii. 386, 389, 406, 418, 439 

— of Venice, iii. 456 

— of France, iii. 465, 474, 494 

— of England, 

iii. 455, 474, 494, 511, 523 ; iv. 428 
Aristophanes, iv. 483 
Aristotle, Philosophy, i. 464 ; 

ii. 229, 262 ; in. 15, 2S5-2S2 ; 

iv. 128, 156 

— Politics, i. 125, 131 ; 

ii. 135, 150, 163, 234, 285 ; 
iii. 259 ; iv. 486 

— Ethics, iii, 259-261 : iv. 4S5 

— Theism, ii. 100; iii 361-364,416; 

iv. 93, 120 

— Physics, i. 451 ; iii. 256 

— Biology, i. 464 ; iii. 257 

— influence of, ii. 286 ; 

iii. 262-281, 412, 416, 437 ; iv. 612 
Arithmetic, i. 387 

— history of, iii. 106-108, 146, 181, 
247, 268, 464 

INDEX. 

657 

AEI 

BIO 

Arithmetic, Future of, iv. 177, 236 
Armies, standing, iii. 455, 490 ; 
iv. 361, 520 
Arms. See Fire-arms 
Arrangement, order meaning, ii. 384 
Art, the term, i. 230 

— general theory of, i. 227-239: 

— Fetiehist, iii. 109-114 

— Theocratic, iii. 187-190 

— Greek, iii 233-277 

— Roman, iii. 301 

— Mediaeval, i. 238, 280 ; 

iii. 372-374,411 

— Modern, i. 239 ; iii. 442, 484-488 

— of Expression, ii. 192-198, 211 
— : its relation to Life, ii. 123, 260 ; 

iv. 45 

Religion, i. 243 ; 

iv. 46, 132 

Politics, i. 224-256 

Art, its true place, iv. 45, 64, 104. 
See Artists 

— relation of Positivism to, i. 220, 240; 

iv. 45, 84, 138 

— education in, i. 246 ; ii. 212; 

iv. 46 
Arthur, legend of King, iii. 395 
Artillery, iv. 361 
Artists, i. 247, 279 ; iii. 189, 236 ; 

iv. 139, 224 
Asceticism, i. 207 ; ii. 59 ; iii. 383 ; 
iv. 250 
Assimilation of human existences, iv. 90 
• Association, theory of, ii. 223-235 

— three types of, ii. 250, 279 
Astrolatry, iii. 94-97, 126, 139, 147, 

416; iv. 20, 127, 188 
Astrology, iii. 126, 416, 458 
Astronomy, i. 373, 403-415; iv. 184 

— arithmetical (history of), iii. 105,126, 
146 

— geometrical (history of), iii. 147, 249, 
270 

— modern (history of), iii. 482, 505 

— future, iv. 184-189 

— solar, i. 411 ; iii. 605 ; iv. 186 

— sidereal, i. 412 ; iii. 273, 606 ; 

iv. 187 
Athanasius, St., iii. 350 
Atheism, i. 36, 370 ; iii. 61, 75 ; 
iv. 189, 337 

— history of modem, iii. 431-434, 
497, 515 

Athens, place of, in history, 

iii. 230-231, 238-241,319; iv. 128. 

See Salamis 
Atomic theory, i. 421, 449; 
iii. 149, 255 
Attachment, i. 566 ; ii. 15, 156 ; 

iii. 47 ; iv. 287 

— growth of, iii. 47, 156, 158, 196, 293, 
398 

VOL. IT. 

Attila, ii. 380 ; iii. 394 
Augurs, art of the, iii. 1 48 
August 15th, iv. 367 
Augustine, i. 209 ; iv. 485, 612 
Augustus, Emperor, iii. 112, 333 
Aurelius, Marcus, iii. 333; iv. 485 
Authors, literary, iv. 340. See Lite- 
rate urs 
Automatism, i. 487 
Avarice, iv. 289. See Thrift 
Avignon, Papacy at, iii. 453, 466 

BACON, scheme of, i. 163, 383, 539 ; 
iv. 154, 160, 161, 165, 485, 596 
— ■ estimate of, ii. 262 ; iii. 483 ; 
iv. 350, 485 

— Roger, iii. 411 ; iv. 501, 613 
Bankers, iv. 71, 301 

Banking, iii. 509 ; iv. 71, 133, 301 
Baptismal Names, i. 277 ; iv. 99 
Barbarians, Grreek view of, iii. 229 

— Teutonic, ii. 96 ; iii. 350, 393, 402 
Barology, i. 423, 428; iii. 506; iv. 190 
Barthez, i. 459, 460; iv. 484, 591 
Bastille, the, iii. 512; iv. 347 
Bathilde, St., iii. 394 

Bayard, iii. 386 

Beatrice, i. 192; ii. 306 

Beauty, sense of, i. 222 ; ii. 67, 125 ; 

iv. 38, 45, 79-82, 149, 213 ■ 
Beeher, i. 452 
Being, analysis of, ii. 276, 282 

— meaning of, i. 366, 475 ; 

iv. 151, 164, 192 
Beings, and Events, i. 5S0, 595 ; 
iv. 151, 164 
Benedict, St., iii. 396 
Benevolence, i. 566 ; ii. 15, 125, 169 ; 
iv. 17, 249 

— growth of, iii. 47, 314, 417, 604 
B&anger, iii. 521 

Bergmann, i. 441 

Bernard, St., i. 228; iii. 408, 419 ; 

iv. 129, 485 
BerthoUet, i. 441, 442, 444, 450, 453 ; 

iii. 499 ; iv. 484, 593 
Bible, the, ii. 286 ; 

iii. 190, 235, 379, 466, 467; iv. 485 
Bichat, i. 268, 335, 481, 484, 491, 518, 
635, 641 ; ii. 22 

— estimate of, i. 458-473, 524 ; 
iii. 507, 528 ; iv. 196, 484, 645 

Binary combinations, i, 446, 449, 467 

Biocracy, i. 500, 566 

Biocratic League, i. 498; iii. 115; 

iv. 126, 312 
Biology, i. 355, 452 ; 

ii. 239-242, 352-357 

— summary of, i. 456-594 

— history of, iii. 148, 185, 266, 411, 
606, 607, 528 

U V 

658 

INDEX. 

BIO 

CA0 

Biology, scheme of, iv. 191-200 

Biologic and Sociologio Laws, 

ii. 234, 240, 376-382 ; iii. 40-42 ; 
iv. 200 
Biological Utopia, iv. 241 
Biotaxy, i. 529-535 ; iii. 607, 528 ; 

iv. 193. See Classification 
Biotomy. See Anatomy 
Birth, influence of, 

iii. 198-199, 229, 309, 386 
Black race, i. 315; ii. 377; 

iii. 83, 160; iv. 431, 450-454 
Blainville, i. 460, 462, 529, 637 ; 

ii. 361, 367 ; iv. 207, 484 
Boerhaave, i. 441, 459 
BoEean, i. 242 

Bonald, ii. 160 ; iii. 519, 528; iv. 624 
Bonaparte, i. 51, 53, 69, 187, 305 ; 

ii. 371, 280; iv. 337, 346 
estimate of, i. 82 ; iii. 517-522 ; 
iv. 361, 556, 560 

— Louis, ii. 372 ; iii. 626 ; 

iv. 343, 345, 360 
Bonaventura, St., iii. 409 
Bonnet, C, iv. 645 
Borgia, Caesar, iii. 457 
Bossuet, i. 249 ; iii. 483 ; iv. 486 
Bourbons, i. 305 ; iii. 512, 518-5ZO ; 

iv. 399 
Bourgeoisie. See Middle Class 
Brahmins, iii. 252 ; iv. 11, 447 
Brain, general theory of, i. 540-593 ; 
iii. 15-33 ; iv. 207-212 

— See Activity, Feeling, Intellect, 
Synthesis 

Britain, conquest of, iii. 331, 402. See 

England 
Brother. See Praternal relation 
Broussais, i. 129, 458, 587 

— on Disease, i. 526-528 ; ii. 350, 
359-363 ; iii. 18, 69 ; iv. 198, 484, 
645-653 

— influence of, iii. 528-529 
Bruno, Leo IX., iii. 408 
Buddha, iii. 205, 283 
Buddhism, iii. 204-206, 217; 

iv. 11, 251, 448 
Budget, the State, iv. 303 
Buffon, i. 249, 458, 469, 489, 496, 500, 
525 

— estimate of, iii. 499, 507 ; 

iv. 160, 484 
Burial, ii. 381 ; iii. 371, 383 ; iv. 139 
Butchers, iv. 312 
Byron, i. 239, 274 ; iv. 484 
Byzantium, iii. 331, 390 ; iv. 441 

CABALA, the, i. 394 ; ii. 90 
Cabanis, i. 42, 63, 458-460, 491, 
603, 541-644 

Cabanis, estimate of, ii. 313, 356 ; 

iii. 529 ; iv. 209, 360, 486, 581 
Caesar, i. 81; ii. 264, 380, 386; 
iv. 118, 485 

— estimate of, iii. 327-329 ; 

iv. 120, 128 
Calculus, the, i. 376-395, 423, 440 ; 
iv. 183,678. <S«e Chances 

— history of, iii. 106-108, 146, 181- 
183, 247-254, 268, 276, 464, 482 

Calderon, iii. 486 

Calendar, the, i. 274-278 ; 

iv. 116-137, 346-351 

history of, iii. 186; iv. 118 

Caloric, i. 441 
Calvin, iii. 465 
Calvinists, i. 216 ; iii. 492 
Cape of Good Hope, iii. 463 ; iv. 605 
Capital, i. 130-134, 294, 300 ; iv. 62. 
See Property 

— general theory of, ii. 129-116, 225- 

235, 326-340 ; iv. 285-293 

— history of, iii. 153, 171, 191, 301, 
309, 376, 438-442, 461,489, 508, 622 

— punishment, ii. 341 ; iv. 66, 199, 252 
Capitalists. See Capital, Industry, 

Property, Eich 
Caracalla, iii. 316 
Cardinals, iv. 226. See Papacy 
Carnivorous animals, i. 489, 496, 510, 

563, 679 ;. iv. 312 
Cainot, iv. 484 
Carolus, coin, i. 311 
Carrel, Armand. i. 59 
Carthage, iii. 319-324 
Caste, ii. 81, 104, 166,198, 375; iv. 11 

— history of, iii. 171-177, 191-204, 
216, 309; iv. 127, 280 

Castle, system of the, iii. 407 

Oat, the, i. 513 

Catechism, the, iv. 362, 463 

Catholicism, the term, iii. 473 ; iv. 403 

— morality of, i. 176, 205 ; 

ii. 90-96, 278 ; iii. 376-387 

— doctrines of, ii. 99-104, 301 ; 

iii. 359-390 

— institutions of, ii. 89-111, iii. 390- 
420 

— germs of, iii. 337-350 

— rise of, iii. 353-359 

— education in, i. 136-138 

. — failure of, ii. 112 ; iii. 414-440 ; 
iv. 13, 128 

— relation of Positivism to, i. 68-73 ; 

ii. 100-119, 301 ; iv. 37, 335 
Causality, iii. 69-72, 133-139, 207- 

209. See Cause 
Cause, the term, i. 290 

— doctrine of, i. 347, 4-2 ; ii. 71 ; 

iii. 12, 31-33 

— history of, iii. 106, 129, 132-142, 
243, 459, 603 

IXDEX. 

659 

CAU 

COM 

•CJaution. See Prudence 

"Cavendish, i. 411 

■Celibacy, i. 176, 192; ii. 158 ; iv. 251 

— of Priesthood, iii. 381, 389, 466; 

iv. 64, 224 
■Cellini, Benvenuto, iv. 485 
•Cellular tissue, i. 524; ii. 234, 241 ; 

iii. 528; iv. 197 
-Centralisation, i. 98 ; ii. 243-249, 261 ; 

iv. 267 
'Cerebral functions. See Brain, Psy- 
chology, and Table, i. 595 
■Cervantes, i. 514, 575 ; ii. 264, 373 ; 
iv. 13, 483 

estimate of, iii. 465, 486 

■Chaldea, ii. 287 ; iii. 203 
Chance, ii. 89-90 ; iii. 362 ; iv. 169 
'Chances, calculus of, i. 20, 381 ; 

iii. 508 
Chapel, private, ii. 68 ; iv. 259 
'Character, the term, i. 551-553, 584 ; 
iii. 314 

— analysis of, i. 534-586 
Charity, i. 566 ; ii. 62 

■Charlemagne, i. 63, 66, 81, 311 ; 
ii. 105, 264, 380 

— estimate of, iii. 401; iv. 120, 129 

— representation of, i. 311 ; iv. 345 
' Charles VII., iii. 456 ; iv. 520 

Charles X., i. 92, 305 ; iii. 525 
Chateaubriand, iii. 519, 527; iv. 483 
Chastity, i. 77, 190, 207; iii. 379; 

iv. 59, 242-251, 279 
•Chaussin, iv. 645 
■Chemistry, i. 416, 430-454 ; iv. 190 

— purpose of, i. 436 

— logic of, i. 432 

— scheme of, i. 450-45+ 

— history of, i. 440; iii. 255, 411, 458, 
506 ; iv. 240 

■Children, education of, i. 193 ; 

ii. 155, 165 ; iv. 229-230 
-China, i. 315; iv. 11, 448. See 

Eetiehism 
-Chivalry, i. 238' 295 ; ii. 105, 170; 
iv. 133, 293 

— history of, 205-208 ; 

iii. 385-393, 407, 419 

— poetry of, ii. 125; iii. 374, 395 

— of future, iv. 133, 293, 416 
•Christ, i. 333 ; iii. 343-349, 387 
-Christianity, the term, iii. 345 

— rise of, iii. 340-350. See 
Catholicism 

■Christian theology, i. 176, 205 ; 

iii. 350, 364, 376 

— poetry, iii. 373, 374 
■Chrysostom, St., iii. 350 

Church, the, ii. 250-272, 278-300; 
iv. 63-67 

— See Anglican 

— National, iii. 453 

Church and State, ii. 277-286 ; 
iii. 443, 464-469, 518 ; iv. 335 
Cicero, iii. 334 ; iv. 485 
Citizen, the term, ii. 278, 305 ; iii. 308 
City, the term, ii. 240 ; iv. 67, 268 

— 'analysis of, ii. 240-242, 251, 291 

— function of, ii. 250-255, 277-278, 
291-294, 304-308 ; iv. 272-274 

— history of the, iii. 92, 122, 158-161, 
172, 177, 213, 305-309, 322 

— normal, iv. 270 

Civic duty, ii. 235-239, 291, 304, 326 

Civil Service, iv. 303 

Civilisation, the term, iii. 56. See 

Progress 
Civism, ii. 304 ; iii. 306 
Glairaut, iii. 499 ; iv. 484 
Classification, La-w of, i. 26-35, 343- 

354; ii. 352; iii. 33-44; iv. 159 

— of the Sciences, i. 355-368, 383, 
464-474; ii. 352-357; iii. 481 ; 
iv. 161-168, 549, 597 

— cosmological. 

i. 369-373, 415-420, 428 

— biological, i. 456-474, 529-540 ; 

iii. 268, 507 ; iv. 193 

— sociological, 

ii. 242-272, 336-357; iv. 54 

— of cerebral functions, table, i. 595 

— of social forces, ii. 224-234 

— of social orders, ii. 336-346 ; 

iv. 56-58, 64-73, 269-278 

— of the arts, i. 234 

— of laws of thought, iv. 154-169, 
551 

Clerks, iv. 124 

Climate, ii. 364, 368, 377 ; iv. 569 

Clothing, institution of, iii. 117, 195. 

See Dress 
Clotilde, St., iii. 394 
Clotilde de Vaux, i. 175, 211, 214-215 ; 

ii. 306, 382 ; iii, 234, 530 
— commemoration of, iv. 45, 95, 

394, 460, 472-481 
Clubs, -workmen's, i. 114, 158 ; 

iv. 277, 333, 617 
Cobdeu, Kichard, iv. 430 
Cceur, Jacques, iii. 462 
Coinage, International, i. 311 
Colbert, iii. 473, 493 ; iv. 340, 503 
Colleges, i. 137, 141 ; iii. 472; iv. 337. 

See Academies, School 
Colonial svstem, iii. 491, 525; 

iv. 364, 423, 431, 452 
Colonies, i. 313 ; iv. 404, 425 
Columbus, iii. 463 ; iv. 134, 559 
Column of Place Vendome, iv. 345 
Combination. See Dualism 

— chemical, i. 444-454; iii. 606 ; 

iv. 190 

— of efforts, ii. 243 ; iv. 640, 632 

— industrial, i. 133; 365 

2 

660 

INDEX. 

COM 

CO0 

Combustion, i. 441 ; hi. 506 
Command, ii. 227, 244, 323-330, 

342; iv. 53 

— order in sense of, ii. 384 
Commedia, iii. 460; iv. 3, 42, 852, 

481. See Dante 
Commemoration of the Dead, i. 276 ; 
iv. 136. See Dead 

— of great men, i. 81 ; iv. 125-130, 
See Worship 

Comtnines, Philippe de, iv. 485 
Commerce, i. 310; iv. 71, 133 

— history of, iii. 191, 233, 462-3, 509 
Commercial system, iii. 463, 509 
Committee, Positive, i. 309, 313; 

iv. 416 
Commons, the. See Middle Class 
Communication, by Language, ii. 209 

— by missive, iv. 415 
Communism, i. 120-136, 184 ; 

ii. 319; iv. 284, 413 

— history of, iii. 522-525 

— in ancient philosophy, i . 125; 

iii. 228 ; iv. 266 

— of modern governments, i. 130 
Comparative Method, i. 432, 528 ; 

iii. 507, 528; iv. 193 
Compass, mariners', iii. 463 
Competition, i. 159 ; ii. 304 ; 

iv. 285, 370 
Composition. See Expression 

— of motions, i. 398 

Compound, chemical. See Combination 
Conception, analysis of, i. 578-582 ; 

ii. 209, 226 
Conceptions, ii. 310-312; iii. 15; 
iv. 156 
Concorde, Place de la, iv. 345 
Concrete and abstract laws, 

i. 30-32, 343-354; iii. 69; iv. 216 

science, i. 32-35, 349-352 ; 

iv. 151 
Concrete synthesis, i. 349 ; 

iv. 151, 216-218 
Condillac, iv. 648 
Condorcet, cited, i. 383 ; 

iii. 146, 231, 386 ; iv. 262, 404 

— criticised, i. 50, 55, 202, 588 ; 

iii. 262 ; iv. 262, S71-S77 

— estimate of, i. 305 ; 

iii. 498, 510, 527 ; iv. 27, 484, S70 

— predecessor of Comte, i. 589 ; 

ii. 151, 369; iii. 11; iv. 2, 262 
Confession, iii. 388 ; iv. 66, 108 
Confiscation, i. 123-124 ; ii. 319, 341 ; 

iii. 310, 406; iv. 408 
Confucius, iii. 283. See China 
Conic sections, i. 389, 414 ; ii. 385 ; 

iii. 369 
Conjugal love, i. 189 ; ii. 158 ; 

iv. 59, 97, 112. See Slarriage 

— relation, ii. 157-165, 170-180 

Conjugal relation, history of, iii. 9U 
118, 196, 227, 301, 379, 381, 469, 
522 

future of, iv. 112, 122, 263-280 

Conquest, ii. 133 ; 

iii. 49, 89, 312-332, 402 

Consanguinity in marriage, ii. 303; 
iii. 196 

Conscience, iv. 291 

Consensus, social, i. 29 ; iv. 40-44 

— intellectual, i. 586 ; ii. 315 ; iii. 18 ; 

iv. 44-50 

— active, i. 584 ; iv. 50-54 

— general, i. 586 ; ii. 299, 317 ; 

iv. 17-24 
Constabulary, iv. 361 
Constancy, i. 192; ii. 157; iii. 409; 

iv. 113 
Constant, Benjamin, ii. 371 
Constantine, ii. 386 ; iii. 390 ; iv. 326 
Constantinople, iii. 331, 390 ; iv. 441 
Construction, Instinct of, i. 562 ; 

ii. 130; iv. 251. See Industry- 
Consumption, of products, ii. 130 
Contemplation, the term, i. 579 

— analysis of, i. 580 ; ii. 310-315 ; 

iii. 16, 124 ; iv. 151-156, 551 

— life of, i. 13 : iii. 376 ; iv. 233 
Continence, i. 207 ; ii. 158 ; 

iii. 379-381 ; iv. 251. See Chastity 
Continuity, the term, i. 292 ; ii. 63 

— analysis of, ii. 293-296, 379-382 ; 

iii. 1-7 

— breach in, ii. 374, 386 ; 

iii. 215, 361, 446-451, 510 

— culture of, iii. 170-178, 308, 527 

iv. 31-32, 125-131 
Contractility, i. 484 
Contrat Social, iii. 511. See Bousseau 
Convention, the, i. 87-105, 144-163, 
304-309 

history of, iii. 510-516 ; iv. 399 

Cook, Captain, iv. 452, 484 
Cooperation, ii. 223, 243, 285, 293 ;. 

iii. 8 ; iv. 282-286 
Copernicus, iii. 276 ; iv. 50.T 
Copyriglit, iv. 340 
Cordova, iii. 404 ; iv. 501 
Corneille cited, i. 177 ; ii. 325 ; iii. 377; 
iv. 122 

— estimate of, i. 222, 232. 244 ; 

iii. 486; iv. 483 
Corpus Juris, the, iii. 311 ; iv. 370 
Corpuscular Theory, i. 421, 449 ; 
iii. 150, 255 
Corsica, ii. 379; iv. 410 
Cosmology, the term, i. 355 ; ii. 353 ; 
iv. 166-175 

— scheme of, i. 369-455 ; 

iv. 176-191 
Councils, ecclesiastical, iii. 388, 453 ; 
iv. 226 

INDEX. 

661 

con 

DIS 

•Counsel and Command, ii. 342 ; 

iv. 66, 294 
Country, ii. 237, 366; iii. 120, 293, 

307. See Patriotism and Town 
Courage, i. 585 ; ii. 343 ; iv. 64, 466 
Cremation, iii. 371 
Crimean War, iv. 345 
'Cromwell, iii. 468, 494, 513 ; 

iv. 429, 485 
■Crusades, ii. 98, 105, 111 ; 

iii. 410, 418, 485 
Cupidity, ii. 138 ; iv. 289 
Curtius, iii. 349 
Cuvier, i. 460 : iv. 645, 649 

TvAMNATION, doctrine of, ii. 281 ; 
/ -X) iii. 382-388 

Dancing, art of, i. 583 ; ii. 192 ; iii. 113 
Dante cited, i. 561 ; 

ii. 106, 267, 286, 319, 327 ; 

iii. 322, 374, 376, 391, 396, 454; 

iv. 25, 85, 289 

— estimate of, i. 223, 239 ; ii. 306 ; 

iii 460, 465; 
iv. 120, 130, 352, 420, 437, 483 

— and Beatrice, i. 192 ; ii. 306 ; iii. 485 
Danton, i. 58 ; 

iv. 45, 329. 333, 338-343, 406 

— estimate of, iii. 510, 5X3-516 
Daubenton, iv. 645 

-Daughter, the, ii. 67, 164, 171-174; 

iv. 97 
Day. See Calendar, Dead, New Year's 

Day 
Dead, the, i. 333 ; ii. 54-55, 294-296, 

366, 379-382; iv. 31, 89-95 

— commemoration of, i. 276 ; ii. 372 ; 

iv. 127-137 

— worship of, iii. 92, 196, 228, 384 ; 

iv. 95 

— judgment of, ii. 269 ; iii. 200 ; 

iv. llo, 353 

— Festival of, i. 276 ; iv. 136 

— day of, i. 276 

— transfer of great, to Paris, iv. 436 
Death, i. 476-482 ; ii. 54, 382 ; 

iii. 60, 125; iv. 105 

— punishment of, ii. 341 ; 

iv. 66, 199, 406 
Decimal Notation, iii. 181, 464 
Decius, iii. 349 

Decomposition, Chemical, i. 444 ; 
iii. 606 

— of States, iv. 268, 366 
Deduction, i. 380-382, 390, 404, 419, 

430, 526 

— theory of, i. 581 ; iv. 177-184 
Defence, ii. 95-98; iii. 51-55 

— history of, iii. 375, 387, 390, 403, 
418 

Defoe, iv. 483 

Deism, i. 149, 273, 316, 320, 331 ; 
iv. 337 

— history of, iii. 429, 450, 496, 601, 
618 

Delambre, iii. 270 
Demagogues, iii. 228 ; iv. 394 
De Maistre, i. 50, 70, 305 ; ii. 161 ; 
iii. 62 

— estimate of, iii. 519, 527; 

iv. 485, 604, 622, 631 
Democritus, iii. 265 
Derangement. See Insanity 
Descartes referred to, i. 8, 153, 639, 591; 
iv. 60, 93, 217, 320 

— estimate of, ii. 202 ; iii. 482-484 ; 

iv. 120, 130, 181 

— philosophy of, i. 472 ; ii. 290 ; 

iii 483 ; iv. 485 

— mathematics, i. 378, 380, 389-393; 

iii. 482 ; iv. 484 
Despots in Greece, iii. 227 

— Feudal, iii. 418, 444, 457 
Destination, Sacrament of, iv. Ill 
Destiny, ii, 89 ; iii. 132-137, 362, 416 

iv. 170 
Destruction, Instinct of, i. 563 ; 

iii. 47, 86 ; iv. 252 

— of animals, iii. 116 
Development, general theory of, i. 474- 

482 ; ii. 350-382 ; iii. 8-64 
Devil, the, iii. 200, 364-367 
Dictatorship, normal, 

i. 92, 160-163, 307 ; 

iv. 300-303, 329, 342, 388-405 

— Eoman, iii. 327-336 

— Feudal, ii. 113; 

iii. 398, 407, 410, 419 

— modern, iii. 454, 475, 493, 498, 513- 
516, 526 

Diderot, estimate of, i. 249 ; iii. 498- 
504, 513-516 ; iv. 350, 485 

— cited, i. 374 ; iii. 426 ; 

iv. 184, 217, 440 
Diet, i. 488-490, 510, 538, 561 ; 
iv. 249-251 

— history of, iii. 195, 283, 314, 379 
Differentiation, i. 480-485, 517-521, 

529; iii. 36-37; iv. 155, 169 

— of function, ii. 242-285 ; 

iv. 193-198 

— of sex, i. 198; ii. 302-307; 

iv. 55, 63 

— of orders, ii. 336-346 ; iv. 55-59 
DiopbantuB, iii. 277 

Diplomacy, iv. 370, 409 
Directness of Mind, i. 448 ; ii. 373 ; 
iii. 19 ; iv. 154 
Discipline, i. 73-80 ; 

ii. 58-66, 225-233, 300-306 

— ancient, ii. 85 ; iii. 161, 194, 293 

— mediaeval, ii. 91-1 04 ; 

iii. 338, 356, 378 

662 

INDEX. 

DIS 

Discipline, modern, iii, 469-500 

— normal, ii. 336-346 ; 

iv. 246-2S6 
Disease, i. 526-528, 592 ; ii. 350, 
359-362, 372; iv. 198, 371-383 
Disestablishment of Churches, iv. 335 
Dissection, ir. 66, 199, 380. See Ana- 
tomy 
Distribution of functions, ii. 242-285 ; 
if. 269-278 

— of Labour, ii. 136, 318-326; 

iv. 269, 285, 540, 632 

— of "Wealth, ii. 326-340 ; iv. 290 
Division of Labour. See Distribution 

— arithmetical, iii. 146, 182 
Divorce, i. 190-191 ; iii. 469 
Dodona, iii. 226 

Dog, the, i. 495, 510, 512, 513; ii. 14 ; 

iii. 87 ; iv. 126, 382 
Dogmatism, i. 346 ; iii. 21 ; 

iv. 151-153, 636 
Domestic Life, 

i. 75-78, 187-200, 495 ; 

ii. 1S5-160; iv. 122, 254-267 

— Morality, i. 77 ; iv. 263 

— relation of, ii. 169-171 ; 

iv. 123, 257 
Domestication of animals, i. 495, 513 ; 
iii. 86 ; iv. 126, 312 
Dominicans, the, iii. 417, 473 
Don Quixote, iii. 465, 486; iv. 483. 

Sec Cervantes 
Drama, the, i. 246 ; 

iii. 236, 486, 608 ; iv. 376, 384 
Dreams, i. 490, 575; iii. 17, 144 ; 

iv. 49, 211 
Dress, iv. 225 
Dualism, Philosophical,- i. 355-365, 

594 ; ii. 16, 34 ; iii. 135 ; iv. 192 
^ Cosmological, i. 371 

— Chemical, i. 446-483 

— Biological, i. 464 

— Sociological, ii. 1-4, 11-17; 

iii. 52-55, 211; iv. 55 
Duclos, iv. 485 

Duel, the, iii. 385, 394; iv. 115, 252 
Dunoyer, i. 127; ii. 261. 330, 332; 

iii. 51 ; iv. 408, 639 
Duties and Eights, i. 52, 289 ; ii. 91 ; 

iii. 515 
Duty, spirit of, ii. 381-382, 385 ; 

iv. 44, 283 
Dynamics, theory of, i. 395, 402 ; 

ii. 1-4 ; iii. 1-13 ; iv. 1-10 

EAR, the, i. 426 ; ii. 194-195 ;' iv. 208 
Earth, the, i. 357, 410-415, 499; 
iv. 185 

— social influence of, ii. 229, 33,')-338 ; 

iv. 186, 188 

— sphericity of, iii. 250, 273 

ENC 

Earth, the, motions of, iii, 185, 276, 

479, 505; iv. 189 
Eclectics, the, iii. 525 ; iv. 399 
Economists, i, 124 ; ii. 134, 230, 234 

— history of, iii. 500 ; iv. 399, 632, 64a' 
Economy, political, i. 123-136 

— normal, ii. 129-148, 230 ; 

iv. 280-300 
Education, the term, iv. 229 

— theory of,i. 325-341 ; ii. 308, 318;. 

iv. 229 

— normal, i. 136-148, 311 ; 

ii. 317. 339 ; iv. 61-67, 227-229 

— domestic, i. 138 ; ii. 170-177, 302 ;. 

iv. 229 

— of children, i. 193; iv. 229-230 

— of women, i. 201 ; iv. 61-64, 233 

— moral, i 79-82; iv. 63, 83, 228-23L 

— intellectual, i. 32-36, 140; 

iv. 145, 231-238 

— ancient, ii. 80-85 ; iii. 139-168, 188„ 
194 

— medieval, i. 136; iii. 366, 364-374 

— scheme of, iv. 226-239 
Egoism, i. 73-80, 177, 560-564; 

ii. 178, 303, 317; iii. 377; 
iv. 84, 246, 253. See Altruism,. 
Problem 
Egypt, ii. 287 ; iii. 203 
Election, system of, ii. 247, 375 ; 

iv. 32, 342, 395 

— hLstory of, iii. 217, 224, 388, 448 

— of the just, ii. 281 ; iii. 382. See- 
Damnation 

Electricity, i. 435, 441, 446 

— sense of, iv. 207 
Electrology, i. 426-430 ; iv. 190 
Elements, four, i. 451 ; iii. 255 

— of religion, ii. 17-20 
^ of soeiocracy, iv. 64 

— biological, ii. 240 ; ir. 1 97 
Elixir Vitas, iii. 459 
Emancipated, the, iv. 467 
Emotion. See Feeling 
Emperor, the Eoman, iii. 329 

— Mediaeval, i. 311 ; ii. 261 : iii. 402 
Empire, the Mediseval, iii. 398-403,46* 
Empiricism, i. 345-348. 419, 572 : 

ii. 258, 363; iii. 21; iv. 152. 
See Dogmatism, IMysticism 
Employers, the, i. 127, 297 ; ii. 319 ; 

iv. 71, 269, 288. See- 
Capital, Patriciate 

— history of, iii. 413, 440-444, 462, 
490- 494 

Employed, i. 133, 153; ii. 134, 318; 

iv. 73, 269, 294. See People, 
Proletariate 

— history of, iii. 413, 440, 462, 490, 
523 

Encyclopaedia, the, iii. 499; iv. 399, 
604 

INDEX. 

663 

ENC 

Encyclopaedic series. .See Classification 

of the sciences 
Endowments, i. 145; iii. 484; 
iv. 226, 303, 408 
Engineer workmen, iv. 307 
England, conquest of, iii. 449. See 

Great Britain 
English constitution, iii. 455, 468, 475, 

494 ; iv. 428 
Ennui, i. 484, 554 
Environment, the term, i. 356 ; ii. 365 

— i. 356, 475, 517, 637, 594 ; iv. 34 

— influence of, on mind, i. 21 ; 

ii. 11, 308-318; iii. 16, 98 

on individual, ii. 235-239 ; 

iv. 194, 207 

on society, ii. 357-366, 377 ; 

iii. 168; iv. 216 
Epic, Positive, iv. 420 
Epictetns, iv. 485 
Equality, doctrine of, i. 127, 304 ; iv. 284 

history of, iii. 426, 446, 468, 511, 

522, 526 

— in inheritance, ii. 330 ; iv. 291 
Equations, i. 39ii, 591 ; ii. 385; iii. 272 
Equinoxes, Precession of, iii. 272 
Era, of the Calendar, iv. 119, 347 
Eratosthenes, iii. 265, 271 

Esthetic. See Art 

Ether, hypothesis of, i. 422 

Etraria, iii. 317 

Etymology, ii. 217 

Eucharist, the, ii. 109; iii. 384, 387; 

iv. 240, 245, 358 
Euclid, iii. 266 

Eudoxus of Cnidos, iii. 265, 273 
Euler, i. 382 

Evimenides, the, iii. 227 ; iv. 59 
Euripides, iii. 239 
Europe, reorganisation of, i. 66-68 ; 

iv. 23, 225, 267, 320-325, 409, 418 
Events, i. 580, 595 ; iv. 151, 164, 176. 

See Beings 
Evolution. See Progress 
Examinations, iv. 376 

— post mortem, iv. 66, 199, 380 
Exchange, ii. 133 
Excommunication, i. 136 ; ii. 340 ; 

iii. 383 ; iv. 292 
Executioner, Pubhc, iv. 66, 199 
Executive, the, i. 98 ; 

iv. 3O0-303, 39X 
Exercise, i. 485, 492; iv. 194 

— effect on feeling, iv. 84, 88 
Existence, the term, ii. 276, 282 ; 

iv. 186, 195. See Life 
Exoenditure, Personal, ii. 327, 335 ; 
^ iv. 52, 289, 296 

— Public, iv. 300-303, 342, 406 
Experiment, Method of, i. 420, 526 
Expression, theory of, ... 

ii. 191-199, 202-212 ; m. 66 

FIG 

Expression, organ of, i. 582-584 ; 

ii. 202 

— and conception, ii. 226 ; iv. 102-106 

— and action, iv. 82, 87 

— in art, i. 232; ii. 124, 199 
External world. See Environment, 

World 

— Power, ii. 11, 41-53 ; iv. 24^33 
Eye, the, i. 235, 426, 581 ; iv. 208 

— language of, ii. 194-195 

FABLES, origin of, iii. 234 
Fabliaux du Moyen Age, iv. 483 
Fairy stories, iii. 401 
Fall of Man, iii. 387 
Family, the term, ii. 169 

— theory of the, i. 75, 187-199 ; 

ii. 150-181, 240, 250, 302 

— perversion of, i. 184 ; 

ii. 165, 178, 179 

— type of the, iv. 264-267 

— Fetichist, iii. 91, 157 

— Theocratic, iii. 194-196 

— Greek, iii. 219, 227 

— Eoman, iii. 301-305 

— Mediajval, iii. 381 

— Modern, ii. 150 ; iii. 469 
Families, governing, ii. 329 

— intermixture of, ii. 295 
Fatalism, i. 42 ; 

iii. 102, 134-138, 362 
Fatality, i. 16-30, 332-340 ; 

ii. 27, 35, 312 ; iv. 34, 169 
Fate, iii. 341. &e Destiny 
Father. See Family and Paternal 
Fatherland, the term, ii. 238. See 

Country. 
Feeling, the term, i. 549 

— theory of, i. 16, 164, 350-370 ; 

ii. 41-53; iii. 55-58 

— influence on Thought, i. 328 ; 

iii. 65 ; iv. 142 

— effect of Language on, ii. 201-208. 
See Affective, Altruism, Logic, Moral 

Feminine Utopia. See Hypothesis 

Ferguson, ii. 370 

Festivals, i. 244, 276 ; ii. 125 ; iii. 188 

— Positive, iv. 121-137, 356, 367. 
See Commemoration 

Fetich, iii. 30, 70, 90, 95 
Fetichism, theory of, ii. 74-76 ; 

iii. 68-93 ; iv. 37 

— relation to Positivism, iv. 38, 126, 
180, 214, 313, 450 

Feudalism, i. 206, 238 ; ii. 97-111 ; 

iii. 387-390, 405-414 

— germs of, iii. 336, 350 

— fall of, iii. 418, 447, 454. See 
Chivalry, Industry, Mediaeval 

Fictions, ii. 71 ; iii- 74. See Hypo- 
thesis 

664 

INDEX. 

PIC 

GOV 

Fictitious system, i. 7, 19, 320 ; 

ii. 70-74; iii. 24-30, 68-84 

See Synthesis, Theological 
Fief, iii. 406 
Fielding, iv. 483 
Filial relation, ii. 156, 165 ; 

iv. 123, 261. &e Daughter 
Fire, iii. 118 ; iv. 126 
Fire-eirms, iii. 463 ; iv. 361 
Firmness. See Perseverance 
Flag of the West, i. 31 1 ; iv. 366 
Flexiry, iv. 485 
Fontenelle, i. 383 ; iii. 498, 504 ; 

iv. 187, 437, 484 
Force, the term, ii. 234. See Power 
Formula, Cerebral, i. 555, 695 ; iii. 65 

— Eeligious, ii. 286 

— Moral, i. 666 ; ii. 243 

— Political, ii. 328 ; iv. 344 

— of transition, iv. 343, 400. See 
Motto 

Foundling hospitals, i. 1 30 
Fourier, i. 424 
Fox, the, i. 679 
Fractions, iii. 182 
France, i. 65-68, 309 ; 

iii. 402, 475, 496 

— Monarchy of, i. 63 ; 

iii. 464, 475, 492, 612 

— Eevolution of, i. 47 ; iii. S09-531. 
See Convention 

— Constitution of, i. 54, 94, 129 ; 

iii, 513 

— Future of, iv. 360-367, 418 
Francis I., iii. 495 

Francis, St., iii. 408 ; iv. 136 
Franciscans, iii. 408, 473 
FrauUin, ii. 295 ; iv. 59, 507 
Fraternal relation, ii. 156, 167, 330; 

iv. 123. See Sister 
Fraternity, i. 305 ; ii. 169 ; iii. 624 ; 

iv. 313 
Frederic of Prussia, ii. 264, 372, 380 ; 

iii. 498, 510, 613 ; iv. 130, 329, 336 
Free Inquiry, i. 96 ; iii. 448, 467 

— Speech, i. 96, 307 ; iv. 332 

— Thought, ii. 82 ; 

iii. 431, 478, 496, 610; iv. 507, 532 
Function, the term, i. 520-525 ; 

ii. 277 
Future of mankind, i. 316 ; 

ii. 220, 266 ; iv. 10, 576 

— of industry, iv. 51-75, 286-314 

— of private life, iv. 253-267 

— of public life, iv. 267-300 

— of language, ii. 220 ; iv. 185 
Future Life. See Immortality 

GALEN, i. 515 
Galileo, referred to, i. 399, 400, 
*17 

Galileo, estimate of, iii. 479, 481 ; 

iv. 158, 505 
Gall referred to, i. 50, 129, 458, 460, 
503; ii. 15; iv. 207 

— cited, i. 83, 235, 485, 659, 662 ; 

ii. 313, 366; iv. 207 

— criticised, i. 815, 543-550, 567, 
571-574 

— estimate of, i. 541-553, 565-590 ; 

iii. 528 ; iv. 486 
Ganglion, cerebral, i. 546 ; iv. 208 
Gaul, conquest of, iii. 317, 320-327, 

332 
Getierality of philosophy, i. 343-352 ; 

ii. 265-272 ; iii. 102 ; iv. 216-218 
Genevieve, St., iii. 394 
Geof&oy, i. 44 
Geography, rise of, iii. 273 
Geology, i. 360 ; ii. 360 
Geometry, i. 376-395 ; iv. 184 

— Theocratic, iii. 147, 182 

— Greek, iii. 248-26B, 265-268, 481 

— modern, iii. 481-482, 605 
Germain, Sophie, i. 677 
Germany, i. 67, 461 ; 

iii. 449, 465, 494 

— conquest of, iii. 332, 402 

— future of, i. 309 ; 

iv. 225, 324, 427, 432 

Germans, ii. 95, 394 ; iv. 427 

Gerson, iii. 460 

Gesture, i. 231, 235, 583 ; ii. 192, 202 ; 
iii. 109-111, 188 

Gibbon, iii. 351 ; iv. 485 

Gibraltar, iv. 430 

Gift, ii. 133, 333 ; iii. 201, 406 ; iv. 69 

Gil Bias, iv. 483 

Gipsy, ii. 237 

Girondists, i. 162 ; iii. 513 ; iv. 404 

God, idea of, i. 280-285, 320, 331 ; 
ii. 307; iv. 20, 34, 188. See Mono- 
theism 

origin of, iii. 341-351, 359- 

378 

decline of, iii. 431, 438, 496, 

523 

Gods, origin of idea of, iii. 125, 136- 
139. See Polytheism 

— household, iii. 216 ; iv. 101 
Godfrey de Bouillon, iv. 129. See 

Crusades 

Goethe, i. 239, 249, 274 ; iv. 484 

Goldsmith, iv. 483 

Goodness, the term, i. 566. See Bene- 
volence 

Governing classes, i. 102 ; 

ii. 226, 244-250, 323, 329 ; iv. 281 

Government, theory of, ii. 224-235 

— material, ii. 225-230, 246, 258, 
326 

— intellectual, ii. 226-232, 248, 256, 
289, 336 

INDEX. 

665 

GOV 

'Oovemment, moral, ii. 227-230, 248, 
283, 302, 336 

— normal, iv. 300-314 
•Gracchi, the, iii. 326 

Grace, theological, i. 73, 283 ; 

ii. 100, 307 ; iii. 346, 363, 378 

— Positive, i. 283 ; ii. 307 
Grammar, ii. 214 
•Grandparents, iv. 257 
Gratuitous service, iv. 227, 298, 302 
Gravitation, i. 406, 415 ; 

iii. 481, 505 ; iv. 185-189 
Great Being. See Humanity 

— Britain, i. 55, 67, 313 ; iii. 494, 623, 
525 ; iv. 225, 325, 427. See England 

Greece, ancient, ii. 82 ; iii. 221 ; iv. 127 

— modern, i. 67, 315 ; iv. 442 
Greek Theocracy, iii. 225 

— Poetry, iii. 234-239 

— Art, i. 237 ; iii. 233-242 

— Philosophy, iii. 242-262, 277- 
284 

— Science, iii. 262-277 

— Monotheism, 

iii. 284-289, 350, 360 ; iv. 441 
Green, colour, i. 112; iv. 225 
Gregory the Great, iii. 396 

— VII., Pope, iii. 408. See Hilde- 
brand 

— XL, Pope, iv. 118 
•Gr^try, i. 232 ; iv. 485 

•Gro-wth, i. 476, 481. See Development 
■Guiana, ii. 131 
Gunpo^wder, iii. 463 
Gutenberg, iii. 463 ; iv. 134 
iGuyton-Morveau, i. 433, 453 

HABIT, i. 485, 491; ii. 175; 
iv. 21, 194 
Hadrian, iii. 333 
Hallam, iii. 462 ; iv. 485 
Haller, i. 458 ; iii. 607 ; iv. 645 
Hannibal, iii. 323 

Happiness, i. 317-321 ; ii. 382 ; iy. 283 
Haruspices, iii. 148 
Harvey, i. 479; iv. 69 
Hayti, i. 316; iv. 453 
Health, i. 488, 492, 494; ii. 8, 372; 

iii. 196, 379; iv. 209, 246-251. 

See Diet, Disease, Hygiene 
Heart, the term, i. 86, 213, 552 . 

— influence on Intellect, i. 177-181, 
328, 554. See Affection, Character, 
Feeling, Synthesis 

Beat, i, 424-430, 435 ; iv. 190 
Heaven, the term, iii. 141 ; iv. 188. 

See Astrolatry 
Hebre^w Theocracy, ii. 286 ; 

iii. 202-205, 287; iv. 128. See 

Judaism, Moses 

— Poetry, iii. 190, 235. See Bible 

HUM 

Heeren, iv. 485 
Heloise, iii. 408 
Helvetius, iii. 499; iv. 648 
Henry IV. of France, iv. 266 
Herbivorous animals, i. 481, 489, 610, 

663, 579 ; iv. 241, 312 
Herder, iv. 603 
Hereditary principle, iii. 171-175, 

198-200. See Birth 

— •wealth, i. 300 ; ii. 328-331 ; 

iv. 280, 291 
Heredity, i. 480, 493; ii. 366-369; 

iv. 194, 278 
Hermits, iii. 383 
Herodotus, iii. 262 ; iv. 485 
Hetaerae, iii. 227 
Hieroglyphics, i. 233 ; ii. 197, 293; 

iii. 187, 220 
High Priest, iv. 224 
Hildebrand, iii. 408, 410 ; ' 

iv. 129, 499, 613 
Hipparchus, i. 386; iii. 251, 263, 

370-377, 437 ; iv. 128, 612 
Hippocrates, i. 469, 465, 586 ; ii. 364 ; 

iii. 257; iv. 128, 484 
Histology, i. 532; iv. 193, 197. See 

Tissue 
Historical method, i. 68 ; ii. 70-74 ; 
iii. 1-7, 527 ; iv. 1-5 

— poetry, i. 244 ; iv. 46, 126 
History, rise of, iii. 262, 335 
Hobbes, ii. 186, 199, 209, 214, 246; 

iii. 483, 496; iv. 329,350 
Holland, i. 67, 309 ; iv. 267, 404, 432 

— history of, iii. 448, 466, 468, 485, 
491, 494, 602,511 

Holy Alliance, iii. 622 ; iv. 529, 643 
Home, the, i. 77, 187 ; ii. 173; iii. 306; 
iv. 258, 295. See Domestic 

Life, Family ^ 
Homer, referred to, i. 222, 237, 245, 

248 

— estimate of, iii. 235-238 ; 

iv. 93, 120, 127, 483 
Horace, iv. 483 

Horse, the, iii. 87 ; iv. 126, 313, 382 
Hospitals, iv. 372, 380 
House, the term, ii. 238 ; iv. 258. See 

Home 
Hufeland, i. 207 ; iv. 484 
Huguenots, iii. 475, 492 
Human Nature. See Problem, Syn- 
thesis 

science of, ii. 356-358 ; 

iv. 142-146 
Humanity, i. 263-274, 317-321, 333; 
ii. 51-58; i v. 22-36 

— idea of, i. 273 ; ii. 383-387, 294; 
iii. 293, 415, 438, 503, 515, 523, 530 

— defined, iv. 27 

— poem of, iv. 420 

— See Goodness, Organism, Eeligion 

666 

INDEX. 

HUM 

INT 

Hume, iii. 51, 454, 459, 499, 503-505; 

iv. 486, 691 
Huyghens, iii. 481 ; iv. 158, 481, 558 
Hygiene, i. 539. See Health 
Hymne, Mediaeval, iii. 373-374 

— Positivist, iv. 102. See Prayer 
Hypothesis, scientific, 

i. 405, 421, 547, 693; iii. 16-21, 80; 
iv. 47, 185, 240, 266 

— unscientific, i. 422, 441, 446, 475 ; 

iii. 71, 459, 483 

— simplest, i. 448 ; ii. 373 ; iv. 154 

— of world without law, ii. 26 ; 

iv. 143 

— of life without labour, ii. 122 ; 

iv. 219 

— of Catholic transformation, 
iii. 429, 466 

— of feminine Utopia, iv. 60, 212, 240- 
245 

ICTINUS, iii. 236 
Idealisation, i. 232; iv. 95, 105, 
420, 566. See Art. 
Ideas, i. 579 ; ii. 311 ; iii. 16. See 
Contemplation, Images, Logic, Medi- 
tation 
Ideologists, i. 58, 154, 573 ; iv. 648 
Idiocy, ii. 373. See Insanity 
Idiosyncrasy, ii. 359 
Iliad, the, iii. 234, 237, 243 ; iv. 483. 

See Homer 
Images, the term, i. 366, 579 ; 

ii. 194, 207, 311 

— use of, ii. 311 ; iii. 16, 142, 151 ; 

iv. 60, 95, 156. See Contem- 
plation, Idealisation, Logic 

Imagination, i. 220-232, 574. See 
Art, Images, Logic 

Imitation, in Art, i. 231 

— in Biology, i. 491 

— in Language, 'ii. 190 

— of Christ, i. 177; iii. 371, 378, 460, 
485 ; iv. 352, 485 

Immortality, Theological, ii. 103, 294 ; 
iii. 180, 372, 377, 382 

— Positive, ii. 64, 306, 382; iii. 159 ; 

iv. 31, 44, 89-95. See 
Subjective Life 

— of women, iv. 100 
Immutability. See Invariability 
Impressions, i. 679 ; ii. 186, 311 ; 

iii. 16 ; iv. 156 
Improvement in condition of women. 
See Women 

— of the earth,]. 499; ii. 147,317,380; 

iv. 74, 313. &e Progress 
Incarnation, the, ii. 94 ; 

iii. 152, 343, 384 
Incest, ii. 303 ; iii. 196 
Incorporation, iv. 90, 115, 292 

Independence, i, 294-297 ; ii. 13,65;' 
iv. 30, 248, 638 

India, i. 315; ii. 287 ; iii. 204; 

iv. 11, 447 
Indies, "West, iv. 453 
Indissolubility of Marriage, i. 190; 

ii. 166; iv. 112- 
Individual life, i. 126 ; ii. 335, 357 ; 

iv. 30, 34, 91. (See Independence • 
Individuals, ii. 152, 223, 371 ; iv. 34,90. 

— relation with society, 

ii. 239-242, 371-380 ; 
iv. 34, 91 
Induction, i. 380, 404, 418, 431, 626, 

581 ; iv. 163, 169 
Industry, instinct of, i. 562 ; 

ii. 134-146 ; iv. 282 

— history of, iii. 192, 376,412, 439, 
462, 520 

— organisation of,i. 127; ii. 131-148, 
318-336; iv. 282-300 

— future of, iv. 51-75, 310-314 

— and war, ii. 95, 320-324, 379 ; 

iii. 48-53, 334, 422 
Industrial training, iv. 232-237 

— chivalry, iv. 293 

— endowments, iv. 408 
Inequality, social, i. 127 ; ii. 266-270; 

iv. 69-74 
See Classification, Equality, Industry 
Inertia, i. 398 ; iii. 103, 12.5, 149 ;-- 

iv. 168 
Infancy, i. 512 ; iv. 230 
Inheritance,!. 132, 300; 

ii. 133,168, 330; iv. 2E1 
Initiation, iv. 110 
Innervation, i. 298 ; iv. 208 
Innocent III., Pope. iii. 408 
Inorganic science, i. 3 S 5-3 63 ; 

iv. 162-170. See 
Classification, and Cosmology 

— chemistry, i. 445 
Insanity, i. 575; ii. 311, 373; 

iii. 17, 62, 78 ; iv. 651 
Instinct, i. 485-488, 559-570 

— Personal, i. 559-564 

— Social, i. 564-570; 

iv. 18, 40-45, 83, 247-253 
Institute, the, iii. 514 ; iv. 339 
Instruction, Public, iv. 232-239. See- 
Education ' 
Instruments, ii. 332 ; iii. 376. See 

Machines 
Intellect, place of, i. 10-16, 552-557; 
iii. 8-22 ; iv. 142-152 

— regulation of, i. 16-30 ; ii. 316 ; 

iv. 142 

— relation to Feeling, ii. 314-318; 

iii. 65-67 ; iv. 46-51 

Action, ii. 122-126 ; iii. 65-67 ; 

iv. 219-222- 

— functions of, i. 571-584 

INDEX. 

66r 

INT 

Intellect, laws of, ii. 308-318; 

iii. 11-44; iv. 154-162. See Logic 

— progress of, i. 85 ; iii. 15-33 

— freedom of, i. 216-218 ; iy. 467 

— power of, ii. 226, 232 

— education of, i. 32-36 ; 

iv. 145, 231-238 
Intermittence, i. 484, 490, 556 ; iv. 194 
International relations, i. 309-315; 
ii. 379 ; iii. 386 ; iv. 416-454, 642 

— school, i. 311 ; iv. 373 

— coinage, i. 3 1 1 

Invariability, i. 357; ii. 27, 33, 359, 

363; iii. 26; iv. 154, 169 
Invasions of Eoman Empire, ii. 96 ; 

iii. 393 
Inventions, iii. 376, 462 ; iv. 134 
Isidore, St., iii. 396 
Islam. See Mahomet 
Italian language, iv. 67, 85, 230, 419 
Italy, i. 67, 315 ; iv. 225, 325, 418 

— history of, iii. 318-322, 332, 400- 
40S, 449 

JACOBINISM, i. 47, 304; iii. 510; 
iv. 428 
Japan, i. 315 ; iv. 449 
Jeanne d'Are, i. 212 ; iii. 455 
Jesuitism, the term, iii. 473 
Jesuits, the, iii. 470-473, 501; 

iv. 337, 666, 613 
Jesus. See Christ 
Jews. See Judaism 
Joachim, Abbot, iii. 409 
Joan of Arc. See Jeanne 
John of Parma, iii. 409 
Joseph II., iv. 560 
Journalism, iv. 275, 332, 406, 415 
Judaism, ii. 286 ; iii. 202-205, 344- 

346 ; iv. 128, 443 
Judges, iv. 370. See Jurisprudence 
Judgment, faculty of, i. 575 

— private, iii. 448, 467 ; iv. 320 

— of Priesthood, ii. 269-272; 

iii. 200; iv. 65, 115,353 

— of the Dead. See Dead 
Julian, the Emperor, i. 82 ; iii. 391 ; 

iv. 351, 656 
Jurisprudence, Eoman, iii. 330 
_ Modern, iii. 445, 500 ; iv. 370, 407. 

See Legists 
Jussieu, i. 529 ; iii. 507 
Justinian, the Emperor, iii. 311 
■ Juvenal, iv. 483 

KANT, reiferred to, i. 356, 575 ; 
ii 29, 363; iii. 15, 261, 459; 
iv. 156 
— estimate of, iii. 503, 519 ; iv. 603 

Eebla, the, iv. 139 

LAW 

Kempis, Thomas a, i. 177; 

iii. 371, 378, 460, 485 ; iv. 352, 486- 
Kepler, referred to, i. 386, 399, 400, 

406, 415, 572 

— estimate of, iii. 274, 276, 479-481, 
605; iv. 158, 189 

Knights, Eoman, iii. 310 

— Mediaeval, i. 206-208, 211 ; ii. 170 ; 

iii. 394, 407 

— Future, iv. 133, 293, 416 
Koran, iv. 485. See Mahometan 

LABOUR, ii. 122-145, 229 ; 
iii. 49, 376, 490 ; iv. 282. (See- 
Industry 
Lafontaine, i. 251 ; iv. 483 
Lagrange, referred to,i. 382, 386,399,401 

— estimate of, i. 440, 442 ; iii. 499 ; 

iv. 181, 350, 484 
Lamarck, referred to, i. 458, 460,' 462,, 
499, 526 

— estimate of, i. 537 ; iii. 528 ; 

iv. 484 
Lambert, Madame de, iv. 485 
Lamennais, iv. 624, 643 
Language, organ of, i. 513, 678, 583 ; 
ii. 124, 18^ 

— nature of, ii. 182-190. See Logio- 

— analysis of, ii. 190-198 

— of animals, ii. 188-190 

— of action, ii. 187 

— of •gesture, ii. 192; iii. 109, 188 

— oral, ii. 193; iii. 109 

— written, ii. 197 ;. iii. Ill, 187, 220 

— its relations to belief, ii. 183, 313 
religion, ii. 183, 2U, 219, 220 ; 

iv. 66 
property, ii. 213 

— development of, ii. 218-220, 313 ;■ 

iii. 109-114, 187 

— future of, ii. 218, 382 ; iv. 419 

— universal, ii. 220, 382 ; 

iv. 66, 85, 230, 419 
Languages, study of, i. 142, 146 ; 

iv. 230, 236, 383 

— Western, i. 678 ; iv. 66, 230, 374 
Laura, i. 192 

Lavoisier, i. 441, 453 ; iii. 506 ; 

iv. 484 
Law, universality of, i. 345; ii. 27-41 
iii. 12, 459 ; iv. 154 

— of Nature, i. 19, 357; 

ii. 25-35, 363 ; iv. 160 

— of three stages, i. 25. 606 ; 

iii. 23-33 ; iv. 157, 547' 

— of activity, i. 27, 507 ; iii. 44-55 ; 

iv. 167 

— of Classification, i. 26, 606 ; 

ii. 233, 265, 271 ; iii. 3 4-44; 
iv. 159, 548. &c Classification, 

— See Jurisprudence, Legists 

■668 

INDEX. 

LAW 

MAE 

Laws, fifteeD, of philosophy, 

iv. 15ft-160 

Leap-year, iv. 118, 137 
Lectures, i. 141, 402, 332; iv. 235 
Legends, Catholic, iii. 373, 401 
Legislation, i. 98; iv. 310, 342. See 

Executive, Parliament 
Legists, iii. 445, 456, 476, oOO ; 

iv. 370, 406, 542 
Leibnitz, i. 393; ii. 262, 296 ; 
iii. 16, 261 ; 
iv. 27, 156, 181, 266, 623 

— estimate of, iii. 482-483 
Leo IX., Pope, iii. 408 
Leonardo da Vinci, iv. 485 
Leonidas, iii. 232. See Salamis 
Lepanto, battle of, iii. 477 ; iv. 129 
Leroy, Georges, cited, 

i. 495, 506, 544, 554; ii. 188, 356 

estimate of, 

iii. 336, 499, 504, 529; iv. 486 
Levellers, the, iii. 495 
Liberty, i. 96 ; ii. 13 ; iii. 426 ; iv. 329. 

See Independence, Free 
^ of education, i. 96 ; iv. 227, 331 

— of speech, i. 97, 307 ; iv. 332 

— of testation, ii. 168, 330 ; 

iv. 291, 407 
Library, Positive, iv. 236, 351, 483 
Life, the term, j. 356, 586 ; ii. 276 ; 

iii. 73; iv. 193 

— theory of, i. 474-517, 694 

— and matter, i. 517-525 ; 

ii. 34, 276, 356 ; iii. 73, 191 ; 
iv. 194-201 

— after Death. See Immortality 
Linnseus, i. 458, 469 ; iii. 507 
Literary property, i. 133 ; iv. 340 
Literateurs, i. 95, 132, 150; 

iii. 510-514 

— future of, 

iv. 339, 407, 415, 429, 434, 469 
Local settlement, ii. 237. See Country, 

Environment 
Localisation, cerebral, 

i. 547, 569, 569, 585 ; iv. 207-213 
Logic, nature of, i. 361-368 ; 
ii. 200-203 

— of Feeling, i. 329, 365 ; ii. 78, 200 ; 

iii. 24-25, 70, 75, 81, 99-105 ; 
iv. 179 

— of Images, i. 366 ; ii. 82, 201 ; 

iii. 142, 368; iv. 50, 17S 

— of Signs, i. 365 ; ii. 89, 99, 201 ; 

iii. 368; iv. 50, 178 

— Positive, i. 366, 4J0, 576; 

ii. 90, 200, 373; iii. 19, 100 

scheme of, iv. 154-160 

Logic, of Mathematics, i. 375 ; 

iv. 176-184 

— of Astronomy, i. 404 ; iv. 185-188 

— of Physics, i. 432 ; iv. 190 

Logic of Chemistry, i. 432 ; iv. 191 

— of Biology, i. 525, 503 ; 

iv. 194, 201, 562 

— of Sociology, i. 325-330 ; 

ii. 1-6, 222, 353 ; iv. 201, 562 

— of Morals, ii. 354-368 ; 

iv. 201-206, 213 
Logicians, ii. 214; iii. 100 
Longevity, ii. 366 ; iv. 262 
Louis IX., iii. 410 

— XL, i. 212 ; iii. 455, 513 

— XIV., i. 55; iii. 488. 493, 612 ; 

iv. 603 

— XVI, iii. 512 ; iv. 399 

— XVni., iii. 512, 520 ; iv. 399 

— Philippe, iv. 333, 345, 364. See 
Orleanist 

— Napolfon. See Bonaparte 

Love, of God, i. 176, 182, 281 ; iii. 378 

— of Humanity, i. 281 ; iv. 40, 80-89 

— of Power, i. 664 ; ii. 245. See 
Ambition, Pride 

— of Praise, i. 564. See Vanity 

— universal, i. 566 ; iv. 40. fiee 
Benevolence 

Loyola, Ignatius, iii. 470. Sci: Jesuits 

Loyalty, i. 205 ; iii. 385 

Lucan, iv. 471, 483 

Luther, i. 217 ; iii. 465-466, 469 ; 

iv. 506, 529 
Luxury, ii. 327, 335 ; iv. 289 
Lycurgus, iii. 232 
Lyons, iii. 523 ; iv. 366 

MACHIAVELLI, iii. 4.57 
Machinery, iii. 376, 461, 491, 508 ; 
iv. 133, 134, 307. 312, 367. See 
Industry, Instruments, Inventions 
Madness. See Insanity 
Mahomet, ii. 93, 294 ; iii. 388, 397 ; 

iv. 101, 129, 441 
Mahometan system, ii. 93. 294 ; 

iii. 397, 477 ; iv. 129, 440, 463 
; — culture, iii. 404; iv. 441. See 
j Arabs 

— invasions, ii. 98; iii. 409. See 
I Crusades 

— countries, i. 315; ii. 98, 283 ; 

iv. 440-443 
I Maintenon, Madame de, iii. 403 
! Maistre. See De Maistre 

M.iladies, the term, ii. 350. See 
\ Pathology 
Malaisia, i. 315; iii. 114, 151; iv. 127 
MalLhus, i. 113 ; ii. 167 ; iv. 278, 641 
Manicheeism, ii. 88 ; iii. 365 
Manufactures, iii. 376. 461, 491, 508; 
iv. 71. 133, 296. 301, 307. See 
Industry, Jliiohmorv 
' Mauzoni, i. 245 ; iii. 527 ; iv. 483 
Marathon, iii. 232, 238 

INDEX. 

669 

MAK 

MON 

Mariolatry, iii. 409. See Virgin 
Mariotte, ii. 30 

Maritime supremacy, iii. 326, 509 
Marius, iii. 326 

Marriage, i. 188; ii. 157, 302. See 
Family 

— history of, ii. 86, 144, 303 ; 

iii. 118, 196, 227, 301, 381,469 

— typo of, ii. 161-174 ; 

iv. 112, 122, 262 

— civil, iv. 264 

— chaste, i. 193 ; iv. 279 

— mixed, iv. 354 

— sacrament of, iv. 112, 265 
Marseillaise, i. 279 

Master and Servant, ii. 169. See 

Domestic, Employed 
Mass, the, ii. 109; iii. 384, 387. See 

Eucharist 
Material progress, i. 86 ; 

ii. 123, 140, 147; iv. 314. See 
Activity 

— power, ii. 225 ; iv. 267, 303 

— wants, ii. 122, 140 
Materialism, i. 39, 370, 383 ; ii. 355 ; 

iii. 36 ; iv. 170-176 
Materials, iv. 314 
Maternal instinct, i. 562 
Maternity, i. 188 ; ii. 164 ; 

iv. 97, 261, 262, 266. See Mother 
Mathematics, i. 270, 373-403 ; 
ir. 176-184 

— history of, iii. 146-148, 247-254 

— Logic of, i. 375; iv. 176-184 

— training in, i. 525 ; iv. 177-181 
Mathematical illnstrations, ii. 386 ; 

iii. 60 ; iv. 177 
Matter, i. 355, 417, 421 ; ii. 34 ; 

iii. 123-129 ; iv. 158, 314. See 
Atomic, Cosmology, Inertia 
Maturity, sacrament of, iv. 113 
Mechanics, i. 378, 395-402 ; ii. 361 ; 
iv. 158 

— history of, 

iii. 148, 254, 268, 479-482 
Media, subjective, iv. 47, 163, 180, 191 
Mediaeval Art, i. 238, 280 ; 

iii. 372-374, 411 

— Science, i. 466 ; 

iii. 370-372, 404, 411, 436, 458; 
iv. 240 

— Morality, ii- 91 ; iii. 376-387. 
Sie Catholic, Feudalism 

.-Poetry, iii. 373-374, 395, 401,460 
Mediator, ii. 106; iii. 384. See Christ 
Medici, Cosmo Hei, iii. 462 
Medicine, modern, i. 459, 539 ; ii. 356 ; 
iii. 407, 528. See Pathology 

— Positive, iv. 66, 247, 371-374, 645 
MedibitioD, i. 579 ; ii. 210, 3]2 ; 

iii. 15-23 ; iv. 151-154, 566. See 
Contemplation 

Melancthon, iii. 466, 469 
Memory, i. 573-577; ii. 311; 

iii. 17 
Mendicancy, iv. 135, 307 
Mendicant monks, iii. 408, 430; 

iv. 136 
Merchants, iv. 71, 133, 369. See- 

Commerce 
Merit, principle of, iii. 217, 230, 388 

— order of, ii. 368 ; iii. 199 
Metamorphosis, iii. 138. 149, 180 
Metaphysical doctrines, i. 150, 421 ; 

ii. 83, 113; iv. 43, 564, 646 

history of, iii. 83, 127, 278, 280, 

411, 446,476,515,645 

— schools, i. 58-60 ; ii. 130; 

iv. 433-435 

— stage, iii. 30-33, 60-64 
Metempsychosis, iii. 367 
Meteorology, i. 30, 350 ; iii. 144 
Method. See Abstract, Comparative, 

Concrete, Deduction, Experiment, 
Induction, Logic 
Mexico, ii. 287 ; iii. 151 
Middle Ages. See Catholicism, Feudal- 
ism, Mediaeval 
Middle Class, iii. 309, 440, 462, 525 ; 

iv. 406, 504, 511 
Military Instinct, i. 562 ; 

iii. 46-55, 86-89 

— system, iii. 46-55, 89, 154, 168,. 
218-224, 294, 312, 376,455,520; 

iv. 500 
Militia, iv. 361 

Miltiades, iii. 232. See Marathon 
Milton, iii. 487 ; iv. 483 
Mimic instinct, ii. 191. See Gesture,. 

Language 
Mind. See Brain, Intellect, Logic 
Miracles, iii. 73, 366 
Modifiability, Cosmological, 

i. 23-25, 42, 355-358, 499 ; 

ii. 33, 141, 347 ; iv. 150, 313 

— Biological, i. 479-510 ; 

ii. 36, 350-351, 366 ; 
iv. 194, 198, 312 

— Human, ii. 350-382 ; iii. 1-63 

— law of, iv. 155. See Progress,, 
Variability 

Molecular theory, i. 421, 449 ; 

iii. 149, 255. See Matter 
Moli^re, i. 152, 181, 579 ; iii. 146, 486 ; 

iv. 371, 483 
Monarchy, European, i. 93 ; ii. 113 ; 
iii. 398, 454, 492, 525 ; iv. 528, 622 

— French, iii. 454, 488, 493, 495, 512, 
617, 525 

— British, iii. 448, 455, 475 ; iv. 428 
Monasticism, iii. 395, 408, 430, 469 ; 

iv. 136 
Money, ii. 132. See Coinage 
Monge, i. 392 ; iv. 616 

670 

INDEX. 

MON 

OBJ 

Monogamy, i. 190; ii. 86, 161 ; 

iii. 219, 396; iv. 112, 122, 263. Sec 

Marriage 
Monopolies, iii. 488; iv. 310. See 

Commercial system 
Monotheism, i. 320; ii. 89-112; 

iii. 33, 55, 353-364, 376, 415 

— history of, 

iii. 202, 278-289, 340-3S0 ; 
iv. 128 

— Mosaic, iii. 202-205 

— Aristotelian, ii. 100 ; 

iii. 361-364, 416 

— Pauline, iii. 34S-3SO, 416 

— Mahometan, iii. 397 ; iv. 440, 463 

— Socinian, iii. 464 
Montesquieu, ii. 368 ; iii. 499, S04 ; 

iv. 565, 568, 603 
Montgolfier, iv. 134 
Month, the, i. 275 ; iii. 185 ; iv. 117, 120 
.Moral Force, i. 169-172 ; 

ii. 172-181, 227-233 ; 
iv. 44, 54-58 

of women, i. 172 ; 

ii. 157, 171, 302; iv. 59-64 

— training, i. 79-82 ; ii. 68, 90, 173 ; 
iii. 378; iv. 42, 64-67, 229-240 

— progress, i. 85 ; ii. 23, 143, 317; 

iii. 55-58 

— unity, i. 73-87 ; ii. 13, 41-53, 317 ; 

iv. 17-20, 41-45 

— existence, ii. 300-308 
Morals, science of, ii. 356-358 ; 

iii. 40-42; iv. 6, 163, 203-218 

history of, iii. 82, 175, 194- 

201, 247, 287, 334-250, 376-387, 
415, 504, 529 
Moses, iii. 202-205, 344; 

iv. 128, 608. See Judaism 
Mother, the, i. 193; ii. 156, 164, 173 ; 

iv. 60, 96, 261-263 
Motion, laws of. See Mechanics 
Motto, of antiquity, ii. 265, 381 ; 

iii. 12, 175; iv. 11 

— of Chivalry, iii. 386 

— of revolution, i. 95, 304 ; iv. 343 

— of Positivism, i. 5, 267 ; ii. 57, 286 ; 
iv. 344, 366, 385, 400. See Formula 

— moral, i. 666 ; ii. 143, 243 ; iii. 211 ; 

iv. 44, 273 

— philosophical, i. 596 ; 

ii. 316, 376, 380 ; iii. 16 

— political, i. 83, 305 ; ii. 328 ; iv. 343 
Movement. See Mechanics, Progress 
Multiplication, arithmetical, 

iii. 146, 182 
Museum, of Alexandria, iii. 264-266 ; 

iv. 611 
Music, i. 235, 279 ; ii. 191-196 ; 
iv. 139, 384 

— history of, iii. 114, 190, 239, 374, 
508 

Mysticism, i. 419; ii. 186; iii. 21 
— history of, i. 366 ; iii. 145, 460 

\TAME, Family, iii. 304 

il — Personal, i. 277 ; iv. 99 

Nantes, edict of, iii. 492 

Napoleon. See Bonaparte 

Nation, the, ii. 242, 378 ; iv. 268. See 

Country, Patriotism 
Natural Philosophy, i. 355, 369, 594 ; 

ii. 352; iv. 166 
Nature, i. 16-27, 355, 369-372 ; 

ii.2S-41, 289,310-314; iii. 72-84. 

See Cosmology, World 
Navy, Western, i. 310 ; iv. 361 
Necessity, i. 332; ii. 27, 217, 3.50; 

iv. 169. S-.e Destiny, Law 
Negative Movement, i. 47-52, 216; 

ii. 112-114 ; iii. 32, 424-434. 44& 
Nephew, the term, iii. 212 
Nerva, iii. 333 
Netherlands. See Holland 
Xewton, referred to, i. 399, 400, 406 ; 
ii. 30 ; iv. 636 

— estimate of, i. 415 ; iii. 481, 505 ; 

iv. 168, 350, 607 
New Year's Day, i. 275; iv. 119. See 

Calendar 
Nicholas of Cusa, iii. 467 
Nomadism, ii. 237 ; iii. 95. 119-121 ; 

iv. 126. See Country 
Nominalism, iii. 32, 279, 412, 459 
Normal state, ii. 3G8. 377. See 

Anomalies, Type. V.iriation 
Norman Conquest, iii. 406, 455 
Notation, Decimal, iii. 181, 464 
Notes, language as, ii. 209 
Notre Dame, Church of, 

iv. 336, 337, 339. See Paris 
Novels, iii. 608 
Nudity, i. 615; iii. 117 
Numbers, theory of, i. 377 ; 

iii. 105-108. ISl, 247; iv. 177 

— sacred, iii. 107, 247 : iv. 89, 576 

— approximative, iv. 222. 269, 303 

— power of, ii. 225 ; iv. 73, 284, 305. 
See People 

Nursing Institutions, iv. 373 
Nutritive instinct, i. 494, 561 ; 
iv. 211, 250 

OBEDIENCE, 
ii. 227, 244, 324-330; 

iii. 164, 389 ; iv. 53. See Discipline 
Obisctive method, i. 354-368 ; ii. 80 ; 
iii. 15-22, 103 ; iv. 156. See 
Contemplation, Subjective 

— Synthesis, i. 470-472; ii. 71; 

iii. 253, 433, 483 ; iv. 156, 176 

— Life, ii. 233 ; iv. 32 

INDEX. 

671 

OBJ 

PEE 

Objective Generality, ii. 271 ; iii. 103 ; 
iv. 166. See Generality 

— basis of Positivism, i. 16 ; 

ii. 22-41 ; iv. 160-167 
Objects, i. 580 ; iv. 161, 164, 176 
Observation. See Contemplation 
Occidentality. See West 
Oceania, i. 310 ; ii. 88, 133 ; iv. 452 
Ochiltree, Edie, iv. 136. See 

Mendicancy 
Odyssey, iii. 237-238 ; iy. 483. See 

Homer 
(Edipus, iii. 226, 239; iv. 483 
Oken, i. 460 
Old Age, iii. 91, 169, 196, 199, 228, 

302 ; iv. 97, 114, 132, 262-264 
Omnipotence, i. 331 ; ii. 100; 

iii. 365, 376, 409 ; iv. 34 
One, the number, iii. 107 ; iv. 89 
-Ontology, i. 36; ii. 100; iii. 32, 181, 

278, 431. See Causality, Cause 
Opera, the, iii. 508 ; iv. 384 
-Optics, i. 423, 428 ; iv. 190 
Optimism, i. 43, 284; iii. 79-81, 136; 

iv. 33-35 
Oracles, Greek, ii. 352 ; iii. 225 
Oral language, ii. 193 ; iii. 109 

— prayer, iv. 102 

— instruction, iv. 232-239 
Oratory, ii. 68 ; iv. 259. See Prayer 
Order, the term, ii. 1-6, 22-41, 

384-387 

— Cosmological, i. 16-25, 337, 406- 
410 ; ii. 352 ; iv. 160 

— Social, i. 56-58, 83 ; 

ii. 2, 244, 266, 290, 380 ; iv. 8 

— Universal, ii. 346-350 ; 

iv. 40, 75, 218, 310-314 
Orestes, iii. 227 ; iv. 69 
Organ, biological, i. 517-522, 533, 
586-591 ; ii. 240 ; iv. 207 

— social, i. 113, 126; 

ii. 223, 240, 264 
Organic Chemistry, i. 444 
Organisation. See Social 
Organism, i. 355-360, 517-522; 

iv. 194 

— Human, i. 267-270, 284, 291. See 
Humanity 

— Social, ii. 221-275 

— Individual, ii. 239-242 
Origen, iii. 360 

Orleanist Monarchy, i. 64, 94, 305 ; 

iii. 525. See Louis Philippe 
Ostracism, iii. 229 
Otho, Emperor, iii. 401 
Ovid, iv. 483 
Ox, the, iv. 126, 312 

)AGE, serving, ii. 170 ; iii. 407; 
iv. 124 

Painters, profession of, i. 250 ; 

iv. 66, 139, 224 
Painting, i. 236 ; ii. 192 

— history of, iii. 113, 190, 240, 487 
Paix, Eue de la, iv. 345 
Pamphlets, iv. 333 

Pantheism, i. 367, 461 ; ii. 186; 

iii. 75 ; iv. 38, 337 
Papacy, the, iii. 391, 398, 453, 466 ; 

iv. 226, 541 
Paris, history of, ii. 105 ; 

iii. 403, 476, 512, 523 

— future of, iv. 130, 224, 270, 323, 
345, 403, 437, 439 

— workmen of, i. 105, 149, 151 ; 

iii. 523 
Parliamentary system, i. 98, 162 ; 
iv. 342 

history of, iii. 475, 494, 612, 520, 

625 
Pascal, i. 270, 462 ; ii. 355 ; 

iv. 27, 181, 485 
Past, the, i. 66-71, 81, 274; 

ii. 70-74, 293-296, 378-382 ; 
iii. 1-7 ; iv. 8-16, 563-688 
Paternal relation, i. 76; ii. ,159, 303 ; 

iv. 123 
Pathology, i. 626 ; ii. 350, 360 ; iii. 629 ; 
iv. 66, 198, 247, 371-383, 649 
Patricians, class of, i. 127, 297; ii. 328, 
335-340; iv. 57, 71, 258, 269 

— history of, iii. 192, 198, 201, 217, 
223, 229, 309, 316, 406, 439, 455, 
475 ^ 

Patriotism, the term, ii. 238 ; iv. 262, 
267, 402. See City, Country 

— ii. 84, 179, 237, 301, 304; 
iv. 271, 287, 402 

— history of, iii. 119-122, 158, 166 
230, 237, 293, 305 

Patroness, the term, iv. 97 

Paul, Saint, i. 81, 288 ; ii. 94, 100 

estimate of, iii. 345, 362-364 ; 

iv. 120, 129, 441 
Pavia, battle of, iii. 475 
Peace, system of, i. 30fi; ii. 116; iii. 
46-55, 422, 489, 521 ; iv. 266, 286 
Pedantocracy, i. 160, 224 ; ii. 262, 342 ; 

iii. 173, 176, 514, 624 
Penates, the, iii. 216 ; iv. 101 
Pensioners, iv. 66, 224, 339 
People, the, i. 102-112, 152-163 ; 
ii. 107, 318 ; iii. 462, 523 ; 
iv. 72, 134-136, 619 

Function of, i. 172 ; 

ii. 226, 292, 337 ; iv. 57, 306 

sovereignty of, i. 106-110 ; 

iii. 448, 468 ; iv. 284, 531 
Pepin, King, iii. 399 
Percipient, i. 366; ii. 12; iii. 16; iv. 
166. See Contemplation, Environ- 
ment 

672 

INDEX. 

PEE 

PBI 

Perfection of man, i. 4-5, 316 ; 

ii. 10, 317, 380. See Humanity 
Permanence of species, i. 179, 493; 

iii. 103, 138, 149 ; iv. 194 
Perraults, the, iv. 340 
Perseverance, i. Sas, 596 ; ii. 343 ; 

iv. 64 
Persia, ancient, iii. 230-232 

— modern, i. 315 ; iv. 410, 443 
Persistence, law of, i. 400; iv. 158 
Personal instincts, i. 559-564 ; 

ii. 123-129 ; iv. 247-253 

— morality, i. 75-78 ; ii. 85 ; iii. 91, 
194, 227, 312, 356, 378, 384, 469 

— responsibility, i. 127 ; 

ii. 223, 326-331 ; iv. 63-75 

— life, i. 558; ii. 8-17, 371; 

iv. 30, 34. See Individual 

Personality, ii. 128, 315, 371. See 
Individuals 

Perturbations, ii. 350, 380. See Law, 
Order, Variation 

Peru, ii. 287 ; iii. 151 ; iv. 425, 431 

Peter, Saint, i. 228 

Peterloo, iii. 523 

Petrarch, i. 192, 251 ; iii. 460 ; iv. 483 

Pharsalia, iii. 329 

Phenomena. See Contemplation, Cos- 
mology, Percipient 

Phidias, iii. 236 ; iv. 127 

Philip II., iii. 477 ; iv. 556 

Philippi, iii. 329 

Philology, school of, i. 145 ; iv. 383 

Philopoemen, iii. 232 

Philosophers, i. 60, 163, 260 ; 

ii. 287-291 ; iv. 63-67 

Philosophy, i. 1-36 ; ii. 306-318 ; 
iv. 142-218. See Absolute, Posi- 
tive, Relative, Synthesis 

— -of Hi story. See Vol. III. 

Phlogiston,!. 441, 446 

Phrenology, i. 545-548, 589. See 
Localisation 

Physical progress, i. 85, 588-498, 
605-507; iv. 311-313. See Material 

Physicians, ii. 356. See Medicine, 
Pathology 

Physics, i. 417-430 ; ii. 361 ; iv. 190 

Physiology, i. 622, 532-536. See 
Biology 

Piety, the term, iv. 83, 101 

Pindar, iii. 236; iv. 483 

Pinel, iv. 645 

Placards, iv. 332 

Planets, i. 411 ; iv. 187 

— history of study, iii. 147, 184, 271, 
479, 505 

Plants. Sea Vegetal 
Plato referred to, i. 27, 223 ; iii. 266 ; 
iv. 266 

— estimate of, i. 125 ; iii. 247. 289 ; 

iv. 612 

Plutarch, iv. 485 

Poetry, i. 227, 234 ; iv. 45, 82 

— origin of, ii. 123, 195; iii. 111-113- 

— of the people, i. 251 

— of women, i. 250 

— of the Future, i. 253 ; 

iv. 47, 66, 139, 420 
Poets, i. 247; ii. 216; iv. 240 

— ancient, iii. 234-239, 332 

— modern, iii. 460, 484-487, 508 
Poland, i. 67, 315 ; iv. 443 
Police, iii. 466 ; iv. 303, 361, 415 
Political philosophy, ii. 242-264 ; 

iii. 527-631 ; iv. 497, SSa 
— ■ economy. See Economy 

— mottoes, i. 83, 95, 304 ; 

iv. 343-344 
Polity, the term, i. 1 ; ii. 347 ; iii. 2 
Polybius, iii. 335 
Polygamy, iii. 91, 118, 196, 219 
Polytechnic School, i. 144 ; 

iv. 369, 616 
Polytheism, ii. 80-89 ; iii. 132-139; 

iv. 127 
Popes. See Papacy 
Population, ii. 167, 366 ; iv. 222, 277 
Portugal, i. 67, 309 ; iv. 425 
Positive, the term, i. 46 ; ii. 218 ; 
iv. 473 

— Method. See Logic 
Positivism, the term, i. 1-6 ; iv. 403 
Positivist, the term, i. 123 ; iv. 473 
Positivity, iii. 1, 71 ; iv. 40 

Post, the, iv. 415 
Posterity, ii. 296 ; iii. 158 ; 

iv. 99, 285. See Future 
Power. See External, Intellect, Mate- 
rial, Moral, Priesthood, Spiritual 
Practice and Theory, ii. 258 ; 

iv. 56, 152, 637. See Theory 
Practical Life. See Active 
Prayer, the term, ii. 68 ; iv. 101 

— nature of, i. 208, 283 ; ii. 67, 208 ; 

iii. 67, 372, 378 

— Positivist, i. 283 ; 

iv. 101-107, 475, 481 
Precession of Equinoxes, iii. 272 
Predestination, ii. 281 ; iii. 376 
Present, the, ii. 296, 381 ; iv. 285 
Presentation, sacrament of, iv. 110 
Press, the, iv. 332, 415. See Journal- 
ism, Printing 
Prevision, i. 444 ; ii, 141, 363 ; 

ir. 2. 17. 19, 23, 216, 560. 576 
Pride, i. 564 ; ii. 316, 342 ; iii. 380 ; 

iv. 252, 290 
Priesthood, i. 112, 260 ; ii. 266-272; 
iv. 8. Sec Spiritual 

— Theocratic, ii. 79 ; iii. 172-178 

— Catholic, ii. 93 ; iii. 376-385 

— Modern, ii. 319 ; iv. 335-337 

— Positivist, iv. 63-67, 222-228 

INDEX. 

673 

PEI 

REV 

Primary instruction, i. 139; iv. 338. 

See Education 
Primogeniture, ii. 168, 330 ; iii. 406 
Printing, invention of, iii. 463 ; 

iv. 134, 505 
Problem of Human Nature, i. 592 ; 
' ii. 122, 146 ; iv. 49, 142 

Prodigality, iv. 289 
Production, ii. 130 ; 

iv. 52, 282-288, 306-314 
Products, iv. 314 

Progress, i. 47-56 ; ii. 35, 147 ; iii. 1-8. 
See Animals, Intellect, Material, 
Moral, Physical 

— development of order, i. 83 ; 

ii. 2, 360 ; iii. 3 ; iv. 1-9 

— la-ws of social, iii. 22-64 ; 

iv. 157-159, 314, 555, 661 
Proletariate. See People 
Propensities, i. 549. See Feelings, 
Instincts 
— Property, origin of, i. 123, 130 ; 

ii. 213, 329 ; iii. 86, 201 

— moral effect of, ii. 236, 238, 326- 
340 ; iii. 201 ; iv. 52-54 

— duties of, i. 125; ii. 213, 230; iv. 
285-293. See Capital, Industry 

— compared with Language, ii. 213 

— tribal, ii. 236 ; iii. 121 

— in the soil, ii. 236 ; iii. 121 ; 

iv. 295-296 

— literary, i. 133; iv. 340 

— future of, i. 123-132 ; 

iv. 411-415 
Prose, origin of, i. 233 ; ii. 196 ; 
iii. Ill 
Protestantism, i. 216 ; 

iii. 450, 464-475, 485 ; iv. 337 
Providence, Divine, i. 320; ii. 77-79; 
iii. 340, 376 

— Human, i. 317-321; ii. 215, 292, 
376-382 ; iv. 35, 311-314 

analysis of, iv. 131-134 

Provisions, ii. 332 ; iv. 294, 298 
Provisional institutions, i. 87, 160, 306; 
iv. 347, 361, 416 
Prudence, i. 585 ; ii. 343 ; iii. 66 ; 

iv. 64 
Psalm XIX., iv. 188 
Psychology, ii. 310; iii. 39; iv. 645- 

652. See Brain, Intellect, Logic 
Psychologists, i. 68, 573 ; iv. 646 
Ptolemy, iii. 265-274 
Public Opinion, i. 80, 110-120; iv. 

148, 292, 305 

— rewards, ii. 341 ; iv. 69, 408 
Publicity, i. Ill ; iv. 273 
Punishment, Theological, iii. 165, 383. 

See Damnation 

— Capital, ii. 341 ; iv. 66, 199, 252 
Purgatory, iii. 388 
Purity, i. 207 ; iii. 379, 384 ; iv. 247 

VOL. IV. X X 

Pythagoras, ii. 49, 298 ; 

iii. 182, 252, 437 ; 
— estimate of, iii. 281-284; 

iv. 576 
iv. 128 

QUAKEES, iv. 266 
Quality, ii. 363 
Quantity, ii. 363 
Quixote, Don, iii. 465, 
See Cervantes 

486 ; iv. 483, 

EACE, influence of, ii. 377-378 ; 
iv. 447-454. See Black, White, 
Yellow 
Eacine, i. 232 ; iv. 483 
Eeaction, law of, ii. 367-371 ; iv. 168 

— against Eevolution, i. 53 ; 
iii. 516-520 

Eeading, iv. 236. See Library 
Realism in philosophy, 

iii. 32, 279, 412, 459 

— in art, i. 231 
Eeason, goddess of, iii. 615 
Eebellion, English, iii. 448. See 

Cromwell 
Eedemption, doctrine of, iii. 387 
Eeflection. See Meditation 
Eeformation, the, 

iii. 426, 450, 464-475 ; 
iv. 503, 629. See Protestantism 
Eelative philosophy, i. 48, 367; 

ii. 310-315 ; iii. 15-23 
Eelativity, i. 409, 456 ; iv. 186 

— growth of, iii. 422, 448, 482, 603, 629 
EeUgion, the term, ii. 7-9 

— analysis of, ii. 8-20 

— history of, Ii. 70-119 

— of Hximanity, i. 257-273 ; 
ii. 53-70 ; iv. 24-37 

— compared with Language, 
ii. 133, 219. See. 

— correlations of, i. 316-321 
Eenovation, i. 476 ; iv. 194 
Eeprobatiou, theological, ii. 281 ; iii. 388 

— positivist, i. 82 ; iv. 351 
Eeproduction, physical, i. 476-481 ; 

iv. 194, 251, 277-280 
Eepublic, i. 80-99 ; iv. 267-314 

— of the "West, i. 309 ; iv. 309. See 
West 

Eepubliean, the term, i. 122 
Eepublicanism, i. 55, 93, 153-163. 

See People 
Retirement, sacrament of, iv. 114 
Eetrogression, iii. 60-64 ; iv. 566 
Eevelation, ii. 92, 102 ; 

iii. 343, 360, 367 
Eevolution, the term, ii. 350, 374 

— of the West, ii. 112-116, 374 ; 
iii. 424-434; iv. 502 

— French, i. 47-55 ; iii. 509-531 

674 

BEV 

Eevolutionary government, i, 307 ; 

iv. 341-345 

— schools, i. 58 ; ii. 375 ; 
iii. 510, 524; iv. 318-323 

Eewards, theological, iii. 1G5, 372, 382. 
See Salvation 

— public, ii. 341 ; iv. 69, 408 
Ehyme, origin of, iii. 374 
Eioh, duties of, i. 123, 302; 

ii. 230, 319, 331, 335 ; iv. 285-293 

— the selfish, ii. 319, 327, 335 ; 

iv. 52, 289 
Richelieu, iii. 493, 513 ; iv. 485, 503 
Eights, doctrine of, i. 52, 289 ; ii. 91 ; 
iii. 515 

— of women, i. 196 ; ii. 163 ; iv. 56-61 
Bitter, i. 434 

Eobertson, i. 174 ; iii. 505 ; iv. 485 
Eobespierre, i. 53, 59, 149, 305 ; iii. 514 
Eobin, Charles, i. 538 
Eome, city, ii. 105 ; 

iii. 316-323, 391, 403; iv. 323 

— history of, ii. 84-86 ; 

iii. 316-350 

— place of, iii. 291-316 

— Modern. See Catholicism, Papacy 
Eousseau, i. 59 ; iii. 497, 499, 511, 514; 

iv. 553 
Eousseauists, i. 59 ; iii. 511 
Eussia, i. 315 ; iii. 522 ; iv. 410, 443 

SACEAMENTS, Catholic. See Eu- 
charist, Mass 

— Tositivist, iv. 109-116 
Sacred Numbers, Signs, &e. See 

Numbers, Signs, &c. 
Saints. See sub iwmm. 

— worship of, iii. 384, 388, 400 
Salamis, ii. 82 ; iii. 231 ; iv. 128, 129 
Salon, the, i. 185 ; iv. 275-277 
Salvation, personal, i. 281, 287 ; 

iii. 372, 382 
Sanction, Moral, ii. 248. See Public 

Opinion 
Savants, i. 168, 270, 341, 386 ; ii. 350; 

iii. 607; iv.321, 337-340,647,614 
Savings-banks, i. 1 56 
Saxons, the, iii. 402 
Say, J. B., iv. 633 
Scale of Being, i. 517, 629; iv. 193. 

See Biology, Biotaxy 

— of Thought, iv. 160-165 

— of the Sciences. See Classification 
Scepticism, i. 38, 239 ; iii. 426 ; 

iv. 385, 636 
School system, i. 141 ; iii. 472 ; iv. 337 

— Positive, i. 141; iv. 223, 368, 373. 
See Education 

Schwann, i. 525 
Science, i. 16-26, 326-343 ; 
iv. 142-154 

INDEX. 

SOC 
Science, Classification of. See Classifi- 
cation 

— synthesis of. See .Synthesis 

— sacredness of, ii. 22-33 ; iv. 48, 149 

— degeneration of, i: 340, 375, 386, 460; 
iv. 173. &« Savants 

Scipio, ii. 386 ; iii. 323, 330; iv. 128 
Scott, Walter, i. 245 ; iii. 235, 527 ; 

iv. 136, 484 
Sculpture, i. 236; ii. 197; iv. 138-140 

— history of, iii. 113, 190, 240, 487 
Secondary education, i. 140 ; iv. 230 
.'(egond. Dr., i. 538 ; iv. 484 
Self-love, i. 73, 283; ii. 178 
Selfishness. See Egoism 
Self-preservation, i. 494, 561 ; ii. 128 ; 

iv. 299 
Senate, Roman, iii. 326 
Sensation, i. 484, 544 ; ii. 185, 311 ; 

iii. 15 ; iv. 207-212 
Senses, the eight, iv. 207 
Sensibility, animal, i. 484 ; iv. 193, 197 
Separation of the Powers, 

i. 69, 293-304; ii. 252-264, 
283-291 ; iv. 618-644 

history of, ii. 92, 110 ; 

iii. 342, 356, 370, 387 
Serfage, i. 110; ii. 95 

— history of, ii. 107 ; 
iii. 350, 395, 413 

Servant, ii. 169, 170; iv. 124 

Service, iii. 407 ; iv. 257 

Seven, the Number, iii. 108 ; iv. 117 

Seville, iii. 404 

Sex, i. 478, 494, 562 ; iv. 66, 210 

Sexual instinct, i. 189 ; ii. 168 ; 

iv. 59, 211, 251 

history of, 

iii. 91, 118, 196, 227, 301, 379, 469 
Shakespeare, iii. 486 ; iv, 483 
Sidereal Astronomy. See Astronomy 
Sign, the term, ii. 185 

— nature of, i. 682 ; ii. 185-193, 201 ; 
iv. 50, 153 

— sacred, iv. 89 

— Logic of. See Logic 
Simultaneous action, law of, i. 400 ; 

iv. 158 
Sister, the, ii. 166 ; iv. 98 
Slavery, ii. 81, 169 ; iii. 119 

— ancient, iii. 155, 217, 303 

— mediaeval, iii. 340, 360, 395, 414 

— modern, iii. 491 ; iv. 453 
Sleep, i. 490, 588 ; iv. 212 
Smith, Adam, iv. 486, 591, 632 
Sobriety, i. 77; iii. 196; iv. 250, 466. 

Sec Nutritive Instinct 
Sociability, i. 12,29, 74, 340; ii. 315; 

iii. 159; iv. 17-24 
Social instincts, i. 564-570 ; 
ii. 313-318 

— life, i. 496, 508-516 

INDEX. 

675 

soc 

BYM 

Social life in animals, i. 495, 501, 508, 
564; ii. 14; iv. 311 

— existence, ii. 276-325; iv. 55 

— forces, ii. 223-235, 368 

— organisation, ii.. 289-300, 336- 

346 ; iv. 219-314, 627, 539 

— organism, ii. 221-275 ; iv. 8-75 

— nature of force, ii. 313-317, 332 
wealth, ii. 327-330 

— sympathy. See Sociability 

— philosophy. See Sociology 

— statics. See Statics 

■ — variations. iScc Variations 

— progress. See Progress 

— classification. See Classification 
Socialism, i. 122; ii. 319,327; iii. 522; 

iv. 284 
Socinus, iii. 465. See Deism 
Sociocracy, i. 327, 500, 608 ; 

ii. 104, 344; iv. 58 
Sociolatry, i. 274, 327 ; iv. 84-141 

— scheme of, iv. 141 
Sociology, the term, i. 326, 383 

— i. 27, 326, 505; ii. 353 ; iii. 8-15 ; 
iv. 175, 201, 558, 605 

— history of, iii. 259, 428, 483, 503, 
527, 530 ; iv. 563, 584 

Socrates, iii. 288 

Solar system, i. 411 ; ii. 26 ; iii. 505 ; 
iv. 186 
Solidarity, i. 105, 293 ; ii. 63, 293, 329 ; 

iii. 215-216 ; iv. 27-31 
Solomon, iv. 128 
Sophocles, iii. 239 ; iv. 483 
Soul, i. 475, 655, 590-595 ; ii. 356; 

iv. 93-95. See Brain 
Sovereignty of the People. See People 
Space, i. 397 ; iv. 47 
Spain, ancient, iii. 320, 402 

— modern, i. 67 ; iii. 449, 465, 486 

— future, i. 309, 313 ; 

iv. 225, 422-427 
Spallanzani, iv. 645 
Sparta, iii. 232 
Specialism, i. 270, 339, 386 ; 

ii. 350, 356 ; iv. 170-176, 337 

— progress of, i. 375, 457-463 ; 

iii. 484, 607 
Species, i. 479; iii. 103, 138. See 

Permanence 
Speech, i. 233, 514 ; ii. 192-197 ; 

iii. 109 ; iv. 229. See Language 
Spinal cord, iv. 209 
Spiritual power, i. 260 ; 

ii. 252-262 ; 289-300 ; 
iv. 63-67, 620 

need of, i. 60, 293 ; iv. 41, 623 

history of, iii. 91, 95, 165-178, 

342-350, 360-370, 453 ; iv. 522 
Spiritualism, i. 41, 281 ; ii. 29 ; 

iii. 433 ; iv. 464 
Sponsors, iv. 110 

Spurzheim, i. 563, 567, 582, 585, 591 ; 

iv. 648 
Squire, ii. 170. See Knight, Page 
Stael, Madame de, iv. 44, 659 
Stag, the, i. 495 

Stages of intellectual progress, i. 25, 
505; iii. 23-33; 

iv. 157, 547, 572, 590 

— of Active Progress, i. 27, 507 ; 

iii. 44-55 ; 
iv. 167, 572 

— of Moral Progress, ii. 273-275 ; 

iii. 55-58 ; 
iv. 157 
Stahl, i. 441, 459 
State, the, ii. 241, 277-280 

iv. 126, 268. See City 

history of, iii. 158, 166, 216, 292, 

299, 306, 403, 443 
Statics, the term, i. 396 ; 

— Social, ii. 1-6, 120, 276 ; 

iv. 1 
Stipends, public, ii. 333 ; iv. 303 
Stoics, iii. 288-289, 341, 360 
Strikes, i. 133; iv. 291, 365 
Structure, the term, i. 623; ii. 277. See 

Activity, Function 
Style, i. 228-235; ii. 210; iv. 103 
Subjective Principle, i. 16, 258 ; 

ii. 11-17, 41-53 ; iv. 18 

— Method, i. 29, 339, 361 ; iv. 17, 149 

— Synthesis, i. 265, 364 ; 

ii. 58-66, 316-318 

iv. 142-154, 161-176 

— Life, i. 276-278; 

ii. 54, 103, 294-300; 
iii. 152, 372; iv. 89-95. See 
Immortality 

— and objective, i. 355-368 ; 

iv. 200-206 

— beings, iv. 47, 153 

of theology, iii. 136-142, 365, 

370, 400 

— media, iv. 153 

— generality, ii. 271 ; iv. 156, 181 
Subjectivity, i. 361 ; iii. 20, 103 ; 

iv. 17-21 
Submission, i. 21, 335, 343 ; 

ii. 24-28, 381; iv. 34. 

See Obedience, Order. 
Suffi-age, ii. 375 ; iv. 342. See Election 
Suicide, iii. 381; iv. 115, 262 
Supreme Being. See Humanity 
Surgeons, ii. 355 ; iv. 66. See Medicine, 

Pathology, Veterinary 
Sweden, i. 67, 309 ; iv. 432 
Sympathy, instincts of, i. 73-80, 564- 

570; ii. 14-17 _; iv. 41-45 

— social, i. 74 ; ii. 46, 315 ; iv. 49. 
See Benevolence 

— training of, i. 79 ; ii. 300-306 ; 

iv. 81, 254, 267 

676 

INDEX. 

STM 

TEA 

Sympathy, intellectual value of, i. 12, 
328, 365-368; ii. 42, 67, 173, 314; 
jii. 79, 100; iv. 149. See Logic of 
Feeling 
Synergy, i. 688; ii. 66, 318, 380; 

iv. 35, 50-54 
Synthesis, nature of, i. 6, 257, 326 ; 

ii. a-11. See 
Eeligion 

— Positive, i. 25-36 ; 

ii. 58-70, 289-300; 
iv. 1-24 

— Subjective, i. 361. See Subjective 

— Objective, i. 359. See Objective 

— Absolute, i- 331. See Absolute 

— Relative, i. 409 ; iv. 455-459. 
See Eelativity 

— of Science, i. 266, 343-345 

— of concrete sciences, i. 349; iv. 151. 
See Concrete 

— of human nature, i. 665, 585, 592. 
See Problem 

— Primitive, ii. 74-76 ; iii. 72-81 ; 

iv. 38-41 

— Theological, i. 7, 13 ; ii. 76-80 ; 

iii. 24-3 O 

— Catholic, i. 68 ; ii. 89-94 ; 

iii. 353-358 

— Metaphysical, iii. 434-446, 459 ; 

iv. 14, 129, 433, 464 

— Partial, iii. 424, 458, 483 ; 

iv. 10-14, 463 
System, the term, i. 23; ii. 241. See 
Synthesis 

TABLE of Cerebral Functions, i. 596 
Sociolatry, iv. 141 

the Calendar, iv. 348 

— Library, iv. 483 

Taboo, iii. 201 

Tacitus, iii. 335, 347 ; iv. 485 
Tartary, i. 315 ; iv. 444 
Tasso, iii. 485; iv. 483 
Taverns, i. 156; iv. 277 
Taxation, i. 123 ; iii. 456 ; 

iv. 301-304 
Taxonomy, i. 483, 529; iv. 178, 193. 

See Classification 
Telegraph, the, iv. 415 
Temperance. See Continence, Sobriety 
Templars, Knights, iii. 419, 465 
Temples of Humanity, iv. 138, 223 
Temporal Power, i. 297 ; 

ii. 246-251, 277; 
iv. 267-275 

and Spiritual, ii. 257-267. See 

Separation, Spiritual 

genesis of, ii. 242-249 

of the Popes, iii. 399, 453 ; 

iv. 419 
Tenancy, ii. 237, 334 ; iii. 122 ; iv. 295 

Tenderness, i. 182, 205, 208 ; 

ii. 97, 106, 172; iii. 381; 
iv. 247 
Ternary Series, i. 467 ; ii. 353 ; 

iii. 42, 52, 107; iv. 157 
Testamentary Liberty, ii. 168, 330; 
iv. 291, 407 
Thales referred to, i. 465, 471 ; 

ii. 49, 298; iii. 437; 
iv. 181 

— Estimate of, iii. 248-251, 281 ; 

iv. 128 
Theatre, the, i. 244; iii. 236, 486, 508; 

iv. 376, 384 
Theism, i. 321; iii. 61, 75; iv. 337. 
See Deism, God, Theology 

— History of, iii. 341, 359, 465, 496 
Themistocles, iii. 230-232; iv. 128. 

See Salamis 
Theocracy, meaning of, ii. 81 ; 

iii. 131, 165 

— Histoiy of, ii. 87, 252, 293 ; 

iii. 170-178. 2O2-210 

— Eelation to Positivism, iv, 11, 127, 
607 

Theocritus, iv. 483 
Theodoric, iii. 394 
Theodosius, iii. 391 ; iv. 326 
Theological stage, i. 26; iii. 24-30 

— synthesis, i. 7, 320 ; ii. 87 

iii. 132-165 ; iv. 12-15 

compared Tvith Positivism, 

iv. 37-40, 127-130 
Theologism, the term, ii. 76-80 ; 

iii, 30-33, 68-84 ; iv. 37 
Theology, i. 13. 320 ; ii. 70-80 ; 
iv. 20, 463. Sie God 

— history of. See God, idea of 
Theory and Practice, ii. 258 ; 

iii. 1-4, 45, 174 ; iv. 152, 537. See 

Generality 
Theresa, Saint, iii. 461 
Thermology, i. 424, 428. Sec Heat 
Thermopylse, iii. 232. See Salamis 
Thought. See Brain. Intellect, Logic 
Three, the number, iii. 107 ; iv. 89 

— stages. See Stages 

— squares, law of, iii. 252 
Thrift, i. 156; ii. 134-146; 

iv. 2R9-296 
Tbucydides, iii. 262 ; iv. 485 
Thursday, Festival of, iv. 124, 133 
Tiberius, iii. 333 
TibuUus, iv. 483 
Tides, theory of, i. 415 ; iii. 480-483 

— use of, iv. 313 

Tissue, biological, i. 523-525 ; 

ii. 234, 240 ; iv. 193. See Cellular 
Town, and Country, ii. 366 ; iii. 439 ; 
iv. 295, 297, 413 
Trade-Unions, i. 134 ; iii. 523 ; 

iv. 201, 365 

INDEX. 

677 

TEA 

Trajan, ii. 386 ; iii. 333, 347, 396 ; 

IT. 128 
Transcendental Analysis, i. 392, 482 
Transfiguration of Nature, ii. 311 ; 
iii. 15-20 ; iv. 151, 164. See Sub- 
jective Synthesis 
Transformation, Sacrament of, iv. 114 
Transmission of Wealtli, i. 132 ; 

ii. 132, 331 ; iv. 114, 291, 407. See 
Property, and Testamentary 
Transmutation of Metals, iii. 458 ; 

iv. 240 
Travelling of Apprentices, i. 143 ; 
iv. 236 

Priests, iv. 236 

Tribal property, ii. 236 ; iii. 121 
Trigonometry, i. 389 ; iii. 271, 458 
Trinity, the, iii. 384, 387 ; iv. 446 
Triumvirate, the future, 

iv. 301, 388-405 
Troubadours, i. 187, 238 ; ii. 125 ; 

iii. 374, 395 
Tudor dynasty, iii. 474 
Turgot, iii. 499-502 ; iv. 399 
Turkey, i. 315 ; iv. 410, 442 
Turks, the, iii. 477 
Two, the number, iii. 107 ; iv. 89 
Type, the complete, ii. 282-289, 377 ; 

iv. 10, 29 
• — use of, ii. 364, 385 ; 

iv. 28, 193, 201 

UGOLINO, i. 561 
Ulysses, iii. 226 
United States, i. 67, 313 ; iii. 502 ; 

iv. 403, 430, 452 
Unity, ii. 11-17, 24-34. See Humanity, 
Synthesis 

— the end, i. 257, 316-321 ; 

ii. 376-382; iii. 8; iv. 309-314 
Universal Education, i. 137 ; iii. 173 ; 
iv. 229 

— Language, ii. 220, 382 ; 

iv. 66, 85, 230, 419 

— Eeligion, i. 313-321 ; iv. 455-459 
Universe, the term, i. 355, 409 ; 

iii. 483 ; iv. 187 
[Jniversities, rise of, iii. 412 

— suppression of, i. 97, 342 ; iii. 514 ; 

iv. 338-340 
University system, i. 137 ; iii. 412, 617 ; 

iv. 337 
Uranus, i. 414 
Urban. See Town 

Utopias, use of, iv. 239-245, 266. 
See Hypothesis. 

VANITY, i. 564 ; ii. 138, 247, 342 ; 
iii. 380 ; iv. 252, 290 

Variation, philosophical, i. 23, 268, 357 ; 
ii. 33-42; iv. 143, 156 

WES 

Variation, cosmological, i. 372 ; ii. 350 ; 
iv. 164 

— biological, i. 479 ; 501-518 ; 

iv. 194-199 

— social, ii. 346-350 ; iii. 8-14 
— ~ — theory of, ii. 350-364 ; 

iii. 15-58 

limits of, ii. 364-376 ; 

iii. 58-64 

course of, ii. 376-382 

Vasco di Gama, iii. 463 ; iv. 505 
Vaucanson, iv. 134 
Vauvenargues, iii. 504 ; iv. 486 
Vegetal life, i. 474-482 ; 

iv. 193, 210 
Veneration, i. 566 ; ii. 14, 156, 316 ; 
iv. 260 

— growth of, iii. 47, 160, 197, 212, 298, 
378 

Venice, iii. 456 

Venus, planet, iii. 96 

Verification, i. 405; ii. 310; iii. 21 ; 

iv. 185. See Hypothesis 
Veterinary surgeons, ii. 386; iv. 381 
Vicars, iv. 132, 223 
Vico, i. 512 ; iii. 504 
Vicq-d'Azyr, iii. 607 ; iv. 645 
Virgil, i. 238 ; iii. 60, 315, 392 ; iv. 483 
Virgin Mary, i. 285 ; ii. 106 

worship of, iii. 408, 470 ; 

iv. 129, 357 

— mother, iv. 60, 212, 240, 245 
Vital influence, on Society, ii. 367. 

See Biology 

on Mind, ii. 313 

Vitality, i. 475; ii. 313; 

iii. 73, 191, 257; iv. 192, 446 
Vocal organs, i. 514 ; ii. 192-197. 

See Speech 
Volney, iv. 686 
Voltaire, referred to, i. 68, 213 ; ii. 614 

— estimate of, iii. 496, SOS, 508, 611 ; 

iv. 483, 485, 507 

WAGES, i. 153; ii.332, 335; iv. 297 
Wallis, i. 393 
War. See Military 
Water, analysis of, i. 450 ; iii. 506 
Waterloo, iii. 521 ; iv. 345 
Watt, iii. 609 ; iv. 134 
Wealth, theory of, ii. 320-335 ; 

iv. 69. See Capital 

— power of, ii. 225. See Material 

— abuses of, ii. 319 ; iv. 289. See 
Property, Eich 

Week, the, iii. 108 ; iv. 116, 120 
Weight, i. 423-426 ; iii. 505; iv. 190 
West, the term, iv. 23, 317 

— the, nature of, i. 63-68, 310 

— formation of, ii. 109 ; iii. 403- 
409; IT. 281 

678 

INDEX. 

WES 

West, reorganisation of, iv. 309, 323, 
417-437 

Westphalia, Peace of, iii. 494 

White race, i. 314; ii. 377; iii. 160. 

See Eaee 
Widowhood, perpetual, i. 191 ; ii. 168 ; 

iv. 113, 263 
Wife. See Conjugal 
Will, the, i. 555, 574 ; iv. 33, 148 

metaphysical view of, iii. 125 

patriciate the seat of, iv. 68, 288 

William the Silent, iii. 468 

Third, iii. 494 

Winckelmann, iv. 485 

Wine, ii. 230 ; iv. 250. Sec .Sobriety 

Women, function of, i. 169 ; ii. 56, 

171-176 ; iv. 56, 244 

— influence of, i. 183-187 ; ii. 302 ; 

iv. 59, 261, 272 

— a spiritual power, i. 164-187 ; 

ii. 176, 336 ; iv. 63 

— education of, i. 201 ; 

iv. 61, 233-239 

— maintenance of, i. 199 ; ii. 337 ; 

iv. 63, 263 

— independence of, ii. 337 ; iv. 59, 262 

— riglits of, i. 196 ; ii. 163 ; iv. 56 

— moral superiority of, i. 169 ; ii. 171 ; 

iv. 55, 131 

— worship of, i. 204 ; 

iv. 96-100, 107, 131 

— poetry of, i. 250; iv. 61 

— improvement in condition of, i. 181 ; 

ii. 86 ; iv. 263 

— position in Petichism, iii. 91, 118 

Theocracy, iii. 196 

G-reece, iii. 227 

Rome, iii. 301, 331, 340 

Catholic Feudalism, 

i. 181, 205; iii. 381, 406 

Western Revolution, i. 196; 

iii. 434-436 

under Positivism, i. 204 ; 

iv. 66, 69, 131 

— Festival of, i. 213 ; iv. 137 
Words, function of, ii. 202, 210. See 

Working class, the term, i. 160. See 

People 
Workmen, function of, i. 108 ; 

ii. 318, 337 ; iv. 53, 72, 294 

— type of, i. 103, 158; 

iv. 73, 134-136 

— life of, i. 153, 261 ; iv. 305 

— public functionaries, i. 153 ; 

ii. 136, 332 ; iii. 192 ; iv. 298 

— improvement of, i. 107 ; 

iii. 413, 523; iv. 51-58 

ZOB 

Workmen, education of, i. 138 ; 

iv. 235-239, 373, 616 

— homes of, ii. 334 ; iv. 258, 295 

— property of, ii. 329 ; iv. 295 

— tools of, ii. 334 ; iv. 367 

— wages of, ii. 332 ; iv. 297 

— clubs of, i. 114, 158 ; 

iv. 306, 333, 365, 617 
World, the term, i. 3 55, 371, 409; 
iii. 483; iv. 187 

— the external, i. 16-30, 334, 406, 
465, 694. See Cosmology, Environ- 
ment 

— imperfection of, i. 23, 408 ; 

iv. 150, 188 

— knowledge of, i. 16, 372 ; 

iv. 143, 169 

— and man, i. 332 ; 

ii. 22-42, 308-318 ; iv. 184 

— influence on man, iii. 37-44, 97 ; 

iv. 35 

— subordination to man, 

iii. 137, 153, 483 ; iv. 215-218 

— subordination of man to, ii. 364 ; 

iii. 101; iv. 34 
Worship, the term, i. 327 ; ii. 67; 
iv. 81 

— function of, ii. 18 ; iv. 81 

— relations of, ii. 17-20, 66, 70 ; 

iv. 76-83 

— nature of, ii. 66 ; iv. 81-89 

— of the dead, i. 276 ; iii. 92, 196, 
228, 384 ; iv. 95, 127-137 

— of humanity, i. 274 ; 

iv. 101-107, 121, 141 

— of women, i. 204 ; 

iv. 96-100, 107, 131, 229 

— of animals, iii. 87 ; iv. 126 

— of heavens, 

iii. 95-97, 139, 147, 416; iv. 188 

— of gods, iii. 135-143 

— of God, iii. 284-289 

— of saints, iii. 384, 388, 400 

— of the Virgin, ii. 106 ; 

iii. 408, 470 ; iv. 129, 357 

TEAR, the, i. 276: iii. 185; ' 
iv. 117-121 

Yellow race, i. 315 ; ii. 377 ; 

iii. 160, 393; iv. 11 

ZACHARIAS, Pope, iii. 399 
Zoology, i. 542. See Biology, 
Physiology, Taxonomy 
Zoroaster, iii. 283 

THE END. 

SpoUimoodc <t Co., Printer!, iVcic-strecl Si/uare, London. 

WOEKS ON 
MENTAL AND POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY. 

COMTE'S SYSTEM of POSITIVE POLITY, or Treatise upon 
Sociology. Translated from the Paris Edition of 1851-1854, and furnished 
with Analytical Tables of Contents and Index. Complete in 4 vols. 8 vo. price £i. 
Vol. I. GENERAL VIEW of POSITIVISM and INTEODUCTORY PRIN- 
CIPLES. Translated by J. H. Beidges, M.B. formerly Fellow of Oriel 
College, Oxford. Svo. price 2\s. 
Vol. II. The SOCIAL STATICS, or the ABSTRACT LAWS of HUMAN 

ORDER. Translated by Feedebic Haeeison, M.A. Svo. price 14s. 
Vol. III. The SOCIAL DYNAMICS, or the GENERAL LAWS of HUMAN 
PROGRESS (the Philosophy of History). Translated by Professor Beesly, 
M.A. Svo. price 21s. 
Vol. IV. The THEORY of the FUTURE of MAN. Translated by Richaed 
CoNORETE, M.D. Vfith an Appendix, containing Comte's Early Essays, 
translated by H. D. Hdtton, B.A. Svo. price 24s. 

ORDER and PROGRESS. Pakt I. Thoughts on Government; 
Paet II. Studies of Political Crises. By Feedbbic Haeeison, M.A. of Lincoln's 
Inn. Svo. price 14s. 

' Wo find from this book — a large part, 
and by far tlie more valuable part, of wbicU is 
new — that Mr. Harrison has devoted careful 
attention to what we shall call the constructive 
problems of political science. Whoever has mis- 
taken him for a commonplace Radical, either of 
the Chartist or Trades Unionist type, has been 
wrong The best political thinlcers for a 

quarter of a century or upwards have 
more or less vaguely felt that one grand problem 
they had to solve was how our governing appa- 
ratus may be made to yield good government; 
but we are not aware that any writer has looked 
it more fully in the face, or more carefully 
scanned it with a view to solution, than Mr. 

HARniSOS." LiTEBAHY WORLD. 

DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA. By Alexis de Tocquetille. 

Translated by Heney Reeve, Esq. Two vols, crown Svo. 16s. 

On REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT. By John Stuakt 

Mill. Crown Svo. 2s. 

On LIBERTY. By John Stuaet Mill. Post Svo. 7s. 6d. 

Crown Svo. Is. id. 

PRINCIPLES of POLITICAL ECONOMY. By John Stoaet 

Mill. 2 vols. Svo. 30s. Or in One volume, crown Svo. 5s. 

ESSAYS on SOME UNSETTLED QUESTIONS of POLITICAL 
ECONOMY. By John Stuaet Mill. Svo. 6s. 6d. 

UTILITARIANISM. By John Stuart Mill. Svo. 5s. 

A SYSTEM of LOGIC, RATIOCINATIVE and INDUCTIVE. 

By John Stuaet Mill. 2 vols, Svo. 25s. 

EXAMINATION of SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON'S PHILO- 
SOPHY, and of the principal Philosophical Questions discussed in his Writ- 
ings. By John Stuaet Mill, Svo. 16s. 

DISSERTATIONS and DISCUSSIONS. By John Stuaet Mill. 

4 vols. Svo. price £2. 6s. 6d. 

ANALYSIS of the PHENOMENA of the HUMAN MIND. 

By James Mill. With Notes, Illustrative and Critical. 2 vols. Svo. 28s. 

CHURCH and STATE ; their Relations Historically Developed. 
By H. Geffckbn, Prof, of International Law in the University of Strasburgh. 
Translated, with the Author's assistance, by E. F. Tayloe. 2 vols. Svo. 42s. 

2 Works on Mental and Political Philosophy. 

OUTLINES of CIVIL PEOCEDURE ; a General View of the 
Supreme Court of Judicature and of the whole Practice in the Common Law 
and Chancery Divisions. By E. S. Eoscoe, Barrister-at-Law. 12mo. 3*. 6d. 

The INSTITUTES of JUSTINIAN; with EngUsh Introduction, 

Translation, and Notes. By T. C. Sandars, M.A. 8vo. 18«. 

LORD BACON'S WORKS, Collected and Edited by R. L. Ellis, 
M.A. J. Speddino, M.A. and D. D. Heath. 7 vols. 8vo. £3. 13s. 6d. 

LETTERS and LIFE of FRANCIS BACON, including all his 
Occasional Works. Collected and edited, with a Commentary, by J. Speddino, 
M.A. 7 vols. 8vo. £i. is. 

BACON'S ESSAYS, with Annotations. By R. Whatelt, D.D. 

8vo. 10s. 6d. 

ELEMENTS of LOGIC. By R. Whately, D.D. 8vo. 10s. 6d. 

Crown Svo. 4s. 6d. 

ELEMENTS of RHETORIC. By R. Whately, D.D. Svo. 

lOs. 6d. Crown Svo. is. 6d. 

PHILOSOPHY WITHOUT ASSUMPTIONS. By the Rev. T. P. 

KiEKMAN, F.K.S. 8vo. 10s. 6d. 

The SENSES and the INTELLECT. By A. Bain, LL.D. 

8vo. 15s. 

The EMOTIONS and the WILL. By A. Bain, LL.D. Svo. 15s. 
MENTAL and MORAL SCIENCE; a Compendium of Psychology 

and Ethics. By A. Bain; LL.D. Crown 8ro. 10s. 6d. Or separately, 
Part I. Mental Science, 6s. 6d. Part II. Moral Science, is. 6d. 

On the INFLUENCE of AUTHORITY in MATTERS of 

OPINION. By the late Sir G. C. Lewis, Bart. 8vo. 14s. 

HUME'S TREATISE on HUMAN NATURE. Edited, with 
Notes, &c. by T. H. Green, M.A. and the Eev. T. H. Geose, Ml 2 vols 
Svo. 28s. 

HUME'S ESSAYS, MORAL POLITICAL, ^nd LITERARY. 

By the same Editors. 2 vols Svo. 28s. 
%* The above form a complete and uniform Edition of Hume's Philosophical Works. 

:\IISCELLANEOUS and POSTHUMOUS WORKS of the late 
Henry Thomas Buckle. Edited, with a Biographical Notice, bv Helfv 
Tayloe. 3 vols. Svo. £2. 12s. Sd. ^ 

SHORT STUDIES on GREAT SUBJECTS. By J. A. Feoude 

M.A. formerly Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. ' 

Cabinet Edition, 2 vols, crown Svo. 12s. 
Libraby Edition, 2 vols, demy Svo. 24s. 
Third Series, demy Svo. 12s. 

London, LQNGMAPTS & 00. 

JVEA-ROia: 1S77 

CLASSIFIED LISTS OF BOOKS 

(NEW WORKS ANB NEW EDITIONS) 

MISCELLANEOUS 

GENERAL LITERATURE 

FOtl.O'WED BY 

AN ALPHABETICAL INDEX UNDER AUTHORS' NAMES 

London' 

Lons^mans, Green & Co. 

Paternoster Row 
1877. 

ANCIENT HISTORICAL tKUunss. 

Now in course of publication, uniform with Epochs of Modern Histokt, 
each volume complete in itself, 

EPOCHS OF ANCIENT HISTORY: 

A Series of Books Narrating the History of Greece and Rome and of their 
Relations to other Countries at Successive Epochs. 

Edited by the Eev. GEOKGE W. COX, M.A. late Scholar of Trin. Coll. Oxford; 
asd jointly by CHARLES SANKEY, M.A. late Scholar of Queen's Coll. Oxford. 

' The special purpose for whicli these 
manuals are intended, they will, we 
should think, admirably serve. Their 
clearness as narratives will make them 
acceptable to the schoolboy as well as to 
the teacher ; and their critical acumen 
will commend them to the use of the 
more advanced student who is not only 
getting up, bnt trying to understand and 
appreciate, his Heeoddtus and Thxtct- 
BiDES. As for the general plan of the 
series of which they form part, we must 
confess, without wishing to draw com- 
parisons for which we should be sorry to 

have to examine all the materials, that 
it strikes us as decidedly sensible. Per 
the beginner, at all events, the most in- 
structive, as it is the easiest and most 
natural, way of studying history is to 
study it by periods ; and with regard to 
earlier Greek and Boman history at all 
events, there is no serious obstacle in the 
way of his being enabled to do so, since 
here period and what has come to be 
quasi - technically called subject fre- 
quently coincide, and form what may 
fairly be called an Epoch of Ancient 
History.' Satuedat Review. 

Tte &EEEKS and the PERSIANS. By the Est. G. W. Cox, M.A. late 

Scholar of Trinity College, Oxford ; Joint-Editor of the Series. With 4 Colonred Haps, 
Fcp. 8to. price 35. Gd. 

The EARLY ROMAN EMPIRE, from the Assassinatiou of Julins Caesar 

to the Assassination of Domitian. By the Eev. "W. Wolfe Capes, M.A.. Reader of Ancient 
History in the Univeraity of Oxford. With 2 Colonred Maps. Pep. 8to. price 2*. Bd. 

ROME to its CAPTURE by the GAITLS. By Wilhelm Ihiie,"Anthor of 

' History of Rome.' With a Coloured Map. Fcp. 8to. price 2s. Gd. 

The ATHENIAN EMPIRE from the PlIGIT of XERXES to the FAIL 

of ATHENS. By the Rev. Q-. W. Cox, M.A. late Scholar of Trinity College, Oxford ; Joint- 
Editor of the Series. With 5 Maps. Fcp. 8to. price 25. 6d. 

The ROMAN TRIUMVIRATES. By ,the Tery Rev. Charles Merivale, DJI 

Dean of Ely ; Author of ' History of the Rpmans under the Empire.' With a Colonred Map. 
Fcp. 8to. price 2j. Gd. 

The ROMAN EMPIRE of the SECOND CENTURY, or the AGl of the 

ANTONINES. By the Rev. W. Wolfh Capbs, M.A. Reader of Ancient History in the XTniTer- 
sity of Oxford. With 2 Coloured Maps. Fcp.'Svo. price 2*. Gd. 

The RISE of the MACEDONIAN EMPIRE. By Arthur M. Ciirteis, TUL 

formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, and late Asaiatftnt-Mastar in Sherborne School. 
With 8 Maps. Fcp. 8to. price 23. Gd. ^ 

The GRACCHI, MARIUS, and SULLA. By A. H. Beesly, MJ.. Assistantr 

Master, Marlborough CoUoge. With 2 Maps. Fcp. 8to. price 2*. fld. ! ' 

ROME and CARTHAGE, the PUNIC WARS. 

Assistant-Master, Harrow School. 

By E. Bosworth Smith, M.Ai 

[/n thejyress. 

SPARTAN and THEBAN SUPREMACY. By Charles Sankey, M.A. late 

Scholar of Queen's College, Oxford ; Assistant-Uaiter, Marlborough College ; Joint-Bditor <tf 
the Series. {In the press, ' 

London, LONGMANS & CO. 

■r r^\ 

39 Paternoster Ro\V, E.C. 
London, j&?-f/^ 1877. 

GENERAL LIST OF WORKS 

PUBLISHED BY 

Messrs. Longmans, Green, & Co. 

PAGE 

Arts, Manufactures, &c. . . . 15 

Astronomy & Meteorology . . 10 

Biographical Works 4 

Chemistry & Physiology ... 14 
Dictionaries & other Books of 

Reference 8 

Fine Arts & Illustrated Edi- 
tions 14 

History, Politics, Historical 

Memoirs, &c i 

[NDEX 25 to 28 

7ASB 

Mental & Political Philosophy' 5 

Miscellaneous & Critical Works 7 
Natural History & Physical 

Science 11 

■ Poetry & the Drama 21 

Religious & Moral Works . . 16 
Rural Sports, Horse & Cattle 

Management, &c ' . ,22 

Travels, Voyages, &c 19 

Works of Fiction 20 

Works of Utility & General 

Information 23 

«.j»;t> 

HISTORY, POLITICS, HISTORICAL 
MEMOIRS. &c. 

Sketches of Ottoman 

History. By the Very Rev. R. W. 
Church, Dean of St. Paul's, i vol. 
crown 8vo. [Nearly ready. 

The Eastern Question. 

By the Rev. Malcolm MacColl, 
• M.A. 8vo. [Nearly ready. 

The History of England 

, from the Accession of James II. 

By the Right Hon. Lord Macaulay. 

Student's Edition, 2 vols. cr. 8vo. 12^-. 
'eople's Edition, 4 vols. cr. 8vo. 16.?. 
Cabinet Edition, 8 vols, post 8vo. 48^. 
jbrary Edition, 5 vols. 8vo. £j^. 

Critical and Historical 

Essays contributed to the Edin- 
burgh Review. By the Right Hon. 
Lord Macaulay. 

Cheap Edition, crown 8vo. 3^. 6d. 
Student's Edition, crown 8vo. 6s. 
People's Edition, 2 vols, crown 8vo. 8f. 
Cabinet Edition, 4 vols. 24?. 
Library Edition, 3 vols. 8vo. 36^. 

Lord Macaulay 's Works. 

Complete and uniform Library Edition. 
Edited by his Sister, Lady Trevelyan. 
8 vols. 8vo. with Portrait, ;^5. 5^. 

A 

NEW WORKS publisktd ^ 

The History of England 

from the Fall of Wolsey to the Defeat 
of the Spanish Armada. By J. A. 
Froude, M.A. 

Cabinet Edition, 12 vols. cr. 8vo. £-i. 12s. 

Library Edition, 12 vols. 8vo. ^8. i8j. 

The English in Ireland 

in the Eighteenth Century. By J. A. 
Froude, M.A. 3 vols. 8vo. £2. Ss. 

Journal of the Reigns of 

King George IV. and King William 
IV. By the late C. C. F. Greville, 
Esq. Edited by H. Reeve, Esq. 
Fifth Edition. 3 vols. 8vo. price 36^. 

The Life of Napoleon III. 

derived from State Records, Unpub- 
lished Family CoiTespondence, and 
Personal Testimony. By Blanchard 
Jerrold. In Four Volumes, 8vo. vfith 
numerous Portraits and Facsimiles. 
Vols. I. and II. price iSs. each. 
*j(* The Third Volume is in the press. 

Introductory Lectures on 

Modern History delivered in Lent 
Term 1842 ; with the Inaugural Lec- 
ture delivered in December 1841. By 
the late Rev. T. Arnold, D.D. 8vo. 
price ys. 6d. 

On Parliamentary Go- 
vernment in England ; its Origin, 

Development, and Practical Operation. 
By Alphehs Todd. 2 vols. 8vo. 
price £1. lis. 

The Constitutional His- 
tory of England since the AccessWi 
of George III. 1760-1870. By Sir 

Thomas Erskine May, K.C.B. D.C.L. 
Fifth Edition. 3 vols, crown 8vo. iSs. 

Democracy in Europe ; 

a History. By Sir Thomas Erskine 
May, K.C.B. D.C.L. 2 vols. 8vo. 

[/« the press. 

History of Civilisation in 

England and France, Spain and 
Scotland. By Henry Thomas 
Buckle. 3 vols, crown 8vo. 24^-. 

Lectures on the History 

of England from the Earliest Times, 
to the Death of King Edward II. 
By W. Longman, F.S.A. Maps andl 
Illustrations. 8vo. I5J-. 

History of the Life & 

Times of Edward III. By W. Long- 
man, F.S.A. With 9 Maps, 8 Plates, 
and 16 Woodcuts. 2 vols. 8vo. 2%s. 

The Life of Simon de 

Montfort, Earl of Leicester, -with 
special reference to the Parliamentary 
History of his time. By George 
Walter Prothero, Fellow and Lec- 
turer in History, King's College, Cam- 
bridge. Crown 8vo. <)s. 

History of England un- 
der the Duke of Buckingham and 
Charles the First, 1624-1628. By 

S. R. Gardiner, late Student of Chi 
Ch. 2 vols. 8vo. with 2 Maps, 24?. 

The Personal Govern- 
ment of Charles I. from the Death of 
Buckingham to the Declaration of the 
Judges in favour of Ship Money, 1628— 
1637. By S. R. Gardiner, late 
Student of Ch. Ch. 2 vols. 8vo. 

\In tJu press. 

Popular History of 

France, from the Earliest Times to 
the Death of Louis XH". By Eliza- 
beth M. Sewell. With 8 Maps. 
Crown 8vo. 7^. dd. 

History of Prussia, from 

the Earliest Times to the Present Day ; 
tracing the Origin and Development of 
her Military Organisation. By Capt. 
W. J. Wyati\ Vols. I. & II. a.d. 
700 to A.D. 1525. 8vo. 36J. 

A Student's Manual of 

the History of India from tlie Earliest 
Period to the Present. By CoL 
Meadows Taylor, ^NI.R. A. S. Second 
Thousand. Crown 8vo. Maps, 7.?. td. . 

Indian Polity ; a View of 

the System of Administration in India. 
By Lieut. -Col. G. Chesney. 2nd 
Edition, revised, with Map. 8vo. 2IJ-. 

Essays in Modern Mili- 
tary Biography. By Col. C. C. 
Chesney, R.E. Sva \2s. &i. 

iSTEW WORKS ■^ahlished by LONGMAN'S &' CO. 3, 

Waterloo Lectures ; a 

.Study of the Campaign of 1815. By 
Col. C. C. Chesney, R.E. Third 
Edition. 8vo. Map, los. dd. 

The Oxford Reformers— 

John Colet, Erasmus, and Thomas 
More ; being a History of their Fel- 
low-Work. By F. Seebohm. Second 
Edition. 8vo. 14^. 

The Mythology of the 

Aryan Nations. By the Rev. G. W. 
Cox, M.A. late Scholar of Trinity 
College, Oxford. 2 vols. 8vo. i%s. 

A History of Greece. By 

the Rev. G. W. Cox, M.A. Vols. I. 
& II. 8vo. Maps, 36J. 

General Hist, of Greece 

to the Death of Alexander the Great ; 
with a Sketch of the Subsequent His- 
tory to the Present Time. By the Rev. 
G. W. Cox, M.A. Crown 8vo. with 
Maps, 7J-. (>d. 

General History of Rome 

from the Foundation of the City to the 
Fall of Augustulus, B.C. 753-A.D. 
476. By Dean Merivale, D.D. 
Crown 8vo. Maps, "Js. dd. 

History of the Romans 

under the Empire. By Dean Meri- 
vale, D.D. 8 vols, post 8vo. 48^. 

The Fall of the Roman 

Republic ; a Short History of the Last 
Century of the Commonwealth. By 
Dean Merivale, D.D. i2mo. ^s. 6d. 

The History of Rome. 

By WiLHELM Ihne. Vols. I. & II. 
8vo. 30J. Vol. III. is in the press. 

The Sixth Oriental Mo- 
narchy ; or, the Geography, History, 
and Antiquities of Parthia. By G. 
Rawlinson, M.A. With Maps and 
Illustrations. 8vo. i6s. 

The Seventh Great Ori- 
ental Monarchy ; or, a History of 
the Sassanians. By G. Rawlinson, 
M.A. With Map and 95 Illustrations, 
^vo. 28s. 

Encyclopaedia of Chro- 
nology, Historical and Biographical ; 
comprising the Dates of all the Great 
Events of History, including Treaties, 
Alliances, Wars, Battles, &c. By B. 
B. Woodward, B.A. and W. L. R. 
Gates. 8vo. 42J. 

The History of European 

Morals from Augustus to Charle- 
magne. By W. E. H. Leckv, M.A. 
2 vols, crown 8vo. i6s. 

History of the Rise and 

Influence of the Spirit of Rational- 
ism in Europe. By W. E. H. Lecky, 
M.A. 2 vols, crown 8vo. 16s. 

The Native Races of the 

Pacific states of North America. By 
H. H. Bancroft. 5 vols. 8vo. ^'6. ^s. 

History of the Mongols 

from the Ninth to the Nineteenth 
Century. By Henry H. Howorth, 
F.S.A. Vol. I. t/ie Mongols Proper 
and the Kalmuks ; with Two Coloured. 
Maps. Royal 8vo. 28j-. 

Islam under the Arabs. 

By Robert Durie Osborn, Major 
in the Bengal Staff Corps. 8vo. I2J-. 

Introduction to the Sci- 
ence of Religion, Four Lectures de- 
livered at the Royal Institution ; with 
Two Essays on False Analogies and the 
Philosophy of Mythology. By Max 
MiJLLER, M.A. Crown 8vo. \os. dd. 

Zeller's Stoics, Epicu- 
reans, and Sceptics. Translated by the 
Rev. O. J. Reichel, M.A. Cr. 8vo. i+r. 

Zeller's Socrates & the 

Socratic Schools. Translated by the 
Rev. O. J. Reichel, M.A. Crown 
8vo. New Edition in the press. 

Zeller's Plato & the Older 

Academy. Translated by S. Frances 
Alleyne and Alfred Goodwin, 
B.A. Crown 8vo. 18^-. 

Sketch of the History of 

the Church of England to the Revo- 
lution, of 1688. By T. V. Short„ 
D.D. sometime Bishop of St. Asaph. 
Crown 8vo. 7^. 61/. 

4 NEW WORKS published b- 

The History of Philo- 

sophy, from Thales to Comte. By 
George Henry Lewes. Fourth 
Edition. 2 vols. 8vo. yis. 

The Childhood of the 

English Nation ; or, the Beginnings 
, of English History. By Ella S. 
Armitage. Fcp. 8vo. 2s. 6d. 

Epochs of Modern His- 
tory. Edited by E. E. Morris, M.A. 
J. S. Phillpotts, B.C.L. and C. 
CoLBECK, M.A. Eleven volumes now 
published, each complete in itself, in 
fcp. 8vo. with Maps & Index : — 

Cox's Crusades, 2s. dd. 

Creighton's Age of Elizabeth, 2.s. 6d. 

Gairdner's Houses of Lancaster and 
York, 2s. td. 

Gardiner's Puritan Revolution, 2x. bd. 

Gardiner's Thirty Years' War, 2s. 6d. 

Hale's Fall of the Stuarts, 2s. 6d. 

Ludlow's War of American Indepen- 
dence, 2s. 6d. 

Morris's Age of Anne, 2s. 6d. 

Seebohm's Protestant ' Revolution, 

price 2s. 6d. 

Stubbs's Early Plantagenets, 2s. 6d. 

Warburton's Edward III. 2s. 6d. 

*»* Other Epochs in preparation, in con- 
tinuation of the Series. 

The Student's Manual of 

Modern History ; containing the 
Rise and Progress of the Principal 
European Nations. By W. Cooke 
Taylor, LL.D. Crown 8vo. Js. dd. 

The Student's Manual of 

Ancient History; containing the Politi- 
cal History, Geographical Position, and 
Social State of the Principal Nations 
of Antiquity. By W. CooKE Taylor, 
LL. D. Crown Svo. Ts, 6d. 

Epochs of Ancient His- 
tory. Edited by the Rev. G. W. 
Cox, M.A. and by C. Sankey, M.A. 
Ten volumes, each complete in itself, 
in fcp. 8vo. with Maps & Index : — 

Beesly's Gracchi, Marius & Sulla, 2s.6d. 

Capes's Age of the Antonines, 2s. 6d. 

Capes's Early Roman Empire, 2s. 6d. 

Cox's Athenian Empire, zs. 6d. 

Cox's Greeks & Persians, 2s. td. 

Curteis's Macedonian Empire, zs. 6d. 

Ihne's Rome to its Capture by the 
Gauls, 2s. 6d. 

Merivale's Roman Triumvirates, 2s. dd. 

Sankey's Spartan & Theban Supre- 
macy. [/« the press. 

Smith's Rome & Carthage, the Pimic 
Wars. \In the press. 

BIOGRAPHICAL \VORKS. 

The Life and Letters of 

Lord Macaulay. By his Nephew, 
G. Otto Trevelyan, M.P. Second 
Edition, with Additions and Corrections. 
2 vols. Svo. Portrait, 36s. 

The Life of Sir William 

Fairbairn, Bart. F.R.S. Partly 
written by himself; edited and com- 
pleted by W. Pole, F.R.S. Svo 
Portrait, l%s. 

Arthur Schopenhauer, his 

Life and his Philosophy. By Helen 
Zimmern. Post Svo. Portrait, 7^. dd. 

The Life, Works, and 

Opinions of Heinrich Heine. By 

William Stigakd. 2 vols. Svo. 
Portrait, 2Sj-. 

The Life and Letters ol 

Mozart. Translated from the Ger- 
man Biograph)- of Dr. LuDwiG Kohl 
by Lady \\'allace. 2 vols, post Svo. 
with Two Portraits. {Xearly ready. 

Felix Mendelssohn'sLet- 

ters from Italy and Switzerland, 
and Letters from 1833 to 1847. 

Translated by Lady Wallace. With 
Portrait. 2 vols, crown Svo. 5j. each. 

■NEW WORKS published hy LONGMANS &- CO. 

OHN 

Life of Robert Frampton, 

D. D. Bishop of Gloucester, deprived as 

; a Non-Juror in 1689^ Edited by T. S. 

■EVANS, M.A. Vicar of Shoreditch. 

Crown 8.V0. Portrait, loj. 6d. 

Autobiography, By J( 

Stuart Mill. 8vo. "js. 6d. 

Isaac Casaubon, 1559- 

1614. By Mark Pattison, Rector 
of Lincoln College, Oxford. 8vo. i8j-. 

Biographical and Critical 

Essays. By A. Hayward, Q.C. 
Second Series, 2 vols. 8vo. 28^. Third 
Series, t yol. 8vo. 14?. 

The Memoirsof Sir John 

Reresby, of Thrybergh, Bart. M.P. 
1634-1689. Edited from the Original 
Manuscript by J. J. Cartwright, 
M.A; 8vo. 21S. 

Leaders of Public Opi- 
nion in Ireland ; Swift, Flood, 
Grattan, O'Connell. By W. E. H. 
Lecky, M. a. Crown 8vo. 7^. 6d. 

Essays in Ecclesiastical 

Biography. .By the Right Hon. Sir j. 
Stephen, LL.D. Crown 8vo. 7J-. 6d. 

Dictionary of General 

Biography ; containing Concise Me- 
moirs and Notices of the most Eminent 
Persons of all Ages and Countries. 
By W. L. R. Gates. 8vo. .25J. , 

Life of the Duke of Wel- 
lington. By the Rev. G. R. GleIg, 
M.A. Crown 8vo. Portrait, 5j. 

Memoirs of Sir Henry 

Havelock, K.C.B. By John Clak,k; 
Marshman. Crown 8vo. 3^. 6d. 

Vicissitudes of Families. 

By Sir Bernard BtrRKE, C.B, Two 
vols, crown 8vo. 2IJ. 

Maunder's Biographical 

Treastiry. Latest Edition, recon^ 
structed and partly re-written, with 
above 1,600 additional Memoirs, by 
W. L. R. Gates. Fcp. 8vo. 6s. 

MENTAL and POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY. 

Comte's System of Posi- 

, , tiye Polity, or Treatise upon Socio- 

' •' logy. Translated from the Paris 

•'•, Edition of 1851-1854, and fiimished 

with Analytical Tables of Contents : — 

Vol. I. General View of Positivism and 
Introductory Principles. Translated by 
J. H. Bridges, M.B., formerly Fellow 
of Oriel College, Oxford. 8vo. price,2ij-. 

Vol. II. The Social Statics, or the 
Abstract Laws of Human Order. Trans- 
'tefed Hrj' 'Frederic -Harrison,- -M.A. 
Svoi pride 1 4^-. 

Vol. III. The Social Dynamics, or 
the General Laws of Human Progress (the 
sPhilosophy of History)., Translated by j 
IPriqfesspr Beesly, M.JA- 8yo, 2).s. . 

Vol. IV. The Synthesis of the Future 
of Mankind. Translated by Richard 
Congreve, M.D. with an Appendix, 
containing Cpmte's , Early Essays, trans- 
latedJiy H. D. Hutton, B.A. , 8vp. . 
[Niarly riady. , 

Democracy in America. 

.■> aBv Alexis de- Tocqueviiile. - Tkui- , 
'!" slated by Hen*y REEVBr Esq. -Two 
' vols: crown 8to.-i6j. 

Essays, Critical and Bio- 
graphical. By Henrst Rogers. " 

vols, crown 8vo. I2J-. a 

Essays on some Theolo- 
gical Controversies of the Time. 
By Henry Rogers. Crown 8vo. 6s. 

On Representative Go- 
vernment. By John Stuart Mill. 

Crown 8vo. zs. 

On Liberty. By John 

Stuart Mill. Post 8to. ys. 6d. 
crown 8vo. is. j[d. 

Principles of Political 

Economy, By John Stuart- Mill. 
2 vols. 8to. 30J. or I vol. crown 8vo. 5^. 

Essays on some Unset- 
tied Questions of Political Econoiqy. 

By John Stuart Mill. 8vo. 6a 6d. 

Utilitarianism. .; By John 

Stuart Mill. Stq.'Sj:. 

6 JV£JV WORKS ptMished 

A System of Logic, Ra- 

tiocinative and Inductive. By John 
Stuart Mill. 2 vols. 8vo. 25^. 

Examination of Sir Wil- 
liam Hamilton's Philosophy, and of 

the principal Philosophical Questions 
discussed in his Writings. By John 
Stuart Mill. 8vo. ifo. 

Dissertations and Dis- 
cussions. By John Stuart Mill. 

4 vols. 8vo. price £2. 6s. td. 

Analysis of the Pheno- 
mena of the Human Mind. By 

James Mill. With Notes, Illustra- 
tive and Critical. 2 vols. 8vo. 28^. 

The Law of Nations con- 
sidered as Independent Political 
Communities ; the Rights and Duties 
of Nations in Time of War. By Sir 
Travers Twiss, D.C.L. 8vo. 2\s. 

Church and State ; their 

Relations Historically Developed. By 
H. Geffcken, Prof, of International 
Lavr in the Univ. of Strasburg. Trans- 
lated, with the Author's assistance, by 
E. r. Taylor. 2 vols. 8vo. 42^. 

A Systematic View of the 

Science of Jurisprudence. By Shel- 
don Amos, M.A. 8vo. iSj. 

A Primer of the English 

Constitution and Government. By 

S. Amos, M.A. Crown 8vo. ts. 

Outlines of Civil Proce- 
dure ; a General View of the Supreme 
Court of Judicature and of the whole 
Practice in the Common Law and 
Chancery Divisions. By E. S. Ros- 
COE, Barrister-at-Law. i2mo. 3J-. (sd. 

A Sketch of the History 

of Taxes in England from the 
Earliest Times to the Present Day. 
By Stephen Dowell. Vol. I. to 
the Civil War 1642. 8vo. loj. td. 

Principles of Economical 

Philosophy. By H. D. MacLeod, 
M.A. Barrister-at-Law. Second Edi- 
tion in Two Volumes. Vol. I. 8vo. 
15J. Vol. II. Part i. price I2j-. 

The Institutes of Jus- 
tinian ; with English Introduction, 
Translation, and Notes. By T. C. 
Sandars, M.A. 8vo. \%s. 

Lord Bacon's Works, col- 
lected & edited by R. L. Ellis, M.A. 
J. Spedding, M.A. and D. D. Heath. 
7 vols. 8vo. £t,. ly. 6d. 

Letters and Life of Fran- 
cis Bacon, including all his Occasional 
Works. Collected and edited, with a 
Commentary, by J. Spedding. 7 vols. 
8vo. £4. 4J. 

The Nicomachean Ethics 

of Aristotle, newly translated into 
English by R. Williams, B. A. Second 
Edition, thoroughly revised. Crown 
8vo. Js. (sd. 

Aristotle's Politics, Books 

I. III. IV. (VII.) the Greek Text of 
Bekker, with an English Translation 
by W. E. BoLLAND, M.A. and Short 
Introductory Essays by A. Lang, M.A. 
Crown Svo. Ts. 6d. 

The Politics of Aristotle ; 

Greek Text, with English Notes. By 
Richard Congreve, M.A. Svo. I&r. 

The Ethics of Aristotle; 

with Essays and Notes. "By Sir A. 
Grant, Bart. M.A. LL.D. 2 vols. 
Svo. 32J-. 

Bacon's Essays, with An- 
notations. By R. Whately, D.D. 
Svo. I Of. 6d. 

Picture Logic; an Attempt 

to Popularise the Science of Reasoning. 
By A. SwiNBOURNE, B.A. Fcp. Svo. ' 
price $s. 

Elements of Logic. By 

R. Whately, D.D. Svo. lor. 6,d. 
Crown Svo. 4^. 6d. 

Elements of Rhetoric. 

By R. Whately, D.D. Svo. 10s. 6d. 
Crown Svo. 4J. 6d. 

NEW WORKS published by LONGMANS &- CO. 

An Introduction to Men- 
tal Philosophy, on the Inductive 
Method. By J. D. Morell, LL.D. 
8vo. \2s. 

Philosophy without As- 
sumptions. By the Rev. T. P. KlRK- 
MAN, F.R.S. 8vo. loj. 6rf. 

The Senses and the In- 
tellect. ByA. Bain, LL.D. 8vo. 15^. 

The Emotions and the 

Will. By A. Bain, LL.D. 8vo. ijj. 

Mental and Moral Sci- 
ence ; a Compendium of Psychology 
and Ethics. By A. Bain, LL.D. 
Crown 8vo. loj. dd. Or separately. 
Part I. Mental Science, ds. 6d. Part 
II. Moral Science, /\s. 6d. 

An Outline of the Neces- 
sary Laws of Thought : a Treatise 
on Pure and Applied Logic. By W. 
Thompson, D.D. Archbishop of York. 
Crown 8vo. 6s. 

On the Influence of Au- 
thority in Matters of Opinion. By 

the late Sir. G, C. Lewis, Bart. 8vo. i^s. 

Hume's Treatise on Hu- 
man Nature. Edited, with Notes, &c. 
by T. H. Green, M.A. and the Rev. 
T. H. Grose, M.A. 2 vols. 8vo. 28^ 

Hume's Essays, Moral, 

Political, and Literary. By the same 
Editors. 2 vols. 8vo. 28^. 
*4f* The above form a complete and uni- 
form Edition of Hume's Philosophical 
Works. 

MISCELLANEOUS & CRITICAL WORKS. 

Selections from the Wri- 
tings of Lord Macaulay. Edited, 
with Occasional Explanatory Notes, 

' byG. O.Trevelyan, M.P. Cr.8vo.6j. 

Lord Macaulay's Miscel- 
laneous Writings. 
Library Edition, 2 vols. 8vo. zis. 
People's Edition, i vol. cr. 8vo. ^. 6d. 

Lord Macaulay's Miscel- 
laneous Writings and Speeches. 

Student's Edition: Crown 8vo. 6s. 

Speeches of the Right 

Hon. Lord Macaulay, corrected by 
Himself. Crovra 8vo. 3^. 6d. 

The Rev. Sydney Smith's 

Essays contributed to the Edinburgh 
Review. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d. sewed, 
3j. 6d. cloth. 

The Wit and Wisdom of 

the Rev. Sydney Smith. Crown 
^vo. 3 J. 6d. 

Miscellaneous and Post- 
humous Works of the late Henry 
Thomas Buckle. Edited, with a 
Biographical Notice, by Helen 
Taylor. 3 vols. 8vo. £2. \2s. 6d. 

Short Studies on Great 

Subjects. By J. A. Frodde, M.A. 

Cabinet Edition, 2 vols, crown 8vo. 12s. 
Library Edition, 2 vols, demy 8vo. 24?. 
Third Series, in the press. 

Manual of English Lite- 
rature, Historical and Critical. By 

T. Arnold, M. A. Crown 8vo. ^s. 6d. 

German Home Life ; a 

Series of Essays on the Domestic Life 
of Germany. Crown 8vo. 6s. 

Miscellaneous Works of 

Thomas Arnold, D.D. late Head 
Master of Rugby School. 8vo. "js. 6d. 

Realities of Irish Life. 

By W. Steuart Trench. Crown 
8vo. 2s. 6d. sewed, or 3^. 6d. cloth. 

B 

8 NEW WORKS published b- 

Lectures on the Science 

of Language. By F. Max Muller, 
M.A. &c. 2 vols, ciown 8vo. ids. 

Chips from a German 

Workshop ; Essays on the Science of 
Religion, and on Mythology, Traditions 
& Customs. By F. Max Muller, 
M.A. 4 vols. 8vo. £2. \%s. 

Chapters on Language. 

By F. W. Farrar, D.D. Crown 8vo. 
price 5-f- 

Families of Speech. Four 

Lectures delivered at the Royal Insti- 
tution. By F. \y. Farrar, D.D. 
Crown 8vo. 3^. dd. 

Apparitions; a Narrative of 

Facts. By the Rev. B. W. Savile, 
M. A. Crown 8vo. i,s. 6d. 

Miscellaneous Writings 

of John Conington, M.A. Edited 
by J. A. Sy.monds, M.A. With a 
Memoir by H. J. S. Smith, M.A. 
2 vols. 8vo. 28j-. 

The . Essays and- Contrfi 

butions of A. K. H. B. .Uniform 
Cabinet Editions in crown 8vo. 

Recreations of a Country Parson, Two 

Series, 3j". 6d. each. 

Landscapes, Churches, and Moralities, 

price 3^. 6d. 

Seaside Musings, 3^-. 6d. 

Changed Aspects of Unchanged- 
Truths, 3^. dd. 

Counsel and Comfort from a City 
Pulpit, 3J-. 6d. 

Lessons of Middle Age, y. 6a. 

Leisure Hours in Town, 3^. td. 

Autumn Holidays of a Country Parson, 
price 3^. dd. 

Sunday Afternoons at the Parish 
Church of a University City, 3^. 6d. 

The Commonplace Philosopher in 
Town and Country, 3^. (>d. 

Present-Day Thoughts, y. dd. 

Critical Essays of a Country Parson, 

price y. dd. 

The Graver Thoughts of a Country 
Parson, Three Series, 3^. dd. each. 

DICTIONARIES and OTHER BOOKS of 
REFERENCE. 

Dictionary of the English 

Language. , By R. 'G. -LatHam, 
M.A. M.D. Abridged from Dr. 
Latham's Edition of Johnson's English 
Dictionary. Medium 8vo. 24J. - 

A Dictionary of the Eng- 
lish Language. By R. G. Latham, 
M.A. M.D. '. Founded on the Dic- 
^; tionary pf Df. S.Johnson, as, edited 
" by the Rev. H. Ji Todd, with 
numerous Emendations and Additions. 
4 vols. 4to. £1. , 

Thesaurus of English 

Words and Phrases, classified and 
arranged so as -to facilitate the- expres- 
sion of Ideas; l-and'tissist- in Literary 
'. Compositiohv >>" By P. '"M. • RooET, 
M,D. Crown 8vo. i&r. dd. 

English Synonymes. By 

E. J. Whately. Edited by R. 
Whately, D.D. Fcp. 8vo. y. 

Handbook of the English 

Languagfe. For the Use of Students 
of the Universities and the Higher. 
Classes in Schools. By R; G. Xa,-"> 
THAM, M.A. M.D. Crown 8vo. ds. ' 

A Practical Dictionary of , 

the French and EngUsh Languages. 
By LfiON CoNTANSEAU, many years 
French Examiner for Military and 
Civil Appointments, &c. Post 8to. 
price Is. dd. 

Contanseau's Pocket 

-Dictionary, Frencli— stnd - ■Englisih,*' 
I abridged irom^' the'Fiagticall'Elictioiisiy 
by the Author. Square i8mo. 31. flif. 

NEW WORKS published by LONGMANS d^' CO. 

A New Pocket Diction- 
ary of the German and English 
Languages. By F. W. Longman, 
Balliol College, Oxford. Square 
i8mo. price 5x. 

A Practical Dictionary 

of the German Language ; German- 
Englisli and English- German. By 
Rev. W. L. Blackley, M.A. and Dr. 
C. M. Friedlander. Post 8vo. Ts. dd. 

A Dictionary of Roman 

and Greek Antiquities. With 2,000 
Woodcuts illustrative of the Arts and 
Life of the Greeks and Romans. By 
A. Rich, B.A. Crown 8vo. Ts. 6d. 

A Greek- English Lexi- 
con. By H. G. LiDDELL, D.D. Dean 
of Christchurch, and R. Scott, D.D. 
Dean of Rochester. Crown 4to. 36J. 

A Lexicon, Greek and 

English, abridged for Schools from 
Liddell and Scott's Greek-English 
Lexicon. Square l2mo. 7^. 6d. 

An English-Greek Lexi- 
con, containing all the Greek Words 
used by Writers of good authority. By 
C. D. YoNGE, M.A. 4to. 2is. 

Mr. Yonge's Lexicon, 

English and Greek, abridged from his 
larger Lexicon. Square i2mo. 8j. 6d. 

A Latin- English Diction- 
ary. By John T. White, D.D. 
Oxon. and J. E. Riddle, M.A. Oxon. 
Sixth Edition, revised. 1 vol. 4to. 28s. 

White's College Latin- 

English Dictionary ; abridged from 
the Parent Work for the use of Uni- 
versity Students. Medium 8vo. 15^. 

A Latin-English Diction- 
ary adapted for the use of Middle- 
Class Schools. By John T. White, 
D.D. Oxon. Square fcp. 8vo. y. 

White's Junior Student's 

Complete Latin-English and Eng- 
lish-Latin Dictionary. Square i2mo. 
price I2X. 

Senaritflv /EngLISH-LATIN, ^s. 6d. 
Separately |latin-Enghsh, p. 6d. 

M'Culloch's Dictionary, 

Practical, Theoretical, and Historical, 
of Commerce and Commercial Navi- 
gation. Edited and corrected to 1876 
by H. G. Reid. 8vo. 63s. Second 
Supplement, price y- 6d. 

A General Dictionary of 

Geography, Descriptive, Physical, 
Statistical, and Historical ; forming a 
complete Gazetteer of the World. By 
A. Keith Johnston. New Edition 
(1877), thoroughly revised. Medium 
8vo. 42^. 

Maunder's Treasury of 

Knowledge and Library of Refer- 
ence ; comprising an English Diction- 
ary and Grammar, Universal Gazetteer, 
Classical Dictionary, Chronology, Law 
Dictionary, Synopsis of the Peerage, 
Useful Tables, &c. Fcp. 8vo. 6s. 

The Treasury of Bible 

Knowledge ; being a Dictionary of 
the Books, Persons, Places, Events, 
and other Matters of whieh mention is 
made in Holy Scripture. By the Rev. 
J. Ayre, M.A. With Maps, Plates, 
and many Woodcuts. Fcp. 8vo. 6s. 

The Public Schools Atlas 

of Modern Geography, in 31 entirely 
new Coloured Maps. Edited with an 
Introduction by Rev. G. Butler, M.A. 
In imperial 8vo. or imperial 4to. price 
5^. cloth. 

The Public Schools Atlas 

of Ancient Geography, in 28 entirely 
new Coloured Maps. Edited with an 
Introduction by the Rev. G. Butler, 
M.A. In imperial 8vo. or imperial 4to. 
price 7-f. 6d. cloth. 

I© NEW WORKS published b^ 

ASTRONOMY and METEOROLOGY. 

The Universe and the 

Coming Transits; Researches into 
and New Views respecting tlie Con- 
stitution of tlie Heavens. By R. A. 
Proctor, B.A. Willi 22 Clmrts and 
22 Diagrams. 8vo. i6j-. 

Saturn and its System. 

By R. A. Proctor, B.A. 8vo. witli 
14 Plates, I4J-. 

The Transits of Venus ; 

A Popvilar Account of Past and Coming 
Transits. By R. A. Proctor, B.A. 
20 Plates (12 Coloured) and 27 Wood- 
cuts. Crown 8vo. 8j. 6i/. 

Essays on Astronomy. 

A Series of Papers on Planets and 
Meteors, the Sun and Sun-surrounding 
Space, Star and Star Cloudlets. By 
R. A. Proctor, B.A. With 10 Plates 
and 24 Woodcuts. 8vo. lis. 

The Moon ; her Motions, 

Aspects, Scenery, and Physical Con- 
dition. By R. A. Proctor, B.A. 
With Plates, Charts, Woodcuts, and 
Lunar Photographs. Crown 8vo. 15^. 

The Sun ; Ruler, Light, Fire, 

and Life of the Planetary System. By 
R. A. Proctor, B.A. With Plates & 
Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 14J. 

The Orbs Around Us ; 

a Series of Essays on the Moon & 
Planets, Meteors & Comets, the Sun & 
Coloured Pairs of Suns. By R. A. 
Proctor, B.A. With Chart and Dia- 
grams. Crown 8vo. yj. td. 

Other Worlds than Ours ; 

The Plurality of Worlds Studied under 
the Light of Recent Scientific Re- 
searches. By R. A. Proctor, B.A. 
With 14 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo. \os. 6d. 

Brinkley's Astronomy. 

Revised and partly re-written by John 
W. Stubks, D.D. and F. Brunnow, 
Ph.D. With 49 Diagrams. Crown 
8vo. price 6s. 

Outlines of Astronomy. 

By Sir J. F. W. Herschel, Bart. M.A. 
Latest Edition, with Plates and Dia- 
grams. Square crown 8vo. 12s. 

The Moon, and the Con- 
dition and Configurations of it.s' Surface. 
By E. Neison, F.R. Ast, Soc. &c. 
With 26 Maps and 5 Plates. Medium 
8vo. 3 1 J. 6d. 

Celestial Objects for 

Common Telescopes. By T. W. 

Webb, M.A. With Map of the Moon 
and Woodcuts. Crovm 8vo. "js. 6d. 

A New Star Atlas, for the 

Library, the School, and the Obser- 
vatory, in 12 Circular Maps (with 2 
Index Plates). By R. A. Proctor, 
B. A. Crown 8vo. 5j-. 

Larger Star Atlas, for the 

Librai-y, in Twelve Circular Maps, 
photolithographed by A. Brothers, 
F.R.A.S. With 2 Index Plates and a 
Letterpress Introduction. By R. A. 
Proctor, B.A. Small folio, 25J-. 

Dove's Law of Storms, 

considered in connexion with the 
Ordinary Movements of the Atmo- 
sphere. Translated by R. H. Scott, 
M.A. 8vo. 10s. 6d. 

Air and Rain; the Begin- 
nings of a Chemical Climatology. By 
R. A. Smith, F.R.S. Svo. 24.?. 

Air and its Relations to 

Life, 1 774-1874; a Course of Lec- 
tures delivered at the Royal Institution 
of Great Britain. By W. N. Hartley, 
F.C.S. With 66 Woodcuts. Small 
Svo. 6s. 

Schellen's Spectrum 

Analysis, in its Application to Terres- 
trial Substances and the Physical 
Constitution of the Heavenly Bodies. 
Translated by Jane and C. Lassell, 
with Notes by W. Huggins, LL.D. 
F, R. S. Svo. Plates and Woodcuts, 28^. 

NEW WORKS published by LONGMANS 6- CO. 

NATURAL HISTORY and PHYSICAL 
SCIENCE. 

Professor Helmhoitz' 

Popular Lectures on Scientific Sub- 
jects. Translated by E. Atkinson, 
F. C. S. With numerous Wood Engrav- 
ings. 8vo. I2J-. 6d. 

On the Sensations of 

Tone, as a Physiological Basis for the 
Theory of Music. By H. Helmholtz, 
Professor of Physiology in the Uni- 
versity of Berlin. Translated by A. J. 
Ellis, F.R.S. 8vo. 36^. 

Ganot's Natural Philo- 
sophy for General Readers and 
Young Persons ; a Course of Physics 
divested of Mathematical Formulse and 
expressed in the language of daily life. 
Translated by E. Atkinson, F.C.S. 
Second Edition, with 2 Plates and 429 
Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. Js. 6d. 

Ganot's Elementary 

Treatise on Physics, Experimental 
and Applied, for the use of Colleges 
and Schools. Translated and edited 
by E. Atkinson, F.C.S. Seventh 
Edition, with 4 Coloured Plates and 
758 Woodcuts. Post 8vo. 15^-. 

Arnott's Elements of Phy- 
sics or Natural Philosophy. Seventh 
Edition, edited by A. Bain, LL.D. and 
A. S Taylor, M.D. F.R.S. Crown 
8vo. Woodcuts, I2J'. 6d. 

The Correlation of Phy- 
sical Forces. By the Hon. Sir W. 
R. Grove, F.R.S. &c. Sixth Edition, 
with other Contributions to Science. 
8vo. I5J-. 

Weinhold's Introduction 

to Experimental Physics ; including 
Directions for Constructing Physical 
Apparatus and for Making Experiments. 
Translated by B. LoEWV, F.R.A.S. 
WithaPrefacebyG. C. Foster, F.R.S. 
8vo. Plates & Woodcuts 31^. 6d. 

Principles of Animal Me- 
chanics. By the Rev. S. Haqghton, 
F.R.S. Second Edition. 8vo. zis. 

Fragments of Science. 

By John Tyxdall, F.R.S. Fifth 
Edition, with a New Introduction. 
Crown 8vo. loj-. dd. 

Heat a Mode of Motion. 

By John Tyndall, F.R.S. Fifth 
Edition, Plate and Woodcuts. Crown 
8vo. loj-. 6a. 

Sound. By John Tyndall, 

F.R.S. Third Edition, including 
Recent Researches on Fog-Signalling ; 
Portrait and Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 
price 10s. dd. 

Researches on Diamag- 

netismand Magne-Crystallic Action; 

mcluding Diamagnetic Polarity. By 
John Tyndall, F.R.S. With 6 
Plates and many Woodcuts. 8vo. 145. 

Contributions to Mole- 
cular Physics in the domain of Ra- 
diant Heat. By John Tyndall, 
F.R.S. With 2 Plates and 31 Wood- 
cuts. 8vo. \(>s. 

Six Lectures on Light, 

delivered in America in 1872 and 1873.' 
By John Tyndall, F.R.S. Second 
Edition, with Portrait, Plate, and 59 
Diagrams. Crown 8yo. 7j. dd. 

Notes of a Course of Nine 

Lectures on Light, delivered at the 
Royal Institution. By John' Tyndall, 
F.R.S. Crown 8vo. \s. sewed, or 
\s. 6d. cloth. 

Notes of a Course of 

Seven Lectures on Electrical Phe- 
nomena and Theories, delivered at 
the Royal Institution. By John Tyn- 
dall, F.R.S. Crown 8vo. is. sewed, 
or IS. 6d. cloth. 

A Treatise on Magnet- 
ism, General and Terrestrial. By H. 
Lloyd, D.D. D.C.L. 8vo. 10s. 6d. 

Elementary Treatise on 

the Wave-Theory of Light. By 
H. Lloyd, D. D. D. C. L. 8vo. los. 6d. 

12 NEW WORKS published 

Text-Books of Science, 

Mechanital and Physical, adapted for 
the use of Artisans and of Students in 
Public and Science Schools. Small 
8ro. with Woodcuts, &c. 

Anderson's Strengfth of Materials, 3j. dd. 

Armstrong's Organic Chemistry, 3^. dd. 

Barry's Railway Appliances, 3^. td. 

Bloxam's Metals, 3^-. dd. 

Goodeve's Mechanics, 3^. M. 

Mechanism, y. 6d. 

Griffin's Algebra & Trigonometry, 3/6. 

Jenkin's Electricity & Magnetism, 3/6. 

Maxwell's Theory of Heat, 3^. 6d. 

Merrifield's Technical Arithmetic, 3^. 6d. 

Miller's Inorganic Chemistry, 3^. 6d. 

Preece & Sivewright's Telegraphy, 3/6. 

Shelley's Workshop Appliances, 3^ 6d. 

Thome's Structural and Physiological 
Botany, 6j-. 

Thorpe's Quantitative Analysis, 4j. 6d. 

Thorpe & Muir's Qualitative Analysis, 
price 3^-. 6d. 

Tilden's Systematic Chemistry, 3^-. 6d. 

Unwin's Machine Design, 3j. 6d. 

Watson's Plane & Solid Geometry, 3/6. 

*«* Other Text-Books, in continuation of 
this Series, in active preparation. 

The Comparative Ana- 
tomy and Physiology of the Verte- 
brate Animals. By Richard Owen, 
F.R.S. With 1,472 Woodcuts. 3 
vols. 8vo. £2,. ly. 6d. 

Kirby and Spence's In- 
troduction to Entomology, or Ele- 
ments of the Natural History of Insects. 
Crovifn 8vo. ^s. 

Light Science for Leisure 

Hours; Familiar Essays on Scientific 
Subjects, Natural Phenomena, &c. 
By R. A. Proctor, B.A. 2 vols, 
crown 8vo. "/s. 6d. each. 

Homes without Hands; 

a Description of the Habitations of 
Animals, classed according to their 
' Prmciple of Construction. By the Rev. 
J. G. Wood, M.A. With about 140 
Vignettes on Wood. 8vo. 14J 

Strange Dwellings ; a De- 
scription of the Habitations of Animals, 
abridged from ' Homes without Hands.' 
By the Rev. J. G. Wood, M.A. With 
Frontispiece and 60 Woodcuts. Crown 
8vo. '/s. 6d 

Insects at Home ; a Popu- 
lar Account of British Insects, their 
Structure, Habits, and Transforma- 
tions. By the^Rev. J. G. Wood, M.A. 
With upwards «f 700 Woodcuts. 8vo. 
price 14^. 

Insects Abroad ; being a 

Popular Account of Foreign Insects, 
their Structure, Habits, and Trans- 
formations. By the Rev. J. G. Wood, 
M.A. With upwards of 700 Wood- 
cuts. 8vo. .14J. 

Out of Doors ; a Selection 

of Original Articles on Practical 
Natural History. By the Rev. J. G.' 
Wood, M.A. With 6 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo. ys. 6d. 

Bible Animals ; a Descrip- 
tion of every Living Creature mentioned 
in the Scriptures, from the Ape to the 
Coral. By the Rev. J. G. Wood, M. A. 
With 112 Vignettes. 8vo. 14J. 

The Polar World : a Pop- 
ular Description of Man and Nature in 
the Arctic and Antarctic Regions of the 
Globe. By Dr. G. Hartwig. With 
Chromoxylographs, Maps, and Wood- 
cuts. 8vo. lo.c. 6d. 

The Sea and its Living 

Wonders. By Dr. G. Hartwig. 
Fourth Edition, enlarged. 8vo. with 
numerous Illustrations, lOf. 6d. 

The Tropical World. By 

Dr. G. Hartwig. With about 200 
Illustrations. Svo. los. 6d. 

The Subterranean 

World. By Dr. G. Hartwig. With 
Maps and Woodcuts. Svo. lar. 6d. 

The Aerial World ; a Pop- 
ular Account of the Phenomena and 
Life of the Atmosphere. By Dr. 
G. Hartwig. With Map, 8 Chromo- 
xylographs & 60 Woodcuts.8vo. 21.S-. 

NEW WORKS published hy LONGMANS c^ CO. 13 

Maunder's Treasury of 

Natural History, or Popular Dic- 
• tionary of Animated Nature; in which 
the Zoological Characteristics that dis- 
tinguish the different Classes, Genera 
and Species, are combined with a variety 
of interesting Information illustrative 
of the Habits, Instincts, and General 
Economy of the Animal Kingdom. 
Fcp. 8vo. with 900 Woodcuts, 6s. 

A Familiar History of 

Birds. By E. Stanley, D.D. late 
Bishop of, Norwich. Fcp. 8vo. with 
Woodcuts, 3^. 6d. 

Rocks Classified and De- 
scribed, By B. Von Cotta. Eng- 
lish Edition by P. H. Lawrence (with 
English, German, and French Syno- 
nymes), revised by the Author. Post 
8v6.i4J'. • , 

The Geology of England 

and Wales ; a Concise Account of 
thi; Lithological Characters, Leading 
Fossils, and Economic. Products of the 
Rocks. By H. B. Woodward, F. G. S. 
Crown Syo. Map & Woodcuts, 14J. 

The Primaeval World of 

Switzerland. By Professor Oswal 
Heer, of the University of Zurich. 
Edited by James Heywood, M.A. 
F.R.S. President of the Statistical 
r Society. With Map, 19 Plates, & 372 
Woodcuts. 2 vols. 8vo. 28j-. 

The Puzzle of Life and 

How it Has Been Put Together : a 

Short History of Vegetable and Animal 
Life upon the Earth from the Earliest 
Times; including an Account of Pre- 
Histoj-ic Man, his Weapons, Tools, 
-and Works. By A. Nicots, F. R. G, S. 
''With 12 lUustratioHS. Crown Svo. $s. 

The Origin of Civilisa- 
tion, and the PriittitiVe Condition of 
Man ; Mental and Social Condition of 
Savages. By Sir ' J. , Lubbock,. Bart. 
, .M.P., F. R,S. .Third Edition, with 25 
\ V^opdeuts.- Svp, lis. ,>.,;,,«... 

The Ancient Stone Im- 

.plementSj We^ons, and Ornaments 
.'of Great Britain. r By John Evans, "^ 
itKfiiSi n With 2) .Plates. and 47&Wodd- 
cuts. .8vo. 28j. .' ' =■' ■■ 

The Elements of Botany 

for Families and Schools. Eleventh 
Edition, revised by Thomas Moore, 
F.L.S. Fcp. 8vo. Woodcuts, 2s. 6d. 

The Rose Amateur's 

Guide. By Thomas Rivers. Latest 
Edition. Fcp. Svo. 4^.. 

A Dictionary of Science^ 

Literature, and Art. Re-edited by- 
the late W. T. Brande (the Author), 
and the Rev. G. W. Cox, M.A. 3 vols..', 
medium Svo. 63^. 

The History of Modern 

Music, a Course of Lectures delivered 
at the Royal Institution of Great 
Britain. By John Hullah. Second 
Edition. Demy Svo. Ss. dd. 

Mr. HuUah's 2nd Course 

' of Lectures on,the Transition Period 
of Musical History, from the 'Beginning 
of the Seventeenth to the Middle of the 
Eighteenth Century. Second Edition, 
Demy Svo. \os. 6d. 

Structural and Physio- 
logical Botany. By Otto W. Tnout, 
Professor of Botany at the School of 
Science and Art, Cologne. Translated 
and edited by A. W. Bennett, M.A.- 
B.Sc. F.L.S. Lecturer on Botany at 
St. Thomas's Hospital. With about 
600 Woodcuts and ' a 'Coloured Map .. 
Small Svo. 6s. 

The Treasury of Botany, 

...or Popular Dictionary of the Vegetable 
'" Kingdom ; with which' is. iiicofporated 

a Glossary of Botanical Terms. ' Edited 

by J. LiNDLEY, F-R.'S; and' T. 

Moore, F.L.S. With 274 Wo.Qdcuts. 

And 20.a:eel Plates- Two Parts,- fcp. 

Svo. I2S. 

Loudon*s Ehcyclbpaedia 

.of Plants ; pomprjsijig. the Specific 
Character,- Description, Culture, His- 
.topy; &Ci of all the Plants. found in 
Greai Britain.'." With 'up-wards of 
l!2,00d Wdodciits. ■8vo.".'4-2j'. ■ 

14 NEW WORKS published 

De Caisne & Le Maout's 

System of Descriptive and Analy- 
tical Botany. Translated by Mrs. 
Hooker ; edited and arranged accord- 
ing to the English Botanical System, by 
J. D. Hooker, M.D. With 5,500 
Woodcuts. Imperial 8vo. 31^. dd. 

Hand-Book of Hardy 

Trees, Shrubs, and Herbaceous 
Plants ; containing Descriptions &c. 
of the Best .Species in Cultivation. 
With 720 Original Woodcut Illustra- 
tions. By W. B. Heilsley. Medium 
8vo. 12s. 

CHEMISTRY and PHYSIOLOGY. 

Miller's Elements of Che- 
mistry, Theoretical and Practical. 
Re-edited, with Additions, by H. 
MACLEOD, F.-C.S. 3 vols. 8vo. 

Part I. Chemicai, Physics, New 

Edition in the press. 
Part II. Inorganic Chemistry, 2ij. 
Part III. Organic Chemistry, New 

Edition in the press. 

Health in the House : 

Twenty-five Lectures on Elementary 
Physiology in its Application to the 
Daily Wants of Man and Animals. 
By Mrs. C. M. BucKTON. Crown 8vo. 
"Woodcuts, 2s. 

Outlines of Physiology, 

Human and Comparative. By J. 
Marshall, F.R.C.S. Surgeon to the 
University College Hospital. 2 vols, 
crown Svo. with 122 Woodcuts, 32^. 

An Introduction to the 

study of Chemical Philosophy ; or, 

the Principles of Theoretical and 
Systematic Chemistry. By W. A. 
TiLDEN, F.C.S. Small Svo. 3^. (>d. 

Select Methods in Che- 

mical Analysis, chiefly Inorganic. By 
Wm. Crookes, r.R.S. With 22 
Woodcuts. Crown Svo. I2j. dd. 

A Dictionary of Chemis- 
try and the Allied Branches of other 
Sciences. By Henry Watts, F.C.S. 
assisted by eminent Scientific and 
Practical Chemists. 7 vols, medium 
Svo. £\o. i6j-. td. 

Supplementary Volume, 

completing the Record of Chemical Dis- 
covery to the year 1S76. 

[/« preparation. 

The FINE ARTS and ILLUSTRATED 
EDITIONS. 

Poems. By W. B. Scott. 

Illustrated by Seventeen Etchings by 
L. A. Tadema and W. B. Scott. 
Crown Svo. \%s. 

Half-hour Lectures on 

the History and Practice of the 
Fine and Ornamental Arts. By W. 

B. ScoTT. Cr. Svo. Woodcuts, %s. dd. 

A Dictionary of Artists of 

the English School : Painters, Sculp- 
tors, Architects, Engravers, and Orna- 
imentists. By S. Redgrave. Svo. 16^. 

In Fairyland ; Pictures 

from the Elf-World. By Richard 
Doyle. With a Poem by W. Al- 
lingham. With 16 coloured Plates, 
containing 36 Designs. Folioj l^s. 

Lord Macaulay's Lays of 

Andent Rome. With 90 Illustrations 
on Wood from Drawings by G. Scharf. 
Fcp. 4to. 2is. 

Miniature Edition, with 

G. Scharf's 90 Illustrations reduced in 
Lithography. Imp. i6mo. 10s. 6d. 

yr U2\.j).^. yuuu>,hed by LONGMANS 6^ CO. 15 

Moore's , Lalla Rookh, 

•Tenniel's Edition, with 68 Wood En- 
gravings from Original Drawings. Fcp. 
4to. 2 1 J. 

Moore's Irish Melodies, 

Maclise's Edition, witli 161 Steel 
Plates. Super royal 8vo. 21s. 

The New Testament, 

Illustrated with. Wood Engravings after 
the Early Masters, chiefly of the Italian 
School. Crown 4to. 63^. 

Sacred and Legendary 

Art. By Mrs. Jameson. 6 vols, 
square crown Svo. price ;^5. I5.r. (>d. 

Legends of the Saints 

and Martyrs. With 19 Etchings and 
187 Woodcuts. 2 vols. 31J. dd. 

Legends of the Monastic 

Orders. With 11 iEtchings and 88 
Woodcuts. I vol. 2IJ-. 

Legends of the Madonna. 

With 27 Etchings and 165 Woodcuts. 
I vol. 21J. 

The History of our Lord, 

with that of his Types and Precursors. 
Completed by Lady Easti.ake. With 
13 Etchings and 281 Woodcuts. 2 
vols. 42J. 

The Three Cathedrals 

dedicated to St. Paul in London ; 

their History from the Foundation of 
the First Building in the Sixth Century 
to the Proposals for the Adornment of 
the Present Cathedral. By W. Long- 
man, F.S.A. With numerous Illus- 
trations. Square crown Svo. 21s. 

The USEFUL ARTS, MANUFACTURES, &e. 

The Amateur Mechanics' 

Practical Handbook ; describing the 

different Tools required in the Work- 

, shop, the uses of them, and how to use 

, them. By A. H. G. Hobson. With 

33 Woodcuts. Crown Svo. 2s. 6d. 

The Engineer's Valuing 

Assistant. By H. T>. IIoskold, 
Civil and Mining Engineer, 16 years 
Mining Engineer to the Dean Forest 
Iron Company. Svo. [In the press. 

The Whitworth Mea- 

suring Machine ; including Descrip- 
tions of the Surface Plates, Gauges, and 
other Measuring Instruments made by 
Sir J. Whitworth, Bart. By T. M. 
GoODEVE, M.A. and C. P. B. Shel- 
ley, C.E. Fcp. 4to. with 4 Plates 
and 44 Woodcuts. [Nearly ready. 

Industrial Chemistry; a 

Manual for Manufacturers and for Col- 
leges or Technical Schools ; a Transla- 
tion'of Stohmann and Engler's German 
Edition of Payen's ' Precis de Chimie 
Industrielle,' by Dr. J. D. Barry. 
With Chapters on the Chemistry of the 
Metals, by B. H. Paul, Ph.D. Svo. 
Plates & Woodcuts. [In the press. 

Gwilt's Encyclopaedia of 

Architecture, with above 1,600 Wood- 
cuts. Revised and extended by Wl. 
Papworth. Svo. yis. dd. 

Lathes and Turning, Sim- 
pie, Mechanical, and Ornamental. By 
W. H. NORTHCOTT. Second Edition, 
with 338 Illustrations. Svo. iSj'. 

Hints on Household 

Taste in Furniture, Upholstery, 

and other Details. By C. L. East- 
lake. With about 90 Illustrations... 
Square crown Svo. l+r. 

Handbook of Practical 

Telegraphy. By R. S. Culley, 
Memb. Insti C.E. Engineer-in-Chief~ 
of Telegraphs to the Post-Office. 8vo^ 
Plates & Woodcuts, ids. 

A Treatise on the Steam 

Engine, in its various applications to 
Mines, Mills, Steam Navigation, Rail- 
ways and Agriculture. By J. Bourne, 
C.E. With Portrait, 37 Plates, and 
546 Woodcuts. 4to. 42J. > 

Recent Improvements in 

the steam Engine. By J, Bourne, 
C.E. Fcp. Svo. Woodcuts, 6s. 

C 

i6 NEW WORKS published h_ 

Catechism of the Steam 

Engfine, in its various Applications. 
By John Bourne, C.E. Fcp. 8vo. 
Woodcuts, ts. 

Handbook of the Steam 

Engine By J. Bourne, C.E. form- 
ing a Key to the Autlior's Catechism of 
the Steam Engine. Fcp. 8vo. Wood- 
cuts, tjs. 

Encyclopaedia of Civil 

Engineering, Historical, Theoretical, 
and Practical. By E. Cresy, C.E. 
With above 3,000 Woodcuts. 8vo. \2s. 

Ure's Dictionary of Arts, 

Manufactures, and Mines. Seventh 
Edition, re-written and enlarged by R. 
Hunt, F.R.S. assisted by numerous 
contributors. With 2, 100 Woodcuts. 
3 vols, medium 8vo. ;r^'5. ^s. 

Vol. IV. Supplementary, completing all 
the Departments of the Dictionary to 
the beginning of the year 1877, is pre- 
paring for publication. 

Practical Treatise on Me- 
tallurgy. Adapted from the last 
German Edition of Professor Kerl's 
Metallurgy by W. Crookes, F.R.S. 
&c. and E. Rohrig, Ph.D. 3 vols. 
8vo. with 625 Woodcuts. £a,. igj-. 

The Theory of Strains in 

Girders and similar Structures, with 
Observations on the application of 
Theory to Practice, and Tables of the 
Strength and other Properties of Ma- 
terials. By B. B. Stoney, M.A. 
M. Inst. C.E. Royal 8vo. with 5 
Plates and 123 Woodcuts, 36^-. 

Treatise on Mills and 

Millwork. By Sir W. Faireairn, 
Bt. With 18 Plates and 322 Wood- 
cuts. 2 vols. 8vo. -xzs. 

Useful Information for 

Engineers. By Sir W. Faireairn, 
Bt. With many Plates and Woodcuts. 
3 vols, crown 8vo. 3IJ-. dd. 

The Application of Cast 

and Wrought Iron to Building 
Purposes. By Sir W. Faireairn, 
Bt. With 6 Plates and 1 18 Woodcuts. 
8vo. ids. 

Practical Handbook of 

Dyeing and Calico-Prlnting. By 

W. Crookes, F.R.S. &c. With 
numerous Illustrations and specimens 
of Dyed Textile Fabrics. 8vo. 42 j. 

Anthracen ; its Constitution, 

Properties, Manufacture, and Deriva- 
tives, including Artificial Alizarin, An- 
thrapurpurin, &c. with their Applica- 
tions in Dyeing and Printing. By G. 
Auerbach. Translated by W. 
Crookes, F.R.S. 8vo. 12s. 

Mitchell's Manual of 

Practical Assaying. Fourth Edition, 
revised, with the Recent Discoveries 
incorporated, by W. Crookes, F.R.S. 
Crown Svo.. Woodcuts, 3 1 j. dd. 

Loudon's Encyclopaedia 

of Gardening ; comprising the Theory 
and Practice of Horticulture, Floricul- 
ture, Arboriculture, and Landscape 
Gardening. With 1,000 Woodcuts. 
Svo. 21/. 

Loudon's Encyclopaedia 

of Agriculture ; comprising the Lay- 
ing-out, Improvement, and Manage- 
ment of Landed Property, and the 
Cultivation and Economy of the Pro- 
ductions of Agriculture. With i,ioo 
Woodcuts. Svo. 2IJ. 

RELIGIOUS and MORAL ^^^ORKS. 

An Exposition of the 39 

Articles, Historical and Doctrinal. By 
E. H. Browne, D.D. Bishop of Win- 
chester. Latest Edition. Svo. i6j. 

An Introduction to the 

Theology of the Church of England, 
in an Exposition of the 39 Articles. By 
T. P. BouLTBEE, LL.D. Fcp. Svo. 6x. 

JSlLW WORKS published by LONGMANS 6- C0\ 17 

Historical Lectures on 

the Life of Our Lord Jesus Christ. 
By C. J. Elucott, D.D. 8va \zs. 

Sermons Chiefly on the 

Interpretation of Scripture. By the 
late Rev. Thomas Arnold, D.D. 
8vo. Is. 6d. 

Sermons preached in the 

Chapel of Rugby School ; with an 
Address before Confirmation. By 
Thomas Arnold, D.D. Fcp. 8vo. 
price y. dd. 

Christian Life, its Course, 

its Hindrances, and its Helps ; Ser- 
mons preached mostly in the Chapel of 
Rugby School. By Thomas Arnold, 
D.D. 8vo. -js. 6d. 

Christian Life, its Hopes, 

its Fears, and its Close ; Sermons 
preached mostly in the Chapel of Rugby 
School. By Thomas Arnold, D.D. 
8vo. "js. 6d. 

Synonyms of the Old Tes- 

, tament, their Bearing on Christian 
' Faith and Practice. By the Rev. R. B. 
GiRDLESTONE. 8vo. 15^. 

The Primitive and Ca- 
tholic Faith in Relation to the 
Church of England. By the Rev. B. 

W. Savile, M.A. 8vo. 7^. 

The Eclipse of Faith ; or 

a Visit to a Religious Sceptic. By 
Henry Rogers. Latest Edition. 
Fcp. Svo. Jj-. 

Defence of the Eclipse of 

Faith. By Henry Rogers. Latest 
Edition. Fcp. Svo. y. 6d. 

Three Essays on Reli- 
gion: Nature; the Utility of Religion ; 
Theism. By John Stuart Mill. 
Svo. los. 6d. 

A Critical and Gram- 
matical Commentary on St. Paul's 
Epistles. By C. J. Ellicott, D.D. 
Svo. Galatians, 8j. 6d. Ephesians, 
&s. dd. Pastoral Epistles, los. 6d. 
Philippians, Colossians, & PWlemon, . 
los. 6d. Thessalonians, "js. 6d. 

The Life and Epistles of 

St. Paul. By Rev. W. J. Conybeare, 
M.A. and Very Rev. John Saul How- 
son, D.D. Dean of Chester. Three 
Editions, copiously illustrated. 

Library Edition, with all the Original 
Illustrations, Maps, Landscapes on 
Steel, Woodcuts, &c. 2 vols. 4to. 42J. 

Intermediate Edition, with a Selection 
of Maps, Plates, and Woodcuts. 2 vols, ,. 
square crown Svo. 21s. 

student's Edition, revised and con- 
densed, with 46 Illustrations and Maps. ' 
I vol. crown Svo. gj. 

Evidence of the Truth of 

the Christian Religfion derived from, 
the Literal Fulfilment of Prophecy. By 
Alexander Keith, D.D. 40th- 
Edition, with numerous Plates. Square; 
Svo. 12s. 6d. or in post Svo. with 5 
Plates, 6^. 

The Prophets and Pro- 
phecy in Israel ; an Historical and 
Critical Inquiry. By Dr. A. Kuenen,, 
Prof, of Theol. in the Univ. of Leyden. 
Translated from the Dutch by the Rev. 
A. MiLROY, M.A. with an Introduc- 
tion by J. MuiR, D.C.L. Svo. 21s. 

Mythology among the 

Hebrews and its Historical Develop- 
ment. By Ignaz Goldziher, Ph.D. 
Translated by Russell MartineAu„ 
M.A. Svo. i6j-. 

Historical and Critical 

Commentary on the Old Testament ; 

with a New Translation. By M. M. 
Kalisch, Ph.D. Vol. I. Genesis, 
Svo. iSj-. or adapted for the General 
Reader, I2.f. Vol. 11. Exodus, 15^. or 
adapted for the General Reader, 12^. 
Vol. III. Leviticus, Part I. i^s. or 
adapted for the General Reader, 8y. 
Vol. IV. Leviticus, Part II. 1^,3. or 
adapted for the General Reader, Sj-. 

1 8 NEW WORKS puWshed by 

The History and Litera- 
ture of the Israelites, according to 
tlie Old Testament and the Apocrypha. 
By C. De Rothschild & A. De 
Rothschild. 2 vols, crown 8vo. 
I2J. U. Abridged Edition, I vol. fcp. 
8vo. 3^. dd. 

Ewald's History of Israel. 

Translated from the German by J. E. 
Carpenter, M.A. with Preface by R. 
Martineau, M.A. 5 vols. 8vo. 63J-. 

Ewald's Antiquities of 

Israel. Translated from the German 
by H. S. Solly, M.A. 8vo. 12^. 6(/. 

Behind the Veil ; an Out- 
line of Bible Metaphysics compared 
with Ancient and Modern Thought. 
By the Rev. T. Griffith, M.A. Pre- 
bendary of St. Paul's. 8vo. loj. td. 

The Trident, the Cres- 
cent & the Cross ; a View of the 
Religious History of India during the 
Hindu, Buddhist, Mohammedan, and 
Christian Periods. By the Rev. J. 
Vaughan, Nineteen Years Missionary 
in India. 8vo. gj. bd. 

The Types of Genesis, 

briefly considered as revealing the 
Development of Human Nature. By 
Andrew Jukes. Crown 8vo. 7^. dd. 

The Second Death and 

the Restitution of all Things ; with 
some Preliminary Remarks on the 
Nature and Inspiration of Holy Scrip- 
ture. By A. Jukes. Crown 8vo. 3J-. dd. 

History of the Reforma- 
tion in Europe in the time of Calvin. 
By the Rev. J. H. Merle D'Au- 
bign£, D.D. Translated by W. L. 
R. Gates. 7 vols. 8vo. price .^5. i \s. 

Vol. VIII. translated byW. L. R. Gates, 
and completing the English Edition of 
Dr. D'AuBlGNli's Work, is in the press. 

Supernatural 

an Inquiry into the 
Revelation. 2 vols. 

Religion ; 

Reality of Divine 
8vo. 24J-. 

Commentaries, by the Rev. 

W. A. O'CoNOR, B.A. Rector of St. 
Simon and St. Jude, Manchester. 

Epistle to the Romans, crown 8vo. 3^. bd. 
Epistle to the Hebrews, 4J. 6rf. 
St. John's Gospel, \os. 6d. 

An Introduction to the 

study of the New Testament, 
Exegetical, and Theological. By the 
Rev. S. Davidson, D.D. L.L.D. 
2 vols. 8vo. 3ar. 

Passing Thoughts on 

Religion. ByELizABETHM. Sewell. 
Fcp. 8vo. 3J-. 6(/. 

Thoughts for the Age. 

by Elizabeth M. Sewell. New 
Edition. Fcp. 8vo. 31. 6d. 

Some Questions of the 

Day. By Elizabeth M. Sewell. 
Crown 8vo. 2s. bd. 

Self-examination before 

Confirmation. By Elizabeth M. 
Sewell. 32mo. \s. 6d. 

Preparation for the Holy 

Communion ; the Devotions chiefly 
from the works of Jeremy Taylor. By 
Elizabeth M. Sewell. 32mo. 3^. 

Bishop Jeremy Taylor's 

Entire Works ; with Life by Bishop 
Heber. Revised and corrected by the 
Rev. C. P. Eden. 10 vols. £S- S-f- 

Hymns of Praise and 

Prayer. Corrected and edited by 
Rev. John Martineau, LL.D. 
Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d. 32mo. is. td. 

Spiritual Songs for the 

Sundays and Holidays throughout 
the Year. By J. S. B. Monsell, 
LL.D. Fcp. 8vo. Sj. iSmo. 2!-. 

Lyra Germanica ; Hymns 

translated from the German by Miss C. 
Winkworth. Fcp. Svo. 5^-. 

TT^ — nuii-ii.^ jjiuuuiHiJ by LONGMANS &• CO. 19 

Hours of Thought on 

Sacred Things ; a Volume of Ser- 
mons. By James Martineau, D.D. 
LL.rj. Crown 8vo. Price ^s. 6d. 

Endeavours after the 

Christian Life ; Discourses. By 
Tames Martineau, D.D. LL.D. 
Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo. 7j-. 6d. 

The Pentateuch & Book 

of Joshua Critically Examined. 
By J. W. COLENSO, D.D. Bishop of 
Natal. Cfown 8vo. 6^. 

Lectures on the Penta- 
teuch and the Moabite Stone ; with 
Appendices. By J. W. Colenso, 
D.D. Bishop of Natal. 8vo. I2j. 

TRAVELS, VOYAGES, &e. 

A Year in Western 

France. By M. Betham-Edwards. 
Crown 8vo. Frontispiece, 10s. 6d. 

Journal of a Residence in 

Vienna and Berlin during the event- 
ful Winter 1805-6. By the late Henry 
Reeve, M. D. Published by his Son. 
" Crown 8vo. 8j. (>d. 

One Thousand Miles lip 

the Nile; a Journey through Egypt 
and Nubia to the Second Cataract. 
By Amelia B. Edwards. With Fac- 
similes of Inscriptions, Ground Plans, 
Two Colt)ured Maps, and 80 Illustra- 
tions engraved on Wood from Draw- 
ings by the Author. Imperial 8vo. 42^-. 

The Indian Alps, and How 

we Crossed them : a Narrative of 
Two Years' Residence in the Eastern 
Himalayas, and Two Months' Tour into 
the Interior. By a. Lady Pioneer. 
With Illustrations from Original Draw- 
ings by the Author. Imperial 8vo. 42X. 

Discoveries at Ephesus, 

Including the Site and Remains of the 
Great Temple of Diana. By J. T. 
Wood, F.S.A. With 27 Lithographic 
Plates and 42 Wood Engravings. Me- 
dium 8vo. 63J. 

Through Bosnia and the 

Herzegovina on Foot during the 
Insurrection, August and September 
' 1875. By Arthur J. Evans, B.A. 
F.S.A. Second Edition. Map & 
Illustrations. 8vo. i8j. 

Italian Alps ; Sketches in 

the Mountains of Ticino, Lombardy, 
the Trentino, and Venetia. By Dou- 
glas W. Freshfield. Square crown 
8vo. Illustrations, 15^. 

Over the Sea and Far 

Away ; a Narrative of a Ramble 
round the World. By T. W. HlNCH- 
LIFF, M.A. F.R.G.S. President of 
the Alpine Club. With 14 full-page 
Illustrations engraved on Wood. Me- 
dium 8vo. 21s. 

The Frosty Caucasus ; an 

Account of a Walk through Part of the 
Range, and of an Ascent of Elbruz in 
the Summer of 1874. ByF. C. Grove. 
With Eight Illustrations and a Map. 
Crown 8vo. price I5J-. 

Tyrol and the Tyrolese; 

an Account of the People and the 
Land, in their Social, Sporting, and 
Mountaineering Aspects. By W. A. 
Baillie Grohman. Crown 8vo. with 
Illustrations, 14J. 

Two Years in Fiji, a De- 
scriptive Narrative of a Residence in the 
Fijian Group of Islands. By Litton 
Forbes, M.D. Crown 8vo. 8j. 6d. 

Memorials of the Dis- 
covery and Early Settlement of the 
Bermudas or Somers Islands, from 
1615 to 1685. By Major-General J. 
H. Lefroy, R.A. C.B. F.R.S. &c. 
Governor of the Bermudas. 8vo. with 
Map. \/n thepr'ess. 

Eight Years in Ceylon. 

By Sir Samuel W. Baker, M.A. 
Crown 8vo. Woodcuts, Is. 6d. 

The Rifle and the Hound 

in Ceylon. By Sir Samuel W. Baker, 
M.A. Crown 8to. Woodcuts, "Js. 6d. 

20 NEW WORKS published ir 

The Dolomite Moiin- 

tains. Excursions- through- Tyrol, 
Carinthia, Catniola, and Friuli.' By J. 
GiLBF.RT and ' G. C. Cl-IURCHILL, 
F. R.G. S. Square crown 8vo. lUus- 
trations, z\s. - ' ^ 

The Alpine Club Map of 

the Chain of Mont Blanc, from an 
actual Survey in 1863-1864. By A. 
Adams-Reilly, F.R.G.S. InChromo- 
lithography, on extra stout ' drawing 

- paper 10J-. or mounted on canvas in a 

■ folding case 12s. 6d. 

The Alpine Club Map of 

the Valpelline, the Val Tournanche, 
and the Southern Valleys of the 
Chain of Monte Rosa, from actual 
Survey. By A. Adams-Reilly, 
F.R.G.S. Price 6s. on extra stout 
drawing paper, or Js. 6d. mounted in a 
folding case. 

Untrodden Peaks and 

Unfrequented Valleys ; a Midsummer 
Ramble among the Dolomites. By 
Amelia B. Ed-wards. With numerous 
Illustrations. 8vo. 21s. 

Guide to the Pyrenees, 

for the use of Mountaineers. By 
Charles Packe. Crown Svo. ys. 6d. 

The Alpine Club Map of 

Switzerland, with parts of the Neigh- 
bouring Countries, on the scale of Four 
Miles to an Inch. Edited by R. C. 
Nichols, F.R.G.S. In Four Sheets 
in Portfolio, price 4.2s. coloured, or 34J-. 
uncoloured. 

The Alpine Guide. By 

John Ball, M.R.I.A. late President 
of the Alpine Club. Post Svo. with 
Maps and other Illustrations. 

The Eastern Alps, lo^. 6d. 
Central Alps, including all 

the Oberland District, ys. 6d. 

Western Alps, including 

Mont Blanc, Monte Rosa, Zermatt, &c. 
Price 6s. 6d. 

Introduction on Alpine 

Travelling in g-eneral, and on the 
Geology of the Alps. Price \s. Either 
of the Three Volumes or Parts of the 
' Alpine Guide ' may be had with this 
Introduction prefixed, \s. extra. The 
' Alpine Guide ' may also be had in 
Ten separate Parts, or districts, price 
2s. 6d. each. 

How to see Norway, By 

J. R. Campbell. Fcp. 8vo. Map & 
Woodcuts, 5j. 

WORKS of FICTION. 

The, Atelier du Lys ; or an 

Art-Student in the Reign of Terror. 
By the author of ' Mademoiselle Mori.' 
Third Edition. Crown Svo. 6s. 

Novels and Tales. By the 

Right Hon. the Earl of Beacons- 
field. Cabinet Editions, complete in 
Ten Volumes, crown Svo. 6s. each. 

Lothair, 6s. Venetia, 6s. 

Coningsby, 6s. Alroy, Ixion, &c. 6s. 
Sybil, 6s. Young Duke &c. 6s. 

Tancred, 6s. Vivian Grey, 6s. 

Henrietta Temple, 6^^. 

Contarini Fleming, &c. 6s. 

Whispers from Fairy- 
land. By the Right Hon. E. H. 
Knatcheull-Hugessen, M.P. With 
9 Illustrations. Crown Svo. 6s. 

Higgledy-piggledy; or. 

Stories for Everybody and Every- 
body's Children. By the Right. Hon. 
E. H. Knatchbull-Hugessen, M.P; 
With 9 Illustrations. Crown Svo. 6j-. 

Becker's Gallus ; or Roman 

Scenes of the Time of Augustus. Post 
Svo. 7^-. 6d. 

Becker's Charicles : Illus- 
trative of Private Life of the Ancient 
Greeks. Post Svo. "js. 6d. 

The Modern Novelist's 

Library. 
Lothair. By the Rt. Hon. the Earl of 

Beaconsfield. Price 2s. boards ; or 

2s. dd. cloth. 
Atherstone Priory, 2s. boards; 2s. dd. cloth. 
Mile. Mori, is. boards ; t.s. 6d. cloth. 
The Burgomaster's Family, 2s. & 2s. 6d. 
Melville's Digby Grand, 2s. and 2s. 6d. 

General Bounce, as. & 2s. 6d. 

Gladiators, 2s. and 2j>. 6d. 

Goodfor Nothing, 2j. &2J. 6;^. 

Holmby House, 2s. & 2s. 6d. 

Interpreter, 2s. and 2s. 6d. 

Kate Coventry, 2s. and 2s. 6d. 

Queen's Maries, 2s. & 2s. 6d. 

Trollope's Warden, 2s. and 2s. 6d. 

Barchester Towers, 2s. & 2s. 6d. 

Bramley-Moore's Six Sisters of the 

Valleys, 2s. boards ; 2s. 6d. cloth. 
Elsa, a Tale of the Tyrolean Alps. 

Price 2s. boards ; 2s. 6d. cloth. 
Unawares, a Story of an old French 

Town. Price 2s. boards ; 2s. dd. cloth. 

r Y-'-d by LONGMANS &- CO. 21 

POETRY and 
Milton's Lycidas. Edited, 

with Notes and Introduction, by C. S. 
Jerram, M.A. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d. 

Lays of Ancient Rome; 

with Ivry and the Armada. By Lord 
,Macaulay. i6mo. y. 6d. 

Lord Macaulay's Lays of 

Ancient Rome. With 90 Illustrations 
on Wood from Drawings byG. ScHARF. 
Fcp. 4to. 2 1 J. 

Miniature Edition of Lord 

Macaulay's Lays of Ancient Rome. 

with G. Scharf s 90 Illustrations reduced 
in Lithography. Imp. l6mo. los. 6d. 

Horatii Opera. Library 

Edition, with English Notes, Marginal 
References & various Readings. Edited 
by the Rev. J. E. YoNGE, M.A. 8vo. 
price 21 s. 

Southey's Poetical 

Works, with the Author's- last Cor- 
rections and Additions. Medium 8vo. 
with Portrait, 14-!-. 

Stories and Tales. By 

Elizabeth M. Sewell. Cabinet 
Edition, in Ten Volumes, each contain- 
ing a complete Tale or Story : — 

Amy Herbert, 2s. 6d. 

Gertrude, 2s. 6d. 

The Earl's Daughter, 2s. 6d. 

Experience of Life, 2s. 6d. 

Cleve Hall, 2s. 6d. 

Ivors, 2s. 6d. 

Katharine Ashton, 2s, 6d. 

Margaret Percival, 3J. 6d. 

Laneton Parsonage, y. 6d. 

Ursula, 3 J. 6d. 

Tales of Ancient Greece. 

By the Rev. G. W. Cox, M.A. late. 
Scholar of Trinity College, Oxford. 
Crown 8vo. 6s. 6d. 

THE DRAMA. 
Beowulf, a Heroic Poem 

of the Eighth Century (Anglo-Saxon 
Text and English Translation), with' 
Introduction, Notes, and Appendix. 
By Thomas Arnold, M.A. 8vo. 12s. 

Poems by Jean Ingelow. 

2 vols. fcp. 8vo. los. 
First Series, containing 'Divided,' 'The 

Star's Monument,' &c. Fcp. 8vo. ^s. 
Second Series, 'A Story of Doom,' 

' Gladys and her Island,' &c. 5j. 

Poems by Jean Ingelow. 

First Series, with nearly 100 Woodcut 
Illustrations. Fcp. 4to. 2ij-. 

The Iliad of Homer, Ho- 

mometrically translated by C. B. 
Cayley, Translator of Dante's Comedy, 
&c. 8vo. 12^. 6d. 

The -^neid of Virgil. 

Translated into English Verse. By J. , 
CoNlNGTON, M.A. Crown 8vo. 9^. 

Bowdler's Family Shak- 

speare. Cheaper Genuine Edition, 
-j^niplete in I vol. medium Svo. large 
type, with 36 Woodcut Illustrations, 
14}. or in 6 vols. fcp. Svo. 21s. 

22 NEW WORKS published 

RURAL SPORTS, HORSE and CATTLE 
MANAGEMENT, &c. 

Annals of the Road ; or, 

Notes bn Mail and Stage-Coaching in 
Great Britain. By Captain Malet, 
. 1 8th Hussars. To which are added 
Essays on the Road, by Nimrod. 
With 3 Woodcuts and lo Coloured 
Illustrations. Medium 8vo. 2\s. 

Down the Road ; or, Re- 
miniscences of a Gentleman Coachman. 
By C. T. S. Birch Reynardson. 
Second Edition, with 12 Coloured 
lUustrations. Medium 8vo. 2\s. 

Blaine's Encyclopaedia of 

Rural Sports ; Complete Accounts, 
Historical, Practical, and Descriptive, 
of Hunting, Shooting, Fishing, Racing, 
c&c. With above 6oo Woodcuts (20 
from Designs by J. Leech). 8vo. 2ij. 

A Book on Angling ; or, 

Treatise on the Art of Fishing in every 
branch ; including full Illustrated Lists 
of Salmon Flies. By Francis Francis. 
Post 8vo. Portrait and Plates, 15^. 

Wilcocks's Sea-Fisher- 
men : comprising the Chief Methods 
of Hook and Line Fishing, a glance at 
Nets, and remarks on Boats and Boat- 
ing. Post 8vo. Woodcuts, I2.f. td. 

The Fly-Fisher's Ento- 
mology. By Alfred Ronalds. 

With 20 Coloured Plates. 8vo. 14J. 

Horses and Stables. By 

Colonel F. Fitzwygram, XV. the 
King's Hussars. With 24 Plates of 
Illustrations. 8vo. loj-. 6d. 

Youatt on the Horse. 

Revised and enlarged by W. WATspN, 
M.R.C.V.S. 8vo. Woodcuts, 12s. dd. 

Youatt's Work on the 

Dog. Revised and enlarged. !vo. 
Woodcuts, 6/. 

The Dog in Health and 

Disease. By Stonehenge. With 
73 Wood Engravings. Square crown 
8vo. 7J-. 6rf. 

The Greyhound. By 

Stonehenge. Revised Edition, with 
25 PortrEits of Greyhounds, &c. 
Square crown 8vo. 15^. 

Stables and Stable Fit- 
tings. By W. Miles. Imp. Svo. 

with 13 Plates, 15^. 

The Horse's Foot, and 

How to keep it Sound. By W. 
Miles. Imp. 8vo. Woodcuts, I2j-. dd. 

A Plain Treatise on 

Horse-shoeing. By W. Miles. Post 
Svo. Woodcuts, 2,s. 6d. 

Remarks on Horses' 

Teeth, addressed to Piurchasers. By 
W. Miles. Post Svo. ij-. 6d. 

The Ox, his Diseases and 

their Treatment ; with an Essay on 
Parturition in the Cow. By J. R. 
DoBSON, M.R.C.V.S. Crown Svo. 
Illustrations, "js. (>J. 

f> u.tL.n..j jiuuuiiitd by LONGMANS 6^ CO. 23 

^ATORKS of UTILITY and GENERAL 
INFORMATION. 

Maunder's Treasury of 

Knowledge and LibrarySif Refer- 
ence ; comprising an English Diction- 
ary and Grammar, Universal Gazetteer, 
Classical Dictionary, Chronology, Law- 
Dictionary, Synopsis of the Peerage, 
Useful Tables, &c. Fcp. 8vo. 6s. 

Maunder's Biographical 

Treasury. Latest Edition, recon- 
structed and partly re-written, with 
above 1,600 additional Memoirs, by 
W. L. R. Gates. Fcp. 8vo. 6^. 

Maunder's Scientific and 

Literary Treasury; a Popular En- 
cyclopaedia of Science, Literature, and 
Art. Latest Edition, in part re- 
written, with above 1,000 new articles, 
by J- Y. Johnson. Fcp. 8vo. 6s. 

Maunder's Treasury of 

Geography, Physical, Historical, 
Descriptive, and Political. Edited by 
W. Hughes, F.R.G.S. With 7 Maps 
and 16 Plates. Fcp. 8vo. 6s. 

Maunder's Historical 

Treasury ; General Introductory Out- 
lines of Universal History, and a Series 
of Separate Histories . Revised by the 
Rev. G. W. Cox, M.A. Fcp.Svo. 6s. 

Maunder's Treasury of 

Natural History ; or. Popular Dic- 
tionary of Zoology. Revised and 
corrected Edition. Fcp. 8vo. with 
900 Woodcuts, 6s. 

The Treasury of Bible 

Knowledge ; being a Dictionary of 
the Books, Persons, Places, Events, 
and other Matters of which mention is 
made in Holy Scripture. By the Rev. 
J. AYRE, M.A. With Maps, Plates, 
and many 'Vi'oodcuts. Fcp. 8vo. 6s. 

A Practical Treatise on 

Brewing ; with Forraulpe for Pubhc 
Brewers & Instructions for Private Fam- 
ilies. By W. Black. 8vo. ioj-. 6cl. 

Chess Openings. ByF.W, 

Longman, Balliol College, Oxford. 
Second Edition. Fcp. 8vo. 2s. 6d. - 

English Chess Problems. 

Edited by J. Pierce, M.A. and W., 
T. Pierce. With 608 Diagrams.. 
Crown 8vo. \zs. 6d. 

The Theory of the Mo- 
dem Scientific Game of Whist. 
By W. Pole, F.R.S. Eighth Edition. 
Fcp. 8vo. IS. 6d. 

The Correct Card ; or, 

How to Play at Whist ; a Whist 
Catechism. By Captain A. Campbell- 
■Walker, F.R.G.S. New Edition. 
Fcp. 8vo. zs. 6d. 

The Cabinet Lawyer; a 

Popular Digest of the Laws of England, 
Civil, Criminal, and Constitutional. 
Twenty-Fourth Edition, corrected and 
extended. Fcp. 8vo. <)s. 

Pewtner's Compre- 
hensive Specifier; a Guide to the 

Practical Specification of every kind of 
Building- Artificer's Work. Edited by 
W. Young. Crovm 8vo. 6s. 

Hints to Mothers on the 

Management of their Health during 
the Period of Pregnancy and in the 
Lying-in Room. By Thomas Bull, 
M.D. Fcp. 8vo, IS. 6d. 

The Maternal Manage- 
ment of Children in Health and 
Disease. By Thomas Bull, M.D. 
Fcp. 8vo. 2s. 6d. 

The Treasury of Botany, 

or Popular Dictionary of the Vegetable 
Kingdom ; with which is incorporated 
a Glossary of Botanical Terms. Edited 
by J. LiNDLEY, F.R.S. and T. Moore, 
F.L.S. With 274 Woodcuts and 20 
Steel Plates. Two Parts, fcp. 8vo. 12s. 

D 

24 NEW- WORKS published ^ 

Modern Cookery for Pri- 
vate Families, reduced to a System 
of Easy Practice in a Series of carefully- 
tested Receipts. By Eliza Acton. 
With 8 Plates and 150 Woodcuts. Fcp. 
8vo. iis. 

The Elements of Bank- 

' ing-. By H. D. Macleod, M.A. 
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Is. td. 

The Theory and Practice 

of Banking-. By H. D. Macleod, 
M.A. 2 vols. Svo. 26j. 

Our New Judicial System 

and Civil Procedure as Reconstructed 
under the Judicature Acts, including 
the Act of 1876; with Comments on 
their Effect and Operation. By W. 
F. FiNLASON, Barrister-at-Law. Crown 
Svo. loj. 6d. 

Willich's Popular Tables 

for ascertaining, according to the Carlisle 
Table of Mortality, the value of Life- 
hold, Leasehold, and Church Property, 
Renewal Fines, Reversions, &c. Also 
Interest, Legacy, Succession Duty, and 
various other useful tables. Eighth 
Edition. Post Svo. loj-. 

INDEX 

^Mo«'j Modem Cookery 24 

Alpine Club Map of Switzerland .......... 20 

Alpine Guide (The) 20 

ylmoj'j Jurisprudence [ 5 

Primer of the Constitution 6 

Anderson's Strength of Materials 12 

Armitages Childhood of the EngUsh 

Nation . 

^rajjifTOKp- J- Organic Chemistry ...'..'..'.'.'.'.'.' 12 

Arnolds (Dr.) Christian Life 17 

Lectures on Modem History 2 

Miscellaneous Works 7 

— ' — '■ School Sermons 17 

^ - Sermons 

- (T.) Manual of English Literature 
- Beowulf . 

^?-Ko«'j Elements of Physics 11 

Atelier (The) du Lys 20 

Atherstone Priory 21 

Autumn Holidays of a Country Parson ... 8 
Ayre's Treasury of Bible Knowledge 9, 23 

Bacon's Essays, hy }/Vhaiely 

Life and Letters, by Sfedding ... 

Works 

Bain's Mental and Moral Science 

on the Senses and Intellect 

• Emotions and Will., 

Baker's Two Works on Ceylon 

Balls Guide to the Central Alps 

Guide to the Western Alps 

Guide to the Eastern Alps 

Bancroft's Native Races of the Pacific 

Barry on Railway Appliances 

Beaconsfield' s (Lord) Novels and Tales ... 

Becker's Charicles and Galliis 

Beesly's Gracchi, Marius, and Sulla 

Black's Treatise on Brewing 

Blacklegs German- EngUsh Dictionary 

Blaine's Rural Sports 

Bloxam's Metals 

Bolland and Lang's Aristotle's Politics 

Boulttee on 39 Articles 

Bournes Catechism of the Steam Engine . 

Handbook of Steam Engine 

^ Treatise on the Steam Engine ... 

Improvements in the same 

Bawdier' s Family Shakespeare 

Bramley-Moore' s Six Sisters of the Valleys . 
Brandt's Dictionary of Science, Literatiu-e, 

and Art 

Brinkley's AslronoraY 

Browfie's Exposition of the 39 Articles 

13 
10 
16 I 

Buckle's History of Civilisation 2 

Posthumous Remains 7 

Buckton's Health in the House 14 

Bull's Hints to Mothers 23 

^Maternal Management of Children. 23 

Burgomaster's Family (The) 21 

Burke's Vicissitudes of Families 5- 

Cabinet Lawyer 23 

Campbells Norway 20 

Capes' s Age of the Antonines 4 

Early Roman Empire 4 

Cates's Biographical Dictionary 5 

s-nAWoodward' s 'Er\cycloymA\3. ... -3 

C<zj//«yj Ihad of Homer 21 

Changed Aspects of Unchanged Truths ... 8 

Chesney's Indian Polity 2 

Modem Military Biography...... 2 

Waterloo Campaign ;..„.... .3- 

ChurcKs Sketches of Ottoman History ... i 

Colenso on Moabite Stone &c 19 

's Pentajeuch and Book of Joshua. 19, 

Commonplace Philosopher in Town and 

Country 8 

Comte's Positive Polity 5 

Congreve's Politics of Aristotle 6 

Conington's Translation of Virgil's yEneid 2r 

Miscellaneous Writings 8 

Contanseau's Two French Dictionaries ... 8' 
Conybeare and Howson's Life and Epistles 

of St. Paul 17 

Counsel and Comfort from a City Pulpit... 8 . 

Cox's (G. W.) Aryan Mythology '3 

Athenian Empire 4 

Crusades 4 

■ General History of Greece 3 

Greeks and Persians 4 

History of Greece 3' 

Tales of Ancient Greece ... 21 

Creighton's Age of Elizabeth 4 

Cresy's Encyclopaedia of Civil Engineering i5' 

Critical Essays of a Country Parson 8 

Cr£7(7>5^j'j Anthracen 16 

Chemical Analyses , 14 

Dyeing and Calico-printing 16 

Culky's Handbook of Telegraphy 15 

C«r^d?zj'j Macedonian Empire 4 

Davidson's Introduction to the New Tes- 
tament 18 

D' Atibign^' s Reformation 18 

De Caisne and Le Maouts Botany 14' 

26 

NEW WORKS published ij „„ 

PAGE 

De Tacfumille's 'Democracy in AmeTica.... s 

Dobson on the Ox 22 

Dove's Law of Storms 10 

/5o2i)i!/^j History of Taxes 6 

Doyle's {K.) Fairyland 14 

Eastlake's Hints on Household Taste 15 

Edwards's Rambles among the Dolomites 20 
Nile ig 

Year in Western France 19 

Elements of Botany 13 

Ellicott's Commentary on Ephesians 17 

Galatians 17 

Pastoral Epist. 17 

Philippians,&c. 17 

Thessalonians . 17 

Lectures on Life of Christ 17 

Elsa, a Tale of the Tyrolean Alps 2t 

Epochs of Ancient History 4 

Modem History 4 

Evans' (J.) Ancient Stone Implements ... 13 

(A.J.) Bosnia 19 

£iBa/(f J History of Israel 18 

Antiquities of Israel 18 

Fairlaim' s Application of Cast and 

Wrought Iron to Building... 16 

Information for Engineers 16 

Life 4 

Treatise on Mills and Millwork 16 

Farrar's Chapters on Language 8 

Families of Speech 8 

i^/»/(Zj(?«'j Judicial System 24 

Fiizwygram on Horses and Stables 22 

Fories's Two Years in Fiji 19 

Framfton's (Bishop) Life 5 

Francis's Fishing Book 22 

Freshfield's Italian Alps 19 

ii>-oa(f«'j English in Ireland 2 

History of England 2 

' — Short Studies 7 

Gairdner's Houses of Lancaster and York 4 

Ganot's Elementary Physics ir 

Natural Philosophy 11 

Gardiner's Buckingham and Charles 2 

Personal Government of Charles I. 2 

• First Two Stuarts 4 

Thirty Years' War 4 

, <7«^^«k'j Church and State 6 

German Home Life 7 

Gilbert if Churchill's Dolomites 20 

Girdlestones Bible Synonyms 17 

Goldziher's Hebrew Mythology 17 

Goodeve's Mechanics 12 

Mechanism 12 

Grant's Ethics of Aristotle 6 

Graver Thoughts of a Country Parson 8 

GrCT27/e' J Journal 2 

Griffin's Algebra and Trigonometry 12 

G?7>i'A'j Behind the Veil 18 

GrcAmaKj Tyrol and the Tyrolese 19 

Grove (Sir W. R.) on Correlation of Phy- 
sical Forces 11 

(F. C.) The Frosty Caucasus 19 

Gwilt's Encyclopaedia of Architecture 15 

PAGE 

.Mz/(;'j Fall of the Stuarts.. 4 

//ar^/ir)' on the Air 10 

Hartwi^s Aerial World 12 

Polar World 12 

Sea and its Living Wonders ... 12 

Subterranean World 13 

Tropical World 12 

/foK^A^offl'j Animal Mechanics 11 

Hayward's Biographical and Critical Essays 5 

Heer's Primeval World of Switzerland 13 

Heine's Life and Works, by Stigand 4 

Helmholtz on Tone 11 

Helmholtz's Scientific Lectures 11 

Hemsley's Trees and Shrubs 14 

^^rjcArfi Outlines of Astronomy 10 

Hinchliff's Over the Sea and Far Away ... 19 

^o^j£7k'j Amateur Mechanic 15 

Hoskold's Engineer's Valuing Assistant ... 15 

Howorih's Mongols 3 

Nullah's History of Modem Music 13 

Transition Period 13 

Hume's'&szs.ys 7 

Treatise on Htmian Nature 7 

Ihne's Rome to its Capture 4 

History of Rome 3 

Indian Alps 19 

Ingelow's Poems 21 

jfameson's Legends of the Saints & Martyrs 15 

Legends of the Madonna 15 

Legends of the Monastic Orders 15 

Legends of the Saviour 15 

Jenkins Electricity and Magnetism 12 

%rraOT'j Lycidas of Milton 21 

Jerrold's Life of Napoleon 2 

Johnston s Geographical Dictionary 9 

Jukes's Types of Genesis 18 

on Second Death 18 

KaliscKs Commentary on the Bible 17 

.A'szVA'j Evidence of Prophecy 17 

Kerls Metallurgy, by Crookes and Rohrig, 16 

Kirby and Spence's Entomology 12 

Kirkman's Philosophy 7 

Knatchbull - Hugessen s Whispers from 

Fairy-Land ... 20 

Higgledy-piggledy 20 

Kueneris Prophets and Prophecy in Israel 17 

Landscapes, Churches, &c 8 

Latham's EngUsh Dictionaries 8 

Handbook of English Language 8 

Lawrence on Rocks 13 

Lecky's History of European Morals 3 

Rationalism 3 

Leaders of PubHc Opinion S 

Lefroy's Bermudas 19 

Leisure Hours in Town 8 

Lessons of Middle Age 8 

Lewes' s Biographical History of Philosophy 4 

i«o«j on Authority 7 

/vzi»r ivuKJiH puOlisned by LONGMANS 6- CO. 

27 

, .J, ,, , - PAGE 

LiddiU and Scolt's Greek-English Lexicons 9 
Lindley axidMoore's Treasury of Botanv.. 13, 22 

/^Ayrf'j Magnetism 11 

Wave-Theory of Light 11 

Longman's (F. W.) Chess Openings 23 

German Dictionary ... g 

(W.) Edward the Third 2 

Lectures on History of 

England 2 

Old and New St. Paul's 15 

Loudon's Encyclopasdia of Agriculture ... i5 

■ —Gardening 16 

: Plants 13 

Lubbock's Origin of CiviUsation 13 

/.K^/ozu'j American War 4 

Lyra Germanica 18 

Macaulay's (Lord) Essays i 

History of England ... i 

Lays of Ancient Rome 14, 21 

Life and Letters 4 

Miscellaneous Writings 7 

Speeches 7 

Works I 

'——^^—^ Writings, Selections from 7 

j!/flcG7//'j Eastern Question i 

McCuUoch's Dictionary of Commerce 9 

MacUods Economical Philosophy 6 

Theory and Practice of Banking 24 

Elements of Banking 24 

Mademoiselle Mori 21 

Jl/a/rf^'^ Annals of the Road 22 

Marshalls Physiology •. 14 

il/flrjA/Kffw'j Life of Havelock 5 

Martineau s ChristicLn Life 19 

' ; Hours of Thought 19 

Hymns 18 

Maunders Biographical Treasury Si 23 

Geographical Treasury 23 

Historical Treasury 23 

Scientific and Literary Treasury 23 

Treasury of Knowledge 9, 23 

Treasury of Natural History.. 13, 23 

Maxwelts Theory of Heat 12 

■ May's History of Democracy 2 

History of England 2 

il/irfcz//<'j Digby Grand 21 

General Bounce 21 

Gladiators 21 

. Good for Nothing 21 

Holmby House 21 

Interpreter 21 

Kate Coventry 21 

Queen's Maries 21 

Mendehsohti s "LfXiexs 4 

ilerivak's Fall of the Roman Republic ... 3 

General History of Rome 3 

. Roman Triumvirates 4 

. Romans under the Empire 3 

Merrifields Arithmetic and Mensuration... 12 

Miles on Horse's Foot and Horse Shoeing 22 

on Horse's Teeth and Stables 22 

Mill (J.) on the Mind 6 

Dissertations & Discussions 6 

Essays on Religion 17 

Hamilton's Philosophy 6 

(J. S.) Liberty S 

Political Economy S 

TAGE 

Mill (J. S. ) Representative Government ... 5 

System of Logic 6 

Unsettled Questions 5 

Utilitarianism 5 

Autobiography 5 

Miller's Elements of Chemistry 14 

Inorganic Chemistry 12 

Mitchell's Manual of Assaying 16 

Modem Novelist's Library 21 

Monsells Spiritual Songs 18 

Moore's Irish Melodies, Illustrated Edition 15 

Lalla Rookh, Illustrated Edition.. 15 

MoreU's Mental Philosophy 7 

A/b«ar/'j Life and Letters 4 

Mullet's Chips from a German Workshop. 8 

Science of Language 8 

Science of Religion 3 

Nelson on the Moon 10. 

New Testament, Illustrated Edition ig 

Nicols's Puzzle of Life 13 

Northcott's Lathes & Turning 15 

0'G?«(7r' J Commentary on Hebrews i3 

Romans 18 

St. John 18 

Osbom's Islam 3 , 

Owen's Comparative Anatomy and Physio- 
logy of Vertebrate Animals I2 

Packe's Guide to the Pyrenees 20 

Pattison's Casaubon ^ S 

Payen's Industrial Chemistry 15 

Pewtner's Comprehensive Specifier 23 

P^rec' r Chess Problems 23 

Pole's Game of Whist 23 

Preece & SivewrigAt's Telegraphy 12 

Present-Day Thoughts 8 

/"rocfcr'j Astronomical Essays 10 

Moon 10 

Orbs around Us 10 

Other Worlds than Ours 10 

Saturn 10 

Scientific Essays (Two Series) ... i2 

Sun 10 

Transits of Venus 10 

Two Star Atlases 10 

Universe 10 

Prot/iero's DeMontfort 2 

Public Schools Atlas of Ancient Geography, g 
Atlas of Modern Geography 9 

Rawlinson's Parthia 3 

■ Sassanians ». 3 

Recreations of a Country Parson 8 

.ff«if^aw'i Dictionary of Artists 14 

Reeve's Residence in Vienna and Berlin ... 19 

Reilly's Map of Mont Blanc 20 

Monte Rosa 20 

Reresby's Memoirs S' 

Reynardson s Down the Road 22 

38 NEW WORKS published b; 

PAGE 

SicKs Dictionary of Antiquities 9 

Kivers's Rose Amateur's Guide 13 

Sogers's EclipsA of Faith 17 

^ .. Defence of Eclipse of Faith 17 

Essays. S 

Sogefs Thesaurus of English Words and 

Phrases ^ 

^oBaW'j Fly-Fisher's Entomology 22 

jeajfoc'j Outhnes of Civil Procedure 6 

Rothschild's Israelites 18 

S3«rfa;-j'j Justinian's Institutes 6 

.SflKfeyi Sparta and Thebes 4 

SaviU on Apparitions 8 

on Primitive Faith 17 

Schelleris Spectrum Analysis 10 

Scott's Lectures on the Fine Arts 14 

Poems H 

Seaside Musing 8 

Seebohm's Orford Reformers of 1498 3 

Protestant Revolution 4 

5«iB«//'j History of France 2 

Passing Thoughts on Religion ... 18 

Preparation for Communion 18 

Questions of the Day 18 

Self-Examination for Confirmation 18 

Stories and Tales 21 

Thoughts for the Age 18 

Shelley's Workshop Appliances 12 

5Aor;'j Church History 3 

Smith's [Sydney) Essays 7 

Wit and Wisdom 7 

— (Dr. R. A.) Air and Rain 10 

(R. B. ) Rome and Carthage 4 

Southey's Poetical Works 21 

Stanley's History of British Birds 13 

Stephen's Ecclesiastical Biography 5 

Stonehenge on theDog 22 

on the Greyhound 22 

Stoney on Strains ..- 16 

S/M^fo'j Early Plantagenets 4 

Sunday Afternoons at the Parish Church of 

a University City 8 

Supernatural Religion 18 

Swinbourne's Picture Logic 6" 

T'ajz/i'r'j History of India 2 

Manual of Ancient History 4 

'■ Manual of Modern History 4 

(Jeremy)'WoT]i.5, eAiltdhy Eden. 18 

Text-Books of Science 12 

Thome's Structural and Physiological Bo- 
tany , 12, 13 

Thomson's Laws of Thought 7 

TAc/^fi'j Quantitative Analysis 12 

Thorpe and Muir's Quahtative Analysis ... 12 

Zz'/iftfK'j Chemical Philosophy 12, 14 

PAGE 

Todd on Parliamentary Government 2 

Trench's Realities of Irish Life '. 7 

Trollope's Barchester Tovifers ,21 

Warden 21 

Twiss's Law of Nations 6 

2>«rfa//' J- American Lectures on Light ... 11 

Diamagnetism 11 

Fragments of Science 11 

JHeat a Mode of Motion 11 

Lectures on Electricity 11 

Lectures on Light 11 

Lectures on Sound 11 

. Molecular Physics 11 

Unawares 21 

f/MOT;'K'j Machine Design 12 

Ure's Dictionary of Arts, Manufactures, 

and Mines 16 

Vaughan's Trident, Crescent, and Cross... 18 

Matter on Whist 23 

H^a;-i5ar;o«'j Edward the Third 4 

Watson: s Geometry 12 

H^a/tfi Dictionary of Chemistry 14 

Webb's Objects for Common Telescopes .... 10 

Weinhold^s Experimental Physics .'...... 11 

Wellington s lAfe, hy Gleig S 

Whately's EngUsh Synonymes 8 

Logic 6 

Rhetoric 6 

White and Riddle's Latin Dictionaries ... 9 

Whitworth's Measuring Machine IS 

Wilcocks' s Sts.-'Fish&ua'S.n 22 

Williams's AristotXe's Ethics 6 

>Fi7/icA'.r Popular Tables 24 

H^wrf'j (J. G:) Bible Animals 12 

Homes without Hands ... 12 

Insects at Home 12 

■ Insects Abroad 12 

Out of Doors 12 

•^ Strange Dwelhngs 12 

(J. T.) Ephesns 19 

Woodward's Geology 13 

Wyatt' s History of Prnssia. 2 

Yongc's Enghsh-Greek Lexicons 9 

Horace 21 

Youatt on ihe Ttog 22 

on the Horse 22 

Zeller's Plato 3 

Socrates 3 

Stoics, Epicureans, and Sceptics... 3 

Zlmmern's Life of Schopenhauer 4 

MODERN HISTORICAL EPOCHS. 

In course of publication, each volume infcp. Swo. complete in itself, 

EPOCHS OF MODERN HI8T0ET: 

A SERIES OF BOOKS NABB^TINQ THE 

HISTORY of BNaLAND and EUROPE 

At SUCCESSIVE EPOCHS SUBSEQUENT to the CHRISTIAN ERA. 

EDITED ET 

E. B. MORRIS, M.A. Lincoln Coll. Oxford; 

J. S. PHILLPOTTS, B.C.L. New Coll. Oxford; and 

C. COLBECK, M.A. Eellow of Trin. Coll. Oxford. 

',Tliis striking collection of little volumes 
is a valuable contribution to tbe litera- 
ture of the day, whether for youthful or 
more mature readers. As an abridgment 
of several important phases of modern 
history it has great merit, and some of its 
parts display powers and qualities of a high 
order. Such writers, indeed, as Professor 
Stubbs, Messrs. Wabbdeton, G-aiednee, 
Ceeighton, and others, could not fail 

to give us excellent work. . . . The style 
of the series is, as a general rule, correct 
and pure ; in the ease of Mr. Stubbs it 
more than once rises into genuine, simple, 
and manly eloquence ; and the composi- 
tion of some of the volumes displays no 
ordinary historical skill. . . . The Series 
is and deserves to be popular.' 

The Times, Jan. 2, 1877. 

Eleven Volumes Now Published : 

The ERA of the PROTESTANT 

Author of ' The Oxford Eeformers— Colet, 
Diagrams on "Wood. Price 2s, 6d. 

' Mr. Sbebohm's Era of the Protestant 
Revolution shews an admirable mastery 
of a complex subject ; it abounds in sound 

REVOLUTION. By F. Seebohm, 

Erasmus, More.* With 4 Coloured Maps and 12 

and philosophic thought, and as a com- 
position it is very well ordered. . . . This 
volume, in short, is of the greatest merit.' 
The Times, Jan. 2. 
The CRUSADES. By the Rev. G. W. Cox, M.A. late Scholar of Trinity 

College, Oxford ; Author of the ' Aryan Mythology ' &o. With a Coloured Map. Price 2s. 6(2. 

' The earliest period, in point of time, 
is that of the Crusades, of which we have 
a summary from the accomplished pen of 
the well-known Author of one of the best 

and latest histories of Greece. Mr. Cox's 
narrative is flowing and easy, and parts 
of his work are extremely good.' 

The Times, Jan. 2. 

The THIRTY YEARS' WAR, 1618-1648. By Samuel Rawson 

Gardiner, late Student of Ch. Ch. ; Author of 'History of England from the Accession of 
James I. to the Disgrace of Chief Justice Coke' &c. With a Coloured Map. Price 2s. 6a. 

' The narrative— a singularly perplexing 

task is on the whole remarkably clear, 

and the Author gives us a well-written 
summary of the causes that led to the 
great contest, and of the most striking 

incidents that marked its progress. Mr. 
Gaedinee's judgments, too, are usually 
just.. ..The Author, we should add, is very 
skilful in his delineation of historical 
characters.' The Times, Jan. 2. 

The HOUSES, of LANCASTER and YORK; with the CONQUEST and 

LOSS of EEANCB. By James G-airdsee, of the Public Record OfBce ; Editor of ' The Paston 
Letters ' &c. With 5 Coloured Maps. Price 3s. 6d. 

< Id]. Gaikdnee's Epoch, ' Lancaster and I the conclusions of the Author are just and 
York is usually correct and sensible, and I acccurate.' The Times, Jan. 2. 

London, LONGMANS & CO. 

[Continued. 

EPOCHS OF MODERN HISTORY-.o«.w. 

EDWARD THE THIRD. By the Rev, W. "Warbuhtoh, M.A. late 

Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford ; Her Majesty's Senior Inspector of Schools. WSHi S 
Coloured Mttps and 3 Genealogical Tables. Price 2». Bd. 

well the spirit and genius ef that chivalrio 
age.' The Times, Jan. 2. 

' This Epoch is a very good one, and is 
well worth a studious reader's attention. 
Mr. Waebubton has reproduced extremely 

The AGE of ELIZABETH. By the Rev. M. Creighton, M.A. late 

Fellow and Tutor of Merton College, Oxford. With 5 Maps and i Genealogical Tables. Ht. 6d. 

' Mr. Creighton has thoroughly mastered 
the intricate mysteries of the foreign poli- 
tics of the whole period ; and he has 
described extiremely ably the relations be- 

tween this country and the other States 
of Europe, and the character of the policy 
of the Queen and her counsellors.' 

The Times, Jan. 2. 

The FALL of the STUARTS; and WESTERN EUROPE from 1678 

to 1697. By the Eev. Bdwaud Hale, M.A. Assistant-Master at Eton. With EleTen Maps and 
Plans. Price 2s. Sd. 
'Mr. Hale has thoroughly grasped the i them in a very eifective light.' 
great facts of the time, and has placed | Tue Times, Jan. 2. 

The EIRST TWO STUARTS and the PURITAN REVOLUTION, 

1603-1660. By SAMUEL Bawson Gabdiker, Author of 'The Thirty Years' War, 1618-164*.' 
With 4 Coloured Maps. Price 2s. Od. 

'Mr. G-aedinbe's "First Two Stuarts 
and the Puritan Revolution" deserves 
more notice than we can bestow upon it. 
This is in some respects a very striking 

work. Mr. Gabdineb's sketch of the time 
of James I. brings out much that had 
hitherto been little known.' 

The Times, Jan. 2. 

The WAR of AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, 1775-1783. By John 

Malcolm Ludlow, Barrister-at-Law. With 4 Coloured Maps. Price 2s. Gd, 

'Mr. Ludlow's account of the obscure 
annals of what afterwards became the 
Thirteen Colonies is learned, judicious, 

the Eed Indian communities ia admirable 
for its good feeling and insight. . . The 
volume is cliaracterised by impartiality 

and full of interest, and his description of and good sense.' The Times, Jan. 2. 
The EARLY PLANTAGENETS. By the Rev. W. Stubbs, IVLA. 

Regius Professor of Modern History in the University of Oxford. With 2 coloured Maps. 
Price 2s. 6d. 

'As a whole, his book is one of rare 
excellence. As a comprehensive sketch 
of the period it is worthy of very high 
commendation. . . .■ As an analyst of 
institutions and laws Mr. Stubbs is cer- 
tainly not inferior to Hallam. His nar- 
rative, moreover, is, as a rule, excellent. 

clear, well put together, and often pic- 
turesque; his language is always forcible 
and sometimes eloquent ; his power of 
condensation is very remarkable, and his 
chapter on the contemporaneous state of 
Europe is admirable for its breadth and 
conciseness.' The Times, Jan. 2. 

The AGE of ANNE. By E. E. Morris, M.A. of Lincoln College, 

Oxford ; Head Master of the Melbourne Grammar School, Australia ; Original Editor of the 
Series. With 7 Maps and Plans. Price 2s. 6d. 

Volumes in preparation, in continuation of the Series ; — 
The NORMANS in EUROPE. By Rev. A. H. Johnson, M.A., Fellow of 

All Souls College, Oxford. [jVearly ready. 

The BEGINNING of the MIDDLE AGES ; Charles the Great and Alfred ; 

the History of England in connexion with that of Europe in the Ninth Century. By the Very 
Kev. E. W. Church, M.A. Dean of St. Paul's. [/» Hu; press. 

The EARLY HANOVERIANS. By the Rev. T. J. Lawreitce, B.A. 

Wai-den of Cavendish College, late Fellow and Tutor of Downing College, Cambridge. 

The FRENCH REVOLUTION to the BATTLE of WATERLOO, 1789- 

1816. By Beetha M. Cordery, Author of ' The Struggle Against Absolute Monarchy." 

FREDERICK the GREAT and the SEVEN YEARS' WAR. By F. W. 

LoNGMAK, of Balliol College, Oxford. 

London, LONGMANS & CO. 

SpoUiawoode & Co., Printers, New-sh'cet Square, London.