DATE DUE 

#5556 , 

= — — — 
Lankavatarasuttrae 

The Lankavatara Sutra : a Mahayana 
text / translated from the Sanskrit by 
Daisetz Teitgro Suzukie —-— Boulder, 
Coloe =: Prajna Press; 1978.6 

XLix, 295 Pe : ill. > 22 cme 

#5556 Gift:Whitmeyer $8.95. 

ISBN 0-87773-702-9 

[e Suzuki, Daisetz Teitaro, 1870- 

1966. IIe Title: A Mahayana texte 

| 

| 

| | 
( 

3 | 

O2 AUG 84 59387120 NEWCxce 78-56113) 

LIBRARY 

NEW COLLEGE OF CALIFORM# 
777 VALENCIA STREET 

BAN ERANGISCO: CA 94K1@ 
1415) 626-1694 

LIBRARY 

NEW COLLEGE OF CALIFORNIA 
777 VALENCIA STREET 

SAN FRANCISCO: CA 24116 

415) 626-1624 ~ 5 
vs passes 

The Lankavatara Sutra 

Contemporary brush painting of Bodhidharma 
by Eitara Tada. 

The 
Lankavatara 
Sutra 

A MAHAYANA TEXT 

TRANSLATED FROM THE SANSKRIT BY 
Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki 

Claude Ch US Wikis é 

1978 
Prajna Press 
Boulder 

Oe ed 

VO JUN CO 

Abe 

re lie We ek SE 

on (Co oF 

i ell 

PRAJNA PREss 
GREAT EASTERN Book COMPANY 
P.O. Box 271 
BOULDER, COLORADO 80306 

ISBN 0-87773-702-9 
LCC 78-056113 
FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1932 BY ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL LTD. 
PUBLISHED BY ARRANGEMENT WITH THE ORIGINAL PUBLISHER. 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. 

PAINTING OF BODHIDHARMA 
Courtesy OF Davip I. ROME. 

PREFACE 

It is more than seven years now since I began the study 
of the Lankdvatara Sutra quite seriously, but owing to 
various interruptions I have not been able to carry out my 
plan as speedily as I wished. My friends in different fields 
of life have been kind and generous in various ways, and I 
now send out to the perusal of the English-reading public 
this humble work of mine. There are yet many difficult and 
obscure passages in the Sutra, which I have been unable to 
unravel to my own satisfaction. All such imperfections are 
to be corrected by competent scholars. I shall be fully 
content if I have made the understanding of this significant 
Mahayana text easier than before, even though this may be 
only to a very slight degree. In China Buddhist scholars 
profoundly learned and endowed with spiritual insights 
made three or four attempts extending over a period of 
about two hundred and fifty years to give an intelligible 
rendering of the Lankavatara. It goes without saying that 
these have helped immensely the present translator. May 
his also prove a stepping board however feeble towards a 
fuller interpretation of the Sutra! 

The present English translation is based on the Sanskrit 
edition of Bunyn Nanjo’s published by the Otani University 
Press in 1928. 

I am most grateful to Mr Dwight Goddard of Thetford, 
Vermont, U.S. A., who again helped me by typing the entire 
manuscript of the present book. To assist me in this way 
was indeed part of the object of his third visit to this side 
of the Pacific. Says Confucius, ‘‘Is it not delightful to have 
a friend come from afar?’’ The saying applies most appro- 
priately to this case. 

It was fortunate for the writer that he could secure the 
support and help of the Keimeikwai, a corporation organised 
to help research work of scholars in various fields of culture ; 
for without it his work might have dragged on yet for some 

0 

vi PREFACE 

time to come. There is so much to be accomplished before 
he has to appear at the court of Emma Daiwo, to whom he 
eould say, ‘‘Here is my work; humble though it is, I have 
tried to do my part to the full extent of my power.’’ The 
writer renders his grateful acknowledgment here to all the 
advisers of the Society who kindly voted for the speedy 
culmination of this literary task—a task which he tenderly 
wishes would do something towards a better appreciation by 
the West of the sources of Eastern life and culture. 

Whatever literary work the present author is able to 
put before the reader, he cannot pass on without mentioning 
in it the name of his good, unselfish, public-minded Buddhist 
friend, Yakichi Ataka, who is always willing to help him in 
every possible way. If not for him, the author could never 
have carried out his plans to the extent he has so far ac- 
complished. Materially, no visible results can be expected of 
this kind of undertaking, and yet a scholar has his worldly 
needs to meet. Unless we create one of these fine days an 
ideal community in which every member of it can put forth 
all his or her natural endowments and moral energies in the 
direction best fitted to develop them and in the way most 
useful to all other members generally and individually, many 
obstacles are sure to bar the passage of those who would 
attempt things of no commercial value. Until then, Bodhi- 
sattvas of all kinds are sorely needed everywhere. And is 
this not the teaching of the Lankdvatara Sitra, which in its 
English garb now lies before his friend as well as all other 
readers? 

Thanks are also due to the writer’s wife who went over 
the whole manuscript to give it whatever literary improve- 
ment it possesses, to Mr Hokei Idzumi who gave helpful sug- 
gestions in the reading of the original text, and to Professor 
Yenga Teramoto for his ungrudgine cooperation along the 
line of Tibetan knowledge. 

DaisetTz TEITARO SuZUKI 
Kyoto, November, 1931 (the sixth year of Showa) 

CONTENTS 

Page 
IPR EIVAC ES ec iccm rr eer oer chs eer ee, ges ee v 
TNR O DWC LIONS ae rer ieieretees: <sopstenauisens <-> s specene oMtien Me anays saat xi 
CHAPTER ONE. RAVANA, LORD OF LANKA, ASKS FOR 
ONSET CATION, ee calenasctocace Movers s « axel aysyans aueuc’s erate terens 
CHAPTER TWO. COLLECTION OF ALL THE DHARMAS .. 22 
§ 1. Mahamati Praises the Buddha with Verses ...... 22 
§ II. Mahdmati’s ‘(One Hundred and Eight Questions’ 23 
¢ Tif. “The One Hundred and Eight Negations” ...... 31 
§ IV. Concerning the Vijihinas .........-csecscceeees 283 
§ V. Seven Kinds of Self-nature (svabhdva) ......... 35 
§ VI. Seven Kinds of First Principle (paramartha), and 
the Philosophers’ Wrong Views regarding the 
MM ABR Gy eCt Ody cys .sc.2 sponses 625.415 0-0 eerece se creiacetass 35 
§ Vil. Erroneous Views held by Some Brahmans and 

Sramanas Concerning Causation, Continuation, 
ete.; The Buddhist Views Concerning Such 
Subjects as Alayavijiina, Nirvana, Mind-only, 

ete.; Attainments of the Bodhisattva ........ 36 
§ VIII. The Bodhisattva’s Discipling himself in Self- 

EMTS LOM: os re ses bepotayaheuess cealonWabsvsye tere) cious cv etesevesane ct 39 
§ IX. The Evolution and Function of the Vijianas; The 

Spiritual Discipline of the Bodhisattva; Verses 

on the Alaya-ocean and Vijifna-waves ........ 39 
§ X. The Bodhisattva is to Understand the Signification 

OPP VEG -OnL ys Peay eeicreteas av evaue ws, syetstavays, curse stole eolecere 44 
§ XI(a). The Three Aspects of Noble Wisdom (dryajiana) 44 
§ XI(b). The Attainment of the Tathigatakfiya .......... 45 
§ XII. Wosicronu! tlre Manes) Hovis) 2. eects sls 46 
§ XIII. Verses on the Alayavijianu and Mind-only ...... 49 
¢ XIV. Purification of the Outflows, Instantaneous and 

GranlivlW noon conn co ae nommeon: A ooob Goce 49 
§ XV. Nishyauda-Buddha, Dharmati-Buddha, and Nir- 

poi eV Boa esonosokuonodooKnudcocupec 51 
§ XVI. The Sravaka’s Realisation and Attachment to the 

NOU, Ole VITO) Soanaasso4c00000000Gcon 52 
¢ XVII. The Eternal-Unthinkable ..........-.-.-.+e-00% 53 
§ XVIII. Nirvana and AlayavijDanua ...........c-eessees 55 
¢ XIX. Al, Bhing spare Wimloorn! ae eter lteter) r- 55 
§ XX. The Five Classes of Spiritual Insight ........... 56 

§ XXI. Verses on the Triple Vehicle ...........--.-.00- 58 

vili 

§ XXII. 
§ XXII. 
§ XXIV. 

xocve 
eux VIL 
§ XXVIL 

§ XXVIII. 
§ XXIX. 
§ XXX. 

Wp.6.0.48 

§ XXXII. 
¢ XXXII. 

§ XXXIV. 
§ XXXV. 

§ XXXVI. 
§ XXXVI 

§ XXXVIIIL. 

§ XXXIX. 
ex. 

§ SLI. 
§ XLII. 
§ XLII. 

§ XLIV. 
§ XLV. 

§ XLVI. 

§ XLVI. 
§ XLVIII. 

6 XDI 

dhe 

§ LI. 

§ LIL. 

§ LI. 
§ LIV. 

CONTENTS 

Two Classes of the Icehantika .................. 58 
The Three Forms of Svabhava ................. 59 
The Twofold Egolessness (nairadtmyadvaya- 

labsltaaa)) eae oo Oe re actas Sere ae 60 
Assertion and Refutation (samdropdpavdda) .... 62 

The Bodhisattva Assumes Various Personalities... 64 
On Emptiness (Sinyata), No-birth, and Non- 

CURES ono Ae ee oe IR os IG Bo sods Geo ob 65 
The Tathagata-Garbha and the Ego-soul ........ 68 
A Verse on the Philosophers’ Discriminations .... 70 
The Four Things Needed for the Constitution of 

Bodhisattvahood! WR... ...Peie re ne ee 70 
On Causation (Six Kinds), and the Rise of 

Existence’ (oc: Sige Peele nee ech Nc C Ota 72 
Four Forms of Word-diserimination ............ 75 
On Word and Diserimination and the Highest 

Realitya sccicnecies is 4c oe ene << 5 ee 76 
Verses on Reality and its Representations ...... 77 
Mind-only, Multitudinousness, and Analogies, with 

an Interpolation on the Dualistie Notion of 

ExiStene@ se. sacs wiie «ete ee ee» eee 78 
The Teaching (dharmadeSané) of the Tathagatas 84 
HoureKndshoteh hyn ae ater e ere eee 85 
On Nirvana seer eee ee PE sae cree ne 86 
Two Characteristics of Self-nmature ............. 87 
Two Kinds of the Buddha’s Sustaining Power 

(adlishthang) .ec.043. ae 87 
On the Chain of Causation (pratityasamutpdda).. 90 
Words (abhilapa) and Realities (bhava) ....... 91 

On Eternality of Sound (nityasabda), the Nature 
of Error (bhrdnta), and Perversion (viparydsa) 92 

On the Nature of Mayale jee. sores te errr 95 
ThateAllDhings hares Umborneesprs ieee es eee 96 
On Name, Sentence, Syllable, and Their Meaning 97 
On Inexplicable Statements (vydkritani) ........ 98 
All Things are and are not (Verses on Four Forms 
of Explanation) .i.. 8. dae ee ee 99 
On the Srivakas, Srotaaipanna, Sakridagdmin, 
Anadgimin, and Arhat; on the Three Knots 
(Saqmyogam) we el OG 
The Intelleet (buddhi), Examining and Diserim- 
nating: JA. . sey ss eee ee ee 05 
The Elements, Primary and Seeondary ......... 106 
The Five Skwhdhis "ae "eee ee ee 107 
Four Kinds of Nirvana and the Eight Vijidnas .. 108 

The False Imagination Regarding Twelve Subjeets 110 

§ LV. 
§ LVI. 

CHAPTER THREE. ON IMPERMANENCY 

§ LVII. 
§ LVIITI. 

§ LEX. 
§ LX. 

§ LXI. 

§ LXII. 
§ LXIII. 
§ LXIV. 

§ LXV. 
§ LXVI. 

§ LXVIL. 
§ LXVIII. 
§ LXIX. 

§ LXX. 
§ Leal. 
§ LXXII. 

60-0000 

§ LXXIV. 
§ LEXV, 

§ LXXVI. 

§ LXXVIL. 
§ LXXVIII. 

§ LXXIX, 

§ Lexx, 

§ LXXXI. 

CHAPTER SIX. ON MOMENTARINESS 
§ LXXXTI. 

CONTENTS 

Verses on the Citta, Parikalpita, Paratantra, and 
IRATANTSH PANNA, | sSerete eno cystevetelsicis) e wusls ss cnecerecions 
The One Vehicle and the Triple Vehicle 

Three Forms of the Will-body (manomayakdya).. 

The Five Immediacies (paficdnantarydani); Desire 
as Mother and Ignorance as Father 

The Buddha-nature (buddhatd) ................ 

The Identity (samataé) of Buddhahood and its 
OUT! ASPOCUS: ctirerccs creel « oveverciel » evei« « Brevertic wheres 

Not a Word Uttered by the Buddha; Self-realisa- 

tion and an Eternally-abiding Reality ........ 
On Being and Non-Being; Realism and Nihilism. . 
Realisation and Word-teaching ...............- 

Discrimination, an External World, Dualism, and 
AICEACH IMGT taecyer: crore «ces ue HENS «) << ea ee 

The Relation between Words (ruta) and Meaning 
(OPAL) ee 6 eceoe: og: GER ere rerio wares o 

On Knowledge, Absolute (jidna) and Relative 
COM) an eee ee mee 

Nine Transformations (parinéma) ............. 
The Deep-seated Attachment to Existence ...... 

Self-nature, Reality, Imagination, Truth of Soli- 
tudetsete:. gamete, qe sn ae «ay. Secs hase oe 8 

The Thesis of No-birth ............ 0... cee eeeee 
True Knowledge and Ignorance ...........+++-> 
Self-realisation and the Discoursing on it 
OnBthet okay atik ae sec. cera cceie <cieresis cue stevens os 
Various) Views of Nirvana .o....-.....-.-..0..-- 

Is Tathagatahood Something Made? Its Relation 
to the Skandhas, to Emancipation, to Knowledge 

The Tathagata Variously Designated; Relation 
Between Words and Meaning; Not a Word 
iittered iby, the. Buddha n.. rises cre ee rere 

Causation, No-birth, Self-mind, Nirvana 
Verses on No-birth and Causation 
Various Views of Impermanency 

CHAPTER FOUR. ON INTUITIVE UNDERSTANDING .... 

Perfect Tranquillisation Attained by Srivakas, 
Pratyekabuddhas, and Bodhisattvas; Stages of 
Bodhisattvahood 

CHAPTER FIVE. ON THE DEDUCTION OF THE PERMA- 
NENCY OF TATHAGATAHOOD 

ee ese eeesreen es ececce 

The Tathagata-garbha and the Alayavijiaina .... 

1x 

112 
114 
118 
118 

120 
122 

122 

123 
125 

127 
129 
133 

135 
137 
138 

141 
144 
146 
148 
149 
157 

161 

164 
170 
172 
176 

182 

182 

x CONTENTS 

§ LXXXIII. The Five Dharmas, and Their Relation to the 

Thee Svabliavas” WoW. ve acseree sae eiese theres 193 

SPL NOXV Lier ive DD hanmasy states «+ + cies clers crererstarsie tren 197 

§ LXXXV. Tathagata and Sands of the Ganga ............. 198 

§ LXXXVI. Momentariness; the Eight Vijfidnas ............ 202 

§ LXXXVII. Three Kinds of the Paramitiis ............... 204 

§ LXXXVIITI. Views on Momentariness; Discrimination ..... 206 
CHAPTER SEVEN. ON TRANSFORMATION .............. 207 
6 Eee. On Transtormation . °c. oq. n-ne - ae Cee 207 
CHAPTER EIGHT. ON MEAT-EATING ...............006- 211 
CUAPTER-NINE. THE.DHARANIS ......s a... see 223 
SAGAMERTOAME oo... a oc choc Bac oc MR eed oc te re OR 8 Ph oti 226 

APPENDIX 

INTRODUCTION 

For those who have already read my Studies in the Lan- 
kavatara Sittra,' no special words are needed here. But to 
those who are not yet quite familiar with the teachings of 
Mahayana Buddhism an expository introduction to the 
principal theses of the Lanka may be welcome. Without 
something of preliminary knowledge as to what the Sutra 
proposes to teach, it will be difficult to comprehend the text 
intelligently. For thoughts of deep signification are pre- 
sented in a most unsystematic manner. As I said in my 
Studies, the Lanka is a memorandum kept by a Mahayana 
master,.in which he put down perhaps all the teachings of 
importance accepted by the Mahayana followers of his day. 
He apparently did not try to give them any order, and it is 
possible that the later redactors were not very careful in 
keeping faithfully whatever order there was in the beginning, 
thus giving the text a still more disorderly appearance. The 
introduction that follows may also serve as one to Mahayana 
Buddhism generally. 

I 

The Classification of Beings 

From the Mahayana point of view, beings are divisible 
into two heads: those that are enlightened and those that are 
ignorant. The former are called Buddhas including also 
Bodhisattvas, Arhats, and Pratyekabuddhas while the latter 
comprise all the rest of beings under the general designation 
of bala or balaprithagjana—bdla meaning ‘‘undeveloped’’, 
‘*puerile’’, or ‘‘ignorant’’, and prithagjana ‘‘people differ- 
ent’’ from the enlightened, that is, the multitudes, or people 
of ordinary type, whose minds are found engrossed in the 

1 Published by George Routledge and Sons, London. 1930. Pp. 
XXXli -+ 464. 

xu THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

pursuit of egotistic pleasures and unawakened to the meaning 
of life. This class is also known as Sarvasattva, ‘‘all beings”’ 
or sentient beings. The Buddha wants to help the ignorant, 
hence the Buddhist teaching and discipline. 

The Buddha 

All the Buddhist teachings unfold themselves around 
the conception of Buddhahood. When this is adequately 
grasped, Buddhist philosophy with all its complications and 
superadditions will become luminous. What is the Buddha? 

According to Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, 
who is the interlocutor of the Buddha in the Lanka, the 
Buddha is endowed with transcendental knowledge (prajna) 
and a great compassionate heart (karuna). With the former 
he realises that this world of particulars has no reality, is 
devoid of an ego-substance (andéman) and that in this sense 
it resembles Maya or a visionary flower in the air. As thus 
it is above the category of being and non-being, it is declared 
to be pure (visuddha) and absolute (vivikta) and free from 
conditions (animitta). But the Buddha’s transcendental 
wisdom is not always abiding in this high altitude, because 
being instigated by an irresistible power which innerly pushes 
him back into a region of birth and death, he comes down 
among us and lives with us, who are ignorant and lost in the 
darkness of the passions (klega). Nirvana is not the ultimate 
abode of Buddhahood, nor is enlightenment. Love and com- 
passion is what essentially constitutes the self-nature of the 
All-knowing One (sarvajfia). 

The Buddha as Love 

The Buddha’s love is not something ego-centered. It is 
a will-force which desires and acts in the realm of twofold 
egolessness, it is above the dualism of being and non-being, 
it rises from a heart of non-discrimination, it manifests 
itself in the conduct of purposelessness (anabhogacaryé). 
It is the Tathagata’s great love (mahdkarund) of all beings, 
which never ceases until everyone of them is happily led to 
the final asylum of Nirvana; for he refuses as long as there 

INTRODUCTION xiii 

is a single unsaved soul to enjoy the bliss of Samadhi to 
which he is entitled by his long spiritual discipline. The 
Tathagata is indeed the one who, endowed with a heart of 
all-embracing love and compassion, regards all beings as if 
they were his only child. If he himself enters into Nirvana, 
no work will be done in the world where discrimination 
(vikalpa) goes on and multitudinousness (vicitratd) prevails. 
For this reason, he refuses to leave this world of relativity, 
all his thoughts are directed towards the ignorant and suffer- 
ing masses of beings, for whom he is willing to sacrifice his 
enjoyment of absolute reality and self-absorption (samadhi- 
sukhabhitakotyad vinwarya). 

Skilful Means 

The essential nature of love is to devise, to create, to 
accommodate itself to varying changing circumstances, and 
to this the Buddha’s love is no exception. He is ever devising 
for the enlightenment and emancipation of all sentient 
beings. This is technically known as the working of Skilful 
Means (updyakausalya). Upaya is the outcome of Prajiia 
and Karuna. When Love worries itself over the destiny of 
the ignorant, Wisdom, so to speak, weaves a net of Skilful 
Means whereby to catch them up from the depths of the 
ocean called Birth-and-Death (samsdéra). By Upaya thus 
the oneness of reality wherein the Buddha’s enlightened mind 
abides transforms itself into the manifoldness of particular 
existences. 

There is a gem known as Mani which is perfectly trans- 
parent and colourless in itself, and just because of this 
characteristic it reflects in it varieties of colours (vicitra- 
rupa). In the same way the Buddha is conceived by beings; 
in the same way his teaching is interpreted by them; that is, 
each one recognises the Buddha and his teaching according 
to his disposition (dSaya), understanding (citta), prejudice 
(anusaya), propensity (adhimukt?), and circumstance (gatt). 
Again, the Buddha treats his fellow-beings as an expert 
physician treats his patients suffering from various forms of 
illness. The ultimate aim is to cure them, but as ailments 

XIV THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

differ medicines and treatments cannot be the same. For 
this reason it is said that the Buddha speaks one language 
of enlightenment, which reverberates in the ears of his 
hearers in all possible sounds. Upaya may thus be con- 
sidered in a way due to the infinite differentiation of indivi- 
dual characters rather than to the deliberate contrivance of 
transcendental wisdom on the part of the Buddha. 

One Buddha with Many Names 

All the Buddhas are of one essence, they are the same 
as far as their inner enlightenment, their Dharmakaya, and 
their being furnished with the thirty-two major and the 
eighty minor marks of excellence are concerned. But when 
they wish to train beings according to their characters, they 
assume varieties of forms appearing differently to different 
beings, and thus there are many titles and appellations of 
the Buddha as to be beyond calculation (asamkhyeya). 

One noteworthy fact about this—the Buddha’s assuming 
so many names, is that he is not only known in various 
personal names but also given a number of abstract titles 
such as No-birth, Emptiness, Suchness, Reality, Nirvana, 
Eternity, Sameness, Trueness, Cessation, ete. The Buddha 
is thus personal as well as metaphysical. 

The Lanka here does not forget to add that though the 
Buddha is known by so many different names, he is thereby 
neither fattened nor emaciated, as he is like the moon in 
water neither immersed nor emerging. This simile is 
generally regarded as best describing the relation of unity 
and multiplicity, of one absolute reality and this world of 
names and forms. 

Transformation-bodtes of the Buddha. 

While the Trikaya dogma is not yet fully developed in 
the Lankd, each member of the trinity is treaceable in such 
ideas as Dharmata-buddha, Vipaka-buddha, and Nirmana- 
buddha. The notion of the transformation-body inevitably 
follows from the Buddha’s desire to save the ignorant whose 
minds are not enlightened enough to see straightway into the 

INTRODUCTION XV 

essence of Buddhahood. As they are not elear-sighted, 
something is to be devised to lead them to the right path, and 
this something must be in accord with their mentalities. If 
not, they are sure to go astray farther and farther. If they 
are not capable of grasping Buddhata as it is, let them have 
something of it and gradually be developed. The theory of 
Upaya (skilful means) is also the theory of Manomayakaya, 
will-body. As the incarnation of a great compassionate 
heart, the Buddha ought to be able to take any form he 
wishes when he sees the sufferings of sentient beings. The 
will-body is a part of the Buddha’s plan of world-salvation. 
This is one of the reasons why Buddhism is often regarded 
as polytheistic and at the same time pantheistic. 

The Bodhisattva and His Ten Vows 

In Mahayana Buddhism the Buddha is not the only agent 
who is engaged in the work of enlightening or saving the 
world. While he is able to transform himself into as many 
forms as are required by sentient beings, he is also assisted 
by his followers or ‘‘sons’’ (putra, suta, or aurasa) as they 
are called in the Mahayana sutras. Bodhisattvas are thus 
the sons of the Buddha and apply themselves most arduously 
and most assiduously to the cause of Buddhism. In fact, 
the actual work of world-salvation, we can say, is carried on 
by these spiritual soldiers under the leadership of the 
Buddha. The latter is sometimes felt to be too remote, too 
serene, too superhuman, and his sight is often lost in the 
midst of our worldly struggles. But the Bodhisattva is 
always with us, and ever ready to be our confidant, for he 
is felt by us to share the same passions, impulses, and aspira- 
tions which are such great disturbing, though ennobling too, 
forces of our human life. 

To state the truth, sentient beings are all Bodhisattvas, 
however ignorant and ready to err they may be. They are 
all Jinaputras, the sons of the Victorious, and harbour in 
themselves every possibility of attaining enlightenment. The 
Bodhisattvas who have gone up successively all the rungs 
of the Bhiimi ladder, and who are thus capable of extending 

XvVl THE LANKAVATARA. SUTRA 

their help over us, are really our own brethren. Therefore, 
Mahamati of the Lawka opens his questions generally with 
this: ‘‘I and other Bodhisattvas, ete.’?’ Mahamati is our 
mouthpiece voicing our wants and aspirations. 

Thus is not the place to consider historically how the 
conception evolved in Buddhism whose primitive object 
seems to have consisted in the realisation of Arhatship. But 
we can state this that the essence of Bodhisattvahood is an 
unequivocal affirmation of the social, altruistic nature of 
humankind. Whatever enlightenment one gains, it must be 
shared by one’s fellow-beings. This idea is classically ex- 
pressed in the Mahayana by the so-ealled ‘‘Ten Vows of 
Samantabhadra’’. The Bodhisattva is a man of ‘‘inexhaus- 
tible vows’’ (dasanishthapada). Without these he is not him- 
self. To save the world, to bring all his fellow-beings up 
to the same level of thought and feeling where he himself is, 
and not to rest, not to enter into Nirvana until this is 
accomplished, how infinitely long and how inexpressively 
arduous the task may be. This is the Bodhisattva. Vowing 
to save all beings, which is technically known as Pirva- 
pranidhana in Mahayana terminology, cannot even for a 
moment be separated from the life of the Bodhisattva. 

The Buddha being surrounded by these noble-minded sons 
cannot fail finally to release all beings from the bondage 
of karma and ignorance and thirst for life. With this in 
view, he is always inspiring the Bodhisattvas with his 
sovereign power (prabhdva) and sustaining (adhishthana) 
them in their efforts to bring enlightenment in the whole 
triple world. 

The Ignorant 

Life as it is lived by most of us is a painful business, 
for we have to endure much in various ways. Our desires 
are thwarted, our wishes are crushed, and the worst is that 
we do not know how to get out of this whirlpool of greed, 
anger, and infatuation. We are at the extreme end of ex- 
istence opposed to that of the Buddha. How can we leap 
over the abyss and reach the other shore? 

INTRODUCTION XVil 

The Mahayana diagnosis of the conditions in which all 
sentient beings are placed is that they are all nursed by 
desire (trishnd) as mother who is accompanied by pleasure 
(nandi) and anger (raga), while ignorance (avidyd) is 
father. To be cured of the disease, therefore, they must put 
an end to the continuous activities of this dualistic poisoning. 
When this is done, there is a state called emancipation 
(vimoksha) which is full of bliss. The Buddhist yuestion is 
thus: ‘‘How is emancipation possible?’’ And here rises 
the Mahayana system of philosophy. 

The Turning back (paravrittr) 

To this philosophy, a special paragraph is devoted below. 
I wish here to say a few words concerning the important 
psychological event known as Paravritti in the Lanka and 
other Mahayana literature. Pardvritti literally means ‘‘turn- 
ing up”’ or ‘‘turning back’’ or ‘‘change’’; technically, it is a 
spiritual change or transformation which takes place in the 
mind, especially suddenly, and I have called it ‘‘revulsion’”’ 
in my Studies in the Lankdvatadra, which, it will be seen, 
somewhat corresponds to what is known as ‘‘conversion’’ 
among the psychological students of religion. 

It is significant that the Mahayana has been insistent to 
urge its followers to experience this psychological trans- 
formation in their practical life. A mere intellectual under- 
standing of the truth is not enough in the life of a Buddhist ; 
the truth must be directly grasped, personally experienced, 
intuitively penetrated into; for then it will be distilled into 
life and determine its course. 

This Paravritti, according to the Lanka, takes place in 
the Alaya-vijiiina or All-conserving Mind, which is assumed 
to exist behind our individual empirical consciousnesses. The 
Alaya is a metaphysical entity, and no psychological analysis 
ean reach it. What we ordinarily know as the Alaya is its 
working through a relative mind. The Mahayana calls this 
phase of the Alaya tainted or defiled (klishta) and tells us to 
be cleansed of it in order to experience a Paravritti for the 
attainment of ultimate reality. 

XVili THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Paravritti in another sense, therefore, is purification 
(viguddht). In Buddhism terms of colouring are much used, 
and becoming pure, free from all pigment, means that the 
Alaya is thoroughly washed off its dualistic accretion or out- 
flow (dsrava), that is, that the Tathagata has effected his 
work of purification in the mind of a sentient being, which 
has so far failed to perceive its own oneness and allness. 
Being pure is to remain in its own selfhood or self-nature 
(svabhava). While Paravritti is psychological, it still 
retains its intellectual flavour as most Buddhist terms do. 

Self-discipline and the Buddha’s Power 

As long as Paravritti is an experience and not mere 
understanding, it is evident that self-discipline plays an 
important rdle in the Buddhist life. This is insisted upon 
in the Lanka as is illustrated in the use of such phrases as 
‘‘Do not rely on others’’ (aparapraneya) ; ‘‘Strive your- 
selves’’ (Stkshitavyam), ete. But at the same time we must 
not forget the fact that the Lanka also emphasises the neces- 
sity of the Buddha’s power being added to the Bodhisattvas, 
in their upward course of spiritual development and in the 
accomplishment of their great task of world-salvation. If 
they were not thus so constantly sustained by the miraculous 
power of the Buddha, they would speedily fall into the group 
of the philosophers and Sravakas, and they would never be 
able to attain supreme enlightenment and preach the doctrine 
of universal emancipation. Indeed, when the Buddha so 
wishes, even such inanimate objects as mountains, woods, 
palaces, ete. will resound with the voice of the Buddha; 
how much more the Bodhisattvas who are his spiritual 
inheritors! 

The doctrine of Adhishthana gains all the more signific- 
ance when we consider the development of Mahayana 
Buddhism into the doctrine of salvation by faith alone. The 
power of a Bodhisattva’s original vows may also be judged 
as being derived from the Buddha. If the possibility of 
enlightenment is due to the Adhishthana or Prabhava of the 
Buddha, all the wonders that are to take place by the 

INTRODUCTION xix 

strength of the enlightenment must be inferred ultimately 
to issue from the fountain-head of Buddhahood itself. 

At any rate the Mahayana idea of the Buddha being 
able to impart his power to others marks one of those epoch- 
making deviations which set off the Mahayana from so-called 
primitive or original Buddhism. When the Buddha comes 
to be considered capable of Adhishthana, the next step his 
devotees are logically led to take would be the idea of 
vicarious suffering or atonement. Giving power to another 
is a positive idea while suffering for another may be said to 
be a negative one. Though this latter is strangely absent 
in the Lankd, the Gandavyiha as well as the Prajidparamita 
are quite eloquent in elucidating the doctrine of vicarious 
suffering. According to this doctrine, whatever suffering ore 
is enduring may be transferred on to another if the latter 
sincerely desires out of his unselfish and all-embracing love 
for others, to take these sufferings upon himself so that the 
real sufferers may not only be relieved of them but escape 
their evil consequences, thus enabling him to advance more 
easily and successfully towards the attainment of the blissful 
hfe. This goes quite against the idea of individual respon- 
sibility. But really religious minds require this vicarious 
suffering for their spiritual life. 

To suffer or atone vicariously is still negative and fails 
to entirely satisfy our spiritual needs. The latter demand 
that more good must be done in order to suppress the evils 
which are found claiming this world for their own glorifica- 
tion. So the Mahayanists accumulate stocks of merit not 
only for the material of their own enlightenment but for the 
general cultivation of merit which can be shared equally by 
their fellow-beings, animate and inanimate. This is the true 
meaning of Parinamana, that is, turning one’s merit over to 
others for their spiritual interest. 

As I said elsewhere, this notion of Parinamana is not 
at all traceable in the Lankd, which is strange. The Lanka 
cannot be imagined to have been compiled prior to the 
Prajnaparamitd, nor to the Gandavyitha or Avatamsaka; if 
so, why this absence? How can this be explained? 

XxX THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Buddha the Enlightened and Sarvasattva 
the Ignorant 

To conclude this section, Buddhism is the story of rela- 
tionship between the two groups of beings: the one is called 
Buddha who is the enlightened, the Tathagata, the Arhat, 
and the other is generally designated as Sarvasattva, literally 
‘all beings’’, who are ignorant, greedy for worldly things, 
and therefore in perpetual torment. In spite of their 
hankering tor worldly enjoyments, they are conscious of 
their condition and not at all satisfied with it; when they 
reflect they find themselves quite forlorn inwardly, they long 
for real happiness, for ultimate reality, and blissful en- 
lightenment. They look upwards, where the Buddha sits rapt 
in his meditation serenely regarding them with his trans- 
eendental wisdom. As he looks down at his fellow-beings 
inexplicably tormented with their greed and ignorance and 
egotism, he is disturbed, for he feels an inextinguishable 
feeling of love stirring within himself—the feeling now per- 
fectly purified of all the defilements of selfishness, which 
embraces the whole world in pity though not attached to it. 
The Buddha leaves his transcendental abode. He is seen 
among sentient beings, each one of whom recognises him 
according to his own light. 

Transcendental wisdom (prajiad) and a heart of all- 
embracing love (mahdkaruna) constitute the very reason of 
Buddhahood, while the desire or thirst for life (trishna), and 
ignorance as to the meaning of life (avidyd), and deeds 
(karma) following from the blind assertion of life-impulse— 
these are the factors that enter into the nature of Sarva- 
sattva, all ignorant and infatuated ones. The one who is 
above, looking downward, extends his arms to help; the other 
unable to extricate himself from entanglements looks up in 
despair, and finding the helping arms stretches his own to 
take hold of them. And from this scene the following narra- 
tives psychological, logical, and ontological, unfold them- 
selves to the Buddhist soul. 

INTRODUCTION XX1 

II 

Psychology 

What may be termed Buddhist psychology in the Lanka 
consists in the analysis of mind, that is, in the classification 
of the Vijnanas. To understand thus the psychology of Bud- 
dhism properly the knowledge of these terms is necessary : 
citta, manas, vijndna, manovijiidna, and dlayavijidna. 

To begin with Vijiana. Vijidna 1s composed of the 
prefix vi, meaning ‘“‘to divide’’, and the root j#a@ which 
means ‘‘to perceive’’, ‘‘to know’’. Thus, Vijhana is the 
faculty of distinguishing or discerning or judging. When 
an object is presented before the eye, it is perceived and 
judged as a red apple or a piece of white linen; the faculty 
of doing this is called eye-vijhana. In the same way, there 
are ear-vijhana for sound, nose-vijhana for odour, tongue- 
vijniana for taste, body-vijiana for touch, and thought- 
vijhana (manovijfiidna) for ideas—altogether six forms of 
Vijfana for distinguishing the various aspects of world 
external or internal. 

Of these six Vijfianas, the Manojiviana is the most 
important as it is directly related to an inner faculty known 
as Manas. Manas roughly corresponds to mind as an organ 
of thought, but in fact it is more than that, for it is also 
a strong power of attaching itself to the result of thinking. 
The latter may even be considered subordinate to this power 
of attachment. The Manas first wills, then it discriminates 
to judge; to judge is to divide, and this dividing ends in 
viewing existence dualistically. Hence the Manas’ tenacious 
attachment to the dualistic interpretation of existence. 
Willing and thinking are inextricably woven into the texture 
of Manas. 

Citta comes from the root cit, ‘‘to think’’, but in the 
Lanka the derivation is made from the root ci, ‘‘to pile up’’, 
‘‘to arrange in order’’. The Citta is thus a storehouse where 
the seeds of all thoughts and deeds are accumulated and 
stored up. The Citta, however, has a double sense, general 
and specific. When it is used in the general sense it means 

xxii THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

‘‘mind’’, ‘‘mentation’’, ‘‘ideas’’, including the activities of 
Manas and Manovijfiana, and also of the Vijnanas; while 
specifically it is a synonym of Alayavijiana in its relative 
aspects, and distinguishable from all the rest of the mental 
faculties. When, however, it is used in the form of Citta- 
mitra, Mind-only, it acquires still another connotation. We 
can say that Citta appears here in its highest possible sense, 
for it is then neither simply mentation nor intellection, nor 
perception as a function of consciousness. It is identifiable 
with the Alaya in its absolute aspect. This will become 
clearer later on. 

Alayavijndna is dlayat+vijfiadna, and dlaya is a’ store 
where things are hoarded for future use. The Citta as a 
cumulative faculty is thus identified with the Alayavijfiana. 
Strictly speaking, the Alaya is not a Vijiiana, has no discern- 
ing power in it; it indiscriminately harbours all that is 
poured into it through the channel of the Vijnanas. The 
Alaya is perfectly neutral, indifferent, and does not offer to 
give judgments. 

Relation Between the Various Functions 

Having explained what the various important terms 
mean and what functions are indicated by them, let us 
proceed to see in what relationship they stand to one another. 

The whole system of mental functions is called in the 
Lanka Cittakalapa or Vijhanakaya; Citta and Vijiiana are 
here used synonymcusly. In this mental system eight modes 
of activity are distinguished: Alayavijiiana, Manas, Mano- 
vijhana, and the five sense-Vijiianas. When these eight Vij- 
nanas are grouped together under two general heads, the 
one group is known as Khyati-Vijhana(pereeiving Vijnanas) 
and the other as Vastuprativikalpa-vijhana (object-diserimi- 
nating Vijnana). But in fact the Vijiidnas are not separable 
into these two groups, for perceiving is discriminating. 
When an individual object is perceived as such, that is, as 
solid, or as coloured, etc., discrimination has already taken 
place here; indeed without the latter, the former is impos- 
sible and conversely. Every Vijiana performs these two 

INTRODUCTION Xxiil 

functions simultaneously, which is to say, one functioning is 
analysable into two ideas, perceiving and discriminating. 
But it is to be observed that this double activity does not 
belong to the Alayavijiiana. 

Another way of classifying the Vijianas is according to 
their Lakshana or modes of being, of which three are dis- 
tinguishable as evolving (pravritit), as performing deeds 
(karma), and as retaining their own original nature (jdtt). 
From this viewpoint, all the Vijianas are evolving and deed- 
performing Vijfianas except the Alaya which always abides 
in its self-nature. For the Vijiianas may cease from evolv- 
ing and performing deeds for some reason, but the Alaya 
ever remains itself. 

The Alaya, according to the Lankd, has two aspects: 
the Alaya as it is in itself, which is in the Sagdthakam ealled 
Paramalaya-vijfiana, and the Alaya as mental representation 
ealled Vijfiaptir Alaya. These two aspects are also known 
respectively as the Prabandha (incessant) and the Lakshana 
(manifested). The Alaya is incessant because of its uninter- 
rupted existence ; it is manifested because of ‘its activity being 
perceptible by the mind. 

From this, we can see that the Alaya is conceived in the 
Lanké as being absolute in one respect and in the other as 
being subject to ‘‘evolution’’ (pravritti). It is this evolving 
aspect of the Alaya that lends itself to the treacherous inter- 
pretation of Manas. As long as the Alaya remains in and 
by itself, it is beyond the grasp of an individual, empirical 
consciousness, it is almost like Emptiness itself although it 
ever lies behind all the Vijiiana-activities, for the latter will 
cease working at onee when the Alaya is taken out of 
existence. 

Manas is conscious of the presence behind itself of the 
Alaya and also of the latter’s uninterrupted working on the 
entire system of the Vijfidnas. Reflecting on the Alaya and 
imagining it to be an ego, Manas clings to it as if it were 
reality and disposes of the reports of the six Vijnanas ac- 
cordingly. In other words, Manas is the individual will to 
live and the principle of discrimination. The notion of an 

XXIV THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

ego-substance is herein established, and also the acceptance 
of a world external to itself and distinct from itself. 

The six Vijnanas function, as it were, mechanically 
when the conditions are satisfied and are not conscious of 
their own doings. They have no intelligence outside their 
respective fields of activity. They are not organised in them- 
selves and have no theory for their existence and doings. 
What they experience is reported to the headquarters with 
no comment or interpretation. Manas sits at the head- 
quarters and like a great general gathers up all the informa- 
tion coming from the six Vijfianas. For it is he who shifts 
and arranges the reports and gives orders again to the 
reporters according to his own will and intelligence. The 
orders are then faithfully executed. 

The Manas is a double-headed monster, the one face looks 
towards the Alaya and the other towards the Vijianas. He 
does not understand what the Alaya really is. Discrimina- 
tion being ane of his fundamental functions, he sees multi- 
tudinousness there and clings to it as final. The clinging 
now binds him to a world of particulars. Thus, desire is 
mother, and ignorance is father, and this existence takes its 
rise. But the Manas is also a double-edged sword. When 
there takes place a ‘‘turning-back’’ (pardvritit) in it, the 
entire arrangement of things in the Vijnanakaya or Citta- 
kalapa changes. With one swing of the sword the pluralities 
are cut asunder and the Alaya is seen in its native form 
(svalakshana), that is, as solitary reality (viviktadharma), 
which is from the first beyond discrimination. The Manas 
is not of course an independent worker, it is always depend- 
ing on the Alaya, without which it has no reason of being 
itself; but at the same time the Alaya is also depending on 
the Manas. The Alaya is absolutely one, but this oneness 
gains significance only when it is realised by the Manas and 
recognised as its own supporter (dlamba). This relation- 
ship is altogether too subtle to be perceived by ordinary 
minds that are found choked with defilements and false ideas 
since beginningless time. 

The Manas backed by the Alaya has been the seat of 

INTRODUCTION XXV 

desire or thirst (trishna), karma, and ignorance. The seeds 
grow out of them, and are deposited in the Alaya. When 
the waves are stirred up in the Alaya-ocean by the wind of 
objectivity—so interpreted by the Manas—these seeds give 
a constant supply to the uninterrupted flow of the Vijfana- 
waters. In this general turmoil in which we sentient beings 
are all living, the Alaya is as responsible as the Manas; for if 
the Alaya refused to take the seeds in that are sent up from 
the region of the Vijhana, Manas may not have opportunities 
to exercise its two fundamental functions, willing and dis- 
eriminating. But at the same time it is due to the Alaya’s 
self-purifying nature that there takes place a great ecata- 
strophe in it known as ‘‘turning-back’’. With this ‘‘turn- 
ing-back’’ in the Alaya, Manas so intimately in relation with 
it also experiences a transformation in its fundamental 
attitude towards the Vijnanas. The latter are no more 
regarded as reporters of an external world which is charac- 
terised with individuality and manifoldness. This position 
is now abandoned, the external world is no more adhered to 
as such, that is, as reality; for it is no more than a mere 
reflection of the Alaya. The Alaya has been looking at itself 
in the Manas’ mirror. There has been from the very first 
nothing other than itself. Hence the doctrine of Mind-only 
(cittamatra), or the Alaya-only. 

The Religious Signification 

The necessity of conceiving Alaya in its double aspect, 
(1) as absolute reality (viviktadharma) and (2) as subject 
to causation (hetuka), comes from the Mahayana idea of 
Buddhahood (buddhaté). If Buddhahood is something 
absolutely solitary, all the efforts put forward by sentient 
beings to realise enlightenment would be of no avail what- 
ever. In other words, all that the Tathagata wants to do 
for sentient beings would never have its opportunity to reach 
them. There must be something commonly shared by each 
so that when a note is struck at one end a corresponding one 
will answer at the other. The Alaya is thus known on the 
one hand as Tathagata-garbha, the womb of Tathagatahood, 

XXVi THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

and on the other hand imagined by the ignorant as an ego- 
soul (pudgala or dtman). 

The Tathagata-garbha, therefore, whose psychological 
name is Alayavijiiana, is a reservoir of things good and bad, 
pure and defiled. Expressed differently, the Tathagata- 
garbha is originally, in its self-nature, immaculate, but 
beeause of its external dirt (dgantuklesa) it is soiled, and 
when soiled—which is the state generally found in all 
sentient beings—an intuitive penetration (pratyaksha) is 
impossible. When this is impossible as is the case with the 
philosophers and ignorant masses, the Garbha is believed 
sometimes to be a creator (karana) and sometimes to be an 
ego-substance (adtman). As it is so believed, it allows itself 
to transmigrate through the six paths of existence. Let there 
be, however, an intuitive penetration into the primitive 
purity (prakritipartsuddhi) of the Tathagata-garbha, and the 
whole system of the Vijiianas goes through a revolution. If 
the Tathagata-garbha or Alaya-vijiana were not a mysterious 
mixture of purity and defilement, good and evil, this abrupt 
transformation (pardvritt:) of an entire personality would 
be an impossibility. That is to say, if the Garbha or the 
Alaya while absolutely neutral and colourless in itself did 
not yet harbour in itself a certain irrationality, no sentient 
beings would ever be a Buddha, no enlightenment would be 
experienced by any human beings. Logicalness is to be 
transcended somewhere and somehow. And as this illogical- 
ness is practically possible, the Mahayana establishes the 
theory of Mind-only (cittamdtra). 

Ontology and the Twofold Egolessness 

In considering the theory of Mind-only, we have to be 
eareful not to understand this term psychologically. Mind 
(citta) here does not mean our individual mind which is 
subject to the law of causation (hetupratyaya). Absolute 
Citta transcends the dualistic conception of existence, it 
belongs neither to the Vijiiana-system nor to our objective 
world (vishaya). Therefore, in the Lanka this Citta is fre- 
quently described in ontological terms. 

INTRODUCTION XXVil 

The most significant one is Vastu, which is found 
coupled with Tathata in one place (p. 147, line 6)) and with 
Arya in another place (p. 164, lines 9 and 10). In the first 
case, Vastu and Tathataé are synonymously used; what. is 
Tathata, that is Vastu. Tathata is to be rendered either 
‘“suchness’’, or ‘‘thatness’’, which is a term most frequently 
used in the Mahayana texts to designate the highest reality 
ever approachable by Prajna, transcendental wisdom; Vastu 
in Buddhism is usually an individual object regarded as 
existing externally to the Vijnanas, and so is it in most cases 
in the Lanka also. But evidently in this connection where 
Vastu is Tathata, it must mean the highest reality. 

In the second case in which Arya is affixed to Vastu, the 
arya must be a modifier here, that is, this reality is something 
to be deseribed as drya, ‘‘noble’’, ‘‘holy’’, or ‘‘worthy’’. 

The highest reality is also called ‘‘something that has 
been in existence since the very first’’ (purvadharmasthitita, 
p. 241, 1.14), or (paurdnasthitidharmata, p. 148, 11.5 and 9). 
As it is the most ancient reality, its realisation means return- 
ing to one’s own original abode in which everything one sees 
around is an old familiar object. In Zen Buddhism, there- 
fore, the experience is compared to the visiting one’s native 
home and quietly getting settled (GAR FE4A, kuei-chia wen- 
tso). The Buddhas, enlightened ones, are all abiding here 
as gold is embedded in the mine. The ever-enduring reality 
(sthititad dharmatd) is above changes. 

To be above changes means to remain in one’s own 
abode, not to move away from it, and for this reason reality 
is known as ‘‘self-abiding’’ (svastha, p. 199, line 4), or 
‘‘remaining in its own abode’”’ (svasthane ’vatishthate, p. 
178, 1.15).1_ To keep one’s own abode it to be single, solitary, 
absolute: hence Reality is Viviktadharma, a thing of soli- 
tude; Bhitakoti, limit of reality, which points to a similar 
mode of thinking. It is again Ekagra, the summit of oneness, 
and this summit or limit (Kofi) is at the same time no-summit, 
no-limit, because this is gained only when one makes a final 
leap beyond the manifoldness of things. 

7 Cf. p. 124, line 1. 

XXViil THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

The more ordinary expressions given to the highest 
reality known as Citta are Tathata, ‘‘suchness”’ or ‘‘thus- 
ness’’, Satyata, ‘‘the state of being true’’, Bhutata, ‘‘the 
state of being real’’, Dharmadhatu, ‘‘realm of truth’’, Nir- 
vana, the Permanent (nitya), Sameness (samatd), the One 
(advaya), Cessation (nirodha), the Formless (animitta), 
Emptiness (Stinyata), ete. 

From these descriptions it is found natural for Maha- 
yanists psychologically to deny the existence of an ego-soul 
or ego-substance in the Alaya, and ontologically to insist 
that the tragedy of life comes from believing in the sub- 
stantiality or finality of an individual object. The former 
is technically called the doctrine of Pudgalanairatmya, ego- 
lessness of persons,' and the latter that of Dharmanairatmya, 
egolessness of things; the one denies the reality of an ego-soul 
and the other the ultimacy of an individual object. 

Superficially, this denial of an Atman in persons and 
individual objects sounds negative and productive of no 
moral signification. But when one understands what is 
ultimately meant by Cittamatra (Mind-only) or by Vivikta- 
dharma (the Solitary), the negations are on the plane of 
relativity and intellection. 

The term ‘‘the Middle’? (madhyama), meaning ‘‘the 
Middle Way’’, does not occur in the Lanka proper except in 
its Sagathakam portion. But the idea that the truth is not 
found in the dualistic way of interpreting existence, that it 
is beyond the category of being and non-being, is everywhere 
emphasised in the Lawka. In fact, we can say that one of 
the principal theses of the Lanka is to establish the Absolute 
which makes a world of particulars possible but which is 
not to be grasped by means of being and non-being (astind- 
stitva). This Absolute is the Middle Way of the Madhya- 
maka school. 

* The conception of the Tathigata-garbha is not to be confused 

with that of a Pudgula or Atman. See §xxvi. For the non-existence 
of a personal ego-soul and the non-reality of an individual object, see 
especially pp. 61-62 of this translation. 

INTRODUCTION XXIX 

Unobtainabdility 

This going beyond all forms of dualism, however differ- 
ently it may be expressed, whether as being and non-being, 
or as oheness and manyness, or as this and that, or as causa- 
tion and no-causation, or as form and no-form, or as assertion 
and negation, or as Samsara and Nirvana, or as ignorance 
and knowledge, or as work and no-work, or as good and evil, 
or as purity and defilement, or as ego and non-ego, or as 
worldly and super-worldly, ad infinitum—this going beyond 
a world of oppositions and contrasts constitutes one of the 
most significant thoughts of the Mahayana. There is nothing 
real as long as we remain entangled in the skein of relativity, 
and our sufferings will never come to an end. We must 
therefore endeavour to take hold of reality, but this reality 
is not something altogether solitary. For in this case no one 
of us will be able to have even a glimpse of it, and if we had, 
it will turn into something standing in opposition to this 
world of relativity, which means the loss of solitariness, that 
is, the solitary now forms part of this world. 

Thus, according to Buddhist philosophy, reality must 
be grasped in this world and by this world, for it is that 
‘‘Beyond which is also Within’’. The Lanka compares it 
to the moon in water or a flower in a mirror. It is within 
and yet outside, it is outside and yet within. This aspect of 
reality is described as ‘‘unobtainable’’ or ‘‘unattainable’’ 
(anupalabdha). And just because it is unobtainable in a 
world of particulars, the latter from the point of view of 
reality is like a dream, like a mirage, and soon. The subtlest 
relation of reality to the world is beyond description, it yields 
its secrets only to him who has actually realised it in himself 
by means of noble wisdom (dryajidna or prajnd). This 
realisation is also a kind of knowledge though different from 
what is generally known by this name. 

Epistemology 

Without a theory of cognition, therefore, Mahayana 
philosophy becomes incomprehensible. The Lanka is quite 

XXX THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

explicit in assuming two forms of knowledge: the one for 
grasping the absolute or entering into the realm of Mind- 
only, and the other for understanding existence in its dualis- 
tic aspect in which logic prevails and the Vijianas are active. 
The latter is designated Discrimination (vtkalpa) in the 
Lanka and the former transcendental wisdom or knowledge 
(prajna). To distinguish these two forms of knowledge is 
most essential in Buddhist philosophy. 

The Lanka is decidedly partial to the use of Aryajiiana 
instead of Prajna, although the latter has been in use since 
the early days of Buddhism. Aryajfiana, noble wisdom, is 
generally coupled with Pratyatma, inner self, showing that 
this noble, supreme wisdom is a mental function operating 
in the depths of our being. As it is concerned with the 
highest reality or the ultimate truth of things, it is no super- 
ficial knowledge dealing with particular objects and their 
relations. It is an intuitive understanding which, penetra- 
ting through the surface of existence, sees into that which is 
the reason of everything logically and ontologiecally. 

The Lanka is never tired of impressing upon its readers 
the importance of this understanding in the attainment of 
spiritual freedom; for this understanding is a fundamental 
intuition into the truth of Mind-only and constitutes the 
Buddhist enlightenment with which truly starts the religious 
life of a Bodhisattva. 

This transcendental Jiiana is variously designated in 
the Lanka. It is Pravicayabuddhi, that is, an insight fixed 
upon the ultimate ground of existence. It is Svabuddhi, 
innate in oneself; Nirabhasa, or Anabhasa (imagelessness), 
beyond all forms of tangibility; Nirvikalpa, beyond dis- 
crimination, meaning direct empirical knowledge before 
analysis starts in any form whatever; which therefore is 
not at all expressible by means of words (vdc or ruta). The 
awaking of supreme knowledge (anuttarasamyaksambodht) 
is the theme of the Prajiapdramitd-sitras, but in the Lanka 
the weight of the discourse is placed upon the realisation by 
means of Aryajiidna of ultimate reality which is Mind-only. 
This psychological emphasis so distinctive of the Lanka 

INTRODUCTION XXxi 

makes this sutra occupy a unique position in Mahayana 
literature. 

The knowledge that stands contrasted to Prajiia or 
Aryajfiana is Vikalpabuddhi, or simply Vikalpa, which I 
have translated ‘‘discrimination’’. It is relative knowledge 
working on the plane of dualism, it may be called the 
principle of dichotomy, whereby judgment is made possible. 
By us existence is always divided into pairs of conception, 
thesis and antithesis, that is, being and non-being, permanent 
and impermanent, Nirvana and Samsara, birth and death, 
creating and created, this and that, Me and not-Me, ad 
libitum. This is due to the working of Vikalpa. The 
Lakshana (form) of existence thus presented to us is not 
its real nature, it is our own thought-construction (vijiaptt) ; 
but our Buddhi which seeks after pluralities fails to under- 
stand this fact and makes us cling to appearances as realities. 
As the result, the world in which we now find ourselves living 
ceases to be what it is in itself; for it is one we have con- 
structed according to our own ignorance and discrimination. 
Reality escapes us, truth slips off our grasp, false views ac- 
cumulate, wrong judgments go on adding complexities upon 
complexities. The habit-energy (vdsand) thus created takes 
complete hold on the Alayavijfiana, and Alaya the Absolute 
is forever unable to extricate itself from these encumbrances. 
Eternal transmigration to no purpose must be our destiny. 

The Twofold Truth (satya) 

The distinction between the highest truth (paramdrtha- 
satya) and conventional truth (samvuriti-satya) is not ex- 
plicitly held in the Lanké, but allusions are occasionally made 
to them; and it is said that false discrimination belongs to 
conventionalism (p. 131, 1. 3). Another word for conven- 
tionalism is Vyavahara, worldly experience, according to 
which we talk of things being born and destroyed, and also 
of the how, what, where, etc. of existence. This kind of 
knowledge does not help us to have an insight into the depths 
of being. 

XXXil THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

The Three Svabhavas 

Another way of classifying knowledge is known as three 
Svabhavas in the Lankd. This is a generally recognised 
classification in all the schools of Mahayana Buddhism. 
Svabhava means ‘‘self-nature’’ or ‘‘self-reality’’ or ‘‘self- 
substance’’, the existence of which in some form is popularly 
accepted. The first form of knowledge by which the reality 
of things is assumed is called Parikalpita, ‘‘imagined’’, that 
is, imagination in its ordinary sense. This is an illusion, 
for things are imagined to exist really where in fact there 
are none. It is like seeing a mirage which vanishes as one 
approaches. Imagined (partkalpita) objects have, therefore, 
no objective reality. 

The second form of knowledge by which we examine 
existence is Paratantra, ‘‘depending upon another’’. This 
is a kind of scientific knowledge based on analysis. Bud- 
dhists make use of this knowledge to disprove the sub- 
stantiality of individual objects, that is, the svabhdvatva of 
things. According to them, there is nothing self-existing in 
the world, everything is depending for its existence on 
something else, things are universally mutually conditioned, 
endlessly related to one another. Disseect an object con- 
sidered final, and it dissolves itself into airy nothingness. 
Modern scientists declare that existence is no more than 
mathematical formulae. The Mahayanists would say that 
there is no Svabhava in anything appealing as such to the 
Vijnanas when it is examined from the Paratantra point 
of view. 

The imagined view (parikalpita) of reality does not 
give us a true knowledge of it, and the relativity view (para- 
tantra) reduces it into nothingness: if so, where does our 
boat of enlightenment get anchored? The Lanka tells us 
that there is a third way of viewing existence, called Pari- 
nishpanna, ‘‘perfected’’, which allows us to become truly 
acquainted with reality as it is. It is this ‘‘perfected’’ know- 
ledge whereby we are enabled to see really into the nature 
of existence, to perceive rightly what is meant by Svabhava, 

INTRODUCTION XXxXiil 

and to declare that there is no Svabhava as is imagined by 
the ignorant and that all is empty (Sinya). 

Perfect or ‘‘perfected’’ knowledge issues from Prajfia, 
or Aryajiiana, or sometimes simply Jiidna, seeing into the 
suchness of things. It perceives things as they are, because 
going beyond the realm of being and -non-being which 
belongs to discrimination, the principle of dichotomisation, 
it dives into the abyss where there are no shadows(andbhdasa). 
This is called self-realisation (svasiddhi). So states the 
Lanka that as the wise see reality with their eye of Prajna, 
they ascertain definitely what it is, i.e. in its self-nature 
(bhavasvabhdva) and not as is seen by the ignorant whose 
eye is never raised beyond the horizon of relativity. 

This is again called seeing into the emptiness of things. 
Emptiness (Sinyatd), however, does not mean ‘‘relativity’’, 
as is thought by some scholars. Relativity-emptiness is on 
the lower plane of knowledge and does not reveal the real 
view of existence as itis. Emptiness taught in the Mahayana 
texts goes far deeper into the matter. It is the object of 
transcendental knowledge. As long as one stays in the world 
of relativity where logic rules supreme, one cannot have 
even the remotest idea of true emptiness or what is designated 
in the Prajnapadramita as MahaStinyata. The Lanka has also 
this kind of Siimyata mentioned as one of the seven Empti- 
nesses (p. 94). Relativity-emptiness so called corresponds 
to the first of the seven Emptinesses, while the Mahayana 
Sinyata is Paramartha-dryajfiana-mahasinyata, that is, the 
great void of noble wisdom which is the highest reality. 

The Five Dharmas 

Before concluding this section, we must not forget to 
mention what is known as the Five Dharmas in the Lanka 
making up one of the main topies of discourses. The Five 
Dharmas and the Three Svabhavas are different ways of 
classifying the same material. The Five are: Appearances 
(nimitta), Names (néma), Discrimination (samkalpa), 
Right Knowledge (samyagjfadna), and Suchness (tathatd). 
The first three correspond to the two of the Three Svabhavas, 

XXXIV THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Parikalpita and Paratantra, while the last two belong to the 
Parinishpanna. 

Our relative knowledge starts with perceiving Appear- 
ances to which Names are given. Names are then thought 
real and discrimination is carried on. We can say that dis- 
crimination has been with us from the first even when what 
is called perception has not taken place. For naming is im- 
possible without some form of discrimination. Then the worst 
thing comes upon us as we begin to persuade ourselves and 
think that by giving Names existence has been successfully 
disposed of, and feel comfortable about the problems of 
religion. Although without naming no knowledge is pos- 
sible, Right Knowledge (samyagjfdna) is not to be had here. 
For this is the inexpressible, the unnamable, it is the mean- 
ing (artha) not to be grasped by words. In this the Lanka 
permits no equivocation, it most emphatically advises us not 
to attach ourselves to words. 

The object of Right Knowledge is Suchness of things 
as not conditioned by the category of being and non-being. 
It is in this sense that ultimate reality is said to be like the 
moon in the water, it is not immersed in it, nor is it outside 
it. We cannot say that the moon is in water, for it is a 
mere reflection; but we cannot say that it is not there, for 
a reflection though it may be it is really before us. Plurality 
of objects is not real from the point of view of relativity as 
well as from the point of view of Suchness. If some one 
declares such reality as maintained by the Mahayana is too 
ethereal, too phantom-like, too unreal for our religious 
aspirations, the Lanka will immediately retort, ‘‘You are still 
on the plane of relativity.’’ When the Aryajiiana is awaken- 
ed, Tathata is the most real thing and a term most fittingly 
applied as far as our power of designation is concerned. 

III 

The Message of the Lanka 

There are many other thoughts of interest in the Lanka 
which may be discussed in this Introduction. But as I have 

INTRODUCTION XXXV 

already given up many pages to it and as the reader who 
wishes to know more about the Sutra may go to my Studies 
in the Lankdvatara, I will say just a few words about the 
position of this Sutra among the general Mahayana Buddhist 
texts. 

While we are still in the dark as to how Mahayana 
Buddhism developed in India, we know that when it was 
introduced into China by the missionaries from India and 
central Asia, it was already regarded as directly coming 
from the Buddha’s own golden mouth, and that what must 
have developed during several hundred years after his death 
was taken in a wholesale manner for a system fully matured 
in his life-time extending over a period of about half a 
century after his Enlightenment. As the sutras were trans- 
lated into Chinese, the first of which appeared in 68 a.p., they 
profoundly stirred the Chinese and then the Japanese mind 
awakening their religious consciousness to its very depths. 
The following are the most important Mahayana texts that 
thus served to move the religious feelings of the Far-eastern 
peoples and are still continuing to do so. 

(1) The Saddharma-pundarika-sitra. One of the main 
theses of this inspiring scripture is the announcement that 
the Buddha never died, that he is forever living on the 
Mount of the HolyVulture and preaching to a group of the 
Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and Bodhisattvas, who are no 
less beings than ourselves, and that the Buddha has just one 
vehicle (ydna) for all beings. This must have been a revolu- 
tionary teaching at the time when the Buddha was thought 
to be just as transient and mortal as ourselves, and when 
the only thing that was left behind after his Nirvana was 
his Dharma, in which his followers were asked to find their 
Master. 

(2) The Avalokitesvara-vikurvana-nirdesa. This is com- 
monly known as Kwannon-gyo in Japan and forms the 
twenty-fourth chapter of the Sanskrit Saddharma-pundarika, 
but it will be better to treat it as a separate document as it 
has quite an independent message and has been so considered 
though not always consciously by its devotees. Avalokites- 

XXXVI THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

vara is here represented as a god of mercy who will help 
anybody who finds himself in trouble spiritually as well as 
materially. In popular minds the god is no more masculine 
than feminine; if anything, more feminine, because of mercy 
being more reality associated with eternal femininity. That 
he can assume various forms (vikurvana) in order to achieve 
his ends appeals very much to the religious imagination of 
the Eastern peoples. And this doctrine of transformation 
is one of the characteristic features of Mahayana Buddhism. 

(3) The Avatamsaka-sitra. This is an encyclopedic 
sutra of which we find the Gandavyiiha and the Desabhiimika 
forming a part. It is another Mahayana sutra that has 
influenced the Chinese and the Japanese mind profoundly. 
The so-called Interpenetration which constitutes the central 
thought of the sutra is symbolically and effectively treated 
in the Chinese translations by Buddhabhadra (60 fas.), by 
Sikshananda (80 fas.), and by Prajfia (40 fas.). The sutra 
as we have it now contains many sutras which may be con- 
sidered independent though they no doubt belong to the same 
class of literature. The reading may be tedious from the 
modern point of view as the main theme is not so succinctly 
presented, and it takes some time before the reader can get 
into the mood of the sutra itself. After a quiet and patient 
pursuit of the text, however, he cannot help but be deeply 
impressed with its underlying spirit whose grandeur of out- 
look almost surpasses human comprehension. The huge rock- 
cut figure of Vairocana at Lung-men and the bronze figure 
in Nara are respectively the Chinese and the Japanese artistic 
response to the spiritual stimulation caused by the Avatam- 
saka, or the Gandavyitha which is the same thing. 

Another profound effect produced by this sutra on the 
Eastern mind is the conception of the Bodhisattva Samanta- 
bhadra with his ‘‘ten inexhaustible vows.’’ He would not 
enter into Nirvana, that coveted object of all the Buddhists, 
because he would not have one single soul unsaved behind 
him. And by this ‘‘soul’’ was meant not only human soul 
but the soul of every being animate or inanimate. It was the 
vow of Samantabhadra to release animals, plants, and even 

INTRODUCTION XXXVli 

such inanimate existences as mountains, waters, earths, etc., 
from the bondage of ignorance and karma. His universe, 
moreover, was far wider and more spiritualistic than our 
ordinary one 

(4) The Prajna-paramita-siitra. This is regarded by 
most Mahayana scholars to have been one of the first Maha- 
yana literature that was declared against the hair-splitting 
scholastic philosophy of early Buddhist doctors, gives us the 
doctrine of Emptiness or Void (Siényatd), whereby every 
possible straw of attachment is taken away from us. To be 
left alone in the Void, even with this Void vanishing from 
around us, is the method of perfect emancipation proposed 
by the Prajia-pdramitad. This was quite a direct straight- 
forward proposition on the part of the Mahayanist. It 
appealed greatly to intellectual minds as well as the mystical. 
While the Avatamsaka filled the universe with things of 
imagination even to its minutest particle, the Prajna- 
paramita swept everything away from the universe which 
now becomes a vast Void indeed. And in six hundred 
fascicles of the sutra we are warned not to be afraid of, not 
to be taken aback by this vast Void. If we stagger at this 
gospel of absolute Emptiness, we are told by the Buddha 
that we cannot be good followers of the Mahayana. 

(5) The Vimalakirti-sitra, This is a masterpiece, a 
drama with great literary merit, and because of this fact it 
is read more generally than other Buddhist sutras by the 
laity. The signification of this sutra lies in taking our soiled 
coat of attachment off our back which we have been wearing 
ever since we became aware of an external existence. Another 
significant feature of the sutra is that its chief figure of 
interest is not the Buddha but a wealthy layman called 
Vimalakirti. It fs this crafty old gentleman-philosopher who 
puts to shame all the Sravakas and Bodhisattvas coming to 
argue with him about the deepest truths of Buddhism, except 
Maiijusri, the head of the Bodhisattvas. The latter proved 
a good match for the eloquence of the lay-disciple of the 
Buddha. What we have to notice especially in this Maha- 
yana text is that Buddhism does not require us to lead a 

XXXViil THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

homeless life as a Bhikshu in order to attain enlightenment, 
that is, the householder’s life is as good and pure as the 
mendicant’s. 

(6) In this respect the Srimald-sitra is also significant, 
for Srimala the queen inspired by the wisdom and power of 
the Buddha delivers a great sermon on the Tathagata-garbha. 
The Mahayana may be said to be the revolt of laymen- and 
laywomen against the ascetic spirit of exclusion pervading 
among early advocates of Buddhism. 

(7) The Sukhavati-vytha-sitra. The influence of this 
sutra on Oriental people is quite different from that of the 
other sutras, for it has awakened the faith-aspect of their 
religious consciousness, which is established on the general 
basis of Mahayana philosophy. Superficially, the faith of 
Amitabha looks very much like Christian faith in Christ, but 
the underlying thoughts are not at all the same. The Jodo 
school could not take its rise from any other soil than Maha- 
yana Buddhism. In Japan this school has achieved a unique 
development marking a spiritual epoch in the history of 
religious faith in the Kast. 

(8) The Parinirvana-sitra. This once formed the 
foundation of the Nirvana school in the early history of 
Chinese Buddhism. Its main assertion is that the Buddha- 
nature is present in every one of us. Before the arrival of 
this sutra in China it was generally believed that there was 
a class of people known as Icchanti who had no Buddha- 
nature in them and therefore who were eternally barred 
from attaining enlightenment. This belief was entirely ex- 
pelled, however, when a statement to the contrary was found 
in the sutra, saying that ‘‘There is something in all beings 
which is true, real, eternal, self-governing, and forever un- 
changing—this is called Ego, though quite different from 
what is generally known as such by the philosophers. This 
Ego is the Tathagata-garbha, Buddha-nature, which exists 
in every one of us, and is characterised with such virtues 
as permanency, bliss, freedom, and purity.’’ 

(9) All these and other sutras of Mahayana Buddhism 
may seem to exhaust the many-sided aspects of this school, 

INTRODUCTION XXXIX 

but another is needed to tell us that mere understanding 
is not enough in the Buddhist life, that without self-realisa- 
tion all intellection amounts to nothing. To tell us this is 
the office of the Lankdvatara-siitra, and Bodhidharma, father 
of Zen Buddhism, made use of the text quite effectively ; for 
it was through him that a special school of Buddhism under 
the title of Zen or Ch‘an has come to develop in China and 
in Japan. While Zen as we have it now is not the same in 
many respects as Bodhidharma first proclaimed it about 
fifteen centuries ago, the spirit itself flows quite unchanged 
in the East. And this is eloquently embodied in the Lan- 
kavatara-sitra. It is not, however, necessary here for us to 
enter into details, for the point has been fully dwelt upon 
in my recent work, Studtes in the Lankavatara Sitra. Suffice 
it to touch lightly upon the characteristic features of the 
Sutra, which constitute its special message as distinguished 
from the other sutras already referred to. 

There is no doubt that the Lanka is closely connected 
ir. time as well as in doctrine with The Awakening of Faith 
in the Mahaydna generally ascribed to ASvaghosha. While 
he may not have been the author of this most important 
treatise of Mahayana philosophy, there was surely a great 
Buddhist mind, who, inspired by the same spirit which 
pervades the Lanka, the Avatamsaka, the Parinirvana, ete., 
poured out his thoughts in The Awakening. Some scholars 
contend that The Awakening is a Chinese work, but this is 
not well grounded. 

In a way The Awakening is an attempt to systematise 
the Lanka, for all the principal teachings of the latter are 
found there developed in due order. As far as the theoretical 
side is concerned, both teach the existence of th Garbha as 
ultimate reality. While this lies in ordinary people defiled 
by the evil passions and does not shine out in its native 
purity, we cannot deny its existence in them. When the 
external wrappage of impurities is peeled off we all become 
Buddhas and Tathagatas. In fact, the birth of a Tathagata 
is nowhere else than in this Garbha. 

The Garbha is from the psychological point of view the 

2 | THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Alayavijfiana, all-conserving mind, in which good and bad 
are mingled, and the work of the Yogin, that is, one who 
seeks the truth by means of self-discipline, is to separate the 
one from the other. Why is the Alaya found contaminated 
by evil thoughts and desires? What is the evil? How does 
it come out in this world? How is the truth to be realised ? 
These questions are answered by postulating a system of 
Vijhanas and by the doctrine of Discrimination (vikalpa), 
as has already been expounded above. 

This is the point where the Lankd comes in contact with 
the Yogacara school. The Yogacara is essentially psycho- 
logical standing in contrast in this respect to the Madhya- 
maka school which is epistemological. But the Alayavijiana 
of the Yogacara is not the same as that of Lanka and the 
Awakening of Faith. The former conceives the Alaya to be 
purity itself with nothing defiled in it whereas the Lanka 
and the Awakening make it the cause of purity and defile- 
ment. Further, the Yogacara upholds the theory of Vij- 
faptimatra and not that of Cittamatra, which belongs to 
the Lanka, Avatamsaka, and Awakening of Faith. The 
difference is this: According to the Vijfiaptimatra, the world 
is nothing but ideas, there are no realities behind them; but 
the Cittamatra states that there is nothing but Citta, Mind, 
in the werld and that the world is the objectification of 
Mind. The one is pure idealism and the other idealistic 
realism. 

To realise the Cittamatra is the object of the Lankd, 
and this is done when Discrimination is discarded, that is, 
when a state of non-discrimination is attained in one’s 
spiritual life. Discrimination is a logical term and belongs 
to the intellect. Thus we see that the end of the religious 
discipline is to go beyond intellectualism, for to discriminate, 
to divide, is the function of the intellect. Logic does not 
lead one to self-realisation. Hence Nagarjuna’s hair-split- 
ting dialectics. His idea is to prove the ineffectiveness of 
logic in the domain of our spiritual life. This is where the 
Lanka joins hands with the Madhyamaka. The doctrine of the 
Void is indeed the foundation of Mahayana philosophy. But 

INTRODUCTION xli 

this is not to be understood in the manner of analytical 
reasoning. The Lanka is quite explicit and not to be mis- 
taken in this respect. 

So far, the Lanka may seem to be only a philosophical 
treatise with nothing religious in it, but the fact is that the 
Sutra is deeply tinged with religious sentiments. For in- 
stance, the Bodhisattva would not enter into Nirvana because 
of his vows to save all sentient beings, and his vows are not 
limited in time and space, and for this reason they are called 
“‘inexhaustible’’. Not only are his vows inexhaustible but 
the ‘‘skilful means’’ he uses for the emancipation of all 
beings know no limits. He knows how to make the best use 
of his inexhaustible resources intellectual and practical for 
this single purpose. Here we may say that the Bodhisattva 
Samantabhadra of the Avatamsaka or the Gandavyiha is 
reflected. 

In the Lanka all the most fundamental conceptions of 
the Mahayana are thrown in without any attempt on the part 
of the compiler or compilers to give them a system. ‘This is 
left to the thoughtful reader himself who will pick them up 
from the medley and string them into a garland of pearls 
out of his own religious experience. 

The one significant Mahayana thought, however, which 
is not expressly touched upon in the Sutra is that of Pari- 
nimana. Parindmana means to turn one’s merit over to 
somebody else so as to expedite the latter’s attainment of 
Nirvana. If anybody does anything good, its merit is sure 
to come back to the doer himself—this is the doctrine of 
Karma; but according to the Mahayana the recipient need 
not always be the doer himself, he may be anybody, he may 
be the whole world; merit being of universal character can 
be transferred upon anything the doer wishes. This trans- 
ferability is known as the doctrine of Parinimana, the turn- 
ing over of one’s good work to somebody else. This idea 
comes from the philosophical teaching of Interpenetration as 
upheld in the Avatamsaka. 

xhi THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

IV 

The Date of the Lanka 

As is the case with other Buddhist texts it is quite 
impossible with our present knowledge of Indian history to 
decide the age of the Lanka. The one thing that is certain 
is that it was compiled before 443 a.p. when the first Chinese 
translation is reported to have been attempted. But this 
does not mean that the whoie text as we have it now was 
then already in existence, for we know that the later trans- 
lations done in 5138 and 700-704 contain the Dharani and 
the Sagathakam section which are missing in the 443 one 
(Sung). Further, the Meat-eating chapter also suffered 
certain modifications, especially in the 513 (Wei) one. 

Even with the text that was in existence before 443 a.p. 
we do not know how it developed, for it was not surely 
written from the beginning as one complete piece of work 
as we write a book in these modern days. Some parts of it 
must be older than others, since there is no doubt that it 
has many layers of added passages. 

To a certain extent, the contents may give a clue to the 
age of the text, but because of the difficulty of separating 
one part from another from the point of view of textual 
criticism, arguments from the contents as to the date are of 
very doubtful character. As long as we have practically no 
knowledge of historical circumstances in which the Buddhist 
texts were produced one after another in India or somewhere 
else, all the statements are more or less of the character of 
an ingenious surmise. All that we can say is this that the 
Lanka is not a discourse directly given by the founder of 
Buddhism, that it is a later composition than the Nikayas 
or Agamas which also developed some time after the Buddha, 
that when Mahayana thoughts began to erystallise in the 
Northern as well as in the Southern part of India probably 
about the Christian era or even earlier, the compiler or com- 
pilers began to collect passages as he or they came across in 
their study of the Mahayana, which finally resulted in the 

INTRODUCTION xliii 

Buddhist text now known under the title of Lankdvatdara- 
stitra. 

Some Remarks Concerning the Text 

Certain irregularities of the chapter-endings are to be 
noticed in this connection. Generally these endings show 
that the chapters are composite parts of a sutra and belong 
to it; but in the ease of the Lanka some endings are quite 
of an independent character, and their relation to the text 
is not at all definite. For instance: 

Chapter I—‘‘Chapter One Known as Ravana-invita- 
tion’’; 

Chapter IJ—‘‘Here Ends Chapter Two Known as the 
Collection of All the Dharmas in the 36,000 (Sloka) 
Lankavatara’’ ; 

Chapter III—‘‘Here Ends Chapter Three on Imperma- 
nency in the Lankavatara, a Mahayana Sitra’’; 
Chapter IV—‘‘Here Ends Chapter Four on Realisa- 

tion’’; 

Chapter V—‘‘Here Ends Chapter Five on the Perma- 
mency and Impermanency of the Tathagata’’; 
Chapter VI—‘‘Here Ends Chapter Six on Momentari- 

ness’’; 

Chapter VII—‘‘Here Ends Chapter Seven on Egoless- 
ness’’; 

Chapter VIII—‘‘Here Ends Chapter Hight on Meat- 
eating from the Lankavatara which is the Essence 
of All the Buddha-Teachings’’; 

Chapter [X—‘‘Here Ends Chapter Nine Known as 
Dharani in the Lankavatara.’’ 

These irregularities, at least in one case, show that there was 
a larger Lanka containing 36,000 Slokas! as referred to in 
Fa-tsang’s notices,” and in another case that the Lankd was 
also known, or contained, a chapter known as the ‘‘ Essence 
of all the Buddha-teachings’’ which is indeed a sort of sub- 

Suggested by Mr Hokei Idzumi. 
See my Studies in the Lankdvatdra Sitra, p. 42. 

xliv THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

title given to the four-volume Chinese Lanka by Gunabhadra 
(Sung), 443 a.p. 

The Gatha section called ‘‘Sagathakam’’ presents 
peculiar difficulties. As the earliest Chinese translation by 
Gunabhadra does not contain it, it is highly probable that it 
was not then included in the Lanka text. But the fact that 
both the Wei version and the Sanskrit edition contain not 
only the verses properly belonging to the Sagathakam but 
those? already appearing in the prose section, hints at the 
existence of a larger or more complete text of the Lanka in 
which all these Sagathakam verses were incorporated in the 
prose section, which, therefore, must have been naturally 
much fuller than the existing Lanka—perhaps something like 
the one containing 36,000 Slokas. There are many verses in 
the Sagathakam which are too obscure to be intelligently 
interpreted without their corresponding prose passages. The 
verses are generally meant for memorising the principal 
doctrines, and they give sometimes no sense when they are 
separately considered, for some watch-words only are rhyth- 
mically arranged to facilitate the memory. 

In the Sanskrit text, the Sagathakam begins with this 
stanza: 

“Listen to the wonderful Mahayana doctrine, 

Declared in this Lankavatara Sitra, 

Composed in verse-gems, 

And destroying a net of the philosophical views.” 

This may be understood to mean that this section is that 
part of the Lanka which is made up with the verses, that 
is to say, the verses taken from the entire text of the Lankd. 
The term sagdthakam also suggests this, for it means the 
‘fone with verses.’’ But in this case the following questions 
may be asked: 

If there were a larger Lanka containing all these verses 
in the Sagathakam in the body of the text, or if there were 
a Lanka with the verses alone and as a separete text which 
was later on put together with the present one, are all these 
verses aS a whole to be regarded as belonging to the same 

* These are systematically excluded in the T‘ang. 

INTRODUCTION xlv 

period? If so, what caused the disappearance of the prose 
passages which accompanied the verses now retained in the 
Sagathakam only? Is there no possibility of some of the 
verses added later to the text independently? There is some 
evidence of such additions as we ean see, for instance, in the 
conception of the Sambhogakaya (verse 384) and of the 
ninth Vijiana (verse 13), which are surely of later develop- 
ment. The solution of these and some other possible ques- 
tions is to be left to some future time when all the circum- 
stances leading to the production of the Buddhist sutras 
Mahayana and Hinayana in various districts of India are 
ascertained. 

The best way of reading the Lankd, as I said in my 
Studies, is to cut the whole text into as many pieces? as the 
sense allows and to regard each piece as completely express- 
ing one chief thought in the philosophy of Mahayana Bud- 
dhism. In some eases the pieces so severed may seem to 
conflict with one another. In such eases a higher principle 
will be found somewhere else that unifies the two contra- 
dictory notions harmoniously. For after all there is but 
one highest truth in the Lanka, of which all others are so 
many aspects viewed at various angles of thought. 

I thought I would treat the Sagathakam in a similar 
manner, by dividing the whole portion into so many groups 
of verses, each of which is presumably concerned with one 
theme. But the verses being too concise and often merely 
mnemonic, one finds it too risky to cut them up into groups 
and to take the latter as containing so many definite sets 
of thoughts. As we notice in the eases of repetition oceur- 
ring so frequently in the Sagadthakam the verses are not 
solidly transferred from the text, that is, they are not always 
found in the Sagathakam in the same order as they are in 
the text proper, nor are they complete. Sometimes one 
Single verse is taken out of the group where it belongs in 

the main text and inserted in an unexpected connection. In 

* This cutting is indicated in the following translation by the 
Roman figures running consecutively through the entire text except the 
Ravana, the Dharani, and the Meat-eating chapter, where no such divi- 
ding is necessary. 

xlvi THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

these circumstances I thought it wise to leave the Sagathakam 
as it stands and not to arrange the verses into groups until 
we know more exactly about the historical evolution of this 
portion of the Lanka. 

In fact, the Sagathakam is a curious mixture where 
subjects not at all referred to in the prose section are in 
juxtaposition with those that have to my view no proper 
bearing in the Lanka. Such subjects are those historical 
narratives concerning Vyasa, Katyayana, Nagahvaya, etc., 
and those relating to the monastery life. And then there 
are some passages in the Sagathakam which may be regarded 
as later additions. For instance, when it refers to eight or 
nine several Vijiianas (verse 13), two forms of Alaya (v. 59), 
the triple body (v. 484), thirty-six Buddhas (v. 380), ete., 
they are evidently later incorporations. The Sagathakam 
requires more study from the point of text criticism, and 
also from the point of doctrinal, literary, and monachical 
history. 

The Transmission History of the Lanka 

In the book called #§(mbi Ze, ‘‘Reeord of Master and 
Disciple in [the Transmission of] the Lanka,’’ which is one 
of the Tung-huang findings, the transmission line of the 
Lanka is recorded. The author ##, Ching-chiieh, living 
probably early in the eighth century apparently identified 
Zen Buddhism with the teaching of the Lanka, for his 
Fathers of the Lavkd transmission are also those of Zen 
Buddhism. He considers Gunabhadra, the translator of the 
Sung or four volume Lanka, the first Father of Zen in China, 
and not Bodhidharma as is generally done by Zen historians. 
In this the author may be in the right, for in his day there 
was yet no independent school which later came to be known 
as ‘‘Zen’’, and whatever represented this movement at the 
time was no more than the study of the Lanka. Moreover, 
Ching-chiieh belonged to the school of Hstian-tsé (“fR) and 
Shén-hsiu (ji}3#) who upheld the Lanka in opposition to 
their rival Hui-néng’s #§6 Vajracchedika. This book is one 
of the most valuable documents for the historical students 

INTRODUCTION xlvil 

of early Zen Buddhism in China.’ It contains so much 
information of definite character concerning its Fathers 
whose sayings and teachings have so far been shrouded in 
obscurity. 

There is another equally valuable history of Zen Bud- 
dhism which was also discovered in the Tung-huang cave. 
It is entitled RE(K?E 2% 42 ‘‘Record of the Succession of the 
Dharma-treasure.’’ This was evidently written to contend 
the position of the #§{msii fac, for it insists that che first 
Father of the Lanka as representing the Dharma-treasure 
was Bodhidharma and not Gunabhadra who was mere trans- 
lator and not the revealer of the inner meaning of the Sutra. 
Therefore, the history of Zen Buddhism in China, which is 
the ‘‘Dharma-treasure’’, should properly begin with Bodhi- 
dharma. The author evidently belongs to the school of Hui- 
néng. 

The discovery of these two important historical works 
on Zen, together with the Sayings of Shén-hui, Whe aBee, 
which was edited by §Ai#%, Professor Hu Hsi of Peking 
University, 1930, with his able eritical notes, sheds an 
abundance of light on the early pages of Zen history in 
China. As a detailed discussion of the subject does not 
belong here, I reserve it for my Essays in Zen Buddhism, 
Series IT. 

The Present English Translation 

As regards the English translation of the Sutra, I have 
decided after much hesitation to send it out to the public 
with all its many imperfections. It is a bold attempt on the 
part of the translator to try to render some of the deepest 
thoughts that have been nourished in the East into a language 
to which he was not born. But his idea is that if somebody 
did not make a first attempt, however poor and defective, the 
precious stones may remain buried unknown except to a few 
scholars, and this perhaps longer than necessary. And then 

2 The book has been quite recently edited by Kin Kyikei, a 

librarian attached to Peking University and published in Peking. He 
was able to do this helped by Professor Hu Hsi, who is the owner of 

xlvili THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

things develop. As it is illustrated in the long history of 
the Chinese translations of the Buddhist texts, there must be 
several attempts before the work assumes something of 
finality. There are at present three Chinese translations 
and one Tibetan of the Lanka, and the first shows many 
traces of immaturity when compared with the third. We 
ean easily understand the difficulties Chinese scholars en- 
countered in trying to master the translations. The T‘ang 
version could not perhaps be so perfect as it is unless it had 
two or three predecessors. 

I have done all I could to make my translation as 
intelligible as possible to my readers. If I tried to be too 
literal, it would be quite unintelligible. The modes of ex- 
pression are so different in the Sanskrit. There are still 
many obscure passages which I failed to interpret satis- 
factorily to myself. These obscurities are found more in 
the Sagathakam, because the verses presuppose much know- 
ledge of the matter treated therein, and this knowledge 
involves at present much more scholarship and intellectual 
perspicuity than the present translator can command. The 
Sagathakam has never had any Chinese commentaries, and 
this fact adds more to the difficulties already in existence. 
Chinese and Japanese scholars have chosen, probably for 
brevity’s sake, the four-volume text by Gunabhadra for their 
study, and the Sagathakam has thus inevitably been left out. 

The Sanskrit text itself as we have it is still far from 
being perfect, and there is no doubt that Nanjo’s edition 
requires many corrections in order to yield a more intelligible 
reading. Even with it, however, whatever shortcomings it 
may have, we are to be grateful to the editor who made the 
text more accessible to the public than ever before. 

I have not always followed Nanjo in the reading of the 
text. I have used my own judgment in several cases when 
the photographic copies of the original Manuscripts of f§fmbpzic 
preserved in the British Museum and in the Bibliothéque Nationale. A 
collotype impression of the London MS which is not so complete as the 
Paris MS, though it is very much more legible than the latter, was pub- 

lished by Professor Keiki Yabuki of Japan, in his collection of the Tun- 
huang MSS, entitled "BY, “Echoes of the Desert’, 1930. 

INTRODUCTION xlix 

I thought the sense became thereby clearer. In paragraph- 
ing too I have often disregarded Nanjo. As I said in my 
Studies, the Lanka is a highly chaotic text, and there are 
also some passages which have forced their way in wrong 
places where they do not belong. 

The T‘ang version in this respect gives on the whole the 
best rendering of the Lanka. While a first draft of the 
translation was prepared by Sikshdnanda, the finishing touch 
was given by Fa-tsang, the great teacher of philosophy of the 
Avatamsaka, with which the Lanka is in the closest relation- 
ship. When difficulties were encountered in the course of 
my English translation of the Sanskrit text. I have quite 
frequently followed the T‘ang reading, though the fact has 
not regularly been noted. 

7 
ow a} 

. oe 
aie My 7 2 4% oe 
teed a 

es ‘ate 

THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

re i be A in 

non Ne 

[CHAPTER ONE] 

(1)? Om! Salutation to the Triple Treasure! Saluta- 
tion to all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas! 

Here is carefully written down the Lankdvatéra Siira 
in which the Lord of the Dharma discourses on the egoless- 
ness of all things. 

Thus have I heard. The Blessed One once stayed in the 
Castle of Lanka which is situated on the peak of Mount 
Malaya on the great ocean, and which is adorned with flowers 
made of jewels of various kinds.2 He was with a large 
assembly of Bhikshus and with a great multitude of Bodhi- 
sattvas, who had come together from various Buddha-lands. 
The Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, headed by the Bodhisattva 
Mahamati, were all perfect masters’ of the various Samadhis, 
the [tenfold] self-mastery, the [ten] powers, and the [six] 
psychic faculties; they were anointed by the hands of all the 
Buddhas; they all well understood the significance of the 
objective world as the manifestation of their own Mind; (2) 
they knew how to maintain [various] forms, teachings, and 
disciplinary measures, according to the various mentalities 
and behaviours of beings; they were thoroughly versed in 
the five Dharmas, the [three] Svabhavas, the [eight] 
Vijianas, and the twofold Non-atman. 

At that time, the Blessed One who had been preaching 
in the palace of the King of Sea-serpents came out at the 
expiration of seven days and was greeted by an innumerable 
host of Nagakanyds including Sakra and Brahma, and 
looking at Lanka on Mount Malaya smiled and said, ‘‘By 
the Tathagatas of the past, who were Arhats and Fully- 

+ These Gothic numerals in parentheses refer to pages of the 

Sanskrit edition. 
* Much more fully described in Bodhiruci (Wei). 
* Literally, “sporting” (vikridita). 

4 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Enlightened Ones, this Truth was made the subject of their 
discourse, at that castle of Lanka on the mountain-peak of 
Malaya,—the Truth realisable by noble wisdom in one’s 
inmost self, which is beyond the reasoning knowledge of the 
philosophers as well as the state of consciousness of the 
Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas.:_ I, too, would now for the 
sake of Ravana, Overlord of the Yakshas, discourse on this 
Truth.”’ 

[Inspired] by the spiritual power of the Tathagata, 
Ravana, Lord of the Rakshasas, heard [his voice]. Indeed, 
the Blessed One, surrounded and accompanied by an in- 
numerable host of Nagakany4as ineluding Sakra and Brahma, 
came out of the palace of the King of Sea-serpents; and 
looking at the waves of the ocean and also at the mental 
agitations going on in those assembled, [he thought of] the 
ocean of the Alayavijnana where the evolving Vijianas [like 
the waves] are stirred by the wind of objectivity. While 
he was standing there [thus absorbed in contemplation, 
Ravana saw him and] uttered a joyous ery, saying: ‘‘I will 
go and request of the Blessed One to enter into Lanka; for 
this long night he would probably profit, do good, and 
gladden (3) the gods as well as human beings ’”’ 

Thereupon, Ravana, Lord of the Rakshasas, with his 
attendants, riding in his floral celestial chariot, came up 
where the Blessed One was, and having arrived there he and 
his attendants came out of the chariot. Walking around the 
Blessed One three times from left to right, they played on a 
musical instrument, beating it with a stick of blue Indra 
(saphire), and hanging the lute at one side, which was inlaid 
with the choicest lapis lazuli and supported by [a ribbon of] 
priceless cloth, yellowish-white like Priyangu, they sang with 
various notes such as Saharshya, Rishabha, Gdandhara, 
Dhaivata, Nishida, Madyama, and Kaisika,?2 which were 

1 

The Sanskrit text is here certainly at fault; there ought to be 
a negative particle somewhere in this passage, which is the case in 
the Chinese translations. 

* Neither Bodhiruci nor Sikshananda refers so specifically to these 
various notes. 

CHAPTER ONE 5 

melodiously modulated in Grama, Mirchana, etc.; the voice 
in accompaniment with the flute beautifully blended with the 
measure of the Gatha. 

1. ‘‘The truth-treasure whose principle is the self- 
nature of Mind, has no selfhood (nairdtmyam), stands above 
all reasoning, and is free from impurities; it points to the 
knowledge attained in one’s inmost self; Lord, show me here 
the way leading to the Truth. 

2. ‘‘The Sugata is the body in whom are stored im- 
maculate virtues; in him are manifested [bodies] trans- 
forming and transformed; he enjoys the Truth realised in 
his inmost self; may he visit Lanka. Now is the time, Muni! 

3. (4) ‘‘This Lanka was inhabited by the Buddhas of 
the past, and [they were] accompanied by their sons who 
were owners of many forms. Lord, show me now the highest 
Truth, and the Yakshas who are endowed with many forms 
will listen.’’ 

Thereupon, Ravana, the Lord of Lanka, further adapt- 
ing the Totaka rhythm sang this in the measure of the 
Gatha. . 

4. After seven nights, the Blessed One leaving the 
ocean which is the abode of the Makara, the palace of the 
sea-king, now stands on the shore. 

5. Just as the Buddha rises, Ravana, accompanied by 
the Apsaras and Yakshas numerous, by Suka, Sarana, and 
learned men, 

6. Miraculously goes over to the place where the Lord 
is standing. Alighting from the floral vehicle, he greets the 
Tathagata reverentially, makes him offerings, tells him who 
he is, and stands by the Lord. 

7. ‘‘I who have come here, am called Ravana, the ten- 
headed king of the Rakshasas, mayest thou graciously receive 
me with Lanka and all its residents. 

8. ‘‘In this city, the inmost state of consciousness 
realised, indeed, by the Enlightened Ones of the past (5) 
was disclosed on this peak studded with precious stones. 

9. ‘‘Let the Blessed One, too, surrounded by sons of 
the Victorious One, now disclose the Truth immaculate on 

6 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

this peak embellished with precious stones; we, together with 
the residents of Lanka, desire to listen. 

10. ‘‘The Lawvkavatdira Siitra which is praised by the 
Buddhas of the past [discloses] the inmost state of con- 
sciousiness realised by them, which is not founded on any 
system of doctrine. 

11. ‘‘T recollect the Buddhas of the past surrounded 
by sons of the Victorious One recite this Sutra; the Blessed 
One, too, will speak. 

12. ‘‘In the time to come, there will be Buddhas and 
Buddha-Sons pitying the Yakshas; the Leaders will dis- 
course on this magnificent doctrine on the peak adorned with 
precious stones. 

13. ‘‘This magnificent city of Lanka is adorned with 
varieties of precious stones, [surrounded] by peaks, refresh- 
ing and beautiful and canopied by a net of jewels. 

14. ‘‘Blessed One, here are the Yakshas who are free 
from faults of greed, reflecting on [the Truth] realised in 
one’s inmost self and making offerings to the Buddhas of the 
past; they are believers in the teaching of the Mahayana 
and intent on disciplining one another. 

15. ‘‘There are younger Yakshas, girls and boys, desir- 
ing to know the Mahayana. Come, Blessed One, who art 
our Teacher, come to Lanka on Mount Malaya. 

16. (6) ‘‘The Rakshasas, with Kumbhakarna at their 
head, who are residing in the city, wish, as they are devoted 
to the Mahayana, to hear about this inmost realisation. 

17. ‘‘They have made offerings assiduously to the 
Buddhas [in the past] and are to-day going to do the same. 
Come, for compassion’s sake, to the Lanka, together with 
[thy] sons. 

18. ‘‘Mahamati, accept my mansion, the company of 
the Apsaras, necklaces of various sorts, and the delightful. 
Asoka garden. 

19. ‘‘I give myself up to serve the Buddhas and their 
sons; there is nothing with me that I do not give up [for 
their sake] ; Great Muni, have compassion on me!”’ 

20. Hearing him speak thus, the Lord of the Triple 

CHAPTER ONE @ 

World said, ‘‘King of Yakshas, this mountain of precious 
stones was visited by the Leaders in the past. 

21. ‘‘And, taking pity on you, they discoursed on the 
Truth revealed in their inmost [consciousness]. [The Bud- 
dhas of] the future time will proclaim [the same] on this 
jewel-adorned mountain. 

22. ‘‘This [inmost Truth] is the abode of those Yogins 
who stand in the presence of the Truth. King of the 
Yakshas, you have the compassion of the Sugatas and 
myself.’’ 

23. The Blessed One accepting the request [of the 
King] remained silent and undisturbed; he now mounted 
the floral chariot offered by Ravana. 

24. Thus Ravana and others, wise sons of the Vic- 
torious One, (7) honoured by the Apsaras singing and 
dancing, reached the city. 

25. Arriving in the delightful city {the Buddha was] 
again the recipient of honours; he was honoured by the 
group of Yakshas including Ravana and by the Yaksha 
women. 

26. A net of jewels was offered to the Buddha by the 
younger Yakshas, girls and boys, and necklaces beautifully 
ornamented with jewels were placed by Ravana about the 
neck of the Buddha and those of the sons of the Buddha. 

27. The Buddhas together with the sons of the Buddha 
and the wise men, accepting the offerings, discoursed on the 
Truth which is the state of consciousness realised in the 
inmost self. 

28. Honouring [him as] the best speaker, Ravana and 
the company of the Yakshas honoured Mahamati and re- 
quested of him again and again:? 

29. ‘‘Thou art the asker of the Buddha concerning the 
state of consciousness realised in their inmost selves, of which 
we here, Yakshas as well as the sons of the Buddha, are 
desirous of hearing. I, together with the Yakshas, the sons 
of the Buddha, and the wise men, request this of thee. 

30. ‘‘Thou art the most eloquent of speakers, and the 

* Verses 20-28, inclusive, are in prose in T‘ang. 

8 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

most strenuous of the Yogins; with faith I beg of thee. Ask 
[the Buddha] about the doctrine, O thou the proficient one! 

31. ‘‘Free from the faults of the philosophers and 
Pratyekabuddhas and Sravakas is (8) the Truth of the 
inmost consciousness, immaculate and culminating in the 
stage of Buddhahood.’’ 

32.1 Thereupon the Blessed One created jewel-adorned 
mountains and other objects magnificently embellished with 
jewels in an immense number. 

33. On the summit of each mountain the Buddha 
himself was visible, and Ravana, the Yaksha, also was found 
standing there. 

34. Thus the entire assembly was seen on each moun- 
tain-peak, and all the countries were there, and in each there 
was a Leader. 

35. Here also was the King of the Rakshasas and the 
residents of Lanka, and the Lanka created by the Buddha 
rivaling [the real one]. 

36. Other things were there, too,—the Asoka with its 
shining woods, and on each mountain-peak Mahamati was 
making a request of the Buddha, 

37. Who discoursed for the sake of the Yakshas on 
the Truth leading to the inmost realisation ; on the mountain- 
peak he delivered a complete sutra with an exquisite voice 
varied in hundreds of thousands of ways.” 

38. [After this] the teacher and the sons of the 
Buddha vanished away in the air, leaving Ravana the 
Yaksha himself standing [above] in his mansion. 

39. Thought he, ‘‘How is this? What means this? 
and by whom was it heard? What was it that was seen? 
and by whom was it seen? Where is the city? and where 
is the Buddha? 

40. ‘‘Where are those countries, those jewel-shining 
Buddhas, those Sugatas? (9) Is it a dream then? or a 
vision? or is it a castle conjured up by the Gandharvas? 

* From this verse T‘ang is in prose again. 

* Thus according to Bodhiruci and Sikshananda. The Sanakrit 
text has: “hundreds of thousands of perfect sutras.” 

CHAPTER ONE 9 

41. ‘‘Or is it dust in the eye, or a fata morgana, or 
the dream-child of a barren woman, or the smoke of a fire- 
wheel, that which I saw here?’’ 

42. Then [Ravana reflected], ‘‘This is the nature as 
it is (dharmatad) of all things, which belongs to the realm of 
Mind, and it is not comprehended by the ignorant as they 
are confused by every form of imagination. 

43. ‘‘There is neither the seer nor the seen, neither 
the speaker nor the spoken; the form and usage of the 
Buddha and his Dharma—they are nothing but discrimina- 
tion. 

44. ‘‘Those who see things such as were seen before, 
do not see the Buddha; [even] when discrimination is not 
aroused, one does not see! the Buddha; the Buddha being 
fully-enlightened is seen where the world itself is not 
evolved. 

The Lord of Lanka was then immediately awakened 
[from his reflection], feeling a revulsion (pardvriti) in his 
mind and realising that the world was nothing but his own 
mind: he was settled in the realm of non-discrimination, was 
urged by the stock of his past good deeds, acquired the 
cleverness of understanding all the texts, obtained the faculty 
of seeing things as they are, was no more dependent upon 
others, observed things excellently with his own wisdom 
(buddht),- gained the insight that was not of discursive 
reasoning, waS no more dependent upon others,? became a 
great Yogin of the discipline, was able to manifest himself 
in all excellent forms, got thoroughly acquainted with all 
skilful means, had the knowledge of the characteristic aspects 

* T‘ang has: ‘‘He who sees in the way as was seen before, cannot 
see the Buddha; when no discrimination is aroused, this, indeed, is the 
seeing.” According to Wei: “If he sees things and takes them for 
realities, he does not see the Buddha. Even when he is not abiding in 
a discriminating mind, he cannot see the Buddha. Not seeing anything 
doing [in the world ]—this is said to be seeing the Buddha. If a man 
is able thus to see [things], he is the one who sees the Tathagata. 
When the wise observe all experiences in this manner, they are trans- 
formed assuming an exquisite body—this is the Enlightenment [attained 

by] the Buddha.” 
* This does not appear in T‘ang, nor in Wei. 

10 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

of every stage, by which he would surmount it skilfully, was 
delighted to look into! the self-nature of Citta, Manas, Mano- 
vijhana, got a view whereby he could cut himself loose from 
the triple continuation, had the knowledge of disposing of 
every argument of (10) the philosophers on causation, 
thoroughly understood the Tathagata-garbha, the stage of 
Buddhahood, the inmost self, found himself abiding in the 
Buddha-knowledge; [when suddenly] a voice was heard from 
the sky, saying, ‘‘It is to be known by oneself.’’ 

‘Well done, well done, Lord of Lanka! Well done, 
indeed, Lord of Lanka, for once more! The Yogin is to 
discipline himself as thou doest. The Tathagatas and all 
things are to be viewed as they are viewed by thee; other- 
wise viewed, it is nihilism. All things are to be compre- 
hended by transcending the Citta, Manas, and Vijiana as 
is done by thee. Thou shouldst look inwardly and not 
become attached to the letter and a superficial view of 
things; thou shouldst not fall into the attainments, con- 
ceptions, experiences, views, and Samadhis of the Sravakas, 
Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers; thou shouldst not have 
any liking for small talk and witticism; thou shouldst not 
eherish the notion of self-substance,? nor have any thought 
for the vainglory of rulership, nor dwell on such Dhydnas 
as belong to the six Dhydanas, ete. 

‘‘Lord of Lanka, this is the realisation of the great 
Yogins: to destroy the discourses advanced by others, to 
erush mischievous views in pieces, to keep themselves pro- 
perly away from ego-centered notions, to cause a revulsion 
in the depths of the mind fittingly by means of an exquisite 
knowledge. Such are sons of the Buddha who walk in the 
way of the Mahayana. In order to enter upon the stage of 
self-realisation as attained by the Tathagatas, the discipline 
is to be pursued by thee. 

“Lord of Lanka, conducting thyself in this manner, let 
thee be further purified in the way thou hast attained; (11) 
by disciplining thyself well in Samadhi and Samapatti, 

+ Tang: to go beyond. 

* Wei and T‘ang: Do not hold the views maintained in the Vedas. 

CHAPTER ONE 11 

follow not the state realised and enjoyed by the Sravakas, 
Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, which rises from the 
imagination of those who discipline themselves according to 
the practices of the puerile philosophers. They cling to the 
individual forms of the world created by their egotistical 
ideas; they maintain such notions as element, quality, and 
substance; they cling tenaciously to views originating from 
ignorance; they become confused by cherishing the idea of 
birth where prevails emptiness; they cling to discrimination 
[as real]; they fall into the way of thinking where obtains 
[the dualism of] qualifying and qualified. 

‘‘Lord of Lanka, this is what leads to various excellent 
attainments, this is what makes one grow aware of the inmost 
attainment, this is the Mahayana realisation. This will 
result in the acquirement of an excellent condition of 
existence. 

‘‘Lord of Lanka, by entering upon the Mahayana dis- 
cipline the veils [of ignorance] are destroyed, and one turns 
away from the multitudinous waves of the Vijiiana and falls 
not into the refuge and practice of the philosophers. 

‘‘Lord of Lanka, the philosophers’ practice starts from 
their own egotistic attachments. Their ugly practice arises 
from adhering to dualistic views concerning the self-nature 
of the Vijfiana. 

‘‘Well done, Lord of Lanka; reflect on the signification 
of this as you did when seeing the Tathagata before; for 
this, indeed, is seeing the Tathagata.”’ 

At that time it occurred to Ravana: ‘‘I wish to see the 
Blessed One again, who has all the disciplinary practices 
at his command, who has turned away from the practices of 
the philosophers, who is born of the state of realisation in 
the inmost consciousness, and who is beyond [the dualism 
of] the transformed and the transforming. He is the know- 
ledge (12) realised by the Yogins, he is the realisation 
attained by those who enjoy the perfect bliss of the Samadhi 
which they gain by coming to an intuitive understanding 
through meditation. May I see thus [again] the Com- 
passionate One by means of his miraculous powers in whom 

12 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

the fuel of passion and discrimination is destroyed, who is 
surrounded by sons of the Buddha, who has penetrated into 
the minds and thoughts of all beings, who moves about every- 
where, who knows everything, who keeps himself away from 
work (kriyd) and form (lakshana) ; seeing him may I attain 
what I have not yet attained, [retain] what I have already 
gained, may I conduct myself with non-discrimination, abide 
in the joy of Samadhi and Sam4patti, and attain the ground 
where the Tathagatas walk, and in these make progress.’’ 
At that moment, the Blessed One recognising that the 
Lord of Lanka is to attain the Anutpattikadharmakshanti 
showed his glorious compassion for the ten-headed one by 
making himself visible once more on the mountain-peak 
studded with many jewels and enveloped in a net-work of 
jewels. The ten-headed King of Lanka saw the splendour 
again as seen before on the mountain-peak, [he saw] the 
Tathagata, who was the Arhat and the Fully-Enlightened 
One, with the thirty-two marks of excellence beautifully 
adorning his person, and also saw himself on each mountain- 
peak, together with Mahamati, in front of the Tathagata, 
the Fully-Enlightened One, putting forward his discourse 
on the realisation experienced by the Tathagata in his inmost 
self, and, surrounded by the Yakshas, conversing on the 
verbal teachings and stories [of the Buddha]. Those (13) 
[Buddha]-lands were seen with the Leaders.* 

* There is surely a discrepancy here in the text. ‘ang reads: 

“Tn all the Buddha-lands in the ten quarters-were also seen such events 
going on, and there was no difference whatever.” Wei is quite different 
and has the following: “Besides, he saw all the Buddha-lands and 
all the kings thinking of the transitoriness of the body. As they are 
eovetously attached to their thrones, wives, children, and relatives, they 
find themselves bound by the five passions and have no time for eman- 
cipation. Seeing this, they abandon their dominions, palaces, wives, 
concubines, elephants, horses, and precious treasures, giving them all 
up to the Buddha and his Brotherhood. They now retreat into the 
mountain-woods, leaving their homes and wishing to study the doctrine. 
He [Ravana] then sees the Bodhisattvas in the mountain woods strenu- 
ously applying themseves to the mastery of the truth, even to the extent 
of throwing themselves to the hungry tiger, lion, and Rakshasas. He 
thus sees the Bodhisattvas reading and reciting the sutras under a tree 
in the woods and discoursing on them for others, seeking thereby the 

CHAPTER ONE 13 

Then the Blessed One beholding again this great as- 
sembly with his wisdom-eye, which is not the human eye, 
laughed loudly and most vigorously like the lion-king. 
Emitting rays of light from the tuft of hair between the 
eyebrows, from the ribs, from the loins, from the Srivatsa? 
on the breast, and from every pore of the skin,—emitting 
rays of light which shone flaming like the fire taking place 
at the end of a kalpa, like a luminous rainbow, like the rising 
sun, blazing brilliantly, gloriously—which were observed 
from the sky by Sakra, Brahma, and the guardians of the 
world, the one who sat on the peak [of “Lanka|vying with 
Mount Sumeru laughed the loudest laugh. At that time the 
assembly of the Bodhisattvas together with Sakra and 
Brahma, each thought within himself: 

‘‘Wor what reason, J wonder, from what cause does the 
Blessed One who is the master of all the world (sarva- 
dharma-vasavartin), after smiling first,’ laugh the loudest 
laugh? Why does he emit rays of light from his own body? 
Why, emitting [rays of light], does he remain silent, with 
the realisation [of the Truth] in his inmost self, and absorbed 
deeply and showing no surprise in the bliss of Samadhi, and 
reviewing the [ten] quarters, looking around like the lion- 
king, and thinking only of the discipline, attainment, and 
performance of Ravana?’’ 

At that time, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
who was previously requested by Ravana [to ask the Buddha 
concerning his self-realisation], feeling pity on him, (14) 
and knowing the minds and thoughts of the assembly of the 

truth of the Buddha. He then sees the Bodhisattvas seated under the 
Bodhi-tree in the Bodhi-mandala thinking of the suffering beings and 
meditating on the truth of the Buddha. He then sees the venerable 
Mahdmati the Bodhisattva before each Buddha preaching about the 
spiritual discipline of one’s inner life, and also sees [the Bodhisattva ] 
surrounded by all the Yakshas and families and talking about names, 
words, phrases, and paragraphs.” This last sentence is evidently the 
translation of the Sanskrit deSanapdthakatham, which is contrasted in 
the Lankdvatara throughout with pratydtmaryajndnagocara (the 
spiritual realm realised by noble wisdom in one’s inmost consciousness). 

1 Swastika. 

2 This is wanting in the Chinese translations. 

14 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Bodhisattvas, and observing that beings to be born in the 
future would be confused in their minds because of their 
delight in the verbal teaching (desanapdtha), because of 
their clinging to the letter as [fully in accordance with] the 
spirit (artha), because of their clinging to the disciplinary 
powers of the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, 
—which might lead them to think how it were that the 
Tathagatas, the Blessed Ones, even in their transcendental 
state of consciousness should burst out into loudest laughter 
—Mahamati the Bodhisattva asked the Buddha in order to 
put a stop to their inquisitiveness the following question: 
‘‘For what reason, for what cause did this laughter take 
place ?’’ 

Said the Blessed One: ‘‘Well done, well done, Maha- 
mati! Well done, indeed, for once more, Mahamati! 
Viewing the world as it is in itself and wishing to enlighten 
the people in the world who are fallen into a wrong view 
of things in the past, present, and future, thou undertakest 
to ask me the question. Thus should it be with the wise men 
who want to ask questions for both themselves and others. 
Ravana, Lord of Lanka, O Mahamati, asked a twofold ques- 
tion of the Tathagatas of the past who are Arhats and 
perfect Buddhas; and he wishes now to ask me too a two- 
fold question in order to have its distinction, attainment, 
and scope ascertained—this is what is never tasted by those 
who practise the meditation of the Sravakas, Pratyekabud- 
dhas, and philosophers; and the same will be asked by the 
question-loving ten-headed one of the Buddhas to come.’’ 

Knowing that, the Blessed One said to the Lord of 
Lanka, thus: ‘‘Ask, thou Lord of Lanka; the Tathagata 
has given thee permission [to ask], delay not, whatever 
questions thou desirest to have answered, I will answer each 
of them (15) with judgment to the satisfaction of your 
heart. Keeping thy seat of thought free from [false] dis- 
crimination, observe well what is to be subdued at each 
stage; ponder things with wisdom; [seeing into] the nature 
of the inner principle in thyself, abide in the bliss of 
Samadhi; embraced by the Buddhas in Samadhi, abide in 

CHAPTER ONE 15 

the bliss of tranquillisation; going beyond the Samadhi and 
understanding attained by the Sravakas and Pratyekabud- 
dhas, abide in [the attainment of the Bodhisattvas] in the 
stages of Acald, Sadhumati, and Dharmamegha; grasp well 
the egolessness of all things in its true significance; be 
anointed by the Buddhas in Samadhi at the great palace of 
lotus-jewels. ‘Surrounded by the Bodhisattvas who are 
sitting on lotuses of various sorts each supported by the 
gracious power of the Buddhas, thou shalt find thyself sitting 
on a lotus and each one of the Bodhisattvas looking at thee 
face to face. This is a realm beyond the imagination. Thou 
shouldst plan out an adequate plan and establish thyself at 
a stage of discipline by planning out such a plan as shall 
include [all kinds of] skilful means, so that thou comest to 
realise that realm which is beyond imagination; and thou 
shouldst attain the stage of Tathagatahood in which one is 
able to manifest oneself in various forms, and which is 
something never seen before by the Sravakas, Pratyeka- 
buddhas, philosophers, Brahma, Indra, Upendra, and 
others.’’ 

At that moment the Lord of Lanka being permitted by 
the Blessed One, rose from his seat on the peak of the jewel- 
mountain which shone like the jewel-lotus immaculate and 
shining in splendour; he was surrounded by a large com- 
pany of celestial maidens, and all kinds of garlands, 
flowers, perfumes, incense, unguents, umbrellas, banners, 
flags, necklaces, half-necklaces, diadems, tiaras, (16) and other 
ornaments whose splendour and excellence were never heard 
of or seen before, were created ; music was played surpassing 

? The following sentence is done by the aid of T‘ang, as the 
Sanskrit does not seem to give any sense. Literally translated it 
reads: “There by the becoming lotuses, by those lotuses that are 
blessed variously by the benediction of his own person....” Wei has: 
“O King of Lankd, thou wilt before long see thy person, too, thus sitting 
on the lotus-throne and continuing to abide there in a most natural 
manner. There are innumerable families of lotus-kings and iunumer- 
able families of Bodhisattvas there, each one of whom is sitting on a 
lotus-throne, and surrounded by those thou wilt find thyself and looking 

face to face at one another, and each one of them will before long eome 
to abide in a realm beyond the understanding.” 

16 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

anything that could be had by the gods, Nagas, Yakshas, 
Rakshasas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Mahoragas, and men; 
musical instruments were created equal to anything that 
could be had in all the world of desire and also such superior 
musical instruments were created as were to be seen in the 
Buddha-lands; the Blessed One and the Bodhisattvas were 
enveloped in a net of jewels; a variety of dresses and high 
banners was made rising high in the air as high as seven 
tala trees to great [the Buddha], showering great clouds 
of offerings, playing music which resounded [all around], 
and then descending from the air, [the Lord of Lanka] sat 
down on the peak of the jewel-mountain ornamented with 
magnificent jewel-lotus whose splendour was second only to 
the sun and lightning. Sitting he made courtesy smiling 
first to the Blessed One for his permission and proposed him 
a twofold question: ‘‘It was asked of the Tathagatas of the 
past, who were Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones, and it was 
solved by them. Blessed One, now I ask of thee; [the 
request] will certainly be complied with by thee as far as 
verbal instruction is concerned! as it was by the Buddhas 
[of the past]. Blessed One, duality was discoursed upon 
by the Transformed Tathagatas and Tathagatas of Trans- 
formation, but not by the Tathagatas of Silence? The 
Tathagatas of Silence are absorbed in the blissful state of 
Samadhi, they do not discriminate concerning this state, nor 
do they discourse on it. Blessed One, thou assuredly wilt 
discourse on this subject of duality. Thou art thyself a 
master of all things, an Arhat, a Tathagata. The sons of 
the Buddha and myself are anxious to listen to it.’’ 

The Blessed One said, ‘‘Lord of Lanka, tell me what you 
mean by duality?’’ 

The Lord of the Rakshasas, (17) who was renewed in 
his ornaments, full of splendour and beauty, with a diadem, 
bracelet, and necklace strung with vajra thread, said, ‘‘It is 

* That is, as far as the teaching could be conveyed in words. 

DeSandapatha stands in contrast with siddhanta, or pratyatmagati in the 
Lankdvatéra. 
? In T‘ang and Wei: “Original Tathagatas.” 

CHAPTER ONE Hig 

said that even dharmas are to be abandoned, and how much 
more adharmas. Blessed One, why does this dualism exist 
that we are called upon to abandon? What are adharmas? 
and what are dharmas? How can there be a duality of 
things to abandon—a duality that arises from falling into 
discrimination, from discriminating self-substance where 
there is none, from [the idea of] things created (bhautika) 
and uncreated, because the non-differentiating nature of the 
Alayavijfiana is not recognised? Like the seeing of a hair- 
circle as really existing in the air, [the notion of dualism] 
belongs to the realm of intellection not exhaustively pur- 
gated. This being the case as it should be, how could there 
be any abandonment [of dharmas and adharmas] ?’’ 

Said the Blessed One, ‘‘Lord of Lanka, seest thou not 
that the differentiation of things, such as is perceived in jars 
and other breakable objects whose nature it is to perish in 
time, takes place in a realm of discrimination [cherished by] 
the ignorant? This being so, is it not to be so understood ? 
It is due to discrimination [cherished by] the ignorant that 
there exists the differentiation of dharma and adharma. 
Noble wisdom (aryajfidna), however, is not to be realised by 
seeing [things this way]. Lord of Lanka, let it be so with 
the ignorant who follow the particularised aspect of existence 
that there are such objects as jars, ete., but it is not so 
with the wise. One flame of uniform nature rises up depend- 
ing on houses, mansions, parks, and terraces, and burns 
them down; while a difference in the flames is seen according 
to the power of each burning material which varies in length, 
magnitude, ete. This being so, why (18) is it not to be so 
understood? The duality of dharma and adharma thus 
comes into, existence. Not only is there seen a fire-flame 
spreading out in one continuity and yet showing a variety 
of flames, but from one seed, Lord of Lanka, are produced, 
also in one continuity, stems, shoots, knots, leaves, petals, 
flowers, fruit, branches, all individualised. As it is with 
every external object from which grows [a variety of] 
objects, so also with internal objects. From ignorance there 
develop the Skandhas, Dhatus, Ayatanas, with all kinds of 

18 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

objects accompanying, which grow out in the triple world 
where we have, as we see, happiness, form, speech, and 
behaviour, each differentiating [infinitely]. The oneness of 
the Vijiana is grasped variously according to the evolution 
of an objective world; thus there are seen things inferior, 
superior, and middling, things defiled and free from defile- 
ment, things good and bad. Not only, Lord of Lanka, is 
there such a difference of conditions in things generally, 
there is also seen a variety of realisations attained innerly 
by each Yogin as he treads the path of discipline which 
constitutes his practice. How much more difference in 
dharma and adharma do we not see in a world of particulars 
which is evolved by discrimination? Indeed, we do. 

‘‘Lord of Lanka, the differentiation of dharma and 
adharma comes from discrimination. Lord of Lanka, what 
are dharmas? That is, they are discriminated by the 
discriminations cherished by the philosophers, Sravakas, 
Pratyekabuddhas, and ignorant people. They think that 
the dharmas headed by quality and substance are produced 
by causes—([these are the notions] to be abandoned. Such 
are not to be regarded [as real] because they are appearances 
(lakshana). It comes from one’s clinging [to appearances] 
that the manifestations of his own Mind are regarded as 
reality (dharmata). (19) Such things as jars, etc., are 
products of discrimination conceived by the ignorant, they 
exist not; their substances are not uttainable. The viewing 
of things from this viewpoint is known as their abandon- 
ment. 

‘‘What, then, are adharmas? Lord of Lanka, [dharmas] 
are unattainable as to their selfhood, they are not appearances 
born of discrimination, they are above causality; there is in 
them no such [dualistic] happening as is seen as reality and 
non-reality. This is known as the abandoning of dharmas. 
What again is meant by the unattainability of dharmas? 
That is, it is like horns of a hare, or an ass, or a camel, or 
a horse, or a child conceived by a barren woman. They are 
dharmas the nature of which is unattainable; they are not 
to be thought [as real] because they are appearances. They 

CHAPTER ONE 19 

are only talked about in popular parlance if they have any 
sense at all; they are not to be adhered to as in the case 
of jars, ete. As these [unrealities] are to be abandoned as 
not comprehensible by the mind (vijfidna), so are things 
(bhava) of discrimination also to be abandoned. This is 
ealled the abandoning of dharmas and adharmas. Lord of 
Lanka, your question as to the way of abandoning dharmas 
and adharmas is hereby answered. 

‘‘Lord of Lanka, thou sayest again that thou hast asked 
[this question] of the Tathagatas of the past who were 
Arhats and Fully-Enlightened Ones and that it was solved 
by them. Lord of Lanka, that which is spoken of as the 
past belongs to discrimination; as the past is thus a dis- 
eriminated [idea], even so are the [ideas] of the future and 
the present. Because of reality (dharmatéd) the Tathagatas 
do not discriminate, they go beyond discrimination and 
futile reasoning, they do not follow (20) the individuation- 
aspect of forms (rapa) except when [reality] is disclosed for 
the edification of the unknowing and for the sake of their 
happiness.t It is by transcendental wisdom (prajfd) that 

2 This is one of the most important sections in this first intro- 
ductory chapter, but singularly all the three texts, perhaps excepting 
T‘ang, present some difficulties for clear understanding. Wei: “Lord 
of Lanka, what you speak of as past is a form of discrimination, and 
so are the future and the present, also of discrimination. Lord of 
Lanka, when I speak of the real nature of suchness as being real, it 
also belongs to discrimination; it is like discriminating forms as the 
ultimate limit. If one wishes to realise the bliss of real wisdom, let 
him discipline himself in the knowledge that transcends forms; there- 
fore, do not discriminate the Tathagatas as having knowledge-body or 
wisdom-essence. Do not cherish any discrimination in [thy] mind. 
Do not cling in [thy] will to such notions as ego, personality, soul, ete. 
How not to discriminate? It is in the Manovijiana that various con- 
ditions are cherished such as forms, figures, [ete.]; do not cherish such 
[discriminations]. Do not discriminate nor be discriminated. Further, 
Lord of Lankd, it is like various forms painted on the wall, all sentient 
beings are such. Lord of Lank4, all sentient beings are like grasses 
and trees, with them there are no acts, no deeds, Lord of Lanka, all 
dharmas and adharmas, of them nothing is heard, nothing talked....” 
Tang: ‘Lord of Lanka, what you speak of as past is no more than 
discrimination, so is the future; I too am like him. [Is this to be read, 
“the present, too, is like it’?] Lord of Lank4, the teaching of all the 

20 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

the Tathagata performs deeds transcending forms (animitta- 
cara) ; therefore, what constitutes the Tathagatas in essence 
as well as in body is wisdom (jfiana). They do not discri- 
minate, nor are they discriminated. Wherefore do they not 
discriminate the Manas? Because discrimination is of the 
self, of soul, of personality. How do they not discriminate? 
The Manovijnana is meant for the objective world where 
causality prevails as regards forms, appearances, conditions, 
and figures. Therefore, discrimination and non-discrimina- 
tion must be transcended. 

‘‘Lord of Lanka, beings are appearances, they are like 
figures painted on the wall, they have no sensibility [or con- 
sciousness]. Lord of Lanka, all that is in the world is devoid 
of work and action because all things have no reality, and 
there is nothing heard, nothing hearing. Lord of Lanka, all 
that is in the world is like an image magically transformed. 
This is not comprehended by the philosophers and the 
ignorant. Lord of Lanka, he who thus sees things, is the 
one who sees truthfully. Those who see things otherwise 
walk in discrimination; as they depend on discrimination, 
they cling to dualism. It is like seeing one’s own image 
reflected in a mirror, or one’s own shadow in the water, or 
in the moonlight, or seeing one’s shadow in the house, or 
hearing an echo im the valley. People grasping their own 
shadows of discrimination (21) uphold the discrimination of 
Buddhas is outside discrimination; as it goes beyond all discriminations 
and futile reasonings, it is not a form of particularisation, it is realised 
only by wisdom. That [this absolute] teaching is at all discoursed 
about is for the sake of giving bliss to all sentient beings. The dis- 
coursing is done by the wisdom transcending forms. It is called the 
Tathagata; therefore, the Tathagata has his essence, his body in this 
wisdom. He thus does not discriminate, nor is he to be discriminated. 
Do not discriminate him after the notion of ego, personality, or being. 
Why this impossibility of discrimination? because the Manovijiiana is 
aroused on account of an objective world wherein it attaches itself to 
forms and figures. Therefore, [the Tathagata] is outside the dis- 
criminating [view] as well as the discriminated [idea]. Lord of 
Lanka, it is like beings painted in colours on a wall, they have no 
sensibility [or intelligence]. Sentient beings in the world are also like 

them; no acts, no rewards [are with them]. So are all the teachings, 
no hearing, no preaching.” 

CHAPTER ONE 21 

dharma and adharma and, failing to earry out the abandon- 
ment of the dualism, they go on discriminating and never 
attain tranquillity, By tranquillity is meant oneness 
(ekdgra), and oneness gives birth to the highest Samadhi, 
which is gained by entering into the womb of Tathagatahood, 

which is the realm of noble wisdom realised in one’s inmost 
self,’’ 

The First Chapter Called ‘‘Ravana Asking for Instruce- 
tion, J? 

* It is noteworthy that the chapter endings are not the same 

throughout the entire text. Generally, reference is made to the Sutra 
itself at the end of a chapter, stating that the chapter bears such a 
title belonging to such a Sutra. But in the present case there is no 
mention at all of the Lankdvatara Sitra as if this Ravana section were 
something quite independent. While there is no doubt about its being 
a later addition, seeing what a complete piece of narrative it forms by 
itself, and again seeing that the rest of the text makes no further 
reference to Ravana, the trend of the discourse as presented by the 
Buddha shows that it is closely related to the Sutra, especially when it 
emphasises at the end the importance of self-realisation against the 
inanity or futility of the verbal teaching ordinarily given out by a 
master. 

[CHAPTER TWO] 

U 

(22) At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
who had visited all the Buddha-lands, together with all the 
Bodhisattvas, rose from his seat by the power of the Buddhas, 
drawing his upper garment over one shoulder, placing his 
right knee on the ground and with folded hands, turning 
in the direction of the Blessed One, respectfully saluted him, 
and praised him with the following verses: 

1. As thou reviewest the world with thy transcendental 
knowledge and compassion, it is to thee like an ethereal 
flower, of which one cannot say whether it is born or 
destroyed, as [the category of] being and non-being is in- 
applicable to it. 

2. As thou reviewest all things with thy transcendental 
knowledge and compassion, they are to thee like visions, they 
are beyond the reach of intellectual grasp, as [the category 
of] being and non-being is inapplicable to them. 

3. As thou reviewest the world with thy transcendental 
knowledge and compassion, it is to thee always like a dream, 
of which one cannot say whether it is permanent or destruc- 
tible, as [the category of] being and non-being is inapplicable 
tots 

4. Inthe Dharmakaya, whose self-nature is like a vision 
or a dream, what is there to praise? When no thought arises 
as to existence or as to not-having-self-nature, then there is 
praise. 

5. Of a thing whose appearance is not visible because 
of its being beyond the senses and their objects (23), how 
can it be praised or blamed, O Muni? 

6. With thy transcendental knowledge and compassion 

This division is made by the translator to facilitate the under- 
standing of the text in which divers subjects are promiscuously treated. 

CHAPTER TWO 23 

which are above form, thou comprehendest the egolessness of 
things and persons, and art thyself always clean and free 
from the hindrances of passion and knowledge. 

7. Thou dost not vanish in Nirvana, nor is Nirvana 
abiding in thee; for it transcends the duality of knowing and 
known and of being and non-being. 

8. Those who see the Muni so serene and beyond birth 
{and death] will be cleansed of attachment, stainless both in 
this world and in the other. 

II 

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
praising the Blessed One with such verses as these, made his 
own name known to the Blessed One. 

9. JI am Mahamati, Blessed One, and am well versed in 
the Mahayana. I wish to ask one hundred and eight ques- 
tions of thee who art most eloquent. 

10. Hearing his words the Buddha, the best knower of 
the world, looking over the whole assembly, spoke to the son 
of the Sugata thus: 

11. Ask me, sons of the Victorious, and Mahamati, you 
ask and I will instruct you in self-realisation. 

At that moment Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
who was given by the Blessed One the opportunity to speak, 
prostrated himself at the feet of the Blessed One and asked: 

(24) 12. How ean one be cleansed of false intellection ? 
Whence does it arise? How can one perceive errors? 
Whence do they arise? 

13. Whence come lands, transformation, appearance, 
and philosophers? Wherefore is the state of imagelessness, 
the gradations, and whence are the sons of the Victorious? 

14. Where is the way of emancipation? Who is in 
bondage? By what is he redeemed? What is the mental 
state of those who practise the Dhyainas? Whence is the 
triple vehicle? 

15. What is that which is born of causation? What is 
effect? What is cause [or that which works]? Whence the 
doctrine of duality? Whence does it arise? 

24 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

16. Wherefore is the tranquilising exercise of formless- 
ness? And that of complete extinction? Wherefore the 
extinction of thoughts? And how is one awakened from it? 

17. How does action rise? Whence is the behaviour 
of those who hold the body? Whence [this] visible [world] ? 
Whence the conditions? Whence the entrance upon the 
stages ? 

18. Who is it that breaks through this triple existence? 
What is the abode? What is the body? Where does that 
which is abiding arise? Whence comes the son of the 
Buddha? 

19. Who attains the psychic faculties, the self- 
masteries, the Samadhis? How is the mind tranquilised? 
Pray tell me, O Bull-like Victor? 

20. What is the Alaya? And whence the Mano- 
vijiana? (25) How does the visible [world] rise? How 
does it cease from being visible? 

21. Whence are families and no-families? What is 
meant by Mind-only? The setting up of marks? And 
whence [the doctrine of] egolessness? 

22. Why is there no being? What kind of teaching is 
in accordance with popular thinking? How can one cease 
cherishing eternalism (Sdévata-darshana) and _ nihilism 
(uccheda-darshana) ? 

23. How is it that you do not differ from the philos- 
ophers as regards appearance? Tell me, whence is the rise 
of the Nyaya school? Its future? 

24. What is meant by emptiness? What do you under- 
stand by momentary destruction? Whence is the Womb? 
And whence is the stability of the world? 

25. Why is the world like a vision and a dream? How 
does it resemble the city of the Gandharvas? Why it is to 
be regarded as like a mirage, or like the moon reflected in 
water? Pray tell me. 

26. What are the elements of enlightenment? Whence 
are the constituents of enlightenment? Wherefore is a 
revolution, and the disturbance of a kingdom? And how does 
the realistic view of existence (bhavadrishti) take its rise? 

CHAPTER TWO 25 

27. What is meant by the world being above birth and 
death? or being like the flower in the air? How do you 
understand it? Why do you regard it as being beyond 
words ? 

28. How is it not subject to discrimination? How is 
it like the sky? Of how many sorts is suchness? How 
manifold is the Mind? How many Paramitas are there? 

29. Whence is the gradation of the stages? What is 
the state of imagelessness? (26) Wherefore is the twofold 
egolessness? How is one cleansed of [the hindrance of] 
knowledge? 

30. Of how many kinds is knowledge (jidna)? O 
Leader! How many moral precepts are there? and forms 
of being? Whence are the families born of gold and jewel 
and pearl? 

31. Of whom is speech born? Whence is the differen- 
tiation of beings? Whence are the sciences, offices, arts? and 
by whom are they made manifest? 

32. Of how many sorts are gathas? What is prose? 
What is metre? Of how many sorts is reasoning and 
exegesis? 

33. How many varieties of food and drink are there? 
Whence does sexual desire originate? Whence are there 
kings, sovereigns, and provincial rulers? 

34. How does a king protect his dominion? Of how 
many groups are heavenly beings? Whence are the earth, 
stars, constellations, the moon, and the sun? 

-85. How many kinds of emancipation are there? of the 
Yogins? How many kinds of discipleship? And how about 
the masters? 

36. How many kinds of Buddhahood are there? And 
how many of the Jataka Tales? How numerous are the evil 
ones? How numerous are the heretics? 

37. What is meant by [the doctrine] that there is noth- 
ing but thought-construction? Pray tell me, thou Most 
Eloquent One? 

(27) 38. Whence are the clouds in the sky? the wind ? 
What is meant by recollection? by wisdom (medhda) ? Whence 

26 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

are trees and vines? Pray tell me, Lord of the Triple 
World? 

39. How do horses, elephants, and deer get caught? 
Wherefore are there fools and despicable people? Pray tell 
me, thou Charioteer of the Mind? 

40. Wherefore are the six seasons mentioned? What 
is meant by the Icchantika [one who is without Buddha- 
nature]? Pray tell me whence is the birth of a man? of 
a woman? of a hermaphrodite? 

41. How does one retrograde in the Yoga exercises? 
How does one make progress in them? How many exercises 
are there? and how are men kept abiding in them? Pray 
tell me. 

42. Beings are born in the various paths of existence, 
what are their specific marks and forms? How is abundance 
of wealth acquired? Pray tell me, thou who art like the 
sky ? 

43. Whence is the Sakya family? And the one born 
of Ikshvaku? Whence is the Rishi Long-Penance? What 
is taught by him? 

44. How is it that thou art thus apparent everywhere 
in every land, surrounded by such Bodhisattvas of such 
various names and forms? 

45. Why is meat not to be eaten? Why is it forbidden? 
Whence was the carnivorous race born, who eats meat? 

46. Why are the lands shaped like the moon, the sun, 
the Sumeru, the lotus, the swatika, and the lion? Pray tell 
me. 

(28) 47. Wherefore are the lands shaped like a cap- 
sized and upturned net of Indra which is composed of all 
sorts of jewels? Pray tell me why? 

48. Wherefore are [the lands] shaped in the form of a 
lute or a drum? Like various flowers and fruits? Like the 
sun and the moon which are so stainless? Pray tell me. 

49. Whence are the Buddhas of Transformation? 
Whence are the Buddhas of Maturity [or Recompense] ? 
Whence are the Buddhas who are endowed with trans- 
cendental knowledge of suchness? Pray tell me. 

CHAPTER TWO 27 

50. Why does not one attain enlightenment in the 
world of desire? Pray tell me. What is the meaning of 
your being enlightened in the Akanishtha by shaking off all 
the passions? 

51. After my passing who will be the upholder of the 
Discipline [or Doctrine, sdsana]? How long should the 
teacher abide? How long should the teaching continue? 

52. How many sorts of established truths are there? 
And how many of philosophical views? Whence is morality ? 
And what constitutes the being of a Bhikshu? Pray tell 
me. 

53. What is meant by a state of revulsion [or turning- 
back]? Whence is a state of imagelessness, [which is 
realised] by the Pratyekabuddhas, Bodhisattvas, and Sra- 
vakas ? 

54. By whom are the psychic powers of this world 
attained? What are the super-worldly ones? By what means 
does the mind enter upon the seven stages? Pray tell me. 

55. How many kinds of Brotherhood are there? And 
how does a dissension take place in a Brotherhood? Whence 
are medical treatises for beings? Pray tell me. 

(29) 56. You say that you were among the Buddhas 
Kasyapa, Krakuchanda, and Kanakamuni; tell me wherefore 
so, O Great Muni! 

57. Whence is the doctrine that there is no ego-soul in 
beings? Whence is the doctrine of eternity, and of annihila- 
tion? Wherefore do you not everywhere announce the 
doctrine of Mind-only as the truth? 

58. What is meant by the forest of men and women? 
And by the forest of Karitaki and Amali? Whence are the 
mountains Kailasa, Cakravada, and Vajrasamhanana? 

509. Among these, whence are the mountains decorated 
with various sorts of jewels and filled with Rishis and Gan- 
dharvas? Pray tell me. 

60. Hearing this [which constitutes] the wonderful 
doctrine of the Mahayana and also the most excellent heart 
of the Buddhas, the Great Hero, the Buddha, the One Most 
Excelled in the Knowledge of the World, [spoke thus] : 

28 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

61. Well done! Well done! O Mahaprajna-Maha- 
mati! Listen well, and I will tell you in order regarding 
your questions. 

62. Birth, no-birth, Nirvana, emptiness, transmigra- 
tion, having-no-self-nature, Buddhas, sons of the Paramitas, 

63. The Sravakas, Bodhisattvas, the philosophers, those 
who are capable of formless deeds, the Meru, oceans, moun- 
tains, islands, lands, the earth, 

64. The stars, the sun, the moon, the philosophers, the 
Asura, (30) emancipations, the self-masteries, the psychic 
faculties, the Dhyanas, the Samadhis, 

65. The extinctions (ntrodha), the supernatural 
powers, the elements of enlightenment, and the paths, 
Dhyanas, the unmeasurables, the aggregates (skandhas), 
and the comings-and-goings. 

66. SamAapattis, the extinctions, the stirrings of mind, 
explanations in words, the Citta, Manas, and Vijianas, 
egolessness, the five Dharmas, 

67. Self-nature, the discriminating, the discriminated, 
the visible [world], dualism—whence are they? Various 
forms of vehicles, families, those born of gold, jewels, and 
pearls? 

68. The Icchantika, the original elements, the wander- 
ing-about, one Buddhahood, knowledge, the known, the 
marching, the attainment, and the existence and non-exist- 
ence of beings? 

69. How are horses, elephants, deer caught? Pray 
tell me how. What is a proposition, a teaching established 
by the conjunction of reason and illustration? 

70. Whence is cause and effect? Various errors? and 
also reason? [Why the statement that there is] nothing but 
Mind, that there is no objective [literally, seen] world, that 
there is no ascending of the stages? 

71. Whence is the state of imagelessness and revulsion 
which is a hundredfold?! You tell me. Likewise about 
medical treatises, arts, crafts, sciences, and teachings? 

72. And also what are the measurements of the moun- 
Not found in T‘ang. 

1 

CHAPTER TWO 29 

tains, Sumeru, and the earth? What are the measurements 
of the ocean, moon, and sun? Tell me. 

(31) 73. How many particles of dust are there in the 
body of a being? How many of the coarser ones, of the 
finer ones, and of the middle ones? How many particles of 
dust in every land? How many in every dhanva? 

74. In measuring distance how much is a hasta, a dhanu, 
a kroSa, a yojana, a half-yojana? How many of rabbit-hairs, 
of window-dust, louse-eggs, or ram-hairs, of barley ?4 

75. How many grains of barley in a prastha? How 
many grains of barley in a half-prastha? Likewise how 
many in a drona, in a kharya, a laksha, a koti, a vimvana? 

76. How many atoms are there in a mustard-seed? 
How many mustard-seeds are there in a rakshika? How 
many in a bean, in a dharana, in a mashaka? 

77. How many dharanas are there in a karsha? How 
many karshas in a pala? and how many palas are there in 
Mount Sumeru which is a huge accumulation [of masses] ? 

78. You should ask me thus, O son! Why do you ask 
me otherwise? How many atoms are there in the body of 
a Pratyekabuddha, of a Sravaka, of a Buddha, and of a 
Bodhisattva? (32) Why do you not ask me in this wise? 

79. How many atoms are there at the top of a flame? 
How many atoms are in the wind? How many in each 
sense-organ? How many in a pore of the skin? in the eye- 
brows? 

80. Whence are these men of immense wealth, kings, 
great sovereigns? How is the kingdom taken care of by 
them? And how about their emancipation ? 

81. Tell whence is prose and metre. Why is sexual 
desire universally cherished? Whence is the variety of foods 
and drinks? Whence the man-woman forest? 

82. Wherefore are the mountains of Vajrasamhanana ? 
Tell me whence, wherefore; are they like a vision, a dream, 
and a fata-morgana? 

83. Whence is the arising of clouds? And whence do 

2 See the Abhidharmakoga, translated by Louis de la Vallée 
Poussin, Ch. III, p. 178. 

30 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

the seasons rise? Whence is the nature of taste? Whence 
is woman, man, and hermaphrodite? 

84. Whence are the adornments and the Bodhisattvas? 
Ask me, O my son! Whence are the divine mountains 
embellished by the Rishis and Gandharvas? 

85. Whence is the way of emancipation? Who is in 
bondage? By whom is he delivered? What is the state of 
one who practises tranquillisation? What is transformation, 
and who are those philosophers? 

86. What is meant by non-existence, existence, and no- 
effect? Whence arises the visible world? (33) How can 
one be cleansed of false intellection? Whence does false 
intellection arise? 

87. Whence arises action? And whence its departure? 
Tell me. How does the extinction of thought take place? 
And what is meant by a Samadhi? 

88. Who is the one that breaks through the triple 
world? What is the position? What isthe body? Where- 
fore the doctrine that beings have no ego-soul? What is 
meant by a teaching in accordance with the world?! 

89. Do you ask me about the marks? Do you ask me 
about egolessness? Do you ask me about the womb, about 
the Nyaya philosophers, O son of the Victor? 

90. How about eternalism and nihilism? How is the 
mind tranquillised? Again [how about] speech, knowledge, 
morality, family, O son of the Victor? 

91. What is meant by reasoning and illustrating, by - 
master and disciple, by manifoldness of beings, food and 
drink, sky, intelligence, evil ones, and the statement that 
there is nothing but thé thought-constructed ? 

92. What do you ask me concerning trees and vines, 
O son of the Victor? What about diversity of lands, and 
about Long-Penance the Rishi? 

93. What is your family? Who is your master? You 
tell me, O son of the Victor. Who are the people who are 
despised? How is it that in the Yoga you do not attain 

truth. 

Samvrityad deSanaé is contrasted to paramdrtha-satya, highest 

CHAPTER TWO 31 

enlightenment in the world of desire, but that in the 
Akanishtha there is realisation? 

94. What do you ask me about reasoning? (34) What 
about the psychie faculties belonging to this world, and about 
the nature of a Bhikshu? 

95. Do you ask me about Buddhas of Transformation, 
Buddhas of Maturity [or Recompense]? About Buddhas of 
the Knowledge of Suchness? And whence is the Bodhi- 
sattva? 

96. You ask me, O son of the Victor, about the lands 
that are devoid of light, resembling a lute, a drum, and a 
flower, and about the mind abiding in the seven stages? 

97. You ask me such and many other questions, which 
are in accordance with the marks [of Truth?] and free from 
erroneous views. 

Il 

98.1 I will instruct you as regards realisation and its 
teaching ; listen to me intently; I will give you an explana- 
tion of the statements, O son, listen to me, in regard to the 
one hundred and eight statements as recounted by the 
Buddhas. 

At that moment Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
said to the Blessed One: What is meant by the one hundred 
and eight statements ?? 

? This verse is probably to be separated from the foregoing ones as 

it forms a sort of introduction to what follows. The one hundred and 
eight questions (prasna) so called are not to be necessarily identified 
with the one hundred and eight statements (pada) which are uniformely 
negated in the paragraph that comes after. Some subjects are common 
to the Questions and the Negations, but others are not. I do not think 
there is any organic relationship between the two sections. What 
strikes one in both the Questions and the Negations is that trivial 
subjects are mixed up with important ones as equally constituting the 
content of self-realisation. The Sutra proper which is supposed to 
concern itself with them is also devoid of an intimate connection with 
them. 

2 Here is one of the most mysterious and unintelligible portions 
of the Lankdvatdra Sitra. The Sanskrit word for “statement” is pada, 
which literally means, ‘“‘foot-step,” ‘“‘a footing,” “‘a position,” “a subject,” 
“an abode,” “a matter of talk,” ‘‘a portion of a line in a stanza,” etc. 

32 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

The Blessed One said: A statement concerning birth 
is no statement concerning birth; a statement concerning 
eternity is no statement concerning eternity. [The topics 
thus negated are as follows:1] the characteristic marks, 
abiding and changing, moment, self-nature, emptiness, 
annihilation, mind, the middle, permanence, causation, cause, 
the passions, desire, (85) means, contrivance, purity, infer- 
ence [or conclusion], illustration, a disciple, a master, a 
family, the triple vehicle, imagelessness, vows, the triple 
circle, form, duality of being and non-being, bothness, the 
noble wisdom of self-realisation, the bliss of the present world, 
lands, atoms, water, a bow, reality, numbers and mathematics, 
the psychic powers, the sky, clouds, the arts and crafts and 
sciences, the wind, the earth, thinking, thought-construc- 
tions, self-nature, the aggregates, being, insight, Nirvana, 
that which is known, the philosophers, disorder, a vision, a 
dream, (36) a mirage, a reflection, a circle made in the dark 
by a fire-brand, the city of the Gandharvas, the heavens, food 
and drink, sexuality, philosophical views, the Paramitas, 
morality, the moon and the sun and stars, truth, effect, 

For the Sanskrit pada the Chinese translators have ‘‘ 4)’’, ‘* BL’, ‘‘fr’’, 
‘*f£’?, but as they stand these translations do not give any sense to the 
general context. 4) is perhaps the best in retaining the origina] sense, 
but it is to be understood in the sense of ‘‘a proposition,” ‘“‘a statement,” 
and each sentence containing this word in the following negations means 
that each subject referred to is not properly conceived, because, for 
instance, the concept of birth is not in accordance with the true under- 
standing of reality. Birth stands against death, they are relative 
notions, and do not apply to a world where things are perceived in their 
absolute aspect. Therefore, any statement that might be made con- 
cerniug birth are not at all true; birth is no-birth, death is no-death, 
and so on, Even of such notions as truth, realisation, self-nature, mind, 
piramitas, the same can be said; to make a statement about anything 
is to falsify it. Hence the series of negations as illustrated here. But 
the mysterious fact about them is the reference to so many trite 
subjects which are evidently in no direct connection with the teachings 
of the Mahayana. There must be something historical about these 
references of which the translator is at present quite ignorant. Another 
mystery here concerns the number of padas: why 108, and not more 
or less? 

* To avoid repetitions, the subjects alone are mentioned which are 
systematically negated in the text. 

CHAPTER TWO 33 

annihilation and origination, medical treatment, the charac- 
teristic marks, the limbs, arts and sciences, Dhy4dna, error, 
the seen [world], protection, dynasty, Rishi, kingdom, appre- 
hension, treasure, explanation, the Icchantika, man, woman, 
and hermaphrodite, taste, action, the body, false intellection, 
motives, sense-organs, the Samskrita,! cause and effect, the 
Kanishtha,” the seasons, a luxuriant growth of trees, vines 
and shrubs, (37) multiplicity, entering into the teaching, 
systems of morality, the Bhikshus, the powers added [by the 
Buddha], the lutes. These are the one hundred and eight 
statements recounted by the Buddhas of the past. 

IV 

At that moment, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
said again to the Blessed One: In how many ways, Blessed 
One, does the rise, abiding, and ceasing of the Vijnanas take 
place? 

The Blessed One replied: There are two ways, Maha- 
mati, in which the rise, abiding, and ceasing of the Vijnanas 
take place, and this is not understood by the philosophers. 
That is to say, the ceasing takes place as regards continuation 
and form. In the rise of the Vijnanas, also, these two are 
recognisable: the rise as regards continuation and the rise 
as regards form. In the abiding, also, these two [are dis- 
cernible] : the one taking place as regards continuation and 
the other as regards form. 

[Further,] three modes are distinguishable in the 
Vijfidnas: (1) the Vijiana as evolving, (2) the Vijhana as 
producing effects, and (3) the Vijfiana as remaining in its 
original nature. 

[Further,] Mahamati, in the Vijfanas, which are said 
to be eight, two functions generally are distinguishable, the 
perceiving and the object-discriminating. AS a mirror 
reflects forms, Mahamati, the perceiving Vijhana perceives 

* Anything that produces an effect. 

2 A class of deities. 

34 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

[objects]. Mahamati, between the two, the perceiving Vi)- 
fiana and the object-discriminating Vijnhana, there is no 
difference; they are mutually conditioning. Then, Maha- 
mati, the pereiving Vijfiana functions because of transforma- 
tion’s taking place [in the mind] by reason of a mysterious 
habit-energy, while, Mahamati, the object-discriminating 
Vijnhana (38) functions because of the mind’s discriminating 
an objective world and because of the habit-energy ac- 
cumulated by erroneous reasoning since beginningless time. 
Again, Mahamati, by the cessation of all the sense- 
Vijfianas is meant the cessation of the Alayavijfiana’s 
variously accumulating habit-energy which is generated 
when unrealities are discriminated. This, Mahamati, is 
known as the cessation of the form-aspect of the Vijnanas. 
Again, Mahamati, the cessation of the continuation- 
aspect of the Vijnanas takes place in this wise: that is to- 
say, Mahamati, when both that which supports [the V))- 
fanas] and that which is comprehended [by the Vijianas] 
cease to function. By that which supports [the Vijnanas] 
is meant the habit-energy [or memory] which has been ac- 
cumulated by erroneous reasoning since beginningless time; 
and by that which is comprehended [by the Vijnanas] is 
meant the objective world perceived and discriminated by 
the Vijnanas, which is, however, no more than Mind itself. 
Mahamati, it is like a lump of clay and the particles of 
dust making up its substance, they are neither different nor 
not-different; again, it is like gold and various ornaments 
made of it. If, Mahamati, the lump of elay is different from 
its particles of dust, no lump will ever come out of them. 
But as it comes out of them it is not different from the 
particles of dust. Again, if there is no difference between 
the two, the lump will be indistinguishable from its particles. 
Even so, Mahamati, if the evolving Vijfiana are different 
from the Alayavijiiana, even in its original form, the Alaya 
cannot be their cause. Again, if they are not different the 
cessation of the evolving Vijfanas will mean the cessation of 
the Alayavijfiana, but there is no cessation of its original 
form. Therefore, Mahamati, what ceases to function is not 

CHAPTER TWO 35 

the Alaya in its original self-form, but is the effect-producing 
form of the Vijianas. When this original self-form ceases to 
exist, then there will indeed be the cessation of the Alaya- 
vijnana. (39) If, however, there is the cessation of the 
Alayavijiiana, this doctrine will in no wise differ from the 
nihilistic doctrine of the philosophers. 

This doctrine, Mahamati, as it is held by the philos- 
ophers, is this: When the grasping of an objective world 
ceases the continuation of the Vijianas is stopped ; and when 
there is no more of this continuation in the Vijfanas, the 
continuation that has been going on since beginningless time 
is also destroyed. Mahamati, the philosophers maintain that 
there is a first cause from which continuation takes place; 
they do not maintain that the eye-Vijiiana arises from the 
interaction of form and light; they assume another cause. 
What is this cause, Mahamati? Their first cause is known 
as spirit (pradhdéna), soul (purusha), lord (vara), time, 
or atom. 

V 

Again, Mahamati, there are seven kinds of self-nature: 
collection (samudaya), being (bhava), characteristic marks 
(lakshana), elements (mahdbhita), causality (hetu), con- 
ditionality (pratyaya), and perfection (nishpattt) 

VI 

Again, Mahamati, there are seven kinds of first princi- 
ple [or highest reality, paramartha]: the world of thought 
(citta-gocara), the world of knowledge (jfiadna-), the world 
of super-knowledge (prajida-), the world of dualistic views 
(drishti-), the world beyond dualistic views, the world 
beyond the Bodhisattva-stages, and a world where the Tatha- 
gata attains his self-realisation.” 

1 What is exactly meant by these concepts regarded as self-nature 
(svabhava) is difficult to define as far as the Lankavatdra is concerned. 

* These seven principles or realities are not explained in the text. 
But we can state that they are so many different kinds of Paramartha, 
as in the case of Svabh4va, so considered by different schools of philoso- 
phers or Buddhists. 

36 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

(40) Mahamati, this is the self-nature, the first principle, 
the essence, which constitutes the being of the Tathagatas, 
Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones of the past, present, and 
future, whereby, perfecting things of this world and of a 
world beyond this, they, by means of a noble eye of trans- 
cendental wisdom, enter into various phases of existence, 
individual and general, and establish them. And what is 
thus established by them is not to be confused with the 
erroneous teachings generally held by the philosophers. 

Mahamati, what are these erroneous teachings accepted 
generally by the philosophers? [Their error les in this] that 
they do not recognise an objective world to be of Mind itself 
which is erroneously discriminated ; and, not understanding 
the nature of the Vijfianas which are also no more than 
manifestations of Mind, like simple-minded ones that they 
are, they cherish the dualism of being and non-being where 
there is but [one] self-nature and [one] first principle. 

Again, Mahamati, my teaching consists in the cessation 
of sufferings arising from the discrimination of the triple 
world; in the cessation of ignorance, desire, deed, and 
causality ; and in the recognition that an objective world, like 
a vision, 1s the manifestation of Mind itself. 

Vil 

Mahamati, there are some Brahmans and Sramanas who 
assume Something out of nothing, saying that there exists 
a substance which is bound up in causation and abides in 
time, and that the Skandhas, Dhatus, and Ayatanas have 
their genesis and continuation in causation and, after thus 
existing, pass away. 

They are those, Mahamati, who hold a destructive and 
nihilistic view concerning such subjects as continuation, 
activity, rising, breaking-up, existence, Nirvana, the path, 
karma, fruition, and truth. (41) Why? Because they have 
not attained an intuitive anderstanding [of the Truth], 
because they have no fundamental insight of things. Maha- 
mati, it is like a jar broken in pieces which is unable to 
function as a jar; again, it is like a burnt seed which ir 

CHAPTER TWO 37 

incapable of sprouting. Even so, Mahamati, their Skandhas, 
Dhatus, and Ayatanas which they regard as subject to 
changes are really incapable of uninterrupted transformation 
because their views do not originate from the perception of 
an objective world as a manifestation of Mind itself which 
is erroneously discriminated. 

If again, Mahamati, something comes out of nothing and 
there is the rise of the Vijfianas by reason of a combination 
of the three effect-producing causes, we can say the same of 
a non-existing thing, that a tortoise would grow hair and 
sands produce oil. [As this is impossible] this proposition 
does not avail, it ends in affirming nothing. And, Maha- 
mati, it follows that deed, work, and cause [of which they 
speak] will be of no use, and so also with their reference 
to being and non-being. Mahamati, when they argue that 
there is a combination of the three effect-producing causes, 
they do this by the principle of cause and effect [which is to 
say, by the principle that something comes out of something 
and not of nothing]; and thus there are [such things as] 
past, present, and future, and being and non-being. As long 
as they remain on their philosophic ground, their demonstra- 
tion will be by means of their logic and text-books, for the 
memory of erroneous intellection will ever cling to them. 
Thus, Mahamati, simple-minded ones, poisoned by an 
erroneous view, declare the incorrect way of thinking taught 
by the ignorant to be the one presented by the All-Knowing 
One. 

Again, Mahadmati, there are some Brahmans and 

+ The reasoning here may be a little difficult to follow. The 
general idea maintained by the Lankdvatara is that as long as a world 
of relativity is asserted there is an ever-recurring chain of causation 
which cannot be denied in any circumstance. In this case we cannot 
talk of anything coming to an end or cessation. The fault with the 
philosophers is that they have no fundamental intuition into the essen- 
tial nature of an objective world—a world of particulars—which is 
really the projection of mind by reason of memory or the habit-energy 
accumulated since beginningless time. When this thought is thoroughly 
grasped, the philosopher’s point of view may also hold good as far as 
it goes. As they lack, however, the fundamental intuition, all the 
logical superstructure they build is essentially an error. 

38 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Sramanas who (42) recognising that the external world 
which is of Mind itself is seen as such owing to the dis- 
crimination and false intellection practised since beginning- 
less time, know that the world has no self-nature and has 
never been born, it is like a cloud, a ring produced by a 
firebrand, the castle of the Gandharvas, a vision, a mirage, 
the moon as reflected in the ocean, and a dream; that Mind 
in itself has nothing to do with discrimination and causation, 
discourses of imagination, and terms of qualification (lakshya- 
lakshana) ; that body, property, and abode are objectifica- 
tions of the Alayavijiiana,! which is in itself above [the 
dualism of] subject and object; that the state of imageless- 
ness which is in compliance with the awakening of Mind 
itself,? is not affected by such changes as arising, abiding, 
and destruction. 

The Bodhisattvas-Mahasattvas, Mahamati, will before 
long attain to the understanding that Nirvana and Samsara 
are one. Their conduct, Mahamati, will be in accordance 
with the effortless exhibition of a great loving heart that in- 
geniously contrives means [of salvation], knowing that all 
beings have the nature of being like a vision or a reflection, 
and that [there is one thing which is] not bound by causa- 
tion, being beyond the distinction of subject and object; 
{and further] seeing that there is nothing outside Mind, and 
in accordance with a position of unconditionality, they will 
by degrees pass through the various stages of Bodhisattva- 
hood and will experience the various states of Samadhi, and 
will by virtue of their faith understand that the triple world 
is of Mind itself, and thus understanding will attain the 
Samadhi Mayopama. The Bodhisattvas entering into the 
state of imagelessness where they see into the truth of Mind- 
only, arriving at the abode of the Paramitds, and keeping 
themselves away from the thought of genesis, deed, and 
discipline, they will attain the Samadhi Vajravimbopama 
which is in compliance with the Tathagatakaya and with the 
transformations of suchness. After achieving a revulsion 

1 

The translator here follows the T‘ang reading. 
This clause does not appear in T‘ang. 

CHAPTER TWO 39 

in the abode [of the Vijfanas], Mahamati, they will 
gradually realise the Tathagatakaya, which is endowed with 
the powers, the psychic faculties, self-control, love, compas- 
sion, and means; which can enter into all the Buddha-lands 
and into the sanctuaries of the philosophers; and which is 
beyond the realm of (43) Citta-mano-manovijfiana. There- 
fore, Mahamati, these Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas who wish, by 
following the Tathagatakaya, to realise it, should exercise 
themselves, in compliance with the truth of Mind-only, to 
desist from discriminating and reasoning erroneously on 
such notions as Skandhas, Dhatus, Ayatanas, thought, causa- 
tion, deed, discipline, and rising, abiding, and destruction. 

Vill 

Perceiving that the triple existence is by reason of the 
habit-energy of erroneous discrimination and false reason- 
ing that has been going on since beginningless time, and 
also thinking of the state of Buddhahood which is imageless 
and unborn, [the Bodhisattva] will become thoroughly con- 
versant with the noble truth of self-realisation, will become a 
perfect master of his own mind, will conduct himself without 
effort, will be like a gem reflecting a variety of colours, will 
be able to assume the body of transformation, will be able 
to enter into the subtle minds of all beings, and, because of 
his firm belief in the truth of Mind-only, will, by gradually 
ascending the stages, become established in Buddhahood. 
Therefore, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva be well 
disciplined in self-realisation. 

IX 

Then Mahamati said: Teach me, Blessed One, concern- 
ing that most subtle doctrine which explains the Citta, 
Manas, Manovijfiana, the five Dharmas, the Svabhavas, and 
the Lakshanas; which is put in practice by the Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas; which is separated from the state of mind 
which recognises a world as something outside Mind itself; 
and which, breaking down all the so-called truths established 
by words and reasonings, constitutes the essence of the teach- 

40 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

ings of all the Buddhas. Pray teach this assembly headed 
by the Bodhisattvas gathering on Mount Malaya in the city 
of Lanka; teach them regarding the Dharmakaya which is 
praised by the Tathagatas and which is the realm of (44) 
the Alayavijiiana which resembles the ocean with its waves. 
Then the Blessed One again speaking to Mahamati the 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this: The reasons whereby the 
eye-consciousness arises are four. What are they? They 
are: (1) The clinging to an external world, not knowing that 
it is of Mind itself; (2) The attaching to form and habit- 
energy accumulated since beginningless time by false reason- 
ing and erroneous views; (3) The self-nature inherent in the 
Vijfiana; (4) The eagerness for multiple forms and appear- 
ances. By these four reasons, Mahamati, the waves of the 
evolving Vijfidnas are stirred on the Alayavijfidna which 
resembles the waters of a flood. The same [can be said of 
the other sense-consciousnesses] as of the eye-consciousness. 
This consciousness arises at once or by degrees in every sense- 
organ including its atoms and pores of the skin; the sense- 
field is apprehended like a mirror reflecting objects, like the 
ocean swept over by a wind. Mahamati, similarly the waves 
of the mind-ocean are stirred uninterruptedly by the wind of 
objectivity; cause, deed, and appearance condition one 
another inseparably; the functioning Vijianas and the 
original Vijiana are thus inextricably bound-up together; 
and because the self-nature of form, ete., is not comprehended, 
Mahamati, the system of the five consciousnesses (vijfidnas) 
comes to function. Along with this system of the five Vij- 
nanas, there is what is known as Manovijiiana fi.e., the 
thinking function of consciousness], whereby the objective 
world is distinguished and individual appearances are dis- 
tinetly determined, and in this the physical body has its 
genesis. But the Manovijiana and other Vijfianas have no 
thought that they are mutually conditioned and that they 
grow out of their attachment to the discrimination which is 
applied to the projections of Mind itself. Thus the Vijianas 
go on functioning mutually related in a most intimate 
manner and discriminating a world of representations. 

CHAPTER TWO 41 

(45) As the Vijfanas thus go on functioning [without 
being conscious of their own doings], so the Yogins while 
entering upon a state of tranquillisation (samdpattt) are not 
aware of the workings of the subtle habit-energy [or 
memory] within themselves; for they think that they would 
enter upon a state of tranquillisation by extinguishing the 
Vijianas. But [in fact] they are in this state without ex- 
tinguishing the Vijnanas which still subsist because the seeds 
of habit-energy have not been extinguished; and [what they 
imagine to be] an extinction is really the non-functioning of 
the external world to which they are no more attached. So 
it is, Mahamati, with the subtle working of the Alayavijfiana, 
which, except for the Tathagata and those Bodhisattvas who 
are established on the stages, is not easy to comprehend; 
[especially] by those who practise the discipline belonging 
to the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, even 
with their powers of Samadhi and transcendental knowledge, 
it is difficult to distinguish. Only those who, understanding 
fully all the aspects of the different stages of Bodhisattva- 
hood by the aid of their transcendental knowledge, acquiring 
a definite cognition as regards the meaning of the separate 
propositions, planting roots of goodness in the Buddha-lands 
that know no limits, and keeping themselves away from the 
discriminations and false reasonings that arise from recogni- 
sing an external world which is of Mind itself, would retire 
into a secluded abode in the forest and devote themselves to 
the practice of the spiritual discipline, either high, or low, 
or middling, only those are capable of obtaining an insight 
into the flowing of Mind itself in a world of discrimination, 
of being baptised by the Buddhas living in the lands without 
limits, and of realising the self-control, powers, psychic 
faculties, and Samadhis. Surrounded by good friends and 
the Buddhas, Mahamati, they are capable of knowing the 
Citta, Manas, Manovijhana, which are the discriminating 
agents of an external world whose self-nature is of Mind 
itself; they are capable of crossing the ocean of birth and 
death which arises by reason of deed, desire, and ignorance. 
For this reason, Mahamati, the Yogins ought to exercise 

42 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

themselves in the discipline which has been given them by 
their good friends and the Buddhas. 

(46) At that time the Blessed One recited the following 
verses : 

99, Like waves that rise on the ocean stirred by the 
wind, dancing and without interruption, 

100. The Alaya-ocean in a similar manner is constantly 
stirred by the winds of objectivity, and is seen dancing about 
with the Vijiianas which are the waves of multiplicity. 

101. Dark-blue, red, {and other colours], with salt, 
conch-shell, milk, honey, fragrance of fruits and flowers, and 
rays of sunlight; 

102. They are neither different nor not-different: the 
relation is like that between the ocean and its waves. So are 
the seven Vijnanas joined with the Citta(mind). 

103. As the waves in their variety are stirred on the 
ocean, so in the Alaya is produced the variety of what is 
known as the Vijnanas. 

104. The Citta, Manas, and Vijnanas are discriminated 
as regards their form; {but in substance] the eight are not 
to be separated one from another, for there is neither 
qualified nor qualifying. 

105. As there is no distinction between the ocean and 
its waves, So in the Citta there is no evolution of the Vijnanas. 

106. Karma is accumulated by the Citta, reflected upon 
by the Manas, and recognised by the Manovijiiana, and the 
visible world is discriminated by the five Vijnanas. 

(47) 107. Varieties of colour such as dark-blue, etc., 
are presented to our Vijnana. Tell me, Great Muni, how 
there are these varieties of colour like waves [on the ocean] ? 

108. There are no such varieties of colour in the waves; 
it is for the sake of the simple-minded that the Citta is said 
to be evolving as regards form. 

109. There is no such evolving in the Citta itself, which 
is beyond comprehension. Where there is comprehension 
there is that which comprehends as in the case of waves [and 
ocean |. 

110. Body, property, and abode are presented as such 

CHAPTER TWO 43 

to our Vijnanas, and thus they are seen as evolving in the 
same way as are the waves. 

111. The ocean is manifestly seen dancing in the state 
of waveness; how is it that the evolving of the Alaya is not 
recognised by the intellect even as the ocean is?! 

112. That the Alaya is compared to the ocean is [only] 
for the sake of the discriminating intellect of the ignorant; 
the likeness of the waves in motion is [only] brought out by 
way of illustration. 

113. When the sun rises it shines impartially on people 
high and low; so thou who art the light of the world shouldst 
announce the truth (tattvam) to the ignorant. 

(48) 114. How is it that in establishing thyself in the 
Dharma thou announcest not the truth? If the truth is 
announced by me, the truth is not in the mind? 

115. As the waves appear instantly on the ocean, or 
[images] in a mirror or a dream, so the mind is reflected in 
its own sense-fields.® 

116. Owing to a deficiency in conditions the evolution 
[of the Vijiianas] takes place by degrees.* The function of 
the Manovijiidna is to recognise and that of the Manas is to 
reflect upon, 

117. While to the five Vijiianas the actual world 
presents itself. There is no gradation when one is in a state 
of collectedness (samahita).© Like unto a master of painting 
or his pupils, 

* This question according to Sung and T‘ang is Mahamati’s. 

* 113 and the first part of 114 are ascribed to Mahdmati in Sung 
and T‘ang, but Wei gives both 113 and 114 to Mahdmati. 

* This must have found its way here by mistake, for the ocean- 
waves simile in this text is generally used to illustrate the Alaya’s 
relation to the other Vijfianas, and not in connection with the immediacy 
of perception as in this case of the mirror-images simile. 

* This ought to belong to the preceding verse. Not wishing, how- 
ever, to disturb the original notation, the translator has followed the 
text. In that which follows, the reader is asked simply to look for the 
sense and to pay no attention to the division of verses. 

° Samahita, samadhi, samdpatti, ekdgra may be understood as 
synonymous, denoting a state of consciousness where the mind is most 
intensely concentrated on one thought. It is the receptive state of 
intuition, rather than the active state of thinking. 

44 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

118.1 Who arrange colours to produce a picture, I teach. 
The picture is not in the colours, nor in the canvas, nor in 
the plate ; 

119. In order to make it attractive to all beings, a 
picture is presented in colours. What one teaches, trans- 
gresses ; for the truth (tattva) is beyond words. 

120. Establishing myself in the Dharma, I preach the 
truth for the Yogins. The truth is the state of self-realisa- 
tion and is beyond categories of discrimination. 

121. I teach it to the sons of the Victorious; the teach- 
ing is not meant for the ignorant. What is seen as multi- 
tudinous is a vision which exists not. 

122. The teaching itself is thus variously given, subject 
to transgression; (49) the teaching is no teaching whatever 
if it is not to the point in each ease. 

123. According to the nature of a disease the healer 
gives its medicine; even so the Buddhas teach beings in ac- 
cordance with their mentalities. 

124. This is indeed not a mental realm to be reached 
by the philosophers and the Sravakas; what is taught by the 
leaders is the realm of self-realisation. 

D4 

Further, Mahamati, if the Bodhisattva should wish to 
understand .fully that an external world to be subsumed 
under categories of discrimination, such as the grasping 
(subject) and the grasped (object), is of Mind itself, let him 
be kept away from such hindrances as turmoil, social inter- 
course, and sleep; let him be kept away from the treatises 
and writings of the philosophers, from things belonging to 
the vehicles of Sravakahood and Pratyekabuddhahood; let 
the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva be thoroughly acquainted with 
objects of discrimination which are to be seen as of Mind 
itself. 

XI(a) 
Further, Mahamati, when the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 

> Follow the sense and not necessarily the verse division as before. 

CHAPTER TWO 45 

establishes himself in the abode where he has gained a 
thorough understanding of Mind by means of his trans- 
cendental knowledge, he should later discipline himself in 
the cultivation of noble wisdom in its triple aspect. What 
are the three aspects of noble wisdom, Mahamati, in which 
he has to discipline himself later? They are: (1) imageless- 
ness; (2) the power added by all the Buddhas by reason of 
their original vows; and (8) the self-realisation attained by 
noble wisdom. Having mastered them, (50) the Yogin 
should abandon his knowledge of Mind gained by means of 
transcendental wisdom, which still resembles a lame donkey ; 
and entering upon the eighth stage of Bodhisattvahood, he 
should further discipline himself in these three aspects of 
novle wisdom. 

Then again, Mahamati, the aspect of imagelessness 
comes forth when all things belonging to the Sravakas and 
Pratyekabuddhas and philosophers are thoroughly mastered. 
Again, Mahimati, as to the power added, it comes from the 
original vows made by all the Buddhas. Again, Mahamati, 
as to the self-realisation aspect of noble wisdom, it rises when 
a Bodhisattva, detaching himself from viewing all things in 
their phenomenality, realises the Samadhi-body whereby he 
surveys the world as like unto a vision, and further goes on 
to the attainment of the Buddha-stage. Mahamati, this 
is the triplicity of the noble life. Furnished with this 
triplicity, noble ones will attain the state of self-realisation 
which is the outcome of noble wisdom. For this reason, 
Mahamati, you should cultivate noble wisdom in its triple 
aspect. 

XI(b) 

At that moment, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
knowing what was going on in the minds of the Bodhisattvas 
who were gathered there, and empowered by the power 
added to him by all the Buddhas, asked the Blessed One 
concerning the doctrine known as examining into the reality 
of noble wisdom. Tell me, Blessed One, the doctrine of 
examining into the reality of noble wisdom, depending on 

46 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

which the one hundred and eight statements are to be dis- 
tinguished—the doctrine depending on which the Tatha- 
gatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones will analyse and dis- 
close the nature and course of false imagination for the sake 
of (51) the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas who uave fallen into 
the way of looking at things from their aspects of generality 
and individuality. Thus the Bodhisattvas will be instructed 
in the analysis and thorough examination of false imagina- 
tion, and thereby they will have the passage purified which 
leads to the egolessness of things and persons, and get an 
illumination on the stages of Bodhisattvahood ; and, further, 
going beyond the bliss of the tranquillisations! belonging to 
all the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, will 
attain the Dharmakaya of the Tathagata, which belongs to 
the realm and course of Tathagatahood transcending thought 
and in which there is no rising of the five Dharmas. That 
is to say, they will attain the Tathagata-body which is the 
Dharma intimately bound up with the understanding born 
of transcendental knowledge, and which, entering into the 
realm of Maya, reaches all the Buddha-lands, the heavenly 
mansions of Tushita, and the abode of the Akanishtha. 

XII 

Said the Blessed One: Mahamati, there are some philos- 
ophers who are addicted to negativism, according to whose 
philosophical view the non-existence of the hare’s horns is 
ascertained by means of the discriminating intellect which 
affirms that the self-nature of things ceases to exist with the 
destruction of their causes; and they say that all things are 
non-existent just like the hare’s horns. 

Again, Mahamati, there are others who, seeing distinc- 
tions existing in things as regards the elements, qualities, 
atoms, substances, formations, and positions, and, attached to 
the notion that the hare’s horns are non-existent, assert that 
the bull has horns. 

There are, Mahamati, those who have fallen into the 

* That is, dhy@na, samddhi and sam4patti, which practically 

belong to the same category. 

CHAPTER TWO 47 

dualistic way of thinking, being unable to comprehend the 
truth of Mind-only; they desire to discriminate a world 
which is of Mind itself. Mahamati, body, property, and 
abode have their existence only when measured in disecrimina- 
tion. (52) The hare’s horns neither are nor are not; no 
discrimination is to be made about them. So it is, Mahamati, 
with all things, of which neither being nor non-being can be 
predicated ; have no discrimination about them! 

Again, Mahamati, those who have gone beyond being 
and non-being, no more cherish the thought that the hare has 
no horns; for they never think that the hare has no horns 
because of mutual reference, nor do they think that the bull 
has horns because no ultimate substance is to be obtained 
however minutely the analysis of the horns may go on even 
to the subtlest particle known as atom: [that is,] the state 
in which noble wisdom is realised is beyond being and non- 
being. 

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said 
this to the Blessed One: Is it not this way, Blessed One, that, 
seeing how discrimination takes place, we proceed to refer 
this to the non-rising of discrimination and infer that the 
horns exist not? 

The Blessed One said: No, indeed, Mahamati, the non- 
existence of the horns has no reference to the non-rising of 
discrimination. Why is it not so? Because there is discrimi- 
nation owing to the idea of the horns. Indeed, depending 
upon the idea of the horns, Mahamati, discrimination takes 
place. And because of this dependence of discrimination 
upon the idea of the horns, Mahamati, and because of this 
relationship of dependence and apart from the anyananya? 
relationship, one talks of the non-existence of the hare’s 
horns, surely not because of the reference [to the horns of 
the bull]. If again, Mahamati, discrimination is different 
(anya) from the hare’s horns, (53) it will not take place by 
reason of the horns [and therefore the one is not different 
from the other] ; but if it is not different (andnya), there is 
a discrimination taking place by reason of the horns: [and 

st 

Literally different and not-different. 

48 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

therefore the one is different from the other]. However 
minutely the atoms are analysed, no horn[-substance] is 
obtainable; the notion of the horns itself is not available 
when thus reasoned. As neither of them [that is, the bull’s 
nor the hare’s} are existent, in reference to what should we 
talk of non-existence? Therefore, Mahamati, the reasoning 
by reference as regards the non-existence of the hare’s horns 
is of no avail. The non-existence of the hare’s horns is 
asserted in reference to their existence [on the bull; but 
really a horn itself has no existence from the beginning] ; 
have therefore no discrimination about it! Mahamati, the 
dualism of being and non-being as held by the philosophers 
does not obtain as we see in the reasoning of horns. 

Again, Mahamati, there are other philosophers affected 
with erroneous views, who are attached to such notions as 
form, cause, and figure; not fully understanding the nature 
of space and seeing that space is disjoined from form, they 
proceed to discriminate about their separate existences. But, 
Mahamati, space is form, and, Mahamati, as space penetrates 
into form, form is space. To establish the relation of sup- 
porting and supported, Mahamati, there obtains the separa- 
tion of the two, space and form. Mahamati, when the 
elements begin to evolve [a world] they are distinguishable 
one from another; they do not abide in space, and space is 
not non-existent in them. 

It is the same with the hare’s horns, Mahamati, whose 
non-existence is asserted in reference to the bull’s horns. 
But, Mahamati, when the bull’s horns are analysed to their 
minutest atoms, which in turn are further analysed, there is 
after all nothing to be known as atoms. The non-existence 
of what, is to be affirmed in reference to what? As to the 
other things, too, this reasoning from reference (54) does 
not hold true. 

At that time, again, the Blessed One said this to Maha- 
mati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva; Mahamati, you should 
discard the views and discriminations that are concerned 
with the horns of a hare and a bull, with space and form. 
And also, Mahamati, let you and other Bodhisattvas reflect 

CHAPTER TWO 49 

on the nature of discrimination which they have of the Mind 
itself, and let them go into all the Bodhisattva-lands where 
they should disclose the way of disciplining themselves in 
the manifestations of Mind itself. 

XIII 

Then at that time the Blessed One recited these verses: 

125. The world [as we see it] exists not, pluralities of 
things rise from the Mind being seen [externally]; body, 
property, and abode are manifested to us as of the Alaya- 
vijhana. 

126. The leaders talk about the Citta, Manas, [Mano-] 
vijhana, the [triple] Svabhava, the five Dharmas, the two- 
fold egolessness, and purification. 

127. Wong and short, ete., exist mutually bound up; 
when existence is asserted, there is non-existence, and where 
non-existence is asserted, there is existence. 

128. Analysed down to atems, there is indeed no form 
to be discriminated as such; what can be established is the 
[truth of] Mind-only, which is not believed by those who 
cherish erroneous views. 

129. This does not belong to the realm of the theo- 
reticians nor to that of the Sravaka; (55) the Buddhas dis- 
close the way of self-realisation. 

XIV 

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattva made a request of the Blessed One regarding the 
»urification of the outflow which comes from recognising an 
objective world which is of Mind itself, saying, How, O 
Blessed One, is the outflow purified that takes place from 
recognising an external world which is of Mind itself? Is 
the purification instantaneous or gradual? 

Replied the Blessed One: The outflow that takes place 
from recognising an external world which is of Mind itself is 
gradually purified and not instantaneously. Mahamati, it is 
like the 4amra fruit which ripens gradually and not instanta- 
neously; in the same way, Mahdmati, the purification of 

50 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

beings! is gradual and not instantaneous. Mahamati, it is 
like the potter making pots, which is done gradually and 
not instantaneously; in the same way, Mahamati, the puri- 
fication of beings by the Tathagata is gradual and not 
instantaneous. Mahamati, it is like grass, shrubs, herbs, 
and trees, that grow up gradually from the earth and not 
instantaneously ; in the same way, Mahamati, the purification 
by the Tathagata of beings is gradual and not instantaneous; 
Mahamati, it is like the mastery of comedy, dancing, singing, 
music, lute-playing, writing, and [other] arts, which is gained 
gradually and not instantaneously ; in the same way, Maha- 
mati, the purification by the Tathagata of all beings is 
gradual and not instantaneous. 

Mahamati, it is like a mirror indiscriminately and 
instantaneously reflecting in it forms and images; (56) in 
the same way, Mahamati, the purification by the Tathagata 
of all beings is instantaneous, who makes them free from 
discrimination and leads them to the state of imagelessness. 
Mahamati, it is like the sun or the moon revealing all forms 
instantaneously by illuminating them with its light; in the 
same way, Mahamati, the Tathagata, by making all beings 
discard the habit-energy which issues from the erroneous 
views they entertain in regard to an external world which is 
of the Mind, instantancously reveals to all beings the realm 
of unthinkable knowledge which belongs to Buddhahood. It 
is like the Alayavijfiina making instantaneously a world of 
body, property, and abode, which is what is seen of Mind 
itself; in the same way, Mahamati, the Nishyanda-Buddha, 
instantaneously maturing the mentality of beings, places 
them in the palatial abode of the Akanishtha mansion where 
they will become practisers of various spiritual exercises. 
Mahamati, it is like the Dharmata-Buddha shining forth 
instantaneously with the rays that issue from the Nishyanda- 
Nirmana [-Buddha] ; in the same way, Mahamati, the noble 
truth of self-realisation instantaneously shines out when the 

1 

Abbreviated from ‘“‘the outflowing that takes place in beings 
when they recognise an external world as real which is of Mind itself” 
(svacittadrigsyadhard sattvandm). 

CHAPTER TWO 51 

false [dualistic] views of existence and non-existence are 
discarded. 

XV 

And yet again, Mahamati, what the Dharmata- 
Nishyanda-Buddha [that is, the Buddha that flows out of the 
absolute Dharma] teaches is that all things are comprehen- 
sible under the aspects of individuality and generality, for 
they are bound up with causes and conditions of habit-energy 
which is accumulated by not recognising an external world 
as of Mind itself; that by reason of clinging to these false 
imaginations there is multitudinousness of unrealities, which 
resemble the various scenes and persons created magically 
and imagined as really in existence. Further again, Maha- 
mati, false imaginations arise from clinging to the notion of 
relativity. To illustrate: when the magician depending 
upon grass, (57) wood, shrubs, and creepers, exercises his 
art, all beings and forms take shape, magically-created 
persons are produced, which appear endowed with individ- 
uality and material body, and they are variously and 
faneifully discriminated. While they are thus manifesting 
themselves, Mahamati, there is no substantiality in them. 
Likewise, Mahamati, based on the notion of relativity the 
false imagination recognises a variety of appearances which 
are distinguished by a discriminating mind. And as their 
individual appearances are imagined and adhered to, there 
is habit-energy, and, Mahamati, so long as the fancying goes 
on we have here all that is needed to constitute the self- 
nature of the false imagination. Mahamati, this is the dis- 
course of the Nishyanda Buddha. 

Again, Mahamati, it is the doing of the Dharmata- 
Buddha to establish the exalted state of self-realisation which 
transcends the phenomena of the [empirical] mind. 

Again, Mahamati, what the Nirmita-Nirmana-Buddha 
{or Buddha of transformation] establishes concerns such 
matters as charity, morality, meditation, tranquillisation, 
various forms of transcendental knowledge and of under- 
standing, the Skandhas, Dhatus, and Ayatanas, emancipa- 

52 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

tion, the Vijfanas, and the ways in which they function, 
the forms which they take, their distinctions and their per- 
formances. The Buddha discloses against the philosophical 
views that which surpasses forms. 

Again Mahamati, the Dharmaté-Buddha is uncondi- 
tioned, free from conditions, has nothing to do with all 
doings, senses, and measurements, and does not belong to the 
world of the ignorant, Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and 
philosophers, who are always clinging to the notion of an 
ego. For this reason, Mahamati, you should discipline your- 
self in the excellent and exalted way leading to self-realisa- 
tion; (58) you should keep yourself away from the views 
that recognise the reality of an external world apart from 
the Mind itself. 

XVI 

Further again, Mahamati, in the life of the Sravaka- 
vehicle, there are two aspects to be distinguished, namely, 
the excellent and exalted state of self-realisation, and the 
attachment to. the notion of self-nature arising from dis- 
crimination. What is the excellent, exalted state of self- 
realisation belonging to the Sravakas? This is a state of 
mental concentration which is attained when one realises 
states of emptiness, egolessness, suffering, and impermanence, 
and the truth that is free from passions and is ever serene; 
when one annihilates notions belonging to the externality of 
things, such as the Skandhas, Dhatus, Ayatanas, individual- 
ity and generality; and when one has an insight into reality 
as it is. Entering upon this state of mental concentration 
the Sravakas will attain the blissful abode of exalted self- 
realisation in which there is the emancipation belonging to 
a Dhyana, the path and fruit of a Samadhi, and the deliver- 
ance cf a Samapatti, but in which there is as yet no dis- 
carding of habit-energy and no escape from the imperceivable 
transformation of death. This, Mahamati, is the Sravaka’s 
exalted state of self-realisation. Having attained this exalted 
and blissful condition of self-realisation as realised by the 
Sravakas, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva may not 

CHAPTER TWO 53 

enjoy by himself the bliss of cessation, the bliss of Samapatti, 
but should think compassionately of other beings and keep 
ever fresh his original vows. Mahamati, in whatever exalted 
and blissful state of self-realisation the Bodhisattva may find 
himself, he should never exert himself in the exalted and bliss- 
ful state of self-realisation as attained by the Sravakas. 

(59) Mahamati, what is meant by the attachment to the 
notion of self-nature arising from discrimination? This 
attachment takes place when a man, seeing that the elements 
and the qualities such as blue, yellow, warmth, humidity, 
motility, and rigidity, have never been created by a creator, 
yet clings to the notions of individuality and generality in 
accordance with the measures laid down im books of logic. 
Mahamati, the Bodhisattva, knowing what this is, must 
abandon it. Conforming himself to the egolessness of 
things and holding back the wrong views regarding the 
egolessness of a person, the Bodhisattva should keep himself 
on the continuously-ascending journey along the stages. 
This is the Sravaka’s attachment to the notion of self-nature 
arising from the discrimination of existence. 

XVII 

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said 
this to the Blessed One: According to the Blessed One’s 
teaching, the eternal-unthinkable is the exalted condition of 
self-realisation and also of highest reality. Now, do not the 
philosophers also talk about the creative agent being the 
eternal-unthinkable? 

The Blessed One replied: No, Mahamati, the eternal- 
unthinkable considered by the philosophers to be charac- 
teristic of their creator is untenable. Why? Because, 
Mahamati, the eternal-unthinkable as held by the philos- 
ophers is not in conformity with the idea of a cause itself. 
When, Mahamati, this eternal-unthinkable is not in con- 
formity with the idea of a cause itself how can this be proved 
tenable? (60) Again, Mahamati, if what is claimed to be 
the eternal-unthinkable is in conformity with the idea of a 
cause [which is eternal] in itself, it can be eternal; but since 

54 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

the idea of a creator is based upon that of a [further] cause, 
it cannot be the eternal-unthinkable. 

But, Mahamati, my highest reality is the eternal- 
unthinkable since it conforms to the idea of a cause and is 
beyond existence and non-existence. Because it is the exalted 
state of self-realisation it has its own character; because it 
is the cause of the highest reality it has its causation ; because 
it has nothing to do with existence and non-existence it 1s 
no doer; because it is to be classed under the same head as 
space, Nirvana, and cessation it is eternal. Therefore, 
Mahamati, it is not the same as the eternal-unthinkable of 
the philosophers; the eternal-unthinkable of the Tathagatas 
is thatness realised by noble wisdom within themselves. For 
this reason, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahisattva dis- 
cipline himself in order to attain by means of noble wisdom 
the truth of self-realisation which is the eternal-unthinkable. 

Again, further, Mahamati, the eternal-unthinkable of 
the philosophers is not characterised with eternality because 
it has a cause which is not eternal; what they regard as 
eternal is not eternal as it is not characterised with the power 
that can create itself. If again, Mahamati, the philosophers 
prove the eternality of their eternal-unthinkable in contra- 
distinction to the becoming and therefore the non-eternality 
of things created, Mahamati, by the same reasoning (61) 
I can prove that their eternality has no reason to be known 
as such just because things created are non-eternal owing 
to their becoming. 

If again, Mahamati, the eternal-unthinkable of the 
philosophers is in conformity with the idea of a cause, what 
they regard as characteristic of a cause is a non-entity like 
the horns of a hare; and, Mahamati, their eternal-unthinkable 
is no more than a verbal discrimination, in which, Mahamati. 
the philosophers’ fault consists. Why? Because, Mahamati, 
mere verbal discriminations are, indeed, the hare’s horns, on 
account of their having no characteristic of a self-cause. 
Mahamati, moreover, my eternal-unthinkable is really eternal 
because it finds its cause in the exalted state of self-realisa- 
tion, and because it has nothing to do with a creator, with 

CHAPTER TWO 55 

being and non-being. Its eternality is not derived from the 
reasoning which is based upon the external notion of being 
and non-being, of eternity and non-eternity. If the eternal- 
unthinkable is eternal in consideration of the non-existence 
and eternality of external things, we can say of this kind of 
the eternal-unthinkable that the philosophers do not know 
what is meant by characteristically self-caused. As they 
are outside the state of self-realisation attainable by noble 
wisdom, Mahamati, their discourse is not to the point. 

XVIII 

Further, Mahamati, those who, afraid of sufferings ari- 
sing from the discrimination of birth-and-death, seek for 
Nirvana, do not know that birth-and-death and Nirvana are 
not to be separated the one from the other; and, seeing that 
all things subject to discrimination have no reality, imagine 
that Nirvana consists in the future annihilation of the senses 
and their fields. (62) They are not aware, Mahamati, of the 
fact that Nirvana is the Alayavijfidna where a revulsion 
takes place by self-realisation. Therefore, Mahamati, those 
who are stupid talk of the trinity of vehicles and not of the 
state of Mind-only where there are no images. Therefore, 
Mahamati, those who do not understand the teachings of the 
Tathagatas of the past, present, and future, concerning the 
external world, which is of Mind itself, cling to the notion 
that there is a world outside what is seen of the Mind and, 
Mahamati, go on rolling themselves along the wheel of birth- 
and-death. 

XIX 

Further, Mahamati, according to the teaching of the 
Tathagatas of the past, present, and future, all things are 
unborn. Why? Because they have no reality, being mani- 
festations of Mind itself, and, Mahamati, as they are not 
born of being and non-being, they are unborn. Mahadmati, 
all things are like the horns of the hare, horse, donkey, or 
camel, but the ignorant and simple-minded who are given 
up to their false and erroneous imaginations, discriminate 

56 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

things where they are not; therefore, all things are unborn. 
That all things are in their self-nature unborn, Mahamati, 
belongs to the realm of self-realisation attained by noble 
wisdom, and does not belong essentially to the realm of 
dualistic discrimination cherished by the ignorant and 
simple-minded. The self-nature and the charaeteristic marks 
of body, property, and abode evolve when the Alayavijiiana 
is conceived by the ignorant as grasping and grasped; and 
then they fall into a dualistic view of existence where they 
recognise its rise, abiding, and disappearance, cherishing the 
idea that all things are born and subject to discrimination 
as to being and non-being. (63) Therefore, Mahamati, you 
should discipline yourself therein [i.e in self-realisation]. 

XX 

Again further, Mahamati, there are five groups of 
people, each of whom attains its own [spiritual] insight. 
What are the five? They are: (1) the group of people whose 
insight belongs to the Sravaka-vehicle; (2) the group of 
people whose insight belongs to the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle ; 
(3) the group of people whose insight belongs to the Tatha- 
gata-vehicle; (4) the group of indefinite character; and (5) 
the group of people to whom no insight is possible. 

Mahamati, how does one know the group of people whose 
insight belongs to the Sravaka vehicle? There are people 
the hair of whose body will stand on end when they know 
and realise the nature of the Skandhas, Dhatus, Ayatanas, 
and [what is meant by] generality and individuality; their 
intellect will leap with joy on knowing and practising what 
belongs to appearance and not on practising what they know 
of the uninterrupted chain of causation,—such ones, Maha- 
mati, are said to be of the group whose insight belongs to the 
Srivaka vehicle. Having had an insight into their own 
vehicle, they abide at the fifth or the sixth stage where they 
do away with the rising of the passions, but not with the 
habit-energy ; they have not yet passed beyond the incon- 
ceivable transformation-death, and their lion-roar is, ‘‘My 
life is destroyed, my morality is established, ete.’’; they will 

CHAPTER TWO 57 

then discipline themselves in the egolessness of persons and 
finally gain the knowledge of Nirvana. 

Again, Mahamati, there are others who, believing in such 
things as ego, being, vital principle, nourisher, supreme 
spirit, or personal soul, will seek Nirvana in them. Again, 
Mahamati, there are still others who, seeing that all things 
exist by depending upon causes, will recognise in this the 
way to Nirvana. (64) But, Mahamati, as they have no 
insight into the egolessness of things, there is no emancipa- 
tion for them. This, Mahamati, is where those of the 
Sravaka-vehicle and the philosophers make the mistake in 
their insight by regarding non-deliverance as deliverance. 
Therefore, Mahamati, you ought to discipline yourself in 
order to escape this wrong view. 

Now, Mahamati, they belong to the group of the Prat- 
yekabuddha-vehicle who will shed tears and feel the hair of 
their body stand on end when the Pratyekabuddha’s insight 
is shown to them. When the teaching to keep themselves 
away from social relations and entanglements, not to become 
attached to the external world and its manifold form, to 
perform miraculous powers by which they can divide their 
own body and appear double or perform the transformations, 
is disclosed to them, they are thereby entreated. Recogni- 
sing. that they are of the group whose insight belong to the 
Pratyekabuddha-vehicle, their discourses will be in con- 
formity with the insight of the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle. 
This, Mahamati, is the characteristic feature of the group of 
people whose insight belongs to the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle. 

Now, Mahamati, three aspects are distinguishable in the 
insight belonging to the group of the Tathagata-vehicle. 
They are: (1) an insight whereby one sees into the self- 
nature of things, which is no self-nature; (2) an exalted 
insight which is the attainment of self-realisation ; and (3) an 
insight into the immensity of the external Buddha-lands. 
When, Mahamati, these three aspects are disclosed one after 
another and also when the inconceivable realm of the Alaya- 
vijiidna is disclosed, where body, property, and abode are 
seen to be the manifestation of Mind itself, a man will not 

58 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

be frightened, nor terrified, nor show any sign of fear; then 
such a one is to be known as of the group of people whose 
insight belongs to the Tathagata-vehicle. This is, (65) Maha- 
mati, the characteristic feature of the insight of those who 
belong to the Tathagata-vehicle. 

Again, Mahamati, when these three forms of insight are 
disclosed to a man, he may thereby be pursuaded to dis- 
cipline himself in them. This, Mahamati, is the stage of 
preparation for the establishment of his own group. In 
order that he may go up to the stage of imagelessness, there 
is this establishment. But the Sravaka who will purify his 
own habit-energy of passions by attaining an inner percep- 
tion into the Alaya and by seeing into the egolessness of 
things, will settle himself in the bliss of the Samadhi and 
finally will attain the body of Tathagatahood.! 

XXI 

Then the Blessed One recited these verses: 

130. The fruit of the Stream-entered, and that of the 
Once-to-come; the fruit of the Not-to-come and Arhatship— 
all these are due to mental perturbation. 

131. The triple vehicle, the one vehicle, and the no- 
vehicle, of these I talk, for the sake of the dull-witted, and 
[also] for the wise, solitude-loving ones. 

132. The gate of highest reality has nothing to do with 
the two forms of thought-construction [subject and object] ; 
Where the imageless stands, why should we establish the 
triple vehicles? 

133. The Dhyianas, the immeasurables, and the no- 
form Samadhis, and the thought-cessation—all these are not 
at all found in Mind-only. 

XXII 

Again, Mahamati, how is it that the Iechantika? never 
awaken the desire for emancipation? (66) Because they have 

* What is stated about the group of indefinite character is not 

quite clear. 
* Those who are destitute of the Buddha-nature. 

CHAPTER TWO 59 

abandoned all the stock of merit, and because they cherish 
certain vows for all beings since beginningless time. What 
is meant by abandoning all the stock of merit? It refers to 
{those Buddhists] who have abandoned the Bodhisattva, col- 
lection [of the canonical texts], making the false accusation 
that they are not in conformity with the sutras, the codes of 
morality, and the emancipation. By this they have forsaken 
all the stock of merit and will not enter into Nirvana. 
Secondly again, Mahamati, there are Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattvas who, on account of their original vows made for all 
beings, saying, ‘‘So long as they do not attain Nirvana, I will 
not attain it myself,’’ keep themselves away from Nirvana. 
This, Mahamati, is the reason of their not entering into. 
Nirvana, and because of this they go on the way of the 
Iechantika. 

Again, Mahamati said; Who, Blessed One, would never 
enter Nirvana? 

The Blessed One replied: Knowing that all things are 
in Nirvana itself from the very beginning, the Bodhisattva- 
Techantika would never enter Nirvana. But those Iechan- 
tikas who have forsaken all the stock of merit [finally] do. 
Those Iechantikas, Mahamati, who have forsaken all the stock 
of merit might some day be influenced by the power of the 
Tathagatas and be induced at any moment to foster the stock 
of merit. Why? Because, Mahamati, no beings are left 
aside by the Tathagatas. For this reason, Mahamati, it is 
the Bodhisattva-Iechantika (67) who never enters into 
Nirvana. 

XXIII 

Further, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva be 
well acquainted with the three kinds of Svabhava (self- 
nature). [What are the three? They are (1) false dis- 
crimination, (2) knowledge of relativity, and (3) perfect 
knowledge.}] Now, Mahamati, false discrimination rises 
from form (nimitta). How, Mahamati, does it rise from 
form? In [the consideration of] the relativity aspect of 
Svabhava, realities appear in various ways, as having forms, 

60 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

signs, and shapes; when, Mahamati, these objects, forms, and 
signs are adhered to [as real], this adherence takes place 
in two ways. The Tathagatas, Arhats, and Fully-En- 
lightened Ones thus declare false discrimination to consist 
in attachment to names and attachment to objects. By the 
attachment to objects is meant, Mahamati, to get attached to 
inner and external things [as realities]. By the attachment 
to names is meant to recognise in these inner and external 
things the characteristic marks of individuality and general- 
ity and to regard them as definitely belonging to the objects. 
These two modes of attachment, Mahamati, constitute false 
discrimination. The knowledge of the relativity-aspect 
(paratantra) rises from the separation of subject (a@sraya) 
and object (dlambana). 

Now, Mahamati, what is perfect knowledge? It is 
realised when one casts aside the discriminating notions of 
form, name, reality, and character ; it is the inner realisation 
by noble wisdom. This (68) perfect knowledge, Mahamati, 
is the essence of the Tathagata-garbha. 

Then the Blessed One recited this verse: 

134. Form, Name, and Discrimination [correspond to] 
the two forms of Svabhava, and Right Knowledge and Such- 
ness [correspond to] the Perfect Knowledge aspect. 

This, Mahamati, is called the doctrine that examines into 
the nature of the five Dharmas and the two Svabhavas (self- 
nature), and constitutes the state of self-realisation attained 
by noble wisdom, and in this you andother Bodhisattvas are 
to discipline yourselves. 

XXIV 

Further again, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattva have a thorough understanding as to the nature of the 
twofold egolessness. Mahamati, what is this twofold egoless- 
ness? [It is the egolessness of persons and the egolessness 
of things. What is meant by egolessness of persons? It 
means that] in the collection of the Skandhas, Dhatus, and 
Ayatanas there is no ego-substance, nor anything belonging 
to it; the Vijiana is originated by ignorance, deed, and 

CHAPTER TWO 61 

desire, and keeps up its function by grasping objects by 
means of the sense-organs, such as the eye, etc., and by 
clinging to them as real; while a world of objects and bodies 
is manifested owing to the discrimination that takes place 
in the world which is of Mind itself, that is, in the Alaya- 
vijiiana. By reason of the habit-energy stored up by false 
imagination since beginningless time, this world (vishaya) is 
subject to change and destruction from moment to moment; 
it is like a river, a seed, a lamp, wind, a cloud; [while 
the Vijiiana itself is] like a monkey who is always restless, 
like a fly who is ever in search of unclean things and defiled 
places, like a fire (69) which is never satisfied. Again, it 
is like a water-drawing wheel or a machine, it [i.e., the 
Vijiiana] goes on rolling the wheel of transmigration, ecarry- 
ing varieties of bodies and forms, resuscitating the dead 
like the demon Vetala, causing the wooden figures to move 
about as a magician moves them. Mahamati, a thorough 
understanding concerning these phenomena is called com- 
prehending the egolessness of persons. 

Now, Mahamati, what is meant by the egolessness of 
things? It is to realise that the Skandhas, Dhatus, and 
Ayatanas are characterised with the nature of false dis- 
crimination. Mahamati, since the Skandhas, Dhatus, and 
Ayatanas are destitute of an ego-substance, being no more 
than an aggregation of the Skandhas, and subject to the 
conditions of mutual origination which are causally bound 
up with the string of desire and deed; and since thus there 
is no creating agent in them, Mahamati, the Skandhas are 
even destitute of the marks of individuality and generality ; 
and the ignorant, owing to their erroneous discrimination, 
imagine here the multiplicity of phenomena; the wise, how- 
ever, do not. Recognising, Mahamati, that all things are 
devoid of the Citta, Manas, Manovijiana, the five Dharmas, 
and the [three] Svabhavas, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva will 
well understand what is meant by the egolessness of things. 

Again, Mahamati, when the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva has 
a good understanding as regards the egolessness of things, 
before long he will attain the first stage [of Bodhisattva- 

62 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

hood] when he gets a definite cognition of the imageless. 
When a definite acquisition is obtained regarding the aspect 
of the stages [of Bodhisattvahood], the Bodhisattva will ex- 
perience joy, and, gradually and successively going up the 
seale, will reach the ninth stage where his insight is per- 
fected, and [finally the tenth stage known as] Great Dharma- 
megha. Establishing himself here, (70) he will be seated 
in the great jewel palace known as ‘‘Great Lotus Throne’’ 
which is in the shape of a lotus and is adorned with various 
sorts of jewels and pearls; he will then acquire and complete 
a world of Maya-nature; surrounded by Bodhisattvas of the 
same character and anointed like the son of the Cakravarti 
by the hands of the Buddhas coming from all the Buddha- 
lands, he will go beyond the last stage of Bodhisattvahood, 
attain the noble truth of self-realisation, and become a Tatha- 
gata endowed with the perfect freedom of the Dharmakaya, 
because of his insight into the egolessness of things. This, 
Mahamati, is what is meant by the egolessness of all things, 
and in this you and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas should 
well exercise yourselves. 

XXV 

At that time, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahisattva 
said this to the Blessed One: Pray teach me about making 
an assertion and refuting it so that I and other Bodhisattvas, 
getting rid of the erroneous views that may rise from asser- 
tion and refutation, may at once realise supreme enlighten- 
ment. Having been enlightened they would keep themselves 
away from the eternalistic assertions as well as from the 
nihilistic refutations, and leave your enlightenment eye 
unrefuted. 

Then the Blessed One again, understanding the request 
of Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, recited this verse: 

135. Assertions and refutations are not to be found in 
the Mind-only; the ignorant who understand not that the 
Mind is [seen in] the form of body, property, and abode, 
wander about with assertions and refutations. 

CHAPTER TWO 63 

(71) At that moment the Blessed One said this to 
elucidate the meaning of this verse: Mahamati, there are 
four forms of assertion made concerning things not in 
existence. What are the four? (1) The assertion about 
individual marks that are non-existent; (2) the assertion 
about philosophical views which are non-existent [i.e., not 
true]; (3) the assertion about a cause which is non-existent ; 
and (4) the assertion about objects that are non-existent. 
These, Mahamati, are the four assertions. 

Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the refutation? It 
means not examining properly, because of ignorance, any 
assertions based on errors. This, Mahamati, is what charac- 
terises assertion and refutation. 

Further, Mahamati, what are the characteristics of the 
assertion made about individual marks that have no exist- 
ence? It concerns the marks of individuality and generality 
in the Skandhas, Dhatus and Ayatanas, which do not really 
exist; but taking them for realities and getting attached to 
them, a man may affirm that they are just so and not other- 
wise. This, Mahdmati, characterises the assertion of indivi- 
dual marks which are non-existent. This assertion and dis- 
crimination, Mahamati, concerning individual marks that are 
not existent, rises from one’s attachment to the habit-energy 
which is amassed, since beginningless time, by varieties of 
erroneous views issuing from false imagination. This, 
Mahamati, characterises the assertion of individual marks 
which are non-existent. 

Again, Mahamati, by the assertion of philosophical views 
which are non-existent [i.e., not true], is meant that in the 
Skandhas, Dhatus, and Ayatanas, [some philosophers] 
assume the existence of an ego, a being, a soul, a living 
being, a nourisher, or a spirit. This is said, Mahamati, to 
be the assertion of some philosophical views which are non- 
existent [i.e., not true]. 

Again, Mahamati, by the assertion of a cause that is non- 
existent is meant that [some philosophers] assume the cause- 
less birth of a first (72) Vijfana, which later comes to have 

7? This is repeated below and is evidently a clerical error. 

64 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

a Maya-like non-existence; that is to say, the originally 
unborn Vijiana begins to function under the conditions of 
eye, form, light, and memory. The functioning goes on for 
a while and then ceases. This, Mahamati, is the assertion of 
a cause that is non-existent. 

Again, Mahamati, the assertion about objects that are 
not-existent is an assertion arising from the attachment to 
such non-working existences as space, cessation, and Nir- 
vana. These, Mahamati, are neither existent nor non- 
existent ; for all things are devoid of the alternatives of being 
and non-being and are to be known, Mahamati, as the horns 
of a hare, a horse, or a camel, or like a hair-net. They are 
discriminated as realities by the ignorant who are addicted 
to assertions and refutations as their intelligence has not 
penetrated into the truth that there is nothing but what is 
seen of the Mind itself. It is otherwise with the wise. This, 
Mahamati, is the characteristic point of the assertion about 
objects which are non-existent. For this reason, Mahamati, 
one should avoid the views based on assertion and refutation. 

XXVI 

Further, Mahamati, the Bodhisattvas who are thoroughly 
acquainted with the nature of the Citta, Manas, and Mano- 
vijnana, of the five Dharmas, of the [three] Svabhavas, and 
of the twofold Egolessness, will assume various personalities 
for the sake of benefitting others, just like the imagination 
that evolves from the seat of the relativity knowledge, and 
again, like the mysterious gem that reflects varieties of 
eolours. Going over to all the Buddha-lands and assemblages, 
the Bodhisattvas will listen to the Buddhas, discourse on the 
nature of all things which are like a vision, a dream, an illu- 
sion, a reflection, and the lunar vision in water, and which 
have nothing to do with birth-and-death, eternality, and ex- 
tinction ; the Bodhisattvas, thus facing the Tathagatas, will 
listen to their discourses on the truth that does not belong 
to the Sravaka- and Pratyekabuddha-vehicle. They will 
then attain a hundred thousand Samdadhis, (73) indeed, a 
hundred thousand niyutas of kotis of Samadhis, and by 

CHAPTER TWO 65 

means of these Samadhis they will go around from one 
eountry to another; they will do homage to the Buddhas, be 
born in all the celestial mansions, where they will discourse 
on the Triple Treasure, manifesting Buddha-bodies ; and, sur- 
rounded by Sravakas and Bodhisattvas, they will, in order 
to free them from the alternatives of being and non-being, 
instruct them to understand thoroughly what is meant by 
an objective world which is nothing but Mind itself and in 
which there are no realities. 

At that time the Blessed One recited this verse: 

136. When those who are born of the Buddha see that 
the world is no more than Mind itself, they will obtain a 
body of transformation, which has nothing to do with effect- 
producing works, but which is endowed with the powers, 
psychic faculties, and self-control. 

XXVII 

At that time again Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattva made a request of the Blessed One. Tell me, Blessed 
One, how all things are empty, unborn, non-dual, and have 
no self-nature, so that I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas 
might be awakened in the teaching of emptiness, no-birth, 
non-duality, and the absence of self-nature, and, quitting 
the discrimination of being and non-being, quickly realise 
the highest enlightenment. 

Then the Blesesd One said this to Mahamati the Bodhi- 
sattva-Mahasattva: Now, Mahamati, listen well and reflect 
well upon what I tell you. 

Replied Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, I will 
indeed, Blessed One. (74) The Blessed One said: Empti- 
ness, emptiness, indeed! Mahamati, it is a term whose 
self-nature is false imagination. Because of one’s attach- 
ment to false imagination, Mahadmati, we have to talk of 
emptiness, no-birth, non-duality, and absence of self-nature. 
In short, then, Mahamati, there are seven kinds of empti- 
ness: (1) The emptiness of individual marks (lakshana), 
(2) the emptiness of self-nature (bhdvasvabbdva), (3) the 
emptiness of no-work (apracarita), (4) the emptiness of work 

66 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

(pracarita), (5) the emptiness of all things in the sense that 
they are unpredicable (nirabhilapya), (6) the emptiness in 
its highest sense of ultimate reality realisable only by noble 
wisdom, and (7) the emptiness of mutuality (itaretara) 
which is the seventh. 

Mahamati, what then is the emptiness of individual 
marks? It is that all things have no [such distinguishing] 
marks of individuality and generality. In consideration of 
mutuality and accumulation, [things are thought to be 
realities], but when they are further investigated and 
analysed, Mahamati, they are non-existent, and not predic- 
able with individuality and generality; and because thus no 
such ideas as self, other, or both, hold good, Mahamati, the 
individual marks no longer obtain. So it is said that all 
things are empty as to their self-marks. 

Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the emptiness of 
self-nature? Mahamati, it is that all things in their self- 
nature are unborn, hence the emptiness of self-nature, and 
it is therefore said that things are empty in their self-nature. 

Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the emptiness of 
no-work? It is that the Skandhas are Nirvana itself and 
there is no work doing in them from the beginning. There- 
fore, one speaks of the emptiness of no-work. 

(75) Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the emptiness 
of work? It is that the Skandhas are devoid of an ego and 
its belongings, and go on functioning when there is a mutual 
conjunction of cause and action. Thus one speaks of the 
emptiness of work. 

Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the emptiness of all 
things in the sense that they are unpredicable? It is that 
the nature of the false imagination is not expressible, hence 
the emptiness of all things in the sense of their unpredicabil- 
ity. Thus one speaks of the emptiness of unpredicability. 

Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the emptiness in its 
highest sense of ultimate reality realisable by noble wisdom? 
It is that in the attainment of an inner realisation by means 
of noble wisdom there is no trace of habit-energy generated 
by all the erroneous conceptions [of beginningless past]. 

CHAPTER TWO 67 

Thus one speaks of the highest emptiness of ultimate reality 
realisable by noble wisdom. 

Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the emptiness of 
mutual [non-existence]? It is this: when a thing is missing 
here, one speaks of its being empty there. For instance, 
Mahamati, in the lecture-hall of the Mrigadrama there are no 
elephants, no bulls, no sheep, but as to the Bhikshus I can 
say that the hall is not devoid of them; it is empty only as 
far as they [1.e. the animals] are concerned. Further, Maha- 
mati, it is not that the lecture-hall is devoid of its own 
characteristics, nor that the Bhikshu is devoid of this Bhi- 
kshuhood, nor that in some other places, too, elephants, bulls, 
and sheep are not to be found. Mahamati, here one sees all 
things in their aspect of individuality and generality, but 
from the point of view of mutuality (itaretara) some things 
do not exist somewhere. Thus one speaks of the emptiness 
of mutual [non-existence]. 

These, Mahamati, are the seven kinds of emptiness of 
which mutuality ranks the lowest of all and is to be put 
away by you. 

(76) Again, Mahamati, not that things are not born, but 
that.they are not born of themselves, except when seen in 
the state of Samadhi—this is what is meant by ‘‘all things 
are unborn.’’ To have no self-nature is, according to the 
deeper sense, to be unborn, Mahaimati. That all things are 
devoid of self-nature means that there is a constant and 
uninterrupted becoming, a momentary change from one state 
of existence to another; seeing this, Mahamati, all things are 
destitute of self-nature. So one speaks of all things having 
no self-nature. 

Again, Mahamati, what is meant by non-duality? It 
means that light and shade, long and short, black and white, 
are relative terms, Mahamati, and not independent of each 
other; as Nirvana and Samsara are, all things are not-two. 
There is no Nirvana except where is Samsara; there is no 
Samsara except where is Nirvana; for the condition of ex- 
istence is not of mutually-exclusive character! Therefore, 

* Read after T‘ang. 

68 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

it is said that all things are non-dual as are Nirvana and 
Samsara. For this reason, Mahamati, you should discipline 
vourself in [the realisation of] emptiness, no-birth, non- 
duality, and no-self-nature. 

Then at that time the Blessed One recited this couplet 
of verses: 

187. I always preach emptiness which is beyond 
eternalism and nihilism; Samsara is like a dream and a 
vision, and karma vanishes not. 

138. Space, Nirvana, and the two forms of cessation— 
thus (77) the ignorant discriminate the things which are not 
effect-producing, but the wise stand above being and non- 
being. 

At that time again, the Blessed One said this to Maha- 
mati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva; This [teaching of] empti- 
ness, no-birth, non-duality, and ro-self-nature is found in 
all the sutras of all the Buddhas, and this doctrine is reeog- 
nised in every one of them. However, Mahamati, the sutras 
are the teaching in conformity with the dispositions of all 
beings and deviate from the [real] sense, and not the truth- 
preserving statement. Mahamati, it is like unto the mirage 
which entices the deer with its treacherous springs, the 
springs are not there but the deer are attached, imagining 
them to be real. So with the teachings disclosed in all the 
sutras, they are for all beings for the gratification of their 
own discriminating minds. They are not the truth-preserv- 
ing statements meant for noble wisdom to grasp. For this 
reason, Mahamati, be in conformity with the sense and be 
not engrossed in the word-teaching. 

XXVIII 

At that time, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said 
this to the Blessed One: Now the Blessed One makes mention 
of the Tathagata-garbha in the sutras, and verily it is 
described by you as by nature bright and pure, as primarily 
unspotted, endowed with the thirty-two marks of excellence, 
hidden in the body of every being like a gem of great value, 
which is enwrapped in a dirty garment, enveloped in the 

CHAPTER TWO 69 

garment of the Skandhas, Dhatus, and Ayatanas, and soiled 
with the dirt of greed, anger, folly, and false imagination, 
(78) while it is described by the Blessed One to be eternal, 
permanent, auspicious, and unchangeable. Is not this Tatha- 
gata-garbha taught by the Blessed One the same as the ego- 
substanee taught by the philosophers? The ego as taught 
in the systems of the philosophers is an eternal creator, un- 
qualified, omnipresent, and imperishable. 

The Blessed One replied: No, Mahamati, my Tathagata- 
garbha is not the same as the ego taught by the philosophers ; 
for what the Tathagatas teach is the Tathagata-garbha in 
the sense, Mahamati, that it is emptiness, reality-limit, 
Nirvana, being unborn, unqualified, and devoid of will-effort ; 
the reason why the Tathagatas who are Arhats and Fully- 
Enlightened Ones, teach the doctrine pointing to the Tatha- 
vata-garbha is to make the ignorant cast aside their fear 
when they listen to the teaching of egolessness and to have 
them realise the state of non-diserimination and imageless- 
ness. I also wish, Mahamati, that the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattvas of the present and future would not attach themselves 
to the idea of an ego [imagining it to be a soul]. Mahamati, 
it is like a potter who manufactures various vessels out of a 
mass of clay of one sort by his own manual skill and labour 
combined with a rod, water, and thread, Mahamati, that 
the Tathagatas preach the egolessness of things which 
removes all the traces of discrimination by various skilful 
means issuing from their transcendental wisdom, that is, 
sometimes by the doctrine of the Tathagata-garbha, some- 
times by that of egolessness, and, like a potter, by means of 
various terms, expressions, and synonyms. For this reason, 
Mahamati, the philosophers’ doctrine of an ego-substance is 
not the same (79) as the teaching of the Tathagata-garbha. 
Thus, Mahamati, the doctrine of the Tathagata-garbha is dis- 
closed in order to awaken the philosophers from their cling- 
ing to the idea of the ego, so that those minds that have fallen 
into the views imagining the non-existent ego as real, and 
also into the notion that the triple emancipation is final, may 
rapidly be awakened to the state of supreme enlightenment. 

70 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Accordingly, Mahaimati, the Tathagatas who are Arhats and 
Fully-Enlightened Ones disclose the doctrine of the Tatha- 
gata-garbha which is thus not to be known as identical with 
the philosopher’s notion of an ego-substance. Therefore, 
Mahamati, in order to abandon the misconception cherished 
by the philosophers, you must strive after the teaching of, 
egolessness and the Tathigata-garbha. 

XXIX 

At that moment then the Blessed One recited this verse: 

139. The personal soul, continuity, the Skandhas, causa- 
tion, atoms, the supreme spirit, the ruler, the creator,—[they 
are] discriminations in the Mind-only.? 

XXX 

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva in 
consideration of future generations made this request again 
of the Blessed One: Pray tell me, Blessed One, about the 
perfecting of the discipline whereby the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattvas become great Yogins. 

The Blessed One replied: There are four things, Maha- 
mati, by fulfilling which the Bodhisattvas become great 
Yogins. What are the four? They are: (1) To have a 
clear understanding as to what is seen of Mind itself,? (2) to 
discard the notions of birth, (80) abiding, and disappearance, 
(3) to look into [the truth] that no external world obtains, 
and (4) to seek for the attainment of inner realisation by 
noble wisdom. Provided with these four things the Bodhi- 
sattva-Mahasattvas become great Yogins. 

This verse has strangely found its way here. 

* This is rather a clumsy trauslation of svacitta-drigya. Drigya 
is ‘‘what is seen,’ that is, this visible world, or this external, objective 
world, which according to the Lankdvatdra is a manifestation of Mind 
itself. When this truth is realised, the objective world loses its reality 
as such, and we no more cling to it as if it were a final irreducible fact 
which stands oppressively against the mind. The Buddhist idea of 
interpreting existence idealistically is more religious than logical, for 
Buddhists want to elevate the value of spirit absolutely above matter so 
that the latter will be amenable to all the commands to be given by the 
former. 

CHAPTER TWO 71 

How, Mahamati, does the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva come 
to have a clear understanding as to what is seen of Mind 
itself? He comes to it by recognising that this triple world 
is nothing but Mind itself, devoid of an ego and its belong- 
ings, with no strivings, no comings-and-goings; that this 
triple world is manifested and imagined as real, under the 
influence of the habit-energy accumulated since beginningless 
time by false reasoning and imagination, and with the multi- 
plicity of objects and actions in close relationship, and in 
conformity with the ideas of discrimination, such as body, 
property, and abode. Thus, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva acquires a thoroughly clear understanding as to 
what is seen of Mind itself. 

How again, Mahamati, does the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
discard notions of birth, abiding, and disappearance? By 
this it is meant that all things are to be regarded as forms 
born of a vision or a dream and have never been created since 
there are no such things as self, the other, or bothness. [The 
Bodhisattvas] will see that the external world exists only in 
conformity with Mind-only ; and seeing that there is no stir- 
ring of the Vijnanas and that the triple world is a complicated 
network of causation and owes its rise to discrimination, (81) 
they find that all things, inner and external, are beyond pre- 
dicability, that there is nothing to be seen as self-nature, and 
that [the world] is not to be viewed as born; and thereby 
they will conform themselves to the insight that things are 
of the nature of a vision, ete., and attain to the recognition 
that things are unborn. Establishing themselves on the 
eighth stage of Bodhisattvahood, they will experience a re- 
vulsion {in their consciousness] by transcending the Citta, 
Manas, and Manovijfiana, and the five Dharmas, and the 
{three} Svabhavas, and the twofold Egolessness, and 
thereby attain the mind-made body (manomayakaya). Thus, 
Mahamati, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva will discard the 
notion of birth, abiding, and disappearance.’ 

1 The proper place of this last sentence is here as restored; it is 

found in the Sanskrit text near the end of page 81. 

72 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Said Mahamati,! what is meant by the will-body, Blessed 
One? The Blessed One replied: It means that one [in this 
body] can speedily move unobstructed as he wills; hence the 
will-body, Mahamati. For instance, Mahamati, the will [or 
mind] travels unobstructed over mountains, walls, rivers, 
trees, ete., many a hundred thousand yojanas they may be 
away, when a man recollects the scenes which had previously 
come into his perception, while his own mind keeps on func- 
tioning in his body without the least interruption or 
hindrance. In the same fashion, Mahamati, the will-body, 
in the attainment of the Samadhi called Maya-like and 
adorned with such marks as the powers, the psychic facul- 
ties, and the self-control, will be born in the noble paths and 
assemblies, moving about as freely as he wishes, as he recalls 
his original vows and worlds in order to bring all beings to 
maturity. 

Then, Mahamati, what is meant by the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva (82) having a good insight into the non-existence 
of external objects? It means, Mahamati, that all things are 
like unto a mirage, a dream, a hair-net; and seeing that all 
things are here essentially because of our attachment to the 
habit-energy of discrimination which has been maturing since 
beginningless time on account of false imagination and 
erroneous speculation, the Bodhisattvas will seek after the 
attainment of self-realisation by their noble wisdom. Maha- 
mati, furnished with these four things, Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattvas become great Yogins. Therefore, in these, Mahamati, 
you should exercise yourself. 

XXXI 

At that time Mahaimati again made a request of the 
Blessed One: Pray tell me, Blessed One, about the causation 
of all things, whereby I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas 
can see into the nature of causation, and by getting rid of 

* This whole paragraph is a digression, a sort of explanatory note. 

The will-body (manomayaldya) is again referred to later on, p. 115 et 
seq. 

CHAPTER TWO 73 

the discrimination [which issues in the philosophical views 
of] eternalism and nihilism, we may no more discriminate 
as to the gradual or simultaneous rising of all things. 

Replied the Blessed One: Mahamati, there are two 
factors of causation by which all things come into existence: 
external and inner. Mahamati, the external factors are a 
lump of clay, a stick, a wheel, thread, water, a worker, and 
his labour, the combination of all of which produces a jar. 
As with the jar, Mahamati, which is made of a lump of clay, 
or a piece of cloth made of thread, or a matting made of 
fragrant grass, or the sprout growing out of a seed, or fresh 
butter which is produced from sour milk by a man churning 
it with his own labour, (83) so it is, Mahamati, with all 
things which, governed by external causes, appear one after 
another in continuous succession. As regards the inner 
factors of causation, Mahamati, they are of such kind as 
ignorance, desire, and action, which make up our idea of 
causation. Born of these, Mahamati, there is the manifesta- 
tion of the Skandhas, Dhatus, and Ayatanas. They are not 
separable [realities]1 but discriminated [as such] by the 
ignorant. 

Now, Mahamati, there are six causes: (1) possibility- 
cause, (2) dependence-cause, (3) objectivity-cause, (4) 
agency-cause, (5) manifesting-cause, and (6) indifference- 
cause.” The possibility-cause means, Mahamati, that when 
a cause to be becomes effective there is the rising of things 
inner and outer. The dependence-cause means, Mahamati, 
that when conditions to be, become effective there is the rising 
of the Skandha-seeds, ete., inner and outer. Further, the 
objectivity-cause means, Mahamati, that bound by the objec- 
tive world [the Vijfiana] keeps up its continuous activity. 

» Wei reads this without the negative particle, while T‘ang omits 
the whole sentence together with the foregoing, pratityasamutpddasam- 
jfiandm pratilabhante. This latter is also omitted in this translation as 
the translator regards its insertion here as a clerical error, which per- 
haps was also the idea of the Tang. 

* The Chinese Bi¢# (T‘ang), Hi## (Wei), or simply #¥ (Sung) 
points to apeksha rather than to upeksha. In this case, “mutual 
reference’ is better. 

14 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Again, Mahamati, the agency-cause means that like a 
sovereion king a cause invested with supreme authority 
asserts itself. Again, the manifesting-cause means that when 
the discriminating faculty rises, as the result it reveals in- 
dividual marks as a lamp does forms, ete. Lastly, the 
indifference-cause means that when there is a dissolution 
(84) the power of combination discontinues, and there rises 
a state of non-discrimination. 

These, Mahamati, are the outcome of discrimination 
earried on by the ignoraut and simple-minded, and there is 
no gradual nor simultaneous rising of existence. Why? 
Because, Mahamati, if there is a simultaneous rising of 
existenee, there would be no distinetion between cause and 
effect, and there would be nothing to characterise a cause 
as such. If a gradual rising is admitted, there is no 
substance that holds together individual signs, which makes 
gradual rising impossible. While a child is not yet born, 
Mahamati, the term father has no significance. The logician 
argues that there is that which is born and that which gives 
birth by the mutual functioning of such causal factors as 
cause, subsistence, continuity, acceleration, and others; and 
they conclude that there is a gradual rising of existence. 
But, Mahamati, this gradual rising does not obtain except by 
reason of their attachment to the notion of self-nature. When 
the [ideas of] body, property, and abode are cherished in 
what is nothing but the manifestation of Mind itself, the 
external world is perceived under the aspects of individuality 
and generality, which, however, are not realities; and there- 
fore, Mahamati, neither a gradual nor a simultaneous rising 
of things is possible. It is only when the Vijiiana evolves by 
reason of discrimination which discriminates the manifesta- 
tion of Mind itself [that existence is said to come into view]. 
For this reason, Mahamati, you must strive to get rid of 
notions of gradation and simultaneity in the combination 
of the causal activities. Thus it is said: 

1 

In this and what follows the translator has adopted the reading 
of T'ang. 

CHAPTER TWO 75 

140. Nothing whatever is born or ceases to exist by 
reason of causation; when causation is discriminated there 
is birth and cessation. 

(85) 141. It is not to keep off the idea of birth and 
disappearance which takes place in causation; it is to keep 
off the wrong imagination as to causation, which is cherished 
by the ignorant. 

142. The being and non-being of things subject to 
causation has no reality; the triple world owes its existence 
to the Mind put into confusion by reason of habit-energy. 

143. Not ever being in existence, what things are there 
that are born? [but] in causation nothing is lost; when 
effect-producing objects (samskrita) are regarded as like 
unto a barren woman’s child or a flower in the sky, one 
perceives that grasping (subject) and grasped (object) are 
an error and desists [from committing the same error]. 

144. There is nothing that is to be born, nor is there 
anything that has been born; even causation is not; it is 
because cf wordly usage that things are talked of as existing. 

XXXIT 

At that moment again Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattva said this to the Blessed One: Pray tell me, Blessed 
One, about the teaching known as the essence of discrimina- 
tion as regards words, whereby, Blessed One, I and other 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, comprehending and becoming well 
acquainted with the essence of discrimination as regards 
words, will be thoroughly informed of the signification of 
two things, expression and expressed, and, thereby im- 
mediately attaining supreme enlightenment, will explain the 
signification of these two things, expression and expressed, 
for the purification of all beings. 

Replied the Blessed One: Then, Mahamati, listen well 
and reflect well, (86) for I will tell you about it. 

Well done! said Mabamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
and listened to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said this to him: There are, Mahi- 
mati, four kinds of word-discrimination. They are: (1) 

76 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Words denoting individual marks, (2) dream-words, (3) 
words growing out of the attachment to erroneous specula- 
tions and discriminations, and (4) words growing out of the 
discrimination that knows no beginning. 

Now, Mahamati, the words denoting individual marks 
rise from discriminating forms and characteristic signs as real 
in themselves and becoming attached to them. The dream- 
words, Mahémati, rise from the unreal surroundings which 
reveal themselves [before the mind] when it recollects its 
previous experience. The words growing out of the attach- 
ment to erroneous speculations and discriminations, Maha- 
mati, rise from recollecting deeds once previously committed. 
The words growing out of the discrimination that has been 
functioning since beginningless time, Mahamati, rise from 
the habit-energy whose seeds have been growing out of the 
clinging to erroneous speculations and false imaginations 
since beginningless time. I say, Mahamati, these are the 
four features of word-discrimination, which is the answer to 
your question. 

XXXIII 

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattva requested of the Blessed One to speak on this subject : 
Pray tell me again, Blessed One, about the conditions 
whereby the word-discrimination manifests itself. Where, 
whence, how, and by whom do words indicating discrimina- 
tion take place among the people? 

Said the Blessed One: Mahamati, the word-discrimina- 
tion goes on taking place by the codrdination of the head, 
chest, nose, throat, palate, lips, tongue, and teeth. 

Said Mahamati; Again, Blessed One, (87) are words to 
be considered different (anyd@) or not-different (ananyd) from 
discrimination ? 

Replied the Blessed One: Mahamati, they are neither 
different nor not-different. Why? Because words rise, 
Mahamati, with discrimination as their cause. If, Maha- 
mati, words are different from discrimination, they cannot 
have it for cause. Then if they are not different, words 

CHAPTER TWO 77 

cannot express the sense, which they do. Therefore, words 
and discrimination are neither different nor not-different. 

Then Mahamati said: Again, Blessed One, are words 
themselves the highest reality? or is what is expressed in 
words the highest reality? 

The Blessed One replied: Mahamati, words are not the 
highest reality, nor is what is expressed in words the highest 
reality. Why? Because the highest reality is an exalted 
state of bliss, and as it cannot be entered into by mere state- 
ments regarding it, words are not the highest reality. Maha- 
mati, the highest reality is to be attained by the inner 
realisation of noble wisdom; it is not a state of word-discri- 
mination; therefore, discrimination does not express the 
highest reality. And then, Mahamati, words are subject to 
birth and destruction ; they are unsteady, mutually condition- 
ing, and are produced by the law of causation. And again, 
Mahamati, what is mutually conditioning and produced by 
the law of causation cannot express the highest reality, 
because the indications [pointing to the distinction between] 
self and not-self are non-existent. Mahamati, words are 
these indications and do not express [the highest reality]. 

(88) Further, Mahamati, word-discrimination cannot 
express the highest reality, for external objects with their 
multitudinous individual marks are non-existent, and only 
appear before us as something revealed out of Mind itself. 
Therefore, Mahimati, you must try to keep yourself away 
from the various forms of word-discrimination. 

XXXIV 

Thus it is said: 

145. In all things there is no self-nature, words too are 
devoid of reality; as the ignorant understand not what is 
meant by emptiness, yes, by emptiness, they wander about. 

146. In all things there is no self-nature, they are mere 
words of people; that which is discriminated has no reality; 
[even] Nirvana is like a dream; nothing is seen to be in 
transmigration, nor does anything ever enter into Nirvana. 

147. As a king or a wealthy householder, giving his 

1 

78 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

children various clay-made animals, pleases them and makes 
them play [with the toys], but later gives them real ones; 

148. So, I, making use of various forms and images of 
things, instruet my sons; but the limit of reality (bhitakott) 
ean [only] be realised within oneself. 

XXXV 

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
again (89) said this to the Blessed One: Pray tell me, 
Blessed One, about the attainment of self-realisation by noble 
wisdom, which does not belong to the path and the usage of 
the philosophers; which is devoid of [all such predicates as] 
being and non-being, oneness and otherness, bothness and 
not-bothness, existence and non-existence, eternity and non- 
eternity ; which has nothing to do with the false imagination, 
nor with individuality and generality ; which manifests itself 
as the truth of highest reality ; which, going up continuously 
by degrees the stages of purification, enters upon the stage 
of Tathagatahood ; which, because of the original vows un- 
attended by any striving, will perform its works in infinite 
worlds like a gem reflecting a variety of colours; and which 
is manifested [when one perceives how] signs of individua- 
tion rise in all things as one realises the course and realm 
of what is seen of Mind itself, and thereby I and other 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are enabled to survey things from 
the point of view which is not hampered by marks of in- 
dividuality and generality nor by anything of the false 
imagination, and may quickly attain supreme enlightenment 
and enable all beings to achieve the perfection of all their 
virtues. 

Replied the Blessed One: Well done, well done, Maha- 
mati! and again, well done, indeed, Mahamati! Because 
of your compassion for the world, for the benefit of many 
people, for the happiness of many people, for the welfare, 
benefit, happmess of many people, both of celestial beings 
and humankind, Mahamati, you present yourself before me 
and make this request. Therefore, Mahamati, listen well 
and truly, and reflect, for I will tell you. 

CHAPTER TWO 79 

Assuredly, said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, 
and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

(90) The Blessed One said this to him: Mahamati, 
since the ignorant and the simple-minded, not knowing that 
the world is what is seen of Mind itself, cling to the 
multitudinousness of external objects, cling to the notions 
of being and non-being, oneness and otherness, bothness and 
not-bothness, existence and non-existence, eternity and non- 
eternity, as being characterised by self-nature which rises 
from discrimination based on habit-energy, they are addicted 
to false imaginings. Mahamati, it is like a mirage in which 
the springs are seen as if they were real. They are imagined 
so by the animals who, thirsty from the heat of the season, 
would run after them. Not knowing that the springs are 
their own mental hallucinations, the animals do not realise 
that there are no such springs. In the same way, Mahamati, 
the ignorant and simple-minded with their minds impressed 
by various erroneous speculations and discriminations since 
beginningless time; with their minds burning with the fire of 
greed, anger, and folly; delighted in a world of multi- 
tudinous forms; with their thoughts saturated with the ideas 
of birth, destruction, and subsistence ; not understanding well 
what is meant by existent and non-existent, by inner and 
outer; the ignorant and simple-minded fall into the way of 
grasping at oneness and otherness, being and non-being. 
Mahamati, it is like the city of the Gandharvas which the 
unwitted take for a real city, though it is not so in fact. 
This city appears in essence owing to their attachment to the 
memory of a city preserved in seed from beginningless time. 
This city is thus neither existent nor non-existent. In the 
same way, Mahamati, clinging to the memory (vdsand) 
of erroneous speculations and doctrines since beginningless 
time, they hold fast to ideas such as oneness and otherness, 
being and non-being, and their thoughts are not at all clear 
about what is seen of Mind-only. (91) Mahamati, it is like 
a man, who, dreaming in his sleep of a country variously 
filled with women, men, elephants, horses, cars, pedestrians, 
villages, towns, hamlets, cows, buffalos, mansions, woods, 

80 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

mountains, rivers, and lakes enters into its inner appart- 
ments and is awakened. While awakened thus, he recollects 
the city and its inner apartments. What do you think, Maha- 
mati? Is this person to be regarded as wise, who is recol- 
lecting the various unrealities he has seen in his dream? 

Said Mahamati: Indeed, he is not, Blessed One. 

The Blessed One continued: In the same way the 
ignorant and simple-minded who are bitten by erroneous 
views and are inclined toward the philosophers, do not 
recognise that things seen of the Mind itself are like a dream, 
and are held fast by the notions of oneness and otherness, 
of being and non-being. Mahamati, it is like the painter’s 
canvas on which there is no depression nor elevation as 
imagined by the ignorant. In the same way, Mahamati, 
there may be in the future some people brought up in the 
habit-energy, mentality, and imagination based on the 
philosophers’ erroneous views; elinging to the ideas of one- 
ness and otherness, of bothness and not-bothness, they may 
bring themselves and others to ruin; they may declare those 
people nihilists who hold the doctrine of no-birth apart from 
the alternatives of being and non-being. They [argue 
against] cause and effect, they are followers of the wicked 
views whereby they uproot meritorious causes of unstained 
purity. They are to be kept far away by those whose desires 
are for things excellent. They are those whose thoughts are 
entangled in the errors of self, other, and both, (92) in the 
errors of imagining being and non-being, assertion and 
refutation, and hell will be their final refuge. Mahamati, 
it is like the dim-eyed ones who, seeing a hair-net, would ex- 
claim to one another, saying: ‘‘It is wonderful! it is wonder- 
ful! Look, O honourable sirs!’’ And the said hair-net has 
never been brought into existence. It is in fact neither an 
entity nor a non-entity, because it is seen and not seen. In 
the same manner, Mahamati, those whose minds are addicted 
to discrimination of the erroneous views as cherished by the 
philosophers, and who are also given up to the realistic ideas 
of being and non-being, oneness and otherness, bothness and 
not-bothness, will contradict the good Dharma, ending in the 

CHAPTER TWO 81 

destruction of themselves and others). Mahamati, it is like 
a firebrand-wheel which is no real wheel but which is 
imagined to be of such character by the ignorant, but not by 
the wise. In the same manner, Mahamati, those whose minds 
have fallen into the erroneous views of the philosophers will 
falsely imagine in the rise of all beings oneness and other- 
ness, bothness and not-bothness. 

Mahamati, it is like those water-bubbles in a rainfall 
which have the appearance of crystal gems, and the ignorant 
taking them for real crystal gems run after them. Maha- 
mati, they are no more than water-bubbles, they are not gems, 
nor are they not-gems, because of their being so compre- 
hended [by one party] and being not so comprehended [by 
another]. In the same manner, Mahamati, those whose 
minds are impressed by the habit-energy of the philosophical 
views and discriminations will regard things born as non- 
existent and those destroyed by causation as existent. 

1Murther, Mahamati, by setting up the three forms of 
measure and the [five] members of a syllogism, (93) [the 
philosophers] make the discrimination that there is a reality 
existing by itself, which is attained by the realisation of 
noble wisdom, and devoid of the two Svabhavas. [This dis- 
crimination however is] not right. [The Buddhist doctrine 
is this:} Mahamati, when a [psychological] revulsion takes 
place in the Yogins [by the transcendence of] the Citta, 
Manas, and Vijiiana, they cast off the [dualistic] discrimina- 
tion of grasped and grasping in what is seen of Mind itself, 
and entering the Tathagata-stage attain the realisation of 
noble wisdom; and in this there is no thought of existence 
and non-existence. Again, Mahamati, if there is the grasp- 
ing of existence and non-existence in the realm attained by 
the Yogins, there will be in them the grasping of an ego, a 
nourisher, a supreme soul, or a person. Again, Mahamati, 
the teaching pointing to self-nature, individuality and 
generality of things, is that of the Transformation Buddha 
and not that of the Dharmata Buddha. Again, Mahamati, 

1 

This whole paragraph must be independently treated. 

82 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

such teaching is meant for the ignorant, being in conformity 
with their mentality, their way of thinking and viewing 
things; any establishment that favours the way of self- 
nature, fails to reveal the truth of self-realisation to be 
attained by noble wisdom and the blissful abode of the 
Samadhi. 

Mahamati, it is like the trees reflected in water; they 
are reflections and yet are not-reflections, the trees are [real] 
figures, and yet no-figures. In the same manner, Mahamati, 
those who are impressed by the habit-energy of the philos- 
ophical views carry on their discrimination regarding oneness 
and otherness, bothness and not-bothness, being and non- 
being, for their minds are not enlightened as regards what is 
seen of Mind-only. 

Mahamati, it is like a mirror reflecting all colours and 
images (94) as afforded by the conditions and without dis- 
crimination; and they are neither images nor not-images, 
because they are seen as images and also as not-images. And, 
Mahamati, they are discriminated forms of what is seen of 
Mind itself, which are known to the ignorant as images. In 
the same manner, Mahamati, oneness and otherness, bothness 
and not-bothness, are reflected images of Self-Mind while 
they appear as if real. 

Mahamati, it is like an echo giving the sound of a human 
voice, of a river, or of the wind; it is neither existent nor 
non-existent, because it is heard as a voice and yet as not a 
voice. In the same way, Mahamati, the notions of being and 
non-being, oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness 
are the discriminations of Self-Mind and habit-energy. 

Mahamati, it is like a mirage which in conjunction with 
the sun appears with its flowing waves on the earth where 
there are no grass, shrubs, vines, and trees. They are 
neither existent nor non-existent, according to the desire for 
them or its absence. In the same way, Mahamati, the dis- 
criminating Vijfiana of the ignorant which is impressed with 
the habit-energy of false imaginations and speculations since 
beginningless time, is stirred like a mirage even in the midst 

CHAPTER TWO 83 

of reality revealed by means of noble wisdom, by the waves 
of birth, subsistence, and destruction, of oneness and other- 
ness, bothness and not-bothness, being and non-being. 

Mahamati, it is like Pisaca who by means of his spell 
makes a corpse or a wooden image throb with life though 
it has no power of its own; but here the ignorant cling to the 
non-existent imagining them to have the power of movement. 
In the same way, Mahamati, (95) the ignorant and simple- 
minded committing themselves to the erroneous philosophical 
views are thoroughly devoted to the ideas of oneness and 
otherness, but their assertion is not at all well grounded. For 
this reason, Mahamati, in order to attain the noble reality 
attainable within yourself, you should cast off the discrimina- 
tions leading to the notions of birth, abiding, and destruc- 
tion, of oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness, 
being and non-being. 

Therefore, it is said: 

149. The Skandhas, of which the Vijnana is the fifth, 
resemble the reflections of the trees in water; they are to be 
regarded as Maya and a dream, they are so by thought- 
construction ; make no discriminations! 

150. This triple world resembles a hair-net, or water 
in a mirage which is agitated; it is like a dream, Maya; and 
by thus regarding it one is emancipated. 

151. Like a mirage in the spring-time, the mind is 
found bewildered; animals imagine water but there is no 
reality to it. 

152. Thus the Vijiiana-seed is evolved and the world 
comes into view; the ignorant imagine it is born, just lke 
the dim-eyed ones perceive things in the darkness. 

153. Since beginningless time, the ignorant are found 
transmigrating through the paths, enwrapped in their attach- 
ment to existence; as a wedge is induced by another wedge, 
they are led to the abandonment [of their wrappage]. 

154. By regarding the world as always like a magically- 
moving corpse, or a machine, or like a dream, or a lightning, 
or a cloud; (96) the triple continuation is torn asunder and 
one is emancipated. 

84 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

155. There is here nothing of thought-construction, it 
is like an image in the air; when they thus understand all 
there is nothing to know. 

156. Here is nothing but thought-construction and 
name. You seek in vain for individual signs; the Skandhas 
are like a hair-net wherein discrimination goes on. 

157. A world of multitudes! is a hair-net, a vision, a 
dream, and the city of the Gandharvas; it is [a wheel made 
by] a firebrand, a mirage; it is a non-entity, only an appear- 
ance to people. 

158. Eternity and non-eternity; oneness, too, bothness 
and not-bothness as well: these are discriminated by the 
ignorant who are confused in mind and bound up by errors 
since beginningless time. 

159. In a mirror, in water, in an eye, in a vessel, and 
on a gem, images are seen; but in them there are no images 
[i.e. realities] anywhere to take hold of. 

160. Like a mirage in the air, so is a variety of things 
mere appearance; they are seen in diversity of forms, but are 
like a child in a barren woman’s dream. 

XXXVI 

Further, Mahamati, the religious teaching of the Tatha- 
gatas is free from the four statements. That is, it is devoid of 
oneness and otherness, of bothness and not-bothness, is free 
from being and non-being, assertion and refutation; the 
religious teaching of the Tathagatas is headed by the [four 
noble] truths, the {twelvefold] chain of origination, and 
{the eightfold noble] path leading to emancipation. (97) 
The religious teaching of the Tathagatas, Mahamati, is not 
fastened to these ideas: Prakriti, Isvara, causelessness, spon- 
taneity, atoms, time and self-nature. Again, Mahamati, [the 
Tathagatas, leading beings] successively forwards like the 
leader of a caravan, in order to purify them from the two 
hindrances of passion and knowledge, will establish them in 
the one hundred and eight statements of imagelessness and 
also in the characteristic distinctions of the vehicles, of the 

? Read cittram, instead of cittam. 

CHAPTER TWO 85 

stages [of Bodhisattvahood], and of the constituents [of 
enlightenment]. 

XXXVII 

Further, Mahamati, there are four kinds of Dhydanas. 
What are the four? They are: (1) The Dhyana practised 
by the ignorant, (2) the Dhyana devoted to the examination 
of meaning, (3) the Dhyana with Tathata (suchness) for its 
object, and (4) the Dhyana of the Tathagatas. 

What is meant by the Dhyana practised by the ignorant? 
It is the one resorted to by the Yogins exercising themselves 
in the discipline of the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, who 
perceiving that there is no ego-substance, that things are 
characterised with individuality and generality, that the 
body is a shadow and a skeleton which is transient, full of 
suffering and is impure, persistently cling to these notions 
which are regarded as just so and not otherwise, and who 
starting from them successively advance until they reach the 
cessation where there are no thoughts. This is called the 
Dhyana practised by the ignorant. 

Mahadmati, what then is the Dhyana devoted to the 
examination of meaning? It is the one [practised by those 
who,] having gone beyond the egolessness of things, indivi- 
duality and generality, the untenability of such ideas as self, 
other, and both, which are held by the philosophers, proceed 
to examine and follow up the meaning of the [various] 
aspects of the egolessness of things and the stages of Bodhi- 
sattvahood. This is the Dhyana devoted to the examination 
of meaning. 

What, Mahamati, is the Dhyana with Tathata for its 
object? When [the Yogins recognise that] the discrimina- 
tion of the two forms of egolessness is mere imagination, 
and that where he establishes himself in the reality of such- 
ness (yathabhita) there is no rising of discrimination, I call 
it the Dhyana with Tathata for its object. 

(98) What, Mahamati, is the Dhyana of the Tathagata? 
When [the Yogin], entering upon the stage of Tathagata- 
hood and abiding in the triple bliss which characterises self- 

86 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

realisation attained by noble wisdom, devotes himself for the 
sake of all beings to the [accomplishment of] incomprehen- 
sible works, I call it the Dhyana of the Tathagatas. There- 
fore, it is said: 

161. There are the Dhyana for the examination of 
meaning, the Dhyana practised by the ignorant; the Dhyana 
with Tathata for its object, and the pure Dhyana of the 
Tathagata. 

162. The Yogin, while in his exercise, sees the form of 
the sun or the moon, or something looking lke a lotus, or 
the underworld, or various forms like sky, fire, ete. 

163. All these appearances lead him to the way of the 
philosophers; they throw him down into the state of Sravaka- 
hood, into the realm of the Pratyekabuddhas. 

164. When all these are tossed aside and there is a 
state of imagelessness, then a condition in conformity with 
Tathata presents itself; and the Buddhas will come together 
from all their countries and with their shining hands will 
stroke the head of this benefactor. 

XXXVIII 

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
again said this to the Blessed One: Thou speakest of Nir- 
vana, Blessed One. What is meant by this term Nirvana? 

Replied the Blessed One: When the self-nature and the 
habit-energy of all the Vijianas, including the Alaya, Manas, 
and Manovijiana, from which issues the habit-energy of 
wrong speculations—when all these go through a revulsion, 
I and all the Buddhas declare that there is Nirvana, and the 
way and the self-nature of this Nirvana is emptiness, which 
is the state of reality. 

(99) Further, Mahamati, Nirvana is the realm of self- 
realisation attained by noble wisdom, which is free from the 
discrimination of eternality and annihilation, existence and 
non-existence. How is it not eternality? Because it has 
cast off the discrimination of individuality and generality, it 
is not eternality. How about its not being annihilation? It 
is because all the wise men of the past, present, and future 

CHAPTER TWO 87 

have attained realisation. Therefore, it is not annihilation. 

Again, Mahamati, the great Parinirvana is neither 
destruction nor death. Mahamati, if the great Parinirvana 
is death, then it will be a birth and continuation. If it is 
destruction, then it will assume the character of an effect- 
producing deed. For this reason, Mahamati, the great Pari- 
nirvana is neither destruction nor death. Neither has it 
anything to do with vanishing ;' it is the goal of the Yogins. 
Again, Mahamati the great Parinirvana is neither abandon- 
ment nor attainment, neither is it of one meaning nor of no- 
meaning; this is said to be Nirvana. 

Further, Mahamati, Nirvana conceived by the Sravakas 
and Pratyekabuddhas consists in recognising individuality 
and generality, in escaping social intercourse, in not having 
a perverted view of the world, and not raising discrimina- 
tion. This is their notion of Nirvana. 

XXXIX 

Further, Mahamati, there are two kinds of characteristic 
signs of self-nature. (100) What are these two kinds? They 
are the attachment to words as having self-nature, and the 
attachment to objects as having self-nature. The attachment 
to words as having self-nature, Mahamati, takes place 
owing to one’s clinging to the habit-energy of words and 
false imaginings since beginningless time. And the attach- 
ment to objects as having self-nature, Mahamati, takes place 
from not knowing that the external world is no more than 
Self-Mind. 

XL 

Further, Mahamati, there are two kinds of the sustain- 
ing power which issues from the Tathagatas who are Arhats 
and Fully-Enlightened Ones; and sustained by this power 
{the Bodhisattvas] would prostrate themselves at their feet 
and ask them questions. What is this twofold power that 
sustains the Bodhisattvas? The one is the power by which 
they are sustained to go through the Samadhis and Sama- 

* Maranam repeated here in the text is a mistake. 

88 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

pattis; while the other is the power whereby the Buddhas 
manifest themselves in person before the Bodhisattvas and 
baptise them with their own hands. Then, Mahamati, sus- 
tained by the power of the Buddkas, the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattvas at their first stage will attain the Bodhisattva- 
Samadhi, known as the Light of Mahayana, which belongs to 
the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas. They will immediately see 
the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones appearing 
before them personally, who come from all the different abodes 
in the ten quarters of the world and who now facing the 
Bodhisattvas will impart to them their sustaining power dis- 
played with the body, mouth, and words. Mahamati, as is 
the ease with Vajragarbha the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, and 
with other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas who are in possession of 
similar character and (101) virtue, so, Mahamati, with the 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas at the first stage, they will attain 
the Tathagatas’ power sustaining them in their Samadhis 
and Samapattis. By virtue of their stock of merit ac- 
cumulated for a hundred thousand kalpas, they will, succes- 
sively going up the stages and getting thoroughly acquainted 
with what they should do and should not do, finally reach the 
stage of Bodhisattvahood called Dharmamegha. Here the 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva finds himself seated on a throne in 
the Lotus Palace, and surrounded by the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattvas of a similar class; a tiara decorated and ornamented 
with all kinds of precious stones is on his head, and his body? 
shines brilliantly like the moon in the yellowish gold colour 
of the Campaka flower. The Buddhas now come from 
their worlds in the ten quarters, and with their lotus-like 
hands, sprinkle the forehead of the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
who is seated on the throne in the Lotus Palace; the Buddhas 
thus give him a baptism personally by hand as when a great 
king invested with supreme authority [baptises his crown- 
prince]. This Bodhisattva and these Bodhisattvas are said 
to be sustained by the Buddhas’ power, being thus baptised 
by [their] hands. Mahamati, this is the twofold sustaining 
power imparted to the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, who, sus- 

1 According to the Chinese translations. 

CHAPTER TWO 89 

tained by this twofold sustaining power, personally come into 
the presence of all the Buddhas. In no other way are the 
Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones to be inter- 
viewed. 

Further, Mahamati, (102) whatever Samadhis, psychic 
faculties, and teachings are exhibited by the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas, they are sustained by the twofold sustaining 
power of all the Buddhas. If, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas show their eloquence without the Buddhas’ sus- 
taining power, the ignorant and simple-minded will also show 
their eloquence. [But the latter do not.] Why? Because 
of the sustaining power [on the one hand] and its absence 
{on the other]. Where the Tathagatas enter with their 
sustaining power there will be music not only in various 
musical instruments and vessels but also even in grass, 
shrubs, trees, and mountains, Mahaémati, yes, in towns indeed, 
palaces, houses, and royal abodes. How much more those 
endowed with sentiency! The mute, blind, and deaf will be 
eured of their deficiencies, Mahamati, and will enjoy their 
emancipation. Such, Mahamati, is the great extraordinary 
virtue of the sustaining power imparted by the Tathagatas. 

Further, Mahamati said: Why is it, Blessed One, that 
when the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are established in the 
Samadhis and Samapattis, and when they are baptised at the 
most exalted stage, the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-En- 
lightened Ones, bestow their sustaining power on them? 

Replied the Blessed One: It is in order to make them 
avoid the evil ones, karma, and passions, to keep them away 
from the Dhyana and stage of the Sravakahood, to have them 
realise the stage of Tathagatahood, and to make them grow 
in the truth and experience already attained. For this 
reason, Mahamati, the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-En- 
lightened Ones sustain with their power the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas. If they were not thus sustained, Mahamati, 
(103) they would fall into the way of thinking and feeling 
as cherished by the wrong philosophers, Sravakas, or evil 
ones, and would not attain the highest enlightenment. For 
this reason, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are upheld by the 

90 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones. Thus it is 
said: 

165. The sustaining power is purified by the Buddhas’ 
vows; in the baptism, Samadhis, ete., from the first to the 
tenth [stage], [the Bodhisattvas are in the embrace of the 
Buddhas]. 

XLI 

At that time again Mahamati the Bodhisattva said thus 
to the Blessed One: The chain of origination as told by the 
Blessed One depends on a cause producing an effect, and that 
it is not a theory established on the principle of a self- 
originating substance. The philosophers also proclaim a 
causal origination when they say that all things rise condi- 
tioned by a supreme spirit, ISvara, a personal soul, time, or 
atom. How is it that the rise of all things is explained by 
the Blessed One in another terminology bearing on causation 
but in its meaning not different? Blessed One, the philos- 
ophers explain birth from being and non-being, while, accord- 
ing to the Blessed One, all things coming into existence from 
nothingness pass away by causation,! that is to say, the 
Blessed One has Ignorance from which there rises Mental 
Conformation until we reach Old Age and Death. This 
teaching as explained by the Blessed One is the doctrine of 
no-causation and not that of causation. According to the 
Blessed One,” ‘‘that being so, this is’’—if this is simul- 
taneous conditionality and not successive mutuality, it is not 
right. There, Blessed One, the philosophers, (104) teaching 
excels, and not thine. Why? The cause assumed by the 
philosophers is not dependent upon the chain of origination 
and produces effects. But, Blessed One, thy cause has refer- 
ence to its effect and the effect to its cause, and thus there 
is an interconnection of causal links, and from this mutuality 
follows the fault of non-finality. When people talk about, 
‘That being so, this is,’’ there is a state of causelessness. 

? This is according to the Chinese translations; in the Sanskrit 
text there is apparently an omission. 

2 

“~ The T‘ang reading seems to give the best sense. 

CHAPTER TWO 91 

Replied the Blessed One: Not so, Mahamati, mine is 
not a causeless theory of causation which results in an [end- 
less] interconnection of causes and conditions. I speak of 
“That being so, this is’’ because of my seeing into the nature 
of the external world which is nothing but Self-Mind and 
because of its unreality of grasped (object) and grasping 
(subject). However, Mahamati, when people clinging to the 
notion of grasped and grasping fail to understand the world 
as something seen of Mind itself; and, Mahamati, by them 
the fault is committed as they recognise the external world 
as real with its beings and non-beings, but not by my theory 
of causation. 

XLIT 

Further, Mahamati said: Blessed One, is it not because 
of the reality of words that all things are? If not for words, 
Blessed One, there would be no rising of things. Hence, 
Blessed One, the existence of all things is by reason of the 
reality of words. 

Said the Blessed One: Even when there are no [cor- 
responding] objects there are words, Mahamati; for instance, 
the hare’s horns, the tortoise’s hair, a barren woman’s child, 
ete. (105)—they are not at all visible in the world but the 
words are; Mahamati, they are neither entities nor non- 
entities but expressed in words. If, Mahamati, you say that 
because of the reality of words the objects are, this talk lacks 
in sense. Words are not known in all the Buddha-lands; 
words, Mahamati, are an artificial creation. In some 
Buddha-lands ideas are indicated by looking steadily, in 
others by gestures, in still others by a frown, by the move- 
ment of the eyes, by laughing, by yawning, or by the clearing 
of the throat, or by recollection, or by trembling. Mahamati, 
for instance, in the worlds of the Steady-Looking and in those 
of Exquisite Odours, and in the Buddha-land of Samanta- 
bhadra the Tathagata, Arhat, Fully-Enlightened One, the 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas by steadily looking without a wink 
attain the recognition of all things as unborn and also 
various most excellent Samadhis. For this reason, Maha- 

92 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

mati, the validity of all things has nothing to do with the 
reality of words. It is observed, Mahamati, even in this 
world that in the kingdom of such special beings as ants, 
bees, ete., they carry on their work without words. Thus 
it is said: 

166. As space, the hare’s horns, and a barren woman’s 
child are non-entities except as expressed in words, so is this 
existence imagined. 

167. When causes and conditions are in combination 
the ignorant imagine the birth [of this world] ; (106) as they 
fail to understand this reason, they wander about in the 
triple world which is their dwelling. 

XLII 

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
again said this to the Blessed One: Blessed One, where 
dost thou pronounce sound to be eternal? 

The Blessed One replied: According to error, Maha- 
mati; since even to the wise there is this error, only that 
they are free from perversion. Mahamati, it is like the 
unwitted in the world who conceive a perverted idea regard- 
ing a mirage, a firebrand wheel, a hair-net, the city of the 
Gandharvas, Maya, a dream, a reflected image, and an 
Aksha-purusha, but with the knowing it is not so, though it 
does not mean that those illusions do not appear to them. 
When, Mahamati, there is this error, diversities of forms are 
seen, though to this error the idea of impermanence is 
inapplicable. Why? Because it cannot be characterised 
with the ideas of being and non-being. Again, Mahamati, 
how are the ideas of being and non-being inapplicable to 
this error? Because all the ignorant take in varieties of 
situations, like the waves of the ocean and the waters of the 
Ganges which are not seen by the Pretas, but seen [by others]. 
For this reason, Mahamati, the error-existence [or this world 
of illusion] is not, but as this water is manifest to other 
people it is not a non-existence either. Thus to the wise, 
the error is neither a perversion nor a non-perversion. And 
for this reason, Mahamati, the error in itself is characterised 

CHAPTER TWO 93 

with permanency, having the nature of non-distinction [as 
far as its own appearance is concerned]. Mahamati, being 
discriminated as regards its diversified individual signs, 
(107) the error is perceived as differentiated. Thus the 
error, [as far as its own nature is concerned J, is characterised 
with permanency. Again, Mahamati, how is the error to be 
considered reality? Mahamati, for this reason that as 
regards this error the wise cherish neither a perverted know- 
ledge nor an unperverted knowledge. It is [such as it is 
and] not otherwise. In case, Mahamati, the wise should 
cherish any thought whatever in this error, it goes contrary 
to the reality attainable by noble wisdom. If there is any- 
thing at all here it is the prattling of the ignorant, it is not 
the talk of the wise. 

Again, when the error is discriminated according to a 
perverted and an unperverted view, it gives rise to two 
classes of family, one of which is the family of the wise, 
and the other the family of the ignorant and simple-minded. 
Now, Mahamati, the family of the wise is divisible into three 
kinds, that is, the Sravakas, the Pratyekabuddhas, and the 
Buddhas. Mahamati, how does the Sravakaydna family rise 
from the discrimination whereby the ignorant conceive the 
error? Mahamati, there is the rise of the Sravakayana 
family where the attachment to the notions of individuality 
and generality is kept up. This is the way, Mahamati, this 
error gives rise to the Sravakayana family. Mahamati, how 
does the Pratyekabuddhayana family rise as the error is dis- 
criminated? Mahamati, when in this error the attachment 
to the notions of individuality and generality (108) leads one 
to a retirement from social life, there rises the Pratye- 
buddhayana family. Mahamati, how is there the rise of the 
Buddhayana family when this error is discriminated by the 
intelligent? Mahamati, when the world is understood to be 
nothing but Mind itself, the existence and non-existence of 
external objects ceases to be discriminated, and there is the 
rise of the Buddhayana family. Mahamati, this is the 
family, that is, what is meant by the family. 

Again, Mahamati, when the error is discriminated by 

94 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

the ignorant, there is the manifestation of varieties of objects 
which ealls forth the assertion [on their part] that this is 
so and not otherwise; whence rises the family of the trans- 
migration vehicle. For this reason, Mahamati, the error is 
discriminated by the ignorant as characterised by multi- 
tudinousness, and this error is neither a reality nor an un- 
reality. Thus, Mahamati, this error being discriminated by 
the wise turns into Tathata (suchness) with them, by virtue 
of a revulsion which takes place in them concerning the 
Citta, Manas, Manovijnana, false reasoning, habit-energy, 
the [three] Svabhavas, and the [five] Dharmas. Thus, 
Mahamati, there is this statement that Tathata is Mind eman- 
eipated. Mahamati, the meaning of this statement is here 
thus clearly expressed by me, that is, by the discarding of 
discrimination is meant the abandonment of all discrimina- 
tions. So much for this statement. 

Mahamati said, Blessed One, is the error an entity or 
not? 

The Blessed One replied: It is like Mayda, Mahamati, 
the error has no character in it making for attachment; if, 
Mahamati, the error had any character in it making for 
attachment, (109) no liberation would be possible from the 
attachment to existence, the chain of origination would be 
understood in the sense of creation as held by the philos- 
ophers. 

Mahamati said: Blessed One, if the error is like Maya, 
it will thereby be the cause of another error. 

The Blessed One said: No, Mahamati, Maya cannot be 
the cause of the error, because of its incapability of produ- 
cing evils and faults; and thus, Mahamati, Maya does not give 
rise to evil thoughts and faults. Again, Mahamati, Maya 
has no discrimination of itself; it rises when invoked by the 
magical charm of a certain person. It has in itself no habit- 
energy of evil thoughts and faults that, issuing from self- 
discrimination, affect it. [Therefore,] there are no faults in 
it. This is only due to the confused view fondly cherished 
by the ignorant regarding Mind, and the wise have nothing 
to do with it. So it is said: 

CHAPTER TWO 95 

168. The wise do not see [the(?)] error, nor is there 
any truth in its midst; if truth is in its midst, [the(?)] error 
would be truth. 

169. If there is the rising of individual forms (nimitta) 
apart from all error, this will indeed be error, the defiled 1s 
like darkness.! 

XLIV 

Further, Mahamati, Maya is not an unreality, because 
it has the appearance of reality; and all things have the 
nature of Maya. 

Said Mahamati: Is it, Blessed One, that all things are 
like Maya because Maya is something imagined and clung 
to as having multitudinousness of individual forms? (110) 
Or is it due to the incorrect imagining of individual forms? 
If all things have the likeness of Maya because Maya is 
something imagined and clung to as having multitudinous- 
ness of individual forms, then see, Blessed One, things are 
not like Maya. Why? Because forms are seen in the multi- 
tudinousness of individual signs not without due causes. If 
they ever appear without due causes, assuming the multi- 
tudinousness of individual signs and shapes, [then] they 
would be like Maya. For this reason, Blessed One, that 
things are like Maya is not because they [i-e. all things and 
Maya] are both alike in being imagined and clung to as 
having multitudinousness of individual signs. 

Said the Blessed One: It is not, Mahamati, that all 
things are Maya because they are both alike in being 
imagined and clung to as having multitudinousness of in- 
dividual signs, but that all things are like Maya because they 
are unreal and like a lightning-flash which is seen as quickly 
disappearing. Mahadmati, a lightning appears and dis- 
appears in quick succession as is manifest to the ignorant; 
in the same way, Mahamati, all things assume individuality 
and generality according to the discrimination [of the Mind] 
itself. When the state of imagelessness? is recognised, 

1 What is exactly meant by these two verses, especially the latter, 
is difficult to find in this connection. 
* According to T‘ang. 

96 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

objects which are imagined and clung to as in possession of 
individual signs cease to assert themselves. Thus it is said: 

170. Maya is not without reality, because it has some- 
thing resembling it; the reality of all things is talked of [in 
a similar manner]; they are unreal like a lightning-flash 
[appearing and disappearing] quickly, and therefore they 
are regarded as resembling Maya. 

XLV 

Further, Mahamati said: Now according to the Blessed 
One, all things are unborn (111) and resemble Maya; but, 
Blessed One, is there not the fault of contradiction between 
the previous statement and the later one? It is asserted by 
thee that that all things are unborn is due to their having 
the nature of Maya." 

The Blessed One replied: Mahamati, when all things 
are asserted to be unborn because of their having the nature 
of Maya, there is no fault of contradiction between my 
previous statement and my later one. Why? Because birth 
is no-birth, when it is recognised that the world that presents 
itself before us is no more than Mind itself; and as to all 
external objects of which we state that they are or are not, 
they are to be seen as non-existent and unborn; and thus, 
Mahamati, there is here no fault of contradiction between my 
previous statement and my later one. But, Mahamati, in 
erder to cast aside the philosophers’ thesis on birth by causa- 
tion, it is asserted that all things are like Maya and unborn. 
Mahamati, the philosophers who are the vathering of the 
deluded, foster the notion of deriving the birth of all things 
from that of being and non-being, and fail to regard it as 
caused by the attachment to the multidinousness which rises 
from the discrimination [of the Mind] itself. Mahamati, no 
fear rises in me [by: making this statement].? In this light, 
Mahamati, the term ‘‘unborn”’ is to be understood. 

+ This last sentence is missing in T‘ang, whereas Wei has: “It is 

said by the Tathagata that all things are unlike maya.” 

“ T‘ang, says: I say that all things are non-existent because of 
their being unborn. Wei: I say that all things are unborn when ex- 

CHAPTER TWO 97 

Again, Mahamati, the teaching that all things exist is 
given in order to admit transmigration, to check nihilism 
which says ‘‘Nothing is,’’ and to make my disciples accept 
the doctrine that asserts the reality of karma in various 
forms and birth in the various worlds, for by admitting the 
terminology of existence we admit transmigration. Maha- 
mati, the teaching that all things are characterised with the 
self-nature of Maya is meant to make the ignorant and 
simple-minded cast aside the idea of self-nature in anything; 
(112) as they cherish the thoughts characterised with error, 
as they do not clearly grasp the meaning of the world which 
is no more than the Mind itself, they imagine and cling to 
causation, work, birth, and individual signs; in order to 
check this I teach that all things are characterised in their 
self-nature with the nature of Maya and a dream. Attached 
to erroneous thoughts they contradict both themselves and 
others by not seeing all things as they really and truly are. 
Mahamati, to see all things as they really and truly are 
means to realise that there is nothing to be seen but Mind 
itself. So it is said: 

171. In the theory of no-birth, causation is not accepted 
[as is maintained by the ignorant]; where existence is ac- 
cepted transmigration prevails; seeing that [all things] are 
like Maya, ete., one does not discriminate individual signs. 

XLVI 

Further, Mahamati, we will explain the characteristics 
of name-body, the sentence-body, and the syllable-body; for 
when name-body, sentence-body, and syllable-body are well 
understood, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas conformable to the 
signification of a sentence and a syllable will quickly realise 
supreme enlightenment and thereby awaken all beings to it. 
Mahamati, by name-body is meant the object depending on 
which a name obtains, the body is this object; in another 
sense the body means substance (Sarira). Mahamati, this 
is the body of a name. By the body of a sentence is meant 

istent, unborn when non-existent. Sung: I do not [say] that the 
existent and the non-existent are born. 

98 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

what it signifies, the real object, determining its sense 
definitely. In another sense, it completes its reference. 
Mahamati, this is my teaching as regards the sentence-body. 
By the syllable-body (113) is meant that by which names 
and sentences are indicated ; it is a symbol, a sign; in another 
sense, it is something indicated. 

Again, Mahamati, the sentence(pada)-body means the 
completion of the meaning expressed in the sentence. Again, 
Mahamati, a name (or a letter, n@ma) means each separate 
letter distinguished as to its self-nature from a to ha. Again, 
Mahimati, a syllable (vyafjana) is short, long, or lengthy. 
Again, Mahamati, regarding the sentence(pada)-body the 
idea of it is obtained from the foot-prints left on the road by 
elephants, horses, people, deer, cattle, cows, buffalos, goats, 
rams, ete. Again, Mahamati, names(ndma) and syllables 
(vyanjana) belong to the four Skandhas which being form- 
less are indicated by names; thus are names made. By 
means of the differently characterised names there are syl- 
lables (vyafijana); thus are syllables made. This, Maha- 
mati, is the meaning of the body of a name(ndma), a sentence 
(pada), and a syllable(vyafijana). You should endeavour 
to have a thorough understanding of these terms. It is thus 
said: 

172. Because of the distinction between nama, pada, 
and vyafjana, the ignorant, the dull-witted, stick to them 
like the elephant in deep mud. 

XLVII 

(114) Further, Mahamati, in the time to come, those 
wrong-headed ones who are inclined to false speculations 
owing to their deficiency of knowledge concerning truth and 
cause may be asked by the wise, regarding that which is 
liberated from the dualistic conceptions of things such as 
oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness; and thus 
asked, they may answer, Saying, ‘‘It is no question; it is not 
at all properly put—that is to say, the question: Are form, 
etc. and transiency to be considered one or different?’’ 

In the same way, Nirvana and the Skandhas, indices 

CHAPTER TWO 99 

and indicated, qualities and qualified, realities and the ele- 
ments, seen and seeing, dust and atoms, knowledge and the 
Yogins—[are these to be considered one or different?] Such 
questions concerning the various aspects of existence lead 
successively from one thing to another without end, and 
those who are asked about these unexplainable questions 
would declare that they were put aside by the Blessed One 
as impossible to answer. However, these deluded people are 
unable to realise [the meaning of] what they heard [from 
the Buddha] because of their deficiency of knowledge. The 
Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones do not explain 
these things to all beings because of their wish to keep the 
latter from the fear-inspiring phrases. 

Mahamati, these inexplicables(vydhritdni) are not taken 
up for consideration by the Tathagatas in order to keep the 
philosophers away from their wrong views and theories. 
Mahamati, the philosophers may declare thus: what life is 
that is the body, or life is one thing, body is another. In 
these they make inexplicable statements. Mahamati, entirely 
bewildered by the idea of a creator, the philosophers make 
an inexplicable statement,.but that is not found in my teach- 
ing. In my teaching, Mahdmati, discrimination does not 
take place becanse I teach to stand above grasped and grasp- 
ing. (115) How could there be any setting aside here? 
But, Mahamati, to those who are addicted to grasped and 
grasping, as they do not have a thorough understanding of 
the world which is no more than what is seen of the Mind 
itself, there is something to be set aside [as inexplicable]. 
Mahamati, the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones 
teach the Dharma to all beings by means of the four forms 
of questioning and answering. As to the propositions that 
are set aside [as inexplicable], Mahamati, they are made use 
of by me on some other occasions for those whose senses are 
not yet fully matured; but for those of matured senses there 
is nothing to set aside. 

XLVIII 
Further, Mahamati, all things being devoid of doing and 

100 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

doer are unborn; as there is no doer, all things are therefore 
said to be unborn. Mahamati, all things are without self- 
nature. Why? Because, Mahamati, when they are examined 
by self-knowledge, there are no such signs obtainable which 
characterise them with individuality and generality; there- 
fore, all things are said to have no self-nature. Again, 
Mahamati, in all things there is no taking birth, no going-out. 
Why? Because, Mahamati, the signs of individuality and 
generality are seen as existing and yet they are non-existent ; 
they are seen as going out, and yet they do not go out. For 
this reason, Mahamati, all things are neither taking birth, 
nor are they going out. Again, Mahamati, all things are 
never annihilated. Why? For this reason that the individ- 
ual signs that make up the self-nature of things are non- 
existent, and all things are beyond reach. Therefore, all 
things are said never to be annihilated. Again, Mahamati, 
all things are not eternal. Why? (116) Because the rising 
of individual signs is characterised with non-eternality. 
Therefore, all things are said not to be eternal. Again, 
Mahamati, all things are eternal. Why? Because the rising 
of individual signs is no-rising and is non-existent; and all 
things are eternal because of their non-eternality. There- 
fore, Mahamati, all things are said to be eternal. 

Thus it is said: 

173. 4The four kinds of explanation are: direct state- 
ment, questioning, discernment, and setting aside; whereby 
the philosophers are kept away. 

174. The Sankha and the Vaiseshika philosophers teach 
birth from a being or from a non-being; all that are pro- 
claimed by them are the inexplicables. 

175. When the self-nature [of all things] is examined 
by knowledge, it is beyond reach; therefore, they are without 
self-nature and unattainable. 

XLIX 

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahdsattva 
again said this to the Blessed One: Pray tell me, Blessed 

1 

These three verses ought to follow § 47. 

CHAPTER TWO 101 

One, regarding the Stream-entered and their special attain- 
ment which characterises the state of the Stream-entered, 
whereby I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas thoroughly be- 
coming acquainted with the Stream-entered and their special 
attainment characterising the state of the Stream-entered, will 
proceed to know the means and conduct which characterises 
the state of the Once-returning, Never-returning, and Arhat- 
ship; and they will then explain the Dharma to all beings 
in this manner. Having understood the twofold form of 
egolessness and (117) having cleansed themselves of the two- 
fold hindrance, they will by degrees go through the stages 
of Bodhisattvahood each of which has its own characteristics, 
and attaining Tathagatahood whose spiritual realm is 
beyond conceivability, they will be like a multicoloured gem 
and will accomplish what is good for the lives of all beings, 
providing them with every teaching, condition, deportment, 
body, and enjoyment. 

Replied the Blessed One: Listen well Mahamati, and 
take well to heart; I will tell you. 

Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva answering him 
said: Very well, Blessed One. 

The Blessed One then said this: Mahamati, in the fruit 
attained by the Sravakas, three kinds are distinguishable. 
What are the three? They are graded, Mahamati, low, 
middle, and the highest. The low ones will be reborn seven 
times when their existence will come to an end; the middling 
will attain Nirvana in three or five births; the highest will 
attain Nirvana in this birth. Mahamati, for these three 
classes [of the Stream-entered] there are three kinds of 
knots: weak, middling, and strong. What are these three 
knots, Mahamati? They are: (1) the view of an individual 
personality, (2) doubt, and (3) the holding-on to moral 
practices. Mahamati, when all these three knots are in suc- 
cession promoted to the higher stage there will be the attain- 
ment of Arhatship. 

Mahamati, there are two kinds of the view of an individ- 
ual personality ; that is, (1) the inborn one and (2) the one 
due to the false imagination; it is like [the relation between] 

102 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

the relativity view and the false imagination [of the three] 
Svabhavas. (118) For instance, Mahamati, depending on 
the relativity view of things there arise varieties of attach- 
ments to the false imagination. But this [existence] is 
neither a being, nor a non-being, nor a being-and-non-being ; 
it is not a reality because of the false imagination, and, 
being discriminated by the ignorant, assumes varieties of 
individual signs to which they are strongly attached just as 
the deer does to a mirage. Mahamati, this is the view of an 
individual personality falsely imagined by the Stream- 
entered, which has been accumulated for a long time by 
their ignorance and attachment. This is destroyed when 
the egolessness of a person is attained by which the elinging 
ceases. 

Mahamati, the inborn view of an individual personality 
as held by the Stream-entered [is destroyed in this way]. 
When this body which belongs equally to each of us is con- 
sidered, it is perceived that it consists of form and the other 
four Skandhas, that form takes its rise from the elements 
and their belongings, that the elements are mutually con- 
ditioning, and that hence there is no aggregate known as 
form. When thus the Stream-entered realise that the idea 
of being and non-being is a partial view [of truth], the view 
of individual personality is destroyed. When the view of 
individual personality is thus destroyed, covetousness will 
never assert itself. This, Mahamati, is what characterises 
the view of individual personality. 

Again, Mahamati, as regards the nature of doubt, when 
the Dharma is attained, and realised, and thoroughly under- 
stood as to its characteristics, and when the twofold view of 
individual personality is destroyed as previously described, 
no doubt is cherished in the teaching [of the Buddhas]. 
And there is no thought [in the minds of the Stream-entered } 
to follow the lead of any other teacher because of [the 
difference between] purity and non-purity. This, Mahi- 
mati, is what is meant by doubt [discarded] (119) by the 
Stream-entered. 

Again, Mahamati, how is it that the Stream-entered do 

CHAPTER TWO 103 

not hold themselves to the morality? They. do not because 
they clearly see into the nature of suffering wherever they 
may be reborn. [What is meant by] the holding? Mahamati, 
that the ignorant and simple-minded observe the rules of 
morality, piety, and penance, is because they desire thereby 
to attain worldly enjoyments and happinesses; they cherish 
the hope of being born in agreeable conditions. And [the 
Stream-entered] do not hold [to the rules of morality], for 
their thoughts are turning only towards the exalted state of 
self-realisation, and the reason why they devote themselves to 
the details of morality is that they wish to master such truths 
as are in conformity with non-discrimination and undefiled 
outflows. This, Mahamati, is the way in which the Stream- 
entered Ones hold to morality and piety. Mahamati, by 
thus breaking up the three knots the Stream-entered will 
discard covetousness, anger, and folly. 

Mahamati said: Many kinds of covetousness are taught 
by the Blessed One; which one of them is to be cast aside? 

The Blessed One replied: The world where love grows, 
i.e., the desire for sexual embrace, showing itself in beating, 
slapping, suggesting, kissing, embracing, smelling, looking- 
sidewise, or gazing may give one momentary pleasures but 
is productive of future grief. [With the Stream-entered] 
there is no greed for such. Why? Because they are abiding 
in the bliss of the Samadhi which they have attained. Hence 
this casting aside, but not of the desire for Nirvana. 

(120) Again, Mahamati, what is the fruit of the Once- 
returning? There is once in them the discrimination of 
forms, signs, and appearances; but as they learn not to view 
individual objects under the aspect of qualified and qualify- 
ing, and as they know well what marks the attainment of the 
Dhyana, they once come back into the world, and putting 
an end to suffering, realise Nirvana. Hence the appellation 
‘‘Once-returning.”’ 

Again, Mahamati, what is meant by Never-returning? 
It means that while there is yet the viewing of individual 
objects as characterised by being and non-being in the past, 
present, and future, the discrimination does not return with 

104. LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

its errors and faults, the dormant passions do not assert 
themselves, and the knots are completely cut off never to 
return. Hence the appellation ‘‘Never-returning.’’ 

Again, Mahamati, the Arhat is the one who has attained 
the Dhyanas, Samadhis, emancipations, powers, psychie 
faculties, and with whom there are no more passions, suffer- 
ings, and discriminations. Hence the appellation ‘‘Arhat.’’ 

Mahamati said: Now, the Blessed One declares that 
there are three kinds of Arhats: to which one of the three 
is this term ‘‘Arhat’’ to be applied? To one who makes 
straightway for the path of cessation? Or to one who 
neglects all his accumulated stock of merit for the sake of 
his vow to enlighten others? Or to one who is a form of 
the Transformation [Buddha] ? 

Replied the Blessed One: Mahadmati, [the term 
‘‘ Arhat’’] applies to the Sravaka who makes straightway for 
the path of cessation, and to no others. Mahamati, as for 
the others, they are those who have finished practising the 
deeds of a Bodhisattva; they are forms of the Transforma- 
tion Buddha. With skilful means born of their fundamental 
and original vows (121), they manifest themselves among 
the multitudes in order to adorn the assemblages of the 
Buddhas. Mahamati, here in these paths and abodes of ex- 
istence they give out varieties of teachings which are based 
on discrimination; that is to say, as they are above such 
things as the attainment of the fruit, the Dhyanas, the 
Dhyana-practisers, or subjects for meditation, and as they 
know that this world is no more than what is seen of the 
Mind itself, they discourse on the fruit attained [for the 
sake of all beings]. Further, Mahamati, if the Stream- 
entered should think. ‘‘These are the fetters, but I am dis- 
engaged from them,’’ they commit a double fault: they 
still hold to the vices of the ego, and they have not freed 
themselves from the fetters. 

Further, Mahamati, in order to go beyond the Dhyanas, 
the immeasurables, and the formless world, the signs of 
this visible world which is Mind itself should be discarded. 
The Samapatti leading to the extinction of thought and 

CHAPTER TWO 105 

sensation does not enable one to transcend the world of 
particulars, for there is nothing but Mind. So it is said: 

176. The Dhyanas, the immeasurables, the formless, 
the Samadhis, and the complete extinction of thought 
(nirodha)—these do not exist where the Mind alone is. 

177. The fruit of the Stream-entered, and that of the 
Once-returning, and that of the Never-returning, and Arhat- 
ship—these are the bewildered states of mind. 

178. The Dhydna-practiser, the Dhyana, the subject 
for it, the destruction, the seeing of the truth,—these are no 
more than discriminations; when this is recognised there is 
emancipation. 

L 

(122) Further, Mahamati, there are two kinds of intel- 
lect : the intellect as an examining function, and the intellect 
which functions in connection with the attachment to ideas 
of discrimination. As for the intellect that examines, Maha- 
mati, it is that act of intellect which examines into the self- 
nature of things, finding it to be devoid of the four proposi- 
tions, and unattainable. This is known as the intellect that 
examines. What is meant by [being devoid of] the four 
propositions? It means to be devoid of oneness and other- 
ness, bothness and not-bothness, being and non-being, etern- 
ity and non-eternity. -These are called the four propositions. 
Mahamati, train yourself to examine carefully all things as 
regards these four propositions. What, Mahamati, is the 
intellect which functions in connection with the attachment 
to ideas of discrimination? It is the intellect with which 
the Mind is discriminated and the ideas arising therefrom 
are adhered to [as real]; and this adherence gives rise to 
the conceptions of warmth, fluidity, motility, and solidity as 
characterising the gross elements; while the tenacious hold- 
ing to proposition, reason, definition, and illustration, leads 
to the assertion of a non-entity [as entity]. This is called 
the intellect that functions in connection with the attachment 
to ideas of discrimination. 

This, Mahamati, is what characterises the two kinds of 

106 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

intellect, in accordance with which the Bodhisattvas, 
thoroughly mastering the signs of egolessness of persons and 
things, (123) and, by means of knowledge of imagelessness, 
becoming conversant with the stage of examination and 
practice, will attain the first stage [of Bodhisattvahood] and 
acquire one hundred Dhyanas. Attaining the excellent 
Samadhis, they will see one hundred Buddhas and Bodhi- 
sattvas, they will enter into one hundred kalpas that were 
prior to the present and also into those that will follow the 
present, they will illuminate one hundred Buddha-lands, 
and, illuminating one hundred Buddha-lands, they will 
understand the signs belonging to the higher stages; and by 
virtue of the most exalted vows they will manifest wonderful 
powers, they will be baptised by [the Buddhas] when they 
reach the stage of Dharmamegha (law-cloud) ; and realising 
the inmost realm of the Tathagatas, they will be provided 
with things which are closely connected with the ten in- 
exhaustible vows; and, in order to bring all beings into 
maturity, they will shine out in various forms with the rays 
of transformation; they will be quite absorbed in the bliss 
ef self-realisation. 

LI 

Further, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are to 
be well acquainted with the primary and the secondary 
elements. How do the Bodhisattvas know the primary and 
the secondary elements? Mahamati, the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas are to know this that the truth is that the 
primary elements have never come into existence, and that, 
Mahamati, these elements are unborn. Thus understood, 
there is nothing in the world but what is discriminated 
{by our imagination]. When it is recognised that the visible 
world is no more than Mind itself, external objects cease to 
be realities, and there is nothing but what is discriminated 
by the mind and perceived [as external]. That is to say, 
let it be understood that the triple world has nothing to do 
with the primary and the secondary elements, (124) that it 
is removed from the four propositions and philosophical 

CHAPTER TWO 107 

systems, that it has nothing to do with a personal ego and 
what belongs to it; and that it establishes itself in the abode 
of real reality, where it is seen in its own form, i.e. in its 
unborn state. 

Mahamati, what is meant by the elements derived from 
the primary elements? The element discriminated as 
vascidity produces the realm of water, inner and outer; the 
element discriminated as energy produces the realm of fire. 
inner and outer; the element discriminated as motility pro- 
duces the realm of air, inner and outer; the element dis- 
criminated as divisibility of form gives birth to the realm of 
earth together with space, inner and outer. Because of the 
attachment to the incorrect truths there is the aggregation of 
the five Skandhas giving rise to the elements primary and 
secondary. 

Again, Mahamati, the Vijnana has its cause in our 
attachment to and the desire for the multitudinousness of 
statements and objective fields; and it continues to evolve in 
another path of existence. Mahamati, the secondary ele- 
ments such as earth, ete., [are said] to have their cause in the 
primary elements which, however, are non-existent. Because, 
Mahamati, of things endowed with being, characteristics, 
marks, perceivableness, abode, and work, one can say that 
they are born of the combination of various effect-producing 
felements!; but not of things which are devoid of charac- 
teristic marks. For this reason, Mahamati, the elements 
primary and secondary are the discriminations of the philoso- 
phers and not mine. 

LIT 

Further, Mahamati, I will explain what characterises 
the self-nature of the Skandhas. Mahamati, what are the 
five Skandhas? They are form, (125) sensation, thought, 
conformation, and consciousness. Mahamati, four of these 
have no material forms—sensation, thought, conformation, 
and consciousness. Form, Mahamati, belongs to what is 
made of the four primary elements, and these elements differ 
from one another in their individual signs. But the four 

108 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Skandhas that are without form cannot be reckoned as four, 
they are like space. For instance, Mahamati, space cannot 
be numbered, and it is due to our discrimination that it is 
designated as such; in the same way, Mahamati, the 
Skandhas that are beyond calculability as they have no 
number-marks, are not to be predicated as existing and non- 
existing, and are beyond the four propositions; but to the 
ignorant they are described as subject to numeration, but 
not so to the wise. 

Again, Mahamati, by the wise the five Skandhas are 
regarded as thought-constructions, devoid of [dualisties such 
as] otherness and not-otherness; for they are like varieties 
of forms and objects in a vision, like images and persons 
in a dream. As they have no better substance for their 
support, and as they obstruct the passage of noble wisdom, 
there is what is known as the Skandha-discrimination. 
This, Mahamati, is what characterises the self-nature of the 
Skandhas. This discrimination must be discarded by you, 
and Having discarded this, you should declare the truth of 
solitude. Keeping back the views held by the philosophers, 
the truth of solitude is to be announced in all the Buddha- 
assemblies, Mahamati, and thereby the teaching of the 
egolessness of things is purified and you will enter upon the 
stage of Far-going (diramgama). Entering upon the stage 
of Duramgama you will become the master of many Samadhis, 
and, attaining the will-body (126) you will realise the 
Samadhi known as Mayopama (Maya-like). Thoroughly 
conversant with the powers, psychic faculties, and _ self- 
control, yon will be the supporter of all beings like the earth. 
Mahamati, as the great earth is the supporter of all beings, so 
is the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva the supporter of all beings. 

LITI 

Further, Mahamati, there are four kinds of Nirvana. 
What are the four? They are: (1) the Nirvana which is 
attained when the self-nature of all things is seen as non- 
entity; (2) the Nirvana which is attained when varieties 
of individual marks characterising all things are seen as non- 

CHAPTER TWO 109 

entities; (3) the Nirvana which is attained when there is the 
recognition of the non-existence of a being endowed with its 
own specific attributes; and (4) the Nirvana which is at- 
tained when there takes place the severance of the bondage 
conditioning the continuation of individuality and generality 
of the Skandhas. Mahamati, these four views of Nirvana 
belong to the philosophers and are not my teaching. Accord- 
ing to my teaching, Mahadmati, the getting rid of the dis- 
eriminating Manovijnana—this is said to be Nirvana. 

Mahamati said: Does not the Blessed One establish 
eight Vijnhanas? 

The Blessed One replied: I do, Mahamati. 

Mahamati said: If eight Vijianas are established, why 
do you refer to the getting-rid of the Manovijfiana and. not 
of the seven [other] Vijianas [as well] ? 

The Blessed One said: With the Manovijiana as cause 
and supporter, Mahamati, there rise the seven Vijianas. 
Again, Mahamati, the Manovijiana is kept functioning, as 
it discerns a world of objects and becomes attached to it, 
and by means of manifold habit-energy [or memory] (127) 
it nourishes the Alayavijiadna. The Manas is evolved along 
with the notion of an ego and its belongings, to which it 
clings and on which it reflects. It has no body of its own, 
nor its own marks; the Alayavijfiana is its cause and support. 
Because the world which is the Mind itself is imagined real 
and attached to as such, the whole psychic system evolves 
mutually conditioning. Like the waves of the ocean, Maha- 
mati, the world which is the mind-manifested, is stirred up 
by the wind of objectivity, it evolves and dissolves. Thus, 
Mahamati, when the Manovijiiana is got rid of, the seven 
Vijiianas are also got rid of. So it is said: 

179. I enter not into Nirvana by means of being, of 
work, of individual signs; I enter into Nirvana when the 
Vijnana which is caused by discrimination ceases. 

180. With it [ie. the Manovijiiana] for its cause and 
support, the Manas secures its use; the Vijiana causes the 
Citta to function, and is supported [by it]. 

181. Like a great flood where no waves are stirred 

110 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

because of its being dried up, the Vijnana|-system] in its 
various forms ceases to work when there is the annihilation 
[of the Manovijnhana}. 

LIV 

Further, Mahamati, I will tell you about the various 
features of the false imagination (parikalpita) ; and when 
you and the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are well acquainted 
with each of them in its specific form, you will get away 
from discrimination; and seeing well and knowing the way 
of inner realisation by noble wisdom and also the ways of 
speculation by the philosophers, (128) you will cast off dis- 
criminations such as grasped and grasping, and will not be 
induced to discriminate in respect to the multiple aspects 
of relativity-knowledge (paratantra), as well as the forms 
of the false imagination. What are the various features of 
the false imagination, Mahamati? They are the discrimina- 
tions as regards (1) words (abhildpa), (2) meaning, (3) 
individual marks, (4) property, (5) self-nature, (6) cause, 
(7) philosophical views, (8) reasoning, (9) birth, (10) no- 
birth, (11) dependence, and (12) bondage and emancipation. 
These, Mahamati, are the various features of the false 
imagination. 

Now, Mahamati, what is the discrimination of words? 
That is the becoming attached to various sweet voices and 
singing—this is the discrimination as regards words. 

What is the discrimination of meaning? It is the dis- 
crimination by which one imagines that words rise depending 
on whatever subjects they express, and which subjects one 
regards as self-existent and belonging to the realisation of 
noble wisdom. 

What is the discrimination of individual marks? It is 
to imagine in whatever is denoted by words the multi- 
tudinousness of individual marks which are like a mirage, 
and, clinging tenaciously to them, to discriminate all things 
according to these categories: warmth, fluidity, motility, and 
solidity. 

What is the discrimination of property? It is to desire 

CHAPTER TWO 111 

a state of wealth such as gold, silver, and various precious 
stones. 

What is the discrimination of self-nature? It is to make 
discrimination according to the imaginary views of the 
philosophers in reference to the self-nature of all things 
(129) which they stoutly maintain, saying, ‘‘This is just 
it, and there is no other.’’ 

What is the discrimination of cause? That is, to dis- 
tinguish the notion of causation in reference to being and 
non-being and to imagine that there are cause-signs—this 
is the discrimination of cause. 

What is the discrimination of philosophical views? 
That means getting attached to the philosophers’ wrong 
views and discriminations concerning such notions as being 
and non-being, oneness and otherness, bothness and not-both- 
ness. 

What is the discrimination of reasoning? It means the 
teaching whose reasoning is based on the grasping of the 
notion of an ego-substance and what belongs to it. 

What is the discrimination of birth? It means getting 
attached to the notion that things come into existence and 
go out of it according to causation. 

What is the discrimination of no-birth? It is to dis- 
criminate that all things are from the beginning unborn, 
that the causeless substances which were not, come into 
existence by reason of causation. 

What is the discrimination of dependence? It means 
the mutual dependence of gold and the filament [which is 
made of gold]. 

What is the discrimination of bondage and emancipa- 
tion? It is like imagining that there is something bound 
because of something binding as in the case of a man who 
by the help of a cord ties a knot or loosens it. 

These, Mahamati, are the various features of the false 
imagination, to which all the ignorant and simple-minded 
ones cling, imagining that things are or are not. Those 
attached to the notion of relativity are attached to the notion 
of multitudinousness of things rising from the false 

112 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

imagination. It is like seeing varieties of objects depending 
on Maya, but these varieties thus revealing themselves are 
discriminated by the ignorant as something other than Maya 
itself according to their way of thinking. (130) Now, Maha- 
mati, Maya and varieties of objects are neither different nor 
one. If they were different, varieties of objects would not 
have Maya for their cause. If Maya were one with varieties 
of objects, there would be no distinction between the two, 
but as there is the distinction these two—Maya and varieties 
of objects—are neither one nor different. For this reason 
you and the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas should never give 
yourselves up to the notion of being and non-being. 

LV 

So it is said: 

182. The Citta is bound up with the objective world; 
the intellect’s function is to speculate; and in the excellent 
state of imagelessness there is the evolving of transcendental 
wisdom (prajnd). 

183. According to the false imagination, [self-sub- 
stance] is, but from the point of view of relativity (para- 
tantra) it is not; owing to perversion, what is discriminated 
is grasped [as real] ; in the relativity there is no diserimina- 
tion. 

184. Multitudinousness of differentiations is imagined 
[as real by the ignorant], but being like Maya they obtain 
not; varieties of individual forms are discriminated as such, 
but they [really] do not obtain. 

185. [To imagine] individual forms is wrong, it puts 
one in bondage; they are born of Mind due to the false 
imagination of the ignorant; based on the relativity they are 
discriminated. 

186. The existence thus subjected to discrimination is 
no other than its relativity aspect; (131) the false imagina- 
tion is of various forms; based on the relativity, discrimina- 
tion is carried on. 

187. Conventional truth (samvritt) and ultimate truth 
(paramaritha)—if there be a third, non-entity is its cause; 

CHAPTER TWO 113 

the false imagination belongs to the conventional; when it is 
cut asunder, there is the realm of the wise. 

188. As to the Yogins there is one reality which reveals 
itself as multiplicity and yet there is no multiplicity in it; 
so is the nature of the false imagination. 

189. As by the dim-eyed a variety of objects is seen and 
imagined while the dimness itself is neither a form (ripa) 
nor a no-form (arupa), so is the relativity [discriminated | 
by the unknowing ones. 

190. As is pure gold, water free from dirt, the sky 
without a cloud, so is [the Mind] pure when detached! from 
the false imagination. 

191. Falsely-imagined existence is not, but from the 
relativity point of view it is, assertion and refutation are 
destroyed when one is freed from the imagination. 

192. If the relativity-aspect of existence is, while the 
imagination is not, this means that there is a being apart 
from being and that a being is born of a non-being. 

193. Depending on the false imagination there obtains 
the relativity-aspect of existence; from the conjunction of 
form and name there rises false imagination. 

194. False imagination can never be perfect know- 
ledge (nishpanna), it is not productive of anything else [but 
itself]; (182) then one knows what is meant by ultimate 
truth whose self-nature is purity. 

195. There are ten kinds? of false imagination and six 
kinds of relativity ; in the knowledge of Tathata innerly at- 
tained there is no differentiation. 

196. Truth consists in [knowing] the five Dharmas and 
also the three Svabhavas; when the Yogin thus comprehends 
[the truth], he does not transgress Tathata. 

197. According to the form of relativity, there are 
those names that belong to false imagination ; and the various 
aspects of false imagination arise from relativity. 

+ Throughout the text, vikalpa is translated “discrimination” or 
“imagination,” but here the term is evidently used as negating the 
function of Kalpita which stands in these verses for parikalpita. 

* All the Chinese texts have “twelve” instead of ‘“‘ten.” 

114 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

198. When well pondered with intelligence (buddht) 
there is neither relativity nor false imagination; where per- 
fect knowledge is, there is nothing [dualistically] existent ; 
for how with intelligence can discrimination take place? 

199. Where perfect knowledge is, the existent cannot 
be qualified with being and non-being; in what cannot be 
qualified with being and non-being, how can there be these 
two Svabhavas? 

200. Because of false imagination, the two Svabhavas 
are established; where there is false imagination multi- 
tudinousness of things is recognised, which being purified 
the [spiritual] condition of the wise obtains. 

201. Where there is false imagination there is multi- 
tudinousness of objects, which are discriminated under the 
aspect of relativity ; if otherwise discriminated, one becomes 
attached to the teachings of the philosophers. 

202. What is imagined being subjected to further 
imagination, there are various- views from which rises the 
doctrine of causal origination; (133) when the dualistic dis- 
crimination is got rid of, there indeed is perfect knowledge.? 

LVI 

Further, Mahamati said: Pray tell me, Blessed One, 
about the one vehicle that characterises the inner realisation 
of noble wisdom, whereby, Blessed One, I and other Bodhi- 
sattva-Mahasattvas, becoming conversant with the one 
vehicle which marks the inner attainment of noble wisdom, 
may be established without depending on anybody else in 
the teaching of the Buddha. 

Said the Blessed One: Then, Mahamati, listen well and 
reflect within yourself as I tell you. 

*» This whole section treats of the threefold Svabhava, chiefly 
explaining where Parikalpita (false imagination) is differentiated from 
Paratantra (relativity view). While the explanation sometimes appears 
quite complicated, the main point is clear enough. The Kalpita is a 
net of wrong interpretations woven about the Paratantra, which is the 
dualistic view of existence, and which is valid as far as it goes. But to 
reach the Nishpanna (perfect knowledge) it is necessary to transcend 
all forms of dualism, for the Paratantra is by no means ultimate truth. 

CHAPTER TWO 115 

Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said, Yes, I will, 
Blessed One; and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

Thereupon the Blessed One said: In accordance with the 
authoritative teachings in which there are no discriminations, 
Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva retire by himself 
to a quiet secluded place, where he may reflect within him- 
self, not relying on anybody else, but by means of his own 
inner intelligence, in order to discard erroneous views and 
discriminations, make successive advances and exert himself 
to finally enter upon the stage of Tathagatahood. This, 
Mahamati, is the characteristic feature of the inner realisa- 
tion to be gained by means of noble wisdom. 

What characterises the way of the one vehicle? I eall 
it the one vehicle because thereby one recognises and realises 
the path leading to the one vehicle. How is this path of 
the one vehicle to be recognised and realised? The recogni- 
tion of the one vehicle is obtained when there is no rising of 
discrimination by doing away with the notion of grasped and 
grasping and by abiding in the reality of suchness (yathd- 
bhita). Mahamati, this recognition of the one vehicle, 
(134) except by the Tathagata himself, has never been 
obtained before by anybody else—the philosophers, Sravakas, 
Pratyekabuddhas, Brahmans, ete. For this reason, Mahamati, 
this is known as the one vehicle. 

Mahamati said: For what reason is it that the Blessed 
One speaks of the triple vehicle and not of the one vehicle? 

The Blessed One replied: Because there is no teaching 
whereby tne Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas can realise 
Nirvana by themselves, I do not speak of the one vehicle. 
Thus, Mahamati, the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas are dis- 
ciplined, segregated, and trained in meditation according to 
the discourse of the Tathagata, whereby they are led to 
emancipation, and not by themselves. 

Further, Mahdmati, as they have not yet destroyed the 
habit-energy (memory) of karma and the hindrance of 
knowledge, all the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas are unable 
to realise the egolessness of things and have not attained the 
inconceivable transformation-death, I preach to the Sravakas 

116 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

[and Pratyekabuddhas] the triple vehicle and not the one 
vehicle. When, Mahamati, destroying all the evil habit- 
energy, they realise the egolessness of things, they who are 
now free from the evil habit-energy will not be intoxicated 
by the Samaddhis and will be awakened into the realm of 
no-evil-outflows. Now being taken into a super-world which 
is the realm of no-evil-outflows, they will gather up all the 
material for the attainment of the Dharmakaya which is of 
severeign power and beyond conception. So it is said: 

203. The Deva vehicle, the Brahma vehicle, the Sravaka 
vehicle, (135) the Pratyekabuddha vehicle, and the Tatha- 
gata vehicle, of these I speak. 

204. So long as there is a mind making conscious efforts, 
there can be no culmination as regards the various vehicles; 
when a revulsion takes place in the mind, there is neither a 
vehicle nor one who rides in it. 

205. There is really no establishment of various 
vehicles, and so I speak of the one vehicle;? but in order 
to carry the ignorant I talk of a variety of vehicles. 

206. There are three emancipations, and in all things 
there is no ego-substance ; knowledge and passions are of the 
same nature, when [one is] emancipated they are discarded. 

207. Like a piece of wood floating on the waves of the 
ocean, the Sravaka obsessed with individual marks is driven 
along [the stream of existence]. 

208. Though disengaged from the actively-functioning 
passions, they [the Sravakas] are still bound up with the 
habit-energy of the passions; intoxicated with the liquor of 
the Samadhi, they still have their abode in the realm of out- 
flows. 

209. In this there is no course of finality, nor retrogres- 
sion either; [losing himself] in the attainment of the 
Samadhi-body, he is not at all awakened even to the end of 
kalpas. 

210. Like unto the drunkard who, being awakened 
from his intoxication, regains his intelligence, [the Sravakas] 

Transfer naikaydnam (line 9) to line 10 after ydnatrayam. 

* According to the Chinese translations. 

CHAPTER TWO 117 

will have the realisation of the Buddha’s truth, which is his 
own body. 

Here Ends the Second Chapter, [Known as] the ‘‘Col- 
lection of All the Dharmas,’’ Taken from the Lankdvatara 
of 36,000 [Slokas]. 

[CHAPTER THREE] 

LVII 

(136) At that time again the Blessed One said this to 
Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva: I will tell you, 
Mahamati, about the various forms of the will-body; listen 
well and reflect well within yourself. I will tell you. 

Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said; I will, 
Blessed One, and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One then said this: There are three kinds 
of will-body, Mahamati. What are the three? They are: (1) 
the will-body obtained in the enjoyment of the Samadhi; 
(2) the will-body obtained by recognising the self-nature of 
the Dharma; and (3) the will-body which is assumed [by a 
Bodhisattva according to] the class of beings [to be saved] 
and which perfects and achieves [without a thought of its 
own achievement]. By realising the higher stages succes- 
sively after the first is attained, the Yogin will experience 
them [all]. 

Now, Mahamati, what is the will-body attained in the 
enjoyment of the Samadhi? It is this: when [the Yogin] 
in the third, fourth, fifth stages removes the various dis- 
eriminations going on in his mind and is at rest, the waves 
of consciousness are no more stirred in the Mind-ocean and 
the Vijiana functions are quieted, the bliss of which is 

* It will be interesting for the Chinese readers of the Lankdvatdra 
to notice that the compound, svacitta-vividha-viveka-vihdra, is here read 
in three different ways by the three Chinese translators, showing how 
variously a Sanskrit compound allows itself to be interpreted. This 
is one of numerous such examples to be met with throughout the text. 
Sung: Mffe pRASetE. The mind itself, variously [discriminat- 

ing], grows quiet and finds its rest. 

Wei: Hibsartriifat?. The mind itself is quiet and practises 
various deeds, 

T'ang: PRHUDEA AG. Discarding various [mentations], the 
mind is quiet and immovable. 

CHAPTER THREE 119 

enjoyed by him; and when he thus recognises the non- 
existence of the external world, which is no more than his 
own mind, he is said to have the will-body.1 

(137) What is the will-body obtained by recognising 
the self-nature of the Dharma? When [the Yogin] of the 
eighth stage has a thoroughgoing penetration into the nature 
of things which is like Maya and not image-producing, he 
experiences a revulsion at the seat of consciousness and 
obtains the Samadhi known as Maya-like and other Samadhis. 
By entering upon the Samadhis he gains a body which 
exhibits various powers of self-mastery and supernatural 
activity, which moves according to his wish as quickly as a 
flower opens up, which resembles Maya, a dream, and a 
reflected image, and which is not a product of the elements 
but has something analogous to what is produced of the 
elements, which is furnished with all the differences apper- 
taining to the world of forms and yet is able to follow up all 
the assemblages in the Buddha-lands. This is the body 
which has a thoroughgoing knowledge of the self-nature of 
the Dharma and for this reason is called will-body. 

Now what is the will-body which is born in accordance 
with the class and which perfects and achieves? When [the 
Yogin] is thoroughly conversant with all the characteristics 
of self-realisation and its bliss which pervades the teachings 
of the Buddha, he is said to have the body which is will- 
made, born with [the class], perfecting and achieving. 
Mahamati, you should exert yourself in order to have a 
thoroughly penetrating knowledge of these three marks of 
the will-body. So it is said: 

1. My Mahayana is neither a vehicle, nor a sound, nor 
words; it is neither the truth, nor emancipation, nor the 
realm of imagelessness. 

2. Yet the Mahayana is a vehicle on which the 
Samadhis are carried leading to various creative activities; 
the several forms of the will-body are adorned with the 
flowers of the sovereign will. 

1 Page 136, line 14, delete abhdva and manaso. 

120 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

LVIII 

(138) At that time again Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva said this to the Blessed One: The five im- 
mediacies are preached by the Blessed One; and what are 
these five, Blessed One, which being committed by a son or a 
daughter of a good family cause them to fall into the Avici 
hell? 

The Blessed One replied: Then, Mahamati, listen well 
and reflect, for I will tell you. 

Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said; Certainly, 
Blessed One, and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said thus to him: What are the five 
immediacies? They are: (1) the murdering of the mother, 
(2) of the father, (3) of the Arhat, (4) the breaking-up of 
the Brotherhood, and (5) causing the body of the Tathagata 
to bleed from malice. 

Now what is meant by the mother of all beings? It is 
desire which is procreative, going together with joy and 
anger and upholding all with motherliness. Ignorance re- 
presenting fatherhood brings about one’s rebirth in the six 
villages of the sense-world. When there takes place a com- 
plete destruction of both roots, fatherhood and motherhood, 
it is said that mother and father are murdered. When there 
is a complete extermination of the subordinate group of pas- 
sions such as anger, ete., which are like an enemy, a venomous 
rat, the murdering of the Arhat is said to take place. What 
is meant by the breaking-up of the Brotherhood? When 
there is a complete fundamental breaking-up of the combina- 
tion of the Skandhas whose characteristic mark is a state of 
mutual dependence among dissimilarities, it is said that the 
Brotherhood is split up. (139) Mahamati, when the body of 
the eight Vijfidnas, which erroneously recognises individual- 
ity and generality as being outside the Mind—which is seen 
[by the ignorant] in the form of an external world—is com- 
pletely extirpated by means of faulty discriminations, that is, 
by means of the triple emancipation and the non-outflows, 
and when thus the faulty mentality of the Vijnana-Buddha 
is made to bleed, it is known as an immediacy-deed. These, 

CHAPTER THREE 12] 

Mahamati, are the five inner immediacies, and when they 
are experienced by a son or a daughter of a good family, 
there is an immediacy-deed of realisation as regards the 
Dharma. 

Further, Mahamati, there are five external immediacies 
which I will point out to you, in order that you and other 
Bodhisattvas in the future may thereby be saved from ignor- 
ance. What are these five? They are those immediacies 
which are described in the canonical texts, and those who 
commit these crimes can never experience any one of these 
manifestations, except those Transformation [-Buddhas] who 
are sustained by the power [of the Tathagatas] and have 
already attained a realisation. The Sravakas of transforma- 
tion, Mahamati, who are sustained by the sustaining power 
either of the Bodhisattvas or Tathagatas, may see somebody 
else practising deeds of wickedness, and they will repeatedly 
make great efforts to turn him away from his wickness and 
faulty views, and to make him realise the non-reality of 
wickedness and faulty views by laying down his burden. 
This is the way I demonstrate facts of ‘the transformation, the 
sustaining power, and the realisation. Mahamati, there is, 
however, no realisation for those who are sheer offenders of 
the immediacies, (140) except when they come to the recogni- 
tion of the truth that an external world is nothing but! the 
Mind itself, seeing that body, property, and abiding place are 
discriminations, and that the notion of an ego and its belong- 
ings are to be kept away; or, when they are released from 
the fault of self-discrimination by encountering a good friend 
at some time or other, or at any time, and being born in 
some other path of existence. So it is said: 

3. Desire is said to be the mother and ignorance the 
father; the Vijiana which recognises an objective world is 
[compared to] the Buddha. 

4, The secondary group of passions is the Arhat, the 
amassing of the five Skandhas the Brotherhood ; as these are 
to be destroyed immediately they are known as immediacy- 
deeds. 

* Page 140, line 1: bhavana is to be deleted. 

122 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

LIX 

Again Mahamati said: Pray tell me, Blessed One, what 
makes the Buddhas and the Blessed Ones such as they are: 
that is, [what is] the Buddha-nature of the Buddhas?! 

Said the Blessed One: when the egolessness of things as 
well as of persons is understood, when the knowledge of the 
twofold hindranee is thoroughly taken hold of, when the 
twofold death (cyuti) is accomplished, and when the twofold 
group of passions is destroyed, there, Mahamati, is the 
Buddda-nature of the Buddhas and the Blessed Ones. When 
these teachings are experienced by the Sravakas and Prat- 
yekabuddhas, this is their Buddha-nature. So it is said: 

5. The twofold egolessness, the twofold group of pas- 
sions, the twofold hindrance, and the inconceivable trans- 
formation-death,—when these are attained, there is the 
Tathagata. 

LX 

(141) At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva said this to the Blessed One: According to what 
deeper sense* did you make this announcement before the 
congregation, that ‘‘I am all the Buddhas of the past,’’ and 
that ‘‘I have gone through many a birth in varieties of forms, 
being thus at times the king Mandhatri, Elephant, Parrot, 
Indra, Vyasa, Sunetra, and other beings in my one hundred 
thousand births?’’ 

Said the Blessed One: There are, according to the 
deeper sense, four kinds of sameness distinguished, Maha- 
mati, and the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones 
make this assertion: J was thus at that time the Buddha 
Krakuechanda, Kanakamuni, and KasSyapa. What are the 
four kinds of sameness which are distinguished according to 
the deeper sense? They are: (1) sameness of letters, (2) 
sameness of words, (3) sameness of teachings, and (4) same- 
ness of the body. According to this fourfold sameness in 

+ Bhagavan buddhanam, page 140, line 10, may better be dropped. 
Samdhaéya. There is no reference to this in Wei and Sung. 
The term has a speeial sense here and elsewhere in the Lankdvatara. 

2 

CHAPTER THREE 123 

the deeper sense, the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened 
Ones make the announcement before the congragation. 

Now, Mahamati, what is the sameness of letters? It is 
that my name is [spelt] B-u-d-d-h-a, and these letters are 
also used for other Buddhas and Blessed Ones; Mahamati, 
these letters in their nature are not to be distinguished one 
from another; therefore, Mahamati, there is the sameness of 
letters. 

Now, Mahamati, what is the sameness of words with 
regard to the Tathagatas, Arhats, and (142) Fully-En- 
lightened Ones? It is that sixty-four sounds of the Brah- 
man language are distinguished by me, and these identical 
sixty-four sounds of the Brahman language are also uttered 
by the Tathagatas, Arhats, and Fully-Enlightened Ones, and 
their Kalavinka-like notes are the same with all of us, as we 
are indistinguishable in this respect. 

Now, Mahamati, what is the sameness of the body? It 
is that I and other Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened 
Ones are the same as regards our Dharmakaya and the 
[thirty-two] signs and the [eighty] minor excellencies of 
bodily perfection—no distinction existing among us, except 
that the Tathagatas manifest varieties of forms according to 
the different dispositions of beings, who are to be disciplined 
by varieties of means. 

Now, Mahamati, what is the sameness of the teaching? 
It is that I as well as they [other Tathagatas] are all con- 
versant with the teachings belonging to the thirty-seven 
branches of enlightenment. According to the deeper sense 
which is concerned with this fourfold sameness, the Tatha- 
gatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones make their announce- 
ment before the congregation. So it is said: 

6. ‘‘I am Kasyapa, Krakucchanda, and Kanakamuni’’; 
this I preach who come out of the sameness for the sake of 
the sons of the Buddha. 

LXI 

Again Mahamati said: It is said by the Blessed One 
that from the night of the Enlightenment till the night of 

124 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

the Parinirvana, the Tathagata (143) in the meantime has 
not uttered even a word, nor will he ever utter; for not- 
speaking is the Buddha’s speaking. According to what 
deeper sense is it that not-speaking is the Buddha’s speaking? 

The Blessed One replied: By reason of two things of 
the deeper sense, Mahamati, this statement is made. What 
are the two things: They are the truth of self-realisation 
and an eternally-abiding reality. According to these two 
things of the deeper sense the statement is made by me. Of 
what deeper sense is the truth of self-realisation? What has 
been realised by the Tathagatas, that is my own realisation, 
in which there is neither decreasing nor increasing; for the 
realm of self-realisation is free from words and discrimina- 
tions, having nothing to do with dualistic terminology. 

What is meant by an eternally-abiding reality? The 
ancient road of reality, Mahamati, has been here all the time, 
like gold, silver, or pearl preserved in the mine, Mahamati; 
the Dharmadhatu abides foreover, whether the Tathagata 
appears in the world or not; as the Tathagata eternally abides 
so does the reason (dharmata) of all things; reality foreover 
abides, reality keeps its order, like the roads in an ancient 
city. For instance, Mahamati, a man who is walking in a 
forest and discovering an ancient city with its orderly streets 
may enter into the city, and having entered into it, he may 
have a rest, conduct himself like a citizen, and enjoy all the 
pleasures accruing therefrom. (144) What do you think, 
Mahamati? Did this man make the road along which he 
enters into the city, and also the various things in the city? 

Mahamati said: No, Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said: Just so, Mahamati, what has 
been realised by myself and other Tathagatas is this reality, 
the eternally-abiding reality (sthitita), the self-regulating 
reality (niydmatd), the suchness of things (tathata), the 
realness of things (bhitatd), the truth itself (satyata). For 
this réason, Mahamati, it is stated by me that from the night 
of the Tathagata’s Enlightenment till the night of his 
entrance into Nirvana, he has not in the meantime uttered, 
nor ever will utter, one word. So it is said: 

CHAPTER THREE 125 

7. From the night of Enlightenment till that of Nir- 
vana, I have not in the meantime made any proclamation 
whaever.? 

8. It is on account of the deeper meaning that the 
eternally-abiding reality of self-realisation is talked of by 
me; and between myself and [all the other] Buddhas, in this 
respect, there is no distinetion whatever. 

LXIl 

At that time, Mahamati made this request of the Blessed 
One: Pray tell me, Blessed One, about the being and non- 
being of all things; and when myself and other Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas are freed of the notions of being and non-being, 
may we quickly attain supreme enlightenment. 

(145) The Blessed One replied: Then, Mahamati, listen 
well and reflect well within yourself; I will tell you. 

Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said, Certainly, 
Blessed One, and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

Then the Blessed One said: People of this world are 
dependent on two things, Mahamati, that is, they are 
dependent on the idea of being and on that of non-being, 
and they fall into the views whereby they take pleasure either 
in nihilism or in realism. They imagine emancipation where 
there is no emancipation. 

Now, Mahdmati, who are the people dependent on the 
notion of being? It means this that they regard the world 
as rising from causation which is really existent, and that 
the actually existing and becoming world does not take its 
rise from causation which is non-existent. This will not be 
the case if the world is something non-existing. They thus 
talk of the really-existing world as arising from the reality 
of causation. This is the realistic view of causation as held 
by some people. 

Now, Mahamati, what is meant by being dependent upon 
the idea of non-being? It means, Mahamati, admitting greed, 
anger, and folly, and yet discriminating as regards the non- 
reality of what makes up greed, anger, and folly; and, Maha- 

1 The Zen masters frequently refer to this important declaration. 

126 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

mati, there is one who does not admit the reality of things 
because of their being devoid of individual marks; and there 
is another who, seeing that the Buddhas, Sravakas, and Prat- 
yekabuddhas are free from greed, anger, and folly, because 
of all things being devoid of individual marks, [think that 
greed, anger, and folly] do not exist. 

Now, Mahamati, who of these is the one doomed to ruin? 

Said Mahamati; Blessed One, it is he who, admitting 
greed, anger, and folly, yet refuses to admit them. 

(146) The Blessed One said: Well said indeed, Maha- 
mati! Again thou hast indeed spoken well, Mahamati! Not 
only is he himself doomed to ruin because of his notion of 
greed, anger, and folly as existent and yet as not-existent, 
but he ruins even the character of the Buddha, the Sravaka, 
and the Pratyekabuddha. Why? Because the passions are 
not to be taken hold of innerly and outwardly, because they 
are neither different nor not-different. Mahamati, greed, 
anger, and folly too are not to be taken hold of innerly as 
well as outwardly; they have no substance of their own and 
they are not to be admitted ; Mahamati, as there is no reality 
in the nature of greed, anger, and folly, [he who fails to 
understand this] is the one who ruins the character of the 
Buddha, Sravaka, and Pratyekabuddha. The Buddha, 
Sravaka, and Pratyekabuddha are by nature emancipated as 
there is in them no cause for being bound and binding; 
Mahamati, {on the other hand,] where there is a state of 
being bound there are the binding and the cause of bondage. 
{And yet there is] one who talks thus, [that is, denies causa- 
tion]; such is doomed to ruin. Mahamati, this characterises 
nihilism and realism. 

This is stated by me in accordance with the deeper sense. 
It is better to cherish the notion of an ego-substance as much 
as Mount Sumeru than to have the notion of emptiness 
derived from the self-conceited view of being and non-being. 
One who is conceited in the view of being and non-being is 
indeed doomed to ruin. Those who are delighted in cherish- 
ing notions of individuality and generality fail to understand 
that an external world is nothing but Mind itself and has no 

CHAPTER THREE 127 

reality; and as they do not understand this they regard 
things external as transient, for they suffer every moment 
changes which follow one after another, now splitting, now 
dividing, while the Skandhas, Dhatus, and Ayatanas succeed- 
ing one another and combining with one another, now come 
forward and (147) now pass away. They who thus dis- 
regarding words of the scriptures are given up to wrong dis- 
eriminations are also doomed to ruin. So it is said: 

9. As far as the duality of being and non-being ex- 
tends, there is the realm of intellection; when this realm 
vanishes, intellection completely ceases. 

10. When the external world is not grasped [as real] 
there is neither causation nor reality; there is the essence of 
suchness (thatata), which is the [spiritual] realm of the wise. 

11. Those who believe in the birth of something that 
has never been in existence and, coming to exist, finally 
vanishes away,—which leads them to assert that things come 
to exist, things pass away, according to causation,—such 
people have no foothold in my teaching. 

12. It is not by the philosophers, not by the Buddhas, 
not by myself, not by anybody else, but by causation that 
being obtains; how can one talk of non-being? 

13. When being obtains by causation, who can bring 
about non-being? By reason of the wrong views based on the 
doctrine of birth, being and non-being are discriminated. 

14. When it is realised that there is nothing born, noth- 
ing passing away, there is no way to admit its being and 
not-being ; the world is to be regarded as quiescent. 

LXITI 

At that time again Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattva requested of the Blessed One, saying: Pray point out 
to me, Blessed One; pray point out to me, Sugata; pray 
point out to me, Tathagata, Arhat, Fully-Enlightened One! 
Pray tell me, Most Excellent One! (148) What is the charac- 
teristic of the realisation by which I and other Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas, becoming thoroughly conversant with its mean- 
ing, may quickly attain the highest enlightenment, and, 

128 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

relying upon themselves, will not be led away by any specula- 
tions or philosophies? 

Said the Blessed One: Then listen well, Mahamati, and 
well reflect within yourself ;I will tell you. 

Mahadmati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said; Certainly, 
I will; and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

Thereupon the Blessed One said this: There are two 
ways of characterising the realisation attained by all the 
Sravakas, the Pratyekabuddhas, and the Bodhisattvas: the 
realisation itself and the teaching [about it]. Now, Maha- 
mati, by the realisation itself is meant that it is the realm of 
inner attainment; its characteristic features are that it has 
nothing to do with words, discriminations, and letters; that 
it leads one up to the realm of non-outflows; that it is 
the state of an inner experience; that it is entirely devoid of 
philosophical speculations and [the doings of] evil beings; 
and that, destroying philosophical speculations and [the 
doings of] evil beings, it shines out in its own inner light of 
attainment. These, Mahamati, are the characteristics of 
the realisation. 

Now, Mahamati, what is meant by the teaching [con- 
cerning it]? It is variously given in the nine divisions of 
the doctrinal works; it keeps one away from the dualistic 
notions of being and non-being, of oneness and otherness; 
first making use of skilful means and expedients, it induces 
all beings to have a perception [of this teaching] so that 
whoever is inclined towards it, may be instructed in it. 
This, Mahamati, is the characteristic of the teaching. Let, 
therefore, Mahamati, you and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas 
(149) exert yourselves in this. 

15. Realisation and teaching, self-attainment and doc- 
trinal instruction—those who have an insight into the differ- 
ence will not be led away by philosophical authorities. 

16. There is no truth in any object that is imagined by 
the ignorant; deliverance is where there is no objective 
world; why is this not sought by the speculators? 

17. The world of the Samskritas is observed as the con- 
tinuation of birth-and-death, whereby dualisms are nour- 

CHAPTER THREE 129 

ished, and because of this perversion [the truth] is not 
perceived. 

18. There is just one truth, which is Nirvana—it has 
nothing to do with the Manas (intellection) ; the world seen 
as subject to discrimination resembles a plantain tree, a 
dream,' a vision. 

19. No greed there is, no anger, nor folly either, and 
again, no personal ego; from desire start the Skandhas, 
which resemble a dream. 

LXIV 

At that time again Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattva requested of the Blessed One, saying: Pray tell me, 
Blessed One, pray tell me, Sugata, regarding what charac- 
terises wrong discrimination (abhitaparikalpa). Blessed 
One, tell me as to the how, what, why, and who of wrong dis- 
erimination, which, when rising and going on, constitutes 
what is known as wrong discrimination ; that is to say, to what 
kind of thought is the term wrong discrimination applicable? 
or what kind of discrimination is to be called wrong? 

(150) The Blessed One said: Well said, well said, 
Mahamati; and again, well said, indeed, Mahamati! You 
who have been admitted [into the order of Bodhisattvas], 
Mahamati, think of this matter which is worth asking about, 
for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many 
people, because of your compassion for the world, for the 
benefit of the multitudes, for the welfare and happiness of 
celestial beings and humankind. Therefore, Mahamati, 
listen well and reflect well within yourself as I tell you. 

Certainly, Blessed One; said Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva, and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

Then the Blessed One said thus to him: When the 
multitudinousness of objects is wrongly imagined [as real] 
and attached to, discrimination goes on evolving ; and, Maha- 
mati, as people are attached tenaciously to the notion of 
grasping, as they have not ascertained in their minds as to 
the nature of the objective world which is no more than the 

1 The text has skandha; but svapna seems to be better. 

130 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Mind itself, as they have fallen into the dualistic view oi 
being and non-being, and, Mahamati, as they are nourished 
by the habit-energy of the views and discriminations of the 
philosophers, they perceive the multitudinousness of external 
objects [as real] and become attached to them; and for this 
reason a system of mentation—mind and what belongs to it 
—is discriminated and is spoken of [as real], and with the 
assertion of an ego-soul and its belongings, the system goes 
on functioning. 

Said Mahamati: As you say, Blessed One, when the 
multitudinousness of external objects is wrongly imagined 
fas real] and attached to by people, discrimination goes 
evolving on; and they fall into the dualistic view of being 
and non-being,! they nourish the views and discriminations 
of the philosophers which are based on the notion of grasped 
and grasping; (151) and as they perceive the multitudinous- 
ness of external objects [as real] and become attached to 
them, a system of mentation—mind and what belongs to it 
—is discriminated and is spoken of [as real] and goes on 
functioning owing to the fact that the external world is 
not recognised as nothing but the Mind itself, and that the 
multitudinousness of things is tenaciously clung to as subject 
to [the notion of] being and non-being. This being the 
case, Blessed One, the multitudinousness of external objects 
which is characterised with the dualism of being and non- 
being, is to be said neither existent nor non-existent, and 
does not render itself to the formation of the philosophical 
views. [Inasmuch as the external world owes its existence to 
discrimination, it in itself must be said to be devoid of all 
forms of dualism.] Blessed One, in the same way the highest 
reality is declared to be devoid of [all forms of logical 
analysis such as] the means of proof, sense-perception, syl- 
logistic arguments, illustration, reasoning, ete. How is it, 
Blessed One, that while, on the one hand, the discrimination 
of multiplicity is said to go on operating on the strength of 
the attachment which attaches itself to the multiplicity of 
external unrealities, the attachment, on the other hand, to 

+ This is omitted in T‘ang. 

CHAPTER THREE 131 

the highest reality does not give rise to discrimination which 
goes on functioning in its own way? Is it not, Blessed One, 
unfair reasoning on your part to say, ‘‘It gives rise [to dis- 
crimination]’’ in one place, and to say in another place, ‘‘It 
does not’’? ‘According to the Blessed One, depending on 
and attaching to the dualism of being and non-being, there 
evolve views characteristic of wrong discrimination as when 
the magician produces varieties of people that are not at all 
real and complete objects. Thus signs of existence and non- 
existence are falsely imagined and go on so imagined; [but 
in fact existence itself is] devoid of discrimination. If so, 
how does one come to cherish the dualism as held by a man 
of the world? 

Said the Blessed One: Mahamati, discrimination, 
indeed, does not evolve, nor is it put away. Why? Because 
there is no evolving of discrimination as regards being and 
non-being; because the perception of objective realities is 
not real; because all that is seen is to be recognised as nothing 
but the Mind itself. (152) Mahamati, discrimination does 
not evolve, nor is it put away. But, Mahdmati, for the sake 
of the ignorant who are addicted to discriminating the multi- 
plicity of things which are of their own Mind, it is said by 
me that discrimination whose first function is to produce 
effects takes its rise owing to the attachment to the aspect of 
multiplicity as charactersitic of objects. How otherwise, 
Mahamati, can the ignorant and simple-minded have an 
insight into the Mind itself which they discriminate, and see 
themselves freed from the notion of an ego and what belongs 
to it, and also freed from the wrong conception of cause and 
effect? And, again, how can they recognise that there is 
nothing but Mind itself and cause a revulsion at the inmost 
seat of consciousness (cittdsraya)? How can they have a 
clear perception of all the stages and attain the inner realisa- 
tion of the Tathagatas, which transcends the five Dharmas, 

* The whole passage below does not appear in Sung. The text 
seems to be confused and it is difficult to make out what it really means. 
The present translation is merely tentative. It mainly follows the 
T‘ang interpretation; Wei gives no sense as far as one can see. 

132 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

the three Svahhavas, and the idea of reality as weil as dis- 
crimination? For this reason, Mahamati, I state that dis- 
crimination takes its rise from our attachment to the multi- 
plicity of objects which are not real, and that emancipation 
comes from our thoroughly understanding the meaning of 
reality as it is and also the meaning of multiplicity of things 
which evolve from discrimination. So it is said: 

20. Those who, regarding the world as evolving from 
causes and conditions, are attached to these notions as well as 
to the fourfold proposition, fail to understand my teaching. 

21. The world cannot be predicated anywhere as being, 
or as non-being, or as being-and-non-being, as is discrimi- 
nated by the ignorant who regard it as subject to causes and 
conditions. 

22. When the world is seen [to be unpredicable with 
such notions as] being, non-being, or being-and-non-being, 
(153) a change takes place in the mind, and egolessness is 
attained. 

23. <All things are unborn because they are born of 
causation ; anything that is born of causation is an effect, and 
from an effect nothing is produced. 

24. From an effect no effect is produced; [if you assert 
this,] you commit the fault of a double effect ; and this double 
effect being untenable, no existence comes from an effect. 

25. When the Samskrita [i.e. anything produced] is 
regarded as free from [the dualism of] depended and 
depending, there decidedly is Mind-only, and hence my 
teaching of Mind-only. 

26. The [Mind as] norm is the abode of self-nature 
which has nothing to do with a world of causation; of this 
norm which is perfect existence and the highest Brahma,} 
I speak. 

27. An ego-soul is a truth belonging to thought-con- 
struction, in which there is no real reality ; the self-nature of 
the Skandhas is also a thought-construction, as there is no 
reality in it. 

* The Chinese all have “the Pure” for this. Does it mean “‘the 
Absolute” cleansed of all dualistic impurities? 

CHAPTER THREE 133 

28. The sameness is of four kinds: individual forms, 
cause, the coming into being,! and the sameness of non-ego is 
the fourth: these are subjects of discipline for the Yogins. 

29. [There is a state which is] removed from all philos- 
ophical views, free from imagined and imagining, of no 
attainment, and of no birth—this I call Mind-norm. 

30. Of neither existence nor non-existence do I speak, 
but of Mind-only which has nothing to do with existence and 
non-existence, and which is thus” free from intellection. 

(154) 31. Suchness (tathatd), emptiness, realm of 
truth (dharmadhdatu), the various forms of the will-body— 
these I call Mind-only. 

32. Multiplicity of objects evolves from the conjunc- 
tion of habit-energy and discrimination; it is born of Mind, 
but is regarded by people as existing outwardly: this I eall 
Mind-only. 

33. The external world is not, and multiplicity of 
objects is what is seen of Mind; body, property, and abode— 
these I call Mind-only. 

LXV 

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahiasattva said 
this to the Blessed One: This is said by the Blessed One 
that the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva and others should not grasp 
meaning for reality, artha], according to words. But, 
Blessed One, why should not the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
grasp meaning from words? What are words? What is 
meaning? 

Said the Blessed One: Then, Mahamati, listen well 
and reflect within yourself well; I will tell you. 

Thereupon said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, 
Certainly, Blessed One; and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One then said this to him: Now, Maha- 
mati, how is speech produced? Depending on discrimination 
and habit-energy [or memory] as the eause, there is the con- 
junction and the distinction of sounds and letters, which, 

Bhavaja, coming into existence. 
2 Tathé, not tathata, according to the Chinese versions. 

134 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

issuing from the teeth, jaws, palate, tongue, lips, and the 
cavity of the mouth, make mutual conversations possible. 
This is speech. Now, Mahamati, what is meaning? (155) 
The Bodhisattva-Mahasattva is said to have grasped meaning 
well, when, all alone in a lonely place, he walks the path 
leading to Nirvana, by means of his transcendental wisdom 
(prajna) which grows from learning, thinking, and medita- 
tion, and causing a revulsion first at the source of habit- 
energy by his self-knowledge (svabuddhi), abides on the 
stages of self-realisation where he leads a life full of ex- 
cellent deeds. 

Further, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva who is 
conversant with words and meaning observes that words are 
neither different nor not-different from meaning and that 
meaning stands in the same relation to words. If, Mahamati, 
meaning is different from words, it will not be made manifest 
by means of words; but meaning is entered into by words 
as things [are revealed] by alamp. It is, Mahamati, like a 
man carrying a lamp to look after his property. {By means 
of this light] he can say: This is my property and so is 
kept in this place. Just so, Mahamati, by means of the lamp 
of words and speech originating from discrimination, the 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas can enter into the exalted state of 
self-realisation which is free from speech-discrimination. 

Further, Mahamati, if a man becomes attached to the 
[literal] meaning of words and holds fast to their agreement 
in regard to the original state of Nirvana which is unborn 
and undying, the triple vehicle, the one vehicle, the five 
[Dharmas], mentation, the [three] Svabhavas, etc., he will 
come to cherish views either affirmative or negative. As 
varieties of objects are seen in Maya and are discriminated 
{as real], statements are erroneously made, discriminations 
erroneously go on. (156) It is by the ignorant that dis- 
eriminations thus go on; it is otherwise with the wise.* 

So it is said: 

» The reading is more or less after T‘ang. Abhinivesam pratitya 
(p. 155, line 15) is dropped, and tad yathd mahdmate anyatha hi mayéa- 

vaicitryam drashtavyam anyatha (p. 155, line 17—p. 156, line 1) does not 

CHAPTER THREE 135 

34. Those who following words, discriminate and 
assert various notions, are bound for hell because of their 
assertions. 

35. The ego-soul is not with the Skandhas, nor are the 
Skandhas in the ego-soul. They are not as they are dis- 
eriminated, nor are they otherwise. 

36. The reality of objects is seen being discriminated 
by the ignorant; if it were so as they are seen, all would be 
seeing the truth. 

37. As all things are unreal, there is neither defilement 
nor purity; things are not as they are seen, nor are they 
otherwise. 

LXVI 

Further, Mahamati, I will tell you about the features 
of Jnana (absolute knowledge) and Vijnana (relative know- 
ledge)?; and when you and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas 
are well conversant with these distinctive features of Jilana 
and Vijnana, you will quickly realise supreme enlightenment. 
There are three kinds of Jnana—worldly, super-worldly, and 
transcendental. Now, worldly knowledge belongs to the 
philosophers and to the ignorant and simple-minded who are 
attached to the dualistic views of being and non-being. 
Super-worldly knowledge belongs to all the Sravakas and 
Pratyekabuddhas who are attached to the notions of indivi- 
duality and generality. Transcendental knowledge which is 
free from the dualism of being and non-being, belongs to 
the Bodhisattvas and takes its rise when they thoroughly 
examine things of imagelessness, see into the state of no- 
birth and no-annihilation, and realise egolessness at the stage 
of Tathagatahood.? 

appear in T‘ang, and as it is partly a repetition of what precedes, not 
to speak of its making the whole passage obscure, it is omitted in this 
translation. 

* According to the Chinese versions. 

* The use of vijidna in this sense is unusual in the Lanka; while 
jnana, aryajndna, prajnd, and buddhi are frequently used as synonyms. 

* The passage between ‘Now, worldly knowledge” and ‘“Tatha- 
gatahood” which is restored here according to T‘ang and Sung, is found 
in the Sanskrit text inserted after the next paragraph, p. 157, 0. 8-13. 

136 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

(157) Vijiiana is subject to birth and destruction, and 
Jfiana is not subject to birth and destruction. Further, 
Mahamati, Vijiiana falls into [the dualism of] form and no- 
form, being and non-being, and is characterised with multi- 
plicity ; but Jiiana is marked with the transcendence of [the 
dualism of] form and no-form. Further, Mahamati, Vijhana 
is characterised with accumulation and Jiiana with non- 
accumulation. Jfana is of three kinds: that which asser- 
tains individuality and generality, that which assertains 
birth and decay, and that which assertains no-birth and no- 
decay. 

Further, Mahamati, Jiana is devoid of attachment; 
Vijfiana attaches itself to the multitudinousness of objects. 
Again, Vijiana is produced from the concordance of the 
triple combination ;' Jana, in its self-nature, has nothing to 
do with combination or concordance. Again, Mahamati,? 
Jnana is characterised with unattainability; it is the inner 
state of self-realisation by noble wisdom, (158) and as it 
neither enters nor goes out, it is like the moon in water. So 
it is said: 

38. Karma is accumulated by Citta, and discriminated 
by Jana; and one acquires by Prajna the state of imageless- 
ness and the powers. 

39. Citta is bound up with an objective world, Jiana 
evolves with reflection; and Prajna evolves in the exalted 
state of imagelessness and in the excellent conditions. 

40. Citta, Manas, and Vijiiana are devoid of thoughts 
and discriminations ;? it is the Sravakas and not the Bodhi- 
sattvas that try to reach reality by means of discrimination. 

41. The Tathagata’s Jiana is pure, [resting] in qui- 
etude in the most excellent patience [or recognition of truth] ; 

* Read trisamgatyutpddayogalakganam (lines 15-16), and asam- 
gatiyogasva® (line 16), according to Sung and T‘ang. 

? T‘ang and Sung have inserted here: Vijiiana is characterised 
with attainability. 

* Is this in accord with the general drift of thought maintained in 
the text? T‘ang and Sung have: Citta, Manas, and Vijiana, when 
devoid of thought and discrimination, attain the state of non-discrimiua- 
tion; this belongs to the Bodhisattvas and not to the Sravakas. 

CHAPTER THREE 137 

it is productive of excellent sense and is devoid of purposive- 
ness (samuddcara-varijitam). 

42. Prajna, with me, is of three kinds; whereby the 
wise grow powerful, individual signs are discriminated, and 
all things are manifested.! 

43. My Prajna has nothing to do with the two vehicles, 
it excludes the world of beings; that of the Sravakas evolves 
from their attachment to the world of beings; the Tatha- 
gata’s Praja is spotless? because of its being in accord with 
Mind-only. 

LXVIT 

Further, Mahamati, there are nine kinds of transforma- 
tion as held by the philosophers endorsing the doctrine of 
transformation. They are: (1) the transformation of form; 
(159) (2) the transformation of characteristics; (3) the 
transformation of cause; (4) the transformation of con- 
cordance; (5) the transformation of view; (6) the trans- 
formation of origin; (7) the transformation of nature; (8) 
the transformation of manifest conditions; and (9) the trans- 
formation of manifest work. These, Mahamati, are the nine 
views of transformation expounded by all the philosophers in 
accordance with their secret teaching, and they are all 
founded upon the dualism of being and non-being. 

Now, Mahamati, by the transformation of form is meant 
the alteration of form in appearance as gold takes various 
shapes when made into all kinds of ornament. For example: 
gold is seen made into a bracelet, a necklace, a fylfot, or 
what not; though the gold itself remains the same, varieties 
of articles [made of it] are all different in form, that is, 
in their transformations. In the same way, Mahamati, there 
is a general transformation of things which is discriminated 
by other philosophers as coming from a causal agency. They 
are not right, nor are they otherwise. All differentiation 
in transformation is to be regarded as due to discrimination, 
such as the thickening of milk into curds and the ripening 

* After T‘ang. 
? Read amald, not matd. 

138 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

of fruit into a liquor. Mahamati, like this thickening and 
ripening each transformation is a transformation rising from 
discrimination, which is diseriminated by the philosophers; 
really there is nothing transformed, for the external objects 
of which being and non-being are discriminated, are what 
is seen of Mind itself and have no reality of their own. In 
the same way, Mahamati, what is regarded by the ignorant 
and simple-minded as the evolving of objects is no more than 
the discrimination of their own mind, and, (160) Mahamati, 
there is really nothing evolving, nothing disappearing, as it 
is like seeing things that evolve in a vision and a dream. 
Mahamati, it is like perceiving the rise and disappearance of 
things in a dream; it is like the birth and death of a barren 
woman’s child. So it is said: 

44. The transformation of the form im time, and the 
embracing [of the soul] in the elements and sense-organs, 
which is in its middle-way existence (antarabhava)—they 
who [thus] imagine [the birth of a child] are not wise men. 

45. The Buddhas do not discriminate the world as 
subject to the chain of origination; but they regard the 
causation which rules this world as something like the city 
of the Gandharvas. 

LXVIII 

At that time, Mahaimati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
asked the Blessed One to explain concerning the deep-seated 
attachment to the existence of all things and the way of 
emancipation, saying: Pray tell me, Blessed One, pray tell 
me Tathagata, Arhat, Fully-Enlightened One, concerning the 
characteristics of our deep attachment to existence and of 
our detachment from it. When I and other Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas understand well the distinction between attach- 
ment and detachment, we shall know what is the skilful 
means concerning them, and shall no more become attached 
to words according to which we grasp meaning. When we 
understand well what is meant by attachment to the existence 
of all things and the detachment from them, we shall destroy 
our discrimination of words and letters; and, by means of 

CHAPTER THREE 139 

our wisdom (buddhz), enter into all the Buddha-lands and 
assemblies; be well stamped with the stamp of the powers, 
the self-control, the psychic faculties, and the Dharanis; 
and, well furnished with the wisdom (buddht) in the ten 
inexhaustible vows and shining with varieties of rays per- 
taining to the Transformation Body, (161) behave ourselves 
with effortlessness like the moon, the sun, the jewel, and the 
elements; and hold such views at every stage as are free 
from all the signs of self-discrimination; and, seeing that 
all things are like a dream, like Maya, etc., [shall be able to] 
enter the stage and abode of Buddhahood, and deliver dis- 
courses on the Dharma in the world of all beings and in 
accordance with their needs, and free them from the dualis- 
tie notion of being and non-being in the contemplation of all 
things which are like a dream and Maya, and free them also 
from the false discrimination of birth and destruction; and, 
finally, [shall be able to] establish ourselves where there is a 
revulsion at the deepest recesses [of our consciousness], 
which is more than words [can express]. 

Said the Blessed One: Well said, well said, Mahamati! 
Listen well to me then, Mahamati, and reflect well within 
yourself; I will tell you. 

Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said, Certainly, 
I will, Blessed One; and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said to him thus: Mahamati, im- 
measurable is our deep-seated attachment to the existence of 
all things the significance of which we try to understand 
after words. For instance, there are the deep-seated attach- 
ments to signs of individuality, to causation, to the notion 
of being and non-being, to the discrimination of birth and 
no-birth, to the discrimination of cessation and no-cessation, 
to the discrimination of vehicle and no-vehicle, of Samskrita 
and Asamskrita, of the characteristics of the stages and no- 
stages, and the attachment to discrimination itself, and to 
that arising from enlightenment, the attachment to the dis- 
crimination of being and non-being on which the philos- 
ophers are so dependent, and the attachment to the triple 
vehicle and the one vehicle, which are discriminated. 

140 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

These and others, Mahamati, are the deep-seated attach- 
ments cherished by the ignorant and simple-minded (162) to 
their discriminations. Tenaciously attaching themselves to 
these the ignorant and simple-minded go on ever discrimina- 
ting like the silk-worms who, with their own thread of dis- 
crimination and attachment, enwrap not only themselves but 
others and are charmed with the thread; and thus they are 
ever tenaciously attached to the notions of existence and non- 
existence. [But really] Mahamati, there are no signs here 
of deep-seated attachment or detachment. All things are to 
be seen as abiding in solitude where there is no evolving of 
discrimination. Mahamati, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 
should have his abode where he ean see all things from the 
viewpoint of solitude. 

Further, Mahamati, when the existence and non-exist- 
ence of the external world are understood to be due to the 
seeing of the Mind itself in these signs, [the Bodhisattva] 
can enter upon the state of imagelessness where Mind-only 
is, and [there] see into the solitude which characterises the 
discrimination of all things as being and non-being and the 
deep-seated attachments resulting therefrom. This being so, 
there are in all things no signs of a deep-rooted attachment 
or of detachment. Here, Mahamati, is nobody in bondage, 
nobody in emancipation, except those who by reason of their 
perverted wisdom! recognise bondage and emancipation. 
Why? Because in all things neither being nor non-being is 
to be taken hold of. 

Further, Mahamati, there are three attachments deep- 
seated in the minds of the ignorant and simple-minded. 
They are greed, anger, and folly; and thus there is desire 
which is procreative and is accompanied by joy and greed; 
closely attached to this there takes place a succession of 
births in the [five] paths. Thus there are the five paths of 
existence for all beings who are found elosley attached [to 
greed, anger, and folly]. When one is cut off from this 
attachment, (163) no signs will be seen indicative of attach- 
ment or of non-attachment. 

* Read buddhy4, instead of budhya. 

CHAPTER THREE 141 

Further, Mahamati, depending upon and attaching to 
the triple combination which works in unison, there is the 
continuation of the Vijiianas incessantly functioning; and 
because of the attachment there is a continued and deep-felt 
assertion of existence. When the triple combination which 
causes the functioning of the Vijhanas no more takes place, 
there is the triple emancipation, and when this is kept in 
view, there is no rising of any combination. So it is said: 

46. The imagining of things not existent—this is 
characteristic of attachment [deeply seated in all beings] ; 
when the truth of this is thoroughly understood, the net of 
attachment is cleared away. 

47. The ignorant take hold of the knowledge of exist- 
ence according to words and are bound up like the silk-worm 
with their own discriminations; hence their ignorance of 
attachment [deeply seated in their minds]. 

LXIX 

Further, Mahamati said: According to the Blessed One, 
in all things that are variously discriminated by discrimina- 
tion there is no self-nature, as it is nothing but [the creation 
of] false imagination (parikalpita) ; if, Blessed One, it is 
but [the creation of] false imagination and there is nothing 
in the world which is to be conceived as indicative of self- 
nature, does it not, Blessed One, come to this, according to 
your statement, that there is neither defilement nor purifica- 
tion, because all things are of the nature of false imagina- 
tion ? 

Said the Blessed One: Mahamati, it is just as you say. 
The self-nature of things is the discrimination of the ignorant 
and simple-minded, and it is not as it is discriminated by 
them. (164) Mahamati, it is the creation of false imagina- 
tion; nothing indicative of self-nature is to be ascertained. 
But, Mahamati, there is the self-nature of things such as is 
ascertained by the wise, by their wise knowledge, by their 
wise insight, by their wise transcendental vision. 

Said Mahamati: Blessed One, if there is the self-nature 
of things such as is ascertained by the wise, by their wise 

142 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

knowledge, by their wise insight, by their wise transcendental 
vision which is neither human nor celestial vision, and if 
there is no such self-nature as is discriminated by the 
ignorant and simple-minded, how, Blessed One, can the 
ignorant and the simple-minded abandon their discrimina- 
tions, as they have no way to recognise the presence of an 
exalted reality (dryabhdvavastu)? For they are neither 
perverted nor unperverted, Blessed One, [that is, they are 
what they are]. Why? Because they are unable to have 
an insight into the self-nature of exalted reality, because 
they see the course of things in the aspect of being and non- 
being. And Blessed One, the reality’ cannot be such as is 
discriminated even by the wise, because the aspect of reality 
as it is in itself cannot be an object [of discrimination by 
anybody]; because, Blessed One, what appears to the wise 
as the self-nature of reality is no more than the creation of 
their imagination, which is predicable with the notion of 
causation and no-causation ; that is, they also cherish in their 
own way the idea of a being with self-nature. [And they 
would say] that this is a realm that belongs to somebody 
else and is not that [of the ignorant]. This is committing 
the fault of non-finality, for thus what constitutes the self- 
nature of reality becomes impossible to know. Blessed One, 
what is derived from the imagination cannot be the self- 
nature of reality. How is it (165) that while things are 
said to exist owing to the imagination? [or discrimination], 
they are said again not to be such as are imagined ? 

Blessed One, [it is true that] according to the way the 
imagination is carried on, the self-nature of reality conceived 
may vary; for when the cause is not alike, the notion of 
reality that thus comes to be cherished may not be alike. 
But according to you, Blessed One, while the imagination is 
kept on going with the wise as well as with the ignorant, 
the latter alone fail to see reality as it is; and yet you tell us 
that the reason why it is said that things are not really such 

* Vastu and bhava are both used here in the sense of reality. 
Throughout this text, parikalpa, vikalpa, pratikalpa, aud prativi- 
kalpa are used interchangeably 

2 

CHAPTER THREE 143 

as are imagined by the imagination is to make all beings 
discard their imagination. Now, Blessed One, is it that in 
order to have all beings free from the notion of being [which 
is realism] and of non-being [which is nihilism], you in turn 
make them cherish a realistic view of existence! by telling 
them to uphold the idea of the self-nature of reality, whereby 
they are led to cling to the realm of noble wisdom? Why 
do you deny the truth of solitude by teaching the doctrine 
of reality whose self-nature is [according to you] noble 
wisdom ?? 

Said the Blessed One: Mahamati, it is not true that 
I deny truth of solitude, nor that I fall into a realistie view 
by upholding the noble doctrine of self-existing reality. But 
in order to save all beings from becoming frightened, who 
are addicted from beginningless past to the notion of self- 
nature, it is told them that there is truth of solitude, after 
making them realise by means of noble wisdom that reality 
in its self-nature is made the subject of attachment [by the 
ignorant]. Mahamati, the doctrine of self-nature is not 
taught by me. But, Mahamati, those who have realised by 
themselves truth of solitude as it really is and are abiding 
in it, will see that [this existence of] error has no form; 
and thereby knowing that what is seen is nothing but the 
Mind itself, (166) they are kept away from [dualistically] 
viewing an external world? under the aspect of being and 
non-being ; they are stamped well with the stamp of suchness 
which is gained by the triple emancipation; they will have 
an intuition into the self-nature of all things by the wisdom 
which is acquired within themselves, and thus get away from 
such ideas of reality as to lead themselves to realism and 
nihilism. 

* Not abhinivesannastitvadrishtih (lines 8-9) as it stands in the 
text, but abhinive§ddastitva® according to T‘ang and Sung. 

2 This whole passage ascribed to Mahdmati is one of the most 
difficult passages in the Lankdvatdra, partly due to discrepancies. The 
translator is not at all satisfied with the result. In the Appendix the 
whole section 69 is given in the original Sanskrit together with all the 
four versions, Chinese and Tibetan. 

& Viviktadharma...... yathadtathya (lines 2-3) being a curious 
repetition of the preceding lines is dropped in the translation. 

144 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

LXX 

Further, Mahamati, the thesis: ‘‘All things are un- 
born’’ is not to be maintained by the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattva as valid. Why? Of this thesis it is to be stated that 
anything of which something is asserted partakes thereby of 
the nature of being, and that the reason for this thesis is 
characterised with the quality of birth; while it is being 
asserted by the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva that all things are 
unborn, the very assertion destroys his thesis. The thesis 
that all things are unborn acts against the one who holds it 
because it is born of the principle of mutuality. Even when 
this thesis of no-birth is to be maintained within the extent 
of existence itself, the notion of no-birth cannot hold itself 
in it, and the statement, the thesis, that all things are unborn 
is destroyed since it is dependent on the members of the 
syllogism. As regards the thesis maintaining the no-birth! 
of being and non-being, Mahamati, this thesis, to be valid, 
must be within the limits of existence itself; but there is 
no aspect of existence which can be regarded either as 
being or as non-being. If, Mahamati, the no-birth of all 
things is to be asserted by this thesis of no-birth, (167) the 
very attempt defeats the thesis itself. Therefore, this thesis 
is not to be upheld. Because many faults come out in con- 
nection with the members of the syllogism, and because in 
these syllogistic members there is a mutual mixing-up of 
reasons, this thesis is not to be upheld. 

As with [the thesis that] all things are unborn, so with 
{the thesis that] all things are empty and have no self- 
nature—neither is to be maintained by the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva. But, Mahamati, this is to be pointed out by 
the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, that things in their self-nature 
are like Maya, like a dream; for they are in one way per- 
ceived [as existing] and in another way are not perceived 

Literally, “is not born.” 
* Pratijiayam...... pratijnd bhavati (lines 1-4) is omitted in 
the translation following T‘ang and Sung, as it does not add to the 
clearing up of the meaning. 

CHAPTER THREE 145 

[as such], and all things are thus seen in [two] ways, in 
accordance either with knowledge or ignorance. Let it be 
pointed out that all things are hike Maya and a dream, except 
when the feeling of fear is aroused in the minds of the 
ignorant. Mahamati, the ignorant and the simple-minded 
are addicted to the views of being and non-being, and are 
liable to tremble [at our teaching] ; Mahamati, let them not 
be frightened away from the Mahayana. So it is said: 

48. There is no sclf-nature, no thought-construction, no 
reality, no Alaya-vijiiina; these, indeed, are so many dis- 
criminations cherished by the ignorant who like a corpse are 
bad logicians. 

(168) 49. All things are unborn—[this thesis] is 
established by all the philosophers; [but] nothing whatever 
is ever born, [no establishment is needed,] things are all 
linked by causation. 

50. <All things are unborn—no such discrimination is 
made by transcendental knowledge; when a certain conclu- 
sion is made depending on a cause, there is no sound judg- 
ment in it. 

51. Asa hair-net is what is wrongly perceived by those 
who are dim-eyed, so existence discriminated [as real] is due 
to the wrong discrimination of the ignorant. 

52. The triple world is no more than thought-construc- 
tion (prajiaptt), there is no reality in its self-nature; by 
means of this thought-constructed reality, logicians go on 
discriminating. 

53. Individual form, reality, thought-construction,— 
these are [only] a mental disturbance ; transcending all this, 
my sons will walk where there is no discrimination. 

54. As in a mirage in the air, the thought of water is 
cherished where there is no water, so things are seen by the 
ignorant otherwise than by the wise. 

55. The insight of the wise, who move about in the 
realm of imagelessness, is pure, is born of the triple eman- 
cipation, is released from birth and destruction. 

56. Where all things are wiped away, even a state of 
imagelessness ceases to exist for the Yogins; in the sameness 

146 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

of existence and non-existence, the fruit [of wisdom] is born 
to the wise. 

(169) 57. How does existence cease to exist? How 
does the sameness take place? When the mind fails to 
understand [the truth], there is disturbance inside, outside, 
and in the middle; with the cessation [of the disturbance] 
the mind sees the sameness. 

LXXI 

Further, Mahamati said: It is told by the Blessed One, 
again, that [true] knowledge is gained independent of any 
object supporting it, and whatever statements one makes 
about it are no more than thought-construction, and that as 
this thought-construction is not to be seized as real, the seiz- 
ing act of the seizer itself ceases, and when there is thus no 
seizing, knowledge which is known as discrimination no more 
evolves. Now, Blessed One, [how is transcendental knowledge 
unobtainable ?] Is it unobtainable because of our not recognis- 
ing the generality and individuality of things, their plurali- 
ties, their unities? Or is it unobtainable because [such 
ideas as] individuality, generality, multiplicity, and self- 
nature overpower one another? Or is it unobtainable be- 
cause of the obstructions presented by a wall, a mountain, 
an earth-work, a rampart, or by earth, wind, water, or fire? 
Or because of remoteness or nearness? Or does the know- 
ledge fail to obtain its object of cognition because of [the 
imperfection of] the sense-organs due to youth, age, or blind- 
ness? If, Blessed One, knowledge was not obtainable because 
of our not recognising individuality, generality, unity and 
plurality, then, Blessed One, such cannot be [transcendental ] 
knowledge; it is to be called ignorance (ajfana), for in spite 
of the fact that objects to be known are before us we do not 
know them. Again, if knowledge is unobtainable because 
[such ideas as] individuality, generality, multiplicity, and 
self-nature overpower one another, such is ignorance 
(ajnana). (170) Blessed One, it is not [transcendental | 
knowledge. Where there is something to be known, Blessed 
One, knowledge evolves; where there is nothing, none evolves; 

CHAPTER THREE 147 

knowledge is possible [only] where there is a correspondence 
with that which is known. Again, if knowledge is unobtain- 
able because of the obstruction presented by a wall, moun- 
tain, earthwork, rampart, or by earth, water, wind, or fire, 
or due to farness or nearness, or on account of the im- 
perfection of the sense-organs as in the case of an infant, 
the aged, and the blind, such as is unattainable is not [trans- 
cendental] knowledge; it is ignorance, for the object to be 
known is there but the knowing faculty is lacking. 

Said the Blessed One: Mahamati, such [knowledge as 
is unobtainable] is not ignorance, such is [transcendental] 
knowledge ; Mahamati, it is not ignorance. It is not because 
of the deeper sense that I say this, but when [we know that] 
there is knowledge gained independent of any supporting 
object, whatever statements we make about it are no more 
than thought-constructions. That [transcendental] know- 
ledge is unobtainable is due to the recognition that there is 
nothing in the world but what is seen of the Mind, and that 
these external objects to which being and non-being are 
predicated are non-existent: As this [knowledge] is un- 
obtainable, there is no evolving of knowing and known, and 
as thus the triple emancipation is realised, there is unattain- 
able knowledge [which is transcendental]. But logicians 
being under the habit-energy of the wrong reasoning which 
has been earried on since beginningless time as to existence 
and non-existence are unable to know all this, and, while not 
knowing it, they are concerned with [such notions as] ex- 
ternal objects, substances, forms, indications, existence and 
non-existence; and yet they declare that the cessation of 
discrimination is [the state of] the Mind-only. As they are 
tenaciously clinging to the thought of an ego-soul and all 
that belongs to it, they are really unable to understand 
what is meant by the doctrine of Mind-only, (171) and 
go on discriminating knowing and known. And because of 
their discriminating knowing and known, they think of 
things as existent and non-existent, and declaring that 
[transcendental knowledge] is unobtainable, abide in nihil- 
ism. So it is said: 

148 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

58. If [transcendental] knowledge fails to see an objec- 
tive world which lies before it, such is ignorance and not 
knowledge; this teaching belongs to the logicians. 

59. If [transcendental] knowledge fails to sce, though 
various obstructions far and near, its own unique object that 
does not present itself [as an object], such is to be called 
wrong knowledge. 

60. If [transcendental] knowledge fails to know, on 
account of defective senses such as infancy, old age, and 
blindness, its own object which is present, such is to be called 
wrong knowledge. 

LXXII 

Further, Mahamati, the ignorant and simple-minded 
keep on dancing and leaping fascinated with their wrong 
reasonings, falsehoods, and self-discriminations, and are 
unable to understand the truth of self-realisation and its 
discourse in words; clinging to the external world which is 
seen of the Mind itself, they cling to the study of the dis- 
courses which are a means and do not know properly how to 
assertain the truth of: self-realisation which is the truth un- 
spoiled by the fourfold proposition. 

Said Mahamati: Blessed One, it is just as you say. 
Pray tell me, Blessed One, about the characteristic features 
of the truth of self-realisation and about the discourses on it, 
whereby I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas in future time, 
understanding what they are, may keep ourselves away 
from the wrong logicians such as the philosophers and those 
who belong to the vehicles of the Sravaka and the Pratyeka- 
buddha. 

(172) Said the Blessed One: Then, Mahamati, listen 
well and reflect well within yourself; I will tell you. 

Certainly, Blessed One; said Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said this to him: Mahamati, there are 
two forms of teaching the truth attained by the Tathagatas, 
Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones of the past, present, and 
future. They are: the teaching by discourses, and the teach- 

CHAPTER THREE 149 

ing by the establishment of self-realisation. What is meant 
by the studying of the discourses is this, Mahamati: there are 
various materials and canonical texts and discourses by 
which sentient beings are taught according to their disposi- 
tions and inclinations. What then is the truth of self- 
realisation by which the Yogins turn away from discrimina- 
ting what is seen of the Mind itself? There is an exalted 
state of inner attainment which does not fall into the dualism 
of oneness and otherness, of bothness and not-bothness; 
which goes beyond the Citta, Manas, and Manovijhana ; which 
has nothing to do with logic, reasoning, theorising, and illus- 
trating; which has never been tasted by any bad logicians, 
by the philosophers, Sravakas, and Pratyekabuddhas, who 
have fallen into the dualistic views of being and non-being— 
this I call self-realisation. This, Mahamati, is what charac- 
terises the truth of self-realisation and discoursing on it, and 
in this you and the other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are to 
discipline themselves. So it is said: 

61. i have two forms of teaching the truth: self- 
realisation and discoursing. I discourse with the ignorant 
and [disclose] self-realisation to the Yogins. 

LXXIII 

(173) At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva said this to the Blessed One: It was told at one 
time by the Blessed One, the Tathagata, the Arhat, the Fully- 
Enlightened One, that the Lokayatika who is [skilled in] 
various forms of incantation and in the art of eloquence 
is not to be honoured, adored, and reverently attended upon; 
for what one gains from such devotions is worldly enjoy- 
ments and not the Dharma [or Truth]. For what reason is 
this said, Blessed One, that by devoting ourselves to the 
Lokayatika who is skilled in varieties of incantations and 
in the art of eloquence, worldly enjoyments are gained but 
not the Dharma [or Truth] ? 

Said the Blessed One: The Lokayatika who is skilled 
in varieties of incantations and in the art of eloquence, 
Mahamati, puts the minds of the ignorant in utter confusion 

150 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

by means of various reasonings, by [clever manipulation of] 
words and phrases, and what he teaches being the mere 
prattle of a child as far as one can make out is not at all in 
accordance with truth nor in unison with sense. For this 
reason, Mahamati, the Lokayatika is said to be skilled in 
varieties of incantations and in the art of eloquence. He 
attracts the ignorant by making clever use of various words, 
[but] he never leads them to the way of truth and right 
teaching. As he himself does not understand what all things 
mean, he puts the minds of the ignorant into utter confusion 
by his dualistic views, thus ruining himself. Not being 
released of the transition from one path to another, not 
understanding that there is nothing but what is seen of the 
Mind itself, and attaching himself to the idea of self-nature 
in external things, the Lokayatika knows no deliverance from 
discrimination. For this reason, Mahamati, the Lokayatika 
who is clever in various incantations (174) and in the art of 
eloquence, being thus never emancipated from such calami- 
ties! as birth, age, disease, sorrow, lamentation, pain, and 
despair, leads the ignorant into bewilderment by means of 
various words, phrases, reasons, examples, and conclusions. 

Mahamati, Indra was a brilliant [{Lokayatika] whose 
knowledge made him master of many treatises and who was 
himself the author of a work on sound. He had a disciple 
who assuming the body of a serpent went up to heaven and 
got into the society of the god Indra. Making up a thesis 
he challenged the god: Either your one-thousand-spoked 
chariot be smashed to pieces, or every one of my own serpent- 
hoods be cut off. In the argument the Lokayatika disciple 
who had assumed the form of a serpent defeated [the god- 
opponent], whereupon the one-thousand-spoked chariot was 
smashed to pieces. The disciple then came down again to 
this world. In such a way, Mahamati, [the Lokayatika] has 
a system composed of various reasonings and exemplifica- 
tions, and, knowing well even the minds of the animal world, 
puts the gods and fighting demons in utter confusion by 
means of various words and phrases; he then makes them 

1 

Read apaydsa instead of updydsa. 

CHAPTER THREE 151 

tenaciously adhere to the notion of coming and going 
(dyavyaya) ; how much more human beings! For this reason, 
Mahamati, the Lokayatika is to be shunned, for he carries 
with him the cause leading to the birth of pain. No homage, 
no reverence, no service is to be shown him. Mahamati, the 
attainment of the Lokayatika does not go beyond the realm 
of the body and knowledge belonging to it, though he may 
explain his materialism by using varieties of words and 
phrases (175) amounting to a hundred thousand. But in 
after times, after five hundred years, divisions will take place 
{among his followers] leading them to wrong reasonings and 
demonstrations; divisions will abound because of this, not 
being able to hold disciples. Thus, Mahamati, materialism 
splitting into many parties and adhering to varieties of 
reasonings is explained by the philosophers, each of whom 
clings to his way of reasoning as he knows no truth existing 
by itself. While this is not at all the case with [all] the 
philosophers who have their own treatises and doctrines, 
materialism is asserted under various disguises which are 
explained by a hundred thousand different methods; there 
is in them [also] no truth existing by itself, and they do not 
recognise that theirs is materialism because of their 
stupidity.? 

Said Mahamati: If all the philosophers teach material- 
ism by means of various words, phrases, examples, and 
conclusions, which are not the truth as it is, but are their 
own selfish assertions tenaciously maintained, does not the 
Blessed One too teach materialism by means of various 
words and phrases, to the assemblages of the gods, demons, 
and human beings, who come from various countries—I say, 
materialism which is not the truth of self-realisation but is 
something like the discourses of all the philosophers? 

The Blessed One said: I do not teach materialism, 
nor coming-and-going (dyavyaya). .But I teach, Mahamati, 
that which is not coming-and-going. Now, Mahamati, com- 
ing means production and mass, it is born of accumulation. 
Going, Mahamati, means destruction. That which is not 

* Read mohGt instead of mohohat. 

152 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

coming-and-going is designated unborn. (176) Mahamati, 
I do not teach anything approaching the discrimination of 
the philosophers. For what reason? Because there are no 
external objects, there is nothing to get attached to; when 
one abides in Mind-only, beyond which there is no external 
world, dualism ceases; as there is no realm of form based on 
discrimination, one comes to recognise that there is nothing 
but what is seen of the Mind itself; and for these reasons 
the discrimination of what is seen of the Mind itself does not 
take place. Owing to the cessation of discrimination, one 
enters into the triple emancipation where is the state of no- 
form, emptiness, and effortlessness. Hence it is called 
deliverence. 

I remember, Mahamati, when I was staying in a certain 
place, a Brahman Lokayatika approached where I was and 
having approached suddenly asked me, saying: Gautama, 
is all created? 

I said this to him: Brahman, if all is created, this is 
the first school of materialism. 

Guatama, is all uncreated ? 

Brahman, if all is uncreated, this is the second school 
of materialism. Thus [to state that] all is non-eternal, or 
that all is eternal, or that all is born, or that all is unborn, 
this, Brahman, is the sixth school of materialism. 

Again, Mahamati, the Brahman Lokayatika said this to 
me: Gautama, is all one? Is all different? Is all charac- 
terised with bothness? Is all characterised with not-both- 
ness? Is all to be regarded as subject to causation since all 
is seen as born of varieties of causes? 

This, Brahman, is the tenth school of materialism. 

Again, Gautama, is all explainable? Is all unexplain- 
able? Is there an ego-soul? Is there no ego-soul? Is this 
world real? (177) Is this world not-real? Is there another 
world? Is there no other world? Is another world existent 
or non-existent?! Is there emancipation? Is there no eman- 
eipation? Is all momentary? Is all not momentary? Are 

* The Chinese translations omit this question. 

CHAPTER THREE 153 

space, Apratisamkhya-nirodha,! and Nirvana, O Gautama, 
are they created or uncreated? Is there the middle existence? 
Is there no middle existence? 

I then said this to him, Mahamati: If so, Brahman, 
this is materialism. It is not mine. O Brahman, it is your 
worldly philosophy. I explain, Brahman, that the triple 
world has its cause in the habit-energy of discrimination 
going on since beginningless time on account of error and 
wrong reasoning: for discrimination takes place. Brahman, 
because it is not recognised that there is no external world 
but the Mind itself, and not because an external world is 
seen as the object of cognition. According to the philos- 
ophers, there is a triple concordance of an ego-soul, sense- 
organs, and an objective world, but such is not mine. 
Brahman, I do not belong to the school of causation, nor 
to the school of no-causation, except that I teach the chain 
of origination as far as the thought-constructed world of 
grasped and grasping exists depending on discrimination. 
This is not understood by you and others who cherish the 
notion of an ego-soul and its continuity. Mahamati, space, 
Nirvana, and causation exist in enumeration; as realities 
they are unobtainable. Hence the question whether they are 
created or not requires no answering. 

Again, Mahamati, the Brahman Lokayatika said this: 
Is the triple world to be regarded as caused by ignoranee, 
desire, and action? or is it causeless? 

Brahman, this twofold question again belongs to 
materialism. 

Gautama, are all things to be coneeived (178) under 
the aspect of individuality and generality? 

This, too, Brahman, belongs to materialism. So long 
as there is a mental perturbation which makes one cling to 
an objective world of discrimination, there is materialism. 

Further, Mahamati, this Brahman materialist said this 
to me: Gautama, is there any philosophy that is not of the 
world? All the truth that is taught by all the philosophers 

1 “Annihilation taking place without premeditation’’—one of the 
three non-effect-producing objects (asamskrita). 

154 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

by means of varieties of words and phrases, by means of 
reasons, examples, and conclusions, by general consent, 
Gautama, belongs to me. 

Brahman, there is something that does not belong to 
you, though it is not beyond the truth of general consent, 
nor independent of varieties of words and phrases, and 
further, it is not out of accord with reason. 

[The Brahman asked,] Is there any philosophy that is 
not of the world and yet belongs to the general opinion of 
the world? 

Brahman, there is that which does not belong to 
materialism and which is not reached by your wisdom nor 
by that of the philosophers who cling to false discriminations 
and wrong reasonings as they fail to see the unreality of 
external objects. By this is meant the cessation of dis- 
crimination. When it is recognised that there is nothing 
beyond what is seen of the Mind itself, the discrimination 
of being and non-being ceases; as thus there is no external 
world as the object of perception, discrimination abides in its 
own abode.! This is not of materialism; it belongs to me, 
it does not belong to you. By abiding in its own abode is 
meant that it ceases to evolve; as discrimination is no more 
born, it is said to have ceased to evolve. This, Brahman, is 
not of materialism. In short, Brahman, if there is any 
coming-and-going of the Vijianas, (179) a vanishing-and- 
appearing, a solicitation, an attachment, an intense affection, 
a philosophical view, a theory, an abode, a touch, the clinging 
to various signs, assemblage, continuity,” desire (trishnd), and 

+ A better reading of the Nanjo text may be to follow the Tang 
and the Wei, according to which vikalpah (1.16) is negated and 
svasthane ’vatishthate forms a separate sentence, thus: ‘‘Discrimina- 
tion ceases, and one abides in the self-abode.” That by this self-abode 
is meant the self-abode of reality is gathered from such phrases as 
yathabhitarthasthdna-darsanam (p. 200, 1.6), yathabhitavasthanadar- 
Sanam (p. 112, 1.6), yathabhitasvalakshandvasthanavasthitam (p. 124, 
1.1), vikalpasyadpravritteh svastho, loko nishkriyah (p. 199, 1.3), ete. 
The self-abode of reality is where reality is seen as it is in itself, or 
as the suchness of existence, or as something solitary (viviktadharma), 
i.e. absolute. 

* Samtatih instead of sattvanam, according to T‘ang and Sung. 

CHAPTER THREE 155 

attachment to a cause, this, Brahman, is materialism of yours 
but not mine. 

Mahamati, I was thus questioned by the Brahman 
materialist, who came to me, and when he was thus sent off 
he silently departed. 

At that time there came to the Blessed One the King of 
the Nagas, called Krishnapakshaka, who assumed the body of 
a Brahman and said thus: Gautama, is there not another 
world? 

Now, young man, whence do you come? 

Gautama, I am come from White Isle. 

Brahman, that is another world. 

The young man thus refuted and put to silence made 
himself invisible without asking me anything about my own 
teaching, which stands in opposition to his;! he thought 
within himself: This son of the Sakyas stands outside of 
my own system; he is a pitiable fellow, he belongs to the 
school which holds the cessation of signs and causes, he talks 
of the cessation of discrimination which will take place when 
there is the cognition of an external world as something seen 
of one’s own discrimination. And, Mahamati, you too ask 
me how, for one who serves the Lokayatika skilled in various 
ineantations and in the art of eloquence, there are worldly 
enjoyments and not the attainment of the Dharma. 

Said Mahamati; What is meant, Blessed One, by the 
words, ‘‘the objects of worldly enjoyment’’ and ‘‘the 
Dharma’’? 

(180) Said the Blessed One: Well said, well said, 
Mahamati! You have thought deeply about this twofold 
meaning, having in view present and future generations. 
Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well within yourself ; 
I will tell you. 

Certainly, Blessed One; said Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said this to him: What is meant by 
a worldly object of enjoyment, Mahamati? It means that 

1 There is no allusion in the Chinese versions to this dialogue 

between Krishnapakshaka and the Buddha. 

156 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

which ean be touched, attracted by, wiped off, handled, and 
tasted ; it is that which makes one get attached to an external 
world, enter into a dualism on account of a wrong view, and 
appear again in the Skandhas, where, owing to the procrea- 
tive force of desire, there arise all kinds of disaster such 
as birth, age, disease, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, 
despair, etc. This is called the object of worldly enjoyment 
by myself and other Buddhas. This, Mahamati, is the at- 
tainment of worldly enjoyments and not that of the Truth. 
It is materialism which one learns by serving the Lokayatika. 

Mahamati, what is meant by the attainment of the 
Dharma (Truth) ? When the truth of Self-mind and the two- 
fold egolessness are understood, and further, when the nature 
of the egolessness of things and persons is seen into, dis- 
crimination ceases to assert itself; when the various stages of 
Bodhisattvahood are thoroughly perceived one after another, 
the Citta, Manas, and Manovijnana are turned away; and 
when one enters upon the path of baptism by the wisdom 
of all the Buddhas, and takes hold of the [ten] inexhaustible 
vows,! one becomes (181) sovereign master of all things by 
virtue of a life of effortlessness. Hence it is called the 
Dharma, as one is thereby released from all philosophical 
views, unsound reasonings, discriminations, and dualistic 
notions. As a rule, Mahamati, the philosophical views lead 
the ignorant, though not the wise, to a dualism, that is, to 
nihilism and eternalism. Eternalism rises from embracing 
a doctrine of no-causation, while nihilism rises from believ- 
ing in the annihilation of causal conditions and in the non- 
existence of a cause. I teach, however, the Dharma so called 
which is [subject to] the conditions of rising, abiding, and 
destruction. This, Mahamati, is the conclusion with regard 
to worldly enjoyment and the Dharma. So it is said: 

62. Beings are subdued by the reception (samgraha) ,? 
and are brought into subjection by the moral precepts (Sila) ; 
they are removed from philosophical views by transcendental 

* Read anishthdpada, instead of anadishthapada. 
There are four ways of receiving others, catvdri samgraha- 

vastunt: charity, kindly spirit, benevolent deeds, and impartiality. 

CHAPTER THREE 157 

knowledge (prajva) and are nourished by the emancipa- 
tions.! 

63. All that is taught by the philosophers to no purpose 
is materialism; where the realistic view of cause and effect 
is cherished, there is no self-realisation. 

64. I teach to my group of disciples one self-realisation 
which has nothing to do with cause and effect, being free 
from materialism. 

65. There is nothing but that which is seen of the 
Mind itself, the duality too is of the Mind; while existence? 
is [observed as divided into] the grasped and the grasping, 
it has nothing to do with eternalism or nihilism. 

(182) 66. As long as mentation goes on, there is 
materialism; when there is no rising of discrimination, the 
world is seen as of Mind itself. 

67. ‘‘Coming’’ (dyam) means the originating of the 
objective world as effect, and ‘‘going’’ (wyayam) is the not- 
seeing® of the effect; when one thoroughly understands the 
‘‘eoming-and-going,’’ discrimination ceases. 

68. Eternity and non-eternity, the made and not-made, 
this world and that world—all these and other [ideas] 
belong to materialism. 

LXXIV 

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattva said this to the Blessed One: Nirvana, Nirvana is 
talked of by the Blessed One; what does this term designate? 
What is the Nirvana that is discriminated by all the philos- 
ophers ? 

Said the Blessed One: Then, Mahamati, listen well and 
reflect well within yourself; I will tell you. 

Certainly, Blessed One; said Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said this to him: As to such Nirvanas 
as are discriminated by the philosophers, there are really 

Missing in Sung. 
* Abhdvena(%) in Sung. 
* According to the Chinese translations. 

158 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

none in existence. Some philosophers conceive Nirvana 
to be found where a system of mentation no more operates 
owing to the cessation of the Skandhas, Dhatus, and 
Ayatanas, or to the indifference to the objective world, or 
to the recognition that all things are impermanent; (183) 
‘or where there is no recollection of the past and present, 
just as when a lamp is extinguished, or when a seed is burnt, 
or when a fire goes out, because then there is the cessation of 
all the substrate, which is explained by the philosophers as 
the non-rising of discrimination. But, Mahamati, Nirvana 
does not consist in mere annihilation. 

Again, some explain deliverance by going to another 
quarter and abode, as when a wind stops blowing, when the 
discrimination of objects ceases. Again, some philosophers 
explain deliverance by the getting-rid of the [dualistic] view 
of knower and known. Some conceive deliverance to be the 
cessation of discrimination where one sees permanence and 
impermanence. 

Again, some explain the discrimination of various forms 
as the bearer of pain, and yet not understanding that there 
is nothing but what is seen of the Mind itself, are alarmed 
by the notion of form, and seek their happiness in formless- 
ness.1 In this they cherish the notion of Nirvana. 

Again some conceive this to be Nirvana: that in con- 
sideration of generality and individuality recognisable in all 
things inner and outer, they are never destroyed, maintain- 
ing their being throughout the past, present, and future. 
Again some conceive that Nirvana is an ego-soul, a being, a 
vital force, a nourisher, a supreme spirit, and the indestruc- 
tability of all things. 

Again, Mahamati, some philosophers owing to their 
foolishness declare this to be Nirvana: that there is a primary 
substance, there is a supreme soul, and they are seen differ- 
ently by each, and that they produce all things from the 
transformations of the qualities. 

Some conceive Nirvana to consist in the extinction of 

* According to the Chinese translations, nimitto (line 10) is to 

be cancelled. 

CHAPTER THREE 159 

merit and demerit; some in the destruction of the passions 
by means of knowledge; (184) some in regarding IS$vara as 
the free creator of the world. Some think that the world is 
born of interaction and that there is no [special] cause other 
than this cause, and clinging to it they have no awakening 
because of stupidity, and they conceive Nirvana to consist in 
this non-awakening. 

Again, Mahamati, some philosophers conceive Nirvana 
to be the attaining of the true path. Some cherish the 
thought of Nirvana as where there is the union of qualities 
and their owner, from which there is oneness and otherness, 
bothness and not-bothness. Some imagine that Nirvana is 
where they see the self-nature of things existing all by its 
own nature, such as the variegated feathers of the peacock, 
variously formed precious stones, or the pointedness of a 
thorn. 

Some, Mahamati, conceive Nirvana in the recognition of 
the twenty-five Tattvas (truths) ; some in the king’s obser- 
vance of the teaching of the six virtues. Some, seeing that 
time is a creator and that the rise of the world depends on 
time, conceive that Nirvana consists in recognising this fact. 
Again, Mahamati, some conceive being to be Nirvana, some 
non-being, while some conceive that all things and Nirvana 
are not to be distinguished one from the other. 

All these views of Nirvana severally advanced by the 
philosophers with their reasonings are not in accord with 
logic, nor are they acceptable to the wise. Mahamati, they 
all conceive Nirvana dualistically and in a causal connection. 
By these discriminations, Mahamati, all philosophers imagine 
Nirvana, but there is nothing rising, nothing disappearing 
here, [and there is no room for discrimination.] Mahamati, 
each philosopher relying on his own text-book from which 
he draws his understanding and intelligence, examines [the 
subject] and sins against [the truth], because [the truth] 
is not such as is imagined by him; [his reasoning] ends in 
setting the mind to wandering about and becoming confused, 
as Nirvana is not to be found anywhere. 

Again, Mahamati, there are others who, roaring with 

160 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

their all-knowledge as a lion roars, explain Nirvana in the 
following wise: that is, Nirvana is where it is recognised that 
there is nothing but what is seen of the Mind itself; where 
there is no attachment to external objects, existent or non- 
existent; where, getting rid of the four propositions, there 
is an insight into the abode of reality as it 1s; where, recog- 
nising the nature of the Self-mind, (185) one does not cherish 
the dualism of discrimination; where grasped and grasping 
are no more obtainable; where all logical measures are not 
seized upon as it is realised that they never assert themselves ; 
where the idea of truth is not adhered to but treated with 
indifference because of its causing a bewilderment; where, 
by the attainment of the exalted Dharma which lies within 
the inmost recesses of one’s being, the two forms of egoless- 
ness are recognised, the two forms of passions subsided, and 
the two kinds of hindrance cleared away; where the stages 
of Bodhisattvahood are passed one after another until the 
stage of Tathagatahood is attained, in which all the Samadhis 
beginning with the Mayopama (Mayéa-like) are realised, and 
the Citta, Manas, and Manovijfiana are put away:! [here 
indeed they say Nirvana is to be found]. 

69. Nirvana is severally conceived by the philosophers ; 
(186) but theirs is no more than imagination, it is not the 
way of emancipation. 

70. Released of bound and binding and free from all 
expediencies, the philosophers imagine they are emancipated, 
but emancipation is not to be found there. 

71. Divided into many a school] are the systems of the 
philosophers; there is thus no emancipation in them, because 
of their imagination stupidly carried on. 

72. Wrongly imbued with the ideas of cause and effect, 
all the philosophers are beguiled, and their is thus no eman- 
cipation for them who are of the dualistic school of being 
and non-being. 

73. The ignorant aie delighted with discoursing and 

* This whole paragraph which ought to be where it is in the 
present translation, is put after the paragraph preceding the last one 

in the Sanskrit text and also in Sung. Delete kalpayanti (p. 185, 1.6). 

CHAPTER THREE 161 

false reasoning [but] they are unable to raise any great 
intelligence towards truth (tatéva), discoursing is a source of 
suffering in the triple world, while truth is the extinguisher 
of suffering. 

74, Like an image seen in a mirror, which is not real, 
the Mind is seen by the ignorant in a dualistic form in the 
mirror of habit-energy. 

75. When it is not thoroughly understood that there 
is nothing but what is seen of the Mind itself, dualistic dis- 
eriminations take place; when it is thoroughly understood 
that there is nothing but what is seen of the Mind itself, 
discrimination ceases. 

76. Mind is no other than multiplicity, [and yet it is] 
devoid of qualified and qualifying; forms are visible but not 
in the way as seen discriminated by the ignorant. 

77. The triple world is no other than discrimination, 
there are no external objects; discrimination sees multipli- 
city, this is not understood by the ignorant. 

(187) 78. [The truth] is told [differently] discrim- 
inated in the different sutras because of names and notions; 
[yet] apart from words no meaning is attainable. 

LXXV 

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said 
this to him: Tell me, Blessed One, Tathagata, Arhat, Fully- 
Enlightened One, concerning the self-nature of Buddhahood, 
whereby I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, understand- 
ing well what constitutes the self-nature! of the Tathagata, 
may have both ourselves and others awakened [in the truth]. 

The Blessed One said: Then, Mahamati, ask me as you 
desire, according to which I will answer. 

Mahamati replied: Blessed One, is the Tathagata, the 
Arhat, the Fully-Enlightened One to be considered unmade 
or made, an effect or a cause, predicated or predicating, an 
expression or that which is expressed, knowledge or that 
which is knowable? Is the Blessed One different from all 
these expressions, or not? 

1 Tathdgata-svabhavakuSsald, instead of svakuSsala. 

162 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

The Blessed One said: If the Tathagata, Arhat, Fully- 
Enlightened One is to be described by those expressions, he 
is neither made nor unmade, neither an effect nor a cause. 
Why ? Because the error of dualism would here be committed. 
If, Mahamati, the Tathagata is something made, he is im- 
permanent; if he is impermanent, anything made would be 
a Tathagata, which is not desired by myself and other Tatha- 
gatas. If he is something unmade, his self-essence being 
attainment, all the preparations brought forward [for the 
realisation of Tathagatahood] will be useless, (188) like a 
hare’s horns, or a barren woman’s child, because of their 
never having been made. That which is neither an effect 
nor a cause, Mahamati, is neither a being nor a non-being; 
and that which is neither a being nor a non-being is outside 
the four propositions. The four propositions, Mahamati, 
belong to worldly usage. That which is outside the four 
propositions is no more than a word, like a barren woman’s 
child. Mahamati, a barren woman’s child is a mere word 
and is beyond the four propositions. <As it is beyond them, 
the wise know it to be not subject to measurement. So is 
the meaning of all the terms concerning the Tathagata to be 
understood by the wise. 

It is told by me that all things are egoless; by this is 
meant, Mahamati, that they are devoid of selfhood; hence 
this egolessness. What I mean is that all things have each 
its own individuality which does not belong to another, 
as in the case of a cow and a horse. For example, Mahamati, 
the being of a cow is not of horse-nature, nor is the being of 
a horse of cow-nature. This [exemplifies] the case of neither 
being nor non-being. Each of them is not without its own 
individuality, each is such as it is by its own nature. In 
the same way, Mahamati, things are not each without its 
own individuality, they are such as they are, and thus the 
ignorant and simple-minded fail to understand the significa- 
tion of egolessness by reason of their discrimination; indeed, 
they are not free from discrimination. The same is to be 
known exactly about all things being empty, unborn, and 
without self-nature. 

CHAPTER THREE 163 

In the same way the Tathagata and the Skandhas are 
neither not-different nor different. If he is not different 
from the Skandhas, he is impermanent as (189) the Skandhas 
are something made. If they are different, they are two 
separate entities; the case is like a cow’s horns. As they 
look alike, they are not different; as the one is short and 
the other long, they are different. [This can be said] of all 
things. Mahamati, the right horn of a cow is thus different 
from her left horn; so is the left from the right; the one is 
longer or shorter than the other. The same can be said of 
varieties of colours. Thus the Tathagata and the Skandhas 
are neither different nor not-different the one from the other. 

In the same way, the Tathagata is neither different nor 
not-different from emancipation, he can be described in terms 
of emancipation. If the Tathagata is different from eman- 
cipation, he partakes of the nature of a material object; if 
he does he is impermanent. If he is not different, there will 
be no distinction in the attainments of the Yogins, and, 
Mahamati, a distinction is seen in the Yogins; therefore, 
{the Tathagata] is neither different nor not-different {from 
emancipation ]. 

In the same way, knowledge is neither different nor 
not-different from that which is known. That, Mahamati, 
which is neither eternal nor not-eternal, neither effect nor 
cause, neither effect-producing nor not-effect-producing, 
neither knowledge nor that which is knowable, neither pre- 
dicated nor predicating, neither the Skandhas nor different 
from the Skandhas, neither that which is expressed nor ex- 
pression, nor bound-up with oneness and otherness, with both- 
ness and not-bothness,—this is something removed from all 
measurement; that which is removed from all measurement 
is not expressible in words;! that which is not expressible? 
is something unborn; that which is unborn is not subject 
to destruction; that which is not subject to destruction 
(190) is like space, and, Mahamati, space is neither an effect 
nor a cause. That which is neither an effect nor a cause is 
something unconditioned. That which is unconditioned 

+ After Sung. 

164 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

goes beyond all idle reasonings. That which goes beyond all 
idle reasonings, that is the Tathagata. Mahamati, this is 
the essence of perfect enlightenment, this is the self-nature 
of Buddhahood which is removed from all senses and 
measurements. So it is said: 

79. That which is released from senses and measure- 
ments is neither an effect nor a cause; it has nothing to do 
with knowledge and that which is to be known; it is free 
from predicated and predicating. 

80. There is something which is nowhere to be seen by 
anybody as the Skandhas, causation, enlightenment; of that 
which is nowhere to be seen by anybody, what description 
can we make? 

81. It is not something made nor unmade, it is neither 
an effect nor a cause, it is neither the Skandhas nor not- 
Skandhas, nor is it other than the combination. 

82. There is something that is not to be seen by the 
discrimination of its being, nor is it to be known as non- 
existent; such is the self-essence of all things. 

83. Accompanied by being, there is non-being; accom- 
panied by non-being there is being; as thus non-being is not 
to be known [by itself], being is not to be discriminated. 

84. Those who cling to mere words, not knowing what 
is meant by an ego-soul and egolessness, are immersed in 
dualism ; they are corrupted and lead the ignorant to corrup- 
tion. 

(191) 85. When they see my religion liberated from 
all detriments, they behold properly, they do not defile the 
world-leaders. 

LXXVI 

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahi- 
sattva said this to the Blessed One: Tell me, Blessed One; 
tell me, Sugata. Mention is made in the canonical books of 
the Blessed One’s being subject neither to birth nor to 
destruction, and it is declared by you that this being subject 
neither to birth nor to destruction is an epithet of the Tatha- 
gata. Now, Blessed One, by this being subject neither to 

CHAPTER THREE 165 

birth nor to destruction, is a non-entity meant? And is it 
another name for the Tathagata, as is declared by the Blessed 
One? It is taught by the Blessed One that all things are 
subject neither to birth nor to destruction because they are 
not to be seen in the dualistic aspect of being and non-being. 
If all things are unborn, Blessed One, no one can take hold 
of anything because nothing has ever been born; and if that 
is another name of something, what can this something. be, 
Blessed One? 

The Blessed One said: Then, Mahamati, listen well and 
reflect well within yourself; I will tell you. 

Certainly, Blessed One, said Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said this to him: Mahamati, the Tatha- 
gata is not a non-entity ; nor is he to be conceived as all things 
are, aS neither born nor disappearing; nor is he to look 
around for causation [in order to appear before others] ; nor 
is he without signification; I refer to him as unborn. (192) 
Nevertheless, Mahamati, there is another name for the Tatha- 
gata when his Dharmakaya assumes a will-body. This is 
what goes beyond the comprehension of the philosophers, 
Sravakas, Pratyekubuddhas, and those Bodhisattvas still 
abiding in the seventh stage. The unborn, Mahamati, is 
synonymous with the Tathagata. 

For instance, Mahamati, Indra is [sometimes known as] 
Sakra, [sometimes? as] Purandara; hand is hasta, kara, 
pani; the body is tanu, deha, Sarira; the earth is prithivi, 
bhiimi, vasumdhara; the sky is kha, dkasa, gagana; all these 
objects each in its way are designated with many names, 
synonymously used and discriminated; but on account of 
these different names different objects are not to be imagined, 
nor are they without their self-nature. The same, Mahamati, 
ean be said of myself, for I come within the range of hear- 
ing of ignorant people, in this world of patience, under many 
names, amounting to a hundred thousand times three asam- 
khyeyas, and they address me by these names not knowing 
that they are all other names of the Tathagata. Of these, 
Mahamati, some recognise me as the Tathagata, some as the 

166 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Self-existent One, some as Leader, as Vinayaka (Remover), 
as Parinayaka (Guide), as Buddha, as Rishi (Ascetic), as 
Bull-king, as Brahma, as Vishnu, as I$vara, as Original Source 
(pradhdna), as Kapila, as Bhitanta (End of Reality), as 
Arishta, as Nemina, as Soma (moon), as the Sun, as Rama, 
as Vyasa, as Suka, as Indra, as Balin, as Varuna, as is known 
to some; while others recognise me as One who is never born 
and never passes away, aS Emptiness, as Suchness, as Truth, 
as Reality, as Limit of Reality, (193) as the Dharmadhatu, 
as Nirvana, as the Eternal, as Sameness, as Non-duality, as 
the Undying, as the Formless, as Causation, as the Doctrine 
of Buddha-cause, as Emancipation, as the Truth of the Path, 
as the All-Knower, as the Victor, as the Will-made Mind. 
Mahamati, thus in full possession of one hundred thousand 
times three asamkhyeyas of appellations, neither more nor 
less, in this world and in other worlds, I am known to the 
peoples, like the moon in water which is neither in it nor 
out of it. But this is not understood by the ignorant who 
have fallen into the dualistic conception of continuity.? 
Though they honour, praise, esteem, and revere me, they do 
not understand well the meaning of words and definitions; 
they do not distinguish ideas, they do not have their own 
truth, and, clinging to the words of the canonical books, they 
imagine that not being subject to birth and destruction means 
a non-entity, and fail to see that it is one cf the many names 
of the Tathagata as in the case of Indra, Sakra, Purandara. 
They have no confidence in the texts where the self-standing 
truth is revealed, since in their study of all things they 
follow mere words as expressed in the texts trying thereby 
to gain into the meaning. 

Thus, Mahamati, these deluded ones would declare that 
as words are so is meaning, that meaning is not otherwise 
than words. For what reason? Because meaning has no 
body of its own and cannot be different from words. That 
the unintelligent declare words to be identical with meaning, 
is due to their ignorance as to the self-nature of words. 
They do not know, Mahamati, that words (194) are subject 

* This is missing in T‘ang and Sung. 

CHAPTER THREE 167 

to birth and death whereas meaning is not. Mahamati, 
words are dependent on letters, but meaning is not. As 
meaning is freed from existence and non-existence, it is not 
born, it has no substratum. And, Mahamati, the Tathagatas 
do not teach the doctrine that is dependent upon letters. As 
to letters, their being or non-being is not attainable; it is 
otherwise with the thought that is never dependent on letters. 
Again, Mahamati, anyone that discourses on a truth that is 
dependent on letters is a mere prattler because truth is 
beyond letters. For this reason, Mahamati, it is declared in 
the canonical text by myself and other Buddhas and Bodhi- 
sattvas that not a letter is uttered or answered by the 
Tathagatas. For what reason? Because truths are not 
dependent on letters. It is not that they never declare what 
is in conformity with meaning; when they declare anything, 
it is according to the discrimination [of all beings]. If, 
Mahamati, the truth is not declared! [in words] the serip- 
tures containing all truths will disappear, and when the 
scriptures disappear there will be no Buddhas, Sravakas, 
Pratyekabuddhas, and Bodhisattvas; and when there is no 
one [to teach], what is to be taught and to whom? For this 
reason, then, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva is not 
to become attached to the words of the canonical texts. 
Mahamati, owing to the functioning of the minds of sentient 
beings, the canonical texts sometimes deviate from their 
straightforward course; religious discourses are given by 
myself and other Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened 
Ones in response to varieties of faiths on the part of beings, 
in order to remove them from [the bondage of] the Citta, 
Manas and Manovijfiana, and not for the attainment and 
establishment of self-realisation which issues from noble 
wisdom. When there is the recognition of the fact that all 
things are characterised with imagelessness and that there is 
nothing in the world but what is seen of the Mind itself, 
there is the discarding of the dualistic discrimination. 
Therefore, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva 

According to the Chinese versions. Updddydnupddayat in this 
connection is not quite intelligible. 

168 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

be in conformity with the meaning (195) and not with the 
letter. Mahamati, a son or a daughter of a good family who 
conforms himself or herself to the letter will ruin his or her 
understanding of ultimate reality! and will cause others to 
fail to recognise [the truth]. Continuing to cherish wrong 
views, one’s own assertion is confounded by the philosophers 
who do not understand well what characterises all the stages 
of the Dharma, and who have no adequate knowledge as to 
the interpretation of words. If they well understand what 
characterises all the stages of the Dharma and are adequately 
equipped with the interpretation of words and expressions, 
and have a good understanding of the meaning and reason 
of all things, they will properly enjoy by themselves the bliss 
of formlessness while others are properly established in the 
Mahayana. Being properly embraced in the Mahayana they 
will, Mahamati, be in the embrace of the Buddhas, Sravakas, 
Pratyekabuddhas, and Bodhisattvas. Being embraced by 
the Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, Pratyekabuddhas, and Sravakas, 
they will [in turn] embrace all beings. Embracing all 
beings they will embrace the good Dharma. The good 
Dharma being embraced, the Buddha-seeds will not be 
destroyed. When the Buddha-seeds are not destroyed, the 
excellent abodes will be attained. When thus these excellent 
abodes are attained, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas 
will see to it that [all beings], being established in the Maha- 
yana, are born there [in the excellent abodes], and fortify- 
ing themselves with the tenfold supernatural power and 
assuming various forms, (196) they will discourse on the 
Dharma in conformity to its true nature (tathdtva), and 
with a thorough knowledge of various wishes and charac- 
teristics of beings. Now the true nature of things(tathatva) 
is characterised by non-differentiation and trueness, it is 
neither coming nor departing, it puts a stop to all idle 
reasonings, and it is called the truth (tattvam). 

Therefore, Mahamati, let son or daughter of a good 
family take good heed not to get attached to words as being 
in perfect conformity with meaning, because the truth is not 

* Read paramartha after Sung and Wei. 

CHAPTER THREE 169 

of the letter. Be not like the one who looks at the finger-tip. 
For instance, Mahamati, when a man with his finger-tip 
points at something to sombody, the finger-tip may be taken 
wrongly for the thing pointed at; in like manner, Mahamati, 
the people belonging to the class of the ignorant and simple- 
minded, like those of a childish group, are unable even unto 
their death to abandon the idea that in the finger-tip of words 
there is the meaning itself, and will not grasp ultimate 
reality because of their intent clinging to words which are 
no more than the finger-tip to them. To give another illus- 
tration, Mahamati: boiled rice is the proper food for infants, 
to whom [suppose] somebody gave uncooked food to eat. 
In this case, this one is to be considered to be out of his 
sense because of his not knowing how to prepare food pro- 
perly. So it is with that which is neither born nor destroyed, 
Mahamati; it will not manifest itself to anybody unless he is 
well disciplined in it. Therefore, you should most assuredly 
discipline yourself in this and not be like one who grasping 
his own finger-tip sees the meaning there. For this reason, 
Mahamati, (197) you should energetically discipline your- 
self to get at the meaning itself. 

Mahamati, the meaning is alone with itself (vivikta) 
and is the cause of Nirvana. Words are bound up with dis- 
crimination and are the carrier of transmigration. Mean- 
ing, Mahamati, is attaimed from much learning, and this 
much learning, Mahamati, means to be conversant with 
meaning and not with words. To be conversant with mean- 
ing means [to ascertain] the view which is not at all 
associated with any philosophical school and which will keep 
not only yourself but others from falling into [the false 
views]. Being so, Mahamati, this is said to be learned much 
in meaning. Therefore, let seekers for meaning reverently 
approach those [who are much learned in it], but those who 
are attached to words as being in accord with meaning, they 
are to be left to themselves and to be shunned by truth- 
seekers. 

170 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

LXXVII 

Further, Mahamati to whom the Buddha’s spiritual 
powers were added, said: There is nothing specially dis- 
tinguishable in the Buddha’s teaching of no-birth and no- 
annihilation. Why? Because all the philosophers also de- 
clare, Blessed One, their causes to be unborn and mot to be 
annihilated ; and you, too, Blessed One, declare space, Aprati- 
samkhyanirodha (annihilation), and Nirvana to be unborn 
and not to be annihilated. The philosophers declare, Blessed 
One, that the world rises from causal agencies and causation, 
while the Blessed One too declares that the world takes its 
rise from ignorance, desire, deed, discrimination, which work 
in accordance with the law of causation. Both thus refer 
to causation, the difference being in names only. 

So with the rise of external objects, both you and they 
assume external causation. Thus, there is no distinction be- 
tween your teaching, Blessed One, and that of the philos- 
ophers. [With them] there are nine substances which are 
regarded as unborn and not to be annihilated: atoms, 
supreme soul (pradhdna), ISvara, creator (prajapait), ete., 
(198) while, Blessed One, you assert that all things are 
neither born nor annihilated as their being and non-being 
is unattainable. Now as the elements are indestructible, 
their self-nature is neither born nor annihilated; while fol- 
lowing various courses of transformation, what constitutes 
their essential nature is not abandoned. Though your notion 
of the elements may differ in form, Blessed One, it is what 
has been imagined by all the philosophers as well as by your- 
self. For this reason this teaching of yours has nothing 
distinctive. If there is anything distinctive by which the 
teaching of the Tathagata excels that of the philosophers, 
pray tell me. Blessed One, if there is nothing distinctive 
in your own teaching, we can say that there is something of 
Buddhahood in the teaching of all the philosophers, because 
in them there is a cause pointing to no-birth and no-annihila- 
tion. It was declared by the Blessed One that many Tatha- 
gatas are not born simultaneously in the same district in 

CHAPTER THREE 171 

one world. But if the rule of cause and effect with regard 
to being and non-being holds true, and your own teaching 
leaves nothing contradicting behind, there must be many 
Tathagatas [rising at the same time and in the same 
locality]. 

The Blessed One said: Mahamati, my [teaching of] no- 
birth and no-annihilation is not like that of philosophers 
who also speak of no-birth and no-annihilation ; nor is it like 
their doctrine of birth and impermanency. Why? Because, 
Mahamati, that to which the philosophers ascribe the charac- 
teristics of no-birth and no-change is the self-nature of all 
things. But mine is not that which falls into the dualism 
of being and non-being. Mine, Mahamati, goes beyond the 
dualism of being and non-being ; has nothing to do with birth, 
abiding, and destruction ; is neither existent nor non-existent. 
How is it not non-existent? Because (199) multitudinous- 
ness of objects is to be seen as like Maya and a dream; I 
say that it is not non-existent. How is it not existent? 
Because there are no characteristic signs to be perceived as 
belonging to the self-nature of things; they are seen [in one 
sense as individual objects] and not seen [as such in another 
sense]; again they are [something in one sense] graspable 
fand in another sense] ungraspable. For this reason, things 
are existent and non-existent. 

But when it is understood that there is nothing in the 
world but what is seen of the Mind itself, discrimination no 
more rises, and one is thus established in his own abode which 
is the realm of no-work. The ignorant work and dis- 
criminate but not the wise. Mahamati, [the doings of the 
ignorant] are wunrealities discriminated, realities con- 
founded; they are like the city of the Gandharvas, like 
magically-created figures. To illustrate, Mahamati, here is 
a city of the Gandharvas where children see magically- 
created people, merchants, and many others, going in or 
coming out, and imagine that they are really people going 
in and coming out. It is owing to this discrimination 
characterised by perturbation that such takes place. It is 
the same, Mahamati, with the ignorant that they have a con- 

172 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

fused perception of birth and no-birth. There is really 
nothing made or unmade, like the rising of magically-created 
people; for magicallvy-created people are neither born nor 
annihilated, because here is no question whatever as to their 
existence or non-existence. In like manner, all things have 
nothing to do with birth and destruction, except that the 
ignorant cherishing false ideas imagine the birth and anni- 
hilation of objects. It is, however, not so with the wise. By 
false ideas it is meant that objects are not judged as they 
are in themselves. They are nothing else. When [reality] 
is discriminated other than it is, there is the clinging to the 
idea that all things have their self-nature (200) and what 
is alone by itself is not seen, and when what is alone by itself 
is not seen there is no disappearance of discrimination. For 
this reason, Mahamati, an insight into formlessness excels, 
and not an insight into form; as form causes another birth, 
it excels not. By formlessness, Mahadmati, is meant the dis- 
appearance of discrimination. 

No-birth and no-annihilation,! this I call Nirvana. By 
Nirvana, Mahamati, is meant the looking into the abode of 
reality as it really is in itself; and when, along with the 
turning-back of the entire system of mentation (citta-caitta- 
kalapa), there is the attainment of self-realisation by means 
of noble wisdom, which belongs to the Tathagatas, I call it 
Nirvana.” 

LXXVIII 

So it is said: 

86. In order to remove [the notion of] birth and to 
accomplish [that of] no-birth, I teach the doctrine of no- 
cause; but this is not understood by the ignorant. 

87. This all is unborn, but that does not mean that 
there are no objects; they are seen to be like the city of the 
Gandharvas, a dream, and Maya; objects are here, but 
causeless. 

a 

Added after the Chinese translations; but Wei has animitta 
instead of anirodha. 

* This digression on Nirvana somehow found its way here. 

CHAPTER THREE 173 

88. Tell me how things are unborn, without self- 
nature! and empty. When things are seen by [transcen- 
dental] knowledge, they are not subject to combination and 
are unobtainable; therefore, I declare that they are empty, 
unborn, and without self-nature. 

89. Considered one by one combination is there, the 
world appears to exist, but nothing is really existing; it is 
not as it is conceived by the philosophers; when combination 
is dissolved, nothing is left to be seen. 

90. As is a dream, a hair-net, Maya, the city of the 
Gandharvas, and a mirage, (201) which rise into view cause- 
lessly, so is the multitudinousness of the world. 

91. By keeping down the theory of no-causation,? no- 
birth is demonstrated; when the theory of no-birth is de- 
clared, my law-eye® is never destroyed; when the theory of 
no-cause is pointed out, the philosophers are horrified. 

92. [Mahamati asked]. How, by whom, where, and 
wherefore does the theory of no-cause make its appearance? 
{The Blessed One answered.]* When things (samskrita) 
are perceived as neither subject to causation nor above it, 
then the view maintained by the philosophers of birth and 
destruction is done away with. 

93. [Mahamati asked;] Is non-being no-birth? or does 
it look for causation? or is it a being’s name without a [cor- 
responding] reality? Pray tell me. 

94. [The Blessed One answered,] Non-being is not 
no-birth, nor does it look for causation, nor is it a being’s 
name, nor is it a name without a [corresponding] object. 

95. Here is a reality which does not belong to the 
Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, nor to the philosophers; neither 
does it belong to the Bodhisattvas who have entered upon 
the seventh stage; this is what characterises no-birth. 

96. The doing away with the notion of cause and con- 

According to Sung and Tang. 
According to T‘ang and Sung, “theory of causation.” 
Netri, according to T‘ang; Sung has “law-stream”’ and Wei 
“my law.” 
* According to Sung. 

1 

174 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

dition, the giving up of a causal agency, the establishment 
of the Mind-only—this I state to be no-birth. 

97. The getting-rid of [the idea that] things are 
caused, the removal of [the dualism of} imagined and 
imagining, (202) the being liberated from the alternatives 
of being and non-being—this I state to be no-birth. 

98. The mind liberated from its objective world, the 
getting-rid of the twofold Svabhava [partkalpita and para- 
tantra], a turning-up at the seat of mentation—this I state 
to be no-birth. 

99. No external existence, no non-existence, not even 
the grasping of mind; [things are like] a dream, a hair-net, 
Maya, [the city of] Gandharvas, a mirage;! the abandon- 
ment of all the philosophical views,—this is what charac- 
terises no-birth. 

100. Thus too all these words will be understood, that 
is, emptiness, having no self-nature, ete.; [the world] is 
empty, not, indeed, because of its being empty, but because 
of its being empty in the sense of being unborn. 

101. <A system [of mentality] may have its rise and 
fall owing to causation; when there is a dissolution of the 
system, there is neither birth nor annihilation. 

102. When a dissolution somewhere takes place among 
the members of the system, such existence ceases as is dis- 
eriminated by the philosophers by means of [such categories 
as] oneness and separateness. 

103. Nothing is born; being is not, non-being is not, 
nowhere is being-and-non-being; except that where there is 
a system, there is the rising of things and their dissolution. 

104. It is only in accordance with general convention 
that a chain® of mutual dependence is talked of; (203) birth 
has no sense when the chain of dependence is severed. 

105. As there is nothing generating, there is no-birth, 
free from the faults of the philosophers; I talk of this con- 
ventionally according [to the theory of] concatenation, and 
this is not intelligible to the ignorant. 

al 

This line may better be dropped as an interpolation. 
Samkata. 

CHAPTER THREE 175 

106. If there is anything born somewhere apart from 
concatenation, here is one who is to be recognised as an 
advocate of no-causation as he destroys concatenation. 

107. If concatenation works [from outside] like a lamp 
revealing all kinds of things, this means the presence of 
something outside concatenation itself. 

108. All things are devoid of self-nature, have never 
been born, and in their original nature are like the sky; 
things separated from concatenation belong to the dis- 
crimination of the ignorant. 

109. There is another kind of no-birth which is the 
self-essence of things realised by the wise; its birth is no- 
birth, and in this no-birth there is a recognition.? 

110. When this entire world is regarded as concatena- 
tion, as nothing else but concatenation, then the mind gains 
tranquillity. 

111. Ignorance, desire, karma, etc.—these are the inner 
concatenation; a ladle, clay, a vessel, a wheel, etc., or seeds, 
the elements, ete.—these are external concatenations. 

112. If there is-any other existence born of concatena- 
tion, this goes against the law of concatenation; those [who 
hold this view] are not established in the principles of correct 
reasoning. 

(204) 118. If there is an object coming to exist and 
yet is non-existent, by what law of causation is there the 
recognition of it? Things here are of mutual origination, 
and for this reason causation is declared. 

114. Heat, fluidity, motility, solidity—such notions are 
discriminated by the ignorant; there is a system of relations, 
no individual objects exist; hence the denial of self-nature 
[as constituting the realness of objects]. 

115. The physician varies his treatment according to 
diseases though there is no difference in the principle [of 
healing] ; the difference comes from varieties of diseases. 

116. In like manner, [in order to save] generations of 

* This is what constitutes anutpattikadharmakshdnti, the ‘‘re- 
cognition of all things as unborn,’’ which is considered the supreme 

spiritual attainment of Bodhisattvas. 

176 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

beings from their disease of passions with which they are 
ill, I teach people with my doctrines, knowing the power of 
their senses 

117. My doctrine does not vary, but the passions and 
powers are differentiated; there is just one vehicle; aus- 
picious is the eightfold path. 

LXXIX 

At that time again, Mahaimati the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattva said this to the Blessed One: Impermanence, im- 
permanence—this is the discrimination of the philosophers, 
Blessed One, and you, too, declare in the canonical texts that 
all composite things are impermanent, to be subject to birth 
and destruction is the nature of things; but, Blessed One, 
is this right or wrong? And how many kinds of im- 
permanency [are there], Blessed One? 

Said the Blessed One: Mahamati, there are eight! kinds 
of impermanency as discriminated by the philosophers, but 
not by me. What are the eight kinds? (1) Some say 
(205) that there is origination and then cessation—this is 
impermanency: that is to say, Mahamati, in the beginning 
there is something born which ceases to exist—this is im- 
permanency. (2) Some explain impermanency as the chang- 
ing of shape. (3) Some say, form? itself is impermanent. 
(4) Some regard impermanency to consist in the changing 
of form (ripa), saying that in a continuous, uninterrupted 
existence of all things there takes place a change in their 
natural flavour; for instance, milk going through a trans- 
formation turns into sour milk, and that such an invisible 
decomposition happens to all-things; this is called im- 
permanency. (5) Some imagine that there is an objective 
existence (bhava) which is called impermanency. (6) Some 
imagine that existence and non-existence—this is imperma- 
nency. (7) Some say that not being born is impermanency; 

* Both T‘ang and Sung have seven, not eight. The present text 
also enumerates only seven; the missing one is supplied in a footnote 
from Wei. 

* Or matter, rapa. 

CHAPTER THREE 177 

because of all things being impermanent, and because of 
impermanency being inherent in them.? 

Now, Mahamati, by impermanency that exists in exist- 
ence and non-existence, is meant that things made of the 
elements? are by nature subject to destruction and have 
nothing in them one can take hold of, while the elements 
themselves are never set in motion. 

By impermanency that is no-birth is meant that there 
is neither? permanency nor impermanency ; that in all things 
there is no [dualistic] evolution of being and non-being, and 
that nothing is seen to exist, even when they are examined 
into the last atom. This not seeing of anything is another 
name for no-birth, and not for birth. This, Mahamati, is 
the nature of impermanency that is no-birth, and as this 
is not understood, all the philosophers cherish the view of 
impermanency that is based on birth. 

Further, Mahamati, by the conception of impermanency 
as objective existence is meant that there is a discrimination 
in [the philosopher’s] own mind as to that which is not 
permanent and that-which is not impermanent. What is 
the sense of this? (206) It means that there is a thing 
called impermanency which in itself is not subject to destruc- 
tion, but by whose working there is the disappearance of 
all things; and if not for impermanency there will be no 
disappearance of all things. It is like a stick or a stone, 
or like a hammer breaking other things to pieces while itself 
remains unbroken. [This is the philosopher’s meaning but] 
as we actually see things about us, there is no such mutual 
differentiation which compels us to say that here is im- 
permanency the cause, and there is the disappearance of all 
things as the effeet; there is no such differentiation of cause 

1 This is the eighth in Wei, and for the seventh Wei has this: 
“Again there are other philosophers according to whom impermanency 
consists in not being [existent] at first but coming later to exist. That 
is to say, when things born of the elements cease to exist, nothing is 
seen, nothing is born, as they are seperated from the substances that 
subsist—this is called impermanency.” 

2 Bhita before bhautika (line 10) may better be dropped. 

* The negative particle na is inserted here according to Sung. 

178 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

and effect, and we cannot say: Here is impermanency as 
cause and there is the effect. When there is thus no differen- 
tiation of cause and effect, all things are permanent since no 
cause exists to render them otherwise. Mahamati, as to the 
disappearance of all things, there is a cause, but it is not 
in the understanding of the ignorant and simple-minded. 
When the cause is of a dissimilar nature, the [same] effect 
is not produced. In ease it does, the impermanency of all 
things is an example of dissimilar effect, and there is no 
distinction between cause and effect. But the distinction 
betweer cause and effect is observed in them. If there is 
an [objective] existence to be known as impermanence, it 
will be characterised with the nature of an effect-producing 
cause, and there will be one entity contained in all things. 
When the notion is cherished of a cause-producing effect, 
this means that impermanence the cause is impermanent 
because it partakes of the nature of the effect which is im- 
permanent. All things then are not to be regarded as 
impermanent but as permanent. 

If impermanency [as the cause] resides within all 
things, it will come under the three divisions of time. It 
passes away together with things past; its future is not yet 
here as things of the future are still unborn; in the present 
it breaks up together with things of the present. 

(207) Form [or matter] results from the combination 
and variation of the elements; as the primary elements and 
the secondary elements are neither different nor not-different, 
they are by nature not subject to destruction, because ac- 
cording to the philosophers the elements are indestructible. 
[But, Mahamati,] it is an established fact that the entire 
triple world with its elements primary and secondary is 
born, abides, and disappears. How do the philosophers con- 
celve a separate existence of impermanency which is in- 
dependent of the elements primary and secondary, while the 
elements themselves are neither set in motion nor destroyed 
because they cling to the notion of self-nature [as eternally 
unchangeable] ? 

The conception of impermanency as existing in the first 

CHAPTER THREE 179 

origination which ceases to continue [is not tenable for three 
reasons]; the elements cannot produce one another, because 
each has its self-nature different from the others. Bach 
individual one cannot produce itself because there is no 
differentiation in it. The [mutually] separated origination 
of the elements is impossible beeause there is no correspond- 
ence between the two. Hence the conclusion that the con- 
ception of origination-impermanency is untenable. 

By the conception of impermanency in consideration of 
changes taking place in external form is meant that the 
elements primary and secondary are not subject to dissolu- 
tion. What is known as dissolution, Mahamati, even when 
closely examined until atoms are reached, is not the destruc- 
tion of the elements primary and secondary but of their 
external forms whereby the elements assume different ap- 
pearances as short or long; but, in fact, nothing is destroyed 
in the elemental atoms. What is seen as ceased to exist is 
the external formation of the elements. This view is 
cherished by the Samkhya school. 

By the impermanency of external shapes is meant the 
impermanencey of form (ripa) ; (208) what is impermanent 
is thus the external shape and not the elements. If the 
elements themselves are impermanent all our everyday ex- 
periences come to naught. This is cherishing the view of 
the Lokayatika, according to which all things are reducible 
to mere words because their self-nature is never seen as born. 

By the impermanency of changes is meant the changing 
of forms (ripa) and not the changing of the elements them- 
selves as is Seen in various ornamental articles of gold which 
assume various forms. While there is no disappearance in 
the nature of gold, the ornamental articles variously change 
in form. 

These and other views of impermanency as changes are 
discriminated variously by the philosophers as is here 
described. Fire may burn all the elements but their self- 
nature can never be burned; when each goes asunder by 
itself, there is the destruction of what constitutes the 
elements primary and secondary. 

180 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

However, Mahamati, I am neither for permanency nor 
for impermanency. Why? For these reasons: external 
objects are not admitted; the triple world is taught as not 
being anything else but the Mind itself; multiplicities of 
external existences are not accepted; there is no rising of 
the elements, nor their disappearance, nor their continua- 
tion, nor their differentiation; there are no such things as 
the elements primary and secondary; because of diserimina- 
tion there evolve the dualistic indications of perceived and 
perceiving ; when it is recognised that because of discrimina-. 
tion there is a duality, the discussion concerning the exist- 
ence and non-existence of the external world ceases because 
Mind-only is understood. Discrimination (209) rises from 
discriminating a world of effect-producing works; no dis- 
crimination takes place when this world is not recognised.! 
Then a man ceases to cherish the discrimination of existence 
and non-existence which rises out of his own mind, he sees 
that things, either of this world or of a higher world, or of 
the highest, are not to be described as permanent or im- 
permanent, because he does not understand the truth that 
there is nothing in the world but what is seen of the Mind 
itself. As [the meaning of] discrimination is not under- 
stood by all the philosophers who have fallen into wrong 
ideas of dualism and who are people of no [spiritual] 
attainment, impermanency comes up to them as a subject for 
discussion. Mahamati,? the triple aspect of all things as 
distinguished as of this world, of a higher world, and of the 
highest, is the outcome of word-discrimination, but this is 
not understood by the ignorant and simple-minded. So it 
is said: 

118. By the deluded philosophers the notion of im- 
permanency is discriminated as origination-cessation, as 
transformation of external forms, as an [independent] ex- 
istence, as form. 

119. There is no destruction of things; the elements 
abide for ever as regards their self-essence; immersed in 

* Read after the Chinese. 
* Sarvatirthakara (line 6) is dropped, according to the Chinese. 

CHAPTER THREE 181 

varieties of views the philosophers discriminate imperma- 
nency. 

120. To these philosophers there is no destruction, no 
birth; the elements are permanent as regards their self- 
essence; who ever discriminates impermanency? [This is 
the position of the philosophers. ] 

121. [According to the Buddha,] there is nothing in 
the world but the Mind itself, and all that is of duality has 
its rise from the Mind and is seen as perceived and perceiv- 
ing; an ego-soul and what belongs to it—they exist not. 

122. The abode and realm of Brahma, ete.—I declare 
all to be of Mind-only, (210) outside Mind-only, Brahma, 
ete., are not attainable. 

Here Ends the Third Chapter, ‘‘On Impermanency,’’ in 
the Lankavatara-Mahdyana-Sitra. 

[CHAPTER FOUR] 

LXXX 

(211) At that time again Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva said this to the Blessed One: Pray tell me, 
Blessed One, about the state of perfect tranquillisation 
(nirodha) and its further development as attained by all the 
Bodhisattvas, Sravakas, and Pratyekabuddhas; for when 
this further development is thoroughly understood by myself 
and other Bodhisattva-Mahdsattvas all may be saved from 
being confounded by the happiness which comes from the 
attainment of perfect tranquillisation and also from falling 
into the confused state of mind of the Sravakas, Pratyeka- 
buddhas, and philosophers. 

Said the Blessed One: Then listen well and reflect well 
within yourself; I will tell you. 

Certainly, Blessed One, said Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said this to him: Those Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas who have reached the sixth stage as well as all 
the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas attain perfect tranquil- 
lisation. At the seventh stage, the Bodhisatt va-Mahasattvas, 
giving up the view of self-nature as subsisting in all things, 
attain perfect tranquillisation in every minute of their 
mental lives, which is not however the case with the Sravakas 
and Pratyekabuddhas; for with them there is something 
effect-producing, and in their attainment of perfect tran- 
quillisation there is a trace [of dualism], of grasped and 
grasping. Therefore, they do not attain perfect tranquillisa- 
tion in every minute of their mental lives which is possible 
at the seventh stage. They cannot attain to [the clear con- 
viction of] an undifferentiated state of all things (212) and 
the cessation of [all] multiplicities. Their attainment is 
due to understanding the aspect of all things in which their 

CHAPTER FOUR 183 

self-nature is discriminated as good and as not-good. There- 
fore, until the seventh stage there is not a well-established 
attainment of tranquillisation in every minute of their 
mental lives. 

Mahamati, at the eighth stage the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattvas, Sravakas, and Pratyekabuddhas cease cherishing 
discriminative ideas that arise from the Citta, Manas, and 
Manovijfiana. From the first stage upto the sixth, they 
perceive that the triple world is no more than the Citta, 
Manas, and Manovijiiana, that as it is born of a discrimina- 
ting mind there is no ego-soul and what belongs to it, and 
that there is no falling into the multitudinousness of external 
objects except through [the discrimination of] the Mind 
itself. The ignorant turning their self-knowledge (svajndana) 
towards the dualism of grasped and grasping fail to under- 
stand, for there is the working of habit-energy which has 
been accumulating since beginningless time owing to false 
reasoning and discrimination. 

Mahamati, at the eighth stage there is Nirvana for the 
Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas and Bodhisattvas; but the 
Bodhisattvas are kept away by the power of all the Buddhas? 
from [being intoxicated by] the bliss of the Samadhi, and 
thereby they will not enter into Nirvana. When the stage 
of Tathagatahood is not fulfilled there would be the cessation 
of all doings, and if [the Bodhisattvas] were not supported 
[by the Buddhas] the Tathagata-family would become 
extinct. Therefore, the Buddhas, the Blessed Ones, point 
out the virtues of Buddhahood which are beyond conception. 
(213) Therefore, [the Bodhisattvas] do not enter into 
Nirvana, but the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, engrossed 
in the bliss of the Samadhis, therein cherish the thought of 
Nirvana. 

At the seventh stage, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva prop- 
erly examines into the nature of the Citta, Manas, and 
Manovijfiana; he examines into [such subjects as] ego-soul 
and what belongs to it, grasped and grasping, the egolessness 
of persons and things, rising and disappearing, individuality 

1 

Read according to T‘ang. 

184 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

and generality; he skilfully ascertains the fourfold logical 
analysis; he enjoys the bliss of self-mastery; he enters suc- 
eessively upon the stages; he knows the differences obtaining 
in the various elements of enlightenment. The grading of 
the stages is arranged by me lest the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, 
not knowing what is meant by individuality and generality 
and failing to understand the continuous development of the 
successive stages, should fall into the philosophers’ wrong 
way of viewing things. But, Mahamati, there is really 
nothing rising, nothing disappearing, all is nothing except 
what is seen of the Mind itself; that is, the continuous 
development of the successive stages and all the multiple 
doings of the triple world [—they are all of Mind itself]. 
This is not understood by the ignorant. I and all the 
Buddhas! establish the doctrine of the stages which develop 
successively as do all the doings of the triple world. 
Further, Mahamati, the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas 
at the eighth stage of Bodhisattvahood are so intoxicated 
with the happiness that comes from the attainment of perfect 
tranquillisation, and, failing to understand fully that there 
is nothing in the world but what is seen of the Mind itself, 
they are thus unable to overcome the hindrances and habit- 
energy growing out of their notions of generality and 
individuality ; and adhering to the egolessness of persons and 
things and (214) cherishing views arising therefrom, they 
have the discriminating idea and knowledge of Nirvana, 
which is not that of the truth of absolute solitude. Maha- 
mati, when the Bodhisattvas face and perceive the happiness 
of the Samadhi of perfect tranquillisation, they are moved 
with the feeling of love and sympathy owing to their original 
vows, and they become aware of the part they are to 
perform as regards the [ten] inexhaustible vows. Thus, 
they do not enter Nirvana. But the fact is that they are 
already in Nirvana because in them there is no rising of dis- 
crimination. With them the discrimination of grasped and 
grasping no more takes place; as they [now] recognise that 
there is nothing in the world but what is seen of the Mind 
* The Chinese reading is here adopted. 

CHAPTER FOUR 185 

itself, they have done away with the thought of discrimina- 
tion concerning all things. They have abandoned adhering 
to and discriminating about such notions as the Citta, Manas, 
and Manovijiiana, and external objects, and self-nature; 
however, they have not given up the things promoting the 
cause of Buddhism; because of their attainment of the inner 
insight which belongs to the stage of Tathagatahood; what- 
ever they do all issues from their transcendental knowledge. 

It is like a man crossing a stream in a dream. For 
instance, Mahamati, suppose that while sleeping a man 
dreams that he is in the midst of a great river which he 
earnestly endeavours with all his might to cross by himself ; 
but before he succeeds in crossing the stream, he is awakened 
from the dream, and being awakened he thinks: ‘‘Is this 
real or unreal?’’ He thinks again: ‘‘No, it is neither real 
nor unreal. By reason of the habit-energy of discrimination 
which has been accumulated by experience ever since 
beginningless time, as multiplicities of forms and conditions 
are seen, heard, thought, and recognised, there is the percep- 
tion and discrimination of all things as existent and non- 
existent; and for this reason my Manovijhana experiences 
even in a dream all that has been seen by myself.’’ 

In the same way, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattvas of the eighth stage of Bodhisattvahood, (215) after 
passing through the first up to the seventh stage, observe 
that there is no more rising in them of discrimination since 
all things are seen as like Maya, etc., when they have an 
intuitive understanding of the [true] nature of all things, 
and [further] observing that, therefore, there is the cessation 
of all things as to grasped and grasping which rise from 
one’s ardent desire for things, and also observing how the 
mind and what belongs to it carry on their discrimination, 
the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas never relax their efforts to 
practise the teachings of the Buddhas. Mahamati, they will 
exercise themselves to make those who have not yet attained 
the truth attain it. For the Bodhisattvas, Nirvana does not 
mean extinction; as they have abandoned thoughts of dis- 
crimination evolving from the Citta, Manas, and Mano- 

186 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

vijilana, there is for them the attainment of the recognition 
that all things are unborn. And, Mahamati, in ultimate 
reality there is neither gradation nor continuous succession ; 
fonly] the truth of absolute solitude (viviktadharma) is 
taught here in which the discrimination of all the images is 
quieted. So it is said: 

1. The abodes and the stages of Buddhahood are estab- 
lished in! the Mind-only which is imageless—this was told, 
is told, and will be told by the Buddhas. 

2. The [first] seven stages are [still] of the mind, but 
here the eighth is imageless; the two stages, [the ninth and 
the tenth,] have [still] something to rest themselves on; the 
[highest] stage that is left belongs to me. 

3. Self-realisation and absolute purity—this stage is 
my own; it is the highest station of MaheSvara, the Aka- 
nishtha [heaven] shining brilliantly. 

4. Its rays of light move forward like a mass of fire; 
they who are bright-coloured, charming, and auspicious 
transform the triple world. 

5. Some worlds are being transformed, while others 
have already been transformed ;? there I preach the various 
vehicles which belong to my own stage. 

(216) 6. But [from the absolute point of view] the 
tenth is the first, and the first is the eighth; and the ninth 
is the seventh, and the seventh is the eighth. 

7. And the second is the third, and the fourth is the 
fifth, and the third is the sixth; what gradation is there 
where imagelessness prevails? 

The Fourth Chapter, ‘‘On Intuitive Understanding.’’ 

* The Sagdithakam, V. 105, has cittamdtram nirdbhdsam...... 

instead of cittamdtre nirdbhdase...... , as it stands here. 
* According to T‘ang. 

[CHAPTER FIVE] 

LXXXI 

(217) At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahiasattva said this to the Blessed One: Is the Blessed 
One, the Tathagata, the Arhat, the Fully-Enlightened One, 
permanent or impermanent? 

Said the Blessed One: Mahamati, the Tathagata is 
neither permanent nor impermanent. Why? Because either 
way there is a fault connected with it. Mahamati, what 
fault is connected with either assertion?! If the Tathagata 
is permanent, he will be connected with the creating agencies. 
For, Mahamati, according to all the philosophers the creat- 
ing agencies are something uncreated and permanent. But 
the Tathagata is not permanent [in the same sense] as the 
uncreated are permanent. If he is impermanent, he will 
be connected with things created. Because the Skandhas 
which are predicable as qualified and qualifying are non- 
existent, and because the Skandhas are subject to annihila- 
tion, destructibility is their nature. Mahamati, all that is 
created is impermanent as is a jug, a garment, straw, a piece 
of wood, a brick, ete., which are all connected with imperma- 
neney. Thus all the preparations for the knowledge of the 
All-Knowing One will become useless as they are things 
created. On account of no distinction being made, the 
Tathagata, indeed, would be something created. For this 
reason, the Tathagata is neither permanent nor impermanent. 

Again, Mahamati, the Tathagata is not permanent for 
the reason that [if he were] he would be like space, and 
the preparations one makes for Tathagatahood would be use- 
less. That is to say, Mahamati, space is neither permanent 
nor impermanent as it excludes [the idea of] permanence 
and impermanence, (218) and it is improper to speak of it 

ob 

Following T‘ang. 

188 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

as characterised with the faults of oneness and otherness, of 
bothness and not-bothness, of permanence and impermanence. 
Further, Mahamati, it is like the horns of a hare, or a horse, 
or an ass, or a camel, or a frog, or a snake, or a fly, or a fish; 
[with the Tathagata] as with them here is the permanency 
of no-birth. Because of this fault of the permanency of 
no-birth, the Tathagata cannot be permanent. 

However, Mahamati, there is another sense in which the 
Tathagata can be said to be permanent. How? Because the 
knowledge arising from the attainment of enlightenment 
[=an intuitive understanding] is of a permanent nature, the 
Tathagata is permanent. Mahamati, this knowledge, as it 
is attained intuitively by the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully- 
Enlightened Ones, is, indeed, permanent. Whether the 
Tathagatas are born or not, this Dharmata, which is the 
regulative and sustaining principle to be discoverable in 
the enlightenment of all the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and 
philosophers, abides, and this sustaining principle of exist- 
ence is not like the emptiness of space, which, however, is 
not understood by the ignorant and simple-minded. Maha- 
mati, this knowledge of enlightenment belonging to the 
Tathagatas comes forth from transcendental knowledge 
(prajnajndna) ; Mahamati, the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully- 
Enlightened Ones do not come forth from the habit-energy 
of ignorance which is concerned with the Citta, Manas, and 
Manovijfiana, and the Skandhas, Dhatus, and Ayatanas. 
The triple world originates from the discriminating of un- 
realities, but the Tathagatas do not originate from the dis- 
eriminating of unrealities. Where duality obtains, Maha- 
mati, there is permanency and impermanency because of its 
not being one. Mahamati, [the truth of] absolute solitude 
is, indeed, non-dualistic’ because all things are characterised 
with non-duality and no-birth. For this reason, Mahdmati, 
the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones are neither 
permanent nor impermanent. Mahamati, as long as there 
is word-discrimination, (219) there follows the faulty notion 
of permanency and impermanency. The destruction of the 

* Read advayam, not dvayam. 

CHAPTER FIVE 189 

notion of permanency and impermanency as held by the 
ignorant, Mahamati, comes from the getting rid of the know- 
ledge that is based on discrimination, and not from the 
getting rid of the knowledge that is based on the insight of 
solitude. So it is said: 

1. By keeping away permanency and impermanency, 
[and yet] by keeping permanency and impermanency in 
sight, those who always see the Buddhas will not expose 
themselves to the power of the philosophical doctrines. 

2. When permanency and impermanency are adhered 
to all the accumulation [one makes for the attainment of 
reality] will be of no avail; by destroying the knowledge 
that is based on discrimination, [the idea of] permanency 
and impermanency is kept back. 

3. As soon as an assertion is made, all is in confusion; 
when it is understood that there is nothing in the world 
but what is seen of the Mind itself, disputes never arise. 

Here Ends the Fifth Chapter, ‘‘On the Deduction of 
the Permanency and Impermanency of Tathagatahood.’’ 

[CHAPTER SIX] 

LXXXII 

(220) At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva made a request of the Blessed One, saying: 
Blessed One, tell me; Sugata, tell me about the rising and 
disappearing of the Skandhas, Dhiatus, and Ayatanas. In 
case there is no ego-soul, what is it that comes to exist and 
to disappear? The ignorant who are attached to the notion 
of rising and disappearing, fail to understand the extinction 
of pain, and thus they know not what Nirvana is. 

Said the Blessed One: Then, Mahamati, listen well and 
reflect well within yourself; I will tell you. 

Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahiasattva said: Certainly, 
Blessed One; and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said this to him: Mahamati, the 
Tathagata-garbha holds within it the cause for both good 
and evil, and by it all the forms of existence are produced. 
Like an actor it takes on a variety of forms, and [in itself] 
is devoid of an ego-soul and what belongs to it. As this is 
not understood, there is the functioning together of the triple 
combination from which effects take place. But the philos- 
ophers not knowing this are tenaciously attached to the idea 
of a cause [or a creating agency]. Because of the influence 
of habit-energy that has been accumulating variously by 
false reasoning since beginningless time, what here goes 
under the name of Alayavijfiina is accompanied by the 
seven Vijnhanas which give birth to a state known as the 
abode of ignorance. It is like a great ocean in which the 
waves roll on permanently but the [deeps remain unmoved; 
that is, the Alaya-] body itself subsists uninterruptedly, 
quite free from fault of impermanence, unconcerned with 
the doctrine of ego-substance, and (221) thoroughly pure in 
its essential nature. 

CHAPTER SIX 191 

As to the other seven Vijianas beginning with the 
Manas and Manovijiiana, they have their rise and complete 
ending from moment to moment; they are born with false 
discrimination as cause, and with forms and appearances 
and objectivity as conditions which are intimately linked 
together ; adhering to names and forms, they do not realise 
that objective individual forms are no! more than what is 
seen of the Mind itself; they do not give exact information 
regarding pleasure and pain; they are not the cause of 
emancipation ; by setting up names and forms which originate 
from greed, greed is begotten in turn, thus mutually condi- 
tioned and conditioning. When the sense-organs which seize 
[upon the objective world] are destroyed and annihilated, 
the other things immediately cease to function, and there is 
no recognition of pleasure and pain which are the self-dis- 
crimination of knowledge; thus there is the attainment of 
perfect tranquillisation in which thoughts and sensations are 
quicted, or there is the realisation of the four Dhyanas, in 
which truths of emancipation are well understood; where- 
upon the Yogins are led to cherish herein the notion of [true] 
emancipation, because of the not-rising [of the Vijnanas]. 

[But] when a revulsion [or turning-back] has not taken 
place in the Alayavijiana known under the name of Tatha- 
gata-garbha, there is no cessation of the seven evolving 
Vijianas. Why? Beeause the evolution of the Vijiianas is 
depending on this cause; but this does not belong to the 
realm of the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and those who are 
disciplining themselves in the exercises of the philosophers. 
As they [only] know the egolessness of the self-soul, as they 
[only] accept the individuality and generality of the 
Skandhas, Dhatus, and Ayatanas, there is the evolving of 
the Tathagata-garbha. When an insight into the five 
Dharmas, the three Svabhavas, and the egolessness of all 
things is obtained, the Tathagata-garbha becomes quiescent. 
By eausing a revulsion in the continuous development of 
the graded stages, [the Bodhisattva] may not be led astray 
in the path [of enlightenment] by those philosophers who 

1 

According to T‘ang and Sung. 

192 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

hold different views. Thus establishing himself at the 
Bodhisattva stage of Acala (immovable), (222) he obtains 
the paths leading to the happiness of the ten Samadhis. Sup- 
ported by the Buddhas in Samadhi, observing the truths of 
the Buddha which go beyond thought and his own original 
vows, not entering into the happiness of the Samadhi which 
is the limit of reality, but by means of the self-realisation 
which is not generally gained by the paths of discipline 
belonging to the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philos- 
ophers, he obtains the ten paths of discipline which belong 
to the noble family [of the Tathagatas], and [also obtains] 
the knowledge-body created by the will which is removed 
from the [premeditated] workings of Samadhi. For this 
reason, Mahamati, let those Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas who are 
seeking after the exalted truth effect the purification of the 
Tathagata-garbha which is known as Alayavijiana. 

Mahamati, if you say that there is no Tathagata-garbha 
known as Alayavijiiana, there will be neither the rising nor 
the disappearing [of an external world of multiplicities] in 
the absence of the Tathagata-garbha known as Alayavijfana. 
But, Mahamati, there is the rising and disappearing of the 
ignorant as well as the holy ones. [Therefore], the Yogins, 
while walking in the noble path of self-realisation and 
abiding in the enjoyment of things as they are, do not 
abandon working hard and are never frustrated [in their 
undertakings]. Mahamati, this realm of the Tathagata- 
garbha is primarily undefiled and is beyond all the specula- 
tive theories of the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philos- 
ophers; but it appears to them devoid of purity, as it is 
soiled by these external defilements. This is not the case 
with the Tathagatas, Mahamati; with the Tathagatas it is 
an intuitive experience as if it were an Amalaka fruit held 
in the palm of the hand. 

This, Mahamati, was told by me in the canonical text 
relating to Queen Srimala, (223) and in another where the 
Bodhisattvas, endowed with subtle, fine, pure knowledge, are 
supported [by my spiritual powers[—that the Tathagata- 
garbha known as Alayavijiiana evolves together with the 

CHAPTER SIX 193 

seven Vijianas. This is meant for the Sravakas who are 
not free from attachment, to make them see into the egoless- 
ness of things; and for Queen Srimala to whom the Buddha’s 
spiritual power was added, the [pure] realm of Tathagata- 
hood was expounded. This does not belong to the realm of 
speculation as it is carried on by the Sravakas, Pratyeka- 
buddhas, and other philosophers, except, Mahamati, that this 
realm of Tathagatahood which is the realm of the Tathagata- 
garbha-Alayavijfiana is meant for those Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattvas who like you are endowed with subtle, fine, penetra- 
ting thought-power and whose understanding is in accordance 
with the meaning; and it is not for others, such as philos- 
ophers, Sravakas, and Pratyekabuddhas, who are attached to 
the letters of the canonical texts. For this reason, Mahamati, 
let you and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas discipline your- 
selves in the realm of Tathagatahood, in the understanding 
of this Tathagata-garbha-Alayavijiiana, so that you may not 
rest contented with mere learning. So it is said: 

1. The Garbha of the Tathagatas is indeed united with 
the seven Vijiidnas; when this is adhered to, there arises 
duality, but when rightly understood, duality ceases. 

2. The mind, which is the product of intellection since 
beginningless time, is seen like a mere image; when things 
are viewed as they are in themselves, there is neither objec- 
tivity nor its appearance. 

3. As the ignorant grasp the finger-tip and not the 
moon, (224) so those who cling to the letter, know not my 
truth. 

4. The Citta dances like a dancer; the Manas resembles 
a jester; the [Mano-] vijnana together with the five [Vij- 
nanas] creates an objective world which is like a stage.! 

LXXXIII 

At that time, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahiasattva 
made a request of the Blessed One, saying: Pray tell me, 
Blessed One; pray tell me, Sugata, concerning the distin- 

* Sung and T‘ang seem to be incorrect in their reading of this 
verse. 

194 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

guishing aspeets of the five Dharmas, the [three] Svabhavas, 
the [eight] Vijiianas, and the twofold egolessness. By 
[recognising] the distinguishing aspects of the twofold ego- 
lessness, I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas will be able to 
establish those truths while effecting a continuous develop- 
ment through the various stages of Bodhisattvahood. It is 
said that by these truths we can enter into all the Buddha- 
truths, and that by entering into all the Buddha-truths we 
can enter even into the ground of the Tathagata’s inner 
realisation. 

Said the Blessed One: Then, Mahdmati, listen well and 
reflect well within yourself; I will tell you. 

Certainly, Blessed One, said Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahiasattva and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said this to him: Mahamati, I will 
tell you about the distinguishing aspects of the five Dharmas, 
the [three] Svabhavas, the [eight] Vijnanas, and the twofold 
egolessness. The five Dharmas are: name, form, dis- 
crimination, right knowledge, and suchness. [When these 
are thoroughly comprehended] by the Yogins, they enter 
into the course of the Tathagata’s inner realisation, where 
they are kept away from such views as eternalism and 
nihilism, realism and negativism, and (225) where they come 
face to face with the abode of happiness belonging to the 
present existence as well as to the Samapatti (tranquillisa- 
tion). But, Mahamati, as the ignorant do not understand 
that the five Dharmas, the {three] Svabhavas, the [eight] 
Vijianas, and the twofold egolessness, together with the 
external objects whieh are regarded as existent and non- 
existent—[all these are no more than] what is seen of the 
Mind itself—they are given to discrimination, but it is other- 
wise with the wise. 

Said Mahadmati: How is it that the ignorant are given 
up to discrimination and the wise are not? 

Said the Blessed One: Mahamati, the ignorant cling 
to names, ideas, and signs; their minds move along [these 
channels]. As thus they move along, they feed on multi- 
plicities of objects, and fall into the notion of an ego-soul 

CHAPTER SIX 195 

and what belongs to it, and cling to salutary appearances. 
As thus they cling, there is a reversion to ignorance, and 
they become tainted, karma born of greed, anger, and folly 
is accumulated. As karma is accumulated again and again, 
their minds become swathed in the cocoon of discrimination 
as the silk-worm; and, transmigrating in the ocean of birth- 
and-death (gatt), they are unable, like the water-drawing 
wheel, to move forward. And because of folly, they do not 
understand that all things are like Maya, a mirage, the moon 
in water, and have no self-substance to be imagined as an 
ego-soul and its belongings; that things rise from their false 
discrimination ; that they are devoid of qualified and qualify- 
ing; and have nothing to do with the course of birth, abiding, 
and destruction; that they are born of the discrimination of 
what is only seen of the Mind itself; and assert’ that they 
are born of ISvara, time, atoms, or a supreme spirit, for 
they follow names and appearances. Mahamati, the ignorant 
move along with appearances. 

Further, Mahamati, by ‘‘appearance’’ is meant that 
which reveals itself to the visual sense (226) and is perceived 
as form, and in like manner that which, appearing to the 
sense of hearing, smelling, tasting, the body, and the Mano- 
vijiidna, is perceived as sound, odour, taste, tactility, and 
idea,—all this I call ‘‘appearance.”’ 

Further, Mahamati, by ‘‘discrimination’’ is meant that 
by which names are declared, and there is thus the indicating 
of [various] appearances. Saying that this is such and no 
other, for instance, saying that this is an elephant, a horse, 
a wheel, a pedestrian, a woman, or a man, each idea thus 
discriminated is so determined. 

Further, Mahamati, by ‘‘right knowledge’’ is meant this: 
when names and appearances are seen as unobtainable owing 
to their mutual conditioning, there is no more rising of the 
Vijfianas, for nothing comes to annihilation, nothing abides 
everlastingly ; and when there is thus no falling back into 
the stage of the philosophers, Sravakas, and Pratyeka- 
buddhas, it is said that there is right knowledge. Further, 

1 

’ 

According to T‘ang and Wei. 

196 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Mahamati, by reason of this right knowledge, the Bodhi- 
sattva-Mahasattva does not regard name as reality and 
appearance as non-reality. 

When erroneous views based on the dualistic notion of 
assertion and negation are gotten rid of, and when the 
Vijfianas cease to rise as regards the objective world of 
names and appearances, this I call ‘‘suchness.’’ Mahamati, 
a Bodhisattva-Mahasattva who is established on suchness 
attains the state of imagelessness and thereby attains the 
Bodhisattva-stage of Joy (pramudita). 

When [the Bodhisattva] attains the stage of Joy, he is 
kept away from all the evil courses belonging to the philos- 
ophers and enters upon the path of supra-worldly truths. 
When [all] the conditions [of truth] are brought to con- 
summation, he discerns that the course of all things starts 
with the notion of Maya, ete.; and after the attainment of 
the noble truth of self-realisation, he earnestly desires to 
put a stop to speculative theorisation; (227) and going up 
in succession through the stages of Bodhisattvahood he 
finally reaches the stage of Dharma-Cloud (dharmameghda). 
After being at the stage of Dharma-Cloud, he reaches as far 
as the stage of Tathagatahood where the flowers of the 
Samadhis, powers, self-control, and psychic faculties are 
in bloom. After reaching here, in order to bring all beings 
to maturity, he shines like the moon in water, with varieties 
of rays of transformation. Perfectly fulfilling! the [ten] 
inexhaustible vows, he preaches the Dharma to all beings 
according to their various understandings. As the Bodhi- 
sattva-Mahasattvas, Mahamati, have entered into suchness, 
they attain the body which is free from the will and thought- 
constructions.” 

Again, Mahamati said: Are the three Svabhavas to be 
regarded as included in the five Dharmas, or as having their 
own characteristics complete in themselves? 

The Blessed One said: The three Svabhavas, the eight 
Vijfianas, and the twofold egolessness—they are all included 

According to Sung and T‘ang. 
* T‘ang and Wei have citta-mano-manovijndnarahitam. 

CHAPTER SIX 197 

[in the five Dharmas]. Of these, name and appearance are 
known as the Parikalpita [false imagination]. Then, Maha- 
mati, discrimination which rises depending upon them, is 
the notion of an ego-soul and what belongs to it,—the notion 
and the discrimination are of simultaneous occurrence, like 
the rising of the sun and its rays. Mahamati, the dis- 
crimination thus supporting the notion of self-nature which 
subsists in the multiplicities of objects, is called the Para- 
tantra [dependence on another]. Right knowledge and 
suchness, Mahamati, are indestructible, and thus they are 
known as Parinishpanna [perfect knowledge]. 

Further, Mahamati, by adhering to what is seen of the 
Mind itself there is an eightfold discrimination. This comes 
from imagining unreal individual appearances [as real]. 
(228) When the twofold clinging to an ego-soul and what 
belongs to it is stopped, there is the birth of the twofold 
egolessness. Mahamati, in these five Dharmas are included 
all the Buddha-truths and also the differentiation and suc- 
eession of the [Bodhisattva-] stages, and the entrance of the 
Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, Bodhisattvas, and Tathagatas 
into the state of self-realisation by means of their noble 
wisdom. 

LXXXIV 

Further, Mahamati, of the five Dharmas—name, ap- 
pearance, discrimination, right knowledge, and suchness— 
appearance is that which is seen as having such characteris- 
ties as form, shape, distinctive features, images, colours, etc. 
—this is ‘‘appearance.’’ Out of this appearance ideas are 
formed such as a jar, ete., by which one can say, this is such 
and such, and no other; this is ‘‘name.’’? When names are 
thus pronounced, appearances are determined! and there is 
‘‘discrimination,’’ saying this is mind and this is what 
belongs to it. That these names and appearances are after 
all unobtainable because when intellection is put away the 
aspect of mutuality [in which all things are determined] 

Samadharmeti va that follows here is probably to be dropped 
on the strength of the Chinese versions. 

198 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

ceases to be perceived and imagined—this is called the ‘‘such- 
ness’’ of things. And this suchness may be characterised as 
truth, reality, exact knowledge, limit, source, self-substance, 
the unattainable. This has been realised by myself and the 
Tathagatas, truthfully pointed out, recognised, made public, 
and widely shown. When, in agreement with this, [the 
truth] is rightly understood as neither regative nor affirma- 
tive, discrimination ceases to rise, and there is a state con- 
formable to self-realisation by means of noble wisdom, which 
is not the course of controversy pertaining to the philosphers, 
Sravakas, and Pratyekabuddhas; this is ‘‘right knowledge.”’ 

(229) These are, Mahdmati, the five Dharmas, and in 
them are included the three Svabhavas, the eight Vijnanas, 
the twofold egolessness, and all the Buddha-truths. In this, 
Mahamati, reflect well with your own wisdom and let others 
do [the same] and do not allow yourself to be led by another. 
So it is said: 

5. The five Dharmas, the Svabhavas, the eight Vij- 
nanas, and the twofold egolessness—they are all embraced in 
the Mahayana. 

6. Name, appearance, and discrimination [correspond 
to] the first two Svabhavas, while right knowledge and 
suchness are the Parinishpanna. 

LXXXV 

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattva said this to the Blessed One: It is told by the Blessed 
One in the canonical text the Tathagatas of the past, present, 
and future are like the sands of the river Ganga. Blessed 
One, is this to be accepted literally? or is there another 
distinct meaning? Pray tell me, Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said: Mahamati, do not take it in 
its literal sense; for, Mahamati, the Buddhas of the three 
divisions of time are not measurable by the measurement of 
the sands of the Ganga. Why? Because an analogy which 
is superior to anything of the world and surpasses it cannot 
be called an analogy, since there is in it something resembling 
and something not resembling. (230) The Tathagatas, Arhats, 

CHAPTER SIX 199 

Fully-Enlightened Ones do not give out such an analogy 
that has in it something resembling and something not 
resembling and that is superior to the world and surpasses 
it. But this comparison is only given out, Mabamat:, by 
myself and the Tathagatas, in which the Tathagatas, Arkats, 
Fully-Enlightened Ones are said to be like the sands of the 
river Ganga; the idea is to terrify those ignorant and 
simple-minded ones who, tenaciously clinging to the idea of 
permanency and impermanency, and giving themselves up 
to the ways of thinking and the erroneous views of the 
philosophers, follow up the wheel of transmigration. To 
those who, anxious to escape the intricacies of the wheel 
of existence, seek after the excellent state, thinking how 
this could be realised, it is told them that the appearance of 
the Tathagatas is not like the blooming of the Udumbara 
flower, because they will thereby see that the attainment of 
Buddhahood is not a difficult undertaking and will put 
forward their energy. But it is told in the canonical text 
that the Tathagatas appear as rarely as the Udumbara 
flower, and this is in consideration of those people whv are 
to be led by me. Mahamati, however, no one has ever seen 
the Udumbara flower blooming, nor will anyone; while, 
Mahamati, the Tathagatas are at present in the world, they 
were seen and are to be seen. To say that the Tathagatas 
appear as rarely as the Udumbara flower has [really] no 
reference to the establishment of the truth itself. When, 
Mahamati, the establishment of the truth itself is pointed 
out, it surpasses beyond measure anything in the world 
that can be offered as an analogy to it, because [the ignorant | 
are incapable of believing. And thus there is an unbelief 
on the part of the ignorant and simple-minded. (231) 
There is indeed no room for analogies to enter in the realm 
of self-realisation which is effected by means of noble 
wisdom. The truth transcends all the notions that are 
characteristic of the Citta, Manas, and Manovijniana. The 
truth is the Tathagatas, and, therefore, in them there is 
nothing describable by analogy. 

But, Mahamati, [sometimes] a comparison is made use 

200 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

of ; that is to say, the Tathagatas are said to be like the sands 
of the river Ganga, because they are the same and impartial 
[to all things], because they are free from imagination and 
discrimination. For example, Mahamati, the sands of the 
river Ganga are tossed about by the fishes, tortoises, por- 
poises, crocodiles, buffalos, lions, elephants, etc., but they are 
free from imagination and discrimination; for they do not 
resent, saying. ‘‘We are down-trodden,’’ or ‘‘ We are not.’’ 
They are non-discriminative, pure in themselves, separated 
from defilement. In the same way, Mahamati, the self- 
realisation of noble wisdom which has been attained by the 
Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones, is like the river 
Ganga, and their powers, psychic faculties, and self-control 
are like the sands; and however much they are tossed about 
by the fishes of the philosophers, by the ignorant who belong 
to other schools, they are not troubled by imaginations and 
discriminations. Because of their original vows, the Tatha- 
gatas [whose hearts are] filled with all the happiness of the 
Samapatti are not troubled by imaginations and discrimina- 
tions with regard to beings. Therefore, the Tathagatas, like 
the sands of the river Ganga, are free from partiality because 
of their being devoid of likes and dislikes. 

To illustrate, Mahamati: as the sands of the river Ganga 
partake of the character of the earth, the conflagration that 
will break out at the end of the Kalpa may burn the earth 
but does not destroy its self-nature. Mahamati, the earth 
is not consumed because of its being inseparably connected 
with the element of fire, (232) and it is only the ignorant 
and simple-minded that on account of their falling into false 
ideas imagine the earth being consumed by fire. But as 
it supplies the material cause to the element fire, it is never 
consumed. In the same way, Mahamati, the Dharmakaya 
of the Tathagatas, like the sands of the river Ganga, is never 
destroyed. 

To illustrate, Mahamati: the sands of the river Ganga 
are immeasurable. In the same way, Mahamati, the rays 
of light of the Tathagatas are beyond measure, which arc 
emitted by them in all the Buddha-assemblies in order to 

CHAPTER SIX 201 

bring beings to maturity and arouse them [to the knowledge 
of the truth]. 

To illustrate, Mahamati: the sands of the river Ganga 
do not assume another nature than itself remaining forever 
the same. In the same way, Mahamati, the Tathagatas, 
Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones are neither evolving nor 
disappearing in transmigration because in them the cause of 
making them come into existence is destroyed. 

To illustrate, Mahamati: the sands of the river Ganga 
are unconcerned whether they are carried away or whether 
more is added into them. In the same way, Mahamati, the 
knowledge of the Tathagatas which is exercised for the 
maturing of beings is neither exhausted nor augmented, 
because the Dharma is without a physical body. Mahamati, 
that which has a physical body is subject to annihilation, 
but not that which has no physical body; and the Dharma 
is not a physical body. 

To illustrate, Mahamati: the sands of the river Ganga, 
however much they are compressed for the sake of the ghee 
and oil, are destitute of them. In the same way, (233) 
Mahamati, the Tathagatas never abandon their deep con- 
cerns! and original vows and happiness as regards the 
Dharmadhatu, however hard they are oppressed with pain 
for the sake of beings, as long as all beings have not yet 
been led into Nirvana by the Tathagatas, who are endowed 
with a great compassionate heart. 

To illustrate, Mahamati: the sands of the river Ganga 
are drawn along with the flow of the stream, but not where 
there is no water. In the same way, Mahdmati, the Tatha- 
gata’s teaching in regard to all the Buddha-truths takes 
place along the flow of the Nirvana-stream; and for this 
reason the Tathagatas are said to be like the sands of the 
river Ganga. 

Mahamati, in tathdgata (‘‘thus come’’) there is no 
sense of ‘‘going away’’; Mahamati, ‘‘going away’’ means 
destruction. Mahamati, the primary limit of transmigration 
is unknown. Not being known, how can I talk of the sense 

7 After T‘ang. 

202 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

of ‘‘gong away’’? The sense of ‘‘going away,’’ Mahamati, 
is annihilation, and this is not known by the ignorant and 
simple-minded. 

Mahamati said: If, Blessed One, the primary limit of 
transmigration of all beings is unknowable, how is the eman- 
cipation of beings knowable? 

The Blessed One said: Mahamati, when it is under- 
stood that the objective world is nothing but what is seen 
of the Mind itself, the habit-energy of false speculations and 
erroneous discriminations which have been going on since 
beginningless time is removed, and there is a revulsion 
for turning-back] at the basis of discrimination—this is 
emancipation, Mahamati, and not annihilation. Therefore, 
Mahamati, there cannot be any talk about endlessness. To 
be endless in limit, Mahamati, is another name for dis- 
crimination. Apart from discriminations (234) there are 
no other beings. When all things external or internal are 
examined with intelligence, Mahamati, knowing and known 
are found to be quiescent. But when it is not recognised 
that all things rise from the discrimination of the Mind 
itself, discrimination asserts itself. When this is understood 
discrimination ceases. So it is said: 

7. Those who regard the removers of obstruction [i.e., 
Buddhas] as neither destroyed nor departed for ever, like 
the sands of the Ganga, see the Tathagata. 

8. Like the sands of the Ganga they are devoid of all 
error: they flow along the stream and are permanent, and 
so is the essence [or nature] of Buddhahood. 

LXXXVI 

At that time again, Mahimati the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattva said this to the Blessed One; Tell me, Blessed One; 
tell me, Sugata, Tathagata, Arhat, Fully-Enlightened One, 
regarding the momentary destruction of all things and their 
distinctive signs. Blessed One, what is meant by all things 
being momentary ? 

The Blessed One replied: Then, Mahamati, listen well 
and reflect well within yourself; I will tell you. 

CHAPTER SIX 203 

Certainly, Blessed One; said Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said this to him: Mahamati, all things, 
all things we speak of, and they are good or bad, effect- 
producing or not effect-producing, of this world (235) or of 
super-world, faulty or faultless, of evil flowings or the non- 
flowings, receptive or non-receptive. In short, Mahamati, 
the five appropriating! Skandhas have their rise from the 
habit-energy of the Citta, Manas, and Manovijfiana, they 
are imagined good or bad. Mahamati, the happiness of the 
Samadhi and the attainments [resulting therefrom], which 
belong to the wise by reason of their abiding in the happiness 
of the existing world, are called the non-outflowing goods. 

Again, Mahamati, by good and bad are meant the eight 
Vijiianas. What are the eight? They are the Tathagata- 
garbha known as the Alayavijfidna, Manas, Manovijiiana, 
and the system of the five Vijfianas as described by the 
philosophers. Now, Mahamati, the system of the five Vij- 
fidnas is together with the Manovijiiana, and there is an 
undivided succession and differentiation of good and bad, 
and the entire body moves on continuously and closely bound 
together; moving on, it comes to an end; but as it fails to 
understand that there is nothing in the world but what is 
seen of Mind-only, there is the rising of another Vijnana 
[-system] following the cessation of the first; and the Mano- 
vijiana in union with the system of the five Vijnanas, 
perceiving the difference of forms and figures, is set in 
motion, not remaining still even for a moment—this I call 
momentariness. Mahamati, momentary is the Alayavijfana 
known as the Tathagata-garbha, which is together with the 
Manas and with the habit-energy of the evolving Vijnanas— 
this is momentary. But [the Alayavijiana which is to- 
gether] with the habit-energy of the non-outflows (andsrava) 
(236) is not momentary. This is not understood by the 

* All the Skandhas are self-appropriating, or self-grasping, as 
long as there is attachment to the notion of an ego-soul. When that 
is got rid of, the Skandhas are andsrava, i.e. not tainted with evil 
outflows. 

204 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

ignorant and simple-minded who are addicted to the doctrine 
of momentariness. Not understanding the momentariness 
and non-momentariness of all things, they cherish nihilism 
whereby they even try to destroy the unmade (asamskrita). 
Mahamati, the system itself of the five Vijfianas is not 
subject to transmigration, nor does it suffer pleasure and 
pain, nor is it conducive to Nirvana. But, Mahamati, the 
Tathagata-garbha is together with the cause that suffers 
pleasure and pain; it is this that is set in motion and ceases 
to work; it is stupefied by the fourfold habit-energy. But 
the ignorant do not understand it, as their thoughts are 
infused with the habit-energy of discrimination which 
cherishes the view of momentariness. 

Further, Mahamati, gold, vajra, and the relics of the 
Buddha, owing to their specific character, are never 
destroyed but remain the same until the end of time. If, 
Mahdmati, the nature of enlightenment is momentary, the 
wise would lose their wiseness (dryatva), but they have never 
lost it. Mahamati, gold and vajra remain the same until 
the end of time; remaining the same they are neither 
diminished nor increased. How is it that the ignorant, fail- 
ing to recognise the hidden meaning of all things internal 
and external, discriminate in the sense of momentariness? 

LXXXVII 

Further, Mahamati said: It is again said by the 
Blessed One that by fulfilling the six Paramitas Buddha- 
hood is realised. What are the six (237) Paramitas? And 
how are they fulfilled? 

The Blessed One replied: Mahamati, there are three 
kinds of Paramités. What are the three? They are the 
worldly, the super-worldly, and the highest super-wordly. 
Of these, Mahamati, the worldly Paramitads [are practised 
thus]: Adhering tenaciously to the notion of an ego-soul 
and what belongs to it and holding fast to dualism, those 
who are desirous for this world of form, ete., will practise 
the Paramita of charity in order to obtain the various 
realms of existence. In the same way, Mahamati, the 

CHAPTER SIX 205 

ignorant will prectise the Paramitas of morality, patience, 
energy, Dhyana, and Prajna. Attaining the psychic powers 
they will be born in Brahma’s heaven. 

As to the super-worldly Paramitas, they are practised 
by the Srivakas and Pratyekabuddhas whose thoughts are 
possessed by the notion of Nirvana; the Paramitas of 
charity, ete. are thus performed by them, who, like the 
ignorant, are desirous of enjoying Nirvana for themselves. 

Again, Mahamati, as to the highest super-worldly Para- 
mitas, [they are practised] by the Bodhisattva-Mah4asattvas 
who are the practisers of the highest form of spiritual dis- 
cipline ; that is, perceiving that there is nothing in the world 
but what is only seen of the Mind itself, on account of dis- 
crimination, and understanding that duality is of the Mind 
itself, they see that discrimination ceases to function; and, 
that seizing and holding is non-existent; and, free from all 
thoughts of attachment to individual objects which are of 
the Mind itself, and in order to benefit and give happiness 
to all sentient beings, [the Bodhisattvas] practise the Para- 
mita of charity. While dealing with an objective world there 
is no rising in them of discrimination; they just practise 
morality and this is the Paramita [of morality]. To practise 
patience with no thought of discrimination rising in them 
(238) and yet with full knowledge of grasped and grasping 
—this is the Paramitaé of patience. To exert oneself with 
energy from the first part of the night to its end and in 
conformity with the disciplinary measures and not to give 
rise to discrimination—this is the Paramita of energy. Not 
to cherish discrimination, not to fall into the philosopher’s 
notion of Nirvana—this is the Paramita of Dhyana. As to 
the Paramita of Prajiié: when the discrimination of the 
Mind itself ceases, when.things are thoroughly examined by 
means of intelligence, there is no falling into dualism, and 
a revulsion takes place at the basis, while previous karma is 
not destroyed ; when [transcendental knowledge] is exercised 
for the accomplishment of self-realisation, then there is the 
Paramita of Praja. These, Mahamati, are the Paramitas 
and their meanings. 

206 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

LXXXVIII! 

So it is said: 

9. The created (samskrita) are empty, impermanent, 
momentary—so the ignorant discriminate; the meaning of 
momentariness is discriminated by means of the analogies of 
a river, a lamp, and seeds. 

10. All things are non-existent, they are not-momen- 
tary, quiescent, not subject to destruction, and unborn— 
this, I say, is the meaning of momentariness. 

11. Birth and death succeed without interruption— 
this I do not point out for the ignorant. Owing to the 
uninterrupted succession of existence, discrimination moves 
on in the [six] paths. 

12. Ignorance is the cause and there is the general 
rising of minds, when form is not yet born, where is the 
abode of the middle existence? 

13. If another mind is set in motion in an uninter- 
rupted succesion of deaths, (239) where does it find its 
dependence as form is not established in time? 

14. If mind is set in motion, somewhere, somehow, the 
cause is an unreal one; it is not complete; how ean one know 
of its momentary disappearances? 

15. The attainment of the Yogins, gold, the Buddha- 
relics, and the heavenly palace of Abhasvara are indestruc- 
tible by any worldly agencies. 

16. Ever abiding are the truths attained by the 
Buddhas and their perfect knowledge; the nature of 
Buddhahood as realised [by them]—how ean there be 
momentariness in them ? 

17. The city of the Gandharvas, Maya-like forms—how 
ean they be otherwise than momentary? Realities are 
characterised with unreality, and how ean they be causal 
agencies? 

Here Ends the Sixth Chapter ‘‘On Momentariness.’’ 

The proper place for this section is after the section on 
“Momentary” and before the ‘““Padramita,” or what is the same thing 
the latter is wrongly inserted where it is found in in the text. 

1 

[CHAPTER SEVEN] 

LXXXIX 

(240) At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva said this to the Blessed One: [How was it that] 
the Arhats were given assurance by the Blessed One of 
their attainment of supreme enlightenment? [How can] 
all beings attain Tathagatahood without realising the truths 
of Parinirvana? [What does it mean that] from the night 
when the Tathagata was awakened to supreme enlighten- 
ment until the night when he entered into Parinirvana, 
between these times the Tathagata has not uttered, has not 
pronounced, a word. [What is the meaning of this] that 
being always in Samadhi the Tathagatas neither deliberate 
nor contemplate? [How do] Buddhas of transformation, 
being iu the state of- transformation, execute the works of 
the Tathagatas? How is the succession of momentary de- 
composition explained which takes place in the Vijnanas? 

{[Further, what do these statements mean] that Vajra- 
pani is constantly with [the Tathagata] as his personal 
guard; that the primary limit is unknown and yet cessation 
is knowable; that there are evil ones, their activities, and 
left-over karma? Blessed One, [facts of] karma-hindrance 
are said to be shown [by the Tathagata in the incident of] 
Cafica the daughter of a Brahmin, of Sundari the daughter 
of a mendicant, an empty bowl, ete.; how can the Blessed 
One with these unexhausted evils attain all-knowledge? 

The Blessed One replied: Then, Mahamati, listen well 
and reflect well within yourself; I will tell you. 

Certainly, Blessed One; (241) said Mahamati the Bod- 
hisattva-Mahasattva and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said this to him: The realm of Nirvana 
where no substratum is left behind is according to the 
hidden meaning and for the sake of the practisers who are 

208 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

thereby inspired to exert themselves in the work of the 
Bodhisattvas. Mahamati, there are Bodhisattvas practising 
the work of the Bodhisattva here and in other Buddha- 
lands, who, however, are desirous of attaining the Nirvana 
of the Sravakayana. In order to turn their inclination away 
from the Sravakayana and to make them exert themselves 
in the course of the Mahayana, the Sravakas in transforma- 
tion are given assurance [as to their future Buddhahood] 
by the Body of Transformation; but this is not done by the 
Dharmata-Buddha. This giving assurance to the Sravakas, 
Mahamati, is declared according to the hidden meaning. 
Mahamati, that the abandonment of passion-hindrance by 
the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas is not different [from 
that by the Tathagatas] is due to the sameness of the taste 
of emancipation, but this does not apply to the abandonment 
of knowledge-hindranece. Knowledge-hindrance, Mahamati, 
is purified when the egolessness of things is distinctly per- 
ceived; but passion-hindrance is destroyed when first the 
egolessness of persons is perceived and acted upon, for [then] 
the Manovijiana ceases to function. Further, dharma- 
hindrance is given up because of the disappearance of the 
habit-energy [accumulated in] the Alayavijiiana, it is now 
thoroughly purified. 

There is an eternally-abiding reality [which is to be 
understood] according to the hidden meaning, because it 
is something that has neither antecedents nor consequents. 
The Tathagata points out the Dharma without deliberation, 
without contemplation, and by means of such words that 
are original and independent. Because of his right thinking 
and because of his unfailing memory, he neither deliberates 
nor contemplates, he is no more at the stage of the fourfold 
habit-energy, (242) he is free from the twofold death, he 
has relinquished the twofold hindrance of passion and 
knowledge. 

Mahadmati, the seven Vijianas, that is, Manas, Mano- 
vijhana,, eye-vijiiana, ete., are characterised with momen- 
tariness because they originate from habit-energy, they are 
destitute of the good non-flowing factors, and are not trans- 

CHAPTER SEVEN 209 

migratory. What transmigrates, Mahamati, is the Tathagata- 
garbha which is the cause of Nirvana as well as that of 
pleasure and pain. This is not understood by the ignorant 
whose minds are torn asunder by the notion of emptiness. 

Mahamati, the Tathagatas who are accompanied by 
Vajrapani are the Tathagatas transformed in transforma- 
tion and are not the original Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully- 
Enlightened Ones. The original Tathagatas, Mahamati, are 
indeed beyond all sense and measurement, beyond the reach 
of all ignorant ones, Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philo- 
sophers. [These Tathagatas] are abiding in the joy of ex- 
istence as it is, as they have reached the truth of intuitive 
knowledge by means of Jiianakshanti. Thus Vajrapani is 
not attached to them. All the Buddhas of Transformation 
do not owe their existence to karma; in them there is no 
Tathagatahood, but apart from them there is no Tathagata- 
hood either. Like the potter who is dependent on various 
combinations, [the Buddha of Transformation] does his 
work for sentient beings; he teaches the doctrine meeting 
conditions, but not the doctrine that will establish the truth 
as it 1s, which belongs to the noble realm of self-realisation. 

Further, Mahamati, on account of the cessation of the 
six Vijianas the ignorant and simple-minded look for nihil- 
ism, and on account of their not understanding the Alaya- 
vijnana they have eternalism. The primary limit of the 
discrimination of their own minds (248) is unknown, Maha- 
mati. Emancipation is obtained when this discrimination 
of Mind itself ceases. With the abandonment of the four- 
fold habit-energy the abandonment of all faults takes place. 

So it is said :? 

1. The three vehicles are no-vehicle; there is no Nir- 
vana with the Buddhas; it is pointed out that the assurance 
of Buddhahood is given to all that are freed from faults. 

2. Ultimate intuitive knowledge, Nirvana that leaves 
no remnant,—this is told according to the hidden meaning 
in order to give encouragement to the timid. 

The following gathas do not seem to have any specific relation 
to the prose section. 

210 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

3. Knowledge is produced by the Buddhas, and the 
path is pointed out by them: they move in it and not in 
anything else, therefore there is no Nirvana with them. 

4. Existence, desire, form (ripa), theorising—this is 
the fourfold habit-energy; this is where the Manovijfiana 
takes its rise and the Alaya and Manas abide. 

5. Nihilism and the idea of impermanency rise be- 
eause of the Manovijiiana, the eye-vijiana, etc.; eternalism 
rises from [the thought that] there is no beginning in Nir- 
vana, intelligence, and theorisation. 

Here Ends the Seventh Chapter, ‘‘On Transforma- 
tion,” 

[CHAPTER EIGHT]? 

(244) At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Maha- 
sattvt asked the Blessed One in verse and again made a 
request, saying: Pray tell me, Blessed One, Tathagata, Arhat, 
Fully-Enlightened One regarding the merit and vice of meat- 
eating; thereby I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas of the 
present and future may teach the Dharma to make those 
beings abandon their greed for meat, who, under the in- 
fluence of the habit-energy belonging to the carnivorous 
existence, strongly crave meat-food. These meat-eaters thus 
abandoning their desire for [its] taste will seek the Dharma 
for their food and enjoyment, and, regarding all beings 
with love as if they were an only child, will cherish great 
compassion towards them. Cherishing [great compassion], 
they will discipline themselves at the stages of Bodhisattva- 
hood and will quickly be awakened in supreme enlighten- 
ment; or staying a while at the stage of Sravakahood and 
Pratyekabuddhahood, they will finally reach the highest 
stage of Tathagatahood. 

Blessed One, even those philosophers who hold erroneous 
doctrines and are addicted to the views of the Lokayata 
such as the dualism of being and non-being, nihilism, and 
eternalism, will prohibit meat-eating and will themselves 
refrain from eating it. How much more, O World Leader, 
he who promotes one taste for mercy and is the Fully- 
Enlightened One; (245) why not prohibit in his teachings 

* This chapter on meat-eating is another later addition to the 
text, which was probably done earlier than the Ravana chapter. It 
already appears in the Sung, but of the three Chinese versions it 
appears here in its shortest form, the proportion being S=1, T=2, 
W=3. It is quite likely that meat-eating was practised more or less 
among the earlier Buddhists, which was made a subject of severe 
criticism by their opponents. The Buddhists at the time of the 

Lankdvatdara did not like it, hence this addition in which an apologetic 
tone is noticeable. 

212 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

the eating of flesh not only by himself but by others? In- 
deed, let the Blessed One who at heart is filled with pity 
for the entire world, who regards all beings as his only 
child, and who possesses great compassion in compliance 
with his sympathetic feelings, teach us as to the merit and 
vice of meat-eating, so that I and other Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattvas may teach the Dharma. 

Said the Blessed One: Then, Mahamati, listen well 
and reflect well within yourself; I will tell you. 

Certainly, Blessed One; said Mahamati the Bodhisattva- 
Mahasattva and gave ear to the Blessed One. 

The Blessed One said this to him: For innumerable 
reasons, Mahamati, the Boddhisattva, whose nature is com- 
passion, is not to eat any meat; I will explain them: 
Mahamati, in this long course of transmigration here, there 
is not one living being that, having assumed the form of 
a living being, has not been your mother, or father, or 
brother, or sister, or son, or daughter, or the one or the 
other, in various degrees of kinship; and when acquiring 
another form of life may live as a beast, as a domestic 
animal, as a bird, or as a womb-born, or as something stand- 
ing in some relationship to you; [this being so] how can 
the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva who desires to approach all 
living beings as if they were himself and to practise the 
Buddha-truths, eat the flesh of any living being that is 
of the same nature as himself? Even, Mahamati, the Rak- 
shasa, listening to the Tathagata’s discourse on the highest 
essence of the Dharma, attained the notion of protecting 
[Buddhism], and, feeling pity, (246) refrains from eating 
flesh; how much more those who love the Dharma! Thus, 
Mahamati, wherever there is the evolution of living beings, 
let people cherish the thought of kinship with them, and, 
thinking that all beings are [to be loved as if they were] 
an only child, let them refrain from eating meat. So with 
Bodhisattvas whose nature is compassion, [the eating of] 
meat is to be avoided by him. Even in exceptional cases, 
it is not [compassionate] of a Bodhisattva of good standing 
to eat meat. The flesh of a dog, an ass, a buffalo, a horse, 

CHAPTER EIGHT 213 

a bull, or man, or any other [being], Mahamati, that is not 
generally eaten by people, is sold on the roadside as mutton 
for the sake of money; and therefore, Mahamati, the Bodhi- 
sattva should not eat meat. 

For the sake of love of purity, Mahamati, the Bodhi- 
sattva should refrain from eating flesh which is born of 
semen, blood, ete. For fear of causing terror to living 
beings, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva who is disciplining 
himself to attain compassion, refrain from eating flesh. To 
illustrate, Mahimati: When a dog sees, even from a dis- 
tance, a hunter, a pariah, a fisherman, ete., whose desires 
are for meat-eating, he is terrified with fear, thinking, ‘‘ They 
are death-dealers, they will even kill me.’’ In the same 
way, Mahamati, even those minute animals that are living 
in the air, on earth, and in water, seeing meat-eaters at a 
distance, will perceive in them, by their keen sense of smell, 
(247) the odour of the Rakshasa and will run away from 
such people as quickly as possible; for they are to them the 
threat of death. For this reason, Mahamati, let the Bodhi- 
sattva, who is disciplining himself, to abide in great com- 
passion, because of its terrifying living beings, refrain 
from eating meat. Mahamati, meat which is liked by un- 
wise people is full of bad smell and its eating gives one 
a bad reputation which turns wise people away; let the 
Bodhisattva refrain from eating meat. The food of the 
wise, Mahamati, is what is eaten by the Rishis; it does not 
consist of meat and blood. Therefore, Mahamati, let the 
Bodhisattva refrain from eating meat. 

In order to guard the minds of all people, Mahamati, 
let the Bodhisattva whose nature is holy and who is desirous 
of avoiding censure on the teaching of the Buddha, refrain 
from eating meat. For instance, Mahamati, there are some 
in the world who speak ill of the teaching of the Buddha; 
[they would say,] ‘‘Why are those who are living the life 
of a Sramana or a Brahmin reject such food as was en- 
joyed by the ancient Rishis, and like the carnivorous animals, 
living in the air, on earth, or in the water? Why do they 
go wandering about in the world thoroughly terrifying living 

214 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

beings, disregarding the life of a Sramana and destroying 
the vow of a Brahmin? There is no Dharma, no discipline 
in them.’’ There are many such adverse-minded people 
who thus speak ill of the teaching of the Buddha. For 
this reason, Mahamati, in order to guard the minds of all 
people, (248) let the Bodhisattva whose nature is full of 
pity and who is desirous of avoiding censure on the teach- 
ing of the Buddha, refrain from eating meat. 

Mahamati, there is generally an offensive odour to a 
corpse, which goes against nature; therefore, let the Bodhi- 
sattva refrain from eating meat. Mahamati, when flesh is 
burned, whether it be that of a dead man or of some other 
living creature, there is no distinction in the odour. When 
flesh of either kind is burned, the odour emitted is equally 
noxious. Therefore, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva, who is 
ever desirous of purity in his discipline, wholly refrain from 
eating meat. 

Mahamati, when sons or daughters of good family, wish- 
ing to exercise themselves in various disciplines such as the 
attainment of a compassionate heart, the holding a magical 
formula, or the perfecting of magical knowledge, or start- 
ing on a pilgrimage to the Mahayana, retire into a cemetery, 
or to a wilderness, or a forest, where demons gather or 
frequently approach; or when they attempt to sit on a couch 
or a seat for the exercise; they are hindered [because of 
their meat-eating] from gaining magical powers or from 
obtaining emancipation. Mahamati, seeing that thus there 
are obstacles to the accomplishing of all the practices, let the 
Bodhisattva, who is desirous of benefiting himself as well 
as others, wholly refrain from eating meat. 

As even the sight of objective forms gives rise to the 
desire for tasting their delicious flavour, let the Bodhisattva, 
whose nature is pity and who regards all beings as his only 
child, wholly refrain from eating meat. (249) Recognising 
that his mouth smells most obnoxiously, even while living 
this life, let the Bodhisattva whose nature is pity, wholly 
refrain from eating meat. 

[The meat-eater] sleeps uneasily and when awakened 

CHAPTER EIGHT 215 

is distressed. He dreams of dreadful events, which makes 
his hair rise on end. He is left alone in an empty hut; he 
leads a solitary life; and his spirit is seized by demons. 
Frequently he is struck with terror, he trembles without 
knowing why, there is no regularity in his eating, he is 
never satisfied. In his eating’ he never knows what is 
meant by proper taste, digestion, and nourishment. His 
visceras are filled with worms and other impure creatures 
and harbour the cause of leprosy. He ceases to entertain 
any thoughts of aversion towards all diseases. When I teach 
to regard food as if it were eating the flesh of one’s own 
child, or taking a drug, how can I permit my disciples, 
Mahamati, to eat food consisting of flesh and blood, which 
is gratifying to the unwise but is abhorred by the wise, 
which brings many evils and keeps away many merits; and 
which was not offered to the Rishis and is altogether 
unsuitable ? 

Now, Mahamati, the food I have permitted [my dis- 
ciples to take] is gratifying to all wise people but is avoided 
by the unwise; it is: productive of many merits, it keeps 
away many evils; and it has been prescribed by the an- 
cient Rishis. (250) It comprises rice, barley, wheat, kidney 
beans, beans, lentils, etc., clarified butter, oil, honey, molasses, 
treacle, sugar cane, coarse sugar, etc.; food prepared with 
these is proper food. Mahamati, there may be some irra- 
tional people in the future who will discriminate and establish 
new rules of moral discipline, and who, under the influence 
of the habit-energy belonging to the carnivorous races, will 
greedily desire the taste [of meat]: it is not for these 
people that the above food is prescribed. Mahamati, this 
is the food I urge for the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas who have 
made offerings to the previous Buddhas, who have planted 
roots of goodness, who are possessed of faith, devoid of dis- 
crimination, who are all men and women belonging to the 
Sakya family, who are sons and daughters of good family, 
who have no attachment to body, life, and property, who 
do not covet delicacies, are not at all greedy, who being 

* Delete pitakhadita (line 7). 

216 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

compassionate desire to embrace all living beings as their 
own person, and who regard all beings with affection as if 
they were an only child. 

Long ago in the past, Mahamati, there lived a king 
whose name was Simhasaudfsa. His excessive fondness for 
meat, his greed to be served with it, (251) stimulated his 
taste for it to the highest degree so that he [even] ate human 
flesh. In consequence of this he was alienated from the 
society of his friends, counsellors, kinsmen, relatives, not to 
speak of his townsmen and countrymen. In consequence he 
had to renounce his throne and dominion and to suffer 
great calamities because of his passion for meat. 

Mahamati, even Indra who obtained sovereignty over 
the gods had once to assume the form of a hawk owing to 
his habit-energy of eating meat for food in a previous ex- 
istence; he then chased ViSvakarma appearing in the guise 
of a pigeon, who had thus to place himself on the scale. 
King Sivi feeling pity for the innocent [pigeon had to sacri- 
fice himself to the hawk and thus] to suffer great pain. 
Even a god who became Indra the Powerful, after going 
through many a birth, Mahamati, is liable to bring mis- 
fortune both upon himself and others; how much more 
those who are not Indra! 

Mahamati, there was another king! who was carried 
away by his horse into a forest. After wandering about in 
it, he committed evil deeds with a lioness out of fear for his 
life, and children were born to her. Because of their des- 
cending from the union with a lioness, (252) the royal chil- 
dren were called the Spotted-Feet, ete. On account of their 
evil habit-energy in the past when their food had been 
flesh, they ate meat even [after becoming] king, and, 
Mahamati, in this life they lived in a village called Kutiraka 
(‘“seven huts’’), and because they were excessively attached 
and devoted to meat-eating they gave birth to Dakas and 
Dakinis who were terrible eaters of human flesh. In the life 
of transmigration, Mahamati, such ones will fall into the 
wombs of such excessive flesh-devouring creatures as the 

* The text has all this in the plural. 

CHAPTER EIGHT 217 

lion, tiger, panther, wolf, hyena, wild-cat, jackal, owl, ete. ; 
they will fall into the wombs of still more greedily flesh- 
devouring and still more terrible Rakshasas. Falling into 
such, it will be with difficulty that they can ever obtain a 
human womb; how much more [difficult] attaining Nirvana! 

Such as these, Mahamati, are the evils of meat-eating; 
how much more numerous [evil] qualities that are born of 
the perverted minds of those devoted to [meat-eating]?. 
And, Mahamati, the ignorant and simple-minded are not 
aware of all this and other evils and merits [in connection 
with meat-eating]. I tell you, Mahamati, that seeing these 
evils and merits the Bodhisattva whose nature is pity should 
eat no meat. 

If, Mahamati, meat is not eaten by anybody for any 
reason, there will be no destroyer of life. ‘Mahamati, in the 
majority of cases (253) the slaughtering of innocent living 
beings is done for pride and very rarely for other causes. 
Though nothing special may be said of eating the flesh of 
living creatures such as animals and birds, alas, Mahamati, 
that one addicted to the love of |meat-] taste should eat 
human flesh! Mahamati, in most cases nets and other de- 
vices are prepared in various places by people who have 
lost their sense on account of their appetite for meat-taste, 
and thereby many innocent victims are destroyed for the 
sake of the price [they bring in]—such as birds, Kaura- 
bhraka, Kaivarta, ete., that are moving about in the air, on 
land, and in water. There are even some, Mahamati, who are 
hke Rakshasas hard-hearted and used to practising cruelties,? 
who, being so devoid of compassion, would now and then 
look at living beings as meant for food and destruction— 
no compassion is awakened in them. 

It is not true, Mahamati, that meat is proper food and 
permissible for the Sravaka when [the victim] was not 
killed by himself, when he did not order others to kill it, 
when it was not specially meant for him. Again, Mahamati, 

* Both T‘ang and Wei have here a sentence to the following 
effect: ‘“‘Those who do not eat meat acquire a large sum of merit.” 
2 According to T‘ang. 

218 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

there may be some unwitted people in the future time, who, 
beginning to lead the homeless life according to my teach- 
ing, are acknowledged as sons of the Sakya, and carry the 
Kashaya robe about them as a badge, but who are in thought 
evilly affected by erroneous reasonings. They may talk 
about various discriminations which they make in their moral 
discipline, being addicted to the view of a personal soul. 
Being under the influence of the thirst for [meat-] taste, they 
will string together in various ways (254) some sophistic 
arguments to defend meat-eating. They think they are 
giving me an unprecedented calumny when they discriminate 
and talk about facts that are capable of various interpreta- 
tions. Imagining that this fact allows this interpretation, 
[they conclude that] the Blessed One permits meat as proper 
food, and that it is mentioned among permitted foods and 
that probably the Tathagata himself partook of it. But, 
Mahamati, nowhere in the sutras is meat permitted as some- 
thing enjoyable, nor it is referred to as proper among the 
foods prescribed [for the Buddha’s followers]. 

If however, Mahamati, I had the mind to permit [{meat- 
eating], or if I said it was proper for the Sravakas [to eat 
meat], I would not have forbidden, I would not forbid, all 
meat-eating for these Yogins, the sons and daughters of good 
family, who, wishing to cherish the idea that all beings are 
to them like an only child, are possessed of compassion, 
practise contemplation, mortification, and are on their way 
to the Mahayana. And, Mahamati, the interdiction not to 
eat any kind of meat is here given to all sons and daughters 
of good family, whether they are cemetery-ascetics of forest- 
ascetics, or Yogins who are practising the exercises, if they 
wish the Dharma and are on the way to the mastery of 
any vehicle, and being possessed of compassion, conceive the 
idea of regarding all beings as an only child, in order to 
accomplish the end of their discipline. 

(255) In the canonical texts here and there the process 
of discipline is developed in orderly sequence like a ladder 
going up step by step, and one joined to another in a re- 
gular and methodical manner; after explaining each point 

CHAPTER EIGHT 219 

meat obtained in these specific circumstances is not inter- 
dicted.1. Further, a tenfold prohibition is given as regards 
the flesh of animals found dead by themselves. But in the 
present sutra all [meat-eating] in any form, in any manner, 
and in any place, is unconditionally and once for all, pro- 
hibited for all. Thus, Mahamati, meat-eating I have not 
permitted to anyone, I do not permit, I will not permit. 
Meat-eating, I tell you, Mahamati, is not proper for home- 
less monks. There may be some, Mahamati, who would say 
that meat was eaten by the Tathagata thinking this would 
ealuminate him. Such unwitted people as these, Mahaimati, 
will follow the evil course of their own karma-hindrance, 
and will fall into such regions where long nights are passed 
without profit and without happiness. Mahamati, the noble 
Sravakas do not eat the food taken properly by [ordinary] 
men, how much less the food of flesh and blood, which is 
altogether improper. Mahamati, the food for my Sravakas, 
Pratyekabuddhas, and Bodhisattvas is the Dharma and not 
flesh*-food ; how much more the Tathagata! The Tathagata 
is the Dharmakaya, Mahamati; he abides in the Dharma as 
food; his is not a body feeding on flesh; he does not abide 
in any flesh-food. He has ejected the habit-energy of thirst 
and desire which sustain all existence; he keeps away the 
habit-energy of all evil passions; he is thoroughly emanci- 
pated in mind and knowledge; he is the All-knower; (256) 
he is All-seer; he regards all beings impartially as an only 
child; he is a great compassionate heart. Mahamati, having 
the thought of an only child for all beings, how can I, 
such as I am, permit the Sravakas to eat the flesh of their 
own child? How much less my eating it! That I have 
permitted the Sravakas as well as myself to partake of 
[meat-eating], Mahamati, has no foundation whatever. 

So it is said: 

1. Liquor, meat, and onions are to be avoided, Maha- 
mati, by the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas and those who are 
Victor-heroes. 

1 

The text as it stands requires fuller explanation. 
* Amiéra (mixed) in T‘ang. 

220 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

2. Meat is not aggreeable to the wise: it has a nausea- 
ting odour, it causes a bad reputation, it is food for the 
carnivorous; I say! this, Mahamati, it is not to be eaten. 

3. To those who eat [meat] there are detrimental ef- 
fects, to those who do not, merits; Mahamati, you should 
know that meat-eaters bring detrimental effects upon them- 
selves. 

4. Let the Yogin refrain from eating flesh as it is born 
of himself, as [the eating] involves transgression, as [flesh] 
is produced of semen and blood, and as [the killing of ani- 
mals] causes terror to living beings. 

5. Let the Yogin always refrain from meat, onions, 
various kinds of liquor, allium, and garlic. 

6. Do not anoint the body with sesamum oil; do not 
sleep on a bed, perforated with spikes; (257) for the living 
beings who find their shelter in the cavities and in places 
where there are no cavities may be terribly frightened.? 

7. From eating [meat] arrogance is born, from arro- 
gance erroneous imaginations issue, and from imagination 
is born greed ; and for this reason refrain from eating [meat]. 

8. From imagination, greed is born, and by greed the 
mind it stupefied; there is attachment to stupefaction, and 
there is no emancipation from birth [and death]. 

9. For profit sentient beings are destroyed, for flesh 
money is paid out, they are both evil-doers and [the deed] 
matures in the hells called Raurava (screaming), etc. 

10. One who eats flesh, trespassing against the words 
of the Muni, is evil-minded; he is pointed out in the teach- 
ings of the Sakya as the destroyer of the welfare of the two 
worlds. 

11. Those evil-doers go to the most horrifying hell; 
meat-eaters are matured in the terrific hells such as Raurava, 
etc. 

12. There is no meat to be regarded as pure in three 
ways: not premeditated, not asked for, and not impelled; 
therefore, refrain from eating meat. 

Brimi, instead of brihi as in the text. 

* Unintelligible as far as the translator can see. 

CHAPTER EIGHT 221 

13. Let not the Yogin eat meat, it is forbidden by 
myself as well as by the Buddhas; those sentient beings 
who feed on one another will be reborn among the carnivo- 
rous animals. 

14. [The meat-eater] is ill-smelling, contemptuous, and 
born deprived of intelligence; (258) he will be born again 
and again among the families of the Candala, the Pukkasa, 
and the Domba. 

15. From the womb of Dakini he will be born in the 
meat-eaters’ family, and then into the womb of a Rakshasi 
and a cat; he belongs to the lowest class of men. 

16. Meat-eating is rejected by me in such sutras as 
the Hastikakshya, the Mahamegha, the Nirvana, the Anglt- 
malika, and the Lankavatara. 

17. [Meat-eating] is condemned by the Buddhas, 
Bodhisattvas, and Sravakas; if one devours [meat] out of 
shamelessness he will always be devoid of sense. 

18. One who avoids meat, etc., will be born, because 
of this fact, in the family of the Brahmins or of the Yogins, 
endowed with knowledge and wealth. 

19. Let one avoid all meat-eating [whatever they may 
say about] witnessing, hearing, and suspecting; these theo- 
risers born in a earnivorous family understand this not. 

20. As greed is the hindrance to emancipation, so are 
meat-eating, liquor, ete., hindrances. 

21. There may be in time to come people who make 
foolish remarks about meat-eating, saying, ‘‘Meat is proper 
to eat, unobjectionable, and permitted by the Buddha.’’ 

22. Meat-eating is a medicine; again, it is like a 
ehild’s flesh; (259) follow the proper measure and be 
averse [to meat, and thus] let the Yogin go about begging. 

23. [Meat-eating] is forbidden by me everywhere and 
all the time for those who are abiding in compassion; [he 
who eats meat] will be born in the same place as the lion, 
tiger, wolf, etc. 

24. Therefore, do not eat meat which will cause terror 
among people, because it hinders the truth of emancipation ; 
[not to eat meat—] this is the mark of the wise. 

222 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Here Ends the Eighth Chapter, ‘‘On Meat-eating,’’ 
from the Lankavatdra, the Essence of the Teaching of All 
the Buddhas.’ 

* For the phrase ‘The essence of the teaching of the Buddhas 
(sarvabuddhapravacanahridaya),” see pp. 39-40. 

[CHAPTER NINE} 

(260) At that time the Blessed One addressed Mahamati 
the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva: Mahamati, you should hold 
forth these magical phrases of the Lankavatdra, which were 
recited, are recited, and will be recited by the Buddhas of the 
past, present, and future. I will recite them here for the 
benefit of the proclaimers of the Dharma, who will retain 
them in memory. They are: 

Tutte, tutte—vutte, vutte—patte, patte— katte, katte— 
amale, amale—vimale, vimale—nime, nime—hime, hime— 
vame, vame—kale, kale, kale, kale—atte, matte—vatte, tutte 
—jhette, sputte—katte, katte—latte, patte—dime dime—cale, 
cale—pace, pace—badhe, bandhe—afce, mance—dutare, 
dutare—patare, patare—arkke, arkke—sarkke, sarkke— 
cakre, cakre—dime, dime—hime, hime—tu tu tu tu (4)— 
du du du du (4)— ru ru ru ru (4)—phu phu phu phu (4)— 
svaha. 

(261) These, Mahamati, are the magical phrases of the 
Lankavatara Mahdyana Sitra: If sons and daughters of good 
family should hold forth, retain, proclaim, realise these 
magical phrases, no one should ever be able to effect his 

* Another later addition probably when Dharani was extensively 
taken into the body of Buddhist literature just before its disappearance 
from the land of its birth. Dhdrani is a study by itself. In India 
where all kinds of what may be termed abnormalities in religious sym- 
bology are profusely thriving, Dhadrani has also attained a high 
degree of development as in the case of Mudra (holding the fingers), 
Asana (sitting), and Kalpa (mystic rite). When a religious symbolism 
takes a start in a certain direction, it pursues its own course regard- 
less of its origina] meaning, and the symbolism itself begins to gain 
a new signification which has never been thought of before in con- 
nection with the original idea. The mystery of an articulate sound 
which infinitely fascinated the imagination of the primitive man has 
come to create a string of meaningless sounds in the form of a Dharani. 
Its recitation is now considered by its followers to produce mysterious 
effects in various ways in life. 

224 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

descent upon them. Whether it be a god, or a goddess, or a 
Naga, or a Nagi, or a Yaksha, or a Yakshi, or an Asura, or 
an Asuri, or a Garuda, or a Garudi, or a Kinnara, or a 
Kannari, or a Mahoraga, or a Mahoragi, or a Gandharva, or 
a Gandharvi, or a Bhita, or a Bhuti, or a Kumbhanda, or a 
Kumbhandi, or a Pisara, or a Pisaci, or an Austaraka, or 
an Austaraki, or a Apasmara, or an Apasmari, or a Rak- 
shasa, or a Rakshasi, or a Daka, or a Dakin}, or an Aujohara, 
or an Aujohari, or a Katapiitana, or a Katapitani, or an 
Amanushya, or an Amanushyi,—no one of these will be able 
to effect his or her descent [upon the holder of these magical 
phrases]. If any misfortune should befall, let him recite the 
magical phrases for one hundred and eight times, and [the 
evil ones] will, wailing and crying, turn away and go m 
another direction. 

I will tell you, Mahamati, other magical phrases. They 
are: 

Padme, padmadeve—hine, hini, hine—cu, cule, culu, 
cule (262)—phale, phula, phule—yule, ghule, yula, yule— 
ghule, ghula, ghule—pale, pala, pale—munece, mufice, munee 
—cechinde, bhinde, bhaiije, marde, pramarde, dinakare— 
svaha. 

If, Mahamati, any son or daughter of good family 
should hold forth, retain, proclaim, and realise these magical 
phrases, on him or her no [evil beings] should be able to 
make their descent. Whether it be a god, or a goddess, or 
a Naga, or a Nagi, or a Yaksha, or a Yakshi, or an Asura, 
or an Asuri, a Garuda, or a Garudi, or a Kinnara, or a 
Kinnari, or a Mahoraga, or a Mahoragi, or a Gandharva, or 
a Gandharvi, or a Bhita, or a Bhuti, or a Kumbhanda, or a 
Kumbhandi, or a Pisaea, or a Pisadci, or an Austaraka, or an 
Austaraki, or an Apasmara, or an Apasmari, or a Rakshasa, 
or a Rakshasi, or a Daka, or a Dakini, or an Aujohara, or an 
Aujohari, or a Katapiitana, or a Katapttani, or an Amanu- 
shya, or an Amanushyi—no one of these will be able to effect 
his or her descent upon [the holder of these magical phrases]. 
By him who will recite these magic phrases, the [whole] 
Lankdvatdra Sitra will be recited. (263) These magic 

CHAPTER NINE 225 

phrases are given by the Blessed One to guard against the 
interference of the Rakshasas. 

Here Ends the Ninth Chapter Called ‘‘Dharani’’ in the 
Lankavatara. 

[SAGATHAKAM]' 

(264) Listen to the wonderful Mahayana doctrine, 
Declared in this Latkdvatara Sutra, 
Composed into verse-gems, 
And destroying a net of the philosophical views. 

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said 
this to the Blessed One :* 

1. (Chapter II, verse 1.) 

2. (Chapter II, verse 3.) 

3. (Chapter IJ, verse 2.) 

4,5. (Chapter II, verses 6, 7.) 

(265) 6. (Chapter IT, verse 8.) 

7,8. (Chapter II, verses 151, 152.) 

9. (Chapter II, verse 178.) 

10. These individual objects are not solid [realities] ; 

1 This section entitled, ‘‘ Sagithakam,” consists entirely of verses. 
It is probable that it was added later into the text. The subjects 
treated are many and varied, including those that have never appeared 
in the text. The verses are in a most confused condition, and it is 
frequently quite difficult to disentangle them and give them a sem- 
blance of order. The reader may use his own judgment in the matter. 

? This remark refers only to the first six verses. The Chinese 
translations have here the following: ‘‘At that time the Blessed One 
wishing to declare again the deep signification of the Sutra uttered 
the following verses.” The verses enumerated in the Sanskrit text are 
884, out of which about 208 are repetitions of those which have already 
appeared in the main text. These repetitions are systematically ex- 
cluded in T’ang, while Wei, with a few exceptions, repeats them al). 
In this English translation I have followed the method of T’ang. 
When we know more about the historical cireumstances of the com- 
pilation of the various sutras we may be able to see how these re- 
petitions came to be inserted here and also may learn something 
regarding the relation which this “Sagithakam” section stands to 
the preceding part of the Sutra. 

* These verses are not repeated in the same order as they are in 
the prose section of the text. There are some omissions, too. These 
irregularities take place throughout the ‘“‘Sagithakam,”’ showing that 
the verses were originally an independent body. 

SAGATHAKAM 227 

they rise because of imagination; as the imagination itself 
is empty, what is imagined is empty. 

11. (Chapter II, verse 149.) 

12. (Chapter II, verse 154.) 

18. By wrong discrimination the Vijiana[-system] 
rises; severally as eightfold, as ninefold, like waves on the 
great ocean. 

14. The root is constantly nourished by habit-energy, 
firmly attached to the seat; (266) the mind moves along with 
an objective world as iron is drawn by the loadstone. 

15. The original source on which all sentient beings 
are dependent is beyond theorisation; all doings cease and 
emancipation obtains, knowing and known are transcended. 

16. In the Samadhi known as Maya-like, one goes 
beyond the ten stages of Bodhisattvaship ; one who is removed 
from thought and knowledge perceives the Mind-king. 

17, When a ‘‘turning-back’’ takes place in the mind, 
one abides permanently in the palace of lotus-form, which is 
born of the realm of Maya. 

18. Abiding in it one attains a life of imagelessness, 
and, like a many-coloured jewel, performs religious deeds for 
all beings. 

19. Except for discrimination, there is neither Sam- 
skrita (or things made) nor Asamskrita (or things not 
made); the ignorant hold on to them as a barren woman 
does to the child of her dream; what fools they are! 

20. Let it be known that without self-nature, unborn, 
and empty are a personal soul, the Skandha-continuity, 
causation, the Dhatus, and [the notion of] existence and 
non-existence. 

21. To me teaching is an expedient, but I do not teach 
external signs; the ignorant because of their attachment to 
existence seize on signified and signifying. 

22. A knower of all things is not an all-knower, and all 
is not within all; the ignorant discriminate and [think] ‘‘I 

* This requires attention. The Sutra itself maintains a system 
of eight Vijiianas, and not a ninefold one, which is a later develop- 
nent. 

228 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

am the enlightened one in the world’’; but I am not en- 
lightened nor do I enlighten others. 

(267) 23. (Chapter II, verse 156.) 

24. (Chapter II, verse 143 and the first half of 144.) 

25. (Chapter II, verse 179.) 

26. (Chapter II, verse 181.) 

27. These things are empty, without self-nature, and 
unborn, like Maya, like a dream, and their being and non- 
being is unobtainable. 

28. One self-nature (svabhdva) I teach, which is 
removed from speculation and thought-construction, which 
belongs to the exquisite [spiritual] realm of the wise, 
removed from the two Svabhavas [i.e., the Parikalpita and 
the Paratantra]. 

(268) 29. Though multitudinuusness of things has no 
[real] existence as such, they appear to the intoxicated as 
like fire-fies because of their constitutional disturbance; like- 
wise is the world essentially [appearance]. 

30. As Maya is manifested depending on grass, wood, 
and brick, though Maya itself is non-existent, so are all 
things essentially [mere appearances]. 

31. There is neither seizing nor seized, neither bound 
nor binding; all is like Maya, like a mirage, like a dream, 
like an affected eye. 

32. When the truth-seeker sees [the truth] devoid of 
discrimination and free from impurities, then he is accom- 
plished in his contemplation; he sees me, there is no doubt. 

33. In this there is nothing of thought-construction ; 
it is like a mirage in the air; those who thus see all things, 
see nothing whatever.” 

34. In causation which governs being and non-being 
things do not originate; in the triple world the mind is 
perturbed, therefore multiplicities appear. 

35. The world is the same as a dream, and so are the 
multiplicities of things in it; [the wise] see property, touch, 

Omit the line in parentheses. 

This verse and the following one do not appear in T‘ang, and 
they are also missing in the prose section. 

2 

SAGATHAKAM 229 

death, a world-teacher, and work as of the same nature.’ 

36. This mind is the source of the triple world; when 
the mind goes astray there appears this world and that; 
(269) recognising the world as such, as it is non-existent, 
[a wise man] does not discriminate a world. 

37. The ignorant because of their stupidity see [an 
objective world] as taking its rise and disappearing, but he 
who has transcendental knowledge sees it neither rising nor 
disappearing. 

38. Those who are always above discrimination, in con- 
formity with truth, and removed from mind and its belong- 
ings, are in the celestial palace of Akanishtha where all evils 
are discarded. 

39. Such attain the powers, psychic faculties, and 
self-control, are thoroughly adept in the Samadhis, and are 
there [in the heaven] awakened to enlightenment; but the 
transformed ones are awakened here [on earth]. 

40. The Buddhas appear on earth in their innumerable 
transformation-bodies beyond calculation, and everywhere 
the ignorant following them listen to the Dharma. 

41. [There is one thing which is] released from [such 
conditions of existence as] beginning, middle, and endling, 
removed from existence and non-existence, all-pervading, 
immovable, pure, and above multiplicity, and [yet] produ- 
cing multiplicity. 

42. There is an essence” entirely covered by thought- 
constructions and hidden inside all that has body; because 
of perversion there is Maya; Maya, [however], is not the 
cause of perversion. 

43. Even because of the mind being deluded, there is 
a somewhat [perceived as real]; being bound up with the 
two Svabhavas there is the transformation of the Alaya- 
vijnhana. 

(270) 44. The world is no more than thought-con- 

* For the last quarter Wei has: ‘“‘The honoured one of the world 

preaches these doings.’ T’ang: “The person who perceives this well 
will be honoured by the world.” 
2 Gotra (HE) according to T’ang. 

230 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

struction, and there rages an ocean of views as regards ego 
and things (dharma) ; when the world is clearly perceived 
as such and there takes place a revulsion! [in the mind], 
this [one] is my child who is devoted to the truth of perfect 
knowledge. 

45. Things are discriminated by the ignorant as heat, 
fluidity, motility, and solidity ; they are, however, unrealities 
asserted ; there is neither signified nor signifying. 

46. But this body, form (samsthdna) and senses are 
made of the eight substances; deluded in the cage of trans- 
migration, the ignorant thus discriminate this phenomenal 
world (ripa). 

47. In the intermingling of causes and conditions, the 
ignorant imagine the birth[of all things]; but as they do 
not understand the truth, they go astray in this abode of 
the triple world. 

48. (Chapter II, verse 146.) 

(271) 49. What is known as _ multiplicity-seeds 
multiply in the mind (citta); in what is revealed, the 
ignorant imagine birth and are delighted with dualism. 

50. Ignorance, desire, and karma—they are the causes 
of mind and its belongings ;? as they evolve thus [relatively], 
they are [recognised] by me to be Paratantric. 

51. When the field of mentation gets confused, they 
imagine that there is something [real] to take hold of; in 
this imagination there is no perfect knowledge, it is false 
imagination rising from delusion. 

52. When bound in conditions there evolves a mind in 
all beings; when released from conditions, I say, I see no 
{mind rising}. 

93. When the mind, released from eunditions and un- 
supported by thought of self, abides no longer in the body, 
to me there is no objective world. 

54 and 55. (Chapter II, verses 147 and 148.) 

56. (Chapter II, verse 99.) 

(272) 57. So the flood of the Alayavijfiana is always 

Pardavritti, turning-over, or turning-up, or turning-back. 
* Read cittacaittdnam karakam. 

SAGATHAKAM 231 

stirred by the winds of objectivity (vishaya), and goes on 
dancing with the various Vijiana-waves. 

58. Because there is that which is seized and that 
which seizes, mind rises in all beings; there are no such signs 
visible [in the world] as are imagined by the ignorant. 

59. There is the highest Alayavijfiana, and again there 
is the Alaya as thought-construction (vijmapti); I teach 
suchness (tathata) that is above seized and seizing. 

60. Neither an ego, nor a being, nor a person exists 
in the Skandhas; [there is birth when] the Vijnana is born, 
and [cessation when] the Vijiana ceases. 

61. As a picture shows highness and lowness while [in 
reality] there is nothing of the sort in it; so in things existent 
there is thingness seen [as real] while there is nothing of 
the sort in them. 

62. The visible world (drigyam) has always the ap- 
pearance of the city of the Gandharvas and that of fata 
morgana; it is to be regarded as such, but it does not thus 
exist to the transcendental wisdom [of the wise]. 

63 and 64. (Chapter III, verses 79 and 80.) 

65. A proposition [is established] by means of condi- 
tions, reasons, and examples, (273) such as a dream, the 
Gandharva’s [eastle, fire-] wheel, mirage, the moon, the sun. 

66. By such examples as flame, hair, ete., I teach that 
birth is something not to be recognised really as such; the 
world is something imagined, empty like a dream, or Maya, 
which is error. 

67. The triple world has nowhere to place itself, either 
within nor without, it is thus [homeless]; seeing that all 
beings are unborn, there grows a full acceptance of the truth 
that nothing is ever born (kshdnti-anutpattt). 

68. He will then attain the Samadhi called Maya-like, 
the will-body, the psychic faculties, the self-mastery, the 
various powers belonging to the Mind. 

69. All things existent are unborn, empty, and without 
self-substance; and the delusion about them rises and ceases 
in accordance with conditions. 

7 Here I have followed T‘ang. 

232 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

70. Depending upon the Mind, there appears [within] 
a mind and, without a world of individual objects (ripina) ; 
this and no other is an external world which is imagined by 
the ignorant. 

71. This heap of bones, the Buddha-image, the analysis 
of the elements—[these are subjects of meditation]; by 
means of mental images (prajiapt:) good students handle 
the various aspects of the world. 

72. Body, abode, and property are three representa- 
tions (vijiapti) seized upon fas objects]; the will, [the 
desire] to hold, the discrimination of these representations 
are the seizing agents. 

(274) 73. As long as those philosophers who get con- 
fused in their reasonings and who are unable to go beyond 
the realm of words, distinguish the discriminating from the 
discriminated—so long they do not see [the truth] of 
suchness. 

74. When the Yogin by means of his transcendental 
wisdom understands that all things existent have no self- 
substance, he thus attains calmness and establishes himself 
in the state of no-form (dnimitta). 

75. As an object painted black is taken by the unwise 
to be a cock, so by the ignorant who do not know, the triple 
vehicle is understood in like manner. 

76. There are no Sravakas, no Pratyekabuddhas here; 
if, however, one recognises the form of a Buddha, of a 
Sravaka, this is a transformed manifestation of the Bodhi- 
sattva whose nature is compassion itself. 

77. The triple world of existence is no more than 
thought-construction, which is discriminated by the twofold 
Svabhava [of imagination and relative knowledge]; but 
when [within the mind] a turning-away from the course of 
sense-objects (dharma) and the ego-soul (pudgala) takes 
place, then we have [the truth of] suchness (tathatd). 

78. The sun, the moon, the lamp-light, the elements, 
and the gems,—each functions in its own way without dis- 
crimination; and so does the Buddha’s nature work on its 
own accord. 

SAGATHAKAM 233 

79. (Chapter II, verse 51.) 

80. Things known as defiled or as pure are like hair- 
nets [that is, wrongly perceived by the dim-eyed]; (275) 
they [really] have nothing to do with such notions as birth, 
abiding, and disappearance, or as eternity and non-eternity. 

81. It is like a drugged man whoever he is, who sees 
the world in golden colours; though there is no gold, for 
him the earth has changed into gold. 

§2. The ignorant, thus defiled since beginningless time 
with the mind and what belongs to it, apprehend existing 
things to be really such as they appear to be; though in fact 
they owe their origin to Maya or a mirage. 

83. One seed and no-seed are of the same stamp, and 
one seed and all seed also; and in one mind you see multi- 
plicity. 

84. When one seed is made pure, there is a turning 
into a state of no-seed ; the sameness comes from non-discrim- 
ination; from superabundance there is birth and general 
eonfusion from which there grows a multitude of seeds, 
hence the designation all-seed.? 

85. (Chapter II, verse 140.) 

86. (Chapter III, verse 52.) 

87. When the self-nature of existence is understood 
there is no need of keeping off the delusion; no-birth is the 
self-nature of existence, seeing thus one is released. 

(276) 88. (Chapter II, verse 170.) 

89. (Chapter II, verse 144.) 

90. (Chapter II, verse 141.) 

91. (Chapter III, verse 48.) 

92. (Chapter II, verse 136.) 

93. When the mind is evolved, forms begin to manifest 
themselves; really [if] no minds, no forms; the mind is due 
to [the accumulation of] delusions since beginningless past; 
then the Yogin by his transcendental wisdom sees the world 
shorn of its appearances (abhdsa).? 

* The two verses $3 and S4 on “seed” (bija) require fuller explana- 
tion to make them more intelligible. 
” The first line of verse 94 properly belongs to the preceding verse. 

234 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

94. (Chapter III, verse 53.) 

(277) 95. The Gandharva’s air-castle, Maya, a hair- 
circle, and a fata morgana,—they are non-entities yet they 
appear as if they were entities; the nature of an objective 
existence is thus to be regarded. 

96. Nothing has ever been brought into existence, all 
that is seen before us is delusion; it is due to delusion that 
things are imagined to have come into existence, the ignorant 
are delighted with the dualism of discrimination. 

97. As memory [or habit-energy, vadsand] grows in 
various forms the Mind is evolved like the waves; when 
memory is cut off, there is no evolving of Mind. 

98. The Mind is evolved dependent upon a variety of 
conditions, just as a painting depends upon the wall [on 
which it is painted]; if otherwise why is not the painting 
produced in the air? 

99. If Mind evolves at all depending on individual 
forms as conditions, then Mind is condition-born, and the 
doctrine of Mind-only will not be held true. 

100. Mind is grasped by mind, it is not a something 
produced by a cause; Mind is by nature pure, memory (habit- 
energy) has no existence in [mind which is lke] the sky. 

101. An individual mind is evolved by clinging to Mind 
in itself; there is no visible world outside [Mind itself]; 
therefore, [it 1s declared that] Mind-only exists. 

(278) 102. Mind (citta2) is the Alayavijiiana, Manas 
is that which has reflection as its characteristic nature, it 
apprehends the various sensc-fields, for which reason it is 
called a Vijnana. 

* The Sanskrit as it stands is unintelligible; I have followed 
the T‘ang. This githa may be regarded as a question to which the 
following few verses are a reply. 

° Citta whieh is generally translated ‘‘mind,” either with the ‘‘m’’ 
capitalised or not, is used in this text in two different senses. When it 
stands in the series of Citta, Manas, and Vijfiinas, it means the 
empirical mind. It is also used in a general sense meaning mentation. 
Besides this, citta has an absolute sense denoting something that goes 
beyond the realm of relativity and yet that lies at the foundation of 
this world of particulars. When the Lankaé speaks of ‘“‘Mind-only,” it 
refers to this something defined here. It is important to keep this 

SAGATHAKAM 235 

103. Citta is always neutral; Manas functions in two 
ways; the functioning Vijhana is either good or bad. 

104. (Chapter II, verse 132.) 

105-109. (Chapter IV, verses 1-5.) 

(279) 110. In self-realisation itself there are no time 
[-limts]; it goes beyond all the realms belonging to the 
various stages; transcending the measure of thought, it 
establishes itself as the result [of discipline in the realm] 
of no-appearance. 

111. That non-existence and existence is recognised, 
and multiplicity too, is due to erroneous attachment of the 
ignorant; the error [is to see] multiplicity. 

112. If there is non-discriminative knowledge, it is not 
in accord with reason to say that [individual] realities 
(vastu) exist ; because of Mind, there are no individual forms 
(ripdni), and, therefore, we speak of non-discriminative 
[knowledge]. 

113. The sense-organs are to be known as Maya, the 
sense-fields resemble a dream; actor, act, and acting—they 
do not at all [in reality] exist.? 

114. (Chapter II, v. 133, v. 176.) 

115. (Chapter II, v. 130, v. 177.) 

116(280)-117. (Chapter II, vv. 9 and 10.) 

118. (Chapter II, v. 174.) 

119. (Chapter II, v. 173.) 

120. According to worldly knowledge (samvrtti) every- 
thing exists, but in ultimate truth (paramadrtha) none exists; 
in ultimate truth, indeed, one sees that all things are devoid 
of self-substance. Although there is no self-substance, there 
rises something which one perceives [as objective reality ]— 
this is called worldly knowledge. 

121. If things are regarded as existing by themselves, 
they exist because of their being so designated in words; if 
there were no words to designate their existence, they are 
not. 

distinction in mind. See also my Studies in the Lankavatdra, p. 176 
and elsewhere. 
? This verse is missing in Wei. 

236 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

122. That which exists only as word and not as reality 
—such is not to be found even in worldly knowledge; this 
comes from the nature of reality being erroneously under- 
stood, for no such perception is possible. 

123. If such errors were granted, it would not be 
possible to talk about the non-existence of self-substance ; 
(281) as the nature of reality is erroneously understood, 
there is something perceived where there is really no self- 
substance; all is indeed non-existent. 

124. What is seen as multiplicity is the mind saturated 
with the forms of evil habits; because of mental delusions one 
clings to forms and appearances regarding them as objective 
[realities]. 

125. Discrimination is eut asunder by non-discrimina- 
ting discrimination; the truth of emptiness is seen into by 
non-discriminating discrimination. 

126. Like an elephant magically created, like golden 
leaves in a painting, the visible world is to the people whose 
minds are saturated with the forms of ignorance. 

127-128. (Chapter II, vv. 168 and 169.) 

129. As a man whose eye is affected with a cataract 
perceives a hair-circle because of his delusion, so the ignorant 
perceive an objective world rising with its various aspects. 

130. (Chapter II, v. 150.) 

(282) 131. Discrimination, that which is discrim- 
inated, and the setting up of discrimination; binding, that 
which is bound, and its eause: these six are conditions of 
liberation. 

132. There are no stages [of Bodhisattvaship], no 
truths, no [Buddha-]lands, no bodies of transformation; 
Buddhas, Pratyekabuddhas, Srivakas are [products of] 
imagination. 

133. (Chapter II, v. 139.) 

134, Mind is all, it is found everywhere and in every 
body ; it is by the evil-minded that multiplicity is recognised, 
there are no [recognisable] marks where Mind-only is. 

135-187. (Chapter III, wv. 35, 36, 37.) 

138. The constructing of appearances (nimitta) created 

SAGATHAKAM 237 

by delusion is the characteristic mark of Paratantra (de- 
pendence) knowledge; (283) the giving of names to these 
appearances [regarding them as real individual existences] 
is characteristic of the imagination. 

139. When the constructing of appearances and names, 
which come from the union of conditions and realities, no 
more takes place, we have the characteristic mark of per- 
fected knowledge (parinishpanna) * 

140. The world is everywhere filled with Buddhas of 
Maturity,? Buddhas of Transformation,* beings, Bodhi- 
sattvas, and [Buddha-]lands. 

141. The Issuing®{-Buddhas], Dharma[-Buddhas], 
Transformation({-Buddhas] and those that appear trans- 
formed—they all come forth from Amitabka’s Land of Bliss. 

142. What is uttered by Buddhas of Transformation 
and what is uttered by Buddhas of Maturity constitute the 
doctrine fully developed in the sutras, whose secret meaning 
you should know. 

145. What is uttered by the Bodhisattvas and what is 
uttered by the teachers—they are both what is uttered by 
the Buddhas of Transformation and not by the Buddhas of 
Maturity. 

144. All these individual objects (dharmas) have never 
been born, but they are not exactly non-existent either; they 
resemble the Gandharva’s castle, a dream, and magical ecrea- 
tions. 

145. Mind is set in motion in various ways, and mind 
is liberated; mind rises in no other way, and mind thus 
ceases. 

146. The mind of all beings is that which perceives 
something like objective reality, and this mind is the product 
of imagination; (284) in Mind-only there is no objective 

Generally parikalpita, but here vikalpita. 

* This is the reading of T‘ang, but I suggest the following: 
“When the constructing of names and appearances no more takes place 
in it, there are only causal signs indicative of reality—this is the 
characteristic mark of perfected knowledge.” Both Wei and T‘ang 

here understand sanieta in the sense of “union.” 
3 Vaipakika. * Nairmanika. ° Nisyanda. 

238 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

world; when one is released from discrimination there is 
liberation. 

147. Brought together by the evil habit of erroneous 
reasoning, discrimination asserts itself; hence the evolution 
of this fallacious world. 

148. [Relative] knowledge (vijidna) takes place where 
there is something resembling an external world; [trans- 
cendental] knowledge (jana)? belongs to the realm of Such- 
ness. When aturning-back (paravritta) takes place, there is 
a state of imagelessness, which is the realm of the wise. 

149. ‘(Chapter II, v. 161.) 

150. By reason of false imagination (parikalpiia) all 
things existent are declared unborn; as people take refuge 
in relative knowledge (paratantra), they get confused in 
their discriminations. 

151. When relative knowledge is purified by keeping 
itself aloof from discrimination, and detatched from imagina- 
tion, there is a turning-back to the abode of suchness. 

152. Do not discriminate discrimination, there is no 
truth in discrimination; [this world of] delusion is diserim- 
inated as to that which is perceived and that which perceives, 
but in reality there is no such dualism in it; it is an error 
to recognise an external world, [the conception of] self- 
substance is due to imagination. 

(285) 153. Imagining by this imagination, self-sub- 
stance is conceived to rise by the conditions of origination 
(pratyayodbhava) ; an external world is recognised in dis- 
tortion, there is [in fact] no such external world, but just 
the Mind. 

154. To those who see [the world] clearly and properly, 
the separation between that which perceives and that which 
is perceived ceases; there is no such external world as is 
discriminated by the ignorant. 

155. When the Mind is agitated by habit-energy (or 
memory) there rises what appears to be an external world; 
when the dualistic imagination ceases there grows [trans- 
cendental] knowledge (jfidna), the realm of suchness, the 

* As to the distinction between Jiiina and Vijiiina see p. 135 et seq. 

SAGATHAKAM 239 

realm of the wise, which is free from appearances and beyond 
thought. 

156. (Chap. II, v. 134; Chap. VI, v. 3.) 

157. From the union of mother and father, the Alaya 
gets connected with Manas; like a rat in a pot of ghee, the 
red together with the white grows up. 

158. Through the stages of Pesi, Ghana, and Arbuda, 
the boil grows—an unclean mass bearing a variety of karma; 
nourished by the wind of karma and the four elements, it 
comes to maturity like a fruit. 

159. The five, the five, and the five; and the sores are 
nine; (286) nails, teeth, and hair are supplied; when ready 
to spring forth it is born. 

160. When [the baby] is just born, it is like a worm 
growing in the dung; like a man waking from sleep, the eye 
begins to distinguish forms, and discrimination goes on 
increasing. 

161. With knowledge gained by discrimination, human 
speech is produced from the combination of the palate, lips, 
and cavity; and discrimination goes on like a parrot. 

162. Philosophical doctrines are definite, but the Maha- 
yana [or Great Vehicle] is not definite, it is set in motion by 
the thoughts of beings; it is not an abode for those who see 
wrongly. The vehicle realised within my own inner self is 
not the realm that can be reached by dialecticians.* 

163-164. After the passing of the Teacher, pray tell 
me who will be the bearer [of the Mahayana]? O Mahamati, 
thou shouldst know that there will be one who bears the 
Dharma, when sometime is past after the Sugata’s entrance 
into Nirvana. 

165. In Vedali, in the southern part, a Bhikshu most 
illustrious and distinguished [will be born]; his name is 
Nagahvaya, he is the destroyer of the one-sided views based 
on being and non-being. 

2 

148. 

2 

The first line of verse 156 is a part of the preceding one. Cf. v. 

The verses are wrongly divided here, for this line properly 
belongs to 162 and not to 163. 

240 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

166. He will declare my Vehicle, the unsurpassed 
Mahayana, to the world; attaining the stage of Joy he will 
go to the Land of Bliss. 

(287) 167. (Chapter II, v. 175.) 

168. In the realm of conditional origination, ‘‘there 
is’’ and ‘‘there is not’’ do not take place; those who imagine 
something real in the midst of conditional origination say, 
‘there is’’ and ‘‘there is not,’’ but these philosophical views 
are far away from my teaching. 

169. The giving names to all things existent has always 
been going on for hundreds of generations past; this has 
been repeated, is being repeated constantly; an endless 
mutual discrimination is thus taking place. 

170. If this designating does not take place, the whole 
world falls into confusion; thus names are established in 
order to get rid of confusion. 

171. Things existent are discriminated by the ignorant 
in the threefold form of discrimination; there is delusion 
from discriminating names, from conditional origination, 
and from the [the notion of] being born. 

172. {The philosophers argue that] the primary 
elements are unborn and like the sky are imperishable; but 
{in reality] there are no individual self-substances and the 
notion [itself] belongs to discrimination. 

173. [Individual existences are] appearances, images, 
like Maya, like a mirage, a dream, a wheel made by a revolv- 
ing fire-brand, the Gandharva’s [castle], an echo—they are 
all born in the same manner. 

(288) 174. Non-duality, suchness, emptiness, ultimate 
limit, essence (dharmatd), non-discrimination,—all these I 
teach as belonging to the aspect of perfected knowledge 
(parinishpanna). 

175. Language belongs to the realm of thought, the 
truth becomes [thus] wrongly [represented] ; transcendental 
knowledge (prajfid) being discriminated by thought falls 
into a duality; therefore, transcendental knowledge is some- 
thing not imagined. 

176-177. (Chap. III, vv. 9 and 10.) 

SAGATHAKAM 241 

178. The whole existence is not perceived by the igno- 
rant as it is perceived by the wise; the whole existence as it 
is perceived by the wise, has no marks [of individuation]. 

179. Asaspurious necklace, not of gold though looking 
like it, is imagined by the ignorant to be of [genuine] gold, 
so all things are imagined by those who reason wrongly. 

180. (Chapter III, v. 11.) 

181. Things have no beginning, no end; they are abiding 
in the aspect of reality; (289) there is no creator, nothing 
doing in the world, but the logicians do not understand. 

182. Whatever things that are thought to have been 
in existence in the past, to come into existence in the future, 
or to be in existence at present,—all such are unborn. 

183-184. (Chap. III, vv. 44 and 45.) 

185. This [world] is just a sign! indicative of reality 
(dharmata); apart from the sign, nothing is produced, 
nothing is destroyed. 

186-187. (Chap. II, vv. 159 and 160.) 

188-189. (Chap. III, vv. 1 and 2.) 

(290) 190. Existence in its conditional relations 
cannot be [described] as unity or diversity; it is Just in a 
general way of speaking that there is birth, cessation, and 
destruction. 

191. Emptiness unborn is one thing, emptiness born is 
another ; emptiness unborn is the better, [because] emptiness 
born leads to destruction. 

192. Suchness, emptiness, the limit, Nirvana, and the 
Dharmadhatu, the various will-made bodies,—these I point 
out as synonymous. 

193. Those who discriminate purity according to the 
Sutras, Vinayas, and Abhidharmas, follow books and not the 
inner meaning; they are not established in egolessness. 

194-196. (Chap. III, vv. 12-14.) 

(291) 197. The visible world is likened to the hare’s 
horns as long as all beings go on discriminating; those who 
discriminate are deluded just like a deer running after a 
mirage. 

* Sanketa; see also verse 139. 

242 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

198. By elinging to discrimination, [more] discrimina- 
tion goes on; when the eause of discrimination is put away, 
one is disengaged therefrom. 

199-200. (Chap. III, vv. 54 and 55.) 

201. Transcendental knowledge is deep, exalted, far- 
reaching, and perceives all the Buddha-countries; this I 
teach for the sons of the Victorious One; for the Sravakas I 
teach transitoriness. 

202. The triple existence is transitory, empty, devoid 
of the ego and what belongs to it; thus I teach the doctrine 
of generality to the Sravakas. 

203. Not to be attached to anything existent, truly 
knowing what the truth of solitude is, is to walk all alone; 
the fruit of Pratyekabuddhahood which is above speculation 
is what I teach. 

204. External objects are imagined, those endowed with 
corporeality are dependent on relative knowledge; being 
deluded they see not themselves, therefore a mind is evolved. 

205 (292)-206. (Chap. IV, vv. 6 and 7.) 

207 and 208. (Chapter III, verses 56 and 57.) 

209. (Chapter II, verse 153.) 

210. (Chapter II, verse 150.) 

211. There are four psychic powers: that which comes 
from the maturing [of the disciplinary exercises], that which 
comes from the sustaining power of the Buddhas, that which 
rises from entering into the various paths of living beings, 
and that which is obtained in a dream. 

212. The psychic power which is obtained in a dream, 
that which comes from the power of the Buddhas, and that 
which has its birth by entering the various paths of beings 
—these powers are not! born of the maturing [of the dis- 
ciplinary exercises]. 

(293) 213. The mind being influenced by _habit- 
energy, there rises a something resembling real existence 
(bhavabhasa) ; as the ignorant do not understand, it is said 
that there is the birth [of realities]. 

Read after the Chinese and Tibetan versions. Not vijidna- 
vipadkajah, but "bhijnd na vipakajah. 

SAGATHAKAM 243 

214. As long as external objects (baéhyam)? are dis- 
eriminated as possessing individual marks, the mind is con- 
fused (vimuhyate)? being unable to see its own delusion. 

215. Why is birth spoken of? Why is not the per- 
ceived world spoken of? When the perceived world, which 
has no existence, is yet perceived as existing, what is that 
which is spoken of? To whom is it? and why? 

216. The Citta in its essence is thoroughly pure, the 
Manas is defiled, and the Manas is with the Vijfanas, habit- 
energy is always casting out [its seeds]. 

217. The Alaya is released from the body, the Manas 
solicits the [various] paths of existence; the Vijnana is 
deluded with something resembling an objective world, and 
perceiving it is befooled.® 

218. What is seen is one’s own mind, an objective 
world exists not; when one thus perceives [that existence is] 
an error,’ one even gets into suchness. 

219. The [spiritual] realm attained by Dhyana- 
devotees, karma, and the exalted state of the Buddhas—these 
three are beyond thought, they belong to the Vijfiana-® 
realm that surpasses thought. 

(294) 220. The past and the future, Nirvana, a per- 
sonal ego, [space®], words,—of these I talk because of worldly 
convention, but ultimate reality is beyond the letter. 

221. The two vehicles’ and the philosophers are one in 
their dependence on [wrong] views; they are confused in 
regard to Mind-only, and imagine an external existence. 

222. The enlightenment attained by the Pratyeka- 
buddhas, Buddhahood, Arhatship, and the seeing of the 
Buddhas—these are the secret seeds that grow in enlighten- 
ment; but it is accomplished in a dream.® 

1 After the Chinese. 2 After Wei. 

Pralubhyate, “greedily attached,” according to Wei and Tang. 
Bhranti, ‘“‘a delusion,” ‘‘an external world.” 

Should be jidna, or does it refer to the Alaya? 

According to the Chinese. 

Naikdyikdas, literally, “they who belong to the Nikdya.” 

What this verse purports to mean is difficult to gather from the 
contents of the Lanidvatara as we have it here. The existence of such 
verses as this, and there are quite a number of them in the Sagithakam, 

244 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

223. Maya, Citta (mind), intelligence,’ tranquillity, 
the dualism of being and non-being—where are these teach- 
ings? for whom? whence? wherefore? and of what significa- 
tion? Pray tell me. 

224. I teach such things as Maya, being and non-being, 
ete., to those who are confused in the teaching of Mind-only ; 
when birth and death are linked together [as one], qualified 
and qualifying are removed. 

225. Another name for Manas is discrimination 
(vikalpa), and it goes along with the five Vijnanas; mind 
seeds (cittabija) take their rise in the way ‘images [appear 
in a mirror] or [waves roll on] the ocean-waters. 

226. When the Citta, Manas, Vijiadna cease to rise, 
(295) then there is the attainment of the will-body and of 
the Buddha-stage. 

227. Causation, the Dhatus, Skandhas, and the self- 
nature of all things, thought-construction, a personal soul, 
and mind—they are all like a dream, like a hair-net. 

228. Seeing the world as hike Maya and a dream, one 
abides with the truth; the truth, indeed, is free from indivi- 
dual marks, removed from speculative reasoning. 

229. The inner realisation attained by the wise always 
abides in a state of no-memory’; it leads the world to the 
truth as it is not confused with speculative reasoning. 

230. When all false speculation subsides, error no more 
rises; as long as there is discriminative knowledge,*® error 
keeps on rising. 

231. The world is empty and has no self-nature; to 
talk of permanency and impermanency is the view main- 
tained by followers of birth and not by those of no-birth. 

232. [The philosophers] imagine the world to be of 
oneness and otherness, of bothness [and not-bothness], and 
[to have risen] from ISvara, or spontaneously, or from 
time, or from a supreme spirit, or other causal agency. 

suggests in one way that this verse section has no organic relation 
with the main text. 

The Chinese rezd gati (path or course), and not mati. 
Asmara, T‘ang. 

1 
* Jidna for prajid. 

SAGATHAKAM 245 

233. The Vijfana which is the seed of transmigration 
is not evolved when this visible world is [truly] recognised ; 
like a picture on a wall, it disappears when [its nature] is 
recognised. 

(296) 234. Like figures in Maya, people are born and 
die; in the same way the ignorant because of their stupidity 
[imagine] there really is bondage and release. 

935. The duality of the world, inner and outer, and 
things subject to causation—by distinctly understanding 
what they are, one is established in imagelessness. 

236. The mind (citta) is not separate from habit- 
energy, nor is it together with it; though enveloped with 
habit-energy the mind itself remains undifferentiated. 

237. Habit-energy born of the Manovijnana is like dirt 
wherewith the Citta, which is a perfectly white garment, is 
enveloped and fails to display itself. 

238. As space is neither existent nor non-existent, so 
is the Alaya in the body, I say; it is devoid of existence as 
well as of non-existence. 

239. When the Manovijiiadna is ‘‘turned over’’ (vyd- 
vritta), the Citta frees itself from turbidity ; by understand- 
ing [the nature of] all things, the mind (citta) becomes 
Buddha, I say. 

240. Removed from the triple continuity, devoid of 
being and non-being, released from the four propositions, 
all things (bhava) are always like Maya. 

241. The [first] seven stages are mind-born and belong 
to the two Svabhabas; the remaining [two] stages and the 
Buddha-stage are the Nishpanna (‘‘perfected knowledge’’). 

(297) 242. The world of form, of no-form, and the 
world of desire, and Nirvana are in this body; all is told 
to belong to the realm of Mind. 

243. As long as there is something attained, there is 
so much error rising; when the Mind itself is thoroughly 
understood, error neither rises nor ceases. 

244. (Chapter II, verse 171.) 

245. (Chapter II, verse 131.) 

246. Two things are established by me; individual 

246 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

objects and realisation; there are four principles which con- 
stitute the dogmas of logic. 

247. The error{or the world] is discriminated when 
it is seen as characterised with varieties of forms and figures; 
when names and forms are removed self-nature becomes pure 
which is the realm of the wise. 

248. As long as discrimination is carried on, the Pari- 
kalpita (false imagination) continues to take place; but 
as what is imagined by discrimination has no reality, self- 
nature is [truly understood in] the realm of the wise. 

249. The mind emancipated is truth constant and ever- 
lasting; the essence making up the self-nature of things 
(298) and suchness is devoid of discrimination. 

250. There is reality (vastu) ; it is not to be qualified 
as pure, nor is it to be said defiled; since a mind purified 
leaves traces of defilement, but reality is the truth that is 
[absolutely] pure, belonging to the realm of the wise. 

251. The world is born of causation; when it is 
regarded as removed from discrimination and as resembling 
Maya, a dream, etc., one is emancipated. 

252. Varieties of habit-energy growing out of error are 
united with the mind; they are perceived by the ignorant as 
objects externally existing ; and the essence of mind (cittasya 
dharmata) is not perceived. 

253. The essence of mind is pure but not the mind 
that is born of error; error rises from error, therefore Mind 
is not perceived. 

254. Delusion itself is no more than truth, truth is 
neither in Samskara nor anywhere else, but it is where 
Samskara is observed [in its proper bearings]. 

250. When the Samskrita is seen as devoid of qualified 
and qualifying, all predicates are discarded and thus the 
world is seen as of Mind itself. 

256. When the [Yogin] enters upon Mind-only, he will 
cease discriminating an external world; establishing himself 
where suchness has its asylum he will pass on to Mind-only.? 

Cittamdtram here and in the following verse is rendered in 
T‘ang as f+ (hsin-liang) and not the usual H&t> (wei-hsin). Hesin- 

SAGATHAKAM 247 

257. By passing on to Mind-only, he passes on to the 
state of imagelessness; (299) when he establishes himself in 
the state of imagelessness, he sees not [even] the Mahayana." 

258. The state of non-striving (andbhoga) is quiescent 
and thoroughly purified with the [original] vows; the most 
excellent knowledge of egolessness sees no [duality in the 
world] because of imagelessness. 

259. Let him review the realm of mind, let him review 
the realm of knowledge, let him review the realm, with 
transcendental knowledge (prajfidé), and he will not be con- 
founded with individual signs. 

260. Pain belongs to mind, accumulation is the realm 
of knowledge (jfidna) ; the [remaining] two truths? and the 
Buddha-stage are where transcendental knowledge functions. 

261. The attainment of the fruits, Nirvana, and the 
eightfold path—when all these truths are thus understood, 
there is Buddha-knowledge thoroughly purified. 

262. The eye, form, light, space, and attention (manas) 
—out of this [combination] there is the birth of consciousness 
(vijfana) in people; consciousness is indeed born of the 
Alaya. 

263. There is nothing grasped, nor grasping, nor one 
who grasps; there are no names, no objects; those who carry 
on their groundless discriminative way of thinking lack 
intelligence. 

264. Name is not born of meaning, nor is meaning born 
of name; (300) whether things are born of cause or of no- 
cause, such is discrimination ; have no discrimination ! 

265. (Chapter II, verse 145.) 

266. Imagining himself to be standing on a truth, he 
liang means “‘mind-measurement,” the term used in Sung throughout 
for cittamdtram, for in the days of Sung wei-shin had not been 
thought of. But why does T‘ang use hsin-liang for wei-shin in this 
particular case while wei-shin is used in the preceding line? Does 
cittamdtram mean here simply “mental or intellectual measurement” 
and is not used in the technical sense in which the term is found 
elsewhere in this sutra? 

+ “Not” (na) is replaced by “the” (sa) in one MS. May this be a 

better reading ? 
* Referring to the Four Noble Truths. 

248 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

discourses on thought-construction; oneness is not attained 
in five ways, and thus the truth is abandoned. 

267. Delusion (prapajica) is the evil one who is to be 
broken down; being and non-being is to be transcended; as 
one sees into [the truth of] egolessness, he has no longing 
for, no evil thought of, the world. 

268. [The philosophers imagine] a permanently exist- 
ing creator engaged in mere verbalism; highest truth is 
beyond words, the Dharma is seen when cessation takes 
place. 

269. Leanig on the Alaya for support the Manas is 
evolved; depending on the Citta and Manas the Vijnana- 
system is evolved. 

270. What is established by a proposition (samdropa) 
is a proposition; suchness is the essence of mind; when this 
is clearly perceived, the Yogin attains the knowledge of 
Mind-only. 

271. Let one not think of the Manas, individual signs, 
and reality from the point of view of permanency and 
impermanency ; nor let him think in his meditation of birth 
and no-birth. 

272. They do not discriminate duality; the Vijnana 
rises from Alaya; (301) the oneness of meaning thus taking 
place is not to be known by a dually operating mind. 

273. There is neither a speaker nor speaking nor 
emptiness, since the Mind is seen; but when the Mind is not 
seen there rises a net of philosophical doctrines. 

274. There is no rising of the causation[-chain], nor 
are there any sense-organs; no Dhatus, no Skandhas, no 
greed, no Sanskrita. 

275. There is no primarily working fire;? no working 
done, no effects produced, no final Timit, no power, no 
deliverance, no bondage. 

276. There is no state of being to be called neutral [or 
inexplicable] (avyakrita); there is no duality of dharma 

' The reference is not clear. 
* T'ang has, “karma and its effects’: while Wei has, “‘karma in 
work.” 

SAGATHAKAM 249 

and adharma; there is no time, no Nirvana, no dharma- 
essence. 

277. And there are no Buddhas, no truths, no fruition, 
no causal agents, no perversion, no Nirvana, no passing 
away, no birth. 

278. And then there are no twelve elements (anga), 
and no duality either, of limit and no-limit; because of the 
cessation of all the notions [that are cherished by the philos- 
ophers] I deelare [there is] Mind-only. 

279. The passions, path of karma, the body, ecreatcrs, 
fruitions—they are like a fata morgana and a dream; they 
are like a city of the Gandharvas. 

280. By maintaining the Mind-only, the idea of reality 
is removed; by establishing the Mind-only permanency and 
annihilation are seen [in their proper relationship]. 

281. There are no Skandhas in Nirvana, nor is there 
an ego-soul, nor any individual signs; (302) by entering into 
the Mind-only, one escapes from becoming attached to 
emancipation. 

282. It is error (dosha) that causes the world to be 
externally perceived as it is manifested to people; Mind is 
not born of the visible world; therefore, Mind is not visible. 

283. It is the habit-energy of people that brings out 
into view something resembling body, property, and abode; 
Mind is neither a being nor a non-being, it does not reveal 
itself because of habit-energy. 

284. Dirt is revealed within purity but purity itself is 
not soiled; as when the sky is veiled with clouds, Mind is 
invisible [when defiled with error]. 

285. (Chapter III, verse 38.) 

286., =( =a; LT ype SZ.) 

28 Te ie Ye Ps Geet 40) 
Ze5° “(=e Tey et) 
250 nt ID 18s.) 

(303) 290. Mind is not born of the elements (bhita), 
Mind is nowhere to be seen; it is the habit-energy of peovle 
that brings out into view body, property, and abode.! 

‘ This is a repetition of the latter half of verse 282 and the first 

250 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

291. <All that is element-made is not form and form is 
not element-made; the city of the Gandharvas, a dream. 
Maya, an image,—these are not element-made. 

292. 

Doo 

294. (Chapter III, verse 43.) 

295. <As reality and non-reality ean be predicated of 
existence that originates from causation, the view of oneness 
and otherness definitely belongs to them. 

296-302. (Chapter II, verses 184-190.) 

(304) 303. There are three kinds of my Sravakas: 
the transformed, the born of the vows, and the Sravakas 
disengaged from greed and anger, and born of the Dharma. 

304. There are three kinds, also, of the Bodhisattvas: 
those who have not yet reached Buddhahood, those who 
manifest themselves according to the thoughts of sentient 
beings, and those who are seen in the likeness of the Buddha.® 

305-310. (Chapter II, verses 191-196.) 

(305) 311. It is a man’s mind that is perceived as 
something resembling (samntbham) the form of a star, a 
cloud, a moon, a sun; and what is thus perceived by them 
is born of habit-energy. 

312. The clements are devoid of selfhood, there is 
neither qualified nor qualifying in them; if all element-made 
objects were the elements, form (riipa) would be element- 
made. 

313. The elements are uniform, there are no element- 
half of 283. This is omitted in both T‘ang and Wei, showing that the 
insertion is probably due to a elerical mistake. 

1 The first half of this corresponds to the first half of Chapter ITI, 
verse 42; while the second half of 292 and the first half of 293 are 
practically a repetition of 290, and also of the second half of 282 and 
the first half of 283. Nanjo’s verse divisions are to be revised I think 
in some places, but fearing to cause greater confusion in the numbering 
of the whole “Sagiithakam” I have followed Nanjo. 

* The first half of 292 and the second half of 293 correspond to 
Chapter III, verse 42. 

* This is the T‘ang reading. Another reading is: ‘‘There are 
three kinds of Bodhisattvas. As to the Buddhas, they have no 

[tangible] form, but something looking like a Buddha may be seen 
according to the thoughts of each sentient being.” 

SAGATHAKAM 251 

made objects in the elements; the elements are the cause; the 
earth, water, etc. are the result. 

314. Substances and forms of thought-construction are 
like things born of Maya; (3806) they appear like a dream 
and a city of the Gandharvas, they are a mirage and a fifth. 

315. There are five kinds of the Icchantika, so with 
the families which are five; there are five vehicles and no- 
vehicle, and six kinds of Nirvana. 

316. The Skandhas are divided into twenty-five, and 
there are eight kinds of form, twenty-four Buddhas, and 
there are two kinds of Buddha-sons. 

317. There are one hundred and eight doctrines, and 
three kinds of Sravakas; there is one land of the Buddhas, 
and so with the Buddha, there is one. 

318. Likewise with emancipation; there are three 
forms, four kinds of mind-streams, six kinds of my egoless- 
ness, and also four kinds of knowledge. 

319. Disjoined from causal agencies, removed from 
faulty theories, is the knowledge of self-realisation, which is 
the Mahayana, immovable and highest. 

320. Of birth and no-birth there are eight and nine 
kinds; whether the attainment is instantaneous or successive, 
it is one realisation. 

321. There are eight worlds of formlessness; Dhyana 
is divided into six; and with the Pratyekabuddhas and 
Buddha-sons, there are seven forms of emancipation. 

322. There are no such things as the past, present, and 
future; there is neither permanency nor impermanency ; 
doing, work, and fruition—all is no more than a dream-event. 

323. From beginning to end the Buddhas, Sravakas, 
and Buddha-sons have never been born; (307) the mind is 
removed from what is visible, being always a May3-like 
existence. 

324. Thus the abode in the Tushita heaven, the eon- 
ception, the birth, the leaving, the worldly life, the revolving 

* The text gives no clue to this. Is prajaaptirapam (form of 
thought-construction) the same as vijfaptiripam of the Abhidharma- 

kosa? 

252 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

of the wheel, the wandering about in all the countries. [A 
Buddha] is seen [doing all these things], but he is not one 
born of the womb. 

325. Thus, for the sake of sentient beings who are 
wandering and moving about from one place to another, 
emancipation is taught, the truth, the knowledge of the 
[Buddha-]land, and the rising of things by causation. 

326. Worlds, forests, islands, egolessness, philosophers, 
wanderings, Dhyanas, the vehicles, the Alaya, the attain- 
ments, the inconceivable realm of fruition, 

327. Families of the moon and stars, families of kings, 
abodes of the gods, families of the Yakshas and Gandharvas, 
—they are all born of karma and are born of desire. 

328. Inconceivable transformation-death is [still] in 
union with habit-energy; when interrupted, death is put a 
stop to, the net of passions is destroyed. 

329. [The Bodhisattva] is not to keep! money, grain, 
gold, land, goods, kine and sheep, slaves, nor horses, ele- 
phants, ete. 

330. He is not to sleep on a perforated couch, nor is 
he to smear the ground with mud;? he is not to have a bowl 
made of gold, silver, brass, or copper. 

331. Let the Yogin have white cloth dyed in dark 
blue or brownish-red with cow-dung, or mud, or fruits, or 
leaves. 

(308) 332. The Yogin is permitted to carry a bowl 
of full Magadha measure made of either stone, or clay, or 
iron, or shell, or quartz. 

333. The Yogin whose final aim is to discipline himself 
may carry a curved knife four fingers long for cutting 
cloth ; he who is intent on disciplining himself may not learn 
the science of mechanics. 

334. The Yogin who disciplines himself in the exercises 
is not to be engaged in buying and selling; [if necessary] 
let the attendant see to it—these are the regulations I teach. 

335. Thus, guarding his senses, let him have an exact 

According to the Chinese 
The source is unknown to the translator. 

SAGATHAKAM 253 

understanding in the meaning of the Sutras and the Vinaya, 
and let him not associate with men of the world, such I call 
the Yogin. 

336. Let the Yogin prepare his abode in an empty 
house, or a cemetery, or under a tree, or in a cavern, or 
among the straw, or in an open place. 

337. Let [the Yogin] dress himself in three garments, 
whether in the cemetery or any other place; if anyone should 
voluntarily give him a garment-—-let him accept it. 

338. When he goes about begging food, let him look 
ahead not more than the length of a yoke; let him conduct 
himself in the way bees treat flowers. 

339. When the Yogin finds himself in a large company, 
in the confusion of a company, or with Bhikshunis [women- 
mendicants], this is not a desirable relationship for Yogins; 
for it means to share a livelihood with them. 

340. The Yogin, whose aim is to discipline himself in 
the exercise, (309) is not to approach for his food kings, 
princes, ministers of state, or persons of rank. 

341. In houses where a death or a birth has taken 
place, or in the houses of friends and relatives, or where 
Bhikshus and Bhikshunis are mixed together, it is not proper 
for the Yogins to take their food. 

342. In the monasteries food is always regularly cooked, 
and when it is purposely prepared [somewhere else], it is 
not proper for the Yogins to take their food. 

343. The Yogin should regard the world as removed 
from birth and death, as exempt from the alternation of 
being and non-being, though it is seen in the aspect of 
qualified and qualifying. 

344. When birth [and death] is not discriminated, the 
Yogin before long will attain the Samadhi, the powers, the 
psychic faculties, and the self-mastery. 

345. The Yogin should not cherish the thought that 
the world exists from such causal agents as atoms, time, or 
supreme soul; nor that it is born of causes and conditions. 

346. From self-discrimination the world is imagined, 
which is born of varieties of habit-energy; let the Yogin 

254 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

pereeive existence as always like unto Maya and a dream. 

347. The [true] insight is always removed from asser- 
tions as well as from negations; let not [the Yogin]} dis- 
criminate the triple world which appears as body, property, 
and abode. 

348. Not thinking how to obtain food and drink, but 
holding his body upright, let him pay homage over and over 
again to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. 

349. Gathering truth from the Vinaya, from the teach- 
ings in the Sutras, let the Yogin have a clear insight into the 
five Dharmas, Mind itself, and egolessness. 

(310) 350. The Yogin should have a distinct under- 
standing of the undefiled truth of self-realisation and as to 
what the stages [of Bodhisattvahood] and the Buddha-stage 
are and be anointed on the great lotus [seat]. 

dol. Wandering through all the paths, he becomes 
averse to existence, and directing his steps toward some quiet 
cemetery he will begin various practices. 

352-354. (Chapter II, verses 162-164.) 

355. [According to the philosophers] there is a reality 
born of no-cause, neither permanent nor subject to annihila- 
tion, and removed from the alternatives of being and non- 
being, and this is imagined by them to be the Middle Path. 

356. They imagine the theory of no-cause but their 
no-cause is nihilistic; as they fail to understand [the real 
nature of] external objects they destroy the Middle Path. 

307. The attachment to existence is not abandoned for 
the fear of being nihilistic, and they try to teach the Middle 
Path by means of assertion and negation. 

(311) 358. When Mind-only is understood, external 
objects are abandoned and discrimination no more takes 
place; here the Middle Path is reached. 

359. There is Mind-only, there is no visible world; as 
there is no visible world, [Mind] is not risen; this is taught 
by myself and other [Tathagatas] to be the Middle Path. 

360. Birth and no-birth, being and non-being,—these 

* After T‘ang. Wei has: ‘Apart from Mind there is no rising.” 
No rising of a visible world? 

SAGATHAKAM 255 

are all empty; there is no self-nature in all things; the 
duality is not to be cherished. 

361. Where there is no possibility of discrimination 
taking its rise, the ignorant imagine there is emancipation ; 
but as there is no understanding [in them] as to the rise of 
a mind, how can they destroy their attachment to duality ?? 

362. As it is understood that there is nothing but what 
is seen of the Mind, the attachment to duality is destroyed ; 
knowledge, indeed, is the abandonment, not the destruction 
of the discriminated. 

363. As it becomes thoroughly known that there is 
nothing but what is seen of the Mind, discrimination ceases; 
as discrimination ceases, suchness is removed from intellec- 
tion (citta).? 

364. If a man, seeing the rise [of all things], yet per- 
ceives that Nirvana is devoid of the faults of the philos- 
ophers, this is the Nirvana as held by the wise, because of 
its not being annihilation. 

365. To realise this is said by myself and [other] 
Buddhas to be [the attainment of] Buddhahood; if there 
is any other discrimination one is committed to the philos- 
ophers’ views. 

366. Nothing is born, and yet things are being born; 
nothing dies and yet things are passing away; (312) all 
over millions of worlds what is seen simultaneously is like 
a lunar reflection in water. 

267. Unity being transformed into plurality, rain falls 
and fire burns; as a mind is changed into [many] thoughts, 
they declare that there is Mind-only. 

368. Mind is of Mind-only, no-mind is also born of 
Mind; when understood varieties of forms and appearances 
are of Mind-only. 

369. By assuming Buddha[-forms], Sravaka-forms, 
Pratyekabuddha-appearances, and varieties of other forms. 
they deelare Mind-only. 

370. For the sake of beings [the Buddhas] show forms 

The text as it stands is difficult to understand. I follow T‘ang. 
* Cf. Chapter IIT, verses 25, and the “Sagdthakam,”’ verse 651. 

256 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

by means of no-form, from the world of no-form and of form 
down to the hells where hell-dwellers are; and all this 
originates from Mind-only. 

371. When a [spiritual] revulsion [takes place in 
them], they will attain the Samadhi called Maya-like, the 
will-body, the ten stages, the self-mastery. 

372. On account of self-discrimination which causes 
errors and sets false reasonings in motion, the ignorant are 
bound up with ideas in what they see, hear, think, or under- 
stand. 

373. (Chapter II, verse 197.) 

374. (Chapter II, verse 198.) 

(313) 375-378. (Chapter II, verses 199-202.) 

379. The Buddhas in [every] land are those of trans- 
formation, where [the doctrine of] the one vehicle and the 
triple vehicle is taught; I never enter into Nirvana, for all 
things are empty being devoid of birth [and death]. 

380. There are thirty-six different Buddhas, and in 
each ten different ones; in accordance with the thought of 
all beings they share their lands. 

381. When existence is discriminated there are varieties 
of appearances; in like manner the Dharma-Buddha’s world 
may appear in its multiplicity, which in reality exists not. 

382. The Dharma-Buddha is the true Buddha and the 
rest are his transformations; according to a continuous flow 
of their own seeds, sentient beings see their Buddha-forms.? 

383. When [the mind is] bound up with error and 
appearance, discrimination is set in motion; (314) suchness 
is no other than discrimination and discrimination is no 
other than appearance. 

384. The Self-nature Buddha, the Enjoyment Buddha, 
the Transformation Buddha, the five Transformation 
Buddhas, and a group of thirty-six Buddhas—they are all 
of the Self-nature Buddha. 

* After T’ang and Wei. 

* The five transformation bodies (paficanirmita) may mean those 
transformation Buddhas who manifest themselves in the five (some- 
times six) paths of existence in order to save the sentient beings that 
are suffering there in the endless wheel of transformation. According 

SAGATHAKAM 257 

385-(315-316)-406. (Chapter II, verses 101-123, with 
verse-divisions occasionally varying.) 

407. Owing to seeds of habit-energy [that grow from 
the recognition} of an outer world, discrimination takes 
place; and thereby the relativity aspect! is grasped, and 
that which is grasped is variously imagined.” 

(317) 408. When one depending upon the mind 
recognises an external world, error is produced; error takes 
place from these two [causes], and there is no third cause. 

409. Depending on that and from that cause error is 
produced; the six (imdryas), the twelve (dyatanas), the 
eighteen (dhdtus), are thus said by me to be of the Mind. 

410. [When it is understood that things are because 
of] the combination of self-seeds and an external world 
(grahya), the ego-attachment is abandoned. 

411. Because of the Alayavijiana the Vijiiana 
[-system] is evolved ; because of inner support there is some- 
thing externally appearing. 

412. The unintelligent imagine the Samskrita and 
Asamskrita to be permanent, while they are not, as they 
are like the stars, a hair-net, an echo, or things seen in a 
dream. 

413. [As they are] like the city of the Gandharvas, a 
mirage, or Maya; they are not, yet they are perceived [as 
if they were real]; so is the relativity aspect of existence 
(paratantra). 

414. By means of a triple mentality I teach the self, 
senses, and their behaviour; but the Citta, Manas, and 
Vijnana are devoid of self-nature. 

to the Shingon doctrine of the fourfold Dharmakdya, this last trans- 
formation or manifestation is distinguished from the generally accepted 
transformation-Buddha and is given a spevial position by itself. The 
fourth one thus in the Shingon is known as the Nishyandakjdya, dis- 
tinguishing it from the third which is Nirmana- or Nirmita-kaya. This 
verse is quoted by Amoghavajra (704-774), one of the Indian Shingon 
Fathers, who settled in China, in one of his works called $2t@Ri Ai 
SpA EERIE (the Taisho Tripitaka, No. 870; Nanjo Catalogue, 
No. 1433). I owe this information to Professor Shéun Toganowo, of 
Koya Buddhist College. 
» Tantram= paratantram. ° Kalpitam = partkalpitam. 

258 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

415. The Citta, Manas, and Vijiiana, the twofold ego- 
lessness, the five Dharmas, the [three] Svabhavas,— these 
belong to the realm of the Buddhas. 

416. Habit-energy as cause is one, but as far as form 
(lakshana) goes it is triple; (318) this is the way in which 
a picture of one colour appears variously on the wall. 

417. The twofold egolessness, the Citta, Manas, and 
Vijiiina, the five Dharmas, the [three] Svabhavas—they do 
not belong to my essence.! 

418. When the Citta-form is put aside, the Manas and 
Vijhiana removed, and the [five] Dharmas, and the [three] 
Svabhavas abandoned, then one attains the essence of Tatha- 
gatahood. 

419. The pure [essence of Tathagatahood] is not 
obtained by body, speech, and thought; the essence of Tatha- 
gatahood (gotram tathagatam) being pure is devoid of 
doings. 

420. To be pure by means of the psychic faculties, 
and the self-mastery, to be embellished with the Samadhis 
and the powers, to be provided with varieties of the will- 
body—these belong to the pure essence of Tathagatahood. 

421. To be undefiled in inner realisation, to be released 
from cause and form (hetulakshana), to attain the eighth 
stage and the Buddha-stage—this is the essence of Tathagata- 
hood. 

422. The Far-Going, the Good-Wisdom, the Law-Cloud, 
and the Tathagata-stage—they belong to the essence of 
Buddhahood, while the rest are taken up by the two vehicles. 

423. Since sentient beings are differentiated as to their 
mentality and individuality, the Buddhas who have achieved 
self-mastery over their minds teach the ignorant the seven 
stages. 

424. At the seventh stage no faults arise as to body, 
speech, and thought; at the eighth, the final abode [of con- 
sciousness], it seems to him like having crossed a great river 
in a dream. 

(319) 425. At the fifth and the eighth stage the 
Gotra, lit. “family.” 

1 

SAGATHAKAM 259 

Bodhisattvas acquire proficiency in mechanical arts and phi- 
losophy and attain kingship in the triple world. 

426. Birth and no-birth, emptiness and no-emptiness, 
self-nature and no-self-nature,—these are not discriminated 
[by the knowing one] ; in Mind-only [no such things} obtain. 

427. To discriminate, saying ‘‘ This is true, this is true, 
this is false,’’ is teaching meant for the Sravakas and Prat- 
yekabuddhas, and not for the sons of the Buddha. 

428. There is neither being-and-non-being, nor the 
aspect of momentariness, there are neither thought-construc- 
tions (prajiaptz) nor substances (dravya) ; nothing obtains 
in Mind-only. 

429. According to conventional truth (samvrit?), things 
are, but not in the highest truth; to be confused in things 
not having self-nature—this belongs to conventional truth. 

430. I establish thought-constructions where all things 
are non-existent; whatever expressions and experiences 
that belong to the ignorant are not of the truth as it is 
(tattva). 

431. Things born of words seem to belong to an objec- 
tive realm; but when it is perceived that they are born of 
words, they become non-existent. 

432. As no pictures are separable from the wall, no 
shadow from the post, so are no [Vijnana-]| waves stirred 
when the Alaya[-ocean] is pure [and quiet]. 

433. (Chapter VI, verse 4.) 

(320) 4384. It is taught that from the Dharma 
{[-Buddha] comes the Nishyanda, and from the Nishyanda 
the Nirmita;! these are the original Buddhas, the rest are 
transformed bodies. 

435-436. (Chapter II, verses 125-126.) 

437. (Chapter II, verses 123 and 129.) 

438-439. (Chapter II, verses 127-128.) 

440. Do not discriminate, saying ‘‘ Here is emptiness,’’ 
or saying again, ‘‘Here is no emptiness’’; both being and 
non-being are merely imagined, for there is no reality cor- 
responding to the imagined. 

? After T‘ang. 

260 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

441. The ignorant imagine that things originate from 
the accumulation of qualities, or atoms, or substances; but 
there is not a single atom in existence, and, therefore, there 
is no external world. 

442. Forms seen as external are due to the imagination 
of people, they are nothing but the Mind itself; (321) there 
is nothing to be seen externally, and, therefore, there is no 
external world. 

443-444, (Chapter III, verses 157-158.) 

445-447. (Chapter II, verses 205-207.) 

448. (Chapter II, verse 209.) 

449. (Chapter II, verse 208.) 

450. (Chapter II, verse 210.) 

(322) 451. As the elephant who is immersed in deep 
mud is unable to move about, so the Sravakas, who are deeply 
intoxicated with the liquor of Samadhi, stand still. 

452. (Chapter II, verse 135.) 

453. Space, the hare’s horns, and a barren woman’s 
child are unrealities, and yet they are spoken of [as if real] ; 
so are all things imagined. 

454. The world originates from habit-energy, there is 
nothing whatever to be designated as being and non-being, 
nor is there its negation; those who see into this are eman- 
cipated, as they understand the egolessness of things. 

455. [Of the three Svabhavas] one is Parikalpita, 
mutuality is Paritantra, and suchness is Parinishpanna; this 
is always taught by me in the sutra. 

456. (Chapter II, verse 172.) 

457-458. (Chapter II, verses 203-204.) 

459. The Citta, discrimination, thought-constructior., 
Manas, Vijfiana, (328) the Alaya, all that which sets the 
triple world in motion, are synonyms of Mind. 

460. Life, warmth, the Vijiiana, the Alaya, the vital 
principle, Manas, Manovijiana,—these are the names for dis- 
crimination. 

461. The body is maintained by the Citta, the Manas 
always cognitates, the {Mano-]vijnana together with the 
Vijiianas cuts the world in pieces as objects of Citta. 

SAGATHAKAM 261 

462-464. (Chapter II, verses 3-5.) 

465-469 (324). (Chapter II, verses 15-19.) 

470-471. (Chapter III, verses 7-8.) 

472. [Some say that] an ego-soul really is, which is 
separate from the Skandha-appearance, or that the Skandhas 
really exist; [but] there is after all no ego-soul in them. 

473. When one’s doings, together with the passions 
primary and secondary, are brought to light, one perceives 
the world to be the Mind itself and is released from all 
sufferings. 

474-487 (325-326). (Chapter II, verses 20-33.) 

488. The extinction-knowledge attamed by _ the 
Sravakas, the birth of the Buddhas, and [that] of the Prat- 
yekabuddhas and Bodhisattvas—all takes place by getting 
rid of the passions. 

489. No external forms are in existence, what is ex- 
ternal is what is seen of the Mind itself; as the ignorant fail 
to understand as regards the Mind itself, they imagine the 
Samskrita [as real]. 

490. The insight that pluralities are of the Mind itself 
is withheld from the bewildered who, not knowing what the 
nature of the external world is, are under bondage to [the 
idea] of causation, and the fourfold proposition. 

491. There are no reasons, no statements, no illustra- 
tions, no syllogistic members to the intelligent who know 
that the external world is the reflection of their own Mind. 

492. Do not discriminate by discrimination, to discrim- 
inate is characteristic of the Parikalpita (imagination) ; 
depending on the imagination, discrimination is evolved. 

493. One’s habit-energy is the origin [of all things] 
which are mutually and uninterruptedly knitted together ; 
(327) as dualism is [primarily] external to people’s minds, 
there is no rising of it. 

494. Because of mind and what belongs to it, there is 
discrimination, [the ignorant] are comfortably established 
in the triple world; that an external world of appearances 
is evolved is due to the discrimination of self-nature. 

495. Because of the combination of appearances and 

262 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

seeds there are the twelve Ayatanas; because of the com- 
bination of subject and object,’ I talk of doings. 

496. Like images in a mirror, like a hair-net, to the 
dim-eyed, the mind to the ignorant is seen enveloped in habit- 
energy. 

497, Discrimination goes on in the world imagined by 
self-discrimination ; but there is no external world as it is 
discriminated by the philosophers. 

498. Like the ignorant who not recognising the rope 
take it for a snake, people imagine an external world, not 
knowing that it is of Mind itself. 

499. Thus the rope in its own nature is neither the 
one nor the other; but owing to the fault of not recognising 
Mind itself, people go on with their discrimination over the 
rope. 

500-501. (Chapter III, verses 82-83.) 

(328) 502. While the imagined is being imagined, the 
imagination itself has no reality; seeing that discrimination 
has no reality, how does it [really] take place? 

503. Form (réipam, or matter) has no reality of its 
own, as is the case with a jar, a garment, ete.; in the world, 
however, which has no real existence, discrimination is 
carried on. 

004. If people discriminate erroneously regarding the 
Samskrita since the beginningless past, how is the self-nature 
of beings an error? Pray tell me, O Muni. 

905. The nature of all beings is non-existent, and what 
is seen [as external] is nothing but the Mind; when the Mind 
itself is not perecived discrimination is evolved. 

006. When it is said that there are no such things 
imagined as the ignorant imagine, it means that there is 
something which is not recognised by the intellect. 

507. If it is said that something exists with the wise, 
this is not what is discriminated by the ignorant; if the 
wise and the ignorant walk the same way, that which [is 
realj with the wise must be a falsehood. 

508. To the wise there is nothing erroneous, therefore 

' Aégraya and dlambana, depended and depending. 

SAGATHAKAM 263 

their mind is undefiled; the ignorant whose mind is un- 
interruptedly defiled goes on imagining the imagined. 

509. It is like the mother who fetches for her child a 
fruit from the air, saying, ‘‘O son, don’t ery, pick the fruit, 
there are so many of them.’’ 

510. In like manner I make all beings covet varieties 
of imagined fruit (329) whereby I [lead them to] the truth 
that goes beyond the antithesis of being and non-being. 

511. The being [which is realised by the wise] having 
never been in existence is not united with causation; it is 
primarily unborn and yet born, while its essence is not 
obtainable.’ 

512. The unobtainable essence (alabdhdimaka) is 
indeed unborn, and yet it is nowhere separated from causa- 
tion; nor are things as they are for this moment anywhere 
separated from causation. 

513. When the visible world is thus approached, it is 
anywhere neither existent nor non-existent, nor is it not- 
existent-and-non-existent; putting itself under causation, 
reality is not the subject of discrimination to the wise. 

514. The philosophers cherishing wrong ideas and the 
ignorant have theories of oneness and otherness; they under- 
stand not that the world, subject to causation, is hike Maya 
and a dream. 

515. The supreme Mahayana is beyond the realm of 
words, its meaning is well elucidated by me, but the ignorant 
do not comprehend. 

516. [The doctrines] thus advanced by the Sravakas 
and philosophers are tainted with jealousy; they go astray 
from reality, because their doctrines are false theorisings. 

517. Appearance, self-nature, form (samsthanam), and 
name,—depending on these four conditions all kinds of 
imagination are carried on. 

918. Those who believe in the oneness or the manyness 

The meaning of this and what follow is this: there is an absolute 
beiug which precludes all form of qualification, but without which this 
world of cause and effect is impossible; the absolute is thus in one sense 
unobtainable, and yet in another sense it is the reason of this existence 
subject to causation. 

1 

264 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

[of cause], those who imagine Brahma god or the authority 
of ISvara, (330) those who take the sun and the moon for 
an element—they are not my sons.! 

519. Those who are equipped with a noble insight and 
are thoroughly conversant with the suchness of reality, know 
well how to turn over ideas and reach the other shore of 
the Vijnhana. 

520. This is the seal of emancipation belonging to 
those sons who [have embraced] my teaching; it is released 
from existence and non-existence, removed from coming and 
going. 

521. If karma disappears by causing a transformation 
in the world of matter (ripa) and the Vijnanas, permanence 
and impermanence no more obtain, and transmigration 
ceases. 

522. When this transformation takes place, the idea of 
matter is shaken off, space-relations are banished, but karma 
released from the fault of being and non-being abides with 
the Alaya. 

523. While matter and Vijnanas pass into annihilation, 
karma abides with the being of the Alaya which is not 
destroyed, whereby there is the union of matter and 
Vijianas. 

524. If people’s karma which is in combination with 
them is destroyed, karma-succession being thus destroyed, 
there will be no transmigration, no attainment of Nirvana. 

520. If karma is destroyed together with matter and 
Vijnanas, and yet is subject to transmigration, matter will 
then subsist as it differs in no way from karma. 

526. Mind (citta) and matter are neither different nor 
not-different from discrimination; there is no distinction of 
all things as they are removed from being and non-being. 

(331) 527. The Parikalpita and the Paratantra are 
mutually dependent and are not to be differentiated; thus 
with matter and impermanency, they are mutually condi- 
tioning. 

528. Apart from oneness and otherness the [Pari-] 

7 The whole verse is not at all clear. 

SAGATHAKAM 265 

kalpita is not knowable; so with matter and impermanency ; 
how can one speak of their being and non-being? 

529. When the Parikalpita is thoroughly understood 
[as to its nature], the Paratantra is not born; when the 
Paratantra is understood, the Parikalpita becomes suchness. 

530. When the Parikalpita is destroyed my Dharma- 
eye (netri)! is destroyed; and there takes place within my 
teaching [the controversy of] assertion and negation. 

531. In this way, then, and at that time, there will 
rise disparagers of the Dharma, none of whom are worth 
talking with as they are destroyers of my Dharma-eye. 

532. As they are not taken into the company of the 
intelligent, they abandon the life of the Bhikshu; and as they 
destroy the Parikalpita, they are engaged in controversies 
asserting and negating. 

533. As their insight is bound up with being and non- 
being, what appears to their imagination resembles a hair- 
net, Maya, a dream, the Gandharva’s city, a mirage, etc. 

534. He who studies under the Buddhas may not live 
‘together with those who cherish dualism and are destroyers 
of others. 

535. But if there are Yogins who see a being separated 
from the imagination (332) and released from existence and 
non-existence, he [i.e. a Buddhist] may associate with them 
[i.e. such Yogins]. 

536. It is hke a mine in the earth producing gold: and 
precious stones; it harbours no cause of strife in it, and yet 
it furnishes people with various means of subsistence. 

537. Likewise, though the essence (gotra)* of all beings 
appears various, it has nothing to do with karma; as the 
visible world is non-existent, there is no karma, nor is the 
path born of karma. 

538. As is understood by the wise, all things have no 
self-being, but according to the discriminations of the 
ignorant things appear to exist. 

539. If things are not existent as discriminated by the 

Tang, EB ;sx Wei, EB or RE. 
e+, read after Wei. 

266 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

ignorant, all things being non-existent, there are no defile- 
ments for any one. 

540. Because of varieties of defilement cherished by 
beings there is transmigration, and the sense-organs are com- 
pleted ; being bound up by ignorance and desire there is the 
evolution of beings possessed of a body. 

541. If beings are not existent as‘discriminated by the 
ignorant, there will be no evolving of the sense-organs in 
these beings, which is not the Yogin’s [view]. 

542. If beings themselves are not and yet they become 
the cause of transmigration, then there will be an emancipa- 
tion which is independent of people’s strivings. 

543. If beings are non-existent to you, how ean there 
be any distinction between the wise and the ignorant? Nor 
will there be anything characterising the wise who are dis- 
eiplining themselves for the triple emancipation. 

(333) 544. The Skandhas, personal soul, doctrines, 
individuality and generality, no-signs, causation, and senses 
—of these I talk for the sake of the Sravakas. 

545. No-cause, Mind-only, the powers (vibhiitz), the 
stages [of Bodhisattvahood], the inner realisation, pure 
suchness—of these I talk for the sake of the Bodhisattvas. 

546. In the time to come there will be disparagers of 
my teaching who, putting on the Kashaya robe, will talk 
about being-and-non-being and its works. 

547. Things born of causation are non-existent—this 
is the realm of the wise; a thing imagined has no reality, yet 
things are imagined by the theorisers. 

548. In the time to come there will be [a class of 
ignorant people headed by} Kanabhuj; they will talk about 
the non-existence of work, and will ruin the people with 
their evil theories. 

949, The world is originated from atoms, atoms are 
causeless, and there are nine permanent substances—such 
evil theories they teach. 

550. [They say that] substances are produced by sub- 
stances, and so qualities by qualities; and they destroy the 
self-being of all things [saying that] it is another being. 

SAGATHAKAM 267 

551. If it is said that originally the world was not and 
then evolved, it must have had a beginning; but my state- 
ment is that there is no primary limit to transmigration. 

(334) 552. If all the innumerable things in the triple 
world were not and then evolved, nobody would doubt if 
horns grow on a bitch, or a she-camel, or a donkey. 

553. If the eye, form (rupa), and Vijiana were not 
and now they are, straw-mats, crowns, cloth, ete. would be 
produced from lumps of elay. 

504. A straw-mat is not found in cloth, nor cloth in a 
straw matting; why is it that by some combination anything 
is not produced from any other thing? 

999. That life and the body so called were not and then 
evolved ; all such controversies as this have been declared by 
me [as untrue]. 

596. The statement has been made first [against the 
philosophers] and their views are warded off; their views 
being warded off, I will make my own statement. 

oof. While I [first] make a statement in behalf of the 
philosophical systems, let not my disciples be disturbed by 
{my] drawing on the dualism of being and non-being. 

908. That the world is born of a supreme soul and 
that changes are due to the qualities—this 4s what the 
school of Kapita teaches its disciples; but it is not the right 
way of thinking. 

509. There is no reality, no non-reality, nor is there 
any [world of] causation conditioned by causation; as there 
is nothing to be characterised as causation, non-reality never 
has its rise. 

3060. My statement is free from the alternatives of 
being and non-being, is removed from cause and condition, 
has nothing to do with birth and destruction, and is removed 
from qualified [and qualifying]. 

561. When the world is regarded as like Maya and a 
dream, exempt from cause and condition, (335) and eternally 
causeless, there is no rising of imagination. 

562. When existence is always regarded as resembling 
the Gandharva’s [city], a mirage, a hair-net, and as free 

268 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

from the alternatives of being and non-being, removed from 
cause and condition, and causeless, then the mind flows clear 
of defilements. 

563. (The philosophers may say that] if there is no 
external reality, Mind-only too will be non-existent ; how can 
Mind exist without objective reality? The [doctrine of] 
Mind-only! [therefore] is untenable. 

564. [Further they may say that] on account of an 
objective world of realities, people’s minds are aroused; how 
can there be a mind without a cause? [The doctrine of] 
Mind-only? is [therefore] untenable. 

565. But suchness and Mind-only? are realities belong- 
ing to the teaching of the wise; neither those who deny nor 
those who affirm comprehend my teachings. 

566. If a mind is said to evolve on account of perceived 
and perceiving, this is the mind that is of the world; then the 
Mind-only obtains not. 

567. When it is said that there is something resembling 
body, property, and abode produced in a dream-like manner, 
a mind, indeed, is seen under the aspect of duality; but 
Mind itself is not dualistic. 

568. As a sword cannot cut itself, or as a finger cannot 
touch its own tip, Mind cannot see itself. 

569. In the state of imagelessness there is no reality, 
no Parikalpita, no Paratantra, no five Dharmas, no twofold 
mind.” 

(336) 570. The dualism of giving-birth and being- 
born belongs to the nature of things; when I speak of the 
giving-birth of things that have no self-nature, it is on 
account of a hidden meaning. 

571. If multiplicities of forms are born of imagination, 
there will be something of objectivity in [the notion of] 
space, in [that of] a hare’s horns. 

572. When an objective reality is of mind, this reality 

2 

For these ctttamatra, T‘ang has £2 instead of MEY. Ordi- 

narily MEG is for vijndnamatra or vijnaptimdtra, and not for citta- 

matra. In this respect Wei is consistent, for it has £.t) throughout. 
2 After T‘ang. 

SAGATHAKAM 269 

does not belong to imagination; but reality born of imagina- 
tion is something other than mind and is unobtainable. 

573. In a transmigration that has no beginning, an 
objective world nowhere obtains; when there is no 
nourishing mind, where can an objective semblance take 
its rise? 

574. If there is any growth from nothingness, horns 
will grow on a hare; let no discrimination take place, think- 
ing that something grows out of nothing. 

975. As there is nothing existing now, so there was 
nothing existing previously; where there is no objective 
world, how can a mind which is bound up with an objective 
world take its rise? 

076. Suchness, emptiness, [reality-]limit, Nirvana, the 
Dharmadhatu, no-birth of all things, self-being—these 
characterise the highest truth. 

577. The ignorant, who cherish [the notion of] being 
and non-being, by imagining causes and conditions, are 
unable to understand that all things are causeless and 
unborn. - 

578. The Mind is manifested; there is no objective 
world of pluralities whose cause is in the beginningless past ; 
(337) if there is no objective world since the beginningless 
past, how does individualisation! ever come to exist? 

579. If anything grows from nothingness, the poor will 
become rich; when there is no objective world, how can a 
mind be born? Pray tell me, O Muni. 

580. As all this is causless, there is neither mind nor 
objective world; as the mind is not born, the triple world is 
devoid of doings. 

581-613 (338-841). (Chapter III, verses 86-117.) 

614. The statement that a hare has no horns is made 
out of the reasonings concerning a jar, a garment, a crown, 
and a horn; where there is no complete cause, there is no 
[real] existence; thus you should know. 

615. There is non-existence when proof of existence [is 
produced]; non-existence does not prove non-existence; 

1 

According to T‘ang, viSesha here is evidently citta. 

270 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

existence, indeed, looks for non-existence, they look for each 
other and are mutually conditioned. 

616. If it is thought, again, that something appears 
depending on something else, the something thus depended 
upon must be causeless, but there is nothing that is ecauseless. 

617. If [it is said that] there is another reality which 
is depended on, then this must have still another [reality to 
depend on]; this is commiting the fault of non-finality ; may 
it not end in reaching nowhere? 

618. Depending on leaves, pieces of wood, etc., the 
magical charm is effected; in like manner, pluralities of 
objects depending on some [other] objects are manifested 
to the people. 

619. The magical net is neither the leaves nor the 
pieces of wood, nor the pebbles; (342) it is owing to the 
magician that the magic scene is perceived by the people. 

620. Thus when something [of magic] depending on 
some objects is destroyed, dualism ceases at the moment of 
seeing; how will there be anything of discrimination? 

621. The discriminated by discrimination exist not, 
and discrimination itself does not obtain; discrimination 
being thus unobtainable, there is neither transmigration nor 
Nirvana. 

622. Discrimination now being unobtainable, it is not 
aroused ; discrimination not being aroused, how ean a mind 
rise? Mind-only then is not tenable. 

623. When thought is divided into many, the teaching 
lacks in validity ; and owing to the absence of validity, there 
is NO emancipation, nor is there multitudinousness of objects. 

624. There is no such objective world as is discrim- 
inated by the ignorant; when the Mind goes astray on 
account of habit-energy, it manifests itself like images. 

625. All things are unborn and have nothing to do 
with being and non-being: all is nothing but Mind and is 
delivered from discrimination. 

626. For the ignorant things are said to be causal, but 
not for the wise; when the self-nature of Mind is liberated, 
it becomes pure where the wise have their abode. 

SAGATHAKAM 271 

627. Thus, the Samkhya, the Vaiseshika, the naked 
philosophers, the Brahmin theologians, followers of Siva, 
(343) cherishing views based on being and non-being, are 
destitute of the truth of solitude. 

628. Having no self-nature, being unborn, being empty, 
being like Maya, being free from defilements—to whom is this 
taught by the Buddhas as well as by yourself? 

629. For the sake of the Yogins who are pure in mind, 
spiritual discipline (yoga) is taught by the Buddhas who 
are free from theories and speculations, and such is also 
proclaimed by me. 

630. If all this is the Mind, where does the world 
stand? Why are men seen coming and going on earth? 

631. As a bird moves in the air according to its faney 
without abiding anywhere, without depending on anything, 
as if moving on earth; 

632. So people with all their discrimination move along, 
walk about in the Mind itself like a bird moving in the air.! 

633. Tell me how something looking like body, prop- 
erty, and abode rises from the Mind. How does appearance 
take its rise? Why is Mind-only? Pray tell me. 

634. Body, property, and abode are appearances and 
their rise is due to habit-energy; appearances are born of 
irrationality (ayukta), their rise is due to discrimination. 

635. Objectivity discriminated makes the world, a 
mind takes its rise from [recognising] objectivity; when 
it is clearly perceived that what is seen is the Mind itself, 
discrimination ceases. 

(344) 636. When discrimination is seen [as to its true 
nature, it is noticed that] name and sense are to be disjoined 
(visamyukta),? then both knowledge and knower will be dis- 
carded, and one is released of the Samskrita. 

* This means that in spite of our discriminations and imaginings 
we cannot get away from the control of Mind-only, which is, religiously 
expressed, Amitabha Buddha pursues sentient beings, as is taught in 
Shin Buddhism, in spite of their struggle to run away from his all- 
embracing love. Thus interpreted, this verse gives us a new outlook 
in the philosophy of the Lankdvatara. 

* This is the reading of Tang. 

272 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

637. To abandon both name and sense, this is the way 
of all the Buddhas;} those who wish to get enlightened in 
any other way will not attain enlightenment for themselves, 
nor for others. 

638. (Chapter VI, verse 5.) 

639. When the world is seen detatched from knowledge 
and knowability, there is no meaning to it, and discrimina- 
tion ceases to go forth. 

640. By seeing into [the nature of] Mind there is the 
cessation of discrimination as regards works and words; by 
not seeing into [the true nature of] Self-mind, discrimina- 
tion evolves. 

641. Four of the Skandhas are formless (aripina), 
they cannot be numbered; the elements differ from one 
another, how can they produce such pluralities of forms 
(ripa) ¥ 

642. When [the notion of] individuality is abandoned, 
we have no elements, primary and secondary; if [we say 
that] form is produced by other qualities, why not by the 
Skandhas ?? 

643. When one is emancipated from the Ayatanas and 
Skandhas, seeing them as free of individual signs, then the 
mind is liberated because of seeing the egolessness of things. 

(345) 644. From the differentiation of an objective 
world and the senses, the Vijiiadna is set in motion in eight 
ways; thus the aspects [of self-nature]* are three, but when 
imagelessness obtains they all cease. 

645. When dualism is cherished, the Alaya sets up in 
the Manas the consciousness of an ego and its belongings, 
and the Vijianas; when this is penetratingly perceived, they 
all subside. 

646. When the immovable is seen, oneness and otherness 
being discarded, then there will be no more discriminating 
of the two, ego and its belongings. 

647. Nothing evolving, there is no growth, nor is there 
Read after T‘ang. The Sanskrit text is too obscure for intel- 
ligent reading. 
* Not clear. 
* That is, Svabhavalakshana. 

1 

SAGATHAKAM 273 

any cause to set the Vijianas in action; work and cause 
being removed, there is cessation and nothing is aroused. 

648. Pray tell me the why of discrimination, of Mind- 
only, and of the world. Why is the world said to be dis- 
joined from causes, discarding qualified and qualifying? 

649. The Mind is seen as manifold when visible forms 
are discriminated; as it is not clearly perceived that what is 
seen is of the Mind, there is something other than the Mind, 
because [the dualism of] a mind and an external world is 
clung to. 

650. When [the world] is not understood with intel- 
ligence there is nihilism; [but] the Mind being asserted, 
how is it that this does not give rise to realism (astttva- 
arishit) ? 

651. Discrimination is neither existent nor non- 
existent, therefore, realism does not arise; as it is clearly 
understood that what is seen is of Mind-only, no diserimina- 
tion is set to work. 

652. Discrimination not rising, there is a turning-back 
(pardvritti), and there is no dependence on anything; (346) 
when things are regarded as subject to causation, the four- 
fold proposition obstructs [the way of truth]. 

653. Different expressions are distinguished but none is 
verifiable; in all these there is a necessary implication which 
rises from the notion of a primary causal agency.! 

654. By maintaining the combination of causes and 
conditions, a primary causal ageney is warded off; when a 
chain of causes is held to be impermanent, the fault of 
permanency is avoided. 

655. There is neither birth nor destruction where the 
ignorant see impermanency ; nothing is ever destroyed, what 
is seen [as real] is due to [the idea of] a causal agency.” 
How is the unseen [born]? By what does the impermanent 
world come into existence? 

656. (Second line only, Chapter III, verse 62.) 

> Not quite clear. 
In the Sanskrit text this line is made to belong to the next 
verse, which is wrong. 

274 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

657-662 (347). (Chapter III, verses 62-68.) 

663. The gods, the Asuras, mankind, the animals, 
hungry ghosts, and Yama’s abode—these six paths of ex- 
istence are enumerated, where sentient beings are born. 

664. According to one’s karma, be it superior, inferior, 
or middling, one is born in these [six] paths; guarding all 
that is good, [one will attain] an excellent emancipation. 

665. The company of the Bhikshus is taught by you 
that there is birth and death at every moment; pray tell 
me its meaning. 

666. As one form changes into another, so is the mind 
born and broken up; thence I tell my disciples how uninter- 
ruptedly and momentarily birth-[and-death] takes place. 

667. In like manner discrimination also rises and dis- 
appears with every single form; where there is discrimina- 
tion, there are living beings; outside of it there are no 
living beings. 

668. At every moment there is a disjunction, this is 
called causation; (348) when one is liberated from the notion 
of form (ripa), there is neither birth nor death. 

669. When dualism is upheld, there rise causation-born 
and no-causation-born, ignorance and suchness, etc.; not to 
be dualistic is suchness. 

670. When eausation [-born] and no-causation-born 
[are distinguished], things are differentiated, there are 
permanency, etc., there are effect, cause, and causation. 

671. As long as the notion of cause and effect is upheld, 
there is no difference between the philosophers; this is your 
teaching as well as that of [other] Buddhas; O Mahamuni, 
such are not the wise ones. 

672. Within the body, measuring one vyana,! there is 
a world; the cause of its rising, the attaining of cessation, 
and the path (pratipad)—this I teach to sons of the Victor. 

673. By clinging to the three Svabhavas, perceived [or 
grasped] and perceiving [or grasping] are manifested; the 
simple-minded discriminate objects as belonging to the world 
and to the super-world. 

* The measure of two extended arms. 

SAGATHAKAM 275 

674. From the viewpoint of relativity the notion of 
Svabhava has been upheld, but in order to ward off one-sided 
views the Svabhava is not to be discriminated. 

675. As faults and defects are sought, the principle is 
not established, nor is the mind [properly] set to work; this 
is due to the rising of dualistic notions; non-duality is 
suchness. 

(349) 676. [If one should think that] the Vijfiana, 
ete. are originated by ignorance, desire, and karma, this is 
wrong, for the fault of non-finality is committed ; this being 
committed, the rise of the world becomes impossible. 

677. The fourfold destruction of things is told by the 
unenlightened ; discrimination is said to rise in two ways; 
{in fact,] there is no existence, no non-existence. When one 
is released from the fourfold proposition, one abandons 
dualism. 

678. Discrimination may rise in two ways, but when 
it is seen [in its true nature], it will never rise [again]; for 
in all things not being born there is the awakening of intel- 
ligence ; but! where there is the birth of things, this is owing 
to discrimination ; let one not discriminate. 

679.2, Pray tell me, O Lord, about the truth in order to 
check dualistic views, [so that] I and others may not cherish 
the [dualism of] being and non-being. 

680. And [thus] we may keep ourselves away from 
the philosophers’ teachings and also from the Sravakas and 
Pratyekabuddhas; for it behoves the Bodhisattvas not to 
lose the life of enlightenment as realised by the Buddhas. 

681. To be delivered from [the notion of] cause and 
no-cause, not to be born, and being one—these are synonyms; 
[the ignorant] are bewildered by them, but the wise always 
rise above them. 

682. All things appear like a cloud, a multitude of 
clouds, a rainbow; they are like a vision, a hair-net, Maya, 

1 That which follows forms the first half of verse 678 in the 
Sanakrit text. 

* The verse 679 here is composed of the second half of 679 and 
the first line of 680 in the Sanskrit text. 

276 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

etc., they are born of self-discrimination; and yet the philos- 
ophers discriminate the world as born of a self-creating 
agency. 

683. Not being born, suchness, reality, limit, and empti- 
ness,—these are other names for form (riipa); one should 
not imagine it to mean a nothing. 

(350) 684. In the world [another name of] hasta 
(hand) is kara; Indra [is also called] Sakra and Purandara; 
in the same way [there are many synonyms] for this ex- 
istence; and one should not imagine it to mean a nothing. 

685. Emptiness is no other than form, so is no-birth; 
one should not imagine anything different from this; if one 
does, faulty views will follow. 

686. Because of objective appearances being asserted, 
there is general discrimination (samkalpa) and particular 
distrimination (vikalpa) ; because of imagination (partkalpa) 
there are long and short, square and round, etc. 

687. General discrimination belongs to the Citta, 
imagination to the Manas, and particular discrimination to 
the Manovijnana; [but reality] is neither the qualified nor 
the qualifying. 

688. What is regarded by the philosophers as unborn 
is my own teaching wrongly viewed, and [the latter is] 
imagined to be indistinguishable [from theirs], but this is 
submitting a faulty argument. 

689. Those who have acquired the knowledge of proper 
reasoning by making use of [the idea of] no-birth and its 
meaning, are said to have an understanding of my doctrine. 

690. In order to erush the philosophical views, not 
being born is said to mean not having any abode; knowing 
what dualism means, I teach the doctrine of no-birth. 

691. Are all things to be regarded as unborn, or not? 
Pray tell, O Mahamuni. The doctrine of causelessness, no- 
birth, the rising of existence,—all these are held by the 
philosophers. 

(351) 692.1. I teach Mind-only which is removed from 
{the dualism of] being and non-being. One should discard 

* The first half of this verse numbered 692 in the Sanskrit text 

SAGATHAKAM 277 

[the view of] birth and no-birth which causes various philos- 
ophieal theories. 

693. In the doctrine of causelessness, of no-birth, of 
birth, the notion of a causal agency [is involved] on which 
they depend. Effortless deeds come from nothingness, and 
deeds [as ordinarily performed] are mixed with motives. 

694. Tell me the [right] view that goes with skilful 
means, original vows, etc.; how does the society [of the holy 
ones] come into existence when all things are not? 

695. By separating oneself from [the dualism of] 
perceived and perceiving, there is neither evolution nor 
cessation ; the mind is born as views are cherished as regards 
one existence or another. 

696. Things are said to be unborn, how is this? Pray 
tell me. Sentient beings do not understand it, so it ought 
to be explained. 

697. Pray explain to me, O Mahamuni, all the con- 
tradictions [involved in the statements made] before and 
after, to escape the errors of the philosophers and to be 
released from the perverted theory of causation. 

698. Pray tell me, O Most Excellent of Teachers, 
regarding cessation and coming back into existence, in order 
to be released from being and non-being, and yet not to 
destroy cause and effect. 

699. Pray tell me as to the graded succession of the 
stages, O Lotus-eyed One;! for the world cherishes dualism 
and is bewildered with wrong views. 

(352) 700. For on account of [the wrong views con- 
cerning] birth, no-birth, ete., the cause of serenity is not 
recognised, there is no society [of the holy ones] for me, 
and I have no chance to discourse on the nature of being. 

701. There is error where dualism is maintained, but 
the Buddhas are thoroughly free from dualism; all things 
are empty, momentary, have no self-nature, and have never 
been born. 
is evidently inserted here by mistake, and is not translated; and the 
first half of the following verse is brought over here to complete 691. 

The numbering, therefore, from 692 to 694 is altered in this translation. 
* Padma ikshana! according to T‘ang. 

278 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

702. Discriminations are carried on by those who are 
enveloped by evil theories and doctrines, but not by the 
Tathagatas; pray tell me about the rise and cessation of 
discrimination. 

703. Accumulated by false reasonings, there is a com- 
bination of varieties of appearances [and Vijfanas], whereby 
[each Vijfiana] takes in an objective field according to its 
class. 

704. Recognising external forms, discrimination is set 
in motion; as this is understood and the meaning of reality 
is seen as it is, the mind conforms itself to the nature of 
the wise and is no more set in motion. 

705. The elements being rejected, there is no birth of 
things, but as the elements as appearances are always the 
Mind, one understands what is meant by no-birth. 

706. Do not diserir inate discrimination, the wise are 
those who are free from discrimination ; when discrimination 
is carried on, there is dualism which does not lead to Nirvana. 

707. By the statement of no-birth, Maya is seen and 
destroyed; when Maya is made to be born of no-causation, 
this injures the truth of the statement. 

(353) 708. The mind is to be regarded as a reflected 
image originating in the beginningless past; it is something 
of reality but not reality itself; one should realise it truly as 
it-is in itself. 

709. The nature of birth [or existence] is like an image 
appearing in a mirror, which, while it is devoid of oneness 
and otherness, is not altogether non-existent. 

710. Like the Gandharvas’ city, Maya, ete., which 
appear depending upon causes and conditions, the birth of 
all things is not no-birth [in a relative sense]. 

711. It is on account of general usage that a dualistic 
discrimination is set up as regards persons and things; but 
this is not clearly understood by the ignorant so that [the 
thought of] an ego-soul and individual objects is cherished. 

712. There are five [classes of] Sravakas, the Sravakas 
[that is, hearers] generally, those who are attached to the 
doctrine of causation, those who are Arhats, those who are 

SAGATHAKAM 279 

dependent upon their own power, and those who are 
dependent upon [the power of] the Buddha. 

713. Time-interruption, destruction, the highest reality, 
and mutuality—these four are imagined as involved in the 
idea of impermanency by the ignorant who are not endowed 
with intelligence. 

714. The ignorant addicted to dualism cherish [such 
thoughts as] dualities, atoms, original matter, and primary 
cause, and fail to understand the means of emancipation, 
because they adhere to the alternatives of being and non- 
being. 

715. (Chapter VI, verse 3.) 

(854) 716. The primary elements are of different 
qualities, and how can they produce? this world of matter 
(ripa)? [Each of] the elements has its own seat; what are 
{regarded as] secondary elements are not made by them. 

717. Fire burns matter (ri#pa), the nature of water is 
to wet, the wind scatters matter; how can matter be produced 
by the elements [when they are of such contradicting 
natures] ? : 

718. The Ripa-skandha (matter) and the Vijiana 
(-Skandha)—there are these two Skandhas and not five; they 
are different names for the Skandhas; of this I have talked 
in a hundred ways. 

719. By the separation of mind from what belongs to 
it, the present world evolves; [various] forms {of matter] 
are inseparably conjoined with one another; matter is mind 
[-made], and is not element-made. 

720. Blue, ete., are to be referred to white, and white 
to blue; cause and effect being produced [in the same mutual 
way], both being and non-being are emptiness. 

721. Effect and effecting and effected, cold and heat, 
qualified and qualifying,—such-like and all [other things] 
are not to be explained away by theories. 

722. The.Citta, Manas and the six Vijfidnas are by 
nature united and removed from oneness and otherness; they 
are evolved from the Alaya. 

> After T‘ang. 

280 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

723. The Samkhya and the Vaiseshika followers, the 
naked philosophers, and the advocates of ISvara the creator, 
are addicted to the dualism of being and non-being, and do 
not know what solitary reality is.? 

(355) 724. Varieties of forms (sansthdna) and figures 
(akriti) are not produced by the primary elements; but the 
philosophers declare them to originate from the elements 
primary and secondary. 

725. As the philosophers imagine causes other than the 
unborn, they do not understand, and because of stupidity 
they uphold the dualism of being and non-being. 

726. There is a truth (tattva) characterised by purity; 
it is united with the Citta but disunited with the Manas, ete.; 
it abides with knowledge. 

727. If karma is form (ripa), it will be the cause 
of the Skandhas and the objective world; beings without 
attachment will not be abiding [even] in the world of form- 
lessness. 

728. That egolessness is the true doctrine follows from 
the non-existence of beings; the advocate of non-ego is a 
destroyer,” causing even the cessation of the Vijnana. 

729. There are four abodes of it, how does it arise 
from the non-existence of form? As there is nothing 
existent innerly or outwardly, no Vijfianas arise. 

730. The theorisers wish to see the Skandhas in the 
middle existence; likewise, [they wish,] a being born in the 
world of formlessness is of no-form; what else is there? 

731. [If one says that] emancipation is attained 
without exerting oneself, as there are no beings, no Vij- 
hanas, this is no doubt a philosopher’s theory ; the theorisers 
do not understand. 

732. If form is to be found in the world of formless- 
ness, it is not visible; (356) its non-existence contradicts the 
truth, there is neither a vehicle nor a driver.? 

733. The Vijiiana, born of habit-energy, is united with 

1 A repetition of verse 627. 
? Literally, cutting off (chela). 

* The statements about form here are not quite intelligible. 

SAGATHAKAM 281 

the senses; there are eight kinds of it, they do not grasp one 
field all at once.? 

734. When form is not evolved, the senses are not the 
senses; therefore, the Blessed One declares that the senses, 
ete. are characterised with momentariness. 

735. How without determining form (ripa) can the 
Vijiana take its rise? How without the rising of knowledge 
can transmigration take place? 

736. To pass away instantly after birth,—this is not 
the teaching of the Buddhas; nor is there the uninterrupted- 
ness of all things; as discrimination moves about, one is 
born in the various paths. 

737. The senses and their objective worlds are meant 
for the stupid but not for the wise; the ignorant grasp 
after names, the wise comprehend the meaning. 

738. The sixth [Vijnana] is not to be understood as 
non-attachment, or as attachment; the wise who are devoid 
of the fault of being are not committed to a definite theory. 

739. Those theorisers who are without knowledge are 
frightened at eternalism and nihilism; (357) the ignorant 
are unable to distinguish between the Samskrita, the 
Asamskrita, and the ego-soul. 

740. [Some imagine the ego-soul] to be one with the 
Citta, [others] to be different from the Manas, ete., attach- 
ment? exists in oneness as well as in otherness.* 

741. If attachment is determined and mind and what 
belongs to it are designated, how is it that on account of 
the attachment there is the determination by oneness ?4 

742. By reason of attachment, attainment, karma, 

7 Not clear. 
Dana evidently stands here for upadana, as is understood by 
T‘ang. However, this and the following two or three stanzas are 
difficult to understand very clearly as there are no references in the 
text to the ideas discussed here. Probably they contain allusions to 
the Abhidharma doctrines. 

* Read after T‘ang. 
This is not clear. A number of verses in these pages that give 
no sense as far as we can see in their several connections are not at all 
in cognation with the general thoughts of the Lanka. Are they later 
additions taken from somewhere else? 

4 

282 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

birth, effect, etc., they are brought to the goal like fire; 
there is resemblance and non-resemblance in the principle. 

743. As when fire burns, the burned and the burning 
are simultaneously there, so is attachment to an ego-soul; 
what is it that is not seized by the theorisers? 

744. Whether there is birth or no-birth, the mind shines 
forth all the time; what illustrations will the theorisers 
produce to prove their notion of an ego-soul? 

745. Those theorisers who are destitute of the principle 
are lost in the forest of Vijiianas; seeking to establish the 
theory of an ego-soul, they wander about here and there. 

746. The ego (dtma) characterised with purity is the 
state of self-realisation; this is the Tathagata’s womb 
(garbha) which does not belong to the realm of the theorisers. 

747. When one thus knows what are the characteristics 
of attached and attaching by the analysis of the Skandhas, 
there rises the knowledge of the principle. 

(358) 748. The Alaya where the Garbha(womb) is 
stationed is declared by the philosophers to be [the seat of] 
thought in union with the ego; but this is not the doctrine 
approved [by the Buddhas]. 

749. By distinctly understanding it [i.e. the doctrine] 
there is emancipation and insight into the truth, and purifica- 
tion from the passions which are abandoned by means of 
contemplation and insight. 

750. The Mind primarily pure is the Tathagata’s 
Garbha which is good but is attached to [as an ego-soul] by 
sentient beings; it is free from limitation and non-limitation. 

751. As the beautiful colour of gold and gold among 
pebbles become visible by purification, so is the Alaya among 
the Skandhas of a being. 

752. The Buddha is neither a soul nor the Skandhas, he 
is knowledge free from evil outflows; clearly perceiving him 
to be eternally serene, I take my refuge in him. 

753. The Mind, primarily pure, is with the secondary 
passions, with the Manas, ete., and in union with the ego- 
soul—this is what is taught by the best of speakers. 

“ Is this correct? 

SAGATHAKAM 283 

754. The Mind is primarily pure, but the Manas, etce., 
are other than that; varieties of karma are accumulated by 
them, and thus there are defilements giving rise to dualism. 

755. The ego [primarily] pure has been defiled on 
account of the external passions since the beginningless past, 
(359) and what has been added from outside is like a [soiled] 
garment to be washed off. 

756. As when a garment is cleansed of its dirt, or 
when gold is removed from its impurities, they are not 
destroyed’ but remain as they are; so is the ego freed from 
its defilements. 

757. Imagining that a melodious sound obtains in a 
lute, a conch-shell, or in a kettle-drum, the unintelligent thus 
seek something of an ego-soul within the Skandhas. 

758. As one tries to find precious stones in the treasure- 
house, or in water, or underneath the ground, where they 
are invisible, so do [they seek] a soul in the Skandhas. 

759. As the unintelligent cannot take hold of a mind 
and what belongs to it as a group, and their functions whieh 
are connected with the Skandhas, so [they cannot find] an 
ego-soul in the Skandhas. 

760. As the womb is not visible to the woman herself 
who has it, so the ego-soul is not visible within the Skandhas 
to those who have no wisdom. 

761. Like the essence of the medicinal herb, or like 
fire in the kindling, those who have no wisdom do not see 
the ego-soul within the Skandhas. 

762. Trying to find permanency and emptiness in all 
things, the unenlightened cannot see them; so with the ego- 
soul within the Skandhas. 

763. When there is no true ego-soul, there are no 
stages, no self-mastery, no psychic faculties, no highest 
anointing, no excellent Samadhis. 

(360) 764. If a destroyer should come around and 
say, ‘‘If there is an ego, show it to me;’’ a sage would 
declare, ‘‘Show me your own discrimination.’”! 

1 

The statements so far made here regarding an ego-soul (dtman 
or pudgala) as they stand seem to contradict one another, and some 

284 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

765. Those who hold the theory of non-ego are injurers 
of the Buddhist doctrines, they are given up to the dualistic 
views of being and non-being; they are to be ejected by the 
convocation of the Bhikshus and are never to be spoken to. 

766. The doctrine of an ego-soul shines brilliantly like 
the rising of the world-end fire, wiping away the faults of 
the philosophers, burning up the forest of egolessness. 

767. Molasses, sugar-cane, sugar, and honey; sour milk, 
sesame oil, and ghee—each has its own taste; but one who 
has not tasted it will not know what it is. 

768. Trying to seek in five ways for an ego-soul in 
the accumulation of the Skandhas, the unintelligent fail to 
see it, but the wise seeing it are liberated. 

769. By means of illustrations furnished by the 
sciences, etc., the mind is not accurately determined; as to 
the meaning contained in it, how can one accurately deter- 
mine it? 

770. Things are differentiated but the Mind is one— 
this is not perceived ; the theorisers [imagine it] to be cause- 
less and not-functioning, which is a mistake. 

771. When the Yogin reflects upon the mind, he does 
not see the Mind in the mind; an insight comes forth from 
the perceived [i.e. the world] ; whence is the rising of this 
perceived [world] ? 

(361) 772. I belong to the Katyayana family, descend- 
ing from the Suddhavasa; I teach the Dharma in order to 
lead sentient beings to the city of Nirvana. 

773. This is the course of the past; I and those Tatha- 
gatas have generally disclosed the meaning of Nirvana in 
three thousands of the sutras. 

774. Not in the world of desire nor in [the world of] 
no-form is Buddhahood attained; but at the Akanishtha in 

really violate the Buddhist doctrine of Non-dtman as far as we know. 
* This and the following verse again seem to contradict the Bud- 
dhist doctrine of non-ego. It is not easy to determine the purport of 
these verses as they stand all by themselves without any explanatory 
prose. In fact these verses in the Sagathakam which have no direct con- 
nection with the main text, except those that are quite obvious in mean- 
ing, are mostly difficult to know precisely what they intend to signify. 

SAGATHAKAM 285 

the world of form one is awakened to Buddhahood by getting 
rid of greed. 

775. The objective world is not the cause of bondage; 
the cause is bound up in the objective world; the passions 
are destroyed by knowledge, which is a sharp sword gained 
by discipline. 

776. How is non-ego possible? How are things like 
Maya, etc.? How about being and non-being? If suchness 
reveals itself to the ignorant, how is non-ego non-existent ?? 

777. Because of things done and of things not done, 
the cause is not the producer; all is unborn, and this is not 
clearly recognised by the ignorant. 

778. The creating agencies are unborn; both the created 
and the conditions of causality are unborn; why is imagina- 
tion carried on as regards creating agencies? 

779. The theorisers explain a cause to consist in the 
simultaneity of antecedent and consequent; the birth of all 
things is told by means of a light, a jar, a disciple, ete. 

780. The Buddhas are not Samskrita-made, but are 
endowed with the marks [of excellence]; (362) they belong 
to the nature of a Cakravartin; the Buddhas are not so 
named because of these [marks]. 

781. What characterises the Buddhas is knowledge 
(jfvdna) ; it is devoid of the defects of intellection (drishtr- 
dosha); it is an insight attained by self-realisation, it is 
removed from all defects. 

782. The religious life (brahmacarya) is not found in 
those especially, who are deaf, blind, one-eyed, dumb, aged, 
young, nor in those who are given up to the feeling of enmity. 

783. The world-ruler is endowed with the celestial 
marks and the secondary characteristics though not manifest- 
ed. They become, however, manifested in some of the home- 
less monks and not in enybody else—so it is declared. 

784. After the passing of the Leader of the Sakyas, 
these will follow me: Vyasa, Kanada, Rishabha, Kapila, and 
others. 

785. Then one hundred years after my passing, Vyasa’s 

* Is this correct reading? 

286 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

Bharata will appear, the Pandavas, the Kauravas, Rama, 
and then the Maurya. 

786. The Maurya, the Nanda, the Gupta, and then the 
Mleccha who are bad kings; after the Mleccha will rage a 
warfare, and then the age of vice; (363) and after this age 
of vice, the good Dharma will no more prevail in the world. 

787. After passing through these ages the world will 
be thrown into confusion like a wheel; fire and the sun 
being united, the world of desire will be consumed. 

788. The heavens will again be restituted and therein 
the world will take its rise, together with its four castes, 
kings, Rishis, and the Dharma. 

789. The Vedas, worship, and charity will again prevail 
with the revival of the Dharma; by narratives,! histories, 
prose-compositions, commentaries, annotations, thus-I-have- 
heard’s, ete., the world will [again] fall into confusion. 

790. Preparing properly-coloured cloth, have it further 
cleaned, have the cloth dyed with bluish mud and cow-dung 
making it nondescript in colour, so that the body may be 
covered with robes in every way different from the ap- 
pearance of the philosophers. 

791. Let the Yogin preach the doctrine, which is the 
badge of the Buddhas; let him drink water filtered through 
a cloth and carry the hip-string; in due time let him go 
about begging and keep away from things vile. 

(364) 792. He will be born in a heaven filled with 
light, and the other two will appear among mankind; deco- 
rated with precious stones he will be born as a god and a 
world-lord. 

793. In the abode of light he enjoys the four worlds 
by means of the teaching based on the Dharma; but after 
a long reign over the worlds he will retrograde on account 
of desire. 

794. Thus there are the golden age, the age of triads, 
the age of two, and the age of vice; the Lion of the Sakyas 
will appear in the age of vice, I and others in the golden age. 

795. Siddhartha of the Sakya family, Vishnu, Vyasa, 

+ Literally, “So indeed it was.” 

SAGATHAKAM 287 

Mahesvara—such other philosophers will appear after my 
passing. 

796. There will be the teaching of the Lion of the 
Sakyas told in the thus-I-have-heard’s, and that of Vyasa in 
the narratives (so-indeed-it-was), and the past events. 

797. Vishnu and Mahesvara will teach about the crea- 
tion of the world; things like this will take place after my 
passing. 

798. My mother is Vasumati, my father is the wise 
Prajapati; I belong to the Katyayana family, and my name 
is Viraja the Victor. 

799. I was born in Campa, and as my father and 
grandfather, being descendants of the lunar race (soma- 
vamsa), [my family name] is ‘‘The Moon-Protected’’ 
(somagupta). 

(365) 800. Making vows, I shall become a homeless 
mendicant and teach the doctrine in a thousand ways; 
Mahamati being given assurance and anointed, J shall enter 
into Nirvana. 

801. Mati will hand [the doctrine] over to Dharma and 
Dharma to Mekhala; but Mekhala and his disciple being too 
weak [the doctrine] will disappear at the end of the Kalpa. 

802. Kasyapa, Krakuecchanda, and Kanaka, who are 
the removers, and I, Viraja, and others—these Buddhas all 
belong to the golden age. 

803. After the golden age there will appear a leader 
by the name of Mati, who is a great hero (mahdvira) well 
acquainted with the five forms of knowledge. 

804. Not in the age of two, not in the age of triads, 
not in the age of vice, which will come after, but in the golden 
age world-teachers will appear, and attain Buddhahood. 

805. Without removing the marks, without cutting it 
into tens,! have the upper garment patched with spots like 
the eyes in the tail of a peacock. 

806. Let the space between the eyes be two or three 
fingers apart; if the patches are otherwise distributed it will 
excite in the ignorant a desire to possess. 

1 Is this right? 

288 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

807. Let the Yogin always keep the fire of greed under 
control, be bathed in the water of knowledge, and practise 
the triple refuge, and exert himself diligently throughout the 
three periods. 

(366) 808. When an arrow, or a stone, or a piece of 
wood, is sent forth by means of a bow or sling, one hits and 
another falls; so it is with good and bad. 

809. The one cannot be the many, for then nowhere 
would diversities be seen. Let all receivers be like the wind, 
and donors be like the land. 

810. If the one were the many, all would be without 
a causal agency; this is the destruction of a causal agency, 
which is the teaching of the theorisers. 

811. [Their teaching] will be like a lamp, like a seed, 
because of similitude; but where are the many? If the one 
becomes the many, this is the teaching of the theorisers. 

812. From sesame no beans grow, rice is not the cause 
of barley, wheat does not produce corn; how can the one 
be the many? 

8138. There will be Panini, author of the Sabdanetri, 
Akshapada, Vrihaspati; Pranetri the Lokayata will be found 
in Brahma-garbha. 

814. Katyayana will be the author of a sutra, and 
Yajnavalka will be like him; Bhudhuka will write astro- 
nomical works; they will appear in the age of vice. 

(367) 815. Balin will appear to promote the welfare 
of the world, the happiness of mankind, he will be the 
protector of all that is good; Balin the king will be a great 
ruler. 

816. Valmika, Masuraksha, Kautilya, and Asvalayana, 
who are highly virtuous Rishis, will appear in the future. 

817. Siddhartha of the Sakya family, Bhitanta, Pai- 
cacudaka, Vagbaliratha, Medhavin will appear in the times 
that follow. 

818. When I take my abode in the forest-ground, 
Brahma, chief of the gods, will give me the hairy skin of a 
deer, a staff made of wood, a girdle, and a discus. 

819. The great Yogin. will be called Viraja the Muni, 

SAGATHAKAM 289 

the teacher and pointer of emancipation; he is the badge of 
all the Munis. 

820. Brahma with his retinues and many gods will 
give me an antelope’s skin from the sky, and then the ruler 
will vanish. 

821. When I am in the forest-ground, Indra and 
Viriidhaka and others, accompanied by the celestial beings, 
will give me most exquisite garments and a begging bowl. 

(368) 822. Seeking for a cause in the doctrine of no- 
birth, [one may say that] that which is unborn is born, too, 
[and imagine that] the no-birth [theory] is [thereby] 
established ; but this is done in words only. 

823-828. (Chapter VI, verses 12-17.) 

829. That the mind is set in motion by ignorance which 
has been accumulated by thought since beginningless past, 
that it is bound to birth and destruction—this is the imagina- 
tion of the theorisers. 

830. The Samkhya philosophy is twofold. There is 
transformation owing to primary matter; (369) in primary 
matter there is action, and action is self-originating. 

831. Primary matter is with all existing beings, and 
qualities are regarded as differentiated, various are effects 
and causes, no transformation takes place. 

832. As quicksilver is pure and not soiled dy dirt, so 
is the Alaya pure, being the seat of all sentient beings. 

833. The onion-odour of onion, the womb of a pregnant 
woman, the saltiness of salt, ete—does not [each] evolve 
like the seed? 

834. Otherness is not otherness, so is bothness not both- 
ness ; to be is not to be attached to, there is neither non-being 
nor the Samskrita. 

835. [To say that] an ego is found in the Skandhas is 
like saying that the horse-nature is in the cow-nature, which 
has nothing to do with it; we may speak of the Samskrita 
and the Asamskrita, but there is no self-nature. 

? It is noteworthy that the repetitions grow less as we approach 
the end and that the subjects referred to are less congruous with those 
of the text. The Sagathakam may be an independent collection. 

290 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

836. Defiled by logic. by the traditional teachings 
(agama) ,' by wrong views, by speculation, they are not able 
to ascertain definitely about the ego, which they say is; but 
it does not exist in any way other than clinging. 

837. It is certainly their mistake to think that the ego 
is perceivable along with the Skandhas by reason of oneness 
and otherness; the theorisers are not enlightened. 

838. As an image is seen in a mirror, in water, or in an 
eye, (370) so is the soul in the Skandhas devoid of oneness 
and otherness. 

839. Let it be known that those who reflect and practise 
meditation can be released from the evil theories by training 
themselves in the three things: the path (marga), the truth 
(satya), and the insight (darsana). 

840. As a flash of lightning is seen and unseen as the 
sun passes through a slit of a door, so is the transformation 
of all things; it is not as it is imagined by the ignorant. 

841. Being confused in mind the ignorant view 
Nirvana as the disappearance of the existent; but since the 
wise see into reality (sadbhava) as it abides in itself, they 
have a truer insight. 

842. Transformation [which is the actual state of 
existence] is to be ascertained as removed from birth and 
destruction, devoid of existence and non-existence, released 
from qualified and qualifying. 

843. Transformation is to be ascertained as having 
nothing to do with the philosophical doctrines, with names 
and forms, and giving an abode? to views of an inner ego. 

844. With the [pleasant] touches of the gods and the 
harassings of the hells, if it were not for the middle existence, 
no Vijnanas would ever evolve.® 

845. It should be known that the womb-born, the egg- 
born, the moisture-born, and other various bodies of sentient 
beings are born of the middle existence and descend into the 
[six] paths of existence. 

After T‘ang. 
“Destroying”, according to Tang. 
Read after T‘ang. 

1 
= 
3 

SAGATHAKAM 291 

846. To say that the passions are quieted and destroyed 
apart from right reasoning and scriptural teaching, (371) 
is the view and discourse of the philosophers, which is not 
to be practised by the intelligent. 

847. One should first examine into the nature of an 
ego-soul and keep oneself away from attachment; to try to 
go beyond without an examination is of no more worth than 
a barren-woman’s child. 

848. I observe with a divine eye which is of trans- 
cendental wisdom and is removed from the flesh, [with this 
I observe} sentient beings, the physical bodies of all living 
ereatures as devoid of the Samskara and Skandhas.! 

849. It is seen that [beings] are distinguished as ugly- 
coloured and beautifully-coloured, as emancipated and un- 
emancipated, as heavenly and free from the Samskara, and 
as abiding with the Samskara. 

850. I have the body that goes about in the [six] 
paths of existence; this does not belong to the realm of the 
theorisers; it goes beyond the human world and is not the 
possession of the theorisers. 

851. The ego-soul is not, and the mind is born; how 
does this evolving come about? Is it not said that its 
appearing is like a river, a lamp, and a seed? 

852. The Vijnana not being born there is no ignorance; 
ignorance being absent, there is no Vijnana, and how can 
succession take place? 

853. The three divisions of time and no-time, and the 
fifth is beyond description; this is what is known to the 
Buddhas [only, though] mentioned by the theorisers. 

(372) 854. Knowledge that is the cause of the Sam- 
skara is not to be described by the Samskara; knowledge that 
is known as the Samskara seizes the Samskara-path.? 

855. That being so, this is; causal conditions [every- 
where] but no causes; because of this absence there are no 
causal agencies; they are [only] symbolically pointed out. 

856. The wind, indeed, makes fire burn, but it only 

Read after T‘ang. 
Is this the right reading? 

292 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

incites and does not produce; further, incited by it the fire 
goes out; how can [the ego of] a sentient being be estab- 
lished ? 

857. The Samskrita and the Asamskrita are spoken of 
as devoid of attachment ; how is fire imagined by the ignorant 
for the establishment [of their ego] ? 

858. Fire comes to exist in this world supported by 
the strength of mutuality; if it is imagined to be like fire, 
whence is the rising of a sentient being [i.e. an ego-soul] ? 

859. By reason of the Manas, etc., there is the ae- 
cumulation of the Skandhas and Ayatanas; non-ego like a 
wealthy merchant moves on with mentation (cttta). 

860. These two like the sun are always removed from 
effect and cause; fire does not establish them, and the 
theorisers fail to understand. 

861. The mind, sentient beings, and Nirvana—these 
are primarily pure, but defiled by faults of the beginningless 
past; they are not differentiated, they are like space. 

(373) 862. Defiled by the bad theories of the philos- 
ophers, Hastisayya, ete., are wrapped end enveloped with 
{the false discriminations of] the Manovijiiana, they imagine 
fire, etc., are purifying. 

863. Those who see [reality] as it is in itself will see 
their passions burst asunder; leaving the forest of bad 
analogies behind, they reach the realm of the wise. 

864. Thus [reality] is imagined to be something other 
than itself by the differentiation of knower and known; the 
dull-witted do not understand it, and what is beyond descrip- 
tion is talked about. 

865. As the ignorant make a sandal-wood drum by 
taking something else which appears like sandal-wood and 
aloe wood, so is [true] knowledge [to be distinguished] from 
that of the theorisers. 

866. Having eaten he will rise holding the bowl empty ; 
he will have his mouth well cleansed of offensive and 
injurious matter; he is to conduct himself thus towards food. 

867. He who reflects rationally on this truth will attain 
serenity of mind, accomplish the most excellent discipline, 

SAGATHAKAM 293 

and be above imagination; he will be released from attach- 
ment and realise the highest meaning; and thus he will light 
up the golden path of the Dharma. 

868. When he who is possessed of stupidity and 
imagination rising from his views of being and non-being is 
freed from the net of bad theories tainted thereby, and from 
greed, vice, and anger, he is washed ofthe pigment and 
besprinkled by the Buddhas [with their own] hands. 

869. Some philosophers are confused about the direc- 
tion [of truth] because of their theory of causation; others 
are perturbed over conditions of causality ; (374) others who 
are not wise abide in nihilism because of their negation of 
causation and reality. 

870. There are transformations maturing from [the 
activities of] the Manas and the Vijfianas; the Manas is born 
of the Alaya, and the Vijiiana comes from the Manas. 

871. From the Alaya all mental activities take their 
rise like the waves; with habit-energy as cause all things 
are born in accordance with conditions of causation. 

872. [All things] momentarily divided but bound up 
in a continuous chain, are taken hold of as real while they 
are of Mind itself; they appear in varieties of forms and 
characters, but are the product of Manas and the eye- 
Vijiiana, ete. 

873. Bound up by the faults [of speculation] since 
beginningless past, there is the growth of habit-energy which 
gives rise to something like an external world; it is Mind 
which is seen as manifoldness when it is hindered by wrong 
philosophical theories. 

874. With that as cause and with that other as condi- 
tion, {the Vijiidna system] is evolved; when these philos- 
ophical views are born, transformations take place. 

875. All things are like Maya and a dream and the 
Gandharvas’ city; they appear as a mirage, as a lunar 
reflection in water; be it known that it is all due to self- 
discrimination. 

876. From the splitting-up of moral conduct, there is 
suchness and the right knowledge dependent on it; such 

294 LANKAVATARA SUTRA 

SamAadhis of superior grade as the Maya-like, the Sirangama, 
ete. [are attained]. 

877. By entering into the [various] stages, the psychic 
powers, and the self-masteries, the knowledge of the Maya- 
likeness of existence and the [will-]body [are obtained], and 
there is anointment by the Buddhas. 

(375) 878. When the world is seen as quiescent, the 
mind ceases and the [first] stage of Joy is attained, and 
[finally] they will reach Buddhahood. 

879. A revulsion taking place at the seat [of con- 
sciousness, a man becomes] like a multicoloured gem; he 
performs deeds [of beneficence] for sentient beings in the 
same way as the moon reflects itself in water. 

880. When the dualism of being and non-being is 
abandoned, there is neither bothness nor not-bothness; and 
going beyond Sravakahood and Pratyekabuddhahood, one 
will even pass over the seventh stage. 

881. [As he goes up through the stages] his insight 
into the truth of self-realisation will be purified at every 
stage, and releasing himself from externality as well as from 
the philosophers, he will discourse on the Mahayana. 

882. When there is a revulsion (pardvuritti) from dis- 
crimination, one is removed from death and destruction; let 
him discourse on the truth of the emancipated ones, which is 
Jike a hare’s horns,’ and a [multicoloured] gem. 

883. <As the text [is completed] by reason, so is reason 
[revealed] by the text; therefore, let there be reason [and 
the text]; let there be no other discrimination than reason.” 

* After Wei and T‘ang. The text has “hare’s hair’ which in this 
connection yields no sense. The truth of emptiness may be in a manner 
compared to a hare’s horns and not to its hair. 

* This is the reading of T‘ang. By “text” (Z#%, grantha) is meant 
any literary production in which a principle or reason, #2, (yukti) is 
expounded. Grantha is here contrasted to yukti as defand or desana- 
patha is to siddhdnta or pratydtmagati, or as ruta is to artha. This 
contrasting the letter to spirit or meaning has been one of the main 
topies of the Lankdvatdra. Wei has #§ for grantha and 49 for yukti, 
which does not yield any sense in this connection. The two versions, 
Wei and T'ang, are quoted in full: 

Wei— im kts tae. iE IIa. (KR HEFAE. ELST IP. 
Tiang— Zc Ed. FT. TILER. DAR ST He. 

SAGATHAKAM 295 

884. Such are the eye, karma, desire, ignorance, and 
the Yogins; such is the Manas in relation to the eye[-con- 
sciousness] and form, such is the Manas in relation to the 
defiled. 

Here Ends ‘‘The Mahayana Sitra Called the Arya- 
Saddharma-Lankdvatadra, Together with the Verses.’’ 

(376) All things are born of causation, 
And their cause has been told by the Tathagata; 
And the Great Muni tells 
That their cessation takes place thus. 

* This is missing in T‘ang. Wei further adds: “When the 
Buddha preached this exquisite Sutra, the Holy Mahamati the Bodhi- 
sattva-Mahisattva, Ravana the King, Suka, Sfrana, Kumbakarna, and 
other Rakshasas, the Devas, the Nagas, the Yakshas, the Gandharvas, 
the Asuras, the gods, the Bhikshus were all delighted and accepted [the 
teaching].’’ This addition shows that Wei as a whole may be 2 much 
later production even than T‘ang, for such a passage is ordinarily 
regarded as the regular conclusion for a sutra; nd when this was found 
missing in the earlier copy of the Lankdvatdara, the writer of the Wei 
original added it to complete the form. 

7 AT a ah ¥ ~~ wy, . ae jt a 

ON a (0 ca Mees 
: uN ‘ nee ap re i Oa ; 9) . roe, 

vA i @ i oT} m4 7 i ra - es yt oy ie 

; t i) i aie 

\ liliahali se sina maneneear 
4 or le al! sas, neat JPA. FO alt ha ni cloned 
a i wt tiseh ea , ‘twin oa i 

bt 
af : wine ty A 

: eu Mk { on } haa i ty | 4 AG 
wr i! lr Dy pe es. Py re ak ud 4 4 ‘alent, . pind ds 

aR ii ‘ wor Oa Nie Ke ae an Ve Me i Hi tN ay 
j wen Tk! LL > i bal ees 
Poh i a! & 
i nf ‘a 4 i si ati 
BERET ol Ba LO amirind viral Palen ea 

i] 
« te 

ly io r Ph fay y ; ? ’ } 7 

i ; y ; j f i 
Hf a 4 HV M ‘hal | } pit 4 cn yi jin : a Ng wi W inte Os 4 

Ai) /@ ( + \ rT Ps aa ny , i. ew rit Ml ‘oe ayy! ve Taal oh / 
¥ Pe Be é Wy 4 ' : 7 

Ca ha sd Wt a a 

i’ \ ¢ ee / ’ is \ Di ang 

1@eoa A i 7 a my ey Maly Mini i yh: ie {Whi a 

Wy 1 45 heb a Wa ina Ae aati 

ee ‘a 

wh \ or an had Tea aie ry 

' ry Pa A : * Wi 7 
i ‘ij A i oe Le na ry hy A, nr Ws gy 
j ww 

: 4 
ur ’ i 
Ups! oi’ } 
‘ : ; i c ¥ 
ME NOON iin Litas 
iv .™ on ewe) Cees 4 

APPENDIX 

APPENDIX 

In order to show how varied are the three Chinese and 
one Tibetan translations, due to whatever causes textual or 
personal, I have herewith appended a comparative table of 
these versions which are accompanied with their respective 
English translations. The passage chosen for this purpose is 
one of the most difficult and at the same time most important 
sections (§ LXIX) in the Lanka, chiefly from the point of 
doctrinal interpretation. In the reading of the Tibetan ver- 
sion I have entirely relied upon Professor Yenga Teramoto, 
of Otani Buddhist College. 

One thing in this section, which is most striking, is 
that the Lanka asserts the existence of a reality which is 
perceivable only by the eye of transcendental knowledge, 
which is in the possession of a wise man. The reality is here 
designated as Aryabhavavastu or Aryavastubhavasvabhava. 
It is the exalted ultimate self-nature of all things, and as it 
ean be recognised only when our spiritual eye looks beyond 
the realm of discriminations which is ruled by laws of being 
and non-being, it is also to be called the truth of Solitude, 
Viviktadharma, that is, the Absolute. 

For dryabhdavavastu, Sung has 32s, Wei AH, 
and T‘ang #223, while for adryavastubhdvasvabhava Sung 
has BEATE, Wei WAM RMR, and Tang BA 
Pyate. The Sung and the Nanjo text must have been the 
Same as far as these two terms go, but Wei evidently had 
vishaya for vastu and bhita(?) for bhava, while T‘ang has 
one #: probably for both vastu and bhava, though it has 
generally 3 for vastu and }: for bhava. For T‘ang’s fr 
(drisya) there is nothing corresponding in the Sanskrit. 

The Tibetan for dryabhdvavastu and dryavastubhdavas- 

vabhéva is respectively Reamay 23° Rag heey ef and 9458 
PAIRS mw 
ay Rea da 5’ Aaa |GgS, whereas dryajnanasvabhavavastu 

APPENDIX 

is Qe cia uP dary shay 2 Evidently in this case the 
Tibetan equivalent for vastu is ea), and this is missing in 
the last combination. Generally in the Lanka the Tibetan 

a CN — anton 
has Rea eran gg 5 for bhavasvabhava, and cca and &'4 
are synonymously used as is sometimes the case with the 
Chinese. 

In paragraph 5, towards the end, there is another re- 
ference to Aryajiianasvabhavavastu for which both Sung 
and T‘ang have quite literally 3247 8 #ESs, whereas Wei gives 
wesnrzeRs. Ordinarily, vastu and bhdva are used both to 
designate particular objects of discrmination, thus making 
them interchangeable. But vastu is used in another sense 
in the Lanka, that is, in the sense of absolute reality. We 
have on p. 147, line 6(Nanjo) : Vidyate tathatdvastu drydnam 
gocaro yathd, for which Sung has: 473326 4n4n. a 2S; 
Wei: smitanA A. te SL SBSBIE; and Trang: A Mako. dn 
xe sp 4#. A Vastu to be characterised as suchness and the 
realm where the wise have their abode, cannot be a particular 
object of discriminating knowledge. 

The following comparison will be I hope of some interest 
to Chinese and Sanskrit students of Buddhism. 

‘oind Jo paijap Suryj0u 
way) UI oq [[IM aJay2 ‘pourseuw Ajastey Suraq Ay? ‘shes 
3UQ praInouoY-ppJOAA ay? se ‘o[qeMoUyUN st oINIVU-j[IS 
jo yodse asoym uoneuIseml asyey yO ore s#uryr [fe Ft 
‘UQ PasnouoYy-p]JOA\ ‘dINIVU-jJas OU aAvY PUL pauTseUIT 
Ajasjey ase Ady, ‘“paiwururlsosip ase sizafqo yons pur 
yons ‘suoneurwisosip yons pue yons Aq ‘auQ poJnouoy 
-PHOM, ay? 0) SuIpJony :payse urese neweyeyy 

Il sp zbb.sttsete 
te.sh bess. bb.sSst.e’ | ab.tzieay. bg 
we bi pb .sG Sbbb ox ob sbSp. bi be 
IB.be. by 8. buy SS bbez.vet |e 
los .b¢orebotox bys | Sishwb¢ 
tote $e Step. Sisbb. be teeb.ty.e®. blu 
WEIL IS SeS ber sy.tobss Ib.sé.r 
tel $b. bi bbb S.y.slo$b.slb ab. sbb.ty.iens 
flo alps. slo. lo $size SSeS bbG eb 

oz.veb.sb lbbbiy be kb.8.sm ii 

ae 

XIX'T 

(PHET-ZET “TOF ‘oC “fury “py pay Furyjeg) werqry 

GUONLUISEW as[e} JO oINIwU oYy1 JO are 
ssuryi [je asnesoq ‘uoneoiysnd Jou jusWalap Joyieu 
st aJoy2 yey uauaiws INOA 01 BuIpsloav “sIy 02 
dO) ‘AUD Ppassa[g “OU I saop “‘aINIeU-;[aS JO JANITpUT 
Se PdATIIUOD 9q 0} ST YTYA pyJoM oy} UI Sulpou st 
ajay) pue voneuIsewt asey [JO uonevasd aya] anq st 4 
‘QUO passat ‘Ji ‘uoneuIseu asjey [Jo Uonvasd ayi] Ing 
SuIyIou st I sev ‘aIMIVU-jJ9s OU SI aJay2 UORVUTUTTIISIp Aq 
pawurutistp A[snotsea ose yey) ssuryI []e Ul ‘ulede ‘“aU_ 
passas[g 942 02 SuIpJooy iples neweyepy ‘JoyINy 

U ej lh bev lb Pb) Lieb Ikebe Bho jb) 
zh Ubep :blklblabeRkR :BbE be bik B 
Eb milkblpk@blnbblk b Iplba BE j by} 
shebiek DjBY Iplbp pee}ey}h Bib L bli 
Ihe B 2} b BmOwb) lblk bE LBL) bb 
Bh lwbiek WEEIebP | B1wWeIee hyreb 

L 

XIX’ 
(991—E91 “dd ‘olueny) arrysuesg 

i eudpvytard pue 

IC vdjpyxia Udanjaq soysmnsunsip Jur, yj, 
Whe 99129: Gl SEM PME OLO | oLe 

*pahons 
-op aq Ayyenbo |e qi sind pue parlyjap 
SSUIyI ‘soni[eol OU PUR SUOReUISEWT os[ey 
AJUO 938 aJoYy JI ‘oUQ pasInouOY-p]Io/A\ 
“SUONVUISEWI os[ey UY sJoW OU aIe Ady 
‘sdUIY] [JB UI dINIU-JJ9S OU ST oJOYy] puE 
‘palvUIUTIOSIP ose ssurIyI [je “spurw snorea 
jo quNOIDE UO ‘SUG PpoeInouOY-pyJopAA 9yI 
0} SuIpsooe ‘aug ponouoy-pyjof~y : pres 
‘eyppng 24] SulssoJppe urese vaneseyew 
-PANESIYpog 94) NeWweEYeyYy oN Ivy IV 

BW ATE ME AAP TEE Sih 2 4 bs 
“Hr 42 2A Uh Ak ED Up yk WE IE 
St BE I AG Oy eg 
FE! WH) EW 9d Soe A A ae OF lS 
I 
XIXT 

(Q iv Hd “238 MD PPUEUEYSYIS—Sur, 1 

‘vavgquas 
OJ yHIF JO eB ‘vavgq soy Ft puv ‘vyrdjvy 
-tapgd pure vdyvyta yroq soy fif{G sey py 

‘woud ur Alljval OU ST oJoq) 
pue uONeUWIIDsSIP as[ey 01 Bulpsiodv usas 
ale sduly2 [[v ‘viese~ET, oy2 soyoved ‘osnvoag 
éAg “ANInd ou “uowolap ou oq [[IM 
aJoy) SPUIy? [[@ UT ‘ou paINoUOY-pjIOAY IY 
Jo suryova) oy) 0} Surpsooov ‘purus uMO sau0 
Aq PoaUIUITIOsIp st yeyM Adodxa sy~oalqo yYons 
OU 938 9J0q) JI “OUG PoINoUOY-pyJo~“Y “purur 
uMO $9u0 Aq paleulwtiosip ose Aay2 3eY) 
idaoxe ‘oIMIvU [EIUaSsa JY JO sy? OU DALY 
sialqo yons pue yous oA pue ‘!payeUTUTTIOSIp 
ase sia{qo YM puL YM ‘spully FuNeUTUITID 
-sSIp YM pur IwYM JO ysNEI9q ‘soydesI IUO 
pamnouoy-pjJo“y 243 sy :sursvs ‘eyppng sty 
passorppe ulese vANesTypog oy3 YeUWEYLYYy 

ao Suet Lif 
"WIG GREG - we ON by 
“2 AAG i TE (6 -- 2 
Tt WA Wh ea RT 
EI) a CE BY PY mY SY Uy ip Sk YI 
"ESSE Sup he Ia fi £5 SD IG LG Sh BE ay 
W HY 2HWHUMHATY 
t 
XIX 

(QU S4- ME PA) Ponsrypog—PA 

‘pavgqvas JOY Hey ‘vavgg 310y FH ‘vydjoy 
ed pue vdyvyta Ylog J0j [if gg sey dung, ¢ 

‘99Ud)SIXO OU APY PUL 
UONVUISEUT JO O3NIVU-jJJ9S 9YyI YA pastsa} 
-IBIVYD aJe sidafqo [eB asnevdIg ¢SISIXI oIOW 
ou Ajzmd pure suorssed [isa [usosayjaq uon 
“UNSIP oyi] IYI poyrUTUIOD YNeZ sty, JOU ST 
‘9UQ peINouoY-p]JO“AA 942 Jo Furyovay styd o} 
SuIplonoy ‘siafqo sSuowrw souaJajor yenntu 
OU SI dJay)] ‘pouIseuT st se osnivu-jjas ve ATUO 
ST asaya JI ‘AUG pasnouOY-pjJo“, “pourseust st 
se oInjeu-jjas ev AjuO “oINJeU-jfas YINs OU st 
24942 INq ‘pazeuIMIsIp se syafqo Yyons puy 
yons ‘suoneulsews yons pue yons fo asneaq 
‘sayova] SUG PpaINouOY-pjJO/A, 941 SY : pres 
‘eyppng ey) SulssoIppe ulvse neweyLyy 

= Y Ad Af 
“Ade ED we 26 Sf ( — SU GE Hae SS 2 Be 
My 8 Tf UY bb a SY HE AL Ade Lol oP 
“Ad EL ae 2 Up Se Gk Te Ea} 
“Td EL dP CA ROE PH 

WY I wa CE WEN fe 

I 
XIXT 

(CE fy) PIpeyquonyg—suns 

‘ad poj MOUY [e]UapUsS 
-ues] JO ahd asi Jay. “YSIsuT ast IFoy ‘ad pay Mouy 
aSIM JIOYI JO suvow Aq st JF se s#uryi jo oInIeu-j[as 
dy} AIVUIWIIISIP OYM STM 9y2 Aq poUTeIJoIse st se Ys 
sdur) jO ainjeu-jjas aya st asaya ‘neweyeyy ‘sduryy 
[[@ Ul paureyazse aq 03 JOU st aIMevU-jJ[as Jo IWadse 
ayi pur ‘uoneuIseUT as[ey IJVaYyI st 3s JO} ‘OS OU SI Ww 
‘gjdoad jo sasseur JuvJous! ay Aq paieurwizsIp aq Avw 
ssury)y JO ainieu-jjas ayy AvmM JoaaieyM Uy ‘neUEYyeyy 
‘Avs nOA se ‘Os SI YJ i ples aUGQ paInouoY-pyJoA 24], 

ie by bbb oy. pb 

fa B.S tvb$ sts. bbb oe bk pstsl 
ie.G ty. ish bbly.tslbbb. ob .b Bly, bly. tela 
aS.eb in bh bbb eG iste? klbb of 
ey eet 19] tebe. I Ips b¢ bot. 
ay bbb. bbs ISSE rr ielSe. bie 
| G btn tes .8.S.t.tel Sty.setv.te® ebay. 
obs kG.’ b Roe yi kG x8 Sb. be 

KEE l[ebbb Sieh bhs 1S bob Sp 
Ler .& lbbd blt.sGwhb.loxtegd II 

aS 

uvaqry 

‘UOISIA JeIUAPUDSURI) OSIM ITayI Aq “IYSIsUI ASTM ITOYI 
Aq ‘aspaymouy astm Jtayy Aq ‘astm ayy Aq poutejsaose 
Sy SU UPS SSUIYI JO JINIVU-jJas ay st asaya ‘neWEYyRyy 
‘ng mek ee Bia e) Cn gap LULA ayo) oy 2)/ 218) sul 
-YIOU SUONCUISCUIT ostey JO UONNAID ay) SI VW ‘neWwEYyLyy 
‘papurw-ajdurts pur juvsJousi ay) Aq payeurustsostp 
SI JF sv JOU SI ssuTYy) Jo sINIVU-JJOs ay ‘NeWEYLPY “Aes 
nod se yasnf st w ‘neweyry :3auQ Ppassaig ay) pres 

NW MjbR Lblkbblk Lae 
inkblds MkipeRS Mklehl® Mblis wkikbs 
Jbittiablkkiis wblak lah Db) 1 kiln 
“INBObinebIR Lb Held JBlbR vEP\ey}h 
Ivibk. bb pinbb} [bikinktkbiechbOlb Ibk 
Bild b O)2k lnb Held yeba | Blelbick 

3G 

aIEnjsueg 

“st A[NJ} 41 se ssury) [[e JO sInIeU-z[as 
ay) astusod9I adpayMouyY [vIUepusdsueI? 
jo 949 OSIM JIOYyI YA astM YI ING ‘sduUTYyI 
JO 9INj}ZU YINs OU SI dJOYI ‘USWYIvIUL oSTeF 
uey) sJOW OU SI MW Jo} ‘st WW Sse Yons OU 
St sdurlyy JO sInjzeu ay) Inq ‘s#uIy? sIwUTUITID 
-sip ajdoad juvsoust Jpy “Aes nod se st 3 

os ‘SI 2f OS “HeUIEYRY : ples eyppng sy], 

“th BME eT at 
HRY HREM eau 
Fy IG A oh 7k RE SHR ME fk 1 — 
“Big me PME CR CEH 

rd 

EpULULYSyIS—SsuUr, T, 

‘st Aj[vas a1 se sduryi yje jo yadse 
aINIVU-J[as aY1 aAtsIJod snyi Avy ‘ed pojmouy 
[eqUapusdsuPI] JO 94d dSTM JTOYI YSISUT OSIM 
Jjayi ‘WOpsIM asim IJJoy] Jo suvow Aq ‘st 4 
se sduryi [[e JO yadse osnieu-jjas ay} MOUY 
Aayi ‘astm 942 01 se ‘HeuEyRpPY ‘ore Ayyeor 
Asyi se wey) 398s Jou Op puke Woy) darTeoIOd 
Ajasjey Aoyd ‘sPury je jo Ayyeel ay) spied 
-o1 se Sunvurursostp Ajasyey aye sjdood ossey 
][e ‘neweyepy *(vavgqvas) saniyess Joy poweu 
Twostp Ajasyey ayi ayer Aoyy ‘(vuvgsyrz) 
SyJeUT YINS OU oIe daJoYI sduIYyI vsayI [][e Ur 
ynq ‘sdury) [je seurwtostp sjdoad jo sasseur 
JUEIOUSI oyi [JY “Weureyeyy ‘Aes nod sv st 3 os 
‘SE HW OS ipeWEYyR, OF pres eYppng 9q,L, 

"He BY EL FR 98 
oy MO MTS EC VEU 
V de I BY ER WEG — Oy V ae Oy 
Te MME SH We 
AMI GBH UTM EN OH 
ME Ge CWT Uy ee 
RHI OEE RO HE 
WM RUE Fy ORR me HE 

G 

Ionsrypog—ia py 

*[sI at se yons] sd#urqi jo ainjvu 
-JJ9S ay saatodJod sy ‘adpayMouyY [vJUapuaos 
-UEJ] JO ahd SIM SIY ‘YSISUT astM sty ‘odpay 
-MOUY ISIM SIY YA ‘ssuIyI jo sINIwU-J[as 
ay} WI O} ST alayi ‘adpsyMOUY Ss ULU asIM B 
0} Sv ‘TIBUIBYPYY “SI 3 Se SsUTYI JO JINIvU-jIas 
aya JOU pur pouIseu Ajas[ey sINIVU-JJaS eB st 
[10,7] ‘Aqyeas Joy W aye] puL aINIeU-j[as auUIse 
-wI Ajasjey OYM JURIJOUST ayi Aq [pourseur] 
SI se JOU SI J] “neUTEYLy ‘ABS NOA se ST II Os 
‘st aE OG sneweqeW oF ples eyppng oq], 

Uh Hoh FA ah FY 
“TiN Fe He EY he Se Th Eh EX ae ae WF 
“Sef YEU ET Ee EE 2H 
H RWRSHABS SHE HO 
"ME LE REE E EE NG eS 
G 

espeyqeung—suns 

‘uo aaour Ady} aToyA\ JOU SI 
jadse-jjas Jo Wyvat oy} astm oyd 
Aq paieurusssip aq Avur sduryy 
Ae Joaaqeya. uy ‘Wadse Zutloq 
-UOU-pUe-3uUIdg JO asinod oy} 
Ul ssury? sas Ady} asnedaq “ost” 
dy} 0} Fulsuojaq ssuryi jo ainqeu 
“jas Jo Aiypeas ay) ureya.se OU 
op Aoyi osnesag ¢AY A “pada 
-Jadun Jou poalsaatod Joyioau 
ase Aayi ‘auQ pasmouoy-pjJopy, 
‘Ing ‘payoAtod si uoneUrUutIa 
-SIp JIayI asta ay 01 FuIsuoTaq 
ainivu-jjas Jo Ayy]ear ayy UTeIaIsE 
youur) s[doad jo sasseus jursous! 
ay] se ‘os jt ‘9uUQ painouoy 
“Pox, ‘ssuryi ye jo aimeu 
-JJas ayi 01 pieSor ur ajdoad jo 
Sasselu JULIOUST ay} Aq paleurWtys 
-sIp si se jou pue ‘adpa,mMoux 
jeuapuassursy jo a49 asta Itay)I 
VYZISUI ost IJtayI ‘od po; mouyx 
asim tay ‘“Jamod = snopnovsirus 
Jay) yA asta, ayy Aq paeurUstyd 
SIP si se yons aq Avur sduryy 
ye jo aimeu ayi ‘9uQ paso 
-UOY-P]JJOA, :payse ewEYyeyy 

lexi te.S bts 

La. tlw te. SG tok OLE loots by 
wx sity. kb $size '. 28.3 ted Gee’ 

Qa a 

tyislbbirsbe.wet | | bS.SRlob.oBy.ts 
Ang. tote. S¢ octet Sieben | aba. 
we Sool bbb oy bps bie buy tele 

i 6.6. 

[eSB ves | 

Oe ae NOR 

| te .telaty.te 

a 

sb.ty lpy.te.2.66 | lbw.te 30 boty.2. 6. lab 

i “NS 

Lisbvleziset | |vGb.stbbe.nbg sted 
Gare’ bp @ brie wG.xG. bb SP eS so 

~~ 

bass. abt lbs 3 ebb .os sot 
[bisbv.teré.b.t.bb$b.st.s.bbb.os.br 

jy as.k Wp les.ty, 

= = 

G@oitneG |4xfbS.ebe 

we Wea 

Lota tel. S¢.ty 3 bb, 

Vern 

3 isla le G.tbz.kb 

ySor™~ ~ NS 

Luptslbrb |ob.b.sBie bbb | sb.sb.n 

uty .tslobaly | 

Sb tob 3 G.ste.ty.telbb.G 

ad 

rbsb.ex.eot | b.tetylety.bets 8 ll 

uriaqrL g 

‘Sutoq-uou pur sutoq Jo Idadsv 
ay} Ul s#uIyy JO asINoD ay) aas AdYI asnedoq ‘AMAT 
payexd JO aInjeu-jjas ay} OUT IYMIsuT Ue DALY O} JIqQL 
-un ose Aaya asnesag ¢Ay Ay “Lose Aaya yey ase Aoy? ‘st 
yweyp] ‘auQ passatg ‘payeaatodun Jou paioArlod Joyiou 
aye Asya Jog ~AnyTeaI paljexa ue jo aduasatd oy) astu 
-Sod01 02 AvM ou aavy Ady?) sev ‘SUOTIEUIWIIDSIp Jtay] uOp 
-uege papulu-ajduls pur juvsjoud! ayy ued ‘auQ passolg 
‘moy ‘popurul-ajduts pue juvsjous! ayi Aq paleurusldostp 
sl SB dINQVU-jJas YONS OU ST aIJOYyI JI pu ‘UOISIA [eTISo] 
-3) JoU UEUINY JoyISU st YTYA UOISIA [vIJUapUsIsUL] 
asta yoy) Aq QYSIsuT astm Jtayy Aq ‘aspaymMouy asta JToyI 
Aq ‘asim ayy Aq paurejiaose st se yons sduryy jo osnjeu 
-J[as aya st oJoy2 jt ‘aug passajg ieuUrEYyepy ples 

VBIbP bl eibhbJMROp Bb 
lhp » pinibh} fab Ibi-biek bjrbie | ble 
=Roajb mnvelpadmihi bbb bike blRiabk 
sIBShip2 brew | iebhbjle Imekhee bie B 
bh BlAlbbebebbikhibinbi eB) bliebibb} Lb 
=lbierchh® lebih Rip | bikie ble pinteh} 
=plch2@ib Ibb B b yb Lnu Bhihbs bbl 
-mbit lnbbelyied) & ihkbidn DblbbRe 
Delbpl’ Mkirhibpbiek 2}B | Rw alaee 

UIysUeS ( 

‘aysvavavqquidy PRM Y RE « purw 
-JJ28 JO Udas st VY JO WRI vO? SuOaq Ady? 
asnvsoq ‘Wadse yons ou aaey sontyeas snore 
ye [ang] ‘uoneuruostp say sary 003 

‘nysva "vhogsta «HEME av908 LA 
‘nyspavavgqviay WBN tt 10 of ic Xe es 
‘saaow [UOReUT 
-UITJISIP] UMO $.9U0 IIYM WII B O} SUOCT 
-9q ou saop [YIN oyI] asnedaq ‘[yINN 
ay) owt] 393 snyiI YOU Op pu JULIOUSI 
ay2 SB UONJBUIUITIDSIP = JtoYy) = aARY 00} 
asta aya [ang] “suleq-uou pue gulaq jo 
ywadse ay1 WOsJJ 9977 SI astm ayy Aq Ua—aS 
sT YAM asnedeq pur ‘asim ay) Aq Uaas oIv 
se s#uIy? 99S 30U op Ady? asnedsg ¢AU A 
‘2uQ pasnouoy-p]JoA, “Wopstm Jo ssuly? jo 
*payjaatadun Jou polsoarlod saywou ase Aoy) 
SulIpueissapun uv sAvY 0} MOY MOUY JOU 
op Aay2 asnedogq {UONeUTWIIDSIp JIayy YUAN 
qed JURIOUSI 9y} URED MOY JUEIOUST 94) Aq 
PAVUIUITIISIP SI YTYA Jey] sv owes oY) JOU 
st faas Asya yeym] jr pue ‘ado ATYsoayy v 
Jou af9 AyUsAvOYy ¥B JOYyOU SI YIYM spo] 
-MOUX [B]UIPUIIsULI] JO JAD JSTAL IJTOYI YITAN 
SSUTY] JO 3INIVU dy} 99S JSIM JY? JI ‘pres 

‘feyppng oy] Sulssaippe neweyeyy 
« i Le de OR 
Fe OG NG <7 Ma ME Me ae °F EY Sh IT 
Be de OP RM UV de hk OR oy 
“(S} Ui sy SE Te) A IE A OT te HE 
LGUs MOREA WS lh 
Me Ue ET EME 

EUW Se oe KV ie MEE CE ge OF 
epuvueysylS—dur, 7, £ 

fe JouaU ST 

usw OSIM [[B ‘9UO pesnoUuOY-pljo~y :surdes 
‘eypphg oy) passaJppe neweyry “suloq 
-uoU puUe sUIoq jo ‘adueyd jo joedse Jay) ut 
sdutyy sas Aay2 asnedoq ‘st AT[vas 3 se s#urTy) 
jo Ajyvasr oy} O}UT ‘OSIM ay JO War oy 
OJUI 99S OF afqeuN oJe Ady) asned9g GAYA 
‘MIA pavoaTadun ue JOU MATA powoasod 
v Joyyou sary afdooad jo sossew ueIOUsI 
3soy} ‘9UQ paINoUOY-P]Jo/M, “pooyas|ey Jo von 
-1ugOD Ul VONEUIJOJsSUeN B st dJoyI ‘st AT]eVOI 1 
SB OSIM JY] JO WIaI 942 SasTUFOIDI aUO UaY AY 
EME ENO} Pigs PURPNY 24 Sapooues Tey ao 
qadse oy} ul vORevWIOJsUeI asned ajdoad jo 
Sasseu JURIOUSI 9Yy] UD MOY ‘9UQ perTNouOY 
-P]JoM, ‘URIOUT! ay) Aq paieuTWIDsIp Ajasyey 
st se Aiyeas Jo Joadse yons ou st dJay? s#urIy? 
We ur yey ‘oda ATuoavay e sou ado AlYsayz 
yorya ‘oaspaymouy [eUapuars 
-uPJ1 JO 9A9 ASTM JNOYy? pue JWYSIsur astm 
Toya ‘ospaymouyx asim JyayI jo suvaw Aq 
asIuTOIIT ADYI ISI 32 0} Sv ‘OUG PpasnouOY 

-PIJOAA «pres evanesIypog oy) NeWeEYe 
COAL A ie BF EL YH Ge 
Bwia— “MGV Ia — “h 
“BWLD Te OMT i Ee Se mT OF 
foo 27 SUE I ie Ve PF A OR Sa 
“Ys ths PYM Oe Oe 
“Si HE 2 ah OMG eV ate 8h BY By 
CS a a eee eee a 
ZW NE BE EE 
My ih CL FRE (BT Se TH 
Af UM ae ake TE ae Se ae 

V te HE Sb ae HE ME? 
fonsrypog—Io g 

‘MISVADAVOQUhAD =e he 
cf[asi-ut-suig] — vuvgsyojvas By 
‘v4vI03 — vivYSIA Age % 

‘wadse 
“JJas Jo wWyvar oy} JOU SI WyPat sjiay1 asned 
-oq ‘pouiseut Ajasjey [osje] st Ayijvas Iroyy 
‘[Anpeat] aataosad snyi Jou Op 00} asta ay} 
‘2UQ peInouoy-pjJop“, “suUlaq-uou pue sutaq 
WOIJ VdJJ st YIYM Jy) padteojed [394] OU 
aavy Ady? asnv.0q ‘s#uIYy] JO sIMIU-J[as 9y} 
SI yoy ‘asim oY} 0} FuIsuOTaIq Ajeet ay 0} 
pauoyeme [304] Jou ose Asy) osnedeg <A AY 
‘payjaatodun Jou poayostod Joyweu ose Ady} 
‘IUQ pesInouoYy-pjsopAy “astm oyi [03 s#uoT 
-9q YoTyM] ‘sdury? JO Aq]vas ay] 02 pauoyeme 
[294] Jou ase Ady asneddg <~sUOneUIseUT 
as[e} Jloy. ym wed JuRJOUSI oy? UL MOY 
‘2UQ peInouoy-pjjo~y, O ‘auo Ajysa[j eB JOU 
aha A[UaAvIY B JoYyIZOU st YDIYM ‘os po]Mouy 
[euspuassursy] Jo Ad asim sIy YA WYSISUT 
dSIM SITY YUM ‘ospoyPMOuUy ost sTY YA ‘UU 
aSIM B YA asvd oY] UF se ‘[ud—as st JI] UoYyM 
uesJous! oy Aq poulsgeull Ajas[ey si se 20uU pue 
yons 9q 0} UMOUY Ss! sdutyi Jo oINjVU-jjos 9Y) 
jl ‘ples ‘eyppng oy) Sulssorppe neweyeyy 

«OF Uh Be Si te le 

Se ee 
WR LY ab en Gs OO Eh He ote 
We Soh EY LT Ws ET) UI SA 
UT OR Wd Be OW 

Eb a HA aE Coy 

Ty OF Hh Fe ORME Be HE ORD Le oe 

PY ae UY he 1 ae OR EE Ee 
vipeyqeing—sung g 

‘aie Adyi se yons aq Jou [IM Ady] paleuIWIsIp JoaomopY ~UONeUIsSeUNT osTe] 
Aq paieurumiosip Ajaivsedas Asyi oJe Moy ‘odUaISTXO OU sny2 sey puke UOReUIseWT 
as[e} JO asnjeu-jjas ay3 Aq padnposd st sd#uryi Jo sInjeu-jjas ay2 JI ‘oUG paInouOCY 
-P[JOM, ‘“padwuwUuwo st Aujeurj-uou jo yne} ayI pue ‘oIe Ady) se JOU aJe Ady) ‘pouTE] 
-JOISE JOU ST ssuIYyI JO ywodse-jjas ay se ‘aUQ PpaInouoY-pjIOA, “UO d9AOW sIDyIO 
ajay Wes e st styy ‘[poureiureur] st sdursq jo iadse-jjas ay2 Yyorym Aq MoTA 
oy? OIUT [[ey} Ady asnevddq ‘UOTIVUTSeWI as[e] JTDYI JO dINIU-JJas dy) ST ssury? []e ut 
aInjeu-jjas yO yadse ay2 Se Way) 0} poIsaflueUT SI JeEYM ‘AUG poINOUOY-plIO“Ny 

1G bbl stb oot G.bot.ox.biy 
tgs | bly sO4¢ lorie. bir nS eh. k ey 
tsb.exivet Il IsbbySbbpSizebS 
@eerop IsB.t.ebsbSb.rt.te? ek v.kb 
dog bf we 3b.b.t7 low teb¢ loge 6.0 
ox bi.bab.b.e8v.8.G. bbb. oy. yt. tle St 
beiwbbvibees lysbbxtytvel.ty.ty bo 
Jetzteloto te. b6b.b.t.3 bb Ssh bbb8S 

~ NNW 

xbb.S re SG le bbs bbl. oBrt.éb.ty.b¢ 
egebyeas 1828S |lookb¢ bbb 
‘ot slo St. bi tsty. bab te Bon SSE loxte way 
Ot. oy by oh tle bs.b ebb, lox.eet II 

ueIqLy p 

¢poulseull ole 
se Yous aq 0} Jou Ul¥de pres ase Ady ‘[ UONeUTUITIDSIp 
Jo] voneuUIseW 943 0] FUIMO JsIXO 0} Pres are sFuryI 
apiyM wy2 I st MOFZ “ATBIT JO oInIeU-j[as ay 9q JOU 
-UE) UONCUISEWT OY) WOJJ PaalJop st 1eYM ‘UO Pposso[g 
‘MOUY O01 a[qissodur sowodeq Alessi jo 9sInIeU-J]as 
ay} saynisuod 3wYyM sny} Joy ‘Aj]TEUIJ-uoU jo INE} oy? 
Sun WWWOD st sty], ‘[JUeJOUTT 942 JO] IVY? JOU ST pue 
asja Apoqowos 0} sduojEq Jey] Wess e st sIyi yey) [Aes 
pintom Assy puy] ‘omMieu-jjas IM Bulaq jo vapr oyp 
A’M UMO Jay) UT YstJoyd oOsTe Adyi ‘st Jey fuOTEsNed 
-oU pUe wuolnesne) jo uonoU 93Yy2 YUM os[qQeorpoid 
St YoIYyM “UONvUIdeWT ITY] JO UOTIVIID 942 UFYI sIOW 
ou st ANy¥asI JO dINIeU-jJ[aS dy) se astm ay) 0} sIvadde 
ywym ‘9UQ passaTg ‘asnedaq ‘[Apoqdue Aq uorzeurUITID 
-SIp jo] 3afqo ue 9q JOUURD JfosiT UT sI yw se Ar[eos 
JO wodse aya asnedoq ‘astm ayi Aq UsdAd poyeUTWIIDSIpP 
ST se Yons oq JOUUED AIIT¥OI 941 ‘“oUG passo[g PUY 

U Beby}h lbh Bjinblk Lhe & Lb 
sla bbjviit bit yth hb b B | ie b lite 
sik LePableeymybrihebick b Bini bbb ip 
sB@Oblkmblieblee beat Ibbeubhinjlhy 
Ink bt vibe Lbs Lhieis | Uibprybaysote 
s@bble webehhep? Bhi? ba ble 
Te} b>jh -PRObleAbebine bielhy & 
Ie Eas P 

EUONLUIWIIDSIP JO asn¥doq ae 
ssuTyR [[v 3ey? Avs NOA op AYA fUOTRBUTUNTID 
-sIp UO JUapUsdap JOU st sdurIYyI ][e UT 
aimeu [-Jjas}] Jo 3adse oy3 ‘aug pasnovoy 
“pop, ¢sdury jje ur asnieul[-jjos] jo 
yoadse oy} spivgol sve gurpuvisiopun Jeapd 
B Ary Uayd UY OYA “A[eUTJ-UOU Jo 
yney ayy st sty) ‘os J] “[ssoyj0 Aq poaure? 
-UIeUL st se] Yons dyxI] JOU SI pue ‘WYIPRaI 
JoyIouL OF ssuojaq sty? [2ey2 Avs Ady? snyI] 
‘SUQ PamMouoy-pfJOAY “sFuIyI [ev uT 2odse 
[-JJas]JO Mota aya our [ey Ady? ‘uUOTIYsNLD 
-OU pUe UOT¥esned ynoqe x" OU Op Ady], 
‘JUSWYIENLY IS[LJ YIM PostJajovIeyD JI se 
jjasyt sysaytuew 31 Joy ‘sdury2 []e Ul aInievu 
[-J]as] jo 1adse ayi das 002 [asta ayy ] 

“HEME Ak WN OE GE LG 

Soy Z NE YB Se EME tk EY 
Wh ty SPEC NYE Ba YF 

“A (ol sk FAG i EO OF EE 

REM RMB M ey HM i* 

Li UT en a a 
4 

epuvueysyiS—sur, 7 

éaSIMJOyIO 20U PUR sny) 9UOP aq 
0} St UONBUTUTIDSIp IYI [sn []JaI osTM 9yI] OP 
Aym ‘[Aem siaoyi ur] suneururiostp oq Avuw 
Aayi ayy ‘9uUQ paInouOY-plIO“A, ‘ssuTy? [Ie 
aje asoy A ‘ssuryI Je ul Ayypear jo yadse 
ay) St aJoyy IVY] VONCUTWIIDsSIp 0} oNp JOU 
sl W ‘OUQ paInouOoY-pjJOoAA ‘Aiyear-j[as IroyI 
se UMOUY aq 0} IWoadse OU st aJoYyI sdurYyI [Te 
UI 3BY] asTuUPOIaI OU Op As) asned0g AYA 
“AY]TEUTJ-UOU JO INE} ayI WUTWTOD sny) y[e) OY 
asoyl ‘9UQ PasJNouOY-pjJo“AY ‘JauueU siya UT 
you Inq ‘pyaiy ay2 Mata AvUT sJayO “Suloq Jo 
wadse oy) OUT s[[eZJ 9UO asnwddg Z¢AY AY ‘“UOR 
-esnevd-OU dvd] JOU ssOp “UORNESNED YE} JOU 
sdOp 9UQ pasnouoy-pyJoA, oy asnedaq “adse 
Tay] O} se dIVUIWIIDSIP ssury2 jo Ayyeos 
a) FUIIIS UI JSIM ‘DUG PaINOUOY-p]IO AY 

“Nh Le OE BH 
"16 oA YONG LY So ZH tH 
ye fy On Ee Ore Ik nM A OF 

LA BEY Sie He 78 Ee YEG RE DOOR Sh 
BE iis Sy Ik MERE TY ME Sa RPE TY Oe 
VR YV ORE DY ORT Lb 
“NS CNR AE Se TH 
Why “ORIEN de HE 
P 

reeds 122 

‘PADIOS ALTE x 

CUONNVUIseUIT 
se uoneuIseu sJ1oy2 psedot you op Ady 
UdYM VUONVUISEUIT asTey B st YA MOUY Alvar 
Aay] ued MOP ‘“s#uTYyI JO oINIVU-J[aS JO Dodse 
ay2 OU SI UONLUIseUT as[yy JO aJINIVU-J[aS 
aya Aq pasne> st YM ‘9UQ PaINoUOY-P[JO/\ 
‘asnedoq issury) Jo ammivu-jjas aya jo Wadse 
a2. pueisIapun ou op Aayi asned9q ‘aUO 
paInouoy-pyjoy“y “[payrurmos] Arryeurj-uou 
jo yey aya st snyy, “waya Aq [pourdeut] st 
se Yons IOU ST YW ‘WyeaI JayouR st yy “Wadse 
-JJ9S Jay savy sFUIYI IYI MITA OY? OIUT I]PY 
Aay2 ‘St ey? ‘asnevd-OU JO osneD INOqGe Hye) OU 
op Aayy, “AeM styt Ul poysoyrueW st aInivu 
-jJas siya [yurya] pue ssury2 jo simieu-jjas ay) 
DJUITEUTT 00} asTM ot ‘OUG paINOoUOY-p]IO/AY 

WE HG Ba 
26 Af We 2B Io) = A Ah Ee Bd te Ea 
df CM ORI Ce 
fi GE AME i A OFS EO ie BY 
YT A a PO HEE Cee 
Wd Oe ee 
P 

vipeyqrung—sung 

gopnaijos jo yin oy Yrs) Jou NOA Op Wopstm 
3fqou 0} ZuIsuOjaq ss#urys Jo JInIwU-jjas ayI Suryoeay AG {UO SsAOW WoOPpstm a[qou 
aay wWyedIT ay) OF ‘sFuTIYyI JO JINIVU-Jfas aYyI 02 payDeNY jos puR sdulaq IONUAS 
ye 4q play se Sursq-uou pue suloq jo Mata ay) apise Surnd Aq Suraq jo MIA 
ay) ysipqvisd nod aey3 Ut st MOY ‘9UQ paINoUOY-plJo~A, ~UODRUTUTTIOSIp raya Aq 
PIILUIUIFIISIP 91v SB JUaISIXD aJe ssuryI YyoNs ou yeyi NOA Aq Pjoy I st ‘s#utaq [Ie 
jO UONRUIWTIDSIP ay) 2AOUIAT O1 JopsJo UT snyy, ‘a[doad jo sassewr juvsousT ayy Aq 
PIeUIWTISIp pur Pa[voaacI ase se Ys Jou ase Ady, “pasned Ayse[FWISsIp ose ainjeU 
-JJ9S Jo wadse yi pur vORvUTUTIDSIP ‘oUQ pasINoUOY-p[JOM “JojjIp Os[e osnaeu 
-}Jas jo siadse ‘JayjIp voReurUTIIsIp JO sivodse yi sv ‘uC pasnoUuoY-PfIOA 

| tet. Gb.ly.kGte.te.ty. bat 
Ag. bh.ebh.0 by tty bab beh. OS¢..5 
G.SG.tz.esS.G.sbinluty.tslb | eb Glpb.te 
b. Rt xtz.Sin.itytsbe.sty.oste.ty.te& | ab. 
SA.C.bbn bby tbbbb | b.ty.ilbe.sty. ’st.to 
boox.beess labebbésbbe Isb 
t2.Sip. Gite? be.stey hE SELe bbb. 8 tee | 
ley. Gb... SiS bbb. S.t.ilySt.uty.te ity 
Ib $ sty te? sy v3.5 SB lob bP ty lg 
sive? Give’. bereysi. bol IsbbieS 
bbb bx8.3.2 bsp 8 6e by eG ste? b.& 
uty tet 6 bbb Sty. Bie BLE bate G.ebt 

eT ad adil 

soz | 1 ob. bb Sty te? bb oz tet 

Urq! G 

¢WOPsIM afqou [Nod 01 BSuIpJoo.R] st oineU 
-JJas esoym Ayest jo ourD0p ayy suryoes) Aq opn) 
“Jos Jo yjny oy AUap nOA Op AYAY ¢Wopstm aqou jo 
Wy]vdI oYy2 O1 SuTpD 02 pay aie Ady Aqoiaym ‘Avo jo 
sIMeU-jJas ayi JO vapr ay2 pyoydn o2 woyi suryjer Aq 
DUdISTXD JO MOTA ONST[VOI ve YSstIays Way) syeW UIN) 
ur nod ‘[uisi[Iysyu st ystyM] sursq-uou jo pue [ursi[ear st 
ysrym] sulogq JO uOTIOU 9YyI WOIJ 993} Sdutog [[R aAeY 
0} JopsJO UF IYI IT ST ‘9UQ posso[g ‘MON] “UORPUTeUT 
Jiay] psleossip s#uloq [je ayxvUI OF st UOTIRUIseUT ay Aq 
poursewr oe se yons Ajjeal Jou ose sduryi yi pres 
st at AYA UOseod 942 IYI sn [[o3 NOA JOA puL ‘st YE se 
Aji]eoI 99S O1 [Ie} QUOTE Jone, ay2 “URIOUST 942 YIM se 
]JO4 se astm oui YIM SuIos uo idoy st voNvUIdeUTT 9y3 
aIyM ‘auQ passsfg ‘NoA 0} Surpsoooe Ing ‘axI[e 9q JOU 
Aeus poystiayd oq 0} souTOd snyI IYI AIyvaI Jo vOHnoU 
ay? ‘oxT[e OU St asne> ayy UaYyM JO} fAJBA ABUT PaAtIdUOD 
dINjeU-jJ[as JO wWadse oy ‘uO pated st vONeUIseUTT JYyI 
ABM 3Y] O} FuIpsjoooe [IeYI oni st Wt] ‘auC Ppassatg 

U lbp ofabbikmpidhiis whit} Re bikiit 
sebibhwbjb) poibbjieh :ajSpipjibidphy 
sRIbbb)BiebIPRibRb bl Rjlbikeipb bib 
=b)b} ajSbipajbelp Lbb! Lelebe bieke Dis}th} 
i web) & lbp peimtbh) be bby lak 
tim bbjhinbipiibh) iuie Bib) | :wink} 
sh lbp khkchh@le kik }h rob & B 
DRObie mere bek b waded) aes 

slkbs bbine® mi bbl pit bier b> bis 
WIysueS c 

PULAPYPOLYLAIA UNE TLY! « 

“SSoTWIOJ sny2 oI 
WOpstm s]qou 0} ZuIsuOjaq saliyvoI 3.yI 

¢wopsim a]qgou 
jo dINjeU-jJas sy st YoY ART Furyoeay 
JO peagsur ‘ssoundwe pue opnjyos jo yin 
ay) yoeai 20u nod op AYAA ~SUIOq JO MeTA 
ayy OUT [[vJ pue Wopsim afqou jo wryval 
B® 0] poyoeyje swodeq ulese Woy) oyxvU 
noA juouTYyIee JO 3ealqo Jay} os[e puL 
Sulaq-uouU pur SUIoq JO MoIA oy) UOpuRqe 
sdulog ][@ ayvw 02 Jopyo ur Jeyr W st 
Moy ‘8UQ paInouoY-pjjo~, “vOReUTUTID 
-stp Aq uoas se sdury ul Aqiyear Yyons ou st 
dI9Y2 VUONCUIWTIDSIp IW9Yy1 uOpuRqE sduraq 
]J@ oyYeW oO} JapJo Ul WY? pres st 3s voy) 
puy ¢2q 02 349no WT se YyoNs JULIOUST ay) 
Aq voneurutidsip ay you st urede AY 
{UONLUIUITIDSIP VO JUapUadap ss#uIY) [[e Ie 
AYA ‘“JeIWWIISsIp oJe sasnvd ‘sIajjIp osye 
sdulog JO Jadse oy? ‘SJajjJIP UONPUTWIIDSTp 
Jo wadse ay se ‘ouQ pasnouoY-pyIO“A 

“WY He Ad ak te ME 
Oh Rh ERE OYA 
Lk M4 BA YG Hie oe he HE FEE 
Pf BH Eb Bil FUE EY Se) RF 
ce: ae A a a 

OY CE WAM Ch a Oy ie 4 SW 
TA OY A HG Eh HM FRE Sy “YA 

VM MIR RE ORI I “i 
epuvurysyIS—sur, 7, G 

‘ssajwJoy pue [Inbuvs) ase sduryy [je sey) Avs 
nod asnessg ~AYUAY ¢SI SUloq-uOU JO MoIA 
ay? sF9YM ad"TI ay1 OIUT []eJ sdutoq ]]e oyxeW 
urege nod op ‘3uQ pammouoy-pijo~, [IO] 
é8uloq-uou pur Bulag Jo MarTA ayy YstIays 
ssuUIOg [[e 9YVW OF sv s}da[qo YoNs JO JdUaISTXO 
ay2 0) dois e and nod aya ‘oJe sontypeor 
aIsyM WOpstm s[qou Jo Wyeas oy? 0} payor 
nod ose AyM ‘9UQ paINouoY-pjJoAY *9DU9IST 
-x2 OU Ary JULJOUST 9y43 Aq paieuUTUTTIosIp 
Ajastey Aoy se syafqo Yyons 3ey) Surdes “spur 
SUNVUIWIIDSIP SurAjisjey roy AoNsop ssuloq 
[TB 29] 01 JOpsO UT dUTIDOP sty soydvai oY IVY 
soyoval 9UQ porInouoY-pjjom~, sy, ~wop 
Aq usas aie se yons yst{durodoe Aqasay3 Jou op 
quvJous! sy Aq paleumtidsIp sny2 sdurya yey) 
W St MOFY “OYE IOU ST payeUrUTTIDsIp sduryy 
jo Ajywal oy) IepTuwIssIp Fuloq sasned OA} 
ay2 ‘auUQ poINouOY-pjjo~A ‘puy “sJajjIp osye 
Aqyeas-jjas jo yoadse oy? ‘sJajjIp vwoNvuUrUtID 
-SIp JO qadse ayi sv ‘aUGQ paINnouvOY-pfIOM 

a 7 LM Sih Pf 
fhe ee UM Sh BRE ED OY Hy 
"HA 4 Si By WA — YO Sa OY Bie 
ihe FR AL REE Safe PY BD Ie ye ME SS Oy 
Suh gh A “TRE OG Sh XY eB YY 
“ME AY OT Mh LY ey HE ( — 
BMS LEM OM ly WM Ww 
Bat Nh LY EY oy ZR Gr 
(NG <7 HY) Ee se Bd Be hk 
TEE GE DCH EG“ 

FonaTypog—Ia AK ° 

WRG vuavgperyiaia “yelp psoatutqqn 
ARG Pivgsia § ye masva * Spy v4vI0H ee 

‘WOPSIM a[qouU JO aINIwU-JIas JY? 
sv Aljvax yovar [NoA] JOA puv sinjeu[-jjas] ou 
sey ssoundwa jo yins2 oy) 3eYyI Yoval [noZ | 
é8ulaq JO MITA oy? OVUT Pulypey snyi ‘soaour 
WOPSIM 3[GOU YDIYM UL pjJoM ay? O02 payred 
ye auj0deq [NOA] ‘sontvel jo oInIeu-j[as oy? 
02 poyoue suI0I0q [Nod] ssuIoq [Te Aq ploy 
se Sulog-uou pue Bulag JO MATA 9Yy) YDIYD OF 
JopIoO UT IYI W ST MOY ‘9UO paINoUOY-pjIOA, 
‘uoneUIseWT oy? 0) Jvadde Aayi se Al]eal JOU 
ale s#ury2 ey) YSN. st wr ‘uONvUIseUT WoT] 
Aeme szutoq [Te daoy 01 JopJo ul yng ést 
Ajjeay 3y se 3F MOUY JOU Op IwRIOUSI ay? IDA 
puy ¢[4em umo sty 02 Surpsoo.e] surseurt 
yora you Asay) oq ‘uoneuIseu jo yoadse 
-}J[9S ay) spiedoz se asned jo apnayprutsstp jo 
asnecaq ‘sJayJIp aInqeu-jjas yo 2adse ay? ‘IajjIp 
SUOTIZUIZEWT «se ‘dUQ pasNoUOoY-PpfIO/Y 

«He dd EI be he ME Nh HE 
RUM MIM O48 Me Be I by ae 
“Redd El fe ODE Sk a Ee Fre SO Sy 
a CE MOY WH Be UW 
We se YG AO 
WEY yd EO Be Eo 
“$B LAE) OR Rh 

eIpeyqeunsy—sung ¢ 

‘QINIVU-JJIS JO wWadse ay yIvai JOU Op | ‘NeUTBYRYY “Wop 
“SIM J[qou 0} Fulsuojaq Azypeas se ainyeu-jjos jo qadse 
ay) 0} payreE JI se SYOOT YITYA MATA 9YI JO SURI 
Aq apniyos jo ying oyi yor | “sed ssa]d ULUUIS aq 
wosy sduryI JO oIMIwU-jJas aYyI Jo Iadse 9y2 0} PoyouI 
8 318 OYM IYSIIZ JO aIeIs 9YyI Woy ssuloq JUIUAS 
J[@ 2043 0} Jopso ul ‘neweyryy Ing Bulog jo MoIA 
ay2 YSt]qviso 31 saop Jou ‘apraryos jo YINIy syI AUap JOU 
saop siya ‘3ysne. st Wopstm a[qou 0 Sulsuojaq s#urp 
jo ounjeu-jjas ay uoyM “Heweyey ‘pres eyppng 

[G.Ste86 
2 by. bey bitsy. b bwab.way. beg 5 

NAS ~~ 

locte july Wise. sty. eoie to. ebb. uz .kas G 
kb nbb.slobb |s6.bb.e08.8.estetrels. bbs 
IDB .G ise? be tstety ‘by tbe xiv baz to bg 
leew .G.b8b.ax.b pwab.tlewS bry bre.te.loB 
eae. | G.bty.teabtySlps.to.b.k 
as Sin [ein te nb.b.6.xz babe bh.ebd.t 
by wath. bab. bb oy. pea. ble 
22.058 l.te®. this tbb.bx.gh | 
9 

ueIoqi 

‘aw Aq 28ne} JOU st oINIeU-jJIs JO JUTDOpP 9yI 
‘Qeweyeyy ‘[jueJousT ay Aq] JUaWYeIIe Jo yalqns 9y) 
DpeW St aINJeU-jJas su UT AI]PLII Jey Wopstm a[qou jo 
suvaw Aq asijeat Woy) Fulyeus Jaye “apnyyos jo YyINI s! 
aiay2 yy Woy) PjoOd st 3 ‘oINIeU-jJJ9s JO UOHOU 9y2 OF 
ysed ssajsuiuursoq wosJy palippe ase oy ‘pauasysryy 
Surwmossq WoIy sFuloq [[e aavs 0} Jopso ur yng “Auyeos 
SuNsixd-j[as aJqou jo auld0p oy dSutppoydn Aq Mota 
ansyvar eB oyUT ]]ey ] Jey2 Jou ‘apnarjos yo yn Auvap | 
yeU) aNI] JOU SIU ‘ReWEYeYW :9UQ Ppass2}g 24} Pres 

1 pbudg 
‘bablblnieblk pldee ihe & pha} cb2bibh 
s@blb} lhaSmRokbbjyipibikein bbl Phlble 
=labbRIPRO blkmbl Olibaiibibh Bel? 
sit Iblitp Ble bb) PhP le-by) | bab) ble 
sfabblis Bblbbjaje pip & Bhi} ckik 
slkabizhthjh} peldle lke & | 2lbikice 
9 

HIYSULS 

‘wo sulseay Aq pauazydisy oq you [Jax Ady) 
qyi os ‘opmyyos jo yINs oy ur Areas 
J]Gou & st oJayi 2eYyI Way Yyova) J “ised 
ssajsuluulgeq o9uIs guloq [jo vapr 942] 
0} payorie oJ2 OY4M ssuUIog [Je jo oes 
2y2 JOY “WoOPpsIM ys[qou Jo daJMIeU-j[Is JI 
st yorym Alyvosi B JO 20UaIsIxa 9Yy) IYPNeI 
Apeasje aaey J asnedog ~¢AYA, ‘“dUIaq jo 
MOIA IY) OUT Furey Aqoyoyi ssoundwa pur 
apnzijos jo yINIa sy1 YIve} Jou Op yY Izy) 
10U SI YW ‘neUeYyLeY :pres eYyppng 24], 

“We Hy sk AE RE the ae 127 

A CUES Ee dE Oe Sa 7h Sh EOF 

HW a ee A OW A 

“Se AMEE HEE CHEK CE 
#) 

epueueysyi¢—sur 7, 

‘DIU = BLE , 

‘sdury) jo Ay[eay oy) JO aduUa)sTX2-uOU pue 
22UdISIXA JY} OF SB YA] JOU Op | ‘NeweYeYW 
‘ssopwsJOJ pue jinbuvy) o3e sduryi jje wy 
yovod Joys [ ‘“sduryy [je ur st yorym Areas 
ees oyi Aq QUROU sT JeYM MOU Is1M YI JY] 
yova} aJojojoyy J ‘“Fuistxa A[[vas se sdurya ye 
jo Ayyvor oy2 0) payoeie ysed ssa[suruuldoq 
WOJjJ ae sdulog [je se pue ‘saovjd sursidsur 
-JeoJ WIOIJ SsuUIOg ]]B 99IJ 02 Jopso ul ¢AUAY 
‘UOU OSIM ]][B JO SI IE se Weal ay 0} payoerIIT 
MOIS Woy) dyVW [ Op Jou ‘AIQUI-UOU JO MaTA 
ay) OUT ]]PJ Woy syewW Y Op Jou ‘WuaIsTxo 
-uouU ose sduIy) [Je VY Yea J Op Jou ‘sso] 
-Wwsjoy pue jinbuey ose sdury3 j[e ywyI yea) 
jou Op [ ‘neweyeyy plo eyppng oy], 

x 3 Ik 

MEY MDA eV ae SEE 

GB EME Ue MEE OME HE SHE EO 

YR MA A ME SE I) 

Wf Wh MeV Be — EY YP HE SA 

WG MERE ER UH 
SORE (GB aE CTE te 

9 

pO dS ea 

‘aInjeu-j[Is JO 
woadse oy yoeai Jou Op | ‘Neweyeyy ‘Wopstm 
gjqou 0} gulsuojoq Aiyeor se oimywu-jjas jo 
jadse ay) 03 payrene oq 0} SUIZaS YOIYM MTA 
ay) [jo suvaw Aq]—osnzeu-jjas jo adse oy 
0? ysed = ssojguluuIgoq = 2UIS payee Je 
ssuloq |[e Joj—ssoundwa jo yInsa aya Yyovar 
J ‘suuJo) Zuisidsut-reay Wosz paysejap swod2q 
sdulog [[@ oyeu 0} JopyO UI JOA “WOPpsta 
ajqou jo asimjeu-jjas oyx se Aypeat yovad | 
‘dulag JO MITA JY? OIUE [LJ [| OP Jou “uaystxa 
-uou oq 0} ssoundwa jo ying? oy) Yoead | 
jeu? JOU SI ay sneULYRyY plo) eYppNng IY], 

HY dt EL TA SE ME CHE OE 
“Re CM i RE ae ae eC 
FA Hak SE 4B A YD FS A OR Coy 

HEY OY Cd ee eT 
A | (ee | a a 

9 

eipeyqeuny—suns 

‘sduryy Jo 
OINIWU-J[9S YI UL UOlesI{vaI-j]aS JO aFpo]MOUy oy} OUT 
a.uriUa Ue Uled A[OATIINJUI pu ‘Suleq-uoU pue ZUloq 
JO [MdIA ay} 02 Ialqns] sdUAIsSTXO UOJ] SoATaSUTOYI dod] 
‘durvys oyi YUM podureys oq ‘uonedisueura [dis 9y) 
Aq st Ww se [yjns ayi] puvissiapun ‘saouajsIxa [vUJOIxa 
ul SUIog-uOU pue SUIOq JO MATA oY? Idalod ‘FJosw puIyy 
jO Uoas st JeYM Inq FulyIou st oJoy? [3ey} Mora oy] 
OWI JojUa ][IM Ady ssapwsojJ aq 0} 3t 9as Ady uoy AY 
Wo pasievas A[Ns1 pue saajasuroyyi Aq dary OYM ‘opnzITos 
jo yan ays ur opiqe [jim Asya “heweyeyy Ing 

I eb 
sla ivewn.S te ose tp 8 oly lox nia ety by.to 
te? bt oy. biy.ieal ity. wok sty tee by 
Way {uy Se sb. bin xe Gt 5 lob eG bs 
weSP.S spl S bby bt katbs Cc ser 10) 

[.oin.bG Bley xB ost e? | | glib. 
xt 8 isto bbe bp bgh obyesd bsk 
Gitex. xR. oe bbb .S tee bse. tte loos ab 
Be xty Lyte ogtetobel lysGbxh 
SGtoxG. by. bbs bh.SeS og) S bby Aw 
tabs shag S¢ bbe st bb beers ! 

L 

urIqLL 

‘vAIPUL JO] PAJOUE PBII 2¢ UIT , 

“WISI[IYIU PUL WSI[R9I OJ SOATISUTIYI PPa] O1 se AI]eII JO 
seapl Yyons urory Aeme jos snyi puv ‘soajoswmoy) UTYITM 
posinboe st yoy WoOpsIm oy? JO sdury) [[e Jo sImevU 
-Jjos 942 OlUT UORINIUL UR dARY [IM Ady ‘uonedioueWwo 
aqjdim oy Aq paured st yorym ssauyons jo durejs oy} 
(Bim jan podureys ose Aoyd ‘Fuleg-uou pur suloq jo 
wodse oy} Jopun plJOM [eUJoIxXo Ue SuIMoIA [AT[BITISI 
-jenp] wos, Aeme jdoy ase Aoys ‘Jyasul purpy oy ang sur 
“YOU SI Uoas ST IwYyM Ivy] Fulmouy AqosJoyI pue SwWIOJ 
OU sey JOJO [JO ddUaISTXS sIqd] JY 9aS ]]IM QI ur 
Suipiqe aie pure st Aj[eas af se apnyyos jo YINI soayas 
-wayy Aq pasifval savy oym asoy) ‘neweyRyy ‘Ing 

vl ‘LB }bblalShrbb pe belee Le} bs 
sb} UY Bbywbn iek lhyichjlwinns & b 
sIkb bike IWS jess binvibihvieh Ibe flied} 
thaSabpypibieibiebis Rib bib whrd 
SREjJEMIER ARR Leelee welobire LR yZI2b} 
-ghtbjkiinPibibvihiibibe Yields Bub) 
L 

WUIYSUES 

3g Jou pur 

Wey Prapuas st vaypucvsy9 atoym sade[d 
JoyJO OM} JO JUO sey Sue], ‘wuvsqvuevisip 
-pyytgvas O01 SpuodsasJoD APUSPIA Be Mey « 

‘Sulog-uou pur suloq spiedal se sjusWy ee 
ayy [ye wory Avme saajasmoyi daay pue ‘ost 
aya JO wWyeal ayi aatadjod ‘sduryy jO ainiwu 
-JJas ay? as ‘ssauTvas jo durvis oy) uleIqo ‘uOn 
-edisuvwia afdiy ayy jo ales ay} puvisJopun 
‘[A]UO-puluy Jo] Uses St IYAX IPIS9q IIUAISTXO 
ou si asay2 Ivy} MOoUy ‘ATUO-UOTIeJUasaIdaI jo 
gjdiursd ay) our sJaqua ‘Joa Jo yadse oy) 
WOsJ SdAjIsWaYyI 9a} ‘ssauNdua pue apndtyos 
jo ying ayy 0} UTEIe ATjear [IM Aayd Ing 

+ ¥ a — 3 EE 
BW i ae Lh eh ey Cs Be a ed 
Waa ee He Sh FE Oe 
WY WSR Oe EM SE My al 
L 

epuvuLYysyIS—sue J, 

‘SUlog-UOU pur BUIdq JO MaTA 94} WoT} IIT} 
ase ‘uonestpeor Aq saayaswoyI UIYIIM pauTEs st 
yoTyA IYystsur aya yM [ppyom oyi] Surmora 
pue ‘ssoujeas jo dureis ayy ym sduryi [[e 
duseis [jam [jim Aaya ‘sty? poureye duravy pue 
‘uonediourwa afdi33 ay2 0} lee pue ‘sydalqo 
jeusjaixa [je JO a2Ua}sIxa-UOU pUe 93Ud)SIXO 
ay] WOIJ saa[aswWay] 921J ‘puIWT UMO s,u0 
jo uaas ase ivy} ssuIYy2 9Y2 OWT Jou ‘ssou 
-SSa]WIO} pur ssauYyoNs JO Wess ay O2UT das 
ued ‘qinbues ase ieyI sdulyi |[w JO ssousso} 
“WIOJ dy} Ul SaAfasuayI auT[dIsIp pue ould 
0p AW 0} UAIsI]T OYM asoy2 Ivy? Os ‘st AT[eAI 
W se vOnESI]eas-j]as JO YINII ay2 Yai | 

"PY 3 E88 OG Te by Bd fr 
RE R “Oe Chd WA 
th MARR WE CRM Y 
eas ee ih aS ae a ee OZ 
H CHMERD YA FLEE MF fr He 

L 

et Pogo aN 

‘vysyoiiosd SAN 
‘vaqysolysou tei ‘vavgqvavgg BWitw «. 

“sangi[eayl JO 93Ua}SIxX9-UOU 
puv a9uaIsIxd JO SMaTA JY} WOIJ 9dJF “UONTNIUI 
ay ul SuIpiqe we pur ‘sduryi jo sINIwU-J]Is 
ay) Ul uUOTESI]eaI-jJas poured savy ‘ssou[eos 
jo dws ay) tprm padurvis we ‘uonedpurwo 
g[disa ayy paurene savy ‘purw-jjas Jo UONeISoj 
-TUBUT 9} 0} preII ul Zuloq-uou pur suloq 
JO SMaTA WOIJ JaJz ‘10IID JO yadse oya UO 
paseq SMaIA WOIJ das} [WE J] +Joszt UT St ay Se 
pue W paurene fjashty Aq oavy | se ssounduwo 
jo yiny) aya Ur aprqe J ‘neueyeyy “Ing 

«lh Of th 3 RC) ee 
BAM a WH HM ‘ids 
WHhh “MWe Cl 
SH RBM eA Te 

L 

vipeyqeunsy—sung 

A - Ley, Phy) in 
se 

ae Be) 
i ine a 1 

baa) pif; ie i 

poop i ae 
" we me ‘ 

¥ 
" lee SV 
a i oo, 
- i] 

ae Ni 
rr , y 1 i 7 1) 
f } - f ma ; i sn 
ie t ty ¥ ss r" . ; 
: j 17 aif a ’ ! 
i : 7 ny 1 
HH | : f i wie! Ny i 
ieee Mn hcl ague 
URN he se 
Tu) fh 1 ie i ve did 
ok gh \ T 
bit cl aA ¥ ip wie 4 ae 
ar its 
i) BA a WAL, A 
| ‘ , ie a v3/\ West mo 
ee RO 
r ’ 1h ie , tau f \ WW Ar ve he 

iar 

Pn 
‘A 
7 

ie 

A 
oa | 

rt 
7 

eal 
» 

g | here iu 

The Lankavatara Sutra : a Mahayana text 

iio 

NEW COLLEGE OF CALIFORNIA (SF) 

$8.95 

| AASHAAAAA 

fadauaqaraay suey send Taez, | 
renarandgaarah eae aa Fe THAT II 

The Lankavatara Sutra contains a comprehensive discussion of the 
fundamental concepts of Mahayana Buddhism. This text profoundly 
influenced the development of Buddhism in Japan and China and is 
still considered by Buddhist practitioners and scholars to be an in- 
valuable exposition of the Buddhist teachings. Here is the first com- 
plete and authoritative translation from the Sanskrit of this important 
Mahayana text. Dr. Suzuki has written an informative introduction, 
discussing the historical background and significance of this text. 
In addition, he has appended an extract from the Sanskrit text as well 
as three Chinese and one Tibetan extract, with the respective English 
translations. The comparison of these versions illustrates the great 
variety of the different translations. 

PRAJNA PRESS 
BOULDER 

0-87773-