GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 

DEPARTMENT OP ARCHAEOLOGY 

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
LIBRARY 

\^2 6 0 

Call No. 

Etc 

i 

HINDUISM AND BUDDHISM 

VOLUME in 

HINDUISM AND BUDDHISM 

AN HISTORICAL SKETCH 

BY 

SIR CHARLES ELIOT 

\nzoo 

In three volumes 

VOLUME III 

esl 

KOUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL LTD 
Broad^vay House, 68'74 Carter Laae« 
Londoti. R.C.4. 

IIOHSHIRAM MANOHARL^ 
Orfeunl A. Fettiga Bock-ScIU^ 
PJ, 1145,DELHl-6 

FifU imUuM 1921 
Bfprinttd I9S4 
Btpfinitd 19S7 

^FNTRAL ARCHAEOLOGWAI 

UdRARY» NEW DELHl* 

PaiNTBP IN ORBAT BRITAIN BY 
LONP H^TMTHRIBt 
LPNPPN * BRADFORD 

A'****' i' y*H- t(,/ 

CONTENTS 

s. 

BOOK VI 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA. 

GEAFTSB 

XXXIV. ExpAuaioH of Isbuit Iimuisc* 

XXZV. Croon. 

XXXVI. .. 

XXXVn. Siam. 

fYTVfTT. CaMBOJA . . . ,, 

XXXIX. Champa. 

XL. Jata amb thv ilAi.Ag ABHjfrpgr.ioo 

TT.T 0*KTStAl Asia. 

TT.n CmnA. Ibtbodtotobt .... 

TT.nT Ckcia {eoniintied). Histoby 
XLIV. Chwa Thb CinoH . 

XLV. Cshta (am«»w5). Schools of CHmsss Btobhiwi 

XLVI. China («wiin«d)- Ckwise Bubdsmm ai 'tbe 
Pb^sht Day. 

XLVTI- .. 

XLVm. Ajwam. 

XLIX. TtBST. iHTBODtrCIOBT .... 

L. Tibbt Histobt 

LI. Tdbt (cojtfinwrf), Thb CAnon . 

UI, Tibbt Doctbdiss op Lamaism . 

T.rrr Ton Sbots .... 

LTV. .. 

PAOZ 

3 

11 

46 

78 

too 

137 

151 

188 

223 

244 

281 

303 

321 

336 

340 

345 

847 

872 

382 

397 

402 

CONTEl^TS 

iv 

BOOK VII 

MUTUAL INFLUENCE OF EASTERN 
AND WESTEBN RELIGIONS 

CHATTER 

LV, lOTXUBarCB of CHRISTlASITr IS ISElA . - .409 

LVT. Ihrxas Istlcehoe jk the Wsotsrn World . 429 

LVII, Persian Intiubnoe in India .... 449 

LVin. Mohahmbdantsm m India.455 

iNDBX.463 

BOOK VI 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

i 

CHAPTER XXXIV 

EXPANSION OF INDIAN INFLUENCE 
Ijjtbodttotoby 

Tffs subject of tbia Book Is the expansion of Indian influence 
throughout Eaatem Asia and the neighbovuing islands. That 
influence is clear and wide-spread, nay almost unirersal, and it 
is with justice that we speak of Further India and the Dutch 
oaU their colonies Needands Indi§. For some early chapters in 
the story of thia expansion the dates and details are meagre, 
but on the whole the in-e^estigator^s chief difficulty is to grasp 
and marshal the mass of facts relating to the development of 
religion and civilization in this great region. 

The spread of Hindu thought was an intellectual conq^uest, 
not an exchange of ideas. On the north'Western frontier there 
was some reciprocity, but otherwise the part played by India 
was conwtently active and not receptive. The Far East counted 
for nothing in her internal history, doubtless because China was 
too distant and the other countries bad no special culture of 
their own. Still it is remarkable that whereas many Hindu 
missionaries preached Buddhism in Chins, the idea of making 
Confucianism known in India seems never to have entered the 
head of any Chinese. 

It is correct to say that the sphere of Indians intellectual 
conquests was the East and North, not the West, but still 
Buddhism spread considerably to the west of its original home 
wd entered Persia, Stein dls^veied a Buddhist monastery in 
“ the terminal marehes of the Helmund In Seistan^ and Bamlan 
Is a good distance from our frontier. But in Persia and ite 
border lands there were powerful state religions, first Zero* 
astriamem then Isbm, which disliked and hindered the lm> 

portation of foreign creeds and though we may see some 
resemblance between Sufis and Vedantists, it dose not appear 
that the Uoslim civiliza^on of Iran owed much to Hinduism. 

^ 0«cg~ /«v. Aog., I9ia p. 342. 

4 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[OH. 

But in &11 Asia north and eaat of India, excluding most of 
Siberia but including tbe Malay Archipelago, Indian influence 
is obvious. Though primarily connected with religion it includes 
much more, such as architecture, paintii^ and other arts, an 
Indian alphabet, a vocabulary of Indian words borrowed or 
translated, legends and customs. Tbe whole lifo of such diverse 
countries aa Tibet, Burma, and Java would have been diflerent 
had they had no connection with India. 

In these and many other regions the Hindus must have 
found a low state of civilization, but in the Far East they en¬ 
countered a culture comparable with their own, There was so 
question of colonizing or civilizing rudo races. India and China 
met as equaU, not hostile but also not congenial, a priest and a 
statesman, and the statesman made large concessions to the 
priest. Buddhism produced a great fermentation and contro¬ 
versy in Chinese thought, but though its fortimes varied it 
hardly ever became as in Burma and Ceylon the national 
religion. It was, as a Chinese Emperor once said, one of the 
two wings of a bird. The Cbincee characters did not give way 
to an Indian alphabet nor did the Confxician Classics fall into 
desuotudi.. Tbe subjects of Chinese and Japanese pictures may 
be Buddhist, the plan and ornaments of their temples Indian, 
yet judged as works of art the pictures and temples are indige¬ 
nous. But for all that one has cnly to compare the China of the 
Hans with the China of the T'angs to see how great was the 
change wrought by India. 

This out^wing of Indian influence, so long continued and 
'bo wide in extent, was naturally not the result of any one im¬ 
pulse, At no time can we see in India any passion of discovery, 
any fever of conquest such as possessed Europe when the New 
World and the route to the East round the Cape were discovered. 
Indians expansion wae slow, generally peaceful and attracted 
little attention at home. Partly it was due to the natural per¬ 
meation and inflltration of a superior culture beyond ite own 
borders, but it is equally natural that this gradual process 
shoxUd have been sometimes accelerated by force of arms. The 
Hindus produced no Tamerlanes or Babers, but a series of 
expeditions, spread over long ^s, but still not few In nunber, 
carried them to such distant goals as Ceylon, Java and 
Camboja. 

xxxrv] EXPANSION OF INDIAN INFLUENCE 

$ 

But tbd diftusioii of Indian influenco, especially ui China, 
was also due to another ^ncj, namely religious propaganda 
and the deliberate despatch of missions. These mlssioua seem 
to haTO been ezclusirely Buddhist for wherever we find records 
of Hinduism outside India, for instance in Java and Camboja, 
the presence of Hindu conquerors or colonists is also recorded^. 
Hinduism accompanied Hindus and sometimes spread round 
their settlements, hut It never attempted to convert distant and 
alien lands. But the Buddhists had from the beginning the true 
evangelistic temper: they proaoLed to all the world and in 
singleness of purpose: they had no political support from India. 
Many as were ^e charges brought against ^em by hostile 
Confuoians, it was never suggested that they sought political or 
commercial privileges for their native land. It was this simple 
disinterested attitude which enabled Buddhism, though in many 
ways antipathetic to the Fax East, to win its confidence. 

Ceylon is the first place where we have a record of the intro* 
duorion of Indian civilisation and ite entry there illustrates all 
the phenomena mentioned above, infiltration, colonisation and 
propaganda. The island is close to the continent and cemmirni* 
cation with the Tamil country easy, but though there has long 
been a large Tamil population with its own language, religion 
and temples, the fundamental civilisation is not Tamil. A 
Hindu called Vijaya who apparently started from the region of 
Broach about fiOO b.o. led an expedition to Ceylon and intro* 
duoed a western Hindu language. Intercourse with the north 
was doubtless m^ntained, for in the reign of Asoka we find the 
King of Ceylon making overtures to him and receiving with 
enthusiasm the missionaries whom be sent. It is possible that 
southern India played a greater part in this conversion than the 
accepted legend indicates, for we hear of a monastery built by 
Mahinda near Tanjore^. But still language, monumenta and 
tradition attest the re^ty of the connection with northern 
India. 

It is in Asoka’s reign too that we first hear of Indian influence 
spreading northwards. His Empire included Nepal and Kashmir, 

* Tbe preuDce ei Brfttm&iu kt th« Coutc of ButM sad Sikm it » di&rest 
matter. ir«r« expraailj iovfted m more tkiUod ia utnlog? ood Jtsto c«i«- 
iBOoios tboo Buddhistj. 

* Watt«n. rasa CSussf, voL o. p. 22$. 

BUDDHISM OUTBIDS INDIA 

[OH. 

be sent misaionariee to the region of Himavanta, meaning 
apparently the southern slopes of the Himalayas, and to the 
Kambojae, an ambiguous race who were perhaps the inhabitants 
of Tibet or its border lands. The Hindu Kush seems to have 
been the limit of his dotninions but tradition ascribes to tbi« 
period the joint coloniiation of Hhotan from India and China. 

Sinhalese and Burmese traditions also credit him with the 
despatch of missionaries who oonverted Suvar^iabhilmi or Pegu. 
No mention of this has been found in his own inscriptions, and 
European critics have treated it with not unnatural scepticism 
fer there is little indication that Asoka paid much attention to 
the eastern irontiere of bis Empire. SM 1 think the question 
should be regarded as being suh jttdice rather than as answered 
in the negative. 

Indian expeditions to the Bast probably commenced, if not 
in the reign of Asoka, at least b^ore our era. The Chinese 
Amials^ state that Indian Embassies reached China by sea 
about $0 B.a and the Questions of Milinda allude to trade by 
this route: the Kamayana mentions Java and an inscription 
seems to testify that a Hindu king was reigning in Champa 
(Annam) about 150 a.l>. These dates are not so precise as one 
could wish, but if tiiere was a Hindu kingdom in that distant 
region in the second century it was probably preceded by settle* 
ments in nearer halting places, such as the Isthmus of Kra^ or 
Java, at a considerably anterior date, although the inscriptions 
discovered there are not earlier than the fifth century a.d. 

Java seems to have left some trace In Indian tradition, for 
instance tiie proverb that those who go to Java do not come 
back, and it may have been an early distributing centre for 
men and merchandise in those seas. But Ligor probably marks 
a still earlier baiting place. It is on the same coast as the Mon 
kingdom of Thaton, which had connection with Conjevaram by 
sea and was a centre of Pali Buddhism. At any rate there was 
a movement of conquest and colonization in these regions which 
brought with it Hinduism and Mahayanism, and established 
Hindu kingdoms in Java, Camboja, ciampa and Borneo, and 
another movement of Hinayanist propagandA, apparently 

‘ But not ooiifc«mp««7 AmiJ*. The linng auMli iD»k« the iUtem«Dt sbotit 
tn* mga ol Eiiiwi Ij 73-49 n.a 

* £flp»dsUy St ligor or BUnunJa, 

7 

XXXIV] EXPANSION OP INDIAN INFLUENCE 

earlier, but o! whiob we kaow leae^. Though these expeditions 
both secular and religious probably took ship on the east coast 
of India, e.p. at Masulipatam or ite Seven Pagodas, yet their 
original starting point may have been in the west, such ae the 
district of Badami or even Gujarat, for there were trade routes 
across the Indian Peninsula at an early date^. 

It is curious that the early history of Burma should be so 
obsciue and in order not to repeat details and hypotheses I 
refer the reader to the chapter dealing specially with this 
country. From an early epoch Upper Burma had connection 
with China and Bengal by land and Lower Burma with Orissa 
and Conjevaram by sea. We know too that Pali Buddhism 
existed there in the sixth century, that it g^ed greatly in 
power in the reign of Anawrata (c. 1060) and that in subsequent 
centnnee there was a dose eccledaetical connection with Ceylon. 

Siam as a kingdom is relatively modem hut like Burma it 
has been subject to severd influences. The Siamese probably 
brought some form of Buddhism with them when they de¬ 
scend from the north to their present territories. Prom the 
Cambojans, their neighbours and at one time their suzerains, 
they must have acquired some Hinduism and Mahayanism, 
but they ended by adopting Hinayanism. The source was 
probably Pegu but learned men from Ligor were also welcomed 
and the ecclesiastical pre*6mineiic6 of Ceylon was accepted. 

We thus see how Indian Influence conquered Further India 
atiA the Malay Archipelago and we must now trace Its flow across 
Central Asia to China and Japan, as well as the separate and 
later stream which irrigated Tibet and Mongolia. 

Tradition as mentioned ascribes to Asoka some connection 
with Khotan and it is probable that by the beginning of our 
era the lands of the Oxus and Tarim had become Buddhist and 
acquired a mixed civilization in which the Indian factor was 
large. As usual it is diffi cult to give precise dates, but Buddhism 
probably reached China by a Uttle before rather than 
after our era and the prevalenoe of Gandharan art in the dtlea 
of the Tarim basin makes It likely that their effloreececce was 
not far removed in time from the Gandharan epoch of India. 

' Tb» of I-CMaf tb«( • viehed kio; de«troy«d Buddbiaa ia Fudia 

is important. 

• So* Fleet in 1901, p. MS. 

8 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[oa. 

The disccreiy near Khotan o£ official doeumenta written in 
Prakrit makes colonization aa well aa religioos missions probable. 
Further, although the movemente of Gential Asian tribes com* 
monly took the form of inTSding India, yet the current of 
culture was, on the whole, in the opposite direction. The 
Kushans and others brought with them a certain amount of 
Zoroaetnan theology and Kelleniatio art, but the compound 
resulting from the mixture of these elements with Buddhism was 
re-exported to the north and to China. 

X shall diecnss below the grounds for belieTing that Buddhism 
was known in China before a.d. 62, the date when the Emperor 
l£ng Ti is said to have despatched a mission to enquire about 
it. For some time many of its chief luminaries were immigrants 
from Central Asia and it made its most rapid progress in that 
disturbed period of the third and fourth centuries when North 
China was split up into contending Tartar states which both in 
race and politics ware closely connected with Central Asia. 
Communication with India by land became frequent and there 
was also communication vid the Malay Archipel^o, especially 
after the fifth century, when a double stream of Buddhist 
teachers began to pour into China by sea as well as by land. 
A third tributary joined them later when Khubilai, the Mongol 
conqueror of China, made Lamaism, or Tibetan Buddhism, the 
state religion. 

Tibetan Buddhism is a form of late Indian Mshayanism with 
a considerable admixture of Hinduism, exported from Bengal 
to Tibet and there modified not so much in doctrine as by the 
creation of a powerful hierarchy, cuxiously analogous to the 
Roman Church. It is unknown in southern China and not much 
favoured by the educated classes in the north, but the Lamaist 
priesthood enjoys great authority in Tibet and Mongolia, and 
both the Ming and Ch'iog dynasties did their beet to conciliate 
it for political reaaotw. Lamaism has borrowed little from 
China and must be regarded as as invasion into northern Asia 
and even Europe^ of late Indian religion and art, somewhat 
modified by the strong idiosyncrasy of the Tibetan people. This 
northern movement was stoned by the desire of imitation, not 
of conquest. At the beginning of the seventh century the King 

‘ Tli«e •» M M . Iamen a of EsImoM Baat S^tnUtaa who h«T« Le ma tainplM 
and mkiatAA a MiuMtion with Tib«u 

xxnv] SXPANSIOii OF INDIAN INFLUFNCS 

of Tibet, who had dealings with both India and China, sent a 
miation to the former to enquire about Buddhism and in the 
eighth and eleventh cectuhee eminent doctors were euromoned 
from India to eatablieh the faith and then to restore it after a 
temporary eclipse. 

In Korea, Armam, and especially in Japan, Buddhism has 
been a great ethical, religious and artistic foice and in this 
sense those countries owe much to India. Yet there was little 
direct communication and what they received came to them 
almost entirely through Ohlna. The ancient Champa was a 
Hindu kingdom analogous to Camboja, but modern Aonam 
represents not a continuation of tiiis dvilkation but a later 
descent of Chinese cultnie from the north. Japan was in close 
touch witii the Chinese just at the period when Buddhism was 
fermenting their whole intellectual life ^d Japanese thought 
and art grew up in the glow of this new inspiration, which was 
more ictende than in China because there was no native antagon* 
ist of the same strength as Confucianism. 

In the following chapters I propose to discuss the history of 
Indian influence in the various countries of Eastern Asia, 
taking Ceylon first, followed by Burma and Siam. Whatever 
may have been the origin of Buddhism in these two latter they 
have bad for many centuries a close ecclesiastical oonneotioa 
with Ceylon. Pali Buddhism prevails in all, as well as in modem 
Camboja. 

The Indian religion which prevailed in ancient Camboja was 
however of a difiei^t type ai^ similar to that of Champa and 
Java. In treating of these Hindu kingdoms I have wondered 
whether I shoidd not begin with Java and adopt the hypothesis 
that the settlements established there sent expeditions to the 
mainland and Borneo^. But the history of Java is cuiiously 
fr^mentary whereas the copious inscriptions of Camboja and 
Champa combined with Chinese notices give a fairly continuous 
cbronicle. And a glance at the map will show that if there were 
Hindu colonists at Xigor it woufd have been much easier for 

^ Tb» exbtaoM oi a Hinda kingdom OQ Um Batl Cput of B«moo in 400 4.P. 
or B4HJQr is & ■Irong ic ftroor of colottlssUoo from Jevft. Erpsdittoos 

tivm any otiier ^sartor vould uaturaliy b«T« gooe to tbs Weti CMst^ Also thon is 
some koowiedgs ot Java ia In<b*, but sppsrently nono ^ Otmbojs or Qio a pe. 
TUs soggssts tihst JsTs msy hATo besn tho Bnt kiitini; plaeo ead ks>t op sons 
slight sonosetion with tho mother eouafiiy. 

10 

BVDDBISU OUTSIDE IBDIA [OH-xxiiv 

them to go across thd Gulf of Siam to Camboja than vid Java. 
I have therefoio not adopted the hypothesis of expansion from 
Java (while also not rejecting it) nor followed any chronological 
method but have treated of Camboja drat, as being the Hindu 
state of which on the whole we know most and then of Champa 
and Java in comparison with it. 

In the later sections of the book I consider tho expansion of 
Indian influence in the north. A chapter on Central Asia 
endeavours to summarize our rapidly increasing knowledge of 
this meeting place of nations. Its history is closely connected 
with China and naturally leads me to a somewhat extended 
review of the fortunes and achievements of Buddhism in that 
great land» and also to a special stud}’ of Tibet and of Lamaism, 
I have treated of Nepal elsewhere. For the history of religion 
it is not a new province, but simply tho extreme north of the 
Indian r^on where the lost phase of decadent Indian Buddhism 
which practically disappeared in Bengal still retains a nominal 
existence. 

CHAPTER XXXV 
CEYLON 
1 

Tub island of Ceylon, perhaps the most beautiful tropical 
country in the world, lies near the end of the Indian peninsula 
hut a little to the east. At one point a chain of smaller islands 
and rocks stud to hare been built by Itama as a passage for hia 
army of monkeys leads to the mainland. It is therefore natural 
that the population shonld hare relations with sou^em India. 
Sinhaleae art, religion and language show traces of Tamil influ¬ 
ence but it Is somewhat surprisii^ to that in these and in 
all departments of civilization the influence of northern India 
is stronger, The traditions which explain the connection of 
Ceylon with this distant region seem credible and the Sinhalese, 
who were often at war with the Tamils, were not disposed 
to imitate their usages, although juxtaposition and invasioii 
brought about much involuntary resemblance. 

The school of Buddhism now professed in Ceylon, Burma 
andSiam Is often called Sinhalese and (provided it is not implied 
that its dootrines originated in Ceylon) the epithet is coneot. 
For the school ceased to exist in India and in the middle ageo 
both Burma and Siam accepted the authority of the Sinha]^ 
Sangha^. This Sinhalese school seems to be founded on the 
doctrines and scriptures accepted in the time of Asoka ia 
Magadha and though the faith may have been codifled and 
supplemented in its new home, I see no evidence that it under¬ 
went much corruption or even development. One is inclined at 
flret to think that the Hindus, having a continuous living 
tradition connecting them with Gotama who was himself a 
Hindu, were more likely than these distant islanders to pre¬ 
serve the spirit of his taaobing. But there is another side to 

^ B 4 . Burma ia tbo ralgp of Auwnta ood liter in tho Ubm of Cbtp«te nboot 
UOO, and &aa ia Cbe tiiM of SOiVATaqm lUcoa, 1301. On tbo other band in 1762 
the 8itth»teee saeoecsos waa TaUdated b; obUiams mooke Itcta Buioa 

a m. 

2 

12 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [oa. 

tie question. Tie Hindus being addicted to theological and 
metaphysical studies produced original thinkers who, if not able 
to found new religions, at least modified what their predecessors 
had laid down. If certain old texts were held in too high esteem 
to be neglected, the ingcnvdtf of the commentator rarely failed 
to reinterpret them as favourable to the views popular in his 
time. But the Sinhalese liad not this passion for theology. So 
far M we can judge of them in earlier periods they were endowed 
with an amiable and receptive but somewhat indolent tempera- 
meitt, moderate gifts in art and literature and a moderate love 
and understanding of theology. Also thoir chiefs claimed to 
have come from northern India and were inclined to accept 
favourably anything which had the same or^n. These are 
exactly the surroundings in which a religion can flourish without 
change for many centuries and Buddhism in Ceylon ac(iuired 
stability because it also acquired a certain national and patriotic 
flavour: it was the faith of the Sii^halese and not of the invading 
Tamils. Such Sinhalese kings as had the power protected the 
Church and erected magnificent buildings for its service. 

If Sinhalese tradition may be believed, the first historical 
contact with northern India was the expedition of Vljaya, who 
with 700 foQowers settled in the island about the time of the 
Buddha’s death. Many det&ls of the story are obviously in¬ 
vented. Thus in order to cxpli^ why Ceylon is called Sinhala, 
Vijaya is made the grandson of an Indian pnneess who lived 
with a lion. But though these legends inspire mistrust, it is a 
fact that the language of Ceylon in ita earliest known form Is 
a dialect closely connected with Pali (or xather with the spoken 
dialect from which ecclesiastical Pali was derived) and still 
more closely with the MahiHishtii Praknt oi western India. It 
is not however a derivative of this Prakrit but parallel to it and 
in some words presents older forms^. It does not seem possible 
to ascribe tbo introduction of this language to the later mission 
of Mahinda, for, though Buddhist monks have in many countries 
influenced literature and the literary vocabulary, no instance is 
moorded of their changing the popular speech^. But Vijaya is 
said to have conquered Ceylon and to have slaughtered many 

* Qei^, u«d Spracie izr p. 92. 

* Cospftr* tlM hkMrj of SboUA. I'ho Ant Indian colooiats teeai to li4v« 
latrodaeod ft Pimhrit dUioot. BudcUunn nad Sftiukeit oftine »<t«rwftrds. 

CBYLON 

13 

ixrv] 

of ita andent mhabitante, called TafckhM^ of whom wq know 
little except that Sinhalese contaixia some un-Aryan words 
probably boirowod from them. According to the Dipavanisa* 
Vijaya started from BhaniJcaccha or Broach and both language 
and such historical facto as we know confirm the tradition that 
some time before the third century 5 ,a Ceylon was conquered 
by Indian imroigrante from the west coast. 

It would not be unreasonable to suppose that Vijaya intro¬ 
duced into Ceylon the elements of Buddhism, but there is little 
evidence to indicate that it was a conspicuous form of religion 
in India in his time. Sinhalese tradition rnmniains that not only 
Gotama himself but also the three preceding Bnddhas were 
miracolously transported to Ceylon and made arrangements for 
its conversion. Gotama is stud to have paid no leas than three 
visits^: all are obviously impossible and were invented to en¬ 
hance the glory of the island. But the legends which relate bow 
Paoduvtoudeva came from India to succeed Vijaya, how he 
subsequently had a Sakya princess brought over from India to 
be his wife and how her brothers ostoblished cities in Ceylon^, 
if not true in detail, are probably true in spirit in so far as they 
imply that the Sinhalese kept up intcrcourae with India and 
were familiar with the principal forma of Indian religion, Thus 
we are told^ that King Paiiduk&bbaya built religious edifices 
for Niganthas (Jains), Brahmans, Paribbhjakas (possibly Budd¬ 
hists) and Ajivikas. Whou Devinampiya Tissa ascended the 
throne (cire. 245 b.o.) he sent a complimentaiy mission bearing 
wonderful treasures to Asoka with whom he was on friendly 
terms, although they bad never met. This implies that the 
kingdom of b^adha was known and respected in Ceylon, and 
we hear that the mission included a Brahman. The answer 
attributed to Asoka will surprise no one acquainted with the 
iosoriptions oi that pious monarch. He said that he had taken 

’ Utorall)’ deaoBa Chat is wild uii(aftaa 7 12390 , J relnln from diKOSslBg tbe 
ori^ «&d eibnolosleal positioo of tii« TMddij for >( baxdly atoeU tto butory of 
doddhism ia Cc\'Iob. Tot Vi)47a’i coaqu««U see MetiTeque tu. 

« IX. 26. 

* &tp»TizBse L 10-81. XL 1-B9. MahSvuiee L 19-83. 'Hie iegaod ttuS (be 

Baddh* vi^ied (V.yloo end left bU 00 aduo> peek is at Inat as old aa 

BoddbAgboea. See Ssa^ot a-pilsidikl lo Oldeoborg's Fiaoya Piiiafo. eoL m. p. 332 
and the (;aoUiMoaA ia Sha«b*e Aiom't Ptnk, p. 60. 

* iKpa. t. X. 1-9. U.«hivequa vm. 1-87, xs. 1-18. 

* MabATajpM £ 9t, 108. 

14 

BUVDBI8M OUTSIDE IlfDIA 

lea. 

Kfaee in tiie law of Buddha and advised the Kmg of Ce^rton to 
find^vation in the aame way- He also 
preeente ooosiatdng chiefly of royal insigi^ Tia^ wm 
crowned for the second time, which probaWy mwns that he 
became not only the disciple but the yaesal of ^ia. 

In any caae the leooida declare that the Injhan 
showed the ercateet soUcitude for the spiritnal welfare of Ceylon 
and though they are obyiou^y embellished, them is no 
to doubt^ substantial accuracy*. The Sinh^em tradition 
agrees on the whole with the data supplied by Indian in^p- 
^ and Chinese pi^rims. The names of missiownas menUon^ 
in the DJpa end Mahivamsaa recur on urns found at banctu 
and on its gateways are pictures in relief which appear to 
represent the transfer of a branch of the Bo-lree in solemn pm- 
owuon to some destination which, though unnamed, may ^ 
conjectured to he Cteylon* The absence of Mahin<fe s name m 
Asoka’a inacripaona is eeitainly suspicious, but the Sinhalese 
chronicles give the names of other misoonaries correctly and 
a mere argwne^m ex eilenUo cannot disprove their testimony 
on this important point- 

The principal repowtoriee of Sinhalese tr^tion sje the 
Dtpavamsa, the Mah&vamsa, and the histoncal preface of 
Buddhi^osa’s Samanta.pisidiih^ All later works ^ founded 
on these three, so far as concerns the conversion of Ceylon and 
the immediately subsequent period, eaad the three works appear 
tobe tearrangementsof a single source known as the A^thakatbA, 
SibalatthakathA, or the words of the Porhna (ancients). Thew 
names were given to commentaries on the Tipitaka written m 
Sinhalese prose interapeised with Pali verae and several of the 
greater monasteries had their own editions of them, including 
a definite historical section*. It is probable that at the beginning 
of the fifth century a.n. and perhaps in the fourth century the 
old Sinhalese in which the prose parts of the Atthakathft were 

I for tbt cwdibility of the 6ittb4lMO Utdltiooa GeWw Intpod. lo tfsoiltrtoo 
of UAb&vuQM ISIS 4nd Norms io J.B.A.3. ISOS, pp. I f. wid on th« oU»*r od* 
B. 0 PpmAo to W.B.K.M. 21, pp. 3lTff. md Z.JXM.O. 68, pp, MCff. 

* Ortawodel. B*ddli wl ort 7i»dio.pp.«S-7l RSy.U’id*. ftcdAirf fwdio. p. 302. 

* TtM Jitiaa*iu<UBS*hAilit a 4bo ok«a]y Allied to iImm «orki to tboM petto 
vben the eubiKt m*tt«E ie tbe lAme. 

* Tbis Mctktt vee probsUr oaDed UeUTAipaft to • gesend eeoM Icag before 
lb« BAme «M epeeiellr Applied to Oie work vbioh no* b«An it 

CE7L0N 

15 

xxrv) 

written waa growii^ unintelligible, and tb&t it was becozaing 
more and more the faahion to use Pali as the lai^uage of eccleei' 
astical literature, for at least three writers eet themselres to 
turn part of the traditions not into the venaoular but into Pali. 
The earliest and least artisric is the unknown author of the short 
ohronicle oalled Dtparamsa, who wrote between S02 aj>. and 
430 a.D.' His work is weak both as a specimen of Pall and as 
a narratiwe and he probably did little but patch together the 
Pali verses occurring from time to time in the Slnludese prose 
of the Atthakathk. Somewhat later, towards the end of the 
fifth century, a certain Mah&n&ma arranged the materials out 
of which the Dlpavamaa had been formed in a more conseoutive 
and artisiic form, combining ecclesiastical and popular legends*. 
His work, known as the Mah&vamsa, does not end with the 
reign of £l&ra, like the Dtparamsa, but describes in 16 more 
chapters the exploits of XhitMiH^mapi and his successors ending 
withMah&sena*. The third writer, Baddhagbosa. apparently lived 
between the authors of the two chronicles. His voluminous Hierary 
activity will demand our attendou later but so far as history is 
concerned his narrative is closely parallol to the Mahivamsa^, 

The historical narrative is similar in all three works. After 
the Council of Pataliputra, Moggaliputta, who bad presided 
over it, came to the conclusion that the time had come to 
despatch missionaries to convert fore^n countries. Sinhalese 
tradition represents this decision as emanating from Moggali- 
pntta whereas the inscriptions of Aseka imp^ that the king 
himself Initiated tiie momentous project. But the dlSerence is 
small. We cwmot now tell to whom the great idea first occurred 
but it must have been carried out by the clergy with the 
assistance of Asoka, the apostle selected for Ceylon was his* 

^ 6m iatrodoatioo to Oldenbux'a sditjoo, pp. 8» S. 

* ^rb*pa thi* ii allnded M at the btguutiog ol tb« U«U?4isi& itMlf. 
took aftde by the MuiMU (porrioehi k»to) wm ia eobe pl^Ms too diffaae tnd in 
otben too eoftdeDaod tad coattised atnr teptUttou" 

* The M*hi.y*Bii> vm oootiaosd bj ^t«r writon and broo|ht dovs to tboet 
17S0 A.D. 

* The tfth&Teisji.t!ki. t coDaiut«rr vrittoo bMVMn 1000 end 1300 t-U., hee 
tleo tome iadependeat value beoeoee the old AW)tktthe*Mth&TtzBBe tm thU 
•xUat tad need bj the vnter, 

* $00 eoeordio^ to the Suaheleee eouvee but eeeordijis to Zi3ea Chnug ead 

othen, bfothv. In fevout ei the letter it Biey be eaid tbet the ronnset 

brotheri of kings often beoeme meake in order to evoid pobtieel oompUeetione. 

16 

BVDDSJSM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

near relative Mabioda wbo aocording to tbo traditions ot the 
Siohaleae made bis vay to their island through the air with aix 
companions. The account of Hsuan Choang hints at a less 
miracolous mode of progression for be speaks of a monastery 
built by Mahinda somewhere near Tanjore. 

The legend tells bow Mahinda and his following alighted on 
the MIssaka moon tain* whither King Ber&nampiya T^ssa had 
gone in the coarse of a hunt. The mooke and the royal cortege 
met: Mahinda, after testing the king’s intellectual capacity by 
some curious dialectical pussies, had no difficulty in converting 
him^ Next morning he proceeded to Anuradhapnra and was 
received with all honour and enthusiasm. He preached first in 
the palace and then to enthusiastic audiences of the general 
public. In these discourses he dwelt cbiefiy on the terrible 
punishment awuting sinners in future existences’. 

We need not follow in detail the picturesque accotmt of the 
rapid cosversion of the capitfd. The king made over to the 
Church the Mah&megha garden and proceeded to construct a 
series of rel^ous edifices in Anuradhapura and its neighbour' 
hood. The catalogue of them is given In ^e Mabivamsa* and 
the most important was the Mah&vlhhra monastery, which 
became specially famous and infiuentfal in the history of Bud> 
dhism. It was situated in the Mah&megha garden close to the 
BO'tree and was regarded es the citadel of or^odoxy. Its sub¬ 
sequent conflicts with the later Abhaysgiri monastery are the 
obiet theme of Sinhalese ecclesiastical history and our version 
of the Pah Pifakas is the one which received its imprimatur. 

Tisaa is represented as having sent two further missions to 
India. The first went in quest of relics and made its way not 
only to Pataliputra but to the court of Indra, king of the gods, 
and the relics obtained, of which the principal was the Buddha’s 
alme-bowl’, were deposited in Anuiadhapura. The then 
built the Tbuparima dagoba over them and there is no reason 

' iBodan 

* Ti* HftUvupa* implie* tUi klnftdjr bmdb MquifiUnce with Bad. 

dlutm. UropmMta liiio m knowi&gtbatmonka do not eM io tha iftonooa and 
M that it would U tetur to ordain bh» lajuan Bhaodu. 

i Th* elKODiobo giro with aoBie ili^ht diVM^Mi tbo name« of tha t«xti on 
wh^ hiB prMcluBS waa Uaod. It ii donbUaaa maaot that ha rccltad tho Sutta 
wits t ninnin^ txpoMUoiL 

* Uabivam. iz. 17. 

* MaQ7 oth«r placM oUinad to yoiww thla relic. 

xxrv] 

CEYLOJiJ 

17 

to doubt that the building which now bears this name is gonuiae. 
The story may therefore be true to the extent that relics were 
brought from India at this early period. 

The second mission was despatched to bring a branch of the 
treei under which the Buddba had sat when be obtained en* 
iightenment. This narrative* is perhaps based on a more solid 
substratum of fact. The chronicles connect the event with the 
desire of the Princess Anul4 to become a non. Women could 
receive ordination only from ordained nuns and as these were 
not to be found on the island it was decided to ask Asoka to 
send a branch of the sacred tree and also hlahinda’s sister 
Sanghamitti, a religieuse of eminence. The mission was success¬ 
ful. A branch from the Bo-tree was detached, conveyed by 
Asoka to the coast with much ceremony and received in Oeyloa 
by Tisea with equal respect. The princess accompanied it. Tho 
Bo*tree wae planted in Che Megbavana garden. It may still be 
seen and attracts pilgrims not only from Ceylon but from 
Burma and Siam. Unlike the buildii^ of Anuradhapuia it has 
never been entirely neglected and it is clear that it bos been 
venerated as the Bo-tree from an early period of Sinhalese history. 
Botanists consider its long life, though remarkable, notlmpossiblo 

since trees of this species throwup fresh shoots from the roots near 
the parent stem. The sculptures at Sanchi represent a branch of 
a sacred tree belngcarried in procession, though no inscription at¬ 
tests its destination, and Fs-Ksiensays that hesaw the tree*. The 
author of the first part of the MUhivamsa clearly regards it as 
already ancient, and throughout the history of Ceylon there are 
references to the construction of railings and terraces to protect it. 

Dev&aampiya Tiaa probably died in 207 b.c. In 177 tho 
kingdom passed into the hands of Tamil monarchs who were 
not Buddhists, although the chroniclers praise their justice and 
the respect which they showed to the Church. The most im¬ 
portant of them, Ellra, reigned for forty-four years and was 
dethroned by a descendant of Tissa, called Ba^hag&maoi*. 

‘ Of oouw the SQtiqoitj of the SIbIuJom Bo-tre« ie % dUTerent {{uoeUoa from 
tho ideotit^ ot the poront tree with UiQ Ue« nodor vhicb the Buddha ut 

* M&bSvoiB. X?I1L ; DSpevoqi. xv, wd xvl 

* But be ee^e Bothinssboot Uitiado or SangbAMittl tnd doee oo6 eupport tb» 
Mshivoipea in deUik 

* Duttbt, DOMUBg b&d, on^.or vuIoBt, 4ppu«iiU7 refers to tb« ferocity 
ihovn in bis struggle with tbe Tkmib. 

18 BULDBISM 0VT8WE INDIA [CH. 

The eypleite of this pimce are recorded at such length in 
the Mahivamsa (xxn.-sxxn.) as to suggest that they formed 
the subject of a separate popular epic, in which be figured m 
the champion of Sinhalese against the Tamils, and therefore as 
a deront Buddhist. On ascending the throne he felt, like 
Asoka, remorse for the bloodshed which had attended hie early 
life and slrore to atone for it by good works, espedally the 
construction of sacred edifices. The most important of these 
were the Lohapas&da or Copper Palace and the Mahithupa or 
Ruwanweli Dagoba. The former* was a monastery roofed or 
covered with copper platee. Its numerous rooms were richly 
decorated and it consisted of nine storeys, of which the four 
uppermost were set apart for Aihats, and the lower assigned to 
the inferior grades of monks. Perhaps the nine storeys are an 
exaggeration: at any rate the building sufiered from fire and 
underwent nvzmerous reconstructions and modifications. King 
Mah&sena (301 a.n.) destroyed it and then repenting of his 
errors rebuilt it, but the ruins now representing it at Anurad- 
bapura, which consist of stone pillars only, date from the rdgn 
of Parhkrama B&hul (about i.n. 1150). The immense pile known 
as the Enwanweli Dagoba, though often injured by invaders In 
search of treasure, still exists. The somewhat dilapidated ex* 
tenor is merely an outer shell, enebsing a smaller dagoba*. 
This is possibly the structure erected by Dutthag&manf, though 
tiadi^on says that there is a stiU smaller edifice inside. The 
foundation building of the original structure are related at 
great length*. Crowds of distinguished monks came to see the 
first stone even from Kashmir and Alasanda. Some have 
identified the latter name with Alexandria in Egypt, hut it 
probably denotes a Greek city on the Indus*. But in any case 
tradition represents Buddhists from all parte of India as taking 
part in the ceremony and thus recognizing the unity of Indian 
and Sinhalese Buddhism. 

* DipAmjjM ziz. 1. UfthivunM rzm 1-1$. 8 m JwguMoa. But. f«$. 

ISIS. pp. 23$, 24$. 1 &id k bud io pictuM racb h buUtUog rewed «b 
plkn. Perbepe it ma MipetbiAg Hka tb« 84t-iB»hAl.pru4d& ti PolUoMua,. 

* f&tkar, Ccybis p, 232. Tbe rMtcnUoa of Uie ituvonveU 

iif)d«rtAbeQ bj fiuddfauta in 187$. 

' MabSTiipw XXTUL-XXXL Ihittba^Bkol diod bafor* it wm fioubed. 

* MahivAqus iiir, 87. YoQanlgiir&lMeade. Tha fiowQ is aJao caactioaed u 
dtUAied on an liland in tbe Indus: Mil. Pan, tXL 7. 4 

OETLON 

zzxy] 

1& 

Of great importonce for the history of the Si nh aW Chnrcb 
is the reign of Vatta^lma^ Abhaya who after feeing dethroned 
by Tamils recovered his kingdoia and reigned for twelve yeara*. 
He built a new monastery and dagoba known u Abhayagiri*' 
which soon became the enemy of the Mshavihfija and heterodox,' 
if the latter is to fee considered orthodox. The account of the 
schism given in the MahAvaipss* is obscure, but the dispute 
resulted in the Htakas, which bad hitherto been preserved 
orally, being committed to writing. The coimdJ which defined 
and edited the scriptures was not attended by all the monas¬ 
teries of Ceylon, but only by the monks of the Mah&vih&ra, and 
the text which they wrote down was their epecial version and 
not universally accepted. It inclnded the ParivAra, which was 
apparently a recent manual composed in Ceylon. The Mabi- 
vamea says no more about this solustt, but the NikSya-Sangra. 
hawa* says that the monks of the Abhayagiri monastery now 
embraced the doctrines of the Vajjiputta school (one of the 
eeveateen branches of the MabAsanghikas) which was known in 
Ceylon as the Dhammaruci school from an eminent of 

that name. Many pious kings followed who built or repaired 
sacred edifices and Buddhism evidently flourished, but we also 
hear of heresy- In the third century a.D.^ King Voharaka Tissa 
suppressed* the Vetulyas. This sect was connected with the 
Abhayagiri monasteiy, but, though it lasted until the twelfth 
century, I have found no Sinhalese account of its tenets. It is 
repreeented as the worst of hereeies, which was suppressed by 

‘ Ajjwdins to the oottaen peckooiag i-o. 88-7S; ftooordios to Geigv 3.0. 
29-17. tt oMDu pnUblo that ia bho ««ly of BiabtlMo lu5toty tlwr* n m 
error of ebout 92 jeers. See Oeieer, Tfw, SfeA^Kmeo. to. xrr B. end FUae 

j.s.A£, 1909 , pp, ssa-sse. ’ ^ 

• For the eite mo Perker'e Ceyfee, pp. »9ff. The fsxna 

70 eM X, 98-100} Mje it wu boUt oa ^e «t« of en enoient Jein Mtebliebment 
«nd Kem thiake theC tto tradiUoQ Uoto et ocrcometenoM *biea eoconaC in the 
boretioe] end ooutcntioue e^t ^ the Abheje 

» Ueh&v. xxxm. 100-104. See too the Ttki qBote by Turawix ifi hla introdoo. 
ttoa, p. liiL 

• A »ort OQ eeoIeeitftKsI bietoiy vrittea ebotii 1395. Ed. uid TrfTir Colombo 
Beconi Office. 

* The probable error in SinhalaM dates oenttoned in a pierlose cote oemtinaea 
till tbe twelfth ceotoiy a.p. though gradu^y deoicasing. For the early ceaturiei 
of the Chrielian era It la probable that the accepted datm should be put ball a 
eeotujy later 

* Uah&Tainaa zzrvT, 41. VetcIyaTidam maddltvA According to the nklva 
eaog. he borat tbair Pi^aka. 

20 

BU3DHI8M OITTSIBE INDIA 

[OH. 

^ orthodox kinge h\>t again and again rovlTOd, ot was re- 
iatroduced from India. Though it always found a footiog 
at the Abhayagin it was not officially recognized as the 
creed of that Monastery which since the time of Vattag&ma^ 
seems to ha7e professed the relatively orthodox doctrine called 
Dhammaruci. 

Mention is made in the Katb&*vatthii of heretics who held 
that the Buddha remained in the Tusita heaven and that the 
law was preached on earth not by him but by Ananda and the 
commentary^ ascribes these views to the Vetulyakas. The 
reticence of the Sinhalese chronicles makes It doubtful whether 
the Vetulyakas of Ceylon and these heretics are identical 
but probably the monks of the Abhayagiri, if not strictly 
speaking Mahayanist, ware an off*6hoot of an ancient sect 
which contained some germs of the Mahayana, Hsdan Chuang 
in his narrative* states (probably from hearsay) that the monks 
of the Mah&Wh&ra were Hinayanists but that both vehicles 
were studied at the Abhayagirl. I-Cbing on the contrary says 
expressly that all the Sinhalese belong^ to the Aryasthavira 
KikAya. Fa^Haien describes the Buddhism of Ceylon as he 
saw it about 412 a.X)., but does not apply to it the terms Hina 
or Mahayana. Ho evidently regarded the Abhayagin as the 
principal religious centre and says it had 5000 monks as against 
8000 in the MahAvih&ra, but though he dwells on the gorgeous 
oeremooial, the veneration of the sacred tooth, the representa¬ 
tions of Gotama’s previous lives, and the images of Maitreya, 
he does not allude to the worship of Avalokita and Maftjusti or 
to anything that can be called definitely Mahayanist. He 
describes a florid and somewhat superstitious worship which 
may have tended to r^ard the Buddha as superhuman, but the 
relics of Gotama’s body were its chief visible symbols and we 
have no ground for assuming that such teaching as is found in 
the Lotus sfitra was its theological basis. Yet we may legiti¬ 
mately suspect that the traditions of the Abhayagiri remount 
to early prototypes of that teaching. 

In the second and third centuries the Court seems to have 
favoured the MahavibAra and ICing Goth&bhaya banished 

‘ On KtlbS vu. XV11I.: ftnd t Pnntcd io Journal of ths Pali Tat Soc. for 
1SS9. 

’ Walters. U. 234. Ct. l/tfian Chia»g’t life, ebap. iv. 

CSTION 

21 

xsxv] 

monks belonging to the Vetulja sect', but in spite of this a 
monk of the Abbayagiri named Sanghamitta obtained bis con- 
fidence and that of bis son, Mahfiaena, who occupied tbo throne 
from 275 to 302 a.d. The Mahavibixa was destroyed and its 
occupants persecuted at Sangbamitta’s instigation but bo was 
murdered and after his death the great Monastery was rebuilt 
The triumph bowoTer was not complete for Mohiaena built a 
new monastery called Jetavana on ground belonging to the 
MaMvihSra and asked the monks to abandon this portion of 
their territory, They refused and according to the Mahiramea 
ultimately sneoeeded in proving their rights before a oourt of 
law. But the Jetavana remained as the headquarters of a sect 
known as Sagaliyas. They appear to have been moderately 
orthodos:, but to have bad their own text of the Vinaya for 
according to the Commentary 2 on the Mahivamsa they “separ¬ 
ated the two Vibhangas of the Bhagavft* from the Vinaya... 
altering their meaning and misquoting their contents.” In 
the opinion of the Mah5vibhra both the Abhayagiri and Jeta- 
vans were scbiamatical, but the laity appear to have given 
their respect and offerings to all three impartiaUy and the 
Mah&vsnisa several times records how the same individual 
honoured the three Confraternities. 

M^ith the death of Mabheena ends the first and oldest part 
of fho Mahftvamsa, and also in native opinion the grand period 
of Sinhalese history, the subsequent kings being known as the 
Cfllavarpsa or minor dynasty. A continuation* of the chronicle 
takes up the story and tells of the doings of Mabasena's son 
Siriinoghavapi:ia». Judged by the standard of the Mahhvihira, 
be was fairly satisfactory. Ee rebuilt the lohapasAda and 
caused a golden image of Mahinda to be made and carried in 

’ MahAwjjL xaxvi. ili. ff. Qo(bibhft7»'« date proUhly dOS-3Uao(] 

Tii« coaistt chroaolciO' lOskM Qotbibtoya reign irosi ?44 td 
2fi7 And UnbSMn* from tS9 296 a.d. 

* QooUd by TujiKior. Inttod. p. liii. The Uebiv»i]). v, axprvttly 
tb«t th« PbeTTinurufti kad dlgtliya mcu ongiaafied in Oeyioa. 

* /.«. i« I oadentMtd. the two diTlsona of the Sotte Vibbtog^ 

* It vae wrilten up Co date »t vnhoua p«nod». The eheptort wlnob uke up the 
histoij efcer tbe death of Wahieene 4» uid to be tb« work ol DbemmakitU. wbo 
lired about 1260 . 

* He wu a oonteapomry of Cbe Qupta King Samudrij^upta who ttigned approri* 
matoly 33O-S70 a.o. Sm S. Zdri ia Jji. 1900, pp. 316 ff. 401 ff. TU» eynebrooum 
la a atriking ooaffrmation of Fleet a«d 6«iger‘e obionology. 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [ oh . 

procession. This veneration of the founder of a bcal church re¬ 
minds one of the respect shown to the images of half-deified 
abbolfl in Tibet, China and Japan. But the king did not neglect 
the Abhaydgiri or assign it a lower position than the Mahivihim 
for he gave it partial custody of the celebrated relic known os 
the Buddha*® tooth which was brought to Ceylon from Kalinga 
in the ninth year of his reign and baa ever since been considered 
the palladium of the island. 

2 

It may not he amiss to consider here briefly what ie known 
of the history of the Buddha’s relics and especially of this tooth. 
Of the minor distinctions between Buddhism and Hinduism one 
of the sharpest is this cultus. Hindu temples are often erected 
over natnral objects supposed to resemble the footprint or some 
member of a deity and sometimes tombs receive veneration^. 
But no case appears to be known in which either Hindus or 
Jains show reverence to the bones or other fragments of a human 
body. It is hence remarkable that relic-worship should be so 
wide-spread in Buddhism and appear so early in its history. 
The earliest Buddhist monuments depict figures worshipping at 
« stupa, which was probably a reliquary, and there is no reason 
to distrust the tractions which carry the praotice back at 
least to the icdgn of Asoka. The principal cause for its prevalence 
was no doubt that Buddhism, while creating a powerful religious 
current, provided hardly any objects of worship for the faithful*, 
It is also probable that the rudiments of relic worship existed 
in the districts frequented by the Buddha. The account of his 
death states that after the cremation of his body the Hallas 
placed his bones in their council ball and honoured them with 
songs and dancee. Then ught communitfos or individuals de¬ 
manded a portion of the relics and over each portion a cairn 
was bnilt. These proceedings are mentioned as if they were the 
usual ceremonial observed on the death of a great man and in 

^ S.p. tb* tont o{ Mml&ujs At Srinassm. 

' For A ioinewbAt Auiiil»r naaon tbo TonArsUoo of r«Hc« is pr«TAl«aC smoog 
Healkms. latom i&do«i an object of wonhip bat ifia ceromoaiee are ao 

auetere aoU monotonoua that any UoTetiosal pcKiiOM whioh an not forbiddeo as 
idolatroua are valooiae to the dsToob 

CEYLON 

23 

3CXXV] 

thd same Sutta* ibe Buddha himself mentions four classes of 
worthy of a eaim or d&goha*. We may perhaps conclude 
that in the earliest agee of Buddhism it was usual in north¬ 
eastern India to honour the bones of a distinguished man after 
cremation and inter them under a monument. This is not 
exactly relic worship but it has in it the root of the later tree. 
The Pitakaa cont^n little about the practice but the bfilinda 
Pafiha discusses the question at length and in one passage’ 
endeavoiirs to reconcile two sayings of the Buddha, “Hinder 
DOt yourselves by honouring the remains of the Tathigstha" 
and “Honour that relic of him who is worthy of honour.” It U 
the first utterance rather than the second ^at seems to have 
the genuine ring of Qotama. 

The earliest known leEoe are those discovered in the stupa 
oi Pipr&v& on the borders of Nepal in 1898. Their precise nature 
and the date of the Insoriptioo. describing them have been the 
subject of much discussion. Some authorities thinV that this 
stupa may be one of those erected over a portion of the Buddha’s 
ashes after his funeral. Even Barth, a most cautious 
sceptical scholar, admitted^ first that the inscription is not 
later than Asoka, secondly that the vase is a reliquary con¬ 
taining what were believed to be bonee of the Buddha, "^us In 
the time of Asoka the worship of tho Buddha’s relics was well 
known and I see no reason why the inscription should not be 
anterior to that time. 

According to Buddbaghosa’s Sumangalavildsint and Sin¬ 
halese texts which though late ate based on early material’, 
Mah&kassapa instigated Aj&tssattn to collect the relics of the 
Buddha, and to place them in a stupa, there to await the 
advent of Asoka. In Asoka’a time the stupa bad become over¬ 
grown and bidden by jungle but when the king was in search oi 
reUcs, its position was revealed to him. He found inside it an 
inscription authorizing him to disperse the contente and pro- 

* Dis. Sik. x?T. T, 27. 

* PIntaKh mentioos a atory tb&C tbe reUaa ot TCtrp Kaaander wm ciiaUarl; 
divided icto eight portiwi bat the story may be meiely a re^a e£ the obseqoiea 
of (bo Suddhe. 

* IT. 3, 24. The fint teat Is iiom Uahiparinibb&oa 8otta, t. 24. The eeoc&d hia 
DOt been ideotlfled. 

* yomuti des <9sti«n(s, Ool. 1206. 

* See Nortaaa," Buddhist le^eoda el Aseba and his limes." 1 b J A.<9. Beeg. 1910. 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

24 

[Cfi. 

cecded to distribute thejo among the 84,000 Tuonasteries ivhich 
be is said to have constructed. 

lo its main outlines this account is probable, Aj4tsaattu 
conquered the LicohaTis and other small states to the north of 
Magadha and ii he was convinced of the importance of the 
Buddha’s relics it would be natural that be should transport 
them to his capital, regarding them perhaps as talismans*. 
Here they were neglected, though not damaged, in the reigns 
of Brahmanical kings and were rescued from oblivion by Asoka, 
who being sovereign of all India and anxious to spread BuddbUm 
throughout his dominions would be likely to distribute the 
relics as widely as he distributed his pillars and inscriptions. 
But later Buddhist kings could not emulate this imperial im- 
partiahty and we may surmise that such a monarch as Kanishka 
would see to it that all the principal relics in northern India 
found their way to his capital. Tbe bones discovered at Pesha¬ 
war are doubtless those considered most authentic in his reign. 

Next to tho tooth, the most interesting relic of tbe Buddha 
was bis patra or alms*bowI, which plays a part somewhat aimilar 
to that of tbe Holy Orail in Christian romance. The Mahivamsa 
stated that Asoka sent it to Ceylon, but tbe Chinese pilgrim 
>VHsieu^ saw it at Peshawar a^ut 405 a.n. It was shown to 
the people daily at the midday and evening services. The pilgrim 
thought it contained about two pecks yet such were its miracu* 
ious properties that tho poor could fill it with a gift of a few 
flowers, whereas tbe rich cast in myriads of bxwhels and found 
there was still room for more. A few years later Fa-Hsien 
heard a sermon in Ceylon* in which the preacher predicted that 
tlie bowl would be t^en in the course of centuries to Central 
Asia, China, Ceylon and Central India whence it would ulti¬ 
mately ascend to the Tusita heaven for tho use of the future 
Buddha. Later accounts to some extent record the fulfilment 
of these predictions inasmuch as they relate how tho bowl (or 
)k)wIs) passed from land to land but the story of its wandering 
may have little foundation since it is combined with the idea 
t)iat it is wafted from shrine to ahrine according as the fMth is 
flourishing or decadent. Hsiian Chuang says that it “had gone 

• Just M Ibe Teota vu ooaiidcAd to U tbe pelledmia of SlobtkM kifiga 

• iUocrtl of Boddhiet kingdoae. L«gge, pp, S4, 3a- P4-Hai«> epeake of tbe 

CMjitry boe ibe lovn of (PuCebepue), 

• Ibii. p. IW. ?e.E»lea do«e not indkete thei tt tbii time ibere wee » rirel 
bowl in Ceylo® but npneecte tho preeeber te eeying it wu th«e ia aindben. 

xxxv] 

CETLON 

25 

Peshawar to several coiintries and was now in Peraia' 
A Mohammedan legend relates that it is at Kandahar and will 
wntam any quantity of liquid without overflowing. Maroo 
Polo says Kubiai Khan sent an embassy in 12S4 to brine it 
from Ceylon to China*. ® 

The WOTderinga of the tooth, though almost as surprising 
as those of the bowl, rest on better historical evidence but 
there is probably more wntinuity in the story than in the holy 
object of which it is related, for the piece of bone which is 
credited with being the left canine tooth of the Bleeeed One 
may have been changed on more than one occasion. The Sin- 
haleae chronicles*, as mentioned, say that it was brought to 
Ceylon m the ninth year of Sirimeghavwjna*. This date may be 
approximately correct for about 413 or later Pa-Hsien described 
^e annual festival of the tooth, during which it was exposed 
for veneration at the Abhayagiri monastery, without indicating 
that the usage w^ recent. 

The tooth did not, according to Sinhalese tradition, fonn 
port of the relics distributed after the cremation of the Buddha, 
Seven bones, including four teeth*, were excepted from that 
distribution and the Sage Kbema taking the left canine tooth 
direct from the funeral pyre gave it to the king of KaUnga, who 
enshrined it in a gorgeous temple at Dantapura* where it is 
supposed to have remained 800 years. At the end of that period 

i. pp. S02, 203. Bet tid life of Hadu Chuong ttyt B«aor« oot 

* tfuto Polo trua Yolo, zl pp, Ste. 830. 

* For tb* history of the tooth ne iV&Uicoawo, p. 241, in Toreonr's odiUoD; Ch« 

DothaTamia in Poli written by DhuamobtU in 1211 a. 0 ,: sad th* glnUloeB 
pewmj I)»l4d»poisT*U aad DbHu»acia»y*. Boo olso Bo Conho, Mmair <m th» 
Euiory of At TooA Belie of Ceytoit, 1873, ond Yolo^e aot«s on Unrw Polo u. 
pp. 828-380. ' 

* /•boot Ml or 810, ecoording to which chronok^y ii idoptcd, hut neither 
IV-fliien Of EsnsB Chuoa^ eny» »nything ehoul ife »rri»ul froea Indfe oni this 
pMt «l th* ecocy might be dinnjaeed u a legend. Rot eeeuig how oxtnonlioory 
w«ro the •dvenluras oi the tooth So historieei times, it would be ooreMOoehle to 
dsoy thet It tney beve been emugglsd out of Indie for eafety. 

* Veriou eoecunfe ere given of the dupoeel of those tsoth, but aoro thsn enough 
relies wsrs preeervod in Tarioue shrines to sMOQOt for slL Hshso Chueng sew or 
beerd of aeered tooth in Bsikh, Neger, Ksshmlf, Kenenj end Csyion. Another 
tooth Is uid to bo kept ooer FoO'Chew. 

* Fleosibly euppo^ to be Pari. The cennonfes still obMrred in the temple of 
Jegennetb ue saspeetod of briog bseed on Buddhist ritee. Dentepure of the KAhages 
is however mentioned in some verses ^sotod in DTghe IJibSye iiz. iC. This looks 
as ii the Deme ajigbt be pro'Buddhist. 

BVDDH2SM OUTSIDE INDIA [oa. 

ft piow Mug named GuhasiTft became involved in disaetwraa 
win on account of the relic, and, aa the beet means of pie- 
serving it, bade bis daughter fly with bet husband* and take it 
to Ceylon. This, after some miraculous adventures, they were 
able to do. The tooth was received with great ceremony and 
lodged in an edifice called the Dhammaoakka from which it 
was taken every year for a temporary sojourn* in the Abhaya- 
giii monastery. 

The cultus of the tooth flouriehed exceedingly in the next 
few centuries and it came to he regarded as the talisman of the 
king and nation. Hence when the court moved from Anura* 
dhapufa to Pollunaruwa it was installed in the new capital. In 
the troubled times which followed it changed its residence some 
fifteen times. Early in the fourteenth century it was carried off 
by the Tamils to southern India but was recovered by Parftkrama 
Bihn HI and during the commotion created by the invasions 
of the Tamils, Chine« and Portuguese it was hidden in various 
cities. In 1560 Dorn Constantino de Bragan^a, Portuguese 
Viceroy of Goa, led a crusade against Jaffna to avenge the 
alleged persecution of Christians, and when the town was 
sacked a relic, described as the tooth of an ape mounted in 
gold, was found in a temple and carried off to Goa. On this 
Bayin Naung, King of Pegu, offered an enormous ransom to 
redeem it, which the secular government wished to accept, but 
the clergy and inquisition put such pressxire on the Viceroy 
that he rejected the proposal. The aicbbUbop of Goa pounded 
the tooth in ft mortar before the viceregal court, burned the 
fr^^ents and scattered the aehee over the sea*. 

But the singular result of this bigotry was not to destroy 
one sacred tooth but to create two. The king of Pegu, who 
wished to marry a Sinhalese princeas, sent an embassy to Ceylon 
to arrange the matoh. They were received by tiie king of Ootto, 
who bore the curiously combined name of Hon Juan Hharma- 
p&la. He had no daughter of his own hut palmed off the daugh¬ 
ter of a chamberlain. At the same time he informed the king 

‘ Tbe; mr* c«Ued KmouU sod Dsftts In (ho EUijSTsU;*. 

* i* sstnUagmulsn^ betwsse Uus rtto sod the MrooeoiM obwrred st 

pQit tbs isLsgss of Js^sxmStbs bis rdstirM sn MOTs^cd omy suounsr 

viUk Smsi pomp to s oonntry nedsnes vbsra tb«y remsio dudog some *Mks 

* 8«s Tea&eot’s Ceylon, toL o. pp. 24, 80 sad 199 ff. sod tbs PortugOMS 
ntborittM geotod 

xzxv] 

CS7L0N 

27 

of Pegu that the tooth destroyed at Goa »aa not the real relic 
and that this still remamed in his posseesiou. Bajin Kaung was 
induced to marry the lady and received the tooth with appro¬ 
priate ocremonies. But when the king of Kandy heard of these 
doings, he apprized the king ol Pegu of the double trick that 
had been played on him. He offered him his own daughter, a 
veritable princess, in marriage and as her dowry the true tooth 
which, he said, was neither that destroyed at Goa nor yet that 
sent to Pegu, but one in his own possession. Bayin Naung 
received the Kandyan embassy politely but rejected its pro¬ 
posals, thinking no doubt that it would be awkward to declare 
the first tooth spurious after it had been solemnly installed ae 
a sacred relic. The second tooth therefore remained in Kandy 
and appears to bo that now venerated there. When Vitnala 
Dharma re-established the original line of kings, about 1592, 
it wae accepted as authentic. 

As to its authenticity, it appears to be beyond doubt that 
it is 8 piece of discoloured bone about two inches long, which 
could never have been the tootJi of an ordinary human being, 
80 that oven the faithful can only contend that the Buddha 
was of superhuman stature. Whether it is the relic which was 
venerated in Ceylon before the arrival of the Portuguese is a 
more difficult question, for it may be argued with equal plausi¬ 
bility that the Sinhalese had good reasons for hiding the real 
tooth and good reasons for duplicatir^ it. The s^ngeet argu¬ 
ment against the authenticity of the reUc destroyed by the 
Portuguese is that it was found in Jaffna, which had long been 
a Tamil town, whereas there is no reason to believe that the 
real tooth was at this time in Tamil custody. But, although the 
narive literature alwa}^ speaks of it as unique, the Sinhalese 
appear to have produced replicas more than once, for we hear 
of such being sent to Burma and China^. Again, the offer to 
ransom the tooth came not from Ceylon but from the Ving of 
Pegu, wbo, as the sequel shows, was gullible in such matters; 
the Portuguese clearly thought that they had acquired a relic 
of primary importance; on any hypothesis one of the kings of 
Ceylon must have deceived the king of Pegu, and finally Vimala 
Bhorma had the strongest political reasons for accepting as 

* F'ortuoe in Two VttUi to Ton Counlnu of China, roL n. pp. dMcribci 
cm of tK««e tootli pTt4er««<l in tho Ku-aIim aionutwy noar Fo&<ohow. 

A 

B. UL 

28 BUI>DB28M OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

geti’oine the relic kept et Kftndy, emce the posseesion of the true 
toottk ivent far to substantiate a Sinhalese monaroh's right to 
the throne. 

The booth is now preserved in a temple at Kandy. The visitor 
looking through a soreen of bars can see on a silver table a 
Urge jewelled case shaped like a bell. Flowers soattered on the 
door or piled on other tables fill the chamber with thoir heavy 
perfume. Inside the bell are six other bells of diminishing size, 
the innermost of which covers a golden lotus containing the 
sacred tooth. But it U only on rare oocaalons that the outer 
caskets are removed. Worshippers as a rule have to content 
themselves with offering dowers^ and bowing but X was informed 
that the priests celebrate puja daily before the relic. The cere¬ 
mony comprises the consecration and distribntion of rice and 
LB interesting as connectmg the veneration of the tooth with 
the ritual observed in Hindu temples. But we must return to 
the general history of Buddhism in Ceylon. 

3 

The kings who ruled in the fifth century were devont Bud¬ 
dhists and builders of vih&ras but the most important event of 
this period, not merely for the island but for the whole Buddhist 
church in the south, was the literary activity of Buddbaghosa 
who is said to have resided in Ceylon during the reign of 
Mah&n&ma, The chief authorities for bis life are a passage in 
the continuation of the Mah&vamsa^ and the Buddbaghosup- 
patti, a late Burmese te:(t of about 1550, which, while adding 
many anecdotes, appears not to come from an independent 
source^. The gist of their account is that he was bom in a Brah¬ 
man family near Gaya and early obtained renown as a disputant. 
He was converted to Buddhism by a monk named Bevata and 
began to write theologies treatises*. Bevata observing his 

^ Thi* pnetioe mast bs nty old. Tbo Yiosja of the UOJuarrfistiTSdiiu And 
•iailAr Utie »p«ak of offeru^ flovon to a tootb of tho Bsddhs. 6e» J.A. 1914, XL 
pp. 023. M3. Tbft PaU CtLOa too toUe u* th«t the relics of tho Boddbo were honoured 
with ^rlAnds wd perfumes. 

* Chop, zxxvn. 

» Both proboblf repreeoct the trediCton eurrent et the Meh&rihlre, bat ocecfii- 
iDf M tho Tslsmg trsditioB fiuddha^boos was a BrebiMn bom At Thaton. 

* The MAhlTAipsA eape he eompowd the OfiSnodera and AtthasilinJ at this 
tiaiA before JUrtus for Ce/IoA. 

XXX7] 

0B7L0N 

29 

mt«ntion to compose a oommenlary <m the Pitokea, told him 
that only the test (pilimattam) of the soriptures was to be 
fonnd in India, not the anoisnt commentaries, but that the Sin¬ 
halese commentaries were gennine, haring been oomposed in 
that language by Mahiada. He therefore bade Buddhaghosa 
lepw to Ceylon and translate these Sinhalese works into the 
idiom of Magadha, by which Pali must be meant. Buddba- 
ghosa took this advice and there is no reason to distrust the 
statement of the Mahivamsa that he arrived in the reign of 
M s h an&ma, who ruled according to Geiger from 466 to 480, 
though the usual reckoning places him about fiity years earlier! 
The fact that Fa-Esien, who visited Ceylon about 412, does not 
mention Buddh^hosa is in favour of Geiger’s chronology*. 

He first studied in the Mahavihira and eventually re^iuested 
permission to translate the Siuhaleae commentaries. To prove 
his competence for the task he composed the celebrated Viand* 
dbi-magga, and, this being ecnaiderad satisfactory, he took up 
his residence in the Ganthftksra Vihlra and proceeded to the 
work of translation. When it was finished he returned to India 
or according to the Talaing tradition to Thston. The Buddha* 
ghosuppatti adds two stories of which the truth and meaning 
are equally doubtful. They are that Buddhaghosa burnt the 
works written by Mahinda and that his knowledge of Sanskrit 
was called in question but triumphantly proved. Can there be 
here any allusion to a Sanskrit canon supported by the oppo¬ 
nents of the Mah&vlhkra? 

Even in its main outline the story is not very coherent for 
one would imagine that, if a Buddhist from Magadha went to 
Ceylon to translate the Sinhalese commentaries, his object 
must have been to introduce them among Indian Buddhits. 
But there is no evidence that Buddhaghosa did this and he is 
for ns rimply a great figure in the Uteraiy and religious history 
of Ceylon. Burmese tradition maintains that he was a native 
of Thaton and returned thither, when his labours in Ceylon 
were oompleted, to spread the scriptures in bis native language. 
This version of his activity is intelligible, though the evidence 
for it is weak. 

* IVEaleo is cbsry of stsshoaifi; ooouioporur colsbriUM but li« rafen to a 
WQll-kDOwa moole oallad Ta>iQO>kiQ.a (fDbauuDakatUj Mid had BoddlugboM 
bean already eelebiatcd ha vouM baxdly bare omiHad bia. 

80 SUDDH28M OUTSIDE INDIA [CR. 

He composed & great oorpns of exegetical Hterati^ which 
has been preserved, hot. since mnch ot it le still unedited, the 
precise extent of his labours is tmcertain. There is l^weyer httle 
doubt of the authenticity of his commentaries on the four great 
ITilt&yas, on the Abhidbamma and on the Vinaya (called 
Samanta-pAsftdM) and in them^ he refers to the Visuddhi- 
ma»a as his own work. He says expressly that his explanations 
are founded on Sinhalese materials, which be frequently cites 
as the opinion of the ancients (porln&). By this word he prob¬ 
ably means traditions recorded in Sinhalese and attributed to 
Maiinda, but it is in any case clear that the works which he 
consulted were considered old in the fifth oentury a.e>. Some 
of their names are preserved in the Samanta-pfisidihi whore 
he mentions the great commentary (Msb&-Atthakathi), the 
Raft comraentaiy (Paccari, so called because written on a rafth 
the Knrundi commentary composed at Kurunda-Velu and 
others*. All this literature has disappeared and we can only 
judge of it by Buddhaghosa’s reproduction which Is probably 
not a translation but a selection and rearrangement. Indeed 
bis occasional direct quotations from the ancients or from an 
Atthakathft imply that the rest of the work is merely based on 
the Sinhalese commentaries, 

Buddhaghosa was not an independent thinker but he makes 
amends for his want of originality not only by his industry and 
learning but by his power of grasping and expounding the 
whole of an intricate subject. Hw Visuddhi-magga has not yet 
been edited in Europe, but the extracts and copious analysis* 
which have been published indicate that it is a comprehensive 
restatement of Buddhist doctrine made with as free a hand as 
orthodoxy permitted. The Mahkvamsa observes that the 
Theiss held his works in the same estimation aa the Fitakas. 
They are in no way coloured by the Mahayanist tenets which 
were already pievsJent in India, but state in its severest form 
the Hinaysnist creed, of which he is the most authoritative 
exponent. The Visuddhi-magga is divided into three parte 
treating of conduct (eilam), meditation (samAdhi) and knowledge 

* Zo Uu Cone on Uu end DlMoaMMijiai 

* 8«* RbTi D»Tids and Cmpanlar** ifitroduotion to l p. x. 

* In the Jffw*al«fPeU TetiSoe. 1691. pp. 76-lSi Slnoe the above »«e vrttton 
the firat Toluae ol the Wvt of the Vigiiddhi megga, edited b; Ura Khye Devlde, 
bai been pobUehed h; the Pal! Xert Sooietj, 1920. 

CEYLON 

31 

xsyv] 

(padSi), the drat bemg the necessary snbstr&tum for the 
religious life of which the others axe the two principal branches. 
But though he intersperses his exposition with miraculous stories 
and treats exhaustively of superbuman powers, no trace of the 
worship of Mahayanist Bodhisattvas is found in hU worhs and, 
as for literature, he himself is the chief authority for the gena* 
inenses and completeoees of the Pali Canon aa we know It. 

When we find it said that bis works wore esteemed as highly 
as the Fitakas, or that the documents which he translated into 
Pali were the words of the Buddha^, the suspicion naturally 
arises that the Pali Canon may be in part his composition and 
it may he well to review briefly its history in Oeylon. Our 
knowledge appears to be derived entirely from the traditions 
of the Mah&vih3ra which represent Mahinda as teaching the 
text of the Pitakas orally, accompanied by a commentary. If 
we admit the general truth of the narrative concerning Ma- 
hinda’s mission, there is nothii^ improbable in these state* 
mente, for it would be natural t^t an Indian teacher should 
know by heart his sacred texts and the commentaries on them. 
We cannot of course assume that the Fltakas of Mabinda were 
the Pali Canon as we know it, but the inscriptions of Asoka 
refer to passages which can he found in that canon and therefore 
parts of it at any rate must have been accepted as scripture in 
the third century b.c. But it la probable that considerable 
variation was permitted in the text, although the sense and a 
certain terminology were carefully guarded. It was not till 
the reign of Vatt^kniaoi, probably about 20 B.o., that the canon 
was committed to writing and the Pariv&ra, composed in 
Ceylon^, was included in it. 

In the reign of DuddhadAsa^ a learned monk named Mahll- 
dhammakathi is said to have translated the Suttas into Sinhalese, 
which at this time was eetoomed the proper language for letters 
and theology, but in the next century a contrary tendency, 
probably initiated by Buddhaghosa, becomes apparent and Sin¬ 
halese works are rewritten in Pali^. But nothing indicates that 

1 Bb «gpi»tto SitASMD. Sm Buddhagliocuppfttti. ckp. t. 

I U ftppwn to be unknown M tbe CUincM Trfplt«aa. Foreocoe further razoAfki 
ott Uie Genoa eee Book bi cbep. xm. $ 3. 

• That 1» eoeordioj » Geiger 3S0-416 a . o . Psphepi he wee the Te mo kiu-U 
meoUoned b; F»-Hefee. 

* The t«ndezM 7 eoeou odd bnt U een be perellelcd in Indie where It oo« 
owotaaob to rewrite vemeooler wke in Senskriu See Grietwo, J.B.A.S. ISIS, 

83 BUDPffISM OUTBIDS Ji^DIA [oa. 

any part of what we call tha Pali Canon underwent this process. 
Buddhaghosa distinguishes clearly between test and comment, 
between Pali and Sinhalese documents. He has a coherent 
history o! the test, beginning with the Council of Rije^ba; 
he dlscuseea various readings, he esplains dii^ouJt words. He 
treated the ancient commentaries with freedom, but there is no 
reason to think that he allowed himself any discretion or right 
oi selection in dealirig with the sacred texts accepted by the 
Mahavih&ra, though it might be prudent to await the publica¬ 
tion of his commentaries on all the Nik&yas before asserting 
this uoreserredly. 

To sum up, the available evidence points to the conclusion 
that in the time of Asoka texts and commentaries preserved 
orally were brought to Ceylon. The former, though in a some¬ 
what fluid condition, were sufficiently sacred to be kept un¬ 
changed in the onginal Indian language, the latter were trans¬ 
lated into the kindred but still distinct vernacular of the island. 
Zn the next century and a h^ some additions to the Pali texts 
were made and about 20 b.o. the Mah&vibira, which proved as 
superior to the other communities in vitality as it was in 
antic^uity, caused written copies to be made of what it considered 
as the canon, including some recent works. There is no evidence 
that Buddhaghosa or anyone else enlarged or curtailed the 
canon, but the curious ti^tion that be collected and burned 
all the books written by Mahinda in Sinhalese ^ may allude to 
the existence of other works which be (presumably in agreement 
with the Mah&vih&ra) considered spurious. 

Soon after the departure of Buddhaghosa Dhitusena came 
to the throne and held like Dhammasoka a convocation about 
the three Piiakas^” This implies that there was still some 
doubt as to what was scripture and that the canon of the 
Mahkvihira was not universally accepted. The Vetulyas, of 

p. laa. E«so ZB Cocked ic Uw Mohiry B*«oa — to hftvs b««& 

doabtJul of tto iiDiiiort*bty of Mi ifoAi in Eofliih pni*nd o Lotia truukUoa 
of kii S^yt. 

' It k teportod with oomo omphoiij ■« the tnditjoa of the Anckato In Buddha. 
gbMQppatti, cap. m If the work# »«» aer«l:f those whioh Buddhaghcee hunaelf 
had tmuJated tha proeedum aeon# •omawhat diutio. 

» J^T. xxtm. Dhacmiaeokova to haai Pitakuteye Saegaban, Dhituseoa 
nigB«4 from 4dM77 aceenUug to the oopamoft ehronologr or 6CS-C27 aocordioff 
6oO«gat. 

CEYLON 

33 

sxiv] 

whom we heard in the third century a.d., reappear in the 
seventh when they are said to have been support^ by a pro¬ 
vincial governor but not by the king Aggabodhi^ and still 
more explicitly in the reign of Far&krama Bfthu {c. 1160). Ho 
endeavoured to reconcile to the Mah&vih&ra “the Abbayagiii 
brethren who separated themaelves from the time of l^g 
Vattag4mani Abhaya and the Jetavana brethren that had 
parted since the days of Mah&eeoa and taught the Vetulla 
Fit&ka and other writings as the words of Budd^, which indeed 
were not the words of Buddha^.” So it appears that another 
recension of the canon was in existence for many centuries. 

Dh&tusena^ though depicted in the Mab^vanisa as a moat 
orthodox monarch, embellished the Abbay^ii monastery and 
was addicted to sumptuous ceremonies in honour of images and 
relics. Thus he made an image of Mahinda, dedicated a shrine 
and statue to Metteyya and ornamented the effigies of Buddha 
with the royal jewels. In an image chamber (apparently at the 
Abhayagiri) he set up figures of Bodhisattvas^, by which we 
should perhaps understa^ tbs pieviotis births of Gotama. He 
was billed by his son and Sinhalese history degenerated into a 
complicated story of crime and discord, in which the weaker 
faction generally ^ught the ud of the Tamils. These Utter 
became more and more powerful and with their advance Bud* 
dhism tended to give pla^ to Hinduism. In the eighth century 
the court removed from Anuradbapura to PcUumaruwa, in 
order to escape from the pressure of Tamils, but the picture 
of anarchy and decadence grows more and more gloomy antil 
the accession of Vijaya Blhu in 1071 who succeeded in making 
himself king of all O^lon. Though he recovered Anuradbapura 
it was not made the royal reeidenoe either by himself or by hie 
greater successor, Parl^ama Bfthu^. This monarch, the most 
eminent in the long list of Ceylon’s sovereigns, after he had 
consolidated his power, devoted himself, in the words of Tennent, 
“to the two grand objects of royal solicitude, religion and 
agriculture.” He was lavish in building monasteries, temples 
and hbrariee, but not lees generous in constracting or repairing 

> Hfthi?. so. ts a. 

* M*bST. iXCvnL 21*23. 

* UahtT. xxmn. AkW p«tunie«b« babustangAlMeUys boddbmtM oa 
bwUino. Ct Fft-Hiieo, chap. nvm. 

* Or Paimkkaaia Bits. Probably llR-llSa 

34 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [OH. 

tanks and works of irrigation. la fch© reign of Vijaya Bihn 
hardly any duly ordained monks were to be found‘» the succes¬ 
sion having been interrupted, and the deficiency was supplied 
by bringing qualified Tharas from Banna. But by the time of 
ParSkrama Bihu the old quarrels of the monasteries revived, 
and, as he was ansious to secure unity, he summoned a synod 
at Anuradhapura, It appears to have attained its object by 
recognising the Mahivibira as the standaad of orthodoxy and 
dealing summarily with dissentients*. The secular side of mon¬ 
astic life also received liberal attention. Lands, revenues and 
guest-houses were provided for the monasteries as well as 
hospitals. As in Burma and Siam Brahmans were respected and 
the king erected a buildii^ for their use in the capital. Like 
Asoka, he forbade the kiUing of animals. 

But the glory of Parikrama Bihn stands up in the later 
history of Ceylon like an isolated peak smd thirty years after 
his death the country had fallen almost to its previous low level 
of prosperity. The Tamils again occupied many districts and were 
never entirely dislodged as long as the Sinhalese kingdom 
lasted. Buddhism ten^d to decline but was always the tchgion 
of the national party and was honoured with as much magnifi¬ 
cence as their meana allowed. Par&krama Bihu 11 (c. 1240), 
who recovered the sacred tooth from the Tamils, is sEud to have 
celebrated splendid festivals and to have imported learned 
monks from the country of the Colaa^. Towards the end of the 
fifteenth century the inscriptions of Kalyani indicate that Sin¬ 
halese religion enjoyed a great reputation in Burma^. 

A furtbei change adverse to Buddhism was occasioned by 
the arrival of the Portuguese in Z50d. A long and horrible 
struggle ensued between them and the various kings among 
whom the distracted island was divided until at the end of the 
sixteenth century only Kandy remajned independent, the whole 
coast being in the hands of the Portuguese. The singular bar¬ 
barizes which they perpetrated throughout this struggle are 
vouched for by their own bi8toriaas^ but it does not appear 

* MaUvtipM UC 4-7. 

* U«h&>tina Lxxvni. 2l->2T. 

* LXJUiT. If diij DMftiu tii« regiMi of Modru, tbe obvioua qaceUco is 
vb«t leonoU Biuldbin c«a tboro haro boon thm ot thi» poiiod. 

< 7. im. pp. 40, 41. 

* I tak« this stat«>aent from Toooo&t vbo rofoionoea 

XSS7] 

CEYLON 

35 

that the Sinhalese degraded themaelTee bj Bimilar atrocities. 
Since the Portuguese ^rished to propagate Roman Catholicism 
as weU as to extend their politacal role and used for this purpose 
(according to the Hah&vaaisa) the persuasions of gold as well as 
the terrors of torture, it is not surprising if many Sinhalese pro¬ 
fessed ollcgianco to Ohristianitj, bat when in 159? the greater 
part of C^lon formally accepted Portuguese sOTereignty, the 
chiefs insisted that they should be allowed to letain their own 
religion and customs. 

The Dutch first appeared in 1602 and were welcomed by the 
Court of Kandy as allies capable of expelling the Portuguese. 
This they succeeded in doing by a series of rictorics between 
1038 and 1058, and remained masters of a great part of tbe island 
until their posseauons were taken by the British in 1795. 
Randy however continued independent until 1815. At first the 
Dutch tried to enforce Christianity and to prohibit Buddhism 
within their territory* but ultimately hatred of the Roman 
Catholic obiuuh made them favourable to Buddhism and they 
were ready to assist those kings who desired to restore tbe 
national leligion to its former splendour. 

4 

In spite of this assistance the centuries when the Sinhalcso 
were contcnduig with Europeans were not a prosperous time 
for Buddhism. Hinduisnr spread in the nocth^, Cbtistlanity in 
the coast belt, hut stiU it was a point of honour with most 
uative sovereigns to protect the national religion so far as titeir 
distressed condition allow’ed. For the seventeenth century we 
have an interesting account of the state of the country called 
An Hislwicat Relation of the Island of Ceylon by an Englishman, 
Robert Knox, who was detained by the king of Kandy from 
1600 to 1680, Ho docs not seem to have been aware that there 
was any distinction between Buddhism and Hinduism. Though 
he describes the Siuhaleso os idolaters, he also emphasises tbe 
fact that Buddon (aa be urttes the name) is the Cod '‘unto 
whom the salvation of souls belongs,” aud for whom "above all 
others they have a h^h respect and devotionHe aleo describes 

* Sm Ceyfo» i. i. pp. 148, IS7. 

( UfijAsah* I (USl) it tftid to bare made Siratsm die Coort rellsioo. 

36 SUDI>S!SM OUTBIDS INDIA [m. 

the ceiemonies of pint and baoa, the perahera prooeeeion, and 
two dflssee of Baddhist monks, the elders and the ordinary 
mernhers of the Sangha. His narratiye indicates that Buddhism 
was accepted as the higher religion, though men were prone to 
pray to deities who would save from temporal danger. 

About this time Vimala Dharma n‘ made great e^ita to 
improve the religious condition of the island and Bnding that 
the true suceestion had again failed, arranged with the Dutch 
to send an embassy to Arakan and bring back qualified Theras- 
Bnt apparently the steps taken were not sufficient, for when 
king Kittisipi RAjaaiha (1747-81), whose piety forms the theme 
of the last two chapters of the Mflh&vaipsa. about reforming 
the Sangba, he found that dniy ordained monks were extinct 
and that many so-called monks bad families. He therefore 
decided to apply to Dhammika, king of Ayuthia in Siam, and 
like his predecessor despatched an embassy on a Dutch ship. 
Dhamiuika sent back a company of “more than ten monks “ 
(that is mow than sufficient for the performance of all ecoleai- 
astioal acts) under the Abbot UpfiU in 1752 and another to 
relieve it in 1756*. They were received by the king of Oeylon with 
great honour and subsequently by the ordination which they 
oooiened placed the succeedon beyond dispute. But the order 
thus reconstituted was aristocratic aud exclutive: only members 
of the highest caste were admitted to it and the wealthy middlo 
clashes found themselves excluded from a community which 
they were expected to honour and maintain. This led to the 
despatch of an embassy to Burma in 1S02 and to the foundation 
of another branch of the Sangba, known as the Amarapuia 
school, distinct in so far as Its validity depended on Burmese 
not 3iame8e ordination. 

Since ordination is for Buddhists merely self •dedication to a 
higher life and does not confer any sacramental or sacerdotal 

> HU wgB U dstdd M ISTO-lTOl, ftlfo u 16S7-170S. It U i«iBa^bl9 thM tbs 
Mfthfcrwn w mtkM SMt tli« kiss* 04U«d Viatk PhsriBft reli^oua smbMues 
to AstitVL 6«a xmv. 15,16 u<l scm 10 , 11 . 

* Sm for soiD» Lot^wo: NoUos ipr Qft U*&Q4cht Si*n>oi* ooQfawisnt 1 a 
d« dMtx miaioiu rdis^MMS de S^ia 4 Cerlon aa isili«u do xvui 

SiScl» Jov. d«io& ISOS, pp. 563 S. Tb^kiosuU^dPbxmBuksbjtbftU&h&^qiaa 
•pp»4n to bxTo booQ knovtt m Pin Sob^ Tbxa la SImd. Tbo latorat (ok by iho 
SiaoMM in Coyloa st tUU poriod u xbown by Ute SinaeM ol tlio Mnhi.* 

fxqn m*do in 1796. 

zxxv] 

CSYLOii 

37 

the importeaoe Meigned to it may seem strange. But 
toe Idea g,^ back to the oldeet leeorde in toe Vinaya and hae 
Its iwt m toe privileges accorded to toe order, A Bhikkhu had 
a right to ex^ot much from toe laity, but he also had to prove 
hi8 worth Md Gotama-e early legjalation was largely oonoraed 
with excluding unenitable candidates. The solicitude for vaUd 
o^ton was only the ecclesiasaca! form of toe popular feeling 
that toe honours and mmnniUes of the order were conditional 
on itt m^toning a certain standard of conduct. Other 
methods of reform might have been devised, but the old iniuno- 
Hon that a monk could be admitted only by other duly ordained 
monks was fairly efBoadous and could not be disputed But 
the ourions result is that though Ceylon was in early times toe 
second home of Buddhism, almost ali (if indeed not all) the 
monks found there now derive their i^t to the title of Bhikkhu 
from zorcign countries. 

The Sinhalese Sangha is generally described as divided into 
four Bohools, those of Siam, Kelani, Amarapura and Eamanya 
of which the first two are practically identical, Kelani b€dng 
simply a separate province of the Siamese school, which other¬ 
wise has its headquartere in the inland districts. This school 
founded as mentioned above by priests who arrived in 175 o] 
comprises about half of the whole Sangha and has some pre- 
taneione to represent the hierarchy of Ceylon, since the last 
kings of Kandy gave to the heads of the two great monasteriea 
in the capital, Asgiri and Malwatte, jorisdictioa over the north 
and south of the island respectively. It difiera in some porticu- 
lare from the Amarapura school It only admits membere of 
the highest cast© and prescribes that monks are to wear the 
upper robe over one shoulder only, whereas the Amarapuxans 
admit members of the first three castes (but not those lower in 
the social scale) and require both shoulders to be covered. 
There are other minor differences among which it is interesting 
to note that the Siamese school object to the use of the formola 
“I dedicate this gift to the Buddha” which is used in the other 
schools when anything is presented to the order for the use of 
the monks. It is held that this ©xpieesion was oonect in the life¬ 
time of the Buddha but not after his death. The two schools 
are not mutually hostile, and members of each find a hospitable 
reception in the monasteries of the other. The laity patronize 

3 $ 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[ca. 

both indifferently 6J\d both fre^iuent the same places of pilgrim¬ 
age, though all of these and the majority of the temple lands 
belong to the sect of Siam. It is wealthy, aristocratic and has 
inherited the ancient traditions of Ceylon, whereas the Amara- 
piiraos are more active and inchnod to propaganda. It is said 
(bey are (he chief allies of the Theosophists and European 
Buddhists. The Ramanya' school is more recent and distinct 
than the others, being in some ways a reformed community. 
It aims at greater strictness of life, forbidding monasteries to 
hold property and insisting on genuine poverty. It also totally 
rejects the worship of Hindu deiries and its lay members do not 
recognize the monks of other schools. It is not large but its 
influence is considerable. 

It has been said that Buddhism flourished in Ceylon only 
when it was able to secure the royal favour. There is some truth 
in this, for the Sangba does not struggle on its own behalf but 
expects the laity to provide for its material needs, making a 
return in educational and religious services. Such a body if not 
absolutely dependent on royal patronage has at least much to 
gam from it. Yet this admission must not blind us to the fact 
that during its long and often distinguished history Sinhalese 
Buddhism has been truly the national faith, as opposed to the 
beliefs of various invaders, and has also ministered to the 
spiritual aspirations of the nation. As Knox said in a period 
when it was not particularly flourishing, the Hindu gods look 
after worldly aflairs but Buddha after the soiU. When the 
island passed under British rule and all religions received im^ 
partial recognition, the result was not disastrous to Buddhism: 
the numberof Bhikkhus greatly increased, especially in the latter 
half of the nineteenth century. And if in earlier periods there 
was an interval in which technically speaking the Sangha did 
not exist, this did not mean that interest in it ceased, for as 
soon as the kingdom became prosperous the first care of the 
kings was to set the Church in order. This ztoX can be attributed 
to nothing but conviction and afiection, for Baddhism is not a 
faith politically useful to an energetic and warlike prince, 

‘ Ri!Da,AAft i* ibe pert of Burme b«t*«ca Arekao ood Sian. 

xxxvj 

CEYLON 

39 

Sinhate« Buddhism U often styled primitiys or original and 
It fairly be to preaem in substance both the doctrine 
and practice inculcated in the earUeet PaU Uterature. In calling 
this primitive we must lemember the possibility that some of 
this hUiwt^ was elaborated in Ceylon itself. But. putting the 
text of the Pijakas aaide, it would seem that the eady SinhaJeee 
Buddhism was the same as that of Asoka, and that it never 
underwent any important change, It ie true that mediaval 
Smh^ Uterature is full of supematurad legends respecting the 
Buddha' bnt Stoll he does not become a god (for he has attoed 
Nirvana) and the great Bodhisattvas, Avalokita and ManjuM 
are practically unknown. The Abkidhammma sangaha^ which 
IS still the text-book most in use among the Bhikkhus adheres 
ngidJy to the methods of the Abhidhamma* It contains 
neither devotional nor magical matter but prescribes a course 
of austere mental training, based on psychological analysis and 
culminating in the rapture of meditation. Such studies and 
exercises are beyond the capacity of the majority, bnt no other 
road to salvation is officially sanctioned for the Bhikkhu. It is 
admitted that there aro no Arhats now—just as Christianity 
has no contemporary saints—but no other ideal, such as the 
Boddbisattva of the Mahayanista, is held up for imitation 
Medieval images of Avalokita and of goddesses have how¬ 
ever been found in Ceylon* This is hardly surprising for the 
island was on the main road to China, Java, and Camboja* and 
Mahayanist teachers and pilgrims must have continually passed 
through it. The Caunese biographies of that eminent tantrist, 
Amogha, say that he went to Ceylon in 741 and elaborated his 
system there before returning to China. It is said that in 1408 
the Chinese being angry at the ill-treatment of envoys whom 
they had sent to the shrine of the tooth, conquered Ceybn and 

' Sm Spence H&rdy, Manwi of iuiiJtim. ehep. m 

* A tran tf atica by 8. Z. Aims “4 iti» Z)ft»idj bu btto publWicd by ibt 
Pali Test Society, lie eutbOB Auaruddhe eppeew lo Imd botveea tho 
•tibtb twelfth oeotule^, 

* The SifiheloM bed e epeclel nepMt for the AbhidheaiDe. Kaaaepe 7 («. *,» 
830) cMsed it to be eogreved on pletee of gold. Sf. Ze^L l p. 68, 

* See Coomenev&isy m JJt.A .3. i 600, pp. SS3-29?. 

* For interoosiw with Cemboje m« Bfifr. Zeyioeiea, a. p. 74. 

40 BUDBHI3M OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

made it pay tribute for fifty years. By couqueet no doubt is 
meant merely a military success and not occupation, but the 
whole story impUes possibilities of acquaintance with Chinese 
Buddhism. 

It is dear that, though the Hinayamst church was pre¬ 
dominant throi^out the history of the island, there op 
to the twelfth century heretical secte called Vaitulya or Vetul- 
ysia and Vijira which though hardly riyals of orthodoxy were 
a thom in its side. A party at the Abhayagiri monast^ wer« 
favourably disposed to the Vaitulya sect which, though often sup- 
pressed, recovered and reappeared, being apparenfly reinforoed 
£rom India. This need not mean from southern India, for Ceylon 
had regular intercourse with the north and perhaps the Vwtulyas 
were Mahayanists from Beaigal. The NikAya-Sangrahawa also 
mentiow that in the ninth century there was a sect caUed 
Mapatador^anai who wore blue robes and preached indulgence 
in wine and love. They were posdbly Tantiists from the north 
but were persecuted in southern India and never influential in 
Ceylon. 

The Mahfiivaraaa is inclined to minimke the importance or 
all sects compart with the Mahivihbra, but the picture given 
by the Nikfiya-Sangrahawa may be more eorreot. It says that 
the Vaitulyaa, described as infidel Brahmans who had composed 
a Pifaka of their own, made four attemple to obtain a footing 
at the Abhayagiri monastery*. In the ninth century it repre¬ 
sents king Matvalnson as having to fly because he had embraced 
the false doctrine of the Vijiraa. Theee are mentioned in another 
passage in connection with the Vmtulyas: they are said to have 
composed the Gfiejha Vinaya* and many Tantras. They perhaps 
were connected with the Vajraygna, a phase of Tantrio Bud* 
dhism. But a few years later king Mungayinsen set the church 
in order. He recognized the three orthodox schools or nikfiyas 
called Theriye, Dhammaruci and Sftgaliya but proscribed the 
others and set guards on the coast to prevent the importation 
of heresy. Nevertheless the Vifiriys and Vaitulya doctrines 

* a dolnMs niftite th** Ui *7 vw» kaon {& tb« aorth and suppnMed 

by Hanba. Saa EUiaghanwo, Fsrdtoi)4, ISH. p. 8S. NilBAdliaaa appaan 

ta ba a oaiaa far Uatrio praotua^ Saa ATaloe. FrinfipUto/ Ta%tn, prefaaa, p. zlx. 

* In iba rai^u of Voh&ratiMa, Oofbibbara. Mabtaani and Ambaherao* 
8atajDe«vL TbQ kui|i UattalaM aalKongariaw) ara aim bnomi a« Sana I aad n. 

* Soomi Vioayb 

CEYLON 

41 

xxsv] 

were secretly prftctiBed. An msojiption in Sanskrit found at the 
JetavatUk and attributed to the ninth century^ records the 
foundation of a Vib&ra for a hundred resident monks, 25 from 
each of the ionr nik&yas» which it appears to regard as eqniva* 
lent. But in 1 L$5 the great Farikiama Byni held a synod to 
restore unity in the ohuwh. Aa a result, all Nikiyae (even the 
Dbammaruci) which did not conform to the hTahtvih&ra were 
suppressed^ and we bear no more of the Vaitolyas and V&jiiiyas. 

Thus there was once a Mahayanist faction in Ceylon, hut it 
was recruited from abroad, intermittent in actmty a nd was 
finally defeated, whereas the Hinayanist tradition was national 
and continuous. 

Considering the long lapse of time, the monastic life of Ceylon 
has not deviated mnch in practice from the injunctions of the 
Vinaya. Monasteries likft those of Anuradhapma, which are 
said to have contained thousands of monks, no longer esist. 
The largest now to be found—those at Kandy—do not cont^ 
more than fifty bat as a rule a panaala (as these institurions are 
now oalled} has not more than five residents and more often 
only two or three. Some panaalas have villages assigned to 
them and some let tbeii lands and do not scruple to receive the 
tent. The monks still follow the ancient routine of making a 
daily round with the begging bowl, but the food thus collected 
is often given to the poor or even to animals and the inmates 
of the pansala eat a meal which has been cooked there. The 
P&timokkha is recited (at least In part) twice a month and 
ordinations are held mmually^. 

The duties of the Bhikkhus are partly educational, partly 
clerical. In most villages the children iraiva elementary edu¬ 
cation gratis in the pansala, and the preeervation of the ancient 
torts, together with the long list of Pali and Sinhalese works 
produced until recent times almost exclusively by members of 
the Sangha^, is a proof that it has not neglected literature. The 

* Spi^rapkia Zeylm. L p. 4. 

* of tb« isBoriptions uy» tlkat be rMOoeUed the elergy of the three 
KMpn. Bp, L p. 134. 

* See Bowden in J,S,£,3, IS98, pp. 159 S. The MMUAi relere to the Uelwntce 
HofUJter^. But it would tppeer th4t the PlUasokkbe ij reuted is country p l acee 
when t sufficieot oomber oi monks meet on Upoesibn deye. 

* Even the poeta wece me«t]y Bbikkbiu. SinbaJeee literetore oonuins s feir 
number el bistcdotl end phlloeopbfcel works but onrioueb little eboot Inv. See 
JoQy, iUelu »nd SiUt, p. tk 

42 

BUDX>£fIS3f OUTSIDE IKDIA 

[CH. 

chief public religious observances are preaching and reading the 
scriptures. This latter, known aa Bans, is usually accompanied 
by a word for word fcranslarion made by the reciter or an 
assistant. Such recitations may form part of the ordinary 
ceremonial of Uposatha days and most religious establishments 
have a room where they can be held, but often monks are 
invited to reside in a village during Was (July to October) and 
read Sana, and often a layman performs a pinkama or act of 
merit by entertaining monks for several days and inviting bis 
neighbours to hear them recite, The recitation of the JAUkaa 
is patcioularly popular but the suttas of the Dtgha Nik&ya are 
also often read- On special occasions such as entry into a new 
house, an eclipse or any incident which suggests that it might 
be well to ward off the enmity of supematxu^ powers, it is 
usual to recite a collection of tests taken largely from the 
Suttaniplta and called Pirit. The word appears to be derived 
frojn the Pali paritia, a defence, and though the Pali scriptures 
do not sanction this use of the Buddha’s discourses they coun¬ 
tenance the idea that evil may be averted by the use of 
formulie*. 

Although Sinhalese Buddhism has not diverged much from 
the Pali scriptures In its main doctrines and discipline, yet it 
tolerates a superstructure of Indian beliefs and ceremonies 
which forbid us to call it pure except in a restricted sense. At 
present there may be said to be three religions in Ceylon; local 
animism, Hinduism and Buddhism are all inextricably mixed 
together. By bcal animism 1 mean the worship of native 
spirits who do not belong to the ordinary Hindu pantheon 
though they may be identified with its members. The priests of 
this worship are called Kapuralas and one of their principal 
ceremonies consists in dancing until 'they are supposed to be 
possessed by a spirit—the devil dancing oi Europeans. Though 
this religion is distinct ordinary Hinduism, its deities and 
ceremonies find parallels in the southern Tamil country. In 
Ceylon it is not merely a village superstition but possesses 

* S . g . io ti)» XUBiUra «ntu (^2* Nik. xxxtt.) sp«]l by 

wblch mtiobera oi th« or(i«r may protMi tbrnwlTe* against evil ones end in 
J&uba 169 tb« Peacock escapes Janfcr by miUng every day a hymn to the son 
aed (be paisM of past Buddhaa See also Buru’hi, Colalo^, Nos. 487 and 

SOO. 

xxxy} 

CE7L0N 

49 

temples of considerable eiw*, for instance at Badulla and near 
Ratnapura. In tlie Jatter there ia a Buddhist shiin© in the 
court yard, ao that the Blessed One may countenance the 
worship, much as the Pitakas represent him as patroniaing and 
instructing the deities of ancient Magadha, but the atructxue 
and observances of the temple itself are not Buddhist. The chief 
spirit worshipped at Ratnapura and in most of these temples is 
Mahi Sarnmi, the god of Adam’s Peak. He is aometimta identi¬ 
fied with Lakshmana, the brother of R4ma, and sometimeB with 
Indra. 

About a ^luartcr of the population are Tamils professing 
Hinduism. Hindu temples of the ordinary Dravidian type are 
especially frequent in the northern districts, but they are found 
in most parts and at Kandy two may be seen close to the shrine 
of the Tooth*. Buddhists feel no scruple in frequenting them 
and the images of Hindu deities are habitually introduced into 
Buddhist temples. These often contmn a hall, at the end of 
which are one or more sitting figures of the Buddha, on the 
right hand side a recumbent figure of him, but on the left a 
row of four statues representing Mahibrahmi, Viahiju, Kirtti- 
keya and Mahfts&raan, Of these Vishijn generally receiTes 
marked attention, shown by the number of prayers written on 
slips of paper which ore attached to his hand. Nor is this 
worship found merely as a eurvival in the older temples. The four 
fignres appear in the newest edifices and the image of Vishnu 
never f&ls to attract votaries. Yet though a rigid Buddhist 
may regard such devotion as dangerous, it ia not treasonable, for 
Vishiju is regarded not as a competitor but as a very reverent 
admirer of the Buddha and anxious to befriend good Buddhists. 

Even more insidious is the pageantry which since the days 
of King Tissa hns been the outward sign of reli gi on. It may be 
justified as being merely an edifying method ci venerating tbs 
memory of a great man but when images and relics are treated 
with profound reverence or carriod in solemn procession it is 
hard for the ignorant, especially if they are accustomed to the 
ceremonial of Hindn temples, not to think that these symbols 
are divine. This ornate ritualism is not authorized in any 

’ S«« for an AocauAt of tli« Kaha Skuc XtonJa AnL Joly, 1910. 

* So & mciljeTaj inMription *t Hafaintale o( Mkhiikda IV rocords the fovndftUoa 
of BuddbiA odiEcoo and a tampl* M a t p. 103. 

M-ta, 

4 

44 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [ ch . 

known canonical text, but it la thoroughly Indian. Asoka 
records in his inscriptions the institution of religious procedsions 
and HsUan Chuang relates how King Harsha organized a 
feetivai during which an image of the Buddha was carried on an 
elephant while the monarch and his ally the king of Assam, 
dressed as Indra and Br»hm& respeotiTely, waited on it like 
seiranta^. Such festivities were congenial to the Sinhalese, aa 
is attested by tho lo ng series of descriptions which 611 the 
Mahivarass down to the very last book, 1^ what Fa^Hsien saw 
about 4U and by tho Perahera festival celebrated to day. 

6 

The Buddhism of southern India resembled that of Ceylon 
in character though not in history. It waa introduced under 
the auspices of Asoka, who mentions in bis inscriptions the 
Colas, P&udyaa and Keralaputras^. Hsiiau Chuang says that in 
the Malakhta country, somewhere near bfadura or Tanjore, 
there was a stupa erected byAsoka’s orders and also a monastery 
founded by Mahinda. It is possible that fthia apostle and others 
laboured lees in Oylon and more in south India than is generally 
supposed. The pre'eminence and continuity of Sinhalese Bud¬ 
dhism are due to the conservative temper of the natives who 
were relatively little moved by the winds of religion which 
blew strong on the mainland, bearing with them now Jadnism, 
now the worship of Tishnn or &va. 

In the Tamil country Buddhism of an Asokan type appears 
to have been prevalent about the time of our era. The poem 
Manimegalel, which by general consent was composed in an 
early century a.x>., is Buddhist but shows no leanings to 
Mahayanism. It speaks of Sivaism and many other systeoxs^ 
as douHshing, but contains no bint that Buddhism was perse¬ 
cuted. But persecution or at least very unfavourable conditions 
set in. Since at the time of Hsuan Chuang’s visit Buddhism 

* SiinQsrl; in n ra)ision« proewalon d«wrib«d ia tib» VkbiT&aM (xoix. 
ftbout A.n.) time ware "vea ia ibo drew of Br^uoSa." 

* Rock EdiQta, IL eod zm. Tbree Inaefiptionj of Aaoks bare been found in 
UfaMe, 

* The Manimagelel cran mantioDa tix ayeicoa of plnloaaphy wbiob are aet fibe 
etdinniy Dutenea bat Lokiyatem, Bauddtam, SauHyazD, tfeiyirik&m. VafieaM. 
fcaai, MlaSniMkam. 

CEYLON 

xxxv] 

46 

was irt an advanced stage of decadence, it seems prol)ab!e that 
the triumph of ^vaism began in the third or fourth centory 
and that Buddhism offered slight resistance. Jainism being the 
only serious competitor for the first place. But for a long while, 
perhaps even until the ei;»teentb century, monasteries were kept 
up in special centres, and one of these is of peculiar importance, 
namely Ranoipuiam or Oorgeveram’. Esuan Chnang found 

there 100 monasteries with mote than 10,000 brethren, all 

Sthaviias, and mentione that it was the birthplace of Dharma- 
plkla^ We have some further information from the Taltung 
chronicles* which su^ests the Interesting hypothesis that tbe 
Buddhism of Burma was Introduced or lefs^hed by mission¬ 
aries from southern India. They give a list of teachers who 
fioniished in that coontiy, inoluding Eacc&yana and the philoao- 
pher Annmddba*. Of Dharmap&la they say that he lived at 
the monastery of Bhadratittha near Eancipuia and wrote 
fourteen oommentaries in Pali*. One was on tbe Visuddhi-ma^a 
of Buddhaghosa and it is probable that be lived shortly after 
that great writer and like him studied in Ceylon. 

I shall recor to this question of south Indian Buddhism in 
treating of Bonna, but tbe data now available are very meagre. 

1 Kan ohit'pn.lo. W«tt0rs. fia» Cihiov. B. SSS. Tb» idAfitificMkv it aot 
vitboat difioplEitt tsiJ It hM bean n^ud th*i tb* tovu 1 b reaD; Keg»pftt4Q. 
Tli« Life of tlie pUgrin th«t U vu on tbo cout, but be does uot my eo bioaeh 
end bie tuognpber tner heve bcco akiet&keD. 

* See tii. by Bhye Davide in B.ttJB, 

■ See Forebbemraer. Jardiiu PKe« Sttay, 1SS6, pp. S4 ff. 

« aotbor ef the dWdbonmnOit4r.«sii0it^. 

* SoDM hero boeo pubbibed b; the P.T. dodety. 

CHAPTEE ZXXYl 
BURMA 
1 

Uwm recent tunes Burma remained somewliat isolated and 
connected with foreign coontriee by few tiC 9 . The chromclee 
contain a record of long and generally peaceful intercourse with 
Ceylon, but this though important for religion and literature 
had little political effect. The Chinese occasionally invaded 
Upper Burma and demanded tribute but tbo invasions were 
brief and led to no permanent occupation. On the west Arakan 
was worried by the Viceroys of the Mogul Emperors aud on the 
east the Burmese frequently invaded Slam. But otherwise 
from the beginning of authentic history until the British annex¬ 
ation Burma was left to itself and had not, like so many Asiatic 
states, to submit to foreign conquest and the imposition of 
foreign institutions. Yet let it not be supposed that its annalt 
are peaceful and uneventful. The land supplied its own compli¬ 
cations, for of the many races inhabiting it, three, the Burmese, 
Talaings and Shans, had rival aspirations and founded dyn- 
asries. Of these three races, the Burmese proper appear to have 
come from the north west, for a chain of tribes speaking 
cognate languages is said to extend from Burma to Nepal. 
The Mons or Talaings are allied linguistically to the Kbmers of 
Camboja. Their country (sometimes called R&mahhadesa) was 
in Lower Burma and its principal dtiee were Pegu aud Thaton, 
The identity of the name Talaing with Telingana or Kalinga 
is uot admitted by all scholars, but native tradition con¬ 
nects the foaodatiOQ of the kingdom with the east coast of 
India and it seems certain that suob a connecUon existed in 
hUtorical times and kept alive Hinayanist Buddhism which 
may have been originally introduced by this route. 

The Shan States lie in the east of Burma on the borders of 
Vlinnan and Laos. Their traditions carry their foundation bock 
to the fourtb and fifth centuries b.c. There is no confirmation 
of this, but bodies of Sbans, a race allied to the Siamese, may 

CH. XXX\7] 

BURMA 

47 

hftve zQtgr&ted into this region at any date, perhaps bringing 
Buddbism with them or leceivii^ it diect from China. Recent 
in^stigatioos have shown that there was also a fonith race, 
designated as Pyus, who occupied territory between the Bur¬ 
mese and Talaings in the eleventh century. They will probably 
prove of considerable importance for philology and early history, 
perhaps even for the history of some phases of Burmese Bud- 
dbUm, for the religiotzs terms found in their mscriptions are 
Sanskrit rather than Pali and this suggests direct communica¬ 
tion with India. But until more information is available any 
discussion of this interesting hut mysterious people involves so 
many hypotheses and arguments of detail that it is impossible 
in a work like the present. Prome was one of their principal 
cities, their name reappears in P'iao, the old Chinese designation 
of Burma, and perhaps also in Pi^an, one form oi which is 
Pugima*. 

Throughout the historical period the pro-eminence both in 
individual kings and dynastic strength rested uith the Burmese 
but their contests with the Shans and Talaings form an intricate 
story which can be related here only in outline. Though the 
three races are distinct and still preserve their languages, yet 
they conquered one another, lived in each other's capitals and 
shared the same ambitions so that in more recent centuries no 
great change occurred when new dynasties came to power or 
territory was redistributed. The long chronicle of bloodstained 
but ineffectual quarrols is relieved by the exploits of three 
great kings, Anawrata, Bayln Kaxmg and Alompra. 

Historically, Arakan may be detached from the other 
provinces. The inhabitants represent an early migration from 
Tagaung and were not annexed by any kingdom in Burma until 
1784 a.n. Tagaung, situated on the Upper Irrawaddy in the Ruby 
Mines district, wee the oldest capital of the Burmese and has a 
scanty history apparently going back to the early centuries of 
our era. Mu^ & same may be said of the Talaing kingdom 
in Lower Burma. The kings of Tagaung were succeeded by 
another dynasty connected with them which reigned at Prome. 
No datos can given for these events, nor is the part which 
the Fyus played in tiaem clear, but it is said that the Talaings 

> For tit* Pyw v» Blkfden in J.RJ-S. pp. aS5-48S. lUd. in £jMfr. Iniita. 
1013, pp. 1S7-'133. AIM report* of Bvma Ar^ Stri*y, IdlS, 1917. 

48 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE WDIA 

[CH. 

destroyed the kingdom of Ptome in 742 a.d.* According* to 
treditioQ the centre of power moved about this time to Pagan^ 
on the bank of the Irrawaddy somewhat south of Mandalay. 
But the silence of early Chinese accounts^ as to Pagan, whi<^ 
is not mentioned before the Sung dynasty, makes it probable 
that later writers exaggerated its early importance and it is 
only when Anawrata, King of Pagan and the first great name 
in Burmese history, ascended the throne that the course of 
events becomes clear and coherent. He conquered Thaton in 
1057 and transported many of the inhahltante to Hs own capital. 
He also subdued the nearer Shan states and was master of 
nearly all Burma as we understand the term. The chief work of 
his successors was to construct the multitude of pagodas which 
sUU ornament the site of Pagan. It would seem that the dynasty 
gradually degenerated and that the Sbans and Talaings ao* 
quired strength at its expense. Its end came In 1298 and -was 
^tened by the invasion of Khubilai Ehan. There then arose 
two simultaneoas Shan dynasties at Panya and Sagalng which 
lasted from 1299 till 1S84. They were overthrown by King 
Thadomiopaya who is believed to have been a Shan. He 
founded Ava which, whether it was held by Burmese or 8hans, 
was regarded as the chief city of Burma until 1752, although 
throughout this period the kings of Pegu and other distill 
were frequently iudependent. During the fourteenth century 
another kingdom grew np at Toungoo* in Lower Burma. Its 
rulers were originally Shan governors sent from Ava but ulti* 
mately they claimed to be descendants of the last king of Pagan 
and, in this character, Boreng or Bayin Naung (1551-1581), the 
second great mJer of Burma, conquered Prome, Pegu and Ava. 
His kingdom began to break up immediately after his death 
but his dynasty ruled In Ava until the middle of the eighteenth 
century. 

During this period Europeans first made their appearance 
and quarrels with Portuguese adventurers were added to native 

* go C. C. Lewis in tli« of S*fna, toI. l p. SSS, bat secordisg to 

the Bormsss chfonioW pise* tha u, tw 

Sooetime* colled Kev PsgsA to dullngoist it irou Old Psson wblch was o 
QJ4ts cl Tsowig. Also c«D«d Pogsia or Pugszu ssd ia PsU Arintsddsupun. 

* See tlu trmTeU of Kie Too described 1:7 PeHtot 10 1904. pp. ISI. 

* Um eorn^tb Ttuog'Bgu. 

XXXVl] 

BVRMA 

49 

dusensions. The Sh&ns and Tal&ings became turbulent and after 
a tumultuous interval the third great national hero, Aiaung- 
paya or Alompra, came to the front. In the ehort space of eight 
years (1762-1760), he gMied poseessloo of Ava, made the Bur* 
me«6 masters of both the northern and aoutbero provinces, 
founded Bar^oon and invaded both Manipur and Siam. While 
on the latter expedition be died. Some of his sucoessore held 
their court at Avs but Bodawpaya built a new capita) at 
Amarapura (1783) and Mindou Min another at Mandalay (1857). 
The dynasty came to an end in 1886 when King Thibaw was 
deposed by the Government of India and his dominions an¬ 
nexed. 

2 

The early history of Buddhism in Burma is obscure, as in 
most other countries, and difierent writers have maintained 
that it was introduced from northern India, the east coast 
of India, Ceylon, China or Camboja^. All these views may 
be in a measiue true, for there is reason to believe that it 
was not introduced at one epoch or from one source or in 
one form. 

It is not remarkable that Indian inf uence should be strong 
among the Burmese. The wonder rather is that they have pre¬ 
served such strong individnality in art, institutions and every¬ 
day life, that no one can pass from India into Burma without 
fading that he has entered a new country. This is because the 
mountains which separate it from Eastern Bengal and run r^t 
down to the sea form a barrier still sufficient to prevent com- 

a 7^ tbo hictMT s&d piwit ooidJtioa of Buddhism in Bums tbs foUowuig 
my ^ oooiuJud b«eid«< othor vorki icfe n vd lo the cmim of (his cbsptsr. 

tf, Bo4». Edition «/ SSsotuus^M with raJosbls dissarUtMUS, 1M7. lUs 
work is * modem Boraeae ocolsdutieel histor; wriu«a a 1S61 by PAhd&iSiDi. 

U. Bode, Thi Paii l/Utrciv (if Surma. IdOO. 

OsodbsTSipM: oonbrnniog seooMts of ssaj Pill works written in Borina 
Edited by Mm»y»S ia Jour. PaH To** Soe. tot ISSQ. pp. 64 ff. sad iod«x«d by 
K. Bode. Md. IBSe, 63 ff. 

Bi|sadet, Tie os ^ (Tsiuemd. 1678. 

Yoo. 7As M Ufo and no^M. 

J, Q. SooU, Bvmo, a handbook of ftocUul 1906. 

Reporte of (U Apcriilendsnl, Art^oaoioffieai Strom, Burma, 191M920. 

Vuioos vtioke (espod^y by Pnrois^ Ts«-8ein-Ee sad B. 0. TsapU) la 
ihb Indian AnJifuary. BtddAitm, snd BuUOin de PSuk ^rmfafse do PSxkbiu 
OrieM. 

50 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE lEDIA [or. 

municfttiOD by rail. But from the owliest timea Indian immi- 
grants and Indian ideas have been able to find their way both 
by land and sea. According to the Burmese chronicles Tagaung 
was founded by the Hindu prince AbhirAja in the ninth century 
B.c. and tlie kingdom of Arakan cJ^ms as its first ruler an 
ancient prince of Benares. The legends have net much more 
historical value than the Kshattriya genealogies which Brah¬ 
mans have invented for the kings of Manipur, but they show 
that the Burmese knew of India and wished to connect them¬ 
selves with it. This spirit led not only to the invention of legends 
but to the application of Indian names to Burmese localities. 
For instance Aparantaka, which really designates a district of 
western India, is identified by native scholars with Upper 
Burma*. The two merchants Tapussa and BhalUka who were 
the first to salute the Buddha after his enlightenment are said 
to have come from XJkkala. This is usually identified with 
Orissa but Burmese tradition locates it in Burma. A system of 
mythical geography has thus arisen. 

The Buddha himself is supposed to have visited Burma, as 
we)] as Ceylon, in his lifetime^ and even to have imparted some 
of his power to the celebrated image which is now in the Arakan 
Pagoda at Mandalay. Another resemblance to the Sinhalese 
story is the evar^liration of lower Burma by Asoka’e mission¬ 
aries. The Blpavamsa states^ that Sona and Uttara were de¬ 
spatched to Suvarnabhfimi. This is identified with Rimafifia- 
desa or the district of Thaton, which appears to be a corruption 
of Saddhammapura* and the tradition is accepted in Burma. 
The scepticism with which modem scholars have received it is 
perhaps unmerited, but the preaching of these missionaries, if 
it ever took place, cannot at present be connected with other 
historical events. Nevertheless the statement of the JHpavarpsa 
is significant. The work was composed in the fourth century 
A.n. and taken from older clxronioles. It may therefore be con- 

’ So too Promo it c*ll«i Srikabe&n and tbe bubo Imvtddy npresenti IcivnU 
(tb« modem Psvi). The aneient to«% ol $rivMtS or SAntthi 10 anid to ruppMr in 
(he tikfto fonna Tbutveddy, Tbu»vew end ThATmttL 

* See ISOS, p. S, ead Porthhamaier on the pt^od* 

iDPvmoK .inhatelcfkai Stpon (? iSM). 

* Dipev, vui. 12, and in t voro embekubed Iorb Id UahAveisae xn. 44-04. 
See alao tho Kalyaol InaoripUow m /nd^n Anl 109S. f. 18. 

* Through tlio form Set4ja lepdeseeltog Seddban. Early Europeao travellers 

ealledit Saua orXateo. , *..'*■ 

XSXVI] 

BURMA 

61 

eluded that in the early centuries of our era lower Burma had 
the reputation of being a Buddhist country*. It also appears 
certain that in the eleventh century, when the Talaings were 
conquered by Anawrata, Buddhist monks and copies of the 
Tlpitaka were found there. But we know little about the 
country in the preceding centuries. The Kalyaui inscription says 
that before Anawrata’a conquest it was divided and decadent 
and during this period there is no proof of intercourse with 
Ceylon but also no disproof. Cue result of Anawrata’s conquest 
of Thaton was that he exchanged religious embassies with the 
king of Ceylon, and it is natural to suppose that the two mon* 
archs were moved to this step by tractions of previous com¬ 
munications. Intercourse with the east coast of India may he 
assumed as natural, and is confirmed by the presence of Sanskrit 
words in old Talaing and the information about southern India 
in TalMg records, in which the city of Conjevaram, the great 
commentator Dhannap&la and other men of learning are often 
mentioned. Analogies have also been traced between the archi¬ 
tecture of Pagan and southern India^ It will be seen that such 
communication by sea may have brought not only Hinayanist 
Buddhism but also Mahayanist and Tantrio Buddhism as well 
as Brahmanism from Bengal and Orissa, sc that it is not sur¬ 
prising if all these influences can be detected in the ancient build¬ 
ings and sculptures of the country*. Stfll the most important 
evidence as to the oharacter of early Burmese Buddhism is 
Hinayanist and furnished by inscilptiozis on thin golden plates 
and tiles, found near the ancient site of Prome and deciphered 
by Pinot*. They consist of Hinayanist religious fonnul«: the 
l^guage is Pali: the alphabet is of a south Indian type and 
is said to resembb closely that used In the inscriptions of the 
Kadamba dynasty which ruled in Kanara from the third to the 

’ BunucM idesUI? e&d Yona to which Awka abo wot DiaBion- 

Brin vidi Upper Banna and tba Sbaa ooufitty. Bat tlui mcdb to b« nniwly a 
udnppliMtion of Indian aaoaa 

* Soa l^^rchhaoimar, Jariin^ PrtM 18SS. pp. S9~27. Ha abo aaya that 
tba aarliesc Talaios aipbabat u idaBtioal with tba Veogi alphahat of tho foucth 
century a.d. Burmo AnMiol. Aaporl, \917, p. SS. 

* See R. 0. Temple, '‘Notoe on AatiqaitSea of R&mafihadaaa," Ind. ISSt, 
pp. SS7 S. Though I admit the pOMibUlty that MabSyl&iiai and TaatrUm ua; 
bavQ iiouHabed in lower Burma, it 4oea net wao M ^ that the lew Hlndo figora* 
rapreduecd in ibra artiele prove vejy 

« J.A. 1912, n. pp. 131-130. f / 

tees 

62 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [CH. 

wxth century. It ia to the Utter part of this period that the 
mscriptions are to be attributed. They show that a form of the 
Hioayana, comparable, so far as the brief documents permit 
us to judge, with the church of Ceylon, was then known in lower 
Burma and was probably the state church. The character of 
the writing, taken toge^er with the knowledge of southern 
India shown by the Talaii^ chronicUs and the opinion of the 
Dipavatosa that Burma was a Buddhist country, is good 
evidence that lower Burma had accepted Hinayanism before 
the sixth century and had intercourse with southern India. 
More than that it would perhaps be rash to say. 

The Burmese tradition that Buddhaghosa was a native of 
Thaton and returned thither from Ceylon merits more attention 
than it has received. It can be easily explained away as patriotic 
fancy. On the other band, if Buddhaghosa^s object was to 
invigotate Hinayanism in India, the result of bis really stu* 
pendoua labours was singularly smaU, for in India his name is 
connected with no rel^ous movement. But if we suppose that 
be went to Ceylon by way of the holy places in Magadhs and 
returned from the Coromandel Coast to Burma where Hina¬ 
yanism afterwards dourished, we have at least a coherent nar¬ 
rative 

It is noticeable that X&ran&tha states^ that in the Koki 
countries, among which he expressly mentions Fukham (Pagan) 
and Hsmsavatl (Pegu), Hinayanism was preached from the 
days of Asoka onwards, but that the Mahayana was not known 
until the pupils of Vasubandhu introduced it. 

The presence of Hinayanism in Lower Burma oatnially did 
not prevent the arrival of Mahayanism. It has not left many 
certain traces but Ati^ (o. 1000), a great figure in the history 
of Tibetan Buddhism, is reported to have studied both in 
Magadha and in Suvamad^pa by which Thaton must be 
meant. He would hardly have done this, had the olergy of 
Thaton been unfriendly to Tantric learning. This medieval 
Buddhism was also, as in other countries, mixed with Hindoism 

* It is BoddJi*ghoa> comiaeotins ob Afig. Nik. 1.14.6 (quoMd 

b;r PorchhftionivJ d«onbM tbe merchAotc of UUuU m inKsbitiag AaiUiljtiM la 
Um ngioQ of RAzattvftU or Pegu. This idsatifiMtioii ot Ukk*t* with BunoMe 
tertitoiv ii a misuke but aeoepted la BurmA and it is more likely that a BuRneee 
vpqld bare made it » Hiadu. 

* Chap. ^rwTT. 

IXXVl] 

SURMA 

53 

but wherena in Camboja and Champa ^iyaiam, especially the 
worehip of the lingam, waa long the ofBcfal and popular cult 
and penetrated to Siam, few Sivwte emblems but numerous 
statues of Visbnuite deities haye hitherto been diacoyered in 
Bonoa. 

The above refera chiefly to Lower Burma. The hiatoiy of 
Burmese Buddhism becomes clearer jo the eleventh century but 
before passing to this new period we must enquire what was 
the religioTis condition of Upper Bunna in the centuries pro- 
ceding it. It is clear that any variety of Buddhism or Brah¬ 
manism may have entered this region from India by land at 
any epoch. AcMSording to both Heiian Chuang and I-Ching 
Buddhism flourished in Samatata and the latter mentions 
images of Avalokita and the reading of the Praj64-pftramit&. 
The precise position of SamataU has not been fixed but in any 
case it was in the east of Bengal and not far from the modem 
Burmese frontier. The existence of early Sanskrit inscriptions 
at Taungu and elsewhere has been recorded but not witii as 
much detail as could be wished^. Figures of Bodhisattvas and 
Indian deities are reported from Prome*, and iu the Lower 
Chindwin district are rock«out temples resembling the caves of 
Barabar in Bengal. Inscriptions also show that at Prome there 
were longs, perhaps in the seventh century, who used the Pyu 
language but bore Sanskrit titles, According to Burmese trad!' 
tion the Buddha himself visited the site of Pagan and propbeeied 
that a king called Sammutiraya would fourid a city there and 
establish the faith. This prediction is said to have been fulfilled 
in 108 a.D. but the notices quoted from the Burmese chronicles 
are Goucemed less with the progress of true religion t ha n with 
the prevalenoe of heretics known as Aris’. It Km been conjeo' 
tured that this name is a corruption of Arya but it appears that 
the correct orthography is arafi representing an original ann- 
foJea, that Is forest priests. It is ba^ to say whether they were 
degraded Buddhists or an indigenous priesthood who in some 

^ 8m b«weT«r Epig, /n^. vol. r, pM tw. Ooi 189S. pp. 101-102. For th* 
pr«Tftl«DM <A form« vliich must be derived from 8e4MlrTlt aol Pali m ih(m« 
Xni, Etf. ISIS. p. 14. aod 1217, p. 20. 

* MtfOft ^ Snf/t. AreJk Svm^ Fvw. 1209, p. 10. 1210. p. 13. ud 1220. 
pp. 33, Sa rinot. Hctu i’Sfiyr^pkU, p. 3S7. 

* 8m MpMially Finot, ia J.A. 1912. n. p. 123, sod Huber in 1202 

p.m 

54 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[cn. 

wa^s Imitated wbat thej knav of Brabmamc and Buddhist 
institutions. They wore black robes, let their hair grow, wor¬ 
shipped serpents, hung up in their temples the heads of animals 
that had been sacrificed, and once a year they assisted the king 
to immolate a victim to the Nats on a mountwn top. They 
claimed power to expiate all ains, eren parricide. They lived In 
convents (which is their only real resemblance to Buddhist 
monks) but were not ceUbato^. Anawrata is aaid to have sup¬ 
pressed the Aiis but he certainly did not extirpate them for an 
inscription dated U68 records their existence In the Myingyan 
district. Also in a village near Pagan are preserved Tantric 
frescoes representing Bodhisattvas ^vith their ^ktis. In one 
temple is an mscription dated 1248 and requiring the people to 
supply the priests morning and evening with rice, beef, betel, 
and a jar of spirits*. It is not clear whether these priests were 
Aria or not, but they evidently professed an extreme form of 
Buddbfst ^aktiam. 

Chinese Influences in Upper Burma must also be taken into 
accoimt. Burmese kings were perhaps among the many 
polentates who sent religious embassies to the Emperor Wu-ti 
about 525 a.d. and the T'ang^ ^nnAU show an acquaintance with 
Burma. They describe the inhabitante as devout Buddhists, 
reluctant to take life or even to wear silk, since its manufacture 
involves the death of the silk worms. There were a hundred 
monasteries into which the youth entered at the age of seven, 
leaving at the age of twenty, if they did not intend to become 
monks. The Chinese writer does not seem to have regarded the 
religion of Burma as differing materially from Buddhism as be 
knew it and some similarities in ecclesiastical terminology shown 
by Chinese and Burmese may indicate the presence of Chinese 

^ Tbs Arift an further ondiCed witb having practiMd e aori ci jirima 
wieii*. Sea od this quMtion iba ohapier on Camboja aod aUegad abailar caitomi 
there. 

* Sea BariTia AftA. S^, 1016, pp. IS. 19. They aaain to have beeo almilar to 
tho NQapatanadartaaa of Ceylon. The Ptabod h a6an«iro<Uya (about 1100 a.&.} 
npraeonte Bucldinst monba m draoken and Uoeotiooe. 

* Sea Pa^ar. Svrna. 1803, The anaaliet eaya "Tbara is a hoga Thito alaphsoi 
(or lipaje) 100 feet high, LHiganti bom iocease aod kitsal bafora it, rafioetisg 
within thamedvae wbetiiar they an right or wrong... .When ibsro is aay disaster 
or plajuo tha king also koaeU in front of it and hkmM himseU.” Tim CUnasa 
ebaractar means aitbar Image or elepbaat, hut surely tbe fomer must ba tiis 
meaning beta. 

BURMA 

65 

xxxn] 

influence^. Bat this influence, ^ough possibly strong Ijetvreen 
the sixth and tenth centuries a.d., and again about the time of 
the Chinese inTasion of 1284» cannot be held to exclude Indian 
influence. 

Thus when Anawrata came to the throne* serereti forms of 
religion probably co-existed at Pagan, and probably most of 
them were corrupt, though it is a mistake to think of his 
dominions as barbarous. The reformation which follcnTcd is 
described by Burmese authors in considerable detail and as 
usual in such accoimte is ascribed to the ectivity of one per¬ 
sonality, the Thera Arahanta who came from Thaton and en¬ 
joyed Anawrata’s confldenee. The story implies that there was 
a party in Pagan which knew that the prevalent creed was 
corrupt and also looked upon Thaton and Ceylon as religions 
centres. As Anawrata waa a man of arms rather than a theo¬ 
logian, we may conjecture that his motive was to concentrate in 
his capital the flower of learning as known in his time-^ motive 
which has often animated successful princes in Asia and led to 
the unoeremonions seisuie of living swnts. According to the 
story be broke up the communities of Aris at the instigation of 
Arahenta and then sent a mission to Manohari, king of Pegu, 
asking for a copy of the Tipitaka and for relies. He received a 
contemptuous reply intimating that he was not to he trusted 
with such sacred objects. Anawrata in Indignation collected an 
army, marched against the Takings and ei^ed by carrying ofT 
to Fagan not only elephant loads of scriptures and relics, but 
also all the Talaing monks and nobles with the king bimsclf^. 
The Pitakos were stored in a splendid pagoda and Anawrata 

* 8m T*w.8^*E0i in Ind, A^i^UAry, 1900, p. Zll, But I sustoon/Ms that I 
have not abla to toUov or confirm til tbe atynologko la gg Mtad by Kiin. 

* 8m for CbioBM ramiine at Pa^aa, Stporl 9/iA« Saperiatowint, Ank, Svrerf, 

fariMa, /or year «ndtA0 JfarcA, 1910, pp. 20, 21. An inMription at Pagan 
records that in 1265 Kbabilal*s troops wen aoeompaniad by monks sent to oyso. 
g:«liM Bonna. Both troops &ad monks at Tagann" and both were mb- 

sequently withdrawn Sm AnK Smv/, 1917, p. 98. 

* Tbs date of Anawreta'a conquest of TbatM Msms to be no* fitted by iosorip. 
tioQS as 1007 A.D., thoQgb formsrly supposed to be earlier. 8m Burns Ardu lUp. 
19ia For Arkavrata’s religious leforau SM SdiSBOsoiTUV. pp. 17 ff. and 57 ff. 

* It has been noted tiiat atany of the Insenplioas explanatory «f Uis smsh 
depicted on the walls of the Ananda tenpla at Pasan are in Talidng. sliowiag Uiac 
it waa sons Uas before the Barmans wsre able to aMiailate tho culture of the 
oonriuered country. 

6$ BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [OB. 

eent to Ceylon' for otljere whioh were compared with the 
copies obtaied from Thaton in order to settle Ae text*. 

For 200 years, that is from aboot 1060 a.d. vmtil the later 
decades of the thirteenth oentory, Pa^an was a great centre of 
Buddhist culture not only for Burma but for the whole east, 
renowned alike for its architeotore and its scholarship. The 
former can still be studied in the magnihcent pagodas which 
mark its site. Towards the end of his reign Anawrata made not 
very suocesafxil attempts to obtain relics from China and Ceylon 
and commenced the construction oi the Sbwe Zigon pagoda. 
He died before it was completed but his successors, who enjoyed 
fairly peaceful reigns, Enished the work and constructed about 
a thousand other buildings among which the most celebrated Is 
the Ananda temple erected by King Kyansithk*. 

Pali literature in Burma begins with a little grammatical 
treatise known as K&nk& aod composed in 1064 a.p. by the 
monk l)hammasen4pati who lived in the monastery attached 
to this temple. A number of other works followed. Of these the 
moat celebrated wsa the Saddaniti of Aggavaipsa (1154), a 
treatise on the language of the Tipitaka which became a classic 
not only in Burma but in Ceylon. A siugular enthusiasm for 
ling uiatio studies prevailed especially in the reign of Eyocvk 
(c. i2SO), when even women are s^d to have been distinguished 
for the skill and ardour which they displayed in conquering the 
difficnlties of Pali grammar. Some treatises on the Abbidham* 
ma were also produced. 

like Mohammedanism, Hinayaziist Buddhism is too sinple 
and deEnite to admit much variation in doctrine, but its clergy 
are prone to violent disputes about apparently trivial questions. 
In the thirteenth century such disputes assumed gravs propor¬ 
tions in Burma. About 1176 a.i>, a celebrated elder nsined 

1 gotb«f4«Mt'am40. p. 94i4»dp. so SaeiUoBod«, PsIaLtitraAtrs 
{k 15. But (be JUfthSveipeu, tx. 4-7, while rvoordhis (be oonuniiBleetioas b e tween 
Vljeje Beba ead Aniruddbe {w Anewrete) lepreeeatt Cevlon m eekioA for mfini.« 
frott BlaeilfliL, wbieh iotpUee thee lower Bonoe wu even then legerded m e 
Baddhiet ccuntrj with »fioe tndiUen. 

* Tbe Bunotee cenoD edde leu works to (be Kbaddeke«Nik&7a, oeaely: 

{s) Ptfihe. (5} KeW'Peknnon, (c) 6ut(ee*dgehs» (d) Petakopedeee. 

* faeoApUeBS give hie rMgn ea 10S4-1U2 a.d. See Htf. IP16, 

p, 24. ArsoDg other nmariieblo ediAcee mtj be mentioHd (he Thepiayo or 
ThebbancB (1100), tbe OeudspeUa (IISO) end the Bodhi (e. 1200) whiob is e oop7 
oi the temple tt Bodhgeye. 

xxm] 

BUnUA 

57 

Uttar&jira accompanied by his pupil Chapata left for Ceylon. 
They spent some years in study at the MahivihfLra and Chapa^ 
received ordination there. He returned to Pagan with four other 
monks and m^ntained that valid ordination could be conferred 
only through the monks of the MahiTih&ra. who abne bad kept 
the succession unbroken. He with his four companions, having 
received this ordinatton, claimed power to transmit it, but he 
declined to reoogniae Burmese orde«. This pretension aroused 
a storm of opposition, especially from the Talaing monks. They 
maintained that Arahanta who had reformed Buddhism under 
Anawrata was spiritually descended from the missionaries sent 
by Asoka, who were as well q^ualified to administer ordination 
as Mahinda. But Chapata was not only a man of learning and 
an author' but also a vigorous personality and in favour at 
Court. He had the best of the contest and succeeded in makiog 
the Talaing school appear as secedera from orthodoxy. There 
thus arose a distinction between the Sinhalese or later school 
and the old Burmese school, who regarded one another ss 
schismatics. A scandal was caused in the Sinhalese community 
by B&bnla, the ablest of Cbapata's disciples, who fell in love 
with an actress and wished to become a layman. His coheagus 
induced him to leave the country for decency’s sake and peace 
was restored but subsequently, after Chapafa’s death, the re* 
maining three disciples^ fell out on questions of discipline rather 
than doctrine and founded three factions, which can hardly be 
called schools, al^ough they refused to keep the Uposatha 
days together. The light of religion shone brightest at Pagan 
early in the thirteenth centnry while these thi^ brethren were 
alive and the Sfisanavamsa states that at least three Arhats 
lived in the city. But the power of Pagan coUapsed under 
attacks from both Chinese and Shaus at tl^ end of the century 

^ Th« bc«t kno«n of hit work* •!« Uio Sutt*>nidcl«M,en gnatco&r and Uie 
SankbQp4vacu<u)& The latt«r ii a oommenU^ mi Ute AbhidhaioiakCtba^ugaba, 
hut It it Dot oerUia iX Chapata compoaed it or loarelj tnaalaCed It Jroa tha 
SinbalMO. 

* Sorea authorilirs spank as if th« fou disciplM of Chapata bad founded fou 
wets, bot the roprobota KihiUa oao hardly bavt done ^la The above acooust i* 
taken from tho Kalyoni inscription. In4. Anf. 1SS3, pp. 30, 31. It says Ttrj die* 
fikoeUy "Then in Pugama (Pagan) 4 weta 1. 'Xlie succoaon of tb« priesta 
• who intiodaeed the religion from Sudhunmanigaea {f.a the Urasaffla Ss^ha). 
2. The diseiplM of SWakiQabithar^ 3. Ths dis^plea of T&BaliadamaliAtbsra. 
4. lbs disolplca of Anaoda Mab&thaea.” 

68 BVDI>HISM OUTSIDE ISDIA [CH. 

and the last king bacame a monk under the compuiaion of Sban 
chiefs. The deserted city appears to hare lost its importance as 
a religious centre, for the ecolesiaaticai chioniclCB shift the 
scene elsewhere. 

The two Shan states which arose from the ruin of Fagan, 
namely Fanya (Vijayapura) and Sagaing (Jeyyapuia), encour¬ 
aged religion and learning. Their existence probably explains 
the cl^ mads in Siamese inscriptions of about 1800 that the 
territory of Siam extended to Haipsavati or Fegu and this con¬ 
tact of Burma and Siam was of great importance for it must be 
the origin of Fall Buddhism in Siam which otherwise remains 
unexplained. 

After the fall of the two Shan states in 1364, Ara (or Ratna- 
pura} which was founded in the same year gradually became 
the religious centre of 'Opper Burma and remained so during 
several centuries. But it did not at first supersede older towns 
inasmuch as the loss of political independence did not always 
involve the destruction of monasteries. Buddhism also flour¬ 
ished in Fegu and the Talaing country where the vicissitudes of 
the northern kingdoms did not affect its fortunes. 

Anawrata had transported tho most eminent Therae of 
Thaton to Fagan and the old Talaing school probably suffered 
temporarily. Somewhat later we hear that the Sinhalese school 
was introduced into these regions by S&riputta^, who bad been 
ordained at Pagan. About the same time two Theras of Marten 
ban, preceptors of the Queen, visited Ceylon and on returning 
to their own land after being ordained at the Mah&vih&ra con¬ 
sidered themselves superior to other monks. But tho old Bur¬ 
mese school continued to exist. Not much literature was pro¬ 
duced in the sou^. S&riputta was the author of a Dbammathat 
or code, the first of a long series of law books bsksed upon Kanu. 
Somewhat later Mahkyasa of Thaton (c. 1370) wrote several 
grammatical works. 

The most prosperous period for Buddhism in Pegu was the 
reign of Dhammaoeti, also called Rlmidhipati (1460-1491). 
He was not of the royal family, but a simple monk who helped 
a princess of Pegu to escape from tho Burmese court where she 
was detained. In 1453 this princess became Queen of Pegu and 
Dhammaceti loft his monastery to become her prime minister, 

’ AIm ksovb b; th« tiUe of DhiiB)mAvU4i4. He vaj acUto in 1140. 

XXX7T] 

BUSMA 

5d 

son-in-law and ultimately her successor. But though he had 
returned to the world his heart was with the Church. He was 
renowned for his piety no less than for his magnificence and is 
known to modem scholars as the author of the Kalyani inscrip¬ 
tions*, which assume the proportions of a treatise on ecclesi¬ 
astical laws and history, Their chief purpose is to settle an 
intricate and highly technical question, namely the proper 
method of defining and consecrating a siind. This word, which 
moans literally bcundary, signifies a plot of ground within which 
Uposatha meetings, ordinations and other ceremonies can take 
place. The expression occurs in tiie Vinayo Pitaka* but the 
area there contemplated seems to be an ecclesiastical district 
within which the Bbikkhus were obliged to meet for Upesatha. 
The modem simd is much smaller^, but more important since 
it is maintained that Talid ordination can be conferred only 
within ite limits. To Dbamroaceti the question seemed mo¬ 
mentous, for as he explains, there were in southern Burma six 
schools who would not meet for Uposatha. These were, first the 
Oamboja^ school (identical with the Arabanta school) who 
claimed spiritual descent from the mlsslonaties sent by Aseka 
to SuvarpabhOmi, and then five dlvitions of the Sinhalese 
school, namely the three founded by Chapata’s disciples as 
already related and two more founded by the theras of Marta¬ 
ban. Bhainmaceti accordingly sent a mission to Oeylon charged 
to obtain an authoritative ruling as to the proper method of 
consecrating a Hm4 and confening ordination. On their return 
a locality known as the KalyanisSmk was consecrated in the 
manner prescribed by the Mah&vih&ra and during three years all 
the Bhikkhus of Bhammaceti’s kingdom were reordamed there. 
The total number reached 16,60t, and the king boaste that he 
bad thus purified religion and made the school of the Mahkvi- 
bkra the only sect, all other distinctions being obliterated. 

* FMiad ia Zaingf«QAinx> s aoboxb of Pagu. Tho t»x6. truiiIsUon iiad ootso sro 

oontooed is vsriou ftrticlw by in tbs ZndtsA Anii^ary for 1893-4. 

* Mftbivasc*, a. 11, IS, 13. 

* According to T«v*S«iQ-Eo Ani. 1S93, p. 11) "sbont or 189 Im( a 

potlBioiec.” 

* No cootoot wiUi CnobojAD roUgion is intpliMl. Tbs soot wu so csllad bocauie 
its chief raooMtory vu oosr tbo Csmbojt murket sod tliu derived it« nsate from 
tibe fftcb that many Caobojan (probably meaning Bhanl prlaoaera vero eeodmd 
iiMr it. 

a m. 

60 

BUDDBTSM 0UT8WB INDIA 

[CB. 

There can be little doubt that in the fifteenth century 
Buncese Buddhiem had assumed the fonn which it still has, 
but was this form due to Indigenous tradition or to imitation of 
Ceylon ? Five periods merit attention, (a) In the sixth century, 
and probably several centuries eaiiler, Hinayanism was known 
in Lower Burma. The inscriptions attesting its existence are 
written In Pali and in a south Indian alpliabet, (h) Anawrata 
(10LO~1062) purified the Buddhism of Upper Burma with the 
help of scriptures obc&ned from the Talaing country, which 
were compated witn other scriptures brought from Ceylon, 
(c} About 1200 Chapata and his pupils who had studied in 
Ceylon and received ordination there refused to recognise the 
Talaing monks and two hostile schools were founded, pre« 
dominant at first in Upper and Lower Burma respectively, 
(d) About 1260 the Sinhalw school, led by S&riputta and others, 
began to make contjuesta in Lower Burma at the expense of the 
Talaing school, (e) Two centuries later, about L460, Dham- 
mscetl of Pegu boosts that he has purified religion and made 
the school of the Mah&vih&ra, ^at is the most orthodox form 
of the Sinhalese school, the only sect. 

In conneotion with these data must be taken the important 
statement that the celebrated Tantrist Atjia studied in Lower 
Burma about 1000 a.n. Up to a certain point the conelnsion 
seems clear. Pali Hinayanism in Burma was old: intercourse 
with eoutbem India and Ceylon tended to keep it pure, whereas 
intercourse with Bengal and Orissa, which must have been 
equally frequent, tended to import Mahayanism. In the timo 
of Anawrata the religion of Upper Burma probably did 
not deserve the name of Buddhism. He intn^uced in its 
place the Buddhism of Lower Burma, tempered by refer¬ 
ence to Ceybn. After 1200 if not earlier the idea prevailed 
that the Mab&vihara was the standard of orthodoxy and 
that the Talaing church (which probably retained some 
Mahayanist features) fell below it. In the fifteenth century 
this view was universally accepted, the opposition and indeed 
the separate existence of the Talaing church having come 
to an end. 

But it stiU remains uncei:tain whether ths earliest Buiraese 
Buddhism came direct from Magadha or from the south. The 
story of Asoka's missionaries cannot be summarily rejected 

BVRMA 

61 

ixxvi] 

bat it bUbo cannot be accepted without hesitation^ It is the 
Ceylon chronicle which knows of them and coinmunication 
between Burma and eoathem India was old and peisistents It 
may have existed even before the Christian era. 

After the fall of Pagan, Upper Bunns, of which we must 
now speak, passed through trooblad times and we hear little of 
religion 01; literature. Though Ava was founded m 1364 it did 
not beeome an intellectual centre for another century. But the 
reign of Narapati (1442-1463) was ornamented by several writers 
of eminence among whom may be mentioned the monk poet 
Silavamsa and Ariyavamaa,. an exponent of the Abhidhamma. 
They are noticeable as being the first writers to publish religious 
works, either original or translated, in the vernacular and this 
practice steadily increased. In the early part of the sixteenth 
century* occurred the only persecution of Buddhism known in 
Burma. Thohanbw4, a Shan who had become kii^ of Ava, 
endeavoured to oxtcrcdnate the order by deliberate massacre 
and delivered temples, monasteries end hbraries to the fiames. 
The persecution did not last long nor extend to other districts 
but it created great indignation axnong the Burmose and was 
perhaps one of the reasons why the Shan dynasty of Ava was 
overthrown in 1555. 

Bayin (or Buieng) Naung stands out as one of the greatest 
personalities in Burmese history. As a Buddhist he was sealoos 
even to intolerance, since he forced the Sbans and hfoshms of 
the northern districts, and indeed all Ms subjects, to make a 
formal profession of Buddhism. Ho also, as related elsewhere, 
made not very successful attempts to obtun the tooth relic 
from Ceylon. But it is probable that his active patronage of 
the faith, as shown in the coastnzerion and endowment of 
religioiis buildings, was exorcised chiefiy in Pegu and this must 
be the reason why the S^sauavamsa (which is interested chiefiy 
in Upper Burma) says Uttie about him. 

His successors showed little political capacity but encour¬ 
aged religion and literature. The study 0! the AbMdhamma was 

^ Ib lAvour of iC. it mby be wiS that tb» &Ipe.T»w«a aod tb» eariisr Waditfesa 
OD which tb» DtpcTupn is based are aacieul and impartial witoesase: afaisst it, 
that AMka'a attentiw aeoas be have been directed wMt«anU, act tevards Bengal 
aed Burout, and tbas no yuy early proof of the oiistcnce cl Bsddluam in Surma 
has beeD (oond. 

* Apparently about 1S25-ISS0. 

62 

BUDDHISM OUTBIDS INDIA 

[oh. 

speeUU;^ Hourishing in the districts oi Ava and Sagaing from 
about 1600 to 1650 and found many iUustrioua exponents. 
Besides works in Pali, the writers of this time produced numer* 
ouB Burmese translationa and paraphrases of Abhidhamma 
works, as well as edifying stories. 

In the latter part of the seventeenth century Burma was in 
a disturbed condition and the Sfisanavamsa says that religion 
was dimmed as the moon by clouds. A national and reUglous 
revival came with the victories of AJompra (1762 onwards), but 
the eighteenth century also witnessed the rise of a curious and 
not very edifying controversy which divided the Sangha for 
about a hundred years and spread to Ceylon^, It conoemed the 
manner in which the upper robe of a monk, consisting of a long 
piece of cloth, should be worn. The old practice in Burma was 
to wrap this cloth round the lower body from the loins to the 
ankles, and draw the* end from the back over the left shoulder 
and thence across the breast over the right shoulder so that it 
finally hung loose belund. But about 1698 began the custom 
oi walking ^th the right shoulder bare, that is to say letting 
the end of the robe fall down in front on the left side. The 
Sangha became divided into two factions known as Ekatimka 
(one-shouldered) and Pdrapam (fully clad). The bitterness of 
the seemingly trivial controversy was increased by the fact 
that the Ekamsikas could produce little scriptural warrant and 
appealed to late authorities or the practice in Ceylon, thus 
ne^ecting sound learning. For the Vinaya frequently* pre¬ 
scribes that the robo is to be adjusted so as to fall over only one 
shoulder as a mark of special respect, which implies that it was 
usually worn over both shoulders. In 1712 and again about 
twenty yearn later arbitrators were appointed by the king to 
hear both sides, but they had not sufficient authority or learning 

* Sm Sitenatoiya, pp. 21$ ff. 

' ^4- L 19, S; rr. 3, 3. Ebaquam aU«rSa&sg»iB lurilTi. But 

betb tTTftns«ffleet« oi dnperr u« found ia tba oldo«t iintgM o| tli« Buddli* nad 
pwli*pt tbe Bfea pii k t fuhioo U tbo oonoionor. Sm GrSnwadal. BuidWiI Art in 
2adi^ 1901, p. ITS. Tfaougb tben iiB£^ tn conmd«rmblp i*t«r this ChoUubiTngga 
tad prove Dothing m to tbo orifinai prAottco of tli« Siilgbi, yet they ibov tbit 
th» EUnuiki fubioo praviikd it i relitirely eirly period. It bow previlli in 
SiuD end pirtly in CBylon. I.Chiog: {cbip. zl) bu i dWnaaon on tbe wiy robe* 
we» worn in ladi* (c. 980 a-b.) vbieh k voiy obarare bat nenu to iiy that zootic* 
aiy kMp their aboulden covered while io i monutory but should onoow oae 
when they go out 

XX XVI] 

BURMA 

63 

to gire & decided opinion. The atirring poli^cel events of 1740 and 
the following jeara naturally thtewecclesiostical ^^narrels into the 
shade hut when the great Alompra had disposed of his enemies 
be appeared as a modem Asoka. The court religiously observed 
Uposatha days and the kii^ was popularly believed to be a 
Bodbisattva^. He was not however sound on the great question 
of ecclesiastical dress. His chaplain, Atula, bebnged to the 
Hkaipsika party and tbo king, saying that he wished to go into 
the whole matter himself but had riot for the moment leisure, 
provisionally ordered the Sabgha to obey Atula’s ruling. But 
some champions of the other »de stood firm. Alompra dealt 
leniently with them, hut died during his Siamese campaign 
before he had time to unravel the intricacies of the Vinaya. 

The infiuence oi Atula, who must have been an astnte if not 
learned man, continued after the king’s death and no measures 
were taken against the Ekaznslkas, although King Hsin*byu-8bm 
(176$-1776) persecuted an heretical sect called Faraniats', His 
yonthfol successor, Sing^gu^sa, was induced to hold a public 
disputation. The Ekatnsikas were defeated in this contest and 
a royal decree was issued making the P&rupana discipline 
obligatory. But the vexed question was not settled for it came 
up again in the long reign (1781-1819) of BodopayA. This king 
has won an evil reputation for cruelty and insensate conceit^ 
but be was a man of vigour and kept together his great empire. 
His megalomania natorally detracted from the esteem won by 
his piety. His benefactions to religion were lavish, the shrines 
and monasteries which be built innumerable, But he desired to 
build a pagoda larger than any in the world and dunng some 
twenty years wasted an incalculable amount of labour and 
money on tl ug project, still commemorated by a ^gantie but 
unfinished mass of bric^ork now In ruins. In order to supervise 
its erection he left his palace and lived at Mingun, where be 

I S6tanA\>. p. 1S8. S4kai*41ftmiiia&-n(ibeTbiao c«: ftyais amhekla :4j4 
bodhiMtM U Tob&riioiu. la the Pe>U*Dtusg MKripUm, AJwnpre’i sob, Hm* 
b;u-ahiiL n7S tvioo **lnTirtue oi thli n; good deed, raey 1 becone e Buddha,.,, 
40 outtieelent one.” Iniian Aniiqwfi/. 1993, pp. 2 eod S. There is eometbing 
MebSTinist in this ispbetion. Cl Uw the insaripticfis of the Sie m eee Eing 8fl* 
SiUyeveipee lUios reentiOBeC belov. 

s Tb^ were PurittBS who objeoted to shrliiM U)d unegee end eie ssJd to be 
representwi to-dey by the Sewti eecu 

• See Tha Brnma £«pt>« b; tbe Iteiian P*ther SecseraiMO, who west to 
Borma in 1788 ead lived tbere etmt 20 Teaie, 

64 

BUDDHISM OUTBIDS INDIA 

[CH, 

conc«i7e<l the idea that he waa a Buddha, an idea which had 
not been enticel^ absent from the minds of AJompra and Hsiii- 
byU'Shin. It is to the credit of the Theraa that, despite the 
danger of opposing an autocrat as cruel as he was crasy, they 
refused to countenance tiiese pretensions and the long returned 
to his palace as an ordinary monarch. 

If be could not make himself a Buddlia, he at. least disposed 
of the Ekaqisika dispute, and was probably influenced in his 
views by R4n&bhivamsa, a monk of the P&rupana school whom 
be made his chaplain, although Atula was still alive. At first 
he named a cojnniission of enquuy, the result of which was that 
the Ekaipsikas admitted that their practice could not be 
justified from the scriptures but only by tradition. A royal 
decree was issued enjoining the observance of the P&rupana 
discipline, but two years later Atula addressed a letter to the 
king in which he maintained that the Ekamsika costume was 
approved in a work called Cfilaganthipsda, composed by 
HoggalS^a, the immediate disciple of the Buddha, The king 
ordered representatives of both parUes to examine this oouten* 
tion and the debate bet\7een them is dramatically described in 
the S&sanavamsa. It was demonstrated that the text on which 
Atula relied was composed in Ceylon by a there named Moggalkna 
who lived in the twelfth century and that it quoted medieval 
Sinhalese commentaries. After this exposure the Mcaipsika party 
collapsed. The king commanded (1784) the P&rupana discipline 
to be observed and at last the royal order received obedience. 

It will be observed that throughout thiA controveray both 
sides appealed to the Idng, as if he had the right to decide the 
point in dispute, but that his decision had no compelling power 
as long as it was not supported by evidence. He could ensure 
toleration for views regarded by many as heretical, but was 
unable to force the views of one party on the other until the 
winning cause had publicly disproved the contentions of its 
opponents. On the other hand the king bad practical control 
of the hierarchy, for his chaplain was de Jado head of the 
Church and the appointment was strictly personal. It was not 
the practice for a king to take on his predecessor’s chaplain and 
the latter could not, like a Lamaist or Catholic ecclesiastic, 
claim any permanent supernatural povers. Bodbpayi did sorae- 
thing towards o^anizlng tSie hierarchy for he appointed four 

xxxvt ] 

BUHMA 

65 

eldera of repute to be Sa^hat&ja£ or, so to speak, Bishops, 
with four more es assistants and o^er them all hii ohapl^n 
ftipa as Archbishop. f9'4na vaa a man of energy and lived in turn 
in various monasteries supervising the discipline and studies. 

In spite of the extravagances of Bod6pay&, the Church was 
flourishing and respected in his reign. The celebrated Image 
called Mah&mrml was transferred from Arokan to his capital 
together with a Sanskrit library, and Burma sent to Ceylon not 
only the monks who founded the Amarapura school but also 
numerous Pali texts. This prosperity continued in the reigns of 
Bagyidaw, Tharrawadi and Pagan*inin, who were of little per¬ 
sonal account. The flist ordered the compilation of the Yasawin, 
a chronicle which was not original but iooorporated and super* 
seded other works of the same kind. In his re^ arose a question 
as to the validity of grants of land, eto., for religious purposes. 
It was decided ia the sense most favourable to the order, viz. 
that such grants are perpetual and are not invalidated by the 
lapse of time. About 1845 there was a considerable output of 
vernacular litorature. The D!gha, Barayutta and Anguttara 
Kikiyas with their commentaries were translated into Burmese 
but no compositions in Pali are recorded. 

From 1852 till 1877 Burma was ruled by Mindon-min. who 
if not a national hero was at least a pious, peace^bving, capabb 
king. His chaplain, Pailflaa&mt, composed the Stsanavamsa, or 
ecclesiastical history of Burma, and the king himself was am¬ 
bitious to dgure as a great Buddhist monarch, though with more 
sanity than Boddpayi. for bb chief desire was to be known as 
the Convener of the Fifth Buddhist Council. The body so styled 
met from 1863 to 1371 and, like the ancient Safins, proceeded 
to recite the Tipitaka in order to establish the correct text. The 
result may still be seen at Mandalay in the collection of buildings 
commonly known as the lour hundred and fifty Pagodas: a 
central ^upa surrounded by hundreds of small shrines each 
sheltering a porpendicubr tablet on which a portion of this 
veritable bible in stone is inscribed. Mindon-min also corrected 
the growing laxity of the BblkkhuB, and the eetcom in which 
the Burmese chu^ was held at this time is shown by the fact 
that the monks of Ceylon sent a deputation to the Saftgbarija 
of Maitdalay referring to his decision a dispute about a rivuf or 
eocleaiastied boundary. 

66 

BVDLBISM 0VT8WS INDIA 

iCH. 

Mindon-min iras succeeded by Tbibaw, who was deposed by 
the British. The S&iigharija aiamtaincd his office \mtil he died 
in 1895. An iaterrcgnum then occurred for the appointment 
bad always been made by the king, not by the Sangha. But 
when Lord Ourzon 7isited Burma in 1901 ho made arrangementa 
for tho election by the monks themeelyea of a superior of the 
whole order and Tsunggwin Sayidaw was solemnly instailod in 
this office by the British authorities in 1003 with the title of 
Thathanabaing^. 

3 

We may nov examine briefly some sides of popular religion 
and institutions which are not Buddhist. It is an iotcreeting 
fact that the Burmese law books or Dhammathate* which are 
still accepted as regulating inheritance and other domestic 
matters, are Indian in or^iu and show no traces of Sinhalese 
influence although since 1760 there has been a decided tendency 
to bring them into connection with authorities accepted by 
Buddhism. The earliest of these codes are those of Dbam- 
mavilisa (1174 a.d.) and of Waguru, king of Martaban in 1880. 
They professedly base themselves on the authority of Manu 
and, so far as purely legal topics are ooncemod, correspond 
pretty closely with the rules of the M&nava-dharroaeAstra. But 
they omit all prescriptions which involve Brahmanic religious 
observances such as penance and saoridoe. Also the theory of 
punishment is different and inspired by tlie doctrine of Karma, 
namely, that every evil deed will bring its own retribution! 
H^ce the Bormeae codes ordain for every crime not perulties 
to be anffered by the criminal but merely the payment of eom- 
pe^tion to the party aggrieved, proportionate to the damage 
suffered*. It is probable that the law-books on which these 
codes were based were brought from the east coast of India and 

XXXVJ] 

BURSfA 

07 

wore of the eawe type oa the code of Nirada, which, though of 
XU 1 questioned Brahmanic orthodoxy, is almost purely legai and 
has little to gay about religion. A suhsidiaiy literature embody¬ 
ing local decisions naturally grew up, and about 1640 was sum- 
maiiied by a Burmese nobloman calledKaing-zi in the Mahirhj a- 
dhammathat. He leosived from the king the title of Manurifa 
and the name of Menu became connected with his code, though 
it is really based on local custom. It appears to have supemded 
older law-books until the reign of Alompra who remodelled the 
administration and caused sevetai codes to be oompiled'. These 
also preserve the name of Manu, but he and Kaing-si are 
treated os tho same personage. The rules of the older law-books 
are in the mwn retiuned but are made to depend on Buddhist 
texts. Later Phammathats become more and more decidedly 
Buddhist. Thus the Mohavicchedani (1832) does not mention 
Manu but presents the substance of the Menu Dbammathats as 
the law preached by the Buddha. 

Direct Indian induence may be seen In another department 
not unimportant in an oriental country. The court astrologers, 
soothsayers and professors of kindred sciences were even in 
recent times Brahmas, known as Bdnn& and mostly from 
Manipur. An inscription fouiid at Pagan and dated 1442 men¬ 
tions the gift of 295 books^ to the Sangha among which several 
have Sanskrit titles and about 1600 we bear of Pandits learned 
in the Vedadhstros, meaning not Vedic learning in the strict 
sense but combinations of science and magic described as 
medicine, astronomy, KAma^tras, etc. Hindu tradition was 
suffiuentiy strong at the Ldurt to make the presence of experts 
in the Atbarva Ycda seem detirablo and in the capital they were 
in request for such services as drawing up horoscopes^ and 

^ Forohh«iQra«r a liat oi 39 S^hkamAthAU o&mpIlMl hctirera 1763 And 
18S2. 

* Th«; Accm to hAv* iBctudAd taBtrio irorki of the UAhll:4lACAkn> ty]*' 6 m 
B odo, Liu of Burma, p 10S> Noc 270,271. But t}io nwe is giToit in tbe PaB 
form CAktA. 

• AmoAf UM£M botroved from Hlndtutaa UAy ho nrenUoai^d tbe daily wsahii^s 
ill holy VAt«r of the uba^ in the AnkAn tAmylo At bf&edeJAy. Fonorrly oout 
faRivitiM, 1(1011 AA tlio Yaat'a fetel sod the footiTAl of ploughing, wore pa^ 
formod by PStioIa aad vitb Indiin rtEc«. Ob the ottor hAsd the lUUoAyAQA doea 
Bot wem to hAVB tho sAoie induoocA OQ Art And litentun thAt it Iiab bid in BiAra 
And Java, Chough scenM from it Am aodmIudm deplctod. 8 m Popart, SupU 
Anhaoolog. Afnwy, Buma, 1906, p. 22. 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

C8 

[CB, 

invoking good lack at weddings whereas monks will not attend 
social gatherings. 

More important as a non-Buddhlst element in Boimese 
roligion is the worship of Nats* or spirits of various kinds. Of 
the prevalence of such worship there is no donbt, but I caimot 
agree with the authorities who sa^ that it is the practical 
religion of the Burmese. No passing tourist can fail to see that 
in the literal as well ae hguiative sense Burma takes ite colour 
from Buddhism> from the gilded and verailion pagodas and 
the ^llow robed priests. It is impossible that so much money 
should be given, so many lives dedicated to a religion which 
had not a real hold on the hearts of tbo people. The worship of 
Kate, wide-spread though it be, is humble in its outward sigrie 
and is a auporstl^n ra^er than a creed. On several occasions 
the kings of Burma have suppressed its manifestations when 
they became too conspicuous. Thus Anawrata destroyed the 
Nat houses of Pagan and recent kings forbade the practice of 
£ring gone et funerals to scare the evil spirits. 

Nats are of at least three classes, or rather have three 
origins. Firstly they are nature spirits, similar to those revered 
in China and Tibet. They inhabit noticeable natural features of 
every land, particalarly trees, rivers and mountains; they may 
bo specially connected with villages, houses or individuals. 
Though not essentially evil they are touchy and vindictive, 
pxmishing neglect or discoortesy with misfortune and ill-luck. 
No esplanation is offered as to the origin of many Nats, but 
others, who may be regarded as formii^ the second category, 
are ghosts or ancestral spirits. In northern Burma Chinese 
influence encouraged ancestor worship, but apart from this 
there is a disposition (equally evident in India) to believe that 
violent and uncanny persons and thoee who meet with a tragic 
death become pow^ul ghosts requiring propitiation. Thirdly, 
there are Nats who are at least in part identified with the Indian 
deities recognised by early Buddhism. It would eeem that the 
Thirty Seven Nats, described in a work called the Mahflgft& 
Med&nigygn, correspond to the Thirty Three Gods of Buddhist 
mythology, but that the number has been raised for unknown 

' See Mpwkll; Tht TKitty Stven bf Sir K. C. Temple, iSOd, ud 
b; Sir J. G. Scott, IdOC, pp. SSC ff. The beet eutborUaw m«zb agreeil that Ket is 
nM tbe Seaakrii Nitbe bat an indigeuona word ol unkaowD denvatloiL 

xxxvt] 

BURMA 

69 

reasons to 37*, They are spirits of deceased heroes, and there is 
nothing uubuddhist in this conception, for the Pital^as fre¬ 
quently represent deserving persons as being reborn in the 
Heaven of the Thirty Three. The chief is Thagy&, the Sakra or 
India of Hindu mythology*, but the others are heroes, connected 
with five cycles of legends based on a popular and often inac¬ 
curate version of Burmese history*. 

Besides Thagyft Nat we find other Indian figures such as 
Man Nat (Mira) and Byammi Nat (Brahmi). In du^raros 
illustrating the Buddhist cosmology of the Burmans* a series of 
heavens is depicted, ascending from those of the Four Kings 
and Thirty Three Gods up to the Brahmi worlds, and each in¬ 
habited by Nats according to their degree, Here the spirits of 
Burma are marshalled and classified according to Buddhist 
system just ae were the spirits of India some centuries before. 
But neither in ancient India nor in modem Burma have the 
devas or Nats anything to do with the serious bnsiness of 
religion. They have their place in temples as guardian genii and 
the whole band may be seen in a shrine adjoiniRg the Shwe-zi- 
gon Fagoda at Fagan, but this interferes no mote with the 
supremacy of the Buddha than did the deputations of spirits 
who according to the scrlpturos waited on him. 

4 

Buddhism is a real force in Burmese life and the pride of 
the Burmese people. Bvery male Burznan enters a monastery 
when he is about 16 for a short stay. Devout parents send their 
sons for the four months of Woi4 (or even for this season daring 
three sucoeerive years), but by the majority a period of from 
one month to one week is considered sufficient. To omit this 
stay in a monastery altogether would not be respectable: it is 
in common esteem the only way to become a human being, for 
without it a boy is a mere animal. The praises of the Buddhs 

^ PoMbty ia order to inolud* four fonuls apirit*: or pcoaibly bccaun it »m lol 
Uidi loodry Ufor Itcrocs bod as attODg % cUim to meisbonhip of tbia distingtiiahod 
body u ito originail 93. 

* It 19 ooUooftblo tbot Thagyi cozzms fr«a tho 3»iukrit Sokro set PiU 
SakkA.Th«Slc a:7=Sk.t. 

* S«9 &. C. Tompto, TAc Thirtif Stuen NeM, «b»pc X.-4JO., Xor tJuM oyciM. 

* C< Tontple, L& p, 3S. 

70 BVDDBISM OVTSIDE INDIA [ oh . 

and V 0 W 8 to lead a good life are commonly recited by the laity' 
every morning and evening. It is the greatest ambition of 
most Bumans to build a pagoda and those who are able to do 
so (a large percentage of the popolation to judge from the 
nvimber of buildings) are not only sure of their reward in 
another birth but even now enjoy respect end receive the title 
of pagoda-builder. Another proof of devotion is the existence 
of thousands of raonaslerie8*-^)erhaps on an average more than 
two for each large village and town—built and supported by 
voluntary contribu^ona. The provision of food and domicile fox 
their numerous inmates is no small cliarge on tho nation, but 
observers are agreed that it is cheerfully paid and that the 
monks are worthy of what they receive. In energy and morality 
they seem, as a class, superior to their brethren in Ceylon and 
Siam, and their services to education and learning have been 
considerable. Every monastery is also a school, where instruc¬ 
tion is given to bo^ day boys and boarders. The vast majority 
of Burmans enter such a school at the age of eight or nine and 
learn there reading, writing, and arithmetic. They also receive 
rel^ious instruction and moral training. They commit to 
memory various works in Pali and Burmese, and are taught the 
duties which they owe to themselves, society and the state. 
Sir J. G. Scott, who is certainly not disposed to exaggerate the 
influence of Buddhism in Burma, says that *'the education of 
the monasteries far surpasses the instruction of the Anglo- 
vemacular schools from every point of view except that of 
immediate success in life and the obtaining of a post under 
Government*.” The more studious monks are not merely 
schoolmasters but can point to a coosideTable body of literature 
whiob they have produced in the past and are still produdtig*. 
Indeed among the Hinayanist churches that of Burma bas in 
recent centuries held the flist place for learning. The age and 
continuity of Sinhalese traditions have given the Sangba of 
Ceylon a correspondingly great prestige but it has more than 

1 Aecordiag Sir J. Q. Booit madb toon commooly tba& pnysra imoog 
CbitfUaB*. .^urma. ^ 164. 

* 19,371 according M th« oewu of ISSI. Tlt« dgone ifi the leet oeoiui ere noi 
eonvenicnti; ^rreofed ice BoddhUt etatijtict. 

* UeatioKB* BnefcL 9fJlsJifion and SMc*. ert. "5unii*(BaddluiiB).'' 

* Bm Bode, Pnii LikTCtiiTt in Bunne, pp. S5 8. 

BUR^A 

) 

\ 

xxxvx] 

71 

once been recruited from Burma and iu literary output it can 
hardly rival the Burmese clergy. 

Though many disquIsiUons on the Vinaya have been pro¬ 
duced in Burma, and though the Jgtakas and porticos of the 
Sntta Pitaka (especially those c^ed Parittam) are known to 
everybody, yet the favourite study of theologians appears to 
be the Abhidhamma, concerning which a midtitude of hand¬ 
books and oonunentanes have been written, but it is worth 
mentioning that the Abhidbammattha-sangeha, composed in 
Ceylon about the twelfth century A.n., is still the standard man- 
ual^. Yet it would be a mistake to think of the Burmese monks 
as absorbed in these recondite studies: they have on the contrary 
produced a long series of works dealing with ^e practical 
things of the world, snch as chronicles, law-books, ethical and 
political treatises, and even poetry, for SilavMusa and Rattha- 
pgla whose verses are still learned by the youth of Burma were 
both of them Bhikkbus. The Sangha bos always shewn a laud¬ 
able reserve in interfenng directly with politics, but in fonner 
times the king’s private chaplain was a councillor of importance 
and occasionally matters involving both political and religious 
questions were submitted to a chapter of the order. In all cases 
the induence of the monks in secular matters made for justice 
and peace: they sometimes interceded on behalf of the con¬ 
demned or represented that taxation was too heavy. In 18$6, 
when the British annexed Burma, the Head of the Sangha for¬ 
bade monks to take part in the political strife, a prohibition 
which was all the more remarkable because King Thibaw had 
issued proclainatioDs saying that the object of the invsMon was 
to destroy Buddhism. 

In essentials monastic life is much the same in Burma and 
Ceylon but the Burmese standard is h^ber, and any monk 
known to misconduct himself would be driven out by the laity. 
The monasteries are numerous but net large and much space 
is wasted, for, though the exterior 

in several stories the interior usu^^y is a ringle hall, although it 
may be divided by partitions. To the eastern side is attached a 
chapel contjuning images of Gotama before which d^y devotions 

1 No IM lb»n 23 of it h*rt been njtde into Burm«»o. See S. 2 . 

in J.p.T^. 1012, p. 129. H« lOrtlWM lli»t night WcUirto on the Abti* 

in Burmese Are gtmv in nonutoiie*. 

i 

72 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [ch. 

ftre performed. It is surmounted by & steeple culmioating in 
s Jai, a sort of baldacbino or sacred umbrella placed also on 
the top of dagobae» aod made of open metal vork hung with 
little bells. Moiiasteries are always built outside towns and, 
tliough many oi them become subsequently enclosed by the 
growth of the larger cities, they retaia spacious grounds in 
which there may be separate buildings, such as a library, dor¬ 
mitories for pupils and a ball for performing the ordination 
serrioe. Tho average number of inmates is sis. A large establish* 
ment may house a superior, four monks, some novices and 
besides them several lay scholars. The grades are Sahin or 
novice, Pyiiskin or fully ordained monk and P&ngifi, literally 
great gbry, a monk of at least ten years’ standing. Bank de* 
ponds on seniority—that is to say the greatest respect ia shown 
to the monk who has observed his vows for the longest period, 
but there are some simple hierarchical arrangements. At the 
head of each monastery is a Say& or superior, and all the 
monasteries of a ia^ town or a country district are under the 
supervision of a Provincial called Gaing-Ok. At the head of 
the whole church is the Thathanabaing, already mentioned. 
AU these higher officials must be Pongyls. 

Although all monks mast take part in the daily round to 
collect alms yet iu most monasteries it is the custom (as in 
Ceylon and Slam) not to eat the food collected, or at least not 
all of it, and though no solid nourishment is taken after midday, 
three morning meals are allowed, namely, one taken veiyoarly^ 
the next served on the retum from the begging round and a 
third about 11.30. Tivo or three services are intoned before the 
image of the Buddha each day. At the morning ceremony, 
which takes place about 5.30, all the inmates of the monastery 
prostrate themselves before the superior and vow to observe 
the precepts daring the day. At the conclusion of the evening 
service a novice announces that a day has passed away and in 
a loud voice proclaims the hour, the day of the week, the day 
of the month and the year. The laity do not usually attend these 
services, but near la^ monasteries there are rest houses for 
the entertainment of visitora and Uposatha days are often 
celebrated by a pious picnic. A family or party of friends take 
a rest-house for a day, bring a goodly store of cheroots and betel 
nut, which are nob regarded as out of place during divine 

SXXVI] 

BUSMA 

n 

earvice*, and listen at tbeii eaee to the expo^tion of the law 
delivered by a yeUow-robod monk. When the congregation in- 
olodea women he holds a la^ fan-leaf palm before his face lest 
his eyes should behold vanity. A custom which might not be 
to tho taste of western ecclesiasacs is that the congregation ask 
questions and, if they do not understand, request the preacher 
to be clearer. 

There is little seetarianiam in Burma proper, bat the Sswtis, 
an anti*clerioal sect, are found in some jixmibere in the Shan 
States and similar communities called Man are still met with 
in Pegu smd Tenasserim, though said to be disappearing. Both 
refuse to recognize tlie Sangha, monaateries or temples and per¬ 
form their devotions in the open fields. Othennse their mode 
of thought is Buddhist, for they hold that every m a n can work 
out his own salvatton by conquering Mhra^ as the Buddha did, 
and they use the ordinary fonnuUa of worship, except that 
they omit all expressions of reverence to the Sangha. Tlie ortho¬ 
dox Sangha is divided into two schools known as Mahhgandi 
. and Sulagandi. The former are the moderate easy-going 
majority who maintwn a decent discipline but undeniably 
deviate somewhat from the letter of the Vinaya. The latter are 
a strict and somewhat militant Puritan minority who protest 
against such concessions to the fiesh. They insist for instance 
that a monk should eat out of bis beggir^ bowl exactly as it is 
at the end of the morning round and they forbid the use of silk 
robes, sunshades and sandals. The Sfilagandi also believe in free 
will and attach more value to the intention than the action in 
estimating the value of good deeds, whereas the Mahigandl 
accept good actions without enquiring into the motive and 
believe that all deeds are the result of karma. 

5 

In Burma all the h^er branches of architecture are almost 
exclusively dedicated to religion. Except the Palace at Manda¬ 
lay there is hardly a native building of note which is not con¬ 
nected with a shrine or monastery. Burmese architectural 

^ But m nu)U occmoiw th» Uity u^aaJly f&ft •tt«r oidtUr. 

* Mao lA tb« Bqmim« Icno of USn- 

74 BVDDIUSM OUTSIDE INDIA [csR. 

forms show most analogy to bliosc of Nepal and perhaps^ both 
presorva what was once the common style for wooden buildings 
In ondonfi India. In reoent contiuies the Burmese have shown 
Uttle inclination to build anything that oon be called a temple, 
that is a chamber containing images and the paraphemalia of 
worship. The commonest form of religioos edifice is the dogoba 
or sedi^: im^es are placed in niches or shrines, which shelter 
them, but only rarely, as on the platform of the Shwe Dagon at 
Rangoon, assume the proportions of rooms. This does not apply 
to the great temples Pagan, built from about 1050 to 1200, 
but that style was not coQtmued and except the Arakan 
Pagoda at Mandalay has perhaps no modem representative. 
Details of these biiil^gs may be found in the works of Forch- 
hammer, Fergusson, de BcyK4 and various archeological re¬ 
ports. Their construction is remarkably solid. They do not, like 
most large buildings in India or Europe, contain halls of some 
sise but are rather pyramids traversed by passes. But this 
curious disineJination to build temples of the usual kind is not 
duo to arty dislike of images. In no Buddhist country ate they 

more common and thoir numbore ore more noticeable becauae 

there is here no pantheon os in China and Tibet, but im^s of 
Gotama are multiplied, merely in order to obtain merit. Some 
slight variety in these figures is produced by the fact that the 
Burmese venerate net only Gotama but the three Buddhas who 
preceded him*. The Shwe Dagon Pagoda is reputed to contain 
relics of all four; statues of them all stand in the beautiful 
Ananda Pagoda at Pagan and not infrequently they ore repre¬ 
sented by four sitting figures facing the four quarters. A gigantic 
group of this kind composed of statues nearly 90 feet high 

< Among tJiA uo*t striking obsmeUnstitt ot tbo Nspekse stylo buildings of 
asny steiMS osoh wUA s projecting root No exsaplss of similsr buildings from 
sncisfit Indis bare somved. porbsie toonuse they wen made of wood, but repre* 
senbetione o( Cwo-itoried bulhlings bsro como down to us, for instance on the 
Sohgtan copper pinto vbiob dates jmbnbly Irom lbs time of Asokn (seo Blihler, 
B'.^.AT.Af. 169C, p. 1S8). See olao Um iguiee In i^oucher's Ari iv 

(JoHdidra, an pp, 121, 122, The reonumeote e( MimeUipurein known ae fUths 
<sse Feegusson, 7iKfis» and Bawlern ArtSUstiurt, i. p. 172} appenr to be reprseenU- 
tions of many atoned VibSm. Then tn eoveml nferenees to seven storied bejldiatrs 
is the J&tokee. 

» acetiys. 

* Ooouiooeliy gtoupe of five Suddhse, tbet tb«s four Buddhss together 
with Uettoyyn, ore found. 8«« JZ«;iorl of iAe Snpl. A rdu Surmy (Bu>ma) Ja tAe year 

otdeny Jfurc* 31^. 1910, p. 10. 

SXXVl] 

BURMA 

t6 

gUndd in the outskirts o( Pegu, and in the same neighbourhood 
is a still larger recumbent iigure 180 ieet long. It bad been for* 
gotten since the capture of Pegu by the Burmans in 1757 and 
was rediscovered by the ongineere surveying the route for the 
railway. It Ues almost in sight of the line and is surprising by 
its mere size, as one conies upon It suddenly in the jungle. As 
a work of art it can hardly be praised. It does not suggest the 
Buddba on his death bed, as is intended, but rather some huge 
spint of the jungle waking up and watching the rulway with 
indolent amusomont. 

. In Upper Burma there are not ao many large images but as 
one approaches Mandalay the pagodas add moro and more to 
the lan^oape. Many are golden and the rest are mostly white 
and oonspicuous. They crown the hills and punctuate the wind* 
ings of the valleys. Perhaps Burmese art and nature are seen 
at their best near Ssg^g on the bank of the Irrawaddy, a 
mighty hood of yellow water, sweeping down smooth and steady, 
but here and there showing whirlpools that look like molten 
metal. From the shore rise hiilg of moderate height studded 
with monasteries and shrines. Flights of white steps lead to the 
principal summits where golden spires gleam and everywhere 
are pagodas of all ages, shapes and sizes. Like most Asiatics the 
Burmese rarely repair, but build new pagodas instead of teno* 
vating the old ones. The instinct is not alt<^ther unjust. A 
pagof^ does not collapse like a hollow building but understands 
the art of growing old. Like a tree it may become cleft oi over* 
grown with moss but it remains pioturesque. In the neighbour¬ 
hood of Sagaing there is a veritable forest of pagodas; htunble 
seedlings built by widows* mites, mature golden domes reared 
by devout prosperity and venerable ruins decomposing as all 
compound things must do. 

The pagoda slaves are a curious institurion connected with 
temples. Under the Bimnese kings persons could be dedicated 
to pagodas and by this process not only became slaves for life 
them^ves but involved in the same servitude ^ their posterity, 
none of whom could by any method become free. They formed 
a low caste like the Indian Pariahs and though the British 
Government has abolished the legal status of slavery, the social 
stigma wluch cUugs to thero is said to be undiminisbed. 

Art and architeotore make the picture of Burma as it 

0 

1. m. 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE IHDIA 

7 « 

[CH, 

lems^ns in memory and ^ey we the £aitMul reflection of the 
character and ways of its iohcbitants, their cheerfol but religious 
temper, their love of what !e fanciful and graceful, their moder¬ 
ate aspirations towards wbat is arduous and sublime. The most 
Gtriking feature of this architecture is its free use of gold and 
colour. In no country of the world is gilding and plating with 
gold so lavishly employed on the exterior of buildings. The 
larger Pagodas euch as the Shwe !Dagon are veritable pyramids 
of gold, and the roofs of the Arakan temple as they rise above 
Mandalay show tier upon tier of golden beams and plates. The 
brilliancy is increased by the et^ually lavish use of vermlhon, 
sometimes diveiaihed by glass mosaic. I remember once in an 
East African jungle seeing a clump of flowers of such brilliant 
red and yellow that for a moment I thought it was a Are. 
Somewhat Bimilar is the surprise with which one first gazes on 
these edifices. 1 do not know whether the epithet flamboyant 
can be corroctly applied to them as architecture but both in 
oolonr and shape they imitate a pile of flame, for the outlines 
of monasteries aud shrines arc fanciful in the extreme; gabled 
roofs with flniala like tongues of fiie and panels rich with 
carvings and fret-work. The buildings of Hindus and Burmans 
are as different as their characters. When a Hindu temple is 
imposing it la usually because of its bulk and mystery, whereas 
these buildings are l^htheartcd and fairy-like: heaps of red and 
yellow fruit with twining leaves and tendrils that have grown 
by magic. Hor is there much resemblance to Japanese archi¬ 
tecture. There also, lacquer and gold aro employed to an unusual 
extent but the flourishes, horns and fini^ which in Burma 
spring from every corner and projection are wanting and both 
Japanese aud Chinese artists are more spetring and reticent. 
They distribute ornament so as to emphr^ze and lead up to 
ihi more important parts of their buildings, whereas the open- 
handed, splendour-loving Burman puts on every panel and 
pillar as much decoration as it will hold. 

The result oust be looked at as a whole and not too minutely. 
The best woric is the wood carving which has a freedom and 
boldness often missing in the minute and crowded designs of 
Indian art- Still as a rule it is at the risk of breaking the spell 
that you examine the details of Burmeso omaruentatioo. Better 
rest content with your first amazement on beholding these 

BVRMA 

77 

xxrvi] 

cured and pinnacled piles of gold and Termilion> wLere the 
iantaetic animaU and plants seem about to break into life. 

The most celebrated shrine in Burma ia the Shwe Dagon 
Pagoda which attracts pilgrims from all tbe Baddhist world. 
No descriptions of it gave me any idea of Its teal appearance 
nor can I hope that I shall be more successful in giving the 
reader my own impressions. Tbe pagoda itself ia a gilt bell* 
shaped mass rather h^her than the Dome of St Paul's and 
terraihating in a spire. It is set In centre of a raised mound 
or platform, approached by lofty flights of steps. Tbe platform, 
which is paved and level. is of Imposing dimonsions, some nine 
hundred feet long and seven hundred wide. Bound the base of 
the central pagoda Is a row of shrines and another row runs 
round tho edge of the platform so that one moves, as It were, in 
a street of these ediflees, lea^ng here and there into ^de 
squares where are quiet retreats with palm trees and gigantic 
images. But when after climbing the long staircase one first 
emerges on the platform one doee not realiae the topography 
at onoe and seems to have entered suddenly into Jerusalem the 
Golden. E^ht aod left are rows of goigcous, fantastic eanc- 
tuaries, all gold, vermilion and glass mosaic, and within them 
sit marble figures, bland, enigmatic personages who seem to 
invito approach hut offer no explanation of tho singular scene 
or tho part they play in it. If analyzed in detail the artistic 
merits of these shrines might be found small but the total 
iroprossion is unique. Tho SJxwe Dagon has not the qualities 
which usually diatingoiah great religious buQdmgB. It is not 
Bpedally impressive by its majesty or holiness; it is certainly 
wanting in order and arrangement. But on entering the plat¬ 
form one feels that one has suddenly passed from this life ioto 
another and different world. It is not perhaps a vtty elevated 
world; oertainly not the final repose of the just or the steps of 
the throne of God, but it is as if you wore walking in tbe bazaars 
of Paradise—one of those Buddhist Paradises where the souls 
of the moderately pure find temporary rest from the whirl of 
transmigration, where the very lotus flowers are golden and the 
leaves of the trees are golden bells that tinkle in the perfumed 
breeze. 

CHAPTER XXXVII 

S1AM‘ 

1 

The Buddhiam of Siam does not diSer materially from tliat of 
Burma and Ceylon but merits separate mention, since it has 
features of its own due in some measure to tbe fact tbat Siam 
is stUJ an independent kingdom ruled by a monarch who ia also 
head of the Church. But whereas for the last few centuriee this 
kingdom may be regarded ae a political and religious unit, ite 
condition in earlier times was different and Siamese history 
tells us nothii^ of the introduction and first diffusion of Indian 
teligioiis in the countries between India and China. 

* TbR prifMlpiU W 1 UCM for informaWn aboet SiuDM» Bud4hinD an: JwrMi 
o/Sma Socittf, 1901, and ODwanla 

1. Foornenau, U Siam 2 fob. 1396 aod 1908 ifi du Jitiade 

ClUd bare u Foiuftercaa. 

Uiaaion Pa vie □. ffbtoire da CanMfft« da 1808. 

Oerini, AsnareAM «a PbfejByV iSeaftepAy a/ Batim Atia. 1909. Citad bare aa 
Gerini, Piolemr. 

Gerini, OhMtdiuH^autnffaUor Tonavn Cvonony. 1893. 

?. Alabaeter. iTh Whe*i of <Aa Lag, (871. 

P. A. Tbonpeon. Xotai CmA, 1908. 

W. A. Grabaa, Siam, 1918. 

p*tilbugoa«in, “Neb* oritiqu« poor aemr b l‘hbWin du Siam.” B.B.F.B O. 
191 a Ne. 8. 

CoedK ‘’DocomcDta aor la Dyorulb do Siikbodaya,” i6. 1917, No. 3. 

Maob oorioos iniomatioo may bo found in tho Ikrtcarryfor and Siam, 

a iBoak inumiiiis book. 1 bavo qnJy ibe imo for 1907. 

1 bare adopM tha oonrentJonal Eoropoan epelliog (or each vorda ao may bo 
oaid to bavo ono. For otbor irorda I bavo follWBd Palksott’o dictioBAjy flSW) 
for nodering tbe vowob and Umn io Rozaaa ebanctore. but bavo dopartod in 
Bone Rspooto from bis ayitom of traaslitantane oonsooanb aa I it Qzmcooaaary 
and mialasding to -writo ) and x for aMiads wbjoh appannUy eomopond to y and 
ob u pronoeaeod in English. 

The King of SiMn haa publiahod a T«k on the spoiling of Hia Majwty’s own 
langoago in UUn letters which ought te be autboritetivo, bot it into mr 
hands too bto (or wo to modHy tho orthegrapby boro adopted. 

As Pallogeix'a epoJling involvoa tbo u« of a great many acooub 1 bavo aomo- 
Umos bogna by udog the etrictly oomat orthography and afterwarda a simpler bnC 
intelligibto fora. It ebouU be noted tbat in this onhograpby ' is act a colon 
bit a sign tbat the votrel before 16 is vory abort. 

81AM 

CH. xxxvn] 

n 

Thd people commonly knovn m Siamese <**11 themeelvee 
which (in the form Tu) appears to he tho racial name of 
several tribes who can be traced to the southem provinces of 
China. They spread thence, in fanlike fashion, from Laos to 
Assam, and the middle section ultimately descended the Menam 
to the sea. The Siamese filftim to have assumed the name Th&i 
(free) after they threw oS the yoke of the Oambojans, bat this 
derivation is more acceptable to politics than to ethnology. 
The territories which they inhabited were known as Siem, 
Syim or Sy&ma, which is commonly iden^hed with the Sanskrit 
^y&ma, dark or brown*. But the names Shan and A-hom seem 
to be variants of the same word and ^y&ma is possibly not ita 
origin but a learned and artlhoial distortion*. The Lao were 
another division of the same race who occupied the country 
now called Laos before the Tal bad moved into Siam. This 
movement was gradual and until the beginning of the twelfth 
century they merely established small prmcipalitiee, the princi¬ 
pal of which was Lamphim*, on the western arm of the Mekong. 
They graduaUy penetrated into the kingdoms of Svankalok, 
Sukhothai* and Lavo (Lopbburi) which then were vassals of 
Camboja, and they were reinforced by another body of Tais 
which moved southwards early in the twelfth century. For 
some time the Cambojan Empire rnade a successful effort to 
control these immigrants but in the latter part of the tlurteenth 
century the Siamese definitely shook off its yoke and founded 
an independent state with its capital at Sukboth^. There was 
probably some connection between these events and the south¬ 
ern OTcp^tions of Kbcbil^ Khan who in 1254 conquered Talifu 
fnd set the Tai tiibos in motion. 

The history of their rule in Siam may be briefly described as 
a succession of three kingdoms with capitals at Sukhothid, 
Ayuthia and Bangkok reepec^vely. Like the Burmese, the 
Siamese have ann^ or chr^cles. They fall into two divisions, 
I Ths name loud w Cbaapu lAoenptlOM of 1060 i.D. and Mcordiigi to 
0 «riiii appean in Ptol«m;'« S4n<mide=£itDan<tha. 6«e GbHxu, Ptokmy, p. 170. 
Bat SsoandB i» looated c m Bangkok and then eas k«rd|; baT« bMO T»ia then 
la Ptolomr'* time. 

' So t«o in C«ntrd Alia Kuetana appear* to be * leoroed dletoiiion of the oame 
Kbotu, made (« it a mean ing to Smukrib 

' Q^iri eUMe p. 107J that tbem iM PnU Buouaenpt olir«u<lW <ji 

Laaphon appanotly goiag bank to SS4 a.v. 

* SWot^ SOkbdlbu. 

BXrnDHlSM OUTSIDE lUDlA 

SO 

[cit. 

the chronicles* of the northern kin^^dota in three volumes which 
go down to the foundation of ATuthia and are admitted even 
by the Siamese to be mostly fabulous, and the later annals in 
40 volumes which were rearranged after the sack of Ayuthia in 
1767 but claim to begin with the foundation of the city, Various 
opinions have been expressed as to their trustworthiness*, but 
it is allowed by all that they must be used with caution. More 
authoritative but not very early are the inscriptions set up by 
various kings, of which a considerabb number have been 
published and translated*. 

The early history of Sukhothai and its kings is not yet 
beyond dispute hut a monarch called Bimar&ja or E&ma 
Khomheng pbyed a considerable part in it, Hb identity with 
Fhaya Rbang, who is said to have founded the dynasty and 
city, has been both affirmed and denied, Sukhothai, at least as 
the designation of a kingdom, sseiua to be muoh older than his 
reign*. It was imdoubtedly understood as the equivalent of the 
Sanskrit Sukhodaya, but like Syima it may be an adaptation 
of some native word, In an important inscription found at 

Sukhothai and now preaorvod at Bangkok*, which was probably 

composed about 1300 a.l., R&ma Khombeug gives an account of 
his kingdom. On the east it extended to the banks of the 
Mekhong and beyond it to Chavi (perhaps a name of Luang* 
Prabang): on the south to the sea, as far as gri Dharmar&ja or 
Ligor: on the west to HanisaTaW or Pegu. This last statement 
is important for it enables us to understand how at this period, 
and no doubt considerably earlier, the Siamese were sKiquainted 
with Pah Buddhism, The king states that hitherto his people 
had no alphabet but that he invented one*. This script subse- 

» Pb«LS*4va; daa or VaijusvidA. S«e ferSiamcM eJuuiuolea B.B.F.S.0. 191i, 
K«. S, "Rec«ziuon pftk» de« tno&tMd'AyathiA," utd ^ 1918, pp. 6-7. 

» B.9. Apoiomer Ia J.A. 1903, p. 1«, ud Qetisd ia Jour/uU of Sian Soeuki 
Tol. u. pirt 1.1005. 

* Ste FounMnta sad filio publiestiooe oi tke Minioa Favi* uti 

* G«ruu, p, 178. 

» Btt> Foumema. t p. 22fi. B.S.B.B.O. 1016, m, pp, $-18, end mmcIaU? 
Bndlej to J. Sion Sociify, 1009, pp. ^ 

* Thie sIphAboB ftppe«i« to be bemwed from Ceabojen but some oi tbe 
letum peKuuJeri; b their Ubr ehspaa thow the bSueoee of the Udo or Talebe 
eeripb The Qodeni CunbojiA iJphebet, which le conuDoaly ueed for 

purpeeee b Sieo, ia UMe mon thea ea eUborate form of SbiDeee. 

SIAM 

XXXVJl] 

81 

i^uently de76]op^ into the modem Si&meee writing which, 
though it presents m&ny difhcaltiee, is an ingenious attempt 
to express a lar^piage with tones in aa alphabet. The Tocabul^ 
of Siamese is not homogeneous: it comprises (a) a foundation of 
Thai, (b) a considerable admixture of Khmer words, (o) an 
element borrowed from Malay and other languages, (d) numer* 
ous ecclesiastical and learned terms taken from Pali and Sau« 
skrit. There are five tones which must be distinguished, if either 
written or spoken speech is to be intelligible. This is done partly 
by accents and partly by diTidii^ the fortydour consonanto 
(many of which are superfluous for other purposes) into thieo 
groups, the high, middle and deep. 

The king also speaks of religion. The court and the inhabi¬ 
tants of Sukhothai were devout Bnddhists: they observed the 
season of Yassa and celebrated the festival of Kashina with 
processions, concerts and reading of the scriptures. In the city 
were to be seen statues of the Buddha and scenes carved in 
relief, as well as large monasteries. To the west of the city was 
the Forest Monast^, presented to a distinguished elder who 
came from ^ Dharmarkja and had studied the whob Tripitaka. 
The mention of this offlclal and others su^nests that there was a 
regular hierarchy and the king relates how he exhumed certain 
sacred rehes and built a pagoda over them. Though there is no 
direct aUuaion to Brahmanism, stress is laid on the worship of 
spirits and devas on which the prosperity of the kingdom de¬ 
pends. 

The form of Buddhism described seems to have differed 
little from the Hinayanism found in Siam to*day. Whence did 
the Siamese obtain it? For some centuries before they were 
known as a nation, they probably professed some form of 
Indian religion. They came from the border lands, if not from 
the actual territory of CJhina, and must have been acquainted 
with Chinese Buddhism. Also Burmese influence probably 
reached Yunnan in the eighth century^, but it is not easy to 
say what form of religion it brought with it. Still when the 
Thai entered what is now Siam, it Is hkely that their religion 
was some form of Buddhism. While they were subject to Cam- 
hoja they must have felt the influence of Sivaism and possibly 

t Qvi B.E.F.E.0. 1004, p. I SI. 

82 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[cs. 

of Mahayaoist Sanskrit Buddhism but no Pali Buddhism can 
have come from this quarter^. 

Southern Slam was however to some extent affected by 
another wave of Buddhism. From early times the eastern coast 
of India (and perhaps Ceylon) had intercourse not only with 
Burma but with the Malay Peninsula. It is proved by inaorip* 
Uons that the region of Ligor, formerly known as Sri Bhar* 
mai&ja, was occupied by Hindus (who were probably Buddhists) 
at least aa early as the fourth century a.d.*, and Buddhist 
inscriptions have been found on the mainland opposite Penang. 
The Chinese annals allude to a change in the customs of Camboja 
and I-Ching says plainly that Buddhism once flourished there 
but was exterminated by a wicked king, which may mean that 
Hinayanist Buddhism had spread thither from Ligor but was 
suppressed by a dynasty of Sivaitea. He also says that at the 
end of the seventh century Hinayaniam wae prevalent in the 
islands of the Southern Sea. An inscription of about the fourth 
century found in Kedah and another of the seventh or eighth 
from Phra Fathom both conWn the formula Te dharmd, efco. 
The latter inactiption and also one from Morgui asoribod to the 
eleventh century seem to be in mixed Sanskrit and Pali. The 
Sukhothai macription summarized above tells how a learned 
monk was brought thither from Ligor and clearly the Pali 
Buddhism of northern Siam may have followed the same route. 
But it probably had also another more important if not exolusive 
source, namely Burma. After the reign of Anawrata Pali Bud¬ 
dhism was accepted in Burma and in what we now call the 
States ae the religion of dviJined mankind and this coll¬ 
ection found its way to the not very distant kingdom of 
Sukhothai. Subsequently the Siamese recognised the seniority 
and authority of the Sinhalese Cburoh by inviting an instructor 
to come from Ceylon, but m earlier times they can hardly have 
had direct lelatioix with the island. 

‘ Bimdlsy, J. £i<m 3«ci^, p. i<j, ^ 

IiAj;® 9^ tUeee but Um obj©«Uoo is tbi w« hmov * good d94l tbotit tb« wKtfJon 
o^bojs.^ tut d>et« i. DO lrt» of P*b Buddhi»m^ uatU it wm ii^rtod 
fiiain. Tbs tbit tb» SioauM wu bom>«d £ron CaojbojrS* 

xzxvu] 

SUM 

38 

We have aiiothei picture of religious life in a Khmer iosorip- 
tion^ of Lidaiya or §r! Sflryavamss lUma composed in 1361 or 
a little later. This monarch, who is also known by many lengthy 
titles, appears to have been a man of learning who had studied 
the Tipltaka, the Vedae, the ^tr&gama and Dharmahhya and 
erected images of Kaheiivara and Vishnu as well aa of the 
Buddha. In 1361 he sent a meaeengcr to Ceylon charged with 
the task of bringing back a Metropolitan or head of the SaAgha 
learned in the Pitakae. This ecoleeiastio, who is known only by 
his title, was duly sent and on arriving in Siam was received 
with the greatest honour and made a triumphal progress to 
Sukhothai. He is not represented as introducing a new religion: 
the impression left by the inacription is rather that the 
and his people being already woU-instxucted in Buddhism de¬ 
sired ampler edldcation from an authentic source. The arrival 
of the Sarighar&ja coincided with the begmning of Vassa and 
at the end of the sacred season the king dedi^ted a golden 
image of the Buddha, which stood in the midst of the oity, and 
then entered the order. In doing eo he solemnly declai^ his 
hope that the merit thus acq^uired might make him in future 
lives not an Emperor, an India or a Brahin& bat a Buddha 
able to save mankind. He pursued his religious career with a 
gratifying accompaniment of miracles and many of the nobility 
and learned prcdessions followed his example. But after a 
while a deputation waited on his Majesty begging him to return 
to the business of his kingdom^. An edifying contest ensued. 
The monks besought him to stay as their preceptor and guide: 
the liuty pointed out that government was at an end and 
claimed his attention. The matter was referred to theSaAghar&ja 
who decided that the king o^ht to return to his secular duties. 
He appears to have found lit^ difhoulty in resuming lay habits 
for he proceeded to chastise the people of Luang-Prabang. 

Two other inscriptions^, apparenriy dating fi^ this epoch, 

* PoureerMH, pp. 167 ff. and Co«d^ tb B.S.FS.O. 1917, No. 3. Bwide* Ui« 
iiMoripUoo which is hadJy d«la«ed la pada, we h&vc (I) t umiUr inacriplion 
in Tbii, which is ao6 bOTorer a tnaalatioo, (S) a ntodsrs Siamese tiuilabion. used 
by SohffliU but MV«nIy critteiMd fay Coedia and P«iiUiQsu«ain. 

* Ihli portien of the namUTa te loood only in ScfamiU’a venloB of tbe &aa«a 
tranalaUoQ. Tba part oi the attme vhaiv ft would have oeotmad is dafaoed. 

* Sea FoaraareepQ, e^c.inscripUMUXvandzviaadtbaaocounCtitbaJttakas, 

p,43. 

84 

BUDDinSM 0VT8IDB INDIA 

[cn. 

relate that a cutting of the Bo-tiee waa brought from Ceylon 
and that certain relics (perhaps from Patna) were also inatalled 
with great eolemnity. To the same time are referred a series of 
engravings cn stone (not reliefs) found in the Yat^sigum at 
Sukhotbai. They Ulustiate about 100 Jatakas, arranged for 
the most part according to the order followed in the Pali 
Canon. 

The facts that King ^rl Sdryavamsa sent to (!)eylon for his 
MetropoUtan and that some of the inscriptions which ortol his 
merits are In Pali^ make it probable that the religion which he 
professed differed little from the PaU Buddhism which flourishes 
in Siam to-day and this supposition is conflrmed by the general 
tone of his insenptions. But still several phrases in them have 
a Mahayanist flavour. He takes as hie model the conduct of the 
Bodhisattvas. described as ten headed by Metteyya, and Ms vow 
to become a Buddha and save aH creatures is at least twice 
mentioneds The Buddhas are said to be innumerable and the 
feet of Bhikkhus arc caUed Buddha feet^. There is no difHculty 
in accounting for the presence of such ideas: the only question 
is from what quartor this Mahayanist Influance came. The king 

U B&id to have been a student of Indian hterature; his coimtry, 
liko Burma, was in touch with China and his use of the Khmer 
language indicates contact witii Camboja. 

Another insenption engraved by order of Dharmlaokardja^ 
and apparently dating from the fourteenth century is remark¬ 
able for its clear statement of the doctrine (generally considered 
as Mahayanist) that merit acquired by devotion to the Buddha 
can be transfezved. The king states that a woman called Bnn- 
rak has transferred all her merit to the Queen and that he him¬ 
self makes over ah his merit to bis teacher, to his relations and 
to all beings in unhappy states of existence. 

At some time in this period the centre of the Thai empire 

» Founwmu, l pp, 247, 278. 1917, No. 2, p. 29. 

• twu is to. Tbo 8o<Uutttt7B«tf«4MCnbsduA^MBett*- 

yUtntiD diMQum BodhintUoAiD. TbQ vow to b«com« & Baddba ibotili It miss 
b» plscsfl ui tlis oMutb of tbo Kin^ not ef the UetropoliMn ss is BchauU'i trsns- 
istion. 

* See Fooresresu, pp, 209 ff. DhsroiwoksHjs oisy perbspe be the isue ss 
UshStlhsrmuije wbo reigsed 196^1410. Bot die weed aisy also be a loexo tide 
applied to all hiop of this dyoMty, so thsi this may be another iaseriptioo of 
ort ShiyaTainea 

xxxvn] 

SIAM 

S5 

changed but diTergent views Jiave l«en held as to the date' 
and character of this event. It would appear that in 1350 a 
Siamese subsequently known as King RAmidhipati, a descen¬ 
dant of an ancient lino of Thai princes, founded Ayuthia as a 
rival to Sulfhothai. The site was not new, for it had bng been 
known as Dv&ravatl and seems to be mentioned under that 
name by I*Ching (c. 680), but a new city wag apparently con¬ 
structed. The evidence of inscriptions inioates that Sukhofchai 
was not immediately subdued by the new kingdom and did not 
cease to be a royal residence for some time. But still Ayuthia 
gradually became predominant and in the fifteenth century 
merited the ritle of capital of Siam. 

Its rise did not affect the esteem in which Buddhism was 
held, and it must have contained many great rcl^ioue monu¬ 
ments. The Jungles which now cover riie site of the city sur¬ 
round the remnants of the Wat Somarokot, in which is a gigantic 
bronze Buddha facing with scornful calm the ruin which 
threatens him. The Wat Cbern, which lies at some distance, 
contains another gigantic image. A curious insoription' en¬ 
graved on an of $iva found at Sukhothai and dated 

1510 A.n. assorts the identity of Buddhism and Brahmanism, 
but the popular feehng wae in favour of ths former, At Ayuthia 
the temples appear to be exclusively Buddhist und at Lophburi 
ancient buildings orf^nally constructed for the Brahmanic cult 
have been adapted to Buddhist uses. It was in 1602 that the 
mark known as the footprint of Buddha was discovered at the 
place now called Phra-bat. 

Ayuthia was captured by the Burmese in 1568 and the long 
was carried into captivity but tho disaster was not permanent, 
for at the end of the century the power of the Siamese reached its 
highest point and their foreign relations were extensive. We het^ 
tliat five hundred Japanese assisted them to repulse a Burmese 
attack and that there was a large Japanese colony in Ayuthia. 
On the other hand when Hideyoshi invaded Korea in 1592, the 
Siamese offered to assist tho Chinese. Europeans appeared first 
in 151L when the Portuguese took Malacca, But on the whole 

‘ ISCO It tb« dtto but H. Aymoakr. pp. ISO ff. trpcca io 

fkvourof ftbtiut 14U0. FoiinMrMu, Siam, p. 242, uumptios of 1426 A.&. 
aad p. 18C, inscription of 1510 dasoribed ss Oroops d« Ssjj&uJtfB ot Sukbodsys. 

* yogrnoroao, voL z. pp. 186 S. 

86 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDS INDIA 

[oh. 

the dd&lin^ of Siam with Europe were peaceful and both 
traders and aissionaries were welcomed. The most singular 
episode in this International intercourse was the career of the 
Greek adrentnier Constantine Pbaulcon who in the reign of 
King Karai was practically Foie^ Minister. In concert with 
the French missionaries he arranged an exchange of embassies 
(1682 and 1686) between Narai and Louis XIV, the latter 
haring been led to suppose that the king and people of Siam 
were ready to embrace (Christianity. But when the French 
enroys broached the subject of oonreraion, the king replied 
that he saw no reason to change the religion which his oountcy- 
roen had professed for two thousand years, a chronological 
statement which it might be hard to substantiate. Still, great 
facilities were given to missionaries and further negotiations 
ensued, in the course of which the French received almost a 
monopoly of foreign trade and the right to maintoi garrisons, 
But the death of Narai was followed by a reaction. Pbaulcon 
died in prison and the French garrisons were expelled. Bud¬ 
dhism probably flourished at this period for the Mahgvaipes 
tells iia that the king of Ceybn eent to Ayuthia for monks in 
1760 because religion there was pure and undefiled. 

Ayuthia continued to be the capital until 1767 when it was 
Wd in ruins by the Burmese who, though Buddhists, did not 
scruple to destroy or deface the temples and statues with which 
it was ornamented. But the oollapee of the Siamese was only 
local and temporary. A leader of Chinese origin named Pbgya 
Tak Sin rallied their forces, cleared the Bunnese out of the 
country and made Bangkok, officiaJly described as the Capital 
of the Angels, the seat of Govemment. But he was deposed in 
1788 and one of the reasons for .his fall seems to have been a 
too zealous reformation of Buddhism. In the troublous times 
following the collapse of Ayuthia the Church bad become die- 
orgamied and oorrupt, but even those who desired improvement 
would not assent to the powers which the king clUmed over 
monks. A new dynasty (of which the sixth monarch is now on 
the throne) was founded in 1782 by Chao PhSya Chakkri- One 
of his first acts was to convoke a council for the revision of the 
Tipitaka and to build a special hall in which the text thus 
agreed on was preserved, ffis successor Phra: Buddha Lot La 
IS considered the best poet that Siam has produced and it is 

xxxvn] 

SIAM 

87 

probably fche only country in tJie world where tills distinction 
has fallen to the lot of a sovereign. The poet king bad two sods, 
Pbra: Nang j Klao, who ascended the throne after his death, and 
Mongkut, who during his brother's reign remained in a monss* 
teiy strictly observing the duties of a monk. He then became 
king and during hie reign (1851-1868) Siam “may be said to 
have passed from the middle ages to modem times*.’* It is a 
tribute to the excellence of Buddhist discipline that a prince 
who spent twenty-ebc years as a monk should have eme^d as 
neither a bigot nor an impractical mystic but as an active, 
enlightened and progreesive monarch. The equality and sim¬ 
plicity of monastic life disposed him to come into direct touch 
with his subjects and to adopt straightforward measures which 
might not have occurred to one who had always been surrounded 
by a wall of ministers. While stiH a monk he founded a stricter 
sect which aimed at reviving the practice of the Buddha, but 
at the same time he studied foreign creeds and took pleasure 
in conversing with missionaries. He wrote several historical 
pamphlets and an English Grammar, and was so good a mathe¬ 
matician that he could calculate the oocurreace of an edipso. 
When he became king he regulated the international position 
of Siam by concluding treaties of friendship and commerce with 
the principal European powers, thus showing the broad and 
liberal spirit in which he regarded politics, though a better 
acquuntsnee with the ways of Europeans might have made 
him refuse them extrateiritorial privileges. He abolished the 
custom which obliged every one to keep iodeers when the 
went out and he publicly received petitions on every Upesatha 
day. He legislated against slavery* gambling, drmMng spirits 
and smoking opium and considerably improved the status of 
women. Ho also publiahed edicts ordering the laity to inforoi 
the ecclesiastical authorities if thoy noticed any abuses in the 
monasteries. He caused the annals of Siam to be edited and 
issued numerous orders on archaeological and literary questions, 
in which, though a good Pali scholar, he deprecated the affected 
use of Fall words and enjoined the use of a terse and simple 
Siamese style, which he certainly wrote himself. He appears to 

* 0. FrMldCrt«r, "Kin; Mengluit,’’ Jovnal^SienBxutv. toI. x. 1904. 

* Bat it «M his soQ vho first dsorsed id 1868 tbst ao SiAosMe omM b« born » 
•loTS. 8lATei7 for dsbti though i)l«gsi< is said not to bo prActicnllj ostinct. 

88 

BVDDBISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH, 

have died of scaeatific zeal for he caught a fatal fever on a trip 
which he took to witness a total eclipse of the sun, 

Ho was succeeded by his »n Chulalongkom* (1888-1911), a 
libeiaj and eiilight4aied ruler, who had the misfortune to 1<^ 
much territory to the French on one side and the English on 
the other. For religion, bis chief interest is that he published 
an edition of the Tipitaka. The volumes are of European style 
and printed in Siamese type, whereas Cambojan characters 
were previously employed for religious works. 

2 

As I have already observed, there is not much difference 
between Buddhism in Burma and Siam. In medimval times a 
mixed form of religion prevailed in both countries and Siam 
was influenced by the Brahmanism and Mahayanism of Cam- 
boja. Both seem to have derived a purer form of the faith from 
Pegu, which was conquered by Anawrata im the eleventh cen¬ 
tury and was the neighbour ctf Sukhothai so long as that king¬ 
dom lasted. Both had relations with Ceylon and while vener¬ 
ating her as the metropolis of the faith also sent monks to her 
in the days of her spiritual decadence. But even in externals 
some differences are visibb. The gold and vermilion of Burma 
are replaced in Siam by more sober but artistic tinte—oKve, 
dull purple and dark orango-and the change in the colour 
scherao is accompanied by other changes in the buildings. 

A religious establishment in Siam consists of several edidees 
and is generally known as followed by some special 

designation such as W4t Chang, Bangkok is full of such cstab- 
lishmente mostly constructed on the banks of the river or canals 
The entrance is usually guarded by gigantic and grotesque 
figures which are often lions, but at the Wat Pho in Bangkok 
the tutelary demons are represented by curious caricatures of 
Euro^ans wearing tall hate. The gate leads into several courts 
opomng out of one another and not arranged on any fixed plan, 
The first is sometimes surrounded by a colonnade in which 
are set a long Uno of the Buddha’s eighty disciples. The most 

• sCeUkAkin. 

V ^ inv H n« b« the P.li 

VaUia, Seiuknt Vi«tu, i, *ite or buiUlir^? 

xxx7n] 

3IAH 

8D 

importajit building in e. Wat a frnown as BStV It baa a colon¬ 
nade of pillars outside and la surmounted by three or four 
' roofs, not much raised one above the other, and bearing finials 
of a curious shape, said to represent a snake’s head^ It ie also 
marked off by a circuit of eight stones, cut in the shape of Bo- 
tree leaves, which constitute a slraA or boundary. It is in the 
B5t that ordinations and other acts of the Sangba are per¬ 
formed, Internally it is a ball: the walls are often covered with 
p^tings and at the end there is always a fit ting figure of the 
Buddha* forming the apex of a pyramid, the lower st^s of which 
are decorated with s mal ler imagee and curious ornaments, such 
as clocks under glass cases. 

Siamese images of the Buddha generally represent him as 
crowned by a long flame-like ornament called Sir6 r^t*. probably 
representii^ the light supposed to issue from the prominence 
on his head. But the ornament someUmes becomes a ventable 
crown terminating iu a spire, as do those worn by the kings of 
Camboja and Siam. On the left and right of the Buddha often 
stand figures of Phra: Mokha: la {MoggalAna) and Phra: 
Siiibut (S&riputta). It is stated that the Siamese pray to tlicm 
as saints and that the former is invoked to heal broken lirabs*. 
The Buddha when represented in frescoes is robed io red but 
bis face and bands are of gold. Besides the BSt a W&t contains 
one or more wihins. The word is derived from ViJidra but has 
come to mean an image-house. The wibiDB are balls not unlike 
the Bots but smaller. In a largo W&t there is usually one con¬ 
taining a gigantic recumbent image of Uie Buddha and they 
sometimes shelter ludian deities such as Yama. 

In most if not in all Wilts there are structures known as 
Phra: chedi and Phra: prang. The former are simply the ancient 
cetiyas, called dsgohaa in Ceylon and tedia in Burma. They do 
not depart materially from the shape usual in other countries 

< 9Up<«atba. 

* ThcM uo v«ry conoiAii on Uic loof ends of toaiple* nad 

It k ctnuigo thAt (hey (Jm sro fotiad in eonjunoUon with muTtiple teof» 
in Konr^iMi ChuivhM of eleventh eentory. See do BeylU, ArMUdttre khdotu 
d0fl4 Vtxirtm* OrinU, pp. 47, iS> 

■ The Suddh&k geDcrelly known A* Phc«: KhO(]om{aGoUmft). 

* In ea eldSluncM bronso from XiMii^Kng Pot. figure*! in Grliovcderi 
Aiiitt 2»diA, p. 179, fif. 127, tbo Sird rAt memi U Im in pracesi of evelatwik 

* P, A, XliompMO, Lotia Land, 1900, p. ICO, 

00 

BXJDDHISM OUTSlbE WDU 

[CH. 

ftod sometimes, for instance in the gigantic chedi at Pra Pratom» 
the part below the spiie is a eohd ^U-shaped dome. But Siam> 
ese taste tends to make gueh buiJdings slender and elongate and 
they generally consist of stone discs of deoreaslng sise, set one 
on the other in a pile, which assumes in its upper parts the 
proportions of a fiagstaff rather than of a stone building. The 
Phra: prar^s though often la^t than the Phra; chedis are 
proportionally thicker and less elongate. They appear to be 
derived from the Brahmanjc temple towers of Camboja which 
consist of a shrine crowned by a dome. But in Siam the shrine 
is often at some height above the groimd and is reduced to 
small dimensions, eometimee becoming a mere niche. In large 
Phraprangs it is approached by a flight of steps outside and 
above it rises the tower, terminating in a metal spice. But 
whereas in the Phra: chedis these spires are simple, in the Phra: 
prar^s they bear three creecents representing tiie trident of 
Sva and appear like barbed arrows. A large Wat is sore to 
contra a number of these structures and may also comprise 
balls for preaching, a pavilion covering a model of Buddha’s 
foot print, taoke for ablution ^nd a bell tower. It is said that 
only royal Wats contain libraries and buildings called chatta 
mukh, which shelter a four-faced image of Brahmk*. 

The monks are often housed in single chambers arranged 
round the courts of a Wat but sometimes in larger buildings 
outside it. The number of monks and novices living in one 
monastery is larger than in Burma, end according to the Bang¬ 
kok Biiectoxy (1007) works out at an average of about 12. In 
the larger Wats this flguire is considerably exceeded. Altogether 
there were 60,7 $4 monks and 10,411 novices in 1907* the pro¬ 
vince of Ayuthia being decidedly the best provided with clergy. 
As in Bunua, it is customary for every male to spend some 
time in a monastery, usually at the age of about 20 , and two 
months is considered the mlrumum which is respectable. It is 
also common to enter a monastery for a short stay on the day 
when a parent is cremated. During the season of Vassa all 

i Four iBu^ facing tho loor qoMUn tre ooDiidvod in Barm* to ropment Ui» 
Iwt four Buddiiu ood Among the JaIzk oomo of tho TirthAoWu m m ropracoted, 
th« legoad Itting Uint whoueror Oitj pr«»ob«d Uw; Momod to toe* hMt«n 
on OTtry tido. 

’ Tb««e figurM QQjp Uko »«coiut of CwoIto oat of tb« wrontaan proancea. 

xxxvirl 

BIAM 

91 

monks go oufc to collect alms but at other seasons onlj^ a few 
make the daily round and the food collected, as io Burma and 
Ceylon, is generally not eaten. But during the dry season it is 
considered meritorious for monks to make a pilgrimage to 
Phra Bit and while on the way to live on charity. They engage 
to some extent in manual work and occupy themselves with 
carpentering^. As in Burma, education is in their hands, and 
they also act as doctors, though their treatment has more to do 
with charms and faith cures than with medicine. 

Afi in Burma there are two sects, tbe ordinary unreformed 
body, and tbe rigorous and select communion founded by 
Mongkut and called Dhammsyut, It aims at a more austere 
and useful life but in outward observances the only distinction 
seems to be that the Bhammsyuts hold tbe alms-l^wl in front 
of thorn in both hands, whereas the otoers hold it ag;ainet the 
left hip with the toft hand only. The hierarchy is well developed 
but somewhat secularized, though probably not more so than 
it was in India under Asoka. In the ofhual directory where tho 
departments of the Ministry of Public Instruction are eauraer* 
ated, the Ecclesiastical B^rtmont comes immediately after 
tho Bacteriological, the two being clearly regarded as different 
methods of expelling evil spirits. The higher cbrical appoint* 
ments are made by the king. Ee names four Primatesone of 
whom is selected as chief. The Primates with nineteen superior 
monks form the highest governing body of the Church. Below 
them are twelve dignitaries called Gurus, who are often heads 
of lai^ Wats. Thera are also prelates who bear the Cambojan 
title of Buricn equivalent to Msh&chrya. They must have passed 
an czaraination in Pali and are chiefly consulted on matters of 
ecreraoniol. 

It will thus be seen that the differences between the churches 
of Burma, Ceylon and »Siam are slight; hardly more than 
local pccuIiaritioB which mark the Roman church in Italy, 
Spain, and England. Different opinions have been expressed as 
to the moral tone and conduct of Siamese monks and moat 
critics stato that they arc somewhat inferior to their Burmese 

• Tiriuiipeoa, I.M T/ihA, p. ISO. 

* I'hey )>cnr thi title of SiimdSt Tbm: Cli&o «nU h«vfl tuthority 

iT4pootircly wtt (•>) onlifutiy Biid'Hibta iii sortitom Swb. (4) onliMiy Buddliiat^ 
ia tlie aouth, (i*) hormiln. («/) (hu Db«iDinikyut tect. 

am. 

7 

02 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CB. 

brethren. The system by which a village undertakes to support 
a monk, provided that he is a reasonably competent echool- 
master and of good character, works well. But in the larger 
monasteries it is admitted that there are inmates who have 
entered in the hope of leading a laay life and even fugitives from 
justice. Still the penalty for any grave offence is immediate 
expulsion by the ecclesiastical autboiitiee and the offender is 
treated with extreme severity by tiie civil courts to which he 
then becomes amenable. 

The religious festivals of Siam are numerous and character¬ 
istic. Many are Buddhist, some are Brohmanic, some are 
royal, Uposatha days (wan phra:) are observed much ae in 
Burma. Tire birth, enlightenment and death of the Buddha 
(which are all supposed to have taken place on the 15th day of 
the 6th waxing moon) are celebrated during a three days 
festival. These three days are of peculiar solemnity and are 
spent in the discharge of religious duties, such as hearing ser¬ 
mons and ^ving alms. But at moat festivals religious observ¬ 
ances are mingled with much picturestiue but secular gaiety. 
In the moniiiig the monks do not go their usual round^ »r>d the 
alms-bowls are arranged in a line within the temple grounds. 
The lelty (mostly \vomen) arrive bearing wicker trays on .which 
are vessels containing rice and delicacies. They place a selection 
of these in each bow! and then proceed to the B^t where they 
bear the commandments recited and often vow to observe for 
that day some which are usuaUy binding only on monks. While 
the monks are eating their meal the people repair to a river, 
which is rarely far distant in Siam, and pour water drop by 
drop saying "May the food which we have given for the use of 
the holy ones be of benelit to our fathers and mothers and to 
all of our relatives who have passed away.” This rite is onriously 
in barmeny with the injunctions of the Tirokuddasuttam in the 
Khuddakap&tba, which is probably an ancient work^. The r^ 
of the day is usucdly devoted to pious merrymaking, such as 
processions by day and illuminations by night. On some feasts 

i For tUa and oiviy other deUik I iDd»h(«4 (o P. A. ThompeoD, Lctu^ 
p. 123. 

* Wb«o ^ta ol food ore roede to monkf oa certasoniAl occoaoos, they aiuUy 
AcknovtelcQ the nenpt by teelUog veraM 7 uid 8 of this SuUo, comaooJy known 
tM Yaflui Lrom tbe £nl 

TXTvn] 

SIAM 

93 

thd laws against gambling are suspended and varfoos games of 
cbanco are freely indulged in. Thus the New Year festi7al oalled 
Trut (or Krut) Thu laate three days. Oa the first two days, 
especially the second, crowds fill the temples to ofier fiowezs 
before the statues of Buddha and more substantial presents of 
food, clothes, etc., to the clergy. Well-tO'do families iiiTite 
monks to their houses and pass the day in listening to their 
sermon# and recitations. Compsuiies of priests are posted round 
tho city walls to scare away CTil spirits and with tho same object 
gun# are fired throughont tbe night. But the third dayi# deroted 
to gambling by almost whole population except the monks. 
Not dismjnllar i# the celebration of the SOngkrau holidaye, at 
the beginning of the oiHaial year. The special religions obserr* 
ance at this feast consists in bathing the images of Buddha and 
in theory the some form of wateiy respect is extended to i^ed 
relatives and monks. In practice its place 1# take^i by gifts of 
perfume# and other present#. 

The rainy season is preceded and ended by holidays. Daring 
this period both monks and pious laymen observe their religious 
duties more strictly. Thu# monk# eat only once a day and then 
only what is put into their bowls and laymen observe some of 
the minor vows. At the end of the rains come the important 
holidays known a# Th6t K&tliin^ when robes are presented to 
monks. This festival has long hod a special importance in Siam. 
Thus R&ma KhomhSng in his inscription of a.d. 1292’ describes 
the feast of Ksthina which lasts a month. At the present day 
many thousands of robo# ore prepared iu the capital alone so ss 
to be ready for distribution in October and November, when 
the king or some deputy of high rank visits every temple and 
makes the offering in person. Dirring this season Bangkok 
witnesses a scries brilliant processions. 

These festivals mentioned may be called Buddhist though 
their Ughtrhearted and aplendourdoving gaiety, their prooeseiona 
and gambUng are far removed from the spirit of Gotama. 
Others however are definitely Brabmonic and in Bangkok are 
superintended by the Brahmau# attached to the Court. Since 
the time of Mongkut Buddhist priest# aro also present as a aign 
that the rites, if not ordered by Buddhism, at least have its 

> 2 C«tbin& in 6 m Utbivt;. cep. m 

t PoomorMU, y. 23#. 

94 BUDDBISH OUTSIDE INDIA [ ch . 

countenance. Such is the K^k Na*. or ploughing festival. The 
king is represented hy the Minister of Agriculture who formerly 
hod the right to exact from all shops found open such taxes as 
he might claim for his temporary sovereignty. At present he 
is escorted in procession to Duat‘,a royal park outside Bangkok, 
where he breaks ground with a plough drawn by two white 
oxen. 

Somewhat ftimfiar is the Thlb-Ching-Oba, or Swinging 
holidays, a two days* festival which seems to be a harvest 
thanksgiving. Under the supervision of a high official, four 
Brahmans wearing tall conical hats swing on a board suspended 
from a huge frame about 100 ft high. Their object is to catch 
with their teeth a bag of money hanging at a little distance 
from the smug. When three or four sets of swingers have ob' 
tained a prize in this way, they conclude the ceremony by 
sprinkling the ground with holy water contained in bullock 
horns. Swinging is one of the earUest Indian ritee’ and as part 
of the worship of Krishna it has Lasted to the present day. Yet 
anotlier Brahmanic festival is the Loi Kathdng^, when mioiatuie 
rafts and ships bearing lights and offerings ore sent down the 
Men&ffi to the sea. 

Another class of ceromonies may be described as royal, inas¬ 
much as they are religious only in so far as they invoke religion 
to protect royalty. Snch are the anniversaries of the birth and 
coronation of tlio king and the Thu N&in or drinking of the water 
of allegiance which takes place twice a year. At Bangkok ail 
ofilckls aasemble at the Palace and tliere drink and sprinkle on 
their heads water in which swords and other weapons have been 
dipped thus invoking vengcuice on themselves should they 
provo disloyal. Jars of this water are despatched to Governors 
who superintend the performance of tire same ccromony in the 

* Tt)» i>lou;bing fenival is » ncagniz«d imperifti cenatonr k Chla*. la India 
eemnontsa for pnvst« Uiulovaer* ora pmcriM ia the Gribya Siltns bat 2 do not 
know if their perfomuince hy kfni9 is soywbere dedniuly oidereaL However lo 
Uio Nidaos> Ksthe S70 the Buddhe's father celebntef oa iatpoeng plooghiog 
cerofTiony. 

* Im Tusitiu Cett|i4te each English ojiiDee deeeripiUe of hoMtiluf sceaery m 
H esven'i Get*. 

* See Keith. AiUNya Jnnyttka, pp. 17^J7t. The careoony there deeeribed 
undoubtedly origliuted is & very uieteat popular fesUml 

* /.e. hoat.nft. Host toGtoie give tl)e word u Enthoog. hut Pellegoix prefen 
Kathong. 

xxxvn] 

81AM 

96 

proTinci&l capit&ls. It is only after the vatot has heen drunk 
that officials receive their half yearly salary. Plonks arc excused 
from drinking it but the chief ecclesiastics of Bangkok meet 
in the Palace temple and perform a service in honour of the 
occasion. 

Besides these public solemnities there are a number of 
domestic festivals derived from the twelve Soj^slcaras of the 
Hindus. 0! these only three or four are kept up by the nations 
of Indo-China, namely the shaving of the first hair of a child a 
month after birth, the giving of a name, and tlie piercing of the 
ears for earrings. This last is observed in Banna and l^oos, bat 
not in Siam and Camboja where is substituted for it the KCn 
Chuk or shaving of the topknot, which is allowed to grow until 
the eleventh or thirteenth year. This ceremony, which is per¬ 
formed on boys and girls alike, is tho most important event in 
the life of a young Siamese and is celebrated by weU-to do 
parents with lavish expemditure. Those who arc indigent ofUn 
avail themselves of the royal bounty, for each year a pubic 
ceremony is performed in one of the temples of Bangkok at 
which poor children receive the tonsure gratia. An elaborate 
description of the tonsitfo rites has been pubbshed by Cerini^. 
They ore of considerable interest as showing bow closely 
Buddhist and Brahmanic rites are intertwined in Siamese 
family life. 

Marriages aro celebrated witli a feast tc which monks are 
invited but are not regarded as roUgicus ceremonies. Tho dead 
are usually disposed of by cremation, but are often kept some 
time, being either embalmed or simply buried and exhumed 
subsequently. Before cremation the ooffin is usually placed 
within the grounds of a temple. The monks read Suttas over it 
and it is said* that they hold ribbons which enter into the 
coffin and are supposed to communicate to the corpse the merit 
acquired by tbe recitations and prayers. 

3 

In the preceding pages mention has often been made not 
only of Brahmanic rites but of Brahman priests*. These are 

^ CAwrAitM/aMaffajan, BAOgfcok. 1SS3. 

* F. A. ThompMn, Mna L^Ad, p. 1S4. 

* For th* BxmhBiftni o( Suni mo Fr«ok(&r(«T, Otieniai. Arthip. ItlS, pp. ISB-?. 

06 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE IHDIA [oh. 

still to be found in Bangkok attuohed to the Court and possibly 
in other oities. They dross in white and b&ve preserved many 
Hindu luagee but are said to be poor Sanskrit scholars. Indeed 
Gorini^ seems to say that they use Pali in some of their reeitSi- 
Uona. Their piincipid duty is to officiate at Court fQncdos6> but 
wealthy families invite them to take part in domestic rites, and 
also to cast horoscopes and hx lucky days. It is clear that the 
presence of these Brahmas Is no innovation. Brahmanism 
must have been strong in when it was a province of 0am- 
boja, but in both countries gave way before Buddhism. Many 
rites, however, connected with securing luck or predicting the 
future were too 6rmly established to be abohshed, and, as 
Buddhist monks were unwilling to perform them* or not 
thought very competent, the Brahmans remained and were 
perhaps reinforced from time to time by new importations, for 
there are stall Brahman colonies in Ligor and other Malay 
towns. Siamese lawbooks, like those of Burma, seem to be 
mainly adaptations of Indian BharmatSstras. 

On a cursory inspection, Siamese Buddhism, especially as 
seen in villages, seems remarkably free from alien additions. 
But an examinatioa of ancient buildings, of royal temples in 
Bangkok and royal ceremonial, suggests on the contrary that 
it is a mixed faith in which the Brahmanic element is strong. 
Yet though this element appeals to the eoperstitlon of the 
Siamese and their love of pageantry, 1 think that as in Burma 
it has sot invaded the sphere of rdigion and ethics more than 
the Pitakas themselves allow. In art and literature ita ioflueiioe 
has been considerable. The story of the Ramayana is illustrated 
on the cloister walls of the royal temple at Bangkok and 
Indian mythology haa supplied a multitude of types to the 
painter and sculptor; such as YOmms: r4t (Ylma), Ph&ya Man 
(Mira), Phra: In (India). These arc all deities known to the 
Pitakas but the sculptures or images* in Siamese temples also 

^ p. M. 

* Tbftp an moctir obturunsoa coob m GolMnk voqU *reons *'low 

tiU" (tlr*ccb&4*7ijit}. At prMtnt tbe ttOdke o( doal fnal; ia cbBrau 4nd 
«xorciaiDs but on iisporta&i mcuIocib public opjoion mbbu to b&ve smtor wn- 
fldonco 1b the ikiO And powar oi Bnlmans. 

I Kins fiOrTSTupaa lUato in an ifucriptioo of about 13S6 bov h* 
mt op st*M<c of PuuDoir&n «ad Vijh^iubKaM (}) ud oppoifttod BniiiBUis to 
wtvB tbein. 

SIAM 

97 

XXXVTl] 

include 6ane^, Phra: N&m (Nlr&yana or Vishou) riding on 
the Garuda and Phra: laudn (Sira) riding on a bull. There is a 
legend that the Buddha and ^ra tried wliich could znaXe him- 
seli inTiaible to the other. At last the Buddha sat on Sira’s 
head 9^d the god being unable to see him acknowledged lu 
defeat. This story is told to explain a small figure whioh Sira 
bears on his head and recalls the legend foujid in the Pitakas^ 
that the Buddha mode bimseli uiTiaible to Brabmi but that 
Brahmi bad not the oonesponding power, lingas are still 
venerated in a few temples, for instance at W&t Pho in Bangkok, 
but it would appear that the majority (e.p- those found at Pra 
Pratom and Lophburi) are eurvivale of ancient Btahmanic 
worship and have a purely antiquarian importance. The Brah* 
manic cosmology which makes Mt Mem the centre of this 
Universe is generally accepted in ecclesiastical treatises and 
paintings, though the educated Siamese may smile at it, and 
when the topknot of a Siamese prince is cut off, part of the 
coremony consists in his being received by the king dressed as 
giva on the summit of a mound out in the traditional sinpe of 
Mt KajJSia. 

like the N&te of Burma, Siam has a spirit population known 
as Phis*. The name is occasiooally applied to Indian deities, 
but the great majority of Phis fall into two classes, namdy, 
ghosts of the dead and nature spirits which, thoi^ dangerous, 
do not rise above the position of good or bad fairies- In the 
first claas are included the Phi PrSt, who have the cbaracter- 
istica as well as the name of the Indiwi Pretae, and also a 
multitude of beings who like European ghosts, haunt houses 
and behave in a mysterious but generally disagreeable manner. 
The Phi am is apparently our nightmare. The ghosts of children 
dying soon after birth are apt to kill their mothers and in 
general women are liable to be possessed by Phis. The ghosts 
of those who have died a violent death arc dangerous but it 
would seem that Siamese magicians know how to utiliae them 
as familiar spirits. The better sort of ghosts are known as Chio 
Phi and shrines called San Chko are set up in their honour. It 
does not however appear that there is any hierarchy of Pbia 
like the thirty-seven Nits of Bunna. 

* t<i IV. part ii. 1907. 5me Siemm fiort lcre by A. J. iTwia, 

98 BUDDBI8M OUTSIDE INDIA [CH. 

Among those Phis who are not ghosts ot the dead the most 
Important is the Phi rden or guardian spirit of each house. 
Frequently a little shrine is erected for him at tho top of a pole. 
There are also innumerable Phis in the jungle mostly malevolent 
and capable of appearing eitlicr in human form or as a dangerous 
animal. But the tree spirits ore generally benevolent and when 
their trees are cut do^m they protect tlie bouses that aio made 
of them. 

Thus the Buddhism of Siam, like that of Burma, has a 
certain admixture of Brahmanism and animism. The Brah¬ 
manism is perhaps more striking than in Burma on ac<viuiit of 
tho Court ceremonies: the belief in spiiite, though almost 
imiversa!, seems to be more retiring and less conspicuous. Yet 
the inscription of R&ma KomhSng mentioned above asserts 
emphatically that tho prosperity of the Empire depends ou due 
honour being shown to a certain mountoiu spirit^. 

It is pretty clear that the first introduction of Hinayanist 
Buddhism into Siam was from Southern Burma and Pegu, but 
that somewhat later Ceylon was accepted as tlie staudord of 
orthodoxy. A learned thera who knew the Sinhalese Tipitaka 
was imported tbence, as well as a branch of the Bo*tree. But 
Siamese patriotism flattered itself by imagining that the national 
religion was due to personal contact with the Buddha, although 
not even early legends can be cited in support of such traditions. 
In 1602 a mark in the rocks, now known as the Phra: Bti, was 
discovered in the hills north of Ayuthia and identified as a 
footprint of the Buddha similar to that found on Adam’s Peak 
and in other places. Burma and Ceylon both claim the honour 
of a visit from the Buddha but the Siamese go further, for it is 
popularly believed that be died at Fraten, a little to the north 
of Pbra Fathom, on a spot marked by a slab of rock under gyeat 
trees*. For this reason when the Government of India presented 

‘ Jovr, Sisn Sot. 1000. p. 29. yonder moaolaa is » dsneo apiht Plui 
EhipbO&g tbst 1* great«r tbui orciry otbat ipirit in tbij realm. U any Princa 
ruling thif realm ravareiuet him «eU with proper offeringi, thja realm ataode finn, 
bbii realm proepera I( the ipirit be not revereneed well, if the offeriogi be not 
ri^bt, tbs aplrit io tho mountaia dcee nob protect, doce not regerd,'—this realm 
penehse." 

* The most popnUr Ills of the Buddbs In SienieM ie flailed Fssth^ooa Sfim- 
pMbhfyeo, trejuleled by AlobMter in 7Ae Whotl of lh» Loio. But like the l^llU 
Tuten end other ladien lives on which ib ia modelled lb stope abort at tho ealigbtu. 

xxxvu] 

SIAM 

99 

the king of Siam with the relics found in the PlpraTa rase, the 
gift though received with honour, aroused little enthusiasm 
and was placed in a somewhat seoludcd shrius*. 

mont. AaoChcr weltkaown religions book is tho lYiupbtre (sTribhOmi)! on 
Mooont oi tbo ooiTciM accordiog to Hiadu principles, coraiiUed ia 177C frocs various 
anoiont xmba 

7ho Pali lilanUtro of SJsdi is noi rery large. Sumo aceouni of it is given by 
CooOis in B.B.F.E.0. 1015. m. pp. SO-10. 

' Wbon in Bangkok ia 1007 I sew in e pHotognpber’s shop o photogrspb nf 
the ptoceasinn uhtcli esenried thofie relies to their clcslinetten. 11 nas ifisoribed 
‘*A>Ttr*l of Dodtlhe'e leotU from KeAd?." Tliie ihows hov Jeeepiive liisiorirtO 
eviiteoee my be. The iikscription Me the trelioiooy et an sye.vitaeas and yet ib 
vas OBtiiely wrong. 

CHAPTER XXXVIII 

CAMBOJA* 

1 

Ths Freoch Protectorate of Caotboja corresponds rougUy to 
the nucleus, though by no moans to the whole extent of the 
former Empire of the Khmers. The fliBnitioa of this race hare 
given rise to considerable discussion and it has been proposed 
to oonnect them with the Mup^a tiibee of India on one side 
and with the Malays and PolynWans on the other*. They axe 
allied linguisticaily to the Mens or Tal^gs of Lower Burma 
fl.nri to the Khaaias of Assam, but it is not proved that they are 
siiiiilaily related to the Aimamites, and recent investigators are 
not disposed to maintain the Mon-Annam family of languages 

* Se» Maoog other eutbortUM: 

(o) E. AyiDonter, Le Ctmbod^ Paris, 9 TOk. 1$00, 1904 (cit«d aa Aymoitiet). 
(t) A. Barth, liueT\pii9fU S<iMeriUtd% CtmMit (ifeeins tt tstraiU it* MSB. 
<U ia BtWoi. AV.j, Parle, 18 SS (eitad aa Cor^, I.V 

(c) A. Bergaieno, /lucripiim* San*cHUt it Compi u iu Camiciffe {In eaue 

aeries), 1893 {cll«d u Oorfitt, o.). 

(d) L, Ficot, “BmlHUstn in Indo.Clima," Sniikiti Aanew, Oet. 1909. 

(t) 0, Uaep4(W L'Snjiirt Skfn4r, FAflom FwA, 1904 (cited aa Maap4ro). 

{/) F. Palhot, “U^sioiree sur las C»DtniDes de Cwnbodsa par Tebaou Ta< 
Icooan, ti^doifia oC aonotds,” fi.S.F.S.O. 190?, pp. 123-177 (Mied m 
PelliAt, Teitoti Ta~hnani. 

(9) Id. “La Fwwi." BS.P.E.0. 1903. pp. 54S-303(dt«daa PelUot, P*9Mn). 
(it) Articlea oo Tarioua ioaeriprioaa b? Q. Coadia ia 1B03, zl p. S03. zn. 

p. 213:1909. ua p. 467 aad p. 611, 

(i) Sniyin da la OmMieaim AfeLUopi^ da P/adoeiUns, 1906 onwards. 

Le Bapon i"Angkor Tkon, Mi*tiM Henri thtfov, 1910-191A 
Beside* tbe artlcloa elted abora tba d* PE<ct* Frangam £^Sx~ 

trfm Orienl (^uotad aa B.B.F.B.O.) coo&ains maap oUian 
wiib tba rali^D sod arobas^ogp of Cambojk 
(k) U Knot. HottedEpiffrapkie Indo-Chinoite, 191A 

Sea for litanture up to 1909, Q. CoadM, BMaM^ nieonnie dee 
frounor d rAreAeMopts dw CsfnMpa c< dv ChomjA Faria, 

Impruoeria Natioaale. 1909. 

* Seo espaciallp P. W. Sohiaitt, Pie Uon Sfmer Fdlier. Sin BindegUed 
nriseAea FdUers 2«Hbvf-Ast<tu wid Aiutnneeien*. Bnuschwaig. 1906. 

CAMBOJA 

101 

OH. xszvm] 

proposed by Log&n end others. But the undoubted similarity 
of the Mon uid Khmer languages suggests that the ancestora 
those who now speak them were at one time spread over the 
central and western parts of lndo*China but were subsequently 
divided and deprived of much territory by the southward 
invasions of the Thais in the middle ages. 

The Khmers also called themselves ICambuja or Kamvuja 
and their name for the country is still either Si^k K&mpOch^a 
or Sr6k Khmer Attempts have been made to find a Malay 
origin for this name Kambuja but native tradition regards it 
os a with India and affirms that the race is descended from 
Kambu Svayambhuva ajvi Mer4 or Peri who was given to him 
by ^iva as wife^. This legend hardly proves that the Khmer 
people came from India hut they undoubtedly received thence 
their civiUaation» their royal family and a considerable number 
of Hindu Immigrants, so that the mythical ancestor of their 
kings naturally cams to be regarded as the progenitor of the 
race. The Chinese traveller Chon IVkuan (1206 a.d.) says that 
the country known to the Chinese as Ch6n-Ia is called by the 
natives Kw-po-chih but that the present dynasty call it Kan' 
p'u-cbih on the authority of Sanskrit (Haidan) works. The 
origin of the name Cb6u-la is unknown. 

There has been much discussion respecting the relation of 
Cb^n-la to the older kingdom of Pu*nan which is the name given 
by Chinese hiatorians until the eariy part of the seventh century 
to a state occupying the south-eastern and perhaps central 
portions of Indo-Ohina. It has been argued that Ch6n*la is 
simply the older name of Fu-nan and on the other hand that 
Fu-nan is a wider designation includicg several states, one of 
which, Ch6n-la or Oamboja, became paramount at the expense 
of the others^ But the point seems imimportant for their 

* Cftmbod^ ii the tooeptf d Frencb cpelliog of this counUy^s asms. lo Esgliah 
K4mbo]a Etnibodia Oftmtoja. aod C^bodU mo oU toobd. Tbo Ust a Cbo ooM 
luoo] bet di» not o good my of npieoc&uag the sowid of; u opiolly hoerd ia 
tbie nozBO. I bAvo tberefon y to rod Coiobeja 

* 8«« the iseoripUoti of BbkaS, C^mhrCA. J.A. xm. IMC, 468, 4«, 497. 

* the 6ui (Pelboi, /duM», p. 372) tiAU tbot "ChtQ.lei bee to the met 
of Ija.yi* 7^ origioally e vMeeJ Mete of Fd-nea.. .The nene of the king's 
(evUy VM KeboCriye: bii foreonaJ qaisb ms CUresen*: bis eaceeton pfogreestvely 
eeqoind tbs eoTenignty of the oountiy: Cltroeen* seised Fu osn ssd reduced it 
to sobmiMloft.” This seetoa perfsoUy «lssr sad m knoir from Csabojen mtcrip- 
tions thst Citrseeu vss the persoosl asne of the king «bo teigoed ts 

102 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[Cff. 

religious history witli whicli we have to deal. In religion and 
general civilisation both were subject to Indian influence and 
it is not recorded that the political circumstances which turned 
Fii-nan into Chen*Ia were attended by any religious revolution. 

The most important fact in the history of these countries, 
as in Champa and Java, is the presenoe from early times of 
Indian influence as a result of commerce, colonization, or con¬ 
quest. OricutaJists have only recently freed themselves from 
the idea tliat tlie ancient Hindus, and especially tbeir religion, 
wore restricted to the limits of India, In medieval times this 
was tnic. Emigration was rare and it was only in the nineteenth 
century that the travelling Hindu became a familiar and in 
some British colonics not very welcome visitor. Even now 
Hindus of the higher caste evade rather than deny tho rulo 
which forbids them to cross the ocean'. But for a long while 
Hindus have froqnented the coast of East Africa* and in earlier 

MehfodmTamiin. e, COO A.p. Bui It *ouM tppoftr fron th» buoriptiont Uitt it 
«u bis preUcn.«)Qr BbavtiTafraan wbp zn^ '■?bat«T«r thugs oscorred In tbs 
reUtiooj <4 CsuIkiJs to Fu.non luid m sny caw it b not who vers the iaJisbU 
UnU of Fu.iuin it net Caiubujsns. Perhaps Utapibo is Hght in sng^estin; tbst 
Pa MA WAS MiMlhing Jih« i>u|vr4fvl Germany (p. SS), *' Si b ret Ue Usviftn a’enpMUt 
dekcDuroans cmp6rtdc, rienoe ser&itcbsn^eB Altstupeqoe lafamUIer^jnuito.” 

• It is rcmefluble CbAt tbe BtodliATstuwilbArmft-sfltrA enumentos going to sea 
Among tliA cuaioos peculiar to the NortJi (l I, S, 4) sad then (n. 1, S. S) eUsses 
making voysgee by su m tbe ant oX the offene« whlcb cause Iom of caste. This 
srcfus to indieste that ibo omigraQis from Tri.tia mainly from tUe Kortii, but 
ic houlil be rash to eeneJude tbai in times of atme or efithuaUss tbe Southrroerv 
did not foUow their pwotlce. A pesiage ia tbc sacood ebaptor of tho 
Arthaiistn bas boon iotorpreted to relerriog to tbe doopotob of oolonUta to foreiga 
oooBtnee. but it probtbfy cootompUtei aobbmg more than tho tnaefor of popula* 
tj<m from ooe part of India to another. Seo Pioot, B.B.F.B.O. 1912, No. fi. But 
tho ptesego at uy rata above that the idea of the Xigg being able to tiuiuport a 
oonsiJerablo mass of popufaUob was familiar In aedeat J&taka 4M eob- 

Uios a curieoa atoty ©I a Tillage of carpoutora vho beiog uosooeeaaful in trade 
UUt a Bhip sad emigrated to an ialaod ia the ocean. It li clear that tharo rauat 
have bwo a oouaiderable saetariog population ia India in early for tho But 
Veda (jr. 4S, 3; i. SO, 2; l 118, 3;, tbe Uahahhsrata and tho Jitakao aJIscIa to the 
low of gain vhioh aendi oierehanta aojom tbe seo and to ahipwncke. Soulptnraa 
at Salaetto SMcibod to about 160 a.p. reproeeot a ahipvreck. Shipo ve» dopiotod 
ut the patotlaga of Ajanta and also oeont on the coiu of the AoJbra Kins YaiaaSrt 
(c 200 4.IJ.) cad in the seulpturae of Beroboodeer. The tUgha Nikiya fn 66) 
ep^ of eavgoing ahipa which when loot let loooe a Ued sighting bird. Much 
ZBtoinataon le ooileeted m Badbakomud Mookerjl i fiirt-y o/ Indius Shipping, 

• Voyages are sUU rtgulariy made in dhows between tbe veM ooaet of ludia and 
Aansibar or Mombasa and the trade appears co be old. 

xxxvm] 

CAMBOJA 

IDS 

centuries their traders, soldiers and oiissionariea covered con¬ 
siderable distances by sea. The J&takas* mention voyages to 
Babylon: Vijaya and Mahinda reached Ceylon in the fifth and 
third centuries b.o. respectiToIy. There ia no certain evidence 
as to the epoch when Hindus first penetrated beyond the Malay 
peninsula, but Java is mentioned in the Reinayana*: the eariiest 
Sanskrit inscriptions of Chfljnpn date from our tliird or perhaps 
second century, and the Chinese Annals of the Tsin indicate 
that at a period considerably anterior to that dynasty thore 
were Hindus in Pu-non*. It is therefore safe to conclude that 
they must have reached ^these regions about the beginning of 
the Christian era and, should any evidence be forthcoming, 
tbero is no reason why this date should not be put further bock. 
At present we an only say that the establishment of Hindu 
kingdoms probably implies earlier visits of Hindu traders and 
that voyages to the south coast of lndo*Cbina and the Archi' 
pclngo wore probably preceded by settlements on the Isthmus 
of Kra, for instance at Ligor. 

The motives which prompted this eastward movement have 
been variously connected with religious persecution in India, 
niisi^ionary enterprise, commerce and political adventure. The 
first is the least probable. Tlierc is little evidence for the sys* 
tenmtic persecution of Buddhists in Io<Ua and stiU less for the 
persecution of Brahmans by Buddhists. Nor can these Indian 
settlements be regarded as primarily religious missions. The 
Brahmans liavc always been willing to follow and supervise the 
progress of Hindu civiliiation. but they have never shown any 
disposition to evangehzc foreign couifiies apart from Hindn 
settlements in them. Tlte Buddhists had this evangelistic temper 
and the journeys of their missionaries doubtless stimulated 
other classes to go abroad, but still no inacriptions or amials 
suggest that the Hindu migrations to Java and Camboja were 
parallel to hlabinda’s mission to Ceylon. Nor is there any 
reason to think that they were commanded or encouraged by 

> 8«o JStakA m for tbe r«ra£« to BaT«rD or B«b/loa. Jifoku SSO sad 442 
B«oUoB voyA$« to 8uvaco*l'bdjni or Lower Burcoa from Bburulceecbe and fr«Ea 
Benares down Uo rivtt. Tbo Uilinda PeObe (vl 21) Alludw to in &9 with China 
bj MO. 

* Rim. IT, 40. 30. 

* Ptslliot, /tfKsax, p. SM. The Weetmt and Eesiem reiped Iron 2S9 to 
41S A.a 

104 

BUDDHISJf OUTSIDE INDIA 

[cir. 

Indiim Rajas, for no meotion of their despatch has been found 
in India, and no Indian state is recorded to have claimed 
suscrainty over these colonies. It tharefoxe seems likely that 
they wore founded by traders and also by adventurers who 
followed existing trade routes and bad their own reasons for 
leaving India. In a country where dynastio quarrels were fre¬ 
quent and the younger sooe of Rajas bad a precarious tenure of 
hie, such reasons can be easily imagined. In Camboja we find 
an Indian dynasty established after a short struggle, but in 
other countries, such as Java and Sumatra, Indian civilization 
endured because it was freely adopted by native chiefs and not 
because it was forced on them as a result of conquest, 

The inscriptions discovered in Camboja and deciphered by 
the labours of French savants offer with one lacuna (about 
660-800 A.D.) a fairly continuous history of the country from 
the sixth to the thirteenth centuries. For earlier periods we 
depend almost entirely on Chinese accounts which are frag¬ 
mentary and not interested in anything but the occasional rela¬ 
tions of China with Fu-nan. The annals of the Tsin dynasty^ 
already cited say that from 265 4 .n. onwards the kings of Fu-nan 
sent several embassies to the CJhineGe Court, adding that the 
people have books and that their writing resembles that of the 
Hu. The Hu are properly speaking a tribe of Central Asia, but 
the expression doubtless meMis no more than alphabetic writing 
as opposed to Chinese characters and such an alphabet cam 
hardly have had other than ui Indian origin. Origmally, adds 
the Annalist, the sovereign was a woman, but there come a 
stranger called Hun-Hui who worshipped the Devas and had 
had a dream in which one of them gave him a bow* and ordered 
him to sail for Fu-nan, He conquered the country and married 
the Qneen but his descendants deteriorated and one Fan-Hsun 
founded another dynasty. The annals of the Ch'i dynasty 
(47&-^l) give substantially the same story but say that the 
stranger was called Hun-T'ien (which is probably the correct 
form of the name) and that he came from Chi or Chiao an 
unknown locality. The same annals state that towards the end 

Most ci (be r»fer«Qca0 to /Tiinoti wmalg *r« 

’ PalUot, Fcvaan, p. 264. 

£raB ibie valnAtl* p^per. 

* Tbe inecnpuoa ol U-mq Rlate« bev pUated tt BhaRpuR in 

Caisto>«) 4 j4Ta|if) given to bUa bj A4v4Ubliit4& ^ ' 

xxxvm] 

CAMBOJA 

106 

of the fifth century tJie king of Fu-nan tvLo bore the family 
name of Cli'iao*ch'ln*ja^ or KauQ^h^je. and the personal name 
of Shfe-yeh-po-mo (Jayavarman) tra^ with Canton- A Bud* 
dhist monk named Nagasena returned thence with some Cam- 
hojan merchants and so impressed this king with hie account of 
China that he was sent back In 464 to beg for the protection of 
the Emperor. The king’s petition and a supplementary paper 
by K&gasena are preserved in tlie annals. They seem to be an 
attempt to represent tbe country as Buddhist, while explaining 
that Mabe^vara is its tutelary dkty. 

The Liang annals also state that during the Wu dynasty 
(222-‘2S0) Fan Chan, then king of Fu*nan, sent a relative 
named 3u-Wu on an embassy to India, to a king called Mao-Iun, 
which probably represents Muruj>4a, a people of tbe Ganges 
valley mentioned by the Purliias and by Ptolemy- This king 
despatched a return embassy to Fu*nan and his ambassadors 
met there an official sent by the Emperor of China*, The early 
date ascribed to these events Is noticeable. 

The Liang annals contain also the following statements. 
Between the years S57 and 424 a.d. named as the dates of 
embassies sent to China, an Indian Brahman called Oh'iao* 
cb'lngu (Kaundinya) heard a supernatural voice bidding him 
go aud reign in Fu^nan. He met with a gocxl reception and was 
elected king. He changed the customs of the country and made 
them conform to those of India. One of his aueceesors, Jayavaiv 
man, sent a coral image of Buddha in 603 to tbe Emperor 
Wu‘ta (502-560). Tbe inhabitants of Fu-nan are said to make 
bronze images of tbe heavenly genii with two or four beads 
and four or eight arms. Jayavarman was succeeded by a 
usurper named Xau*t' 0 'pa-mo (Rndravarraon) who sent an 
image made of sandal wood to the Emperor in 519 and in 539 
offered him a hair of the Buddha twdve feet long. The Sni 
annals (5S0>filS) state that Citrasena, king of ChSn-la, con* 
quered Fu^nan and was succeeded by his son I^nesena. 

Two monks of Fu*nau are mentioned among the translators 
of the Chinese scriptures*, namely, SaAghap&la and Mandra. 

1 Xhii la tb« Bodem r64diAg of tto oliAtscttn in Peltiog, tot JuImd'i M6Sod» 
tibo uaiweripUoo K*a-4i>D7a 

* 8«« S. Liri 1 a CharU* 4c Hofki, p. 17S. Deux p«opl<« akonsus 

L La Uuruoiju. * ifanjio Catalocu. p. 02. 

m 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

Both arrived in Chuja during the first years of the sixth century 
and their ^70^1^s ore extant. The pilgrim I-Ching who returned 
from India in 0&5 says^ tliat to the S.W. of Champa lies the 
country Po-nan, fomerly called Pu-nan, which is the southern 
comer of JambudWpa. He says that “of old it was a ooimtiy 
the inhabitants of wlueh lived naked; the people were mostly 
worshippers of dcras and later on Buddhism flourished there, 
but a wicked king has now expelled and exterminated them all 
and there are no members of the Buddhist brotherhood at all*’ 
Those data from Cliinese authorities ore on tho whole eon- 
firmed by the Cambojan Inscriptions. Rudravarman is men¬ 
tioned* and the Idngs claim to belong to the race of Ksundinya*. 
This is tho name of a Brahman golra, but such designations 
were often borne by Kehatriyas and the conqueror of Camboja 
probably belonged to that caste. It may be affiimed with some 
certainty that be started from south-eastern India and possibly 
he sailed from Mahabalipfir (also caUed the Seven Pagodas). 
Masulipatam was also a port of cmbaxcafcion for the East and was 
connected with Broocii by a trade route ninning through Tagara, 
now Ter in the Nizam’s dominions. By using this road it was 

po^ble to avoid the west coast, which was infested by pirates. 

The earhcftt Camboj.in uiscriptions date from the begirming 
of tho seventh oentury and aro written in an alphabet closolv 
r^blnig that of tho inscriptioos in the temple of P&pan&tha 
ot Pnttadkai m the Bijapur dUtrict*. Tboy arc composed in 

' I Titog, trant T«kakiuu, p. 12. i Oormt t tl 6fL 

• Cerp^t, L pp, SJ, ao, 00, will JevT. Atutiiqvt, ISSS p leg. ’ 

„."‘*° in 1912 I n»l«l tb, JoUnWng 

bt»Mn llo Mmplb. d lhat dilWet lod th»« ot Omboii.. (o)Th! 

> fC “* ^ rtprosCTit tho Ortuoing tbo See asdle^ 

CAMBOJA 

107 

sxsvin} 

S&uskrit Torse of & somewhat eiruberant style, which rerels in 
the commonplflcos of Indian poetry. The deities most fr&^uently 
mentioned are ^iva by himself and united with Vishnia in 
the form Hari-Hara. The names of the kings end in Varman 
and this termination is also specify frequent in names of the 
PaUava dynasty*. Tlie ma^iheent monuments sl^ extant 
attest a taste for architecture on a large scale similar to that 
found among tho Dravidinns. These and many other indications 
jnstify the conclusion that the Indian civilization and religion 
which became predoroinant in Comboja were imported from the 
Deccan. 

The Clkinese accounts distinctly mention two inTasions, one 
under Ch'iao-oh'4n-ju (Kaundinya) about 400 a.n. and one con* 
siderably anterior to 265 imder Hun-T'isn. It might be supposed 
that this name also represents Kuundinya and that there is a 
confusion of dates. But the available evidence is certainly in 
favour of the establishment of Hindu civilization in Pu-can 
long before 400 a.n. and there is nothing improbable in the 
story of the two inrsisions and even of two Kaundinyas. 
Maepiro suggests that tlie first invasion came from Java and 
formed part of the same movement which founded the kingdom 
of Champa. It is remarkable that an inscription in Sanskrit 
found CQ the east coast of Borneo and apparently dating from 
the fifth century mentions Kund^gga as the graudfatbsr of the 
reigning Idug, and the Liang ann^ say that the king of Poll 
(probably in Borneo but according to some in Sumatra) was 
called Ob'iao‘ch'4n-ju, It seems likely that the Indian family of 
Kaupdluya was established somewhere in the South Seas (per¬ 
haps in Java) at an early period and thence Invaded various 
countries at various times. But Fu*nan is a vague geographical 
term and it may be that Hun-T'ien founded a Hindu dynasty 
in Champa. 

' B.g. UthcBdrftf imao, NaM^nhsTarnuB, Parafflce^aniTamiwi, «t«. li coay 
b« notiiMd that a eoniidenhly to tbe N.W. of Madras aod that lL» 

PallavM 4ia suppMcd to have eome from the nortbem port of tbe proMot Muirae 
ProeldoQojr. Tkousb Um HumIub wlio omi^fod to Cafoboja probably embarked in 
iho nelabbeorliood ol Madras, they may have coum from coustrico much funhor 
to the sorth. Vannaa is eooo^isod as a proper tonnioation ef Ksbathya names, 
but it ii reotarkabls (hat it is found in oH tba Saaskiit BaaiM ol Cambojaa kine* 
aad IS vary oonnon in Paltava names. Tbs Dams ol Aivattbiman Sgursa in tha 
mytbioal genealogies of both tho FslIaTos aod ths kings of Cbampa or porhafs of 
amboja, ISO S.B.F.S.O. im. p. 923. 

1. m. 

lOS BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [<m. 

It 18 clear that during the period of the inscriptions the 
leligioQ of Oaxnboja was a mixture of Brahmanism and Bud* 
dhiam, the only change noticeable being the preponderance of 
one or other element in different centuries. But it would be 
interesting to know the value of I-Ching’s statement that 
Buddhism flourisbod in Fu^nan in early times and was then 
eubverted by a wicked ting, by whom BhaTavaiman' may be 
meant. Primd facie the statement is not improbable, for there 
is no reason why the first immigrants should not have been 
Buddhists, but the traditions oonnecting these countries with 
early Hinayaniat misslcnariee are vague. T&ran&tha^ states 
that tbo disdples of Vasubandhu introduced Buddhism into the 
country of Koki (Indo-China) but his authority does not count 
for much in such a matter. The statement of I-Ching however 
has considerable weight, especially as the earliest inscription 
found in Champa (that ol 70000) appears to be inspired by 
Buddhism. 

2 

It may be well to state briefly the chief facte of Cambojan 
history* before considering the phases through which religion 
passed, Until the thirteenth century our chief authorities are 
the Sanskrit and Xbmer inscriptions, supplemented by notices 
in the Chinese annals. The Khmer inscriptions are often only 
a translation or paraplirasc of Sanskrit texts found in the same 
locality and, as a rule, are more popular, having little literary 
pretension. They frequently contain lists of donations or of 
arriclea to be supplied by the population for the upkeep of 
pious foundations. After the fourteenth century we have Cam¬ 
bojan annals of dubious value and we also fuid inscriptions in 
Pali or in modem Cambojan, The earliest Sanskrit inscriptions 
date from the boning of the seventh century and mention 
works undertaken in 604 and 624. 

The first important king is Bhavavarman (c, 500 a.n.), a 

‘ Some eiibotiUm thial: iUt Kewjdinye u neut by the wicked fciitf, but he 
bT«i ebout 000 yoen brfort I-Chiag^s visit *od tbo lenguege eeecu to iSwto more 
woMrt erent*. Although Bbavewnsan Ij not knora to have been • reUri<m« 
uuwvstor b» sppeere to hive eitoblUbed * new order of thinge In Ckmboj* wd big 
meerlptioiu ehov tUt he was e leeiona worthipper of fees and other drtlie*. 

It would be even more utocnl U IChin^ refentd to t^ioaTarmaji («. 815) or Jsya- 
varaun I {&. 6»), but tboro is ao proof tost Uiws kinge wsrs anti.buddiiict. 

• fichiefnsr, p. 268. e Ssa Mespiro, L'*»pifs pp. 24 ff. 

xxxvin] 

OAMSOJA 

109 

conq,DMX)t Kid prol^aU; a usurper, vho extended bis kingdom 
considerably towards the vest. His career of oon^^neet vae oon* 
tinued by Mah&Tarmui (also called Citraeena)» by 2i&naTannan 
and by JayaranciaD^. This last prince was on the tbrone in 
667, but hia reign is followed by a lacuna of more than a century. 
NoUcee in tbo Chinese annals, condnucd by the double gene¬ 
alogies given for this period in later inscriptions, indioato that 
Cainboja was divided for some time into two states, one littoral 
and the other inland. 

Clear history begins again with the reign of Jayavarman 11 
(602-869). Later sovereigns evidently regard him as the great 
national hero he lives in popular legend as the builder of a 
magnificent palace, Beng Mealea, whose ruins still sriat^ and as 
the recipient of the sacred sword of India which is preserved at 
Fhnom*penh to this day. We are told that he '*oame from 
Javh,” which is more likely to be some locality in the Malay 
Peninsula or Laos than the island of that name. It is possible 
that Jayavarman was carried away captive to this region but 
returned to found a dynasty independent of it*. 

The ancient city of Angkor has probably done more to make 
Camboja known in Europe than any recent achievements of 
the Khmer race. In the centre of it stands the temple now called 
Bayon and outside its walls are many other edifices of which 
the majestic Angkor Wat is the largest and best preserved, 

^ F«rbftps • MMAd Shkn^innsa «uaft betwMit tbsM lut tvo kiags; we 
Coedte is B.B.F.E.O. IftM, p Ctl. 

* See Ued^seseo ia B.B.f.B.O. ISIS, Ko.S. 

* But Uie otpttTityfe an infereow eod nets nwreen Ty eae. FinoteugswU 
tbit tbe SMMntroyel beoeeot Fa*n*n mijbiTe loiided at Jee& ixid bive clalned 
eosecala rishte ores Cimbej* vbtob JaysTirmaa eomebow iboKibed. The only 
^ 4^ sUtamente on (be quwt'iMi lue tbow in tho S^ok Kik Thom mecrtptios, 
Khaer text c. 'it, wbieb tdl mm that Camboja had been dependent on JaoS and 
that Jiyavarman IT ineUtuted a epeoul itate oolt le i oi^n tbit tbia dependent 
hid oome to an end. 

It i« tne that tbo Hiedo oolonUte of Camboja may ha?! oomo Cram Ua« laland 
ol Java yet no iTidaaoe lupporta the Idea Uiit Camboia wa# a depoodenoy d 
iilind about SOOa.s. ud tbo iwenptioaB o( Champa aeem to dtatmcQjab clmrly 
between Yaead^ (tbe Uland) lad the uaknown owinby caiW Javfc. See f ia«, 
ffMet (tSpij. pp. 48 and 240. H«b« it seeau onlihily that tbe Wharoiie piraUe 
(oaDod tha armiee ol Java) wbo hiTaded Champa in 78? (we the ioteriptim of 
Yane Tihoh) wore from the adaad. The Siamese bueription of Riai EbombSus, 
e. 1300a.».,apeaki of a pla« called CbiTA.wluob may be Loans Piibans. On the 
orber hand it doe* not weiB likely that expwtaJy demribed at rfnpe, 

would baee oome fiOD tha interior. 

110 

BVDDBISM OVTBIDE INDIA 

[CH- 

King Indravarmaa (877-899) seema responsible for tlie selection 
of the site but he merely commenced the constraction of the 
Bayon. The edifice was completed by his son YaSovarman 
(881^908) who also built a town round it, called Yaiodharapura, 
Kombupuri or Mahhnagara. Angkor Thom is the Cambojan 
translation of this last name, Angkor being a corruption of 
Nokor (= ITagara). YadoTarman'a empire comprised nearly ail 
Indo-China between Banna and Champa and he baa been 
identified with the Leper king of Cambojan legend. His sue* 
cessors continued to embellish Angkor Thom, but Jayavax- 
man IV abandoned it and it was deserted for seTetal years un^ 
Hajendravarman 11 (94^968) made it the capital again. The 
C hinese Annals, supported by allusions in the inscriptions, state 
that this prince conquered Champa. The long reigns of Jayayor- 
man V, Suryayarman I, and Udaykdityayarman, which coyer 
more than a century (968-1079) seem to mark a prosperous 
period when architecture flourished, although UdayAdityavar- 
man had to contend with two rebellions. Another groat king 
Sfiiyayarman Tl (1112-1162) Mowed shortly after them, and 
for a time succeeded in uniting Camboja and Champa under his 
sway. Some authorities credit him with a successful expedition 
to Ceylco. There is not sufficient evidence for this, but he was 
a great prince and, in spite of his foreign wars, maintained 
peace and order at home. 

Jayayannan VIT, who appears to hare reigned from 1162 
to 1201, reduced to obedience his unruly yaasaJs of the north 
and BUccesafulJy invaded Champa which remained for thirty 
years, though not without rebellion, the vassal of Camboja. It 
was evacuated by his snccesaor ^dravarman in 1220. 

After this date there is again a gap of more than a century 
in Cambojan history, and when the sequence of events becomes 
dear again, we find that Siam has grown to be a dangerous mid 
aggressive enemy. But though the vigour of the kingdom may 
have declined, the account of the Chinese traveDer Chou Ta-kuan 
who visited Angkor Thom in 1296 shows that it was not in a 
state of anarchy nor conquered by Siam. There had however 
been a recent war with Siam and he mentions that the country 
was devastat^. He unfortunately does not tell us the name of 
the reigning king and the list of sovereigns begins again only in 
1340 when the Annals of Camboja take up the histoiy. They 

xxxvm] 

CAMBOJA 

111 

jkTd not of groat value. The custom of recording all events of 
importance prevailed at the Cambojan Court in earlier times 
but these chronicles were lost in the eighteenth century. King 
Ang Chan (ITd&'lSSi) ordered that they should be re-written 
with the aid of the Siamese ohrooicles and such other materials 
as were available and fixed 1340 as the point of departure, 
apparently because the Siamese chronicles start from that 
date^. Although the period of the annals offers little but a 
narrative of dissensioris at home and abroad, of the interference 
of Annam on one side and of Siam on the other, yet tt doea not 
seem that the sudden cessation of inscriptions and of the ancient 
style of architecture in the thirteenth century was due to the 
collapse of Camboja, for even in the sixteenth century it offered 
a valiant, and often successful, reeistance to aggressions fr om 
the west. But Anghor Thom and the principal monuments 
were situated near the Siamese frontier fdt the shock of 
every coUmon. The sense of security, essential for the con* 
struction of great arohitectnial works, had disappeared and the 
population became leas submissive and less willing to supply 
forced labour without which suoh monuments could not be 
erected. 

The Siamese captured Angkor Thom in 1313,1351 and 1420 
but did not on any occasioa hold it for long. Again in 1473 
they occupied Cbaataboim, Korat and Angkor but bad to 
retire and conclude peace. King Ang Chan I successfully dis¬ 
puted the right of Siam to treat Mm as a vassal and established 
his capital at Lovek, which he fortified and ornamented. He 
roigned from 1605 to 1555 and both he and his son, Barom 
Racha, seem entitled to rank among the great kings of Camboja. 
But the situation was clearly precarious and when a sue* 
oeeded to the throne in 1574 the Siamese seized the opportunity 
and recaptured Lovek and Chantabonn, Though this capture 
was the death blow to the power of the Khmers, the kingdom 
of Camboja did not cease to exist but for nearly three centuries 
continued to have an eventful but uninteresting history as the 

^ For UuM ftAHAb MO F. Osrelor, **1* ChroaiqM ro;«J« do CkiDbcdi«,‘* J.A. 
1871 4&4 1872. A. 4« Villenenoil, Fxp&fe^uHu tt iiiuimt dt Dcudotd dt 
1881. J. Uourm Lt Acya««« dt Canbodjt, toL □. 1888. fi. Armoukr. 
Ohfpniqnt itt Antitv fdt dn CawtM^. IMxettrtmu it rMOMowMACM. 

ISSl.) 

m BUDDEI8X 0UT3WS INDIA [CH. 

TAsaal of Si&m or Annem or oven of hoih\ until in the middle 
of the nineteenth century the intervention of France substituted 
a Eoropean Protectorate for these Aaiatio rivalries. 

The provinces of Siem'teap and Battambang, in which 
Angkor Thom and the principal ancient monuments are situated, 
were annested by Siam at the end of the eighteenth century, 
hut in virtue of an arrangement negotiated by the French 
Government they were restored to Camboja in tM7, Krai 
and cert^ territories being at the same time ceded to Sam^, 

3 

The religious history of Camboja may be divided into two 
periods, etclusive of the possible existence there of Hinayanist 
Buddhism in the early centuries of our era. In the first period, 
which witnessed the construction of the great monuments and 
the reigns of the great kings, both Brahmanism and Mahayanist 
Buddhism flourished, but as in Java and Champa without 
mutual hostility. This period extends certainly from the sixth 
to the thirteenth centuries and perhaps its limits should be 
stretched to 400-1400 a. d. In any esse it passed without abrupt 
transition into the second period in which, under Siamese 
inEuence, Hinayanist Buddhism supplanted the older faiths, 
although the ceremonies of the Cambojan court still preserve a 
good deal of Brahmanio ritual. 

During the flist period, Brahmanism and Mahayanism were 
professed by the Court and nobility. The multitude of great 
temples and opulent endowments, the knowledge of Saziskrit 
literature and the use of Indian names, leave no doubt about 
this, but it is highly probable that the mass of the people bad 
their own humbler forms of worship. Still there is no record of 
anything that can be called Khme^^as opposed to Indian— 
religiou As in Siam, the veneration of nature spirits is universal 
in ^mboja and little shrines elevated on poles are erected in 
their hononr in the ueighbourhood of almost every honse. 

* hng Chm (179^1834) rM^tod hii crown hoB tbe oi 8i »gi tad 
paid tnbato M ibo Klnf ot AoMBi Ang iNioiig (1S4S-1869) wu eivntad b 7 
laptMMiUtiTM of Aj>bi 4B &Qd SUtt uid hk torriuicv wu oocapiod bj the troope 
of both MujitrlM. 

■ The later biMUaj oi Cunhoja ie treated m ooadderaUe dot^ hj A. leeleie, 
de CanMf*, 1914 

xxxvm] 

QAMBOJA 

113 

Possibly fche more important of these spirits were idectMed in 
early times with Indian deities or receiTod Sanskrit names. 
Thus we hear of a pious foxmdatxon in honour of Brahmaxak- 
shas*, perhaps a local mountain spirit. Siva is adored under 
the name of Sri Sikhaw6vara, the Lord of the Peak and Kipsh^a 
appears to he identified ^th a local god called ^ Champe^vara 
who was worshipped by Jayavannan VI*. 

The practice of accepting and hinduizing strange gods with 
whom they came in contact was so familiar to the Brahmans 
that it would be odd if no ez^ples of it occurred in Camboja, 
Still the Brabraamc religion which has left soch clear records 
there was in the main not a hinduized form of any local cult 
but a direct irspoitation of Indian thought, ritual and bteratore. 
The Indian invaders or colonists were accompanied by Brah¬ 
mans: their descendants continued to bear Indian names a nd 
to give them to all places of importance: Sanskrit was the 
ecclesiastical and official languagie, for the inscriptions written 
in Khmer are clearly half-contemptuous notifications to the 
common people, respecting such details as specially ooncemed 
them: Airamas castes (voru) are mentioned* and it is 
probable that natives were only gradually and grudgingly ad¬ 
mitted to tbe higher castes. There is also reason to believe that 
this Hindu civilization was from time to time vivified by direct 
contact with India. The embassy of Su-Wu has already been 
mentioned* and an inscription records the marri^ of a 0am- 
bojan princess with a Brahman called Div&kara who came from 
the banka of tbe Yamnn&, “where Krishna sported in his 
infancy," 

During the whole period of the mscriptioiu the worship of 
dva seems to have been the principal cultua and to some extent 
the state religion, for even kings who express themselves in 
their inscriptions as devout Buddhists do not f^ to invoko 
him. But there is no trace of hostility to Vishnuiam and the 
earlier inscriptions constantly celebrate the praises of the 
compound deity Vishnu-^va, known under such names as 

* ln««np. oi Uorono. Oorjw. d, 387. 

* OUmt IocjU <UjUM be ftlladcd te, onder the aimee oi 3d Jftj«kihWei. 
"tbe Aeld ot yiotor;” adored et Be^ett SialdacoAUkA, MMdar«4nr*t end 
fid JftlAogeiTftn. AymOfuar, ti. p. 287; i. pp. 3U» SOS and St7« 

* Inscrip. of LoseL 

* Pna E^Qkoee7, 870 a.o. 8m 0« rpm , c pp. 77 fl. 

114 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [CH. 

Hari-Hara^, ^&mbhu*yisbj;iii, ^likara‘Nar& 7 a^a, eto, Thus on 
inscdption of Ang-Pou datmg from tiloavarman’s reign aaj^ 
“Viotoriotis are Kara and Acyuia become one for the good of 
the vorld, though as the spouses of Parvati and ^r! they hare 
different forma*.’* But the worship of thia double being is 
accompanied by pure ^vaism and by the adoration of other 
deities. In the earlieet iusenptions Bhavavarman mvokes f^va 
and dedicates a linga. He celebrates the compound deity 
under the name of 3amhhu-Vishnu and mentions Um&, La^« 
shml, Bh&ratt, Bhaima, the Marute, and VishJ^iu under the 
names of Caturbhuja and Traiiokyaa&ra. There appears to be no 
allusion to the worship of Vishi^U'^va as two in one after the 
seventh c«)tury, hut though ^iva became exited at the expense 
of his partner, Vishnu must have had adorers for two kings, 
Jayavarman 111 and Sdryavarman II, were known after their 
death by the names of Vishnu loka and Parama-Vlshuu-ioka. 

&va became generally recognized as the supreme deity, in 
a comprehensive but not an exclusive sense. He is the universal 
spirit from whom emanate Brahmk and Vishnu. His character 
as the Destroyer is not much emphasized: he is the God of 
change, and therefore of reproduction, whose symbol is tiio 
^ga. It is remarkable to find that a pantheistic form of 
Sivaism is clearly enunciated in one of the earliest iuscriptions*. 
Mva is there styled Vibhu, the omnipresent, ParajnvTahm& 
(■ Brahini), Jagatpati, Faiupati. An inscription found at 
Angkor* mentions an Aokrya o! the Pl^upatas as well as an 
Acirya of the ^vas and Chou TVkuan seema to allude to the 
worshippers of Paiupati under the name of Pa-ssS-wei. It would 
therefore appear that the Pliupatas eziated in Camboja as a 
distinct sect and there are some indications* that ideas which 
prevailed among the Lingayats also found their way thither. 

* THb oKspoud d«ty k o«I«br»Ud m ti« H4riT&jB*» sod k rejwwftUd in the 
eeulplorae Die rook tempi© et BadHol vblcb it deud *78 a.d. Tbit bi» wotehin 
mey oesily Lave raeched Oemboj* ia tbe dxtb or mvtoih oeato/y 

« Jeytt© jmttia bbfltyai Kritueodbl Hepioyekij, PervetiiilpatttTMe Bhjo. 
MwflrtlidbtriTei^ See ele© the loacrip, of Ai^ CbuBioik («7 4.B.), vonro 11 «&d 
12 in Corptt4, 1. p. 07. 

* The B»ytos loesriptioii, (?o»yw, i. 51 ft which aunUoae tbe dotes 004 end 
020 u roc«qt. 

* Cerpiw, n. p. 422 SeiTftpeiopatialiyyeu. Tbe iuecriptigo fleet the rektive 
rank ©J 7tn©iie Aairyw. 

* See 3.B.P.B-0. l»6, p. 70, 

CAMBOJA 

US 

xxxvm] 

Thd most interesting and original aspect of Cambojan 
religion is its connection with the state and the worship of 
duties somehow idcDtified with the kii^ or with prominent 
peisonsges*. These features axe also foond in Champa and Jara. 
In all these countries it was usual that when a king founded a 
temple, the god worshipped in it should be called by his name 
or by something like it. Thus when Bhadravarman dedicated a 
temple to ^iva, the god was styled Bhadre^vara. More than 
this, when a king or any distinguished person died, be w*as oom* 
memorated by a statue which reprc^uced his features hut 
represented him with the atthbutea of his favourite god. Thus 
Indravarman and Ya^ovarman dedicated at Bakd and Lolei 
shrines in which deceased members of the royal family were 
commemorated in the form of images of Siva and Deri bearing 
Samoa similar to their own. Another form of apotheosis was to 
describe a king by a posthumous title, indicating that he hod 
gone to the heaven of his divine patron such as Paramavialmu* 
loka or Buddhaloka, The temple of Bayon was a truly national 
fane, almost a Westminster abbey, in whose many shrines all 
the gods and great men of the country were commemorated. 
The French archeologists recognize four classes of these shrines 
dedicated respectively to (a) Indian deities, mostly special 
forms of Sva, Dev! and Vishriu; Mahayouist Buddhas, 
especially Buddbaa of healing, who were regarded as the patron 
sainte of various towns and mountains; (c) ainiilar locd deities 
apparently of Oambojan origin and perhaps corresponding to 
the God of the City worshipped in every Chinese town; (d) delhed 
kings and notables, who appear to have been represented in 
two forms, the human and divine, bearing slightly difierent 
names. Thus one inscription speaks of Sri Maheodre^vari who 
is the divine form (vrah rdpa) of the lady ^ Mabendia* 
lakshmj. 

The presiding deity of the Bayon was ^iva, adored under the 
form of the linga. The principal external ornaments of the 
buildup are forty towers each surmounted by four heads. Theee 
were formerly thought to repreeent BrahmA but there is little 
doubt that they are meant for lingas bearing four faces of &va, 

' 6 m ap«iA]l 7 on this aabjoet, Oosdts ia SkU. Cotm- ArehioL i* 

1011, p. it, and 1913, p 61 , and tbe lotterpnas of l« Ttfom, 

1914. 

lie SUDDSISM 0UT3WS INDIA [CH. 

emce each bead hae three eyee. Such Hugos arc ocoasionaUy 
seen ic India* and many metal coses boaring faces and made 
to be fitted on lingas bare been discovered in Ctiamp&. These 
four-headed columns are found on the gates of Anghor Thom 
as well as in the Bayon and are singularly impressive. The 
emblem adored in the central shrine of the Bayon was probably 
a linga but its title was KamnUcA jagtU la r^a or Devar^joj the 
king-god. More explicitly still it is styled KamraieA jagai ia 
nijyay tbo god who is the kingdom. It typified and contained 
the royal essence present in the living king of Camboja and in 
all her kings. Several inscriptions make it clear that not only 
dead but living people could be represented by statue-portraits 
whioh identified them with a deity, and in one very remarkable 
record a general offers to the king the booty he has captured, 
asking him to present it *‘to your subtle ego who is Id vara 
dwelling in a gdden linga^.” ^ns this subtle ego dwells in a 
linga, is identical mth iSiva, and manifests itself in the successive 
kings of the royal house. 

The practices described have some analogiee in India. The 
ouatom of describing the god of a temple by the name of the 
founder was known there^ The venera^on of ancestors is 
universal; there are some mausolea (for instance at Ahar near 
Udeypore) and the notion that in life the soul can reside else¬ 
where than in the body is an occasional popular superstition. 
Still these ideas and practices are not conspicuous featiues of 
Hinduism and the Cambojans bad probably come within the 
sphere of another influence. In all eastern Asia the veneration 
of the dead is the fundamental and obi<;uitous form of religion 
and in China we find fully developed such ideas as that the great 
should be buried in monumental tombs, that a spirit can be 
made to reside in a tablet or image, and that the human soul is 
compound so that portions of it can be in different places. 
These beliefs combined with the Indian doctrine that the deity 

^ I bave Meo »tt4M» Uo^mq umA with in t Uak bthugitig 

to ft tftBiplo ftt UfttftbBt not I*r from Sftdftni. 

* SuTftteftmfty4liiigig«teST4» U rthhiatetftrttiaaiu. Iwrip. of Pna Nsook 

Coffnw. L p. 187. * ’ 

• Mft Bpig. Tci m. pp. I i. At PftttftdUl fwlucli i^on offen so 

many points of nmmbls&cs to Cftmbojft) King Vy*yi4i^ft fooaded s tompls of 
Vijft;tS?*Tft ftnd two QoMOS, Loksmsbidovt and TnilokyamahldsTl fouodsd 
tsmplM of LoUSrarft and Traitokyekvar^ 

CAMBOJA 

117 

xxxvm] 

is manifested in incamatious, in the bnman soul and in images 
afford a good theoretical baas for the ‘worship of the DeTarftja. 
It was sieo agreeable to far-eastern Ideas that rebgicoi and tbe 
state should be closely associated and tbe Cambojan kings 
would be glad to imitate the glories of the Son of Heaven. 
But probacy a simpler cause tended to nnite church and state 
in all these Hindu colonies. In medueval India the Brahmans 
became so powerful that they oould claim to represent religion 
and ci'nlization apart from tbe state. But in Camboja and 
Champa Brabmanic religion and civilization were bound up 
with the state. Both were attacked by and ultimately suc¬ 
cumbed to tbe same onemies. 

Tbe Brahmanism of Camboja, as we know it from the 
inscriptions, was so largely concerned with the worship of this 
" Boyal God” that it might almost be considered a department 
of tbe court. It seems to have been thought essential to the 
dignity of a Soreieign who aspired to be more than a local 
prince, that his Chaplain or preceptor should have a pontidcal 
position. A curious parallel to this is shown by thoee medissval 
princes of eastern Europe who claimed for their chief bishops 
the title of patriarob as a complement to their own impezial 
pretensions. In its ultimate form the Cmbojan hierarchy was 
tbe work of Jayavarman XI, who, it will be remembered, re¬ 
established the kingdom after an obscure but apparently dis¬ 
astrous interr^Dum. He made the priesthood of the Royal 
God hereditary in the family of Svakaivulya and the sacerdotal 
dynasty thus founded enjoyed during some centunes a power 
inferior only to that of the kings. 

in the inscriptions of 8dok K&k Thom^ the history of this 
family is traced from the reign of Jayavarman II to 1092. The 
beginning of the story as related in both the Sanskrit and 
K^er teste is interesting hat obscure. It is to the effect that 
Jayavarman, anzious to assure hU position as an Emperor 
(Cakiavartln) independent of Javl‘, summoned from Janapada 
a Brahman called Eliranyadftma, learned in magic (siddhividyl), 
who arranged the rules (viddhi) for tbe worship of the Royal 
God and taught the king’s Chaplain, Sivakaivalya, four 
trea^ses called Vrah VinH^kba, Nayottara, Sammoha and 

> AymoDi«r, n. pp. S. cad ««p*d*Uy Ptool in B.B.l.S.0. IW#, XV, *. 
p. 63. * Se® above. 

119 

SUDDSIS^ dCTTSIDB INDIA 

[CB. 

Sirascheda. These works are not otherwise teown*. The king 
made a solemn compact that “only the members of his (Sba- 
kaivaJya’s) maternal* family, men and women, should be 
Y&jafcas (sscrificera or ofBdants) to the exoJnsion of all others.” 
The reetriction refers no doubt only to the cult of the Royal 
God «id the office of court chaplain, called Purohita, Guru or 
Hotri, of whom there were at leaat two. 

The outline of this narratiye, that a learned Brahman was 
imported and charged with the instruction of tho royal chaplain, 
is simple and probable but the details are perplexing. The 
Sanskrit treatises mentioned are unknown and the names 
siagolar. Janapada m the name of a definite locality is also 
strange*, but it is conceiTahle that the word may have been 
used in Khmer ae a designation of iidia or a part of it. 

The inscription goes on to relate the gratifying history of 
the priestiy family, the grants of land made to them, the honours 
they received. We gather that it was usual for an estate to be 
given to a priest with the right to claim forced labour from the 
population. He then proceeded to erect a town or village em¬ 
bellished with temples end tanka. The hold of Brahmaniam on 
the country probably deperuied more on such prieetJy towns 
than on the convictions of the people. The inscriptions often 
speak of religious establishments being restored and sometimes 
say that they had become deserted and overgrown. We may 
conclude that if the Brahman lords of a viUsge ceased for any 
reason to give it their attention, the labour and contributions 
requisite for the upkeep of the temples were not forthcoming 
and the jungle was allowed to grow over the buildings. 

Numerous inscriptions testify to the grwideur of the &va- 
kaivalya family. The monotonous lists of their properties and 
slaves, of the statues erected in their honour and the number 
of parasols borne before them show that their position was 
almost regal, even when the king was a Buddhist. They pru¬ 
dently refrained from attempting to occupy the throne, but 

SmdoW end HwitUf* an glTn » iuibm of Tb« fonner word 

Bay pCTtapc b* ti,t b«gifmiag «{ » cwppouad. There PaU wke eaUed Samno. 

iMMipUoo call! tha four treatieea tie four £a«i of 

» Tide ihow* that matnareby mut hare baeo in forea in Ckmbola. 

0.5. ^ ’’’’ --d fr.- tt. 

xxxvni] 

CAMBOJA 

1L9 

probablj no king could auoceed unlods consecrated by them. 
Sadaiiva. ^azycarapaQ.cjita and Pivakarapa^dita formed an 
ecclesiastical djnas^ from about 1000 to 1100 a. D. parallel to 
the long reigns of the kiogs in the same period^. The laat*named 
mentions in an inscription that he had consecrated three kings 
and SaOkarapsjidtte, a man of great leaniing> was de /tzdo 
sovereign during the minority of his pupil Udayidityavarman 
nor did he lose his induenco when the young king attained his 
majority. 

The shrine of the BoyaJ God was first near Mt Mahendra 
and was then moved to Hariharilaya^, Its location was 
definitely fized in the reign of Indravannan, about 877 a,d. 
Two Sivakaivalya Brahmans, ^vaeoma and his pupil V&mativa, 
chaplain of the king> built a temple called the Sivlirama and 
erected a liDga therein. It is agreed that fthia buildmg is the 
Bayon, which formed the centre of the later city of Angkor. 
Indiavarmui also illtistrated another characteristic of the court 
religion by placing in the temple now called Pr^di Kou three 
statues of ^va with the features of hie father, grandfather and 
Jayavarman II together with corresponding statues of ^akti in 
the likeness of their wives. The next king, Ya^ovamisn, who 
founded the town of Angkor round the Bayon, built near hia 
palace another llnga temple, now known as Ba^puen. He also 
erected two convents, one Brahmonic and one Buddhist. An 
inscription^ gives several intereating particulars respecting the 
former. It fixes the provisions to be supplied to priests and 
students and the honours to be rendered to distinguished 
risitora. The tight of ea>nctuai 7 is accorded and the sick and 
helpless are to receive food and medicine. Also funeral rites 
are to be celebrated within its precincts for the repose of the 
friendless and thoee who have died in war. The royal residence 
was moved from Angkor in 92d, but about twenty years later 
the court returned thither and the inscriptions record that the 
Royal God accompanied it. 

The oultus was probably to what may be seen in the 

i PoaaWy otben ifi»y h«Te bald office duiifig tlu* long pariod, boi eridftoUy ftll 
tbm priftM li««d to bo reiy oM isod kiid Mcb may bavt boon Cnni for forty yoAra 

* Tbij ^e« vbieb moixu oonly '*lh« abode of Hah tod Uara” hw oob be«a 
ideotibod. 

* OorTW, D. lAeorip. 1«1 eepedally pp. d4S-S51. 

120 

BVDDHlSSf 0UT3IDS INDIA 

[CH. 

Si7ait« temples of India to-day. The principal lingam was 
placed in a shrine approached throi^h other chambere and 
accessible only to privileged persons. Libations were poured 
over the emblem and sacred Iwks were recited. An intereefcing 
inscription^ of about 600 a.d. relates how ^risomasarman (prob¬ 
ably a Brahman) presented to a temple "the Rimaya^a, the 
Purina and complete Bhlrata’^ and made arrangements for 
their recitation. Sanskrit literature waa held in esteem. We are 
told that Sflpyavarman I was versed in the Atharva-Veda and 
also in the Bhiahya, Kivyas, the six Daxsanas, and the Dhar^ 
mai&stras^. Sacrifices are also frequently meotfoned and one 
ioscnption records the performance of a Kotihoma*. The old 
Vedio ritual remained to some extent in practice, for no drcmn- 
stancee are more favourable to its survival than a wealthy 
court dominated by a powerful hierarchy. Such ceremonies 
were probably performed in the ample enclosures surrounding 
the temples*. 

4 

Mohayanist Buddhism existed in Camboja during the whole 
of eba period covered by the inscriptions, but it remained 
m such close alliance with Brahmanism that it is hard to say 
whether it should be regarded as a separate religion. Tbe idea 
that the two systems were incompatible obviously never 
oceiured to the writers of the inscripticns and Buddhism was 
not regarded as more distinct from ^vaism Mid Vishnuism 
tJum these from one another. It had nevertheless many fervent 
^d generous, if not exclusive, admirers. The earliest record of 
Its existence is a short inscription dating from the end of the 
sixth or beginning of the seventh centurys, which relates how 
a person called Pon Prajni Candra dedicated male and female 
slaves to the three Bodhisattvas, g&et4«, Maitreya and Avalo- 

‘ V«al C9rpV4, i. p, £8. 

* lOMr. fit hth K)UA. B.S.e.g^. 19H p. STS. 

• RS.r.g.0~ 1904, p. m. 

‘im*' to d U.. of Oidom. 

' A^raoBier, ConU^. j. p. 44$, 

‘ bnt, a Asmoohr b wmot, th» p«. 

^la . Bpdhl..t6v-. Tlu« pHOd^ ^ to mX, 

xxxvm] 

CAMBOJA 

121 

kite^ara. Tb© title given to the Bodbisattras (Vrah Kamrati 
an) which is also borne by Indian deities shows that this Bud¬ 
dhism was not very dif erent from the Brahmanic onJt of Cam- 
boja. 

It is intorestii^ to find that Yaiovarman founded in Angkor 
‘Thom a SaugatUrama or Buddhist monastery paraliel to his 
Biihmaci&Srama already described. Its inmatee enjoyed the 
same privileges and had nearly the same rulee and duties, being 
bound to afiord sanctuary, msintaia the destitute and perform 
funeral masses. It is laid down that an Ao&rya versed in Bud¬ 
dhist lore corresponds in rank to the Aciiyas of the Waives and 
PIteupatas and that in both institations greater honour is to 
be shown to such Ac&ryas as also are learned in grammar. A 
Buddhist Ac&rya ought to be honoured a little lees than a 
learned Brahman. Even in form the inscriptions recording the 
foundation of the two A^ramas show a remarkable parallelism. 
Both begin with two stanaaa addressed to ^va: then the 
Buddhist inscription ineerte a stanza in honour of the Buddha 
who delivers from transmigration ^d gives nirv&na, and then 
the two tests are identical for several stanzas^. 

Mahayankm appears to have fiourished here especially 
from the tenth to the thirteenth centuries and throi^hout the 
greater part of this period we find the same feature that its 
principal devotees were not the kings but their ministers. 
Sfiiyavannan I (f 1049) and Jayavarman VII (f 1221) in some 
sense deserved the name of Buddhists since the posthumous 
title of the former was Nirv&oapada and the latter left a long 
insciiptiou^ beginning with a definitely Buddhist invocation. 
Yet an inscription of S&ryavarman which states in its second 
verse that only the word of the Buddha is true, opens by singing 
the prusss of iSiva, and Jayavarman certainly did not neglect 
the Brahmanic gods. But for about a hundred years there woe 
a series of great ministers who specially encouraged Buddhism. 
Such were Satyavarman (c. 900 a.Z).), who was charged with 
the erection of the building in Angkor known as Phlmeanakae; 
Kavindi&nmathana, minister under B&jendravarman U and 
Jayavarmcm V, who erected many Buddhist statues and 
Klrtipandita, minister of Jayavarman V. Ktrtipaipdita was the 

> 8m CMdte. "U 6t£}e de TSp Prmoam;’ in J.A, n. IKS. p. 203. 

• laMrip. oi Ta Tnbm. B.S.F.B.0. 1906. p. 44. 

122 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [ca. 

ftuthor^ of the inBcriptiori found at Srey Santhor, whioh states 
Chat thanks to bU efforts the pure doctrine of the Buddha re* 
appeared like the moon from beliind the clouds or the aim at 
davm. 

It may he easily imagined that the po>'er enjoyed by the 
court chaplain would dispose the intelligent classes to revolt 
against this hierarchy and to favooc liberty and vaiiety in 
religion, so far as was safe. Possibly the kings, while oo*operat* 
ing with a pnesthood which recognized them as somi-divine, 
were glad enough to let other religious elements form some sort 
of counterpoise to a priestly family which threatened to be 
omnipotent. Though the identihcation of Sivaism and Buddliiam 
became so complete that we actually dnd a Tiinity composed 
of PadmodbbaTa (Brahin&), Ambhojanetra (Vishi^u) and the 
Buddha’, the inscriptioos of the Buddhist ministers are marked 
by a certain diplomacy and self •congratulation on the sucoess 
of their efforts, as if thoy felt that their position was meritorious, 
yet delicate. 

Thus in an inscription, the object of which seems to be to 
record the erection of a statue of PrajaA‘P&ramit& by Kavin* 
dr&rimaihana we are told that the king charged him with the 
embellishment of Yaiodharapura because though an eminent 
Buddhisthis loyalty was abore suspicion*. The same minister 
erected three towers at Bit 6um with inscriptions* which record 
the dedication of a tank. Tlie first invokes the Buddha, Vajra* 
pim* Mid Lokelvara. In the others Lokelvara is replaced by 
PrMfi&>piramiti who here, as elsewhere, is treated as a goddees 
or Sakti and referred to as Dev! in another stanza*. The three 
inscriptions commemorate the construction of a sacred tank 

' 8m SeziArt io ArcJt^oioffiqMt. ISS^ A« ia mwir iiuoriptioiu it ia aoc 
always pUln vbo ip^filfirig but in Dost p4rta it m apparentily tb« iiii&iat«r pro- 
tilt liutruotiopi the king. 

* iBMipt. ol PnMt Pnb Cwpu, l p. 173, 

* fiiidUliSaSn A|;FaQfr Api, J.A~ zx. 1S83, p. lOi. 

* S«»CofrCta "iDMripUaiis d« Bat Cam." ia J.A. xo. 1908, pp. 280, 241. 

* Tbe BodhiuttvA eorrespondios to Um Duddbs Akabobbys. Rs is gt*«D m 
bho AOd carrim a thuAdorbolt. It mum probable tiiat be it a loetainorphocis oi 
India. 

* Aft ucsedbiglp corioos stanaa «uIogiz«e tbe dootiine oi tbe noo-eiiateaee 
oi the ml taogbt by tb« Boddha wUoh leada to idaatideaUoB with tbe ooiTereal 
eool eltbou^h ooftlrary to iu Vuddbo Todbfm vidaddbyid to yesa nairitoiyadar. 
ianaib viruddbaey&pr eMbfiktaip sadhaftam pacsmAtmuiab. 

CAMBOJA 

12S 

xxxvm] 

but, though tho author wm a Buddhist, be expressly restricts 
the use of it to Brahmamc functionaries. 

The inscription of Srey Santhori (c. 076 A.&,) describes the 
BDccessful efforts of Klrtipat^dita to restore Buddhists and gires 
the instructions of the king (JayaTarman V) aa to its status. 
The royal chaplau ia by no means to abandon the worship of 
^iTa but he is to be Tersed iu Buddhist learning and on 
feast days he will bathe the statue of the Buddha with due 
ceremony. 

A point of interest in this inscription is the etatement riiat 
Ktrtipandita introduced Buddhist books from abroad, including 
the Sistra Madhyavibhiga and the commentary on the Tsttva* 
sangroha. The first of these is probably the Mfidhy&otaribh^a 
Aliatra* by Vasubandhu and the authorship is worth attenrion 
as supporting T&ran&tha’s statement that the disciples of 
Vasubs^hu introduced Buddhism into Indo*Cbma. 

In the time of Jayavarman VII (c, 1186 a.x>-)» althot^jh 
Hindu mythology is not discarded and though the king’s 
chaplain (presumahly a Slvaite) receives every honour, yet 
Mahayanist Buddhiam seems to be frankly professed aa the 
royal reli^on. It is noteworthy that about the same time it 
becomes more prominent in Java and Champa. Probably the 
flourishing condition of the faith in Ceylon and Burma increased 
the prestige of all forms of Buddhism throughout south-eastern 
Asia. A long inscription of Jayavarman in 145 ataoras has been 
preserved in the temple of Ta Prohm near Angkor. It op«8 
with an invocation to the Bnddha, in which are mentioned the 
three bodies, Lokeivara*, and the Mother of the Jinss, by whom 
Prajai-piramitS mast be meant- ^va is not invoked hut 
allusion is made to many Brahmanic deitiee and Bhikkhus and 
Brahmans axe mentioned together. The inscription contains a 
curious list of the materials supplied daily for the temple 
eervices and of the personnel. Ample provision is made fOT 
both, but it is not clear how far a purely Buddhist ritual is 
contemplated and it seems probable that an extensive Brah¬ 
manic cultus existed side by ride with the Buddhist ceremonial. 

» Ajmoniw, 1 pp 261 ft. SwiArt, M^rvAvril. J9M. 

> K4nj(0. 12M »nd . v , 

* Tb# tiommera duianAtion of A^AluJdte in C*mbojs Aad Ji’a For iMonp. 
tion MO &B.F.B.O. 1906, pp. 41 0. 

B. m. 

124 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [ch. 

We leem that there were clothes for the deities end forty-five 
ZQOsquito nets of Chinese meteii&l to protect their statues. The 
Upoeatha days seem to be alluded to^ and the spring festival is 
described, w^a “Bhagavat and Bhagavat!" are to be escorted 
in solemn procession with parasols, music, banners and dancing 
girls. The whob staff, including Burmese and Obama (probably 
slaves), is put down at the enormous figure of 79,365, which 
perhaps includes all the neighbouring inhabitants who could be 
called on to render any service to the temple. The more sacer¬ 
dotal part of the establishment consisted of 18 principal priests 
(adhik&ri^ah), 2740 priests and 2232 assistants, including 616 
dancing girls. But even these figures seem very larged 

The inscriptiou comes to a gratifying conclusion by an- 
noimcing that there are 102 bospitab in the kingdom^. These 
institutions, which are alluded to in other inscriptions, were 
probably not all founded by Jayavarman VII and he seems to 
treat them as being, like temples, a natural part of a well- 
ordered state. But he evidently erpeaded much care and money 
on them and in the present inscription he makes over the fruit 
of these good deeds to his mother. The most detailed description 
of these hospitals occurs in another of his inscriptions found at 
Say-fong in Laos. It is, like the one Just cited, definitely Bud¬ 
dhist and it ia permissible to suppose that Buddhism took a 
more active part than Brahmanism in such works of charity. 
It opens with an invocarioa first to the Buddha who in his 
three bodies transcends the distinction between existence and 
non-existence, and then to the healing Buddha and the two 
Bodhisattvas who drive away darkness and disease. These 
divinities, who are the lords of a heaven in the east, analogous 
to the paradise of Amitfibha, are still worshipped in China mid 
Japan and were evidently gods of light*. The hospital erected 

’ Sums xrn. 

• The iaswlptloo only Mya "Tlw *» hen Cta thia meea in the 

vwteu nligimie eet«bliihQ»nU by (be Uo;T 

• 8m alw Jinet, VoU* SSfif. pp. The Meh&TemM wpMtedly men. 

tiOM lUi Hngi fooaded hoepitUs kA diitributed medldnee. $m tee, Yale. Mareo 
Pck. i. p. 446. The cue ot the lick vu reeositiaed m • doty utd aoierltortoue Mt in 
|]| Buddbiit coontrie* end la itcommended by the ewaple of the Boddhe hiraadf. 

‘ Their eomewhet Jengthy titles ue BbwahijyagoruTeidaiyipnibberiji. SCryn^ 
^roMii4MUd*foci and Ctedi^viirocenarobinlie. gee for in icoonat oi then iftd 
the tmte oa »Mob their Tonhlp is founded the learned uikle of M. Pellfol "Le 
Bhiiiejya^ra.” 1S03, p. 3$. ' 

xxrvmj 

CAMBOJA 

125 

under tbeir auspices by the Cambojan king waa open to all the 
four castes and had a stai! of 98 persons, beeidcs an cetrologer 
and t^o aacrideers (y&jaka). 

d 

These inseriptiona of JayaTarman are the last which 
us anything about the religion of medisTd Camboja but we 
have a somewhat later account from the pen of Chou Ta-kuan, 
a Chinese who visited Angkor in 1295^. He describes the 
temple in the centre of the city, which must be the Bay on. and 
says that it had a tower of gold and that the eastern (or princi* 
pal) entrance was approached by a golden bridge flanl^ by 
two lions and eight statues, all of the same metal. The chapto 
of his work entitled “The Three Beligioua," runs as follows, 
sightly abridged from M. Pelliot^s version. 

“The literati are called Pan<h'i, the bonzes Ch'u-ka and the 
Taoists Pa*8Su-woi. 1 do not know whom the Pan*ch'i worship. 
They have no schools and it is difficult to aay what books they 
read. They dress like other people except that they wear a 
white thread round their necks, which is th^ distinctive mark. 
They attain to very high poationa. The Ch'u-ku shave their 
heads and wear yellow clothes. They uncover the right shoulder, 
but the lower part of their body is draped with a skirt of yellow 
cloth and they go hare foot. Their temples are sometimes 
roofed with tiles. Inside there is only one image, exactly like 
the Buddha S&kya, which they call Po-lai (= Prab), ornamented 
with vermilion and blue, and clothed in red. The Buddhas of 
the towers (1 images in the towers of the temples) are different 
and cast in bronae. There are no hells, drums, cymbals, or fiage 
in theii temples. They eat only one me^ a dey, prepared by 
someone who entertains them, for they do not cook in their 
temples. They eat fish and meat and also use them in their 
offerings to Buddha, but they do not drink wine. They recite 
numerous texts written on strips of palm-leaf. Some boozes 
have a right to have the ehafte of their palanquin a and the 
handles of their parasols in gold or silver- The prince oonsuite 
them on eerioue matters. There are no Buddhist nuns. 

“The Pa-ssQ-wei dress like every one else, except that they 
wear on their heads a piece of red or white stuff like the Ku-ku 

» H» MnaUte ia tP«8U»d by M. Poliiol is ISOS, 143-1??. 

226 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[OH, 

wom by Tartar women but lower. Their temples are smaller 
than those of the Buddbiate, for Taoism is less prosperous than 
Buddhism, They worship nothing but a block of stone, somewhat 
like the atone on the altar of the God of the Sun in China. I 
do not know what god they adore. There are also Taoist nuns. 
The Pa-ssiS-wei do not partake of the food of other people or 
eat in public. They do not drink wine. 

*'8noh children of the laity as go to school frequent the 
bonses, who give them instruction. When grown up they 
return to a lay life. 

"I hare not been able to make an exhaustive inrcstigalion." 

Elsewhere he says "All worship the Buddha” and he 
describes some popular festivals which resemble those now 
celebrated in Siam. In every village there was a temple or a 
Sttlpa. He also mentions that in eating they use leaves as 
spoons and adds "It is the same in their sacrifices to the spirits 
and to Buddha.” 

Chou Ta'kuoQ confesses that his account is auperfidal and 
he was perhaps influenced by the idea that it was natural there 
sliould be three religions in Camboja, as in China. Buddhists 
were found in both countries: Pait-ch'i no doubt represents 
Paodito and he saw on analogy between the Brahmans of the 
Cambojau Court and Confucian mandarins; a third and less 
known sect he identified with the Taoists. The most important 
point in bis description is the prominence given to the Buddhists. 
His account of their temples, of the dreaa and life of their 
monks* leaves no doubt that he is describing Hiijayanist Bud¬ 
dhism such as atili fiourishes in Camboja. It probably found its 
way from Siam, with which Camboja had already close, but 
not always peaceful, relations. Probably the name by which 
tho bonses are designated is Siamese*. With Chon Ta-kuan’s 
statements may be compared the inscription of the Siamese 
ICing R4ma Khomh^* which dwells on the fiourUhing con¬ 
dition of Pali Buddhism in Siam about 1300 a.d. The contrast 
indicated by Chou Ta-kuan is significant. The Brahmans held 

* PelUot (B.S.y.S.0. ItOS, ^ 14$) cltoa » lUtwneot £wm the Linr W*l Tw T» 

th.t tbm wen two cUmm ol boww b ttow who w«e reibw robes 

ma Biwrud tad tho« wbo wen red rabss Mid lived io eonvanU. 

ttoa*‘het it nprewsUtbe ChM(LofdJ end » comip. 

* 8m eUptor oo Siem, wot 1 . 

xxxvin] 

CAMBOJA 

127 

high ofBce but had no acItooU. Those of the laity who desired 
education spent some portion of thdr youth in a Buddhiat 
monastery (ee they stiJI do) and then returned to the world. 
Such a atate of things naturaJly resulted in the difiuson of 
Buddhism among the people, while the Brahmans dwindled to 
a Coart hierarchy, When Chou Ta*kuan says that all the Cam- 
bojans adored Buddha, he probably mak» a mistake, as he 
does in saying that the acolptures above the gates of Angkor 
are heads of Buddha. But the general impression which he 
evidently received that everyone frequented Buddhist temples 
and monasteries speaks for itself. His statement about sacri* 
fices to Buddha is remarkable and, since the inscriptions of 
Jayavaman VII speak of sacridcers, it cazmot be rejected as a 
mere mistake. But if Hinayanist Buddhism cocntenanced such 
practices in an age of transition, it did not adopt them per¬ 
manently for, so fat as I have seen, no offerings are made to*day 
in Cambojan temples, except fiowers and sticks of inceose. 

The Pa-ssu-wei have given rise to many conjectures and have 
been identified with the Baaalh or sacerdotal class of the Chams. 
But there seoms to belittle doubt that the word really represents 
PlL^upata and Chou Ta-kuan*B account clearly points to a sect 
of linga worshippers, although no informa^on is forthcoming 
about the stone on the altar of the Sun God in China'* to 
which he compares th^ emblem. His idea that they repre¬ 
sented the Taoists in Camboja may have led him to exaggerate 
their importance but his statement that they were a separate 
body is confirmed, for an inscription of Angkor^ defm» the 
order of hierarchical precedence as “the Brahman, the ^va 
Acirya, the Pfliupata Acarya*.” 

P^m the time of Chou Ta-kuan to the present day 1 have 

> Cotfu*, n. p. m. 

* TIm AUaag« itaWBcat ol Cbou T^kowi {pp. 16^166) thAt tli« Bad<Uiift CAd 
T40kt prieaU enjoyed e apectee of jiu prinm twlU hee been smcb dieoQMed. 
Tekea by iteeli it migbi b« menly a ^ueer itoiy tooaded on a uiraBdertUsding 
of Cembojan cuttomi, for be candidly saye tbat hit inforBiaCioB U ontnutwortby. 
fiat it in caonecUon vlth the eterie* ebont tbe Arii is £uma («ee aepeeially 

Pioot, J.A. L91S, p. 121) and tbe enitexos sttriboted by Chineee aad fiurepeani 
to tbs Siemeee and Phflip^oa, we oao banUy cooia any oondoKon except tbet 
tbie etrange usa^e vaa an abongliial ceeCoD in Ifido.Cbioa aad Ibe Aiebipela^ 
prior to tiie intr^uetleof oi ladies dnlwation, buc not nppresaed for tome tixoe. 
At tbe ptteant day there aeeas to be no ffeca or e«aa treditioa of eueb a euitom. 
For xuiTiftaft ead Fhiiippiae ouetoou eee S.S./.F.0.1002, p. U3, note 4. 

128 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[cs. 

found fow iioticea about tho religion of Camboja. Hmay nnie f 
Buddhism became supremo and though we have few details of 
the conquest we can h^dly go wrong in tracing its general 
lines. Brahmanism was exolnaive and tTrannical. It made no 
appeal to the masaee but a seTere levy of forced labour must 
have been neceesary to erect and maintain the numerous great 
ahxinea which, though in ruins, are stall the glory of Camboja*. 
In many of them are seen the remains of inscriptions which 
have been deliberately erased. These probably prescribed cer¬ 
tain onerous services which the proletariat was bound to render 
to the established church. When Siamese Buddhism invaded 
Camboja it had a double advantage. It was the creed of an 
aggreeave and successful neighbour but, while thus armed with 
the weapons of this world, it also appealed to the poor and 
oppressed. If it enjoyed the favour of princes, it bad no desire 
to defend the righto of a privileged caste: it offered salvation 
and education to the average townsman and villager. If it 
invited the support and alms of the laity, it was at least modest 
in its demands. Brahmanism on the other hand lost strength 
as the prestige of the court declined. Its greatest shrines were 
in the provinces most exposed to Siamese attacks. The first 
Portuguese writers speak of them as already deserted at the 
end of the sixteenth century. The connection with India was 
not kept up and if any immigrants came from the west, after 
the twelfth century they are more hkely to have been Moslims 
than Hindus. Thus driven from its temples, with no roote 
among the people, whose affections it had never tried to win, 
Brahmanism in Camboja became what it now is, a court 
ritual without a creed and hardly noticed except at royal 
functions. 

It is remarkable that Mohammedanism remained almost 
unknown to Camboja, Siam and Bimna. The tide of Moslim 
invaaion swept acro« the Malay Peninsula southwards. Its 
effect was strongest in Sumatra and Java, feebler on the coasts 
of Borneo and the Philippines. Prom the islands it reached 
Champa, where it had some success, but Siam and Camboja 
lay on one aide of ito main route, and also showed no sympathy 

* Tb* Fpeiwt Anh»g)c«lcftl CoDulMfoD atftM Uitfi ex«hBT« ot Aukor lAd 
til* iMgbboQnj« buUdin^ there we rett&lB» of 600 tenplec in CiSw». end 
probeny meny here entdi^lf diMppewed. 

xxsvm] 

CAMBOJA 

12d 

for it. King Rama Thuppdej Cban^ ^ho reigned in Camboja 
from 164^1659 became a Mohaounedazi and sorrounded him- 
ealf ‘tntb Malays and Javanese. But be alienated the affections 
of his subjects and vas deposed by the intervention of Annam. 
After ibis bear no more of Mohammedanlem. An onnsual 
incidenti which must be counted among the few eases in which 
Buddhism has encouraged violence, is recorded in the year 1780, 
when a Laotian who claimed to be inspired, collected a band of 
fanatics and proceeded to massacre in the name of Buddha all 
the Annamites resident in Camboja. This seems to show that 
Buddhism was regarded as the religion cf the coontry and could 
be ueed as a national cry against strangers. 

As already mentioned Brahmanism still survives in the 
court ceremonial though this hy no means preventa the king 
from bting a devout Buddhist. The priests are known as Bakus. 
They wear a top'knot and the sacred thread after the Indian 
fashion, and enjoy certain privileges. Within the premncta of 
the palace at Phnom Penh is a modest building wb^ they still 
guard the sword of India. About two inches of the blade aie 
shown to visitors, but except at cert^ festivals it is never 
taken out of its sheath. 

The ofRcial programme of the coronation of Ring Sisowatb 
(April 23-29, 1906), published in French and Cambojan, gives 
a curious account of tho ceremoniee perfonned, which were 
mainly Brahmanio, although prayers were recited by the Boneee 
and offerings made to Buddha. Four special Brahmanic abrines 
were erected and the essential part of the rite consisted in a 
lustral bath, in which the Bakus poured water over the king. 
Invocations were addressed to beings described as “Angee qui 
6tos au paradis des ax sdjours celestes, qui habites auptis 
d*£ndra, de Brabm& et de Tarobange Sahabodey,” to the epirite 
of mountains, valleys and rivers and to the spirits who guard 
the palace. When the king has been duly bathed the programme 
prescribes that 'Ue Direoteur des Bakous remettra la oouroone 
A M. le Gouvemeur OAn^al qui la portera sur la tdte de Sa 
Majesty au nom du Gouvemement de la BApubliqoe Fran^aise." 
Equally curious is the “Programme dee f9tes royales 4 Toccaaon 
de la cremation de S.M, Norodom” (January 9-16, 1906). The 
lengthy ceremonial consisted of a strange mixture of prayers, 

' IdMp^rp, pp. SS-S. 

130 

BUDDEI8M OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

sermons, psgeaata and amusements. The definitely religious 
e^ceroises were Buddhist and the amosements which accom¬ 
panied them, though according to our notions curiously out of 
place, clearly correspond to the funeral games of antiquity. 
Thus we read not only of “ofiiande d*uiL repas auz umee 
royaJee" but of “illominatioiis g^rales.. .lancement de 
ballons.. .luttee et assauts de boxe et de I’escrime.. .donses et 
soir^ de gala.... Apr^ la cremation, Sa Majesty distribuera dee 
billets de tombola.” 

The ordinary Buddhism of Camboja at the present day 
resembles that of Sifun and is not mixed with Brahmanic ob- 
eervances. Monasteries are numerous: the monks enjoy general 
respect and their conduct is said to be beyond reproach. They 
act as schoolmasters and, as in Siam and Burma, all young men 
spend some time in a monastery. A monastery generally con¬ 
tains from thirty to fifty monks and consists of a number of 
wooden houses raised on piles and arranged round a square. 
Each monk has a room and often a house to himself. Besides 
the dwelUi^ houses there are also stores and two halls called 
Saia and Vih^ar (vih4ra>. In both the Buddha is represented 
by a single gigantic string image, before which are set flowers 
and inceose. As a rule there are no other images but the walls 
are often ornamented with frescoes of Jataka stories or the 
early life of Gotama. Meals are taken in the Salk at about 7 and 
n a.m.*, and prayers are recited there on ordinary days in the 
morning and evening, The eleven o’clock meal is foUowcd by a 
rather long grace. The prayers consist mostly of Pali f ormul*, 
such as the Three Refuges, but they are sometimes in Cambojan 
and contain definite petitions or at least wishes formulated 
before the image of the Buddha. Thus I have heard prayers for 
peace and against war. The more solemn oeremoniee, such as 
the Uposatha and ordinations, are perfonned in the Vihear. 
The redtation cf the Eitimokkhs. is regularly performed and I 
have several times witneesed it. All but ordained monks have 
to withdraw outside the Slm& stones during the service. The 
ceremony begins about 6 p.m. r the Bhikkhus kneel down in 
paire face to face and rubbing their foreheads in the dust ask 
for mutual forgiveness if they hove inadvertently offended. 

' 71* food ii pr«pu«<] in fl» and, u In other cooaSri®#. the htatiae 

round B t iBoro fonnalit^, ■ 

CAMBOJA 

xxxvrn] 

131 

This MFemony i£ also perfonned on other occaaioDs. It is 
followed by singing or intoning lauds, after which comes the 
recitation of the P&timokkha itself which is marked by great 
eolenmity. The leader sits in a large chair on the arms of which 
are fixed many lighted tapers. He repeats the text by heart 
but near him mts a prompter with a palm'leaf manuscript 
who, if necessary, corrects the words recited. I have never 
seen a monk confess in public, and I believe that the usual 
practice is for sinful brethren to abstain from attending the 
ceremony and then to confess privately to tbo Abbot, who 
assigns thorn a penance. As soon as the P&timokkha is concluded 
all the Bhikkhus smoke large cigarettes. In most Buddhist 
countries it is not considdred irreverent to smoke^, chew betel 
or drink tea in the intervals of religious exercises. When the 
cigarettes are finished there follows a service of prayer and 
praise in Cambojan. During the season of Wassa there are 
usually several Bhikkhus in each monastery who practise 
meditation for three or four days consecutively in tenta or 
enclosures mode of yellow cloth, open above but dosed all 
round. The four stages of meditation described in the Pltakas 
^ said to be commonly attained by devout menks^. 

The Abbot has considerable authority in disciplinary matters. 
He eats apart froL' the other monks and at religious ceremonies 
wears a sort cf red cepe, whereae the dross of the other brethren 
is entirely yellow. Novices prostrate themselves when they 
speak to him. 

Above the Abbots are Provincial Superiors and the govern¬ 
ment of the whole Church is in the bands of the Somdcc prib 
sangbr&c. There is, or was, also a second prelate called L6k pr&h 
s&kbo, or Brab Sugaodba, and the two. somewhat after the 
manner of the two primates of the English Church, supervise 
the clergy in different parts of the kln^om, the second being 
inferior to the first in rank, but not dependent on him. But it 
is said that no successor has beeu appointed to the lost Brab 
Sugandha who died In 1804. He was a distinguished scholar 
and introduced the Dbammayut sect from Siam Into Camboja. 

I Bvt In tenplea Doticas forbiddios sawking uo o{t«D poeWd on tb» 

door*. 

* Tbe trerd dhyliu ia toovo, but tiw onrciw is nwio cobraonl; cati«d VI. 
pamui^ or K*mmi.tbAiifc 

SUDJOHTSM OUTSIDE INDIA 

132 

[CH- 

Tbe kio^ is recognized aa bead of the Churcb, but cannot alter 
ite doctrine or confiscate ecclesiastical property. 

6 

No account of Cambojan religion would be complete without 
some reference to the splendid monuments in which it found 
expression and which still remain in a great measure intact. 
The colonists who established themselves in these regions 
brought with them the Diavidian taste for great buildings, but 
either th^ travels enlarged their artistic powers or they 
modified the Indian style by assimilatiog succeesfuUy some 
arohitectuxa! features found in their new home. What pre* 
Indian architecture there may have been among the Khmors 
we do not know, but the fact that the eaxHest known menu* 
ments are Hindu makes it improbable that stone buildings on a 
large scale existed before theix arrival. The feature whidt most 
clearly distinguishes Cambojan from Indian architecture is its 
pyramidal structure. InHia has stupas and gepurams of pyra^ 
midal appearance but still Hindu temples of l^ie normal type, 
both in the north and south, consist of a number of buildings 
erected on the same level. In Camboja on the contrary many 
buildings, such aa Ta-Keo, Ba*phuong and the Fb'meanakas, 
are ahrines on the top of pyramids, which consist of three storeys 
or large steps, ascended by flights of relatively small steps. In 
other buildings, notably Angkor Wat, the pyramidal form is 
obecored by the s%ht elevation of the storeys compared with 
their breadth and by the elaboration of the colonnades and other 
ediflees, which they bear. But still the general plan is that of 
a seiies of courts each rising within and above the last and this 
gradual rise, by which the pilgrim is led, not only through 
colonnade after colonnade, but up flight after flight of stairs, 
each leading to something higher but invisible from the base, 
imparts to Cambojan temples a eubUmity and aspiring grandeur 
which is absent from the mysterious halls of Dravidian shrines. 

One might Edmost suppose that the Camhojan arohitects 
had deliberately set themselves to rectify the chief faults of 
Indi^ architecture. One of these is the profusion *oi external 
ornament in high relief which by its very multiplicity ceases to 
produce any effect proportionate to its elaboration, with the 

CAMBOJA 

133 

xsxvinj 

result chat the general view is disappomting and majestic cot* 
linee are wanting. In Cambojan buildings on the contrary the 
general effect is not sacrificed to detail: the artiste knew how 
to make air and space gire dignity to their work. Another 
peculiar defect of many J^raridian huildings is that they were 
gradually erected round some anrient and ori^aily humble 
shrine with the unfortunate leenlt that the outermost courts 
and gateways are the most magnificent and that progress to 
the holy of hoUes is a series of artistic disappointments. But at 
Angkor Wat this fault is carefully avoided. The long paved 
road which starts from the first gateway isolates the great 
central mass of buildings without dwarfing it and even in 
the last court, when one looks up the vast staircases leading 
to the five towers which crown the pyramid, all that has led 
up to the central shrine seems, as it should, merely an intro¬ 
duction. 

The solidity of Cambojan architectore is connected with the 
prevalence of inundations. With such duigers it was of primary 
Importance to have a masrive substructure which could not be 
washed away and the style which was necessary in building a 
finn stone platform inspired the rest of the work. Some un* 
finished temples reveal the interesting fact that they were 
erected first as piles of plain masonry. I^n came the decorator 
and carved the stones as they stood in their places, so that 
instead of carving separate blocks he was able to contemplate 
his deagn as a whole to spread it over many stones. Hence 
most Cunbojan buildings have a pecuHar air of unity. They 
have not had ornaments affixed to them but have grown into 
an ornamental whole. Yet if an unfavourable criticism is to 
be made on these edifices-^speciaUy Angkor Wat—it is that 
the sculptures are wanting in meaning and importance. They 
cannot be compared to the reUefs of Boroboedoer, a veritable 
catechism in stone where every clause teaches the believer 
something new, or even to the piles of figures in Dravi<^an 
temples which, though of small artistic merit, seem to represent 
the whirl of the world with all its men and monsters, etrugglbg 
from life into death back to life again. The reliefs in the 
great cerridore of Angkor are purely decorative. The artist 
justly felt that so long a stretch pitin stone would be 
wearisome, and as decoration, his work is eucceesful. Looking 

134 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[oa. 

outwards the eye is satiaiied with such variety aa the trees and 
houses m the temple courts afford: looking inwards it finds 
similes variety in tbe warriors and deities portrayed on the 
waUs. Some of the scenes have an historical interest, but the 
attempt to follow the battles of the Ramayana or the Churning 
of tbe Sea soon becomes a tedious task, for there is little 
individuality or inspiration in tbe figures. 

This want of any obvious correspondence between the 
decoration and cidt of the Cambojan temples often makes it 
difficult to say to what deitlee they were dedicated. The Bayon, 
or ^iviirsma, was presumably a linga temple, yet the coujecture 
is not confirmed as one would by any indubitable evi« 
deuce in the decoration or arrangements. In its general plan 
the building seems more Indian than others and. like the temple 
of Jagannhtha at Buri, consists of three successive chambers, 
each aunnounted by a tower. The most remarkable feature in 
the decoration is the repetition of the four headed figure at the 
top of every tower, a striking and effective motive, which is 
also found above the gates of the town. Chou Ta^kuan says 
that there were golden statues of Buddhas at the entrance to 
the Bayon. It is impossible to say whether this statement is 
socurate or not. He may have simply made a mistake, but it is 
e<iuaUy possible that the fusion of tbe two creeds may have 
ended in images of the Buddha bting placed outside the shrine 
of tbe linga. 

Strange as it may seem, there is no clear evidence as to the 
character of the worship performed in Camboja’s greatest 
temple, Angkor Wat. Since the princo who commenced it was 
known by the posthumous title of Paiumavish^uloka, we may 
presume that he intended to dedicate it to Vishnu and some 
of the sculptures appear to represent Vishnu slaying a demon. 
But it was not finished luitil after his death and his intentions 
may not have been respected by his successors. An authoritative 
statement^ warns ue that it is not safe to say more about the 
date of Angkor Wat than that its extreme Ir^ts are 1050 and 
1170. Jayavarman VII (who oame to the throne at about this 
Utter date) was a Buddhist, and may possibly have used the 
great temple for his own worship. The sculptures are hardly 

^ U. (7. ill BuU. Comm. Ar</ihL ISll. p. 2S0. 

xxxvm] 

CAMBOJA 

135 

Brahmaiuc in the theological sense, and those which represent 
the pleasures of paradise and the pains of hell rcoaU Buddhist 
delineations of the same thomo^. Tho four images of Che Buddha 
which are now found in the central tower aro modem and all 
who ha7d soon them will, 1 think, ^^ee that the figure of the 
great teacher which seems so appropriate in the noighbouring 
monasteries Is strangely out of place in this aerial shrine. But 
what tike dcs^aer of the building hitendcd to place there 
remains a mystery. Perhaps an empty throne such as is seen 
in tho temples of Armam and Bah would have been the best 
symbol*. 

Though the monuments of Camboja are well preserved the 
grey and massive severity which marks thorn at present is 
probably very different from the appearance that they wore 
when used for worship. Prom Chon Ta-kuan and other sources* 
we gather that the towers and porches were gilded, the bas- 
reliefs and perhaps the whole surface of the walls were painted, 
and the building was ornamented with flags. Music and dances 
were performed in the courtyards and, as in many Indian 
temples, the intention was to create a scene which by ite 
animation and brilliancy might amuse the deity and rival tho 
pleasures of paradise. 

It is remarkable that ancient Camboja which has left us so 
many monuments, produced no books*. Though the insoriprioas 
and Chou Ta-kuwi testify to the knowledge of Uteratuie 
(especially religious), both Brahmanic and Buddhist, diffused 
among the upper ol^es, no original works or even adaptations 
of Indian originals have come down to us. The length and 

' AJUiougb Ui«r« u ao rmoq whj tlicM picUiRa oi tte iaUm lil* abould iie(b» 
Br4biuaie u well a* Buddhlsl, I do oat kavuig eoeo them to any purely 

Brabsenic temple. 

* After epeadiog eome time et Angkor Wet I Hod it bard to betieve tbe tbeoiv 
thet it «M e pelece. Tbe King of Cemboja wu doubtleee rogerded ea e living God. 
bkil M a ibe Orend lAme. aod it dc«s not ap|»ar that tbe l^lnln wlicro be livaeia 
anything but e large ne;deatial building eoataioing lialla and ehApda nuoH like 
tbe Vatican. But at Angkor Wat ereiythlns Irodi op to a cootiel ehrme. It is 
<;iute probeMe however that tlie deity <A tble ahrine vaa e deified king, identified 
with Viaheu alter hla death. Thla would aoooont lor tbe rerevhe of Chou To-kuoa 
who aeerea to hare regarded it os a tomb. 

* Bee specially laecription ol Bn mine. Kem. AnnaUs FExtrime OriM. 
t. m. 1880 . p. C6. 

« P&M bouke ore common In monaatonee. For the lltanture of Laoe me FuKiC, 
B.S.f.B.0- m?. No, C. 

136 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE IHDIA [oa. xxxvm 

ambitioiu character of many msoriptiotu gi^e an idea of what 
the Cambojaua could do in the way of writing, but the reaolt is 
disappoiotmg. These poems in stone show a knowledge of 
Sanskrit, of Indian poetry and theology, which is surprising if 
we consider how far from India they were composed, but t^y 
are almost without exception artldcial, frigid and devoid of 
vigonr or inspiration. 

CHAPTER XXXIX 

CHAMPA' 

I 

T&B kingdom of Cbaropa, though a confiidOTahle power from 
about the third century until the end of tho fifteenth, has 
attracted less attention than Camboja or Ja'va. Its name is a 
thing of the past and known only to students; its monuments 
are inferior in size and artistic merit to those of the other Hindu 
kingdoms in the Far East and perhaps its chief interest is that 
it furnishes the oldest Sanskrit inscription yet known from these 
regions. 

Champa occupied the sonth'castem comer of Asia beyond 
the Malay Peninsula, if the word comer can be properly applied 
to such rounded outlines. Its extent varied at difierent epochs, 
but it may be roughly defined in the language of modem 
geography as the southern portion of Annam, comprising the 
provinces of Qi^ng nam in the north and Blnh'Xhuan in the 
south with the intervening country. It was divided into three 
pronncee, which respeoriv^y became the seat of empire at differ¬ 
ent periods. They were (i) in the north Amar&vat! (the modem 
Qu3ng*nam) with the towns of Indrapiua and Sinhapura; 

* ain «p«lt CampS aod Tebamp^ It ■nnma aafar to oae Cb for C in naaiea 
vikioh though of Indian ori^ an uaod oQtaide ladii. Tba o tboogh alrictlr 
epaabang long is ufuallr vritteo without aa aocoiiL Tho foBowisg ara Ui» prineipal 
works wbieh I have oonioltod aboat Chatapa. 

(a) Q. Maapdro, Xaii ^w M da CAowpa. Pabfiabed la S^ova^Pao, 1910-19 IS. 
Cited ae Mwp^ro. 

(b) A. Bergaigna, “ Inacriplioiu Saaahrlbn do Champa” 'mNoiietae*Sztraiit 

dsi UonuzeriU it Jo Nalienoit, tome itxvn. 1'* Jttrtie. 2* 

f«arifiiii»L, 1S93, pp, 181-293. GlUd aa Oerf^ n. 

(d) U. Farmentier, /swnftxKs dtferip6/ du J^oaumU* da Fdanosk 
1S99. 

(d) 1. Finot, "lA ReligleQ doa Cbane." RS.F.t.O. 1901, and yoUt 

irmpAia. "Lea ImoBpUona d« Ki'Sen," ib- 190e Kuiserooa ether 
papen bj this aothor, Doiaod. PainiaDtior and otben ia the asae 
parlodiaal oan ba consultod with advactego. 

(a) Id., X«U4 Indo-ChirtoiM, ISld. 

138 BUDDHISM OUTBIDS INDIA foH. 

(ii) m the middie Vijaye (the modem Bing-Dinh) with the 
town of Vijaya and the port of Srl-Vinaye; (iii) in the south 
P^urAnga or Panran (the modem provinces of Phanraug and 
Bmh-Thuan) with the town of Virapura or R&japura. A section 
of PA^idminga caUed Kaufcb&ra (the modem Kanh hoe) was a 
aeparato prorinoe at certain times. Like the modem Aimam, 
Champa appears to have been mainly a littoral kingdom and not 
to have extended far into tbe mountains of the interior. 

Champa was the ancient name of a town in western Bengal 
near Bbagalpur, but its appheation to tlieee regions does not 
seem due to any connection with north-eaatem India. The 
conquerors of tJie country, who were called Chams, had a 
certain amount of Indian oulturo and considered the classical 
Champa as an elegant expression for the la. d of the 
^aiM, Judging by their language theee Chams belonged to 
the Mday.Polynesian group and their distribution along the 
httoral suggests that they were invaders from tbe sea like the 
M^ay pirates from whom they themselves subsequently 
Bufiered. The earliest inscriprioa in the Cham language dales 
from the ^ginning of the ninth century but it is preceded by 
n long series of Sanskrit inscriptions the oldest of which, that of 
yo-can», IS attributed at Utest to the third century, and refers 
to an earlier king. It therefore seems probable that the Hindu 
dynasty of Champa was founded between 150 and 200 a.d but 
tb^js no evideuce to show whether a Malay race already 
MttiM in Champa was conquered and hinduized by Indian 
mvaders, or whether tbe Chams were already hinduized when 
they arrived, possibly from Java. 

TJie inferiority of the Chams to the Khmera in civilization 
was tbe result of tboir more troubled history. Both countries 
had to contend against tbe same difficulty—a powerful and 
aggressive neighbour on either side. Camboja between Siam and 
Annam in 1800 was in very much the same portion as Champa 
had been between Camboja and Annam five hundred yearn 
earlier. But between 060 and 1150 a.p. when Champa by no 
means enjoyed stability and peace, the history of Camboja, if 
not altogether tranquil, ot least records several Jong rrigns of 
powerful kings who were able to ombeUish their capital and 
assure its security. The Chams wore exposed to attacks not only 

* Cofftu, n. p. 11, And Fiaet, pp, 827 fi. 

T TVty J 

CHAMPA 

139 

irom Annato but aUo from tbo more formidable if distant 
Chinese their capital, Instead of leoiaiiung stetionary 
through seTeroi centuries like Angkor Thom, was fre*^ueDtly 
moved as one or other of the three provinces became moro 
important. 

The inscription of Vo<aa is in correct Sanskrit prose and 
contains a fragmentary address from a king who seems to have 
been a Buddhist and writes somewhat in tlie style of Asoka. He 
boasts that be is of the luroily of &im£rarija. The letters closely 
resemble those of Eudrademian’s inscription at Oimar and oon' 
temporary inscriptions at Kanberi. The text is much mutilated 
so that we know neither tlie name of the writer nor his relation' 
ship to ^rfm&ra. But the latter v*as evidently the founder of 
the dynasty and may have been separated from bis descendant 
by several generations. It is noticeable that his name does not 
end in Yarman, like those of later kings. If he lived at the end 
oi the second century this would harmonize with the oldest 
Chineee notices which the rise of lin*! (thoir came for 
Champa) about 192 a.D.* Agreeably to t.hig we also hear that 
Hun I^Ien founded an Indian kingdom in Fu-nan considerably 
before 26$ a.c. and that some time between 220 and 280 a king 
of FU'Uan sent an embassy to India. The name Fu-nan may 
include Champa. But though we hear of Hindu kingdoms in 
these districts at an early date we know nothing of thrir 
oiviLizatioQ or history, nor ^ we obtmn much information from 
those Cham legends which represent the dynasties of Champa 
as descended from two clans, those of the cabbage palm 
(ar^guler) and cocoannt. 

CHuneee sources also state that a king called Fan*yi sent an 
embassy to China in 284 and give the names of several kings 
who reigned between 326 and 440. One of these, Fan'hu>ta, is 
apparently the Bhadravarman who has left some Sanskrit 
inscriptions daring from about 400 and who built the first 
temple at Mi-so'n. This became the national sanctuary of 
Champa: it was burnt down about 075 ad. but rebuilt. 
Bhadravarmau's son Gangar$ja appears to have abdicated and 
to have gone on a pilgrimage to the Qangee^another inst^ce 
of the intercourse prevailing between these regions and India. 

* Sm ‘ioMed hy tfMpCn, Tounf P«o, p. 329. 

I piaot ift 1004, pp. 018 «&d 92i. 

B, m. 

10 

140 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [ch, 

It would be useless to follow in detail the long chromcle of 
the longs of Champa but a few events merit mention. In 446 
and again in 606 the Chinese invaded the countzy and severely 
ebastised the inhabitants. But the second invasion was followed 
by a period of peace and prosperity. Sambhuvarman (f 629) 
restored the temples of Mi-so'n and two of his successors, both 
called Vikr&ntavarmsn, were also great builders. The kings who 
reigned from 768 to 869, reol;oned ae the fifth dynasty, belonged 
to the south and had their capital at Vtrapura. The ch^igd seems 
to have been important, for the Chinese who had previously 
called the country Lin-I, henceforth call it Huan*wang. The 
natives continued to use the name Champa bat Satyavarman 
and the other kings of the dynasty do not mention Mi-so'n 

though they adorned aod endowed Po-nagar and other sanctuaries 
in the south. It was during this period (a.D. 774 and 787) that 
the province of Kautbara was invaded by pirates, described aa 
thin black barbarians and cannibals, and also as the armies of 
Java*. They pillaged the temples but were eventually expelled. 
They were probably Malays but it is difficult to believe that the 
Javanese could be seriously accused of cannibalism at this 
period*. 

The capital continued to be transferred under subse^^cent 
dynasties. Under tho sixth (860-900) it was at Xndrapuia in the 
north: under the seventh (900-986) it retorned to the south: 
under the eighth (989-1044) it was in Vijaya, the central pro¬ 
vince. These interzial changes were accompanied by foreign 
attacks. The Khmers invaded the southern province in 945. On 
the north an Annamite Prince founded the kingdom of Dai-c6- 
Ti4t, which became a them in the side of Champa, In 982 its 
armies destroyed Indrapuxn, and in 1044 they captured Vijaya. 
Id 1069 ICing Rudravarman was taken prisoner but was released 
in return for the cession of the three northernmost provinoee. 
Indrapura however was rebuilt and for a time successful wars 
were waged against CSamboja, but though the kings of Champa 
did not acquiesce in the loss of the northern provinces, and 

; Nagar. pp. 252 i sad 4e Ka*# TihiX, p. 206, «t«. 

Tb« stat«iii«iite that they oams ftooi Jits aad were cazmtMs e»ur ia diff«reni 
t&Mriptiona aad tusy ooiw«r»My lafer M iwo bc<Ue» of fnTodere. But the dsut 
m ^ nw. Ppobobly Java ii not the isUed now so esUed. 8e» tho chaptM on 
CsBboi*, see. 2. Ti® undoobted retoeone in the laecriMion* ot Cheai** to the 
ieleod o( Jave call 16 Vavadelpa. 

CEAMPA 

111 

xxnx] 

thougli Harivaraian III <1074-80) was temporarily Tictorioua, 
uo real progress was made in the contest with Annam, whither 
the Chams had to send embassies practically admitting that 
they were a vassal state. £n the next century turtber dissatrous 
quarrels with Camboja ensued and in 1188 Champa was split 
into two kingdoms, Vijaya in the north under a Csmbojan 
prince and Panran in the south governed by a Cham phnee but 
imder the suzerainty of Camboja. This arrangement was not 
successful and after much fighting Champa became a Khmer 
province though a very unruly one from 1303 till 1220. Subse* 
quently the aggressive vigour of the Khmers was tempered by 
their own wars with Siam. But it was not the fate of Champa 
to be left la peace. The invamon of Khuhilai lasted from 1278 to 
1285 and in 1306 thepro vinces of 6 and Ly were ceded to Annam. 

Champa now became for practical purposes an Annamite 
province and in 1818 the Xing fled to Java for refuge. This 
connection with Java is interesting and there are other instances 
of it. King Jaya Simhavarmau in (t 1307) of Champa married 
a Javanese princess called Tapasi. I4.ter we bear in Javanese 
records that in the fifteenth century the princess Darawati of 
Champa married the king of Madjapahit and her sister mairied 
Kaden Kadmat, a prominent Moslim teacher in Java^. 

The power of the Chams was crushed by Annam in 1470. 
After this date they had little political importance but continued 
to exist as a nationality under tlieir own rulers. In 1650 they 
revolted against Annam without success and the king was 
captured. But his widow was accorded a titular position and the 
Cham chronicle* continueathe list of nominal kings down to 1822. 

In Champa, as in Camboja, no books dating from the Hindu 
period have been preserved and probably there were not many. 
The Cham language appears not to have been used for literary 
purposes and whatever cultime existed was exclusively Sanskrit. 
The iHnga are credited with an extensive knowledge of Sanskrit 
literature. An inscription at Po nagar* (918 a,i>.) says that ^rl 
Indravarman was acquainted with the Hlm&inek and other 

) V«a. Java, t. p. 23S. 

* Sm BoTSIe*’' BsS~F~B.0. 1009. p. 3?7. 

* CorpMi u. p. tea JiDttdr*i>iAyb*saane«dtl)erc{ih»5uddbaarof •snm* 
asrun. Tlis m«t»n <rf tb« KAiii trUti w toporUBt m tboynag UiAt work 
mtut be sftleriof to tto siotb «ntory. The Cttor* Kslpe ie qootod is tbe X»ntm 
(eee B«rs«gbo’* AOto), but AotLiog U ksows cl It. 

143 BUDDBISM OUTSIDE INDIA [ch. 

sjstemfl of philosophy; eHooDdra, and grammar together with 
the K&^lk& (vritti) and the Saivottara-Kalpa. Agaio an inscrip- 
tdoD of Hi-son* asoriboa to Jaya Indravarmadeva (e. 1175 a.D.) 
proficiency in all the sciences as well as a knowledge of the 
UahAyfrna and the Dbarmai&etrae, particularly the N&radiya 
and Bbirgaviya. To eome estent original compositions m 
Sanskrit must haye been produced, for several of the inscriptions 
axe of conridorable length and ono> gives a quotation from a 
work called the Pur&^rtha or Artliapurh^aiiatra which appears 
to have been a chroniclo of Champa. But the language of the 
inscriptions is often careleea and incorrect and indicates that 
the study of Sanskrit was less nourishing than in Camboja. 

2 

The mozrumenta of Champa, though considerable in site and 
number, are inferior to those of Camboja. The individual 
buildings are smaller and simpler and the groups into whioh 
they are combined lack unity. Brick was chief material, 
etone being used only when brick would not serve, as for statues 
and Imtels. The commonest type of edifice is a square pyramidal 
structure called by the Chams ICalan. A Kalan is as a rule 
erected on a hill or rising ground; its lowest storey has on the 
east a porch and vestibule, on the other three sides fEblso doors. 
The same shape is repeated in four upper storeys of decreasing 
size which however serve merely for external decoration and 
correspond to nothing in the interior. This Is a single winOowless 
pyramidal cell lighted by the door and probably ohto by lamps 
placed in niches on the inner m'aJIs. In the centre stood a 
pedestal for a linga or an image, uith a channel to carry 
libations, leading to a spout in wall. The outline of tho towor 
is often varied by projecting figures or ornaments, but the 
sculpture is less lavish than in Camboja and Java. 

In the greater religious sites several structures are grouped 
together. A square wall sunoundB an enclosuro entered by a 
gateway and containing one or more Kal&ns, as well as smaller 
buildings, probably for the use of priests. Before the gateway 
there is frequently a hall supported by columns but open at the 
sides. 

' £.S-f£.0. 1004, p. 07a. 

* From Hi>Ma, 1157 A.&. 8«« BJ.F.E-0~ 1904, pp, 901 and 063. 

CHAMPA 

143 

xxsit] 

All known speciinens of Chftm architecture are temples; 
paJacM and other secular buildings were made of wood and 
haTe disappeared. Of the many sanctuaries which haTe been 
discovered, the most remarkable are those of Mi*son, and Dong 
PuoDg, both in the neighbourhood of Tourane, and Po Nagar 
close to Nhatrang. 

Mi-son^ Is an undulating amphitheatre among raountainsand 
contains eight or nine groups of temples, founded at different 
times. The eariiest structures, erected by Bhadravanaan I 
about 400, have disappeared* and were probably of wood, since 
we bear that they were burnt (apparently by an actident) in 
675 A.D. New temples were constructed by ^ambhuvarman 
about twenty-five years later and were dedicated to ^ambhu- 
bhadrs4vara, in which title the names of the founder, restorer 
and the deity are combined. These buildings, of which portions 
remain, represent the oldest and best period of Cham art. 
Another style be^a under VitranUvarman 1 between 067 and 
679 A.D. This reign marks a period of decadence and though 
several buildings were erected at Mi-son during the dghth and 
ninth centuries, the locality was comparatively neglected* until 
the reiga of Harivannan III (1074-1080). The temples had been 
ravaged by the Annamites but this king, being a successful 
warrior, was able to restore them and dedicated to them the 
booty which he had captured. Though his reign marks a period 
of temporary prosperity in the annals of Champa, the style 
which he inaugurated in architecture has little originality. It 
reverts to the aneient forms but shows conscious archaism 
rather than fresh vigour. The position of Mi-son, however, did 
not decline and about 1155 Jay a Harivarman 1 repaired the 
buildings, dedicated the booty token in battle and erected a new 
temple in fulfilment of a vow. But after this period the princes 
of Champa bad no authority in the district of Mi-son, and the 
Aimamitee, who seem to have disliked the reUgion of the Chams, 
plundered the temples. 

1 =Chia«M (Un, irnnmi mouiitaiD. For m of tha tenpl«i Mid 

thrir hi»tory tb* irtiole* by sad Fieot, BJi.F.S^O. !»*, ». 804- 

077 

• Bot c«it«mpor»Ty jiacripUoM be« di*»»M*d. l»S, pp. 

1S6 S 

• boiibM«M bcceuM ospUl vu trtBAmO U> tba •ooth wher* U>0 »Wne U 

Po-B>8»r b»d first cUim*. 

144 

BUDDH2S£f OUTBIDS INDIA 

fCB. 

Fo-na^at^ is near the port of Kba-trang and OT^rlooks the 
sea. B^g smaller that Mi^son it has more unity but still shows 
little attempt to combine in one architectural whole the buildings 
of which it is compoeeii. 

An mscription^ states with curious precision that the shrine 
was first erected in the year SOU of the Dvipara age and this 
fantastic chronology shows that in our tenth century it was 
regarded as ancient. As at Mi-8on» the original buildings were 
probably of wood for in 774 they were sacked and burnt by 
pirates who carried oS the imaged. Shortly afterwards they 
were rebuilt in brick by King Satyavarman and the existing 
southern tower probably dates from bis reign, but the great 
central tower was built by HariTarman 1 (817 a.i).) and the 
other edifices axe later. 

Fo Nsgar or Yang Po Nagar means the Lady or Goddess of 
the city. She wen commonly called BbagaTatt in Sanskrit^ and 
appears to have been the chief object of worship at Xfha*trang, 
although ^Ta was associated i^h her imder the name of 
BbagaratitTara. In 1050 an ardhanar! image representing ^ya 
and Bhagaeati combined In one figure was presented to the 
temple by King Paxamedyara and a dedicatory inscription 
describes this double deity as the cosmic principle. 

When Champa was finsUly conquered the temple was sold to 
the Annamitee, who admit^ that they could not acquire it 
except by eome special and peaceful arrangement. Kven now 
they still continue the worship of the goddess though they no 
longer know* who she is^. 

LongLuong, about twenty kilometres to the south of Mi-son, 
marks the site of the ancient capital Indrapura. The moniuneut 
which has made its name known differs from those already 
described. Compared with them it has some pxetensioDs to 
a whole, laid out on a definite plan and it is Buddhist. It 
consists of three courts* surrounded by walls and entered by 
massiye porticoes. In the third there axe about tw'enty bnildinge 

* Sm MpadaHy bbo articl* bj PameatHr. B.B.f.B.0. 1902, pp. 17-M, 

* ZZTl Corfu*, IL pp. 144 , 296 ; SIS A.O. 

* SarusnSItaQ: pr^bablj a wanVhaUnp . 

* AIm Tapoeagm «T«b la Saoakrit maenpUePDa 

* Pannantiar, it. p. 49. 

* Tbii ii onlp a vaiy roogh dNcripUon of a ntber compUealad structnxe. For 
dauila M# PwoiaBtMr, J/mawtua dan*, pbnoba zcvizl 

CHAMPA 

L46 

szxix] 

and p6rba.ps it did not eeoape the favdt conunon to Cbam 
architecture of presenting a collection of disconnected and un* 
related edibcee, bet still there is ole&rly an attempt to lead up 
from the outermost portioo throi^h halls and gateways to the 
principal shrine. From an inscri^ion dated S75 a.n. we leam 
that the mins are those oi a temple and vih&ra erected by King 
Lviravarman and dedicated to A?alobita under the name of 
Lakshmindra Lokeivara. 

3 

The religion of Champa was practically identical with that 
of Qft mbojft If the inscriptions of the former tell ua more about 
mukhalingas and kosbas and those oi the latter have more 
aUuaiooB to the worship of the compound deity Han^hara, this 
is probably a matter of chance. But even supposing that 
different cults were specially prominent at different places, it 
seems clear that all the gods and ceremonies known in Cambo}a 
were also known in Champa and vice ver«i. In both countries 
the national religion was Hinduism* m^ly of the &vaite type, 
accompanied by Mahayanist Buddhism which occasionally came 
to the front under royal patronage. In both any indigenous 
beliefs which may hare existed did not form a separate system. 
It is probable however that the goddess known at Po-nagar as 
Bhagavati was an ancient local deity worshipped before the 
Hindu immigration and an inscription found at Mi-son recom¬ 
mends those whose eyes are diseased to propitiate KuTera and 
thus secure protection against Ek&kshapingaia, "the tawny 
one-eyed (spirit).” Though this goddess or demon was probably 
a creation of local fancy, similar identifications of Kill with the 
spirits presiding over cholera, smallpox, etc., take place in 
India. 

The social system was theoretically based on the four castes, 
but Chinese accounts indicate that in questions of maxriage and 
inberitance older ideas connected with matriarchy and a division 
into clans still had weight. But the language of the inscriptions 
is most orthodox. Fing Vikrintavannan^ qnotes with approval 
the saying that the horse sacriice is the beet of good deeds and 
the murder of a Brahman the worst of sins. Brahmans, oh^- 
Iwna (purohita), pandits and ascetics are frequently mentioned 
^ Inacrip. at Ui^oa of 658 a.». 8 m B^S.f^S.0. 18 M, p. 811. 

146 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [ca. 

as worthy of honour and gifts. The high priest or royal chaplain 
is atyled ^riparamaporohita but it does not appear that there 
was a sacerdotal family enjoying the unique position held by 
the iSivakaiTalyas in C^boja. The frequent changes of capital 
and dynasty in Cbampa were unfavourable to continiuty in 
either Church or State. 

Sivaism, without any hostility to Vishnuism or Buddhism, 
was the dominant creed. The earliest known inscription, that of 
Vo'Can, contains indications of Buddhism* but three others 
believed to date from about 400 a.D. invoke ^iva under some 
such title as Bhadie4vara, indicating that a temple bad been 
dedicated to him by King Bhadiavarmau. Thus the practice of 
combining the names of a king and his patron deity in one 
appellation existed in Cbampa at this early date*. It Is also 
recorded from southern India, Camboja and Java. Besides ^va 
one of the inscriptions venerates, though in. a rather perfunctory 
manner, Uml., BrahmA, '^slmu and the five elements. Several 
inscriptions^ give details oi ^vaite theology which agree with 
what we know of it in Camboja. The world animate a nd in* 
animate is an emanation from (Siva, but he delivers from the 
world those who think of him. Meditation, the practice of Yoga, 
and devotion to ^iva are several times mentioned with approval^. 
He abides in eight forms corresponding to his eight names 
Sarva, Bhava, Ba4upati, l44na, Bhima, Budra, Mah&deva, and 
Ugra. He is also, as in Java, Guru or the teacher and he has 
the usual mythological epithets. He dances in lonely places, he 
rides on the bull Nandi, is the slayer of Kims, etc. Though 
represented by figures embodying such legends he was moat 
commonly adored under the form of the linga which in Champa 
more than elsewhere came to be regarded as not merely 
symbolic but as a personal god. To mark this mdividuslity it 
was commonly enclosed in a metal case (kosha) bearing one or 
more human faces^ It was then called mukhalinga and the 

» Other exitnplw are IndaWiodteSvira, Cowt. n. t>. 201 HarironBeivija. 

AS.F.B.O. ISM, p. Ml. 

* S 4 . B.B.F.B.O. pp. 218 ft D«t«« 008 I.D. onvarda 
' Yosoddh^iaa. ^TMdba, &vabhaliU. 6 m B.S.f JS.0. 1004 pp. S30..2&0 
Htfjffonuan III eMicoted in 1080 end geve hbaeelf ap u. oonteapletiott end 
devMioo M Sive. 

^ 8m B.B.F.B.0, 1004, pp. 912 8. and eep, p. 970. I here e«D a koehe whieb 
u etiU innet in tbe aeigh bourhoad at BodenL 7t 1 « kept In a NeodiLe. 

xxssj 

CHAMPA 

147 

f&ees were pro'ba^ intended as portrftita of royal donors, 
identified with the god in form ss well as in name. An in- 
scrip^n of 1163 ii.Z). records the dedication of such a kosha, 
adorned with five royal faces, to ^li^nabhodrcdvara. Tbo god, 
it is said, will now be able to give bis blessing to all regions 
through his dve months which he could not do before, and being 
enclosed in the kosha, like an embryo in the matrix, he becomes 
Hiranyagarbha. The linga, with or without these ornaments, 
was sat on a sndnadroM or stone table arranged for receiving 
libations, and sometimes (as in Java and Camboja) four or more 
liegas were set upon a single slab. From a.t>. 400 onwards, the 
cult of ^iva seems to have maintained its paramount position 
during the whole history of Champa, for tho last recorded 
Sanskrit inscription is dedicated to him. From first to last It 
was the state region. Sva is said to have sent Uroja to be the 
first king and is oven styled the root of the state of Champa. 

An inscription* of 611 a.n. celebrates the dual deity Sankara- 
N&r&yaoa. It is noticeable that Nir&ya^a is said to have lield 
up Mt Govardhana and is apparently identified with Krislma. 
mma and Krishna are both mentioned in an inscription of 
1157 which states that the whole divinity of Vislma was 
incarnate in King Jaya Harivoman 1*. But neither allusions 
to VishQU nor figures of him^ are numerous and he plays the 
part of an accessory thoirgh respected personage. Garuda, on 
whom he rides, was better known than the god himself and is 
frequent^ represented in sculpture. 

The ^akti of ^iva, amalgamated as mentioned with a native 
goddess, received great honour (especially at Nhatrang) under 
the names of Umi, Bhagavati, the Lady o! the city (Yaug Fo 
Nagar) and the goddess of Kauthara. In another form or aspect 

irftrt, tat oo ooruin fMtiTiU it ia pot ob a iiaga at Uia tanpla of Mababit, 
It ia about 2 feat lo uiohao broad; a nlver caM with a raundod and oma* 

maotod top. On ooo tide ia a aio^la face ia bold emboMed work beanos 
mouatachai exaotlr M in tbo nokiialiii^ of Qiampa Is tka took of tbe tompU of 
Uahakut u a half auboiorged ahnna, bam which riaea a atooe lioga on which aro 
carved lour la««a baaring mooctachM. Thera ie Mid to bo a gold kooha eat with 
jaweta at ^tlngarh 8aa .7. ifpAw. Society (Ba&galorah^oLvin.p. 27. Aacordiogto 
Oopinatba Kao, Xadsda /conoyropAy, voL U. p. S3, tha oldeat ksowa Krigaa liavo 
figure* earred on tbem. 
t Corpw, a. pp. 229, 230, 

» BJ.F.BsO. 1904, pp. 959. 9Sa 
' Sea for an account of nma B-BS.B.0, 1901, p. 18. 

US 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[cu. 

ahe was cUlad Malad&ku^h&r&i. There waa also a temple of 
Oajie^a (Sri>Vjo&yaka) at Nhatrang but statues of this ddty 
and of Skanda are rare. 

The Chmeso pilgiim I-Chiog, wciting in the last year of the 
serentb century, iooludea Champa (Lm>I) in the list of countries 
which “greatly reverence the three jewels*’ and contrasts it 
with Fu-nan where a wicked king had recently almost exter¬ 
minated Buddhism. He says “In tboe country Buddhists 
generally belong to the Aiya-sammiti school, and ^ere are also 
a few followers of the AryasairlstiT&din school.” The statement 
is remarkable* for he also telle us that the Sarvfiativftdins were 
the predominant sect in the Malay Archipelago Nourished 
in southern China. The headquarters of the Sammitlyas were, 
according to the accounts of both Hstian Chuang and l*Ohlog, 
in western India though, like the three other schools, they were 
also found in Magadha and eastern India. We also hear that 
the brother and sister of the lElmperor Hareha belonged to this 
sect and it was probably infuential. How it spread to Champa 
we do not know, nor do the inscriptaons mention its name or 
indicate that the Buddhism which they knew was anything but 
the miztiua of the Mahayana with ^aaism^ which prevailed in 
Camboja. 

I-Ching’s statement can hardly be interpreted to mean that 
Buddhism was the official religion of Ch^pa at any rate after 
400 a.D., for the inscriptions abundantly prove that the ^ivaite 
shiinee of Mi-son and Po-nagar were so to speak national 
cathedrals where the kings worshipped on behalf of the country. 
But the Vo-oan inscription (? 250 a.n.), though it does not 
mention Buddhism, appears to be Buddhist, and it would be 
quite natural that a dynasty founded about 150 a.n. should be 
Buddhist but that intercourse with Camboja and probably with 
India should strengthen Sivaism. The Chinese annals mention* 
that 1350 Buddhist books were carried ofi during a Cbineee 
invasion in 506 a.n. and this allusion implies the existence of 
Buddhism and monasteries with libraries. As in Camboja it was 

> a. p. S8I. 

* la Mv«r«l pMMg«« H»lu) Chguis thkt tbor» wen PUaiMtu or oCbor 
6iTait«e in tb» suae Cowui oi Indis whore SoeafiiitiTwi were foofid Be« Wotton, 
7Sen Ckwan^, i. 3S1. SSSi O. 47, 242. tSS* SSS, 260. 

■ Hiopiro. rotmg Pa^ 1910* p SU 

CHAMPA 

149 

peri^ followed by miiuatera rather than by kmge. An 
inacripticm found^ in aouthem Champa and dat^ as S39 a.n. 
records how a athsTira named Buddhaniir&Qa erected two 
vih&ras and two temples (devakula) to Jina and Sankara 
(Buddha and ^iva) in honour of hia deceased father, Shortly 
afterwards there came to the throne IndraTarman U (86O>-890 
a.p ), the only ting of Champa who is known to have been a 
fervent Buddhiat. He did not fail to honour ^va as the patron 
of hie kingdom but like Asoka he was an enthusiast for the 
Dbanna*. He desires the knotriedge of the Dharma; he builds 
monasteries for the sake of the Dbannar he wishes to propagate 
it: he even says that the king of the gods governs heaven by 
the principles of Dharma. He wishes to lead all his subjects to 
the “yoke and abode of Buddha,” to “the city of deliverance.” 

To this end he founded the vihira of Dong Duong, already 
described, and dedicated it to ^ri X<akshn^dra Lokedvara*. 
This last word is a synonym of Avalokita, which also occurs 
in the dedicatory inscription but in a fragmentary passage. 
L^shmindra is explained by other passages in the inscription 
from which we learn that the hiug’s name before he ascended 
the throne was Lakshmlndra BhhmUvara, so that the Bodhi- 
aattva is here adored under the name of the king erected 
the vih&ra according to the custom prevalent in ^Ivaite temples, 
like those temples this vihlrareceived an endowment oi land and 
slaves of both sexes, as well as gold, silver and other metals*. 

A king who reigned from 1080 to 1086 was called Parama- 
bodhisattva, hut no further epigraphic records oi Buddhism are 
known until the reigns of Jaya Indravarmadeva (1167-1192) 
and his successor Sdryavarmadeva^. Both of these monarohs, 
while worshipping ^iva, are described as knowing or practising 
the jSi&na or dharma of the Mahayana. Little emphasis seems 
to be laid on these expressions but still they imply that the 

* At Y&ng Eor. 8«« Oprfut. a. pp. 297*341. 

* For hii viom 0M hit iascripUoM ia 1604. pp. S6 fi. Set vbe 

•n DOt knovB io h«T» bora BQddhiaU tl>o ipcah oi Dhwva BJ.F.SXi. 1604, 
pp. 622,645. 

* ApporoQtly ionu of deiUM mob u §]<Uaobbidf«4TiA or l4ibsbalDd* 

LokeSvua w«ro ** ^ moo extODt Mpomto exiMnce^ Tbui tlu fonom 

i£ colled e portion of RB.F.B.O, 1904, p. 673. 

* PraeuneU^ in tfa» form of rcMela 

* B.S.F.S.0. 1604, pp. 673-S75. 

160 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [ch. xxxn 

^Uhayana Tvas respected and considered pajt of the royal 
religion. StlryaTarmadoTa erected a building called ^ Heruka* 
hsrmya^. The ^tle is intcreating for it contruns the name of the 
Tantric Buddha Heruka. 

Tho grotto of Phong>nha^ in the extreme north of Champa 
(province of Qaang Binh) must have been a Buddhist shrine. 
Numerous medallions in clay bearing icpresentationB of Buddhas, 
Bodhiaattvas and Dagobaa have been found there but dates are 
wanting. 

It does not appear that the Hinayanist mBuence which 
became predominant in Camboja extended to Champa. That 
influence came from Siam and before it had time to traveree 
Camboja, Champa was already in the grip of the Annamites, 
whose religion with the rest of their civilisation came from China 
rather than India. Chineee culture and writing spread to the 
Oambojan frontier and after the decay of Champa, Camboja 
marks the permanent limit within which an Indian alphabet 
and a form of Buddhism not derived through China have 
maintained themselves. 

A large number of the Chams were converted to Moham¬ 
medanism but the time and circumstances of the event are 
unknown. When Friar Gabriel visited the country at the end 
of the sixteenth contnry a form of Hinduism seems to have been 
still prevalent*. It would be of interest to know how the change 
of religion was effected, for history repeats itself and it is likely 
that the Moslims arrived in Champa by the route followed 
centuries before by the Hindn invad^. 

There arc still about 130,000 Chams in the south of Annam 
and Camboja. In the latter country they ore all Mohammedans. 
In Annam some traces of Hinduism romain, such as mantras in 
broken Sanskrit and hereditary priests called Baiaih. Both 
rehgions have become unusually corrupt but are intereeting as 
showing how beliefs which are radically distinct become dis¬ 
torted and combined in £astom Asia*. 

* a.n.FJs.o. lew, p. vrs. 

* /a 1001, p. IS, and Pamentier. Inwuain i*t ihfwmenU Chant, p. MS. 

' C«.brkkl dQ San Afitoiiio, Brtve y wdadtro rtJalion <U ht ncetttot 4« Stjfv it 
Ctun^M. 1004. 

* Sm for the modern Chams “Chuns" in B.K.g. and and 

Diunnd, "Us Chuus B&ot," B.X.FS.O. IMS, tad "NoUs sur las Chwiis," ib. 
1005-1 

CHAPTER XL 

JAVA AND THE MALAY ARCHIPELAGO 

1 

Ik most of tbo countriee whioh we h&ye been considering, the 
native civilization of the present day is still Indian in origin, 
although in the former territories of Champa this Indian phase 
has been superseded by Chinese culture with a little Mohani' 
roedaniem. But in another area we hnd three succesrive stages 
of culture, indigenous, Indian and Mohammedan, Tl)is area 
includes the Malay Peninsula with a large part of the Malay 
Archipelago, and the earliest* stratum with which we need con* 
cem ourselves is Malay. The people who bear this name are 
remarkable for their extraordinary powers of migration by sea, 
as shown by the fact that languages connected with Malay 
are spoken in Formosa and New Zealand, in Easter Island and 
Msd^ascar, but thrir originality both in thought and in the 
arts life is small. The three stages are seen most clearly 
in Java where the population was receptive sjid the Interior 
acoosrible. Sumatra and Borneo also passed through them in 
a fosliion but the indigenoiis elem^t is still predominant and 
no foreign influence has been able to affect either island as a 
w hole. iHlam gained no footing in Bali which remains curiously 
Hindu but it reached Celebes and the southern Philippines, in 
both of which Indian inffuonce was slight^. The destiny of south* 
eastern Asia with its islands depends on the fact that tho tide 
of trade and conquest whether Hindu, Moslim or European, 
flowed from India or Ceylon to the Malay Peninsula and Java 
and thenco northwards towards China with a reflux westwards in 
Champa and Camboja. Bunna and Sism lay outside this track. 
They reedved their culture from India mainly by land and w*ere 
untouched by Mohammedanism. But the Mohammedan current 

^ J bar* noi been «ble xc find Miytbiag iwr* Uiaq cacuiil ufi mood-liftnd 
KM«ni«nta to tho (bet lodian wtiguitiM bAT* b«eo feud Ic tboM i^&ada. 

162 

BUDDHISM OUTBIDS INDIA 

[gh. 

wMch effected the Malays was old and continuous. It started 
from Arabia in the early days of the Hijra and had nothing to 
do with the Moalim invasicms which entered India by land. 

2 

Indian ciTilisatioc appean to have existed in Java from at 
least the fifth century of our era^. Mach light bse been thrown 
on its history of late by the examination of inscriptions and of 
fairly ancient literature but the record still remains fragmentary. 
There are considerable gaps r the scat of power shifted from one 
district to another and at most epochs the whole i&iand was not 
subject to one ruler, so that the title hing of Java merely 
indicates a prince pre>emineut among others doubtfully sub* 
ordinate to Hm. 

The name Java is probably the Sanskrit Jatia nsed in the 
sense of grain, espeolEblly zoillot. In the Ramayana^ the monkeys 
of Hannman are bidden to seek for Stti in various places in¬ 
cluding Yava-dvipa, which contains seven kingdoms and pro¬ 
duces gold and silver. Others translate these last words oe 
referring to another or two other islands known as Gold and 
Silver Land. It is probable that the poet did not distinguish 
clearly between Java and Sumatra. He goes on to say that 
beyond Java is the peak called ^i^a. Tbie is possibly the same 
as the Yavaketi mentioned in 4D9 a.d. by the Indian astronomer 
Aryabbatta. 

‘ TlMf* is oo Uek of soholsrly sod sckoUfic works sbout Jsvs, bot iboy sre 
mostly vrfUea la Patch sad dlsaonaboM oa ^toeisl ere mora numerous 
tbsa gsosrsi sorrsys of JsTsxtoM bistory, Utsretore sad erchitectoie. Porbsps tbo 
boot ssosrsl eccount of tbo Hxodu period ia Jsve wifi be found ia tbs ohspter eoB* 
Cribatsd by Koni to tbs publleetiw ceDed i^tertand* ladii {Amsterdam, ItU, 
chsp. VL n. pp. Si^248). The sbundaet publieetions of tbs Betevieseob Graoob 
sehsp Tss Xdctstea on WeteDselis(>psa ooopHes FsrAewZe&spett, ifotvies. sad the 
laHteha Tool-, Land-, ss FoUwiiunde (sited hers se Tijdaekrijt), 
eU of vhiob contein aumsroas sad importanC srticke oa history, philolo^, rsUgioa 
sod sxtthmology. Tbs Isst is trastsd speslslly in the pobUcatioot ./frsKses* 

logitck OndtTto*k of /sea «n ifodvrs. Vetb's Jaw, vole l and rv. and various 
articks in. the Sitc^dopaaiU van NtderlanifcA-IndU may also be consol ted. I hsTs 
endssTOursd to mention tbs mere Laportani odltiena of JavuMee books as veil as 
wo^ epeelally sdtb tbo old reUgioo in ths notes to tbeee chaptsn. 

Althoagh Datob ortbegtapby Is nsither toovsnicat not familiar to most readers 
1 bars thought it bsttsr to pteesrve it in uanseribinf Javsnees. Tn this system of 
transerfptioii yay; tj voh; djwj; sjsihi v^v; oo^u. 

* BSm. TV. 40, 30. YaTadvIpan ssptarijyopabobhitam SuvaroarQpyakadvfpaiB 
SQT ajpak aramap . 

XL] JAVA AHID TEE MALAY ARCBIPBLAGO 153 

Sifloe tbe Kamayana is a product of gradual growth it is 
not easy to assign a deSnite data to fthia passage, hut it is 
probably not later than the first or second century a.D. and an 
early date is rendered probable by tbe fact that the Alexandriaa 
Geographer Ptolemy (c. 130 a.d.) mentions^ 'la^aSiov ^ 

2<tffaBUv and by Tarious notices collected from inscriptions and 
from Chinese bistoriaoe. The annals of the Ziang Dynasty 
(608^56 A.D.) in speaking of tbe countries of tbe Southern 
Ocean say that in the rdgn of Hsuan Ti (73-40 b.c.) the 
Romans and Indians sent envoys to China by that routeS thus 
indicating that the Archipelago was £re<juented by Hindus. The 
same work describee under the name of Lang-ya-hau a country 
which professed Buddhism and used tbe Sanskrit language and 
states that the people say that their country was established 
more than 400 years ago*/* Lang-ya-hsiu has been located by 
some in Java by others in the Malay Peninsula, but even on the 
latter supposition this testimony to Indian ui£uence in the Far 
Bast U still important. An inscription found at Kedah in the 
Malay Peninsula is believed to be older than 400 a.d.^ Ho 
more definite accounts are forthcoming before the fifth or sixth 
century. Fa-Hsien* relates bow in 418 he returned to China 
from fa d ift by sea and “arrived at a country called Ya^•va^.** 
"In this country” he says “heretics and Brahmans flourish but 
the law of Buddha hardly deserves mentioning*.” Three in¬ 
scriptions found in west Java in the district of Bnitenzorg are 
referred for p^eographic reasons to about 400 A.n. They are 
all in Sanskrit and eulogise a prince named POr^varman, who 
appears to have been a Vishnuite. Tbe name of his capital is 

< Ptobuir’e Otfiffrephy. m 2. S9 (m« bIm vm. 2?. 10). TojMa* (S 
S fn/niff St Xi'jfrtii t «?faf xaJ frt jcfvti* 

roUU, ^ ireut ratt 

■ The MiIaUa PifiltS of dMbUul but apt yvy )&{« dBt4 bIm mBotioaa voyBg«« 
t«CkiDik 

* OroenavolCt, ypta oa ^ Mahy ArtUp^tfiC coMfiVaf/rm C'Ubbm teurat, 
IS7S (ciud b«low u OroBBPTBiSt), p. la CpnflnsBd by th* atAtameat io tbs Miag 
badbIs book S24 tbM « 14SS tbe Jatbscm mii tbox kingdoco had been fpuaded 
137e y«*n b«fcr*. 

« EBre io FtfW. e« ifed. S. Ak •. F. A/i Lett. 3 Rke. z. 18$4. p^ 

* CbBp. XU p> liS, Bitd QroBneroIdt, pp. 6^. 

* Hb porhipe laadad is th« pmrnt disu^et ol ReabtiJig “vb«n soooriing te 
OBtlvp tr^toPo the first Hiadu Mttkreent wbb sihuvUd BttbBttmie*' (OreeuPVBldt, 
p.4). 

154 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE IHDIA 

[ca. 

deciphered ae Naruiii& or Tanixu&. In 435 according to the Liu 
Sung annals* a king of Ja-Ta*da named Shih-li-pa*da-do-a-2ai-pa- 
mo 9Cai tribute to China. Xbe Ifing’a nEune probaUy represents 
a Sanskrit tide beginning with Sr!*P&da and it ib noticeable that 
two footprints are carved on the etonea which bear P^rnavarman’s 
inscriptions. Also Sanskrit inscriptions found at Koetei on the 
east coast of Borneo and considered to be not later than the 
fifth century record the piety and gifts to Brahmans of a King 
Mhlavaiman and mention his father and grandfather^. 

It follows from these somewhat disjointed facts that the 
name of Yava^vipa was known in India soon after the Christian 
era, and that by the fifth century Hindu or hinduized states 
had been established in Java. The discoveiy of early Sanskrit 
inscriptions in Borneo and Champa confirms the presence of 
Hindus in these seas. The T'ang annals’ definitely of 
Kaling. otherwise called Java, as lying between Sumatra and 
Bali and say that the inhabitants have letters and under> 
stand a little astroQon:ty. They further mention the presence of 
Arabs and say that in 674 a queen named Sima ascended the 
throne and ruled justly. 

But the certain data for Javanese history before the eighth 
century are few. For that period we have acme evidence from 
Java itself. An inscription dated 654 $aka (» 732 a.n.) dis¬ 
covered in Kidoe celebrates the praises of a king named 
Sanjaya, son of King Sanna. It contains an account of the 
dedication of a linga, invocations of ^iva, Brahmi and Visbpu, 
a eulogy of the king’s virtue and learning, and praise of Java. 
Thus about 700 a.D. there was a Hindu kingdom in mid Java 
and this, it would seem, was then the part of the island most 
important politically. Buddhist mscriptions of a somewhat later 
date (one is of 776 a.n.) have been found in the neighbourhood 
of Pramb^nom. They are written in the Hagari alphabet and 
record various pious foundations. A little later again (909 and 
940 a.D.) are the inscriptions found on the Dieng (Dihyang), a 

> 6rMii€V«ldt, p. 9. Tba tnoMription* ol ebaraettn giren in tiw fellow* 

Aspafios do not repcvMotthoiDodom sound bot •eam pittiftad (tJiougb thB^caimoC 
bo regardod m bj Um ioUaocM coll«ct«d m JuU«a'» MAM* pwr JMiiffrtr 

rt trenjerirt Ua soM rnnacriu. Ponilly ib* afllablea Do*A*Io.pa*ttO ar» partly 
corrupt Bod wsiobow or other repnMOt Ptiatvannao. 

* Ktm in VstL m iTcdcd. AJtL lMi.ZS.SLP. 1882. 

* OroBborcldt, jip. 12, 13 . 

i 

XL] JAVA AyP THE MALAY ARCHIPELAGO 166 

lonely mountain plateau on which are eoTeral Braho^anio 
ahrmea in fair preservation. There is no record of their builders 
but the NewT'ang Annals say that the tojb^ residence was oalled 
Java hut “on the mountains is the district Laiig*pi*ya where 
the Mng frequently goes to look at the sea*.” This may possibly 
be a teference to pilgrimages to Pieng. The inscriptions found 
on the great monument of Boroboedoer throw no light on the 
drcumstances of its foundation, but the character of the writing 
makes it Ukely that it was erected about 860 and obviously by 
a king who could command the services of numerous workmen 
as well as of skilled artists. The temples of Pramb&nam are 
probably to be assigned to the nest century. All th»e buildings 
indicate the existence from the eighth to the tenth century of 
a considerable kingdom (or perhaps kingdoms) in middle Java, 
comprisiDg at least the regions of Mataram, K6doe and the 
Pieng plateau. From the Arabic geographers also we lean, that 
Java was powerful in the ninth contuiy and attacked Q^ar 
(probably Khmer or Camboja). They place the capital at the 
mouth of a river, perhaps the Solo or Brantas. If so, there 
must have been a prisoipality in east Java at this period. This 
is not improbable for aicheeological evidence indicates that 
Hindu civilisation moved eastwards and flourished flret in the 
west, then in mid Java and finally from the ninth to the fifteenth 
centuries in the east. 

The evidence at our disposal points to the fact that Java 
recwved most of its dviJiaatioa from Hindu colonists, but who 
were these colonists and from what part of India did they come? 
We must not think of any sudden and definite conquest, but 
rather of a continuous current of inunigration starting peihape 
from several springs and often merely trickling, but occasionally 
swelling into a flood. Native traditions collected by Raffles* 
ascribe the introduction of Brahmardam and the $aka era to 
the sage Tritresta and represent the invaders as coming from 
Kaluga or from Gujarat. 

The difference of locality may be due to the fact that there 
was a trade route ruoning from Broach to Masulipatam through 
Tagara (now Ter). People arriving in the Far East by this route 
might be described as ceming eitlicr from Kalinga, where they 

> CrMiMTildt. p. 14. 

• fitjCofy »/Jdw, Tol. c. chap. x. 

11 

a xsL 

156 BUDI>RI8M OUTSIDE INDIA [cs. 

embariced, or from Gnjwat, their countiy of oi^. Dubious 
as is the authority of these legends, they perhaps preserve the 
facts in outline. The earliest Jaranese inscriptions are writtoa 
in a variety of the Vengi script and the T'ang annals call the 
island Kaling as well as Java. It is therefore probable that 
early tradition represented Ralinga as the home of the Sindu 
invaders. But later immigrants may have come from other 
parts. Fa-Halen could no Buddhists in Java in 418, bnt 
Indian forms of Mahayanism indubitably flourished there in 
later centuries. The KaJasan inscription dated 778 a. D. and 
engraved in NAgari characters records the erection of a temple 
to Tfijft and of a Mahayanist monastery. The change in both 
alphabet and religion suggests the arrival of new influences from 
another district and the Javanese traditions about Gujarat are 
said to w echo among the bards of western India and in 
such proverbs as, they who go to Java come not baoh^. In the 
period of the Hinmish and Arab invasions there may have been 
many motives for emigration from Gujarat. The land route to 
Kalinga was probably open and the sea route offers up great 
difficulties*. 

Another indication of connection with north-western India 
is foiuid in the Chinese work Kao Chuan (619 a.n.) or 
Biographies of Eminent Monks, if the country there called 
She-p'o can be identified with Java^. It is related that Gno*^ 
varman, son of the long of Kashmir, became a monk and, 
declining the throne, went first to Ceylon and then to the 
kingdom of Sh5*p'o, which be converted to Buddhism. He died 
at Nanking in 481 s.c. 

T&ran&tha* states that Indo-China which he calls the Koki 
country^, was first evangelieed in the time of Asoka and that 

^ Ja«kioa. Cambodja. App. IV. io Bombay OasetUer, tq). i, part I. ISM. 

' it li 4l0O pcMib^ that vben Uu JavueM MdiUoM Kaliog tlu; 

mean the Ualay PaniiuuU. ia tAow regiou vara eoaicDOnly knovn u 

g«Ti"g tbay came from K&Uaga «>d ia CioM tbo ptru of the Peolaiula 

vhon they vere nuaeraue ««r« aUo ciilsd Kiiing. 

* Bm for tbie QOMtion PelUot m lOOi, pp. 274 ff. Alao Soblegol i& 

To*7tf Paa, 1S09, p. 247, and Charaium, »t. 1904, p. ISA 

* Chap. xtTnc. Sctoofoor, p. 2d2. 

I ThoQ^ be oxpiaMly Include# Camboja and Ohanpa ia Kobt it ia only right 
ay that be montiooi Naa-gliag {m Yava-dvipa] wparuely In aaothet c^umantioi) 
togetfaerwitli Ceyloa. Bnt U Boddhiata pa w ed in any oumbera from India t« Camboja 
aodvice WM, tbey probably appeared is Java aboot the ausotise. or ather later. 

XL] JAVA AND T£/£ MALAY ARCEIPSLAQO 167 

MaKayauism was introduced Uiere by the disciples of Vasu* 
bandliu, who probably died about 860 a. D., so that the actmty of 
bis followers would take place in tbe fifth century. Ho also says 
that many clergy from the Koki country were in Madhyadeia 
from the time of Dhannap64a (about 800 a, n.) onwards, and 
tbeee two statements, if they can be accepted, certainly explun 
the character of Javanese and Cambojan Buddhism. T&ranitha 
is a confused ^d untrustworthy writer, but his statement about 
the disciples of Vasubandhu is conBrmed by the fact that 
Dign&ga, who was one of them, is the only authority cited in 
the Kamah&ylnikan^. 

The fact that the lenns connected with ricse cultivation are 
Javanese and not loan-words indicates that the island had some 
indigenous civilization when the Hindus first settled there. 
Doubtless tJiey often cwne with military strength, but on the 
^7holo as colouists and teachoi’s rather than as conquerors. I'ho 
Javanese kings of whom wo know most app^ to have been 
not members of Hindu dynasUes but native princes who had 
adopted Hindu culture and religion. Sanskrit did not oust 
Javanese as the language of epigraphy, poetry and even rebgious 
literature. Javanese Buddhism appears to have preserved its 
powers of growth and to have developed some special doctrines. 
But Indian influence penetrated almost aU institutions and is 
visible even to-day. Its oiistonce is still testified to by the 
alphabet in use, by such titles aa Arjo, Radja, Praboe, Dipati 
(= adliipati), and by various superstitions about lucky days and 
horoscopes. Communal land tenure of the Indian kind sdll 
eaials and in former times grants of land were given to priests 
and, as in India, recorded on copper plates. OSerings to old 
statues are still made and the Tenggerese* are not even nominal 
Mohammedans. The Balinese still profess a species of Hinduism 
and employ a Hindu Calendar. 

Fiom the tenth century onwards the history of Java becomes 
a little plainer. 

Copper plates dating from about 900 a,d. mention Mataram. 
A certain Mpoe Sindok was visier of this kingdom in 919, bat 
ten year's later we find him an independent long in east Java. 

> Sm KamshA 9,10, sod WatCors. Yin n. pp, 200-214. 

• Tbey prewm to nuu eiMit Uu oM aivilis&tim of MftdisptUub 6 m th» 
ftiticlo '‘TsagoTMua'’ m BAcydopatiu nm HedtriandteH-IndU. 

158 

BUDDBI8N 0UT8WB INDIA 

[CH. 

He tired at leaet tT>rent 7 -fire years longer and bia poseeeeiona 
included Fasoeroean, Soerabaja and Kedbi. Hie great-grandson, 
Er*Iangga (or Laoggliya), is an important figore. Er-langga'e 
early life was inrolred in war, but in 1032 be was able to call 
himeelf, though perhaps not with great eoirectnesa, king of all 
J&Ta. His memory has not endured among the Javanese but is 
still honoured in the traditions of Bali and Javanese literature 
began in his reign or a little earlier. The poem Aijuna-viv&ha is 
dedicated to him, and one bock of the old Javanese prose 
trsnslation of the Hahabharata bears a date e<;uivalent to 
996a.n.> 

One of the national heroes of Java is Djajabaja^ who is 
supposed to have lived in the ninth century. But tradition 
must be wrong here, for the free poetic rendering of part of the 
Mababharata called Bhkrata'Vuddha, composed by Mpoe S$dah 
in 1157 a.D., is dedicated to him, and his reign must therefore 
be placed later than the traditional date. He is said to have 
founded the kingdom of Baha in Kedlri, but his insoriptions 
merely indicate that be was a worshipper of Vishnu, literature 
and art fourishcd in east Java at tins period for it would seem 
that the Kawi Bamayaaa and an ore poelica c^ed Vritta- 
saticaya* were written about 1160 and that the temple of 
Panataran was built between 1160 and 1176, 

In western Java we have an inscription of 1030 foimd on 
the river Tjitjatih. It mentions a prince who is styled Lord of 
the World and native tradition, confrmod by inscriptions, 
which however give few details, relates that in the twelfth 
century a kingdom called Podjadjaran was founded in the 
Soeoda country south of Batavia by princes from Toemap6I in 
eastern Java. 

There is a gap in Javanese history from the reign of Bjajabaj a 
till 1222 at which date the Pararaton*, or Book of the King s of 
ToemapSl and Mad}apahit, begins to furnish information. The 
Sung annals^ also give some account of the island but it is not 

’ Sm S«n), SeiM-UtAin t. ud □. 1871. Ju^boU, Drtt Boeien 

Kw \ei ifoMUdroM, 1893, a&d ii. ffirSuponnoo, 191t. Thu iMt is 

44t«d^4ks 913 -998 A.P. 

* Or 

* 5m Ou^vaantcA* Bt,id*%dic3tt, e6it««i Eero. 1900, and KVUe 

&Hl«aya, aditad aad tnaalaWd b/ the saoe, 1S7& 

* Coapowd in 1818 a.p. 

* Granaraldt, p. 14, 

XL] JAVA AND THE MALAY ARCHIPELAOO i6d 

clear to what years their description refers. They imply, however, 
that there was on organised government and that commeroe 
was flouiiehlng. They also state that the inhabitante “pray to 
the gods and Buddha'": that Java was at war with eastern 
Sumatra: that embassies were sent to China in 992 and 1109 
and that in 1129 the Emperor gave the ruler of Java (probably 
Bjajabaja) the title of king. 

The Fararaton opens with the fall of Daha in 1222 which 
made Xoemap^, known later as Singasori, tbe principal kingdom. 
Five of its kings are enumerated, of whom Vishnuvardhana was 
buried in the celebrated shrine of Tjandi Bjogo, where he was 
represented in the guise of Buddha. His suooessor ^ BajesO' 
u&gara was praised by the poet Prapontja^ as a zealous Buddhist 
but was known by the posthumous name of i^vabuddba. Ho 
was the first to use the name of Slngaairi and perhaps founded 
a new city, bat the kingdom of Toemap^ came to an end in hie 
xeign for he was slain by Djaja Katong*, prince of Daha, who 
restored to that kingdom its previous primacy, but only for a 
short time, since it was soon supplanted by Madjapohit. The 
foundation of state is connected with a Chinese invasion of 
Java, related at some length in the Yuan annals*, so that we 
are fortunate in possesring a double and fairly consistent account 
of what occurred. 

We learn from these sources that some time after Khubilai 
Khan bad conquered China, he sent missions to neighbouring 
countries to demand tribute. Tbe Javanese had generally 
accorded a satisfactory reception to Chinese missioDs, but on 
this occasion the king (apparently Bjaja Katong) maltreated 
the envoy and sent him back with his face cut or tattooed. 
Khubilai could not brook this outrage and in 1292 despatched 
a punitive ejrpedition. At that time Baden Vidjaja, the son- 
in-law of K^rtanagara, had not submitted to Bjaja Katong and 
held out at Madjapabit, a stronghold which ho had founded 
near the river Brantas. Ho offered his services to tbe Chinese 
and after a two months* campaign Baba was captured and 
Bj aj a Katong killed. Baden Vidjaja newfound that he no longer 

^ la vorii commnnty oft]l«d “Ni(»nl(nSUg»iM” (»d. 5niid««, 

OtrtooUtAa^ lit. 1 B 02 ), but it ii lUMd that lU ml name ii ** Defavsre* 

8MWk” Sm TijtUcAriJt, tn. 1»14. p. 1S4. 

» 0* * Qro*n*?«Mt, pp. 

160 BU£>DiiI8M OUTSIDE INDIA [ch. 

needed bis Chinese allies. He troachcrouelj massacred some 
and prepared to fight the rest. But the Mongol generals, seeing 
tlie difficulties of campaigning in an unknown country without 
guides, prudently returned to their mester and reported that 
they bad taken Baba and ItilJed the insolent king. 

Madjapahit (or Wilwatikta) now became the premier state 
of Jara, and had some permanency. Eleven sovereigns, in* 
eluding three queens, are enumerated by the Pararaton until 
its collapse in 1466. We learn from the Ming annals and other 
Chinese documents' that it had considerable commercial 
relations with China and sent frequent missions: also that 
Palembang was a vassal of Java. But the general impressiort 
left by the Pararaton is that during the greater part of its 
existence Madjapatut was a distract^ and troubled kingdom. 
In 1403, as we know from both Chinese and Javanese sources, 
there began a great war between the western and eastern 
kingdoms, that is between Madjapabit and Balambangon in the 
extreme east, and in the fifteenth centmy there was twice an 
interregnum. Art and literature, though not dead, declined and 
events were clearly tendii^ towards a break-up or revolution, 
This appears to have been consummated in 1468, when the 
Pararaton simply says that King Pa^ansalas III left the 
KralM, ox royal residence. 

It ie curious that the native traditions as to the date and 
circumstances in which Mad japahit fell should be so vague, but 
perhaps the end of Hindu rule in Java was leas sudden and 
dramatic than we are inclined to think. Islam bod been making 
gradual progress and its last opponents were kings only in title. 
The Chinese mention the presence of Arabs in the seventh 
century, and the geography called Tinff-yai SMn^-lan (published 
in 1416), which mentions Griase, Socrabaja and Madjapahit as 
the principal towns of Java, divides the inhabitants into three 
classes: (a) Mohammedans who have come from the west, “their 
dress and food is clean and proper”; (6) the Chinese, who axe 
also cleanly and many of whom are Mohammedans; (c) the 
natives who ere ugly and uncouth, devil-worahippers, filthy in 
food and habite. As the Chinese do not generally speak so 
severely of the hinduized Javanese it would appear that 
Hinduism lasted longest among the lower and more savage 

* Oroeaeveldt, pp. 34>SS. 

XL] JAVA AND TBE MALAY ARCBIPELAOO lei 

classes* Q<nd that the Moslims stood on s higher level. As in 
other countries, the Arabs attempted to spread Islam from the 
time oi their first appearance. At first they confined their 
propaganda to their native vivee and dependents. Later we 
hear of veritable apostles of Islam each as Malik Ibrahim, and 
Raden Rah[nat> the ruler of a town oalled Ampel^ i»hlcb became 
the head quarter of Islam. The pTincee whose territory lay 
round Madjapahit were gradually converted and the extinction 
of the last Hindu yirigdnm became inevitable^. 

3 

It is lemarkabio that the great island of Sumatra, which 
eeems to lie in the way of anyone proceeding from Indio cast- 
wEkrds and la dose to the M^^y peoinsula, should in all ages 
have proved less accessible to invaders coming &om the west 
than the more distant Java. Neither Hindus, Arabs nor 
£uropeans have been able to establish their infiucnce there in 
the some thorough manner. The cause is probably to bo found 
in its unhealthy impenetrable jui^Iee, but eveu so its 
relative isolation remains singular. 

It does not appear that any prince ever claimed to be king 
of aU Siunatra. For the Hindu period we have no indigenous 
literature and our scanty knowiedge is derived from a few statues 
and inscriptions and from ztoticea in Chinese writings. The 
latter do not refer to the island as a whole but to several states 
such as Indiagiri nesu* the Equator and Kandali (afterwards 
called San-bo-tsai, the Sabaza of the Arabs) near Palembang. 
The of the liang dynasty eay that the customs of 

were much the seme as those of Camboja and appor* 
ently we ate to understand that the country was Buddhist, for 
one long viabed the Emperor Wu-ti in a dream, and his son 
addressed a letter to His Majesty eulogising his devotion to 
Buddhism. Kandali Is said to have sent three envoys to China 
between 454 and 619. 

I Kenr 8o«nbaj^ IthtaJd thfttlwiQAm»d«d«usbUroi tb«kinsof ObMapa, 

Md tliAt the kiag of Uedjepabit werried ber steter. For the ccoMoUoa batveea 
tba Toftl of Jar* aad Champa at this period Me Maepdro la Taunf Poo. 

lOi 1, pp. tt., and (he refecooce* (e Cbampo in NdjaraMU^ama. 15,2, and 9S. 4 

a Sea l^aflea, ehap. X, lor Jaraoeae tratUUou reapectiog Che deoUne and fall oi 
Madjapahit. 

102 

£UI>DB28M OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

Tho Chineeo pilgrim lOhing^ Tinted Sumetre twice, once 
foT two months in 672 end snbeequently for some years (ehout 
688-606). He tells us that in the islands of the Southern Sea, 
"which axe more than ten countrie8>*’ Buddhism flourishes, the 
eohool almost uniTersally followed being the MMasarr&stiT&da, 
though the Sammitfyas and other schools hare a few adherents. 
He calls the country where he soj oumed aod to which these state¬ 
ments primarily r^er, Bhoja or ^ribboja (Fo-shih or Shib-U-fo- 
ehih), adding that its former name was Malayu. It is conjectured 
that Shih-U'fO'Shih is the place later known as San-bo-tsai^ and 
Chinees authors seem to consider that both this place and the 
earlier Kandali were roughly speaking identical wi^ Palcmbang. 
Inching tells ur that the king of Bhoja faroured Buddhism and 
that there were more than a thousand priests in the city. Gold 
was abundant and golden flowers were offered to the Buddha. 
There was commimication by ship with both Tudia and China. 
The Hiuayana, he says, was the form of Buddhism adopted 
“exoept in Malayn, where there are a few who belong to the 
Mahay ana.” This is a surprising statement, but it is impossible 
to suppose that an expert like 1-Ching can have been wrong 
about what he actually saw in ^rSbhoja. So far as his remarks 
apply to Java they must bo based on hearsay and have less 
authority, but the sculptures of Boroboedoer appear to show 
the influence of Mulusarr&stiv&din literature. It must be 
remembered that this school, though nominally belonging fo 
the Hinayana, ocuno to be something very different from the 
Theravida of Ceylon, 

The Sung annals and subsequoit Chinese writers know tho 
same district (the modem Palcmbug) as San-bo*tsai (which may 
indicate either mere change of name or the rise of a new city) 
and say that it sent twenty*one envoys between 960 and 1178. 
The real object of these missions was to foster trade and there 
was evidently frequent interccorse between eastern Sumatra, 
Champa and China. Ultimately the CHunese seem to have 
thought that the entertainment of Sumatran diplomatists cost 
more than they were worth, for in 1178 the emperor ordered 
that they shonid not come fo Court but present themselves in 

' S«« Takakuaa. A rword of tin nltgion. pp. xl to zHi. 

* la a4)otb«r prwiueulion the ebarMMn *ro r«d Siva-fo chAi. The mcAoioff 
appCiui Uj W Tb« Three Buddhio. 

XL] JAVA A^D THE MALAY ARCHIPELAQO H3 

the province of Fu-kien. The Annals sCata that Sanskrit writing 
waa in use at San bo-taai and lead us to suppose that the 
ooimtrj was Buddhist. They mention several kings whose 
names or titles seem to begin with the Sanskrit word In 
1003 the envoys reported that a Buddhist temple had been 
erected in honour of the emperor and they received a present 
of bells for it. Another envoy asked for dreesea to be worn by 
Buddhist monks. The Uing fl-nnaia aIoa record rniwanna from 
8an*bo*tsai up to 1376, shortly after which the region was 
conquered by Java and the town decayed^. In the fourteenth 
century Chinese writers begin to speak of Su^mln-ta^la or 
Sumatra by which is meant not the whole island but a state in 
the northern part of it called Samudra corresponding to 
Atjeh^. It had relations with China and the manners and 
customs of its inhabitants are said to be the same as in Malacca, 
which probably memis that they were Moslims. 

Little light is thrown on the history of Sumatra by indi¬ 
genous or Javanese montunents. Those found testify, as might 
be expected, to the existence here and there of both Brahman¬ 
ism and Buddhism. In 13i3 a Somatraa prioce named iditya* 
varman, who was apparently a vassal of Madjapahit, erected ao 
image of Mauju^i at Tjandi Djago and in 1S75 one of 
Amogbapd^. 

4 

The Liang and T'ang annals both speak of a coimtry called 
Po^li, described as an isl^d lying to the south>east of Canton. 
Qroeneveldt identihed it with Sumatra, but the account of its 
position suggests that it is rather to be found In Borneo, parts 
of which were undoubtedly known to the Chinese as Po-lo and 
Pu-ni*. The Liang annals state that Po‘U sent an embassy to 
the Emperor WU'^ in 518 bearing a letter which described the 

* &;. 8i-U-au^h«*le*«lui> {s6rttwb&rija) (p«rljap««>Sr1d«?»). 

* The oraquMt however «u iococapUte end ehont 1400 e CHobm edHnCunr 
mlcd there eoioe tune, ^e nune wee obtoged to KoJCen^ wbioh ie eeid to be 
stin tbe Chineee oemt for Pelembeag. 

* Tbe Uing ezprewly itftte that tbe aome was ehenged to Aijeb ebest 
1600. 

* For the identifiofttion of Po*U eee Oreeaeveldt, p. SO, ud Boeo endMcDoug^, 
P<ipa« THbu oj Sonm, cbep. u. It xalght be identibed with BeH, but it is doubtfd 
if Hindu avUiteUoQ bad epread to that iilend or even to eejt Jeve in tho lixUi 
oeatoc;. 

164 

BVDDBISM OVTSIDE INDIA 

[CH, 

country as devoted to Buddhism and frequented by stodents 
of the three vehiolee. If the letter is an authentio dooument the 
statements in it may still be exaggerations, for the piety of 
Wu'U was well known and it is clear that foreign phnc» who 
addressed him thought it prudent to represent themselves and 
their subjects as fervent Buddhists. But there certainly was a 
Hindu period in Borneo, of which some tradition remains A.mAri g 
the natives^, although it ended earlier and left fewer permanent 
traces than in Java and elsewhere. 

The most import^t records of this period ore three Sanskrit 
inscriptions found at Koetei on the east coast of Borneo^. They 
record tlic donatioos mode to Brahmans by King MQlavaman, 
son of A4vavarman and grandsou of Xundaggo. They are not 
dated, but ICern considers for palirographical reasons that they 
are not later than tbc fifth century. Thus, since three genera¬ 
tions am mentioned, it is probable that about 400 a.d. there 
wore Hindu princes in Borneo. The inscriptions testify to the 
existence of Hinduism there rather than of Buddhism: in fact 
the statements in the Cbioesc annals are the only evidence for 
the latter. But it is most interesting to hnd that these annals 
give the family name of the king of Poli as Kau^dinya’ which 
no doubt correspouds to tbc Ku^ogga of the Koctei inscription. 
At least one if not two of the Hindu invaders of Camboja bore 
this namo, and we can hardly be wrong in supposing that 
membem of the same great family became princes in different 
parts of the Far Bast. One explanation of their presence in 
Borneo would be that they went thither from Camboja, but we 
have no record of expeditions from Camboja and if adventurers 
started thence it is not clear why they went to the east coast of 
Borneo. It would be less strange if Kauudinyas emigrating from 
Java reached both Camboja and Eoetei. It is noticeable that 
in Java, Koetei, Champa and Camboja alike royal names end 
in ttfmum. 

* See ud 2deDoMgaU,!.«. p. 12. 

* Set Kfrm, “Uver do Opoebniteo ait EooM" io Vertia^en MtSed. Jfi. Leu. 2 
S. XL Lt. Anotbw mooRpiion opponQtl? wKttos io dobtoed lodka cboraoMn 
but Doi yat dcelpbwod hio beoa leuiid io Saasgac> toutb-vut Borneo. 

* Gmoeveldt, p. SI, The obetMton mey be reed lUe-di.npe eceordias 

juUen'i ostbod. Tlw rofoience is to Ltnig bwk SI 

XL] JA VA AND THE MAIA Y ARQHIPEIAOO I fig 

5 

The architectural monumente of Java are remarkable for 
thoir ase, their number and their beauty. Geograpliicaily they 
fall into two chief groups, the central (Boroboedoer, Prambanan, 
Dieng plateau, etc.) in or near the kingdom of Mataram and 
the eastern (Tjandi Djago, Singasari, Panataran, etc.) lying not 
at the extremity of the island but chiefly to the south of 
Soerebaja. No relic cf antiquity deserving to be called a monn* 
ment has been feumd in western Java for the records left by 
Pflmavarman (c. 400 a.n.) are merely rocks bearing inscriptions 
and two footprints, as a sign that the monarch’s triumphal 
progress is compared to the three steps of Vish^iu. 

The eaxlieet dated (779 a.d.) monument in raid Java, Tjandi 
Kalasan, is Buddhist and Lies in the plain of Prambanan. It is 
dedicated to Tkri and is of a type common both in Java and 
Champa, namely a chapel surmoonted by a tower. In conneo 
tion with it was erected the neighbouring building eddied Tjandi 
Sari, a two-storied monastery for Mahayanist monks. Not far 
distant is Tjandi Sevu, which superficially resembles the 460 
Pagodas of Mandalay, for it conaista of a central cruciform shrine 
surrounded by about 240 smaller separate chapels, every one of 
which, apparently, contwned the statue of a Dhyini Buddha, 
Other Buddhist buildings in the same region are Tjandi Plaosan, 
and the beautiful chapel known as Tjandi Mendut in which a» 
gigantic seated images of the Buddha, Muijufr! and Avolokita. 
The face of the last named is perhaps the moat exquisite piece 
of work ever wrought by the chisel of a Buddhist artist. 

It is not fat from Kendut to Boroboedoer, which deserves 
to be included in uiy list of the wonders of the world. This 
celebrated stdpcr^for in essence it is a hi ghl y ornamented stupa 
with galleries of sculpture rising one abo^ the other on its 
sidee—baa been often described and can be described intelligibly 
only at considerable length. I will therefore not attempt to 
detail or criticize its beauties but will merely state some points 
which are important for our purpose. 

It is generally agreed that it must have been built about 
S60 a.n., but obviously the construction lasted a considerable 
time and there are indications that the architects altered their 
original plan. The unknown founder must have been a powerful 

166 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [csh. 

afld prosperous king for ao one else could have commanded the 
neceasary labour. The stipa aho«9 no aiga of Brahmanio 
influence. It ie purely Buddhist and built for purposes of 
ediflcation. The worshippers performed pradakshini fay walking 
round the galleries, one after the other, and as they did so had 
an opportunity of inspecting some 2000 reliefs depicting the 
previous births of Sikyamuai, his life on earth and finally the 
mysteries of Mahayanist theology, As in Indian pilgrim cities, 
temple guides were probably ready to explain the pictures. 

The selection of reliefs ie not due to the artists’ fancy but 
aims at illustrating certain works. Thus the scenes of the 
Buddha’s life reproduce in stone the story of the Lalita Vistara* 
the JAtaka pictures axe based on the Divygvadina. It is 
interesting to find that both these works are connected with 
the school of the MGlasarvAstiv&dins, which according to I-Ching 
was the form of Buddhism prevalent in the archipelago. In the 
third gallery the figure of Maitreya is prominent and often seems 
to be explaining something to a personage who accompanies him, 
As Maitreya Is said to have revealed five important scripturee 
to Asaii^, and as there is a tradition that the esst of Asia was 
evangelised by the disciples of Asonga ox Vasubandhu, it is 
pt^ble that the delivery and progress of Maitreya's revelation 
is here depicted. The foiuth gaUery seems to deal with the 6ve 
superhuman Buddhas* theirpaxadises and other snpra-mundane 
motto, but the key to this series of sculptures has not yet been 
found. It is probable that tbe highest storey proved to be too 
heavy m its origiiial form and that the central dagoba had to 
be reduced l^t it should break the substructure. But it is not 
Imown what image or relic was preserved in this dagoba. Possibly 
it was dedicated to Vairocana who was regarded as the Supreme 
Being and All-Ood by some Javanese Buddhists*. 

The creed here depicted in stone seems to bo a form of 

^ ViiUr. fcmc«d by tie 4rtiw i. not quite 

tbe mae u cbo one thet f* poMeee. ^ 

• AaUUbK Aioogbeiidclbi, lUtHieeiubbaet, Akibobhya. Veifocsofc eome. 

w il jSjfftbieLmo wu in oomaon 

• ^ KameHyiiuken ealli tbesn tbe Rve 

^ « tbo KuQj-reken^ »bieb eee Mow. Tbe XemehiyinibaTtaachee 
w* of Buddhi omejietiow but for puipwei of wwehip it^ot 

qoito oWr Whiub eboulcl be edoreU u t]ie higbaet P u oot 

XL] JAVA AND THB MALAY ARONIPBLAGO 1G7 

Malmjanism. S&kyamuni is abundantly honoured but there is 
no representation oi his death. This may be because the Lalita 
Vistara treats onJy of his early career, but still the omission is 
ootewoHhj. In spite of the iroportanee of ^&kyamuni, a con* 
siderable if mysterious part is played by the fire superhuman 
Buddhas, and several Bodhisattvas, cepedally Maitreya, Avsto* 
Idta and Manju^. In the celestial scenes ve find nomerous 
Bodhisattvas both male and iemaJe, yet the figures are hardly 
Tantric and there is no sign that any of the personages are 
Brahmanio deities. 

Yet the region was not wholly Buddhist, Not far from 
Boroboedoer and apparently of about the same age is the 
Siv^te temple of Bacon, and the great temple group of Pram* 
banam is dose to Kalasan and to the other Buddhist shrines 
mentioned above, It consists of eight temples of which four are 
dedicated to Brahin&, ^iva, Visbrm and Nandi respectively, the 
purpose of the others being uncertain. The largest and most 
decorat4!d is that dedicated to Siva, containing four shrines in 
which are Images of the god as Uah&deva and as Guru, of 
Gane^ and of !Duxg&. The balustrade is ornamented with a 
series of reliefs illustrating the Ramayana. These temples, which 
appear to be entirely ^ahmanio, approach in style the arohi' 
teoture of esatem Java and prol^bly date from the tenth 
century, that is about a century later than the Buddhist 
monuments. But there is no tradition or other evidence of a 
religious revolution. 

The temples on the Dieng plateau are also purely Brabmanic 
and probably older, for though we have no record of their 
foundation, an inscribed stone dated 800 a.p. has been found 
in this district. The plateau which is 6500 feet high was 
approached by paved roads or flights of stairs on one of which 
about 4000 steps still remain. Originally there seem to have 
been about 40 buildings on the plateau but of these only eight 
now exist besides several stone foundations which supported 
wooden structures. The plaee may have been a temple city 
analogous to Gliuar or ^atmnjaya, but it appears to have been 
desert^ In the thirteenth century, perhaps in consequence of 
volcanic activity. Q'he Dieng temples are named after the heroes 
of the Mahabbarata (Tjandi Ajrdjuno, Tjandi Bimo, etc.), but 
these appear to be late designations. They are rectangular tower- 

268 

£UJ>Dff23M OUTSIVE 122DIA 

like ahrijieft with porches wid a single coUulc within. Figures of 
Br&hmh, ^iva and Vishnu have been discovered, os well as 
spouts to carry off the libation water. 

Before leaving mid Java I should perhaps mention the 
reUtively modem (1436-1440 a.d.) temples of Suku. I have not 
seen these buildings, but they are said to be coarse in execution 
and to indicate that they were used by a debased sect of 
Visbnuites. Their interest lies in the eztraordinaiy resemblance 
which they beat to the temples of Mexico and Yucatan, a 
resemblance “which no one can fail to observe, though no one 
has yet suggested any hypothesis to account for it*.” 

The best known and probably the most important monu* 
ments of eastern Java ate Panataran, Tjandl Djago and Tiwidi 
fiingasari*, 

The first is considered to date from about 1150 a.n. It is 
practically a three-atoried pyramid with a flat fop. The sides 
of the lowest storey are ornamented with a aeries of reliefs 
illustrating portions of the Ramayana, local legends and perhaps 
the exploits of Krishna, but this last point is doubtful*. This 
temple seems to indicate the same stage of belief as Prambanam. 
It shows no trace of Buddhism and though giva was probably 
the principal deity, the scenea represented in its aculpturee are 
chiefly Visimuite. 

Tjandi Djago ia in the province of Pasoerocan. According 
to the Pararaton and the NftgawkrStAgamaS VMmuvardhana 
king of Toemapel, waa buried there. As he died in 1272 or 1273 
A.n. and ^e femplo was already in existence, wo may infer that 
it dates from at least 2260. He was repreeented there in the 
f^ of S^ata (that is the Buddha) and at Waleri in the form 
M Siva. Here we have the custom known also in Champa and 
Camboja of a deceased king being represented by a statue with 
his own features but the attributes of his tutelary deity It is 
strange that a king named after Vishpu should be portrayed in 
^e gujso of Siva and Buddha. But in spite of this impaxtialitv. 
the cult practised at Tjandi Djago seems to have been not a 
nuxtoje but Buddhism of a late Mahayaaiat type. It was 

! ad. wo, voL n. p. 439. 

«. “Tj. SingAMri 8D l'*nat*rjui," 1900. 

» S-KiicWio 7^. T.. L » Volhnh^. 41, J900. p. 27 

BoopesM^a quoted OndertMi, t pp. »- 97 . ^ 

XL] JAVA AN£> THE MALAY ARCHIPBLAOO 169 

doobtleae held that Buddhas and Bodhisattras are identical 
with Brahmanlc deities, but the fairly uimierous p&nthecn 
discovered in or near the ruins consists of suporbuman Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas with their spouses*. 

In form Tjaudi Bjago bos somewhat the appearance of a 
thiee-storied pyramid but the steps leading up to the top 
platform are at one end only and the shrine instead of standing 
in the centre of the platform is at the end opposite to the stairs. 
The figures in the reliefs are curiously square and clumsy and 
recall those of Central America. 

Tjandi Singasari, also in the province of Pasoeroeau, is of a 
different form. It Is erected on a single low platform and con¬ 
sists of a plain rectangular building surmounted by five towers 
such as arc also found in Cambojan temples. There is every 
reason to believe that it was erected in 1278 a.d, in the reign 
of Krdtan&gara, the last king of Toemapel, and that it is the 
temple known as &va-buddhAlaya in which he was commemor* 
ated under the name of ^iva-buddba. An inscription found 
close by relates that in 1361 a d. a shrine was erect^ on behalf 
of the royal family in memory of thoso who died with the king*. 

The NfigarakriCagama represents this king as a devout 
Buddhist but his very title ^ivabuddba shows bow completely 
Sivaism and Buddhism were fused in his religion. The same 
work mentions a temple in which the lower storey was dedicated 
to ^va and the upper to Akshobhya; it also leads us to suppose 
that the king was honoured as an incamatioii of Akshobhya 
even daring his life and was consecrated as a Jina under the 
name of ^jn&nabajredvara*. The Singasari templo is less 
ornamented with reliefs than the others described but has 
furnished numoroos statues of ezcellent workmanship which 
ihustrate the fusion of the Bnddbist and Sivaite pantheons. 
On the one side we have Prajn&pfiramitA, Manjuiri and T&rft, 
on the other Graneta, the Linga, Siva in various forms (Quru, 
Nandfsvara, Mah&kAla, eto.), Butgi and Brahml. Not only is 

* HtyogHvA KowoTBT oaj be ngorded ea e Bfehmenio ^od adopted by tbe 
BuddhijU. 

* See for reeMue aod lofenBcee Arduuol. OndtraotJe, c. pp. 30-40. Tht principal 
ffieuben of the bins'i bouMbold probably Mounitud oaiddo durias; the lunt^ 
weuoDloi 

* Kera to Tiji*. icor T., L. m VoUctnkande, Deal ur, ISIO* p 107. Slmilarij in 
Burma Alotnpro ‘waa popularly roganlad ai a BodhiaaitTA 

no BUDDHISM OVTS2DS INDIA [cs. 

the SiTaite element predomuiant but the Buddhiat figures are 
concerned loss with the veneration of the Buddha than with 
aeceesory mythology. 

Javanese architectnxo and scnlpture are no doubt derived 
from India, but the imported style, whatever it may have been, 
was modified by local inflaencea and it seems impossible at 
present to determino whether its origin should be souglifc on the 
eastern or western side of India. The theory that tho temples 
on the Dieng plateau are Chalukyan buildings appears to be 
abandoned but they and many others in Java show a strllung 
resemblance to the sbnnes fonnd in Champa. Javanese archi¬ 
tecture is remarkable for the complete abs e nce not only of 
radiating arches but of pillars, and consequently of large halls. 
This feature is no doubt due to the ever present danger of 
earthquakes- Many reliefs, particularly those of Panataran, 
show the infiuence of a stylo which is not Indian and may be 
termed, though not very correctly, Polynesian, The great merit 
of Javanew sculpture lies in the refinement and beauty of the 
faces. Among figures executed in India it would be hard to find 
anything equal In purity and daUcaoy to the Avolokita of 
Mendut, the ManjuM now in the Berlin Museum or the Prajni- 
p&ramitfi now at Leyden. 

6 

From the eleventh century until the end of tho Hindu period 
Java can show a contiderable body of literature, which is in 
part theological. It is unfortimate that no books dating from 
an eadier epoch should be extant. The sculptures of Prambanam 
and Borob^oer clearly presuppose on acquaintance with the 
Bamayana, the LaUta Vistara and other Buddhist works but, 
as in Camboja, this literature was probably known only in the 
original Sanskrit and only to tho learned. But it is not unlikely 
that the Javanese adaptations of the Indian epics which have 
come down to us were preceded by her attempts which have 
disappeared. 

The old literary language of Java is commonly known as 
B&8& Kaud or Kawi, that is the language of poetry^. It is 
^ Swtakrit Kftvi, « po«t Sm for JtvuMe llWrsbue Vu dw Tduk in JJtA.S, 
xni. laai, p. 4S, and Uioloopea XntbsrMe. i&. JSlt, p. 1. Alio tbs nrUcU “IJt- 
tmteur" In ibo Bnegc m Ntd^rtanitck-lndO, ftod naop aoUewitt Uw wtlUns« of 
Ken sod Vesh. 

3CLj JA VA AND THE MALA Y ARCHIPELAGO 171 

bovever umplj the predecessor of modem Jay&neee and many 
authoritlee prefer to deeeribe the language of the island os Old 
Jayaneae before the Madjapahit period, Middle-Javanese duT' 
ing that peiiod and New Javanese after the fall of Madjapahit. 
The greater part of this iiteraturo oonsiats of free versions of 
Sanstet works or of a eubstratom In Sanskrit accompanied by 
a Javanese explanation. Only a few Javanese works are origmal, 
that is to say not obviously inspired by an Indian prototype, 
but on the other band neariy all of them handle their materials 
with freedom and adapt rather than translate what they borrow. 

One of tbe earliest works preserved appears to be the Tantoe 
PaoggSlaran, a &eatls6 on cosmology in which Indian and native 
ideas are combined. It is supposed to have been written about 
1000 a.n. Before the foundation of Madjapahit Javanese litera¬ 
ture doiuished especially in the reigns of Erlongga ondDjajabaja, 
that is in the eleventh and twelfth centuries respectively. About 
the time of Erlangga were produced the old prose version of 
tbe Mahabharata, in which certain episodes of that poem are 
rendered with great freedom and the poem called Arjonaviv&ha, 
or the marriage of Arjuna. 

The Bb&ratayuddha^ which states that it was composed by 
Mpoe Sedah in 1157 by order of B^ajabaja, prince of Kediri, is, 
even more than the prose version mentioned above, a free 
rendering of parts of the Mahabharata. It Is perhaps based on 
an older translation preserved in Ball^. The Kawi Bamayana 
was in tbe opinion of Kem composed about 1200 a.n. It foUowe 
in Msentials the story of the Bamayana, but it was appm^ently 
oomposed by a poet unacquainted with Sanskrit who drew h^ 
knowledge from some native source now unknown’. He appears 
to have been a Sivaite. To the eleventh century are also referred 
the Smaradahana and tbe treatise on prosody called Viitta* 
saficaya. All this literature is based upon classical Sanskrit 
modele and is not distinctly Buddhist although the prose 
version of the Mahabharata states that It was written for 
Brahmans, Sivaites a-nd Bnddhieta’. Many other translations 

‘ Edited hy OaoBifig, 1903. 

* A fre^mwit of it is printed in Noittltn. BaUs, Om, in. 1914,103. 

* EpisodM of tee Jsdiaa btr* aiao baao used ae tbe subjsete of JevAsese 

dremee. See Jujoboll, /mfowsWsfAs n achJtnniUdie toonetliMx/rtteUingen u»r itef 

end Hudeopon LebWtOb. PtpaUn SapanU SaiotfUala, 1912. 

* ju^boU, £fm Botltn vn kH Ou4}^vaant6kt MokultUfQla, p. 2$. 

a m. 

12 

172 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[ca, 

or adaptations of Sanskrit work are mentioned, such ae t^e 
Nitidkstra, the S&rasamuccaya, the Tantri (in seyeral editions), 
a prose trandation of the Brahm&ndapurdpa, together with 
grammars and dictionaries. The ahaence of dates makes it 
difBcolt to use these works for the history of Javanese thought. 
But it seems clear that during the Madjapahit epoch, or perhaps 
even before it, a strong oairent of Buddhism permeated Javanese 
literature, somewhat in contrast with the tone of the works 
hitherto cited. Bran dee states that the Sutssoma, Vighnotsava, 
Kofijankarna, Sang Hyang Kamabiylknikan, and Buddha* 
pamutus are purely Buddhist works and that the Tjontakapaira, 
Arjunavijaya, Khgarakr^tagama, Wariga and Bubukshah show 
striking traces of Buddhism^. Some of these works are inaccee- 
sible to me but two of them deserve examination, the Sang 
Hyang Kamah&y&nikan^ and the story of KuRjarakarria^. The 
first is tentatiyely assigned to the Madjapahit epoch or earlier, 
the second with the same caution to the eleventh century. 
I do not presume to criticiae these dates which depend partly on 
linguistic considerations. The Kamah&y&nikan is a treatise (or 
perhaps ertrsotsfrom treatises) on Mahayanism as understood in 
Java and presumably on the normal form of Mahayanism. The 
other work is an edifying l^end including an exposition of the 
faith by no one leea than the Buddha Vairoesna. In easentiab 
it agrees with the Kamah&}'imkan but m det^Is it shows either 
sectarian influence or the idiosyncrasies of the author. 

The Kamsh&y&nikan consists of Sanskrit verses explained 
by a commentary in old Javanese and is partly in the form of 
questions and answers. The only authority whom it cites is 
Bignhga. It professes to teach the Atah&y&na and Mantriyana, 
which is apparently a misspelling for Mantray&na. The emphasis 
laid on Bajra (that is vajra or dorje), ghant&, mudr&, mandala, 
mystio syllables, and Devts marks it as an offshoot of Tantrism 
and it offers many parallels to Nepalese literature. On the other 
hand it is curious that it usee the form Nibkia not Kirv&na*. Its 

‘ AK^otot, Ondtfsoei, 2 . p. Oa Thia abatcTBOQt li 4l)nQiiuiUy cooiSmdd by 
Erom'a iodez Uw pfopef ouneaia tbe NR«;EnLk;«Ui£a4B4 in Ti^d9eirlfl, lvi. 1014, 
pp.4eSd. 

* EdiMd with traac). and boU* by J. Kat ,'» QraTCDbage, 1910. 

^ Bditad vith tnnsL by K. Kean in V«rL do K, AhuOtrmt Wtle%4chttpptn 
UAinaoiaiA.AfiLleU.N-J^. 111. S. 1901. 

* Bat thia probably wji raoe nM niibSon ud fa nat* P*li fonzu Ci. Bajfa, Biya 
lot Vaira, Viyu. 

ICL] JA 7A XJVi> MALA 7 AEOHIPSLAQO 173 

objeot is to teach a neophyte, who ha£ to receive initiation, how 
to become a Buddha^. Zu the second part the pupil is addressed 
aa Jinaputra, that is son of the Buddha or one of the household 
of faith. He is to be moderate but not ascetic in food and 
clothing: be is not to cleave to the Pur&nas and Tantros but to 
practise the P&ramit^. Tliese are defined first os su^ and then 
four others are added*, Under PrajfilipS.7ainit& is given a some¬ 
what obscure account of the doctrine of ^dnyattk Then follows 
the ezpo^ticn of Paramaguhya (the highest secret) and Mabl.- 
guhya (the great secret). Tho latter is defined as being Toga, the 
bh&van&s, iko four noble truths and the ten p&ramitis. The 
former explains the embodiment of Bha^a Vitesha, that is to 
say the way in which Buddhas, gods and the world of pheno¬ 
mena are evolved from a primordial principle, called Advaya 
and apparently equivalent to the Nepalese Adibuddha*. Advaya 
is the father of Buddha and Advayajfi&na, also called Bharilf 
Fra}S&p&raniit&, is his mother, bat the Buddha principle at this 
stage is also called Divarfipa. In the next stage this Bivarfipa 
takes form as Slkkyasinni, who is r^arded as a saperhuman 
form of Buddhahood rather than as a human teacher, for he 
produces from his right left ride respectively Lokeivars and 
Bajrap&ni. These ^ings produce, the first Aksbobhya and 
Ratnasambhava, the second Amit&bha and Amoghariddhi, bat 
Vairocana springs directly from the face of ^Ucyamuni. The five 
B^'perhuman Buddhaa are thus accounted for. From Vairocana 
spring l^vara (^iva), Brahmfik, and Visbtm; from them the 
elements, the human body and the whole world. A considerable 
part of the treatise is occupied with conneoting these various 
emanations of tho Advaya with mystic syllables and in showing 
how the five Buddhas correspo^ to the different skandas, 
elements, senses, etc. Finally we are told that there are five 
Devis, or female counterparts oorrespondii^ in the aanie order 
to the Buddhas named above and called Locan&, Ukmaki, 
Pftjidaravasinl, Tftri and DhitvWvart. Bnt it is declared that 

i adTithiihiktfyoahiDasU. p. 30. Pript&m buCeiiUVMa bhftndbhir, it. Md 
£ca» Msio mohlyia* inaiiodft7»t guEuahysoM bbSTtoh* 

jAtbA Tubl^tib. 

■ Dio4. HI*, bbioli. viry^ dhfina l>n]U. 

* Mutrf, kwunS. mutUti, upeJubi. 

* Tb« KirMciftTyuh* teacbet « tonewhu aamUar doctriM o£ crckUv* «akaa> 
UoAb Av»Iokit4, BnKnt, Siv*, Veh^u tnd oUie» »U «vo|v«d Irom tbe 
BiiddbA ipint and praceod te erolro the world. 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

174 

[CH. 

thd £nt and last of thcee aro tiio same and therefore there are 
reaDy only four Devie. 

The legeod of Kofijarakar^a relates how a deront Yaksba 
of that name went to Bodhicitta^ and asked of Vairocana 
instruction in the holy law and more especially ae to the mysteries 
of lebirth. Yairooana did not refuse but bade bis would-^ pupil 
first visit the realms of Yama, god of the dead. Kuajarakarcia 
did BO, saw the punishments of the underworld, inoluding the 
torments prep^ed for a friend of his, whom he was able to worn 
on his return. Yama gave him some explanations respecting 
the alternation of life and death and he was subsec^uently 
pilvileged to receiTe a brief but more general exposition of 
doctaine from Vairocana himself. 

This doctrine is essentially a variety of Indian pantheism 
but peculiar in its terminology inssmueb as Vairocana, like 
Krishpa in the Bbagavadgitft, proclaims himself to be the All- 
God and not merely tbe chief of the five Buddhas. He quotes 
with approval the saying “you are 1: I am you" and affirms 
the identity of Buddhism and Sivaism. Among the monks* 
there are no mukku (».s. none who have attained liberation) 
because they all consider as two what is really one. “The 
Buddhists say, we are Bauddhas, for the Lord Buddha is our 
highest deity: we are not tbe same as the fSivaitce, for the Lord 
^va is for them the highest deity.” The ^ivaites are represented 
aa saying that the five Ku^ikas are a development or incarna- 
tiona of the five Buddhas. “Well, my son” is the conclusion, 
“These are all one; we are ^va, we are Buddha.” 

In this curious exposition the author seems to imply that 
his doctrine is different from that of ordinary Buddhists, and to 
reprimand them more decidedly than Svaitee. He several times 
uses the phrase Dhaidra, namafy Sivdya (Hail, Lord: ha il 
to Siva) yet he can hardly bo said to favour the Sivaites on the 
whole, for his All-God is Vairocana who once (but only onoe) 
receivee the title of Buddha. The doctrine attributed to tbe 
^ivaitee that the five Kuaikas are identical with tho superhuman 
Buddhas remains obscure*. These five personages are said to be 
often mentioned in old Javanese literature but to be variously 

* Tho OM ol tail vwd, u * aaa» for bho rMtSooc* of Vairocaaa, — 
jMQUliar to our outbor. 

* Thii tarm m%y iaelodo ucotic« a» wll u BoddliiR 

* Sm fortbos ditooMioe m Eeni'i odhioo, p. IS. 

su] JAVA AJ^D TUB MALAYABCBIPBLAOO 176 

enumarated*. Tboy are iden^ed with the five Indras, but 
those Again are said to be the five senses (indriyas). Heooe 
we can find a parallel to this doctrine in the teaching of the 
RamaMy6mkan that the five Buddhas correspond to the fire 
senses. 

Two other special theses are enounced in the story of 
KuAjarahaj^a. The first is Vairocana's analysis of a human 
being, whieh makes it consist of five Atmans or souls, called 
respectively Atman, Cetanitman, Paritman, Nir&tman and 
Antaritman, which somehow correspond to the five elements, 
five senses and five Slundhas. The singular list suggests that 
the author was imperfectly acquainted with the meaning of the 
Sanslait words employed and the whole terminology is strange 
in a Buddhist writer. StUJ in the later Upanisbads* the epithet 
panc&tmaka is appDed to the human body, especially in the 
Garbha Upanisbad which, like the passage here under considera- * 
tioo, gives a psychophysiologioal explanation of the develop¬ 
ment oi ^ embryo into a human being. 

The second thesis is put in the mouth of Yama. He states 
that when a being has finished his term in purgatory he returns 
to life in this world first as a worm or insect, then successively 
as a higher animal and a human being, first diseased or maimed 
and finally perfect. No parallel has yet been quoted to thia 
account of metemp^ohoais. 

Thus the Kufijarakarpa contuns peonliar views which are 
probably seoUrian or individual. On the other hand their 
apparent singularity may be due to our small Imowledgo of old 
Javanese literature. Though other writings are not known to 
extol Vaiiooana as being &va and Buddha in one, yot they have 
no scruple in identifying Buddhist and Brahmanio deities or 
connecting them by some system of emanatioos, as we have 
already seen in the TCAfn AhA y &jiilran . Such an identity is etUl 
more definitely proclaimed in the old Javanese version of the 
Sutasoma J&tal<a‘. It is called PurushMa-^ta and was 

^ A 4 »re the racchpin is aoC w a Indu. 

* Ootbhe. Up. I 00(1 3, oapocuJIy tbo phroM utoiii peocaitnutko fctflre. 

Up. S. BbioM psncatiiuke dolio. Nb. Up. 23. 84 vi pumbeb pan- 
otdhi pAiicatotL 

* 8m Kem, "Over Ce VemoDsieg v4d Cireaioia «n Bsddfcleae op JIt«" is 
Farr, en ilmltd. der A'on. AJead. ra» Wit. AJd. M $fi.5 !3*A ISSk 

For tbe Butucoaittako aM Speyer'a UaoeUUoo of tha J&LakamAU, pp- 20 
Wttt hia ooua asd refarsoceo. It iaKo. 537 is tbo Pali Collection of J&takeA, 

176 

BVDDHISM 0VT8WS INBIA 

[cn. 

composed bj Tantidar who lived at Madjapahit in the reign of 
Baj asanogara (1 ^0-1889 A .n.) • Xq the Indian original Sutasoma 
is one of the previous births of Gotama. But the Javanese 
writer describee him as an Avat&ra of the Buddha who is 
BrahitA, Vishnu and I^vara, and he states that "'The Lord 
Buddha is not different from ^iva the king of the gods....They 
are distinct and they are one. In the I>aw is no dualiam.'’ Tho 
superhuman Buddhu are identified with various Hindu gods 
and also with the five senses. Thus Amifcibha is Mahideva and 
Amogbosiddhi is Vishpu. This is only a slight vaiiation of the 
teaching in the Kamah&yiaikan. There Brabmanio deities 
emE^ate from ^ikyamimi through various Bodhisattvas and 
Buddhas: heie tbo Buddha spirit is regarded as equivalent to 
the Hindu Trimfirti and the various aspects of this spirit can 
be described in either Brahmanic or Buddhistic terminology 
though in reality all Buddhas, Bodhisattvas and gods are one. 
But like the other authors quoted, Tantular appears to lean to 
the Buddhist nde of theae equations, especially for didactic 
purposes. For instance he says that meditation should be 
guided by Loke^vaxa's word and ^ikyamuni’s spirit.*' 

7 

Thus it will be seen that if we take Javanese epigraphy, 
monuments and literature together with Chinese notices, they 
to some extent confirm cue another and enable us to form on 
outline picture, though with many gaps, of the history of 
thought and religion in the island. Fa-Hsien tells us that in 
418 A.n. Brahmanism fiourisbed (os is testified by the inscrip* 
tions of P(lrnavarman) but that tho Buddhists were not worth 
meotionii^. Immediately afterwards, probably in 428, Gui^ 
vorman is s»d to bave converted Sh8*po, if that be Java, to 
Buddhism, and as be came from Kashmir he was probably a 
Sarvistiv&din. Other monks are mentioned os having visited 
the southern seas^. About 690 I-Ohiug says that Buddhism of 
the M^asarvastiv&din school was flourishing in Sumatra, which 
he visited, and in the other islands of the Archipelago. The 
remarkable series of Buddhist monuments in Java ex* 

* Se« h'ujio cat. Nm. U7, 13S. 

SL] JAVA AND TBS MALAY ARCHIPELAGO IV 

teadlBg from about 779 to 900 a.d. confinns his statemout. But 
two gueatioriB arise. Firet^y, is there any ezplauatiou of 
sudden sfiloreeceucd of Buddhism in the Arcbipelago, and next, 
what was its doctrinal character? If> as T&ran&tha s^s, the 
disciples of Vasubandhu evangelized the countries of the East, 
thdi influence might well have been productive about the time 
of I'Ohing's virit. But In say cose during the sixth and seventh 
centuries religious travellers must have been continually 
purno^ying between India and China, in both direerions> and 
some of ^em must have landed in the Archipelago. At the 
beginning of the sixth century Buddhism was not yet decadent 
in India and waa all the fashion in China. It la not therefore 
surprising if it was planted in the islands lying on the route. 
It may be, as indicated above, that some specially powerful 
body of Hindus coming from the region of Guj arat and professing 
Buddhism founded in Java a new state. 

As to the character of this earl^ Javanese Buddhism we have 
the testimony of I-Ching that it was of the MJlasarv&stiv&dio 
school and Hinayanist. He wrote of what he had seen in 
Sumatra but of what he knew only by hearsay in Java and his 
statement offers some dlffloulties. Probably Hinayaoism was 
introduced by Gunavaxman but was superseded by other 
teaohings which were imported from time to rima after they had 
won for themselves a position in India. For the temple of 
(a.D. 779) is dedicated to T&rft and the inscription 
found there speaks of the Mahayana with veneration. The later 
Buddhism of Java has literary records which, so fax as I know, 
are unreservedly Mahayanist but probably the sculptures of 
Borobocdoer axe the most definite expression which we shall 
ever have of its earlier phases. Since they contain images of the 
five superhuman Buddhas and of numerous Bodhisattvas, they 
can hardly be called anything but Mahayanist. But on the 
other hand the personality of Shyamuni is emphaaixed; his life 
and previous births are pictured in a long series of soulptures 
and blaitreya is duly honoured. Similar collections of pictures 
and images may be seen in Burma which differ doctrinaUy from 
those in Java chiefiy by substituting the four human Buddhas^ 
and Maitrcya for the superhmnan Buddhas. Bat Mahayanist 
teaching declares that these Lumen Buddhas are reflexes of 
^ UoUind, KMsapa, ud Kakiuudba. 

178 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [cs. 

coxmterparts of the auperhuman Buddba« so that th& difference 
is not great. 

Mahayanisfc Buddhism in Camboja and at a later period in 
JftTa itself vas inextiicably oornbin^ with Hinduis m , Buddha 
beiog either directly identihed with ^iva or r^arded as the 
primordial spirit from which Siva and all gods spring. But the 
sculptures of Boroboodoer do not indicate that the artists knew 
of any such amalgamation nor have inscriptions been found 
there> as in Camboja, which explain this compound theology. 
It would seom that Buddhism and Brahmanism co*existed in 
the same districts but had not yet begun to fuse doctrinaDy. 
The yflyrtA condition seems to have prsvaiJed in western India 
during the seventh and eighth centuries, for the Buddhist caves 
of Ellora, though situated in the neighbourhood of Brahmanic 
buildings and approximating to them In style, contain sculptures 
which indicate a purely Buddhist cultus and not a mixed 
pantheon. 

Our meagre knowledge of Javanese history makes it didicult 
to estimate the spheres and relative strength of the two religions. 
In the plains the Buddhist monuments are more numerous and 
also more ancient we might suppose that the temples of 
Prambanan indicate beginning of some change in belief. 
Bnt the toiuples on the Bieng plateau seem to be of about the 
same age ae the oldest Buddhist monuments. Thus nothing 
refutes the suppoation that Brahmanism existed in Java from 
the time of the first Hindu colonists and that Buddhism was 
introduced after 400 a.n, It may be that Boroboedoer and the 
Bieng plateau represent the religious centres of two different 
kingdoms. But this supposi^on is not necessary for in India, 
whence the Javuiese received their ideas, groupe of temples are 
found of the same age bnt belonging to different sects. Thus in 
the Khajraho groups some shrines arc Jain and of the rest some 
are dedicated to Siva and some to Vishnu. 

The earliest records of Javanese Brahmanism, the insciip*' 
tions of rOmavannan, are Vishnuite but the Brahmanism which 
prevailed in the eighth and ninth centuries was in the ruAin 
^ivaito, though not of a strongly sectarian type. Brahmk, 
VishQu and ^iva were all worshipped both at Prambanan and 
on the Dicng but ^iva together with Gaue4a, Burgh, and Nandi 

‘ About 950-1050 A. i>, Fvr^ujMzi, UiM, »J indim Af«&tC«cA^ n. p. 141, 

XL] JAVA A2/2) TflE MALAY AROHIPELAQO 179 

is evidently tho chief deity. Au image of ^iva in tho foim of 
Bhat&ra Guru or Mah&giua is instalied in one of the ahrinea at 
Prambanaii. This deity is characteristic cf Javanese Hinduism 
and apparently peculiar to it. He is represented as an elderly 
bearded man wearing a richly ornamented costume. There is 
something in the pose and drapery wliich recalls Chinese art 
and I think the figure is due to infiuence, for at the 

present day many of the Images found in the temples of Bali 
are clearly imitated from Chinese models (or perhaps made by 
Chinese artiste} and this may have happened in earlier ^mes. 
The Chinese annals record several instances of religious objects 
being presented by the Emperors to Javanese princes. Though 
BhatiraGuru is c^y an sspectof ^va he is a suffitaently distinct 
personality to have a shiine of his own like Geneva ^d DuTg&, 
in temples where the principal image of Siva is of another kind. 

The same type of Brahmanism lasted at least until the 
erection of Panataran (c. 1150). The temple appears to have 
been dedicated to ^iva but like Prsmbanan it is ornamented 
with scenes from the Ramayana and from Visbnuite Pur&nas^. 
The Eterature which can be definitely assigned to the reigns of 
Djajabaja and Erlanggais Brahmsnic in tone but both literature 
and monuments indicate that somewhat later there was a re¬ 
vival of Buddhism. Something similar appears to have happened 
in other countries. In Camboja the iasoriptions of Jayavarman 
V7I (c. 1185 a.n.) are more definitely Buddhist than those of 
his predecessors and in 1296 Ohou Ta*kuac regarded the country 
as mainly Buddhist. Parakrama Bahu of Ceyion (1133^1186) 
was cealous for the faith and so were several kings of Siam. I am 
inclined to that this movement was a consequence of the 
Nourishing condition of Buddhism at Pagan in Burma from 
2050 to 1250. Pagan certainly stimulated religion in both Slam 
and Ceylon and Sara reacted strongly on Camboja*. It is true 
that the later Buddhism of Java was by no means of the 
Siamese type, but probably the idea was current that the great 
kings of the world were pious Buddhists and eonseqnently in 

> Sw KimIwI, "RoehndMs MiMonunt KrIsliD* et let baa rcIMi 

Jes tamplea Jo 'm Tij^tokrlp, u. 1909, pp. 97-174. 

• Iq camboja tirt r««oU «««nis to h&v« b««o doublo. Psb Buddbiam enUwl 
from Siam uid QltinMcl/ cooquerod oil otl)«r forma of rtilgioa. bot for aoroo tiroa 
HkhaTuiat Suddluam, wliicK woa older io Camboja, revlrad and nc«vad Court 
patroiia^. 

180 

BVBDHISM 0VTS1T>E INDIA 

[CE. 

most countnu the local ionn of Suddhism, whatorer it 
began to be held in esteem. Java had constant comiQUiucatioii 
with Camboja and Champa and a king of Madjapahit mairied 
a princess of the latter couotiy. It is also posable that a direct 
stimulus may have been received from India, for the statement 
of T&ranitha^ that when Bihar was sacked by the Moham¬ 
medans the Buddhist teachers ded to other regions and that 
some of them went to Camboja is not improbable. 

But though the prestige of Buddhism increased in the 
thirteenth century, no rupture with Brahmanism took place and 
Pali Buddhism docs not appear to have entered Java. The unity 
of the two religioDs is proclaimed: Buddha and ^iva are one. 
But the Kamahkyinikan while admitting the Trimdrti makes 
it a derivative, and not oven a primary derivative, of the 
original Buddha spirit. It has been stated that the religion of 
Java in the Madjapahit epoch was SivEusm with a little Buddhism 
thrown in, on the understanding that it was merely another 
method of formulath^ the doctrine. It is very likely that 
the bulk of the population worshipped Hindu deities, for they 
are the gods of this world and dispense its good things. Yet tlie 
natives still apeak of the old religion as Buddh&gama; the old 
times are “ Buddha times ” and even the flights of stairs leading 
up to the Dieng plateau are oaJled Buddha steps. This would 
hardly be so if in the Madjapahit epoch Buddha bad not seemed 
to be the most striking figure in ^e non*Mobammedan religion. 
Also, the majority Of rdigioui works which have survived from 
this period are Buddhist. It is true that we havo the Ramayana, 
tho Bh&rata Yuddha and many other specimens of Brahmanic 
literature. But those, especially in their Javanese dress, ore 
htUes UUres rather than theology, whereas KomaJi&y&nlkan and 
KuAjorakama are dogmatic treatises. Hence it would appear 
that the reUgious life of Madjapahit was rooted in Buddhism, 
but a most tolerant Buddhism which had no desire to repudiate 
Brolunanisin. 

I havo already briefly analysed the Ssmg Hyang Kamo- 
hky^uikan which seems to be the most authoritative exposition 
of this creed. The learned editor baa collected many parallels 
from Tibetan and Nepalese works and ^milor parallels between 
Javaiiobe and Tibetan iconography have been indicated by 

* CUp. 37. 

XL] JAVA AND THE MALAY AECmPELAQO 181 

Ple^te* and others. The explanation must he that (he late forme 
of Buddhist art and doctrine which flounehed in I^tagadha spread 
to Tibet and Nepal bnt were also introduced into Java. The 
Kamah&T&nikan appears to be a paraphrase of a Sanskrit 
original, perhaps distorted and mutilated. This original has not 
been identified with any work known to eaast in India but might 
well be a Mohayanlst catechism composed there abont the 
eleventh century, The tenuinology of the treatise is peculiar, 
particularly in calling tho tdtimate principle Advaya and the 
more personal manifestation of it Dirai^pa. The former term 
may be paralleled in Hcmacondra and the Amarakosha, which 
give respectively as synonyms for Buddha, advaya (in whom is 
no duality) and advayavidin (who preaches no duality), but 
IDivarfipa has not been found in any other worM. It is also 
remarkable that the Kamahiy&nikan does not teach the 
doctrine of the three bodica of Buddha*. It clearly states* that 
the Dlvardpa is identical with the highest bebg worshipped by 
various sects: with FaramaSdnya, Farama^va, the Furusha of 
the followers of Kapila, the i^guoa of the Vishnuites, etc. 
Many names of sects and doctrines are mentioned which remain 
obscure, bat the desire to represent them all as essentially 
identical is obvious. 

The Kam^fty&nikan recognizes the theoretical identity of 
the highest principles in Buddhism and Vishnuism* but it does 
not appear ^at Vishuu'Buddba was ever a popular conception 
like Sivo-Buddha or that the compound deity called ^iva* 
VisbQu, Hari'Hara, ^ankua'Nai&yana, etc., so well Imown in 
Camboia, enjoyed much honour in Java, Vishnu is relegated 
to a distinctly secondary poation and the Javanese version of 
the Mahabharata is more distinctly ^valte than the Sanskrit 
test. Still be has a shrine at Frambanan, the stoiy of the 
Bamayana is depicted there and at Panataran, and varions 

’ “ BijUiftge tot cUXeaaia van bet UablTdoa op Java " in Siji- TaaJ Z^xnd <» 

van KederlandtA-lndil. ItOl and 1002. 

* This oae of advaya and ndvayavidiii strongibau the mpieioa that tha 
ori^ina ths Advilta philoMphy an to be sought in Bcddhiaa. 

< * Zi URS tho vord trihiya but azpnuly do&nea it ao meaning Eiya, vSk and 
citta. 

* In a paaago vhleh U not tmnalatod froiB tha Sanakrit nod may cborolor* 
rafiect tha laligious eoadition of Jam. 

■ So too b the Sotaaoma J&taka Affloghaoddlu is said to he Viibpo. 

182 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

unedited mauuscripte contain alluaions to hifl worship, more 
eepedaUy to bis incamskfion as Korasimba and to the Ganida 
OQ which be ridee^. 

8 

At present nearly all the inhabitants of Java profees Islam 
although the religion of a few tribes, such as the Tenggarese, is 
still a mijrture of Hinduism with indigenous beliefs. But even 
among nominal Moslims some traces of the older croe<l survive. 
On festival days such monmnenta as Boroboedoer and Pram- 
ban on are frequented by crowds who, if they offer no worship, 
at least take pleasure in examining the ancient statues. Some 
of these however receive more definite honours: they arc painted 
red and modeet ofieiings of flowers and fruit are laid before them 
Yet the respect shown to particular images seems due not to 
old tradition but to laodcni and wrongheaded interpretations 
of their meaning. Thus at Boroboedoer the relief which reprints 
the good torto^ saving a shipwrecked ciew receives offerings 
from women because the small figures on the tortoiso’s back arc 
supposed to be children. The minor forms of Indian mythology 
still flourish. AH classes believe in the existence of raksaaas, 
boeUs (bhOtas) and widadaris (vidy&dhaiis), who are regarded 
as spirits similar to the Jinns of the Arabs. Lakshm! survlvee 
in the female genius believed even by rigid Mohammedans to 
preside over the cultivation of rice and the somewhat disreput¬ 
able sect loiown as Santri Birahis are said to adore devas and 
the forces of nature^. Less obvious, but more important ss more 
deeply affecting the national oharacter, is the tendency towards 
mysUcism and asceticism! What is known ae ngelmoe^ plays 
a considerable part in the religious life of the modem Javanose. 
The word is simply the Arabic 'ilm (or knowledge) used in the 
sense of secret science. It sometimes agnifies mere magio but 
the liigher forms of it, such as the ngelmo^ are said to 

teeoh that the contcmplaUvo life is the way to the knowledge 
of God and the attainment of supernatural powers. With such 

^ Sm JaynbAl) in Bijdrat^ loi 44 T<tal en ran Hed.-IndH. 

IMS. pp. 41S-4S0. 

* Veth, Jaw, vol TV. jv 164, wliolo c»>nUiniii ooeh joforoiftlioo 

about tbe HloSo eloaenU ia modem JtvazwM i«l%ioiL 

* 6m VeUi, t«. 4Bd n^mM ia SiK^fei. wn iftdertotujKi-Zndia 

XL] JAVA AND THE MALAY AECHIP^LAQO 183 

ngelmo« is often connected a belief in metempsychosis* in tho 
illusoiy nature of the world, and in the efficacy of regulating 
the breath. Aaccticism ia still known under the name of t&p& 
and it is said that there are many recluses who live on 
and spend their time in meditation. The affinity of all this to 
Indian religion is obvious, although tJic davanoeo have no idea 
that it is in any way incompatible with orthodox Islam. 

Indian rollon, which in Java is represented merely by the 
influence of the post on the present, is not dead in Bali* where, 
tliDugh much mixed with aboriginal supeistitions, it is still a 
distinct and national faith, able to hold its own against Moham¬ 
medanism and Christianity*. 

The island of Bali is divided from the east coast of Java only 
by a narrow strait bat the inhabitants possess certain characters 
of their own. They are more robust in build, their language is dis* 
tinot from Javanese though belongii^ to the same group, and oven 
the alphabet presents idiosyncrasies. Their laws, social iustitu* 
tions, customs and calendar show many peculiarities, explicable 
on the supposition that they have preserved the andont usages 
of pro'Mohammedan Java. At present tbe population is divided 
into the Bali-Agas or aborigince and the Wong Madjapahit who 
profess to have immigrate from that king^m. The 
references* to Ball seem uncertain but, If accepted, indioate that 
it was known in the middle ages as a religious centre. It was 
probably a colony and dependency of Madjapahit and when 
Madjs^ahit fell it became arefuge for those who were not willing 
to accept Islam. 

Caste is still a social institution in Bali, five classes being 
recognized, namely Brahmans, Ksbatriyas (Sattiyas), Vaisyos 
(Visias), Sudras and Pazias. These distinctione are rigidly 
observed and though intermarriage (which in former times was 
often punished with death) is now permitted, the offspring are 
not recognized as belonging to the caste of the superior parent. 
The bodies of the dead are burned and Sati, which was formerly 
frequent, is believed still to take place in noble families. Pork 

' A]«o to toao orteni 1 a Lombok. Tbe BelliiMO voro foracriy tbe nilijig cUes 
in iliis nlend ead ere itUI found there ic eotuldereUe niunbrae. 

* It hea oven been fuggeeted thet btadiaacd Moleye oarried luiao ieinb tm«ei of 
lodM ali^oa to Madeseecer. See T'ouKg Pao lOOO, p. 93, vbea Zasaliari b 
expleiiMd eeTang (sQod in Malay) Hari. 

* Oroeaerddt, pp. 19, OS, 39. 

SUDDHISM 0UT8WB INDIA 

134 

[CH. 

is the only meat used and, as in other Hindu countries, oxen 
are nerer slaughtered. 

An idea of the Balineee religion ma^ perhaps be given most 
easily by describing some of the temples. These are very abund' 
ant: in the neighbourhood of Bodellng (the capital) alone 1 have 
seen more than ten of considerable size. As buildings they are 
not ancient, for the stone used is soft and doee not last much 
more than dity years. But when the edifices are rebuilt the 
uicifmt shape is preserved and wbat we sco In Bali to*day 
probably represents the style of the middle ages. The temples 
consist of two or more courts surrounded by high walls. Worship 
is performed in the open air; there are various pyramids, seats, 
uid small ahrinee like dovecots but no halls or rooms. The gates 
are ornamented with the heads of monsters, especially lions 
with large ears and wingUke expansions at the side. The outer¬ 
most gate has a characteristic shape. It somewhat resembles an 
Indian gopuram divided into two parts by a sharp, clean cut in 
the middle and tradition quotes In explanation the story of a 
king who was refused entrance to heaven but cleft a passage 
through the portal with bis sword. 

In the outer court stand various sheds and hollow wooden 
oylinders which when struck give a sound like bells. Anotlier 
ornamented doorway leads to the second court where are found 
some or all of the following objeote: (a) Sacred trees, eepedally 
Fievs eiasiica. (h) Sheds with seats for human beings. It is said 
that on certain occasions these are used by mediums who be¬ 
come inspired by the gods and then give oracles, (o) Scats for 
the gods, generally under sheds. They are of various kinds. 
There is usually one conspicuous fihAfr with an ornamental back 
and a scroll hanging behind it which bears some such inscription 
as ‘*This is the chair of the Bbat&ra.'* Any deity may be 
invited to take this eeat and receive worship. sWetimes a stone 
linga is placed upon it. In some temples a stone chmr, called 
padmAaana, is set apart for Sflrya. (d) Small shrines two or 
three feet high, set on posts or pedestals, When well executed 
they arc similar to the cabinets used in Japanese temples as 
shrines for images but when, as often happens, they are roughly 
made they are curiously like dovecots. On them are hung strips 
of dried palm-leaves in bunches like the Japanese gohei. As a 
rule the ahrinee contain no imago but only a small seat and some 

XL] JAVA AyV TEE MALAY ARCHIPELAOO 185 

objects said to be stones which aw wrapped up in a cslotlj and 
c^ed Artjeh^ In some temples (e^. the Bale Agoeng at 
Singaraja) there are erections eaUed Meru, supposed to represent 
the sacred mountain where the gods reside. They conaiat of a 
stout pedestal or bads of brick on whioh is erected a cabinet 
shrine as already described. Above this are large round discs 
made of straw and wood, which may be described as curved 
roofs or wnbwUaa, They are from three to five in numbecr and 
rise one above the other, with slight intervals between them, 
(s) In many temples (for instance at Sangait Mid Sawan) 
pyramidal erections are found either in additton to the Merus 
or instead of them. At the end of the second court is a pyramid 
in four stages or teiraees, often with prolongations at the side 
of the mdn structure or at right angles to it. It is ascended by 
several staircases, consisting of about twenty-five steps, and nt 
the top are rows of cabinet shrines. 

Daily worship is not performed in these temples but offerings 
ore laid before the shrines from time to time by those who need 
the help of the gods and there are several annual festivals. The 
object of the ritual is not to honour any image or object habitually 
kept in the temple but to induce tie gods, who aw supposed to 
b« hovering round like birds, to seat themselves in the chair 
provided or to enter into some sacred object, and then receive 
homage and offerings. Thus both the ideas and cewmonial are 
different from those which prevail in Hindu temples and have 
mote affimty with Polynesian bebefa. The deities aw called 
Dewa, bnt many of them are indigenous natuio spirits (especially 
moimtcdn spirits) such as Dewa Dimung Agung, who are some¬ 
times identified with Indian gods. 

Somewhat different are the Durgk temples. These ate 
dedicated to the spirits of the dead but the images of Durgk 
and her attendant Kaliki, receive veueration in them, much as 
in Hindu temples. But on the whole the Malay or Polynesian 
element seemed to m© to be in practice stronger than Hinduism 
in the religion of the Balinese and this is borne oat by the fact 
that the PSmangku or priest of the indigenous gods ranks 
higher than the Pidanda or Brahman priest. But by talking to 
Balinese one may obtain a different impression, for they are 
proud of t he i r connection with Madjapahit and hOnduism: they 

* Tliia word tppMn b« Svokrit area, an iiriAgo £or worslup. 

ISC BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [CB. 

villuigly speak of such subjects &nd Hindu deities are coustajitly 
represented in works of art. Ganeda, Indra, Vishnu, Knslupa, 
S^a» Oaruda and Siva, as well as the heroes of the Mahibhi- 
rata, are well known but 7 have not heard of worship being 
offered to any of them except Durg& and S7a under the form 
of the lioga. Figures of ViahJ?a riding on Garuda are very 
common and a certain class of artiffeers are able to produce 
images of aJl well known Indian gods for those who care to 
order them. Many Indian works such as the Veda, Mah&bh&rata, 
R4m&yana, Brahmhpurhna and Nlt^^tra are known by name 
and ^ said to exist not in the original Saoskzit but in Kawl. 
1 fancy that they oio rarely read by the present generation, but 
any knowledge of them is much respected. The Balinese though 
confused in their theology are greatly attached to their religion 
and belioTe it is the ancient faith of Madjapahit. 

1 was unable to discover in the neighbourhood of SingE^ja 
even such faint traces of Buddhism as have been report^ by 
previous authors^, but they may exist elsewhere. The expression 
&va-Buddha was known to the PMandas but seemed to have 
DO living rigniffcance, and perhaps certain families have a 
traditional and purely nominal connection with Buddhiam. In 
Durgh temples however I have seen figures described as Pusa, 
the Chinese equivalent of Bodhisattva, ond it seems that 
Chinese artists have reintroduced into this miscellaneous 
pantheon an element of corrupt Buddhism, though the natives 
do not recognixe it as such. 

The art of Bali is more fantastic than that of ancient Java. 
The carved work, whether in stone or wood, is generally 
polychiomatic. Figures are piled one on the top of another as 
in the sculptures of Central America and there is a marked 
tendency to emphasize projections. Leaves and fioweis are very 
deeply carved and such features as ears, tongues and teeth are 
mons^usly prolonged. Thus Balinese statues and reliefs have 
a curiously bristling and scaly appearance and are apt to seom 
barbaric, especially if taken separately^. Yet the general aspect 
of the temples is not unpleasu^. The brilliant colours and 

* S.f. Vft& Eente, “liJndo JaTMiuelw «d IkliKha in Biji, T. L~ 

7oiktnhtT»U tm NtdtrlatvUA^Iudii, ISia I vivted Bnli m ISll. 

* 8«« PleyW, Art, IMl, MpwinUy Ch* wT«e<b«Mied figure in plftM 

ZV1 Mid to be Krisbaa 

XLj JAVA TBS MALAY AROHIPSLAOO m 

fantestic ouUmee hamonizo with the tropicaJ vegetation which 
euzTounds them and guggcat that tie guRwUeji doi^es take shape 
as gorgeous inaecta. Such bizarre figuree are not unknown in 
Indian mythology but in Balinese art Chinese influenoe is 
perhaps stronger than Indian. Tho Cbineae probably frequented 
tJie island as early as the Hindus and arc now foxmd there in 
abundance. Besides the statues colled Pusa already mentioned, 
Chbiese landscapes aiv often painted behind tho scats of the 
Devas and in the temple on the Volcano Batoer, wliere a special 
place K ossigued to aU the Balinese tribes, the Chinese have their 
own Khrine. It is said that the temples in southern Bali which 
are older and larger thaji those in the north show even more 
decided signs of Chinese influence «id are surrounded by stone 
figures of Chinese os guardians. 

a in. 

<3 

OHAPTEB XL! 

CENTRAL ASIA 

1 

The term Central Asia ib here used to denote the Tarim basin, 
without rigidly excluding neighbouring countries such as the 
Oxus region and Bndakshan. This barin is a depression sur- 
Toonded on three sides by high mountaiiiB: only on the east is 
the barrier diriding it from Chins relatively low. The water of 
the whole area discharges through the many branched Tarim 
river into Lobnor. This sO'Oalled lake ie now merely a 
fiooded morass and the barin Is a desert with oooaslonal oases 
lying chiefly near its edges. The fertile portions were formerly 
mere considerable but a quarter of a century ago this remote 
and lonely region interested no one but a few sportsman and 
geographers. The results of recent ocplorarion have been im¬ 
portant and surpiiring. The arid sands have yielded not only 
rains, statues and frescoes but whole libraries written in a dozen 
languages. The value of such discoveries for the general history 
of ^a is clear and they are of capital importance for our special 
subject, rinco during many centuries the Tarim r^on and its 
neighbouring lands were centres and highways for Buddhism 
and possibly the scene of many changes whose origin is now 
obscure. But I am unfortunate in having to discuss Central 
Asian Buddhism before scholars have bad rime to pnblish or 
even catalogue completely the store of material collected and 
the reader must reznombv that the statements in this chapter 
are at best tentative and incomplete. They will cortainly be 
supplemented and probably corrected as year by year new 
documents end works of art are made known. 

Tarim, in watery metaphor, is not so much a basin as a pool 
in a tidal river flowing alternately to and from the sea. We can 
imagine that in such a pool creatures of very different proven¬ 
ance might be found together. So cuirenfs both from east to 
west and from west to east passed through the Tarun, leaving 
behind whatever conld live there: Chinese administration and 

Off. ZLl] 

CENTRAL ASIA 

189 

oiviUutioa from the eeet: Iramaos frooi the weefc, bearing with 
them in the stieam fragments that had drifted from Asia Minor 
and Byzantium, while still other currents brought Hindus and 
Tibetans from the south. 

One feature of special interest in the histoiy of the Tarim 
is that it was in touch with Baotria and the regions conquered 
by Alexander and throu^ them with western art and thought. 
Another is that its inhabitants included not only Iranian tribes 
but the speakers of m Aryan Iwiguage hitherto unknown, whose 
presence so far east may oblige us to revise our views about the 
history of the Aryan race. A third characteristic is that from 
the dawn of hist^ to the middle agee warlike nomads were 
continually passing through the country. All these people, 
whether we call them Iranians, Turks or Mongols had the same 
peculiarity; they had little culture of tbeir own but they picked 
up and transported the ideas of others, The most remarkable ex¬ 
ample of this is the introduction of Islam into Europe and India. 
Nothing quite so strikiog happened in earlier ages, yet tribes similar 
to the Turks brought Manicluelsm and Nestorian Christianity into 
China and played no small part in the introduction of Buddhism. 

A brief catalogue of the languages represented in the manu¬ 
scripts and inscriptions discovered will give a safe if on ly 
provisional idea of the many influences at work in Central Asia 
and Its importance as a receiving distributing centre. The 
number of tongues simultaneously in use for popular or learned 
purposes was remarkably large. To say nothmg of great polyglot 
Libraries like Tim-buang, a small collection at Toyog is reported 
as containing Indian, Manlcb^an, Syriac, Sogdian, Uigur a nd 
Chinese books. The writing materials employed were various 
like the idioms and include imported palm leaves, birch bark, 
plates of wood or bamboo, leather and paper, which last was in 
use from the first century a,d. onwards. In this dry atmosphero 
all enjoyed singular longevity. 

Numerous Sanskrit writings have been found, all dealing 
with religious or quasi religious subjects, as medicine and 
grammar were then considered to be. Relatively modern 
Mahayanist literature is abundant but greater interest attaches 
to portions of on otherwise lost Sanskrit canon which agree in 
substance though not verbally with the corresponding passages 
in the Pali Canon and are apparently the original t^t from 

190 3UDDHIS2I OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

which much of the Chinese Tripitakft wes traDSlated. The 
manuBcripte hitherto published include Sdtras from the Sam- 
yukto and Ekottera Agamas, a considerable part of the 
Dharmapoda, and the Pritimokehs of the Sarv&stiviKiin school. 
FarHaen states that the monks of Central Asia were all students 
of the language of India and even in the seventh centoiy Hsuan 
Chuang telle us the same of Kucha. Portiona of a S^skrit 
grammar have been found near Turfan and in the earlier period 
at any rate Sanskrit was probably understood in polite and 
learned society. Some palm leaves from Ming-Oi contain frag¬ 
ments of two Buddhist religious dramas, one of which is the 
S&riputra-prakarana of Aivaghosha, The handwriting is believed 
to date from the epoch of Kanishka so that we have here the 
oldest known Saiukrit manuscripts, as well as the oldest 
specimens of Indian dramatic art*. They are written like the 
T^di s n classical dramas in Sanskrit and various forms of 
Pr&krit. The latter represent hitherto unknown stages in the 
development of Indian dialects and some of them are closely 
allied to the language of Aioka’s inscriptions. Another Prftkrit 
tert is the version of the l^barmapada written in Kharoehthl 
characbers and discovered by the Butreuil de Rhine mission 
near Khotan*, and numerous official documents in this Imiguage 
and alphabet have been brought home by Stein from the same 
region. It is probable that they are approximately coeval with 
the Kushan dynasty in India and the uaeof as Indian vernacular 
as well as of Sanskrit in Central Asia shows that the connection 
between the two countries was not due merely to the intro¬ 
duction of Buddhism. 

Besides these hitherto unknown forms of Frikrit, Central 
Asia has astonished the learned world with two new languages, 
both written in a special variety of the Brahmi alphabet called 
Ontral Asian Gupta. One is sometiaies called Nordarisch and 
IS r^rded by some authorities as the language of the Sakas 
whose incursions into India appear to have begun about the 
second century b.c. and by others as the language of the 
Kuahans and of Kanishka’s Empire. It is stated that the basis 
of the language is Iranian but strongly Induenced by Indian 

* SteLUden, BuJilkUlMitT Dr«mm, 1011, sad id., i)u Sinptira- 

ffoiarana, 1011 . 

* 8m SeoAit, ''Le mi KhueshtU da Ilbunnapaid&,*’ m JA>, ISOS, n. p. 103. 

CENTRAL ASIA 

m 

XU] 

idioms^. M&R 7 tr^uifilationa of MfthaysAut Literature (for mstance 
the Suvartiaprabbflaa, Va]raooliediJi& and Aparimit&yus Sutras) 
were made into it and it appears to have been spoken prmdpallj 
in the southern part of the Tarim basin^. The o^er new language 
was spoken prindpalLj on its northern edge and has been called 
Tokharian, which name implies that it was the tongue of the 
Tokhars or Indoscjths^. But there is no proof of this and it is 
safer to speak of it as the language of Kuoha or Kuobancse. It 
exists in two difierent dialects known aa A and B whose geo* 
graphical distribution is uncertain but numerous official 
documents dated in the first half of the seventh century show 
that it was the ordinary speech of Kucha and Turfan. It was 
also a literary language and among the many translations dis* 
oovered are versions in it of the Pbarmapoda and Vinaya. It is 
extremely interesting to find that this language spoken by the 
early Mid perhaps original inhabitants of Kucha not only belongs 
to the Aryan family but is related more nearly to the western 
than the eastern branch. It oannot be clas^ in the Indo- 
Iranian group but shows perplexing affinities to Latin, Greek, 
Keltic, Slavonic and Armenian^. It is possible that it influenced 
Chinese Buddhist literature^. 

Besides the ^'Kordarisch*’ mentioned above which was 
written in Brohmi, three other Iranian languages have left 
literary remains in Central Asia, all written in an alphabet of 
Aramaic origin. Two of them apparently represent the speech 
of south-western Persia under the Sossaoids, and of north' 
western Persia under the Arsaoids. The texts pieseived in both 
are Maoiohscan but the third Iranian language, or Sogdian, has 

* Liiticn, "Ue und (Uq Nor44nwbe Spiaebo," SUsv^tbtr. ^ 

PrnM. Aiavi ISIS, KoMW, OUtinf. OtL Am. IMS. pp. SCI H 

* 8 m Hoomla io J.R.AM. 1010« pp. SS7 ff. Md ff.; 1011, pp. SOt ft.. 447 S. 

* Aa old Turkiib text about Uaitreye stMee that It wu trtealaled from an 
ladicm langoise into Toicbri end Iron Tokhri into Torktab. S«e 9. H W. HttU«r, 
S'lUaepator. do K6k. Prom^ Aked. 1907, p. dtS. But it ii oot cloer wket ia moent 
b; Tokhri. 

* The lolbnrtng ere waio words In Uila lanj?U4se: 

Kant, a hi&dred; raka t word; por. flee; eoya 4^ (Oicek lawea, 
aweea rein (Orcelc Oei vrrit); SJyak, aaoUier; ckeo, as ox. 

* Tba auuorona pepen on this langoage are satoraIl7 ^uiokly aupeneded. But 
Sieg and Slegluis l^hbarvcb, Spraobe dar lodoak^tbee'’ do 
StriAi. Wi«i. IMS, p. SIC), nay be mentionod aodSylTaia Uri, “T^ihaneaB, 
Xsagoe do Kooteba,** J.A. IDIS, n. p. $11. 

102 BUVDHISJif OVTSWB INDIA [ch. 

a more T&ried literitry content and ofions Buddhist, Manichsean 
and Christian texts, apparontly in that chronological order. It 
vaa originally the language of the region round Samarkand but 
acquired an international character for it iras used by merohante 
th^ughout the Tarim baein and spread even to C^ina. Some 
Christian texts in Syriac hare also been foimd. 

The Orkhon inscriptions exhibit an old Turkish dialect 
written in the cKaraoters commonly called Runee and this Runic 
alphabet is used in manuscripts found at Tun-huang and Miran 
but those hitherto published ore not Buddhist. But another 
TurkUb dialect written in the Uigur alphabet, which is derived 
from the Syriac, was (bke Sc^dian) extensively used for 
Buddhist, Maniohsau and Christian literature. The name Uigur 
is perhaps more correctly applied to the alphabet thui the 
language^ which appears to have been the litoroiy form of the 
various Turkish idioms spoken north and south of the Tien*shan. 
The use of this dialect for Buddhist literature spread consider¬ 
ably when the Uigurs broke the power of Tibet in the Tarim 
basia about 860 ai^ founded a kingdom themeelves; it extended 
into China and lasted long, for SOtras in Uigur were printed at 
Peking in 1380 and Uigur manuscripts copied in the reign of 
K'ang Hsi (1662-1723) are reported from a monasteiy near 
Suchow^. I am informed that a variety of this alphabet written 
in vertical columns is still used in some parts of Kansu where 
a Turkish dialect is spoken. Though Turkish was used by 
Buddhists in both the east and west of the Tarim basin, it 
appears to have been introduced into Khotan only after the 
Moslim conquest. Another Semitic script, hitherto unknown and 
found only in a fragmentary form, is believed to be the writing 
of the White Huns or Hephthalites. 

As the Tibetans were the predominant power in the Tarim 
basin from at least the middle of the eighth until the middle of 
the ninth century, it is not surprising that great stores of 
Tibetan manuscripts have beeu found in the r^ions of Khotan, 
Miran and Tun-huang. In Torfan, as lying more to the north, 
traces of Tibetan induenee, though not absent, are fewer. The 

' 8m iUdloff TiMstviuUk Sttd^ ml Xtt.). p. T. This ttftSOMrtpi C4m« 
from UruQUL A Miulalioii of * portion of tbo Saddboruje.puntUrUiA (8iU. 
Bu44h. XIV.) VM Jouii4 At Turtofi. 

* laufor ill P>», 1907. p. 391 j RaUloff. STvon-fi-tn P\tr3ar, p. vii. 

CENTRAL ASIA 

193 

SZJ] 

documeuiB discoTored must be anterior to the ninth century 
and comprise numerous oMcUi and business papers os well as 
Buddhist traualations^. They are of great importance for tbo 
history of the Tibetan language and also indicate that at the 
period when they were written Buddhism at most shared with 
the Bon religion the allegiance of the Tibetans. No Manicheao 
or Chnstiui translations in Tibetan have yet been discovered, 

Vast numbers of Chinese tosts both religions and secular ore 
preaerved in all the principal centres and offer many points of 
interest among which two may bo noticed. Firstly the posts on 
the old military frontier near Tan*huang have furnished a series 
of dated documents ranging from 98 b.c. to 153 a.d.* There is 
therefore no difficulty in admitting that there wee intercourse 
between China and Cmtral Asia at this period. Secondly, some 
documents of the Tang dynasty are Maniobsean, with an 
admixture of Buddhist and Taoist ideos^. 

The religious monuments of Central Asia comprise stupas, 
caves and covered buildings used as temples or vibiras. Bud¬ 
dhist, Maniduean and Cbiistiau edifices have l>een discovered 
but apparently no shrines of the Zoroastrj^ religion, though it 
bad many adherents in these regions, and though representa- 
iiona of Hindu deities have been found, Hinduism is not known 
to have existed apart from Buddhism^. Caves decorated for 
Buddhist worship are found not only in the Tarim basixi but at 
Tun-huang on the frontier of China proper, near Ta-t'ung-fu in 
northern Shensi, and in the defile of Lung-mfiu in the province 
of Ho-nan. The general scheme and style of these caves are 
similar, but while in the last two, as in most Indian caves, the 
figures and ornaments are true sculpture, in the caves of Tun- 
huang and the Tarim not only is the wall prepared for frescoes, 
but even the figures are executed in stucco. This form of decora¬ 
tion was congenial to Central Asia for the images which embel- 
lisbed the temple walk were moulded in the some fashion. 
Temples and caves were eemetimes combined, for instwice at 
BSz&klik where many edifices were erected on a terrace in front 

> Sm MpeeiAlly St^'i Andui XSota«, epp. B, tad Pruioke mJ.S.A.8~ 19U. 
p. S7. 

* CbftTonow, Lm oUnou dSceuKrtr for AvA Suih, ISIS. 

* SeeMpMiftUy Cti&Taaa«c «od Pslliot, “TnitS Mwicbeeo" io J.A~ 1911 eod 
1913. 

* Sneik dutOBg D9Uc its •sicteoM bowevtc Ic ICebul utd Eapik. 

104 BUDDHISM OUTSJDS INDIA lev.. 

of a setICA of c4ves excaTated in a moimtoln eomar. Few roofod 
buildir^ are well preserred but It seems certain that some were 
high qufulrilateral structures, crowned by a dome of a shapo 
found in Fetaia, and that others had barrel'Sbapod roofs, 
apparently resembling the oliaityas of Ter and Cbezarla^. Le 
Coq states that this type of architecture is also found in Persia^. 
The commonest type of temple vae a hall having at its fxtrtber 
end a cella, with a passage behind to allow of circumambulation. 
Such balls were ^quently enlarged by the addition of side 
roomsandsometiines a shrine was enclosed by seyeral rectangular 
courts®, 

Many stupas have been found either by themselves or in 
combination with other buildings. The one which is best pre¬ 
served (or at any rate reproduced in greatest detail)® is the 
Stupa of Rawak. It is set in a quadrangle bounded by a wall 
which wsis ornamented on both its inner and outer face by a 
series of gigantic statues in coloured stucco. The dome is set 
upon a rectangular base disposed in three stories and this 
arrangement is said to characterize ah the stupas of Turkestan. 
08 weU as those of the Kabul valley and adjacent regions. 

This arohitecturo appears to owe nothing to Chioa but to 
include both Indian (especially Gaud heron) and Persian ele¬ 
ments. Many of its remarkable features, if not common else¬ 
where, are at least widely scattered. Thus some of the caves at 
Miog'Oi have dome-Uke roofs ornamented Nvith a pattern com¬ 
posed of squares within sqixares, set at an angle with each other. 
A similar ornamentation is reported from Pandrenthan in 
Kashmir and from Bamiau®. 

The antiquities of Central Ada include fredcoes executed on 
the walls of caves and buildings, and paintings on sOk paper®. 
The origin and afEnities of this art are still the snbjeot of 
investigation and any discuesion of them would lead me too 
far from my immediate subject. But a few statements can bo 

* $00 for thcM Perguam*BurgCM. o/Iitdiatt AnAiUelun, t, pp, 125-8. 

* J.HA-S. 1800, p. ZVi. 

* S.g, GrQDffodd, dUb*ddkM»eht K'lUtialU*, 6g. 824. 

* Stun, /dirtenf XAobrti, uil-svu m(1 sI. pp. S3 tnd 482 IF. 

* S«« QritnwfrtU'l, fhufdA. KuUtiSUe*, pp. F20-13O nad plut«. FoqcW, “L’art 

Grico-Boudtliu'^ue," p. )43, SS3 and plaia i 

* $00 Wacbalicf^r'e ' Stii^khCischo ttudka tur Kunat Cl)«Quach*Tark«Un’a” 

ia ZUJl. 1614 and 10 la 

CENTRAL ASIA 

196 

xu3 

made with some confidence. The infliiAmv^ of Gandhata ie plain 
in architecture, eculpture, and p^ticg. The oldest worlcs may 
be deecribed as simply Qandbaran but this early style is followed 
by another which shows a development both in technique and 
in mythology. It doubtless reproeente Indian Buddhist art as 
modihcd by local pointen and sculptors. Thus in the Tuxfan 
fresGoee the drapery and compoaition are Indian but the faces 
are eastern asiatic. Sometimes however they represent a race 
with red bair and blue eyes. 

On the whole the paintings testify to the invasion of Far 
Eastern art by the ideas and designs of Indian Buddhism rather 
than to on equal combination oi Indian and Chinese influence 
but in some forms of decoration, particularly that employed in 
the Khan’s palace at Idiqutsb&hri^, Chinese style is predominant. 
It may be too that the early pre'buddhist s^lee of painting in 
China and Central Asia were similar. In the seventh century 
a Khotan artist called Wei-ch'ih Po*chih-na migrated to China, 
where both he and his son Woi-ch'ih I'sSng acquired considerable 
fame. 

Persian influence also is manifest in many paintings. A 
striking instance may be seen in two plates published by Stein* 
apparently representing the some Boddhisattva. In one he is 
of the familiar Indian type: the other seems at first sight 
a miniature of some Persian prince, black*bearded and high' 
booted, but the figure has four arms. As might be expected, it 
is the Manictuean pain'mgs which are least Indian in character, 
They represent a “lost Ute antique school*" which often recalls 
Byzantine art and was perhaps the parent of mcdiieval Persian 
mluiatuxe painting. 

The paintings of Central Asia resemble its manuscripts. It 
is impossible to look through any collection of them without 
feeling that currents of art and civilization flowing from neigh¬ 
bouring and even from distant lands have met and mingled in 
this basin. As the reader turns over the albums of Stoin, 
Oriinwedel or Le Coq he is haunted by strange reminiscencee 
and resemblances, and wonders if they are merely coinddencee 
or whether the pedigrees of tbeee pictured gods and men really 

^ 8m Ort&wedel, £*d4h. pp. 33S ff. 

* .in^eni £Ao(aA, TOL n. pbtM lx mC Ixi. 

* Le Ceq 111 JJ.A.S. 1909, pp. 299 fi. Sm tin vboI« articl*. 

106 BVX)I>UI8U OUTBIDS INDIA [CH. 

stretch across tiDie and space to far off origins. Hero arc coins 
and eeft l s of Hellenic desigix, nude athletes Uiat might adom 
a Greek vase, figures that recall Eg^, Byzantium or the 
Bayeux tapestry, with others that might pass for Christian 
ecolceiastics; Cbineee sages, Krishna dancing to the sound of 
his flute, frescoes that might bo copied from Ajsnta, winged 
youths to be styled cupids or cherubs according to our 
mood*. 

Stein mentions* that he discovered a Buddhist monastery 
in the terminal marshes of the Helmund in the Persian province 
of Seiston, containing pointings of a HeUenistic type which show 
“for the first time in situ the Iranian Jink of the chain which 
connects the Gweco-Buddhist art of extreme north-west India 
with the Buddhist art of Central Asia and the Far East.” 

Central Asian art is somewhat wanting in spontaneity. 
Except when painting portraits (which are many) the artists 
do not seem to go to nature or even their own imagination and 
visions. They seem concerned to reproduce some rel^ous scene 
not as they saw it but as it wsa represented by Indiui or other 
artists. 

2 

Only one side of Central Asian history can bo written with 
any completeness, namely Its relations with China. Of these 
some account with dates can be giv^. thanks to the Chinese 
AnnftlR which mcidentedly supply valuable information about 
earlier periods. But unfortunately theee relations were often 
interrupted and also the political record does not always furnish 
the data which are of most importance for the history of 
Buddhism. Still there is no better framework available for 
arranging our data. But even were our information much 
fullor, we should probably dud the history of Central Asia 
scrappy ^d disconnected. Its cities were united by no bond of 
common blood or language, nor can any one of them have had 
a continuoQs development in institutions, letters or art. These 
were imported in a mature form and more or less aeaunilated 
in a precocious Augustan age, only to be overwhelmed in some 
catastrophe which, if not merely deetmotave, at least bronght 
tho ides^ and baggage of another race. 

‘ Fot covM of UiB mor« itrihmg drAwinga refsTrod to M OrSnv«del. 

6ga. 61. 03. ii9. Ui, 817. 387, 846-349. 

1 Jq Oeof. jeuntai. Miy 1910. p. 842. 

CENTRAL ASIA 

197 

2LI] 

It waa under the Emperor Wu-ta (140-$7 B.c.) of the Hen 
dynasty tb&c the Chinese first penetrated into the T&rim boain. 
They bed heard that the Hsiueg-na, of whose growing power 
they were afraid, bad driven the Yijob*chih westwards and thoy 
therefore despatched on envoy named Chang Ch'ien in the hope 
of inducing the Yiieh-chib to co-operate with them against the 
oomiuon enemy. Chang Cb'ien made two odventurous ezpedi* 
tiona, and visited the Yueh-chih in their new home somewhere 
on the Oxus. His misdon failed to attain ite immediate political 
object but indirectly had important results, for it revealed to 
China that the nations on the Oxus were in touch with India 
on one hood and with the more mysterious west on the other. 
Henceforth it was her aim to keep open tho trade route leading 
westwards from the extremity of the modem Kansu province to 
Kashgar, Khotan and the countries with which tJtoso citiee 
commimicated. Fat from wishing to isolate horself or exclude 
foreigners, her chief desire was to keep the rood to tho west 
open, and although there were times when the flood of Buddhism 
which swept along this road alimned the more conservative 
classes, yet for many centuries everything that came in the way 
of merchandize, art, Literature, and religion was eagerly received. 
The chief hindrance to this Intercourse was the hostility of the 
wild tribes who pillaged caravans and blocked the route, and 
throughout the whole stretch of recorded history the Chinese 
used the same method to weaken them and keep the door open, 
namely to create or utilise a quarrel between two tribes. The 
Empire allied itself with one in order to crush the second and 
that being done, procoeded to deal with its former s^y. 

Dated records beginning with the year 98 B.o. testily te the 
presence of a Chinese garrison near the modem Tun-huang^. 
Bnt at the begiiming of the Christian era the Empire was 
convulsed by internal rebellion and ceased to have influence or 
interest in Central Asia. With the restoration of order things 
took another tum. The reign of the Emperor Ming*ti is the 
traditional date for the introduction of Buddhism and it also 
witnessed the victorious campaigns of the famous general and 
adventurer Pan Ch'ao. He conquered Khotan and Kashgar and 
victoriously repulsed the attacks of the Kush&ns or Yueb'cliih 
who were interested in these regions and endeavoured to stop 
his prepress. The Chinese annals do not give the name of their 
• Documents cktnoie dAwverle par Aunt 3lti*, 1918. 

m BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [ch. 

king but it miut h&re l»een Kuiisbka it he came to the throne 
in 78. 1 eonfeas however that this silence makes it difficult for 
me to accept 78-133 a.d. as the period of Kanisbka’s reign, for 
be must have been a monarch of eome celebritj and if the 
Chinese b ed oomo into victorious contact with him, would not 
tboir historians have mentioned itt It seems to me more 
probable tliat bo reigned before or after Pan Ch'ao's career in 
Control Asia which lasted from a.d. 73-102. Witli the end of 
that career Chinese activity ceased for some time and perhaps 
the Kosbona conquered Kashgar and Khotan early in the second 
century. Neither the degenerate Han dynasty nor the stormy 
Three Kingdoms could grapple with distant political problems 
and during the fourth, fifth and sixth centuries northern China 
was divided among Tartar statess, short*lived and mutually 
hostile. The Smpire ceased to be a political power in the Tarim 
basin but intercourse with Central Asia and in particular the 
infiux of Buddhism increased, and there wtu. also a return wave 
of Chinese influence westwards. Meanwhile two tribes, the 
HephthaliCee (or White Huns) and the Tnrks^, soocessively 
became masters of Central Asia and founded states sometimes 
called Bmpirc^'that is to say they overran vast tracts within 
which they took tribute without establishing any definite 
constitution or frontiers. 

When tho T'ang dynasty (818-007) re-united the Empire, 
the Chineso Government with cboracteiistio tenacity reverted 
to its old polioy of keeping the western road open and to its old 
methods. Tlie Turks were then divided into two branches, the 
northern and western, at war with one another. The Chinese 
allied themselves with the latter, defeated the northern Turks 
and occupied Turfan (640). Then in a series of campaigns, in 
which they were supported by the Uigurs, they conquered their 
former allies the western Turks and proceed^ to organize the 
Tarim basin under the name of the Four Garrisons^. This was 
the most glorious period of China’s foreign policy and at no 
other time bad she so groat a position as a western power. The 

> TbeMof«OQt«earenottlioOnaaAJuvrTurk»ofCDtwt4U)Ui)op]». TheOnu&ltf 
are the kteat of tho cbbd 7 hnnehoe of tho Tb^ who warred and raled In Centcml 
Aeia Tith aocceae from the fifth bo the eighth cenUinea 

' That is iCuhRar. Khotan. Kveba and Tokmaa for whieh lut Earaahabr waa 
•abMi^iiBoU/ nbetituted. llte tnrritor^ vaa aleo called Ao Ha^ 

CENTRAL ASIA 

199 

XLT} 

list of be^ possessions included Bokhara in the west and startup 
from Semirechinak and Tashkent in the north extended aouth* 
wards so as to embraee Afghuilstan with the frontier districts 
of India and Persia^. It is true that the Imperial authority in 
many of these regions was merely nominal: when the Chinese 
com^uered a tribe which claimed sovereignty over them they 
claimed sovereignty themselves. But for tho history of civiliza¬ 
tion, for the migration of art and ideas, even this nominal claim 
is important, for China was undoubtedly in touch with India, 
Bokhara and* Persia. 

But no sooner did these great vistas open, than new enemies 
appeared to bar the road- The Tibetans descended into the 
Tarim basin and after defeating the Chinese in 670 held the 
Pour Qamsons rill 692, when the fortunes of war were reversed. 
But tbo field was not left clear for China: the power of the 
northern Turks revived, and Mohammedanism, thou a new force 
but destined to ultimate triumph in politics and religion alike, 
appeared in the weet. The conquests of the Mohammedan 
general Qutayba (705-716) extended to Ferghana and be 
attacked Kashgar. In the long reign of Hsuan T^ung China 
wAgod a double warfare against the Arabs and Tibetans. For 
about thirty years (719-761) the struggle was snceessfui. Even 
Tabaristan is said, to have acknowledged China’s suzerainty. 
Her troops crossed the Hindu Kush wd reached Gilglt. But in 
751 they sustained a crushing defeat near Tashkent. The 
disaster was aggravated by the Internal troubles U. the Empire 
and it was long before Chinese authority recovered from the 
blow*. The Tibetans reaped the advantage. Except in Turfan, 
they were the dominant power of the Tarim basin for a oentuiy, 
they took tribute from China and when it was refused sack^ 
the capital, Chang-an (763). It would appear however that for 
a time Chinese garrisons held out in Central Aria and Chinese 
officials oxorciBed some authority, though they obtained no 
support from the Empire*. But although even late in the tenth 
oeiitury Khotan sent embassies to tho Imperial Court, China 

* Sm for IesU oed dMallj Chav4iuea wr i«e Tti*-lnv« Otcitkntcmx, 

pp. 07 ff. snd 270 ff. 

* Tho con<iae«t snd orgsoisaLion of (he prcMt Chinm ToibMtna dat«s only 
from tho rei^ of Ch'icn Lung. 

* Thus tbo pU^rio Wu-K'uDg reentiono nitruin offimb Id the Pour Qeirioons. 

200 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

gradually c«a«ed to be a Centra! Asiao power. She made a 
treaty with the Tibctace (783) and an alliance with the Uigura, 
who DOW came to tbe front and occupied l^oifan, where tbece 
was a douriahing Uigur kingdom with Manichsiem as tbe state 
religion from about 760 to 843. In that year tbe Kirghiz sacked 
Torfan and it is intereetiag to note that tbe Chines© who hod 
hitherto tolerated Manichansm as the religion of their allies, 
at once began to issue restriotiv© edicts against it. But except 
in Turfon it does not appear that tbe power of th© Uigurs was 
weakened^. In 860-S17 they broke up Tibetan rule in tbe 
Tarim basin and fenned a new kingdom of their own which 
apparently ineduded Kashgar, Urumtsi and Kucha but not 
Khotan, The prince of Kashgar embraced Islam about ^45, 
but the conyersioQ of Khotan and Turfan was later. With this 
conyersion the connection of the Tarim basin with the history 
of Buddhism naturally ceases, for it does not appear that the 
tiiumphal progress of Lamaiau under KhubiJu Khan affected 
these regions. 

3 

The Tarim basin, though sometimes united under foreign 
rule, had no indigenous national unity. Cities, or groups of 
towns, divided by deserts lived their own civic life and enjoyed 
considerable independence under nadve sovereigns, although 
the Chinese, Turks or Tibetans quartered troops in them and 
appointed residents to supervise the collection of tribute. The 
chief of these cities or oases were Kssbgar in th© west: Kucha, 
Earasbahr, Tuzfan (Idiqutsblhri. Choteoho) and Hsjui lying 
successively to the north‘©ast: Yarkand, Khotan and Miron to 
the south-east*. It may be well to review briefly tbe special 
history of some of them. 

The relics found near Kashgar, tbe most western of these 
cities, are comparaUvely few, probably because its position 
exposed it to the destructive induence of Islam at an early date. 
Chinese writers reproduce tbe name as Oh'la-sba, Chieh-eb'a, 
etc., but also call the region Su-14, Shn-14. or Sha>l$^. It is 

* 8«e tor tlili ptrt of thsir hictory, Orsurd’s «nic)e in J.A. 1900, i. pp. U70. 

* Pdikt tbo ftUribuM imporUneo to a Sogdiaa Colony to aontli oC Lob 

Nor, vbich ta^ bt?Q bod mu«b to do wmi tba tranMniMioa of Snddhiam &iid 
Nevtorf&fuim to Se«7.^. Joo. 1916. pp. 111-123. 

' Tbaao wofds bav« been conoectod i^th the tribe caJJed Becae, SeJiea, or &6k. 

CENTRAL ASIA 

201 

m] 

mentioned irrst in the Han annals. After the missioDS of Chang- 
Ch'ien trade with Baotria and Sogdiana grew rapidly and 
Kashgar which waa a conTenieDfi emporiom became a Chinese 
protected state in the first century b.o, But when the hold of 
China relaxed about the time of the Christian era it was subdued 
by the nwghboiuing kingdom of Khotan. The conquests of 
Pan*Ch'ao lestcred Chinese supremacy but early in the second 
century the Yueh-ohih interfered in the politics of Kashgar and 
placed on the throne a prince who was their tool. The intro¬ 
duction of Buddhism ia ascribed to this epoch*. If Kaoishka 
was tbon reigning the statement that be conquered Kashgar 
and Khotan is probably correct. It is supported by Hsiian 
Chuang’d story of the hostages and by his assertion that 
Kanishka's rule extended to the east of the Ts'ung-ling moun¬ 
tains ; also by the discovery of Kanishka’s coins in the Khotan 
district. little is heard of Kashgar until Pa^Hsieo visited it in 
400^ He speaks of the quinquennial religious conferences held 
by the king, at one of which he was present, of relics of the 
Buddha and of a monastery containing a thousand monks all 
students of the Hinajana. About 460 the king sent as a present 
to the Chinese Court an incombustible robe once worn by the 
Buddha. Shortly afterwards Kashgar wae incorporated in the 
dojninions of the Hephthalitee, and when these succumbed to 
the western Turks alraut 466, it merely changed masters. 

Hsuon ChuoDg has left an interesting account of Kashgar 
as he found it on his return journey^. The inhabitants were 
sincere Buddhists and there were more than a thousand monks 
of the Sarv&stiv&din school. But their kno^edge was not in 
proportion to their zeal for they read the soriptures^ diligently 
without understanding them. They used an Indian alphab^ 
into which they had introduced alterations. 

* 8m !CUpToU>» ToSt BiMfiqtu, p. 146. ftpp4re<it]; qootiDs from CUaoM 
KHUCM. Specht, J^. 1S07, IL p. t$7. PmJa. iMtr.-nv fcMiniM SetfraJ.XMu, 
p. Sa pUB&SQ queUd Ly Sp««bi from tbe Later Haii AodaIs olMriy atete* 

the Yiteh.oUk uftde » m»a of their own cliocwfaig prioce of althcnph, u 

Fr«ake polnte out, it mekw no nfeioBee to KaokUto or tbe etery of tho hoeuiM 
relnted by HiOaq Chunog. 

* Fn*Become Cbtfb.eb'ebMbMBiaterprotedMSkudo, bat CbATuuMB Menu to 
have proTod it ie Kuh^er. 

* Aboot 643 A.n. Ho m ee tdon e tbot tbo iabeJntente tetteoed tbtir bodlM, fljkt* 
teoed tbeir obildrca** betda end had gram eyea. that they epoko a pwoliar 
Ungugo. 

202 

BUDDHISM OUTBIDS IHDIA 

[cs. 

Acconitng to Hsiian Chuang’s religioiu coDspcctiis of these 
rogioDs> Kasbgar, Osh aad Kucha belougcd to the Small 
Vehicle, Yarkand and Khotan mainly to the Great. The Small 
Voiiicle also dourisbed at BaDch and at Bamlan‘. In Kapiia 
the Groat Vehicle was predominant but there were also many 
Hindu sects : in the Kabul Talley too Hindniam and Buddhism 
Bocm to have been mised: in Persia^ there were several hundred 
Sarv&stiv&din monks. In Tokbara (roughly equivalent to 
Badaksban) there was some Buddhism but apparently it did 
not flourish further north in tlio regions of Tashkent and 
Samarkand. In the latter town there were two disused mon- 
aatenes but when Hsuan Chuang’s companions entered them 
they were mobbed by the populace. Ho says that these rioters 
were Are worshippers and that the Tur^ whom be visited 
somewhere near Aulieata were of the same religion. This last 
statement is perhaps inaccurate but the T'ong a-nnalfl expressly 
state that the population of Kashgar and Khotan was in port 
Zoroastriant. No mention of Nostorianiszn in Kashgar at this 
date has yet been discovered, although in the thirteenth century 
it was a Nostorian see. But since Nestorianism had penetrated 
even to China in the seventh century, it probably also existed 
iu Samarkand and Kashgar. 

The pilgrim Wu-K'uug spent five months in Kashgar about 
786, but there appear to be no later data of interest for the study 
of Buddhi»ni. 

The town of Kucha* lies between Kasbgar and Turfan, 
somewhat to tho west of Karosbalii. In the second century B.o. 
it was already a flourishing city. Numerous dated doooments 
show that about 680 a.s. the language of ordinary life was the 
interesting idiom sometimes called Tokborian B, since the 
Chinese annuls record no alien invasion, we may conclude that 
Kucha existed os an Aryan colony peopled by the speakers of 

^ At BktaiiiR tho noiUcs bclongoJ to (he LokottoraTailiii SehooL 

' Bool, BecurJ*, n. p, C7S. Tho laljpliu io •j’Mkiag from hgomy and it la not 
drop to wIiAt |«rt of I'cnea bo nfsr*. 

* See Cbovennee, iMKumenld sur la Toe^Kae OeatUtlw. pp, J31. 12S. The 
labeUtABta oi Ehos (^iemorktnd or Sogdiene) tro uid to honoat both nliuoiu. 
Ib. ^ J3fl. 

* Kaovn to tho Chinw by eevend «lighlly difteront niton aueh aa Ka cblh, 
Kiu.tM vlitch aro all aCUn'pla to reprcacnt Oie wune Mond. For Kuch* moS. Un'e 
meet mtoTMtio^ artiok "Lo *Tokhor«a U' Uogoo da KoaU:ha‘* in J-A. 1913 u 
pp. ail S. 

CENTRAL ASIA 

203 

XLl] 

this Ujiguage some centuries before the Christaan era. It ia 
mentioned in the Han annals and when bronght Into conUot 
with China in the reign of Wu-ti (140-87 b.c.) it became a place 
of coQsiderabie importance* ae it lay at the junction* of the 
western trade routes leadir^ to Kashgar and Aulieata respec- 
tiTely. Kucha absorbed some Chinese dvilization bat its 
doubtful loyalty to tho Imperial throne often involved it in 
trouble. It !s not until the Western Tsin dynasty that we find 
it described as a seat of Buddhism. The Tain annals say that it 
was enclosed by a triple wall and contained a thousand stupas 
and Buddhist temples as well as a magnificent palace fox the 
This implies that Buddhism bad been established for some 
time but no oridcncs has been found to date its introduction. 

Ia 383 Fu-chien, Emperor of the Tsin dynasty, sent his 
general Lii-Knang to subdue Kucha*. The expedition was 
saocessfuj and among the captives taken was the celebrated 
Kumirajiva. Lii-Kuang was so pleased with the magnificent 
and comfortable life of Kucha that he thought of settling there 
but Kum&rajlva prophesied that he was dostined to higher 
things. So they left to try their fortune in China. Lii-Kxiang 
rose to bo ruler of the state known as Southern Liang and his 
captive and adviser became one of the greatest names in Chinese 
Buddhism, 

Kujn&rajiva is a noticeable figure and his career illustrates 
several points of importance. First, his father came from 
India and he himself went as a youth to study in Kipin (Kash* 
mir) and then retxirned to Kucha. Living in this remote corner 
of Central Asia he was recognized os an encyclopaedia of Indian 
learning including a knowdedge of tho Vedas and “heretical 
Astras.” Secondly after his return to Kucha he was converted 
to Mahayaniam. Thirdly he went from Kucha to China where 
he bad a distinguished career as a translator. Thus we see how 

» J.A. lois, n, p. SM. 

* Sm CbuTAfuM io Suio'A Aneiirti Khctan, p. M4. Tho Western TUd Kilned 
2S6-S17. 

* The eitouDwUnew wtikh provoked tbo espodiUon arc not very al«ax. It vaa 
«Mort«d hy ebe kioj; of Turfao 4 q<] other sniafl potooUtca who nm tho tamaIi of 
tbA TaiB and aIm on bAd tarmi with Kuohik They prebAhly aaked Fu-«biea for 
A«isUnc« in eubduins tbAir rivil which be wai drlightcd to irivo. 6c4no AUthoritl«a 
(A(r. NofijK CAt. p. AOO} give KArMhAhr aa tho DAfn» of Kuni&njtTA’a town, bot 
tbia •c«iaa to be a ndauhe. 

aiiL 

14 

204 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

Chitift wa« brought into intellectual touch with India and how 
the Mabayana waa gaining in Central Asia territory previously 
occupied by the Einayana, The monk Dbormagupta who paased 
iJtrough Kucha about 564 Bays that the king favoured Mahayan- 
ism’. That Kucha should have been the home of distingui^ed 
trauslatoia is not strange for a statement^ has been preserved 
to the effect that Sanskrit toxta were used in the cities lying to 
the west of it, bnt that in Kucha itself Indian languages were 
not undeiBtood and translations were made, although such 
Sanskrit words as were ensQy intelligible were retained. 

lu the time of the Wei, Kucha again got into trouble with 
China and was brought to order by another punitive expedition 
in 449. After this lesson a long series of tribute-bearing nusaona 
is recorded, sent firat to the court of Wei, and afterwards to the 
Liang, Chou and Sui. The notices respecting the country are to 
a large extent repetitions. They praise its climate, fertility and 
mineral wealth: the magnidcenceof the royal palace, the number 
and splendour of the religious establishments. Peacocks were 
as common as fowls and the Chinese annalists evidently had a 
general impression of a brilhant, pleasure-loving and not very 
moral city. It was specially famous for its music: the songs and 
dances of Kucha, performed by native artiste, were long in 
favour at the Imperial Court, and a list of twenty airs has been 
preserved*. 

When the T'ang dynasty came to the throne Kucha sent an 
embassy to do homage but again supported Karashahi in 
rebellion and again brought on herself a piuiitive expedition 
(646), But the town was peaceful and prosperous when visited 
by Hsuw Chuaug about 630. 

His description agrees in substance with other notices, but 
he prwses the honsety of the people- He mentions that the 
king was a native and that a much modiBed Indian alphabet 
was in use. As a churchman, he naturally dwells with pleasure 
on the many monasteries and great images, the quinquennial 

* S. L^ri, J.A. 1613, U. p. 340, quotiag Hsil Zao Staff ChuftiL 

‘ QuoWd by 8. Liri from tho 8%%g Kac Bii»9 Cfutan. S«« J,A. ISIS, u n. S44 
tnd B.B.P.S.O^ IC04, p. 582. 

* Ai • prool of foroJgn influence in ChkoM oalturo, It is mtaratiag to not* th*t 

(bero »«* MTsn urobeMru for th* uaperiri booqaeU. includiag tfaoM ol Kueb*. 
Sokbtrs and lodJa and a Eoixad ooe in lebieb n-ere rauafeiana ffOB Sauafkand 
Kotbffar, Camboja and Japao. ’ 

CENTRAL ASIA 

205 

XLS] 

o^mbUed and religioua proceasiom. There were more than 
100 monaeteriee with upwards of 6000 brethren who all followed 
the Sairiativ&da and tho '"gradual teaching,” which probably 
means the Hinayaoa as opposed to tho sudden illumination 
caused by Mabayanist revelation. The pilgiiin differed from his 
hosts on the matter of diet and would not join them in eating 
meat. But he admits that the monks were strict according to 
th^ l^hts and that the monasteries were centres of leaining. 

In 66S Kucha was made the seat of government for the 
territory known as the Four Garrisons, thiring the nert century 
it sent several missions to the Chinese and about 78$ was viaited 
by Wu-K'ung, who indicates that music and Buddhism were 
still flourishing. He mentions an Abbot who spoke with equal 
fluency the language of the country, Chinese and Swiekrit. 
Nothing is known about ICuoba from this date until the eleventh 
century when we ag^ hoar of missions to the Chinese Court. 
Tho annals mention them under the heading of Uigurs> but 
Buddhism seems not to have been extinct for even in 1096 the 
Envoy presented to tie Emperor a jade Buddha. According to 
Hsllan Chuang's acoount the Buddhism of Karashahi (Yenki) 
was the same ae that of Kucha and its monasteries enjoyed the 
same reputation for strictness and learning. 

Turfan ie an oatis containing the ruins of several cities and 
possibly different sitee were used as the capital at different 
periods. But the whole area is so amEill that such difEerencee 
can be of little importance. The name Turfan appears to be 
modem. The Ming Annals^ state that this city lies in the 
land of ancient Ch'e*6hih (or Ka*8hih) called Kao Ch'ang in the 
time of the Sui, This name was abolished by the T'ang but 
restored by the Sung. 

The principal city now generally known as Chotacho seoms 
to be identical with Kao Ch'ang* and Idiqutehfihri and is called 
by Mohammedans Apsua or Ephesus, a curious designation 
connected with an ancient sacred site renamed the Cave of the 
Seven Sleepers. Exteuavo literary remains have been foxmd in 
the oasis; they include works in Sanskrit, Chinese, and various 
Iranian and Turkish idioms bnt also in two dialects of so-called 

^ QooMd bj BrottehMl8«r, litdiattei BtttBrefM, u. ISO. 

* MHotv ISIS, I. p. 570, fUggMU tb*t ClMtMbo or Qoev ii U» TuMih 
equivalent of Kao ^'ang in Taag pramneiatloQ, tho aaaal keins ovuUed 

206 BUDDHISM OVTS2DS IHDIA [cb 

Tokhftri&n. Blue*e;ed» rcd'bjurcd and red-bearded people are 
frequently portrayed ou tbe walls of Turfan. 

But the early history of this people and of tbdr civibtation 
is chiofly a matter of theory. In the Han period* there was a 
kingdom called Kii-sliib or Kiii-shih, with two capitals, lb wae 
destroyed in 60 b.o. by the Chinese general Ohing-Chi and eight 
emiUl prindpaiities were formed in its place. In the fourth and 
fifth centuries a.Z). Turf an had some connection with two 
ephemeral states which arose in Kansu under the names of Hou 
liang and Pd Liang. The former was founded by Lii-Kuang, 
the general who, as related above, took Kucha. He fell foul of 
a tribe in his territory called OhU*cb'u, described as belongiug 
to the Bsiung-nu. Under thdr chieftain Meng-bsiin, who 
devoted bis later years to literature and Buddhism, this tribe 
took a good deal of territory from the Hou Liang, in Turkestan 
as well as In Kansu, and called their state Pei Liai^;. It was 
conquered by the Wei dynasty in 439 and two membere of the 
late reigning house determine to try their fortune in Turfan 
and ruled there successively for about tw<»ity years. An Chou, 
the second of these princes, died in 460 and bis fame survives 
because nine years after his death a temple to Maitreya was 
dedicated in his honour with a long inscription in Chinese. 

Another line of Chineee rulers, bearing the family name oi 
Ch'iu, established themselves at Kao-ch'ang in 607 and u n der 
the Sui dynasty one of them married a Chinese princess. Tuifan 
paid due homage to the T'ang dynasty on its soooasion but later 
it was found that tributary misrions coming from the west to 
the Chinese court were stopped there and the close relations of 
its king with the western Turks inspired alarm. Accordingly it 
was deetroyed by the imperial forces in 640. This is confirmed 
by the record of Hsttan Ohuang, In his biography there is a 
description of his reception by the king of KaO'Ch'ang on his 
outward Journey. But in the account of hie travels written after 
his return he speaks of the mty as no longer existent. 

Nevertheieea the political and intellectual life of the oasis 
was not annihilated. It was conquered by the Uigurs at an 
uncertain date, but they were established there in the eighth 
and ninth centuries and about 750 their Khan adopted Manicha. 
ism as the state religion. The many manuscripts in Sogdian and 

’ ChKvwuive, Tou.tiM OeddfT^ian, p. 101. 

CBNTBAL ASIA 

207 

3CI4] 

otbet Persian dialects found at Turfan show that it had an old 
and close cormection with the west. It ia even possible that 
Mani may bare preached there himself but it does not appear 
that his t^hing became influential until about 700 a.d. The 
presence of Neetorianism is also attested. Tibetan influence too 
must have affected Turfan in the eighth and ninth centuries for 
many Tibetan documents have been found there although it 
seems to have been outaide the political sphere of Tibet. About 
843 this Uigur Kingdom was destroyed by the Kirgbia. 

Perhaps the massacres of Buddhist prieeta, clearly indicated 
by vaults filled with skeletona still wearing fragments of the 
monastic robe, occurred in this period. But Buddhism was not 
extinguished and lingered here longer than in other parts of the 
Tarim basin. Even in 1420 the people of Turfan were Buddhists 
and the Ming Aimals say that at Huo-chou (or Kara-Khojo) 
there were more Buddhist temples than dwelling housse. 

Let us now turn to Khotan^ This was the ancient as well as 
the modem name of the principal dty in the southern part of 
the Tarim botin but was modified in Chinese to Yu-t'ien, m 
Sanskrit to KusUna*. The Tibetan e^juivolent is li-yul, th6 lond 
of li, but no explanation of this designation is forthcoming. 

Traditions respecting the origin of Khotan are preserved in 
the travels of Hsuan Chuang and also in the Tibetan scriptures, 
some of which axe expressly said to be translations from the 
language of Li. These traditions are popular legends but they 
agree in essentials and appear to contain a kernel of important 
truth namely that Kbotsii was founded by two streams of 
colonization ooming from China and from India*, the latter being 
somehow coimected with Asoka. It is remarkable that the 
introduction of Buddhism is attributed not to these or^al 
colonists but to a later missionary who, according to Heuan 
Chuang, camo from Kashmir*. 

» Per Ibe bUtory of KbM*a ms lUmueat, PilU dt ISSO, *nd Stein's 

gitet work A*cis*l ^pocidtj ebiptor ?n. Per tbs ItbcUa ti^diOow ses 

Rockhai,i^#e^<A«*«Atto.pp. WOS. 

* Ku stsDs Mom U> bi9t be« • learned pe^wilon of »* neae, to male* 

a>w»a hf—it ol the wth. .. 

* TTis eombmetiea i» by the SiBo Kheroebthl com* «th • “ 

ChioM on (be obewM *od in Prakrit oa too nvem. 8m Suui, Aaami £AtXffn. 
p. SC4. Bot Uie coins an Uter tbfto 78 a.». 

* Tbe Til»»n tott toe d*u ol cooeewwn u lb« teiga of VJJsywMn* 
bbnea, 170 ymn slier toe {cuadstion ol EhoUa. 

m 

BUX>Da!SM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CB. 

This trsditioQ&l connection with India is confirmed by the 
diecovery of numerous documents written in KhuoshthS 
obaiactere and a Prakrit disJect. Their contents indicate that 
this Pr^rit was the lan«jua^e of common life and they were 
fovmd in one heap with Chinese documents dated 269 a.d. Tiie 
presence of this alphabet language is not adequately ex¬ 
plained by the activity of Buddhist missionariee for in Khotan. 
as in other parts of Asia, the eoncomitants of Buddhism are 
Sanskrit and the Brahmi alphabet. 

There was also Iranian infiaence in Khotan, It shows itself 
in art and has left indnbltahle traces in the language called by 
some Nordarisch, but when the speakers of that l^guage reached 
the oasis or what part they played there, we do not ^ know, 

As a consequence of Chang Ch'ien’s missioo mentioned above, 
Khotan sent an fi/mbasey to the Chinese Court in the reign of 
Wa*ti (140-87 B,o.) (Old the T'ang Annals state that its kings 
banded down the insignia of Imperial investiture from that time 
onwards. There seems however to have been a dynastic revolu¬ 
tion about 60 A.D. and it is poesihle that the Vijaya line of 
kings, meutioDed in various Tibetan works, then began to reign^. 
Khotan became a powerful state but submitted to conquering 
aims of Pan-Ch'ao and perhaps was subsequently subdned by 
Kanishka. As the later Han dynasty declined, it again became 
strong but continued to send emba^ee to the Imperial O^urt. 
There is nothing more to mentbn until the visit of Pa-Hsien in 
400. He deecribee “the pleasant and prosperous kingdom ” with 
evident gusto. There were some tone of thousands of monJea 
mostly followers of the Mahayana and in the coimtiy, where the 
homes of the people were scattered “like stars” about the oseee, 
each bouse bad a small stupa before the door. He stopped in 
a well ordered convent with 3000 monks and mentions a 
magnificent eetablishment called The King's New Monastery. 
He also deecribee a great car feetival which shows the Indian 
colour of Khotaneee rehgion. Perhaps Pa-HsieQ and Heuan 
Chuaag unduly emphasize ecclesiastical features, but they also 
did not hesitate to say when they thought things imsatisfactory 
and their praise shows that Buddhism was flourishing. 

In the fifth and sixth centuries Khotan passed through 
troublous times and was attacked by the Tangute. Juan-Juan 

* 6m Stoo Soaow In 1014, p. SiS. 

QBUTRAL ASIA 

xu] 

m 

and White Huns. Throughout this stormy period missions were 
sent at intervals to China to beg for help. The pilgrim Sung Yun^ 
traversed the oa^ in SI9. His account of the numerous banners 
bearing Chinese inscriptions hxmg up in the temple of Han-mo 
proves that though the political influence of China was weak, 
she was still in touch with the Tarim basin. 

When the T'ang effectively asserted their suaerainty in 
Central Asia, Khotan was included in the Four Garrisons. The 
T'ang AnnaU while repeating much which is found in earlier 
accounts, add some points of interest, for they say that the 
Khotaneso revere the God of Heaven {Hsien ehSn) and also the 
Law of Buddha*. This undoubtedly means that there were 
Zoroastrians as well as Buddhists, which ia not mentioned in 
earlier periods. The annals also mention that the king’s house 
was decorated with pictures and that his family name was Wei 
Ch'ih. This may possibly be a Chinese rendering of Vijaya, the 
Sanskrit name or title which according to Tibetan sources was 
borne by all the sovereigns of Khotan. 

Hsuan Chuang broke his return journey at Khotan in 644. 
He mentions the fondness of the people for mutio tmd says 
that their language differed from that of other countries. The 
MaMyina was the prevalent sect but the pilgrim stopped in a 
monastery of the Sarvfistivfldins*. He describe several rites in 
the neighbourhood, particularly the Goriinga or Cow-hom 
mountain*, supposed to have been visited by the Buddha, 
Though he does not mention Zoroastrians, he notices that the 
people of P'i-mo near Khotan were not Buddhists, 

About 674 the king of Khotan did personal homage at the 
Chineee Court. The Emperor constituted his territory into a 
government called P'i-sha after the deity P'i-aha*m6n or 
VaHravana and made him responribls for its administratton. 
Another king did homage between 742 and 766 and received an 
imperial princess as hia consort. Chinese political influenoe waa 
effective until tbo last decade of the eighth century but aft^ 
790 the conquests of the Tibetans put an end to it and there is 

• Su S<«n, AncUal iOoto*, pp. 170, 4M. 

• OftTfcMw, p. 126, flt pp. 121 Mid 170. For Htlcn ihSn •« GiIm • 

Ckiwt No. 4477. 

• P« 206. . V w 

• Iddotified by Kohmarl UiU which u etoU rovoxed by Mobamiaadana 

M ft ftftond ipet. 

210 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

no mention oi KhoUn in the Chme«) AnnalB for about ISO years. 
Numoroua Ttbetaa manuscripts and inscriptions found atEnder« 
testify to these conquests. The rule of tlie Uiguia who replaced 
Tibet as the dominant power in Tarfan and the northern Tarim 
basin does not appear to have extended to Khotan. 

It >8 not till 998 that we hew of renewed diplomatic relations 
with China, The Imporial Court received an embassy from 
Kholan and deemed it of sufficient importance to despatch a 
special mission in return. Eight other embassies were sent to 
China In the tenth century and at least three of them were 
accompanied by Buddhist priests. Their object was probably to 
solicit help against the attacks of Mohammedans. No details 
are known as to the Mohammedan conquest but it apparently 
took place between 970 and 1009 after a long struggle. 

Another cultural centre of the Tarim basin must have eadsted 
in the oases near Lob*nor where Miran and a nameless site to 
the north of the lake have been investigated by Stein. They 
have yielded numerous Tibetan documents, but also fine remains 
of Gandharan art and Prakrit documents written in the ICharo- 
shthl character. Probably the use of this language and alphabet 
was not common further east, for though a KharosbthS fragment 
was found by Stoin in an old Chinese frontier post^ the library 
of Tun-huang yielded ao specimens of them. That library, how¬ 
ever. dating apparenlly from the epoch of the 'ToDg. contained 
some Sanskrit Buddhist literature and was rich in Sogdion. 
Turldsb, and Ilbetaa manuscripts. 

4 

Ample as are the materials for the study of Buddhism in 
C^traX Asia those hitherto pnblishod throw little light on the 
Umo and manner of its introduction. At present much is 
h^thetical for wc have few hietorical data—such as the career 
erf Knmirajtva and tho inscription on the Temple of Mailreya 
at Turfan—but a great mass of literary and artistic evidence 
tpom wiuch various deductions can be drawn. 

It is cloQx that there was constant intercourse with India and 
the 0x118 region, The use of Prakrit and of various Iranian 
Idioms points to actual colonization from these two quarters and 

* CaAty, D. p. lit 

CENTRAL ASIA 

211 

yu] 

it is probable that there were two streams of Buddhism, for the 
Chinese pilgrims agree that Sban-sbau (near Lob*noT), Turfan, 
Kueba and Kashgar were Hinayinist, whereas Yarkand and 
Khotan were Mohiylnist. Further, much of the architecture, 
sculpture and pmting is simply Gandbaran and the older 
epedmens can hardly bo separated from the Gandharan art ol 
^dia by any considerable inteiral. This art was in part coeval 
with Kanisl^a, and if his reign began in 78 a.d. or later the fUat 
specimens of it cannot be much anterior to the Christian era. The 
earliest Chinese notices of the existence of Buddhism in Kashgar 
and Kucha date from 400 (Fa-Hsien) and the third century 
(Annals of the Tain, 265-3L7) respectively, but they speak of it 
as the national religion ood munidcently endowed, so that it 
may well have been established for some centiiries. In Toifan 
the dist definite record is the dedication of a temple to M^treya 
in 460 but probably the history of religion there was much the 
same as in Kucha. 

It is only In Khotan that tradition, if not history, gives a 
more detailed narrative. This is found in the works of the Chinese 
pilgrims Hauan Chuong and Sung Yiin nud also in four Tibetan 
works which are apparently translated from the language ol 
Khotan^. As the story is substantially the same in aU, it merits 
consideration and may be accepted as the account current in 
the literary circles of Khotan al^ut 600 a.n. It relates that the 
IndiauB who were part-founders of that city in the reign of 
Asoka were not Buddhists^ and the Tibetan verson places the 
conversion with great apparent accuracy 170 years after tho 
foundation of the kingdom and 404 after the death of the 
Buddha. At that time a monk named Vairocona, who woe an 
incamation of Manju^ri, cELme to Khotan, according to Hsiian 
Chiiang from Kashmir^. He is said to have introduced a new 
language as well os MahOyftnism, and the king, Vijayasambhava, 
built for bim the great monastery of Tearma out^e tbe capital, 
which was miraculously supplied with relics. We cannot be sure 

* 8m Wfttten, ySanC&ttnf,i{.p.29d. B«ftl,£>/s.p.205. duTUioet.'‘Voya^ 

do Sqq; Yqo." fi.S.P.S.O. 2903, 393. ni iot tOo TibtUa wbr««. RoekhUU Lift 
r>S at viTL Oii« of tb« four TitoUa works i3 Bzpnsrij itetod to b« 

truil&Wd Uoa KkotaaoM. 

* Tbs Tibotoa ChrooielM of £i*Yui m; that tb«)' wonbipped VaUmtobb and 
6rhimhid«Tt. 

* A monk from ICubmir colled Vairooau wm &bo tetire in Tibet «bgot 750 «.e. 

21Z 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CB. 

th»t the Tibetan d&tee were intended to have the meaning they 
would bear for our chronology, that ia about 30 s.c., but if they 
had, there is nothing unprobaide in the atory, for other traditions 
assert that Buddhism was preached in K*Afl>imir in the of 
Aaoka. On the other hand, there was a dynastic change in 
Khofan about 60 a.d. and the monarch who then came to the 
throne may have been Vi}ay86ambhava. 

According to the Tibetan account no more monasteries were 
built for seven reigns, ^e eighth king built two, one on the 
celebrated Goeirsha or Goeiinga mountain. In the eleventh reign 
after Vijayaeambhava, more chaityas and viharas were built in 
connection with the introduction of the silkworm industry. 
Subse^^uently, but without any clear indication of date, the 
introduction of the Mahksangh^a and Sarv&stivftdln schools is 
mentioned. 

The Tibetan annals also mention several persecutions of 
Buddhism in Khotan as a result of which the monks ded to 
Tibet and Bruzha. Their chronology is confused but seems to 
make these troubles coincide with a persecution in Tibet, 
presumably that of Lang-dar'ma. If so, the persecution in 
Khotan must have been due to the early attacks of Moham¬ 
medans which preceded the final conquest in about 1000 a.D.' 

Xeither the statements of the Chinese annalists abont Central 
Asia nor its own traditions prove that Buddhism fioorished there 
before the Christian era. But they do not disprove it and even 
if the dream of the Emperor Uing-Ti and the consequent 
embassy are diBmissed os legends, it is admitted that Buddhism 
penetrated to China by land not later than the early decades of 
that era, It must therefore have been known in Central Asia 
previously and perhaps Khotan was the place where it first 
fiourished. 

It is fairly certain that about 160 d.g. the Yueh*ohIh moved 
westwards and settled in the lands of the Oxus after ejecting 
the Sakas, but like many warlike nomads they may have oscil¬ 
lated between the east ^ weet, recoiling If they struck against 
a powerful adversary in either quarter. Le Coq has put forward 
an interesting theory of theix origin. It is that they were one 
of the tribes known as Scythians in Europe and at an unknown 

ft! hs&di ei tbs Tmogut*. tnd White Hons. 

CENTRAL ASIA 

21 » 

m] 

pericd moved eaetwarda from southern ItiasU, perhaps Je*ving 
traces of their presence in the monuments still existing m the 
district of Minussmsk. He also identldee them with the red- 
haired, blue-eyed people of the Chotscho freecoee and the 
speakers of the Tokharian language. But th^ intereating 
hypotheses cannot be regarded as proved. It is, however, certain 
that the Yiieh-chih invaded India*, founded the Kushan Empire 
and were mtimafely connected (especially in the person of th fir 
great ^g Kaaishka) with Gandharan art and the fona of 
Buddhism which finds expreeaion in it- Now the .Chinese 
pilgrim Fa-Hsien {c. 400) found the Blnay&oa prevalent in 
ShMa^shan, Kuoha, Kashgar, Oah, tFdysma and Gandhara. 
Hsuan Chuang also notes its presence in Balkh, Bamian, and 
Pemia. Both notice that the Mah&yina was predominant in 
Khotan though not to the exclusion of the other school. It 
would appear that in modem language the North-West I^utier 
provinoe of India, Afghanistan, Badakshan (with small adjoining 
states), the Pamir regions and the Tarim baain all accepted 
Gandharan Buddhism and at one tune formed part oi the 
Kashan Empire. 

It is probably to this Gandharan Buddhism that the Chinese 
pilgrims refer when they speak of the SarvIstivAdm school of 
the Hinayina as prevalent. It is known that this school was 
closely connected with the Council of Kanishka. Its meta¬ 
physics were decidedly not Mahly&nist but there is no reason 
why it should have objected to the veneration of such Bodhisat- 
tvas oe are portrayed in the Gandhara sculptures. An interesting 
passage in the life of Hsiian Chuang relates that he had a dilute 
in Kucha with a Mah&y&nist doctor who maintained that the 
books called Tsa-hsin, Chii-shd, and P'i-sha were sufficient for 
salvation, and denounced the Yoga44atra as heretical, to the 
great indignation of the pilgrim* whose practical definirion of 
Mah&yAnism seems to have been the acceptance of this work, 

* Tbo IaW Haii Acfuis «»7 Chat ^ Hiodos at* vcAket tbe 

AndAr«n9tMQaAtom«dtofl^tt«c«uiaAth«7M*Suddliiit«. (See .Pso, IdlC, 

p. 192.) Thi» MOM to ini{d7 that the Tflek-eluh wen not BoddhifU. But eren 
tU» WM the rul vww oi the complu of ibe iaaiJi we do oot blow froa what 
work b» Wok tkie AUtement not to wbit date it nlen 

* See Beal Li/t, p. 39, Jatieo, p. SO. Tbo books mcotioiMd an ap pw tfttfy the 
SaBTokUbhidbarBakridara (Nttjio, IS?), Abbldbame Eoeha (Naajio, 126?), 
Ahkidbafnia>TibUeba (I7e4uio, 12M>eod7o^4o&i;«bbilim (Nan^io, 1170). 

2i4 BXJDDmSM OUTSIDE INDIA [CB. 

reputed to have been revealed by Ma’treya to Aeanga. Such a 
definition and division ought leave in the ffinayfina much that 
w© should not expect to find there. 

The Mah&yinist Buddhism of Khotan was a sepabrate stream 
and Hsiian Chuang says that it came from Kaehmir. Though 
Kashmir is not known as a centre of Mahiyiniam, yot it would 
be a natural route for men and ideas passing from any part of 
India to Khotan. 

5 

The Tarim basin and the lands of the Oxus* were a n^on 
where different reli^ns and cultures mingled and there ie no 
difficulty in supposing that Buddhism might have amalgaiuatod 
there with Zoroaetrianiam or Christianity. The question is 
whether there is any evidence for such amalgamation. It is 
above all in its relations with China that Central A»a appears 
as an exchange of religions. It passed on to China the art <md 
thought of India, perhaps adding something of its own on the 
way and then received them back from China with further 
additions*. It certainly received a great deal from Persia: the 
number of manuscripts in different Iranian languages puts this 
beyond doubt. Equally vmdoubted is its debt to India, hut it 
would be of even greater interest to determine whether Indian 
Buddhism owes a debt to Central Asia and to define that debt. 
For Tibet the relation was mutual. The Tibetans occupied the 
Taiim basin during a century and according to their traditions 
monks went from Khotan to instruct Tibet. 

The Buddhist Uteratuie discovered in Central Ama represents, 
like its architecture, several periods. We have firat of all the 
fragments of the Sanskrit Agomas. found at Xuifan, Tun-huang. 
and in the Khotan district; fragments of the dramas and poems 
of A^aghesha from Tiurfan: the Prhtimoksba of the Sarvasti- 
v&dins from Kucha and numerous versions of the anthology 
called Bharmapada or Ud&na. The most interesting of these is 
the Pr^mit version found in the neighbourhood of Khotan, hot 
fragments In Tokhariao and Saaskrit have also been discovered. 

‘ The iaiportiiace of tho Tuim Imsb ia due to the oxceUenfc preaarretioa of lU 
racoxda fuid ita cloec oeimeetioD vitb Chmiu The Oxua K^ioiia avSeced more from 
Uebemmadim lOonoeUam, hub they me; have been at lean eqoalty important for 
the history of BoddhiaoL 

* B.9. ae* (ha hfaitraya ioacriptiOD of Tnrfao. 

CENTRAL ASIA 

216 

ZLI] 

All this literature probably represente the caDon aa it existed m 
the epoch of Kaniahka ajitJ of the Gajidharan sculpturee, or at 
least the older stratum la that eaooo. 

The never stratum is composed of Mah&y&niat sutrae of 
which there is a great abundance, though no complete list has 
been published ^ The popularity of the Prsyfil-piramitA, the 
Lotus and the Suvama-prabhisa is attested- The last waa 
translated into both TJigur (from the Chinese) and into ‘‘Iracden 
Onental,” To a still later epoch* belong the Dh&rapSs or ma gf oa l 
formula which have boon discovered in considerable quantitiee. 

Sylv^ livi has shown that somo Mah&yinist sutras were 
either written or re-edited in Central Asia®. Not only do they 
contaiu lists of Central Asian place-names but these receive an 
importance which con be explained only by the local patriotism 
of the writer or the public wliicb he addressed. Thus the Surya- 
garbha sutra praisos the mountain of Oo^jnga near Khotan 
much as the Puranas celebrate in special chapters called 
Mahatmyas the uieiits of some holy place. £ven more remark* 
able is a U«t in the Chandragarbba sutra. Tho Buddha in one of 
the great trai)!<formatioa scenes common in these works Bonds 
forth rays of light which produce innumerable manifestations of 
Buddhas. India (together with what is called tho western region) 
has a total of 813 manifestations, whereas Central Asia and China 
have 071. Of these the whole Chinese Empire has 256, the 
kingdoms of Khctan and Kucha have 180 and respectively, 
but only 60 are giveu to Benares and 30 to Magadha. Olevly 
Central Asia was a very important place for the autlior of thi 
list*. 

One of the TurkiBh sntras discovered at Turfan contains a 
discourse of the Buddha to tho merchants Trapusha and Bhallika 
who are described as Turks and ludra is called Kormusta, that 
is Hormuzd. In another BrahmS. is called A^rua, identihed as 
tlie Iraoiaa deity Zervan®. In these instances no innovation of 
doctrine is implied but when tlie world of spirits and men 

^ Or ie*Mi >« iwi Moeaubls to im Iism in Henst:oB& 

* 1 do not oMen to «ay ih&t tU iir» Into. 

* It i» prabatlo thM k^ryphol SUbu were compoecid in Centrel A»[t- 

8m IVIUot in <rind*aiUfmt, Syivklo Ldri, p. dSS. 

* T)ie lat ol DUtnilMtAUwu k JuDbudvipa rnaraenius 50 kinsdoma AH Monoi 
be ulentifisd with oertoin^, but eppermtly kes tbap bedf ere wiUua lodk proper 

* See BihL JtiM. w. pp. 44, 4S, iiv. p. 46. 

m BUXH>EISM OUTSIDE INDIA [ ch . 

becomea Cental instead of ladiwi, it is only natural th&i 
the doctrine too should take on wme local colour • 

Xhns the dated inscription of the temple erected in Turfan 
A.D. 469 U a mixture of Chineee ideas, both Oonfua^ and 
Taoist, vith Indian. It is in honour of Maitreya, a Bodhisattva 
known to the HSnaytoa, hut here regarded not merely as the 
future Buddha but as an active and beneyolent d«ty who 
manSfeats himself in many forma*, a view which also finda 
expression in the tradition that the works of Asai^a were 
revelations made by him. Akaiagaibhs and the Dharmakiya 
are mentioned. But the inscription also speaks of heaven (t len) 
as appointing princes, and of the imiversal law (tao) and it 
oonfcaina several references to CJhinese literature. 

Even more remarkable is the admixture of Buddhism m 
Mamchoism. The discoveries made in Central Aaa mike 
intelligihle the Chinese edict of 739 which accuses the Mam- 
chjeans of falsely taking the name of Buddhism and deceiving 
the people*. This is not supprieing for Maui seems to have taught 
that Zoroaster, Buddha and Christ had preceded him as 
apostles, and in Buddhist coimtriea hie followers naturally 
adopted words and symbols familiar to the people. Thus 
Manichaan deities are represented like Bodhisattvas sitting 
cross-legged on a lotus; Mani receives the epithet Ju-lai ox 
Tathftgata: ae in Amida's Paradise, there are holy trees bearing 
fiowers which encloss beii^ styled Buddha: the conrtmotion 
and phraseology of Manichean books resemble thcM of a 
Buddhist Sutra*. In some ways the association of Tadsm and 
Manlchsism was even closer, for the Hu-hua-ching identifies 
Buddha with Lao-tefi and Mani, and two Manichaan books have 
passed into the Taoist Canon*. 

( The Tnrkiih lutm npeetedly et;1etbs Buddbfr Qpd (c'«Dgtl) er Ood of Gods. 
The espte«iwi Wtidwe u *pptod to him In Seaaicrit, but tb« Twkiih phmeee 
ftTO taom deoidod end freqomt. Th« Sudtrit phrsM may be due to Ireolaa 

ioQoeoce. . ^ 

* An Cbou, the Prince to whoee meoory the uapk wm dediBeted, Mezae to 
be newded u » nenlicctotien of Ueitoeyk 

■ J.A. ISIS. X. P- 1S4. The earies of three artielM by ChuTAonee and FeJuot 
•ntitled “Gn Uaito Uani^ton letteued en Chine" [J~A. IS 11, ISIS) it a BOft 
TAluable ceotribalioe to out knowledge d Maniobauam io Contnl Am* ead Chiu *. 

• ice J.A. leil, pp. 609 and fiSft See alao Le Ooq, 8itiA preuee- Abtd. der 
WiM. 48, 1909, ISCS'ISLS. 

» J.A. ISIS, L pp. U6 and 132. 

CENTRAL ASIA 

217 

xxi] 

Ndstorian Cbiistianity also existed in the Taris) baein and 
became prominent in the serenth oentmy. Tbis agrees mth the 
record of its introducUon into Cbina by A-lo-pen in 636 a.D.» 
almost eimultaneonaly vitb Zoroastrianism. Fragments of the 
Now Testament hare been found at Tuifan belonging mostly 
to tbe ninth century but one to the £ftb. The moet interesting 
document for the history of Nestorianiam is s^ the monument 
discovered at Si-ngan-fu and commonly called the Kestorian 
stone^. It bean a long inscription partly in Chinese and partly 
in Syriac composed by a fore^ priest called Adam or in Chinese 
King'Tsing giving a long accoimt of the doctrines and history 
of Nestorianiam, Not only dose inscription contain many 
Buddhist phrases (such as Sdng and Ssu for Christian priests 
and monasteries) but it deliberately omits all mentfon of the 
cmcihxion and merely says in speaking of tbe creation that God 
arranged the cardinal points in the shape of a cross. This can 
hardly be explained as due to incomplete statement for it reviews 
in some detail riie life of Christ and its results. Tbe motive of 
omisrion muet be the feeling that redemption by his death was 
not an acceptable doctrine*. It is inteiosting to find that King- 
Tsing consorted with Buddhist priests and even set about 
translating a sutra from tbe Hu lax^age. Takakusu quotes a 
passage from one of the oatsloguee of the Japanese Tripitaka* 
which states that be was a Persian and collaborated with a monk 
of Kapiia called Prajfia. 

We have thus clear evidence not only of the co-existence oJ 
Buddhism and Christianity but of friendly relations between 
Buddhist and Christian priests. The Emperor's objecrion to such 
commixture of religions was unusual and probably due to zeal 
for pure Buddhism. It is posalbU that in western China and 
Central Asia Buddhism, Taoism, Manichaism, Nestorianism and 
Zoroastrianism all b( rowed from one Nnotber juet as the first 
two do in Chiii<b to day and Boadhiion may hr* o become 
modified by this contact. But proof of it is necessary. In most 
places BuddhUm was in atren^ and number.^ the most im* 

’ 8«o «9p«(iaU7 HATTOt, ebnitiCTinQ Si*&gAn4Q'* in A'no* 

legvu. pp. 7,18 An4 SO. 

* 8m HsTtov, te. tn. p, 04, foi Mnn« intotf sti r*TBArha mipMtiss tK» uoA'iHing* 
DMA <A tb« K«*toriuii And aIm of Ui» MUtt to giTo pnhitcitf Uh> rraeiSsia. 

■ Sm TakAkon, l-Uinff, pp. IS9, 223. and Toupg Puo, fSSC. (K SSO 

21 $ 

BVPmiSM 0VT8IDB INDIA 

[CH. 

portant of all these religions and older than all except ZoroaS' 
tiianism. Its contact with Manichasm may possibly date from 
the life of &fani»bQt apparently the earliest Christian manuscripts 
found in Central Asia are to bo assigned to the fifth century. 

On the other hand the Chinese Tiipitaka contains many 
translations which bear an earlier date than this and are 
oecribed to translators connected with the Yiieh-chih, I see no 
reason to doubt the statements that the Happy Land sutra and 
Prajfi&-p$ramitd (Nanjfo. 35, 5) wore translated before 200 a.n. 
and portions of the Avatamsaka and Lotas (Nuijio, iOO, 103, 
13$) before 300 a.n. But if so, the principal doctrinoa of 
Mabayanist Buddhism must have been known in Khotan^ and 
the lands of Oxus before wo havo <l<^nlt43 evidence for the 
presence of Christianity there. 

Zoroastrianism may however have contributed to the de¬ 
velopment and transformation of Buddhism for the two were 
certainly in contact. Thus the coins of K^mishka bear figures of 
Persian dehdcs^ more £re<|aently than images of the Buddha: 
we know from Chinese sources that the two religions co existed 
at Kbotan and Kashgar and possibly there are hostile rcforeoces 
to Buddhism (Bulti and Gaotema the heretic) in the Persian 
scriptures*. 

It is true that we should be cautious in fancying that we 
detect a foreign origin for tbo Mab$y&na. Different as it may 
be from the Buddhism of the Pali Canon, it is an Indian not an 
exotic growth. Deification, pantheism, the creation of radiant 
or teirible deities, extreme forms of idealism or nihilism in 
metaphysics are tendencies manifested in Hinduism as clearly 
as in Buddhism. Even the doctrine of the Buddha's three 
bodies, which sounds like on imitation of the Christian Ihinity, 
has roots in the centuries before the ObrisCfan era. But late 
Buddhism indubitably borrowed many personages from the 
Hindu pantheon, and when we find Bulbas and Bodhisattvas 
such OS Amit&bha, Avalokita, Manju^ and Kshitigarbha with¬ 
out clear antecedents in India we may suspect that they are 
borrowed from some other mythology, and if similar figures 
were known to Zoroastrianism, that may bo their source. 

> Turfas Aod Ku«b4 are epoken o{ *■ betn^ neioly mn&y&niab. 

* See fibaln, Zorcasirian iitiia os coOu. ISST. 

• See rv. < Voodjdad} pp. 146, rOO; xsio. p. 184, ». p. m. 

VmTRAl ASIA 

xuj 

219 

The most important of thorn is Amitibhs. He is strangely 
obscxiro in the earlier art and literature of Indian Buddhism. 
Some of tbc nameless Buddha figures in the GaudbaraQ sculp¬ 
tures may represent him, but this is not proved and the vorks 
of Grunwcdel andFoQchersu^;est that compared with Avalokita 
and T&r& his images are Ute and not numerous. In the earlier 
part of the Lotus^ he is only just mentioned as if he were of no 
special importance. He is also mentioned towards the end of 
the Awakening of Tmth ascribed to A&vagbosha, but the author¬ 
ship of the work cannot be recorded os certain and, if it were, 
the passage stands apart from the main iu’gument a-nH might 
well be an addition. Again ia tho Mah& 3 '&Da*sdti&lahk&ra* of 
Asanga, las paradise is just mentioaed. 

Against tbeso meagre and cursory notices in Indian literature 
may be set the fact that two translations of the principal 
Amidist scripture into Chinees were tnade in the second century 
A.i). and foiu* in the third, all by natives of Central Asia. The 
inference that the worship cf Amlt&bha fiounshed in Central 
Asia some time before the earliest of these translations is 
irresistible. 

According to T&rauAtba, the Tibetan histocan of Buddhism*, 
this worship goes back to Saiaha or Bahulabhadra. He was 
reputed to have been the teacher of N&girjmia and a great 
magician. He saw Amitftbba in the land of Dhingkota and died 
with his face turned towards Sukh&vatl. I have found no 
explanation of the name Bhingkofa but the name Saraba does 
not sound Indian. He is said to have been a sudra and be is 
represented in Tibetan pictures with a beard and topknot and 
bolding an arrow* in his band. In all this there la little that 
con be called history, but still it appears that the first person 
whom tradition connects with the worship of Amitibba was 
of low caste, bore a foreign name, saw the deity in an unknown 
country, and like many tantric teachers was represented os 
totally unlike a Buddhist monk. It cannot be proved that he 
came from tho luida of tho Oxus or Turkestan, but sneh an 

I Chap. TU. The boUcm ia Obapa zxn. and XSir. an ntbor mon dateilad bnt 
alw laur. 

* zo. p. ?3. 

* TraaaL 6ebteftur» pp. 93,100 and 803, and Paodor'a .Poju&een, Ifo. lb But 
T&fMAtbo also that ho waa Ji^adova’a pujaL 

* io Suahiit. 

aCL 

15 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[OH. 

220 

fTyjgiB vould explain much in the tradition. On the other hand, 
there would be no difficulty in aocoun^g for Zoroaetrian 
[nf aence at Peehawar or Takka^ within the frontier of India. 

Somewhat later Vaaubandhu le stated to have preached faith 
in Amitibha but it does not appear that thia doctrine ever bad 
in India a tithe of the importance which it obtained in the Far 
East. 

The essential features of Amidiat doctnne are that there la 
a paradise of light belonging to a benevolent deity and that 
the good* who invoke bis name will be led thither. Both 
features are found in Zoroaatrian wiitlogs. The highest heaven 
(following after the paradises of good thoughts, goc^ words and 
good deeds) is called Boundlees Light or Endless Lights Both 
this le^on and its master, Ahvamazda, are habitually spoken 
of in terms implying radiance and glory. Also it is a land of 
song, just as Aroit&bha’s paradise re*echoes with music and 
pleasant sounds*. Prayers can win this paradise and Ahura 
Mazda and the Archangels will come and show the way thither 
to the pious*. Further whoever recites the Ahuna-vairya 
formula, Ahura Mazda wiU bring his soul to “the lights of 
heavez}*/’ and although, so far as I know, it is not expressly 
stated that the repetition of Ahura Mazda's name leads to 
paradise, yet the general efficacy of bis names as invocations Is 
clearly affirmed*. 

Thus all the chief featuree of Amit&bha’s paradise are 
Persian: only bis method of instituting it by making a vow is 
Buddhist. It is true that Indian imagination had conceived 
numerous paradises, and that the early Buddhist legend tells of 
the Tushita heaven. But Sukh&vati is not like these abodes of 
bliss. It appears suddenly in the history of Buddhism a« some' 
thing exotic, grafted adroitlj on the parent trunk hat sometimes 
oveigrowing it’. 

' Tb« dMtnas of «atv*etoa by Mtb ftloM Meat to b« Uter. The longer ead 
•ppuentlj oTdor verMa of CK« SnhhSTaU VyChe isfiiW oa good votlci u a ooa* 
dltk« of eolry ioto PermdiM. 

* 8.B.B. XT. p. SOS; i6. mm . pp. S17 end 344. 

* It me; eleo be aotfeod tbet amcKCtt, the Afchangel of inuBorUlity. pneldM 
over vegeUtun eod tbeC Amide’e pmMiiic is full of Covers. 

* S.B.S. xxiiL pfk 335-7. » B.B.B. *xii. p, 2S1. 

* S.B.S. XZT1L pp. 21-31 (the Ormeed Yeeht). 

’ It poeefblo Utet there is an; ooaneofioo betwaon SokhSTatl and the land of 
fiauhaTMtiD. eovernod by ao immortal rulor aod loeaud by tba Bondshuh between 

CBSTTtAL ASIA 

221 

Avalokitfr is also connected with AmitAbha’s paradise. His 
figure, though ita origin is not clear, assumes distinct and con- 
spiouoQs proportions in India at a fairly early date. There 
appears to be no reason for associating him specially with 
Central Asia. On the other hand later woria deaoribe him as 
the spiritual son or reflex of AmitAbha, This certainly recalls 
the Iranian idea of the FraTashi defined as “a spiritaal being 
conceived as a part of a man^s personality but existing before 
he is bom and in independence of him: it can also beJoi^ to 
divine b^ga^." Although India offew in abundance both div^ 
incarnations and explanarions thereof yet none of these describe 
tbe relationship between a DhyAm Buddha and his Boddhisattva 
BO well as the Zoroastrian doctrine of the Fravashi. 

S. lAvi has suggested that tbe Bodhisattva Manju^r! is ^ 
Tokharian origin*. His worship at Wu-tai-shan in Shan-ri is 
anwent and later Indian tradition connected him with China. 
Local traditions also connect him with Nepal, Tibet, and KhotM, 
and he is sometimes represented as the first teacher of civili¬ 
zation or religion. But although his Central Asian origin is 
eminently probable, I do not at present see any clear proof of it. 

The case of the Bodhisattva Kshitigarbha^ is sunilar. He 
appears to have been known but not proitunent in India in the 
fourth century a.d. : by the seventh century if not earlier hia 
cult was flourishing in China and eobsequently he became in 
the Far East a popular deity second only to Kuan-yin. This 
popularity woe connected with his gradual transformation into 
a god of the dead. It is also certain that he was known in Central 
Aaa* but whether he first became important there or in China 
is hard to decide. The devotion of the Chinese to th^ dead 
auggeeU that it was among them that he acquired hia great 
position, but his role as a guide to the next world has a paxalW 
in the similar benevolent activity of the Zoroaatrian angel Sroah. 

Tutkirtan 4n<i CWsiaten? I imssla® tba» it oo slytaolo^l reUtioMhip, butJi 
BsukivMun WM wU known m s Und of Ite ble«d ii moy hoTo lafiaeacod tbe 
ehc^ of ft eisBificft&t Seukrii word with ft lizailftr louad. 

t nb tfoet. , 

• J.A. 1912, L p. m. Uofertoiifttoly ody ft brief of bie ewmoiaUcftboo 

\g mw with no detftUft See ftleo 3. Wn. pp. 830 ft 

• Ti MftoS la Jl*ft bi Jftpoacee. See tor hU hiftoiy Tumt'i elftbortto 

ftrtieke in OetftriofiwAe Zl^i- 191^1916, . * - v» t a 

• He wM ftcoeptftd by tbe Xuiehatat ae one oi the ZftToye of light 

1911,0, p. 549. 

S22 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [CE. XLi 

One of Central Asia's clearest titles to importanco in the 
history of the East is that it was the earliest and on the whole 
the principal source of Chinese Buddhism, to which I now tum. 
Somewhat later, teachers also came to China by sea and still 
later, onder the Yuan dynasty, Lamaism was introduced direct 
from Tibet. But from at least the beginning oi onr era onwards, 
monhs went eastwards from Central Asia to preach and translate 
the scriptures and it was across Central Asia that Chinese 
pilgrims went to India in search of the truth. 

CHAPTER XLII 

CHINA 

Prefatory note. 

Fob the traoBcriptioa of Chinese words I use the modern Peking 
proDOJidM^cn ae rapmeeuted in Giles's Biotionu;. It maj be justly 
objected that of all dialects Pekingese la perhaps the furthest removed 
from ancient Chinee© and therefor© uneuilcd for historical Btadiee 
and also that Wade’s system of transcription employed by Giles is 
open to serious oriticlsm. Bui» on the other hand, I am not oompotent 
to write according to the pronunciation of Nanking or Canton all 
the names which appear in these chapteis and, if 1 were, it would 
not be a convenience to my readers. Almost all English woika of 
reference about China use the forms registered In Giles’s Dictionary 
or near approximations to them, and any variation would produce 
difficulty and confuaioo. Fronch and German methods of transcribing 
Chinoee differ widely from Wade’s and unfortunately there seem# to 
bo no prospect of sinologues (^TC*ting on any international sy>rt«iu, 

IlTTBOPUCTOBy. 

The study of Cbineee Buddhism is iotciostiiig but difficult^. 
Here more than in other Asiatic countries we feel that the words 
and phrases natural to a European language fail to render justly 
the elementary forms of thought, the simplest relationships. 
But Europeans are prone to exaggerate the mysterious, topsy¬ 
turvy character of Chinese mind. Such epithets are based 
on the assumption that human thought and conduct normally 
conform to reason and logic, and that when such conformity ia 
wanting the insult must be strongo and hardly human, or at 
least such as no icspoclable European could expect or approve. 
But the assumption is wrong. In no countiy with which I am 

> tot BoddbAio *» eepcoallj Jolia»t«o, Cftinut AicZetAwm, ISIS (cited 

M JohnilOflJ. Much Infermetioo about tbe popolar aid® el BoddbiBo end T»ol»a 
may be tound in AtStfcAw ?ec nperlUiont par Is Pto flean Port, 

10 Tob. 191U101S, fibangbai (tited u Dori^ 

224 BVDDHISM OVTSWB INDIA [<m. 

ftcquainted are lo^c and co-erdination of ideaa more wanting 
than in tiie Britieb Isles. This is not altogether a fault, for human 
systems are imperfect and the rigorous applioation of any one 
imperfect system must end in disaster. But the student of 
Asiatic psychology must be^ his task by recognising that in 
the West and East alike, the thoughts of nations, thoi^h not 
always of individuals, are a confus^ mosaic where the pattern 
has been lost and a thonsand fancies esteemed at one time or 
another as pleasing, oselul or respectable are crowded into the 
available apace. This is especially true in the matter of religion. 
An observer fresh to the subject might find it hard to formulate 
the relations to one another and to the Crown of the various 
forms of Christianity prevalent in our Empire or to understand 
how the English Church can be one body, when some sections 
of it are ha^ly distinguishable from Bman Catholicism and 
others from non*oonformist sects. In the same way Chinese 
religion offers startling combinations of incongruous rites and 
doctrines: the attitude of the laity and of the government to 
the diderent churches is not to be defined in ordinary European 
terms and yet if one examines the practice of Europe, it will 
often throw light on the oddities of China. 

The difficulty of finding a satisfactory equivalent in Chinese 
for the word Qod is well known and has caused much discussion 
among missionaries. Confucius inherited and handed on a 
worship of Heaven which inspired some noble sayings and may 
be admitted to be monotheism. But it was a singularly im- 
pereonal monotheism and had little to do with popular religion, 
being regarded as the prerogative and special cult of the Em* 
peror. The people selected their deities from a numerous 
pantheon of spirits, falling into many classes among which two 
stand out clearly, namely, nature spirits and spirits of ancestors, 
All these deities, as we must call them for want of a better word, 
present odd features, which have had some influence on Chinese 
Buddhism, The boundary between the human and the spirit 
worlds is slight. Deification and euhemerism are equally 
natural to the Chinese. Hot only are worthies of every sort 
roade into gods^, but foreign deities are explained on the same 

> K curiou insMnoe of dslficMion u iMoUotAd in JtftwAn, 191«, p. SI. It 
tppMn UmC MvenI dw c aajt M l Jnsiis hsvo bo«ii <ltiiled. for % ree«at i&aUne« of 
d«ifie*tIon ip ISIS seo Cori, z. p. 793. 

CHliiA 

225 

TT.rr ] 

priixciple. Thus Yen>]o (Ytmh), the king of the deed, ie said to 
have been a Chinese ofioial of the «xth century a.d. But there 
is little mythology. The deitiee are like the figaies on porcelain 
vases: all knew their appearance and some their names, but 
hardly anyone can give a coherent acooont of them. A poly- 
d^monigm of this WmH is even more fluid than Hinduism: you 
may Invent any god you like and neglect gods that don’t concom 
you, The habit of mind which produces sects in India, namely 
the desire to exalt one’s own deity above others and make him the 
AU-t^d, does not exist. No Chinese god inspima such feelings. 

The deities of raediev^ and modem China, including the 
spirits recognized by Chinese Buddhism, are curiously mixed 
vague pereonaliries^. Nature worship is not absent, but it 
is nature as seen by the fancy of the alchemist and astrolc^. 
The powers that control nature are idso identifled with ancient 
heroes, but they are mostly heroes of the type of St George and 
the Dragon of whom history has litrie to eay, and Chinose respect 
for the public service and ofheial rank takes the quee«' form of 
regarding these spirits as celestial functionaries. Thus the gods 
have a Ministry of Thunder which supervises the weather and 
a Board of Medicine which looks after sickness and health. 

The oharacteziBtic expresrion of Chiueso popular religlou is 
not exactly myth or legend but rel^ous romance. A writer 
starts from some slender basis of fact and composes an edifying 
novel. Thus riie well-known story called Hai-Yu-Chi* purports 
to be an aocoimt of Hsuan Chuaug’s journey to India but, ex¬ 
cept that it tepiceents the hero as going there and returning 
with copies of the scripturee, it is romance pure and simple, a 

i Tb»«pihts Billed 8u Kufto or Sfto u«a good iuUnco 

ot Cbiimc deiUe*. Tb« wordi m»d Thrc« As«nb» w Prlneii^lw who twieOy «p«^u)e 
b%Te 06 nMBW: («) appou to repreoant Ueftvon, Eftrth *nd W6l«r. 

(ft) Tbea eh«7 etand lor thm period* of the year tnd tho latrolo^el hifiomcea 
«hieh rule wch. (c) Am AgoM, eod toore or leu 4nalogau t« bumftn pcnoneUUee, 
B«a«eo ^vu hepptuu, Eulh p&rdoos ^e wd WeUr delivera irom uusfortuae. 
(d) They ere IdeeUfied the encicat Emperon Y«, Shuo, Yu. (c) They ere 
alw IdenUAed vith thru Gozieojt under tho Emperor U-Weng. ikC. 87a-S4l. 

I Hrten Caiiu|‘i own eocoont of Jus tAvele been the olijbtly 

ditaront tiUe oi E^Yu.Cbi. jg- Tho wort notiuod here ii ettributsd 

to Cluo Cb'eos eta's#, e Teotat ptieet « tho thirteeaUi centory. Itie e^ to be tbe 
BoddUet book aoet widely r«ftd i& Kone where it U prioted i# the popular seripi. 
Aa ebndgod BngUih timfiikltOD hoe beeo publtshed by T. BiebAnJ uuikr the UUo 
ot A iJiMtion to Utavt*- 

226 

nVDDHlSM OVTSIDE WDU [ch. 

fantastic PUgrim’s Progress, the scene of which is sometimes ou 
caith and sometimes in the heavens. The traveller is accom< 
panied by allegorical creatores such as a magic monkey, a pig, 
and a dragon horse, who have each their own aignificanoe and 
may be seen represented in Buddhist and Taoist temples even 
to-day. So too another writer, starting from the tradition that 
Avalokita (or Kuan-Xin) was once a benevolent human being, 
set himself to writ© tho life of Koan-Yin, represented os a 
princoas endued with every virtue who cheerfully bears cruel 
pciBecution for her devotion to Buddhism. It would bo a 
mistake to seek in this story any facte throwing light on the 
history of Avalokita and his worship. It is a religious novel, 
important only because it still finds numeroos readers. 

It is commonly said that the Chinese betong to three religions, 
Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism, and the saying is not 
altogether inaccurate. Popular language speaks of the tljiw 
creeds and an ordinary person in the course of his life may take 
part in rites which imply a belief in them all*. Indeed the fusion 
is so complete that one may j ustJy talk of Chineee religion, mean¬ 
ing the jujnble of cetemoniee and beliefs accepted by the average 
man. Yet at the same time it is possible to be an enthusiast 
for any one of tho three without becoming nnconventioiuJ. 

Of the three regions, Confucianism has a disputable claim 
to tho title. If the literary classes of China find it sufficiejit, they 
do so only by rejecting the emotional and speoulativo sides of 
religion. The Emperor Wan-li* made a just epigram when he 

that Confucianism arid Buddhism are like tho wings of a 
bird. Each requires the co-operation of the other. Confucius 
was an ethical and political philosopher, not a prophet hiero¬ 
phant or church founder. As a moralist he stands in tho first 
rant, and I doubt if either the Gospels or the Pitakae contain 
maxims for the life of a good citisen equal to his sayings But 
he Ignored that unworldly morality which, among Buddhiate 
and Christians, is so much admired and so little practised In 
religion ho claimed no originality, be brought no revelation but 

rnua ^^^5 ^ ti* »WiUoo ct tho Impaiul QcT.rBiwj»e 

(I«23, Md wb« I uj afttsnUy ntta to •. $uu of tiiinp which h poMUw 

«lig(oiL rilrTuM ofd 

•«7Wg th*fcC3uii4ii wpporKd by Ch® Uuw reBglGM m • tripod by tbm 
> -» K icriotiy ipaaldag the &iU« of his relsn IfiTS-lCSO. 

CHINA 

227 

XU3] 

he accepted the curreat ideas of hia age and time, though 
perhaps bo eliminated many popular superstitions. Ho com> 
monded the worship of Heaven, which, if vague, still connected 
the deity with the moral law, And be enjoined sacnfice to 
ancestors and spiiite. But all this apparently without any 
theory. His definition of wisdom is wall known: ‘*to devoto 
oneself to human duties and keep aloof from spirits vhiJo still 
respecting them/’ This is not the utterance of a sceptical states¬ 
man, equivalent to “remember the political importance of 
religion but keep clear of it, so far as you can.” The best 
commentary is the statement in the Analects that he seldom 
spoke about the will of Heaven, yet such of hU utterances about 
it as have been preserved are full of awe and submission^. 
A certain delicacy mode him unwilling to define or discuss the 
things for which he felt the highest reverence, and a wiTniUr 
detached but respectful attitude is still a living constitoent 
of Chincso society. The scholar and gentleman will not engage 
in thcolo^oal or metaphysical disputes, but he respectfully t^s 
l>art inoeremonies performed in honour of such venerated names 
as Heaven, Earth aiul Confucius himself. Less willingly, but 
still without remonstrance, he attends Buddbiat or T&aist 
celebrations. 

If it is hard to define the religious element in Confucianism, 
it is still huder to define Taoism, but for another reason, 
namely, that the word has more than one meanii^. In one 
sense it is the old popular religion of China, of which Confucius 
selected the scholarly and gentlemanly featvircs. Taoism, on 
the contrary, rejected no godlings and no legends however 
grotesque: it gave its approval to the most extravagant and 
maten^ superstitions, especially to the belief that physical 
immortality could bo insured by drinldng an elixir, which proved 
fatal to many illustnous dupes. As an organized body it owes 
its oiigin to Chang-Ling (c. 130 a.n.) and bis grandson Chang* 
Lu‘. The sect received its baptism of blood but made tonus with 
the Chinese Government, one condition bemg that a member 
of the house of Chang should be recognized as its hereditary 

i Compere rx. 1 uid bt. 38.2. Sm iJm iTocMu cfA* UtM, obi>p. sn, 
for noto poslUre ffovi About apirite. 

* ^ ^ Oroot, “Oilslni oi tbe T»olat Cbuich" b 

Tmu. Tkxri Congrm UiiL SttiQ. 1M8. 

22$ BUDDElSSi 0UT82DB INDIA [CH. 

Patriarch or Pop«^. Bivaliy with Buddliism also contributed 
to give Taoism something of that conristenoy in doctrine and 
discipline which we aseocUce with the word religion, fox in 
their desiie to show that they were as good as their opponents 
the Xaoists copied them in numerous and important particulars, 
for instance triads of deiriea, sacred books and monastic in* 
stituUons. 

The power of invenrive imitation is characteristic of Taoism^. 
In most conntrioe great gods are children of the popular mind. 
After long gestation and infancy they emerge as deities bound 
to humanity by a thousand ties of blood and place. But the 
TaoisU, whenever they thought a new deity needful or oma* 
mental, simply invonted him, often with the sanction of an 
Imperial Edict. Thus Yu•Ti^ the pxecioixa or jade Emperor, 
who is esteemed the supreme lulor of the world, was created or 
at least brought into notice about 1012 a.n. by the Emperor 
Cb&n Tsung^ who pretended to have correspondence with hixo. 
He is probably an adaptation of Indra and is also identided 
with a prince of ancient China, but cannot be called a popular 
hero like Bama or Srishna, and has not the same hold on the 
affections of the people. 

But Taoism is also the name commonly given not only to 
this fanciful church but also to the philosophic ideas expounded 
in the TaO't$*ching and in the works of Chnang-tsu. The Taoiet 
priesthood claim this philosophy, but the two have no necessary 
connection. Taoism as philosophy repreBents a current of 
thought opposed to Confudamsm, compsjed with which it is 
ascetic, mystic and pantheisrio, though except in comparison 
it does not deseive such epithets. My use of panth^ric In 
particular may raise objection, but it seems to me that Tao, 
however hard to define, is analc^ous to Brahman, the impersonal 
Spirit of Hindu philosophy. The tmiverse is the expression of 
Tao and in conforming to Tao man finds happiness. For Con* 
f acianism, as for Europe, man is riio pivot and centre of things, 

* CKM13 Tiiftii'hiu, who held ofBc« in 1913. vm deprlTcd o( hli tidas bj Cb« 
Repablicea GeveouneDt. £n 1S14 pedUona vara pre«eBt«d foe theU’ Nct^ntion, 
hut I do not kaov with wbet rwilt. S«* PiJn>tg ifem, $«pt«aber 6tb, 1014. 

* Soaetbinjf uoul&r zn&r be eeen in Monnoitiem where eagele ead legeada beve 
been uveated by iotfiyiduel Uncy without toy becLgrouid of tnuhUon. 

OEINA 

229 

xm] 

but less so for Taoism and Buddhism. PhiloaopKlo Taoism, 
being somewhat abstruse and unpractical, might seom to have 
htde chance of becomii^ a popular superstition. But from early 
times it was opposed to Confucianism, and as Confudaniam 
became more and more tbo hall-marh of the official and learned 
classes, Taoism tended to become popular, at the expense of 
degradii^ itself. From early times too it dallied with such 
fasdnatlng notions as the acquisition of miraculous powers and 
longevity. But, as an appeal to the emotional and spintual 
tides of humanity, it was, if superior to Gonfudaoiam, inferior 
to Buddhism. 

Buddhism, unlike Confudanism and Taoism, entered China 
as a fore^ religion, but, in usii^ this phrase, we must ask how 
far any system of belief prevalent there is accepted ae what we 
call a religion. Even In Ceylon and Burma people follow the 
observances of two religions or at least of a religion and a 
superstition, but they would undoubtedly call themselves 
Buddhists. In China the Itity use no such detignations and 
have CO sense of exclusive membership. For them a religion is 
comparable to a club, which they use for special purposes. You 
may frequent both Buddhist Taoist temples just as you 
may belong to both the Geographical and Zoological Societies. 
Perhaps ^ position of spiritualism in England offers the 
nearest anabgy to a Chinese religion. There are, 1 believe, some 
few persons for whom spiritualism is a definite, sufficient and 
exclutive creed. These may be compared to the Buddhist clergy 
with a small minority of the laity. But the majority of those 
who are interested or even believe in spiritualism, do not 
identify themselvee with it in this way. They attend s^cee 
as their curiosity or afiectiocs may prompt, but these beliefs 
and practices do not prevent them from also belonging to a 
Christian denomination- Imagine spiritualism to be better 
organized as an institution and you will have a fairly accurate 
picture of the average Chinaman's attitude to Buddhism and 
Taoism. One may also compare the way in which English poets 
use classical mythology. Xyoidos, for instance, is an astoundii^ 
compound of claatical and biblical ideas, and Milton does not 
hesitate to call the Supreme Being Jove in a serious passage. 
Yet Milton's Christianity has never, so far as I know, been called 
in question. 

230 BVDDHI8M OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

There is an obvious historical parallel between the leLigiona 
o{ the Chinese aod early Roman Empires, In both, the imperial 
and official worship was political and indifferent to dogma 
without being hostile, provided no sectary refused to call the 
Emperor Son of Heaven or sacrifice to his image. In both, 
ample provi^on w» made outride the state cult for allaying 
the fears of superstition, as well as for satisfying the soul’s 
thirst for knowledge and emotion. A Roman magistrate of the 
second contuiy a.d. may have offered official saoriffces, pro* 
pitiated local genii, and attended the mysteries of Bfithra, in 
the same impartial way as Chinese m.^strates took part a few 
years ago in the ceremonies of Confucianjem, Taoism and 
Buddhism. In both cases there was entire liberty to combine 
with the official religious routine private beliefs and observances 
incongruous with it and often with one another: in both there 
was the same essential feature that no deity demanded eaclosive 
olicgiance. The popular polytheism of China is indeed closely 
analogous to tbo p^anism of the ancient worlds. Hinduism 
contains too much personal religion and real spiritual feeling 
to make the resemblance perfect, hut in dealing with Apollo, 
Mars and Venus a Roman of the early Empire seems to have 
shown the mixture of respect and scepticism which is obarac' 
tcristic of China. 

This attitude implies not only a certain want of conviction 
but also a utilitariau view of religion. The Chinese visit a temple 
much as they visit a shop or doctor, for definite material 
piuposes, and if it be asked whether they are a religious people 
in the better sense of the word, I am afraid the answer must be 
in the negative, It Is with regret that I express this opinion and 
1 by no means imply that there are not many deeply religious 
persons in China, hut whereas in India the ohrious manifesta* 
tions of superstition are a superficial disease and the heart of 
the people is keenly sensitive to questions of personal salvation 
and speculative theology, this cannot be said of the masses in 
China, where religion, as seen, consists of snperstitions rites and 
the substratum of thought and feeling is small. 

’ Th« azUi £ndd wouUI worn to s ChinMO quiu a n«tur*l doMription of Uio 
nAxt vorld. la xt wo Loro Elyoluar, Tortaroo, truKDlgntioa of lOuU, ooalt vho «mi 
fizKl no rootlDf ploco Wmjm tJidt Loilieo on uabimod, ondphoatomo obovog oUU 
tbo voandi whioh thoix bodioo roonvod in L/o, Nor Uioro ta; otteopt to Lor* 
ntoniio tbooe dJicordoTil idoM> 

CHINA 

231 

mi] 

This stmok me foicibly whxax visiting Siam some years ago. 
In Bangkok there is a large Cliinese population and several 
Buddhist temples have been made over to thorn. The temples 
frequented by Siamese are not nnlilff- catholic churches in 
Europe: the decoration is roughly similar, the standevd of 
decorum much the same. The visitors come to worship, meditate 
or hear sermons. But in the temples used by the Chinese, a 
lower standrbrd is paioiolly obvious and the atmosphere is 
different. Vimtom are there in plenty, but their object is to 
''get luck,'* and the business of religion has become transformed 
into divination and spiritual gamblisg. The worshipper, on 
entering, goes to a counter where he buys tapers and iucense- 
sticks, together with some implements ot superstition such ae 
rods or inscribed cards. After burning incense he draws a 
card or throws the rods up into the air and takes an augury from 
the result. Though the contrast presented in Siam ma^s the 
degradation more glaring, yet these tempba in Bangkok arc 
not worse than many which I have seen in China. 1 gladly sot 
on the other side of the account some beautiful and reverent 
halls of worship in the larger monasteries, but I feat that the 
ordinary Chin^ temple, whether Taoist or Buddhist, is a 
ghostly shop where, in return for oeremonies which involve 
neither moi^ nor intellectnol effort, the customer is promised 
good luck, offspring, and other material hlsssings. 

It con hac^y be denied that the populace In China aro 
grossly superstitious. Superstition is a common foiling and 
were statistics available to show the number and status of 
Europeans who believe in fortune>tellmg and luck, the result 
might be startling. But in most civilised countries such things 
arc furtive and apologetic. In i^hinA the strangest forms ot 
magic and divination enjoy public esteem. The ideas which 
und^llo popular practice and ritual are worthy of African 
sav^cs: there has been a monstrous advance in systematbation, 
yet the ethics and intellect of China, brilliant as are their 
achievements, have not leavened the lump. The average 
Chinese, though an ezeeUent titizen, full of common sense and 
shrewd in business, is in religious matters a victim of fatuous 
superstition and completely divorced from the moral and 
intellectual standards which he otherwise employs. 

Conspicuous amo ng tbsse superstitions is F4ng Shiu or 

232 BVDDEISM 0UT81DB INDIA [oB. 

Geomancy', a psando-sdenec which is treated as ecrioosiy as 
law or surveying. It is based oo the idea that localities have a 
sort of spiritual climate which brings prosperity or the reverse 
and depends on the inflaencea of stars and nature spirite, such 
as the aanre dragon and white tiger. But ance these agencies 
find cxprestion in the contours of a locality, they can be affected 
if its features are modified by artificial means, for insfanoo, the 
construction of walls and towers. Buddhism did not d isd^ 
to patronize these notions. The princdpal hall of a monastery is 
usually erected on a specially auspicious site and the appeals 
issued for the repair of sacred buildings often point out the 
danger impending if edifices essential to the good P6ng Shni of 
a district aie allowed to decay. The sceptioisra and laughter of 
the educated does not clear tiie w, for supentition can flourish 
when neither respected nor believed. The worst feature of 
religion in China is that the decently educated public ridicules 
its external observances, but continuos to practise them, 
because they are connected with occasions of good fellowship 
or because th^ omission might be a sign of disrespect to 
departed relatives or siinply because in dealing with uncanny 
things it is better to be on the safe side. This is tho sum of 
China’s compotite religion as visible in public and private rites. 
Its ethical value is far higher than might be supposed, for ita 
most absurd superstitions also recommend love and respect in 
family life and a high etandard of civic duty. But China has 
never admitted that public or private morality requires the 
support of a religious creed. 

As might be expected, life and animation are more apparent 
in sects than in conventional religion. Since the recent revolu¬ 
tion it is no longer necessary to confute the idea that the Chinese 
are a stationary and unemotional race, but its inaccuracy was 
demonstrated by many previous movements especially the 
T'ai-p'ing rebellion, which had at first a religious tinge. Yet in 
China such movements, though they may kindle enthusiasm 
and provoke persecution, rarely have the, religious value at- 

* A •oroe«h»t nmiltf pMudo tcienoe CftUeS TMthQ*njj& ia c«adciBii«d 

in Uk Pftli aerirtuK*. S.g~ Kgh* N. l tl. AaUologr also iu b««D « gn«t fore* 
in CMocm polibea. Sm Bkod and Backbeusa. and MeMoir4, pasnm. Tba 
faroor ahovo at dlffarcnt timea b) Boddbiat, Haidcbcao aod Catb^ie priarti via 
oJtcQ dna to thoir eoppoaod kaewladga of wbolosy. 

CHINA 

233 

xm] 

tAciiix^ to ft sect in Chri£tiftn> Hindu and Mohammedan 
countries. Viewed as an ecclesUatioal or spiritual movement, 
the T’«-p'ing is insignificant: it was a secret soriety permitted 
by circumstances to become a formidable rising and in its 
important phases the political element was paramount. The 
same is true of many sects which have not achieved such no¬ 
toriety. They aie secret sorietics which adopt a creed, but it is 
not in the that their real vitality lies. 

If it is difficoit to say how far the Buddhism of China is a 
religion, it is equally difficult to its relation to the State. 
Students well acquainted with the literature as well as with the 
actual condition ^ China have stressed diametrically opposite 
views as to the religious attitnde of the Imperial Government*, 
one stating roundly that it was “the most intolerant, the most 
persecuting of all earthly Governments,” and another that It 
“at no period refused hospitality and con^deiatiou to any 
religion recommended as such^” 

In conaderiog such questions I would again emphasize the 
fact that Chinese terms have often not the same extension as 
their apparent synonyms in European languages, which, of 
course, means that the provinces of human life and thought have 
also different boundaries. For most oountries the word clergy 
has a definite meaning and, in spite of great diversities, may ho 
applied to Christian clerics, Mollahs and Brahmans without 
serious error. It means a class of men who are the super- 
intendents of rel^iou, hut also more. On the one side, tboi^ 
they may have serious political difiereiLces with the Government, 
they am usually in touch with it: on the other, though they 
may dislike reformers and movementefrom below, they patronize 
and minister to popular sentiment. They are closely connected 
with education and learning and sometimes with the law- But 
in China there is no class which onites all these features. 
Learning, law and education are represented by the Confucian 
scholars or Uterati. Though no one would think of calling them 
priests, yet they may offer official sacrifices, like Boman magis* 

^ I iHAjftgftitt remind Ui«r«sdotilMt Isa notepOAkin^AftlMCbuMflCltopablu 

but et tb« Tbelot^binerr of iWnl»Uon»to5uddliiem,TMicaiMi4Coo. 

fo«l&ajnB, though it cooceme the paet, u of greet inUreet. 

* De Oroot end Porker, u elsbontim of the Snt Uimte we eepeQialtj 
De Qroot’e end JitUfiott* PtrifCiUion >n CUna. 

234 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[OB. 

trfttes- Though they &rc contemptuous of populw superetatioD, 
yet they embody the popular ideol. It Is tho pride of a Tilla^ 
to produce a scholar. But the scholarehip of the literati U purely 
Confuoian: Buddhist and Taoiet learning hare no part in it. 

The priest, vhether Buddhist or Taoist, is not in the mind 
of the people the lepositoiy of learning and law. He is not 
in religious matters the counterpart of the secular arm, but 
rather a private practitioner, duly Ecensed but of no particular 
standing. But he is skilful in his own ptofesaion: he has access 
to tho powers who help, pity and console, and even the sceptic 
se^s his assistance when confronted with the dangers of this 
world and the next. 

The student of Chinese history may object that at many 
periods, notably under the Yiion dynasty, the Buddhist clergy 
were officially lecc^ized as an ^ucatiooa! body and even 
received the title of KnC'Sbib or teacher of the people. This Is 
true. Such recognition by no means annihilated the literati, 
but it illustrates the dedsive indtMnce exercised by the Emperor 
and the court. We have, on the one side, a learned official class, 
custodians of the best national ideals but inclined to reject 
emotion and speculatiori as well as superstition: on the other, 
two priesthoods, prone to superstition but Intimately strong 
in so far os they satisfied the emotional and speculative inatincte. 
Tlie literati held persistently, though reapeotfuUy, to the view 
that tho Emperor should be & Confuclanist pure and simple, but 
Buddhism and Taoism had such strong popular support that 
it was always safe and often politic for an Emperor to patronise 
them. Hence an Emperor of personal convictions was able 
to turn the balance, and It must bo added that Buddblam often 
flourishod in tho courts of w-eak and dissolute Emperors who 
were in the hands of women and eunuchs. 8ome of these latter 
were among its most distinguished devotees. 

AH Chinese roligione agreed in accepting tho Emperor as 
bead of tho Church, not merely titular but active. He exercised 
a strange prerogative of creating, promoting and degrading 
deities. Even within the Buddhist sphere he regulated the 
incarnations of Bodbisattvas in the persons of Lamae and from 
time to time re-edited the canon^ or added new works to it. This 

* Bat it must bs nmembertd th«t tbs CSiiasse «*qoq U aot sntirelf snaJogoos 
to tlio colkcUoM of ^ scripture* cuirsot ia Indu, Ce^loo or Buropo. 

CHINA 

235 

XLn] 

eztremd Ex^tUiusto had its roots in Indian as wall as Chinese 
Ideas. The Confooiamst, while reminding the Emperor tb&t ha 
should imitate the sages and rulers of antiquity, gladly ad¬ 
mitted bU right to control the worship of all spihts^ and the 
popular conscience, while probably unable to define what was 
meant by the title Son of Beaoen^, felt that it gave Him a vice¬ 
regal ri^t to keep the gods in order, so long as he did not 
proTohe famine or other national calamities by mismanagement. 
The Buddhists, though tenacious of freedom in the spiritual life, 
had no objection to the patronage of princes. Asoka permitted 
himself to regulate the a&uis of the Church and the success of 
Buddhists as missionaries was due in no small measure to their 
tact in allowing other sOTereigns to follow his example. 

That Buddhism should bare obtained in China a favourable 
reception & permanent status is indeed remarkable, for in 
two ways it was repugnant to the sentiments of tbe governing 
classes to say nothing of tbo difiorences in temper and outlook 
which divide Hindus and Chinese. T^tily, its ideal was 
asceticism celibacy; it gave family life tbo lower place and 
ignored the popular Chinese view that to have a eon is not only 
a duty, but also osseutial for those sacrifices without which the 
departed spirit cannot have peace. Secondly, it was not merely 
a doctrine bnt an ecclesiastical organisation, a congregation 
of persons who were neither citizens nor subjects, not exactly 
an imperium in imperio nor a secret society, but dangerously 
capable of becoming either. Such bodies have always meuned 
the suspicion and perseention of tbe Chinese Government. Even 
in the fifth century Buddhist monastories were accused of 
o^anizing armed conspiracies and many later sects sufiered 
from the panic which they inspired in official bosoms. But 
both difficulties were overcome hy tbe suppleness of the clergy. 

* Tlio Bmporor li tbe sit ipirila and hM tho r%bt to Bacri£M all 

■puita. wboreoa otben aboold oocrifico only to such spiriu u cotiaeni tho rn . For 
tho Emporor’a Utk "Lonl of Spirits,” Shu CMog rv.. n, oad Sh(h Chiog, 
m.,n. 

' Tb« tide ia ondonMedly onrioit and means Son of Hearea or Son of 
God See UitloTg ^ Ohvna, pp. But the pnebe foroo of Son 

Is not clear. The Emperor voe Vicoregent of Heaven, high priest and Mspocsible 
fot oatuxal plieaoioona, hot be coold not in historical tJatee be regarded ss epruag 
(like the Emperor of Japoa) from a fomilj of divina desosAt, beoatiee the drsaiHcs. 
oad with them the imperial fomOj, vere eubject to fieqaeat ehosge. 

s m. 

It 

236 BUDDEI8M OUTBIDS INDIA [ch. 

If they outraged family eentiment they managed to make 
themseires indispensable at funeral oeremoniesi. If they had 
a dangeioue resemblance to an imperiim in mperio, they 
minimized it by their obTioos de^ to exercise influence through 
^e Emperor. Though it is true that the majority of anti- 
dynastic political sects had a Buddhist colour, the most 
prominent and influential Buddhists never f^d in loyalty. 
To this adroitJiessmuBtba added a solid psychological advantage. 
The success of Buddhism in China was due to the fact that it 
pj>egented rel^ous emotion and speculation in the best form 
known there, end when it began to spread the intellectual soil 
was not unpropitious. The higher Taoist philosophy had msde 
familiar the ideas of quietism and the contemplatire liie: the 
^ was unsettled, hamssed alike by foreign invasion and civil 
strife. In such times when even active natures tire of on- 
successful atn^les, the asylum of a monastery has attractions 
for many. 

We have now some idea of the double position of Buddhism 
in China and can understand how it sometimes appears as 
almost the established church and sometimes as a persecuted 
sect. The reader will do well to remember that in Europe the 
relations of politics to religion have not always been simple: 
many Catholic sovereigns have quarrelled with Popes and monks. 
Tbo French Government supports the claims of Catholic miadons 
in China but does not favour the Church in France. The fact 
that Huxley was made a Privy Councillor does not imply that 
Queen Victoria approved of his religious views. In China the 
repeated restrictive edicts concerning monasteries shoidd not 
be regarded as acts of persecution. Every politician can see the 
bas to the state if able-bodied men become monks by the 
tbouswd. In periods of literary and missionary real, large 
congregations of such monks may have a sutfioient sphere of 
activity but in sleepy, decadent periods they are apt to become 
a moral or politick danger. A devout Buddhist or Catholic 
may reasonably hold that though the monastic life is the best 
for the elect, yet for the unworthy it is more dangerous than 
the temptations of the world. Tims the founder of the Ming 
dynasty had himself been a bonze, yet he limited the number 

• 8iEiut*p(y it u a popoUt Mtet UiM if a maa beconM t mMh all hia asMeton 
go to HeaTeo. ScoPontpAnuc foered Xdki, ra. 

CEINA 

237 

and age of those who znigbt beeotne On tbe other band» 

be attended Buddbiet eerrlooa and pabliebed an edition of the 
Tiipitaka. In this and in the conduct of most Emperois there 
ie little that Is inconsistent or m^terious: they regardoc' rollon 
not in our fashion as a system deserving either allegiance or 
rejection, but as a modem Colonial Governor might regard 
education. Some Governors are entbuaiastio for education: 
others mistrust it as a stimulus of disquieting ideas: most 
accept it as worthy of occasional patronage, like hospitals and 
races, In the same way some Emperors, like Wu-Ti*, were 
enthutiasts for Buddhi^ and made it practically the state 
religion: a few others were definitely hostile either from con¬ 
viction or political ^jcurnstances, but probably most sovereigns 
regarded it as tbe average BnUsb ofiicial regards education, as 
something that one can*i help having, that one must belaud on 
certain public occasions, that may now and then be useful, but 
still emphatically something to bo kept within limits. 

Outbursts against Buddhism are easy to understand. I have 
pointed ont its un-Chinese features and the pertistent opposition 
of the literati. These were sufficient reaeons for represave 
meamues whenever the Emperor was onbuddhist in hie sym¬ 
pathies, especudly if the monasteries bad enjoyed a period of 
prosperity and become crowded wid wealthy. What is harder 
to understand is the oocaslonal favour shown by apparently 
antl-Bnddhist Emperors. 

The Sacrod Edict of the great K'ang Hti forbids heterodoxy 
(i tuan) in which the official explanation clearly includes 
Buddliism*. It was published in his extreme youth, but had 
his mature approval, and until recently was read in every 
prefecture twice a month- But the same Bmporor gave many 
gifts to monasteries, and in 1705 he issued a decree to the 
monks of P'uto in which he s^d, “we since our boyhood have 
been earnest students of Coirfucian bre and have had no tune 
to become minutely acquainted with the sacred books of 
Buddhism, but we are satisfied that Virtue is tiic one word 

I JapiaMe Ecaperon did tba »*&«, EvtanQ ToqbS in 70S. 

• K'ftng H»i ij mpooaiUe wiy for Uie ioxt of Bdiot wideb cDml; forVidi 
hstorodoxj. But hii ton Vuog CbSng «hu publiihedtbd«xplio&UoAUid panpbnM 
npuirod tbo Buddblst *t P’oto uid tbo Taout tonplo at Lung'bu thkc. 

238 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[OH. 

which indicates what ia essential in both systems. Let ns pray 
to the oompaasioDate Knan-yin that she may of her grace send 
down 'upon our people the spiritual rain and sweet dew of the 
good Law: that she may grant them bounteous harreste, 
seasonable winds and the blessii^ of peace, harmony and long 
life and finally that she may lead them to the salvation which 
she offers to all beings in the Universe^.” The two edicts are 
not con^tont but such inconsistency is no reproach to a states¬ 
man nor wholly illogical. The Smporor reprimands extrava¬ 
gance in doctrine and ceremomal and commends ConfncianiBiB 
to his subjects as all that is necessary for good life and good 
government, hut when be hnda that Buddhism conduces to the 
some end he accords his patronage and politely admits the 
existence and power of Euan-yin. 

But I must pass on to another question, the relation of 
Chinese to Indian Buddhism. Chinese Buddhism is often spoken 
of as a strange and corrupt degeneration, a commixture of 
Indian and foreign ideas. Now if such phrases mean that the 
pulse of life is feeble and the old lights dim, we must rogietfuUy 
admit their truth, but s(^ little is to he found In Chinese 
Buddhism except the successivo phases of later Indian 
Buddhism, Introduced into China from the first century a.d. 
onwards. In Japan there arose new sects, hut in China, when 
importation coo^, no period of invention supervened. The 
T*iea-t*ai school has some origmality, and native and foreign 
ideas were combined hy the followers of Bodhidhaima. But 
the r emaining schools wote all founded by members of Indian 
sects or by Chinese who aimed at scrupulous imitation of Tndify^ 
models. Until the eighth century, when the formative period 
came to an end, we have an alternation of Indian or C^tral 
Auan teachers arriving in China to meet 'with respect and 
acceptance, and of Chinese enquirers who vleitod India In order 
to discover tho true doctrine ^d practice and were honoured 
on their return in proportion as they wore behoved to have 
foimd it. There is this dlstmction between China and such 
countries &s Java, Oamboja and Champa, that whereas in 

' 8m JoWCoo, p, S52. I b»vo not won tho CbntMO Mxt of thli odict. Inlaufcr 
end Fnockt’fi Bpifn^Aite^ Dtnknditr nw CAaoo ii a long inKnpta'on of Kang Hai'a 
giviag (ha hittoiy both le^dary and rocaat of the celebrated «aadal*wood iaa^ 
of the Duddha. 

CSINA 

239 

XI.12} 

them we find & mistore of Hinduiem and Buddliism, in China 
the traces of Hindniem ate slight. The imported ideee, howetar 
corrupt* were those of Indian Buddhist scholars, not the mixed 
ideas of the Indian laymu^. 

Of course Buddhi^ theory and practice felt the infioence of 
their new sunoundings. The omameute and embroidery of the 
faith are Ohiryieft and sometimes hide the original material. 
Thus Euan*yin, con&dered hi 6 torical] 7 > has grown out of the 
Indian deity Avaloldta, but the goddess worshipped by the 
populace is the heroine of the Chinese romance mentioned 
above. And» since many Chinese aie only half Buddhiste, tales 
about gods and saints are taken only half-seriously; the 
Buddha periodically invites the immortals to dine with h im In 
Heaven and the Eighteen Lohau are described as converted 
brigands. 

In every monastery the buUdiDg8> images en d monks 
obviously bear the stamp of the country. Yet nearly all the 
doctrines and most of the usages have Indian parallels. The 
ritual has ita coiuiterpart in what I-Ching describes as seen by 
himself in his Indian travels. China h^ added the idea of 
jhng-shui, and has modified architectural forms. For instance 
the many*storeyed pagoda is an elongation of the stupa*. So» 
too, in ceremonial, the great prominence given to funeral rites 
and many superstitious details are Chineee, yet> as I have often 
mentioned in this work, rites on behalf of the dead were tolerated 
by early Buddhism. The curious mingling of religions services 
with theatrical pagents which Hsiian nhnawg witnessed at 
Allahabad in the reign of Hareha, has its modest parallel to-day 
in many popular festivals. 

The numerous images which crowd a Chinese temple, the 

* His iodicAtM Ui4t fibe fonon of BMd<Uiism 4fK] eompiDte 

thu) «oiM sehoUn wppoMk Wbevo then vm % genar&l iffimfsttUoD the 

nustoTO k fonnd, bnt tlw ladUa ekiwn to diiae were meetly picifceeinpel teeeben 
eod tbeb teechiog vae deSallely Saddhkt. Than ere, however, two noB.Boddhiat 
boob in tbo CbinoM Tripit^e. Keofio Get. Koe. 129fi eod 1800. 

* It hee beeo pointed out fay Ferguasoe e&d olhen Uiei tboie wore faish towere 

la duae before ^ Buddkkt period. dtiD. the enmereus epeoineos erteot dote 
femBoddbutUaies. auay were boUt over relice, ud tfaeecooanteoffaothlVlufob 
end Eet&& Gfaung ebow that the 8tu])e fault by e( Feehewac bed 

ettrected the etteotion of the fhloren 

I regret thet de Groot’o mtefeetlog worit TUpa: doa iMipea dee 

BeddAtwnite GIWm, 1919, reecbed me too Isle fur me to meke oee of ib 

240 

BVDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

fCH. 

four kings, Aihata and Bodhisattrae, though of unfamiliar 
appeai'ance to the Indian student, aro Indian in origin. A few 
Taoist deities may haTe side chapels, but they are not among 
the principal objects of worship. The greater part of the Chinese 
Tripitaka is a translation from the Sanskrit and the Chinese 
works (only 194 against 1467 translations) are oMefly esegetical. 
Thus, though Chinese bonzes coimtenanoe natii^ superstitions 
and gladly undertake to deal with all the gods and devils of 
the land, yet in its doctrine, literature, and even in many 
externals their Buddhism remains an Indies importation. If we 
seek in it for anything tmly Chinese, It is to be found not in the 
constituents, but in the atmospbore, which, like a breeze from 
a moTmtain monastery sometimes freshens the gilded shrines 
and libraries of verbose sutras. It is the narive spirit of the 
Far East which finds expression in the hiii'Side hermit’s sense 
of freedom and in dark sayings such as Buddhism is iht cak-irts 
in my garden. Every free and pure heart can become a Buddha, 
but tUo is one with the Hie of birds and flowers. Both the lore 
of nature^ and the belief that men can become divine can easily 
be paralleled in Indian texts, but they were not, I think, Im* 
ported into China, and joy in natural b^uty and sympathy with 
wild life are much more prominent in Chinese than in Indian art. 

Is then Buddhist doctrine, as opposed to the superstitions 
tolerated by Buddhism, something ezotic and without influence 
on the national life? That also is cot true. The reader will 
perceive from what has gone before that if be asks for statistics 
of Buddhism in China, the answer must be, in tiie Buddha’s 
own phrase, that the question is not properly put. It is incorrect 
to describe China as a Buddhist country. We may say that it 
contains so many zoillion Mohammedans or Christians, because 
these creeds am definite and ezeluaive. We cannot quote similar 
figures for Buddhism or Confucianism. Yet assuredly Buddhism 
has been a great power In China, as great perhaps as Christianity 
in Europe, if we remember bow much is owed by European art, 
literature, law and science to non-Christian sources. The Chinese 
language is fnll of Buddhist phraseology^ not only in literature 

I Tba lo^ of QAtun ibon m the Pali Pit4kAa(p4nicuI*rly tbe Tbert and Tberl 
Otthi) bu often been noticed, but it U nloo ilrosg la Unhtyialat llteratsn. 
BodhiooryivntSro vm. ZS-SS end 8S-SS. 

■ 8eo enpecially Wetten, on Lan^ttagt, obepe. vu end ix, 

end OeDeoti, Oonlon«M Bouqi ik Snsii*K pp. S to It 

CHINA 

2xa] 

U\ 

but in popuJar songs Mid proverbs and an inspection of such 
entries in a ChbiMe dictionary as Fo (Buddha), Etuiii Yin, 
Ho Sluing (monk)’ will ahow how large and not altc^ther 
flattering a part they play in popular speech. 

Popular literature bears the same testimony. It is true that 
in what are esteemed the higher walks of letters BuddbUm has 
little place. The ^^uotations and allosiosa which play there so 
prominent a part are taken from the olasucs and Confudanism 
can rlfti m as Its own the historical, lexicographical and oritical* 
works which are the solid and somewhat heavy glory of Chinese 
literatnre. But its lighter and lees cultivated blossoms, such 
as novels, fairy stories and poetry, are predominantly Buddhist 
or Taoist in inspiration. This may be easily verified by a perusal 
of such works as the Ihean of tM Red Chamber, Strange Stones 
from 0 OUnese Studio, and Wieger’s Folk Lore Chinois Modeme. 
The same is true in general of the great Cbinoae poets, many of 
whom did not conceal that (in a poetic and unascetic fashion) 
they wore attached to Buddhism. 

It may be asked if tbe insolation is not Taoist in the main 
rather than Buddhist. Side by side with ethics and ceremony, 
a native stream of bold and weird ims^ation has never ceased 
to flow in China and there was no need to import tales of the 
Genii, immortal saints and vampire beauties. But when any 
cohei^oy unites these ideas of tho snpematural, that I think 
is the work of Buddhism snd so fat as Taoism itself has any 
coheronoy it is an imitation of Buddhism. Thus the ides of 
metempsychosis as one of many passing fancies may be in- 
digenouB to China but its prevalence in popular thought and 
language is undoubtedly duo to Buddhism, for Taoism and 
Confawanism have nothing definite to say as to the state of 
the dead. 

Much tho some story of Buddhist inflncnce is told by Chinese 
art, cspedsliy painting and sculpture. Here too Taoism is by 
no means excluded: it may be said to represent the artistic tide 

• I^nn^^frain from o rilmg AttenUoo W It® difforeoce bet*«« tb* Chine#© 
6i>d moeb otJiM Aiintic people# (wped*ily U>b Hindu#) m •xhlMWd to tWr 
tuw Quiw #.p«rt from Bur©i-*ii tb* CbinsM prodowd tertni eooUiriM 

ftgo c»l 4 logM ol muaaona wid dweripUr# liR4 of injoriplioM, •otk# wboh hOTO 
00 pMlW ID Hiodo IndiD. 

242 

BUDDBISM 0VT8WS INDIA 

ICB. 

of the Chiixese mind, ae ConfacUnism repieeenta the politicaL 
But it is impossible to mistake the sigiufioeiice of ohioiiology. 
As soon as Buddhism was well eetabll^ed in China, art enter^ 
00 a new phase which cohnlnated in the maaterpieoes of tho 
and S nng t Buddhism did not Introduce painting into 
China or ereo perfect a radimeotary art. The celebrated roU 
of £u K'ai'Obih^ shows no trace of Indian influence and pre¬ 
supposes a long artistic tradi^n. But Mabajanist Buddhism 
brought across Central Acta new shapes and motives. Some of 
Its imports were of doubtful artistic value, such as ^ures with 
many limbs and eyes, but with them came ideas which en* 
nch<^ Chinese art with new dramatic power, pasuon and 
solemnity. Taoism dealt with other worlds but they were 
gardens of the Hesperides, inhabited by immortal wiza^ and 
faiiy queens, not those disquieting regions where the soul 
receives tbs reward of its deeds. But now the art of Central 
Asia showed Chinese palutem something new; saints preaching 
the law with a gestnre of authority and deities of inflnite 
compas^on inviting suppliants to approach their thrones. And 
with them came the dramatic story of Gotama's life and all 
the legends of the Jatakas. 

This clearly is not Taoism, but when the era of great art 
and literature begins, any distinction between the two creeds, 
ezcept for theological purposes, becomes artifleial, for Taoism 
borrowed many externals of Buddhism, and Buddhism, while 
not abandoning its austere and emaciated saints, also accepted 
the Taoist ideal of the careless wandering hermit, Mend of 
moimtam pines and deer. Wei Hsieh* who lived under the 
Chin dynasty, when the strength of Buddhism was beginning 
to be felt, is conudered by Chineee critics as the earliest of the 
great painters and is said to have excelled in both Buddhist and 
Taoist subjects. The same may be said ol the most eminent 
names, such as En E'ai-chih and Wu TaO'tsu^, and we may also 
remember that Italian artists painted the birth of Venus and 
the origin of the milky way as well as Annunciations and 

* Thero trssid to haTsb««ef(wrs^^e}booko{BuddlucC ptiatiog ujutofilM 
rsBg. Sm Kokfc* 294 end SS5. 

I Pmer?6<i in the Brilkli MuseiuB end pobliihod. 

* IS® 

CEINA 

243 

sin] 

AseumptioDs, without any bint that one incidant was lest true 
than another. BaddMsm not only proTided subjects liJce the 
death oi the Buddha and Kuan Yin, the Qoddess of Mercy, which 
hold in Chinese art the same place as the Crucifixion and the 
Madonna in Europe, and aeration after generation ha^e 
stimulated the noblest efforts of the best painters. It also 
offered a creed and ideals suited to the artistio temperament: 
peace and beauty ceigued in its mcnastenea: its doctrine that 
life is one and continuous is reflected in that Ioto of nature, that 
sympathetic understanding of plants and animals, that mtimate 
union of sentiment with landscape which marks the best 
Chinese pictures. 

CHAPTER XLIII 

CEIKA iconUrtutd) 

HlSTOBY. 

Tbs traditional date for the introduction of Buddhism is 62 a.d., 
when the chronicles tell how tie Emperor Ming-Ti of the Later 
Han Dynasty dreamt that be saw a golden man fly into bis 
palace^ and how his conrtiers suggested that the figure was 
Fo-t'o* or Buddha, an Indian God. Ming-Ti did not let the 
matter drop and in 6$ sent an embassy to a destination variously 
described as the kii^om of the Ta Yiieh Chih^ or India wi^ 
Instructions to bring back Buddhist scriptures and priests. On 
its return it was accompanied by a monk called £li4yapa 
Mftti^a*, a ziative of Central India. A second called Cbn 
Fa-Lan^, who cam e from Central Asia and found some difficulty 
in obtaining permission to leave his country, followed shortly 
afterwards. Both were installed at Loyang, the capital of this 
dynasty, in the White Horse Monastery*, so called because the 
foreign monks rode on white horses or used them for carrying 
books. 

The story has been eritloized as an obvious legend, but I 
see no reason why ib should not be true to this extent that 
Ming>Ti sent an embassy to Central Asia (not India in our 
sense) with the result that a monastery was for the first time 
established under imperial patronage. The gravest objection is 
that before the campaigns of Pan Ch'ao^, which began about 
73 a.B., Central Asia was In rebellion against China. But tiiose 

X Sm 1010, Le Sooge si TAabuMds dc rE^iDp«rcTU Miog Ti, ptf 

H. B. MaspAo. vhero Um erigioU toxts an imulateil t&cl aiti<dMd. It is a ourioos 
er^oadaoM thAt PUkleay SoMr ia a^ to bon mtioduoad tbs wonhlp oi SorepSi 
to EgTpt from Biivopa ia coMaquenco of » draom. 

• . No doubt theo prooooaood aoisatbijig lik» Vst-tba 

'mm- 

cs, yr..TiT] 

CB2NA 

245 

c»mpaign3 s^ow that the Chinese Court wee occupied with 
Central Asian questions and to send envoys to enquire about 
religion may have been politically advanta^ous, for they could 
ohtd^ informatioiv without asserting or abandoning China's 
ciaime to sovei^gnty. The story does not state that there was 
no Buddhism In China before 52 a.d. On the contrary it 
implies that though it was not su^eieutly conspicuous to be 
known to the Emperor, yet there was oo difEculty in obtaining 
mformation about it and other facts support tlw idea that it 
began to enter China at least half a eentoiy earlier. The n^otia- 
tioDs of Chang Ch'ieni with the Yiieh Chib (i2d-U9 *.0.) and 
tiie documents discovered by Stein in the ancient roUitaiy posts 
on the western frontier of Kmisq^ prove that Chma had com¬ 
munication with Central Asia, but neither the accounts of 
Chang Ch'ien's jovumeys uor the documents contain any allusLon 
to Buddhism. In 122 a,o. the Annals relate that “a golden 
man” was captured from the Huung-nu but, even if it was an 
image of Buddha, the incident bad oo coosequonccs. More 
important is a notice io the Wei-liieh whiob gives a brief accovint 
of the Buddha's birth and states that in the year 2 b,o. an 
ambassador sent by the Emperor Ai to the court of tiie Yiieh 
Chih was instructed io BuddMsm by order of their king*. Also 
the Later Han Annals intimate t^t in 65 a.d. the Brince of 
Ch'u* was a Boddhlst and that there were ^m^as end 
Upksakas in his territory. 

The author of the Woi-lueh eommonts on the resemblance 
of Buddliist writings to the work of Lao^ted, and suggests that 
the latter left China in order to teach in Lidia. This theory found 
many advocates among the Taoists, but is not likely to commend 
itself to European scholars. Less iruptob^le is a view held by 

* Sm Cb»vftoiu.% Z4S iowmMt OUmK* SSMvwb ftr Avei Sttin, 1919. lafitv- 
docUoxL Tbe BftrlMct iocomeaU km ol 09 

* 7b« W«l*lBeIi Of Wei*l>o eoapowd S39 ud 

longer eileU w ft eozsplete vork, l>H(ft« 0 QiUerftl)Je extract irom it dMJins trith the 
eovatrle* of the We«t to IcecrpMftted is the Sea Eeo Chih 
SuQg.Chlli (^29 ft.r.). See ChftTftnnae, tnnalfttion ooA dom is T'ovng 

Poe, I90S, pp. 919^1. 

* ^ Chsvftasee. te. p. SflO. 

246 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [as. 

m&ny Chinese ciities* and apparently first menUoned in the 
Sui Damely, that Buddhism was Introduced into China 

at an early date but was exterminated by the Emperor Shih 
Huang It (221-200) in the course of his crusade against Utera* 
ture. But this view is not supported by any details and is open 
to the general ohjeotion that iatercooiso between China and 
India vid Central Asia before 200 n.o. is not only unproved but 
improbable. 

Still the mystical, qnietist philosophy of Lao-teu aud Ohuang- 
tzu has an undoubted resemblance to Indian thought. No one 
who is familiar with the tTpanishads can read the Tao-Td^Ching 
without feelii^ that if Brahman is substituted for Tao the whole 
would be in.tel%ible to a Hindu. Its doctrine is not specifically 
Buddhist, yet it conttuna passages which sound like echoes of 
the Pitakas. Compare Tao-TI-Chii^, 33.1, “He who overcomes 
others is strong: he who overcomes himself is mighty/’ with 
Dhammapada, 103, “If one man overcome a thousand thousand 
in battle and another overcome himself, tliia last is the greatest 
of conquerors”; and 46.2, “There is no greater sin that to look 
on what moves deelre: there is no greater evil than discontent: 
there is no greater disaster than cevetoueneas,” with Dham* 
mapada, 26K, “There is no fire like desire, there is no monster 
like hatred, there is no snare like folly, there is no torrent like 
covetousness,” And if it be objected that these are the coin* 
cidences of obvious ethics, 1 would call attenrion to 3d. 1, 
“Hence if we enumertkte separately each part that goes to 
form a cart, we have no cart at all.” Here .the thought and its 
illustratacn cannot be called obvious the resemblance to 
well-known passages in the Samyutta Nik&ya and Questions 
of Milinda* is strikmg. 

Any discussion oi the indebtedness of the Tao-TS-Chii^ to 
India is too complicated for insertion here since it involves the 

‘ See FreaelM, Zur Ptegt da Stn/SAnM^ da BkddkUmui in Ciise, ItlO, end 
Meepiro** reriev ia 1010, p. GSC. AnoUietTuietlcseiidi* tbUCipenkBn 

BodfiSe or Jes Tte^, deaonbed w the teecher of SikyettOfil vm e e&d thet 

igijcykjmijd visited bun ic Chilli GUes quotes sxtreotetrone writer of tbeekventb 
oeatury oeJkd Sb&s Xus bo fibe effect tbeb Buddhiev bed been flowiehlns before 
tile Ch'in dyosety but dieeppeered with its edveaC *sd tleo tbet sigbteea piieete 
were imprisooed in 21Q s.e. But tbe story edds tbnt they rented tbe PiwjnSpIm- 
nlie which is hnrdly poerible nt tbet epoch. 

' Sun. Nik. v. 10. a Cf. for nsimiter ittuitntioo in CbnAa^-ud, 3.S.B. n. p. 1 SC. 

ZLcr] 

CBH^A 

247 

(^uestioQ cA its or tlie d&t6 of particular passagca, if we 
reject the hypothesis that the work as we hare it was composed 
by XaO'tsu in the akth century B.o.’ But there is less reason 
to doubt the genuineness of the essays of Chuang-teil who lived 
in the fourth century 9 . 0 . In them we find mention of trances 
which give superhuman wisdom and lead to nnion with the 
all-pervading spirit, and of magioal powers enjoyed by sages, 
sitailsT to the Indian iddhA. He approves the ptaerico of 
abandoning the world and enunciates the doctrines of evolution 
and reincarnation, He knows, as doss also the Tao-T^:Chlng, 
methods of regulatiiig the breathing which are conducive to 
mental culture and long life. He speaks of the six faculties oi 
perception, which recall the Shsd&yatana, and of name and 
real existence (nfimarUpam) as being the conditions of a tlung^. 
He has also a remarkable comparison oi death to the extinction 
of a fire: “what we can point to are the faggots that have been 
consumed: but the fixe is transmitted and wo know not that it 
is over and ended.’' Several Buddhist parallels to this might 
be cited*. 

The list of such resemblances might be made longer and the 
explanation that Indian ideas reached Chins sporadically, at 
least as early as the fourth century B.a, seems natural. I should 
accept It, if there were any historical evidence besides these 
literary parallels. But there seems to be none and it may be 
justly urged that the roots of this quietism lie eo deep in the 
Chinese character, that the plant cannot have sprung from some 
chance wind*wafted seed. That character has two udee, one 
seen in tbs Chineso £mpire and the classical philosophy, 
excellent as ethics but somewhat stiff and foima!: tho otli» in 
revolutions and reboLIIons, in the free lifo of hermits and 
wanderers, in poetry and painting. This second side is very like 
the temper of Indian BuddbUm and easily amalgamated with 
it^, but it has a special note of its own. 

' I Okay My, bowever, that I it a a campibUoa cooubiing *«ry taeittoi 
Mjlnga anplidto by Ukt thovt BuddiiUt indoeciM. This may b« 

trm to soma of the Sitayi of Cluiaiig*UQ m woE 

' 8w UanaUtioB in S'-S.ff. Pai't l pp. 17Q,Sfi7,B. 40,02; tfr. i. pp. 171, 

192. O. 13; e. S. p. IS; s. p. 9, l p. 249; it. pp. 45, M, ?00. 804, IL p. 189; 
it, B. p. 189; & n. p. 189. 

' Zb. t. p. 208; d the Buddba^i eoevorwUon with Vacoba in Uaj. Nik. 72. 

* KumjlnJIva aiid otker Baddbteto MituUly wrota oommoBtAnc* on tho Tmk 
TOCbins. 

248 

BUDX>BISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[Gtt. 

The ouiioaity Ming'Tl did not lead to any immediate 
triumph of Buddhism. We read that he was zealous in honouring 
Confucius bat not that be shoved devotion to the new faith. 
Indeed it is possible that bis interest was political rather than 
:relig 20 us. Buddhism was also disoredlted by its first convert, 
the Emperor’s brother Chu-Ting, who rebelled unsuccessfully 
and committed euioide. Still it fionrisbed in a quiet way and 
the two foreign monks in the White Horse Monastery began that 
long series of translations which assumed gigantic proportiona 
in followii^ centuries. To K&lyapa is ascribed a collection 
of extracts known as the Sdtra of forty-two eeotions which is 
still popular^. This little work adheres closely to the teaching 
of the Pali Tripitaka and shows hardly any traces of the Ma> 
h&yina. According to the Chinese annals the chief doctimea 
proaohed by the first Buddhist missionaries were the sanctity 
of all animal life, motempsyohods, meditation, ascetioism and 
Earma. 

It is not until the third century^ that we bear much of 
Buddhism as a force at Court or among the people, but mean' 
while the task of translation progressed at Lo-yang. The Chinese 
are a literary race and these quiet labours prepared the soil for 
the subsequent efflorescence, Twelve^ translators are named as 
having worked before the downfall of the Han Dynasty and 
^oot 3S0 books axe attributed to them. Hone of them were 
Chinese. About half came from India and the rest from Central 
Asia, the moat celebrated of the latter being An Shih-koo, a 
prince of An^bsi or Parthia*. The Later Han Dynasty was 

' . It sputa. bc^»«Tcr, in tMUon SC of Iwog bom ia the 

eoDditioo orfunilfof o BodHiattva (P'r-u.cUa). Thore tb« vord aeonw bo bo ttood 
In tb« Ut« MOM of ft dftToub member of tbo Uoddbiet Cborch. 

* But Ibe Emperor Husn Is said to have nori&ccd to Bodilba and l^o.tAti. S«o 
Hob Had 8hu in fWop Fao, IPOTTp. 104. ?or ently Boddhism seo “Comotunautd* 
et Moicoa Bouddhiste Cbioots au K at au IH by Maspth^ bi S.H.F.B.O, 

1910. p. 222. IntJiesocoiul ceoCary lived MoU’tafi a Buddhist Author with 

A sUong spico of Taocont, Ris work « a coliacUon of queut/ons and aasa-on, soma* 
vbat rccODblin;; tbo QoeMiona of Sntinda. 8 m translaUoa by PeiUot (in T'ovig 
Am, Tol. m. 1920) vbo gives the data provisionally m IOC a.l>. 

' SmoodM of tbeso and (be later tianslatom are found in tha tturUen catsdogoos 
of tha Cbifiaso Tripitaha (see Naajia, p. urli) and other worts sQcb ea Uio Kao 
Saog-Choan CKanjio, Ko. 1490). 

‘ ^ r wked at translations in Loyang 148-170. 

CHINA 

219 

SLEQ} 

followed hy the animated and romantic epoch knowii as the 
Three Kingdoms (221-265) when China was divided between 
the States of Wei, Wu and Shu. Loyang became the capital 
of Wei and the activity of the White Horse Monastery con* 
tinned. We have the names of five translators who worked 
there. One of them was the first to translate the PitimokJeha^, 
which argnes that previously few followed the monastic life. 
At Kanlcing, the capital of Wu, we also hear of five translators 
and one was tutor of the Crown Prince. This implies that 
Buddhism was spreading in the south and that monks lOfipiied 
confidence at Court. 

The Three Kingdoms gave place to the Dynae^ known as 
Western Tsin* which, for a short time (a.n. 26S-316), claimed 
to unite the Empire, and we now reach the period when Buddhism 
begius to become prominent. It is also a period of political 
confusion, of contest between the north and south, of stru^lea 
between Chinese and Tartars. Chinese histories, with their 
long lists of legitimate sovereigns, exaggerate the solidity and 
continuity of the Empire, for the tenritory ruled by those 
sovereigns was often but a small fraction of what we call China. 
Yet the Tartar etaiea were not an alien and destructive force 
to the same extent as the conquests made by Mobammedan 
Turks at the expense of Byzantium. The Tartars were neither 
fanatical, nor prejodiced against Chinese ideals in politics and 
zeligion. On the contrary, they re^^eoted the language, liters* 
tuie and institutions of tlie Empire: they assumed Chinese 
names and sometimes based their churn to the Imperial title 
on the marriage of their ancestors with Chinese princesses. 

During the fourth century and the first h^ of the fifth 
some twenty ephemeral states, governed by Tartar chiefti^a 
and peipetu^ly involved in mutual war, rose and fell in northern 
China. The most permanent of them was Northern Wei which 
lasted till 535 A.n. But the Later Giao and both the Earlier and 
Later Ts'in are important for our purpose^. Some writers make 
it a reproach to Buddhism that its progress, which had been 

' DbMmfik&la. Nonllo, p. 980. Tlic ViDOya um<] ia thcM eaH; days of 
ChbcM Boddhina wu ftpp%ronUy that ol the dierieegnpta mKooL S«« J.A. ISIS, 
u. p.40. Aa SbUi-kao(r. a.p. ]50)ttaaeUtedeTori(C4lled1^S000Balu{OTUc4^ 
(Nanjio. 1120 ), but it le aot clau wbat wae the SeaeVnt ori^eL 

2&0 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[oh. 

ehv among the civilized Chinese, became rapid in the provinces 
which passed into the banda of these mder tribes. But the 
phonomenon is natural and is Ulnstrated by the fact that even 
now the advance of Christianity is more rapid in Africa than 
in India. The civilization of China wau already old and self- 
complacent*. not devoid of intellectual curiomty and not in* 
tolerant, but soeprioal of foreign importations and of dealings 
with the nest world. But the Tartars bad little of their own 
in the way of literature and institutions: it was their custom 
to aesimilate the arts and ideas of the civilized nations whom 
they conquered: the more western tribes had already made the 
acquaintance of Buddhism in Central Asia and such native 
notions of religion os they possessed disposed them to taeat 
priests, monks and magioians with respect. 

Oi the states mentioned, the Later Chao was founded by 
Shib-Lo' (273-332), whose territories extended from thu Great 
Wall to the Han and Huai in the South. He showed favo^lI to 
an In^an monk and diviner called Fo-Vu-ch'4ng* who lived 
at hia court and he appears to have been himself a Buddhist. 
At any rate the most eminent of his successors, Shih Ohi-lung^, 
wee an ardent devotee and gave general permission to the 
population to enter monasteries, wUob had not been granted 
previously. This permission is noticeable, for it implies, even 
at this early date, the theory that a subject of tbe Emperor 
has no right to become a monk without his maaCer’s leave. 

In 381 we are told that in north-western China nine-tenths 
of the inhabitants were Buddhists. In 372 Buddhism was 
introduoed into Korea and accepted as the flower of Chinese 
civilization. 

Tbe state known as tho Tormer Te'in^ hod its nucleus in 

■S®i- 

* ^ rcmarbaU« lOftO snd fsiooiu in his timo, for ho wm 

credited not only with ^rvoyance tnd prodadas ^th rdsiog the d«4d. 

(usVs 4cvoMnt of him. bwc4 oo (Jio Tsm annal«> aey eUll b« md with iAtenst. 
See Novt. 3fi3ang&i A^iatiguti, c. 18^, pp. 170 tf. His hiogrtphy Is eonlalaed i& 
chap. 05 of the Tao ^ annale. 

* ttoiS63A.P. 

* Ta'in iCBStbe dietin^'ishod front Tsb name of thrso short but 

If^Unato ilyoMtaea. 

xtm] 

CHINA 

26L 

Sbenai, bat expanded consldorobly between 351 and 304 a.d. 
under leadership of Fu Chioa^, who establiehed in it large 
colonios of Tartars. At lirst he favoured Confucaaniem but in 
381 became a Buddhist. He was evidently in oloso touch with 
the western regions and probably through them with India, 
for we hear tbat^xty*two states of Central Asia sent him tribute. 

The I^ter Ts'in dynasty (384-417) had its bead(iuarters 
in Kansu and was founded by vassals of the Former Ts'in. 
When the power of Fu*Chlen collapsed, they succeeded to bis 
possesrions and established themselves in Cb'ang-an. Yao- 
hsing^, the second monarch of this line was a devout Buddhist, 
and deserves mention as the patron of Kumirajiva’, tho most 
eminent of the earlier translators. 

Kum&rajiva was bom of Indian parents in Kucha and, after 
following the school of tho Sarv&stivddins for some rime, became 
a Mahayoiiist. When Kucha was captured in 8$3 by tbe 
General of Fu-Cluen» ho was carried off to China and from 401 
onwards be laboured at Cb'ang-an for about ten years. He was 
appointed Kuo Shlh^, or Director of Public Instruction, and 
lectured in a hall specially built for him. He is said to have had 
8000 disciples and extant translarions are ascribed to him. 
Probably all the Tartar kingdoms were well disposed towards 
Buddhism, though their unaettlod condition made them pre* 
carious residences for monks and scholars. This was doubtless 
true of Northern Wei, which had been growing during the 
period described, but appears as a prominent homo of Buddhism 
somewhat later. 

Meanwhile in the south tbe Eastern Tsin Dynasty, which 
represented the legitimate Empire and ruled at Nanking from 
317 to 420, was also favourable to Buddhism and Esiao Wu-Ti,* 
tbe lunth sovereign of this lino, was thn first Emperor of China 
to become a Buddhist. 

The times weiu troubled, but order was gradually being 
restored. The Eastern Tsin Dynasty had been much disturbed 
by tbe struggles of rival princes. Those were brought to an end 
in 420 by a new dynasty known as Liu Sang which reigned in 

'm- 

* S«* Knnjio, Catnlog^uc, ^ 400. 

' . 1''*^ PeOiol in T'tmng fno, 1011, {>- 071. 

B. m. 

17 

252 

BVhmiSU OVTBIDB I^DIA 

[CE. 

the fioutb some ^ty yo&rs. The nosib wee divided among sis 
Tartar hingdomB, which all penehed before 440 except Wei. 
Wei then split Into an Eastern and a Western idngdom which 
lasted about a handled yean, In the south, the Liu Sung gave 
place to three short dynasties, Ch'i, Liang and Ch'cn, until at 
last the Sui (539-SOS) united China, 

The Lia Sung Emperor W3n Ti (424-454) was a patron of 
Confuclan learning, but does not appear to have discouraged 
Buddhism. The Sung annals record that several embasaes were 
sent from India and Ceylon to oSer congratulations on the 
fiouiishing conchtion of seligioti in his dominions, but they also 
preserve memorials from Chinese officials asking for imperial 
interference to prevent the multiplicatioa of monasteries and 
the growing expenditure on supetatitious ceremonies. This 
marks the beginning of the de&re to curb Buddhism by re* 
strictive legislation which the official class displayed so promi* 
neutly and persistently in subsequent centuries, A similar 
leacrion seems to have been felt in Wei, where the inf uential 
stateBman Ts'ui Hao^, a votary of Taoism, conducted an anti* 
Buddhist campaign. Ho was helped in this crusado by the 
discovery of arms in a monastery at Ch'ang*an. The monks were 
accused of treason end debauchery and in 446 Toba Tao^ the 
sovereign of Wei, issued an edict ordering the destruction of 
Buddhist temples aiul sacied books as well as the execution of 
cdJ priests. The Crown Prince, who was a Buddhist, was abb 
to save many lives, but no monasteries or tempba were left 
standing, The pereecution, however, was oi short duration. 
Toba Tao was assassinated and almost the first act of his 
successor was to re'establish Buddhism and allow his subjects 
to become monks. From this period date the sculptured grottoes 
of Yiin-Kang in northern 8han*ai which are probably the oldest 
specimens o! Buddhist art in China, In 471 another rubr oi 
Wei, Toba Hung, had a gigantic Image of Buddha constructed 
and subsequently abdicated in order to devote himself to 

m- 

i, U6 vAi CADOnissd under th« Rune of Wu Acd the three 

SKAt penecutMiM of BuUdhura *r« eoneiioiM deecriUal aa the dJeaeten oi the 
three Wu, the olhen bcbi^ Wu of the Kortb C3wq dynuty (674) ead Wo <A the 
T'AQS(d40). 

CHINA 

253 

xua] 

Buddhist studies. His successor m&rks a teactioii, for ho vas 
an ardent Ooofuciamst who changed the family name to Yuan 
aud tried to introduce the Chinese language and dress. But the 
tide of Buddhism was too strong. It secured the favour of the 
next Emperor in whose time there arc said to have been 13,000 
temples in Wei. 

In the Sung dominions a conspiracy was discovered In 45B 
in which a monk was implicated, and restrictive, though not 
prohibitive, xogulut^oos were issued rcepoccing monasteries. 
The Emperor Iding'Tl, though a cruel ruler was a devout 
Buddhist and erected a monastery in Hu-nan, at the cost of 
such heavy taxation that his ministors remoustrated. The fifty* 
nine years of Liu Sung rule must have been on the whob 
favourable to Buddhism, for twenty transbtofs flourished, 
par% natives and paztiy fonsgncia from Central Asia, India 
and Ceylon. In 420 a baud of twenty-five Chinese started on a 
pilgrimage to India. They liad been preceded by tlie cobbrated 
pilgrim Pa-Hsicn* who travelled in India from 800 to 414, 

In the reign of Wu-'K, the first Emperor of tlic Ch'i dynasty, 
one of the imperial princes, named Tzu Liang*, cultivated the 
society of eminent monks and enjoyed theclo^cal disenssions. 
Erom the spedmeus of these arguments which have been pre¬ 
served we see that the explanation of the inequalities of life 
as the result of Karma had a great attiactiou for the popular 
mind and also that it proroM the hostile criticism of the 
Confucian literati. 

The accession of the Liang dynasty and the bug reign of its 
first emperor Wu-Ti (502-540) were important events in the 
history of Buddhiasi, for this monarch rivalled Asoka in pious 
enthu^asm If not in power and prosperity. obviously set 
the Church above the state and it was while he was on the 
throne that Bcdbidharina came to China and the first edition 
of the Trlpiiaka was prepared. 

His reign, though primarily of importance for religion, was 
not w^ting in political interost, and witnessed a long oonfiict 
with Wei. Wu li was aided by ^ disseomons which (hstraoted 
Wei but fmled to achieve his object, probably as a result of his 
religious preoccupations, for he seemed unable to estimate the 

> . Pw the S6 pilgrim* M Nuijlo, p 417. 

254 BVDDHISM 0VT82LE lEDIA [oh. 

power of t^o various adventurets who froitt time to time rose 
to pro-eminence in the north and, holding war to be wrong, he 
was too ready to accept in^ncere OTertures for peace, Wei split 
into two states, the Eastern and Western, and Hou-Ching^, a 
powerful general who was not satisfied with hie position in 
cither, ofiored his services to Wu-Ti, promisiog to add a large 
part of Ho-nan to hie dominions. He failed in his promise but 
WU’Ti, instead of punishing him, first gave him a post as 
governor and then listened to the proposi^ made by the ruler 
of Eastern Wei for bis surrender. On thig Hon>Ching conspired 
with an adopted son of Wu**]^, who had been sat aside as heir 
to the throne and invested Nanking. The city was captured 
after the horrors of a prolonged siege and Wa*Ti died miserably. 

Wu-Ti was not originally a Buddhist. In fact until about 
510, when he was well over forty, he was conspicuous as a 
patron of Confuciamsm. The ebango night be ascribed to per¬ 
sonal reasons, bat it is noticeable that the same thing occurred 
in Wei, where a period of Confucianism was succeeded by a 
strong wave of Buddhism which evidently swopt over aU China. 
Hu‘, tho Dowdier Empress of Wei, was a fervent devotee, though 
of indifferent morality in both public and private life since she 
is said to have poisoned her own son. In 618 she sent Simg Yiin 
and Hui Sh5ng^ to Udylna in search of Buddhist books oi 
which they brought back 175. 

Wu-Ti’s conversion is connected with a wandering monk and 
magician called Pao-Cblb^, who received the privilege of 
approaching him at all hours. A monastery was ereo^ in 
Nanking at great eicpense and edicts were issued forbidding 
not only tbo sacrifice of animals but oven the representation 
of living things in embroidery, on the ground that people 
might cut up such figures and thus become cidlous to the sanctity 
of life. The emperor expoimded sfitras in public and wrote a 
work on Baddhist ritual^. The first Chinese edition of the 
Tripitaka, in manuscript and not printed, was collected in 618. 

’isg. 

* ® 4 ^ Chevttflca "Vojig* do Bosg Yun d£ju rUdySae et 

I« GAodUra, p. S is lteS.pp. STMl. P<»r 4n iotomUng 

AccooDt of th» Cowager Enprat mb pp. 3M-S. 

yi.m] 

CHINA 

255 

Although WU'Ti'fi edicts, psTtacDlsrly that against auimal 
sacridces, gave gieat dissatisfaction, yet the Buddhist movement 
soema to have been popular and not merely an imperial whim, 
for many distinguished persons, for instance the authors Lin 
Hsieh and Yao ChV, took part in it. 

In 520 (or according to others, in 5S5) Bodhidharma (gener^ 
ally called Ta-too in Chinese) landed in Canton from India. He 
is described as the son of a king of a country called Hsiang- 
chih in southern India, and the twenty-eighth Patriarch^. He 
taught that merit does not lie in good works aud that knowledge 
is not gained hy readii^ the scripturca. The one essential is 
insight, which coroee as illonunation after meditation. Though 
this doctrine had subsequently much success in the Far East, it 
was not at first appreciated and Bodhidbarma’s introduction 
to the devout but literary Emperor in Nanking wm a fiasco. 
He offended his Hajosty by ourtiy saying that he had acquired 
no merit by causing temples to be built and books to be tran¬ 
scribed. Then, in answer to the question, what is the most im¬ 
portant of tho holy doctrines, ho replied ** where all is emptiness, 
nothing can bo called holy.” “Who,” asked the astonished 
Emperor, “is he who thus replies to mol ” “I do not know,” 
smd Bodhidharma. 

Not being able to come to any understanding with Wu-TI, 
Bodhidliarma went northwards, and is said to have crossed the 
Yang-tse standing on a leed, a subject frequently represented 
in Chinese art^ He retired to Lo-yang where he spent nine 
years in the Bhoo-Iin* temple gazing silently at a wall, whence 
he was popularly kno^vn as the wall-gazer. One logond says 
that ho sat so long in contemplation that bis legs fell ofi, and 

• 8m f'hap. Tixto. p. 00 , ftoH U.V Wkv (on •ebook of ChinaooBuddhiflQ). 

lor non ibout BodEu<Uiwjno. Tbo Mriloot ChiUMO aoooiuitt of him mmd Co be tbc«o 
oontAmed la tbo Ltong ood W»i oonok. But ooo of tho moot popaJor ood foIlMt 
ocoonatj lo to bo found in tbo Wu Ting Hui Yuia ( 6 nC voloso) pfntcd o 6 Ka&ban 
aew Faf)bo». 

■ mi portr^ti ore olio fiwiuooe both in Chinn lod Jipen (ms Odoiial Zl«/t 
1912, p. 220 ) ftnd the itroogij mirfcod feetom ouributed to hiin 01 A 7 porbips 
roprsMot I trtditlon of hii pormiAl Appeomnea, whieb ii ondrely on-GhfowA 
An olabontA itady of BodhidhArniA vriltOD in Jip'tnoM u noticed in 
1911, ^4S7. 

256 

£UI>DSISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CB. 

B kind of legbss doll vhich is ft farourite plajtbmg in Japan is 
still callod hy bU name. But according to another tale he 
preserved his legs. He wished to retvini to India but died in 
China. When Sung Ydn, tlie traveller mentioned above, wee 
letuming from India, he met him in a mountain pass bare¬ 
footed and carrying one sandal in his hand^. When this was 
reported, his coffin was opened and was found to contain 
nothing but the other sandal which was long preserved as a 
precious relio in the 5hao*Lin tomple. 

Wu-Ti adopted many of the habits of a bonze. He was a 
striot vegetarian, expounded the scriptures in public and wrote 
a work on ritual. He thrice retired into a monastery and wore 
the dross of a Bhikkhu. Those re^romonts were apparently of 
short duration and his ministers twice redeemed him by heavy 
payments. 

In 538 a hair of tho Buddha was sent by the king of Fu*nan 
and received with great ceremony. In tho next year a mUsioA 
was despatched to Magadha to obtain Sanskrit texts. Itretniiied 
in 546 with a large collection of manoscripts And aocompaniod 
by the learned Param&rtha who spent twenty years in trans¬ 
lating them*. Wu-Ti, in bis old age, became stricter. All luxury 
was suppressed at Court, but he himself always wore full dross 
and showed the utmost politeness, even to the lowest officials. 
He was so (oluctant to inffict tho punishment of death that 
crime increased. In 547 he became a monk for tlie third time 
and immediately afterwards tbe events connected with Hou* 
Ching (briody sketched above) began to trouble the peace of 
his old age. Buring the siege of Hanking be was obliged to 
depart from his vegetarian diet and eat eggs. When he was told 
that his capital was taken he merely said, *'1 obtained the 
kingdom through my own efforts and through me it has been 
lost. So I need not comploin.” 

Hon-Ching proceeded to the palace, but*, overcome with awe, 
knelt down before Wu-Ti who merely s^d, "I am afraid yon 
must be fatigued by tbe trouble it b&a coat you to destroy my 
kingdom.” Hoa-Cbing was ashamed and told his officers that 

^ Th« I«$«nd <io«a not fit ia well with ofaivoologv soiee Sonx-YCo la uid to b&ve 
reUiraed from lodlftin S22. 

* 8e« T4keku»Q b J.ILA.3. 1906, p. $9. 

I ]H4iHft, 06 ^ de to OUne, p. 809. 

OEINA 

267 

TT.m ] 

be bad offv&f ielt such fear before and would nerer d&re to see 
Wu-Ti agam. Never^eless, the aged Emperor was treated 
with ind^nit; and soon died of starvation. His end, though 
loelanoboly, was peaceful compared with that In store for Hou* 
Chiog who, after two years of ^htang and murdering, essusidd 
the imperial ritle, but Iminediatiely afterwards was defeated and 
slain. The people ate his body in the streets of Hanking and hie 
own wife is said to have sw^owed mouthfuls of hie desh. 

One of Wu*Ti’B sons, Yiian-Ti, who reigned from 662 to 655, 
inherited his father’s temper and fate with this differenoe that 
he was a Taoist, not a Buddhist. He frequently resided in the 
temples of that religion, studied its scriptures and expomidcd 
them to bis people. A groat scholar, be had accumulated 140,000 
volumes, but when it was announced to him in his Ubtary that 
tho troops of Wei were marching on his capital, be yielded with* 
out rematance and burnt bis books, saying that they had proved 
of no use in this extremity. 

This alternation of imperial patronage in the south may have 
been the reason why Wen Hsiian Ti, the ruler of Northern Cb'iS 
and for the moment perhaps the most important poreonage in 
China, summoned Buddhist aud Taoist priests to a discusalon 
in 556. Both religions could not be true, he sud, and one must 
be superfluous. iUtor bearing the aigumente of both he decided 
in favour of Buddhism and ordered the Tooists to become bouaes 
on pain of death. Only four ref need and were ezeoutod. 

Under the short Ch'6n dynasty (657-689) the poritiou of 
Buddhism continued favourable. The first Emperor, a mild and 
intelligent sovereign, though circumstances obl^ed him to put 
a great many people out of the way, retired to a monastery after 
reignii^ for two years. But in the north there was a temporary 
reaction, Wu-Ti, of the Northern Chou dynasty*, first of all 
defined the pteccdoucs of the three religions &« Confucianism, 
Taoism, Buddhism and then, in 676, prohibited tho two latter, 
ordering temples to be destroyed and priests to return to the 
world. But as usual the persecution was not of long duration. 
Five years later Wu-Ti’s son withdrew his father’s edict and 
in 682, the founder of the Sui dynasty, gave the population 
permission to become monks. He may be said to have used 

258 

BUDDHISM 0UT8IDF INDIA 

[OB. 

Buddhism His basis for restoring the unity of the Empire 
and in his old age he became devout. The Sui annals obseire 
that Buddhist books had become more numerous under this 
dynasty than those of the Confu^anists, and no leas than three 
eoHectious of the Tripltaka wore made between 594 and 616. 

With the seventh centniy began the great T^ang dynasty 
(020-607). Buddhism had now been known to the rulers of 
China for about 550 years. It began as a religion tolerated but 
still regarded as exotic and not quite natural for the eons of 
Han. It had sueoeeded in establi^u^ itself as the faith of the 
majority among both Tartars and Chinese. The rivalry of 
Taoism was only an instance of that imitation which is the 
^cetest flattery. Though the opposition of the mandarins 
assumed serious proportions whenever they could induce an 
Emperor to share their views, yet the hostile atritudo of the 
Qovemment never lasted long and was not shared by the mass 
of the people. It is clear that the permissions to practise 
Buddhism which invariably followed close on the prohibitions 
were a national relief. Though Buddhism tended to mingle with 
Taoism and other indigenous ideas, the many translations of 
Indian works and theinoreasing intercourse between Chinese and 
Hindus had difhised a knowledge of ite true tenets and practice. 

The T'aug dynasty witnessed a trior^ulM war between Con* 
fucianism, Buddhism and Taoism. As a rule Confuedaniam 
attaclced the other two aa base superstirions but sometimes, as 
in the reign of Wu Tsung, Taoism seised a chance of being able 
to annihilate Buddhism. This war continued under the Northern 
Sung, though the character of Chinese Buddhism changed, for 
the Contemplative School, which bad considerable affinities to 
Taoism, became popular at the expense of the T'ien T'm. After 
the Northern Sung (except under the foreign Mongol dynasty) 
we feel that, though Buddhism was by no means dead and from 
rime to rime flourished exceedingly, yet Confucianism had 
ostablishod its claim to be the natural code and creed of the 
scholar and statesman. The Chinese Court remsuned a strange 
place to the end but scholarship and good sense had a large 
measure of success in banishing extravagance from art and 
literature. Yet, alas, the intellectual life of China lost more In 
fire and brilliancy than it gained in sanity. Probably the most 
critical times for literature and indeed for thought were those 

CHINA 

259 

XLin] 

brief periods under tho Sui and T'ang^ when Buddhist and Taoist 
books wore accepted as texts for tho public ezamiuatious and 
the last balf century of the Northern Sung, when tho educational 
reforms of Wang An Shih vrere inteiraittently in force. The 
innovations were cancelled in all cases. Had they lasted, 
Chinese style and mentality might have been different. 

The Tang dynasty, though on tJ^e whole favourabb to 
Buddhism, and indeed the period of its greatest prosperity, 
opened with a period of reaction. To the founder, Kao Tsu, 
is atUibuted the saying that Confuctanism b as necessary to 
the Chioesd as wings to a bird or water to a fish. The imperial 
historiographer Fu 1* presented to his master a memorial 
blaming Buddhism because it undervalued natural relationships 
and urging that monks and nuns should be compelled to marry. 
He was opposed by Hsiao Yd’, who declared th&t hell wu made 
for such people as bis opponent—an argument common to many 
rel^ODS. The Emperor followed on the whole advice of Tu I. 
Magistrates were ordered to inq^uiie into tho lives of monks and 
nuns. Those found pure and sincere were oollectod in the large 
estabhshmenie. The rest wero ordered to return to tho world 
and the smaller religious houses were closed. Eao Tsu abdicated 
in C27 but his son Tai Taur^ continued bis reli^us policy, and 
the new Empress was strongly auti-Buddhist, for when mortally 
ill she forbade her son to pray for her recovery in Buddhist 
shrines. Yet tho Emperor cannot have shared these sentiments 
at any rato towards the end of his reign’. Ho issued an edict 
allowing every monastery to receive five new monks and the 

> 8«e Biot, BUL fiiutveiion y^fqut <» C/utu, pp. 289, S19. 

* . h cobbrotod in CliiAOso Iiiitotr u we o( iho grcstc«t oppenonte 
of Soddlusm. He ooUeotad «11 the objeotiotu to it in 10 booU ud «em«d bie eos 

ic OQ tie death bed. Giles, Biof. DtU- S80. 

* Afi imporUae miobtec ud &pp«RQdy » ntc el UlenS but of 
Qn|OV«ntebl» mkI cbengeeble temper. In 639 be obtiiiMd tbe EmperorV leeve to 
beeotte & pooet bvt eooa Ht hie oionuWry. The Empwoc errlered bin to be 
ee&onhed under the oeme Pun but N»tto«. OUee, Bkg. Biel 7S& The meok 
EVlut ^9^ *bo UUcked tbe viewt of Pu 1 ia two treeUM which hevo beeo 
ineorporeted la tbe Caioeee Tripit^ie. See Kenjio, Cti. Noe. 1600, IGOI. 

* Sobeogoeatly 4 itory gnw up tb*t bie wnil bed Tinted bell durlos • pndoosed 
faiatiAg fit eftet vhieh be reoore^ end beceme e devoot BoddhwC. Sm ohep. sx 
of the Bomwiioe celled Ha.yu.«hi, e iutMtio IrmTerty of Hedea Cboeng*! fiwveb, 
eod tVieger, TotM Bieioriftue, p. 1S8S. 

260 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

celebrated pumey of Hsfi&u Chuaug^ was made iix hia raign. 
Wbeo the pOgrim returned from India, he was reoaired with 
public honours and a title was conferred on him. Learned monks 
were appointed to aaaUt him in translating the library be had 
brought back and the acconnt of his travels was presented to 
the lElmperor who also wrote a laudatory preface to his version 
of the Prajn&p&ramit&. It was in this reign also that Nestorian 
misuonaries &Bt appeared in China and were allowed to settle 
in the capital. Diplomatic relations were maint^ed with India. 
The Indian Emperor Harsha sent an envoy in 641 and two 
Chinese missions were despatched in letnrir. The second, led 
by Wang Hsiian-Ts'l*, did not arrive until after the deatA of 
Haisha when a usurper had seized the throne. Wang Hsiian* 
Ts'S collected a small army in Tibet, dethroned the usurper and 
brought him a« a prisoner to China. 

The latter half of the seventh century is dominated by tho 
hguie of the Dowager Empress Wu, the prototype of the ee[e> 
brated Jody who took charge of China^s fate in our own day and, 
like her, superhuman in dooision unscrupulouenees, yet 
capable of inspiring loyalty. She was a oonoubine of the Emperor 
Tai Tsung and when he died in 649 lived for a short time as a 
Buddhist nun. The eventful life of Wu Hou, who was at least 
successful in maintaining order at home and on the frontiers, 
belongs to the history of China rather than of Buddhism. She 
was not an ornament of tho f^tb nor an example of its ptinuples, 
but, mindful of tbs protection it bad once aSorded her, she gave 
it her patronage even to the extent of making a bonze named 
Ru^ P the minister of her mature passions when she was nearly 

‘ QAme h«4 bm in ta utnotdmatj noabw of 

w&rt. Sm B,B>F,B,0, 1905, pp. 434 13 0. GUm £1tm Wi~>h Cbunos lo bift CiWeMt 
DteUcnorir. but Heiian Taang in hia Bu^fopiiMi I>iawwf. ProbabJ/ Um lattot to 
ntor* oomet Not to tbs preraun^tJaa oi the oba^ton Tariablo, bat tbe 
3^ wa« tabooed aa bolng part of tba Saperot K'acg Hsi’i paraoDtl 
oaiM and lubeUiutad for it Heo(^ tba epaUin^ 7aao Cboaas. 

' ^ 7ii)oejit Smitb, Sari^ Htotofjr 9f India, pp. S26-8S7,. and 

OilM, iKofr. Diet., a.i^ Wang HeSan.T'ae. TUa vorthp appaan to have gona to 
India ag^ in SS7 Co oSer robea at tbe bol; plaoea 

' *1^ Boom of Che principal etatues in the eavee of Long'ioaa were made 
at bei ospenee, bnt otber parte of Uieae oaree seem to data irom at laaat SOO a.i>. 
ChaTaaaM, Jfieeion AnItM. to&a i, deuiSae partie. 

Yt.rrr ] 

CHINA 

262 

seventy years old. A magnifoent terapie, at which 10,000 men 
worked daily, was huilt for Mis, but the Empress was warned 
that he was coUectisg a body of vigorous mooks soicinally for 
its servioe, but really for political objects. She ordered these 
persons to be banished. Hiuul was acgiy and burnt the tempb. 
The Empress at first merely ordered it to be rebuilt, but finding 
that HuM I was growing disrespectful, she had Mm assassinated. 

We bear that the MahSmegha^Otia^ was presented to her 
and circulated among the people with her approval. About 600 
she assumed divine honours and accommodated these preten* 
sions to Buddhism by allowing hereelf to be styled MMtreya or 
Kuan*y in. After her death at the age of 80, there docs not appear 
to have boon any religious change, for two monks were appointed 
to high office and orders were issued that Buddhist and Taoist 
temples should be built in eve^ Department. But the earlier 
part of the re^ of Eslian Tsung^ marks a temporary reaction. 
It was represonted to him that rich families wasted their 
substance on religious edifices and that the inmates wore well- 
to-do persons desirous of escaping the burdens of public service. 
He accordingly forbade tbe building of monasteries, making of 
images and copying of sutrss, and 12,000 monks were ordered 
to return to the world. In 725 he ordered a building known as 
‘'Hall of tbe Assembled Spirits" to be renamod “Hall of As¬ 
sembled Worthies," because spirits were mere fables. 

In tbe latter part of his life he became devout though ad¬ 
dicted to Taoism ra^er than Buddhism. But be must have 
outgrown bis anti-Buddhist prejudices, for in 730 the seventh 
collection of the Tripitaka was made under bis auspices. Many 
poets of this period such as Su Chin and the somewhat later 
Lin Tsuog Yuan^ were Buddhists and the paintings of tho great 
Wu Tao-tsQ and Wang-wei (painter as well as poet) glowed with 
the inspiration of the T'ien-t'ai teaching. In 740 there were 
in the city of Ch'ang-An alone ri^cty-foux monasteries and 

* Tft-Tan Chins. 8«e/,.e. lSld,p.U9.Tb9 kU Dowager Ereprew 

dao WM toed ot u Etus-Tio bat it doca BOt •pp«w tiut tbe per- 

fomoaM VM meoAt to be tekea eerianal;. 

* “Tbet roBMAUe CbiiMee ret^ of Qeaeo {71^764} vbiclk u tbe reel ebeolu 

oulminetacm of CbiiUM gealna*' FeaoUcM, SpocU CAimk <n4 ar 

(. 102 . 

26Z 

BUDDHISM OUTBIDS INDIA 

[CH. 

twenty'Seren nuimories. A ouiioua light i& tbro^m on fho in- 
consistent and composite oharaotor of Cblnose religious sciiti- 
xnent—ae noticeable to-day as it was twelre Imndrod years a^o 
—by the will of Yao Ch'ung* a statesman who presented a 
celebrated anti-Buddhist memorial to this Emperor. In his 
will be warns his children solemnly ag^nst the creed which ho 
bated and yet adds the following direction. "When I am dead» 
on no account perform for me the ceremonies of that mean 
religion. But if you fed unable to follow orthodoxy in every 
respect, then yield to popular custom and from the fimt seventh 
day after my death until the lost (s.e. seventh) seventh day, lot 
mass be cebbrated by the Buddhist clergy seven times: and 
when, as these masses require, you must offer gifts to me, use 
the clothes which 1 wore in life and do not qbo other valuable 
things.” 

In 7bl a mission was sent Co the bang of Ki-pin^. The staff 
included Wu*K'ung^, also known as Dbannadh&tu, who re- 
nuuned some time in India, took the vows and ultimately 
returned to China with many books and relics. It is probable 
that in this and the following centuries Hindu Influence reached 
the outlyii^ province of Yunnan directly through Bunna^. 

Letters, art and pi^jcantiy made the Cooit of Hstian Tsung 
brilliant, but the splendour faded and his reign ended tragically 
in disaster and lel^llion. The T'ar^ dynasty seemed in danger 
of collapse. But it emerged successfully from these troubles 
and continued for a century and a half. Ihiring the whole of 
thig period the Emperors with one exception^ were favourable 
to Buddhism, and the latter half of the eighth century marks 
in Buddhist history an epoch of increased popularity among the 
masses but also the spread of ritual and doctrinal corruption, 
for it is in those years that its oozmection with ceremonies for 
the repose and honour of the dead became more intimate. 

jwHod it ii pretftbt/ equi?aleot to Ktpiwt or N.S. AfghomotAn. 

■ms. 

* Sm B.B.P. B.O. 1804, p. Idl. Tbii (low not oxolo^e tb» pco^bflitp of &n oppo«lt» 
Qumnt. m. Chintee Bwldhbm flovi^g ioto Bunos. 

• Wu ltuog. S41-S4?. 

ZLm] 

CSlliA 

'263 

siiddJe ftod later T'ang Emperors were not exolunve 
Buddhists. According to the eeTsre judgment of their own 
officials, they were inclined to unworthy and outlandish 
superstitions. Many of them were under the infuence of 
eimuebs, magicians and soothsayers, and many of those who 
were not assassinated died from tfddng the Taoist medieme 
called Elixir of Inunortality. Yet it was not a period of deoa* 
dence and dementia. It was for China the age of Augustus, not 
of Heliogab^QS. Art and literature flourished and agmnst Han- 
Yh, the brilliant adversary of Buddhism, may be set Liu Tsung 
Yiian^, a writer of at least equal genius who found in it his 
inspiration. A noble school of painting grew up in the Buddhist 
monasteries and in a long line of artists may be montioned the 
great name of Wu Tao«tzi3, whose religious pictures such as 
Knan*yiii, Purgatory and the death of the Buddha obtained 
for him a fame which is stiiJ living. Among the streams which 
watered this paradise of art and letters should doubtless be 
counted tbs growing importance of Central and Western Asia 
in Chinese policy and the consequent inSuz of their ideas. In 
the mid T'ang period Manichr^m, Nestorianism and Zoro¬ 
astrianism all were prevalent in China. The first was the religion 
of the Uigurs. So long as the Chinese bad to keep on good terms 
with this tribe Moniebsism was respected, but when they were 
defeated by the Kirghis and became unimportant, it was abruptly 
suppressed (843). In this poriod, too, Tibet bocame of great 
importance for the Chinese. Their object was to keep open the 
passes leading to Ferghana and India. But the Tibetans some¬ 
times combined with the Arabs, who bad conquered Turkestan, 
to close them and in 763 they actually sacked Chang An. China 
ondeavoured to defend herself by making treaties with the 
Indian border states, but in L75 the Arabs infiicted a disastrous 
defeat on her troops. A treaty of peace was subsequently made 
with Tibet*. 

When Su-Tsung (766-762), tbe son of Hstian-Tsung, was 
safely established on the throne, he began to show his devotion 
to Buddhism. He Installed a chapel in the Palace which was 

1 " liu-Tnag-Tun be*)»{(b«hlod bim maeb tbU (ot pwilr of icrk ud Midiy 
of wprwtiOD bu r&rdj baeo aiup4aMd." Qike. Oktntde iAtenlurt, p. 191. 

* AppwMtIp io 8«« Waddell* I irUcle* <n Ajtoeab Hietorical £dlct« 

tb LW ia 1909. 1910, 1911. 

264 

BUDJDBISM 0UTS2BB INDIA 

[CH, 

eemd by several hundred monks and caused his cunacbs and 
guards to dross up as Bodhlsattvas and Genii. His ministeis, 
who w&ro leqnir^ to worship these maskers, vainly remon* 
Btrated as also when be accepted a sort of Sibylline book from 
a nun who alleged that she had ascended to heaven and received 
it there. 

The next Emperor, Tai-Tsui^, was converted to Buddhism 
by his Minister Wang Chin^, a man of great abilities who was 
subsequently sentenced to death for oorruptlon, though the 
Emperor commuted the sentence to banishment. Tai-Tsung 
expounded the scriptures in public himseli aud the sacred boola 
were carried from one temple to another in state carriages with 
the same pomp as the sovereign. In 768theeunuch YU ChaO'En^ 
built a great Buddhist temple dedicated to the memory of the 
Empcror*B deceased mother. In spite of his minister’s reraon- 
strancea, His Majesty attended the opening and appointed 
1000 monks and nuns to perform masses for the dead annually 
on the fifteenth day of seventh month. This annjveraaiy 
became generally observed as an All Souls' Bay, and is still 
one of the most popular festivals in China. Priests both Buddhist 
aud Taoist recite prayers for the departed, rice is scattered 
abroad to feed hungry ghosts and clothes are burnt to be used 
by them in the land of shadows. Large sheds are constructed 
in which are dguxes representing scenes from the noxt world 
and the evening is enlivened by theatricals, muric and fire¬ 
works*. 

Tho establishment of this festival was due to the celebrated 
teacher Amogha (Pu*k'ung), aod marks the official recognition 
by Chinese Buddhism of those serviooe for tho dead which have 
londeied it popular at the cost of forgetting its better aspects. 
Amogha was a native of Ceylon (or, according to others, of 
Northern India), who arrived in cWa in 719 with his teacher 
Vajrabodhi. After the latter’s death he revisited India and 
Ceylon in search of books and came back In 746. He wished .to 
return to his own country, but peimission was refused and 
until his death in 774 he was a considerable personage at Court, 

* 6e« ES(d, ffan^ook 9f CAihm Buddhi^vt, p. ItS UIUnbAot, % 
doubtiol word, *pp«>r»ot]y re&d«r«<l Into u yQ.lu.p'te. 

TT.m ] 

CHINA 

266 

receiving high rank and ^tlee. The Ckineae l^ipitakft contains 
lOS translations^ ascribed to him, mostly of a tantrio oharacter 
though to tbe honour of China it must he said that the erotic 
mysticism of some Indian tantias never found favour there. 
Amogha is a considerable, though not auspicious, figure in the 
history of Chinese Buddhism, and, bo far as such Ranges can 
he the work of one man, on him teste the responsibility of 
making it become in popular estimation a religion specially 
concerned with funeral rites^. 

Some authors^ try to prove that the influx of Kestorianism 
under the T'ang dynasty had an important Influence on the 
later development of Buddhism in China and Japan and in 
particular that it popularized these eervices for the dead. But 
this hypoihesiB seems to me unproved and uonecesaary. Such 
ceromonies were an essential part of Chinese reh^on and no 
faith could hope to spread, if it did not countenance them: they 
are prominent in hlinduiero and not unknown to Pah Buddhism*. 
Further the ritual used in China and Japan has often only a 
Buperfleial resemblance to Christian masses for the departed. 
Fart of it is magical and part of it consists in acquiring merit 
by the recitation of scriptures which have no special reference 
to the dead. This merit is then formally transfened to them. 
Doubtless Neetorianism, in bo far as it was associated with 
Buddhism, tended to promote tlie worship of Bodblsattvas and 
prayers addressed directly to them, but this tendency existed 
indopondontly and the Nestorian monument indicates not that 
Nestorianism influenced Buddhism hut that it abandoned the 
doctrine of the atonement. 

In 819 a celebrated incident occurred. The Emperor Htien* 
Tsung had been informed that at the Fa^rndn monastery in 
Shen-si a bone of the Buddha was preserved which every thirty 
years exhibited miraculous powers. As this was the auspiciouB 
year, he ordered the relio to bo brought m state to the capital 

* Sm Nanjlo CSttelesue, pp. 446>448. 

* Hei»ti»ct»idt«bftT6bitredocedtba!2Mgccof tiboITQBrKiiipwhiebaMnow 

toimd io every A portnit of bim by li Chi«n ii nprodneod io ToJiDo'i 

Meuterfi*eu, vol. vm, pUto n. Tbe artist vm perbap* hto eoDtamporaiy. 

* S^, Saoki, yeSorisn MMvmenl i» China, ISia S»s alM abovo, p. 217. 

* Bao E}iuddaka.Palba, 7; Pet* Vattbn, 1, 6 aod tb» ooDUDCotary; MiUoda 
Paaba, rv. 8. 28$ aad lor modem practicea uy ebaptar oe SUm. axid Copkatoa, 
faddUm, p. 445. 

260 

BUDDHISM OUTBIDS INDIA 

[CH. 

ftnd lodged iii the Imperial Palace, after whiob it waa to make 
the round of the monastorics in the dtj. This proceeding called 
forth an animated protest from Han*Yu^, one of the beet known 
authom and statesmen then living, who proaonted a memorial, 
still celebrated as a mastocpleco. The following extract will give 
on idea of its stjle. ‘'Yonr Servant is well awaro that your 
Majesty doca not do this (give the bone euch a reception) in 
the vain hope of deriving advantage therefrom but that in the 
fulnoas of oux present plenty there is a desire to comply with 
the wishes of the people in tho celebration at the capital of 
this delusive mummery....For Buddha was a barbarian. His 
language was not the language of China. His clothes wore of 
an alien cut. He did not utter the maxims of our ancient rulore 
nor conform to the custoins which they have handed down. 
Ho did not appreciate tho bond between prince and minister, 
the He between father and son. Had this Buddha come to our 
capital in the flesh, your Majesty might have received him with 
a few words of admonition, giving him a banquet and a suit 
of clothes, before sending him out of the country with an escort 
of soldiers. 

But what arc the facts t The bone of a man long since dead 
and decomposed is to be admitted within the precincts of the 
Imperial Palace. Confucius said, ‘respect spiritual beings but 
keep tliem at a distance.’ And so when princes of old paid 
visits of condolence, it was customary to send a mi^iclan in 
advance with a peach rod in hie hand, to expo! all noxious 
influences before tho arrival of his master. Yet now your 
Majesty is about to introduce without reason a di^usting 
object, personally taking part in the proceedings without the 
intervention of the magician or his wand. Of the officials not 
one has raised his voice against it: of the Censors* not one baa 
pointed out the enormity of such an act. Therefore your servant, 
overwhelmed with shame for the Censors, implores your Majesty 
that these bones may bo handed over for destruction by fire 

^ native erititt. h«v« donbwd the tuthe&tieit^ of the 

reecived t«itend thovemon iaeertedlnthe Ofiu^lHistoi^eeerae to be eeuaniArj, 
See Wirger. T&zfee Uittori^u. v«L m. pp. 172S ff., end QUee, Chsnm Lilsaiwt, 
pp. 800(1. 

* Tho oOlvielo %'lMee duty it to remoaeireu: altk tbo Emperor if be Mted 
wrongly. 

CHINA 

267 

TTjn ] 

or water, whereby the root of this great evil may be ester- 
minated for all Ujqc and tiie people may know how much the 
wisdom of your Majesty surpaEses that of ordinary men*.” 

The Emperor hooame furious when ho read the memorial 
and wished to execute its author on the spot. But Han-Yu’s 
many friends saved him and the sentence was commuted to 
honourable banishment aa governor of a distant town. Shortly 
afterwards the Emporor died, not of Buddhism, but of the elixir 
of immortality which made him so irritable that his eunuchs 
put him oat of the way. Han-Yii was recalled bat died the next 
year. Among bis numerous works was one called Yxian TW, 
much of which was directed against non-Oonfucian fonns of 
religion. It is still a thesaurus of arguments for the opponents 
of Buddhism and, let it be added, of Christaanity. 

It is not auiprising that the prosperity of the Buddhist 
church should have led to another reacrion, but it came not 
so much from the literary and sceptical class os from Taoism 
which continued to enjoy the favour of the T'ang Emperors, 
although they died one after another of drinking the elixir, The 
Emperor Wu-Tsung was more definitely Taoist than his pre¬ 
decessors. In 643 ho suppressed Manichteism and in S46, at 
the instigation of bis Taoist advisers, he dealt Buddhism the 
severest blow whidi it bad yot received. In a trenchant edict* 
he repeated tho now familiar arguments that it is an alien 
and maleficent superstition, unknown under the ancient and 
glorious dynasties and injurious to tbo customs and morality of 
the nation. Incidentally he testifles to its influence and popu- 
larity for ho complains of the crowds thronging the temples 
which eclipse the imperial palaces in splendour and the in- 
numerablo monks and nuns supported by tho contribntiona of 
the people. Then, giving figures, he commands that 4000 great 
temples and 40,000 smaller rural temples be demolished, that 
their enormous* landed property be confiscated, that 260,500 
monks and nuns be secularized and 100,000 temple slaves* set 
free. These statistics are probably exa^erated and in any case 
the Emperor had barely time to execute bis drastic <iders, 

> Oilaa, ChintM LUtrtUurt, pp. SOI, 202—Muevtet AbbrcnattcL 

* B«e Wi 0 g«r, toI. m. pp, 1744 fl. 

I **TbotiMnC« of t 0 a-tiioiuu;d« Cb'ing." A Ch'ieg^IS’lS 

* Pieiam*bl7 umiUr Ut Oie taopto of OuDbojoi «t«. 

a m. 

92 

268 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE IHDIA [oh. 

though all despatch was used on account of the private fortunes 
which could be amassed incidentally by the executive. 

As the Confucian chronicler of his doings observes, he 
suppressed Buddhism on the ground that it is a euperslution 
but encouraged Taoism which is no better. Indeed the impartial 
critic must edmit that it is much worse, atany rate for Emperors. 
Undeterred by the fate of his predecessors Wn-Tsuog began to 
take the elixir of immortality. He sufiered first from nervous 
irritability, then from internal pains, which were explained as 
due to the gradual transformation of his bones, and at the 
beginning of 846 he became dumb. No further explanation of 
bis symptoms was then given him and his uneb Hslian Tsung 
was rai^ to the throne. Eis first act was to revoke the anti* 
Buddhist edict, the Taoist priests who had instigated it were 
put to death, the Emperor and his ministers vied In the work 
of reconstruction and very soon things became again much as 
they were before thia great hut brief tribulation. Nevertheless, 
in 852 the Emperor received favourably a memorial complaining 
of the Buddhist reaction and ordered that all monks and nuns 
must obtain special permiesion before takir^ orders. He was 
be ginning to fall under Taoist influence and it is bard to repress 
a smib on reading that seven years later he died of the elixir. 
His successor l-Tsung (86D-874), who died at the age of 80, was 
an ostentatious and dissipated Buddhist. In spite of the te- 
monstrances oi bis ministers ho again sent for the sacred bone 
from Pa-men and received it with even more respect than his 
predecessor hsd shown, for he met it at the Tabce gate and 
bowed before it 

Durii^ the remainder of the T'ang dynasty there is littb 
of importance to recount about Buddhism. It apparently 
suffered no reverses, but history is occupied with the struggle 
against the Tartars. The later T'ang Emperors entered into 
alliance with various frontier tribes, but found it hard to keep 
them in the porition of vassals. The history of China from the 
tenth to the tbixteenth centuries is briefly as follows. The T'ang 
dynasty collapsed chiefly owing to the incapacity of the bter 
Emperors and was succeeded by a troubled period in which five 
short dynasties founded by military adventurers, three of whom 
were of Turkish race, rose and fell in 63 years^. In 960 the 

> Ose Eznpetor of Uali epoch, Shih-Tsuiig of tiie leWr Ciieu eupprMeeJ 

CBINA 

269 

Sung dynasty united the Chinese elements in the Empire, 
but had to struggle against the Khitan Tartars in the north¬ 
east and ag^st the kingdom of Hda in the north-west. 
With the twelfth century appeared the Kins or Golden 
Tartars, who demolished the power of the KJutana in alliance 
with the Chinese but turned agmnat their allies and conquered 
all China north of the Yaug*tzo and continually barasesd, 
though they did not capture, the provinces to the south of it 
which constituted the reduced empire of the Sungs. But their 
power waned in its tnm before the Mongols, who, under 
Khan and Ogolai, conquered the greater part of northern Asia 
and eastern Europe. In 1232 the Sung Emperor entered into 
alliance with the Mongols against the Kins, with the ultimate 
result that though the Kins were swept away, Khubilai, 
the Khan of the Mongols, bccaaio Emperor of all China in 
12S0. 

The dynasdes of T'ang and Snng mark two great epochs in 
the history of Chinese art, literature and thouglit, but whereas 
the virtues and vices of the T'ang may be summed up as goniuB 
and extravagance, those of the Sung arc culture a nd tameness. 
But this summary judgment does not do jusdee to the peters, 
particularly the landscape painters, of the Sung and it is 
noticeable that many of the greatest masters, including Li 
Lung-Mien^ were obviously inspired by Buddhism. The school 
which had the greatest influence on art and literature was the 
ChW or contemplative sect belter known by its Japanese 
name Zen. Thou^ founded by Bodbidharma it did not win 
the sympathy and esteem of the cultivated classes until the 
Sung peiiod. About this time the method of block-printing 
was popularised and there began a steady output of compre¬ 
hensive histories, collected works, oncyclop{edi8s and biographies 
which excelled anything then published in Europe. Antiquarian 
research and accessible edltious of classical writers were favour* 

iD0QUt4flcaM<ii.‘0UKdbn)iis« i5D«^inCo curronojr, ds«lftrisc thAi Buddha who la 
to iDAsy bietbt bod tACrifi^cd hiiDA«lf fot aAOkiod, would Sat» &o objoclioo (o bit 
eUbuM b«isg made oMful. But Is tbo Sontih Budd^itm flourubsd ia tbA prOTiiiM 
of Pukka uodar tbt prinrM of Uin aod tbt dyoAsty wUcb «ADed iMlf 
Soutbtn T'aqs* 

> 

270 BVDDBI8M OUTSIDE INDIA [ch. 

aUo to Confuoianiflm, which b&d Uways been the religion of 
the literati. 

It is not surprising that the Emperon of this literary dynaety 
were mostly temperate in esptessing their zeligioue emotions. 

the founder, forbade cremation and remonstrated with 
the I^ce of T'sng, who was a ferreut Buddhist. Yet ho oannot 
have objected to religion in moderation, for the drst printed 
edition ot the Tripitaka was published in bis re^ (972) and 
with a preface of his own. The early and thorough application 
of printing to this gigantic Canon is a proof—if any were needed 
the popular esteem for Buddhism. 

Nor did this edition close the work of translation: 275 later 
translations, made under the Northern Sung, are srill extant and 
religious intercourse with India continued. The names and 
writings of many Hindn monks who settled in China are pre- 
eerred and Chinese continued to go to India. Still on the whole 
there was a decrease in the Tolumo of rol^ioue literature after 
900 a.n.^ In the twelfth century the change was still more 
remarkable. Nanjio does not record a single translation made 
nnder the Southern Sung and it is the only great dynasty wliich 
did not revise the Tripitaka. 

The seoond Sung Emperor also, X'ai Tsung, was not hostile, 
for he erected in the capital, at onormone expense, a stupa 
sop feet high to oont^ relics of the Buddha. The fourth 
Emperor, Jdn-teung, a distlnguishod patron of litorature, whoso 
reign was ornamented by a galaxy of scholars, is said to bavo 
appointed 60 youths ic study Sanskrit but showed no particular 
inclination towards Buddhism. Neither does it appear to have 
been the motive power in the projects of the celebrated eodat 
leformer, Wang An^Shih. But the dynastic history says that 
be wrote a book full of Buddhist and Taoist fancies and, though 
there is nothing specifically Buddhist in bis political and econo* 
mic theories, it is cleat from the denunciations against him that 
his system of education introduced Buddhist and Taoist subjects 
into the public examinations^. It is also clear that this system 
was favoured by those Emperors of the Northern Sung dynasty 
who were able to think for tbemsdvas. In 1087 it was abolished 

* Tbe dcoFMM IS tmiaJktioiu u attenl lot bj tbia vflntooa 

bMo nad* of ia«t worki which had U 17 ckim to bo tn&alated. 

* 5m Biot, L'iiutfueiiM u CA*oe, p, 3SO. 

XUtE} 

CBINA 

271 

by the Empress Dowagot acting as regont for Hib young Chd 
TsuDg, but to soon as be began to reign in bis own right ho 
restored it| and it apparently remained In force un^ the 
collapse of the dynasty in 1127. 

The Emperor Hni-Teong (1101-2126} fell under the infiiience 
of a Taoist priest named Lin ling-Sn*. This yoong man had 
been a Suddbiat norioe in boyhood but, being expelled for 
misconduct, conceived a hatred for bis old religion. Under his 
influence the Emperor not only reorganized Taoism, sanctioning 
many innovations and granting many caw privileges, bnt also 
endeavoured to seppresa Bud^ism, not by persecution, bnt 
by amalgamation, By imperial decree the Buddha and hie 
Arhats were enrolled in the Taoist pantheon: temples and 
monasteries were allowed to exist only on condition of da- 
scribing themaelvas as Taoist and tbair inmates had tha choice 
of accepting that name or of returning to the world. 

But there was hardly time to execute those measures, 
so rapid was the reaction. In less than a year tha insolence of 
T.in ling'Su brought about his downfall; the Emperor reversed 
his edict and, having begun by snpprcsaing Buddhism, ended 
by oppressing Taoism. He waa a painter of merit and perhaps 
the most remarkable artist who aver dllcd a throne. In art he 
probably drew no distinction between creods and among the 
pioturae ascribed to him and pieaerved in Japan are some of 
Buddhist subjects. But like Hslian Tsung he came to a tragic 
and, and in 1120 was carried into captivi^ by the Kin Tartars 
among whom he died. 

Fear of the Tartars now caused the Chinoae to retire south of 
the Yang-tee and Hang-chow was made the scat of Government. 
The century during which this beautiful city was the capital 
did not produce tiie greatest names in Chinese hietory, but it 
witnessed the perfection of Chinese cnltnie, and the bac kgr ound 
of impending doom heightens the brilliancy of this liters^ and 
sestbetlo life. Such a society was naturally eclectic in religion 
but Buddbiazn of the Ch'an school enjoyed contideiation anJ 
contributed many landscape painters to the roll of fame. But 
the most eminent and perhaps the most characteristic thinker 
of the period was Chn-Esi (1130-1200), the celebrated com* 

‘#1^- 

272 BVDDHI8M OVTSIDE INDIA [CH. 

ment&tor on Confuclaa who reinterproted the maater's w:ritinge 
to the eatififaotion of succeeding ages though in bis own life he 
aroused opposition as well as enthusiasm. Chu-Hsi studied 
Buddhism in hU youth and some have detected its induence in 
his works, although on most important points he expressly 
condemned it. 1 do not see that there is much dehnite B uddhism 
in his philosophy, but if Mahayanism hod never entered China 
this new Confucianism would probably nerer have arisen or 
would have taken another shape. Though the final result may 
be aaU-Buddhist yet the topics chosen and the me^od of 
treatment suggest ^at the author folt it necessary to show that 
the Claselcfl could satisfy intellectual curiosity and supply 
spiritual ideals just as ^vcll as this Indian religion. Much of his 
expositions is occupied with cosmology, ftv»d he accepts the 
doctrine of world periods, recurring in an ctomal series of growth 
and decline: also he teaches not exactly transmigration but the 
transformation of matter into varions liviog fenne*. His ao* 
ooimte oi sages and saints point to ideals which have much in 
common with Aihate and Buddhas and, in dealing with the 
retribution of evil, he seems to admit that when the universe is 
working properly there is a natural Karma by which good or 
bad actions receive even in this life rewards in kind, but that 
in the present period of decline nature has become vitiated so 
that vice and virtue no longer produce appropriate results. 

ChU'Hsi had a celebrated controversy with Lu Chiu-Yuan*, a 
thinker of some importance who, like himself, is commemorated 
in the tablets of Oonfucian temples, although he was accused 
of Buddhist tendencies. He held that learning was not in* 
dispensable and that tbs mind could in meditation rise above 
the senses and attain to a perception of the truth. Although he 
strenuously denied tho charge of Buddhist leanings, it is cleat 
that his doctrine is near in spirit to the mysticism of Bodhi- 
dharma and sets no store on the practical ethics and studious 
habits which are the essence oi Confucianism. 

Tbs attitude of the Yuan or Mongol dynasty (1280-1368) 
towards Buddhism was something new. Hitherto, whatever 
may have been ^e religious proclivities of individual Emperors, 

’ Se« L 0 Gail, VfviM* No. 6 Tcbau.Hh Sa dMtnn»S«o iofluanee 

Sluo«bai,lSW.pp.dO, 122. 

' Comparo tht abaUar dootriMa of Wan^ Yaag.Mia g . 

CHINA 

273 

xun] 

the Empire bad been a Oonfudan lasUtution. A body of official 
aod literary opinion always etrong and often OTorwhelmingly 
strong regarded imperial patronage of BuddhUm or Taoism aa 
a concession to the whims of the people, as an ezcreeeenco oa 
the Son of Heaven's proper faith or even a perversion of it. 
But the Mongol Court had not thin prejudice and KhnbiJai, 
like other members of bis bouse* and like Akbar in India, was 
the patron of all the religions professed by his subjects. Hia 
real object was to enoomage any faith which would humaniae 
his rude Mongols, Buddhism was more congenial to them than 
Confucianism and besides, they bad made its acquaintance 
oarlier. Even before Khnbllai became Emperor, one of his most 
trusted advisers was a Tibetan lama known as Pagspa, Bashpa 
or FE^Bsu'pa*. He received the title of KuO'Shih, and after his 
death his brother succeeded to the same honours. 

Khubilai also showed favour to Mohemmedana, Christians, 
Jews and Confucianiats, but little to Taoists. This prejudice was 
doubtless due to the suggestions of his Buddhist advisors, for, 
as we have seen, there was often rivalry between the two reli¬ 
gions and on two occasions at least (in the reigns of Hui Tsung 
and Wa Tsung) the Taoists made determined, if unsuccessful, 
attempts to destroy or assimilate Buddhism. Khubilai received 
complaints that the Taoists represented Buddhism os an off¬ 
shoot of Taoism and that thia objectionable perversion of 
truth and history was found in many ot their books, particularly 
the Hua-Hu-Obii^’. An edict was Usned ordering all Taoist 
books to be burnt with the sole exception of the Tao-Tg-Ching 
but it does not appear that the sect was otherwise persecuted. 

The Ytisizi dynasty was consistently favourable to Buddhism. 
Enormous sums were expended on subventions to monasteries, 
printing books and performing public ceremonies, Old restric¬ 
tions were removed and no new ones were imposed. But the 
sect which was the special recipient of the imperial favour was 

* S.ff. hifl eld«r brother Mangku vfao abowed i*TOar to BoddbiiU, U&hftm* 

iQoCsne uid Ne«iorl*aa ftldc«. 'Hq him«bl( «lahee to obtein ChiiatUD from 

tb« Pop*, by th» h«lp of Mano Polo, out probaUy mmly tron euzicaity. 

* Mon accurately Kphaga-pa. It la a titk rather than a ume. belog the TiboUn 
eeolvelcnt of Ai^a. Khubilai ewioa to ha the correct Lranacription of tho Ereperor’a 
aoaa. The Kbetao sad Chiaew tnneenpticu an Uvopilai and Hu>pi>Ueh. 

* Poe thir curloue work na B-S./.f.O. ISOS, p. CIS. and J.A. ISIS. t. pp. 110- 

1 For Um dMlnctton of Taoiat boob eee ChaTannea io T'ounf Poo, IS04, p. 3S0. 

274 

BVDDEISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[OH. 

not ono of the Chinese schools bub Lamaism, the form of 
Buddhism developed in Tibet, which spread about this time to 
northern China, and still exists there. It does not appear that 
in the Yiian period Lamusm and other forms of Buddhism 
were regarded as different sects^. A lamaist eccleuastic was the 
hierarchical bead of all Buddhists, all other religions being 
placed imder supervision of a special board. 

The Mongol Emperors paid attention to religious literature. 
Ehubilai saw to it that the monasteries in Peking were well 
supplied with books and ordered the bonzes to recite them on 
stated days. A new collection of the Tripitaka (the ninth) was 
published 128&-97. In 1312, the Emperor J4n-teang ordered 
further translations to be made into Mongol and later had the 
whole Tripitaka copied in letters of gold. It is noticeable that . 
another Emperor, Cb4ng Tsung, bad the Book of Filial Piety 
translated into Mongol axtd circulated together with a bri^ 
preface by himself. 

It is postible that the Buddhism of tire Yuan dynasty was 
tainted with ^iktism from which the Lama monasteries of 
Peking (in contrast to ah otiier Buddhist secte in China) are 
not wholly free. The last Emperor, 8hun-ti, is said to have 
witnessed indecent plays and duces in the company of Lamas 
and created a scandal which oontribnted to ^e downfall of 
the dynasty^. In its last years we hear of some opposition to 
Buddhism and of a leaotion in favour of Coofucianism, in conse¬ 
quence of the growing niuubers and pretensions of the Lamas. 

Whole provinces were under their control and Chinese 
historians dwell bitterly on their lawlessness. It was a common 
abuse for wealthy persons to iodoce a Lama to let their property 
bo reglsteied in his name and thus avoid all payment of taxes 
on the ground that priests were exempt from taxation by law^. 

The Mongols were driven out by the native Chinese dynasty 
known as Ming, which reigned from 1368 to 1644. It is nob 

’ At the prcMOt (1 a; an ordiaix; ChiueMN^ardi a Labia aa qoitA iroai 

A UoAfaMg or Boddhiat nonk. 

' Tbe Yufts EaperoxA vtre no donbe (oiid <d witcMAlng roIigiouA tbcAtncAlA 
ia tho PoIac*. for estrtetA irom CbioAM Autbort, tftw China Smm, ISIS, 
pp. S. GompATA th* pArfonDAseeA of tba TYarx Saperor fiu Tiuo^ manHoned 
Abovo. 

* ?or tbe oeelMiuUeAl Abuse* ot the tins im ESppoB, n. 103. And do UaIUa, 
SitMrt dc /a China, a. 476, fiSS. 

xun] 

C31NA 

S76 

to point out any salient ieaturos in religious sctiri^ or 
thought during tlus period, but since tie Ming claimed to 
restore Chinese oivilization interrupted by a foreign invasion, 
it was natural that they should encoxrrage Confucianism as 
interpreted by Cbu-Hsi. Yet Buddhism, especially Lamaism, 
acquired a new political importance. Both for the Mings and 
for the earlier Manchu Emperors the Mongols were a serious 
and perpetual danger, and it was not until the eighteenth 
century that the Chinese Court ceased to be preoccupied by 
the fear that the tribes might unite and again owrrun the 
Empire. But the Tibetan and Mongolian hierarchy had an 
extraordinary power over these wild horsemen and the Gk>vem- 
moat of Peking won and used th^ goodwill by skilful diplomacy, 
the favours shown being generally commensurate to the gravity 
of the situation. Thus when the Grand l iama visited Peking in 
1662 he was treated as an independent prince: in 1006 he was 
made to kneel. 

Few Ming Emperors showed much personal interest in 
religion and most of them were obviously guided by political 
conriderationa. They wished on the one hand to conciliate the 
Church and on the other to prevent the clergy from becoming 
too numerous or influential. Hence very different pictures may 
be drawn according as we dwell on the favourable or restrictive 
edicts which were published from time to time. Tbm T'ai-Tsn, 
the founder of the dynasty, is described by one authority as 
always sympathetio to Buddhists and by another as a crowned 
persecutor*. He had been a bonre himaelf in bie youth but left 
the cloister for the adventurous career which conducted him 
to the throne. It is probable that he had an affectionate re¬ 
collection of the Church which once sheltered him, but also a 
knowledge of its weaknesses and this knowledge moved him to 
publish restrictive edicts as to the numbers and qualiticatioos of 
monks. On the other hand ho attended sermons, received 
in audience and appointed thorn as tutors to 2us sons. He revised 
the hierarchy and gave appropriate titles to its various grades. 
He also published a decree ordering that aQ mocks should study 

^ Sm Wif^gor, BiMripua. m. p. SOIS, and Do Groot. and 

StligicutPeraeeuium in China, i. p. 6d. Soil ofioaoalM Hoog Wo vUob ij iWietir 
sp«akios tbe Utio of liif niffs. H« vw c«rt4inl7 onpoblo of chAnging hia mind, for 
ho <lrgml»d Meocius froza Ui pceitioD in Coafustan (caplM om ;64r aod rottored 
him tluneit. 

276 BUDDBI8M OUTSIDE INDIA [ oh . 

three siitras (Lwikirat&rft^ Prainipararoita and VajraochedikI), 
and that three brief commentaries on these worise should be 
compiled (see Nanjio’a Catalogue, 1613-16). 

It is in this reign that we Bret hear of the seeolat clergy, 
that is to say, persona who acted as priests but manied and 
did not live in monasteries. Decrees against them were issued 
in 1394 and 1412, but they continued to increase. It is not clear 
whether tbeii origin should be sought in a desire to combine the 
profits of the priesthood with the comforts of the world or in 
an attempt to evade restrictions as to the number of moziks. 
In later rimes riiis second motive was certdnly prevalent, but 
the celibacy of riie clergy is not strictly insisted on by Lamaists 
and A lax observance of monastic rules* was common under 
the Mongol dynasty. 

The third Ming Emperor, Cb'6ng-t8u*, was educated by a 
Buddhist priest of literary tastes named Yao Kuang^Hsiao*, 
whom ho greatly respected and promoted to high office. Never* 
tbeless he enacted restrictions respectii^ ordination and on one 
occasion commanded that 1800 young men who presented 
themselves to take the vows should be enrolled In the army 
instead. His prefaces and laudatory verses were collected in a 
small volume and included in the eleventh collection of the 
Tripitaka*, called the Northern colleorioo, because it was printed 
at Peking. It was published with a preface of his own comporition 
and be wrote another to the work called the Liturgy of Kuan- 
yin*, and a third introducing selected memoirs o! various 
remarkable mocks*. His Empress bad a virion in which she im¬ 
agined a sQtra was revealed to her and published the same with 
an introduction. Ho was also conspicuously favourable to the 
Tibetan clergy. In 1403 be sent his head eunuch to Tibet to 
invite the presence of Tsoh-kha*pa, who refused to come himself 

i S«e (le Uaiib, HMotr* it 2o rr. p. 470. 

* Oft«n cbJM Yuag.La wbteh the title ef hie 

« See Nanito, Cu. 1013-16. 

* See Beel. CeitnA of SuiihiM Seriphtm, p. 309. The Emperor “So we, 
the Ruler of the Eis;4re...do herehr bni;^ before meo emode (or e.tUmifig to the 
ooiKktion of eopreme Wiedom. We therefore eemettl; nhori ell iDen.,.cAnfullr 
to etadj the direotiore of thli voxk eod feitbfuBy to follow tbera.” 

* Neojio, Get. 19S0. See eleo fh. 1033 e&d 1647 for the SDpreee'e iQlre. 

xLm] 

CHINA 

277 

but sent a celebrated Lama called Etalima'. On arriving at the 
capital Halima was ordered to say masses for tbe Bmperor^s 
relatives. These ceremoniee were attended by superaatural 
manilestations and be received as a recogiurion of his powers 
the titles of Prince of the Great Freoions Law and Buddha of 
the Western Paradise^. Wia three principal disciples were styled 
Bud Shih, and, agreeably to the precedent established nnder 
the Yuan dynasty, wore made the chief prelates of the whole 
Suddhiet Church. Since this time the Bed or Tibetan Clergy 
have been recognized as having precedence over the Grey or 
Chinese. 

In this reign the Ohineae made a remarlcable attempt to 
assert their authority in Oeybo, In 1405 a DU6»on was sent 
with offerings to the Sacred Tooth and when it was ill received 
a second misrion despatched in 1407 captured the king of 
Ceylon and carried him of as a prisoner to China. Ceylon p«d 
tribute for fifty years, but it does not appear that theee pro* 
ceedings had much importance for religion^. 

In the reigns of Ying Tsung and Ching-Ti^ (1430>d4) 
large numbers of monks were ordained, but, as on previous 
occasiODs, the great increase of candidates led to the imposition 
of restrictions and in 1456 an edict was issued ordering that 
ordinations should be held only once a year. The influence of 
the Chief Etmuchs during this period was great, and two suc¬ 
cessive holders of this poet, Wacg-Ch^n and Hsing'An^, were 
both devoted Buddhists and induced the Emperors whom they 
served Co expend enormous sums on building monasteiies and 
performing ceremonies at which the Imperial Court were 
present. 

t Of K*lunft ^. In TlbflUa K&itM b«hin ^»ga-pa HevMthe 

Uth bud of Um Karm&'P* nbooL See CbucJn dicUraeiy, f.f., where ft 
ref«T«ZkC0 given to kLopg.rdol.gwag.hbarB. It k noUooftbk Uut lire Kftrmft-pft 
k ozre of the older ftod moTsTftQtRo notft 

■ AS&i, sui K-.1 p™ii..d 

ihk Uttar tba four obanotan . 

' Sm Yula, CotAoy and the TMAer, pp. 75 S. 

* Wbea Yiog Taung Vftt Oftnlad ftvaj bp tha UoagoU in KftS hii brotbar 
ddag'T: vm made Euparor. Tboogb Ying Tbong vaa not U«k In 1450, he «m 
not able to oa»t Ching-Ti Croo tba thrare till ItCTf. 

278 £UDI>BI£M 0UT8IDS INDIA [CR. 

The end of the fifteenth contniy is filled by two re^na, Hden 
Teung and Haiao Tsung. The fonner fell under the influence of 
bis favourite conoubine Wan and his eunuchs to such an extent 
that, in the Utter part of hit life, he ceased to see his ministers 
and the chief ennuch became the real ruler of China. It is also 
mentioned both in 1468 and 1483 that he was in the hands of 
Buddhist priests who instructed him in eecret doottines and 
received the title of Kuo-Shih and other distinctions. His son 
Haiao Tsung reformed these abuses: the Palace was cleansed: 
the eunuchs and priests were driven oat and some were executed: 
Taoist books were ooUeoted and burnt. The celebrated writer 
Wang Yai^ Ming^ lived in this reign. He defended and iilns- 
tcatsd the doctrine of Lu Chin-Yuan, namely that truth can 
be obtained by meditation. To express intuitive knowle^, 
he nsed the expression Lian^ Chih^ (taken from Mencius), 
Liang <Niih is ic^erent in all human minds, but in different 
degrees, sad can be developed or allowed to atrophy. To develop 
it should be man’s constant object, and in its light when pure 
ail thills are understood and peace is obtained. The phrases of 
the Great Learning “to complete knowle^,” “investigate 
things,” and “rest in the highest excellence,” are explained as 
referring to the Liang Chih and the contemplation of the mind 
by itself. We cannot here shut our eyas to the influence of 
Bodhidharma wid bis school, however fervently Wang Yang 
Ming may havo appealed to toe Chinese Classics. 

The reign of Wu*tsimg (1506-21) was favourable to 
Buddhism. In 1507 40,000 men became monks, either Buddhist 
or Taoist. The Emperor is swd to have been learned in 
Buddhist literature and to have known Sanskrit* as weD as 
Mongol and Arabic, but he was in the hands of a band of eunuchs, 
who were known as the eight tigers. In L 616 he sent an embassy 
to Tibet with toe object of inducing the Grand Lama to visit 
Peking, but the invitation was refused and the Tibetans expelled 
the mis^on with force. The next Emperor, Shih-T'song (1622- 

> ^ . Hlf r»d &*Qi* vu We&g Shoo Jto . 

* Though th« eoclMduUcfil study of Sasekrit decAyod onda tbs Ulcg dyDMty, 
(oui>d«d lo 14C7 » Mhool of kogotge for (nizuLg istarprtun st vhloh 
SftoArit WM taught MDong oth«r toogOM. 

XLin] 

CBINA 

27d 

66 ), inoUned to Taoism rather than Buddhism. He ordered the 
images of Buddha ia the Forbidden aty to be destroyed, but 
stiU appears to have taken part in Bnddiiisfc ceretnonica at dif¬ 
ferent periods of bis reign. Wan Li (1673-1620), celebrated in 
the annals of porcelain manufacture, showed some favour to 
Buddhism. He repaired many buildings at P'u-t'o and dis- 
taibuted copies of the Tripitakato the monasteries of his Empire. 
In his edicts occurs the saying that Gonfodanism and Buddhism 
are like the two wings of a bird: each ret^uires the co-operation 
of the other. 

European misMonaries first arrived during tho sixteenth 
century, and, had the Oatholic Church been moro flexible, 
China might perhaps have recognized ChristiaDity, not as the 
only true religion but as standing on the same footing as 
Buddhism and Taoism. The polomicB of the early missionaries 
imply that they regarded Buddhism as their chief rival. Thus 
Ricoi had a public oonteover^ with a bonso at Hang-Chou, 
and his principal pupil Hsii Kuang-Ch'i* wrote a tract entitled 

Tlie errors of the Buddhiste exposed.” Replies to these attooks 
ftro preserved in the writanga of the distinguished Buddhist 
priest Shen Chu-Hung*. 

In 1644 the hiing dynasty collapsed before the Manchus 
and China was again under foreign ^e. Unlike the Mongols, 
the M^chus had little inciination to Buddhism. Evon before 
they had conquered China, their prince, T'ai Tsung, ordered 
an inspection of monasteries and limited tho number of monks. 
But in this edict he inveighs only ag^st the abuse of relipon 
and admits that “Buddha^s taaohmg is at bottom pure and 
ohasto, truo and sincere: by serving him ^rith purity cuid pio^, 
one can obtEun bappln^^.” Shtin-Chih, the first Manchu 
Erapeiot, wrote some prefaces to Buddhist works and enter¬ 
tained tho Dalai X,ama at PeUog in 1662^. His son and sno- 
cessor, commonly known as K'ang-Hsi (1662-1723), dallied 
for a while with Christianity, but the net result of his religious 
policy was to secure to Confucianism all that imperial favour 
can give. 1 have mentioned above his Sacred E^ct and the 

■ ■ mm 

* DeGrtM&.Lc.p.93. 

' S«fM ftuthoriUw taj th»t bo bec^nn ft JSOAk btiore h« died, bet the evidonco 
ie not good. So* Jobnston in f/ea CHna Itwicv. Noc. I &nd S, 1020. 

2%0 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. XLm 

partial favour which he showed to Buddhism. He gave donations 
to the roonasteriea of P'n-t'o, Hang-chou and elsewhere: he 
published the Kanjur with a preface of his own^ and the twelfth 
and last collection of the Tiipitska was issued under the auspices 
of hie eon and grandson. The latter, the Emperor Ch'ien Lung, 
sJso re-seived the l^shu Lama not only with honour, but with 
interest and sympathy, as U clew from the inscription pre- 
Bcived at Peking, in which ho extols the Lama as a teacher of 
spiritual religion*. He also wrote a preface to a sutra for 
producing rain* in which he says that he has ordered the old 
editions to be carefully corrected and prayer and worship to be 
offered, “so that the old forms which have been so beneficial 
during former ages might still be blessed to the desired end.” 
Even the late Empress Dowager accepted the ministrations of 
the present Dalai Lama when he visited Peking in 1908, al¬ 
though, to his great indignation she obliged him to kneel at 
Court*. Her former coUc^ue, the Empress Tzu-An was a 
devout Buddhist- The statutes of the Mancha dynasty (printed 
in 1818) contidn regulations for the celebration of Buddhist 
festivals at Court, for the periodical reading of sutras to promote 
the imperial welfare, and for the performance of funeral rites. 

StiQ on the whole the Manchu dynasty showed less favour to 
Buddhism than any which preceded it and its restrictive edicts 
limiting the number of monks and prescribing conditions for 
ordination wore followed by no periods of reaction. But the 
vitality of Buddhism is shown by the fact that these restrictions 
merely led to an increase of tbo secular clei^, not legally 
ordained, who in their turn claimed the imperial attention. 
Ch'ien Lung began in 1735 by giving them the alternative of 
becoming ordinary laymen or of entering a monastery but this 
drastic measure was considerably modified in the next few 
years. Ultimately the secular clergy were allowed to continue 
as such, if they could show good reason, and to have one disciple 
each. 

' 8ce T'oteng Pco. 1909, p. 593. 

* S«« B. Ludwig. TfK vwf( oftfti TeAoo Lana to Fck^. Tien Tfin Praa, 1904. 

* Hu T&*yiin.lung.<!h’ing>yu.obifig. N»ajio'» Catalo^e, I^oa. 1S7-S, 970, and 
•M IImI, ^ fivdtfAarf Smpdfrei, pp. 417>9. 

* 8m for u MOOuDt of bl* Tint *‘Tb« D&Ui Lftm.-wi sod Ih^ tvlstiooj with 
Um MsDcbo Eapeier o( Ckhi*'* la TVsnp Pv*, 1910, p. 774. 

CHAPTER XLIV 

CHINA (eoTtHniud) 

The Ciiroir 

The Buddhist scriptures extsnt is the Chiness language are 
knovn coliectively as 8azi Tsangi or the three store-houses, 
that is to sa^, Tripitaka. Though this usage is justihed hj both 
eastern and European practice, it is not altogether happy, for 
the Chinese thesaurus is not analogous to the Pali Canon or to 
any collection of sacred literature known in India, being in 
spite of its name arranged in four, not in three, diviuons. It is 
a gjeat Corpus Scriptomm Sancionm, embracing all ages and 
schools, wherein translations of the most diverse Indian works 
ate supplemented by original compositions in Chinese. Imagine 
a library comprising Latin tran^tioDs of the Old and New 
Testaments with copious additions from the TWmud and 
Apocryphal literature; the writii^s of the Fathers, decrees of 
Councils and Popes, togetiier with the opera omnia of the 
principal schoolmen and the early protestant lefoimers and yon 
will hare some idea of this theolc^ical miscenany which has no 
claim to be called a canon, ezeopt that all the works included 
have at some time or other received a certain literary or 
doctrinal haU>mark. 

1 

The coUectioD is described in tiie catalogue compiled by 
Bunyiu Nanjlo^. It eniuueiates 1662 works which are dasrided 
in four great divisions, (a) S&tra, (&) ^^aya, (e) Abbidharma, 
(d) Miscellaneoue. The firet three divisions contain translations 
only; tbs fourth original Chinese works as well. 

The first division called Ching or Siltras amoonta to nearly 
two'tbirds of the whole, for it comprisos no lees than 1061 

' — For u AccoQot of eoDM of Uto icripUiM hero montionod no 
ebofk zz. 

* A MUiiofU4 ttf tA* Chintn TrantlaHan ^ Qt* B%3dhul TriftiaJe^ Oxford, 
doteodoo Ptmo, 1893. An mdex to eho Tolyo odfQofi bte been pobUsbed b; FoJiL 
Udji ZZ 2 J (1808>. See too Forke, Zafaiog dee Fektuper Tripiuka, 1910. 

2S2 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[oa. 

works and is su1>divided as follows: (a) Mah&y&na SQtras, 641, 
(6) H!n&7&na Sutras, 240, (o) Mah&y&na and Hi&ay&na Si^txaa, 
3M in number, admitted into the canon nnder the Sung and 
Tuan dynasties, a.d. 960-1S68. Thus whereas the firet two sub- 
divisiona differ in dootrine, the third is a supplement contiuning 
later translations of both schools. The second subdivision, or 
Hinay&na S&tras, which is less numerous and complicated than 
that containing the Mahiyina Stlizae, shows clearly the char* 
acter of the whole collection. It is divided into two classes 
of which the first is called A*han, that is, Agama^. This com¬ 
prises translations of four works cmalogous to the Pali Nik&yas, 
though not identical with the texts which wo possess, and also 
numerous alternative translations of dotached sfitras. All four 
were translated about the beginning of the fifth century whereas 
the tranalations of detached sfitras are for the most part earlier. 
This class also contains the celebrat4?d Sdtra of Porty>twc 
Sections, and works like the Jitaka^nidioa. The second class 
is styled Sfitros of one translation^. The title is not used ngor- 
oQsly, but the works bearing it are relatively obscure and it is 
not always clear to what Sanskrit tests they correspond. It 
will be seen from the above that the Chinese Tripitaka is a 
literary and bibliographical coUootion rather than an ecclesi* 
astical canon. It d^s not provide an authorised vereion for the 
edification of the faithful, but it presents for the use of the 
learned ^ tranabtions of Indian works belonging to a particular 
class which possess a certain age and authority. 

The same characteristic marks the much richer oolleotion 
of Mah&yAoa Sfitras, which contains the works most esteemed 
by Chinese Buddhists. It is divided into soven classes: 

1 , Pan*jo (Po-jo) or Prajn4p&ramit&*- 

2. 1^^. Pao-chi or Ratnakfifa. 

Ta-chi or Mab&sannip&ta. 

4. . Hua-yen or Avatamsaka. 

* TBo-i-chiag ^ - 8oiBe»fthemrlncUM0dudftrl'M4*chifig appear 

to exist in more then qq* lorm,«.?. Kenjlv, Nm. 374 ead 804. 

' These o3ianM)t«r« mv OMoaMOly rt«d Pojo b; Oiiiuso Soddhiste but the 
Jspsfu w rending Hencye ehewethet tbe pronsnelAUciO of the first chsreoterwsePeo. 

3C£JV] 

CHINA 

283 

«- m- Nieh-pan or Panjurr&^a. 

6. . Siltras in more than one trans¬ 

lation but not falling into any of the above five 
classes. 

Other sAttas existing in only one trans* 

lation. 

Each of the first five classes probably repioeents a collection 
of sntras aualogons to a ITik&ya and in one sense a single work 
but translated Into Chinese severe times, both in a complete 
form and in extracts. Thus the first class opens with the majestic 
Mah&pra}niplbramit& in 600 fasciculi and equivalent to 200,000 
stanzas in Sanskrit. This is followed by several translations of 
shorter versions including two of the Uttle sfitras called the 
Heart of the Frap|.p&ramlt&. which fills onJy one leaf. There are 
also six tnmslatioDB of the celebrated work known as the 
Diamoud-cutteri. which is the ninth sOtra in the Mah&prajn&- 
p4ramit& and all the works classed under the heading Pan-jo 
seem to be alternative verdons of parts of this great Corpus. 

The second and third classes are collections of sfitras which 
no longer exist as collections in Sanskrit, though the Sanskrit 
text of some individual sutras Is extant. That called Pao-chi 
or Ratnakfit^ opens with a collection of forty*mne sdtrae which 
includes the longer version of the Sukh&vatlvyfiha. This 
collection is reckoned as one work, but the other items in the 
same class aio all or nearly all of them duplicate translations of 
separate sfitras confined in it. This is probably (xue of the 
third class also. At least seven of the works included in it are 
duplicate translations of the first, which is called Mab8eannlp&ta, 
and the efitras called Candiagarbba, Kshit^., Sumorug., and 
Akfiiag., appear to be merely sections, not separate composi¬ 
tions, although this is not cleu from the remarks of Nanjio 
and WassQjew. 

The priodpal works in class 4 aro two translationa, one 
fuller than the other, of the Hua-yen or Avatamsaka Sdtra^, 
still one of the most widely read among Buddhist works, and 
at least sixteen of the other items are duplicate renderings of 

^ Vft^ncob»dik& or Kang. 

■ WiotoTDito (Omk. ltd. Lit.n.1 p. 242) iUtc« oo the aoUioritj of Takftlcon 
tbfti tUe work ii the una u tho Gac^evyAba. S«e k2«o Periot io JA. 1214, n. 
pp. lie-Sl. The QaQcjftTTlUia ia prebeUy sn extract of the ATeUnmifc*. 

a ru. 

19 

2S4 

BUDDHISM 0VT81DE INDIA 

[oh. 

parte of it. Class 5 ccnsiete of thirteen works dealing with 
the death of the Buddha and his last discoursee. The first 
sfitra, sometimes called the northern text, is imperfect and 
was revised at Nrmkisg in the form of the soathern test*. There 
are two o^er incomplete versions of the same text. To fudge 
from a specimen translated b; Beal^ it is a collection of late 
discourses infioenced by Vlehnuism and does not coneapond 
to the Mahiparinibbinasiitta of the Pali Canon. 

Class 6 consists of sfitras which esiat in several translations, 
but still do uot« like the works fast mentioned, form small 
librarieG hi themselves. It comprises, however, several books 
highly esteemed and histodcally important, such as the 
8addharmapup4ertka (six translaticDB), the Suvarnaprabh&sa. 
the Lalitavistara, the Lankftvat&xa, and the Shorter Sukh^ 
vatlvyfiha’, all extant in three translations. In it are also 
included many short tracts, the originals of which are not 
known. Some of them are J&takaa, hut many^ deal with the 
ritual of image worship or with spells. These charaoCeristics ate 
still more prominent in the seventh class, oonsisting of siltras 
which exist in a single translation only. The best known among 
them are the Sur&ngama and the Mab&valrocana (Ta-jih-ching), 
which is the chief text of the Sbin-gon or Mantra School*. 

The Lu-tsuig or Vinaya-pitaka is divided into Mah&y&na 
and Hinay&na texts, neither very numerous. Many of the 
Mah&yina tests profess to be revelations by Maitreya and are 
extracts of the Yogic&iyabhfimi^&stra* or dmilsf to it. For 
practical purposes the most important is the Fan-wang-ching^ 
or net of Brahmi. The Indian original of this work is not known, 
but since the eighth century it has been accepted in nhinft 
the standard manual for the monastic life*. 

' N««. 113 4nd 114 

* Colcna oj Dtid}U»t pp. 160 9. 

' Th» Iwifcr SokhAvsttvyabk i« in U» lUlnkkdU cIms. 

* Tbs S&tifft pf KuU'jiii vTth tbs tbonaui^ bAudi tad ^ vtry popuUr 
ud sMd in motb t«aapkit. Ntojto. Ko. 3S0. 

* Bftid to b«v« been nvMlsd to AMOg* t>y Maitnya. Ko. 1170. 

’ 1^* It ootlBo; to do with tba Pali SSt4« of tbe ^f tPf 

aamo. Digbo, n 

* &M baloir for aa Moount of it 

CBINA 

28S 

XLIV] 

Tlie Hinayina Vlnaya comprisos five very aubstaRtial 
rec^naiona of tbo whole code, bosides oxtracte, compendiums, 
and mannals. The fire receusiona arc: (a) ^h!h*sung>lu In sixty' 
fi7e fasoiouji, tranalatad In a.d. 404. This Is s^d to be a Vinaya 
oi the Sarv&stiT&dins, but I*Ching^ exprcsaly says that it does 
not belong to the M&Iaearv&stivftdin e^ool, though not unlike 
it. (6) The Vui&ji, of this latter tronaJated by l-Ching who 
brought It from India, (o) Shlh-{en*Iu'taang in eizty fasciculi, 
translated in 405 and said to represent the Dbarmogupta 
school, (d) The MI-sha*60 Wu-fin Lii or A^naya of the Mahi- 
4 &saka3, said to be smular to the Pali Vinaya, though not 
identical with it^. (e) MO'ko-s^g-ohi Lu or Mahasangbika 
Vinaya brought from India by f'a*^en and translated 416 a.d. 
It is noticeable that all dve recensions are classed as Hinayonist, 
although (6) is said to be the Vinaya used by the Tibetan Church. 
Although Chinese Buddhists frequently apeak of the 67e*fold 
Vinaya^^ this oxpressior) does not refer to these five texts, as 
might be supposed, and I-Ching condemns it, saying that^ the 
re^ number of divisions is fonr. 

The Abhidhorma-Pitaka or Lun*tsang is, like the Stltra 
fitaka, divided into MabayanUt and ^nayanist texts and 
texts of both schools admitted into the Canon after 000 a.n. 
The Mahayonist texts have no connection with the Pali Canon 
and their Sanskrit titles do not contain the word Abhidharma'. 
They are pliilosophioal treatises ascribed to Aivagbosha, 
NSgirjuna, Asanga, Vosubandhu and others, inclndlng three 
works supposed to have been revealed by Maitreya to Asanga^. 
The principal of these is the Yog&ciryskbhOmii&stra, a scripture 
of capital importance for the Yc^&c&rya school. It desoriboe 
the career of a BodhUattva and hence parts of it are treated as 
belonging to tho Vinaya. Among other important worke in 
this section may be men^oned tho Madbyamaka ^tra of 

’ flee^ oj liuddh'tt ffgdfee*. p. t0> 

‘ 8c6 Otd«Qb«rg, Vina^. toL l pp. xov-zlvi. 

* 8m WMe«n, yflcM L p. 227. Tlio five tehodi pvtn u Dhtnno- 

gupU, Ui^lelkx, SuriiUvidin, £t*syftpiyft Mtd Mtliie nB ei n l m . For tb» lut 
V«tfliputr» or Stbevin it tooietiaiea tubetiuited. 

* Jt^DOfd .fiviidiiil Fracttctt. p 8. 

* Tbe ChkMas wotd loo oooms IreqaeoUy ift theai. but thoush it ia uwd to 

trontlote Athldbomo. it ii of moch wider eod meus dteouanon o( 

Sibtra. 

* 8m Wtuon, CkvttriQ, t, pp. S6$ ff. 

280 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [«£, 

N^rjuna, the Mah&y&nasiitrilank&ra of Asanga, and the 
Awakening of Faith ascribed to Aivaghosha*. 

The Hinayhna texts also show no correspondence with the 
Pali Fitaka but are based on the Abbidharma works of the 
Sarvdstividin school^. These are soTen in number, namely the 
Jn&oaprastb&nas&stra of K&ty&yaniputrs with six aooeasory 
treatises or F&das*. The Mahivibh&sbasistia, or commentary 
on the Jn&naprasthhoo, and the Abhldbarmakdsa* are also in 
this section. 

The third dirision of the Abbidharma is of little importance 
but contains two curious items: a manual of Buddhist ter* 
minology composed as late as 1272 by Fagspa for the use of 
Khubilai’s eon and tbe Shnkbj'ak&rikibbksbya, which is not 
a Buddhist work but a compendium of Sirikhya philosophy*. 

The fourth diTision of the whole collection consists of 
miscellaneous works, partly translated from Sanskrit and partly 
composed in Chinese. Many of tbe Indian works appear from 
their ritle not to differ much from the later Mab&y4na SOtras, 
but it is rather surprising to find in this section four translations* 
oi the Dharmapada (or at least of some similar anthology) which 
are thus placed outside tbo fiiltia Pitaka. Among the works 
professing to be translated from Sanskrit are a History of the 
Patriarchs, the Buddhacarita of Aivagbosha, a work similar 
to the Questions of King Milinda, Lives of Airaghosha, 
Nlig&rjuna, Vasubandhu and others and the Suhrillekha or 
Friendly Epistle ascribed to N&garjuna. 

The Chinese works iircluded In this Tripitaka consist of 
nearly two hundred books, historical, critical, controversial and 
homiletic, composed by one hundred emd two authors. Excluding 
late treabsea on ceremonial and doctrine, tbe more interesting 
may be classified as follows: 

(a) Historical.—Besides general histories of Buddhism, there 

* Km. 1179. IW). 1249. 

« For * dueuMon of thUlltantore m Ttk4kuao os tke AtUdhertu lilontoio 
oi tbe SuTSsUTidins, J, Paii Teti Socittg, 1906, pp. 07 fl. 

* NMiio, Cst. Noa 127S, 1976. 1276, 1277.1262,1281,19$2,1296.1317. 
iMt vo(k VM AOt tnoakted UU tbo elovectb eeDtur;. 

* Kaajio, Ci.t. No*. 1266,1207 *nd 1369. 

* See TikakMQ** lUidy of thoee truul&tion* io 1904, pp. 1 £ end 

pp.978ff. 

* N*njlo,C*a Noe. 1331,1366.1366,1499. 

CHINA 

287 

xuv] 

Md sevdrftl oollectiODs of ecclesiastical biography. The first is 
the Kao*e8Dg-chuan^, or Meiaoirs of eminent Monks (not, 
howeTer, excluding laymen), giving the Uvee of about fivo 
hundred worthies who lived between 67 and 619 a. n. The series 
is continued in other works dealing with the T'ang and Sung 
dynasties. For the Contemplative School there are further 
supplements carrying the record on to ti^e Yuan. There are also 
several histories of the Chinese patriarohs. Of these the latest 
and theieioie moat complete is ^e Fo*teu*t'ung*cbi^ composed 
about 1270 by Chih P'an of the T'ien-Tai school. The Ching- 
t&-ch'uan*tSog-ln‘ and other treatises give the succesaion of 
patriarohs according to the Contemplative School. Among 
historical works nay be reckoned the travels of varions pilgrims 
who visited India. 

(6) CW^icof.-^Thoze are thirteen catalogues of the Tiipitaka 
as. it existed at different penods. Several of them oontaio 
biographical accounts of the translators and other notes. The 
work called Ch6n cblng*lun criticizes several false efitras and 
names. There are also several enoyoloptedic works contiuoing 
extracts from tho Tripitaka, arranged according to subjects, 
such as the Fa>yuan*chu-lin^ in 100 volumes; concordances of 
numerical categories and a dictionary of Sanskrit terms, 
Fan*i*romg-i-chi*, composed in 1161 . 

(c) The literature of several Chinese seots is well repro* 
sented. Thus them ore mere than sixty works belox^ng to 
the T ien T'ai school beginning with the San-ta-pu or throe 
groat books attributed to tbs founder and ending with the 
ecclesiastical history of C9iih*p'an, written about L270. The 
Hua yen school is rcproscnted by the writu^ of four patriarchs 
and five monks: the Lii or Vinaya school by eight works at¬ 
tributed to its founder, and the Contemplative School by a 
sutra ascribed to Hui-n6ng, tho sixth potziarch, by works on 
the history of the Patriarchs and by several coIlectionE of 
sayings or short compositions. 

' ^ ^ P«tmxobB BM 

tbQ MTi chApwr. 

« Va ldS4, writMe A.o. 1006. 

• N0.14SS. 

. No. 1640. 

288 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [cs. 

{d) Controwrwl—Under tiiis heading may !» mentioned 
polemics against Taoism, including two collections of the con¬ 
troversies which took place between Buddhists and Taoiata 
from A.p. 71 till A.D. 730: replies to the attacks made against 
Buddhism by Coiifu«an scholars and refutations of the objec¬ 
tions raised by sceptics or heretics such as the Ch3-i-liin and 
the Yiian-j€n-lun, or Origin of man^. This latter is a well-known 
text-book written by the fifth Patriarch of the Hna-yen school 
Mid while criticiting Confucianism, Taoism, and the Hinayina, 
treats them as imperfect rather than as wholly erroneons*. Still 
more conciliatory is the Treatise on the three rel^ons com¬ 
posed by Liu Mi of the Ytian ^nasty*, which asserts that all 
three deserve respect as teaching the practice of virtne. It 
attacks, however, anti-Buddhist Oonfuoianiste such as Han-Yii 
and Ohu-Hsi. 

The Chinese section contMns three oompotitions attributed 
to imperial personages of the fifing, viz., a collection of the 
prefaces and laudatory verses written by the Emperor T'tu- 
T^ung. the Shga-S8ng-Chuan or memoirs of remarkable monks 
with a preface by the Emperor Ch’tog-tsu, and a curious book 
by his consort the Empress Jln-Hdao, introducing a sfitra w'hich 
Her Majesty states was miraculously revealed to her on Now 
Year’s day, 1398 (see Nanjio, No. 1657). 

Though the ^ndus were caieM students and guardians of 
their sacred works, their temperament did not dispose them to 
define and limit the scriptuies. But, as 1 have mentioned above*, 
there is some evidence that there was a loose Mahayanist canon 
in In d i a which was the origin of the arrangement found in the 
Chinese Tripitaka, in so far as it (1) accepted Hinayanist as 
well as Mabayanist works, and (2) included a great number of 
relatively late sfitras, arranged In classes such as Prajn&p&rami&& 
and Mabfisannip&ta. 

2 

The Tripitaka analyzed by Nanjio, which contains works 
assigned to dates ranging from 67 to 1622 a.n., is merely the 

' for wm» tCMual of it U&MMi-OnxseVK Article in J,A. 1S15, L pp. 22S-3M. 

• ^ « 

* 8m cbAp. XX on tlie UaJu.yAuLil canon in Indi^ 

CBINA 

299 

xltt] 

best known sutTiTor unoog sevewJ similar thesauri^. From 
518 A.D. onwards twelve coUeo^na ot sacred literature were 
made by imperial order and many of these were published ^ 
more than one edition. The validity of this Canon depends 
entirely on imperial authority, but, though Kmperora occasion¬ 
ally inserted Che works of writers whom they esteemed*, it does 
not appear that they ^ed at anything hut completeness nor 
did they favour any school. The Buddhist Church, like every 
other department of the Empire, received from them its share 
of protection and aupervi^n and its olaima were sufficient to 
induce the founder, or at least an early Sovereign, of every 
important dynasty to publish under his patroru^ a revised 
collection of the scriptures. The list of these collections is as 
follows*: 

1. A.D. 618 in the time of Wu-Ti, founder of the Liang. 

2. „ 833-4 Htiao-Wu of the Northern Wei. 

S, 894] founder of the Sui. 

4. „ 602) 

5. „ 606-16 Yang-Ti of the Sui 

a. „ 695 the Empress Wu of tiie T'ang. 

n. „ 730 Reiian-Tsung of the T'ang. 

8. „ 971 T'ai-Tsu, founder of the Sung. 

9. „ 1288-7 Khubilai Khan, founder of the Ttian. 

10. „ 1868-98 Hung-Wu, founder of the Ming. 

11. „ 1403-24 Yung-Lo of the Ming. 

12 ,, 173^7 Yong-Ching and Ch'ien-Lui^ of the Ch mg*. 

Of theee collections, the first seven were m MS. only: 
last five were printed. The last three appear to be substantially 
the same. The tenth and eleventh collections are known as 

. lia d««ribed « Uutegmning M Ts Ming 

ItMMtbeNo. wdOMtboM 

ThuMbe Bmpetw JSa Tiung or^tnd tbe work* oi CKl Sung 
Admitted to (he ^ton ia lOtS. 

• TAk«D £roio NAnJlo*! C»t4logoe, p. ... ___ 

« a iw-LoDS ie isid (c hew printed the TnpItAke In 
T^beten. Mongol end Mincho. the wliele coIteeOon filUng l»2 vole. See MOUeadort 
in Chine JJtAnch. J.A.S. x»7. 1800, p. 28. 

200 BUDDMISM OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

southern and northern^, because they irere printed at Nan^kiog 
and Peking respeotiTely. They differ only in the number of 
Chinese works admitted and eimilarly the twelfth collection 
ie merely a revision of the tenth with the addition of fiftydour 
Chinese works. 

As mentioned, the Tripitaka contains thirteen catalogues oi 
the Buddhist scriptorea as known at diffeientdates^. Of these the 
most important are (a) the earliest published between 906 and 
512 a J>., {6) three published under the T'ang dynasty and known 
as Noi-tien-Iu, T'u-chi (both about 554 a.z^.), and K'ai-yiian*lu 
(about 720 a.d.), (c) Chih'Tiiandu or catalogue of Tuan dynasty, 
about 12S5, which, besidea enumerating the Chinese titles, 
transliterates the Sanskrit titles and states whether the Indian 
works translated an edso translated into Tibet^. (d) The 
catalogue oi the first Ming collection. 

The later collections contain new mAterfal &nd differ from 
the earlier by natural accretion, for a great number of transla* 
tions were produced under the T'aug and Sung. Thus the 
seventh catalogue (695 a.t>.) records that S59 new works were 
admitted to the Canon. But this espansioo was accompanied 
by a critical and sifting process, so that whereas the first col¬ 
lection contained 2213 works, the Ming edition contains only 
1622. This compression means not that works of importance 
were rejected as heretical or apocryphal, for, as we have seen, 
the Tripitaka is moat catholic, but that whereas the earlier 
colioodons admitted multitudinous extracts or partial trans¬ 
lations of Indian works, many of these were discarded when 
compleCe versions had been made, 

Naojio considers that of the 2213 works contained in the 
first coEectiou only 276 are extant. Although the catalogues 
are preserved, all the earlier eoheotlons are lost: copies of the 

* But MConliDg to AAotlw «Uc«AMDt th» •outikom ncoonon wm aoi tb» 

luporiftl oollMtion besno ^ 1SS6 but & «UitiOD taw lost. See Nonjio, 

Cst. p. ixUl 

* Sm foe Um ooi&ploee list Nsajio, CsL p. uvlL TboM nsmed sbovs sr« 

(.) II 7C^, No. 1«3. 14SJ. l«7. «d (1) 

Ko. 1 G 12 . For tbs < 2 sfio of fill* fints 8 «Ua«p 6 roioAf./’.^, 0 .1910, p. 114 

Th«re vu B lUll esriier ostslogus cogpogd hy Tso-s& in S74 of w Mo h on ly 
fn^^mcots lukTO bs«Q pitterrsd. Boo PoUiot in T'otutg Pt», XCX. J9I0, p 208, 

OSINA 

29L 

XLIV] 

eighth ond ninth were preserred in tho Zo-jo-ji library of Tokyo* 
and Cblnew and Japanese editions of the tenth, eleventh and 
twelfth are current. So far as one can judge, when the eighth 
catalogue, or K'ai‘yuan*lu, waa composed (between 713 aod 
741), the older and major part of the Canon had been dedmtivejy 
fixed and tl!e later collections merely add the translations mado 
by Amcgha, and by writeis of the Sung and Yuan dynasties. 

The editions of tho Chinese Tripitaka roust be dis^nguiehod 
from the collections, for by editions are meant the forms in 
which each collection was published, the text being or purporting 
to be tho same in all the editions of each collection. It is said* 
that under the Sung and Yilan twenty different editions were 
produced. These earlier issues were printed on long folding sheets 
and a nun called Fa*oh$n* is Md to have first pubU^ed an 
edition in the shape of ordinary Chinese boobs. In 1686 a monk 
named Mi-Tsang^ imitated this procedure and bis edition was 
widely used. About a century later a Japanese pnest known as 
Tetsu-yen^ reproduced it and his publication, which is not 
uncommon in Japan, is usually called the G*bal(u edition. 
There are two modem Japanese editione: (a) that of Tokyo, 
begun in 1880, based on a Korean edition* with vaiicus readings 
taken from othor Chinese editions. (6) That of Kyoto, 1906, 
which is a reprint of the Ming coUeetion’. A CbiMse edition 
has been published at ShangbM (1913) at the expense of 
Mrs Hardoon, a CThinese lady well known as a muniiiccnt patron 
of the faith, and I believe another at Ilankuig, but I do not 
know if it is complete or not®, 

^ F«r th« Konao c«p 7 now iB we ConrMt. eordarne, 

▼oL m. pp. tlS-lt. 

* 8m NuHo, O&k p. xxiL 

* ‘ mm- 

» Alco o%U«d Do.ko. 

* Tb« w l i^ coliMtloiu of the TripiMka Mom to hove toon known in Kon* 
And About lOOO A.n. tbe king proeond from CUba a oop; of the ImporUJ Edition, 
proMrsAbl; Uie eighth »oU«o^n (971 a.d.). H« then ordered a eenmiAMo of 
Acbolan to rariM th» text And publish An edition o( hit own. Tbe eop^ of this edition, 
on which the tecenC Tok^ edition vm founded, wm broegbt to JnpAn in tbe 
Buii>reei period l46^14Sa 

* A euppiement to the TrrptUhA oontnlnlng aoii*CAOonic«l wotks in 7fi0 toIuqim 
(Z bki Kippon Zekn-2Ckyu) wAapubbahod in 1911. 

* ITje Peking TripittkA cntAlogoed by Forks nppMct to be e Mt of 1223 works 
repnsented by coplee tekeo froa four editions published in 137S, I CSS. ISSSand 
1735 A.p., tii <d wbioh Ate editions oi tbe oollMtioos numbered II end 12 ebbre. 

292 

BUDI>B28M 0VT3IDE INDIA 

[CH. 

3 

Tte translations contained in the Chinese TripiUka X*elong 
to several periods^. In the earliest, which extends to the middle 
of the fourth century, the works produced were chiefly renderings 
of detached sdtras^. Few treatises clasufied as Vinaya or 
Abhidharma were translated and those few arc mostly extracts 
or compilations. The sdtros belong to both the Itina and 
Mah&y&na. The earliest extant translation or rather compilation, 
the Sdtra of Forty>two sections, belongs to the former school, 
and so do the majority of tiie translations made by AQ*Siiih-Kao 
(148-170 A.D,), bat from the second century onwards the 
Prajn&pftramiU and Amit&bha Sdtras make tbeir appearance^. 
Many of the translations made in this period are described as 
ineomplete or inconect and the fact that most of them were 
superseded or supplemented by later versions shows that the 
Chinese recognised their provisional character. Future re¬ 
search will probably show that many of them are paraphrases 
or compendiums ratiier than translations in our sense. 

The next period, roughly speaking 375-746 i.n., was extra* 
ordinarily prolific in extentive and authoritative translations, 
The translators now attack not detached chapters or discourses 
but the great monnmente of Indian Buddhist literature. Though 
it is not easy to make any chronological bisection in this period, 
there is a clear difieience in the work done at the begiuning and 
at the end of it. From the end of the fourth ceutury onwards 
a desire to have complete translations of the great canonical 
works is apparent. Between 385 and 445 a.p. were traoslated 
the four Agamos, analogous to the Nlk&yas of the Pali Canon, 
three great collections of the Vlnaya, and tiie princupal scrip* 
taces of the Abhldhorma according to the Sorvfistiv^din school. 
For the Mahiyina were translat<^ the great sdtros known os 
Avatamsaka, Lankivat&ra, and many others, os well os works 

* Fi>r two ifit»re«tiag Uvm of titndaton ne tlM T'ottug ^<ia. 1900, {>. 190, tud 
1905. p. 892, vhere will b« femsd the blognphlw of S&ng Kiu, » Sosdies who died 
in 280 ftod Jioagapte • neti^ of Gttdh&re (628-609). 

* Botbetwees 266 ud 818 Dbervtnkeh* tiwulftted the Bedclharmiipuniler&e 
{intiudins the eddiiioiitl ebepter* 21-*20) and the LoJiUTiettra. Bi» tnoeleUen of 
the PrrnjitipflnmiU ie neoinplecd. 

* la tho troniltUooa of 147-188, (3uh.Ch'ico 223-248, DJiomarakalie 

204 ^ 13 . 

SUV} 

CB2HA 

293 

aacribcd to A^vdghosha &nd Nag&rjaii». After 645 a,d. a further 
development of the critical spirit is perceptible, especially in 
the labours of Heiiaii Chuang and I*ChIng. They attorept to 
give tbo rel^ous publio not only complete wcrlm in place of 
extracts and compeDdiums, bat also to eoleot the most authori* 
iative texts among the many current in India. Thus, though 
many translaUons bad appeared under the name of PrajnA* 
phrazDitd, Hsuan Cbuang filled 600 fasciculi with a new rendering 
of tho gigantic treatise. I-Ching supplemented the already 
bulky library of Vjnaya works with versions of tbo MOlasat- 
v&stiv&din zecensioii and many auxiliary texts. 

Amogba (PuOC'ung) whose literary labours extended from 
746 to 774 A.n. is a convenient figure to mark the beginning of 
the next and last period, although some of its ebaraoteristios 
appear a little carlior. They are that no more translations ate 
made from the great Buddhist claerics—partly no doubt 
because they !iad all been translated already, well or ill—but 
that renderings of works described as Dharao! or Tantra pullu¬ 
late and multiply. Though this literature deserves such epithets 
as decadent and suporsritioos, yet it would appear that Ixidiaa 
Xantras of the worst class were not palatable to the Cbiueso. 

4 

The Cbinoso Tripitaka is of great importance for the literary 
history of BuddhUm, but the material which it offers for in* 
vestigation is supciabondaut and the work yet done is small. 
We are confront^ by such questions as, can we accept the dates 
assigned to tbo translators, can we assume that, If the Chinese 
translations or trvialiteratiODS coiteepond with Indian titles, 
tho works are the same, and if the works are professedly the 
same, can we assume that the Chinese text is a correct present^ 
ment of the Indian original? 

The dates assigned to the translators offer little groimd for 
scepticism. The exactitude of the Chinese in such matters is 
well attested, and there is a general agreement between several 
authorities such as the Catalogues of the Tripitaka, the znemoics 
known as KaO'Sing Chuan with their continuations, and the 
chapter on Buddhist books in the Sui annals, There are no signs 

294 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [ ch . 

of a desii^ to claim improbable accuracy or improbable antiquity, 
biany works aie said to be by unknown translators, doubtful 
authorship la frankly discuseod, and the movement of literature 
and thought indicated ia what we should expect- We havo 
hrat fragmentary and incomplete translations belonging to both 
the Uah& and Htnajina: then a series of more complete trans* 
latious beginning about the fifth century in which the great 
Hfnayina texts are conspicuous: then a further series of im¬ 
proved translations in which the Hinay&na falls into the back¬ 
ground and the works of Aeanga and Vasubandhu come to tho 
front. This evidently reflects the condiUon of Buddhist India 
about 600-660 a.n., fust as the translations of tho eighth century 
reflect its later and tautrio phase. 

But can Chinese texts be accepted aa reasonably faithfxd 
reproductions oi the Indian originals whose names they bear« 
and some of which have been lost? This question is really 
double; firstly, did the translators reproduce with fair accuracy 
the Indian text before them, and secondly, since Indian texts 
often exist in several recensions, can we assume that the work 
which the translators knew under a certain Sanskrit name is the 
work known to us by that name? In reply it must be said that 
most Chiaese translators fall short oi ovzr standards of accuracy. 
In early times when grammaia and dictionaries were unknown 
the scholarly rendering of foreign books was a difficult buuuess, 
for professional interpreters would usually be Incapable of 
understanding a philosophic treatise. Tho method often followed 
was that an Indian explained the text to a literary Chinese, who 
recast the explanation in his own lai^uage. The many transla¬ 
tions of the more important texts and the frequent description 
of the earlier ones as imperfect indicate a feeling that the resulb* 
achieved were not satisfactory. Several so-c^ed txanslators, 
especially Kum&raj!va, gave abstracts of tbe Indian texts*. 
Others, like Pharmaraksha, who made a Chinese version of 
AsTaghosha's Buddhacarita, so amplified and transposed the 

' But bn trwtfUliMt of tho Lotu> von adjnlr&tioQ for liUmrr etrlo, Sm 
aoMftki Niehirca, p.' 17. Wtoger (Otosmaoc#, p. M7) boji tht( th» vorki of Ab- 
^tih.kM illuatroto tbo toHou mothods of (mulstion; Bboolatol; UtonI nndenna* 
which bsvo bonll; OMOiiijig in Chinmoi vord for vrord mmltUona to which 
i8 added a ]>aT4p]iTaM of saoh aanMnea io ChinsM idion: aad ekfBAt itndoiiAS* ty 
a oaUTo ia wlii^ tba en^al t«ii obvieoaly aiiffm 

XLTV] 

CHINA 

293 

original that the result can hardly be called a tranBlation*. 
Others cooibined dilleient texts in one. Thus the work called 
Ta-o-mi-to-chir^* con&ste of extracts taken from four previous 
traDslations ot the Sukhivativyfiha and rearranged by the 
author under the ins|uration of Avalokita to whom, as be tells us» 
be was vont to pray durii^ the execution of his task. Others 
again, like DhannagupU, anticipated a method afterwards used 
jn Tibet, and gave a word for word tendering of the Saoaknt 
which Is hardly ictell^ble to an edneated Chinese. The later 
versions, e.g. those of HsUan Chuang, are more accurate, but 
still a Chinese rendering of a lost Indian document cannot be 
accepted as a i»thfu] representation of the original without a 
critical examination*. 

Often, however, the translator, whatever bis weaknesses 
may have been, had before him a text difierlng in bulk and 
arrangement from the Pali and Sanskrit texts which we possess. 
Tbos, there are four Chinese translations of works bearing some 
relation to the Dbammapada of the Pali Canon. All of these 
describe the original text as the compilation of Dbannatr&ta, 
to whom is also ascribed the compilation of the Tibetan Ud&na- 
varga*. His name is not mentioned in connection with the Pali 
text, yet two of the Chinese translations are closely related to 
that text. The Fa cbii-ching* Is a collection of verses translated 
in 224 A.D. and said to correspond with the Pali except that it 
has nine additional chapters and some additional stanaas. The 
Pa-chu*p'i*yu-ching* represents Mother edition of the same 

> Yet It miut have been intended m lueh. Ihe Utk etpresil; the vork 

M coapeecd bj the Bedhiaelt«e Me.Hisg {Aiveshoebe) end treseleted by nber- 
menkebe. Though tie idee of e treoeletion vee et beet eo empUfied inetricel 
pen.phreM. ret be coinoidee verbellf with the origidel eo eften thet hia work oan 
herdlj bo de«ribed ee en independent poem Inepir^ b; it. 

* See SukbAveUrvbta, ed. Vex UuJIer end Bunri** Nujio, Oxford. 1SS3. 
In tbe prefece, pp. vit-ix, h t deletled compeilam of eeretel tnoeleUoM end is en 
eppendii. pp. 7S ff.. t reodaring of BengbevenBea's Cbineee varewn of Tenoe vbiob 
oeeor bi thevotk. Chineee critic* My tbetlfto-ao in the (bird oeoUiiyves the Uni 

to intn^oee e eouad etyle of tremeletioa. He made no tMzuleUone bbnetif wblob 
beve euTvjved but wee e echoler end coomcofetor wbo infloeseed other*. 

‘ Thie ii eo aotbok>sy (edited by Beckh, 191 i: (fearieud by RockhUI. IB9S) in 
which 300 vereee en rimlier to tte Fob Bhentotped* 

• «»• !»«• ■ 

. No. 1393. 

BUPDBI8ZI OUTSIDE II^DIA 

20 (> 

[CH. 

verses, Ulustrated by e collection of parables. It was translated 
between 290 and 306. The Ch'u-yao-chingS translated In 399, 
is a Bimllar collection of verses and parables, but founded on 
another Indian work of much greater length. A revised trans* 
lation oontainiog only the verses was made between 990 and 
loop. They are said to be the same ae the 'Bbetati Ud&na, and 
the charaoterlstios oi this book, going back apparently to a 
Sanskrit original,^ that it is divided into thirty-three chapters, 
and that though it contains about SOO verses found in Pali, 
yet it is not merely the Pali tert plus addidons, but an anthology 
arranged on a different principle and only partly identical in 
substance*, 

There can be little doubt that the Pali Dhammapada is one 
several collections of verses, with or without an ex¬ 
planatory commentary of stories. In Skll these collections there 
was much comnon matter, both prose and verse, but some were 
longer, some shorter, some were in Pali and some in Sanskrit. 
Whereas the CSunese Dhammapada Is longer than the Indian 
texts, the Chinese version of Milinda*s Questions* is much 
shorfer and omits books iv-vQ. It was made between 317 and 
420 A.n. and the inference is that the original Indian text re¬ 
ceived later additions. 

A more important problem is thig : what is the relation to 
the Pali Canon of the Ciiinese texts bearing titles conespondiDg 
to Dlrgha, Madhyama, Samyukta and Ekottara? These coUec- 
tions of shtras do not call themselves hTikiya but A*han or 
^ama: the titles are translated as Ch'ang (long), Chong 
(medium), Taft (miscelianeous) and Tseng-!, representing Ekot- 
tara rather than Anguttara*. There is henoe prima facit reason 

* Pa-oU-jM-ring-ching, No. Hffl. 

' Tb«r» UMO to b* at lOMt two otb«t collecUoiu. Firetly * Trikiit witholog; 
of whnb Dutreuil ds Rhliu dUcovMOd a fitgmeotAry MS. fo Kliot4a *ad iocondJ; 
• renob ampIiSod oollectioa pmervod is Um XorMa Tripitokft And teprlnUd in tb« 
Toltjo •ditioo (xi7T.*g). The ?eletMa of tbeee to the ether reMUdeae !• not cImi. 

* Kesjio, cat. isea See PeUioC, J.A. 1S14. XL i>. ST9, 

» thereUUoiM of tbeOhineee UvulAtleoe to 

the Feh Tripitnke.. eod to e Saneloit Ceneo now pmerved onlj' in e {ngmeotoc? 
sleta, eee oMo, Neojio, Cat. pp. 1S7 ff., eepecadl? Hoe. Mf, MS, 045. Aneeeki, 
.3. 1001, p. 8d5; uf. “ On eorae prohlene of the textuJ hletorj of the Buddhlet 
ecripkircis”m TVweJ. A, 8,Jap«n, ISOS, p. SI, end qioro ecpooiallp his longer ertieU 

CHINA 

297 

mv] 

to suppose that these worlcs represent not the Fall Canon, hut 
a somewhat gimilAr Sanskrit coUeotion, That one or many 
Sanskrit works may have coexisted with a somewhat similar 
Pali work U clearly sliown by the Vinaya toxts, for here we hays 
the Fall Canon Chinese translatioQa of fiye Sanskrit versions, 
belonging to different schools, but apparently covering the 
same gronnd and partly ideutictd. For the Sutra Fiiaka no such 
body of evidence is forthcomuig, but the Sanskrit fragments 
of the Samyukt&gama found near Torfon contain parte of six 
sdtraa which are arranged in the same order as in the Chinese 
translation and am apparently the original from which it was 
made. It is noticeable that three of the four great Agamas were 
translated by monks who came from Tukhata or Kabul. 
Gnnabhadra, however, the translator of the SamyuktAgama, 
came from Centra! India and the text which he translated was 
brought from Ceylon by Fa^Hsien. It apparently belonged to 
the Abhayagiii monastery and not to the Mah&vih&ra. Nanjio^, 
)}Q^7er, states that about half of it is repeated in the Cbkiese 
versions of the Madhyama and Ekottara .^amas. It is also 
certun that though the Chinese ^amas and Fall Nikkyse 
contain much common matter, it is differently distributed*. 

There was in Lidia a copious collection ^ siltras, existing 
primarily as oral tradition amd varying in diction and arrange¬ 
ment, but codified from time to time in a written form. One 
of such codifications is represented by the Fali Canon, at least 
one other by the Sanskrit text which was rendered into Chinese, 
^ith rare exceptions the Chinese translations were from tbs 
Sanskrit*. The Sanskrit codification of the sdUa literature, while 

cnUtM, "The Fc^rBiuidiM in Cbbifw*' Iq th» «Mn» r«*r of tho 

f(i. ''TrocM ol PftU Tests in t MAbaynos TrenUae,*' 1909. B. Uvl, Ln 

SsmTukOewDS SAukrit, T'osnf 1904. p. 207. 

> No. 644. 

* Tbwaevraiy g&trM of thoPeJi AneuU«n uo found in Ckbv«i MadbyAnn 
4iu2 MIBO of tbaro oio KfiOtUd in tho Giincsn E3<ottAcn. Tho MojihijoA coo* 

125 Mtno. the ClilaeaoHidh 7 UD&{;MQA 222, of which 98 Ar» eommon to both. 
Alto twenty«two P»U M*jibinA dWogue* found in lb« CbiaMo EkotUm And 
BAmynkU. wronty ChhAW MsdliyAoiA diAlogim is PaIi Ao^U^ ni» in RgbA, 
Mvea lA SABiyutlA And five Is KbaddslLk AdcaaI^. Scam Probifm of <A« ta*«iaf 
t>i«ory cf A 4 S^ptunt. See aIao Anc«^ ia liftu^on, 1909, pp. 29 S. oe 

the SAfoyutU Nik&yA. 

• Anmki," TfAccA ef PaU TntA," Mtoion, 1906, ahowi tbAS thA IndlAB Aotlor 
of UioMAlitpTAjnApdrAiiillieiAtTA lUAy bA»e koown PaU tttU, but Ui« oaJy wrUia 
twnalAtioo Irom lh« PaII Appe^ Niajic, No. H88, »hiob to a toAmlAtiOB of 

S98 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE lEDIA 

[cs. 

diHering from tbe Pali In language and arrangement, m identical 
in doctrine and almost identical in substance. It is olaarly the 
product of the same or eimiUr schools, but is it earlier or later 
than the Pali or eontemporaiy with it? Tbe Chinese translations 
merely fix the latest possible date. A portion of the Sarnyuhtt- 
gama (Nanjio, No. 547) was translated by an unknown author 
between 820 and 280. This is probably an extract from the 
complete work which was translated about 440, but it would be 
difiicult to prove that tbe Indian original was not augmented or 
rearranged between these dates. The earliest translation of a 
complete Agama is that of the Ekottar&gama, 384 a.d. But 
the evidence of inscriptions^ shows that works known aa NOt&yas 
existed in the third century B.o. The Sanskrit of the .^amaa» 
80 far as it is known from tbe fragments found in Central Asia, 
does not suggeab that they belong to this epoch, but is compatible 
with tbe theory that they date from the time of Kanishka of 
which if we know little, we can at least say that it produced 
much Buddhist Sanskrit literature. M. Sylvun L4vi has sug¬ 
gested that the later appearance of tbe complete Vinaya in 
Chinese is due to the late compilation of the Sanskrit original’. 
It seeroe to me that other explanations are possible. The early 
trausJatora were clearly shy of extensive works and until there 
was a considerable body of Chinese monks, to what public would 
these theological Hhrariee appeal? Still, if any indication were 
forthcoming from India or Central Asia that the Sanskrit 
Agamas were arranged or rearranged iu the early centuries of 
our era, the lata date of the Chinese translations would certainly 
support it. But 1 am inclined to think that the Nik&yas were 
cewntten in Sanskrit about the beginning of our era, when it was 
felt that works claiming a certain position ought to be composed 
in what had become the general literary language of India’. 

thft lBtradu«tion (<r BMddhkgbOM'i Stmuta-pasidiki or eomuiraUry on tbe Vioejft. 
See Tkkekujo io Id^ p. 415. NM)iio*a raetonUon of tiio title •• Sndeciene 

•ppean to be iocomot. 

* Bee Spiffraphia Indicth tqJ. n. p. 98. 

* In eopport of Uui it mey be atenUesed that Fe-Hsieo eeye tbet et tiie time of 
hii Tint 10 lodle tbe Vineye of iht Serrf^Uv&dlBi wm imeerved orally ead not 
ronatiUed to wntlnx. 

* The idee thet ea imporUat book ought to be In Seiukrit or deeerree to he 
tuned into Seoikhi is not deed In Indie. ^ Orienoo, J.H.A .S, 1S18, p. 183. vho 
in dlKueang e Seukrit Tareton of the lUaiyen* of TuU Dae meatlone that tciaa* 
UUoAe of venecakr works into Bnnekrit an not uncommon. 

CHINA 

299 

XLIV] 

Perhaps those who wrote Uiem m Sanakrit were bardJy oon* 
ecious of making a translation in our sense, but simply wished 
to publish them m the beet literary form. 

It seems probable that the Hinayazuat portion of the Chinese 
Tripitaka is in the main a translation of the Canon of the Sar^ 
TaatiT&dins which must have consisted of: 

(1) Four Agamas or Nik&yas only, for the Bhammapada 
is placed outside the Satta Pitaka. 

(2) A voluminous Vlnaya covering the same groond as the 
Fall recension but more copious in legend and anecdote. 

(3) An Abhidharma entirely different from the P^ works 
beahng this name. 

It might seom to follow from this that the whole Pall 
Abhidharma and some important works suCh as the Thera- 
Tber!g&th& were unknown to the Hmayanists of Central Asia 
and Northern India in the early centurise of our era. But canUon 
is necessary in drawing such inferences, for until recently it 
might have been said that the Sutta Nip&Ca also was unknown, 
whereas fragments of it in a Sanskrit version have now been 
discovered in Eastern Turkeatan^. The Chinese editors draw 
a clear distinorion between Hbiayanist and Mcdiayanist scrip' 
tures. They exclude from the Utter works analogous to the 
Pali Nik&yas and Vinaya, and ^so the Abhidbanoa of the 
Sarv&stiv&dins. But the Ubours of Hsiian Ghoang and I-Cbing 
show that this docs not imply the rejection of all these worlu 
by Mabayanists. 

5 

Buddhist literary activity bse an interesting side aspect, 
namely the expedients used to transliterate Indian words, which 

' J.JLA.8. ISIS, p. 709. Abo, tli« dividon isCo St« NikiTu ii U34i€a& Sm 
B bhler in Bptg. /nitco, a. p. 98. AnMiki toy* (TrOM. A, 8, JapOA, 1908, p. 9] Uul 
Nsaiio, No. 714. PSo Sblh b tho lUTuMokMa, vKieh eoald sot bove bees gaeoiod 
froeo Nuijic^o oofeiy. PorUono of the vorSo oeaipoKBg the (Uth Nikiya {e.^, tbo 
SutU NipaU) ocoQr in tko Chiowa TniMUko in tho other Nikayaa For cBeotione 
of tb» fifth Nikaya in duneoe, too J.A. 191 A, D. pp. 82-33, vli«n it b said be 
«aDad Taa.Taaog. Thb b abo fiho deolsnatioa of last aectioa of the THpiUka, 
Nanjio,Hoa 1321 to 1S62, aod ae this eocUon eentaiiu tho Dhansapada. ituightba 
eoppooe<i to bo an oitomoMly diitrodod Tortioa 6i tho J»»htjdraka tTilc&ya. Bat 
thii can bardly be the eaie, for thie Tea-Teaas a piaoed m if it vu cooddend aa a 
fourth Piiaka rather (baa ae a fifth NikSya. 

20 

n. BL 

300 

BVDDHI8M 0UT8WS INDIA 

[CE. 

ftlmost provided the Chinese with an alphabet. To acme oztent 
Indian namee> particularly proper names possessing an obvious 
meaning, are translated. Thus Aaoka becomes Wu^yu, without 
sorrow: A^aghosha, Maiming or horse*voice, and Udyina 
simply Yhan or paik^. But many proper names did not lend 
themselves to such renderings and it was a delicate business 
to translate theological terma lihe Nirv&^ and 8anAdbi. The 
Buddhists did not perhaps invent the idea of using the Chinese 
characters so s« to spell with modemte preoiaion* but they had 
greater need of this procedure than other writers and they used 
it extensively^ and with such vanety of detail that though they 
invented some fifteen (Afferent syllabaries, none of them ob* 
tained general acceptance and Julien* enumerates SOOO Chinese 
characters used to represent the sounds indicated by 47 
Indian letters. Still, they gave currency^ to the system hoown 
as fan’Ch'Hh which lend^ a syllable phoneUcally by two 
characters, the firiAl of the first and the initial of the second not 
being pronounced. Thus, in order to indicate the sound Chuug, 
a Chinese dictionary will use the two characters tku yunp, which 
are to be read together as Ch ung. 

The tranecripdons of Indian words vary in exactitude and 
the later are naturally better. Hsiian Chu^g was a notable 
reformer and probably after bis time Indian wo^ were rendered 
in Chinese oharaoterB as accurately as Chinese words are now 
transcribed in Latin letters. It is true that modem pronuncia¬ 
tion makes such renderings as Fo seem a strange distortion of 
the originsJ. But it is an abbreviation of Fo*t'o and these 
syllables were probably once pronounced something like Vut- 
tba*. Similarly Win-shu'shih-li^ seems a parody of ManjuM. 

* 8e» W«t4«n, m (Sc CUiwm pp, 36, 01, ft&d, for th« wbofe 

•ut)»ot of tnoMriptioD, 6U&1<1 m Juliea, MOhod^ pov diAiJJftr el Cmtwenrc U» 
MOW SoiuorU* qui t4 reitcantrml done Ug Uvret cAinoie. 

* Eotu«84B«kri6soBpo«lticpQi voroMOwtusMbuKrUioUtBChiiiMeobaraeUn. 

B«« Kna FuTms, Sudd. xt. ud SviiJAM TetU/romJ^o*, 

ra. pp. 

« pp. S3-33S. 

* 6m ifU^ a/ia (be PrUm to K'eng Ha'i hloiioBuy. Tbe /on^i'iek 

U oMd in the ir«Q ki»owii dictioner; cftIM TU Ptea compoeed t43 a.d. 

* ETvon ia modem CanteiMce Fo ia pronouoced m Fsh 

XLIV] 

CBINA 

301 

But tbd evidence of modem dialects shows that the hnt two 
syllables may have been pronouneed aa Man*]u, The pupil was 
probably taught to eUminate the obscure vowel of and 
It was taken as the nearest equivalent of n, just aa European 
authora whte ehik and tzS without protending that they are 
more than conventional signs for Cbiuese sounds unknown to 
our langurs. It was certainly possible to transcribe not only 
names but Sanskrit prayers and formula in Chinese charaoters, 
and though many writers sneer at the gibberish chaunted by 
Buddhist priests yet I doubt if ecclesisstical pronunciation, 
which has ebang^ with that of the spoken language, is further 
removed from its original than the Larin of Oxford from the 
speech of Augustus. 

Sanskrit learning Nourished in China for a considenble 
period. In the time of the T'ang, the clergy numbered many 
serious students of Indian Uteratuie and the glossaries included 
in the Tripitaka show that they studied the orig^al texts. Under 
the Snng dynasty (a.d. 1161) was compiled another diorionary 
of reli g ioug terms* and the atudy of Sanskrit was encoursged 
under the Than. But the ecclesiasUcs of the hfing produced no 
new translarions apparently abandoned the study of the 
original texts which was no longer kept alive by the arrival of 
learned men from India. It has been stated that Sanskrit 
manuscripts aio still preserved in Chinese monasteries, but no 
deriuls respecring such works are known to me. The statement 
is not improbable in itselP aa is shown by the Library which 
Stein discovered at Ton-huang and by the J^aneae palm-leaf 
manuscripts which came originally fmm China. A few copies 
of Sanskrit shtras printed in China in the Lanja variety of the 
Uevanigari alphabet have been brought to Europe’. Max Muller 
published a facrimile of part of the Tajraecbedik& obtained at 
Poking and printed in Sanskrit from wooden blocks. The place 
of production is unknown, bat the characters are ^ilar to 
those used for printing Sanskrit in Tibet, aa may be seen from 

> Noniics CSV No. 1040. 

* repckt* itMlL I havo «e«n a*ay BOden Buthmm and SicKaJoM 
>fSS. io CliiiKse mOBMtork*. 

* Jofcm, ed. U&a Uultet in AntcioCa Oronintia, ktyvt 
Bcn<4. 1 . n And m. for tbo Lac)a printed text oao tbo loAt ftflunile in i, oleo m. 
p. 84 ond BiU. Bndd. xrv (Koenei Im PaiM), pp. vl, tU. Another oop 7 ot ibit 
Lenje printed text woe bought in Kfoto, )930> 

302 BVPDB23M OUTSIDS INDIA [ oh . xltv 

another facaimile (No. 3) in the eomo work, Placards and 
pamphlets contain^ short inTOcatloas in Sanskrit and Tibetan 
are common in Chmese monasteries, partioularly where there is 
any Lamaistic influence, but they do not imply that the monks 
who nse them hm any literary acquaintance with those 
languages. 

CHAPTER XLV 

CHINA 

Schools^ o? Gasmss Bitpveisu 

Thb Schools (T^uiig) of Chineae Buddhism an an intrioafo 
subject of little practical importance, for observers agree thnt 
at the present day all salient Hjgerences of doctrine and practice 
have been obliterated, altbongb the older monasteries may 
present variations in details and honour their own line ^ 
teachers. A particular Bodhiaattva may be singled out for 
reverence in one locally or some religious observance may be 
specially enjoined, bot there is lit^ aggressiveness or self 
assertion amor^ the sects, even if they are cooscioue of having 
a definite name; they each tolerate the deities, rites and boo^ 
of all and pay attention to as many items as leisure fi-wH inertia 
permit. There is no dear distinction between Mah&y&na and 
IHnay&na. 

The main division is of conrso into TAiYiAjtup on one side and 
all remaining sects on the other. Apart from this we find a 
record of ten schools which deserve notice for various reasons. 
Some, though obscure in modem CSima, have fiourished after 
transportation to Japan: some, such as the T'ien*t'^, are a 
momorial of a brilliant epoch: some represent doctrines which, 
if not now held by separate bodies, at least indicate difEerent 
tendencies, such as magical ceremonies, mystical contemplation, 
or futh in Amit&bha. 

* Sm Baekoftiu), “KeSchutoa das tibjjwwintihea SuddhUmiu'’ 

(io the Beriio, 1911), whioh ocotAioa tbe 

text ud tmuIttiOD oi an Saeay by a modaca Ctieeae Soddblat, Yang Wta Hui. 
Sueh a ranev of QdiMae aeeU £iod the ocatouporary BuddbUt polat oi view haa 
groat value, but 16 doce not teem to ate that Ur Yaag explaine elearly tlie dogaatJa 
tenete of each oact, tho obvioaa Iblarteca Wng that eDah (eiMta are of Utile 
pracUoal importa&ee Chiseee nonaatariee oHea aeom le eombiae aeveral eeboda 
Thus the lYQ'Pii'Sail awnaatary oear Pekug prefeaeea to belong both to the Lin- 
GU aod Pure Land eoboole tad ita leaefaete expouad the DiaBMid*OQlter, Lobia 

8 lion*LSag«Cbiiig. 6o la '**«^^* See Ahyi Davids m artlala Seote 
Boddhist, B.R.B. Hechinaan gfree a Hat of aolborftiae. Bdldns, Ctmeee RaiAitm 
(ehape. vn and vm), aiay ettU be oonsnltod, thoegh the aecooBt la fas from clear. 

304 

BVDDEISM OVTSIDE INDIA 

[OH. 

Tbe Qxote important scboola were comparatively late, for 
they date from the sixth and seventh centuries. For two or 
three hundred years the Buddhists of China were a colony of 
strangers, mainly occnpied in making translations. By the 
fifth century the extent end divetmty of Indian literature be¬ 
came apparent and Fa'Hslen vent to India to ascertain which 
was most correct Yinaya and to obtain copies of it. Theology 
was now sufficiently dereloped to give rise to two schools both 
Indian in origin and merely transported to China, known as 
Cb'4ng*siuh‘tsaog and Sandun-isvmg*. 

The first is considered as Hinayanist and e^^uivalent to the 
Sautrdntikas*. In the seventh century it passed over to Japan 
vbeie it is known as Ji'jitsa*shu, but neither there nor in 
had it much importance. The 8an-lun-tsung recognizes as three 
authorities (from which it takes its name) the Mhdhyamika- 
4Astra and Dv&daaaziik&ya4&stra of N&g&rjuna with the 
^ata4&6tra of his pupil Deva. It is amply the school of these 
two doctors and represents the extreme of Mahayaniam. It had 
some importance in Japan, where it wae called San'Bon* 
Shu. 

The arrival of Bodhidharma at Canton in 620 (or 626) was 
a great event for the histoiy of Buddhist dogma, ^though his 
special doctrines did not become popular until much later. He 
introduced the contemplative school and also the iostitQtion of 
the Patriarchate, which for a time had some importance. He 
wrote no books himself, hut taught that true knowledge is 
gained in meditation by intuition* and communicated by 
transference of thought. The best account of his teaching is 
contained in the Chinese treatise which reports the sermon 
preached by him before the Emperor Wu-Ti in 620*. The chief 
thesis of this discourse is that the only tarue reality is the Buddha 

* It bued itaeii od th6 3»iyMid(lhiS&8tn of Hwlnmco, Nwiiio, Cak 
iS7«. 

* Thia moditatioD bowB?er ia of a apocia! sort. Tl>» ais PSrainitia an, D&u, 

SUa, Kahaati. VStja, ^jioa aad Tha maditation of BodUdliama la ooi 

the DhTtzia of Uua Hat, but mc^Mtiop qa PrajfU, the hi^bwt of the PStanuUa. 
Sea HackfflazLo'a Cbtnaaa Wxt, p. 249. 

* Ta-iDo*haQa*aai-luekaiial7sad by Witfer io Ua Hi4toirt du Creryaua* nUfiettna 
m pp. 5S0 S. I oould anah fot moto infonaaUoo about tbii vork, but haao 
not beau abk to flnd the ori^aat 

XLV] 

CBIIfA 

30 $ 

nsture^ in the he&rt of eyery man. Prayer, ascetioUm and good 
works are yain. All that man need do is to turn his gaze inward 
and see the Buddha in bis own heart. This Tision, which pyee 
light and deliverance, comes in a moment. It is a simple, natural 
act like ewalbwing or dreaming which carmot be taught or 
learnt, for it is not something imparted but an expenence of 
the soul, and teaching can only prepare the way for it. Some 
are impeded by their karma and are physically incapable of 
the vi^n, whaterer their merits or piety may be, but for those 
to whom it comes it is inevitable and conrincing. 

We have only to substitute dtm< 2 n for Buddha or Bcddha 
nature to see how closely this teaching resembles cert^n 
passages in the Upanishads, and the resemblance is particularly 
strong in aacb statements as that the Buddha nature reveab 
itself in dreams, or that it is so great that it embraces the 
universe and so small that riie point of a needle cannot prick 
it. The doctrine of M&yi is clearly indicated, even if the word 
was not used in the ordinal, for it is expressly said that all 
phenomena are unreal. Thus the teaching of Bodhidharma is 
an antidpation of Sankara’s monism, but it is fonnulatad in 
consistently Buddhist language and is in harmony with the 
views of the M&dhyamika school and of the Biamond-catter. 
This Chinese sermon conhrms other evidence which indicates 
that the ideas of the Advaita philosophy, though Brahmanic 
in their origin and severely condemned by Gotama himself, 
were elaborated in Buddhist oirclea before they were approved 
by orthodox Hindus. 

Bodhidharma*s teaching was Indian but it harmonized 
marvellously wi^ Taoism and Chinees BuddJiists studied 
Taoist books*. A emreni of Chinese thought which was old 
and strong, if not the main stream, bade man abstain from 
action and look for peace and light within. It was, 1 think, the 
junction of th is native tributary with tho river of mflowing 
Buddhism which gave the Contemplative School its importance. 
It lost that Importance because it abandoned its special doctrines 

' Also celled Fs.itin or ObsmstSye u Uis diseoune. BodUdbsRos uli ibsb 
be pTMched tb» Mdl oflh* \mrt (bsiuyu). Thu prabsbl; corrwpoDds to socoo Ssaikrit 
expreeMoo. boi I hSTC act iMod Uis l«diu squivsloot. 

• ID hii Mmoift ofBMine^t iionk*. OMnUons thm ;%riA» m hiTiog 

studied Ch* voAm of Cbosog.tefi snd his om strh shows that bo wm well.rswi in 

ftothor. 

906 

SVDDEJSM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

and adopted the usages of other eohoole. When Taoism flourished 
under the Sung Emperors it was also flouriahiug and influenced 
art as well as thought, but it probably decayed under the Yiian 
dynasty which farouied religion of a difleient stamp. It is 
remarkable that Bodhidharma appears to be unknown to both 
Indian and Tibetan^ writers but his teaching has imparted a 
speoial tone and character to a section (though not the whole) 
of Far Eastern Buddhism. It is called in C^ese Tsung>mda 
or Ch'an-tsung, but this word Ch'an^ is perhaps better known 
to Europe in its Japanese form Zen. 

Bodhidharma is also accounted the twenty-eighth Patriarch, 
a title which represents the Chinese Tan Shih^ rather than any 
Indian designation, tor though in Pali litoratuie we hear of the 
succession of teachers*, it is not clear that any of them enjoyed 
a style or positiou such as is implied in the word Patriarch. 
Hindus have always attaohod importance to spiritual lineage 
and every school has a list of teachers who have transmitted 
its special bre, but the sense of hierarchy is so weak that it ia 
misleading to describe these personages aa Popes, Patriarchs or 
Bishops, and apart from tbs personal respect which the talents 
of individuals may have won, it does not appear that there was 
any succession of teachers who could be correctly termed heads 
of the Church. Even in China such a title is of dubious accuracy 
for whatever position Bodhidharma and his successors may 
have claimed for themselves, they were not generally accepted 
as being more than the heads of a school and other schools also 
gave their chief teachers the title of Tau-shih. From time to 
time the Emperor appointed overseers of religion with the title 
of Kuo-shih*, instructor of the nation, but these were oflicials 
appointed by the Qown.not prelates consecrated by the CJhurch. 

Twenty^ht Patriarchs are supposed to have flourished 
between the death of the Buddha and the arrival of Bodhidharma 
in China. The Chinese hats* do not in the earlier part agiee with 

' B« is act tiMatiwcd bj Tirsa&tbft. 

■ S- • ffigiB. 

• Accn^ftpcfscnpAri. There is * Ibt of soeh t«sch«rc in tUliavtijisa, t. S6 ff., 
DipSTsqiss, rr. 27 S. sod v. SS. 

‘He®. 

* Tbs seoemioo of Patf^srehs Is tbo subject of MreriU works compriKd ta tbs 

^ ^ i^* * <* TrilHt»kw. Of tboM Ui» {Naojio, 1940) is the 

CHIi^A 

307 

XLV] 

the Su^haleee aocotuito of the apostolic eoccossion and contain 
few emin ent names with the exception of Airaghoeha, Nlglir* 
juna, Dera and Vaenbaodhn. 

According to most schools there were only twenty-four 
Patriarchs. These are said to have been foretold by the Buddha 
and twenty-four is a osnal number in such series^. The twenty- 
fourth Patriarch Simha Bhikehu or SlmhUaputrs went to 
Kashmir and suffered martyrdom there at the hands of Mihira- 
kula* without appoin^ng a successor. But the school of Bodhi* 
dharma continues the series, reckoning him as the twenty- 
eighth, and the first of the Chinese Patriarchs. Now ance the 
three Patriarchs between the martyr and Bodhidhanna are all 
desoribed as living in southern India, whsieas suob travellers 
aa Fa-Hsien obviously thought that the true doctrine was to be 
found in northern Ibdia, and sinoe Bodhidharma left India 
altogether, it is probable that the later Patriarchs represent the 

moti imporust, bMSOM ii pro fa wM U> b« baoaktAd (4.9. 472} from tn ladJan 
vork. which, boverer, if agt in th» TUi«tao and ia pob Ic^wq is SAOikilt. 
Tba ChiaewUst, li4v« it, u prpUUy Mb a traatUtion from Kh« Saoakxit, bat 
• oonpS^UcA mad* la Ch* Axth oMtur; which, how««er. acqaind coondsmbta 
aobboribf. See Uaep^ la M4la*gts d'/ndtnime; 67!^^ 121^140, Mid 

1011, pp. 344-S46. Other works em the Fo*Ua*t'oo^4hi ()fe9|io. ISSI}, 
of Chib P'ea ( 0 . 1270}, beloiiguig to the T'ien-b'ai mbool. ead the Chins tS.oh'au). 
toog'lu together with the T»uag<iii«a.t'Qas*7eo hid-olu (Neigjo, 1524.1526} both 
halongiogtotbeaobMlofBodhidbermc Sm ^fo Neailo, 1SS8,169, TheoooiBieft 
Iiet of PeUierchsu u foUowf: 1 . UehikUjepe; 2 . Aaeadei i. SsBewdse or 
keviMi 4 UpegapUi 6. lUiribeke; 6. Hiecbeke. Here ^ aeiDe of Viramifro k 
laMitod b; eoDW hub emlttod hr others; T. BoddhUMidl; a Soddhemibrs.; a PMwe i 
10. PtnyerMM; 11. Aireghoebe: 12. EwptiD^i 13. NlgiTjaui 14. Derw (Kec*. 
dewe); 16. Rihokto; IS Seo^eAMidl; 17. SkDgliwTaheet IS, Kauinto: 10. Joyeto; 
20. VwQ^dbu; 21. KeAorWi 22. Hakkiu or Pedmeretn*; 2S. Stmbe Bhlkahc; 
24. Bkiieiito; 2& Putnoeuto or PoByemitre; 26. ProjoAiMs; 27 (or 25, if Yesii' 
mitre k itekoaeC) Bodbidberma. Keoy oi Uwee aease en odd ere oaly 00a 
leetorel reetoretioM aiede tiein the Owiscriptiaa, for vhieb mo Neojio, 1640. 

Other Iktf oi Petrierehe rtiy from ihet given above, pertly beeeuM they repieseab 
the treditioiu of other eobook. It k aot itruige, for iosteBoe, if the Ser^tivSdias 
did 00 b recognise Kigirituu es e Petrkrob. Two of their Ikte have been preearrod 
by 85og<ya (Hanjio, 1476) wbo wrote ebootSSO. 8oeie aotee ea the Patriarobe and 
topfOduetiOM of ChiAesspieUif«arepieMQtu3gthei&villbefoudfaPor4.pp.244ff. 
It k extremely oorioue tM Aiw^boebe k represented u a women. 

* lb k ftnmd, tor iiufieace, ia the bets of tbs Js4a Tirthankems and in some 
acfloonts of the Boddbea and of the Avetins of Vlshaa 

* Ss« Watten, 74oe Ckvong, p. 200. Bat the dake eflet eome difficofty, for 
Uibirekule, the c^breted Has obJeftaa, k onaUy stippoeed to Iutb iwigiied abcot 
610-S40 a.n. TiraaSthe (Sohitdner, p. 06) Vy of a oertyr o al M UdJikabuddhL 
See, too, it. p. 306. 

SOS BUDDBISM OUTSIDS INDIA [oh. 

epiiitoAl genealogy of eomd school which was Dot tho Church 
as estabU^sd at NilandS^. 

It wIU be coDvenieDt to summarize briefly here the history 
of Bodhidharma’s school. Piudkig that bis dootiines were not 
altogether acceptable to the Emperor Wu-It (who did not relish 
being told that his pious exertaona were Tain works of no value) 
be retired to Lo-jing and before his death designated as his 
successor Hui>k'o. It is related of Eui b'o that when he first 
applied for mstruetion be could not attract Bodhidbarms's 
attention and therefore stood before tho sage^s door during a 
whole winter night ontU the snow reached his knees. Bodhi- 
dharma Indicate that be did not think this test of endurance 
remarkable. Hui-k'o then took a knife, cut off his own arm and 
presented it to the teacher who accepted him as a pupil and 
ultimately gave him the insignia of the Patriarchate—a robe 
and bowl. He taught for thirty-four years and is said to hove 
mixed freoly with the lowest and most debauched reprobates. 
His successors were Sing-te'an, Tao-hsin, Hung-j^n, and Hui- 
nSng^ who died in 713 and declined to nominate a successor, 
saying that the doctrine was well established. The bowl of 
B^hidh&rma was buried with him. Thus the Patriarch was not 
willing to be an Erasrian bead of the Church and thought the 
Church could get on without him. The object of the Patriarchate 
was simply to insuie the correct transmission from teacher to 
scholar of certain doctrines, and this precaution was especially 
necessary in sects which rejected scriptural authority and relied 
on personal instruction. Sc soon as there were several competent 
teachers handing on the tradition such a safeguard was felt to 
be unnecessary. 

That this feeling was just is shown by the fact that the 
school of Bodbidharma is still practicaUy one in teaching. Bat 
its small regard for scripture and insistence on oral instruction 
caxiscd the principal monasteries to regard themselves as centres 
with an apostoUc succession of their own and to form divirions 
which were geographical rather than doctrinal. They are often 

* It ii cl«4c Ui«i Ui» tcliool of Tdsbld WM to tome «rt«nt» ri74l pf NUandi. 

' for apoilmt of Hui-utog mo Eokk*, No. d67. Tbe oonie* of Bodfudbamo'* 
ne««Mon we la Cluiwe obwertwe 

CSINA 

30» 

XL7} 

called school (tsnng)* but the term is sot coireot, if it implies 
that t^e difference is similsr to that wliich separates the 
Ch'an-tsung and LU-tauog or schools of contempIaUon and of 
discipline. Eren in the lifetime of Hui n^ ^ere seems to 
have been a divi^on, for be is sometimes called tbe Patriarch 
of the South, Shdn-Hsiu^ being recognised aa Patriarch of the 
North. But ail subsequent diTiaions of the Ch'an-isung trace 
their lineage to Hui-ning. Two of his disciples founded two 
schools called Nan Yileb and Ch'ing Yuan^ and between the 
eighth and tenth centuries these produced reepectirely two and 
three subdivisions, known together as Wu-teung or five schools. 
They take their names from the places where their founders 
dwelt and are the schools of Wei^Yang, Lin-Chi, Ta'aO'Tung, 
Yun-MSn and Fa-Yen^. This is the chionologioa] order, but the 
most important school is the Iha-Chi, foimded hy I-HsUan*, 
who remded on the banks of a river* in Chih-U aiui died in 867. 
It is not easy to discriminate the special doctrines* of the 
Lln-Cbi for it became the dominant form of tbe school to such 
an eitent that other variants are little more than names. But 
it appeora to have inusted on the transmission of spiritual tmthe 
not c^y by oral instruction but by a species of telepathy between 
teacher and pupil culminating in sudden illumination. At the 
present day the majority of Chinese monasteries profess to 
belong to the Ch'an-tsung and it baa encroached on other aohoola. 
Thus it is DOW accepted on the aacted island of P'nto which 
originally followed the Lii*tsung. 

Although the CSi'an school did not value the study of 
scripture aa part of the spiritual life, yet it by no means neglected 
letters and can point to a goodly array of ecclesiastical authors, 

, ^ ^ Hoob UogEftphjoftl iafomMioo nspwtins tUa ud other 

sebooU «iiU be lounC ia !Doi4. v^ wi «ad vm, Sui filiere la little to mord io the 
va; ol eveiiU or literacy and dootainel aovemecite. 

* iS#. W-fl^. 

* lin-Chi meeae eomiag (o the ford, le Uus an aUamon to the Paii azpnailoo 
SoiSpacnot Tbe oame appeen in Japeaeae ea lUnsai. UMt educeted Chiaeee 
BtookewheaMbedae to their dooMiteaay they beloog to tbe lia.Cbl. 

* They an geomUy called the three myateriee {EMao} and the three uaportaot 
poiote (?ao), bat I hen not beea able to obtain any clear exjdaDatloa ot *bat they 
meao. See Edblaa, Ohra.tfe Ditdiiifm, p. IH and Haoksaan, lx. p. 26C. 

SIO 

BVDDEISM 0VT31EE INDIA 

[oh. 

extending down to modern times^. More than twenty of their 
treatises hare been admitted into tlie Tripitaka. Several of 
these are historical and dlecnse the successioii of Patriarchs and 
abbots, bnt the most characteristic prodnetions of the sect are 
collections of aphorisms, uscaJIy compiled by the disciples of 
a teacher who himself committed nothing to writing^ 

In opposition to the Contemplative School or Tsung-mdn, 
all the others are sometimes classed together ChiaO'mln. 
This dichotomy perhaps does no znoie than justice to the im¬ 
portance of BcdMdhanna^s school, but is hanlly scientific, for, 
whatever may be tho numerical proportion, the other schools 
differ from one another as much as they differ from it. They 
all agree in recognizing the authority not only of a founder but 
of a special sacred book. We may treat first of one which, like 
the Tsung-xn^n, belongs specially to the Buddhism of the Far 
East and is both an offshoot of the Teung-mto and a protest 
against it—there being nothing inecmpatable in this double 
lelaticmsbip. This is the T'ien-t'ai* school which takes its name 
from a celebrated monastery in the province of Chd-kiang. Tho 
founder of this establishment and of the sect was called Cbih-K'ai 
or Chib-P and followed originally BodhIdharma*s teaching, but 
ultimately rejected the view that contemplarion is all-Bufficlent, 
while still claiming to derive his doctrine from N&gkrjona. He 
hod a special veneration for the XA>tus Sfitra and paid attention 
to ceremonial. He held that although the Biiddha*mind is 
present in all living beings, yet they do not of themselves come 
to the knowledge and use of it, so that instruction is necessary 
to remove error and establish true Ideas. The phrase Chih-kuan* 
is almost the motto of the school: it is a translation of the two 
words Samatha and Vlpassani, taken to mean calm and iosight. 

‘ Wl«ser. fowWtuM CAhm*, p. 108 , sum thAt 280 week* to tUa 

Met vere pebJubsd uodar the HMoha dy&Mty. 

* 8m Kaojio, Cat. 1&27,1012. 

* Teedai in JapaiiMe. It it e^led la duoa Pa'bQa. 

* AIm often apekea of aaCbib-cU>t4>sluh;^^*^;^^^. Offlciallj 
be ii ofUa etyled tbo fourtb Patriarob of the acbool. 8m p. MS. 

' ^ P'di Boddbism abo, aapecially in later worlo. Sasatba and 

VipaMaol may le takeo aa a oompendftxin of the bibber li& aatbey an rwpMUrely 
tbe rMdU of ibe two m4 ol nli^oue exorcuM Adbioitba and AdiiipAbSi. 
{8m Ang. Nik. m. 88.) 

CBlIiA 

312 

XLV] 

The T'ien-T'ai is distinguished by its many-sided and 
almost encyclopffidic character. Chih-I did not Kke the exclusive¬ 
ness of the Contemplative SohooL He approved impartially 
of ecstasy, literatuze, cezemonial and discipline: he wished to 
find a place for everything and a point of view from which every 
doctrine might be admitted to have some value. Thus he divided 
the teaching of the Buddha Into five periods, regarded as 
progressive not contradictory, and expounded respectively in 
(o) the Hua*yen Sutra; (6) the Hinayino Sfitraa; (c) the I4ng* 
yen-ching; (i) the PrajDi*parsmit&; (t) the Lotus Sfitra which 
is the crown, quintessence and plenitude of all Buddhism. He 
also divided religion into eight parts*, sometimes counted as 
four, the latter half of the list being the more important. The 
ixames are collection, progress, distinction and completion. 
These terms indicate different ways of looking at religion, all 
legitimate bat not equally comprehensive or in perspective. 
By collec^on is meant the Hinay^ia, the name being apparently 
due to the variously catalogued phenomena which occupy the 
disciple in the early stages of bis progress: the scriptures, divisions 
of the universe, states of the human minds a nd so on. Progress 
(T'ung, which might also be rendered as transition or communi¬ 
cation) is applicable to the Hina and Mabhyan& alike and regards 
tho religious life as a series of stages rising from the state of an 
unconverted man to that of a Buddha, Picb, or distinction, is 
applicable only to the Mab&yan& and means the special excel¬ 
lences of a Boclhisattva. completeness or pbnitude, is 

the doctrine of the Lotus which embraces all aspects of re ligi on. 
In a similar spirit of synthesis and conciliation Cb ih-T osea 
N&girjuna’a view that truth is not of one kind, From the stand¬ 
point of absolute truth all phenomena are void or unreal; on 
the other hand they are indubitably real for practical purposes. 
Mote just is the middle view which builds up tho religious 
character. It sees that all phenomena both exist and do not 
exist and that thought cannot content Itself with the hypothesis 
either of their real existence or of the void. Chih-l*s teaching as 

•InCWe [g|. Tun, 

Chiso, Pt*nl. Pu'tuii:. Tans, Ymil 8e* ITutjio, 15S8, Mid totyrry 

dlffmnt «xi)UaAUMii of tbe«e cWun wordi. £dXiiu, CUisk ihiddSim, p. 152, 

and lUcbard*! Nta TfMamtnl ^ titgka p. 4l. UMMQ«Ounel in J.A. 

lSlS,Lp. SUS. 

312 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE IlfDlA 

[CFT, 

to the natuic of the Buddha is almoac theU^c. It regarda the 
fundamental (pSn) Buddhahood &e not merely the highest reality 
bat aa constant activity exerting itself for the good of all 
beings. Distinguished from ti^ fundamental Buddhahood is 
the derivative Buddhahood or trace (ohi) left by tiie Buddha 
among men to educate them. There has been oonsiderable 
discussion in the school aa to the relative excellence of the j>H 
and the 

The TioH'Tii school is important, not merely for its 
doctrines, but os having produced a great monastic establish¬ 
ment and an illustnous line of writers. In spite of the orders 
of the Emperor who wished to retain him at Kanldng, Chih-1 
retired to the highlands of CbS'Kiaug and twelve monasteries 
still mark various spots where he is said to have resided. He 
had some repute as an author, but more as a preacher. His 
words were recorded by his disciple Kuan-Ting^ and in ibis 
way have bees preserved two expositioss oi the Lotus and a 
treatise on his favourite doctrine of Chih-Kuan which together 
are termed the San-ta-pu, or Three Great Books. Similar 
spoken expoBitions of other sdtras are also preeorved. Some 
smaller treatises on his chief doctrines seem to be works of bis 
own pen*. A century later Chan-Jan*, who is reckoned the 
ninth Patriarch of the T'ien*t'^ school, composed commentaries 
on tho Three Great Books os well os some short original works. 
During tho troubled period of the Five Dynasties, the Tien-tiM 
monasteries suffered severely and the sacred books were almost 
lost. But the school bad a branch in Korea and a Korean priest 
called Ti'Kuan^ lO'established it in China. It continued to 
contribute literature to the Tripitaka until 1270 but after the 
tenth century its works, though numerous, lose their distinctive 
character and are largely concerned with m^cal formuke and 
the worship of Amida. 

Tho latter is tho special teaching of the Pure Land school, 
also known as tho Lotus school, or the Short Out^. It is indeed 

^ * STH* Tb*b(K>b8»r«N«niio.NM.lSS4,1030,1998. 

' Aaong them is the com{)on8iiUD fur bc^imera celled H<U«-ebih>kuen, 
(Nenjio, 1940), putly trt4ieleied la Beel^e Cueua, pp. 361 ff. 

m±'^ 

TKj 

m, 

CHINA 

313 

XLv] 

a short cut to salvation, strilung oacaremouiously across all 
systems, for it teaches that dmple fai^ in AmitAbha (Amida) 
aod invocation of his name can take the place of moral and 
intellectual endeavour. Its popularity is in proportion to its 
facility: Its origin is ancient, its indoeoce vuiiversal, but perhaps 
for this very reikson its existence as a corporation is somewhat 
indistinct. It is also remarkable that though the Chinese 
Tripitaka cont^uns ncunerous works dedicated to the honour of 
AmitAbha, yet they are not described as composed by members 
of the Pore Laud school but appear to be due to authors of all 
schools*. 

The doctrine, if not the school, was known in China before 
186, in which year there died at Lo*yang, a monk of tho Viieh- 
chih called LokAkshi, who translated ^e longer Sukb&vatf' 
vyuha. So far as I know, there is no reason for donbting these 
statements^ The date is important for the history of doctrine, 
since it indicates that the siltra existed In Sanskrit some time 
previously. Another translation by the Parthian An Shih-Kao, 
whose activity falls between 148 and 176 a j). may have been 
earlier and altogether twelve translations were made before 
1000 A.n. of which five are extant*. Several of the earlier 
translators were natives of Central Asia, so it is pormissibb 
to suppoao that the sfitra was esteemed there. The shorter 
SukbAvatt-vyfiba was translated by KumAra}!va (c. 402) and 
later by Hsuan Choang. The AmitAynrdhyftnWtra was trans¬ 
lated by KAlaya^ about 424, These throe books* are the 
prindp^ scriptures of the school and copies of the greater 
SukhAvatf may stiO be fonnd in almost every Chinese monastery, 
whatever principles it professes. 

Hni Yuan^ who lived from 333 to 416 b considered as the 
founder of the school. He was in bis youth an enthusiastic 

I Tha h£i of Mthon in KMgw'i QkUlo(G«, App. m. Oesertboe nan; tM 

boknsui^ to tbe T’ito-t'si, Av»tAm»kA or SliySo* lehooli. but oon» •• b«loa^ 
%o tb« CUng^Ta. 

* For the tothoriUBe, bm Nftiglo, p. SSL 

' N&ojio, p. 10, not*. 

* TtiB7 sro «a tnralBtod In S,B~S. xxix. TK» (wo former «su( in StulaiU 
Tbfl AaitApordhyioB iB kaovn oalj ib tbe ChnwB Osulotion. The; on osltod 
b chb* 

3L4 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

Taoist and after he turned Buddhist is said to have used the 
writings of ChuaDg-t7.u to elncldate his new faith. He founded 
a hrotherhood, and near the monastery where he titled was 
a pond in which lotus flowers grew, hence the brotherhood was 
known as the White Lotos school^. E'er several centuries^ it 
enjoyed general esteem. Pan*ohou, one of its Patriarchs, re¬ 
ceived the title of Kuo^ih about 770 a.n., and Shan-tso, who 
floudshed about 650 and wrote commentaries, was one of its 
principal literary men’. He popularized the doctrine of the Pai- 
tao or White Way, that is, the narrow bridge leading to Paradise 
across which AmiUbha will guide the souk of the faithful. But 
somehow the name of Whits Lotus became connected with 
conspiracy and rebellion until It was dreaded as the title of a 
formidable secret society, and ceased to be applied to the school 
as a whole. The teaching and canonical literature of the Pure 
Land school did not fall into disrepute but since it was admitted 
by other sects to be, if not tbe most excellent way, at least a 
permissible short cut to heaven, it appears in modem times less 
as a separate school than as an aspect of most schools*. The 
ftim pift &nd emotional character of Amidiam, the directness of 
its “Come unto me»‘ appeal so strongly to the poor and un¬ 
educated, that no monastery or temple could afford to neglect it. 

Two important Indian schools were introduced into China 
in the risth and seventh centuries respectively and flourished 
until about 900 a.n. when they began to decay. These ate the 
Cbfl-ahS'tsung and Fa^hsiang-tsung*. The first name is merely 
a Chinese transcription of the Sanskrit Ko'sa and is due to the 
fact that the chief authority of the schoolis the Abhidharmakota- 

i ^ e«H7 )uabor7 of tbo Khoot ii nlatod io & work Lke. 

»bt-k«o*bfien.ch'uao, nid to troa tbs Tan djosstj^. See for so m e sccoitnt 
tbe eerb ver(hi««, Bore, pp. 280 B. uid 467 S. Tbelt biogrspfajss conteSc men; 
viaoai sod Dirsclsfc 

* Appareirtly sil««st natil IMS. 8 m De Oroot, £«tsnoMm. p. 168. The doted 
InMipUoM io Ibe grou«M of Lung*itito mdioete tbet tbe cult of AnitibbAfloaruhed 
MpeeUlb 647 to 716. See CbevaaoM, Uiuuj^ArclH Tome i;dsai:iiae pertie, 
p. 646. 

* 

* See for hMtaaee fihe treet celled Heben.F&.F'a truileted bj 

KclwTd under the UUe oi A Ovuit to BuAdAeAood, pp. 97 S. 

CHINA 

XLV] 

Z\5 

^tra of Vasul^ftmliiu^. This voik ezpovmds the doctrine of the 
Sarv&stivhdlne, hut in a liberal spirit and without iguoriog othet 
Tiews. Though the CShu-sh^-tencg represented the best spholsetdc 
tradition of India more adequately than any other Chinese aect» 
yet it was too technical and arid to become popular and both 
in China and Japan (where it is known as Kusba-shu) it was a 
system of scholastic philosophy rather than a form of reli^on. 
jri nhinft it did not last many centuries. 

The Fa-Hsiang school is timilar inasitiucb as It represented 
Indian scholasticism and remained, tiiougb much eeteemed, 
somewhat academic. The name is a taranslation of Dharmalak* 
sbana a nd the school is also known as Tz'u^Sn-tsung^, and also 
as Wei'Shih'bsiang-chiao because its principal text book is the 
Ch'Sng-wei-shih-lun*. This name, equivalent to Vidy&m&tra, or 
Vijna^m&tra, is the title of a work by Hsuan Chuang which 
appears to be a digest oi ten Sanskrit commentarids on a little 
tract of thirty verses ascribed to Yasubandhu. As ultimate 
authorities the school also reoc^nisee the revelations made to 
Asaoga by Uaita^ya* and probably the Mahftyhnaeutr&lank&ra^ 
expresses its views. It claims as its founder ^abhadra the 
teacher of KsUan Chuang, hut the latter was ita real parent. 

Closely allied to it but reckoned as distinct Is the school called 
the Hua*yen-t8ung* because it was based oq the Hua-yen-chlng 
or AvatamsakasQtra. The doctrines of this work and of N&ghr- 
juna may be convenie&tly if not quite correctly oontiasted as 
pantheistic and nihilistic. The real founder and first patriarch 
was Tu-Fa^Shun who died in 640 but the school sometimes bears 
the name of Hsieii'Shou, the posthumoos title of its third 
Patriarch who contributed seven works to the Tripitaka’. It 

> 6«o Wattera, 0» Ffim Chteong, i. f 10, aed abo Takakwu, /ovfiwl of Pttli 
TmSoc. ISOfi, p. Iti. 

« Tbe HUM c«f«n not to the doctrio&i oi tto •Qbo<^, bac to 

XB'aea.t«i-«hih, a titlo siren to Kud obi Ui« di»dplB ot HaQie Cbuug vbo «m 
ono of iu priAcipal teochon «ad taoght 4 mosMterj «UI«d Ts'fi-So. 

* ^ Naojio. cat. K«. 1107 oad ISIS. 

( Soe Wstten. Oh 7Sftii Ckvaitg, t. pp. S6S S. 

* S(L sod ttaasL by fiylvoio l^dri, 1911. 

t Qit otolO wb«n aim «m Fo^uang. Saa Kanjio, Cat. p 4CS, aad Pot4, 4S0. 
Tbo Emprea Wn patroiusad huD. 

axQ. 

21 

316 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

b^&n to wane in the tenth century but has e distinguished 
hteraiy record. 

The Lu'teung or Vinaya scbool* was founded by Tao Haiian 
(696-667). It diners from those already mentioned inaemucb 
as it emphasizes discipline and asceticism as the essential part 
of the reHgiouslifo. Like the T'ien-t'ai this school arose in China. 
It bases itself on Indian anthonties, but it does not appear that 
in thus laying stioas on the Vinaya it imitated any Indian sect, 
although it caught the spirit of the early Hinayina schools. 
The numerous works of the founder indicate a practical tem¬ 
perament inclined not to mys^cism or doctrinal subtlety but 
to biography, literary history and church government. Thus he 
continued the series called Memoirs of Eminent Monks and 
wrote on the family and country of the Buddha. He compiled 
.. catalogue of the Tripitaka, as it was in his time, and collec¬ 
tions of extracts, as well as of documents relating to the con¬ 
troversies between Buddhists and Taoists^ Although he took 
as his chief authority the Dharmagupta Vinaya commonly 
known as the Code in Four Sections, he held, like most Chinese 
Buddhists, that tlicre is a complete and perfect doctrine which 
includes and transcends all the vehicles. But he inmsted, 
probably as a protest against the laxity or extravagance of 
many monasteries, that morality and discipline ate the in¬ 
dispensable foundation of the religious life. He was highly 
esteemed by his contemporaries and long after his death the 
Emperor Mu*tsung (821-6) wrote a poem in his honour. The 
school is still respected and it is said that the monks o£ its 
principal monastery, Fao-hua-sban in Kiaugsu, are stricter 
and more learned than any other. 

The school called Ch^-yen (in Japanese Shin-gon), true 
word, or Mi-ohiao^, secret teaching, equivalent to the Sanskrit 
Mantray&na or Tantray&na, is the latest among the recognized 
divisions of Chinese Buddhism since it first made ite appearance 
in the eighth century. The date, like that of the tran^tion of 
tho Amida scriptures is important, for the school was introduced 

i caJlod Nan Sliao or Southern mounuln eebool Iron s locality 

in Shensi. 

* iSS* 1484. 1471. 

CHINA 

317 

XLV) 

from India and it follows that its tbaorioe and prac^cas were 
openly advocated at this period and probably wore not of repute 
much earlier. It is akin to the Buddhism ci Tibet and may be 
described in its higher aspects as an elaborate and symbolio 
pantheism, which represents the one spirit manifesting himself 
in a aeries of emanations and reflexes. In its popular and un¬ 
fortunately commoner aspect it is simply poly^eUm, fetlohism 
and m^c. In many respects it resembles the Pure Land school. 
Its principal deity (the word is not inaccurate) Is Vairoeana, 
analogous to Amit4bha, and probably like him a Persian sun god 
in origin. It is also a short cut to salvation, for. without denying 
the efficiency of more laborious and ascetic methods, it promises 
to its followers a similar result by means of formuUe and cere¬ 
monies. Like the Pure Xiand school it has become in Chica not 
so much a separate corporarion as an aspect, and often the 
most obvious Sknd popular aspect, d all Buddhist schools. 

It claims Vajmbodhi as its first Patriarch. He was a monk 
of the Brahman caste who arrived in China from southern 
India^ in 719 and died in 730 after translating several Tantras 
and spells. His companion and successor was Amoghavajra of 
whose career sometbu^ has already been said. The fooxtl) 
Patriarch, Hui Kuo, was the instructor of the celebrated Japanese 
monk Kobo Dai^i who established the school in Japan under 
the name of Shingon*. 

The principal scripture of this sect Is the Ta*jih*ohing or 
Butra of the Sun-Buddha^. A distinction is drawn between 
exoteric and esoteric doctrine (the “true word”) and the various 
phases of Buddhist thought are arranged in ten classes. Of 
these the first nine are merely preparatory, but in tho last or 
esoteric phase, the adept becomes a living Buddha and receives 
full intuitive knowledge. In this respect the Tantric school 
resembles tho teaching of Bodhidbarma but not in detail. It 
teaches that Vairoeana is tho whole world, which is divided into 
GarbhadMtu (material) and Vairadh&tu (iudesfructiblo), the 
two together forming Dharmadhittu. The manifestations of 

' Prom Xo.Ui.yt, whicb Moni Co oiefto Um oxtrorn Math of Intia. Z>on give* 
tooM OtiotM ]cgra<]8 ibotit bim, p. dtd. 

* Fcff Ml Apprcclfitive eritintm of (h* oect u known a no 

B*ddUM Art, ebop. :cu 

• KtnjSn, No, fiSO Kot 583,534 *nd 1089 uo *l*o importMt Wxtt ol thli mcC. 

31S 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[OH. 

Vairocana^s body 6o lumself—that la Buddhaa and Bodhisattvas 
^are represented symbolically by diagrams of seTeral ciroleei. 
Bet it would be out of place to dwell farther on the dogmatic 
theology of the school, for I cannot diacorer that it was ever 
of importance in China wbatem may have been ita influence 
in Japan. What appealed only too powerfully to Chinese 
superstition wae the use of spells, charms and magical formuJe 
and the doctrine that sinee the uoiverse is merely idea, thoughts 
and facts are equipollent. This doctrine {which need not be the 
outcome of metaphysics, but underlies the magical practices 
of many savage trib«) produced surprising results when applied 
to funeral ceiomonies, which in China have always formed the 
major part of religion, for it was held that ceremonial can repre¬ 
sent and control the fortunes of the soul, that is to say that if 
a ceremony represents figuratively the rescue of a soul from a 
pool of blood, then the soul whioh is undergoing that punish¬ 
ment will be deUvered. It was not until the latter part of the 
eighth century that such theories and ceiemonias were accepted 
by Chinese Buddhism, but they now form a largo part of it. 

Although in Japan Buddhism continued to produce new 
schools until the thirteenth century, no movement in China 
attained this statns after about 730, and Lamaisrn, though its 
introduction produced considerable changes in the north, is 
not usually reckoned as a Tmmg. But numerous societies and 
brotherhoods arose especially in connection with the Pure Land 
school and are commonly spoken of as sects. They difier from 
the schools mentioned above in having more or less the character 
of secret societies, sometimes merely brotherhoods like the 
Freemasons but sometimes political in their aims. Among those 
•whose tenets are known that whioh has most religion and least 
politics in its composition appears to be the Wu-wei-chiao*, 
founded about 1620 by one Lo-tsu* who claimed to have received 
a revelation contained in five books. It is strictly vegetarian 

w CShte.yea tebooli, ft&d indwd io ClkintM Boddhbm 
e«MrtlJ 7 , DbSfnu (ff* m OUaMe) i$ r*g«rded u Mimio Itw. Boddbu tb* 
yiMiblo upKMWD of Dboma HMue they WeaUfied with it and tb» wbolo 
ptOMi of co«m« otoJbIioq is Rgsrdod u iiunifMti.tioa of Buddlioliood. 

8m Cb» Mooaoe by £dkiai, CA>n«K Budiiim, pp. 271 A. 

XLV] OB IN A 319 

and antiiitualisUc, objecting to nse of us^ee, incense end 
candles in worship. 

There &ie many o^er seoU with a poU^l tioge. The pro* 
clivity of the Chinese to grzilda, corporatiooa and seoiet societi^ 
ie well known and many of these latter have a religious basis. 
All sDcb bodies are under the ban of the GoTcrmneut, for they 
have always heen suspected with more or lees jostdce of favouring 
anti'social or anti'dynastio ideas. But, mingled with snob 
political aspirations, there is often present the desire for co¬ 
operation in leading privately a religious life which, if made 
public, would be hampered by official restzictions. The most 
celebrated of these sects is the White Letoa. Under the Yi i^ 
dynasty it was anti'Mongol, and prepared tiie way for tbs 
advent of the Ming. When the Ming dynasty in its turn 
became decadent, we bear again of the '^ite Lotus coupled 
with rebellion, and siiQilarly after the M^chus had passed their 
meridian, its beautiful but ill-omened name frequently appears. 
It seems clear that it is an ancient and persistent society with 
aome idea of creating a millennium, which becomes active when 
the contra! government is weak and corrupt. Not unlike the 
White Lotus is the secret society commonly known ae the Triad 
but called by its members the Heaven and Earth Association. 
The T'ai-p'ing sect, out of which the celebrated rebellion arose, 
was timilar but its inspiration seems to have come from a 
pervertion of Christiani^. The Tsai-Li sect^ is still prevalent 
in Peking, Tientsin, and the province of Shantung. I should 
exceed the scope of my task if 1 attempted to examine these 
sects in detail^, for their relation to Buddhism is often doubtful. 
Most of them combine with it Taoist and other beliefs and some 
of them expect a MeselEtiL or King of Kighteousness who is 
usually identided mth Maitreya, It is easy to see how at *>11 < 
point hostility to the existing Govomment arises and provokes 
not unnatural resentment^. 

y«ir.aa0i, ISM. ^43. 

* for Mm* koemmt of tbaiB, TIm Triad Sooi«^, White Lotef 

SocUtj, »tc.. ISOO, reprmtod from CAuw fieview, toIs. xxi, xm, and Do OrooC. 
.SeeMmun md refifww pertettUffn in Ch'na, toI, j, pp, L4S-2SS. 

* Xha Rapublio of dm* haa not obaogod much from tba vaj^a of tho Saptie. 

The Pokdng nawspapos of Jnno 17. 1014, coaiain * PretidaoUal Edict that 

" Ibo niYOGtioQ q{ beroHeal raUgiona by lU-diapOMd pencM la aUioUy p^hlbited 
by lav " and that eortala raUgioua aoctaUaa aro to bo wppnaaad. 

320 

BUDDHISM OUTBIDS INDIA [ch. xlv 

Recently severe! attempts have been made to infoee life 
and order into Chinese Buddhism. Japanese ioBuence can be 
traced in most of them and though they can hardly be said to 
represent a nev school, they attempt to go'back to Mahayanism 
as it was when first introduced into China. Tho Hinhy4na is 
considered as a neceseary preliminary to the Mah&y&^ and 
the latter is treated as eYiating in several schools, among which 
are included the Pure Land school, though the Contemplative 
and Tantric schools seem not to be regarded with favour. They 
are probably mistrusted as leading to negligence and super- 
station*. 

^ Sse, for ftn bocoqr( of rich a nfomed0ec^ 0. Fit&eko, ‘‘Bio BuddhiiUMh«r 
B«forinv«nu<b ia Cbiss,'' T'enuiQ Pao, 1009. p. 

CHAPTER XLVI 

CHINA {continiud} 

OmNSaE BcTDDHZSU AT THS P&SSBNT DAY 

Tss Buddhiam tT«at«d of in this chapter doca not include 
X*amaiam» which befog identical with tlie religion of Tibet and 
Mongolia is more convenicntl 7 described oIsewlKrc. Ordutar^ 
Chinese Buddhism and LomaUm are distinct, but arc divided 
not so much by doctrine as by the race, langu^e and usages of 
the priests. Chinese Buddhism has acquired some local colour, 
but it is still based on the teaching and practice imported from 
India before the Yuan dynasty, whereas Lam£^t tradition is 
nob direct: it represents Buddhism as received not from India 
but from Tibet. Some holy places, such as P'uto and Wu-t'ai- 
shan are frequented by both Lamas and Chinese monks, aud 
Tibetan prayers and Images may sometunes be seen in Chinese 
tomples, but as a rule the two divisions do not coalesce. 

Chinese Buddhism has a physiognomy and languid of its 
own. The Paraphrase of the Saekd Edict in a criticism, which, 
thotigh unfriendly, is not altogether inaccurate, saja that 
Buddhists attend only to the heart, clum that Buddha can bo 
found in the heart, and um at becoming Buddhas. This sounds 
strango to those who are acquainted only with tho Buddhism of 
Ceylon and Burma, but is intelligible as a popular statement of 
Bodhidharma’s doctrine. Hearts means the spiritual nature of 
roan, essentially identicai with tho Buddha nature and capable of 
puriheation and growth so that all beings con become Buddhas. 
But in the Far East the doctrine became less pantheistic and 
more ethical than the corresponding Indian ideas. The Buddha 
in the heart is the Internal light and monitor rather than tho 
universal spirit. Amida, Kuan-yin and Ti*tsang with other 
radiant and benevolent spirits l^ve rison from humanity and 
will help man to rise as they have done. Chinese Buddhists do 
not regard Amlda’s vows as an Isolated achievement. All 

' . For » ipccuDeii ol Srvotioni^ titer«tQn about th* bMrfc no tb» liuk 

trftot tnJUlMd ia Cbiiu Braacb. B.A.8. rrm. pp, S-S2. 

822 

BVDLEIBM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[oh. 

BoddliisattTas have done the same and oairied ont tbeir leeolQ' 
tion in oouAtlees existences. Like the Madonna these gradoue 
figures appeal directly to the emotions and artistic senses and 
their divinity ofiers no difficulty, for in China Cbnroh and State 
have always recognized deification as a natural process. 
One other char«^iistic of all Far Eastern Buddhism may be 
noticed, The Buddha is supposed to have preached many creeds 
and codes at different periods of his life and each school supposes 
its own to be the last, best and all inolusive. 

As indicated elsewhere, the essential part of the Buddhist 
Church is the monkhood and it is often to say if a Chinese 
layman is a Buddhist or not. It will therefore bo best to de¬ 
scribe brlefiy the organization and life of a mcnasteiy, then the 
services performed there and to sonce extent attend^ by the 
laity, and thirdly the rites performed by monks on behalf of 
the laity, especially funeral oeremooies. 

The Chinese Tripitaka contains no less than five recensions 
of the Vinaya, and the later pilgrims who visited made 
it their special object to obtain copies of the most coiieot 
and approved code. But though the theoretical value of t hese 
oodea is still admitted, they have for practical purposes been 
supplemented by other manuals of which the beet known are 
the Fan‘wang-ching or Net of Brahmh^ and the P&-chang- 
ts'img>Un«Qh'mg‘kuei or Buies of Purity of the Monasteries of 

Chang. 

The knmBT is said to have been translated in a.n. 40tl by 
KumArajlva end to be one chapter of a la^er Sanskrit work- 
Some passages of it, particularly the condemnation of legislation 
which forbids or imposes conditions on the praotioe of 
read as If they had been composed in China rather than India, 
and its whole attitude towards the Hinayanist Vinaya as 
something Inadequate and superseded, oan hardly have been 
usual in tidia or China even in the time of I-Ching (700 a.©.). 
Nothing is known of the Indian orig^, but it certainly was not 
the Brahmaj&lasutta of the Pali Canon^. Though the translation 

’ &• tniul*Uaa aod «e&ua«Bt«i7, im De Oroot, Cfii* ^ 

Cfiint, 1S92, m klco Ntcjlo, No. 1087. 

* I>e<3?oo(,p. 81. 

* Tbo idwtitj of OMoe mm* duo to ft niiulftnty of ntotopbor. The Btftlusftjilft 
setu 1 » ft net of aiftny m whaa to cfttoh ail formi of error. 3S>e P«a.w*og<l^ 

CHINA 

323 

Xtvt] 

is ascribed to so earl; a date, there jb no evidence that the vork 
carried weight as an anthorit; before the eighth centoi;. 
Students of the Vinaya, liko I-Ching, ignore it. But when the 
scholarly endeavour to discover the most authentic edition of 
the Vinaya began to £ag. this manual eupereeded the older 
treatises. Whatever external evidence there may be for 
attriburing it to Kuzn&rajlva. its contents suggest a much later 
date and there is no guarantee that a popular manual may not 
have received additions. The rules are not numbered consecutively 
but as 1^10 and 1-43, and it may be that the first class is older 
than the second. In many respects it expounds a late and even 
degenerate form of Buddhism for it contemplates not only a 
temple ritual (inclading the veneration of images and sacred 
books), bat also burning the header limbs as a religious practics. 
But it makes no allusion to salvation through futh in jGnitAbha 
and says little about services to be celebtat^ for the dead^. 

Its ethical and disciplinary point of view is dogmatically 
Mahayanist and eimiJar to that of tiie BodhieaiyftvatiLra. The 
Hinay&ua is several times denounced^ and called heretical, but, 
setting aside a little intolerance and Baperstition, the teeiching 
of this manual is truly admirable and breathes a spirit of active 
charity—a desice not only to do no barm but to help and rescue. 

It contains a code of ten primary forty-ei gh t secondary 
commandments, worded as prohibitions, .but equivalent to 
positive in^nnetions, inasmuch as they blame the neglect of 
various active duties. The ten primary commandments are 
called Pritimokaha and he who Waks Is Ptrftjika*, that 
is to say, he ipto facto leaves the road leading to Buddhahood 
and is condemned to a long series of inferior births. They prO' 
hibit taking life, theft, unchastity, lying, trading in alcoholic 
liquors, evil speaking, boasting, avarice, hatred and blasphemy, 
^ougb infraction of the secondary commandments has less 
permanently aertous consequence, their observance is indis¬ 
pensable for all monks. Many of them are amplifications of the 

ta6 ««ri6tie« of Boddhigi opinion (o tli» uesliM oi a Mt (Z)* Sroot, Lc. 
p. SS), bQ( the Mt ie the ell-ifioioiiTe bodj of Outb. 

* 8««, bowerer, aeotioai 20 end 99. 

* See cepeefellp Z>e Qroot, r.e..p. SS, where the reedlag of the AbUdbarme le 
forbidden. Though tbie aeine is oot ooofinwl to tbe Hbieyioe, A^piVna ia Chineee 
eeemi to bemely need ee % UUe of Uehnyuijt booki. 

a Xhe Tndien wordi tie lnaaliten(«i ia Ibe Chloeee taxh 

324 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

ten mftjor commandments and are diiectod (gainst indirect and 
potential sins, suob aa tho possesion of weapons. The Bhikshu 
may not eat flesh, drink alcohol, set forests on fire or be con¬ 
nected with viy bu^ness injurious to others, such as the slave 
trade. He is warned against gossip, sins of the eye, foolish 
practices such as divination and even momentary forgetfulness 
of hU high calling and duties. But it is not sufficient that he 
should be eelf*concentrated and without offence. He must 
labour for tbs welfare and salvation of others, snd it is a ain 
to neglect such duties aa instructing the ignorant, tending the 
sick, hospitality, saving men or animals from death or slavery, 
praying^ for all In daz^r, exhorting to repentance, sympathy 
wit^ all living things. A number of disciplinary rules prescribe 
a similarly high steward for duly monastic life. The monk must 
be strenuous and intelligent; ho must yield obedience to bis 
suporiors and set a good example to the laity: he must not teach 
for money or be selfish in accepting food and gifts. As for creed 
be is strictly bidden to follow and preach the Mah&y&na: it 
is a sin to follow or preach the doctrine of tho Sr4vaksa’ or 
read their books or not aspire to ultimate Buddbahood. Very 
remarkable arc tho injunctions to bum one’s limbs in honour 
of Buddhas: to sliow great respect to copies of the scriptures 
and to make vows. From another point of view the first and 
forty -80 vonth secondary commandments are equally remarkable: 
the first bids officials discharge tlieir duties with due respect 
to the Church and the other protests against improper legis¬ 
lation. 

The Fan-wang-chlng is the most important and most 
authoritative statement of tho general principles regulating 
monastic life in China. So far as my own observation goes, it 
is known and respected in all monaeteries. The Pai-ebang- 
ob'ing-kuei^ deals rather with tbs details of organization and 
ritual and has not the same universal currency. It received the 

* Mon woontolj rnidinj tbe rttrai oa tbeir bAbkli, baC exetuM ifl pneti* 
CftUy Aquivkloni Go intafCBwoiy pn;&r. 

* Tbo faU titl« a ^ Cb^og ia appcieatlj to 

taken M the oaido of tho author, but it ie the dMi^iwtion of a aoDMtsi? u«ed u n 
penoiisl nune. See HMkaftnrt in T'oun; Poo, 1908, pp, Ul-SCS. Itie No. 1S42 in 
NftAjio'e Cstelogu*. Ho mji tb«t it baa been reriaMl end ilCered. 

cmuA 

825 

XLVl] 

approval of the Yuan dynoaty* and is still accepted as authori¬ 
tative in many monasteries and gives a correct account of their 
general practice. It was composed by a monk of Kiang-si, wbo 
died in 814 A.D. Re belonged to the Ch'an school, but his rules 
are approved by others. I will not attempt to summarize them, 
but they Include most points of ritual and discipline mentioned 
below. The author indicates the relations which should prevail 
between Church and State by opening his work with an account 
of the ceremonies to be performed on the Emperor’s birthday, 
and similar occariens. 

Largo Buddhist temples almost always form part of a 
monastery, but smaller shrines, especially in towns, are often 
served by a single priest. Tbe many-storeyed towers colled 
pagodas which are a characteristic beauty of Chinese landscapes, 
are in tbeir origin stupas erected over relies but at the present 
day can hardly be called temples or religious buildings, for they 
are not places of worship and generally owe their construction 
to tbe dictates of F6ng-shui or geomancy. Monasterios are 
usually built outside towns and by preference on high ground, 
whence or mountain has come to be the common designa¬ 
tion of a convent, whatever its podtion. The dtea of these 
establishments show tbe deep feebng of cultivated Chinese for 
nature and their appredatioo of the influence of scenery on 
temper, an appreciation which connects them spiritnally with 
the psalms of the monks and nuns preserved in the Pali Canon. 
The architecture is not self-assertive. Its aim is not to produce 
edifices complete and satisfying in their own proportions but 
rather to harmonise buildings with landscape, to ^jnst courts 
and pavilions to tbe slope of tbe hillside and diversify the groves 
of fir and bamboo with shrines and towers as fantastic and yet 
as natural as the mountain boulders. Tbo reader who wishes 
to know more of them should consult Johnston’s Buddhist 
Chiruiy a work which combinos in a rare degree sound knowledge 
and literary charm. 

A mouEistcry^ is usually a quadrangle surtoundod by a wall. 

1 S«a Pao, 1004, pp. 437 ff. 

* It is probi^k tbM lb« old«r ChJoBM iDOnMtoriM kttefopKed to reprwtuc* tbe 
Arrmn^emeot of NUtndft and other lodiao cctAhlishmente. UniortunaWly Heuea 
Cbuaog Mid (he other pilgrUu giro ue kv d«tAUe u to (he eppeannee ol ladtaa 
oooeitcriMi they Mil ue, however, thet they vera eturouadMl by » wtU. th^t Um 
munles* qasrton were DMc thli wall, that there were balk there aboral eervieee 

326 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[oh. 

Before the great gate, which faces south, or in the fir%t court 
is a tank, spanned by a bridge, wherein grows the red lotns and 
tame fish await doles of biacuit. The sides of the quadrangle 
contain dwelling rooms, refectories, guest chambers, store 
houses, a library, printing press and other promiaos suitable to 
a learned and pious foundation. The interior space is divided 
into two or three courts, bordered by a veranda. In each court 
is a hall of worship or temple, containing a shelf or alcove on 
which are set the saervd Images: in front of them stands a table, 
usually of massive wood, hearb^ vases of flowers, bowb for 
incense sticks and other vessels. The first temple is called the 
Hall of the Pour Great Kuigs and tho figures in it represent 
beings who are srill in the world of transmigration and have not 
yet attuned Buddhahood. They Include gigantic im^s of the 
Poxii Kings, Maitreya, the Buddha de^gnate of the future, and 
Wei'to', a military Bodbisattva sometimes identified with Indra. 
Kuan-ti, the Chinese God of War, is often representod in this 
building. The chief temple, called the Precions Hall of the Great 
KercS is in the second court and contains the principal images. 
Very commonly there are ninft figures on either ^de representing 
eighteen disciples of the Buddha and known as the Eighteen 
Lohan or Arhats^. Above the altar are one or more large g^t 

v«ra padonned and th&i titan wore tnada of UDOfoa. But tbt Indian buUdlsgt bod 
ttorfw. Sm Cbammso, i£imoif4 nr Ut Rtliffieus Jn^nonU, ISM, p. S5. 

' permoga m« iba ortiole la S.S.f.S-0. I91S. 

No. a. by Pdri vho idesliflea him iriA tb« feaerol of tt« Kingi who 

appeond to Tm HaQon Um fouodar of tlia Vlnoyo oobool and becuu popular os 
a prottatotg dolty of Buddhitw. ^la name it pOMlbi^ a mlitokra trooMnptioit of 
Skandha. 

• . See VM and tSiarannM* two ortacka in JA. 1916, i and a, and 

Watton in J.&AM. 1896, p- S29, for on occoont of ibooe penono^M. Tb« orisinal 
ouniber, attll found in a f»w ChinoM tomplcs a« well oa in Korea. Japan and Tibet voa 
■jrteen. Several Uto fCtoMcoct^ tb* idea (bat tba Buddha entrurtod the protoetton 
ofhiereli^oo to four or uxteeadiKlplea and bade tbezn not enter Nirrona but tonj 
until tbe odveoi of HafUeya Tbe Ta*A*lo*ban.nan.t'l>nu.ta>la-eo-ibuo-fa-«bu-eU 
(Naojio, 1466] U an eoeouat of tbeea sixteen ^soiplea and of tbeir opheroa of in* 
fluttice. Tbe Buddha aailgBed to oaob a refiou within which it is hie duty to guard 
toe faith. They will eot poee frow thia life befoiu the noxt Buddha eomea. Pied^ 
is Ihe i*h lff of toam. If oUung ia known of the work cited eseept that it wae translated 
in 664 by HeSon Chuaog. wbo, oocording to Watton. need on oarUar tranelaUon. 
Aa tite Arhate are Indian pcreenalltkn, aod their ephero ora mapped out from tba 

CBINA 

32? 

2LVI] 

images. When there is only one it is usually ^kya-muni, but 
more often there are three. Snob triads are variously composed 
and the monks often speak of them vaguely as the three 
precious oneSf” ivithout seeming to attach much importance to 
their identity^. The triad is loosely connected with the idea of 
the three bodies of Buddha but this explanation does not always 
apply and the central figure is sometimes O-ml'to or Ktian*ym, 
who are the principal recipients of the worship offered by the 
laity. The latter deity has usually a special shkne at the back 
of the main altar and facing tbe north door of the hall, in which 
her merciful activity as the saviour of mankind is represented 
in a series of statuettes or reliefs. Other Bodhlsattvas such as 
Xa-shih chi (Mah&8tb&maprftpta}and Ti^teang also have separate 
shrines in or at the side of the great hall*. Tbe third ball contains 
as a rule only small images. It is used for expounding die 
scriptures and for sermons, if the monastery has a preacher, but 
is set apart for tbe religious exercises of tbe monks rather than 
the devotions of tbe laity. In very large monasteries there is a 
fourth ball for mcditadoo. 

Monasteries are of various sizes and the number of monks is 
not constant, for the peripatedc habit of early Buddhism is not 
extinct: at one time many inmates may be absent on their 

pcui ol riew of ladi4ii goosrtpbj, then oeo be no doubt tbet ve have to do with 
4n iuported ioto Tibet ae veil m Soto CUfiS where it beeeme fu non 

popuJer tben it bed erer beoi in Indie. The two edditione] Arbett (vbo Ter; in 
difieraot tampke, wbenw tbe nxteen e» fixed) eppeu to b*ve been added during 
tbs T'eag dyneety ead, eMording to Wetten, ta imitetion of e Teryeefoct order of 
merit Inetitnted by tbe Emperor T'el Tmmg uA eoaprlfiag eighteen penens. 
CbnTnonm end LM eee in Umd eidrite borroved from tbe popnlnr pectbeos. 

n-lnnen ideee ebont theLoheei At tbe pneeat day en Tory Tngse. Tbets I&dlna 
origin bee been forgottea end eome of them here been provUied vitb Cblosee 
biogrepbiee. (Bee Ziord, p. 8i&) One popukr eteiy eeyi tbet they ven eighteen 
con ve i led brigtada. 

Is eevenl Urge templee then ere bell* oontMoing tOO inuges of Arbete, wfalab 
men; Chlneee Zopeton end one of then ii often ported not ne being 
Ueroo PoK Bot thie is veiy doubtful Seoi boverer, Heotanena, BuddAwmve. 
p.812. 

' Oenerelly they eoniiat of filhyS'Diui end tve inperbojoen Boddhae or 
BodbisettvM. euob es 0*iiu-te (AsdUbhaj ind To-abih*fo (Veldtrye); Pi-iQ>fo 
(Velioeene} end Lo*abib*fo {Loobean); W&a«eba (VecjuA-ri) end P'o^brien (Samente* 
bbedie). Tbe oommon BuropeMi expleoetion thet they ere the Boddbee of the 
pest, pneeot end fotaif* is not ooneot 

I end . Bor tbe importenee of Tl*tang in populer Bnd* 

dbiire, whicb hM perhnpe been undeneUmeted, eee Jobneten. cbep vm. 

328 BUDDElSa OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

travels, at another there may bo an influx of strangers. There 
are also wandering monks who hare ceased to belong to a 
particular monastery and spend their time in travelling. A large 
monastery usually contains from thirty to fifty monks, but a 
very largo one may have os many as three hundred. The majority 
are dedicated by their parents as children, but some embrace 
the career from conviction in their maturity and these, if few, 
are the more interesting. Children who are brought up to be 
monks receive a religious education in the monastery, wear 
monastic clothes and have their heads shaved. At the age of 
about seventeen they are formally admitted as members of 
the order and undergo three ceremonies of ordination, which in 
their origin represented stages of the religious life, but are now 
performed by accumulation in the course of a few days. One 
reason for this is that only monssteries possesting a licence from 
tho Govemmont' are allowed to hold ordinations and that 
consequently postulants have to go some distance to be received 
as full brethren and are anxious to complete the reception 
expeditiously. At tho first ordination the candidates aro 
accepted as novices: at the second, which follows a day or two 
afterwards and corresponds to the upasampadi, they accept 
the robes and bowl and promise obedience to the rules of the 
pT&tlmoksha. But these ceremonies are of no importance 
compared with the third, called Shou Pu-sa-chieh* or acceptance 
of the Bodhisattva precepts, that is to say the fifty-eight 
procopts enunciated in the Pan^wang-ching. The essential part 
of this ordination is the burning of the candidate’s boad in from 
three to eighteen places. The operation involves contidorable 
pain and is performed by lighting pieces of charcoal set in a 
paste which is spread over the shaven skull. 

Although the Pan-waog-chlng does not mention this 
bumiag of the head as part of ordination, yet it emphatically 
enjoins the practice of burning the body or limbs, affirming that 
those who neglect it are not true Bodhisattvas*. The prescrip¬ 
tion is founded on the twenty-second chapter of the Lotus* 
which, though a later addition, is found in tho Chinese transla- 

^ I ifieak ot tho OU lmi>er<cl GoT«nai«Rt whiob ouno to an end In Idll. 

* Oroot, Ic. p. SI. 

* Soo Kom'a irualatioo, wpeolaily ]>p. and 39S. 

CHINA 

329 

XLYl] 

tion made between 26S and 316a.D.^ I-Ohing discusses and 
reprobates such practices. Clearly they were known in India 
when be dialled it, but not esteemed by the better Buddhists, 
and tbe fact that they form no part oi the ordinary Tibetan 
ritual indicates that they bad no place in the decadent Indian 
Buddhism which in various stages of degeneration was intro¬ 
duced into Tibet^. In Korea and Japan branding is practised 
but on the breast and arms rather than on the head. 

It would appear then that burning and brandii^ as part of 
initiation were known in India in the early centuries of our era 
but not commonly approved and that their general acceptance 
in China was sul^^^uent to tbe death of I-Ching in a.o. 713^. 
This author clearly approved of nothing but the double ordina¬ 
tion as novice ^d fuU monk. The third ordination as Bodhi- 
aattva must be part of the later phase inaugurated by Amogba 
about 750*. 

This practice is defended as a trial of cndiuance, but the 
earlier and better monks were right in rojcotiiig it, for in itself 
it is an imcdii 3 nng spectacle and it points to tbe logical con- 
clurion tbat, if it is meritorious to cauterize the head, it is srill 
more meritorious to burn tbe wbob body. Cases of suicide by 
burning appear to have occurred in recent years, especially in 
tbo province of Chc-Kiang^. The true doctrine of the Mahiy&na 
is that every one should strive for tho happiness and salvation 
of all beings, bat this beautiful truth may be sadly perverted 

' Sm HMtjio, Noc 138 ud 130. The pnettee is set esUrelr uoksovn is the 
IsgoDdff of Bsddhiim. In the LohepWUetti. e woric exUuss in Burm» bst 
pethepe tmulsted fr<«a (he Sea»]crit,Ajoksln]rnslumeeUinboi>ouro{ttieSiuidb*, 
but i« mmeaiomly preeervod. See B.B.7.B.0. 1904, pp 4tl ud 427. 

* See I.Tsn^ Jitcori^ of the BvdiMsl Bdiffiffit, tre«e. Tekefcueu. pp. 198 ff.» 

and iOT Hbcl. Waddell, of p. 178, note 3, from vhich it appoen 

that it i» only in Eeeten Tibet and probably endar Chinfee mduBoee that braudins 
i* in TOfue. For epponnt iaaCaAoee in Centnl Aalan art, eoe Qruovf^del, Fvdd. 
BuliaL p, 13, note 1. 

* Brandiof ie ccuoiofi in many Hindu »««(«, CfpedaUy tbe UhdhvM, but ie 
itpr^iakil by otbeia. 

* It it oondemned at part ot the eupentition of Suddbita in a raemorial of 
Hen YA. 319 i.D. 

* See thoee «)(ed by I>e Creot, to. p. 298, end tbe artiole of MacOowaa [Chnott 
RefOfder, 1888} there refemd to. 6c« aleo Baekmann, BvJdUtm a* a Bolifiw. 
p. 228 . Ghinoee lentiment often epproree luicide, lor inetence, if oottBUtted by 
widove or the adhereote of defeated princes For a 0«ifudan ifietaoee, eee Johnston, 
p 341 

330 BUDDHISM OUTBIDS INDIA [CH. 

if it ia held tiiat the endurance of pain is in itself meritorious 
and that such acquired merit can be transferred to others. Self • 
torture, seems not to be unknown in the popular forms of 
Chinese Buddhism'. 

The postulant, after receiving these three ordinations, 
becomes a fuU monk or Ho-shang* and takes a new name. The 
inmates of every monastery owe obedience to the abbot and 
some abbots have an official position, being lecogniaed by the 
Government as representing tho clergy of a prefecture, should 
there be any business to be transacted with the secular authori¬ 
ties. But there is no real hierarchy outside the monasteries, 
each of which is an isolated administrative unit. Withm each 
monastery due provision is made for discipline and administra* 
tion. The monks aw divided into two olasses, the Western who 
are concerned with ritnal and other purely religious duties and 
the Eastern who are relatively secular and superintend the 
burinees of the establishment?. This is often considerable for 
the income is usually derived from estates, in managing which 
the monks are assisted by a committee of laymen. Other laymen 
of humbler status^ live around the monastery and furnish the 
labour necessary for agriculture, forestry and whatever in* 
duBtriee the character of the propoty calls into being. As a rule 
there is a considerable library. Even a sympathetic stranger will 
often find that the monks deny its existence, because many 
books have been destroyed in political troubles, but roost 
monasteries possess copies of the principal scriptures and a 
complete Tripitaka, usually the edition of 1737, is net rare. 
Whether the books ate much read I do not know, but I have 
observed that after the existence of the library has been ad- 

» 8 m tp. Da Bom. Th* I>r^ie*. Jmsqt aad £>emo*y p. IM, I bw never Men 
•Mb pnoticM UTMlt Sm elao ParofXrM cf (U Sacred Sdut, m S. 

I , Tbi* wort, which be* &o d»riT*lioa in OiineM, ia thought t© be » 

oomptioQ of some vemaonJer form of the*Sanikjit 'Upidhyiya ©urrent in Oanttal 
Saia. Saa I-Wng, tread, Tekakuaa. p, Ua Up*4hyiy4bc«4rBaVeijh»(Mi»«hown 
by the moSoro ladiaa forma 0;h« or Jhs end Teail Vfiddyer). Sm Bloch ia Indo- 
OmaniteJm foncJmmfea, toL nv, IWd. p. StS. Veiiha might baoomo la Chinaaa 
Ko*aho or Ro>ahacg tor Ko aometimM repraaants the lodien syllable me Sm 
J uliao, MiAeda, p. 109, end Eitel Hajtdboak of CiUnMt fuddAsan, p. ISS. 

* For dacaiia sm Heokmana la T'auof Pao, 1908. 

* They eppercntly corrMpood to tho moaeaUc ley aottenU or “pon mea" 
dMcribed by Inching, ebap. xsm, ae liriog m Nlilende. 

CHINA 

$31 

mittod, it often proves dlfBcuIb to find tbs key. There is alao 
a printing press, where are prepared notices and prayers, as 
well as copies of popvdar sfiiras. 

The food of the monks ia ettiotly vegetarian, bnt they do not 
go roimd with the begging bow] nor, except in a few monasteries, 
is it forbidden to eat after midday. As a rale there are three 
meals, the last about 6 p.m., and all most be eaten in silence. 
The three garments prescribed by Indian Buddhism, are still 
wom, but beneath them are trousers, atockinga, and shoes 
which are necessary in the Cbineae cliicate. There ia no idea 
that it is wrong to sleep on a bed, to receive presents or own 
property, 

Two or three serrices are performed daily iti the principal 
temple, early in the morning, about 4 p.m., and aometimea in 
the middle of the day. A specimen of this ritual may be seen 
in the aervice called by Beal the Liturgy of Kuan Yin^. It 
contiats of vermcles, responses and canticles, and, though 
strangely reminiscent both in structure and externals (anoh as 
the wearing of vestments} of the offices of the Roman Church^, 
appears to be Indian in origin. I'Ohing describes the choral 
services which he attended in Nalanda and elsewhere—the 
chanting, bowing, processions—and the Chinese ritnal fa, I 
think, only the amplification of these ceremonies, It includes 
the presentation of ofierings, such as tea, rice and other vege¬ 
tables. The Chinese pilgrims testify that in India fiowera, lights 
and incenae were ofieied to relics and images (as in Christian 
churches), and the Bodhicaiyivatira*, one of the most spiritual 
of later Mahayanist works, mentions offerings of food and drink 
as part of worship, hfany things in Buddhism lent themselves 
to such a transformation or parody of earlier teaching. Offerings 
of food to hungry ghosts were countenanced, and it was easy 
to include among the lecipiente other spirits. It was meritorious 
to present food, raiment and property to living saints: oriental, 

» A Cakiut «/ iMiUM Scripivm from tiU CUncte, 33& f. 

* Tbs *bbob tnd npper priMM vmt rvbM. wiu^ m« gOMnll; r»d icd 

duhii^ th* Mcrico. TI 10 sbbot sko «Mn« a «orfc ol Mpue. Tbe vasimfiiitt of 

otargy an said to U denvad from tba robea of bonoor vfaiob uMd to ba pran 
to them vbao tOa; appaarad at Court, 

* cL la Ct tba ritcab in Da la ValMa fotissta*i .Boaddiiinw «t MaUntitx. 
pp. SU S. Tltanitba lia^uaaUy oianQoM bunt offnia^ u part of vonUp u) 
mcdicaal Ma^dba. 

a m. 

22 

382 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [CR. 

and eapei^y Chinese, symboHsm found It natural to express 
the same devotion by offerings made l>efore images. 

In the oourse of moat ceremonies, the monJca make vowe on 
behalf of all beings and take oath to work for their salvation. 
They are also expected to deliver and beor sermons and to 
engage in meditation- Some of them superintend the education 
of novices which consists ohiefiy in learning to read and repeat 
religious works. Quite recently elementary schools for the 
instruction of the laity have been instituted in some monas¬ 
teries^. , , 

The regularity of convent life is broken by many festivals. 
The year is divided into two periods of wandering, two of 
meditation and one of repose corresponding to the old Vassa. 
Though this divition has become somewhat theoretical, it is 
usual for monks to set out on excursions in the spring and 
autunm, In each month there are six fasts, including the two 
uposatha days. On these latter the 2b0 rules of the Pritimokaha 
are recited in a refectory or tide hall and subsequently the 
fifty-eight rules of the Fan-wang-ching are recited mth greater 
ceremony in the mtin temple. 

Another class of holy days includes the birthdays* not only 
of Sikya-muni, but of other Buddhas and Bodhisattvae, the 
anniversaries of events in Sakya-mnni’s life and the deaths of 
Bodbidharma and other Saints, among whom tho founder or 
patron of each monastery has a prominent place. Another 
important a nd popular festival is called Yu*lan-p§n or All Souls* 
day, which is an adaptation of Buddhist usages to Chinese 
ancestral worship. Of many other festivals it may be said that 
they are purely Chinese but countenanced by Buddhism: such 
are the days which mark the changes of the seasons, those 
sacred to Kuan-ti and other native deities, and (before the 
revolution) imperial birthdays. 

The d^y sorvices are primarily for the monks, but the laity 
may attend them, if they please. More frequently they pay their 
devotions at other hours, light a few tapers and too often have 
recourse to some form of divination before the images. Some* 
* ] do oot relec to pnotic« of tuniog dicoMd tomplM into tchools which ii 
freqaeot. lo lomo aouiteriM the motiu, v)uJe ntAioiag p o w wtin a, h»TO thorn- 
oponod oeboob. 

■ It lo D0( eleax to mo wbot ii retil; moont b; tho lirAdojf* of b^gs Hke 
Utiiuoya ftod AttitShha, 

GEINA 

333 

XLTl] 

times they defray the cost of more elaborate oeremoniea to 
expiate a>Tifl or eusore prosperity. Bat the lay attendance in 
temples is specially large at seasons of pilgrimage. For an account 
of this interesting side of Chinese rel^oira life I cannot do 
better than refer the reader to Mr Johnston’s yolume alroady 
cited. 

ThoQgh the seirices of the priesthood may be invoked at 
every crisis of Ufe» they are most in rei^uitition for funeral 
ceremonies. A detailed description of these as practised at 
Amoy has been given by De Groot* which is probably feme in 
essentials for all parts of China. These rites unite in incongmous 
confusion several orders of ideas. Pre‘Buddhiat Chinese notions 
of the life after death seem not to have included the idea of hell. 
Tho disembodied soul is honoured and comforted but without 
any clea r definition of its status. Some representative—a i>eT80n, 
fignro, or tablet^is thought capable of ^ving it a temporary 
residence and at funeral oetemonioa offerings a» mad© to such 
a representative and plays performed before it. Though Buddhist 
bnguage may be introduced into this ritual, its spirit is alien to 
even the most corrupt Buddhism. 

Buddhism familiarized China with the idea that the average 
ma n stands in danger of purgatory and this doctrine cannot be 
described aa late or Mahayaniat*. Those epithets are, however, 
merited by the subsidiary doctrine that such punishment can 
be abridged by vicarious acts of worship which may take the 
form of simple prayor addressed to benevolent beings who can 
release tho tortured soul. More often the idea underl^g it is 
that the recitation of certain formuLe acquires merit for the 
reciter who can then divert this merit to any purpose*. This is 
really a theological refinement of the ancient and widespread 
notion tliat words hove magic force. Equally ancient and un- 
Buddhist in origin is tho theory of sympathetic ma^o. Jnst as 
by sticking pins into a wax figure you may kill the person 
represented, so by imitating phyrical operations of rescue, yon 
may deliver a soul from the f umaccs and morasses of hell. Thus 

• AelM Onetxaiuk*. L^de, 1888, w. w. pp. 1-130. 

■ S^. io PipftTftoiM. zm; U^Sr. sv. M«hioda b u oonvMUag 

CbtIoq by MMonU of tee iMTon of Uu Best world. 

• TiM Qmb of good ou bo tiaaiUrly vtUj»d. Tie ocmTuig rtloUTas 
te»d teo poor or bay aod momtain for th* nut of ita life oa vjmti dceteMd to 
al*ught«r. Tbo caerit teea gfm to tee de c aMed. 

334 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

a paper model of hades is made which is kfloc^d to pieces and 
finally burnt: the spirit is escorted with muric and other pre- 
caudons over a mock bridge, and, most ringtJar of all, the 
priests place over a receptacle of water a special machme 
conasring of a cylinder containing a rsTOlring apparatus which 
might help a creature immersed in the fluid to climb up. This 
strange mwnmery is supposed to release those souls who are 
condemned to sojourn in a pool of hlcod*. This, tw, is a supw- 
stition eonntenanced only by Chinese Buddhism, for the 
punifihment is incupred not so much by aumera as by those dying 

oi illnesses which defile with blood. Many other rites are based 

on the notion that objeots^r their paper im^s—ceremonially 
burnt are transmitted to the other world for the use of the dead. 
Thus representations in paper of servants, clothes, furniture, 
money and all manner of things are burned together with the 
effigy of the deceased and sometimes also oertaficates and pass- 
porta giving him a clean bill of health for the Kingdom of Heaven. 

As in funeral rites, so in matters of daUy life, Buddhism 
gires its countenance and help to popular superstition, to every 
kind of charm for reading the future, securing happiness and 
driving away evU spirits. In its praise may be said that this 
patronage, though far too easy going, is not extended to cruel 
or immoral customs. But the reader will aak, is there no brighter 
tide? I believe that there is, but it is not conspicuous and, as 
in India, public worsMp and temple ritoal display the lower 
aspects of religion, But in China a devout Buddhist is generally 
a good man and the objects of Buddhist associations are praise¬ 
worthy and philanthropic- They often include vegetariamam 
and abstinence from alcohol and drugs. The weakness of the 
religion to-day is no doubt the want of intelligence and energy 
among the clergy. There are not a few learned and devout monks, 
but even devotion is not a characteristic of the majority, On 
the other hand, those of the laity who take their religion seriously 
generally attain a high standard of piety and there have been 

' it SU 7 poidbiy te gsoMbU to Mmlehaim which tonght thst muIs tn tnu- 
Umd fr«m eb» «ph€T« to uothw by s tort of coamic wster wb«eL 6 m CoDOUt's 
ftrticle, rouB k putoat )m imMdaMtiiiob4lMDB*‘iiiAm<i«rHw«.(fM£dviM«. 
lS15.p. 36^ CbsvumM tod PellioiluvB Bhovu tbst tnoM of Mtiucheim Hsgend 
loog M Fu-Eira. Dot^hor of Uio eadlcM ohah) of bnekou ia also foiutd in tiba 
YfSan JSn Xob. 

XLVi] CEINA 336 

attempts to reform Buddhism, to connect it with edacation and 
to spread a knowledge of the more au^entic scriptures^. 

When one begins to study Buddhism in China, one fears it 
may he typified by the neglected temples on the outakirta cd 
Peking, sullen and mouldering memorials of dynasties that have 
passed away. But later one lesms not only that there are grwt 
and flonrisl^g monasteries in the south, but that even in Peking 
one may often step through an archway into courtyards of which 
the prosaic streets outade give no hint and find there refreehment 
for the eye and soul, fiower gardens and uel]*kept shrines 
tended by pious and learned guardians. 

* Se« FruclM. BuMbuUwhtt ItofonnTBrvMfa In Chiat,*' T'ovtf Poo, 
1909 . pp 6S7<'602. 

CHAPTER XLVir 

KOREAN 

Ths Buddhisra of KorOft cannot bo eharply distinguished from 
the Buddhism of Chinft and Japan. Its seolnd^ mountain 
mooastories have some local colour, and contiun halls dedicated 
to the seven stars and the mountain gods of the land. And 
travellers are impressed by the columns of rock projectwg from 
the soil and carved into im^es (mirtok), by the painted walls 
of the temples and by the huge rc11ed-up pictures which are 
painted and displayed on festival days. But there is little real 
originality in art: in literature and doctrine none at all. Buddb* 
ism started in Korea with the same advantages as in China and 
Japan hut it lost in moral indnence because the monks con* 
tinually. engaged in politics and it did not win temporal power 
because they were continually on the wrong side. Yet Korea 
is not without importance in the annals of far-oastern Buddhism 
for, during the wanderings and vicissitudes of the f«tb, it served 
as a rest-house and depot. It was from Korea that Buddhism 
first entered Japan: when, during the wars of the hve dynasties 
the T'ien-t'ai school was nearly annihilated m China, it was 
revived by a Korean priest and the earliest extant edition of the 
Chinese Tripitaka is known only by a slngla copy preserved in 
Korea and taken thence to Japan. 

For our purposes Korean history may be divided into four 
periods: 

I. The three States (a.o. 67-4 .p. 

II. The Kingdom of SilJa (668-018). 

UI. The Kingdom of Koiye (918~13D2). 

IV. The Kingdom of Chosen (1390-1910), 

The throe states were Koguryu in the north, Fakcbe in the 
soQtb'west and SlUa in the south-east^. Buddhism,' together 

> Sm 9tri9a wtieka in Ui« Tratu. <4 Zmm FrdnaV«/<A« &.A.9., ftndP. BUn, 
Xoretfts Aicc M. Conraot, »r4auu, e«p«a4lly vol m. 

ebap. 9. 

' 71t« ortbogrftpbr oi (be«« three umee t^m oooudmblr. Tb» JapaaeM 
equivftleQta w Kom*. Kodan and Shlra^ Tli«s« an alao ali^t Tariafiioaa in fiba 
data* for thelotcodoollon of Buddhius late tarioiu »tat«a. Ib ■nnmfi prohabla 
that M&rananda aod Huhooha, the Snt miwiooariea to Pahche and SUia vere 

KOREA 

337 

CH. x&vii] 

with ChineBe wri^ng, entered Koguiyu from 6be north in 372 
and P&kcha from the aouth a few years later. Siha being more 
distant and at war with the other states did not receive it till 
ahoQt 424. In 552 both Japan and Pakche were at war with 
SiUa and the Ifing of Pakche, wishing to make an alliance with 
the Emperor of Japan sent him presents which included Buddhist 
books and images. Thus Korea was the intermediary for intro¬ 
ducing Buddhism, writing, and Chinese culture into Japan, and 
Korean monks played an important part there both in art and 
religion. But the induence of Korea must not be eseggerated. 
The Japanese submitted to it believing that they wore acqumng 
the culture of China and as soon as cucnmstances permitted 
they went straight to the fountain head. The principal early 
sects were all imported direct from China. 

The kii^om of Siila> which became jiredoiiijnant in ths 
seventh century, had adopted Buddhism in 328, and mEuntamed 
fneudly Intercourse with the T'ai^ dynasty. As in Japan 
Chinese civilization was imitated wholesale. This tendency 
strengthened Buddhism at the time, but its formidable rival 
Confudauism was also introduced early in the eighth century, 
although it did not become predominaat until the thirteenth^. 

In the seventh century the capital of SUla was a centre of 
Buddhist culture and aim of tr^e. Uorchants from India, 
Tibet and Persia are e^d to have frequented its markets and 
several Korean pilgrims visited India. 

In 91$ the Wang dynasty, originating in a northern family 
of humble extraction, overthrew the kingdom of Silla and with 
It the old Korean aristocracy. This was replaced by an official 
nobility modelled on that of China: the Chinese system of 
examinations was adopted and a olass of scholars grow up. But 
with this attempt to reconstruct society many abusos appeared. 
The number of slaves greatly increased*, and there wore many 

Hiniluft or uUtcs of Csstnl vbo eomo from CiiiM imd tone of l.ho oar^y 
art of SiHk is dininctly lodlMi in stylo. 60s SUrr, U. pUUs m sad ic. 

^ Thsse daut ue inMnotio^. ss tbo of Uioaglit la Cbln s. 

In ths sixth eontury Cbifiase mflocnce tD««&t BoddfaisiD. It ii not uaUJ (hs lattsr 
part of tbs Southsm Svag. when th« philosophy of Cha hsi bsd roeonsd ofSoisI 
oppravsl, tbit CUosso meoat Orwifadanigii. ^ 

■ Tho reasons won mssy, but th* oppsr cUsses vst» ssidonUy rood/ to oppms 
ths iovor. Poor mv t ths davss of tho rleb to obtsia a Uvslihood. All 

obildren of sIsto vomsQ were deoUrod iursdit*^ sIxtbs sod so wsrs ths fsnuUn 
p{ criiniosla. 

338 

BVDDEI8M 0VT8WB INDIA 

[oh* 

hdieditarj lov o&stes, the members of which were little better 
than slaves. Only the higher castes coold compete in examine* 
tions or hold office and there were continual struggles and 
quarrels between the military and civil classes. Buddhism 
fiouiished much as it flourished in the Hei*an period of Japan, 
but its comparaUve sterility reflected the inferior social con* 
ditions of Korea. Festivals were celehrated by the Court with 
great splendour: magnificent monasteries were founded: the 
bouses kept troops and entered the capital armed: the tutor of 
the hell apparent and the chancellor of the kingdom were often 
ecclesiastics, and a law is said to have been enacted to the 
effect that if a man bad three eons one of them must become a 
monk. But about 1260 the infiuence of the Sung Oonfumanists 
began to be folt. The bonzes were held responsible for the evils 
of the time, for the continual feuds, exactions and massacres, 
and iik6 civil nobility tended to become Confntianist and to side 
against the church and the military. The inevitable outburst was 
delayed but also rendered more disastrous when it came by the 
action of the Mongols who, as in China, were patrons of Buddh¬ 
ism. The Yiiau dynasty invaded Korea, placed regents in the 
principal towns and forced the Korean princes to marry Mongol 
wives. It was from Korea that Khubil^ despatched his ex¬ 
peditions against Japan, and in revenge the Japanese harried 
the Korean coast throughout the fourteenth century. But so 
bng as the Ytian dynasty lasted the Korean Court which had 
become Mongol remcuned faithful to it and to Bnddhism; when 
it was ousted by the Ming, a similar movement soon followed 
in Korea. The Mongolized dynasty of Korye was deposed and 
another, which professed to trace ite lineage back to Silla, 
mounted the throne and gave the country the name of Chosen. 

This revolution was mainly the work of the Confucianist 
party in the nobility and it was not unnatural that patriots a nd 
reformers should see in Buddhism nothing bat the religion of 
the corrupt old regime of the Mongols. Du^g the next century 
and a half a series of restrictive measures, sometimes amounting 
to persecution, were appUed to it. Two kings who dated to 
build monasteries and favour bonzes were deposed. Statues 
were melted down, Buddhist learning was forbidden: marriages 
and burials were performed accoidii^ to the rules of Chu*hsi. 
About the boginoing of the sixteenth century (the date is 

XLvn] 

KORSA 

339 

Tariously given ae 1472 and L312 and periiaps there was more 
than one edict) the monasteries in the capitc^ and all oi^es were 
olosad and i^iis is why Korean monasteries are all in the coimtry 
and often in almost Inaccessible monntaine. It is only gi poe t he 
Japanese occupatum that temples have been built in towns. 

At first the resnlts of the revolution were benefidal. The 
great families were compelled to discharge their body-guards 
whose collisions had been a frequent cause of bloodshed. The 
public finances and military forces were put into order. Printing 
with moveable type and a phonetic alphabet were brought into 
use and vernacular literature began to fiouiish. But in time 
the Confncian literati formed a sort of corporation and became 
as troublesome as tbe bonzes had been. The aristocracy ^Ut 
into two hostile camps and Korean poUrics became again a 
confused struggle between families and districts in which pro¬ 
gress and even public order becsme impcssibls. Por a moment, 
however, there was a national cause, ^lis was when Hidejosbl 
invaded Korea in 1592 as part of his attack on China. The 
people rose against the Japanese troops and, thanks to the 
death of Hideyoshi rather than to their own valour, got rid of 
them. It is said that in this struggle the bonzes took part as 
soldiers fighting under their abbots and that tbe treaty of peace 
was negotiated by a Korean and a Japanese monk^. 

Nevertheless it does not appear that Buddhism enjoyed 
much oonslderation in the next three centuries. The Hermit 
Kingdom, as it has been called, became completely isolated and 
eta^^ant noi was there any literary orintefieotual bfe except the 
mechanical study of tbe Chinese clasrics. Since the annexation 
by Japan (1910) conditions have changed and Buddhism is 
encouraged. Much good work has been done in collecting and 
reprinting old books, preserving monuments and copying in- 
soriprions. The monasteries were formerly under the control of 
thirty head establislunents or sees, with somewhat confilcring 
interests. But about 1912 these thirty sees formed a union 
under a premdent who resides in Seoul and bolds office for a year. 
A tbech^cal seminary also has been founded and a Bud^Ist 
magasine is pnbliabed. 

' naMstftt«ni»iitiaTet4aeDfre&il[eDfic«CoQnnt*«E{Htom*ofKomaHawr7 
in to tfor^ ChiftA, p. 42S. I bav» sot Imw noMMful io Tartyiiis 

them 1ft Chincie or Jeptawe twU. See, bo«»?«r,StiuT,ZoraiiJiBU&»m.pp. 89-90 

CHAPTER XLVIII 

ANNAM 

Thb modem temtoiy called Aimam includes the ancient 
Champa, and it falls within the French political sphere which 
includes Cambcja, Of Champa 1 have treated elsewhere in 
connection with Camhoja, but Annam cannot be regarded as 
the heir of this ancient culture. It represents a southward 
extension of Chinese influence, thoi^h it is possible that 
Buddhism may have entered it in the early centuries of our 
era either by sea or from Burma. 

At the present day that part of the French possessions 
which occupies the eastern coast cf Asia ia divided into Tonkin, 
Annam and Cochin China. The Annamites are predominant in 
all three provinces and the laogus^ and reli^on of all arc the 
game, except that Cochin lias felt the influence of Europe 
more strongly than the others. But before the ^teenth century 
the name Annam meant rather Tonkin and the northern portion 
of modem Annam, the southern portion being the now vanished 
kingdom of Champa. 

Until the tenth century Annam in this sense wae a 
part of the Chinese Empire, although it was occasionally success¬ 
ful in asserting its temporary independence. In the troubled 
period which followed the downfall of the T'ang dynasty this 
independence became more permanent. An Annamite prince 
founded a kingdom called Bai-cd-viet^ and after a turbulent 
interval there arose the Li dynasty which reigned for mere tlian 
two centuries (lOOfl-1226 a.d.). It was under this dynasty that 
the country was first styled An-nam: previously the official 
designation of the land or its inhahitante was Giao-Chi’. The 

' Th« dftttt U1 

' Fndct KhoUn dm & grcai ouxabw «f scoenW aqU «tao now forms of letun 
bo tr&aMribe Aanmnito, bub sinct tlni UnsuASQ hM notliinj to do with Cho hiatorx 
of BoddhioB or HioduisfD And tho Motmto ortbogr*ph7 is voty difSoult to ttsd, 
E h&7« cootonted niTMlf with a roasb femnAcriptioA. 

* Thijutli«co(DiDonorUiosrAph;,but>CbtAoCliihvoD]dbothoapeUinsAOCOTdiS8 
to tho B^um ot tiAoalUorAtaii; Qiioae adoptod is tbia book. 

CB. XLVm] 

ANNAM 

341 

Annft ipit&s were at period a cooaiderai^Ie zmEtor^ power, 
though their iateroal admiz^tration appears to have been 
chaotic. They were oooadooaUy at war with China, but as & 
rule were ready to send complimentary embaeties to the Em¬ 
peror. With Champa, which was still a tonnidable antagonist, 
there was a continual struggle. Under the Tran dynasty (1225- 
1400) the foreign policy of Annam foQowed much the same 
lines. A serious ciitis was created by the expedition of Khubilai 
Khan in 1285, but though the Annamites suffered severely at 
the beginning of the invasion, they did not lose their Inde* 
pendence and their recognition of ChinaM snserainty remained 
nominal. In the sonth the Chams continued hostilities and, after 
the loss oi some tenitory, invoked the ud of China wito the 
result that the Chinese occupied Annam. They held it, however, 
only for five years (1414-1418). 

In 1428 the li dynasty came to the throne and ruled Annam 
at least in name until the end of the eighteenth century. At 
first they proved vigorous and capable; they orgaoiz^ the 
kingdom in provinces and crashed the power of Champa. 
But after the fifteenth pentury the kings became merely titular 
sovereigns and Annamite history is occupied entirely with the 
rivalry of the two great famiEes, Trinh and Nguyen, who 
founded practicaEy independent kingdoms in Tbnkin and 
Cochin-China respectively. In 1802 a member of tbs Nguyen 
family made himself Emperor of all Annam bat both he and his 
successors were carefol to profess themselves vassals of China. 

Thus it will be seen toat Annam was at no time really 
detached from China. In spite of political independence it 
always looked towards the Chinese Court and tbongh compU- 
mentary missions and nominal vassalage seem unimportant, 
yet they arc significatit as indicating a^iration for Chinese 
institutions. Between Champa and Annam on the other hand 
there was perpetual war: in the later phases of the contest the 
Annamites appear as invaders and destroyers. They seem to 
have disliked the Chams and were not disposed to imitate them. 
Hence it is natural that Champa, so long as it existed as an 
independent kingdom, should mark the Emit of d4r4Ct Indian 
mfiuence on the mainland of Eastern Asia, though afterwards 
Camboj a became the limit. By direct, 1 do not mean to exclude 
the postiblEty of transmission through Java or elsewhere, but 

342 nVDDBISM OUTSIDE IHDIA [CH. 

by whateT©? route Indian cirilization came to Champa, it 
brought its own art, alphabet and lai^uage, such instatutiona as 
caste and forma of Hinduism and Buddhism which had boirowed 
practically nothing from non-Indian 8onr««. In Annam, on 
the other hand, Chinese writing and, for literary purposes, a 
form of the Chinese language were in use: the arte, customs and 
mstitationa were mainly Chinese; whatever Buddhism can be 
found was imported from China and is imperfectly distinguished 
from Taoism: of Hinduiam there are hardly any traces'. 

The Buddhism of Annam is often described as corrupt 
decadent. Certainly it would be vain to claim for rt that its 
doctrine and worship are even moderately pure or primitive, 
hat it cannot be eaid to be moribund. The temples are better 
kept and more numerously attended than in China and there 
are also some considerable monasteries. As in China very few 
except the monks are exclumve Buddhiste and oven the monks 
have no notion that the doctrines of Lao-teu and Confucius 
are difierent from Buddhism. The religion of the ordinary layman 
is a selection made according to taste from a masa of beliefs 
and observances traceable to several distinct sources, though no 
Arnamite is conscious that there is anything in^ngruoua in 
this heterogeneous combination. This fusion of religions, which 
is more complete even than in China, is illuetrated by the temples 
of Annam which ate of various kinds*. First we have the Chua 
or Buddhist temples, always served by boniee or nuns. They 
consist of several buildings of which the principal contains an 
altar bearing a series of images arranged on five or mx steps, 
which rise like the tiers of a theatre. In the front row there is 
usuaDy an image of the infant ^yamuni and near him stand 
figures of At-nan (An&nda) and Muc-Lien (Mandgalyiyana), 
On the next stage are Taoist deities (the Jade Emperor, the 
Polar Star, and the Southern Star) and on the higher stages are 
images representing (a) three Bnddhas* with attendants, 

^ It mi that Um ttoev ot tb« Rttt&raoa ii loaod la aaoanuW 

IdOS, p. 77). and ioOD» M two plaoai the AnoanilUa nmmiaa rtatuea 
of Indian daitiaa. 

* Tba moci tfuatwonby aoaooftft AnnamSta raligloe ia parhapa Deacratier, 

Itt O^Ues Hanoi, 1907. It was puUUhad after tha autbor’i death and 

MODita of a aanaa of note# ratbar thin a gaaaral deaohption. 8aa abo l^et, 
Xw .danamai. 190S, MpaoiaUy ohap. tl 

* H^Uapa ia called JU.lao^CUneM Ui*Ia. Tba aqoiT^anee of tha epUablaa 
fi aodma aeami atfange, bat cerUlo. Cl d.ri.dasAmidaor 0-tai.to> 

XLvmJ 

343 

(6) the BuddhUt Triiutna and (c) tbe tbtee religions, Buddhism, 
Confucianism and Taoism. But tbe arrangement of the imagee 
is subject to much variation and the laity hardly know who are 
the personages represented. At aide altan there are generally 
statues of Quan-Am, guardian deities, eminent bonzes and other 
worthies. Representations of hell are also common. Part of 
the temple ie generally set apart for women who frequent it in 
the hope of obt^ning children by praying to Quan-Am and 
other goddesses. Buddhist literature is sometimes printed in 
these Ghua and such works as the Amithyurdhy&nc^tra and 
collections of Dh&raois are commonly placed on the altars. 

Qaan-Am (Kuan-Yin) Is a popular deity and the name seems 
to be given to several goddesses. They would probably be 
described as incamaUons of Av^okita, if any Annamite were 
to define hie beliefs (which is not usual), hut they are really 
legendary heroines who have left a reputation for superhuman 
virtue. One was a daughter of the Emperor Chuang of the 
Chou dynasty. Another (Quan-Am-Thi'^nh), represented as 
sitting on a rock and carrying a child in her arms, was a much 
perseoutod lady who passed part of her life disguised as a house. 
A third form, Quan-Axn-To^on, she who dweUs on the moun¬ 
tains, haa an altar in nearly every temple and is specially 
worshipped by women who wish for sons. At Hanoi there Is a 
small temple, rising on one column out of the water near the 
shore of a lake, like a lotus in a tank, and contsdning a brass 
image of Quan-Am with eight arms, which is evidently of Indian 
origin. Sometimes popular heroines suoh as Cao Tien, a princeee 
who was drowned, arc worshipped without (it would seem) being 
ident^ed with Qnaa*Ain. 

But besides the Chna there arc at least three other kinds of 
xeligioua edifices: (i) IHnh. These are municipal temples dodi* 
cat^ to heii^s commonly called genii by Europeans, ^lat is to 
say, superhuman personages, often, but not always, departed 
lo^ worthies, who for one reason or another are supposed to 
protect and supervise a particular town or village. The Binh 
contains a council room as well as a shrine and is served by 
laymen. The genius is often represented by an empty chair and 
his name must not be pronounced within tbe temple, (ii) Taoist 
deities are sometimes worshipped in spetial temples, but the 
Annamites do not seem to think that suoh worship is antagonistic 

344 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [ca. TLvra 

to Buddhism or even dis^ct from it. (iii) Temples dedicated 
to Confnoiua (Van mien) aie to be found in the towns, bat are 
generally open only on certain feast days, when they are visited 
by offidals. Sometimes altars dedicated to the sage may be 
found in natural grottoes or other picturesque situations. 
Besides theee numerous elements, Annacnite religion also in¬ 
cludes the veneration of ancestors and ceremcuies such as the 
worship of Heaven and Earth performed in imitation of the 
C?ourt of Pekii^. To this must be added many local superstitions 
in which the worship of animals, especially the tiger, is prominent. 
But a further analysia of this composite religion does not fall 
within my province. 

There is little to be said about the history of Buddhism in 
Annam, bat native tradition places ite introduction as late as 
the tenth cemtury*. Buddhist temples usually contain a Itatue 
of Phat To* who is reported to have been the first adherent of 
the faith and to have built the first pagoda. He was the tutor 
of the Emperor li-Thw-To who came to the throne in 1009. 
Pbat*To may therefore have been active in the middle of the 
tenth century and this agre« with the statement that the 
Emperor Dinh Ticn-Hoang De (9fiS-979) was a fervent Buddhist 
who built temples and did his best to make oouTerts*. One 
Emperor, Li Hu4-Ton, abdicated and retired to a monastery. 

The Annals of Annam* record a discussion which took place 
before the Emperor Thai-T6n (1433-1442) between a Buddhist 
and a soroerer. Both held tingularly mixed beliefs but re¬ 
cognized the Buddha as a deity. The king said that he could 
not decide between the two sects, but gave precedence to the 
Buddhists. 

> PaliioC (Hcou-Tws. tmdoit tb ia Poo, vol. xix- p. ISSO) givw 
iQMPBS for ihinkiu^ tiiM Buddlifom vu io Tonkin fo tbs Mily ontarUs 

ot ovrwa. but, U «>, it nppoan U> hare d«««rod aad beoB rwtrodoend. Also at 
thfo UfDfi CIiiaO'Qilh may h&ro meant Kuang-tueg. 

* Diguet. Lit «4«ftoaufoi, p. SOS. 

* Uaybon at Boam, L'Uitteirt p. IS. 

* l>uraouUar. Z** Annamitu, p. 5S. 

CHAPTER XLIX 

TIBET 

iHTBODTTOTORy 

Tus religion of Tibet wd Mongolia, often called Lamaiam, is 
probably the moat singular form of Buddhism in ezisteDce and 
has long attracted attention in Europe on account of its con¬ 
nection irith politics and its cuiioos resemblance to the Roman 
Church in ritual as veil as in statecrait. The pontiffs and curia 
of Lhasa emulated the authority of the medieval papacy, so 
that the Mings vid Manohus in China as well as the British in 
India had to recognize them as a considerable power. 

Tibet had early relations with Kashmir, Central Asia and 
China which may ^ have contributed somethiog to its peculiar 
civilization, but its religion is in the main iantiic Buddhism 
imported from Bengal and inv^orated from time to time by 
both native and Indian reformers. But though almost every 
feature of Lamaism finds a parallel somewhere in India, yet too 
great inaifitence on its source and historical development hardly 
does justice to the originality of the Tibetans. They borrowed 
a foreign faith wholesale, but still the relative emphasis which 
they laid on its different aspects was something new. They had 
only a moderate aptitude for asceticism, meditation and meta¬ 
physics, although they manfully translated huge tomes of 
Sanskrit philosophy, but they had a genius for hieraicby, 
discipline and eccletiastioal polity unknown to the Hindus. 
Thus tjUHng the common Asiatic idea that great and holy men 
are somehow divine, they made it the principle of tivil and 
eacerdot^ government by declaring the prelates of the church 
to be duties incarnate. Yet in strange contrast to these practical 
talents, a cert^ innate deviliy made them exaggerate ^1 the 
magical, terrifying and demoniac elements to be found in Indian 
Tantrism. 

Tlie extraordinary figures of raging fiends which fill Tibetan 
shrines surest at first that the artists simply borrowed and 
made ruore horrible the least civilized f andss of Indian sculpture, 

346 

BUDDB28M OUTSIDE INDIA [oh.xlix 

yet the mejesty ot Tibetan arcMtectura (tor, judging by the 
photograpbB of Lhaaa and Tashilhumpo, it deaervee no lew a 
name) givee another impreesion. The simplicity of ito lines and 
the solid, spacious walls unadorned by carving recall Egypt 
rather than India and banaonize not witb the many-Iimbed 
demons but with the calm and dignified features of the deified 
pnesta who Me also portrayed in these halls. 

An atmosphere of mystery and sorcery hae lor^ hung about 
the mountainous r^ons which lie to the north of India. Hindus 
and Chinese alike saw in them the home of spirits and wiaarda, 
and the grand but uncatuiy scenery of these high plateaus has 
infiuenc^ the art and ideas of the natives. Tho climate mode it 
natural that priests should congregate in roomy strongholds, 
able to defy the cold and contain the stores necessary for a long 
winter, and the massiTe walle seem to imitate the outline of 
the rooks out of which they grow. But the strange shapes 
assumed by mists and clouds, <^ten dyed many colours by the 
rising or setting sun, suggest to the least imaginatiTe mind an 
aerid world peopled by monstrous and magical fguree. At 
other times, when there is no fog, distant objects seem in the 
stall, clear atmosphere to be very near, until the discovery ^at 
they are really far away produces a strange feeling that they 
Me unreal unattainable. 

In discussing this interesting faith, 1 shall first treat oi its 
history and th^ of the eacrod books on which it professes to 
be ba^. In the light of this information it will be easier to 
understand the doctrines of Lamaism and I shall finally say 
something about its different scots, particularly as there is 
reason to think that the strength of the Established Church, of 
which the Grand Lama is bead, has been exaggerated. 

CHAPTER L 

TIBET 

HiSTOBy 

It is generally stated that Buddhism was firat preached in Tibet 
at the instance of King SroDg'taoa-gam-po^ wbo came to the 
tbpono in 629 a.d. Some legendary notices of its earlier appear¬ 
ance* will bear the natural interpretation that the Tibetans 
(like the Chinese) had heard something about it from either 
India or IChotan before they invited instructors to visit th em *, 
At this time Tibet play^ some part in the poUtica ol China 

> 'nb«tMi ortbognpby 8rot-bU&a-i^m-po. It Is bftrd to 6edJs vliai it tbs 
b«c6 iMtbod of r«pi«MoUDs TiboUn vodt to Lfttin |ett«n: 

(а) Til* ortbogr^>by diSan from tbo modem proouooUtiaa more io 4Ay 
other langQAge, eseepb perfaepe TSugUah, but it appereotlj repnaenta wt older 
pmmifilaUoB *&d tberafon bu histonad velue. 6iaa, 4 vord 04n be foosd ia 4 
Tibetao dioUonuy only U the natire spelling i» l4itblully tepmduoed. On the 
otber b&ad reedere iatereeted in orioctol maUere lutow laaoy words lit 4 
spe l lin g whiob is 4 roagb repneeatatioo of tfae modem prooMcattoa. Zt eeeme 
pod4ntio to write bK«b-bg7ur 4nd bBree-epuCe wbeo tbe best known aaihopties 
•p«4k of Z4njor sad Debiug. Os the whole. I kero decided to r«prce«nfr tbe 
oomaoner words by tbs popnlsr ortbegrtph; 4 s pren by Itoekhill. Wsddsli tod 
otbera wUIo giyiog tbe Tibetan epeillng in 4 fooc<D 9 te> Bet wlien 4 word oe&not 
be S4id to be well known even aaong OosstaJists I btre reprodueed tbs Tibetan 
epeiling. 

(б) But it is not easy to nprodnoe this speUiog clearly and oonaisteotly. Oa 
tbo whole I bave followed tbs syitein seed by Sarst Cbendra Da* in bis DicUonary. 
It is open to some objeoUoos. as, for iostoiioet **'*»■ tbe sign b bas more than one 
rslos, bnt the more aoourato method oaed by GriinwedsJ is bis MfiMofit is 
extremely bard to mad. My Mnscrip&ioo is as foUows ia tbe order of the Tibetan 
oOQsoaaAta 

k. kb. g. ft, 0, eb, i. ny. 

6, tb. d. n, Pi pb, b, nu 
ts, tbsi ds» w. 

»bi», b. y. 
r. I« S, e, b. 

Altbougb tsh ie in some reepeota praferable to represent an asplratod to, yet it 
is liable to be pronounced as la tho EngUsb words Aol stop, sad perbapa tbs is on 
tbe whole ''Otter. 

* 8ee Waddell. SydJiim of Tibet, p. IB. 

* It hes been srgoed (ap., J.R^.8., 1B03, p> 11 ) that dleeoverfse In Cantr^ Ada 
iodieato that Tibetan eivJlisatien and tbaroforo Tibetan Budclbisia aro older tbso 
la generally nppoeed. But ceoent reecaioh ibONta that Ceotral Asian MSS. of even 
tbe eighth ceniory aay Uttls about Boddhisa, wb stover teelimony they may beat 

to cwiliWiou 

B tu. 

23 

848 BUDDBISM OUTSIDE INDIA [cs. 

and northam India. The Emperor H^ha and the T'ang 
Emperor ^ai Teung exchanged embaasiea but a second embassy 
sent from China amyed after Eareha’a death and a ueurper who 
had seized the thieme refuaed to leceiTe it. fThe Chinese with the 
aesifltance of the kings of Tibet and Nepal dethroned him and 
carried him ofi captave. There is therefore nothing improbable 
in the story that Srong-tsan-gam-po had two wives, who were 
princesses of Nepal and China reepecrively. Ho was an active 
ruler, warlike but progressive, and was persuaded by these two 
ladiee that Buddhism was a necessary part of civilization. 
According to tradition he sent to India a messenger called 
Tbonmi Sanbhota, who studied there for several years, adapted 
a form of Indian writing to the use of his native language and 
translated the Keranda Vydha. Recent investigatore however 
have advanced the theory that the Tibetan letters are derived 
from tie alphabet of Indian origin used in Khotan and that 
Sanbhota made its acquaintance in Kashmiri Though the king 
and bis two wives are now regarded as the first patrons of 
Lamaism and worshipped as incarnations of Avalokita and 
Tart, it does not appear that his direct religious activity was 
great or that he built monasteries. But his reign established the 
foondations of civilization without which Buddhism could 
hardly have fiouriahed, he to some extent unified Central Tibet, 
he chose the sito of Lhasa as the capital and introduced the rudi¬ 
ments of literature and art. But after bis death in 660 we hear 
little more of Buddhism for some decades. 

About 706 King Khri-gteug-lde-btaan is said to have built 
monasteries, caused translations to bo mode, aiui summoned 
monks from Khotan. His efforts bore Uttle fruit, for no Tibetans 
were willing to take the vows, but the edict of 783 preserved in 
Lhasa mentions his zeal for religion, and he prepared the way 
for Khri-sroft-lde-btsan in whose reign Padma-Sambhava, the 
real founder of Lamaism, arrived in Tibet^. 

> Bm 1916,pp. xvuS.,MidFr40Cik«, 

Bpif. Ind. n. SSS S., uid od tbs other tide lAoier m J,A~0>3- ISIS, pp. 84 ff. 
There h t, oonaidsuMfl diffue&ce betwoea the printed end ciuvTe fonoi «(the 
ItbeUB elphebet. le It poMible tha* thep hsTB diflorent oripiu ood the« th« 
fonner ceinQ /reiD Beogel. the Utter from Rlioteal 

* There vere leme other ■treems ol BuddhUm, Cor the loos I'ed * teocher 
oelled 8ietor»hehitA who edrised hue to eeod iot Pedme-Seu^heTe end Pedme. 
fie&bheve «e« oppoesd bp Chineeft beniee. 

EJSTOJiT 

S49 

L] 

This event is said to have occurred in 747 and the epoch is 
noticeable for two reasons. Firstly Tibet, which had become an 
important military power, was now brought into contact both 
in peace Awiii wat with and Cffiitral Asia. It was prO’ 
4lominant in the Tarim Baain and ruled over parta of Ssu-ohuan 
and Yunnan. China was obliged to pay tribute and when it was 
suhseqaently refused the Tibetans sacM the capital, Chaz^-an. 
In 783 China made a treaty of peace with Tibet. The long was 
the eon of a Chinese princess and thus blood as well as wide 
experience disposed bim to open Tibet to foreign ideas. But in 
747 relations with China were bad, so he turned towards India 
and invited to his Court a oelebrated Pandit nadied S&ntar^' 
sbita, who advised him to send for Padma*Sambhava. 

Secondly tb ip was the epoch when Amogba flourished m 
China and introduced the Mantrayina syst^ or Chdn Yen. 
This was the same form of corrupt BnddUsm which was brought 
to Tibet and was obviously the domioant seot in India in the 
eighth century. It was pliant and ama^amated easily with local 
olMervaoces, in China with funeral rites, in Tibet with de* 
tnonolatry. 

At th^ time Padma-Sambhava was one of the most cele¬ 
brated exponents of Tantrio Buddhism, and in 'Hbot is often 
called simply the Teacher (Guru or Mah&c&rya). His portraits 
represent him as a man of strongly marked and rather angry 
featuree, totally unlike a conventional monk. A popular account 
of his life^ is stiU widely read ay>d may contain some grains of 
history, though the narrative as a whole is fantastic. It 
describee him as born miraculously in Udyina but as having 
studied at Bodhgaya and travelled in many regions with the 
intention of converting all the world. According to his plan, 
the convciaion of his native land was to be bis laat labour, and 
when he h ad finished hie work in 'Hbet he vanished thither 
miraculously. Thus Udygna is not represented as the souroe and 
home of Tantric Buddhism but as being like Tibet a land of 

‘ TbsPsd-ffl&'UtfLB’riC* Itiadic«t«««om«M«)auaUoo*vilhlal»iaaadoi«QtioBi 
EaJtigQKasik. Sm T’oHn^PaOt IdM, 586 fl. 8 m for ft fortber ftCMont Qrinwidel. 
MyiMetit, p. il. WadOell. Bu4^im. p. 360, ftod the TibtUa foxt sdifod «aC 
tfftubCftd by Unfor ondftr tbe tiUe XW ifomoft ««iMr rifotfoeAM JTaufiii, MpecoAU; 
pp.S60fl. g-T-obrmibflfhrnlbttng ttp Pti’mr—,** 
46&ftaa i. baytr. AkeuL 1. Cl. zsi Bd. u. AbtlL 41 0 M4, ftnS ^ L O. zm Bd 111. 
Abth. SIO-676. 

850 

BVDDEIS^ OUTSIDE INDIA 

[oh, 

niftgie and mystery but, like Tibet, needing conversion: both are 
disposed to welcome Tantric ideas but those ideas axe elaborated 
by Padma-Sambhava not in Udy&na but in Bengal which 
from ether sources we know to have been a centre of 
Tantrlsm. 

Some other points of interest in these legends may be 
noticed. Padma Saznbhava is not celibate but is accompanied 
by female companions. He visits many countries which worship 
various deities and for each ho has a new teaching suited to its 
needs. Thus in Tibet, where the older religion consisted of de¬ 
fensive warfare against the attacks of evil spirits*, he a ssumes 
the congenial character of a victorious exorcist, and in his 
tiiumphant progress subdues local demons as methodically as 
if he were suppressing the guerilla warfare of native tribes. He 
has new revelations (^ed Terma which he hides in caves to be 
discovered by his successors. These revelataons are said to have 
been in 6ti unknown language^. Those at present esdstiog are in 
Tibetan but difier from the oanonicol scriptures in certain 
orthographical peculiariti». The legend thus admite that 
Padma-Sarnbhava preached a ncn-celibato and magical form of 
Buddhism, ready to amalgamate with local superatitioiiB and 
needing new revelations for its justidcatlon. 

He built the monastery of Samye* about thirty miles from 
Lhasa on the model of Odantapuri in Bengal. ^Smtarakshita 
became abbot and from this period datse tbe foundation of the 
order of Lamas*. Mara (Thse lila-ra) was worshipped as well as 
the Buddhas, but however corrupt the cxiltus may have been, 
Samyo was a literary centra where many translations were 
made. Among tbe best Imowa translators was a monk from 
Kashmir named Vairocana^ It would appear however that 

* Much of QuDw popukr religlOD faM mwo obiActor. Beo Do Gtoot, 

ReJifious of CMno, toL vi. pp. 029.1 lfi7, ^ Tbs Wsr Spectra.” 

* Both he and Uu oacb later Sukya Te&diU ai« Mid to bars uadenfiood tbe 
Bn^ha lan^sgs, for which m T'imq Pao, 190$, pp. 1-47. 

* Ortfiam yaa. Bee Waddell, PadcUiM.p. 20$, for aaaocoont of this neiMtery 
at Ibe praeot day. 

< nwTlbeUawotd blena means Qppar and ia properly appUoable to tbe higher 
elergy only though soxunciDly need of all 

' He wae (eaporarily baiuabed owuig to tbe Intrigoee of the Ooeea, wbo aetad 
tbs part of Potipbar'e wife, bot be was trioaphaoUy rwtcxsd. A nobh ealled 
Vairosaoa la also aatd to haTO Introduced Buddhism into Hbotaa ftom Kashmir, 
but at a data vlueb tboogb oncertain muat be considerahly earlier tban this 

ElSTOSy 

361 

L] 

there was conaderable opposition to the riew school not only 
from the priests of the old native religion but from Cbmeee 
Buddhists^. 

Numerous Tibetan documents discovered in the Taiim basin* 
date from this period. The absence in them of Buddhist personal 
names and the rarity of direct references to Buddhism indicate 
that though known in Tibet it was not yet predominant- 
Bnddhist priests (ban-de) axe oocaaionally mentioned but the 
title Lama has not been found. The usages of the Bonpo religion 
seem familiar to the writers and there are allusions to religious 
struggles. 

When Padma-Sambhava vanished from Tibet, the legend 
says that ho left behind him twenty-five disciples, all of them 
magicians, who propagated his teaching. At any rate it flourished 
in the reign of Ralpachan (the grandson of Khri-sron-lde-btsan). 
Mouasteries multiplied and received land and the right to collect 
tithes. To each monk was assigned a small levenne derived from 
five tenants and the hierarchy was reorganizod*. Many trans¬ 
lators were at work in this period and a considerable part of 
the present canon was then rendered into Tibetan. The king's 
devotion to Buddhism was however unpopular and he was 
murdered* apparently at the instigation of his brother and 
successor Lang-dar-ma*, who endeavoured to extirpate Lama- 
ism, Mooaateriea were destroyed, books burnt, Indian monks 
were driven out of the country and many Lamas were compelled 
to become hunters or butchers. But the persecution only lasted 
three years*, for the wicked king was assassinated by a Lama 
who has since been canonized by the Church and the incident 
of his murder or punishment is still acted in the mystery plays 
performed at Himie and other monasteries. 

After the death of Lang-dar-ma Tibet ceased to exist as a 

> 8w J«nmal of Buddkiti Ttff Sodtin. 1803, p. S. I imo^ne th»i by IToehaag 
Ufthiyin* (he tollower* of SodhUbenu uo dM«ot. 

* J.B.A.S. W14.».3l-8« 

• See BMkMll. oftM p. 2ia. 

♦ Veriou <iKt«e ets gi«o for hi* death, renfcmS ^>vio 838 to 002. See RockMll 

{Uft of At p, S23, end BuebeU b J.B.A.S. pp. *40ff. 

treety of 823 made to hia lelgo. 

* g lAii.dAr>m». 

• Bat eea for ether eoceanU RockhUl (Life of A* 828. Aocordiag 

Chome de KSrua'e t*U« the date of the peraccutiOB wee 888. 

352 BUDDHISM 0UT8IDH INDIA [oh. 

united kingdom and was diridod among olana and chieitaina. 
Tliis was doubtless connected with the collapse of Tibetan 
power in the Tarim boain, but whether as efiect or cause it is 
bard to say. The persecution may have had a political motive j 
Lang*der-md may have thought that the rise of monastio 
corporations, and thwr right to own land and levy taxes were 
a menace to unity and military efBdenoy. But the political 
confuwn which followed on his death was not due to the 
triumphant restoration of Lamaism. Its recovery was elow. The 
interval during which Buddhism almost disappeared is estimated 
by native authorities os from 73 to 108 years, and its subsequent 
revivid is treated as a separate period called phyi*dar or later 
diffmon in contrast to the sfia-dor or earlier diffusion. The 
silence of ecclemsstical history during the tenth century con¬ 
firms the j^avity of the catastrophe*. On the other hand the 
numerous translations made in the ninth century were not lost 
and this indicates that there were monasteries to preserve them, 
for instance Samye. 

At the be^nning of the eleventh century we hear of foreign 
monks arriving from various countries. The chronicles* say that 
the ob ief workers in the new diffusion were La*chen, Lo-ohen^ 
the royal Lama Yeles ISod and Atlia. The first appears to have 
been a Tibetan but the pupil of a teacher who had studied in 
Nepal. Lo-ohen wss a Koahmiri and several other Kashmiri 
Tj>Tr^ft<a axe mentioned as working in Tibet. Ye^es ^od was a 
king or chieftain of mf^a-ris in western Tibet who Is said to 
have been disgusted with the debased Tantrism which passed 
as Buddhism. He therefore sent young Lamas to study in India 
and also invited thence learned monks. The eminent Dbarma- 
pftla, a monk of Magadha who was on a pilgrim^ in Nepal, 
became hie tutor. Yeke came to an unfortunate end. He 
was taken captive by the Baj a of Garlog, an enemy of Buddhism, 
and died in prison. It is possible that this Ea]a was the ruler 
of Garhwal and a Mohammedan. The poliUcal history of the 
period Is far from dear, but evidently there were numerous 
Buddhist schools in Bengal, Kashmir and Nepal and niunerous 
learned monks ready to take up their residence in Tibet. This 

> Bee the «hraiolc^eAl Ubis in Wtddnll'a p. 57a Koi t aogI« 

TlbeUa h iMnHoosd betwMo 81kd ftnd lOOS. 

* Pftg Sora JoQ Zu^. Bid. Saimt Obaadra Daa, p. 183 . 

BISTORT 

S 5 a 

readiness haa been explained ae due to fear of the rising tide of 
Islam, but was more probably the result of the revival of 
Buddhism in Bengal during the eleventh century. The most 
illustrious of these pandits was AtKa‘ (dSO-1053), a native of 
Bengal, who was ordained at Odontspuri and studied in Burma*. 
Subsequentiy he was appointed head of the monastery of 
Vikiamailla and was induced to visit Tibet in 1038*. He 
rem^ed there until his death fifteen years later; introduced a 
cew calendar and inaugurated the second period of Tibetan 
Buddhism which is marked by the rise of sucoesave sects 
described as reforms. It may seem a j set to call the teaching of 
AtlSa a reform, for he professed the KflJacakra, the latest and 
most corrupt form of Indian Buddhism, but it was doubtlees 
superior in discipline and cohwen^ to the native superatitions 
mixed with debased tantriam, which it replaced. 

As in Japan du ring the eleventh and twelfth conturiee many 
monaeteriee were founded and grew in importance, and what 
might have happened in Japan but for the somewhat unsctupidous 
preeclenoe of Japanese statesmen actually did happen in Tibet. 
Among the numerous contending chiefs none was pre-eminent: 
the people were pugnadoas but superstitious, Itey were ready 
to build and lespeot when built the substantial structures 
required to house monastic oornmunities during the r^orous 
rater. Hence the monasteries became the hugest and safest 
buildings in the land, possesaii^ the doable strength of walls 
and inviolability. The most important was the Sakya monastery. 
Its abbots were of royal blood and not celibate, and this dyn^y 
of eocleaUstical statesmen practically ruled Tibet at a criti^ 
period in the history of eastern Asia and indeed of the world, 
namely, the cxmqueets of Chinggiz* and the rise of the Mongo! 
Empire. 

I8W."liMli»nP4iuiit« iBTttp*t.”pp. 7fi- . , v . 

• So»*r?*U»lp*.wii®»Jwttodi®(l, onfftb^TkMcotndtttoeoxMniJtofladUiat 

iC wu * «Mtr« of uatno loeniAg. , . j i. 

• Fwo loss odwmUb »• ohroaologwol fiftWe* of Sotn-po tmaikM 67 

BM CSiondia D- in iSSft pp. «-M. Tboy oinsy 

»p«jt)Iv 0 * Wogttphy. Tl« TlboUn •yiton of enmpu^ u 

bwed on eycl** of «xt 7 boguminj: it vonJd wen nok ln 103S but l«7. eo 
that in tOMoy Set** U an error of * y«nr. See Pelbot, J.A. ISIS, l 638, and 
Innfer. T'o^ttg P«o, ISIS, 6 SS. _^ 

• Or Jenghb Ehnn. Tbe fom is the text leemi W be toe noie eotreot. 

354 

BUDDBI8M OUTSIDE lEDIA 

[oh, 

There is no evidence 6bat Cliiagg;iz was specially favourable 
to Buddhism. His principle was one King and one God^ and 
like other princes of his race he thought of religions not as 
incompatible systems bat sa different znethods of worehip of no 
more importance than the different languages used in prayer. 
The destruction wrought by the Mongol conquerors has often 
been notieed> but they had also an ample, temper which 

deserres recognition. China, Russia and Persia all achieved a 
unity after the Mongol conquest which they did not possess 
before, and though this uxuffcation may be described as a protest 
and reaction, yet but for the Mongols and their treatment of 
large areas as units it would not have been posable. The Mings 
could not have united China before the Yuan dynasty as they 
did after it. 

In spite of some statements to the contrary there is no proof 
that the early Mongols invaded or conquered central Tibet, but 
Khubilal subdued the eastern provinces and through the 
Lamaist hieraicby established a special connection between 
Tibet and his dynasty. This connection began even in the time 
of his predecessor, for the hood Lama of the Sakya monastery 
commonly known as Sakya Pandita (or Sa-skya-pan oen) was 
summoned to the Mongol Court in 124&-8, and cured the 
Bmperor of an illness’. This Lama was a man of great learning 
and influence. Ho bad received a double education both secular 
and religious, and was acquainted with foreign languages. The 
iavouiable impression which he created no doubt facilitated the 
brilliant achievements of his nephew and successor, who is 
commonly known as Bashpa or Pagspa’. 

Khubiloi Khan was not content with the vague theism of 
Central Asia and wished to give his rude Mongols a definite 
rehgion with some aoceasohee of literature and manners. 
Confucianism was dearly too scholastic for a flghting race and 
we may surmise that be rejected Chiistiaoity as distant and 

* T«^ Or IEMT«n. Tiut aonotbeiem oommou tQ tb« saeient Tarki 

ftsd Uod^oIa did BOt o( coune azolada tt* vonfaip of ipinU. 

* OuTUie WM Kh iga n Bt this Ua» bet tb« Mongol of Bontag 8eU«n 

(Sebmidi, p. S) Mft tbBt tbo L*m» wm naaoa*d by tba Qodfta It icnrui 

Uut Godas VM B 0 TW kbtsftn, but u ia iofiototi*! prmco ho may bftT« Mut th« 
sammosa. 

* bPhiffBpB (comptAd in Moused to PMbpe) is moniy * titi« oqgiT4lsat to 
lyi» is SMukrtC. His till tiylo bus b^ha^po bLO’Sroo.i^^ mthMD. 

HISTORY 

366 

1^1 

unimportant. Mohammedanism aa inconTcniently mixed with 
politics. Bat why did be prefer Lamaism to Chioeeo Buddhism 1 
The latter can hardly have becu too austerely pure to suit his 
ends, and Tibetan was as straogo as Chinese to the Mongols. 
But the Mongol Court bad already been favourably jmprossed 
by Tibetan l^mas and the Emperor probably had a just feeling 
that the inteltectaal calibio of the Mongols and Tibetans was 
similar and also that it was politic to conciliate the uncsknny 
spiritual potentates who ruled in a land which it was difficult 
to invade. At any rate he summoned the abbot of Sakya to 
China in 1201 and was initiated by him into the mysterios of 
Lamaism^. 

It is said that bafore Pagepa's birth the God Ganeia showed 
his father all the land of Tibet and told him that it would bo 
the idngdom of his son. In later life when he had difficulties at 
the Chinese Court Mah&k&Ia appeared and helped him, and tho 
mystery which he imparted to Khubilai is call^ the Hovajrava* 
^tA*. These legends indicate that there waa a la^ proportion 
of Sivaism in the religion first taught to the Mongols, larger 
perhaps than in the present Lamaism of Lhasa. 

The Mongol historian Sanang Setsen relates’ that Pagspa 
took a higher seat tlxan the Emperor when instructing him aiid 
on other occasions sat on the same level. Thissounds unprobable, 
but it is clear that he enjoyed great power and dignity. In China 
he reo^ved the title of Kuo-Shih or instructor of the nation and 
was made the head of all Buddhists, Lemusts and other. In 
Tibet he was recognized as head of tho Chorch and tributary 
Boverdgn, though it would appear that the Emperor named a 
lay council to assist him in the government and also bad a com* 
zniBuoncrin each of the three provinces. This was a good political 
b^gain and Itud the foundations of Chinese induonec in a 
country which he could hardly have subdued by force. 

PagBpa was charged by the Emperor to provide the Mongols 
with an alphabet as well as a religion. For thia purpose he used 

1 By ftbhiiokhs er ipriokla; with wtUr. 

* VtHU s foraulft whica «oinp«U the eb«dieDe* ol aptriU or nstorsl 

forM*. (spiMrauly tb« tame u is oo« ^ Ui« fsoUstb bsiog* 

oooMlvtd H mwiXeetttioaa of 5uddbs4 and BodbisaUTM luiids for a epsciol pox* 
poM, doooly oorrospoodjog, ss Grfinvodei poisU out, to tho msoilsoutloiu of &*a> 

* BohoidtV odidos, p. 115. 

356 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE llfDIA [ ob . 

i. square form of tlie Tibetan letters*, wtitten not in boriaontal 
but in reclical lines. But the experiment was not suooeeaful. 
The cbaiaetera were neither easy to write nor graceful, and after 
Pagspa's death his Invention fell into disuse and was replaced 
by an enlarged and modifed form of the Uigur alphabet. This 
had already been employed for writing Mongol by Sakya 
Paudlta and its dednitiTe form for that purpose was elaborated 
by the Lama Chos-kyi-bcd-zer in the reign of Kbubilai’s 
succeseor. This alphab^ is of Aramaic origin, and had already 
been utilized by Buddhists for writing rd^^ue works, so its 
application Co Mongol was merely an extension of its general 
ciutency in Asia*. 

Pagspa also superintended the preparation of a new edition 
of tile Tripitaka, not in Mongol but in Chinese. Among the 
learned editors were persons acquainted with Sanskrit, Chineee, 
Tibetan Uigur. An interesting but natural feature of tiiin 
edition is that it notes whether the various Chinese texts are 
found in the Tibetan Canon or not. 

Khubilai further instituted a bureau of fine arte, the head of 
which was a Lama called Anzko, eMBed in both sonlpture and 
painting. He and his Ohineee pupil Liu Yuan introduced into 
Peking varicus branchee of Tibetan art such as Buddhist images 
of a special type, omamentid ironwork and gold tapestry. The 
Chinese at this period appear to have regarded Tibetan art as 
a direct importation from India*. And no doubt Tibetan art 
was founded on that of Nepal which in its turn came from 
Bengal. Miniatnre p ointing is a characteristio of both. But in 
later times tiie individuE^ty of Tibet, shown alike in its 
monstrous deities and its life-like portraits of Lamas, imposed 
itself on Nepal. Indian and Tibetan temples are not alike. In 
the former there is little painting but the walls and pillars are 
covered with a superabundance of figures carved in relief; in 
Tibet pictures and painted banners are the first thing to strike 
the eye, but carvings in relief are rare. 

It is hard to say to what extent the Mongols beyond such 

i 16 u ghm ia 1 mm Ti.;lor‘e TU Alphabtl, rd. IL p. 830. Sm iJsO 
1910 , yp. 1208 - 1214 . 

^ B.g. MO TiMstTOlUItt.a ittro ia a Tbrkicb diaisot knd Uigisr otanotan 
foond ftt Turfoo uid patUibed la &d»ort«fg xn. 

* 8m Cokka Ko. 9!1,191S, Art in Okino, 

BI STORY 

857 

paxte of northern Cbm* u felt the direct influence of the 
imperial court were coQ7erted to Lamaism. At enj rate their 
conversion was only temporary for, as will be related below, 
a reconversion was necessary in the asteenth century. It looks 
as if the first growth of Mongolian Buddhism was part of a 
politaeal system and collapsed together with it. But so long as 
the Yuan dynasty rdgned, Lamaist influence was strong and 
the downfall of the Yiian was partly caused by their subservienoe 
to the clergy and extravagant expenditure on religious buildings 
and ceremonies. After the departure of Pagspa, other Lamas 
held a high position at the Court of Peking such as Ohos kyi- 
bod-zor and gYuA^ston rDo^rje-dpal. The latter WM a die* 
tinguished exponent of the Klkcs^ system and the teacher 
of the historian Bu^ston who is asid to have arranged the 
Tibetan Canon. 

Although the Yiiao dynasty heaped favours upon priests and 
monastcrios. it does not appear that religion flourished in Ubet 
during the fourteenth century for at the end of that period the 
gravo abuses prevalent prov^ed the reforming zeal of Tsong* 
kha*pa. From 1270 to 1340 the abbots of Sakya were rulers of 
both Church and State, and we hear that in 1320 they burned 
the rival monastery of Dikung. The language of Sanang Setsen 
implies that each abbot was appointed or invested by the 
Emperor^ and their power decided udth the Yuan dynasty. 
Other monasteries increased in importance aud a chief known 
as Pbagmodu^ succeeded, after many years of flgbting, in 
founding a lay dynasty which ruled parte of Tibet until the 
seventeenth century. 

In 1368 the Ming supereeded the Yiian. They were not 
professed Buddhiste to the same extent and they had no pre¬ 
ference for Lamaism but they were anxious to maintain good 
relarione with Tibet and to treat it as a friendly but vassal state. 
They accorded imperial recegniUon (with an implication of 
suzerainty) to the dynasty of Pbagmodu and also to the abbots 
of eight monssteries. Thougl; they were doubtless glad to see 
Tibet a divided and contentions house, it does not appear that 
they interfered actively in its affairs or did more than recognize 

’ Sonoae Stinn, p. Tbe luccsttlon of (Ha Stk^ kbbota ii not oloar bet (ba 
priioacj ooatlooaJ in tba fuznJy. 8«e Efippco, n. p, IOC. 

* Strlotly flpft&loug a pJu«>naba. 

358 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CE. 

tbe statM In the time of Khxibil&i the piimac;^ of Sekya 
vfls a reality: seventy years later Sakya was only one among 
several great monaaterioa. 

The advent of the Ming djuasty coincided with the birth of 
l%ong*kha-pa*, the last reformer of Lamaiem and oigaouer of 
the Chnrch aa it at present exists. The name means the'man of 
the onion-bank, a vdley near the monastery of Kombum in the 
district of Amdo, which lies on the western frontiers of the 
Chinese province of Kansu. He became a monk at the age of 
seven and from the hair cut oS when he received the tonsure is 
said to have sprung the celebrated tree of Kumbum which bears 
on its leaves wondrous markings*. According to tho legend, his 
birth and infancy were attended by miracles. He absorbed 
instruction from many teachers and it baa been conjectured that 
among them were Roman Catholic missionaries^. In early man¬ 
hood he proceeded to Tibet and studied at S^ya, Dikung and 
finally at Lhasa. His reading convinced him that Lamatam as 
he found it was not in harmony with the scriptiuee, so with the 
patronage of the secular rulers and the support of the more 
earnest clergy he eaoceesfully executed a thorough and per¬ 
manent work of reform. This took visible shape in the Gelugpa, 
the sect presided over by the Grand Lama, which acquired such 
paramount importance in both ecclesiastical and secular matters 
tliat it is justly termed the Established Church of Tibet. It may 
also be conveniently termed the Yellow Church, yellow being 
its special colour particularly for hate and girdles, in opposition 
to tiio led or unrefomed sects which use red for the same 
purpose. Tsong'kha-pa's reforms took two principal lines. 
Firstly be made monastic discipline stricter, insisting on ceUbacy 
and frequent services of prayer: secondly he greatly reduced, 
^though he did not annihilate, the tantric Emd magical dement 

* ortho^ph; a bttsod (or B« wu c«n»(] rJe-rm< 

po.olw bLo>bsaA.gp«^.p& ia TibeUa kod Somotiltrti in Sanskrit 

T)ia Tibetan ortbosraphj of the mooastery is sEu.bboo) or hundiad tiboruand 
plctuna See, for aocoanta of hia life. Bant Chandra )Dm is J.A.S.B, 1SS2, pp. 
tS-S? and 1S7, Hutb, i» d«r J^onpoiei', B. pp. 176 It 

* There la eome diifereoee of lUteitieDtes to vhetber these tDarktags are images 
of Teoog-kba.pa or Tihetsa ehataeteie. Use, thougb no SoddhUt, thought them 
mirMuioua. See fiia T'ra&eis ia TarUrrn, toL n. cbep. u. See also RockhiS, Land of 
the Lamui, p 67, and FUehoar, DA4 Ktodtr XumbuR, chap tl 

* But tito tmditivn nentioned b)^ Kuo tbaC ho was instructed a long-nosed 
stranger from the west, has not boon foond ia an7 Tibetan biography. 

HISTORY 

359 

in Lamusm. T}xeee principled were perpetuated by an effective 
organiaataon. He hitoeelf founded the great monaafery of 
Gandan near Lbaea and beovne ite first abbot. During bis life* 
time or shortly afterwards were founded three others, Sera ay'H 
Depung both near Lhasa and Tashilhunpo^. He himself seems 
to have ruled simply in virtue of his personal authority as 
founder, but his nephew and successor G^en-dub* claimed the 
same right as an Incarnation of the divine head of the Cborcb, 
and this claim was supported by a hierarchy which became 
overwhelmingly powerful. 

Tsong*kha-pa died in X417 and is said to have been trans* 
figured and carried up into heaven while predictlog to a great 
crowd the future glories of his church. His mor^ remains, 
however, preserved in a magnificent mauaoleiun within the 
Gandan monastery, etili receive great veneration. 

Among his more eminent disciples were Byams chen cbos-rje 
and mElhaa*grah*Tje who in Tibetan art are often represent^ 
as accompanying him. The first played a considerable part in 
China. The Smperor Yung>Lo sent an embassy to invite Tseng* 
kha*pa to his c^tal. Tsong*hha-pa felt unable to go himself 
but sent his pupil to represent him, Byams-ehen-ohos'rje was 
received with great honour*. The main object of the Ming 
Emperors was to obtain political infiuence in Tibet through 
the Lo m as but in return the Lamas gained considerabU prestige, 
Tbe Konjur was printed in China (1410) and ByamS'chen* 
cbos*rje and his dUeiplee were recognized as prelates of the 
whole Buddhist Church within the Empire. He returned to 
Tibet laden with presents and titles and founded tbe monastery 
of Serra in 1417. Afterwards he went back to China and died 
there at the age of eighty*four. 

* Tibsten oribogMpby irritct dO«t*ldui, So.ra. bfirMapou aod bEr»4i» 
Lhu-po. dO«t*ldiQ, tb» happy, it a LrtiuUtloa o( Uie Suukht Tiubita m Pandise. 
Tmig-kha.pe’a rdonaod smS vm originally uJIad dGab'logB.po or thow who 
folio* tbfl vAy ofdOat’ldtn. Bat tbl« pcMlbly foggeetad thoce wbo pume pimura 
and ibe nana waa obingad to d0o.laga«p4 or tboae of tbs wrCaooa order. 

* dGo-'diin grab. 

* Bs WAS Mt tbs — as Bs-U-ma (sm p. 9T7) of whoia mors is bserd in 
ChtiMss AMoats. Ha-ff.fiia or Sarmt *a« fiitb bsAd of tbs EAms.pA sohool Aod 
irsa ioritsd on bis ova merits to Chhu vbera be dtod In 1426 or 1414, See Hath, 
f.c. ToL L p. 109 sod vol. Tc. p. 171. Also EOppeo, dw i2«I. 4 m fuddSs, il 107. 
ByABs ehsn-eboa.Tfe vas innied as tbs lepneaotAtlve of Tacmg.ka.pe. Bet Bstfa, 
U, rol. L p 120 , eel c. p. 129. 

360 BUDDMrm OUTSIDE INDIA [CH. 

mKbaS'grub'rje founded the mona£t 6 r 7 of Tasbiihunpo and 
beoame ite abbot, being accepted ae an incarnation of the Buddha 
Amit&bha. He was elgbth in the series of incarnations, which 
henceforth were localised at Tashiihnnpo, but the first is said 
to have been SubhOti, a dboiple of Gotama, and the second 
Mafijuicikirti, king of the countiy of ^ambhala*. 

The abbot of Tashilhunpo became the second personage in 
the ecclesiastical and political hierarchy. The bead of it was the 
prelate commonly known as the Grand Lama and resident at 
Lhasa. Qedea*dub*, the nephew of Tsong-kha-pa, is reckoned 
by common consent as the first Grand Lama (though he seems 
not to have home the title) and the first incarnation of Avalokita 
as head of the Tibetan Church*. The Emperor Ch'6ng Hua 
(1366-1488) who had occasion to fight on the borders of Tibet 
confirmed the position*cf these two sees as superior to the eight 
previously recognized a-nd gave the occupants a patent and seal. 
Prom this time they bore the title of rGyal-po or Ung. 

It was about this time that the theory of successive incama* 
tions* which is eharacteristio of X<amaism was developed and 
defined. At least two ideas are combined in it. The first is that 
divine persons appear in human form. This is oommon in Asia 
from India to Japan, especially among the peoples who have 
accepted some form of Hindn religion. The second is that m a 
echod, sect or church there is real continuity of life. In the 
unreformed sects of Tibet this was accomplished by the simple 
principle of heredity so that celibacy, though undeniably 
correct, seemed to snap the thread. But it wes reunited by the 
theory that a great teacher is reborn in the successive occupante 
of his ohair. Thus the historian Tiranitha Is supposed to be 
reborn in the hierarchs of Urga, Bat frequently the hereditary 
soul is identified with a Buddha or Bodhisattva, as in the great 

^ 8m for * lift of the Iazdm of Tubilliaapo uid thtlr l!re« J.A.SS. 1S62. pp. 
la-tS. Tiio third iftursMioQ Oupte, o ealehr*tod Pvulit 

vho Souri«b«d in fih* r«i^ of RSmApSJo. Thlt oppoftr* to t«Mi *boat 
IIJB, but then is oouiidmblo diacnp«&«p ia th» dotM glTeo. 

* Bm> tor hi# life J.A.8.B. ISSS. p. H. 

* T#wig.Mn-p* i# Qot reohoasd in thu mtuc of mc*ni#tioni. for fintlv h# waa 
rogwdad o# *n icuMiaatwa of MahjaSrt tad Moondly Oodon-dub mi bom b«for« 
hi# dMth aod h#Bc« could not rop rei ftct tb« #piik whleb dvelt la him. 

* Tibettt tPruI-pa, Mongol UobdshuL Both are traailattoBi of the Sanskrit 
Nirtalaa and the lOot Idea Is not lacamatlon bot tranilormation io an ihuun 
fonm 

H18T0K7 

I-] 

incamAtions of Lhasa and Tashiihunpo. This dogma hu ohtious 
advanbages. It imparts to a Lamaisb see a dignity which the 
papaoy cazmot rival bnt it is to the advantage of the Curia 
rather than of the Pope for the incarnate deity of neceaai^ 
succeeds to his li^h ofiice aa an infant, is in the lumds of regents 
and not unfrequently dies when about twenty years of age. 
These incarnations aro not confined to the great sees of tHbet. 
The heads of most large monasteries in Moogolia olaim to he 
living Buddhas and even in Peking there are said to be six. 

The second Grand Lama^ enjoyed a long reign, and set the 
hieraiohy in good order, for he distinguished strictly clerical 
posts, filled by incaraatfons, from administrative posts. He was 
summoned to Pairing by the Emperor, but declined to go 
the somewhat imperative embassy sent to invite bixa was 
rooghly handled. His successor, the third Grand Lama bSod- 
uams*, although less noticed by historians than the fifth, perhaps 
did more solid work for the holy see of Lhasa tha n any other 
of his line for he obtained, or at least received, the allegiance of 
the Mongols who since the time of Khubilai bad woefully back* 
sUdden from the true faith. 

As mentioned above, the conversion of the Moi^ols to 
Buddhism took place when their capital was at Peking and 
chiefly affected those resident in China. But when the Yuan 
dynasty bad been dethroned and the Mongols, driven back into 
their wilds, were frequently at war with China, they soon 
relapsed into their original superstitions. About 1570 AJtan^ 

^ Tb« loUovisg ll»t of Onsd L*ibm ii 6«]cu from GrtavodoTs 
p. 206. Tbair daom ftr» folbved by tbo tiUs rOp^Tbao sad b msar osm the 
fint part ^ tb« »»»•"* la a tiUe. 

I. dO«-banft.dub, 130UU78. 7, bU-buO ilUl^faa. ITOekiTSa 

5. dQe.bdoD. 14?t<lML S. bLo'bsiS bJftO-dpal 1769-lSOS. 

a be^d.aaoa lS4d-lSSa 9. bUhbuO Uft.rtop, 1S06>ISIS. 

4. Yon.tas, 1087-I6ia U>. bLo-bsaQ Thnldchriou, J817-1S37. 

a eJag-dbafi bLcKbaS, 1617^1680. 11. bLo-baaS dGa.dmu, 18S8-186& 

6. Rm.clwaTbnaa.dbrai»,L69S-]703. IS. bLChbufi ^uin-ka, 1866-1674 

13. ^a«>dba& bLe'beafi Tbfib-Uam, 1376. 

■ See ter an aceoniit of hia doiii^ Saiuag Seteaa. ebap. im Euth, 
n. pp. 30Q fL K6;^aQ, n. pp 134 E It voold appear that about 1646 aerth* 
vaaUm Tibet iraa deraatated by from Eiabgar. Sm Waddell, 

p, 683. 

I AJao biovD aa Teota or Aada. See, ter aeae panloulara abeoi him, Parker 
B tf. Qiiaa Bra&eb of R.A^ ISIS, pp. 93 S. 

3e2 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDJE INDIA 

[CB. 

Khag&n, the powerful chief of the Tiimed, became more ncE^ly 
acquainted with Tibet, since some Lamas captured in a border 
fray bad been token to his Court. After causing China much loss 
and trouble he made an advantageous peace and probably 
formed the idea (which the Manchus subsequently proved to be 
reasonable) that if the Mongols were stronger they might repeat 
the conquests of Khubilai. The Ming dynasty was clearly 
decadent and these mysterious priests of Tibet appeared to be 
on the upward grade^. They might help him both to become the 
undisputed chi^ of all the Mongol tribes and also to reconquer 
Peking. So he sent an embassy to invite the Grand Lama’s 
presence, and when it was not successful he followed it with a 
second. 

Q?he Grand Lama then accepted and set oat on hus travels 
with great pomp. According to tl^e story he appeared to the 
astonished Mongols in the guise of Avalckita with four arms (of 
whioh two remained folded on his breast) and the imprint of 
his horse’s hoofs showed the six mystic syllables on mani podme 
hum. These wonders are so easily explicable that they may be 
historical. 

A great congr^ation was held noar Lake Kokonor and 
Sanang Setsen reoo^s an Interesting speech made there by one 
of his ancestors respecting the relataons of Church and State, 
which he compared with the sun and moon. The Lama bestowed 
on the Rhagau high sounding titles and received himself the 
epithet Lalai or Talai, the Mongol word for sea, signifying 
metaphorically vast extent and profundity^. This is the origin 
of the name Dalai Lama by which the Tibetan pontiff is com¬ 
monly known to Europeans. The hierarchy was divided into 
four classes parallel to the four ranks of Mongol nobles: the use 
of meat was restricted and the custom of killing men and horses 
at funerals forbidden. The observance of Buddhist festivals was 
made compulsory and native idols were destroyed, but the 

’ NMinllj Um it not told without EOinouJoui «mbeUubment, in. 

ftindinp the uigukr story thst AJtna who luffered boa the goat nssd to put his 
fenoToiy month Into tbo r^psd up bodyof i^msa or boiw sad bsths tbeo id tbe 
wsra blood. Avslokita sppeiuod to him when «ngsged in this iohofasn ouw rad 
bsds him dssist rad stone for hU 

' In TibetoA lOys.mTheo. Cooipsre the Chlntee sspreesion Usng (m« 
measure) uManing ospadoue or bnsd miud»i Tbe Khsgra reeeived Uu title of 

tllleas.pa cl»W1-pO Ot^UITSlanC to 

BIST 0 R 7 

S63 

deitiee wiiich they represented were prob&bly idGnti£ed with 
others in the new pantheon. The Grand Lama specialty recom¬ 
mended to the Moogob the worship of the Blae Mahik&la, a 
six armed representation of ^va standing on a figure of Gane^a, 
and he left with them a priest who was esteemed an incarnation 
of Manjibri, vid for whom a temple and monastery were built 
in Kuku-Ichoto. 

His Holiness then returned to Tibet, but when Altan Khagan 
died in 1533 he made a second tour in Mongolia in order to make 
sure of the allegiance of the new chiefs. He also received an 
embassy from the CSiinese Emperor Wan*U, who conferred on 
him the same titles that KhabOai had given to Pagspa. The 
alliance between the Tibetans and Mongols was naturally dJs- 
quietiag to the Ming dynasty and they sought to minimize it by 
showing extreme dviJity to the Lunas. 

This Grand Lama died at the age of iorty'Seven, and it is 
significant that the next incarnation appeared in the Mongol 
royal house, being a great-grandson of Altan Khagan. Until he 
waa fourteen be lived in Mongolia and when he moved to Lhasa 
a Lama was appointed to be his ricar and Primate of all 
Mongolia with residence at Kuren or Urga^. The prelates of this 
line are considered as incarnations of the historian T&ran&tha*. 
In common language they bear the name of rJe'btsun'da>m*pa 
hut are also called Maldari Khutuktu, that is incamation of 
Maitreya. About this time the Emperor of China issued a 
decree, which has since been respected, that these hierarchs 
must be reborn in Tibet, or in other words that they must not 
reappear in a Mongol family for fear of uniting religion and 
patriotism too closely. 

Jjozaog^, the fifth Grand Lama, Is by common consent the 
most remarkable of the pontifical line. He established the right 
of himself and his successors-^, as he might have said, of 
himself in his successive births—to the temporal and ecclesiastical 
sovereignty of ^bet; be built the Potala and his dealings with 

> l%e oorreet nAioM of Uua plMOMem to)>o Oi^ Aoii Kuri. Tbe Iaiu'b 

auae «m h$ftm«pa rOTwmTbso. 

* He fijiialied hi* hiatoiy io 160 S »od liv«d MDe longw so ihst 
rOys'inTlMO cenoot hATS bMS m iooAi&AUoQ <A 

* This u Afi AOOApMd AbbnTutioo of bis fuQ Dam« AagnibAfi bLo«s«a rOra* 

mXluo. is as ApiCluC m^Aning •loqoAsL 

am. 

24 

m BUVDBISM OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

the Moogols and the Emperor of China are of importancd for 
general Asiatic history. 

From the seventeenth century onwards there were four 
factors in Tibetan politics. 

1. The Gelugpa or Yellow Church, very strong hut anxious 
to 2>eoome stronger both by increasing its temporal power cmd 
by Buppressiog other sects. Its attitude towards Chinese and 
Mongols showed no prejudice and was dictated by policy. 

2. The Tibetan chiefs and people, on the whole respectful 
to the Yellow Church but not single-hearted nor forgetful of 
older sects: averse to Chinese and prone to side with Mongols. 

d. The Moogols, conscious of their imperfect civlliaation and 
anxious to improve themselves by contact with the Lamas. As 
a nation they wished to repeat their past victories* over China, 
and indlvidoal chiefs wished to make themselves the head of 
tbe nation. People and princes alike respected all Lamas. 

4. Tbe Chinese, apprehensive of tbe Mongols and desirous 
to keep them tram^nil, caring little for Lam^am in itself but 
patiently determined to have a decisive voice in eoolesiaetioal 
matters, since the Church of Lhasa had become a political power 
in their border lands. 

l/>‘ 2 aiig was bom as the son of a high Tibetan official about 
1616 and was educated in the Depung monastery under tbe 
supervimon of Chos*kyi-Gyal-tsaa, abbot of TashUbnnpo and a 
man of political weight. Tbe country was then divided into 
Ehamdo, Wu and Tsang, or Eastern, Central and Western 
Tibet, and in each province there ruled a king of tbe Phagmodu 
dynasty. In Central Tibet, and specially at Lhasa, the Qelngpa 
was the established church accepted by the king but in the 
other provinces there was much religious strife and the older 
sects were still predominant. About 1630 the regent of Tsang 
captured Lhasa and madei himself sovereign,of all Tibet. He 
was a follower of the Sakya sect and his rule was a menace to 
the authority a-nd even to the existence of the Yellow Church, 
which for some years suffered much tribulation. When the 
young Grand Lama grew up, be and his preceptor determined 
to seek foreign aid and appealed to GusM Khan*. This prince 

' TIm lUMB* a TMiwtIy Qoibi, Oubrl. Qu'ri. «to.. and is said to 

•tainl for OunCri. Tbo oaeu of tlio tdbe also Tarisa: Oiiad and Oofoied ara 
both found. 

HISTORY 

8«5 

t] 

was a former pupU of CIioS'kyi-Gyal'tsaii and chief of the Oelot, 
the anoeetozs of the Kalmuks and other weetem tribee, but then 
living near Kokonor. He w&s a gtaunch member of the Yellow 
Cburoh and had alreadj made it paramoimt in Khamdo which 
he invaded in 1638, He prompdy reeponded to the appeal, 
invaded Tibet, took the regent prieoner, and, after making him- 
self master of the whole country, banded over his authority to 
the Grand Lama, retaining only the command of bis Mongol 
garrieons. This arrangemont was advantageoue to both parties. 
The Grand Lama not only greatly increased his eooleaastioal 
prestige bnt became a temporal eover^gn of considerable 
importance. Gushi, who had probably no desire to reside 
permanently in the Snow Land, received all the favours which 
a grateful Pope could beetow on a king and among the super¬ 
stitions Mongols these had a real value. Further the Oelot 
garrisons which continued to occupy various points in Tibet 
gave a deciave voice in the affEuia of the country, if there 
was ever a question of using force. 

The Grand Lamas had hitherto resided in the Lepung 
monastery but Lo*sangf now moved to the hill of Marpori, the 
former royal residence fl-nH began to build on it the Potsla^ 
palace which, jxidging from photographs, must be one of the most 
atrikmg edihees ut the world, for its stately walls continue the 
curves of the moimtain side and seem to grow out of the living 
rook. Hra old toaoher was given the title of Panchen BLnpoebe. 
which has since been borne by the abbots of Tashiilmiipo, and 
the doctrine that the Grand Lmnas of Lhasa and Tashilhnnpo 
are respectively incarnations of AvaloMta and Amit&bha was 
definitely promulgated^. 

The establishment of the Grand Lama as temporal rulet of 
Tibet ooinoided with the advent of the Manchu dynasty (1644). 
The Emperor and the I«ama had everything to gain from friendly 
relations and their negotiationa culminated in a visit which 

^ f-r**" in Tfuii* qq vhiob AvtloIuM Imfc Tiu ori^ of 

th« Dsm* is doobtfol but b^n the titte q( E»Ub Cbu4as it tAd ooim M k« AFfiM 

to » mountain in Sooth India 

■ Some Enropeen eutboritHe eouldor tbi.t La-taa^ invented Udi ol 

incamnUona bfeUve erideiice to me to point tbe ether wnjr, bot it must be 
edttiUed tS n4 ii be vie tbe fint to eUimlotbinueU thie diSBit7 be naeaml 

for him to it (et hie predeceeeoce eieo end <Mee eod w iM tt e n J bietocy to bo 
vnuon eccordingly 

366 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE IHDIA [ca. 

Losang paid to Peking in 1652-3. He woe treated as an inde* 
p^dent sovereign and received from the Emperor a long title 
containing the phrase Self-existent Buddha, Universal Kuler 
of the Buddhist faith.” In return he probably undertook to use 
his induence with the Mongols to preserve peace and prevent 
raids on China. 

After his return to Tibet, he appears to have been a real aa 
well as a nominal autocrat for his preceptor and Gush! Khan 
both died, and the new Manchu dynasty had its hands fall. 
His ohief adviser was the Desi^ or Prime Minister, supposed to 
be bis natural son. In 1666 the great Emperor K'ang-hsi 
succeeded to the throne: and shortly aftorwards the restlessneea 
of the Mongol Princes began to inspire the Chinese Court with 
apprehension. In 16S0 L^aang died hot his death was a state 
secret. It was apparently known in Tibet and an infant successor 
was selected but the continued to rule in Lo-zai^’s name 
and even the Emperor of China had no certain knowledge of bis 
suspected demise but probably thought that the fic^n of his 
ecdstence was the best means of keeping the Mongols in order. 
It was not antal 1696 that his death and the acoeesion of a youth 
named Thsang-yang Gya-thso were made public. 

But the young Grand lAiaa, who owing to the fiction that 
his predecessor was still alive had probably been brought up 
lees strictly than usual, soon began to inspire alann at Peking 
for he showed himself wilful and intelligent. He wrote love 
songs which are still popular and his licentious behaviour was 
quite out of harmony with the traditions of the holy see. In 
1701, under joint pressure from the Chinese and Mongols, be 
resigned his ecclesiastical rights and handed over the care of 
the Church to the abbot of TashJlhonpo, while retaining his 
position as temporal ruler. But the Chinese still felt uneasy 
and in 1705 succeeded in inducing him to undertake a journey 
to Peking. When he got as far as Mongolia he died of either 
drop^ or assassination. The commander of the Oelot garrisons 
in Tibet was a friend of the Chinese, and at once produced a new 
Grand Lama called Yedes, a man of about twenty-five, who 
claimed to be the true reincarcatioc of the fifth Grand Lama, 
the pretensions of the dissolute youth who bad just died being 
thus set aside. It suited the Chinese to deal with an adult, who 

’ iD».ind. 

EiaTORJ 

367 

t] 

could bo made to nnderstajid that be bad reoeiyed aod held hie 
o£Rce onl^ tbroi^ their good will, but the Ubetane would hare 
uozie of this arrangement. They clung tc the memory of the 
dissolute youth and welcomed with enthusiasm the news that 
he bad reappeared in li*t'ang as a new*boni child, who was 
nltimately recognized as the eerenth Grand Lama named 
Kalzang. The Chinese imprisoned the infant with his parents in 
the monastery of Cumbum in Kansu and gare all their support 
to Yedes. Por the better control of affaire in Lhasa two Chinese 
i^ents were appointed to reside there with the Manchu title 
of Amban'. 

But the Tibetans would not accept the rule of Yedes and in 
1717 the rerolutionary p^y conspired with the Oelot tribee of 
Bi to put Kalzang on the ^one by force. The troops sent to 
take the holy child were defeated by the Chinese but those which 
attacked Lhasa were completely succesafid. Ye^ abdicated 
frftd the dty passed into the possession of the Mongols. The 
Chinese Government were greatly alarmed and determined to 
subdue Tibet. Their first espedition was a failure but in 1720 
they sent a second and larger^ and also decided to Install the 
youthful Kalzang as Grand Lama, thus conciliating the religious 
feelinge of the Tibetans. The erpeditiou met with little difficulty 
and the result of it was that China became suzerain of the whole 
country. By imperial edict the young Grand Lama was recog* 
nized as tempord ruler, the four ministers or Kaldn were given 
Chinese titles, and garrisons were posted to keep open the road 
from China. But the Tibetans were still discontented. In 1737 
a rebellion, instigated it was said by the family of the Gruid 
Lama, broke out, wid the Prime Minister was killed. This rising 
was not permanently successful and the Chinese removed the 
Grand Lama to the ctighbourbood of their frontier. They felt 
however that itwas unsafe to give groiud for suspicion that they 
were ill-treating Him and in 1734 he was reinstated in the Petals. 
But the dislike of the Tibetans for Chinese supervision was pltin. 
In 1747 there was another rebellion. The population of Lhasa 
rose and were assisted by Oelot troope who suddenly arrived on 
the scene. Chinese rule was saved only by the heroism of the 
two Chinese Agents, who invited the chief conspirators to a 
meeting and engaged them in person^ combat. They lost thsix 
* It is —**■>«■ 4U Ambaai wen Uaseboa 

$68 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

own \xv6S 1)ut ^ed the princdpal nbeU. The Chineoe then 
ahoLUbed the office of Fiime Minieter, lacrewed their garrison 
and gave the Agents larger powers. 

About 175 B the Grand Lama died and was sncceeded an 
infant called Jambal. The real authority vaa wielded by the 
Panchen Lama who acted as regent and was so influential that 
the Bmperor C2h'ien*LuDg insisted on his visiting Peking^. Ha 
had a good reception and prob^ly obtained some pronuaa that 
the gorerunent of Tibet would be left more in the bands of the 
Church but he died of smallpox in Peking and nothing came of 
hia visit except a beautiful tomb and an epitaph writt^ by the 
Emperor. After his death a new oomplioatlon appeared. The 
prelates of the Red Church encouraged an invasion of the 
Gurkhas of Nepal in the hope of crus^g the Yellow Church. 
The npshot was that the Chinese drove out the Qorkhas hut 
determined to eetablisb a more direct control. The powers of 
the Agents were greatly increased and not even the Grand Lama 
was allowed the Hght of memorializing the throne, but h ad to 
report to ^e Agents and ask tb^ orders. 

In 179$ Cb'ieii‘Lung issued a remarkable ediot regulating the 
appearance of incarnations which, as he observed, had become 
simply the hereditary perquisites of oertain noble Mongol 
families. He therefore ordered that when there was sny question 
of an incarnation the names of the claimants to the distinction 
should be written on slips of paper and placed in* a golden bowl: 
that a religious service should be held and at its close a n a m e be 
drawn from the bowl in the presence of the Agents and 

the public. The child whose name should be drawn was to be 
recognized as the true incarnation but required investiture by 
act imperial patent. 

A period of calm followed, and when the Grand T ^mw died 
in 1804 the Tibetans totally neglected this ediot and selected 
a child bom in eastern Ti^t. The Chinese Court, desiroos of 
avoiding cumeceeeary trouble, approved ‘ the choice on the 
ground that the infant’s piecodons ability established his divine 

^ 6m S. Ladvis. TAt pUU oJ tAe TtAoo Latw to Pokinf. TtaUta PiM^ lt04. 
Sm aiM J,A.a.B. 18S2, pp. S9^S. 

* the eurieui ediot oi Qua Ch'ins enotUUd bf Waddell ia J3.A.3. 2910, 
pp. 69 ff. The Chioaae Oeremaeat tren diapoeed to dlccndit the nzth, eereath 
and eighth aoara&Uose Mid to paoi eti aig lit fma the fifth Qnod to the 
nidtih. 

SJ8T0RY 

369 

oharactor but whan he died ia 1S16 and &zl attempt was made 
to repeat this irregularity, a eecond edict was published, in* 
^ting that the oamea of at least three caadidatee must be 
placed in the golden um and that he whose name sboold be 
first drawn miast be Orand Lama. This procedure was followed 
but the child elected by the oracle of the um died before he 
was twenty and another infant was chosen as his eucceesot in 
1839. As a result the Lama who was regent acquired great 
power and also unpopularity. HU tyranny caused the Tibetans 
to petition the Emperor; TTia Majesty sent a new Agent to 
inveetigate bis conduct. Good reason was shown for holding 
him responsible for the death of the Grand Lama in 1838 
for other misdeeds. The Emperor then degraded and bmuahed 
him and, what ia more singnlai, forbade h>rn to reappear in a 
human rrincamatiou. 

The reigns of Grand Lamas in the nineteenth centioy baTe 
mostly bera short. Two others were selected in 1858 and 1877 
leepectiTely. The latter who is the present occupant of the poet 
was the son of a Tibetan peasant: he was duly chosen by the 
oracle of the um and inTested by the Emperor. In 1893 be 
assumed personal control of the administration and terminated 
a regency which seems to haye been oppieesiye and unpopular. 
The British Goyemment were anxious to negotiate with him 
ftbout SilfhiiTi fl.nd other matters, but finding it impoeaible to 
obtain answeia to tbeir communioationB sent an expedition to 
Lhasa in 1904. The Grand Lama then fied to Urga, in which 
region he remained until 1907. In the autumn of 1908 he was 
induced to yisit Peking where he was receiyed with great 
ceremony but, contrary to the precedent established when the 
fifth Grand TAma attended Court, he was obliged to kneel and 
kotow before the Empress Dowager. Keither could he obtain 
the right to memorial^ the throne, but was ordered to report 
to the Agents. The Court duly recognized his religious position. 
On the birthday of the Empress he performed a aeirice for her 
long life, at which Her Majesty was present. It was not wholly 
successful, for a week or two later he ofiiciated at her funeral. 
At the end of 1908 be left for Lhasa. He visited India in 1910 
but created dissatisfaction at Peking. In the same year^ 

' Sm (or a truuUtioaof tbia ovioiu d«ciw, Utnii of Harot Sth, 

1910. 

S70 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

a decree was issued deposing him £rom his spiritual as well as 
hie temporal powers and ordering the Agents to seek out a new 
child by drawing lota from the golden um. This decree was 
probably vitra vires and certainly illogical, for if the Chinese 
OoTcmmeot recognized the Lama as an incarnation, they could 
not, according to the accepted theory, replace him by another 
incarnation before Ms death. And ii they regarded him as a 
false incamation, they should have ordered the Agents to seek 
out not a child but a man bom about the time that the last 
Grand Lama died. At any rate the Tibetans paid no attention 
to the decree. 

The early deaths of Grand lamas in the nineteenth century 
have naturally created a presumption that they were put out 
of the way and contemporary sospiciou accused the regent in 
I&38. Th»e is no evidence that the deaths of the other three 
were regarded as unnatural but the earlier Grand Lamas as well 
as the abbots of Tashilhanpo lived to a good age. On the other 
hand the Grand Lamas of Urga are said to die young. If the 
pontifia of some lines live long and those of others ^e early, 
the inference is not that the life of a god incarnate is unhealthy 
but that in special esses special drciunstances interfere with it, 
and on the whole there are good grounds for suspecting foul 
play. But it is mtoreeting to note that most Europeans who 
have made the acquaintance of high Lomas speak in praise of 
their character and intelligence. So Manning (the friend of 
Charles Lamb) of the ninth Grand Lama (1811), Boglo of the 
Tashi Lama ^ut 1778, Sven Hedin of his successor ir 1907, 
and Waddell of the Lama Regent in 1904. 

The above pages refer to the history of Lamaiam in Tibet 
and Mongolia. It also spread to China, European Russia, Ladak, 
Sikkim and Bhutan. In China it is confined to the north and 
its presence is easily explicable by the genuine enthusiasm of 
Khubilai and the encouragemeut given on political grounds by 
the Ming and Manchu dynasties. Eurthcr, several Mongol towns 
such as Kalgan and Kutu-khoto are within the limits of the 
eighteen proviucee. 

The Kalmuke who live in European Russia are the descend- 
ante of tribes who moved westwards from Dzungaria in the 
seventeenth century. Many of them left Russia and returned 
to tlie east in 1771, but a considerable number remained behind, 

HISTORY 

371 

Lj 

chiefly between the Volga and the IDon, and the population 
professing LamaUm there is now reckoned at aboat 100,<K)0. 

Bnddhiet influences may have been at work in Ladak from 
aa early period. In later times it can be regarded as a depend¬ 
ency of Tibet, at any rate for eooleaiafitjoal purposes, for it 
formed part of Tibet until the disruption of the kiogdom in the 
tenth century and it subsequently accepted the sorereignty of 
Lhasa in isligious and somctimee in political matters. Con¬ 
cerning the history of Bhutan, I have been able to discover but 
little. The earliest known inhabitants are called Tephu and the 
Xibetans are said to have conquered them about 1670. Latoaism 
probably entered the country at this time, if not earber*. At 
any rate it must have been predominant in 1774 when the 
Tashi Lama used bis good offices to conclude pe?M;e between the 
Bbutiyas and the East India Company. The established oburcb 
however is not the Gelugpa but the Dngpa, which is a sab- 
diviaion of the Kar-gyu*pa. There are two rulers in Bhutan, the 
Dharmarftja or spiritual and the Dobraja or temporal. The 
former is regarded as an incarnation of the flist class, though it 
is not clear of what deity*, 

The conversion of Sikbim is ascribed to a saint named LatsUn 
Ch'embo, who visited it about 1G50 with two other Lamas. They 
associated with themselves a native chief whom they ordamed as 
a Lama and made kiog. All four then governed SiWiim. Though 
Latsun Ch'embo is represented as a Mend of the fifth Grand 
Lama, the two sects at present found in fflkKim &re the Nying* 
ma-pa, the old unreformed style of Lamaism, and the Karmapa, 
a branch of the Kar-gyu-pa, analogous to the Dugpa of Bhutan. 
The principal monasteriee are at Pemicngchi (Peme-yang-tse) 
and Tasking*. 

X lo Uio List of tbe Btutuk HUnrobi given bj W4d40ll {fiwWtm, p. S4S) it 
it Mtd Ib 4 t Uio fint Wit ooQ 6 «aporsr 7 with tba thic 6 Ortad lame, 154S-1680. 

* AtconiliigM Wed(]eU(£>kWi«m,p.d42)be»ppMretobe»rebirihofDo{)seni 
ShepUim 6 L«ni« gittttiy rapected bj Ute Tlbetu ioTiden of BbpUn. For como 
eocouat of the r«U^ 0 Q of Bbotoa m Cb« eeirip 19th ceotu/j', eee (h« ertiote b; DtTU 
in T.S.A.8. voL n. 1890. p. 491. 

* TboiuUeeteecoQnt of SikhimoMBuddhisDugiren by Weddell ijitbe(7as«UMr 

0 / 1394. See eleo R4sf, P^lerintft ov de PemmoMti, 16S0; 

Sil«<a» '‘Boddhlfn ia Sikkim," BudiMtl Snkv. 1919, p 97.' 

CHAPTER LI 

TIBET 

Tbb CUi>ok 

Ttbct la to remote and rude a land chat it ia a turpriae to team 
that !t haa a voluminous literature and further that much of 
this literature, though not all, ia learned and eoholaatio. The 
explanation is that the nationa! life wu moat vigorous in the 
great monasteries vhioh were in eloee touoh with Indian 
leamiiig. Moreover Tibetan became to some extent the Latin of 
the surroujidizig countries, the language of learning and religion. 

For our purpose the prlnoipa] works are the two great 
ooUeotiona of sacred and edifying literature tranalaCed into 
Tibetan and known as tho Kan jut and Tanjur^ The first 
contains works eeCeocned as canonioal, including Tantras. The 
second is composed of exegetloal literature and also of many 
treatises on such lubjeote as medicine, astronomy and grammar*. 
The two together correspond roughly speaking to the Chinese 
Ttipitaka, but are more bulky. The oanonioal part is smaller 
but the commentaries and miscellaneous writings more n umerous. 
Then are also other differences due to the fact that the great 
literary epoch of Tibet was in the ninth oentury, wheroas neariy 
three-quarters of the Chinese Tripltaka bad been translated 
before that date. Thus the Kan jar appears to contain none* 
of the Abhidhamma works of the Hinaykna and none of the 
great Hik&yas as suoh, though single sfitraa are entered in the 
catalogues as separate books. Further there is only one version 
of the Vinaya whereas the Chinese Tripitaka has five, but there 

^ Tb« ItlMtui orthosniphy b Mtah.hgypf tiwulAUS cenauid) tod 
b*TM.b^ur <th* MiuUted «iplMfttloB). Vkrion* ipeUtas* sn osod by EiuMp«aB 
wriUn ouob M Eid)*g7sr, Kaadjoiir. BkiJigyw, Wtddell viltM 
tDd TSa.gyv. 

* Tboagb Uiie diitiooUra M«mi Cc bold gwd od tbe vbol*, ;«t i* sot lUkUy 

eb«»rv«d. Thus tbe woA oUled Udlas And corrMpondlng to tba Dbaomopod* ii 
lou&d in both tbe ud Tkojur. 

* Neejlo'e eeUlofue $t$im thet • grest ouuy Abhidhsfmn vo^ is CbizM* 
•STM with TibeUn, but (belt Utlee «t« not to bo loond in Ceeme'e ennlyu of the 
Stojox. They mey howerer b« ia Uw Ikajur, wbieb le leee folly ooelyaed. 

GH. U] 

THE CAm^l 

378 

eareril inportaat Tantrae wbiob are granting in Cbineee. 
The Tibetan soriptoree reflect the late Buddhism oi Magadha 
when the great books of the Hlnayanist Canon were neglected, 
though not wholly unknown, and a new tantrio literature wae 
donrishing ezuberantly. 

The contents of the ICanjnr and Tanjvr are chiefly known by 
analyses and iudioes^ although seTeral editions and trans* 
lationaof short treatises have been published^. The information 
obtained may be briefly summaiued as follows. 

The Kanjur in its different editions conaists of one hundred 
or one hundred and eight volumes, most of which contain aeverai 
treatisee, although sometiues one work, for instance the Vinaya, 
may fill many volumes. The whde collection is commorily 
divided mto seven parte*. 

I. The Dulva*, equivalent to the Vinaya. It is stated to be 
the Mflla-sarv&stivftda Vinaya, and so far as any opinion can be 
fonned from the smaJI portions available for comparison, it 
agrees with the Chinese translation of Kum&rajSva also 
(though with some difference in the order of paragraphs) with 
the Sanskrit Pr6timokaha found at Kucha*. It ie longer and 
more mixed with narrative than the correspondir^ Pali code. 

^ AA«l7«lf oi the Dalrc, Ma. fou p4rt« in A^aHt SMeorcAw. roJ. zx. ISSS, hj 
a. OtorriA ESfCo. I'cmnaUtod into Frenob b; Teer, An*4l4* i* Gtumd, 

tomfl 2m». ISSl. Ind4z du Sat^, herMigesebMi tpo 1. <7. Sobmidt (in Tlbetu). 

1$4S. Eutb. FcmieAw der i» TiMtwAm Tai^v, AbAtH^itf ml>», «rlaU«iu% 
Wtrht ID SibnnffAitr, £erlM. AkcA 1S9S. P. CordJw. Cvdogut fvnd* TitAain dt 
la BibticAifu Nctkmeit. Seokh. FmewSw icr Bandtc^ifkn dtr 

BibMktk n BtrHi^ 1 Abth.. Enaju, ISia Thjj is ao t>i Um ediCina ia lOt 

T^giiiA*. vbwM Ccom* dt ESMa nnd Pbat AnAlysAd Uia AdiUon Id 100 toIojiiaa 
T h» arrABSAiBWt of the two Aditloni k DOtqolM tbe See loo PBlBot*i Terkv 
of BAokh'i cntelosoA la J~A. Itli. b. pp. HI fl. See eleo Weddell. " Ilbeteb Mea8» 
•eiipW And Botite** ia AtiaAe QHorUrifh JolF. ItH. PP> dO-JlS, vbleb. thoosb bM 
AB AOAljiiA of Uie Cabozl, lacideotAlIj giv<« mneb informAtk^ 

* S.g, UdioA (aDbADiBApAdA) b;f Kookhill. 1S92 (bn£l. And Bedkb ftext 
1911) UedbyemAlUrTAtScA: de k VeUte PooMln. 1912, lUdyABiikA4Siti»i Hex 
WeDeeAT, 1911 (trAael). ClteAkkibABA, ed. And UeBA’leufer, 1919; Fmc, Frog- 
•M»k eairaiu dit goajvr, 4wia2w du Jfveds OuinO, tone Sne, 1993. 

* It k ebo eonetigw* divided iato Ibiee FitAbee. Wben fibii k do o A, the DuIva 
k the ^^la^ F.. thedw'SbiB k the AbhidbAnBAP,. and aU the other work* wbetbw 
SAtree or Ttatree tie okiNd tosether aa the SOin P, 

« hI>BJ.bA. 

* Baa NADjio, Hoa lllS-lllt. 112S. 1132-4. RocbhiU. FrdtimeMa Sdtn tAart 

ia 1B94 Hocb, fSAeskcAe ?«rtien dtr A^a«ii»ffrgil'njinfytnf><. 

tikadkonnd*, 1991. Knot end EObet. "Le PriUaokM d<« SAtvMiTediae,” J.A. 
1919. m p. 465. 

374 

BVDDBISM OVTSIDS INDIA 

[CH, 

II. The second division is known as l^*chinS com* 
eponding to the Pnj&&'p&rainit& and in the ee^ation of the 
Tihetans to the Abhidhama. It is said to have been first 
collected by Kfliyapa and to represent the teaching delivered 
by the Buddha in bis fifty^first year. This section appears to 
oontaic nothing but versions, longer or shorter, of the Prajni- 
p&ramit&, the limit of conoeotration being reached by a tezt in 
which the Baddlta explains that the whole of this teaobing is 
comprised in the letter A. As in and Japan, the Va^rao- 
ohedikg (rDO'XJe*gCod*pa) is very popular and has been p;dnted 
in many editions. 

III. The third division is called Phal*chen, equivalent to 
Avatazpsaka, Beckh treats It as one work in six volumes with 
out subdivisions. Peer gives forty'five subdivisions, some of 
whiok appear as separate treatises in the sootion of the Chinese 
Tripitaka called Kua Yen*. 

IV. The fourth division called dKon*brtecga or Ratnakti^a 
agrees cloeely with the similar section of the Chinese Tripitaka 
but ocmsisu of only forty-eight or forty-five efitras» according 
to the edition*. 

V. The fifth section is ooliod mDo, equivalent to Sfitra. In 
its narrower sense mDo means sfitns which are misesUanoous 
in so far as they do not fall into special classes, but it also com- 
prises such important works as the Lalita-vistara. Laok&vatira 
and Saddharma-pa^^ailka. Of the 270 works oontained In this 
section about dO are jninut Jack identical with works In the 
Ching division of the Chineee Tripitaka and probably the 
identity of many others is ebsoured by slight changes of title. 
An interesting point in the mDo is that it contains several 
sfitrae translated from the Pali*, vis. Noe. 13-25 of vol. xxx, 

' SWokIj' fiw.phTio. 

* WtddtU Id Amatio Quortwh'. ISIS, xxcv. p. OS. mdon tb* till* u Vhi$, 
MBghk. whiob p»Ubl 7 rapmwU AT»t4ftiukft. 8 mM Cb»adr4 Dm, pom, 
•ay* PhaI*eheii*(^*p4sUaUMQsbjba. 

* Tfaa akateeBanU of Ntniio u to "deaat te an Dot quit* aoearmto m 

nsordi thi oditioA la lOS toIudm. Compan hb Mtalosna witb BookbV 

* Tbb ■ba(«m*B( mad« bj MOb aobolan m Pm» {A*aL 4* Xartfw, p. SSS) and 

RookblU (C/ddns. p. xj ia of gnM veisbb. but I have nob fguod la tbair vorbi 
aoj quotoUoft fnu ibe Tlb«Ua tmulatloo njiag that tb* ongwal wm 

not Sanikrit and tb« tiUa givan by Fnr an io SMukrlt ttob Id PiU. I pnMma it 
la i»ot DMQt tbM the Tibeun t«xt ia a tnoalatfon fron a Saoakrit text vbieb 
cotnapooda vikb the Pali (ext kaown to oa. In Bockb’a oatalo^ ol the ediUou la 

u] 

THE CANON 

375 

nine of whici are taken from the coHe^tion known aa Paiitta. 
The naznee and dates of the translators are not giren but the 
ezietence of these translations probablj' indicates that a know¬ 
ledge of Fall lingered an in Magadha later than is generally 
supposed, It will also be remembered that about a.d. IOOO, 
Attfa though a Tantrist, studied in Burma and preeomably 
came in contact with Pali literature, Elockhill notes that the 
Tanjur contains a commentary on the Lotus SAtra written by 
Pntblvibandhu, a monk from Ceylon, a nd Pali manuscripts hare 
been found in Xepal^. It is possible that Sinhalese may ha76 
brought Pali books to northern India and given them to Tibetans 
whom they met there. 

VI. The sixth division is called Myafig-hdas or bfirvftpa, 
meaning the dseoription of the death of the Buddha which aiso 
forms a special sectiou in the Chinese Tripitaka. Here it con¬ 
sists of only one work, apparently correeponding to Nanjio 113*. 

VH, The seventh and last section is called rOyud* or 
Tantra It consists of twenty-two volumes oontaioing about 
300 treatises. Between thirty and forty are j/rima facie identical 
with treatises comprised in the Chinese Tripitaka and perhaps 
further examination m^ht greatly increase the number, for the 
titles of these books are often long and capable of modification. 
Still it is probable that the major of tlus literature was either 

deliberately rejected by the Chinese or was composed at a period 
-when religious intercourse had become languid between India 
and China but was still active between India and Tibet. From 
the titles it appears that many of these works are Brahznanlo 
in spirit rather than Buddhist; thus we have the Mah^gafiapati- 
tantra, the Mah&kila-tantra, and many others. Among the 
better known Tantras may be mentioned the Arya-mafijuiil- 
mOla-tantra and the ^rt-Oubya Samaja^ both highly praised 
by Csoma de Kerbs: but perhaps more important is the Tantra 

108 tdIuom the eeise tltlee ooeor in the Prftjfi&.p&r«aitl McliMi, bet vitbout eoy 
sMtemenC tbM tb» work* we tMOileteii irom PeH, See Beobb, p. IS. uU Peer. 
Fp. tSStf. 

> Li/« of As p. 224. J.S.A.3. 1SS9, p. 422. 

' There is ecotber sborUr sCtre eo the seine sobjeoi ia the mDo eectloo of the 
Etojor. Peer, p. 247. Id tbe editieo ef 108 voJumee. the vbole eeetion Is areor* 
ponUd io the loDo, Beokh. p. 3S. 

* Tbe irord eeeats to raeeik itring or chain. 

* appeientlr not tbe eeaie es tbe Teth 8 gsite* 0 aii 7 *ks aUat Qobre SeiDigU 
described bj R. Hitm. 8b. Bud. Lit. p. 281. 

376 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

omwhich the Kaiaoekra system ia founded. It is styled Pwa- 
m&dibuddhs-uddhrite-drt k&Iaeskra and there is also a oom- 
pendium giTiug its essence or Hpldsya. 

The Tanjur is a considerably larger collection than the 
Kaujur for it consists of 225 Tolumes but its contents are 
imp^eotly known. A portion has been catalogued by Falmyr 
Oordier. It is known to contain a great deal relatiTely late 
Indian theology such as the works of AiTaghosha, Nflg&^una, 
Asanga, Vasubsndhu, and other Mahaycmist doctors, and also 
secular literature such as the MeghadAta of K&lid&sa, together 
with a multitude of works on logic, rhetotic, grammar and 
medicine^. Some treatises, such as the Ud&na’ occur in both 
ooileoUoxis but on the whde the Tanjur is clearly intended as 
a thesaurus of exegotioal and ecientido litaratiue, sdeixoe being 
oonsidered, ss in the middle ages of Europe, to be the handm^d 
of the Church. Grammar and lexicography help the under* 
standing of scripture: medicine hss been of great use in estab* 
lishing the influence of the Lamas: secular law U or should be 
an ampUfloation of the Cburob’s code: history oompiled by 
sound theologians shows how the t^ue faith is progreesire and 
triumphant: art and ritual are so near together that tbur 
boundaries can hardly be delimitated. Taking this view of the 
world, we find in the Tanjur all that a learned man need know*. 

It is divided into two parts, mDo (Sfltra) and rOyud (Tantra), 
besidee a volume of hyn^ and an index. The sane method of 
division is really applicable to the Kanjur, for the Tibetan Dulva 
is little more than a combination of Sfitras and Jfttakas and 
sections two, three, four and six of the ICsnjur are ooUeotions of 
■pedal sfitras. In both compilarions the tantric secdon appears 
to consist of later books expounding ideas which are further 
from the teaching of Gotama than the Mahayaoist sfitras. 

’ 8m nolfoM d UuM in fMr srtblM b; Sitikudrs Vjd;&bb(ktbnM ia J.AS. 
£»V. 1907. 

' /.«. tbs PiuBi(D»p*di- 

* Hutb'i toAljBia of voh. 1 17*'ISS of tbs Tiojar Sin. Prtu**. A katL 

Witt. B4rH», 186S) ibofti tbst the; mitr oUs vigbt «o^ oo Snoakrit 

liMnUir* szid plUlologv boddM tb* HoghAdOu, qIm oo nodltwe and aIcbKoy wfUi 
ocataeaUilM, foulcM os wbviogy sod dlvliistlon, tbree oa ohomisiry {tb« oota- 
poetwn of aoosM), olght oa gaonio pootiy aad otluoa ou taa^eWpaidla. six Utm 
of Um Soaotj. alx work* os tbo Itbotaa Unguago aod fir» oa ^alaUag aod fio» art. 
Cordier gltM fojtbar particulan of tba modioal irorka la S.S.f,t~0. 1S03. p. fi04. 
TlU7 ioetuda a TOMrinacy tnatiia. 

TBB CANON 

377 

Lij 

To the groat majority of wo^ in both colloctiona is preiued 
a title which gives the Sanskrit name first in irvisoription and 
then in translatioii, for instance In Sanskrit Citralskshana; in 
TibetaA Bi-moi*mthsa&*md*/’ Hence there ia usually no doubt 
as to what the Tibetan translations profess to be, Sometimes 
however the headings ore r^iettabiy brief. The Vinaya for 
instance appears to be introduced with that simple super' 
scription and with no indica^on of the eohool or locality to 
which the text belonged. 

Although the titles of books are given in Sanskrit, yet all 
Indian proper names which have a meaning (as most have) are 
translated. Thus the name Pro^a (rigni^^g a messure and 
ronghly equivalent to such an English name as Dr Busbeli) is 
render^ by Bre-bo, a similar measure in Tibetan. This habit 
greatly increases the difEicnlty of reading Tibetan texts. The 
translators apparently desired to give a Tibetan equivalent for 
every word and even for every part of a word, so as to make clear 
the etymology as well as the meanii^ of the sacred original. The 
learned language thus produced must have varied greatly bom 
the vernacular of every period but its slavish fidelity makes 
it possible to reconstruct the original Sanskrit with tolerable 
oertainty. 

I have already mentioned the presence of translations from 
the Pah. There are also a few from the Chinese^ which appear 
to be of no special importance. One work is translated from the 
BrU'za language which waa perhaps spoken in the modem 
Qilgit* another from the Umguage of Khotan^. Some works 
in the Eanjnr have no Sanskrit titUa and are perhaps original 
compositions in Tibetan. The Taejor appears to contam many 
such. 

But the Kanjui and Tanjur as a whole represent the 
literature approved by the late Buddhism of Bengal and certain 
resemblances to the arrangement of the Chinese Tripitaka 

^ 8«« tatio b Laofu'i sditiML 

• Sm Le. {or insMac*. t87, 24a. 

^ Sm FW, La p. 344. uid laobr, "1^ Brou BpcMbe" 1ft f'oMf Pao. IMS. 
It is that Bs.«he>Mft of Broah* or Doilvo tnnalitlod {t vbat date) 
HSIa.TanCrm and V;Skhyi-TaQtra iato Um lan^U|* of bia oouQtr7 S«e J.A.SJ, 
1382, p. 13. Beokb rtatai tbat (our vorka bnva tlll«« la CHna a a, ooo in Bmia and 
one in Tartar (Hor>ayl.akad*daX 

* Laular, ttfd. p. 4 

378 

BVDDBISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

suggest that not only new svktrss but new oIssaiBoations of 
sCtrae had replaced the old PitoJeas and Agamas. The Tibetan 
Canon being later than the Chinese has lost theAbhidharma and 
added a large section of Tantraa. But both eanons recognize 
the dlrisions known ae Prajdi*piranut&, Ratnakd^a, Avatam* 
sales, and Mab&parimrvd^a as aeparate sections. The Ratnakdta 
is clearly a ooUecdon of sdtroa equiTslcnt to a amsU Nik&ya^. 
This is probably also true of the voluminous Prajh&'p^amlt& in 
its various editions, but the diviDons are not commonly treated 
as separate works except the yajracchodIk&. The Imperfectly 
known Avatamsaka Sfltra appears to be a euuilar collection, 
dnee it is described as discourses of the Buddha pronoiuiccd at 
eight assemblies*. The Mafa&parinirv&pa Sdtra though not 
nominally a collection oi sdtras (at least in its Pali form) la 
unigue both in subject and structure, and it is easy to under* 
stand why it was put in a class by itself. 

The translation of all this literature falls into three periods, 
(i) from the seventh century unril the reign of Ralpaohan in the 
ninth, (ii) the roigo of Kalpachan, and (iii}some decades following 
the arrival of Atl^a in 1088. In the hrst period work was sporadic 
and the translaiions made were not always those preserved in 
the Kanjur. Tbonmi Sanbhota, the envoy sent to India in 810 
is said to have made renderings oi the Kara^da Vyhha and 
other works (but not those new extant) and thm items in the 
Tanjur are attributed to him^. The existence of early transla* 
tions has been ooniinned by Stein who discovered at Endere 
a Tibetan manuscript of the f^listambbssdtra which is said not 
to bo later than about 740 s.n.* The version now found In the 
Kanjur appears to bea revision and expansion of this earlior text. 

A few translations from Chinese texts are attributed to the 
reign of Khri-gtsug-lde-btssn (708-768) and Rookhili calls 
attention to the interesting statement that he sent onvoys to 
India who leamod Sanskrit books by heart and on their return 
reproduced them in Tibetan. If this was a common habit, it 
may be one of the reasons why Tibetan translations sometimes 

> 8 m K»xiiio, No. ST, Md Feor, Lc. pp. 20^212, bot tli« two votb 0*7 oot bo 
tbo iftme. Tb» TibetAn aMRU to be w ooUMtloa of 48 e&tfM. 

* Itoftkbill, to. p. 21 a 

* Buio. AneitU Xhotan, pp. iSS-S tod App. B. Sm tlM FfilBot 1ft B.K.F.B.O. 
120s, pp. 507 ff. 

LI) 

THS CAmN 

379 

ahow differences in length, arrangemont and even subject matter 
when compared with Souaknt and Cbineae veraioDs bearing 
the same n?«ne. During the reign of Khri-sroA-lde-btean and the 
visit of Padma-Sambhava (which began in a.d. 747 according 
to the traditional chronology) the number of tranalatioas began 
to increase. Two works ascribed to the king and one to the saint 
are included in the canon, but the most prolific writer and 
translator of this period was KamaMa. Seventeen of his 
original works are preserved in the Tanjur and he translated 
part of the RatnakHta. Tie great period of translation—the 
Augustan age of Tibet as it is often called—was beginning and 
a solid foundation was laid by oompoeing two dictionariee con- 
tcdnii^ a collection of Sanskrit Buddhist terms^. 

The Augustus of Tibet was Ralpaohan who ruled in the ninth 
century, though Tibetan and Chineee chronicles are not in 
accord as to his exact date. He summoned from Kashmir and 
India many celebrated doctors who with the help of native 
assistants took seriously in hand the business of rendering the 
canon into Tibetan. They revised the existing translations and 
added many more of their own. It is probable that at least 
half of the works now contained in the Kanjur and Tanjur were 
translated or revised at this time and that the additions made 
later were chiefly Tantras (rGyud). On the other hand it is also 
probable that many tantric translations ascribed to this epoch 
are 1 ‘eaUy later*. The most prolific of Ralpachan’s translators 
was Jinamatra, a pandit of Kashmir described as belonging to 
the Vaibhishika school, who translated a large part of the 
Vinaya and many siltras*. Among the many Tibetan assistants 
Ye'ses-sde and Dpal-brTsega are perhaps those most frequently 
mentioned. These Tibetan translators are commonly described 
by the title of Io*tsa-va. As in China the usual proc^ure seems 
to have been that an Indian pandit explained the sacred text 
to a native. The latter then wrote it down, but whereas in China 
be generally paraphrased whatever he understood, in Tibet ho 
endeavoured to reproduce it with laborious fidelity. 

* l'h» Ush&TTQtp&ttl editod b; Mhityeff In Bilt. BudiiUo and an 

* Aceordinc M F«er p. 325) Itbetan hlatcdioa iteto that epoch 

kiiigi prohilntod the twuI&Uon of moro thoa * f«v Untrte wofka 

* NomofOQi voriu aee oLo Morihod to SarTajfiSdero oad Dhanoaba, both of 

Kaabmlr. and to Uw Indiao Vidyikaraprabbi aod SunndrebodhL 

2'y 

a. in. 

380 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

The language o! the tranflUtioaa, which is now the wcepted 
ionn of litOTfijy Tibcten, appears to hare been an archaic and 
classioal dialect even in the early days of Tibetan Buddhism, 
for it is not the same as the langnage of the secular documents 
dating from the eighth century, which have been found in 
Turkcetan, and it remains unchanged in the earliest and later 
translations. It may posdbly have been the sacred language of 
the Bonpo* priests. 

As narrated in the bJstorical section Buddhism suffered a 
severe reverse with the death of Kalpachan and it was nearly 
a century before a revival began. This revival was distinctly 
tantrio and the most celebrated name connected with it is Attia. 
According to Csoma de Kords'e chronology tbs K&lacakra 
system was introduced in 1035 and the eminent translator 
bLo-ldan'SheS'rab*, a follower of Attta, was bom in 1057. It is 
thus easy to understand how during the eleventh century a great 
number of tantrio works were translated and the published 
catalogues of the Kanjur and Tanjur confirm the fact, although 
the authors of the tnnslations are not mentioned so often as 
in the other divieloos. To AtSU is escribed the reviaion oi many 
works in the Tantra section of the Konjur and twenty others 
composed by him are found in the Tanjur^ It is said that the 
definitive arrangement of the two ooUeotions as w« know them 
was made by Bu-aton early in the thirteenth century*. The 
Kanjur (b>it not the Tanjur) wu translated into Mongol by 
order of KhiiLuktu Khagen (1504-1634) the last prince of the 
Cbokhar Mongols but a printed edition was first published by 
the Emperor K'ang*Ho. Though it is said that the Tanjur was 
translated and printed by order of Ch'ien*Lung, the statemont 
is doubtful. If eucb a translation was made it was probably 
partial and in manuscript*. 

* Sm Fmiek* la J.B.A.a. 1414, pp. 50-7. 

* 8w Ptndw, Pan(A«im, Vo. SO. 

* WoddoU, ButUAifm. p. 9S, giw » lift of Unm. 

* It oppowi to a* (bon ii mcbo eoalMioA bolwoen Bron-ftoo, e dlMipIo 
of AUte. who ouat b»»« Sooiiabod obout 1000 and Bu-aUui, wbo vm bom i& JSS8. 
QrCnvcdsl myt that tho ta.ttaf li ontlltod wltb tbo compikUona of tbo Ksojur 
and Tanjor, but Bockhill [I^cf lAa BuddAd, jk !S7) daaettbea Bu-atOQ m a 

of AUk. 

* 8m Huth, OeMiieAU iu AtAf. in dar JfMpotei, 2 dl, a&d Laafer, "Skitto dar 
HonaoUaefwQ latmUir” (k AaUtf Btmk, 1907), p. SI 9, Ako FoIUot in J.A. 1914, 
U. pp. US^ 

THE CANOH 

381 

nj 

Manu3<7ipt3 are still extensiTelj copied and uead la Tibet 
but the Kanjnr hae been prioted from wooden hlooke for the 
last 200 years. There are said to be two printing preesse, the 
older at hlarthang near Tashiliiimpo where an edition in 100 
volumes is produced and another at Deige in the eastern 
province. This edition is in 108 volumes. An edition was also 
printed at Peking by order of K'ang'Hsi in red type and with 
a preface by the Emperor himself^. 

Besides the canon the Tibetans possess many religious or 
edifying works composed in their own langtiage^. Such are the 
Fadma-than-yig, or life of Padma*SBmbhava, the works of 
Tsong-kha-pa, and several histories such as those of BU'Ston, 
T&ranAtha, 8um‘pa> and hJ^s-med-nam-mkha^, biographiea of 
Lamas without number, accounts of holy places, works of 
private devotion, medical treatises and grammars. 

There are also numerous works called Tenna which profess 
to be revelatioixs composed by Padma-S^bhava. They are said 
to be popular, though apparently not accepted by t^ Yellow 
Cbiunh. 

Although it hardly comes within the scope of the present 
study, 1 may mention that there is also some aon*Buddhist 
literature in Tibet, sometimes described as scriptures of the Bon 
religion and sometimes as folklore. As samples may be cited 
Laufer’s edition and translation of the Bitndred Thousand 
Ndgas* and Francke’a of parts of the Kesar-saga^. 

* do6 Lwfet in dt Ticad d« 3. P^Urtbovrf, ISOS, pp. $07-^74. Thera tn 

•one diSerencee In (hd That of Varthasg ii Mid to oostau a aeries of 

•Atm traaalatad hoD the Pall aod wAatios in the Red Edition, hot not to 

tvo UaseUtioM from vhkh an fotmd In the Red Edition. Sw the preface 

to BeoLh’e catalogue. The US. analyted by was chtaiood at Faking, bet it la 
not IffiOwD whence It cams, dn edlUon by Ch^kn Lung ia mentlcned by aome autbon. 
It it also mid that aa editkm la priatad at Punakba in Bhutan, and another ia Uon* 
goliaa at Kombuo. 

* Some cf these are probably Included la the Taitiuj*, vhicb baa aot bom fuBy 
catalogoed. Sec S«nf. 1004, for a Uet of SA pilafi^ hooka booght >o Lhaao, 
1902. aad Waddcira article in AnoHe Quofterly. July, L012, already referred to. 

* Edited aad tranalated by EuCh aa GtMhiehk dw BtutdMfmu der J/o*poIei. 
1893 . 

* FiAco Ugnan Sodety of HelauifforB, 1S 0 6. 

* Same Society, 1900 and IVH, and J.A.S.B, 1006-7. 

CHAPTER LII 
TIBET {continiud) 

D&OTBDrBS 01 LiKiTSM 

LahatSm ma 7 be defined aa a mixture of late Indian Buddhiam 
(which ifl iteeU a mixture of Buddhism and Hinduism) vdth 
Tarious Tibetan praotieos and beliefs. The principal of these are 
demonophobia aod the worship of human beings oe inoamate 
deities. Demonophobia is a compendious expression for an 
obsession which \dctimlze 0 Cbineeo and Hindus to some extent 
as well as Tlbetana, namely, the conTiotion that they are at all 
times surrounded by fierce and terrible beings against whom 
they must protect themselTes by all the methods that religion 
and magic can supply. This is merely an acute form of the 
world-wide belief that all nature is an^ated by good and bod 
spirits* of which the latter being more oggroasiTe require more 
attention, but it assumes startlingly conspicuous forms in Tibet 
because the Cburoh has enlisted all the forces of art, theology 
and philoeopby to aid In this war against demons. The externals 
of Tibetan worship suffer much from the idea that benevolent 
deities assnme a terrible guise in order to strike fear into the 
hosts of ovil^. The helpers saviours of mankind such as 
Avalokita and TAr6 are often depictod in the shape of raging 
fiends, as hideous and revolting as a fanciful brush and distorted 
brain can paint them. The idea inspiring these monstrous images 
is not the worship of cruelty and tensor, but the hope that evil 
spirits may be kept away when they see how awful are the 
powers which the Church can summon. Rcverthelees the result 
is that a Lama temple often looks like a pandemonium and 
meeting house for devil-worship, an Olympus tenanted by 
Gorgons, Hydras aod Furies. It is only fair to say that Tibetan 
art Bometimee repceaeots with success gods and saints in atti¬ 
tudes of repose and authority, and hoe produced some atriking 

» no fiUnsM Mo6 In J«pM de^t beoeroleoC d«iUM to » rBglBg fonn, Fubdq. 
6m Kokk», No. SSS. p. 6S. Tbe i<l«& bode M ladl* v}i«io the osaons of Mojvd 
Brt rwcfiBM ttftt doittOB m& bo coproMotod b o p»cUlc (UnU or Momy*; ot b o 
torrlfio (usm or roodn) tom. $m Oopiaotb lUo, Binda Iconofr^Af, vd. l p. )9, 
oad voL a of tbo umo for « loagtby dworlpUoB e( tbo upBct* of diva 

OH. in] 

IKfCTRlNSS OF LAMAIST 

38$ 

portraits^, but ita moet marked feature (whicli it ehares 
Jiteratvire) ia a morbid loye of the monatrous and tenible, a 
perpetual endeayour to portray Aenda surrounded with every 
oircumatance of horror, and still more appalling deitiee, all eyes, 
beads and limba, wreathed with fire, drinking blood fr om ekuUs 
and trampling prostrate creaturee to death beneath their feet. 
Probably the wild and fantastic laodacapee of Tibet, the awfo! 
fin^;estaon8 of the spectral mists, the real terrors of precipice, 
deaert and storm have wrought for ages upon the min^ of 
those who live among them. 

Like demonophobia, the worship of incarnate deities is 
common in eastern Asia but here it acqiures an extent and 
intensity unknown elsewhere. The Tibetans show a strange 
power organisation in dealing with the supernatural. In India 
iocamationa have usuaUy been recognized post-mortem and as 
incalculable manifestations of the spirit^. But at least ^ce the 
seventeenth century, the Lamas have accepted them as port of 
tlie Church's dally round and administrative work. The practicea 
of Shamanism probably prepared the way, for in his mystic 
frenzies the Shaman is temporarily inlxabited by a god and Che 
extreme ease with which distinguished persons are turned into 
gods or Bodhisattvas in China and Japan is another manifceta- 
tion of the same spirit. An ancient inscription* applies to the 
kingfl of Tibet the word which is also used of the Orand 

Lamas and means that a deity is transformed, or as we aay, 
incarnate in a human person. The Yellow Church officially 
recognized* the Emperor of China as an incarnation of Mahjutri 
and the Mongols believed the Tsar of Busaia to be an Incarnation 
of the White T&rk. 

The admixtures received by Buddhism in Tibet are not alien 
to Indian thought. They received an unusual emphasis but India 
provided terrible deities, like Kftl! with hor attendant (lends, 
and also the idea that the divine embo<^es itself in human 
personalities or special mainfeatationa. Thus Tibetan Buddhism 
is not 60 much an amalgam, as a phase of medieval Hindu 

* 8 . 9 » Q{uav«d*l, art 6j. 149. wt IftfiMofU, 6 g- M. 

* But ii rtill ft iMiedJtMy incftnfttiofi of OcutBift OBftr Pootaa, whiob begu 
in tba MTcotMntb CftoMry. 8e« AtiaUe HeaeanJtet, to, SSL 

* 8m WilMl Is 1900, p. 941. 

* 8m «.?. J.A-3.S- 1883, p. 41, Tbs ST»rBmblia Puiioft alM lUM that UftfijuArt 

8v«a in 9 m J. BuidhUt Tsxt S^citty, 1804, toL n. pari n. p. 83. 

384 

BUDDHISM 0UT82DS INDIA 

[oh. 

religion disproportionately developed in eotse directions. The 
Lamaa have acquired much the same status as the Brahmans. 
If they could cot make themselves a hereditary caste, they at 
least enforced the principle that they are the necessary inter* 
mediariea between gods and men. Though they adopted the 
monastio eyetem of Buddhism, they are not so much znonke ae 
priests and ghostly warriors who understand the art of fighting 
with demons. 

Tet Tibet like Japan could aaumUate and transform as well 
os borrow, The national and original clement in Lamaiam be* 
comes plain when we compare Tibet with the neighbouring land 
of Nepal. There late Indian Buddhism eimply decayed un^ an 
overgrowth of Brahmanism. In Tibet it acquired more life and 
character than it bad in its native Bengal. This now oharaoter 
hoe something monstrous and fantastic in goveramont os well 
as art: the magio fortreasos of the Snowland, peopled by priests 
and demons, seam uncanny homes for plain mortals, yet 
lATWAii^w has tho strength belonging to all genuine expressions 
of national character and it dearly suits tho Tibetans and 
Mongols. The oldest known form of Tibetan religion bad some 
of the same characteristics. It is called B9n or P6n. It would 
be outside my province to discuss it here, but even when Hrst 
hoard of it was more than a rude form of animism. In the eighth 
century its hierarchy was sufficiently strong to oppose the 
introduction of Buddhism and it possibly contained a pre* 
buddhist stratum of Iranian ideas*. In later times it adopted 
or travestied Buddliist dogma, ritual and literature, much as 
Taoism did in China, but still remaioed a repository of necro* 
money, magic, animal saorffioes, devil.danomg, and such like 
practices, which have in all ogea corrupted Tibetan Buddhism 
though theoretically dlsapprovod. 

Of Tibetan Buddhism anterior to 74? there is little to be 
said. It consisted in the sporadic introduction of books and 
Images from India and did not assume any notional character, 
for it is clear that in this period Tibet was not regarded as a 
Buddhist country. The £tst phase deserving the name of 
Lainaiam begins with the arrival of Padma-Sambbava in 747. 

> 6m T'oun^ Po^ ISOS, p. IS. F«r tb» Bfia graAnll; m sIm J.AJ. Sngal, 
1S81. p. 187) BMkbfU, Loud e>f 04 Lane*, pp. 217-218; 40d T'niagPac, l»l, 

2«r-H. 

LIT) 

DOCTRINES OF LAMAI8M 

8S5 

The Nying-ma-pa or Old School cl&iios to reprc«eat his teaching, 
but, aa already mcntioiiGd, the Tarious seota have interacted otx 
ooe another eo much that their tenets are hardly distinctive. 
Still it is pretty clear that what Padma*Samhhava brought with 
him was the late form of India Buddhism called Mantray^ia, 
closely allied to the ChSn Ven of China, and transport^ to 
Japan under the name of Shingon and also to the Buddhism of 
Java as represented in the sculptures of Boroboedoer. The Far 
East felt shy of the tantrio element in this teaching, whereas the 
Tibetans exaggerated it, but the doctrinal basis is everywhere 
the same, namely, that there are five celestial Buddhas, of 
whom Vairocana is the prmcipal and in some sense the origin. 
These give rise to celeetial emanations, female os well as male, 
and to terrestrial reflexes such aa ^hkyamuni. Among the other 
features of Fadma-Sambhava’s teaching the following may he 
enomerated with more or lees certainty: (o) A redness to 
tolerate and incorporate the local cults of the coiintries where 
be preached. (6) A free use of spells (dhhranl) and magical 
flgnres (mandola) for the purpose of subduing demons and 
acquiring supematuTal powers, (c) The belief that by such 
methods an adept can not only summon a deity but assiune his 
form and In fact become the deity, (d) The wor^p of Amithbha, 
among other deities, and a belief in his paradise, (c) The pre* 
eentation of ofierings, though not of flesh, In saeriflee^ and the 
performance of ceremonies on behalf of departed soule. {f) The 
worship of departed and perhaps of living teachers. His image 
is a conspicuous object of veneration in the Nyiag-ma-pa sect 
but he does not appear to have taught the doctrine of hierarchical 
succession by incarnation. Orunw^el’ has pointed out that the 
later corruptions of Buddhism in northern India, Tibet and 
Central Asia are connected with the personages known as the 
eighty-four M^di&siddhas, or great magicians. Their appearance 
as shown in pictures is that of Brobmanic ascetics rather than 
of Buddhist Bhlkshus, but many of them bear names which are 
not Indian. Their dates cannot be fixed at preeeot and appear 

> Tb6 o&r burnt bvt U is sM ^uii« «l««r wbetli«r Umm mo 

d«ri?«d from tbe I&diaa homa adoptod bj* Tutrio Suddhum or fnaa Tlbotaa tad 
Uonsol oarBCQOOlM. S**, for • dweriptiOB of tbn c*r«cDoay, Jfy UJ* in 
by Biihop oi Konrich, pp. lCS-114. 

* dM p. 40. 

S86 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

fCH. 

to cover a period from the early centuries of our era up to 
about 2200 , 80 that they represent not a special mevemont but 
a ooiitmuQua tendency to import into Buddhism very various 
curronta of thought, north Indian, Iranian, Central Asian and 
ev^ Mohammedau. 

The visit of Padma*8ambhava v&s followed by a period of 
roligious activity whioh culminated in the ninth oontury under 
ICing Rolpaohan, but it does not appear that the numerous 
tranaUtiona from Indian works made in this reign did more 
than supplement and amplify the doctrine already pronched. 
But when after a lengthy eclipse Buddhism was roinstated in 
the eleventh century under the auspices of Atlia anti other 
foreign toachers we hear of eometbing new, called the Kilncokra^ 
system also known os tho Vajrayiua. Pending tho publication 
of the K&lacakra Tantra', it Is not easy to moke dehnito state* 
monts about this aobool whioh presumably marks tho cxtivnic 
point of development or degeneration in Buddhism, but a 
poraiatent tradition connects It with a country called Sambliala 
or ZhambhaJa, translated in Tibetan as bDe-hbyuA or source of 
happiness. This country is scon only through a hose of mytli: 
It aoy have beon in India or It may have been somewhere 
in Central Asia, where Buddhism mingled with Turkish Idoaa*. 
Its kings were called Kulika and the Tibetan calendar intro* 
duced by AtlU is said to have come from it. This foot and 
the moaning of tJie word Kfclacakra (wheel of time) suggest 
that the system has some connection with the Turl^h cycle 
of twelro animals used for expressing dates*. A legend* 
states that dUcyamuni promulgated tho K&Iaoakra system in 
Orissa (Dh&nyakatal<a) and that Sucandra, king of ^ambhala, 
having miraculously roooived tins tcochiug wrote tho KAlocokra 
Tantra in a propbetio spirit, although it was not published until 

' In 11b«Uc Dii»>kyi>hklier.Io. TnpiD kSrdQn. 

* Anaoiuwcd io tit« Iiv<Ukie^ 

* 8#o JWliot, Imi^cripUont opputeMiu d CamtMA <bH4 Ift Uxt<4 

Chifuit (in T'wHff Pm, rol xx. iOSO, p. 7S) for wn* ooojeolarc«. KuUi* 'i$ 
tr«a«fot«d {bu> TltcUa u RlgcLdM. TlboUn kxU »pMk oi books cmUjm from 
SMobbsk. see Lufor In foMfiPao, 1019, p. 6M. 

* See Loafer io T’ouftt Pm. 1007, p. 401 In Sumps^e ohronology, JUM. Stnf. 
p. 43, tbe reign of • Kuliks fimperorMSOM to be sinpJ; s dMigubioa for t oeaffirr. 

* SmJ.J.S.S- 82, p. 225, Tto ting Is siso (bob ftppsreatlp inoomotly) celled 
Osodre.Bbsdre. 

LU) 

DOCTRINES OF LAMAISM 

387 

d65 A.D. This U toallj the approximate date of its oompiiation 
and I can only add the foUoving disjointed data^ 

Tibetan authorities state that it was introduced into 
NlUandi by a Pandit called TsUu or Chilu and accepted by 
Narotapa who was then head of the University. From NUand& 
it spread to Tibet. ManjuirtkfrU> hing of ^ambhala, is said to 
have bm an exponent of it and to have begun his reign C74 
years after the death of the Buddha. Bnt sinoe he is also the 
second incarnation of the Panohen Lama and since the fourth 
(Abhayakaxa) lived about 1075, be may really have been a 
historical character in the latter part of the tenth century. Its 
promulgation is also ascribed to a personage called Siddha Pito. 
It must be late for it is said to mention Islam and Mchammed. 
It is perhaps connected with anti-mohammedan movomente 
which looked to KEiIkl, the future incarnation of Vishnu, as their 
Messiah, for Hindu tradirion says that Kalk! will be bom in 
^mbhalagr&ma*. We hear also of a Siddha called Xelopa or 
Tulopa, who was a vigorous opponent of Islam. The mythology 
of the school is Vishnuite, not Sivaitic, and it is noticeable that 
the Phncor&tra system which bod some connection with Kashmir 
lays stress on the wheel or discus (cakra or sudariana) of Vishnu 
which is said to be the support of the Universe and the mani¬ 
festation of Creative will. The K&iaoakra is mentioned as a 
special form of this cosmic wheel having six spokes^. 

The peculiar doctrine of the Buddhist EAlacalcca is that there 
is an Adi»Buddha*, or primordial Buddha God, from whom ail 
other Buddhas are derived. It is posable that it repreeente a 
lost effort of Central Asian Buddhism to contend with Mosllms, 
wluch Instead of denying the bases of Mohammed’s teaching 
tried to show that monotheism (like everything else) could be 
found in Buddhism—a method of argument frequent in India. 
The doctrine of the Adi-Buddha was not however new or really 

^ 8m OrOnv«(I«l, Uythlofii, p. 41. Sent C%uidr» Du ia Jji.8. Btnf. IS8S, 
p. IS, aivd Beng. l^lS, p. Si, behig rapcmti of wiU«r tfiltlu b; Caof&a de 
KhrOe. 

* SeoEkik! PurSnft. VUna PBr&oo,rT. xxlr. BhSg. Pur, zs. ii IS, udNonnw 

in Traat. W, Int. toL n. p. 8S. AJm AafraeSt, Oat Cad. Seui. 

73A S4B. 

' 8m Scbndsr. iiUnkf. to iAe Pdneofdtra, pp. KKklOS ead SS. 

* 6m th* orticla “Adi Buddbt" by Do to V*U4c Poouio io Hutiagt* Btupe. o/ 
BfUffian and Bliiu. 

383 

BUDDEISM 0VT81DB INDIA 

[oh. 

important. For the Indian mind it is Implied in the dogtna oi 
the three bodiee of Buddha, for the Sambhogak&ya U praetioaliy 
an Indian Deva and tho Dharmakiya is the pantheos or BrahmA. 
Under the iniluenoe of tho Kilacakra the Lamaa did not bocome 
theietfi in the sonse of worshipping one supreme God but thoy 
identified with the Adi-Buddhaaomo particular deity, rarying 
according to the seote. Thus Samantabhadra, who usually ranks 
w a BodhisattTa—that ie oa inferior to a Buddha—was selected 
by some for the honour, The logic of this is hard to explain but 
it is olearly analogous to tho prooeduro, common to the oldest 
and newest phases of Hindu religion, by wbioh a special deity 
is deolared to be not only all the other gods but also the universal 
spirit^ It does not appear that the K&ltoalcra Tontra met with 
general acceptance. It is unknown in China and Japan and not 
well known in Kepal*. 

The K&lacakra adopted all the extravagances of tho Tantras 
and provided the principal Buddhas and Bodhlsattvas with 
Spouses, ovon giving one to the Adi'Buddha himself*. Extra* 
ordinary as this li from a Buddhist point of view, it is little more 
than the Hindu idea that the Supreme Being became male and 
female for tho purpose of producing the uniTerse. But the 
genoral effect of the system on monutio and religious Life was 
bad. Celibacy was not obaerred; morals, discipline and doctrine 
alike dotetiorated. A striking instance is afforded by the 
ceremonies used by Pagspa when reoeiving Kublai into tho 
Church. The Tibetan p^ate presumably ^shed to give the 
Emperor what was beet and most important in his creed and 
selected a formula for invoking a demoniac Buddha. 

The latest phase of Lamaism was inaugurated by Tsong- 
kha*pa’s reformation and is still vigorous. PoliUeally and socially 
it was of capital importa>noe, for it diedplined the piieethood 

* 8m, tor a msden euapl* of {Jili, tiu QsQs4itliArf*SInh«p«nlihftS (Antnd. 
tsncnft oditloo, pp. 21 aiid IC) Tvsd bt* Mrvua khslvidsu Brtbmiii. ..TvBn 
Brshoi Trsa VWuiu IVftin Rudna Tms ladrM Tv^m Tv4m VAyu 
Ttbid SlzjM Tvsa Ctndrsais Tv4in .firoAifw. H«n QiqiIb IfichtdM sU tb« 
dtiUM ssd tbs PwthsM. Thsre Is sIm s book osUsd OsoeSadstisosm in which tbs 
TsdsnU vCtfss srs nwriUsa uid Gsa^ ta&de sqitiTidsDt to firshms. Sm Msdns, 
Cal oJSk. ass. ICia-lfllS. p. 1030. 

■ It Is fust mentioQod in 8. Uvi’s Kepol II. p. 383, hot to not in Rojendrslcl 
Uitia’s 

* Wtddell, BvidJUm, p. 131. Psnder, p. 00, Ko. SO. 

DOCTRINES OF LAMAISJH 

389 

LU] 

and enabled the heads of (he Ohiuxh to rule Tibet. In docUiae 
It was not marked bj the importation of new Ideas, bnt it 
emphasized the worship of Avalokita as the patron of Tibet, 
it systematized the ezisting beliefs about reincarnation, thereby 
creating a powerful hierarchy; anditxeetricted Tantrism, withoat 
abolishing it. But many monasteries persistently r^iused to 
accept these reforms, 

Tibetan mythology and ceremonial have been described in 
detail by QrUnwedel, Waddell and others. The pantheon is 
probably the largest in the world. AH heaven and hell seom to 
meet in it. Tho originals of the dei^ee are nearly all to be fonnd 
in Kepaleee Buddhism^ and the perplexing multiplicity of Tibet 
is chiedy due to the habit of representing one deity in many 
forms and aspects, thus making hirn a dozen or more persox^ages 
both for art and for popular worship. The adoration of saints 
and their images is also more developed than in Kepal and forms 
some counteipoise to the prevalent demonolatry. 

I will not attempt to catalogue this fantastic host but will 
merely notice the principal elements in it. 

The first of these may be called early Buddhist. The figure 
of ^ftkyEmmni is frequent in poses which illustrate the familiar 
story of his life and the statue in the cathedral of Lhasa repre¬ 
senting >i»m as a young man is the most venerated image in all 
Tibet. The hiunan Buddhas anterior to him also receive recc^ni- 
tion together with Maitreya. The Pratimoksha is still known, 
the Uposatba days are observed and the details of the ordination 
services recall the prescriptions of the Pali Vinaya; forzoulie 
such as the four truths, the eightfold path and the chain of 
causation are still in use and form the basis of ethics. 

The later (but still not tantric) doctrines of Indian Mahayan- 
ism are naturally prominent. The three bodies of Buddha are 
well known and also the series of five Celestial Buddhas with 
corresponding Bodhisattvas and other manifestations. 1 feel 
doub^ whether the table given by Waddell* can be accepted 

' Buddhkm b>on not 00I7 fibo Dby&iai Boddbta fiftkUt ud Bodhi* 

aMtvu uid VftjndbMe, beb ebo dsitm Ute Hartgifn, 

BbrikoU. UtricI, EarukoUi la botb K«pa 1 Aod Tibet ue found 
plcturM o»Iled ia vUoh tbe deitlw of tba Ptotheon (or tt keet ibo 

prlaoipti o( tbem) *re groaped *e«crdijis ^ See for ui ez»apJ« eoatadolag 
1$S deitiea tbs froatiaptooe of OeitT*! OodM e/VvnJurp BvSdMMk 
• BwUAum. pp. aSO-1. 

m 

BVDDBISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH. 

as & eompendluni of the Lamaist creed. The symmetry is spoiled 
by the existence of other groups such as the Thirty Buddhas, 
the Thousand Buddhas, and the Buddhas of Healing, and also by 
the habit just mentioned oi representing d ei ties in varioua forms. 
For instance Amoghap&da, theoretically a form of ATalokita, is 
in practice distinct. The fact is that Lamaism accepted tho whole 
host of Indian Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, with additions of its 
own. The claasi^oations made by various sOtras and tantras 
were not sufficiently dogmatic to hecome artiolee of faith: 
chance and fancy determined the prominence and popularity 
of a given figure. Among the Buddhas those most worshipped 
are Amitibha, ^kya and Bhaishajyagnru or the B^d^a 
of Healing: among tho Bodbisattvas, Avalokita, Maitreya and 
MafijuArt. 

There is nothing in the above difiering materially from 
Chinese or Japanese Buddhism. The peculiarities of Tibet are 
brought out by the tan trio phase which those countries eschewed. 
Three charaoteristics of Tibetan Tantrism, which are all more 
or less Indian, may be mentioned. Firstly, all deities, even the 
meet august, become familiar spirits, who are not so much 
worshipped as coerced by spells. The neophyte Is initiated into 
tiielr mysteries by a special ceremonial^: the adept can summon 
them, assume their attributes and attain union with them. 
Secondly, great prominence is given to goddesses, either es tlio 
counterparts of male deities or as independent. Thirdly, deities 
appear in various forms, described as mild, angiy or fiendish. 
It is specially oharaoteriatic of Lamaism that naturally benevol¬ 
ent ddtics are represented as raging in furious frensy. 

Whether the superhuman beings of Tantrlsm are Buddhas, 
Bodhisattvas, or Hindu gods like Mahikala, it is correct to 
describe them as deities, for they behave and are treated like 
Indian Devas. Beeidee the relatively old and simple forms of 
the various Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, there are many others 
which are usually accommodated to the system by being 
deeoribed as protecting spirits, that is virtuous and religions 
fiends who expend their ferocity on the enemies of the Church. 

Of these Protectors there are two classes, which are net 
mutually exclusive, namely, the tutelary deities of individuals, 

' 7ar M) ouUln* of Sbo matbod followod by UteUns ia tbo Tutm, 

««a Jounol Bit<i4Xui 7«sf SocUl^, ISSS, toL i. put BL pp. SS-S. 

DOCTRINES OF LAMAI8M 

391 

liUj 

&ad tlio defender of tho f^ith or totolaries of the whole Churoh. 
The former, who are extremely importaot in the religious life 
of the Lamas, are called Yi-dam and may be compared with the 
Ifihfa-devat&s of the Hindus: the latter orCbos Skyoh coireapond 
to the Dbarmap&Ias. Erety Lama sheets a Yi«dain either for 
life or for a period. His choice must remain a secret but ho 
himsolf has uo doubts, as after fasting and meditation the deity 
will appear to him*. Henceforth he cyery morning repeats 
formxils which are supposed to give him the appearance of his 
tutelary' and thus scare away hostile demons. The most 
efficacious tutelariee ore tantric foims of the Dhy&m Buddhas, 
especially Vajrssattya, Vajradhara and Amithyua. The deity is 
represented not in the guise of a Buddha hut crowned, robed, and 
holding a thunderbolt, and bis attributes appear to he deriyed 
from those of India*. In his arms he always clasps a Sakti. 

A second class of tutularies is composed of so-calf^ Buddhas, 
accompaniod by ^oktls and terrffic in aspect, who are maiiiiesfa> 
tions of the Buddhahood for special puiposee. I do not know if 
this description is theologically oorreofi, for these fantastic 
figures have no relation to anything deserying the name of 
Buddhism, but Griinwedel* has shown that they are comparable 
with the yarious forms of Sira. This god does not become 
ineamate like Vishnu but maniieets himself from time to time in 
many shapes accompanied by a retinue who are sometimes 
merely attendants and sometimes altematiye forms of the Lord. 
A^abhadra, the terrible being created by ^ya from himself in 
order to confound Dakaha's sacrifice, is a close parallel to the 
demoniac Buddhas of Lomaism. Some of them, such as Mah&k&la 
and Samvara, show their origin in their namee and the rest, 
such as Hoyajra, Buddhakap6Ia and Yamfintaka, are similar. 
This last is a common subject for art, a many headed and many 
limbed miuotaur, convulsed by a paroxysm of devilish passion. 
Among his heads the most conspiououg is the face of an ox, yet 
tKta grotesque demon is regarded os a manifestation of the 
bonign and intellectual Mahjuiri whose images in other lands 
are among the most gracious products of Buddhist sculpture. 

' Tb« <l«iC7 zDAj io sa QfiUffuI («rai, so (b« wonUppu c«n MiiJy 

porauods ii>rri«>ii Uitt to liM looeivod the destrod toveUtioo. 

■ A SsQie idonUSod with ladn «r Vojnp&ai b fonod in GoedhsM seulpturN. 

> Mtft/utefk, p. S7. 

m BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [oh. 

Most tutelary deities of this dees ect ee defenders of the faith 
and each seat hoa one or two u ite special guardians^. The idea 
is ancient for even in the Fitakaa, Sakka and other epiilta 
respectfully protect the Buddha’s dieciplee, and theDharmap&las 
of Qandharan art are the anceetors of the Chos SkyoA. But in 
Tibet these asseme monstrous and manifold dieguiaes. The oldest 
is Vajrap&Qi and nearly all the others are fonns of ^7a (auoh 
as Aeala or Mi-gyo'ba who reappears in Japan as Fudo) or 
personages of his retinae. Bight of them are often adorod 
oolleotively under the name of the Eight Terrible Ones, Sevoral 
of these are well*kaown figures in Hindu mythology> for though 
the Lamas usually give Buddhist titles to their principal deities, 
yet they also Tcnerate Hindu gods, without any explanation of 
their status. Thus b Jlg8'm6d'Sam*mkba says that he oomposed 
his history with the help of Siva*. The members of this group 
rary in different enumerations but the following usually form 
part of It. 

(a) HayagItTa^ the bqree-neckad god. In India he appears 
to be connected with Vishnn rather than ^iva, The magic d^or 
with which Lamas belieTe they oan stab demons is said to be 
a form of him. The Mongols regard him as the protector of 
horses. Varna, the Indian god of the dead, accompanied by 
a hollish retinue including living skeletons, (c) hfahik&la, the 
form of ^iva already mentioned. It was by his inspiration that 
Pagspa was able to convert KhubiJai Khan, (d) Lha*mo, the 
goddM, that is Devi, the spouse of &va. (a) ICam^sraA, a war 
god of somewhat uncertain origin but perhaps a Tibetan form 
of KArtikeya, Other deities frequently included in group 
are Yam&ntaka, mentioned above, Kubera or Vai^avana, the 
Hindu god of wealth, and a deity called the White Brahm& 
(Thsangspa dKarpo). This last is an ordinary human figure 
riding on a white horse and brandishing a sword. He wears 
white clothes and a crown or turban. He is perhaps Kalki who, 
as suggested above, had some conneotion with the K&lacakra. 
The Eight Terrible Ones and their attendants ore represented 
by grotesquely masked Sgurse in the dances snd mystery plays 
enacted by Lamas. These performances are said to be still 

‘ Th» DhySoi DoJilhM however omid to he (h» e( iadiviCaak oaly. 

* Hufib’e edition, p. ]. 

* Sre T«xt 3oeidj/, toL il pert a. eppeoeUx n. 1S04, p. a 

DOCTRINES Of LAMAISM 

393 

m] 

Icnown among tbo Tulgar ss dances of the Bed Tiger Devil> but 
in the bands of the YeUow Church hare become a historical 
drama representing the persecution of Buddhism under Kiog 
Lang*dar-ma and its ultimate triumph after he has been slain 
by the help of these gboetly champions. 

Lamaist books mention numerous other lodian diviniti€e> 
such as BrahmA, the thirty*three Levas* the Kings of the four 
quarters, eto. These hare no particular place in the system hut 
their appearance lo act and literature is natural, ainoe they are 
decoratire though not essential parts of early Buddhism. The 
same may be said of all the host of N&gas, Yakshas. Eakshasas, 
eto. But though these multitudinous spirits hare been reananged 
and olassided in conformity with Hindu ideas they are not an 
importation but rather part of the old folklore of Tibet, in many 
ways identical with the same stratum of thought in India Thus 
the snake demigods or N&gas^ occupy in both countries a large 
place in the popular imagination. In the higher ranks of the 
Lamaist pantheon all the figures seem to be imported, but some 
indigenous godllngs hero retained a place in ^e lower classes. 
Such are rBo'rje’lege, at first an opponent of Buddhism as 
prsacbed by Fadma*Sambhava but honoured as a deity after 
making due submission, and the Five Kings', a group of fierce 
spirits, under the piesidenoy of dPe*dkar. 

It remains to say a word of the numerous goddesses who pisy 
an important part in Tibetan Buddhism, as in Hindu Tantrism. 
They ars usiially represented as the female counterparts or 
better halves of male deities, but some are seU-aufficieat. The 
greatest of these goddesses U T&r&'. Though Lamaist theology 
describes her as the spouse of Avalokita she is not a single 
personality but a generic name applied to a whole class of 
female deities and, as in many oth^ cases, so clear distinction 
is drawn between her attendants and the forms which she 
herself assumes. Originally benoToIent and depicted with the 
attributes of Lakshm! she is transformed by a tarn of Ubetan 

* 8m lAaiw, "Hund«rt TkaMnd le Mtmoiu »/ 

ISOS. 

* OrPlT*BedlM.*Ca>laft. tf».dEAtorPe*bAtUb7Mis«ui(li«riUMideDtifl»d 

th* CUoM* dnV WetCo. TU* Mi«r U rspraMotad in th» mUt eoart of 

IDMC OlilMM (AZaplM. 

* Ifi TibotAD sGrol.iDA, in Uoojol Dm SU. For tOe eaH; biiUu7 of Tirl m 

Ual^iaus pour tenir i rAwfowr Sc.. 

m BUDDUISM OUTSIDE INDIA [CH. 

imaffualion, \nih wluch tho re«ler is now famfliar, into various 
terrible shapes and is praetically the same aa the spouse ot 
^va» celebrated in the Tantras under coimtlees namee. Twenty- 
one Tarfie are often ennmerated in a list said to be well known 
even to the laity* and there are others. Among them are (o) the 
Groen Tiri, the commonest form in Tibet. (6) The White Tirg, 
much worshipped by Mongols and supposed to be incarnate in 
tho Tsar of Enssia. (o) Bhrikii^, a dark blue, angry, frowning 
form, (d) Ushnishavijayg*, a graceful and benevolent form 
known to the Japanese. She is mentioned in the Horiuji palm- 
leaf manuscript whicli dates ftom at least 60 Sa.d. (<) Pama- 
^vart, represented as wearing a girdle of leaves and also called 
GandhftiJ, Pi^c! and Sanra-Savai^im Bhagavatl*. She is 
apparently the goddess of an aborigmal tribe in India. 
(/) Kurukullk, a goddess of riches, inhabiting caves. She is said 
to have given great wealth to the fifth Grand l«ama, and though 
she might be suspected of being a native deity was known in 
Nopal and Xndia^. 

The Goddess Mario!, often depicted ^th Tlri, appears to 
be distinct and in one form is represented with a sow's head 
and known as Vajravarihl. As such she is incarnate in the 
abbesses of several monasteriee, particnlarly Samding on lake 
Yamdok*. 

A notice of Tibetan Buddhism can hardly avoid referring to 
the use of praying wheels and the celebrated formula Om mapi 
padme bum. Though these are among the most conspicuous and 
ubiquitous features of Lamaism their origin is strangely obscure*. 
Attempts to connect the praying wheel with the wheel of the 
law, the oakravartin and other uses of the wheel in Indian 
aymholism, are irrelevant, for the object to be expWned is not 
really a wheel but a barrel, large or small, containing written 
prayers, or even a whole library. Those who turn the barrel 

^ WaadelL p. 960. 

’ TibeUa aTflug>t«r.niMn-paMf:7»l-m». 

■ Cf. WhitdbMd'* MtooMAt (ViUoft (Soia «/ 8. Iniia, p. ?S) thftt vemw 
wonUpplfig CATiklfi goddMNf &re olad calf ia tbs twij^ of tho mlmMO tm. 

* ?0ueh«r, i««h Bouidhi^, ISOO, p. 14S, 4&(1 T&roaitbo 6r. Sohufoer. 

p. loa 

* Sm Wo<i<ML Grflawodfll Menu to VaJrft’Vorihl sa distmot from 

Moriet 

* A< for luUnoe is »leo Cbo origui of linga vonhip in India 

DOCTRINES OF LAMAI8U 

m 

Ln] 

acquire all tbo merit aiisisg from repeating the prayers or 
rea^iing the books. In Tibet this form of deTotioo is a national 
mania. People cany small prayer wheels in their hands as they 
walk and place large ones in rivers to bo turned by the current. 
In China, Japan and Korea we find revolving Ubrariee and 
occasional praying machines, though not oi quite the same form 
as in Tibet*, but, so far as I know, there is nothing to show that 
these were not introduced from Tihei into China and thence 
found their way further East, The hypothesis that they were 
known in India and thence exported to Tibet on one side and 
China on the other naturally suggests itself, but the total 
absence of praying machines in India as well as in the ruined 
cities of Central and the general Hindu habit of regarding 
scriptures uid spells as words rather than written documents 
lend it no support. It may be that when the illiterate Tibetans 
£rst became acquainted with written prayers, they invented 
this singular method of utilizing them without reading them. 

Equally obscure is tho ori^ of the formula Om map! padme^ 
hxun, which permeates Tibet, uttered by every humta voice, 
revolved Id cocutless machines, graven on the rocks, printed on 
dags. It is obviously a Dh&rou!^ and there is no reason to doubt 
that it came to Tibet with the first introduction of Buddhism, 
but also no record. The earliest passage hitherto quoted for its 
occurrence is a Chinese translation made between 980 and 1001 
A.D.* and said to correspond with tho Kanjur and the earliest 
historical mentiozi of its use is found in Willelm de Rubruk (12$4) 
and in the writings of Bu-ston*. The first legend of its origin is 
contained in the Manikombum, a work of doubtful age and 

‘ Soe Stidaer la Sft'nL OueUieh, Katnf- ». OH-Atient, 

1000-10, p. 35. 

* PtdBift is W b* commoolj pronoiuiced pono. 

* Wftddall quotM » doilltr er«U known in both Tibet $ai J*pe&, but addwieed 
to Vdrooeob Ora AirMgKft VAiroc«juko&htniadj« oiwu pedoA 

hum. BitiJhim, ^ 149. 

* Divif(tve4d*A (Cowa]! oAd Hdl}, pp. 013^ e&d Baj. Mltra, Hts^kH Lit 
p. 9a 6 m deo the kerned note ol ChnTWM aod Feiint, beeed n JepeoeM 
eoureee in JA. 1913, l 314. Tbo text refemd to is Nonjio, Vo. 733. li is not pUin 
U it is tbe as MriMr tmulstions with timilsr titles. A ronoM of sax sylkblM 
not further d s fin od is utoUed in tbo DivyivAclSn* *ed tlie OusAklncds^f^he. 

* Bu-swa VAS bom io 1233 ud tbs ssmourp of bis writm^ conUinod in tbe 
JoMraoi of .BudiUst TuS Sceitip. toL l 139$, repnsonts tbs formula mm used 
in tbe tiraes of Atite, c. 1030. 

30 

XU. 

396 BVDDHI8M OUTSIDE INDIA fcB- ut 

authorship but perhaps as old as the fifteenth century^ The 
popularity of the prayer may date from the time when the 
pontiffs of Lhasa were recognied as inoamatione of Avalokita. 
The first and last words are mystic syllahlea such as often occur 
in these f ormuJ*. Ma^i padme is generally interpreted to mean 
the jewel in the lotus*, but Thomas has pointed out that it is 
more consonant with grammar and usage to regard the syllables 
as one word and the vocative of a feminine title similar to 
Padmapl^i, one of Aralokita'a maiy names. The anal(^ of 
similar spells supports this interpretation and it seems probable 
that the formula was originally an invocation of the Sakti under 
the ritie of Manipodmi, although so far as I hnow it is now 
regarded by the Tibetans as an address to the male Avalokita. 
It baa also been suggested that the prominence of this prayer 
mey be due to ManichEean influence and the idea that it con¬ 
tained the name of Mani. The suggestion is not absurd for in 
menyinstancee Manichieism and Buddhism were mixed together, 
but if it wore true we should expect to find the formula frequently 
used in the Tarim basin, hut of such use there is no proof. 

> k iflag batootwryilluinlntfilng. Iteokhill’i Lend of 

'ki latHOi, pp. 826-334 

• J.R.A.3. 1906, p. te4 «Dd Fnaok«« ii. 1015, pp. 80THM>t H« pmnU out the 
parallel between th« three tormolm: Om wptnuri mom: On namjiadme fctm; Om 
tojrapSni &tMi. Tlie te IDurgS In &r&babh&r. Bhlabmeper, 706 (Hks neoy 
odier byiBM) e leaf etrios lemlaine ToeetiTea ending in < or ». 

CHAPTER LIII 
TIBET (ccnHnved^ 
Sbots 

Lamaisu is divided into various soots, which concern the clergy 
rather fhorp the laity. The difFerencee in doctrine are not very 
important. Each sect has special tutelary deities, scriptures and 
practices of its own but they all tend to borrow from one 
another whatever inspires respect or attracts worshippers. The 
baser sort try to maintain their dignity by imitating the institu¬ 
tions of the superior seota, but the superior cannot aSord to 
n^leot popular superstitions. 8o the general level is much the 
same. Nevertheless, these sectarian differences are not without 
practical Importance for each sect has monasteries and a 
hierarchy of its own and ia outwardly diatinguiahed by peculi¬ 
arities of costume, especially by the hat. Further, though the 
auhjeot has recrived little investigation, it ia probable that 
different sects possess different editions of the Kanjur or at any 
rate aspect different books^. Since the seventeenth century the 
Gelugpa baa been recognmed as the established church and the 
divinity of the Grand Lama is not disputed, but in earlier times 
there were many monastio quarrtie and forced convertiona. In 
the eighteenth century the Red clergy iatrigued with the 
Gurkhas in the hope of supplant^ their Yellow brethren and 
even now they are so powerful in eastern ^bet that this bops 
may not be unreasonable, should po l itica l troubles shake the 
hierarchy of Lhasa. In spite of the tendency to borrow both 
what is good and what is bad, some seots are on a higher grade 
intellectually and morally than others. Thus the older sects do 
Aot intist on celibacy or abstinence from ^cohol, and Tantrism 
and magic form the major part of rsHgion, whereas the Gelugpa 
or established church strict discipline, and tantric and 

magical rites, though by ao means prohibited, are at least 
practised in moderation. 

Setting aside the earliest period, the history of Buddhism 
in Tibet is biiefiy that it waa established by Padma-Sambhava 
^ See fot iasUbm partifloUn gf vm m W VAricpw br*sal)M ol th» 

9eo( to Ju.s.B. lass, pp. S-ia 

SOS 

BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA 

[CH, 

about 760, reformed by Atl^a about 1040 and agun reformed 
by T8ong-lciia-pa about 1400. The soots correspond to these 
epochs. The oldest clwms to preaervo the teaching of Padma* 
Sambhara, those of middle date are offshoots of the movement 
started by Atfla, and the newest represents Atffia’a principal 
seot corrected by the second reformation. The oldest sect is 
Imown as Kying*ina-pa or rNyifi'ma-pa, signifying the old ones, 
and also as the Red Choroh from the colour of the hats worn 
by the clergy. Among its subdivisions one called the sect of 
Udy4na^ in reference to Padma-SambhaTa*a birthplace, appears 
to he the most ancient and still exists in the Himalayas and 
eastern fRbet. The Nying-ma Lamas are said to have hept the 
QscTomancy of the old Tibetan religion more fully than any 
of the reformed sects. They pay special worship to Padma- 
Sambhava and accept the revelations ascribed to him. Celibacy 
and abstinence are rarelyobserved in their monasteries but these 
are by no means of low repute. Among the more celebrated are 
Dorje dag and MindoUing: the great monastery of Femiongchi^ 
in Sikhim is a branch establishment of the latter. 

Of the sects ori^nating in Atl^a's reformation the principal 
was the Kadampa^, but it has lost much of its importance 
because It was remodelled by Tsong-kha-pa and hence hardly 
exists tO'day as an independent body. The Sakya sect is 
ooaoected with the great monastery of the same name situated 
about fifty miles to the north of Mount Everest and founded 
In 1071 by Sakya, a royal prince. It acquired great political 
importauce, for from 1270 to 1840 its abbots were the rulers of 
Tibet. The historian T&ran&tha helouged to one of its sub-sects, 
and about 1600 settled in Mongolia whore he founded the 
monastery of Urga and established the Hne of r^camate lAmas 
which still rules ^ere. But shortly after his death this monastery 
was forcibly taken over by the Yellow Church and is still the 
centre of its infiuence in Mongolia In theology the Sakya offers 
nothing specially distinctive but it mixes the Tantras of the old 
and new sects and according to Waddell* is practically indis¬ 
tinguishable from the Hying-ma-pa. The some is probably true 
of the Ear-gyn-pa* said to have been founded by Marpa and 

' Uf^»L-p4 or Dcok'OluO'PA. 

* bK»S>£Dtai.p^ 

* bKoh'bfOyud 

' Or PemoyiingtM, 
' p. 70. 

SECTS 

390 

Lm] 

hie follower Milar6pa, who eet m example of eoUtaiy and 
wanderii^ lived. It ia eometimes described as a Kying-ma eeot^ 
but appears to date from after AtUa’s tefonne, although it has 
a strong tendency to revert to older practiced. It has several 
important sub*8e^, suob as the Karmapa found in Sikbim and 
Darpling, as well as in Tibet, the Bugpa which is predominant 
in Bhotan and perhaps in Ladak^, and the Dikung-pa, which 
owns a large monaste^ one hundred miles north*east of Lhasa. 
Milarftpa (or Mila), the cotton-clad saint who wandered over the 
Snowdand in the Ught garments of an Indian ascetic, is perhaps 
the post picturesque figure in ijimtiiain and in some ways reminds 
us cd St Francis of Assist. He was a worker of miiacies and, what 
is rarer in Tibet, a poet. His composiUons known as the 
Hundred Thousand Songs are still popular and show the same 
delicately sensitive lovo of nature as the Psalms of the Tbera- 
githh. 

The main distinction Is between the Gelugpa or Yellow 
Church and all the other sects. This is merely another way of 
saying that AtMa refonned the corrupt superstitions which he 
found but that his reformed church in its turn became corrupt 
and required correction. This was given by Tsong-kha-pa who 
belonged originally to the Kadampa. He collected the scattered 
members of this sect, remodelled its discipline, and laid the 
foundations of the system which made the Grand Lamas rulers 
of Tibet- In externals the Gelugpa is characteriiad by the use 
of the yellow tap and the veneration paid to Tsong^kharpa’s 
image. Its are all celibate and h»edita>ry succession is 

not recognized. Among the many great establiahmente which 
belong to it are tbs four royal monasteries or Ling in Lhasa; 
Qand^, Depung and Serra near Lhasa; and Taehilhunpo. 

It has often been notioed that the services performed by the 
Gelugpa* and by the Roman Catholic Church are strangely 

> Saodberz. of TthtWi, f. W. 

* AolberitM* diJer *» to tbe daum d Ui« MOt vluoh oimt HItch adU otber 
mooiAterMA >a 

■ 6m tor Aomo aeoooot of hiai oad ■peeicocai of poan i , Siudbers, TVM and 
(Aa nteWM, tm. 

* 1 do ooi know vboUier Um oamdioum of Uio oUw MOto oSor ua BAine 

rcMinhUBCA. ProbAbI; thAf ttAV« a;I iaitAtod tlM QAlugpA. 8oau AUtbon AttribuU 

ebe rMAoblAOM to ooouct «iih NotonAO ChnUlABl^ in Aoriy Mam but (be 
nMmblAoce U deSaitcly to Bom An eo«tai&M luid MranioaiGA act to tooM of Uie 

400 

BUDDHISM OUT3WS INDIA 

[OB. 

similax in appearaucd. Is this an insbanoe of borrowing or of 
convorgexice? On the one hand it is stated that there irere 
Roman missions in ^do in Xsong-kha*pa’8 youth, and the 
teeemblanoee are such as would be natural if he had seen great 
celebrations of the mass and taken hints. In essentials the 
similarity Is vsall but in ezteni^ such aa the vestments and 
head-dresses of the officiants, the arrangement of the choir, 
the general mU^-trh^ciTU, it is st riking . On the other hand many 
points of reaemblanoe in ceremonial, though not all, ore also 
found in the older Japanese sects, where there can hardly be 
any question of imitatiog Ohristiaiuty, and it would seem that 
a ritual common to Tibet and Japan oan be explained only as 
boiTowed from India. Further, although Tsong-kha-pa may 
have come in contact with missionaries, is it likely that he 
bad an opportunity of seeing Roman rites performed with any 
pomp? It is in the great choral semces of the two religions that 
the resemblance is visible, not in their simpler ritual. For these 
reasons, I think that the debt of Lamaism to the Catholic Ch'urch 
must be regarded as not proven, while admitting the resem- 
bUnoe to be so striking that we should be justified in concluding 
that Tsong-kha-pa copied Roman ceremonial, could it be shown 
that he was acquainted with it. 

The life and ritual of the Lamas have often been described, 
and I need not do more than refer the reader to the detailed 
account given by Waddell in his BuddMm of Tibei^, but it is 
noticeable that the monastic syatem is organized on a larger 
scale and inspired by more energy than in any other oount^. 
The monasteriea of Tibet, if inferior to those of Japan in the 
middle ages, are the greatest Buddhist establishments now 
ezistiDg. For instanoe Depung has 7000 monks, Serra 5000 
and Tashilhunpo 8600: at XJrga in Mongolia there are said to 
be 14,000. One is not surprised to hear that these institutions 
are veritable towns with their own police and doubtless the 
spirit of discipline learned in managing snoh large bodies of 
monks has helped the X^amaist Church in the govenunent of 
the country, Also these monasteries are nniveiBities. Candidates 
for ordination study a course of theology and are not received 

E«4Mm ehoTcL Is than to; nasoa b«H«Te tka( tbs Nsstorun ritoal rsssatlsd 
(bM of VMtsm oatbolicsr 

^ 6es also Filclwer, Dot Sbtler Sumbum, 1900. 

SECTS 

401 

as aovicee or full monks unlees tbe^ pass eoccessiTe examina 
tiona. In every monsetery there is a central temple in vhich 
the monks aesemble several times a day to chant lengthy choral 
offices. Of these there are at least five, the first before dawn and 
the last at 7 p.m. Though the value of Lamae’ learning and 
ritual may be Queslfioiied, it is clear that many of them lead 
strenuous Uvea in the service of a religion which, if fantastic, 
stiU expreases with peculiar inteoaty the beliefs and emotions 
of the i^betaos and Mongols and has forced men of violence to 
believe that a power higher than their own is wielded by intellect 
and asceticism. 

There seems to be no difference between Tibetan and 
Mongolian T Am in deities, doctiinee or observances*. 
Mongolian Lamas imitate the usages of Tibet, study there when 
they can and recite theii services in Tibetan, although th^ 
have translations of the scriptimes in their own lugu^. Well 
read priests in Peking have told me that it is better to study 
the canon in Tibetan than in Mongol, because complete copies 
in Mongol, if e^:ta>nt, are practicaUy unobtainable. 

The poUtioal and military decadence of the Mongols has been 
ascribed by some authors to X^aism and to the substitution of 
piiestly for warlike ide^. But such a substitutdon is not likely 
to have taken place except in minds prepared for it by other 
causes and It does not appear that the Moslims of Cent^ Asia 
are more vinie and vigorous than the Buddhists. The collapse 
of the Mongols can be easily illustrated if not explained by the 
fate of Turks Tartars in the Balkan Peninsula and Busaia 
Wherever the Turks are the ruling race they endeavour to 
assert their superiority over all Christians, often by violent 
methods. But when tiie portions are reversed and the Obnstians 
become rulers as in Bulgaria, the Turks make no redatance but 
dther retire or acquiesce meekly in the new regime. 

^ AlnMt onir 4iffsraooc that I havo ooticed ti ittAi vb«nu Tibtuni 
Itsbimklly tmnakts Indiui proper Mongols fit^oentlr qm Ssnabit vuda, 

•uob AM MMjoirt, or iligbll; Bodifted forou MOb M bora, U«idAri (aT&ri. 
Wiitroyo). 'Xbe •une praot«M ii lound ic ihe old Uisor tronsUUona. 8«« 
Ji%ddK xn. TiMSiToKik. For on interaetias tccout of oooUBporoi^ lAtBAiim ia 
UongollR R« Binitood, “Ufe ia » KhaJkba Stoppo UoBaatoiy/' J.B.A.3. 1924, 
a47>soa 

CHAPTER LIV 

JAPAN 

This work as originally planned oontained a section on Japanese 
Biidclhism conaeting of throe chapters, bnt after it had been 
sent to the pabllshers I was appointed H.M. Ambassador in 
Tokyo and I decided to omit this section. Let not any Japanese 
suppose that it contained disparaging criticism of his country 
or its religions. It woald, I hope, have given no ofience to either 
Buddhists or Shintolsts, bnt an ambasador bad better err on 
the aide of discretion and refrain from public comments on the 
institutions of the country to which he is accredited. 

The omission is r^rettable in so far as it prevents me from 
noticiog some of the most interesting and beautiful develop¬ 
ments of Buddhism, but for historical purposes and the investi¬ 
gation of the past the loss is not great, for Japanese Buddhism 
throws little light on ancient Lidia or even on ancient China. 
It has not inBuenced other countries. Its interest lies not in 
the rolics of antiquity which it has preserved but in the new 
shape and setting whi^ a race at once assimilative and inventive 
has given to old ideas. 

Though the doctrine of the Buddha reached Japan from 
China through Korea S Chinese and Japanese Buddhism differ 
in several respects. Lamaism never gained a footing in Japan, 
probably because it was the religion of the hated Mongols. 
There was hardly any direct intercourse with India. Whereas 
the state religion of China was frequently.hostile to Buddhism, 
in Japan such relalious were generally friendly and from the 
seventh century until the Meiji era an arrangement known as 
^rjibu S^to or two-fold Shinto was in force, by which 
StentS ffiines were with few exceptions handed over to the 
custody of Buddhist priests, native deities and historical 
personages being declared to be manifestations of various 
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. Again, Buddhism in Japan has 
had a more intimate connection with social, political and even 
military matters in various periods than in China. This is one 

' Tho occQptcd dale le a.u. 

OB. UV] 

JAPAN 

409 

reason for its chief chMscteriaiic, namely, the large number and 
distinct character of ita sects. They ate not merely echoois like 
the religions diTiaions of India and China, hut real sects with 
dirergent doctrinea and sometimes ants^onistie to one another, 

It became the fashion in Japan to talk of the twelve sects, 
bat the names given are not always the same. 

One of the commonest lists la as followa^: 

1. Knsba. ti. Hosed. 9. Jodo. 

2. Jo-jiteu, 6. Kegon. 10. Zen. 

8. Eitsu'Shu or Risshu 7. Tendai. 11. Shin. 

4. Sanron. 8, Shingon, 12. Hichiien. 

This list is hiatorically correct, but Kos. 1-4 are almost or 
quite extinct, and the number twelve is therefore scmetimes 
made up as follows; 

1. Hosso. 6. Yuzu Nembutau. 0. Obaku. 

2. Kegon. 6. Jodo. 10. Shin. 

3. Tendai. 7. Rinzw. U, Nichiren. 

4. Shingon. 8. S5d6. 12. Ji. 

Here Nos. 7, 8, 0 are subdivisions of the Zen and 6 and 12 
are two small sects. 

Taking the first lUt, we may eatily distinguish two classes. 
The first eight, called by the Japanese Hasshu, are all old and 
all imported from China. They represent the Buddhism of the 
Nara and Hei-an periods, The other four all arose after 1170 
and were all remodelled, if not created, in Japan. Chronobgically 
the sects may be arranged as follows, the dates marking the 
foundation or introduction. of each: 

(i) Seventh century: Sanron, 825; Jo-jiteu, 625; Hoasd, 

657;KU8ha, 860. 

(ii) Eighth century: Kegon, 786; Riten, 745. 

(iu) hHnth century: Tendai, 806; Sbingon, 806. 

(iv) Twelfth and thirteen^} centuries: Yuzu Nembuteu, 

1128; Jodo, 1174; Zen, 1202; Shin, 1224; Hiobiren, 

1263; Ji, 1275. 

' Thoac n&fflcc mb umI]/ borrowed froa tba CUmm and teprweAt: ^ ; 

2. Cb'teg>>hil; S. LS; 4. Stt-Iun; 6. Fa-hsiaag: 6. 7. TloQ-l'eii 6. Gbta. 

foa; 0. Cbing’t's; 20. Cb'eo. See m^reaMk* eo tfaeee eMle io tbe Mtionm CLlseM 
Buddhieo. See Rue, Dw StHen its ISOSt ouc^ notMM 

in the eeoo toUior’e An»aU% iu Jap. Bvd. eJted ebeve end Ryeuoa Fujishieaa, 
Lo JwddAuw Japonaii, 1899. 

404 BUDDHISM OUTSIDE INDIA [CK. 

All Japanese sects of importaace are Mahayaniet. The 
Hinayana ie represented only by the Kusha, Jo-fitsu and 
RUshu. Tbe two former are boii extinct: the third still numbers 
a few adherents, but is not anti-Mahayanist. It merely insists 
on the importance of discipline. 

Though the HossS and Kegon sects axe not extinct, their 
survival is due to their monastic possesaons rather than to the 
vitality of their doctrines, but tbe great sects of the ninth 
century, the TendU and Shingon, are still flourishing. For some 
seven hundred years, especially in the Fujiwara period, they 
had great influence not only in art and literature, but in political 
and oven in military matters, for they maintained large bodies 
of troops consisting of soldier monks or mercenarice and 
were a considerabJe menace to the seciolar authority. So serious 
was the danger felt to be that in the sixteenth century Nobunaga 
and Hideyoshi destroyed the great monasteries of H i e i za n and 
Ksgoro and the pretensions of the Buddhist Church to temporal 
power were brought to an end. 

But apart from this political activity, new sects which 
appeared in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries suited the 
popular needs of the time and were a sign of true religious life. 
Tw of these sects, the Jodo and Shinshu^, are Amidist—that 
is to say they teach that the only or at least the best way of 
winning salvation is to appeal to tbe mercy of Am Ida, who will 
give his worshippers a place in his paradise after death. The 
Jodo is relatively old fashioned, and does not differ much in 
practice from the worship of Amida as seen In China, but the 
ShinshQ has no exact parallel elsewhere. Though it has not 
introduced many innovations in theology, its abandonment of 
monastio discipline, its progrestive and popular spirit and its 
conspicuous success make it a distinct <md remarkable type. 
Its priests many and eat meat: it has no endowments and r^ea 
on volunlary subscription, yet its temples are amoi^ the largest 
and most conspicuous in Japan. But the hierarchical spirit is 
not absent and tince Shinshu priests can many, there arose the 
institution of hereditary abbots who were even more like barous 
than the celibate prelates of the older sects. 

The Nicbiren sect is a purely Japanese growth, without any 
prototype in China, and is a protest against Amidism and an 
^ A9 w«U M tbo tmftljor called Ji and YOaBnembutou. 

JAPAN 

405 

LTV] 

attempt to restore Shake—the hlstoncal Buddha—to hia proper . 
position from which be has heon ousted. NIehlien, the founder, 
is one of the most picturesque figures of Japanese history. 
His teaching, which was based on the Lotus Sfitra, was remark¬ 
able for its combatiTe spirit and he himself played a oonsiderable 
part in the politics of bis age. His followers form one of the 
most infiuential and conspicuous sects at the present day, 
although not so numerous as the Anudists. 

Zen is the Japanese equivalent oi Ch'an or Dhy&n& and is 
the name given to the sect founded in by Bodhidharma. 

It is stdd to have been introduced into Japan in the seventh 
century, but died out. Later, under the Hdjc Regents, and 
especially during the Ashikaga period, it fionrisbed exceedingly. 

eccleaiastics managed politics like the French cardinals 
of the seventeenth century and profoundly infiuenced art and 
Uteratuie, since they produced a long line of peters and 
writers. But the most Intoresting feature in the history of this 
sect in Japan is that, though it preserves the teaching of Bodhi¬ 
dharma without much change, yet it underwent a cuiions social 
metamoiphosis, for it became the chosen creed of the military 
class and contributed not a little to the Bushido or code of 
chivalry. It is strange that this mystical doctrine should have 
spread among warriors, but its insistenco on simplidty of life, 
discipline of mind and body, and concentrataon of thought 
harmonised wi^ their ideals. 

Apart from difieiences of doctrine such as divide the Shinshu, 
Nicbiren and Zen, Japanese sects show a remarkable tendency 
to multiply subdivisions, due chiefiy to disputes as to the 
proper succession of abbots. Thus the JMo sect has four sub¬ 
sects, and the first and second of these arc ag^ subdivided 
into six and fom respectively. And so with many others. Even 
the little Ji sect, which is credited with only 509 temples in all 
Japan, includes thirteen subdivisiODS. 

BOOK YII 

MXJTDAL INFLUENCE OF EASTERN 
AND WESTERN RELIGIONS 

1 

CHAPTER LV 

INFLUENCE OP CHRISTIANITY IN INDIA 

^ Ik phraaes like the above title, the word mflucnce is easy and 

coQTenieiit. When we hesitate to describe a belief or visage ae 
borrowed or derived, it comes pat to say that it shows traces 
of external infloence. But in vhst eircumetauces is such in> 
; flueuce exercised? It is not the necessary result of contact, for 

I in the east of Europe the Christian Church has not become 

mohamxnedanized nor in Poland and Rouinama bos it contracted 
any taint of Judaism. In these cases there is difference of race 
as well as of religiOQ. In business the Turk and Jew have some 
common ground with the oriental Christian: in sori^ life but 
little and in religion none at all. Europe has sometimes shown 
an interest in Asiatic religions, but on the whole an antipathy 
to them. Christianity originated in Palestine, which is a 
Mediterranean rather than an Asiatic country* and its most 
important forms, particularly the JRoman Catholic Church, took 
shape on European soil. Such cults as the worriiip of Isis and 
Mithra were prevalent in Europe but they gained their first 
footing among Auatic slaves and soldiers and would perhaps 
I not have maintained themselves among European converts only. 

' And Buddhism, though it may have attracted individvial minda 
has never produced any general impression west of India. Both 
, in Spain and in south>eastem Europe Islam was the religion of 
invaders made surprisingly few converts. CSuistian heretics, 
such as the Nestorians and Monopbysitee, who were expelled 
from Constantinople and had their home in Asia, left the west 
alone and prosel^zed in the east The peculiar detestation 
felt by the Church for the doctrines of the Manicbfeans was 
. perhaps partly due to the fact that they were in spirit A^tic. 

I And the converse of this antipathy is also true: the progress of 

Christianity in Asia has been inrignificant. 

But when people of the same race profess different creeds, 
A these creeds do mfiuence one another and tend to approximate. 

I This is specially remarkable in ^dia, where Islam, in theory 

I the uncompromising opponent of image worship and polytheism, 

410 EASTERN AND WESTERN RSL1020N3 [cu. 

h BomeUmcs la praoticc undjetipguishable from thQ lower 
fiupcrstitions of Hmduiam. In tne middle ages BuddJiism and 
Hindclsm conTerged tmtil they coincided so completely that 
Buddbiam disappeared. In China it often needs an expert to 
distinguish the manileetations of Taoism and Buddhism: in 
Japan Buddbiam and tbo old national religion were combined 
in the mixed worship known as Ryobu Shintd. In Che British 
Isles an impartial observer would probably notice that Anglicans 
and English Roman Catholics (not Irish porbapa) have more in 
common than they think. 

There are clearly two sets of causes which may divide a 
race between religions: internal movemente, acoh as the rise of 
Buddhism, and external impulses, such ae missions or conquest. 
Conquest pure and aiiaple is best illustrated by the history of 
Islam, also by the conversion of Mexico and South America to 
Roman Catholicism. But eves when conversion is pacidc, it 
will generally be found that, if it is successful on a large scale, 
it moans the introduction of more than a creed. The religious 
leader in his own country can trust to bis obquenoe and power 
over hia hearers. The real support of the missionary, however 
Uttb be may like tho idea, is usually that he rcpiosonte a 
superior type of civilisation. At one time in their oarocr Buddhism 
and Christianity were the greatest agendes for spreading civi* 
lisation in Asia and Europe respectively. They brought with 
them art and literature: they had tho oncouragement of the 
most enlightened princes: these who did not accept them in 
many caeca remained obviously on a lower bvel. Much tho 
same thing happens in Africa to-day. The natives who accept 
Mohammedanism or Christianity are moved, not by the argu* 
ments of tho Koran or Bible, but by the idea that it is a fine 
thing to be like an Arab or a European. A pagan in Uganda 
is literally a pagan; an uniostructed rustic from a distant 
village. 

Now if we consider the relations of India with the west, we 
find on neither side the conditions which usually render pro¬ 
paganda successful. Before the Mohammedan invasions end the 
I’ertuguesa conquest of Goa, no f^th can have presented itself 
to the Hindus with Miytbing like the prestige which marked 
the advent of Buddhism in China and Japan. Abzander opened 
a road to India for Heliomo culture and with it cams some 

CHRISTIANITY IN INDIA 

411 

hv] 

religious idees, but the Greeks had no rDis^ona^ spirit and 
if there were any early Chris^an missions they most have been 
on a small scale. The same is true of the vest: ii Asoka’s missions 
reached their destination, they failed to inspire any record of 
their doings. Still there was traSio by land and sea. The Hindus, 
if self-complacent, were not averse to new ideas, and before tho 
establishment of Christianity riiere was not much bigotry in 
the west, for organised rel^on was unknown in Europe: 
piaotices might be forbidden as immoral or anti-social but 
such expressions as contrary to tbo Bible or Koran bad no 
equivalent. Old worships were felt to be unsatisfying: new ones 
were freely adopted; mysteries were relished. There was no 
invasion, nothing that suggested foreign conquest or rdarmed 
national jealousy, but the way was open to ideas, though 
they ran some risk of suffering transformation on their long 
jonmey. 

As I have repeatedly pointed out, Hinduism and Buddhism 
are essentially religions of central and eaotem, not of western 
Asia, but they came in contact with the west in several regions 
and an enquiry into the influence which they exercised or felt 
can be subdivided. Tboro is the question whether they owe any¬ 
thing to Christianity in their later developments and also the 
question whether Christianity has borrowed anything from them^. 
Other questions to be considered are the relations of Indian 
religious to Zoroastrianism in ancient and to Islam in more 
recent times, which, if of less general inteieet than problems 
involving duistianity, are easier to investigate and of consider¬ 
able importance. 

Let us begin with the influence of Christiamty on Indian 
religion. For earlier periods tim record of contact between 
Hindus and Christians is fragmentary, but the evidence of the 
last two centuries may give a significant indication as to the 
effect of early Christian influence. In these two centuries 
ChristiaDity ^ been presented to the Hindus in the most 
favourable circumstances: it has come as the religion of the 

^ Tbs mart iMUtisd sad looid t^aooMioii o( Uwm qoMiioQa vhlob intiudei «n 
MQQuat of e«rtietlit4r»tu» on tb« nbJ«o^ it to be femdia Owbe’i ludit* v»d da* 
CAnAnlvR, 1014 BuC 1 km noti eblft to ftooept til lue oonolMMCiifc Tbe vork, to 
which I Ub raoeb tndobted. i& dt«d holow m Oixbe. 6«e tbo CtiTOoter, >n 

MaiUaol India, 19S1, pp. fiSl-hSd. 

X ZD. 

27 

412 EASTERN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [oh, 

governing power &nd aeaociated with European civilization: it 
baa not, like Mohammedanism, been propagated by force or 
accompanied by any intolerance which could awaken repugnance, 
but its doctrines have been preached and expounded by private 
miseionaries, if not always with skill «id sympathy, at least 
with zeal and a desire to persuade. The result is that according 
to the census of 1911 there are now 3,876,000 Christians in¬ 
cluding Europeans, that is to say, a sect a little stronger than 
the ftikbs es against more than si^-six million Mohammedans. 
Of theso 8,876,000 many aie drawn from the lowest castes or 
from tribes that are hardly considered as Hindus. Some 
religious assoriations, generally known os Somaj, have been 
founded under the induenco of European philosophy as much as 
of Christianity; imitation of European civilization (which is 
quite a diferent thing from Christianity) is visible in tbe objects 
and methods of religious and philanthropic insUtutioziB: some 
curious mixed secte of numerical strength have been 
formed by tbe fusion of Christian with Hindu or Mohammedan 
elements or of all three together. Yet the religious thought and 
customs of India in general seem hardly conscious of contact 
with Christianity: there is no rign that thay have felt any fancy 
fer the theology of the Atbanasian Creed or the ceremonies of 
the Roman Catholic Church which might have interested 
speculative and ritualistic minds. Similarly, thongh Intelleetual 
intercourse between India and China was long and fairly intimate 
and though the iofluence of Indian thought on China was very 
great, yet the induence of China on Indian thought is negli' 
gible. This being so, it would be rash to believe without good 
evidence that, in the post, doctrines which have penetrated 
Indian literature during centuries and have found acceptance 
with untold miUions owe their origin to obscure foreign colonists 
or missions. 

Writers who wish to prove that Indian relJgioDs are indebted 
to Christianity often approach their task with a certain mis¬ 
conception. They assume that if at some remote epoch a few 
stray Christians reached India, they could overcome without 
difficulty the barriers of language and social usage and further 
that their doctrine would be accepted as something new and 
striking which would straightway influence popular superstition 
and philosophic thought. But Lyall gives a juster perspective 

CBRISTIAHITT IN INDIA 

413 

LV] 

in bis poem about the Meditations of a Hindu Prince who, 
grown sceptical in the quest of txutb, Listens to the "word of 
the English," and it: 

"Naught but the world wide story how the e&rth eoid the heaveas 

„ 

How the goda were glad and angry and a dMty once was mao. 

Many doctrines preached by Christianity such as the love 
of God, salvation by faith, and the incarnation, bad been thought 
out in India before the Christian era, and when Christian mis* 
monaries preached them they probably seemed to thoughtful 
Hindus a new and not very adequate version of a very old tale. 
On the other hand the control and peculiar doctrine of dogmatic 
Christianity is that tho world has been saved by tho death of 
Christ. If this docthne of the atonement or the sacrifice of a 
divine being had appeared In India as on importation from the 
west, we might justly talk of the influence of Chnstianity on 
Indian religion. But it is unknown in Hinduism and Bu d dhism 
or (since it is rash to moke absolute statements about these 
vast a nd multifarious growths of speculation) it Is at any rate 
exoeedii^ly rare. These facts create a presumption that the 
resemblances between Christianity aud Indian religion are due 
to coincidenoe rather than borrowing, unless borrowing can be 
clearly proved, and this conclusion, though it may eeem tame, 
is surely a source of satisfaction. The divagations of human 
thought ate manifold and its conclusions oftencontradlctory.bat 
if there is anything that can be called truth it is but natural that 
logic, intuition, philosophy, poetry, learning and saintship 
should in different countries sometimes attain similar results. 

Christianity, like other western ideas, may have reached 
India both by land and by sea. After the conquests of Alexander 
bad once opened the ronte to the Indus and established Hellen* 
istic kingdoms in Its vicinity, the ideas and art of Greece and 
Rome journeyed without difficulty to the Panjah, arriving 
perhaps as somewhat wayworn and cosmopolitan travellers but 
still clearly European. A certain amount of Christianity may 
have come along this track, but for any historical inveatigation 
clearly the first question is, what is the earliest period at which 
we have any record of ita presence in Indial It would appear^ 

> Garbe ood UsnMk, vni Autbmi^ in Ohritte^tum. n. CLry. 

•stCoB (Uoai> ui 3oL 2. 8) wriUns th« »ad of tte fooilb nutvj of Synui, 

414 EASTERN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [csh. 

that the firsi alloaions to the presence of Christiane in Parthia, 
Bactria and the border lands of India date from the third 
century and that the oldest account^ of Christian communitios 
in southern India is the narrativo of Cosmas Indicoplenstea 
(c. 625 A.n.)- These latter Christians probably came to India by 
sea from Persia in consequence of the persecutions which raged 
there in 843 and 414, exactly as at a later date the Pareees 
escaped the violence of the Moslime by emigrating to Gujarat 
and Bombay. 

The Bto^ that the Apostle Thomas preached in some part 
of India has often been used as an argument for the early 
introduction and influence of Christianity, but recent authorities 
^reo in thinking that it is legendary or at best not provable. 
The tale occurs first in the Acts of St Thomas*, the Syriac text 
of which is considered to date from about 250. It relates bow 
the apostle was sold as a slave skilled in architecture and coming 
to the Ccurt of Gundaphar, king of India, undertook to build 
a palace but expended the moneys given to him in charity and, 
when called to account, explain^ that he was building for the 
King a palace in heaven, not made with bands. This sounds more 
Ilka an echo of some Buddhist J&taka written in praise of Eber- 
ality than an embeUishmentoiany real biography. Other legends 
make southern India the sphere of Thomas’s activity, though 
he can hardly have taught in both Madras and Partbia, and a 
similar uncertidnt^ is indicated by the tradition that his relics 
were transported to Edessa, which doubtless moans that iky- 
cording to other accounts he died there. Tradition connects 
Thomas with Parthians quits as much as with Indians, and, if 
he really contributed to the difiusion of Christianity, it is more 

Eg 7 pti*aa. Ponuna kad tco tliooskod oUicr ottioiu iMming C3)mti&nity from 
tn(i«Utwa» ioto tbeir UngofigM, bat mu fuaex expect geognphica] eccnTMj io 
m> rheUoKel a puMge. 

I EaMUue (ffcc. fiia. v. 10), rapported hf ooUcee In Jeteme eod cOien, lUtc* 
U)*t Pentaniu vent fiem Alexendtie to psMcb in In din end {oand tben Gbrtetieec 
Idling tbo Qoepei «*‘^**»*<"g to hfettbew written in Hebrew cbereotore. It had bewn 
Mt there bj the ApoaUe Bertholoaiev. Bat oikax ■cbden an of opnioD that bj 
lodlaiAChupaaMseiamawQtaootJMn AraUa. InthMeearljooticee l]idia>ieQfed 
ragoel; for Saatern Perthia, Soathem Arabia aod eren Ethiopia. It requiKa con* 
aidoraM evldenw to miAe it probable that at the time of P4B(ciuu(MoondoeDtuj7 
a.B.) an^ one In India uied the Goepel io a SemiUo iMgus*. 

* Bee. for Uu Tbomaa lagead, Oarbe, Vfneont Bnith, for^ India, 

3Hed.pp.d91 if., and PhUippe in LA. 1903, pp. I-IS and 149-100. 

CSRISTIANITT IN INDIA 

415 

LV] 

li^ly tbdt he laboured in the veetem part of Faxihia t h an on 
iU estteme eastern frontiers. The fact that there really vae an 
Indo-Fertblan ki ng with a name eomething like Gondopharea 
no more makes the legend of St Thomas historical than the 
fact that there was a Bohemian king with a name sozne^tng 
like Wenceslas m a k ee the Chiistmas carol containing that name 
historical. 

On the other hand it is clear that during the early centuries 
of our era no definite frontier in the religious and intellectual 
sphere can be drawn between India and Persia. Obnstianity 
reached Persia early: it formed part of the compodte creed of 
Mani, who was boro about 216, and Christiana were persecuted 
in 543. !Bhom at least the third century onwards Christian Ideas 
maj/ have entered India, bnt this does not authorize tho aasump* 
rion that they came with sufficient prestige and following to 
exercise any lively influence, or in sufficient purity to be clearly 
dlsUnguishcd from Zorossbrianjsm and Manicbeism. 

By water there was an ancient connecrion between tbe west 
ooast of Indie and both the Red Sea and Persian Gulf. Traffic 
by tho former route was specially active, from the time of 
Augustus to that of Nero. Pliny^ complains that every year 
India and the East took from Italy a hundred million sesterces 
in return for spices, perfumes and ornaments. Strabo* who 
visited Egypt tells how 120 ships sailed from Myoe Hormos (on 
the Red Sea) to India " although in the time of the Ptoleim^ 
scaroely any one would undertake this voyage.” MozirU 
(Cranganore) was the chief depot of western trade and even 
seems to have been the seat of a Roman commerdal colony. 
Roma^ coins have been found in northern and even more 
abundantly in southern India, and Hindu mints used Roman 
models. But only rarely can any one except sailors and caer- 
chante, who made a speciality of eastern trade, have undertaken 
the long and arduous journey. Cert^nly ideas travel with 
mysterious rapidity. The debt of Indian astronomy to Greece 
is undeniable* and if tbe same cannot be affirmed of Indian 
mathematics and medicine yet the resemblance between Greek 
and Indian treatises on these sciences is remarkable. Early 

* ifoL Hitt, hl is ( 41 ). 

* n.'iT/ IS. 8(r»1>o died mod aft«r 211.0. 

» Itiaaeea ewiiiiloiTOve-l wotdi, e.^. hgia^sl^: Jy»u»Z<h: H«lis^Xwf, 

4l« EASTERN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS {oh. 

Tamil po«m8* speak of Greek wines and dumb (that is un- 
inteUigible) Bom&n soldiers in the eomce of Indian kings, but 
do not mention philosophers, toaobers or missionaries. After 
70 a.]>. this trade declined, perhaps because the Flavian Em¬ 
perors and their successors were averse to the oriented luxuries 
whicb formed Its staple, and in 21b the massacre ordered by 
Caracalla dealt a blow to the commercial impoitanco of Alez* 
andria from which it did not recover for a long time. Thus the 
period when intercourse between Egypt and India was most 
active is anterior to the period when Gbrisrianity bogan to 
spread: it is hardly likely that in 70 or 80 A.n. there were many 
Christians in Egypt. 

As fUieady mentioned, colonies of Christians from Persia 
settled on the west coast of India, where there are also Je^visb 
colonies of considerable uoti^uity. The story that this Church 
was founded by St Tbomos and that his relies aio preserved 
in south India has not been found in any work older than 
Marco Folo^. Cosmos Indicopleostes states that the Bishop of 
Ealliana was appointed from Persia, and this explains the 
connection of Kestorianiam with southern India, for at that time 
the Kestorian Catholicos of Ctesiphon was the only Christian 
prelate tolerated by the Persian Government. 

This Church may have had a considorable number of 
adherents for it was not confined to Malabar, its home and centre, 
bat had branches on the east coast near Madras. But it was 
isolated and became corrupt. It is said that in C 60 it bad no 
regular ministry and in the fourteenth century even baptism 
had fallen into disuse, Like the popular forms of Hoham aedan- 
isre it adopted many Hindu doctrines and rites. This implies 
on the one hand a considorable exchange of ideas: on the other 
hand, if such reformers as B&mhnuja and B&m&nanda were in 
touch with these Keetorians we may doubt if they would have 
imbibed horn them the teaching of the New Testament. There 
is evidence Chat Homan Catholic missions on their way to or 
from China landed in Malabar during th?. thirteenth and 
fourteenth centuries and made some converts. In 1330 the 

* S«e RtcaluMtbiu'a book. The TmntU 1800 yetfN 

• fUmack {J/uam «»< AutirefUinp du ChrUUnlume, a. 128) mts die 

ThoQ]M'Qirat«n wclobo oicn im 10 Jehthmuiort ui wiodcr ontdeokte bis 

iss 9 Jehthuodert bicsot^hca CeMt lich lucbt anwMB.” 

LV] CHRISTIANITY IN INDIA 417 

Pope sent » Bishop to Quilon with tho object of bringing the 
Nestorians into communion with the see of Rome. But the 
definite eatablishment of Romaa Catholicism dates from the 
• Portuguese conquest of Goa in 1610, followed by the appoint- 
i ment of an Archbishop and the introduction of the Inquisition. 

I Henceforth there is no difficulty in accounting fox Christian 

' influence, but it is generally admitted that the intolerance of 

‘ the Portuguese made thorn and their religion distasteful to 

Hindus and Moslims alike. We hear, however, that Akbar, 

I dedring to hear Christian doctrinee represented in a disputation 

I held at his Court, sent for Christian pritats from Goa, and his 

I Minister Abul Pazl is quoted as having written poetxy in which 

' mosques, churches and temples are classed together as places 

where people seek for God*. 

Such bemg the opportunities and approximate dates for 
Christian influence in India, we may now examine the features 
in lOuduism which have been attributed to it. They may 

under three prindpal heads, (i) The monotheistic 
Sivaism of the south, (ii) Various doctrines of Vaishnavism 
I such as bhakti, grace, the love and fatherhood of God, the Word, 

and incarnation, (iu) ParticuJar ceremonies or traditions such 
! as the sacred meal known as Pras&da and the stories of Krishna’s 

j infancy. 

In southern Iiuiia we have a seaboard in communication 
with Egypt, Arabia and the Persian Gulf. The reality of inter¬ 
course with the west U attested by Roman, Jewish, Nestoriaa 
and Mohammedan settlements, but on the other hand the 
Brahmans of Malabar are remarkable even according to Hindu 
standards for their strictness and aloofness. As I have pointed 
out elsewhere, the want of chronology in south Indian literature 
makee it difficult to sketch with any prewsion even the outlines 
of its religions history, but it is probable that Aryan religion 
’ came first in the form of Buddhism and Jwnism and that 

I Srvwsm made its appearance only when the ground had been 

prepared by them. They were lees exposed than the Buddhism 
of the north to the mfluences which created the Mah&yana, but 
they no doubt mingled with the indigenous beliefs of the Dra- 
I vidians. There is no record of what these may have been before 

Toh IV. 171-3. 

4J8 EASTERN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [ch. 

contAot with Hindu civUjMdon; bt historical times they com- 
prise the propitiation of spirits, mostly malignant and hence 
often called devils, hut also a strong tendency to monotheism 
and ethical poeby of a high moral standard. These latter charac¬ 
teristics are noticeable in most, if not all. Dravidian races, even 
those which are in the lower stages of civilisation^. This tem¬ 
perament, educated hy Buddhism and finally selecting Sivaism, 
might spontaneonsly produce such poems as the Tiruv&^agam. 
Such id^ as God^s love for human souls and the soul's struggle 
to be worthy of that love are found hi other Indian rellgiODa 
besides Tamil Sivaism and in their earlier forms cannot be 
ascribed to Chriatian influence, hut it must be admitted that 
the poems of tiie Sittars show an extraordinary approximation 
to the language of devotional literature in Europe. If, as Cald¬ 
well thinks, ^se compositions ate as recont as the sixteenth 
or seventeenth century, there is no chronolt^cal difficulty in 
supporing their contents to be inspired by Christian ideas. But 
the question rather is, would Portuguese Catholicism or corrupt 
Nestorianism have inspired poems denoun^ng idolatry and 
inculcating the purest theism? Scepticism on this point is 
permissible. 1 am inclined to think that the influence oi 
Christianity as well as the much greater influence of Mohammed- 
anisD was mostly indirect. They imported little in the way of 
custom and dogma but they strengthened the idea which 
naturally accompanies sectarianism, namely, that it is reason¬ 
able and proper for a religion to inculcate the worship of one 
all-sufficient power. But that this idea can flourish in surround¬ 
ings repugnant to both Christianity and Islam is shown by the 
sect of Linggyats. 

The resemblances to Christianity in Vishnuism are on a 
larger scale than the correspont^og phenomena in Sivaism. In 
most parts of India, from Assam to Madras, the worship of 
Vishnu and his incarnations has assumed the form of a mono¬ 
theism which, if frequently turning into pantheism, still per¬ 
sistently inculcates loving devotion to a deity who is himself 
moved by love for mankind. The corxespooding phase of Sivusm 
is reetricted to certain periods and districts of southern India. 
The doctrine of bhakH, or devotional faith, is common to 
Vishnuites and Siv^^tes, but is more prominent among the 
' fiM Cover, Fcik ^ SoutitTn InAa, 1S71. 

Lv] CHRISTIANITY IN INDIA 419 

formor. It hw often Ijccn conjectured to be due to Christian 
influence but the ooujecturo is, I think, wrong, for tho doctrine 
is probably pre-Cbrietiai^. appears to allude to it, and 

the idea of loving devotion to God is fully developed in the 
gvet&6vatara Upanishad and the Bhagavad-glt4, worts of 
doubtful date it is true, but in my opinion anterior to the 
Christian era and on any hypothesis not much posterior to it. 
Some time mnst have olapsed after the death of Christ before 
Christianity could present itself in India as an influential 
doctrine. Also bhaiki docs not make ite first appearance as 
something new and full grown. The seed, the young plant and 
the flower can all be found on Indian soil. So, too, the idea that 
God became man for the sake of mankind is a gradual Indian 
growth. In the Veda Vishnu takes three steps for the good of 
jnefl. It is probable that his avat&ras were reoegniaed some 

centuries before Christ and, if this is regarded as notdemonstrable, 

it cannot he denied that the analogous eonooption of Buddhas 
who visit the world to save and instruct mankind is pre- 
Christian*. Similarly though pMsagea may be found in the 
writings of Kabir and otliors in which the doctrine of Sabda or 
tl» Word is stated in language reoallii^ the fourth Gospel, and 
though in this case tho hypothesis of imitation offers no chrono- 
lo^cal difficulties, yet it is unnecessary. For ^abda, in the sense 
of tlie Veda conceived as an eternal self-existent sound, is an 
old Indian notion and when stated in these terms does not 
appear very Christian. It is found in Zoroastrianism, where 
Manthra Spenta the holy word is said to be the very soul of 
God*, and it is perh^s connected with the still more primitive 
notion that words and names have a mysterious potency and 
are in themselves spells. But even if tho idea of Sabda were 
derived from tho idea of Logos it need not be an instance of 
specifically Christian influence, for this Logos idea was only 
utilised by Christianity and was part of the common stock of 
religious thought prevalent about the time of Clirist in Egypt, 
Syria and Asia fctnor, and it is even posmble that its earlier 
forms may owe something to India. And wore it proved that 

'IT 3. S5, 98. 

* a lb© Piii la the TbwfgAUjft, l«7: "Hial to tbe©, Buddhs, wh© »Teit 

iD« »nd otMiv ©Cben fron suJering.'* 

• See YMht, 13.31 uid Veodidad, 19.14 

420 BA8TESN ANX> WESTERN RELIGIONS [ch. 

the WAching of Kabir, which dearly owes much to Islam, also 
ewes much to Christianity, the fact would notlw very important, 
for the followers of Kabir form a small and eccentric though 
intoreeting sect, in no way typical of Hinduism aa a whole. 

The form of Vishnuism known as Pancarttra appears to 
have had its origin, or at least to have flonriahed very early, in 
Kashmir and the extreme north-west, and perhaps a direct 
connection may be traced between eontral Asia and some 
aspects of the worship of Krishna at Muttra. The pas3^ of 
Greek and Peraan influence through the frontier districts is 
attested by statuary and coins, but no such memorials of 
Christianity have been discovered. But the loaders of the 
Viehnuits movement in the twelfth and subsequent centuries 
wore mostly Brahmans of southern extraction who migrated to 
Hindustan. Stress is somstimee laid on the fact that they lived 
in the neighbourhood of ancient Nestorian churches and even 
Garbe thinks that B&minuja, who studied for some time at 
Conjevaram, was in touch with the Chiisiuans of Mallapur near 
Madras. I And it hard to believe that such contact can have had 
much result. For Rkm&nuja was a Brahman of the straitest 
sect who probably thought it contamination to be within speaking 
distance of a CSirisrian^. He was undoubtedly a remarkable 
scholar and knew by heart all tiie principal Hindu scriptures, 
including those that teach bhakti. Why then suppose ^at be 
took his ideas not from works like the Bbagavad g!t4 on wldch he 
wrote a commentary or from the Pancar&tra which he eulogizes, 
but from persona whom he must have regarded as obscure 
heretics? And lastly is there any proof that such Ideas as the 
love of God and galvation by faith flourished among the Chris* 
t.iAna of Mallapur? In remote branches of the oriental Church 
Christiaiiity is generally reduced to legends and superstitions, 
and tbift Church wsa so corrupt that it hod even lost the rite of 
* The?(licral ideM «» ie eutA held by som* Viahoultc* (tie doe ic lUmanMid 
{e. 140CJ who VM oKoomTaimtoated by lui coreUgMiisU. 1 find it hurd to 
with Qwbo tbftt Riai«niij& (ulmittoil th* thooreUo*! o^iuUtyof *11 eMkw. Uo nyt 
hJiDMir (Sri-61ii»b;ft. n. 3.40, 47) th»tMuli tra of the uanonatm in to f*r ss Uiey 
4T«tn p^of BnhaMn(» prQx>ciiidoawliiah follows Croia]uftruiidMMDt4li)rineipU» 
&nd l» aot w 4ll duo tv ChriuiM iitfiueoeo), but tbot tome bka an ontitM to nod 
tbd Voda wlula othon on dobomd froei tbo privUe^, All Qro, ho adda, ia of 4b» 
•(UDe oaturo, but fin toheci from Un bouw of • Brahmoa ii pun, whereoa fire Ukoo 
from a orcmsUoii ground ie impam. Even «o tbo eoul ii dwfiled by bobtg toeodatod 
with • low'CbU body. 

CHBISTIANITY IN INDIA 

42L 

LV} 

baptism and is said to have held that the third person of the 
Trinity was the Madonna^ and not the Holy Ghost. Surely this 
doctrine is an extraordinary heresy in CSiristianity and far from 
having inspired Hindu theories as to the portion of Vishnu’s 
sponso is borrowed from those theories or from some of the 
innumerable Indian doctrines about the ^kti. 

It is clear that the Advaita philosophy of Ankara was 
influential in India from the ninth century to the twelfth and 
then lost some of its prest^ owii^ to the rise of a more persoi^ 
theism- It does not seem to me that any introduction or rein¬ 
forcement of Christianity, to which this theistio movement 
might be attributed, can be proved to have take n place about 
1100, and it is not always safe to seek for a political or social 
explanation of such movements, But if ws must have an 
oxtemal explanation, the obvious one is the pn^ress of Moham¬ 
medanism. One may even suggest a parallel between the epochs 
of Ankara and of lUminuia. The former, though the avowed 
enemy of Buddhism, introduced into Hinduism the doctrine of 
Mhyh described by Indian critics as crypto-Bnddhism. Rhml- 
nuja probably did not coma into direct contact with Islam*, 
which was the chief enemy of Hinduism in his time, but his 
theiwm (which, however, was semi-pantheistic) may have been 
eimilarly due to the imprestion produced by that enemy on 
Indian thought*. 

It is easy to see superficial paraUels between Hindu and 
(Christian ceromonies, but on examination they are generally 
not found to prove that there has been direct borrowing from 
Christianity. For instance, the superior castes are commoidy 
styled twice bom in virtue of certain initiatory oeremoniM 
performed on them in youth, and it is natural to compare tha 
second birth with baptismal regeneration. But, though there is 
here a real similarity of ideas, it would bo hard to deny that these 
ideas as well as the practices which express them have ansoo 

* 890 0ri*«B *nd G«be. Bat I noi found » quoUUoo from wy ortgiii*! 
*utfcority. Hcdiwaffiad, Kowow, lud tbo »a>0 notion of tb* Trioity. 

* Bat tie MfcpploJtf or Mopl 4 h» W Ut® wUJ^d on tbe MalnUr ©OMt 

ftltoat COO A.V. , a at. 

* SlmiMy tha nBoOmlawMiun of ^ Suns dynMty «« Moen^ ^ 
Hfth&tfSwC Boddbitfn. Chu-bn md to dboipk* 90 odwa» 9 d Buddtonv bnt th« 
MW probleiM nod mv ioloUoni wtob 6b*7 bfougbc fofwd would not hew b«o 
hoard of bub for Buddhlaa. 

422 EASTERN AtJD WESTBRJ^ RELIQ10N8 [CH. 

independently*. And though & practice of sprinkling the fore¬ 
head with water timilar to haptism is in nae among Hindus, 
it is only & rariety of the world-wide ceremony of punfication 
with sacred water. Several authors have seen a resemblance 
between the communion and a sacred meal often eaten in 
ffiudu temples and called (favour) or mahiptasfid, The 

usual forms of this observance do not resemble the Mass in 
externals (as do certain ceremonies in Lamaism) and the 
analogy, if any, resides in the eating of a common religions meat. 
Such a meal in Indian temples has its origin in the necessity and 
advantage of disposing of sacrificial food. It cannot be main- 
tttined that the deities eat the substance of it and, if it is not 
consumed by fire, the obvious method of disposal is for mankind 
to eat it. The practice is probably world-wide and the con- 
sumeia may be either the priests or the worshippers. Both 
varieties of the rite are found in India. In the ancient Soma 
aacrifioea the officiants drank the residue of the sacred drink: 
in modem temples, where ample meals ate set before the god 
more than once a day, it is tiie custom, perhaps because it is 
more advantageous, to sell them to the devout. From this point 
of view the praM is by no means the equivalent of the Lord’s 
Supper, but rather of the things offered to idols which many 
early Christiana scrupled to eat. It has, however, another and 
special significance due to the regulations imposed by caste. 
As a rule a Hindu of respectable social status cannot eat with 
his inferiors without incurring defilement- But in many temples 
members of all castes can eat the prasdd together as a sign that 
before the dei^ all his worshippers are equal. From this point 
of view the pnuAd is really analogons to the communion inas¬ 
much as it is the tign of leli^ua community, but it is clearly 
distinct in origin and though the sacred food may be eaten with 
great reverence, we are not told that it is associated with the 
ideas of commemoration, sacrifice or transubstantjation which 
cling to the Christian sacrament*. 

> the ides of the Moood UrUi U found in the Uejibinie NUt&Te, vbore Is 
SutU S6 tbo connrtcd brigftsd AssulintU epeeki of hie Rgosente )ife w Fsfe 
oi^ jSio, "6i&o» 1 VM botn ^ thii itoUe (or bolj) birth.” Br»h* 

meoie pereUele ere auocroiu, e.ff. Uesu. S. 14 S. 

’ It i« eeid, howerw, thM the celebreUos of the Pru&d by tiie Ktbupenthia 
b««n an mbnordioary neembhuoe to the Holy Coxomsslon of OuietlaAs. Thia 
may be eo. but, m already raesttosed, thia Uto and admittedly eempoelte eeot It 
ool typleal ef Uinduira ee a wb^. 

CBmSTlAUlTy IN INDIA 

423 

LV] 

The most oiotious coincidence between Indian and Christian 
legend are afforded by the stories and representations of the 
birth and infancy of Krishna. Tbeee hay© been elaborate^ 
discoaaod by Webor in a weh-known monograph*. Kriahna la 
represented with his mother, much as the infant Christ with 
the Madonna; he is born in a stable*, and other well-known 
incidents such as the appearance of a star aw reproduced. 
Two things strike us in these resemblances. Firstly, they are 
not found in the usual literary yersion of the Indian legend®, 
and It is therefore probable that they represent an independent 
and borrowed story: secondly, they are almc^ entoly con¬ 
cerned with the mythologioal aepeirte of Christ^aaity. Many 
Christians would admit that the s-doration of the Vi^in and 
Child is unscriptural and borrowed from the worship of pa^ 
goddesees who were represented as holding their dime offeprii^ 
in th^r arms. If this is admitted, it is poerible that DeyaJd and 
her son may be a replica not of the Medonna but of a pagan 
prototype. But there ia no difficulty in admitting that ChriaUM 
legends and Christian art may haye entered northern India 
from Bactria and Peiaia, and haye found a home in Muttra. Only 
it does not follow from this that any penetrating influent 
transformed Hindu thought and is responsible for Kiishna^s 
divinity, for the idea of hAaW, or for the theology of the Bha- 
gavad-^. The borrowed features in the Krishna story are 
supcrficiM and also late. They do not occur in the MaWbh&rata 
and tlie earliest authority dted by Weber is Hem&dn, a writer 
of the tliirtoenth century. Allowing that what he describes 
may have existed sevoial centuries before bis own date, we 
have still no ground for tracing the m^n ideas of Vwshnayism 
to Christianity and the later vagaries of ICrishnaism are pre¬ 
cisely the aspects of Indian religion which most outrage 
Christian sentiment. 

One edition of the Bhavishya Purana contains a summary 

* KmhpujsombhtMiS, Hcmairt of Acoiom*/ of BiHiit, IM7. 

• In ipito of infcku>s«iqm*71«be*pd of rop»#«iUUw 

of 0 .UUb mywlf. A* 8«»rt pcUiU ont {Uft^ ^ 3») *1* ^ w 

pl*y * part 1ft life *!»*« 

ihi» do«a not imply Out ihopborfo tnd taw flock* *» tapposod W bo p«*«t b* 

^Tbonsli the ordinwy U«8ad dow net 8^ tUt KriihnfcWM bom u> • atsU* 
yti it doM 4UO&*»tO hift) with 0MU«. 

424 EASTSRN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [CR. 

of Uxc book of Geiioaia from Adam to Abraham'- Though it U 
a late interpolation, it shows conclimvely that the editors of 
Puranas had no objection to borrowing from Chriatian sources 
and it m ay be that some incidents in the life of Krishna aa related 
by the VishDO, Bh4gavaea and other Puranaa are borrowed from 
the Gospels, such as Kamsa’s orders to masaacro all male infanta 
when Krishna is bom, the journey of Nanda, Krislina’s foster- 
father, to Mathori in order to pay taxos and the presentation 
of a pot of ointment to Krishna by a hunchback woman whom 
he miraoulously makes straight, In estimating the importance 
of such coincidenceB we must remember that they are merely 
casual details in a long story of adventures which, in their 
genera] outline, bear no relation to the life of Christ, The most 
striking of these is the “maesacre of the Innocents.” The Hari- 
vaipea, which is not later than the fifth century a n., relates 
that Kamsa killed aU the other children of Bevaki, though it 
does not mention a general massaoie, and Pktanjali (e. 160 b.o.) 
knew the legend of the hostility between Krishna and Kamsa 
and the lattei^a deaths So if anything bae been borrowed from 
the Gospel account it is only the general slaughter of children. 
Tlie mention of a pot of ointment strikes Europeans because 
sucli an object is not familiar to us, but it was an ordinary form 
of luxury In India and Judea alike, and the fact that a woman 
honoured both Krishna and Chnst in the same way but in 
totally difierent circumstances is hardly more tiian a chance 
colncidonce. The fact that both Nanda and Joseph leave their 
homes in order to pay their taxes is certaixiiy curious and 1 will 
leave the reader to form his own opinion about it. The instance 
of the Bhavishya Parana shows that Hindus had no scruples 
about borrowing from the Bible and in some Indian dialects 
the name Krishna appears as Krishto or Kushto. On the other 
hand, whatever borrowing there may have been is eoncemed 
oxclusively with trivial details: the principal episodes of the 
Krishna legend were known before the Christian era. 

This is perhaps the place to examine a curious episode of 
the Mah&bhlirata which narrates the visit of certain s^es to 

' I>j/itfuHu «/ Xoli ogre, sviii. 

* OoDinioaUry oo Pwilai, 2. S. dS, 8. 1. SO 4od & S. 111. It AMnu probsblo thkt 
lUtAftjkli kn»w li»o itoiy of Krishfis sad Emim »ub«U&tl&ll; m it ift nooiifitod io 
tha Htttiraqisa 

CERlSTIArnTY IE lEDIA 

425 

a T«^on called ^vetedTlpa, the white island or continent> 
identified by some with Alexandria or a Christian settlement in 
central A^. The opieode occurs in the ^ntiparran^ of the 
Mah4bh&rata and is introduced by the story of a royal sacrifice, 
at which most of the gods appeared in viable shape but Hari 
(Vishnu or Krishna) took his offerings unseen. The king and 
his priests were angry, hut three sages called Ekata, Dvita and 
Trito, who are described as the miraculous ofispring of BrahmA, 
interposed explwning that none of those present were worthy 
to see Harl. They related how they had once desired to behold 
him in his own form and after protracted austerities repured 
under divine guidance to an island called ^vetadvlpa on the 
northom shores of the See of Milk*. It was inhabited by beings 
white and shining like the moon who followed the roles of the 
Pancarfttra, took no food and were continually engaged in 
silent prayer. So great was the effulgence that at first the 
visitors were blinded. It was only after another century of 
penance that they began to have hopes of beholding the deity. 
Then there suddenly arose a great light. The inl^bitante of 
the island ran towards it with joined hands and, a* if they were 
making an offering, cried, “ Victory to thee, 0 thou of the lotus 
eyes, reverence to thee, producer of ail things: levereuee to thee, 

‘ SMtioo 8S7. A journey to SreUdripfc relMedin theS ttK iii n t 

• The iDoet Meai^ble lUtoaoni ot the googrepWoel here teferred is lo 
Viehnn Purtne, Book a. oUp. rv. The Son «I Milk i. the «xih of the 
oofttrio eeu which lurroond Jembudrtpe Md Mt Uen. It the ^ ef^ 

Mocaouio owtin«tt « diked^tp* from tie WTenth 
iDhnbiUsU of Sikedvlpe wordiip VWmo ei the Sun end b*»e this rnnoi 
thnt »t Msy rate, eooordiag to tie VUhno nod Bhneiehye Poiiiiw, they we 

li e terrmtrul perediw ; the iaieWtwto live » thoneecd jMW. ere of the ^ netw 

M eod^ee^ eortow end •!»- “The three VedaJ. Ibe Portn^ EJwa 

«d P^ty ere unknown” emong th«n «d "tb«e ero 

order! tti« ere no fixed imtitutee." The 'JS; 

Brehmen^ UWtdeio iho north oeeme eku to thet which k4 the Gre^ W 

of Hyp«bo»^Feirly eerly in the hietory of Indie It 

thet tie weeUto, ecuthem, end eutem coeete »ew «ihed by^ ^ eo tiet 

eertUy petediee wee netnreJiy pl«ed in the north Xhoe we heer cd en eto^ 

the ceUed tie ooBntry of the kdy f 

Here nothing cen be peroeived with bomea eanme 

ie neatio^io the eemeWh ee Heevea «id tbe aty of le^ 

It ii oot Qoito deer (eeitber ie it of mnoh moment), whether the M^bhl^U 
Intendi by Bvetedvtpe one of theee c«oentrie world divielone or e eeper^ 

TrKtri. Md P.d»* !•»**« *•“ ‘‘ “ 

and liii eeioUy eerveate. 

426 EASTERN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [ch. 

HrisM£:eda, great Pumsha, tbs first'bom.” The three eagea 
saw EOthlflg but were oonscious that a wind laden with per¬ 
fumes blew past them. They were convinced* however, that 
the deity had appeared to bis worebippere. A voice from heaven 
told them that this was so and that no one without ftutb 
(abbakta) oonid see N|j4jaoa. 

A subsequent section of the same book tells us that Khrada 
visited ^vetadvfpa and received from N&r&ya^ tbe Pancar&tra, 
which is thus de&iitelj associated with the locality. 

Some writen have seen in this legend a poetical account of 
contact with Christianity, but wrongly, as I think. We have 
here no mythicized version of a real journey but a voyage of 
the im^uiation. The sea of milk, the white land and its white 
shining inhabitants Me an attempt to express tbe pure radiance 
proper to the courts of God, mnch as the Book of Bevelation 
tells of a sea of glass, elders in white rMxnent and a deity whose 
bead Mid hair were white like wool and snow. Nor need we 
suppose, as some have done, that the worship of the white sages 
is an attempt to describe the Mass. The story does not say that 
whenever the White Islanders held a religions service the deity 
appeared, but that on a particular occasion when the deity 
appeared they laa to meet him and saluted hlTn with a hymn. 
Tbe idea that prayer and meditation are tbe sacridee to be 
offered by perfected saints is thoroughly Indian and anoieut. 
The account testifies to the non-Bn^unanic obaraoter of this 
worship of Vishnu, which was patronised by the Brahmans 
though not originated by them, but there is nothing exotic in 
the hymn to N&riyana and the epithet fiist-bom (pdrvaja), 
in which some have detected a Christian flavour, is as old as 
the Rig Veda. The reason for laying the scene of the story in 
the north (if indeed the points of tbe compass have any place 
in tiiis mythical geography) is no doubt the early connection 
of the Pancar&tra with Kashmir and north-western India^. 
The fsets that some Puranas people the regions near §veta- 
dv^a with Iranian son-worshippers* and that some details of 
the Pancar&tra (though not tho system as a whole) show a 
resemblance to Zoroastrianism suggest interesting hypotheses 
as to origin of this form of Vishnuism, but more facts are needed 
to confirm them. Chronology gives os little help, for though tbe 

' 0*rb» tUoka that tU $M of UUk is L4k« BoUusb. ?or tJt« PawMitn se* 
bookv. iae. * 8«« note 2 Ofi Iftst p«^. 

LV] 

CBRISTUNITT 2N INDIA 

427 

Mab&bh&rata was substactially complete in the fourth century, 
it cannot he denied that additiona may have been made to it 
later and that the etoiy of ^vetadTipa may be one of them. There 
were Nestorian Bishops at Meir and Herat in the fifth century, 
but there appears to be no eridenco that Chrls^anity reaoh^ 
Transoxiana before the fall of the Saasanids in the first half of 
the seventh century. 

Thus tbero is little reason to regard Christianity as an 
important factor in the evolution of Hinduism, because (n) there 
is no evidence that it appeared in an infiuonrial fonn before the 
uzteenth century and (6) there is strong evidence that moat of 
the doctrines and practices resembling Christianity have an 
Indian origin, On the other band abundwt instances show that 
the Hindus bad no objection to borrowing from a foreign religion 
anything great or small which took their fancy. But the in- 
teresriog point is that the principal Chrisrian doctrines were 
either indigenous in India—such as and avatdras —or 

repugnant to the vast majority of Hindns.such as the cmcifizion 
and atonement. 1 do not think that Kestorianism had any 
'appreciable efiect on tho history of religions thought in sonthem 
India, Hellenic and Zoroaetrian ideas undoubtedly entered 
north-western India, but, though Christiau ideas may have come 
with them, few of tho instances cited seem even probable except 
some details in the life of Krishna which affect neither the legend 
as a whole nor the doctrines associated with it. Some later 
sects, such as the Kabirpanthls, show remarkable resemblances 
to Christianity, bnt then the teaching of wss admittedly 
a blend of Hinduism and Islam, and since Islam accepted many 
Christian dootnnes, it remains to be proved that any farther 
explanation is needed. Barth ohserred that criticism is genetaliy 
on the look out for the least trace of Christian infinence on 
Tlinduigm but does not pay sufficient attention to the extent of 
BlosUm infiuence. Every student of Indian reUgion shonld bear 
in mind this dictum of tho great French savant. After the 
rixteenth century there is no difficulty in supposing direct 
contact with Roman Catholicism. Tukaram, the Maratha poet 
who lived comparatively near to Goa, may have imitated the 
diction of the Gospels. 

Some authors^ are disposed to see Chrisrian infiuence in 
Chinese and Japanese Buddhism, particularly in the Amidist 

^ MTersi works <4 Uojd and SmIu. TU KAslonm in Ciunc. 

a m. 

2S 

428 EASTERN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [CH. Lv 

96Cto. 1 have touche on this subject in severe places but it 
may he weU to summaiizd icy conclu^one here. 

The chief Amidist doctrines aro oleuly defined in the SukJii 
Tatt-vytUia which was translated from Sanskrit into Chinese 
in the latter half of the second century a.d. It must therefore 
hare esUted in Sanskrit at least in the first century of our 
era> at which period dogmatic Christianity could har^y have 
penetrated to India or any part of Central Asia where a Sanskrit 
treatise waa likely to be written. Its doctrines must therefore 
be indepeodent of Christianity and indeed their reGemblance 
to Cbiistianity is often exaggerated, for though salvation by 
faith in Amida is remarkably like justification by faith, yet 
Amida is not a Saviour who died for the world and faith in him 
is coupled with the use of certain invocations. The whole theoiy 
has close parallels in Zoroastrianism and is also a natural 
development of ideas already existing in India. 

Kor cmi 1 think that the common use of rites on behalf of 
tbe dead in Buddhist China is traceable to Christianity. Jn 
this case too the parallel is superficial, for the rites are in most 
cases not prayers for the de^: the officiants recite formnle 
by which ^ey acquire merit and they then formally transfer 
this merit to the dead. Seeing how great was tbe importance 
assigned to the cult of the dead in Ct^a, it is not necessary to 
seek for explanations why a religion trying to win its way in 
those Gouatfiea invented ceremonies to satisfy tho popular 
craving, and Buddhism had no need to imitate Chiistianity, 
for from an early period it had countenanced ofierings intended 
to comfort and help the departed. 

Under the T'ang dynasty Msnichseism, Nestorianism and 
new streams of Buddhism all entered China. These religions 
had some similarity to one another, their olergy may have 
co-operated and Udaniohsism certainly adopted Buddhist ideas. 
There is no reason why Buddhism should not have adopted 
Nestorian ideas and, in so far as the Nestorians familiarized 
China with the idea of salvation by faith in a divine personage, 
they may have helped tbe spread of Amidism. But the evidence 
that we possess seems to ikow not that the Nestorians intro¬ 
duced the story of Christ’s life and sacrifice into Buddhism 
but that they suppressed the idea of atonement by his death, 
possibly ondM Buddhist influence. 

CHAPTER LVI 

INDIAN INFLUENCE IN THE WESTERN WORLD 

Tffs m£uenc« oi Indian religion on Clmatiaxiity is part of the 
wider question of its influence on the west genetallj. It is 
clear that from 200 b.o. imtil 300 i-.n. oriental religion played 
a coriftderahle part in the countries round the Mediterranean. 
The worship of the Magna Mater was known in Rome by 200 B.o. 
and that of leis and Serapis in the time of Sulla. In the early 
centuries of the Christian era the onltus of Mithra prevailed 
not only in Rome but in most parts of Europe where there were 
Roman legions, even in Britain. These rellgioiiB may be appro¬ 
priately labelled with the vague word oriental, for ^y ^ not 
so much the special creeds of Egypt and Perria transplanted 
into Roman soil as fragments, combinations and adaptations 
of the most varioDB eastern beliefs. They difieied from the forms 
of worship indigenous to Greece and Italy in being personal, 
not natioi^r they were often emotional and professed to reveal 
the nature and destinies of the soul. If we ask whether there ace 
any definitely Indian elements in all this orientalism, the answer 
must be that there is no clear case of direct borrowing, nothing 
Indian analogous to the mirations of Isis and Mithra. If Indian 
thought bad any infiuence on the Mediterranean it was not 
immediate, but through Persia, Babylonia and Egypt. But it 
is possible that the doctrine of metempsychosis and the ideal 
of the ascetic life are echoes of India. Though the former is 
fonnd in an incomplete shape among savages in many parts of 
the world, there is no indication that it was ind^enous in Egypt, 
Syria, Babylonia, Aria Minor, Greece or Italy. It crops up now 
and again as a tenet held by phUoaophers or communities of 
cosmopolitan tastes such as the OrpMc Societies, but usually 
in circumstances which suggest a foreign origin. It is s^d, 
however, to have formed part of the doctrines taught by the 
Druids in Gaul. Similarly though occasional fasts and other 
mortifioations may have been usual in the worship oi various 
deities and thou^ the r^orons Spartan discipline was a sort 
of military asceticism, still the Idea that the religious life 

430 EASTERN ANX> WESTERN KBLIOIONS [ch. 

coQu^ in suppresamg tlto passions, which pidys such a largo 
part in Christaaxi monastidsm, can bo traced not to any Jewish 
or Suropean institution but to Egypt. Although monasUcisni 
spread quickly thence to Syria, it is admitted that the first 
Christian hermite and monasteries were Egyptian and there is 
some eTidenoe {ox the existence there of pagan hermits^. Egypt 
was a most religious country, but it does not appear that 
asostioism, celibacy or meditation formed part of ite oider 
reli^ous life, and their appearance in Hellenistic times may be 
due to a wave of Adatic infincnce starting originally from India. 

Looking westwards from India and considering what were 
the circumstances favouring the diffusion of Indian ideas, we 
most noto fir^ that Hindus have not only been in all ages pre¬ 
occupied by religious questions but have also had a larger portion 
of the missionary spirit than is generally supposed. It is true 
that in wide tracts and long periods this spirit has been sup¬ 
pressed by Brahmanic exclusiveness, but phenomena like the 
spread of Buddhism and the establishment of Hinduism in 
Indo-China and Java speak for themselves. The spiritual tide 
Sowed eastwards rather than westwards; still it is probable 
tbat its movement was felt, though on a smaller scale, in the 
accessible parts of the west. By land, our record tel ls us mainly 
of what came into India from Persia and Bactria, hut something 
must have gone out. By water we know that at least after 
shout 700 B.c. there was communication with the Persian Gulf, 
Arabia and probably the ited Sea. Semitic alphabets were 
borrowed: in the Jitakas we hear of merchants going to Baveru 
or Babylon: Solomon’s commercial ventxires brought him Indian 
products. But the strongest testimony to the disseminarion of 
religious ideas is found in Asoka’s celebrated edict (probably 
256 B.o.) in which he claims to have spread the Dhamma as far 
as the dominions of Antiochus “and beyond that Anfcioohus to 
where dwell the four kings named Ptolemy, Antigoniis, Magas 
and Alexander.” The kings mentioned are identified as the 
rulers of Syria, E^t, Macedonia, Gyrene and Epirus. Asoka 
compares his missionary triumphs to the military conquests of 
other mouarchs. It may be that the comparison is only too just 

* Sm Scale Mofiertcff, FagaKW CkritdafUiy in Sfyp<, p. 1». Potrie, 
fftitgian in Sffypl, p. M. Bui Icr » eeoMry »jew jm FreuelUD. MOneJUvm 
vnd StfofuhU/, IMS. 

LVT] INDIAN INfLUENCE IN THE WEST 431 

and that Uko them he clsumed to have extended hia law to 
regions where his name was unknown, No record of the arrival 
of Buddhist missions in any Hellenistic kingdom has reached 
us and the language of the edict, if examined critically, is not 
precise. On the other hand, however vague it may be, it testifies 
to two things. Firstly, Egypt, Syria and the other Hellenistic 
states were lealltiee to the Indians of this period, distant but 
not fabulous regions. Secondly, tbs kii^ desired to spread the 
knowledge of the law in these ccantries and this desire was 
shared, or inspired, by the monks whom he patronised. It is 
tberefoze probable that, though the difficulties of travelling 
were great and the Unguislio dMculties of preachirtg an Indian 
religion even gireater, missionaries set ont for the west and 
reached if not Macedonia and Epims, at least Babylon and 
Alexandria. We may imagme that they would fre^iuent the 
temples and the company of the priests and not show much 
talent for public preaching. If no record of them remains, it 
IS not more wonderful than the corresponding rilenoe in the 
east about Greek visitors to India. 

It is only after the Obristian era that we find Apollonius and 
Plotinus boking towards India as the home of wisdom. In 
earlier periods the defirute instances of connection with India 
are few. Indian figures fonnd at Memphis perhaps Indicate the 
existence there of an Indian colony*, and a Ptolemaic grave¬ 
stone has been disco^ied bearing the signs of the wheel and 
trident*. The infant deity Horns is represented in Indian 
attitudes and as sitting on a btus. Some fragments of riie 
Kanarese language have been found on a papyrns, but it 
appears not to be earlier than the second century a.d.* In 
21 A.n. Augustus whUe at Athens received an embassy from 
India which came viA Antioch. 

It was accompanied by a person described as Zarmanochegae, 
an Indian from Bargosa who astonished the Athenians by 
pubhely burning himself alive*. We also hear of the movement 
of an Indian tribe from the Panjab to Parthia and thence to 

> 11isd«n FeUie. Utn. 10 OB, p. 12 S. 

• J.SU.S. 1898, p. 816, 

* Hnltawb. Htfnat. xxixx. p. $07. tod J.S.A.S. 1904, p. 999. 

« Niooltu PajotMMtu, quoted bjStnbo, st. 73 Stt •!»> CtatUu. a. 59, 
vbo ctlta Indito Ztfmtra. Ztnii4B0«bceoi p«rb^« ec«Uiia Um two vordt 
^romtot tad fiotrya 

482 EASTERN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [ch. 

Armenia (14d-127 5.0.)', and oi an Indian colony at Ale;saadria 
in the titno of Trajan. Doubtlese there were other tribal more- 
menta and other mercantile colonies which have left no record, 
but they were all on a amall scale and there was no general 
outpouring of India westwards. 

The early relations of India were with Babylon rather than 
with Egypt, but if Indian ideas reached Babylon they may easily 
have spread further. Ck^mmunicatioii between Egypt and 
Babylon existed from an early period and the tabbte of Tdl*el- 
Amama testify to the antiquity and mtimacy of this intercourse. 
At a later date Necho iii7aded Babylonia but was repulsed. The 
Jews returned from the Babylonian oaptirity (588 B.o.) irith 
their religious horizon enlarged and mod^ed. They were chiefly 
affected by Zoroastriau id^ but they may hare become 
acquainted with any views and practices ^en known in Babylon, 
and not necessarily with those identdfled with the state worship, 
for the exiles may have been led to associate with other strangers. 
After about 535 a.o. the Persian empire extended from the 
valley of the Indus to the valley of the Nile and from Macedonia 
to Babylon. Wo hoar that in the army which Xerxes led against 
Greece there were Indian soldiers, which is interesting as showing 
how the Persians trusportcd subject races from one end of their 
empire to the other. After the career of Alexander, HeUenistic 
kingdoms took the place of this empire and, apart from inrdads 
on the north-weet frontier of India, nuuntained friendly rela¬ 
tions with her. Seleucua Nicator sent Msgasthenes as envoy 
about 800 B.c. and Ptolemy Pbiladelphus (285-247 b.o.) a 
representative named Dionysius. Bindushta, the father of 
Asoka, exchanged missions with Antiochus, and, according to 
a well-known anecdote*, expressed a wish to buy a professor 
(ffoift6C7^vy But Antiochus replied that Greek professors were 
not for sale. 

Egyptologists consider that metempsychosis is not part of 
tho earlier strata of Egyptian religion but appears first about 
600 B.O., and Flinders Petrie refers to this period the originals 
of the earliest Hermetic literature. But other authorities regard 
these works as being both in substance and language consider* 

' 1007, p, 948. 

• Sm Viacenl flmitii, Sarig Butorg cf Indie, ediOoc m. p, U7, Tb» origuiAi 
aocm of tho ouocdoto k HcgMoadroi la AUmmiu. 14. gW v 

LVi) INDIAN INFLUENCE IN THE WEST 433 

My posterior to the Chrietifrn era and aa pxesentiag a jtUDble 
of Chne^anity, Neoplatonism and Egyptian ideas. 

I have neither space nor competence to discuas the date of 
the Hermetic writing, bnt it is importance for the question 
which we are considering. They ooufain addiesses to the deity 
like 1 am Thou and Then art I {iyio ^ koX ^ Iy^)> If such 
words could be used in Egypt several centtuies before Christ, 
the probabihty of Indian indnence seems to me strong, for they 
would not grow naturally out of Egyptian or Hellenistic religion. 
Five hundi^ years latex they woi^ be lees remarkable. What¬ 
ever may be the date of the Hermetic Eteratore, it is certain 
that the Book of Wisdom and the writings of Philo are pre- 
Christian and show a mixture of ideas drawn from many sources, 
Jewish, Neoplatonic and Neopythagorean. D these hospitabb 
systems made the acquaintance of Indian philosophy, we may 
be sure that they gave it an unprejudiced and even friendly 
hearing. In the centuries just before the Christian exa Egypt 
was a centre of growth for personal and private leUgious ideas 
hardly posseesmg sufficient organization to form what we oall 
a religion, yet stiE, inasmuch as they aspired to teach individual 
souls right conduct as well as true knowledge, implicitly con* 
taming the same eebeme of teaching as the Buddhist and 
Chiistian CSiurohes, But it is characteristic of all this movement 
that it never attempted to form a national or universal religion 
and remained in all its manifestations individual and personal, 
connected neither with the secular government nor with any 
national cultus. Among these religious ideas were monotheism 
mingled ‘frith pantheism to the extent of saying that God is all 
and all is one: the idea of the Logos or Divine Wisdom, which 
ultimately assumes the form that the Word is an emanation 
or Son of God; asceticism, or at least the desire to free the soul 
from the bondage of the senses; metempsychosis and the doctrine 
of conversion or the new birth of the soul, which fits in woE with 
metempsychosis, though it frequently exists apart from it. 
I doubt E there is sufficient reason for attributing the doctrine 
of the Logos* to India, but it is possible that asceticism and 
the beUef in metempsychosis received their first impulse thence. 

• 6«* FlJadvM Petri®. Pertonai in CifiHianUjf, 1009. 

* A« I h&v« pointed out tSMwhut tfaere ii little reel cimIoct betKveo the ideM 
efLesM wd Sebde. 

434 EASTER}^ AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [cH. 

Tiiey Appear late aod, like the phraseology of the Honnetic 
hooks, they do not grow naturally out of antecedent ideas and 
practices in Egypt and Palestine. The life followed by eucb 
communities as the Therapeut^e and Essenes is just such as 
might have been evolved by seekers after truth who were trying 
to put into practice in another country the religions ideals of 
India. There are differences: for instance these communities 
laboured with their hands and observed the seventh day, but 
their main ideas, recrement from the world and snppression 
of the passions, are those of Indian monks and foreign to 
Egyptian and Jewish thought. 

The character of Pythagoras's teaching mid its relation to 
Egypt have been much diseased and tbe name of the master 
was clearly extended by later (and perhaps also by early) 
disciples to doctrines wHch he never held. But it seems in¬ 
disputable that there were widely spread both in Oreeo^and 
Italy societies called Pythagorean or Orphic which inculcated 
a common role of life and believed in metempsyebous. The rule 
of life did not as a mle amount to asceddsm in the Indian 
sense, which was most uncongenial to Hellenic ideas, but it 
comprised great self-restrmnt. The belief in metempsychosis 
finds remarkably clear exprewlon: we hear in the Orphic 
fragments of tbe circle of bi^ and of escape fr o m it, language 
strikingly parallel to many tidian utterances and strikingly 
unlike the usual turns of Greek speech and thought, Thus the 
sotd is addressed as "Hail thou who hast suffered the suffering ” 
and is made to declare "I have flown out of the soitowful weary 
wheel*.” I see no reason for discrediting tbe story that Pytha¬ 
goras visited Egypt*. He is said to have been a Samian and 
during his life (c. 600 B.o.) Samos had a special connection with 
BOTf 1 Polycrates was the ally of Amaas and as^ted him 
with troops. The date, if somewhat early, is ixot far removed 
from the time when metempsyohosiB became part of Egyptian 
religion, The general opinion of anfci^iuity connected the Orphic 

‘ Prota ti* Ubiet fwmd M CoBOMio. 

a Pwlus in put 3Vn. v. 330, *0^4.1 rtf 

wrac Tvtrt t9x9^ Ki.X-r r at Xtfai tai (bavv«iV<u njiir^rat. 8m J. E. BtlTlMo 

Proltg. IfitUttuino/OrKilUlviim, 1008, cap. n. ud appendix. 

* BoraM, Eofitf Ontk PSHoaofky. p M, wft tbtt it flrrt oeeuM In Uib BwUs 

of iMoraiM and d©M a©i belUr* that ite •cMBBt In HerodoUwijBpliM that PytU. 

SOTM rinUd EsTpt 

LVi] WDIAN ll^ILUENCE IN TEE WE9T 

435 

doctrines with Thrace but so little is known of the Thiaciane 
and their or^in that this connection does not cainy ns much 
further. They appear, howerer, to hare had relations with Asia 
Minor and that region must bare been in touch with India^. 
But Orphism was also connected with Crete, and Cretan civilisa¬ 
tion bad oriental affinities*. 

The point of greatest interest naturally is to determine what 
were the religious influences among which Christ grew up. 
Whatever they may have been, his originality is not called in 
question. Mohammed was an enquirer; in estimating his work 
we have often to ask what ho bad heard about Christianity and 
Judaism and how far be had understood it correctly. But neither 
the Buddha nor Christ were enquirers in nense: they ac¬ 
cepted the best thotight of their time and countr}': with a genius 
which transcends comparison and eludes definition they gave it 
an expression which has become immortal. Neither the sub¬ 
stance nor the form of their teaching can reasonably be regarded 
as identical, for the Buddha did not treat of God or the divine 
government of the world, whereas Christ’s chief the^ is that 
God loves the world and that therefore man should love God 
and his fellow men. But though their basic principles differ, 
the two doctrines agree in m^ntaining that happiness is ob¬ 
tainable not by pleasure or success or philosophy or rites but 
by an unselfish life, culminating in the state c^ed Nirvana or 
the kingdom of heaven. “The kingdom of heaven is within 
you.” 

In the Gospels Christ teaches neitiier asceticism nor metem- 
psyohosis. The absence of the former is remarkable: be eats 
flesh and allows himself to be anointed: he drinks wine, pie- 
Boribes its use in rel^on and is credited with producing it 
miraculously when human cellars run short. But be praises 
poverty and the poor: the Sermon on the Mount and the in¬ 
structions to the Seventy can be put in practioe only by those 
who, like the members of a religious community, have severed 
all worldly ties and though the extirpation of desire is not in 

‘ W^et«v«r s*7 h«T« t«aa tlw tru* «hAfmct»r end histeiy of Uio oolsiDotia 
poopI« of Ifiuiuii it tpp««n e«rt^ tb»t tb«y adotod doitiM witb ladi*a neoM 
•boat 1400 ac. Bni tb*7 me; been Inniooi, and it m»; be daabted if tbs 
AryM lodiime ef thie beOered in aetempajehoeb. 

* J. E. HwTiaon, Le. pp. 4SS nod M4, tt6m to think ek»t OipUem aijgr«Md 
kom Crete W llirftoe. 

436 EASTERN AND WESTERN RE110I0N8 [ ch . 

tlie Gospels held up as aa end, the detachment, the freedom 
iiom care, lust ^d enmity preecribed by the lew of the Buddha 
find theii nearest counterpart in the lives of the Essenes a nd 
Tberapecte. Though we have no record of Christ being brou gh t 
into contact with these conunvuiities (for John the Baptist 
appears to have been a solitary and erra^o pxeacher) it Is 
probable that their ideals were known to him and influenced 
hie own. Their rale of life may have been a faint refiez of Indian 
monasticism. But the debt to India must not be ez^erated: 
much of the oriental element in the Easenes, such as their 
frec^uent purifications and their prayers uttered towards the 
Biu), may be doe to Persian influence. They seem to have be¬ 
lieved in the pre-existence of the soul and to have held that it 
waa imprisoned in the body, but this hardly amounts to metem¬ 
psychosis, and metempsychosis cannot be found in the New 
Teatament*. The old Jewish outlook, preserved by the Sadduoees, 
appears not to have included a belief in ^y life after death, and 
the supplements to this materialistic view admitted by the 
Pharisees hardly amounted to the doctrine of the natural 
immortality of the soul but rather to a belief that the just would 
somehow act^uire now bodies and hve again. Thus people were 
ready to accept John the Baprist as boing Elias in a new form. 
Perhaps these rather fragmentary ideas of the Jews are trace¬ 
able to Egyptian and ultimately to Indian teaching about 
transmigration. That belief is said to crop up occasionally in 
rabbinical wriringe but was given no place in orthodoi Christ- 
ianity^ 

With regard to the teaching of Christ then, the oonolusion 
must be that it owes no direct debt to Indian, Egyptian, Persian 
or other oriental sources. But inasmuch as be was in sympathy 
with the more spiritual elements of Judaism, largely borrowed 
during the Babylonian captivity, and with the unworldly and 
self-denying lives of the Essenes, the tone of his teaching is 

' tibsT^MtplMmJohnix. t. Wb9djdw,tlu8Biaiiorlii«pAnat«, 

that b« wu bom blmd} mut if tkkttt etridtjy imply mzb* form of pn.«xiAt«iie«. 
Bat it li » popolv quMUoo, cot s tboolo^icsl atstemoBt, uA I doubt if mtokIv 
lo^oid dodootiooi from it vArrMtod. 

' Tli« pn-cxlMooe of tte oool moido tobe impliod >e ib* Book of Wiidom tUL 
SO. Tbo nmuksblo orpreMioA In Um £pi«tlQ of jAm«« ili. 5 ^ 

Mggitu B oompwMOii «itb tbe Orphie expraaoioiM qaotad tbovo and Saipi&n, bat 
UisdiSeaUto balnveitoaDmaan moro tbaa "tbeeoiuwoiaMura.*’ 

LVi] INDIAN INFLUENCE IN THE WEST 437 

nearer to tbeso newer and imported doctrines than to the old 
]aw of Israel^. 

Some striking paralleU have been pointed out between the 
Gospels and Indian texte of such undoubted antiq^uity that if 
imitation ia admitted, the Evangelists must have been the 
imitators. Before considermg these instances 1 invite the reader’s 
attention to two parallel passages from Shakespeare and the 
Indian poet Bhartrihari. The latter Is thus translated hy 
Monier Williama^: 

^ow for a little while a child, and now 
An amorous youth; then for a season turned 
Into the wealth; householder: then stripped 
Of all his riches, with decrepit limbs 
And wrinkled hame man creeps towards the end 
Of life's erratic course and like an actor 
Basses behind Death's ourtain out of view. 

The resemblance of this to the well-known lines in As 7 oh 
lAks li, “All the world’s a stage,” etc., is obvious, and it is a 
real resemblance, although the point emphasised b; Bhortri* 
hari is that man leovos the world like an actor who at the end 
of the piece sUps behind the curtsiu, which formed the back' 
ground of an Indian stage. But, great as is the resemblance, 
I imagine that no one would maintain that it baa any other 
origin than that a fairly obvious thought occnired to two writeis 
in different times o I countries and suggested tx- 

pressioDS, 

Now many parallels between the Buddhist and Christian 
Bcriptnies—the majority as it seems to me of those ooUeoted 
by Edmunds and Anesaki—belong to this class’. One of the 
most striking is the pass^ in the Vinaya relating how the 

^ As in tbsir Ief«a4s, so in thoir doctrioes, ib* apcsaonicsi writmg* am mor» 
OTMotol tbsa tbs c«nomoAl sud eoaUia mors p&atbelstlc snd 4seeUo u/ingB. 

"Wboro tboio is om slone, I ui with hisu Rniss the stono tnd tbou shslt 
ms: eloftTS the wood snd I ua thsrt** lOitr^AyncMu "I na thoo u4 thou 

4H I snd irbsresocTtt thoo ut I 4 ri slso; utd in *11 tbin^ 1 «u distribgtsd *&d 
wberssoevor thou wilt thou gstbersst me sod in gntherio^ me tbon g*tban«t tii 7 . 
Sell ” (Qospel of Ere in Bpiph ffaef> xzvu 3). " Whee (hs L«fd vu »sh«d, »b«n 
ebonidhis kingdom oom«. hs i*id: Whon ivo shell be one end the witheut ee tbe 
eritbin end the mele with tbe teaele, Dttthsr msle oerfeoi&le*' (XopM). 

* ffiftdtiim, p. 64e. Tbe origmel is to he fomd in BherUiheri'e VeirogjiUn* 
tekera, lit. 

' Tie Atddiiet end CArishmi (Tospels, 4tii ed. 1909. 

488 EASTEmi AND WB8TERi^ RELIGIONS [CH. 

Buddha hirasdlf cared for a eick monk who was neglected by 
his colleagues and 84ud to these latter, ‘‘WIiosootot would wait 
upon me let him weat on the aick^,” Here the resemblance to 
hCattbew sxT. 40 azui 45 is remarkable, but 1 do not imagine 
that the writer of the Qospel bad ever heard or read of the 
Buddha’s words. The sen^ment which prompted thorn, if none 
too common, is at least widespread and is the same that made 
ConfuMUs show respect and courtesy to the blind. The setting 
of the saying in tho Vinaya and in tiie Gospel is quite different: 
the common point is that one whom all are anxious to honour 
sees that those around him show no consideration to tho sick 
and unhappy and leprovea them in the words of the text, words 
which admit of many intorpretatlons, the simplest perhaps 
being " 1 bid you care for the sick: you neglect me if yon neglect 
those whom I bid yon to cherish.*’ 

But many passages in Buddhist and Christian writings have 
been compared where there is no real parallel but only some 
word or detail which catches the attention and receives an 
importance which It does not possess. An instance of is 
the sO'Called parable of the prodigal son in the Lotus Shtra, 
Chapter iv, which has often hiea compared with Luke zv. 12 ff. 
But neither in moral nor in plot are the two parables really 
rimilar. The Lotus znaintainsi that there are many varieties of 
doctrine of which the less profound are not necessarily wrong, 
and it attempts to illustrate this by not very convincii^ stories 
of how a father may withhold the whole truth from his children 
for their good. In one story a father and son are separated for 
fifty years and &ott move about: the father becomes very rich, 
the son poor. The son In his wanderings comes upon his father’s 
palace and recognizes no one, The fa^er, now a very old man, 
knows his son, but iustead of welcoming him at once as his hoir 
puts him through a gradual discipline and explains the real 
position only on hU deathbed. These ineddente have nothing in 
common with the parable related in the Gospel except that a 
son is lost and found, an event which occurs in a hundred oriental 
tales. What is much more remarkable, though hardly a case 
of borrowing, is that in both versions the chief personage, that 
is Buddha or God, is likened to a father as he also is in the parable 
of the carru^cs^. 

' vm. 26. 

* tatiu, ehap. v. 

43d 

tvi] INDIAN INFLVENOE IN THE WEST 

One of the Jain scripturee called XJtUiidjajana^ contains 
tha following remarkable passage^ ‘‘Three merchants sot out 
on their traV^ each with his capital; one of them gained much, 
the second returned with his capital and the third merchant 
came home after having lost hh capital. The parable is taken 
from common life; learn to apply it to the Law. The capital is 
human life> the gain is heaven,'* etc. It is imposaihle to Bx the 
date of this passage: the Jain Canon in which it ocenrs was 
edited in 454 a.D. but the component parts of it are much older. 
It clearly gives a rough sketch of the idea which is elaborated 
in the parable of the talents. Need we suppose that there baa 
been borrowing on either side ? Only in a very restricted sense, 
1 think, if at all The parable is taken from common life, as the 
Indian text truly says. It occurred to some teacher, perhaps to 
many teachers Independently, that the spiritual life may be 
represented as a matter of profit and loss and illustrated by the 
conduct of those who employ their money profitably or not. 
The idea is natural and proMly far older than the Gospels, 
but the parable of the talents is an original and detailed treat¬ 
ment of a metaphor which may have been known to the theo¬ 
logical schools of both India and Palestine. The parable of the 
sower bears the same relation to the much older Buddhist 
comparison of instruction to agriculture* in which different 
classes of hearers correspond to different classes of fi e l ds. 

I feel considerable hesitation about two other parallels. 
What relation does the story of the girl who gives two copper 
coins to the Saugha boar to the parable of the widow’s mite) 
It ocou>^ in Aivaghosa’s Sfitr&lankgra, but though be was a 
learned poet, it is very unlikely that be had seen the Gospels. 
Although his poem ends like a fairy tale, for the poor girl 
marries the king’s son as the reward of her piety, yet there is 
an extraordinary resemblance in the moral and the detail of 
the tioo mites- Can the origin be some proverb which was 
current in many countries and worked up differently 1 

The other parallel is between Christ’s meeting with the 
woman of Samaria and a story in the Divygvadftna* telling how 
Ananda asked an outcast maiden for water. Here the Indian 
work, which is probably not earlier than the third century a.n., 

» 7n. 18-41 In 3.B.B- XtV- p, ». * Sun, Nit xuL to. 

• Ed.Co««ll.p.011. 

440 EASTBRii AND WESTERN RSLiaiONS [cH. 

might well be the boirower, Yet the incident is thoroughly 
Indi&n. The resemblance 10 not in the conversation but in the 
fact that both in India and Palestine water given by the impure 
is held to defile and that in both countries spiritual teachers rise 
above such rules. Perhaps Europeans, to whom such notions 
of defilement are unknown, ejcaggerate the similarity of the 
narrativea, because the similarity of oustoms on which it depends 
seems remarkable. 

There are, however, some incidents in the Gospels which 
bear so great a likeness to earlier stories foimd in the Fitakas 
that Che two narratives can hardly bo wholly independent. 
These ate {a) the testimony of Asita and Simeon to the future 
careers of the infant Buddha and Christ: (6) the temptation of 
Buddha and Christ: (c) their transfiguration: (d) the miracle of 
walking on the water and its dependence on fai^: (s) the nuraolo 
of feeding a multitude with a li^e bread. The first three parallels 
relate to events dimctly concerning the life of a superhiunan 
teacher, Buddha or Christ. In saying &at two narratives 
can hardly be independent, I do not mean that one is necessarily 
imhistorical or that the writers of the Gospels had read the 
Pitakss. That a great man should have a mental ori&s in hla 
early life and feel that the powers of evil are trying to divert 
him his high destiny is eminently likely. Bat in the East 
Buparhnman teachers were many and there grew up a tradidon, 
fluctuating Indeed but still not entirely without consistency, as 
to what they may be expected to do. Angelic voices at their 
birth and earth<juakes at their death are coincidences in cm* 
bellishment on which no stress can be laid, but when we find that 
Zoroaster, the Buddha and Christ were all tempted by the Evil 
One and all at the same period of their careets, it is impossible 
to avoid the suspicion that some of their biographers were in- 
fiuenoed by the idea that such an incident was to be expected 
at that point, unless Indeed we regard these so-called tempta¬ 
tions as mental crises natural in the development of a religious 
genius. Simply it is most remarkable that all accounts of 
the transfiguration of the Buddha and of Christ agree not only 
in describing the shining body but in adding a reference to 
impending death. The resemblance between the stories of 
Asita and Simeon seems to me loss strUdog but I that they 

owe their place in both biographies to the tradition that the 

hvx] INDIAi^ INFLUJ?NCE IN THE WEST 

44t 

supennan iq leoognlzed and saluted by an aged S^nt soon after 
birth. 

The two stones about miraclee are of less importance in 
substance hut the onrlouB coincudeccea in detail suggest that 
they are pieces oi folklore which circulated in Aaia, and Eastern 
Ehirope. The Buddhist Tersiona occur in the introdootions to 
Jfttakaa 190 and 78, which are of uncertain date, though they 
may be very ancient^. The idea that s^te can walk on the water 
is found in the Majjhima‘nik&ya^, hut the J&taka adds the 
foUowii^ particolaTs. A disciple desirous of seeing the Buddha 
begins to walk across a riyer in an ecstasy of faith. In the middle, 
his ecstasy and he feels himself sinking but by an effort of 
will he regains his foimer confdence and meets the Buddha 
safely on the further bank. In J&taka 90 the Buddha miracu¬ 
lously feeds 500 disciples with a aingle cake and it is expressly 
mentioned that, after all hsd been satisfied, the remnants were 
80 numeroQs that they bad to be collected and disposed of. 

Still all the parall^ cited amount to little more than this, 
that there was a yague and fluid tradition about the super 
man’s life of which fragments bays received a consecration in 
literature. The Canonical Gospels show great caution in drawing 
on this fund of tradition, but a number of Buddhist legends 
make their appearance in the Apocryphal Gospels and are so 
obvioosly Indian in character that it can hardly be mEuntained 
that they were invented in Palestine or Egypt and spread thence 
eastwards. Trees bend down before the young Christ and 
dragons (oftgas) adore him: when he goes to school to leam the 
alphabet he convlote his teacher cf ignorance and the good man 
faints^. When he enters a temple in Egypt the images prostrate 
themselves before just as they do before the young Gotama 
in the temple of ICapilavaatu*. Mary is luminous Wore the 
birth of Christ which takes place without ps^ or impnilty*. 
But the parallel which is most curious, because the incident 
related is unusual in both Indian and European hterature, is 

' Sm Rbjt EUvldt, BvddiiiH indte. p. 2C«. md Wiatersitt. Oet. Ind- L»L n. SI. 

* Mfti. Nik w. 

* of TboEDM; lon^ Tettim, clapa vi. sv. Sm ab« tlie Aj»bio ud 
Sttuo Q««p«1s of tbe Inftnc;, cf. LftliU-WfliA, chftp. T. 

* PMDdo-M4t(lMW, clup. xm.-xzir. and IaL Viat. eliAp. Ttrt 

* XD. Ct Dig. Nik U tnd Uaj. Nik. 1S3. Nouuuiq'b doM 
os tbs Uttar ^re mssy ouriow oedUrsI panUale. 

442 EASTERN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [CH. 

the det^ed nerrative in the Gospel of James, and also in 
Lah(a*yi6tara relating how all activity of mankind and nature 
was suddenly interrupted at the moment of the nativity^. Winds, 
stars and rivers stayed their motion and labouxere stood stili 
in the attitude in which each was surprised. The same Gospel 
of James also relates that Mar; when 9b: months old took seven 
stepe, which must surely he an echo of the legend which attri* 
butes the same feat to the infant Buddha. 

Several learned authors have discussed the debt of medieval 
Christian legend to India. The most remorkabb instance of this 
is the canonization by both tbo Eastern and the Western Church 
of St Joasapb or Josaphat. It seems to he established that thia 
name is merely a corruption of Bodhisat and that the story in 
its Christian form goes back to the religious romance called 
Barlaam rmd Joasapb which appears to <^te from the seventh 
century^. It cootfuns the history of an Indian prince who was 
converted by the preaching of Barlaam and became a hermit, 
and it introduces some of the well-known stories of Gotama’s 
early life, such as the attempt to hide from him the existence 
of uckness and old ago, and his meetings with a cripple and 
an old man. The legends of St Placidns (or Hubert) and St Chris¬ 
topher have also been Identified ^th the ^^grodha and Suta- 
soma Jhtakas*. The identification is not to my mind conclusive 
nor, if it is admitted, of much importance. For who doubts that 
Indian fables reappear in Aesop or Kalilah and Biranah? Little 
is added to this fact if they also appear in legends which may 
have some connoction with the Chu^ but whi^ most Ohriatiane 
feol no obligation to believe. 

But the occnrrence of Indian legends in the Apocryphal 
Gospels is more important for it shows that, though in the early 
centuries of Christianity the Church was shy of orient^ 
exuberance, y&t the materials were at hand for those who chose 
to use them. Many wonders attending the superman’s birth were 
deliberately rejected but some were accepted and oriental 
practices, such as asceticism, appear with a suddenness that 
makes the suspicion of foreign influence legitimate. 

Hot only was monasticism adopted by Christianity but 

‘ 8c« Qo«pcI of kvm. and LaL ViaL vn. ad %niL 

* iUira Davida, fiuUAiW DirtM Marin, 1S80, introdoetioo: and JoMph Jaooba, 
Seriaam and Jeattpitai, ISM, 

• Hoc 12 and $97. 

443 

LVil INDIAN INFLUENCE IN TBE WEST 

mCkQj practices common to Indian and to Obiietian worship 
obtained the approval of the Chtiroh at abont the same time. 
Some of these, such as incense and the toneore, may have been 
legacies from the Jewish and l^yptian pneethoods. Many 
coincidences also are dne to the fa^ that both Buddhism and 
Christianity, while abolishing animal Bacrihees, were ready to 
sanction old religious customs: both countenanced the per¬ 
formance before an Image or altar of a ritual including luoense, 
flowers, lights and singing. This recognition of old and wide¬ 
spread ritee goes far to explain the extraordinary similarity of 
Buddhist services in Tibet and Japan (both of which derived 
their ritual ultimately from India) to Roman Catholic oeze- 
monial. Yet when all allowance is made for amilar causes and 
coincidences, it is hard to believe that a collection of such 
practices as clerical c6Ubacy> confestion, the veneration of 
relics, the use of the rosary and bells can have originated inde¬ 
pendently in both religions. The dificulty no doubt is to point 
out any occasion in the third and fourth centuries a.d. when 
oriented Christians other than casual travellers had an oppor¬ 
tunity of becoming ac^uMnted with Buddhist institutions. But 
the number of resemblances remains remarkable and some of 
—such as clerical eeUhaoy, relics, and confession—are old 
institutions in Buddhism but appear to have no parallels in 
Jewish, Syrian, or Egyptian antiquity. Up to a certain point, 
it is a sound principle not to admit that resemblances prove 
borrowing, unless it can be shown that there was contact 
between two nations, but it Is also certain that all record of sueb 
contact may disappear. For instance, it is indisputable that 
Hindu civilisation was introdxxced Into Oamboja, but there is 
hardly any evidence as to how or when Hindu colonisfa arrived 
there, and nene whatever as to how or when they left India. 

It is in Christian cr tquaaL-Ohristian hereries—that is, the 
sects which were rejected by the majority—-that I ndia n in¬ 
fluence is plainest. This is natural, for ii there is one thing 
obvious in the history of religion it is that Indian speculation 
and the Indian view of life were not congenial to the people of 
Europe and western Asia. But aoms spirits, from the time of 
Pytiiagoras onwards, bad a greater affinity for oriental ways of 
thinking, and such sympathy was speoially common among the 
Gnostics. Gnosticism consisted in the combination of Chris- 

2fl 

a ai. 

444 EASTERN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [oh. 

tiaoity with the already mixed religion wiiich prerailed in 
Alezandiia, Antioch and other centres, and which woe an un- 
certt^ Mid varying compound of Judaism. Hellenistic thonght 
and the ideae of oriental countries such as Egypt, Persia and 
Babylonia. Its fundamental idea, the knowledge of God or 
Onose, is clearly similar to the Jfi&oak&^d^ of the Hmdus*, 
but the emphasis laid on dualism and redemption is not Indian 
and the resemblances suggest little more than that hints may 
have been taken and worked up independently. Thus the idea 
of the Demiorgns is related to the idea of I^vara in so far as both 
imply a diatinotion not generally letx^nked in Europe between 
the creator of the world and the Highest Deity, but the Gnostic 
developments of the Demluxgus idea are independent. Simi¬ 
larly thoi^h the Aeons or emanations of the Gnostics have to 
eorae extent a parallel in the beii^s produced by Brahmg, 
Praj&pati or V&sudeva, yet these latter are not characteristie 
of Hinduism and still less of Buddhism, for the celestial Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas of the Mah&y&na are justly suspected of being 
additions due to Persian infuenoe. 

Batdesanes, one of the latest Gnostic teachers (165-983), 
wrote a book on Indian religion, quoted by Porphyry. This is 
important for it shows that he turned towards India for truth, 
hut though his teaching included the pre-eodatence of the soul 
and some doctrine of Karma, it was not spedally impregnated 
wi^ Indian ideas. This, however, may be said without ez^era- 
tira of Carpocrates and Basilides who both taught at Alexandria 
about 120-130 a.n. Unfortunately we know the views of these 
interesting men only from the accounts of their opponents. 
Carpocrates* is said to have claimed the power of coercing by 
magic the spirits who rule the world and to have tai^bt metem¬ 
psychosis in the ionn that the soul is imprisoned in the body 
ag^ and again until it has perfonned all possible actions, good 
and evil. Therefore the only way to escape reincarnation (which 
is the object of religion) and to rise to a supeiior sphere of peace 
is to perform as much action as possible, good and evil, for the 
distinction between the two depends on intention, not on the 
nature of deeds. It is only through f(uth and love that a man 

> Ai is aIm the ids* tbsi inplM a spaoiti Mwttc mode of 1U«, the fin 

* Inbaus, I. UT. 

LVi] INDIAir INFLUENCE IN THE WEST 

446 

oan obtain blesaednoss. Much of tho above sounds liks a cari¬ 
cature, bat it may be a misrepresentation of somethiz^ analogous 
to the Indian dootrioe that the acta of a Yogi are neither black 
nor white and that a Yogi in order to get rid of his Kanna 
creates and animates many bodies to work it off for him. 

£n Badlides we find the doctrines not only of reincamatloo. 
which seems to have been common in Gnostic schools*, but of 
Karma, of the suffering inheitDi in existence and perhaps the 
composite nature of the soul. He is said to have taught that 
the martyrs suffered for their sms, that is to say that seals came 
into the world tainted with the guilt of evU deeds done in 
another existence. This guilt must be expiated by common¬ 
place misfortune or, for the nobler sort, by martyrdom. He 
considered the world process to con^ in sorting out confused 
things and the gradual establishment of order. This is to some 
extent true of the soul as well: it is not an entity but a compound 
(compare the Buddhist doctrins of the Skandhas) and the pas¬ 
sions are appendages. He called God ovx av which seems 
an attempt to express the same idea as Brahman dewoid of all 
qualities and attributes (nirgiu^a). It is significant that the 
system of Basilides died out^, 

A more important sect of decidedly oriental affinities was 
Manicheism, or rather it was a truly oriental religion which 
succeeded in penetrating to Europe and there took on conader- 
ably more Christianity than it had possessed in its original form. 
Mam himself (216-276) Is said to have been a native of Eebstana 
bat vitited Afghanistan, Bactria and India, and his followers 
carried his faith across Asia to China, while in the west it was 
the parent inspiration of the Bogomils and Albigenses. The 
natnre and sources of his creed have been the subject of con¬ 
siderable discussion but new light Is now pouring in from the 
Manichman manuscripts disco veredin Central Aria, some of which 
have already been published. These shovtiiat about the seventh 
centaiy and probably considerably earlier the Maniohsism 

‘ U 4pp«*r« io tbe Plsti* Sophia vhieh perhap* reprweeU the Mhool vf Vileii* 
timo*. BtMHdea tavsht that “uto the (hMaadfourth sn>aratioo"rafan to Cram* 
miStaUoB {na CSom. Al. fnsW' aaet. 2S Op., ed. Elota. rr. 14). and Paol’a M 7 mg 
“I vaa alira anthonC tha Uv onca’* (Rom. til S), to formar Uio aa aa aiuiiial 
(Orlg. in Ep. ad Fton. ▼. Op. 1*. 644). 

■ For OTwatioHSi, tea BaddSUA Onetheim, J. Kennady ia J,&.A,3, 100?, and 
Uaad, ffofmeiUt a FoUh /oipoffoa. 

440 EASTERN ANX> WESTERN RELIGIONS [ca. 

oi those regions bad muck ia common with Buddhism. A 
M»nicb»an Ueatise discorered at Xuu-huang^ has the fonn of 
a BuddhistSkbia: it speaks of Maui as the Tatbfigata, it mentions 
Buddhas of TransformatiOD (Eua*fo} and the Bodhiaattva 
Ti'teang. Even more important is the coofes^onal formula 
called Ehuastuanift^ foui^ in the same locality. It is clearly 
similar to the rfttimokkha and besides using much Buddhist 
terminology it zeekons kiUing or injuring apimala as a serious 
sin. It is true that many of these resemblances may be doe to 
association vitb Buddhism and not to the original teaching of 
Mani, which was strongly dualistic and contained mmiy Zoroas- 
trian and Babylonian ideas. But it was eclectic held up 
an ascetic ideal of celibacy, poverty and fasting unknown to 
Persia and Babylon. To life was counted a sin and the 
adepts formed an order apart who lived on the food given to 
them by the Isity. The more western accounts of the Manichsans 
testify to these featxuea as strongly as do the records from 
Central Asia and China. Cyril of Jerusalem in his polemic 
against them^ charges them with believing in retributive metem- 
peyohosie, he who mifl an animal being changed into that 
animal after deatii. The Persian king Hotnuzd is said to have 
accused Mani of bidding people destroy the world, that is, to 
retire from social life and not have children. Alberuni* states 
definitely that Mani wrote a book called Shhbiukftn in which 
he said that God sent different messengers to mankind in 
different ages, Buddha to India, Zaiidusht to Persia and Jesus 
to the west. According to Cyril the Manicbtean scriptures were 
written by one Scytbianus and revised by bis disciple Teiebin* 
thus who changed his name to Boddas. This may bo a jumble, 
but it is hard to stifle the sospicion that it contains some allusion 
to the Buddha, ^ya-muni and the Bo tree. 

I think therefore that primitive Manidueism, though it 
contained lees Buddhism than did its later and eastern forma, 
still owed to India its asceticiam, its order of celibate adepts 
and its regard for animal life. When it spread to 

> CbsrsiUMS«t P«Uiot> tnitS UsmoUea nttoav^ an Chine," J~A. 1911. i, 
sod ieiS.lL 

' le C 09 in J.B.A.B. leil, p. S77. 

* AteuLbetio Lectures. 7L 20 ff. The whole poloinio isanrfoue asd wonh resdios* 

* Alberuni, Chtonolon of aneitMitatvm, tna*. Ssehsu. p. 190. 

LVi] INLIAm IVFLUEliCE IN THE WEST 

447 

Europe it became more Cbiistiaa, just ea it became more 
Buddbfst in China, but it is exceedingly curiouB to see bow this 
Asiatic religion, like the widely different rebgion of Mobammed, 
wae even in its latest phrases the subject of bitter hatred and 
persistent mieropieeectatiou. 

Finally, do the Neoplatoniste, Keopytbagoreans and other 
pagan philosophers of the early oentuiies after Christ owe any 
debt to Indial Many of them were cons^ously endeaTOuring 
to arrest the progress of Christianity by transforming philosophy 
into a non-Christian religion. They gladly welcomed erery proof 
that the higher life was not to be fomud exclusively or most 
perfectly in Obristianity. Hence bias, If not accurate knowledge, 
led them to respect all forme of eastern mysticism. Apollonius 
is s^d to have travelled in India': in the hope of so doing 
Plotinus accompanied the unfortunate expedition of Gordian 
but turned back when it failed. We may suimiee that for 
Plotinus the Indian origm of an idea would have been a point 
in its favour, although b:s writings show no spedal hostility 
to Christianity*. So far as I can judge, bis system presents those 
features which might be expected to come from sympathy with 
the Indian temperament, aided perhaps not by reading but 
by conversation with thoughtful orientals at .^exandria and 
elsewhere. The direot parallels ue not striking. Flato himself 
had entertained the idea of metempsychotis and much that 
seems oriental in PlotinuB may be not a new importation but 
the elaboration of Plato’s views in a form congenial to the ago^. 
Affirmations that God is to and ru h are not so much 
borrowings from the Ved&nta philosophy as a re^statement of 
Hellenic Ideas in a mystic ^uletist spirit, which may owe 
something to India. But Plotinus seems to mo nearer to India 
than were the Gnostics and Maniebeana, because his teaching 
is not doaUstio to the same extent. He Ends the world un¬ 
satisfying not because it is the creation of the Evil Coe, but 
because it is transitory, imperfect and unreal. 

* Tho ucovnt in PhilMtntus (bocks it. aod m.) ntdj lUu ft roaftsco ftnd btrdJ; 
prevM Uui( ApcUoiUQft vsot to Indis, but still then it ao roftion wby bs sboold Aot 
bftTft done 90. 

* R« vTO(«, bowmr, ftgftutsC certiuA Coo9tic& 

a SioiUftiiy SalluaUui (e. 360 vbooB obj«ot vu to n?iv« Bftllwum. 
inclodt* m«ttmpeyabc«is in hit erwd ft&d It Cfta b« f« 0 T«d. Sm tmulftllon 
in Uurrft;, Fovf Sisft* of Ortei p. SlA 

448 EASTERl^ AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [oh.lvi 

His BjBtem baa been called dyn&mio paotbeism and this 
deaoriptiou applies also to xnuob Indian theology which regards 
God in himself as devoid oi all qualities and yet the source of 
the forces which move the uni versa. He held that there are 
four stages of being; pnmaval being, the ideal world, the soul 
and phenomena. This, if not exactly parallel to anything In 
Ixudian philosophy, It similar In idea to the evolutionary theories 
of the S&nhhya and the phases of conditioned spirit taught by 
many Vishnuite eecta. 

For Plotinus neither moral good nor evil Is ultimate: the 
highest principle, like Brahman, transcends both and is beyond 
go^ (vir«pa 7 a^ov). The highest morality is a morali^ of 
inaction and detachment; fasting and abstinence from pleMuie 
are good and so is meditation, but happiness comes in the form 
of ecstasy and onion with God. In human life such union 
cannot be permanent, though while the ecstasy lasts it afiords 
a resting place on the weary journey, but after death it C6ai be 
permanent: the divine within us can then return to the universal 
divine. In these ideas there Is the real spirit of India. 

CHAPTER LVII 

PERSIAN INFLUENCE IN INDIA 

OuB geographical and political phiaseologj about India and 
Per^ obscuiOB the iaot that in aan;f perioda the frontier 
between the two countriea was uncert&n or not drawn ae now. 
North'Westem India and eastern Persia most not be regarded 
ae water^t^bt or eren merely leaky compartmenta. Ewen now 
there are mote Zoroastriane in India than in Persia and the 
Persian sect of Shiite Mohammedans is powerful and conspicuoua 
there. In former times it is probable ^at there was often not 
more difierence between Indian and Iranian religion than 
between different Indian seots. 

Yet the religious temperaments of India and Iran are not 
the same. Zoroastrianism has little sympathy for pantheism 
or asceticism: it docs not teach tDetempsyohosIs or the sinfulness 
of taking life. Images ate not used in worship', God and his 
angels beii^ thought of as pure and ahinixig spirits. The founda¬ 
tion of the system is an uncompromising dualism of good and 
eril, purity and impurity, light and darkness. Good and evil 
are different in or^in and duality will be abolished only by 
ultimate and complete victory ot the good. In the next world 
the dis^ction between heaven and hell is equally sharp but 
hell is not eternal^ 

The pantheon and even the ritual of the early Iranians 
resembled those of the Veda and we can only suppose that the 
two peoples once lived and worshipped together. Subsequently 
came the reform of Zoroaster which substituted theis m and 
dualism for this nature worship. For about two centuries, from 
630 B.o. onwards, Qandhara and other parts of north-weetom 
India were a Persian province. Between the time of Zoroaster 
(whatever that may be) and thiis period we cannot say what 

1 an toUddA hj ttrict thmlog?. bat is pnatm thaev *n exeeptloDi, 
for ioftaace. tb« vingad figor* baUarod to r«pr«e«nt Aton Uuda, {»iDd os 
AflhaionUii reliefs 

* Tboo^ tha priiioploa of 2oroMtriaiuiQ wood excoUeBt to Eonpoana, I 
eftSBot discover ihM eneieiii Persia va« Mdall; or poliLkftU; soiMrior to lodia 

450 EA8TSEN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [CH. 

were the ralatioDs of Indian and Iranian religions, but after 
seventh centuiy thtj couat have flourished in the same region. 
Aristobulus^, ape^ii^ of Taxila in the tuue of Alexander the 
Great, doscribee a marriage market and bow the dead were 
devoured by vultures. These are Babylonian and Persian 
customs, and doubtless were accompanied by many others less 
striking to a foreign touriat. Some hold that the Zoroaetrian 
ecriptnees allude to disputes with Buddhists^. 

Experts on the whole agree that the most ancient Indian 
architecture which has been preserved—that of the Maurya 
dynasty^^as no known antecedents in India, hut both in 
structure (especially the pillars) and in decoration is reminiscent 
of PenepoUs, just as Asoka's habit of lecturing his subjects in 
stone sermons and the very turns of bis phrases recall the 
insoriptions of Dariue^, And though the king’s creed Is in some 
respects—such as his tenderness for animal life—’thoTonghly 
Indian, yet this cannot be said of bis style and choice of themes 
as a whole. Bjs marked avoidance of theology and philosophy, 
his insistence on ethical principles such as truth, and his frank 
a^ument that men should do good in order that they may fare 
happily in the next world, sug^t that he may have become 
familiar with the simple and practical Zoroastrian outlook 
perhaps when be was viceroy of Taxila In his youth. But still 
he shows no trace of theism or dualism; moraUty is his one 
concern, but it means for him doing good rather than suppresmng 
evil. 

* Stnbo, xv. 6t So. toe, tbe Kuku ec«m to ngni Mucteriw u pltee* 

ftbon erdinwy corpeea «n tlixowB nifa«r tb&D boned or bunt. Id Di^. 17ik. 
m. (be Buddho eeye (bet the eocioat S&kyM ounied tbair Bu(en. Soob atp‘'"g— 
are Md (o ta«v« pormitted in Porsa.. 

* “He wbo retvu rletorloae Eram dianueioBa vlth Oeoteae the heretic.*' 
Fvredin Teeht ia SJ.g, xznz. p. 1S4. Tbe reference of this peeae^e to BoddhiBiD 
bee teen moob diipnted end I &in quite iDoompetat to expma eay opiiucia eboot 
}(. Sul »bo b Geoteise U not tbe Beddbe7 It b (roe Ihet Ibero wero oteoy elber 
QeuUaie of modereteuninenoe bi Indie, but voold eny of tfxm here been kzwvn 
In Pemet 

* Tbe iDKriptinu aeer tbe iemh of Perioe et Nekehi'BwUw'eppeer to be 
horUtoiy like tboee of Aeoke. See Willieine Je«keon,.P«rM. p, 308 end rebienoee. 
Tbe DM of tbe Kheroebtri ecripC end of tbe word dt>» hee aiK been noted ee ia< 
dieetlDS conaootdoa wftb P«r^ 

* Perhepe the aerked ebeance of fi^oree tepnewtiog fbe Snddhe in the oldM 
Indten eoolpUiree. whioh eceste (o imply thee (he boUeet (binp miut not be r»< 
ptUMcted, b due to Pemba eentlmeftb 

PERSIA}^ IJSFLVBPGB IN INDIA 

451 

LVU] 

Aiier the desth of Asoka his Empire broke up and races who 
were Irezuan in cnliore, ii not always In blood, advanced at 
its ezpense. Dependencies of the Persian or Parthian empiie 
extend into India or like the Satrapies of Matbnr^ and 8an> 
rSahtra lay wholly within it. The mixed dvilitation which the 
Kuehans brought with Uiem included Zoroaetriaoism, as is 
shown by the coins of Ranishka, and late Eusban coins indicate 
that Saesanian influence bad beoome very strong in northern 
Tnt^ia when the dynasty coUapeed in the third century a.d. 

1 see no reason Co suppose that Gotama himself was In* 
fluenced by Iranian thought. Eis fundamental ideas, his view 
of life and his scheme of salvation are truly Hindu and not 
Iranian, But if the childhood of Buddhism was Indian, it grew 
to adolescence in a motley bazaar where Persians and tbsii 
ways were familiar. Though the Buddhism exported to Oeybn 
escaped this phase, not merely Mahayanism but schools like 
the Saivfistivadins must have passed through it. The share of 
Zoroastrianism must not be exaggerated. The metaphysical 
and ntuaiistio tendenmes of Indian Buddhism are purely Hindu, 
and if its free use of images was due to any foreign stunuius, 
that sUmulus was perhaps Bellenistic. But the altruistic 
morality of Mahayanism, though not borrowed from Zoroaa* 
trianism, marks a change this ebango may well have occurred 
among races accustom^ to the preaching of active charity and 
dissatisfied with the ideals of sett-training and lonely perfection. 
And Zoroastrian influence is I think indubitable in the rigurea 
cf the great Bodhisattvaa, even Maitreya^, and above all in 
Amithbba and his paradise. These personalities have been 
adroitly fitted into ^dian theology but they have no Indian 
lineage and, in spite of all explanations, Amit&bba and the 
salvation which he offers cema^ in strango contradiction with 
the teaching of Gotama. I have shown elsewhere^ what close 
parallels may be found in the Avesta to these radiant and 
benevolent genii and to the heaven of boundless light which is 
entered by those who repeat the name of its msstcr. Also there 
is good e^ence to oonnect the early worship of Ami^bha with 

* fittiotiv bhm ii nothias etoot vbo is mnly fibo uifc 

in fttt ittSitito Mrm ol BuddbM, bot his figors hss mtay soslo0«s 

to ScebvM or Saoshsnt, tbQ Feni Mviow sad nnoTator of ths vorid. 

■ Sm obsp. zn. p. S$0. 

452 EA3TESN AND WESTERN SBLIOIONS [CH- 

Oentral Ma. Later Iraman infuence may bare meant Mitbra* 
ism and ManiobBUm as well as Zoroastrianiam and tbo sobool 
of Aeanga perhaps owes aometbmg to these systems*. They may 
have brought with them fragments of Chnstianity or doctrines 
similar to Christianity but I think that all attempts to derive 
Amitabhist teaching from Christianity aie faorifuJ. The only 
point which the two have in common is salvation by futh, and 
that doctrine is certainly older than CbristJanity. Otherwise 
the efforts of Amitibha to save humanity have no lesemhlance 
to the Christian atonement. Nor do the lelatioos between the 
various Buddhas and Bodhlsattvas recall the Trinity but rather 
the Persian Fravashis. 

Peiman influences worked more strongly on Buddhism than 
on Hinduism, for Buddhism not only flourished in the frontior 
districts but penetrated into the Tarim ba^ and the region of 
the OxuB which lay outside the Indian and within the Iranian 
sphere. But they affected Hinduism sdso, especially in the 
matter of sun-worship. This of course is part of the oldMt Vedic 
religion, but a sperial form of it, introduced about the beginning 
of our era, was a new importation and not a descendant of the 
ancient Indian cult^. 

The Brihatsainhita^ says that the Mc^as, that is Magi, are 
the priests of the son and the proper persons to superintend the 
consecration of temples and images dedicated to that deity, but 
the clearest statements about this foreign cult are to be found 
in the Bhavishya Purana^ which contains a legend as to ite 
introducriOD obviously based upon history. S4mba, the son of 
Krishna, desiring to be cured of leprosy from which he suffered 
owing to his father’s curee, dedicated a temple to the sun on 
the river Candrahh&g&, hut could And no Brahmans willing 
to officiate in it. By the advice of Gauramukha, priest of 
King Ugraseua, confirmed by the sun himself, be imported 
some Magas from S&kodvipa^, whither he flew on the bird 

* See ebep. ea Uebirin*, tl 

* A cooventenC rlaCearat of vhet le -kBOini eteoC thie cul6 will be loond in 
BhmdutfcAr, FaicHoMm o»i Sadvi*Pit part a. obep. tvl 

* Cbep. 60. IS. Tbe work probably datee from ateot SSOA.e. 

' diap. 13S. 8m. for axertota Croot the text. Aolreebt. Cat. Cod. Saaeo. p. 80. 

* For SSkadvtpa eee Viahou, p. 2 L rv. when It i»««d that Brabaaoe are oaUed 
there Kriga or Maga and Krhattriyae Mtgadha. The oaoe elearij meanathacoQaay 
of Um 4ikae vbo were regarded ae Zoroaetriani, wbetber they wen Iraiuaa by 

j,Tn] PERSIAN INFLVERGE /JV INDIA 453 

Gariu^d*. Tb&t this refers to the importa^OQ of Zoroastrian 
pnests from the country of the ^ikas (Persia or the Oxus 
legiona) is made clear by the aocount of theii oustome—such 
as the wearing of a girdle called Avyahga^—given by the Purana. 
It also says that they were descended from a of the aim 
called Jar^bda or Jara^asfa, which no doubt lepresente Zara- 
thustra. 

The river Caudrabh&g& is the modem Chenab and tbe town 
founded by S&mba is Mdlasth&na or Multan, called Mu la^sao* 
pu'lu by the Chinese pilgrim EeUan Chuang. The Bhaviabya 
Purana oal le the place S&mbapuri and the Chinese name is an 
attempt to represent Mdlasimba-puri. Hsuan Chuang speaks 
enthusiastically of the magnificent temple^, which was also seen 
by Alberuni but was destroyed by Aurungzeb. Tftran&tha* 
r^tee bow in earlier times a Ung c^ed ^ Hamba burnt alive 
near Multan 12,000 adherents of the Mleccha sect with their 
books and thereby greatly weakened the religion of Persians 
and Sakas for a century. This legend offers difficulties bnt it 
shows that Moltan was regarded as a centre of Zoioaatiianism. 

Multan is in the extreme west of India, but sun temples are 
found in many other parts, such as Gujarat, Gwalior and the 
district of Gaya, where an inscription has been discovered at 
Govindapur i^eriing to the legend of Skmba. This same legend 
is also related in the Eapila Samhit&, a leligioas guide'book for 
Orissa, in connection with the great Sun temple of Konarak^. 

In these temples the sun was represented hy images, Hindu 
convention thus getting the better of Zoroastrian prejudices, 
but the coatume of the images shows theix ori^n, for the Brihat' 
samhitil* directs that Sdiya is to be represented in the dress of 

nc« or Qot, But tbe topo^phj ii imi^ftr^, lor d thir loocUuJ geoxr*ph7 lBdi» 
U tbo ooafttl oo&tmoDt and tbo lixtb, wheroM il it neani Penis or tb« 

ooofttrios of tfa« Oku it on^t t«bo dom lodis. 

^ The Qsrods ms; it««U b« of Penlsa prorenuoe, for Urda pUy s OMtstdafsbi* 
psrtin Peniso mytliologf. 

* Hm Aieyi^NagbOD of tbe 

* Wstten, roL n. 264, snd Ia/b, ebsp. rr. 

* TArsn&tiis, tr. Sohle&ier, p. 12S. snd Vincent Smith** remuks in Borfyfftatpfy, 
p. S47, note S. 

* See Etjendnlils 0 / Oriata, voL n. p. 146. He also qootee 

the Stubs PurftQS. Tbe t«a^ x» ssid to bare been built between 1240 and 1290 
but the beauty oi Its anUUeUire snggosta ta eatUer date. 

* 69. 47. 

434 EASTERN AND WESTSBl^ REL1Q10}^8 [oH.Lvn 

tlie nortbcmors, covered from tbo f«et upwards and wearing the 
girdle called avyahga or Tiyatiga. In Bajputaua I have seen 
sereral et&taea of him in high boots and they are probably to 
be found elsewhere. ' 

£V>rtutou6ly or otherwise, the cult of the aim was often 
associated with Buddhism, as is indicated by these temples in 
Gaya and Orissa and by the fact that the Emperor Harsba styles 
his father, grandfathu and great-grandfather param&diiya- 
bhakla, great devotees of the sun^. He himself, though a devout 
Buddhist, also showed honour to the image of SCirya, as we 
hear from Heuang Chuang. 

i Sm Epig. Ind 7S-78. 

CHAPTER LVIII 

MOSAMMEDANISH IK IKPIA 

Let us now turn to Mohammedanism. This is different from 
cases which we have been considering and we need not 
trouble ourselves with an; enquiry mto opportunities and possi* 
bilities. The presence and strength of the ProphePs religion in 
India are patent facts and it is surprising that the result baa 
not been greater. 

The chief and most obvious method by which Islam in¬ 
fluenced India was the series of invasionB, culminating in the 
Mughal conquest, which pouisd through the mountain passes 
of the sortb'West frontier. But there was also long establiebed 
communication and to some extent intermigration between 
west coast and Mohammedan countries such as Arabia and 
Persia. Compared with the enormous politicaland social changes 
wroQght by the land invasions, the results of thiR maritime 
intercourse may seem unworthy of mention. Yet for the inter* 
change of ideas it was not without importance, the more so ae 
it was unaccompanied by violence and hostility. Thus the 
Mappilas or Moplahs of Malabar appear to be the descendants 
of Arab immigrants who arrived by sea about 900 i.n., and the 
sects known as Khojas and Bohrae owe their conversion to the 
zeal of Arab and Persian nuuionariea who preached in the 
eleventh century. Apart from Mohammedan conquests there 
must have been at this time in Gujarat, Bombay, and on the 
west coast generally some knowledge of the teaching of Islam. 

In the ftn n als of invamons and conquests several stages can 
be distinguished. Eirst we have the Arab conquest of Sind in 
712, which had little effect. In 1021 Mahmnd of Ghasni annexed 
the Panjab. He eondooted three campaigns against other 
kingdoms of India but, though he sacked Muttra, Somnath and 
oMier reli gi ous centres, he did not attempt to conquer these 
regions, stiUi less to convert them to Islam. The period of oon- 
queata as distinguished from raids did not begin until the end 
of the twelfth century when Muhammad Ghori began bis 

460 EASTERN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [CH. 

cftmpaigna and succeeded in making himself master of northern 
lodia> which fiom 1193 to 1626 waa ruled by Mohammedan 
djnaatiea, mostly of Afghan or Tuiki descent. In the south the 
frontiers of Vijajanagar marked the limits oi Islam. To the 
north of ^em Rajputaua and Orissa still remained Hindn states, 
but with these exceptions the OoTemment was Mohammedan. 
In 1626 came the Mughal inTasiou, after which all northern 
India was united under one Mohammedan Emperor for about 
two centuries. Anruogzeb (1669-1707) was a fanatioal Moham¬ 
medan : his intolerant reign muked the beginning of disintegra* 
tion in the Empire and aroused the opposi^on of the Mahrattas 
and Sikhs. But until this period Mohammedan rule was not 
tnarkijd by special bigotry or by any perustsnt attempt to 
proselytise. A woeful chromcle of selected ontrages indeed 
be drawn up. In the great towns of the north hardly a temple 
remained unsacked and most were utterly destroyed. At different 
periods individuals, such as Sikander Lodi of Delhi and Jela* 
Inddin (1414-1430) in Bengal, raged against Hinduism and 
made converts by force. Bnt such acts arc scattered over a 
long period and a great area; they are not characteristic of 
Islam in India. Neither the earlier Mughal Emperors not the pre¬ 
ceding Sultans were of irreproachable orthodoxy. Two of t^m 
at leaet, Ala-ud-Din and Akbar, contemplated founding new 
religions of their own. Many of them were connected with 
Hindu soveie^s by marriage or political alliances. 

The wo^ of Alberuni and Mohsm Fan! show that educated 
Mohammedans lelt an interest not only in Indian science but 
in Indian religion. In the Fazgab and Hindustan Islam was 
strengteened by immigrations of Mohammedan tribes from the 
north-west extending over many centuries. Mohammedan 
sultans and governors held their court in the chief cities, which 
thus tended to become Mohammedan not only by natural 
attre«tion but because high caste Hindus preferred to live in 
the country and would not frequent the company of those whom 
they cODsideied as outcasts. Still, Hindus were often employed 
as accountants and revenue officers. All non-Moslims had to 
pay the jiziya or poll tax, and the remission of this impost 
accorded to converts was naturally a powerful incentive to 
change o! f^th. Yet Mohammedanism cannot record any 
wholesale triumph in India such as it has won in Persia, Egypt 

LTin] 

MOHAMMBDAi^ISM 2N INDIA 

467 

and Jftya. At the preeent day about oxie-dfth of the population 
are MosUm. The stieogth ot Islam in the Panjab is due to 
immigration as well as oouTsnion^^ but it was embraced by large 
numbers in Eashmlr and made rapid progress in Oudh and 
Eastern Bengal. The number of Mohammedans inBengal (twenty- 
dye miUione out of a total of sizty two in all India) is striking, 
seeing that the proyinee is out of touch with the chief Moham¬ 
medan centres, but is expUcable by the fact that Islam had to 
deal here not with an educated and o^anised Hindu community 
but with Imperfectly hinduiaed aboriginal racos, who welcomed 
a creed ^th no caste distinctions. Yet, apart from the districts 
named, which lie on the natorsl line of march from the Panjab 
down the Ganges to the sea, it made Uttle progress. It has not 
even conquered the slopes of the Himalayas or the country 
south of the Jumna. If we deduct from the Mohammedan 
population the descendants of Mohammedan immigrants and of 
those who. like the inhabitants of Eastern Bengal, were not 
Hindus when they embraced the fsath, the imprestion produced 
by Islam on the rel^ons thought of India is not great, con¬ 
sidering that for at least five centnries its temporal supremacy 
was hardly contested. 

It is not until the tima of Kabir that wo meet with a sect 
in which Hindu and Mohammedan ideas are clearly blended, but 
it may be that the theology of R&m&nuja and Madhva, of tiie 
Idngayats and Sivsute sects of the south, owes something to 
Islam. Its insistence on the unity and personality of God may 
have vivided similar Ideas ezisti^ within Hinduism, but the 
ezprossion which they found for themselves is not Moslim In 
tone, just as nowadays the Arya 8amaj is not European in 
tone. Yet 1 think that the Arya Samaj would never have come 
into being bad not Hindus become conscious oi certain strong 
points in European religion. In the north it is natural that 
Moslim induence should not have made itself felt at once. Islam 
came drat as an enemy and a raider and was no more sympathetic 
to the Brahmima th^ it was to ths Greek Church In Europe. 
Though Indian theism may sometimes seem practically equiva¬ 
lent to Islana, yet it has a different and gentler tone, and it often 
rests on the idea that God, the soul and matter are all separate 
and eternal, an Idea foreign to Mohammed’s dootnns of creation. 

* Bot am on Uaia p«iot Cenna o/tatdia, toI. S. pan i. p. ISS. 

458 EASTERN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [cs. 

Bu( from the fifteenth century onwards wo find a series of 
sects which are obTiouety compromieea and blends. Advances 
are made from both eid^. Thoughtful Mohammedans see the 
profundity of Hindu theology: liberal Hindus declare that no 
caste or condition, including birth in a Moslim family, dis* 
qualifies man for access to God. 

The fnuon of Islam with lEndujsm exhibited in these sects 
has for Ite basis the unity and omniprefienoe oi God in the lig ht 
of which minor differences have no existence. But fusion also 
arises from an opposite tendency, namely the toleration by 
Indian Moslims of Hindu ideas and practices, especially respect 
for religions teachers and their deification after doath. While 
known by some such title as ewt, which does not shock uni* 
tarian snsceptibility, they are in practice honoured as godlings. 
The bare siznplicity of the Arabian futh has not proved satis¬ 
fying to other nations, and Turks, Persians and Indians, even 
when professing orthodoxy, have allowed embeUIshmenta and 
accretions. Such supplementary beliefs thrive with special 
luxuriance in India, where a considerable portion of the MosIIm 
population are descended persons who accepted the new 
faith nnwililogly or from interested motives. They brought with 
them a plentiful baggage of superstitions and did not attempt 
to sever the ties which bound them to their Hindu neighbours. 
In the last century the efforts of the Wahabis and other reformers 
are said to have been partly successful in purifying Islam from 
Hindu obseruances, but oven now the puxture is noticeable, 
especially in the lower classes. Brahmans are employed to cast 
horoscopes, Hindu ceremonies are observed in connection with 
marriages and funerals, and the idea of pollution by eating with 
unbelievers is derived from caste rules, lor Mohammedans in 
other countries have no objeotlon to eating with Christians. 
Humorous sacred sites, such as the shrine of Sheikh Chisti at 
Ajmere and of Bhairav Hath at Muttra^, are frequented by both 
Moslims and Hindus, and it is an interesting parallel to find that 
the chief Moslim shrines of Turkestan am erected on spots 
which were once Buddhist sanctuaries. Sometimes the opposite 
happens: everv Brahmans ate known to adopt the observanoea 

’ another ie tiie ehria* of Sai;»d S4Ur UMUd et BebMiob. fie vm a 

oeph»v of UftbfDud of QhAal cod vo clcln by Hindu#, but ii oow worebij^pod 
b; ttesL Bm Orionoiv 1011, p. 19 <L 

LVTn] 

M03Ai{MEDANI83! IN INDIA 

469 

of Shiaba*. But on the whole it U chlefi; the Mohemioedana who 
borrow, not the mein doctrines of Hinduism, but popuUr magio 
and demonology. Ignorant Mohammedans in Bengal worship 
Sxtalll, K&li, Dhannar&j, Baidyanath and other Hinda dedtios 
and also respect certain my&ical beings who seem to hare a 
Moalim origin, but to bare acquired strange obaraoters in tbo 
conree of time. Such are Khwaja Ehizr who lives in riven, 
Zindah Ghasi who rides on a tiger in the Sandarbans, and Sultan 
Shahid who is said to be the bodyguard and lover of Bev!. Bub 
it is in the adoration of Firs that this fusion of the two religious 
is most apparent. A Fir is the Moslim equivalent of a Guru and 
distinct from the Mollahs or offirial hierarchy. Just as Hindus 
receive initiation from their Guru so most Moslims, except the 
Wahabis and other purists, make a profession of faith before 
tbeit Kr, accept his gtiidanoe and promise Mm obedience. When 
an eminent dies his tomb b^mes a place of prayer and 
pilgrimage. Even educated Mohammedans admit that Firs can 
intercede with the Almighty and the uneducated offer to them 
not only direct supplications but even sacrifices. The Shrine of 
an Important Fir, such as HazratMoin-ud'Bin Chistl at Ajznete, 
is an edifice dedicated to a superhuman being as much as any 
Hindu temple. 

This veneration of saints attains its strangest development 
in the sect of the Pancbplriyas oc worshippers of the five Firs, 
They are treated by the last oemus of India as ''Hindus whose 
religion has a strong Mohammedan fiavour^." There is ixo 
agreement as to who the five saints or deities are, but though 
the names vary from place to place they usually comprise five 
of the beet known semi'mythical Firs^. Whoever they may be, 
they are worshipped under the form of a small tomb with five 
domes or of a rimple mound of clay set in the comer of a room, 
Every Wednesday the mound is washed and ofierings of flowers 
ftnA in cense are made. A somewhat rimilar sect are riie M&lk&naa 
of the Panjab. These appear to be Hindus formerly converted 
to Islam and now in process of reverting to Hinduism. 

* Sm to «tAmpW. Oetttm Indict 1001. PABj*b, p. 161. e.9. tbs BrebjDA&s of 
• village nett FlodJ ar» aeid to be KoriS* of AMal.EadfrJil4iiL 

* Cnam ef India, 19U, 1 . pert l ^ 1S5. Tbe M SlkSttM tee deeeribed on 

the itffle page. 

* Suob aa Qlitcl HlTta. Plr Badar. Obazi. Sbttbli Farid, fibaikh Sado 

aad Eliwaja Khbx. 

3ti 

i.nL 

m SAS^EBN AND WESTERN RELIGIONS [CH. 

The infiiience of Hiiiduism on Indium Mobftmtoedftzusm U 
tbas obvious. It is i«aponaible for the addition to the Prophet’s 
creed of much superstition but also for rerudeiing it less arid 
and more human. It is harder to say how far Moelim mysticism 
and Sufiism are due to the same influence. History and geo* 
graphy nuse no diflieulties to such anohgin. ^bia was in touch 
with the western ooaet of India for centuries before the time 
of Mohammed: same is true of the Persian Gulf and Bagdad, 

a nd of Bal^h and other districts near the fron^rs of India. But 
recent writers on Suflism^ have shown a dispo^tion to seek its 
origin in Neoplatonism rather than in the east. This hypothesis, 
hhe the other, presents no geographical difflculties. Many Arab 
authors, such as Avicenna (Ibn Sloa) and Avertoea (tbn Rusbd) 
were influenced by Greek Philosophy: Neoplatonists are said 
to have taken refuge in Persia at the Court of Nushirwan 
(e. A.n. 5S2} : the Fihrist {c. 938) mentions Porphyry and Pb* 
tinus. If, therefore, Suflism, early or late, presents distinct 
resemblancefl to Neoplatonism, we need not hesitate to ascribe 
them to direct borrowing, remembering that Neoplatonism 
itself contiuns echoes of India. But, ad^tting that much in 
the doctiine of the Sufls can be found to the west as well as to 
the east of the countries where they flourished, can it be said 
that their general tone is Neoplatonic ? Amongst thoir cbaractar- 
iatics axe pantheism; the institution of religious orders and 
monasteries; the conception of the religious life as a path or 
journey; a bold use of language in which metaphors drawn from 
love, wine and music are freely used in speaking of divine things 
and, although the doctrine of metempsychosis may be repudiated 
as too obviously repugnmt to Islam, a tendency to believe in 
scocessi ve existences or states of the soul. Some of these features, 
such as the use of erotio language, may be paralleled in other 
ancient xeligionB as well as Hinduism but the pantheism which, 
not content with speaking of the soul’s union with God, boldly 
identifies the soul with the divinity and says I am God, does 
not seem traceable in Neoplatonism. And though a distinotion 
may justly be drawn between early and later Suflism and Indian 
influence be admitted as stronger in the later developments, 
still an early Sufi, AJ-HajJaj, was executed in 922 a.d. for saying 

^ S. Q, Browne, LUertfy HittoTy ofPtttia : IL A. Nietoleoii, Potmfrom 

tA« Aosn erf S’&eeWH-Totru. 

i.vm] 

MOHAMMEDAnSM IN INDIA 

461 

Ana U-Haqq» 1 am the Truth or God, and ire are expressly told 
that he visited India to study magic. Many important Sufis 
made the same joumey or at least'came within the geographical 
sphere of Indian infiuenoe. Faridn-’d'Bm Attar travelled in 
India and Toilseetan; JalaIu-*d*I>in er*Euinl was bom at Baikh, 
once a centre of Buddhism: Sa'di visited Balkb, Ghasna, tiie 
Panjab, uid Gujarat, and mvea^gated Hindu temples^. Hafix 
was Invited to the Deccan by Sultan Muhanunad Bahmani 
and, though shipwreck prevented the completion of the viat, 
be was probably in tonoh with Indian ideas. These journeys 
indicate that there was a prevalent notion that wisdom was to 
be found in India and those who could not go there must have 
had open ears for suob Indian doctrines as might reach them by 
oral toaching or in books. After the establishment of the Cali¬ 
phate at Bagdad In the eighth centvzry traoelations of Indian 
authors became acccsublo. Arabic versions were made of many 
works on astronomy, matbema^ and medicine and the example 
of Alberuni shows bow easily such treatsses might be fiavoured 
with a relish of theology. ^ book and still more the Fihrist 
testify to the enstenco among MoaUms, especially in Bagdad 
and Persia, of an interest in all forms of thought very different 
from the self-satisfied bigotry which too often cbaracteri 2 es 
them. The Caliph Ma'mun was so fond of religionB speculation 
and disoussion that he was suspected of being a Maniohee and 
nicknamed Amiru-I-Kafirin, Commander of the Unbelievers. 
Everything warrants the sapposition that In the centuriee 
preceding Mohammed, Indian ideas were widely disseminated 
in western Asia, partly as a direct overflow from India, for 
instance in Turkestan and Afghanistan, and partly as entering, 
together with much other matter, into the doctrines of Neo- 
platonists and Manicheaos. Amid the intolerant viotoiies of 
early Islam such ideas would naturally retreat, but they soon 
recovered and efiected an entrance into the later phases of 
the faith and were strengthened by the risits of Sufi pilgrims 
to Turkestan and India. 

The form of Jewish mysticism known as Kabbala, which in 
Indian terminology might be described as Jewish Tantrism, has 
a historical connection with Sufism and a real analogy to it, 

^ Be <iMcnbe« how b» diceoTcnd tbe maebAobm b; vbioh the prieete mede 
minooloua iaegee more. See Brovae, Lit EitL n. DSS. 

462 EASTERN ANT> WESTERN RELIGIONS [ch. xvm 

for both Arise from the deeiro to temper &n Austere and regal 
^th conceeuons to the oommon human craTiog for the 
interesting pietoresiiue^ such as mTStioism and magic. If 
th9 accent of India can sometiinea be heard in the poems of 
the Suds we may also admit that the ICobhaJa is its last echo. 

Ejcperts do not assign any one region as the origin oi the 
Kabbala but it grew on parallel lines in both I^jypt and Baby¬ 
lonia, in both of which it was naturally in touch with the va^us 
oriental indnences which we hare been discussing. It is smd 
to have been introdneed to Europe about 900 a.d. but received 
important additions and modifications at the bands of Isaac 
Lniia (15Si-73) who lived in Palestine, althoi^ hie disciples 
soon spread his doctrines among the European Jews. 

Uany features of the Kabbala. such as the marvellous powers 
assigned to letters, the use of charms and amulets, the emana¬ 
tions or phases of the deity and the theory of the correspondence 
between macrocosm and microcosm, are amaungly li^ Indian 
Tautrism bnt no doubt are more justly regarded as belonging to 
the religious ideas oommon to most of Asla^. But in two points 
we seem able to discern definite Hindu infinence. These are 
metempsychosis and pantheism, which we have so often found 
to have some connection with India when they exist in an ex¬ 
treme form. Their presence here is specially remarkablo because 
they are alien to the spirit of orthodox Judaism. Yet the pre- 
ezisteace and repeated embodiment of tho soul is taught in 
the Zohar and even more systematically by Luria, in whose 
school were composed works called Oilgfilim, or lists of trans¬ 
migrations. TbeedtimateGodheadis oall^ Eo soph or the infinite 
and is declared to be unknowable, not to be deecribed by positive 
epithets, smd therefore in a sense non-existent, since nothing 
which is predicated of existing beings can be truly predicated 
of it. These are emmbs from the table of Plotinus and the 
Upaniahads, 

^ Bvt titan in tomartiing very Indian in Uie nlucUnce nf tho SntIudlaW to 
ooeopt orootion ee iu&a'2o ud Co explun it away by emMaUou, or by tbo doctrine 
of liinitAtion, that is Ood'a nU-with^va) in o^r that the vorld might be ereated. 
or ona by tbe eternity of maUer. 

INDEX 

Abbo& S«4 UoQMteriM, And OrgizuA- 

AbduJ Jilftai, m. 459 
Abiiku, m. 425 

1.3»S.'293: m. 16.19.3S.297 
AVU^jS^ n. 113; XU. 390, 967 
Abh^n Rlji. a lU 
AblwibuDiBft. I. 208. 296. 969. 276 
260. 269 291. 299. 300; B. 47 <9,, 
90. 92.109; a. SO. 39.61.71. S72,374 
4 V.Vitf h»Tnni» »th«.ii g^fc , OL 71 
_ Mognhs. m. 39. 45 
AbhidbftRU, m. 292. 299 
^ Ko4A. a. 99; m. 213, 266.314 

— PiteA*. a. 59, 81; ul 285, 378 

— Tibb4ab«Mrtc4. n. 73. 81; m. 212 

— «7ikAT4.D. 89 
AbhiauAb4. a. 11 
AbbukftT* GopU, n. 228. 224 
Abhi&A4.1. 3l7 
Abbriji. CB. 50 

AbbSna. n. 158 

AbliUMkA XL 122.276: ox. 865 
Abhir bucnpUctt. a. 226 
Aborigifift] dsiUM. L sxxvi. 6; □. 129. 
127. 139. 286; ut 98. 97, 112. 192. 
199. 2S4, 343. 362 
Abaoluto Godlicftd. Set Bnhmfta 
AbB{^U). I. 116. 120; XL 203 
AbBlfMl (B> 417 
A<«k.xi. U;ixx. 392 

AcArlfftMMmMrA. m. 808 
loteA. a 114. 221. 257; m. I2t 

— Uiia4BB.lL 237 

— PUnpUB. XXL 114 

— ^TB. m. 114 

— TBdB.L 262 
AobiHDeniBa fbIMb, ol 449 
AtiTBTBU. L 160 

Aai. 11. Sl6 

AotB ol th* ApoBtlM. L 256 
A^BtB. m. 1*4 
AmUatadB D6«B. n. 116 
AdB«L m. 917 
AdBm'a Bridg*. B. 160 

— PmA. l7:bx. 18.43 
idb5r*K4rifcta.s. 224 

1,106 

AdbMtU,L 813. 816; m. 310 
AA\if^»s. t 818; BL 810 
AdbrAtBB IUaft7«9B. il 152.187.194 
Aiii.WdbB. IL 13. 26,31.67.117,118. 

119,129; m. 173.387 
Adi-gTBBtb. a. 263,268 

Adi^M, L 91; D. 149 
AdHyanrauA. 9T, 193 
AdcBiM, AttU and 0mn«. a. 286 
AdTBiU (philoiophy), L di. 74. $2, 226; 
B. 40. 74, 804, 238. 268. 239. 

307. 812M.;rB.309.42l 
— {P. N.), n 264 
AdTBT*. m. 173-181 

a t Ubmy. XX. 196, 210. 270. 828 
tr« tdftnia, il 315 
AaoM, to. 444 

AighuiiAui, L 10. 24. 28. 29, 81. 264; 

a. 278; XIL 199.469 
4e«BU». n. 48. 92 

S QA BfimAoyB, a. 232 

OBS, D. 1% 188, 139. 190. 994. 
»19.222. 282;m. 214,282,292,299. 
297, 999 

Ayinf.L 184.216,263 
A^fwils, XL 177 
aSmi;b. XL 213 
AAgtbodiu, king. lu. 3$ 

S ^5b Sbtre. I. 336 
n.xi 108, 234 
Aeboris, C. S03. 239 
AgiklB.lL 77 
Aged. L 56, 62 
AgsUiotn, L 90 
A^ PiuioB. S. 130, 231 
AgtkishtaoB,!. 96; XL 170 
AgoMUe tMcban, l 98 
Agn.x . 37 
AgnyBDB, a. 8 
Agnoultiue fwbtdko. l 113 
AABUkArB. i. IxxtU; d. 899 
AbBB. m. 292. 296 
Abar, UL 116 

AUnai, L Ivi; n. 114, 170 a;., 200; 

BL248 
Aluoaa,L 69 

AbirbadbnyB Baiplubk D. 147,194, 195 
— ol tbQ PsAo^Ob AgsuB, a. 188 
Abjn.tL 168 

1.116,119; a. 17S, 262,269 
I. 29 

(kugdom. Qto.). IL 260,880.288; 

ra. 79 

!. 336 

AbuB-TBUTB. m. 229 

Maada. l 90, 64; u. 198; m. 220,449 
Ai {aioparor). id. 245 
AihfjB, n. 172; IXL 109 
AlavBiTB, n. 199 
AiUray* BrBbmiAB. r. 9? 

Ai?7i^liaQ. IIL 463 

464 

INDEX 

AimSt^a. 814 

AkrtogAt, Kxul^ n. 239. 838 

», HiiU. l«;iiLl02 
ki^ (Ajkt* 6ftUa). L 36, 
^ 74. 77, 87, m.Til, 138. i83. 158, 
167. 168, 181, 185. 172, 281, 2«8; 
10.25.24 
Aiftrtd»T4.1.114 

AHa, I. M: 0.21 

A Wk h 107 

1 Mkft*. L 45,90.123, 841, 268; m. 13 
A BW. L 20; Dt. 468, 469 
AUltt. a. 873,273 
AkUk^b^u. 84:111.216,283 
AkbM; I. 90, 31,115: n. 242. 288. 280: 
to. 417, 468 

Abaftc«lUl4?at«nkiD. 1.136 
AlsTTkHdiki. i. 00 

Akafobhyk (Baddhk). n. 26,37; m. 128, 
186,180,172 
AlxbkfUt.m. 0$ 

AXin SAUiDft. L 125. U8, 303, 316 
A&ukada,m. 18 

e .ud.diD, L 80.80; m. 458 
vftAMr, 0.232 
— Mtnm. n. 232 

AUT*ni&4n^ i. xuis; n. 43,44,34,87 
Alb«md. Q. 187.160,238; m. 440,453. 
458,481 

AJbidBPMB. in. 445 
AUxttdw, kifi6. t 268 
AJ«xaB8«r ol Hkcedm. i. sxi, lui, 21 , 
60,177: m. 189, 418. 430.460 
AMuadria, m. 414 
Al Halkj, m 400 

AlkoodATflii 0«TiodM6T7k, (. 40; o. 333 
Aiuh, L 6; O. 216, 2*0 . sIm 0«1 
Talam 

AlkhkUd, D. 00 
1. 160 

iii..T hw iiM»>‘*i n. 270 
All Soak* Day. Oi 284, 888 
AJompta. m. 47 169 

A.k.paa. m. 217 

Alckabsk. l 61; to. 4, 51, 80. 62, 104, 
TMri54,167,168,100,101,192,201, 
3OO17., 343,355, 460 

S Uzk.iiL 881 

Ucar Tadaata, n. 74 
Alrar. SttAmr 
Asankoaha, n. 280; 0.161 
Asanpun, D. 36, 37, 49 
AslraTati ttepa, n. 86,106,143 
^ (QuCD^m). m. 137 

Aiiiw4m<jW. Q. 288 
Ainar Mol. a. 268 
— Sioffb. n. 147 
Ae»a*ia. m. 434 

AiDbabaraca Sakoavaa, m. 40 
AnManbika. T. 286 
Aotbaiu m. 367«{, 

Affib^lk 1 163 

AmbattbMuUa, L 87.181; b. 176 
Ambbojaostfa, m. 123 
n. 277 

Amdo, m. 958.400 
Ainar«t4t,ic. 220 
Anurlcan Lcctuna, l 161, 313 
h« Spaota, XL 12,120,198 
Amida, 1. 162,315: in. 812,321,404,418 
ABldiim, I. xUz; 0. 220 •{. 
AfBiru-’l-lCafifV. nr 461 
AjnftAbba (Boddba), l xzix, xbH; b. 8, 
13. 23, ^ 28. 88. 60. 86. 72. 86. 88. 
151,162; m. 124.166,173,176,218. 
210 292.813,327,885,865,890,451 

AmitAyardkrtDaafitia, n. 83, 80, 30; 
UL 118 

AonUTua. n. 28, 80. 33, 103; zil 801 
Amitacanpapikkad, l 116 
Amogha, m. 80, 2M, 298, 327, 842 
Affi^hap6aa, m. 189, 890 
Aucffbawd^ o. 26: XO. 188,173.170, 
ill 

Amo^haTajfa, is. 817 
AmoffbaTanba, l 814 
Amoy, tn. 383 
Amp^m. 161 
Ainritaar, n. 26$, 272 
amaft- q, 230 

Aorakta. 1.109. 8u Ha|^ 
AsaobroniaUQ jnetiow, U. 166 
AnA^miO, h £l7 

AsUlnta>vaaaa, c. 22 

Aaau4, n. 276 
AoalMla, 1.177; m. 227 
Aaanda. l 188.151,163,156,168.160. 
182.183 w.. 170, 174, 207, 200. 247, 
266,261. i68.343, 344; XL 0, 29, 68; 
m. 20, 307, 342, 489 
^ Oart:^ zl 128 

— Qin. IL 110 

— Ei^B.82 
Anaadaa. X. 84 
loaoda Pagoda, zil 74 
Anandaamma Praw, XL 195 
Asaoda Tample, zl 66, 66 

^ Tirtha.iL287 
AlMtaTanUJI finUgang a , L 80 
a&aan'reJio, l 235 
aoariyazo, I. 241 

Anatta. 1.191,104, 210 
aQattbapiniii^kt, l 161,160 
Anavrata {klat), 1. sxv; in. 7,11,47 m 
A ficactOMWilup, L 8, 0, 10, 83; 

ra. 66,116. 2M. $44 
An.CbcML XZL 206. $16 
Antitiu Oai'xn. to. 1$, 10 

— ;n^M,lL 169,169 

AAda,XIL $81 
A2idal,iL231 
AfidbakM, L 261 

Aadbra (kdudoD, ate.], x. 22; B. $6, 
100,108; XXL 102 

INDEX 

465 

Aiwlru, L SA8 

A—oiota OMwwiA. n. 53 

Ao6kMt*rM». 1.1(K 

Aiim$,K u iiii sii. 2d4» »S, 8fi7, m. 

Aoctd* Qnn, n. 268 
An|M,L 115, 148, S81;a 279 
Afig CUa m. Ill 
Aog ^OM (k^l, to. 112 
AfigeU (8t) of Foligno, L 160 
AnguAiu, t. Mi a. 

Anfikot Wm (TlieB). m. I0$i 109 K> 
^82 tq. 

Ai«uU^» Pib»U. t. 160, 293, Si7s 
IS. 422 

SOtiA, XL 103 

AcifuUAf* Nliin. J. Ixjui, 134. 218, 
223, 276, 286. 269. 266; n. 46, 49; 
m. 66. 286, 297 

an«hAd, n. 268 
As-bti (Pwthi4), ni. 246 
I. 219 

AaIAo Iabs, m. 366 

L K lebt. 66. 115, 267; n. 
181, 167; U. 346. 254.344,445.446. 
8u al*o Ahirptt 

Ai^am. 1.104, 832; IL 167; nr. 48.96. 
8»t aUo AbongiiuJ dettot, NtU. 
N4ture ironlup. Phis 
Aslnddha. a. 19o, 835 
At^ftelu dn JTwdi c. 122.270 
Aoiuto (rariooi), in. 104.106.106, i 10, 
m, 153,344 

Aiuu»m (ClLMnpa], r. xav, rtfii u. 26; 

m. 6,8, J ulBd. 185,140,141.340 
Aaocsi. 1.175 

Eba, u. N: m. 248, S62, 818 
AfltBC»dM40.1.116 
AnUrriUd. 1.116 
B&UrttttBB, m. 176 
utafi;*, L 107 
ActBr7ifa!&, o. 46. 235, 817 
AntigOBu*. L S06i m. 430 
AallMh, t. 266 

AstiookuB, kins, 1. 266; m. 430 
Acu, u. 226. 282 
Anujid^ ^97 

A&ugnlM. u. 160 
AsuRMfOkcl, a. 168 
AnolB (PnAM^l, to. 17 
ABumte*. tL 293 
Bn-UBBdj.MM-iiibbBMB. t. 298 
AmridhBpur*. 1.14$. 276; m. 16. 38 
AjtoruddU, u 194, 156. 166; in. 39. 45 
ABOiMAOB^rOoB, IL 194 
AsBttan Too, n. 126,189 
AJ)oU*rov*?iUiwM. 1.116 
A»y SSOU.D. 152, 163 
AMbbrMBM. t. 299 
A^ t. 63 

A^otBiW4bM, o. 2Q2 

ApuBBtfcfc*. SZ. 50, 51 

Aper&rUB^flkB, L 259 

ApaAMukaj, l 859 

ApBriai^Ariu SOtru, m. 191 

ApMiTvbi^ OmpbIs. nL 441 

Apollo. CL 139 

ApoU^oB, m. 481,447 

AppBT, XL 215 

Apr«U»htb;U, (. 323 

Apeu (i^basoa) {Cboueho), m 805 

tpArva. D. 811 

Aft4.x. 108 

Anbl* {Arfrbo, «to.>. l 26; il 109; XIL 
168. IM, 100,258.456 
AnoOei, X. 83 

AiBbBfiU Sobool. m. 69 

— Tfiera, TC. 65 «?. 

AnA&ttam, i. ui 

AnkBO, IL 105; ZIT. 14. $6, 47 
ArnsBie Alph4l>Bt, m. 191 
IcMVBku, L 53; XXL 58 

AM 1.102 

Ar« (Imue). L Ib; XR. 166 
AithaoiMKol fSurwy oJ MatfltnbfM}. 
s. 114.125 

Anhbiibop (K.CL), xn. 417 
AfObiMoUiK. L uvl, 92, 119; it. 109, 
211: QL 3,51,7A 69,131 if., l431}.. 
195 w., 164 If., IH 239. ^ 450 
ftrunUM, IJ. 11 

AimA o. 113 
Artlb&a»re4r4r&, n. 146 
i.rdbiflu( im^, RL 144 
ArbU, I. 110, 146. 146, 166, 214, 288. 
227. 862, 860; XL 5, 6; m. 57. 
825 If. 

Arkibalo. n. 14 
Ana, xo. 68 

Arialotnilui, sS. 450 
Arlatoorktio rapablk*. 5 m UbUbb, Sxk* 
yai, VaiiiMia 

AhyBpMiyeMBB sutt*. i. 185,162 
Arlj« laoo&iu, x. 200 

— TMMB, XXL 61 
Anuf) (Qom), il 266, 259 

aHud»,ii. 150,200,253 
AijuMTl^Bfa, XXL 178 
ArraenUne. l 122; xs. 191 
Arnold, MaUbev, i, sovi, 388 
amyo, L 201 

Antw« la rit«, l 100; iil 8l9 
Amodaa, l 22; xn. 191 
Ar^ (Ardha) Magadbik, l ItO 
Art, L xlii, zxix, xcd, bbt, tzvl, xo, 
22, 92, 137, L7A 218; XL 166, 211; 
trr. 4, 90, 166,194 if.. 240,241. 248, 
262,269. 355. 982, 405 
r^rf <}r4cc-Sou4Aitiq>u du OwidAora, a. 
76 

AiUxorxM LoDglsaouB, L 841 
Aftba pBacafca, XL 237 

— BoriM Ultra, m. 142 

— iMOa, L 18 

466 

INDEX 

Afileh, m. 1S6 
Anl, D. 217 

B. 221 
AjOuftco, L 227 
irw%n.221, 239.296 
Am (reltfioB. Mopl«).L xr, 8,7, U. 19, 
1C, M. 66. ^ 200; n. 177; 0. 272 
m. L52 

Ar7ft6m.L xxzlii;0. 8S,$C; m. 219 
ArjuDihlwoghiV*! B. 69 
— DikiTV B 101 
ArT^B«£jaM-tBU^Uatt«» nL 876 
Im-BftlAiWTfcMiytd^Tiikiyt, D. 91, 
102 

Ar7ft8«A»j,i. xlfii; m. 467 
ArTMftmmiU, m. 148 

liyfc<Mmmi(4kA*BjkA;x, a. 102 

Mr*4«t«vtdia. OL 146 
InMtbxTiB oiUyft, O, lOS; m, 20 
Aiilba,L 246 
t 306 

A«U4«, r. xxrrill, 193. 293, 806; n. 11, 
2S, 31. 48, 67. 69, S2 m., 102, 125, 
806: m. 164. 214, 216,219, 284,846, 
804. 916, 370,462 
iuakbAdhOn. 1. 226 
waelkAto,225, 260 
uaaUyftKxIpa, jl 108 

lU^U.Lm 
Aav*. 1. 139 

AxMbdtm. (iUe h t7% 1x1, 

IXT, 42. 49. 71.44. 96,106, 107, 110. 
119, 128, 138, 240; n, 207. 920; 
m 162,246, 243,816,345, 429. 433, 
488, 446 

AKlepuj**, t. 69 
Atfin, m. 87 

period, m. 406 
An. u, 246 

AfiU, 1.188,174; m. 440 
AMkx. J. xiU.«. 16.16. !l, 50, 99, 109. 
118. 127, 139, 244, 264, 274; a. 06, 
80,98, 106,116,214; m, 6.0,18, 82, 
44, 190, 207, 895, 900. 329, 430, 460 
loxiM C 49. 90; rt. 209; lit 118 
AB»vft,L 107 

A^n*. m. 216 

Amia. i sxxvi, Uxv, IxxxTii, 14, 25, 
104; a. 120,127,143,176,166,191. 
244. 269 44,79 

A«Urt«.L 63; c, 276 
AfUrte r. Lmvii 

AMnlbodj, t.817 

Ajtt«U«?, L XXV; m. 07. 9Q. 129, 167, 
232 

AxtfQooaiv, 1. 886; xn, 872, 416 
AaiLiw, L 01, 836 
Anri, 0. 296 

AkvMkoabx, t XX3,300; a 6.49,69.66, 
66779, 62 a?., 104. 169. 176; JU. 
190. 219, 285, 886, 298, 204, 295, 
300. 307, 370. 439 

.in. 406 

Aftvxmedax, i, 08 
AmpAti l^iksTA, 74 
Aev»v«rzEi.ao, m. 164 
Aavifte, t 63 

iUaAtijs ratU, 7. 878; m. 42 
AtWvuB, I. 64, 08 
AtlixmrVeaB, i. 64, 55, 98, 101; n. 60, 
142, 270, 276; m. 67 
AthesMUB, n. 482 

Atite, t xxvii; n. 19, 112; m. 52, 00, 
862 . 473, 830.886, 396 

AUttaAO. 177 

r. lij, Ixiil. Mv, 45.02,79,81, $4, 
98. 186, 161, 216. 220; n. 76, 124, 
180, 206, 296, 806, 309; m. 175, 
806 

ItioilUD.n. 206 

Aa*B. m. 342 
Atomic tbeorif, 1.109 
AmBme&fc, i. av, 09; at 427 
Atte. 1.166,191, 816, 220; n. 101 
BtebBkxai. 1160 
Atthakxti&, m. 14 
AtUmiUal, m. 84 
AtuiA, m. 69 <9. 

AufrMbC. a. US; m. 287,462 
AQ^aiuAB. 106 
AuniUi, X. 26; ZD. 481 
AqWu, m, 202 

Aoog, $, Z., 1,169, 269; nr 69, 71 
Aaron, 1- 63 

Auanazeb, t xlv, 30, 81; n. 253, 261, 
216, 271; XXL 453, 456 
Avtfiiciliilt BrtSUiM^, i. 116 
Atb, bl 44. 66. 61 
ATBOiOXS, XL 58 «, 

AvBdbfitu, a. 248 

Avalokite, t. sxk; XL 18, IS, 83, 80, 67, 
60, 73, 86, 103, 106, l£2, 126, 129; 
nt 89, 63. 123. 144, 149, 166, 218, 
219, 221. 239, 296, 343, 348, 860, 
835, 890, 893 
AvAlobMvBn, m. 120 
AvaIob. l 67.811: n. 121,168,190,274. 

261, 262, 320; OL 40 
AvuU,282 
ATM4:^lDi, 1.107 

AvAtaipeeJuaCtTA, a 10,54,60; m. 818, 

262, 2S8. 292, 819,315. 374, 378 
Ars^Afw, 1. Ixx. 48; D. 73, 180. 197; 

ID. 807, 419 
AvenoeADZ* 460 

krmtA. >. 19. 00. 03; O. 24; m. 880,461 
4ffibhi^a,D. 312 
AviMlUA. XU. 460 
Avfel. j. 386 
Bvijik,}. 287 
BTfikxUni, /. 226, 2S9 
AVyBQgB. ra. 469, 464 
AwBkekiDi oi fUth, znii; a. 84, 42, 
44. 43, M, 87; in. 219,266 
iy&r4jjgwaU«, 1.116 

INDEX 

467 

IS^Uoua, i. 226 
B. 194 

Ajmociwr. to.90,26, 111, 118,117, m, 
122 

Ayndhj*, t. 20. 26; JX. 97, 100,140 
Ayuh£»,t. 107 

nL SO, 79 «j. 

AuTW. «ee Amr 

Be. 1218 
Baber, i ». 80 

BbbjUa. L 61, 2M; m. 103,430.482 
Bxietfc) groQW, n. 169 
BMtrie, l 28. 24: n. 139. 276: m. 189, 
200.414 

j. n«i; in 202 

B>d4mi. L 86: n. 164,172; m. 7, 107. 
114, 116,146 

BiderOvu*. xL 211, 811, 816 
BedBrf.B.238 
Bedrtaech,! 17; a 207. 208 
BedoUe, m. 43 
Beaded, m> 461 
Biffyidew, OL 66 

dTDftS^, L 29, 80 
Behnieb, m. 4^ 
b4hj»7<^ a 162 
Betdjanetf], m. 469 
Bekbnsbe, a 177 
BelM, m. 172 
Beirepici, m. 173 
B4k«.nL 116 
or. 189 
beU,a 196 
Belebhi, a 106 
BftMere. a 168, 266 
Bil* Qopii*^ n. 249 
BeJembwigea, ffi. 160 
a. iM 

Bele AsoMU, m. 188 
Bell, a 148: m. 186,161,167,171, L79, 
183 <9. 

BeK-AgM. m. 186 
R.fth, L 86: m. 26, 802, 813,461 
BellAtttjM. R. 896 
BemUao, a 160 

Beouea. a 102, 177; m, 8, 194. 202, 
218 

mmumu, B. 260 
BM&Ttt. 1. 26 

Bio*, b xnax. 16: a 97, 187, 206. 280 

K>n », RL 36, ^ 

Bei>de.a8Tl 
bea-de.m. 361 
Beadba.!;. 107 
Beadraa. a 119 
Baeg^oh, za 79, 86, 93 
116 

Baaoo. is. 167 
Beit^^LD^rore, L 148 

Bip, E. 200 

Be>pliaong. IB. 132 
BapUam, is 422; of. aUuiakba 
Bmbar. m. 68 
FarafnH, a 114 
Bardeaa&M, m. 444 
BergQa»,ZB. 491 
Banaeo aad Joaaapb, ID. 442 
Bema BrehniBna, a 178 
BarMtt, a 882, 884 
Banda, 1 . 81.116; b. 202, 868 
Benoi Beebe, a S69 
Berp»U.a 269 

B*rUi,a 143,169, 238; m. 2$, 487 

BertbokiOMW {ApeaUe}. m. 4l4 

Baaaib.oz. 127 

BWKewi.ia 170 

Banve. a 176, 220 

Baabpe, m. 873, 364 

Badaalte, la 307 

BeaididM. xo. 444. 446 

Baaeit gimidapiataU. za 119 

BaMi,!. 180 

Bttuli.a 277 

B*laTia.is. I6S 

Bat Cum, m. 188 

Bativia, zi. 116 

BaUaxabaog, la 112 

Baoddhem, za 44 

Baodhiyana, a 279 

— dbihae (Owe, nz. 108 

BaiuaB, Q. 119 
Baoria,a 116 
Baven, bl 108,430 
Bayu Nmibc, la 86, 47 m. 

BayM. m. 1^ 109,116,134 
BtoiUik. la 193 

Beal. z. 178,876; a 8, 66: m. 219. 876. 

284, 318. 331 
BeaaM*, b. 844 

Baotae de Adpiaio FtMuiwn 

el InetiuUanum Dibtr, 1 160 
Baatilodn, 1.184, 818 
BecU, m. 196.378 
Bedoor, n. 226 
Balattba, L 98 
Belgami, a. 108 
Belova, l 163 

Beoara, i. zM. 20, 87, 89, 138, 140; 
a 118. 171, 189,194, 808, 887. 243, 
864. 863; la 86 

BeBdaU. ic. 66.116.181.183, 220 
Beadall aad Barapnaad. s. 18 
Benaal. i. zxzvi, Izzxvii, 19. 26. 29,31. 

If, 114,181: a 31.92.100.102,108. 

109. Ill, 113, 17$, 190, 230. 842. 
863. 277, 276. 876, 349 af . 366 
Beegali literatore,xlv, M9: O. 197. 
8M.266 

— Valabnavae, B. 846 
Beef Uealea. ol 106 
Berw. L 31: n. 86 
Ber2aign6.nL 187 

488 

BMpea. (. cai 
Bmu itimom, TL SO 
1. SIS 

B«nuM» c. 8!0 
Barttiolea, i. 

Bm 4L(» Un. 1. zItu 

gwaiw oolomn. n. 199.107 

BMto. 1. ISO 

B«Tvidg«,:. 90 

0» m. 7^ 89 

B^buftau. n. 201 

BUbra Sdi«t. i. 264. 270. S90, 295 

Bladdi^i. IS1.2M 

Bh»drthlbo. i. 114.116; u. 814 

Bh*4n4ittbz. m. 46 

Bbk^vannM. nz. 115,199.143.146 

BbftOMVAM. m. 116,140 

Bbap. 1. 67. OS 

BUpv*. 1.168 

Bll4<**Ml Oiu, U BX. zllT. SlT, IXBT, 
Iffl, SIS, 95S; n. 31, 78. 162, 180, 
186. 186, 200, 201. SOS. 219. 225. 
228. 228. 231. 883. 234, 83$, 239. 
267.299,296,906. 917; ol 174, iSO, 
423 

BWkTia,n* 25S;m. 21 
s. 190.189 

BbanTtt* PorOn^L lnir;n. 180.147, 
148, 167, 187. 180. 183. 186, 18$, 
218,231. 261.231 

BbzAviUa, n. 87. 159, 166, 194, 195. 

iW. 209. 211. 234.280 
BbaAvSta Tikz taboiUdiu, D. S49 
Bbzpvsd. I. liti m. 144.146. 147 
BbapndSvftT*. m. 144 
Mtpvftou. tr, 201 
bluinbi. IL 2S0 
Bfa«tf«t*,n. 145 
BbftiTATl. n. 277. 2S8 
BbftiiaT N4tb. m. 468 
Bha^Ufk I. 201 
BbftWuin funi, m. 390 
Bh*kftto?BlukU4). o. 260 
BbftktamiU. u. 147,181.198, 845 
Bb»kti. i. 40; a. 163.174,180>189. 228. 

266;m. 417«9. 8 m dlM 
Bb^lilft. m. 50.216 
Bbtadiala*, U 162,164 
BbkBdAfbM, D. 108,153.167. 202. 230. 
231.83S. 281.242.248.866.267.262, 
SSO. 452 
BhAAto, L 162 
Bb4f»U,n. 169 

— Bmhili. a. 189 

— jaOaS*. QL 158,171 

Bhftnt i, xlvU 

Bbaiiiti. in. 114 
BUfgaTtra, m. 142 
Bhaitnban, a. 27; m. 4S7 
Bbarubaocb* (BfMCb), m. 13 
B]>l4hj4.n. $9;TTr. 120 
BbMUn Vanoa, a. 127 

n. 10$, 

BhatOra, m. 184 

— Goru.m 179 
^ VUeaba, m. 173 

BkUtaaarra (Jog«iwlnaatIi), 

179. LfJ, 800,110,244, 281 
BUva. I. 208; O. 140 
BUtOOv^U, It 322 
l)hiT*Aj«. xa. 173 

BhaT«TanBan. m. 102,10$. 109,114 
BbavaviTska, n. 74, 94 
Bbinabya Farina, l IzziTi OL 4S3. 
462.463 

bbadabbada prattia. n. 865 
Bblfckha (Bbtkaba, BhiUm), l 90, 157. 
182. 237>259i n. 104. 118. 210; 
m. $8. 41. 06, ISO. 130. 866 
BUii.0. 166 
Bbir^ n. 838; bl 140 

— Bbabn. 116. UO 
Bboia. I. 27. 200; m. 168 
BbnVotl. BL $88, 384 
BbrioA n. 273 
IUiQ,n. 145 

BbubaiMTar, L zl^; s. 114. 178, 
174,206 
bbo^t liz^ 

Viha-.;, TT. 8.11 

Bbstas. m. 970 

BbQtaa, l 6; m. 1S2 (boataa) 

BbatatatbaO. 220: O. $4. 43. 67. $4 

Ui0aiakti(mattw).lL l», L97 

BibU. Tba, L 865 

BSfioUMA SuddAdea, n. 67. $6 

^ indxeo. u. 0. 61.186. 802 

Bl<iar.L2e 

BuaaOat, L 173; m. 49 
Bibar. l iIz. 20. 96, 118; n. Ill, 112, 
127 

Uja, sr. 129 
Bgab.n.2<3 

Kjapar. t. 26, 29,114. 286; s. 251; OL 
100 

^iala,L2B.l]4:a226 
BimblMra (kiLa), i. Ill, 132,135, 147, 
167. 17iriS.844;iL30 
Biodo, s. 319 
Biodoalra, id. 432 
Slag Dlab.m 138 

Tiuua. nt 137,133 
Knstoad, m.401 

Acyr a p3*M of Moni*, nx 160 

Kot. BL 269. 270 
^.TZ'pa, ZL 180 

Kahnopad, n. 180 
Kabva Slaoh. n. 280 

Blagdao, m. 4? 

Blafca. rt 286 

Bland and Baokbouaa, m. 232 
Bloob, UL 330 
OaBlMia?. n. 1$, 13 
Blaa MiS&kila. Tbe. tc. 363 
Boar (utoaraatioa), n. 147 

INDEX 

469 

Bo(Uwp«7a, ni. 49 
Boddaa, m. 4M 
SoddhftnAft»n. 2$d 
Bo4^ l6t.:. 249; XL 40, », 66, 67 
Bodbirau, o. 2^ 316 
BodB Oara. >. ISO. 186.143» 272; n. H* 
112.113.129, 130: m. M. 349 
Bodiii.L xxxTiii; B. 32, 44; m. 66 
— PriftM.:. 162 
Bodfai^badra, D. 128 
BodUoaiTiratOn. n. 0; m. 240. 323. 

B«dhidU*.XL46;nL 174 
Bodhl-dltAma, l zxTi; a. 46, 96, 816; 
m. 289. 263,266. 20^ 269.272, 278, 
304. 306. 307. 317. 823,406 
B«dlu.rajikDn4r» «ptU, L 136 
Bodhi*iattTi«L xzax, iti 3) xi^ xl, 11, 
174, 261, 848, S44; XL 6. 86. B6, 63, 
37, 106, 116. 122, 123, 170; m. 81, 
33. 63, 34. 120. 124, 169. 213, 216. 
234. 266. 286, 318. 326 n-. S29. 369. 
390, 461 

TMhi-HltTi Ht6m1i n 37 

— PlUka, Q. 61 

Bodhi tna. L 142,143,176; Q. 22 
Bod«p»;a (kktf). m. 63 
(Ja«e^(. 316 
BoehtliDtf aad tUas. a. 163 

— lUr^in. 118 
BMlaliatf. BL184 

^i7h 

Bo«MnlIa.xiL 446 
BouM, m. 466 
Bokhan, m. 199 
Bombsf. t. 116. 116; m. 466 
BoDAfd {Mtft). XL 161 
BoQ^. OL 361. 360. 364 
B6a raiigiQi). nx. 193 

— aoripton^ XXL 361 
Boom, xxl 240 a;. 

Book ot Wiadon. so. 433 
Dorel, B., D. 42 

Bornoo. I. ni, 16; XXI. 6, 107. 151. 163 
Bofohoedoar. xxl 102, 133. 166. 162, 
166 tq.. 177.162. 886 
Boaasqoai, i. Irril, diJ; IL 317 
Bo Tim .!. 206; XL 96, 130; XXL 14, Id, 
17. 84,98. 446 
B0t,m. 99 
BoaddAMna (la). XL 9 

ft u. 

121. IS2 
Bcvdao, XB. 41 
BovUBuddkaHm-18.24 
Bradkj, L liv, ki«. tin, oil. dii. 86; 
XXL 80, 82 

Brabna. i. xrUi. 46, 62. 73, 237. 331. 
333: D- 182.137.199, 926, 266,284; 
in. 69, 146,167,169, 178, 816, 284, 
388 

BeahiaaeArio, i. 68 

EnbakadotU, i. 269 
Bnlmujlla aotta, l 97,108; il 26; nx. 
322 

Brahoao {Abaokto 6odkc«d.Paotbaofl, 
L STiii, lux, 9,47.73. SO, 83.84.86; 
XL 40. 76. 234, 288, 289, 262. 308, 
309 M.; CO. 228, 246, 446, 448 
(Brahmin, oaata aad ayatei), i. 
XTii. i?Ui. rnJ, zrr. xxriu, xli, 
hxxii, 94. 86. 37,41, 74, 67, 88, 30, 
91, 96, 104, 131, 13$, 146, 168, 169, 
184, 262, 268, 806: >7. 89. 116, 116, 
U7.118,166, L71.173,176, 191.192. 
193. 210. 236; XXL 13, 34, 61. 67, 
93 tq., 1 IS »g.. 176 183. 466 

Brihm^aa, x. Tixiu, loiiL to, 46, 61, 
63. 62, 60, 69, 77, 87 
Bribrnaokeracaa. xn. 121 
BiihirandapnrtBa, nL 172 
Brahma Banpiiooha, il 62 
Brabnapiuioa, m. 186 
Brakaaputra {riTor), il 286 
gr^katfakabaa, v. 113 
Braksa Sahampati. t 102, 140, 149, 
384 

Brahroa-aambaadba-karaolt, il 249, 
250 

Brahma Sainliiti, xi. 196 

Bnbaa«aaxBpra44Ta, il 239. 265 

Br^una SACraa, L xla; XL 898.814,318 

Braksatantra'Svate&tra-avamj, n. 232 

BcahmiraiTarta Purina, o. 166,164 

Brahm&vih&ca.316; il 192 

Brahma^OBJ (poea>. l 147 

Brafau ^ioaanptiOQa), xi. 214; ixl 190 

BrahininTMn and Hiftdnian, XL 207a^ 

Brahmo Bomaj, l zItU 

Brak Bugandha. ixl 131 

Brakoi (aQIaitiai]. l 20 

Braj, XL 168,181, 244.246. 266 

Braodaa, xxi. 172 

Btaikdi&& m. 624, $26 

Biantaa »T6r, tiX. 169 

Broatk (aa mU). l 77,306 

Biihad Iraoyaka Upaniahad. l 

76. 79. 81. 63. 64. 94, 298; IL 124, 
236, 238, 239, 240, 308 
Brihadbrahma SarphiUi il 196 
Brikaipati. XL 320 
BrihataamkiU, m. 488 
IrihataannTim Upaoiahad, S. 198 
Biindahaa, s. 249, 254 
Broaoh. m. 106,166 
Brom at^a. m. 890 
Browna, B. Q., m. 460 
Bruno (GiordMO), i. If 
Bruaba. ul 212, 360, 377 
Boddka (Jma tarn), X. 110 
Boddka, tka, L z±z xzix, xlix. tu. 
mu. Ixiiii. Irrvlit 20, 27, 48, 49, 
64. 72, 97. 103, Ul, 129 133 

148. 146<178. 130, 297; U. 97, ». 

470 

INDEX 

105. 113. 116. 250, 145, 234. 906; 
lO. BO. 446 

BoddhA.bhadn, n. &5 

Bvddha Cirft*. 1.173.176; a, B3.68.85. 

113; m. 286. 204 
Be6d^-63«, kux. u. 31 
Baddh*>deTt, B. 114 
BuddUfAUM. m. 160 

BuddbJbCM. i. ISl. IM. SOS. 209. 21S, 
255. >70. 261. 293. 313. 32U m- 19. 
14. 15. 33. 28 N.. 62. 296 
Baddhi^hofoppftUi, ifl. 38, 51 
BuddbtfQpU. D. 116 
Bu6l£LM|».m.391 
BaddluiuMU*. n. 12 
BuddhftBiitn, m. 507 
Btt6dbta»adi. cx. 307 
B«cidHftQtf*4^ m. 149 
BaddJrtPMwito*, m. 17S 
BuddbM, L xix, zxix, 46.129.542; U. 6, 
123; V. 169, 216. 317.318.342 
BoddlamaaiKTOA n. 138 
BsJdbuACtl. TT. 186 
Mdto iB(4 Jfdrs. r. 143 
B«dcUt**Ttatt. 1. S30. 343. 344 
BnddliATiMqiMlU'iOlm, ii> 51 
BsMUnUn. n. 114 
buddhi. o. S99 
.BuddUmta 7^1.356 

— im tnniitihfmt. 1.100.252. 320 

— »/7V3<<.a.]SS 

BwMMsl AH w India, n. SO. 148; tS. 

14 

-> Biftii Suriet, 1.171 

— Oktna. n. 18; IS. 326 

— India, BL 14 

— IdfoU* of A^eia tsnS A<« itnu. m. 

^ UMAton. I. Izxiil. 05. 27^1 
{PaliCaBOD); XL 47>42(ld^*?*matl. 

n {BwiM}; SL 261-302 (OunM* 
Ck&OA). 372-361 (TitetAOl. Stt 
14iU7». Pitaku, SOUM (SoUm). 
Vuwjs 

— piyiicUn. 1.190,199. 813 

— KiBOfdsWofiit i .258 

Badfl«,iL 128 

BObW. t 105. 113: S> 100. 185, 187; 

in. 74, 287 
BuUasofV. m. 163 
Biiiti,in.218 
Bshka. I. 30 
Bulk. L 159 
Baikd«Uib. m. 220 
BudclkbAAd, l 87; n. 861 
BansMi period. nL 281 
Baortk, ut. ^ 

Bam*, 1. til, 02 . 221 *. zrr. Izxxu, 
xeir. 120.241,245,276; n. 90; lu. 7. 
34. 46-77. 81, 868. 253 
BecnM, m. 484 
Bun9at.iC. 53 

B«nt offerififti, Q. 186 
Bothell, m. 351 
Boahido, in. 406 
Botifli, ro. 434 
Boston, m. 357. 580. 381, 396 
ByoDm* Net. iS. 69 
Byeine<heii*oboe'ojo, m. 559 
Byamepa {Janpe). n. 81 
ByMfitise Empire, l 50 

GMw.t. 177 

Caitonre. D. 119,147.178,850,254,244. 

2^ 246. 263 ef«, 268 
CeitaDTeHkdtaoinU. a. 113 

Chitany* B4aa, n. 116 

Cakkavilea. t 396 
Ckkra. n. 196, 264; m. 387 
CekraTarton. i. 88; n. 59; m. 115.117. 
594 

Cilead end Hran. i. 66 
Celeatte, s. 118,286 
CkldwaU, fl. 219,280: m. 418 
Celknt. L 8t 
Celiphwa, m. 481 
Celw Ka'Dam. m. 461 
C41^a. L 26. 27.114 
CelTiiT. L 56 

Cunb<^4. L 241. 276: a 14$. 169,164, 
189, 203: TO. 5, 9. 45. 79, 61, 81, 
100 Jf., m 
Cefflboja aohool m. C9 
Coop*. 1.160 
IQuB.rai. m. 398 
OuBttada, s. 278 
Gdae^e,!. 16 
Ceoda, C. 186, 278 
Ceodela. X. 87 
Ctndi.n. 277 

Oiftdrahkltfa Bi*er. sl 462, 463 
OendregtfD^ SOtn, zl 68; m. 863 
Coedn^min. a. 96 
C»odr«|nkyatflaka. n. 128 
CendrafopU (I), tl 67,86 
Ckodreffopta, Maiijya, L 18,21. 24,114, 
127:n.2U 
Ceadrakirti. u. 88 
CiAdn.prabba, s. 56 
CeodiapredIpa<e5tre, n. 66 
Candjatajii, 1 . 866 
Caogalariji. o. 113 
CeaMa,!. svi: s. 95: D. 255.804 
CaoTlao, m. 843 
Capaa, n. 267 
CaraoalU, m. 416 
Cataa Daa, d. 855,252 
Car leniTal, i, Izz; m. 206 
Cariya Pitaka, l 280, 544 
CarpeoMr, m. 30 
Ganocratee, in. 444 
Gtr7aka8.U.320 

Oarya. n. 126, 160 

Caeta, l ull, xUv, xlvi, zlvii, 54; 

WDBX 

471 

a. 120. 175-17S. 24^ 254, 267, S60. 
2$6; m. 146,16S. 420 
CaMt* md TriM» of S. x> 20; 
a. 171, 225 

C»Ul0pUc t. 204 

CatAk^ of Ii6f*v. n. 270 
CVUdl^ <4 1 A« Buddktd Triftiahit 

(CUMMj of Boddhist 
ton, m. 2^. 200, 293. 316 
CaUeitim of Saioa a 140, 215. 

<7ateid of BuddJUM Seriptwoo, D. 54 
CaUle^wonhip. XL 159 
CaUirbfau^ m. 114 
Catortha. J. IxUi. 29 
CaoaatMi. ^ si, 104,196, 212 
Cava <pf tbe S«v«n Steope)*. m. 205 
Cava taoipka, m. lOs, 252. 3u alto 
Ajaata, 

Cedi. I. 27 
01*tM.XD, 151 

Celifaaar, l 237-24$; n. 256; m. 230. 

430. GL ABMticia^ tfonaateriea 
Oeiiaon. nL 2M 
Canw ^ daiMi. l rxrTui 
~ of Satfol, s. 276 

— a/Zadao, L xiivili, x\, xlvil. xd; 
n. 114,147. 250, 261, 273 

Central Aeia. i. uiv. xxii. 292; u. 4. 
61,129: m, ISO#?., 215a$., S45.46I 

— Aaiaa Gupta, ra. 100 

— India, l 116,119; ix. 100.103 

— ProTiDoee, (. 27 
OBra.L 26 
CeuivA, 1. 200 
CeUoitaan, m. 175 
Cetina.lL 171 

Cerlra, L XiL niii, js7, shiil. I, llttii, 
xcv. 113, 248, 208, 293; IL 58. 61. 
80.37,116, 814:nL4a;..S2,$S 

— ijitiqoary, m. 35 
Chabbagg^rae, l 156 

Cbaio enaoaauon, l 49,139,144, 136. 

sod, 207. 213, 213. 230, 267 
CbaitaDya,!. ilv: n. 157 
CkHaapA't N^riiry^ end UatJUn^ 
fro<tt A» Coknya Cent 6mnla of 
grittma Da«, n. 259 
CbaitTM, CL 104, 812 

Meitfok, CL 330 
Chalokyaa n. 225: ol 170 
Chaubal nnr, L 25 
Cbavpa (Anoam), zli, niv. xsrli, 
KTTiii. 16: n. 143,158: to, 6. 0. 70. 
102, 103. 129.137-150, $40 to. 
Chaaa. tl»Ma 124.127,136, llo 
Ch an. t. 323; m. 299, 271, 300. 405 
Chaodldia, n. 253 

Chiodeea Xlpaouhad. l lir. Ixrvui, 
66, 7^ 81:0. 27, 152,166,132.195. 
236, 290 

Chaadngirblia sOtia. ci. 216 
C9iafig An. m. 190. 251, 261. S63 
~ Ch Ud. CL 197, SOI. SD8. 245 
Cbang-Ung. m. 227 
Ch'tng {long). tB. 296 
Chang ho. m. 227 
CbanuhL 197,175 
QbAoubaMTa. n. 225 
ChanUboQO, m. Ill 
Ch'ao tauDg. lU. 306,900 
Cbao (latorT iil 840 
Cbaa m^a ChiAkri. ic. 89 

— Phi. nr. 07 
Chapata. cl LI, 67, 50, 60 
Chariar, T. BAjlgOpala, C. 292, 297 
Ch'a-B u. iL 05 

Ctianarji. C. 804, 284 

— fiabn Bach Wnli^w, q. 281 

— Bnnldm Chandra, o. 287 
Chattoiji. J. C.. XL 061 
ChAH, IZL 80.100 

ChaTannas, m. 193. 199. 202. S08, 206. 

211, 2H, 290, 278, 814,926 
ChaniutM at Pdliet, xl 109; CL 219. 

245, 834, 305. 446 
0ba4*Uia.0. 289 
Ch«>hiang. cl 310 
Cheoab. xn. 403 
Ch'an dynai^, a. 268, 857 
Cb4ng>CI». Jit. 206 
0h'9iig Hua (Ecpp«»r), m. 360 
Cb5ag4hjh'fiaus$, xil 604 
Cb'6^*taa (Empesnr), in. 276, 288 
Ch'8fig Taung (Empaiotl. id. 274 
Oheng-vei'Bluh'liui, to. 315 
OMnV A lOli 105 
Ohen Trang (Eapem), xil 228 
ChoLfan, XL 56, 87, 275: xc. 816 af., 
64, 885 

Cbet BAbm. L zlTi 
CbdTfong. OL 871 
Chenada, cl 194 
Chi. CL 612 

— (dTuaty). or. 853. 253.257 
Chia dt'iQg, XU. 366 
0hiap*ah'ko>ju, til 166 
Chl^mio, m, 310 

Ch'ia-aba (Chuh>eh'a']£aabgar), rl 200 
ChjdaaxhaTam. XL 171.183.207.2£2 
ChMolthe Werid.L840 
Chieh.oh'a, m. 801 

Ch'iao Lufig. m. 109, 280, 288. 368.360 
Chlb-ehft-ta-ahlh, u. 310 
Quh>Chiee.m. 398 
Chih.1, m. 310 
Chih.K'ai, IIL 810 
Chih-Ktxaa. m. SIO, 812 
Chihli, ot 300 
^ Paii.lZL287 
~ Yflac-lo. XXL 200 
Child marrlagea, i. i^griT 
Dhildars, o. 10 

4T2 

liJDEX 

Cb'is ox. 246 

CiunA, 1 . sii. lix. ziir, xrri, Itxv, 
luxili. 101. 243, 243. 262, 260. 2C9. 
237: IL 4. 6. 13. 20; m. 8, 26. 89, 
288-886 

ChiDMC AjmiJs. n. 64; dL 6. 62. 108, 
110. 148. 170, 196,246 
— CtfOb. 1.278 : 0.47,48.67.69: OX 
294. 262«{. 

^ aaiyM.iiL 226 
— ftod SaoikrlC. D. 301 
— MoaUdM*. L 180,188. 176. 268; 
O. 61. 71, 74.69. 126 (TMtru). 260. 
296: OL 216, 261-870. 274, Hitq.. 
278 

— TrWUU. 7. 299; o. 64. 61, 71, 
91. M, 804; ra. 81, 189. 218, 280. 
2(0. 246. 868, 254. 256. 269. 201. 
266.270. 274. 276. 280. 288 «?.. 306. 
888,336.366. 872.674 
Clt'lA9 (djiuiM;). m. 9,269 
(iftMi), OX 261 f?.. 874 
ChlDig», OL 368 

Cfcmg>t^c6'caa>t6Q|-lQ, 2B. 287. 807 
duof-ti. m. 277 
rt 86 

YtMo. m. 809 
Cluiuk»iMft4kft. a. 377 
Cb1 SQB9.ID. 888 
CbiUin. ISO; £l 244 
Cbta ijtutf, D. 206 
— Ru4.n. 26 
aalM.L268 
Chebia dfOMt?. 1 .29 
QkpU. 0.233 
Cb6>aaklti. L 129 
Cbc« k7l-07*l'tMa. to. 364 
CSm* •ni*l>W4«r. m. 866 
C^-utoo, m. 891 
Chouebo. at. 200. 206. 216 
Cbou djBMtr. m. 266. 843 
Cbou '^^kou. m. 101. 110. 114. 
]86«f., 136.179 

CkoMitkawhii S'aiUtrit 4a*e4, D. 249 
Chrwt. L 66. 143. 166. 171, 177. 178- 
184.213.814. !16.884.226,286,330; 
IS. 216. 423, 436 

Ckrutiamto. L nv. xliz, 1, XOriu. oi, 14, 
65. 204. 838; B. 107. 140, 168, 161. 
160. 218. 219. 866. 276.265; m. 193. 
214 «7.. 409^. 

Cbrl4(ko tBfiUo*. l 606 «. 

Ckroboleo. i 46.50: a. & «f.: m. 366 
Cha. 0X246 
ClU14,XD. 642 
CbuM9 (Stap^Tor), nx 843 
CkiuBt Yn, ui 246. 847. 248, 805 
Ck&-cb 0, m. 206 
Cku F» Tut.OL 244 
dn B«i. ID. 278 275. 288, 887, 838. 

421 

Ck'o Kd, m. 125 

Clmklongkora m. 88 

3 i«diuo).m. 206 
B. 276 
in.218 

Cb&*4k4*uaag, A 314 
Ohati;*^ n. 2^ 

Ch'a-7M*«bui9. m. 296 
Chd'Tiag, m. 248 
eit. CL 316 

sitiMUkabuift. OL 378. 876 
Qtoiwn, TQ. 101.106. XOO 
dtU, 1. 210. 308; D. 43; ox 181 
anfj*, n. 141 
CleoieiM dt AUsaiuihA, n. 160 
□•dMtM, ox 240 
Cloud of Uokfiovl&j;. l 307 
CockM 2W6 m and Catiet, n, 171,19L 
Coodte. L Xji: m. 63,109. U6.121,122, 
184 

OoIm, X 20, 27,114; n. 100, 814; m. 34. 
44 

CoBunoQtddM. C. 310(Indian); 
m. 29 M. (Baddhaghcu), 49 {Dbar. 
mapilaf, ^2 (Chu*^) 

OonnerUary ot iMorniapMS, ix 73 
— do TatVra-MOgraba. nx 23 
CoaimattioQ. m. 49. Su oZao pna&d 
Gompagno, m. 434 

Otoranor qf At Dfat)i4*t» 
ianftagtt, n. 219 
Oonw^iitn of l 180 

Cooiaacioo, a. 448. Cf. piUmokl^ 
GonintdniiUM. L 95, 237. 8»t Saoglia 
and Uonaiieriaa 

Confueiux ; nc. xxii. Ixz^nii, 12, 18, 

m. 217, 841; nx 4, 9, 216, 224. 
226 «9., 241. 248, 252 a}.. 266, 270, 
276 ag.. S37 aj. 

Coajavaima, x xcy. 26,114; O. 95,101. 

lid. 237; m. 6.45. 61 
Coo^umU of tba Dkaouna, 1.16 
ConnonaoMi, x ISii, Izrrill, 209, 210. 
230 

GonataoUna, L 273; IX 77 
— Phaulc^ m. 66 
Oont«iopUtiv« aokooU nx 268, 267, 
806 49 . 

S t) OonitwipU .VtMd;. x 202 
QTBotiiOaa (artk L 1& 

ConTmtd. Stt k^onaatahcd, Nuna 
Coomaraawaoty, a. 244; m. 89 
Coop«rJrvjng, 8.. x ItIU 
OoplMtao. m. 266 
Coppar-plata iiMOriptioiu, ox 167 
Cnwr. m. 873, 8f6 
Cocinaa lodiooplanal^d. nx 414. 416 
GMoogoiuaa, j. IxrUl. 43. 46. 832, 336; 

11x171, 272 
Coeta,nL 26 

Coooetla (Buddbki), x 264 ao., 290: 
B. 78 ag.. 224:70.16.19. 32, 66, 66 
(Siaa), 213 (Kanlabka) 

INDEX 

m 

CoQrut, m. S90, 236 
Coir«U lAd 541 n. (9; m. 995 
b Mi m 416 
OnaEkw. a. Iti 

Cmtion. L Ipri. 67; O. 398 tq . 513 
Cr«M.nL 456 

Crooke. i. lOS. 104,146, U7; n. 577 
Crsoifinoo, the, m. 427 
Cryptc BoddbtfU, n. 78.115. 211, 815: 
m. 421 

CMMpbOQ, m. 416 
C6UgaatUp«dA, m. 64 
Cfila^noM. m. 21 

CslUTasn, L 181. 196, 859. 257, 258. 

277^^ 290: D. 49 
Cuad*,]. 

OumiagbMi. Sir A., 1.142 
Cunon, Lfird, m. 66 
Culeh. 0.261 
CQ«tMk,IL lU 
Cybete. 1. 62i n. 276 
r. 262: iil 480 
oi JwuMlea, m. 446 

D*biiUn. a. 581 
D4Ciinbk,m. 25 

Mdu, a. 863,268 
^idoMOthl*. XL 266 

a. 178; m. 78, 74 tq., 190, 

D4l^ CEL 199 

D«i c6.TiH. m. 140. 540 

DM Io.EL 8 

X^’tfippoa Zoko ZSkrO, m. 291 
DaitTM, IL 821 
pikbila, iL 868 

MaU, IL 142,193. 203. 266; m. 891 

I>akahato2riB«. o. 285 

DalatUpajaTali. in. 26 

Daki Ufoa, bl 279. 290. 362 

DteiarM, n. 852 

Panhal.lL 109 

Damdama. XL 871 

dioam. XL 10; iB. 175. 304 

PaaoM oi tba Rad Ti^ PaviJ, BX. 393 

Paatas m. 86 

Piotapura, XXL 29 

Parawati. ID, 141 

PachhanA Haharaia of, t xMi 

Parioa (IdaakizL 460 

Punilin^. m. 309 

duiaDa, D. 291; m. 120 

dartaoa-Taniilya, x. 107 

Paa. Sarat Cbaadra. xl 129; m. 347. 

562, 368, 399, 37^ 887 
PaJabMmiH, a 60 
Pa4abhfinl4«ara, u. 66 
Paaafca. j. 296. 267 
PaaJmfiaa, D. 841 
TV—"■ L 150 

DaOaaa P&dahib ka Grantli, n. 271 
PaNaimii, d. 809 

Paiaxatha (lung), s. 149 

PaMMctEL^ 

Paaa SclmaUa, il 177 
Pat (Cbaodl), XL 244 
Paa {Snr). XL 249 
dia7a,ZL 866 
PaouB.69 
Pathavaaiaa. iil 86 
Pa{aa,L 121 
Paolatahad, 1. 29, 90 
Pavia. XXL 571 

Pead. apirita d, x. 359; ixl 116. £m 
aUo Axweator-wonhip 
Daath’i aeaaaitfen, l ^ 
PebciJa,SL5rt 
Peb (dackar). n. 244 
Pocalegoa, l 218. 215, 860 
Paccaa, 1 . 19.86,87.115: Q. 92.98.100, 
108, 119. 184: m. 107. Sta aiao 
Sou thorn India 

Pacairer, the, il 194. 3tt dio Miia 
Dear Park, 1.140.141,148 
Da Oroot, m, 279, 3U. 319. 522. 389, 
138.960 

Da Graot and Parkar, m. 288 
bDa-hbTU, XXT. 596 
DoiBcation of izian, L 4$; XL 147. 160, 
157. L70,194.196,861.266; m. 115, 
119,169. 218. 284 
DaiaoL. l xlvi 

PaltiH, inrantioft of. ai 228 
Dalbi.x.80,28.29,89;B.S72 
Panetrtuj. l 88 
Paouargoa. IIL 444 
Damonopbobia, m. 3S2 
P« pnfvndii, XL 236 
Dapoiu^ m. 864. 899 
Da^ (SeraL to. 381 
DarViahaa (howling), XL 884 
Deal, tba, IXL 566 
Paul, L 68 

Pauaas. u h. 86; u. 187.506. 809 
Paaa. i. 47.45. 03, 105. m. 540: CL 75, 
86: BL 81. 304 
ParabliaBa, i. 89 

DoradaUa, L 153. 166. 167, 166, 181, 
240. 820, 342; IL 95 
Daaadutaragga. L 184 
Parakl, rt lu. 483 

Darakula, IS. 149 
Daranigari, il 869; is. 301 
Davanimpiya Tma, ol 13,16,17 
Davap41a,m. Ill 
Davariji, IXL 117 

DaTarau. il 191. 815. 819, 280. 844 
DaHtidaaa, x. 540 
Para^vonMp, n. 100; is. 104,192 
IkTBaina. l 89 

IL 874: IB. 172.178.592, 459 
ParU. L Irrii. 143, 537 
Daail dancon, L xli; m. 42, 393 
Deri Uibitoya, a. 879 

474 

INDEX 

Tvii, Kxix; n. 72. 8m 
bb^ktii, 5^v4tio& 
Dm^rn. 1S5 
l>lull4» XL 276 
Db&AU.iL2M 

DbuBM, L xriu. 10,165, ld2,211.266, 
266. 260. 207: a. 34 
r uifin«-r<jfini , 1.310 

Dll4CIlJBla^k^ m. 20 
DbMitttMi*, m. OS 

], 310 

PhaABinUika^ L SOS 
DhsauBilAthl. m. 2$. SJ 
PhMUBAUtU, m. 21. 26 
Dh4BB4*B4ti4lB4t4, L SOO 
PbaoBAOMk. 1.117,136.206.272, 226; 

ZL ISI: m. 246.299. 290, 269, 372 
DhMaaftnoi. at. 19,31.40 
Dbni)tPM>miqi) I. 103. 192, 206, 2S5, 
314;ZZL30 

PIHTimnnfnr*ti (O' 60 
DfaftamfttkM, m. 60,66 

p k>mtn>wiH«V TTT. ^ 

DhkBuuviUM. m. 66 
DfaMiB«,pi(, m. 91,101 
mujui-.v* (kio^j. CL 86 
PliAiDjk, I. 280 

IS- 280 

Dhirtot. 1. 307 

dUnoM, L 250, 8S2: c. 60, 61, 126; 

ID. 216, 293. 386. 395 
Pliumx* L 49,100.198: n. 69.110.119. 

200:10.114.149 
DbwaA'OftkrvmmdA, n. 20 
DbknkdUMi, XL 34,48: CL 208, 317 
DhAniUAlCO, c. 115 

4. 291; xiL 204, 249, 286, 

266 

D64rai4-gupt4 Tioa;*. m. 816 
Z)b4m4k4. UL 079 
DbkrBkkii*, m. 242 
Dbtnnikftr*, IL 89 

DA4r»«kl7». a. 30.12, 33^ 60. 73; 

01216.900.30$ 

PhftnsAklrtL XL 96 
DbMVUlftk^AAfti S16 
DWmaaaglM, l 307: 0. U 
lAMemmSt, m. ISO, 191. S14,280,399 
DUnufOl*. L 27; XL 111. liOj m. 45, 
167.362,391 
SbamMvrOjv 60 
Dbaratft^A. a. 116: m. 6,071, 409 
UtfMnkihft. XL 32: m. 292, 894, 296 
a. 17. 23. $6 

DhimriliWni, m. 66, 90. 120, 142 
DbAraklMkafi^, lo. 04 
dbaraculw (l 193 
TMiama Utklrar. 1 .110 
nuBBAbiita, IL SO; m. 296 
DhwtB^Ottft. iiL 83 
Db»rm PM. a. 806 
HUM. L SO 

DtAtQ Sena. m. 38 
PhetQVftOja^ m. 26 
Pb&tviftstri. tlL 173 
DbirgkcU, m. 219 
Dl4iuk4, m. 307 
DhrlUmehtri (eons of), n. 154 
DhcmdiM, 1. liO 
PbOtOcru. L 73. 240, 257 
Bbvinft. L 307: XL 70.110; lo. 131.173, 
^.318.406. JUne ftsd Uedi* 
teUon 

Phjini BoddhM, c. 8$, 116. 118: nL 
106. 389, 301 

DiftlenM of the Buddhe, l 97. 109. 

161: IT. 320 

QjeiBOod.cuU«r, ttw,L 180; XL 6,41, 60, 
62, 60: ic. 283, 306 
dibb4-e4kkha, i. 320 

dibye*c*nU. rt 22 $ 

Piwg IPibyanc), CL 164, 106,167, 179 
l>jeamUn, i. $6.112.117, 119.120 
DistA L 98. iSl, 142.166. 278. 

229,296. 344; IT. 137. USiDL 30.42. 
05.102,232,297.460 
Digni^ TU. 167.172 
et» ID. 842 
m. 36? 

Dikungpe. tXL 399 

DioL, rn. $4$ 

Dinh ^en Ho«nc ]>$, m. 344 
Pin.i.llLhi, XL 2TO 
DiBUCft. XL 94, 96 
Dion CeedM. cl 431 
DioQyeiuft, m. 422 
DioQTsoe (EriilQe), a 187.293 
Dioecuh, x. 03 

Dlpepkftn (Baddb*), l 843; m. 246 
Dlpeekwe Enjft&ae, m. 363 
Dlcievmiiifie, L 260«9.. 202. 269; in. 

13 «?., 60. 61, 806. 333 
D^b»,iiL 290 

DiMMory p/Uvint SttdHiim in Bauai, 
XL 118 

Di*4k4i», m. 11$ 

Dlrekunpendiu. id. 119 
DiverlM, IC. 173,181 
DiTToetMO. L 103 

DiTyiTsd&nA, l 299: Q. 22. 66. 16$; 

m. 106, 395, 439 
DjejeU}*. xn. 168,171.170 
Dieiefceteofl, xn. 169 
mDo. CL 374, 375 
D«ko. XXL 201 
Dolgeronki, l 841 

Dooi Coneniitino d» Braunz*. ixl 20 
DOQA, L 109 

Pong Doow m. 144,149 
Don Ju&a DowiDepda, king, id. 86 
Dor4. L 241; R. 18: m. W, 309. $14, 
816.317, 387 
DoiiB, CL 172 
Docie>de^ CL 89$ 

INDSX 

rDp^rJe-jCDd-p*, lo. Z74 
rDor«je4«K>. m. 303 
Do«babbdc^ XL 233 
Dmit, D. 7^9 
Dp4] to. 379 

Orftoud^ D. 293 
D»v)d». a. 100 

Dnn4i»a«, i. sli, rv, xEzaj, 19, 113: 
n. 33,141.182.106, tlX, 220. 279; 
m. 107,192, 417 f«e o1k> TMitte 

^DrtfhUfiira, n. 13 

Pofiju. n. 194 
DruJda, i. It; m. 429 
Dutliun, I. xliT. Izu; n. 290, 237. 316. 

818; m. 449 
Do Bow, m. 930 
DommSTl, 809 
doJULU* t 44. SOO. 203, 219 
daUbkkkhud*. i. 206 
l><jTft. m. 37$ 

I>QnooUw (£w OnUtt m. 

342 

IhiadhibhiooMO, u 269 
Duod&ubbitMn. I. 239 
^perreo (Aiiqe^), s. S70 
DuaUoq oi L*v, UiB, c. 61 
pBf hiinp, n 289 

Dam. L XV, 39i U. 118,182.118.146. 

228. 8741;.; m. 167.139.185 
Duj«paji» x> Ixx; n. 283 

dor^k a. 11 

Dorouella, to. 49 
Daii^ m. 04 
DoMb (th»j. m. 34 

Do(r«uil do Rhi&x Miwioo. m. 100, 886 

DoWbigiq^oi, m. 16.17 

DrldxMoikiTAilf^ m. 804 

DtMU. XT. 237, 313 

3TwUdT4it4EU«k XL 230, 318 

DripMa^OL 144 

DHnU. XL 163 

Z>Tic%T«a. XL 163; CL 86 

I>TiU, BL 4S6 

Dworf moftraxtioa, n. 147 

Dyxiu. L 33 

ol tii» Kali Afia, L 16: U. 
187 

Duo^tru, OL 370 

£«riy BUtory »/ India, l 16; O. 76, 37. 
167 

Earth {8«idM), XL 276. 286 
BwtbQMkk L 16 a. 13$. 176: m. 440 
Bwt Sean], xl 101.102; m. 467 
Barter lAfeBd, in. 161 

Bertem Oeage dTOWt/. L 80 

— Had dmartj, XL Z? 

— HoMcalik. L 316 

— Tiia djBArtr* IQ* 261 

BobeteoA, XXL 446 

BwlartAetw. i. 04, U2, 203 
EdeMA.m.414 

SdioU of Axokk I. xziii. 113, 264, 236, 
270; nr 430 

BdkiM. XXL 54. 303. 309. 311 
Bdumadi Aod Aiu^j, xo. 487 
EdooeXioa (BnhisAzia ,89; Baddli«(>, 
XXL 70 

Ggo, I. 290. St« Ateua 

Egy^ (BgTpfeena). r. It. 218, 868; 

a 174.276; in. 430,432,460 •{., 467 
Eigltt««n lobABk the, m. 239 
Eiebt-fold peth, l 144, 200. 213. 214, 
261 

Eight TembJe oooe. the, m. 392 
Eit«l,tt. 88; m. 834,330 
BkikahAph^eli. ixl 146 
SkAgAhCA, XIL 32 
Elcealtbe, xl 168 
EkinhkedbAimA. n. 196 
ik&rthA.XL 43 
BkAU, xn. 426 
nkitntprA^yAyArtjB, l 83 
•kiyou. n. 106 

BkoHenigAiDA, X. 300: Q. 48: m. 100, 

Blere, A 16. 17 

Blmmi* of Bindn leonafraphy, xl 100 

SlephAntD. n. 166 

BUw (Prophet), i. 33 

Elicbpuj. L 29 

Biiot.a 260 

of lomoKAlity, D. 233, S38 
BUork L xlii. 28; ii. 203. 236; XIL 178 
CmAQAtioak X2.196 

ElffiotieoaJ tbeisa. l nxir. zU, e. ifee 
ai4o fihweTAd Oftk Ch^tenyk 
HriihiiA. lUma, TellAbbA 
Empedoelee, x. xlx 

Em^or (Chioaw. fnaetloai of), xn. 
Eodere, m. 810 

BzJjghtenaeat. the. l 136,134.165,176 
En tof, UL 432 
*H4r, L 33 

Sphtbelltek $wSQ&i 
^08 (iDdiAD), L IzxIt, 63. 84e hf Ah4 
BhiraCe hoi BAnUyeae 
^grapiia indicOt m. 208 

Zfylenica, m. 39, 41 
Epi^L 238; sL 490 
Epiitlw of St PaoI, l UxIt 
P poote e/ CAiMM and jsponew An, 
XL 18 

Ena, n.203 
StiABggk UL 171,170 
(eet. Ll84;n. 269 
ErotUsAffl. Sm Baku worebip 
r«M» 4c BtbiicffQpltU Joins, L 105 
fwsfM on tJu hnftvfi, tUralvc dad 
n/^gien o/Be^ md rtfid. n. 113 
Eecayc on Lu Sdifion of (Ae fftndkc. 
Q. 232 

Bweaec. a 434, 430 

k ju. 

476 

INDEX 

EkUd^bcaMn. n. in. 40 
EubaaecuB* m. iU 
EaknUda^ i. 23 

Bvop«Mi cultuT«» T. zii. xivi, In. 
iVi» , IxxTiii Inix. xon<9.; 

m. 422 

Ei3tb?deDQS. I. 28 
ET«r«t(Mt). 01.202 
EMI. 1 . 1 ^ *- fiu Ulr* 

BrctetiOB ^ Mfta. i. 396 
Bxpo*ar» of lieftd, in. 460 
G7« Trotb. (bot L 1S6.160 

Pft-ob«n. PL S91 
Fx-ehi’Tao-na^’Ohaog. m. 200 
Fk^bil-cblB^i UL 205 
P»-eba*pi'7t)-ohiQ& lu. 295 
P» CO. 314 

Fk L 167. 258. 259. 893. 342{ 

n. 16. 19. 82. 66. 65. 70, 92 m.. 126, 
168: m. 17. 29. 84. 86. 29. 31. 44, 
163. 166. 176, 191. 201. 298, 219. 
S30. 863, 897, 209. 393. 397 
7».bBA, m. 310 
Fk.Un. PL 260 
7kl|U.XL23e 
r»U «( Uftn. L lux 
Fx.ai«a. PL 886. 38$ 

Pka-CbMi {king). PL 106 
Fifi CbMh. PL SOO 
Pio bv.U, riL 130 
Fia4.niax-i-Qhl. PZ. 2$7 
IWw4dx-oUb£. PL 8$4. 328. 824. 328, 
828 

Pfta.yt (huK). m. 180 

Fkrida-^d EU Alter. PL 401 

FwQObw. n. 242 

FwwnjAT n. 271 

Fxmdin Yiebt, PL 460 

Ffr-SMo. P. 83: PL 905 

EkteUn, L IxxtU. 00. 218 

Fk.t«ng. PL 816 

F»>7efl. PL 310 

Fk>70M*«ha.lm, EL 287 

Pmt. d. 878 

F«iuW OoTD*. IL 186 

P«e9«lm. B. 282; pl 881 tg., S29. 326 

F«Bdk«ft, ZL 10; CL 161 

ForghM^ L 28; nx. 190.203 

F«rguMS. OL 18, 74.108,194 

Fmando, 1. 208 

FMt<*4b (Stea). m. 98. 832 

Fmut BahgtoMs l 142 

FtftL Baddhift Ooondl. PL 06 

FlbjMl m. 460.461 

niehD«r. IP. 866, 400 

Piltel of), m. 874 

F»a« Art m inddc, TL 169 

Fteot, J. A.. I. xtvi E. 67. 100; iu. 51. 

63. 82. 108.199. 124. 120, 136, 137, 

188.189. 143 
Plfiot *ftd UQbor, ol 87$ 

FlM fTiotead). L 9, 80, 07 

Flr«, L 90.100. 820.281. 232; PL 802 

— wrmcm. l 140 
Fiih iQOftroxtien, n. 147 
Five Kiogs, m. 393 

FtreHofUr. 1.171 

FImL I. 84;C. 808inL 19.21 

Fo (fioddU). PL 240 

Fol^re. L Uv. 101. Set Anlaiwn 

— ^nuot 1 a Hindu ooltun. IL 82. 
111. 114,116; PL 441 

Foochow. UL 86 

F(.peUiMDiDar. EL 46. 51, 60. 67. 74 
FoRnloae worlds, i. 9, 0 
FonacM, rc. 161 

ForaaliL Spa lAyiait, Uigk. Heofcrs«, 
Tkatnj 
Forton*. PL 87 
Fo.ahib, in. 108 
Fo-('o. CL 244 

FcMCQD.Vaeig.clil. CL 267, 307 

Fo.b'u'oh'ug, PL 260 

Fooclur.z. 178; p. 15. 81, 70. 63. 128; 

m. 74. 219, 304 
Foolkae.P. 140,816. 219 
Four Qaitwoiu. the, to. 19$, 806, 209 
Foot Greet Elog*. Che, L 102; pl 839, 
106,32$ 

Focr Trufihe. tbe. i. 49, 800, 8ll, 201 
FotmsrMQ, m. $0. 88, 86 

FTMke. I. 84,2H. 278. 282; DI. 14. SOI. 

238.24$, 320,886.84$. 390,381, 390 
Fnnkforter, PL 96 
FreeeeUe. n. 19$; PZ. 221. 461 
E^uer.Sir J.a.a286.889 
Freewill, l Ixseii 

Frenoh <tbo>, L 81; PL 112. 129. 236 
Frppccm, CL 64. 89.130,193, 194.196, 
218. Su Ajeate 
Fner Gebnel, lO. 160 
Fo-ohioD. PL 80$, 860 
Fu de, m. 892 

Fu>te>M^>^^ytM*ohiA8t P7* 306 

Fajlwerm period. CL 404 
Fn-Ueii.nL 103.209 
FUAU. nz. 7.101.103.104. 1$9,14$ 
FvAenl liM. SL 333 

Oebled Hell, tee,:. 160 
OededberSi^. XL 200 
QadATeh Bieer, r. 803 
Oaegen l^ka. 1. 160 
Guerwec dybiety, l 27 
OUAF-Gk. PL 72 
OeliML 181 
Qftodeh Riser, L 132 
Geoden. pl 869,899 
0&od«Tytlbe, a. 54; CL 283 

Oendheobes, L 102 
Qudhekati, L 160 

GOndh&n, l xxx, xUx. 20. 87, 208, 262. 

INDEX 

477 

aSO: a 16. t2. 63. 59. 70, 81, 83. 90. 
93. M. 100.160.172; m. 7,100,810. 
211, 213.210. 301.440 
QvtdMrt. m. 304 

OMUfa. 1, 60; XL 113. 14«, 228. 263; 

m. 07. 140. 167.100. 186, 356. 383 
OkMa, L 121 
Oaa^ KijO. tn. 129 
Oasie*.:. 136.163; n. 146 
Qactukara VlUia, m. 80 
OiDtho. u. 70 
OaoMna, m. 813 

OarlM. a. 2D0. 806. 800. 303; m. 411 «q. 

GarbWhiU, m. 317 

Qarbha Upauabad. m. 176 

Qa^ I. 74. 34. 04 

Oanog. in. 362 

QaraJar.iB. Ill 

Oanda, n. 820; m. 147.138.186. 462 
Oatbaa. l 10. 61. 888 

l cU; s. 74. 208. 318 

QatadapaHn, m. 66 
Oammokha, sl 482 
Qaori. XL 07 

Owta&lja TafiCra. xl 100 
OawiJgafb, L 121 

Qaja. L 24. ISO: XX. 101. 106. 126: 
m. 28,463 

Gamtaaraf BoiabaT Piaodsicj.n. 826 

— oi Borma. xil w 

— «4 India, u. 833 
Oedas.dab. is. 960, 360 

0«i«w. i. 2W: m. 12. 14. 10. 21. SO. 31 

G«luoP*> 

OaBoratara forcaa, vorabip, s. luxvt 

fif g ^4 

0«iaiia.L Ini*: m. 424 
GMi^pb7, L 335. Sss aito Cosoo* 

OOOM 

Oaomacciy (nao*aU&). xn. 322 
Gadm. XXL 70. 06, 06 
Om 7. XL 26; XXL 300 
Obania, ol 172 
Ghat* Jitaha. IL L6S 
Qbata (vcatan), t. 31 
Qbaal Miyaa, iil 460 
ObasAa. xiz. 461 
OhaBu, c. 16 
Ohor. I. 28 
Obara. xl 162 

QhoaVvorabip. l 10 ; ill 68. 831 

Qboumohha.160 

Qlao Chi, XD. 340 

OiSord LaoCam. l Ixrli. cUi 

Mu’* Ckinm iMa,. iil 200. 213. 246. 

860. 260. 866. 287 
GflAt. XL 08; XXL 377 
Oinbbaja. 1.147 

Ginar. L 114,121; n. 60. 203; m. 167 
GtU Oorinda, XL 167.16). 210,890.848, 
246 

ait&Tali, a. 246 

QUiboncf, xl 160 

(Bemitw from tbs SAoiUmaia, n. 101. 
246 

Goottkism, L sai; A 443 m. 

Goa, L 31; XXL 26,417 

Gotund RMt, XL 147 

Gobvdbao. xl 169 

God. L 8.47.840; O. 73,166; xn. 224 

Gad. tba Ea^bla Etw, l «u2 

Qodaa, m. 864 

Goda?«; Biaar, x. 27 

Goddaa.ironhlp. i. kzzrl; il 127,146. 

160. 276«tf.;aL 30. 943, 300, 303 
Oodhika. 1.167. 206 
(?ode o/iforlitn SvMitm, xl 26 
Qoaaha, l It 
Ootel (abriM). l iax?u 
Gahnl. il 861, 200 
Gokiila,iL 164 
Goknl Ooaaiaji, il 261 
Ooknlnatbli, IL 261 
0 oUs 3ou^ eba, d. 866 
GoldM TaiD|dB, a. 868 
Ga&onda. l 20 
OoiBakdTaia, x. L80 
GMHlopboraa, L S3; BL 416 
Oaii^L 27 
Oopl.iL 164,161.220 
Oopi Hath. a. 147 
Ooparaai, n. 207; iel 132 
Qonkbpoi’. n. 263 
Oor Baba, n. 145 
Qaidlao. m. 447 
Gandran, a. 146 
GaMm.IL 184,266 
Qa^L 106,1)2 
Gcdnba. Ut, a 212 
Qoapals, I. 1 c4t. 180,183; n 440 «• 
OcM)0a, He. OL 200. SIS, 216 
Gaarami, xl 135, 261 
QoUsa ((ba Bnodba), L ax. n. xxril. 
zzix, 110, 120, 123.120-262; B. 30, 
130; BL 13.71,177. ^Baddba.tbe 
GatUbbaTa (kina), m. 21.40 
Gatipotta, I. 260 
Gatra.L 107 
QOTaidbaoa, Ht, m. 147 
Geraija. iz. 147 
QaTiftda,xL 208,232 

GoriDdacacTiavicm. iz. 188 
GoaiadapOT. m. 463 
GoTind sla^b Onn, IL 268 
Oras 60 «BaolriaiM, o. 80 
OiMaa-Buddhiit acolpcwa. a. 172 
Gnnd Uua, x. xxvu; jil 136, 368 m 
< ltftaa^ 861) 

GraoUk, i. Izxii; XL S43 ^ 266 

Oraotba, XL 70 
Qiaat of India, D. 160 
Great Bm, tba. nL 126 
GiaM Eisa of Qtoip. Iba, l 172 
Oiaattf after, l 63 

478 

INDEX 

Great SaMpr, i. 23 
GfWM {Onw), L idx, xzsl. xli. Id, 22 , 
66,171: n. 70,139: m. 9,191, 410 
QracA Tiri. the, m. 9M 
GnMrd.nL 200 
Ot«j the. nL S77 

Qrienon. i. xc, 993: n. 187, 191, 2S0, 
297. 942. 244, 948, iZ9, 999: xn. 91, 
900,421,456 
QrUieMiia, i. 89 

SOttu. L 101; m. 94 
OroeMTddt, sl 108 tq. 

Orovn. L zo: n. 240 to. 

OrOowwlel XL 20, 29, 84, 8$, 27, 6$, 
126, 120. 143: to. 14, 92, 99, 194, 
109. 190, 219, 829, 349, 261, 380, 
862,389,397,300, 301 
06484 ViMJ4, ID. 40 
Ooefbet l 100, US, 114, US 
Qnbidre, luo^, ql 29 

OobvaA^j*. D. 126 
OolwaL L 10. 29, 114. 117.119, 120, 
121 ( a. 100,109.100,118, 228, 164, 
242. 849, 892. 276: m. 7, 16S. 177, 
463.466, 461 
OojM* (Qorjval, t 29 

C a, L 212, 304; IL 166,190, 233, 299 
labbadia, 1.114, 298: m. 297 
Oao4'k4raaca*TyiUi4. a. 67; m. 306 
OaiaiMti. IL 94 
Gonararaia. m. 166,179,177 

QnndapW, kiqc, m, 4U 
OoMiAg, DL I7l 

Ouptai (dynaaty). l zziUl. 10, 24: 

&. 64, 06. 60. 87.127, 200 
OortAbio^ n. 119 
Gorkhaa. n. 117; dl 869, 897 
OonukU. tt 269 

OuQ, L 220; Q. 194. 867. 268: BL 91, 
219, 146, 197, 199.460 
Qora’Mraaipari^praVbi'raiB, n. 2S2 
Ooalii £hao, (Q, 304 
Oofuk, m. 364 
GwaJior, i. 31; m. 463 
QjUto, m. 366 
rOyoa, m. 378, 376 

D, 88 
]. U8 

Haekmaca. dl 308, 824, 329. 380 

Halls, ox. 461 

HaUeoa, m. 307 

Hatebid. L 80,116 

Balisa. CD. 877.359 

Haai, ni.200 

Kam^, L SO 

SaauaTait. m. 62, 59, 90 

Saa dyaaety, nz. 197,203,206.209.213. 

244, 848 

Hanc CbOQ. ni. 871.280 
Haa*Di«. in. 209 
HaaaowL D. 149, 268; DL 162 

HaDunat, tt. 239 

Haa^Yo. m. 298, 809, 297, 298, 329 

Haoua. AaSoaa 

Happmm. i. Uavi. 189, 214, 225 

BappT Laad Sfitn. dl 219 

Ha£ s. 145: m. 114 

Hardooa, Urs, m. 201 

Hardy. 1.173, 314: n. 170; m. 29 

Har GoTiad, IL 269 

Harl. It 116, 192, 200, 266, 267, 2M, 
299; xn. 183,426 
Ha^daa.n. 264 

Harihaia. i. 30: XL 164; dl 106, 107, 
114.146,181 
Hanbaiilaya, m. 119 
Earinyall* n. 860 
Haritl.lL 17 

Hanraqita, xl 169, 164, 230, 261, 279; 
CL 114, 424 

Harisarmaa, Idag, dl 141,143, 804 
HarivaroMdrata, CL 149 
Eartisaa Qura, a. 268 
Sar>ru Qoro, IL 898 
Eanuoa, Uin S. B.. nl 434 
Eanba {eaapererl, i. ziziz, 19,26,114; 
D. 77, 07 a?,, 106, 127, 200: IT. 40, 
44.149,2», 849, 464 
Harsbacaiita, i. 16; IL 07 
Hartmann, L 211 
Hathayoga, i. 304 
Hathi^iogb, L 119 
Haug, I. 69 
Barret, m. 217 
Eayifrira. m. 169, 999, 398 
Ewat UOm-od-Idii CUati, nL 460 
Eeari ai Jaialan, 1.106 
Eearea aad Earth Aeaxiatloo. m. 819 
Heareea. $ea ToMta aod Paradiaa 
Hyimndrri m. 492 
Htt-aa peddd, in. 409 
Heliodorai, s. 197 

HaUeoJctio IdagdoiBS, L zzz, 23. r^ee 
OiBece 

Helli. L 337; xl 24: nr. 943 
TA Ealffioat, L Ir 
Kalxauad rirer, m. 3 
Eamanaadra, L 117; CD. 181 

Bem&dri. nr. 423 
HeiMTaflhu, l 259 
Hepbchalitaa, Stt Hum 
H erakln (Sira), n. 137, 169 
Herat, m. 487 
Herdar, l Ir. 

Hamatie Litcratan, nr. 432 a}. 
Handotoe, in. 484 
Eenik:a.n. 129;«. 160 
batu (oauae), l 207 
Heraira, n. 140: dl 891 
H«ra)rara4iU, m. 356 
Hideyoahi, irt 86. 339. 404 
Hia i aaa, l liirii; oj, 404 

INDEX 

479 

L Kspal. 

H3b>w, PL 381. $97 

H!nATifU» L nif, fix, *tt», lur, 

titi, $&3: n. 11. 80. 82.101: m. S3. 
eO. 82. 88. 112. 126. ISO. )$2. 177. 
201. 202. 206. 213. $11. $20. $23. 
871.404. fiMP»liCaiMa 

— 60(n«. 10.282 

— LC. 285 
Hindi, a. 188.208. 269 

Bi%iv CmIm md SeeU. n. 163, 173, 
177. 308. 810. 844. 361 

Itpftofroflw. 1. ^ZTi 6$: It no. 
IM. 202:QL ^ 

H^Tninim (lodifto raUfloo: todnl otdn), 

l. MMte. 6,18.17.8$. $4. 87. 
88.89.40,41. 48.48,49,64.87. 127. 
189; TU 107422; IQ. fi, 96, 10$. 105, 
112«{.. 148«2.. 160 «f.. I669g.. 843. 
332 to., 411. 417 tg.. 430, 447. 453. 
457 M 

Hlado Brush, oi. 0 

Kutdostna, n. 82 

m. 117 
n, 166, 202 

Ktfth,m.3$6 

Bidoirt de U JJitnJdveutt 3f<trfnMU 
MofU, XL 161 

Bid^r* do ia HUirottift BindMt, n. 
362 

Hu4oir« dot Crcvciutt en 

Cki*t, n. 284. $20 
BuUntaJJUthon t/lit Idwid^ 

m. 36 

Stdary of (he BtwH Lannngt mi 
LUdsimt. B. 114.187, 8li 245.878 

— of fituAH, a. 172 

—. t^I%dta* AreAiud^ ax 18,166 

— ^Indtm fudiUiem, n. 6$ 

— ^ I*dim SUppint, m. 102 

of BoniUtA-yaca^, a. 183 

— oidt BJiafdM. iL 260 
Hedpoo, B.lL.n. 60.116.117 

w. 8h«dworth.n. 38 
Bownl^ L 98.106; n. 66; m. 181. 848 
Houmis wid BumsU. i. 116 
n«6 th^ m. 406 

Helv UvtM o/dt ^sAeore. j. 40 
B<Mie of Pa&. i. 282 
Bo.QMi, m. 18$. 264 
Ho]>kittf.n. 107.169 
HornpMhtkn, n. 69 
Hor*0i*sh4d'da, lit 677 
Hun^i p *■"-'«** DtnueripV m. 394 
Hom^. m. 446 
Homusd. nx 216 

H«»e •Mn£oe. i. xsxrui. 61: m. 146 
Honu, m. 431 

Mom ud UoDoobaU, nx. 163 
Ho-fihM^ (eovh). a. 241, 230. $61 
Hoepiub. 1118; m. 124 

Soflibo, m. 404 

Hoiri (pAmW). I. 63, 68.100; xn. 118 

Bon Cfiiu. ox. 264, 866, 267 

HoB»Hnfi43ho, CL 248 

Hou-Iinnfi. ixl 206 

EmlM, I. 80.114 

hp£nL Dt $83 

HndaTn. bl 376 

HfilhiMf*. IIL 426 

Hii». m. 289 

Hilfta OboQ< ffL $16 

Bseas«Cltil). a. 96; m. 266 

TtL $12 

BAsoTsqo^. m. 278 

— Wu, m. 389 

— Wu Ti, xa. SSI 

— ?6. m. 288 
Esin Sh4n, m 209 

— T Vmg , m. 266. 278 
Edn-b^ ihlB. IL 7; at 93 
HirtDg JVn, xru 277 
Esia*7ia. m. $06 
Esiaiu-oQ. m. 197 
Hif.Yu'CU. nt 236 
Eii*7a*b. UL 226 

Hsflfta Cbiunx i. xgd». 26. 388. 375, 
332; XL 3, 6. 14. 16, 17. 18, 23. 33. 
81. 61. 68, 72, 74, 77«9.. 125. 126. 
127, 168. 206. 844. 280. 386; Oi. 16, 
20. 24. 44. 53. 148, 190. 183, 201, 
2C2. 204. 206, S07. 208. 311. 21$. 
216. 239.260.38$, 289. $00. $1$. 46$ 
Hiwtt'Fo’po, m. $14 
flsoaaTi, m. 16$ 

Hiftao TsQSff. nL 189. 261. 392, 268, 
389 

Hm'KQLSg'CIi'i, nt 278 
Hgnng»pa, m. 846 
bt4,iiL 73 

Hu. m. 104. 217. 264 
Huft'io. nt 446 
HoB’Ha Oiisg. m. 273 
Hoai, m. 290. 26L 
Hum. Baperor, m. 849 
SQstfl’Wtu, xn. 140 
HQt.;«n, n. 64, 90; nt 262, 283, 267, 
3fl (sOtn). $74 

Huft>ye&'Ching. ni. 216 
RoSkjee'tfun^ ni. 816 
Huo.nL 368 
Hu&L xztU 
Hurt. 1. U 
Ho*hQMlune. in. 216 
Hai.k'% m. $08 
Hoi Kao, m. $17 
Hoiatec. at 308 

XL 99; m. 864 
Hoi Ihsitf, XXL 87$ 

Hai YoMW m. 31$ 

HulOeoh, n, 376; m. 431 
Huiu^ Ehaa. nt 849 

480 

INDEX 

Uajiuui uerifiM, i. xrsrl, 68; 0. 188, 
m. 193, S76, 888, 269 
Hujne, L Iv 

HuaMar >. 178 

BuoMk. CO. 383 

Uuadred HiouMiid N&gw, 1Q> 331 
UuadMd Tb9Ui4bd SoiM IB. 339 
Haag»rUa AfialUM, t w 
Haageo. m. 308 
Hpqb Woi m, 833 

Unocal (Han TIm). m. 104,107,139 
HuDi B»pbthAllM). J. 

xzTii. ih, 18,19, 86; n. M. 33. 93. 
119; RL 192. 198. 801.309.812 
Hoo-«bOQ {R4ra-Kbo]P). oi> 207 
Uuth. IL 13, 32; m. 36S. 381.873, SBO 
UuTbbU. T. 23.11$: u* 84 
Udxlcj. T. H., L If. zeiT. cU 
Hwa-&«jiK-Z(^ao, TP. 331 * 
U;4«r»b»4,1. 2% 208 
bf BM, CL 104. iStt Arf»n, pthip 
bypaoUatiOB. L 319. feeoM Medlta- 
tim. Yoga 

TbMD.L If 

I^CUu. u 890; n. 3. 6.18. 20, 82. 83, 
82,^. 00«.. 126,807; m. 7. 80. 33, 
68, S2, 86, 106, 103, 148. 168. 106, 
178. 177, 239, 28$, 892. 299. 305. 
328. 329. 330 

I«on£fnffu«tcttddiu^<^ a. 16. $1,122 
IMhi. t. 317;ip. 247 
iOeatiOaaUoB (uuon). n. 128 
IdjooUhihjj. m. 196. 800 
IdeUtiy. Sa InogM 
Icatpun, n. 203 

IpdfaziM. I. Ixu. 188, 807. 211 
l^bOiA. UL 309 

TkhUfM QdMiiB WubaBDiad. n. 118 

Ikkaa.ELSSO 

Hi rtT«, L 88 

Hludoa {M Vtya). J. xUii, 49; ii. 40, 

864 

‘Ua, m. 188 

Ia«g«. I. Izx. 119. 120.121, 139. 171: 
II. 8.17,104,106. 290; m. $9. 60.63, 
71. 74, 83. 89. 113. 130. 166. 210. 
828 «y., 386. $60, 430 tq. St^ aito 
AR 

ffi t9likU^ont ChfitU, n. 9 
oortality. 1. li, I?. 66 
lDMrp»(40ia {oLfP avstOrul. L xv, 11. 
$0. $48; D. 147, 170, 816, 286, 829, 
84$. 861. 261; UL S89<f, 869. 383 
Indie, Oi <Btd New, rr. 167 
Indian Buddhism, it. 90 w. 

— UlezaMia. l zui. zlr. zvi, ziz, 
IzzU If.. 16. 90. 180. $86; n. 186- 
828 polls a» 

/adMCAi SdifitmnetMtXit, IT. 170 
IndmU Simitn. t. 116 
Indore, l 31 

Indre, 7. 39.68. $3$; n. 88,99.187.138. 
131, 870; m. 48.109.129.179, 186, 
815. 888. 891 
IndrahbadreOfan, co. 146 
ladregiri, CO. 131 
ladrapura. m. 127,144 
Todrav amaa, king, nx. 110, 119, 141, 
144. 148 

lodn Viahau. t 37 
ladriya. m. 173 
iBiantiddB, n. 869 
InquiifttOD. i. xofi; m. 417 
Xoaeriptione, i. zii, xilii, Briii, nix. 
1^ 87. 99. lOa. 118, 114, 268 If ; 
IT, 39. 11$. 214. 285; m. 84, 40, 42. 
47, 61. 32, 54. 66, 97. 98, 39, 68. 67, 
79. 80. 61. 82, 63. 63. 104. 106,107, 
106. 109. 113. 114. ISO. 181. 122, 
183.124.186, 138. 450 
/aecniXwBM StMtriUt in Camdoft. n. 
168 

/alimafraaal C<^isi a/ iUigsoai. 

n. 148 

/a/rodwliai >0 1.139 

— te i’Oiuardlrs, n. 128, 1B8. 189. 
197 

latuitioa, t. xdx; ca. 276, 804 
Innians, t. 58. 54. 81. 63, 64; n. 66, 
196; m. 189, 191. 208. 215, 409 sf. 
BtA olio Pemia, ^roaster 
Xfatwm 0rit9i<i, m. 815 
ZreaaeuB, m. 444 
Imvaddy. 1.120; m. 47, 48 
TgaiiO Luria, o:, 432 
t^na,!!. 137.196; m. 140 
ti&saTannaa. m. 109. 114 
Iiapur, n, 69 
lahu-aerata, m. 691 
laipatana, x. 140 
laa. ti 237; m. 409, 489 
Iilaia, L zziii, zlu. xIvL xlix, 17. 26, 
115, 176, S96i u. 107. 240; m. 3, 
161. 409. 453 If. 
raaciatea, ut. 434 

l47an, L 85; n. 16. $04. 818. 816; 
m. 173. 444 

— .‘^aoMta. n. 105 
IdratUka. i. 816; ur. 890 
l ain^i. 868: m. 266. 280 
l;arpa, c. 238 

Ijivagar. SrtaiTa*. c. $10.320 

JaokeoD, m. 166 
^ (WmUrnaK iu> 490 
Jacobi 1.105. no. 803; n. 74. 300. 311 
Jade Emperor, the, m. 342 
JaSoa, m. 20 
Jagadcuro. n. 210 

Jasaonalh. i. 80; Q. 114. 176, 238. 854. 

26?ini. 134 
Jagai Gauri n. 273 
JagatpaU, ui. 114 

INDEX 

481 

jMoiTAB'du. n, 

JaC'IdukIwU Juni, 2. 105, 106,117 
J*hfi.n. 258 
J4ie]ini, D. 801,310 
J«la (Jkuiin), L ^ xH. 28, 36, 40, 
72, 05, 106, 106-128, 168, 226, 841, 
262, 268, 802; n. 69.24,07. lOO. UO. 
12», 118. 168. 218. 814. 816. 230, 
848; m. 10.44, 178 
Jain LiUnton. l 06.116. 888 
Jaintu Pamoaa, n. 286 
Jaipur. B. Z86 

J«la]d-'4>4ifi a^Kusu. UL 481 
Jalandlun. O. 78 
Jaobal, m. $68 
Jambudrlpa, el 106, 426 
Jamaa. Gc4fid of. m. 448 
Jamaa. WiQlao, i. iox, di, 190, SOO; 
XL 161 

bJaiD-pahJ-dbta&a (Jaravaag), XL 10 

Jaaaka, Ung, l 86 . 87. M 

Janapada, ui> 118 

Jannaia, n. 287 

JtD iBD£,m. 248 

Jfc0QMei>l.L 82$ 

Japan, l ziu. Ixuit. IxxxUI, 7.202,812, 
2$8, 248. 280: n. 10,1S8; ID. 0. 86, 
200,214 fj.. 402 iq. 

Japaneae ql 217, 201 

Japjl, B. 207 
Jaraa. n. 164 

Janaibda (Jandaatra). HL 453 
Jarftaandba, n. 108 

Jibaka, L zrr. 167,871,176. 28$: 07; 

m. 42. 84. 102, 102, 166. 242, 8$4. 
430,441 

— Nidina, m. 882 
J4ti. L 208: n. 178 
JaUUa. 1.146 
JaU. Q. 271 
Jaonpnr. L 20. 20 

Java. L si, aiU, rxvii. xxtz: B. 4, 10, 
87.82, U8; IZL 6.102,103.12$, 140. 
UJ, 161 ag.. 467 
Javakoaira, n. 163 
Javadara. a. 230,25$ 

Java Bari Varmao. m. 143,147 

— Ifidravanudera, is. 142,142 
Japi Rh;a, zl 106 

Jaya Saiphitt. B 105 

— BlmbaTaraao, m. 141 
Japaathjt), B 117 
Japaawal. a. 148 
Javata, m. 207 

JapavarmiA. ta. 106.109 af.. 124,179 
rJa*HaQa*d^>pa, m. 363 
JebM^, L 80.^1,00: XL 270 
Jahc4.a. 16 
Jaharab. >. 8, 02.188 
JaiikabkokU, L 87 
Jalaloddin, XD. 466 
jaoghis Bhao. nL 858 

Jen EaiM, m. 288 
J 6 n Taong. dl 270.874. 260 
Jerorua, IB 414 
Jmud^ L 181; Q. 107 
Jetaba, IL 86 

JetaTana, l 151.343: c. 56: zs. 81.32, 
41 

Java. L d. 122.161, 838: zb. 424. 433. 

4^ 49^ 461 ag. Bee eiao galibala 
J4n^ara.m. 58 
J^Voa, 7. 907, 311 af. 

Ji.m.4M 

hJi£a-bad-DaiD*mb4, a. 881. 302 
Jl-jtlM-abq, m. 8 M 
JiDa, L 46, UO, 182: a. 26.108; ID. 183, 
140 

Jin^picU, m. 382 

Jlnazaiba, Dt 270 

Jiaapntra, ZB. 178 

Jinueoa, L 114 

Jlneodra, iB 148 

Jlra. L 107. 1 $ 6 . 107: B 230. SU 

JtTal(a,LL 6 $ 

Jivaka CS&Umaiy. l 11 $ 

JUpa. 10.460 

J)so.rL 84 ;iil221 

jg£iia, n. 128,180.190: el 140 

JA4oa.bhrai&aa. i. kxix 

JAioa btQ^a, m. 444 

JUa&mrlcaaira, o. 196 

JfiittApada, IL 806 

JA&nipMatbinat&itn, i. 280: n. 70,81. 

80: m. 280 
J64i)&«arao!7a, L 107 
j5$o$ranih(ba, IL 162 
J&inaOrara. B 267 
Jd^ftodara. CL 2$ 

JBAU.L 111 

JSkbadhazsa Bath$. 1.116 

Jodo. B 88 . 00; iiL 404 

Jaboaton. n. 18; IZL 838, 385. 229. 823 

J 0 U 7 . EL 41. 6 $ 

Janaa, Bvfuai b 313 
Jaaapbat, id. 442 
Joan-juan Hona, XB 203, 818 
judal^ Sea Jem 
Jndgaeafc. tbs, l 229 
Jn.|ai, L 182; m. 816 
JuUmi. il 287 

JiiIia.L8?5:a.3. 66 ; el 105. 300,280 

Junaa, l 25 

Jopitar, I. 02 

Joe prizBJi BMti^ ZD. 127 

Jop^. IS. 168. 171. 188 

Ka,L2l2 

Raaba.B867 

Eabb^ t. H. d; el 401«. 

KaUr. L l£d. za. 886 : ZL 168,243.844, 
S82 274: EL 419, 457 

KaUi PsnUus. l zUv: zl 161.165, 212: 
EL 422, 427 

482 

INDEX 

Eltbol.i. 34; ut. m. 203, 2dT 
KtecAyu*. m. 46 
KMhiTkppa, B. iso, 331 
dyDMky, IfX. 61 
KMUnipi. 2D. Sw 
KIdMUct. a. 0 ? 

KfcdiMin, I. zlvi 
KadphiM, I. 33, 34 
Kwduc. n. 227 

KdlM*. zdi, 2?; n. 145, 306, 223; 
111.97 

Raise Za, ITL 67 
Kaltalya, i. 804; tl 303 
KakuMAdba, u 342; lo. 177 
KakoUha. 1. 164 
KiU.n. 304 

Kiiaaakra. a. 33,11$, 129, lOS; m. 363, 
367, 380,3$« 

Xalaeoria, L 27 
SaladkiL 207 
KklaaQkhaa. D. 303 
m. 142 

Kalaolu, a 12S 
Ki 'laft.U. B, 70 
Kalawk. m. 167, 177 
KUatUa, l 0 $ 

£U4?a4a«, s. 313 
Ka)aTala,i. 67 
EaJgan, m. 3S0 

KiO, X. lJUUt; D. 10.116,126.146.174, 
274w.;ni. 146, 383,469 
KiUdiaa. i. 66; u. 06; m. 376 
RiltfUt, n. 286 
XibU Puri&a, IL 876, 285, 280 
KiW.m. 186 

Kalima,DX. 277 
Kallog, fioaao of, nr 164 
Kalian, u 85. 26$. 266, 263; a. 100, 
ICi; DL 36, 46,166 

EalU (vlahaa), l 47; a. 148; as. 387, 
393 

EallaM, s. 223 
Kalliasa (bbbw of;, m. 416 
XalBuia. 1. 6; CL 0, 866,370 
Kal6o, m. 267 
Kalpa. 1. 46, 234; d. 103 
Kalpa gOtfa, i. 116 
KaJvar, n. 184 
KaJyaxt. n. 226 

Kaljau. L 23; m. 24, 61,67. 69 
RalaaoK, oi. 367 
KiiBa.c. 253; m. l40 
KimaMra.:. Ittviil 

Kkznachaado, i. 216 

Ka£Bado,iL 24 

KaaaUyiaikac, m. 167,166.178. 180 

KioUiliyA. j. Ixxrrii; a. 286, 288, 390 

Eaoialabari. IL 260 

KaoiaiailU, m. 379 

Ktenar^o, t 227 

Xinartpa, n. 127 

KAnu SLlna, nt. 67 

Xaabaa. c. 102 
Xaiabojaa, l 268; m. 6 
ICaiobiijo (KamTU)a), cl 101 
Kasiliu Svayaabbava, itL 101 
Kaai. 1 . 6 

XtaUca ifaioa, n. 205 
KanmatliMia, m. 181 
Xamoana fat, m. 89 
Eanua, c. 163,104, 167,168; ID, 424 
KaQAda. 1.109; n. 97, S98 
Kinadeva, XL 86; m. 207 
Kanaia (wuU)). o. 213; m. 61 
Eaaana*. i. 118; O, 226, 233. 341; m. 
431 

Eaoaoj. i. 26, S7; c. 90, 100, 108, 109; 
m. 26 

Kac*ehib*pu,lo, m. 46 
Kacapora, in. 46 
Eaiuukai, n. 204 
EaacQliyaA b. 279 
Eaadahar, i. 23; m 20 
EandaH. CL 161, 162 
Xanda Puiiea, c. 220 
Eaady. L 368; cl 37, 41 
X'aa&ta.203 

Z.'utg Hfi (ampamj, i. 267; itt 192, 
2^, 279,300,366, 880,361 
ikaolta,n. 158 
SaQ.ba7ire, o. 163 
EazJiari. n. 109 
Eanb b^CL 136 

Eanulkka. L xxti, zxxi, S4, ITS. 268, 
272, 299, 200, 201; ir. 6, 47, 64 
234; CL 24, 100, 198, 201, 808, 311. 
213, 218. 289,461 

Eujor, tb«, IXL 280. 369, 872 «?.. 89? 
Ea&JU, m. 192,197, 206, 240, 261, 967 
Kaafc, X. Jv, IixvU. 47; ii. 6 
EuiUiaka, L 176 
Eantu, n. 79 
Eanva drxtaaty, n. 79 

KaQ.afa^aag, nr.'800 
Eao.Saag<^uAn, ID. 348 
Eao-Stag Chuao, m. 166. 387. S93 
JUoTN.m.259 
KaptWr&ra, a. 208 
Rapalikaa, a. 303 

Eapik, XL 97, 148, 202. 296; ffi. 181 
— SasiUti, IXT. 453 
Eapiiax, IL 219 

EapilaTaKba CvaaW), l 131. 192, 148. 

m 161, 1^, 169: u. 98 
KipiiBaia, m. 807 
EaptAa, lo. 108, 217 
EapoU,n. 15 
Xapurataa, UL 42 
Earali,n. 278 
E4n«a ^ra. n. 23 
K&raoaTaglhA, n. 316 
E8no4ay6ha, il 18, 57, 72, 118; m. 

EarwtaW, cl 198, 900. 303. 204 

INX>EX 

463 

m. S71, ZM 

Kwi& c. 74.87, 800: m. £6 
lUdkli.U. 147 
Kkskal, 1 .181 

Eftnaft, 1. YvHi, zlTni. Ui. Isvii, 
44. M, 107, ISO, 189, IBS, 194, IW, 
208, 810, 218. 818. 880, 307: a. 10, 
M. $7. 40, 22], 825. 847. 894, 808: 
m. 60, 845, 258, 272.444 
K«rm*'p4. m. 277.871. 809 
EMBApuadMikfc, n. 5$ 

K*rpor» mojad, n. 282 
Tii4hnfc, TT. 187 
E4it*.XL 261 
XwUMijjM. IL 261 
E«rt4 ponkh. n. 856 
XArtikBjMt a. 142, 145; m. 48,392 
1(w«a4,iil 178 
KIXTtviMU. XL 815 
ki«4T*, i. 241 

Eubgftr, I. zrri. 24; IL 76; at 197.198, 
2t» *7.. 211, 213, 851 
SiibgMUtt nudiuoripM, t 851; n. 46 
KMbsif, I. iiST, 15, 84, 852, 258, 269; 
ZL 75, 73. 79 {Kiun), 80. 31. 90. 91, 
68. 95, 100, 109.185,127. 196, 204. 
22^85: m. 5. 15. 25, 176, 194, 
211M.. 307,345,420.457 
E«n, L 85, 74. 87, 88 
KAMht (vrlttl). m. 142 
314, 815 

Fnurt {Buddhfr),84S; m. 177 
KmM, (KmmwI. I. 146. 165, 196, 
239, 240, 255. 857, 259. 28S; 

XL 12; XD. 874 

£ 4474^4 bUUog*. n. 71: m. 844, 248 

£4*7404 p4nr«rt4. zt 60 

EfttfUL n2 
E«ab4. XL 15 
E«U)&«4rit 8*g4r4, la. 4S5 
Rtthi Up4nia1wl, o. 160. 306 
R»tb4«tt4u, I. 259, 250, 251, 252, 271, 
88B. 889; a 48. 66, 61, 101, 124; 
ext 20 

KAthikvar, t 23 
K*Uuo». 1.246:10.81,93 
E4ttB*ftda. a 115 
Eit7ipuV4. a 70 

RAtyiTaa], L 79, 299: & 53; Ut 255 
EMU4oir», a 2H 
K4afidUy4. xa 104,155,107, 164 
X4or4TM. t 55; u. 155 
X4oa4siU.L 25 

EiftfhT^W* Erihmia*. a 162 

— UM&labsd. :. limi, 76; n. 151 
K»u(Ur4. BL 135,140,147 
KkQtilT* ArtbktfAtr*. a 197; la 103 
E»t«rv n. 281 
lUTi. za 170 

K*vi;i4r4rin4Uuo4. nt 121,122 

R4TitUT*li. B. 245 
Ki*74, a 53; xo. 120 

E4Vl, xa 170,186 
— Biis4yft^ m. 156,171 
K 574 . xa 181 . Sat Trikiv* 
E47&r5bfta4 {EirOria), n. 202 
£Mt«,a317 
Ked*b, m. 82,153 
Kedimstb. a 227 
EediR, m, 155,171 
Ewic«,xa 155 
Eogoo, a 54; m. 404 
ENtb, Prof., L 288; U. 167, 205, 311; 
Dt94 

Esiini fitpgh*. xa 87 
K4lu,x. 54; a 276; at 18! 

K«04 Uptniabftd, u. 877 
Keaoedy, J., at 445 
E«fmlA, t 26: la 44 
K«nBiD. L 69 

Ken, 1.251: a 18,32,48,53,91: xa 19. 
155 , 158, 158, 184, 189, 171, 172, 
174, 2» 

Eerteoigen, xa 169 

Eeeai K£ati, a 279 

Eoew 5«^, la 361 

Eoreddli* Sntt*, t 320, 331 

Ktvlia.i. 110,180 

Kenkia, t. 107, L08 

Khegm, m. 354, 362 

Eh4]4r4e TempK t. ilii, 27; m> 175 

Ehftltt. a 871 

Kb«a>do, m. 564 

KH«o54. Su Slnndi;* 

KEeodagiri, a 114 
Khurfakiut, l 97? 

Khend* K 40 . a 145 
Eheodelmls, a 177 
£h»od€eb, i. 29 
Kh4Zidob4, a 145 
Kbereveift, ldng,t 113 
EberaatH, m. 190. 807, 808, 210, 450 
Kban, t. 14; IIL 100 
mEbw-gniVrje, m. 350 
Kbeobuf, t. 305 
EhezBt (sage), XU. 25 
Sber-hob, X2. 128 
Xhitji SulMaa. x. 89 
bbtn^vo, X. 229 
ghifj" Tarten, m. 269 
Ebuen, m. 45, 61, 62, 84, 100 m.. 135, 
140 

Eboju, IJL 456 
Eboeda. n. 256, 289 
EbeUo, I. XZT, 24: xi. 19, 52, 76. 93; 
m. 5. IS. 190. 197 a?., 807 ««., 345. 
877 

Ehri-gtaug-lde-bUao, Idag, m. 848. 876 
Ehri »reo-ld«*bt«a4i. klag, ut 348. 379 
KKuuUmft, xa 446 
Sbobilal (Khaa), t. rxris n. 5. 45, 55, 
141. 156, 200. 266, 278, 874, 269, 
836,341, 354, 392 
Kbobilgbao, la 860 

4S4 

INDEX 

SbodfUU Nik&7». i. 270, 286; m. W, 
287 

!UQdd«UM(bA, L 11, W. 840; ID. 92, 
286 

Khun, L 28 

KhutakUi Klu^ia, BL 380 

RlnP4j« Khisr, m. 460 

KiM^m. 626 

KiftOAfn, m. 816 

K,i4 TftD, m. 48 

Kiw OhlA Ftt Ibuk, xn. 600 

of !• 224, 2SS 

— «{ ^i fbWngwa, i. 140 
KiBg H4lw Tljitt’4 Morifioc, 1.172 

Kin^ K4t« of, L 86 
m. 217 

KiM {O^dMi TwUn), m. 26B 
Eipin (EMhttlr), tc. 70; m. 208, 282 
Kifgbtt. m. 200.207, 288 
c. 2M 

KifUp>adit4. oz. 12,128 
Kirti riroM Chuidd. i. 27 
Kiiori BbftjAO, n. 165 
EJ«U4.i.f7 
Eittal. n. 143 
KitUiizl Bijuilit, nL 86 
KlftBtolh, m. SOI 
KM^iL 68 
Kiiftbol, OL 188,170 
KftOvMm. I. rri, rni, lull, 74, 76, 
78,^ $w Jains 
Kdoi (RobcA). m. 36 
Koeh.lL 280 
Koto DsuH m. 817 
Kofukan.ZL 68 

Ko«f)M. m. 338 

gfAfitaM hill. OL 200 

EoU m. 62. 108 . 168 

KoLk4.iXL 242,368 

Kekeoor IskB. m, 862 

KoU«u,L 140,180 

Koatgsmifts. t 342; m. 177 

KobM, tt 114; ni. 458 

dKoB,brtoeA m. 874 

K8 q CbSk, m. 06 

Kcttksa, o. 108 

KoAow (Smb). l usl: u, 62 

K6pp«L n. 00; io. 874, 367.861 

Ko^ L luiT. 266; u. 263. 288, 203 

Kmo* L uir, xs'fi; m. 0, 260, 200, 

812,886 <7.. 402 
Eortoa THpiUko, m. 205 
Korvuutk. BL 216 

do Kdrt* (Chons), n. 16; BL 861, 873, 
875.880. 887 

KottlB. 1. 20, 06, 181, 146, 140. t50, 
157,151,162;XL 08 
X(«bs. m. 145,146 
XoUH^s, (o. 120 
KoUsrii, god dsn, n. 276 

— (vUMrksis), n. 213 
Kovst, ut. Ill 

Ers (ledimas), m. 6,108 

Erst, in, 118 

Knti^ m. 150 
E>otsa^TS,nL 160 
SfiihQS, L rr, xnv, zlr, 48, 100, 180, 
333; n. 38, 72, 73, 115, 119, 137, 
147,140 100 n-. 105.200,220 <9., 

248; BL 147,188, 417, 420, 423 
Ertohss 1, kid|, i. 27 
Knsli^dss.n. 113 
EruhAS dsvs, L 80 
Kririo**** literstftn, a. 244 «9. 

KriihM. m, 424 
EriKiTiss. n. 246 
Krivs, n. 128,169 
Kd;s 6skti (faN«;. n. 106 

Ei^yo^s, L 804, 307 
Kron, nr. 172 
Esbs&ti. CL 173, 804 
Xshstrtyi, l 34, 86. 86. 87. 86, 02.134. 
160. 262. 272, 341; XL 148, 227; 
OL 60,105,183 
Eahemstiji, B. 223 
Eibensa^B. 180 
Ksbstrspstii, l 102 

XL 18. 18. 24; UL 213, 

22f.283 

Eihudtsks Nikiys, CL 299. r^eeKhod* 
dsksITikiTft 
Euuk Shiyia, XL 14 
KiMO Tl, m. 320,332 
EuD-TiDg, XXL 312 
XBSA-tCQ-tMl, XL 14, 17 
Kun*Iui,L Ixxrrii; XL 14. 17, 18, 24; 

m. 221,225, 288, 280, 201. 827, 343 
EQhsrs, CL 892 
Xahbd XhsQ, cl 85, 70, 3B8 
Kochs. L xrrl; m. 100, 198, 200. 202, 
208-205, 211. 213.861,572 
Euchucse. i. 276 
Kuci'Clu, m. 315 
So E'u-Oiih, ID. 242 
Ea “Kang, nr. 163 
EnkB, OL 126 
KaW Khoto. cl 370 

KuJArasTs TsntfS. XL 281 
Kuktobluis, XL 231 
XuUfcs, m. 896 
KalUksBbstUmx. 2$1 
XulotCongs, XL 838 
Eumirs, u. 127 
SomlrshbOts, xl 10 
Xanlfsaupts, el 06 

Kuoicv'^ u. 41* ^ ^ 

210, k?. 261, 804, 318. 821, 378 
Xuairslshdhs, n. 85, OS 
Kon&rspils, i. 114 
EsiointB, o. 85; XC. 307 
Kusirt. n. 278 

XacEi&rils BhUts, l xl: □. 109. 205 
310, 811 

Eombbsndsi, x. 102 

JNIfSI 

48& 

KaubUoMbiai^ i, xl; n. il6 
Xomboa. m. S68, 267, 261 
KanUM, u 271 
Eao4*ag«» m 107. IM 
Kai)44lmi D«rl. c. 210; D. SO. 320 
KuB]tf»k»nm nr. l6^ 172,174.160 
Kuo^bib. m. 234. SSL 272, 277. 276. 

306. 3S5 
Kuri. in. 363 
Kunl. XL 216 
Eur«a.nL 362 
Kutt* Puftet. n. 140.163 
XurDod, n, 237 
Koroksbetn, 1, 6S 
KQCUIreUi. m. 222. 3M 
Konodi MOUiKaUTy. m. 80 
Kurai. tb«. 1. 20. 67. S8,69. 92. 149 

Xuabsa Eupira. 1. xxTi, xxxi. xll, 19, 
23. 33. 2^ 301; a 04«f.. 83. 86, 
802. 870: m. 6,190,193, 461 
XoahajSu, re. 814 
K6-«hili {Eio.aUb). U. 206 
KuabM. OL 424 
Eu«ka4 (f1v«). m. 174 
Kuaioirl. j. 168.164. ICS, 100.109, SOS; 
II. 93 

KOHdaat* Su»(4, 1 .121 
Xuta^r* Ua)!, i. 1S9 
Kotb>ad.<UB*lb4k.86{ 12.112 
Eo7«ra, m. 146 
Kwa&nm, u. 17 
Rvaa-ahi-yiD, D. 93, 136 
Kvau yifi. xz. 876; el 264. 281 
Kyaaaitbi (kia^), in. 66 
E7013V& (luu), XU. 66 

Kyoto. EL 291 

l^bertoQ. 01 . 171 

l Ao h oa, OL 363 

U<Uk. m. 370. 309 

l4boi«. L 136; n. 867 

Uitj, 1.128, 849«.i XL 120; DL 330 

lAjooquiin. lu. $2 

L4ohaQ4-*iaakt*-brid»y4 SOaM, XL 10 
EL 43 

UkaboJ. s. 19. 146. 233, 234, 320; 

XXL 114.162,393 
Lakabmiada Bhuaufvar4. xxl 149 
— UMvafa. m. 146.149 

UJcnlin {Lakoiiaik). n. 202 

Ua BaU. U. 266 
UllUditya, kiju;. IL 109 
L«UC4T4ir». IL 

UbU Vaura. x. 136. 173. 176; a. 22. 
8^ 28, 63: UL 166. 170, 234. 298, 
674.442 
Lftlitpur. I. 267 
UUOJlLiLiL 18S 
lamaiaa. i. xi. sxvi. xlix, 246; n. 186. 
186, 260; m. 6. 200. 274. 802 «f.. 
818. 821. 346 S82 

Laxaaa. s. 122; ul 834, 274 

Lacapbott. m. 79 
Laitgdarma (king), iil 212 
l^Df})a>haio, izl 168 
laa^-'pi-ya, xc. 164 
Laiua scnpi. el 301 
Lanka. ^2; il 149 
lackiTaUra S4tra, e. 19. 63. 60, 74, 
64; HL 276, 284. 298, 274 
el 46. 79,124 

laMrtre, L six; ixl 210. 246. 240 
fi. 147 
Uta, D. 102 
LatiB, z. 63; m. 19l 
Lataoa Cb'embo, lu. 271 
Laufer. Id. 192. 848, 363, 373, 380. 231 
Laukikaa. D. 210 
LaTater. l 1# 

1atq,ib. 79 
lAw Bmka. n. 187 
LceUfC. A., xiL 112 
U Coq. re. 194, 818 tq., 216. 446 
LafUbandad Taatriun. u. 126, 233 
Lo Gall, flz, 272 
Le^.L S6S:m. 163, 210 
UCa 878 

l^ogyen CMiig, a. 68. 60: XXL 811 

Laparkiog, tu. 110 
T fMirr L 1? 

LaCtarlw Oaa. the, n. 866 
L6Ti, S.. t. 283. 292; a 14, 42. 80. 68. 
67. 88, 116, 119; m. 21. lOS, 191, 
208, 204, 216, 221. 897. 266. 816. 
386.888 
I«vitlou8 , {. 878 
Uimho. el 392 

Lbaaa, l xxaii; n. IS; m. 34S w,. 369 
Li. m. 807 

Cbib, JIL 876 

Lla||d^ty, a 82; ta 163. 161. 868. 

liaoc (aogtben), zil 203. 204 
Uao'Cui, L 318 

lictbarta. I. ill. 163, 161. 163. 169; 
IIL 84 

li<Cbiap,m, 266 
LicbUolMi^ L It 

Lidajya, xn. 68 
Li dysaMy. xn. 340. 341 
Lift and aoytw of S4Ma KnoSita, 
n. 168 

Ltfe mi Ueelunqt of Sir Uadhoa- 
Charpar, n. 240 

£i/< Eadi^i, 99,173, 2G9: It. 81. 

Lift of V«tu6aadAv. n. 78 
LikH Paradiaa of. ol 220 
LiAor. xn. 8. 60. 62. 96.103 
la^uA Ton, Bopazor. izl 344 
LOS, D. 146. 2S8 
Ulbaja. L 136 
Iil£«aj8a,iL 186 
Li 7""g Mian. nL 209 

INDEX 

X^<nu. m. 909 

liotf* Pnrijui 140> 1S7| 202 
— ^rir», D. 32.900 
~ wonlbp, U zHi, 17,1^; Q> 142 
213, 239: to. 53, 07, 100, U4. 115. 
140.100. 3M 

linnTftnto (Uitg&7»U), t », «! Ji- 
176,172,120,225-227,318; m, 114, 
41S 

lifiniftm. L 20, 03; m, 100.136,151, 
l», l», 191, 192. See elto AlpoA- 

beta. Tnoaletiooe. TreoeHteretioai 
Lin I (CbAinps), oi. 132 
X<<<e Jwtoiw itJ A<U4 A< Budiia, 
1.173 

Ll't'eag, nr. 947 

wtd Sfroehe der AtzpAolMA, 

Ol. 12 

Li Th^ To tBnpeRir), tXL 944 
lithueAiea form^ 1. 

Utore? ^ Kuea.yin, m. 174 
lialfieb, m. 264 
lia Mi, m. 283 

D, 154, 241, 253 
Xia>t'o-pe>B0, tu. 104 
lia Tfung Yuen. m. 261, 249 
Liu Yoen, m. 956 

Uwt ttfnU ft dtt innorteU. 

Q. 18 

LobnoT, Uk^ a. 232 a. 189,9L0 
LoeMi, m. 173 
m. 837 
Lochu, m- 352 
Ledge. Sir 0., 1.11 
Ledj b 29, 30 

LoAa,m. lOl 
lSio, n. 91, 94,181 
L^oe. n. 193; ux. 419.433 
IrtSefte. tbe. uz. 8S9 9. 

Lebepeaed* (Copper relzee), ID, 18 
Lol Utb5Qg. O. 94 
LeUedm. u, 247 
T/f rfcthl, m. $91, 913 
Lokunebederl, in. 3.16 
Lek»A4tb, rt 14 
LakepefifieCU, m. 310 

LoUrsiikM. B. 97, aso 

LekipeUn, m. 44 

LoMren, a. 13,16; 0.116,112,113, 
173 

L^MUrevidifii. n. 49, lOS; tti. 202 
L4k prib e&kdn, m. ISl 
Lokotten, i. 243 
bLo.ldea.^«.reb, m. 380 
Loki, m. 119 
Lenbok. m. 189 
ijonguBMU. L 941 
Lopbbarl, m. 35,97 

L«tfeeo. ta 36 
L^^b-fu, DC. 317 

re, m. 379 

Lotao, ni. 818 

Lofcu, tlie, 1, 180; n, 4,14, 19. 28, 23, 
iS 26.48,50,51,51.60.66, 84,109, 
125,279; ru. 20, 215, 818, 210, 294, 
610,911, 911,928.375, 405, 438 
X« XoHw de to to>uu £o», u. 52 
Lo(4t aohooL in. 912 
Leatdee, 1, 927 
L^ektHL 111, 119 

Lowii, 0. C., m. 48 . 

K/Ojeog, UL 244, 246,146, 306. 313 
Le^oto, IgbMioe, i. 315 
L^eiu, O, 363 
Lo;VSi*y«J eebeol, dl 287 
L<1M)C Prebeng, 0. 80, 39, lOO 
LQ.CCia Yms, UL 272, 278 
Locimev, u- 252 
Lftden. tL 197; m. 190.191 
ladwig, zzL 230, 368 
loipe, n. 126 
L& kdeog. B. 209, 206 
LiunbiBiFark,1.132.174, 269 
LoagOiMhaa, nt 237 
Loog'ioeii, m. 193, 314 
lApeneUe, 1,101 
LQ-tw>8g, IXL 284 
lAl'toeoe. xn. 309,916 »q. 

Lt, UL wl 

L^, Sir Attred, l Iziii, 166; OX 412 

tfiyomTiffe, n. 846, 262 tq- 

UtiOdoTiell, n. 199 

MiiodomU e&d £eiU), L 134; n. 168 
Meoedoato, l 268; m. 430 
MeeGoTUQ, ol 329 
Meaueol. a. 261 
Uede^iecar, m. 151,163 
Uedheb PeK D. 191, 249 
Uidbs,Te,l. Izzil. 125; n. 110, 291; 
in. 457 

MMtirt fy*, Q. 265 

lAidkre i<AiT», l zli«; n. 79, 169, 

236. 237 eg. 

M&dbTU. D. 73. 163. 239, 241, 918; 
10. 329 

MidbT* 9%mpT%dlT4. n. 851 
Hedbvi,TijA7a, n. 241 
MedhjemAniae, m. 297 
Uedb7emtJ»T»Ure, m. 379 
uiXby ftmik*. eohoo), L 200; n. 37, 73, 
74. 95, 90, 102. 103, 211, 315; lo. 
896, 296, 304, 80^ 973 
M&dkTiBUTlbbiga SUDa. nz, 123 
kLAdie^eUt, m. 141,159,159, 171 ag., 

Hediu. I. ili. 19.26; m. 416 
UedsoUe, m. 330 

Uedun (ModorAj, i. 20, 114; D. 814, 
822: zn. 44 
M»d;«,n.2S4 

Uft^be, L zl, 18,20.21, $7,95.191«?., 
147, 149. 156, 161, 169, 169, 383; 

INMZ 

487 

XL 9d» 100, 102, 106, 124, 126, 
120; m. 24, 256 

t. 266; m. 426, 461 
11. 263 

Huio, 1. kuvi, Isxnii, 67; n. 66, 67, 
M. 113, 121, 126, 100, 274*9., 811; 
IS. 117, 182, 206, 316 M.. S88, 360, 
366. 3 m oIm AUatm. ImCtw 
Mofi^ in u. 128 

UiAM Ufttfir, UL as 
MftEi AttbftJwtbi, xn. 80 
HAUUJlpar. UL 106 (S«v«ii PAgodai) 
UaUbUraU, i. zrrriil, Itxiv. xc, xd, 
56, 60, 288, 332; a. 114, 143, 146, 
161 *0., 168,162, 166, 187, 188, 200. 
206.279. 806, 817: m. 102,120, 167. 
186.434 

HaU.bhlahT*. L 803; B. 166,167 
H*hi Bodi Vupu. t. 266 
3UUbx»2mi, l 102; in. 43 
MabtcinakrattiatT*, tl 21 
Hal)i«mataoUa.’XL 126 
UaUd«va, x. 48: xl 146: ul 146. 176, 
167 

Hah&d«TAd&M, XL 116 
31kb&d*v),68: XI. 126,146 

ITT 31 

Maliiga^mUUatca, m. 376 
HahlgiDdl. XXL 73 
UaUglu lUdiolgyiA, kil 68 
M4h4^7», m. 179 
UaUMTU, m. 179 

HaUUU, D. 106. 140, 146; xiL 169, 
366. 301,892 
MaM-Ula<«Lr», hl 67 
XP. 376 
XL 14,16 

S< 14 

L 166: m, 23, 907 
MahOkQt, OL 116,14? 

UaUoati, It 64 
UthiiDltfh. XL 286 
HatABOjopaalitod, tt 210 
UabOAwiha gwdao, m. 16 
>- SAka. BL 261 

l/aKt m nwi^ m. 66 

MaUoadL l 263 

MaUniba, is. 16. 26 

UaUstfrloa TaoM, L Iixxvui. 67; 

D. 278, 261, 282, 286, 269 
Mah6padioa Ntb, 1 .184 
UabtwBwbUaa niU, l IsxOi. 186, 
l6l. 184; IL 21, 68; XXL 28. S84. 876 
KahiprajapaU, L 188, 169 
UaUpraj&ipiramjU Siftra, xl 62, 84, 
66; XXL 2U. 207 
kUhlpiraMd. is. 422 
UAbipojuiba, X. 841 
UahApuroahia*, XL 260 
MahiFUJO. (. 131; XL 260 
UaUriildbaamaUiab, xil 67 
MahLriabki, t 31; n. 108 

Uahlricbtri (Prakrit), L 1)6; IB. 12 
MthittfinV* Sdtra, L 136 
MaUSaman, l 7; xil 48 
HabiwA*7a inUa. 1.103, 273 
MuMummfttiyag, i. 289 

I, 200 

bUUuDChika. t. 266, 260, 262. 263, 
26S. 289, 832; m. 19, 212, 285 
(Vujaya), 874 

UaUMOKfO. L 2^ 268, 290 
MahlMdSUka, t. 268, 262 
MaU«aanjp4U SOtra. xl 67, 66.61; xxl 
28S.23I 

Uahiaeoa, BL 16, 18, 21.40 
MahtriddhM, il 128; xn. 386 
Mahinhiaapripta. n. 19, 23, 30: 
1U.927 

Uab&.«Q(]aBsana, X. 166 

UahlfukbakO^a, xl 123 

MabitaQbaaesAhaya rutta, I. 197 

Uihifih^a, m. IS 

UaUlb*^ XXL 81 

U&Utbyaa, xil 216 

HakkraAea. L 197. 142, 148, 146«f.. 

206,B?, 277, 288; BL 69 
UaU-vairocaal.blii-MmbkodU, a. 68; 
0.284 

Malii.«azpsa,z. 267.269,269; XIL13 af., 
66, $6,124, 306 
Mabi'Zanaat&l, nL 16 
MaUvanaan. m. 109 
Uahl?aattL i. 179, 263, 269; XL 0. 22, 
27, 53 

Mablvlbb8aU4AaU». xl 169; m. 266 

UabkTidpla. n. 286 

Uahirih&ra,z. 276, 202; XD. 16,19, 2). 

29, 31, 82, 40,60.60. 297 
KabLflT. L liz. 08. 106. lOS, 110 a«., 
119.123.129 

Uah&TTEta MRmeoT, 1.100 
lUbinitiBa. XL 20^ 

MaUvrotpatU, m. 370 
UahlH^ L zTTiaf., 220, 260, 283, 
27K 926. 382: n. 1,131.181: m. 90, 
40. 61. 68. 60. 84,112, 120 a?, 142, 
149. 149, 156, 162, 166, 177, 202. 
203, 208.213,216,218 af., 330, 328, 
«M.461 

Hab4«4Aa'dkaRaa>dh&t7BTik«liala- 
6&stn.B. 10 
UaMyina-UaUa. xi. 84 
kfab67iaa.>f0tdJaakin. el 11, 82, 42, 
48,87, 126; a. 219.286.815 
Uali&7^ S&Ma. bl 283 
Uah^Anki CanoB, il 47 af. 

Kahiyaaa, iit 68 
tfaUniAa, L 334 
Uahsidja {Ui), XXL 119 
Mahandiarannaa. m. 102 
Uabaiamurti, u. 166 
kfaLtdrara, m. 33 
Titaii,g i> Sbama, il 118 

INDSX 

Ufthtndt. s. 214; m. 0.12,16, 22, 30, 

u.m 

Mihinttl* D> 42 
M»liip4U.Q« 111. 128 

UfthiaaukM, l 398; lO. 286 
U&UAtm. n. 203 

M X. 1$, 28$ HI. 466, 

468 

Uikhmtc^ 5Mtfftr»thfi« 

M*i (mother) Mctaos, n. 306 
HAldMUnil 
HMOAri Ebotokt^ aj> 362 
Ukikpiu. m. 430 

UtilU. XB. 20& 376 

M9ilSai CMAtwIby, a. 244 
meitbum, n. 87,124,126, 284 
Uftim/iM UpuiiibAd, J. 83; a. 76, 
188.310 

lUlmr*, L 47: D. 12,18,12,21, 28, 8S. 
S8. 102; nr. 20 (la«n), ISO. 166. 
177, 210, 218, 316. SOI, $16, 818, 
326. 882. 461 

c. Uxiii, 74, 79, 80,169.3$3 
H*icn,XCi. 178 
Vftjibiiii*,262 

Uftijhim* Hik&Tft. r. 14$, 12^, 278, 882. 

$42: m. Ui. 887, 422, 441 
Kftjall laUftO. 0.260 
mAkm> Cbc«, c. 160 
MaJibbaU OomU. i. hxTui, 97, 22. Ill, 
146 

U*Ul»r, n, 148, 207, 212; id. 416, 
466 

MaUmm. m. 86.168 
KkledUiithtf*, m. 148 
MalAtttt. n 16.100: m. 44 
UbUtf, I. Ixzii 

MaUn (ArchM»A etc.), i, xm. 

BTiJi. 16; tL 8$: ns. $1, $3. 100, 

161-187 

Htiaya (Ut), o. 64 
1U1»? UBflBA2M,m. 18$ 
3mjt«b(^<i}iCiix.$07 
HilikAdm, L 369 
Melik IbreUm, m. 161 
Melik K«fu. (. 80 
HilklfiAi. OJ. 469 
MelklMd.t.37 
Melke,!. 166, 168«;.:m.28 
lUtBM. L 166 
HklwkWpeU*. I. 288 
Melve. I 27. 29: D. 391, 271 
Melceue, xc. 37. 41 
Miaekl. m. I7S 
UimaHepano, m. 74 
M4f|M».n. 884 

296,800 
MeoQA, tn. 807 
Men (eect), m. 78 
Menee. n. 44, 800 
Menem. IL 378. 279 
Mifieye<4lMrb»-IM<re, lo. 66 

Utn&Tftle Webimimi, n. 337 
Meoobo dynertT. t. zzrl. 248; m. 379. 
866 

MeoCaiu-Shjb.U, n. 19 

MudeMi BL 172,986 

MeDdeler, IL lOOi m. 46, 66.76,186 

Mendor, zl 169 

Meodm, in. 106 

Ueodube, X. 89; f^eoie b e nj , n. 74 
Ueai, 5, 88? OL 20^ 216, 416,445 ag. 
Meeieo. (he, O. 384 

MeoichiDirs, t, zU, s^, n> i^i 
340; m. ISO, 196,200, 306.316.268, 
iff], 884, 896. 409.428, 446 eQ., 461 
MeoHecUiMoa (Siid4ba^B),nL 216. 3u 
aiv> i,TetEEiA locerMtione 

Mftsjheabua, is. 886 
M«niVV* V«9ft8»r. n. 213, 216 
MMimeajerl. n. 241 
MABunet, Q. 338, 840 
MeniniOgmlM, n. 108? SL 44 
MAoimOuelel. n. 314 
Mempom, L zszfU; xs. 49,60, 67 
Menio^hoahe. a. 10 
MaHjimithe. D. 19 

Me&iuM, % zxtz; s. 13, 13, 1^21, 64, 
9i. 116; BL 82. 103, 166. L69, 211, 
218, 821, 827, 9$8 
Me&juM Kini. A 860, 887 
HehiuM Krodbs, n. 18S 
HaHjbM rikridlU, a. 19 
Men UoB (maenuUoQ), a. 147 
Men Met, A 69 
Meno, L 192, 237 
Hi&obAst, m. 66 
Henthf* Spmte, ru. 419 
Mectna, L 832; n. 60, 139, 174, 184. 

276, 819; XD. 284, 896. 8u PUrmaM 
H4atre?iae,n. 4,87;in. 172, 816, 249. 
896 

L xECviil. Ixniz, 18, 90, 384: 
a. 164. 137, 199, 381. 806; iD. 66, 
66.422 

Msevol ofaMyatic, i. 310, 912; n. 7 
MaaauivB%tdiMam,OL 89 
Uamuti 9f giijrfiliif TtaenfMtofy, m. 
830 

Menojnfe, a 67 
MefttaserfpC noMna, (l 66 
MeiiTenWTia, t. 46, 834 
MaajekbatB, i. 27 

Mao^od, zn. 106 

Meppilehi (Mopleba), a 421.466 
Hire. 1. Isxiz, 143,164, 176. 179. 190. 

887; s. 100; A 69. 79. 860 
Kutl-OafiA-Samteadber, u. 221 
MOrOoeadai, a 336 
Uer&thea, 1.19,31,33; XL 17$. 244.266, 
86$; m. 466 

Mereo Pglo,i. 306: n. 380: a 26,124, 
379, 937, 416 
Uercoa Aonlhis, L 203 

INDEX 

489 

Mfcritofc. n. 2(7 
U4rg«bUai 8Qb», a. (4 

Hftrie Akooqoot n. Iftt 

M»yi»mTTij>n| n. 276 

MArici, m. 889.^ 

n. 23( 

lla«k»cd«yA PortoA, l Zxu, 89; 
cu 197,193 

MArkM*>i)?iy«, a. 280 
Utf^ox. 898 
MArr^ri hiil, m. 963 
M«(TU2« D^M, m. 030 
KvIaImii, m. 38, 66 
Uuuto.L 67; m. 114 
MkiridA JItm □< 249 
UmMco. m. 107. 108, 129, 189, 148, 
161. 244. 246, 24$. 290, 801 
Uui, di€, L 66; m. 400.482 
Mi—rim o{ tbA Iimoc«DU. m. 424 
iitmn Oomi. m. 288, 311 

HMQlipM 4 «. ax 106,166 

HAtA idiAAkei {= QbATiDA), ZL 116 
HAtAram, td. 163,167 
MfttazUTAO. X 37. 62 
lUtATulMm. U 99,196; n. $804j. 

HAtAr TrtunphAlii. n. 287 
MAthA. XL 173. 208. 28S. 240. 244. 236, 
260. ,8ce UoQAftariAA 
Matborl, BX 431 
blAtbura, D. 164 

ifalAvfb 4 DiMria Memoir, a. 248 
tlAtnAfcby, m. 118.146 
UitricakrAA.lL 127 
Hialeb0U.lL 104 
iaaiki,a .228 

M4UyA.L87;iL264 
HAtmPuriaA.L 16; d. 167 
HatATeadnaitU. tu 117.118 
HaOer. tbeoriei of, l dll; n. 296«g. 
lUabaknDdAli, n. 73 
HALralAAMi. Ufig, cx 40 
HaudgiJyiriaA, zzL 842 
Hauiva dnMt;, x 21; zl 6$; ni. 
430 

Hiyi, L krrli. eU, 43. 82. 193, 211. 
212; IL 73, 74. 204, 211, 221, 223, 
286. 246, 247, 253. 264, SC8, 27$. 
264. 299, 807. 309, 312 «f.; m. 806. 
421 

Haja (BOtber of Boddha). i. 132 174 
HlTittla, a. 12$ 

HatO^ n. 96 
HATurtbbABjA, D. no 
HeCziftdKi. 13:0.169 

HoTAffgArt. L Ir, dil 
U0*d,nx 440 
M4eGA.n. 26? 

HAeqeoMB. ax 109 
MtdUeal S<k)ol of /wh’an Lofio, a. 94, 
103 

Hodiutleo, 1.0.12$. 120.130.222,802- 
324; n. 122, 904; W. $9, 181, l46, 

24$. 272. 276, 382. $43. 480, 44$. 
Su l&tuUOD, YogA 

HAgadbonB. l 21, a 187; m. 482 
UeghadOU, ax 210 
UAshoTBriDia, tT"p, n. 87 
era, m. 402 

UdAUr Bebbert, a. 813 
Hokoeg, m. 70. 30 
M&nfta Bofiey. d. IS, 196, 28$ 
Ua1aa,l 108; n. 172 
Udneole, n. 2$^ 243 
Jfrmdr m tAe ffMotyc/tSt ToatA /Uu 
e/Cegkin,m. 20 

UBffloi; Aod nbirtb, t. Irii, 820 ef. 
UeispluA, nr. 431 
M awihil, tit. 79 

HeoADder, l 23; o. 139; ox 23 
MencioA, to. 273 
UAodioAoto. I. 100, 184 
Meatd pb0iiea»«aA. IntoUioa, 

KaevMigA, HadiUUoa, Memory 
Hen, (pen), nx 101 
HorcQOAl ByeUs, L 306 

a oi. m. 82 

'Cra&Afer, l bcxxri; a 10, 81 ; zn. 
84.304 
Heru,iiL 160 

U«iu, Ut, I. $36; ZZL 07. 423 
HerutAAtfA, Q. 880 
M«rp, XIX 427 

M<«uAb, L 4.86,179: a 68,149; m. 319 
MeUiagrphow, t. 200 
MstAchT«». I. zzix, cii, 64. 78, 139, 
1^, 192. 193; ZL 6. 36-46, 72, $2, 
92. 207. 226. 313; O. 218, 218. $43 
MetepAfeiee ondSiAite n/lAe Joint,u 103 
MetempeyahocAiL zr, ZTiii, 104; C. 101, 
26$; zn. 170,1$$. 241,240,429,482, 
493.444. 446,447. 462 
MMoi4,a,9$ 

Uetu. 1.134, 216 

UetUyA. L 344j zl 81; is. 3$, 74, $4 
HevAT, L SO 
Uezloo. DL 108 
Me; Berw, n. 821 
MlAO-3b6&.ZL 1$ 

MieeliAkA, m. 907 
Mi.c>dAo.iiL 816 
Middle Emcdoni, a. 99 
Mie£rA,Ll6S 
Ugy^ba. D. 902 
Ux&lST 

kbUngolA, I. 26; ZL 96,100; m. 807 
MilAtipA. ZE. 390 
Mi le, IZL 342 
HObtLSl 

u,\inA. PanbA. 1.190. 227, 944; m. 2$, 
06.106.169 
UfuiiBAi. c. 202, 810 

TTT 44 

$Cda; 02, n. 9; zn. 49, $70 
MiadeUiog, ZZL 39$ 

490 

l^DBX 

Hiadon Min. trt 49, 6$ 

Mine {clnMtv. MO.), i. uvi, iSS, 160, 
SOd. SOT, ^4 S89, 8d0, SOI. SIO, 

3» 

Mijc-M, m. 190.194 

Ti.m.S, 197, 912. 2», 244, 24S, 

Mlnnn. m. 68 

Hinkw; o( Tbiodo, m. 220 

Xifiox Book Edict. Su Edicu of Aaokft 

Vt«.ii^ii«fc , m. 218 

M]i« 54i, IL244 

HinelM. I. 330. S»; n. 03, 58, 60, 34, 
164; Di. 441 

Mmj, n. 109 

Hino.D. 193. 300,210 
Mirlok.iO. 330 
Miroku, n. 31 
HImLilSTS 

Mi4b4>i0 Wn.ffo LQ, in. 23C 
Ml^o'n.cL 139 «2. 

MiMk*,Mt,ni. 16 

MiaODbing, i. xuvll. Uxs^ui, z«u, 
264, 3 Mj? ; n. 70; m. 4, 16, 410, 
430 

Mitneni. ID, 430 
MitUk. L 39; n. 149 

L 41; n. 88,139; m. 109, 451 
UiUmdkM, (. 2$ 

Mi«k,r. 57. 80, 88;n.2T0 _ 

MiM>S*j0odr»l4l4, a. 61. 62. 64. 61, 
116, 119, 133, 182, 190, 370, 396, 
403 

Mi Tnm, at 391 
Hix«d outo, a. 70 
Mooioibo tndiUoit, L 236 4g., 290 

Mo4iBAriM, n. 261 

Mcd^3iddUm.a. 114 , . 

Moitrt Vejmoctiar Lutraivt oj inMU. 

4(sH,n. 246 
Hofgdipntu. to. 15 
M^alliD*, I. 147. 106, 819; m. 64, 

UobavaBd. l 177, 178, 183; m. 438, 
456 m. 

MebMtMwdul!, m. 67 
KobMt^ (, 107 
MokAo Full. m. 486 
Mo ko.84u*Chi.Lu. m. 235 

MotaU. 7e« atlvtbica 

Molu 7 «, m. 817 
MoUno.!. 130 

H«lbk*,aL45» 

MoU«odorf. m. 289 
H^)o-po,n.9d 
Hui. m. 46,100 

UonwMriw. i. urrlii. sU. bxxii, xcui, 
187, 180; D. 94, 104, 106, 112. U8, 
119, 120. 121, 176, 203. 2C0. 206; 
Oi. IS. 41. 44. 46, 64, 69, 70, 
72. 90. 119. 121, 130, 166, 196, 
201. 202. 206, 908, 211. 212, 

223. 285, 260. 262. 261. 277. 803, 
828, 839, 353, 87S. 398 * 9 ., 430. 
442 

UoBgkut, lo. 87,93 
HoAgoll»»i> 

MoneoliMi nz. 402 m, 

Wo^h, I. ztvl, 28; m. 253, 272 

UeSn, L xUii; tt 223, 249; m. 306 
MonjQ.iLlO 

Hoa Kbfim l&n|:aMes. EL 979 
Hono-QhvaiM,39; :u, 409 
UoQOtlum, 1 . zvili, xzxiv, d, 7, 85; 
c. 192, 195, 197, S19, 229. 238, 239, 
243i m. 224, 854. 417,413, 433 . 
Mor»Uty, t, Ixxi, Iszvi; u. 167,163,209 
Uoriyu, L 169 
UonDOdm, 1 . 326; m. 298 
U 0 M 8 .1. 216 
Moale«B,r. 173; m. 468 
Motken, Ui«, n. 376 
Uoootun cl 169 
Uoorx. o. Ill 
Moa-tSQ, iZL 213 
Mpoe Sedah. m. 166.17l 

— Bindok. lu. 187 
Uriccha-ka'^kA, n. 149 
Mrigaz, zc. 426 
Urig«3(ij«, n. 205 
Upt^, n. 145 
M^tyuh^piBKi T. 387 
tfpQtUflda, L 142 
Uoo-li«n, m 342 
Hudal'iyuaiD, c. 931 
modiU. a 11; m. L73 
UudiA, L 306: n. 884; m. 179 
Uugbala,19. 30; m. 456 
HuEamnad Adil, l 29 

— Bakkt?ar, l 29; a. 112 

— Dux &ukoh, a. 270 

— otQb«r,i. 28; m. 466 
Habaam«dan ConquMta, i. 89; n. 95, 

109,112; ox. 456 a;. 

Uidr, L 36; n. 148 
MukaQoa Kadaisba, c. 913 
Mukbalioga, t iivfu; m. 144 a;. 
Uukhvaa, cl 20 
Hnkoeka. m. 336 
MokU. m. 174 
HokUgiri, L 191 

MokU. I. 44; n. 140, 235. 247, 260. fiu 
BalvatMb 

Hukt4ki (Jpuuabad, t. 76 
Mukunda B«v». n. 116 
Uuda-MO-pQ-la. m. 465 
M0)« 8«4atiT3da, 1 , 260, 209, 301; 
XX. 67. 62; TB. 23,162. 166,167. 286 
(Vijujx), 878 
MQJAtthtoa, XD. 463 
mOU t*&tca, IB. 277 
UolftTamaB (lone), to. 164 
mOluxipaha, n. 173 
MoUar, P. W. E., is. 64; m. 191 

INDEX 

491 

HulUr, SO, 84, 317, 340; n. fiS, 

163. 294; :u. 283, 800, 301 
Value, m. 44$ 

Hand*.10; n. 270; m, lOO 
i. 86 

Kaeg*r<n S«n (king), m. 40 
Uunu (ledlAn), t. 224 
Maoja, kiA£ i. 27 
Mur4«r, t. 09 
Uvids. XXL 460 
HujT«7, m. 447 
Vurvp^a, m. 106 
Hunrwi, n. 213 

Miuim. a. 42, 87, 222, 821; m. 297 
UaUsB^ (Bmparor), m. 816 
Muttra. I. xIt, U3, 268; n. 10. 03,164, 
168, 169. 162, 230, 244, 201. 255; 
ro. 420. 455. 468 
Hudria. t. 2B;rB. 415 
toaBg bdw, m. 375 
MTiagrao, m. 64 
H^oa AomM, ro. 416 

xB, 26; n. 108,171. SIS, 238. 
835; TO. 44 

Jfjvora «ad Cpor^ fmit iAc IfueripHom, 
t. 114; It. 108,218 

lljatMam, i. Ixi, 180,142.304,310.322, 
823: OJ. 461. Set tUo UeditaUes, 

Toga 

MyttiSm (UodsAUl), i, 308, 316, 317; 
&.275 

H^OfU dtr fittcUlMnw, a. 120 
Mjtliologr. I. xxxi. 8. 13. 49, 68, M, 
108. 128. 148. d2&-d46; n. 20 «c.. 
52, 66. 77, 82, 137, 162, 170. 801. 
81^ 829; m. 76. 389 

Nt51i«Daa,n. 191.246 
N45baka. l 266 
MObhjtaa. i. 868 
Hida.a8)0 
Nadi*, a. 863. 256 
J16g&B4a4a, n. 07 
Nagar, m. 26 

Ntgankrttinma. m. 166.178 
Ni^joDa, 1. xxxii, 193; d. 6, 10, 20, 
^ 43, 46. 68. 04. 66, 69. 66, 68 to.. 
816: m. 219.865, SSd. 892,804. 30^. 
815,376 

MCgaa. 1 . 6.102,175: n. 85.116; ox. 303 
VSgaaeea. x. 886; nx. 106 
Nig-dbaa bLo«xafiTO?a>aThM, m. 369 
Nf£aaba.L 30 
Vauitarntt. u. 86 
NaiTiTiiaB, CD. 44 

RoiUQt. m. 450 

N61*di9ar. n. 816 

Vilaada. i. 150, 168. 268; n. 87, 06, 
108,106,106. Ill, 126.128; m. 330. 
88? 

N6l67iraB. n. 891. 835, 244 
KiUjira PrabaodJUa, n. 191 

Nizna.!. 167,209 
altDaMpaa, m. 847 
NaxHbX’Xedw-Nambi, n. 216 
Nambatiri Brabmaea.!. 90; n. 171,190, 
207, 875; in. 417 
Nbmder.n. 844, 266 
Naaghoaba,:. Ixxf; c. 101. 859, 860 
Kaom’trw, n, 831, 283 
5l4aibhlTai|Ma. xn. 64 
I^aoak, j. Ixxii; XL 176. 848, 244, 246. 
257, 267 

Kaoa nun, il 210 
oinirtlia, zl 48 
Naoda djsarty. c. 138 
Kaeda. 1.146; xl 63, 164: m. 424 
Haadi, d. 812; m. 146,167 
NaediludTarat ra. 146 
Haediailtra, n. 61 
NaedSiTara, xcr. 160 
Nofw (BuDTxa) i. 206; zl 8 . 

14, 19, 84, 46, 6), 64 tf., 61, 84, 86. 
89, 120, 804: in. 48, 106, 123, 213, 
218, 230. 243, 849. 869. 866. 870. 
276. 280, 862 w. 

Hankiag, u. 816; oz. 840.261, 264,266, 
857, 234, 290. 812 
KaaSbao.m. 216 
I^ae Tuab, m. 800 

Naparaia IttbatUr&tl.L 139 
Nara,ic.87,86,m 253 
— partod, m. 408 

Hlnda, XL 168, 106. 106, 200, 230; 
xzz. 66,486 

>l&rada paScarAtra. n. 168,196, 260 
Nlrada parividjaka UpeoUbad, 0 .198 
Kitada Purina, xi. 187 
KiradJya, a. 188; zil 142 
Nirab.CL 166 

Idng, m. 96 
Karalna, n. 896 
Nara NirdpaQa, s. 209 
Narapati, m. 61 
Narattm^a, izc. 198 
Nanainba Tamae, i. 26 
Nanaiaba QapU Biliditya, xz. 106 
NIrtylM. L n. 169,103.165, lOT, 
IWi?., 828. 233, 294. 353. 382: 
m. S7, 426 

N&riyaofya. l luir; il 187, 200 , 801, 
880 

Kartliaiig Pnea, a. 361 

mNaria,iiL 862 

NarlU (bunt'eSariegfl at), xi. 126 
Ka.ro.pa, n. 186 
Namt^u, ID. 667 
N4rusaa.xxL 154 
Ka^L8T;n. 363 
HlAika.a82 
mu, z. 14,166 

KlUpaUa, x. 106,111 

N&tbamimi, xl 831, 232, 884, 287 
N4thaa,n, 117 

S. XXL 

Si 

492 

li^DEX 

N&th Dv*r«» n. 
N»t*.l.6,102{n.«*SS,&7 

hfiV 6, 1, i*. ». W* IS’* ***• 
a SIT: m «, US. IM, IM, SS6, 
241}, S4S, 32fi» ass 
M4;4.i.ni 

{aiTid^*a»ftk»UOi L UQ 
KItO**. n. 262 
Nft;a4», n. 224 
14»7oU4f», m. U7 
Nwbo, m. 422 

N«e*pMMa. D. 162 
tfworo, m. 404 

vZutn io. m. 290 ^ ^7 

No»pUtooiaU, u iii» Iv; **'• 

460 

HsMrrtiuuanuM* m. 423* 447 

^19, 8). ai, 82, no, 117,129,148: 
m. 10.74, 8M, 876, 888 
Li A'ftttf, n. no 

N«ihU» mih4tfQj4, ft 1, 8 

yiftUiUMM LUtnitn. It 61, 

62. M 

W>p>|g«» 8«rij»tuMa, L 276 

— iDMOVcnpU. u. 16 

Ker«A]ftn. 1184.148 
yeeboddft, i. 20, 86, 808 _ 

y«(«hu CbiMtoiij. i> sH> 
m. 169, 208, 807, Il7.280, 203, 200, 
400.410,427.42$ 

— 8t«M»nL 217 
n«ui ^•kanoA. nt 0$ 

H*tan, a. llO, 117,176 
N«« r«UzBU(. OL 817 
I4«« ZMlaad, tb, 101 
M^lboe. m. 162 
Nai;«q, m. 241 
Nba-bMg, nt 144,147 
mUftik m. 172 
Nibb4;e774. t 831 
lubbuM, J. 828 
NioMreo sect, m. 404 
NioboliMi. B< A., BL 460 
Mkcteue DettMoeoua, to. 431 
Hidtaft Ketiii. L 171; Uf. 04 
Nidinee. r. 207. 212 
eidd^i. 208: rt 197 

Nieh peo. m. 262 
ni^M, a. 262 
Ilkk4(fc«4, t 106. Ill; m. 19 
HkUtft. t 269 
NkK^JiuU, ITI.442 
m£i?4, l liali. liTT, 278 •?.: n. 48. 
206: U. 30. 288, 296, 299, 372. 
8ft Sotta PiUka. XK^be Ntk&74. 
UajjkliDe Mki^aemtU Nlk^ 
Afi^ttank 14iki;4, uoddeke Ki* 
kijs 

NikA/a^e&grabave, t 293; Bt 19, 40 

HQXeela. n. 114 
NlUkeittiia. n. 206, 316 
NlUcaata PaHne, u. 180 
Kildaetra, It 68 
ynapfttA'dartiiMk £0. 40 
Nil Sddhana. or. 40 

Nimdvete (NimbMbse), i. xlL; d. 280. 
248, 251 

Nimbiditye NlaWtek, n. 228. 230 

Nine DbanoM. A. 59,119 

Nlng'po, n. 14 

Nindiea*. n. 88 

Mir&taw, nt 170 

oiraetna, it 43 

NTrgect]iM,t 111 

ffirgu^ m. 161, 446 

NixTuns, Udbitoiya. n. IIC 

Nl^iS. 1107 

Nini&ne, m. 300 

Kinn&st IC&Te. n. 33 

oirodba, it. 43 

NinitUn (Taaba), m, 118 

Kirrins, t xviii, x«v. 204, 219, 222, 
230, 849, 260: n. 0, 8, 10, 12. 32. 
44, 46, 07,76.106.121, 204: ro. 376 
Kirr&napade. uu 121 
Kirvine SOtre, n. 61 
NifTTlUl. t Ixxii: n. 283 
NhiOetn. m. 172,180 
Nitvlnen^ D. 264 
yi^«MRi,hom Serin, n. 282 
oitTaivt, □. 804 
NiTflse. It 230 

NivedlU (futwl, i. xJtu. Ixxxix; a. 887 
Nlnae.t 305 
ni?4ti. t 98: b. 204 
l»saiik'f L 81; St 226 

Nobunen, n, 4M 
NctfdaBsch, z. 278; m. 191. 208 
lfvi-0*M de r/adt dOH4 U 7ia«$« dee 
JfuldfartasAMdiM. i. 203: n. 81 
Kormaa, b. 148: m. 14. 23, 387 
Kortboni CboQ dynast;, m. 207 
Orcara, T. 22 

_Siflo dTaastr, m. 253 

BL 249, 289 

North.Wcat India, i, 203 
Nri Biisha, nt. 106 
KridnhaU*paii1;e. n. 280 
Nudity, till 
Nub, s. 9 

Nuns. L 169, 248; m. 17. 126, 120, 

342 

NMhinren, nt 400 
NydM. i. 67: n. 870. 263 
^&ya. n. 89, 96. 291. 894 
l^ya^6ra44etra, n. 91 
Ny8ya*nn,Ta4a, a. 90 
Kylag.Ba.pa. in. $71, 386, $97 

6. m. 141 
O-bako. nt S'^l 

Il^DSZ 

49$ 

ObMfij^y IB riCuAlt !• 100 
OmumUob Aod omW, a 177 
CHkAUpori. a. \U. 113; a. 900 
O«)ot. m. 30$ 

OU mb\. a. 378 

OMenbors, c U7; m. I3i l&i 285 
Obm, n Ss 
Q.nu.lo, m. 997 

Om-m»fU«p«(ifM bom, IL 17; tiL 805 
Or»AlM,L 108 

Ordmation. l 14\. 148, 243; zu. 90, 87, 
41.57, 30, 180,828.880 
OmeiMtion, BwlMlMtJf*!, l 37,297#;.; 
a. 210; m, 04 «f., 01, 181, 327«?., 
800.404 

Ond& «i V*n, m, SS8 
Crnm^ t. iikix, sUi, 10, 80, 81, 1)8; 
n, m. 113, U4, 116, 174, 206, 277, 
886 

Om**d Ykibt. m. 220 
OrpbCQi. Otphto, l It, 237; a. 286 

S ik SookOM, m. 420, 434 
oi. 202, 218 

Otiri^n, 122.286 

OBmBa]2B.iD> 198 

Oadh, I suJ, 20, 81, 96, 113, 131; 

XL 149.206; m. 4^ 

Oo^Uftt. D. 270 

Ott&tMM «/ indioi Q« 186, 

228 

— cf x> 105 

— «/ Jvdibun, n. 45, H 

Oz/ord lime^ of InAt, IL 64 
Osu«,iu. L07, 210, 212 
OxyfVuAM L^a. a. 437 

Pftbb«j« 6QtU, 1.136 
FftbUitB.!. 243 

pM04n (nd( BODzaeotwy), m, 30 

PBOMTIk, u 208 
Pftdoekft BuddbM. t. 344; D. 8 
PftdBb»lpft(«ra, U. 846, 2B0 
PBdftkMtit, R. 266 
PUu.iS.286 
PUUum.116 
PUjUlWM, m. 168 
P»daui*M»4.n. 147 
. Qm, IL 238, S40 
PUoMpinl, SL 16; TO. 39C 
Pftdsa* Pu^QA, a. 148 
PUmuMit. u. 807 
pBdaiB SMtbbATft. I. XXTU; CL 126; 

m. 848 979. S8l, 834, 808, 897 

pUnft Bamhi H. n> 168 
P>iim4>triti zn. l$4 
n. 188 

PUaft'tb«i>rlg, IS. 340, 381 
PUaodbbtTfc. m. 122 
PifiB.n, L 120; UL 47, 62, 68, 66.66.67, 
179 

PftSBn Hio, zzr. 66 

F^odo, ZB. 43, 66, 70, S39, 826 

P«£ 8ftBi Job ZIutg. R. 129; ol 862 
Faops, in. 273. 864, 388, 891 
PoMbvw,!. 23; n. 60 
Pai.Chtfts*ti'B2U*UB-eb^UBg*ka^ zil 
822,314 
F&itu, IS. 814 
PBliftU, U L08 
P»koh«, BL 386 
Fftkodba KBOcOyacs. l 09 
PalH.!. 27 :b. 109; izl 120 
Palembuko, 161 
Pftli, i. xxTv, 116. 262; UL 12, 81,876 
PftU Bod SMdirit, L 282 
PiU-Buddhim, L zslT, 127; OL 6, £4, 
170,160. C(. Blniria* 
Pa/i<£Bff£b#niw, >, 8i2 
Pali CinoB, u 128, 130, 104, 264, 27Ek 
801; n. 7, 21. 88. 34. 43, 60, 102; 
m. 91, 139. 205. 807 
Pali dietiOMT^, St 10 
— j&KripUoac, m. 34 

e m&CtoiD, IS. 20 
t3n^ L 119 if, 

Pah' Text Soei^n. t 276, 304 
PbILm wonbip. i. 83 
FftltBras. I. 23. 27; co. 107 
PlllAgOlX, SL 94 
PbUwbU, n, m 
FalDvrs. Q. 14 

E J7B.1. IIQ 

UMtBTBB, m. 158. ICS aq-, 170 
PtncBbbe^ il 230 
PBQ»kn9ift, n. 86 
Pao&ftUs. L 30. 27, 87,96, 06 
paneBBiBkfini. n. 2S4 
ntowAtra. t. XXST, bsx; a. 97, 147, 
162, 132, 185. 133, 196. 196, 197, 
202, 224. 282«?.. 800; zn. 387, 420, 
426, 426 

Piflcudtn BUOa, XL 130 
PBdar&trft'Unfn, n. ISO 
PtaoBlildiA, n. 20, 296 
Pknc^nbB, :z. 80 

pBnCBUttTB, tL 284 
MMiOnakB, SL 175 
WnBBTBi. n. 176 

Puk-diBO, L 24; Q. 64,76; CD. 107,201, 
203,244 

picchBD iBcam IB. 363 
— BLDMoba, UL 865 
PiQ.cVitDt. 126 
Parvcboa, TC. 814 
Pancbpiri^, ID. 469 
P«oebpir«, ZD. 176 
P«o3kfiMJM biog, OL 130 
PaQ;jar»T34iiiI, m. 178 
PandaTW, i. 66; c. 164,165,169 
PBAdcr, DL 210, 380 
Paadluipor, il 13, 253, 267 
PaodrMtbiA. ID 104 
PBodokabUjA (king), dl 13 
Plodunng, SL 276 

494 

li^DEX 

PiO^urin^, UL )S8 
pA^uvijadtT*, OL Id 
PftodT* (PNtdiui)* 1' 24> 114, 2dli 
n. SI4i (EL 44 
Piabi*4£kr4aijm, t lid 

t. zxii; D. Ifidi 180, 194, 197; 

CL 419 

P4oi&i7» DftiiuA, n. S91 _ 

Pujtb, 1. il?iu, 20 If., 26, Sd, 89, 31, 
r; n. 92, 93. 109, 270 •«,; m. 467. 
461 

?«!]«, to. 242, 863 
P»&U. f. 280. 26]: BL 30 
PkflfiAiifliL Qi« 36 
FftorM, UL 138,141 

C «la (QoQMUrp), la. 41 
Moua. m. 414 
PactbakL, J. 179 

PlAtheUB. L ZTlU. SXBT, IKXTL xM, 
Um, ci, 6i 0. 137. UB, 197, 224. 
265; m. 218, 317. 462 
P4AJ*, CL 48, 58 
PaooHi, m. 862. S83 
PMhOiid. m. 254 
PM.h«a,|hMi. m. 318 
P4pkL 107 
Pipa-c^th*. TO. 103 
Ptft. 0.193.265 
Panbrihina. n. 31. 273 
PtMCUtL n. S13 

Par»dtf», u. 23. 86. 30, 31, 35, 42, 37, 
6); ra. 385, 451. Bu Kdlw, 
SuUiTLU. TuAMq Bmt«o 
PoMdue iMt. IL 245 
FdroiiH AifaaMd. L 129 
Piriiika. L »5: m. 838 
PiAbnai* BUv. t. 298; ox. 18, 85. 
88 a;.. 179 

PatioaVpdluMUvft, m. 149 . . 

P«njB8di-5nddh4-wldltn^*»7*k8liK 
Mkra. CL 373 

P»raa44iya*bkakU. m. 454 
pans4.;uji^, CL 179 
nnaaia t. 27 

PanoArtiM, T 260; c. 73. 80. 81, 34, 
68; m. 363 

K aiainha-iaVa, a. 33 
ama SaipJuu, n. 139 
sTi, m. 181 
— 6ftA«a. m. 181 
PaniBiiaM, a 265, 312 
Panaata.m. 63 
Paniiia*Vlaho«4»ka. nt 114,134 
Parab Brahma, a. 42 
Parcmcdrara, m. 96 
— kiag, CL 144 
Pirani^ m. 178, 304 
Paraa.TTahski, m. 114 
ParualciD, BL 133.168 
PannMh {Mt}. X. ] 20,121 
Pamurima, i. 36. 6$, 130; a. 147, 313 
parataatn, u. 33 

Patibnas. tn. 175 
pariepari, O. 278 
^arbaUTa, xx. 110 
— Ooaaifia, n. 28$ 

Paruter. l 15; U. 187,136, 279; IC. 424 
Parw, CL 183 
ParlbUjakaa.:. 93; ro. 13 

K i.kalpiba, n. 36 
io4aan8, n. 31 
nari(»imav4^ n. 204, 316 
PariiubbaaacD, x. 226 
PanDirrioa, i. !23; ut. 832 
Fa^ihpacAa. xl 3$ 

Pah-prtwA. n. 61. 32 
Parlahada. t. 76 
Paritta, xo. 376 
parittam, m. 71 

I. 263, 292; ul 19. 31 
FanTrljaka. l 95 
Parker, m. 13. 91. 64, 301 
PanDoaidw, l. six 
Panoentiar. u. 137,143,144. 160 
FamaAamf, m. 394 
Paawt. 09, 122; 01.414 
PattTi. L xU, 110,112 
PMTa,m. 307 
Panrac^tha. i. 95, 120 
Parttuafi#, L Ul, 22, 39; cl 414 
PInpaaa. ol 32, 63 

174, 222. 277; m, 114 
FUa,iLS04.216. 223 
Faaa&aai. L 148 
Paabacda CapaEika. n. 263 
Paaoateaao. cl 153,136 
Fa'MQ'pa, Ci. 273 
Pa,aao>wBJ, m. 114.125 
Pa4a, s. 204. 210, 223 
PUapata pUloaophT, c. 64. 190. SOU 
205, 211, 213, 28b. 291; d. 114.148 
Padopati.XL 113.145, 202; Of. 114, 146 
PluW^ L 101 

Pa&»atra (Patna), l 21 . 24. U7.131. 

132, 272, 290; a. 92.1S7;DL 16 
PaUn. XL 113 

PatafiJaU, l 303; a. 163. S02, 303; 
m. 424 

Path, Tbe, l 166,133, 213 
Pa: abOmma 53Dnbdthl?aa, CL 9$ 
Pa-U, n. 204, 213. 223 
pabcoaaattum4da, T. 144, 206 

K ',igho, S&1 

toDokkka, I. 129, 247, 277. S69, 290; 
xn. 41,180, 249. 3'<e Coofmno 
PatiiaiBbUdi, i. 253 
Pa(iaaadiu7i5fta«afD, L 197 
Patna,!. 136; s. 111. St» PataUntra 
Patilaraha (Boddbiit), l 250; n. l6, 83, 
63, 95: xo. 263. 304, 806, 307 (IM) 
— (Jain), I. 113; o. 153 
^ ^Taoiat), m. 226 
Fattadkal. m. 100.116 
Pa^tanatta PiUu. a 310, 226 

INDEX 

405 

PHtUoiBAjo. t. 208 
PMd^ih4B) KviDt» L 107 
PMnlnk*, kiu, !t. 182 
FMikkftm, D. w 

— SftabiA*. It 189,198 
P»rft,T. 111. 162. IH 109 
PftvMoL L 248. 247 
P4WW dynMVi i> S7 

K Ui. J. 198 
u)d».lTL 185 
dP»-dk4r. m. 299 

Pm. I. I2T. 299: is. 8. 26. 48. 82. 58. 
73. 76. 80. 88 

p«i T.iftnp . m. 206 

Peklu. :t. lOi m. 192. 274, S78. 301, 
381. 309. 381 
P»liy4kihi. n. 60 

PeUiot. n. 65; m. 101.103,124 «9., 167, 
200. 216. 389. 298. 368. 378, 38D «?. 
P«Ofto(ha. m 185 
P«CDeyM3|tt0, m. 871 
P«ttl»&8elB. m. 371.398 

C . fo. 311 
•«lii. m. 299 
P«al4d. n. 26.104 
Pf nbcM fMiivftl. L 208; m. 44 
Pdri.!. SOliiL 22. 66. 87:m. 826 
Penttrlyftr. n. 219 
PanyA Perioa, u. 138. 220 
PvhyirvM, n. 231 

Pcrlyollramon' 

Pcnecuboo*. 1. 178:10.44.01.103,212. 

262. 867. 207. 361. 414 
PoTMp^. m. 460 

PomA. 1. XV, XXX, xxxi. 21, 22, 31; 
n. 23. 66. 39, 139, 181, 240; m. 8. 
26.130. ISO, 199. 21349 ., 432 4f-. 463 
PohAVSt. L 2U XL 76. 87i m. 34. 220, 
299 

P«akwu.L 31 

rtajiirixiHi I. Ux, Irr, 44, S08 0g., 206 
Pe(Ak«B4deM., m. 68 

P«U«.r3» 

P«taT«((liA, r. S90, 230; m. 206 
Pti€rAitrf Lttiem, u. 190 
Patitbuoarun. tXL 83 
FaMa (Plmdan). OL 48D«i. 

P»y%L 6 

Pba^uoda 6jaa4(y, m. 367, 364 
hPbam* bLo«ZN»fKT^*B^^i*4&, m. 

364 

PhalflbaD. m. 374 
Pbai^.136 
PkaAraitg. m. 183 
Pbanaaea. m. 436 
PhaMO. 1 . 189. 209 
PkM-To. m. 344 
Pbiya Han. zn. 96 (Mira) 

— r6mu. m. 90 
— T4k £&. D. 96 
PhLnz.OT 
— Am, m. 97 

PUla, XU. 433 

PUloaojji;, t. 73, 808 af.; n. 291 af. 
Bt» oUo AdvUta, Mofll^, Sankira, 
VadMta 

«/ S^flsetiw, Jt. 89 
o/lks UpaniAad*, XL 306 
PliiJoctrabu*, m. 447 
Phiiaeibnakaa, m. 121,132 
PU.PT6t. m. 97 
pH' RusD, IZL 98 
Phaom P^b, m. 100,129 
Phoitf .nha groXla, m. 150 
PJwtixma, t. 30S 
Phia-bat, m. 85.93 
Pbra: Buddbft'Ut.L&.m. 86 
Phraiobadi, m. 89 
Phra; In (ln<^), m. 96 
Pbia:Iau^ (^iva), m. 97 
Phra'EbapliQQg. jb. 96 
Phxa: Ko^B {Gautama), ul 89 
Plira:M6kba:i^nLd9 
Phra: Nanx: mao, m. 37 
phra:KinI.i3X.97 
Phra PatbOD, m. 92, 98 
Pb»:praju. nr 89 
Fhn:Sanoat,iQ, 90 

e dat, m. 352 

dciana blag of, l 201 
Pbjmca. u cm, 66. fiea Matter 
K'ao, m. 47 
n.«h. QL 311 
Rlcnnia, 1.143; 0. 94.130 
P)i)(U Lokl<£rya. n. 236 
Piikr Rdicta, L 260 aa. 

K lo fo. nL 827 
Pl-ao,nL 209 
l^a^ola, rs. 826 

Bbandrija, i. 320; n. 12 
ainkaoxa, m. 43 
Pipal trea.L 142 
Pipa Raja, D. 243 
Pipar, Mn. 1 . Ivii 
PtppbaUvioa, r. 169 
Piprara VaM, L 189; m. 28. 99 
Pir Badar. m. 469 
t, m. 36,42 
irs. wonbin of. zn. 469 
PiUotm. 3k 
Fisba. vu 209, 213 
pistil Sophia, m. 446 
PitabM, X. ills, lasilb InvUi. 96.103. 
117, 133 a?., 141, 143, Uft, 162, 
169 ag., 1^. 198. 196. 197, 208, 
211 ao.. 239. 260, 290-301; IL 67, 
122,187,171. 306; D. 6.19, 23, 29, 
31. 69, 97, 240, 440, 460 
piths, Q. 286 
ntiitibaa. i. 288 
Pitc, B. 189 
pitny&iia, I. 88 
nyuaaai,8M 
Plates i- Iv. tuU; BX< 447 > 

BS 

496 

INDEX 

piorto, 20.107, i$i 

Plioj. uU.m. 415 

?loU&iu. I. 910i m. 431, 447, 460. 462 

PlaUrcb. D. 20 

Po.Ud(Pr«h), a. 126 

Poltf SUr, m. 042 

Poli, m. 107, m 

PekUetMd Beligioiw J.Uzu; m- 236 aq- 
P»UM«n«, m. 18 
PoUuawuw*. m. 20 

7ok>, m. 160 

P»l74bdf7. J. 60: R. 106 
Pol^ontM, i3L 434 
PolfdjKsoaiun, ru. 216 

|4iBy, r. 00 

PcilyfiKNrfhlui. j. 40: tt 130 
PolTBHiftoa. m. lOO, 170,180 
PolTbhMUi, L bli, 61.62.68; m. 31? 
P<KUp2, m. 140,144.147 
P^uft. m. 106 
Fosfol fotbvibit^ L 100 
POdg^, m. 72 
P6QU4, m- 67 
PoQ PMjfii Ckadi», m. 120 
PoooA, L 60; s. 171, 268 
Pop*. G. U., I. zo; a. 183, 216 
P^ InAOC«Bt m. L 202 
Pmkr FUlictai. L Ixlr. 644., lOOi 
a. 178: m. 42, 66, 07.112.146,182, 
224, 640, S60,382w. (B60) 

Pov^«r Utnen «/ ytwflimt India, L 
103, 146,147; u. 277 
Porlp*. m. 14, SO 
Ponhvry. m. 444, 460 
P^QM, L 3L; lu. 20, 34, 86, 128, 

POMMAOn bj apiRt*, I. 11 
Po^lPotAkkk), :l 16; UL 186, 363 
Po-U-Daud^, m. 08 
PrabMdkAffi. n. 281 
prabkakAri, D. 11 
^bbO. U. 2&0 
PrabbolidgOiK a. 220 
Prabodbk QAitdndAya. 127; 0.12$, 230 
pradkkihijia path. d. 178{ m. 106 
pn4e«Ju. L U6 
PradUoa, c. 380 
PraOyumsa, n. 190, 8$6 
Pr»b K»ta.ni. 119 
Prmj&nti. h 67, 68, 67 
PrajoL I. 220: tL 21, 34, 79; to. 173, 
217, 801 

— piraaitt, j. nrii, lxtbl;<a. 60 tf., 
OOT40. 71, 73, 83, 80, 93, U3, lib; 
m. 68. 122, 128, 169,173, 216, 200, 
276, 282, 298, 298, 311, 874, 878 
PrajSaUra. 3R. 307 
PraHia, a. 819 

Prakrit, (, 110; m. 0,190,208, 210, 2U, 
iM 

PrakriU, R. 217, 244, 966, 278, 299, 
297 

pralara, n. 817 
piam&ra, n. 299 

Pramb&um, oz. 164, 166, 100, 178 ««.. 
168 

Praaaya Ratnivalt, a. 866 

Pramayaratinii^aTa, n. 248 

Pri^a, a. 240 

Friloayaata, 1.306 

Praoi^hasa, i. 344; U. 89 

Prann&tb, XL 201 

Prapafisaaifa Ta&tra, xl 262 

Prapaatja, m. 109 

PraMttt, R. 237 

Pra'Pratom, m. 90, 97 

praaH n. 17^ 180: nz. 417, 428 

Fraaat Prah ICbK, Inacri^, rl 122 

FrasnaviyaharACLaoi, 1 ,116 

Praathinaa, R. ^8 

Piatapa CbMdra Gheaba, n. 230 
PraUparo4ra, n. 116 
Pratardasa, q. 101 

Pnteo, m. 90 
PradbU, 1.809 

Fr&UcMbabas 1. 300; nz. 180. 214, 823. 

380, 332, 373, 309. 3u CwfaMloii 
Pratltja Samofiiilda. l 206 
PraiyabbijiSa, n. 226, 224 
PraMabbij&iHUrikla. n. 323 
Pra^&bftra, i. 300 

C ratyakaha, R. 292 
ratyckabuddbarina, n. 4 
Prav&baoa Jaivali, 1. 74, 88, 208 
PravritU, l Izxri: n. 268 
Frayaga, n. 24S 
Praying wheels, RL $04 
Prea Syakoeey, n. 109: m. 113 
nraaa 

PrenS&gar, o. 101, l9l 
PrcauTcr, tbo, IL 146 
Preta, 1. 886: m. 97 
Fnunbeo, cl 480 

PriosibooO, t. $6. Bee aieo Bgnae, 
•Rr Atimew, Hoabajtg, Hotri, Parohii 
Prineiplee »/ Tonfro, b. 190. 281, 262: 
UL 40 

PAaline pias. m. 260 861 

PAthivi-baAdbu. rl 376 
PriyadarttkO, a 97 
Prad.ie, m. 434 
Prodigal eon MTable, m. 436 
Promo, m. 47, 61, 63 
ProTorbe, Sook oi, t. 94 
Proriaetol Oeoanpttiea of Indian &. 
278 

iFrat.pa. m. 360 
Psylnaki, 1.161, 263: S. 61 
Pswme of Haralka Sointe, o. 206 
Payobology, 1.166,198, 262; m. 89 
Ptalomy, t. 86, 266; s. 168; nz. 79,106, 
163,480 

— Philadelpbus, rl 482 
Soter, m. 844 

INDEX 

Pcibb«MlllM.L iB6 

Poblie vonbl^ l Ixuit 

Pogicii*, m, ^ 

Pa8ga4»vidjd, n. 101 
PugnJo (iadivldoAl),:. lOUzL 101 
P'o^hiua. tr. S3( m. S27 
Pujftris, a. 178 

Pofek^m, TTT. S2 

PuJikm*, L 198 
Pa.K'aag. m. 204,803 
PoUktra, 1.10 
PoliodM, 1, 86S 
PoQu. n. 186 
PoMkhft Pemi, m. 381 
Paki. JO. 183 
PBD'iBiJig, a, 18 

K &y*, 1.107 

m. 307 
Pson^MM, m. 307 
PvNOs Kutap*. L M 
PviMrbha, m. US 
PoriDaa, l stsvl, attil, Iut, 16, 
60,256,833 i n. 88.48,151.187.183. 
881,308, 321; m. 106. 180, ITS. 816 
Pan lud nliool. m. 318 
Pon, L 80; o, 114. 116.176. 808, 838, 
864; m. S6.134 
PAro4.175. 888 
Pftr^ pnjBa, n. S37 

K r^iva. o. 304 

roa^umaa, n. 8fl. 307; m. 163,1S6, 
176 

Panbiu, i. 68; m. 116.146 
Pam,Foni| l^«abi>IUlai, n. SIS 
PuTuba. a. 387; m. 181. 4S6. St* 

Itain 

Parosh&da Slnla, m. 178 
Pnroihapoxa, n. 76 

K rTmja, m. 486 

iraalaiBui SAM, n. 207, 281. 884. 
310 

POrraa,! 116 
Pusa. m. IM 
Poto. L 57; n. 146 
Poabkara.dvtpa, m. 486 
PubpadaoU. i. 117 
PoabUOKa n. 249 

Poab^mlM D. 63. 68 
Po.tu, 0. 26 
P'a ti to lo. IL 96 
PotaouiU, m. 307 

Pu't'o, u. 15; 10. 837, 878. 200. 308, 

831 

PoTvaa. L 116 
Ppitabia, ol 78 

^Uagona, t. It, 837; 03. 434 ag. 

P/oa. m. 47. 63 

Qaaar.is. 266 
^uak«r%i. 183 

S MD-Aa, m. 343 
aaa*AB-Thi*KiAb, ui. 943 

Quai)>AB*TQa>9(», to. 343 
QoKbo.guq, xil 137 
QuaailaQa of MJiada. i. 23, 198, 205, 
225, 236, 240, 881, 338; m. 9. 846, 
236,296 
QmeUajn. L 130 

£ 11«q {^bop of)* OL 417 

oO aaapar. uUquo. quad ab 

ODJiiboa, L Torii 

^Uyba, 0L 198 
Rabbii, r. 81 

Racial dlatiactiocta, n. 177 
Badaa mOcoat, m. 141 

— RabnaS, lO. 161 

^ Vidjaja, m. 168 
RidbA, n. 167,163. 229, 268 
R&dfa4,aw4iaia, a. 25$ 

E4dh4 Vallabhis. tL 366 
KadUaco, vocld of, l 43L 
Radios, m. 182 
Rafflaa, a. 156 ,161 
riga. s. 204 

BMboraaaa, o. 161,1S8 
R&uajaa, a. 237 

R3buJa. X, 134,148. 161. 160, 893, 301, 
316; obom. $7 
Rdbulabhadn, B. 36; XTL S18 
Ribulabhadra N&g&rjima, il 188 
RihulaU, m. 307 
Rai Dai, n. S43 
1U)4. «batua of, 1 .131 
Rajagaba, l 136. 147, 143. 160, 197, 
IN. 161. 168. i6i. 266; m. 32 
(oovooU a») 

RAjagiri^ I. 269, 339 
R4 agopala Chanac, n. 190. 816 
B«airiba,i, 111; 0.94 
R4ja Knmin. B. 98 
Rajanja, z. 26; n. 106, 8L6 
rajaa. il 26 $ 

RAilaaoagan. u. 173 
R^asaya, L 63 
RSfatataagial, n. 85,108,127 
RbitTaliTa, m. 26 
R4a*yoga,L 306 
Rai«&te Taman, nz. 110,121 
Rajnr.t. 1 Si. 196 

Rajpvtana, i. 10. 30, 81, 116; n. 113, 
242. 244, 252; m. 454, 456 
Rajput dam, i. 26, 26 
Rbj^ I. 363 
Pakiaaaa, m. 163. 383 
Balpaobao. klog. nt 361, 373. 379, 380 
Ram, B. 3637264. 363 
Rima. xt. xixt, 72.158; d. 148 «*., 
159. 243 ; o. U7 

— C^dra. n. 113, l4d tq. 
Rdmidblpad, kiog, BL 6^, B5 
RiaM4raa.i. 139 
lUSTPaadit. 0.114 
RamaitM, n. 233 

EioiA KMabfeg, L xsv; m. 80, 100. 

1S8 

— &rkhs», >. xlvii; 0. X8) 

12ftM Kritima {lih of), t. 817, 840 
IUa»4ia|*, D. Sil 

PAo&Bvtda. r. zilr n. S12, M2 k., 
267, 268, 208, 2W;».420 
RiDftAAftdMk, m. 46,60 
Kiaibajk, j. ilit; n. 78, 74. 146. 161, 
182. 166. 182.18T«.. 208, 212. 221. 
220. 228. 238,282 242, 814, 816; 

1X1.420,467 

R4iB««vft Sftfiffha. m. 87. 38 
R4iB>p4la> cl'JI^ 128; SL 260 
E6tBA|p0r«tti.paa!j» UpuiUbMl. D. 161 
in. "do 

R&ffiAtiWtjft. Li. 880 

Tliirepde?-Cbaa, kiof. m. 188 
E4iuti. n. 143 
R4iB*.Qf ti>fi ilpn nly>, X 151 
RiBiyui. I. xIt. Ijxt. le. c {n. 148 
169. 187, 246: m, 6,103, 100. 120, 
162. 167,170.180. 180, $42 
lUiuyy4, a. 225 
lUadl*, n. S66 
R&n VU {Ooni). ti. 2$6 
BaaMTxno. 1.17; x 160 
R*wn>to (Bffchma), 1 .169 
iUiicbor. IL 244 
lUngMhjirl. V.. x 286 
lUnfoAfx, nb 48 
FWAjlb-Siaeli, a. 272 

Ranmali ti» 26 

iUo-QoplititliA, t. xxxT. 68j c. 140, 
166. 100. 202; m. 147. 862 
iUf«oB, X 169 
CUpti iBppw}. 1.192 
RaMvm Ptritfbb. t. 809; x 820 
FUaliti* kOt* drn*^, i. 114 
X 100 

Uind*lj, X 860 

x 19 

Raboftkau. cx £82. 374, $78 
fUUakata.dhMmvp»r26;a, x 67, 61 
RMsapura. nr 48 
lUtoawabhaTft, x 26; nr. 106,178 

&4(0»Ttjra. X 126 

RatalraU.L 819; x 97. 259 

iUtthapik luiu. 1.184; m. 71 

IUadM.ixa82 

Samva, x 206 

FUtam, b 72. 837; D. 64. 140 

tUxarlT. 9.113 

FUrt. X. 20 

FUvtk.m. [94 

lUwal Pindi, v 21 

Rawliiura. x 366 

Ra/mood. l 11 

Bte^rfhtinrliitvptfdUioiufn Ohiiu, 
I.841{X18 

m. 41.66 

£scorrf <if BuddJiidpnuHut, 9, 8 
Su^rdt a/ (A« ffnnre, t. 858 

B«dCl«87,1X 277, 897 tg. 
BwoeamaUcfl. i. triii, xbt, 11. 42. 
106, 109, 123, 138. 194. 190; 

m. 247. 444 «. 

Bik Ka. IX 94 

FUlatiou. rtlatlTitf, tbaory, j. 203 
FloHoi (Boddfaut). 1.109; ix 16.20,22- 
28, 56. 81. 64. 311. 255. 302. 266, 
266, 263. 270 

Ballon, (iQfittitioB, l xil, xovU. 12. Ct 
fotrcdaotion pastim 
Jitligiotu of n. 14$ 

Ral^QS Ord«n.x. 26. 96. 97. 287. Su 
AiMlieiam. n«Qa«t«nM 
Basbasg. m. 159 
Bdmoiat. m. 297. 260 
R6mj, m. 371 

BanuaoiaBoB. b Ixvm.. 186. 316; 
0.168 

Edportoift (r.89(of0pA»e Jaina, t 10$. 
118 

Batata, 7. 267; id. 28 
Banlatioo {pKvraaaixa). t. Ixxj. TO; 
X 121, 2S 

Bav«lAUou(Mai(nya).x 88 
Bhya Daxidi, r. 27. 109. 128.129.161, 
212. 226. 269. 200, 315; X 100.17S, 
820; ra. 14. 39. 45, 308 
Bbya IHTida (Hn),i. xxi. 130.193.120. 
193, 203. 209. 213, 248. 2S9, 281. 
814: zx 82 

Rhn Davids and Oldsobun, u 182 

Bicol, n. 279 

Bioo.z. 114; X 199. 21$ 

Rlctards. x 174; OL $11 
Flight Eifort. I. 217 
BlgbUOQsoaaa. ksngdom of, L 140 
— vheal of. i. lia. 170 
FUgbt miodfaluM. i. 217 
^ Vada, L ziv. Isxii, 19.10.61.68,66. 
60. 62; u. 187. UO. 163. 181, 244 
376; m. 102. 426 
Ri«lao. Ob 842 
iU-uid>iDtbsan*6id, m. 9T7 

S babba, 1.110; X 148 
hia.n. 199 
FUasho asct. m. 404 
Ritual. I. xTi. xri. Ixxiv; x 6,166>186, 
207; IX 831. Cf. Sanifioas, Taupiss 
Rochas (CoIoQol). i. IvU 
FUohMlf, b 99. 17$. 269; x 81. 108; 
QL 207. 2U. 896. 861. 859. 373. $75, 
87$. 860, 896 
Ron, i. 801 

Rohinl, r, 149; x 168, 164 
Roja, 2.171 

Roman CathoUaism. t. lx«v, 37, 88. 
23$. 846; ni. 96. $99, 4l7. 437. 44$ 
Oolooise, IX 415 
— Efflpira, I. 94 

INPEX 

49d 

Mlifloa^ KL 22$ 

Ro«»ni, u liszvlj 
Roa, 6(.' DeotfCiA. n. 8B 
R«i3ii«l. n. 19$ 

IWrtJ XE. 116,119,169 

da Bolnk (WULkmj, m. 806 
ID. 977 

red.n. 266 

BQdUrtdMTft, iL 280 

Rodn, 1.6); n. 187.140.141.183. 208. 

228.277; to;. 146 
BQdndamaD, n. 80; m. 189 
RodrM, L 27 

&iidrft<«aaprMUra, n. 2S9. 248 
Rodn It ^ 

BodntariMQ. xn. 106, IM 
Rodn Yiftala Taotc*. n. 281 
Rq£u.C. 264 
RskmlQl. a. 267 

Bolific Beltiu of Um Four Qutfton. 

tlOl 

Tt nmmin Dof. L 122,260, 274 
Roact, m. 192 
Bnot. I. 67 
r0p4,L 126,200 
rOpuiM. I. 227 

BoMea n. 261. 288 
Boa^ L hx. 64,122; m- 870 

RowacvoU D«cob^ CL 18 

BoTvteook. I. wO 

B;^ ^ ShatO. ttL 402,410 

SaUaBO. I. 228 

m, 161 

RabbaUnlL 267 

a. 266. 266. 292. 820; m. 419 
6«bb4.a. 278 

RM^Atr,»y^A, L cUI, 84; c. 248 

Bwbaa. cl 448 

docrod Boob a. 182. 266 

SuKd Bdiot. L 207im. 287. 823 

L rfi. zxil, u<Ti. M. Iszxr, 

Izuvil. 40. 82. 63. 64. 86 a?., ISO, 
146. 230; m. 127, 382. 886, ^ 
SodaitTB. OL 119 
SoddaxOd. m. 68 
SoddhaaiiBapva, o. 00 
S«ddbxmaPaQdarika,n. 4,62; m. 284. 
292,874 

Siddutow, XXL 498 

o. 123 

Bsdbii«,L4e;c.46,282 
SOdbu. D. 104, 245 
Bidbasutl, o. 11 
B'adf. m. Ml 
&ad}TB. XL 270 
g^.VBiibaaTM. n. 230 
Ssdyojito. u. 128 
Saab. BL 266 
gagaia^, cc. 48, 53,76 
Smlijaa. m. 21. 40 
86can,L 110 

D nx. 

Siat*. 1.116, 329 
SoEaiinaoda, tl 262 
6tli*j Bhajaaiai. il 185 
Btha wdara, i. 280 
Sahui (oorica), m. 72 
SaU«h, rr. U7 
Baljidli*r*-or&vaJ<B4, d 120 
Balttt Aagalia, i. 316 

^ Acuortioo D 180 

— ChnatopW, xil 442 

^ Fraiuaa. n. 217 

— 0«TCr«d*,u. 181 

— John,181 

— Pas],:. Izziv. 278 

— FliMidn (Hubert), m. 442 

— T^raaa, l Ixu, 310 

— Thomaa, Apcatie. m. 414 af. 
falnalga droMlr. l 132 

eta. aae Sitb. eto. 

§^T* Sddhiau, il 184, 203, 204. 218, 
221.226. 291.309.618 
SidTCOan EaJpa, SL 142 
Bailed Solar hiMud (afarice). m. 468 
Bemd dvTMt;. l 89 
BSadtilnfa. l 227 
Bikedrlpa. CL 426.462 
Bake era, xil 164.166 
|>kg4fa*r7aiaata.iaiiyahfc, n. 240 
gihambhara, I. 102 
a«^aa, X. xit. 22, 23; o. 89; la. 212 
SOUjfr. L 131 

gakka. t. 69,108,180,833; m. 898 
Sakk&ya, L 200 
.L287 

I. 833 

S&ktaa (SAkttsB). l. izzir, lazvl, 
InxTii, 104.910; il 17.18.121.124, 
126 m., 170. 178. 186, 130 M.. 209. 
224, 266, 260. 274-290, 312 a;.; 
10.64.274 

BlkH (proper name), c. 146. 198, 218, 
223. 2f4«.. 910; m. 64. tl9, 147. 
380 391 398 

SAkra folaa). l 181.188.1S6. 140.166. 

181. 162.168.189; in. 13. 460 
— {«bb«(a), a. 363. 864. 867. 398 
Sttya, CL 266; OL 3M 
Bakra Hud. L 133. 274: it 7. 90. 38, 
62, 63. 66. 68. 66, 93, 106; CL 168. 
ItK 177.248,827,842. 836.389.446 
Bakjapatdfa, L 242 
Bak^ aiqiha, 2.133 
Bal4 m. ISO 

d^Umbha SOtra, ul 378 
B^Qftaua. ID. 447 
Balra, klag. n. 166 

BalTaUoD (bj devoUea or talth or 
praver), r. <tI, zrui. zU. szi. xzll, 
U. inil 81, 44. 40. 89. 100 M.. 
144. 186.^ a?.: c. 72. 84 111 
(Tastjaa). 140. 182. 180-188, 217 
222. 286, 8S9. 166. 300, S0l, 226. 

38 

600 

INX>EX 

tlO. 817; m. 88. SiO, SIS, 817. 404. 
418.428.467 

SittidM (nptoM). *. 88.8Sl. 881.807; 

XL 61: UL 60,800 
8tka4dbi«i4{a. u. 66 
BukAjik. 1.108 
BAffiaoM.!. 66 
BMiafi£**pb»l»4(Ma. t. 808 
6«4Baat»bA«drai. XL 18. 88, 98; m. S£7. 
868 

BaoiMitoffiQklia, n. 14 
fi*bkftt4 PM4ika. il IS. 14. 80. SOS 
n 108, SOI 
Baawpuka. 12. 260 
Bacutt. ZL 48; m. 810 
Banauu. nr. 6S 
Banaibo, X. 818 
BaoaviytDniD.!. 116 
Sioa Veda. i. 68 
Sinba. m. 468 

g basdha. n. 816 

bapuji. ZIL 468 

bbala. n. ISO; m. 360, 866 (Zhain- 
b4)a) 

Baabb^XL 98 

£ bbcfa Eiya. xl 8 S; XD. 866 
bhnvamaa, nL 140 
bbu Viabao. m. 114 

SiAdifu, m. S84 

Bavblui.n. 128.1B6.106 

Baaikara. n. 886 
SattnidiH^ L 216 
Sa&bl SaaiiHbi, r. Iro. 221 

fliffiml aim l 844 

Baamitfra. l 260, 898; il 08.101.106, 
108. [I0;xa. 146. 162 
aaminftha.ax IIT 
>UiiiiiiftV»n> (TanUa). m. 118 
fiaiBXBohavlaadli)] (PaU). is. 118 

Banaiuarv** 03 

BaBM.iiL 484 
SasMTada. l 0 

bBaa*M PSpa-mlhao, m. 868 
8asipniU;a. n. 170, 228. Cl Saeta 
Baioptati. r. 118 

Saaiira (ftJfratioB). l 1 . 48. 48, 444;., 
108. 200; n. 46. Bc« BaiftoacaatioB 
Mqiakin.!. 168. 810; S. 300; ts. 06 
SanodtaQuna, i. 84; s 87; m. 21 
Saavara. 1. 107; s. 140; m. 801 
8aiBrnti*aat7a, S. 38 
SaEBTama. l 808 
Saa^e. m. 8M 

6a97Ut6bhklbamabxl6a?a. xn. 218 
Supyaktduiaa. X. 208, ‘SOO; s. 48; 
XD. 100. 280*}. 

6aaL7akt*.ratoa>pKaka SOUa, n. 88 
Baafikte-raatu. il 2S4 
BaipyoU* zukija, L UnU. 180. 100. 
1^. 108, 201. 898, tJi. iS9i XL 46| 
IQ. 66. 846. 807 
Banakidi. IL 226 

Baiiakldi aaiBpndATi^ XL S30 
Baoakavbaa, nx. 807 (SaatTin) 
Baaang Setaan, m. 9d6> 867, 861 
Baoaa^o&ra. l 108 
Baoitama Dhajua. i. xlalli 
BaoaUuJatlja, s. 167 
Sao>b»>uai. m. 161,162 
Saa*CbaQ. m. 07 
Saacbi ficpa, r. 260, 872; zn. 14 
Baodbars, m. 300 
6MU7a>U'806 
— BiCraa, xl 163 
Bangbnudi. L 160 
BaaRnnano. Fatbex. is. 68 
Saagha (BaddfaMt ord«r),z. 07.164.166, 
fSS, 166. 887 4?.. 266. 266; O. 116: 
All, 36.71, 814 
Sftngbamktb, A 17, 21 
Ba&gbaBM, il 814 
SasBbaaandl. a. 307 
Saaghj^dla. A 106 
SaogbMjBa, m. 68 . 88 
Baaghanleaba. il 64. 80 
A 806 

SasBluvatea, A 807 
Bang Hyaiu SajDablvAiukait, a 178. 
180 

Baaelti. l 266; m. 66 
SaoMlt^ D. 

SbsTaTa, l 08,146,147.106 
— (JaTa), A 164 
^ Btlaeatu. n. 07 
Sabkara Ao&rja, t. suli. zl. xUi. 

IzTiii. loll. 62. 86. 211. 203: D. 79. 
74.100. no, 130,175,189, 187,107, 
808. 206 49. (Ule). 880.889. 884. 828, 
266, 280. 362. 812«. (docOinea); 
A 481. 3u Adrait*, aCooUia 
SaAkara-dig-vlJaTa. s. 110.803 
3a0karaK&&7atta,n. 164; a 114. U7, 
. 101 

SaAkanpaodita, kiag, A 110 

SaQkaxa>«ljaja.iL SOO 
Saakawbapa, a. 100.107, 800. 285. 319 
Saokhiraa. l 186 49.. 206 tg., 225. 280 
Bankb&nippatti^QtU. L 310 
MnbAys d»Uri4A4 of Zapiia. S. 806 
SiOk^ ^iklbh&^Ta. D. 296. 904; 
A S86 

pbilpaopbp. L Izxvi, xdi, 47, 49. 
74. 08.^. 100, jOO. 128. 210. 
Ill. 902; XL 40.64.88. 90.168.197. 
SOI. 202. lie. 117, 881. 801, 202. 
309.896 n. {detaila); a 448 
BiokbpaD, m. 44 

dio Ji rtya fUooopUo. XL 296, 290 
840khjapia.vac4]ia. tl 296 
BkAkbya-Uttra-kaumadi. il 803 
Biokhja'Yoga, il 224. S30 
BaoKoao, a 236 
Ban-loo-tacjia. a 804 
SaaB*. 1.18a 

INDEX 

601 

SaciiA UL 154 

S*aa.yUo. 89; n. 247. 264. 284 
eM•kti^ t. xxiT, xrTiii. 117, ISO, 275. 
300; ZL 4, 6, 47 «?. {Cuon). («42 m 
V fthiTicust l4t«r*Mn). 60. 116. 
123 (Nep*l); ul 81. 82. 188 w. 
(OuBpt). 154. m. 186.160. 264 
{ChlMM Cmoq). 878 
Sam*itUma»t9ifttofBiim*r,n. 160 
Stn^TnU(Utiiri.i.» 
B4AU,m.8g2 
a. 66 

Swt*>pQ. m. 28?. 8U 
SioUnlAfaiU, m. 848 m. 

$Mtbag4n,i. 150 
XU. a. 266 

st)deT», XL 6,45. 60,108 
i^ma. XL 196,166. 202,203: nt 

SdaCri Bitthia. m. 182 
SinTWag, m. 282 
&ft04b94at, B. 23: m. 461' 

Smbb* HOrti, tr. 140 

Tantin, a. 281 

Sumbii, j. xxxii; n. 26.86; OL 210 
8tf»b. n. 114. m 
84r»l4d4B». a. 114 
SifOtlMttOOjt, XXL 172 
SfMnU. a 10,145 
S8ripmin<pr*k4n^ Uf. 190 
San^cu.147.148.166.157,172,180, 
211.2S0.320; n. 9: to. 53.60.39 
6ark4r. a K.. ir. 82, 111. 114,116 
SarkwJ’aduMh.a 118 
SarMth. L 141,171, 26^ 270: xx. 122 
Birva. m. 148 

Barra-tfarianvflgfaba. il 01. 201, 
202, 208. 805. ^ 801. 880, 821 
fi4rrai&&4l«va, m. 879 
aarraiMtra, a. 204 
•arra-kanrltra. n. 204 
8ajra SaTwteln Bha^arati. m. 804 
Sarriattridia (aMt). i. xxvi. xnii, 262, 
268. 291, XL 48. 72. 77 86. 

00.101. 284; m. 148, 176, lOf. 201. 
202. 209. 212, 218. 285. 886. 292, 
260 (Canon). 318, 451 
SlaafUTaiiiM, m. 66 61,68 m. 

SaHota. IL 96 
fia-akTa^paiMea. m. 854 
Saakra Paodita, at 360 
BaMoida. i. 24; m. 191. 461 

g b8.iXL ISO 

tra M^braTiVhlaa, TO-128 
t/i.PaD&HarlP^.iL 118, 116 
■aarati.n. 48 
BatagM. l 108 

BatM44UBrlb9UAa,tlzxz,89.91 m.; 
a. 168 

^U(a Bfahmana. n. 279 
BatarudJlja hrma. il 141,142,183 
6aU4<Ara, OL 304 

Sltarah^a djnaat;, t 22; n. 86 
Satbagops u. 831, ^ 

54tt.z. 197 
Satl, I. 211 
Satl. a. 126.286 

Sati (dottae). i. larrui; ti 266; m. 163 
8at-mahaJ.pn«Ma, m. 18 
Ba4>tt8mla, n. 266 
SatoapiM, m. Ml 
SatriTia, is. 188 
SaaroajBTa, l 121: hl 161 
Sattraa (aiotuatorka), n. 176, 260 
SattTa,n. 298 

Sittvata-SanahltlL IL 188, 180. 105. 
' 196,199 

fiUTata a^, a. 164,162. 184 ay. 
Sityiaddkiaaira, nL 804 
Satyavannaa, is. 121,140.144 
gauga tMt attta, id. 121 (Bonanacy) 
SaokaraatM. UL 290 
eaaa^, m. 382 
SauQdarioaod^aTTa, n. S3 
Saora Purtoa, n. l38.238 
SauAotrika, i. 860; n. 66, 00, 08; 

QL 304 
8aoTtra,L 160 

SirattU, l 143, 161. 158. 160. 169, 246 
Sarltri. L S7; B. l46 
Bavan, Bi. 185 
Savti Mot. m. 83.73 
Sa^m.72 
Slywaicdrya, n. 210 
Say>f»Bg m. 124 

ScandiBaviaa £lteratain, i. 46 
Seirmittc Vuiv BvdAa, 1.178 
Sobklnar, 1.173; S. 138, IS%, m. 108, 
166. 219,307.468 
Scbuidt, m. 564,878 
BchodU, ui. 83 

fieboaianiB. l xli; a. 188,204. 310 
ftahoola e! PbOcaapbr flodian), b« 
291 ij. aSaoK 

SebownbauQT. i. It, Ixrri, 47,201, 808 
2^6, 800: XL 8TC 

Bobradar. z. Ixzz. 76. 97. 09. 220. 282. 
836; a. 123.188.186.106,197.108, 
204, 810, 286,270, 322, 387 
S<naac «,ib 816 {'nbetan litera* 
ton). Cf. CcMnoIggr. Matasbf doa 
Boom, Sit J. 6.. m. 40,66. 70 
Bootc Hoftcslafl, zd. 4M 
SoTtbian Iditgdotta. I. 23: A 212 ay. 
SmbiaDQa.iTL 446 

Sdok Eab Tbom iaaoripi, id. 100,117 

Sa«<dMilk.nL486 

Saeret htaa, n. 12), 283 

B«et4: 

Buddhiat, i. 850, 290 (Bat), 298 (Urt); 
ZD. SSO 

Buiiiiaae, BL 67 ay. 

ChliMaa Buddhlata, in. 803 ay. 

Siado, a. 170 ay, 

502 

IITDSX 

Seote (amf.}: 

JftpMMe Soddhis^ m. 40S te> 
Uftb4yia» Md HiiAjwik uSdad, 
I. Ill: a. 

Bivftit*. IL 216 V., 222 ao. {K—timic)» 
SS6«i(. 

T1b«t4&. m. 897 ig. 

[Viabnort*. S. IM tq-, 228 «.] 
6e)d«Ktdeker, I. 812 
6clfft»zk.in. 8 
6«kb«a. I. S18 
6dkkilu,XL2S0 
8tk9om Nieatot, L 21; m. 432 
S«lf hniiotii«UoB. 1. 819 
SeaivMtock. to. 199 
Sdoitlo alphabatd, L 61; m. 4S0 
— dMtiM, 1. 60; n. 276 
SoQ’l^ioaih Cbdoiln> n. 114, 187, 218, 
24d, 268, 266. 279, 287 
6«Q. K«hab Cbcadar, i. 3S9 
6«ddrt.tll8, 887;C1L 122, ISO 
27; n. 112,863 
ScadjU-pi, D. 129 
68b;, m. 217 
64o;-Hia, m. 298 
SbBg td'M, m. 308 
SI^ Yb. m. 307 
Saara ODiamimiB, ^ 192 
Savvl, ID. 339 
8w»,m. S09 

6e»pU,L 41; 10.244,489 
6ariuaMt4B. n. 237 
6am«Ai(BwddUa). 1.143.146.166,203 
Aliat, u. 42, 71 
BatpMfc F%ii«r, Cba, L 211 

6arp«ot«v»nhlp, c. 108 

Sanm, m. 86B, 999 

SaUT^a, 1.168 

SUbwkAD. m. 446 

fibadljaUiLB, m. 247 

6b»b JahM, 1. so, 31; a. 270 

SbakitCB. 403 

SbakaanMa, m. 437 

6ba4a (Su-1q, Sho-le) (Raahgar), Bi. 200 

8>iaqnmaiB, m. 388 

fibaoa 71 (Tiaii), l 8 

8baa UA;u;aa. n. 279 

— momtaia, id. 825 
Sba&a,iiL 4eaff., ei, 79,88 
6bBa*«bBa, m. 311,213 
Sbdo-4. a. 20; m. 221 
Sbaa Tm, m. 814 
Sbaotn;, ul 819 
&bao-l^ Tanpla. m. 866 
6bat44b»bba^ l 310 
6bat.bama, j. 906 

6be« and Tn^er, u. SSI 
&b«lkb Cblati ihi^a, m, 468 

— Band, DL 439 

— Sadn, OL 499 
filMlIap, L 40 
Slua, 1. 0 

gbao.Cho Hoiu, m. 279 
SbBD.HoB, xn. 809 
Sbes-Kua, m. 246 
Gb6n.88Q;>CbnaB, m. 8S$ 

Sbea«ben (Hinajamat), n. 93 
6h«a.8i, m. 860, 863 
Bb*-p'», ns. 166,176 
Sher-Chio, BL 378, 374 
8b6*^po>iiio, m. 103 
Sbiana, nr. 439 
SUefner, □. 29 
Shib'ClujQn;, m. 260 
Shlli.fan.ia.taafijf. DL 263 
ghih-Haadf 'R (EioMror}, m. 246 
Shih'li-faauh, m. 162 
Sbib*U*pa*da>do<a>la*pa'fflo, or. 164 
Sluh.aQn;.lii, QL 266 
«hth Taoitf. m. 236 
SIUB,XL 60 

fibiDTOD aao^ s. 27,36,87,275; m. 284. 

816 tq., 382,833, 404 
Sblo-abo, u. 61; DL 4M 
Sbintola^ t Izixui, baxviil; m. 408 av. 
8bo<jo, c. 8 
Short oBi, tba, ni. 812 
8b(K:*lad;>;en-aaa>mei'0Ma;, q. 66 
6boQ*Pu4a*Cbiab. m. 328 
gtuioh^aaambhaia, it, 121 
BhfliMa, XL 116 (Nap^asa). See alto 
Tauplaa. loiaoM. Uraa. Pltb, Da. 
ffobaa, Pstfodaa, Chadii, Stnpaa 
Sbo, UI, 849 
SbuddU, r. zlviU 
Sbnn.Cbih. m. 279 
fihun-tl, m. 274 

ShvaDafOb Fa;oda. 1.119; u. 74, 76 
ShwB STuod Pagoda, nt 60,68 
Slalkcrt^i. 26 

Siaai, I. xU, ulr, xxt, Ixxzn. 241, 243, 
270:0. 80; m. 48,78 a;. 

Biam tD. 37 

SiamaM uWoiclaa, m. 79 m.. Ill 

Siddha, 1.110 

giddhlata, 1.116; n. 210, 228 

Siddhistd.'' ,0 284 
SiddMaU Dit^, zl 163, 204,205.281 
Raha«7a. n. 849 
Biddba Pffio, m. 387 
Biddbanba. Slddhattba (naaia of Bud* 
dha).:. 183 
Siddhattika, i. 388 
Siddhi.o 126,232 
fiiddhl UaTa, zl 232 
glddhi'TiVi^ 2ZL 117 
8UDo.&i.]S^. a 122 
SiaB-raap, id. 112 
SlgOla, 1. 861 

Blgitorida autta, s. 138,261 
SiMTE. I. 866 

SlU^L 111, 166 
BOuJattha KaUiS, ul 14 
BI k anda r Lodi, o 808; IZL 466 

INDEX 

5ad 

Bikhi.L $42 

B. fi60; BX Se9, l»$ 

8iU lUlkioD, n. 8M, 2d2 tq. 

L ur» xlTl, Ixftii, Id, 81 i s. 161, 
. 17^ 177, 186, 212. 287 tq.i m. 456 
§iJuh*p4ttl. B. 262 
SUnMwmwoyt. n. 66 «f., 80 
8ilsbb«top«rfta<40. i. 2S7 
SilsbhadA, nr. $16 

SUi4itr»,a.M 

E n (6rU). 1. 872: xn. 80,178. 804 
pp>4h.it*imm, n. 214 
Sibppadicmm. il 108 

1.108 

SlIsTftVM, IS, 81.71 
Silk. BL 838 
Simi. m. 66 .180 
Sink xn. 164 

SiOMOO, L )8l 
R »mh* Bbikibu. m. 807 
SlaiUkputr». xn. 807 
Siab4«^ 6««), il 227 

6ii> (Jmd Tk«i). L 107 
SitKi. 1.26. SO; ZL 100, ICO, 120; in. 466 
S«dbQ, D. 102 
Si of ufu. m. 207 
8b0rftj».nL 1S6 
SiogMMl. m. 169,186 «f. 
m. 83 

Sio odeM Cuoo. L 289 «?.; m. 80 
— ChroBkiM. I. 280; zxl 36. CL 
UxUruTiM. OukruoM 
— CoamebUm*. m. 29 
— SftA^ba, Dx 37 
Siolupun. m. 1$7 
SiDope. IB. 244 

m. U8 
Siji. L 10$; n. 124 

SihaM^hA'TMQa. m. 21. 26 

m. 152 
SiiQMl^h.tL 143 
fikodiM, It. IS6 
Slwwaib. klag. m. 130 
6»t«r*m*rTu^. nt. 460 
SitA. t. 72; BL 162 
SiteU. n. 276; m. 459 
&tt4n. n. 216, 220; OL 416 
6iTk, 7. XT. ZTi. zxTiii. ilil. zlri. 48; 

n. 70,95. 90,98. 114. 118.119, 133. 
126. 127. 188-166. 174. 170. 162. 
192302-277, 238. 274. $19; 
m. 62.5$. 86.07.107.118.144.148. 
167. 17$. 186. S&5. 391. 892, 417. 
3te 9Uc LlB9x.vonlilp 
Ocddwaat, a. 146 
rt.bhinTMM, n. 202 
BL 146 

t»>VQd42x. OL 169.169,181, 186 
ivft.bnddbik;*, m. 169 
ivt.diiAnDOtUr*, B. 187 
B. 223 

8iTM». KM^aun, a. 222 *9. 

Straia, zl 212 mj. 

8lT»lt0 Taatrkm, il 189 
Sirt)i(UcT<Ub»). 61; n. 157. 161. 260 
SlTk lUiTalTB, or. U7«f., 146 
BiTft-makhAD. IB. 144 
SiTttftteibotbam. il 305 
SvftAlofcr, XL 321 
|iT4>rt(UiA, BL 146 
|iTvSMa»,m 119 
SiHiram*, zzL 184 
SiTa SObia, n. 206. 332. 324, 236 
NTiTikTMS, IL 220 
b 1 t» Vi^u. m. 161 

Sfcasda (iUrtakepa]. il 146. 302 
— Poiina, B. 280 

SkudM, L 128.189.190.108. 809.2LS 
«•. 333. 380. 280; IL 67; m. 175 
83atio,xa. 80 
SkMb. CL 18 

Skoptm L zxxTi. Ixs. 122 
SkTA SoltMU, L 20 
SkpoDio (SkTt). L 64, 63; SL 191 
SlMp, L Liiil, 88 *7.; n. 302 
SloM XE. 104 
SlBAAdAhaOA, BL 171 
8xB4rU l«6z7^ IL 287 
SxB&rtoa. i. zxxiT, mrL xxxTiii, xJ: 
n. 189. 200. 222 

Smith CViAMDtK L dz. IS. 82.367.271; 
XL 64. 76, 06, 149. 169, 172. 167; 
xn. 260, 414, 468. 468 
Safiti. T. Ixt9. 64, 317; IT. 189.210 
spsdar, nL 362 
SDiftaOntLi, BL 147 
Socntaa. l 94.148 
bSod^iuziu, BL 361 
Bo«oda.in. lltt 
S««raU]». DZ. 168.101.166 
Swdiana. L 276; n. 139; sa. 169.191. 
192. 301.200 

Sohgaora m. 74 

fiokr aaitko. B. Si 
Sokmon, l 94; m. 4$0 
Soma. z. 89. 66. 69. 90.108 
Somaj.oz. 412 
SoouiaBda. iz. 223 
Soaaaaradittyar. il 818 
Soaapiij), D. Ill 
SoadM pz4h Moghifio. bl 181 
S«mnatf. x. 38; m. 465 
Sob of EaaToa. sl 386 
Sou, m. 60 

9otta^4a S&it% l 181.186.162 

SooMir,:. 131 

6oo2^ L 266. 867 

Sooad.LSOO 

S^e^uan. m. 03 

SoQxa of th« Moala and Nqm. l 171. 
248 

So«h?M.m. 451 
8okpaofto, u 227 

Sonl. L 1 d •;.> 960; It 204,330,2S9, 

604 

INDEX 

297,300; a. 1J& a XiVM.AnttU, 

Jfvk PumhAi PaAU( 

Smii^ loditc iMt^ptiooi. n. S78 
Soutbeca 6t4r. tb». ixz. 842 
SoT«n SItiJia. U' 43 
Bpt^ a. SS3, 224 
— K4rikM,iLS28 

8p«ebt, m. 801 

8p»lU> S«4 DlMrfnic. UutfM 
SpeoU Muajd* O. 198 
SpbtrtlnhA, n. 89 
SpintutliMi. m 229 
Spirii vorid. I. 380; m. 81. See NkUi 
Phil, PnU.bhut 
Sra4dU.iLe3,180 
fr&sMQU,90; ui. 245 
Sriv^M. rr, 80,114,120; m. 334 
Br4«iJ»yid4, ii. 4 

firtTM* L xU, 114, 117, 180, 

121; 0.314 

Srftvuti, n. SO, 93 
8re7 3«6iber iiUCTlpt.. id. 2£8,123 
Sri, n. l45,»;oi. IH 
— QtuBjMOran, ID. 113 

— m. 80, 81 

— Qahft ID. 875 

— HuAft, m. 453 

Henifcubtfta;*. m. 150 

— iIikoQfltfvftJv m. U8 
— J4;4abetr*.is. 113 
— Kintbi, It. 205 

^ lC»hcndreir»ri. m. 115 
— Micdmivxn, m. 118 
6ribU«b7».ix. (82. 188. 820, 833. 884, 
235. 287: n. 420 
8f1bbo>», UL 188 
Sf1n4r»rtj4. m. 13D 
Srim^ir, i, 209 

Snofim {Abbot Aod aoftMtOTj), i. 208, 
810. 211; ZL 176; CO. 147 
Mo>*7», T, 88 
Wpwmaft.punlut*. m. 146 
te.BanuDbodar. n. 233 
8rf RAjuuwIglM. UL 169 
firfniA D. 173, 190. 238. 232, 233. 

0.227 
l;a. u. 233 

. . m, 147 

oikhinArm, iR. 118 
^riiomMtfinAD. m 120 
6ri SdmvMtM lUsix. m. 93,84, 90 
_ VftuhB*?M. a. 238, 23S, 841 
m. 138,149 

Srbk K4mp4cb^4(Khmer), m. 101 

SreM.bwc4in.po (UfU). U. 847 

Srah. CD. »1 

Srub GopeJ. ji. 2G5 

Srvli. t. lx IT, 64; Q. 310 

8m. cn 817 

Sm CbuxB, m. 349 

8tMl Uolitxifi, o. 64 

Semid 4cr t nii acJien FAtZtuepi^ mr ZeU 
MoiA^ Mnd ^udAM, L 97 
Slxatoo, m. S19 
SUIT, F.. ID. 886 
6b»t*>eTftft, 1.18 
Bbetae perils. Dz. 114 w. 
Sicberbxttfcw, n. 87 
8MA. L ixxi; TL 127; ZD. 8, 193. 195. 

190.207. 209,210, 219,245, 801.378 
SuiMT. m. S95 
Stereosoc, Mn, i. 105 
Btb&.L 116 
6tb9a»k»ri8i, 1.116 

StUrire, t, 260; n. 100. 101, 108; m. 

46,149 

SttimnAtj, ti. 10, 46, 94 
D. 32 

Storits iif tU 3ighiv-/due VsitJmatu. 
o. 261 

SUtbesm. 416,431,450 
St*din in Mjftlicd Stiifknt. n. 813 
Slope, r. 119. 162; n. 76, 65. 96, 143. 
172; RL 28. 65, 189, 165, 193, 194^ 
239,270,825 ^ 

SuaU. n. 821 
Sobaodhu, iz. 98 

BubbAihitc Saegnbe. a. 181, [29 

Subbadda, l 154,160 
SubbiabUa, iL 104 
SobbOti, m. 360 
Subjectivo reaUtj. i. 827 
8dbr»bfnaa;a. n. 328 
StKUdn, bins, ui. 386 
Suchm. m. 26l 
Soobov, Qz. 192 
Sadedana, m. 208. 387 
9udM. t. 20,69 
SoddUdraitc, a. 248, 318 
SnddhaTidp*, n. 819 
Soddbodana, t 181, 183, 148 
SodhanTM, Idas. n. 110, 2OT 
fiodbanDan. I. Ill 

6udns. >. 72; n. 85, [73. 186, 160; 
m. 183, 219 

Sofierisj (oaoM of), 1.144, 206 
Sudam,:. xU, d; CL 230, 200; m. 400 
Bngato.m. 108 
lU) SvM*<}n. i. $1$ 

SohrilUbEA, c. 86; m. 280 

Bafatezdear, n. 73 

fid Aimali aad d/na*tT, co. 101. SOd, 
857 If,, 289, 893 

Snioide, i. Ixx, 205; U. 104; m. 889 
SoiAri.!. 17$ 
fiosbam, L 224 

SobhlTati. it. 23, 28.103; in. 219, 828 
BukUTatl.TvOba, d. 5. 14. 19, 27 m.: 

m. 220. l83. 884, 296, 313. 428 
fiobh Ifldbxs, n. 265 
Sokbothti. m. 79 if.. 82, 85 fSukbo* 
da^aj 

Sukbtaitbar, tt 815 

INDEX 

605 

P*^H*'T‘-^****i * li 

6aka m. IM 

6AkgM<li. m. 7S 

Suluutt*. i. 20, SO 

SolUa tfubftiBiDMl BfthCBAtti, m. 461 

— m. 469 
SaouiigAkMlAMa], is. 83, 30 
Soflutt (QUMt). a. 897 
5w*«*. J. xU; m. lOi, 107.163, 161- 

169 

], 348 

€B-ni6D-t444, IS. 163 
8titB«n^bba, ax 269 
donp*, CB. 363, 961 
Soa (BodiUk), m. 817 
SundM (Ung). L 114 

— (wnut). s 216 

SnBOMt, L Iffl 

&mg dyoMM. m. 146, 169. 806, 948. 

269. 969. 262. 990, 800. 301 
6«M» ^TnMtv. I. 22; u. 66 
8uas TOn. o. 66. 06; m. 200, ill. 264. 
296 

Soa wonhip. n. 06. 106. 146. 166; 
01.462.463 

SftBTl |SAo7ui. BOant*. Sdnyit*}, n. 
i6. 48. 61. 62, 65, 67. 73, 76. 116. 
lOOiRi. 173 
S4n7Bi«Qru.B. 116 
861174 PnriQB. n. 114 
^ov» BMpUtt. ci. 116 
SAjiTt.TidA, L 906; O. 388 
8up«niAtanJ. the, u 141.161.174. 904. 
8«<Uir4eiee 

SopcntitlMi, L xxxvii: s 181; Sf. 
220«7.,240.694.944. .Jwiberifbul 
dktfM, *»»»««<•»»» 

Buppiy*. j. 269 

8«pre«e dpirit, b. 46, 187, 179, 193, 
IM. 109. 229. 296. 249. 880. 894 
dlMcg:MDe,nL 264 
^rtngtaat 8*ia*<^hi. n. 66 
SvfMhtf*. >. 23; UL 461 

Sxrdu. n. 101 
8uj«odnbed91, m. 270 
But,nM, D. 101 

S6cr*, j. 67; u. 146; m. 164.166, 453. 
454 

SOrTa^bbe BOtm. il 69; m. 815 
Btryauriyeea, s 1I4 
86T7*«e«ie Reou (SA). it. 7; lO. 11 
BOr^vannedeve. in. 140 
BOmvemea, m. 110 
Bum. I. 317 

BaUeon* J4uk4, m. 178. 176, 161, 
443 

Sltr»Xrit4ua, t. III. 116 
SavileaUre. a. 40. 69.160; ffi. 490 
8x*Tuiog. ID. 269. ^4 
Sotu. 1. bttili. 96. 129 (meening), 130, 
160.166.178. 266. 277 «Q. 

SxUeaU, L 120 

BetU Ni76te, r. 117,193.186,164. 816. 
232, f79. 280; a. 160, 107; OX 42, 
290 

— Se&gfthe, m. 55 
— VAQ«e,z.277.260 
Su?M9^»hdad. m. 6. 62. 69,103 
8avima>d?fp4. m. 959 
BoTBr^pmdhM-eOtta. s. 98i 64, 60; 

m. m. 815. S84 
8« Wq. m. 105.113 
SfiyutfedeogBsi. x 116 
Sossxi^^'ttm}. s 10, 84, 42, 44, 56, 

Sfebhire. s 99 
8T«bb6Tfr.fci7s, a. 82 
8Tebb6vB>vi^ L 06 
SraMheade, ix 224 
StaakeJek, m. 79 
SveMDvedyopeiiiihed, s 822 
SrayambM.s 20,67,116 
— PQjiOfr,D. 20,66,116,110; OX 866 
Bvet4dTlp4. rx 195; CO. 425 

S iui. X 6 

bM. I. Ill, 112.116,117. 120 
aun Upattiabadi i. 66; b. 160. 
168.167, 819,206.302.306 
BTimioir&yaxa, u. 175. 252 
8vat. o. 126 
8v«dmborg. X It 
S winburne, i. IxtI; n. 267 
Swing ritM. x 100: s 115; m. 94 
Sy^Tidn. 7.106 
8;4iae. m. 70 
SyUabenee. see <d. Bx 300 
SymboUem, x hex 
Byikod. m. 34 
Syria, l 269; m. 480 
Byrieo, m. 160 
SyMea Chrietiaaity, B. 226 

Ta>A«k>>baii4ua'4'i*ttX(^le«eo*altao*Ca> 
obu'Chl, m. 886 
TabedateB, sr. 190 
TabeVvHa^ 3. 112 
T*Clu,nx292 
T» Chieu. TZ. 6 
Tagere {Ter). Ot. 106.155 
T^ung. m. 47, 60 
Tagore DeteudnAalb, X 76; b. 287 
— Rabladranath. x 46; u. 46 
Faip^ RabeUion, m. 232, 819 
Tu.fhiE.oUh, a. 23 
Tai.1^ m. 870. 275, 280 
Tai Taaag. m. 359, 260, 264, 870. 279. 
869.9^ 

Faiuiriya Araaraka, U. 159 
raittirlya school, l. Izuli. 76 eg. 

— (Ipaai^. X 46, 7S. 76, 61. 94 
refill, a. 27 

l^iib-ehtag. n. 56; m. 264, 617 

r»>jima. n. 96; m. 865 

TWhakeen, x 259: s 8. 65. 76, 61. 82. 

606 

IKDBZ 

so, lOS. IM. \K-, W. 102. 217, SfiO, 

SSa, 280, 22$. 918, 2S9 
T* K*«, m. 192 

Tftkib*ttU. L 288; IL 100; m. £20 
Tilftinfi, :n. 28.29, 49, 49, 61,100 
T4lifQ, ID. 79 
T4li£oU.L90 
U«M.a. 228 

2Vwi44« a. I16, 219 

Tamil Purlntj, u. 189 
Tamkb (U&guare, LMratun, eta), i> 
txir. xli. 10% 114,118; a. 99, 182. 
189, 191, 192, 2M, 211. 218, 819; 
OLS. Um, 96, 48 49,416 
Te 9 Ub 4 6aft nan^ u. 889 
Ttfflluk, n. 94 
Ta-me, m. 266 
Ta.4DobaG«*a»iluD. oi. 804 
TanmlipU, u. 92 
taa-dbao-oai), n. 860 
T'eng dyuetj, o. 18; m. 64,164,166, 
199, 199. W. 204, 209, 209. 809, 
810.842. 8S9-299,889, 890.801, $97 
Taagri, m. 816 
Tecsata, m. 20S, 819 
TecU. L Ixxvii144, 198. 306. 808. 
209 

Tujon.80; n. 214; m. 6, 19, 44 
Taojor. tbe. m. 351, 878 af. 

TaBA&tn, 11. 299 

TedMe Pa^cgUajan. ni. 171 
Tutrai {Taatrtfb), i. xtivi. Izzi^^, 
l2ui. Uuvi, li&xviii. 49, 97; a. 4, 
9, 9.21, 88. 66, 91, 68, 87. 121, 186, 
188 w. 274309, 842; m. 40, 
178, §9$. 979. 976.462 
Tu(A Siatra, n. 881 
TanU»T4nUka, n. 207 
tto^;4ea. m. 819 
Taatn, dl 172 

Taauu BuOdiiiia, n. 126, 129, 130; 
nr. 61,68, 849 

— aebool, m. 816-920 

— teste, n. 121 : dl 896 
Taotolea, tn. 176 
TaBuoe^t (Agni), i. 67 
Tko, Q, 48; nx. 816 

Tae an, at 396 
Tae HMa. m. 909 
Tao HauaA. ol 916. 926 
TaniaiB. t. UuUi. 49. 806; s. 264; 
m. 136,199, 216, 287 241. 168. 

862, 267. 871. 876 306, 919 

Taeiat ju. 342 
Tao«raj.(n Cbina, m. 296 
Tao>t4.CKiw. rn. 246. 247 
T*pl, UL iS 

Tapea, t 71,119. AacatluaB 
Tapaai, m. 141 
Ta ?rehai teaple, m. 188 
Tapoaaa. m. 60 

T4r4, o. 19-19, 27, 108, 138 ej,, 277, 

880: 03.169.196.169,173, 819,348, 
398 

Tir4, the WUU. lo. 383 
Ticmnitha. n. 60, 63. 96. 6$. 78, 80, 87. 
111. 112. 119, 116. 126, 126. 138, 
129; m. 62,108,189. 169,177, ISO. 
819, 909, 907, 391. 860, 369, 981, 
999, 468 

Tiraa8tlia Vidrtiatha, d. 281 
reri«e.r. 239 

Tarim baaio, t axri; n. 17; m. 169 m., 
849.468 

Tartar etatM, m. 9,189. 849, 268 
Teahidme, at 971 
Taahihohl, m. 987 
Taabi Laaa. a. 118: is. 370. 371 
TaatP'lhoa.po. id. 946. 860.990 
Taahhwii. m. 109, 803 
de TAea7 (Garoin], s. 868 
TatbOgata, r. llO, 139, 163. 164. 169, 
167, 169. 223. 290; n. 29, 3S; nz. 
196,816,449 

Oarbba, n. 94, 43. 76. 84. 87 
— Gubvaka, s. 66, 61, 123; n. 976 
T*-Tal, D. 67 
Tattawta Piyal, n. 880 
Tat tram as, i. 81 
taUvia, a. 204,897, 919 
taitratra/a. n. 297 
ta'4'Qng*fe. st 193 
TWiioggwiD Savidav, flt 99 

TVimn, ID. 6§ 

Tanoc Artamie, a. 279 
Taw Stia Ko. m. 49, 66, 60 
^^sla (Ikkauaila). t ixzl, itxt, 21, 
29;m.460. New Eawainadi 
Tailor (laaaoX m. 956 
Ta Vseb Chi^ m. 844 
Ta Yna CSuog.nr. 891 
T'aoeUa^ o/ Vtivtta to 

SiJniiilM. n. 916 
Teg Behadur Oun. n. 268.270 
Tegri. DL 354 
tejae. n. 109 
TflltBg, u. 207 
Tel el-Areana. m. 438 
Talinga Btmlmiana, d. 240 
Teli^f^a. at 49 
Telopa (Tailopa). nz. 987 
Teluga,!. 1 U;b. 819 
Tmple, Sir EL C., m. 49. 61. 68. 60 
Temple ritual, z. IxuIt; n. 174; m. 

^ 831389 ag., 400 (TtbeUa) 

Tecapiee, t. isia. suill, liii, xhi, 
IzxslTw., 114, 116. no (JaiM); 
a. 178. 1?4{ DL 74, 166 m.. 184 m.. 
336, 943. 866. 8t« obo Chedia. 
Bagobae. Pagodae, Stspae 
TeoaeMrim. dz. 79 

Teodai, nj. 810, 404 
Tengalaia. rr. 103, 291, 896 
Troggame, u. 167.182 

INDEX 

607 

TwiTnwtfa Oeyion, m. &a 

TcnajKio, t. 329 
T«pbQ. m. $11 
T«r. m. IM 
T«ni. 1. 2M 
Tw«bfirtbui, at MS 
Ttrib*. m. $90 

T«Tttiaologf, unbinUiM, t. $, 199: m. 
224 

T«ahu T.»m», m. 280 
T«Ua ;«e. m. 291 

190 

T«Kpar, n. 127 
TbA^adupftn, Hi 48 
Tbwi m. te 
Thu, Ui», 1 zTTi m. 19, $1 
Thutugso.! 118 
niMMf, 1 26, W 
XbftpiBja, m. 66 
TbuMwa^ gj. 85 
Ththuitb*ing> m 68, IS 
Thuco. UL 6,28, S9. 46.48, 60. 66 
Tb«g>4mM, D. 8 
Ttu^'ohea'po, s. 8 

Thmathlc oMuiitk«, a. 161 
Tb«T», j. 256: m. 80 
Tbe^thft, 1 187, m. 110,180, 200, 
275; a. ISltm. 840.297 
Th«?MQ(^ m. 484. 486 
ThenHtte. i 261. 282: c. 46,62.162 
Tb^^4hi. 1 171,279; c. 281; m. 240, 

Th«ri 7 » m. 40 

TbncDOplMcu, j. 101 

mh*n(. a. 816 
TbihAw, kite. m. 48. 66,71 
TbJb.CUte^b*. m. 94 
Th&htebin. m. 61 
TbomM.nL 896 
Tbompooo, fruKiB, u. 162. US 
Thompooa, F. A., m. 98 
Tioimu fiuibbot*, m. 348, 878 
Thor. I. 68 
Th6t-Kitht&, m. 98 
TbOQfbt &«oal«rebM. m. 804, 809 
Thntoo (Thnokful, tD. 436 
Tlmo BodlM 8tt TiikAjfr 
Tlm«ku^4etM, m. 249 
Tlu4n07U9.O74>th«9. m. 366 
Thui. 1. Ixni2:n.277 
Th6. him. m. »4 
Tbimdor. Hl&lMrr m. 226 
Tbaputma Dftgo^ m. 16 
TbantOD, t. 90: U. 171. 286 
T^boi. L ilU. z^r, BTii, z^. 212, 288. 
248; JT. 17. 19. 28. 88, 88.100, 111. 
128.127. 196.129. 276: m. 9,192. 
199. 200. 807. 810. 814 260. 263. 
276. 279. 380. 846 m, 

Hboten Ctooo, l 876: a. 47, 57. 87^ 
381 

-< CbroitielM, m. 2li 

TlbeUa ouiaMriptc. n. 192 
— (no4l*UeM, D. 74, 96. 108. Ill. 
280. 360, 658. St* aUo Kujur. 
Tiiritiin), Taaiuf, Tt&crlia 
TibMo-Bonaui UsffUftgM, n. 279; 
to. 46 

Tim {Shaag H), i. 7; m. 216 
TMft-4bkD, m. 192 

Tiw.t'al, n. 51; xo. 238. 268, 261. 287. 

803. 310.311386 
Timtiu. OL 819 
Tuk^n. lU 
TiTEwb. m. 312 
TQadbal^ n. 17 
a 106 

Timur, i. 29 

Ttnoarellp,88; n. 222. 837 
Ti^tahb 6'«T7ip<(4A» 
Tlrokad4ua(t«in« m* 92 
Tifbnt.J. 87,118; D. 117 
TtrthBoharft, u 110. 119. 348; n. 168; 
m. 807 

TlnuDalar. n. 204 
TinLfQkagi4 n. 831 
Tiramnru, u. 816.180 
Timpati. n. 840 

Txrerif^^m. l sir. zc; n. 816. 217. 

819. 831. 232: m. 418 
Tn-vay mon, XL 83i 
TteCTuaUk (Torbiib), m. 366 
Tluak.iB.48 

Tum HcggatoBtU,!. 266,269.861.271 
Ti-taaag. n. U. 24; hl 281. 321. 827. 
446 

Tiuhira mbml, r. 97 
Tjaadl Arjnnft, nL 167 

— Bimo, EL 167 

— Djigo, CO. 169, 166. 168 
yalltin, m. 166 tq. 

— M«B45Qe,m. 165 
Placaaa, m. 165 

— Sangteun. xtr. 16$ 

— Sari. nL 106 
Tjut&akaparva. el 178 
T^ltjatthBiTar.m. 168 
Tom Hung. BL 262 
roU Tm. EL 262 
rodar Uall. l 31 
tM&apal. m. 168,169.168 
TokUra. el 802 

ToUianaa {T»khan), SL 191. 802, S06, 
813,221 

Tokmak. el 198 
Tdk76.EL290 

Tolwation. x. zcii. xdv. 16$, 178 
rolO'Pu-ia, n. 17 
Tomara dyBatly. l 89 
Torn tAdexiOA. el $1 
TeakdiLiB* $40 

ToMh (Boddlu’a). m. 88-88, 277 

Toramtoa. J. 85 

TortolM (oacanatioa}, s. 147 

INDEX 

TOQBU, XL 19 
TMBgPCs m. 48 

Au. n. 78.88; m. 188.818.217. 
848. 380, 292. 287. &U. 838. 349. 
860.S58.S84 

7W <n 9f ttumMcn j)<^ 

&.187 

Toir«n of ftiM o&d Viototy. l ISO 
Tofog. m. 189 

Tnde route*, i. ni. izvli tL 138; m. 
100. 100. 166. 188. 189. 197. 203. 
203,415.489 
Treilohroeire. m~ 114 

TreUekTtOrve, is. 110 
Tmpbto. m. 99 
Timo dfuiety. xn. 841 
dVeMioiie** e/ it* XttemnA San^ari, 
L 381 

Tmo^Urmbon (Cluo«*e ■Jiteml. m. 
800 4*.; (libMea *7it«a), lO. 347, 
877 

TmDiBi^t<e& 8u U«tam|»7chosu, 
lUtAunutioo. 

TympiMla, 03. 210 
Trmmioore, L SO: n. 147. 222 
TcUd.n. S3. 80.104.304: m. 1S2 
Tned (fhinniiT ScnpiBN*). 7ff. 317, 
387 

Tribe! dmriMU, 0.178 
7ni(«> aai Casit» of At CetUrel Pto- 
niWM.s 201. 200 
TrieUnepelf. l 17. 20: a 236 
Tnebv. s 207 
Trik* (dPipertifie). n. 828 
TrlUye. CL 32. 04: m. 101.380 
Trilok**0r«.L 117 
TriaOrti. c. 07: n. 194: m. 176,180 
Triflk.ixL 841 

TrisitT. L 310; m. 122. 4S1. 401 
iMiUke (TlBHeto). j. 61. U7. 128. 
242. 260. 881. Rl. 276: tL 78. 81, 
94; m. 14,61.59.96.81. 88.89.88, 
90. 217. 237. 248. 869. $u Cbtam 
Triplteke 
TRretoe. m. 843 
TrU*,izL429 

166 

Tni««.L20 

T7«e Lev. L 217 

T»tt-lVi.BL93 

T^m.299 

Tael HU. m. 218 

TWi.U QC. 319 

Teeag pro viao e. m. 894 

T4Mg*p*-4Herpe. m. 892 

IWTqb^. D. 809 

Taeme. m. 811 

Tm0s.i. m. 299 

Tate Van. tu. 360 

lU>Iu(Chl lu}. m. 287 

TUo dneatj. m. 103,194, 249, 814 

TatB Iforaar) SUte, xu. 260 

•Uae p*. L zzTu; tct 276. 868. 

Tnil Heo. m. 262 

TkitDf, Ed. 303 

XiuAg.inte. m. 306. 310 

Tsuao-a'M-t’usfl’Taea.baa^bi, in. 807 

Tau-^h. UL 309 

TB>Cki, Iff. 290 

Tq Fa ShnA. m. 319 

a iiiftV d^neat;. l 29 

arem. l x«; D. 161. 244. 246, 256, 
298: tp. 427 
Tokhara, m. 297 

Tula! Dm, l xIv. Ixrr, Ixxxi. xo, o; 

D. 160.152.191.24619., 202 
Tfim4d,(D.S92 
T'ooo, m. 811 
TuQcabhedre. (. 80 

Tim^Daiu.nL ISO. 192.193.197,210. 
301. 4^9 

Tvaiuan xATuicine. i. 36 
Turfan, Q. 22; m. 190.198. 200.206 ae.. 
287,869 

Tunve, j. Ixiii, 83 

Torkeetea. ft 24,64. 69: ro. 880. 468 
Turks djnaatiaa, i. 28: m. 450 
Turklah. i. 20; at 192. 816 
TwkonMoa. t SS 
Tvrka.m. 198, 199 
Tumour, m. 21, 26 

ToaiubaeTan, l 174, 291, $42; b. 7, 
07: m. 20, 24, 220 
TuttlacF (Mtiea, sl 391 ag. 

Traahtri, i. 67 

Tuo iriai'ta to Tia OovUriM oT CAtaai, 
m. 27 

TtIot. L 804 
Tig Jlb. m. 280 
Ta'a-Oa-teiVob, m. 316 
TVa ta-taufig, is. 315 
^ Uaag, Bl. 363 

Uocha44.XL 48 

VdOna. j. 133, 167, 160, 226. 296; 

111.214,290,372,378 
Dd&fi4atfp, m. 295 
TTdaadepare. a. Ill 
DdayiditjaTennan, ttL 110, llO 
Dda^eu jbiag). CL 86 
Dddaka Kimaputte, i. 189, 130, 303, 
316 

Udd&laka Arani, i. 76, 81, 92; fi. 808 

Udarpoie. UL 119 

DdrttTi, L 99 

UdRawaaB, i. 227 

Ddipi, IL 240 

Udyioa. a 22. 93, 99, 100, 109. 126, 
127. 278; nx. 218, 264, 800, 349. 398 
Ugra, ffl. 146, 382 
DeeaSDa, buk OL 462 
Diebor, i. 875: s 64. 89; m. 189, 162. 
198. 200. 206. 210. 816. 203.856 

INDEX 

509 

I. S6; XL lOS 
n. S27 

5^ 

^b«1»b«kft«CL 69 
ITkkaJa. IB. 60 
tiUo. t. 9 
inUmHo», PL 264 
Gmi, a. 916, 218; m. 114, U6, L47 
Umi H«liDATili, tL 277 
ZL 184. 921 

TTndtffaill. u 196. 908; a. 276 
Uctifonoit; (HioduuttK n. 167.177 
TJaiUd ProTtEMs, i. zItui, 87, 189; 
tu 108.194 

Uniraid Uotbw. n. SS7 

— iMic>oi4 r. 198: B. 124 
UpMtafc L 208 w. 

6Mr». XL 78 
mdU*. tt. 313 
tpUL7i;4.xix.830 
QigittM, a. 905 

iWortA, (, 969. 271: 0.80: tu. 307 
U^jhi^^L 244 

vp^$^t. no 

^ftkink^L 908 
11^ ). 165. 266. 267.868 

— (Abbot), m, 36 

0p4Dlab»ds, L xri. Hr K., Izziii. Izrtii, 
Ixxiz. 90. 40. 42. 44» 46. 48. 61. 68 . 
69, 66. 72. 74 «f. 92. 104,108. 120, 
159. 192. 209. 986, 288. 297. 300. 
906, 310. 331; XL 48. 74, 161. 164. 
186. 187. 20). 206. 299. 232. 284. 
288. 940. 970. 280. 28). 298. 806. 
306. 321: izl 176. 946.306, 462 
FpApurinu, It. 886 
Up5«*U. I. 249: lEL 946 
116 

■tppidl, i. 844: ni. 328 
165 

l^VMAttlA dAT*. B. 104 
XXL ll8 
QiAadrA. 0.166 

l^WMtliA dAm L 943. 244. 250. 257. 
270: XXL il. 42. 69. 63, 72. 89. 194. 
130. 339.889 
UppAr Chndvtt. m. 63 
tim AltAie kanAM. t. 20 
Ur^A. XXL 36069, 398 
Cro^ XL 147 

Ort p net^ itt lAttf* inittt, n. 142 
Umaul. DL 192. 200 
VniT^ 1.136. l4^ 168,267 
UAbiA. 1. 62. 88 
UtholibA^iA/A, m, 394 
Uih^iabA-njATl.dbirAoi. n. 196 
«^idA,iL 48 
U«pAlA.XL92d 
Uterpiid. L 107 
atMVAnnhA, tL 173 
UtMkloHl^XLS 

attAQA.)4ftA, XL 3 
UttAiA, to. 60 

VUArA>dhv&OA, X. Ill, 119 
UUArtd^AT&ftA. 1.117; ID. 439 
UttorijtTA, m. 67 
UUtn MIzQijj»6. n. 291.310 
UtCATipAtbAlOt I. 261 
Uf 4i«AdAM0, X. 99,118 

Vm, XL 181 
VACAoimdtAig, u. 268 
TuAApAtfmiitA. Q. 96 
yAecbA,L 2S0 

VtdkCAkis. a. 168,286 w., 243 
VAAdSbM, ni. 13 
VA^UrAtA. XL 19 
V^Atl Di5b5tta«A, XL 119 
yJbhiAhilcA. L XL $2. 89.90,102; 
ID. 879 

VAld^ (qaeAD). il SO 
VudilcA tkAnxAkAo^^ n. 190 
YASdfliTA. m 327 
YAjkbiaAAdazBA, XL 190 
VAUa&tbA. XL 196 
— KithA, n. S60 
TAii>ul7A SfiMA, n. 48,64.108 
Yntmaha. XL 19, 26. 27. 128, 198; 
ca. 166, 172 AC.. 21), 837, 360, 936. 
395 

YAirocAnA-rBAol.pnUmABditA. a. 97 
Yaua11.l 11). lU; cl 17 
Yai ^b ilcA L 100: B. 90, 

Viifcahitia. XXL 44 
VAiabBATA, VAiAhBATUCB. Bm YlAbaa* 
bin. Tblmuitoi 

F«Mn4nm cMd finnAO. ZL 152. ]5S, 
U7. 209. 242. 248. 256,269 
Ffl V A> w g i r*ti of India, u. 933, 

YAbriTADA. m 209,392 

VAbTASAZA. J. 57 fAgrrf) 

VaUta. l 34; sl 163 (VibAA) 

Vax^a Mot. flL 40. 41 
YAl^t^A, IL 171 
Ya^ 1, 190; m. 40 
VAjjiAu, I. 18). 169.186. 267. 958 
YullpiiUA Mbool. OL 19 
Yuca, id. 122 

YAir^Mdbi. n. 81: DL 264,8L7 
VA|ciO&S7A. CL 129 

YAjrte5i7A-AfliAb>bbLkAba*biiddbA. B. 

1)9 

TAinoobAdiJU, a. 41; id. 19). 276. 

983. 301. 874. 379 (diAttODd^nttar) 
VigTAdbAn. il 23; dl 889, 891 
YtjrAdbita. dl 317 
YqncArbhA, CL 66 
YAiTAii;A.B.S2,128 
Vaicap^ m. 129. 391. 892 
FAjmAttTt. a. a. 26. 89; dl 839, 
391 

VAirAAACibJ. DL 394 

VAjrtriiiA, n. 4; zxl 40, 386 

610 

lUDBX 

Tik. m. m 
vtJ»tu.L 117 iu. m 
VftkTftti, u, 

VklentoiQ*. :a. 445 

VtHM^ L xIt; II. 280. 244. 248, S98 

ValkbhMcr*. i. 43; n. 147,178. 18$. 

$45, 24$ 281,288. SOO 

(Db 1ft) Tall&o.?oiisoii. S. 9. U. 82, 48. 
85. 82. 121.122. 815; m. 881. 378. 
887 

VUttlb, D. 248 

ViffiA-oAriDi. n. 288. 384 (UfUhftiid«d 
oftltbruU) 

Tu 198 

VioftM. a. 161 .198; m. 108 

V8iDft|iTft.iZLll9 
V4uiT4ll.XL 1)9 

VaaftprMt^ t. 89 

7*0^ n. 272 

Vfto.nuM, m. 844 

Vir»hft4*oluU, a. 196 

y&rihi Tun. n. 120 

74rimadr», XL 10 

V4Jte4 Pvioft, :i. 193 

VwdbftOtinB. I. 10& 111, 1)2 

Forietifi cj Bdigiotct S:^efi$nc«, i, 802; 

a. 181 

VkmMX 178; m. 118 
L 298 

FtfOttB. L 87. 90. 88.108; 9. 28. 270 

ViMft.a.44 

VMWbrtiftTft. rt 770 

VftuTAdftUft, n. 98 

Vtaee dft GBiaft, (. 18. 31 

VMitter. a. 81.90.92 

7«Mbkft.n. 84 
VkdMU, n. 152 
T«4ia. m. 38$ 

VftBft. t. 149. 245; CL 81. 90, 181, 
S82 

Vftn. IfkgBBdfftDftU). tL ll4 
Tttgbtixfiia, i. iBxnii. 280: n. 48. 59. 
84 88 4^.. 102. 123. 189. 808; 

m. 82,10$, 123,157. 188.178, 220. 
28S, 288. 224, 207. $16. 378 
VindBVft. L xlbi. 24. 11$; a. 84. 15$. 
IM, 182.100. 124 m.. $00. 220, 283. 
246 

FftngupU. a. 226 
Vftnoltrft, n. 70; ID 807 
Vhu. l 87 
VftUa. I. 20. 27,114 
Tltudyft. c. 268 
7«M.jQa. cQ. 04 

74t(«4lmftai, L 206; U. 50; £0.12, 01, 
2$ 

^nhQ'VlJlt, m. 282 

V47«. L i3i a. 239, 240 

FIjq PaHoft. t. 18; a. 107, 202 

V&TwtQtl, CL 241 

Mu!. L 100 

rwlftnl^B. 1.107 

T«4i4n(4 {PhlkwpliTj, ruU, li). «U, 
47. 225. 302; a 202. 200'228. 235. 
280, 292 807*^17 

— Duiltft. n. 195. 238. 227 

— S&trw, a 202, 208, 229. 2d0. 238, 
230, 385, 282. 806. 814 

Ved4Ttb» P»01p«T a 283 

— SfthKiftbft. a 283 
VcxIm (Jm C^oa), $.117 

Vedu (V«ilio reHgioa). L zr. xsiTi, 
Ixziv. a. 40.42, 87. 77 tq., 89{a 138 
UO. 202. 238, 202 ij i m. 108. 
^9 

7Mlft44Urfta, a 07 
VtdielnM,!. 134; a 153 
7edic n. 171 

VegQUtiM dei^, a 168 
VOmuift. a. 219 

V«aft(l^).i.80.88 
Vmci. t. xa 8l, 158 

ViqLii, I. 103; a 137 (Vkh^l 
V6ok«l<4vftr», L 106 
V^uUft(Ut).L 103 
VwBtllJBgOft, I. 03 

VvaftcnlftT. UterfttoM. ud luumagg, 
L zzlT.xlv, 40; a 119,24!.^. 2^; 
0. 85 

Vwilt.z. 150.159.181 189.254,266, 

257.290 
VMwbhO, L 342 
V««aftQtftrft,a 10 
V«tb,az. 182 
V«th*47r)ft. 1.180 

Vg^akft 0Mt. L 280, 281. 293; a 40. 

07; ca 20, 40 
VMulnft, m. 19, 32 

VlbbhAjBTUm MCi. I. 261. 202. 276. 

291.290 

Vibb4DflM, IP. 21 
Vibhift^. a 70. 82, 89 
vibhiju&mift. u. 256 
Vibbs, m. 114 
vin.hiooU, i, 227 
7idubbft,a 86 
Ti44nii,in. 117 
Videbft. X. 38, 87.94,101 

Tidlaa 195 

Ti808ftbbft.L 101 
Vl^a.a 204 

VidWbbtaabftaft, SftHMh&ftdxa. a 65. 

M. 106, 111; 0.376 
Vidridhftru, m. 102 (vidftduix) 
Vl^i-kftnpxftbU, cl 879 
Fi^toaOtn. xa 815 
7idr&pfta a 244. 250 
Titr f M otofi i te/u Te*k d*4 MtAa- 
h^tgtom,lL 187 
VkbftoUftTft. cx. 172 
Viy,rft,L 119.245; a 257; OL 149.198. 

211 dee al#o Uooutarus 
TMto. I. 210 
Vijftifft. c. 149; m. 5,12 

lNt>EX 

511 

Tljm (Okkttp*). m. m 
m. 83 

lu. nt 83 

(Idng), m. 116 

j. xli. 16, 30. n. flO, 
Sli,i4/».m. 46d 
Vij4;r»piir, to. 63 

TijMu^zBbUTft (luu), m. 207, S21, 
218 

TliMfru^ IS. 116 
VUfiiu Bbiicbo. n. 303 
VjiSiumib^, m. $16 
Vnft&a^vidin Met. n. 87 
YikmoiditTk, L 25$ D. 83 
VibMMUft.Il. III. 112.188 
ss. 140,143 

VikrtU, o. 297 

Tiliftfft h 100,108 

Mt of SnJMm Mi^. o. f IS. 

Villeaiftnul. m. Ill 
VlBftli.S.U 

Vlojii Dbftnuft (1 ftod IT), lo. 27. 36 
Vioftiftbnl SftCTft. n. 84 
Timioft Tftttho, i. 280. 288 

TbUf’ind. O. 222 

ViAVft.L lur. 97.129.1». 138. iSSiq,, 
131, 224. 289. 241. 244. 248. 268 w., 
383. 277 M i n. 48.87.71.72. 80. 

99. lOS. 126; m. 21,29.«. 191.286. 
291. 288 w. {Hlnft^MK 322, 373 
VioMft pftiUUft, n. iiS 

RMkft. IB. 18. 59.284. 273 
Vifi^^Tibbt«hft48tt>, u. 78 
Vind^ raonoUiDa, i. 20; A. 277 
VbdbfiOftl. B. 277 
Vindh^t^rail (K»bftrte3). n. 877 
ViAUvft, t. 189.190.197,198 
VlpakftMatftM. L US 
Vyawftcl. L 829: m. 191, 310 
V^ftatf. 1.942 
Tlnbhftdfft. D, 140; CL 891 
yirftporft, TO. l40 
Vtr» fiftlTft BfftAaftM. Q. 227 
X. It 

TlnncfTftUft, B. 37 
Ttryft.n. 196; m. 173.804 
VlOkU. I. 168. 169. 951 
ViahoQ {Viahaolui), l xxxirM., zlc;.. 
Izrl. IzziT, Izxi, 17, 96. 47. 48. 67. 
108. 943 {incTMtioMl: a. 38. US, 
US, 190. 198-166. m 228 w.; 
OL 43 (CerloD). 97 (Siftin). 148 
(Ghftmpft), 167. 173. 176 (JftTft), 
188 (BftU). 992 (TibM], 419 
Viabbft bod^ft. m. 181 
VUbaq Dbwttft, XL 187, 22S 
VkhfioltM (McM). USi n. US. 128, 
140.177 (B^aimftbc). 179 186 ij.. 

228af.242«f. 

Viibpokftrmft, QL 96 

VlibQolokft. m. 114 

Vbbou Portoft. I. 218; n. 28.148, 148. 

166, 157. 166, 137, 228, 234. 806: 
oi. 420' 

VnbQQ.3lrft. cl 119. Cl HuiJiftn 
VbbpusTStsi. XL 248 
Vtthou VftrdhSnft, m. 169.168 
Vi«Uht4dTu:« (pbilMophr), □. 229. 

238. 234 816 u. 

ViMftT. u. 24; XXL ^31 
Vlnddlu'Uag^ m. 29. 30. 46 
^9Tft)3COft,IL 233 
VlsTftsijtrft. L 96 
ViUifthAtb. n. 251 
VitUlft D«Tft. i{. 233 
Vittbftlft, XL 101, 257 
TitCobi^ n. m. 267 
VlTd^UTkOl. L 116 

viTfttMvSdft. rr. 264, 319 
ViTftfTftt. L 67 
Tivfthft Obu). n. S37 
VlTcltftaWft (Srinu). l zIto 
V> y8b^»fifl>ttl, L llS 
TiyftAgft, XXL 4S4 

Vooftn (VoduQ iatoppS.), l zstUi: 

XXL 108.198 as. 

Vohftnkft Tteft (kias)* i°* 18 
VoUntiMft. nz. 40 
Vrftb Eftzantb, sl 121 
Vrftb r6p».iZL 116 
Vrfth V;n44ithft, cl 117 
Vriddlift Riota SftBilait*. C. 163 
VrikftH. Q. 26d 
Vrind&TMift. iz. 154 
VnalUhbbft, il 226 
Vriahqu (Mpt), c. 1S4 194 Sf. 

VriUft, I. S9 
Vritrftb4a.L 63 
Vnttft’MficftTft, m. 168 
Taloftc, I. 66 

Voltare’* Peftk {eermcB, «to.}, l lOT; 

□. 29. 49. 61. 65 
^ftkftTftQit a- 05 
mkbyiprvioSpti, L 116 
^kl^Maaft. IB. 377 
^MftkatM, B. 241 
^hft, XL 198 ag. 

Wftebsbamr, ui. 194 
WftddeU, z. 212. 336: xl 16, SO. 128: 
XD. 929. 847,949.361. 370.371, r73, 
980,988. 989.994. 396, 398, 400 
Wanra (kiag), m. 66 
Wftbftbia. m. 463 
WiioSaSineb. L 67 
Wftleri. zn. 168 

WtlloHf. □. 51. 74. 85, 86, 816. 373 

W*Q, m. 278 

Wang Id Bhlh, zn. 260 

Warig-Cbes. izx. 277 

Waag Cto. m. 204 

Waa( dTMJty. (XL 897 

WMg tfsuaa T«^. in. 260 

WM6*We]. CL 261 

612 

WDZX 

Wftng Ymu Uing. m. 27S 
Wio^.m. S26. ^9. 8S3 
wfcftpbr*:, DL 98 
Waa 71, D. 289 
Warm), I. 190, 212, 268, SiO 
WaMai n. 176.269 
Waa. au Taaae 
Waanlfae, m. 283 
Wkb, re. 68 

CliefD,m. 86 
— ^nL97 
^ Soaarokoi, re. 86 

Watanaba, 0.66 

WaUaia, l 868; n. 16.88.28.83,61.61, 
76 to.. 90. 82 02.1»: m. 6. 21. 

26. tf. 148, 211.240. S86. 300. 

807.816, 888. 463 
Wabar, 1. 116; n. l?6; re. 428 
W«4. n. 171; xn. 204. 206. 249. 352 a?.. 
VI 

Wd Cblb. re. S09 
W«*«bUl.ab)&iXL 196 
Wai.«>8%.Po.cbib-aa, m. 196 
Wai Hal«b. re. 242 
WeiOwh. rn. 246 
Wai-kbib.lidaQg-ctMa, re. 316 
Wai-M. re 326 
WaUa. R. 0., t nib 

Z>i« VA ITi^e «n4 VortUUmo, 
j. 888.309 

W«na ICadpbiaca, ii. 202 
WIb Uauan Ti. 0). 261 
Wla Shu. Q. 19; m. 387 
Wto-ti (Sopara). re 268 

WMteMt,aU,. ii. 262 a?. 

Waataro THb dynaatr, iL 68: m. 803, 
849 

Whaal of CaoBatlon, l. 49 

Wb»l Of liia. I. 818 

Wbcaj «( Bightaounm, l 148 

WUta Brahoa, St 393 

WMttbaa8, a. 813.276, 894 

WUta Htfia MoMatarr. re 244,848,849 

WUta Buna. 8«t Beoa 

WUia L«wa aebool, m. 814, 919 

WUtaltfi.m. 883.394 

WMow-barainc {SatL Snttaa}, 2. 

kurfll; n. 168; st 192 
Widov’a ttta. m. 487 
WMazBana, tt. 122 

Wkgar. 179; n. S84, 390; m. 241. 

369.206,267.294, 9M 
W!b4o, CO. 89 
WiMa, Oac«r, n. 230 
WilliawlM^Mtlar), n. 877 
Wilsoo, H, B . a. 166.202 
WilsaUkU, ST. 160 
Wiadiarh, t. 148. 882 
Wiataroita. i. 134. 288; ZL 66, 83. 84, 
87, 118,109, 187.238 
Wiadcpm, God of. a. 145 
Woda^ara ct Uyaora, d. 226 

(The) Womaa e( Samada. m. 439 
Womao (lUMal, t 113. 168. 248, 261; 
a. 133. 160, 168, 232, 260. 261, 
376 a?., 986; ra. 68, 97. Set alao 

Nona 

Woos Mad^paUt, re 183 

Worwonb. j. !▼ 

World BaHgioo (Bnddbiaoi aa), i. 177 
Wonblp of Ralica. 6ee Relloa 
Wright, n. 110 

Wiltifig; of), I. 987. Set olao Alpha. 

bat^ IziaoriptaonB 
Wa djnaa^, ZZL 106, 109 
Wu, Empraa, m. 260, S86, 816 
Wo Hoa, m. 260 
Wad (HtaaTinist), a. 98 
Wq E'ang, ra. 202, 206. 202 
Wu provlsM, m. 864 
WBVat.abaa. n. 30. 21; m. 321. 331 
WB*Tao-tao. to. 242, 261, 383 
Wu TI. L 806; m. 106, 101, 163. 196, 
208, 808, 287,263 a?.. 289. 804 
Wo'Ti (RoAbam Chan), m. 357 
Wo Taung, m. 268,207, 263. 273, 378 
Wv-vd. D. 42 
Wu'wel-ebiao, re 818 
Wq.to. u. 300 

Xooaa, m. 422 

V&0a7M, I. 30; n. 113,164.194 
Taddcab&.vjldiiu, t. 98 
Y&jabaa, m. 113,126 
Yajaa, i. 63 
YalfiaM. Uag. m. 102 
V&)flavaik;a. i. IcxUi. 73. 79. 80, 88, 
84, 93.159, 396. 308 
Ydorvada, L 63.93; a. t41, 277 
Vttt-kUlgitt, n. 8 

Yakbbaa {YababM). l 0,102. 103; m. 
13, 174. 393 

Yaua. L 02, 108. 937; m. 174, 276, 
225,392 

Tama (rartrabit). i, 806, 393 

Yamaka, l 229, 234 

Tiaialaa, n. 282 

YafOnCnka. re 889,391. 892 

Yamdok (Uka). m. 394 

Tamimi, n. 159; ni. 113 

Y4m«&kirfa, n. 196,232 

Yiaa. B. 4. Cf. Hbiaaioa. Uabijisa 

Taog, B. 878,289 

Yaaa {» Qcd, m UalaT). m. 188 

Yaag.T1. m. 289 

Yaj)g Tikoh i&aedpt., re 106 

Yangtaa, Bl 266, 259 

Yaag wea Eiu, ra. 303 

Yaonar, l 126 

Yantraa. a. 280 

Yao Cb'a, ib. 265 

Tao Cb'iug, m. 202 

Yao Eu4n| Hboo, m. 770 

INLSX 

Y4rtwtl, 1. sx7i, S4i n. 79; CS. 200, 

ai,2ii 

7M4. L lU. 14^ 1$6. 297 
o. 22 

YMftft.L 0$ 

?4wd&,]L IM 

TaM^ui, L 174, SOI 

TaAodhansM n. 148 

Yaloinhn, a. 80 

TaiOTMTUIl, DL 110, 110 

Tafiig, 1, IIS, 110,121 

Tfttna (religioiu dmou), a. 230 

Tm, m. 103 

Y»vaA m. 169 

YavadTlpa, m. 140> 162 

TavakPli. O). 162 

T4?aaM,i.23in.0O 

YtMTla (Chraikla). m, 86 

Y«Uev Chanb, m. 368. 3C4, 883, 898. 

808 If. 

7«Q lo. nz. 238 

V«QU, ZZL SOI 

888,367 
Y«w« Hod. m. 308 
YaWade. m. 370 
YMb4a,iL00 
T«xd.i.OO 
yi.d4zn.iz. 128,391 
Yio, D. 278 
Yiac Tnu, m. 877 
yifi^jii^MQg'len. m. 160 
7 m. IB. 40 

YoA {piukaopty), L iM 78. 201, 

302 w; n. 120, 163. 189. 201. 202, 

216. 284. 246, 201, 262. 9M. 302 if.; 
tt. 148. 178 

YceicAT*. t. 193, 280. 803; zl 37 m.. 

42,83,87,08,90,01.103 
Yo^^bbOml Mm m. 213, 284. 

Yoficbin* (AaaoA’i ipMett), x. ; 

XL 8, 906. 5e» iU4a84 

Yo8addb34Q4, m. 146 
YofftMctn, BL 213 
Yea.T44i4bt]>4.r4ttt7«o^ n. 187 
Voffa] T4Otn,ZL280,209 
Toginli. XL 286 
YOfii, 1. Ut. 72, 303i XL 204 

ai3 

YOsuus rit (YOoft), m. 06 
YooulgarOUMAd*. uz. 1$ 

YooM. 1.283 
Yo>«Ub-io, m. 3f7 
7040. ZD. 263. 311 

Yoao (400411. dTftMtv), m. 100. 284, 
872, 273. 28?, 280, 301, 810, 318, 
824,388,857 • * • » 

Yitto Chwoag, L 268; n. 76; m. 0 
Yuan Jando, ol 298 
Yoan Tao, IZZ.207 
Yoao Ti. m. 2S7 
Yp o a t an, m. 169 
Td Cbao-Eo. m. 264 
Yoeb'Qhib. n. 20, M, 109; izl 197.201. 

812,218,213, 24& 0se£«taaQ 
YTWh fttng Mn md oblM, n. 60 
Ywaa,L 46 

Ya^ yeo, in. 261, 332 
7 q1»*i ir<tf«»?0lo, L 805; B. 320; zn. 28, 
124,277 

YcagikCbOiu, ZZL 237 
Yua^U. m. 176, 278.2$?, 309 
You &an£, zcr. 301 
Yoo MOa, ZZL 800 
VAozLaa, nz. 46, 61,262,340 
sY<lii-etoc<rD»rta'6n], izl 3G7 
YO'Slao, ZZL 800 
7u tl. m. 228 
YBailiiaiQbotic sact, zn. 404 

gatiMganiing, ttL SO 
Zaolar. i. 63 
Zantbuftta, zl 106 
ZannaooolMaa, m. 491 
Zadi. 10.74, 89 (oMi) 

Z«a,283,322; ZL 10; m. 260,806.400 
Zanan. m. ll$ 

Zeui, L 63 

Zibda Saliaoa, zl 117 

— Obasl. m. 409 
Zol«r, tba, ZZL 462 

m. 290 

ZoroaaM (Z<tfoaatdaQ nHgio^. l irr, 
52,68; n. 70, 270; ZZL 202,loO. 218. 
216, 218 m., 263, 410. 440 «?. 
Soroiiairiao <7allua, r, 01, 03 

— Tbaology, n. 276 

i 

i 

I 

j 

1 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL LIBRARY, 
KBW DELHI 

Catalogue No.294,09/^^^.17*200^ 

Author— niot, Sir Gharl&s. 

Title— HindulcD axd Buddhisis* 
7ol.3, 

icoh ihat is sJstd hut a NmV* 

OQK mat %8 9nm out 
^cV.AEOtO(>^^ 

G©VT. OF INDIA 
kq^utsieclof Ascloecd^ 

NEW DELHh 'ii*. ^