Short Histories of the Literatures 
of the World 

Edited by Edmund Gosse 

''pLt'>"^''^"i 

c^r, - 

LITERATURES OF THE WORLD. 

Edited by EDMUND GOSSE, 

Hon. M. A. of Trinity College, Cambridge. 

A succession of attractive volumes dealing with the 
history of literature in each country. Each volume will 
contain about three hundred and fifty 12mo pages, and 
will treat an entire literature, giving a uniform impres- 
sion of its development, histoiy, and character, and of its 
relation to previous and to contemporary work. 
Each, 12mo, cloth, $1.50. 

NOW READY. 

JAPANESE. By W, G. Aston, C. M. G., M. A., late 
Acting Secretary at the British Legation at Tokio. 

SPANISH LITERATURE. By J. Fitz Maurice-Kelly, 
Member of the Spanish Academy. 

ITALIAN LITERATURE. By Eichard Garnett, C. B., 
LL. D., Keeper of Printed Books in the British 
Museum. 

ANCIENT GREEK LITERATURE. By Gilbert Murray, 
M. A., Professor of Greek in the University of 

Glasgow. 

FRENCH LITERATURE. By Edward Dowden, D. C. L., 
LL. D., Professor of English Literature at the Uni- 
versity of Dublin. 

MODERN ENGLISH LITERATURE. By the Editor. 

IN PREPARATION. 

AMERICAN. By Prof. Moses Coit Ttlek. 

GEEMAN. 

HUNGARIAN. By Dr. Zoltan Beothy, Professor of Hungarian 
Literature at the University of Budapest. 

LA TIN. By Dr. Arthur Woolgar Verrall, Fellow and Senior 
Tutor of Trinity College, Cambridge. 

MODERN SCANDINAVIAN. By Dr. Georg Brandes, of Co- 
penhagen. 

SANSCRIT. By A. A. Macdonell, M. A., Deputy Boden Professor 
of Sanscrit at the University of Oxford. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK. 

A HISTORY OF 

JAPANESE LITERATURE 

BY 

W. G. ASTON, C. M. G., D. Lit. 

LATE JAPANESE SECRETARY TO H. M. LEGATION, TOKIO 

NEW YORK 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY 

1899 

CJ 

OojuiZ 

Copyright, 1899, 
By D. APPLETON AND COMPANY. 

PREFACE 

The Japanese have a voluminous literature, extending 
over twelve centuries, which to this day has been very 
imperfectly explored by European students. Forty years 
ago no Englishman had read a page of a Japanese book, 
and although some Continental scholars had a useful 
acquaintance with the language, their contributions to 
our knowledge are unimportant. Much has been done 
in the interval, by writers of grammars and dictionaries, to 
facilitate the acquirement of this most difficult language, 
and translations by Sir E. Satow, Messrs. Mitford, Cham- 
berlain, Dickins, and others, have given us interesting 
glimpses of certain phases of the literature. But the wider 
field -has hitherto remained untouched. Beyond a few^ 
brief detached notices, there is no body of critical opinion 
on Japanese books in any European language, and al- 
though the Japanese themselves have done more in this 
direction, their labours are for various reasons in a great 
measure unserviceable. 

The historian of their literature is therefore thrown 
mainly upon his own resources, and must do his best, 
by a direct examination of those works which the verdict 
of posterity has marked out as most worthy of notice, to 
ascertain their character and place in literature, and to 
grasp as far as possible the ideas which inspired them. 
In the following pages comparatively little space has 

vi PREFACE 

been devoted to what is necessarily a record of personal 
impressions and opinions, the outcome of rough pioneer 
work, and having Httle claim to be considered as mature 
literary criticism. It seemed preferable, especially in the 
case of a literature so little known to the English public 
as that of Japan, to allot ample room to translated 
extracts, and to such biographical notices as are neces- 
sary to show what manner of men the authors were. 

The general plan, however, of this series has not been 
lost sight of. Important writers have been treated at com- 
paratively greater length, to the neglect of many lesser ■ 
notabilities, and an attempt has been made, in so far as 
the state of our knowledge permits, to follow the move- 
ment of the literature, and to trace the causes which 
determined its character at particular periods. 

Writers on European literatures are entitled to take 
for granted, on the part of their readers, a previous 
acquaintance with the leading facts of the political and 
religious history of the country with which they are 
dealing. In the case of Japan, however, it has been 
thought not superfluous to add a few data of this kind, 
without a knowledge of which it is impossible to under- 
stand the course of the literary development. 

In justice to Japanese literature, it is right to draw 
attention to some obstacles which prevent any transla- 
tions from giving an adequate idea of its merits. The 
Italian adage is particularly applicable to translators from 
the Japanese. Even when they have a competent know- 
ledge of the language they cannot possibly reproduce 
all the metaphors, allusions, quotations, and illustrations 
which form the stock of the Japanese author, and which 
are in great part unintelligible without a profusion of 
explanatory notes intolerable to the reader. 

PREFACE vii 

Another difficulty arises from the fact that a Japanese 
word frequently covers a meaning which is only approxi- 
mately the same as that of the corresponding English 
term, or calls up quite different associations. The karasuy 
for example, is not exactly a crow, but a corvus Japonensis^ 
a larger bird than our species, with different cries and 
habits. The cherry is, in Japan, the queen of flowers, 
and is not valued for its fruit, while the rose is regarded 
as a mere thorny bush. Valerian, which to us is sugges- 
tive principally of cats, takes the place of the rosebud as 
the recognised metaphor for the early bloom of woman- 
hood. And what is the translator to do wit^Uhe names 
of flowers as familiar to the Japanese as daisy or daffodil 
to ourselves, but for which he can offer no better equi- 
valents than such clumsy inventions as Lespedeza, Platy- 
codo7i grandifloruin, and Deutzia scab r a ? 

In the world of thought and sentiment, the differences, 
though less tangible, are even more important. Take 
the Japanese word for conscience, namely, hoiisJiin, It 
means ^* original heart," and implies a theory that man's 
heart is originally good, and that conscience is its voice 
speaking within him. The words for justice, virtue, 
chastity, honour, love, and many more ideas of this class, 
although meaning substantially the same as with our- 
selves, must yet be taken with differences which are 
necessarily lost in a translation. 

When to these are added the ordinary difficulties which 
beset the task of rendering thought from one language 
into another, and which are incomparably greater in the 
case of an idiom so different from our own, it will be 
seen that it is not possible to do justice to Japanese litera- 
ture by translation. In the present volume it has often 
been necessary to pass over the best and most charac- 

viii PREFACE 

teristic passages of an author in favour of others which 
lent themselves more readily to presentation in an Eng- 
lish form. 

With one or two stated exceptions the translations 
are my own. 

My best thanks are due to Sir Ernest Satow, Her 
Majesty's Minister to Japan, for lending me most of his 
extensive library of Japanese books, and also for supply- 
ing me from time to time with recent native publications, 
which have been of much service to me. 

I cordially associate myself with previous contributors 
to this series of histories, by acknowledging the benefit 
which the present volume has derived from the editorial 
care of Mr. Edmund Gosse. 

Japanese words and proper names have been intro- 
duced as sparingly as possible. The system of spelling 
adopted is that of the Royal Geographical Society. It 
may be described briefly as *^ Consonants as in English, 
vowels as in Italian ; no silent letters." 

W. G. ASTON. 

CONTENTS 

BOOK THE FIRST— ARCHAIC PERIOD (before A.D. 700) 

PAGE 

INTRODUCTORY — SONGS — SHINTO RITUALS .... 3 

BOOK THE SECOND— NARA PERIOD (eighth century) 
(poetry cultivated) 

CHAPTER 

I. INTRODUCTORY — PROSE — •" KOJIKI " — " IDZUMO FUDOKI " — 

IMPERIAL EDICTS ... 17 

II. JAPANESE POETRY GENERALLY — THE " MANYOSHIU " — WORKS 

IN CHINESE 24 

BOOK THE THIRD— HEIAN OR CLASSICAL PERIOD 

(800-1186) 

I. INTRODUCTORY 53 

IL POETRY — THE " KOKINSHIU " 58 

IIL PROSE — " KOKINSHIU " PREFACE, "TOSA NIKKI," "TAKETORI 

MONOGATARI," " ISE " AND OTHER MINOR MONOGATARI . 63 

IV. " GENJI MONOGATARI " . 92 

V. '•' MAKURA ZOSHI " IO4 

\'\. SOME MINOR WORKS , 11^ 

VII. " YEIGWA MONOGATARI" — " 6-KA6AMI " — WORKS IN CHINESE. 122 

CONTENTS 

BOOK THE FOURTH— KAMAKURA PERIOD (i 186-1332) 
(decline of learning) 

CHAPTER PAGE 

I. INTRODUCTORY 13 1 

II. HISTORICAL WORKS — '* GEMPEI SEISUIKI," " HEIKE MONOGA- 
TARI," "MIDZU-KAGAMI," " HOGEN MONOGATARI," " HEIJI 

MONOGATARl" I34 

III. CHOMEI AND THE " HOJOKI " — " IZAYOI NO KI " — POETRY — 

WORKS IN CHINESE I45 

BOOK THE FIFTH— NAMBOKU-CHO AND MUROMACHI 
' PERIODS (1332-1603) 

(dark age) 

I. INTRODUCTORY — " JINKOSHOTOKI "■;— " TAIHEIKI " . . . 163 
II. KENKO AND THE " TSURE-DZURE-GUSA " 184 

III. POETRY — THE NO OR LYRICAL DRAMA — KIOGEN OR FARCE . I97 

BOOK THE SIXTH— YEDO PERIOD (1603-1867) 
(revival of learning) 

I. INTRODUCTORY — " TAIKOKI " 217 

II. SEVENTEENTH CENTURY — KANGAKUSHA (CHINESE SCHOLARS) 
— SEIKWA AND THE CHU-HI PHILOSOPHY, YEKKEN, HAKU- 

SEKI, KIUSO 224 

1:1. SEVENTEENTH CENTURY — POPULAR LITERATURE — SAIKAKU, 
children's STORIES — CHIKAMATSU AND THE POPULAR 
DRAMA 267 

IV. SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY POETRY — HAIKAI, HAIBUN, KIOKA . 289 
V. EIGHTEENTH CENTURY — KANGAKUSHA — FICTION — JISHO AND 

KISEKI — ^JITSUROKU-MONO— WAS(3BI0YE — POPULAR DRAMA 3OO 

CONTENTS xi 

CHAPTER PAGE 

VI. EIGHTEENTH CENTURY — THE WAGAKUSHA (STUDENTS OF 
JAPANESE antiquity) — KEICHU, KADA, MABUCHI, MO- 

TOORI 315 

YII. NINETEENTH CENTURY — HIRATA — SHINGAKU SERMONS . . 334 
VIII. NINETEENTH-CENTURY FICTION — ROMANTIC SCHOOL — KIO- 
DEN, BAKIN, TANEHIKO. HUMOURISTS — SAMBA, IKKU. 
SENTIMENTAL NOVELS (NINJOBON) — SHUNSUI. WORKS IN 
CHINESE 345 

BOOK THE SEVENTH—TOKIO PERIOD (1867-1898) 

SOME RECENT DEVELOPMENTS UNDER EUROPEAN INFLUENCE . 383 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 400 

LIST OF DICTIONARIES, «S:c 403 

INDEX . 405 

BOOK THE FIRST 

ARCHAIC PERIOD (before a.d. 700) 

BOOK THE FIRST 

ARCHAIC PERIOD (before a.d. 700) 

There are a few geographical and other facts which it 
is useful to bear in mind in tracing the history of Japan- 
ese literature. If we glance at a map of Eastern Asia 
we see that Japan forms a group of islands somewhat 
larger in superficial area than Great Britain and Ireland, 
separated by a narrow strait from the adjoining con- 
tinent. Here lies the peninsula of Corea, inhabited by 
a nation distinct from the Chinese in. race and language, 
but from ancient times dependent both politically and 
intellectually on its powerful neighbour. Corea has 
shown little originality iii the development of its litera- 
ture or civilisation, and its chief importance in connec- 
tion with Japan depends on its geographical position, 
which, in the infancy of the art of navigation, made it 
the natural intermediary between Japan and China. 

China, with its ancient civilisation, its copious and in 
many respects remarkable literature, and a history 
which goes back for more than two thousand years, has 
for many centuries exercised a commanding influence 
over all its neighbours. What Greece and Rome have 
been to Europe, China has been to the nations of the 
far East. Japan, in particular, is very deeply indebted 
to it. There is no department of Japanese national 

4 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

life and thought, whether material civilisation, religion, 
morals, political organisation, language, or literature, 
which does not bear traces of Chinese influence. 

Beyond China lies India, which has furnished one 
important factor in moulding the literature of Japan, 
namely. Buddhism. If, in regard to Japan, China takes 
the place of Greece and Rome, Buddhism, with its 
softening and humanising influences, holds a position 
similar to that of Christianity in the Western World. 
The alternate preponderance of these two powers is an 
interesting feature of Japanese history, and we shall see 
that it has not been without effect upon the literature. 

We must not, however, forget the native genius of the 
Japanese nation, which, in spite of numerous external 
obligations, has yet retained its originality. The Japan- 
ese are never contented with simple borrowing. In art, 
political institutions, and even religion, they are in the 
habit of modifying extensively everything which they 
adopt from others, and impressing on it the stamp of 
the national mind. It is the same with the literature. 
Though enormously indebted to China, and at times 
hindered in its natural development by a too implicit 
reliance on foreign guidance, it has remained neverthe- 
less a true index of the national character. It is the 
literature of a brave, courteous, light-hearted, pleasure- 
loving people, sentimental rather than passionate, witty 
and humorous, of nimble apprehension, but not pro- 
found ; ingenious and inventive, but hardly capable of 
high intellectual achievement; of receptive minds en- 
dowed with a voracious appetite for knowledge ; with 
a turn for neatness and elegance of expression, but sel- 
dom or never rising to sublimity. 

The insular position and political independence of 

ARCHAIC PERIOD ^ 

Japan no doubt account partially for the literature re- 
taining its native originality of character. But more is 
no doubt due to a fundamental difference of race from 
the nations to which the Japanese have been indebted. 
There is reason to believe that the Japanese nation con- 
tains an aboriginal polynesian element (which some 
writers call Malay), but the evidence of language and 
anthropology is conclusive that it is in the main a con- 
tinental race, quite distinct, however, from the Chinese. 
It must have come from a more northerly region, and 
geographical considerations point distinctly to Corea 
as the point of embarkation. Beyond this it is safer 
not to go. Nor need we attempt to fix any date for 
their migration. Native tradition is silent on the sub- 
ject, or rather assumes that the Japanese are aborigines. 
The process of colonisation probably extended over 
centuries, and the numerous immigrations from Corea 
to Japan in historical times are no doubt simply a con- 
tinuation of the same movement. 

The first historical fact to be gleaned from the legen- 
dary stories which have been preserved to us in the an- 
cient Japanese annals is an invasion of the central part 
of the country, already settled by men of Japanese race, 
by a conquering army from the western island of 
Kiushiu. Their leader, Jimmu Tenno, who is recog- 
nised as the first Mikado, established his capital in the 
province of Yamato at a time which it is best to indi- 
cate vaguely as a few centuries before the Christian 
epoch. Here, or in one of the adjoining provinces, his 
successors reigned for many centuries, each Mikado 
building himself a palace and founding a capital in a 
fresh locality. A semi-nomad arrangement of this kind 
is obviously incompatible with much advance in civili- 

6 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

sation. It was not until the capital was established on 
a more permanent footing at Nara, in the beginning of 
the eighth century, that any substantial progress was 
made in literature and the arts. 

Although the Archaic period has left us but few literary 
monuments, it is marked by two events of prime import- 
ance for the development of literature in Japan. One is 
the introduction of the art of writing, with which was 
associated an acquaintance with the literature and his- 
tory of China ; and the other the first propagation of the 
Buddhist religion. Both came, in the first place, from 
Corea, which had received them from China no long 
time before. Until they became acquainted with Chinese 
the Japanese had no written character. It is probable 
that individuals had acquired some knowledge of the 
Chinese language and script early in the Christian era, 
but the first actual mention of the study of Chinese in 
Japan belongs to A.D. 405. In this year a Corean named 
Wangin was appointed tutor in Chinese to a Japanese 
Imperial Prince. He was the first of a succession of 
teachers from Corea whose instructions paved the way 
for a revolution in Japanese customs and institutions, not 
less profound and far-reaching than that which we have 
witnessed in our own day as the result of an acquaint- 
ance with Western civilisation and science. 

Buddhism was introduced about one hundred and fifty 
years later — in the middle of the sixth century — but it 
was not until the seventh that it made much progress. 
Its real founder in Japan was the Imperial Prince Shotoku 
Daishi, who died A.D. 621. 

In the scanty remains of the period with which we are 
now dealing, there is scarce any trace either of Buddhist 
or of Chinese influences. It may be said that the Kmjiki, 
a historical work attributed to the Prince just mentioned, 

SONGS -r 

should be reckoned an exception to this statement. But 
its authenticity has been questioned ; and, in any case, 
it is in the Chinese language, and therefore, properly 
speaking, forms no part of Japanese literature. 

Songs. 

The oldest relics of the genuine native literature of 
Japan are a series of songs contained in the ancient 
annals known as the Kojiki and Nihongi, and the Norito 
or liturgies of the Shinto, or native Japanese religion. 

These songs are associated with some historical or 
quasi-historical incident, and are ascribed to Mikados 
or other distinguished personages. Several of them are 
attributed to Jimmu Tenno, who is said to have founded 
the Japanese monarchy in 660 B.C., and equally fictitious 
accounts are given of others. Probably we shall not be 
far wrong if we assign most of the poems of the Kojiki 
and NiJiongi to the latter part of the Archaic period, 
namely, to the sixth and seventh centuries of our era. 

The poetry of this time possesses a certain philological 
and archaeological interest, but its merit as literature is 
small. The language is still unformed, and there is a 
plentiful lack of imagination and of the other higher 
qualities of poetry. What, for example, can be more 
primitive than the following war-song, which is supposed 
to have been chanted by Jimmu Tenno's soldiers, and 
which, the author of the Nihongi informs us, was still 
sung by the Imperial Guards in his own day ? 

" Ho ! now is the time ; 
Ho ! now is the time ; 
Ha ! Ha I Psha ! 
Even now 
My boys ! 
Even now 
My boys /" 

8 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Or this, which is dated 90 B.C. ? 

" The Hall of Miwa 

{Of sweet sake' fame), 
Even at morn its door 
Let us ptcsk open — 
The door of the Hall of Miwa." 

Sake, it ought, perhaps, to be explained, is an intoxi- 
cating- liquor brewed from rice. The sentiment of this 
song therefore recalls our own '* We won't go home till 
morning." 

The following, which is said to have been composed 
by the Mikado Ojin, a.d. 282, but which more probably 
belongs to the sixth century, may serve to indicate the 
highest level to which poetry attained during this period. 
This Mikado was about to add to his harem a beautiful 
woman named Kami-naga-hime, or the " long-haired 
maid," when he discovered that his son had fallen vio- 
lently in love with her. He invited them both to a 
banquet, and then surprised his son by resigning to him 
the lady with the following words : — 

" Lo ! my son ! 
On the moor, garlic to gather, 
Garlic to gather^ 
On the way as I went^ 
Pleasing of perfume 
Was the orange in flower. 
Its branches beneath 
Men had all plundered.^ 
Its branches above 
Birds perching had withered^ 
Midway its branches 
Held in their hiding 
A blushing maiden. 
Lo I my son^ for thee 
Let her burst into blossofn." 

SHINTO RITUALS q 

The Kojiki and Nihongi have preserved to us more 
than two hundred of these poems. Their study tends 
to correct ideas such as that of Macaulay, who, doubt- 
less reasoning from the now exploded premiss that 
Homer is a primitive poet, argued that '' in a rude 
state of society we may expect to find the poetical 
temperament in its highest perfection." Judging from 
this early poetry of Japan, a want of culture by no 
means acts as a stimulus to the poetic faculty. We 
nowhere find " the agony, the ecstasy, the plenitude of 
belief," which Macaulay would have us look for in this 
product of an age and country which were certainly 
far less advanced than those of Homer in intellectual 
culture. Instead of passion, sublimity, and a vigorous 
imagination, we have little more than mild sentiment, 
word-plays, and pretty conceits. Moreover, a suspicion 
will not be banished that even for such poetical quali- 
ties as they possess, these poems are in some degree 
indebted to the inspiration of China. Of this, however, 
I can not offer any definite proof. 

Shinto Rituals. 

The prose of the Archaic period is represented by a 
series of Norito,' or prayers to the deities of the Shinto 
religion, w^hich were recited with much ceremony by 
the Nakatomi, a hereditary corporation of court officials 
whose especial function it was to represent the Mikado in 
his capacity of high priest of the nation. Their precise 
date and authorship are unknown. In their essence they 
are no doubt of very great antiquity, but there is reason 

' Vide Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, March 1S79, &c., 
for a translation of some of these by Sir Ernest Satow. 

lO JAPANESE LITERATURE 

to believe that they did not assume their present form 
until the seventh century, some of them perhaps even 
later. The Norito are not known to have been commit- 
ted to writing before the period Yengi (901-923), when 
the preparation was begun of the work entitled Yengi- 
shiki or '* Institutes of Yengi," a collection of the ceremo- 
nial regulations in force at this time. The YengisJdki 
enumerates seventy-five of these prayers, and gives the 
text of twenty-seven, which, no doubt, comprise all the 
most important. There are prayers for a good harvest, 
deprecating fire and pestilence, invoking blessings on 
the palace, services in honour of the Food Goddess, the 
Wind Deities, and so on. The most famous of all is 
the Oharai or General Purification Service. It is not 
devoid of literary quality, as the following translation 
may perhaps indicate. The other Norito which I have 
read are much inferior in merit. 

" Give ear, all ye Imperial Princes, Ministers of State, 
and high functionaries, who are here assembled, and 
hearken to the great purification by which at this inter- 
lune of the sixth month are purged and washed away all 
sins which may have been committed by Imperial offi- 
cials and attendants — whether they wear the scarf [wom- 
en] or the shoulder strap [stewards] ; whether they 
bear on their back the bow, or gird on them the sword. 

'' Of yore, our I mperial ancestors who dwell in the plain 
of high heaven, summoned to an assembly the eight 
hundred myriads of deities, and held divine counsel 
with them. And they gave command, saying, ' Let our 
Ausfust Grandchild hold serene rule over the land of fair 
rice-ears — the fertile reed-plain.' But in the land thus 
delivered to him there were savage deities. These they 
chastised with a divine chastisement, and expelled with a 

SHINTO RITUALS II 

divine expulsion. Moreover, the rocks, trees, and leaves 
of grass which had the power of speech, were silenced. 
Then thej despatched him downward from his celestial, 
everlasting throne, cleaving as he went with an aw^ful 
way-cleaving the many-piled clouds of heaven. Here 
at the middle point of the land entrusted to him — in 
Yamato, the High Sun Land — the August Grandchild 
established his peaceful rule and built a fair palace, 
basing deep on the nethermost rock the massy pillars, 
and upraising to high heaven the timbers of the roof 
wherewithal to shelter him from sun and sky. 

*' Now, of the various offences to be committed by the 
celestial race destined more and more to people this land 
of peaceful rule, some are of heaven and others of earth. 
Heavenly offences are the breaking down of divisions 
between rice-fields, filling up of water-courses, removing 
water-pipes, flaying alive, flaying backwards. . . . Earth- 
ly offences are the cutting of living bodies, the cutting 
of dead bodies, leprosy, incest, calamities from creep- 
ing things, from the high gods and from high birds, kill- 
ing of cattle, bewitchments. 

" Whensoever these offences are committed, for com- 
mitted they will be, let the great Nakatomi clip heavenl}^ 
twigs at the top and clip them at the bottom, making 
thereof a complete array of one thousand stands for 
offerings. Having trimmed rushes of heaven at the top 
and trimmed them at the bottom, let them split them 
into a manifold brush. Then let them recite this great 
liturgy. 

*' When they do so, the gods of heaven, thrusting open 
the adamantine doors of heaven and cleaving the many- 
piled clouds of heaven with an awful way-cleaving, will 
approach and lend ear. The gods of earth, ascending 

12 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

to the tops of the high mountains and the tops of the 
low mountains, sweeping aside the mists of the high 
mountains and the mists of the low mountains, will 
approach and lend ear. 

" Then shall no offences remain unpurged, from the 
court of the august child of the gods even to the remotest 
ends of the realm. As the many-piled clouds of heaven 
are scattered at the breath of the Wind Gods ; as the 
morning breezes and the evening breezes disperse the 
morning vapours and the evening vapours ; as a huge 
ship moored in a great harbour, casting off its stern 
moorings, casting off its bow moorings, drives forth into 
the vast ocean ; as yonder thick brushwood is smitten 
and cleared away by the sharp sickle forged in the fire — 
so shall all offences be swept utterly away. To purge 
and purify them, let the goddess Seoritsu-hime, who 
dwells in the rapids of the swift stream whose cataracts 
tumble headlong from the high mountains and from the 
low mountains, bear them out into the great sea plain. 
There let the goddess Haya-akitsu-hime, who dwells in 
the myriad ways of the tides of the raging sea, and in 
the myriad meeting-places of the tides of the myriad 
sea paths, swallow them up, and let the god Ibukido 
Nushi [the master of the spurting-out place], who dwells 
in Ibukido, spurt them out away to the nether region. 
Then let the goddess Haya-sasura-hime, who dwells in 
the nether region, dissolve and destroy them. 

'' They are now destroyed, and all, from the servants 
of the Imperial court down to the people in the four 
quarters of the realm, are from this day forth void of 
offence. 

" Attend, all of you, with ears pricked up to the plain 
of high heaven, to this great purification by which, on 

SHINTO RITUALS 

13 

this interlune of the sixth month as the sun goes down, 
your offences are purged and purified." 

The Norito, although prose, are in some respects 
more poetical than much of the contemporary poetry. 
This is not the place to discuss the general question 
whether literature begins with prose or poetry. It may 
be noted, however, that the earliest Japanese literature 
presents two imperfectly differentiated types — a poetry 
which in metrical form, thought, and diction, is not far 
removed from prose ; and prose compositions which 
contain an appreciable plement of poetry. 

BOOK THE SECOND 

NARA PERIOD (EIGHTH CENTURY) 

BOOK THE SECOND 
NARA PERIOD"^ (EIGHTH CENTURY) 

CHAPTER I 

PROSE OF THE NARA PERIOD— THE " KOJHCr' 

Strictly speaking, this period begins A.D. 710, when 
Nara was made the seat of the Mikado's government, and 
ends A.D. 794, when the capital was removed to Nagaoka, 
in the province of Yamashiro, a site which was aban- 
doned a few years later for that of the existing city of 
Kioto. For the present purpose it is sufficiently accu- 
rate to make the Nara period coincide with the eighth 
century. 

With the establishment of the capital at Nara, the 
old system by which every Mikado built himself a new 
palace in a fresh locality was discontinued. This was 
not only in itself an important progressive measure, 
but it was an evidence of the advance in civilisation 
which had been made during the previous two centuries. 
Under the influence of Chinese political ideas, the 

^ I have followed the convenient Japanese practice of calling the periods of 
history by the names of the places which were the seat of government at the 
time. 

17 

I 8 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

authority of the crown had become greatly extended, the 
power of the hereditary local chieftains broken, and a 
system of government instituted under prefects who held 
office subject to the control of the central authority. 
Learning, by which in Japan is, or rather was, meant the 
study of the masterpieces of Chinese antiquity, had made 
great progress. The Mikado Tenchi (662-671) established 
schools, and w^e hear later of a university under govern- 
ment auspices which comprised four faculties, viz., 
history, the Chinese classics, law, and arithmetic. 

This, it should be observed, was for the benefit of the 
official classes only. It was not until many centuries 
later that education reached the common people. There 
were also teachers (mostly Coreans) of painting, medicine, 
and the glyptic arts. The colossal bronze statue of 
Buddha and some remarkable sculptures in wood which 
are still to be seen at Nara, testify to the skill which the 
Japanese had then acquired in the last-named arts. 

Of even greater importance was the advance in the art 
of architecture. This was intimately associated with 
Buddhism, a cult which demanded stately temples and 
pagodas for its due exercise. The increased authority of 
the court also required edifices more befitting its dignity 
and more in consonance with the gorgeous costumes 
and ceremonial adopted from China than the old one- 
reign palaces. 

The first written book which has come down to us in 
the Japanese, or indeed in any Turanian tongue, is the 
Kojiki^ or ^^ Records of Ancient Matters," which was 
completed A.D. 712. It contains the early traditions of 
the Japanese race, beginning with the myths w^hich form 

1 Translated by B. H. Chamberlain in the Transactions of the Asiatic 
Society of JaJ-an^ 1882; vol. x., Supplement. 

KOJIKI 19 

the basis of the Shinto religion, and acquiring more and 
more of a historical character as it proceeds, until it 
comes to a close in a.d. 628. 

The Kojiki, however valuable it may be for research 
into the mythology, the manners, the language, and the 
legends of early Japan, is a very poor production, whether 
we consider it as literature or as a record of facts. As 
history it cannot compare with the Ni/iongiy a contem- 
porary work in Chinese ; while the language is a strange 
mixture of Chinese and Japanese, which there has been 
little attempt to endue with artistic quality. The circum- 
stances under which it was composed are a partial 
explanation of tlie very curious style in which it is 
written. We are told that a man named Yasumaro, 
learned in Chinese, took it down from the lips of a 
certain Hiyeda no Are, who had such a wonderful 
memory that he '* could repeat with his mouth whatever 
was placed before his eyes, and record in his heart what- 
ev^er struck his ears." Yasumaro's task was not an easy 
one. He himself in his preface describes his embarrass- 
ment. The phonetic syllabaries, known as the Katagana 
and Hirakana, which correspond to our alphabet, had 
not then been invented. The only choice open to him 
was to use the Chinese ideographic symbols, giving them 
their proper meaning and construction — in other words, 
to write pure Chinese — or to make each Chinese character 
fepresent merely the sound associated with it regardless 
of its meaning. The result of this latter course would 
be a Japanese text. 

By the former method it was impossible to write down 
Japanese poetry, proper names, and a quantity of phrases 
and expressions for which there existed no adequate 
Chinese equivalent ; while if a separate Chinese character 

20 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

had to be used for every syllable of the polysyllabic 
Japanese words, a prolixity intolerable to a mind formed 
by Chinese study would be the result. In this dilemma 
Yasumaro resorted to a compromise, and mixed up the 
two systems in a way which is fatal to style. Even in 
the same sentence we often find a purely Japanese con- 
struction interrupted by a phrase which it is impossible 
to consider as anything but clumsy Chinese ; while, vice 
versdy his Chmese contains expressions not to be under- 
stood without a knowledge of Japanese. 

At the time of the compilation of the Kojiki there 
existed at the court of Nara a hereditary corporation of 
Kataribe or ''reciters/' whose function it was to recite 
''ancient words" before the Mikado on certain solemn 
State occasions, such as the beginning of a new reign. 
Even if Yasumaro's informant was not himself a member 
of this order, he must have been well acquainted with 
the matter of their recitals, and there can be little doubt 
that the myths, legends, and quasi-history of the Kq/iki 
were drawn from this source. There is no reason what- 
ever to believe that the recitations of the Kataribe were 
anything but prose. We are in possession of a consider- 
able body of poetry belonging to this period, but none 
of it takes the form of narrative. It consists of lyrics, 
not ballads, and yields no material for history, whether 
true or otherwise. The annals of Japanese literature 
therefore give no countenance to Macaulay's theory that 
in the natural course of things history is preceded by 
ballad poetry. So far from its being true of Japan, a 
directly opposite process is observable. At a later period, 
history showed some tendency to develop into poetry. 
It began to be treated in an ornate, romantic fashion, 
and with some imperfect endeavour after metrical form. 

KOJIKI 2 1 

The motley character of the language of the Kojiki 
of course disappears in a translation, but the following 
passage may give some idea o! the sort of legends which 
form the staple of the earlier part of the work. The 
student of folk-lore will recognise in it one of the 
numerous variants of what in its Greek form is the 
story of Perseus and Andromeda. 

The god Haya-Susa no wo, having been banished from 
heaven for his misdeeds, descends to earth and alights 
on the bank of a river in the province of Idzumo. He 
observes a chopstick floating down with the current : 

'' His Augustness Haya-Susa no wo, thinking that there 
must be people living farther up the stream, went in 
quest of them, and found an old man and an old woman 
weeping, with a young maiden set between them. He 
asked of them, ' Who are ye ? ' The old man replied, 
*Thy servant is a deity of earth, and his name is 
Ashinadzuchi, son of the great God of the Mountain. 
My wife's name is Tenadzuchi, and my daughter is called 
Kushinada hime.' He further inquired, * Why weep 
ye ? ' He answered, saying, ' I have had eight children, 
girls ; but the eight-forked serpent of Koshi came year 
after year and devoured them. It is now the time of its 
coming, and therefore do we weep.' * Describe to me 
this serpent,' said Haya-Susa no wo. ' Its eyes are as 
red as the winter cherry. It has one body with eight 
heads and eight tails. Moreover, its body is overgrown 
with moss, pines, and cedars. ' Its length extends over 
eight valleys and eight hills. Its belly is always all 
bloody and inflamed to look upon.' ' Then his Auc^ust- 
ness Haya-Susa no wo said to the old man, ' If this be thy 
daughter, wilt thou give her unto me ? ' ' With reverence 
be it said,' replied the old man, ' I know not thy honour- 

22 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

able name/ * I am the elder brother of the Sun Goddess, 
and have now come down from heaven,' replied Susa 
no wo. Then the deities ftishinadzuchi and Tenadzuchi 
said, * In that case, with reverence we offer her to thee/ 
Haya-Susa no wo straightway took that young maiden 
and changed her into a many-toothed comb, which he 
stuck into his hair, and said to the deities Ashinadzuchi 
and Tenadzuchi, ^ Do ye brew some sake of eight-fold 
strength. Also make a fence round about, and in that 
fence let there be eight doors, at each door let there be 
eight stands, on each stand let there be a sake-tub, and 
let each sake-tub be filled with the sake of eight-fold 
strength. Then wait.' So having prepared everything 
in accordance with his august bidding, they waited. 
Then the eight-forked serpent came, indeed, as had been 
said, and bending down one head into each of the tubs, 
lapped up. the sake. Hereupon it became drunken, and 
all the heads lay down to sleep, when straightway Haya- 
Susa no wo drew his ten-span sword from his girdle and 
slew the serpent, so that the river had its current 
changed to blood. Now, when he cut the middle part 
of the tail the edge of his august sword was broken. 
Wondering at this, he pierced it and split it open, when 
he found that within there was a great sharp sword. He 
took this sword, and thinking it a wonderful thing, 
reported his discovery to the Sun Goddess. This is the 
great sword Kusanagi (Herb-queller). " 

In the early part of the eighth century the Japanese 
Government gave orders for the compilation of geogra- 
phical descriptions of all the provinces. The mineral, 
vegetable, and animal productions were to be noted, 
with the quality of the soil, the origin of the names of 
places, and the local traditions. Of these works only a 

TOPOGRAPHY ^ 

few have reached us, the best known of which is t4e 
Idzumo Fudoki, written in 733. It contains a very few 
interesting legendary passages, but as a whole it consists 
of bald statements of fact, and must be classed with 
Charles Lamb's Biblia Abiblia or " Books that are No 
Books." It was the forerunner of the very considerable 
modern topographical literature known to us as Meisho. 
The only other Japanese prose compositions of this 
time which need be noticed are the Imperial Edicts con- 
tained in the Shoku-nihongi, a continuation (in Chinese) 
of the Nihongi, Their style much resembles that of the 
Norito, Motoori has edited them in a separate form 
with a commentary. 

CHAPTER II 

JAPANESE POETRY GENERALLY— 
THE "MANYOSHIU" 

Before proceeding to an examination of the Nara 
poetry, it seems desirable to give an account of those 
characteristics of Japanese poetry generally which dis- 
tinguish it in a conspicuous manner from that of Europe. 
Narrow in its scope and resources, it is chiefly remark- 
able for its limitations — for what it has not, rather than 
for what it has. In the first place there are no long 
poems. There is nothing which even remotely resembles 
an epic — no Iliad or Divina Commedia — not even a 
Nibelungen Lied or Chevy Chase. Indeed, narrative 
poems of any kind are short and very few, the only ones 
which I have met with being two or three ballads of a 
sentimental cast. Didactic, philosophical, political, and 
satirical poems are also conspicuously absent. The 
Japanese muse does not meddle with such subjects, and 
it is doubtful whether, if it did, the native Pegasus 
possesses sufficient staying power for them to be dealt 
with adequately. For dramatic poetry we have to wait 
until the fourteenth century. Even then there are no 
complete dramatic poems, but only dramas containing 
a certain poetical element. 

Japanese poetry is, in short, confined to lyrics, and what, 

POETRY 2 ; 

for want of a better word, may be called epigrams. It is 
primarily an expression of emotion. We have amatory 
verse, poems of longmg for home and absent dear ones, 
praise of love and wme, elegies on the dead, laments over 
the uncertainty of life. A chief place is given to the 
beauties of external nature. The varymg aspects of the 
seasons, the sound of purling streams, the snow on 
Mount Fuji, waves breaking on the beach, seaweed drift- 
ing to the shore, the song of birds, the hum of insects, 
even the croaking of frogs, the leaping of trout in a 
mountain stream, the young shoots of the fern in spring, 
the belling of deer in autumn, the red tmts of the maple,' 
moon, flowers, rain, wind, mist, these are among the 
favourite subjects which the Japanese poet delights to 
dwell upon. If we add some courtly and patriotic 
effusions, a vast number of conceits more or less pretty, 
and a very few poems of a religious cast, the enumera- 
tion is tolerably complete. But, as Mr. Chamberlain 
has observed, there are curious omissions. Sunsets and 
starry skies, for example, do not appear to have attracted 
attention. War-songs, strange to say, are almost wholly 
absent. Fighting and bloodshed are apparently not 
considered fit themes for poetry. 

It is not only in its form and subject-matter that 
Japanese poetry is limited in its scope. The modern 
poet of Europe makes free use of the works of the 
Greek and Roman poets as models and as storehouses 
of poetic imagery. Much of his very language comes 
from the same source. But the poets of Japan have 
deliberately refrained from utilising in this way the only 
literature which was known to them. That their refine- 
ment of language and choice of subjects are in some 
measure due to an acquaintance with the ancient liter a 

26 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

ture of China is hardly open to question, but they allow 
few outward signs of it to appear. Allusions to Chinese 
literature and history, although not wholly absent, are 
unfrequent, and the use of Chinese worcTs is strictly 
tabooed in all poetry of the classical type. There was a 
substantial reason for this prohibition. The phonetic 
character of the two languages is quite different. Chinese 
is monosyllabic ; Japanese as polysyllabic as English. A 
Chinese syllable has far more complication and variety 
than those of Japanese words. It may have diphthongs, 
combinations of consonants and final consonants, none 
of which are to be found in Japanese, where every 
syllable consists of a single vowel or of a single con- 
sonant followed by a single vowel. It is true that the 
Japanese, in adopting Chinese vocables, modify them 
to suit their own phonetic system. But the process of 
assimilation is incomplete. The two elements harmonise 
no better than brick and stone in the same building. It 
was most natural, therefore, for the Japanese to refuse 
these half-naturalised aliens admission to the sacred pre- 
cincts of their national poetry, although by so doing they 
sacrificed much in fulness and variety of expression, and 
deprived themselves of a copious store of illustration 
and allusion to which their prose writers resort even too 
freely. 

The acknowledged euphony and ease of pronuncia- 
tion of the Japanese language is greatly owing to that 
property of the syllable which has just been described. 
Even a reader who knows no Japanese may appreciate 
the euphonic quality of the following : — 

POETRY 27 

*' Idete zjiaba 
Niishi 7iaki yado to 
Narinic ioino 
Nokiba no ume yo 
Haru wo wasuruna^'' '^ 

But it is at the same time a source or weakness. It 
makes smooth versification ahnost a matter of course, 
but it also renders impossible mucti variety or force of 
rhythm. The Japanese poet can hardly do otherwise 
than obey Pope's precept : — 

" Then all your Muses softer art display^ 
Let Carolina smooth the timeful lay^ 
Lull with A inelids liquid name the line.^' 

The whole language is composed of words made up, 
like Carolina and Amelia, of syllables with open vowels 
preceded by single consonants or none. Nor is he 
under any temptation to 

" Rend with tre^nendoics sound your ears astifider 

With gun^ dru7?i, trumpet, blunderbuss, and thunder.^'^ 

His phonetic resources simply will not admit of it. 
Pope further advises that 

" When loud surges lash the sounding shore, 
The hoarse rough verse should like a torrent roar. 
When Ajax strives some rock^s vast weight to throw. 
The line too labours and the words move slow.^^ 

^ The initial i of inaba is elided. 

Translation : — 

*' When I am gone azuay, 
Masterless my dwelling 
Though it become — 
Oh ! plum tree by the eaves. 
Forget not thou ihe spring.'^ 

2 8 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

But it is vain for the Japanese poet to strive to adopt 
this counsel. With a language Hke the old Japanese it 
is only within the narrowest limits that it is possible to 
make the sound an echo to the sense. It is probably in 
some measure to the want of variety of rhythm which 
results from this quality that the preference of the 
national genius for short poems is due. 

The mechanism of Japanese verse is simple in the 
extreme. Unlike Chinese, it has no rhyme, a want which 
is plainly owing to the nature of the Japanese syllable 
described above. As every syllable ends in a vowel, 
and as there are only five vowels, there could only be 
five rhymes, the constant reiteration of which would be 
intolerably monotonous. 

In the Japanese poetical language all the vowels are 
of the same length, so that quantity, such as we find 
in the poetry of Greece and Rome, is unknown. Nor 
is there any regular succession of accented and un- 
accented syllables as in the poetry of modern Europe, the 
Japanese laying hardly any greater stress on one part of 
a word than on another. In short, the only thing in 
the mechanism of Japanese poetry which distinguishes 
it from prose is the alter^iation of phrases of five and 
seven syllables each. It is, in fact, a species of blank 
verse. 

Some Japanese critics seem to think that the numbers 
five and seven were suggested by the Chinese Book of 
odes, where many of the poems consist of lines of five, 
and others of lines of seven syllables. This does not 
seem very probable. 

The best known metre constructed on this principle is 
what is known as *' Tanka " or *' short poems." When 
poetry is spoken of in Japan it is usually this kind of 

POETRY 29 

verse which is meant. It consists of five phrases or 
lines of 5, 7, 5, 7, and 7 syllables — 31 syllables in all.^ 
Each of these stanzas constitutes an entire poem. The 
Tanka is the most universal and characteristic of the 
various forms of poetry in Japan. The oldest examples 
date back to the seventh century, or possibly earlier. 
Ever smce there has been a continual and copious 
stream of this kind of composition. Even at the present 
day the Mikado gives out themes at the New Year for 
his courtiers to show their skill upon, and the pages of 
the magazines give evidence that Tanka are still produced 
in considerable quantity. 

It may be thought that in the compass of 31 syllables, 
and with the other limitations to which the poet in Japan 
is subject, nothing of much value can be the result. 
This, however, is far from being the case. Although no 
great qualities can be claimed for the Tanka, it must be 
admitted that the Japanese poets have made the most of 
their slender resources. It is wonderful what felicity of 
phrase, melody of versification, and true sentiment can 
be compressed within these narrow limits. In their way 
nothing can be more perfect than some of these little 
poems. They remind us of those tiny carvings known 
to us as Netsuke, in which exquisite skill of workmanship 
is displayed in fashioning figures an inch or two in 
height, or of those sketches where the Japanese artist has 
managed to produce a truly admirable effect by a few 
dexterous strokes of the brush. 

Next to the Tanka, the most common kind of classical 
metre is the Naga-uta or '* long poetry." The Naga-uta 
has the same alternation of five and seven syllable 
phrases, with an additional line of seven syllables at the 

^ See specimen on page 27. 

30 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

end, as the Tanka, and oniy differs from it in having no 
Hmit in regard to length. 

Some of the best poetry which Japan has produced is 
in this metre. But it has never been a great favourite, 
and after the Nara period was almost completely 
neglected, the preference of the national genius being 
evidently for the shorter kind of verse. 

Notwithstanding the name, Naga-uta are by no means 
long poems. Few of them are nearly so long as 
*' Locksley Hall," and the majority are effusions of a few 
dozen lines only. 

A feature which strikingly distinguishes the Japanese 
poetic muse from that of Western nations is a certain 
lack of imaginative power. The Japanese are slow to 
endow inanimate objects with life. Shelley's '' Cloud," 
for example, contains enough matter of this kind for 
many volumes of Japanese verse. Such lines as 

" From my wings are shaken 
The dews that waken 
The sweet buds every one, 
Whe7t rocked to rest 
On their 7nothers breast 
As she dances about the sun" 

would appear to them ridiculously overcharged with 
metaphor, if not absolutely unintelligible. Still more 
foreign to their genius is the personification of abstract 
qualities. Abstract words are comparatively few, and it 
does not occur to the Japanese poet (or painter) to 
represent Truth, Justice, and Faith as comely damsels 
, in flowing robes, or to make Love a chubby naked boy 
with wings and a bow and arrows. Muses, Graces, 
Virtues, Furies — in short, the host of personifications 

POETRY 3 1 

without which Western poetry would be only a shadow 
of itself — have little counterpart in Japanese literature. 

This impersonal habit of the Japanese mind is shared 
by them with other races of the Far East, notably China. 
It is not confined to poetry, or even to literature, but is 
profoundly characteristic of their whole mental attitude, 
showing itself in their grammar, which is most sparing of 
personal pronouns; in their art, which has no school of 
portrait-pamting or monumental sculpture worth men- 
tioning ; in the late and imperfect development of the 
drama ; and in their religious temper, with its strong 
bent towards rationalism, and its hazy recognition of a 
ruling personal power in the universe. To their minds"' 
things happen, rather than are done ; the tides of fate are 
far more real to them than the strong will and the 
endeavour which wrestles with them. The significance 
of this fact in regard to the moral and psychological 
development of these races may be left to others to 
determine. It is sufficient here to note its influence on 
the literature, and especially on the poetry. 

Some rhetorical devices which are peculiar to Japanese 
poetry require a brief notice. One of these is the Makura- 
Kotoba, or ^'pillow-word" as it is called, because it 
usually stands at the beginning of the verse, serving, as 
it were, as a pillow upon which it rests. The Makura- 
Kotoba is a stock conventional epithet prefixed to certain 
words something after the fashion of Homer's ''swift- 
footed" Achilles or " many-fountained " Ida. These 
words are survivals from a very archaic stage of the 
language, and the meaning of some of them is now 
extremely doubtful, a circumstance which forms no 
obstacle whatever to their continued use. Others are 
still intelligible and appropriate enough, such as the 

32 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

"house-bird" cock, the "rain-enshrouded" Mount Mi- 
kasa, the "ever-firm" heaven, "morning-mist" thought- 
wandering. But even although a Makura-Kotoba may 
be sufficiently apt if it is rightly applied, some Japanese 
poets take a perverse pleasure in wresting it from its 
proper sense in a way which to us is nothing short 
of ludicrous. " Whale-catching," for example, may pass 
as an epithet of the sea. But what shall we say of the 
poet who uses it as a prefix to the mland sea of Omi, 
now called Lake Biwa, where, needless to observe, whales 
are an unknown phenomenon ? " Creeper-clad " is well 
enough as an epithet of a rock, but it tries one's patience 
a little to find it applied to the province of Iwami, simply 
because Iwa means rock. 

From the versifier's point of view the Makura-Kotoba 
is a very useful institution. It consists almost invariably 
of five syllables, and therefore supplies him without any 
trouble with a first line ready made, no unimportant con- 
sideration when the entire poem consists of only thirty- 
one syllables. These epithets are several hundreds in 
number, and are collected into dictionaries which serve 
the purpose of a Gi^adtis ad Parnassum. They are most 
useful in a country where the composition of Tanka has 
been for centuries little more than a mere mechanic art. 
Another trick of the Japanese poet is what Mr. Cham- 
berlain ^ has aptly termed "pivot-words." In these a 
word or part of a word is used in two senses, one with 
what precedes, the other with what follows. Thackeray 
has something of the kind in The Newcomes, where he 
speaks of the tea-pot presented to Mr. Honeyman by the 
devotees attending, his chapel as the " devotea-pot." 
Here the syllable "tea" is contrived a double debt to 

1 In his Classical Poetry of the Japanese. 

POETRY 33 

pay. It represents at the same time the final syllable of 
^'devotee" and the first syllable of "tea-pot." Perhaps a 
better example is the following from Butler's Hudibras : — 

" That old Pyg — what cVye call him — nialio7t^ 
Who cut his mistress out of stone ^ 
Had not so hard a hearted one." 

"What is this but a kind of pun ?" the reader will not 
unnaturally say. Yet it would be hardly fair to stigma- 
tise i\\Q?,Q j'eiix de mots as puns. They are meant not to 
provoke laughter, but as ornament, and the elTect is 
sometimes not unpleasing. 

At its best, however, the " pivot " word is an ornament 
of doubtful taste, and poets of the classical period indulge 
in this figure of speech but sparingly. More remains to 
be said of it when we come to the dramatists of a later 
age, who have used it in an extravagant, and, at least to 
us Europeans, exasperating manner. 

Parallelism, or the correspondence between each word 
of two successive lines or clauses, noun for noun and 
verb for verb, is an occasional ornament of Japanese, 
as it is of Chinese poetry. It is familiar to us in the 
Psalms of David, and is a favourite with Longfellow^ 
whose ///<7Z£/<3:^//^ contains numerous such pairs of parallel 
lines, as — 

" Filled the marshes full of wild-fowl^ 
Filled the river fdl of fishes.'''' 

Some Japanese examples of this figure will be found in 
the poema quoted on page 37. 

Nara Poetry 
While the eighth century has left us little or no prose 
literature of importance, it was emphatically the golden 
age of poetry. Japan had now outgrown the artless 

34 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

effusions described in a preceding chapter, and during 
this period produced a body of verse of an excellence 
which has never since been surpassed. The reader who 
expects to find this poetry of a nation just emerging from 
the barbaric stage of culture characterised by rude, un- 
tutored vigour, will be surprised to learn that, on the 
contrary, it is distinguished by polish rather than power. 
It is delicate in sentiment and refined in language, and 
displays exquisite skill of phrase with a careful adherence 
to certain canons of composition of its own. 

The poetry of this and the following period was written 
by and for a very small section of the Japanese nation. 
The authors, many of them women, were either mem- 
bers of the Mikado's court, or officials temporarily 
stationed in the provinces, but looking to the capi- 
tal as their home. We hear nothing of any popular 
poetry. On the other hand, the faculty of writing verse 
was universal among the higher classes. Nearly every 
educated man and woman could indite a Tanka upon 
occasion. There were no voluminous writers. It was 
not the custom to publish the poems of individual 
authors separately. Had it been so, very thin volumes 
indeed would have been the result. Collections were 
made at intervals by Imperial authority, in which the 
choice poems of the preceding period were brought to- 
gether, and if twenty or thirty Tanka of one poet found 
a place there, it was sufficient to give him or her a dis- 
tinguished position among the multitude of contributors. 

The poetry of the Nara period has been preserved to 
us in one of these anthologies, known as the Manyoshiuy 
or "Collection of One Thousand Leaves." According to 
the usual account, it was completed early in the ninth 
century. The poems contained in it belong chiefly to 

MANYOSHIU 35 

the latter half of the seventh and the first half of the 
eighth century of the Christian era, and cover a period 
of about 130 years. They are classified as follows : 
poems of the four seasons ; poems of the affections ; 
elegiac, allegorical, and miscellaneous poems. They 
number in all more than 4000 pieces, of which the great 
majority are Tanka, or short poems of thirty-one syllables. 
The remainder are for the most part Naga-uta or so- 
called 'Mong poems." As for the authors, their name is 
legion. Among them, however, two poets stand out with 
some degree of eminence — viz., Hitomaro and Akahito. 
The former flourished at the end of the seventh century, 
the latter in the reign of Shomu (724-756). Little is 
known of either, further than that they were officials of 
the Mikado's court, and attended him on some of his 
progresses through the provinces. 

The Riakuge edition of the Manyoshiu in thirty 
volumes, which was formerly the best, has now been 
totally eclipsed and. superseded by the magnificent Man- 
yoshiu Kogiy recently published under official auspices. 
It extends to 122 volumes, and contains everything (and 
more) in the way of commentary and indexes that the 
most ardent student can desire. The print is admirable, 
and the text a great improvement on that of the Riakuge 
edition. 

The following translations, inadequate as they are, may 
help to give some idea of the character of the Manydshiu 
poetry. The first specimen is by Hitomaro. It is an 
elegy on Prince Hinami, son of the Mikado Temmu, 
who died A.D. 687, before succeeding to the throne. 

The poet begins by relating the appointment, at a 
council of the gods, of the deity Ninigi no Mikoto as the 
first divine sovereign of Japan. In the second part 

S6 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

allusion is made to the death of the late Mikado ; while 
in the third the poet gives expression to the disappoint- 
ment of the nation that Prince Hinami did not live to 
succeed him, and laments the loneliness of his tomb, 
which he represents as a palace where the Prince dwells 
in silence and solitude. 

" When began the earth afid heaven, 
By the margin of the River 
if the Jir77ia7nent eternal, 
Met the Gods in high assembly. 
Met the gods and held high counsel. 
Myriads upo?i myriads gathered. 
Then to each high charge was given ; 
On the Goddess of the Su?ilight^ 
Her who fills the sky with radiance. 
They bestowed the realm of Heaven, 
To her grandchild they delivered 
This^ the land of Ashihara, 
This, the lajid of fairest rice-ears. 
His with god-like sway to goverjt. 
Long as heaven a?id earth eyidurea 
Downward sped, he swept asunder 
Heaveri s clouds, the many-piled. 
Earthward gloriously desce7idi7ig. 

In the Palace of Kiyo77ii, 
The great seat of power Imperial, 
God-like ruled his true descendant. 
The august High-shini7ig-su7t-Prince, 
Till he rose 07i high divi7iely, 
Fli7iging wide the gates ete/yial 
On the plain of heave7i that ope7t. 

Mighty Pri7ice, if thou hadst deigned 
This sublu7iar world to gover7i, 
Thou hadst bee7i to all thy people 
Dear as are the flowers i7i spri7ig-ti77ie. 
As the full 1)10071, soul-co7itenti7ig. 
As in a great ship the sea7nan. 
So our trust i7i thee we rested: 

MANYOSHIU 37 

As the welcome rain froin heaven^ 

All the tiation did await thee. 

Thou hast chosen — why we know 7iot — 

By the hill of lo?te Mayunii 

There to raise the massy pillars^ 

There to build a lofty palace, 
But at morn thy voice is heard not; 
Mojiths and days have passed iji silence. 
Till thy servants, sad and weary, 
Have departed, no)te knows whither.''^ 

The next specimen is also by Hitomaro. It is an elegy 
on a lady of the court. 

''In her face were the tijits of the autumn woods. 

Buxom was her form as the graceful bamboo. 

Unknown to us are her thoiights of the future; 

We hoped for her a cable-long life, 

Not transitory like the dew which falls at morn 

A7td vanishes before evening, 

Or the mist which rises at even 

And is dispersed in the morni?zg. 

Even we, who knew her by report — 

We, who had seen her but by gliijipses. 

Are filled with deep regret. 

What then must be the sorrow 

Of her youthful spouse 

Who shared her couch — 

Their white arms interlaced for pillows ? 

Desolate indeed inust be his tJioughts as he lies down, 

Despairing must be his longings for her. 

Ah me! she who has passed away froin us 

By so u?ttimely a fate, 

Did indeed resemble the morning dews 

Or the mists of event ft ^''' 

The following illustrates the Japanese poet's use of 
parallelism. It is dated a.d. 744. 

''By the Palace of Futagi, 
Where our great king 
And divine lord 
Holds high rule. 

38 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Gentle is the rise of the hills ^ 
Bearing hundreds of trees j 
Pleasant is the murmur of the rapids 
As downward they rush. 

So long as in the spring-time 
( When the nighti7igale comes and si77gs) 
On the rocks 

Brocade-like flowers blossom^ 
' Brightening the moitntai7i-foot ; 

So long as in the autiumi 
( When the stag calls to his mate) 
The red leaves fall hither aiid thither, 
Wou7ided by the showers^ 
The heave7i be-cloudi7tg — 

For many thousa7id years 
May his life be prolo7tged^ 
To rule over all tmder heaven 
In the great palace 
Desti7ied to retnain U7icha7iged 
For himdreds of ages. ^^ 

In Praise of Japan 

" The land of Yai7iato 
Has mou7itai7is in 7iU7nbers, 
But peerless among the7n 
Is high Kaguyama. 
I stand on its su77t7nit 
My kingdo77t to view. 

The snlokefro7n the la7id-plaiK 

Thick 7'ises i7i air., 

The gulls f7'07n the seaplain 

By fits soar aloft. 

O la7id of Ya7nato ! 

Fair Akitsushima ! 

Dear art thou to 7nel' 

MANYOSHIU 39 

The Legend of Urashima 

This is one of the most ancient and popular of Japanese 
legends. In its original version it is much older than 
the ManydsJiiu. 

" 071 a hazy day in spring 
I went fori h and siood upon the beach of Suminoye j 
And as 1 watched the fishing-boats rock to andfro^ 
I bethought me of the tale of old. 
How Urashima of Midzunoye, 

Proud of his skill in catchijig the boftito a?td the tai, 
Did not return even for seven days. 
But rowed on beyond the bounds of ocean^ 
Where with a daughter of the Sea God 
It was hisfortu7ie to meet as he rowed onwards. 
When, after 7nutual courtship, they Jiad co77ie to an U7idersta7iding, 
They plighted their troths, a7id we7it to the i7)iinortal land. 
Hand i7t ha7id they two entered 
hito a stately 77iansio7i within the precincts 
Of the Palace of the Sea God. 
Here he 77iight have dwelt for ever. 
Never growi7ig old, a7td never dying. 
But the foolish 7nan of this world 
Thus addressed his spouse : 

* For a little while I would return ho7ne 
A7id speak to 77iy father a7td 7ny 7nother; 
To-77iorrow 1 will co77ie agai7i. ' 

Thus he spake, a7td his wife replied : 

* If thou art to retur7i again to the inwiortal la7ia 
And live with 77ie as now, 

Beware how thou openest this casket.^ 

Strongly did she e7ijoin this 07i hi77i. 

But having returned to Su77iinoye, 

Though he looked for his house, 7to house could he see; 

Though he looked for the village, 7io village could he see. 

Wondering at this, the thought occurred to hi7n : 

''In the space of three years, since I left 7ny ho7ne, 

The horizon. 

40 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Ca?i 77iy home have vanished^ leaving not even the fence ? 

Were I now to open this casket^ 

Might it not appear as before ? ' 

So saying^ he opened a little the precious casket^ 

Whereiipo7i a white cloud issued from it 

And spread away towards the immortal land. 

He ran, he shouted, he waved his sleeves, 

He writhed up07i the earth, and grou7id his feet together. 

Of a sudde7i his heart 7nelted away ; 

Wrinkles covered his body, that had been so youthful ; 

His hair, that had been so black, became white. 

By -and- by his breath also failed ; 

At last his life departed. 

A7td, lo I here 07ice stood the cottage 

Of Urashi77ia of Midstmoye.'" 

Like most Naga-uta, the above is followed by a thirty- 
one syllable poem known as a Hanka. The Hanka 
sometimes echoes the principal idea of the poem which 
precedes, and is at others employed as a sort of poetical 
save-all to utilise any stray scrap of thought or imagery 
which it may not have been convenient to include in 
the principal poem. Some Naga-uta have several Hanka 
appended to them. 

Hanka 

" In the i77i77iorial la7id 
He itiight have go?te on to dwell ; 
But by his 7tature 
How dull was he, this wight ! " 

The authors of the two following lyrics are unnamed. 
Mount Fuji (Fujiyama) 

" Where 07i the 07ie ha7idis the provi7tce of Kai, 
A7id 071 the other the land of Suruga, 
Right i7i the 77iidst between the77i 
Sta7ids 071 1 the high peak of Fuji. 
The very clouds of heaven dread to approach it ; 
Even the soaring birds reach not its sum7nit in their flight. 

MANYOSHIU 41 

Its burning fire is quenched by the snow; 

The snow that falls is vielied by the fire. 

No words 7nay tell of it^ no name kftow I that is fit for it, 

But a wondrozis deity it surely is / 

That lake we call the Sea of Se 

Is contai?ted within it; 

That river which men., as they cross it., call the Fuji 

Is the water which flows down fro7n it; 

Of Yamato, the Land of Su7irise^ 

It is the peace-giver., it is the god, it is the treasure. 

Ofi the peak of Fuji, iti the land of Suruga^ 

I never weary of ga2i?igP 

Poverty 

The following is exceptional, as giving a glimpse of 
the condition of the poorer classes. It contains lines in 
which Buddhist influence is traceable. 

" ^Tis 7iight : 77iingled with the storm the rain is falling; 
Mingled with the rai7i the s7tow isfilli77g. 
So cold a7n /, / know not what to do. 
I take up and suck coarse salt {^fish .?] 
A7id sip a breiv of sake dregs; 
I cough, I sneeze and sneese, I can7iot help it. 
1 77iay stroke 7ny beard, a7id thi7ik proudly to 77iyself 
Who is there like 77ie ? 

But so cold a77i I, I pull over 77ie the he77ipen coverlet, 
A7id huddle upon 77ie all the 7iuno cloaks I have got. 

Yet €ve7i this chilly 7iight 
Are there not others still poorer, 
Whose parents are starvi7tg of cold a7id hunger. 
Whose wife a7id children are begging their food with tears ? 

(The poet fancies himself addressing such a person.) 
* At such a ti77ie how do you pass your days ? ' 

(Answer.) 

' Heave7t and earth are wide, but for 77ie they have beco77ie narrow ; 
The SU71 a7id 7710071 are bright, but for 77ie they yield no radia7ice. 

42 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Is it so with all men^ or with me alone ? 

Born a man by the rarest of chances^ 

I am made in human shape like another^ 

Yet on my shoulders 1 wear a nuno cloak void of paddings 

Which hangs down in tatters like seaweed — 

A mere mass of rags. 

Withi?i my hut., twisted out of shape, 

Straw is strewn oti the bare floor of earth. 

Father and mother at my pillow, 

Wife and children at my feet, 

Gather round me weeping a?td wailifig, 

With voices as from the throat of the nuye bird. 

For no sjnoke rises fro7n the kit che?t furnace, 

hi the pot spiders have Jnmg their webs, 

The very art of cooking is forgottejt. 

To crown all — cutting off the end, as the proverb has it. 

Of a thing that is too short already — 

Co?nes the head ma7t of the village with his rod. 

His summons [to forced labour'] penetrates to my sleeping-place. 

Such helpless misery is but the way of the worlds " 

It is characteristic of the difference between the 
Japanese and English languages, that this poem in the 
original contains only seven personal (including posses- 
sive and relative) pronouns. 

Some Tank a 

No Edward FitzGerald has yet come to give us an 
English metrical version of the best Tanka of the Manyo- 
shiu and Kokinshiu._ A prose rendering must serve in 
the meantime. The translations correspond mostly line 
for line to the original. 

The following are ten of a set of thirteen Tanka com- 
posed in praise of sake by Otomo-no-Yakamochi (died 
785), after Hitomaro and Akahito, the most distinguished 
poet of his day. This is not a very common theme of 

MANYOSHIU 43 

the Japanese poet, and its choice is probably due to 
Chinese influence. 

" Ah / how true was that saying 
Of the great sage 
Of the times of old^ 
Who gave to sake 
The nai7ie of ' Sage? " 

" // was sake 
That was the thing most loved^ 
Even by the seven wise men 
Of the days of old?' 

" Better than talk 
That would be wise. 
Were it even to drink sake 
Until you weep tears 
Of drunk€7inessr 

" More than I can say, 
More than I can do to show it^ 
A71 exceeding noble thing 
Is sake:' 

" If it turned out 
That I were aught else but nian, 
I would be 
A sake-jar, 
For the?! I should get soakedP 

" Hateful in my eyes 
Is the se7itentious prig 
Who will not drink sake. 
When I look ofi such a one 
I find hiin to resemble an ape" ^ 

" Talk of priceless treasures ! 
Can they be more precious 
Tha?t a single cup 
Of thick sake?'' 

^ The official edition of the Manyoshiu has bestowed eight pages of com- 
mentary on this last stanza. 

44 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

" Talk of jewels 

Which shine by Jtightf 

Can they give so much pleasure 

As drinking sake' 

To drive away on^s care ? " 
" Majiy are the ivays 

Of this world's pleasures J 

But none to my nii7id 

Is like that of getting mellow^ 

Even to tears^ 
" So long as i?i this world 

I have my pleasure^ 

In the future existence 

What care I though I become 

An insect or a bird? " 

Spring is a more favourite subject. The following are 
by various authors : — 

" On the plian blossoms 

Thick fell the snow j 

I wished to gather some 

To show to thee^ 

But it melted in my handsS'' 
" The plum blossoms 

Had already beeri scattered^ 

But notwithstaytding 

The white snow 

Has fallen deep in the garden? 
''^ Amojig the hills 

The snow still lies — 

But the willows 

Where the torre7its rush together 

Are in full bud." 
" O thou willow 

That I see every morn^ 

Hasten to become a thick grove 

Whereto the nigJiHyigale ^ 

May resort and sing." 

The bird which it is necessary in an English translation to call the nightin- 
gale is not our songster, but an allied species, the Uguisu or Cettia cantans. 

MANYOSHIU 45 

^''Before the wind of spring 
Hns tangled thefiyie threads 
Of the green willow — 
Now^ I would show it 
To 7ny loveJ'' 

" The time of the cherry blossoms 
Is not yet past — 
Yet now they ought to fall 
Whilst the love of those who look on them 
Is at its height ^'^ 

"■Fall gently 

0 thou rain of spfing ! 
And scatter not 

The cherry flowers 
Until I have seen the?n.''* 

" When I we7it out 
Over the moor, 
Where the haze was risings 
The nightiftgale sa?ig ; 
Spring, it seems, has come." 

^^ My days pass in longing. 
And my heart melts 
Like the hoar-frost 
On the water-plants 
When spring has corned 

" In yearning love 

1 have etidured till 7iight. 

But to-i7ior7-ow^ s long spri7tg day 
With its risi7ig 77iists, 
How shall I ever pass it ? " 

It is not without some resemblance to the English bird, being of the same size, 
and of a plain greyish colour. Its habits are not specially nocturnal, but 
when singing it seeks the deepest shade of a bush or thicket, a condition 
which the Japanese simulate by covering its cage with paper so as to produce 
an artificial gloom. The repertory of the Uguisu is by no means so varied as 
that of the nightingale, but for liquid melody of note it is unsurpassed by any 
songster whatever. Its brief melodious utterances are no inapt emblem of the 
national poetry. 

46 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

" Mf love is thick 
As the herbage in springy 
It is manifold as the waves 
That heap themselves on the shore 
Of the great ocean^ 

" No more will I pla?it for thee 
Tall trees^ 
O cuckoo I ^ 

Thou co7nest, and with thy resounding cry 
Dost increase my year7iings.^'' 

" This morn at dawti 
The cuckoo s cry I heard. 
Didst thou hear it^ my lord^ 
Or wast thou still asleep ? '' 

" / will plant for thee 
A whole grove of orange-trees, 

0 thou cuckoo I 

Where thou mayst always dwell, 
Eveji U7itil the winterP 

^'' It is daw7i J 

1 caimot sleep for thoughts of her I love. 
What is to be do7te 

With this cuckoo 

That goes on si7igi7ig?^^ 

" Were only thy ha7td 
Lyi7ig i7t mi7ie, 

What 7}iatter though meii^s words 
Were copious as the herbage 
Of the siu7i7ner 77ieads.''^ 

" Si7ice we are such thi7tgs 
That if we are bor7i 
We 77iust so7tie day die, 
So lo7ig as this life lasts 
Let us e7tjoy ou7'selvesP 

The Japanese have quite different associations with the cuckoo from our- 
selves. They hear in its cry the longings of unsatisfied love. It is true that 
it is not the same bird as ours, but an allied species with a different note. Its 
name (in Japanese, Hototogisu) is onomatopoetic. 

MANYOSHIU 47 

*' To what shall I co7npare 
This life of ours ? 
It is like a boat 
Which at daybreak rows away 
And leaves no trace behind it." ^ 

" I would go to some land 
Where ?io cuckoos are^ 
I am so melancholy 
When I hear 
Their notcT 

" The rippling'^ wistaria 
That I pla?ited by my house 
As a mejnento 
Of thee whom I love., 
Is at length i?t blossonu''' 

" When the cuckoo sang., 
Straightway I drove him off"., 
Bidding him go to you. 
I wonder did he reach you ? " 

" Go.^ thou cuckoo., 
And tell my lord.. 
Who is too busy 
To come to see me., 
How much I love him.^^ 

" Granted that I 
Am hateful to you, 
But the florveri7ig orange., 
That grows by my dwelling.. 
Will you really not come to see it /" 

*' / wear no clothiiig 
Drenched with dew 

Fro7n wending my way through the siamner herbage ; 
But yet the sleeve of my gartnent 
Is 7iever for a 7no77ient dry \froi7t tearsy' 

1 The sentiment of this poem is Buddhist. The transitoriness of life is a 
constant refrain all through Japanese literature. 

2 The flowers are supposed to resemble waves. 

48 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

" ' Tis the sixth month^ 
The SU71 is shining^ 
So that the very ground is cracked j 
But even so, how shall my sleeve beco7ne dry 
If I never meet thee ? " 

" On the spring moor 
To gather violets 
I went forth; 
Its charm so held 77ie 
That 1 stayed'^ till mornP 

— Akahito. 

" Oh ! the misery of loving. 
Hidden from the world 
like a maiden-lily 
Growing amid the thick herbage 
Of the summer plai7i ! " 

" The sky is a sea 

Where the cloud-billows rise; 
And the 7iioon is a bark ; 
To the groves of the stars 
It is oaring its way?' 

" Oh ! that the white waves far out 
O71 the sea of Ise 
Were but fiozuers, 
That 1 77iight gather the77i 
And b7i.7ig them as a gift to 77iy love /" 

— Prince Aki, a.d. 740. 

Although the Nihongi^ being in the Chinese language, 
does not fall within the proper scope of this work, it 
occupies so conspicuous a position among books written 
in Japan, that it deserves a passing notice. In it we have 
a collection of the national myths, legends, poetry, and 
history from the earliest times down to A.D. 697, prepared 

^ No doubt to be understood metaphorically of a visit to his love. 
2 Translated by W. G. Aston in the Transactions of the Japaji Society^ 
1896. 

NIHONGl 49 

under official auspices and completed A.D. 720. It is the 
first of a long series of official histories in Chinese. 
They are for the most part dreary compilations in which 
none but students of history, anthropology, and kindred 
subjects are likely to take much interest. The writers 
were content to record events in their chronological 
sequence from month to month and from day to day, 
without any attempt to trace the connection between 
them or to speculate upon their causes. The attention 
to Chinese composition and studies, which the use cf 
this language necessitated, had, however, some important 
effects. It served to engross the attention of the men, 
the cultivation of the native literature being left in a 
great measure to the women, and it helped to familiarise 
the Japanese with better models of style than they could 
find in their own country. 

BOOK THE THIRD 
HEIAN (CLASSICAL) PERIOD (800-1186) 

BOOK THE THIRD 

HEIAN {CLASSICAL) PERIOD (800-1186) 

CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTORY 

In 794 the capital was removed to the site of the present 
city of Kioto. It received the name of Heian-jo, or the 
"City of Peace." The Mikados continued to make it 
their residence until the revolution of 1868, but the term 
" Heian period " is restricted to the time when Kioto was 
the real seat of government, namely, about four centuries. 
When Yoritomo, at the end of this period, established 
the Shogunate, or rule of the military caste, at Kamakura, 
in the east of Japan, all practical authority was trans- 
ferred thither. 

With the founding of Heian-jo (Kioto) the wave of 
progress which received its impulse from the combined 
influences of Chinese learning and the Buddhist religion 
reached its height, and a period of great material pros- 
perity ensued. But the usual results were not long in 
manifesting themselves. The ruling classes became indo- 
lent and luxurious, and neglected the arts of government 
5 53 

54 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

for the pursuit of pleasure. There was great laxity of 
morals, as the literature of the period abundantly shows ; 
but learning flourished, and a high state of refinement 
prevailed in that narrow circle which surrounded the 
Mikado and his court. 

The Heian period is the classical age of Japanese 
literature. Its poetry may not quite reach the stan- 
dard of the Manyoshiu, but it contains much that is 
of admirable quality, while in the abundance and excel- 
lence of its prose writings it leaves the Nara period 
far behind. The language had now attained to its full 
development. With its rich system of terminations and 
particles, it was a pliant instrument in the writer's hands, 
and the vocabulary was varied and copious to a degree 
which is astonishing when we remember that it was drawn 
almost exclusively from native sources. The few words 
of Chinese origin which it contains seem to have found 
their way in through the spoken language, and are not 
taken straight from Chinese books, as at a later stage 
when Japanese authors loaded their periods with alien 
vocables to an extent for which our most Johnsonian 
English affords a feeble parallel. 

The literature of the Heian period reflects the plea- 
sure-loving and effeminate, but cultured and refined 
character of the class of Japanese who produced it. It 
has no serious, masculine qualities. History, theology, 
science, law— in short, all learned and thoughtful works 
were composed in the Chinese language, and were of 
poor literary quality. The native literature may be de- 
scribed in one word as belles-lettres. It consists of 
poetry, fiction, diaries, and essays of a desultory kind, 
called by the Japanese Zuihitsu, or ''following the 
pen," the only exceptions being a few works of a more 

HEIAN PERIOD 55 

or less historical character which appeared towards the 
close of the period. 

The lower classes of the people had no share in the 
literary activit}^ of this time. Culture had not as yet 
penetrated beyond a very narrow circle. Both writers 
and readers belonged exclusively to the ofBcial caste. 
The people from time to time showed their dissatis- 
faction with oppression and misgovernment, but their 
discontent found no expression in literature. It took 
the form of outbreaks and rebellions, robbery and 
piracy. 

It is a remarkable and, I believe, unexampled fact, 
that a very large and important part of the best literature 
which Japan has produced was written by women. We 
have seen that a good share of the Nara poetry is of 
feminine authorship. In the Heian period the women 
took a still more conspicuous part in maintaining the 
honour of the native literature. The two greatest 
works which have come down to us from this time are 
both by women. This was no doubt partly due to the 
absorption of the masculine intellect in Chinese studies, 
and to the contempt of the stronger sex for such frivolous 
pursuits as the writing of poetry and romances. But 
there was still a more effective cause. The position of 
women in ancient Japan was very different from what 
it afterwards became when Chinese ideas were in the 
ascendant. The Japanese of this early period did not 
share the feeling common to most Eastern countries, 
that women should be kept in subjection, and, as far as 
possible, in seclusion. Feminine chieftains are frequently 
mentioned in the old histories, and several even of the 
Mikadoswere women. Indeed the Chinese seem to have 
thought that the '' monstrous regiment of women " was 

56 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

the rule in Japan at this time ; at least they often styled 
it the ^'Queen-country." Many instances might be quoted 
of Japanese women exercising an mfluence and main- 
taining an independence of conduct quite at variance 
with our preconceived notions of the position of women 
in the East. It is this which gives their literary work an 
air of freedom and originality which it would be vain to 
expect in the writings of inmates of a harem. 

The fact that the Heian literature was largely the 
work of women no doubt accounts partly for its gentle, 
domestic character. It abounds in descriptions of scenes 
of home and court life, and of amours and sentimental 
or romantic incidents. Though the morality which it 
reveals is anything but strait-laced, the language is 
uniformly refined and decent, in this respect resembling 
the best literature of China, upon which the Japanese 
taste was formed, and contrasting strongly with the 
pornographic school of popular fiction which disgraced 
Japan in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. 

The Heian period witnessed an important advance 
in the art of writing, the invention of • the phonetic 
script known as Kana. The ancient Japanese had no 
writing. When they began to write their own language 
phonetically they had no alternative but to use Chinese 
ideographs for the purpose. This system was open to 
two objections. A Chinese character is a complicated 
contrivance, consisting of numerous strokes, and as a 
complete character was required for each syllable of the 
polysyllabic Japanese words, an intolerable cumbersome- 
ness was the result. The second objection was that a 
given Japanese syllable might be represented by any 
one of several Chinese characters. Some hundreds were 
actually in use to write the forty-seven syllables of which 

PHONETIC WRITING 57 

the language consists. It was no easy matter to remem- 
ber so many, either in reading or in writing. To meet 
these difficuhies the Japanese did two things : they 
restricted themselves to a limited number of characters 
for use as phonetic signs, and they wrote these in an 
abbreviated or cursive form. There are two varieties 
of the script thus produced, which are known as the 
Katakana and Hiragana. No exact date can be assigned 
for their introduction, but for the present purpose it is 
sufficient to know that both had come into use by the 
end of the ninth century. They simplified writing enor- 
mously. It IS hardly too much to say that without them 
the labour of committing to paper the lengthy composi- 
tions of this period would have given pause to the most 
industrious scribes. 

CHAPTER II 

POETRY— THE "KOKINSHIU" 

For seventy or eighty years after the estabhshment of 
the capital at Heian or Kioto, Chinese learning mono- 
polised the attention of the nation. No prose writings 
of importance in the Japanese language have come 
down to us from this period. The native poetry also 
languished. Chinese verse composition was the fashion, 
Mikados and even princesses being numbered among the 
adepts in this accomplishment. The end of the ninth 
century, however, saw a revival of Japanese poetry. We 
now meet with the names of Yukihira, Narihira, Otomo 
no Kuronushi, and others, followed in the early part of 
the. tenth by Ki no Tsurayuki, Oshi Koji, Henjo, and Ono 
no Komachi (a poetess). 

In A.D. 905 the Mikado Daigo instructed a committee 
of officials of the Department of Japanese Poetry, con- 
sisting of Ki no Tsurayuki and other poets, to make a 
collection of the best pieces which had been produced 
during the previous one hundred and fifty years. The 
Anthology known as the KokinsJiiu (Poems, Ancient and 
Modern) was the result of their labours. It was com- 
pleted about 922, and contains over eleven hundred 
poems, arranged under the headings of Spring, Summer, 
Autumn, Winter, Felicitations, Partings, Journeys, Names 
of Things, Love, Sorrow, and Miscellaneous. Only five of 

this number are in the longer metre called Naga-uta, the 

58 

KOKINSHIU 59 

rest being Tanka of thirty-one syllables, with a few in 
somewhat sunilar short metres. 

The neglect of the Naga-uta for the Tanka which is 
indicated by these figures was no passing phase of Japan- 
ese poetry. It has continued up to our own day, with 
fatal consequences, and has been a bar to all real pro- 
gress in the poetic art. How a nation which possessed 
in the Naga-uta an instrument not unfitted, as there 
are examples to show, for the production of narrative, 
elegiac, and other poems, could practically confine itself 
for many centuries to a form of poetic expression within 
whose narrow limits nothmg more substantial than 
aphorisms, epigrams, conceits, or brief exclamations can 
be contained, is a question which it is more easy to ask 
than to answer. 

Much of the poetry of this time was the outcome of 
poetical tournaments, at which themes were proposed to 
the competitors by judges who examined each phrase 
and word with the minutest critical care before pro- 
nouncing their verdict. As might be expected, the 
poetry produced under these circumstances is of a more 
or less artificial type, and is wanting in the spontaneous 
vigour of the earlier essays of the Japanese muse. Con- 
ceits, acrostics, and untranslatable word-plays hold much 
too prominent a place ; but for perfection of form, the 
poems of this time are unrivalled. It is no doubt to this 
quality that the great popularity of this collection is due. 
Sei Shonagon, writing in the early years of the eleventh 
century, sums up a young lady's education as consisting 
of writing, music, and the twenty volumes of the Kokin- 
shiu. Subsequent poetry is evidently modelled on it 
rather than on the more archaic poems of the Manyo- 
shiu. Even at the present day the KokinsJiiu is the best 

6o JAPANESE LITERATURE 

known and most universally studied of all the numerous 
anthologies of Japanese poetry. 

SOME TANKA FROM THE " KOKINSHIU " 

" Who could it have been 
That first gave love 
This naine ? 

^ Dyi7tg^ is the plain laord 
He might well have iisedP 

Neatly rendered by Mr. Chamberlain : — 

" O love ! ivho gave thee thy siiperfluotts name ? 
Loving and dying — is it not the same ? " 

The personification of love, however, is hardly in the 
Japanese style. 

" Do I forget thee 
Eve 71 for so brief a space 
As the ears of grain 
Oft the fields of autumn 
Are lit up by the lightning's glare 7''^ 

" I fell asleep ivhile think i7ig of tJiec j 
Pe7-chance for this reaso7i 
I saw thee i7i a dream ! 
Had 1 07ily know7i it to be 07ie 
I luould 7iot have awaked.^"* 

" Shall we call that only a dreafii 
Which we see 
While asleep : 
This vai7i world itself 
I ca7inot regard as a reality ^ 

" / know that 77ty life 
Has no assura7ice of to-77iorrow ; 
But to-day^ 

So lo7ig as dark7iess has 7iot yet falle7i^ 
I will grieve for hi7it who has passed awayT 

KOKINSHIU 6 1 

" O thou cuckoo 
Of the ancient capital 
Of ho no Kami ! \_Narci\ 
Thy voice alone 
Is all that is left of the olden time" 

Tsurayuki, having met with a cool reception at his 
native place, plucks a branch of flowering plum, and 
exclaims — 

" Its people ? A h well I 
I know not their hearts, 
But in my native place 
The flowers with their a?zcie7it 
Fragra?tce are odorousJ^ 

" The hue of the flowers 
Mingles with the snow. 
So that it cannot be seen; 
But their presence may be known 
Were it only by the perfume." 

" / came and found thee not : 
Wetter far is my sleeve 
Than if I had threaded my way at morti 
Through the bamboo-grass 
Of the autumn pi ai7i" 

" This night of spring. 
Of formless gloom, 
The colour of the phim-flowers 
Cannot, indeed, be seen; 
But how can their perfume be hiddeji ? '' 

** What is it that makes me feel so desolate 
This evenijig 
While I wait 
For one who comes not? 
Can it be the blowing of the [chill] auticmn wind?'''' 

*'^ I would that thy heart 
Were melted unto me. 
As when spri7ig comes 
The ice thaws away 
A?id leaves ?io remainder" 

62 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

" For 7nany a year 
The fire i7i me of love 
Has not been quenched^ 
Yet my fr 02671 sleeve [soaked with tears] 
Is still u7ithawedP 

" // is I alo7ie 

Who a77t 77iost 7niserable, 
For no year passes 
In which eve7i the ' Cow-herd'' 
Does 7iot 77ieet his loveP 

There is here an allusion to the Chinese story, accord- 
ing to which the Cow-herd, one of a group of stars near 
the River of Heaven (the Milky Way), is the lover of a 
star on the other side called the Spinster. They are 
separated all the year round except on the seventh day 
of the seventh month, when magpies bridge over the 
River of Heaven, so as to allow the pair to meet. 
Both Chinese and Japanese poetry contain numberless 
allusions to this legend. 

The most convenient of the many editions of the 
Kokinshiu is Motoori's To-Kaganii. It contains a modern 
colloquial paraphrase of the original. 

CHAPTER III 

PROSE— "KOKINSHIU" PREFACE, "TOSA NIKKI," 
"TAKETORI MONOGATARI," "ISE MONOGA- 
TARI," MINOR WORKS 

The ''Kokinshiu" Preface 

About two centuries elapsed after the Kojiki was written 
without any substantial addition being made to the prose 
literature of Japan. Some of the Norito and Imperial 
edicts described in a previous chapter belong to this 
period, but it was not untl the early part of the tenth 
century that Japanese writers took up in earnest the 
practice of prose composition in their native language. 
Kl NO TSURAYUKI, the poet and editor of the KokinshiUy 
was the first in the field. 

But few details of his life have reached us. He was 
a court noble who traced his descent in a direct line, 
from one of the Mikados, and his history is little more 
than the record of the successive offices which he held 
at Kioto and in the provinces. He died A.D. 946. 

His famous preface to the KokinsJiiu was written 

about 922. It has to this day a reputation in Japan as 

the ne phis ultra of elegance in style. Later literature is 

full of allusions to it, and it has served as the model for 

countless similar essays. It is interesting as the first 

attempt to discuss such a philosophical question as the 

63 

64 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

nature of poetry in a thoughtful spirit. I transcribe the 
more important passages : — 

^'The poetry of Yamato (Japan) has the human heart 
for its seed, and grows therefrom into the manifold forms 
of speech. Men are full of various activities, among 
which poetry is that which consists in expressing the 
thoughts of their hearts by metaphors taken from what 
they see or hear. 

'^ Listening to the nightingale singing among the 
flowers or to the cry of the frog which dwells in the 
water, we recognise the truth that of all living things 
there is not one which does not utter song. It is poetry 
by which, without an effort, heaven and earth are moved, 
and gods and demons invisible to our eyes are touched 
with sympathy. By poetry the converse of lovers is 
made gentler, and the hearts of fierce warriors soothed. 

" Poetry began when heaven and earth were created. 
But of that which has been handed down to our day, the 
first was made in everlasting heaven by Shita-teru-hime, 
and on the ore-yielding earth by Susa-no-wo. In the 
age of the swift gods it would seem that as yet there was 
no established metre. Their poetry was artless in form 
and hard of comprehension. It was in the age of man 
that Susa-no-wo made the first poetry of thirty and one 
syllables. And so by the varied multrplication of 
thoughts and language we came to express our love 
for flowers, our envy of birds, our emotion at the sight 
of the hazes which usher in the spring, or our grief at 
beholding the dew.^ As a distant journey is begun by 
our first footstep and goes on for months and years, as a 
high mountain has its beginning in the dust of its base 
and at length rises aloft and extends across the sky like 

1 Dew with the Japanese poets suggests tears, and is "associated with grief. 

KOKINSHIU PREFACE 65 

the clouds of heaven, so gradual must have been the rise 
of poetry. 

" In the present day love has seduced men's hearts into 
a fondness for ornament. Hence nothing is produced 
but frivolous poetry without depth of feeling. In the 
houses of those given to a life of gallantry, poetry is like 
a tree buried in the ground and unknown to men ; while 
with more serious people it is regarded as a flowering 
Suzuki ^ which will never bear ears of grain. If we con- 
sider its origin, this ought not to be. The Mikados of 
former times, on a morning when the spring flowers 
were in blossom, or on a night when the autumn moon 
was shining, used to send for their courtiers and demand 
from them verses suitable to the occasion. Some w^ould 
represent themselves as wandering in trackless places in 
search of the flowers they loved ; others would describe 
their groping in the guideless dark and longing for the 
moon. The Mikado would then examine all such fancies, 
and pronounce this to be clever, that to be stupid. 

'** Or else they wished prosperity to their lord, using the 
metaphors of pebbles- or of Mount Tsukuba.^ When 
joy was too much for them, when their hearts overflowed 
with pleasure, when they felt their love to be eternal as 

•^ A kind of grass. 
^ " A/ay our lord 

Live for a thousand ages, 
Until the pebbles 
Beco7ne a rock 
Overgro7vn with mossT 

3 " Mount Tsukuba \zvhich has two peaks^ 
Has a shadow 
On this side and on that, 
But the shadoiu of Our Lord 
Has no shadow to excel it^ 

66 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

the smoke which rises from Mount Fuji, when they 
longed for a friend with the yearning of the cry of the 
matsumushi [a kind of cicada], when the sight of the pair 
of fir-trees of Takasago and Suminoye suggested a hus- 
band and wife growing old together, when they thought 
of their bygone days of manly vigour, or grudged to the 
past the one time of maiden bloom, it was with poetry 
that they comforted their hearts. Again, when they 
looked upon the flowers shed from their stalks on a 
spring morning, or heard the ieave3 falling on an 
autumnal eve, or every year lamented the snow and 
waves [i.e. grey hairs] reflected in a m.irror ; or, seeing 
the dew upon the grass or the foam upon water, were 
startled to recognise in them emblems of their own lives ; 
or else, but yesterday in all the pride of prosperity, 
to-day, with a turn of fortune, saw themselves doomed to 
a wretched life, those dear to them estranged ; or again 
drew metaphors from the waves and the fir-clad moun- 
tain or the spring of water in the midst of the moor, or 
gazed on the under leaves of the autumn lespedeza, or 
counted the times a snipe preens its feathers at dawn, 
or compared mankind to a joint of bamboo floating 
down a stream, or expressed their disgust with the world 
by the simile of the river Yoshino, or heard that the 
smoke no longer rises from Mount Fuji, or that the 
bridge of Nagara had been repaired — in all these cases 
poetry it was by which they soothed their hearts." 

The above are allusions to well-known poems. Tsura- 
yuki traces briefly the history of Japanese poetry in the 
Nara period, and then goes on to speak of the more 
recent poets whose effusions find a place in the collec- 
tion he had made. The following may have some interest 
as the earliest example of literary criticism in Japan: — 

TOSA NIKKI e-j 

*' Henjo excels in form, but substance is wanting. 
The emotion produced by his poetry is evanescent, and 
may be compared to that which we experience at the 
sight of a beautiful woman in a painting. Narihira over- 
flows with sentiment, but his language is deficient. His 
verse is like a flower which, although withered and with- 
out bloom, yet retains its fragrance. Yasuhide is skilful 
in the use of words, but they match ill with his matter, 
as if a shopkeeper were to dress himself in fine silks. 
Kisen is profound, but the connection between the begin- 
ning and the end is indistinct. He may be compared to 
the autumn moon, which, as we gaze on it, is obscured 
by the clouds of dawn. We have not much of his poetry, 
so that we gain little towards understanding it by a com- 
parison of one poem with another. Ono no Komachi 
belongs to the school of Soto-ori-hime of ancient times. 
There is feeling in her poems, but little vigour. She is 
like a lovely woman who is suffering from ill health. 
Want of vigour, however, is only natural in a woman's 
poetry. Kuronushi's verse is poor in form. He re- 
sembles a woodman burdened with faggots resting in the 
shade of flowers." 

'^TOSA NIKKI" 

Another work of Tsurayuki's is the Tosa Nikki or Tosa 
Diary. It was written on a journey back to Kioto after 
having completed his term of four years' service as 
Prefect of that province. 

The first entry bears date the 21st day of the tw^elfth 
month, and we learn from other sources that the year 
was the fourth year of Shohei. This would be, according 
to the European reckoning, some time in the months of 
January or February ^A.D. 935. 

68 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Tsurayuki begins by telling his readers that diaries 
being commonly written by men, this is an attempt to 
write a woman's diary ; meaning, that it was in the 
Japanese language and written character, not in Chinese. 
He then records his departure from the Government 
House of Tosa, and his arrival at the port from which 
he was to sail. He was accompanied hither by large 
numbers of people who came to take leave of him. 
Most brought with them parting presents, usually of 
eatables or sake. The result was that in Tsurayuki's 
words, ^' Strange to say, here we were all fresh by the 
shore of the salt sea." He did not actually set sail till 
the 27th, the intervening six days being chiefly taken up 
in disposing of the presents, and in a visit to the newly 
appointed Prefect, with whom he spent a day and night 
in drinking and verse-making, after which he took a 
final leave. Tsurayuki's successor in office shook hands 
with him at the bottom of the steps leading up to the 
house, and they bade each other farewell with many 
cordial but tipsy expressions of good-will on both sides. 
On the following day, however, we find Tsurayuki in a 
different frame of mind. He tells us that during his stay 
in Tosa a girl had died who was born in Kioto, and that 
amid all the bustle and confusion of leaving port, her 
friends could think of nothing but her. Some one, he 
says, composed this verse of poetry on the occasion : 
"With the joyful thought, ^ Home to Kioto,' there 
mingles the bitter reflection that there is one who never 
will return." We are informed by another writer that 
Tsurayuki here deplores the loss of his own daughter, a 
little girl of nine years of age. 

But the jollifications had not yet come to an end. The 
new Prefect's brother made his appearance at a project- 

TOSA NIKKI 69 

ing cape on their way to the first stopping-place, and 
they were accordingly obliged to land on the beach, 
where there was more drinking and composing of 
verses. Of these Tsurayuki seems to have had no great 
opinion. He says that it required the united efforts of 
two of the party to make one bad verse, and compares 
them to two fishermen labouring along with a heavy net 
on their shoulders. Their jollity w^as interrupted by the 
master of the junk, who summoned them on board. 
There was a fair wind, he said, and the tide served ; and 
Tsurayuki maliciously adds that there was no more sake 
to drink. They accordingly embarked, and proceeded 
on their voyage. 

On the 29th they had got no farther than Ominato, a 
harbour only a few miles distant from their starting- 
point. Here they were detained for ten days waiting for 
a fair wind. Presents of eatables and drinkables still 
came in, but more sparingly, and Tsurayuki records 
regretfully the fate of a bottle of sake which he had 
fastened on the roof of the cabin, but which was displaced 
by the rolling of the junk and fell overboard. One of 
these presents was a pheasant, which, according to the 
old Japanese custom, was attached to a flowering branch 
of plum. Some brought verses with their gifts. Here 
is a specimen : '' Louder than the clamour of the white 
surges on your onward path will be the cry of me 
weeping that I am left behind." Tsurayuki remarks that 
if that were really so, he must have a very loud voice. 

On the 9th of the second month they at last sailed 
from Ominato. As they passed Matsubara, they admired 
a large grove of ancient firs which grew by the sea- 
shore. Tsurayuki mentions the pleasure with which 
they watched the cranes flying about among their tops, 

70 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

and gives us this verse composed on the occasion : 
"Casting my glance over the sea, on each fir-tree^ top 
a crane has his dwelhng. They have been comrades for 
a thousand years." 

It became dark before they reached their next stopping- 
place. The idea of pursuing their voyage all night long 
does not seem to have occurred to them. Besides, to 
judge from its having gone up the Osaka river as far as 
Yamazaki, their junk must have been a very small one, 
and the diary shows that it depended more on oars than 
on sails. Here is Tsurayuki's description of nightfall : — 

" Whilst we rowed along gazing on this scene, the 
mountains and the sea became all dark, the night deep- 
ened, and east and west could not be distinguished, so we 
entrusted all thought of the weather to the mind of the 
master of our ship. Even the men who were not ac- 
customed to the sea became very sad, and still more the 
women, who rested their heads on the bottom of the ship 
and did nothing but weep. The sailors, however, seemed 
to think nothing of it, and sung the following boat-song." 
Tsurayuki gives a few lines of it, and then proceeds. 
" There was a great deal more of this kind of stuff, but I 
do not write it down. Listening to the laughter at these 
verses, our hearts became somewhat calmed in spite of 
the raging of the sea. It was quite dark when we at 
length reached our anchorage for the night." 

Three more days leisurely travelling brought them to 
Murotsu, a port just to the west of the eastern of the two 
horns which the island of Shikoku sends out to the 
southward. The morning after their arrival here, a slight 
but constant rain prevented them from starting, and the 
passengers took the opportunity to go on shore for a 

^ Both the crane and the fir are, in Japan, emblems of long life. 

TOSA NIKKI 71 

bath. In the entry for this day, Tsurayuki mentions a 
curious superstition. He tells us that since the day on 
which they first embarked, no one wore scarlet or other 
rich colours or good silks, lest they should incur the 
anger of the gods of the sea. The next day the rain 
continued. It was a Buddhist fast-day, and Tsurayuki 
kept it faithfully till noon ; but as suitable food for fast- 
days was not obtainable on board, he bought with rice (not 
having any copper cash) a tai which one of the sailors 
had caught the day before. This was the beginning of a 
trade between him and the sailors, sake and rice being 
exchanged for fish. There was no change in the weather 
till the 17th, the fifth day from their arrival at Murotsu. 
On that day they started early m the morning with the 
moon, then just past the full, shining over a waveless sea, 
which reflected the sky so perfectly, that, as Tsurayuki 
said, the heaven above and the ocean beneath could not 
be distinguished. He composed the following stanza on 
this occasion : ''What is this that strikes against my oar 
as the boat is rowed along over the moon of the sea- 
depths ? Is it the bush of the man in the moon ? " 

The fine weather, however, did not continue. Dark 
clouds gathering overhead alarmed the master of the junk, 
and they put back to Murotsu under a pelting shower, 
and feeling very miserable. Three more wretched days 
they were obliged to remain here, endeavouring with 
indifferent success to w^hile away the time by writing 
Chinese and Japanese verses, and every morning counting 
the days that had been already spent on the voyage. On 
the 2ist they again proceeded on their way. A large 
number of other junks sailed at the same time, a pretty 
sight, which was greatly admired by Tsurayuki. '' It 
was spring," he remarks, '' but it seemed as if over the 

72 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

sea the leaves of autumn were being scattered." The 
weather was now fine, and they entered what we call 
the Kii Channel. 

Here they were disturbed by a fresh cause of anxiety. 
It seems that Tsurayuki during his term of office in 
Tosa had had occasion to deal rather severely with the 
pirates of these parts, and it was thought likely that 
they would now try to have their revenge. One of the 
commentators attempts to save Tsurayuki's reputation 
for courage by reminding us that this diary is written in 
the character of a woman. The course of the narrative 
shows that their fears were to all appearance well 
grounded. Two days later we find them praying to the 
Kami and Hotoke ^ to save them from the pirates. On 
the following days there were constant alarms, and on 
the 26th they heard that the pirates were actually in 
pursuit of them, so they left their anchorage at midnight 
and put to sea. There was a place on their way where 
it was usual to make offerings to the God of the Sea. 
Tsurayuki made the captain offer nusa.'^ They were 
offered by being cast into the air, and allowing the wind 
to carry them to the sea. The iiusa fell in an easterly 
direction, and the junk's course was turned to the same 
quarter. To the great joy of all on board, they had now 
a favourable wind, sail was set, and they made a good 
day's run. The next two days they were again storm- 
bound, but on the 29th they proceeded on their voyage. 
On the 30th they crossed the entrance to the Naruto 
passage, and the same night, by dint of hard rowing, they 
reached the strait of Idzumi. They had now reached the 
Gokinai, or five provinces round Kioto, and here there was 

^ Shinto and Buddhist gods. 

" The strips of white paper seen in Shinto shrines, and also called gohei. 

TOSA NIKKI 73 

no longer any fear of pirates. The ist day of the second 
month they made httle way, and on the 2nd we have 
the following entry : *' The rain and wind ceased not ; 
a whole day and a whole night we prayed to the Kami 
and Hotoke." On the next day the weather was equally 
bad, and on the 4th the captain would not put to sea, 
from a fear of bad weather which proved quite ground- 
less. There were a great many beautiful shells on the 
beach at this place, and Tsurayuki composed these lines 
in allusion to a shell which is called in Japanese the 
wasure-gai or ^' shell of forgetfulness: " ^' I would descend 
from my ship to gather the shell of forgetfulness of one 
for whom I am filled with sorrowful longing. Do ye, oh 
ye advancing surges, drive it forward to the strand." 
He afterwards says that the true wish of his heart was 
not to forget her whom he had lost, but only to give 
such respite to his sorrow that it might afterwards gain 
greater strength. 

The following is part of the entry for the 5th, the day 
before they arrived in the Osaka river. They were now 
opposite Sumiyoshi. 

^^ Meanwhile a sudden gale sprung up, and in spite of 
all our efforts we fell gradually to leeward, and were in 
great danger of being sent to the bottom. ^ This god of 
Sumiyoshi,' said the captain, ^ is like other gods. What 
he desires is not any of the fashionable articles of the 
day. Give him nusa as an offering.' The captain's ad- 
vice was taken, and nusa were offered ; but as the wind, 
instead of ceasing, only blew harder and harder, and the 
danger from the storm and sea became more and more 
imminent, the captain again said, ^ Because the august 
heart of the god is not moved for misUy neither does the 
august ship move ; offer to him something in which he 

74 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

will take greater pleasure/ In compliance with this 
advice, I bethought me what it would be best to offer. 
^ Of eyes I have a pair — then let me give to the god my 
mirror, of which I have only one.* The mirror was 
accordingly flung into the sea, to my very great regret ; 
but no sooner had I done so than the sea itself became 
as smooth as a mirror." 

The next day they entered the Osaka river. All the 
passengers, men, women, and children, were overjoyed 
at reaching this point of their voyage, and clasped their 
foreheads with their hands in ecstasies of delight. 
Several days were now spent in dragging the vessel 
laboriously against the strong current of the river. A 
fast-day occurred on their way up it, which Tsurayuki 
had this time the satisfaction of keepmg properly by 
abstaining entirely from fish. On the 12th they reached 
Yamazaki, from which place a carriage (that is, one of 
the bullock-carts in which nobles rode) was sent for to 
Kioto, and on the evening of the i6th they left Yamazaki 
for the capital. Tsurayuki was greatly delighted to re- 
cognise the old familiar landmarks as he rode along. He 
mentions the children's playthings and sweetmeats in the 
shops as looking exactly as when he went away, and 
wonders whether he will find as little change in the hearts 
of his friends. He had purposely left Yamazaki in the 
evening in order that it might be night when he reached 
his own dwelling. I translate his account of the state in 
which he found it : — 

" When I reached my house and entered the gate the 
moon was shining brightly, and its condition was plainly 
to be seen. It was decayed and ruined beyond all 
description — worse even than I had been told. The 
heart of the man in whose charge I left it must have been 

TOSA NIKKI 75 

in an equally dilapidated condition. The fence between 
the two houses had been broken down, so that both 
seemed but one, and he appeared to have fulfilled his 
charge by looking in through the gaps. And yet I had 
supplied him by every opportunity with the means of 
keeping it in repair. To-night, however, I would not 
allow him to be told this in an angry tone, but in spite 
of my vexation, offered him an acknowledgment for his 
trouble. Therp was in one place a sort of pond where 
water had collected in a hollow, by the side of which 
grew a fir-tree. It had lost half its branches, and looked 
as if a thousand years had passed during the five or six 
years of my absence. Younger trees had grown up 
round it, and the whole place was in a most neglected 
condition, so that every one said that it was pitiful to see. 
Among other sad thoughts that rose spontaneously to my 
mind was the memory — ah, how sorrowful ! — of one who 
was born in this house, but who did not return here along 
with me. My fellow-travellers were chatting merrily wdth 
their children in their arms ; but I meanwhile, still un- 
able to contain my grief, privately repeated these lines 
to one who knew my heart." 

I shall not give the verses, but proceed to the last 
sentence of the diary, which is as follows : '^ I cannot 
write down all my many regrets and memories ; be it for 
good or for evil, here I will fling away my pen," 

The Tosa Nikki is a striking example of the importance 
of style. It contains no exciting adventures or romantic 
situations ; there are in it no wise maxims or novel 
information ; its only merit is that it describes in simple 
yet elegant language, and with a vein of playful humour, 
the ordinary life of a traveller in Japan at the time when 
it was written. But this has proved sufficient to give it 

7^ JAPANESE LITERATURE 

a high rank amongst Japanese classics, and has insured 
its being handed down to our own day as a most esteemed 
model for composition in the native Japanese style. It has 
been followed by many imitations, but has had no equal. 

''Taketori Monogatari" and ''Ise Monogatari" 

Monogatari^ a word which will be frequently met with 
below, means '' narrative." It is applied chiefly to fiction, 
but there are some true histories which fall under this 
denomination. 

The date and authorship of both these books is un- 
known. We may, however, accept the opinion of the 
eminent native critic Motoori, that they belong to a time 
not long after the period Yengi (901-922). Both are 
obviously the work of persons well versed in the litera- 
ture of the day, and familiar with court life in Kioto. 

The Taketori Monogatari^ is usually given the pre- 
cedence in order of time. It is what we should call a 
fairy-tale. The scene is laid in the neighbourhood of 
Kioto, and the personages are all Japanese. The lan- 
guage too is as nearly as possible pure Japanese. But 
there are abundant traces of foreign influences. The 
supernatural machinery is either Buddhist or Taoist, and 
most even of the incidents are borrowed from the copious 
fairy-lore of China. 

An old man who earned a living by making bamboo- 
ware {Taketori means bamboo-gatherer) espied one day 
in the w^oods a bamboo with a shining stem. He split 
it open, and discovered in one of the joints a beautiful 
little maiden three inches in height. He took her home 
and adopted her as his daughter, giving her the name of 

1 Translated by Mr. F. V. Dickins in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society^ January 1887* 

TAKETORI MONOGATARI jy 

Kaguyahime or the ^' shining damsel." She speedily 
'grew up to womanhood, when her beauty attracted 
numerous admirers. To each of them she assigned a 
quest, promising that she would marry the suitor who 
successfully accomplished the task allotted to him. One 
lover was told to fetch Buddha's beggmg-bowl of stone 
from India; another to bring her a branch of the tree with 
.roots of silver, stem of gold, and fruit of jewels, which 
grew in the fabulous island Paradise of Mount Horai. 
From the third she required a garment made of the fur 
of the fire-rat, supposed to be uninflammable. The 
fourth was to procure the shining jewel of many hues 
of the dragon's head, and the fifth a swallow's cowry- 
shell. They all failed. The maiden was then wooed by 
the Mikado, but equally in vain, though they remained on 
friendly terms and kept up an exchange of sentimental 
Tanka. She was eventually taken up to heaven in a flying 
chariot, brought by her relatives in the moon, whence 
it seems she had been banished to earth for an offence 
which she had committed. 

The episode of the quest of the golden branch from 
Mount Horai may serve as a specimen of this work. 
Prince Kuramochi, to whom this task was allotted, having 
had a counterfeit branch made by cunning workmen, 
produces it and claims his reward. The old man asks 
him to tell in what manner of place he obtained this 
*' marvellous, graceful, and lovely " branch. Prince 
Kuramochi thereupon relates his supposed voyage to 
Mount Horai, not, it will be observed, without some 
bungling and repetition natural to a man who has to 
make up his story as he goes along : — 

''Three years ago, on the loth day of the second 
month, we embarked from Osaka. We knew not what 

-8 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

course we should take when we put out to sea, but as 
I felt that life would be valueless if I could not have my 
heart's desire fulfilled, we sailed on, entrusting ourselves 
to the empty winds. If we perish, thought we, there is no 
help for it. So long as we live, however, we will sail on 
until it may be we reach this island, called, it seems, 
Mount Horai. With such thoughts we rowed on over 
the ocean, and tossed about until we left far behind the 
shores of our own land. In our wanderings we were at 
one time like to go down even to the bottom of the sea 
whilst the waves were raging ; at another time we were 
borne by the wind to an unknown country where crea- 
tures like devils came forth and tried to kill us. At one 
time, knowing neither the way we had come nor the 
course we should follow, we were almost lost upon the 
sea ; at another our provisions became spent, and we 
used the roots of trees for food. Once beings hideous 
beyond description came and attempted to devour us, 
and once we sustained life by gathering shell -fish. 
Under a strange sky, where there was none to render 
us aid, we tossed about over the sea, a prey to diseases 
of all kinds, and leaving the ship to her own spon- 
taneous motion, for we knew not at all the course we 
ought to follow. At last, when five hundred days had 
passed, about the hour of the dragon a mountain became 
faintly visible in the midst of the sea. All in the ship 
gazed steadfastly at it, and saw that it was a very great 
mountain which floated about upon the surface. Its 
appearance was lofty and picturesque. This, we thought, 
must be the mountain we are seeking. No wonder we 
were filled with dread at its sight. We sailed round it for 
two or three days. Then there came forth from amongst 
the hills a woman clothed like an inhabitant of heaven, 

TAKETORI MONOGATARI 79 

and drew water in a silver vessel. When we saw her, we 
landed from the ship, and asked what might be the name 
of this mountain. The woman replied and said, ^This is 
Mount Horai.' Our joy was unbounded. 'And who/ 
we inquired, ' is she who tells us so ? ' ' My name is 
Hokanruri,' she said, and of a sudden went away in 
among the hills. 

''There seemed no way to climb this mountain, so we 
went round its side, where flowering trees unknown in 
this world were growing. Streams of golden, silver, and 
emerald hue flowed forth from it, spanned by bridges of 
all manner of jewels. Here stood shining trees, the least 
beautiful of which was that of w^hich 1 brought away a 
branch, but, as it answered Kaguyahime's description, I 
plucked it and came away. That mountain is delightful 
beyond measure, and there is nothing in this world to 
compare with it. But when I had got the branch, I 
became impatient to return ; so we embarked in our ship, 
and the wind being fair, arrived at Osaka after a voyage 
of over four hundred days. Urged by my great desire, 
I left for the capital yesterday, and now I present myself 
here without even changing my garments soaked with 
brine." 

(I omit a verse of poetry in which the old man ex- 
presses his sympathy with the Prince's sufferings, and 
also the Prince's poetical reply.) 

At this juncture a party of six men appeared in the 
courtyard. One of them, who held in his hand a cleft 
stick, with a paper in it, said : " I, Ayabe no Uchimaro, 
the head smith of your workshop, beg humbly to state — 
For more than a thousand days I and my men have 
laboured with all our strength and most heedful care in 
making for you the jewel-branch, but yet have received 

8o JAPANESE LITERATURE 

from you no wages. I pray you let me receive them, so 
that I may pay my men." So saying, he presented his 
paper. The old bamboo-cutter, with his head bowed 
down in thought, wondered what the words of this work- 
man might mean, while the Prince, beside himself with 
dismay, felt as if his heart were melting within him. 
When Kagayuhime heard this, she said, ^' Bring me that 
paper." It read as follows : — 

" My Lord the Prince, — When you shut yourself up 
for more than a thousand days with us mean workmen, 
and made us fashion the wonderful jewel-branch, you 
promised to reward us with official appointments. As 
we were lately thinking over this, we remembered that 
you had told us that the branch was required by 
the lady Kaguyahime, whose lord you were to be, and it 
occurred to us that in this palace we should receive our 
reward." 

Kaguyahime, whose heart had been growing sadder 
and sadder as the sun went down, bloomed into smiles. 
She called the old man to her and said, *^ Truly I had 
thought that it was no other than the real tree of Mount 
Horai. Now that we know that it is but a sorry counter- 
feit, give it back to him at once." 

Compared with the later literature of the Heian period, 
the style of the Taketori is artless and unformed, but its 
naive simplicity accords well with the subject-matter, and 
is not without a charm of its own. 

The Ise Monogatari is one of the most admired pro- 
ductions of the older Japanese literature. Its style is 
clear and concise, and far surpasses in elegance that of 
the Taketori Monogatari. 

It consists of a number of short chapters which have 
little connection with each other, except that they all 

ISE MONOGATARI 8i 

relate incidents in the life of a gay young nobleman of 
the court of Kioto, who is usually identified with a real 
personage named Narihira. Narihira lived about a cen- 
tury before the date when the he Monogatari was written, 
but he is supposed to have left diaries on which this work 
was founded. What truth there may be in this it is now 
impossible to ascertain, nor does it much concern us to 
know. The long series of love affairs in which the hero 
is involved are more suggestive of fiction than of fact, and 
the most plausible explanation of the title of the work 
points to the same conclusion. It seems that the men 
of Ise, like the Cretans of old, were not remarkable for 
veracity, so that the author, by calling his work Talcs of 
Ise, probably meant to convey a broad hint to his readers 
that they must not take everything in it for truth. A 
free rendering of Ise Monogatari would be Tales for the 
Marines — a title under which we should not expect to 
find a very conscientious adherence to actual fact. 

It is a caprice of the author to make all his chapters 
begin with the word Mukashi, the Japanese equivalent 
of the " a long time ago " of our fairy tales. Each 
serves as a setting for one- or two little poems of more 
than average merit which are put into the mouth of the 
hero and his numerous inamoratas. 

The first few chapters relate some juvenile love ad- 
ventures of the hero. The following may serve as a 
specimen : — 

^^ A long time ago there dwelt a woman in the Western 
Pavilion which was occupied by the Empress in East 
Gojo.^ Here she w'as visited by one who loved her 

1 The city of Ki5to is divided into sections by parallel streets somewhat in 
the fashion of the " Avenues " of New York, Goj5 (fifth column) is one of 
these. It is the principal shopping street of Kioto at the present day. 

82 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

deeply, though in secret. About the loth day of the 
first month she concealed herself elsewhere. He learned 
where she was living, but as it was a place where visits 
were impossible, he remained plunged in melancholy. 
In the first month of the following year, reminded of the 
previous spring by the flow^ering of the plum-trees before 
his house, he went to the Western Pavilion, and stood 
there gazing. But gaze as he might, there was to his 
mind no resemblance to the scene of the year before. 
At last he burst into tears, and laying himself down on 
the shattered floor, thought longingly of the bygone time 
until the moon went down. He composed this poem — 

" Moon ? There is none. 
Spring? ' Tis not the spri7tg 
Of former days : 
It is I alone 
Who have remained imchanged'''' i — 

and then took his way homeward as the night was break- 
ing into dawn." 

A Western writer would have expanded this into a 
sonnet at least, but within the narrow bounds of thirty- 
one syllables prescribed by custom to the Japanese poet, 
it is hardly possible to express more forcibly the blank 
feeling of despair at the sight of familiar scenes which 
are no longer brightened by the presence of the loved 
one. The moon and spring flowers are there before his 
eyes, but as they do not move him as they did formerly, 

1 The following is an attempt to imitate as nearly as possible the metrical 
movement of the original, which, however, has no rhyme : — 

" Moo7i 1 There is none. " TsuJn ya! aranti: 

Where are spring s wonted flowers ? Ham ya I nijikashi no 

I see not one. Haru naranu : 

All else is changed, but I Waga vii hitotsn wa 

Love on imalteringly.'^ Moto no mi ni shite.'''' 

ISE MONOGATARI 83 

he boldly denies their existence, giving emphasis by the 
contrast to the declaration of his own unchanging love. 
His subsequent adventures, it must be confessed, do not 
speak highly for his constancy. 

After several other unfortunate love affairs, the hero 
found his life in Kioto intolerable, and set out on an ex- 
pedition to the east of Japan. His journey gives occa- 
sion for the introduction of a number of stanzas descriptive 
of the remarkable sights on the way, such as the smok- 
ing summit of Mount Asama, and the snow on Fujiyama 
in the height of summer. He and his people crossed 
the river Sumida, where Tokio now stands, in a ferry- 
boat at nightfall. The dismal scene made them all feel 
as if they had come to the end of the world, and their 
thoughts went back with longing to their homes in Kioto. 
There were some birds on the river known to us as 
^'oyster-catchers," but to the Japanese by the more 
poetical name of Miyakodori, or ^' birds of the capital." 
Narihira exclaims — 

" O tho2i bird of Miyako! 
If such be thy 7tafne, 
Come ! this question I would ask thee — 
Is she wliom I love 
Still alive ^ or is she no more ? '"' 

On hearing this, every one in the boat was moved to 
tears. But Narihira is not always so sentimental. Some 
of his adventures are intended to be more or less 
comical. 

We soon after find him in one of the northern pro- 
vinces, where a rustic beauty, eager to make the ac- 
quaintance of a fashionable young gentleman from 
Kioto, sends him a poem (of course in thirty-one syl- 
lables) of invitation. He condescends to visit her, but 

84 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

takes his leave while it is still pitch-dark. As Juliet, under 
somewhat similar circumstances, reviles the lark, the 
lady, attributing his departure to the crowing of a cock^ 
vents her displeasure in the following stanza, which still 
lingers in the popular memory : — 

" When morning dawns 
I would that a fox 
Would devour that cock 
IVho, by his imseasonable crowing^ 
Has drive7i away my spouse I " 

I have before me two of the many editions of this 
work. One is by the eminent scholar and critic Ma- 
buchi, and contains much more commentary than text. 
The other (dated 1608) is perhaps worthy of the attention 
of book-collectors whose mental horizon is not bounded 
by Europe. It is in two volumes, block-printed on 
variously-tinted paper, and adorned with numerous full- 
page illustrations which are among the very earliest 
specimens of the wood-engraver's art in Japan. 

The Utsubo Monogatari is conjectured to have been 
written by the same author as the Taketori MonogatarZy 
and the style and matter of the first of the fourteen 
stories of which it consists go far to confirm this supposi- 
tion, though it may perhaps be a question whether the 
whole collection is by the same person. It is mentioned 
in the Genji Monogatari and in the Makura Zoshiy works 
which belong to the end of the tenth or the beginning 
of the eleventh century, and was probably composed 
som.e fifty or sixty years earlier. No exact date can be 
assigned for its composition. 

The style of the Utsubo Monogatari is plain and 
straightforward; but it has unfortunately suffered greatly 
at the hands of copyists and editors, and also from the 

UTSUBO MONOG ATARI 85 

ravages of time, so that the text, as we now have it, is in 
a very unsatisfactory condition. 

The title of the first story, " Toshikage," is taken from 
the name of the hero. It is the best known of the series, 
and has been pubHshed separately, as if it were the entire 
work. Like the Taketori Monogatariy it belongs to the 
class of fiction best described as Mahrchen. 

The hero is a son of a member of the Fujiwara family 
by an Imperial Princess. In other words, he has in his 
veins the bluest blood in Japan. His parents purposely 
allow him to grow up without any teaching, but he 
nevertheless learns with astonishing quickness, and at 
seven years of age holds a correspondence in the Chinese 
written character with a stranger from Corea who is on 
a visit to Japan. The Mikado, hearing of his remarkable 
talent, holds an examination, at which Toshikage far sur- 
passes all his competitors. He subsequently receives an 
official appointment at the court, and later, at the age of 
sixteen, is made Ambassador to China. Two of the three 
ships in which the' embassy sailed are lost during a 
storm, and Toshikage's own vessel drives ashore in a 
strange country, everybody (apparently) being drowned 
but Toshikage himself. On landing, he puts up a prayer 
to the Buddhist goddess Kwannon. A black horse, 
ready saddled, makes his appearance, and carries him 
to a spot where there are three men under a sandal- 
tree seated on tiger-skins and playing on lutes {koto). 
The horse vanishes. Toshikage remains here until the 
following spring, when hearing in the west the sound 
as of men felling trees, he resolves to follow it. Taking 
a courteous leave of his three hosts, he sets out on his 
quest. Seas and rivers, mountains and valleys are crossed, 
but it is not until the spring of the next year but one that 
7 

86 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

he arrives at his destination. Here in a valley he sees a 
company of Asura (demons of Indian myth) engaged 
in cutting up an immense kiri-tree {Paullownia Imperialis) 
which they had felled. These demons *'had hair like 
upright sword-blades, their faces burned like flames of 
fire, their feet and hands resembled spades and mattocks, 
their eyes gleamed like chargers of burnished metal." 
Toshikage is in danger of faring ill at their hands, when 
a boy comes down from the sky, riding on a dragon, 
amid a storm of thunder and lightning and rain, bearing 
a golden tablet, with instructions to the Asura to let him 
go, and to give him part of the tree they had felled, so 
that he might make it into lutes. He makes thirty lutes 
and goes his way, the lutes being carried for him by a 
whirlwind, w^hich arises opportunely. 

After other adventures of an equally wonderful kind, 
Toshikage returns to Japan and makes his report to the 
Mikado. He retires into private hfe, marries, and has 
one daughter. He and his wife die, leaving the daughter 
in great poverty. She lives in a secluded spot in the 
suburbs of Kioto, where she is one day visited by a youth 
who was accompanying his father to worship at the 
shrine of Kamo. On his return home the next morning, 
his father, enraged at him for giving his parents so great 
anxiety by his disappearance, forbids him in future to 
leave his sight for a moment. When, after some years, 
he is able to visit the place where his lady-love dwelt, the 
house had completely disappeared. 

Meanwhile Toshikage's daughter gives birth to a child, 
who, like many of the heroes of Chinese and Japanese 
romance, is a prodigy of precocious talent and filial 
devotion. At the age of five he sustains his mother by 
the fish which he catches, and at a later time brings her 

UTSUBO MONOGATARI 8/ 

fruit and roots from the mountains. Finding, however, 
that this obhges him to leave her too much alone, he 
seeks a place in the woods where he can lodge her, and 
finds a great hollow i tree, which he thought would serve 
his purpose. It is already the home of a family of bears. 
They are about to devour the intruder, when he remon- 
strates with them as follows :— 

''Stay a little and do not destroy my life, for I am a 
filial child, the support of my mother, who lives all alone 
in a ruined house, without parents, or brothers, or any 
one to attend upon her. As I could do nothing for her 
in the village where we live, I come to this mountain to 
get her fruit and roots. Having to climb up lofty peaks, 
and to descend into deep valleys, I leave home in the 
morning and return when it is dark. This is a source of 
great distress to us. I therefore thought of bringing her 
to this hollow tree, not knowing it to be the dwelling of 
such a king of the mountain. ... If there is any part 
of me which is not useful for my mother's support, I w^ill 
sacrifice it to you. But without feet how could I go 
about ? Without hands how could I gather fruit or dig 
up roots for her? Without a mouth where would the 
breath of life find a passage ? W^ithout a breast where 
would my heart find a lodgment ? In this body there is 
no part which is not of service except the lobes of my 
ears and the tip of my nose. These I offer to the kin^t 
of the mountain." ^ 

This discourse moves the bears to tears, and they at 
once give up the hollow tree to him and seek a home 
elsewhere. 

The mother and son live here for many years, being 
supplied with food by a number of monkeys. They are 

^ "Hollow" is in Japanese iitsubo, whence the name of the whole work. 

88 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

ultimately discovered by the father, who comes here on 
a hunting expedition. He builds them a fine mansion in 
Kioto, in which they all live happily ever after. 

The Hamaviatsu Chiunagon Monogatcwi is a story of 
a Japanese noble who goes to China and has an amour 
with the Empress. He brings back to Japan with him a 
child who was the fruit of their union. The author is 
unknown. It belongs to the second half of the tenth 
century. 

The story called OcJiikubo ATonogataj-i dXso belongs to the 
second half of the tenth century. Mabuchi would assign 
it to the period from 967 to 969. Its author is said to be 
one Minamoto no Shitagaii, a small official and famous 
scholar, who flourished in the reigns of the Mikados 
Murakami, Reizei, and Yenyu. The name Ochikubo 
means ^'underground cavity." The heroine, a young 
lady of noble birth, is confined in a room underground 
by her step-mother. She has a very miserable time, until 
by the help of a female servant she makes the acquaint- 
ance of a young nobleman, who assists her to escape. Of 
course they are married and live happily ever after. 

A work named Sumiyoshi Monogatari is mentioned 
in the Makura Zoshi. Critics, however, are agreed 
that the book now known by that name is a forgery of 
a later date. It is also a story of a wicked step-mother 
(a favourite character of far-eastern fiction), and of the 
events which led in due course to her condign punish- 
ment. 

The author of the Yamato Mofiogatari is really un- 
known, though it has been ascribed by some to Shige- 
haru, a son of Narihira, the hero of the he Monogatariy 
and by others to the Mikado Kwazan. It is an imitation 
of the Ise Monogatari, but is m.uch inferior to its model, 

YAMATO MONOGATARI 89 

and the style is wanting in clearness and conciseness. It 
is a collection of stories adorned with Tanka after the 
manner of the earlier work. There is, however, no con- 
necting link between them. The following is one of the 
best know^n of the series : — 

^*A long time ago there dwelt a maid in the province 
of Tsu. She was w^ooed by two lovers, one of whom, 
Mubara by name, lived in the same provmce ; the other, 
called Chmu, belonged to the province of Idzumi. 

" Now these youths were of like age, and were also 
alike in face, form, and stature. The maid thought of 
accepting the one who loved her best, but here, too, no 
difference could be found between them. When night 
fell they both came together, and when they made her 
presents, the presents of both were alike. Neither of 
them could be said to surpass the other, so that the 
maiden was sore distressed in mind. If their devotion 
had been of vulgar sort she would have refused them 
both. But as for days and months the one and the other 
presented themselves at her door, and showed their love 
in all manner of ways, their attentions made her utterly 
wretched. Both persisted in coming with their like gifts 
of all kinds, notwithstanding that they were not accepted. 
Her parents said to her, 'It is a pity that month after 
month and year after year should pass in this unseemly 
manner. It is wearisome to listen to the laments of these 
men, and all to no purpose. If you married one, the 
other's love would cease.' The girl replied, ' I think so 
too, but I am sorely perplexed by the sameness of the 
men's love. What am I to do?' Now in those days 
people lived in tents on the bank of the river Ikuta. 
Accordingly the parents sent for the two lovers and said 
to them, 'Our child is sorely perplexed by the equality 

90 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

of the love shown by you two gentlemen. But we intend 
to-day, in one way or another, to come to a decision. One 
of you is a stranger from a distant place ; the other, a 
dweller here, has taken trouble beyond measure. The 
conduct of both of you has our warm sympathy.' Both 
heard this with respectful joy. ^ Now, what we pro- 
posed to say to you,' continued the parents, ' was this : 
aim your arrows at one of the water-fowl floating on this 
river. We will give our daughter to the one who hits it.' 
'An excellent plan,' said they. But when they shot at 
it, one hit it on the head and the other near the tail. 
Thereupon the maiden, more profoundly embarrassed 
than ever, exclaimed — 

' Weary of life ^ 
My body I will cast away 
Into the river Ikuia^ 
In the land of Tsu. 
Ikuta ! 1 to me a name and ?iothing more / ' 

"With these words she plunged into the river which 
flowed below the tent. Amid the frantic cries of the 
parents, the two lovers forthwith leaped into the stream 
at the same place. One seized her by the foot, the other 
took hold of her arm, and both died along with her. The 
parents, wild with grief, took up her body and buried it 
with tears and lamentations. The parents of the lovers 
also came and built tombs on each side of the sepulchre 
of the maiden. But when the time of burial came, the 
parents of the youth of the land of Tsu objected, saying : 
'That a man of the same province should be buried in 
the same place is but right and proper, but how can it be 
allowed that a stranger should intrude upon our soil?' 
So the parents of the Idzumi wooer brought over in ships 

1 Ikiita means "living field." 

YAMATO MONOGATARI 91 

earth from the province of Idzumi, and at length buried 
their son. The maiden's tomb is in the middle, and those 
of her lovers on each side, as may be seen unto this day." 
The present writer once made a pious pilgrimage to 
these tombs, which are still in existence not far from the 
treaty port of Kobe. He was not a little surprised to 
find that they were immense tumuli, certainly the 
sepulchres of much more exalted personages than the 
heroes of the above tale. Not only so, but the so-called 
lovers' tombs are a mile away on each side from that of 
the fair lady for whom they died. On one of them, sad 
to say, there was growing a thriving crop of cabbages, 
planted by some irreverent, or more likely ignorant, 
Japanese. The Ikuta river must have greatly changed 
since the days of this story. It now sends to the sea a 
volume of water about equal to that of the stream which 
waters the public gardens at Bournemouth, and where, 
needless to say, death by drowning is impossible. 

CHAPTER IV 

« GENJI MONOGATARI " i 

We now come to two works which by common consent 
mark the highest point to which the classical literature 
of Japan attained, namely, the Genji Monogatari and the 
MakiLi'a Zoshi. The authors were contemporaries, and 
both of them were women. 

The real name of the author of the Genji Monogatari has 
not come down to us. She is known to history as MuRA- 
SAKi NO Shikibu. Critics are not agreed as to the reason 
why she was called Murasaki, a word w^hich means 
" purple," nor does it greatly matter. Shikibu, if it meant 
anything, would indicate that she was in some way con- 
nected with the Board of Rites. It was, however, 
customary at this time for the ladies of the court to take 
to themselves fancy official designations which had no 
particular application. In her case the name was per- 
haps suggested by the circumstance that her father held 
office in that Department. 

Murasaki no Shikibu belonged to a junior branch of 
the great Fujiwara family, or rather clan, which held so 
distinguished a position in Japan during many centuries 
of its history, and which has produced such numbers of 

^ There is a translation of the first seventeen (out of fifty-four) chapters of 

this work by K. Suyematsu. Although a highly creditable performance under 

the circumstances, it is not satisfactory. The translator had not Motoori's 

commentary before him, and the Kogetsusho edition is a very uncertain guide. 

92 

GENJI MONOGATARI 93 

Mikados, statesmen, literati, and poets. Her father had 
a reputation for scholarship, and others of her family 
were poets of some note. Miirasaki no Shikibu herself 
displayed a love of learning at an early age. She was 
well versed both in Japanese and Chinese literature, and 
her father often wished that such talents and learning 
had not been wasted on a girl. Married to another 
Fujiwara, she lost her husband after a short time, and 
seems to have then attached herself to the Empress 
Akiko, also a Fujiwara and fond of learned pursuits. This 
would explain her familiarity with the ceremonies and 
institutions of the court of Kioto. Her writings bear 
unmistakable testimony to the fact that she moved in 
the best circles of her time and country. 

The Genji is generally supposed to have been finished 
in A.D. 1004, but this date has been disputed, and it may 
have been composed a few years earlier. There is a 
pleasing legend which associates its composition with the 
Temple of Ishiyama at the southern end of Lake Biwa, 
where the river Uji issues from it. To this beautiful spot, 
it is said, Murasaki no Shikibu retired from court life to 
devote the remainder of her days to literature and rehgion. 
There are sceptics, however, Motoori being one, w^ho 
refuse to believe this story, pointing out, after the manner 
of their kind, that it is irreconcilable with known facts. 
On the other hand, the very chamber in the temple 
where the Gefiji was written is shown — with the ink-slab 
which the author used, and a Buddhist Sutra in her hand- 
writing, which, if they do not satisfy the critic, still are 
sufficient to carry conviction to the minds of ordinary 
visitors to the temple. 

The Genji Mojiogatari is a novel. There is nothing 
remarkable, it may be said, in a woman excelling in this 

'94 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

branch of literature. But Murasaki no Shikibu did more 
than merely write a successful novel. Like Fielding 
in England, she was the creator in Japan of this kind of 
fiction — the prose epic of real life, as it has been called. 
In the quality of her genius, however, she more resembled 
Fielding's great contemporary Richardson. Before her 
time we have nothing but stories of no great length, and 
of a romantic character far removed from the realities of 
daily life. The Genji Monogatari is realistic in the best 
sense of the word. Here we see depicted men and 
women, especially women, as they are, in their everyday 
lives and surroundings, their sentiments and passions, 
their faults and weaknesses. The author does not aim at 
startling or horrifying her readers, and she has a whole- 
some abhorrence for all that is sensational, unnatural, 
monstrous, or improbable. Such a hero as the nine- 
teenth-century novelist Bakin's Tametomo, who has two 
pupils to his eyes and one arm longer than the other, 
and who, after falling over a clifT many thousand feet 
high, presently picks himself up and walks home several 
miles as if nothing had happened, w^ould have seemed to 
her as ridiculous as he does to ourselves. There are few 
dramatic situations in the Genjiy and what little of mira- 
culous and supernatural it contains is of a kind which 
might w^ell be believed by a contemporary reader. The 
story flows on easily from one scene of real life to another, 
giving us a varied and minutely detailed picture of hfe 
and society at Kioto such as we possess for no other 
country at the same period. 

The hero is the son of a Mikado by a favourite con- 
cubine, whose colleagues are all jealous of the preference 
shown her, and are continually annoying her in a petty 
way. She takes this so much to heart that she falls ill 

GENJI MONOGATARI 95 

and dies. Her death is related with much pathos. Genji 
grows up to be a handsome and accompHshed youth of 
a very susceptible disposition, and his history is mainly 
an account of his numerous love affairs, and of his ulti- 
mate union with Murasaki, a heroine in all respects 
worthy of him. It continues the story up to his death 
at the age of fifty-one. The last ten books, which relate 
chiefly to one of Genji's sons, are by some considered a 
separate work. 

The style of the Genji has been called ornate. The 
writer who applied this epithet to it was probably think- 
ing of the courtly honorifics with which it is in many 
places burdened. But there is much excuse for this. 
The Genji is a novel of aristocratic life. Most of the 
characters are personages of rank, in describing whose 
sayings and actions a courtly style of speech is indis- 
pensable. To a Japanese it would be simply shocking 
to say that a Mikado has breakfast — he augustly deigns 
to partake of the morning meal, and so on. The Euro- 
pean reader finds this irritating and tiresome at first, but 
hie soon gets accustomed to it. In truth, such language 
is in entire consonance wnth the elaborate ceremonial, 
the imposing but cumbrous costumes, and much else of 
the rather artificial life of the Japanese court of the time. 
Apart from this the style of the Genji is not more ornate 
than that, let us say, of Robinson Crusoe, and incom- 
parably less so than that of many Japanese books of 
later date. It is free from any redundance of descriptive 
adjectives or profusion of metaphors such as we are 
accustomed to associate w^ith the word ornate. 

Others have objected to the style of the Genji as 
wanting in brevity. It must be admitted that its long, 
involved sentences contrast strongly with the direct, con- 

96 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

cise manner of the he Monogatari. But, as Motoori 
points out, a brief style may be a bad one, and lengthy 
sentences full of detail may best fit the subject. Mura- 
saki no Shikibu's fulness is not prolixity. On close 
examination it will be found that there is nothing super- 
fluous in the abundant details of her narrative. That is 
her method, and is essential to the effect she aims at 
producing. 

The Gcnji is not intrinsically a very difficult work, and 
no doubt the author's contemporaries found it quite easy 
to understand. But since then the language, institu- 
tions, and manners and customs of Japan have changed 
so much as greatly to obscure the meaning, not only 
to European students, but to the Japanese themselves. 
Piles of commentary by native editors have been accumu- 
lated over it, and their interpretations are often so blun- 
dering and inadequate that Motoori found it necessary to 
devote to its elucidation a critical w^ork ^ in nine volumes, 
mostly taken up with correcting the errors of his prede- 
cessors. 

The enormous bulk of the Genji will alw^ays remain 
another obstacle to its just appreciation by European 
readers. It is in fifty-four books, which in the standard 
(but not very satisfactory) Kogetsusho edition run to no 
less than 4234 pages. The genealogical tree alone of 
the personages which figure in it, comprising several 
Mikados, a crowed of Princes, Princesses, and Imperial 
consorts, with a host of courtiers, occupies eighty pages. 

Japanese critics claim for the Ge7iji that it surpasses 
anything of the kind in Chinese literature, and even 
deserves to be ranked with the masterpieces of European 
fiction. None, however, but an extreme Japanophile 

1 The Tama no O.^ushi. Ii was left unfinished at his death. 

GENJI MONOGATARI 97 

(the species is not altogether unknown) will go so far as 
to place Murasaki no Shikibu on a level with Fielding, 
Thackeray, Victor Hugo, Dumas, and Cervantes. On 
the other hand, it is unjust to dismiss her summarily 
with the late AI. George Bousquet as ^' cette ennuyeuse 
Scudery japonaise," a verdict endorsed by Mr. Chamber- 
lain. There are in the Genji pathos, humour, an abundant 
flow of pleasing sentiment, keen observation of men and 
manners, an appreciation of the charms of nature, and 
a supreme command of the resources of the Japanese 
language, w^hich in her hands reached its highest point 
of excellence. Though never melodramatic, she gives 
us plenty of incident, and is seldom dull. A scholar, she 
abhorred pedantry and line WTiting, the bane of so many 
of the modern novelists of Japan. 

It is unnecessary to discuss here 'the opinion of some 
Japanese writers, that the Gcnji was written to inculcate 
Buddhist doctrine, or the notion of others, that the teach- 
ing of Confucian morality w^as its aim. Nor need w^e 
trouble ourselves with the suggestion that it is a novel 
a defy and that the personages are to be identified w^ith 
real persons who were alive at the time when it was 
written. As Motoori very justly observes, all these ideas 
show an ignorance of the true object of novel-writing, 
which is to excite our sympathies, and to interest and 
amuse by the presentation of a picture of real life. 

Another subject much dw^elt on by native critics is the 
morality of the Ge?ijij some denouncing it, as it deserves, 
w^hile others strive to defend what even from the Japanese 
point of view is indefensible. Truth to say, the laxity of 
morals which it depicts is deplorable. It is a satisfaction 
to add that it belongs to the age and country in which 
the author lived, and that her ow^n private life is admit- 

98 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

tedly free from any stain of this kind. Of coarseness 
and pruriency, moreover, there is none m the Gen/z\ or 
mdeed in the Hterature of this period generally. The 
language is almost mvanably decent, and even refined, 
and we hardly ever meet with a phrase calculated to 
bring a blush to the cheek of a young person. 

Jt is difficult to give much idea of the Genji by quota- 
tion. The following passages may serve as well as any 
others for this purpose ; but the writer is conscious that 
here, more perhaps than anywhere else in Japanese 
literature, the chasm which divides us in thought, senti- 
ment, and language from the Far East forms an insuper^ 
able obstacle to communicating to a translation the 
undoubted charm of the original. 

Genji,aged sixteen, discusses feminine character with a 
young friend : — 

" It was an evening in the wet season. Without, the rain 
was falling drearily, and even in the Palace hardly any one 
was to be seen. In Genji's quarters there was an unusual 
sense of stillness. He was engaged in reading by the 
light of a lamp when it occurred to him to take out from 
a cupboard which was close by some letters written on 
paper of various tints. The Chmjo [his friend] was 
inordinately eager to have a look at them. ^ There are 
a few of a kind that I can let you see,' said Genji, ' but 
there are others that are imperfect;' and these he 
refused to show him. 'Oh ! but it is just those WTitten 
without reserve and couched in moving language that I 
like. Commonplace ones don't count. What fwish to 
see are letters which reveal the various circumstances of 
the writers. When they are inspired by petulant jealousy 
or written at the hour of eve— a prey to passionate 
longings and the like— it is then that they are worth 

GEN J I MONOGATARI 99 

reading/ It was unlikely that any which demanded the 
strictest secrecy should be left lying about in an ordinary 
cupboard. Such were no doubt carefully concealed, and 
these were of the second order of intimacy. Genji there- 
fore, being thus pressed, allowed his friend to read 
passages from them here and there. ' What a variety ! ' 
said the Chiujo, and began to guess at the authors. *This 
is from so-and-so, is it not ? — that from such another ?' 
he inquired. Sometimes he guessed right, and even when 
he missed the mark Genji was much amused by his infer- 
ences and suspicions. But he said little and maintained 
his reserve, putting his friend off with dubious answers. 
*You must have a collection of your own,' said Genji. 
'Will you not let me see a few of them ? In that case, 
my cupboard would open its doors more cheerfully.' ^ I 
am sure none of mine would be worth your while to read,' 
replied the Chiujo. ' I have at last [he was aged sixteen] 
discovered,' continued he, * how hard it is to find a 
woman of whom it may be said, ^' Here at any rate is the 
one. Here no fault can be found." There are plenty 
who may be considered fairly tolerable, girls of super- 
ficial sensibilities, ready with their pens, and competent 
to give intelligent responses ^ upon occasion. But how 
hard it is to pitch upon any of whom you can say that 
here is one who compels your choice. Often they have 
no thought for any accomplishments but such as they 
themselves possess, and depreciate those of others in a 
most provoking way. Some, again, there are, made 
much of by their parents and not allowed to leave their 
side, who, while they remain within the lattice which 
bounds their future, may no doubt make an impression 
on the hearts of men who have had little opportunity of 

^ Probably poetical responses of thirty-one syllables are meant. 

loo JAPANESE LITERATURE 

really knowing them. They may be young, attractive, 
and of sedate manners ; and so long as they are without 
external distractions, they will naturally, by the assiduous 
imitation of others, gain some skill in frivolous pastimes. 
But their friends will screen their defects and represent 
their good qualities in the best light. How is anybody 
to condemn them in his own mind without a proof, and 
say to himself, ^^ That is not so " ? Whereas if we believe 
all that is said of them, we are sure to find on further 
acquaintance that they fall in our estimation.' Here the 
Chiujo paused, ashamed of his own precipitancy. Genji 
smiled, thinking of something of the same kind, though 
not absolutely so, in his own experience, and said, ^ But 
surely they have all some good points?' ^Just so,' 
replied the Chiujo. * If they had none, who would be 
taken in ? Of those utterly sorry creatures who are 
beneath notice, and of the superior women for whose 
accomplishments we feel an unqualified admiration, the 
numbers are alike few. Those born in a high station are 
made much of by their friends, and their faults are con- 
cealed, so that in outward appearance they are naturally 
second to none. In the middle class, there is greater 
freedom of expression of individual feeling, and thus the 
means are afforded of distinguishing among them. As 
for those of the lowest station of all, they are quite un- 
worthy of our attention.' " 

Here Genji and the Chiujo are joined by two other 
friends. The conversation is continued at considerable 
length, and various types of womanhood are discussed 
with illustrative anecdotes drawn from the speakers' 
experience. This passage, known as the Shina-sadame, 
or Critique (of women), is much admired by the Japanese, 
and is considered by critics to be the kernel of the whole 

GEN J I MONOG ATARI loi 

work, the chief idea of which is to present to the reader 
a picture of various types of womanhood. 

Genji, having retired to a monastery in order to be 
exorcised for ague, espies in a neighbouring temple a 
young girl who is living with her grandmother, a nun, 
and who is destined to fix his vagrant fancy at a later 
period. 

^^ At this season the days were very long, and time passed 
slowly ; so under cover of the deep evening mist he 
approached the low hedge of which he had been told. 
Here he sent back all his attendants, retaining with him 
only Koremitsu. Peeping through the hedge, he could 
see straight before him the western front of the house, 
where there was a nun performing her devotions before 
a private image of Buddha. She raised up the hanging 
screen and made an offering of flowers. Then taking her 
place by the middle pillar, she placed a Sutra on an arm- 
rest, and proceeded to read it in a voice which betrayed 
much suffering. This nun seemed no ordinary person. 
She was something over forty years of age. Her com- 
plexion was fair, and she had an air of distinction. She 
was thin, but her face had a puffy appearance from ill 
health. Whilst looking at her, Genji was struck with the 
beauty of her hair, which seemed rather to have gained 
in elegance by having been cut. ^ Two comely grown- 
up women were in waiting on her. 

^^ Now there were some children playing in and out of 
the room. One of them, who might be perhaps ten years 
of age, wore a white silk gown lined with yellow, and not 
too new. She had no resemblance to the attendants or 
to the rest of the children, and her beauty seemed to give 

^ Nuns at this time did not shave their heads, but only trimmed the hair 
short. 

8 

I02 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

promise of a future for her. Her hair was tossed in 
waves hke an expanded fan, and her eyes were red with 
weeping. The nun looked up when she saw her near, and 
said, ^What is the matter ? Have you been quarrelhng 
with some of the children ? ' As Genji looked at them, 
it occurred to him that there was a resemblance, and that 
the little girl was probably her daughter. ' Inuki has let 
go my sparrow that I had put under a basket,' said she 
dolefully. The waiting-woman exclaimed, ^ He is always 
doing thoughtless things like that and plaguing the poor 
girl, all because he does not get scolded enough. I 
wonder where it has gone to ? It had at last become so 
delightful, and now I'm afraid the crows have discovered 
it.' So saying, she went out. 

*' This woman's hair hung down loose and was very long. 
She was a pleasant-looking woman. The others called 
her Nurse Shonagon, and she seemed to have charge of 
this child. ^ Come now ! be a good girl,' said the nun, 
'and don't do such naughty things. You forget that my 
life is but for to-day or to-morrow, and you can think of 
nothing but your sparrow. Haven't I often told you that 
it was a sin [to keep birds in a cage]. You pain me 
greatly. Come here, child.' The little girl stood forward 
with a rueful expression of face, and a mist hanging 
round her eyebrows. The contour of her forehead, from 
which the hair was combed back in childish fashion, and 
the style of her hair itself were very lovely. ^ What a 
charming girl she will be when she is grown up ! ' thought 
Genji, and his eyes dwelt on her with interest. She 
greatly resembled one to whom formerly his whole heart 
had been given, and at the thought his tears began to fall. 
The nun, stroking the little girl's head, said, ^What beau- 
tiful hair, though you think it so much trouble to have 

GENJI MONOGATARI 103 

it combed ! I am greatly concerned that you are so 
frivolous. At your age some girls are so different. When 
your late mother was married at the age of twelve she 
had an extraordinary amount of good sense. But now if 
you were to lose me, what would become of you ? ' And 
she burst out weeping. Genji, at this sight, was m.oved 
unawares to sorrow for her. The little girl, child as she 
was, looked at her, and with downcast eyes bent her head 
to the ground, so that her hair fell loosely forward, showing 
a lustre that was very beautiful. 

' There is no sky \weather\ to dry up 
The dew [of uiy tears] at leavifig behi7id 
The tender herb 

That k?iows not where shall be its abode 
lVhe?t it has 7'eached full grozuth^' 

** So the nun. ^ True,' said the other waiting-woman 
[not the girl's nurse], and with tears answered her — 

' So lo7tg as the first blades of grass 
Know 7iot what will be their future whe7z grown up^ 
How ca7i the dew 
Thi7ik of beco7iii7ig dried? ' " 

This notice may be fitly closed by the following poem, 
in which Motoori in his old age expressed his intention of 
returning, if time permitted, to the study of the Genji: — ■ 

" So dearly do I love thern, 
Again I would co77ie to see 
The violets on the plai7is of spri7ig 
Which I left imgathe?'ed — 
Though to-day 1 77iay not pluck the77iy 

The author of the Ge7tji Monogatari wrote a diary 
called Murasaki no SJiikibu Nikki^ which has come down 
to us. It is not without merit, but its fame has been 
wholly eclipsed by that of her greater v/ork. 

CHAPTER V 

"MAKURA ^OSHI" 

With the Genji Monogatari the Japanese associate the 
Makura Zoshi or " Pillow Sketches " of Sei Shonagon 
as of equal excellence, although different in form and 
character. The author, like Murasaki no Shikibu, was 
a lady of high rank, her father, who was a poet of some 
fame, being descended from the Prince who compiled 
the Nihongi. Her learning and talents obtained for her 
the honour of being appointed Lady-in-waiting to the 
Empress. On the death of the latter in A.D, looo, she 
retired from the world, some say to a convent, where she 
received to the last marks of the esteem of her former 
master, the Mikado Ichigo. Others, however, describe 
her condition as one of great poverty and misery. 

The title " Pillow Sketches " is explained by some to 
mean that she kept the manuscript by her pillow and 
jotted down her thoughts and observations when going 
to bed and when getting up in the morning. It is more 
probable, however, that it is an allusion to an anecdote 
which she herself relates in a postscript : — 

^* It has become too dark for literary work, and my pen 
is worn out. I will bring these sketches to a close. They 
are a record of that which I have seen with my eyes and 
felt in my heart, not written that others might read them, 
but put together to solace the loneliness of my home life. 

MAKURA ZOSHI 105 

When I think how I tried to keep them secret, conscious 
of vulgar and exaggerated remarks which have escaped 
me, the tears flow uncontrollably. 

" One day when I was in attendance on the Empress, 
she showed me some paper which had been given her by 
the Naidaijin. * What is to be written on this?' said 
her Majesty. ^The Mikado has had something they call 
History written on his.' * It will do nicely for pillows,' I 
replied. * Then take it,' said she. So I tried to use up 
this immense supply by writing down strange matters of 
all kinds without any connection or sequence." 

The Makura Zoshi is the first example of a style of 
writing which afterwards became popular in Japan under 
the name of Zuihitsu or '^ following the pen." There is 
no sort of arrangement. The author sets down upon the 
spur of the moment anything which occurs to her. 
Stories, descriptive enumerations of dismal, incongruous, 
abominable and dreary things, lists of flowers, mountains, 
rivers, sketches of social and domestic life, thoughts 
suggested by the contemplation of nature, and much 
more form her faj^rago libelli. 

Unlike the author of the Genjiy who loses herself in the 
characters which she describes, the personality of Sei 
Shonagon comes out distinctly in everything which she has 
written. The clever, som.ewhat cynical, cultured woman 
of the world is always present to the reader. Her tastes 
and predilections are made known at considerable length, 
and she does not mind being her own Boswell, not 
failing to record in her '^ Pillow Sketches " any apt 
quotation or neat retort which she may have made. 
Subsequent writers do not acquit her, as they do 
Murasaki no Shikibu, of a personal share in the amorous 
intrigues which formed so large a part of life among the 

io6 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

upper classes of Kioto at this period. It may be readily 
gathered from her writings that she was no stranger to 

" The politic arts 
To take a?id keep 77ten^s hearts ; 
The letters^ e?nbassies^ and spies ^ 
The frowns, a?zd smiles, and flatteries. 
The quarrels^ tears, and perjuries, 
Niunberless, naineless mysteries^'' 

of Cowley's poem. 

The following extracts will give some idea of the 
general character of the work. The four seasons form 
the subject of the opening chapter : — 

'^ In spring/* the author says, '' I love to watch the 
dawn grow gradually whiter and whiter, till a faint rosy 
tinge crowns the mountain's crest, while slender streaks 
of purple cloud extend themselves above." 
• ''In summer, I love the night, not only when the 
moon is shining, but the dark too, when the fireflies cross 
each other's paths in their flight, or when the rain is 
falhng." 

" In autumn^ it is the beauty of the evening which 
most deeply moves me, as I watch the crows seeking 
their roosting-place in twos and threes and fours, while 
the setting sun sends forth his beams gorgeously as he 
draws near the mountain's rim. Still more is it delightful 
to see the lines of wild geese pass^ looking exceeding 
small in the distance. And when the sun has quite gone 
down, how moving it is to hear the chirruping of insects 
or the sighing of the wind 1 " 

" In winter, how unspeakably beautiful is the snow ! 
But I also love the dazzling whiteness of the hoar-frost, 
and the intense cold even at other times. Then it is 
meet quickly to fetch charcoal and kindle fires. And let 

MAKURA ZOSHI 107 

not the gentle warmth of noon persuade us to allow the 
embers of the hearth or of the brazier to become a white 
heap of ashes ! " 

The Exorcist 

'^ What a pity it is to make a priest of a child whom one 
loves ! How painful it must be to have to regard as so 
many bits of stick the things which are in life the most 
desirable ! Priests have to go to bed after a meal of 
wretched fasting diet, and are blamed if, when young, 
they so much as take a sly peep into places where there 
are attractive girls. The life of an exorcist priest is 
particularly hard. What dreadful experiences he must 
have on his pilgrimages to Mitake, Kumano, and all the 
other sacred monasteries ! Even after he has gained a 
fame for unction and is sent for on all occasions, his very 
reputation is a bar to his repose. What a labour it must 
be to drive out the evil spirit from the sick man he is in 
attendance on ! And yet if he dozes a little out of sheer 
exhaustion, he is promptly reprimanded, and told that 
he does nothing but sleep. How embarrassed he must 
feel ! " 

The exorcist is much sympathised with by the author. 
In another place she says — 

^'When the exorcist is summoned to drive out an evil 
spirit, he puts on a consequential air as he distributes his 
maces and bells to those who are present. Then he 
drones out his chant in tones like the note of the cicada. 
But suppose that the demon is not a whit disturbed, and 
that the spells are of no avail ? The whole household, who 
had joined in the prayers, begin to wonder. Still he goes 
on hour after hour till he is utterly weary. At last he 
sees that it is useless, so he lets them get up and takes 

io8 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

back his maces and bells with a confession of failure. 
How he ruffles back his hair and scratches his head as 
with many a yawn he lays himself down to sleep ! " 

Visit of the Empress to a Court Noble 

"When the Empress visited the Daishin Narimasa, 
her carriage went in by the East Gate, which is wide 
with four pillars. Her women, however, preferred to 
have their carriages go round to the North Gate, where 
there were no guards. Some who had not done up their 
hair thought to themselves with some disdain, *' Oh, we 
shall drive up to the door, so we need not be very 
particular." But the palm-leaf-covered carriages stuck 
fast in the narrow portal, and there was no possibility of 
getting in. So the usual path of matting was laid, and 
we were told to get down, to our no small annoyance 
and indignation. But there w^as no help for it. It was 
provoking to see the courtiers and servants standing 
together in the guard-room to watch us pass. When 
we came before her Majesty, and told her what had 
happened, she only laughed at us, saying, ^ Is there 
nobody looking at you now ? How can you be so 
untidy ?' ^ Yes,' replied I, ^ but everybody here is used 
to us, and would be greatly surprised if we took special 
pains about our appearance. To think that a mansion 
like this should have a gate too small to admit a car- 
riage ! I shall have a good laugh at the Daishin 
when I meet him.' Presently he came in bringing the 
Empress's ink-stone and writing materials. 'This is too 
bad of you,' said I. ' How can you live in a house with 
such a narrow gate ? ' To which he replied with a smile, 
that his house was on a scale suited to his station. 'And 

MAKURA ZOSHI 

109 

yet/ said I, ' I have heard of a man who had his gate, 
though nothing more, made too large for his personal 
requirements/ ^Well, to be sure/ said the Daishin, 
with astonishment, ^you refer, of course, to U Teikoku 
[a Chinese worthy]. Who would have thought that 
any one but a venerable pundit knew aught of that ? I 
myself have occasionally strayed into the paths of learn- 
ing, and fully comprehend your allusion.' * Indeed, 
then,' returned I, ^ your paths are none of the most 
sensible. There was a nice disturbance, I can tell you, 
when w^e found ourselves entrapped into walking along 
your matted paths.' ^ I fear you must have been incom- 
moded,' he replied. ^And it was raining, too. But I 
must attend the Empress.' Saying which, he made his 
exit. 

" * What was it put Narimasa out so much ? ' the 
Empress inquired of me later. ^ Oh, nothing,' I said ; 
* I was only telling him of our misadventure at his 
gate.' 

Domestic Scene in the Mikado's Palace 

"On the sliding doors of the northern front of the 
Mikado's private apartments there are painted fearful 
pictures of creatures that live in the wild ocean, some 
with long arms, others with long legs. When the doors 
of the ante-chamber are open we can always see them. 
One day towards noon, while we were laughing and 
talking about them, saying what hideous things they 
are, and were engaged in setting great flower-pots of 
green porcelain ^ by the balustrade of the verandah, and 
filling them with an abundance of the most delightful 

^ Probably of the kind now known to connoisseurs as Seiji. 

no JAPANESE LITERATURE 

cherry branches five feet long, so that the blossoms over- 
flowed to the foot of the railing, his Excellency the 
Dainagon [the Empress's brother] approached. He had 
on a cherry-coloured tunic, enough worn to have lost its 
stiffness, and dark purple trousers. His white under- 
clothing, showing at the neck, displayed a gay pattern of 
a deep crimson hue. As the Mikado was then with the 
Empress, he seated himself on the narrow platform 
before the door and made some report to him on official 
matters. 

^'The waiting-women, with their cherry-coloured sleeve- 
less jackets hanging down loosely by their sides, some 
■dressed in wistaria [purple], some in kerria [yellow], 
and all manner of lovely colours, showed out from the 
screen of the small hatch. Just then dinner was served 
in the Imperial apartments. We could hear the tramp- 
ling of the attendants' feet, and the cry ^ Less noise' 
from one of the chamberlains. The serene aspect of 
the weather was exceedingly agreeable. When the last 
dishes had been served, a butler came and announced 
dinner. The Mikado went away by the middle door, 
attended by his Excellency the Dainagon, who subse- 
quently returned to his former place beside the flowers. 
The Empress then pushed aside the curtain, and came 
forward as far as the threshold to greet him. He re- 
marked on the beauty of the surroundings and the good 
deportment of the servants, and ended by quoting the 
line of poetry which says — 

' The days and months roll on^ 
But the Mount of Mimoro remains for ever.^ 

" I was deeply impressed, and wished in my heart that 
so it might indeed continue for a thousand years. 

MAKURA ZOSHI iii 

The Attack of the Dog Okinamaro upon the Cat 
MiYOBu NO Otodo 

^'The august Cat-in-waiting on the Mikado was a very 
delightful animal, and a great favourite with his Majesty, 
who conferred on her the fifth rank of nobility and the 
title of Miyobu no Otodo, or Chief Superintendent of 
the Female Attendants of the Palace. One day she had 
gone out on to the bridge between two of the buildings 
of the Palace, when the nurse in charge of her called 
out, * How nnproper ! Come in at once.' But the cat 
paid no attention, and went on basking drowsily in the 
sun. So in order to frighten her, ^ Where is Okina- 
maro ? ' cried the nurse. * Okinamaro ! bite Miyobu no 
Otodo.' The foolish dog, thmking she was in earnest, 
flew at the cat, who in her fright and consternation took 
refuge behind the screen of the breakfast-room where 
his Majesty then was. The Mikado was greatly shocked 
and agitated. He took the cat into his august bosom, 
and summoning the chamberlain Tadataka, gave orders 
that Okinamaro should have a good thrashing and be 
banished to Dog Island at once. The attendants gave 
chase to Okinamaro amid great confusion. They soon 
caught him, and sent him away as they were ordered. 

^^ Alas, poor dog ! He used to swagger about so much 
at his ease. When on the third day of the third month 
he was led along with a willow wreath upon his head, 
and adorned with flowers of peach and cherry, did he 
ever think that it would come to this ? At meal times he 
used always to be in attendance, and now, when three 
or four days passed without him, we missed him greatly. 
One day at noon there was a tremendous noise of a 

112 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

dog's howling. All the other dogs rushed to the spot in 
excitement to see what made him go on yelping so. 
Meanwhile a scavenger-woman of the Palace came to us 
running. 'Oh! how terrible!' exclaimed she, 'Two 
of the chamberlains are beating a dog till he is nearly 
dead. They say they are chastising him for having come 
back after he was banished.' My heart told me that 
it was Okinamaro who was being beaten by Tadataka 
and Sanefusa. I was just sending to stop them when the 
howling ceased. I was then told that he was dead, and 
that his body had been flung away outside the gate. At 
sundown, when we were all pitying his fate, a wretched- 
looking dog, trembling all over, walked in, his body 
fearfully and amazingly swollen. ' Can this be Okina- 
maro?' we said. 'No such dog has been seen about 
here recently.' We called to him by his name, but he 
took no notice. Some said it was he, others that it was 
not. The Empress sent for a lady who knew him well. 
'Is this Okinamaro?' she said, pointing to him. ' It is 
like him,' replied she, 'but is too utterly loathsome to 
be our dog. Besides, when one called to Okinamaro by 
name, he came joyfully ; but this animal won't come. 
It cannot be Okinamaro. And then Okinamaro was 
killed and his body thrown av^ay. He can't possibly be 
alive after the beating he got from the two chamberlains.' 
When it got dark he was offered something to eat, but 
he refused it, so we made up our minds that it could not 
be our friend. The next morning when I went to attend 
the Empress at her toilet, and had served her wash-hand 
basin and her mirror, a dog came to the foot of one of 
the pillars. ' Alas 1 ' cried the Empress, ' what a terrible 
beating Okinamaro seems to have got last night. I am 
so sorry that he is dead. I suppose he now looks some- 

MAKURA ZOSHI 113 

thing like that animal. He must have suffered miserably/ 
At this moment the dog lying by the pillar trembled and 
shook, and poured forth a flood of tears, to our intense 
amazement. This was Okinamaro after all, and his 
refusal on the previous day to come when he was called 
was for fear of betraying himself. The Empress was 
touched and delighted beyond measure. She put down 
her mirror and called to him, ^ Okinamaro ! ' The dog 
laid himself flat on the ground and yelped loudly, at 
which the Empress was greatly amused. Everybody 
gathered round, and there was much talking and laugh- 
ing. The Mikado himself, when he heard of it, came 
in, and smilingly expressed his amazement at the good 
sense shown by a dog." 

The reader will be glad to hear that Okinamaro's 
sentence of banishment was reversed ; he was well 
treated, and in a short time was his old self again. 

But the author was not always so tender-hearted 
towards dogs. Among '' Detestable Things " she enume- 
rates— 

A dog who barks in recognition of your lover when 
he comes to pay you a clandestine visit — that dog should 
be killed. 

A few more of her enumerations may be added. 

Dreary Things. 

A nursery where the child has died. 
A brazier with the fire gone out. 
A coachman who is hated by his ox. 
The birth of a succession of female children in the 
house of a learned scholar. 

A letter from one's country home with no news in it. 

114 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Detestable Things. 

Of these the author has a long hst, of which the 
following are a few : — 

A visitor who tells a long story when you are in a 
hurry. If he is a person you are intimate with, you can 
pack him off, saying that you w^ill hear it another time. 
But those whom you cannot treat in this way are very 
detestable. 

An exorcist who, when sent for in a case of sudden 
illness, recites his charms as if he were half asleep. 

Babies that cry or dogs that bark when you want to 
listen. 

The snoring of a man whom you are trying to con- 
ceal, and who has gone to sleep in a place where he has 
no business. 

People who ride in a creaking- carriage. Such people 
must be deaf, and are very detestable. When you ride 
in such a carriage yourself it is the owner who is de- 
testable. 

People who interrupt your stories to show off their 
own cleverness. All interrupters, young or old, are very 
detestable. 

People who, when you are telling a story, break in 
wnth, *^ Oh, I know," and give quite a diff'erent version 
from your own. 

Either at home or in the palace to be roused up to 
receive an unv/elcome visitor, in order to avoid whom 
you have been pretending to be asleep. 

While on friendly terms with a man, to hear him sound 
the praises of a woman whom he has known. This is 
detestable even when some time has elapsed, much more 
so if he is still acquainted with her. 

MAKURA ZOSHI 115 

People who mumble a prayer when they sneeze. 

N.B. — Loud sneezing is detestable, except in the case 
of the gentlemen of the house. 

Fleas are very detestable, especially when they get 
under your clothing and jump about. 

As a contrast to ^'Detestable Things/' a few ''Things 
which give one a Thrill " may be added : — 

To see sparrows feeding their young. 

To pass by where infants are playing. 

To find that your Chinese (metal) mirror is beginning 
to get dim. 

To be asked the way by a handsome man who stops 
his carriage for the purpose. 

Among " Things which Excite Regrets for the Past," 
Sei Shonagon enumerates : — 

Withered hollyhocks. (Reminding one of the festivals 
they have been used for.) 

On a w^et day to turn over the letters of a person once 
loved by us. 

Last year's fans. (No doubt w-ith sentimental Tanka 
written on them.) 

Bright moonlight nights. 

Here are a few "Cheerful Things" : — 

Coming home from an excursion with the carriages 
full to overflow^ing, to have lots of footmen w^ho make 
the oxen go and the carriages speed along. 

A river boat going down stream. 

Teeth nicely blackened. 

To hear a well-voiced professor of magic recite his 
purification service on a river bank. 

ii6 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

A drink of water when awake during the night. 

When in a dull mood, to have a visitor neither so inti-' 
mate as to be uninteresting, nor too great a stranger to 
be unreserved, who will tell us what is going on in the 
world — things pleasant or odious or strange, now touch- 
ing on this, now on that, private matters or public — in 
just sufficient detail not to be tedious. This is very 
agreeable. 

Here follow the ^'points" of carnage-oxen, horses, 
coachmen (who should be big men, of a ruddy counte- 
nance, and a consequential demeanour), footmen, pages, 
cats, and preachers. The last subject is treated at some 
length. 

*'A preacher," she says, "ought to be a good-looking 
man. It is then easier to keep your eyes fixed on his 
face, without which it is impossible to benefit by the 
discourse. Otherwise the eyes wander and you forget to 
listen. Ugly preachers have therefore a grave respon- 
sibility. But no more of this ! " She adds, however, 
" If preachers were of a more suitable age I should 
have pleasure in giving a more favourable judgment. 
As matters actually stand, their sins are too fearful to 
think of." 

If any apology is needed for the length of these 
extracts, it may be pleaded that they represent that 
which is best and at the same time most quotable in 
Japanese literature. They are taken almost exclusively 
from the first two of the twelve volumes (646 pp.) 
of which this entertaining miscellany consists. It is 
hard to realise that it was written in Japan nine hun- 
dred years ago. If we compare it with anything that 
Europe had to show at this period, it must be admitted 

MAKURA ZOSHI 117 

that it is indeed a remarkable work. What a revelation 
it would be if we had the court life of Alfred's or 
Canute's reign depicted to us in a similar way. 

Both the Genji Monogatari and the Makura Zoshi are 
only imperfectly intelligible even to educated Japanese, 
and they are little read at the present day. This is to 
be regretted, as modern writers would derive much 
benefit from making these old masterpieces their study 
and example. 

CHAPTER VI 

SOME MINOR WORKS 

The author of the Sagoromo Monogatari was a court 
official named Daini no Sammi, the daughter of Murasaki 
no Shikibu. Her work, a love-story of considerable 
length, is an obvious imitation of the Genji Monogatariy 
but much inferior both in style and matter. It is be- 
lieved to have been written about A.D. 1040. 

The Sarashina Ntkkz, by a daughter of Sugawara no 
Takasuye, a descendant in the sixth generation of the 
famous statesm.an Sugawara no Michizane, was com- 
pleted in the reign of the Emperor Go Rei-zei (1046- 
1068). It is the record of a journey from Shimosa to 
Kioto by the Tokaido in 1021, and of a second journey 
from Kioto to Sarashina, in the province of Shinano, 
some years later. It is written in a vein of melancholy 
sentiment, and is plentifully adorned with doleful Tanka. 

Nothing is known as to the date and authorship of 
the Torikayebaya Monogatari. It is believed to have 
been written subsequently to the Sagoromo, and would 
therefore belong to the middle or end of the eleventh 
century. The Torikayebaya Monogatari is a story of the 
difficulties experienced by a nobleman in the education 
of his two children, a boy and a girl. The boy is fond of 
feminine pursuits and amusements, and the girl just the 
reverse, much to the annoyance of their father, who used 

UJI MONOGATARI 119 

frequently to exclaim, " Torikayebaya ! " that is, ^' Oh ! 
if I could only exchange them." 1 All he can do is to 
have the boy dressed in girl's clothes and treated accord- 
ingly, while the girl is brought up as a boy. The results 
are unsatisfactory from a moral point of view. 

The author of the collection of stories entitled Uji 
Monogatari was a court noble named Minamoto no 
Takakuni, better known as Uji Dainagon, from his place 
of residence and rank. He died A.D. I077, at an advanced 
age. Bemg a fat man, and greatly disliking the hot 
weather, he used to retire for the summer season to Uji, 
a village not far from Kioto, on the bank of the river 
which flows out of Lake Biwa. Here he built a little 
tea-house on the roadside near his country-seat, where 
tea was offered to the passers-by. They were then in- 
vited to tell stories, which the Dainagon, sitting behind 
a screen, took down from their mouths. Most of the 
stories so collected are obviously fictitious ; but, true 
or false, they have a special interest, inasmuch as they 
present a fuller and livelier picture of the lives and 
ideas of the middle and lower classes than most other 
works of this period. 

As might be expected from the manner of its com- 
pilation, the Uji Monogatari contains a large element of 
folk-lore. The style is easy and unpretentious. Thirty of 
the sixty thin volumes of which it consists are assigned 
to Japanese stories, the remainder containing tales of 
Chinese or Indian origin. Probably not all of these were 
collected in the manner above described, and a certain 

^The reader may think that this is a great deal to express by the one word, 
Ton-kaye-ba-ya!" It is literally " Take-change-if-oh ! " Note the absence of 
personal pronouns, to the use of which the genius of the Japanese language is 
averse. ^ ^ 

I20 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

proportion, it is believed, have been added by later 
editors. 

The following outlines of a few may give some idea of 
the general character of this collection : — 

A painter named Kawanari has an intimate friend, an 
architect and engineer called Hida no Takumi. The 
latter, having built a small square pavilion, invites his 
friend to enter it. The painter approaches the south 
door, when by some mechanical contrivance it shuts in 
his face. When he tries to go m by the west door, it 
closes and the north door opens. And so on. In 
revenge for the practical joke thus played on him, 
Kawanari paints on a screen the picture of a corpse so 
loathsome and repulsive, that when Hida no Takumi is 
made to approach it unawares he starts back m horror 
and rushes out into the garden. 

A Buddhist monk, a renowned player of Go, is invited 
to visit a mysterious lady. With a screen interposed 
between them, they play a game which ends in the total 
massacre of the monk's men. The lady is never heard 
of again, and is presumed to have been a supernatural 
being. 

A professor of magic, by some mistake in his cere- 
monies, excites the wrath of the infernal demons. They 
pursue him. He gets off his horse and lets it go home 
by itself, while he hides among the sheaves in a rice-field 
by the way. The demons follow the tracks of the horse's 
feet, and the magician escapes, having learnt from the 
conversation of his pursuers as they pass his hiding- 
place how to circumvent them when they renew their 
attack upon him. 

A professor of magic goes to perform a ceremony of 
purification from evil mfluences. His little boy, who 

UJI MONOGATARI 121 

accompanies him, by an inward gift is able to see a 
number of devils, invisible to the ordinary eye, carrying 
away the offerings of food made to them. He afterwards 
becomes a great magician. 

A guitar, a valued heirloom of the Mikado, disappears 
mysteriously. One of the courtiers w^ho is a great 
musician traces it by its sound, and finds that it has been 
purloined by a devil. On its being explained to the 
devil that the guitar is a much-prized possession of the 
Mikado, he at once returns it. 

A young woman who is urged by her parents to take 
a second husband, fortifies her refusal to do so by the 
example of a swallow w^hich had built its nest in their 
house, and whose mate had been taken from it. It goes 
away in the autumn, and when it comes back the follow- 
ing summer it is still alone. 

Among other fictitious Monogatari which have come 
down to us from this period, there may be mentioned 
the Idzumi Shikibu Monogatariy the Lna Monogatai-iy 
the Tsutsunii Chiunagon Monogatari , the Akiyo no Naga- 
monogatari, and the Matsuho Monogatariy which, although 
all useful for the study of the state of society at this time, 
do not present any special features of literary interest. 
Of many others the names only have reached us. 

CHAPTER VII 

"YEIGWA MONOGATAPa" AND "O-KAGAMI'' 

It was inevitable that the Japanese language, which had 
now reached its highest degree of perfection as an instru- 
ment for the expression of thought, should, sooner or 
later, be applied to some more serious purpose than the 
writing of poetry, stories, diaries, and other light literature. 
The Yeigwa Monogatari is notable as the first instance of 
its being used for history. The authorship of this work 
is unknown. A not very trustworthy tradition ascribes it 
to a celebrated poetess of this period named Akazome 
Yemon, but as it mentions events which occurred after 
her death, it cannot all be from her pen. She may, 
however, have left materials which were incorporated 
into the work of a subsequent writer. The date of its 
composition is also uncertain. It must be near the end 
of the eleventh century. 

The Yeigwa Monogatari consists of forty books, 
which cover a period of about two centuries of Japanese 
history, ending with A.D. 1088. It is, however, not so 
much the general history of the country during this 
time as of the glorious rule ( Yeigzva Monogatari means 
^'A Tale of Glory") of Fujiwara no Michinaga, who 
was Chief Minister in the three reigns of Ichijo, 
Sanjo, and Go Ichijo, and who died A.D. 1027. The 
latter part of the work is the history of his two 

YEIGWA MONOGATARI 123 

sons, Yorimichi and Norimichi, who succeeded to his 
power. 

The author's style and method have been greatly in- 
fluenced by his models — the more fictitious Monogatari. 
He (or she) betrays a preference for romantic episodes, 
and leans to a more or less poetical and imaginative 
treatment of his subject, enlivening his narrative with 
anecdotes, and adorning his pages freely with the 
ubiquitous Tanka. 

The custom, common with romance writers at the 
present day, of placing fanciful headings to every 
chapter, began with this work. 

The following passage illustrates the strong hold which 
Buddhism had upon the Japanese nation at this period. 
It may be premised that the Mikado Kwazan ascended the 
throne in 985 at the age of seventeen. He was provided 
with three beautiful and noble women as consorts. One 
of these he became passionately fond of, and when she 
died soon after, the shock was too great for a mind 
in which there already lurked hereditary germs of in- 
sanity : — 

^* From the beginning of the second year of Kwanwa 
(986) there was an uneasy feeling in the minds of the 
people, and many strange warnings were given. In the 
palace also religious abstinence was frequently practised. 
Moreover (at what time this began is uncertain) the 
people turned their minds to religion in an extraordinary 
degree, and nothing else was heard of but of one becom- 
ing a nun and another entering the priesthood. When 
the Mikado was informed of this, he bewailed the wretch- 
edness of this transitory world. He must have thought 
to himself, * Alas ! how deep Kokiden's [his favourite 
wife] sins must have been. Such as she was, her guilt 

124 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

[in some past existence] was surely great [or she would not 
have died so young]. Oh that I could find some means 
of doing away with it !' His august heart being frequently 
disturbed by strange and lofty thoughts like this, the 
result was apparent in his agitated demeanour. The 
Prime Minister noted this wnth sorrow, and the Chiunagon 
also, the Mikado's uncle, must in secret have been simply 
heart-broken. Gonkiu, a priest of the monastery of 
Kwazan, was continually sent for in order to expound 
the scriptures, and the Mikado's august heart was given 
up to religion in an infinite measure. His remarks about 
wife and child, and the priceless treasure of the sovereign 
rank, filled the Sachiuben Korenari with the utmost pity, 
and this devotion to religion gave both him and the 
Chiunagon great concern. ^To give up the world and 
enter religion,' they said, ^ is an ordmary course to take, 
but how will it be in this case ?' Certain expressions of 
his sentiments from time to time must have been due 
to nought else but an evil influence proceeding from 
Reizei-in [his father and predecessor on the throne, who 
became insane]. Meanwhile,, they noted other strange, 
unwonted, and unconscious behaviour of the Mikado, 
and attended closely upon him. But on the night of the 
22nd day of the sixth month of this year he suddenly dis- 
appeared. An alarm was given, and everybody, without 
exception, from the nobles-in-waiting down to the guards 
and servants of meanest rank, procured lights and sought 
everywhere. But no trace of the Mikado could be found. 
The Prime Minister with the other ministers and nobles 
all assembled. Every room was searched, but he was 
nowhere to be seen, and the night was spent by all in 
the utmost consternation and alarm. 

^'The Chiunagon, prostrating himself in grief before 

O-KAGAMI 125 

the shrine of the [Shinto] gods, protectors of the palace, 
prayed them with tears and lamentations to reveal to him 
the place where his precious lord was hidden. Then he 
was sought for by parties despatched severally to all the 
Buddhist temples, but in vain. Meanwhile his consorts 
wept, and in their hearts thought what a terrible thing 
had happened. The long summer's night at length gave 
way to dawn, but the search was still fruitless. 

''The Chiunagon and the Sachiuben Korenari went at 
last to Kwazan, and there they discovered him clothed as 
a dear little priest. They fell down before him with 
exclamations of grief and concern, and both followed his 
example and entered the priesthood." 

The 0-Kagami or '' Great Mirror " is another his- 
torical work. It contains the history of fourteen reigns, 
beginning with that of Mondoku, who came to the 
throne A.D. 851, and ending with that of Go Ichijo, 
who died in A.D. 1036. The author was one Tamenari, 
a member of the great Fujiwara family, and an ofBcial 
attached to the court of the Mikado Sutoku (11 24-1 141). 
He served for some time as Director of the Empress's 
palace, but subsequently assumed the tonsure and retired 
to a hermitage on Mount Ohara, near Kioto. Here he 
was joined by his two brothers, who followed his ex- 
ample and abandoned the world for a life of religion. 
Tamenari's preface to the 0-Kagami shows that he was 
a devout Buddhist. 

Whether we have regard to its matter or to its form, 
the 0-Kagami is not a very important contribution to 
literature. It is in eight volumes. Volume I. contains, 
in sixty-four pages, meagre sketches of the lives of 
fourteen Mikados. The year, month, and day of birth, 
appointment as Crown Prince, assumption of the manly 

126 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

style of dressing the hair, accession to the throne and 
death of each sovereign, are set down baldly in a page 
or two. Then follow one or two sentimental or 
humorous anecdotes, adorned as usual with Tanka. 
There is little more. In the next six volumes we find 
biographies of the principal statesmen during the same 
period. This part of the w^ork is somewhat more sub- 
stantial, but there is still a marked inclination towards 
the anecdotal and romantic treatment of the subject. 
The last volume is an excursus on the origin of certain 
festivals at the shrines of Kamo and Hachiman. 

The 0-Kagami throws but little light on the times of 
which it professes to give the history, but it may perhaps 
be acceptable as an addition to the mformation supplied 
us by the drier official histories in the Chinese language. 

This work, with the Masa-Kagamiy and the Midzu- 
Kagami (to be noticed afterwards), are known as the 
Mitsu-Kagami or "Three Mirrors." Mirror, it may be 
explained, is a familiar metaphor for history, not only in 
Japan, but in China and Corea. 

Before closing this chapter, one or two w^orks in the 
Chinese language require to be mentioned. 

The Shojiroku is a sort of peerage. It was prepared 
A.D. 815, and contains the genealogy of 1182 noble 
families of Japan. It has no value as literature, but is 
useful for historical reference, and has one interesting 
feature — it shows that at this period about one-third of 
the Japanese nobility claimed to be descended from 
Chinese or Corean ancestors. 

The Yengishikiy or ''Institutes of the Period Yengi" 
(901-923), was completed in 927. The first two volumes 
contain minute directions for the celebration of the 
Shinto rites of worship, including the Norito or 

WORKS IN CHINESE 127 

liturgies used on these occasions, which were now for 
the first time, so far as we know, committed to writing, 
although in existence for centuries previously. The 
remaining forty volumes give a description of the 
organisation of the various Government departments, 
the duties of the officials, &c. The Yengishiki is a most 
valuable work of reference. 

The Waniioshd is a Chinese - Japanese dictionary, 
arranged according to categories, such as Heaven, 
Earth, &c., and is valuable to philologists, but not 
otherwise. The author of this lexicon was one Mina- 
moto no Shitagaii (911-983). 

BOOK THE FOURTH 
KAMAKURA PERIOD (1186-1332) 

(DECLINE OF LEARNING) 

BOOK THE FOURTH 

KAMAKURA PERIOD (1186-1332) 

(DECLINE OF LEARNING) 

CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTORY 

In the history of Japan, as in that of many other 
countries, there is observable an alternate tendency 
towards strong and weak central governments, which 
is all the more pronounced as the insular position of the 
country protects this natural oscillation against foreign 
interference. From time to time rulers of commanding 
abilities and resolute character made their appearance, 
who enlarged the sphere of authority of the State, and 
kept local ambitions in check. But sooner or later the 
central control became relaxed, and each province estab- 
Hshed a sort of Home Rule for itself, until another swing 
of the pendulum took place, and the reins of govern- 
ment were again grasped by the strong hand of a single 
authority. 

The establishment by the Shogun Yoritomo, after 
much hard fighting, of the sway of the military caste at 
Kamakura, near the end of the twelfth century, marked 
the beginning of one of these periods of vigorous 

132 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

centralisation. Though the Mikados were allowed to 
retain an outward semblance of authority, all real power, 
civil and military, had passed from their hands ; while, 
on the other hand, the local nobles saw themselves 
supplanted by offtcers appointed by the Shoguns and 
entirely dependent on them. 

Yoritomo was succeeded by his two sons, who with 
their father are known to history as the ''Three Shoguns." 
After them the Hojo dynasty of Shikken (directors), who 
were simply Shoguns under a different name, took their 
place as the rulers of Japan. They remained in power 
until A.D. 1335. 

The rule of a class to whose very existence a practical 
knowledge of war and warlike accomplishments was 
vital, and who necessarily neglected, if they did not 
despise, intellectual culture, was not conducive to the 
production of important literary works. Nor was this 
the only unfavourable condition of the time. Inter- 
course with China and Corea had become much inter- 
rupted. The shores of these countries were infested 
by Japanese pirates, in punishment for whose descents 
it was that Kublai Khan despatched his famous but 
abortive expedition against Japan. Chinese learning 
consequently languished. Buddhism, on the other hand, 
flourished greatly, as the colossal figure of Buddha 
(A.D. 1252) at Kamakura testifies to this day. Most of 
the Mikados, after a few years of reign, became monks, 
as did also many of the highest personages of their court, 
though ic must be said that the adage '' Cucullus ^on facit 
monachum " was in their case abundantly exemplified. 

The three thousand monasteries which at this time 
dotted the slopes of Hiyeisan (a mountain north-east of 
Kioto) were a very material embodiment of Buddhist 

KAMAKURA PERIOD 133 

influence. Not content with mere spiritual weapons, 
the inmates of these estabhshments were always ready, 
on the smallest provocation, to don their armour over 
their monastic frocks and troop down to the streets of 
Kioto to place their swords in whatever scale of the 
politics of the day seemed to them most expedient. They 
were the terror of the Mikados, one of whom is recorded 
to have said : ^' There are three things I cannot control — 
the water of the Kamogawa (a river which does frequent 
damage to Kioto by its floods), the fall of the dice, and 
the monks of Buddha." 

It was, however, the Buddhist monks who w^ere the 
chief maintainers of learning during this period. Some 
of the men of letters were ecclesiastics, and even when 
this was not the case, their writmgs are deeply imbued 
wdth Buddhist teachings and sentiments. The vanity of 
w^ealth and power, and the uncertainty of human things, 
form the constant refrain of their moralisings. 

In comparison with the Heian period, the contribu- 
tions by women to the literature of this time are insig- 
nificant, and altogether a more virile, if less refined, 
spirit is discernible. There are hardly any of those 
debonair romances w^hich in the preceding period 
amused the leisure of the nobles of Kioto. The new^er 
literature, wiih its tales of combats and battles, reflects 
the more warlike temper of the times of which it is the 
product. As a Japanese writer has observed, *^The 
Heian literature is like the Kaido {Pyrus spectabilis) 
drooping after rain ; that of the Kamakura period 
resembles the plum-blossom which exhales its perfume 
in the snow and frost." 

It is to be noted that the more important writings of 
this period belong to the earlier part of it. 

CHAPTER II 

HISTORICAL WORKS 

The authorship of the Gempei Seisuiki is doubtfully 
ascribed to one Hamuro Tokinaga, of whom we know 
little or nothing. He is also conjectured to have written 
the Heiji JMorwgatari and Hogen Mo?iogatari, but of this 
too there is no certainty. The precise date of its com- 
position is likewise unknown. It must belong to the early 
part of the Kamakura period. 

The Gempei Seisuiki, as its name indicates, is a history 
of the rise and fall of the Gen and Hei, two great noble 
famihes whose struggles for supremacy convulsed Japan 
during the latter half of the twelfth century. It is in 
forty-eight books, and embraces the period from A.D. 
1161 to 1 185. No doubt itself suggested by the Chinese 
Yengi or ^' Paraphrases of History," of which the Safi- 
kwo-chik is the best known, the Gempei Seisuiki is the 
first example in Japan of a large class of quasi-historical 
works to which there is nothing precisely similar in 
our literature, though a comparison with Shakespeare's 
historical plays will convey some idea of the relative pro- 
portions of fact and fiction which they contain. They 
have no original plot, and little or no introduction of 
imaginary personages. The writers content themselves 
with following the general course of real history, w^hile 
adorning it with what flourish their nature prompts. 

GEMPEI SEISUIKI 135 

But the " flourish " means a great deal. It is not only 
rhetorical ornament and sententious reflections which 
these authors provide. They evolve from their inner 
consciousness speeches for statesmen and soldiers, war- 
like stratagems for generals, prayers for the devout, 
appropriate omens, dreams, incantations, and miraculous 
incidents in great variety, with a host of minute details 
of dress, of pompous processions, of hairbreadth escapes, 
of single combats, and the like. Tanka, original or 
otherwise, are supplied whenever the occasion seems to 
demand them. 

The Gempei Seisiiiki is a work of considerable literary 
pretensions, and in its own special style is only surpassed 
by the Taihciki, The language marks a considerable 
advance towards the modern form of Japanese. While 
the works of the Heian period are very imperfectly 
intelligible to an ordinary educated Japanese, with the 
Gempei Seisuiki he finds little difliculty. Much of the 
older grammatical equipment of particles and termina- 
tions is now dispensed with, and the vocabulary shows 
a large increment of Chinese words, a notable propor- 
tion of which owe their introduction to Buddhist 
influences. 

The following is part of the account of the naval 
engagement of Dannoura, one of the decisive battles 
of Japanese history. By it the strife between the great 
Hei (or Taira) and Gen (or Minamoto) factions w^as 
brought to an end for the time, and Yoritomo enabled 
to establish his authority over all Japan. 

^'The capture of Yashima shut out the House of Hei 
from Kiushiu. Unable to find a port of refuge, they 
drifted on to Dannoura in Nagato, Akama (Shimono- 
seki), Moji, and Hikushima. Here they remained afloat 

136 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

upon the waves, passing the time -on board their ships. 
The Gen fleet arrived at the bay of Katsura, in the 
province of Awa. They had been victorious in the 
conflicts engaged in in various places, and had taken the 
palace of Yashima. They now followed the movements 
of the Hei ships, pursuing them by land, as the hawk 
urges the pheasants when the moors are burnt and no 
cover is left. The Gen fleet reached a place called 
Oitsuheitsu, twenty chd or more [about two miles] 
from where the adherents of the Hei House were 
stationed. 

''On the 24th day of the third month of the same 
year [1185], Yoshitsune [the Gen general, brother of 
Yoritomo] and his army, in seven hundred ships or 
more, attacked the enemy at dawn. The House of Hei 
were not unprepared. With five hundred war-ships or 
more, they advanced to meet him, and the exchange of 
arrows [by way of formal defiance] took place. The 
Gen and Hei troops numbered together over 100,000 
men, and the sound of the battle-cry raised on both 
sides, with the song of the turnip-headed arrows [a 
special kind of arrow which made a noise like a hum- 
ming-top] as they crossed each other's course, was 
startling to hear— audible, one would think, as far as 
the azure sky above, and re-echoing downwards to the 
depths of the sea. 

''Noriyori [with other Gen generals] had arrived at 
Kiushiu with 30,000 cavalry, and had cut off the retreat 
in that direction. The Hei were like a caged bird that 
cannot escape, or a fish in a trap from which there is 
no exit. On the sea there were ships floating, by land 
were bridle-bits in ranged lines. East and west, south and 
north were closed, and on no side was evasion possible. 

GEMPEl SEISUIKI 137 

^'Tomomori [a Hei general] stood forward on the bow 
of his ship and spoke as follows : — 

" ^ Let us think this day our last, and let us all banish 
the thought of retreat. In ancient and modern times 
there have been examples of even famous generals and 
brave soldiers, when their armies were beaten and 
their good fortune exhausted, being captured by a 
traveller or taken prisoner by a wayfarer. All these 
arose from the endeavour to avoid a death which was 
inevitable. Let us each one at this time abandon our 
lives to destruction, and think of nothing else but to 
leave a name to after ages. Let us show no weakness 
before these fellows from the east country. What have 
we done that we should be grudging even of our 
lives ?' Let us unite in the resolve to seize Yoshitsune 
and fling him into the sea. This should be the chief 
object of to-day's battle.' " 

The first onset was favourable to the Hei faction, 
upon which : — 

*^ Yoshitsune, observing that his troops showed signs 
of yielding, rinsed his mouth in the salt tide, and with 
closed eyes and folded palm.s preyed to Hachiman 
Daibosatsu^ to grant him his protection. Hereupon a 
pair of white doves [the pigeon is sacred to Hachi- 
man] flew thither and alit on Yoshitsune's flag. While 
Gen and Hei were saying, '' Look there, look there," a 
mass of black clouds came floating from the east and 
hung over the scene of battle. P>om amidst this cloud 
a white flag descended, while Yoshitsune's flag, its top 

1 This deity has a cmious history. Originally the Mikado Ojin, he was 
credited with having conquered Corea while an unborn infant. Then he 
became the Shinto god of war, and finally was annexed by the Buddhists, 
who added to his name the Buddhist title of " Daibosatsu." 

138 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

waving to and fro, passed away along with the clouds. 
The Gen joined their hands together in prayer, while 
the Hei's hair stood on end, and their hearts felt small 
within them. 

^^The Gen soldiers, encouraged by such favourable 
omens, shouted aloud in their ardour. Some embarked 
in boats and rowed on and on, fighting as they went. 
Others, marching along the dry land, and fitting arrows 
to their bows one after another in quick succession, 
engaged in a battle of archery." 

This is described in a style which recalls the com- 
bats of the Iliady the doings and sayings of individual 
heroes being related in great detail. 

"The Gen were many, and encouraged by success, 
pressed forward to the attack ; the Hei were fewer, 
but acquitted themselves as if that day were their last. 
Can the battle of Indra with the A'suras have been 
more terrible than this ? 

''The Hei ships were drawn up two or three deep. 
The ship of Chinese build was furnished with troops 
in a manner which showed that the general was on 
board. On the [ordinary] fighting-ships the Daijin and 
other fit officers of low^er rank were embarked. It w^as 
the plan of the Hei, whilst the Gen were attacking the 
Chinese ship, that their fighting-ships should fetch a 
circuit round the enemy's vessels, and enclosing them, 
smite the Gen to a man. 

"Thereupon Shigeyoshi, hitherto so faithful to the 
Hei cause, suddenly changed his heart, and with three 
hundred ships or more, manned with troops from 
Shikoku, rowed away, and remained a passive spectator 
of the battle, prepared, if the Hei proved the stronger, 
to shoot his arrows at the Gen ; if the Gen seemed 

HEIKE MONOGATARI 139 

likely to gain the victory, to aim them at the Hei. 
How true is it that heaven may be reckoned upon, 
earth may be reckoned upon ; the only thing which we 
cannot reckon on is the heart of man." 

Ultimately Shigeyoshi betrays to Yoshitsune the Hei 
plan of battle, with the result that the latter faction 
are completely overthrown. 

The authorship and precise date of the Heike Mo?io- 
gatari are unknown. It was probably composed soon 
after the Geinpei Seisuiki, of which it is little more than 
an adaptation, page after page being simply copied from 
the latter work. But as if its model and source had not 
already departed sufhciently from true history, the Heike 
Monogatari, which covers the same ground and relates 
the same events, adds a number of inventions of its own, 
under the inspiration of patriotic or pious motives, or for 
the sake of poetical or dramatic effect. It is said that a 
main object of the author was to produce a narrative 
which could be chanted to the accompaniment of the 
biwa, a kind of four-stringed lute. That it was so chanted 
by men with shaven heads cTiW^d . biwa-bozu (biwa- 
bonzes) is a fact frequently referred to by later writers. 
In this form it became immensely popular, and even at 
the present day it is far better known than the Gempei 
Seisuiki, a work much superior to it in merit. Motoori, 
reasoning from the premiss that everything which can 
be sung is poetry, classes the Heike accordingly. He 
says that even though the actual count of syllables will 
not come right, they can be slurred over in singing so as 
to make metre. The reader might expect from this to 
find that the Heike is an example of poetical prose some- 
what in the style of Ossian. But there is really hardly 

I40 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

anything to justify Motoori's opinion. Its style, though 
occasionally more or less ornate, is not really more 
poetical than that of many books for which no such 
pretension is advanced. To this, however, an excep- 
tion must be noticed. In a very few passages, forming 
altogether an utterly insignificant part of the book, there 
is something of that alternation of phrases of five and 
seven syllables which in Japan constitutes metre, and 
the diction and thought bear traces of an attempt to 
treat the subject in a poetical manner. The following 
is a specimen : — 

A local official named Morotsune, having had a dispute 
with the monks of a certain temple, burnt it. The latter 
assembled the monks of the parent monastery, to the 
number of over two thousand men, and approached his 
official residence : — 

" And now the sun went down. 
Resolved to engage battle on the morrow., 
That night they drew near and contained themselves. 
The breath of the dew-laden wi7id of autumn 
Fluttered the left sleeves of their armour. 
The liglitnijig which illumined the clouds above 
Made the stars of their helmets to blaze. 
Morotsu7te^ feeling that resistance was in vain., 
Fled up by night to Kioto. 

The 7iext day they advanced at the hour of the Hare [sunrise] 
And abruptly raised the battle-cry ; 
But within the castle not a soimd was heard. 
A man was sent to examitie., 
But reported that they had all decamped. " 

Even in this short passage the regularity of metre and 
the poetical diction are not well sustained. 

It would not be necessary to dwell on this feature of 
the Heike Monogatari but for the circumstance that we 
have here the beginning of a kind of composition which 

HEIKE MONOGATARI 141 

subsequently became very popular in Japan. The Tai- 
heiki carried this '^ dropping into poetry " somewhat 
further, and the modern dramatists and novelists have 
bestowed on us much tediousness of this particular 
description. 

After the battle of Dannoiira (see p. 135), the Mikado 
Antoku's nurse, seeing that all was over, took him into 
her arms (he was then a boy of eight years of age) and 
plunged into the sea with him. Both were drowned. 
The following is the Heike Monogatari's account of this 
incident : — 

'' Niidono was long ago prepared for this [the defeat of 
the Hei or Taira party]. Throwing over her head her 
double garment of sombre hue, and tucking up high the 
side of her trousers of straw-coloured silk, she placed 
under her arm the Sacred Seal, and girt on her loins the 
Sacred Sword. Then taking the sovereign to her bosom, 
she said, ^Although a woman, I will not allow the enemy 
to lay hands on me. I will accompany my sovereign. 
All ye who have regard for his intention make haste and 
follow.' So saying, she calmly placed her foot on the 
ship's side. The sovereign had this year reached the 
age of eight, but looked much older. His august coun- 
tenance was so beautiful that it cast a lustre round about. 
His black locks hung loosely down below his back. With 
an astonished expression he inquired, ' Now, whither do 
you propose to take me. Amaze ? ' ^ Niidono turned her 
face to her child-lord, and wdth tears that fell bara-bara, 
^Do you not know, my lord,' said she, Uhat although, 
by virtue of your keeping the Ten Commandments 
in a previous state of existence, you have been born 
into this world as the ruler of ten thousand chariots, 

^ A respectful title for women who have taken Buddhist vows. 

142 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

yet having become involved in an evil destiny, your 
good fortune is now at an end ? Be pleased to turn 
first to the east, and bid adieu to the shrine of the 
Great God of Ise. Then turn to the west, and call 
upon the name of Buddha, solemnly committing your- 
self to the charge of those w^ho will come to meet you 
from the Paradise of the Western Land. This world 
is the region of sorrow, a remote spot small as a grain 
of millet. But beneath the waves there is a fair city 
called the Pure Land of Perfect Happmess. Thither it 
is that I am taking you.' With such words she soothed 
him. The child then tied his top-knot to the Imperial 
robe of the colour of a mountain-dove, and tearfully 
joined together his lovely little hands. First he turned 
to the east, and bade adieu to the shrine of the Great 
God of Ise and the shrine of Hachiman. Next he 
turned to the west, and called upon the name of Buddha. 
When he had done so, Niidono made bold to take him in 
her arms, and soothing him with the words, 'There is a 
city away below the waves,' sank down to the bottom 
one thousand fathoms deep. Alas, the pity of it ! — the 
changeful winds of spring swiftly scattered the flowery 
august form. Alas, the pain of it ! — the rude billows 
of severance buried the jewel person. His palace had 
been called Chosei, to denote that it was established as 
his long abode ; and the gate inscribed Furo, that is, 
the portal through which old age enters not. But ere 
ten years had passed he had become drift of the deep 
sea. In the case of such a virtuous monarch it would 
be wholly idle to talk of reward and retribution. It is 
the dragon of the region above the clouds descending 
and becoming a fish." 

A comparison of the above with the corresponding 

MIDZU-KAGAMI 143 

passage of the Gempci Seisuiki shows very clearly the 
different character of the two works. There is nothing 
in the latter about praying to Shinto deities or to Buddha, 
and no talk of a future Paradise. When the young 
monarch asks where his nurse is taking him, instead of 
the devout sentiments attributed to her by the Heike 
Monogatari, the Gernpei Seisuiki tells us that she said, 
^' The soldiers are shooting arrows at the august ship, 
and I have the honour to escort your Majesty to 
another one." 

The honorifics characteristic of the Japanese lan- 
guage come in very oddly in some of these passages. 
Thus in the above the waves " respectfully " submerge 
the Mikado, the enemy's soldiers ''respectfully" direct 
their arrows against the august ship, and so forth. It 
would be tedious to follow these peculiarities in a 
translation. 

The authorship of the historical work called Midzu-Kag- 
aniii^' Water-Mirror ") is really unknown. It has been as- 
cribed to Nakayama Tadachika, who was born 1131, and 
died 1 195. Omitting the myths of the so-called " Age of 
the Gods," the writer begins his history with the legend of 
Jimmu Tenno, the first Mikado, and brings it down through 
lifty-four reigns to the death of Nimmio in 850. It is of 
course impossible to give anything but a meagre outline 
of the history of this long period in three volumes of no 
great bulk. Its value is small. In the earlier part it is 
little more than an epitome of the Nihongi. The story 
is told in a plain, artless fashion, without rhetorical orna- 
ment, philosophical reflections, or the least attempt to 
trace the causes or connection of events. Whoever the 
author was, he was a devout Buddhist, to which fact is 

144 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

no doubt to be attributed a certain miraculous element 
in the latter part of the history. 

The Midzu-Kaganii is an obvious imitation of the 
d-Kagami, The language is comparatively free from 
Chinese admixture, and from the point of view of style 
the work is to be classed with the literature of the Heian 
period. 

The authorship of the Hdgert Monogatari and Heiji 
Monogatari is attributed to Hamuro Tokinaga, who 
lived towards the end of the twelfth century. The 
former contains an account of the civil disturbances in 
Kioto in the year 1157, arising out of a dispute respecting 
the succession to the throne ; the latter is a record of the 
renewal of the conflict in 11 59. The result of this light- 
ing was the downfall for a time of the power of the great 
Minamoto (Gen) family, and the establishment of the 
Taira (Hei) family in power. 

CHAPTER III 

CHOMEI AND THE "HOJOKI" 

Kamo Chomei, the author of the Hojoki, was a guardian 
of the Shinto shrine of Kamo in Kioto. Having acquired 
some reputation as a musician and poet, he was appointed 
by the retired Mikado Go Toba to a post in the Depart- 
ment of Japanese Poetry. He subsequently petitioned to 
be allowed to succeed his father as superior guardian of 
Kamo, but his prayer was not granted. This he resented 
deeply, and shaving his head, retired to a hermitage on 
Oharayama, a few miles from Kioto. 

The Hojoki, written in 1212, is a record of the author's 
personal experiences. It is valued highly for its excel- 
lent style, which is not too close an imitation of the older 
classical manner, nor yet, on the other hand, overloaded 
w^ith Chinese expressions. After giving an account of 
the great fire of Kioto in 1177, the famine of 1181, and 
the earthquake of 1185, the writer of these memoirs 
proceeds to tell us of the mountain hermitage to which 
he fled in order to escape from a world so rife with 
direful calamities. His hut and mode of life are 
minutely described, with many touches which not only 
give indications of his own tastes and character, but 
reveal something of the inner spirit of the Buddhist 
religion. It is a tiny book on which to rest so high 
a reputation, containing some thirty pages only, and it 
IS therefore possible to transcribe all the more interest- 

146 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

ing passages. Hojo, it may be premised^ means ^'ten 
feet square," the supposed dimensions of a hermit's cell, 
and actually those of Chomei's hut. Ki means *^ notes " 
or *' record." 

''The current of a running stream flows on unceas- 
ingly, but the water is not the same : the foam floating 
on the pool where it lingers, now vanishes and now 
forms again, but is never lasting. Such are man- 
kind and their habitations. In a splendid capital where 
the dwellings of the exalted and of the lowly join 
their roof-trees and with then- tiles jostle one another, 
they may appear to go on without an interval from 
generation to generation. But we shall find, if we make 
inquiry, that there are m reality but few which are ancient. 
Some were destroyed last year to be rebuilt this year ; 
others, which were great houses, have been ruined, and 
replaced by smaller ones. The same is true of their 
inmates. If we have lived long in a place where we 
have numbers of acquaintances, we find that but one 
or two are left of twenty or thirty whom we knew 
formerly. In the morning some die, in the evening 
some are born. Such is life. It may be compared 
to foam upon the water. Whether they are born or 
whether they die, we know not whence they come nor 
whither they go. Nor in this temporary sojourning- 
place do we know who will benefit by the trouble w^e 
put ourselves to, or wherewithal to give pleasure to 
the eyes. Of a house and its master I know not 
which is the more subject to change. Both are like 
the dew on the convolvulus. The dew may fall, leaving 
the flower behind ; but even so, the flower fades with 
the morning sun. Again, the flower may wither, while 

HOJOKI 147 

the dew remains ; but even so, it cannot last until 
evening. 

" During the forty springs and summers which have 
passed since I first knew the heart of things, many 
extraordinary events have happened. In the third year 
of Angen (1177), on the twenty-eighth day of the 
fourth month, the night being unquiet by reason of a 
violent wind, a fire broke out in the south-eastern part 
of the capital, about eight o'clock, and spread in a 
north-westerly direction, gaining the southern gate of 
the Palace, the Hall of Audience, the University build- 
ings, and the Home Office. That same night all were 
reduced to ashes. It was said to have had its origin 
in a temporary building used as a hospital. Urged by 
the blasts of the devious wind, it spread this way and 
that until it widened out like an extended fan. The 
distant houses were immersed in smoke, while the 
nearer ground was completely covered with the sparks 
blown on to it. The ashes, driven aloft into the sky, 
and illumined by the flames, formed a ruddy back- 
ground agamst which the sparks might be seen, con- 
tmually detached by the gusts, and as it w^ere flying 
over a space of several hundred yards to some new 
quarter. Imagine the distracted state of the inhabitants ! 
Some there were who fell down, stifled by the smoke ; 
others, involved in flames, met with a sudden death ; 
others, again, barely escaped with their lives, and were 
unable to save their property. Their seven rare things 
and their ten thousand treasures became mere ashes. 
How great were the losses ! Sixteen houses of nobles 
were consumed, and others without number. One-third 
of all Kioto was destroyed. Several thousands of men 
and women lost their lives, and an immense number 

148 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

of cattle. All the ways of man are full of vanity, but 
it may be deemed specially unprofitable to build our- 
selves dwellings in so dangerous a place as the capital, 
wasting our wealth, and giving ourselves much anxiety 
of mind. 

" Again, on the 29th day of the fourth month of the 
fourth year of Jisho (1180), there was a great whirlwind 
which arose in the Kiogoku quarter, and blew with 
much violence as far as Rokujo. Three or four of the 
city wards received its full force. In these there was 
not a single house, great or small, which was not de- 
stroyed by its whirling blasts. Some were srniply laid 
flat on the ground ; in others nothing was left but the 
posts and cross-beams. The roofs of gates were blown 
off and deposited at a distance of several streets. Fences 
were swept away, removing all distmction between a 
neighbour's ground and one's own. It need hardly be 
said that all the contents of the houses without excep- 
tion rose to the sky, while the bark and shingles of the 
roofs were scattered abroad like autumnal leaves before 
the wind. The dust was blown up like smoke, so that 
nothing could be seen, and the din was so tremendous 
that one could not hear his neighbour speak. The 
blasts of the Buddhist Inferno of which we have been 
told must be something of this kind. Not only were 
houses destroyed, but countless numbers of people were 
injured, and became cripples [by exposure] while their 
homes were being repaired. This wind passed off in 
a south-westerly direction, having caused lamentation to 
many. Now a whirlwind is an ordinary phenomenon, 
but this was no mere natural occurrence ; I strongly 
suspect that it was sent as a warning." 

[Here follows an account of the miseries attendant 

HOJOKI 149 

upon the removal of the capital to Settsu in the same 
year (1180).] 

^^ It is so long ago that I do not exactly remember, but 
I believe it was in the period Yowa (118 1-2) that there 
was for two years a very wretched state of things caused 
by famine. Misfortunes succeeded one another. Either 
there was drought in spring and summer, or there w^ere 
storms and floods in autumn and winter, so that no grain 
came to maturity. The spring ploughing was in vain, 
and the labour of summer planting [of the young rice] 
came to naught. There was no bustle of reaping in 
autumn, or of ingathermg in winter. In all the pro- 
vinces people left their lands and sought other parts, 
or, forgetting their homes, went to live among the hiLs. 
All kinds of prayers were begun, and even religious 
practices which were unusual in ordinary times revived, 
but to no purpose whatever. The capital, dependent as 
it is on the country for everything, could not remain 
unconcerned when nothing was produced. The inhabi- 
tants in their distress offered to sacrifice their valuables of 
all kinds one after another, but nobody cared to look at 
them. Even if buyers came forward, they made little 
account of gold, and much of grain. Beggars swarmed 
by the roadsides, and our ears were filled with the sound 
of their lamentations. Amid such misery we with diffi- 
culty reached the close of the first year. With the new 
year, men's hopes revived. But that nothing might be 
left to complete our misfortunes, a pestilence broke out 
and continued without ceasing. Everybody was dying 
of hunger, and as time went on, our condition became as 
desperate as that of the fish in the small pool of the story. 
At last even respectable-looking people wearing hats, and 
with their feet covered, might be seen begging importu- 

I50 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

nately from door to door. Sometimes while you won- 
dered how such utterly wretched creatures could walk at 
all, they fell down before your eyes. By garden walls or 
on the roadsides countless persons died of famine, and as 
their bodies were not removed, the world was filled with 
evil odours. As they changed, there w^ere many sights 
which the eyes could not endure to see. It was worse 
on the river banks where there was not even room for 
horses and vehicles to pass back and forwards. Porters 
and woodcutters too became so feeble that firewood 
got scarcer and scarcer, and people who had no means 
pulled down their houses and sold the materials in the 
market. It was said that a load for one man was not 
enough to provide him with sustenance for a single day. 
It was strange to see among this firewood pieces adorned 
in places with vermilion, or silver or gold leaf. On 
inquiry, it appeared that people in their extremity went 
to old temples, stole the images of Buddha, and broke 
up the objects used in worship, of which these were the 
fragments. Such mournful spectacles it was my lot to 
witness, born into a polluted and wicked world. 

^' Another very pitiable thing was that when there were 
a man and woman who were strongly attached to each 
other, the one w^hose love was the greatest and whose 
devotion was the most profound always died first. The 
reason was that they put themselves last, and, whether 
man or woman, gave up to the dearly loved one anything 
which they might chance to have begged. As a matter 
of course, parents died before their children. Again, 
infants might be seen clinging to the breast of their 
mother, not knowing that she was already dead. A 
priest of the Temple of Jisonin, grieved in his secret 
heart at the numberless persons who were thus perish- 

HOJOKI 151 

ing, consulted with a great many holy men, who by his 
advice, when they saw any one dead, wrote on his 
forehead the first of the Chinese characters for Amida 
[Buddha] and by this bond united him [to the Church]. 
The numbers of those who died in central Kioto during 
the fourth and fifth months alone were 42,300. To this 
must be added many who died before and after ; while if 
we also reckon those who perished in the various out- 
lying quarters, the number has no limit. And then the 
provinces ! I have heard that in recent times there was 
a similar famine in the reign of Sutoku, in the period 
Chojo (1132-1135), but of this I do not know the circum- 
stances. What I have described is the most lamentable 
state of things that I have myself witnessed." 

Chomei next describes the great earthquake at Kioto 
of the year 1185, in which, when at its worst, there were 
twenty or thirty shocks a day, such as would be called 
severe in ordinary times. After ten or twenty days the 
shocks in one day were two to five, then one every two 
or three days. It was not until the third month that the 
earth had quite recovered its quiet. 

The story of these disasters is introductory to an 
account of his own life, and is brought in to explain his 
resolve to abandon the city and to live the life of a 
recluse. He spent thirty years in a small cabin remote 
from Kioto, but finding even this seclusion not suffi- 
ciently restful — 

" Five springs and autumns," he says, "came and went 
to me making my bed among the clouds of Mount 
Ohara. And now at sixty, when the dew does not 
easily evaporate,^ I again built myself a last leaf of a 
dwelling, something like the shelter which a traveller 

^ In other words, "sad thoughts are not easily shaken off." 

152 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

might erect for one night's lodging, or the cocoon spun 
for itself by an aged silkworm. It is not a hundredth 
part so commodious as the habitation of my middle-time. 
As my age declined with every year, at each remove my 
dwellmg became smaller. This last one is no ordinary 
house. It is barely ten feet square, and only seven feet 
high. As it was not meant for a fixed abode, the ground 
about it was trodden hard and left uncultivated. The 
walls are of mud, and it is thatched with rushes. The 
joints are fastened with rings and staples, for the greater 
convenience of removal elsewhere if any subject of dis- 
satisfaction should arise. How little trouble it would 
take to rebuild it m another place ! It would barely 
make two cart-loads, and there would be no expense 
w^hatever beyond the cartage. 

'' Since I concealed my traces in the recesses of Mount 
Hino, I have put up a projecting roof of some three feet 
or more in width on the eastern side, as a place for 
breaking and burning brushwood. On the south I have 
set out a temporary shade and laid down a bamboo 
grating [by way of a mat]. On the west there is the 
domestic shrine. Within, against the north, and on the 
other side of a paper screen, I have installed a picture 
of Amida, and beside it have hung one of Fugen. Before 
them I have placed a copy of the Hokkekio} Close to 
the eastern wall I have spread a quantity of fern, which 
serves me as a bed. On the south-west there is provided 
a hanging shelf of bamboo, on which are three or four 
black leather cases containing Japanese poetry, music, 
a Buddhist pious book, and such-like manuscripts. Be- 
sides there are a harp and a lute of the kinds known as 
Origoto and Tsugibiwa. 

1 Buddhist Scriptures. 

HOJOKI 153 

^^Such is my temporary dwelling. Now to describe 
its surroundings. On the south there is a water-pipe 
which leads to a reservoir, constructed by piling large 
stones one on another. A wood close by affords plenty 
of sticks for firewood. The Masaki creeper hides all 
that is beyond. The valley is thickly wooded, but is 
clear towards the west, which is not unfavourable to 
meditation.^ 

'* Here in spring there may be seen the rippling 
blossoms of the wistaria, shedding a fragrance towards 
the west. In summer the Hototogisu- is heard, who by 
his reiterated cry invites to a tryst with him on that 
rugged path which leads to Hades. In autumn the song 
of the cicada tills the ears, sounding like a wail over the 
vanities of this earthly existence. In winter the snow 
excites in me a sympathetic emotion. As it grows 
deeper and deeper, and then by degrees melts away 
again, it is an apt symbol of the obstruction of sin. 

^^When I am too sad for prayer, or cannot fix my 
mmd on the pages of holy writ, there is no one to pre- 
vent me from resting and being as indolent as I please, 
nor is there any friend in whose presence I might feel 
ashamed. Though I have not specially adopted silence 
as my rule, living alone as I do, the faculty of speech 
has naturally been suspended. With no definite resolve 
to observe the commandments, my circumstances are 
such that there is no temptation to break them. When 
at morn I approach the white waves of the lake, I feel 
as if I had stolen the sentiments of the novice Mansei 
when he gazed on the boats passing to and from 
Okanoya [and compared human life to the ripples left 

^ In the west is India, the native place of Buddhism. 
- A kind of cuckoo. 

154 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

in their wake] ; when at evening the cassia wind rustles 
the leaves, I think of the estuary of Junyo and imitate 
the style of Gen Totoku. When more cheerful than 
usual I extol the music of the autumn wmd to the ac- 
companiment of its song among the firs, or to the sound 
of water join my praises of the music of the running 
stream. I do not pretend to anything great in music, 
and I sing or play all by myself, only for the comfort of 
my own heart, and not for the entertainment of others. 

^' At the foot of the mountain there is another cabin, 
built of brushwood, where a forester lives. He has a 
son who sometimes comes to see me. When I am dull 
I take him for a walk, and although there is a great 
difference in our ages, he being sixteen and I sixty, we 
both enjoy the same pleasures. We pluck the great 
rush flowers or gather cranberries. We fill our baskets 
with wild potatoes or collect parsley. Sometimes we go 
down to the rice-fields in the belt of ground at the bottom 
of the mountain and glean the fallen ears. In serene 
weather we climb to the summit and view from afar the 
sky over my native place. Hence we can see Kowata- 
yama, Fushimi, Toba, and Hatsukase. Fine scenery is 
not private property, and there is nothing to prevent me 
from enjoying it. With no toilsome journey on foot, 
my mind flies afar along the range of mountain peaks. 
I cross Mount Sumi, I pass beyond Karadori, I make a 
pilgrimage to Iwama, I worship at Ishiyama, or else I 
thread my way over the plain of Awadzu, and pay my 
respects to the remains of the old Semimaru [a famous 
musician] ; I cross the river Tagami, and visit the tomb 
of Sarumaru Dayu [a poet]. 

*^ On our way home we break off the cherry branches, 
or gather the red autumn foliage ; we pluck the young 

HOJOKI 155 

shoots of the bracken, or pick up nuts according to the 
season. Some of these are offered to Buddha, and some 
are taken as presents [to my companion's family]. 

^' When on a calm night the moon shines in at my 
window, I think with yearnnig of the men of old, and 
at the cry of the monkeys my sleeve is wetted with tears. 
The fire-flies in the clumps of herbage represent to me 
the fishermen's cressets on the isle of Magi no Shima ; 
the rain at daybreak sounds to me like the leaves when 
fluttered by a stormy gust of wind. When I hear the 
copper pheasant with his cry of ' horo, horo,' I wonder 
whether it is my father or my mother.^ W^hen the stag 
from the mountain top approaches w^ithout shyness, I 
realise how far I am separated from the world. 

"When I first took up my abode in this place, I thought 
it was only for a little while. But five years have passed 
and my temporary hut has become old. Under the 
eaves there is a deep bed of withered leaves, and moss 
has gathered on the earthen floor. When by chance I 
receive news of the capital, I hear of the deaths of many 
men of high rank, while of those of men of low 'degree 
it is impossible to reckon the number. I hear too of 
many houses being destroyed by frequent conflagra- 
tions. But this temporary cabin of mine has remained 
secure and undisturbed. It is small, but at night I have 
a bed to lie upon, in the daytime a mat on which I sit. 
It has all that is needed for the lodging of one person. 

" Buddha has taught mankind not to allow their hearts 
to become enslaved by outward things. Even my love 
for this thatched cabin is to be reckoned a transgres- 

^ Referring to a poem in which the doctrine of transmigration is aUuded to. 

156 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

sion ; even my lying down to quiet rest must be a 
hindrance to piety. How can any one waste precious 
time in a continuous indulgence in useless pleasure ? 
One calm morning I thought long over the reasons of 
this, and asked of my own heart the question — 'The 
object of leaving the world and making companions 
of the hills and woods is to give peace to the mind, 
and to enable us to carry out the practices of religion. 
But though your outward appearance is that of a holy 
man, your heart is steeped in impurity. Your dwelling 
is an unworthy imitation of that of jomyo, but in 
observance you fall behind even Shuri and Bandoku. 
Is this a natural affliction, inseparable from a mean 
condition, or is it due to the disorderly passions of an 
impure heart V To this my heart made no answer. 
A few unbidden invocations of the name of Buddha rose 
to my lips, and then — silence. 

*' Written in my hut at Toyama, the second year of 
Kenriaku (a.d. 12 12), the last day of the third month, 
by me the monk Renin." 1 

Some editions add the following pious Tanka : — 

" The moon is gone — 
A cruel niountain-spitr 
Where late she sho7ie : 
Oh I that i7iy soul had sight 
Of the 7(nfalllng lights 

Chomei is also the author of a collection of short essays 
entitled Mumiosho (" Anonymous Selection "), mostly 
relating to poetical subjects, and of the Shiki (''Four 
Seasons ") Monogatai-iy descriptive of court functions 
throughout the year. 

^ Ch5mei's name as a Buddhist monk. 

IZAYOI NO KI 157 

Several diaries and journals of travel have come down 
to us from the Kamakura period. The Izayoi no Ki is 
the best known of these. It was written by a lady 
called Abutsu, a name which indicates that she had 
taken Buddhist vows. She was a descendant of one of 
the MikadoS; and the widow of a son of the Fujiwara no 
Sadaiye who edited the Hiakunin-is-shiu. The diary was 
composed on a journey which she took to Kamakura 
in 1277 to obtain justice for her son Tamesuke against 
an elder brother by a different mother, who had usurped 
one of the family estates. 

The Izayoi no Ki is a highly sentimental journey in- 
terspersed plentifully with Tanka. The following short 
passage may suffice as a specimen : — 

'' 26th day. We crossed a river, which I believe is 
called the Warashina, and proceeded to the shore of 
Okitsu. I remembered the poem which says, ^the 
moonshine behind me as I took my way with tears.' 
At the place where we made our mid-day halt there 
was a queer litlle pillow of boxwood. I lay down 
quite exhausted, and finding an ink-stone there, wrote, 
as I lay, the following on the paper slides close to my 
pillow : — 

' Twas a?i experience 

Scarce worth remembering. 

Tell it 710 1 to the world, 

O thou cha7ice pilloiv / 

Nor say tJiat I have bou7id 77iyselfP 

JMusubi-okitsn^ which means '' to bind oneself down," 
also contains the name of the place where the author 
was stopping. The verse is obviously composed simply 
for the sake of this pun, and contains no record of 
any actual personal experience. 

158 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

''As it became dusk we passed Kiyomigaseki. The 
waves breaking over the rocks looked as if they were 
clothing them in white robes — a very pretty sight! 

Ye ancie?it rocks 

On the shore of Kiyoini! \ 

A question let me ask of you — 
How many suits have yo7i put on 
Of wet wave-garme?zts ? " 

[''Wet garments" is a metaphorical expression for 
unmerited blame or punishment]. 

" Presently it became dark, and we put up for the 
night in a village in that neighbourhood which stood 
close by the sea. From somewhere near, there came a 
smoke of burning, the smell of which was very noisome. 
It was no doubt caused by something the fishermen 
were doing. It brought to my mind the words, 'the 
rank odours of my nightly lodging.' 

"The wind was very boisterous all night long, and 
the waves seemed breaking in tumult over my pillow." 

The next passage relates to Fujisan. It appears 
from it that in the author's day the smoke from this 
mountain was intermittent. It has long ago quite 
ceased to rise. 

The style of the Izayoi no Ki is very different from 
that of the Gempei Seisuiki or Heike Monogatari. It 
is comparatively free from Chinese elements, and reads 
more like a work of the Heian period. The author 
has evidently taken the Tosa Nikki for her model. 

Abutsu also published a volume of critical essays on 
poetry, called Yo no Tsuru (''The Crane in the Night"), 
and other less important writings. 

The Ben no Naiji Nikki, also by a woman, is a diary 
of incidents which occurred between 1246 and 1252. 

POETRY 159 

Poetry 

The manufacture of Taiika at the court of Kioto con- 
tinued during this period. Several collections of verses 
prepared under official auspices were the result ; but, 
as they contain little which is characteristic, it is need- 
less to dwell updi^ them. The poetry of this time 
deserves mention chiefly as an indication that culture 
was not wholly neglected during what was in the main 
a benighted age. 

It was now that the practice began of making 
anthologies of Tanka consisting of one specimen each 
of one hundred different authors. These are called 
Hiaku-nin-is-sJiiii. The original collection of this kind, 
w^hich contains Tanka from the seventh to the thirteenth 
centuries, is at this day in the hands of every Japanese 
schoolgirl. It was compiled about 1235 by a court 
noble named Sadaiye, one of the great Fujiwara clan, 
which at this time had almost a monopoly of Japanese 
poetry. It has been translated into English by Mr. F. 
V. Dickins. 

A new metre appeared during this period, which 
took the place of the older Naga-uta. It is called 
Ima-yo or '^ present fashion," and consists of alternate 
phrases of seven and live syllables. This arrangement 
is more or less closely approximated to in the poetical 
passages which now begin to occur in prose w^orks. 

Books in Chinese 

The works written in Chinese during the Kamakura 
period bear witness to the general decay of learning. 
They are composed in a species of bad Chinese w^hich 

i6o JAPANESE LITERATURE 

may aptly be compared to the barbarous Latin of the 
Aliddle Ages in Europe. 

The most important is the Adsiima-Kagaini ov *' Mirror 
of the East," a history of Japan from 1180 till 1266. 
Invaluable as a mine of historical information, its literary 
worth is but small. It is one of those dry chronicles 
in which events are jotted down month by month and 
day by day without any attempt to show their con- 
nection. 

BOOK THE FIFTH 

NAMBOKU-CHO (1332-1392) AND MUROMACHI 
^ (1392-1603) PERIODS 

(DARK AGE) 

BOOK THE FIFTH 

NAMBOKU-CHO (1332-1392) AND MUROMACHI 
(1392-1603) PERIODS 

(DARK AGE) 

CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTORY—" JINKOSHOTOKI "— 
"TAIHEIKI'' 

Towards the end of the Kamakura period the mis- 
government of the Hojo regents, who were to the 
Shoguns what the Shoguns had been to the Mikados, was 
the cause of general discontent ; and when a Mikado of 
resolute character came to the throne, the opportunity 
seemed favourable for castmg off the domination of the 
military caste. At the court of Kioto there had always 
been a strong undercurrent of intrigue directed against 
the Shoguns' authority, and that of the regents who ruled 
in their name. The Mikado Go Daigo was the first who 
thought himself strong enough to take bolder measures. 
After a desperate struggle, and many vicissitudes of for- 
tune, his enterprise was partially successful. It resulted 
in the establishment of two Mikados, who reigned simul- 
taneously— one, the creature of the Shoguns, occupying 

the old capital of Kioto ; while the second held his court 

163 

1 64 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

at Yoshino and other places in the province of Yamato, 
and enjoyed a somewhat precarious independence. This 
system, known in Japanese history as the Nam-boku-cho 
(Southern and Northern Courts), was put an end to by 
the reunion of the two Hnes in the person of Go Komatsu 
(1392), after a prolonged series of intestine troubles. A 
new dynasty of Shoguns, the Ashikaga House, was by 
this time established at Muromachi, in Kioto, a place 
which gave its name to the next period of Japanese 
history. It remained in power until 1603, when the 
Shogunate, having again changed hands, was transferred 
a second time to the east of Japan. 

The 270 years covered by these two periods were sin- 
gularly barren of important literature in Japan. One or 
two quasi-historical works, a charming volume of essays, 
and a few hundred short dramatic sketches (the No) are 
all that deserve more than a passing notice. 

''JiNKOSHOTOKi" 

The author of the JinkosJidtdki was a statesman and 
soldier named KiTABATAKE Chikafusa, who acted an 
important part in the civil wars which disturbed Japan 
during the iirst half of the fourteenth century. 

Chikafusa was descended from a prince of the Imperial 
family. He was born in 1293, and held various offices in 
the early part of Go Daigo's reign, but on the death of a 
prince to whom he was attached he shaved his head and 
retired from public life. In 1333, when the Emperor Go 
Daigo returned from the island of Oki, whither he had 
been banished by the Kamakura Government, Chikafusa 
was persuaded again to take office, and distinguished him- 
self greatly in the wars w^hich followed. The eminent 

CHIKAFUSA 165 

services he had rendered to the cause of the Southern 
Court by his sword, his pen, and his counsel, were recog- 
nised in 1 35 1 by the highest honours which his sovereign 
could bestow. He died a few years later. 

The Jinkoshotoki is Chikafusa's principal work. His 
object in writing it is indicated by the title, which 
means '' History of the True Succession of the Divine 
Monarchs." It was composed in order to show that the 
Mikados of the Southern Court, whose minister he was, 
were the rightful sovereigns of Japan. This explains the 
prominence which he gives to m^atters affecting the 
authenticity of the Alikado's claims to the throne, such 
as the history of the regalia, genealogies, questions of 
disputed succession, and the like. 

It was written in the reign of Go Murakami (i339-i34S)« 
The first of the six volumes of which it consists is purely 
mythical. It begins literally ab ovo with the egg-shaped 
chaotic mass from which heaven and earth were deve- 
loped. Then we have an account of the creation of Japan 
by the male and female deities Izanagi and Izanami, taken 
partly from the Nihongi^ but mixed up with Chinese 
philosophy and Indian mythical cosmography in the 
strangest manner. The descent of the Mikados from the 
Sun-goddess, who in Japan is the daughter of the divine 
creator pair, is then traced with due attention through a 
series of deities down to Jimmu Tenno, who is reckoned 
the first human sovereign of Japan. 

The next four volumes are a resume, necessarily brief 
and meagre, of the history of Japan from Jimmu Tenno 
(who came to the throne, according to the ordinary 
Japanese chronology, in B.C. 660) down to the accession 
ot Fushimi in A.D. 1288. 

The sixth volume deals with the historv of Chikafusa's 

i66 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

own time. It is very disappointing. Although the writer 
and his sons took a prominent part in the fighting and 
pohtics of their da}^ Chikafusa has not thought proper to 
give more than a short and bald account of the events in 
which he was a principal actor. Most of this volume is 
taken up with dissertations on the principles of govern- 
ment, which, however necessary for a comprehension of 
the motives and ideas of Japanese statesmen under the 
old regime, are not very interesting to the European 
reader. 

By his own countrymen Chikafusa has been much 
lauded as an exponent of the Chinese type of political 
philosophy. Even modern critics bestow on him a lavish 
praise which to us seems hardly deserved. His writings 
certainly contain evidences of statesman-like capacity, as 
for example his condemnation of sinecures and mortmain 
grants to ecclesiastical foundations ] and if there is also 
much that we are inclined to set down as mere platitudes, 
it is fair to remember that Chikafusa was the first Japanese 
writer who attempted to apply philosophical principles 
to actual politics, and that what seems trite to us may 
have appeared novel and striking to contemporary 
readers. 

The style of the Jinkdshdtdki is simple and unpreten- 
tious. Its value as literature is small in proportion to the 
political influence which it has exercised. Not only was 
the cause of which the author was a devoted champion 
substantially furthered by its publication, but it has also 
left its mark on later times. Chikafusa's patriotic senti- 
ments and his loyalty to the de jure sovereign of his 
country had a large share, directly, or filtered down 
through the works of writers who derived their inspira- 
tion from him, in forming the public feeling and opinion 

CHIKAFUSA 167 

which led to the restoration of the Mikado's power in our 
own day. 

He is one of the few writers of this class who do not 
indulge in Tanka. 

The following extracts will give some idea of the quality 
of Chikafusa's political reasonings : — 

'^ Great Yamato is a divine country. It is only our 
land whose foundations were first laid by the divine 
ancestor. It alone has been transmitted by the Sun 
Goddess to a long line of her descendants. There is 
nothing of this kind in foreign countries. Therefore it 
is called the divine land." 

'' It IS only our country which, from the time that 
heaven and earth were first unfolded until this very day, 
has preserved the succession to the throne intact in one 
single family. Even when, as sometimes naturally hap- 
pened, it descended to a lateral branch, it was held in 
accordance with just principles. This shows that the 
august oath of the gods [to preserve the succession] is 
ever renewed in a way which distinguishes Japan from 
all other countries." 

^' There are matters in the way of the gods [the Shinto 
religion] w^hich it is difficult to expound. Nevertheless, 
if we do not know the origin of things, the result is 
necessarily confusion. To remedy this evil I have jotted 
down a few observations showing how the succession 
from the age of the gods has been governed by reason, 
and have taken no pains to produce an ordinary history. 
This work may therefore be entitled ' History of the True 
Succession of Divine Monarchs.'" 

^'The man devotes himself to husbandry, providing 

1 68 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

food for himself and others, and thus warding off hunger ; 
the woman attends to spinning, thereby clothing herself 
and also making others warm. These may seem mean 
offices, but it is on them that the structure of human 
society rests. They are in accordance with the seasons 
of heaven, and depend on the benefits drawn from 
earth. 

^' Others are skilled in deriving gain from commerce ; 
while others, again, prefer the practice of the mechanic 
arts, or have the ambition to become officials. These 
are what are called the ^ four classes of the people.' 

*^Of officials there are two classes — the civil and the 
military. The method of the civil official is to remain 
at home and reason upon the right way, wherein, if he 
attains to lucidity, he may rise to be a Minister of State. 
It is the business of the soldier, on the other hand, to 
render service in warlike expeditions, wherein, if he g::ins 
fame, he may become a general. Therefore these two 
professions ought not to be neglected for a moment. It 
has been said, ^ In times of civil disorder, arms are placed 
to the right and letters to the left ; in peace, letters are 
put to the right and arms to the left.' " 

" It is the duty of every man born on the Imperial soil 
to yield devoted loyalty to his sovereign, even to the sacri- 
fice of his own life. Let no one suppose for a moment 
that there is any credit due to him for so doing. Never- 
theless, in order to stimulate the zeal of those who come 
after, and in loving memory of the dead, it is the business 
of the ruler to grant rewards in such cases [to the chil- 
dren]. Those who are in an inferior position should not 
enter into rivalry with them. Still more should those 
who have done no specially meritorious service abstain 

CHIKAFUSA 169 

from inordinate ambitions. It is a truly blessed principle 
to observe the rut of the chariot which has preceded, at 
whatever risk to our own safety [that is, a conservative 
policy should be maintained at all hazards]." 

'' I have already touched in several places on the prin- 
ciples of statesmanship. They are based on justice and 
mercy, in the dispensing of which firm action is requisite. 
Such is the clear instruction vouchsafed to us by Ten- 
shodaijin [the Sun Goddess]. Firm action is displayed in 
various ways. Firstly, in the choice of men for official 
positions. Japan and China both agree that the basis of 
good government consists in the sovereign finding the 
right man and bestow^ing his favour on him. Secondly, 
in excluding private motives from the distribution of 
appointments to provinces and districts. This should be 
done on grounds of reason only. Thirdly, firm action is 
shown in the reward of merit and the punishment of 
crime. By this means encouragement is given to virtue, 
and wickedness is repressed. If any of these three things 
is neglected, we have what is called bad government." 

'' Sinecures and jobbery in the matter of promotions 
are steps tow^ards the downfall of the State, and fatal to 
the permanence of the royal office." 

Another w^ork by Chikafusa is the Gengenshiu^ in eight 
volumes. It contains a resume of the myths which are 
articles of the Shinto faith. 

Like the linkdshotdkt, the celebrated work named 
Taiheiki is a history of the attempts of the Mikado Go 
Daigo to shake off" the domination of the '' Eastern Bar- 
barians," as the Kamakura Shoguns and their adherents 

lyo JAPANESE LITERATURE 

were called, and of the civil wars arising out of these 
enterprises which distracted Japan for more than forty 
years. 

The edition entitled TaiJieiki Somoku has an introduc- 
tion purporting to relate the circumstances under which 
this work was compiled, on the authority of a '^tradition/' 
the sources of which are unknown to us. Begun, it is 
said, at the nistance of the Mikado Go Daigo, by a 
priest named Genye, it was continued by other priests 
at various times, until its completion in 1382. These 
writers, we are told, based their narratives on infor- 
mation obtained directly from the Shogun Takauji, 
Nitta Yoshisada, Kusunoki Masashige, and other chief 
actors in the political events of the day. Recent inves- 
tigation, however, seems to show that the author was 
really a priest named KojiMA, probably belonging to one 
of the three thousand monasteries of Hiyeisan, who died 
in 1374, but of whom nothing further is known. If this 
be correct, either the former account is an imposture, of 
which there are not a few in the literary annals of Japan, 
or Kojima may have utilised materials collected in the 
manner just described. Internal evidence points to the 
Taiheiki being j;he work of one person who wrote some 
time after the events related, and who owed much more 
to his imagination than to direct communication with the 
heroes of his story. 

It begins with a sketch of the history of the Shogunate 
from its foundation by Yoritomo in 1181, and then goes 
on to describe the political condition of Japan at the 
accession of Go Daigo in 13 19. The events of this reign, 
which ended in 1339, ^^^ given in considerable detail, 
and the work is continued to the close of the reign of Go 
Murakami (1368). 

TAIHEIKI 171 

The Taiheiki, as it has come down to us, contains 
several chapters which have little or nothing to do with 
the general plan of the work, and look very like inter- 
polations by some later writer. Such are the chapters 
on '^ Rebellions in Japan," on the conquest of Yamato by 
Jimmu Tenno, on the Corean expedition of Jingo Kogu, 
and on the Mongol invasion of Japan by Kublai Khan. 
The addenda in the Somoku edition form, of course, no 
part of the original work. 

Taiheiki or '^ Record of Great Peace " is a strange 
name for the history of one of the most disturbed 
periods that Japan has ever passed through. It presents 
a succession of intrigues, treasons, secret conspiracies, 
and open warfare, with w^holesale sentences of death or 
banishment. This w^as not, however, the original name 
of the w^ork. It was at first called Anki Yuraiki or 
"Record of the Causes of Peace and Danger." Another 
name for it was Kokiika Jiranki, or '^ Record of the Cure 
of Civil Disturbance in the State." These last titles rather 
suggest a philosophical history. But the Taiheiki is very 
much the reverse of this. It is clearly the work, not of 
a statesman or philosopher, but of a literary man intent 
on producing an ornate and romantic story. So long as 
this end is attained, fact and fiction are to him very much 
alike. It is difficult to say which predominates in his 
narrative. He is notoriously inaccurate in such matters 
as numbers, dates, and genealogies ; but that is nothing to 
the way in which he embroiders his accounts of sieges 
and battles wath details that cannot possibly have been 
handed down by eye-witnesses, and to the dreams, 
portents, and miraculous occurrences with which his 
story abounds. There are also numerous speeches, 
apparently adapted by him to the speaker and the 

172 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

occasion, but which, Hke those in Thucydides, have 
nevertheless a certain historical value. The serious way 
in which the commentators treat the Taiheikis frequent 
excursions into the land of romance is not a little 
amusing. 

The style of Kojima (if he is the author) has been 
condemned by native critics as inflated and pedantic. 
It" must be admitted that there is not a little truth in 
these charges. The TaiJieiki supplies abundant evidence 
of his erudition and command of all the resources of 
Chinese and Japanese rhetoric. His pages at times are 
highly charged with Chinese words and phrases, and 
fairly bristle with Chinese historical allusions and 
quotations. In this style of writing, a ^' bamboo grove " 
means a family of princes, a '' pepper court " is put for 
the Imperial harem, *^ cloud guests" stand for courtiers, 
the Mikado's carriage is termed the '' Phoenix Car," and 
his face the '^ Dragon Countenance." A fair lady is said 
to put to shame Mao Ts'iang and Si She, famous beauties 
of Chinese antiquity. Civil war is a time when '^ wolf- 
smoke obscures the heaven, and whale-waves shake the 
earth." Kojima does not hesitate even to insert long 
episodes of Chinese and Indian history which present 
some resemblance to the events which he is describing, 
especially if they lend themselves to romantic treatment. 

Still more trying to the ordinary Western reader than 
his ostentatious display of Chinese learning is the 
Buddhist theology in which Kojima was plainly well 
versed, and of which there is more than enough in the 
Taiheiki. Students of the history of religion, however, 
will find this feature of the work interesting. Kojima is 
a typical case which illustrates the national propensity 
for compromise and arrangement in matters of faith. In 

TAIHEIKI 173 

the Taiheiki he makes an attempt to reconcile three 
essentially conflicting systems, viz., Chinese philosophy, 
Shinto mythology, and Buddhism, including with the 
latter the older Indian myths which found their way to 
Japan in its company. Thus in a passage near the end 
of Book XVI. he describes the Yin and Yang (the 
negative and positive principles of nature according to 
the Chinese) as the origin and source of all things. 
These two elements by their mutual interaction evolve 
Izanagi and Izanami, the creator deities of the Shinto 
Pantheon. Their child Tenshodaijin (the Sun Goddess) 
proves to be a manifestation of Buddha, one of whose 
services to humanity was at some far remote period to 
subdue the '^ Evil Kings of the Six Heavens " of Indian 
myth, and compel them to withdraw their opposition to 
the spread of the true doctrine (that is, Buddhism) in 
Japan. 

Kojima, however, does not always dravv' his inspiration 
from China or from theology. Like the Heike Monoga- 
tari, the Taiheiki contains a number of highly poetical 
passages which owe nothing to foreign models or ideas. 
In metre they resemble Naga-uta, except that the order 
of the alternation of five and seven syllable phrases is 
reversed. Words of Chinese origin are not wholly 
excluded. One of these passages describes the enforced 
journey of Toshimoto, an adherent of the Mikado Go 
Daigo, to Kamakura, where he was executed for treason 
to the Shogunate ; and another, that of the same Mikado, 
to an exile in the island of Oki. The names of places 
along the route are ingeniously woven into the narrative 
in such a way as to suggest reflections suitable to the 
circumstances. This feature of the TTz/Z/^'/ZV has had an 
enormous influence on the work of the dramatists and 

174 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

novelists of the Yedo period, as is shown by the nume- 
rous direct imitations of the passages just described 
(known as michiyuki or "journeys"), and by the 
rhythmical swing of the alternation of seven and five 
syllable phrases, due to its example, which pervades so 
much of the subsequent popular literature, 

Europeans who propose to take up the study of the 
Taiheiki will be glad to learn that there still remains a 
good deal of straightforward, business-like narrative, 
which, though not without occasional florid phrases 
and picturesque touches, is laudably free from recondite 
allusions and obscure metaphors, perplexing to the un- 
learned, and condemned as pedantic even by those who 
understand them. 

The language of the Taiheiki is very different from 
that of the writings of the Heian period. Simpler 
forms are substituted for the older, more elaborate 
grammatical structure, and the vocabulary is enriched 
by the accession of a vast number of Chinese words, 
which no longer, as formerly, are only admitted to 
the literature after a time of probation in the collo- 
quial speech, but are taken straight from Chinese 
books. 

The importance of the Taiheiki in the history of 
Japanese literature is far greater than its intrinsic merits 
would lead us to expett. More than any other work 
it is the foundation of the modern literary style, and 
its good and bad qualities generally are reflected in 
the writings of a host of imitators, direct or indirect. 

The events and personages which it describes are 
the themes of a very large share of the modern litera- 
ture of Japan, and allusions to it are continually met 
with. Its popularity is further testified to by the fact 

TAIHEIKI 175 

that there sprang up at Yedo and Kioto a distinct 
class of professors who earned a hving by giving Tai- 
Jieiki readings. They correspond to the biwa-bonzes 
who chanted the Heike Monogatari. 

The following is an account of a battle between the 
Shogun's adherents and the monks of Hiyeisan, who 
had for once espoused the Mikado's cause. It was 
fought near Karazaki, on the shore of Lake Biwa. This 
passage may serve as a specimen, as it was probably 
the model, of innumerable similar combats in Japanese 
literature : — 

^'When Kaito saw this, 'The enemy are few,' he 
cried. 'We must disperse them before the rear comes 
up. Follow me, my lads.' With these words he drew 
his 3 feet 6 inch sword, and holding up his armed 
left sleeve as an arrow guard, rushed midmost into 
the whirl of the expectant foe. Three of them he 
laid low. Then retiring to the beach of the lake, 
he rallied to him his followers. Now when Kwai- 
jitsu, a monk of Okamoto, descried him from afar, he 
kicked over — ^ Kappa!' — the shield which he had set up 
before him, and with his 2 feet 8 inch bill revolving 
like a water-wheel, sprang forward to attack him. 
Kaito received the stroke w^ith his armed left sleeve, 
while with his right he aimed a blow at the skull-piece 
of his adversary's helmet, meaning to split it fair in 
twain. But his sword glanced off obliquely to the 
shoulder-plate, and thence downwards to the cross- 
stitched rim of his epaulierCy doing no harm. In 
endeavouring to repeat the blow he used such force 
that his left stirrup-leather broke, and he was on the 
point of falling from his horse. He recovered his 
seat, but as he was doing so Kwaijitsu thrust forw^ard 

176 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

the shaft of his bill so that the point entered Kaito's 
helmet from below two or three times in succession. 
Nor did he fail in his aim. Kait5, stabbed through 
the windpipe, fell headlong from his horse. Kwaijitsu 
presently placed his foot on the depending tassel of 
Kaito's armour, and seizing him by the hair, drew it 
towards him, while he cut off his head, which he then 
fixed on the end of his bill. ^ A good beginning ! I 
have slain a general of the military faction,' he ex- 
claimed joyously, with a mocking laugh. Whilst he 
was standing thus, a boy of about fifteen or sixteen, 
with his hair still bound up in 'Chinese-ring' fashion, 
wearing a corselet of the colour of brewer's grains, his 
trousers tucked up high at the side, came out from 
among the onlookers, and drawing a small gold-mounted 
sword, rushed at Kwaijitsu and smote him vigorously 
three or four times on the skull-piece of his helmet. 
Kwaijitsu turned sharply, but seeing a child of twice 
eight years, with painted eyebrows and blackened teeth, 
thought that to cut down a boy of this age would be 
a piece of cruelty unbecoming his priestly condition. 
To avoid killing him he made numerous dashes, re- 
peatedly flourishing his weapon over him. It then 
occurred to Kwaijitsu to knock the sword out of the 
boy's hands with the shaft of his bill and seize him in 
his arms ; but while he was trying to do so, some of 
the party of the Hiyei cross-roads approached by a 
narrow path between the rice-fields, and an arrow shot 
by one of them transfixed the lad's heart so that he 
fell dead upon the spot. Upon inquiry it was found 
that this was Kaito's eldest son Karawakamaru. For- 
bidden by his father to take part in the fight, he was 
discontented, and mixing with the crowd of spectators, 

TAIHEIKI 177 

had followed after. Though a child, he was a born 
soldier, and when he saw his father slain he too fell 
lighting on the same battlefield, leaving a name behind. 
Alas, the pity of it ! 

''When Kaito's retainers saw this, they felt that after 
having their chieftain and his son killed before their 
eyes, and, what was still worse, their heads taken by 
the enemy, none of them ought to return home alive. 
Thirty-six of them, bridle to bridle, made an onrush, 
each more eager than the other to fall fighting, and 
make a pillow of his lord's dead body. Kwaijitsu, 
seeing this, laughed out, 'Ha! ha! There is no 
understanding you fellows,' he exclaimed. ' You ought 
to be thinking of taking the heads of enemies instead 
of guarding the heads of your own people. This is 
an omen of the ruin of the military power. If you 
want the head you can have it.' So saying, he flung 
the head of Kaito into the midst of the foe, and witli 
downward-sweeping blows in the Okamoto style, cleared 
a space in all directions." 

The next specimen of Kojima's style is from an account 
of the arrest of Toshimoto, one of the Mikado Go Daigo's 
principal advisers, on a charge of conspiracy against the 
Shogunate. 

''On the nth day of the seventh month he was 
arrested and taken to Rokuwara [the residence of the 
Shogun's representative at Kioto], and was despatched 
thence to the eastern provinces. He set out on his 
journey, well knowing that the law allowed no pardon for 
a second offence of this kind, and that whatever he might 
plead in his defence he would not be released. Either 
he would be done away with on the journey, or he would 
be executed at Kamakura. No other end was possible." 

i;8 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

(Then, without any warning of type or otherwise, there 
follows a passage which in metre, diction, and sentiment 
IS essentially poetry. It is not very original, however, 
much of it consisting of scraps of verse supplied by the 
author's memory from older writers.) 

" But one night more and a strange lodgmg would be his, 
Far from Kadono, where in spring his steps had often wandered 

in the S710W of the fallen cherry -flowers j 
Far fro7n Arashiyama^ wheiice on an aittumn eve he was wont to 

return clad in the brocade of the red maple leaves — 
Despondent^ his mind could think of 7tothing but his home, bou7id 

to hi77i by the strongest ties of love, 
And of his wife a7id childre7i, whose future 7vas dark to hi77i. 
' For the last tii7ie^ he thought, as lie looked back 07i the 7iinefold 

l77iperial city, 
For 77iany a year his wo7tted habitation. 
How sad /lis heart 7nust have been witlii7i hi77i 
As he set out 07i this u7ilooked-f or journey ! 
His sleeve wet i7i the fountai7t of the barrier of Osaka — 
No barrier, alas / to stay his sorrow — 
He sets forth over the 77iountai7i track to Uchide'^ 7io ha77ia, 
Whe7if7'077i the shore he cast his gla7ice afar over the waveP 

Here the author becomes so involved in ingenious 
punning combinations of the names of places on the 
route with the thread of his story that it is impossible to 
follow him in a translation. 

The following is one of the extraneous chapters of the 
TaiJieiki. It describes in a very imaginative fashion the 
famous Mongol invasion of Japan by Kublai Khan in the 
thirteenth century of our era. 

" Poring over the records of ancient times, in the lei- 
sure afforded me by the three superfluous things [night, 
winter, and rain], I find that since the Creation there have 
been seven invasions of Japan by foreign countries. The 

^ Ucliide means '' to set forth," and hauia, " shore." 

TAIHEIKI 179 

most notable of these attacks were in the periods Bunyei 
(1264- 1275) and Koan (i 278-1288). At this time the 
Great Yuan Emperor [Kublai Khan] had conquered by 
force of arms the four hundred provinces of China. 
Heaven and earth were oppressed by his power. Hard 
would it have been for a small country like our own to 
repel him, and that it w^as able easily and without effort 
to destroy the armies of Great Yuan was due to naught 
else but the divine blessing. 

^^The plan of this expedition was as follows : General 
Wan, the leader of the Yuan force, having estimated the 
area of the five metropolitan provinces of Japan at 3700 ri 
square, calculated that to fill this space with soldiers so as 
to leave no part of it unoccupied would require an army 
of 3,700,000 men. So he set forth from the various 
ports and bays with his troops embarked in a fleet of 
more than 70,000 great ships. Our Government, having 
had previous information of this design, ordered pre- 
parations to be made. The forces of Shikoku and 
Kiushiu were directed to assemble in all haste at Hakata, 
in Tsukushi ; those of the western provinces of the main 
island hurried to the capital ; while the men of Tosando 
and of the northern provinces occupied the port of Tsu- 
ruga, in Echizen. 

"Thereupon the warships of Great Yuan, 70,000 in 
number, arrived together at the port of Hakata on the 
third day of the eighth month of the second year of 
Bunyei (1265). Their great vessels were lashed together, 
and gangways laid across from one to another. Every 
division was surrounded by screens of oilcloth ; their 
weapons were set up in regular array. From the Goto 
Islands eastward as far as Hakata the sea was enclosed 
on all sides for 400 ri, a of and sudden became dry land. 

i8o JAPANESE LITERATURE 

One wondered whether a sea-serpent vapour had not 
been belched out and formed a mirage. 

^'On the Japanese side a camp was constructed ex- 
tending for thirteen ri along the beach of Hakata. A 
high stone embankment formed its front, precipitous on 
the side of the enemy, but so arranged in the rear as to 
allow free movement for our troops. In the shelter of this, 
plastered walls were erected, and barracks constructed, 
in which several tens of thousands of men were lodged in 
due order. It was thought that in this way the enemy 
would be unable to ascertain our numbers. But on the 
bows of the hostile ships, beams like those used for rais- 
ing water from wells were set up to a height of several 
hundred feet, at the ends of which platforms were placed. 
Men seated on these were able to look down into the 
Japanese camp and count every hair's end. Moreover, 
they chained together planks forty or fifty feet wide 
so as to form a sort of rafts, which, when laid on the 
surface of the water, provided a number of level roads 
over the waves, like the three great thoroughfares or 
the twelve main streets [of Kioto]. By these roads the 
enemy's cavalry appeared in many tens of thousands, 
and fought so desperately that our troops relaxed their 
ardour, and many of them had thoughts of retreat. When 
the drum was beaten, and a hand-to-hand contest was 
already engaged, iron balls, like footballs, were let ffy 
from things called ^cannon' [with a sound] like cart- 
wheels rolling down a steep declivity, and accompanied 
by flashes like lightning. Two or three thousand of these 
were let go at once. Most of the Japanese troops were 
burnt to death, and their gates and turrets set fire to. 
There was no opportunity of putting out the flames. 

'* When the men of Upper Matsura and L.^wer Matsura 

TAIHEIKI i8i 

saw this, they felt that ordinary measures would be use- 
less, so they made a circuit by way of another bay, and, 
with only looo men, ventured on a night attack. But 
however brave they might be, they were no more than 
one hair upon a bull or one grain of rice in a granary. 
Attacking with so small a force, they slew several tens of 
thousands of the enemy, but in the end were all made 
prisoners. They were bound with cruel cords, and their 
hands nailed to the bulwarks of the line of vessels. 

" No further resistance was possible. All the men of 
Kiushiu fled to Shikoku and the provinces north of the 
Inland Sea, The whole Japanese nation was struck with 
panic, and knew not what to do. Visits to the shrines of 
the Shinto gods, and public and secret services in the 
Buddhist temples, bowed down the Imperial mind and 
crushed the Imperial liver and gall-bladder. Imperial 
messengers were despatched with offerings to all the 
gods of heaven and earth, and all the Buddhist temples 
of virtue to answer prayer, great and small alike, through- 
out the sixty provinces. On the seventh day, when the 
Imperial devotions were completed, from Lake Suwa 
there arose a cloud of many colours, in shape like a great 
serpent, which spread away towards the west. The doors 
of the Temple-treasury of Hachiman flew open, and the 
skies were filled with a sound of galloping horses and of 
ringing bits. In the twenty-one shrines of Yoshino the 
brocade-curtained mirrors moved, the swords in the 
Temple-treasury put on a sharp edge, and all the shoes 
offered to the god turned towards the west. At Sumi- 
yoshi sweat poured from below the saddles of the four 
horses sacred to the deities, and the iron shields turned 
of themselves and faced the enemy in a line." 
(Many more similar wonders follow.) 
13 

182 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

^' Now General Wan of Great Yuan, having cast off the 
moorings of his 70,000 ships, at the hour of the dragon 
on the seventeenth day of the eighth month started for 
Nagato and Suwo by way of Moji and Al^amagaseki 
[Shimonoseki]. His fleet were midway on their course 
when the weather, which had been windless, with the 
clouds at rest, changed abruptly. A mass of black clouds 
arising from the north-east covered the sky, the wind 
blew fiercely, the tumultuous billows surged up to 
heaven, the thunder rolled and the lightning dashed 
against the ground so abundantly that it seemed as if 
great mountains were crumbling down and high heaven 
falling to the earth. The 70,000 warships of the foreign 
pirates either struck upon cragged reefs and were broken 
to atoms, or whirling round in the surging eddies, went 
down with all hands. 

^' Nevertheless, General Wan alone was neither driven 
of^ by the storm nor buried beneath the waves, but flew 
aloft and stood in the calm seclusion of the middle heaven. 
Here he was met by a sage named RyoTo-bin, who came 
soaring from the west. He addressed General Wan as 
follows: ^The gods of heaven and the gods of earth of 
the entire country of Japan, 3700 shrines or more, have 
raised this evil wind and made the angry billows surge 
aloft. Human power cannot cope with them. I advise 
you to embark at once in your one shattered ship and 
return to your own country.' General Wan was per- 
suaded. He embarked in the one shattered ship which 
remained, braved all alone the waves of 10,000 ri of ocean, 
and presently arrived at the port of Mingchu [in China]." 

The word rendered ^'cannon" is teppo^ lit. "iron tube." 
It properly means a matchlock. But according to the 
encyclopaedia called the Sansaidznye, neither cannon nor 

TAIHEIKI 183 

matchlocks were known to the Chinese before the six- 
teenth century. Matchlocks were first introduced into 
Japan by Mendez Pinto and his companions in 1543, and 
were not known to the Chinese until later. The inference 
is that this passage, and probably the whole chapter, is a 
later interpolation. 

It is perhaps necessary to remind the reader that there 
is a nucleus of fact hidden among all this fictitious em- 
broidery. Kublai Khan did send a large fleet against 
Japan about the time stated, which met with a fate 
similar to that of the Spanish Armada prepared for the 
conquest of England. 

CHAPTER II 

KENKO AND THE *«TSURE-DZURE-GUSA"i 

If there are many arid wastes in Japanese literature, 
there are also some pleasant oases, and of these the 
Tsure-dzure-gusa is surely one of the most delightful. 
It is a collection of short sketches, anecdotes, and 
essays on all imaginable subjects, something in the 
manner of Selden's Table Talk. The author is known 
to us as Kenko-boshi, bdshi being an honorific epithet 
something like our Reverend. He was a man of good 
family, and traced his descent through various dis- 
tinguished personages from the Shinto deity Kogane 
no Mikoto. For many years in the service of the 
Mikado Go Uda no In, his writings show an intimate 
acquaintance with the ways and customs of the Im- 
perial palace. On the death of his master in 1324, 
Kenko became a Buddhist monk, and retired from 
public life, spending the remainder of his days in 
various secluded spots in the neighbourhood of Kioto. 
The date of his death is not positively known, but 
there is nothing improbable in the statement that he 
died in 1350, in his sixty-eighth year. 

Very contradictory views of his character have been 
taken by native writers. Some call him a profligate, 
unscrupulous, common priest, and quote an old scandal 

^ Translated by Rev. C. S. Eby, in the Chrysa7itheiniiiii, vol. iii. 
184 

TSURE-DZURE-GUSA 1 8 5 

told in the Taiheiki, of his writing for Ko no Moronao 
the letters which he addressed to the wife of Yenya 
Hangwan urging his adulterous suit. But the TaiJieiki 
is a very dubious authority, and there are other reasons 
for questioning the truth of this story. Kenko's ad- 
mirers maintain that he was a truly pious man. 

Judging from his writings, there would appear to have 
been two personalities in Kenko, the shrewd, polished, 
and somewhat cynical man of the world, and the 
Buddhist devotee, the former element of his character 
having a decided preponderance. His religion was to 
all appearance sincere, but was certainly not profound- 
Like Horace, whom he much resembles in character, 
he had his pious moods, but was very far indeed from 
being a saint. A professor of the Tendai sect of 
Buddhism, he has much to say, and says it well, of 
the uncertainty of life, the folly of ambition and 
money-getting, and the necessity for putting away the 
lusts of this wicked world and preparing betimes for 
eternity. But the old Adam is never far off. His 
unregenerate nature is not to be suppressed, and gives 
evidence of its existence ever and anon in passages 
which his devout admirers would willingly forget. 

His religion was not of that robust kind which thrives 
amid the cares and distractions of the world, and by 
wiiich ordinary life may be made '' a perfumed altar- 
flame." He has left on record his opinion (which is 
indeed a commonplace of the sect to which he be- 
longed) that true piety is impossible except in seclu- 
sion from the world. The quiet of his own hermitage 
having once been disturbed by the visit of a hunting 
party, he composed a poem complaining that the world 
pursued him even there, and changed his abode to a 

1 86 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

still more remote locality. But with all his precau- 
tions he never attained to Nirvana, if by that term we 
are to understand the holy calm of mind which is the 
result of long-continued meditation on divine things. 

The name Kenko, which he selected when he became 
a monk, is characteristic of his spiritual condition. He 
retained the two Chinese characters with which his 
lay name Kaneyoshi is written, simply altering the 
pronunciation to something which with a little good- 
will might be allowed to stand for a Buddhist priestly 
designation. This is much as if a man named Oliver 
were to enter religion as '' Brother Oliverus," instead 
of adopting a saint's name from the calendar. 

There is much self-revelation in Kenko's writings. 
The personality w-hich they portray is not a wholly 
lovable one. There is something wrong about the man 
who abhorred matrimony (not that celibacy and chastity 
w^ere with him convertible terms), thought children 
a mistake, and declared that after forty life was not 
worth hving. The following anecdote, which he him- 
self relates, throws some light on his curiously mixed 
character : — 

" Even men from whom we should not expect much 
feeling sometimes say a good thing. A certain wild 
savage of terrible appearance, meeting a neighbour, 
asked him, had he any children. ' Not one,' was the 
reply. ' Then you cannot know^ the Ah-ness of things, 
and your doings must be with a heart devoid of feel- 
ing.' This is a very fearful saying. It is no doubt 
true that by children men become conscious of the 
Ah-ness of all things. Without the path of the natural 
affections how should there be any sentiment in the 
hearts of such persons?" 

TSURE-DZURE-GUSA 187 

To know the Ah-ness of things {inono no aware wo 
shiru) IS a phrase which is constantly recurnng in 
Japanese hterature, especially during the classical period. 
The learned critic Motoori discusses it at great length 
in his treatise on the nature of poetry entitled ho no 
Kami Shi-shiikii-gen. It means to have a sensitive, 
emotional nature, the cmir sensible of the French, and 
applies more particularly to a capacity for receiving 
the impressions produced on man by Nature in her 
various moods. 

Kenko would doubtless have spurned the idea that 
for an accomplished gentleman, scholar, and poet like 
himself paternity was necessary in order to awaken 
the emotional sensibilities, though in the case of '' such 
persons" as the rude peasant of his story this might 
very well be the case. 

The followers of the various forms of religion and 
ethics practised in Japan have all claimed Kenko as 
a teacher of their own set of doctrines. It is true 
that although he is in the main a Buddhist, he had, 
with the liberal comprehensiveness characteristic of the 
Japanese nation, more than a mere tolerance for other 
faiths. He not only showed a reverence for the Shinto 
deities, but was a profound student of the Confucian 
moral philosophy, and even of Taoism, that mass of vague 
speculations attributed to Laotze and his disciple Chwang- 
tze. But it is a mistake to regard him as a partisan of 
any particular creed, or as a moral teacher at all. He 
tells us. himself in the opening sentences of (he Ts2(re- 
dzure-gnsa that it was written to while away the live-long 
days of tedium (tsure-dzure), sitting with his ink-slab 
before him, and jotting down all manner of trifles as 
they presented themselves to his mind. If one of his 

1 88 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

latest editors is correct, it was not even written for publi- 
cation, but was collected after his death uito its present 
form by some unknown person. 

Kenko was a lover of antiquity, whether in the shape 
of old works of art, the old customs and forms of speech 
which lingered (and still linger) about the Mikado's palace, 
or old books. He speaks in terms of special admira- 
tion of the Genji Monogatari and the Makura Zoshiy on 
which his own style was evidently modelled. It contrasts 
strongly with the idiom charged with Chinese vocables, 
metaphors, and allusions, which in his day had well-nigh 
supplanted the old Japanese of the Heian period. Kenko, 
in a word, is a belated classic. He has no objection to a 
useful Chinese word or an apt illustration from Chinese 
history, but his purer taste rejects the pompous plati- 
tudes and pedantic show of learning w^hich too often 
disfigure the works of imitators of Chinese models. His 
essays read like the conversation of a polished man of 
the world, and have that appearance of simplicity and 
ease of expression w^hich is in reality the result of 
consummate art. 

Those who wish to enter on the study of the older 
Japanese literature cannot make a better choice than the 
Tsure-dziire-gusa. It is not so difficult as the Genji Mono- 
gatari or the Makiira Zoshiy and the new edition called 
the Tsure-dzure-giisa Kogi affords every help in the way 
of explanation to those who have made sufficient pro- 
gress in Japanese to avail themselves of it. The lover of 
curious books w^ill prefer the quaint old block-printed 
editions of 1672 and 1688, both of which have numerous 
notes. 

Kenko had a high reputation as a writer of Tanka. He 
was one of the ''Four Heavenly Kings" (a phrase bor- 

TSURE-DZURE-GUSA 1 89 

rowed from Indian mythology), as the four chief poets 
of his day were termed. Fortunately, most students of 
Japanese will say, the exercise of Kenko's poetic talent 
has been diverted into other channels. The Tsure-dzure- 
gusa is not besprinkled with Tanka. 

Some Extracts from the "Tsure-dzure-gusa" 

'^ When I was eight years of age, I asked my father, 
'What sort of thing is a Buddha?' He replied, ^A 
Buddha is something which a man grows into.' ^ How 
then does one become a Buddha ? ' said I. ' By the teach- 
ings of a Buddha.' ^ But who taught the Buddha who 
gives us this teaching ? ' ^ He becomes a Buddha by the 
teaching of another Buddha who was before him.' ^ Then 
what sort of a Buddha was that first Buddha of all who 
began teaching ? ' My father was at an end of his answers, 
and replied, laughing, ^ I suppose he must have flown 
down from the sky or sprung up from the ground.' He 
used to tell his friends this conversation, much to their 
amusement." 

'^ However accomplished a man may be, without gal- 
lantry he is a very lonely being. Such a one reminds me 
of a costly wine-cup that has no bottom." 

^'That man is to be envied whose mind is fixed on 
futurity, and to whom the way of Buddha is familiar." 

"What strikes men's eyes most of all in a woman is the 
beauty of her hair. Her quality and disposition may be 
gathered from the manner of her speech, even though a 
screen be interposed. There are occasions too when her 
very posture when seated leads a man's heart astray. 
Then, until his hopes are realised, he bears patiently 
what is not to be borne, regardless even of his life. It is 

I90 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

only love which can do this. Deep indeed are the roots 
of passion, and remote its sources. It is possible to put 
awa}^ from us all the other lusts of this wicked world. 
But this one alone it is very hard to eradicate. Old and 
young, wise and foolish, all are alike its slaves. There- 
fore it has been said that with a cord twined of a woman's 
hair the great elephant mav be hrmlv bound ; with a 
whistle carved from a woman's shoe the deer in autumn 
may without fail be lured. 

'' It is this beguilement which we must chastise in our- 
selves, it is this which we must dread, it is this against 
which w^e must be on our guard." 

^' One day in the tenth month [about our September] 
I took a walk over the plain of Kunsu, and exploring 
a certain hill-district which lay beyond, was threading 
my way along a narrow moss-grown path, when I came 
upon a lonely cottage. No sound was to be heard except 
the dripping of water from a pipe buried under fallen 
leaves. It was, however, inhabited, as I gathered from 
the chrysanthemums and red autumn leaves which be- 
strewed the domestic shrine. ^Ah!' thought I, 'to 
spend one's days even in such a spot ! ' But whilst I 
stood gazing I espied in the garden beyond a great 
orange-tree with branches bending to the ground. It 
was strongly fenced off on every side. This [evidence 
that covetous desires had penetrated even here] some- 
what dispelled my dreams, and I wished from my heart 
that no such tree had been." 

*' If we take a pen in hand, it suggests writing ; if we 
take up a musical instrument, the very act of doing 
so prompts us to make music ; a wine-cup suggests 
drinking ; dice make us think of gambling. Our hearts 
are inevitably influenced by our actions. \Vc should 

TSURE-DZURE-GUSA "191 

therefore be careful to abstain wholly from unedifying 
amusements. 

^' If we thoughtlessly glance at a verse of the Sacred 
Scriptures, what goes before and after presents itself to 
our mmds without our effort, and this may lead to a 
sudden reformation of the errors of many years. If we 
had never read the Scriptures, how should we have known 
this ? Such IS the virtue of association. 

" If, even without any pious intentions whatever, we 
kneel down before the Buddha, and take in our hands 
the sacred book and the bell, a good work goes on of 
itself within us. If, even with wandering minds, we take 
our seat on the rope-mat, unawares we become absorbed 
in devout contemplation. 

'^At bottom, action and principle are one. If we are 
careful to avoid offences in our outward actions, the 
inner principle becomes fortified. We should therefore 
beware of making a profession of unbelief, and treat 
religion with all honour and respect." 

*' There are many things in this world which to me are 
incomprehensible. I cannot understand how any one 
can find pleasure in urging people to drink against their 
will, as is done the first thing on all occasions. The 
victim in his distress knits his brows, and watches an 
opportunity when no one is looking to spill the liquor or 
to steal away. But he is caught, detained, and made to 
drink his share as if there was nothing the matter. The 
nicest fellows suddenly become madmen, and give way 
to absurd conduct. The healthiest men, before our 
very eyes, become afflicted with grave illness, and lay 
themselves down unconscious of past and future. A 
sorry way indeed of celebrating a festal occasion ! 
Until the morrow they remain lying in a drunken state, 

192 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

with aching heads, and unable to eat, as if far removed 
from life, taking no thought for the next day, and too ill 
to attend to important business, public or private. 

^^ It is not kindly or even courteous to treat people 
in this way. If we were told that such a custom existed 
in some foreign country (being unknown in Japan) we 
should think it most strange and unaccountable." 

Here follows a description of a drunken debauch w^hich 
is somewhat too graphic for transference to these pages. 
Kenko goes on to say — 

" In this world strong drink has much to answer for. 
It wastes our means and destroys our health. It has been 
called the chief of the hundred medicines, but in truth it 
is from strong drink more than aught else that all our 
diseases spring. It may help us to forget our miseries, 
but, on the other hand, the drunken man is often seen 
to weep at the remembrance of his past woes. 

"As for the future world, strong drink is pernicious to 
the understanding, and burns up the root of good within 
us as with fire. It fosters evil, and leads to our breaking 
all the commandments and falling into hell. Buddha 
has declared that he who makes a man drink wine shall 
be born a hundred times with no hands." 

It must not be supposed from this that Kenko was a 
total abstainer, as he ought to have been if he kept his 
vows as a Buddhist monk. On the contrary — 

"There are times when wine cannot be dispensed with. 
On a moonlight night, on a snowy morning, or when the 
flowers are in blossom and with hearts free from care we 
are conversing with a friend, it adds to our pleasures if 
the wine-cup is produced." 

Kenko goes so far as to allow that wath intimate friends 
it is permissible occasionally to drink deeply. 

TZURE-DZURE-GUSA 193 

^^ There is no greater pleasure than alone, by the light 
of a lamp, to open a book and make the men of the 
unseen world our companions." 

"Nothing opens one's eyes so much as travel, no 
matter where." 

'' I love to shut myself up in a mountain temple and 
attend to the services to Buddha. Here there is no 
tedium, and one feels that his heart is being purged of 
its impurities." 

The Seasons— Spring 

*^ It is change that in all things touches us with sym- 
pathy. Every one says, and not without some reason, 
that it is chiefly the autumn which inspires this feeling. 
But it appears to me that the aspects of nature in spring, 
more than at any other lime, make our hearts swell with 
emotion. The songs of birds are especially suggestive of 
this season. With the increasing warmth the herbage 
in the hedge comes into bud, and as the spring grows 
deeper the hazes are diffused abroad and the flowers 
show themselves in all their glory. Sometimes with 
continual storms of wind and rain they are dispersed 
agitatedly, and nothing but green leaves is left. All this 
affects our hearts with constant trepidation. 

" The flowering orange has a great fame. But it is the 
perfume of the plum-tree which makes us think longingly 
of the past. Then there are the gaily-coloured kerria 
and the wistaria of obscurer hues. All these have many 
feelings associated with them w^hich it is impossible to 
leave unmarked." 

" In cur hours of quiet thought, who is there who has 
no yearnings for ail that has pass-ed away ? 

194 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

''When every one has retired to rest, to while away the 
long hours of night we put in order our little odds and 
ends of property. Among scraps of paper thrown away 
as not worth preserving, a handwriting or a sketch 
thrown off for amusement by one who is no more, 
catches the eye and brings up vividly the time when it 
was made. It is affecting too, after years have passed, to 
find a letter even from one who is still alive, and to think 
that it was written at such a date, on such an occasion. 

^^ The articles their hands were familiar with remain 
unchanged {tJiey have no hearts ! ) for all the long years 
that have elapsed. Alas ! alas ! " 

'' The man who writes a bad hand should not be 
deterred by that circumstance from scribbling letters. 
Otherwise he gets his friends to write for him, which is a 
nuisance." 

'' He is a fool who spends his life in the pursuit of fame 
or gain." 

"The venerable priest Hozen, being asked by a man 
whose drowsiness at prayers interfered w^ith his religious 
duties, how he should remove this hindrance to devo- 
tion, replied, ' Pray earnestly enough to keep yourself 
aw^ake.' This was an admirable answer. 

"The same priest said, 'If you think your salvation is 
assured, it is assured ; if you think it is not assured, it is 
not assured.' This is also an admirable saying. 

"Another admirable speech of his was to this effect: 
' If, notwithstanding that you are perplexed by doubts, 
you continue your prayers, you will be saved. " 

Kenko w^ith some friends once attended a race-meeting, 
not, one would think, a fit place for a Buddhist recluse to 
be seen. A crowd got between their carriage and the 
course, shutting out their view. 

TZURE-DZURE-GUSA 195 

*'We all got down and tried to push our way forward 
to the rails, but the press w'as too great for us to get 
passage. At this juncture we observed a priest who had 
chmbed up a tree and seated himself in a fork to see 
better. Being drowsy, he was continually dozing over, 
and awaking just in time to save himself from falling. 
Everybody shouted and jeered at him. ' What a fool,' 
cried they, Uhis fellow is to let himself fall asleep so 
calmly in such a dangerous position ! ' Upon this a 
thought flashed on me, and I exclaimed, ' Yet here are 
we, spending our time in sight-seeing, forgetful that 
death may overtake us at any moment. We are bigger 
fools even than that priest.' The people in front of us 
all looked round and said, ' Nothing can be more true. 
It is indeed utter folly. Come this way, gentlemen.' So 
they opened a passage and allowed us to come forward. 
Now this remark of mine might have occurred to any- 
body. I suppose it was the unexpectedness of it at this 
time which caused it to make an impression. Alen are 
not sticks or stones, and a w^ord spoken at a favourable 
moment sometimes finds its way to the heart." 

A commentator says that '' this chapter is intended to 
impress us with the uncertainty of human things." The 
reader may draw his own moral, 

'^ Beware of putting otT the practice of religion until 
your old age. The ancient tombs are mostly those of 
young people." 

^^ W^hen we hear a man's name we try to form to our- 
selves some idea of his appearance, but we invariably 
find, on afterwards making his acquaintance, that we 
have been quite wrpng." 

'4 wonder if it is only I who have sometimes the feeling 
that speeches which I have heard or sights that I have 

196 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

seen were already seen or heard by me at some past 
time — when, I cannot tell." 

''Things which are in Bad Taste 

Too much furniture in one's living room. 
Too many pens in a stand. 
Too many Buddhas in a private shrine. 
Too many rocks, trees, and herbs in a garden. 
Too many children in a house. 
Too many words when men meet. 

Too many books in a book-case there can never be, 
nor too much litter in a dust-heap." 

'' It is not only when we look at the moon or flowers 
with our eyes that they give us pleasure. On a spring 
day, though we do not leave our house ; on a moonlight 
night, though we remain in our chamber, the mere 
thought of them is exceedingly cheering and delightful." 

If Wordsworth had been a Japanese scholar, he might 

have been charged with plagiarising from this passage 

his 

" i?tward eye 
That is the bliss of solitude''' 

CHAPTER III 

POETRY— THE NO OR LYRICAL DRAMA— 
KIOGEN OR FARCE 

The manufacture of Tanka at the court of the Mikado 
proceeded, as usual, during these periods of Japanese 
history. They were duly collected into anthologies 
from time to time ; but as they present no features 
specially worthy of notice, and as they are admit- 
tedly much inferior in merit to the verse of earlier 
times, it is needless to dwell upon them here. A far 
greater interest belongs to a new development of the 
poetic art w^hich now demands our attention, namely, 
the No or lyrical drama. 

Like the ancient Greek tragedies and the mystery 
plays of the Middle Ages, the drama in Japan was in 
its beginnings closely associated with religion. Its im- 
mediate parent was the Kagura, a pantomimic dance, 
which is performed at this day to the sound of fife 
and drum at Shinto festivals, on a platform provided 
for the purpose. The antiquity of the Kagura may be 
inferred from the fact that when the Kojikz{x.Y}. 712) and 
the Nihojigi (a.d. 720) were WTitten, there was already 
a myth current which was intended as an explanation 
of its origin. The Sun Goddess, it is related, disgusted 
at the unseemly pranks of her brother Susa-no-wo, 

shut herself up in the rock-cave of heaven and left 
Id 197 

198 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

the world to darkness. Upon this the gods assembled 
in their myriads in the dry bed of the River of Heaven 
(the Milky Way), and among other expedients which 
they devised for luring her out of her retirement they 
caused Ame-no-Uzume (the Terrible Female of heaven) 
to array herself in a fantastical manner, and standing on 
an inverted tub, which gave out a hollow sound when 
she stamped on it, to perform a mimic dance which had 
the desired effect. 

The same works give elsewhere a story which was 
meant to supply an explanation of another pantomime 
which was performed in the Mikado's palace by the 
Hayato or guards. 

It runs as follows : — There were two brother deities, 
the elder of whom, Ho-no-Susori, was a hunter, and 
the younger, Hiko Hohodemi, a fisherman. The two 
brothers having quarrelled, the younger used against 
his brother a talisman given him by his father-in-law, 
the God of the Sea, by virtue of which the tide rose 
and submerged Ho-no-Susori. The latter then begged 
for pardon, and promised to be his brother's bonds- 
man and mime to all generations ; whereupon, by the 
power of another talisman, the tide retired and his life 
was spared. The younger brother was the ancestor of 
the Mikados, and the elder of the Hayato, who in 
memory of this were accustomed to perform a dance, 
in which the drowning struggles of Ho-no-Susori were 
imitated. The actors were naked to the waist-cloth, 
and smeared their hands and faces with red earth ; 
reminding us of the wine - lees of Thespis and his 
crew. 

There is frequent mention in subsequent Japanese 
history of pantomime performances, some of which 

NO 199 

were secular, and others of a more or less sacred 
character. 

When the dance and music of the Kagura were 
supplemented by a spoken dialogue, the No were the 
result. The addition of words is said to have been 
suggested by the chanted recitations of the Heike 
Monogatari by itinerant bonzes, and there is much in 
the language of the No to countenance this supposition. 
It is certain that the authors were well acquainted with 
it, and also with the Gempei Seisuiki and the Taiheiki. 

The beginnings of the No date from the fourteenth 
century. They were at first purely religious perform- 
ances, intended to propitiate the chief deities of the 
Shinto religion, and were acted exclusively in connection 
with their shrines. At Ise, the principal seat of the wor- 
ship of the Sun Goddess, there were three No theatres, 
in Omi three, in Tamba three, and at Nara four, all 
devoted to the service of the respective Shinto gods 
w'orshipped in these places. 

In the early part of the Muromachi period a manager 
of one of the No theatres at Nara, named Kwan-ami 
Kiyotsugu, attracted the notice of the ruling Shogun, 
who, for the sake of his art, took him into his im- 
mediate service. It is a noteworthy circumstance, as 
indicating the social position of the No performers, 
that this Kwan-ami was a small daimio, holding a fief 
in the province of Yamato, He died in 1406. From 
this time forward the No were under the special 
patronage of the Shoguns, just as the Tanka found 
favour and official protection at the court of the 
Mikado. Kiyotsugu w^as succeeded by his eldest son 
Motokiyo, who died in 1455, in his eighty-first year. 
Their descendants enjoyed the favour of the Shoguns 

200 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

for a long period. Hideyoshi, who was Shogun in all 
but name, was very fond of the No, and is said to 
have taken part in them as an actor. Several of the 
more recent date from his time. In the Yedo period 
the Shoguns gave great attention to No performances. 
They were made a ceremony of state, and were acted 
by young gentlemen of the military class educated 
specially for this profession. Even at the present day 
there are some remains of their former popularity 
with the Samurai. Representations are still given in 
Tokio, Kioto, and other places, by the descendants or 
successors of the old managers who founded the art 
five hundred years ago, and are attended by small but 
select audiences composed almost entirely of ex-Daimios 
or military nobles and their ex-retainers. To the vulgar 
the No are completely unintelligible. 

Of the two hundred and thirty-five No contained in the 
latest and most complete collection (the Yo-kyoku Tsuge), 
no fewer than ninety-three are assigned to Se-ami Moto- 
kiyo, the second of the line of official managers ; his 
father, Kwan-ami Kiyotsugu, being credited with fifteen. 
Motokiyo's son-in-law and successor has twenty-two 
assigned to him, those of the remainder which are not 
anonymous being distributed among a dozen or so of 
the subsequent holders of the office. The great majority 
belong to the fifteenth century. 

The Yo-kyoku Tsuge editor suggests, with great proba- 
bility, that although the names of Kiyotsugu, Motokiyo, 
and their successors are given as authors of the No, they 
were in reality only responsible for the music, the panto- 
mimic dance (the '' business," as we might say), and the 
general management. He surmises that the libretto was 
the work of Buddhist monks, to which class almost all 

NO 20I 

the literary men of this period belonged. The question 
of authorship is, however, of minor importance, as the 
characteristics of the No are rather those of a school of 
writers than of individuals. 

Whoever their authors may have been, their primary 
object w^as the promotion of piety. In some cases a 
patriotic or martial enthusiasm is the inspiring motive, 
and a love of nature is discernible in almost all, but the 
staple material is the mass of legends associated with the 
Buddhist and Shinto religions. A monk or guardian of 
a Shinto shrine is most frequently the chief personage 
of the play, and the virtue of hospitality to the priestly 
order, the sin of taking aw^ay life, the praise of particular 
deities, the uncertainty of life, and the transitoriness cf 
human things are favourite themes with them. 

In the No, next after religion comes poetry. Not that 
they are exactly poems. Purely lyrical passages are not 
wanting, but much, both from the point of view of metre 
and of diction, is undeniable prose. Not a little is in an 
intermediate style, in which the seven and five syllable 
phrases succeed one another with great irregularity, and 
the language is alloyed with a less poetic element. The 
admission of Chinese words, although in moderation, 
also tends to lower the poetic level. It will be remem- 
bered that these are rigorously excluded from the older 
classical poetry. 

A very striking feature of the No is the lavish use which 
they make of the poetic devices mentioned in a previous 
chapter.^ Pillow-words are freely introduced, and paral- 
lelism is a common ornament. But the greatest favourite 
of all is the '' pivot-w^ord," which is employed in the No 
to an extent and in a manner previously unknown to 

^ See above, p. 32. 

202 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Japanese literature. This must be my excuse for dwell- 
ing on it at somewhat greater length here. ''The Pivot" 
(I quote from Mr. Chamberlain's Classical Poetiy of the 
Japanese) " is a word of two significations, which serves 
as a species of hinge on which two doors turn, so that 
while the first part of the poetical phrase has no logical 
end, the latter part has no logical beginning. They run 
into each other, and the sentence could not possibly be 
construed." Mr. Chamberlain adds that '' to the English 
reader such a punning invention will doubtless seem the 
height of misapplied ingenuity. But, as a matter of fact, 
the impression produced by these linked verses is delight- 
ful in the extreme, passing as they do before the reader 
like a series of dissolving views, vague, graceful, and sug- 
gestive. This ornament especially characterises the old 
poetic dramas, and renders them a peculiarly arduous 
study to such as do not thoroughly appreciate its nature." 

Native critics would no doubt endorse Mr. Chamber- 
lain's favourable opinion of the pivot-word, and it is 
undeniable that the Japanese, wiio are an eminently 
nimble-witted race, delight in these acrobatic feats of 
language. But the English student will ask whether it 
is worth while to sacrifice sense and syntax for the sake 
of such inane, if sometimes pretty, antics. I venture to 
think that the ''pivot" is a mistake in serious com- 
position, and that the partiality for such a frivolous 
ornament of style manifested not only by the writers 
of No, but by the dramatists and novelists of the Yedo 
period, is a characteristic sign of an age of literary deca- 
dence and bad taste. Such writers as Hakuseki, Kiuso, 
and Motoori disdain it utterly. 

The authors of the No do not pique themselves on 
originality. They are in the habit of conveying to their 

NO 203 

own pages in the most liberal manner snatches of Tanka, 
texts of Buddhist scripture, or striking phrases supplied 
by their memory from older writers, stringing them to- 
gether, however, in a way which does much credit to 
their ingenuity. Plagiarism, it may be remarked, is 
hardly recognised as an offence by the Japanese. 

The No are not classical poems. They are too de- 
ficient in lucidity, method, coherence, and good taste to 
deserve this description. Still they are not without charm. 
Jeux-de-mots are not everything in them, and the reader 
who has the patience to unravel their intricacies of 
language will not go altogether unrewarded. If their 
vein of poetic ore is less pure than that of the Alanyoshiu 
and Kokinshiu^ it is also richer. They embrace within 
their scope a world of legendary lore, of quaint fancies, 
and of religious sentiment, to which the classical poetry 
of Japan is a stranger. And if we miss the perfection of 
form which characterises the dainty little Tanka, we have 
instead a luxuriance and variety which go some way to 
indemnify us for its absence. It is to be regretted that 
so promising a literary departure should have proved 
ultimately abortive. After the sixteenth century the No 
ceased to be written. The current of the higher Japanese 
thought had by this time turned away from Buddhism 
and everything that belongs to it, and was setting strongly 
towards Chinese philosophy. Though the No were still 
performed, the impulse to write new ones was apparently 
no longer felt. 

As dramas the No have little value. There is no action 
to speak of, and dramatic propriety and effect are hardly 
thought of. The plot is frequently something of the 
following description : — 

A priest appears on the scene. He announces his 

204 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

name, and informs the audience that he is setting out on 
his travels. Presently he arrives at a temple, a battle- 
field, or other celebrated spot, when a ghost or deity 
appears, who relates to him the local legend. An ex- 
change of edifying sentiments follows, and the super- 
natural personage finally reveals his identity. 

The whole piece rarely occupies more than six or seven 
pages of print, and it usually takes less than an hour to 
perform. Within this narrow compass it might be ex- 
pected that the unities of trnie, place, and action would 
have been observed. This is far from being the case. 
The action, in so far as there is any, is generally more 
or less coherent, but the other unities are wholly disre- 
garded. In the TakasagOy for example, the scene changes 
from Kiushiu to Harima, and again from Harima to 
Sumiyoshi, within seven pages, while weeks must be 
allowed for the journeys of the chief personage between 
these places. 

The number of the di^amatis personce varies from two 
or three (the latter being very frequent) up to five or six. 
To these must be added a few musicians and the chorus. 
The chorus of the No has various functions. The chief 
office is to chant a narrative which serves to supplement 
and explain the action of the piece, as in some of Shake- 
speare's older plays, or to recite poetical descriptions 
which supply the place of the absent scenery. The 
chorus also indulges from time to time in sententious or 
sympathetic observations, or even enters into conversa- 
tion with the personages on the stage. 

The following description of the No theatre will help 
us to realise their character more fully. It is taken from 
Mr. Chamberlain's Classical Poetry of the Japanese : — 

"The stage, which has remained unaltered in every 

NO 205 

respect since the beginning of the fifteenth < •?. is a 

square wooden room open on all sides but one, and 
supported on pillars, the side of the square being about 
eighteen English feet. It is surmounted by a quanit 
roof somewhat resembling those to be seen on Buddhist 
temples, and is connected with the green-room by a 
gallery some nine feet wide. Upon this gallery part of the 
action occasionally takes place. Added on to the back 
of the square stage is a narrow space where sits the 
orchestra, consisting of one flute-player, two performers 
on instruments, which, in the absence of a more fitting 
name, may perhaps be called tambourines, and one beater 
of the drum, while the chorus, whose number is not fixed, 
squat on the ground to the right of the spectator. The 
back of the stage, the only side not open to the air, is 
painted with a pine-tree, in accordance with ancient 
usage, while, equally in conformity with established rules, 
three small pine-trees are planted in the court which 
divides the gallery from the space occupied by the less 
distinguished portion of the audience. The covered place 
for the audience runs round three sides of the stage. ^ 
Masks are worn by such of the actors as take the parts of 
females or of supernatural beings, and the dresses are 
gorgeous in the extreme. Scener}-, however, is allowed 
no place on the lyric stage." 

It will readily be understood that the difficulty of arriv- 
ing at the meaning of such compositions as the No is 
very considerable. Mr. Mitford, no mean scholar, in his 
Ta/es of Old Japan pronounces them 'Svholly unin- 
telligible " ; though this statement must be taken with 

^ From which it is separated by a space corresponding to our pit, only open 
to the air.— W^ G. A. 

2o6 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

some qualification, as he gives in the same work a lucid 
account of the plot of several of them. But even when 
he has mastered their sense, the translator's difficulties 
are only beginning. I know of nothmg in literature for 
which it is more impossible to give an adequate English 
equivalent than the intricate network of word-plays, 
quotations, and historical, literary, and scriptural allusions 
of which they consist. Mr. Chamberlain, who has done 
some of them into English verse, confesses that his 
rendering is only a paraphrase. Prose or a rough and 
ready blank verse has been preferred for the partial 
translation of the Takasago, which is given below. But 
even when freed from the temptation to introduce ex- 
traneous matter which is hardly separable from a poetical 
version, it is not possible to render the original as faith- 
fully as might be desired. I have tried, however, while 
omitting a certain untranslatable element, at any rate to 
bring in nothing of my own. 

"Takasago" 
This is one of the pieces attributed to MOTOKIYO, who 
died in 1455, but, as already suggested, he was probably 
only the director or manager of the theatre where it was 
produced. It is the best known, and is considered the 
finest of all the No. Its popularity was testified to no 
longer ago than last year (1897) by the launching, from the 
yard of Messrs. Armstrong & Co. at Newcastle, of a cruiser 
for the Japanese navy bearing the name of Takasago, 

DRAMATIS PERSONS. 

ToMONARl . . . Guardian of the Shinto shrhie of Aso, ill Kiushiu. 

An Old Man . . Really the spirit of the Stimiyoshi fir-tree. 

An Old Woman . . Really the spirit of the Takasago fir-tree. 

The God of Sumiyoshi. 

Chorus. 

TAKASAGO 207 

Chorus (?) ^ {chants ifi nearly regular metre). 

Now for the first time he ties the lace of his travelling 

garb : 
His goal is distant many a long day's journey. 

ToMONARi {speaks in prose). Now, this is I, Tomonari, guardian 
of the shrine of Aso, in the province of Higo, in Kiushiu. 
Never having seen the capital, I have now made up my mind, 
and am going up to the capital. Moreover, I wish to take this 
opportunity of viewing the bay of Takasago, in Harima. 

Chorus (?) {chants tn regular metre). To-day he has made up his 
mind, and has donned his travelling raiment for a journey to a 
distant goal — the capital. With waves that rise along the shore, 
and a genial wmd of spring upon the ship-path, how many 
days pass without a trace of him we know not, until at length 
he has reached the longed-for bay of Takasago, on the coast of 
Harima. 

Old Man and Old Wo^^an {chant). The wind of spring that 
blows through the fir-tree of Takasago has gone down with the sun ; 
the vesper bell is heard from the Temple of Onoye. 

Old Woman. The waves are hidden from us by the mist- 
enshrouded rocks. 

Both. There is naught but the sound to mark the rise and fall 
of the tide. 

Old Man. W^hom can I take to be my friend? Except the 
fir-tree of Takasago, my ancient comrade, there is none to con- 
verse with me of the bygone days on which are ever gathering 
white snows [of forgetfulness], I grow older and older, accus- 
tomed to hear nothing but the wind in the fir-tree either when I 
rise or go to sleep in my nest of an aged crane, where the night- 
long moon sheds its rays, and the spring sends down its hoar- 
frosts. So I make my own heart my companion, and thus give 
utterance to my thoughts. 

Both. Let us sweep away the fir-needles that lie beneath the 

^ The distribution of the speeches is sometimes doubtful. I have made one 
or two chanc'es. 

2o8 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

tree, sleeve touching sleeve of our garments, whereon rest fallen 
leaves shaken down by the shore-wind asking their news of the firs. 

T0M.0NARI (spoken). While waiting for some of the villagers to 
appear, an old man and an old woman have come hither. 1 pray 
you, old people, permit me to ask you a question. 

Old Man. It is I whom you address ? What is it you desire 
to know? 

ToMONARi. Which is the tree that is called the fir-tree of 
Takasago ? 

Old Man. This very tree whose shade we are cleansing is the 
fir-tree of Takasago. 

ToMONARL The phrase "growing old together" is used of the 
Takasago and Suminoye fir-trees. But this place and Sumiyoshi 
[the same as Suminoye] are in provinces distant from one another. 
How then can they be called the fir-trees which "grow old 
together " ? 

Old Man. As you have deigned t6 observe, it is stated in the 
preface to the Koktfisliiu^ that the fir-trees of Takasago and Sumi- 
noye make us feel as if they were growing old together. However 
that may be, here am I, an old man, who belong to Sumiyoshi, in 
the province of Settsu, while the old woman here is of this place. 
Be pleased to tell me, if you can, how that may be. 

ToMONARi {in verse). Strange ! I see you old couple here to- 
gether. What mean you then by saying that you dwell apart, one 
in distant Suminoye, the other in Takasago, divided from one 
another by seashore, hill, and province ? 

Old Woman {t?i verse). What an odd speech ! Though many 
a mile of mountain and river separate them, the way of a husband 
and wife whose hearts respond to one another with mutual care, 
is not far apart. 

Old Woman. There is Suminoye. 
Old Man. And here is Takasago. 
Tomonarl The fir-trees blend their hues, 

■^ See above, p. 66. 

TAKASAGO 209 

Old Man. And the spring air- 
ToMONARi. Is genial, while 

{Here the chorus strikes in with a canticle which is chanted as 
the indispe7isable acco7n_paniment of every regular Japanese wedding, 
and is one of the best known passages in Japanese literature. 
Figures representing the two old folks under the fir-tree with 
hroo77is in their ha7ids are, 07i such occasio7ts, set out on a sort 
of tray. This is a favourite subject of the Japanese artist.) 

Chorus. On the four seas 

Still are the waves ; 

The world is at peace . 

Soft blow the time-winds,^ 

Rustling not the branches. 

In such an age 

Blest are the very firs. 

In that they meet 

To grow old together. 

Vain indeed 

Are reverent upward looks ; 

Vain even are words to tell 

Our thanks that we were born 

In such an age, 

Rich with the bounty 

Of our sovereign lord. 

Old Man. I hear the sound of the bell of Onoye, in Taka- 
sago. 

Chorus. The dawn is near, 

And the hoar-frost falls 

On the fir-tree twigs ; 

But its leaves' dark green 

Suffer no change. 

Morning and evening 

Beneath its shade 
^ The land and sea breezes, which blow regularly only in fine weather. 

2IO JAPANESE LITERATURE 

The leaves are swept away, 

Yet they never fail. 

True it is 

That these fir-trees 

Shed not all their leaves ; 

Their verdure remains fresh 

For ages long, 

As the Masaka trailing vine ; 

Even amongst evergreen trees — 

The emblem of unchangeableness — 

Exalted is their fame 

As a symbol to the end of time — 

The fame of the fir-trees that have grown old together. 
ToMONARi. And ye who have made known the bygone story 
of these ancient firs whose branches have indeed earned fame — 
tell me, I pray you, by what names are ye called. 

Old Man and Old Woman. Why conceal it longer ? We are 
the spirits of the fir-trees of Takasago and Suminoye that have 
grown old together, manifested under the form of a married pair. 
Chorus. Wonderful ! A miracle wrought by the fir-trees of 
this famous place ! 

Old Man and Old Woman. Plants and trees are without 

souls 

Chorus. Yet in this august reign 

Old Man and Old Woman. Even for plants and trees 

Chorus. Good is it to live 

For ever and ever 

In this land 

Of our great sovereign. 

Under his rule. 

To Sumiyoshi,! therefore. 

He would now take his way 

And there wait upon [the god]. 

He embarks in a fisher's boat 

That lies by the beach, 

^ Sumiyoshi means "dwell-good.'* 

TAKASAGO 21 r 

Where the waves of evening roll, 
And spreading his sail 
To the favouring breeze, 
Puts out into the deep, 
Puts out into the deep. 
ToMONARi. From Takasago I set sail 

In this skiff that lies by the shore, 
And put forth with the tide 
That goes out with the moon. 
I pass under the lee 
Of Awaji's shore, 
I leave far behind me Naruwo, 
And now I have arrived 
At Suminoye. 

{The god of Sumiyoshi^ appears^ and enters into a poetical diahgue 
with the chorus. ) 

Chorus. We give thanks for this manifestation ; 
Ever anew we will worship 
Thy spirit with sacred dance 
By Sumiyoshi's pure moonlight. 

Chorus. And now, world without end, 

The extended arms of the dancing maidens 

In sacerdotal robes 

Will expel noxious influences ; 

Their hands folded to rest in their bosoms 

Will embrace all good fortune ; 

The hymn of a thousand autumns 

Will draw down blessings on the people, 

And the song of ten thousand years - 

Prolong our sovereign's life. 

And all the while, 

^ There are in reality three gods. Doubtless only one appears on the 

ige. 

- Equivalent to our " God save the Queen." 

stasre. 

\ 

212 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

The voice of the breeze, 
As it blows through the firs 
That grow old together, 
Will yield us delight. 

Some oi tne No have more of dramatic action than the 
Takasago. Nakamitsu^ a piece translated by Mr. Cham- 
berlain, is one of these. Another example is the Tdsen^ 
of which the following is a resume • — 

An inhabitant of Hakosaki, in Kiushiu, informs the 
audience that under an embargo placed by the Japanese 
Government on Chmese ships thirteen years before, he 
had detained a vessel from that country, and made the 
owner his cow-herd. 

The Chinaman's two sons come to ransom their father. 
His master gives him leave to go, but just when they are 
about to sail, two sons born to him in Japan appear and 
propose to accompany him. Their request is refused by 
the master, and the father, distracted between his wish to 
retufn home with his Chinese family, and his reluctance 
to leave his Japanese children behind, tries to drown 
himself. Much appropriate sentiment ensues, which 
touches the heart of the master, so that he allows all five 
to depart together. 

. In Dojoji a priest appears, and informs the audience 
that he is about to consecrate a new bell for his temple, 
the former one having been long ago removed. He then 
directs his acolyte to make the necessary preparations, 
enjoining on him specially to take care that no woman 
shall be present at the ceremony. 

A dancing-girl approaches, and proposes to dance in 
honour of the occasion. The acolyte forgets his instruc- 
tions, and allows her to do so. She takes the opportunity 
of seizing the bell by the suspending ring, and bringing 

KIOGEN 213 

it down over her, greatly to the consternation of the priest. 
He calls together his fellows and relates a legend which 
explains why women \vere not allowed to be present : — 

^'A man had an only daughter, who formed a union 
with a Yamabushi [a sort of lay-priest]. When pressed 
to marry her, he ran away and hid in the bell of the 
temple. She pursued him, and came to a river which 
she could not cross. But the fife of her passion was so 
intense that it changed her into a serpent, in which form 
she found no difficulty in swimming over. Coming 
to the temple, the serpent coiled itself round the bell, 
which was melted by the heat of her passion, the false 
lover penshuig at the same time." 

The priest, having told this legend, joins with his col- 
leagues in reciting with might and main all kinds of 
Buddhist prayers and invocations, by w^hich the bell is 
raised to its former position, and the dancing-girl forced 
to reveal herself in her serpent shape. Involved in flames, 
she plunges into the adjoining river and disappears. 
Exc unt onmes. 

The Kiogen (mad-words) are to the No what farce is 
to the regular drama. They are performed on the same 
stage in the intervals between the more serious pieces. 

They differ from the No in having no chorus, and in 
being composed in the pure colloquial dialect of the time. 
They are even shorter, and of the slightest construction. 
The following is an example : — 

"A Daimio sends his servant to the city to buy a talis- 
man which w^ill work miracles. The servant meets with 
a swindler, who sells him an object which he calls the 
Mallet of Daikoku (every blow of which is supposed to 
produce a piece of gold), telling him a charm by repeat- 
15 

2 14 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

ing which, as he holds the mallet, he can have anything 
he pleases. The servant returns with his prize. The 
Daimio asks him to produce a horse. The servant repeats 
his charm, and declares that the horse is ready saddled 
and bridled. The Daimio pretends to think his servant 
the horse, jumps on his back, and rides him about the 
stage in spite of his protestations." 

Fifty of the Kiogen have been published under the 
title Kiogen Kz, and there is before me a manuscript 
collection which contains one hundred and fifty of these, 
pieces. 

BOOK THE SIXTH 
YEDO PERIOD (1603-1867) 

BOOK THE SIXTH 
YEDO PERIOD (1603-1867) 

CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTORY—" TAIKOKI '' 

The student of Japanese history, in any of its branches, 
should note well the two dates which stand at the head 
of this chapter.^ They mark the beginning and end of 
that wonderful political organisation known as the Toku- 
gawa Shogunate. The first is the date of the establish- 
ment of his capital at Yedo by Tokugawa lyeyasu, and 
the second that of the abolition of the office of Shogun, 
and the resumption of sovereign authority by the Mikado 
after many centuries of abeyance. During this period a 
great wave of Chinese influence passed over the country, 
deeply affecting it in every conceivable way. Not only 
the constitution of the Government, but the laws, art, 
science, material civilisation, and, most of all, the thought 
of the nation as expressed in its philosophy and literature, 
bear profound traces of Chinese teaching and example. 
This w^ave has not w^holly subsided even now, but it has 
ceased to be of importance, except, perhaps, in deter- 
mining the moral standards of the nation, and 1867 is a 

2i8 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

convenient date from which to reckon the substitution 
of Europe for China as the source whence the Japanese 
draw inspiration in all these matters. 

The latter half of the Muromachi period, coinciding 
with the second half of the sixteenth century, was a very 
disturbed time in Japan. The local nobles or Daimios, 
defying all control by the central government, engaged 
in continual struggles with one another for lands and 
power, and a lamentable condition of anarchy was the 
result. The first to apply a remedy to this state of 
things was one of their own order, Nobunaga, a man of 
resolute character and great military capacity. Aided by 
his two famous lieutenants, Hideyoshi and lyeyasu, he 
succeeded in bringing most of the Daimios mto subjection, 
and even deposed the Shogun, although he w^as prevented 
by his descent from assuming that title himself. At his 
death in 1582, the reins of powder passed into the hands 
of Hideyoshi, who completed the work which Nobunaga 
had begun. Under the titles of Kwambaku (Regent) .or 
Taiko, he was practically monarch of Japan, until his 
death in 1598. Then lyeyasu, after a sharp struggle, 
which ended in 1600 by the defeat of his opponents 
in the decisive battle of Sekigahara, succeeded to the 
supreme authority, and caused himself to be appointed 
Shogun by the puppet Mikado of the day. He was the 
founder of the Tokugawa (his family name) dynasty of 
Shoguns, which lasted until our own time. 

lyeyasu was probably the greatest statesman that Japan 
has ever seen. By the organisation of that remarkable 
system of feudal government under which the nation 
enjoyed peace and prosperity for tW'O and a half cen- 
turies, he solved for his day and country the problem, 
which will occupy politicians to the end of time, of the 

YEDO PERIOD 219 

due apportionment of central and local authority. At no 
previous period of Japanese history was the power of the 
Central Government more effectively maintained in all 
essential matters, although in other respects the Daimios 
were allowed a large measure of independent action. 
Under this regime Japan increased amazingly in wealth 
and population, and made great progress in all the arts 
of civilisation. 

As a consequence, the new capital of Yedo rose rapidly 
to importance. Under the regulation, established by lye- 
yasu's grandson lyemitsu, wiiich compelled the Daimios 
to reside there for part of the year, leaving their wives and 
children as hostages during the remainder, its population 
attained to at least a million, and is believed to have been 
at one time considerably more. 

It is not surprising that the enhanced political and 
commercial importance of Yedo should have brought 
about a displacement of the literary centre of Japan. 
Kioto, especially during the early part of the Yedo period, 
continued to be a place of some literary activity, and 
Osaka became the cradle of a new form of drama, but 
Yedo attracted to itself all the principal learning and 
talent of the country. For the last two hundred years 
Yedo has been to Japan for literature what London is to 
the United Kingdom, or Paris to France. 

There is another feature of the literature of the Yedo 
period which is traceable to the improved condition of 
the country. Authors now no longer addressed them- 
selves exclusively to a cultured class, but to the people 
generally. The higher degree of civilisation which was 
rendered possible by an improved administration and 
a more settled government included a far more widely 
extended system of education than Japan had ever known 

220 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

before. And not only were the humbler classes better 
educated. They were more prosperous in every way, and 
were better able to purchase books as well as to read 
them. Books, too, were far more easily attainable than 
before. Printing, which in Japan dates from the eighth 
century, now for the first time became common. i 
Hideyoshi's armies, returning from their devastating 
raid upon Corea, brought with them a number of books 
printed with movable types, wiiich served as models 
for the Japanese printers. lyeyasu was a liberal patron 
of the printing-press. Since this time the production 
of printed books has gone on at an increasing rate, and 
they now form an accumulation which is truly formi- 
dable in amount. 

The popularisation of literature during the Yedo 
period worked for evil as well as for good. Many whole- 
some moral and religious treatises were brought within 
tlie reach of the nation generally, and knowledge was 
greatly extended. But, on the other hand, the average 
level of taste and refinement was distinctly lowered, and 
notwithstanding the well-meant but spasmodic attempts 
of the Government to repress it, a flood of pornographic 
fiction not easily to be paralleled elsewhere was poured 
out over the country. 

For the Buddhist religion the Yedo period was a time 
of decadence. Its continued popularity is attested by 
the vast number of temples which were erected every- 
where, and by the hosts of monks who were maintained 
in idleness. But its influence was on the wane. While 
Confucianism became the creed of the strong, governing 
military caste. Buddhism attached itself to the broken 

i See papers on the "Early History of Printing in Japan," by Sir Ernest 
Satow, in i\iQ Japan Asiatic Society s Trajtsactions, vol. x. I, and x. 2. 

YEDO PERIOD 221 

fortunes of the Mikados and their court. The nation 
generally was gradually awaking to a fuller and more 
vigorous life, and homilies on the instability of human 
things, the vanity of wealth and power, the detestableness 
of violence and cruelty, the duty of abstinence from the 
grosser pleasures, and the beauty (?f a life of seclusion 
and pious meditation, were no longer so much to their 
taste. The moral principles which animated politics and 
literature were now drawn from the more robust and 
manly, if more worldly, teachings of the Chinese sages. 
But of this more remains to be said hereafter. 

Towards the end of this period there was a partial 
reaction in favour of the old Shinto religion. It proved 
to be only an eddy m the main current of the national 
thought, and is chiefly important politically as one of the 
disintegrating influences which led to the breaking up of 
the Tokugawa regime. 

Compared with the writings of the Heian or classical 
period, the Yedo literature is infinitely more voluminous, 
and has a far wider range of subjects. It comprises 
history, biography, poetry, the drama, essays, sermons, a 
multitude of political and religious treatises, fiction of 
various kinds and travels, with a huge mass of biblia 
abiblia^ such as dictionaries, grammars, and other philo- 
logical works, bibliographies, medical works, treatises on 
botany, law, the art of war, commentaries on the Chinese 
classics (in themselves a host), expositions of Buddhist 
doctrine, cyclopaedias, antiquarian and metaphysical 
works, guide-books, and so on. 

But while the new literature is much richer and of a 
more vigorous growth than the old, there is a sad falling 
off in point of form. With few exceptions it is disfigured 
by the grossest and most glaring faults. Extravagance, 

22 2 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

false sentiment, defiance of probability whether physical 
or moral, pedantry, pornography, puns and other mere- 
tricious ornaments of style, intolerable platitudes, im- 
possible adventures, and weary wastes of useless detail 
meet us everywhere. There is no want of ability. Plenty 
of genuine wit and humour is to be discovered by those 
who know where to look for it. True pathos is to be 
met with in works otherwise highly objectionable ; ex- 
cellent moral advice is only too abundant ; there are 
graphic descriptions of real life, prodigious fertility of 
invention, a style frequently not devoid of elegance, and 
generally a far wider range of thought in political and 
social matters than the hedonist literature of ancient 
Japan could boast. It is the writer ^' totus teres atque 
rotundus" whose absence is so conspicuous. Sane 
thought, sustained good writing, disciplined imagination 
and some sense of order, proportion and consistent 
method are sadly to seek in the profusion of written and 
printed matter which this period has left to us. 

The Japanese language underwent considerable change 
at this time. To supply the needs of the new civilisa- 
tion a vast increase of the vocabulary became neces- 
sary, and Chinese words were adopted so freely that 
they now far outnumber those of native origin. As 
in English, however, the latter retain their position for 
all the essentials of language. At the same time the 
simplification of the somewhat cumbrous grammatical 
system of the old language made still further progress. 

In this period the colloquial speech, which had been 
gradually diverging from the written language so far as 
at last to necessitate separate grammars for its elucida- 
tion, began to show itself in literature. Whether its 
partisans will succeed in erecting it into a literary dialect 

TAlkoKI 223 

remains to be seen. Up to the present their success has 
not been very conspicuous. It will require far more 
cultivation than has yet been bestowed upon it to make 
it equally concise and perspicuous, and to give it the 
same range of varied expression, as the ordinary literary 
language. 

The ''Taikoki." 

One of th3 earliest works of the Yedo period is the 
Taikokiy a biography of the Taiko, or Regent Hideyoshi, 
in twenty-two books (eleven volumes). Although written 
only twenty-seven years after Hideyoshi's death, there 
had already been time for his history to acquire a certain 
legendary quality. The first chapter exemplifies the pro- 
pensity of ignorant mankind for surrounding the birth 
of great men with miraculous occurrences. The Taikoki 
cannot be given a high place as literature, but it is 
valuable for the contemporary documents which it con- 
tains, and has supplied material for a number of later 
works bearing the same or similar titles. It was written 
in 1625 by an unknown author. 

CHAPTER II 

THE KANGAKUSHA (Chinese Scholars) 

Towards the end of the Muromachi period, learning in 
Japan had reached its lowest ebb. Hideyoshi, at the 
height of his power and fame, was an ignorant man, as 
letters written by him remain to testify, and he had great 
difficulty in finding scholars competent to conduct the 
negotiations with China and Corea which arose out of his 
invasion of the latter country. He was, however, a friend 
of learning. His successor lyeyasu (1603-1632) fully 
recognised the necessity of wider knowledge for building 
up the new social and political fabric which he created. 
His patronage of printing has been already mentioned. 
He also established schools, and devoted much*attention 
to the collection and preservation of printed books and 
manuscripts. A special department was provided by 
him, w^here he employed a staff of monks in copying out 
the family records of the Daimios. 

Among the scholars who enjoyed lyeyasu's patronage 
the most eminent was Fujiwara Seikwa, a native of 
Harima, where he was born in 1560. Himself a poet, 
he was a descendant of Fujiwara Sadaiye, a v/ell-known 
Tanka- writer of the thirteenth century. As a boy he gave 
great promise of talent. He received the Buddhist ton- 
sure, but soon recognised the emptmess of Buddhism, 

SEIKWA 225 

and applied himself with great diligence to the study of 
the ancient Chinese literature. Finding, however, that 
the difficulties caused by the want of competent teachers 
and suitable text-books were too great for him to sur- 
mount, he made up his mind to go to China and continue 
his studies there. He had got as far as the province of 
Satsuma, and was waiting for a ship, when one of those 
apparently trivial incidents occurred which exercise a 
profound influence on the fate of a nation. He over- 
heard a boy in the house next to the inn where he was 
staying read aloud from a Chinese book which w^as 
unfamiliar to him. Upon inquiry, it proved to be a 
commentary by Chu-Hi on the ''Great Learning" of 
Confucius. A brief examination showed him its im- 
portance. Equally delighted and astonished, Seikwa 
exclaimed, '' This is what I have so long been in want 
of." Eventually he discovered a complete set of the 
philosophical works of Ching Hao (1032-1085), Cheng 
I. (1033-1107), and Chu-Hi (i 130-1200), the famous 
Chinese schoolmen and expositors' of the doctrines of 
Confucius and Mencius under the Sung dynasty. He 
w^as so strongly impressed by tneir perusal, that he re- 
solved to abandon his intention of proceeding to China, 
and to devote himself entirely to their study at home. 

Seikwa subsequently made the acquaintance of lye3^asu 
at the camp of Nagoya, where Hideyoshi was then pre- 
paring his famous invasion of Corea. lyeyasu recognised 
his merit, and sent for him repeatedly to expound the 
classics ; but Seikwa, taking offence at being confounded 
with the rabble of ordinary monks, pretended illness, and 
having introduced as his substitute his pupil Hayashi 
Rasan, retired to a quiet village near Kioto. Here pupils 
flocked to him in great numbers, many of them the sons 

2 26 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

of court nobles or Daimios ; and he also received flatter- 
ing offers of appointments, all of which he declined. In 
1614 he was offered a post as teacher in connection with 
a project of lyeyasu's for establishing a school at Kioto. 
This proposal he accepted, but some civil disorders which 
broke out soon after rendered this scheme abortive. 
Seikwa died in 1619 in his fifty-ninth year. He left 
nothing which deserves notice as literature ; but it is 
hardly possible to estimate too highly the service he per- 
formed by making known to his countrymen the philo- 
sophical literature of the Sung schoolmen. His Kana 
Seiri may be mentioned as a typical example of his 
writings. As its title indicates, it is an attempt to facilitate 
the study of the Sung philosophy in Japan. 

The whole literature of the Yedo period is so thoroughly 
pervaded by moral principles and ideals based on this 
system of thought, that it is desirable to give a brief out- 
line of it here. Those w^ho wish to make themselves 
more thoroughly acquainted with it will find the means 
of doing so in Monseigneur de Harlez's Ecole Philoso- 
phique de la Chme, and some able papers contributed by 
Dr. Knox and others to ih.Q Journal of the Asiatic Society 
of Japan in 1892. 

Professedly an exposition of the doctrines of the 
ancient Chinese sages, the Sung philosophy is in reality 
an essentially modern system of ontology, ethics, natural 
philosophy, and principles of government, subjects which 
to the Chinese mind are inseparable. 

According to Chu-Hi, the origin and cause of all things 
is Taikhi {Taikyoku in Japanese) or the " Great Absolute. ' 
The energy evolved by its movement produced the Yaiig 
(Yd in Japanese), and when it came to rest, the Yin {In 
in Japanese) was the result. The Yang is the active, 

CHINESE PHILOSOPHY 227 

positive, productive, male principle of nature, while the 
Yin is regarded as passive or receptive, negative and 
female. By the mutual action of these two principles 
the Kosmos was formed out of chaos, the Yin manifest- 
ing itself in the settling down of the impure sediment as 
earth, while the lighter and purer part, representmg the 
Yang, ascended and formed heaven. The Yi?t and 
Yang are also the source of the hve elements, water, fire, 
earth, metal, and wood. Each of these has its proper 
function, on the right discharge of which depend the 
regular sequence of the four seasons and phenomena 
generally. These processes go on eternally. There is 
no such thing as a creation in this system. The energy 
w^hich produces all these results is called in Chinese A'V, 
in Japanese A7 (Breath). It follows fixed laws called 
Li {Ri in Japanese). The precise nature of these two 
last conceptions has been elucidated (or obscured) by 
many volumes of dissertations both in China and Japan. 

Chu-Hi says little of 2"^;/ (Heaven). In his philosophy 
its place is taken by the more impersonal Taikhi, But 
m Japan, as with Confucius and Mencius, Ten is all- 
important. It is the nearest approach to a deity which 
the essentially impersonal habit of mind of these nations 
permits. Ten or Tendo (the Way of Heaven) is said 
"to know," "to command," " to reward," "to punish," or 
"to be wroth," and is looked up to W'ith reverence and 
grateful emotion. But the conception falls short of that 
of a personal deity as we understand the phrase. There 
are in Japan, at any rate, no temples to Ten, no litanies, 
and no formal acts of worship. 

Ethics are in the Chu-Hi system a branch of natural 
philosophy. Corresponding to the regular changes of 
the seasons in nature is right action in man (who is the 

228 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

crown of nature) in the relations of sovereign and sub- 
ject, parent and child, elder brother and younger brother, 
husband and wife, friend and friend. To his sovereign 
or lord he is bound to be faithful, to his parents dutiful, 
and to his elder brother respectful. Affection should 
characterise the relations of husband and wife, and trust 
that of friend with friend. A man should also display in 
his conduct the five virtues of Goodness, Righteousness, 
Propriety, Enlightenment, and Good Faith. The same 
combination of ethics and natural science is implied in 
Confucius's doctrine when he says that the command of 
Heaven is called natural disposition, accordance with 
this natural disposition is called the path (of duty), the 
regulation of this path is cnlled instructi-on. Man's heart 
is naturally good. In like manner Kiuso, a Japanese 
exponent of the Chu-Hi philosophy, says, ''Man makes 
the heart of heaven and earth [nature, we would say] 
his own." 

Principles of government are also found a place in this 
philosophy. If the sovereign practises the virtues above 
described in his own person, the people will naturally 
imitate his example, and good government will be the 
result. But the necessity of dealing out justly rewards 
and punishments, of encouraging sages to lead the people 
in the right way, and of purity in making appointments, 
is not lost sight of. 

The Japanese have added little or nothing to Chu-Hi's 
philosophy. It is in its application that the national 
genius reveals itself, and more especially in the relative 
importance attached by them to the various moral obliga- 
tions incumbent on man. 

It is here that we must look for an answer to a question 
which will occur to all who take the smallest interest in 

ETHICS OF YEDO PERIOD 229 

the Japanese, namely *^ In what respect does their national 
character differ from that of European nations ? " 

The vices and virtues are on the whole the same with 
them as with ourselves. It is in their ^' Table of Moral 
Precedence," as it were, that we discover some striking 
differences. The most noteworthy instance of this is the 
commanding position assigned to loyalty, which in the 
moral ideas of this period overshadows and dwarfs all 
other obligations. It means not so much the reverent 
submission due by all his subjects to the Mikado, although 
in theory this was not lost sight of, as of the Daimios to 
the Shogun, and, in a still higher degree, of men of the 
two-sworded class to their immediate chiefs. Implicit 
obedience and unfaltering devotion to his feudal lord w^as 
the Samurai's most sacred duty. For his lord's sake the 
retainer was bound not only to lay down his own life 
cheerfully, but to sacrifice the lives and honour of those 
nearest and dearest to him. Japanese history and litera- 
ture teem with instances which show the extreme lengths 
to W'hich this virtue was carried, not only in theory, but 
in practice. It was responsible for many acts of barbarity, 
such as that of Nakamitsu, a favourite hero of Japanese 
drama and stor}^, who slew his own innocent son, and 
substituted his head for that of his lord's heir, who had 
been guilty of a capital offence. But there was also 
associated with it unshrinking courage, loyal service, and 
disinterested self-sacrifice to a degree for which we must 
go to ancient Rome to find a parallel. The political 
system of which this virtue was the vital support is nov/ 
a thing of the past. Daimios and Shoguns exist no 
longer. But those who know the Japan of the present 
day will readily recognise the same quality in the spirit 

of national patriotism and zeal in the discharge of public 
16 

230 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

duty which honourably distinguish the descendants of 
the former Samurai. 

Next after loyalty in the Japanese scale of virtues stands 
filial piety. The State being composed of families, if 
the family is badly managed, the State cannot be well 
governed. If the child is disobedient to his parents, he 
is not likely to prove a loyal and obedient subject when 
he grows to manhood. Hence the necessity, from a 
political point of view, of filial piety. On the extreme 
importance attached to this virtue both in China and 
Japan it is needless to dilate. 

Among the chief duties of a Samurai to his lord, or of 
a child towards his parent, was that of revenge. The 
forgiveness of injuries had no place in the moral code 
of the Japanese of this time. No more stern obligation 
rested on them than to execute dire vengeance for the 
unmerited death or disgrace of a parent or lord. That 
this was not in theory only, there are many well-authenti- 
cated instances in real life to show. It applied to women 
as well as to men, though in their case, as in that of the 
lower classes of society, it was regarded more or less as 
a counsel of perfection. If they did rise to the occasion, 
all the more honour was paid them. The drama and 
fiction of modern Japan are full of stories of revenge 
{kataki-uchi)y and this passion occupies the same place 
of honour with their novelists that love does in European 
fiction. 

In presence of the obligations imposed by loyalty and 
filial duty, life was regarded as of no account. When 
we remember the humane Buddhist influences to which 
Japan was so long subjected, and the ancient national 
character reflected in the mildly sentimental Heian litera- 
ture, the disregard of human life which pervades history 

ETHICS OF YEDO PERIOD 231 

and fiction alike during the Yedo period is not a little 
remarkable. It is conspicuously observable in the ethics 
of suicide. The moral code of this time contains no 
canon 'gainst self-slaughter. On the contrary, the occa- 
sions when a Japanese Samurai was bound to commit 
suicide were innumerable. Grave insults which it was 
impossible to revenge, unmerited disgrace, gross blunder- 
ing, errors of judgment, or even simple failure in official 
matters, crimes not of a disgraceful character, all entailed 
the necessity of suicide, or at least made it the most 
honourable course to pursue. If a Samurai had occa- 
sion to remonstrate with his lord for some act of mis- 
government, he frequently emphasised his appeal by 
suicide. The case of the forty-seven Ronins who slew 
themselves in a body at the grave of their master after 
having executed a bloody revenge on his enemy, is known 
to all readers of Mr. Mitford's Tales of Old J apart. Another 
admired example is that of a governor of Nagasaki who 
in 1808 committed suicide in the approved manner be- 
cause he was unable to detain and destroy a British man- 
of-war which had defied his authority. The case of the 
last of the Shoguns may also be quoted. On the down- 
fall of his power in 1867 he was urged by one of his 
Council to save the honour of his family by a voluntary 
suicide. He flatly refused to do so and left the room, 
whereupon his faithful adviser retired to another part of 
the castle and solemnly performed the hara-kiri} Of 
suicides, attempted suicides, or threatened suicides of 
men, women, and children, on the stage and in fiction, 
there is simply no end. ' 

Human nature being the same everywhere, the duties 

^ Literally "belly-cut," a term which some English wag has thought fit to 
render by "happy despatch." 

232 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

arising out of the relations of the sexes are essentially 
the same in Japan as in Europe. Chastity, both in men 
and women, is a virtue, as it is with ourselves. But in 
the Yedo period it was thrust mto the background by the 
more urgent claims of loyalty and filial duty. In theory 
a man should have but one wife. In the case of the 
heads of great houses, one or even more concubines were 
allowed, but only with the bond fide object of having 
children. Vulgar licentiousness was condemned, and in 
the case of officials was visited with severe punishment. 

The position of the wife, as of women generally, was 
very different in the Yedo period from what it had been 
in earlier times. Chinese notions of the absolute sub- 
jection and the seclusion, as far as possible, of the sex, 
made great progress. Women were now rarely heard of 
in public life, and disappear completely from the world 
of literature — a signihcant fact when we remember the 
feminine masterpieces of the Heian period. A woman's 
first duty was to be faithful and obedient to her husband. 
Second marriages of widows were not absolutely for- 
bidden, but women who refused to contract such unions 
were highly commended, and when we meet with the 
word ^^ chastity" in a Japanese book, it is generally this 
form of the virtue which is meant. A wife was bound 
to revenge her husband's murder, and in fiction at least 
was permitted to sacrifice her own honour with this 
praiseworthy object. Some European travellers and 
novelists speak as if an unmarried woman's maiden fame 
were a thing of no account in Japan. This is simple 
nonsense. But it can hardly be denied that more par- 
ticularly in their case chastity holds a lower place in the 
scale of virtues than in Christian countries. According 
to the code of morality of novelists and dramatists, it is 

ETHICS OF YEDO PERIOD 233 

permissible for, and even obligatory on, a girl to allow 
herself to be sold into prostitution in order to support 
her destitute parents. Incidents of this kind are very 
common indeed in their pages. 

The harlot figures very prominently in the literature 
of the Yedo period, and in Japan, as elsewhere, writers 
have not been wanting who have done their best to 
surround this calling with a halo of romance. But, as 
Mitford has shown, Japanese opinion on this subject is 
on the whole sound. There may be some difference of 
degree, but of the substantial identity of the feeling with 
which prostitution is regarded by them and by ourselves 
there can be no doubt. The proverb, " When you find 
an honest harlot and a three-cornered egg, the moon will 
appear on the last day of the [lunar] month," very clearly 
indicates the general opinion of this class. 

Piety, by which must be understood a devotion to 
Buddhist religious practices, was not in high estimation 
under the Tokugawas. It is not a distinctive virtue of 
the Japanese character at any period of their history. 

On the extreme punctiliousness and ceremony which 
characterised all the doings of a well-bred Japanese, of 
his sensitiveness on the point of honour, and of his cult 
of the sword as a sort of incarnation of the spirit of the 
Samurai, this is not the place to dilate. Nor need any- 
thing be said of the virtues of frugality, sobriety, honesty, 
and liberality, as they hold practically the same position 
in Japan as with ourselves. The duties of superiors to 
their inferiors, of a lord to his retainer, of a father to his 
son, and of a husband towards his wife, may also be taken 
for granted. Though less frequently insisted upon, they 
are by no means passed over by the Japanese moralist. 

As time went on, the code of morals derived from the 

2 34 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

teachings of the philosophers of China, and expounded 
and appHed by their Japanese followers, gained in pre- 
cision and detail. But what had originally been a whole- 
some and vivifying influence became a burden to the 
nation. It fell most heavily on the Samurai, all whose 
actions were governed by strict rules and punctilious 
etiquette, in a way which was fatal to any reasonable 
share of personal freedom. In short, the great fault of 
the later Shogunate was over-regulation in almost every 
department of life. I was one day walking with the late 
Count Terashima, then Minister for Foreign Afl"airs, in one 
of those beautiful creations of the landscape gardener's 
art which abound in Tokio. He pointed to a grove of 
fir-trees standing by an artificial hke, which had been 
trimmed and trained by generations of gardeners into 
quaint and not unpleasing but stunted shapes. ''There," 
he said, ''is an emblem of the Japanese nation under the 
Bakufu [Shogunate]. That is what Chinese learning did 
for us." 

There is much in this type of humanity which it is 
hard for us Europeans to understand and appreciate. 
The Japanese of the ancient classical period appeal more 
strongly to our sympathies. Even Herodotus and Plato, 
far removed as they are from us in point of time, are 
immeasurably nearer to modern Englishmen in all their 
ideas, sentiments, and moral standards, than the Japanese 
of fifty years ago. 

Fujiwara Seikwa was the forerunner of a long series of 
Kangakusha. His pupils became in their turn teachers, 
and handed on the torch of learning, which now began 
to burn brightly. It is difficult to give an idea of the 
rage for the acquisition of knowledge which possessed 
the Japanese people during the seventeenth century. It 

DOSHUN 235 

can only be compared to the passion for European 
learning of the last thirty years. 

Following the example of the great founder of their 
dynasty, the Tokugawa Shoguns encouraged learning by 
every means in their power. They founded libraries and 
colleges, subsidised professors, and were liberal of their 
favours to all eminent scholars. Tsunayoshi, the fifth 
Tokugawa Shogun (1680- 1709), an indifferent ruler, was 
passionately fond of learning. He surrounded himself 
with scholars, and spent all his leisure time in study. 
He used even to deliver lectures on the Chinese classics 
to audiences composed of Daimios and high officials, 
Shinto functionaries and Buddhist priests. It w^as in his 
time that Yedo began to take prominence as a literary 
centre. 

The Daimios, in their turn, vied with one another in 
attracting distinguished Kangakusha to their service, and 
in establishing high schools for the teaching of the 
classics, Chinese and Japanese history and composition. 
Nor were the people neglected. Nearly every temple 
had a tei-akoya attached to it, where the children of 
peasants, mechanics, and tradespeople were instructed 
in reading, writing, and arithmetic. 

It is impossible to notice all the Kangakusha who 
flourished at this time, or to enumerate their most volu- 
minous writings. They do not take high rank as litera- 
ture. A word of mention is due, however, to Hayashi 
Rasan, also called DoSHUN, with half-a-dozen other 
aliases, which it is needless to reproduce here. All the 
Kangakusha indulged in a profusion of aliases, much to 
the confusion of bibliographers and writers on Japanese 
literature. Doshun (b. 1583, d. 1657) was a pupil of 
Seikwa. He was a devoted student, and never passed a 

236 JAPANESE LITEI^TURE 

clay in his life without reading something. It is related 
of him that once, when obliged to flee from his house by 
a great conflagration, he took some books with him in 
his kagOy and continued his work of annotation on the 
way. The list of his publications comprises one hundred 
and seventy separate treatises, mostly of a scholastic or 
moral character. There are also some memoirs use- 
ful to the historian, and one hundred and fifty volumes 
of miscellanies, essays, &c. He held an official position 
under the Shogun's Government, by which he was em- 
ployed in drafting laws, and in giving advice on knotty 
questions which required learning for their solution. 
He was the founder of a long line of official Kangakusha 
which lasted until the downfall of the Shogunate in 
1867. 

His son, Hayashi Shunsai (1618-1680) compiled about 
1652 a history of Japan entitled 0-dai-ichi-ran. It is in 
every respect a very poor production, and is only men- 
tioned here because a translation into French by Klaproth 
was published by the Oriental Translation Fund in 1835. 

Passing over a number of scholars deservedly remem- 
bered with gratitude in their own country for their ser- 
vices to learning and good morals, we come to Kaibara 
Yekken {1630-1714), who w^as born at Fukuoka, in 
Chikuzen, of the Daimios of v/hich province his family 
were hereditary retainers. His father held an official 
appointment as physician, and Yekken himself acquired 
some proficiency in the art of medicine. His first 
teacher was his elder brother, under whose instructions 
he was weaned of a liking for Buddhism, and devoted 
himself to the study of the Chinese classics. When he 
grew up to manhood he went to reside in Kioto, where 
he benefited by the instruction of Kinoshita Junan and 

YEKKEN 237 

other scholars. He had, however, no regular teacher. 
After three years spent in study he returned to his 
province, where he held honourable official posts under 
three successive Daimios until 1700, when he retired on 
a pension, and took up his abode in Kioto, where he 
spent the remainder of his days. His wife is said to 
have been an accomplished woman. She accompanied 
him on his travels to various parts of Japan, and assisted 
him in his literary labours. 

Yekken was a voluminous writer, and in the course of 
a long life (the Kangakusha were remarkable for longe- 
vity) produced over a hundred different works, compris- 
ing moral treatises, commentaries on the Chinese classics, 
learned dissertations on Japanese philology, botanical 
works, and books of travel. His sole object in writing 
was to benefit his countrymen ; and his style, though 
manly and vigorous, is wholly devoid of rhetorical orna- 
ment, and of those frivolities of language which w^ere so 
freely indulged in by contemporary novelists and drama- 
tists. He used the Kana or native phonetic script as far 
as possible, so as to bring his teachings down to the level 
of children and ignorant people. Though perhaps the 
most eminent scholar of his day, there is not an atom of 
pedantry about him. No Japanese books are more easy 
of comprehension than his. Their principal fault is one 
very common with Japanese writers of the Yedo period, 
namely, difTuseness and repetition. 

Due allowance being made for his age and country, 
Yekken's writings are full of excellent morality of a plain, 
common-sense description. It is hardly possible to over- 
estimate their influence, or the service which he rendered 
to his country by his teachings. 

The following detached sentences from the Dojikuny a 

238 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

treatise on education, composed by him at the age of 
eighty, will give some idea of their quality. They have 
been somewhat abridged in translation. 

'' In the houses of the great, good persons should be 
chosen from the first to be attached to the child. Even 
the poor should be careful, so far as their circumstances 
will permit, that their children should associate with good 
people. This is the teaching of the [Chinese] sages." 

^^A wet-nurse should be of a gentle disposition, staid 
and grave of demeanour, and of few words." 

*' A boy's education should begin from the time when 
he can eat rice, speak a little, and show pleasure or 
anger." 

^' Some nurses make cowards of children by wantonly 
telling them frightful stories. Ghost stories and the like 
should not be told to children. They should not be too 
warmly clad, or have too much to eat." 

^^ Cunning, chattering, lying women should not be 
engaged as nurses. Drunkards, self-willed or malicious 
persons should also be avoided." 

" From their infancy, truth in word and thought should 
be made of the first importance. Children should be 
severely punished for lying or deceit. Let their parents 
be careful not to deceive them, for this is another way of 
teaching them to deceive." 

^'A tutor should be a man of upright life. A child 
should not be put to learn of a disreputable person, no 
matter how clever he may be." 

^^ Better for a child to lose a year's study than consort 
for a day with a base companion." 

*^ Every night the child's sayings and actions during 
the day should be reviewed, and if necessary, punishment 
administered." 

YEKKEN 239 

"At the age of ten a boy should go to school. If he 
remains longer at home he is apt to be spoiled by his 
parents." 

" Before sitting down to study, a boy should wash his 
hands, set a guard upon his thoughts, and compose his 
countenance. He should brush the dust off his desk, 
place his books upon it in an orderly manner, and read 
them in a kneeling posture. When he is reading to his 
teacher, he should not rest his book on a high desk, but 
on its case or on a low stand. It should certainly not be 
placed on the floor. Books should be kept clean, and 
when they are no longer required, the covers should be 
put on, and they should be put back in their place. This 
should be done even when the pupil is called away for 
some urgency. Books should not be flung about, stridden 
over, or used as pillows. The corners should not be 
turned down, or spittle used to raise the leaves. If waste 
paper contains texts from the classics or the names of 
sages, boys should be careful not to apply it to common 
purposes. Nor should waste paper with the names of 
one's parents or lord be defiled." 

Yekken devotes the third volume of the Ddjikun to the 
education of girls. The two great virtues of a w^oman 
are, in his opinion, amiability and obedience. In another 
place he sums up the good qualities of a woman as — 

" ist. A womanly disposition, as shown in modesty 
and submissiveness. 

'' 2nd. Womanly language. She should be careful in 
the choice of words, and avoid lying and unseemly ex- 
pressions. She should speak when necessary, and be 
silent at other times. She should not be averse to listen- 
ing to others. 

*' 3rd. Womanly apparel. She should be cleanly, avoid 

240 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

undue ornament, and have a proper regard to taste and 
refinement. 

'^4th. Womanly arts. These include sewing, reeling 
silk, making clothes, and cooking. 

*^ Everything impure should be kept from a girl's 
ears. Popular songs and the popular drama are not 
for them. The Ise Monogatai'i and Genji Monogatari 
are objectionable on account of their immoral tend- 
ency." 

Yekken recommends parents to write out the follow- 
ing thirteen counsels and give them to their daughters 
on their marriage. I have abbreviated them a good 
deal. 

'' I. Be respectful and obedient to your parents-in-law. 

^' 2. A woman has no [feudal] lord. She should rever- 
ence and obey her husband instead. 

" 3. Cultivate friendly relations with your husband's 
relatives. 

'^4. Avoid jealousy. If your husband offends, remon- 
strate with him gently, without hate or anger. 

^^ 5. Generally, when your husband does wTong, it is 
your duty to remonstrate with him gently and affection- 
ately. 

*'6. Be of few v/ords. Avoid abusive language and 
falsehood. 

" 7. Be always circumspect in your behaviour. Get 
up early. Go to bed at midnight. Do not indulge in a 
siesta. Attend diligently to the work of the house. Do 
not become addicted to sake or tea. Avoid listening to 
lewd songs or music. Shinto shrines and Buddhist 
temples being public resorts for pleasure, should be 
sparingly visited before the age of forty. 

'' 8. Have nothing to do with fortune-tellers or 

YEKKEN 241 

mediums, and do not offend the gods and Buddha by too 
famihar importunities. Attend to your human duties, 
and do not let your heart run astray after invisible 
supernatural beings. 

" 9. Economy in domestic matters is all-miportant. 

*' 10. Keep young men at a distance. On no account 
have any written correspondence with them. Male 
domestics should not be allow^ed to enter the women's 
apartments. 

^^ II. Avoid conspicuous colours and patterns in your 
dress. Choose those suitable for a somewhat older 
person than yourself. 

^'t2. In everything your husband and his parents 
should come before your own parents. 

^* 13. Do not attend to the tattle of female servants." 

This is commonplace enough. But Yekken could rise 
to higher flights on occasion, as the following extract 
from a treatise on the philosophy of pleasure {Raku-kuti) 
will show. The sentiment is of a distinctly Words- 
worthian quality. 

*' If we make inward pleasures our chief aim, and use 
the ears and eyes simply as the means of procuring such 
dehghts from without, we shall not be molested by the 
lusts of these senses. If we open our hearts to the beauty 
of heaven, earth, and the ten thousand created things, 
they wall yield us pleasure without limit, pleasure always 
before our eyes, night and morning, full and overflowing. 
The man who takes delight in such things becomes the 
owner of the mountains and streams, of the moon and 
flowers, and needs not to pay his court to others in order 
to enjoy them. They are not bought with treasure. 
Without the expenditure of a single cash he may use 
them to his heart's content, and yet never exhaust them. 

242 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

And although he enjoys possession of them as his own, 
no man will wrangle with him in order to deprive him of 
them. The reason is that the beauty of mountain and 
river, moon and flowers, has from the beginning no fixed 
owner. 

''He who knows the boundless sources of delight 
which are thus contained in the universe, and who 
finds his enjoyment therein, envies not the luxurious 
pleasures of the rich and great ; for such enjoyments 
are beyond those of wealth and honours. He who is 
unconscious of them cannot enjoy the delectable things 
in the greatest abundance which are every day before 
his eyes. 

"Vulgar pleasures, even before they pass, become a 
torment to the body. If, for example, carried away by 
desire, we eat and drink our fill of dainty things, it is 
pleasant at first, but disease and suffering soon follow. 
In general, vulgar pleasures corrupt the heart, injure the 
constitution, and end in misery. The pleasures of the 
man of worth, on the other hand, nourish the heart and 
do not entice us astray. To speak in terms of outward 
things, the pleasures which we derive from the love of 
the moon or of flowers, from gazing on the hills and 
streams, from humming to the wind or following the 
flight of birds with envy, are of a mild nature. We may 
take delight in them all day long and do ourselves no 
harm. Man will not blame us, nor God remonstrate 
with us for indulgence in it. It is easy to be attained, 
even by the poor and needy, and has no ill consequences. 
The rich and great, absorbed in luxury and indolence, 
know not these pleasures ; but the poor man, little affected 
by such hindrances, may readily procure them if he only 
chooses to do so." 

YEKKEN 243 

On Gardening 

'^ When you move into a house your first care ought to 
be to plant fruit-trees. Others may come after. Fore- 
thought for ten years consists in planting trees. In 
planting, fruit should come first, flowers should be your 
next care, and foliage last of all. Fruit is of the greatest 
use. to man ; and fruit-trees should be planted in large 
numbers, particularly the orange and the lime. When 
their fruit has formed and ripened, it is not inferior in 
beauty to flowers. In planting persimmons, pears, chest- 
nuts, and pepper, the best sorts should be selected. For 
flowering trees, the ordinary plum should come first. 
The red-blossomed plum is also good, and the cherry. 
It is a pity it sheds its flowers so soon. The camellia 
remains long in bloom, and its leaves are beautiful. It 
grows readily from cuttings, and blossoms early. The 
kaido [Pyrus spectabilis\ and azaleas of different kinds, 
are also to be commended. For foliage-trees, choose 
the cryptomeria, the TJiuya obtusa, the podocarpus, and 
evergreen-trees generally. Bamboos should be planted 
on the northern side, as a protection against fire and 
wind. They may be cut down from time to time, and 
put away for use on occasion. In the front garden plant 
willows, cherry-trees, firs, and cryptomerias. Avoid 
planting too thickly ; it makes too much moisture, and 
in summer harbours mosquitoes, which are a plague. ' 

*' Vegetables may be planted for everyday use. They 
are fresher when grown at home than if bought in the 
market. Besides, the luxuriance of their leaves delights 
the eye not less than the beauty of flowers. 

'' Moreover it tends to edify the heart if we plant trees 

244 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

and herbs in our gardens and love them. In our leisure 
moments we should pay some attention to looking for 
things easy to get, just as they may turn up, and planting 
them. If we strive after procuring things hard to come 
at, and either beg them unconscionably of our friends, or 
buy them at a high price, we get proud of the number of 
kinds we have collected, or of the superiority of the 
flowers. This leads to rivalry in the goodness of the 
flowers. Trouble ensues, and heart-burnings, which are 
injurious to self-discipline, yield no pleasure, and cause 
nothing but anxiety." 

Yekken was also a poet. The following Tanka was 
composed by him when he felt death approaching : — 

" The past 
Seems to me 
Like a single 7iigJit : 
Ah I the dreajn 
Of 77iore than eighty years I'^'* 

The most distinguished of the Kangakusha was un- 
doubtedly Arm Hakuseki. He was born in Yedo in 
1657, his father being in the service of Lord Tsuchiya, a 
small Daimio of the province of Kadzusa. Hakuseki 
has fortunately left an autobiography, a very rare kind 
of literature in japan, and we have therefore much fuller 
information regarding his life than is usual in the case of 
Japanese authors. It was written not for publication (the 
copy before me is in manuscript), but for the information 
of his own descendants, so that they might not have the 
dissatisfaction he himself had experienced of knowing 
little about their ancestors. This autobiography was 
written in 1716, after Hakuseki had retired from public 
life. It is entitled Orz-taku-s/iida (^' Burning Faggots"), 

HAKUSEKI 245 

in allusion to a poem of the Emperor Go Toba which 
speaks of the smoke of faggots at evening bringing back 
the memory (of a departed dear one who had been cre- 
mated ?). The early part of this work is taken up with 
an account of '' the man who was his father," to use 
Hakuseki's curious phrase, a vietsuke^ or inspector of 
the Daimio's Yedo mansion. In him he has given a 
minute and loving description of a Japanese gentleman 
of the olden time. 1 transcribe a few sentences : — 

'' Ever since I came to understand the heart of things, 
my memory is that the daily routine of his life w^as always 
exactly the same. He never failed to get up an hour 
before daybreak. He then had a cold bath, and did his 
hair himself. In cold weather, the woman who was my 
mother would propose to order hot water for him, but 
this he would not allow, as he wished to avoid giving the 
servants trouble. When he was over seventy, and my 
mother also was advanced in years, sometimes when the 
cold was unendurable, a lighted brazier was brought in, 
and they lay down to sleep with their feet against it. 
Beside the fire there was placed a kettle with hot water, 
which my father drank when he got up. Both of them 
honoured the Way of Buddha. My father, when he had 
arranged his hair and adjusted his clothing, never 
neglected to make obeisance to Buddha. On the anni- 
versaries of his father's and mother's death he and my 
mother prepared the rice for the offerings. This duty 
was never entrusted to servants. After he was dressed 
he waited quietly till dawn, and then w^ent out to his 
official duty." 

^^ Since I remember, there were but few black hairs on 

1 This is the word usually rendered "spy." 
17 

246 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

his head.- He had a square-shaped face with a high 
forehead. His eyes were large, he had a thick growth 
of beard, and was short of stature. He was, however, 
a big-boned, pow^erful man. He was never known to 
betray anger, nor do I remember that even when he 
laughed he ever gave way to boisterous mirth. Much 
less did he ever descend to violent language when he 
had occasion to reprimand any one. In his conversation 
he used as few w^ords as possible. His demeanour was 
grave. I have never seen him startled, flurried, or im- 
patient. When he applied the viozUy^ he used to say 
there was no use in small and few applications, and 
would put on five or seven great patches at the same 
time without showing any sign of suffering. The room 
he usually occupied he kept cleanly swept, had an old 
picture hung on the wall, and a few flowers which were 
in season set out in a vase. He would spend the day 
looking at them. He painted a little in black and white, 
not being fond of colours. When in good health he 
never troubled a servant, but did everything for him- 
self." 

As a boy Hakuseki gave many proofs of precocious 
intelligence. Before he was three years of age he copied 
out some Chinese characters in a recognisable manner. 
His Daimio noticed him and kept him constantly about 
his own person. 

'^ In the autumn of my eighth year, Tobe [his Daimio] 
went to the province of Kadzusa, leaving instructions 
that I was to be taught writing. In the middle of the 
twelfth month of the winter of that year he returned, and 
I resumed my usual attendance on him. In the autumn 

^ A kind of tinder, applied to the skin in small patches and then burnt, as 
a remedy for various ailments. 

HAKUSEKI 247 

of the next year, when he went again to his province, 
he set me a task, ordering me to write out every day in 
the day-time three thousand Chinese characters in the 
round or cursive script, and at night one thousand. 
When winter came on and the days became shorter, it 
frequently happened that the sun approached his setting 
before my task was finished. I would then take my desk 
out to a bamboo veranda which faced the west, and finish 
it there. Moreover, as I sometimes got intolerably sleepy 
over my nightly task, I ai-ranged with the man who was 
told off to serve me to put two buckets of water on the 
aforesaid veranda. When I became very drowsy I took 
off my coat and poured one of the buckets of water over 
me. I then resumed my clothing and went on writing. 
The cold produced in this way for a while answered the 
purpose of keepmg me awake. But after a time I became 
warm again, and the drowsiness came back, when I poured 
water over myself as before. With two applications of 
this kind I was able to get through most of my work. 
This was in the autumn and winter of my ninth year. 
. . . From my thirteenth year Tobe used me to con- 
duct most of his correspondence." 

Hakuseki was an ambitious youth, as the following 
saying of his shows : ^' If, alive, a man cannot become 
a Daimio, better die and be a king of Hades." In this 
spirit he refused an eligible offer of marriage to the 
daughter of a wealthy merchant, although both he and 
his father, who had retired on a small pension, were in 
great poverty. In 1682 he entered the service of Hotta, 
the Daimio of Furukaw^a, with whom he remained ten 
years. When he left him Hakuseki was almost desti- 
tute. His only property was a box containing three 
hundred cash, and three measures of rice (a week's 

248 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

supply). His teacher, Kinoshita Junan, of whom he 
always speaks with the greatest reverence, tried to pro- 
cure him an appointment with the Daimio of Kaga ; but 
Hakuseki, being appealed to by a friend who had an 
aged mother in that province dependent on him for sup- 
port, begged Junan to use his influence for him instead. 
Hakuseki had no favourable opportunity of advancement 
until 1693, when he was thirty -six years of age. On 
the recommendation of Junan, he was then engaged as 
Professor of Chinese by lyenobu, subsequently (1709- 
1713) Shogun, but at this time Daimio of Kofu. 

His relations with lyenobu were throughout of the 
most cordial nature. He was always receiving from him 
presents of clothing and money. When Hakuseki 
lectured on the Chinese classics, lyenobu listened with 
the greatest respect, refraining in summer from brushing 
ol^ a mosquito, and in winter, when he had a cold in his 
head, turning away from the lecturer before wiping his 
nose with the paper of which he kept a supply in his 
sleeve. "You may imagine," says Hakuseki, addressing 
his posterity in the Ori-taku-shiba^ "how quiet the rest of 
the audience were." 

In 1701, by command of lyenobu, Hakuseki composed 
his greatest work, the Hankampu, a history of the Daimios 
of Japan from 1600 to 1680. It is in thirty volumes and 
must have required immense research, yet it was written 
in a few months. Having received the order in the first 
month, he began the draft on the eleventh day of the 
seventh month. The manuscript was completed in the 
eleventh month, and a fair copy was made by Hakuseki 
himself and laid before lyenobu on the nineteenth 
day of the second month of the following year. Haku- 
seki mentions these details with obvious pride in his 

HAKUSEKI 249 

autobiography. They are very characteristic of the 
extreme rapidity of composition of Japanese authors 
during this period. They expended no superfluous 
labour of the hie upon their works. Yet the Hankampu 
cannot be called a carelessly written book. Not only 
does it contain most valuable material for the future 
historian of Japan, but the style is highly commended 
by the best native critics for its combined elegance and 
vigour, neither leaning too much to Chinese pedantry 
on the one hand, nor to Japanese purism on the other. 
So far as a '* Western barbarian " may be allowed an 
opinion, this praise is not undeserved, though it is perhaps 
unnecessary to endorse the language of a native admirer 
who declares that ** Hakuseki's heart is brocade, his 
bowels are rich embroidery, his spittle produces pearls, 
and his half - conscious mutterings form harmonious 
music." The Hankampu contains much genealogical 
and other matter which has little interest for the 
European reader. Even Hakuseki's countrymen at the 
present day will probably admit that there is more than 
enough of this element. Although one of the most 
important works of the Yedo period, I doubt whether it 
has been printed. The Shoguns' government was much 
given to cacJiotterie in matters of state, and very many of 
the most interesting political works of this period were 
only circulated privately among the official class. Two 
copies in my possession are both in manuscript, the 
form in which Hakuseki's works are usually met with. 
In the case of the Hankavipu there were probably 
substantial reasons for refraining from publication. It 
was hardly possible, especially for a man of Hakuseki's 
fearless and uncompromising nature, to relate without 
offence the history of three hundred and thirty-seven 

^2 5o JAPANESE LITERATURE 

noble houses down to twenty years before the time of 
writing. 

The following extract will give some idea of the scope 
and character of this work : — 

Itakura Shigehide as a Judge of Criminal Cases 

'^ It is impossible fully to set forth here the reputation 
of this man while he remained in office, or his f3me 
throughout the Empire. I shall only take one principal 
instance. 

** From the time that he received his appointment, he 
was in the habit, when on his way to the tribunal and 
before taking his place there, to pay distant worship in a 
corridor which faced the west. Here a tea-mill^ was 
placed, and the paper slides being drawn, Shigehide 
seated himself behind them and heard the cases while 
grinding the tea with his own hand. Everybody won- 
dered at this conduct, but no one dared to question him. 
Many years afterwards he was asked the reason, and 
replied : ^ Well, the reason why I worshipped afar in a 
corridor which faced the west before taking my place in 
the tribunal was this : I was worshipping the gods of 
Atago. I was told that among all the many gods these 
were the most efficacious, and I offered a prayer to them 
when I thus worshipped. I said in my prayer : ^^ In 
deciding the cases which are brought before Shigehide 
this day, may there be nothing to which his heart is un- 
equal. If he errs and allows selfish motives to influence 
him, may the gods be pleased that same moment to take 
away his life." And I adjured them daily, in virtue of my 

1 A small hand-mill of stone used for reducing tea to powder before making 
the infusion. The whole is then drunk — leaves and all. 

HAKUSEKI 251 

profound trust in them for years, not to let me live if 
self should get the better of me. 

*^ * Another thing which I thought to interfere with 
clearness of judgment is the emotion of the heart. A 
really good man will not allow such emotion to arise. 
Shigehide [himself], however, could not reach this per- 
fection. So in order to test my heart and ascertain 
whether it was calm or perturbed, the only expedient I 
could think of was to grind tea. When my heart w^as 
steady and calm, my hand was accordant with it. The 
mill then went round smoothly, and the powdered tea 
which fell from it w^as beautifully fine. I knew when 
the tea fell down in a fine powder that my heart was 
free from emotion. Not till then did I pronounce 
judgment. 

*' ' The reason why I heard cases with a paper screen 
interposed was this : Taking men in general, a glance at 
their faces shows that some are ill-favoured and others 
prepossessing ; some are honest-looking, others knavish. 
There are many such varieties — more than I can tell. On 
looking at them we are apt to conclude that the honest- 
looking man's evidence is true, and that the actions of 
the knavish-looking fellow are all false, though they may 
be straightforward enough. We think that the plaint of 
the man of prepossessing appearance shows that he has 
been wronged, and that the contention of the ill-favoured 
man is erroneous. In all these cases the heart is moved 
by what we see with our eyes. Even before the wit- 
nesses utter a word, we say in our hearts, ^' Such a one is a 
knave, such a one is right, such a one is straightforward," 
so that when we come to hear the evidence we are apt to 
wrest it to our preconceived ideas. But very frequently 
it is seen during the trial that among prepossessing coun- 

252 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

tenances some belong to men who are truly detestable, 
and that of ill-favoured men some are deserving of sym- 
pathy. Among the honest-lookmg there are knaves, and 
true men among the knavish-looking. Men's hearts are 
hard to know, and the plan of judging of them by their 
looks will not answer. . . . Even for those against whom 
there is no charge, it must be a terrible thing to appear 
in a court of justice. Some there are who, when they 
see before them the man in whose hands are life and 
death, are bewildered and cast down to such a degree as 
to be unable to plead what they might in their defence. 
When I reflected on this I felt that it was after all better 
that the judge and the prisoner should not see one another 
face to face. This was my reason for taking my seat with 
a screen interposed.' " 

Next to the Hankampu, Hakuseki's most important 
work is the TokusJii Yoron, which was written by order 
of lyenobu in 1712. It gives for the first time a general 
view of Japanese history for two thousand years, dwelling 
more particularly on periods of change and revolution, 
and showing the connection of events in a way which had 
never been previously attempted. Its historical value is 
considerable, but the style is not considered equal to that 
of his earlier work. 

lyenobu became Shogun in 1709. From this time 
forward Hakuseki, although holding no definite position 
in the government, was his constant adviser in state 
affairs. His influence was given on the side of common- 
sense and justice. One of the first matters he was con- 
cerned in was a currency question. To meet the expenses 
of the installation of the new Shogun, the Minister of 
Finance, Hagiwara Shigehide, proposed various schemes 

HAKUSEKI 253 

involving the debasing of the currency. These were 
vigorously opposed by Hakuseki, and with complete 
success, Hagiwara being deprived of office, and the cur- 
rency at length (in 1714) placed on a solid foundation. 
A more doubtful financial measure taken by his advice 
restricted the export of gold and silver, and limited the 
number of vessels engaged in foreign commerce. 

Throughout lyenobu's reign Hakusekiwas the acknow- 
ledged authority on financial matters. In 1741 an embassy 
arrived from Corea. He was charged with the negotia- 
tions, and acquitted himself with great credit. At this 
time he received the title of Chikugo no Kami, and a 
grant of 500 kokus of rice annually. His strong interest 
in foreign affairs is evidenced by a little work called 
Gojiryaku^ a collection of memoranda (still in manu- 
script) on Loochoo, the forms of diplomatic intercourse, 
the movement of specie, &c. 

To us Europeans the most interesting episode in 
Hakuseki's life is his relations with an unfortunate 
Italian missionary. Father Sidotti, who landed alone in 
the province of Satsuma in 1708, with some wild hope 
of being allowed to preach the Christian religion in 
Japan. He was at once arrested, and ultimately sent 
to Yedo, where, after some time had elapsed, he was 
handed over to Hakuseki for examination. 

In the Seiyo Kibun (''Notes of the Western Ocean"), 
Hakuseki has given a history of this affair, to which he 
has appended such information regarding the geography 
and history of European countries as he was able to 
extract from this unhappy man. Owing chiefly to diffi- 
culties of interpretation, it is meagre in the extreme, but 
yet interesting as the first attempt of a Japanese writer 
to give an account of Europe. 

2 54 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Sidotti produced in Hakuseki that mixed feeling of 
perplexity and irritation which contact with a profound 
rehgious faith so often excites in thinkers of the positive 
type. The devotion to his sovereign and rehgious chief 
(for so Hakuseki thought it) which prompted him at the 
Pope's command to journey to so distant a country, and 
there for six years to undergo peril and suffering, ap- 
pealed strongly to a man who had himself a stern sense 
of duty. Hakuseki reported to his Government that it 
was impossible to witness without emotion Sidotti's firm 
adherence to his own faith, and he also spoke with warm 
appreciation of his kindly disposition and scientific know- 
ledge. *' But," said he, '* when this man begins to speak 
of religion his talk is shallow and scarce a word is intel- 
ligible. All of a sudden folly takes the place of \yisdom. 
It is like listening to the talk of two different men." 

The "folly" which Hakuseki had more particularly 
in view was an outline of Bible history and Christian 
doctrine which Sidotti had dictated to him in the fulness 
of his heart. In its Japanese form it is a dry and soulless 
husk, which affords some excuse for Hakuseki's obtuse- 
ness to its spiritual import. It should be a warning to 
missionaries not to attempt the teaching of religion until 
they have something more than a tyro's command of the 
language. As Hakuseki's attitude towards Christianity 
is essentially that of educated Japanese at the present 
day, I may quote some of his observations. 

" The foreign word ' Deus,' which the Western man 
used in his discourse, is equivalent to * Creator,' and 
means simply a Being who first made heaven and earth 
and the ten thousand things. He argued that the universe 
did not come into existence of itself. ^ It must,' he said, 
* have had a maker.' But if this were so, then who made 

HAKUSEKI 255 

Deus ? How could he be born while there was yet no 
heaven or earth ? And if Deus could come into existence 
of himself, why should not heaven and earth do so like- 
wise ? Again, there is the doctrine, that before the world 
existed, there was a heavenly paradise made for good 
men. I cannot understand how men could have any 
knowledge of good and evil while there was yet no heaven 
and earth. It is unnecessary to discuss all his notions 
about the beginning of the world and of mankind, of para- 
dise and of hell, as they are all derived from Buddhism. 

^^ What will be thought of the idea that Deus, pitying 
the heinous criminals who had broken the heavenly com- 
mands, and who of themselves could not give satisfaction, 
was three thousand years after, for their sakes, born as 
Jesus, and in their stead redeemed their guilt ? This 
sounds very childish. At the present time, the judge who 
is charged with the infliction of punishment may yet take 
a merciful view of the circumstances and grant pardon 
or mitigation. And in the case even of the heavenly 
commands, what was there to prevent Deus from par- 
doning an offence against them, or mitigating the punish- 
ment, more especially as he hjmself was the author of 
the prohibition which was broken." 

Hakuseki discusses Noah's flood in the same spirit. 
The Ten Commandments, he thinks, were borrowed 
mainly from Buddhism, as well as the miraculous occur- 
rences connected with the birth of Christ, and His styling 
Himself ^' Deus." The rite of baptism he refers to the 
same source. 

The result of Hakuseki's examination was a report, in 
which he pointed out that the Shogun's Government had 
three courses open to them : first, to send Sidotti back 
to his own country ; second, to retain him in imprison- 

2 56 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

ment ; and third, to put him to death as prescribed by 
law. He gave his own voice strongly m favour of the 
first course, but the second was the one actually adopted. 
Sidotti died in prison not long after.^ 

On the death of his patron in 171 3, Hakuseki wished 
to retire from public life. But it was pointed out to him 
that his help was required to carry out certain measures 
already contemplated by the late Shogun. He therefore 
consented, from public motives, to continue his counsels, 
lyenobu was succeeded by his son lyetsugu, then four 
years of age. A momentous question now arose which 
convulsed official circles in Yedo for some time. Was a 
child of such tender years bound to wear mourning for 
his father or not ? Hayashi Shuntai, the hereditary 
official representative of Chinese learning at the Shogun's 
court, declared for the negative. But he was no match 
for Hakuseki, who maintained the affirmative proposi- 
tion, and fairly crushed his opponent under a weight of 
learning and argument which seems to us rather dis- 
proportionate to the occasion. In his autobiography 
Hakuseki tells the story of Shuntai's discomfiture with 
great triumph. 

At lyetsugu's death in 17 16, the reins of power passed 
into other hands. Hakuseki was no longer consulted, 
and spent the remainder of his days as a recluse among 
his dearly loved books. He died in 1725 in his sixty- 
ninth year. His life shows that in Japan at this time 
a career was open for talent. He owed little to any 
one but himself. It was sheer worth, force of intel- 
lect, and a self-reliant, uncompromising character which 

^ The principal part of the Selyo Kibtin, from which the above particulars 
are taken, has been translated by the Rev. W. B. Wright, in the Tt-ansactions 
of the Asiatic Society of Japan ^ August 1 88 1. 

KIUSO 257 

raised him to the unique position of influence which he 
held. 

His works, inclusive of state papers and reports to his 
Government, number over three hundred. In addition 
to those already mentioned, there may be named Yeso- 
dan Hikki (m MS.), which treats of the productions of 
Yezo, the Yezo language, and the Aino revolt of 1669 ; 
Nantdshi, a geographical work on Loochoo ; Keizai Tenkei, 
or ''Principles of Finance" ; Kwahci Kd, a work on the 
currency ; Gunki Kd, on arms ; Kishin Ron, a book on 
the nature of the gods ; Gwako Beju^an, a work on 
painting ; Ketsugoku Kd, on knotty points of criminal 
law ; Dobim Tsfiko^ on the various forms of script used 
in Japan ; SJiuko Dzusetsu, an antiquarian work ; Toga^ 
a dictionary of Japanese w^ords in twenty books ; and 
Saira7i Jgeny an expansion of the historical and geo- 
graphical part of the Sezyd Kibun. 

MURO Kiuso was born at Yanaka, in the province of 
Musashi (not far from Yedo), in 1658. He was dis- 
tinguished from his earliest years by a love of learning. 
When only thirteen he was taken into the service of the 
Daimio of Kaga, who was so much struck by his pre- 
cocious talent that he sent him to Kioto to study under 
the famous Kinoshita Junan. 

In 171 1, on the recommendation of his friend and 
fellow-pupil Hakuseki, Kiuso received a Government 
appointment in Yedo as Professor of Chinese. In 1713 
he took up his residence in a house at Surugadai, a lofty 
platform w^hich overlooks Yedo from the north, near the 
spot where a Christian church now stands, conspicuous to 
the whole city. Here he spent the remainder of his days. 
When Hakuseki retired from public life, Kiuso to some 

258 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

extent took his place as adviser to the Shogunate. The 
Shogun Yoshiniune(i7i6-i75i) esteemed him highly and 
consulted him continually. Kiuso died in 1734 in his 
seventy-seventh year. 

Kiuso is best remembered by his Shimdai Zatsuwa 
(1729)/ a work of his old age. The title means " Mis- 
cellaneous Talk on Surugadai." It consists of notes taken 
of the discourses which he delivered in answer to '' those 
who believed in the Old Man and came to him with 
questions/' and covers a wide variety of subjects. It con- 
tains unsparing denunciations of Buddhism, superstition, 
and heresy from the faith as it is in Chu-Hi ; pantheistic 
philosophy, metaphysics, politics, lectures on the arts of 
war and poetry, literary criticisms, and so on. Kiuso 
propounds to the world no original ideas on these 
subjects. His philosophy is simply that of Chu-Hi in a 
Japanese garb. But in him, as in Hakuseki, the inner 
spirit and temper of mind which it fostered in Japan is 
seen at its best. Some Christian ideals are wanting. 
Forgiveness of one's enemies is not to be found there, 
nor is a chivalrous consideration for the weak and for 
women very conspicuous. But a noble enthusiasm for 
lofty ideals and high achievements with a scorn of mean- 
ness and duplicity pervades all the utterances of this 
Socrates of Surugadai. Loyalty to friends, devotion to 
duty, and a high-souled contempt for cowardice, dis- 
honesty, and self-seeking, are their unfailing character- 
istics. 

Kiuso, like the other seventeenth and eighteenth 
century expounders of Chinese philosophy, had a 

^ Partly translated by Dr. Knox in the Transactiotts of the Asiatic Society 
of Japan, 1892. But a more complete and accurate translation is desir- 
able. 

KIUSO 259 

supreme contempt for Buddhism. The Kangakusha's 
ideal of life was essentially different. To the Buddhist 
the spiritual life is all-important. For its sake men 
should wean themselves from the things of this world, 
sever all family ties, and retire to hermitages or mon- 
asteries, there to spend pure and holy lives in pious 
meditation and religious observances. The Chinese 
philosophy, on the contrary, is eminently practical. It 
may be summed up in one word — duty. The various 
relations of human life being ordained by Heaven, it is 
man's business not to evade the obligations thus imposed 
on him, as the Buddhists would have him do, but to fulfil 
them faithfully at all costs. 

Japan owes a profound debt of gratitude to the Kanga- 
kusha of this time. For their day and country they were 
emphatically the salt of the earth, and their writings must 
have helped materially to counteract the pernicious in- 
fluence of a very differe;-it class of literature which now 
began to deluge the country, the pornographic writings 
of Jisho and his school. 

Kiuso's style is unequal to his matter. He is frequently 
obscure, and is somewhat too fond of learned allusions 
to Chinese history and literature. In both respects he 
contrasts with his predecessor Yekken, and even w^ith 
Hakuseki, though the latter could be erudite enough 
upon occasion. But his learning was probably not mis- 
placed considering the audience whom he was addressing, 
while his obscurity seems due to the fact that he moved 
in an intellectual sphere so far above his contemporaries 
that he found the Japanese language of his time an in- 
adequate vehicle to convey his thoughts. 

The following extract from the Shundai Zatsiiwa will 
give some idea of Kiuso's philosophic vein : — 

26o JAPANESE LITERATURE 

The Morning-glory {or Convolvulus) 

" ' Oh for the heart 

Of the morning-glory ! 

Which^ though its bloom is for a si?igle hour, 

Is the same as that of the fir-tree 

Which lives a thousand years^ — Matsunaga. 

*' To my mind there is a profound meaning in this verse. 
Many poems, some of ancient date, have been composed 
on the morning-glory, for the most part alludmg to its 
short-Hved bloom, and associating it with the melancholy 
sentiment of autumn. It is thus made an emblem of this 
transitory world. Such verses have no deeper meaning. 
The lines of Haku Kyo-i [in Chinese, Peh Ku-yih]— 

* After a thousand years at last the fir decays : 
The hibiscus-flower glories in its one day's life^ — 

have the stamp of official approval, and are reckoned 
elegant. But there is here a forced endeavour to make 
glory and decay the same, and to assimilate robust life 
w^ith early death. This may sound fine in the ears of the 
vulgar, but it is after all a very superficial view. Such 
ideas go no further than to reproduce the drivel of 
Gautama [Buddha], or to lick the spittle of Chwang- 
chow [a Taoist philosopher]. This cannot be the mean- 
ing of Matsunaga's ' heart differing not from that of the 
fir-tree.' What do you say, gentlemen ? To this old 
man's mind it says, ' He that in the morning has found 
the Way may die content at night.' To blossom in the 
early morn, to await the sun's rays and then to fade, is 
the nature which the morning-glory has received from 
heaven. There are in the world fir-trees which live a 
thousand years, but the morning-glory, though endowed 

KIUSO 261 

with so brief a span of existence, never forgets itself for 
a moment or is envious of others. Morning after morn- 
ing the flowers unfold, enchantingly beautiful ; and having 
exhausted that natural virtue which has been allotted to 
them, they wither. Flerein they show their faithfulness 
to duty. Why should it be regarded as vain and un- 
profitable ? The fir does just the same, but the morning- 
glory, being short-lived, illustrates this principle in a 
more striking manner. Not that in the mind of the fir- 
tree there is any idea of a thousand years, or in that of 
the morning-glory the thought of a single day. Each 
simply fulfils its allotted nature. The view of the thousand 
years of the fir-tree as robust vigour, and of the one day 
of the morning-glory as vain and transitory, belongs 
simply to the man who looks on them from without. It 
is absurd to suppose that m the mind of the fir-tree or 
convolvulus there is any such thought. 

''All things without sense are the same. But man, 
endowed with feeling, and described as the soul of the 
universe, becomes entangled by his own craftiness, and 
so long as he does not learn the Way, falls short of 
this perfection. This is why it is necessary for him to 
learn the Way. To learn the Way must not be taken 
to be anything of a special kind, such as the spiritual 
vision of the Buddhists or the like. The Way is the 
original right principle of things. It is something which 
vulgar men and women know and practise as well as 
others. But as they do not truly know it, they do not 
thoroughly practise it. They learn it, but do not fully 
comprehend it ; they practise it, but not with conspicuous 
success. They may go on striving to the end of their 
days, but they will never enter into its full meaning. 

Now to learn the Way is nothing more than to acquire a 
18 

262 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

true knowledge of this principle, and to practise it effec- 
tively until you have the restful feeling of a fish in water, 
and take the same pleasure in it that a bird does in the 
groves. It should be made one's very life at all times, 
never being departed from for a moment. If, so long as 
we live, we follow the Way, when we die these bodies 
of ours and the Way come to an end together, and a 
long peace ensues. Living for a day, let us fulfil the 
Way for that day and die ; living for a month, let us 
fulfil the Way for that month and die ; living for a year, 
let us fulfil the Way for that year and die. If we do so, 
there will be left not an atom of regret, even if we die in 
the evening after having learnt the Way in the morning. 
^' Looking at the matter in this light, why should the 
morning-glory resent that it must fade when the sun's 
rays fall upon it ? Though its life is but for a day, it has 
bloomed to the full extent of its endowment, and there 
IS nothing left. It is widely different from the thousand 
years of the fir-tree in length of lime, but they are both 
alike in that they exhaust the command of Heaven [fulfil 
their destiny] and are satisfied. This is what is meant 
by the expression ^ a heart differing not from that of 
the fir-tree.' Doubtless Matsunaga wished that his heart 
should become even like it, and therefore wrote this poem 
of the morning-glory." 

In the following passage, which contains echoes of 
Taoist doctrines, Kiuso approaches very nearly to the 
idea of a personal Deity : — 

^^The Saden [an ancient Chinese book] says, ' God * is 
uniformly intelligent and just.' It is his very nature to 

^ Or " the Gods." The Chinese and Japanese languages rarely distinguish 
between singular and plural. The concluding part of this extract, however, 
shows that Kiuso was tliinking of a single Deity. 

KIUSO 263 

be so. Now while all men know that he is just, they do 
not know that he is intelligent. Yet there is nothing of 
so keen an intelligence as God. How is this ? Man 
hears with his ears, and beyond their reach he hears 
nothing though he were as quick of hearing as Shiko ; 
he sees with his eyes, and beyond their range he can see 
nothing, were he as sharp-sighted as Riro ; with his heart 
he reflects, and, however swift his intuitions may be, still 
this must involve delay. God borrows not the help of 
ears or eyes ; nor does he waste time in reflection. With 
him sensation is immediate, and is followed by immediate 
responsive action. This, be it observed, is his nature, and 
flows not from two or three, but from a single reality. 

" But although there is in heaven and earth a some- 
thing infinitely quids: of hearing and infinitely sharp of 
sight, independent of conditions of time or space, present 
as if actually on the spot, passing to and fro without any 
interval, embodying itself in all things which are, and 
filling the universe, it ha-s neither form nor voice, and is 
therefore not cognisable by our senses. It is, however, 
sensible to the Real and the True. As it feels, so it 
responds. If there is no truth or reality, there can be 
no response. If it did not feel, it would not respond. 
The response is therefore a proof of its existence. That 
which responds not, of course does not exist. What a 
wonderful property for heaven and earth to possess ! 

" In the words of a stanza composed by priest Saigio 
when he made a pilgrimage to the shrines of Ise — 

* IV/ia^ it is 
That dwelleth here 
I know not ; 

Yet my heart is full of gratitude^ 
And the tears trickle down.'' " 

264 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

*' Think not that God is something distant, but seek for 
him in your own hearts ; for the heart is the abode of 
God." 

*'To forsake all evil and follow good is the beginning 
of the practice of our philosophy." 

'* The Way of the Sages is not sundered from matters 
of everyday life." 

"That which in Heaven begets all things is in man 
that which makes him love his neighbour. So doubt 
not that Heaven loves goodness of heart and hates its 
opposite." 

" Has not bravery itself its root in goodness of 
heart, and does it not proceed from sympathy ? It 
IS only when it arises from goodness that bravery is 
genuine." • 

'' Once when I was in Kaga I heard a man say, 
' All faults whether great or small may be excused in 
the eyes of the world upon repentance and amendment, 
and leave behind no stain of deep-seated baseness. 
But there are two faults which are inexcusable, even 
when repented of — theft, and the abandonment by a 
Samurai of a post which he is bound to defend with his 
hfe." 

"Avarice and cowardice are the same. If a man is 
stingy of his money, he will also grudge his life." 

"To the Samurai first of all comes righteousness, next 
life, then silver and gold." 

Kiuso's righteousness and our righteousness are ap- 
preciably though not essentially different. The former 
approaches the Roman ideal more than the Christian. 
He uses the w^ord to describe the conduct of the forty- 
seven Ronins, who, having avenged an insult to their 
master which led to his death, by the murder of the 

KIUSO 26s 

offender, then committed hara-kiri together. This inci- 
dent occurred in Kmso's own Hfetime. He consecrated 
their memory in a booklet in the Chinese language 
entitled Gi-jin-roktiy which, although not in itself a very 
important contribution to history, has been the parent 
of a whole literature. A later writer gives a list of one 
hundred and one works relating to this subject, includ- 
ing fiction and the drama. Mr. Mitford has told the 
story in his Tales of Old Japan. It is highly characteristic 
of the Yedo period of Japanese history. 

It is not creditable to the Japanese Government of this 
time, that although Kiuso presented the Shiindai Zatsuwa 
to his patron the Shogun in 1729, it was allowed to 
remain unpublished until 1750, although all the while a 
flood of pornographic literature was being poured out 
over the country without let or hindrance. 

The modern literary language of Japan owes much to 
the Kangakusha, more especially to those of the seven- 
teenth and early eighteenth centuries. The older 
Japanese of the Taiheiki was wholly inadequate for the 
expression of the host of new ideas which were the off- 
spring of the revival of learning and the reorganisation of 
the State. The social changes and the marked advance 
in civilisation and the arts which accompanied this 
movement required a new vocabulary. Just as we 
resorted to Latin and Greek to meet a similar want, the 
Kangakusha enriched their language by the adoption 
of large numbers of Chinese words. This process was 
carried to great excess in later times. But writers like 
Hakuseki and Kiuso were no pedants. They were 
practical men who were accustomed to use their pens for 
practical purposes, and who wrote to make themselves 
understood, not to display their cleverness or learning. 

266 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

In their hands the Japanese language not only gained 
much in fulness of vocabulary, but acquired a clearness 
and directness unattainable with the more cumbrous 
forms of the older language. Needless to say, pillow- 
words, pivot-words, and all such frivolous excrescences 
of style were utterly disdained by them. 

CHAPTER III 

THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY 

Popular Literature — Saikaku— Children's Stories 
— Chikamatsu^ and the Popular Drama 

Concurrent with the movement described in the pre- 
ceding chapter, another and very different development 
of Hterature was going on in Japan. It was threefold, 
comprismg fiction, the drama, and a new kind of poetry 
known as Haikai. But while the Kangakusha wrote 
mamly for the Samurai class, the writers of romances, 
plays, and Haikai addressed themselves for the first 
time in Japanese history to the people. Their public 
consisted more especially of the populace of the three 
great cities of Yedo, Kioto, and Osaka. In Japan as 
in China, the traders occupy a very low place both 
morally and socially. Of the four classes into which the 
population is divided, the Samurai, including men of 
learning, soldiers, and officials of all grades, stand at the 
top. Next to them are the peasants, the artisans come 
third, and the merchants last of all. It cannot be denied 
that there was much justice in this classification. Under 
the Tokugawa regime the city populations enjoyed great 
material prosperity. But their moral standards were not 
high. Naturally quick-witted, and educated up to a point 

which may fairly be described by our own slang phrase, 

267 

268 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

*^ the three R's/' they had httle real culture or refine- 
ment. The many-headed beast had, however, learned 
to read, and demanded an intellectual pabulum suited 
to its tastes. A want had been created which required 
to be supplied. The result was a popular literature of 
which some account must now be given. 

The seventeenth century has not much to show in the 
way of fiction. One of the earliest romances of this time 
was the Mokuzu Monogatarz, a highly melodramatic tale of 
love, jealousy, and revenge, the leading feature of which is 
of such a nature as to debar more particular description. 

The Usuyiiki Monogataj^i and the Hannosiike no Soshi 
(1660) both relate the same story. A man while visiting 
the temple of Kiyomidzu, in Kioto, meets a woman named 
Usuyuki (thin-snow). They love and are united, but the 
woman dies soon after, and the man shaves his head and 
retires to a monastery. 

Ibara Saikaku was the founder of a new school of 
popular writing in Japan. He revived a class of com- 
position which had been sadly neglected since the days 
of Murasaki no Shikibu and Sei Shonagon, and gave to 
the world a large number of volumes consisting of tales, 
novels, and sketches of contemporary life and manners. 
The latter are extremely lifelike and humorous. Sai- 
kaku was a resident of Osaka, where he followed the 
profession of composer of Haikai. The world has very 
willingly forgotten his poetry. Nor have the short dra- 
matic pieces w^hich he wrote for the Osaka stage fared 
much better with posterity. He was a man of no 
learning. Bakin says that he had not a single Chinese 
character in his belly, 1 and his books, most of which 
have very little story, are mainly descriptions of the man- 

^ The seat of knowledge, according to the Chinese and Japanese. 

SAIKAKU 269 

ners and customs of the great lupanars \Vhich then, as 
now, formed a prominent feature of the principal cities 
of Japan. The very titles of some of them are too gross 
for quotation. The immoral tendency of his works was 
denounced even in his own day by a hostile critic under 
the suggestive title Saikaku no Jigoku Meguri ('' Saikaku 
in Hell"), and led to their suppression by the Govern- 
ment. It is only recently that a new edition has been 
permitted to appear, the reason for this tolerance being 
perhaps the circumstance that the fugitive humour of 
fast life in the seventeenth century has become in a great 
measure unintelligible to modern readers. 

Saikaku has written one decent book, a collection of 
gossipy stories about his fellow-writers of Haikai. It 
is entitled Saikaku Nagori no Tomo^ and was published 
posthumously in 1699. He died in 1693, in his ftfty- 
second year. 

For various reasons it is impossible to give a really 
characteristic specimen of Saikaku's writings. The fol- 
lowing is a story of the Enoch Arden class, with a 
Japanese ending. It is one of a series of tales woven 
into a w^ork entitled Fudokoro no Suzuri or ^' Bosom Ink- 
slab," a fanciful title for what we might call Notes of 
Travel {16'^^), This work is less objectionable than most 
of his productions : — 

^^ Listening to the cries of the plovers that frequent 
the Isle of Awaji, one may perceive the sadness of the 
things of this world. 

*^Our junk anchored for the night in a harbour called 
Yashima. A wretched place it was. With what eyes 
could the poet have regarded it who called it 'the 
flowery Yashima ' ? Even though it was spring, there 
were no cherry-flowers ; so, with feelings suited to an 

270 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

autumn eve, I approached a mat-roofed shed which 
stood near the beach. There were some women 
assembled here enjoying themselves over a cup of tea. 
Usually it would have been a case of commonplace ill- 
natured daughter-in-law gossip; but judging from their 
excited manners that something unusual was going on, 
I inquired what was the subject of their important-seem- 
ing conversation. It appeared that a fisherman of this 
shore, by name Hokugan Kiuroku, was in the habit of 
hiring himself annually for the sardine fishery off the 
east coast. He usually went down there in company 
with many others, but the previous autumn nobody else 
came forward, and so he wilfully went alone. Time 
passed and nothing was heard of him. Being an illiterate 
man, he naturally held little communication with the 
world, and thus became a cause of anxiety to his rela- 
tions. That autumn there were many storms, and great 
numbers of fishing-vessels were lost. All his family, when 
they listened to the noise of the wind, lamented, ^ Ah ! 
Kiuroku is no more of this world.' Others talked as 
if they had actually witnessed his end. There was a 
rumour that two hundred and fifty men had perished in a 
body in the outer sea, and all congratulated themselves 
that owing to a presentiment of ill-luck they had this 
year stayed at home. His w^ife hearing this, even in the 
depth of her misery and sorrow, felt her condition still 
more profoundly wretched. Morning and evening she 
could think of nothing else, to such a degree that she 
was on the point of throwing away her life. Thus she 
gave proof of a gentle, womanly heart. Moreover, Kiu- 
roku, in his capacity of iri-muko^ had been on excellent 
terms with his wife, and had done his duty faithfully 

^ Adopted heir and son-in-law. 

SAIKAKU 271 

towards her parents, so that when she remembered his 
position, his loss was a source of great grief to her. 

^'Winter arrived, spring came and went, nearly a year 
passed with no news of him. There could be no longer 
any doubt that he was dead. The day on which he said 
good-bye and left his native village was chosen for the 
anniversary of his death. Priests said the proper masses, 
his personal effects were restored to his true parents, 
and, as is the way of the world, he began gradually to be 
forgotten. 

" Now his wife was still young. People thought it a 
pity she should remain a widow, and urged her to take a 
second husband for the relief of her parents' cares, as was 
the custom. But she could by no means be persuaded 
to give her consent. She resolved by-and-by to shave 
her head, to abandon the world, and with profound 
*incense-and-flowers' purpose of heart to devote herself 
to her husband's memory. Everybody did his best to 
dissuade her, saying first of all how undutiful it would be 
towards her parents. In short, they insisted with such 
success that a lucky day was chosen for her nuptials. 
The man selected for her husband was a fisherman of 
the same village, named Iso no Mokubei, a far better 
match than Kiuroku, and satisfactory in every respect. 
The parents rejoiced, the friends exulted, and though it 
was a second marriage, even in this fishing hamlet every- 
thing was done in a style equal to that of the ceremony 
of breeching a boy. The women had on their boxwood 
hair-combs ; sake was circulated freely. But there are 
jealous people everywhere, and the company were dis- 
turbed from time to time by pebbles flung against the 
door. As the night went on, this too ceased. The bride 
and bridegroom retired to their chamber, and placing 

272 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

their wooden pillows side by side, began a confidential 
talk, in which Kiuroku was naturally forgotten. The 
wedding company, fatigued with their enjoyment of the 
previous night, slept soundly late into the next morning. 
When the door was opened, there was Kiuroku in his 
travelling garb. He walked in with an air of being at 
home, his heart full of love for the wife he had not 
seen for so long. He entered the disordered sleeping- 
chamber, which was lighted up by a ray of sunshine 
from the southern window. A feeling of pride came 
over him when he caught a glimpse of his wife's hair, 
which was more beautiful than ever. 'The prettiest 
woman in this village/ he thought to himself. But 
observing her companion, his dream was shattered. The 
woman, too, waking from her joy, burst into tears, and 
Mokubei came out, looking much embarrassed. With a 
strange expression on his countenance, 'What is this ?' 
asked Kiuroku. Mokubei explained what had happened, 
laying the blame of this terrible misadventure on fate. 
What made things worse was the presence of so many 
people, and the fact that Mokubei had for a long time 
been on bad terms with Kiuroku. But Kiuroku, showing 
him a more friendly cheer than usual, collected himself 
and related the story of his sufferings when cast away 
on the remote sea. When he had done he calmly 
stabbed his wife, cut down Mokubei, and with the same 
sword put an end to himself. What a heroic winding-up 
of the matter for a mere rustic ! " 

Children's Tales 

To the fiction of the seventeenth century belong a 
number of children's tales,^ which retain their popularity 

1 Most of these have been translated by Mr. Mitford in his Tales of Old Japan. 

POPULAR DRAMA 273 

even at the present day, unless they have been swept 
away of late years by the advancing tide of European 
civiHsation. Though they bear a general resemblance to 
such stories as Cinderellay and appear in various forms, 
I am inclined to think that they are not really folk-lore, 
but had definite authors, whose names have long been 
forgotten. T\\q Nedztimi no F^w^/r/ ('* Rat's Wedding ") 
dates from before 1661, while of the Saj-u-kajii Kassen 
(" Battle of the Ape and the Crab ") and the Shitakiri 
Suzuine ('* Tongue-cut Sparrow ") we have ''new editions" 
which bear the date of Hoyei (1704-1711). Others are 
Momotaro (" Little Peachling "), Hana Sakaya Jiji (" The 
Old Man who made Trees to Blossom "), Usagi no Kataki- 
uchi (^'The Hare's Revenge"), and Urashima Taro (a 
version of the legend told above, p. 39). 

The novelist Bakin, a very competent authority on 
folk-lore, was much interested in these tales, and has 
been at the pains to ransack Chinese and Japanese litera- 
ture for anything which might be thought to suggest the 
incidents related in them.^ 

The Popular Drama — Chikamatsu 

It would not be quite correct to say that the popular 
drama owed nothing to the No. But it certainly followed 
a different and independent line of development. Its 
literary progenitor is the Taiheikiy which, it may be re- 
membered, was chanted or recited in public by men who 
made this their profession. The Taiheiki was followed 
by more or less dramatic stories, which were recited by 
a single person seated before a desk, to the accompani- 
ment of taps of a fan to mark the time or to give emphasis. 
To this was subsequently added the music of the sami- 

^ See his Yenseki Zasshi, vol. iv. 

274 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

sen, a three -stringed guitar recently introduced from 
Loochoo. A favourite story for this purpose was the 
Joruri jiti-ni dan SosJii, written towards the end of the 
Muromachi period. It relates the loves of the famous 
Yoshitsune with a heroine whose name, Joruri, is now 
used as a synonym for a whole class of dramatic com- 
positions. 

Towards the middle of the seventeenth century we 
hear of Joruri-Katari (chanters of Joruri) at Yedo, for 
whom two authors named Oka Seibei and Yonomiya 
Yajiro are said to have written a number of pieces, 
some of which, known as Koinpii^a-bofiy are still in ex- 
istence. They relate the adventures of a hero named 
Kompira, nine feet two inches high, with a face so red 
that nothing could be redder, whose doughty deeds in 
quelling demons and slaying savage beasts are still the 
delight of the Japanese schoolboy. 

The first Kabuki Shibai, or popular theatre, as distin- 
guished from the No Shibai, and from the Ayatsuri Shibai, 
or marionette theatre, is said to have been established at 
Kioto early in the seventeenth century. We are told that 
a priestess of the great temple of Kidzuki in Idzumo, 
named O Kuni, having made the acquaintance of one 
Nagoya Sanzaburo, ran away with him to Kioto. There 
they got together a number of dancing-girls and gave 
performances on the bank of the river Kamo, where the 
Theatre Street stands at the present day. O Kuni as a 
priestess would naturally be acquainted w4th the panto- 
mimic dances performed in honour of the Shinto gods, 
and was doubtless herself a trained dancer and mime. 
Owing to certain abuses, the employment of women as 
actors was put a stop to by the authorities. Their place 
was taken by boys, but this also was eventually prohibited. 

CHIKAMATSU 275 

A marionette theatre was next established. In 1661 it 
was transferred to Osaka, where it was famous in sub- 
sequent dramatic history as the Takemoto Za. The 
marionette theatre is stiH popular in japan. The puppets 
are elaborate contrivances, fitted with machinery for 
rolling the eyeballs, raising the eyebrows, opening and 
closing the mouth, moving the fingers so as to grasp and 
flirt a fan, and so on. The popularity of the Takemoto 
Za procured it several rivals, the most celebrated of 
which was the Toyotake Za. 

The fame of the Takemoto Za was chiefly owing to the 
genius of Chikamatsu Monzayemon, who is unquestion- 
ably the most prominent figure m the history of the 
Japanese drama. The birthplace of this remarkable 
man has been as much disputed as that of Homer. The 
most probable statement is that he was a Samurai of 
Hagi, in Choshiu, where he was born in 1653. It is said 
that in his boyhood he became a priest. He himself tells 
us that he was a retainer of more than one noble house 
in Kioto. For some reason his services ceased, and he 
became a Ronin. The Ronin, that is, a Samurai who has 
been dismissed for misconduct, or whose indocile temper 
has found the severe discipline of the Yashiki irksome 
beyond endurance, is a very familiar personage during 
the Yedo period of Japanese history, not only in fiction, 
but in real life. Countless deeds of desperate courage 
"and many atrocious crimes are related of them, among 
which may be mentioned the well-known revenge of the 
forty-seven Renins and their subsequent suicide, and the 
murderous attacks on the British Legation in 1861 and 
1862. In the early days of foreign intercourse with 
Japan, Ronin was a word of fear to all quiet, law-abiding 
people. It is significant that the principal playwright 

276 JAPANESE LITERATURE ' 

as well as the most eminent novelist (Bakin) of this 
period should both belong to the ranks of these homines 
declasses. 

After leaving the service of the Kioto nobles, Chika- 
matsu wrote a number of stories and pieces of no great 
merit for dramatic performance at Kioto. One of these, 
formerly attributed to Saikaku, is the Kaijin Yaslmna, 
which bears traces of a study of the older No drama and 
Kiogen. Its subject is an episode in the life of Yoshit- 
sune. Chikamatsu's earliest dated work was written in 
1685. In 1690 he took up his residence in Osaka, when 
his connection with the Takemoto marionette theatre 
began. From this time until his death in 1724, he pro- 
duced in rapid succession a number of dramas which, 
whatever their faults, leave no doubt of his possessing a 
fertile and inventive genius. 

On a superficial examination of one of Chikamatsu's 
plays, a European reader might fail to recognise the fact 
that it is a drama at all, and take it for a romance with 
rather more than the usual proportion of dialogue. All 
the Joruri contain a large narrative element of a more or 
less poetical character. This part of the play is chanted 
to music by a chorus seated on a platform overlooking 
the stage on the spectator's right, where also the persons 
sit who declaim the speeches of the puppet actors. It is 
the narrative part which is more especially designated by 
the term Joruri. The chorus which recites it is the true' 
successor of the Joruri-Katari or dramatic reciters above 
mentioned, and is the nucleus of the whole, the dialogue 
being at first merely subsidiary. It not only supplies a 
thread of story to connect the scenes represented by 
the puppets on the stage, but aids the imagination of 
the audience by describing expressions of countenance, 

CHIKAMATSU 277 

scenery, and much more that the resources of a theatre, 
and especially of a marionette theatre, fail to co.ivey. 

On closer examination, however, it becomes apparent 
that Chikamatsu's works are not really romances, but 
stage-plays. They have a well-marked movement of 
plot from the opening scene up to the final catastrophe ; 
they abound in dramatic situations, and many of the 
scenes are obviously designed with a view to spectacular 
effect. These things were new in Japan, and to Chika- 
matsu therefore belongs the credit of being the creator 
of the Japanese drama. 

Chikamatsu's plays are classified by the Japanese as 
Jidai-Mono or historical plays, and Sewa-Mono or dramas 
of life and manners. With the exception of a few in 
three acts, they are all plays of five acts; but whether the 
choice of this consecrated number had anything to do 
with the fact that the Dutch were in the habit of visitin^z 
the theatres of Kioto and Osaka on their periodical 
journeys to Yedo to pay their respects to the Shogun, I 
have not been able to ascertain. Nor is it possible to 
verify a suspicion that the arrangements of the Japanese 
popular theatre, with its capacious pit and galleries, and 
a stage well furnished with scenery, trap-doors, turn- 
tables (as in ancient Greece), and other appliances, may 
owe something to hints given by these visitors. In these 
respects the Japanese popular theatre is certainly far in 
advance of any other in Asia, and more particularly of the 
No Shibai above described. 

Chikamiitsu was a voluminous writer. The modern 
edition of his selected works comprises fifty-one plays, 
and runs to more than two thousand closely printed 
pages. He is credited with the authorship of as many 
more. Each is of about the same length as one of 
19 

278 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Shakespeare's plays, so that they constitute a truly for- 
midable bulk of literary matter. The novelist Kioden 
tells us that a three-act piece of his called Naga-niachi 
onna Hara-kiri (" The Woman's Hara-kiri^' a gruesome 
title) was written in a single night, and the statement, 
whether true or not, bears testimony to the opinion 
entertained by his countrymen of his facility of com- 
position. His works deal with all manner of subjects. 
They show that he was well acquainted with the Shinto 
and Buddhist religions, and that he possessed a wide 
and varied knowledge of the history and institutions of 
Japan and China. 

Of Chikamatsu's merits as a dramatist and poet it 
behoves a European writer to speak with some degree of 
reserve, more especially as it is impossible to read more 
than a tithe of his works. The admiration of his own 
countrymen for him is unbounded, some of them going so 
far as to compare him w^ith Shakespeare. It is certainly 
possible to trace resemblances. Both in Shakespeare 
and Chikamatsu, comedy frequently treads on the heels 
of tragedy ; in both, prose is intermixed with poetry, and 
an exalted style of diction suited to monarchs and nobles 
alternates with the speech of the common people ; both 
divided their attention between historical and other 
dramas ; both possessed the fullest command of the re- 
sources of their respective languages, and both are tainted 
with a grosser element which is rejected by the more 
refined taste of later times. It may be added that neither 
Shakespeare nor Chikamatsu is classical in the sense in 
which we apply that term to Sophocles and Racine. 
Chikamatsu in particular is very far removed indeed from 
the classical type. 

But few such comparisons have any value, and it is 

CHIKAMATSU 279 

really idle to compare Shakespeare with a writer whose 
portraiture of character is rudimentary, whose incidents 
are outrageously extravagant and improbable, whose 
philosophy of life is wholly wanting in originality or 
depth, and who is constantly introducing scenes brutal 
and revolting to a degree inconceivable to the Western 
mind. Of this last blemish his audiences must share 
the responsibility. Nothing seems to have given greater 
pleasure to these smug, unwarlike shopmen and me- 
chanics with their womankind (no Samurai with any 
self-respect ever entered a theatre) than sanguinary com- 
bats, and scenes of torture, suicide, and murder. They 
loved to have their blood curdled, and their fiesh made 
to creep, and Chikamatsu, like other writers of his day, 
took care to supply this demand in no stinted measure. 
Defects like these are oftly partially compens:ited for by 
a certain barbaric vigour and luxuriance which undoubt- 
edly distinguishes his works. That such a writer should 
hold the position of the prince of Japanese dramatists 
only shows by what an imperfect standard this art is 
judged in Japan. 

It is difficult for a Western reader to understand the 
esteem in which tChikamatsu is held by his countrymen 
as a poet. In that part of his plays which is chanted 
to music by the chorus we may, it is true, find metre, 
rhythmical cadence, fit language, and play of fancy, but 
all in a very modest degree. The metrical form adopted 
by him is the usual alternation of seven and five syllable 
phrases, which is even less substantial than our ordinary 
blank verse, or the irregular, unrhymed lines favoured 
by Southey. Nor does he adhere strictly even to 
this. Longer or shorter lines are introduced from time 
to time for no other apparent reason than the author's 

2 8o JAPANESE LITERATURE 

convenience. The rhythmical quality of his poetry is 
unmistakable ; but, for reasons already pointed out, the 
Japanese language does not lend itself to any but the 
simplest harmonies of this kind. A more serious blemish 
is the abundant use of pivot-words and other m.eretricious 
ornaments, which are fatal to coherent sense, and de- 
structive to grammar. The general result is seldom such 
as to satisfy a European taste. 

It will nevertheless, I think, be found that Chikamatsu's 
poetry, with all its faults, occupies an important place 
in the history of Japanese literature. The writers of 
No had done something to extend the domain of the 
poetic art beyond the narrow limits prescribed by 
tradition : Chikamatsu continued their work, and took 
possession of, if he failed to reclaim, large tracts of 
subject-matter w^hich had been neglected by his prede- 
cessors. The older poetry may be compared to a trim 
garden of a few yards square : Chikamatsu's Joruri 
resembles a wide clearing in a forest where the pro- 
ducts of a rude agriculture are seen growing among 
tree-stumps and jungle. 

Chikamatsu's most famous play is one which is entitled 
Kokusenya Kassen (1715), or the " Battles of Kokusenya." 
Kokusenya (called Coxinga by older European writers 
on Japan) was a famous pirate, the son of a Chinese by 
a Japanese mother, who played a considerable part in 
the wars of the last days of the Ming dynasty in China. 
As this is considered the masterpiece of the greatest of 
Japanese dramatists, it seems desirable to give an ana- 
lysis of it here. 

ACT I 

The scene opens at the court of Nanking. The last of 
the Ming Emperors is seen surrounded by his ministers. 

CHIKAMATSU 281 

An envoy from the King of Tartary appears, bringing 
rich presents, which are piled up in the courtyard. He 
makes a speech in which, on behalf of his master, he 
asks for Kwasei, the favourite concubine of the Emperor, 
so that he may make her his queen, and thus cement 
friendship between the two powers. 

The Emperor and his court are much disturbed by 
this proposal, as Kwasei was just then expected to 
give birth to an heir to the Ming throne. A traitor- 
ous minister named Ri Toten urges its acceptance. 
General Go Sankei rushes forward and protests in- 
dignantly, ordering the Tartar King's presents to be 
taken away. The Tartar envoy replies with spirit, 
and is about to fling out of the Imperial presence, 
w^hen Ri Toten strives to pacify him. To enforce his 
appeal, he digs out his own left eye with a dagger, and 
hands it on an ivory slab to the envoy, who receives 
it with respect, and accepts it in satisfaction for Go 
Sankei's insult to his sovereign and himself. The envoy 
takes his departure. 

The next scene is in the apartment of the Emperor's 
younger sister. The Emperor appears, accompanied 
by tv.'O hundred youthful inmates of his harem, half of 
whom bear branches of flowering plum and half of 
cherry. They draw up on each side of the stage. The 
Emperor tells his sister of Ri Toten's noble self-sacrifice, 
and again urges the latter's suit for the hand of the 
Princess, which had previously been rejected by her, 
suggesting that her answer should depend on the result 
of a battle between the plum and cherry squadrons of 
ladies. The Princess agrees to this, and puts herself at 
the head of the plum party, who, acting in collusion with 
the Emperor, allow themselves to be defeated. 

282 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Go Sankei now rushes in, clad in full armour, and with 
his lance drives off both squadrons. He remonstrates 
with the Emperor for setting an example in the palace 
which, if followed by the people, would lead to disas- 
trous civil tumults, charges Ri Toten with treachery, 
and by an elaborate analysis of the Chinese written 
character for Ming, the name of the dynasty, proves 
that Ri Toten's digging out his eye was merely a private 
signal to the Tartar envoy that the time was ripe for the 
execution of their treacherous schemes. The Emperor 
scoffs at this learned sophistry, and kicks Go Sankei on 
the forehead with his Imperial foot. 

From all sides there now comes a sound of conchs, 
drums, and battle shouts. The Tartars have arrived, and 
are surrounding the palace. Their general rides into the 
courtyard. He tells the Emperor that the Tartar King's 
love for Kwasei was all a pretence, and that his real 
object was the destruction of the unborn heir to the 
Ming throne. He avows Ri Toten's treacherous com- 
plicity, and announces to Go Sankei his intention of 
carrying off the Emperor and Kwasei as prisoners, 
and of making them serve as menials in his master's 
kitchen. 

Go Sankei's wife, Riuka, now appears with an infant 
in her arms. She flies with the Princess by a postern 
gate, leaving her child behind. Go Sankei makes a sally, 
and with one hundred men drives off several millions of 
the enemy. In his absence Ri Toten's younger brother, 
Ri Kaiho, murders the Emperor, cuts off his head, and 
binds Kwasei. Go Sankei returns, cleaves Ri Kaiho in 
two, releases Kwasei, and reverently sets up the Em- 
peror's headless trunk, which he adorns with the heredi- 
tary regalia. While he is hesitating whether to save the 

CHIKAMATSU 283 

Emperor's body or the pregnant consort Kwasei, the 
enemy renevv their attack. Having beaten them off, he 
resolves to save the unborn heir to the throne, and to 
abandon the corpse. 

Meanwhile his own infant child begins to cry for his 
natural nourishment. '' What a nuisance ! " he ex- 
claims. But on second thoughts he reflects that the 
child is his own heir, and that it would be on the whole 
better to save him. So he binds him firmly to the shaft 
of his spear and retreats to the seashore with Kwasei, 
pursued by the enemy. Kwasei is killed by a bullet, 
and Go Sankei, by an improvised Cesarean operation 
{coram populo /), rescues her living child, a beautiful boy, 
which he wraps in his dead mother's sleeve. " But 
stay ! if the enemy find that the child is gone, they will 
spare no pains to discover it." So he stabs his own 
child, who, it may be remembered, was all this time 
lashed to the shaft of his spear, and substitutes it for 
the infant Prince. Exit Go Sankei. 

Enter Go Sankei's wife with the Princess. They hide 
among the reeds by the seashore. A Tartar officer named 
Godatsu follows in pursuit. He takes a small boat and 
searches all the creeks near them. Riuka (Go Sankei's 
wife) catches his oar and overturns his boat. He goes 
to the bottom, and Riuka gets into the boat with the 
Princess. Godatsu comes up from below all dripping, 
and a combat ensues, in which Godatsu has his head cut 
off by Riuka. Then, as in her bedraggled and blood- 
stained condition she is no fit company for a princess, 
she shoves off the boat containing the latter, which is 
carried away by the wind and tide, and remains behind 
on the shore. The chorus describes the situation in 
poetical imagery. 

2 84 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

ACT II 

The scene changes to Hirado, in Japan. Kokusenya, 
with his wife, is gathering shellfish on the seashore, 
when a small boat approaches. It proves to contain 
the Princess, who had drifted over from China. Koku- 
senya's wife, a low, vulgar woman, who provides the 
comic element of the play, is overcome with laughter 
at the Chinese which the Princess and her husband talk. 
Jealousy then gets the upper hand, but this gives way 
to respect when she learns the rank of the stranger. 

Kokusenya, who is the son of a trusted minister of 
the Ming Emperors, makes up his mind to restore that 
dynasty, and proceeds with his father and mother to 
China, leaving the Princess in his wife's charge. On 
arriving there, they resolve to seek the assistance of 
Kanki, a Chinese magnate who had married a sister of 
Kokusenya. While travelling through a forest on their 
way to his castle, Kokusenya bearing his aged mother 
on his back, they fall in with a tiger. Disdaining to use 
his sword against the beast, Kokusenya gains the mastery 
over him after a struggle, which, doubtless, gave much 
gratification to the ''groundlings" of the Osaka theatre. 
A hunting party arrives ; their leader claims the tiger for 
Ri Toten,the traitorous one-eyed minister of the first act. 
Kokusenya replies in a style of inimitable braggadocio. 
With the tiger's assistance he subdues the huntsmen, and 
forms of them the nucleus of an army with which to 
conquer the Tartar invaders. Kokusenya's first care is 
to cut off the pig-tails of his recruits, and to give them 
new names, in which Japanese terminations are stuck 
on to names indicative of their foreign origin. One of 

CHIKAMATSU 285 

these names is Igirisu (English)-bei. We may well wonder 
what an Englishman was doing dans cette galere, 

ACT III 

Kokusenya, at the head of his newly recruited force^ 
arrives before Kanki's castle, but he is absent, and they 
are refused admittance. The old mother, however, is 
permitted to enter in the guise of a prisoner bound w^ith 
cords. Kanki returns. The old woman begs him 
earnestly to espouse her son Kokusenya's cause. He 
forthwith draws his sword and tries to kill his wife, but 
is prevented. He then explains that he has not suddenly 
gone mad, but that if he joined Kokusenya people would 
say he was influenced by women, so it was necessary to 
remove his wife as a preliminary to granting her request. 
His wafe being still alive, this was impossible. 

News of this refusal being conveyed to Kokusenya, 
he bounds over the moat and parapet of the castle,^ and 
presents himself before Kanki. After mutual Homeric 
defiance they prepare to fight, when Kanki's wife ex- 
poses her breast, showing that in order to remove all 
obstacle to the plans of her husband and brother, she 
has given herself a death-w^ound. The two then frater- 
nise, and a quantity of warlike gear is produced, in 
which Kokusenya is clad, his mother looking on with 
great admiration. She then commits suicide, enjoining 
on her son and Kanki to show no w^eakness in fight- 
ing against the Tartars, but to regard them as the 
enemies of mother and wife. She dies with a smile 
on her face, gazing at the gallant appearance of Koku- 
senya in the new armour supplied him by Kanki. 

^ Incidents like this remind us that it was a marionette theatre for which 
Chikauiatsu wrote. Puppets can do many things impossible to human actors.. 

2 86 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

ACT IV 

We now return to Go Sankei, who, at the end of the 
first act, had retired to a secluded place among the hills 
with the heir to the Ming throne. Here follows a Rip van 
Winkle episode, at the end of which Go Sankei finds that 
the young Prince has become a boy of seven, whose 
voice sounds to him '^ like the first song of the nightingale 
heard in some secluded valley where snow still lies." 
Kokusenya's father now appears upon the scene, accom- 
panied by Kokusenya's wife and the Princess, who have 
come over from Japan. Whilst they are giving mutual 
explanations the enemy come in chase ; but the gods 
having been prayed to, a cloud issues from a cave and 
forms a bridge, over which they cross an abyss to the 
mountain on the other side. The enemy attempt to 
follow, but the bridge is blown away by a puff of wind. 
The five hundred foes tumble to the bottom and are 
crushed to pieces. 

ACT V 

Kanki, Kokusenya, and Go Sankei hold a grand council 
of war, at which the most impossible nonsense is talked. 
A letter arrives from Kokusenya's father, stating that 
finding life at his age, seventy-three, not worth living, 
he is about to find death in the enemy's ranks. The 
three, full of determination to save him, rush off to 
Nanking, now the Tartar King's stronghold. 

The scene changes to Nanking. Kokusenya's father 
appears before the gate and challenges Ri Toten to single 
combat. The Tartar King is seen on the battlements. 
By his order the old man is seized and brought into 
the city. Kokusenya and his party appear before the 

CHIKAMATSU 287 

walls. Ri Toten tells Kokusenya that he must choose 
between his father committing hara-kiri or their both 
going back to Japan. Consternation of Kokusenya 
and his party. Speech by Kokusenya's father, remind- 
ing him of his mother's dying injunctions, and adjuring 
him not to think of his fate. Kokusenya is about to 
spring at the Tartar King, but is deterred by Ri Toten 
putting his sword to the old man's throat. Go Sankei 
now throws himself at the feet of the Tartar King, offer- 
ing to give up Kokusenya if the lives of the other two 
were spared. No sooner has the Tartar King granted 
this request than Go Sankei springs at him, knocks him 
over, and binds him. Kokusenya also rushes forward, 
releases his father, and seizes Ri Toten. The Tartar 
King has five hundred blows of a bamboo administered 
to him, and is sent off a prisoner to Japan. Ri Toten's 
head is wrenched off there and then, and the play ends 
amid general rejoicing. 

A summary of this kind gives too much prominence 
to the defects of this most famous of Japanese dramas. 
Its manner is better than its matter. There is a copious 
flow of sonorous and often picturesque language, of 
exalted sentiment, and sententious oratory, which divert 
the reader's (and still more the audience's) attention from 
the improbabilities of the story. The personages do and 
say many absurd things ; yet they speak and bear them- 
selves in a manner not altogether unworthy of tragic 
heroes. It may be added that even in his maddest 
moods Chikamatsu never neglects dramatic force of 
situation, and that he has a turn for impressive dialogue 
which ought not to be ignored. Dulness is not among 
the numerous faults of the Kokusejiya Kasscn. 

The European reader is not likely to relish the more 

288 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

poetical passages of this drama, with their pivot-words 
and closely woven allusive phrases. Yet possibly there 
is more in them than we are willing to acknowledge. 
The Japanese find them the choicest part of the work, 
and they might not unreasonably deny to foreigners the 
right to sit in judgment upon the finer raptures of their 
national muse. As a poet Chikamatsu may readily be 
allowed one merit : if Japan ever produces epic, drama- 
tic, or long narrative poems of importance, he will have 
done much to prepare the way. 

The popularity of the Kokusenya Kassen with the 
audiences of Osaka was so great as to call for two con- 
tinuations in the same style, and it is still one of the 
stock pieces of the Japanese theatre. 

Kabuki Theatre 

Meanwhile a somewhat different development of the 
dramatic art was taking place — chiefly at Yedo. Kabuki 
theatres, which had men for actors, had been established 
there before the middle of the seventeenth century. The 
pieces produced in these theatres were at first the com- 
position of the actors engaged in them, but towards the 
beginning of the eighteenth century ^ we hear of definite 
authors whose works were published under the title 
of Kyaku-bon. Native critics agree that the Kyaku-bon 
contain little that is of value as literature. In form 
they approach the European drama far more nearly 
than do the Joruri. The dialogue is here all-important, 
the chorus, with its narratives and poetical descriptions, 
taking a subordinate position or being altogether wanting. 

^ The first of the series ot great actors bearing tlie name of Ichikawa Dan- 
jtiro made his debut on the stage in 1673. The present holder of that name is 
the ninth of the line. 

CHAPTER IV 

POETRY OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY— 
HAHCAI, HAIBUN, KIOKA 

Haikai 

It might naturally be supposed that in the Tanka of 
thirty-one syllables poetry had reached its extreme limit 
of brevity and conciseness. But a still further step 
remained to be taken in this direction. In the sixteenth 
century a kind of poem known as Haikai, which con- 
sists of seventeen syllables only, made its appearance. 
The Haikai is a Tanka minus the concluding fourteen 
syllables, and is made up of three phrases of five, 
seven, and five syllables respectively, as in the follow- 
ing :— " 

" Fufu ike ya ! 
Kawadzu tobi-koviii^ 
Midzu no eta''' ^ 

It differs from Tanka, however, in more than metre, 
being much less choice in diction and matter than the 
older kind of poetry. It admits words of Chinese deriva- 
tion and colloquial expressions, and often deals with 
subjects which the more fastidious Tanka refuses to 
meddle with. 

The earliest professor of this accomplishment was 
Yamazaki So-kan, a Buddhist priest (1445-1534). The 

290 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

verses of his which I have met with have mostly a comic 
character. Here is one : — 

" Eve7i in the rain, come forth^ 
O inid7iight 7noon ! 
But ti7'st put 071 your hat.^'' 

A halo is called in Japanese kasa, which also means a 
broad hat or umbrella. 

Another early Haikai writer was Arakida Moritake 
(1472-1549). The following is from his pen : — 

" Thought /, the fallen flowers 
Are returning to their branch; 
But lo ! they were butterflies^'' 

Coming down to the Yedo period, the first name of 
note in this department of literature is that of Matsunaga 
Teitoku (1562-1645). A well-known Haikai of his is the 
following : — 

" For all 7nen 
"'TIS the seed of siesta — 
The autu77in 7noon.^^ 

In other words : The autumn moon is so beautiful that 
people sit up half the night to gaze on it, and have there- 
fore to make up for their want of sleep by a siesta on the 
following day. 

If it were not, however, for the fame of Matsura Basho 
(1643-1694) and his disciples, it would hardly be neces- 
sary to notice this kind of composition at all. He im- 
ported a more serious element, and greatly refined and 
improved the Haikai, until ^it became a formidable rival 
to the Tanka. The latter had in these days become too 
exclusive for the popular taste. The Fujiwara family, 
who were its special patrons, practisers, and critics, 

BASHO 291 

maintained the traditional canons of the art in all their 
rigidity, and the nation was glad of a new and more un- 
confined field for its poetical talent. To write tolerable 
Tanka required a technical training, for wiiich the many 
had neither time nor opportunity, but there was no- 
thing to prevent any one with ordinary cleverness and 
a smattering of education from composing Haikai. 
Saikaku, an unlearned man, is said to have produced 
twenty thousand stanzas of this kind of poetry during 
one day's visit to the shrine of Sumiyoshi, and to have 
received on that account the cognomen of ''the twenty- 
thousand old man." The story is an obvious exaggera- 
tion, but it shows what an easy thing Haikai writing was 
thought to be. 

Basho belonged to a Samurai family, hereditary re- 
tainers of the Daimio of Tsu, in the province of Ise. He 
acquitted himself with credit in an official capacity con- 
nected with water-works m Yedo, but for some reason 
threw up his appointment and entered the Buddhist 
priesthood. He built himself a cottage in the Fukagawa 
district of Yedo, and planted a banana-tree beside the 
window. It grew up and flourished, and from it he took 
the name of Basho (banana), by which he is known to 
posterity. He was a diligent student of the Zen Buddhist 
doctrines and of Taoism, and was also an artist. From 
time to time he took long excursions to the remotest 
parts of Japan, leaving behind him traces of his presence, 
which remain to this day, in the shape of stones inscribed 
with poems of his composition. On one of these jour- 
neys he took suddenly ill, and died at Osaka in the 
fifty-first year of his age. 

Shotei Kinsui relates the following incident which hap- 
pened on one of Basho's tours. It illustrates the favour 

292 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

in whicli Haikai was held even by the lowest classes of 
the people : — 

Once, when on his travels, Basho passed through a 
certain rural district, making Haikai as he went along. 
It was full moon. The whole sky was flooded with light, 
so that it was clearer than noonday. It was so bright 
that Basho did not think of seeking an inn, but contmued 
his journey. In a certain village he came upon a party 
of men who had brought out sake and something to eat 
with it into the open air, and were enjoying the moon- 
light. Basho stood still to watch them. Presently they 
fell to composing Haikai. Basho was greatly pleased to 
see that this elegant accomplishment was practised even 
in so remote a place, and continued looking on, when a 
silly fellow of the party noticed him and said, "There is 
a priest who looks like a pilgrim. He may be a begging 
priest, but, never mind, let us invite him to join us." 
They all thought this would be great fun. Basho could 
not refuse, so he joined their circle, taking the lowest 
seat. The silly fellow then said to him, *' Everybody 
here is bound to compose something about the full moon. 
You must compose something too." Basho apologised. 
He said he was a humble individual, belonging to a 
country place. How should he presume to contribute 
to the entertainment of the honourable company ? He 
begged, therefore, that they would kindly excuse him, 
" No ! no !" said they, "we can't excuse you. Good or 
bad, you must compose one verse at least." They urged 
him until at last he consented. Basho smiled, folded his 
arms, and turning to the clerk of the party, said, " Well, 
I will give you one : — 

' ^Twas the Jtew moon ' " 

BASHO 293 

" The new moon ! What a fool this priest is ! " cried 
one. ''The poem should be about the full moon." '* Let 
him go on/' said another ; ''it will be all the more fun." 
So they gathered round, and mocked and laughed at 
him. Basho paid no attention, but went on — 

" ^Twas the new moon / 
Since then I waited — 
And lo 1 to-nigh t ! 
[/ have my reward^'' 

The whole party were amazed. They took their seats 
again and said, " Sir, you can be no common priest to 
write such a remarkable verse. May we ask your name ? " 
Basho smilingly replied, " My name is Basho, and 1 am 
travelling about on a pilgrimage for the sake of practis- 
ing the art of Haikai." The rustics, in great excitement, 
apologised for their rudeness to an eminent man " whose 
fragrant name was known to all the world." They sent 
for their friends who were interested in Haikai, and 
began their al fresco feast anew in his honour. 

It has been objected that Haikai, even in the hands of 
an acknowledged master like Basho, is too narrow in its 
compass to have any value as literature. The Kanga- 
kusha Dazai Shuntai calls it a tsuta?iaki mono (a stupid 
sort of thing), and Shotei Kinsui admits that in the eyes 
of "the superior man" this is doubtless so. Its popu- 
larity, however, is undeniable. The name of Basho was 
known to the very cow-herds. He had ten disciples, and 
they in their turn had pupils whose name is legion. 
Monthly conferences of Haikai amateurs were held 
regularly both in the capital and the provinces, and there 
were professors who contrived to make a living by 
practising this art. 

294 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

It would be absurd to put forward any serious claim 
on behalf of Haikai to an important position in literature. 
Yet, granted the form, it is difficult to see how more could 
be made of it than Basho has done. It is not only the 
metre which distinguishes these tiny effusions from prose. 
There is in them a perfection of apt phrase, which often 
enshrines minute but genuine pearls of true sentiment 
or pretty fancy. Specks even of wisdom and piety may 
sometimes be discerned upon close scrutiny. Sugges- 
tiveness is their most distinctive quality, as may be seen 
by the following : — 

^ A cloud of flowers! 
Is the bell Uyeno 
Or Asakusa ? " 

To the English reader this will appear bald, and even 
meaningless. But to an inhabitant of Yedo it conveys 
more than meets the ear. It carries him away to his 
favourite pleasure resort of Mukojima, with its long lines 
of cherry-trees ranged by the bank of the river Sumida, 
and the famous temples of Uyeno and Asakusa in the 
vicinity. He will have no difficulty in expanding it into 
something of this kind : ^* The cherry-flowers in Muko- 
jima are blossoming in such profusion as to form a cloud 
which shuts out the prospect. Whether the bell which 
is sounding from the distance is that of the temple of 
Uyeno or of Asakusa I am unable to determine." 

But brevis esse laborat, obscurns jit, A very large pro- 
portion of Basho's Haikai are so obscurely allusive as to 
transcend the comprehension of the uninitiated foreigner. 
The following are some of the more lucid. The same 
quality of suggestiveness pervades them all. 

BASHO 295 

^^ An anciejit pond! 

With a sflimdfro7n the water 
Of the frog as it plimges in^ 

" / cofue weary ^ 
In search of aft i?in — 
Ah! these wistaria flowers I " 

" Ah I the waving lespedeza^ 
Which spills not a drop 
Of the clear dew r' 

" ' Tis thefir<it S7iow — 
Just enough to bend 
The gladiolus leaves 1 " 

'■' Of Mildera 
The gate I would knock at — 
The moon of to-day^'' 

That is to say, How beautiful the scenery about the 
temple of Miidera must look on a fine moonlight night 
like this ! I would that I were there to see it. 

" On a withered branch 
A crow is sitti7ig 
This autumn eveT 

" The cry of the cicada 
Gives no sign 
That presently it will die^'' 

• The following are by other writers : — 

'■'■^Tis the cuckoo — 
Listen well! 
How much soever gods ye beT 

^^^Tis the first s?iow, 
, Yet some 07ie is ifidoors — 

Who can it be?'' 

" The club-shaker s 
Risi7tg a7idfalli7ig 171 the water 
U7ttil it beco7nes a inusquito.'' 

296 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

The water-grub, which subsequently becomes a mus- 
quito, moves about by the rapid vibration of its tail. 
Hence the name '' club-shaker." To the Japanese it is 
an emblem of the mischievous boy who is destined to 
develop into a wicked man. 

" 0 ye falleji leaves ! 
There are far more oj you 
Than ever I saw growing on the trees ! " 

^^ Alas! the width of this jnusqiiito-net 
Which meets my eye when I wake 
And when I lie dow?i.^^ 

The following characteristic specimen of this kind of 
poetry is quoted in Mr. B. H. Chamberlain's Handbook 
of Colloquial Japanese : — 

*' Asagao ni 

Tsurube torarete, 
Morai-mizu ! " 

Literally, " Having had my well-bucket taken away by 
the convolvuli, — gift-water ! " The meaning, as Mr. 
Chamberlain not unnecessarily explains, is this: ^'The 
poetess Chiyo, having gone to her well one morning to 
draw water, found that some tendrils of the convolvulus 
had twined themselves around the rope. As a poetess 
and a w^oman of taste, she could not bring herself to 
disturb the dainty blossoms. So, leaving her own well 
to the convolvuli, she went and begged water of a 
neighbour. A pretty little vignette surely, and expressed 
in five words." 

Haibun 

The Haibun is a kind of prose composition which 
may be conveniently mentioned here, as it is a sort of 

HAIBUN 297 

satellite of the Haikai, and aims at the same conciseness 
and suggestiveness. The most noted writer of Haibun is 
YOKOI Yayu (1703 -1 783), a high official of Nagoya, in 
Owari. He is the author of the much admired apologue 
which follows : — 

'^An earthen vessel, whether it be square or round, 
strives to adapt to its own form the thing which it 
contains : a bag does not insist on preserving its own 
shape, but conforms itself to that which is put into it. 
Full, it reaches above men's shoulders ; empty, it is folded 
up and hidden in the bosom. How the cloth bag which 
knows the freedom of fulness and emptiness must laugh 
at the world contained within the jar ! 

O thou bag 

Of moon and flowers 

Whose form is ever changing!'''' 

In other words : How much better it is to yield our 
hearts to the manifold influences of external nature, like 
the moon and flowers, which are always changing their 
aspect with the weather and the season, than, self-con- 
centrated, to try to make everything conform to one's 
own narrow standard ! 

KlOKA 

Kioka (literally ''mad poetry") is a comic and vulgar 
variety of Tanka. There is here an absolute freedom 
both in respect to language and choice of subject. The 
Kioka must be funny, that is all. In this kind of poetry, 
of which an immense quantity was produced during the 
Yedo period, the punning propensity of the Japanese has 
been allowed full scope. Share (pronounced ''sharry") 
reigns there supreme. Share is one of those numerous 

298 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Japanese words for which there is no exact EngHsh 
equivalent. It may be translated '* wit," but in order to 
express its full meaning a spice of what is comprehended 
under the terms gaiety, esprit, playful fancy, stylishness, 
must be added. Japanese wit, like that of other countries, 
has an element which defies analysis or classification. 
But the Jen- de-mots predominates. Share infests not 
only the Kioka, but the drama and fiction, to an extent 
well-nigh intolerable to European tastes. Dr. Florenz, 
Professor of Philology in the Imperial University of 
Tokio, has treated this subject with truly German con- 
scientiousness and erudition in a paper read before the 
German Asiatic Society of Japan in July 1892. Follow- 
ing a native investigator named Tsuchiko Kaneshiro, 
he classifies share under two heads with divisions and 
subdivisions, making in all twenty different kinds. Our 
old enemy the pivot-word is here, also the pillow-word, 
and several varieties of the ordinary pun, with various 
fearfully complicated acrobatic contortions of speech 
which I shall not attempt to describe. Even the reader 
who has a competent knowledge of the language requires 
a special study to understand and appreciate them. He 
follows these far-eastern waggeries with a halting step, 
and frequently finds himself in the position of the 
Scotchman who was heard suddenly to burst into 
laughter at a joke which had been made half-an-hour 
before. Nothing testifies more strikingly to the nimble- 
ness of the Japanese apprehension than their delight in 
these " Taschenspielerkunstchen des sprachlichen Aus- 
drucks" (linguistic prestidigitations), as Dr. Florenz has 
aptly called them, whether in conversation or in books. 
It may be doubted whether such an excessive fondness 
for mere verbal wit does not amount to a disease, and 

MODERN LYRICS 299 

whether it has not constituted a serious obstacle to the 
development of higher qualities in their literature. 

In quite recent times a popular kind of lyrical poetry 
has come into fashion which somewhat resembles the 
ancient Naga-uta in form. The following may serve as a 
specimen : — 

'^ Vain has been the dream 
In which I thought that we ?net; 
Awake, I ^nd myself again 
In the darkness 
Of the wretched reality. 
Whether I try to hope 
Or give way to gloomy thought^ 
Truly for my heart 
There is no relief 

If this is such a miserable world that I may not vicct thee, 
Oh / let me take up juy abode 
Deep in the far mountains^ 
And deeper still 
In their furthest depths. 
Where, careless of men's gaze^ 
I may think of my love." 

CHAPTER \ 

EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 
Kangakusha — Fiction — Jisho and Kiseki — Jitsuroku- 

MONO — WaSOBIOYE — POPULAR DRAMA 

Kangakusha 

The pursuit of Chinese studies reached its height in the 
eighteenth century. In its early years Hakuseki, Kiuso, 
and other distinguished men of letters still lived and 
wrote. They had numerous successors, who continued 
to bring out volume after volume of commentaries on 
the Chinese classics, works on government, the art of 
war, history, finance and political economy, ethics, 
metaphysics and religion, under which the shelves of 
Japanese libraries are groaning at this day. But, as the 
Hezke Monogatari says, ''that which flourishes must 
also decay." After the philosophers came the sophists. 
Japan had little more to learn from the Chu-Hi philo- 
sophy, and the renewed study of the ancient Chinese 
literature which it had promoted. The impulse derived 
from these sources had spent its force, though it con- 
tinued to be indirectly felt in other departments of 
literature than the writings of the Kangakusha. 

In the eighteenth century the Chu-Hi philosophy was 

no longer so universally recognised as the unquestioned 

300 

KANGAKUSHA 301 

standard of doctrine. Even in the preceding century 
there had been heretics, vigorously denounced by Kiuso, 
who followed the teachings of Wang Yangming,i a 
Chinese thinker who " endeavoured to substitute an 
idealistic intuitionalism for the scientific philosophy of 
Chu-Hi." Another heretic was Ito Jinsai (1627-1705), who 
was one of the founders of a new^ sect known as the 
Kogakusha, which set aside Chu-Hi's exposition of the 
Chinese classics, and sought to base a system of philo- 
sophy on the direct study of the works of Confucius. 
His son Togai (1670-1736), a distinguished scholar, fol- 
lowed in the same track as w^ell as the still more eminent 
Ogiu Sorai (i 666-1728). Togai was the author of Yuken 
Shoroku and Hyosokn-dan^ collections of miscellaneous 
writings in the Japanese language ; and Sorai is remem- 
bered for his Seidan ('^Talk on Government") and Naru- 
heshiy both of which are in Japanese. Dazai Shuntai, also 
a heretical philosopher, w^as the author of a work on 
finance called Keizairoku^ and of a volume of desultory 
essays, in a plain, straightforward style, entitled Dokugo 
('^Soliloquy"), which is much esteemed. All these were 
voluminous writers in the Chinese language. 

Meanwhile the Chu-Hi or orthodox school of philosophy 
was not without its champions, and a war of contending 
sects arose w^hose wrangles disturbed Japan until the end 
of the century. The intolerance of all classes of Kanga- 
kusha for Buddhism, and the aversion and contempt of 
the Wagakusha (or students of the native learning and 
religion) for Chinese scholars and Buddhists alike, helped 
to increase the turmoil and confusion. Towards the end 

^ See Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, vol. xx. p. 12; also 
Dr. Knox's translation of Nakai Tojiu's Okina Mondo, in vol. ii. of the 

Ciirysanthcinum. 

302 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

of the century this state of things became so unbear- 
able that the reigning Shogun, lyenari, was driven to 
apply a partial remedy. He prohibited all philosophical 
teaching whatever other than that of Chu-Hi and his 
adherents. 

The Kangakusha^ by their excesses and extravagances, 
were themselves responsible for the decay of their ni- 
f^uence. Their admiration for things Chinese passed all 
reasonable bounds. Sorai, for example, spoke of himself 
as an *^ Eastern barbarian," and Chinese standards were 
blindly accepted as unquestionable rules of conduct both 
in private and public matters. 

In the world of literature the most noticeable result of 
the Kangakusha craze (for such it ultimately became) 
was the neglect of Japanese composition. For all 
serious writings Chinese was preferred, and it was only 
for their lighter and more carelessly written works that 
these scholars condescended to use their own language. 
The native style was for a long time left mainly to the 
writers of fiction. 

JlSHO AND KiSEKI 

At the beginning of the eighteenth century there was 
at Kioto a bookseller and publisher whose place of busi- 
ness was known as the Hachimonjiya or *' Figure-of- 
eight-house." The principal of this estabhshment was 
also an author, and in that capacity signed himself 
JiSHO (spontaneous laughter). Associated with him 
was a writer who styled himself KiSEKl. Kiseki was a 
broken-down tradesman of Kioto, the heir of a long 
line of shopkeepers who had amassed wealth by the sale 
of a kind of sweetmeat or cake. Such part of their sub- 
stance as had descended to him he wasted in riotous 

JISHO AND KISEKI 303 

living, and was at last compelled to resort to authorship 
for a subsistence. At first Kiseki allowed his works to 
be published in ]isho s name ; but as their popularity 
became established, he insisted on his own name also 
appearing on the title-page. Ultimately author and 
publisher quarrelled, and Kiseki opened an independent 
establishment, where a good number of his works were 
brought out. Some go so far as to say that Jisho never 
wrote anything, but that the books which bear his signa- 
ture were in all cases really the work of Kiseki or other 
needy authors, whom he paid for their services. What- 
ever may have been the relations between them, the two 
names Jisho and Kiseki are constantly associated by the 
Japanese, just as we speak of Erckmann-Chatrian or 
Besant and Rice. 

Kiseki died about 1736, in his seventieth year, and 
Jisho in 1745, at an advanced age. In a preface to his 
last published work, the latter commends to the favour 
of the public his son Kisho and his grandson Zuisho, w^ho 
were authors of writings of a similar character to those 
for which the Hachimonjiya had acquired its reputa- 
tion. One of these, printed in 1746, contains a catalogue 
of one hundred and three publications of this notorious 
press. The names of a considerable proportion are 
sufficiently indicative of their character. They are por- 
nographic novels, tales, or sketches. Even when the 
title is a harmless one, the reader after a few pages is 
pretty sure to find himself introduced to one of the 
Kuruwa or brothel-quarters of Kioto or elsewhere, and 
the manners and customs of these places furnish a large 
part of the subject-matter. 

There is a reason, if not an excuse, for the prevailing 
choice of this unsavoury topic by Japanese writers of 

304 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

fiction during the Yedo period. There was no social 
intercourse to speak of between men and women of the 
better class. Whenever reasons of economy did not 
stand in the way, the women hved a very secluded life, 
seeing no men but their near relations. Their marriages 
were arranged for them, and romantic attachments were 
extremely exceptional. The manners and customs of 
the respectable classes of society were therefore not a 
promising field for the writer of fiction. He preferred 
the freer atmosphere of the Kuruwa, to which pretty 
gardens and handsome buildings, with the showy educa- 
tion and gay costumes of their inmates, lent a superficial 
appearance of elegance and refinement. The element of 
romance in the lives of these women was perhaps small, 
but it existed, and it was far more natural to credit them 
with romantic adventures and passions than their more 
immaculate sisters. And if the novelist's description of 
these places as the home of wit and jollity, and the 
natural resort of all young men of spirit and fashion, 
had a tendency to corrupt public morals, it is also to 
be remembered that the class of readers whom he 
addressed were not particular in these matters. It was 
a case oi populus vult corrumpi^ et corrunipitur. 

The most famous of the Hachimonjiya publications is 
a work entitled Keisei Kintanki (171 1). Jisho's name 
appears on the title-page, but it is probably one of those 
which were really written by Kiseki. It is not a novel, 
but a debate on a subject of which I must renounce the 
attempt to give an idea. In so far as mere words go, 
there are more objectionable works, but the whole atti- 
tude of the author is profoundly immoral. What is 
specially unpardonable is his irreverent use of terms 
borrowed from the Buddhist religious vocabulary, and 

JISHO AND KISEKI 305 

the scandalous way in which here and elsewhere the 
great names of Japanese history are dragged by him 
through the mire. Its humour, however, is undeniable. 

A somewhat less objectionable work is the Oyaji Katagi 
or "Types of Elderly Men," by Jisho and Kiseki. It is 
a series of racy, lifelike sketches of " The Gourmand," 
"The Devotee," "The Valetudinarian," "The Patron of 
Wrestlers," with others which need not be specified. 

This was followed by a number of similar works, such 
as Musuko Katagi (" Types of Youths "), Tedai Katagi 
("Types of Merchants' Assistants"), Musimie Katagi 
("Types of Girlhood"). The last-named work has a 
preface, which makes what I have no doubt is a sincere 
profession of the most unexceptionable moral aims. 

The Kokuseiiya MincJid Taiheikiy by Kiseki, is a version, 
with variations, of Chikamatsu's well-known play. The 
practice of novelising dramas is more common in Japan 
than the reverse process. As has been already explained, 
there is far less difference between these two forms of 
composition than in European literature. 

The Fflriu Gurnpai Uchizva is a romance of the olden 
time, related in the Hachimonjiya manner. Other 
romances are the SJionin Gurnpai Uchiwa (Kiseki, N. D.), 
Furiu Saikai Susui'i, and Furiu Tokai Suzuri. 

It is not easy to discover in the works of these writers 
passages which are suitable for quotation in these pages. 
The following is an outline of a story from the Ze7t-aku 
MimocJii Ogiy or " Good and Evil Conduct Fan," a series 
of moral tales, signed by Jisho and Kiseki : — 

"Piety has its Reward" 

There was once an ink-maker of Nara, named Kuro- 
suke (Blackie), tolerably well off, but not rich. He was 

3o6 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

a very pious man, and went every day to the shrine of 
Kasuga, neal* that city, to pay his devotions. One day, 
as he went to make his usual morning prayer, he met a 
white-haired man in the garb of a Shinto priest, who told 
him that on his way home he would find a reward of his 
piety at the great Torii (Shinto archway) leading to the 
shrine.' He accordingly found there a purse of fifty 
gold kobans. He took it home, intending to advertise 
it, and so give the loser an opportunity of making a 
claim. Meanwhile Kurosuke heard a sound of great 
lamentation which proceeded from the house of a neigh- 
bour. It appeared, on inquiry, that the father of the 
family had gone security for a friend who had absconded, 
leaving him liable for a sum of one hundred rios. It was 
totally impossible for him to raise this amount. The 
creditor offered to take thirty, but even this sum was 
far beyond his means. His daughter (the experienced 
reader of Japanese novels knows what is coming) then 
offered to let herself be sold to a KuruWa in order to 
provide the needful money, and an establishment of this 
kind, far away in Chikuzen, was selected, so as to lessen 
the family disgrace as much as possible. It was the 
lamentation at her approaching departure which had 
drawn Kurosuke's attention. He concluded that with 
the gift of the gods he could not do better than release 
this unhappy household from their difficulty. So he 
paid the thirty rios, and returning home, deposited the 
balance of the money in the domestic shrine and went 
about his business. Now his wife, of whom he had made 
a confidante, was a foolish woman. She took it into 
her head that her husband had stolen the money. Full 
of this idea, she must needs let their landlord know of 
her suspicions. And so from one to another the matter 

JISHO AND KISEKI 307 

became public property. Kurosuke was arrested, and 
although he told the true story over and over again, 
nobody believed him. The authorities directed that he 
should be detained in custody until the loser of the 
money should appear to corroborate his statement. At 
last the original owner came forward. She was a young 
widow^ from a distance, who had meant it for the erection 
of a stone 1 uitern in front of the shrine, in memory of 
her deceased husband, and on her relating the circum- 
stances of its loss, Kurosuke was at once released. He 
obtained the magistrate's permission to divorce his wife 
for her treacherous conduct, and married the widow. 
They adopted the young girl who had been saved from a 
Hfe of shame, and were happy and prosperous ever after, 
leaving children and grandchildren who handed down 
their name. This true story is told to this day as an 
example of the saying that '' piety has its reward." 

The Hachimonjiya continued its activity until the end 
of the eighteenth century. Meanwhile other houses had 
sprung up, first at Kioto and subsequently at Yedo, to 
supply the public demand for literature of this kind. 
Their publications, known as skare-bon, or witty books, 
were of so outrageous a character that the Government 
at last (in 1791) interfered, and visited both authors and 
publishers with severe but not unmerited punishment. 
Non ragioniani di lor. 

With all their faults, Jisho and Kiseki must be pro- 
nounced the truest representatives for their time of the 
characteristic qualities of the Japanese national genius. 
They fill an important place in the history of Japanese 
literature, continuing the tradition of Saikaku by their 
graphic and humorous descriptions of real life and 
manners, while they far excelled him in culture and 

3o8 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

literary ability. They have been called realistic writers 
by some native critics, and when we think of the extrava- 
gant and unreal romances so much in vogue at a later 
period, they must be admitted to have considerable claim 
to the title. But in fidelity to the facts of everyday life 
and actual human nature, unsophisticated by superfine 
Chinese ethical notions, they fall short of some of their 
successors. Their works are by no means uniform in 
this respect, and some of them contain a large element 
of romance. 

'^ JiTSUROKU-MONC" 

In the Heike Monogatari and TaiJieiki we have seen 
examples of what may be called *' history paraphrased." 
The authors of similar works in the eighteenth century 
went a step further. They treated real personages and 
events with still greater freedom, and thus produced 
what, notwithstanding the name Jitsuroku-mono (^'True 
Record"), was in reality closely akin to the historical novel. 
Their favourite themes are battles and vendettas, warlike 
exploits, and the disorders which from time to time dis- 
turbed the peace of the Daimios' Governments. Their 
style is for the most part plain and unadorned, but not 
without a certain naive charm, and their works are still 
popular, although the authors' names have long been 
forgotten. 

Among the principal works of this kind may be men- 
tioned the Okubo MusasJii Yoroij Onna Taiheikiy JSIikawa 
Go Fudokiy Taikokiy and the Oka Seidan. The Taikokiy 
written in the early years of this century, relates the 
history of the famous soldier and statesman Hideyoshi in 
a highly imaginative fashion and at enormous length. 
It is to be distinguished from the earlier Taikdki already 

JITSUROKU-MONO 309 

noticed, and from subsequent works with the same or 
similar titles. 

An even more popular work was the Oka Seidan^ which 
purports to be a collection of causes dlebres tried by a 
judge named Oka Echizen no Kamii, famous for his 
impartiality and acumen. He was Machibugio or civil 
governor of Yedo, a post which carried with it high judi- 
cial powers, under the Shogun Yoshimune, in the eariy 
part of the eighteenth century. 

The Oka Seidan consists of forty-three stories, some 
of which are founded on fact, though the hand of the 
romancist is readily distinguishable in all. It may be 
cordially recommended to European students for its 
simple, unpretentious style, which is entirely free from 
the irritating tricks of the writers of superfine Japanese. 

The most interesting of the stories related in this bulky 
volume is the first. It is an account of an attempt by a 
scoundrelly young Buddhist priest, named Tenichi Bo, 
to pass himself off on the Shogun ^ as a son of his by a 
woman whom he had known in his youth. In order to 
carry out this design, he and his accomplices commit some 
forty murders and other crimes. By means which recall 
the devices of a famous claimant of our own day, they 
persuade the merchants of Osaka and Kioto to advance 
them large sums of money wherewith to furnish Tenichi 
Bo with an outfit suitable to his supposed station. He 
then proceeds to Yedo with a train of several hundred 
followers, and takes up his residence there in a handsome 
yashiki^ built specially for his reception from the funds 
supplied by his deluded adherents. The Shogun is 
strongly inclined to recognise him ; but Judge Oka, at 
the imminent risk of receiving an invitation to commit 

^ Arai Ilakuseki's patron, Yoshimune. 

3IO JAPANESE LITERATURE 

hara-kiri^ urges caution. He ultimately succeeds in trac- 
ing out, by his detectives, the whole history of Tenichi 
Bo's criminal career, and the story ends dramatically with 
the arrest, exposure, and execution of the chief culprits. 
It is true in all its more important features. 

The Jitsurokii-mono were suppressed by the Shogun's 
Government in 1804, as containing matter injurious to 
the fame of lyeyasu, the deified founder of the dynasty, 
and his lieutenants. At the same time all mention of 
real personages belonging to the military caste who lived 
after 1573 was prohibited in works of fiction. T\\q Jitsu- 
roku-mono continued, however, to be read in manuscripts, 
which formed a substantial part of the stock of the circu- 
• lating libraries. 

'* Wasobioye " (1774) 

Wasobioye is a sort of Japanese Gulliver. The hero 
drifts out to sea from the port of Nagasaki in a fishing- 
boat, and reaches the Land of Perennial Youth and Life, 
the Land of Endless Plenty, the Land of Shams, and 
finally the Land of Giants, meeting with numerous 
adventures, which are related with no little humour. 
This work has not been treated as a very important con- 
tribution to Japanese literature. Mr. Chamberlain, who 
has translated the best part of it for the Transactions of 
the Asiatic Society of fapan^ speaks of it as of no par- 
ticular importance or celebrity, and the native WTiters of 
literary history take no notice of it whatever. It appears 
to me that it is deserving of a more favourable judgment, 
and I confess that I prefer it to the more celebrated w^ork 
suggested by it, namely, the Musobioyc of Bakin. I tran- 

1 Vol. vii. (1879). 

WASOBIOYE 3 1 1 

scribe from Mr. Chamberlain's version a passage which 
will give some idea of its character : — 

" Now you must know that, as in this country there 
were no such phenomena as death and disease, none of 
the people knew what death or disease felt like, though 
they were much given to speculating on the subject. 
Some few volumes of the Buddhist Scriptures that had 
been brought over in ancient times from India and China, 
described heaven in such glowing terms that they were 
filled with quite a desperate admiration for death, and 
distaste for their own never-ending existence, so much so 
that when, as a rare exception, any of their countrymen 
chanced to die, he was envied in the same manner as in 
Japan would be envied one who should have obtained 
immortality. They studied the ' art of death ' as it were 
the art of magic, retiring to mountain districts and 
secluded valleys, where they subjected themselves to all 
manner of ascetic privations, which, however, rarely 
obtained for them the desired effect. In the matter of 
food, all such articjes as ginseng, wild potatoes, eels, wild 
duck, &c., which increase the action of the kidneys, and 
strengthen the spleen and stomach, were feared and 
avoided as being poisonously life-giving ; whereas what 
people of rank and consideration highly prized and de- 
lighted in were such viands as were likely to cause the 
eater's death. Thus mermaids were unusually cheap 
and plentiful — plentiful as cuttle-fish on the coast of 
Idzumi — and you might see slices of them piled up on 
dishes, as well as whole ones hanging from the eaves of 
every cook-shop. But nobody who was anybody would 
touch with the tips of his fingers a fish so apt to poison 
you to life, and it was accordingly left to the lowest 
of the populace. The globc-fish was much esteemed, 

312 , JAPANESE LITERATURE 

commanding a high price, and a favourite dish to set 
before the most honoured guests was a broth made of 
this fish powdered over w^ith soot. These would not, of 
course, in this Land of Perennial Youth and Life, actually 
h'lA a man. But still the poison would have a certain 
slight effect, making him feel giddy for half-an-hour or 
so, and giving him sensations as pleasurable as that experi- 
enced by us Japanese after drinking rice-beer. 'Ah,' he 
would exclaim, ' this is what death must feel like ! ' and he 
would clap his hands and dance and sing, and believe 
himself to have attained the very acme of felicity. If, in 
trying to say something flattering about a friend's child, 
a caller were to remark on its apparent healthiness, both 
father and mother would remember his words with un- 
easiness ; whereas, if he should say, 'The little thing 
doesn't look as if it would live long,' he would give the 
parents the greatest pleasure, and they would reply, 
'Ah, if only what you say may come true 1 ' " 

Popular Drama 

The eighteenth century was the flourishing period of 
the Japanese popular drama. Nearly everything of note 
in this department of literature belongs to it. Chika- 
matsu, it is true, began his career somewhat earlier, but 
all his principal works date after 1700. Since the be- 
ginning of the nineteenth century, on the other hand, the 
writing of Joruri has almost altogether ceased. 

Chikamatsu was succeeded by Takeda Idzumo, who 
wrote about the middle of the century. Most, however, 
of the plays commonly attributed to him were composed 
in collaboration with other writers, some being the work 
of as many as five or six authors. It seems to have been 
the usual practice at this time for playwrights to work 

TAKEDA IDZUMO 313 

together in this \v:iy. A committee having been formed, 
the proceedings began by the president giving out a sub- 
ject. At a subsequent meeting each member offered his 
suggestions as to its treatment, and the work of com- 
position went on in concert, nothing being accepted un'.il 
it met with the general approval. 

One of the best known works of Idzumo is a historical 
play of five acts, founded on the fortunes of Sugawara 
Michizane, a celebrated statesman of the ninth century, 
who was deified after his death as Temman Tenjin, and 
is now worshipped as the god presiding over penman- 
ship. It is entitled Siigazvafa denjiii tenarai no Kagaini 
or "Mirror (that is. History) of the Transmission of the 
Art of Calligraphy by Sugawara" (1746). The names of 
four authors appear on the title-page. 

A still more famous drama by Idzumo and two col- 
laborators is the Chiushiugura^ (1748) or ''Magazine of 
Faithful Retainers." Chikamatsu's five-act arrangement 
was at this time no longer adhered to, and the Chiushin- 
gura is in eleven acts or scenes. It is a version of the 
favourite story of the forty-seven Renins. There are no 
fewer than forty or fifty plays on this subject, some of them, 
however, being mere adaptations of previous works. 

In their general character, Idzumo's plays greatly 
resemble those of his predecessor. There is the same 
overcrowding of exciting incidents, the same mixture of 
comedy and tragedy, and the same desire to shock the 
audience with brutal murders and other enormities 
enacted on the stage, and to pander to their lewder 
tastes. But although it is heresy to say so, I confess to 
a preference to Idzumo over his more famous master. 

^ Translated into English by Mr. F. V. Dickins, under the title Ckins/uti' 
giira ; or the Loyal League ; a Japanese Romance. 

314 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

The improbabilities are not quite so startling, the per- 
sonages are several degrees nearer to ordinary humanity, 
and their sentiments are somewhat less unnatural and 
less stilted in their expression. The poetical element is, 
perhaps, thinner, but that, to the European reader at least, 
is a doubtful disadvantage. 

Idzumo died in 1756. He was foUow^ed as playwright 
for the Takemoto theatre by Chikamatsu Hanni, who 
did his best to attract audiences by startling novelties 
and spectacular effect. He reduced the share given to 
poetical narrative, and depended more on dialogue. But 
in his hands the Joruri declined sensibly. The public 
got tired of it, the Takemoto Za went into bankruptcy, 
and after the end of the century this kind of drama 
became practically extinct. 

CHAPTER VI 

EIGHTEENTH CENTURY {Continued) 

Wagakusha (Students of Japanese Antiquity) 

The Kangakusha's extravagant admiration for every- 
thing Chinese, and their persistent and largely successful 
endeavours to mould the thoughts and institutions of 
Japan upon Chinese models, were followed by an inevi- 
table reaction in favour of a more genuinely national 
development. This movement, which has been fully 
described by Sir E. Satow in the Transactions of the 
Asiatic Society of Japan {1875), forms one of the most 
interesting features of recent Japanese literature. 

It began with the renewed study of the old literary 
monuments of Japan, which for centuries had been so 
much neglected that the very language in which they ar3 
written was no longer understood. lyeyasu's patronage 
of literature, and his measures for the preservation of old 
books, have been already referred to. One of his grand- 
sons, the famous Mitsukuni (1622-1700), Daimio of Mito, 
inherited his great ancestor's love of learning. He appro- 
priated a considerable part of his revenue to the cost of 
collecting a vast library of books of all kinds, and to the 
maintenance of scholars whom he employed in the com- 
pilation of works of research. The chief outcome of 
their labours was the well-know^n Dai Nihonshiy a history 

3i6 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

of Japan in the Chinese language, which is recognised at 
the present day as the standard work of its class. 

One of Mitsukuni's services to literature was the pub- 
lication in 1678 of an anthology of masterpieces in the 
Wabun or pure Japanese style, under the title FtLso-jiu- 
yo-shiu, given to it by the reigning Mikado, to whom it 
was dedicated. It is a line specimen of the block-printing 
of the time. 

A priest named Keichiu (1640-1701) was the chief 
pioneer of the revived study of the old literature. He 
was by birth a Samurai, but out of a love for learning 
abandoned the world for the quiet of a Buddhist monas- 
tery. His fame as a scholar reached the ears of Mitsu- 
kuni, who invited him in the. most courteous manner to 
come to Yedo and be enrolled in his company of learned 
men. Keichiu declined this offer, upon which the Prince 
sent one of his staff to prosecute his studies under 
Keichiu's guidance. The latter, not to be outdone in 
courtesy, compiled and dedicated to Mitsukuni a treatise 
on the ManydsJiiu, in twenty volumes, entitled Manyo 
DaisJwki, The tadc of preparing a similar work had 
already been vainly assigned to another of the Prince's 
proteges, a learned but lazy Wagakusha called Shimo- 
kawabe Choriu. The DaisJwki is now superseded, but it 
was in its day a work of the highest importance for the 
study of the old Japanese. Mitsukuni evinced his satis- 
faction by sending the author a present of one thousand 
ounces of silver and thirty rolls of silk. 

Another book of Keichiu's was the Kokon Yozaisho^ 
which means literally ''A Selection of Spare Timber, Old 
and New." It is a miscellaneous collection of material 
prepared by him in the course of his researches for the 
DaisJwki^ but not used in that work. He also contributed 

KEICHIU 317 

to the interpretation of the Ise Monogatari and the Genji 
Monogataj'iy and wrote a number of other erudite treatises 
which are still vakied by scholars. Like most of the 
Wagakusha, he was a poet, and has left both Tanka and 
Naga-uta, which in metre, diction, and sentiment are 
little more than echoes of the Manyoshiu, They are 
adorned with the same devices of pillow and pivot words, 
and are in short the old wine in the old bottles. The 
following simple effusion is in its way not unpleasing : — 

The First Day of Spring 

" Bending its magic bow^ 
The spring hath come : 
The cterfial heavens^ 
Likewise the ore-yielding earthy 
Are dim with hazej 
The snow begins to melt 
On the moimtaiiis rim, 
And the ice dissolves 
From the surface of the pond j 
The 7iightingale s te7ider note 
Soimds {oh / how lovely /) 
From amid the first blossoms 
Of the plinn branch. 
Now from the memory fade 
Onr regrets for the bygone year. 
How many days must pass 
Before we ca?t go forth into the meadows 
And pluck the youfig pot-herbs ? ^ 
When will the widow 
Fla?ne into bud? 

^ Haru in Japanese means "to bend" and also "spring." Hence this con- 
junction. There is no intention of personifying spring as an archer. A small 
bow forms part of a magician's outfit in Japan. 

- An old custom in early spring. 

3i8 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

IVhen will the cherry-flowers open ? 
Such are the expectant thoughts 
That 071 this day 
Crowd into all men^s mitidsP 

About the same time Kitamura Kigin, a scholar em- 
ployed by the Shogun's Government, performed a useful 
service by editing and annotating most of the classical 
works of the Heian period. His editions of the Genji 
Monogatari and Makura Zoshi are still much esteemed 
by students. Kigin also wrote Tanka and Haikai. 

Kada Adzuma-maro (1669-1736), the son of the guar- 
dian of a Shinto shrine, was Keichiu's successor as a 
student of Japanese antiquity and the old classical litera- 
ture. He presented to the Government a memorial, in 
which he protested vigorously against the exclusive study 
of Chinese, and urged the establishment of a school for 
the cultivation of the Japanese language and literature at 
Kioto. This project received the approval of the Shogun's 
Government, but was never carried out. Kada was suc- 
ceeded by his nephew and adopted son, Kada Arima- 
maro (i 706-1 751). Arima-maro took up his residence 
in Yedo, where he continued his uncle's teachings with 
some success. 

Among the elder Kada's pupils the most distinguished 
was Mabuchi ( 1 697-1 769). Like his master, Mabuchi 
came of a family of guardians of Shinto shrines. In 1738 
he removed to Yedo, where he spent the remainder of 
his life. He formed there a school which produced 
many famous men, and soon rivalled the Kangakusha 
in popularity and influence. Motoori, who was one of 
his pupils, describes him as *' the parent of the study of 
antiquity." 

*' It was he," he adds, ^^ with whom began that style of 

MABUCHI 319 

learning which consists in devoting oneself to the exa- 
mination of the ancient language and thought with a 
mind wholly detached from Chinese prepossessions. 
Before the time of this master the study of poetry was 
confined to the KokinsJiiu and later collections. The 
Manyoshiu was thought obscure and incomprehensible. 
Nobody dreamed of judging between the good and bad, 
of distinguishing the old from the more recent poems, 
or of mastering their language so as to use it as his 
own. But now, thanks to the teachings of this master, 
w^e have appropriated the ancient language. It has 
become possible to compose poetry in the style of the 
Manyoshiu, and even to write prose after the manner of 
antiquity. The men of this day fancy that this is due to 
their own exertions, but in reality they owe everything 
to Mabuchi. It is now universally acknowledged that in 
studying ancient books like the Kojiki and A'iho?tgz\ it 
is necessary to avoid being misled by Chinese notions, 
and having first thoroughly mastered the old language, 
to guide ourselves by its meaning. This is the very spirit 
of Mabuchi's teaching of the Manyoshiu." 

Mabuchi was a purist in style, and aimed at the 
exclusion from his writings of words of Chinese deriva- 
tion as far as this was possible. He has left numerous 
commentaries and other works of research, indispen- 
sable even novv^ to the student of the older Japanese 
language. Among them may be mentioned treatises on 
pillow-words {Kanjiko), on poetry, and on prose com- 
position, and commentaries on the Manyoshiu, on the 
Norito {Norito Kd\ the Genji Monogatari, and other 
classical books. He was also a writer of Tanka and 
Naga-uta. 

The greatest of the Wagakusha, and one of the most 

320 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

remarkable men whom Japan has produced, was MOTO- 
ORI NORINAGA. He belonged to a family which had been 
originally Samurai, and w^as born in 1730 at Matsuzaka, 
in the province of Ise. There can be no doubt that the 
proximity of his native place to the famous shrines sacred 
from antiquity to the worship of the Sun Goddess and the 
Goddess of Food, had a considerable influence on his 
career. Stories are told of his youth, of his omnivorous 
appetite for knowledge, his precocious talent, and his 
boyish ambitions, which it is needless to repeat here. At 
the age of twenty-one he was sent to Kioto by his widowed 
mother to study medicine. There he became acquainted 
with the works of Keichiu, which he read with avidity. 
In 1757 he returned to Matsuzaka and set up in practice 
as a physician. Soon afterwards his attention was drawn 
to Mabuchi's writings. In 1761 he had a personal meet- 
ing with th:;t great scholar. This, their only interview, 
was followed by a long-continued and voluminous corre- 
spondence. 

Motoori's life w^as from this time forward a very busy 
one. In addition to his medical practice, which w^as in a 
flourishing condition, he was engaged in collecting mate- 
rial for his great commentary on the Kojikiy and in giving 
instructions to hundreds of pupils whom the fame of his 
learning had attracted to him. Eventually he was taken 
into the service of the Daimio of Kishiu, who was a great 
admirer of his writings. Late in life Motoori resigned 
his official position and removed to Kioto, where he gave 
lectures which were attended by audiences drawn from 
the highest classes of society in that city. He died there 
in 1801, in the seventy-second year of his age. By his 
own desire he was buried at his native place on a hill 
over the temple of Miorakuji, a fir and cherry tree were 

MOTOORI 321 

planted by his grave, and a stone set up inscribed simply 
with his name. 

Motoori was a prolific writer. He brought out fifty- 
five distinct works in over one hundred and eighty 
volumes. His fame as a scholar and writer rests chiefly 
on his Kojiki-defiy a commentary on the Kqjiki^ the sacred 
book of the Shinto religion.^ Before his time the study 
of the Kojiki\\'d.A been much neglected, the very language 
in which it is written being well-nigh unintelligible even to 
educated Japanese. In this monumental work, which fills 
no fewer than forty-four good-sized volumes, he brought 
to bear on the elucidation of a very difficult text a vast 
store of erudite knowledge, derived from a long study of 
the Ma7iydshiu and other books of the old literature. It 
occupied him for many years. Begun in 1764, it was 
not completed until 1796, and the final volumes were 
not issued from the press till long after his death. 

The Kojiki-den is not only valuable for its prodigious 
learning ; it was a vigorous blow aimed at the supre- 
macy of the Chinese school of ethics and philosophy. 
No opportunity is lost of girding at everything Chinese, 
and of exalting the old Japanese customs, religion, and 
language, in a spirit of ardent and undiscriminating 
patriotism. The K(jiki-den had no small share in pro- 
ducing the reaction against Chinese ideas and institu- 
tions which has become so pronounced a characteristic 
of modern Japan. 

The Reki-cJw SJiosJii-kai-in is an edition, with notes, 
of the speeches and proclamations of some of the early 
Mikados which have been preserved to us in a historical 
work entitled Shoku NiJiongi. 

Other w^orks of Motoori's are his edition of the Kokin- 

^ See above, p. 18. 

322 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

shiu already noticed ; the ho no Kami ShishukugeUj a 
treatise on poetry ; the Gio-jin Gai-gen, an attack on the 
Chinese philosophy ; the Tama no Ogiishi, a valuable 
critical and exegetical work on the Genji Monogatari ; 
the Kenkiojin ("The Madman Fettered"), a controversial 
work written in reply to hostile criticisms of the sacred 
Shinto books ; the Kuzithana, composed in answer to a 
similar attack by a scholar named Ichikawa Tatsumaro ; 
the Uiyama biimi^ a treatise on methods of study, and the 
Tama-arare ('^ Hail of Pearls"), a lively and amusing 
critique of common errors in WTiting Japanese. 

The Saki-take no ben is a refutation of various erroneous 
notions current with regard to the gods of Ise and their 
worship. The " abominable heresy " of some Kangakusha 
who would euhemerise the Sun Goddess into an ordinary 
mortal empress, and make the Takama no Hara (or Plain 
of High Heaven) the name of the place where her capital 
stood, is duly anathematised. '^What doubt can there 
be that Amaterasu no Ohomi Kami [the Sun Goddess] 
is the great ancestress of the Mikados, and that she is 
no other than the Sun of Heaven which illumines this 
world ? These things are in their nature infinite, not to 
be measured, and mysterious." 

The Tamagatsuma (in fifteen volumes, published post- 
humously in 1812), may be called '^ Motoori's Note-book." 
It is a collection of jottings of a very miscellaneous char- 
acter, comprising notes on Shinto ceremonial, on the 
old literature, on grammar and spelling, on poetry, on 
ancient customs, on the iniquity of Chinese principles 
and institutions, &c., &c. It is a mine of instruction to 
all students of Japanese antiquity, but has little except 
perhaps a few autobiographical memoranda which v/ill 
interest others. 

MOTOORI 323 

Another miscellaneous work, the Suzunoya no Bmtshiuy 
also contains some interesting personal reminiscences. I 
should like to transcribe from it a delicately drawn de- 
scription of how the author spent a very hot day in the 
society of some congenial friends. It is unfortunately 
too long for quotation. 

Before Motoori's time there was no Japanese grammar, 
one or two dictionaries of the Teniwoha or particles 
being hardly an exception. Although he did not pro- 
duce a systematic grammar of the Japanese language, 
Motoori did much to throw light upon its structure. 
The Tama-arare, already referred to, contains many 
useful grammatical hints. In the Moji-goye no Kana- 
dzukai (1771) he enunciated the principles of the correct 
spelling of Japanese words, and in the Kanji Sanonko 
(1785) he dealt with the various modes of spelling and 
pronouncing words of Chinese origin^ His principal 
gramm.atical work, however, is the Kotoba no Tama no 
wo (1779); in which he set forth and illustrated at great 
length certain rules of Japanese syntax. Conciseness 
was not one of Motoori's merits. The seven volumes of 
which this work consists have been compressed without 
material loss into seven pages of English. His gramma- 
tical researches were continued by his son, Haruniwa, in 
whose well-known work, the Kotoba no Yachiviatay the 
inflexional system of the Japanese verb and adjective was 
for the first time formulated, and by his adopted son, 
Ohira, who was the author of a treatise on causative 
and passive verbs. European writers on Japanese 
grammar owe much to the researches of Motoori and 
his followers. 

Carlyle's idea that the qualities which go to make a 
man of literary genius fit the same person for being a 

324 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

statesman is a favourite one with the Japanese. We 
have seen that Hakuseki and Kiuso were constantly con- 
sulted upon official matters by the Shogun's Government. 
Motoori was invited by the Daimio of Kishiu to place 
on record his views on the government of a Daimio's 
domain, and did so in a little work in two volumes 
entitled Tama Kushige (^^The Precious Casket"). In this 
treatise he unbends from the severe purism of his other 
works, and sets an example of a simple, practical style 
well suited to the subjects discussed, and level to the 
meanest understanding. His position is that of a cautious 
reformer. He saw that one of the greatest abuses of the 
day was the excessive number of officials and retainers 
of all kinds, and urged earnestly that it should be 
diminished ; gradually, however, so as to avoid injury 
to vested interests. The oppressed condition of the 
peasantry had his warmest sympathy. He thought that 
the ikki or agrarian risings, which had become common, 
were a disgrace to the Daimios in whose jurisdiction they 
occurred, rather than to the ignorant men who took part 
in them. The hara-kiri is another subject on which he 
had a strong opinion. In his view this form of suicide 
had become far too common. It was not for the public 
advantage, he considered, that honest and capable men 
should do away with themselves because they were 
responsible for some trifling official miscarriage, as was 
too often the case. He was in favour of prohibiting 
all hara-kiri without a formal order from the culprit's 
superior. 

It is not by writing of this kind, however, that Motoori's 
political influence is to be measured. His works helped 
materially to enfranchise the Japanese nation from their 
moral and intellectual servitude to China, and to produce 

MOTOORI 325 

a spirit of self-reliance and patriotism which at a sub- 
sequent period became translated into political action. 
Though he was himself loyal to the Shogunate, he contri- 
buted indirectly, but most effectively, to the national 
movement which in 1867 brought about its downfall, 
and restored the descendant of the Sun Goddess to the 
sovereign position which was the logical result of the 
principles advocated in his works. 

Motoori's efforts on behalf of the Shinto religion pro- 
duced little tangible result. It was too late to call back 
the deities of the old pantheon from the Hades to which 
the neglect of the nation had consigned them. In his 
own lifetime nothing was done, and although a half- 
hearted, perfunctory attempt to re-establish the ancient 
faith was made in 1868, the efforts of its supporters 
were soon relaxed. The Buddhist priests ceased to be 
the guardians of the Shinto shrines, and a so-called 
Shinto form of burial was introduced, but little more 
was effected that was not soon afterwards allowed to 
fall into abeyance. At the present day this religion is 
practically extinct. 

All the Wagakusha considered themselves bound to 
compose poetry in the old style. Motoori acquitted him- 
self of this obligation more creditably than most of his 
fellows. The following Tanka is much admired : — 

" If one should ask you 
What is the heart 
Of Island Yafnato — 
// is the moufttain cherry blossom 
Which exhales its perfume in the tnorning sun.^^ 

In other words, ^^The Japanese are instinctively and 
naturally noble and virtuous — not like the Chinese, who 

26 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

require a clumsy and artificial system of ethical philo- 
sophy for the cultivation of their moral natures." 

Motoori's anti-foreign and patriotic prejudices go far 
to explain his antipathy for the Kangakusha with their 
extravagant admiration for everything Chinese. But 
there was a deeper cause for his dislike to their philo- 
sophy. As already stated, the Chinese nation has a 
strong bias against the conception of the power which 
rules the universe as a personal being. The Ten (Heaven) 
of Confucius and Mencius, and the Tao (Way) of Laotze,^ 
not to speak of the TaikJii and other metaphysical con- 
ceptions of the Sung schoolmen, all fall short of this idea. 
The main bent of the Japanese mind is in the same direc- 
tion. But there is evidence in both countries of a con- 
trary curre^it of thought. Here, too, there are men born 
with a craving which refuses to be satisfied w^th abstrac- 
tions in the place of a personal God (or gods) to whom 
they can look up as the Creator and Ruler of the 
universe, and as exercising a providential care over 
mankind. Motoori was one of these. He professed 
not even to understand w^hat the Sung schoolmen meant 
by their Taikhi and their Yin and Yangy and stoutly 
maintained that these were mere fictions. But whatever 
may be the case with philosophical notions, no man can 
evolve a God from his own inner consciousness. He 
must accept the God or gods which he finds already 
acknowledged, whether by his own or by other people's 
fathers. Motoori's intensely patriotic temper compelled 
him to seek at home for the satisfaction of his inborn 
religious instincts. He turned naturally to Shinto. But 
in his time Shinto had fallen on evil days. It had suffered 

^ The late General Alexander, in his work on Laotze, translates Tao by 
' ' God." He explains his reasons for doing so in the preface. 

MOTOORI 327 

grievously from the encroachments of Buddhism. Bud- 
dhist priests had assumed the guardianship of the great 
majority of the shrines of the national cult, and had 
adulterated its ceremonies and doctrines with much that 
was alien. The native gods were not abolished — they 
had still some hold on the popular mind ; but they 
were degraded to the position of temporary manifesta- 
tions of Buddha. As one of Motoori's pupils said, they 
were made domestics in the Buddhist household. 

This state of things was a great grief to Motoori. It 
drove him back from the present to the old unadulterated 
Shinto taught in the Kojiki^ NiJiongiy and Norito. Here 
he found the satisfaction to his mind and heart which he 
had failed to find elsewhere. Himself convinced of the 
excellence of the old national religion, he made it the 
business of his life to propagate it among his fellow- 
countrymen, and to denounce the abominable depravity 
of those who neglected it in favour of sophistical heresies 
imported from abroad. 

Hence arose a controversy which is not without in- 
terest to ourselves as an episode in the unending con- 
flict between science and religion. Both parties to the 
struggle fought under grievous difficulties. Not only 
could the Kangakusha offer nothing to satisfy the heart- 
need of a personal Deity, but they were sorely hampered 
by the imperfections of their philosophy, and by a belief 
in divination, ghosts, and spiritual beings, which they did 
not perceive to be inconsistent with it. Motoori and 
his followers, on the other hand, were weighted by an 
antiquated mythology which presented many glaring 
absurdities even when viewed in the dim light of Chinese 
philosophy. The Wagakusha were also embarrassed by 
the absence from Shinto of anything like a code of 

328 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

morals. They were therefore driven either to deny the 
necessity of anything of the kind, or to put forward as 
derived from Shinto a system of ethical teaching which 
was really borrowed from China. 

It may not be out of place here to describe in as few 
words as possible the old Shinto of the seventh and eighth 
centuries, which Motoori aimed at restoring. It was 
essentially a nature-worship, upon which was grafted a 
cult of ancestors. It tells us nothing of a future state 
of rewards and punishments, and contains the merest 
traces of moral teaching. The Norito, quoted in an 
earlier chapter, in enumerating the offences from which 
the nation was purged twice a year by the Mikado or his 
representatives, makes no mention of any one of the sins 
of the decalogue. What then remains ? A mythical 
history of the creation of the world, and of the doings 
of a number of gods and goddesses, the chief of whom, 
namely, the Sun Goddess, was the ancestress of the human 
rulers of Japan, while from the subordinate deities were 
sprung the principal noble families who formed their 
court. Add to this a ceremonial comprising liturgies in 
honour of these deities and we have the Shinto religion. 

The mythological record begins with the bare names 
of a number of gods who seem to have been provided 
merely in order to form a genealogy for Izanagi and 
Izanami, the male and female creator deities of Japan. 
The creation is thus described : — 

Izanagi and Izanami, at the bidding of the other deities, 
took into their hands the ^'Jewel-spear of Heaven," and 
standing on the '^ Floating-bridge of Heaven," stirred 
with it the chaotic mass below. The brine which dripped 
from its point curdled and became an island. The divine 
pair descended thither and proceeded to procreate the 

MOTOORI 329 

islands of Japan. They also became the parents of a 
multitude of other deities, such as the Mountain Gods, 
the Wind God, the Goddess of Food, the Gods of the 
Sea, Rivers, and Moors, with many others whose attri- 
butes are obscure and whose worship is forgotten. 
The last god to be produced was the Fire God, in 
giving birth to whom Izanami died. She went to the 
Land of Yomi or Hades, whither Izanagi followed her, 
but w^as obliged to retreat hastily to the upper world 
hotly pursued by the thunder gods and the Ugly Female 
of Hades. In his flight he made use of various expe- 
dients to delay his pursuers, which recall similar devices 
in European folk-lore. After his return to earth, Izanagi 
bathed in the sea in order to wash away the pollutions 
which he had contracted during his stay in Hades, and in 
doing so generated various deities, among which were the 
Sun Goddess, produced from his left eye, and the Moon 
God, produced from his right eye. A third deity, named 
Susa no wo, was at the same time born from his nose. 
Izanagi conferred on these three the dominion of the 
Plain of Heaven, of Night, and of the Sea respectively. 
Susa no wo was a boisterous and rowdy deity, whose 
mischievous and unseemly pranks so disgusted the Sun 
Goddess that she hid herself in the rock-cave of heaven 
and left the world to darkness. The other gods had 
much ado to persuade her to emerge from her seclusion, 
inventing for the purpose dances and other expedients 
which are evidently meant to represent the ceremonies 
in use at Shinto shrines in the times of the Kojiki and 
Nihongi. Susa no wo was then tried by a council of 
gods, and sentenced to a fine, and banishment to this 
lower world. 

A grandson of the Sun Goddess became the first ruler 

330 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

of Japan. From him was descended, after a few genera- 
tions, Jimmu Tenno, the first human sovereign of Japan, 
and the founder, according to tradition, of the present 
dynasty of Mikados. 

There is food for reflection in the fact that it was 
possible for a man of high intelhgence and vast learning 
like Motoori, not unacquainted with the philosophy and 
religions of India and China, to accept these childish 
fables as the basis of his faith. Yet not only was he 
himself a sincere believer. He had a large and zealous 
body of followers, drawn from the highest and most 
enlightened classes of his fellow-countrymen. Truly it 
would almost seem as if, in the words of the Japanese 
proverb, '' Iwashi no atama mo shinjin-gara," that is to 
say, *' It is the quality of faith that is important, were 
its object only the head of a sardine." 

The following passage from the Tainagatsunia will 
help us to define more precisely Motoori's attitude to- 
wards the Chinese school of thinkers. It is headed 

''Chinese Opinion 
'' In China all good and bad fortune of men, all order 
and disorder in the State — everything, in short, which 
happens in this world — is ascribed to the action of Ten 
(Heaven). Using such terms as the Way of Ten, the 
Command of Ten, and the Principle of Ten, they regard 
it as a thing to be honoured and feared above all. China, 
however, is a country where the true way generally has 
not been handed down. There they do not know that all 
things ^re the doing of the gods, and therefore resort 
rashly to such inventions. Now Heaven is nothing more 
than the region where the gods of Heaven dwell. It is 
a thing destitute of sense, and it is unreasonable to talk 

MOTOORI 331 

of its * command ' and the like. To fear and honour Ten, 
and not fear and honour the gods, is Hke yielding an idle 
honour and awe to the Imperial Palace, and showing no 
reverence or honour to its sovereign. Foreign countries, 
however, not having attained to the knowledge that 
everything is the doing of the gods, may be pardoned 
for believing this Doctrine of the Way of Ten or the 
Principle of Ten. But wiiat is to be thought of those 
who, in this imperial country, w^here a knowledge of the 
true way has been handed down, do not take the trouble 
to examine it, but, simply accepting the erroneous doc- 
trines of foreign lands, imagine that that which they 
call Ten is a thing of peerless excellence, and in all 
matters can talk of nothing but its principle ? Take 
again their pedantic and wearisome Taikhi [the Great 
Limit], Mil Ki [the Limitless], Yin and Yang [Positive 
and Negative Principles of Nature], Ch'ien and K'lm 
[Celestial and Terrestrial Principles], P<2/^w^ [Eight Dia- 
grams of the Book of Changes], and Wu-Jiing [Five 
Elements], which are pure inventions of the Chinese, 
and for which there is in reality no sound reason. What 
consummate folly it is for those who would interpret 
our sacred books to rely implicitly on principles of this 
kind. In recent times even those who try to divest 
themselves of Chinese prejudices in their interpretations 
fail to understand the falseness of their doctrines of the 
Principle of Ten, and of the Positive and Negative Powers 
of Nature, and do not succeed in bursting the barrier 
because they do not put thoroughly away from them 
their Chinese notions, nor resolutely rouse themselves 
from their deluding dreams. Moreover, the refusal of 
some to identify Ama-terasu no Ohomi Kami [the Sun 
Goddess] as the Sun of Heaven is owing to their being 

332 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

steeped in Chinese narrow-minded reasonings, and so 
become blind to the wondrous and profound principle 
of the true way." 

Towards Buddhism his antagonism is less pronounced. 
He acknowledges elements of good in it, and for Laotze 
he confesses to a certain measure of sympathy, prompted 
no doubt by the circumstance that the doctrines of this 
philosopher are irreconcilable with the teachings of the 
Sung schoolmen. On the question of the immortality of 
the soul he formally declines to give an opinion. 

Motoori's religion is frankly anthropomorphic, as in- 
deed it could hardly fail to be if he attached any 
credence to the statements in the Kojiki. He says in so 
many words that the Shinto deities had hands and legs. 
When pressed with the obvious inconsistencies which 
are involved in this belief, Motoori has nothing better to 
say than they are '*a proof of the authenticity of the 
record, for who would have gone out of his way to invent 
a story so ridiculous and improbable, if it were not true. 
S^Credo quia impossibile.'\ The acts of the gods are not to 
be explained by ordinary principles. Man's intelligence 
is limited, and there are many things which tran- 
scend it." 

Not the least of Motoori's achievements was his creation 
of a new literary dialect. It is true that his style was 
more or less modelled on that of his teacher Mabuchi. 
But the latter was content to use the pure Japanese 
language, or Wabun, as it is called, just as he found it. 
Stiff and antiquated, it was by no means an apt instru- 
ment for the expression of modern ideas. In Motoori's 
hands it became flexible, picturesque, and expressive. 
All foreign students have felt the charm of his lucid 
and flowing style. But it is marred by one terrible fault, 

MOTOORI 333 

prolixit}^ This is partly inseparable from Motoori's 
purism, which leads him to reject many useful and 
thoroughly naturalised Chinese words in favour of 
Japanese forms of expression, however circuitous, and 
is partly owing to an inveterate habit which he has of 
repeating himself, especially when an opportunity offers 
of debouncing Chinese proclivities or of magnifying the 
merits of Shinto. 

Motoori's Wabun has had many imitators, and it has 
exercised a perceptible influence on some departments 
of the more recent Japanese literature. 

CHAPTER VII 

NINETEENTH CENTURY 

HiRATA — Kangakusha — Shingaku Sermons — 
Buddhist Literature 

The eminent theologian HiRATA Atsutane^ (1776-1843) 
was born in Kubota, a town of the remote province of 
Dewa. His parents belonged to the Samurai class, and 
he traced his genealogy on the father's side through 
the Mikado Kwammu, up to the Sun Goddess herself. 
In his youth he followed the usual course of instruc- 
tion in the Chinese classics, and had also made fair 
progress in the study of medicine, when, at the age 
of nineteen, he suddenly made up his mind to run 
away from home. He left a paper behind in which 
he informed his parents of this resolution, and set out 
for Yedo with one rio in his pocket. On arriving in 
the capital he applied for help neither to the officials 
of his province nor to private friends, but sought an 
upright and virtuous teacher under whose guidance he 
might devote himself to learning. For four or five 
years he lived from hand to mouth, having sometimes 
to resort to manual labour for a livelihood. In 1800 he 
was adopted by a Samurai of the Matsuyama Daimiate, 

^ For a full account of Hirata and his theology, I would again refer the 
reader to Sir E. Satow's " Revival of Pure Shinto," in the Transactions of the 
Asiatic Society of Japan, 1 87 5. 

334 

HIRATA 335 

and his position thus became assured. The following 
year he first became acquainted with Motoori's writings. 
This led him to give himself up entirely to the study of 
Japanese antiquity. 

His first published work, a criticism of a treatise 
by the famous Kangakusha, Dazai Shuntai, was written 
two years later. In 1804 he began to take pupils, and 
from this time forward not a year passed without some 
publication by him. He also practised as a physician. 
In 1808 he was sent on a mission to instruct certain 
Shinto official guardians in the principles of the old 
faith, and acquitted himself with credit of this duty. 
In 181 1 he retired to Suruga, where he composed the 
Sezbzmy which was the most important work he had yet 
written. In 1822 the Abbot of Uyeno (an Imperial 
prince) asked for a copy of his works, and sent him a 
handsome present in return. This led subsequently to 
his visiting Kioto, and having his work brought to the 
notice of the Mikado and his court. Some of his later 
writings gave offence to the Shogun's Government, and 
in 1 841 he was ordered to return to his native province 
and to publish nothing more. He at once started from 
Yedo and proceeded to Akita. The arrival of the dis- 
tinguished scholar caused no little excitement in that 
remote place. His contemporary relations were mostly 
dead, but he was welcomed by numerous nephews and 
other younger branches of the family. The social duties 
thus imposed upon him, together with the demands upon 
his skill as a physician, soon wore out his strength. He 
died two years later at the age of sixty-seven. 

That in view of their own interests the Shogun's 
Government were perfectly right to put a stop to Hirata's 
career is not to be doubted. The attention drawn by 

2,^6 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

his writings to the divine descent of the Mikados, and 
their unquestioned and unquestionable claim to be con- 
sidered the de jure sovereigns of Japan, was tending 
slowly but surely to sap the authority of the de facto 
rulers. It was, however, a little late in the day for them 
to interfere. Nothing could undo the work of nearly 
forty years of assiduous propagation of his views both 
through the press and by viva voce lectures to his hun- 
dreds of disciples. His published works amount to 
several hundred volumes. It is impossible to notice 
more than a very few of them here. 

The Kishin Shinroii (1805), or '^ New Treatise on the 
Gods," is a characteristic specimen of Hirata's writings. 
He here combats the rationalistic theories of the Kanga- 
kusha by proving, or attempting to prove, that the ancient 
Chinese believed in a real God called Shangti or Tien,^ 
who dwells in heaven, and guides the affairs of this world, 
but whom the Sung schoolmen endeavoured to explain 
away as a mere allegory, attributing all phenomena to 
the action of principles without life which they called 
Yin and Yang (Positive and Negative Principles of 
Nature). ^' But how," argues Hirata, '^ can there be 
action without life ? Certainly the existence of activity 
presupposes a living God from whom it proceeds." 

*' In this connection," Hirata goes on to say, '' I w^ill 
relate a story. Of late some people have introduced the 
learning of a country called Holland. It has found a 
good .number of students here in Great Yedo. It may 
be true, as I am told, that the men of this country are 
fond of examining profoundly the principles of things. 
Among other inventions they have a machine called 
* electer/ which they say is constructed by an application 

^ In Japanese Ten. 

HIRATA Z2>7 

of the principles of thunder and hghtning. I saw this 
machine some years ago. [Here follows a description 
of the electric machine and its operation.] The friend 
who showed it to me said, ^Thunder and lightning are 
caused truly by this same principle. Why, then, should 
we fear them ? The reason why some people dread 
them so much is that they do not understand their prin- 
ciple. This is very foolish.' 'Verily,' replied I, 'this is 
an admirably constructed machine. Whether the actual 
thunder and lightning are really of the same nature is a 
matter on which I am unable to form an opinion. But 
supposing that to be the case, is not the production of 
lightning [the electric spark] by it dependent upon you 
and me and our friend, one holding one thing, another 
another, while the third turns a handle ? Well, then, the 
same principle applies to the real thunder and lightning 
of the universe. It cannot be produced without the action 
of something corresponding to you and me. Moreover, 
this machine, made by the skill of man, is merely a small 
engine, entirely subject to our control, and so there is no 
need to fear it. But the real thunder rages among the 
clouds, turning them to confusion, or, leaving them, 
comes down to earth and indiscriminately splits trees 
or grinds rocks to powder. It may be thought a thing 
of no feeling, yet there are frequent instances in history 
of evil things and wicked men having been destroyed 
by it.' " 

Mutatis mutandis^ is not this precisely the position taken 
up by Paley in his well-known apologue of the watch ? 

The conversation ended in a hot discussion, in which 
both parties lost their tempers. Hirata saw no prospect 
of convincing his opponent, and returned home. 

Good and evil, according to Hirata, flow from the 

338 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

action of two classes of deities, each of whom has his or 
her own particular function. But deities are, after all, 
like men. None are wholly bad or wholly good. A 
benevolent deity, if angered, may send a curse, and an 
evil deity, on the other hand, may occasionally dispense 
blessings. Moreover, an action of the gods which is 
indifferent in itself may be good or bad, according to 
the object affected. The hot sun, which delights the 
cicada, scorches the worm. 

The efficacy of prayer and the nature of sacrifices are 
next discussed. 

To the question, ^^ Is a pious Shinto believer to wor- 
ship Buddha?" Hirata replies in the affirmative. He 
quotes a verse of Motoori's to the effect that '' Shaka and 
Confucius are also Kami [gods], and their way is a 
branch of the way of the Kami." That this is really the 
case is proved, he says, by the Buddhist miracles which 
have been worked in Japan as in other countries. More- 
over, everything which takes place in this world being 
ordered by the Kami, Buddhism too must be in accord- 
ance with their will. Hirata, in short, wants to turn 
the tables on the Buddhists, and, in revenge for their 
giving the Shinto deities a subordinate place in their 
theological system, proposes to make Buddha a sort of 
inferior Kami. 

Hirata believed in the immortality of the soul, and 
takes pains to prove that Confucius did so also. ^' If 
the dead are non-existent," he argues, 'Svhat meaning 
can there be in the worship of ancestors, and how shall 
we account for the undoubted fact that dead men send 
curses upon those who have injured them while alive ?" 

The Koshi Seibun, which with its dependent works the 
Koshi-cho and Koshi-den constitute Hirata's chief claim to 

^HIRATA 339 

a reputation for learning, was begun in 1812. It is an 
attempt to harmonise the myths of the Kojiki^ Nikongiy 
and other ancient books in a continuous and consistent 
narrative, written in the archaic dialect of the Kojiki, As 
these old stories differ very considerablv among them- 
selves, Hirata was naturally obliged to do them violence in 
order to make them agree, and scholars will prefer to go 
to his originals rather than accept his version of them. 
A higher value attaches to the KosJii-cho (eleven volumes, 
1819), in which he gives an account of the authorities for 
the text of the Seibiin; but his greatest contribution to our 
knowledge of Japanese antiquity is the Koshi-den^ a com- 
mentary on the Seibtuiy in twenty-eight volumes, begun 
in 181 2, but never completed. It covers only 143 sections 
of the 165 of which the Seibun consists. The Koshi-den 
stands next after Motoori's Kojiki-den as a monument of 
Japanese old-world learning. It is indispensable to the 
student of Shinto. 

The Tamadasuki (ten volumes) was composed origin- 
ally in 181 1, in a colloquial style, and rewritten in the 
literary dialect in 1824. It is a sort of breviary contain- 
ing a set of prayers addressed to the very numerous 
deities of Shinto, intended, however, not for temple but 
for individual use. The prayers are accompanied by 
a considerable and very heterogeneous mass of com- 
mentary. 

The Kodo Tai-iy or ^' Summary of the Ancient Way " 
(two volumes, 181 1), states the principles of the Shinto 
religion in easy language and in a brief and intelligible 
form. It is very clearly printed, and forms an excel- 
lent introduction to the study of Shinto in its native 
language. 

Hirata also published summaries of Chinese learning, 

340 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

of Buddhism, of the art of medicine (chiefly from the 
point of view of its divine origin), of the art of poetry, 
and of the vulgar Shinto, with other works far too 
numerous even to mention. 

A professed disciple of Motoori, Hirata was more 
exclusively a theologian than his master. All his works 
were intended either directly or indirectly to promote a 
belief in Shinto, which in his hands assumed a far more 
definite and tangible character than it had ever done 
before. Consciously or unconsciously, he added to it 
several new features, such as the doctrine of the immor- 
tality of the soul, and a moral code purloined from 
the stores of the detested Kangakusha. Thus he says : 
*^ Devotion to the memory of ancestors is the mainspring 
of all virtue. No one who discharges his duty to them 
will ever be disrespectful to the gods or to his living 
parents. Such a man will also be faithful to his prince, 
loyal to his friends, and kind and gentle with his wife 
and children. For the essence of this devotion is in 
truth filial piety. These truths are confirmed [!] by the 
books of the Chinese, who say that the Moyal subject 
issues from the gate of the pious son,' and again, 'filial 
piety is the basis of all good actions.' " 

Hirata's writings have no high value from a purely 
literary point of view. The native History of Literature 
dismisses him in a few contemptuous sentences. His 
literary style is more useful than elegant. It is formed 
on the Wabun of Motoori ; but he is much less of a purist 
than his master, and does not reject useful words simply 
because they come from China. His style has gained 
thereby in vigour and conciseness, but it falls far behind 
that of Motoori in distinction and charm. 

A certain number of his less important works are in the 

OHASHI JUNZO 341 

colloquial dialect. They consist of lectures taken down 
by his students just as they were delivered. Two little 
works on Buddhism, named Godoben and SJiittsnjo Shogo, 
belong to this class. In them Hirata has undertaken 
the easy task of ridiculing popular Buddhism in Japan. 
They are racy and entertaining diatribes, but, it must be 
added, are disgraced by scurrilous abuse quite unworthy 
of the would-be founder of a new form of religion. 

Kangakusha 

There is not much to be said of the Kangakusha who 
wrote in the Japanese language during the nineteenth 
century. Among them, Ohashi Junzo (1816-1862) has 
left a certain reputation as one of the most determined 
opponents of the policy which led to the opening of 
Japan to foreign trade in 1859. His chief work, the Heki- 
ja-sho-ron, which is a violent and ignorant attack upon 
the moral and philosophical ideas of Europe, was written 
to promote this object. It was published in 1857. The 
character of its contents may be gathered from the head- 
ings, *' Europe knows not philosophy," " Europe knows 
not heaven," " Europe knows not benevolence and 
righteousness," '^ Europe knows not versatile talent." 
He also wrote a history of the Tartar invasion of Japan, 
entitled Genko Kiriaku (1853). 

Junzo did not confine himself to attacking European 
learning in his writings. He took part in the anti-foreign 
agitation which culminated in the murder of Ando 
Tsushima no Kami in February 1862. He was arrested, 
thrown into prison, and examined under torture, but suc- 
ceeded in satisfying his judges that he was not directly 
implicated in this crime. Exhausted by his sufferings, 
he died five days after his release from prison. 

342 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Shingaku (Heart-learning) Sermons 

As Buddhism absorbed Shinto, and as Hirata, on behalf 
of the latter religion, proposed to admit Buddha and his 
saints to a humble place in the native assemblage of 
deities, so the Shingaku movement was an attempt to 
utilise both religions in the interests of Chinese philo- 
sophy and ethics. The preachers of this school professed 
to combine the teachings of all three faiths, and they 
spoke with something more than tolerance of Buddhism 
and Shinto ; but they were at heart rationalists, to whom 
much in the popular presentation of both these religions 
must have appeared utterly unworthy of credence. They 
tried, how^ever, to smooth over matters by introducing the 
proviso that everything in them which is irreconcilable 
with reason is to be regarded as hoben. This hdben is a 
word of great virtue. It is quite inoffensive, and embraces 
everything which, though not strictly in accordance with 
fact, tends to edification. It is alike apphcable to the 
parables of the Gospels, the lives of the saints, and even 
to the Neapolitan miracle of the liquefaction of the blood 
of St. Januarius. To the tolerant minds of the Shingaku 
preachers the use of any weapon which was likely to be 
useful in that struggle between the powers of light and 
darkness which goes on in Japan, as elsewhere, was not 
only permissible, but laudable, and even imperative. That 
it might have been taken from the armoury of the enemy 
was with them a very minor consideration. 

Practically, the maxims of Confucius and Mencius are 
the sources of the Shingaku doctrines. The preachers 
usually take their texts from the writings of one of these 
two sages. They address themselves to the ignorant, and 

SHINGAKU 343 

more especially to women and children, and their lan- 
guage is the ordinary colloquial speech of Kioto and 
Osaka. Works of this kind are much despised in Japan 
by the learned, who look upon the language of ordinary 
life as quite unfitted for literature. These discourses, 
however, are not without merit ; the style is homely, but 
vigorous and direct, and they are admirably suited to 
arouse the minds of the ignorant to some sense of the 
cardinal truths which underlie all systems of morality. 

The best are the collections entitled Kind Doivay Shin- 
gakii Doway and Teshivia Dowa, Of these the Kind 
Dowa is undoubtedly the most amusing. Indeed, it may 
safely be said that few more entertaining sermons are 
to be found anywhere. But the reader must not be 
squeamish. For although of unexceptionable morality, 
and addressed virginibus puerisque, the stories and illus- 
trations with which this and others of these collections 
abound are frequently of a very Rabelaisian character. 
The Shingaku Dowa is somewhat more scrupulous in 
this respect, and reaches a higher level in every other 
way except that it is unfortunately less amusing. 

Three sermons* from the Kiuo Ddwa have been trans- 
lated by Mr. Mitford in his Tales of Old Japan. One of 
these, comprising the original text, notes, a romanised 
version, and an English translation, was published by 
the late J. O'Neill as a First Japanese Book. 

The Shingaku movement received a good deal of 
official support and countenance, and attracted much 
public attention, during the first half of the nineteenth 
century ; but it is not surprising that it ultimately proved 
abortive. The attempt to reconcile three such conflicting 
elements as Buddhism, Shinto, and Confucianism was in 
reality hopeless. 

344 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

The Buddhist hterature of Japan forms a separate sub- 
ject, which I shall not attempt to deal with. Most of it 
is in the Chinese language, and that part which is in 
Japanese is not very important as literature. It consists 
chiefly of lives of the Buddhist saints, and of edifying 
tracts and stories all addressed to the more ignorant 
classes, and highly seasoned with a thaumaturgic 
element. 

CHAPTER VIII 

NINETEENTH CENTURY (6W/V/z/^ J)— FICTION 

Romantic School — Kioden, Tanehiko, Bakin. 
Humourists — Samba, Ikku. Sentimental Novels 
— Shunsui. Works in Chinese of Yedo Period 

The eighteenth-century writers of Jitsuroku-mono or 
historical novels did not attempt to invent plots for them- 
selves or to introduce imaginary personages of import- 
ance, although in minor details they allowed their fancy 
free play. SANTO KlODEN (1761-1 8x6) was the first to 
give to the world the romantic novel pure and simple. 
He w^as followed by Bakin, Tanehiko, and a host of 
other writers whose existence can only be indicated. It 
is quite impossible to notice them or their numerous 
works more particularly. 

Kioden was a genuine Yedokko or Child of Yedo, the 
Japanese term corresponding to our '' Cockney." He 
was born in that city in 1761, of parents of the merchant 
class. His youth was unpromising. He spent much of 
his time in places of ill resort, sometimes remaining away 
from home for weeks together. Books were his abhor- 
rence, and all attempts to teach him a profession were in 
vain. He took lessons in painting from the well-known 
artist Kitawo Shigemasa, and it is stated by Mr. W.Ander- 
son 1 that he has left many beautiful chromoxylographs, 

1 In his Catalogue of Japanese Pictures in the British Museum. 

345 

346 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

but his native biographers pronounce him a failure in this 
respect also. In 1790 he married a woman of the harlot 
class. Notwithstanding what has been asserted by some 
English writers, such unions are regarded in Japan with 
marked disapproval, and his friends augured little good 
of Kioden's choice. His wife, however, proved an excep- 
tion to the general rule. She made an excellent house- 
wife, and, the chief of virtues in a Japanese married 
woman, was unremitting in her dutiful attentions to her 
father-in-law. In short, she won respect from all Kioden's 
acquaintances, and was spoken of by them as " the lotus- 
flower which has its roots in the mud." When she died 
he married another woman of the same class, who also 
made him a good wife. 

Kioden's place of business was near the Kiobashi (a 
bridge) in the street called Temmacho. Hence the name 
by which he is known as an author, and which is com- 
posed of the first syllables of the names of these two 
places. His real name was Iwase Denzo, and he had 
half-a-dozen other appellations at various periods of his 
life and in various capacities. Kioden sold smoking 
apparatus, such as pipes, tobacco-pouches, and the like, 
while he was also the inventor and compounder of a 
quack medicine, to which he gave the name of Doku- 
shogwan, or Reading Pills, the precise operation of which 
I have not been able to discover. He had the reputation 
of a shrewd and successful man of business, and was 
especially noted for his quickness at mental reckoning. 
He seldom bought books, but was always borrowing, 
and made it a rule when drinking with a friend that each 
should pay his own share, which, as we know from '' Auld 
Lang Syne," was also the practice of Robert Burns. This 
became known as the Kioden fashion. 

KIODEN 347 

Kioden's first work (1782) was an imitation, more by 
way of joke than anything else, of some ephemeral pub- 
lications describing the manners of the brothel-quarter of 
Ycdo. It was successful to a degree which surprised no 
one more than the author. His next work was equally 
well received. Fortunately for his fame, his career as a 
purveyor of pornography was put a stop to by the police 
authorities. Kioden, with many others, was prosecuted 
under the edict promulgated in 1791 for the suppression 
of such publications, and was condemned to fifty days' 
handcuffs (in his own house). The work which brought 
down on him this punishment he had had the audacity 
to describe on the cover as an ^^ Edifying Story-book." 
He wrote no more books of this kind. In one of his 
later prefaces he protests strenuously that his works, 
although fiction, would be found to inculcate the highest 
morality. It is quite true that they are free from coarse- 
ness or licentiousness, although their moral tendency 
leaves something to be desired, at least from the Euro- 
pean point of view. Kioden lost nothing by his reforma- 
tion. The bookshops were crowded by eager purchasers 
of his novels. The very horse-boys and cow-herds knew 
his name, and his house was besieged by rival publishers 
clamouring for manuscript. Kioden took advantage of 
his popularity to insist on definite payment for his com- 
positions. His predecessors, we are told, received nothing 
for their works but an occasional invitation to supper in 
some place of public resort, or presents of trifling value 
when their books sold well. 

The first work for which Kioden bargained for pay- 
ment was an early production entitled Shogi Kinuburuiy 
a share-boiiy for which he received the munificent sum of 
one rio. 

348 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Kioden's best known stories are the Inadzuma Hidshi 
(1805), of which some account is given below, the HoncJid 
Suibodai (1806), the Udonge Monogatari (1804), the Soshdki 
(1813), the ChiusJdn Suikoden (1798), a version of the 
forty-seven Ronin legend, and the Fukushiu Kidan Asaka 
no numa. He was also the author of two w^orks of anti- 
quarian research which are much valued by native spe- 
cialists : these are the Kottoshiu and the Kinse Kikeki Ko. 

Kioden's writings would be classed by us among ^^ sen- 
sation " novels. Wonder, amazement, and horror are 
the feelings which he aims, not unsuccessfully, at exciting. 
His style, how^ever, is simple and straightforward ; and 
although he can be graphic and picturesque upon occa- 
sion, he is not fond of that superfine writing to which 
some of his successors and contemporaries were so prone, 
and which is so exasperating to European readers. 

It is possibly a mere personal bias which leads me to 
prefer him to his pupil, the much-vaunted Bakin. If any 
Japanese novel deserves to be published complete in 
English dress, one of Kioden's would, I think, be found 
the most suitable for this purpose. 

His masterpiece is perhaps the Inadztcma Hidshi^ one 
of those tales of revenge of which the Japanese popular 
literature contains many examples. The characters are 
so numerous and the plot so complicated that it is impos- 
sible to give an adequate summary of it here. Amongst 
the incidents related are several murders and homicides, 
described with much vigour and an abundance of grue- 
some details, a hara-kiri and other suicides, thefts, sales 
of women by their relatives, terrific combats, hairbreadth 
escapes, dying speeches of great length, tortures, strange 
meetings, and surprising recognitions. There is an ex- 
cellent description of a Japanese fair, with its booths of 

KIODEN 349 

merchandise, its lecturers, quack-doctors, fortune-tellers, 
and shows of wonders. There are beauteous maidens 
at the sight of whom the moon hides her head for shame 
and the flowers close, demons of smallpox and of suicide, 
scenes of witchcraft and enchantment, with 

^'' Dreams^ magic terrors^ spells of 7mghty power^ 
Witches a7id ghosts who rove at the nightly hour.^^ 

This is surely a sufficient stock of material with which 
to furnish a novel of twenty chapters and about three 
hundred pages. 

Each chapter, as is the custom with Japanese novelists, 
has a sensational heading, such as " The Hovel and 
the Strange Stratagem," '^The Danger by the Wayside 
Shrine," ''The Guitar's Broken String," ''The Witchcraft 
of the Venomous Rats," "The Drum of Hell." 

The following is part of the opening chapter of the 
Honcho Suibodai : — 

" In the reign of Go Hanazono [fifteenth century] there 
was a pilgrim named Shikama no Sonematsu. He had 
been told in his youth by a soothsayer that his physiog- 
nomy indicated a danger by the sword, so in order to 
avoid such a calamity he entered the way of Buddha. 
He had no settled residence, but wandered about visiting 
one province after another. At length he arrived at a 
place called Rokudo, in the district of Atago, in the pro- 
vince of Yamashiro. Darkness came on. A wide moor 
stretched out before him which afforded no lodging, so 
he resolved to spend the night there, and take shelter 
under a tree. This Rokudo is a place of burial on the 
moor of Toribe, provided for all sorts and conditions of 
men. Here the monuments of the dead stand in long 
rows, some overgrown with moss, some freshly carved. 

3 50 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Not a day elapses in which some one does not pass to 
exile here. Dew [of tears] follows upon dew^, one smoke 
[of cremation] succeeds another without an interval. 
The lines — 

' The name remai7ts^ the form has ininislicd^ 
The bones beneath the fir-clad mound 
Are changed to ashes in the grassy mead'' — 

must have been said of some such place as this. An 
utterly wild and dismal moor it w^as, the deep grass 
drenched with dew, and here and there a bleached bone 
showing among it. A weird, uncanny spot indeed, fit 
to inspire such sentiments as those of the poet, who 
says — 

' He is g07ie to his long hojne, 
A7id we who 7iow retur7t 
Will one day follow hi77t 
071 the r legged path 
That leads to Hades. 

While in such gloomy thoughts im77iersed. 
The moon glii7i77iering through the s?7ioke \of crematio7{\ 
See77is like a crag of the Eagl(^s Mount: ^ 

*' Well, then, our pilgrim Sonematsu, brushing away the 
dew from the moss below an ancient fir-tree, put down 
his portable shrine. It was the season of the festival of 
the dead, so by way of a fire to light their path from 
Hades [the dead are supposed to revisit the earth at this 
time], he gathered some leaves and kindled them, the dew 
upon them standing for the offering of water. Then 
turning to the Buddha of the shrine which he carried 
with him, and striking his bell, he recited the prayer for 
the dead. Whilst he was thus deep in his devotions, the 

1 A mountain in India where Buddha preached— put for the other world. 

KIODEN 351 

moon was shedding a full flood of crystal light, and the 
lespedeza, the Platycodon graitdiflorum^ the Anthester'ia 
barbata^ the valerian, the pampas grass [or something like 
it], the DolicJios bulbosiis, and such-like flowers ^ were 
blossoming luxuriantly and heavy with dew. The shrill 
notes of various insects piping with all their might, mingled 
with the chanting of the prayers and the sound of the bell, 
produced a sense of loneliness and desolation. There 
was borne on the wind the boom of a bell struck in some 
temple away on the moor, which by the number of its 
strokes indicated that the night was already far spent. 
His fire, too, had gone out, so the pilgrim thought to 
himself, ' I must snatch a short sleep.' He hung up a 
tent of oil-paper, and spreading on the grass his rain 
coat to keep off the dew of night, with a tree-root for his 
pillow he laid himself down. He was soon plunged in 
deep slumber, forgetful alike of past and future. But 
after awhile he woke, and pricking up his ears, ^ Was 
that an insect's cry ? No ! it was a faint, far-off sound of 
music' The pilgrim wondered how on this desolate 
moor, at this late hour of the night, such beautiful music 
could be heard. Was it not an enchantment by some 
fox, badger, or wild cat ? Presently he raised up his tent, 
and putting out his head, looked round. The weather 
had changed, and a night mist had gathered thickly, 
obscuring the moon. Even nigh at hand nothing could 
be seen. But the music came closer and closer." 

The mist clears away, the moon again shines out, and 
a splendid palace is seen, which Kioden describes with 
great wealth of language. It proves to be inhabited 
by the spirits of a wicked lady of noble birth and 
her equally wicked retainers, who use the brief respite 

^ Such are some of the difficulties of a translator from the Japanese. 

352 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

granted them from the tortures of hell to plot further 
mischief against their former enemies in this life. 

One of the few Japanese authors whose fame has 
penetrated to Europe is Kiokutei Bakin (1767- 1848). 
In his own country he has no rival. Nine out of ten 
Japanese if asked to name their greatest novelist would 
reply immediately ^' Bakin." 

He was born in Yedo, and was the youngest of three 
sons of a retainer of an official of the Shogun's Govern- 
ment, named Matsudaira Shinsei. When only eight, 
Bakin was appointed to attend upon the son of his lord, 
who was a boy like himself. At the age of thirteen, 
unable any longer to endure the tyranny of his young 
master, he ran away from home. His elder brother pro- 
cured him several other situations, but he had not the 
patience to remain in any of them. He was also appren- 
ticed to a physician, and became the pupil of a Kanga- 
kusha or Chinese scholar, but completed his studies 
with neither. At this period of his life he was for a short 
time a public fortune-teller at Kanagawa, close to the 
treaty port of Yokohama ; but having lost all he possessed 
by a flood, he returned to Yedo. Here he made the 
acquaintance of the novelist Kioden, who received him 
into his house and showed him great kindness. It was 
while residing with Kioden that Bakin produced his first 
novel (1791). Kioden admired it so much that he ex- 
claimed, *' In twenty or thirty years I shall be forgotten." 
In the title-page of this work Bakin describes himself as 
Kioden's pupil. It is not creditable to him that at the 
height of his fame he tried to destroy all traces of this 
fact, and with this object bought up as many copies of 
his early publication as he could find. 

Through Kioden's influence, Bakin obtained a position 

BAKIN 353 

as a bookseller's assistant^ in which situation he re- 
mained three years. A novel which he wrote at this 
period, and which was illustrated by Hokusai, w^as very 
successful. 

Bakin was a tall, well-built man. One day the manager 
of a company of wrestlers came into the bookseller's 
shop. He greatly admired Bakin's stature (over six feet), 
and said, ^'Join us, my boy, and I promise you a reputa- 
tion which will extend everywhere within the four seas." 
Bakin laughed, but vouchsafed no answer. The old 
Samurai pride still clung to him. The uncle of his em- 
ployer, who kept a tea-house, supported by the custom of 
an adjoining brothel, proposed to Bakin that he should 
marry his daughter, a girl of considerable personal attrac- 
tions. Bakin refused disdainfully to become connected 
with a family which drew its income from this source. 
Brothel-keeping, he said, was no better than begging or 
thieving, and he must decline to disgrace the body he had 
received from his parents by such a marriage. He left the 
bookseller in order to marry the daughter of the widow 
of a dealer in shoes in lida-machi, becoming his mother- 
in-law's adopted son and heir, as is the Japanese custom. 
He was too fond of the pen and ink-slab, however, to 
be a good business man, and as soon as his daughter 
reached a marriageable age he provided her with a hus- 
band, to whom he handed over the shoe business. He 
himself went to live with his son, who now held the 
position of physician-in-ordinary to the Daimio of Mat- 
sumaye. Bakin not only contributed to the household 
resources by keeping a school, but earned a consider- 
able income from the novels which he produced in 
rapid succession. At the age of seventy he became 
almost blind, but he still continued his labours, his 

3 54 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

widowed daughter-in-law acting as his amanuensis. He 
died at the age of eighty-one, after a career as an author 
of more than sixty years. The amount of saleable 
"copy" produced by Bakin can have few equals in 
literary annals. His pen was never at rest, and the 
rapidity with which he composed may be inferred from 
the circumstance related by himself, that one of his 
novels (of about two hundred pages) was completed by 
him in a fortnight, "to stay the demands of an impor- 
tunate publisher." He is said to have written no fewer 
than two hundred and ninety distinct works, many of 
which were extremely voluminous. Some authorities 
put the figure still higher. 

Bakin was not an amiable man. He is described as 
upright, but obstinate and unsociable. A single word 
which offended him made of him an epemy for"" life. 
Even Kioden, to whom he owed so much, could not 
get on with him. The famous artist Hokusai, who 
illustrated many of his novels,^ had also reason to com- 
plain of his morose and intractable temper. Edmond 
de Goncourt, in his life of Hokusai, says that the quarrel 
between the painter and Bakin occurred in 1808, and 
was caused by the immense success of the illustrations 
to the Nanka no YumCy of which Bakin was jealous. It 
was smoothed over by friends, but broke out again with 
great violence in 181 1, when a continuation of that novel 
was brought out. Bakin accused Hokusai of paying no 
attention to his text, and demanded that the drawings 
should be altered. But the publishers had already en- 
graved both text and pictures. 

It was in consequence of Bakin's recriminations on 

1 See Mr. W. Anderson's Catalogue of JapaJtese Pictures in the British 
Museum, p. 357. 

BAKIN 35 5 

this occasion that Hokusai turned his attention to pub- 
Hshing volumes of pictures without text. 

It is impossible to notice more than a few of Bakin's 
publications. The early years of the century were a time 
of great literary activity with him. In 1805 he published 
the Yumibari-tsuki (''The Bow-bend or New Moon"), 
which is thought by some to be his masterpiece. It 
professes to be an imitation of the Chinese romantic 
histories, but departs far more widely from historical 
truth, and is indeed a romance pure and simple, though 
a few of the personages have names taken from real 
history. 

The hero of this story is one Hachiro Tametomo, a 
famous archer of the twelfth century, whose adventures 
and exploits fill over eight hundred pages of the modern 
closely printed edition. For intelligence and valour he 
had no peer. His stature was seven feet. He had the 
eyes of a rhinoceros, and the arms of a monkey. In 
strength he had no equal, and was skilled in drawing the 
nine-foot bow. Nature seem^ed to have destined him for 
an archer, for his left arm was four inches longer than 
his right. His eyes had each two pupils. 

Tametomo on one occasion was allowed to attend a 
lecture given before the Mikado by a scholar named 
Shinsei. The conversation afterwards turned on the 
great archers of ancient and modern times. Tametomo, 
at this time a boy of twelve, broke in with the following 
speech : — 

*' ' It is useless to discuss the superiority of this one or 
that, for among archers of the present day I do not think 
there are any who excel Tametomo in repulsing myriads 
of stalwart foes.' Shinsei, on hearing this, w^as so taken 
aback that for a while he made no answer. Then bursting 

3 56 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

suddenly into a boisterous laugh, he said, * An art requires 
months and years of hewing and polishing before it reaches 
perfection. Even if you had practised since your baby- 
hood, you are little over ten years of age. Bethink your- 
self. Men are not wooden figures. If you try to shoot 
them, they will try to shoot you. Those who are skilled 
in shooting should also learn to ward off the shafts. Are 
you prepared to catch the arrows shot at you ? ' Tame- 
tomo, without waiting for him to finish his speech, 
replied, ' Hoi, in his eighth year, acted as general for the 
Chinese Emperor Shun ; Duke Yeki, in his fifth year, 
had the direction of fire. Wisdom and folly, skill, and 
the want of it, are not to be reckoned by years. Be 
pleased to summon archers the most nimble-handed. 
Even though it were the arrows endued with understand- 
ing of the goddess Kwannon, I will show you how easily 
I shall catch them.' Shinsei, who from the first had 
intended to give him a sharp lesson, at the unflinching 
attitude of Tametomo became highly exasperated. Pro- 
bably thinking it an opportunity for making a display of 
his own influence, he stood up abruptly and called out, 
* Who are in attendance ? Let them bring bows and 
arrows.' *Your will shall be obeyed,' was the answer. 
Two of the Imperial Guards, named Norishige and Nori- 
kazu, now advanced with bows and arrows to the foot of 
the stairs [leading from the courtyard up to the hall where 
the Mikado held his court]. Shinsei, turning to them, 
explained the circumstances, and told them to have a 
shot at this youngster. 

'^ Now, these two guards were originally soldiers of 
the Emperor Shirakawa, and skilled archers. When 
Gotoba no In came to the throne they were enlisted 
in the Imperial Guards. Once the Mikado gave them 

BAKIN ^S7 

a target of 3J feet in diameter, telling them to shoot 
away its centre. The order was given at the hour of 
the Serpent [ten o'clock], and the target was returned 
without its centre at the hour of the Rat [two o'clock]. 
' Yoyu himself could do no better/ exclaimed everybody 
in admiration. These men were now advanced in years, 
but their vigour had not failed. Even my Lord Yorinaga 
thought that Tametomo, had he six arms, could never 
escape the arrows of such archers. He could no longer 
bear to look on, and, turning to Shinsei, said, * Tame- 
tomo, though he has a grown-up appearance, is still, so 
to speak, a yellow-mouthed boy. Even a joke should 
have some relation to the person it is practised on. This 
conduct is most unlike Shinsei.' Then turning to Tame- 
yoshi [the boy's father], he advised him to retire at once 
and take his son with him. Tameyoshi, who up till now 
had remained silent, replied with deep respect, ' Tame- 
tomo is only twelve, but he is no longer a baby. If he 
does not stand the test on this occasion, I would call it 
worse than to turn his back on the enemy. I could bear 
the loss of one son without regret. What I should hate 
w^ould be to disgrace the soldier-fame of the house of 
Gen, established for many generations. I earnestly 
beseech your Lordship to grant your permission, and 
allow^ the matter to proceed as Shinsei wishes.' 

^^ Yorinaga offered no further opposition. Tametomo 
was delighted, and addressed Shinsei as follows : * Nori- 
shige and Norikazu are peerless bow^men. To be a target 
for their shafts is an inappreciable boon. But if I fail to 
seize their arrows my life will end in a moment. I am 
therefore placing it in your hands. What will you give me 
if I succeed in catching their arrows ? ' Shinsei smiled. 
^ If you succeed, this head of mine shall be your recom- 
24 

3 5 8. JAPANESE LITERATURE 

pense. Shinsei belongs to the Gate of Buddha, and 
should you now be slain, he will not continue his revenge 
after your death.' Tametomo paid no attention to this 
taunt, but rushed down into the larger courtyard and 
stood up at the distance of a bowshot. . . . The two 
archers took two arrows each, and stood over against 
him. Not only the sovereign but all present wrung their 
hands till they perspired, expecting every moment to see 
Tametomo's life fade faster than the clear dew beneath 
the sunbeams. Norishige fitted an arrow to his bow, 
and drawing it till it bent into a full moon, let fly with 
an accompanying shout. With his right hand Tametomo 
caught the arrow in the nick of time, while with his left 
he stopped the shaft which Norikazu the next miOment 
shot at him just as it flew close to his heart. ' A miss ! ' 
exclaimed the two archers, disappointed. 'We don't 
want to kill him, but this time he won't catch our 
arrows.' They drew their bows together, and watching 
a proper moment, let fly with a whiz. One arrow Tame- 
tomo stayed by entangling it in the sleeve of his garment ; 
but as he had no other means of catching the second, he 
seized it firmly between his teeth, and at once crunched 
its head to atoms. All this was done with a rapidity 
which may be compared to the flickering air dancing 
over the hot ground, or to the lightning's flash. To all 
the spectators it seemed more than human. They felt as 
if intoxicated. It was beyond all praise, and no one said 
a word. Tametomo flung aside the arrows to right and 
left. ' Now, your Reverence, you will be so good as 
to give me your head,' he cried, and springing up the 
stairs, was about to tike hold of Shinsei, when his father, 
Tameyoshi, interfered." 

Tametomo has to leave Kioto for poHtical reasons. He 

BAKIN 359 

goes down to Kiushiu, where he has a number of surpris- 
ing adventures. He becomes possessed of a wonderful 
crane, and an equally remarkable tame w^olf. A strange 
hunter, who has neither bow nor shafts, but who brings 
down his prey by stones flung with marvellous precision 
to an incredible distance, attaches himself to his service. 
With him he proceeds to Loochoo, where, among other 
adventures, he falls over a cliff ** several thousand feet " 
to the bottom. He is a little stunned, but walks home 
afterwards as if nothing had happened. He subsequently 
goes to Hachijo and other islands off the Bay of Yedo, 
and then again to Loochoo, where the principal events of 
the story take place. 

Bakin's Seiyuki, or "Journey to the West" (1806), is 
not an original w^ork, but an adaptation of the well- 
known Chinese romance Siyuki, in which a Buddhist 
ecclesiastic, attended by a magician-monkey and a semi- 
human hog, goes to India from China in order to 
procure Buddhist scriptures. It is full of supernatural 
occurrences from beginning to end,^ and is w^holly lack- 
ing in human interest. 

He also translated the Shiii-Jisii-cliiian (Szii-ko-den in 
Japanese), a much more amusing Chinese story, which 
fills over two thousand pages of small print in the 
modern Japanese edition. The influence of these and 
other Chinese romances is very noticeable in the works 
of Bakin and his school. 

T\\Q Na7tka no Yume (1807) is a story of fairyland in 
the Chinese manner. 

The Shichiya no Kura (" Pawnbroker's Store "), 1810. — 

^ An episode of this story has been dramatised in Japan. A version of 
this in the Ingoldsby legend style is given in M'Clatchie's Japanese Plays 
Versijied. 

360 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

In this work a pawnbroker lying awake at night hears 
a noise in his storehouse. He peeps in and sees the 
pledges deposited there assembled in conclave. Each 
tells its story. 

The Musobidye Kosho Monogatari^ is an allegorical novel 
in which the hero visits the Land of Childhood, the Land 
of Lust, the Land of Drunkenness, the Land of Avarice, 
the Village of Lies, the Village of Sinful Desires, the 
Village of Grief, and the Village of Pleasure. The idea 
is borrowed from the older work Wasdbidye, noticed in 
a previous chapter. It is very learned, intensely moral, 
and insufferably tedious. The same criticism will apply 
to the ShicJiiya no Kura, 

The most famous of Japanese novels is the enormous 
work entitled Hakkenden. Begun in 1814, it was not 
finished until 1841. In its original form it consisted of 
one hundred and six volumes, and even in the modern 
reprint it forms four thick volumes of nearly three 
thousand pages. 

The Hakkenden ('' Story of the Eight Dogs ") narrates 
the adventures and exploits of eight heroes of semi- 
canine parentage, who represent the eight cardinal 
virtues. After a perusal of some hundreds of pages of 
this work I can only express my amazement at its extra- 
ordinary popularity in Japan. It is full of physical and 
moral impossibilities, and, worse still, is often pedantic 
and wearisome. Yet it was greedily bought up by the 
public. The wood-engravers came daily for copy, and 
as soon as a part was ready it was printed off in an 

^ This work has been translated into English by L. Mordwin (Yokohama, 
1 88 1). An English version of Bakin's Knma no faye??ia amayo no isuki, by 
Edward Greey, was published in Boston in 1886. A French translation of his 
Okoma appeared in Paris in 18S3. 

BAKIN 361 

edition of ten thousand copies, creating a demand for 
paper which, we are told, appreciably affected the 
market-price of that commodity. 

In addition to his novels, Bakin wrote a miscellany 
entitled Yenseki Zasshi^ which gives interesting informa- 
tion on such subjects as folk-lore and popular supersti- 
tions. His Gendo Hogen is another work of a somewhat 
similar character. He also wrote an account of a journey 
to Kioto in 1802, which was published long after his 
death. 

Bakin's writings have some obvious merits. They 
prove, sometimes only too conclusively, that he was a 
man of great learning, intimately acquainted with the 
history, religion, literature, and folk-lore both of China 
and Japan. His style is usually flowing, perspicuous, 
and elegant, and he possesses a command of the re- 
sources of his own tongue unique among his contem- 
poraries. His language is a happy medium between the 
purism of such writers as Motoori and the semi-Chinese 
jargon of the later Kangakusha. It is honourable to him 
that at a time when pornography was the rule rather 
than the exception with writers of fiction, his writings are 
free from all indecency of language, and are invariably 
moral in their tendency. They alone were excluded 
from the sweeping prohibitive measure directed against 
light literature by the Shogun's Government in 1842. 

Perhaps the quality which most strikes European 
readers of Bakin's novels is his prodigious fertility of in- 
vention. The number and variety of surprising incidents 
with which they are crowded can have few parallels. On 
the other hand, his faults are as glaring as his merits are 
conspicuous. For the profusion of incidents with which 
he crowds his pages, he has recourse to his memory as 

363 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

well as to his invention, and, what is worse, he constantly 
overleaps the bounds of possibility to an extent which 
tries the patience of the most indulgent reader. The 
deus ex inachind, in the shape of a ghost, demon, or 
supernaturally gifted animal, is in far too frequent re- 
quisition. His moral ideals are of the common con- 
ventional type of his day and country, the product of 
the teachings of China grafted on a Japanese stock. His 
power of delineating character is extremely limited, and 
reminds us very much of the portrait-painting of Japanese 
pictorial art. He has little or no humour, and his wit is 
mainly of the verbal kind. The sentiment of love is dealt 
with by him in a way which is to us very unsatisfactory. 
While he can describe the mischief produced by un- 
lawful passion, and wifely fidelity and devotion are his 
frequent themes, such things as the gradual growth of 
the sentiment in man or woman, the ennobling influence 
of a pure love, and all the more delicate shades of feeling 
are wholly neglected by him. The pathos which native 
admirers find in his works fails to move his European 
readers, although they are not insensible to the same 
quality iu other Japanese authors. In short, human 
nature as depicted by Bakin is far too sophisticated to 
appeal to our sympathies. He shows us men and women 
as they might be if constructed on principles derived 
from the Chinese sages and their Japanese expositors, 
and goes for his material to books rather than to real 
life. It is characteristic of him, that unlike many of the 
dramatists and novelists of his time, he avoids the common 
speech for his dialogue, and confines himself entirely to 
the more stilted literary language. 

Bakin's style, which is his strong point, is occasionally 
disfigured by lapses into fine writing adorned with pivot- 

BAKIN 363 

words 1 and other artifices of Japanese rhetoric irritating 
to all plain-minded people. Nor can he always resist the 
temptation of bestowing on his readers tedious displays 
of his erudition, or of introducing foreign or obsolete 
words not understanded of the people. 

It may be a question whether the rhythmical character 
of much that Bakin has written is a merit or a defect. It 
results from the more or less regular alternation of five 
and seven syllable phrases so often referred to, and pro- 
duces much the same effect as the blank verse to which 
some English novelists are addicted. Bakin borrowed 
it from the popular dramatists of the preceding century ; 
but while it is obviously in its proper place on the stage, 
where the words are chanted to a musical accompani- 
ment, it seems a more doubtful kind of ornament in an 
ordinary romance. Japanese critics have an unqualified 
admiration for this feature of Bakin's works, and suggest 
that it entitles the Hakkenden to be classed among epic 
poems. 

1 The more frivolous of my readers will perhaps pardon the following 
attempt to give an example of the sort of thing which we might have if the 
pivot style were adopted in English. It illustrates the mode in which Japanese 
novelists and dramatists frequently slur over the transition from one scene 
to another by a use of this device ; something on the same principle as their 
artists introduce a golden mist between different parts of the landscape in order 
to disguise defects of perspective. 

" The sun went down, and the welcome, the thrice-wished for, the most 
fair, the best beloved ^^ } sought a well-earned repose. On the morrow he 
rose from his couch at T'^^^ned his armour and sallied forth in quest of 
fresh adventuresome as was his bold spirit, his courage was now to be put to a 
testy old ?^! of meat as an egg-shaped domes, slender minarets, and square- 
built towers rose in picturesque confusion from the summit of a hill where 
dwelt," &c., &c. 

364 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

It may be thought that the above is too low an esti- 
mate of a writer whose enormous popularity with all 
classes of his own countrymen is unquestionable. I 
therefore append the judgment of the authors of. the 
only native History of Japanese Literature. It will en- 
able the reader to correct any injustice which may have 
been done by the barbarous Western critic. 

" Bakin was a man of immense erudition. His flow of 
ideas was profuse. When he took up his pen, a thousand 
words were quickly formed, long chapters fell from his 
hand. He, nevertheless, from time to time, used deep 
thought and mature reflection, giving profound atten- 
tion to plot and construction. His pen darted hither 
and thither, following his thoughts wherever they went, 
accompanying his sentiments wherever they turned them- 
selves. In describing men and events, his style changed 
with the change of subject. Many there have been in 
ancient and modern times who gave their attention to 
style, each of whom has his own particular merits. Some 
excel in depicting scenes of grief and affliction, some of 
gladness and jollity, while others possess unrivalled gifts 
of indignant or satirical language. But how many are 
there who, like Bakin, can build on so vast a scale, 
and include within their scope the billows of mankind 
with all their varied capacities and qualities ? How 
many possess the styles fitted for this purpose wherein 
are seen ever and anon magical things which far tran- 
scend our comprehension ? In short, Bakin comprises 
in himself the best points of many men. We see in 
him numerous resemblances to Shakespeare. It is not 
only women and children, tradespeople and peasants, 
who admire him. Even educated gentlemen are fre- 
quently moved to tears or laughter, or made to gnash 

TANEHIKO 365 

their teeth and strain their arms [with rage] by his 
writings." 

That there is some truth in this I am not con- 
cerned to deny. I nevertheless venture the prediction 
that when the Japanese people have more completely 
shaken off, as they are doing every year, the Chinese 
influences which have moulded their character and 
formed their tastes for centuries, Bakin's heroes and 
heroines will appear to them as grotesque and unreal 
as they do to us. His works will then be relegated to 
the same limbo which contains the romances of chivalry 
so dear to Europe before Cervantes, and be regarded 
merely as a document of a passing phase of the national 
development. 

The best known of Bakin's contemporaries is RiUTEi 
Tanehiko (1783-1842), a Samurai of the Tokugawa house, 
from which he received an annual allowance of two 
hundred bales of rice. Like Kioden, he was in early 
life an artist. He also practised Haikai writing with 
some degree of success. As a writer of fiction he is 
best known for his romantic novels ; but he also pub- 
lished stories in dramatic form {shdhonjidatc), meant only 
for reading, and not for the stage. Another kind of 
novel, of which he wrote a few volumes, was the nmjobon 
or *^ sentiment book," which will be noticed presently. 
He was also the author of several works which are of a 
useful character, but have no pretensions to be regarded 
as literature. 

Among his novels may be mentioned the Awa no 
Naruto (1807), the Asaviagatake Omokage Zoshi (1808), 
and its continuation the Shujakti Monogatari (181 2). 
The plot of the last two works is taken from an old 
play, and the scene is in the fourteenth century. 

366 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Tanehiko's principal work, the Inaka Genji, "A Rustic 
Genji" (in ninety volumes), is an imitation of the Genji 
Monogatariy the well-known romance of the Heian period. 
It was a great success, and other authors, by choosing 
titles which included the word Genji, endeavoured to 
persuade the public that their w^orks were of a similar 
character. In 1842 the Shogun's Government took 
measures to suppress publications of an immoral tend- 
ency. The Inaka Genji was considered objectionable on 
this score, and Tanehiko received a private intimation 
that he had better give up writing novels. He was only 
too glad to escape so cheaply, as any official condemna- 
tion would have entailed the loss of his allowance from 
the Government. 

I have not had access to this work. It is much ad- 
mired by native critics for its style and sentiment ; and 
the illustrations, to which Tanehiko attached great im- 
portance, set an example to which was due a marked 
improvement in Japanese wood-engraving. 

Tanehiko's shohorijidate or dramatic stories differ 
chiefly from ordinary Japanese novels by the prepon- 
derance of dialogue over narrative, and by the choice 
of the ordinary spoken language for the speeches of the 
characters. They are also more realistic, and vary less 
violently from actual living manners, than the romantic 
novel. 

The great defect of his books is their want of human 
interest. Like Kioden, Bakin, and the other novelists of 
the romantic school, Tanehiko accepts implicitly the 
conventional standards of honour and morality, and 
deviates little from the types of character which were the 
common property of the writers of his day. Indeed he 
carries unreal sentiment and artificial rules of conduct 

SAMBA 367 

to a more fantastic extreme than either of his rivals. 
Human nature is travestied by him in such a manner as 
to be no longer recognisable. How can one take any 
interest in a heroine of fifteen years of age who sets out 
to travel through Japan in quest of her father's murderer 
with the intention of making love to him and thus find- 
ing an opportunity for putting him to death ? Or in the 
murderer himself, who is a magician with the power of 
making himself invisible, but who finds no better use 
for such a gift than to rob unsuspecting travellers ? In 
another work of Tanehiko's the hero submits patiently to 
be insulted and beaten in the presence of his inamorata 
by her temporary owner, and then indemnifies himself 
by waylaying his enemy in a lonely spot with the inten- 
tion of assassinating him. It is true that the author tries 
to save his credit a little by making him, in the first place, 
discharge his money obligations to his intended victim. 

It is to be regretted that Tanehiko's writings should be 
marred by so vital a defect. They contain many interest- 
ing glimpses of manners and customs in a state of society 
which has now passed away, and his style, when not too 
ornate, is graceful and pleasing. 

Shikitei Samba (1775-1822) — his numerous ahases 
may be omitted — was a native of Yedo. He belonged 
to the trading class, and in his boyhood was apprenticed 
to a bookseller. He subsequently opened a book-shop 
on his own account. His first work was written in 1794, 
v\hen he was in his nineteenth year. In 1799 he was 
reported to the authorities by some person who objected 
to the immoral tendency of his writings. His parents 
and relatives, alarmed on his account, urged him to 
give up authorship, but he refused to do so. He was 
a prolific writer. Among his numerous publications 

368 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

he is now remembered chiefly by two — the Ukiyo-furo 
and the Ukiyo-toko. The Ukiyo-fiiro was first pubhshed 
in 1809 ; but the blocks having been burnt, a second 
enlarged edition was brought out in 181 1. The name of 
this work means ''The World's Bath-house." It consists 
of a series of realistic sketches of everyday life, something 
in the manner of Mr. Anstey's Voces Populi, a certain unity 
being given to them by assigning the dialogues to the 
frequenters of a public bath-house — an institution well 
known in Japan as a centre of gossip for the neighbour- 
hood. In the preface Samba protests that he writes in 
the interests of morality. '' In bringing up children/' he 
says, ''we give them bitter pills and sweet malt-extract. 
The Chinese classics resemble the pills, while novels 
and stories correspond to the sweet stuff. Both convey 
instruction, though in^ different ways." The edifying 
character of the Ukiyo-furo is not very obvious to a 
casual observer, but it is undeniably amusing. Some 
Japanese critics rank it even before the Hizakurige, If 
any one cares to know what subjects are discussed by 
Japanese of the middle and lower classes when they 
meet, he will find ample means of gratifying his curio- 
sity in this work. Here is a conversation between two 
matrons at the bath-house : — 

Mrs. A. Well ! I have tried lots of servants, but I find that 
instead of their serving you, it is you who have to serve them. 

Mrs. B. Really ? But I thought the maid who was with you 
till last year was such an amiable girl. 

Mrs. A. Yes, and she was bound over to me for a long term ; 
but as she had a good offer, I married her off and let her go. 

Mrs. B. That was very nice of you. 

Mrs. A. The one I have now has such a temper that I don't 
know what to do. If I reprove her she gets into a rage and 

IKKU 369 

smashes everything, and if I humour her it makes her so con- 
ceited. The worst of it is that when I He down to sleep I cannot 
get that face of hers out of my mind. 

Mrs. B. Our hussy Rin is just as bad. She is always putting 
herself forward, and talking when she is not wanted. So she gets 
the place to herself, and as soon as she has cleared away the 
breakfast things she goes upstairs and spends half the day doing 
her hair. Then, until I tell her to get dinner ready, she is always 
going out, as she says, to hang out the washing, but really for 
gossip. There is not a day that she does not excite herself about 
matters of course, crying and laughing over them, but grudging 
to take pains with her needful work. She will take up a pail, and 
with " I am going to fetch water, ma'am," off she goes to the well, 
and does not get back for a couple of hours. No wonder ! When 
she is not making a fool of herself with all the young men in the 
row, she joins girls like herself in abusing the masters and mis- 
tresses. The other day I wondered what they were talking about, 
so I slipped behind the outhouse, and there she was praising her 
last master, «S:c., (Sec. 

The Ukiyo-toko ("The World's Barber's Shop") is of a 
similar character. Other works of Samba are the Kokon 
Hiakunin Baka ('^ One Hundred Fools Ancient and 
Modern ") and Shijiuhachi Kuse (*^ The Forty-eight 
Humours "). 

His works had a great popularity and have been often 
imitated. 

JiPPENSHA IKKU ( ?-i83i) was the son of a petty 

official of Suruga. His early life was very unsettled. We 
hear of his holding small appointments in Yedo and 
Osaka, and his name appears with those of two others 
on the title-page of a play written for an Osaka theatre. 
He w^as three times married. On the first two occasions 
he was received into families as irimuko, that is, son-in- 
law and heir. In Japan such situations are nctoriously 

370 JAPi^NESE LITERATURE 

precarious and unsatisfactory. " Don't become an iri- 
inuko," says the proverb, ^' if you possess one go of rice." 
Ikku did not remain long with either of these wives. Very 
Hkely his parents-in-law objected to his Bohemian habits 
and dismissed him. In his third marriage he was careful 
not to sacrifice his freedom. Ikku's biographers relate 
many stories of his eccentricities. Once when on a visit to 
a wealthy citizen of Yedo he took a great fancy to a bath- 
tub. His host presented it to him, and Ikku thereupon 
insisted on carrying it home through the streets, inverted 
over his head, confounding with his ready wit the pas- 
sengers who objected to his blindly driving against them. 

One New Year's Day a publisher came to pay him the 
usual visit of ceremony. Ikku received him with great 
courtesy, and prevailed on him, somewhat to his be- 
wilderment, to have a bath. No sooner had his guest 
retired for this purpose than Ikku walked off to make his 
own calls in the too confiding publisher's ceremonial 
costume, Ikku not being possessed of one of his own. 
On his return, some hours later, he was profuse in his 
thanks, but said not a word of apology. 

When he was engaged in composition he squatted on 
the floor in a room where books, pens, inkstone, dinner- 
tray, pillow, and bedding lay about in confusion, not an 
inch of free space being left. Into this disorderly sanctum 
no servant was ever admitted. 

Ikku's ready money went too often to pay for drink, 
and his house lacked even the scanty furniture which is 
considered necessary in Japan. He therefore hung his 
walls with pictures of the missing articles. On festival 
days he satisfied the requirements of custom, and pro- 
pitiated the gods by offerings of the same unsubstantial 
kind. 

IKKU 371 

On his deathbed he left instructions that his body 
should not be washed, but cremated just as it was, and 
enjoined on his pupils to place along with it certain 
closed packets which he entrusted to them. The funeral 
prayers having been read, the torch was applied, when 
presently, to the astonishment of his sorrowing friends 
and pupils, a series of explosions took place, and a dis- 
play of shooting stars issued from the corpse. The 
precious packets contained fireworks. 

Ikku's first work, exclusive of the dramatic piece above 
mentioned, was published in 1796 at Yedo, where he had 
then been settled for six or seven years. Others followed, 
but it is useless to enumerate them, as their fame has 
been eclipsed by that of the Hizakurigc, the great work 
with which Ikku's name is always associated. 

The Hizakurige was published in twelve parts, the first 
of which appeared in 1802, the last not until 1822. It 
occupies a somewhat similar position in Japan to that 
of the Pickwick Papers in this country, and is beyond 
question the most humorous and entertaining book in 
the Japanese language. Hizakw^ige m^-jins, ''knee-chest- 
nut-horse," the Japanese equivalent for our '' shank's 
mare." It is the history of the travels, mostly on foot, as 
the title indicates, of two worthies named Yajirobei and 
Kidahachi along the Tokaido and other great highways 
of Japan, and of their manifold adventures and mishaps. 
Yajirobei, Yajiro, or Yaji, as he is indifferently called, is 
an elderly man of the shopkeeper class, whom some 
Japanese insist on identifying with Ikku himself. There 
are points of resemblance, but this, like most such identi- 
fications, is in reality fallacious. Indeed there is a passage 
in the fifth part of the Hizakurige which seems intended 
as a repudiation of the suggestion. Yaji is here repre- 

372 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

sented as involved in cruel embarrassments by an attempt 
to impose himself on some provincial virtuosos as the 
renowned poet and novelist Jippensha Ikku. Ikku says 
elsewhere that Yaji was intended as a tada no oyaji or 
'' ordinary elderly man." But in truth he is neither 
jippensha Ikku nor yet a tada no oyaji. He and his 
younger companion belong to that class who having 
never lived can never die. They are humble but not 
unworthy members of the illustrious fraternity which 
includes Falstaff, Sancho Panza, Sam Weller, and Tar- 
tarin — to us far more real personages than any originals 
which may have supplied hints for them. 

Yaji and Kida are by no means heroes. They are 
cowardly, superstitious, and impudent. Lies, '^ gross as 
a mountain, open, palpable," fall from their lips on the 
smallest provocation or in mere wantonness. Yaji has 
a certain share of good sense and bonhomie which goes 
some way to redeem his character, but Kida is a fool 
positive whose idiotic sallies and ill-advised amorous 
schemes are continually entangling him in scrapes from 
which it requires all the wit and s avoir fair e of his elder 
companion to extricate him. Nor is Yaji, from a moral 
point of view, much better. Both are, in sooth, shame- 
less wights, whose moral principles are on a par with 
those of Falstaff or Sir Harry Wildairs, and for whose 
indecency of speech and conduct even Rabelais hardly 
affords an adequate comparison. The most that can be 
said for them is that their grossness is the grossness of 
the natural uncultured man, and not the con amore con- 
centrated filth which revolts us in some European authors, 
and that with two continents and a wide gulf of social 
and racial differences intervening, their indecency some- 
how creates less disgust than if they were Englishmen 

IKKU 373 

or Frenchmen. Still, people of nice taste had better not 
read the Hizakiirige. 

It is hopeless by translation to give any idea of the 
copious flow of rollicking humour which pervades every 
page of this really wonderful book. Those who have 
read it will not forget the scene in a roadside inn where 
some terrapins laid on a shelf overnight come out when 
Yaji, Kida, and their party are all sound asleep, and in- 
sinuate themselves among the bedding ; or Kida's misad- 
venture at the river ford with the two blind men who had 
agreed that one should carry the other over on his back. 
Yaji cleverly substitutes himself, and so crosses over dry- 
shod. But Kida, in endeavouring to follow his example, 
is detected, and shot off in mid-stream. Then there is 
the scene in which a strolling medium (a young woman) 
delivers to Yaji a terrific but untranslatable message 
from his deceased wife, who adds a climax to his fright 
by proposing to come and pay him occasional friendly 
visits ; and one where Yaji, fancying that Kida is a fox 
which has taken the shape of his friend, belabours him 
soundly to make him resume his natural vulpine form. 
Another amusing scene is one in which the owner of the 
pack-horse which Kida is riding, meets a man to whom 
the animal had been assigned as security for a debt. 
The creditor threatens to foreclose then and there. As 
the negotiations between the two sway backward and 
forward, Kida is made alternately to mount and dismount, 
until at last the situation is cleared by the horse bolting 
with debtor and creditor in hot pursuit, while Kida is 
left bruised and shaken on the ground where he had 
fallen. 

The great drawback to the fun of the Hizakiirige is 
that it is unrelieved by more serious matter. Doubtless 
25 

374 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Bottom the weaver and Falstaff would still be amusing 
even if they stood by themselves, but they gain immea- 
surably by contrast with the poetry of fairy-land and the 
stately court of Theseus in the one case, and with grave 
political surroundings on the other. In the Hizakiirige 
there is no suggestion of serious thought or feeling ; all 
is broad, frequently even farcical humour. It is, how- 
ever, excellent fooling of its kind. 

There can be no greater contrast than that between 
Ikku and the romantic school of novelists. He repu- 
diates utterly their entire equipment of fantastic notions 
of right and wrong, artificial sentiment, supernatural 
interventions, impossible exploits, and euphuistic fine- 
writing. He is a realistic writer in the good as well as 
in the bad sense of the word. The Hizakurige is a 
picture of real life, for every detail of which Ikku has 
drawn on his own observation. We know that he actually 
travelled through the places which are the scenes of his 
heroes' exploits ; but even if there were no record of the 
fact, it is obvious to every reader who knows Japan. 
There is little word-painting or description of scenery, 
but the human life of the great highways is depicted with 
photographic accuracy, and with a verve and humour 
which no mere observation, however minute, could ever 
impart. We see the Daimio's train, slow-moving, silent, 
and imposing — but nevertheless containing a rowdy ele- 
ment—and hear Yaji and Kida's very free criticisms as 
they squat humbly by the roadside until the great man 
has passed. The religious processions, noisy and dis- 
orderly, are treated by them with more open ridicule. 
We meet provincial Samurai, the butt of the more quick- 
witted citizens of Yedo, obsequious innkeepers, facile 
waiting-maids, begging priests, Ronins, Komuso (criminals 

IKKU 37 5 

of the Samurai class who have been permitted to become 
priests, and who lead a wandering life with their faces 
wholly concealed under immense basket-hats), pilgrims 
(who nowadays travel by excursion trains with tickets 
available for two months from date of issue), boy pilgrims 
to the shrines of Ise with all the precocious shrewdness 
of a gamin or a street arab, Tome-onna or female touts 
who beset the highway near their master's inn at sun- 
down and wheedle or hustle the traveller into it, coolies 
with their degraded dialect (all Ikku's personages use the 
language and speak the dialect proper to them), thieves, 
jugglers, rustics, ferrymen, hopse-boys, and many more. 
Most of these have disappeared for ever, but they still 
live in Ikku's pages to delight many a future generation 
of readers. 

It has been said that there are no terms of vulgar abuse 
in the Japanese language. The compliments exchanged 
by the coolies and pack-horse men in the Hizakurige are 
a sufficient answer to this rash assertion. There is more 
truth in the statement that profane language is unknown 
in Japan. A European Yaji and Kida would certainly 
have been as richly supplied with terms of this kind as 
Ernulphus or our armies in Flanders, but the only oath 
uttered by the heroes of the Hizakurige is the very mild 
Nainu San or Nainu Sambo, that is to say, by the three 
holy things, namely, Buddha, the Law, and the Priest- 
hood. Paradoxical though it may appear, this is pro- 
bably owing to the want of any very deep-seated 
sentiment of piety in the Japanese nation. Their lan- 
guage is equally deficient in such phrases as '^ God 
bless you," '^ Thank God," and '^ Adieu." 

376 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

The Ninjobon 

All students of Japanese literature are familiar with 
the Ninjobon or Sentiment Book, a species of novel 
which flourished most in the third and fourth decades 
of the nineteenth century. It was at last prohibited 
by the Government, like its predecessor and model the 
Share-bon. 

The best known writer of this class of story was 
Tamenaga Shunsui, who also called himself (after 1829) 
Kiokuntei. He was a pupil of Samba. Shunsui was a 
bookseller of Yedo. He began his literary career with 
some tales of an unedifying character, which he styled 
Fujo Kwanzen no Tame ('^ For the Encouragement of 
Women in the Paths of Virtue "). He died in 1842 whilst 
undergoing a sentence of confinement to his own house 
in handcuffs for publishing works of a tendency pre- 
judicial to public morals. The blocks from which they 
were printed were at the same time destroyed. Even 
his admirers cannot say that Shunsui's punishment was 
altogether unmerited. 

One of Shunsui's best known stories is the Munie 
Koyomi ('* Plum Calendar "), with its continuation en- 
titled Shiinshoku Tatsumi no Sono ('' Spring - Colour 
Eastern-Garden"), w^hich appeared in 1833. It is a 
novel of low life, and the characters are singing-girls, 
harlots. Renins, professional jesters, and the like. Its 
morality cannot be defended, but in decency of lan- 
guage it is superior to the Hizakurige, and even to the 
Ukiyo-furo. 

The Iroha Btuiko, which is considered Shunsui's greatest 
work, is not a typical Ninjobon, though from some points 

SHUNSUI 377 

of view it belongs to this class of literature. It is one of 
the numerous versions of the story of the revenge of the 
forty-seven Renins. Few worse arranged books have 
ever been written. The scenes of which it is composed 
have no sort of order, chronological or otherwise, and in 
many cases have no obvious connection with the main 
action of the book. Shunsui, in writing it, seems to have 
had two objects in view, irreconcilable with each other. 
One was to produce a historical narrative (he describes 
it as a true record) enriched by matter drawn from 
genuine documents ; the other to enhance the interest 
of the story by the addition of imaginative details. As 
a contribution to historical research the Iroha Bunko 
is w^orthless. It is not always possible to distinguish 
Shunsui the historian from Shunsui the romancist ; and 
in order to comply with the edict forbidding novelists to 
meddle with real personages of the Yedo period, he was 
obliged to garble his materials, transferring the scene of 
the story from Yedo to Kamakura, and from the eight- 
eenth to the fourteenth century, and altering the names 
of the characters. In this he was only following the 
example of the CJiiusJimgiira, the famous drama which 
deals with the same subject. The judicious reader will 
skip his historical disquisitions, nor care, for example, to 
follow him in discussing the question of the precise date 
when shops for the sale of buckwheat vermicelli were 
first established as separate institutions. He will turn 
from such viiida-banashi (vain talk), as Shunsui himself 
calls it, to the scenes where he abandons his facts, and 
endeavours by the help of a sympathetic imagination 
to realise the feelings and emotions of the actors in the 
tragedy, filling in their surroundings, supplying them 
with parents, wives, sweethearts, or children, inventing 

3/8 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

romantic incidents and passionate speeches, and, in 
short, converting them from vaguely outHned person- 
ages of history into real men and women. 

The great service rendered by Shunsui and his fellow- 
composers of Ninjobon was to recall the attention of 
writers and readers of fiction to human nature as the 
proper subject of the novelist's art. Since the time of 
Murasaki no Shikibu this branch of study had been 
sadly neglected in Japan. The novelists of the romantic 
school were too much occupied with sensational situa- 
tions, hairbreadth escapes, and supernatural wonders, to 
study the human heart with its affections and passions ; 
while Ikku and Samba, though excellent in their way, 
were humourists and nothing more. 

The Ninjobon, it is true, do not show us human 
nature at its best. The society into which they intro- 
duce the reader is far from select, and the morality sadly 
defective. But the vital element of fiction is there. We 
find in these works real human beings depicted in such 
a way that we can follow their fortunes with interest, 
and sympathise with them in their joys and sorrows. 

The dialogue of the Ninjobon is in the ordinary col- 
loquial language of Yedo, the narrative portion in the 
written style. 

Amongst other Ninjobon may be mentioned the Tsuge 
no Ogushi {y'^^^), by Jippensha Ikku the younger ; Imose- 
dori (n. d.), by Tamenaga Shunga, a pupil of Shunsui ; 
Musiime Setsuyd (1831) and Musume Taiheiki (1837), by 
Kiokusanjin ; and Temari Sannin Musmney by Shotei 
Kinsui. 

During the remainder of the Yedo period Japanese 
fiction presents no feature of special interest. A good 
many novels were produced in the several styles de- 

WORKS IN CHINESE 379 

scribed above, but there was no new departure and no 
writer of conspicuous merit. 

Works in the Chinese Language 

During the Yedo period the Chinese language held a 
position in Japan similar to that of Latin in Europe 
during the Middle Ages. It was the vehicle of all 
literature of a serious kind, and more especially of his- 
tory. Japanese scholars attained to great skill in com- 
position in the literary dialect of the Han dynasty, a 
period which may be taken as corresponding for China 
to the Augustan era in Rome. 

One of the chief historical works of this kind was the 
DainihonsJii, a history of Japan from the accession of 
the first Mikado, Jimmu Tenno, B.C. 660, to the abdica- 
tion of Go Komatsu in A.D. 141 3, which, with its nume- 
rous addenda, extends to one hundred volumes. It was 
written by a number of scholars engaged for that pur- 
pose by Mitsukuni, Prince of Mito, and was completed 
about 1715, although not printed until 1851. The Daini- 
honshi is much admired for its concise and elegant style. 

The Nihon Gwaishz, which was brought out by Rai 
Sanyo in 1837, is probably the best known work of its 
class in Japan. It relates the history of the Shogunate 
from its beginnings in the twelfth century down to the 
establishment of the Tokugawa dynasty of Shoguns under 
lyeyasu in the beginning of the seventeenth century. 
Both this and the last-named work are invaluable for the 
study of Japanese history; but they present few attrac- 
tions to ordinary European readers, who will heartily 
concur in the unflattering estim_ate of the Gwaishi con- 
tained in Mr. Chamberlain's Things Japanese, 

38o JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Another important work by Rai Sanyo is the Nihon 
Seikiy a history of Japan in sixteen volumes. 

Towards the end of the Yedo period there was a great 
falhng off in the Hterary use of the Chinese language in 
Japan. At the present day it is employed only for a few 
special purposes similar to those for which Latin is still 
resorted to in Europe. 

BOOK THE SEVENTH 
TOKIO PERIOD (1867-1898) 

BOOK THE SEVENTH 

TOKIO^ PERIOD (1867-1898) 

Some Recent Developments under European 
Influence 

The first half of the present century was a time of pro- 
found peace in Japan^ during which the feudal system, 
established by Tokugawa lyeyasu, was in appearance as 
flourishing and efficient as ever ; but indications were 
not altogether wanting that it was already tending to its 
downfall. The condition of the peasantry had become 
very unsatisfactory. They were grievously taxed and 
oppressed by the Daimios, who competed wnth one 
another in pomp and magnificence, and to this end 
maintained large numbers of sinecure officials and idle 
retainers. The military organisation was wholly effete, 
as some collisions with British and Russian men-of-war 
early in the century proved very clearly. The nation had 
become tired of over -government. The Shoguns, for 
want of general support, were obliged to relax their 
control over the Daimios, the more powerful of whom 
began to assert their independence in a way which was 
fatal to the maintenance of the old feudal government. 

^ The name of the capital was changed from Yedo to Tokio in 1869, when 
the Mikado took up his residence there. 

383 

384 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

The opening of Japan to foreign commerce in 1859 
precipitated the inevitable struggle between the decrepit 
Shogunate and its recalcitrant vassals. It resulted in 
1867 in the complete downfall of the former, and the 
establishment of a new political organisation, presided 
over by the Mikado, and supported by the chief advisers 
of the Daimios who had been instrumental in restoring 
him to his rightful position in the State, so long usurped 
by the Shoguns. 

These men, who combined political wisdom with 
ardent patriotism in no ordinary degree, built up on the 
ruins of the Shogunate the new system of government 
which Japan now enjoys. It is the most highly central- 
ised and efhcient that the country has ever known, and 
has raised it to an unparalleled height of power and 
prosperity, liberty and enlightenment. 

A very large share in this result was due to the influ- 
ence of Western ideas. With the fall of the Shogunate 
the moral, religious, and political principles on which it 
was based became more or less discredited, and the 
nation turned to Europe for guidance. The great poli- 
tical change which had taken place produced no imme- 
diate results so far as the literature was concerned. The 
reorganisation of the constitution, the reform of the laws, 
the formation of an army and navy, the construction 
of roads, railways, lighthouses, and telegraphs, and the 
establishment of a national system of education had 
first to be attended to. But the visible superiority of 
Europe in all such matters led to the study of European, 
and especially English books as sources of practical 
knowledge. 

Before 1867, Dutch, which was studied by interpreters, 
and as a means of acquiring a knowledge of Western 

EUROPEAN LEARNING 385 

medicine, was the only European language known to the 
Japanese. About this time the nation was seized with a 
passion for more extensive European learning. In spite of 
many difficulties, numbers of young men of good family 
made their way to Europe or America for study, or were 
not ashamed to take service in the households of foreign 
residents in Japan in order to have an opportunity of 
learning English, even a slight knowledge of which was 
a sure passport to official positions and emoluments. 
The school of foreign languages in Tokio received sub- 
stantial Government support, and flourished greatly. 
Presently a group of wTiters came forward who did 
their best by translations and original works to meet 
the general demand for information as to the learning, 
customs, laws, and institutions of Europe. Of these, 
Fukuzawa, with his Sciyo Jijo ('' Condition of Western 
Countries"), was the most distinguished. Nakamura's 
translations of Smiles' Self- Help and Mill's Liberty 
also deserve mention. Kant and Herbert Spencer 
followed somewhat later. Their writings frequently 
supply texts for the Japanese able editor, instead of 
the works of the formerly venerated Confucius and 
Mencius. 

Another sign of the renewed avidity for knowledge was 
the rise of a newspaper press and of a magazine litera- 
ture. The first newspaper in Japan deserving of the 
name was published in Tokio by a Scotchman named 
Black about 1872. At the end of 1894 there were in 
existence, in spite of a rigorous censorship, no fewer 
than 814 different newspapers and magazines, with a 
total circulation of 367,755 copies. 

With the exception of translations and works designed 
to make Europe known to the Japanese, the literature 

386 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

showed few signs of foreign influence until about 1879, 
when translations of European novels began to make 
their appearance. The first of these was Lord Lytton's 
Ernest Maltj-avers. It produced a profound sensation, 
and was followed during the next few years by a number 
of others.i A pronounced reaction against the methods 
and principles of the Bakin school of fiction was the 
consequence. TsuBOUCHi Yuzo w^as the principal pro- 
moter of the new movement. In a work entitled Shosetsu 
Shinzui (*' Spirit of Fiction ") he denounced the artificial 
morality of Bakin's wTitings. More recently he became 
editor of a literary magazine called Waseda Bungaku^ the 
organ of the newer school of criticism, which derives 
its principles and standards entirely from European 
sources. In his Shosei Katagi (''Types of Students"), 
1887, Tsubolichi has given an example of a realistic 
novel. It is well written, and contains some graphic 
and humorous sketches of modern student life viewed 
from the seamy side, but has little plot, portraiture of 
character, or dramatic incident. Tsubolichi has also 
tried his hand at drama. I have not seen his Julius 
CcBsaVy w^hich Dr. Florenz describes as a version of 
Shakespeare's drama thrown into the form of Joruri, 
that is, with a thread of poetical narrative and descrip- 
tion woven into it ; but I have before me two others of 
his plays, the Maki no Kata (1897), and the Kiku to Kiri 

The Maki no Kata is in the Kyakubon style, that is, it 
depends almost wholly on dialogue. The small element 

^ Among European writers of fiction whose works have been translated into 
Japanese may be mentioned Dumas ( Trois Moiisqueiaires\ Cervantes, Rider 
Haggard, and Jules Verne. Telcmaque and Robinson Crusoe (commended for 
its excellent moral teaching) have also been translated. 

RECENT FICTION 387 

of Joruri which it contains is Hmited to one of the seven 
acts of which this play is composed w^hich seemed to 
demand a more poetical treatment. It is one of a trilogy 
w^hich deals with the history of the Hojo regents. The 
time is the beginning of the thirteenth century, and the 
subject the crimes and intrigues into which Maki no 
Kata, the wife of the Regent, was led by her ambitions 
on behalf of a favourite son. The Maki no Katct is 
decidedly melodramatic. There are several murders and 
bloody combats, and two hara-kiri by women. But there 
are also some really forcible scenes, and although no 
supreme height of excellence is anywhere attained, there 
is careful workmanship and a gratifying freedom from 
the extravagances of the earlier school of Japanese 
dramatists. Of pivot -words and such -like rhetorical 
devices there are the merest traces. Most writers of 
the Tokio period show a marked tendency to dispense 
with these contrivances. 

The speciahy of SUDO Nansui is the political novel. 
This author belongs to the progressive party in politics 
and social science, and his pages bristle with allusions 
to ''things European." He quotes glibly, ''To be or 
not to be, that is a question " {sic)^ and talks familiarly 
of Shakespeare, Dumas, Gladstone, and O'Connell. The 
extent and variety of his reading may be inferred from 
an airy reference in one of his prefaces to Lytton, 
Bakin, Scott, Tanehiko, Hugo, Shunsui, Dickens, and 
Ikku. 

The Ladies of New Style (1887) is a good example 
of his works. It is a novel of the future, when Tokio 
shall have become a great port, with all the appliances 
of an advanced civilisation, such as wharves, docks, 
tramways, and smoking factory chimneys. The heroine, 

388 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

whose charms are depicted with a profuse expenditure 
of ornate diction, is a dairymaid. Let not the reader 
suppose that this occupation is meant to suggest pastoral 
simpHcity. On the contrary, it indicates to the Japanese 
pubhc that the lady is in the forefront of the progres- 
sive movement. Formerly cow's milk was not used as 
food in Japan, and when this novel appeared none but 
a truly enlightened person would d^re to affront the 
old-fashioned prejudices against it. This dairymaid's 
favourite reading is Herbert Spencer's treatise on educa- 
tion. She is a member of a ladies' club where croquet 
and lawn-tennis are played and women's rights discussed. 
Other characters are — an adherent of Arabi Pasha, who, 
after his leader's defeat by the '' great warrior General 
Wolseley," was banished from Egypt and took service 
with a Japanese gentleman ; a Chinese cook, who is 
naturally assigned the role of a subordinate villain, and 
a number of politicians of the Conservative and Liberal 
parties. Among the incidents we have a balloon ascent, 
a contested election, and a dynamite explosion, which 
is prevented from doing harm by the sagacity of a dog 
of European breed. All this, it will be observed, indi- 
cates a high degree of civilisation. 

In the last chapter the dairymaid is married to the 
advanced politician, who, on the auspicious occasion, 
wears a clean standing-up collar and a white silk neck- 
tie, with white gloves, and a small white orange blossom 
in the left button-hole of his coat. 

The Ladies of New Style has really considerable merit. 
There is plenty of incident and a coherent plot, and the 
writer can not only quote Herbert Spencer and Mill, 
but, what is more to the purpose, has an excellent 
command of his own language, more especially of the 

RECENT FICTION 3^9 

Chinese element in it, which is so prominent at the pre- 
sent time. 

The Local Self Government (Sudo affects EngUsh titles) 
is a work of a similar character. 

Yamada Taketaro, a contemporary of Tsubouchi's, is 
the principal champion of an attempt to substitute the 
modern colloquial grammar for the grammatical forms 
and rules of the traditional literary dialect. He has pro- 
duced a number of novels and stories written on this 
principle, which, if universally adopted, would save the 
Japanese nation the trouble of mastering a second 
grammar for purposes of reading and writing, in addition 
to that of their ordinary speech. His Natsu Kodachi 
('' Summer Trees ") is a series of short stories which bear 
numerous traces of the author's studies of European 
literature. One is a Japanese version of the story of 
Appiiis and Virginia, and another a pastoral idyll 
obviously suggested by a European model. Yamada's 
later writings I have not seen. Dr. Florenz describes 
them as "cleverly written, the characters well and natu- 
rally drawn." This is high praise to give a Japanese 

novelist. 

Yencho, a blind story-teller of Tokio, also composes in 
the colloquial style. Indeed his novels are first delivered 
in a spoken form, and are taken down in writing by his 
pupils. Their language is simple and easy, and they may 
be recommended to any European who is beginning the 
study of Japanese. Some of his plots are said to be taken 
from the French. 

One of the most popular and voluminous novelists 

of the present day is OZAKI TOKUTARO (Koyosan). In 

his earlier works, which I have not seen, he made great 

use of the pivot style, but his Tajo-takon (1897) is 

26 

390 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

written in the colloquial language. An acquaintance 
with English is evinced by the short sentences, the 
copious use of personal pronouns, and the frequent 
introduction of words which, although composed of 
Chinese elements, can only be fully understood when 
we have recognised the English word which they are 
intended to represent. Such English-Chinese-Japanese 
words are by no means peculiar to Ozaki. They 
now form a considerable part of the vocabulary of 
newspaper and magazine writers. Ozaki frequently 
gives the impression of having thought in English, and 
then presented his readers with a literal translation into 
Japanese. He is said to be an admirer of M. Zola. 

The Tajo-takon (''Much Feeling, Much Hate") is a 
study of sentiment. It opens with the lachrymose lamen- 
tations of a disconsolate widower. At the eightieth page 
the hero is still plaguing his friends and exhausting the 
reader's patience with a maudlin grief, which must be 
even more obnoxious to Japanese feeling than to our 
own. One weary reader left him at this point, wiping 
his streaming eyes with a borrowed pocket-handker- 
chief, and complaining that he had now nobody to wash 
his own dirty ones for him. 

One of the most considerable literary figures of the 
present day is KODA Nariyuki (pseudonym, Rohan). 
He writes in the ordinary literary dialect, using the 
colloquial speech only for the dialogue, and in some 
of his writings not even for that. He has imagination, 
lofty aims, and a fine flow of language, never descend- 
ing to vulgarity, and rising frequently to poetical descrip- 
tions of a high order of merit. But the action of his 
stories moves slowly, and the speeches of his personages 
are terribly lengthy. His Hige-otoko (1897) is a historical 

RECENT FICTION 39I 

novel of the civil wars which preceded the establishment 
of the Tokugawa Shoganate. 

The general impression left by a very imperfect exami- 
nation of the drama and fiction of the last twenty years is 
on the whole favourable. The moral standards are less 
artificial, there are fewer offences against good taste and 
decency, and there is a prevailing sobriety of tone and 
an avoidance of the glaring improbabilities of every 
kind which abound in the writings of such authors as 
Chikamatsu and Bakin. We no longer meet with such 
monstrously long drawn-out stories as the Hakkenden. 
Comparatively much shorter than its predecessor, the 
recent novel shows more signs of conscientious care in 
its composition. 

The social position of Japanese writers of fiction has 
of late been completely revolutionised. In the Yedo 
period they were Bohemians or homines declasseSy who 
were in constant trouble with the police, and were classed, 
along with actors, among the low^est of the people. Now 
they are respectable members of society ; some of them, 
like Tsubouchi, being graduates of the Imperial Univer- 
sity. Notwithstanding the low prices at which their 
works are issued,^ a popular novelist now commands a 
fair income from his works. Yano Fumio, out of the 
proceeds of the sale of his Keikoku Bidan (a novel of 
Theban life, with Epaminondas for the hero), was able 
to treat himself to a tour in Europe, and to build a fine 
house with the balance. 

The art of writing history has not made much pro- 
gress in recent years. Modern methods of investiga- 

1 The Tajolakon, of five hundred pages, with illustrations, is published at 

aijout IS. Cd. of our money. 

392 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

tion and principles of historical criticism are known 
and accepted ; but a great sifting of the existing hetero- 
geneous material must be done before history, as we 
understand it, can be written. Nobody has yet made 
any serious attempt to distinguish the true from the false 
in the old Japanese annals, though it is pretty generally 
acknowledged that this process is indispensable. Philo- 
sophical history is still in its infancy. The numerous 
historical works which have appeared during the last 
twenty years are chiefly uncritical epitomes of Japanese, 
Corean, Chinese, and European history, and simple 
memoir es pour servir. Shimada Saburo's Kaikoku Shi- 
viatsu (1888) is one of the most important of the latter 
class. It is a collection of material bearing on the 
opening of Japan to foreign trade in 1859. 

The Shorai no Nikon ("Japan of the Future"), by 
Tokutomi lichiro, is an attempt to forecast the future of 
Japan by an examination of its past history. Mr. W. 
Dening describes it as '* more philosophical in concep- 
tion than most preceding publications of its class, and 
surpassed by none of them in point of style. This work, 
in the space of two years, ran through five editions, and 
competent Japanese critics pronounce it to be one of 
the most remarkable books of the age. The writer is a 
Christian." 

Among other works of a serious kind may be men- 
tioned Marquis Ito's Commentary on the Constitution^ and 
a treatise by Ono Adzusa on the same subject. Mr. 
Dening gives high praise to Nose Yei's Kyoikugakuy a 
work on education. The author's aim is to adapt Western 
principles and ideas to the local requirements of Japan, 
and in this he has, according to Mr. Dening, achieved a 
high degree of success. 

RECENT POETRY 393 

It can hardly be maintained that the Japanese nation 
has up to the present time produced much poetry of 
striking merit. The Naga-uta of the Manyoshiu, not- 
withstanding its Hmited resources and confined scope, 
gave a promise which was not destined to be fulfilled, 
and the tiny Tanka which succeeded it in popular favour 
was precluded by its very form from being a vehicle for 
the utterance of any but the merest atoms of poetical 
thought or sentiment. Again, the poetical element to be 
found in the No and Joruri drama is so disfigured by 
ornament of questionable taste, and so imperfectly freed 
from prosaic dross, that w^e can only allow it a very 
modest place in the history of the art. Its importance 
lies rather in its keeping alive the national taste for 
imaginative writing than in any intrinsic merit w^hich it 
possesses. 

The conditions of the present day are more favour- 
able than those of any previous time to the production 
of good poetry in Japan. The ordinary language, by 
the more thorough assimilation of its Chinese element, 
has gained considerably in fitness for poetical purposes, 
and its phonetic capabilities are now appreciably greater 
than in the time of the Manyoshiu. Still more im- 
portant considerations are the great stimulus which 
the national life has received from the introduction of 
European ideas, and the attention which has been 
recently directed to the poetry of Europe, especially 
of England. 

The credit of being the first to recognise the advan- 
tages which the Japanese poet might derive from a study 
of^ European models belongs to Toyama Masakazu, a 
Professor of the Imperial University, Yatabe Riokichi 
and Inouye Tetsujiro, whose joint publication, entitled 

394 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Shintaishisho^ or "Poetry of New Form" (1882), marks 
an epoch in the history of poetry in Japan. It is a bold 
attempt to revolutionise the art. The writers ignore the 
Tanka altogether, and set an example of a kind of Naga- 
uta adapted to modern conditions. The old principle of 
the alternation of phrases of five and seven syllables is re- 
tained, the seven-syllable phrases, however, being usually 
put first. A decided improvement is the division into 
verses or stanzas of equal length. But it is chiefly in the 
language employed that the new style is distinguished 
from the old. Toyama and his colleagues, finding the 
ancient classical language unequal to the expression of 
the new ideas, and largely unintelligible to a modern 
public, frankly adopted the ordinary written language 
of the day, which had hitherto been only used for 
popular poetry of the humblest pretensions. In their 
choice of themes, in the length of their poems, and in 
the general tone of thought, the influence of European 
models is plainly traceable. 

Some experiments in rhymed verse by poets of the 
new school confirm the opinion already expressed of 
the unsuitableness of the Japanese language for this 
form of poetical ornament. 

The Shintais/nskd contains nineteen poems of no great 
length. Of these only five are original, the remainder 
being translations from English poets. Bloomfield is 
represented by "The Soldier's Return," Campbell by 
"The Mariners of England," and Tennyson by "The 
Charge of the Light Brigade," of vdiich two versions 
are given. The same compliment is paid to Gray's 

^ Dr. Florenz, Professor of Philology in the Imperial University of Tokio, 
has given an interesting account of this movement in a paper contributed to 
the German Asiatic Society of Tokio, March 1892. 

RECENT POETRY 395 

'• Elegy '* and Longfellow's ^^ Psalm of Life." Shake- 
speare is represented by four extracts, and Charles 
Kingsley by his ''Three Fishers." 

The original poems include verses written before the 
colossal image of Buddha at Kamakura, an ode to the 
four seasons, and a war-song. Neither the original poems 
nor the- translations have striking merit in themselves, 
but they attracted a large measure of public attention, and 
gave rise to a lively controversy between the adherents of 
the old and new styles. They also produced a school of 
imitators, among whom the novelist Yamada was one of 
the most eminent. 

More recently (1891) Toyama, the chief originator of 
the movement, brought out a poem on the great earth- 
quake of 1855, which has not only considerable merit in 
itself, but occupies a unique position in Japanese litera- 
ture as a descriptive poem of some length. 

Dr. Florenz, writing in 1892, says that 1888 may be 
taken as the culminating point of the favour shown to 
the new st}^^ of poetry. A reaction then set in, which, 
however, was of short duration. The last two or three 
years have produced a considerable quantity of verse 
more or less in the new form, of which all that can now 
be said is that, on a hasty examination, it reveals some 
promising features. Regularity of form is more carefully 
attended to — a great desideratum in the longer kinds of 
Japanese poetry. 

The day of Tanka and Haikai seems to have passed. 
These miniature forms of poetry are now the exception 
and not the rule. 

The following specimen, which may be taken as 
characteristic of the vague and dreamy style of most 
recent Japanese poetry, is translated from a little volume 

396 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

of prose and verse by three authors, entitled Hana Momijiy 
or ''Flower and Autumn Leaves" (1898) : — 

The Bamboo Flute by the Shore 
I 

"/« the shade of the firs of the craggy cliffy 
To-night agai7t a bamboo finte is heard : 
Is it some fisher-boy^ solacing his heart 
From the woes of a world bitter with salt and seaweed? 

Moonlight or dark, he little cares, 

Night after night he visits these fir-trees^ shade. 

In the music of his bamboo finte 

There may be heard cadences which tell of yearning love. 

A day had passed since the courtiers of the lord of the land 

Held 7iight-long revel here, wajtdering forth upo?t the beach. 

While the bark of the autiwin tnoon 

Pursued its crystal course ; 

Whejt the fisher' s fiute was for the first time heard. 

A day had passed since the ladies of our lord, 
Mooring their gay pleasure-boat, held revel here^ 
Attuning the music of their golden lutes 
To the song of the breeze through the fir-trees on the clifis; 
When the fisher* s flute was for the first time heard. 

II 

On nights when the dew lay heavy on the reeds of the chilly shore^ 
And the wind of the firs came in gusts down from the crags ^ 
He never failed to come — this fisJier-boy : 
His bamboo fiute was heard in clear- soundi7ig notes. 

On nights when the rattling of the hail was loud, 
And the ripples on the beach were changed to ice^ 
He never failed to come— this fisher-boy : 
His bamboo fiute was heard in subdued tones. 

RECENT POETRY 397 

On nights when eveniiigfell^ wild with mou7itain blasts^ 
And the sand was whirled up into the air, 
He never failed to come — this Jisher-boy : 
His bamboo flute was heard in co7ifused notes. 

On nights of rain, when dark?iess came down with a sowtd of 

moa?ti?ig waves, 
And the rocks were steeped in moisture, 
He never failed to come — this fisher-boy : 
His bamboo flute was heard, languid and faint. 

III 

To-night the autumn moon has changed^ 
So long his yearni?tg love has efzdured. 
Still his bamboo flute is heard, 
Its tune and measure ever more entraiicing. 

With tiie storm from the clifl^it was troubled. 
With the echoes from the fir-trees it became clear^ 
With the surges from the deep it was frenzied. 
With the -waves on the rocks it became choked. 

Even the clouds over Onoye^ paused to listen 

To its notes, now calling clearly, and now with strangled utterance* 
What wonder then that some ojie descends from the bower above. 
And comes forth absorbed in reverie ! 

For awhile the fiute ceased its importunities ; 

But hark / louder than before 

The music of the bamboo bursts forth, maki?tg the sky resound, 

And in accord with it, how sweet! 

Are heard the notes of a golden lute. 

Sometime the wide-spreading clouds descending from Ottoye 
Bore away with them the musicians of the fragrant rocks below ^ 
Up to that region where tJie bark of the moon. 
With altered helm, steered straight to meet them.'' 

— ShiWOI Uko. 

1 The mention of this place shows that the scene is the same as that of 
Takasago. See above, p. 207. 

•398 JAPANESE LITERATURE 

Thirty years is far too short a time for the seed sown 
at the Revolution of 1867 to grow up and ripen Hterary 
fruit. We have seen that the intellectual movement to 
which lyeyasu's establishment of the Yedo Shogunate 
led, did not reach its climax until a century later. No 
doubt things move more rapidly in the present day, 
but ijt seems reasonable to believe that what we now 
witness is only the beginning of a new and important 
development. 

The process of absorbing new ideas which has mainly 
occupied the Japanese nation during the last thirty years, 
is incomplete in one very important particular. Although 
much in European thought which is inseparable from 
Christianity has been freely adopted by Japan, the 
Christian religion itself has made comparatively little 
progress. The writings of the Kamakura and two sub- 
sequent periods are penetrated w4th Buddhism, and 
those of the Yedo age with moral and religious ideas 
derived from China. Christianity has still to put its 
stamp on the literature of the Tokio period. 

There are some considerations which tend to show 
that important results in this direction may be expected 
during the century which is nearly approaching us. The 
previous religious history of the nation has prepared 
Japan for the acceptance of a higher form of faith. 
Buddhism did not a little towards fostering ideals of 
holiness, humanity, and detachment from worldly things. 
Confucianism provided high, though it may be some- 
what distorted, standards of morality, and a compara- 
tively rational system of philosophy. Shinto taught 
a reverence for the Divine powers which created and 
govern the universe and man. But none of the three 
sufficed by itself to meet the heart, soul, and mind want 

CHRISTIANITY 399 

of the Japanese nation. Can it be imagined that when 
a rehgion is presented to them which alone is adapted 
to satisfy far more completely all the cravings of their 
higher nature, the Japanese, with their eminently recep- 
tive minds, will fail in time to recognise its immense 
superiority ? ^ They have already accepted European 
philosophy and science. It is simply inconceivable that 
the Christian religion should not follow. Probably, as 
was the case with Buddhism, it will not be received 
without some modification. Their previous history sug- 
gests that this may take the direction of a more rational- 
istic form of Christian belief than that which prevails 
in Europe. 'AXX' rjroL fxev ravra 6eo)V iv ^ovvaai Kelrai. 
The historian of the Japanese literature of the future 
will have more to say on this subject. 

1 There are even now 113,000 native Christians in Japan. 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 

In regard to bibliography, the writer of the present volume of this 
series finds himself in a very different position from his predecessors. 
He has no evibarras de richesses to contend with. The only survey of 
the whole field of Japanese literature which has hitherto appeared in 
any European language is an article by Sir E. Satow, in vol. ix. pp. 
55 1-565 o{ Appleion^ s American CyclopcEdia (New York, 1874), excellent 
as far as it goes, but owing to the brevity inseparable from such a form 
of publication, more fitted to excite than to satisfy the reader's curiosity. 
It will be found useful by any one who wishes to extend his knowledge 
of the subject, as it mentions a large number of Japanese books which 
have been entirely passed over in the preceding pages. 

Mr. B. H. Chamberlain's Classical Poetry of the Japanese (1880) 
contains translations into English verse of a number of poems from 
the Manyoshiu and Kokinshiii^ with selections from the No and 
Kiogeti^ and an appendix of very short biographical notices of the 
more ancient Japanese poets. There is a similar work in French 
by M. Leon de Rosny. 

Some interesting glimpses of the popular literature and folk-lore 
of the Yedo period are given in Mr. A. B. Mitford's Tales of Old 
Japan (1871). 

Mr. William Anderson's Catalogue of Japanese and Chinese Pictures 
in the British Museum (1886) deals with the literature of Japan viewed 
as a source of supply of subjects for the artist. 

The Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan contain a number 
of translations and notices of Japanese books, by Sir E. Satow, Mr. 
B. H. Chamberlain, and others ; and Dr. K. Florenz's contributions 
to the Journal of the Ger7nan Asiatic Society of Japan should also 
be mentioned. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 401 

In addition to the above, there exists in various European languages 
a considerable mass of translations from the Japanese, published either 
separately or in magazines and journals of learned societies, of which 
it may be said — 

" Sunt bona, sunt qiicsdam mediocria, sunt mala plural 
The more important have been indicated in the body of this work, and 
it is believed that little inconvenience will be caused by the omission of 
all reference to the remainder. Those who wish to prosecute their 
researches further in this direction will find the means of doing so 
in Mr. Fr. von Wenckstem's comprehensive and useful, though not 
particularly accurate. Bibliography of the Japanese Empire (1895). 
A Catalogue of Japa?iese Books and Manuscripts in the British 
Museum, by Mr. R. K. Douglas, is also useful for reference. 

The contributions of the Japanese themselves to the materials for 
a history of their literature are naturally much more important than 
anything which has been written by Europeans. The labours of 
Mabuchi and his greater pupil Motoori have been already noticed, 
and good work has been done by a multitude of native editors and 
commentators towards clearing up the obscurity which even to 
Japanese surrounds many of their older authors. Nothing, however, 
which deserves the name of a History of Literature appeared until 
1890, when Messrs. Mikami Sanji and Takatsu Kuwasaburo, of the 
Imperial University of Tokio, brought out their Nippon Bungakushi, 
which is by lar the most valuable work on this subject. The critical 
judgments of the authors may not always commend themselves to 
Europeans, but they have succeeded in setting forth the leading facts 
of the history of their literature in a clear, methodical manner. I 
gladly acknowledge my very considerable obligations to their work. 

A history of fiction, entitled Shosetsu Shiko, by Sekine Masanao 
(1890), should also be mentioned. 

The most useful bibliography in the Japanese language is the 
Gunsho Ichiran, by Ozaki Masayoshi, six volumes (1801), and the 
best biographical dictionary is a bulky work by a number of authors, 
entitled Dai Nippon Jiminei Jisho (1886). A list of other works of 
this class may be found in the article in Appleton's Cyclopcedia already 
referred to. 

Monographs on Hakuseki, Sorai, Chikamatsu, and other eminent 
authors, have been lately published, and a good deal is being done at 

402 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

the present time in the way of re-editing and annotating the monu- 
ments of the older literature. 

The Hakubunkan publishing house of Tokio have reprinted most 
of the fiction and drama of the Yedo period under the description 
Teikokii Bunko or "Imperial Library." As an illustration of the cheap- 
ness of books in Japan, it may be mentioned that each volume of this 
series contains about one thousand octavo pages of reasonably good 
print, on tolerable paper, in neat binding, and is sold for the equivalent 
of about one shilling of our money. 

A LIST OF DICTIONARIES, GRAMMARS, AND OTHER 
WORKS OF REFERENCE USEFUL TO STUDENTS 
OF JAPANESE 

A Japanese-English and English-Japanese Dictionary, by J. C. 
Hepburn (fourth edition, iS88). 

A Dictionary of Chiyiese Japanese Words, by J. H. Gubbins (1889). 

A Chi7iese-E7iglish Dictionary, by H. A. Giles (1892). 

A Native Chinese-Japanese Dictionary, such as the Giokii-hen. 

One of the folio wingTiative dictionaries of the Japanese language: 
Nippon Daijirin; Genkaij Nippon Daijisho. Of these, the first- 
named is the fullest and most elaborate. But even in the best 
dictionaries, whether by Japanese or foreigners, vast numbers of 
words are not to be found. 

A Grammar of the Japanese Written Language, by W. G. Aston 
(second edition, 1877). 

A Grammar of the Japajtese Spoken Language, by \V. G. Aston 
(fourth edition, 1888). 

Or, A Hattdbook of Colloquial Japajtese, by B. H. Chamberlam 
(third edition, 1898). 

A Romanised Japanese Reader, by B. H. Chamberlain (1886). 

A Manual of Japanese Writiftg, by the same author, is in pre- 
paration. 

Japanese Chroitological Tables, by E. M. S. (Sir Ernest Satow), 
(1874), or a similar work by W. Bramsen (1880), will be found 
necessary. 

403 

INDEX 

Abutsu, 157 

Adzuma-kagami, 160 

Akahito, 35 

Anthologies, 34, 58, 159 

Arm Hakuseki, 244 : Arakida 

moritake, 290 
Archaic period, 3 

Bakin, 352 

Ballad Poetry, 20, 24 

Basho, 290 

Bc7i no Naiji Nikki, 1 58 

Bibliography, 400 

Buddhism, 4, 6, 132, 145, 220, 344, 

Chikafusa, 164 

Chikamatsu, 273 

Children's tales, 272 

Chinese Philosophy. See Kimgahi- 

sha and Wagakusha 
Chomei, 145 
Christianity, 253, 39S 
Chuhi, 225. See also Kangakiisha 
Chmshingu7'a, 313 
Classical period, 53 

Daiiiihonshi, 315, 379 
Dazai Shuntai, 301 
Ddjikttn, 237 
DosHUN, 235 

Drama, 197, 213, 273, 2S8, 312, 386 
Dutch, study of, 384 
27 

Epics, none in Japan, 24 
Essays, 54, 184 
Euphony of Japanese, 26 

Farce, 213 

Fiction. See Novels, Romances 
Fudokoro no Stiztcrz, 269 
FujiWARA Seikwa, 224 
Fukuzawa, 385 

Gernpei Seisiiiki, 134 
Gengenshiu, 169 
Genji Monogatai-i, 92 
Gijitirohi, 265 
Goddben, 341 
Grammar, 323 

Hachinwnjiya press, 303 

Haibtin, 296 

Haikai, 289 

Hakkenden, 360 

Hakuseki, 244 

Hamamatstc Chitmagon Monogatari, 

88 
Hanka, 40 
Hankampic, 248 
Hayashi Rasan, 235 
Hayashi Shunsai, 236 
Heian period, 53 
Heiji Monogatari, 144 
Heike Monogatari, 1 39 
Hekijashoron, 341 
Hiaku-nin-is-shiii^ 1 59 

4o6 

INDEX 

Hi RATA, 234 

History, 18, 49, 55, 122, 134, 165, 
169, 24S, 252, 379, 392 

HiTOMARO, 35 
Hizakiirige, 371 
Ho gen Monogata7'i, 144 
Hojoki, 145 
Humourists, 307 

Ibara Saikaku, 268 

Idzumo, 312 

Jdztimo Fudoki, 23 

Ikku, 369 

Impersonal habit of Japanese mind, 30 

Inadztinia J/ioshi, 348 

Inaka Genji, 366 

Iroha Bunko, 376 

Ise Monogatari, yb 

lyeyasu, 218, 224 

Izayoi no ki, 157 

Kiuo Dd"va, 343 
Kiuso, 257 

KlYOTSUGU, 199 

K(3da Nariyuki, 390 
Kodo Tan, 339 
Kojiki, 17 
Kojikiden, 321 
KOJIMA, 170 

Kokinshiu, 58 
Kokinshiu Preface, 63 
Koktiseriya, 280 
Kompira-bon, 274 
Koshicho, 338 
Koshiden, 338 
Koshiseilnin, 338 
Kottoshiu, 348 
Kyakiibon, 288, 386 

Ladies of New Style, 3S7 
Lyrics. 6"^^ Poetry 

/inkoshdtdki, 164 
JippENSHA Ikku, 369 
Jit stir okiimono, 308 
Joriiri, 274, 276, 312 

Kabuki theatre, 274, 28S 

Kada Adzumamaro, 318 

KaguTa, 197 

Kaibara Yekken, 236 

Kaijin Yashi/zia, 276 

Kamakura period, 131 

JCana, 56 

Kangaknsha, 224, 235, 300, 341 

Kataribe, 20 

Keichiu, 316 

Keisei Kintanki, 304 

Kenko, 184 

KioDEN, 345 

Kiogen, 213 

Kioka, 297 

KlOKUTEI BaKIN, 352 
Kishin Shinron, 336 
Kitabatake, 164 
Kiujiki, 6 

Mabuchi, 318 
Maki no Kaia, 386 
Makiira Kotoba, 31 
Makura Zoshz, 104 
Manyoshitt, 34 
Alanyoshiu Kogi, 35 
Matsunaga Teitoku, 290 
Metre, 28, 29, 289, 394 
Midzti - kaga m i, 143 
Mitsukujti, 315 
Mohizu Monogatai-i, 268 
Monogatari, 76 
INIoral code, 229, 327, 340 
MoTOKiYO, 199 

MOTOORI NORINAGA, 32O 
Mumiosho, 156 
MURASAKI NO ShIKIBU, 92 
Murasaki no Shikibu Nikki, 103 
MuRO Kiuso, 257 

Naga-uta, 29, 35, 59, 31? 
Namboku-cho and y]//^;'^wa(r/// Periods, 

163 
Nanka no Y!i??ie, 359 

INDEX 

407 

Nara Period, 17 

Narihira, 81 

National character of Japanese, 4 

Natsu Kodachi, 389 

Newspapers, 385 

Nihongi , 48 

Nihon Givaishi, 379 

Ninjobon, 376 

No, 197 

Noi'ilo, 9 

Novels. 5<?^ MuRASAKi NO Shikibu, 

SaIKAKU, JlSHO, KlODEN, BaKIN, 

Tanehiko, Shunsui,Tsubouchi, 
SuDO, Rohan, Ozaki, Yamada, 
Yencho. 

Ochikubo Alonogatari, 88 
Odai ichiran, 236 
Okarai, 10 
Ohashi JunzO, 341 
Okagami, 125 
Oka Seidaji, 308 
Ori-takii-shiba, 244 
Otofno no Yakamochi, 42 
Ozaki, 389 

Parallelism, 33, 37, 396 
Philosophy, 225 ; see also Kanga- 

kusha 
Phonetic writing, 56 
Pivot-words, 32, 201, 280, 298, 363, 

387, 389 
Poetry, 7» 24, 33, 58, 63, 140, 159, 

178, 197, 279, 289, 299, 317, 393 
Popular Drama, 273, 312 
Popular Literature, 219, 267 
Pornography, 269, 303, 307, 347 
Printing, 220 
Profanity, 375 

Rai Sanyo, 379 
Kaku-kun, 241 
RiUTEi Tanehiko, 365 
Rhythm, 27 
Rohan, 390 

Romance, see Novels 
Kojiin, 275 

SagoroJHo Monogaiarj, 1 18 

Saikaku, 268 

Samba, 367 

Santo Kioden, 345 

Sarashina Nikki, 1 18 

Seibiin, 335, 338 

Seikwa, 224 

Sei Shonagon, 104 

Seiyo Kibiin, 253 

Seiyuki, 359 

Share, 297 

Sharebon, 307, 376 

Shichiya no Kitra, 359 

Shiki Monogatari, 156 

Shikitei Samba, 367 

Shingakii, 342 

Shintaishisho, 394 

Shinto, see No7'ito, Kojiki, Wagaknsha 

Shinto Rituals, 9 

Shojirokii, 126 

Shoku-fiihongi, 23 

Shundai Zatsmva, 258 

Shunsui, 376 

Shittstijo Shdgo, 341 

Songs (archaic), 7 

SORAI, 301 

SUDO, 387 

Snibodai, 348 

Suikoden, 359 

Sumiyoshi Alonogatari, 88 

Taiheiki, 169 
Taikoki, 2.1'i^, 308 
Tajo-takon, 389 
Takasago, 204 
Takeda Idzumo, 312 
Takemoto Za, 275 
Taketori Monogatari, 76 
Taffiadasuki, 339 
Tamakiishige, 324 
Tamenaga Shunsui, 376 
Tanehiko, 365 

4o8 

INDEX 

Ta7ika, 28, 35, 42, 59, i97, 395 
To-kagajui, 62 
T5l'i5 period, 383 
Toktishi Yoron, 252 
Topography, 22 
Torikayebaya Mouogafari, 1 1 S 
Tosa Nikki, ( 7 
Toshikage, 85 
Tournaments "(poetical), 59 

TOYAMA, 393 

TsuBoiJCHi YuzO, 3S6 

TSURAYUKI, 58, 61, 63 
Tsure-dzure-gnsa, 1S4 

Udonge Monogataid, 348 
Uji MonogataiH, 119 
Ukiyo-ftiro, 368 
Ukiyo-toko, 368 
Urashima legend, 39 
Utsubo Monogiiiari^ 84 

Wabim, 316, 332 
Wagakiisha, 315, 334 

Wamidsho, 127 
Wasobidye, 310 
Women as authors, 34, 

157, 158, 232 
Writing, 6, 56 

55» 92, 133, 

Yamada Taketaro, 3G9 
Yajuato A/onogatari, ^^ 
Yamazaki Sokan, 2S9 
Yasumaro, 19 
Yedo a literary centre, 219 
Yedo period, 217 
.Yeigwa Monogatari, 122 
'Yekken, 236 
Yencho, 389 
,Yengishiki, 10, 126 
YoKoi Yayu, 297 
Yokyokii Tsuge, 200 
Yo no tsuru, 158 
Ytiini-bari-tstiki, 355. 

,Zuihitsii, 54 

THE END 

/ 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY'S PUBLICATIONS. 

LITERATURES OF THE WORLD. 

Edited by EDMUND GOSSE, 

Hon. M. A. of Trinity College, Cambridge. 

Each i2mo. Cloth, I1.50. 

^FANISH LITERATURE. By James Fitz- 
*^ maurice-Kelly, member of the Spanish Academy. 

" This is an excellent and model handbook. It is treated with perspective and pro- 
portion ; it is comprehensive, clear, concise, yet not dry as dust ; the judgments are 
judicial, impartinl, and well on the hither side of exaggeration ; the style is good, lucid, 
and interestmg." — London Acadetny. 

TALI AN LITERATURE. By Richard Gar- 
NETT, C. B., LL. D., Keeper of Printed Books in the British 
Museum. 
" Breadth of view, culture, and thoroughness without pedantry characterize this 
history. We see Italian literature not merely in its local proportions, but as an influ- 
ence spreading wide over the literatures of other nations, and most conspicuously, per- 
haps, over our own." — Lo?idcn Daily AlaiL. 

" This history of Italian literature is a valuable addition to the list of works of its kind. 
It is written with insight and appreciation, with enthusiasm, yet without lack of poise, 
and with a plentiful equipment of sound scholarship." — New York Titnes. 

ANCIENT GREEK LITERATURE. By Gil- 

•^^ BERT Murray, M. A., Professor of Greek in the University of 

Glasgow. 
" The admirable perspective of the whole work is what one most admires. The 
reader unlearned in Greek history and literature sees at once the relation which a given 
auth.T bore to his race and his age, and the current trend of thought, as well as what 
we value him for to-day. ... As an introduction to the study of some considerable 
portion of Greek literature in English translations it will be found of the very highest 
usefulness." — Boston Herald. 

PRENCH LITERATURE. By Edward Dowden, 
-^ D. Litt., LL. D., D. C.L., Professor of English Literature in 
the University of Dublin. 
"A book readable, graphic, not overloaded with detail, not bristling with dates. . . . 
It is a book that can be held in the hand and read aloud with pleasure as a literary treat 
by an expert in style, master of charming words that come and go easily, and ot other 
literatures that serve for illustrations." — The Critic. 

iK/TODERN ENGLISH LITERATURE. By 

-^^ Edmund Gosse, Hon. M. A. of Trinity College, Cambridge. 

" A really useful account of the whole process of evolution in English letters- an 
account based upon a keen sense at once of the unity of his subject and of the rhythm 
of its ebb and flow, and illumined by an unexampled felicity in hitting oft the .cading 
characteristics of individual wx'xicrs." — London Athencetun. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY'S PUBLICATIONS. 

M 

T 

Recent Volumes of the International Scientific Series. 

EMORY AND ITS CULTIVATION. By F. 

W. Euridge-Green, M. D., F. R. C. S., author of " Colour- 
Blindness and Colour-Perception," etc. $1.50. 
Memory is the most important function of the brain; without it life would be a 
blank. Our knowledge is all based on memory. Every thought, every action, our 
very conception of personal identity, is based on memory. Without memory, all expe- 
rience wonld be useless; reasonmg would be based on insufficient data, and would 
be, thereiore, fallacious. In this volume the author demonstrates that memory is a 
deftnite faculty, and has its seat in the basal ganglia of the brain, separate from but 
associated with all the other faculties of the brain, 

HE A URORA BOREALIS. By Alfred Angot. 
Honorary jNIeteorologist to the Central Meteorological Office 
of France. With 18 Illustrations. $1.75. 

While there have been many monographs in different languages upon various 
phases ol this subject, there has been a want of a convenient and comprehensive sur- 
vey of the whole field. Professor Angot has cited a few illustiations of each class of 
phenomena, and, without encumbering his book with a mass of minor details, he presents 
a picture of the actual state of present knowledge, with a summary both of definite 
results and of the points demanding additional inves.igation. 

Y^HE EVOLUTION OF THE ART OF MUSIC. 
■^ By C. Hubert H. Parry, D. C. L., M. A., etc. $1.75. 

Dr. Parry's high rank among modern writers upon music assures to this book a 
cordial welcome. It was first published as " Ihe Art of jNIusic," in octavo form. The 
title of this revised edition has been slightly amplified, with a view of suggesting the 
intention of the work more effectually. 

T,J^HAT IS ELECTRICITY! By John Trow- 
'^ '^ BRIDGE, S. D., Rumford Professor and Lecturer on the Appli- 
cations of Science to the Useful Arts, Harvard University. 
Illustrated. $1.50. 
Professor Trowbridge's long experience both as an original investigator and as a 
teacher imparts a peculiar value to this important work. Finding that no treatise could 
be recommended which satisfactorily answers the question, What is Electricity? he 
has explained in a popular way the electro-magnetic theory of light and heat, and the 
subject of periodic currents and electric waves, seeking an answer for his titular ques- 
tion in the study of the transformations of energy and a consideration of the hypotheses 
of movements in the ether. 

TCE-WORK, PRESENT AND PAST. By T. G. 
^ Bonney, D. Sc, F. R. S., F. S. A., etc., Professor of Geology 
at University College, London. $1.50. 
In his work Professor Bonney has endeavored to give greater prominence to those 
facts of glacial geology on which all inferences must be founded. After setting forth 
the facts shown in various regions, he has given the various interpretations which 
have been proposed, adding his comments and criticisms. He also explains a method 
by which he believes we can approximate to the temperature at various places during 
the Glacial enoch, and the different explanations of this general refrigeration are stated 
E.id briefly discussed. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY'S PUBLICATIONS. 

New Volumes in the International Education Series. 

IDIBLIOGKAPHY OF EDUCATION. By Will 

^-^ S. Monroe, A. B., Department of Pedagogy and Psychology, 

State Normal School, Westfield, Mass. $2.00. 

This book will prove of great use to normal schools, training schools for teachers, 
aiid to ed.icational lecturers and all special students seeking to acquaint thenaselvea 
with the literature of any particular department. It will be ot especial value to librari- 
ans in the way of assisting them to answer two qtiestions . («) What books has this 
library on any special ed icational theme ? (i^) What books ought it to obtain to com- 
pbte its collection in that theme ? 

PROEBELS EDUCATIONAL LAWS FOR ALL 

^ TEACHERS. By James L. Hughes, Inspector of Schools, 

Toronto. $1.50. 

The aim of this book is to give a simple exposition of the most important principles 
of Froebel's educational philosophy, and to make suggestions regarding the applica- 
tion of these principles to the work of the schoolroom in teaching and training. It will 
answer the question often propounded, How far beyond the kindergarten can Froebel's 
principles be successfully applied ? 

CrCHOOL MANAGEMENT AND SCHOOL 
"^ ME THODS. By Dr. J. Baldwin, Professor of Pedagogy in 
the University of Texas ; Author of " Elementary Psychology 
and Education " and " Psychology applied to the Art of Teach- 
ing." $1.50. 

This is eminently an everyday working book for teachers ; practical, suggestive, 
inspiring. It presents clearly the best things achieved, and points the way to better 
things. School organization, school control, and school methods are studies anewfrom 
the standpoint of pupil betterment. The teacher is led to create the ideal school, em- 
bodying all that is best in school work, and stimulated to endeavor earnestly to realize 
the ideal. 

P 

RINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF TEACH- 
ING. By James Johonnot. Revised by Sarah Evans 
JoHONNOT. $1.50 

This book embodies in a compact form the results of the wide exuerience and care- 
ful reflection of an enthusiastic teacher and school supervisor. Mr. Johonnot as an 
educational reformer helped thousands of struggling teachers who had brought over the 
rural school methods into village school work. He made life worth living to them. 
His help, through the pages of this book, will aid other thousands in the same struggle 
to adopt the better methods that are possible in the graded school. The teacher who 
aspires to better his instruction will read this book with profit. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY. NEW YORK. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY'S PUBLICATIONS. 

s 

JAMES SULLY'S WORKS. 
TUDIES OF CHILDHOOD. 8vo. Cloth, $2.50, 

An ideal popular scientific book. These studies proceed on sound scientific 
lines In accounting for the mental manifestations of children, yet they require the reader 
to follow no laborious train of reasoning; and the reader who is in search of enter- 
tainment merely will find it in the quaint sayings and doings with which the volume 
abounds. 

f^HILDREN'S WAYS. Being Selections from the 

^ Author's " Studies of Childhood," and some additional matter. 

i2mo. Cloth, $1.50. 

This work is mainly a condensation of the author's previous book, " Studies of 
Childhood," but considerable new matter is added. The material that Mr. Sully sup 
plies is the most valuable of recent contributions on the psychological phases of child 
study. 

T 

'EACHER'S HAND-BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY. 

On the Basis of " Outlines of Psychology." Abridged by the 
Author for the use of Teachers, Schools, Reading Circles, and 
Students generally. Fourth edition, rewritten and enlarged. 
i2mo. Cloth, $1.50. 

The present edition has been carefully revised throu2;hout, largely rewritten, and 
enlarged by about fifiy pages. While seeking to preserve the original character of the 
book as an hitrodnction, I have felt it necessary, in view of the fact that our best train- 
ing colleges for secondary teachers are now making a serious study of psychology, 
to amplify somewhat and bring up to date the exoosition of scientific principles. I have 
also touched upon those recent developments of experimental psychology which have 
concerned themselves with the measurement of the simpler mental processes, and which 
j)romise to have important educational resulis by supplying accurate tests of children's 
abilities." — From the A iitkor's Preface. 

r^UTLlNES OF PSYCHOLOGY, with Special 
^-^ Refo'ence to the Theory of Education. A Text-Book for Col- 
leges. Crown 8vo. Cloth, $3.00. 

/LLUSLONS. A Psychological Study, i: 
pages. Cloth, $1.50. 

P 

ESSIMISM. A History and a Criticism. Second 
edition. 8vo. 470 pages and Index. Cloth, $4.00. 

T 

HE HUMAN MIND. A Text-Book of Psychol- 
ogy. Two volumes. 8vo. Cloth, $5,00. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY. NEW YORK. 

F 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY'S PUBLICATIONS. 

pUNCrUATION. With Chapters on Hypheniza- 
-^ tion, Capitalization, Spelling, etc. By F. Horace Teall, au- 
thor of " English Compound Words and Phrases," etc. i6mo. 
Cloth, $i.oo. 
" The rales and directions for the use of the various marks of punctuation are brief, 
clear, and founded on common sense. 'I'hey are calculated to assist, and there seems 
no danger that they will confuse." — Boston Herald. 

" It seems to be one of the most sensible and practical works on the subject that 
has come under nonce."— Cleveiand Plain Dealer. 

" A work that can be safely commended for its simplification of a subject that often 
puzzles others besides literary workers who are called upon to decide between conflict- 
ing theories as to punctuation." — Philadelphia Press. 

RENCH STUMBLING-BLOCKS AND ENG- 
LISH STEPPING-STONES. By Francis Tarver, M. A., 
late Senior French Master at Eton College. i2mo. Cloth, 
$i.oo. 
" A most valuable book for advanced students of French as well as beginners. . . . 
The book is one of the most useful of the many good books that appear on this sub- 
ject."— San F?-a?icisco Bidleiin. 

" One can hardly commend it too highly. " — Bostoti Herald. 

" A work which will be of great help to the reader and student of French, and 
which fully meets the promise of its title." — Chicago Evening Post. 

T^ON' T ; or, Directions for avoiding Improprieties in 
-^-^ Conduct and Common Errors of Speech. By Censor. Parch- 
ment-Paper Edition, square i8mo, 30 cents. Vest-Pocket Edi- 
tion, cloth, flexible, gilt edges, red lines, 30 cents. Boudoir 
Edition (with a new chapter designed for young people), cloth, 
gilt, 30 cents. i3Sth thousand. 
"Don't" deals with manners at the table, in the drawing-room, and in public, with 
taste in dress, with personal habits, with common mistakes in various situations in life, 
and with ordinary errors of speech. 

'HAT TO DO. A Companion to "Don't." By 

Mrs. Oliver Bell Bunce. Small i8mo, cloth, gilt, uniform 

with Boudoir Edition of " Don't," 30 cents. 

A dainty little book, containing helpful and practical explanations of social usages 
and rules. 

IV: 

E 

RRORS IN THE USE OF ENGLISH. By 
the late William B. Hodgson, LL. D., Fellow of the College 
of Preceptors, and Professor of Political Economy in the Uni- 
versity of Edinburgh. i2mo. Cloth, $150. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY. NEW YORK. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY'S PUBLICATIONS. 

THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL SERIES. 

NOW READY. 

"J^HE BEGINNINGS OE ART. By Ernst 

-* Grosse, Professor of Philosophy in the University of Freiburg 
A new volume in the Anthropological Series, edited by Pro- 
fessor Frederick Starr. Illustrated. i2mo. Cloth, $1.75- 
" This book can not fail to interest students of every branch of art, while the gen- 
nal reader who will dare to take hold of it will have his mind broadened and enriched 
beyond what he would conceive a work of many times its dimensions mi^ht effect."— 
l^.ioklyii Eagle. 

" The volume is clearly written, and should prove a popular exposition of a deeply 
interesting t\v^m&." —Fhiladdphia Public Ledger. 

I J ROMAN'S SHARE IN PRIMITIVE CUI- 

^^ TURK. By Otis Tufton Mason, A. M., Curator of the 
Department of Ethnology in the United States National Mu- 
seum. With numerous Illustrations. i2mo. Cloth, Si-75- 
"A most interesting r-dstDiie oi the revelations which science has made concerning 

die habits of human beings in primitive times, and especially as to the pldce, the duties, 

an J the customs oi womGn." — Philadelphia Inquire f. 

HE PYGMIES. By A. de Quatrefages, late 
Professor of Anthropology at the Museum of Natural History, 
Paris. With numerous Illustrations. i2mo. Cloth, $1.75. 
" Probably no one was better equipped to illustrate the general subject than Quatre- 
fages. While constantly occupied upon the anatomical and osseous pi.a'jes of his sub- 
ject, he was none the less well acquainted with what literature and history had to say 
concerning the pygmies. . . . This book ought to be in every divinity school in which 
man as well as God is studied, and from which missionaries go out to convert the human 
being of reality and not the man of rhetoric and t&xt-hodks." —Boston Literary World. 

"J^HE BEGINNINGS OF WRITING. By W. J. 
'- Hoffman, M. D. With numerous Illustrations. i2mo. Cloth, 

$1.75. 
"The author, as one of the foremost of our ethnologists, is well qualified for the 
inquiry, and the result of his labors is not only a monument to his industry, but a most 
valuable contribution to our national history as well. It is a book full of interest even 
to the general reader, while to the scientist it is a rich mine of facts." — Chicago Even- 
ing Post. 

IN PREPARATION. 
THE SOUTH SEA ISLANDERS. By Dr. Schmfltz. 
THE ZUNI. By Frank Hamilton Gushing. 
THE AZTECS. By Mrs. Zelia Nuttall. 

T 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY. NEW YORK. 

D. APPLETON & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS. 

NEW EDITION OF PROF. HUXLEY'S ESSAYS. 

COLLECTED ESSA YS. By Thomas H. Huxley. 
New complete edition, with revisions, the Essays being grouped 
according to general subject. In nine volumes, a new Intro«. 
duction accompanying each volume. i2mo. Cloth, 8i 25 per 
volume. 

Vol. !.— method AND RESULTS. 

Vol. II.— DARWINIANA. 

Vol. III.— science AND EDUCATION. 

Vol. IV.— SCIENCE AND HEBREW TRADITION. 

Vol. v.— SCIENCE AND CHRISTIAN TRADITION. 

Vol. VI.— HUME. 

Vol. VII.— MAN'S PLACE IN NATURE. 

Vol. VIII.— DISCOURSES, BIOLOGICAL AND GEOLOGICAL. 

Vol. IX.— EVOLUTION AND ETHICS, AND OTHER ESSAYS. 

" Mr. Huxley has covered a vast variety of topics during the last quarter of a 
CCMitury. It gives one an agreeable surprise to look ever the tables of contents and 
note the Immense territory which he has explored. To read these books carefully 
and studiously is to become thoroughly acquainted with the most advanced thought 
on a large number of topics." — New Yot k Herald. 

" The series will be a vvrelcome one. There are few writings on the more abstruse 
problems of science better adapted to reading by the general public, and in this form 
tne books will be well in the reach of the investigator. . . . The revisions are the last 
expected to be made by the author, and his introductions are none of earlier date 
than a few months ago [1893I, so they may be considered his final and most authorita- 
tive utterances." — Chicago Times. 

" It was inevitable that his essays should be called for in a completed form, and they 
will be a source of delight and profit to all who read them. He has always commanded 
a hearing, and as a master of the literary style in writing scientific essaj'S he is worthy 
of a place among the great English essayists of the day. This edition of his essays 
will be widely read, and gives his scientific work a permanent form." — Boston Herald. 

"A man whose brilliancy is so constnnt as that of Prof. Huxley will always com- 
mand readers ; and the utterances which are here collected are not the least in weight 
and luminous beauty of those with which the author has long aelighted the reading 
^ox\6.." —Philadelphia Press. 

"The connected arrangement of the essays which their reissue permits brings into 
fuller relief Mr. Huxley's masterly powers of exposition. Sweepmg the subject-matter 
clear of all logomachies, he l-^ts the light of common day fall upon it. He shows that 
the place of hypothesis in science, as the starting point of verification of the phenomena 
ito be explained, is but an extension of the assumptions which underlie nctio-s in every- 
day affairs ; and that the method of scientific investigation is only the method which 
i-ules the ordinary business of life." — London Chronicle. 

New York : D. APPLETON Sc CO., 72 Fifth Avenue. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY'S PUBLICATIONS. 

MISCELLANEOUS WORKS OF HERBERT SPENCER. 

(^OCIAL STATICS. New and revised edition, in- 
^^ eluding " The Man versus The State." A series of essays on 
political tendencies heretofore published separately. i2mo. 
420 pages. Cloth, $2.00. 

" Mr. Spencer has thoroughly studied the issues which are behind the social and 
poUtical Hfe of our own time, not exactly those issues which are discussed in Parliament 
or in Congress, but the prniciples ot all modern government, which are slowly chang- 
ing in response to the broader uidustiial and general development of human experience. 
One will obtam no suggestions out ot his book lor guidmg a pohtical party or cair>-ii g 
a point in economics, but he will find the piinciples of sociology, as they pertain to the 
whole of life, better stated m these pages than he cin find them expressed anywhere 
else. It is in this sense ihat this work is important and frcbh and vualizing. It goes 
constantly to the foundation of thin^i,." — Loston Heraui. 

J/ARIOUS FRAGMENTS. 12010. Cloth, $1.25. 

Along with a considerable variety of other matter, these " Fragments " 
include a number of replies to criticisms, among which will be found some 
of the best specimens of Mr. Spencer's controversial writings, notably his 
letter to the London Athenceimi on Professor Huxley's famous address on 
Evolutionary Ethics. His views on copyright, national and international, 
" Social Evolution and Social Duty," and " Anglo-American Arbitiation," 
also form a part of the contents. 

E 

DUCATION : Intellectual, Moral, and Physical. 

i2mo. Paper, 50 cents ; cloth, $1.25. 

Contents: What Knowledge is of most Worth? Intellectual Education. Moral 
Education. Physical Education. 

T 

HE STUD V OF SOCIO LOG V. The fifth volume 

in the International Scientific Series. i2mo. Cloth, $1.50. 

Contents : Our need of it. Is there a Social Science ? Nature of the Social Sci- 
ence. Difhculties of the Social Science. Objective Difficulties. Subjective i ifificul- 
ties. Intellectual. Subjective Difficulties, Emotional, I'he Educational Hias. The 
Bias of Patriotism. The Class Bias. The Political Bias. The Theological Bias. 
Discipline. Preparation in Biology. Preparation in Psychology. Conclusion. 

T 

HE INADEQUACY OF ''NATURAL SELEC-^ 

TJON." i2mo. Paper, 30 cents. 

This essay, in which Professor Weismann's theories are criticised, is re- 
printed from the Contemporary Review, and comprises a forcible presenta- 
tion of Mr. Spencer's views upon the general subject indicated in the title. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY'S PUBLICATIONS. 

/JPPLETONS' HOME-READING BOOKS. 

-^ Edited by W. T. Harris, A. M., LL. D., U. S. Commissioner 

of Education. 

This comprehensive series of books will present upon a symmetrical plan 
the best available literature in the various fields of human learnincr, selected 
with a view to the needs of students of all grades in supplementing their 
school studies and for home reading. NATURAL HISTORY, including Geography 
and Travel ; PHYSICS and CHEMISTRY ; HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY, and ETHNOLOGY, in- 
cluding Ethics and Morals; LITERATURE and ART. 

Year. ^et. 

6th. THE STORY OF THE BIRDS. By James Newton Baskett . . . $0.65 

5th. THE PLANT WORLD. By Frank Vincent 60 

5th. THE STORY OF OLIVER TWIST. Edited by Ella B. Kirk ... .60 

5th. IN BROOK AND BAYOU. By Clara Kern Bavltss 60 

4th. CURIOUS HOMES AND THEIR TENANTS. By James Carter Beard . .65 

5th. CRUSOE'S ISLAND. By F. A. Ober 65 

6th. UNCLE SAM'S SECRETS. By O. P. Austin 75 

5th. THE HALL OF SHELLS. By Mrs. A. S. Hardy 60 

NATURE STUDY READERS. By J. W. Troeger. 

1st. Harold's First Discoveries. Book I 25 

2d. Harold's Rambles. Book II 40 

3d. Harold's Experiments. Book III. {Ready shortly.) SO 

4th. Harold's Explorations. Book IV. {Ready shortly.) .... 

5th. Harold's Discussions. Book V. {Ready shortly.) ... 

UNCLE ROBERT'S GEOGRAPHY. By Francis W. Parker 
and Nellie L. Helm. 

1st. Playtime and Seedtime. Book I 32 

2d. On the Farm. Book II 42 

3d. Uncle Robert's Visit. Book III . 50 

4th. The Work of Rivers and Wind. Book IV. {Ready shortly.) . 

5th. Mountain, Plain, and Desert. Book V. {Ready shortly.) . 

6th. Hut Own Continent. Book VI. {Ready shortly.) .... 

5th. THE ANIMAL WORLD. By Frank Vincent 60 

4tb. NEWS FROM THE BIRDS. By Leander S. Kevser 60 

4th. HISTORIC BOSTON AND ITS SUBURBS. By Edward Everett Hale . .50 

2d. THE EARTH AND SKY. By Edward S. Holden 28 

5th. THE STORY OF ROB ROY. By Edith D. Harris 60 

4th. OUR COUNTRY'S FLAG AND THE FLAGS OF FOREIGN COUNTRIES. By 

Edward S. Holden 1.00 

{Others in preparation.) 

These books will be found especially desirable for supplementary- 
reading in schools. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY. NEW YORK. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY'S PUBLICATIONS. 
THE LIBRARY OF USEFUL STORIES. 

Each book complete in itself. By writers of authority in their various spheres. 
Illusttated. \t7n0. Cloth, 40 cents per volume. 

NOW READY. 

^HE STORY OF THE MIND. By Prof. J. 
^ Mark Baldwin. 

^HE STORY OF PHOTOGRAPHY. By Al- 
-^ FRED T. Story. 

HTHE STORY OF LIFE IN THE SEAS. By 
-* Sydney J. Hickson. 

"J^HE STORY OF GERM LIFE. By H. W. 
-* Conn, Professor of Biology, Wesleyan University ; Author of 
" The Living World," etc. 

HTHE STORY OF THE EARTH'S ATMOS- 
-• PHERE. By Douglas Archibald, Fellow and Sometime 

Vice-President of the Royal Meteorological Society, London. 
^HE STORY OF EXTINCT CIVILIZATIONS 
■^ OF THE EAST. By Robert Anderson, M. A., F. A. S., 

author of " Early England," " The Stuart Period," etc. 
Y^HE STORY OF ELECTRICITY. By John 

-* MUNRO, C. E. 

nrHF STORY OF A PIECE OF COAL. By E. 

■^ A. Martin, F. G. S. 

"J^HF STORY OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM. By 

-^ G. F. Chambers, F. R. A. S. 

^HE STORY OF THE EARTH. By H. G. 

■^ Seeley, F. R. S., Professor of Geography in King's College 

London. 
^HE STORY OF THE PLANTS. By Grant 
■^ Allen, author of " Flowers and their Pedigrees," etc. 
^HE STORY OF ''PRIMITIVE" MAN. By 
-^ Edward Clodd, author of " The Story of Creation," etc. 
fBE STORY OF THE STARS. By G. F. 
•^ Chambers, F. R. A. S., author of " Handbook of Descriptive 

and Practical Astronomy," etc. 

(Others in preparation.) 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY. NEW YORK. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY'S PUBLICATIONS. 

O 

M 

LLENDORFF'S METHOD OF LEARNING 
TO READ, WRITE, AND SPEAK THE SPANISH 
LANGUAGE. With an Appendix containing a Brief but 
Comprehensive Recapitulation of the Rules, as well as of all the 
Verbs, both Regular and Irregular, so as to render their Use 
Easy and Familiar to the Most Ordinary Capacity. Together 
with Practical Rules for the Spanish Pronunciation, and Models 
of Social and Commercial Correspondence. The whole de- 
signed for Young Learners and Persons who are their own In- 
structors. By M. Velazqtjez and T. SiMONNE. i2mo. Cloth, 
$i.oo. Key to Exercises in Method, 50 cents. 

The superiority of Ollendorff's Method is now universally acknowledged. Divested 
of the abstractedness of grammar, it contains, however, all its elements; but it develops 
them so gradually, and in so sunple a manner, as to render them intelHgible to the most 
ordinary capacity. It is hardly possible to go through this book with any degree of 
application without becoming thoroughly conversant with the colloquial, idiomatic, and 
classic use of Spanish. 

ERCANTILE DICTION AR V. A Complete Vo- 
cabulary of the Technicalities of Commercial Correspondence, 
Names of Articles of Trade, and Marine Terms in English, 
Spanish, and French ; with Geographical Names, Business Let- 
ters, and Tables of the Abbreviations in Common Use in the 
Three Languages. By I. De Veitelle. i2mo. Cloth, $1.50. 

An indispensable book for commercial correspondents. It contains a variety of 
names applied to various articles of trade in Cuba and South America, not found in 
other dictionaries. 

yi DICTIONARY OF THE SPANISH AND 

-^ ENGLISH LANGUAGES. Containing the latest Scientific, 

Military, Commercial, Technical, and Nautical Terms. Based 

upon Velazquez's unabridged edition. 32mo. Cloth, $1.00. 

This Dictionary, which is of a convenient size for the pocket, has proved very popu- 
lar, and will be found an excellent lexicon for the traveler's handy reference. 

^HE MASTER V SERIES. Manual for I.earnin- 

-^ Spanish. By Thomas Prendergast, author of " The Mastery 

of Languages," " Handbook of the Mastery Series," etc. Third 

edition, revised and corrected. i2mo. Cloth, 45 cents. 

The fundamental law of the Mastery Series is, that the memory shall never be over- 
charged, and economy of time and labor is secured by the exclusion of all that is super- 
fluous and irrelevant. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY'S PUBLICATIONS. 

T 

'HE COMBINED SPANISH METHOD. A 

New Practical and Theoretical System of Learning the Castilian 
Language, embracing the Most Advantageous Features of the 
Best Known Methods. With a Pronouncing Vocabulary con- 
taining all the Words used in the course of the Work, and Ref- 
erences to the Lessons in which each one is explained, thus 
enabling any one to be his own Instructor. By Alberto de 
ToRNOS, A. M., formerly Director of Normal Schools in Spain, 
and Teacher of Spanish in the New York Mercantile Library 
New York Evening High School, and the Polytechnic and 
Packer Institutes, Brooklyn. i2mo. Cloth, $1.25. Key to 
Combined Spanish Method, 75 cents. 

The author has successfully combined the best in the various popular systems, dis- 
carding the theories which have failed, and produced a work which is eminently prac- 
tical, logical, concise, and easily comprehended. The unprecedented sale which this 
book has had, and its steadily increasing popularity as a text-book, mark this as the 
leading Spanish method book now published. 

y^HE SPANISH TEACHER AND COIIOQUI- 
-^ AL PHRASE BOOK. An Easy and Agreeable Method of 

Acquiring a Speaking Knowledge of the Spanish Language. 

By Francis Butler, Teacher and Translator of Languages. 

New edition, revised and arranged according to the Rules of the 

Spanish Academy, by Herman Ritter. i8mo. Cloth, 50 cents. 
The large sale and continued popularity of this work attest its merit. 

^HE SPANISH PHRASE BOOK ; or, Key to 

Spanish Conversation. Containing the Chief Idioms of the 

Spanish Language, with the Conjugations of the Auxiliary and 

Regular Verbs. On the plan of the late Abbe Bossut. By E. 

M. DE Belem, Teacher of Languages. i8mo. Cloth, 30 cents. 

This little book contains nearly eight hundred sentences and dialogues on all corn- 
men occurrences. It has been the aim of the compiler to insert nothing but what will 
really meet the ear of every one who visits Spain or associates with Spaniards. 

/I GRAMMAR OF THE SPANISH lANGUAGE. 
-^^-^ With a History of the Language and Practical Exercises. By 
M. Schei?e de Vere, of the University of Virginia. i2mo. 
Cloth, $1.00. 
This book is the result of many years' experience in teaching Spanish in the Uni- 
versity of Virginia. It contains more of the etymology and history of the Spanish lan- 
guage than is usually contained in a grammar. 

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK. 

BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY 

3 9999 06561 046 9