Google 

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world’s books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 
Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 

public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individual 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

and we request that you use these files for 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 
ai[http: //books . google. com/| 

EE TI ς - τ΄ ST STE Ta ee gs Se acs Deseret SSR er ἁὐσοσς- 
τ =. Tpeemie eis eee TES ἀν πο σιαν -τν 

~ 

Aristoteles 
THE 
WORKS OF ARISTOTLE 

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH 
UNDER THE EDITORSHIP 

OF 

J. A. SMITH M.A. 

FELLOW OF BALLIOL COLLEGE 

W. D. ROSS M.A. 

FELLOW OF ORIEI. COLLEGE 

VOLUME VIII 

METAPHYSICA 

OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

1908 

HENRY FROWDE, M.A. 
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 

LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK 
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE 

cess 

O6-2 7-27 

Κα ἔα 
ό" 21 -712 
Ou Qt 4 f Zz 
foew Ξ ee a he ἐς 
.,2 - “7-- «κέ 

GENERAL PREFACE 

IT was the desire of the late Master of Balliol, Dr. Ben- 
jamin Jowett, as formulated in his will, that: the proceeds 
from the sale of his works, the copyright in which he 

- bequeathed to Balliol College, should be used to promote the 

study of Greek Literature, especially by the publication of 
new translations and editions of Greek authors. Ina codicil 
to his will he expressed the hope that the translation of 
Aristotle’s works begun by his own translation of the Politics 
should be proceeded with as speedily as possible. The 
College resolved that the funds thus accruing to them should, 
in memory of his services to the College and to Greek 
letters, be applied to the subvention of a series of translations 
of the works of Aristotle. Through the co-operation, financial 
and other, of the Delegates of the University Press it has now 
become possible to begin the realization of this design. | By 
agreement between the College and the Delegates of the Press 
the present editors were appointed to superintend the carrying 
out of the scheme. The series, of which the first instalment 
is now brought before the public, is published at the joint 
expense and risk of the College and the Delegates of the 
Press. 

The editors have secured the co-operation of various 
scholars in the task of translation. The translations make 
no claim to finality, but aim at being such as a scholar might 
construct in preparation for a critical edition and commentary. 
The translation will not presuppose any critical reconstitution 
of the text. Wherever new readings are proposed the fact 

ili 

GENERAL PREFACE 

will be indicated, but notes justificatory of conjectural 
emendations or defensive of novel interpretations will, where 
admitted, be reduced to the smallest compass. The editors, 
while retaining a general right of revision and annotation, 
will leave the responsibility for each translation to its author, 
whose name will in all cases be given. 

J.A.S. 
W. Ὁ. Ε. 

wih “«“αὦἪ @@ - ὃ ΄ῃΞῸ᾿ 

METAPHYSICA 

BY 
W. D. ROSS 

| TO 
INGRAM BYWATER 

PREFACE 

WITH the permission of Messrs. Teubner I have followed in 
this translation the text of W. Christ (Leipzig, 1895). All 
divergences from his readings have been mentioned in the 
notes, except that I have frequently left it to the rendering 
itself to show that I have not followed his punctuation or his 
excisions. The commentaries of Alexander and Bonitz have 
been my greatest help; but I owe much also to Bullinger’s 
notes, and to the translation of Book Z, chaps. i-xi, by 
the late Mr. Richard Shute. 

I wish to acknowledge my deep obligations to Mr. Bywater 
and Prof. Cook Wilson, whose opinions on several difficult pas- 
sages have been most kindly placed at my disposal ; tothe mem- 
bers of the Oxford Aristotelian Society, for what I learnt from 
them during our reading of Books M and N;; to Mr. H. H. 
Joachim, Fellow of Merton College, for the loan of his valuable 
notes on Books Z, H, and ©; to Mr. C. Cannan, Secretary to 
the Delegates of the University Press, and Mr. R. P. Hardie, of 
Edinburgh University, whose comments on various parts of 
the work have been of the greatest assistance to me; to my 
co-editor Mr. J. A. Smith, and to Dr. G. R. T. Ross, who have 
read the whole book both in manuscript and in proof, and 
whose suggestions I have adopted in countless passages; and 
to my wife, who has read the whole book in proof, and has 
aided me very greatly in points of style. 

W. Ὁ. ΚΕ. 

vil 

CH. 
ας The advance from sensation through memory, experience, and art, to 

- CONTENTS 

A. 

theoretical knowledge. 

. Characteristics of ‘ wisdom’ (philosophy). 
. The successive recognition by earlier philosophers of the material, 

efficient, and final causes. 

. Inadequacy of the treatment of these causes. 
. The Pythagorean and Eleatic schools ; the former recognizes vaguely 

the formal cause. 

. The Platonic philosophy ; it uses only the material and formal causes. 
. The relation of the various systems to the four causes. 

. Criticism of the pre-Platonic philosophers. 

. Criticism of the doctrine of Ideas. 

. The history of philosophy reveals no causes other than the four. 

. General considerations about the study of philosophy. 

2. There cannot be an infinite series, nor an infinite variety of kinds, of 

3. 

4. 

5. 

Causes, 

. Different methods are appropriate to different studies. 

B. 

. Sketch of the main problems of philosophy. 
. Fuller statement of the problems :— 

(i) Can one science treat of all the four causes ? 
(ii) Are the primary axioms treated of by the science of substance, 
and if not, by what science? 
(iii) Can one science treat of all substances? 
(iv) Does the science of substance treat also of its attributes? 
(v) Are there any non-sensible substances, and if so, of how many 
kinds? 
(vi) Are the genera, or the constituent parts, of things their first 
principles ? 
(vii) If the genera, is it the highest genera or the lowest? 
(viii) Is there anything apart from individual things? 
(ix) Is each of the first principles one in kind, or in number? 
(x) Are the principles of perishable and of imperishable things the 
same? 
(xi) Are being and unity substances or attributes? 
(xii) Are the objects of mathematics substances ἢ 
1X 

CH. 
6. 

= 
° 

DO ON ANUAWwW ἢ 

=~ 

10. 

CONTENTS 

(xiii) Do Ideas exist, as well as sensible things and the objects of 
mathematics ἢ 
(xiv) Do the first principles exist potentially or actually ? 
(xv) Are the first principles universal or individual ? 

r. 

. Our object is the study of being as such. 
. We must therefore study primary being (viz. substance), unity and 

plurality, and the derivative contraries, and the attributes of being 
and of substance. 

. We must study also the primary axioms, and especially the law of 

contradiction. 

. Fatal difficulties involved in the denial of this law. 
. The connexion of such denial with Protagoras’ doctrine of relativity ; 

the doctrine refuted. 

. Further refutation of Protagoras. 

The law of excluded middle defended. 

. All judgements are not true, nor are all false; all things are not at 

rest, nor are all in motion. 

A. 

Philosophical Lexicon. 
‘ Beginning.’ 

. ‘Cause.’ . 
. 'Element.’ 

‘Nature.’ 

. ‘ Necessary.’ 

‘One.’ ‘Many,’ 
‘ Being.’ 

. ‘Substance.’ 
. *Thesame.’ ‘Other.’ ‘Different.’ ‘Like. ‘ Unlike.’ 
. ‘Opposite.’ ‘Contrary.’ ‘Other in species.’ ‘The same in species.’ 

‘Prior. ‘Posterior.’ 

. *Potency.’? ‘Capable. ‘Incapacity.’ ‘Incapable.’ ‘Possible.’ ‘Im- 

possible.’ 

. ‘Quantity.’ 

. ‘Quality.’ 

. ‘Relative.’ 

. ‘Complete.’ 

. § Limit.’ 

. ° That in virtue of which.’ ‘In virtue of itself.’ 

‘ Disposition.’ 

. ‘Having’ or ‘habit’ (és). - 
. ‘Affection.’ 

. §Privation.’ 

. ‘Have’ or ‘hold’ (ἔχειν). “Βε in.’ 

. ‘From.’ 

x 

CH 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 

CONTENTS 

© Part,’ 

‘Whole.’ ‘Total.’ ‘All.’ 

‘ Mutilated.’ 

‘Race’ or ‘genus’ (γένος). ‘ Other in genus.’ 
‘False.’ . 

* Accident.’ 

E. 

. Distinction of ‘theology’, the science of being as such, from the other 

theoretical sciences, mathematics and physics. 

. Four senses of ‘being’. Of these (i) accidental being is the object 

of no science. 

. The nature and origin of accident. 
. (ii) Being as truth is not primary being. 

Ζ. 

. The study of being is primarily the study of substance. 

2. Various opinions on the question, what things are substances ? 

. Four things are commonly held to be substantial—the essence, the 

universal, the genus, the substratum. The last may be conceived 
as matter, form, or the concrete individual. Reasons why matter 
and the concrete individual cannot be primary substance. Form 
to be studied first in sensible things. 

. What is essence and to what does it belong, i.e. what things can be 

' defined? Primarily substance. 

. Combinations of a subject with one of its proper attributes have no 

definition nor essence. 

. Is a thing the same as its essence? Yes, if it is a substance. 

Analysis of generation, whether by nature, art, or spontaneity. 

. Form is not generated, but put into matter; yet it did not previously 

exist apart—the agent in generation is form embodied in another 
individual of the same species, 

. Why spontaneous generation sometimes takes place. The conditions 

of generation in the categories other than substance. 

. When are definitions of the parts included in the definition of the 

whole? When the parts are parts of the form. 

. Which parts are parts of the form, which of the concrete individual ? 
. Wherein consists the unity of an object of definition? In the appro- 

priateness of the differentia to the genus. 

. A universal cannot be either the substance or an element in the sub- 

stance of anything (yet how else can a thing be defined ?). 

. Hence it is fatal to make Ideas substances and yet hold that they are 

composed of other Ideas. 

. No individual can be defined, whether sensible or, like the Ideas, 

intelligible. 

. The parts of sensible things are only potencies. Unity and being 

are not the substance of things. 
xi 

CONTENTS 

CH. 
17. Substance is the cause or form which puts matter into a determinate 

state; it is that in a thing which is distinct from its material 

elements. 
H. 
1. The discussion of sensible substances continued. Their matter is 
itself substance. 

2. The main types of form or actuality. Definitions of matter, of form, 
and of the concrete individual distinguished. 

3. Form distinguished from the material elements; Antisthenes’ attack 
on definition ; definition analogous to number. 

4. Remote and proximate matter; the substratum of attributes not matter 
but the concrete individual. 

5. The relation of matter to its contrary states. 

6. What gives unity to a definition? The fact that the genus is simply the 
potency of the differentia, the differentia the actuality of the genus. 

Θ. 

1. Being as potency and actuality. Potency in the strict sense, as 
. potency of motion, active or passive. 

2. Non-rational potencies are single, rational potencies twofold. 

3. Potency defended against the attack of the Megaric school. 

4. Potency as possibility. 

5. How potency is acquired, and the conditions of its actualization. 

6. Actuality distinguished from potency; a‘ special type of potency 
described ; actuality distinguished from movement. 

7. When one thing may be called the potency or matter of another ; 
how things are described by names derived from their matter 
or their accidents. 

8. Actuality prior to potency in definition, time, and substantiality ; 
nothing eternal or necessary is a mere potency. 

9. Good actuality better than potency, and bad actuality worse ; therefore 
no separate evil principle in the universe. Geometrical truths 
found by actualization of potencies. 

10. Being as truth, with regard to both simple and composite objects. 

I, 

I. Four kinds of unit ; the essence of a unit is to be a measure of quantity 
or of quality ; various types of measure. 

2. Unity not a substance but a universal predicate; its denotation the 
same as that of being. 

3. Unity and plurality ; identity; likeness ; otherness; difference. 

4. Contrariety is complete difference; how related to privation and 
contradiction. 

5. The opposition of the equal to the great and the small. 

6. The opposition of the one to the many. 

Xi 

CONTENTS 

CH. 

7. Intermediates are homogeneous with each other and with the 
extremes, stand between contraries, and are compounded out of 
these contraries. 

8. Otherness 7% species is otherness of the genus and is contrariety ; 
its nature further described. 

g. What contrarieties constitute otherness in species. 

10. The perishable and the imperishable differ in kind. 

Κ, 
1, Recapitulation of B. 2, 3. 
2. ,9 Β. 4-6. 
3. " Yr. 1, 2. 
4. 99 Yr. 3 
5. 99 r. 4. 
6. » Γ, 5-8 
7. 9 Ἑ.1. 
8. ” E, 2-4. 

Extracts from Physics: 
9. II. 5, 6, on luck. 
III. 1-3, on potency, actuality, and movement. 
10. IV. 4, 5, 7, on the infinite; there is no actual infinite, and 
especially no infinite body. 
11, V. 1, on change and movement. 
12. V. 2, 3, on the three kinds of movement. 
Definitions of ‘together in place’, ‘apart’, ‘touch’, ‘between’, 
‘contrary in place’, ‘successive ’, ‘ contiguous ’, ‘continuous ’. 

A. 

1. Substance the primary subject of inquiry. Three kinds of substance— 
perishable sensible, eternal sensible, and unmovable (non- 
sensible). 

2. Change implies not only form and privation but matter. 

3. Neither matter nor form comes into being. Whatever comes into 
being comes from a substance of the same kind. If form ever 
exists apart from the concrete individual, it is in the case of 
natural objects. 

4. Different things have elements numerically different but the same 
in kind; they all have form, privation, and matter. They also 
have a proximate and an ultimate moving cause. _ . 

5. Again actuality and potency are principles common to all things, 
though they apply differently in different cases. The principles of 
all things are only analogous, not identical. 

6. Since movement must be eternal, there must be an eternal mover, 
and one whose essence is actuality (actuality being prior to 
potency). To account for the uniform change in the universe, 

ΧΙ 

CONTENTS 
CH. 
there must be one principle which acts always alike, and one 
whose ‘action varies. 

7. The eternal mover originates motion by being the primary object of 
desire (as it is of thought); being thoroughly actual, it cannot 
change or move; it is a living being, perfect, separate from 
sensible things, and without parts. 

8. Besides the first mover there must be as many unmoved movers 
as there are simple motions involved in the motions of the planets. 
The number is probably either 49 or 55. As there is but one 
prime mover, there must be but one heaven. 

9. The divine thought must be concerned with the most divine object, 
which is itself. Thought and the object of thought are never 
different when the object is immaterial. 

10. How the good is present in the universe both as the order of the parts 
and (more primarily) as their ruler. Difficulties which attend the 
views of other philosophers. 

M. 

1, We pass to immaterial substance. Two kinds of immaterial 
substances have been believed in, mathematical objects and 
Ideas. We shall discuss first the former, then the latter, then 
the view that numbers and Ideas are the substance of sensible 
things. 

2. (1) Mathematical objects cannot exist as distinct substances either in 
or apart from sensible things. 

3. They can be separated only in thought. Mathematics is not entirely 
divorced from consideration of the beautiful, as is sometimes 
alleged. 

4. (11) Arguments which led to the belief in Ideas. Some prove too 
little, others too much. . 

5. Even if there were Ideas, they would not explain the changes in the 
sensible world. 

6. (iii) Various ways in which numbers may be conceived as the substance 
of things. . 

7. (a) If all units are addible, this gives only mathematical, not ideal 
number. (ὁ) If all units are inaddible, this gives neither mathe- 
matical nor ideal number. (c) If only the units in the same 
number are addible, this leads to equal difficulties; units must 
have no difference of kind. 

8. The views of Platonists who disagree with Plato, and those of the 
Pythagoreans, lead to equal difficulties. Further objections to 
ideal numbers: (4) How are the units derived from the indefinite 
dyad? (4) Is the series of numbers infinite or finite ; and if finite, 
what is its limit? (c) What sort of principle is the one? 

g. Discussion of the principles of geometrical objects. Criticism of the 
generation of numbers from unity and plurality, and of spatial 

X1V 

CONTENTS 
CH. 
magnitudes from similar principles. The criticism of ideal 
numbers summed up, The upholders of Ideas make them at once 
universal and individual. | 
10. Are the first principles of substances individual or universal ? 

N. 

1. The principles cannot be contraries. The Platonists in making them 
contraries treated one of the contraries as matter. Various forms 
of this theory. The nature of unity and plurality expounded. 

2. Eternal substances cannot be compounded out of elements. The 
object of the Platonists is to explain the presence of plurality in 
the world, but in this they do not succeed. What justifies the 
belief in the separate existence of numbers? 

3. Difficulties in the various theories of number. The Pythagoreans 
ascribe generation to numbers, which are eternal. 

4. The relation between the first principles and the good. 

5. How is number supposed to be derived from its elements? How is it 
the cause of substances ὃ 

6. The causal agency ascribed to numbers is purely fanciful. 

XV 

BOOK I (a) 

CHAPTER I 

ALL men by nature desire to know. An indication of this 980 
is the delight we take in our senses; for even apart from 
their usefulness they are loved for themselves ; and above all 
others the sense of sight. For not only with a view to action, 
but even when we are not going to do anything, we prefer 25 
sight to almost everything else. The reason is that this, 
most of all the senses, makes us know and brings to light 
many differences between things. 

By nature animals are born with the faculty of sensation, 
and from sensation memory is produced in some of them, 
though not in others. And therefore the former are more 980° 
intelligent and apt at learning than those which cannot re- 
member; those which are incapable of hearing sounds are 
intelligent though they cannot be taught, e.g. the bee, and 
any other race of animals that may be like it; and those which 
besides memory have this sense of hearing, can be taught. 

The animals other than man live by appearances and 25 
memories, and have but little of connected experience; 
but the human race lives also by art and reasonings. And 
from memory experience is produced in men; for many 
memories of the same thing produce finally the capacity for 
a single experience. Experience is almost identified with 981° 
science and art, but really science and art come to men 
through experience; for ‘experience made art’, as Polus 
says,’ and rightly, ‘but inexperience luck.’ And art arises, 5 
when from many notions gained by experience one universal 
judgement about a class of objects is produced. For to have 
a judgement that when Callias was ill of this disease this 
did him good, and similarly in the case of Socrates and in 
many individual cases, is a matter of experience; but to τὸ 

1 Cf. Gorgias, 448 C. 

AR, MET. B 

981" METAPHYSICA 

judge that it has done good to all persons of a certain 
constitution, marked off in one class, when they were ill of 
this disease, e. g. to phlegmatic or bilious people when burning 
with fever 1—this is a matter of art. 
With a view to action experience seems in no respect in- 
ferior to art, and we even see men of experience succeeding 
15 more than those who have theory without experience.| The 
reason is that experience is knowledge of individuals, art of 
universals, and actions and productions are all concerned with 
the individual ; for the physician does not cure man, except 
in an incidental way, but Callias or Socrates or some other 
ao called by some such individual name, who happens to be 
aman. If, then, a man has the theory without the experience, 
and knows the universal but does not know the individual 
included in this, he will often fail to cure; for it is the in- 
dividual that is to be cured. But yet we think that Anow- 
ledge and understanding belong to art rather than to experi- 
a5ence, and we suppose artists to be wiser than men of 
experience (which implies that Wisdom depends in all cases 
rather on knowledge); and this because the former know the 
cause, but the latter do not. For men of experience know 
that the thing is so, but do not know why, while the others 
80 know the ‘why’ and the cause. Hence we think that the 
master-workers in each craft are more honourable and know 
in a truer sense and are wiser than the manual workers, 
981" because they know the causes of the things that are done 
[we think the manual workers are like certain lifeless things 
which act indeed, but act without knowing what they do, as 
fire burns,—but while the lifeless things perform each of their 
functions by a natural tendency, the labourers perform them 
5 through habit]?; thus we view them as being wiser not in 
virtue of being able to act, but of having the theory for 
themselves and knowing the causes. And in general it is 
a sign of the man who knows, that he can teach, and there- 
fore we think art more truly knowledge than experience is ; 
for artists can teach, and men of mere experience cannot. 
1 981% 12 read χολώδεσι πυρέττουσι καύσῳ (following H. Jackson, J. of P. 

vi, 206). 
2 9815 2 rots... 5 ἔθος is probably a later addition. 

A. BOOK I. 981" 

Again, we do not regard any of the senses as Wisdom ; 10 
yet surely these give the most authoritative knowledge of 
particulars. But they do not tell us the ‘why’ of anything — 
e.g. why fire is hot; they only say that it is hot. 

At first he who invented any art that went beyond the 
common perceptions of man was naturally admired by men, 
not only because there was something useful in the inventions, 13 
but because he was thought wise and superior to the rest. 
But as more arts were invented, and some were directed to 
the necessities of life, others to its recreation, the inventors of 
the latter were naturally always regarded as wiser than the 
inventors of the former, because their branches of knowledge 
did not aim at utility. Hence when all such inventions were 20 
already established, the sciences which do not aim at giving 
pleasure or at the necessities of life were discovered, and first 
in the places where men first began to have leisure. This is 
why the mathematical arts were founded in Egypt ; for there 
the priestly caste was allowed to be at leisure. 

We have said in the Ethics! what the difference is between 25 
art and science and the other kindred faculties; but the point 
of our present discussion is this, that all men suppose what is 
called Wisdom to deal with the first causes and the principles 
of things. This is why, as has been said before, the man of 30 
experience is thought to be wiser than the possessors of any 
perception whatever, the artist wiser than the men of experi- 
ence, the master-worker than the mechanic, and the theoretical 
kinds of knowledge to be more of the nature of Wisdom than 
the productive. Clearly then Wisdom - ‘is knowledge about t 982" 
certain causes and principles. 

CHAPTER II 

Since we are seeking this knowledge, we must inquire of 5 
what kind are the causes and the principles, the knowledge 
of which is Wisdom. ‘If we were to take the notions we have . 
about the wise man, this might perhaps make the ‘answer 
more’ evident. We suppose first, then, that the wise man 
knows all things, as far as » possible, although he has not 

a ‘vi. 3-7. 
Ba 

982° | METAPHYSICA 

το knowledge of each of them in detail; secondly, that he who 
can learn things that are difficult, and not easy for man to 
know, is wise (sense-perception is common to all, and there- 
fore easy and no mark of Wisdom); again, he who is more 
exact and more capable of teaching the causes is wiser, in 
every branch of knowledge ; and of the sciences, also, that 

15 which is desirable on its own account and for the sake of 
knowing it is more of the nature of Wisdom than that which 
is desirable on account of its results, and the superior science 
is more of the nature of Wisdom than the ancillary; for the 
wise man must not be ordered but must order, and he must 
not obey another, but the less wise must obey 4zm. 

30 ouch and so many are the notions, then, which we have 
about Wisdom and the wise. Now of these characteristics 
that of knowing all things must belong to him who has in 
the highest degree universal knowledge; for he knows in 
a sense all the subordinate objects. And these things, the 
most universal, are on the whole the hardest for men to know ; 

25 for they are furthest from the senses. And the most exact 
of the sciences are those which deal most with first principles ; 
for those which involve fewer principles are more exact than 
those which involve additional principles, e.g. arithmetic 
than geometry. But the science which investigates causes 
is also the more communicable, for the people who teach are 

30 those who tell the causes of each thing. And understanding 
and knowledge pursued for their own sake are found most in 
the knowledge of that which is most knowable ; for he who 
chooses to know for the sake of knowing will choose most 

982° readily that which is most truly knowledge, and such is the 
knowledge of that which is most knowable; and the first 
principles and the causes are most knowable; for by reason 
of these, and from these, all other things are known, but these 
are not known by means of the things subordinate to them. 
And the science which knows to what end each thing must 

s be done is the most authoritative of the sciences, and more 
authoritative than any ancillary science; and this end is the 
good in each class, and in general the supreme good in the 
whole of nature. Judged by all the tests we have mentioned, 
then, the name in question (‘Wisdom’) falls to the same 

A. BOOK I 982° 

science; this must be a science that investigates the first 
principles and causes; for the good, i.e. the end and aim, 
is one of the causes.. 

That it is not a science of production is clear even from 10 
the history of the earliest philosophers. For it is owing to 
their wonder that men both now begin and at first began to 
philosophize ; they wondered originally at the obvious diffi- 
culties, then advanced little by little and stated difficulties 
about the greater matters, e.g. about the phenomena of the 15 
moon and those of the sun, and about the stars and about 
the genesis of the universe. And a man who is puzzled and 
wonders thinks himself ignorant (whence even the lover of 
myth is in a sense a lover of Wisdom, for the myth is com- 
posed of wonders); therefore since they philosophized in 
order to escape from ignorance, evidently they were pursuing 20 
science in order to: know, and not for any utilitarian end. 
And this is confirmed by the facts; for it was when almost 
all the necessities of life and the things that make for comfort 
and recreation were present, that such knowledge began to be 
. sought. Evidently then we do not seek it for the sake of any 
other advantage ; but as the man is free, we say, who exists 25 
for himself and not for another, so we pursue this as the only 
free science, for it alone exists for itself. 

Hence the possession of it might be justly regarded as 
beyond human power ; for in many ways human nature is in 
bondage, so that according to Simonides? ‘God alone can 
have this privilege’, and it is unfitting that man should not be 30 
content to seek the knowledge that is suited to him. If, then, 
there is something in what the poets say, and jealousy is 
natural to the divine power, it would probably occur in this 983° 
case above all, and all who excelled in this knowledge would 
be unfortunate. But the divine power cannot be jealous (nay, 
according to the proverb, ‘ bards tell many a lie’), nor should 
any science be thought more honourable than one of this sort. " 
For the most divine science is also most honourable ; and 5 
this science alone is, in two ways, most divine. For the 

1 982° 26 read αὐτὴν ὡς μόνην οὖσαν ἐλευθέραν. 
3 Fr. 3 Hiller. 
5 Solon, fr. 26 Hiller. 

983° . METAPHYSICA 

science which ‘it would be most meet for God to have is 
a divine science, and so is any science that deals with divine 
objects ; and this science alone has both these qualities; for 
(1) God is thought to be among the causes of all things and 
to be a first principle, and (2) such a science either God alone 

ro can have, or God above all others. All the sciences, indeed, 
are more necessary than this, but none 15 better. 

‘Yet the acquisition of it must in a sense end in something 
which is the opposite of our original inquiries. For all 
men begin, as we said, by wondering that the matter is 
so (as those who have not yet perceived the explanation 

Παρ marvel at automatic marionettes)—whether the object of 
their wonder be the solstices or the incommensurability of the 
diagonal of a square with the side; for it seems wonderful to 
all men that there is a thing which cannot be measured even 
by the smallest unit. But we must end in the contrary and, 
according to the proverb, the better state, as is the case in 
these instances when men learn the cause; for there is nothing 
which would surprise a geometer so much as if the diagonal 
turned out to be commensurable. 

20 We have stated, then, what is the nature of the science we 
are searching for, and what is the mark which our search and 
our whole investigation must reach. 

CHAPTER III 

Evidently we have to acquire knowledge of the original 

ag causes (for we say we know each thing only when we think 
we recognize its first cause), and causes are spoken of in four 
senses. In one of these we mean the substance, i.e. the essence 
(for the ‘ why ’ is reducible finally to the formula, and the ulti- 
mate ‘ why’ is a cause and principle) ; in another the matter 
20 or substratum, in a third the source of the change, and ina 
fourth the cause opposed to this, the purpose and the good 
(for this is the end of all generation and change). We have 
studied these causes sufficiently in our work on nature,! 
983” but yet let us call to our aid those who have attacked the 

1 Phys. ii. 3,7. 

A. BOOK I 983° 

investigation of being and philosophized about reality before 
us. For obviously they too speak of certain principles and 
causes ; to go over their views, then, will be of profit to the 
present inquiry, for we shall either find another kind of cause, 
or be more convinced of the correctness of those which we 
now maintain. 

Of the first philosophers, most thought the principles which 
were of the nature of matter were the only principles of all 
things ; that of which all things that are consist, and from which 
they first come to be, and into which they are finally resolved 
(the substance remaining, but changing in its modifications), 
this they say is the element and the principle of things, and 
therefore they think nothing is either generated or destroyed, 
since this sort of entity is always conserved, as we say Socrates 
neither comes to be absolutely when he comes to be beautiful 
or musical, nor ceases to be when he loses these character- 15 
istics, because the substratum, Socrates himself, remains. So 
they say nothing else comes to be or ceases to be; for there 
must be some entity—either one or more than one—from 
which all other things come to be, it being conserved. 

Yet they do not all agree as to the number and the nature 
of these principles. Thales, the founder of this school of 20 
philosophy, says the principle is water (for which reason he 
declared that the earth rests on water), getting the notion 
perhaps from seeing that the nutriment of all things is moist, 
and that heat itself is generated from the moist and kept alive 
by it (and that from which they come to be is a principle of 
all things), He got his notion from this fact, and from the 25 
fact that the seeds of all things have a moist nature, and that 
water is the origin of the nature of moist things. 

Some think that the ancients who lived long before the 
present generation, and first framed accounts of the gods, had 
a similar view of nature ; for they made Ocean and Tethys 30 
the parents of creation, and described the oath of the gods as 
being by water, which the poets themselves call Styx; for 
what is oldest is most honourable, and the most honourable 
thing is that by which one swears. It may perhaps be 
uncertain whether this opinion about nature is primitive and 984° 
ancient, but Thales at any rate is said to have declared him- 

an 

ong 

ο 

984" METAPHYSICA 

self thus about the first cause. Hippo no one would think fit 
to include among these thinkers, because of the paltriness of 
his thought. 

5 Anaximenes and Diogenes make air prior to water, andthe 
most primary of the simple bodies, while Hippasus of Meta- 
pontium and Heraclitus of Ephesus say this of fire, and 
Empedocles says it of the four elements, adding a fourth— 
earth—to those which have been named ; for these, he says, 

10 always remain and do not come to be, except that they come 
to be more or fewer, being aggregated into one and segregated 
out of one. 

Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, who, though older than Empe- 
docles, was later in his philosophical activity, says the principles 
are infinite in number ; for he says almost all the things that 
are made of parts like themselves are generated and destroyed 

15 (as water or fire is) only by aggregation and segregation, and 
are not in any other sense generated or destroyed, but remain 
eternally. 

From these facts one might think that the only cause is the 
so-called material cause; but as men thus advanced, the very 
facts showed them the way and joined in forcing them to 
investigate the subject. However true it may be that all 

ao generation and destruction proceed from some one or more 
elements, why does this happen and what is the cause? For 
at least the substratum itself does not make itself change; 
e.g. neither the wood nor the bronze causes the change of 
either of them, nor does the wood manufacture a bed and the 

2s bronze a statue, but something else is the cause of the change. 
And to seek this is to seek the second cause, as we should 
say,—that from which comes the beginning of the movement. 
Now those who at the very beginning set themselves to this 
kind of inquiry, and said the substratum was one, were not at 
all dissatisfied with themselves; but some at least of those 
30 who maintain it to be one—as though defeated by this search 
for the second cause—say the one and nature as a whole is 
unchangeable not only in respect of generation and destruc- 
tion (for this is a primitive belief, and all agreed in it), but 
also of all other change ; and this view is peculiar to them. 
984> Of those who said the universe was one, none succeeded in 

A. BOOK I 984° 

discovering a cause of this sort, except perhaps Parmenides, and 
he only insomuch that he supposes that there is not only one 
but in some sense two causes. But for those who make more 5 
elements it is more possible to state the second cause, e.g. for 
those who make hot and cold, or fire and earth, the elements ; 
for they treat fire as having a nature which fits it to move 
things, and water and earth and such things they treat in the 
contrary way. 

When these men and the principles of this kind had had 
their day, as the latter were found inadequate to generate the 
nature of things, men were again forced by the truth itself, as 
we said, to inquire into the next kind of cause. For surely it 
is not likely either that fire or earth or any such element 
should be the reason why things manifest goodness and beauty. 
both in their being and in their coming to be, or that those - 
thinkers should have supposed it was; nor again could it be 
right to ascribe so great a matter to spontaneity and luck. 
When one man said, then, that reason was presen{—as in 
animals, so throughout nature—as the cause of the world and 
of all its order, he seemed like a sober man in contrast with the 
random talk of his predecessors. We know that Anaxagoras 
certainly adopted these views, but Hermotimus of Clazomenae 
is credited with expressing them earlier. Those who thought 
thus stated that there is a principle of things which is at the 
same time the cause of beauty, and that sort of cause from 
which things acquire movement. | 

/ 

CHAPTER IV 

One might suspect that Hesiod was the first to look for 
such a thing—or some one else who put love or desire among 
existing things as a principle, as Parmenides does ; for he, in 25 
constructing the genesis of the universe, says ! :— 

Love first of all the Gods she planned. 
And Hesiod says? :— 

0 

μά 

[| 

5 

Oo 

First of all things was chaos made, and then 
Broad-breasted earth, and love that foremost is 
Among all the immortals, 

1 Fr. 13, Diels, Vorsokratiker. 2 Theog. 116. 

98 

98 

4? METAPHYSICA 

30 which implies that among existing things there must be from the 
first a cause which will move things and bring them together. 
How these thinkers should be arranged with regard to priority 
of discovery let us be allowed to decide later; but since the 
contraries of the various forms of good were also perceived to 
be present in nature—not only order and the beautiful, but 

5° also disorder and the ugly, and bad things in greater number 
than good, and ignoble things than beautiful, therefore another 
thinker introduced friendship and strife, each of the two the 
cause of one of these two sets of qualities. For if we were to 
follow out the view of Empedocles, and interpret it according 

5 to its meaning and not to its lisping expression, we should 
find that friendship is the cause of good things, and strife of 
bad. Therefore, if we said that Empedocles in a sense both 
mentions, and is the first to mention, the bad and the good as 
principles, we should perhaps be right, since the cause of all ᾿ 

10 goods is the good itself. 

These thinkers, as we say, evidently grasped, and to this 
extent, two of the causes which we distinguished in our work 
on nature?—the matter and the source of the movement,— 
vaguely, however, and with no clearness, but as untrained 
men behave in fights; for they go round their opponents 

15 and often strike fine blows, but they do not fight on scientific 
principles, and so these thinkers do not seem to know what they 
say; for it is evident that, as a rule, they make no use of their 
causes except to a small extent. For Anaxagoras uses 
reason as a deus ex machina for the making of the world, and 
when he is at a loss to tell for what cause something neces- 

a0 Sarily is, then he drags reason in, but in all other cases ascribes 
events to anything rather than to reason?. And Empedocles, 
though he uses the causes to a greater extent than this, neither 
does so sufficiently nor attains consistency in their use. At 
least, in many cases he makes friendship segregate things, and 

25 strife aggregate them. For when the universe is dissolved 
into its elements by strife, fire is aggregated into one, and so 
is each of the other elements; but when again under the 
influence of friendship they come together into one, the parts 
must again be segregated out of each element. 

1 Phys. ii. 3,7. 2 Cf. Diels, Vorsokratiker, ed. 2, p. 303. 42. 

A. BOOK I 985" 

Empedocles, then, in contrast with his predecessors, was the 
first to introduce this cause in a divided form, not positing one 30 
source of movement, but different and contrary sources. Again, 
he was the first to speak of four material elements ; yet he 
does not use four, but treats them as two only ; he treats fire 985° 
by itself, and its opposites—earth, air, and water—as one kind 
of thing. We may learn this by study of his verses. 

This philosopher then, as we say, spoke of the principles in 
this way, and made them of this number. Leucippus and his 
associate Democritus say that the full and the empty are the 5 
elements, calling the one being and the other non-being—the 
full and solid being being, the empty and the rare non-being 
(whence they say being is no more being than non-being is, 
because the solid is no more being than the empty”); and they 
make these the material causes of things. And as those who 10 
make the underlying substance one generate all other things 
by its modifications, supposing the rare and the dense to be 
the sources of the modifications, in the same way these philo- 
sophers say the differences in the elements are the causes of 
all other qualities. These differences, they say, are three— 
shape and order and position. For they say the real is rs 
differentiated only by ‘rhythm’ and ‘ inter-contact’ and 
‘turning’; and of these rhythm is shape, inter-contact is order, 
and turning is position ; for A differs from N in shape, AN 
from NA in order, πὸ from H in position.2, The question of 
movement—whence or how it belongs to things—thesethinkers, 
like the others, lazily neglected. 

Regarding the two causes, then, as we say, the inquiry seems 20 - 
to have been pushed thus far by the early philosophers. _ —- 

---- 

a 

CHAPTER V 

Contemporaneously with these philosophers and before 
them, the Pythagoreans, as they are called, devoted themselves 
to mathematics ; they were the first to advance this study,’ and 

1 985° 9 read οὐδὲ τοῦ κενοῦ τὸ σῶμα. So perhaps Alexander. 
oe 18 read τὸ δὲ πὶ τοῦ H θέσει. Cf. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, 
1. 

ὃ. 985> 24 read πρῶτοι ταῦτα προήγαγον. 

985° METAPHYSICA 

a5 having been brought up in it they thought its principles were 
the principles of all things. Since of these principles numbers 
are by nature the first, and in numbers they seemed to see 
many resemblances to the things that exist and come into 
being—more than in fire and earth and water (such and such 
30a modification of numbers being justice, another being soul 
and reason, another being opportunity—and similarly almost 
all other things being numerically expressible 1) ; since, again, 
they saw that the attributes and the ratios of the musical 
scales were expressible in numbers; since, then, all other things 
seemed in their whole nature to be modelled after numbers, 
and numbers seemed to.be the first things in the whole of 
986° nature, they supposed the elements of numbers to be the 
elements of all things, and the whole heaven to be a musical 
scale and a number. And all the properties of numbers and 
5 scales which they could show to agree with the attributes and 
parts and the whole arrangement of the heavens, they collected 
and fitted into their scheme ; and if there was a gap anywhere, 
they readily made additions so as to make their whole theory 
coherent. E.g. as the number Io is thought to be perfect 
to and to comprise the whole nature of numbers, they say that 
the bodies which move through the heavens are ten, but as 
the visible bodies are only nine, to meet this they invent a 
tenth—the ‘ counter-earth’. We have discussed these matters 
more exactly elsewhere.’ : 
But the object of our discussion is that we may learn from 
these philosophers also what they suppose to be the principles 
15 and how these fall under the causes we have named. Evidently, 
then, these thinkers also consider that number is the principle 
both as matter for things and as forming their modifications 
and their permanent states, and hold that the elements of 
number are the even and the odd, and of these the former is 
unlimited, and the latter limited ; and the 1 proceeds from both 
20 Of these (for it is both even and odd), and number from the 1 ; 
and the whole heaven, as has been said, is numbers. 
Other members of this same school say there are ten 

1 Cf. Diels, Vorsokratiker, ed. 2, p. 235, § 12 
2 De Coelo, ii. 13; Fr. de Pythagorets, ii. 15132 35-Ὁ 20. Cf. Diels, 
2bid. p. 270. 48. 

A. BOOK I 986" 

principles, which they arrange in two columns of cognates !— 
limit and unlimited, odd and even, one and plurality, right and 
left, male and female, resting and moving, straight and curved, 25 
light and darkness, good and bad, square and oblong. In this 
way Alcmaeon of Croton seems also to have conceived the 
matter, and either he got this view from them or they got it 
from him; for he expressed himself similarly? to them. For 30 
he says most human affairs go in pairs, meaning not definite 
contrarieties such as the Pythagoreans speak of, but any 
chance contrarieties, e.g. white and black, sweet and bitter, 
good and bad, great and small. He threw out indefinite 
suggestions about the other contrarieties, but the Pythagoreans 986° 
declared both how many and which their contrarieties are. 
From both these schools, then, we can learn this much, that 
the contraries are the principles of things; and how many 
these principles are and which they are, we can learn from 
one of the two schools. But how these principles can be 
brought together under the causes we have named has not 5 
been clearly and articulately stated by them; they seem, 

1 gvorotxia and σύστοιχος are used in a great variety of connexions by 
Aristotle, but the common notion is that of things which from some point 
of view may be treated as forming one line or column. The meanings in 
the Metaphysics may be summarized thus :— 

In A. 986% 23, N. 1093 12 the reference is to a Pythagorean classifica- 
tion of important general notions. The first column is the line of good 
(ἡ συστοιχία ἡ τοῦ καλοῦ, N. 1093 12), the second the line of evil. To the line 
of good N. 1093” 13 adds ‘the equal and the powers of certain numbers’. 

In I. 1004 27, Κ. 1066 15, A. 10728 31 there is no explicit reference 
to the Pythagorean doctrine, but Aristotle speaks of two ‘ lines’, one of 
which is ‘ knowable in itself’, while the other 15 ‘ privative’, and its ‘ prin- 
ciples ’ are ‘ indefinite because they are privative ’. 

In I, 1054” 35, 10589 13 we have a different sort of line. Terms which 
in the strict sense ‘ differ’ are said to be either different in genus or in the 
same line of predication, and therefore in the same genus ; and contraries 
which differ in species and not in genus are said to be in the same line of 
predication. συστοιχία τῆς κατηγορίας seems to correspond to σχῆμα τῆς 
κατηγορίας (1054 29), which is said. in A, 1016 33 to be coextensive with 
a γένος, It is surprising to find genus identified with category, and one 
is tempted to suggest that συστοιχία (or σχῆμα) τῆς κατηγορίας Means one 
ofthe main divisions of a category, within which the same sort of predicate 
is found. Thus number would be the genus within which the predicates 
odd and even, and various subordinate predicates, are found. Then the 
subordinate predicates may be thought of as forming a column under ‘odd 
and even.’ But A. 1024} 12-16 shows that genus in one sense cam be 
identified with category. The categories are the only genera proper, 
since they are the only genera which are not species. 

2 986% 29 omit ἐγένετο τὴν ἡλικίαν, ἐπὶ γέροντι Πυθαγόρᾳ, and δέ. 

986° METAPHYSICA 

however, to range the elements under the head of matter ; for 
out of these as immanent parts they say substance is composed 
and moulded. 
From these facts we may sufficiently perceive the meaning 
of the ancients who said the elements of nature were more 
το than one; but there are some who spoke of the universe as if 
it were one entity, though they were not all alike either in the 
excellence of their statement or in regard to the nature of the 
entity. The discussion of them is in no way appropriate to 
our present investigation of causes, for they do not, like some 
of the natural philosophers, assume being to be one and yet 
15 generate it out of the one as out of matter, but they speak in 
another way; those others add change, since they generate 
the universe, but these thinkers say the universe is unchange- 
able. Yet this much is appropriate to the present inquiry: 
Parmenides seems to fasten on that which is one in 
a0 formula, Melissus on that which is one in matter, for which 
reason the former says that it is limited, the latter that it 
is unlimited ?; while Xenophanes, the first of this school of 
monists (for Parmenides is said to have been his pupil), gave 
no clear statement, nor does he seem to have grasped either 
of these two kinds of unity, but he contemplates the whole 
25 heaven and says the One is, namely God. Now these thinkers, 
as we said, must be neglected for the purposes of the present 
inquiry—two of them entirely, as being a little too naive, 
viz. Xenophanes and Melissus; but Parmenides seems to 
speak with somewhat more insight. For, claiming that, 
besides the existent, nothing non-existent exists, he thinks 
20 that the existent is of necessity one and that nothing else exists 
(on this we have spoken more clearly in our work on nature) ὃ, 
but being forced to follow the observed facts, and supposing 
the existence of that which is one in formula, but more than 
one according to our sensations, he now posits two causes and 
two principles, calling them hot and cold, i.e. fire and earth ; 
987" and of these he ranges the hot with the existent, and the 
other with the non-existent.* 
From what has been said, then, and from the wise men who 

1 Cf, Philolaus, Fr. 2, 5,6 Diels, Vorsokratiker. 
2 Cf. iid. Ὁ. 142. 20. 8. Phys. i. 3. * Cf. I. roro0* 1. 

A. BOOK I 987" 

have now sat in council with us, we have got thus much—both 
from the earliest philosophers, who regard the first principle 
as corporeal (for water and fire and such things are bodies), and 
of whom some suppose that there is one corporeal principle, 5 
others that there are more than one, but both put these 
under the head of matter; and from some others who posit 
both this cause and besides this the source of movement, 
which is stated by some as one and by others as two. 

Down to the Italian school, then, and apart from it, philo- 
sophers have treated these subjects rather obscurely !, except τὸ 
that, as we said, they have used two kinds of cause, and one 
of these—the source of movement—some treat as one and 
others as two. But the Pythagoreans have said in the same 
way that there are two principles, but added this much, which 15 
is peculiar to them, that they thought finitude and infinity 
and unity were not attributes of certain other things, e.g. of 
fire or earth or anything else of this kind, but that infinity 
itself and unity itself were the substance of the things of which 
they are predicated. This is why number was the substance 
of all things. On this subject, then, they expressed themselves 
thus; and regarding the question of essence they began to 20 
make statements and definitions, but treated the matter too 
simply. For they both defined superficially and thought that 
the first subject of which a given term would be predicable, 
was the substance of the thing, as if one supposed that ‘double’ 
and ‘2’ were the same, because 2 is the first thing of which 
‘double’ is predicable. But surely to be double and to be 2 25 
are not the same; if they are, one thing will be many ?— 

a consequence which they actually drew.? From the earlier 
philosophers, then, and from their successors we can learn 
thus much. 

CHAPTER VI 

After the systems we have named came the philosophy 
of Plato, which in most respects followed these thinkers, 30 

_ 1 9879 10 read μορυχώτερον. 

2 i.e. 2 will be identified with each even number. 

δ᾽ e.g. as friendship was 4, and 4 was the first square number, friendship 
was identified with each square number, 

987" ᾿ METAPHYSICA 

but had peculiarities that distinguished it from the philosophy 
of the Italians. For, having in his youth first become familiar 
with Cratylus and with the Heraclitean doctrines (that all 
sensible things are ever in a state of flux and there is no know- 
ledge about them), these views he held even in later years. 
987" Socrates, however, was busying himself about ethical matters 
and neglecting the world of nature as a whole but seeking the 
universal in these ethical matters, and fixed thought for 
the first time on definitions; Plato accepted his teaching, 
5 but held that the problem applied not to any sensible thing 
but to entities of another kind—for this reason, that the 
common definition could not be a definition of any sensible 
thing, as they were always changing. Things of this other 
sort, then, he called Ideas, and sensible things, he said, were 
apart from these, and were all called after these; for the 
multitude of things which have the same name as the Form 
10 exist by participation in it. Only the name ‘participation’ 
was new; for the Pythagoreans say that things exist by 
‘imitation’ of numbers, and Plato says they exist by partici- 
pation, changing the name. But what the participation or 
the imitation of the Forms could be they left an open question. 
Further, besides sensible things and Forms he says there 
15 are the objects of mathematics, which occupy an intermediate 
position, differing from sensible things in being eternal and 
unchangeable, from Forms in that there are many alike, while 
the Form itself is in each case unique. . 
Since the Forms are the causes of all other things, he 
20 thought their elements were the elements of all things. As 
matter, the great and the small were principles; as essential 
reality, the One; for from the great and the small, by 
participation in the One, come the Forms—i.e. the Numbers. 
But he agreed with the Pythagoreans in saying that the 
One is substance and not a predicate of something else ; and 
in saying that the Numbers are the causes of the reality of 
25. other things, he also agreed with them ; but positing a dyad - 
and constructing the infinite out of great and small, instead 
of treating the infinite as one, is peculiar to him; and so is his 
view that the Numbers exist apart from sensible things, while — 
they say that the things themselves are Numbers, and do not 

A. BOOK I 987° 

place the objects of mathematics between Ideas and 
sensible things. His divergence from the Pythagoreans in 30 
making the One and the Numbers separate from things, and his 
introduction of the Forms, were due to his inquiries in the 
region of definitory formulae (for the earlier thinkers had no 
tincture of dialectic), and his making the other entity besides 
the One a dyad was due to the belief that the numbers, 
except those which were prime,! could be neatly produced 
out of the dyad as out of a plastic material. 

Yet what happens isthe contrary; the theory is not a reason- 988° 
able one. For they make many things out of the matter, 
and the form generates only once, but what we observe is 
that one table is made from one matter, while the man who 
applies the form, though he is one, makes many tables. And 5 
the relation of the male to the female is similar ; for the latter 
is impregnated by one copulation, but the male impregnates 
many females ; yet these are analogues of those first principles. 

Plato, then, declared himself thus on the points in question ; 
it is evident from what has been said that he has used only 
two causes, that of the essence and the material cause (for the τὸ 
Forms are the cause of the essence of all other things, and the 
One is the cause of the essence of the Forms) ; and it is evident 
what the underlying matter is, of which the Forms are predi- 
cated in the case of sensible things, and the One in the case 
of Forms, viz. that this is a dyad, the great and the small. 
Further, he has assigned the cause of good and that of evil to 
the elements, one to each of the two, as we say? some of his 15 
predecessors sought to do, e.g. Empedocles and Anaxagoras, 

CHAPTER VII 

Our account of those who have spoken about first principles 
and reality and of the way in which they have spoken, has been 

1 This is not quite accurate. Really it is only powers of 2 that could 
be neatly produced out of this 1 and the indefinite dyad; cf. N. 1091 9. 
In Parmenides 143 C-144 A 3 15 derived from 1 and 2 (the number 2, not, 
as Aristotle says, the indefinite 2) by addition, and the numbers higher 
than 3 are derived from 2 and 3 by multiplication. Primes are not there 
excepted; Plato speaks as if all the higher numbers could be got by 
multiplication. Nothing in the works of Plato corresponds exactly to 
what Aristotle says here. 

3 Cf. 984° 18, 985° 4. 

AR. MET. ς 

988" METAPHYSICA 

20 concise and summary ; but yet we have learnt this much from 
them, that of those who speak about ‘ principle’ and ‘ cause’ 
no one has mentioned any principle except those which have 
been distinguished in our work on nature,! but all evidently 
have some inkling of ¢em, though only vaguely. For some 
speak of the first principle as matter, whether they suppose 

25 one or more first principles, and whether they suppose this to 
be a body or to be incorporeal ; e.g. Plato spoke of the great 
and the small, the Italians of the infinite, Empedocles of fire, 
earth, water, and air, Anaxagoras of the infinity of things 
composed of similar parts. These, then, have all had a 
notion of this kind of cause, and so have all who speak of air 

30 or fire or water, or something denser than fire and rarer than 
air ; for some have said the prime element is of this kind.? 
These thinkers grasped this cause only ; but certain others 
have mentioned the source of movement, e.g. those who 
make friendship and strife, or reason, or love, a principle. 

The essence, i. e. the substantial reality, no one has expressed 

35 distinctly. It is mentioned chiefly by those who believe in 

g88> the Forms; for they do not suppose either that the Forms 
are the matter of sensible things, and the One the matter of 
the Forms, or that they are the source of movement (for they 
say these are causes rather of immobility and of being at rest), 
but they furnish the Forms as the essence of every other 
5 thing, and the One as the essence of the Forms. 

That which is the end for which actions and changes and 
movements take place, they assert to be a cause in a way, but 
not in this way, ie. not in the way in which it is its nature 
to be a cause. For those who speak of reason or friendship 
class these causes as goods; they do not speak, however, as if 
anything that exists either existed or came into being for the 

10 sake of these, but as if movements-started from these. In the 
same way those who say the One or the existent is the good, 
say that it is the cause of substance, but not that substance either 
is or comes to be for the sake of this. Therefore it turns out 
that in a sense they both say and do not say the good is a cause; 

15 for they do not call it a cause gua good but only incidentally. 

τ Phys. ii. 3, 7. 2 Cf. Diels, Vorsokratiker, ed. 2, pp. 15. 4, 327. 28. 

A. BOOK I 988° 

All these thinkers, then, as they cannot pitch on another 
cause, seem to testify that we have determined rightly both 
how many and of what sort the causes are. Besides this it is 
plain that when the causes are being looked for, either all four 
must be sought thus or they must be sought in one of these 
four ways. Let us next discuss the possible difficulties with 20 
regard to the way in which each of these thinkers has spoken, 
and with regard to his views about the first principles. 

CHAPTER VIII 

Those, then, who say the universe is one and posit one kind ot 
thing as matter, and as corporeal matter which has spatial mag- 
nitude, evidently go astray in many ways. For they posit the 
elements of bodies only, not of incorporeal things, though there 25 
are incorporeal things. And in trying to state the causes of 
generation and destruction, and in giving an account of the 
nature of all things, they do away with the cause of movement. 
Further, they err in not positing the substance, i. 6. the essence, 
as the cause of anything, and besides this in! lightly calling 
any of the simple bodies except earth the first principle, with- 30 
out inquiring how they are produced out of one another,—I 
mean fire, water, earth, and air. For some things are produced 
out of others by combination, others by separation, and this 
makes the greatest difference to their priority and posteriority. 
For (1) in a way the property of being most elementary of all 35 
would seem to belong to the first thing from which they are 
produced by combination, and zhis property would belong to 9898 
the most fine-grained and subtle of bodies. Therefore those 
who make fire the principle would be most in agreement with 
this argument. But each of the other thinkers agrees that the 
element of corporeal things is of this sort. At least none of 5 
the later philosophers who said the world was one claimed 
that earth was the element, evidently because of the coarseness 
of its grain. (Of the other three elements each has found some 
judge on its side; for some maintain that fire, others that 
water, others that air is the element. Yet why, after all, do 
they not name earth also, as most men do—for people say all 
1 988> 28-29 read τῷ γὴν... τῷ ῥᾳδίως. Cf. I. Bywater in /. of P. xxviii. 

246 
C2 

989" METAPHYSICA 

10 things are earth. And Hesiod says! earth was produced first 
of corporeal things; so ancient and popular has the opinion 
been.) According to this argument, then, no one would be 
right who either says the first principle is any of the ele- 
ments other than fire, or supposes it to be denser than air 

15 but rarer than water. But (2) if that which is later in genera- 
tion is prior in nature, and that which is concocted and 
compounded is later in generation, the contrary of what we 
have been saying must be true,—water must be prior to air, 
and earth to water. 

Let this suffice, then, as our statement about those who 

ao posit one cause such as we mentioned; but the same is 
true if we suppose more of these, as Empedocles says the 
matter of things is four bodies. For he too is confronted by 
consequences some of which are the same as have been 
mentioned, while others are peculiar to him. For we see 
these bodies produced from one another, which implies that 
the same body does not always remain fire or earth (we have 
as spoken about this in our works on nature?) ; and regarding 
the moving cause and the question whether we must suppose 
one or two, he must be thought to have spoken neither correctly 
nor altogether plausibly. [And in general those who speak in 
this way must do away with change of quality, for on their 
view cold will not come from hot nor hot from cold. For if it 
did there would be something that accepted those very con- 
traries, and there would be some one entity that became fire 

_and water, which Empedocles denies.*] 

“39 As regards Anaxagoras, if one were to suppose that he said 
there were two elements, the supposition would accord 
thoroughly with a view which Anaxagoras himself did not 
state articulately, but which he must have accepted if any one 
had developed his view. True, -to say that in the beginning all 
things were mixed is absurd both on other grounds and because 
it follows that they must have existed before in an unmixed 

9895 form, and because nature does not allow any chance thing to 
be mixed with any chance thing, and also because on this view 

1 Theog. 116. 
3. De Caelo, iii. 7 ; De Gen. et Corr. li. 6. 
8 LI. 26-30 are probably a gloss. - 

A. BOOK I 989" 

modifications and accidents could be separated from sub- 
stances (for the same things which are mixed can be separated) ; 
yet if one were to follow him up, piecing together what he 
means, he would perhaps be seen to be somewhat modern in 5 
his views. For when nothing was separated out, evidently 
nothing could be truly asserted of the substance that then 
existed. I mean, e.g. that it was neither white nor black, nor 
grey nor any other colour, but of necessity colourless; for if it 
had been coloured, it would have had one of these colours. 
And similarly, by this same argument, it was flavourless, nor 10 
had it any similar attribute ; for it could not be either of any 
quality or of any size, nor could it be any definite kind of 
thing. For if it were, one of the particular forms would have 
belonged to it, and this is impossible, since all were mixed to- 
gether; for the particular form would necessarily have been 
already separated out, but he says all were mixed except 
mind, and this alone was unmixed and pure.! From this it 
follows, then, that he must say the principles are the One 
(for this is simple and unmixed) and the Other, which is of 
such a nature as we suppose the indefinite to be before it is 
defined and partakes of some form. Therefore, while ex- 
pressing himself neither rightly nor clearly, he means some- 
thing like what the later thinkers say and what is now more 20 
clearly seen to be the case.” 

But these thinkers are, after all, at home only in arguments 
about generation and destruction and movement; for it is 
practically only of this sort of substance that they seek the 
principles and the causes. But those who extend their vision 
to all things that exist, and of existing things suppose some to 25 
be perceptible and others not perceptible, evidently study both 
classes, which is all the more reason why one should devote 
some time to seeing what is good in their views and what bad 
from the stand-point of the inquiry we have now before us. 

The ‘ Pythagoreans’ treat the principles and the elements 
more strangely 8 than the physical philosophers (the reason 30 
is that they got the principles from non-sensible things, for the 

νὴ 

5 

1 Fr, 12, Diels, Vorsokratiker. 
2 989» 20 read τοῖς νῦν φαινομένοις μᾶλλον. 
8 989» 30 read ἐκτοπωτέρως. 

9825 METAPHYSICA 

objects of mathematics, except those of astronomy, are of the 
class of things without movement); yet their discussions and 
investigations are all about nature; for they generate the 
990" heavens, and with regard to their parts and attributes and 
functions they observe the phenomena, and use up the princi- 
ples and the causes in explaining these, which implies that 
they agree with the others, the physical philosophers, that the 
real is just all that which is perceptible and contained by the 
5 so-called ‘heavens’. But the causes and the principles which 
they mention are, as we said, sufficient to act as steps even 
up to the higher realms of reality, and are more suited to 
these than to theories about nature. They do not tell us 
at all, however, how there can be movement if limit and un- 
το limited and odd and even are the only things assumed, or 
how without process and change there can be generation and 
destruction, or how the bodies that move through the heavens 
can do what they do. Further, if we either granted them 
that spatial magnitude consists of these elements, or this 
were proved, still how would some bodies be light and others 
have weight? To judge from what they assume and 
1s Maintain, they speak no more of mathematical bodies than 
of: perceptible ; hence they have said nothing whatever about 
fire or earth or the other bodies of this sort, I suppose be- 
cause they have nothing to say which applies peculiarly to 
perceptible things. 
Further, how are we to combine the beliefs that the modifi- 
cations of number, and number itself, are causes of what 
20 exists and happens in the heavens both from the beginning 
and now, and that there is no other number than this number 
out of which the world is composed? When in one par- 
ticular region they place opinion and opportunity, and, a 
little above or below, injustice and sifting or mixture, and 
allege as proof of this that each one of these is a number, 
25 but when there happens to be already in each place! a 
plurality of the extended bodies composed of numbers, because 
these modifications of number attach to the various groups 
of places,—this being so, is this number, which we must 

1 ggo* 25, 26 omit μέν and read ovpBaivy . . . τόπον ἤδη. 

- A. BOOK I 990° 

suppose each of these abstractions to be, the same number 
which is exhibited in the material universe, or is it another 
than this? Plato says it is different ; yet even he thinks that 30 
both these bodies and their causes are numbers, but that the 
intelligible numbers are causes, while the others are senszble. 

CHAPTER IX 

Let us leave the Pythagoreans for the present; for it is 
enough to have touched on them as much as we have done. 
But as for those who posit the Ideas as causes, firstly, in seek- 
ing to grasp the causes of the things around us, they introduced ggo” 
others equal in number to these, as if a man who wanted to 
count things thought he could not do it while they were few, 
but tried to count them when he had added to their number. 
For the Forms are practically equal to or not fewer than the 
things, in trying to explain which these thinkers proceeded 5 
from them tothe Forms. For to each set of substances there 
answers a Form which has the same name and exists apart from 
the substances, and so also in the case of all other groups? in 
which there is one character common to many things, whether 
the things are in this changeable world or are eternal. 

Further, of the ways in which we? prove that the Forms 
exist, none is convincing ; for from some no inference neces- 
sarily follows, and from some it follows that there are Forms τὸ 
of things of which we think there are no Forms. 

For according to the arguments from the existence of the 
sciences there will be Forms of all things of which there are 
sciences, and according to the argument that there is one 
attribute common to many things there will be Forms even 
of negations, and according to the argument that there is an 
object for thought even when the thing has perished, there 
will be Forms of perishable things; for we can have an image 
of these. 

Further, of the more accurate arguments, some lead to 15 
Ideas of relations, of which we say there is no independent 
class, and others involve the difficulty of the ‘third man ’.® 

1 ggo? 7 read τῶν re ἄλλων. ? Aristotle speaks as a Platonist. 
5. Cf. K. 1059" 8 and Plato Parm. 131 E. 

ggo? METAPHYSICA 

And in general the arguments for the Forms destroy the 
things for whose existence those who maintain! the Forms 
are more anxious than for the existence of the Ideas; for it 

30 follows that not the dyad? but number is first, i.e. that the 
relative is prior to the absolute,>—besides all the other points 
on which certain people by following out the opinions held 
about the Ideas have come into conflict with the principles of 
the theory. | 

Further, according to the assumption on which our belief in 
the Ideas rests, there will be Forms not only of substances 
but also of many other things (for the concept is single not 

a; only in the case of substances but also in the other cases, and 
there are sciences not only of substance but also of other 
things, and a thousand other such conclusions also follow). 
But according to the necessities of the case and the opinions 
held about the Forms, if they can be shared there must be 
Ideas of substances only. For they are not shared incidentally, 

30 but a thing must share in its Form as in something not pre- 
dicated of a subject (e. g. if a thing shares in ‘double itself’, it 
shares also in ‘eternal’, but incidentally ; for‘ eternal’ happens 
to be predicable of the ‘ double’). Therefore the Forms will be 
substance ; and the same terms indicate substance in this and 

ggi* in the ideal world (or what will be the meaning of saying that 
there is something apart from the particulars—the one over 
many ?).4 And if the Ideas and the particulars that share 
them have the same Form, there will be something common 
to these; for why should ‘2’ be one® and the same in the 
perishable 2’s or in those which are many but eternal, and 
snot the same in the ‘ 2 itself’ as in the particular 2? But if 
they have not the same Form, they must have only the name 
in common, and it is as if one were to call both Callias and 
a wooden image a ‘man’, without observing any community 
between them.® 

1 ggo? 18 read βούλονται. 

2 Sc. the ‘ indefinite 2’ which Plato held to be one of the first principles 
of number. 

$ i.e. number, which is relative, is prior to the indefinite 2, which Plato 
held to be an absolute first principle. 

* This seems to be an enthymeme, the conclusion to be supplied being 

that the Forms, since they are substances, must be of substances. 
5 g9g1*5 omit εἶναι. 6 With 990* 34-991? 8 cf. M. 1078" 32-1079? 3. 

A. BOOK I gg! 

Above all one might discuss the question what on earth 
the Forms contribute to sensible things, either to those that το 
are eternal or to those that come into being and cease to be. 
For they cause neither movement nor any change in them. 
But again they help in no wise towards the knowledge of the other 
things (for they are not even the substance of these, else they 
would have been in them), nor towards their being, if they 
are not z# the particulars which share in them ; though if they 
were, they might be thought to be causes, as white causes 15 
whiteness in that with which it is mixed. But this argument, 
which first Anaxagoras and later Eudoxus and certain others 
used, is too easily upset ; for it is not difficult to collect many 
insuperable objections to such a view. 

But further all other things cannot come from the Forms in 
any of the usual senses of ‘from’. And to say that they are 20 
patterns and the other things share them is to use empty 
words and poetical metaphors. For what is it that works, 
looking to the Ideas? Anything can either be, or become, 
like another without being copied from it, so that whether 25 
Socrates exists or not a man might come to be like Socrates ; 
and evidently this might be so even if Socrates were eternal. 
And according to the Platonist’s principles there will be 
several patterns of the same thing, and therefore several Forms, 
e.g. ‘animal’ and ‘two-footed’ and also ‘man himself’ will 
be Forms of man. Again, the Forms are patterns not only of 
sensible things, but of things-in-themselves also, i.e. the 30 
genus as genus is the pattern of the species; therefore the 
same thing will be pattern and copy. 

Again it must be held to be impossible that the substance 991° 

and that of which it is the substance should exist apart; how, 
therefore, can the Ideas, being the substances of things, exist 
apart? 

In the Phaedo' the case is stated in this way—that the 
Forms are causes both of being and of becoming; yet when 
the Forms exist, still the things that share in them do not 
come into being, unless there is some efficient cause; and 5 
many other things come into being (e.g. a house or a ring), 
of which we say there are no Forms. Clearly, therefore, 

1 Ioo D. 

991Ὁ METAPHYSICA 

even the other things can both be and come into being owing 
to such causes as produce the things just mentioned.? 

Again, if the Forms are numbers, how can they be causes? 

10 Is it because existing things are other numbers, e.g. one number 
is man, another is Socrates, another Callias? Why then are 
the one set of numbers causes of the other set? It will not 
make any difference even if the former are eternal.and the 
latter are not. But if it is because things in this sensible 
world (e.g. harmony) are ratios of numbers, evidently there 
is some one class of things of which they are ratios. If, then, 

15 this—the matter—is some definite thing, evidently the numbers 
themselves too will be ratios of something to something else. 
E.g. if Callias is a numerical ratio between fire and earth and 
water and air, his Idea also will be a number of certain other 
underlying things; and the Idea of man, whether it is a 
number in a sense or not, will still be a numerical ratio of 

20 certain things and not a number proper, nor will it be a 
number merely because it is a numerical ratio.” 

Again, from many numbers one number is produced, but 
how can one Form come from many Forms? And if the 
number comes not from the many numbers themselves but 
from the units in them,® e.g. in 10,000, how is it with the 
units? If they are specifically alike, numerous absurdities 
will follow, and also if they are not alike (neither the units in 
the same number being like one another nor those in different 

25 numbers being all like to all) ; for in what will they differ, as 
they are without quality? This is not a plausible view, nor can 
it be consistently thought out. Further, the Platonists must 
set up a second kind of number (with which arithmetic deals), 
and all the objects which are called ‘intermediate’ by some 
thinkers ; and how do these exist or from what principles do 

380 they proceed? Or why must they be intermediate between 
the things in this sensible world and the things-in-themselves ? 

992° Further, the units in 2 must each come from a prior 2; but 

1 With 991% 8-" 9 cf. M. 1079” 12-10808 8. 

2 i.e. the Idea is a numerical ratio in some underlying material. It 
may perhaps be called a sort of (rs) number, but strictly it is a numerical 
ratio.—The passage, however, is very difficult, and the contradiction in 
ll. 39 20 almost intolerable. 

"9912 22 read τῶν ἐν τῷ ἀριθμῷ, 

A. BOOK I 992° 

this is impossible. Further, why is a number, when taken 
all together, one? Again, besides what has been said, if the 
units are diverse the Platonists should have spoken like 
those who say there are four, or two, elements; for each of 
these thinkers gives the name of element not to that 
which is common, e. g. to body, but to fire and earth, whether 5 
there is something common to them, viz. body, or not. But 
in fact the Platonists speak as if the One were homogeneous 
like fire or water; and if this is so, the numbers will not be 
substances. Evidently, if there is a One-in-itself and this is 
a first principle, ‘one’ is being used in more than one sense ; 
for otherwise the theory is impossible. 

When we Platonists wish to reduce substances to their prin- τὸ 
ciples, we state that lines come from the short and long (i.e. 
from a kind of small and great), and the plane from the broad 
and narrow, and the solid from the deep and shallow. Yet 
how then can the plane contain a line, or the solid a line or 
a plane? For the broad and narrow is a different class of 
things from the deep and shallow. Therefore, just as number 15 
is not present in these, because the many and few are different 
from these, evidently no other of the higher (more abstract) 
classes will be present in the lower {more concrete). But 
again the broad is not a genus which includes the deep, for 
then the solid would have been a species of plane.? Further, 
from what principle will the presence of the points in the line 
be derived? Plato even used to object to this class of things 20 
(sc. points) as being a geometrical fiction. What we call 
the point he called the principle of the line, and this is what 
he meant by the indivisible lines which he often posited. Yet 
these must have a limit; therefore the argument from which 
the existence of the line follows proves also the existence of 
the point. © 

In general, though philosophy seeks the cause of perceptible 
things, we Platonists have given this up (for we say nothing of 25 
the cause from which change takes its start), but while we 
fancy we are stating the substance of perceptible things, we 
assert the existence of a second class of substances, while 

? Sc. but ordinary mathematical numbers. Cf. M. 1081° 5. 
2 With 9928 10-19 cf. M. 1085 9-10. 

992° METAPHYSICA 

our account of the way in which they are the substances of 
perceptible things is empty talk; for ‘sharing’, as we said 
before,’ means nothing. Nor have the Forms any connexion 
with that which we see to be the cause in the case of the arts, 
go. and for whose sake mind and nature produce all that they do 
produce,?—with this cause which we assert to be one of the 
first principles; but mathematics has come to be the whole of 
philosophy for modern thinkers? though they say that it 
992” should be studied for the sake of other things Further, one 
might suppose that the substance which according to them 
underlies as matter is too mathematical, and is a predicate 
and differentia of the substance, i.e. of the matter, rather than 
the matter itself; i.e. the great and the small are like the rare 
and the dense which the physical philosophers speak of, 
5 calling these the primary differentiae of the substratum ; for 
these are a kind of excess and defect. And regarding move- 
ment, if the great and the small are to ὅσ movement, evidently 
the Forms will be moved; but if they are not, whence did 
movement come? If we cannot answer this the whole study 
of nature has been annihilated. 
And what is thought to be easy—to show that all things 
10 are one—is not done; for by the separating of the universal 
from particulars ὅ all things do not come to be one but there 
comes to be a One-in-itself, if we grant all the assumptions. 
And not even this follows, if we do not grant that the universal 
is a Class ; and this in some cases it cannot be. 
Nor can it be explained either how the lines and planes and 
solids that come after the numbers exist or can exist, or what 
15 meaning they have; for these can neither be Forms (for they 
are not numbers), nor the intermediates (for those are the 
objects of mathematics), nor the perishable things. This is 
evidently a distinct fourth class.® 
In general, if we search for the elements of existing things 
without distinguishing the many senses in which things are 
said to exist, we cannot succeed, especially if the search for 

1 gg1® 8-59. ? Sc. the final cause. 8. Cf. B. 996% 29-° 1. 

‘ Cf. Plato, Rep. vii. 531 D, 533 B-D. 9025 33 read φασκόντων ἄλλων. 
5 For this Platonic method cf. B. 1003* 10, Z. 1031} 21, M. 1086? Io. 
® Cf. Z. 1028 24, M. 1080” 23. 

A. BOOK I 992” 

the elements of which things are made is conducted in the 
Platonic manner. For it is surely impossible to discover 20 
what ‘acting’ or ‘ being acted on’, or ‘the straight’, is made 
of, but if elements can be discovered at all, it is only the 
elements of substances ; therefore to seek the elements of all 
existing things or to think one has them is incorrect. And 
how could we arn the elements of all things? Evidently we 25 
cannot start by knowing something before. For as he who is 
learning geometry, though he may know other things before, 
knows none of the things with which the science deals and 
about which he is to learn, so is it in all other cases. There- 
fore if there is a science of all things, as some maintain, he 
who is learning this will know nothing before. Yet all learn- 30 
ing is by means of premises which are (either all or some of 
them) known before,—whether the learning be by demonstra- 
tion or by definitions ; for the elements of the definition must 
be known before and be familiar; and learning by induc- 

tion proceeds similarly. But again, if the science is innate, it 993° 

is wonderful that we are unaware of our possession of the 
greatest of sciences. Again, how is one to kzow what all 
things are made of, and how is this to be made evident? This 
also affords a difficulty ; for there might bea conflict of opinion, 
as there is about certain syllables; some say za is made out 5 
of s and d and a, while others say it is a distinct sound and 
none of those that are familiar. Further, how could we 
know the objects of sense without having the sense in ques- 
tion? Yet we should, if the elements of which all things 
consist, as complex sounds consist of their proper elements, 
are the same. 10 

CHAPTER X 

It is evident, then, even from what we have said before, 
that all men seem to seek the causes named in the Physics}, 
and that we cannot name any beyond these; but they seek 
these vaguely ; and though in a sense they have all been 
described before, in a sense they have not been described at 

1 ii, 3, 7. 

993" METAPHYSICA 

15 all. For the earliest philosophy is, on all subjects, like one 
who lisps, since in its beginnings it is but a child. For even 
Empedocles says? bone exists by virtue of the ratio in it. 
Now this is the essence and the substance of the thing. But 
it is similarly necessary that the ratio should be the substance 

20 of flesh and of everything else, or of none; therefore it is on 
account of this that flesh and bone and everything else will 
exist, and not on account of the matter, which 4e names,—fire 
and earth and water and air. But while he would necessarily 
have agreed if another had said this, he has not said it clearly. 

On such questions our views have been expressed before ; 

25 but let us return to enumerate the difficulties that might be 
raised on these same points; for perhaps we may get some 
help towards our later difficulties. 

1 993® 16 read νέα κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς οὖσα, ἐπεί. 
2 Diels, Vorsokratiker, ed. 2, fr. 96 and p. 166. 4. 

ΝΥΝ 

BOOK II (a) 

CHAPTER I 

THE investigation of the truth is in one way hard, in another 30 
easy. An indication of this is found in the fact that no one is 
able to attain the truth adequately, while, on the other hand, 993° 
no one fails entirely, but every one says something true about 
the nature of things, and while ‘individually they contribute 
little or nothing to the truth, by the union of all a considerable 
amount is amassed. Therefore, since the truth seems to be 
like the proverbial door, which no one can fail to hit, in this 5 
way it is easy, but the fact that we can have a whole truth 
and not the particular part we aim at shows the difficulty of it. 

Perhaps, as difficulties are of two kinds, the cause of the 
present difficulty is not in the facts but in us. For as the 
eyes of bats are to the blaze of day, so is the reason in our 10 
soul to the things which are by nature most evident of all. 

It is just that we should be grateful, not only to those 
whose opinions we may share, but also to those who have 
expressed more superficial views; for these also contributed 
something, by developing before us the powers of thought. It 15 
is true that if there had been no Timotheus we should have 
been without much of our lyric poetry ; but if there had been 
no Phrynis there would have been no Timotheus. The same 
holds good of those who have expressed views about the 
truth!; for from the better thinkers we have inherited certain 
opinions, while the others have been responsible for the 
appearance of the better thinkers. 

It is right also that philosophy should be called knowledge 
of the truth. For the end of theoretical knowledge is truth, a0 
while that of practical knowledge is action (for even if they 
consider how things are, practical men do not study the cause in 
itself, but? in some relation and at some time). Now we do not 

1 9935 17 read περὶ τῶν περὶ τῆς. * 99322 read οὐ τὸ αἴτιον καθ᾽ αὑτὸ ἀλλά. 

993” METAPHYSICA 

know a truth without its cause; and a thing has a quality in 
a higher degree than other things if in virtue of it the similar 

as quality belongs to the other things (e.g. fire is the hottest of 
things ; for it is the cause of the heat of all other things); so 
that that which causes derivative truths to be true is most 
true. Therefore the principles of eternal things must be 
always most true; for they are not merely sometimes true, 
nor is there any cause of their being, but they themselves are 

30 the cause of the being of other things, so that as each thing 
is in respect of being, so is it in respect of truth. 

CHAPTER II 

994" Evidently there is a first principle, and the causes of 
things are neither an infinite series nor infinitely various in 

_ kind. For (1), on the one hand, one thing cannot proceed from 
another, as from matter, ad infinitum, e.g. flesh from earth, 

5 earth from air, air from fire, and so on without stopping; nor 
on the other hand can the efficient causes form an endless 
series, man for instance being acted on by air, air by the sun, 
the sun by Strife, and so on without limit. Similarly the final 
causes cannot go on ad infinitum,—walking for the sake of 
health, this for the sake of happiness, happiness for the sake 
10 of something else, and so one thing always for the sake of 
another. And the case of the formal cause is similar. For in 
the case of an intermediate, which has a last term and a prior 
term outside it, the prior must be the cause of the later terms. 
For if we had to say which of the three is the cause, we should 
say the first; surely not the last, for the final term is the 
15 cause of none ; nor even the intermediate, for it is the cause only 
of one. It makes no difference whether there is one interme- 
diate or more, nor whether they are infinite or finite in number. 
But of series which are infinite in this way, and of the infinite 
in general, all the parts down to that now present are alike 
intermediates ; so that if there is no first there is no cause at all. 

20 Nor can there be an infinite process downwards, with a 
beginning in the upper direction, so that water should proceed 
from fire, earth from water, and so always some other kind 
should be produced. For one thing comes /vom another in 

a. BOOK II 

two ways (if we exclude the sense in which ‘ from’ means ‘ after,’ 
as we say ‘from the Isthmian games come the Olympian’), (2) as 
the man comes from the boy, by the boy’s changing, or (δ) as air 

994° 

comes from water. By ‘as the man comes from the boy’ we 25 

mean ‘as that which has come to be from that which is coming 
to be, or as that which is finished from that which is being 
achieved’ (for as becoming is between being and not being, so 
that which is becoming is always between! that which is and 
that which is not; and the learner is a man of science in the 
making, and this is what is meant when we say that from a 
learner a man of science is being made); on the other hand, 
coming from another thing as water comes from air implies 
the destruction of the other thing. This is why changes of 
the former kind are not reversible,—the boy does not come 
from the man (for that which comes to be does not come to 
be from the process of coming to be, but exists after? the 
process of coming to be; for it is thus that the day comes 
from the morning—in the sense that it comes after the 
morning ; and therefore the morning cannot come from the 
day); but changes of the other kind are reversible. But in 
both cases it is impossible that the number of terms should be 
infinite. For terms of the former kind being intermediates ὃ 
must have an end, and terms of the latter kind change into 
one another ; for the destruction of either is the generation of 
the other. 

At the same time it is impossible that the first cause, being 
eternal, should be destroyed; for while the process of becoming 
is not infinite in the upward direction, a first cause by whose 
destruction something came to be could not be eternal.‘ 

1 9048 27 read ἐστι μεταξύ. oo, 

2 994 1 read ἀλλ᾽ ἔστι. The meaning seems to be, that in this kind of 
change the y that comes from Ζ is not simply x rearranged, but + affected 
by a lapse of time. .*. # cannot be got from y. 

8 Cf. *27-29. 

4 This paragraph is very obscure. Aristotle has in 811-19 given a 
general argument which applies to all the four causes, to show that there 
must always be a first cause. This, he assumes, must be eternal. He 
now applies this argument to the prime material cause, and shows that 
it must be indestructible. There are two difficulties in the paragraph :— 

(1) It seems pointless to say that the first cause must be indestructible 
because it is eternal. Ground and consequent appear to be identical. 
But probably the object is to show that the first cause must be to its 

AR. MET. D 

20 

994" 

5 

Ne ΝΜ ΠῚ ΠΥ, γα " ἝΝ Ν" ΜΝ 

994" METAPHYSICA 

Further, the fizal cause is an end, and that sort of end 
which is not for the sake of something else, but for whose sake 
to everything else is; so that if there is to be a last term of this 
sort, the process will not be infinite; but if there is no such 
term there will be no final cause. But those who maintain 
the infinite series destroy the Good without knowing it. Yet 
no one would try to do anything if he were not going to come 
15 to a limit. Nor would there be reason in the world; the 
reasonable man, at least, always acts for a purpose ; and this 

is a limit, for the end is a limit. 

But the formal cause, also, cannot be reduced always to 
another definition which is fuller in expression.2 For the 
original definition is always more of a definition, and not the 
later one; and in a series in which the first term is not 

20 correct, the next is not so either.— Further, those who speak 
thus destroy science ; for it is not possible to have this till one 
comes to the indivisible concepts. And knowledge becomes 
impossible; for how can one think things that are infinite in 
this way*? For this is not like the case of the line, to 
whose divisibility there is no stop, but which we cannot think 

25if we do not make a stop; so that one who is tracing the 
infinitely divisible line cannot be counting the possibilities of 
section. | 

But further, the matter in a changeable thing must be 
cognized “. 

Again, nothing infinite can exist; and if it could, at least 
being infinite is not infinite.® 

But (2) if the &zzds of causes had been infinite in number, 

then also knowledge would have been impossible ; for we think 
effects not as water to air but as boy to man. It develops into them, 
and is not destroyed when they come into being. 
_ (2) The clause beginning with ἐπεί seems, as is often the case, to be 
elliptical. The meaning probably is :—‘ Since the process of becoming 
is not infinite in the upward direction, (there must be an eternal first 
cause, but) a first cause by whose destruction something came to be could 
not be eternal.’ 

1 994 15 read ἐν τοῖς οὖσιν. 

2 i.e. one can reduce the definition of man as ‘mortal rational animal’ 
to ‘mortal rational sensitive living substance’, but one cannot carry on 
process ad infinitum. 

8. i.e. actually infinite. 

4 Sc. and therefore cannot form an infinite series. 
5 i.e. the notion of infinity does not contain an infinite number of marks. 

a. BOOK II | 994° 

we know, only when we have ascertained all the causes, but that 30 
which is infinite by addition cannot be gone through in a 
finite time. 

CHAPTER III 

The effect which lectures produce on a hearer depends 
on his habits; for we demand the language we are accus- 995° 
tomed to, and that which is different from this seems not 
in keeping but somewhat unintelligible and foreign because 
of its unwontedness. For the customary is more intelli- 
gible. The force of habit is shown by the laws, in whose 
case, with regard to the legendary and childish elements 5 
in them, habit has more influence than our knowledge about 
them?. Some people do not listen to a speaker unless 
he speaks mathematically, others unless he gives instances, 
while others expect him to cite a poet as witness. And 
some want to have everything done accurately, while others 
are annoyed by accuracy, either because they cannot follow 
the connexion of thought or because they regard it as petti- 
foggery. For accuracy has something of this character, so 10 
that as in trade so in argument some people think it mean. 
Therefore one must be already trained to know how to take 
each sort of argument, since it is absurd to seek at the same 
time knowledge and the way of attaining knowledge; and 
neither is easy to get. 

The minute accuracy of mathematics is not to be demanded 15 
in all cases, but only in the case of things which have no matter. 
Therefore its method is not that of natural science; for pre- 
sumably all nature has matter. Hence we must inquire first 
what nature is: for thus we shall also see what natural science 
treats of [and whether it belongs to one science or to more 
to investigate the causes and the principles of things |.? 20 

1 995° 4 read ἐν οἷς περὶ ra... αὐτῶν τὸ ἔθος. 
2 This clause has probably been wrongly inserted from 995° 6. 

BOOK III (B) 
CHAPTER I 

WE must, with a view to the science which we are seeking, 
as first recount the subjects that should be first discussed. These 
include both the other opinions that some have held on certain 
points, and any points besides these that happen’ to have 
been overlooked. For those who wish to get clear of diffi- 
culties it is advantageous to state the difficulties well; for 
the subsequent free play of thought implies the solution of 
the previous difficulties, and it is not possible to untie a knot 
30 which one does not know. But the difficulty of our thinking 
points to a ‘knot’ in the object; for in so far as our thought 
is in difficulties, it is in like case with those who are bound ; for 
in either case it is impossible to go forward. Therefore one 
should have surveyed all the difficulties beforehand, both for 
the reasons we have stated and because people who inquire 
35 without first stating the difficulties are like those who do not 
know where they haveto go; besides, a man does not otherwise 
know even whether he has found what he is looking for or not ; 
995° for the end is not clear to such a man, while to him who has first 
discussed the difficulties it isclear. Further, he who has heard 
all the contending arguments, as if they were the parties to a 
case, must be in a better position for judging. 

5 The first problem concerns the subject 2 which we discussed 
in our prefatory remarks. It is this—whether the investiga- 
tion of the causes belongs to one or to more sciences, and, if 
to one, whether this should survey only the first principles of 
substance, or also the principles on which all men base their 
proofs, e.g. whether it is possible at the same time to assert 

1o and deny one and the same thing or not, and all other such 
questions.* And if the science in question deals with sub- 

1 995% 27 read τυγχάνει. 2 Sc. the four causes. 
δ Cf. 996% 18-» 26. 4 Cf. 996> 26-997 15. 

B. BOOK III 995° 

stance, whether does omé science deal with all substances, or 
more than one, and if more, whether are all akin, or must 
some of them be called forms of Wisdom and the others 
something else?! And this itself is also one of the things that 
must be discussed—whether sensible substances alone should 
be said to exist or others also besides them, and whether 15 
these others are of one kind or there are several classes of 
substances, as is supposed by those who believe both in Forms 
and in mathematical objects intermediate between these and 
sensible things.2, We must inquire, then, as we say, into 
these questions, and also whether our investigation is con- 
cerned only with substances or also with the essential attributes 
of substances.2 Further, with regard to the same and other ao 
and like and unlike and contrariety, and with regard to prior 
and posterior and all other such terms, about which the 
dialecticians try to inquire, starting their investigation from 
probable premises only,—whose business is it to inquire into 
all these? Further, we must discuss the essential attributes 25 
of these themselves; and we must ask not only what each of 
these is, but also whether one thing always has one contrary.* 
Again, whether are the principles and elements of things the 
classes, or the parts present in each thing, into which it is 
divided ;° and if they are the classes, whether are they the 
classes that are predicated proximately of the individuals, or 
the highest classes, e.g. whether is animal or man the first 30 
principle and the more independent of the individual instance? ® 
And we must inquire and discuss especially whether there is, 
besides the matter, any thing that is a cause in itself or not, 
and whether this can exist apart or not, and whether it is one 
Or more in number. Once more, is there something apart 
from the concrete thing (by the concrete thing I mean the 35 
matter with something predicated of it), or is there nothing 
apart, or is there something in some cases though not in others, 
and what sort of cases are these’? Again we ask whether 996* 
the principles are limited in number or in kind, both those in 

1 Cf. 997° 15-25. 2 Cf. 997% 34-998* 19. 

δ Cf.997% 25-34. 

* Cf. T. 1003" 32-1005 18, Z. 10, and (1). 

5 Cf. 998% 20-" 14. 

® Cf. 998 14-999% 23. 7 Cf. 999* 24-" 24. 

9965 METAPHYSICA 

the formulae and those in the substratum ;! and whether the 
principles of perishable and of imperishable things are the same 
or different ; and whether they are all imperishable or those 
of perishable things are perishable. Further there is the 

5 question which is hardest of all and most perplexing, whether 
unity and being, as the Pythagoreans and Plato said, are not 
attributes of something else but are the substance of existing 
things, or this is not the case, but the substratum is some- 
thing else——as Empedocles says, love ; as someone else says, 
fire ; while one says water and one, air.> Again we ask whether 

ro the principles are universal or like individual things,* and 
whether they exist potentially or actually; further, whether 
they are potential or actual in any other sense than in reference 
to movement ;5 for these questions also would present much 
difficulty. Further, whether are numbers and lines and figures 
and points a kind of substance or not, and if they are 
substances whether are they separate from sensible things or 

15 present in them?® With regard to all these matters not 
only is it hard to get possession of the truth, but it is not 
easy even to think out the difficulties well. 

CHAPTER II 

First then with regard to what we mentioned first, whether 

does it belong to one or to more sciences to investigate all the 

ao kinds of causes? How could it belong to one science to know 
the principles if these are not contrary? 

Further, there are many things to which not all the principles 
pertain. For how cana principle of change or the nature of 
the good be present in unchangeable things, since everything 
that in itself and by its own nature is good is an end, and a 

as cause in the sense that for its sake the other things both 
come to be and are, and since an end or purpose is the end 
of some action, and all actions imply change; so that in 
unchangeable things this principle could not exist nor could 
there be a good-in-itself. This is why in mathematics nothing 

1 Cf. 999° 24-1000 4. 2 Cf. 1000 5—1001* 3. 

Ὁ Cf. 10018 4— 25. * Cf. 10039 5-17. 
* Cf. 1002 32-10038 5. 6 Cf. 1001 26-1002? ΣΙ. 

B. BOOK III 996* 

is proved by means of this kind of cause, nor is there any 30 
demonstration of this kind—‘ because it is better, or worse’; 
indeed no one even mentions anything of the kind. And so 
for this reason some of the Sophists, e.g. Aristippus, ridiculed 
mathematics; for in the arts, even in the industrial arts, 
e.g. in carpentry and cobbling, the reason always given is 
‘because it is better, or worse’, but the mathematical sciences 
take no account of goods and evils. 

But if there are several sciences of the causes, and a 996° 
different science for each different principle, which of these 
sciences should be said to be that which we seek, or which of 
the people who possess them has the most scientific knowledge 
of the object in question? The same thing may have all 5 
the kinds of causes, e.g. the moving cause of a house is the 
art or the builder, the final cause is the function it fulfils, 
the matter is earth and stones, and the form is the definitory 
formula. To judge from our previous discussion! of the 
question which of the sciences should be called Wisdom, there 
is reason for applying the name to each of them. For inasmuch τὸ 
as it is most architectonic and authoritative and the other 
sciences, like slave-women, may not even contradict it, the 
science of the end and of the good is of the nature of Wisdom 
(for the other things are for the sake of the end). But inas- 
much as it was described as dealing with the first causes and that 
which is in the highest sense object of knowledge, the science 
of substance* must be of the nature of Wisdom. For as men may 1g 
know the same thing in many ways, we say that he who knows 
what a thing is by the characteristics it has knows more fully 
than he who knows it by the characteristics it has not, and 
in the former class itself one knows more fully than another, 
and he knows most fully who knows what a thing is, not he 
who knows its quantity or quality or what it can by nature 
do or have done to it; and further in all other cases also (i.e. 
where demonstration is possible) ὃ we think that the knowledge 20 

1 Cf. A. 2. 2 i.e. essence. 

5 996” 19 καὶ ὧν ἀποδείξεις εἰσί appears to be explanatory of ἐν τοῖς ἄλλοις. 
The meaning is that whether the essence is known directly (as in the case 
of substances) or by means of demonstration (as in the case of attributes 
or of events like thunder or eclipse), knowledge of the essence is the 
primary knowledge. 

996” 

28 

20 

88 
997" 

δ 

10 

METAPHYSICA 

of each thing is present when we know what it is, e.g. what 
squaring a rectangle is, viz. that it is the finding of a mean ; and 
similarly in all other cases. And we know about becomings 
and actions and about every change when we know the source 
of the movement; and this is other than and opposed to the 
end. Therefore it would seem to belong to different sciences 
to investigate these causes severally.! 

But, regarding the starting-points of demonstration also, it 
is a disputable question whether they are the object of one 
science or of more. By the starting-points of demonstration I 
mean the common beliefs, on which all men base their proofs, 
e. g. that everything must be either affirmed or denied, and 
that a thing cannot at the same time be and not be, and all 
other such premises ; the question is whether the same science 
deals with them as with substance, or a different science, and if 
it is not one science, which of the two must be identified with 
that which we now seek.— It is not reasonable that these topics 
should be the object of one science; for why should it be 
peculiarly appropriate to geometry or to any other science 
to understand these matters? If then it belongs to every 
science alike, and cannot belong to all, it is not peculiar to 
the science which investigates substances, any more than to 
any other science, to know about these topics——And, at the 
same time, in what way can there be a science of the first prin- 
ciples? For we are aware even now what each of them is; at 
least even other sciences use them as familiar. And if there is 
a demonstrative science which deals with them, there will have 
to be an underlying kind, and some of them must be demon- 
strable attributes and others must be axioms (for it is impossible 
that there should be demonstration about all things) ; for the 
demonstration must start from certain premises and be about 
a certain subject and prove certain attributes. Therefore it 
follows that all attributes that are proved must belong to one 
class ; for all demonstrative sciences use the axioms.—But if 
the science of substance and the science which deals with the 
axioms are different, which of them. is more authoritative and 
prior? The axtoms are most universal and are principles of 

1 With g96® 18-> 26 cf. 9955 5-7. For the answer to this problem 
cf, Τὶ 2. 

B. BOOK III 

allthings. And if it is not the business of the philosopher, to 
whom else will it belong to inquire what is true and what is 
untrue about them ?! 

In general, do all substances fall under one science or under 
more than one? If the latter, to what sort of substance is the 
present science to be assigned? On the other hand, it is not 
reasonable that one science should deal with all. For then 
there would be one demonstrative science dealing with all 
attributes. For every demonstrative science investigates with 
regard to some subject its essential attributes, starting from 
the common beliefs.2, Therefore to investigate the essential 
attributes of one subject, starting from one set of beliefs, 
is the business of one science. For the subject belongs to 
one science, and the premises belong to one, whether to the 
same or to another ; so that the attributes also are investigated 
either by these sciences or by one derived from them. 

Further, does our investigation deal with substances alone or 
also with their attributes? I mean for instance, if the solid is 
a substance and so are lines and planes, is it the business of the 
same science to know these and to know the attributes of each 
of these classes (the attributes which the mathematical sciences 
prove), or of a different science? If of the samme, the science 
of substance also must be a demonstrative science; but it is 
thought that there is zo demonstration of the essence of things. 
And if of axother, what will be the science that investigates 
the attributes of substance? This is a very difficult question.* 

Further, must we say that sensible substances alone exist, 
or that there are others besides these? And are substances 
of one kind or are there several kinds of substances, as those 
say who assert the existence both of the Forms and of the 
intermediates with which they say the mathematical sciences 
_ deal ?—In what sense we ® say the Forms are causes and sub- 
stances in themselves has been explained in our first remarks 

: Cre 296” 26-997 15 cf. 995 7-10. For the answer cf. I. 3. 
8 σογὰ 24 oad εἴθ᾽ αὗτα. But no really good sense can be made of 

the passage. With 9978 15-25 cf. 995 10-13. For the answer cf. I. 

. 1004" 2-9, Ε. I. 

* With 997 25-34 cf. 995» 18-20. For the answer cf, T, 1004” 5-26. 

δ Cf. note on A. ggo’g. 

997" 

320 

35 
997° 

997° METAPHYSICA 

5 about them’;? while the ideal theory presents difficulties in 
many ways, the most paradoxical thing of all is the statement 
that there are certain things besides those in the material 
universe, and that these are the same as sensible things except 
that they are eternal while the latter are perishable. For they 
say there is a man-in-himself and a horse-in-itself and health- 
in-itself, with no further qualification—a procedure like that 

10 of the people who said there are gods, but in human form. 
For they were positing nothing but eternal men, nor are the 
Platonists making the Forms anything other than eternal 
sensible things.—Further, if we are to posit besides the Forms 
and the sensibles the intermediates between them, we shall 
have many difficulties. For clearly on the same principle 
there will be lines besides the lines-in-themselves and the 
sensible lines, and so with each of the other classes of things ; 

15 so that since astronomy is one of these mathematical sciences 
there will also be a heaven besides the sensible heaven, and a 
sun and a moon (and so with the other heavenly bodies) 
besides the sensible. Yet how are we to believe these things? 
It is not reasonable even to suppose these bodies immovable, 

ao but to suppose their moving is quite impossible. And simi- 
larly with the things of which optics and mathematical 
harmonics treat. For these also cannot exist apart from the 
sensible things, for the same reasons. For if there are sensible 
things and sensations intermediate between Form and individual, 
evidently there will also be animals intermediate between 
animals-in-themselves and the perishable animals.—We might 
a5 also raise the question, with reference to which kind of existing 
things we must look for these additional sciences. If geometry 
is to differ from mensuration only in this, that the latter of 
these deals with things that we perceive, and the former with 
things that are not perceptible, evidently there will be a science 
other than medicine, intermediate between medical-science-in- 
itself and this individual medical science, and so with each 

30 of the other sciences. Yet how is this possible? There 
would have to be also healthy things besides the perceptible 
healthy things and the healthy-in-itself. And at the same 

1 CfA. 6 and 9. 

B. BOOK III 997” 

time not even this is true, that mensuration deals with percep- 
tible and perishable magnitudes; for then it would have 
perished, when they perished. And astronomy also cannot be 
dealing with perceptible magnitudes nor with this heaven above 
us. For neither are perceptible lines such lines as the geometer 35 
speaks of (for no perceptible thing is straight or curved in the 998" 
way in which he defines ‘ straight’ and ‘curved’; for a hoop 
touches a straight edge not at a point, but as Protagoras said 

it did, in his refutation of the geometers), nor are the move- 
ments and complex orbits in the heavens like those of which 5 
astronomy treats, nor have geometrical points the same nature 
as the actual stars—Now there are some who say that these 
so-called intermediates between the Forms and the perceptible 
things exist, not apart from the perceptible things, however, 
but in these ; the impossible results of this view would take 
too long to enumerate, but it is enough to consider such points 10 
as the following :—It is not reasonable that this should be so 
only in the case of these zmtermediates, but clearly the Forms 
also might be in the perceptible things ; for the same account 
applies to both. Further, it follows from this theory that there 
are two solids in the same place, and that the intermediates 
are not immovable, since they are in the moving perceptible 
‘things. And in general to what purpose would one suppose 15 
them to exzs¢ indeed, but to exist 7 perceptible things? For 
the same paradoxical results will follow which we have 
already mentioned ; there will be a heaven besides ¢he heaven, 
only it will be not apart but in the same place; which is still 
more impossible.! 

CHAPTER III 

Apart from the difficulty of stating the case truly with re- 20 
gard to these matters, it is hard to say, with regard to the first 
principles, whether it is the genera that should be taken as 
elements and principles, or rather the primary constituents of 
a thing; e.g. it is the primary parts of which all articulate 
sounds consist that are thought to be elements and principles 

1 With 997° 34-998" 19 cf. 995» 13-18. For the answer cf. A. 6-I0, 

4 4 > 

998" METAPHYSICA 

of articulate sound, not the common genus—articulate sound ; 
25 and we give the name of ‘ elements’ to those geometrical pro- 
positions, the proofs of which are implied in the proofs of the 
others, either of all or of most. Further, both those who say 
there are several elements of corporeal things and those who 
say there is one, say the parts of which bodies consist and are 
30 compounded are principles, e.g. Empedocles says fire and 
water and the intermediates between these are the constituent 
elements of things, but does not describe these as genera 
of existing things. Besides this, if we want to examine the 
998° nature of anything else, we examine the parts of which, e.g., 
a bed consists and how they are put together, and then! we 
know its nature. To judge from these arguments, then, the 
principles of things would not be the genera; but in so far as 
5 we know each thing by its definition, and the genera are the 
principles or starting-points of definitions, the genera must also 
be the principles of definable things. And if to get the know- 
ledge of things is to get the knowledge of the species according 
to which they are named, the genera are at least starting- 
points of the sfeczes. And some also of those who say unity 
1oand being, or the great and the small, are elements of 
things, seem to treat them as genera.—But, again, it is not 
possible to describe the principles in doth ways. For the 
formula of the essence is one; but definition by genera will be 
different from that which states the constituent parts of a 
thing.” 
Besides this, even if the genera are in the highest degree 
15 principles, whether should one regard the first of the genera 
as principles, or those which are predicated directly of the 
individuals? This also admits of dispute. For if the universal 
is always more of a principle, evidently the uppermost of the 
genera are the principles; for these are predicated of all things. 
There will, then, be as many principles of things as there 
20 are primary genera, so that both being and unity will be 
principles and substances ; for these are most of all predicated 
of all things. But it is not possible that either unity or being 

1 998" 1 read ἀθρεῖν, ἀθρεῖ οἷον... συγκειμένων, καὶ τότε. 

2 With οοδᾶ 20-Ὁ 14 cf. 995» 27-9. For the answer cf. Z. Io, 13. 

oY B. BOOK III 998° 

should be a genus of things; for the differentiae of any 
genus must each of them both have being and be one, but it is 
not possible for the genus to be predicated of the differentiae 
taken apart from the species (any more than for the species of 25 
the genus to be predicated of the proper differentiae of the 
genus); so that if unity or being is a genus, no differentia will 
either be one or have being. But if unity and being are not 
genera, neither will they be principles, if the genera are the prin- 
ciples.— Again, the intermediate classes, whose concepts include 
the differentiae, will on this theory be genera, down to the indi- 
viduals; but as it is, some are thought to be genera and others 
are not thought to be so. Besides this, the differentiae are 30 
principles even more than the genera; and if these also are 
principles, there comes to be practically an infinite number of 
principles, especially if we suppose the highest genus to be 

a principle—But again, if unity zs more of the nature of a 999" 
principle, and the indivisible is one, and everything indivisible 

is so either in quantity or in species, and that which is so in 
species is prior to the divisible, and genera are divisible into 
species (for man is not the gezus of individual men), that which 

is predicated directly of the individuals will have more unity.— 5 
Further, in the case of things in which the distinction of prior 
and posterior is present, that which is predicable of these 
things cannot be something apart from them; e.g. if two is 
the first of numbers, there will not be a Number apart from 
the kinds of numbers; and similarly there will not bea Figure 
apart from the kinds of figures; and if the genera of these 10 
things do not exist apart from the species, the genera of other 
things will scarcely do so; for genera of these things are 
thought to exist if any do. But in the indivisible species one . 
member is not prior and another posterior. Further, where 
one is better and another worse, the better is always prior; so 
that of these also no genus can exist. From these considera- 
tions, then, the species predicated of individuals seem to be 15 
principles rather than the genera.—But again, it is not easy 
to say in what sense these are to be taken as principles. For 
the principle or cause must exist alongside of the things 
of which it is the principle, and must be capable of existing in 
separation from them ; and for what reason should we suppose 

999° 

20 

25 

3° 

35 
999” 

5 

METAPHYSICA 

any such thing to exist alongside of the individual, except 
that it is predicated universally and of all? But if this is 
the reason, the more universal must be supposed to be more 
of a principle; so that the highest genera would be the 
principles.’ 

CHAPTER IV 

There is a difficulty connected with these, the hardest of all 
and the most necessary to examine, and to this our argument 
has now brought us. If, on the one hand, there is nothing 
apart from individual things, and the individuals are infinite in 
number, how is it possible to get knowledge of the zxfinzte? 
individuals? For all things that we know, we know in so far 
as they have some unity and identity, and in so far as some 
attribute belongs to them universally.— But if this is necessary, 
and there must be something apart from the individuals, it 
will be necessary that the classes exist apart from the indi- 
viduals,—either the lowest or the highest classes ; but we found 
by discussion just now that this is impossible.——Further, if we 
admit in the fullest sense that something exists apart from the 
concrete thing, whenever something is predicated of the matter, 
must there, if there is something apart, be something corre- 
sponding to each set of individuals, or to some and not to 
others, or to none?? (1) If there is nothing apart from indi- 
viduals, there will be no object of thought, but all things will be 
objects of sense, and there will not be knowledge of anything, 
unless we say that sensation is knowledge. Further, nothing 
will be eternal or unmovable ; for all perceptible things perish 
and are in movement. But if there is nothing eternal, neither 
can there be a process of coming to be; for that which comes 
to be, and that from which it comes to be, must be something, 
and the ultimate term inthis series cannot have come to be, since 
the series has a limit and nothing can come to be out of that 
which is not.—Further, if generation and movement exist there 

1 With 998° 14-999® 23 cf. 995" 29-31. For the answer cf. Z. 12. 1038 
19, and 13. 
2 999° 27 read τῶν γ᾽ ἀπ 
8 The question which mw ividuals have something apart corresponding 
to them suggests to Aristotle the further question whether any have. 
Thus the end of the sentence takes a form inconsistent with the beginning. 

B. BOOK III 

must also be a limit; for no movement is infinite, but every 
movement has an end, and that which is incapable of com- 
pleting its coming to be cannot be in process of coming to be; 
and that which has completed its coming to be must ὅδ as 
soon as it has come to be.!—-Further, since the matter exists,? 
because it is ungenerated, it is ἃ fortiori reasonable that the sub- 
stance or essence, that which the matter is at any time coming 
to be, should exist ; for if neither essence nor matter is, nothing 
will be at all. And since this is impossible there must be some- 
thing besides the concrete thing, viz. the shape or form.—But 
again (2) if we are to suppose this, it is hard to say in which 
cases we are to suppose it and in which not. For evidently 
it is not possible to suppose it in all cases; we could not 
suppose that there is a house besides the particular houses.— 

999 

Io 

Besides this, will the substance of all the individuals, e.g. of 20 

all men, be one? This is paradoxical, for all the things whose 
substance is on this view one are not one.’ But are they many 
and different? This also is unreasonable.—At the same time, 
how does the matter become each of the individuals, and how 
is the concrete thing these two elements ὃ * 

Again, one might ask the following question also about the 
first principles. If they are one zx kind only, nothing will be 
numerically one, not even unity-itself and being-itself. And 
how willit be possible to know, if there is not to be something 
common to a whole set of individuals ? But if there is acommon 
element which is ~umerically one, and each of the principles is 
one, and the principles are not as in the case of perceptible 
things different for different things (e.g. since this particular 
syllable is the same in kind whenever it occurs, the elements 
of it are also the same in kind; only in kind, for these also, 
like the syllable, are numerically different in different con- 
texts),—if the principles of things are not one in this sense, 
but are numerically one, there will be nothing else besides 
the elements; for there is no difference of meaning between 

1 Sc. and thus there is a limit to its coming to be. 
2 Sc. before the concrete thing. 
8 ggg? 21 read οὐ γὰρ ἕν ἅπαντα. 

* With 999% 24-Ὁ 24 cf. 995 31-36. For the answer cf. Z. 6, A. 6-10, 
M. Io. ᾿ 

20 

999° METAPHYSICA 

‘numerically one’ and ‘individual’. For this is just what we 
mean by the individual—the numerically one, and by the 
universal we mean that which is predicable of the individuals. 

10008 Therefore just as, if the elements of articulate sound were 
limited in number, all the literature in the world would be 
confined to the ABC, since there could not be two or more 
letters of the same kind, so is it with all existing things and 
their first principles.! 

s One difficulty which is as great as any has been omitted 
both by modern philosophers and by their predecessors— 
whether the principles of perishable and those of imperishable 
things are the same or different. If they are the same, how 
are some things imperishable and others perishable, and for 
what reason? The school of Hesiod and all the mythologists 

10 thought only of what was plausible to themselves, and had no 
regard to us. For asserting the first principles to be gods and 
born of gods, they say that the beings which did not taste of 
nectar and ambrosia became mortal; and clearly they are 
using words which are familiar to themselves, yet what they 
have said even about the very application of these causes is 

15 above our comprehension. For if the gods taste nectar and 
ambrosia for their pleasure, these are in no wise the causes of 
their existence; and if they taste them to maintain their 
existence, how can gods who need food be eternal ?—But into 
the subtleties of the mythologists it is not worth our while to 
inquire seriously ; those, however, who use the language of 

20 proof we must cross-examine and ask why, after all, things 
which consist of the same elements are, some of them, eternal 
in nature, while others perish. Since these philosophers 
mention no cause, and it is unreasonable that things should be 
as they say, evidently the principles or causes of things 
cannot be the same. Even the man whom one might sup- 

25 pose to speak most consistently—Empedocles,—even he has 
made the same mistake; for he maintains that strife is a 
principle that causes destruction, but strife would seem 
none the less to produce everything, except the One; for all 

' With 999” 24-1000% 4 cf. 996% 1-2. For the answer cf. Z. 14, A. 4 
M. Io. . 

B. BOOK III 1000° 

things excepting God proceed from strife. At least he 
says :-— 
From which grew all that was and is and will be hereafter— 
Trees, and men and women, and beasts and birds 30 
And water-nourished fish, and long-aged gods.* 
The implication is evident even apart from these words ; for if 1000° 
strife had not been present in things, all things would have been 
one, as he says—‘ when they have come together, strife stands 
outermost.’ Hence it also follows on his theory that God 
most blessed is less wise than all others ; for he does not know 
all the elements ; for he has in him no strife, and knowledge 5 
is of the like by the like. ‘For by earth,’ he says, 
we see earth, by water water, 
By ether godlike ether, by fire wasting fire, 
Love by love, and strife by gloomy strife.’ 
But—and this is the point we started from—this at least is 
evident, that on his theory it follows that strife is as much the 10 
cause of existence as of destruction. And similarly friend- 
ship is not specially the cause of existence; for in collecting 
things into the One it destroys all other things.—And at the 
same time Empedocles mentions no cause of the change itself, 
except that things are so by nature. 
But when strife waxed great in the limbs, 
And sprang to honour as the time was fulfilled 
Which is fixed for them in turn by a mighty oath.‘ 15 
This implies that change was necessary; but he shows no 
cause of the necessity. But yet sofar at least he alone speaks 
consistently ; for he does not make some things perishable and 
others imperishable, but makes all perishable except the 
elements.° The difficulty we are speaking of now is, why some 2° 
things are perishable and others are not, if they consist of the 
same principles. 
Let this suffice as proof of the fact that the principles cannot 
be the same. But if there are different principles, one difficulty 
is whether these themselves will be imperishable or perishable. 
For if they are perishable, evidently these also must consist of 

1 Fr. 21 Diels, Vorsokrattker. 2 Fr. 36 Diels, 20. 
3 Fr. 109 Diels, 2d. 
* 1000? 16 read map’ ἐλήλαται. Fr. 30 Diels, 20. 
δ But cf. Diels, 26. p. 161, § 52. 
E 

AR. MET. 

1000° METAPHYSICA 

a5 certain elements; for all things that perish, perish by being 
resolved into the elements of which they consist ; so that it 
follows that prior to the principles there are other principles. 
And this is impossible, whether the process has a limit or 
proceeds to infinity. Further, how will perishable things 
exist, if their principles are to be destroyed? But if the 
principles are imperishable, why will things composed of some 
30 imperishable principles be perishable, while those composed of 
the others are imperishable? This is not probable, but is 
either impossible or needs much proof. Further, no one has 
even tried to maintain different principles ; they maintain the 
1001" same principles for all things. But they swallow the difficulty 
we stated first! as if they took it to be something trifling.? 
The hardest inquiry of all, and the one most necessary for 
5 knowledge of the truth, is whether being and unity are the 
substances of things, and whether each of them, without being 
anything else, is being or unity respectively, ov we must inquire 
what being and unity are, with the implication that they 
have some other underlying nature. For some people think 
they are of the former, others think they are of the latter 
το Character. Plato and the Pythagoreans thought being and 
unity were nothing else, but this was their nature, their 
essence being just unity and being. But the natural philo- 
sophers take a different line ; e.g. Empedocles—as though 
reducing it to something more intelligible—says what unity 
is ; for he would seem to say it is love: at least, this is for all 
1s things the cause of their being one. Others say this unity and 
being, of which things consist and have been made, is fire, and 
others say it is air. A similar view is expressed by those who 
make the elements more than one; for these also must say 
that being and unity are precisely all the things which 
they say are principles. (1) If we do not suppose unity 
20 and being to be substances, it follows that none of the other 
universals is a substance; for these are most universal of all. 
For if’ there is no unity-itself or being-itself, there will 
scarcely be in any other case anything apart from what are 

1 1000° 7. 
3 With 1000% 5-1001*% 3 cf. 996% 2-4. For the answer cf. Z. 7-11, A. 
5 1001 22 read εἰ γάρ. 

B. BOOK III 

called the individuals. Further, if unity is not a substance, 
evidently number also will not exist as an entity separate from 
the individual things ; for number is units, and the unit is some- 
thing whose essence it is to be one.— But (2) if there is a unity- 
itself and a being-itself, their substance must be unity and 
being ; for it is not something else that is predicated univer- 
sally of them, but just unity and being. But if there is to be 
a being-itself and a unity-itself, there is much difficulty in 
seeing how there will be anything else besides these,—I mean, 
how things will be more than one in number. For what is 
different from being does not exist, so that it necessarily follows, 

10012 

25 

according to the argument of Parmenides, that all things that are — 

are one and this is being.—There are objections to both views. 
For whether unity is not a substance or there zs a unity- 
itself, number cannot be a substance. We have already! 
said why this result follows if unity is not a substance: 
and if it is, the same difficulty arises as arose with regard to 
being. For whence is there to be another one besides the 
unity-itself? It must be not-one ; but all things are either 
one or many, and of the many each is one.—Further, if the 
unity-itself is indivisible, according to Zeno’s doctrine? it will 
be nothing. For that which neither when added makes a 
thing greater nor when subtracted makes it less, he asserts to 
have no being, evidently assuming that whatever has being is 
a spatial magnitude. And if it is a magnitude, it is corporeal ; 
for the corporeal has being in every dimension, while the other 
objects of mathematics, e.g.a plane or a line, added in one way 
will increase what they are added to, but in another way will 
not do so,® and a point or a unit does so in no way. But if 
he argues thus,* his argument is of a low order ; and an indi- 
visible thing cam exist, so that in this way too the position 
may be defended even against him ; for the indivisible when 
added will make the number, though not the size, greater. 
But how can a magnitude proceed from one such indivisible 
or from many? It is like saying that the line is made out 

1 Cf. 1001 24. 

2 Cf. Diels, Vorsokratiker, ed. 2, p. 130, § 21. 

8 e.g. a line added to another at the end makes it longer, but one which 

lies beside another makes it no broader. 
* 1001» 13 read εἰ δὴ οὕτως. 

E 2 

1001? 

5 

Io 

15 

1001" METAPHYSICA 

of points. But even if one supposes the case to be such 

ao that, as some say, number proceeds from the unity-itself and 
something else which is not one, none the less we must 
inquire why and how the product will be sometimes a number 
and sometimes a magnitude, if the not-one was inequality 
and was the same principle in either case. For it is not evident 

25. how magnitudes could proceed either from the one and this 
principle, or from some number and this principle.! 

CHAPTER V 

A question connected with these is whether numbers and 
bodies and planes and points are substances or not. If they 
are not, it baffles us to say what being is and what the 
substances of things are. For modifications and movements 

30 and relations and dispositions and ratios do not seem to 
indicate the substance of anything; for all are predicated 
of a subject, and none is a ‘this’. And as to the things 
which might seem most of all to indicate substance, water and 

10028 earth and fire and air, of which composite bodies consist, 
heat and cold and the like are modifications of these, not 
substances, and the body which is thus modified alone persists 
as something real and as a substance. But, on the other 
. hand, the body is surely less of a substance than the surface, 

5 and the surface less than the line, and the line less than the 
unit and the point. For the body is bounded by these; and 
they are thought to be capable of existing without body, but 
the body cannot exist without these. This is why, while 
most of the philosophers and the earlier among them thought 
that substance and being were identical with corporeal 

10 matter, and that all other things were attributes of this, so 
that the first principles of bodies were the first principles of - 
being, the more recent and those who were held to be wiser 
thought ~umbers were the first principles. As we said, then, 
if these are not substance, there is no substance and no being 
at all; for surely it is not proper to call the accidents of these 

1 With 1oor® 4-Ὁ 25 cf. 996% 4-9. For the answer cf. Z. 1040 16-24, 
I, 2, M. 1083 20-58 2. 

OT NS SO Se Ce eee ee Oe ψι -“ eel ϑυοδακ ὐμμῳμῳμαασυοσννασοπασασ 

Β. BOOK III 1002% 

beings. But if this is admitted, that lines and points are sub- '5 
stance more than bodies, but we do not see to what sort of 
bodies these could belong (for they cannot be in perceptible 
bodies), there can be no substance.—Further, these are all 
evidently divisions of the body,—one a division in breadth, 
another in depth, another in length.— Besides this, no sort of 20 
shape is present in the solid more than any other;! so that 
if the Hermes is not in the stone, neither is the half of the 
cube in the cube as something determinate; therefore the 
surface is not in it either; for if any sort of surface were in 
it, the surface which marks off the half of the cube would be 
in it too. And the same account applies to the line and to a5 
the point and the unit. Therefore, if on the one hand the 
body is in the highest degree substance, and on the other 
hand these things are so more than the body, but these are 
not even instances of substance,’ it baffles us to say what 
being is and what the substance of things is.—For besides 
what has been said, the questions of generation and destruc- 
tion confront us with further paradoxes. For if substance, 30 
not having existed before, now exists, or having existed before, 
afterwards does not exist, this change is thought to be 
accompanied by a process of becoming or perishing; but 
points and lines and surfaces cannot be in process of becom- 
ing nor of perishing, though they at one time exist and at 
another do not. For when bodies come into contact or are 
separated, their boundaries instantaneously become one at one 1002» 
time—when they touch, and two at another time—when they 
are separated ; so that when they have been put together one 
boundary does not exist but has perished, and when they 
have been separated the boundaries exist which before did 
not exist. For it cannot be said that the point (which is 
indivisible) was divided into two. And if the boundaries 
come into being and cease to be, from what do they come 
into being?? A similar account may also be given of the 5 
‘now’ in time; for this also cannot be in process of coming 
into being or of ceasing to be, but yet seems to be always 

1 yoo2 21 omit ἣ οὐδέν. 
? Sc. not to speak of their being the whole of substance. 
® 1002) καὶ read ἐκ τίνος γίγνονται ; 

1002? METAPHYSICA 

different, which shows that it is not a substance. And 
evidently the same is true of points and lines and planes; 

10 for the same argument applies, as they are all alike either 
limits or divisions.! 

CHAPTER VI 

In general one might raise the question why, besides per- 
ceptible things and the intermediates,? we have to look for 
another class of things, such as the Forms which we? posit. 
If it is for this reason, because the objects of mathematics, 
while they differ from the things in this world in some other 

15 respect, differ not at all in that there are many of the same 
kind, so that their first principles cannot be limited in number 
(just as the elements of all the language in this sensible world 
are not limited in number, but in kind, unless one takes the 
elements of this individual syllable or of this individual articu- 
late sound—whose elements will be limited even in number—, 

20 so is it also in the case of the intermediates; for there also 
the members of the same kind are infinite in number), so that 
if there are not—besides perceptible and mathematical objects 
—others such as some maintain the Forms to be, there will 
be no substance which is one in number as well as in kind, 
nor will the first principles of things be determinate in number, 

2s but only in kind,—if then this must be so, the Forms also 
must therefore be held to exist. Even if those who support 
this view do not express it distinctly, still this is what they 
mean, and they must be maintaining the Forms just because 
each of the Forms is a substance and none is by accident. 
But if we are to suppose that the Forms exist and the 

80 principles are one in number, not in kind, the impossible results 
that we have mentioned‘ necessarily follow. 

Closely connected with this is the question whether the 
elements exist potentially or in some other way. If in some 
other way, there will be something else prior to the first 

1 With 1001” 26-1002" 11 cf. 996® 12-17. For the answer cf. M, N, 
esp. Logo? 5-13. 

2 For these cf. A. 6. 987° 14. > Sc. Platonists. 

* 999° 27. 

B. BOOK III 100ga 

principles; for the potency is prior to the actual cause, and 
it is not necessary for everything potential to be actual. 
—But if the elements exist potentially, it is possible that 
everything that is should not be. For even that which is not 
yet is capable of being; for that which is not comes to be, but 5 
nothing that is incapable of being comes to be.? 

We must not only raise these questions about the first 
principles, but also ask whether they are universal or what we 
call individuals. If they are universal, they will not be sub- 
stances ; for everything that is common indicates not a ‘ this’ 
but a ‘such’, but substance is a ‘ this ’.—Annd if we can actually τὸ 
hypostatize the common predicate as an individual, Socrates 
will be several animals—himself and ‘man’ and ‘animal,’ 
if each of these indicates a ‘this’ and a single thing.—If, then, 
the principles are universals, these results follow; if they are 
not universals but of the nature of individuals, they will not 
be knowable ; for the knowledge of anything is universal. 
Therefore if there is to be knowledge of the principles there 15 
must be other principles prior to them, which are universally 
predicated of them.? 

1 With 1002° 32-10038 καὶ cf.996* 10-11. For the answer cf. H. 2-9. 9, Δ. 6. 
3 With 1003 5-17 cf. 996* 9-10. For the answer cf. Z. 13, 14, M. 10. 

aaa rae ννανο πα ΕΙΝΑ ” ΟΝ ΝΗ ΑΙ ne ie IEEE EEE EEE ED 

BOOK IV (r) 

CHAPTER I 

THERE is a science which investigates being as being and 
the attributes which belong to this in virtue of its own nature. 
Now this is not the same as any of the so-called special 
sciences; for none of these others deals generally with being 
as being. They cut off a part of being and investigate 

25 the attributes of this part—this is what the mathematical 
sciences for instance do. Now since we are seeking the 
first principles and the highest causes, clearly there must be 
some thing to which these belong in virtue of its own nature. 
If then our predecessors who sought the elements of existing 
things were seeking these same principles, it is necessary 

3° that the elements must be elements of being not by accident 
but just because it zs being. Therefore it is of being as being 
that we also must grasp the first causes. 

CHAPTER II 

There are many senses in which a thing may be said to 
‘be’, but they are related to one central point, one definite 
kind of thing, and have not merely the epithet ‘being’ in 
common. Everything which is healthy is related to health, 

35 one thing in the sense that it preserves health, another in 
the sense that it produces it, another in the sense that it 
is a symptom of health, another because it is capable of it. 

1003” And that which is medical is relative to the medical art, one 
thing in the sense that it possesses it, another in the sense 

that it is naturally adapted to it, another in the sense that it 

is a function of the medical art. And we shall find other 
swords used similarly to these. So, too, there are many 
senses in which a thing is said to be, but all refer to one 
starting-point ; some things are said to be because they are 

΄» α΄ 

rT. BOOK IV 

substances, others because they are affections of substance, 
others because they are a process towards substance, or 
destructions or privations or qualities of substance, or pro- 
ductive or generative of substance, or of things which are 
relative to substance, or negations of some of these things or 
of substance itself. It is for this reason that we say even of 
non-being that it zs non-being. As, then, there is one science 
which deals with all healthy things, the same applies in the 
other cases also. For not only in the case of things which 
have one common ‘notion does the investigation belong to one 
science, but also in the case of things which are related to 
one common nature; for even these in a sense have one 
common notion. It is clear then that it is the work of one 
science also to study all things that are, gua being.—But 
everywhere science deals chiefly with that which is primary, 
and on which the other things depend, and in virtue of which 
they get their names. If, then, this is substance, it is of 
substances that the philosopher must grasp the principles and 
the causes. 

Now for every single class of things, as there is one per- 
ception, so there is one science, as for instance grammar, 
being one science, investigates all articulate sounds. There- 
fore to investigate all the species of being gua being, is the 
work of a. science which is generically one, and to investigate 
the several species is the work of the specific parts of the 
science, | | 

If, now, being and unity are the same and are one 
thing in the sense that they are implied in one another as 
principle and cause are, not in the sense that they are 
explained by the same definition (though it makes no differ- 
ence even if we interpret them similarly—in fact this would 
strengthen our case); for ‘one man’ and ‘existent man’ and 
‘man’ are the same thing, and the doubling of the words in 
‘the man is one and is a man’! does not give any new mean- 
ing (it is clear that his unity is not severed from his humanity 
either in coming to be or in ceasing to be; and similarly his 
being is not severed 3), so that it is obvious that the addition 

1 1003" 28 read εἷς ἐστὶν ἄνθρωπος καὶ ἔστιν ἄνθρωπος. 
2 1003” 30 read τοῦ ὄντος. 

1003” 

10 

30 

1003” METAPHYSICA 

in these cases means the same thing, and unity is nothing 
apart from being!; and if, further, the essence of each thing 
is one in no merely accidental way, and similarly is from its 
very nature something that zs :—all this being so, there must be 
exactly as many species of being as of unity. And to in- 
vestigate the essence of these is the work of a science which 
35 is generically one—I mean, for instance, the discussion of the 
same and the similar and the other concepts of this sort ?; 
1004" and nearly all contraries are reducible to this source; but let 
us take them as having been investigated ih the ‘ Selection of 
Contraries’*.—And there are as many parts of philosophy 
as there are kinds of substance, so that there must necessarily 
be among them a first philosophy and one which follows this. 
5 For being and unity fall immediately into genera; and 
therefore the sciences too will correspond to these genera. 
For ‘ philosopher ’ is like ‘mathematician ’ with its variety of 
meanings; for mathematics also has parts, and there is a 
first and a second science and other successive ones within 
the sphere of mathematics.‘ 
Now since it is the work of one science to investigate 
10 opposites, and plurality is opposite to unity, and it belongs 
to one science to investigate the negation and the privation 
because in both cases we are really investigating unity, 
to which the negation or the privation refers (for we either 
say simply that unity is not present, or that it is not present 
in some particular class; in the latter case the characteristic 
difference of the class modifies the meaning of ‘unity’, as 
compared with the meaning conveyed in the bare negation; 
15 for the negation means just the absence of unity, while in 
privation there is also implied an underlying nature of which 
the privation is predicated °),—-since, then, plurality is opposite 
to unity, in view of all these facts, the contraries of the concepts 

1 The argument is obscured by doubts as to the reading, but seems to 
be that being and unity are not severed from the particular thing which 
zs and is one, and .᾿. are not severed from one another. 

2 1003” 36 read τοιούτων" σχεδόν. 

3 Fr. 1478> 36-1479" καὶ (Fr. 31 ed. Rose, 1886). 

4 With 1004* 2-9 cf. B. 995 10-13, 0978 15-25. - 

5 i.e. negation is simply the negation of an attribute ; in privation some 
member of a definite class is said not to have the attribute in the form 
appropriate to that class. 

Tr, BOOK IV 10047 

we named above, the other and the dissimilar and the unequal, 
and everything else which is derived either from these or from 
plurality and unity, must fall within the province of the science 
above-named.—And contrariety is one of these concepts, 29 
for contrariety is a kind of difference, and difference is a kind 
of otherness. Therefore, since there are many senses in which 

a thing is said to be one, these terms also will have many 
senses, but yet it belongs to one science to consider them 
all; for a term belongs to different sciences not if it has 
different senses, but if its definitions neither are identical 
nor can be referred to one central meaning. And since all 25 
things are referred to that which is primary, as for instance 
all things which are one are referred to the primary one, we 
must say that this holds good also of the same and the 
other and of contraries in general; so that after distinguish- 
ing the various senses of each, we must then explain by 
reference to what is primary in each term, saying how they 
are related to it; some in the sense that they possess it, 3° 
others in the sense that they, produce it, and others in other 
such ways. 

It is evident then! that it belongs to one science to be able 
to give an account of these concepts as well as of substance. 
This was one of the questions in our book of problems.? 

And it is the function of the philosopher to be able to 
investigate all things. For if it is not the function of the 1004° 
philosopher, who is it who will inquire whether Socrates and 
Socrates seated are the same thing, or whether one thing has 
one contrary, or what contrariety is, or how many meanings 
it has? And similarly with all other such questions. Since, 5 
then, these are essential modifications of unity gua unity and of 
being gua being, not gua numbers or lines or fire, it is clear 
that it belongs to this science to investigate both the essence 
of these concepts and their properties. And those who study 
these properties err not by leaving the sphere of philosophy 
but by forgetting that substance, of which they have no 10 
correct idea, is prior to these other things. For number gua 

1 1004% 32 omit ὅπερ... ἐλέχθη. 
2 i.e. B. 995 20-27. 
3 Sc. which they do not do. 

1004° METAPHYSICA 

number has peculiar attributes, such as oddness and evenness, 
commensurability and equality, excess and defect, and these 
belong to numbers either in themselves or in relation to one 
another. And similarly the solid and the motionless and that 
which is in motion and the weightless and that which has 

15 weight have other peculiar properties. So too certain pro- 
perties are peculiar to being as such, and it is about these 
that the philosopher has to investigate the truth.—Avn indica- 
tion of this may be mentioned :—dialecticians and sophists 
assume the same guise as the philosopher, for sophistic is 
philosophy which exists only in semblance, and dialecticians 4 
embrace all things in their dialectic, and being is common 

20 to all things; but evidently their dialectic embraces these 
subjects because these are proper to philosophy.—For sophistic 
and dialectic turn on the same class of things as philosophy, 
but this differs from dialectic in the nature of the faculty 
required and from sophistic in respect of the purpose of the 

25 philosophic life. Dialectic is merely critical where philosophy 
claims to know, and sophistic is what appears to be philosophy 
but is not. 

Again, in the list of contraries one of the two columns? is 
privative, and all contraries are reducible to being and non- 
being, and to unity and plurality, as for instance rest belongs 
to unity and movement to plurality. And nearly all 

go thinkers agree that being and substance are composed of 
contraries; at least all name contraries as their first principles 
—some name odd and even, some hot and cold, some limit 
and the unlimited, some love and strife. And everything else 

is evidently reducible to unity and plurality (this reduction 
1005* we must take for granted‘), and the principles stated by other 
thinkers fall entirely under these as their genera. It is obvious 
then from these considerations too that it belongs to one 
science to examine being gua being. For all things are 
either contraries or composed of contraries, and unity and 

5 plurality are the starting-points of all contraries. And these 
belong to one science, whether they have or have not one 

1 1004” 18 read ἡ yap... . διαλεκτικοὶ διαλέγονται περὶ ἁπάντων. 
3 With 1004” 5-26 cf. B. 995” 18-20, 9975 25-33. 
5 Cf. note on A. 9868 23. * Cf. Fr. 1478" 36-1479 5. 

r. BOOK IV 1005" 

common notion. Probably they have not; yet even if ‘one’ 

" has several meanings, the other meanings will be related to the 
primary meaning—and similarly in the case of the contraries. 
—And if! being or unity is not a universal and the same in 
every instance, or is not separable from the particular instances 
(as in fact it probably is not; the unity is in some cases that ro 
of common reference, in some cases that of serial succession) — 
just for this reason it does not belong to the geometer to inquire 
what is contrariety or completeness or being or unity or the 
same or the other, but only to presuppose these concepts and 
reason from this starting-point.—Obviously then it is the 
work of one science to examine being gua being, and the 
attributes which belong to it gva being, and the same science 
will examine not only substances but also their attributes, 15 
‘both those above named and the concepts ‘prior’ and 

‘ posterior ’, genus and species, whole and part, and the others 
of this sort.’ 

CHAPTER III 

We must state whether it belongs to one or to different 
sciences to inquire into the truths which are in mathematics 20 
called axioms, and into substance. Evidently the inquiry 
into these also belongs to one science, and that the science of 
the philosopher ; for these truths hold good for everything that 
is, and not for some special genus apart from others. And 
all men use them, for they are true of being gua being, and 
each genus has being. But men use them just so far as to satisfy δὲ 
their purposes ; that is, as far as the genus, whose attributes 
they are proving, extends. Therefore since these truths 
clearly hold good for all things gua being (for this is what is 
common to them), he who studies being gua being will inquire 
into them too.—And for this reason no one who is conducting 
a special inquiry tries to say anything about their truth or 30 
falsehood,—neither the geometer nor the arithmetician. Some 
natural philosophers indeed have done so, and their procedure 
was intelligible enough; for they thought that they alone 

1 1005* 8 omit καὶ διὰ τοῦτο. 
3 With ch. 2 cf. B. 995 5-7, 996® 18-- 26. 

1005" METAPHYSICA 

were inquiring about the whole of nature and of being. 
But since there is one kind of thinker who is even above the 
natural philosopher (for nature is only one particular genus 
of being), the discussion of these truths also will belong 
35 to him whose inquiry is universal and deals with primary 
1005° substance. Physics also is a kind of Wisdom, but it is not 
the first kind.—And the attempts of some who discuss the 
terms on which truth should be accepted, are due to a want 
of training in logic ; for they should know these things already 
5 when they come to a special study, and not be inquiring into 
them while they are pursuing it—Evidently then the philo- 
sopher, who is studying the nature of all substance, must 
inquire also into the principles of syllogism. 
But he who knows best about each genus must be able 
10 to state the most certain principles of his subject, so that he 
whose subject is being gua being must be able to state the 
most certain principles of all things. This is the philosopher, 
and the most certain principle of all is that regarding which 
it is impossible to be mistaken ; for such a principle must be 
both the best known (for all men may be mistaken about 
τ things which they do not know), and non-hypothetical. For 
a principle which every one must have who knows anything 
about being, is not a hypothesis; and that which every one 
must know who knows anything, he must already have when 
he comes to a special study. Evidently then such a principle 
is the most certain of all; which principle this is, we proceed 
tosay. It is, that the same attribute cannot at the same time 
belong and not belong to the same subject in the same respect; 
20 we must presuppose, in face of dialectical objections, any 
further qualifications which might be added. This, then, is 
the most certain of all principles, since it answers to the defini- 
tion given above. For it is impossible for any one to believe 
the same thing to be and not to be, as some think Heraclitus 
δ says; for what a man says he does not necessarily believe. 
If it is impossible that contrary attributes should belong at 
the same time to the same subject (the usual qualifications 
must be presupposed in this premise too), and if an opinion 
which contradicts another is contrary to it, obviously it is 
impossible for the same man at the same time to believe the 

ge ee EE ee EO EEeEeEeee 

Tr. BOOK IV 1005° 

same thing to be and not to be; for if a man were mistaken 30 
in this point he would have contrary opinions at the same 
time. It is for this reason that all who are carrying out 

a demonstration reduce it to this as an ultimate belief; for 
this is naturally the starting-point even for all the other 
axioms.! 

CHAPTER IV 

There are some who, as we have said, both themselves 35 
assert that it is possible for the same thing to be and not to 
be, and say that people can judge this to be the case. And 10062 
among others many writers about nature use this language. 
But we have now posited that it is impossible for anything 
at the same time to be and not to be, and by this means have 
shown that this is the most indisputable of all principles.2— 
Some indeed demand that even this shall be demonstrated, ; 
but this they do through want of education, for not to know 
of what things one may demand demonstration, and of what 
one may not, argues simply want of education. For it is 
impossible that there should be demonstration of absolutely 
everything; there would be an infinite regress, so that there 
would still be no demonstration. But if there are things of 
which one should not demand demonstration, these persons τὸ 
cannot say what principle they regard as more indemon- 
strable than the present one. 

We can, however, demonstrate negatively even that this 
view is impossible, if our opponent will only say something ; 
and if he says nothing, it is absurd to attempt to reason with 
one who will not reason about anything, in so far as he 
refuses to reason. For such a man, as such, is seen already 
to be no better than a mere plant. Now negative demonstra- 15 
tion I distinguish from demonstration proper, because in a 
demonstration one might be thought to be begging the 
question, but if another person is responsible for the assumption 
we shall have negative proof, not demonstration. The starting- 

1 With ch. 3 cf. B. 995” 7-10, 996° 26-997 15. 
2 j.e. we have shown that since 4 cannot be both 2 and not-Z, no one 
can think A is both B and not-B (1005 22-31). : 

1006% METAPHYSICA 

point for all such arguments is not the demand that our 
20 opponent shall say that something either is or is not (for this 
one might perhaps take to be a begging of the question), but 
that he shall say something which is significant both for him- 
self and for another ; for this is necessary, if he really is to 
say anything. For, if he means nothing, such a man will not 
be capable of reasoning, either with himself or with another. 
But if any one grants this, demonstration will be possible ; 
as for we shall already have something definite. The person 
responsible for the proof, however, is not he who demonstrates 
but he who listens ; for while disowning reason he listens to 
reason. [And again he who admits this has admitted that 
something is true apart from demonstration, so that not every- 
thing will be ‘so and not so’.!] 
First then this at least is obviously true, that the word ‘be’ 
30 or ‘not be’ has a definite meaning, so that not everything 
will be ‘so and not so’.—Again, if ‘man’ has one meaning, 
let this be ‘two-footed animal’; by having one meaning 
I understand this:—if ‘man’ means “χ᾽, then if A is a man 
‘X’ will be what ‘ being a man’ means for him. And it makes 
no difference even if one were to say a word has several 
1006” meanings, if only they are limited in number; for to each 
formula there might be assigned a different word. For 
instance, we might say that ‘man’ has not one meaning 
but several, one of which would be defined as ‘two-footed 
animal’, while there might be also several other formulae 
if only they were limited in number; for a peculiar name 
s might be assigned to each of the formulae. If, however, 
they were not limited but one were to say that the word has 
an infinite number of meanings, obviously reasoning would 
be impossible; for not to have one meaning is to have no 
meaning, and if words have no meaning reasoning with other 
το people, and indeed with oneself, has been annihilated; for 
it is impossible to think of anything? if we do not think of 
one thing; but if this zs possible, one name might be assigned 
to this thing. Let it be assumed then, as was said at the 

1 This sentence is probably out of place. For ‘so and not so’ cf. Pl. 
Theaet. 183 A. 
2 1006” 10 read οὐδὲν γάρ. 

eS ἀψ' ΡΨ ΄᾽ ΒΡ 

Γ, BOOK IV . 1006° 

beginning,! that the name has a meaning and has one mean- 
ing; it is impossible, then, that ‘being. a: man’ should mean 
precisely ‘not being a man’, if ‘man’ is not only predicable 
of one subject but also has one meaning (for we do not 15 
identify ‘having one meaning’ with ‘ being predicable of one 
subject’, since on that assumption even ‘musical’ and ‘ white’ and 
‘man’ would have had one meaning, so that all things would 
have been one; for they would all have had the same meaning). 

And it will not be possible for the same thing to be and 
not to be, except in virtue of an ambiguity, just as one whom 
we call ‘man’, others might call ‘not-man’; but the point in 20 
question is not this, whether the same thing can at the same 
time be and not be a man in name, but whether it can in fact. 
Now if ‘man’ and ‘ not-man’ mean nothing different, obviously 
‘not being a man’ will mean nothing different from ‘ being 
aman’; so that ‘being a man’ will be ‘not being a man’; 
for they will be one. For being one means this—what we find 
in the case of ‘raiment’ and ‘ dress ’—viz. that the definitory 
formula is one. And if ‘being a man’ and ‘not being 
a ‘man’ are to be one, they must mean one thing. But it 
was shown earlier that they mean different things. There- 
fore, if it is true to say of anything that it is a man, it must 
be a two-footed animal; for this was what ‘man’ meant; 3° ὁ 
and if this is necessary, it is impossible that the same thing 
should not be a two-footed animal; for this is what ‘ being 
necessary ’ means—that it is impossible for the thing not to 
be. It is, then, impossible that it should be at the same time 
true to say the same thing is a man and is not a man. 

The same account holds good with regard to ‘not being 
man’?, for ‘being man’ and ‘being not-man’ mean different 1007 
things, since even ‘ being white’ and ‘ being man ’ are different ; 
for the former terms are much more opposed, so that they 
must ὦ fortiorz mean different things. And if any one says 
that ‘ white’ means one and the same thing as ‘man’, again 5 
we shall say the same as what was said before, that it would 
follow that a// things are one, and not only opposites. But if 
this is impossible, then what has been said will follow, if our 
opponent answers our question. 

7 8 31, 2 10078 1 read μὴ εἶναι ἄνθρωπον. 
AR. MET. F 

it~] 
qn 

1007* | METAPHYSICA 

And if, when one asks the question simply, he adds the 
10 contradictories, he is not answering the question. For there 
is nothing to prevent the same thing from being both man 
and white and countless other things: but still if one asks 
whether it is true to call this a man or not our opponent must 
give an answer which means one thing, and not add that it is 
also white and large. For, besides other reasons, it is impos- 
sible to enumerate the accidents, which are infinite in number ; 
15 let him, then, enumerate either all or none. Similarly, there- 
fore, even if the same thing is a thousand times man and not- 
man, we must not add, in answering the question whether 
this is a man, that it is also at the same time not a man, 
unless we are bound to add also all the other accidents, all 
20 that the subject is or is not; and if we do this, we are not 
observing the rules of argument. 

And in general those who use this argument do away with 
substance and essence. For they must say that all attributes are 
accidents, and that there is no such thing as ‘being essentially 
man’ or‘ animal’. For if there is to be any such thing as ‘ being 
essentially man ’ this will not be ‘ being not-man’ or ‘ not being 

a5 man’ (yet these are negations of ἰΐ 1) ; for there was some one 
thing which it meant, and this was the substance of something. 
And denoting the substance of a thing means that the essence 
of the thing is nothing else. But if its being essentially man 5 

is to be the same as either being essentially not-man or 
essentially not being man, then its essence wi// be something 
else. Therefore our opponents must say that there cannot 
30 be such a definition of anything, but that all attributes are 
accidental ; for this is the distinction between substance and 
accident—‘ white’ is accidental to man, because though he is 
white, whiteness is not his essence. But if a// statements are 
accidental, there will be nothing primary about which they 
are made, if the accidental always implies predication about 
1007" a subject. The predication, then, must go on ad infinitum. 
But this is impossible; for not even more than two terms 
can be combined in accidental predication. For (1) an acci- 
dent is not an accident of an accident, unless it be because 

2 Sc. and hence (on the view attacked) should be compatible with it. 
3 10078 27 read εἰ δ᾽ ἔσται αὐτῷ τὸ ὅπερ ἀνθρώπῳ εἶναι. 

r. BOOK IV 1007" 

both are accidents of the same subject. I mean, for instance, 
the white is musical and the latter is white, only because both 
are accidental to man. But (2) Socrates is musical, not in 5 
this sense, that both terms are accidental to something else. 
Since then some predicates are accidental in this and some 
in that sense, (4) those which are accidental in the latter sense, 
in which white is accidental to Socrates, cannot form an 
infinite series in the upward direction,!—e. g. Socrates the white 
has not yet another accident ; for no unity can be got out of 10 
such a sum. Nor again (4) will ‘white’ have another term 
accidental to it, e.g. ‘ musical’. For this is no mare accidental 
to that than that is to this; and at the same time we have 
drawn the distinction, that while some predicates are accidental 

in this sense, others are so in the sense in which ‘ musical’ is 
accidental to Socrates ; and the accident is an accident of an 15 
accident not in cases of the latter kind, but only in cases of 
the other kind, so that not αὐ terms will be accidental.” 
There must, then, be something which denotes substance. 
And it has been shown that, if this is so, contradictory state- 
ments cannot be predicated at the same time. 

Again, if all contradictory statements are true of the same 
subject at the same time, evidently all things will be one. 
For the same thing will be a trireme, a wall, and a man, if it is 20 
equally possible to affirm and to deny anything of anything,— 
and this premise must be accepted by those who share the 
views of Protagoras. For if any one thinks that the man 
is not a trireme, evidently he is not a trireme; so that he 
also is a trireme, if, as they say, contradictory statements are 
both true. And we thus get the doctrine of Anaxagoras,? 25 
that all things are mixed together; so that nothing really 
exists. They seem, then, to be speaking of the indeterminate, 
and, while fancying themselves to be speaking of being, they 
are speaking about non-being; for that which exists poten- 
tially and not actually is the indeterminate. But they must 

1 j,e. in the direction of predicates, which are naturally wider or higher 
than the subject. | 

* Sense (1) reduces to sense (2), and in this an infinite number of 
accidents combined together is impossible; there must be substance 
somewhere. 

3 Fr. 1 Diels, Vorsokratiker. 

F 2 

1007 METAPHYSICA 

predicate of every subject every attribute and the negation 
30 Of it indifferently. For it is absurd if of every subject 
its own negation is to be predicable, while the negation 
of something else which cannot be predicated of it is not pre- 
dicable of it ; for instance, if it is true to say of a man that he 
is not a man, evidently it is also true to say that he is not 
35 a trireme. If, then, the affirmative! can be predicated, the 
negative must be predicable too; and if the affirmative is not 
predicable, the negative, at least, will be more predicable than 
1008" the negative of the subject itself. If, then, even the latter 
negative is predicable, the negative of ‘trireme’ will be also 
predicable ; and, if this is predicable, the affirmative will be 
so too.—Those, then, who maintain this view are driven to 
this conclusion, and to the further conclusion that it is not 
necessary either to assert or to deny. For if it is true that 
5a thing is man and not-man, evidently also it will be neither 
man nor not-man. For to the two assertions there answer 
two negations. And if the former? is treated as a single 
proposition compounded out of two, the latter also is a single 
proposition opposite to the former. 
Again, either the theory is true in all cases, and a thing is 
το both white and not-white, and being and non-being, and all other 
᾿ contradictories are similarly compatible, or the theory is true 
of some statements and not of others. And if not of all, the 
exceptions will be contradictories of which admittedly only one 
is true; but if of all, again either the negation will be true 
wherever the assertion is, and the assertion true wherever 
the negation is, or the negation will be true where the asser- 
tion is, but the assertion not always true where the negation 
15 is, And(1) in the latter case-there will be something which 
fixedly zs μοί, and this will be an indisputable belief; and if 
non-being is indisputable and knowable, the opposite asser- 
tion will be more knowable. But (2) if what it is necessary to 
deny it is equally necessary to assert, it is either * true or not 
true to separate the predicates and say, for instance, that a 
20 thing is white, and again that it is not-white. And if (a) it is 

1 Sc. ‘trireme’. 
# Sc. that the thing is man and not-man. 
5 1008 18 read καὶ ὅσα ἀποφῆσαι φάναι ἀνάγκη, Frot. 

Tr. BOOK IV | 10089 

not true to apply the predicates separately, our opponent is 
not really applying them, and nothing at all exists; but how 
could non-existent things speak or walk, as he does? Also 
all things will .on this view be one, as has been already said, 
and man and God and trireme and their contradictories will be 
the same. For if contradictories can be predicated alike of 25 
each subject, one thing will in no wise differ from another ; for 
if it differ, this difference will be something true and peculiar 
to it. And (δ) if one may with truth apply the predicates 
separately, the above-mentioned result follows none the less. 

Further, it follows that all would then be right and all would 
be in error, and our opponent himself confesses himself to 
be in error.—And at the same time our discussion with him is 30 
evidently about nothing at all; for he says nothing. For he 
says neither ‘yes’ nor ‘no’, but both ‘yes’ and ‘no’; and 
again he denies both of these and says ‘neither yes nor no’ ; 
for otherwise there would already be something definite.— 
Again, if when the assertion is true, the negation is false, 
and when this is true, the affirmation is false, it will not be 
possible to assert and deny the same thing truly at the 
same time. But perhaps they might say we had assumed 1008” 
the very question at issue. 

Again, is he in error who judges either that the thing is 
so or that it is not so, and is he right who judges both? 
If he is not right, what can they mean by saying that 
the nature of existing things is of this kind? And if hes5 
is not right, but more right than he who judges in the 
other way, being will already be of a definite nature, and 
this will be true, and not at the same time also not true. 
But if all are alike both right and wrong, one who believes 
this can neither speak nor say anything intelligible; for he 
says at the same time both ‘yes’ and ‘no’. And if hero 
makes no judgement but ‘thinks’ and ‘does not think’, in- 
differently, what difference will there be between him and 
the plants?—Thus, then, it is in the highest degree evident 
that neither any one of those who maintain this view nor 
any one else is really in this position. For why does a man 
walk to Megara and not stay at home thinking he is walking ὃ 
Why does he not walk early some morning into a well or 15 

1008? METAPHYSICA 

over a precipice, if one happens to be in his way? Why 
do we observe him guarding against this, evidently not 
thinking that falling in is alike good and not good? Evi- 
dently he judges one thing to be better and another worse. 
And if this is so, he must judge one thing to be man and 

a0 another to be not-man, one thing to be sweet and another 
to be not-sweet. For he does not aim at and judge all 
things alike, when, thinking it desirable to drink water or to 
see a man, he proceeds to aim at these things; yet he ought, 
if the same thing were alike man and not-man. But, as was 
said, there is no one who does not obviously avoid some 

as things and not others. Therefore, as it seems, all men make 
unqualified judgements, if not about all things, still about 
what is better and worse. And if this is not knowledge but 
opinion, they should be all the more anxious about the truth, 
as a sick man should be more anxious about his health than 
one who is healthy; for he who has opinions is, in comparison 

30 with the man who knows, not in a healthy state as far as the 
truth is concerned. 

Again, however much all things may be ‘so and not so’, 
still there is a more and a less in the nature of things ; for we 
should not say that two and three are equally even, nor is 
he who thinks four things are five equally wrong with him 

35 who thinks they are a thousand. If then they are not equally 
wrong, obviously one is less wrong and therefore more right. 
If then that which has more of any quality is nearer the 
1009* norm, there must be some truth to which the more true is 
nearer. And even if there is not, still there is already 
something more certain and true, and we shall have got rid 
of the unqualified doctrine which would prevent us from 

5 determining anything in our thought. 

CHAPTER V 

Again, from the same opinion proceeds the doctrine of 
Protagoras, and both doctrines must be alike true or alike 
untrue. For on the one hand, if all opinions and appearances 
are true, all statements must be at the same time true and 
false. For many men hold beliefs in which they conflict 

r. BOOK IV 1009° 

with one another, and all think those mistaken who have not to 
the same opinions as themselves; so that the same thing 
must be and not be. And on the other hand, if this is so, all 
opinions must be true; for those who are mistaken and those 
who are right are opposed to one another in their opinions ; 
if, then, reality is such as the view in question supposes, all 
will be right in their beliefs. Evidently, then, both doctrines 15 
proceed from the same way of thinking. 

But the same method of discussion must not be used with 
all opponents; for some need persuasion, and others com- 
pulsion. Those who have been driven to this position by 
difficulties in their thinking can easily be cured of their igno- 
rance ; for it is not their expressed argument but their thought 
that one has to meet. But those who argue for the sake of 20 
argument can be convinced only by emending the argument 
as expressed in words. 

Those who really feel the difficulties have been led to this 
opinion by observation of the sensible world. (1) They think 
that contradictions or contraries are true at the same time, 
because they see contraries coming into existence out of the 
same thing. If, then, that which is not cannot come to be, 25 
the thing must have existed before as both contraries alike, 
as Anaxagoras says all is mixed in all, and Democritus too ; 
for he says the void and the full exist alike in every part, and 
yet one of these is being, and the other non-being. To those, 30 
then, whose belief rests on these grounds, we shall say that ina 
sense they speak rightly and in a sense they err. For ‘that 
which is’ has two meanings, so that in some sense a thing can 
come to be out of that which is not, while in some sense it 
cannot, and the same thing can at the same time be and 
not be—but not in the same respect. For the same thing 35 
can be potentially at the same time two contraries, but it 
cannot actually. And again we shall ask them to believe 
that among existing things there is another kind of substance to 
which neither movement nor destruction nor generation at all 
belongs. 

And (2) similarly some have inferred from the sensible world 1009° 
‘the truth of appearances’. For they think that the truth should 
not be determined by the large or small number of those who 

1009" METAPHYSICA 

hold a belief, and that the same thing is thought sweet by 
some who taste it, and bitter by others, so that if all were ill 

5 or all were mad, and only two or three were well or sane, these 
would be thought ill and mad, and not the others. And again, 
many of the other animals receive about the same things im- 
pressions contrary to ours ; and even to the senses of each indi- 
vidual, things do not always seem the same. Which, then, of 
these impressions are true and which are false is not obvious ; 

1o for the one set is no more true than the other, but both are 
alike. And this is why Democritus, at any rate,:says that 
either there is no truth or to us at least it is not evident. And 
in general it is because these thinkers suppose knowledge to 
be sensation, and this to be a physical alteration, that they 

15 say that what appears to our senses must be true; for it is for 
these reasons that Empedocles and Democritus and, one may 
almost say, all the others have fallen victims to opinions of 
this sort. For Empedocles says that when men change their 
condition they change their knowledge ; 

For wisdom increases in men according to their present 
state.' 

And elsewhere he says: 

20 90 far as their nature changes, so far to them always 
Come changed thoughts into mind.’ 

And Parmenides also expresses himself in the same way: 

For as in each case the much-bent limbs are composed, 
So is the mind of men; for in each and all men 
Tis one thing thinks—the substance of their limbs: 
For that of which there is more is thought 
as A saying of Anaxagoras to some of his friends is also related, 
—that things would be for them such as they supposed them 
to be. And they say that Homer also evidently had this 
opinion, because he made Hector, when he was unconscious 
30 from the blow, lie ‘thinking other thoughts ’,—which implies 
that even those who are bereft of thought have thoughts, 
though not the same. Evidently, then, if both are forms of 
thought, the real things also are at the same time ‘so and not 

1 Fr. 106 Diels, Vorsokratiker. * Fr. 108 Diels, 26. 
δ Fr. 16 Diels, £0. 

r. BOOK IV 1009? 

so’. And it is in this direction that the consequences are most 
difficult. For if those who have seen most of what truth is 
possible for us (and these are those who seek and love it 
most)—if these have such opinions and express these views 25 
about the truth, is it not natural that beginners in philosophy 
should lose heart? For to seek the truth would be to follow 
flying game. | 

But the reason for this opinion is that while these thinkers τοιοῦ 
were inquiring into the truth of that which is, they thought 
‘that which is’ was identical with the sensible world ; in this, 
however, there is largely present the nature of the indeter- 
minate—of that which exists in the peculiar sense which we 
have explained ;! and, therefore, while they speak plausibly, 
they do not say what is true. For it befits us to put the 5 
matter so rather than as Epicharmus put it against Xeno- 
phanes.” And again, they held these views because they saw 
that all this world of nature is in movement, and that about 
that which changes no true statement can be made; at least, 
regarding that which everywhere in every respect is changing © 
nothing could truly be affirmed. It was this belief that 
blossomed into the most extreme of the’ views above men- 
tioned, that of the professed Heracliteans, such as was held 
by Cratylus, who finally did not think it right to say anything 
but only moved his finger, and criticized Heraclitus for 
saying that it is impossible to step twice into the same 
river ; for Ze thought one could not do it even once, 

But we shall say in answer to this argument also, that there 15 
is some real sense in their thinking that the changing, when it 
is changing, does not exist. Yet it is after all disputable ; for 
that which is losing a quality has something? of that which is 
being lost, and of that which is coming to be, something must 
already be. And in general if a thing is perishing, there will 
be present something that exists; and if a thing is coming to 20 
be, there must be something from which it comes to be and 
something by which it is generated, and this process cannot 
be* ad infinitum. But leaving these arguments, let us insist 

1 Cf. 1009* 32. ; 

? Epicharmus may have said that Xenophanes’ views were ‘neither 

true nor plausible’, or that they were ‘ true but not plausible ’. 
5 1olo* 18 read ἔχει τι τοῦ. * 1010 22 read μὴ εἶναι εἰς. 

μη 

ο 

1010" METAPHYSICA 

on this, that it is not the same thing to change in quantity and 
in quality. Grant that in quantity a thing is not constant; still 
a5 it is in respect of its form that we know each thing.—And 
again, it would be fair to criticize those who hold this view for 
asserting about the whole material universe what they saw 
only in a minority even of sensible things. For only that 
region of the sensible world which immediately surrounds us 
30 is always in process of destruction and generation ; but this is— 
so to speak—not even a fraction of the whole, so that it would 
have been juster to acquit this part of the world because of the 
other part, than to condemn the other because of this. And 
again, obviously we shall make to them also the same reply 
that we made before ;! we must show them and persuade them 
35 that there is something whose nature is changeless. Indeed, 
from the assertion that things at the same time are and are not, 
there follows the assertion that all things are at rest rather than 
that they are in movement; for there is nothing into which they 
can change, since all attributes belong already to all subjects. 
τοι Regarding the nature of truth, we must maintain that not 
everything which appears is true. Firstly, they contend that 
sensation—at least of the object peculiar to the sense in 
question—is not false ; we answer that appearance is not the 
same as sensation.—Again, it is fair to express surprise at 
our opponents for raising the question whether magnitudes 
5 are as great, and colours are of such a nature, as they appear 
to people at a distance, or as they appear to those close at 
hand, and whether they are such as they appear to the sick or 
to the healthy, and whether those things are heavy which 
appear so to the weak or those which appear so to the strong, 
and whether truth is what appears to the sleeping or to the 
waking. For obviously they do not think these to be open 
10 questions ; no one, at least, if when he is in Libya he fancies 
one night that he is in Athens, straightway starts for the 
Odeum. And again with regard to the future, as Plato says,’ 
surely the opinion of the physician and that of the ignorant 
man are not equally weighty, for instance, on the question 
whether a man will get well or not.—And again, among sensa- 

! Cf. 1009* 36. 2 Cf. Theaetetus 171 E, 178 C. 

r. BOOK IV 1010" 

tions themselves the sensation of a foreign object and that of 15 
the appropriate object, or that of a kindred object and that of 
the object of the sense in question,’ are not equally authori- 
tative, but in the case of colour, sight, not taste, has the 
authority, and in the case of flavour, taste, not sight; each of 
which senses never says at the same moment of the same 
object that it at the same time is ‘so and not so’.—But not 
even at different moments does one sense disagree about the 
quality, but only about that to which the quality belongs. 20 
I mean, for instance, the same wine might seem, if either it or 
one’s body changed, at one time sweet and at another time not 
sweet ; but at least the sweet, such as it is when it exists, has 
never yet changed, but one is always right about it, and that 
which is to be sweet must of necessity be of such and such 

a nature. Yet all these views destroy this distinction, so that 25 
as there is no essence of anything, so nothing is of necessity ; 
for the necessary cannot be in this way and also in that, so 
that if anything is of necessity, it will not be both ‘so and 
not so’. 

And, in general, if only the sensible exists, there would 30 
be nothing if animate things were not ; for there would be no 
faculty of sense. The view that the sensations also would 
not exist is doubtless true (for they are affections of the 
perceiver), but that the substrata which cause the sensation 
should not exist even apart from sensation is impossible. 
For sensation is surely not the sensation of itself, but there 35 
is something beyond the sensation, which must be prior to 
the sensation; for that which moves is prior in nature to 
that which is moved, and if they are correlative terms, this is 1011° 
no less the case. 

CHAPTER VI 

There are, both among those who have these convictions 
and among those who merely profess these views, some who 
raise a difficulty by asking, who is the judge of the healthy ς 

1 yoro 16 read αὑτῆς. E.g. the knowledge which smell gives us of 
savour and of odour respectively. 

1011" METAPHYSICA 

man, and in general who is likely to judge rightly on each 
class of questions. But such inquiries are like puzzling over 
the question whether we are now asleep or awake. And all 
such questions have the same meaning. These people demand 
that a reason shall be given for everything; for they seek 
a starting-point, and they wish to get this by demonstration, 
το while it is obvious from their actions that they have no con- 
viction. But their mistake is what we have stated it to be; 
they seek a reason for that for which no reason can be given ; 
for the starting-point of demonstration is not demonstration. 
These, then, might be easily persuaded of this truth, for it 
15 is not difficult to grasp; but those who seek merely com- 
pulsion in argument seek what is impossible; for they demand 
to be made to contradict themselves, while they are contra- 
dicting themselves from the very first.—But if not all things 
are relative, but some are self-existent, not everything that 
appears will be true; for that which appears appears to some 
one; so that he who says all things that appear are true, 
ao makesall things relative. And, therefore, those who ask for an 
irresistible argument, and at the same time demand to be 
called to account for their views, must guard themselves by 
saying that the truth is not that what appears exists, but that 
what appears exists for him to whom it appears, and when, 
and zm the sense in which, and in the way in which it appears. 
And if they give an account of their view, but do not give it 
in this way, they will soon find themselves contradicting them- 
a5 selves. For it is possible that a thing may for the same man 
appear as honey to the sight, but not to the taste, and that, as 
we have two eyes, things may not appear the same to each, if 
the eyes are unlike. For to those who for the reasons named 
30 above! say that what appears is true, and therefore that all 
things are alike false and true, for things do not appear either 
the same to all men or always the same to the same man, but 
often have contrary appearances at the same time (for touch 
says there are two objects when we cross our fingers, while sight 
says there is one),—to these we shall say ‘ yes, but not to the 
35 Same sense and in the same part of it and in the same way and 

1 Cf. 1009” 1. 

Yr. BOOK IV ror" 

at the same time’, so that what appears zs under these qualifica- 
tions true. But perhaps for this reason those who argue thus 1011” 
not because they feel a difficulty but for the sake of argument, 
should say that this is not true, but true for this man. And 
as has been already said, they must make everything relative 
—relative to thought and perception, so that nothing either 5 
has come to be or will be without some one’s first thinking 
so. But if things Zave come to be or will be,! evidently not 
all things will be relative to opinion.— Again, if a thing is one, it 

is in relation to one thing or to a definite number of things ; and 

if the same thing is both half and equal, still the equal is not 
correlative to the double.* Τί, then, the same thing is a man, 
in relation to that which thinks, and is that which is thought, 
in relation to that which thinks, that which zhinks will not be τὸ 
a man, but only that which zs thought. Again, if each thing 
is to be relative to that which thinks, that which thinks will 
be relative to an infinity of specifically different things. 

Let this, then, suffice to show (1) that the most indisputable 
of all beliefs is that contradictory statements are not at the 
same time true, and (2) what consequences follow from the 
denial of this belief, and (3) why people do deny it. Nowsince 15 
it is impossible that contradictories should be at the same 
time true of the same thing, obviously contraries also cannot 
belong at the same time to the same thing. For of the con- 
traries, no less than of the contradictories, one is a privation— 
and a privation of substance; and privation is the denial of 
a predicate to a determinate genus. If, then, it is impossible 20 
to affirm and deny truly at the same time, it is also impossible 
that contraries should belong to a subject at the same time, 
unless both belong to it in particular relations, or one in 
a particular relation and one without. qualification. 

CHAPTER VII 

But on the other hand there cannot be an intermediate 
between contradictories, but of one subject we must either 
affirm or deny any one predicate. This is clear, in the first 25 

1 Sc. without some one’s first thinking so. 
2 Sc. but the equal to the equal, the half to the double. 

torr” METAPHYSICA 

place, if we define what the true and the false are. To say of 
what is that it is not, or of what is not that it is, is false, while 
to say of what is that it is, and of what is not that it is not, 
is true; so that he who says. of anything that it is, or that it 
is not, will say either what is true or what is false; but neither 
what is nor what is not is said to be or not to be.!—Again, 
30 either the intermediate between the contradictories will be so 
in the way in which grey is between black and white,? or as 
that which is neither man nor horse is between man and 
horse. (1) If it were of the latter kind, it could not change 
into the extremes, for change is from not-good to good, or 
from good to not-good (but as a matter of fact when there 
is an intermediate it is always observed to change into the 
extremes). For there is no change except to opposites 
35 and to their intermediate. (2) But if it is really intermediate,‘ 
in this way too there is a difficulty—there would have to be 
1012" a change to white, which was not from not-white ; but as it is, 
this is never seen.— Again, the understanding either affirms or 
denies every object of understanding or reason ; this becomes 
obvious if we define when thought is true and when false. 
When it connects in one way by assertion or negation, it is 

5 true, and when it does so in the other way, it is false.—Again, 
there must be an intermediate between αὐ contradictories, if 
one is not arguing merely for the sake of argument ; so that 
it will be possible for a man to say what is neither true nor 
untrue. And there will be a middle between that which is 
and that which is not, so that there will also be a kind of 
change intermediate between generation and destruction.— 
Again, in all classes in which the negation of an attribute 
10 means the assertion of its contrary, even in these there will 
be an intermediate ; for instance, in the sphere of numbers 
there will be number which is neither odd nor not-odd. 
But this is impossible, as is obvious from the definition.— 
Again, the process will go on ad infinitum, and the number 

1 Sc. by those who say there is an intermediate between contradictories. 
Hence such a statement is neither true nor false, which is absurd. 

? Though of course it differs from this case in being between contra- 
dictories, not contraries. 

5 Sc. contrary, not contradictory opposites. 

4 Sc. as grey is between black and white. 

r, BOOK IV 1019" 

of realities will be not only made half as great again, but even 
greater. For again it will be possible to deny this intermediate 
with reference both to its assertion and to its negation,’ 
and this new term will be some definite thing; for its essence 

is something different. Again, when a man, on being asked 15 
whether a thing is white, says ‘no’, he has denied nothing 
except that it is; and its not being is a negation. 

Some people have acquired this opinion as other paradoxical 
Opinions have been acquired; when men cannot refute 
eristical arguments, they give in to the argument and agree 
that the conclusion is true. This, then, is why some argue 20 
in such fashion; others do so because they demand a reason 
for everything. And the starting-point in dealing with all 
such people is definition. Now the definition rests on the 
necessity of their meaning something; for the formula, of 
which the word is a sign, becomes its definition —The doctrine 
of Heraclitus, that all things are and are not, seems to make 25 
everything true, while that of Anaxagoras, that there is an 
intermediate between the terms of a contradiction, seems to 
make everything false*; for when things are mixed, the 
mixture is neither good nor not-good, so that one cannot say 
anything that is true. 

CHAPTER VIII 

In view of these distinctions it is obvious that the one-sided 
theories which some people express about all things cannot be 30 
valid—on the one hand the theory that nothing is true (for, 
say they, there is nothing to prevent every statement from 
being like the statement ‘the diagonal of a square is com- 
mensurate with the side’),—on the other hand the theory 
that everything is true—These views are practically the same 
as that of Heraclitus; for that which says that ‘all things are 
true and all are false’ also makes each of these statements 35 
separately, so that since they are impossible, the double state- ro1a° 
ment must be impossible too.—Again, there are obviously 
contradictories which cannot be at the same time true. Nor 

Ὁ i.e. if there is a term B which is neither 4 nor not-J, there will be 

a new term C which is neither 25 nor not-Z. 
* 1012 27 omit ὥστε. 

rora? METAPHYSICA 

5 on the other hand can all statements be false ; yet this would 
seem more possible in view of what has been said.—But 
against all such arguments we must postulate, as we said 
above, not that something is or is not, but that people mean 
something, so that we must argue from a definition, having 
got what falsity or truth means. If that which it is true to 
affirm is nothing other than that which it is false to deny,? 

το it is impossible that all statements should be false ; for one 
side of the contradiction must be true.—Again, if it is 
necessary with regard to everything either to assert or to 
deny it, it is impossible that both should be false; for it is 
one side of the contradiction that is false—Further, all such 
arguments are exposed to the often-expressed objection, that 

15 they destroy themselves. For he who says that everything is 
true makes the statement contrary to his own also true, so 
that his own is not true (for the contrary statement denies 
that it is true), while he who says everything is false makes 
himself also false—And if the former person excepts the 
contrary statement, saying it alone is not true, while the 

ao latter excepts his own as being alone not false, none the less 
they are driven to postulate the truth or falsehood of an 
infinite number of statements ; for that which says the true 
statement is true, is true, and this process will go on to infinity. 

Evidently again those who say all things are at rest are not 
right, nor are those who say all things are in movement. For 
if all things are at rest, the same statements will always be 
true and the same always false,— but they obviously are ποῖ: 
as for he who makes a statement himself at one time was not 
and again will not be. And if all things are in motion, 
nothing will be true ; everything therefore will be false. But 
it has been shown that this is impossible. Again, it must 
be that which is that changes; for change is from something 
to something. But again it is not the case that all things 
329 are at rest or in motion sometimes, and nothing for ever; for 
there is something which always moves the things that are in 
motion, and the first mover must itself be unmoved. 

1 Cf. 1006* 18. 
2 1012” 9 read ἄλλο τὸ ἀληθὲς φάναι ἣ (ὃ) ἀποφάναι ψεῦδος. So perhaps 
Asclepius. 

BOOK V (Δ) 

CHAPTER I 

‘BEGINNING’ means (1) that part of a thing from which one 
would start first, e.g. a line or a road has a beginning in 35 
either of the contrary directions. (2) That from which each 1013* 
thing would best be originated, 6. g. we must sometimes begin 
to learn not from the first point and the beginning of the 
thing, but from the point from which we should learn most 
easily. (3) That from which (as an immanent part) a thing 
first arises, e.g. as the keel of a ship and the foundation of a 
house, while in animals some suppose the heart, others the 5 
brain, others some other part, to be of this nature. (4) That 
from which (of as an immanent part) a thing first arises, and 
from which the movement or the change naturally first pro- 
ceeds, as a child comes from the father and the mother, and 
a fight from abusive language. (5) That at whose will that τὸ 
which is moved is moved and that which changes changes, 
e.g. the magistracies in cities, and oligarchies and monarchies 
and tyrannies, are called ἀρχαί, and so are the arts, and of 
these especially the architectonic arts. (6) That from which 
a thing can first be known ; for this also 2 is called the beginning 15 
of the thing, e. g. the hypotheses are the beginnings of demon- 
strations. (Causes are spoken of in an equal number of senses ; 
for all causes are beginnings.) It is common, then, to all 
beginnings to be the first point from which a thing either is 
or comes to be or is known; but of these some are immanent 
in the thing and others are outside. Therefore the nature of 20 
a thing is a beginning, and so are the elements of a thing, 
and thought and will, and essence, and the final cause—for the 

1 The double meaning of ἀρχή--- beginning’ and ‘government ’— 
cannot be reproduced in English. 
3 1013* 15 read καὶ yap αὕτη. 

AR. MET. G 

1013* METAPHYSICA 

good and the beautiful are the beginning both of the know- 
ledge and of the movement of many things. 

CHAPTER II 

‘Cause’ means (1) that from which (as immanent material) 
25a thing comes into being, e.g. the bronze of the statue and 
the silver of the saucer, and the classes which include these. 
(2) The form or pattern, i.e. the formula of the essence, and 
‘ the classes which include this (e.g. the ratio 2: 1 and number 
in general are causes of the octave) and the parts of the 
formula. (3) That from which the change or the freedom from 
40 Change first begins, e.g. the adviser is a cause of the action, 
and the father a cause of the child, and in general the maker 
a cause of the thing made and the change-producing of the 
changing. (4) The end, i.e. that for the sake of which a thing 
is, e.g. health is the cause of walking. For why does one 
walk? We say ‘that one may be healthy’, and in speaking 
35 thus we think we have given the cause. The same is true of 
all the means that intervene before the end, when something 
1013” else has put the process in motion (as e. g. thinning or purging 
or drugs or instruments intervene before health is reached) ; 
for all these are for the sake of the end, though they differ 
from one another in that some are instruments and others 
are actions. 
These, then, are practically all the senses in which causes 
are spoken of, and as they are spoken of in several senses it 
5 follows that there are several causes of the same thing, and in 
no accidental sense, e.g. both the art of sculpture and the 
bronze are causes of the statue not in virtue of anything else 
but gua statue; not, however, in the same way, but the one 
as matter and the other as source of the movement. And 
things can be causes of one another, e.g. exercise of good 
τὸ condition, and the latter of exercise; not, however, in the 
same way, but the one as end and the other as source of 
movement.—Again, the same thing is sometimes cause of 
contraries ; for that which when present causes a particular 
thing, we sometimes charge, when absent, with the contrary, 
e.g. we impute the shipwreck to the absence of the steers- 

A. BOOK V 1013? 

man, whose presence was the cause of safety; and both— rs 
the presence and the privation—are causes as sources of 
movement. 

All the causes now mentioned fall under four senses which 
are the most obvious. For the letters are the causes of 
syllables, and the material is the cause of manufactured 
things, and fire and earth and all such things are the causes 
of bodies, and the parts are causes of the whole, and the 
hypotheses are causes of the conclusion, in the sense that 20 
they are that out of which these respectively are made; but of 
these some are cause as substratum (e.g. the parts), others as 
essence (the whole, the synthesis, and the form). The semen, 
the physician, the adviser, and in general the agent, are all 
sources of change or of rest. The remainder are causes as 25 
the end and the good of the other things; for that, for the 
sake of which other things are, is naturally the best and the 
end of the other things ; let us take it as making no difference 
whether we call it good or apparent good. 

These, then, are the causes, and this is the number of their 
kinds, but the varieties of causes are many in number, 
though when summarized these also are comparatively few. 
Causes are spoken of in many senses, and even of those 30 
which are of the same kind some are causes in a prior and 
others in a posterior sense, e.g. both ‘the physician’ and ‘the 
professional man’ are causes of health, and ‘the ratio 2:17 
and ‘number’ are causes of the octave, and the classes that. 
include any particular cause are always causes of the particular 
effect. Again, there are accidental causes and the classes which - 
include these, 6. g. while in one sense ‘the sculptor’ causes the 35 
statue, in another sense ‘ Polyclitus’ causes it, because the 
sculptor happens to be Polyclitus; and the classes that in- 10148 
clude the accidental cause are also causes, e. g. ‘man ’—or in 
‘general ‘animal ’—is the cause of the statue, because Poly- 
clitus is a man, and a man is an animal. Of accidental causes 
also some are more remote or nearer than others, as, for 5 
instance, if ‘the white’ and ‘the musical’ were called causes of 
the statue, and not only ‘ Polyclitus’ or‘ man’. But besides all 
these varieties of causes,! whether proper or accidental, some 

1 1014* 7 retain παρά. 
G2 

1014" METAPHYSICA 

are called causes as being able to act, others as acting, e.g. 
the causé of the house’s being built is the builder, or the 
10 builder when building.—The same variety of language will be 
found with regard to the effects of causes, e.g. a thing may 
be called the cause of this statue or of a statue or in general 
of an image, and of this bronze? or of bronze or of matter in 
general ; and similarly in the case of accidental effects. Again, 
both accidental and proper causes may be spoken of in com- 
bination, e.g. we may say not ‘ Polyclitus’ nor ‘the sculptor’, 
but ‘ Polyclitus the sculptor’. . 

15 Yet all these are but six in number, while each is spoken 
of in two ways ; for (1) they are causes either as the individual, 
or as the class that includes the individual,? or as the accidental, 
or as the class that includes the accidental, and these either as 
combined,? or as taken simply; and (2) all may be taken as 

20 acting or as having a capacity. But they differ inasmuch as 
the acting causes and the individuals exist, or do not exist, 
simultaneously with the things of which they are causes, e. g. 
this particular man who is curing, with this particular man 
who is recovering health, and this particular builder with this 
particular thing that is being built; but the potential causes 
are not always in this case; for the house does not perish at 

25 the same time as the builder.‘ 

CHAPTER III 

‘Element’ means the primary component immanent in 

a thing, and indivisible in kind into other kinds, e.g. the 
elements of speech are the parts of which speech consists and 
into which it is ultimately divided, while ¢hey are no longer 
divided into other forms of speech different in kind from them. 
30 If they are divided, their parts are of the same kind, as 
a part of water is water (while a part of the syllable is not 

a syllable). Similarly those who speak of the elements of 
bodies mean the things into which bodies are ultimately 

1 For this way of speaking cf. PAys. II. 194% 33. 

5 10148 17 for αὐτοῦ read τοῦ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον. 

8 Sc. the particular proper cause with the particular accidental, or the 
general proper with the general accidental. 

‘ With this chapter cf. PAys. 11. 3. 

A. BOOK V 1014° 

divided, while skey are no longer divided into other things 
differing in kind; and whether the things of this sort are one 

or more, they call these elements. The elements of geometrical 35 
proofs, and in general the elements of demonstrations, have 

a similar character; for the primary demonstrations, each of 
which is implied in many demonstrations, are called elements 1014° 
of demonstrations ; and the primary syllogisms, which have 
three terms and proceed by means of one middle, are of this 
nature. 

People also transfer the word ‘element’ from this meaning 
and apply it to that which, being one and small, is useful for 
many purposes ; for which reason the small and simple and 5 
indivisible is called anelement. Hence come the facts that the 
most universal things are elements (because each of them being 
one and simple is present in a plurality of things, either in all 
or in as many as possible"), and? that unity and the point 
are thought by some to be first principles. Now, since the 
so-called genera are universal and indivisible (for there is no τὸ 
analytic formula of them), some say the genera are elements, 
and more so than the differentia, because the genus is more 
universal ; for where the differentia is present, the genus accom- 
panies it, but where the genus is, the differentia is not always. 
It is common to all the meanings that the element of each 
thing is the first component immanent in each. 15 

CHAPTER IV 

‘Nature’ means (1) the genesis of growing things--the 
meaning which would be suggested if one were to pronounce 
the v in φύσις long.? (2) The primary immanent element in 
a thing, from which its growth proceeds. (3) The source 
from which the primary movement in each natural object is 
present in it in virtue of its own essence. Those things are 20 
said to grow which derive increase from something else by 

1 ἢ ὅτι πλείστοις shows that A. is not thinking of the strict universals of 
science but of the rough generalizations of dialectic. Cf. the use of 
στοιχεῖον in the Zofgics, and Diels, Elementum, Ὁ. 29. 

2 yo14> 8 omit διό, 

5 This (i.e. ‘growth’) is the etymological sense of φύσις. φύεσθαι, 
‘to grow,’ has νυ long in most of its forms. 

1014” 

25 

30 

METAPHYSICA 

contact and organic unity, or organic adhesion as in the case 
of embryos. Organic unity differs from contact; for in the 
latter case there need not be anything besides the contact, but 
in organic unities there is something identical in both parts, 
which makes them grow together instead of merely touching, 
and be one in respect of continuity and quantity, though not 
of quality.—(4) ‘ Nature’ means the primary matter of which 
any non-natural object consists or out of which it is made, 
which cannot be modified or changed from its own potency, 
as e.g. bronze is said to be the nature of a statue and of bronze 
utensils, and wood the nature of wooden things ; and so in all 
other cases ; for when a product is made out of these materials, 
the first matter is preserved throughout. In this way people 
call the elements of natural objects also their nature, some 
naming fire, others earth, others air, others water, others some- 
thing else of the sort, and some naming more than one of 

35 these, and others all of them.—(5) ‘ Nature’ means the essence 

1015" 

5 

10 

of natural objects, as with those who say the nature is the 
primary mode of composition, or as Empedocles ! says :— 
Nothing that is has a nature, 

But only mixing and parting of the mixed, 

And nature is but a name applied to them by men. 
Hence as regards the things that are or come to be by nature, 
though that from which they naturally come to be or are is 
already present, we say they have not their nature yet, unless 
they have their form or shape. That which comprises both of 
these—matter and form—exists dy nature, e.g. the animals and 
their parts ; and nature is both the first matter (and this in two 
senses, either first, counting from the thing, or first in general, 
e.g. in the case of works in bronze, bronze is first with reference 
to them, but in general perhaps water is first, if all things that 
can be melted are water), and the form or essence, which is 
the end of the process of becoming. And from this sense 
of ‘nature’ every essence in general is in fact, by an extension 
of meaning, called a‘ nature’, because the nature of a thing is 
one kind of essence. 

From what has been said, then, it is plain that nature in the 

1 Fr. 8 Diels, Vorsokratiker. 

A. BOOK V 1015" 

primary and strict sense is the essence of things which have in 
themselves, as such, a source of movement; for the matter is 15 
called the nature because it is qualified to receive this, and 
processes of becoming and growing are called nature because 
they are movements proceeding from this. And nature in this 
sense is the source of the movement of natural objects, being 
present in them somehow, either potentially or actually. 

CHAPTER V 

‘ The necessary ’ means (1) that without which, as a condition, 20 
a thing cannot live, e.g. breathing and food are necessary for 
an animal; for it is incapable of existing without these.—(2) The 
conditions without which good cannot be or come to be, or 
without which we cannot get rid or be freed of evil, e.g. drinking 
the medicine is necessary in order that we may be cured of 
disease, and sailing to Aegina is necessary in order that we 25 
may get our money.—(3) The compulsory and compulsion, 
i.e. that which impedes and hinders contrary to impulse and 
purpose. For the compulsory is called necessary ; whence the 
necessary is painful, as Evenus! says: ‘For every neces- 
sary thing is ever irksome.’ And compulsion is a form of 30 
necessity, as Sophocles? says: ‘ Force makes this action a 
necessity. And necessity is held to be something that cannot 
be persuaded—and rightly, for it is contrary to the movement 
which accords with purpose and with reasoning.—(4) We say 
that that which cannot be otherwise is necessarily so. And 35 
from this sense of ‘necessary’ all the others are somehow 
derived ; for as regards the compulsory we say that it is neces- 
sary to act or to be acted on, only when we cannot act according 1015” 
to impulse because of the compelling force,—which implies that 
necessity is that because of which the thing cannot be other- 
wise ; and similarly as regards the conditions of life and of good, 
when in the one case good, in the other life and being, are 5 
not possible without certain conditions, these are necessary, 
and this cause is a kind of necessity.— Again, (5) demonstration 
is a necessary thing, because the conclusion cannot be other- 
wise, if there has been demonstration in the full sense ; and 

1 Fr, 8 Hiller. 3 Electra 256. 

1015° METAPHYSICA 

the causes of this necessity are the first premises, i.e. the fact 
that the propositions from which the syllogism proceeds 
cannot be otherwise. 
Now some things owe their necessity to something other 
το than themselves; others do not, while they are the source of 
necessity in other things. Therefore the necessary in the 
primary and strict sense is the simple ; for this does not admit 
of more states than one, so that it does not admit even of one 
state and another ; for already it would admit of more than 
one. If, then, there are certain eternal and unmovable things, 
1g nothing compulsory or against their nature attaches to them. 

CHAPTER VI 

‘One’ means (1) that which is one by accident, (2) that 
which is one by its own nature. (1) Instances of the acci- 
dentally one are ‘Coriscus’ and ‘musical’, and ‘musical 
Coriscus’ (for it is the same thing to say ‘Coriscus’ and 
‘ musical’, and ‘ musical Coriscus’), and ‘ musical’ and ‘just’, 

20 and ‘ musical Coriscus’ and ‘just Coriscus’. For all these are 
called one by accident, ‘just’ and ‘ musical’ because they are 
accidents of one substance, ‘ musical’ and ‘ Coriscus’ because 
the one is an accident of the other ; and similarly in a sense 
‘musical Coriscus’ is one with ‘ Coriscus’, because one of the 

25 parts of the concept is an accident of the other, i.e. ‘ musical’ 
is an accident of Coriscus ; and ‘ musical Coriscus’ is one with 

‘just Coriscus’, because both have parts which are accidents of 
one and the same subject. The case is similar if the accident 
is predicated of a class or of any universal term, e.g. if one 

30 Says that man is the same as ‘ musical man’ ; for this is either 
because ‘ musical’ is an accident of man, which is one sub- 
stance, or because both are accidents of some individual, 
e.g. Coriscus. Both, however, do not belong to him in the 
same way, but one doubtless as genus and in the substance, 
the other as a state or affection of the substance. 

35 The things, then, that are called one by accident, are called 
so in this way. (2) Of things that are called one in virtue of 
their own nature some (4) are so called because they are 
continuous, e.g. a bundle is made one by a band, and pieces 

A. BOOK V 1016 

of wood are made one by glue; and a line, even if it is bent, 
is called one if it is continuous, as each part of the body 
is, e.g. the leg or the arm. Of these themselves, the con- 
tinuous by nature are more one than the continuous by art. 
A thing is called continuous which has by its own nature one 5 
movement and cannot have any other; and the movement is 
one when it is indivisible, and indivisible in time. Those things 
are continuous by their own nature which are one not merely 
by contact; for if you put pieces of wood touching one 
another, you will not say these are one piece of wood or one 
body or one continuum of any other sort. Things, then, that 
are continuous in any way are called one, even if they admit of 10 
being bent, and still more those which cannot be bent, e.g. 
the shin or the thigh is more one than the leg, because the 
movement of the leg need not be one. And the straight line 
is more one than the bent ; but that which is bent and has an 
angle we call both one and not one, because its movement 
may be either simultaneous or not simultaneous; but that 15 
of the straight line is always simultaneous, and no part of it 
which has magnitude! rests while another moves, as in the 
bent line. 

(ὁ) Things are called one in another sense because the 
substratum does not differ in kind; it does not differ? in 
the case of things whose kind is indivisible to the sense. 
The substratum meant is either the nearest to, or the furthest 
from, the final state. For, on the one hand, wine is said to 20 
be one and water is said to be one, gua indivisible in kind ; 
and, on the other hand, a// juices, e.g. oil and wine, are 
said to be one, and so are all things that can be melted, 
because the ultimate substratum of all is the same; for all 
of these are water or air. 

(c) Those things are called one whose genus is one though 
distinguished by opposite differentiae ; and these are all called 
one because the genus which underlies the differentiae is one 
(e.g. horse, man, and dog are one, because all are animals), 
and in a way similar to that in which the matter is one.® 

tw 

5 

1 Any point may remain fixed while the line rotates round it; but 
a point has no magnitude. 
2 1016" 18 read ἀδιάφορον---ἀδιάφορον δέ. * Cf. (4) above. 

a ΝΕ YY» 

1016 METAPHYSICA 

These are sometimes called one in this way, but sometimes 
it is the higher genus! that is said to be the same (if they 

go are infimae species of their genus)—the genus above the 
proximate genera,’ e.g. the isosceles and the equilateral are 
one and the same figure because both are triangles, but they 
are not the same triangles.? 

(4) Two things are called one, when the formula which states 
the essence of one is indivisible from another formula which 
shows the essence of the other (though 77 ztself every formula 

351s divisible). Thus even that which has increased or is 
diminishing is one, because its formula is one, as, in the 
1016" case of planes, is the formula of their form. In general 
those things, the thought of whose essence is indivisible, 
and cannot separate them either in time or in place or in 
formula, are most of all one, and of these especially those 
which are substances. For in general those things that do 
not admit of division are one in so far as they do not admit 
5 of it, e.g. if something gva@ man does not admit of division, 
it is one man; if gua animal, it is one animal ; if gua magni- 
tude, it is one magnitude.—Now most things are called one 
because they do or have or suffer or are related to something 
else that is one, but the things that are primarily called one 
are those whose substance is one,—and one either in con- 
tinuity or in form or in formula; for we count as more than 
10 one either things that are not continuous, or those whose form 
is not one, or those whose formula is not one. 

(e) While in a sense we call anything one if it is a quantity 
and continuous, in a sense we do not unless it is a whole, 
i.e. unless it has one form; e.g. if we saw the parts of a shoe 
put together anyhow we should not call them one all the 

15 same (unless because of their continuity); we do this only if 
they are put together so as to be a shoe and have already 
some one form. This is why the circle is of all lines most 
truly one, because it is whole and complete. 

1 10168 29 read ὁτὲ δὲ τὸ ἄνω γένος. 

2 1016® 30 retain τὸ ἀνωτέρω τούτων. 

8 Horse, man, and dog, are one, because all are animals. But if we are 
to call them one something, we cannet call them one (kind of) animal, but 
must go to the higher genus and call them one (kind of) living thing. 

A. BOOK V 1016" 

The essence of ‘ one’ is to be a beginning of number ; for the 
first measure is the beginning, for that by which we first } know 
each class is the first measure of the class; the one, then, is 20 
the beginning of the knowable regarding each class. But the 
one is not the same in all classes. For here it is a quarter- 
tone, and there it is the vowel or the consonant; and there 
is another unit of weight and another of movement. But 
everywhere the one is indivisible either in quantity or in kind. 
That which is indivisible in quantity and gua quantity is 
called a unit if it is not divisible in any dimension and is 25 
without position, a point if it is not divisible in any dimension 
and has position, a line if it is divisible in one dimension, 
a plane if in two, a body if divisible in quantity in all—i.e. 
in three—dimensions. And, reversing the order, that which 
is divisible in two dimensions is a plane, that which is divisible 
in one a line, that which is in no way divisible in quantity is 
a point or a unit,—that which has not position a unit, that 30 
which has position a point. 

Again, some things are one in number, others in species, 
others in genus, others by analogy; in number those whose 
matter is one, in species those whose definition is one, in 
genus those to which the same figure of predication applies,’ 
by analogy those which are related as a third thing is to 
a fourth. The latter kinds of unity are always found when 35 
the former are, e.g. things that are one in number are one 
in species, while things that are one in species are not all one 
in number ; but things that are one in species are all one in 1017 
genus, while things that are so in genus are not all one in 
species but are all one by analogy; while things that are 
one by analogy are not all one in genus. 

Evidently ‘many ’ will have meanings opposite to those of 
‘one’; some things are many because they are not continuous, 
others because their matter—either the proximate matter or 5 
the ultimate—is divisible in kind, others because the formulae 
which state their essence are more than one. 

1 1016” 19 read ᾧ yap πρώτῳ. 
? Sc. the same category. Cf. note on A, 986% 23. 

1017" METAPHYSICA 

CHAPTER VII 

Things are said to ‘be’ (1) in an accidental sense, (2) by 
their own nature. 

(1) In an accidental sense, e.g., we say ‘the just is musical’, 

το and ‘the man is musical’ and ‘ the musical is a man’, just as we 
say ‘the musical builds’, because the builder happens to be 
musical or the musical happens to be a builder ; for here ‘one 
thing is another’ means ‘one is an accident of another’. So 
in the cases we have mentioned ; for when we say ‘the man is 
musical’ and ‘the musical is a man’, or ‘the white is musical’ or 

15. ‘the musical is white’, the last two mean that both attributes 
are accidents of the same thing, which zs; the first that the at- 
tribute is an accident of that which zs; while ‘the musical is a 
man’ means that ‘musical ’is an accident of man. In this sense, 
too, the not-white is said to δέ, because that of which it is 
an accident zs. Thus when one thing is said in an accidental 

20 sense to be another, this is either because both belong to the 
same thing, and this zs, or because that to which the attribute 
belongs zs, or because the subject which has as an attribute 
that of which it is itself predicated, itself zs. 

(2) The kinds of essential being are those that are indicated 
by the figures of predication’; for the senses of ‘being’ are 
just as many as these figures. Since some predicates indicate 

25 what the subject is, others its quality, others quantity, others 
relation, others activity or passivity, others its ‘where ’, others 
its ‘when’, ‘being’ has a meaning answering to each of these. 
For there is no difference between ‘the man is recovering’ 
and ‘the man recovers’, nor between ‘the man is walking’ or 

30 ‘cutting ’’ and ‘ the man walks’ or ‘cuts’; and similarly in all 
other cases. 

(3) ‘Being’ and ‘is’ mean that a statement is true, ‘not 
being’ that it is not true but false,—and this alike in affirmation 
and negation; e.g. ‘Socrates ἐς musical’ means that this is 
true, or ‘ Socrates zs not-white’ means that this is true; but 
‘the diagonal of the square zs μοῦ commensurate with the side’ 
means that it is false to say it is. 

35 (4) Again, ‘being’ and ‘ that which is’, in these cases we 

1 i,e. the categories. Cf. note on A. 986* 23. 

A. BOOK V 1017” 

have mentioned, sometimes mean being potentially, and some- 
times being actually. For we say both of that which sees 
potentially and of that which sees actually, that it is ‘seeing’, 
and both of that which can use knowledge and of that which 
is using it, that it knows, and both of that to which rest is 5 
already present and of that which can rest, that it rests. And 
similarly in the case of substances we say the Hermes is in the 
stone, and the half of the line,is in the line, and we say of 
that which is not yet ripe that it is corn. When a thing is 
potential and when it is not yet potential must be explained 
elsewhere.! 

CHAPTER VIII 

‘ Substance’ means (1) the simple bodies, i. e. earth and fire τὸ 
and water and everything of the sort, and in general bodies 
and the things composed of them, both animals and divine 
beings, and the parts of these. All these are called substance 
because they are not predicated of a subject but everything 
else is predicated of them.—(2) That which, being present in 15 
such things as are not predicated of a subject, is the cause of 
their being, as the soul is of the being of animals.2—(3) The 
parts which are present in such things, limiting them and 
marking them as individuals, and by whose destruction the 
whole is destroyed, as the body is by the destruction of the 
plane, as some say, and the plane by the destruction of 
the line; and in general number is thought by some to be 20 
of this nature; for if it is destroyed, they say, nothing exists, 
and it limits all things.—(4) The essence, the formula of 
which is a definition, is also called the substance of each 
thing. 

It follows, then, that substance has two senses, (a) the ulti- 
mate substratum, which is no longer predicated of anything a5 
else, and (δ) that which is a ‘this’ and separable ®—and of 
this nature is the shape or form of each thing. 

1 9.7. 3. 1017" 16 read τῶν ζῴων. 
δ Cf. H. 10428 29. 

1017” METAPHYSICA 

CHAPTER IX 

‘The same’ means (1) that which is the same in an acci- 
dental sense, e. g. ‘ white’ and ‘ musical’ are the same because 

» they are accidents of the same thing, and ‘man’ and ‘musical’ 
because the one is an accident of the other ; and ‘the musical’ 

30 is ‘man’ because it is an accident of man. And the com- 
plex notion is the same as,either of the simple ones and 
each of these is the same as it; for ‘man’ and ‘ musical ’ are 
said to be the same as ‘ musical man ’, and this is the same as 
they. This is why all of these statements are made not 
universally ; for it is not true to say that evcry man is the 

35 same as ‘musical’; for universal attributes belong to things 
in virtue of their own nature, but accidents do not belong to 

1018% them in virtue of their own nature, but are predicated without 
qualification only of the individuals. For ‘ Socrates’ and 
‘musical Socrates’ are thought to be the same ; but ‘ Socrates’ 
is not predicable of more than one subject, and therefore we 
do not say ‘every Socrates’ as we say ‘every man’. 

5 Some things are said to be the same in this sense, others (2) 
are the same by their own nature, as that which is one is in 
some cases one by its own nature; for both the things whose 
matter is one either in kind or in number, and those whose 
essence is one, are said to be the same. Clearly, therefore, 
sameness is a unity of the being either of more than one thing 
or of one thing when it is treated as more than one, i. e. when 
we say a thing is the same as itself; for we treat it as two. 

Things are called ‘other’ if either their kinds or their 

ro matters or the formulae of their essence are more than one; 
and in general ‘ other’ has meanings opposite to those of ‘ the 
same ’. 

‘Different’ is applied to (1) those things which though 
other are the same in some respect, only not in number but 
either in species or in genus or by analogy ; (2) those whose 
genus is other, and contraries, and all things that have their 
otherness in their essence. 

1s Those things are called ‘like’ which have the same attri- 
butes in every respect, and those which have more attributes 
the same than different, and those whose quality is one; and 

A. BOOK V 

that which shares with another thing the greater number or 
the more important of the attributes (each of them one of two 
contraries) in respect of which things are capable of altering, is 
like that other thing.! The senses of ‘ unlike’ are opposite to 
those of ‘like’. | 

CHAPTER X 

The term ‘ opposite’ is applied to contradictories, and 
contraries, and relative terms, and privation and possession, 
and the extremes from which and into which generation and 
dissolution take place ;? and the attributes that cannot be 
present at the same time in that which is receptive of both, are 
said to be opposed,—either themselves or their constituents. 
Grey and white colour do not belong at the same time to the 
same thing; therefore their constituents are opposed.® 

The term ‘contrary’ is applied (1) to those attributes that 
differ in genus, which cannot belong at the same time to the 
same subject, (2) to the most different of the things in the same 
genus, (3) to the most different of the attributes in the same 
receptive material, (4) to the most different of the things that 

fall under the same faculty, (5) to the things whose difference 30 

is greatest either absolutely or in genus or in species. The 
other things that are called contrary are so called, some be- 
cause they possess contraries of the above kind, some because 
they are receptive of such, some because they are productive 
of or susceptible to such, or are producing or suffering them, or 
are losses or acquisitions, or possessions or privations, of such. 

Since ‘one’ and ‘being ’ have many senses, the other concepts 35 

which are derived from these, and therefore ‘same’, ‘other ’, 
and ‘contrary’, must correspond, so that they must be 
different for each category. 

The term ‘ other in species’ is applied to things which 1018 

being of the same genus are not subordinate the one to the 

1 Such attributes are hot and cold, wet and dry, rough and smooth, 
hard and soft, white and black, sweet and bitter. The more important 
pairs of contraries, in Aristotle’s view, are the first two. 

2 The extremes meant may be (1) being and not being, or (2) matter 
(potentiality) and form (actuality). | 

5 We cannot say grey and white are opposed, but we say the consti- 
tuents of grey (black and white) are opposed. 

1018" 

i) 

be 

5 

1018> METAPHYSICA 

other, or which being in the same genus have a difference,! or 
which have a contrariety in their substance ; and contraries 
are other than one another in species (either all contraries 

5 or those which are so called in the primary sense 3), and so are 
those things whose formulae differ in the izjfima species of 
the genus (e. g. man and horse are indivisible in genus, but 
their formulae are different), or which being in the same 
substance have a difference.* ‘The same in species’ has 
the various meanings opposite to these. 

CHAPTER XI 

The words ‘ prior’ and ‘posterior’ are applied (1) to some 

10 things (on the assumption that there is a first, i.e. a begin- 
ning, in each class) because they are nearer some beginning 
determined either absolutely and by nature, or by reference 
to something or in some place or by certain people, e. g. 
things are prior in place because they are nearer either to 
some place determined by nature, e.g. the middle or the 
last place, or to some chance object; and that which is 
15 further is posterior.—Other things are prior in time ; some 
by being further from the present, i.e. in the case of past 
events (for the Trojan war is prior to the Persian, because it 
is further from the present), others by being nearer the 
present, i.e. in the case of future events (for the Nemean 
games. are prior to the Pythian, if we treat the present as 
beginning and first point, because they are nearer the present). 
ao —Other things are prior in movement; for the things that 

1 This definition is wider than the previous one, since it includes 
species subordinate one to the other. 

2 Cf. 10188 25-31 in distinction from 31-35. 

δ᾽ No satisfactory explanation of this clause has been proposed. 
Alexander suggests that Aristotle may mean that individuals with the 
same specific essence differ in individual essence; but in ordinary 
language (which alone Aristotle is examining in Δ) these would not be 
called ἕτερα εἴδει. He also suggests that the reference may be to bodies 
such as earth and water which are ἕτερα εἴδει without being contrary like 
fire and water ; but these could hardly be said to be ἐν τῇ αὐτῇ οὐσίᾳ. 
Asclepius suggests more plausibly that the reference may be to different 
elements in the essence of complex substances, e. g. to heat and cold in 
the essence of man. Cf. νοῦς and αἴσθησις in the human soul. Aquinas 
thinks the reference is to attributes in the same substance. 

A. BOOK V 1018" 

are nearer the first mover are prior (e. g. the boy is prior to the 
man); and the prime mover also is a beginning absolutely.— 
Others are prior in power ; for that which exceeds in power, 
i.e. the more powerful, is prior; and such is that according 
to whose will the other—i.e. the posterior—must follow, so 
that if the prior does not set it in motion the other does not 
move, and if it sets it in motion it does move; and here will 25 
is a beginning.—Others are prior in arrangement ; these are 
the things that are placed at certain intervals in reference to 
some one definite thing according to rule, e. g. in the chorus the 
second man is prior to the third, and in the lyre the second- 
lowest string is prior to the lowest; for in the one case the 
leader and in the other the middle string is the beginning. 

These, then, are called prior in this sense, but (2) in another 30 
sense that which is prior for knowledge is treated as absolutely 
prior; of these, the things that are prior in formula are 
different from those that are prior in perception. For in 
formula universals are prior, in perception individuals. And 
in formula also the accident is prior to the whole, e.g. 
‘musical’ to ‘musical man’, for the formula cannot exist 35 
as a whole without the part; yet musicalness cannot exist 
unless there is some one who is musical. 

(3) The attributes of prior things are called prior, e.g. 
straightness is prior to smoothness; for one is an attribute of 
a line as such, and the other of a surface. 

Some things then are called prior and posterior in this 1019 
sense, others (4) in respect of nature and substance, i.e. those 
which can be without other things, while the others cannot be 
without ¢hem,—a distinction which Plato used.! If we consider 
the various senses of ‘being’,” firstly the subject is prior (so 5 
that substance is prior); secondly, according as potency or 
actuality is taken into account, different things are prior, for 
some things are prior in respect of potency, others in respect 
of actuality, e.g. in potency the half line is prior to the 
whole line and the part to the whole and the matter to the 
concrete substance, but in actuality these are posterior; for 

* 1019* 4 read ἐχρήσατο. Cf. Zimaeus 34 B,C. Or the reference may be 
to the Platonic Διαιρέσεις. Cf. Divisiones Aristoteleae, ed. Mutschmann, 
Pp. xvii, Xvili. | 

2 Cf. ch. 7. 

AR. METs H 

1019* METAPHYSICA 

10 it is only when the whole is dissolved that they will exist 
in actuality. In a sense, therefore, all things that are called 
prior and posterior are so called according to this fourth 
sense ; for some things can exist without others in respect of 
generation, e.g. the whole without the parts, and others in 
respect of dissolution, e.g. the part without the whole. And 
the same is true in all other cases. 

CHAPTER XII 

1g ‘Potency’ means (1) a source of movement or change, which 
is in another thing than the thing moved or in the same 
thing gua other, e. g. the art of building is a potency which is 
not in the thing built, while the art of healing, which is a 
potency, might be in the man healed, but not in him gua healed. 
‘Potency’ then means the source, in general, of change or 
movement in another thing or in the same thing gua other, 
and also the source of a thing’s being moved by another thing 

20 or by itself gva other. For in virtue of that principle, in 
virtue of which the patient suffers anything, we call it 
‘capable’ of suffering ; and this we do sometimes if it suffers 
anything at all, sometimes not in respect of everything it 
suffers, but only if it suffers a change for the better—(2) The 
capacity of performing this well or according to intention; 
for sometimes we say of those who merely can walk or speak 

as but not well or not as they intend, that they canxot speak or 
walk. The case of passivity is similar.—(3) The states in 
virtue of which things are absolutely impassive or unchange- 
able, or not easily changed for the worse, are called potencies ; 
for things are broken and crushed and bent and in general 
destroyed not by having a potency but by not having one and 

30 by lacking something, and things are impassive with respect 
to such processes if they are scarcely and slightly affected 
by them, because of a ‘potency’ and because they ‘can’ do 
something and are in some positive state. 

As ‘potency’ has so many meanings, the ‘potent’ or ‘capable’ 
in one sense will mean that which can begin a movement 
(or a change in general, for even that which can bring things 
to rest is a ‘potent’ thing) in another thing or in itself gua 

Δ. BOOK V 101g” 

other ; and in one sense that over which something else has 35 
such a potency; and in one sense that which has a potency of τοιοῦ 
changing into something, whether for the worse or for the 
better (for even that which perishes is thought to be ‘ capable’ 
of perishing, for it would not have perished if it had not been 
capable of it; but, as a matter of fact, it has a certain dis- 
position and cause and principle which fits it to suffer this ;— 
sometimes it is thought to be of this sort because it has some- 5 
thing, sometimes because it is deprived of something ; but if 
privation is in a sense ‘having’ or ‘ habit’, everything will be 
capable by having something, so that things are capable both 
by having a positive habit and principle, and by having the 
privation of the positive principle, if it is possible to ave 
a privation ; and if privation is zo¢ in a sense ‘habit’, ‘ capable’ 
is used in two distinct senses!); and a thing is capable in τὸ 
another sense because neither any other thing, nor itself gua 
other, has a potency or principle which can destroy it. Again, 
all these are capable either merely because the thing might 
chance to happen or not to happen, or because it might do so 
well, This sort of potency is found also in lifeless things, 
e.g. in instruments ; for we say one lyre can be made to 
‘speak’, and another cannot be made to ‘ speak’ at all, if it 
has not a good tone. 

Incapacity is privation of capacity—i, e. of such a principle 
as has been described—either in general or in the case of 
something that would naturally have the capacity, or even 
at the time when it would naturally already have it; for 
the senses in which we should call a boy and a man and a 
eunuch incapable of begetting are distinct.—Again, to either 
kind of capacity there is an opposite incapacity—both to that 20 
which only caz produce movement and to that which can 
produce it well. 

Some things, then, are called ἀδύνατα in virtue of this kind 
of incapacity, while others are so in another sense, i.e. in 
that in which we couple δυνατόν and ἀδύνατον The impossible 

ounq 

5 

1 1019” 7 read ety τιν ὥστε τῷ τε ἔχειν ἕξιν τινὰ καὶ ἀρχήν ἐστι δυνατὸν 
καὶ τῷ ἔχειν τὴν τούτον στέρησιν, εἰ ἐνδέχεται ἔχειν στέρησιν" ‘el δὲ μή, ὁμωνύμως. 
90 perhaps Alexander. 

2 1019 22 retain οἷον. Aristotle passes now to δυνατόν and ἀδύνατον in 
the sense of ‘ possible’ and ‘ impossible’, 

H 2 

1019” METAPHYSICA 

is that of which the contrary is of necessity true, e.g. that 
the diagonal of a square is commensurate with the side is 
25 impossible, because such a statement is a falsity such that not 
only is the contrary true but it is zecessary that the diagonal 
should be incommensurate; that it is commensurate, then, is 
not only false but of necessity false. The contrary of this, 
the possible, is found when it is not necessary that the contrary 
is false, e.g. that a man should be seated is possible ; for that 
30 he is not seated is not of necessity false.—The possible, then, 
in one sense, as has beeri said, means that which is not of 
necessity false; in one, that which is true; in one, that which 
is capable of being true.—A ‘ potency’ or ‘ power ’! in geometry 
is so called by a change of meaning.—These senses of ‘capable’ 
35 or ‘ possible’ involve no reference to potency. But the senses 
which involve a reference to potency all refer to the one primary 
1020° kind of potency ; and thisis a source of change in another thing 
or in the same thing gua other. For other things are called 
‘capable’, some because something else has such a potency 
over them, some because it has not, some because it has it in 
a particular way. The same is true of the things that are 
incapable. Therefore the proper definition of the primary 
5 kind of potency will be ‘a source of change in another thing or 
in the same thing gua other’. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

‘Quantity’ means that which is divisible into two or more 
constituent parts of which each is by nature a ‘one’ and a‘ this’. 
A quantity is a plurality if it is numerable, a magnitude if it is 
1e measurable. ‘ Plurality’ means that which is divisible poten- 
tially into non-continuous parts, ‘magnitude’ that which is 
divisible into continuous parts; in magnitude, that which is 
continuous in one dimension is length, in two breadth, in three 
depth. Of these, limited plurality is number, limited length 

is a line, breadth a surface, depth a solid. 
Again, some things are called quantities in virtue of their 
15 own nature, others incidentally, eg. the line is a quantity by 
its own nature, the musical is one incidentally. Of the things 

1 The reference is to squares and cubes. 

A. BOOK V _ 10207 

that are quantities by their own nature some are so as sub- 
stances, e.g. the line is a quantity (for ‘a certain kind of 
quantity ’ is present! in the formula which states what it is), and 
others are modifications and states of this kind of substance, 20 
e.g. much and little, long and short, broad and narrow, deep 
and shallow, heavy and light, and the other terms of the 
sort. And also great and small, and greater and smaller, 
both in themselves and when taken relatively to each other, 
are by their own nature attributes of quantity; but these 25 
names are transferred to other things also. Of things that are 
quantities incidentally, some are so called in the sense in which 

it was said that ‘musical’ and ‘white’ were quantities, viz. 
because that to which they belong is a quantity, and some are 
quantities in the way in which movement and time are so; 
for these are called quantities and continuous because the 39 
things of which these are attributes are divisible. I mean not 
that which is moved, but the space through which it is moved ; 
for because that is a quantity movement also is a quantity, 
and because this is a quantity time is so. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

‘Quality’ means (1) the differentia of. the essence, e.g. man 
is an animal of a certain quality because he is two-footed, and 
the horse is so because it is four-footed; and a circle is a 35 
figure of particular quality because it is without angles,—which 
shows that the essential differentia is a quality —This, then, is 1020° 
one meaning of quality—essential differentia, but (2) there is 
another sense in which it applies to the unmovable objects of 
mathematics ; i.e. the numbers have a certain quality, e.g. the 
composite numbers which are not in one dimension only, but 
of which the plane and the solid are copies (these are those 5 
which have two or three factors); and in general that which 
exists in the essence of numbers besides quantity is quality ; 
for the essence of each is what it is once, e.g. that of 6 is not 
what it is twice or thrice, but what it is once; for 6 is once 6. 

(3) All the attributes of substances in motion (e.g. heat and 
cold, whiteness and blackness, heaviness and lightness, and the τὸ 

1 10208 19 read ποσόν τι ὑπάρχει. 

1020" 

15 

METAPHYSICA 

others of the sort), in virtue of which, when they change, 
bodies are said to alter. (4) Quality in respect of virtue and 
vice and, in general, of evil and good. 

Quality, then, seems to have practically two meanings, and 
one of these is the more proper. The primary quality is the 
essential differentia, and of this the quality in numbers isa part; 
for it is a differentia of essences, but either not of things in 
motion or not of them gua in motion. Secondly, there are 
the modifications of things in motion gua in motion, and the 
differentiae of movements. Virtue and vice fall among these 
modifications; for they indicate differentiae of the movement 

a0 or activity, according to which the things in motion act or are 

acted on well or badly ; for that which can be moved or act in 
one way is good, and that which can do so in another—the 
contrary—way is vicious. Good and evil indicate quality 
especially in living things, and among these especially in 

a5 those which have purpose. 

CHAPTER XV 

Things are relative (1) as double to half and treble to a third, 
and in general that which contains something else many times 
to that which is contained many times in something else, and 
that which exceeds to that which is exceeded ; (2) as that 
which can heat to that which can be heated, and that which 
can cut to that which can be cut, and in general the active 

30 to the passive; (3) as the measured to the measure and the 

1021° 

known to knowledge and the perceived to perception. 

(1) Relative terms of the first kind are numerically related 
either indefinitely or definitely, either to various numbers or to 
1, e.g. the double is in a definite numerical relation to 1, and 
that which is ‘many times as great’ is in a numerical, but 
not in a definite, relation to 1, i.e. not in this or in that rela- 
tion to it; the relation of that which is ὃ of something else to 
that something is a definite numerical relation to a number ; 

that which is 
2+ 1 

ee, 

22 
times something else is in an indefinite relation to that some- 

A. BOOK V 1021" 

thing, as that which is ‘ many times as great’ is in an indefinite 
relation to 1; the relation of that which exceeds to that which 
is exceeded is numerically quite indefinite; for number is 5 
always commensurate, but this relation may involve a ‘ non- 
commensurate number’; for that which exceeds is, in rela- 
tion to that which is exceeded, so much and something more ; 
and this something is indefinite ; for it can, indifferently, be 
either equal or not equal to that which is exceeded.—All these 
relations are numerically expressed and are determinations of 
number, and so in another way are the equal and the like and 
the same, for all refer to unity. Those things are the same ro 
whose substance is one; those are like whose quality is one ; 
those are equal whose quantity is one ; and 1 is the beginning 
and measure of number, so that all these relations imply 
number, though not in the same way. 

(2) The active and the passive imply an active and a passive 15 
potency and the actualization of the potencies, e.g. that which is 
capable of heating is related to that which is capable of being 
heated, because it cam heat it, and, again, that which heats is 
related to that which is heated and that which cuts to that 
which is cut, because they actually do these things. But 
numerical relations are not actualized except in the sense which 
has been elsewhere! stated; actualizations in the sense of 20 
movement they have not. Of relations which imply potency 
some? further imply particular periods of time, e.g. that 
which has made is relative to that which has been made 
and that which will make to that which will be made. For 
it is in this way that a father is called father of hzs son; 
for the one has acted, and the other has been acted on in 
a certain way.’ Further, some relative terms imply przva- 25 
tion of potency, i.e. ‘incapable’ and terms of this sort, e.g. 
‘invisible ’, 

Relative terms which imply number or potency, therefore; are 
all relative because their very essence includes in its nature 
a reference to something else, not because something else is 

1 Cf. ©. 10518 30. 

? 1021% 22 read λέγονταί (riva) πρός tt. So perhaps Alexander. 

3 i,e. there need not be any gresenz relation to justify the use of the 
relative form of words; there is always the past relation. 

τοῦ ἢ 

30 

1021” 

5 

10 

15 

METAPHYSICA 

referred to 22; but (3) that which is measured or known or 
thought is called relative because something else is referred 
to it. For ‘that which is thought’ implies that the thought 
of it exists, but the thought is not relative to ‘that of which 
it is the thought’; for we should then have said the same 
thing twice. Similarly sight is the sight of something, not 
‘of that of which it is the sight’ (though of course it is true 
to say this); in fact it is relative to colour or to something 
else of the sort. But according to the other way of speaking 
the same thing would be said twice,—‘ it is the sight of that 
which is the object of sight.’ 

Things that are by their own nature called relative are called 
so sometimes in these senses, sometimes because the classes that 
include them are of this sort, e.g. medicine is a relative term 
because its genus, science, is thought to be a relative term. 
Further, there are the properties in virtue of which the things 
that have them are called relative, e.g. equality is relative 
because the equal is, and likeness because the like is. Other 
things are relative by accident, e.g. a man is relative because 
he happens to be double of something and double isa relative 
term; or the white is relative, if the same thing happens to be 
double and white. 

CHAPTER XVI 

‘The complete’ means (1) that outside which it is not pos- 
sible to find even one of the parts proper to it, e.g. the complete 
time of each thing is that outside which it is not possible to 
find any time which is a part proper to it—(2) That which in 
respect of excellence and goodness cannot be excelled in its 
kind, 6. g. a doctor is complete and a flute-player is complete, 
when they lack nothing in respect of their proper kind of excel- 
lence. And thus we transfer the word to bad things, and speak 
of a complete scandal-monger and a complete thief; indeed 
we even call them good, i.e. a good thief and a good scandal- 

2aomonger. And excellence is a completion; for each thing is © 

complete and every substance is complete, when in respect of 
its proper kind of excellence it lacks no part of its natural 
magnitude.—(3) The things which have attained a good end 

A. BOOK V ro21° 

are called complete; for things are complete in virtue of 
having attained their end. Therefore, since the end is some- 25 
thing ultimate, we transfer the word to bad things and say 

a thing has been completely spoilt, and completely destroyed, 
when it in no wise falls short of destruction and badness, but is 
at its last point. This is why death is by a figure of speech 
called the end, because both are last things. The ultimate 
purpose is also an end.—Things, then, that are called complete 30 
in virtue of their ow nature are so called in all these senses, 
some because they lack nothing in respect of goodness and 
cannot be excelled and no part proper to them can be found 
outside, others in general because they cannot be exceeded 
in their several classes and no part proper to them is outside ; 1022* 
the others are so called in virtue of these first two kinds, 
because they either make or have something of the sort or 
are adapted to it or in some way or other are referred to the 
things that are called complete in the primary sense. 

CHAPTER XVII 

‘Limit’ means the last point of each thing, i.e. the first 
point beyond which it is not possible to find any part, and the 5 
first point within which every part is ; it is applied to the form, 
whatever it may be, of a spatial magnitude or of a thing that 
has magnitude, and to the end of each thing (and of this nature 
is that towards which the movement and the action are—not 
that from which they are, though sometimes it is both, that 
from which and that to which the movement is—and the final 
cause), and to the substance of each thing, and the essence of 
each ; for this is the limit of knowledge ; and if of knowledge, 10 
of the thing also. Evidently, therefore, ‘limit’ has as many 
senses as ‘beginning’, and yet more; for the beginning is 
a limit, but not every limit is a beginning. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

‘That in virtue of which’ has several meanings, (1) the form 
or substance of each thing, e.g. that in virtue of which a man 15 
is good is the good itself,! (2) the proximate subject in which 

1 10228 15 read καθὸ ἀγαθός, αὐτὸ ἀγαθόν. 

1022° METAPHYSICA 

an attribute is naturally found, e.g. colour in a surface. ‘ That 
in virtue of which, then, in the primary sense is the form, and 
in a secondary sense the matter of each thing and the proximate 
substratum of each.—In general ‘that in virtue of which’ will 
20 be found in the same number of senses as ‘cause’; for we say 
‘in virtue of what has he come?’ or ‘for what end has he 
come ?’; and ‘in virtue of what has he inferred wrongly, or 
inferred at all?’ or ‘what is the cause of the inference, or of 
the wrong inference ? '—Further (3) καθό 1 is used in reference 
to position, e.g. ‘in which he stands’ or ‘ in which he walks’ ; 
for all such phrases indicate place and position. 
Therefore ‘ in virtue of itself’ must have several meanings. 
25 It applies to (1) the essence of each thing, e.g. Callias is in virtue 
of himself Callias and the essence of Callias; (2) whatever is 
present in the ‘what’, e.g. Callias is in virtue of himself an 
animal. For ‘animal’ is present in the formula that defines him ; 
Callias is a particular animal.—(3) Whatever attribute a thing 
30 receives in itself directly or in one of its parts, e.g. a surface 
is white in virtue of itself, and a man is alive in virtue of him- 
self; for the soul, in which life directly resides, is a part of 
the man.—(4) That which has no cause other than itself; 
man has more than one cause—animal, two-footed—but man 
35 is man in virtue of himself.—(5) Whatever attributes belong 
to a thing alone and gza alone ; hence also that which exists 
separately is ‘in virtue of itself’. 

CHAPTER XIX 

1022" ‘Disposition’ means the arrangement of that which has 
parts, in respect either of place or of potency or of kind; for 
there must be a certain position, as the word ‘ disposition’ 
shows. 

CHAPTER XX 

‘Having’? means (1) a kind of activity of the haver and the 
5 had—something like an action or movement. When one thing 
makes and one is made, between them there is a making; so 

1 Aristotle here mentions the original local sense of καθό. No English 
word or phrase has quite the same ambiguity. 
2 The word ἕξις does duty for ‘ having ’, ‘ habit,’ and ‘ permanent state’. 

A. BOOK V ~ yoaa> 

too between him who has a garment and the garment which 
he has there is a having. This sort of having, then, evidently 
we cannot Aave; for the process will go on to infinity, if we can 
have the having of what we have.—(2) ‘ Having’ or ‘habit’ τὸ 
means a disposition according to which that which is disposed 

is either well or ill disposed, either in itself or with reference to 
something else, e.g. health is a ‘habit’; for it is such a dis- 
position.—(3) We speak of a ‘habit’ if there is a portion of 
such a disposition; therefore the excellence of the parts is 
a ‘habit’. | 

CHAPTER XXI 

‘Affection’ means (1) a quality in respect of which a thing 15 
can be altered, e.g. white and black, sweet and bitter, heavi- 
ness and lightness, and all others of the kind.—(2) The already 
actualized alterations.—(3) Especially, injurious alterations and 
movements, and, above all, painful injuries—(4) Experiences 20 
pleasant or painful ' when ona large scale are called affections. 

CHAPTER XXII 

We speak of ‘ privation’ (1) if something has not one of the 
attributes which a thing might naturally have, even if this 
thing itself would not naturally have it, e.g. a plant is said to 
be ‘deprived’ of eyes.—(2) If, though either the thing itself 
or its genus would naturally have an attribute, it has it not, 25 
e.g. a blind man and a-mole are in different senses ‘ deprived ’ 
of sight ; the latter in contrast with its genus,’ the former in 
contrast with his own normal nature.—(3) If, though it would 
naturally have the attribute, and when it would naturally have 
it, it has it not; for blindness is a privation, but one is not ‘blind’ 
at any and every age, but only if one has not sight at the age 
at which one would naturally have it. Similarly a thing suffers 30 
privation when it has not an attribute in those circumstances, 
οὐ ὃ in that respect and in that relation and in that sense, in 

1 1022” 20 read τῶν ἡδέων καὶ λυπηρῶν. 
21, 6. ‘quadruped ’, 5 1022» 30 read ἐν ᾧ ἂν 7. 

1022” METAPHYSICA 

which it would naturally have it.—(4) The violent taking 
away of anything is.called privation. — 

There are just as many kinds of privations as there are of 
words with negative prefixes or affixes; for a thing is called 
unequal because it has not equality though it would naturally 
have it, and invisible either because it has no colour at all or 

35 because it has a poor colour, and footless either because it has 
no feet at all or because it has imperfect feet. Again, a priva- 
tive term may be used because the thing has little of the 

1023” attribute (and this means having it ina sense imperfectly), e.g. 
‘kernelless ’; or because it has it not easily or not well (e.g. 
we call a thing indivisible not only if it cannot be divided 
but also if it cannot be easily or well divided) ; or because it 
has not the attribute at all; for it is not the one-eyed man 
5 but he who is sightless in both eyes that is called blind. This 
is why not every man is good or bad, just or unjust, but there 
is also an intermediate state. 

CHAPTER XXIII 

To ‘have’ or ‘hold’ means many things. (1) To treat 
a thing according to one’s own nature or according to one’s 
10 own impulse, so that fever is said to have a man, and tyrants 
to have their cities, and people to have the clothes they wear.— 
(2) That in which a thing is present as in something receptive 
is said to have the thing, e.g. the bronze has the form of the 
statue, and the body has the disease.—(3) As that which con- 
tains holds that which is contained ; for a thing is said to be 
15 held by that in which it is contained, e.g. we say that the 
vessel holds the liquid and the city holds men and the ship 
sailors; and so too that the whole holds the parts.—(4) That 
which hinders a thing from moving or acting according to its 
own impulse is said to hold it, as pillars hold the incumbent 
20 weights, and as the poets make Atlas hold the heavens, im- 
plying that otherwise they would collapse on the earth, as some 
.of the natural philosophers also say. In this way that which 
holds things together is said to hold the things it holds 
together, since they would otherwise separate, each according 
to its own impulse. 

A. BOOK V 1023" 

‘Being in something’ has similar and corresponding mean- 
ings to ‘holding’ or ‘ having’. 25 

CHAPTER XXIV 

‘To come from something ’ means (1) to come from some- 
thing as from matter, and this in two senses, either in respect 
of the highest genus or in respect of the lowest species, e. g. 
in a sense all things that can be melted come from water, but 
in a sense the statue comes from bronze.—(2) As from the 
first moving principle, e.g. the fight comes from abusive 30 
language,' because this is the source of the fight—(3) From 
the compound of matter and shape, as the parts come from the 
whole and the verse from the Ziad and the stones from the 
house; {the stones are to the house as part to whole,) for 
arrangement as a house is their end, and only that which 35 
attains an end is complete.—(4) As the form from its part, 
e.g. man from ‘two-footed’ and syllable from ‘letter’; for 
this is a different sense from that in which the statue comes 1023" 
from bronze; for the composite substance comes from the 
sensible matter, but the form also comes from the matter of 
the form.—These, then, are some of the meanings of ‘coming 
from something’, but sometimes (5) one of these senses is 
applicable only to part of a whole, e.g. the child comes from 
its father and mother and plants come from the earth, because 
they come from a part of those things.—(6) It means coming 5 
after a thing in time, e.g. night comes from day and storm 
from fine weather, because the one comes after the other. Of 
these things some are so described because they admit of 
change into one another, as in the cases now mentioned ; 
some merely because they are successive in time, e.g. the 
voyage took place ‘from’ the equinox, because it took place τὸ 
after the equinox, and the Thargelia come ‘ from’ the Dionysia, 
because after the Dionysia. 

CHAPTER XXV 

‘Part’ means (1) that into which a quantity can in any way 
be divided; for that which is taken from a quantity gua 

1 1023* 30 read οἷον ἐκ τῆς λοιδορίας. ἡ μάχη. 

1023” METAPHYSICA 

quantity is always called a part of it, e.g. two is called in 
1g ἃ sense a part of three.—(2) It means, of the parts in the first 
sense, only those which measure the whole ; this is why two, 
though in one sense it is, in another is not, a part of three.—(3) 
The elements into which the kind might be divided apart from 
the quantity, are also called parts of it; for which reason 
we say the species are parts of the genus.—(4) The elements 
into which the whole is divided, or of which it consists—‘ the 
whole’ meaning either the form or that which has the form ; 
20 e.g. of the bronze sphere or of the bronze cube both the 
bronze—i.e. the matter in which the form is—and the 
characteristic angle are parts.—(5) The elements in the 
formula which explains a thing are parts of the whole; this 
is why the genus is called a part of the species, though in 
25 another sense the species is part of the genus. 

CHAPTER XXVI 

‘A whole’ means (1) that from which is absent none of 
the parts of which it is said to be naturally a whole, 
and (2) that which so contains the things it contains that 
they form a unity ; and this in two senses—either as each and 
all one, or as making up the unity between them. For (a) 
that which is true of a whole class and is said to hold good 

3o as a whole (which implies that it is a kind of whole) is true of 
a whole in the sense that it contains many things by being 
predicated of each, and that each and all of them, e.g. man, 
horse, god, are one, because all are living things. But (4) the 
continuous and limited is a whole, when there is a unity con- 
sisting of several parts present in it, especially if they are present 
only potentially,! but, failing this, even if they are present 
actually. Of these things themselves, those which are so by 
nature are wholes in.a higher degree than those which are so 

35 by art, as we said? in the case of unity also, wholeness being 
in fact a sort of oneness. 

1024" Again, as quantities have a beginning and a middle and an 
end, those to which the position does not make a difference 
are called totals, and those to which it does, wholes, and those 

1 j,e. if they are only distinguishable, not distinct. 2 Cf. 10168 4. 

A. BOOK V 

which admit of both descriptions are both wholes and totals. 
These are the things whose nature remains the same after 
transposition, but whose form does not, e.g. wax or a coat ; 

1024" 

they are called both wholes and totals; for they have both 5 

characteristics. Water and all liquids and number are called 
totals, but ‘the whole number’ or ‘ the whole water’ one does 
not speak of, except by an extension of meaning. To things, 
to which gua one the term ‘total’ is applied, the term ‘all’ is 
applied when they are treated as separate ; ‘this total number,’ 
‘all these units.’ 

CHAPTER XXVII 

It is not any chance quantitative thing that can be said to 
be‘ mutilated ’; it must be both divisible and a whole. For two 
is not ‘ mutilated ’ if one of the two ones is taken away (for the 
part removed by mutilation is never equal to the remainder), 
nor in general is any number thus mutilated ; for it is also neces- 
sary that the essence remain; if a cup is mutilated, it must 
still be a cup; but the number is no longer the same. Further, 
even if things consist of unlike parts, not even these things 
can all be said to be mutilated, for in a sense a number has 
unlike parts, e.g. two and three. But in general of the things 
to which their position makes no difference, e. g. water or fire, 
none can be mutilated; to be mutilated, things must be such 
as in virtue of their essence have a certain position. Again, 
they must be continuous; for a musical scale consists of 
unlike parts! and has position, but cannot become mutilated. 
Besides, not even the things that are wholes are mutilated by 
the privation of amy part. For the parts removed must be 
neither those which determine the essence nor any chance 
parts, irrespective of their position ; e. σ΄. ἃ cup is not mutilated if 
it is bored through ; but only if the handle or a projecting part 

20 

is removed. And a man is mutilated not if the flesh or the a; 

spleen is removed, but if an extremity is, and that not every 
extremity but one which when completely removed cannot 
grow again. Therefore baldness is not a mutilation. 

1 1024" 21 read ἐξ ἀνομοίων. 

1024" METAPHYSICA 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

The term ‘race’ or ‘genus’ is used (1) if there is continuous 

30 generation of things which have the same form, e. g. ‘ while 
the race of men lasts’ means ‘while the generation of 
them goes on continuously ’.—(2) It means that which first 
brought things into existence ; for so some are called Hellenes 
by race and others Ionians, because the former proceed from 
Hellen and the latter from Ion as their first begetter. And 
the word is used in reference to the begetter more than to 

35 the matter, though people also get a race-name from the 
female, e.g. ‘the descendants of Pyrrha.’1—(3) There is 

1024” genus in the sense in which ‘plane’ is the genus of plane 
figures and ‘solid’ of solids; for each of the figures is in the 
one case a plane of such and such a kind, and in the other 
a solid of such and such a kind; and this is what underlies 
the differentiae. Again, in formulae their first constituent 

5 element, which is included in the essence, is the genus, whose 
differentiae the qualities are said to be.—‘ Genus’ then is used 
in all these ways, (1) in reference to continuous generation of 
the same kind, (2) in reference to the first mover which is of 
the same kind as the things it moves, (3) as matter; for that 
to which the differentia or quality belongs is the / substratum, 
which we call matter. 

10 Those things are said to be ‘ other in genus’ whose ultimate 
substratum is different, and which are not analysed the one 
into the other nor both into the same thing (e.g. form and 
matter are different in genus); and things which belong to 
different categories of being ; for some of the things that are 
said to ‘be’ signify essence, others a quality, others the other 

15 Categories we have before distinguished ;* these also are not 
analysed either into one another or into some one thing. 

CHAPTER XXIX 

‘The false’ means (1) that which is false as a ¢heng,and that 
(a) because it is not put together or cannot be put together, 
1 Aristotle thinks that the male supplies the efficient and the formal, 

the female the material cause of generation. 
2 1017® 24. 

A. BOOK V 1024 

e.g. ‘that the diagonal of a square is commensurate with the 
side’ or ‘that you are sitting’; for one of these is false 20 
always, and the other sometimes; it is in these two senses 
that they are non-existent. (4) There are things which exist, 
but whose nature it is to appear either not to be such as 
they are or to be things that do not exist, e.g. a sketch or 

a dream ; for these are something, but are not the things the 
appearance of which they produce in us. We call things 
false in this way, then,—either because they themselves do 25 
not exist, or because the appearance which results from them 

is that of something that does not exist. 

(2) A false conception is the conception of non-existent 
objects, in so far as it is false. Hence every conception is 
false when applied to something other than that of which it 
is true, e.g. the conception of a circle is false when applied 
to a triangle. In a sense there is one conception of each 
thing, i.e. the conception of its essence, but in a sense there 30 
are many, since the thing itself and the thing itself modified 
in a certain way are somehow the same, e.g. Socrates and 
musical Socrates. The false conception is not the conception 
of anything, except in a qualified sense. Hence Antisthenes 
foolishly claimed that nothing could be described except by its 
own conception,—one predicate to one subject ; from which it 
followed that there could be no contradiction, and almost that 
there could be no error. But it is possible to describe each 25 
thing not only by its own conception, but also by that of 
something else. This may be done altogether falsely indeed, 
but in some ways it may be done truly, e.g. eight may be 
described as a double number by the use of the conception 
of two. 

These things, then, are called false in these senses, but (3) 1025 
a false man is one who is ready at and fond of such concep- 
tions, not for any other reason but for their own sake, and 
one who is good at impressing such conceptions on other 
people, just as we say ¢hings are false, which produce a false 5 
appearance. This is why the proof in the A/zppas' that the 
same man is false and true is misleading. For it assumes that 
he is false who can deceive (i.e. the man who knows and is 
1 Hippias Minor 373 C seqq. 

I 

AR. MET. 

1025* METAPHYSICA 

wise) ; and further that he who is zwe//ingly bad is better. This 

10 is a false result of znduction ; for a man who limps willingly is 
better than one who does so unwillingly ; by ‘limping’ Plato 
means ‘ mimicking a limp’, for if the man were actually lame 
willingly, he would perhaps be worse in this case as in the 
corresponding case of moral character. 

CHAPTER XXX 

‘Accident’ means that which attaches to something and 
1scan be truly asserted, but neither of necessity nor usually, 
e.g. if one in digging a hole for a plant found treasure. 
This—the finding of treasure—happens by accident to the 
man who digs the hole; for neither does the one come of 
necessity from the other or after the other, nor, if a man plants, 
does he usually find treasure. And a musical man might 
20 be white; but since this does not happen of necessity nor 
usually, we call it an accident. Therefore since there are 
attributes and they attach to a subject, and some of them 
attach in a particular place and at a particular time, whatever 
attaches to a subject, but not because it is this subject, at 
this time or in this place, will be an accident. Therefore 
there is no definite cause for an accident, but a chance cause, 
25 i.e. an indefinite one. Going to Aegina was an accident, if 
the man went not in order to get there, but because he was 
carried out of his way by a storm or captured by pirates. 
The accident has happened or exists,?—not in virtue of 
itself, however, but of something else ; for the storm was the 
cause of his coming to a place for which he was not sailing, 
and this was Aegina. 

30 ‘Accident’ has also another meaning, i.e. what attaches to 
each thing in virtue of itself but 15 not in its essence, as having 
its angles equal to two right angles attaches to the triangle. 
And accidents of this sort may be eternal, but no accident 
of the other sort is. This is explained elsewhere.® 

1 10258 26 read συνέβη τὸ εἰς Αἴγιναν ἐλθεῖν. 
? 1025" 28 read δὴ ἣ ἔστι. 
2 E. 2, 3, K. 8, An. Post. I. 75% 18. 

BOOK VI (E) 

CHAPTER I 

WE are seeking the principles and the causes of the things ro25> 
that are, and obviously of things gua being. For there is a 
cause of health and of good condition, and the objects of mathe- 
matics have principles and elements and causes, and in general 5 
every science which is ratiocinative or at all involves reasoning 
deals with causes and principles, exact or indeterminate ; but 
all these sciences mark off some particular being—some genus, 
and inquire into this, but not into being simply nor gua 
being, nor do they offer any discussion of the essence of the 
things of which they treat; but starting fram the essence τὸ 
—some making it plain to the senses, others assuming it 
as a hypothesis-—they then demonstrate, more or less 
cogently, the essential attributes of the genus with which 
they deal. It is obvious, therefore, from such a review of 
the sciences,' that there is no demonstration of substance or 
of the essence, but some other way of exhibiting it. And 15 
similarly the sciences omit the question whether the genus 
with which they deal exists or does not exist, because. it 
belongs to the same line of thought to show what it is and 
that it is. . | | 

And since natural science, like other sciences, confines 
itself to one class of beings, i.e. to that sort of substance 20 
which has the principle of its movement and rest present in 
itself, evidently it is neither practical nor productive. For 
the principle of production is in the producer—it is either 
reason or art or some potency, while the principle of action 
is in the doer—viz. will, for that’ which is done and that 
which is willed are the same. Therefore, if all thought is 25 
either practical or productive or theoretical, physics must be 
a theoretical science, but it will theorize about such being 

τ Cf. K. 1064° 8, 
I 2 

1025> METAPHYSICA 

as admits of being moved, and only about that kind of sub- 
stance which in respect of its definition is for the most part 
not separable from matter. Now, we must not fail to notice the 
nature of the essence and of its definition, for, without this, 
30 inquiry is but idle. Of things defined, i.e. of essences, some 
are like ‘snub’, and some like ‘concave’. And these differ 
because ‘snub’ is bound up with matter (for what is snub is 

a concave 2056), while concavity is independent of perceptible 
matter. If then all natural things are analogous to the snub 
1026° in their nature—e.g. nose, eye, face, flesh, bone, and, in general, 
animal ; leaf, root, bark, and, in general, plant (for none of 
these can be defined without reference to movement—they 
always have matter), it is clear how we must seek and define the 

5 ‘what’ in the case of natural objects, and also why it belongs 
to the student of nature to.study soul to some extent, i.e. so 
much of it as is not independent of matter.—That physics, 
then, is a theoretical science, is plain from these considerations. 
Mathematics also is theoretical ; but whether its objects are 
immovable and separable from matter, is not at present clear ; 

it is clear, however, that it considers some mathematical 
10 objects gva immovable and gua separable from matter. But 
if there is something which is eternal and immovable and 
separable, clearly the knowledge of it belongs to a theoretical 
science,—not, however, to physics (for physics deals with 
certain movable things) nor to mathematics, but to a science 
prior to both. For physics deals with things which are 
inseparable from matter’ but not immovable, and some 
parts of mathematics deal with things which are immovable, 
15 but probably not separable, but embodied in matter; while 
the first science deals with things which are both separable 
and immovable. Now all causes must be eternal, but espe- 
cially these; for they are the causes of so much of the divine 
as appears to us.2, There must, then, be three theoretical 
philosophies, mathematics, physics, and what we may call 
20 theology, since it is obvious that if the divine is present any- 
where, it is present in things of this sort. And the highest 
science must deal with the highest genus, so that the theoretical 

1 1026* 14 read ἀχώριστα. 
2 i.e. the movements of the heavenly bodies. 

_.E. BOOK VI 10262 

sciences are superior to the other sciences, and this to the other 
theoretical sciences. One might indeed raise the question 
whether first philosophy is universal, or deals with one 
genus, i.e. some one kind of being; for not even the mathe- 2. 
matical sciences are all alike in this respect,—geometry and 
astronomy deal with a certain particular kind of thing, while 
universal mathematics applies alike to all. We answer that 
if there is no substance other than those which are formed by 
nature, natural science will be the first science; but if there 30 
is an immovable substance, the science of this must be prior 
and must be first philosophy, and universal in this way, 
because it is first. And it will belong to this to consider 
being gua being—both what it is and the attributes which 
belong to it gua being.! 

CHAPTER II 

But since the unqualified term ‘being’ has several mean- 
ings, of which one was seen ? to be the accidental, and another 
the true (‘non-being’ being the false), while besides these 35 
there are the figures of predication, e.g. the ‘what’, quality, 
quantity, place, time, and any similar meanings which ‘ being’ 
may have ; and again besides all these there is that which ‘is’ 1026" 
potentially or actually :—since ‘ being’ has many meanings, we 
must first say regarding the accidental, that there can be 
no scientific treatment of it. This is confirmed by the fact 
that no science—practical, productive, or theoretical—troubles 5 
itself about it. For on the one hand he who produces a 
house does not produce all the attributes that come into 
being along with the house; for these are innumerable ; the 
house that is made may be pleasant for some people, hurtful 
᾿ to some, and useful to others, and different—to put it shortly 
—from all things that are; and the science of building does 
not aim at producing any of these attributes. And in the same 10 
way the geometer does not consider the attributes which 

1 With ch. 1 cf. B. 955 10-13, 997% 15-25. 

2 Ch Δ. 7. 

3 For the point of the last clause cf. ll. 12,17, below. The question as to 
the identity or difference of various things was popular with the Sophists. 

1026° METAPHYSICA 

attach thus to figures, nor whether ‘triangle’ is different 
from ‘triangle whose angles are equal to two right angles’. 
—-And this happens naturally enough; for the accidental is 
practically a mere name. And therefore Plato! was in a sense 
not wrong in saying that sophistic deals with that which is 
15 not. For the arguments of the sophists deal, we may say, above 
all with the accidental; e.g. the question whether ‘ musical ’ 
and ‘ lettered’ are different or the same, and whether ‘ musical 
Coriscus’ and ‘Coriscus’ are the same, and whether ‘ everything 
which is, but is not eternal, has come to be’, with the para- 
doxical conclusion that if one who was musical has come 
to be lettered, he must also have been lettered and have come 
20to be musical,—and all the other arguments of this sort; 
the accidental is obviously akin to non-being. And this 
is clear also from arguments such as the following: of things 
which are in another sense there is generation and decay, 
but of things which are accidentally there is not. But still 
we must, as far as we can, say, regarding the accidental, 
25 what is its nature and from what cause it proceeds; for 
_ it will perhaps at the same time become clear why there is 
no science of it. 

Since, among things which are, some are always in the 
same state and are of necessity (not necessity in the sense 
of compulsion but that which means the impossibility of 
being otherwise), and some are not of necessity nor always, 

30 but for the most part, this is the principle and this the cause 
of the existence of the accidental ; for that which is neither 
always nor for the most part, we call accidental. For instance, 
if in the dog-days there is wintry and cold weather, we say 
this is an accident, but not if there is sultry heat, because the 
latter is always or for the most part so, but not the former. 

35 And it is an accident that a man is white (for this is neither 
always nor for the most part so), but it is not by accident that 
he is an animal. And that the builder produces health is an 

1027% accident, because it is the nature not of the builder but of the 
doctor to do this,—but the builder happened to be a doctor. 
Again, a confectioner, aiming at giving pleasure, may make 
something wholesome, but not in virtue of the confectioner’s 

1 Cf. Sophistes 237 A, 254 A. 

E. BOOK VI 

art; and therefore we say it was an accident, and while there 
is a sense in which he makes it, in the full sense he does not 
make it.—For some accidental results sometimes tend to be 
produced by alien potencies,! but to others there corresponds 
no determinate art nor potency ; for of things which are or 
come to be by accident, the cause also is accidental. There- 
fore, since not all things are or come to be of necessity and 
always, but the majority of things are for the most part, 
the accidental must exist ; for instance a white man is not 
always nor for the most part musical, but since this sometimes 
happens, it must be accidental. If not, everything will be 
of necessity. The matter, therefore, which is capable of being 
otherwise than as it usually is, is the cause of the accidental. 
And we must take as our starting-point the question whether 
everything is either always or for the most part. Surely this 
is impossible. There is, then, besides these something which 
is fortuitous and accidental. But while the usual exists, can 
nothing be said to be always, or are there eternal things ? 
This must be considered later,? but that there is no science 
of the accidental is obvious; for all science is either of that 
which is always or of that which is for the most part. For 
how else is one to learn or to teach another? The thing 
must be determined as occurring either always or for the 
most part, e.g. that honey-water is useful for a patient in a 
fever is true for the most part. But one will not be able to 
state when that which is contrary to the usual law happens, 
e.g. ‘on the day of new moon’ ;° for if one can say this, ‘on the 
day of new moon’ is itself the statement of a universal or a 
usual law ; but the accidental is contrary to such laws. We 
have stated, then, what the accidental is and from what cause 
it arises, and that there is no science which deals with it. 

CHAPTER III 

That there are principles and causes which are generable 
and destructible without ever being in course of being gene- 

1027° 

5 

5 

rated or destroyed, is obvious. For otherwise all things will 30 

1 10278 5 read ἄλλαι. 2 Cf. A. 7. 
3 1027925 λέγειν πότε, οἷον νουμηνίᾳ. 

1027° 

METAPHYSICA 

be of necessity, since that which is being generated or de- 
stroyed must have a cause which 15 not accidentally its cause. 
Whether is A to be or not? It will be if B happens ; and if 
not, not. And Δ will be if C happens. And thus if time 
is constantly subtracted from a limited extent of time, one 

1027” will obviously come to the present. This man, then, will die 

by disease or violence, zf he goes out; and he will do this if 
he is thirsty; and he will be thirsty if something else hap- 
pens; and thus we shall come to that which is now present, 
or to some past event. For instance, he will go out if he is 
thirsty ; and he will be thirsty if he is eating something pun- 

s gent; and this is either the case or not; so that he will of 

necessity die, or of necessity not die. And similarly if one 
jumps over to the past, the same account will hold good ; for 
this—I mean the past condition—is already present in some- 
thing. Everything, therefore, that is to be, will be of neces- 
sity, e.g. it is necessary that he who lives shall one day die ; 
for already some link in the series has been forged—e. g. the 

to presence of contraries in the same body. But whether he 

dies by disease or by violence, is not yet determined, but 

_ depends on the happening of something else. Clearly then 

the process goes back to a certain starting-point, but this no 
longer points to something further. This then will be the 
starting-point for the fortuitous, and will have nothing else as 
cause of its coming to be. But to what sort of starting-point 

15 and what sort of cause we thus refer the fortuitous—whether 

to matter or to the purpose or to the motive power, must be 
carefully considered.’ 

The doctrine of the chapter seems to be as follows. Events in general 
occur as the necessary result of a series of causes. E.g. death is the 
necessary result of the presence of contrary elements in every living body. 
But there are certain events which, while beginning a causal nexus, are 
not the result of a causal nexus. We can never say of them, ‘ their con- 
ditions are being fulfilled, and they are coming to be.’ At one time they 
are not, and at another time they are. ‘lherefore they come to be. 
But they never ave coming to be. The events A. seems ito be thinking of 
are those which he would ascribe to free will, e.g. a man’s eating pungent 
food. Once this is done, his death 2” some deterininate way is certain ; 
till he does it, only his death is certain. 

E. BOOK VI 

CHAPTER IV 

Let us dismiss the accidental; for we have sufficiently 
determined its nature. But since that which zs in the sense 
of being true, or zs zo¢ in the sense of being false, depends on 
combination! and separation, and truth and falsehood together 
depend on the decision between the two sides of a con- 
tradiction (for the true judgement affirms where the subject 
and predicate really are combined, and denies where they are 
separated, while the false judgement predicates the contra- 
dictory of this—it is another question, how it happens that 
we think things together or apart; by ‘ together’ and ‘ apart’ 
I mean thinking them so that there is no succession in the 
thoughts but they become a unity—; for falsity and truth are 
not in things—it is not as if the good were true, and the 
bad were in itself false—but in thought; while with regard 
to simple concepts and essences falsity and truth do not 
exist even in thought):—we must consider later? what 
has to be discussed with regard to that which is or is not 
in this sense; but since the combination and the separation 
are in thought and not in the things, and that which is in 
this sense is a different sort of ‘being’ from the things that 
are in the full sense (for the thought attaches or removes either 
the ‘what’ or quality or quantity or one of the other cate- 
gories), that which zs accidentally and that which zs in the 
sense of being true must be dismissed. For the cause of the 
former is indeterminate, and that of the latter is some affec- 
tion of the thought, and both are related to the remaining 
genus of being, and do not indicate any separate class of 
being. Therefore let these be dismissed, and let us consider 
the causes and the principles of being itself, gva being. It 
was Clear in our discussion of the various meanings of .terms,? 
that ‘ being’ has several meanings. 

1 1027 19 read παρὰ σύνθεσιν. 2 Cf. @, Io. δ A. 7. 

1027° 

30 

ο 

10282 

BOOK VII (2) 

CHAPTER I 

THERE are several senses in which a thing may be said to 

10 ‘be’, as we pointed out previously in our book on the various 
senses of words ;! for in one sense the ‘ being’ meant is ‘ what 
a thing is’ or the individual thing, and in another sense it 
means that a thing is of a certain quality or quantity or has 
some such predicate asserted of it. While ‘being’ has all 
these senses, obviously that which ‘is’ primarily is the ‘what’, 
which indicates the substance of the thing. For when we say 
of what quality a thing is, we say that it is good or beautiful,” 
but not that it is three cubits long or that it isa man; but when 
we say what it is, we do not say ‘ white’ or ‘hot’ or ‘three 
cubits long ’, but ‘man’ or ‘God’. And all other things are 
said to be because they are, some of them, quantities of that 
which zs in this primary sense, others qualities of it, others 
affections of it, and others some other determination of it. 
20 And so one might raise the question whether walking and 
being healthy and sitting are, each of them, existent or non- 
existent, and similarly in any other case of this sort; for none 
of them is either self-subsistent or capable of being separated 
from substance, but rather, if anything, it is that which walks 
or is seated or is healthy that is an existent thing. Now 
these are seen to be more real because there is something 
definite which underlies them; and this is the substance or 
individual, which is implied in such a predicate ; for ‘good’ or 
‘sitting ’ apart from that which sits or is good has no meaning. 
Clearly then it is in virtue of this category that each of the 
30 Others zs. Therefore that which is primarily and zs simply 

(nat ‘is something’) must be substance. 

Now there are several senses in which a thing is said to be 
first; but substance is first in every sense—(1) in formula, 

bat 
σι 

2 

tr 

1 Cf. A. 7. 3 1028" 16 read καλόν. 

Z BOOK VII 1028% 

(2) in order of knowledge, (3) in time. For (3) of the other 
categories none can exist independently, but only substance. 
And (1) in formula also this is first; for in the formula of 35 
each term the formula of its substance must be present. 
And (2) we think we know each thing most fully, when we 
know what it is, e.g. what man is or what fire is, rather than 
when we know its quality, its quantity, or where it is; since 1028" 
we know each of these predicates also, only when we know 
what the quantity or the quality zs. 

And indeed the question which was raised of old and is 
raised now and always, and is always the subject of doubt, 
viz. what being is, is just the question, what is substance? 
For it is this that some assert to be one, others more than 
one, and that some assert to be limited in number, others 5 
unlimited. And so we also must consider chiefly and pri- 
marily and almost exclusively what that is which zs in this 
sense. 

CHAPTER II 

Substance is thought to belong most obviously to bodies ; 
and so we say that both animals and plants and their parts 
are substances, and so are natural bodies such as fire and water 10 
and earth and everything of the sort, and all things that are 
parts of these or composed of these (either of parts or of the 
whole bodies), e.g. the heaven and its parts, stars and moon 
and sun. But whether these alone are substances, or there 
are also others, or only some of these, or some of these and 
some other things! are substances, or none of these but only 15 
some other things, must be considered. Some think the 
limits of body, i.e. surface, line, point, and unit, are substances, 
and more so than body or the solid. 

Further, some do not think there is anything substantial 
besides sensible things, but others think there are eternal sub- 
stances which are more in number and more real, e. g. Plato 20 
posited two kinds of substance—the Forms and the objects of 
mathematics—as well as a third kind, viz. the substance of 

1 7028) 14 read # τούτων τινὲς ἢ καὶ ἄλλαι. The possibilities are 
(a) all of these, (ὁ) all of these and some others, (c) some of these, 
(4) some of these and some others, (6) some others. 

1028 METAPHYSICA 

sensible bodies. And Speusippus made still more kinds of 
substance, beginning with the One, and making principles for 
each kind of substance, one for numbers, another for spatial 
magnitudes, and then another for the soul; and in this way 
25 he multiplies the kinds of substance. And some say Forms 
and numbers have the same nature, and other things come 
after them, e.g. lines and planes, until we come to the 
substance of the material universe and to sensible bodies. 
Regarding these matters, then, we must inquire which of 
the common statements are right and which are not right, 
and what things are substances, and whether there are or are 
not any besides sensible substances, and how sensible sub- 
30 stances exist, and whether there is a separable substance (and 
if so why and how) or there is no substance separable from 
sensible substances; and we must first sketch the nature of 
substance. | 

CHAPTER III 

The word ‘ substance’ is applied, if not in more senses, still 
at least to four main objects; for both the essence and the 
universal and the genus are thought to be the substance of 

35 each thing, and fourthly the substratum. Now the substratum 
is that of which the others are predicated, while it is itself not 
predicated of anything else. And so we must first determine 

1029" the nature of this ; for that which underlies a thing primarily 
is thought to be in the truest sense its substance. And in one 
sense matter is said to be of the nature of substratum, in 
another, shape, and in a third sense, the compound of these. 
By the matter I mean, for instance, the bronze, by the shape 
the plan of its form, and by the compound of these (the 
5 concrete thing) the statue. Therefore if the form is prior to 
the matter and more real, the compound of both? will be prior 
also for the same reason. 

We have now outlined the nature of substance, showing 
that it is that which is not predicated of a subject, but οἵ. 
which all else is predicated. But we must not merely state 

1othe matter thus; for this is not enough. The statement 

1 10298 6 read τὸ ἐξ ἀμφοῖν. 

Z. BOOK VII 1029* 

itself is obscure, and further, on this view, matter becomes 
substance. For if this is not substance, it is beyond our power 
to say what else is. When all else is taken away evidently 
nothing but matter remains. For of the other elements 
some are affections, products, and potencies of bodies, while 
length, breadth, and depth are quantities and not sub- 
stances. For a quantity is not a substance; but the substance 15 
is rather that to which these belong primarily. But when 
length and breadth and depth are taken away we see nothing 
left except that which is bounded by these, whatever it be; 
so that to those who consider the question thus matter alone 
must seem to be substance. By matter I mean that which 20 
in itself is neither a particular thing nor of a certain quantity 
nor assigned to any other of the categories by which being is 
determined... For there is something of which each of these is 
predicated, so that its being! is different from that of each of 
the predicates ; for the predicates other than substance are 
predicated of substance, while substance is predicated of 
matter. Therefore the ultimate substratum is of itself neither 

a particular thing nor of a particular quantity nor otherwise 
positively characterized; nor yet negatively, for negations 25 
also will belong to it only by accident. 

If we adopt this point of view, then, it follows that matter 
is substance. But this is impossible; for both separability 
and individuality are thought to belong chiefly to substance. 
And so form and the compound of form and matter would be 
thought to be substance, rather than matter. The substance 30 
compounded of both, i.e. of matter and shape, may be dis- 
missed ; for it is posterior and its nature is obvious. And 
matter also is in a sense manifest. But we must inquire into 
the third kind of substance ; for this is the most difficult. 

It is agreed that there are some substances among sensible 
things, so that we must look first among these. For it is an 1029? 3 
advantage to advance to that which is more intelligible. For 
learning proceeds for all in this way—through that which is 
less intelligible by nature to that which is more intelligible ; 
and just as in conduct our work is to start from what is good 5 
for each and make what is good in itself good for each, so it 

1 1029* 22 read Sore τὸ εἶναι. 

os 

1029? METAPHYSICA 

is our work to start from what is more intelligible to oneself 
and make what is intelligible by nature intelligible to oneself. 
Now what is intelligible and primary for particular sets of 
people is often intelligible to a very small extent, and has 
10 little or nothing of reality. But yet one must start from that 
which is barely intelligible but intelligible to oneself, and try 
to understand what is intelligible in itself, passing, as has been 
said, by way of those very things which. one understands. 

CHAPTER IV 

1 Since at the start we distinguished the various marks by 

2 which we determine substance, and one of these was thought 

13 to be the essence, we must investigate this, And first let us 
make some abstract linguistic remarks about it. The essence 
of each thing is what it is said to be propier se'. For being 

15 you is not being musical ; for you are not by your very nature 
musical. What, then, you are by your very ‘nature is your 
essence. 

But not the whole of this is the essence of a thing; not 
that which it is propter se as a surface is propter se white, 
because being a surface is not zdentical with being white. 
But again the combination of both— being a white surface’ 2 
—is not the essence of surface. Why? Because ‘ surface’ 
itself is repeated. The formula, therefore, in which the term 

20 itself is not present but its meaning is expressed, this is the 
formula of the essence of each thing. Therefore if to be 
a white surface is to be a smooth surface , to be white and 
to be smooth are one and the same.‘ 

But since there are compounds of substance with the other 
categories (for there is a substrate for each category, e.g. for 

as quality, quantity, time, place, and motion), we must inquire 
whether there is a formula of the essence of each of them, i. 6. 
whether to these compounds also there belongs an essence, 

1 It seems convenient here to translate thus the phrase translated in 
A. 18 as ‘in virtue of itself’. 

2 1029? 18 read τὸ ἐπιφανείᾳ λευκῇ εἶναι. 
8 1029 21 read τὸ ἐπιφανείᾳ εἶναι λεία, Cf. De Sensu 442” 11 (on 

Democritus). 
4 i.e. this identification does not give the essence of ‘surface’ (for 

‘surface’ is repeated) but it gives the essence of ‘ white’, since this is not 
repeated but replaced by an equivalent. 

Hanus 

eR ere. 

“SS ἄν ee 

Z. BOOK VII 1029” 

e.g. to white man the essence of white man. Let the com- 
pound be denoted by ‘ X’.1 What is the essence of X? But, 

it may be said, this also is not a propter se expression. We 
reply that there are just two ways in which a predicate may fail 
to be true of a subject propter se, and one of these results from 30 
the addition, and the other from the omission, of a determinant, 
One kind of predicate is not propter se because the term that 

is being defined is combined with another determinant, e.g. 
if in defining the essence of white one were to state the 
formula of white man ; another because in the subject another 
determinant is combined with that which is expressed in 
the formula, e.g. if X meant white man, and one were to 
define X as white ; white man is white indeed, but its essence 1030% 
is not to be white. But is being-X an essence at all? Prob- | 
ably not.? For the essence is an individual type; but when an 
attribute is asserted of an alien subject, the complex is not an 
individual type, e. g. white man is not an individual type, since 5 
individuality belongs only to substances.* Therefore there 

is an essence only of those things whose formula is a defini- 
tion. But we have a definition not where we have a word and 

a formula identical in meaning (for in that case all formulae or 
sets of words would be definitions ; for there will be some 
name for any set of words whatever, so that even the /iad 
would be a definition ὅ), but where there is a formula of some- 
thing primary; and primary things are those which do not τὸ 
imply the predication of one element in them of another, alien 
element. Nothing, then, which is not a species of a genus 
will have an essence—only species will have it, for in these the 
subject is not thought to participate in the attribute and to 
have it as an affection,® nor to have it by accident; but for 
everything else as well, if it has a name, there will be a formula 15 
of tts meaning—viz. that this attribute belongs to this subject ; 

1 *X” Aristotle expresses by arbitrarily taking the word ‘cloak’. 

2 1030* 1 read οὐ μέντοι «τὸν τί ἦν εἶναι λευκῷ εἶναι. 

5 10303 3 read ὅλως ; ἣ οὔ. 

* The point is that λευκόν is one thing, ἄνθρωπος another, while ζῷον and 
δίπουν are not distinct things but δίπουν is only a form of ζῷον. Thus 
ἄνθρωπος λευκός is not an individual type and cannot be defined, while 
(gov δίπουν is an individual type and can be defined. 

° Sc. of the word ‘ Iliad ’. 

® Cf. 1037 14-21 for the interpretation of this. 

1030° METAPHYSICA 

or instead of a simple formula we shall be able to give 
a more accurate one; but there will be no definition nor 
essence. 

But after all, ‘ definition,’ like ‘what a thing is,’ has several 
meanings ; ‘ what a thing is’ in one sense means substance and 
the individual, in another one or other of the predicands, quan- 

ao tity, quality, and the like. For as ‘is’ is predicable of all 
things, not however in the same sense, but of one sort of thing 
primarily and of others in a secondary way, so too the ‘ what ’ 
belongs in the full sense to substance, but in a limited sense 
to the other categories. For even of a quality we might ask 
what it is, so that a quality also is a ‘what’,—not in the full 

25 sense, however, but just as, in the case of that which is not, some 
say,! emphasizing the linguistic form, that that which is not 
7s—not zs simply, but zs non-existent. 

Now we must inquire how we should express ourselves on 
each point, but still more how the facts actually stand. And so 
now also since it is evident what language we use, essence will 
belong, just as the ‘ what’ does, primarily and in the simple 

30 sense to substance, and in a secondary way to the other cate- 
gories also,—not essence in the full sense, but the essence of 

a quality or of a quantity. For it must be either by an 
equivocation that we say these are, or by making qualifications 
and abstractions (in the way in which that which is not known 
may be said to be known ”),—the truth being that we use the 

35 word neither ambiguously nor in the same sense, but just as 
we apply the word ‘ medical ’ when there is a reference to one 
1030" and the same thing, not meaning one and the same thing, nor 
yet ‘speaking ambiguously ; for a patient and an operation and 
an instrument are called medical neither by an ambiguity nor 
with a single meaning, but with reference to a common end. 
But it does not matter in which of the two ways one likes to. 

5 describe the facts; this is evident, that definition and essence 
in the primary and simple sense belong to substances. Still 
they belong to other things as well. For if we suppose this 
it does not follow? that there is.a definition of every word 
which means the same as any formula ; it must mean the same 

1 Cf. Pl. Soph. 237. ? i.e. it is known to be unknown, 
8 1030 6 read καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ὅμως. οὐ yap ἀνάγκη. 

Z. BOOK VII 1030” 

as a particular kind of formula; and this condition is satisfied 

if it is a formula of something which is one, not by continuity 
like the //tad or the things that are one by ‘being bound 
together, but in one of the main senses of ‘one’, which 10 
answer to the senses of ‘is’; now ‘that which is’ in one sense 
denotes an individual, in another a quantity, in another a 
quality. And so there can be a formula or definition of 
white man, but not in the sense in which there is a definition 
either of white or of a substance. 

CHAPTER V 

It is a difficult question, if one denies that a formula with 
an added determinant! is a definition, whether any of the 15 
terms that are not simple but coupled will be definable. For 
we must explain them by adding a determinant. E.g. there 
is the nose, and concavity, and snubness, which is compounded 
out of the two by the presence of the one in the other, and it 
is not by accident that the nose has the attribute either -of 
concavity or of snubness, but in virtue of its nature; nor do 2° 
they attach to it as whiteness does to Callias, or to man 
(because Callias, who happens to be a man, is white), but 
rather as ‘male’ attaches to animal and ‘equal’ to quantity, 
and as all so-called ‘attributes propter se’ attach to their 
subjects.2_ And such attributes are those in which is involved 
either the formula or the xame of the subject of the particular 
attribute, and which cannot be explained without this; e.g. 25 
white can be explained apart from man, but not female apart 
from animal. Therefore there is either no essence and 
definition of any of these things, or if there is, it is in another 
sense, as we have said.® 

But there is also a second difficulty about them. For if 
snub nose and concave nose are the same thing, snub and 
concave will be the same thing ; but if snub and concave are 30 
not the same (because it is impossible to speak of snubness 
apart from the thing of which it is an attribute propter se, 

1 Cf, 1029” 30. 
2 In the sense of καθ᾽ αὑτό explained in dz. Post. i. 73° 37-" 5. 
3 1030° 6. 

AR. MET. K 

1030" METAPHYSICA 

for snubness is concavity-i#-the-nose), either it is impossible 
properly to say ‘snub nose’ or the same thing will have 
been said twice, concave-nose nose; for snub nose will be 
concave-nose nose. And so it is absurd that such things 

35 should-have an essence; if they have, there will be an infinite 
regress ; for in snub-nose nose yet another ‘nose’ will be 
involved. 

1031} Clearly then only substance is definable. For if the other 
categories also are definable, it must be by addition of a 
determinant, e.g. the qualitative is defined thus, and so is 
the odd, for it cannot be defined apart from number ; nor can 
female be defined apart from animal. (When I say ‘by 
addition’ I mean the expressions in which we have to say 

5 the same thing twice, as in these instances.) And if this is 
true, coupled terms also, like ‘odd number’, will not be 
definable (but this escapes our notice because our formulae 
are not accurate). But if these also are definable, either it is 
in some other way or, as we said, definition and essence must 

10 be said to have more than one sense. Therefore in one 
sense nothing will have a definition and nothing will have 
an essence, except substances, but in another sense other 
things will have them. Clearly, then, definition is the 
formula of the essence, and essence must belong to substances 
either alone or chiefly and primarily and in the unqualified 
sense. 

CHAPTER VI 

15 We must inquire whether each thing and its essence are 
the same or different. This is of some use for the inquiry 
concerning substance ; for each thing is thought to be not 
different from its substance, and the essence is said to be the 
substance of each thing. 

Now in the case of things with accidental attributes the 

ao two would be generally thought to be different, e.g. white 
man would be thought to be different from the essence of 
white man. For if they are the same, the essence of man and 
that of white man are also the same; for a man and a white 
man are the same, as people say, so that the essence of 

35 white man and that of man would be also the same. But 

Z. BOOK VII 

probably it is not necessary that a subject+an accident should 
be the same as its essence. For the extreme terms are 
not in the same way identified with the middle term.— 
Perhaps ¢his might be thought to follow, that the extreme 
terms, the accidents, should turn out to be the same, e.g. the 
essence of white and that of musical; but this is not actually 
thought to be the case.' 

But in the case of so-called self-subsistent things, is a thing 
necessarily the same as its essence? E.g. if there are some 
substances which have no other substances nor entities prior 
to them—substances such as some assert the Ideas to be ?— 
If the essence of good is to be different from the Idea of good, 
and the essence of animal from the Idea of animal, and the 
essence of being from the Idea of being, there will, firstly, be 
other substances and entities and Ideas besides those which are 
asserted, and, secondly, these others will be prior substances 
if the essence is substance. And if the posterior substances are 
severed from the prior, (1) there will be no knowledge of the 
former (the things-themselves or Ideas), and (2) the latter (the 
essences) will have no being. (By ‘severed’ I mean, if the Idea 
of good has not the essence of good, and the latter has not the 
property of being good.) For (1) there is knowledge of each 
thing only when we know its essence. And (2) the case is the 

1 The argument used in ll. 21-4 is :— 
Essence of white man = white man. 
White man = man. 

Man = essence of man. 

.. Essence of white man = essence of man. 

This is absurd, and Aristotle infers that essence of white man does 
not = white man. 

He next hints that the belief that it = white man arises from the 
argument :— 

Man = essence of man. 
Man = white man. 

.. By substitution, white man = essence of white man. 

But while man = essence of man καθ᾽ αὑτό, man = white man κατὰ συμ- 
βεβηκός (οὐ yap ὡσαύτως τὰ ἄκρα γίγνεται ταὐτά). Nor is the argument any 
better if both the identities used are κατὰ συμβεβηκός :-- 

Essence of white = white. 
_ White = white man. 
White man = man (κατὰ συμβεβηκός). 
Man = musical man (xara συμβεβηκός). 
Musical man = musical. 
Musical = essence of musical. 
... Essence of white = essence of musical. 

K 2 

1031* 

3° 

1031" 

5 

1031° METAPHYSICA 

same for other things as for the good ; so that if the essence of 
good is not good, neither is the essence of reality real, nor the 
essence of unity one. And all essences alike exist or none 

10 οὗ them does; so that if the essence ‘of reality is not real, 
neither is any of the others. Again, that which has not the 
property of being good is not good.! The good, then, must 
be one with the essence of good, and the beautiful with the 
essence of beauty, and so with all things which do not depend 
on something else but are self-subsistent and primary. For 
it is enough if they are this, even if there are no Forms; and 

15 perhaps all the more if there are Forms.—At the same time 
it is clear that if there are Ideas such as some people say there 
are, the substratum of them will not be substance; for these 
must be substances, and not predicable of a substratum ; for 
if they were they would exist only by being participated in.2— 
Each thing then and its essence are one and the same in no 
merely accidental way, as is evident. both from the preceding 

ao arguments and because to ἔχοι each thing, at least, is to 
know its essence, so that even by the exhibition of instances 
it becomes clear that both must be one. 

(But of an accidental term, e.g.‘ the musical ’ or ‘ the white’, 
since it has two meanings, it is not true to say that it itself 
is identical with its essence; for both that to which the 
accidental quality belongs, and the accidental quality, are 

25 white, so that in a sense the accident and its essence are the 
same, and in a sense they are not; for the essence of white is 
not the same as the man or the white man, but it is the same 
as the attribute white.) | 

The absurdity of the separation would appear also if one 
were to assign a name to each of the essences; for there 

30 would be another essence besides the original one, 6. g. to the 
essence of horse there will belong a second essence. Yet 
why should not some things be their essences from the start, 
since essence is substance? But not only are a thing and its 

1 Sc. and the essence of good has not (on this theory) the property of 
being good, and .". is not good. 

Σ΄, δ. aS immanent in particulars. 

8 Sc. and so ad infinitum. As an infinite process is absurd, why take 
the first step that commits you to it—why say that the essence of horse is 
separate from the horse? 

Z. BOOK VII 10g? 

essence one, but the formula of them is also the same, as is 
clear even from what has been said; for it is not by accident that 1032" 
the essence of one, and the one, are one. Further, if they were 
different, the process would go on to infinity ; for we should 

have (1) the essence of one, and (2) the one, so that in their case 

also the same infinite regress would be found. Clearly, then, 5 
each primary and self-subsistent thing is one and the same as 

its essence. 

Now the sophistical objections to this position, and the 
question whether Socrates and to be Socrates are the same 
thing, are obviously answered in the same way; for there 
is no difference either in the standpoint from which the ques- 
tion! would be asked, or in that from which one could answer 
it successfully. We have explained, then, in what sense each 10 
thing is the same as its essence and in what sense it is not. 

CHAPTER VII 

Of things that come to be some come to be by nature, 
some by art, some spontaneously. Now everything that comes 
to be comes to be by the agency of something and from some- 
thing and comes to be something. And the something which 
I say it comes to be may be found in any category; it may 
come to be either a ‘this’ or of some size or of some quality 
or somewhere. 

Now natural comings to be are the comings to be of those rg 
things which come to be by nature; and that out of which 
they come to be is what we call matter; and that by which 
they come to be is something which exists naturally; and 
the something which they come to be is a man or a plant or 
one of the things of-this kind, which we say are substances if 
anything is. All things produced either by nature or by art 20 
have matter; for each of them is capable both of being and 
of not being, and this capacity is the matter in each.? And, in 
general, both that from which they are produced is nature, 
and the type according to which they are produced is 
nature (for that which is produced, e.g. a plant or an animal, 

1 10324 9 read ἐρωτήσειεν. 
* 10329 22 read ἐστὶν ἐν ἑκάστῳ. 

1032° 

25 

METAPHYSICA 

has a nature), and so is that by which they are produced—the 
so-called ‘formal’ nature, which is specifically the same as the 
nature of the thing produced (though it is in another indi- 
vidual) ; for man begets man. 

Thus, then, are natural products produced; all other pro- 
ductions are called ‘ makings’. And all makings proceed either 
from art or from a potency or from thought.' Some of them 
happen also spontaneously or by luck? just as natural pro- 

30 ducts sometimes do; for there also the same things sometimes 

are produced without seed as well as from seed. Concerning 
these cases, then, we must inquire later,? but from art proceed 

1032” the things of which the form is in the soul of the artist. (By 

5 

form I mean the essence of each thing and its primary sub- 
stance.) I say ‘form’ and not ‘form or privation’, for even 
contraries have in a sense the same form ; for the substance of 
a privation is the opposite substance, e. g. health is the sub- 
stance of disease ; for it is by its absence that disease exists ; * 
and health is the formula and the knowledge® in the soul. 
The healthy subject, then, is produced as the result of the 
following train of thought ; since ¢4#s is health, if the subject 
is to be healthy 2 τς must first be present, e.g. a uniform state 
of body, and if this is to be present, there must be heat; and 
the physician goes on thinking thus until he reduces the 
matter to a final step which he himself can take. Then the 

το process from this point onward, i.e. the process towards health, 

is called a ‘making’. Therefore it follows that in a sense 
health comes from health and house from house, that with 
matter from that without matter; (‘from health’ and ‘ from 
house’,) for the medical art and the building art are the form 
of health and of the house ; and ¢‘ from that without matter’, 

15 for) I call the essence substance without matter. Of pro- 

ductions and movements one part is called thinking and the 
other making,—that which proceeds from the starting-point 
and the form is thinking, and that which proceeds from the 
final step of the thinking is making. And each of the inter- 

1 Cf, Ε΄ 1025» 22. 

2 For the theory of these cf. Phys. ii. 5, 6. 

3 Cf, 1032” 23-30. * 1032” 5 omit δηλοῦται. 
δ᾽ 1032” 5 read καὶ ἡ ἐπιστήμη. 

Z. BOOK VII 10g2° 

mediate steps is taken in the same way. I mean, for instance, 

if the subject is to be healthy his bodily state must be made 
uniform. What then does being made uniform imply? This 
or that. And this depends on his being made warm. What 20 
does this imply? Something else. And this something is 
present potentially ; and what is present potentially is already 
in the physician’s power. 

The active principle then and the starting-point for the 
process of becoming healthy is, if it happens by art, the form in 
the soul, and if spontaneously, it is that, whatever it is, which is 
the starting-point of his making? for the man who makes by 
art, as in healing the starting-point is perhaps the production 25 
of warmth, and this the physician produces by rubbing. 
Warmth in the body, then, is either a part of health or is 
followed (either directly or through several intermediate steps) 
by something which is a part of health; and this, viz. that 
which produces the part, is the last step, and is itself thus 
a part? of health, and so are, e.g., the stones a part of the 
house, and so in all other cases. 

Therefore, as we say, it is impossible that anything should 30 
be produced if there were nothing before. Obviously then 
some part of the result will pre-exist of necessity; for the 
matter is a part; for this is present in the process and it is 
this that becomes something. But are some also of the 1033" 
elements in the formula matter? At least we describe in 
both ways* what bronze circles are; we describe both the 
matter by saying it is bronze, and the form by saying that it 
is such and such a figure; and figure is the proximate genus 
in which it is placed. The bronze circle, then, has its matter 
in its formula.* 

- And as for that out of which as matter they are produced, 5 
some things are said, when they have been produced, to be 

1 Sc. not of his thought, cf. ll. 15-17. 

2 1032 29 read καὐτὸ οὕτως μέρος. So perhaps Alexander. From the 
proportion established, warmth : health :: stones : house, and from the next 
paragraph, it would appear that warmth is treated as the matter which 
when specialized in a particular way becomes health. Yet Aristotle began 
(1. 24) by treating it as the efficient cause of health, and he gives no warn- 
ing of the transition, nor is matter elsewhere identified with efficient cause. 

5 1033° I read ἀλλ᾽ dpa... λόγῳ ; ἀμφοτέρως ye λέγομεν. 

‘ i.e. the genus acts as matter, the differentia as form. 

1033" 

METAPHYSICA 

not it but of it, e.g. the statue is not stone but of stone. But 
though what becomes healthy is a man, ‘a man’ is not what 
the healthy product is said to come from. The reason is that 
though a thing comes both from its privation and from its 

10 substratum, which we call its matter (e.g. what becomes healthy 

is both a man and an invalid), it is said to come rather from 
its privation (e. g. it is from an invalid rather than from a man 
that a healthy subject is produced). And so the healthy 
subject is not said to d¢ an invalid, but to be a man, and a 
healthy man. But as for the things whose privation is 
obscure and nameless, e.g. in bronze the privation of a par- 

rg ticular shape or in bricks and timber the privation of arrange- 

ment as a house, the thing is thought to be produced from 
these materials, as in the former case the healthy man is pro- 
duced from an invalid. And so, as there alsoa thing is not 
said to be that from which it comes, here the statue is not 
said to be wood but is said by a verbal change to be not wood 
but wooden, not bronze but of bronze, not stone but of stone, 

2o and the house is said to be not bricks but of bricks (though 

we should not say without qualification, if we looked at the 
matter carefully, even that a statue is produced from wood or 
a house from bricks, because its coming to be implies change 
in that from which it comes, and not permanence). For this 
reason, then, we use this way of speaking. 

CHAPTER VIII 
Since anything which is produced is produced by something 

as (and this I call the starting-point of the production), and from 

something (and let this be taken to be not the privation but 
the matter; for the meanings we attach to these have already ! 
been distinguished), and since something is produced (and 
this is either a sphere or a circle or whatever else it may 
chance to be), just as we do not make the substratum—the 
bronze, so we do not make the sphere, except incidentally, 

30 because the bronze sphere is a sphere and we make. the 

former. For to make a ‘this’ is to make a ‘this’ out of the 
general substratum. I mean that to make the bronze round is 

1 Cf, 1033° 8. 

Z. BOOK VII 1033” 

not to make the round or the sphere, but something else, 
i.e. to produce this form in something else as a medium. For 
if we make the form, we must make it out of something else ; 
for this was assumed.!_ E.g. we make a bronze sphere; and 1033° 
that in the sense that out of this, which is bronze, we make this 
other, which is a sphere. If, then, we make the sphere itself, 
clearly we must make it in the same way, and the processes of 
making will regress to infinity. Obviously then the form also,? 5 
or whatever we ought to call the shape of the sensible thing, 
is not produced, nor does production relate to it,—i.e. the 
essence is not produced ; for this is that which is made to be 
in something else by art or by nature or by some potency. 
But that there is a bronze sphere, this we make. For we 
make it out of bronze and the sphere; we bring the form τὸ 
into this particular matter, and the result is a bronze sphere. 
But if the essence of sphere? in general is produced, some- 
thing must be produced out of something. For the product 
will always have to be divisible, and one part must be this and 
another that, I mean the one must be matter and the other 
form. If then a sphere is ‘the figure whose circumference 
is at all points equidistant from the centre’, part of this will be 
the medium in which the thing made‘ will be, and part will 15 
be in that medium, and the whole will be the thing produced, 
which corresponds to the bronze sphere.® It is obvious then 
from what has been said that the thing, in the sense of form 
or substance, is not produced, but the concrete thing which gets 
its name from this is produced, and that in everything which 
comes to be matter is present, and one part of the thing is 
matter and the other form. 

Is there then a sphere apart from the individual spheres or 20 
a house apart from the bricks? Rather we may say that no 
individual would ever have been coming to be, if this had been 
so. The ‘form’ however means the ‘such’, and is not a 
‘this ’—a definite thing; but the artist makes, or the father 

1 Or, ‘ for this other something was the underlying matter.’ 

2 Sc. as well as the substratum. 

5 1033" 11 read τοῦ δὲ σφαίρᾳ εἶναι. 

* 1033515 read ἔσται ὃ ποιεῖ. 

® i.e. ‘sphere’ must be a whole analysable into matter and form as 
‘bronze sphere’ is. 

1033° METAPHYSICA 

generates, a ‘such’ out of a ‘this’; and when it has been 
generated, it is a ‘this such’). And the whole ‘this ’, Callias 
25 or Socrates, is analogous to ‘this bronze sphere’, but man and 
animal to ‘bronze sphere’ in general. Obviously then the 
cause which consists of the Forms (taken in the sense in which 
some maintain the existence of the Forms, i.e. if they are 
something apart from the individuals) is useless with regard 
both to comings-to-be and to substances ; and the Forms need 
not, for this reason at least, be self-subsistent substances. In 
30 some cases it is even obvious that the producer is of the same 
kind as the produced (not, however, the same nor one in 
number, but in form), e.g. in the case of natural products (for 
man produces man), unless something happens contrary to 
nature, e.g. the production of a mule by a horse. And even 
these cases are similar; for that which would be found to be 
common to horse and ass, the genus next above them, has not 
received a name, but it would doubtless be both, as the mule 
1034" is both. Obviously, therefore, it is quite unnecessary to set up 
a Form as a pattern (for we should have looked for Forms in 
these cases if in any; for these are substances if anything is 
so) ; the begetter is adequate to the making of the product and 
5 to the causing of the form in the matter. And when we have 
the whole, such and such a form in this flesh and in these 
bones, this is Callias or Socrates; and they are different in 
virtue of their matter (for that is different), but the same in 
form; for their form is indivisible. 

CHAPTER IX 

The question might be raised, why some things are pro- 
duced spontaneously as well as by art, e.g. health, while 
το Others are not, e.g. a house. The reason is that in some 
cases the matter which determines the production in the 
making and producing of any work of art, and in which a part 
of the product is present, is such as to be set in motion by 
itself and in some cases is not of this nature, and of the former 
kind some can move itself in the particular way required, 

1 1.6. the artist, or the father, turns a mere piece of matter into a qualified 
piece of matter. 

Z. BOOK VII 1034° 

while other matter is incapable of this ; for many things can be 
set in motion by themselves but not in some particular way, 
e.g. that of dancing. The things then whose matter is of this 15 
sort, 6. g. stones, cannot be moved .in the particular way re- 
quired,’ except by something else, but in another way they 
can move themselves ; and so it is with fire. Therefore some 
things cannot exist apart from some one who has the art of 
making them, while others can exist without such a person; 
for motion can be started by these things which have not the 20 
art but can move of themselves, i.e. either by other things 
which have not the art or by a part of the product itself. 

And it is clear also from what has been said that in a sense 
everything is produced from (1) another individual which 
shares its name (natural products are so produced), or (2) a 
part of itself which shares its name (e. g. the house produced 
by reason is produced from a house; for the art of building is 
the form of the house), or (3) something which contains a part 
of it,?-—if we exclude things produced by accident. For what 25 
directly and of itself causes the production is a part of the 
product. The heat in the movement® causes heat in the 
body, and this is either health, or a part of health, or is 
followed by a part of health or by health itself. And so it 
is said to cause health, because health is caused by that to 
which heat attaches as a consequence. 

Therefore substance * is the starting-point of all production, 30 
as of syllogism. It is from the ‘ what’ that syllogisms start ; 
and from it also we now find processes of production to start.® 
And things which are formed by nature are in the same case 
as these products of art. For the seed produces them as the 
artist produces the works of art ; for it has the form potentially, 
and that from which the seed comes has 7” a sense the same 1034” 
name as the offspring; only in a sense, for we must not expect 
all cases to have exactly the same name, as in the production 
of ‘human being’ from ‘ human being’ (for a ‘woman’ also 
can be produced by a ‘ man’—and so it is not from a mule 

1 Se. for building. ; 

10345 23 read ἢ éx μέρους ὁμωνύμου (οἷον ἡ ἡ οἰκία ἐξ οἰκίας ἡ ὑπὸ νοῦ" ἡ 
γὰρ τέχνη τὸ εἶδος), ἣ ἐκ (rot) ἔ ἔχοντός τι μέρος. 

3 Sc. of the rubber’s han 

* i.e. essence, 5 Cf. τὸ εἶδος, 1. 24. 

1034” METAPHYSICA 

that a mule is produced'); we must expect this only if the 
offspring is not an imperfect form. The natural things which 
5 (like some artificial objects) can be produced spontaneously 
are those whose matter can be moved even by itself in the way 
in which the seed usually moves it; but those things which 
have not such matter cannot be produced except by parents. 
But not only regarding substance does our argument prove 
that its form does not come to be, but the argument applies 
to all the primary classes alike, i.e. quantity, quality, and the 
το other categories. For as the bronze sphere comes to be, but 
not the sphere nor the bronze, and so too in the case of bronze 
itself, if it comes to be, it is its concrete unity that comes 
to be (for the matter and the form must always exist before), 
so is it as regards both ‘what’ and quality and quantity 
and the other categories likewise; for the quality does not 
15 come to be, but the wood of that quality, and the quantity 
does not come to be, but the wood or the animal of that size. 
But we may learn from these instances a peculiarity of sub- 
stance, that there must exist beforehand another actual 
substance which produces it, e.g. an animal if an animal is 
produced ; but it is not necessary that a quality or quantity 
should pre-exist otherwise than potentially. 

CHAPTER X 

20 Since a definition is a formula, and every formula has parts, 
and as the formula is to the thing, so is the part of the 
formula to the part of the thing, we are already faced by the 
question whether the formula of the parts must be present in 
the formula of the whole or not. For in some cases the 
formulae of the parts are seen to be present, and in some not. 
The formula of the circle does not include that of the seg- 

25 ments, but that of the syllable includes that of the letters; 
yet the circle is divided into segments as the syllable is into 
letters.—And further if the parts are prior to the whole, and 
the acute angle is a part of the right angle and the finger 
a part of the animal, the acute angle will be prior to the right 

1 Cf. 1033° 33. 

Z. BOOK VII 1034 

angle and the finger to the man. But the latter are thought 30 
to be prior; for in formula the parts are explained by 
reference to them, and in virtue also of their power of existing 
apart from the parts the wholes are prior. 

Perhaps we should rather say that ‘ part’ 15 used in several 
senses. One of these is ‘that which measures another thing in 
respect of quantity’, But let this sense be set aside; let us 
inquire about the parts of which substance consists. If then 1035 
matter is one thing, form another, the compound of these a 
third, and both the matter and the form and the compound 
are substance, even the matter is in a sense called part of a 
thing, while in a sense 72 is not, but only the elements of which 
the formula of the form consists. E.g. flesh (for this is the 
matter in which it is produced) is not a part of concavity, but 5 
of snubness it is a part; and the bronze isa part of the concrete 
statue, but not of the statue as form. (For each thing must be 
referred to by naming its form, and as having form, but never by 
naming its material aspect as such.) And so the formula of the 
circle does not include that of the segments, but the formula of 
the syllable includes that of the letters ; for the letters are parts τὸ 
of the formula of the form, and not matter, but the segments 
are parts, in the sense of matter, on which the form supervenes ; 
yet they are nearer the form than the bronze is when roundness 
is produced in bronze. But in a sense not even every kind 
of letter will be present in the formula of the syllable, e. g. 15 
particular waxen letters or the letters as sounds in the air; 
for these also are part of the syllable only in the sense that 
they are its perceptible matter. For even if the line when 
divided passes away into its halves, or the man into bones 
and muscles and flesh, it does not follow that they are com- 
posed of these as parts of their essence, but rather as matter ; 20 
and these are parts of the concrete thing, but not of the form, 
1.e. of that to which the formula refers; and therefore also 
in the formulae of some things the formula of such parts will 
be present,! but in others it must not be present, where the 
formula does not refer to the concrete object. For it is for 
this reason that some things have as their constituent prin- 
ciples parts into which they pass away, while some have not. 

1 10358 22 read καὶ ἐν τοῖς λόγοις τῶν μὲν ἐνέσται. 

1035" METAPHYSICA 

25 Those things in which the form and the matter are taken 
together, e.g. the snub, or the bronze circle, pass away into 
these material parts, and the matter is a part of them; but 
those things which do not involve matter but are without 
matter, and whose formulae are formulae of the form only, 
do not pass away,—either not at all or at any rate not 

30in this way. Therefore these materials are principles and 
parts of the concrete things, while of the form they are neither 
parts nor principles. And therefore the clay statue is resolved 
into clay and the ball! into bronze and Callias into flesh and 
bones, and again the circle into its segments; for there is 
a sense of ‘ circle’? in which it involves matter. For ‘ circle’ 
is used ambiguously, meaning both the circle in general and 

1035° the individual circle, because there is no name proper to the 
individuals. 
The truth has really now been stated, but still let us state 
it yet more clearly, taking up the question again. The parts 
5 of the formula, into which the formula is divided, are prior to 
it, either all or some of them. The formula of the right angle, 
however, does not include the formula of the acute, but the 
formula of the acute includes that of the right angle; for he 
who defines the acute uses the right angle; for the acute is 
‘less than a right angle’. The circle and the semicircle 
also are in a like relation; for the semicircle is defined by 

το the circle; and so is the finger by the whole body, for a 
finger is ‘such and such a part of a man’. Therefore the 
parts which are of the nature of matter and into which as its 
matter a thing is divided, are posterior; but those which are 
parts of the formula, and of the substance according to its 
formula, are prior, either all or some of them. And since the 

15 soul of animals (for this is the substance of living beings) is 
their substance according to the formula, i.e. the form and 
the essence of a body of a certain kind (at least we shall 
define each part, if we define it well, not without reference to 
its function, and this cannot belong to it without perception °), 
therefore the parts of soul are prior, either all or some of 
them, to the concrete animal, and similarly in each case of 

1 1035* 32 read καὶ ἡ σφαῖρα. 7 1035 34 read τις ds. 
3 And therefore not without soul. 

Z. BOOK VII 1035? 

a concrete whole ; and the body and its parts are posterior to 20 
this its essential substance, and it is not the substance but the 
concrete thing that is divided into these parts as its matter. 
To the concrete thing these are in a sense prior, but in a 
sense they are not. For they cannot even exist if severed 
from the whole ; for it is not a finger in any state that is the 
finger of a living thing, but the dead finger is a finger only in 
name. Some parts are neither prior nor posterior to the 25 
whole, i.e. those which are most important and in which the 
formula, i.e. the essential substance, is immediately present, 
e.g. perhaps the heart or the brain; for it does not matter 
which of the two has this quality. But man and horse and 
terms which are thus applied to individuals, but universally, 
are not substance but something composed of this particular 
formula and this particular matter treated as universal; but 30 
when we come to the individual, Socrates is composed of 
ultimate individual matter; and similarly in all other cases. 

‘A part’ may bea part either of the form (i.e. the essence), 
or of the compound of the form and the matter, or of the matter 
itself. But only the parts of the form are parts of the formula, 
and the formula is of the universal ; for ‘being a circle’ is the 1036 
same as the circle, and ‘ being a soul’ is the same as the soul. 
But when we come to the concrete thing, 6. g. ¢4zs circle, i, 6. 
one of the individual circles, whether sensible or intelligible 
(I mean by intelligible circles the mathematical, and by sen- 
sible circles those of bronze and of wood), of these there is no 5 
definition, but they are known by the aid of intuitive reason or 
sensation ; and when they go out of our actual consciousness it 
is not clear whether at a given time they exist or not; but 
they are always stated and cognized by means of the uni- 
versal formula. But matter is unknowable in itself. And 
some matter is sensible and some intelligible, sénsible matter τὸ 
being for instance bronze and wood and all matter that is 
changeable, and intelligible matter being that which is present 
in sensible things not gua sensible, i.e. in the objects of mathe- 
matics, We have stated, then, how whole and part, and prior 
and posterior, are related. 

When any one asks whether the right angle and the 
circle and the animal are prior to that into which they are 15 

1036° METAPHYSICA 

divided and of which they consist, i.e. the parts, we must 
meet the inquiry by saying that the question cannot be 
answered simply. For if the soul is the animal or! the living 
thing,” or the soul of each individual is the individual itself, 
and ‘being a circle’ is the circle, and ‘ being a right angle’ and 
the essence of the right angle is the right angle, then the 
whole in one sense must be called posterior to the part in one 
sense, i.e. to the parts included in the formula and to the 

20 parts of the individual right angle (for both the material right 
angle which is made of bronze, and that which is formed by 
individual lines, are posterior to their parts); while the im- 
material right angle is posterior to the parts included in the 
formula, but prior to those included in the particular instance. 
But the question must not be answered simply. If, however, 
the soul is something different and is not identical with the 

25 animal, even so some parts must be called prior and others 
must not, as has been said. 

CHAPTER XI 

The question is naturally raised, what sort of parts belong 
to the form and what sort not to the form, but to the concrete 
thing. Yet if this is not plain it is not possible to define 
anything ; for definition is of the universal and of the form. 
If then it is not evident which of the parts are of the nature 

30 of matter and which are not, neither will the formula of the 
thing be evident. In the case of things which are found to 
occur in specifically different materials, as a circle may exist 
in bronze or stone or wood, it seems plain that these, the 
bronze or the stone, are no part of the essence of the circle, 
since it is found apart from them. Of things which are xot 

35 seen to exist apart, there is no reason why the same may not 

1036° be true, e. g. even if all circles that had ever been seen were of 
bronze (for none the less the bronze would be no part of the 
form); but it is hard to effect this severance in thought. 

E. g. the form of man is always found in flesh and bones and 

parts of this kind; are these then also parts of the form and 

gthe formula? No, they are matter; but because man is 

1 Sc. to put it more widely so as to include the vegetable world. 
2 1036 17 read ζῷον 7 ἔμψυχον. 

Z. BOOK VII 1036° 

not found also in other matters we are unable to effect the 
severance. 

Since this is thought to be possible, but it is not clear when 
it is the case, some are in doubt even in the case of the circle 10 
and the triangle, thinking that it is not right to define these by 
lines and by continuous space, but that all these are to the 
circle or the triangle as flesh or bones are to man, and bronze 
or stone to the statue; and they reduce all things to numbers, 
and they say the formula of ‘line’ is that of ‘two’. And of 
those who assert the Ideas some make ‘two’ the line itself, 
and others make it the form of the line; for in some cases 15 
they say the Form and that of which it is the Form are the 
same, e.g. ‘two’ and the Form of two; but in the case of 
‘line’ they say this is no longer so. 

It follows then that there is one Form for many things 
whose Form is evidently different (a conclusion which con- 
fronted the Pythagoreans also); and that it is possible to 
make one thing the very Form of all, and to hold that the 
others are not Forms; but thus all things will be one. . 30 

Now we have stated! that the question of definitions con- 
tains some difficulty, and why this is so, Therefore to reduce 
all things thus to Forms and to eliminate the matter is useless 
labour; for some things surely are a particular form in a 
particular matter, or particular things in a particular state. 
And the comparison which Socrates the younger? used to 
make in the case of ‘animal’? is not good; for it leads away 25 
from the truth, and makes one suppose that man can possibly 
exist without his parts, as the circle can without the bronze. 
But the case is not similar; for an animal is something per- 
ceptible, and it is not possible to define it without reference to 
movement—nor, therefore, without reference to the parts and 
to their being in a certain state, For it is not a hand in 30 
any state that is a part of man, but the hand which can fulfil 
its work, which therefore must be alive; if it is not alive it is 
not a part. 

Regarding the objects of mathematics, why are the formulae 
of the parts not parts of the formulae of the wholes, e.g. why 

1 Ch. V. 3 Cf. Pl. Zheaet. 147 C; Soph. 218 B; Pol. 257 C. 

® Cf. 10369 34— 5. 

AR. MET. L 

1036" METAPHYSICA 

are not the formulae of the semicircles parts of the formula of 
the circle? It cannot be said, ‘because these parts are per- 
ceptible things’; for they are not. But perhaps this makes no 
3 difference; for even some things which are not perceptible 
1037} must have matter; for there is some matter in everything 
which is not an essence and a bare form but an individual. 
The semicircles, then, will be parts, not of the universal 
circle, but of the individual circles, as has been said before ; for 
while one kind of matter is perceptible, there is another which 

is intelligible. . 

g It is clear also that the soul is the primary substance and 
the body is matter, and man or animal is the compound of 
both taken universally; and ‘Socrates’ or ‘ Coriscus’, if even 
the soul of Socrates may be called Socrates,! has two mean- 
ings (for some mean by such a term the soul, and others mean 
the concrete thing), but if ‘Socrates’ or ‘Coriscus’ means 
simply this particular soul* and this particular body, the 
individual is analogous to the universal in its composition.® 

το Whether there is, apart from the matter of such substances, 
any other substance, and one should look for some substance 
other than these, e. g. numbers or something of the sort, must 
be considered later.* For it is for the sake of this that we are 
trying to determine the nature of perceptible substances, since 
in a sense the inquiry about perceptible substances is the 

15 work of physics, i.e. of second philosophy; for the physicist 
must not only know about the matter, but also about the sub- 
stance in the sense of ‘the formula’, and even more than 
about the other. . And in the case of definitions, how the 
elements in the formula are parts of the definition, and why 

ao the definition is one formula (for clearly the thing is one, but 
in virtue of whaz is the thing one, although it has parts ?),— 
this must be considered later.° 

What the essence is and in what sense it is independent, 
has been stated universally in a way which is true of every 
case, and also why the formula of the essence of some things 

Ὁ. 1037 8 read ψυχὴ Σωκράτης, διττόν. Cf. 1036" 16-17, H. 1043 2-4. 

® 10378 g read ἁπλῶς ἡ ψυχή. 

S i. 6. as man = soul + body, Socrates = this soul + this body. 

* Cf. Z. 13, 14, A, M, N. 
δ Cf. Z. 12, H. 6. 

Z. BOOK VII 1078" 

contains the parts of the thing defined, while that of others 
does not; and we have stated that in the formula of the sub- 
stance the material parts will not be present (for they are not 25 
even parts of the substance in that sense, but of the concrete 
substance; but of this there is in a sense a formula, and in a 
sense there-is not ; for there is no formula of it with its matter, 
for this is indefinite, but there is a formula of it with reference 
to its primary substance—e.g. in the case of man the formula of 
the soul—, for the substance is the indwelling form, from which 
and the matter the so-called concrete substance is derived ; 
e.g. concavity is a form of this sort, for from this and the nose 30 
arise ‘snub nose’ and ‘ snubness’; ‘nose’ will be found to be 
involved twice in these terms) ; but in the concrete substance, 
e.g. a snub nose or Callias, the matter also will be present. 
And we have stated that the essence and the individual thing 
are in some cases the same; i.e. in the case of primary sub- 1037» 
stances, 6. g. curvature and the essence of curvature, if this is 
primary. (By a ‘primary’ substance I mean one which does 
not imply the presence of something in something else, i.e. in 

a substrate which acts as matter.) But things which are of the 
nature of matter or of wholes which include matter, are not 5 
the same as their essences, nor are accidental unities ! like that 
of ‘Socrates’ and ‘musical’; for these are the same only by 
accident. | 

CHAPTER XII 

Now let us treat first of definition, in so far as we have not 
treated of it in the Azalytics?; for the problem stated in them 
is useful for our inquiries concerning substance. I mean this 10 
problem :—wherein consists the unity of that, the formula of 
which we call a definition, as for instance in the case of man, 
‘two-footed animal’; for let this be the formula of man. 
Why, then, is this one, and not many, viz. ‘ animal’ and ‘ two- 
footed’? For in the case of ‘man’ and ‘white’ there is 
a plurality when one term does not belong to the other, but a 15 
unity when it does belong and the subject, man, has a certain 

1 1037° 5 read οὐδ᾽ εἰ κατὰ συμβεβηκός. 
3 Cf. An. Post..ii. ο25 20. 

L2 

1037” METAPHYSICA 

attribute; for then a unity is produced and we have ‘the 
white man’. In the present case, on the other hand—that of 
‘animal’ and ‘two-footed ’—one does not share in the other ; 
20 the genus is not thought to share in its differentiae; for then 
the same thing would share in contraries ; for the differentiae 
by which the genus is divided are contrary. And even if the 
genus does share in them, the same argument applies, since 
the differentiae present in man are many, e.g. endowed with 
feet, two-footed, featherless. Why- are these one and not 
many? Not because they are present in one thing; for on 
this principle a unity can be made out of any set of attri- 
butes. But surely all the attributes in the definition must be 
a5one; for the definition is a single formula and a formula of 
substance, so that it must be a formula of some one thing; 

for substance means a ‘one’ and a ‘this’, as we maintain. 
We must first inquire about definitions arising out of divi- 
sions. There is nothing in the definition except the first- 
3o named genus and the differentia’. The other genera are the 
first genus and along with this the differentiae that are taken 
with it, e.g. the first may be ‘animal’, the next ‘animal which 
is two-footed ’, and again ‘animal which is two-footed and 
featherless ’, and similarly if the definition includes more terms. 
1038° And in general it makes no difference whether it includes many 
or few terms,—nor, therefore, whether it includes few or simply 
two ; and of the two the one is differentia and the other genus, 
e.g. in ‘two-footed animal’ ‘animal’ is genus, and the other 
5is differentia. If then the genus absolutely does not exist 
apart from the species which it as genus includes, or if it 
exists but exists as matter (for the voice is genus and matter, 
but its differentiae make the kinds, i.e. the letters, out of it), 
clearly the definition is the formula which comprises the 

differentiae. 
But it is also necessary in division to take the differentia of 
the differentia; e.g. ‘endowed with feet’ is a differentia of 
10 ‘animal’; again we must know the differentia of ‘animal en- 
dowed with feet’ gua endowed with feet. Therefore we must 
not say, if we are to speak rightly, that of that which is en- 
dowed with feet one part has feathers and one is featherless ; 
_ 2 1037 30 read καὶ ἡ διαφορά, 

Z. BOOK VII 1038* 

if we say this we say it through incapacity; we must divide 
it gua* cloven-footed or not-cloven ; for these are differentiae 
in the foot ; cloven-footedness is a form of footedness. And 
we always want to go on so till we come to the species '5 
that contain no differences. And then there will be as many 
kinds of foot as there are differentiae, and the kinds of animals 
endowed with feet will be equal in number to the differentiae. 
If then this is so, clearly the /ast differentia will be the sub- 
stance of the thing and its definition, since it is not right to 20 
state the same things more than once in our definitions ; for it 
is superfluous. And this does happen ; for when we say ‘ animal 
which is endowed with feet, and two-footed’ we have said 
nothing other than ‘animal having feet, having two feet’; and 
if we divide this by the proper division, we shall be saying the 
same thing many times—as many times as thereare differentiae. 

If then a differentia of a differentia be taken at each step, 25 
one differentia—the last—will be the form and the substance ; 
but if we divide according to accidental qualities, e.g. if we 
were to divide that which is endowed with feet into the white 
and the black, there will be as many differentiae as there are 
processes of division. Therefore it is plain that the definition 
is the formula which contains the differentiae, or, according to 
the right method, the last of these. This would be evident, 30 
if we were to change the order of such definitions, e.g. that 
of man, saying ‘animal which is two-footed and endowed 
with feet’; for ‘endowed with feet’ is superfluous when ‘ two- 
footed’ has been said. But order is no part of the substance; 
for how are we to think the one element posterior and the 
other prior? Regarding the definitions, then, which arise out 
of divisions, let this much be taken as stated in the first place 35 
as to their nature. 

CHAPTER XIII 

Let us again return to the subject of our inquiry, which is 1038» 
substance. As the substrate and the essence and the com- 
pound of these are called substance, so also is the universal. 
About two of these we have spoken ; about the essence and 

1 1038" 14 read ἀλλ᾽ 7 τὸ μέν. 

1048" 

METAPHYSICA 

about the substrate, of which we have said that it underlies in 

5 two senses, either being an individual thing—which is the way 

[δ 

in which an animal underlies its attributes—, or as the matter 
underlies the complete reality. The universal also is thought 
by some to be in the fullest sense a cause, and a principle ; 
therefore let us attack the discussion of this point also. For 
it seems impossible that any universal term should be the 
name of a substance. For primary substance is that kind of 
substance which is peculiar to an individual, which does not 
belong to anything else ; but the universal is common, since 
that is called universal which naturally belongs to more than 
one thing. Of which individual then will this be the sub- 
stance? Either of all or of none. But it cannot be the 
substance of all; and if it is to be the substance of one, this 
one will be the others also; for things whose substance is 
one and whose essence is one are themselves also one. 

Further, substance means that which is not predicable of 
a subject, but the universal is predicable of some subject 
always. 

But perhaps the universal, while it cannot be substance in 
the way in which the essence is so, can be present in, this, 
e.g. ‘animal’ can be present in ‘man’ and ‘horse’. Then clearly 

' there is a formula of the universal. And it makes no differ- 

ence even if there is not a formula of everything that is in the 

20 substance; for none the less the universal will be the sub- 

stance of something. ‘Man’ is the substance of the individual 
man in whom it is present; therefore the same will happen 
again ; for a substance, e.g. ‘animal ’, must be the substance of 
that in which it is present as something peculiar to it. And 
further it is impossible and absurd that the individual, i.e. the 
substance, if it consists of parts, should not consist of substances 

25 nor of what is individual, but of quality ; for that which is not 

substance, i.e. the quality, will then be prior to substance and 
to the individual. Which is impossible; for neither in formula 
nor in time nor in knowledge! can the affections be prior 
to the substance ; for then they would be separable from it. 
Further, in Socrates there will be a substance? in a sub- 

3o stance, so that he will be the substance of twothings. And in 

1 1038” 27 read οὔτε γνώσει οἷον. Cf. 1028 32. 3 Sc. ‘man’, 

Z. BOOK VII 1038». 

general it follows, if man and such things ! are substances, that 
none of the elements in their formulae is the substance of any- 
thing, nor does it exist apart from the species or in anything 
else ; I mean, for instance, that no ‘animal’ exists apart from 
the particular animals, nor does any other of the elements 
present in formulae exist apart. 

If, then, we view the matter from these standpoints, it is 35 
plain that no universal attribute is a substance, and this is 
plain also from the fact that no common predicate indicates 1039* 
a ‘this’, but rather a ‘such’. If not, many difficulties follow 
and especially the ‘ third man’.? 

The conclusion is evident also (1) from the following con- 
sideration—that a substance cannot consist of substances pre- 
sent in it actually (for things that are thus actually two are never 5 
actually one, though if they are potentially two, they can be 
one, e.g. the double line consists of two halves—potentially; for 
the actualization of the halves divides them from one another ; 
therefore if the substance is one, it will not consist of sub- 
stances present in it); and (2) according to the argument which 
Democritus states rightly ; he says one thing cannot come το 
from two nor two from one; for he identifies his indivisible 
magnitudes with substances. It is clear therefore that the 
same will hold good of number, if number is a synthesis of 
units, as is said by some; for ‘two’ is either not one, or there 
is no unit present in it actually. 13 

The consequence of this view involves a difficulty. Η no 
substance can consist of universals because a universal indicates 
a ‘such’, not a ‘this’, and if no substance can be composed 
of actual substances, every substance would be incomposite, 
so that there would not even be a formula of any substance. 
But it is thought by all and has been previously stated ὃ that 
it is either only, or primarily, substance that can be defined ; 20 
yet now it seems that not even substance can. There cannot, 
then, be a definition of anything; or rather in a sense there 
can be, and in a sense there cannot. And what we say will 
be plainer from what follows.* 

1 Sc. cu fimae species. 3 Cf. A. 990” 17. 
3 Cf, 10319 11. * Cf. Ζ. 15, H. 6. 

1039" METAPHYSICA 

CHAPTER XIV 

It is clear also from these very facts what consequences con- 
front those who say the Ideas are substances and can exist 
as apart, and at the same time make the Form consist of the 
genus and the differentiae. For if the Forms exist and 
‘animal’ is present in ‘man’ and ‘horse’, it is either one and 
the same in number, or different. (In formula it is clearly 
one; for he who states the formula unfolds the same formula 
3oin either case.) If there is a ‘man-in-himself’ who is an 
individual and exists apart, the parts of which he consists, 
e.g. ‘animal’ and ‘ two-footed’, must indicate individuals and 
be self-existents and substances; therefore ‘ animal ’, as well as 
‘man’, must be of this sort. 

Now (1) if ‘animal’, which is in ‘the horse’ and in ‘ man’, is 

one and the same, as you are one and the same with yourself, 
1039” how will the one in things that exist apart be one, and how 
will this ‘animal’ escape being divided even from itself?! 

Further, (a) if it is to share in ‘two-footed’ and ‘many- 
footed’, an impossible conclusion follows; for contrary attri- 
butes will belong at the same time to it although it is one and 
an individual. (ὁ) If it does not, what is the relation implied 

5 when one says the animal ‘ is two-footed’ or ‘has feet’? But 
perhaps these concepts are ‘ put together’ and are ‘in contact’, 
or are ‘mixed’. Yet all these expressions are absurd. 

But (2) suppose the Form to be different in each species. 
Then there will be practically an infinite number of things 
whose substance is ‘animal’; for it is not by accident that 
‘man’ has ‘animal’ for one of its elements. Further, ‘animal-in- 
itself’ will be many. For (a) the ‘ animal’ in each species will 

το be the substance of the species; for it is not dependent on 
anything else; if it were, that other would be an element in 
‘man’,i.e. would be the genus of man, And further (4) all the 
elements of which ‘man’ is composed will be Ideas. Now 
nothing can be the Idea of one thing and the substance 
of another; this is impossible. Each, then, of the Ideas 
present in the species of animals will be the ideal animal. 
Further, from what will these Ideas be derived; how will 

? 1039” 1 read χωρὶς αὑτοῦ. 

Z. BOOK VII 1039” 

they be derived from the ideal animal!? Or how can an Idea 15 
of ‘animal’ whose essence is simply ‘animal’? exist apart 
from the ideal animal? Further, in the case of sensible 
things both these consequences and others still more absurd 
follow. If, then, these consequences are impossible, clearly 
there are not Forms of sensible things in the sense in which 
some maintain their existence. 

CHAPTER XV 

Since substance is of two kinds, the concrete thing and the 20 
formula (I mean that one kind of substance is the formula 
taken with the matter, while another kind is the formula in 
its generality), substances in the former sense are capable of 
destruction (for they are capable also of generation), but there 
is no destruction of the formula in the sense that it is ever 
in course of being destroyed; for there is no generation of it 
(the being of house is not generated, but only the being of 
this house), but without generation and destruction formulae 25 
are and are not; for it has been shown 3 that no one produces 
nor makes these. For this reason, also, there is neither 
definition nor demonstration of sensible individual substances, 
because they have matter whose nature is such that they are 
capable both of being and of not being ; for which reason all 30 
the individual instances of them are destructible. If then 
demonstration is of necessary truths and definition is a 
scientific process, and if, just as knowledge cannot be some- 
times knowledge and sometimes ignorance, but the state 
which varies thus is opinion, so too demonstration and defini- 
tion cannot vary thus, but it is opinion that deals with that 
which can be otherwise than as it is, clearly there can neither 1040 
be definition nor demonstration of sensible individuals. For 
perishing things are obscure to those who have knowledge 
of them, when they have passed from our perception; and 
though the formulae remain in the soul unchanged, there will 
no longer be either definition or demonstration. Therefore 5 
when one of those who aim at definition defines any individual, 

1 1039" 15 read αὐτοῦ ζῴου ; 
? 1039” 15 read ζῴον, ᾧ οὐσία τοῦτο αὐτό. 3 Ch, VIII. 

1040° METAPHYSICA 

he must recognize that his definition may always be over- 
thrown ; for it is not possible to define such things. 

Nor is it possible to define any Idea. For the Idea is, as its 
supporters say, an individual, and can exist apart; and the for- 

to mula must consist of words; and he who defines must not invent 
a word (for it would be unknown), but the established words are 
common to each of a number of things ; these then must apply 
to something besides the thing defined; e.g. if one were defining 
you, he would say ‘an animal which is lean’ or ‘white’, or some- 
thing else which will apply also to some one other than you. 
If any one were to say that perhaps all the attributes taken 

15 apart may belong to many subjects, but together they belong 
only to this one, we must reply firstly that they belong also to 
both the elements, e. g. ‘ two-footed animal’ belongs to animal 
and to the two-footed. And where the elements are eternal 
this is even necessary, since the elements are prior to and 
parts of the compound; nay more, they can also exist apart, if 

20*man’ can exist apart. For either neither or both can. If, 
then, neither can, the genus will not exist apart from the 
species ; but if it does, the differentia will also. Secondly, we 
must reply that ‘animal’ and ‘two-footed’ are prior in being 
to ‘two-footed animal’; and things which are prior to others 
are not destroyed when the others are. 

Again, if the Ideas consist of Ideas (as they must, since 
elements are simpler than the compound), it will be further 
necessary that the elements of which the Idea consists, e. g. 
‘animal’ and ‘two-footed’, should be predicated of many sub- 

a5jects. If not, how will they be known? For there will then 
be an Idea which cannot be predicated of more subjects than 
one. But this is not thought possible—every Idea is thought 
to be capable of being shared. 

As has been said, then, people do not realize that it is 
impossible to define in the case of eternal things, especially 
those which are unique, like the sun or the moon. For they 

30 err not only by adding attributes after whose removal the sun 
would still exist, e.g. ‘going round the earth’ or ‘night- 
hidden’ (for from their view it follows that if it stands still or 
is visible, it will no longer be the sun; but it is strange if this 

1 Sc. at night. 1040* 32 omit ἀεί. 

Z. BOOK VII 10407 

is so; for ‘the sun’ means acertain substance); but also by the 
mention of attributes which can belong to another subject; 

e.g. if another thing with the stated attributes comes into 
existence, clearly it will be a sun; the formula therefore is 
general. But the sun was supposed to be an individual, like 1040° 
Cleon or Socrates. Why does not one of the supporters of 

the Ideas produce a definition of an Idea? It would become 
clear, if they tried, that what has now been said is true. 

CHAPTER XVI 

Evidently even of the things that are thought to be sub- 5 
stances, most are only potencies,— e.g. the parts of animals (for 
none of them exists separately ; and when they ave separated, 
then they too exist, all of them, merely as matter) and earth 
and fire and air; for none of them is one, but they are like a 
heap’ before it is fused by heat and some one thing is made 
out of the bits. One might suppose especially that the parts 
of living things and the corresponding parts of the soul are 
both, i.e. exist in complete reality as well as in potency, because 
they have sources of movement in something in their flexures ; 
for which reason some animals live when divided. Yet all 
the parts must exist only potentially, when they are one and 
continuous by nature,—not by force or even by growing to- 15 
gether, for such a phenomenon is an abnormality. 

Since the term ‘ unity’ is used like the term ‘being’, and the 
substance of that which is one is one, and things whose sub- 
stance is numerically one are numerically one, evidently 
neither unity nor being can be the substance of things, just 
as being an element or a principle cannot be the substance, 
but we seek what the principle is, that we may reduce the 
thing to something more intelligible. Now of these concepts 
‘being’ and ‘unity’ are more substantial than ‘principle’ 
or ‘element’ or ‘cause’, but not even the former are sub- 
stance, since in general nothing that is common is substance ; 
for substance does not belong to anything but to itself? 
and to that which has it, of which it is the substance. 

μὴ 

ο 

fe) 

1 1040" 9 read οἷον ὁ σωρός. 
2 1040” 24 read ἢ αὑτῇ τε. 

1040° METAPHYSICA 

25 Further, that which is one cannot be in many things at the 
same time, but that which is common is present in many 
things at the same time; so that clearly no universal exists 
apart from the individuals. | 

But those who say the Forms exist, in one respect are right, 
in saying the Forms exist apart, if they are substances; but in 
another respect they are not right, because they say the one 

302% many is a Form. The reason for their doing this is that 
they cannot say what are the substances of this sort, the 
imperishable substances which exist apart from the individual 
and sensible substances. They make them, then, the same 
in kind as the perishable things (for this kind of substance we 
know)—‘ man himself’ and the ‘horse itself’, adding to the 
sensible things the word ‘itself’. Yet even if we had not 

ΙΟ41 seen the stars, none the less, I suppose, would, there be 
eternal substances besides those things! which we knew; so 
that now also if we do not know what eternal substances 
there are, yet it is doubtless necessary that some should exist. 
Clearly, then, no universal term is the name of a substance, 

5 and no substance is composed of substances, 

CHAPTER XVII 

Let us state what should be said to be the genus and the 
differentia of substance, taking another starting-point ; for 
perhaps from this we shall get a clear view also of that sub- 
stance which exists apart from sensible substances. Since, 
then, substance is a principle and a cause, let us attack it from 

10 this standpoint. The ‘ why’ is always sought in this form—— 
‘why does an attribute attach to a subject?’ For to inquire 
why the musical man is a musical man, is either to inquire— 
as we have said—why the man is musical,” or it is something 
else. Now ‘why a thing is itself’ is doubtless a meaningless 

15 inquiry; for (to give meaning to the question ‘why’, the fact or 
the existence of the thing must already be evident (e. g. that 
the moon is eclipsed), but the fact that a thing is itself is 

1 10418 2 read map’ a. 

-e 

2 yo41* 13 read διὰ τί ὁ ἄνθρωπος μουσικός ἐστιν. 

Z. BOOK VII 1041° 

the single reason and the single answer to all such questions as 
‘why the man is man, or the musical musical’, unless one 
were to answer ‘ because each thing is inseparable from itself’ ; 
and its being one just meant this. This, however, is common 
to all things and is a‘ short and easy way’ with the question. 
But we caz inquire why man is an animal of such and such a 20 
nature. Here, then, we are evidently not inquiring why he who 
isa manisa man. We are inquiring, then, why something is 
predicable of something ; that it is predicable must be clear ; 
for if not, the inquiry is an inquiry into nothing. E.g. why 
does it thunder? This is the same as ‘ why is sound produced 25 
in the clouds?’ Thus the inquiry is about the predication 
of one thing of another. And why are certain things, i.e. 
stones and bricks, a house? Plainly we are seeking the cause. 
And this is the essence (to speak abstractly), which in some 
cases is the end, e.g. perhaps in the case of a house or a bed, 
and in some cases is the first mover ; for this also is a cause. 30 
But while the efficient cause is sought in the case of genesis 
and destruction, the final cause is sought in the case of being 
also. 

The object of the inquiry is most overlooked where one 
term is not expressly predicated of another? (e.g. when we 1041” 
inquire why man is), because we do not distinguish and do 
not say definitely ‘why do these parts form this whole?’ But 
we must distinguish the elements in the concept before we 
begin to inquire; if not, it is not clear whether the inquiry is 
significant or unmeaning. Since we must know the existence 
of the thing and it must be given, clearly the question is why 
the matter is some individual thing, e.g. why are these materials 5 
a house? Because that which was the essence of a house is 
present. And why is this individual thing, or this body in 
this state,a man? Therefore what we seek is the cause, i.e. 
the form, by reason of which the matter is some definite 
thing ; and this is the substance of the thing. Evidently, then, 
in the case of szmple terms no inquiry nor teaching is possible ; 10 
our attitude towards them is other than that of inquiry. 

1 Sc. and therefore in this case, when the fact is known, there is no 
question as to the ‘ why’. 
3. 10418 33 read κατ᾽ ἀλλήλων. 

1041" METAPHYSICA 

As regards! that which is compounded out of something 
so that the whole is one—not like a heap, however, but like 
a syllable,—the syllable is not its elements, da is not the 
same as ὦ and a, nor is flesh fire and earth; for when they 
are dissolved the wholes, i.e. the flesh and the syllable, no 
15 longer exist, but the elements of the syllable exist, and so do 
fire and earth. The syllable, then, is something—not only its 
elements (the vowel and the consonant) but also something 
else; and the flesh is not only fire and earth or the hot and 
the cold, but also something else. Since, then, that some- 
20 thing must be either an element or composed of elements, (1) if 
it is an element the same argument will again apply; for 
flesh will consist of this and fire and earth and something still 
further, so that the process will go on to infinity; while (2) if it 
is a compound, clearly it will be a compound not of one but of 
many (or else it will itself be that one),? so that again in 
this case we can use the same argument as in the case of 
as flesh or of the syllable. But it would seem that this ‘ other’ is 
something, and not an element, and that it is the cause which 
makes ‘iis thing flesh and shat a syllable. And similarly 
in all other cases. And this is the substance of each thing; 
for this is the primary cause of its being; and since, while 
some things are not substances, as many as are substances are 
30 formed by nature,’ their substance would seem to be this 
‘nature ’,* which is not an element but a principle. An 
element is that into which a thing is divided and which is 
present in it as matter, e.g. ὦ and J are the elements of the 
syllable. 
+ Not even the protasis of the sentence beginning 10415 11 is ever com- 

pleted; the parenthesis beginning ἡ δὲ συλλαβή, 1. 12, is so long that the 
original construction is forgotten. . 

3 1041” 23 read πλειόνων (ἡ ἐκεῖνο αὐτὸ ἔσται). 
5. 1041” 29 omit κατὰ φύσιν καί. 
* Sc. the formal cause. 

BOOK VIII (H) 

CHAPTER I 

WE must draw our conclusions from what has been said, 1042* 
and sum up our results, and put the finishing touch to our 
inquiry. We have said! that the causes, principles, and 5 
elements of substances are the object of our search. And 
some substances are recognized by all thinkers, but some 
have been advocated by particular schools. Those generally 
recognized are the natural substances, i.e. fire, earth, water, 
air, &c., the simple bodies ; secondly, plants and their parts, 
and animals and the parts of animals; and finally the heavens 
and the parts of the heavens; while some particular schools 
say that Forms and the objects of mathematics are sub- 
stances. And it follows from our arguments that there are 
other substances, the essence and the substratum.? Again, in 
another way the genus seems more substantial than the species, 
and the universal than the particulars. And with the universal 15 
and the genus the Ideas are connected; it is in virtue of the 
same argument that they are thought to be substances.® 
And since the essence is substance, and the definition is a 
statement of the essence, for this reason we have discussed ® 
definition and essential predication. Since the definition is 
a formula, and a formula has parts, we had to consider’ with 
respect to the notion of ‘ part’, what are parts of the substance 20 
and what are not, and whether the same things are also parts 
of the definition. Further, then,’ neither the universal nor 
the genus is a substance; we must. inquire later® into the 
Ideas and the objects of mathematics; for some say these exist 
apart from sensible substances. | 

But now let us resume the discussion of the generally 

1 Cf. Z. 1. 2 Cf. Z. 2. δ Cf. Z. 3, 4. 4. Cf. Ζ. 13. 

5 Cf. Z. 14. 6 Cf. Ζ. 4, 5, 12. 7 Cf. Z. 10, 11. 
δ 1042" 21 read ἔτι τοίνυν. Cf. Z. 13. | ® Cf. M and N. 

μή 

ο 

1042° METAPHYSICA 

25 recognized substances. These are the sensible substances, 
and sensible substances all have matter. The substratum is 
substance, and this is in ane sense the matter (and by matter 
I mean that which, not being a ‘this’ actually, is poten- 
tially a ‘this’), and in another sense the formula or form 
(which being a ‘this’ can be separately formulated), and thirdly 

3o the complex of matter and form, which alone is generated and 
destroyed, and is, without qualification, capable of separate 
existence ; for of substances in the sense of formulae some are 
separable and some are not. 

But clearly matter also is substance ; for in all the opposite 
changes that occur there is something which underlies the 
changes, e.g. in respect of place that which is now here and again 

35 elsewhere, and in respect of increase that which is now of one 
size and again less or greater, and in respect of alteration that 

1042" which is now healthy and again diseased; and similarly in 
respect of substance there is something that is now being 
generated and again being destroyed, and now? underlies the 
process as a ‘ this’ and again? underlies it as the privation of 
positive character. In this last change the others are involved. 

5 But in either one or two of the others this is not involved ; for 
it is not necessary if a thing has matter for change of place 
that it should also have matter for generation and destruction. 

CHAPTER II 

The difference between becoming in the full sense and 
becoming in a qualified sense has been stated in our works on 
Physics. Since the substance which exists as substratum and 
as matter is generally recognized, and this is that which exists 

10 potentially, it remains for us to say what is the substance, in 
the sense of actuality, of sensible things, Democritus seems 
to think there are three kinds of difference between things ; 
the underlying body, the matter, is one and the same, but 
they differ either in rhythm, i. e. shape, or in turning, i.e. posi- 

15tion, or in inter-contact, i.e. order. But evidently there are 
many differences ; for instance, some things are characterized 

1 Sc. in the case of destruction. 2 Sc. in the case of generation. 
δ Cf. Phys. v. 1, De Gen. εἰ Corr. i. 2, 3. * Cf. A. 985" 13. 

8 “Φαὰ. ““π................. “ἢ 

H. BOOK VIII 1042” 

by the mode of composition of their matter, e.g. the things 
formed by mixture, such as honey-water; and others by 
being bound together, e.g. a bundle; and others by being 
glued together, e.g. a book; and others by being nailed 
together, e.g. a casket; and others in more than one of 
these ways; and others by position, e.g. the threshold and 
the lintel (for these differ bysbeing placed in a certain way); 
and others by time, e.g. dinner and breakfast; and others 20 
by place, eg. the winds; and others by the affections 
proper to sensible things, e.g. hardness and softness, density 
and rarity, dryness and wetness; and some things by some 
of these qualities, others by them all, and in general some 
by excess and some by defect. Clearly then the word ‘is’ 25 
has just as many meanings; a thing is a threshold because 
it lies in such and such a position, and its being means its 
lying in that position, while being ice means having been 
solidified in such and such a way. And the being of some 
things will be defined by a// these qualities, because some 
parts of them are mixed, others are fused, others are bound 30 
together, others are solidified, and others possess the other 
differentiae ; e.g. the hand or the foot requires such complex 
definition. We must grasp, then, the kinds of differentiae (for 
these will be the principles of the being of things), e.g. the 
things characterized by the more and the less, or by the dense 
and the rare, and by other such qualities; for all these are 
characterized by excess and defect. And everything that is 35 
characterized by shape or by smoothness and roughness, is 
determined by the straight and the curved. And for other 
things their being will mean their being mixed, and their not 1043* 
being will mean the opposite. It is clear then from these 
facts that if its substance is the cause of each thing’s being, we 
must seek in these differentiae the cause of the being of each 
of these things. Now none of these differentiae is substance, 
even when coupled with matter, yet in each there is something 
analogous to substance ; and as in substances that which is 5 
predicated of the matter is the actuality itself, in all other 
definitions also it is what most resembles full actuality. E.g. 
if we had to define a threshold, we should say ‘ wood or stone 
in such and such a position ’, and a house we should define as 

AR. MET. M 

1043" 

METAPHYSICA 

‘bricks and timbers in such and such a position’ (or we may 
name the purpose as well in some cases), and if we define ice 
we say ‘water frozen or solidified in such and such a way’, 

10 and harmony is ‘ such and such a blending of high and low’ ; 

15 

and similarly in all other cases. 

Obviously then the actuality or the formula is different when 
the matter is different ; for in some cases it is the juxtaposition, 
in others the mixing, and in others some other of the attributes 
we have named. And so, in defining, those who define a house 
as stones, bricks, and timbers, are speaking of the potential 
house, for these are the matter; but those who define it asa 
covering for animals and chattels, or add some other similar 
differentia, speak of the actuality ;1 and those who combine 
both of these speak of the third kind of substance, which is 
composed of matter and form. For the formula that gives 
the differentiae seems to be an account of the form and the 

ao actuality, while that which gives the components is rather an 

account of the matter. And the same is true with regard to 
the definitions which Archytas used to accept; for they are 
accounts of the combined form and matter. E.g. what is still 
weather? Absence of motion in a large extent of air; air is 
the matter, and absence of motion is the actuality and sub- 

25 stance. Whatis acalm? Smoothness of sea; the material 

substratum is the sea, and the actuality or form is smoothness. 
It is obvious then, from what has been said, what sensible sub- 
stance is and how it exists—one kind of it as matter, another 
as form or actuality; while the third kind ts that which is 
composed of these two. 

CHAPTER III 

We must not forget that sometimes it is not clear whether 

30a name means the composite substance, or the actuality or 

form, 6. g. whether ‘ house’ is a sign for the composite thing, 
‘a covering consisting of bricks and stones laid thus and 
thus,’ or for the actuality or form, ‘a covering,’ and whether 
a line is ‘twoness in length’ or ‘twoness’, and whether an 

35 animal is ‘a soul in a body’ or ‘a soul’. For soul is the 

1 1043 18 read τὴν ἐνέργειαν. 

H. BOOK VIII - 1ο43" 

substance or actuality of some body; but ‘ animal’ might be 
applied to both, not that both are definable by one formula 

but because they refer to the same thing. But this question,’ 
while important for another purpase, is of no importance for 

the inquiry into sensible substance; for the essence certainly 1043” 
attaches to the form and the actuality. For ‘ soul’ and ‘ to be 

soul’ are the same, but ‘to be man’ and ‘man’ are not the 
same, unless indeed the soul is to be called man; and thus on 

one interpretation the thing is the same as its essence, and on 
another it is not. 

If we consider? we find that the syllable is not produced by 5 
the letters + juxtaposition, nor is the house bricks + juxtaposi- 
tion. And this is right ; for the juxtaposition or mixing is not 
produced by those things of which it is the juxtaposition or 
mixing. And the same is true in the other cases, 6. σ΄. if the 
threshold is characterized by its position, the position is not 
produced by the threshold, but rather the latter is produced by 
the former. Nor is man animal+ biped, but there must be 10 
something besides these, if these are matter,—something which 
is neither an element in the whole nor produced by an element, 
but is the substance, which people state when they eliminate 
the matter. If then this is the cause of the thing’s being, and 
if the cause of its being is its substance,’ they must be stating 
the substance itself. 

This, then, must either be eternal or it must be destructible 
without being ever in course of being destroyed, and must 
have come to be without ever being in course of coming to be. 
But it has been proved and explained elsewhere‘ that no one 
makes or generates the form, but it is the individual that is 
made, i.e. the complex of form and matter that is generated. 
Whether the substances of destructible things can exist apart, 20 
is not yet at all clear ; except that obviously this is impossible 
in some cases—in the case of things which cannot exist apart 
from the individual instances, e. g. house or utensil. Perhaps 
neither these things themselves, nor any of the other things 
which are not formed by nature, are substances at all; for one 

= 
υ 

1 Sc. whether the name means the form or the concrete thing. 
3 Aristotle returns to the subject discussed in Chapter II. 
δ᾽ 1043” 14 read οὐσία τοῦτο, αὐτήν. Cf. Δ. 1017? 14-15. “ Cf. Z. 8. 

M 2 

1043°- ᾿ METAPHYSICA 

might say that the nature in natural objects is the only 
substance to be found in destructible things. 

Therefore the difficulty which was raised by the school of 

as Antisthenes and other such uneducated people has a certain 
-appropriateness. They stated that the ‘what’ cannot be defined 
(for the definition so called is a ‘long formula’#) ; but of what 
sort a thing, e. g. silver, is, they thought it possible to explain, 
not saying what it is but that it is like tin. Therefore one 
kind of substance can be defined and formulated, i.e. the 
composite kind, whether it be the object of sense or of reason ; 
3o but the primary parts of which this consists cannot be defined, 
since a definitory formula predicates something of some- 
thing, and one part of the definition must play the part of 
matter and the other that of form. 

It is also obvious that, if all substances are in a sense 
numbers, they are so in this sense and not, as some say, as 
numbers of units. For definition is a sort of number ; for (1) it 

35 is divisible, and into indivisible parts (for definitory formulae 
are not infinite), and number also is of this nature. And (2) as, 
when one of the parts of which a number consists has been 
taken from or added to the number, it is no longer the same 
number, but a different one, even if it is the very smallest 

_ 1044" part that has been taken away or added, so the definition and 
the essence will no longer remain when anything has been 
taken away or added. And (3) the number must have some- 
thing in virtue of which it is one, while our opponents cannot 
say what makes it one (for it is not one? but a sort of heap, 
or if it is, we ought to say what it is that makes one out of 

5 many); and the definition is one, but similarly they cannot 
say what makes 12 one. And this is natural; for the same 
reason is applicable, and substance is one in the sense which 
we have explained, and not, as some say, by being a sort of 
unit or point; each is a complete reality and a definite nature. 
And as number does not admit of the more and the less, 

io neither does substance, in the sense of form, but if any sub- 
stance does, it is only the substance which involves matter. 

1 Sc. and therefore cannot give the essence, which is simple. For the 
contemptuous meaning of μακρὸς λόγος cf, N. 10918 8. 
2 1044° 4 read rim εἰς" εἷς yap οὔκ ἐστιν. 

H. BOOK VIII 1044° 

Let this then suffice for an account of the generation and 
destruction of so-called substances—in what sense it is possible 
and in what sense impossible—and of the reduction of things 
to number. | 

CHAPTER IV 

Regarding material substance we must not forget that even 15 
if all things come from the same first cause! or have the 
same things for their first causes, and if the same matter serves 
as starting-point for their generation, yet there is a matter 
proper to each, e.g. the sweet or the fat is the proximate 
matter of phlegm, and the bitter, or something else, that of bile; 
though perhaps these come from the same original matter. 
And there come to be several matters for the same thing, 20 
when the one matter is matter for the other, e.g. phlegm 
comes from the fat and from the sweet, if the fat comes from 
the sweet ; and it comes from bile by analysis of the bile into 
its ultimate matter. For one thing comes from another in 
two senses, either because it will be found at a later stage of 
development, or because it is produced if the other is analysed 
into its original constituents. When the matter is one, different 25 
things may be produced owing to difference in the moving cause, 
e.g. from wood may be made both a chest and a bed. But 
some different things must have their matter different, e. g. 

a saw could not be made of wood, nor is this in the power of 
the moving cause; for it could not make a saw of wool or of 
wood. But if, as a matter of fact, the same thing can be 
made of different material, clearly the art, i.e. the moving 30 
principle, is the same; for if both the matter and the moving 
principle were different, the product would be too, 

When one inquires what is the cause, one should, as 
‘causes’ are spoken of in several senses, state all the possible 
causes. E.g. what is the material cause of man? The 
menses. What is the moving cause? The semen. The 35 
formal cause? His essence. The final cause? His end. 

But perhaps the latter two are the same.—We must state 1044” 

the proximate causes. What is the-material cause? Not 
fire or earth, but the matter peculiar to the thing. 

1 Sc. material cause. 

1044 METAPHYSICA 

Regarding generable natural substances, zf the causes are 
really these and of this number and we have to learn the 
5 causes, we must inquire thus, if we are to inquire rightly. 
But in the case of natural but eternal substances another 
account must be given. For perhaps some have no matter, 
or not matter of this sort but only such as can be moved in 
respect of place. Nor does matter belong to those things 
which exist by nature but are not substances; their substratum 
is the substance. E.g. what is the cause of an eclipse? 
1o What is its matter? There is none; the moon is that 
which suffers eclipse.’ What is the moving cause which 
extinguishes the light? The earth. The final cause perhaps 
does not exist. The formal principle is the definitory formula, 
but this is obscure if it does not include the cause.? E. g. 
what is eclipse? Deprivation of light. But if we add ‘by 
interposition of the earth’, this is the formula which includes 
13 the cause. Jn the case of sleep it is not clear what it is that 
proximately has this affection. Surely the animal, it will be 
said. Yes, but the animal in virtue of what, i.e. what is the 
proximate subject? The heart or some other part. Next, 
by what is it produced? Next, what is the affection—that of 
the proximate subject, not of the whole animal? Shall we 
say that it is immobility of such and such a kind? Yes, but 
20 to what process in the proximate subject is this due? > 

CHAPTER V 

Since some things are and are not, without coming to be 
and ceasing to be, e.g. points, if they can be said to de, and 
in general forms and shapes (for it is not ‘white’ that comes 
to be, but the wood comes to be white, if everything that 
comes to be comes from something and comes to be some- 

25 thing), not all contraries can come from one another, but it 
is in different senses that a white man comes from a black 
man, and white comes from black. Nor has everything 
matter, but only those things which come to be and change 

1 i.e. the substratum of a substance is bare matter, but the substratum 

of an attribute is a determinate substance such as the moon. 
2 Sc. the efficient cause. 

H. BOOK VIII 1044” 

into one another. Those things which, without ever being 
in course of changing, are or are not, have no matter. 

There is difficulty in the question how the matter of each 
thing is related to its contrary states. E.g. if the body is 30 
potentially healthy, and disease is contrary to health, is it 
potentially both healthy and diseased? And is water poten- 
tially wine and vinegar? We answer that it is the matter of 
one in virtue of its positive state and its form, and of the 
other in virtue of the privation of its positive state and the 
corruption of it contrary to its nature. It is also hard to say 
why wine is not said to be the matter of vinegar nor poten- 
tially vinegar (though vinegar is produced from it), and why 35 
the living man is not said to be potentially dead. In fact 
they are not, but the corruptions in question are accidental, 
and it is the matter of the animal that is itself! in virtue of 1045" 
its corruption the potency and matter of a corpse, and it is 
water that is the matter of vinegar. For the one comes from 
the other as night from day. And a// the things which 
change thus into one another must be reduced to their matter, 
e.g. if from a corpse is produced an animal, the corpse is first 
reduced to its matter, and only then becomes an animal; 
and vinegar is first reduced to water, and only then becomes 5 
wine. 

CHAPTER VI 

To return to the difficulty which has been stated? with 
respect to definitions and numbers, what is the cause of the 
unity of each of them? In the case of all things which have 
several parts and in which the whole is not, as it were, a mere 
heap, but the totality is something besides the parts, there is 10 
a cause of unity; for as regards material things contact is the 
cause in some cases, and in others viscidity or some other such 
quality. And a definition is a set of words which is one not by 
being connected together, like the //zad, but by dealing with 
one object.—What then is it that makes man one; why is he 
one and not many, 6. σ΄. animal + biped, especially if there are, 15 
as some say, an ideal animal and an ideal biped? Why are 

‘l 70458 1 read αὐτή. 2 Cf. Z. 12, H. 1044 3-6. 

1045" ) METAPHYSICA 

not those Ideas the ideal man!, so that men would exist by 
participation not in man, nor in one Idea, but in two, animal 
and biped? And in general man would be not one but more 
than one thing, animal and biped. 
a0 +=. Clearly, then, if people proceed thus in their usual manner 
of definition and speech, they cannot explain and solve the 
difficulty. But if, as we say, one element is matter and 
another is form, and one is potentially and the other actually, 
a5 the question will no longer be thought a difficulty. For this 
difficulty is the same as would arise if ‘round bronze’ were 
the definition of X ;? for this symbol would be a sign of 
the definitory formula, so that the question is, what is the 
cause of the unity of ‘round’ and ‘ bronze’? The difficulty 
disappears, because the one is matter, the other form. What 
30 then is the ‘cause of this—the reason why that which was 
potentially is actually,—what except, in the case of things 
which are generated, the agent? For there is no other reason 
why the potential sphere becomes actually a sphere, but this 
was the essence of either.2 Of matter some is the object of 
reason, some of sense, and part of the formula is always 
35 matter and part is actuality, e.g. the circle is (1) a figure 
which (2) is plane. But of the things which have no matter, 
1045° either for reason or for sense, each is by its nature essentially 
a kind of unity, as it is essentially a kind of being—individual 
substance, quality, or quantity. And so neither ‘existent ’ nor 
‘one’ is present in definitions, and an essence is by its very 
nature a kind of unity as it is a kind of being.. This is why 
none of these has any reason outside itself for being one, nor 
5 for being a kind of being; for each is by its nature a kind of 
being and a kind of unity, not as being in the genus ‘ being’ 
or ‘one’ nor in the ‘sense that being and unity can exist 
apart from particulars. 
Owing to the difficulty about unity some speak of ‘ partici- 

1 1045® 17 read αὐτοάνθρωπος. 

2 «X’ is used to represent the Greek ἱμάτιον, lit. ‘cloak.’ Cf. Z. 1029» 
28, de Int. 18* 9. 

3 i.e. it was the essence of form to unite with matter, and of matter to 
unite with form. 

4 The definition is incomplete, but sufficient to show the presence of 
matter (genus) and form (differentia). 

H. BOOK VIII 1045? 

pation ’, and raise the question, what is the cause of participa- 
tion and what is it to participate; and others speak of 
‘communion ’,! as Lycophron says knowledge is a communion τὸ 
of knowing with the soul; and others say life is a ‘com- 
position’ or ‘connexion’ of soul with body. Yet the same 
account applies to all cases; for being healthy will be either 
a communion or a connexion or a composition of soul and 
health, and the fact that the. bronze is a triangle will be 
a composition of bronze and triangle, and the fact that a 15 
thing is white will be a composition of surface and whiteness. 
—The reason is that people look for a unifying formula, and 

a difference, between potency and complete reality. But, as has 
been said, the proximate matter and the form are one and 
the same thing, the one potentially, the other actually. 
Therefore to ask the cause of their being one is like asking 
the cause of unity in general; for each thing is a unity, and 20 
the potential and the actual are somehow one. Therefore 
there is no other cause here unless there is something which 
caused the movement from potency into actuality. And 
all things which have zo matter are without qualification 
essentially unities. 

+ 3045" 10 omit ψυχῆς. 

BOOK IX (@) 

CHAPTER I 

WE have treated of that which zs primarily and to 
which all the other categories of being are referred—i.e. of 
substance. For it is in virtue of the concept of substance 

30 that the others are said to be—quantity and quality and the 
like; for all will be found to involve the concept of substance, 
_as we said in the first part of our work.’ And since ‘being ’ 
is in one way divided into ‘ what’, quality, and quantity, and 
is in another way distinguished in respect of potency and 
complete reality, and of function, let us discuss potency and 

35 complete reality. First let us explain potency in the strictest 
sense, which is, however, not the most useful? for our present 

1046° purpose. For potency and actuality extend further than the 
mere sphere of motion. But when we have spoken of this 
first kind, we shall in our discussions of actuality® explain 
the other kinds of potency. 

We have pointed out elsewhere* that ‘potency’ and the 

5 word ‘can’ have several senses. Of these we may neglect 
all the potencies that are so called by an equivocation. For 
some are called so by analogy, as in geometry; and® we say 
things can be or cannot be because in some definite way they 
are or are not. | 

But all potencies that conform to the same type are starting- 
points, and are called potencies in reference to one primary kind 

10 of potency, which is a starting-point of change in another thing 
or in the thing itself gva other. For one kind is a potency of 
being acted on, i.e. the principle in the very thing acted on, 
which makes it capable of being changed and acted on by 
another thing or by itself regarded as other; and another kind 

1 Cf, I. 1003* 33 and Z. 1. 2 1045" 36 read χρησιμωτάτη. 

δ Cf. ©. 1048% 27. 4“ Cf. A. 12. 
δ 10468 7 read colon after γεωμετρίᾳ. Cf. A. 1019» 22-33 and note. 

©. BOOK ΙΧ 

is a state of insusceptibility to change for the worse and 
to destruction by another thing or by the thing itself gua 
other, i.e. by a principle of change. In all these definitions 
is implied the formula of potency in the primary sense.—And 
again these so-called potencies are potencies either of acting 
merely or of being acted on, or of acting or being acted on 
well, so that even in the formulae of the latter the formulae 
of the prior kinds of potency are somehow implied. 

᾿ς Obviously, then, in a sense the potency of acting and of being 
acted on is one (for a thing may be ‘capable’ either because 
it can be acted on or because something else can be acted 
on by it), but in a sense the potencies are different. For the 
one is in the thing acted on; it is because it contains 
a certain motive principle, and because even the matter isa 
motive principle, that the thing acted on is acted on, one 
thing by one, another by another; for that which is oily is 
inflammable, and that which yze/ds in a particular way can 
be crushed ;} and similarly in all other cases. But the other 
potency is in the agent, e.g. heat and the art of building are 
present, one in that which can produce heat and the other in the 
man who can build. And so in so far as a thing is an organic 
unity, it cannot be acted on by itself; for it is one and not 
two different things. And want of potency, or powerlessness, 
is the privation which is contrary to potency of this sort, so 
that every potency belongs to the same subject and refers to 
the same process as a corresponding want of potency. Priva- 
tion has several senses ; for it means (1) that which has not 
a certain quality and (2) that which might naturally have it 
but has not it, either (4) in general or (6) when it might 
naturally have it, and either (i) in some particular way, e.g. 

1046* 

15 

25 

30 

when it completely fails to have it, or (ii) when it in any | 

degree fails to have it. And in certain cases if things which 

naturally have a quality lose it by violence, we say they 3s 

suffer privation. 

7 1, 6. the event would not happen if the passive factor were different. 
What is oily cannot necessarily be crushed, nor what is yielding burnt. 

10467 METAPHYSICA | 
f 

CHAPTER II | 

Since some such principles are present in soulless things, 
and others in things possessed of soul, and in soul and in the 
1046° rational part of the soul, clearly some potencies will be non- 
rational and some will be accompanied by knowledge of a 
rational formula. This is why all arts, i.e. all productive forms | 
of knowledge, are potencies; they are principles of change 
in another thing or in the artist himself considered as other. 
And each of those which are accompanied by reason is 
5 alike capable of contrary effects, but one non-rational power 
produces one effect; e.g. the hot is capable only of heating, 
but the medical art can produce both disease and health. 
The reason is that science is a rational formula, and the 
same rational formula explains a thing and its privation, 
only not in the same way; and in a sense it applies to both, 
το but in a sense it applies rather to the positive fact. Therefore 
such sciences must deal with contraries, but with one in 
virtue of their own nature and with the other not in virtue of 
their nature ; for the rational formula applies to one object in 
virtue of that object’s nature, and to the other, in a sense, 
accidentally. For it is by denial and removal that it explains 
the contrary ; for the contrary is the primary privation, and 
15 this is the entire removal of the positive term. Now since on the 
one hand contraries do not occur.in the same point of reality, 
but on the other hand science is a potency which depends on 
the possession of a rational formula, and the soul possesses 
a principle of movement; therefore, on the one hand, the 
wholesome produces only health and the calorific only heat and 
the frigorific only cold, but the scientific man, on the other 
ao hand, produces both the contrary effects. For there is a 
rational formula which applies to both, though not in the 
same way, and it is in a soul which possesses a principle of 
movement; so that the soul will start both processes from 
the same principle, applying them to the same object. And 
so the things whose potency is according to a rational formula 
act contrariwise to the things whose potency is non-rational; for 
the products of the former are included under one principle, 
the rational formula. 

©. BOOK IX 1046 

It is obvious also that the potency of merely doing a thing 25 
or having it done to one is implied in that of doing it or. 
having it done we//, but the latter is not always implied in 
the former: for he who does a thing well must do it, but 
he who does it merely need not do it well. 

CHAPTER III 

There are some who say, as the Megaric school does, that 
a thing ‘can’ act only when it is acting, and when it is not 30 
acting it ‘cannot’ act, e. g. he who is not building cannot build, 
but only he who is building, when he is building ; and so in 
all other cases. It is not hard to see the absurdities that 
attend this view. | 

For it is clear that on this view a man will not be a builder 
unless he is building (for to be a builder is to be able to build), 
and so with the other arts. If, then, it is impossible to have 35 
such arts if one has not at some time learnt! and acquired 
them, and it is then impossible not to have them if one has 
not sometime lost them (either by forgetfulness or by some 1047° 
accident or by time; for it cannot be by the destruction of 
the object itself,? for that lasts for ever),a man will not have 
the art when he has ceased to use it, and yet he may imme- 
diately build again; how then will he have got the art?? And 
similarly with regard to lifeless things; nothing will be either 
cold or hot or sweet or perceptible at all if people are not 5 
perceiving it ; so that the upholders of this view will have to 
maintain the doctrine of Protagoras. But, indeed, nothing will 
even have perception if it 15 not perceiving, i.e. exercising its 
perception. If, then, that is blind which has not sight though 
it would naturally have it, when it would naturally have it 
and when it still exists, the same people will be blind many 
times in the day—and deaf too. _ 

Again, if that which is deprived of potency is incapable, that 10 

1 1046” 37 read μαθόντα. 

3 The object of knowledge is always a form, which is eternal. The 
matter which makes things perishable is no object for knowledge. 

8 The protasis here states facts, the apodosis states a conclusion which 
follows from the Megaric theory, and the final question states a difficulty 
which follows from the apodosis. 

1047° METAPHYSICA 

which is not happening? will be incapable of happening ; but 
he who says of that which is incapable of happening that it is 
or will be will say what is untrue; for this is what incapacity 
meant. Therefore these views do away with both movement 

15 and becoming. For that which stands will always stand, and 
that which sits will always sit; if it is sitting it will not get 
up; for that which, as we are told, cannot get up will be in- 
capable of getting up. But we cannot say this, so that evidently 
potency and actuality are different; but these views make 
potency and actuality the same, so that it is no small thing 
they are seeking to annihilate. 

2. Therefore it is possible that a thing may be capable of 
being and not ὅδ, and capable of not being and yet de, and simi- 
larly with the other kinds of predicate; it may be capable of 
walking and yet not walk, or capable of not walking and yet 
walk. And a thing is capable of doing something if there is 

a5 nothing impossible in its having the actuality of that of which 

, it is said to have the capacity. I mean for instance, if a 
thing is capable of sitting and it is open to it to sit, there will 
be nothing impossible in its actually sitting; and similarly if 
it is capable of being moved or moving or of standing or 
making to stand or of being or coming to be, or of not being 
or not coming to be. 

30 The word ‘actuality’, which we connect with ‘complete 
reality’, has, strictly speaking, been extended from move- 
ments to other things; for actuality® in the strict sense is 
identified with movement. And so people do not assign 
movement to non-existent things, though they do assign some 
other predicates. E.g. they say that non-existent things are 

35 Objects of thought and desire, but not that they are moved ; 
and this because, while ex hypothest they do not actually 
exist, they would have to exist actually if they were moved. 

1047” For of non-existent things some exist potentially ; but they 

do not exist, because they do not exist in complete reality. . 

1 10478 11 read γινόμενον. 
2 1047 23 read καὶ μὴ βαδίζειν δυνατὸν εἶναι βαδίζον, following A. Bullinger. 
8. 1047 32 read ἡ ἐνέργεια. 

©. BOOK IX 1047” 

CHAPTER IV 

If what we have described! is identical with the capable? 
in so far as the two things are logically convertible, evidently 
it cannot be true to say ‘this is capable of being but will 
not be’,—a view which leads to the conclusion that there is 5 
nothing incapable of being. Suppose, for instance, that a man 
(one who did not understand the meaning of ‘incapable of 
being’) were to say that the diagonal of the square is capable 
of being measured but will not be measured, because a thing 
may be capable of being or coming to be, and yet not be or 
be about to be. But from the premises this necessarily follows, 
that if we actually suppose that which is not, but is capable τὸ 
of being, to be or to have come to be, there will be nothing 
impossible in this; but the result τοῦδέ be impossible, for the 
actual measuring of the diagonal is impossible. For the false 
and the impossible are not the same; that you are standing 
now is false, but that you should be standing is not impossible. 

At the same time it is clear that if, when 4 is real, B must 
be real, then, when A is possible,’ B also must be possible. 15 
For if B need not be possible, there is nothing to prevent its 
not being possible. Now let 4 be supposed possible. Then, 
when Α is possible, nothing impossible would follow if 4 were 
supposed to be real; and then & must of course be real. 
But we supposed B to be impossible. [Let it be impossible, 20 
then. If, then, B is impossible, A also must be so. But A 
was supposed possible ; therefore B also is possible.|* If, then, 
A is possible, B also will be possible, if they were so related 
that if A is real, B must be real. If, then, A and B being 
thus related,® B is not possible on this condition,® A and B 25 
will not be related as was supposed.” And if when 4 is 
possible, B must be possible, then if 4 is real, B must also 
be real. For to say that B must be possible, if A is possible, 

1 Cf. 10478 24-26. 2 1047” 3 read τὸ εἰρημένον τὸ δυνατόν. 

5 1047” 15 read ὄντος εἶναι τοῦ A. 

‘ 1047” 20 ἔστω---22 B ἄρα is probably spurious. : 

5 Sc. so related that if the reality of 4 implies the “Teality of B the 
possibility of 4 implies the possibility of 2. 

® Sc. if A is possible. 

7 Sc. so related that the reality of 4 implies the reality of 2. 

1047” METAPHYSICA 

means that if A is real both at the time when and in the way 
3o in which it was supposed capable of being real, B also must 
then and in that way be real. 

CHAPTER V 

As all potencies are either innate, like the senses, or come by 
practice, like the power of playing the flute, or by learning, like 
artistic potency, those which come by practice or by rational 
formula we must acquire by previous exercise, but this is not 
necessary with those which are not of this nature and which 
imply passivity. 

35 Since that which is ‘capable’ is capable of something and 
1048 at some time and in some way—with all the other qualifica- 
tions which must be present in the definition—, and since some 
things can work according to a rational formula and their 
potencies involve a formula, while other things are non-rational 
and their potencies are non-rational, and the former potencies 
must be in a living thing, while the latter can be both in the 

5 living and in the lifeless; as regards potencies of the latter kind, 
when the agent and the patient meet in the way appropriate 
to the potency in question, the one must act and the other 
be acted on, but with the former kind of potency this is not 
necessary. For the non-rational potencies are all productive 
of one effect each, but the rational produce contrary effects, 
so that if they produced certain effects necessarily they would 
produce contrary effects at the same time; but this is im- 
10 possible. That which decides, then, must be something else; 
I mean by this, desire or will. For whichever of two things 
the animal desires decisively, it will do, when it is in the circum- ᾿ 
stances appropriate to the potency in question and meets the 
passive object. Therefore everything which has a rational 
potency, when it desires that for which it has a potency and in 
the circumstances in which it has the potency, must do this. 
1; And it has the potency in question when the passive object is 
present and is in a certain state; if not it will not be able to 
act. To add the qualification ‘if nothing external prevents it’ 

is not further necessary ; for it has the potency in so far as this 

is a potency of acting, and it is this not in all circumstances 

© BOOK IX 1048* 

but on certain conditions, among which will be the exclu- 
sion of external hindrances; for these are barred by some 20 
of the positive qualifications. And so even if one has a 
rational wish, or an appetite, to do two things or contrary 
things at the same time, one cannot do them}; for it is not on 
these terms that one has the potency for them, nor is it a 
potency of doing both at the same time, since one will do just 
the things which it is a potency of doing. 

CHAPTER VI 

Since we have treated of the kind of potency which is 28 
related to movement, let us discuss actuality, its genus and 
its differentia. In the course of our analysis it will also 
become clear, with regard to the potential, that we not only 
ascribe potency to that whose nature it is to move some- 
thing else, or to be moved by something else, either without 
qualification or in some particular way, but also use the word 
in another sense, in the pursuit of which we have discussed 
these previous senses. Actuality means the existence of the 30 
thing, not in the way which we express by “ potentially’ ; we 
say that potentially, for instance, a statue of Hermes is in the 
block of wood and the half-line is in the whole, because it 
might be separated out, and we call even the man who is not 
studying a man of science, if he is capable of actually studying 
a particular problem.? Our meaning can be seen in the par- 35 
ticular cases by induction, and we must not seek a definition of 
everything but be content to grasp the analogy,—that as that 
which is building is to that which is capable of building, so is 1048° 
the waking to the sleeping, and that which is seeing to that 
which has its eyes shut but has sight, and that which is shaped 
out of the matter to the matter, and that which has been 
wrought up to the unwrought. Let actuality be defined by 
one member of this antithesis, and ‘the potential’ by the 5 
other. But all things are not said in the same sense to exist 
actually, but only by analogy—as 4 is in B or to B, Cis in D 
or to 22; for some are as movement to potency, and the others 
as determinate substance to some sort of matter. 

1 Cf. Θ. 1-5. | . * 7048 35 read τόδε. 

AR. MET. N 

1048" ᾿ς METAPHYSICA 

The infinite and the void and all similar things are said to 
10 exist potentially and actually in a different sense from that 
in which many other things are said so to exist, e:g. that 
which sees or walks or is seen. For of the latter class these 
predicates can at some time be truly asserted without quali- 
fication; for the seen is so called sometimes because it is being 
seen, sometimes because it is capable of being seen. But the 
infinite does not exist potentially in the sense that it will ever 
actually have separate existence; its separateness is only in 
15 knowledge. For the fact that division never ceases to be 
possible gives the result that this actuality exists potentially, 
but not that it exists separately. 
Since of the actions which have a limit none is an end but 
all are relative to the end, e. g. ‘the process of making thin ’ is of 
20 this sort}, and the things themselves when one is making them 
thin are in movement in this way (i.e. without being already 
that at which the movement aims), this is not an action or at 
least not a complete one (for it is not an end); but that in 
which the end is present is an action.” E.g. at the same time 
we are seeing and have seen, are understanding and have 
understood, are thinking and have thought : but it is not true 
that at the same time we are learning and have learnt, or are 
2s being cured-and have been cured. At the same time we are 
living well and have lived well, and are happy and have been 
happy. If not, the process would have had sometime to cease, 
as the process of making thin ceases: but, as it is, it does not 
. cease; we are living and have lived. Of these processes, 
then, we must call the one set movements, and the other 
actualities. For every movement is incomplete—making thin, 
learning, walking, building ; these are movements,’ and incom- 
30 plete movements. For-it is not true that at the same time we 
are walking and have walked, or are building and have built, 
or are coming to be and have come to be, or are being moved 
and have been moved, but if we are being moved and have 
been moved, what is moving us is different from what has 

1 10485 19 read οἷον ἡ ἰσχνασία. ἰσχνασία is presumably viewed as 
a means to health. 

2 1048? 22 read ἐκείνη 7} . . . καὶ πρᾶξις. 

5 1048 30 read αὗται δὴ κινήσεις. 

©. BOOK IX | 1048" 

moved us. But itis the same thing that at the same time has 
seen and is seeing, or is thinking and hasthought. The latter 
sort of process, then, I call an actuality, and the former a 
movement. 

CHAPTER VII 

The genus and the differentia of the actual may be taken as a5 
explained by these and similar considerations. But we must 
distinguish when a thing exists potentially and when it does 
not; for it is not at any and everytime. E.g. is earth poten- 
tially a man? No—but rather when it has already become seed, 1049° 
and perhaps not even then, as not everything! can be healed by 
the medical art or by luck, but there is a certain kind of thing 
which is capable of it, and only this is potentially healthy. 

And (1) the definition of that which as a result of thought comes 5 

to exist actually from having existed potentially is that when 

it has been willed it comes to pass if nothing external hinders 

it, while the condition on the other side—viz. in that which is 
healed—is that nothing in it hinders the result. Similarly 
there is potentially a house, if nothing in the thing acted on— 

i.e. in the matter—prevents it from becoming a house, and if 10 
there is nothing which must be added or taken away or 
changed; this is potentially a house, and the same is true 
of all other things for which the source of their becoming 
is external. And (2) in the cases in which the source of the 
becoming is in the very thing which suffers change, all those 
things are said to be potentially something else, which will 
be it of themselves if nothing external hinders them. E.g. 
the seed is not yet potentially a man; for it must further 
undergo a change in a foreign medium. But when through 
its own motive principle it has already got such and such 
attributes, in this state it is already potentially a man; while 
in the former state it needs another principle, just as earth 
is not yet potentially a statue, for it must change in order 
to become brass.? | 

It seems that when we call a thing not something else but 

ome 

5 

1 1049* 2 read ἴσως, ὥσπερ οὐδέ. | 
2 The classes marked by (1) and (2) are the works of art and of nature 
respectively, but at the end (2) is illustrated by an example from (1). | 

N 2 

104.9% METAPHYSICA 

‘of’ that something (6. g. a casket is not‘ wood’ but ‘ of wood ’, 

20 and wood is not ‘earth’ but ‘made of earth’, and again per- 
haps in the same way earth is not something else! but ‘made 
of’ that something), that something is always? potentially (in 
the full sense of that word) the thing which comes after it in 
this series. E.g.a casket is not ‘earthen’ nor ‘earth’, but 
‘wooden ’; for wood is potentially a casket and is the matter 
of a casket, wood in general of a casket in general, and this 
particular wood of this particular casket. And if there is a 
first thing, which no longer is called after something else, and 
a3 said to be ‘of it’, this is prime matter; 6. g. if earth is ‘airy’ 
and air is ‘fiery’, but fire is not thus called after anything 
else, fire® is prime matter; while the ultimate substratum, if it 

is an individual, is not matter but substance. For the subject 4 
or substratum is differentiated by being an individual or 
not being one; the substratum of accidents is an individual 
such as a man, i.e. body and soul, while the accident is 
30 something like ‘ musical’ or ‘white’. (The subject is called, 
when music is implanted in it, not ‘music’ but ‘ musical ’, 
and the man is not ‘ whiteness’ but ‘ white’, and not ‘ ambu- 
lation’ or ‘movement’ but ‘walking’ or ‘ moving ’,—which 
is another. instance of the derivative predicate.) Wherever 
this is so, then, the ultimate subject is a substance; but 
when this is not so but the predicate is a form or individual 
35 character, the ultimate subject is matter and material sub- 
stance. And it is only right that the derivative term should 
1049" be used with reference both to the matter and to the acci- 
dents; for both are indeterminates. We have stated, then, 
when a thing is to be said to exist potentially and when 

it is not. 
1 1049* 20 read γῆ εἰ οὕτως μὴ ἄλλο. 2. 104908 21 read ἀεὶ ἐκεῖνο. 
8 1049* 26 read ἀὴρ πύρινος, τὸ δὲ πῦρ μὴ κατ᾽ ἄλλος τὸ πῦρ. So perhaps 
Alexander. 

4 1049 27 read τὸ καθ᾽ of, following O. Apelt. Cf. I. 1007% 34. 

4 Aristotle points out that there are two kinds of derivative predicates— 
those derived from the matter of the subject, like ‘fiery’, and those formed 
from the accidents of the subject, like ‘musical’, Matter and accidents 
have this in common, that they are indeterminate—i. e. not confined to one 
special subject as essential predicates are. He mentions at the same 
time that there are two kinds of substratum—the bare matter which 
underlies form or essence, and the complete individual which underlies 

accidents. Cf. Z. 1038” 5. 

©. BOOK IX 049° 

CHAPTER VIII 

We have distinguished! the various senses of ‘ prior’, and 
it is clear that actuality is prior to potency. And I mean 5 
by potency not only that definite kind which is said to be 
a principle of change in another thing or in the thing itself 
regarded as other, but in general every principle of movement 
or of rest. For nature also is in the same genus as potency ; 
for it is a principle of movement—not, however, in something 
else but in the thing itself gva@ itself. To all such potency, τὸ 
then, actuality is prior both in formula and in substance ; and 
in time it is prior in one sense, and in another not. 

(1) Clearly it is prior in formula; for that which is in the 
primary sense potential is potential because it is possible for 
it to become actual, e.g. I mean by ‘capable of building ’ 
that which can build, and by ‘capable of seeing’ that which 15, 
can see, and by ‘visible’ that which can be seen. And the 
same account applies to all other cases, so that the formula 
and the knowledge of the one must precede the knowledge of 
the other. 

(2) In time it is prior in this sense: the actual member of a 
species is prior to the potential member of the same species, 
though the individual is potential before it is actual. I mean 
that the matter and the seed and that which is capable of 20 
seeing, which are potentially a man and corn and seeing, but 
not yet actually so, are prior in time to this particular man 
who now exists actually, and to the corn and to the seeing 
subject; but they are posterior in time to other actually 
existing things, from which they were produced. For from 
the potential the actual is always produced by an actual thing, 
e.g. man by man, musician by musician; there is always 25 
a first mover, and the mover already exists actually. We 
have said in our account of substance? that everything that 
is produced is something produced from something and by 
something, and that the same in species as it. 

This is why it is thought impossible to be a builder if one 
has built nothing or a harper if one has never played the harp ; 30 

1 Cf, A. II. 2 Cf. Z. 7, 8. 

1049" METAPHYSICA 

for he who learns to play the harp learns to play it by playing 
it, and all other learners do similarly. And thence arose the 
sophistical quibble, that one who does not know a science will 
be doing that which is the object of the science; for he who 
351s learning it does not know it. But since, of that which 
is coming to be, some part must have come to be, and, of 
that which, in general, is changing, some part must have 
1050° changed (this is shown in the treatise on movement ἢ), he who 
is learning must, it would seem, know some part of the science. 
It is surely clear, then, in this way, that the actuality is in 
this sense also, viz. in order of becoming and of time, prior to 
the potency. 

But (3) it is also prior in substantiality ; firstly, because the 
things that are posterior in becoming are prior in form and in 

5 substantiality, e.g. man is prior to boy and human being to 
seed ; for the one already has its form, and the other has not. 
Secondly, because everything that comes to be moves towards 
a principle, i.e. an end. For that for the sake of which a 
thing is, is its principle, and the becoming is for the sake of 
the end; and the actuality is the end, and it is for the sake 

10 of this that the potency is acquired. For animals do not see 
in order that they may have sight, but they have sight that 
they may see. And similarly men have the art of building 
that they may build, and theoretical science that they may 
theorize ; but they do not theorize that they may have 
theoretical science, except those who are learning by practice ; 
and these do not theorize except in a limited sense, or else 

15 they have no need to theorize? Further, matter exists in 
a potential state, just because it may attain to its form; and 
when it exists actually, then it is in its form. 

And the same holds good in cases in which the end is a 
movement, as well as in all others. Therefore as teachers 
think they have achieved their end when they have ex- 
hibited the pupil at work, so also does nature. For if this 
is not the case, we shall have Pauson’s Hermes over again ; 

20 for it will be hard to say about the knowledge, as about the 

1 Cf. PAys. vi. 6. 

3 10508 14 omit ὅτι, So perhaps Alexander. Sc. if they theorize in 
the full sense, they already have the és and do not need to theorize 
in order to obtain it. 

© BOOK IX 1050° 

statue, whether it is'within or νου. For the action is 
the end, and the actuality is the action. Therefore even the 
word ‘actuality’ is derived from ‘action’, and points to the 
complete reality. 

And while in some cases the exercise is the ultimate thing 
(e.g. in sight the ultimate thing is seeing, and no other product 
besides this results from sight), but from some things a product 25 
follows (e. g. from the art of building there results a house as 
well as the act of building), yet none the less the act is in the 
former case the end and in the latter more of an end than the 
mere potency is. For the act of building is in the thing that 
is being built, and comes to be—and is—at the same time as 
the house. 

Where, then, the result is something apart from the exercise, 30 
the actuality is in the thing that is being made, e.g. the act 
of building is in the thing that is being built and that of - 
weaving in the thing that is being woven, and similarly in all 
other cases, and in general the movement is in the thing that 
is being moved ; but when there is no product apart from the 
actuality, the actuality is in the agents, e.g. the act of seeing 35 
is in the seeing subject and that of theorizing in the theorizing 
subject and the life is in the soul (and therefore well-being 1050° 
also ; for it is a certain kind of life). 

Obviously, therefore, the substance or form is actuality.” 
From this argument it is obvious that actuality is prior in sub- 
stantial being to potency ; and as we have said,’ one actuality 
always precedes another in time right back to the actuality of; 
the eternal prime mover. 

But actuality is prior in a higher sense also; for eternal 
things are prior in substance to perishable things, and no 
eternal thing exists potentially. The reason is this. Every 
potency is at one and the same time a potency of the opposite ; 
for, while that which is not capable of being present in a sub- 

1 Alexander tells us that Pauson made a statue of Hermes, about which 
it was hard to say whether it was made in the ordinary way or enclosed 
in a transparent substance; how could it be ‘without’, when the surface 
looked smooth, or ‘within’, when the surface showed no trace of a 
joining? 

2 This follows from 1050% 16, and what intervenes is to some extent 
parenthetical. 

3 1049? 17-29. 

1050” METAPHYSICA 

10 ject cannot be present, everything that is capable of being may 
possibly not be actual. That, then, which is capable of being 
may either be or not be; the same thing, then, is capable both 
of being and of not being. And that which is capable of not 
being may possibly not be; and that which may possibly not 
be is perishable, either in the full sense, or in the precise sense in 

15 which it is said that it possibly may not be, i.e. either in respect 
of place or quantity or quality; ‘in the full sense’ means ‘in 
substance’. Nothing, then, which is in the full sense imperish- 
able is in the full sense a potential being (though there is 
nothing to prevent its being so in some respect, e. g. potentially 
of a certain quality or in a certain place) ; imperishable things, 
then, exist actually. Nor can anything which is of necessity 
be potential ; yet these things are primary ; for if these did 
not exist, nothing would exist. Nor does eternal movement, 

ao if there be such, exist potentially ; and, if there is an eternal 
mobile, it is not potentially in motion (except in respect of 
‘whence ’ and ‘ whither’; there is nothing to prevent its having 
matter which makes it capable of movement in various direc- 
tions). Therefore the sun and the stars and the whole heaven 
are ever active, and there is no fear that they may sometime 
stand still, as the natural philosophers fear they may. Nor do 

25 they tire in this activity ; for movement does not imply for 
them, as it does for perishable things, the potency of opposites, 
so that the continuity of the movement should be laborious ; 
for it is that kind of substance which is matter and potency, 
not actuality, that causes this. 

Imperishable things ἦ are imitated by those that are involved 
in change, e.g. earth and fire. For these also are ever active ; 
for they have their movement of themselves and in themselves. 

30 But the other potencies, according to the distinction we have 
drawn above,’ are all potencies of opposites; for that which 
can move another in this way can also move it not in this way, | 
i.e. if it acts according to a rational formula. But the same 
non-rational potencies can produce opposite results only by 
their presence or absence. 

If, then, there are any entities or substances such as the 

1 Sc. the heavenly bodies. 
δ i.e. they are both movers and moved. 5 Cf. 9. 2. 

©. BOOK IX 1051" 

dialecticians say the Ideas are, there must be something much 35 
more scientific than the Idea of science and something more 
mobile than the Idea of movement ; for these will be more of 
the nature of actualities, while the Ideas of science and move- 
ment are potencies of these.’ Obviously, then, actuality is 
prior both to potency and to every principle of change. 

CHAPTER IX 

That the good actuality is better and more valuable than the 
good potency is evident from the following argument. Every- 5 
thing of which we say that it can do something, is alike capable 
of contraries, e.g. that of which we say that it can be well is the 
same as that which can be ill, and has both potencies at once ; 
for one and the same potency is a potency of health and illness, 
of rest and motion, of building and throwing down, of being built 
and being thrown down. The capacity for contraries 15 present ro 
at the same time ; but contraries cannot be present at the same 
time, and the actualities also cannot be present at the same 
time, e.g. health and illness. Therefore one of them must be 
the good, but the capacity is both the contraries alike, or 
neither ; the actuality, then, is better. And in the case of bad 15 
things, the end or actuality must be worse than the potency ; 
for that which ‘can’ is both contraries alike. 

Clearly, then, the bad does not exist apart from bad things ; 
for the bad is in its nature posterior to the potency.2 And 
therefore we may also say that in the things which are from 
the beginning, i.e. in eternal things, there is nothing bad, 20 
nothing defective, nothing perverted (for perversion is some- 
thing bad). 

It is by actualization also that geometrical relations are 
discovered ; for it is by dividing the given figures that people 
discover them. If they had been already divided, the relations 
would have been obvious ; but as it is the divisions are present 

1 The Idea, being the universal apart from its special manifestations, 
will be a potentiality, and will therefore be inferior to the corresponding 
particulars—e. g. the Idea of science will be inferior to particular acts of 
scientific thought. 

? Sc. while the eternal and substantial must be better than the potency. 

10518 | METAPHYSICA 

only potentially. Why are the angles of the triangle equal to 
two right angles ? Because the angles about one point are equal 
25 to two right angles. If, then, the line parallel to the side had 
been already drawn, the theorem would have been evident to 
any one as soon as he saw the figure. Why is the angle in 
a semicircle in all cases a right angle? Because if three lines 
are equal—the two which form the base, and the perpendicular 
from the centre—the conclusion is evident at a glance to one 
who knows this premise.! 
Obviously, therefore, the potentially existing relations are 
30 discovered by being reduced to actuality (the reason being 
that thinking is the actuality of thought 2); so that potency 
is discovered from actuality (and therefore it is by an act of 
construction that people acquire the knowledge), though the 
single actuality is later in generation than the corresponding 
potency. 

CHAPTER X 

The terms ‘being’ and ‘non-being’ are employed firstly 

35 with reference to the categories, and secondly with reference 

to the potency or actuality of these or their non-potency or 
1051" non-actuality, while being and non-being in the strictest sense 

J The figures required for the two theorems are :— 

A Ξ R 
; 
/ ! 
Ι 
7. 7 
/ Ι 
/ 
as nn ne 
B ς DA CG B 

Euclid gives a more direct proof by supposing D to be amy point on the 
semicircle. But probably the symmetrical case in which CD is perpen- 
dicular to the diameter was what first suggested the theorem, and with 
Aristotle’s construction the proof may be made quite general if we 

« remember that all angles in the same segment are equal. ΝΕ 

3 The argument apparently is that, since thinking is an actuality, its 

object must be an actuality. 

©. BOOK IX 

are truth and falsity'. The condition of this in the objects is 
their being combined or separated, so that he who thinks the 
separated to be separated and the combined to be combined 
has the truth, while he whose thought is in a state contrary to 
that of the objects is in error. This being so, when is what is 
called truth or falsity present, and when is it not? We must 
consider what we mean by these terms. It is not because we 
think truly that you are white, that you are white, but because 

you are white we who say this have the truth. If, then, some 

things are always combined and cannot be separated, and 
others are always separated and cannot be combined, while 
others are capable either of combination or of separation, 
‘being’ is being combined and one, and ‘ not being’ is being 
not combined but more than one; regarding contingent 
facts, then, the same opinion or the same statement comes to 
be false and true, and it is possible at one time to have the 
truth and at another to be in error ; but regarding things that 
cannot be otherwise opinions are not at one time true and at 
another false, but the same opinions are always true or always 
false. 

With regard to incomposites, what is ‘ being’ or ‘ not being’, 
and truth or falsity? <A thing of this sort is not composite, 
so as to ‘be’ when it is compounded, and not to ‘be’ if it is 
separated, like ‘the white wood’ or ‘the incommensurability 
of the diagonal’; nor will truth and falsity be still present in 
the same way as in the previous cases. In fact, as truth is not 
the same in these cases, so also ‘ being’ is not the same ; but (1) 
truth or falsity is as follows—contact and assertion are truth 
(assertion not being the same as affirmation), and ignorance is 
non-contact. I say ‘ignorance’, for it is not possible to be in 
error regarding the question what a thing is, save in an acci- 
dental sense ; and the same holds good regarding .non-compo- 
site substances (for it is not possible to be in error about them). 
And they all exist actually, not potentially; for otherwise 
they would come to be and cease to be; but, as it is, being 

1 The last clause is very difficult. The natural sense, which is given 
above, contradicts E. 1027” 31, and is not in keeping with Aristotle’s 
usual doctrine. Yet we can hardly translate ‘ while sometimes they mean 
truth or falsity in the strictest sense ’, for there is no point here in a distinc- 
tion between the strictest and other senses of ‘truth’. 

ros 

οι 

μη 

5 

rosi> 

METAPHYSICA 

itself does not come to be (nor cease to be) ; for if it did it 

30 would have to come out of something. About the things, 

then, which are essences and exist in actuality, it is not possible 
to be in error, but only to think them or not to think them. 
Inquiry about their ‘ what’! takes the form of asking whether 
they are of such and such a nature or not.? 

(2) As regards ‘ dezng’ in the sense of truth and ‘not being’ 
in the sense of falsity, in one case there is truth if the subject 
and the attribute are really combined, and falsity if they are 

35 not combined; in the other case, if the object is existent it 
1052" exists in a particular way, and if it does not exist in this way 

it does not exist at all®; and truth means thinking these 
objects, and falsity does not exist, nor error, but only ignorance, 
—and not an ignorance which is like blindness ; for blindness 
is akin to a total absence of the faculty of thinking. 

It is evident also that about unchangeable things there can 

5 be no error in respect of time, if we assume them to be un- 

changeable. E.g. if we suppose that the triangle does not 
change, we shall not suppose that at one time its angles are 
equal to two right angles while at another time they are not 
(for that would imply change). It is possible, however, to sup- 
pose that one member of such a class has a certain attribute 
and another has not, e.g. while we say suppose that no even 
number is prime, we may suppose that some are and some are 
not. But regarding a single number not even this form of 

10 error is possible; for we cannot in this case suppose that one 

instance has an attribute and another has not; but whether 
our judgement be true or false, it is implied that the fact is 
eternal. 

1 1051 32 read τὸ τί ἐστι. 
2 Sc. not what elements their essence can be resolved into (for it is 
simple), but what other things it is like. Cf. H. 1043” 23-28. 
i.e. we have not here 4 and 3, which may or may not be combined, 
but 4, which if it exists at all exists as 4. 1051" 35 read εἴπερ ὅν, 
OUT@S ἐστιν. | 

ae 

- ee ee 

BOOK X (I) 

CHAPTER.-I 

WE have said! previously, in our distinction of the various 15 

meanings of words, that ‘one’ has several meanings ; while 
it is used in many senses, the things that are primarily and 
of their own nature and not accidentally called one may be 
summarized under four heads. (τ) There is the continuous, 
either in general, or especially that which is continuous by 

nature and not by contact nor by artificial union; and of 20 

these, those things have more unity and are prior, whose 
movement? is more indivisible and simpler. (2) That 
which is a: whole and has a certain shape and form is one 
in a still higher degree ; and especially if a thing is of this 
sort by nature, and not by force like the things which are 
unified by glue or nails or by being tied together, i.e. if it 
has in itself something which is the cause of its continuity. 
A thing is of this sort because its movement is one and 
indivisible in place and time; so that evidently if a thing 
has by nature a principle of movement that is of the first kind 
(i.e. local movement) and the first in that kind (i.e. circular 
movement), this is in the primary sense one extended thing. 
The things, then, which are in this way one are either 
continuous ? or whole, and the other things that are one are 

those whose formula is one. Of this sort are the things the 30 

thought of which is one, i.e. those the thought of which is 
indivisible; and it is indivisible if the thing is indivisible in 
kind or in number. (3) In number, then, the individual is 
indivisible, and (4) in kind, that which in intelligibility and in 
knowledge is indivisible, so that that which causes substances 
to be one’ must be one in the primary sense. ‘One,’ then, 

1 Δ. 6. 

2 Nature is defined (Δ. 1015* 13) as ‘the substantial being of the 

things which have a source of movement in themselves gua themselves’. 
8 10528 29 read ἕν ἣ συνεχές. 4 Sc. the form. 

1052" METAPHYSICA 

has all these meanings—the naturally continuous, the whole, 

35 the individual, and the universal. And all these are one 
because in some cases the movement, in others the thought 
or the formula, is indivisible. 

1052 But it must be observed that the questions, what sort of 
things are said to be one, and on the other hand what it 
is to be one and what is the formula of it, should not be 
assumed to be the same. ‘One’ has all these meanings, and 
each of those things to which one of these kinds of unity 

5 belongs will be one; but ‘to be one’ will sometimes mean 
being one of these things, and sometimes something else,! 
which is even nearer to the meaning of the word ‘one’, while 
these other things approximate to its denotation. This is also 
true of ‘element’ or ‘cause’, if one had both to specify 
the things of which it is predicable and to give the definition of 

10 the word. For in a sense fire is an element (and doubtless ‘the 
indefinite’ or something else of the sort is by its own nature 
the element), but in a sense it is not; for it is not the same 
thing to be fire and to be an element, but while as a particular 
thing with a nature of its own fire is an element, the name 
‘element’ means that it has this attribute, that there is 
something which is made of it as a primary constituent. And 

13S0 with ‘cause’ and ‘one’ and all such terms. For this 
reason ‘to be one’ means ‘ to be indivisible (being essentially 
a “this” and capable of existing apart) either in place, 
or in form or thought’; or perhaps ‘to be whole and 
indivisible’; but it means especially ‘to be the first measure 
of a kind’, and above all of quantity ; for it is from this that 

20 it has been extended to the other categories. For measure is 
that by which quantity is known; and quantity gua quantity 
is known either by a ‘one’ or by a nimber, and all number 
is known by a‘one’. Therefore all quantity gua quantity is 
known by the one, and that by which quantities are 
primarily knowr. is the one itself; and so the one is the 
starting-point of number gva number. And hence in the 
other classes too ‘ measure’ means that by which each is first 

25 known, and the measure of each is a unit—in length, in breadth, 

1 Cf, 1052” 18. 

I BOOK X 1052> 

in depth, in weight, in speed. (The words ‘weight’ and 
‘speed’ are common to both contraries!; for each of them 
has two meanings,—‘ weight’ means both that which has 
any amount of gravity and that which has an excess of 
gravity, and ‘speed’ both that which has any amount of 
movement and that which has an excess of movement; for 30 
even the slow has a certain speed and the light a certain 
weight.) 

In all these, then, the measure and starting-point is some- . 
thing one and indivisible, since even in lines we treat as 
indivisible the line a foot long. For everywhere we seek 
as the measure something one and indivisible ; and this is 
that which is simple either in quality or in quantity. Now 35 
where it is thought impossible to take away or to add, there 
the measure is exact. Hence that of number is most exact ; 
for we posit the unit as absolutely indivisible; and in all 1053* 
other cases we imitate this sort of measure. For in the 
case of a furlong or a talent or of anything large any addition 
or subtraction might more easily escape our notice than in 
the case of something smaller; so that the first thing from 5 
which, as far as our perception goes, nothing can be subtracted, 
all men make the measure, whether of liquids or of solids, 
whether of weight or of size; and they think they know the 
quantity when they know it by means of this measure. And 
they know movement too by the simple movement and the 
quickest ; for this occupies least time. And therefore in astro- 
nomy a ‘one’ of this sort is the starting-point and measure 
(for they assume the movement of the heavens to be uniform 10 
and the quickest, and judge the others by reference to it), 
and in music the quarter-tone (because it is the least interval) 
and in speech the letter. And all these are one in this sense 
—not that ‘one’ is something predicable in the same sense of 
all of these, but in the sense we have mentioned. 

But the measure is not always one in number—some- 15 
times there are several ; e.g. the quarter-tones (not to the ear, 
but as determined by the ratios) are two, and the articulate 
sounds by which we measure are more than one, and the 

1 Sc. heavy and light, fast and slow. 

1053" 

20 

METAPHYSICA 

diagonal of the square and its side are measured by two 
quantities, and so are all spatial magnitudes.' Thus, then, 
the one is the measure of all things, because we come to know 
the elements in the substance by dividing the things either 
in respect of quantity or in respect of kind. The one is 
indivisible just because the first of each class of things 
is indivisible. But it is not in the same way that every ‘one’ is. 
indivisible, e.g.a foot and a unit ; the latter is absolutely indi-; 

. visible, while the former? is placed among things which are 

35 

30 

35 

1053° 

undivided in perception, as has been said already,?—only to 
perception, for doubtless every continuous thing is divisible. 

The measure is always homogeneous with the thing 
measured ; the measure of spatial magnitudes is a spatial 
magnitude, and in particular that of length is a length, that 
of breadth a breadth, that of articulate sounds an articulate 
sound, that of weight a weight, that of units a unit. (For 
we must state the matter so, and not say that the measure 
of numbers is a number; we ought indeed to say this if we 
were to use the corresponding form of words, but the supposi- 
tion does not really correspond—it is as if one supposed that 
the measure of units is units, and not a unit, for number is 
a plurality of units.) 

Knowledge also, and perception, we call the measure of 
things, for the same reason, because we know something by 
them,—while as a matter of fact they are measured rather 
than measure other things. But it is with us as if some one 
else measured us and wecame to know how big we are by 
seeing that he applied the cubit-measure a certain number of 
times tous. But Protagoras says ‘ man’ is the measure of all 
things, meaning really ‘the man who knows’ or ‘the man 
who perceives’, and these because they have respectively 
knowledge and perception, which we say are the measures 

1 Alexander thinks this means that a line may be measured either by 
the ideal measure (e. g. the standard yard), or by the particular imperfect 
measure (the yard-wand, which slightly differs from the standard yard). 
This sense does not agree with the context, and perhaps the meaning is 
that as the diagonal and the side are incommensurable they must be 
measured by different units. But what of ‘all spatial magnitudes’? 

2 1053% 23 read τὸ δ᾽ εἰς ἀδιαίρετα πρὸς τὴν αἴσθησιν τίθεται. 

5 Cf. 1052> 33. 

I BOOK X 1053° 

of objects. He is saying nothing, then, while he appears 
to be saying something remarkable. 

Evidently, then, unity in the ‘strictest sense, if we define 
it according to the meaning of the word, is a measure, and 5 
especially of quantity, and secondly of quality. And some 
things will be one if they are indivisible in quantity, and 
others if they are indivisible in quality ; therefore that which 
is one is indivisible, either absolutely or gua one. 

CHAPTER II 

With regard to the substance and nature of the one we must 
ask in which of two ways it exists. This is the very question 10 
that we reviewed! in our discussion of problems, viz. 
what the one is and how we must conceive of it, whether we 
must take the one itself as being a substance (as both the 
Pythagoreans say in earlier and Plato in later times), or 
there is, rather, an underlying nature; and if so, how it is 
to be explained more intelligibly and more in the manner of 
the physical philosophers, of whom one says the one is love, 15 
another says it is air, and another the indefinite.” 

If then no universal can be a substance, as has been said ὃ 
in our discussion of substance and being, and if being 
itself cannot be a substance in the sense of a one apart from 
the many (for it is common to the many), but is only a predi- 
cate, clearly unity also cannot be a substance; for being 2° 
and unity are the most universal of all predicates. Therefore, 
on the one hand, classes are not certain entities and substances 
separable from other things; and on the other hand the one 
cannot be a class, for the same reasons for which being and 
substance cannot be classes. 

Further, this must hold good in all categories alike. Now 25 
‘ being ’ and ‘ unity ’ have an equal number of meanings; so that 
since in the sphere of qualities the one is something definite— 
some entity—and similarly in the sphere of quantities, clearly 

1 B. 10018 4-525. 

2 The three thinkers referred to are Empedocles, Anaximenes, 
Anaximander. 

8 Z. 13. 

AR. MET. O 

1053” METAPHYSICA 

we must also ask in general what unity is, as we must ask 
what being is, since it is not enough to say that its nature is 
just to be unity or being. But in colours the one is a colour, 
e.g. white, if the other colours are observed to be produced 
out of this and black, and if black is the privation of white, 
as darkness of light (for darkness is privation of light). There- 
fore if all existent things were colours, existent things would 
have been a number, indeed, but of what?! Clearly of colours; 
and the ‘one’ would have been a particular ‘one’, e.g. white. 
And similarly if all existent things were tunes, they would 
35 have been a number, but a number of quarter-tones, and 
their essence would not have been number; and the one 
would have been something whose substance was not to be 
_1054* one but to be the quarter-tone. And similarly if all existent 
things had been articulate sounds, they would have been a 
number of letters, and the one would have been a vowel. 
And if all existent things were rectilineal figures, they would 
have been a number of figures, and the one would have been the 
triangle. And the same argument applies to all other classes. 
Since, therefore, while there are numbers and a one both in 
affections and in qualities and in quantities and in movement, 
in all cases the number is a number of particular things and the 
one is one something, and its substance is not to be one, the 
same must be true of substances ; for it is true of all cases alike. 
That the one, then, in every class is a definite thing, and in no 
case is its nature just this—viz. unity, is evident; but as in 
colours the one-itself which we must seek is one colour, so 
too in substance the one-itself is one substance. 

And that in a sense unity means the same as being is 
clear from the fact that it follows being by having just as 
many meanings as there are categories, and is not comprised 
within any category, e.g. neither in substance nor in quality, 
but is related to them just as being is; and from the fact 
that in ‘one man’ nothing more is predicated than in ‘man’, 
just as being is nothing apart from substance or quality or 
quantity ; and 5 to be one is just to be a particular thing. 

oO 

3 

οι 

I 

Oo 

I 

οι 

1 1053” 33 read ὄντα, ἀλλὰ τίνων; 
? 1054* 18 read ποσόν" καὶ τὸ Evi. 

I. BOOK X 1054" 

CHAPTER III 

The one and the many are opposed in several ways, of 20 
which one is the opposition of the one and plurality as indi- 
visible and divisible; for that which is either divided or divi- 
sible is called a plurality, and that which is indivisible or not 
divided is called one. Now since opposition is of four kinds, 
and one of these two terns is privative in meaning, they must 25 
be contraries, and neither contradictory nor correlative in 
meaning.’ And the one gets its meaning and explanation 
from its contrary, the indivisible from the divisible, because 
plurality and the divisible is more perceptible than the indi- 
visible, so that in formula plurality is prior to the indivisible, 
because of the conditions of perception. To the one belong, 
as we indicated graphically in our distinction of the con- 30 
traries,” the same and the like and the equal, and to plurality 
belong the other and the unlike and the unequal. 

‘The same’ has several meanings ; (1) we sometimes mean 
‘the same numerically’; again, (2) we call a thing the same if 
it is one both in formula and in number, e.g. you are one 
with yourself both in form and in matter; and again, (3) if the 35 
formula of its primary essence is one; e.g. equal straight 1054” 
lines are the same, and so are equal and equal-angled quadri- 
laterals ; there are many such, but in these equality consti- 
tutes unity. 

Things are like if, not being absolutely the same, nor 
without difference in their concrete substance, they are the 5 
same in form, e.g. the larger square is like the smaller, 
and unequal straight lines are like; they are like, but not 
absolutely the same. Other things are like, if, having the 
same form, and being things in which difference of degree is 
possible, they have no difference of degree. Other things, if 
they have a quality that is in form or kind one and the same 
—e.g. whiteness—in a greater or less degree, are called like τὸ 
because their form is one. Other things are called like if 

1 Two of the kinds, contrariety and privation, are not mutually ex- 
clusive, for contrariety is the relation between a form and its complete 
privation. Cf. Pr. 1004> 27, I. 1055” 26. 

3 Cf. T. 1004 2, 

O 2 

1054 METAPHYSICA 

the qualities they have in common are more numerous than 
those in which they differ—either the qualities in general or 
the prominent qualities, e.g. tin is like silver, gua white, and 
gold? is like fire, gua yellow and red. 
Evidently, then, ‘other’ and ‘unlike’ also have several 
meanings. And the other in one sense is the opposite of the 
1g same (so that everything is either the same as or other than 
everything else). In another sense things are other unless 
both their matter and their formula are one (so that you are 
other than your neighbour). The other in the third sense is 
exemplified in the objects of mathematics.? ‘Other’ or ‘ the 
same’ can be predicated of everything with regard to every- 
thing else,—but only if the things are one and existent, for the 
λο Other is not the contradictory of the same; which is why it 
is not predicated of non-existent things (while ‘not the same ’ 
7s so predicated). It zs predicated of all exésteng things; for 
if a thing is in its nature both existent and one, it is either 
one or not one with anything else. The other, then, and the 
same are thus opposed. 

But difference is not the same as otherness. For the other 
and that which it is other than need not be other in some 
definite respect (for everything that exists is either other 
or the same), but that which is different from anything 
is different in some respect, so that there must be some- 
thing identical whereby they differ. And this identical thing 
is genus or species; for all things that differ differ either 
in genus or in species,? in genus if the things have not their 
matter in common and are not generated out of each other 
(i.e. if they belong to different figures of predication),* and 
in species if they have the same genus (‘ genus’ meaning that 
which is essentially predicated of both the different things 
alike). And contraries are different, and contrariety is a kind 
of difference. That we are right in this supposition is shown 
by induction. For they are all seen to be different; they are 

35 not merely® other, but some are other in genus, and others 
1055° are in the same line of predication,* and therefore in the same 

qn 

ro) 

3 

1 1054» 12 read ἀργύρῳ ἣ λευκόν, χρυσός. So perhaps Alexander. 
3 Cf. 8 35-> 3. 5 See note on 1057° 36. 
* See note on A. 986° 23. 5 1054» 34 read φαίνεται καὶ ov μόνον. 

I BOOK X 

genus, and the same in genus. We have distinguished! else- 
where what sort of things are the same or other in genus. 

CHAPTER IV 

Since things which differ may differ from one another more 
or less, there is also a greatest difference, and this I call con- 
trariety. That contrariety is the greatest difference is made 
clear by induction. For things which differ in genus have no 
way to one another, but are too far distant and are not com- 
parable ; and for things that differ in speczes the extremes from 
which generation takes place are the contraries; and the 
distance between extremes—and therefore that between the 
contraries—is the greatest. 

But that which is greatest in each class is complete. For 
that is greatest which cannot be exceeded, and that is com- 
plete beyond which nothing can be found. For the complete 
difference marks the end ofa series(just as the other things which 
are called complete are so called because they have attained an 
end), and beyond the end there is nothing ; for in everything 
it is the extreme and includes all else, and therefore there is 
nothing beyond the end, and the complete needs nothing 
further. From this, then, it is clear that contrariety is com- 
plete difference ; and as contraries are so called in several 
senses, their modes of completeness will answer to the various 
modes of contrariety which attach to the contraries. 

This being so, evidently one thing cannot have more than 
one contrary, for neither can there be anything more extreme 
than the extreme, nor can there be more than two extremes 
for the one interval. And in general if contrariety is a differ- 
ence, and if a difference must be between two things, then the 
complete difference must be so too. 

And the other commonly accepted definitions are also 
necessarily true of all contraries. For in each case the com- 
plete difference is the greatest difference. We cannot get 
anything beyond it, whether the things differ in genus or in 
species ; for it has been shown? that there is xo ‘ difference’ 

1A. 9. 
3 Cf. 1054 25-27. But how can we reconcile this with 1054» 27-30, 35? 

1055" 

5 

Io 

1055" METAPHYSICA 

between anything and the things outside its genus; and (1) 
among the things which differ in speczes the complete difference 
is the greatest, and the things in the same genus which differ 
most are contraries ; for the complete difference is the greatest 
difference between species of the same genus. And (2) the 
things in the same receptive material which differ most are con- 
30 trary ; for the matter is the same for contraries. And (3) of 
the things which are dealt with by the same faculty the most 
different are contrary ; for one science deals with one class of 
things, and in these the complete difference is the greatest. 
The primary contrariety is that between positive state and 
privation—not every privation, however (for ‘ privation’ has 
35 several meanings), but that which is complete. And the other 
contraries must be called so with reference to these, some 
because they possess these, others because they produce or tend 
to produce them, others because they are acquisitions or losses 
of these or of other contraries. Now if the kinds of oppo- 
sition are contradiction and privation and contrariety and 
1055” relation, and of these the first is contradiction, and contradic- 
tion admits of no intermediate, while contraries admit of one, 
clearly contradiction and contrariety are not the same. But 
privation is a kind of contradiction ; for what suffers privation, 
either in general or in some determinate way, is either that 
5 which is quite incapable of having some attribute or that which, 
being of such a nature as to have it, has it not; here we 
have already a variety of meanings, which have been dis- 
tinguished ' elsewhere. Privation, therefore, is a contradic- 
tion or incapacity which is determinate or taken along with | 
the receptive material. This is the reason why, while contra- : 
diction does not admit of an intermediate, privation some- 
το times does; for everything is equal or not equal, but not 
everything is equal or unequal, or if it is, it is only within the 
sphere of that which is receptive of equality. If, then, the 
changes which happen to the matter start from the contraries, 
and proceed either from the form and the possession of the 
form or from a privation of the form or shape, clearly all con- 
15 trariety is a privation. But certainly not all privation is 
contrariety, the reason being that that which suffers privation 

1 A, 22. 

I. BOOK X 1055° 

may suffer it in several ways. It is only the extremes from 
which changes proceed that are contraries. 

And this is obvious also by induction. For every contra- 
riety involves, as one! of its terms, a privation. But not all 
cases are alike; inequality is the privation of equality and 
unlikeness of likeness, and on the other hand vice is the priva- 
tion of virtue. But the cases differ as has been said”; in one 20 - 
case we mean simply that the thing suffers privation, in another 
case that it does so at a certain time or in a certain part (e.g. 
at a certain age or in the proper part), or throughout. This is 
why in some cases there is a mean (there are men who are 
neither good nor bad), and in others there is not (a number 
must be either odd or even). Further, some contraries have 25 
their subject defined, others have not.—Therefore it is evident 
that one of the contraries is always privative ; but it is enough 
if this is true of the first—i. e. the generic—contraries, e. g. the 
one and the many ; for the others can be reduced to these. 

CHAPTER V 

Since one thing has one contrary, we might raise the question 30 
how the one is opposed to the many and the equal to the great . 
and the small.—For if? we use the word ‘ whether’ only in an 
antithesis, e.g. ‘whether is it white or black?’, and ‘whether is it 
white or not white?’ (we do not say ‘whether is it a man or 
white δ᾿ unless we are proceeding on a prior assumption and 
asking something analogous to this, ‘whether was it Cleon or 35 
Socrates that came?’ But this is not a zecessary disjunction in 
any class of things. Yet even this is an extension from the case 
of opposites ; for opposites alone cannot be present together ; 
and we assume this incompatibility here in asking which of 
the two came; for if they might both have come, the question 1056° 
_ would have been absurd. But if they might, even so this falls 
just as much into an antithesis—that of the one and the many, 
i.e. ‘whether did both come or one of the two? ’):—if, then, the 
question ‘whether’ is always concerned with opposites, and 

1 1055 18 read θάτερον. 2 1055> 4. 
. 8 1055 32 read εἰ γὰρ τὸ πότερον. 

1056" METAPHYSICA 

5 we can say ‘whether is it greater or less or equal?’ what is 
the opposition between the greater and the less, and the 
equal? The equal is not contrary either to one alone or 
to both; for why should it be contrary to the greater rather 
than to the less? Further, the equal is contrary to the w7- 
equal. Therefore if it is contrary to the greater and the less, 
it will be contrary to more things than one. But if the un- 
equal means the same as both the greater and the less 

10 together, the equal zwz// be opposite to both (and the difficulty 
supports those who say the unequal is a ‘two’ 4), but it follows 
that one thing has two contraries, which is impossible. Again, 
the equal is evidently intermediate between the great and the 
small, but no contrary is either observed to be intermediate, 
nor, from its definition, can be so; for it would not be a per- 
fect contrary if it were intermediate between any two things, 
but rather it always has something intermediate between itself 
and something else. 

1s It remains, then, that it is opposed either as negation or as 
privation. It cannot be opposite to one of the two; for why 
to the great rather than to the small? It is then the privative 
negation of both. Therefore also ‘ whether’ is said with refer- 
ence to both—not to one of the two (e. g. ‘ whether is it greater 
"ΟΥ̓ equal?’ or ‘ whether is it equal or less ?’); there are always 

20 three cases. But it is not a mecessary privation ; for not every- 
thing which is not greater or less is equal, but only the things 
which are of such a nature as to have these attributes. The 
equal, then, is that which is neither great nor small and is 
naturally fitted to be either great or small; and it is opposed 

25 to both as a privative negation (and therefore is also interme- 
diate). And that which is neither good nor bad is opposed 
to both, but has no name (for each of these has several 
meanings and the receptive material is not one); but that 

which is neither white nor black has more claim to a name. — 

Yet even this has not one name, though the colours of which 
this negation is privatively predicated are in a way limited ; 
for they must be either grey or yellow or something else of 
30 the kind. Therefore it is an incorrect criticism that is passed 
by those who think that all such phrases are used in the same 

1 This is a Platonic doctrine; cf. N. 1087" 10. 

I. -BOOK X 

way, so that that which is neither a shoe nor a hand would 
be intermediate between a shoe and a hand, since that which 
is neither good nor bad is intermediate between the good and 
the bad,—as if there must be an intermediate in all cases, 
This result does not necessarily follow. For the combined 
denial of opposites applies when there is an intermediate 
and a certain natural interval; but in the other case there 
is no ‘difference’!; for the things, the denials of which are 
combined, belong to different classes, so that the substratum 
is not one. | 

CHAPTER VI 

We might raise similar questions about the one and the 
many. For if the many are absolutely opposed to the one, 
certain impossible results follow. One will then be few?; for 
the many are opposed also to the few. Further, two will be 
many, since the double is multiple, and ‘ double’ derives its 
meaning from ‘two’; therefore one will be few; for what is 
that in comparison with which two are called many, except 
one, which must therefore be few? For there is nothing 
fewer. Further, if the much? and the little are in plurality 
what the long and the short are in length, and whatever is 
much is also many, and the many are much (unless, indeed, 
there is a difference in the case of an easily-bounded con- 
tinuum) ‘, the little (or few) will be a plurality. Therefore 
one is a plurality, if it is few ; and this must be so, if two are 
many. But perhaps, while the ‘many’ is in a sense said to 
be ‘ much ’, it is with a difference, e.g. water is much but not 
many. | 

But ‘many’ is applied to the things that are divisible; in one 
sense it means a plurality which is excessive either absolutely 
or relatively (while ‘few’ is similarly a plurality which is de- 

1 Cf. 1054 25-27. | 
- 3 The Greek is ὀλίγον ἣ ὀλίγα, which, it might seem, should be trans- 
lated “a little or a few’, But the singular ὀλίγον is used only because of 
the difficulty of predicating the plural ὀλίγα of ‘one’. On the other hand, 
πολύ and πολλά are used in the really distinct senses of ‘much’ and 
‘many’. ὀλίγον has been translated ‘few’.in this chapter except where 

It is opposed to πολύ and must be translated ‘little’. 
5 1056° ro read ἔτι εἰ ὡς. * i.e. a fluid. Cf. I. 16. 

1056" 

35 

1056° 

5 

=~ 

ο 

1056" METAPHYSICA 

ficient), and in another sense it means number, in which sense 
20 alone it is opposed to the one. For we say ‘ one or many ’, 
just as if one were to say ‘one and ones’ or ‘ white thing and 
white things’, or to compare the things that have been 
measured with the measure.’ It is in this sense also that 
multiples are so called. For each number is said to be many 
because it consists of ones and because each number is 
measurable by one; and it is ‘many’ as that which is op- 
25 posed to one, not to the few. 725: this sense, then, even two 
is many—not however in the sense of a plurality which is 
excessive either relatively or absolutely; it is the first 
plurality. But without qualification two is few; for it is 
the first plurality which is deficient. For this reason Anaxa- 
goras was not right in leaving the subject with the statement ? 
that all things were together, boundless both in multitude and 
30 in smallness—where by ‘and in ‘smallness’ he meant ‘and in 
fewness’; for they could not have been boundless in fewness, 
since it is not one, as some say, but two, that make a few. 
The one is opposed then to the many in numbers as measure 
to thing measurable ; and these are opposed as relatives which 
are not from their very nature relative. We have distinguished ὃ 
elsewhere the two senses in which relatives are so called':— 
35 (1) as contraries; (2) as knowledge to thing -known, a term 
1057" being called relative because another is relative to it. There 
is nothing to prevent one from being fewer than something, 
e.g. than two ; for if it is fewer, it is not therefore few. Plu- 
rality is as it were the class to which number belongs; for 
number is plurality measurable by one. And one and number 
,are in a sense opposed, not as contrary, but as we have said 
5 some relative terms are opposed; for inasmuch as one is 
measure and the other measurable, they are opposed. This 
is why not everything that is one is a number, 1.e. if the thing 
is indivisible it is not a number. But though knowledge is 
similarly spoken of as related to the knowable, the relation does 
not work out similarly, for while knowledge might be thought 
10 to be the measure, and the knowable the thing measured, the 
fact is that all knowledge is knowable, but not all that is know- 

1 1056 22 omit καὶ τὸ μετρητόν. Fr. 1, Diels, Vorsokratiker. 
8 Δ. 10218 26, 

I. BOOK X 

able is knowledge, because in a sense knowledge is measured 
by the knowable.—Plurality is contrary neither to the few 
(the many being contrary to this as excessive plurality to plu- 
rality exceeded), nor to the one in every sense ; but in one sense 
they are contrary, as has been said, because the former is 
divisible and the latter indivisible, while in another sense they 
are relative (as knowledge is to knowable), if plurality is 
number and the one is measure. 

CHAPTER VII 

Since contraries admit of an intermediate and in some cases 
have it, the intermediate must be composed of the contraries. 
For (1) all intermediates are in the same genus as the things 
between which they stand. For we call those things interme- 
diates, into which that which changes must change first ; 
e.g. if we were to pass from the highest string to the lowest 
by the shortest way, we should come sooner to the interme- 
diate notes, and in colours if we are to pass from white to 
black, we shall come sooner to crimson and gray than to 
black ; and similarly in all other cases. But to pass from one 
genus to another genus (e. g. from colour to figure) is not pos- 
sible except in an incidental way. Intermediates, then, must 
be in the same genus as one another and as the things they 
stand between. 

But (2) all intermediates stand between opposites of some 
kind ; for only between these can change take place in virtue 
of their own nature. Therefore an intermediate is impossible 
between things which are not opposite ; for then there would be 
change which was not from one opposite towards the other. 
Among opposites, contradictories admit of no middle term; for 
contradiction is this—an opposition, one or other side of which 
must attach to anything whatever, i.e. which has no interme- 
diate. Of other opposites, some are relative, others privative, 
others contrary. Of relative terms, those which are not con- 
trary have no intermediate. The reason is that they are not 
in the same genus. For what intermediate could there be 
between knowledge and knowable? But between great and 
small there zs one. 

1057 

30 

35 

1057” 

1057° METAPHYSICA 

(3) If intermediates are in the same genus, as has been shown, 
and stand between contraries, they must be composed of these 
contraries. For either there will be a genus including the con- 
traries or there will be none. And if (a) there is a genus in 

5 such a way that it is something prior to the contraries, the 
differentiae which constitute the contrary species of the genus 
will be contraries prior to the species; for species are com- 
posed of the genus and the differentiae. E.g. if white and 
black are contraries, and one is a piercing colour and the other 
a compressing colour,! these differentiae— piercing’ and 

10 ‘ compressing ’—are prior ; so that these are prior contraries of 
one another (though indeed the species which differ by con- 
trariety are more truly contrary”). And the other species, 
i.e. the intermediates, must be composed of their genus and 
their differentiae. E.g. all colours which are between white 
and black must be said to be composed of the genus (i.e. 
15 colour) and certain differentiae. But these differentiae will 
not be the primary contraries ; otherwise every colour would 
be either white or black. They are different, then, from the 
primary contraries; and therefore they will be between the 
primary contraries; the primary differentiae are ‘piercing’ 
and ‘compressing’. Therefore it is (6) with regard to these 
contraries which do not fall within a genus that we must first 
10 ask of what their intermediates are composed. (For things 
which ave in the same genus must be composed of terms in 
which the genus is not an element, or else be themselves 
incomposite.*) Now contraries do not involve one another in 
their composition, and are therefore first principles; but the 

1 Cf. Pl. Zim. 67 E ff. 

3 This very difficult clause seems to mean that the species are more 
properly contraries than the differentiae. Of the differentiae one is 
obviously just the negation of the other, and they might be regarded as 
ἕξις and στέρησις ; but each of the species has a positive nature of its own, 
and is a true ἐναντίον. 

8 Aristotle has first (εἰ μέν, 1. 4) considered the case of contraries in 
a genus, and shown that they involve prior contraries which are not in the 
genus, but when added to the genus constitute its species. These are 
the primary contraries, and it is primarily of them that we must ask, 
Of what are their intermediates composed? The sentence, Il. 20-22, in 
which he reverts to contraries in a genus must be parenthetical. A species 
in a genus must either contain an element (sc. the differentia) which does 
not itself contain the genus, or (which is incompatible with its being 
a species) be an unanalysable term. 

I BOOK X 1057” 

intermediates are either all incomposite, or none of them. 
But there is something compounded out of the contraries, 
which is such that there can be a change from a contrary to it 
sooner than to the other contrary ; for it will have less of the 25 
quality in question than the one contrary and more than 
the other. This also,' then, will come between the contraries. 
All the other intermediates also, therefore, are composite; for 
‘that which has more of a quality than one thing and less than 
another is compounded somehow out of the things than which 

it is said to have more and less respectively of the quality. And 
since there are no other things prior to the contraries and homo- 
geneous with the intermediates, all intermediates must be com- 30 
pounded out of the contraries. Therefore all the inferior classes, 
both the contraries and their intermediates, will be compounded 
out of the primary contraries.? Clearly, then, intermediates are 
(1)all in the same genus and (2)intermediate between contraries 
and (3) compounded out of the contraries. 

CHAPTER VIII 

That which is other in species is other than something in 35 
something, and this must belong to both’; e.g. if it is an 
animal other in species, both are animals. The things, then, 
which are other in species must be in the same genus. For by 
genus I mean that one identical thing which is predicated of 

1 i.e. this intermediate differentia comes between the extreme 
differentiae, as the intermediate species comes between the extreme 
species. 

3 This seems to mean that each extreme as well as each intermediate 
species is compounded out of both the extreme differentiae. E.g. white 
would have to be to some extent ‘compressing’ as well as ‘piercing’. 
But this 15 not in itself a likely doctrine, and it can hardly be said to be 
proved in the present passage; the meaning probably is that each 
extreme species contains ove differentia as a logical element, the other 
element being the genus; while each intermediate contains both the 
differentiae. 

* It might seem that the respect in which things differ is just what 
does not belong to both. But Aristotle’s meaning is this: If A differs 
from 2), it must be a different something, and this something is the genus 
common to both. Horse and man are different aztma/s. And when two 
things differ in their essence, they differ just in that in which (in another 
sense of ‘in’) they agree. Difference in a genus makes the genus itself 
other (1058 7-8). Cf. 1054> 25-28. 

1058" 

I 

Ia 

5 

ο 

ω 

ο 

METAPHYSICA 

both and is differentiated in no merely accidental way, whether 
conceived as matter or otherwise. For not only must the 
common nature attach to the different things, e.g. not only 
must both be animals, but this very animality must also be 
different for each (e.g. in the one case equinity, in the other 
humanity), and therefore this common nature is specifically 
different for the two things. One then will be in virtue of its 
own nature one sort of animal, and the other another, e. g. one 
a horse and the other a man. This difference then must be 
an otherness of the genus. For I give the name of ‘difference 
in the genus’ to an otherness which makes the genus itself 
other. 

This, then, will be a contrariety (as can be shown also by 
induction). For all things are divided by opposites, and it has 
been proved that contraries are in the same genus!. For con- 
trariety was seen” to be complete difference ; and every differ- 
ence in species is a difference from something 22 something ; 
so that this is the same for both and is their genus. (Hence 
also all contraries which are different in species and not in 
genus are in the same line of predication,® and other than 
one another in the highest degree—for the difference is com- 
plete—, and cannot be present along with one another.) The 
difference, then, is a contrariety. 

This, then, is the meaning of calling two things other in 
species—that they are contrary, being in the same genus and 
being indivisible* (and those things arethe same in species, which 
have no contrariety, being indivisible®); we say ‘ being indi- 
visible’, for in the process of division contrarieties arise even in 
the intermediate stages before we come to the indivisibles.‘ 
Evidently, therefore, with reference to that which is called the 
genus, none of the species which belong to ® the genus is either 
the same as it or other than it in species (for the matter is 
indicated by negation,” and the genus is the matter of that of 
which it is called the genus, not in the sense in which we 
speak of the genus or family of the Heraclidae, but in that in 

Ch. iv. 2 τοῦδ 16. . 
3 Cf. 1054> 35 and note on A. 986® 23. 4 Sc. infimae species. 
5 Sc. individuals. © 10589 23 read προσηκόντων. 

7 i.e. by eliminating the form which characterizes the concrete thing. 

I. BOOK X 1058" 

which we speak of a genus in nature’), nor is it so with refer- 25 
ence to things which are not in the same genus, but it will 
differ in genus from them, and in species from things in the 
same genus. For the difference between things which differ 
in species must be a contrariety ; and this belongs only to 
things in the same genus. 

CHAPTER IX 

One might raise the question, why woman does not differ 
from man in species, female and male being contrary, and 30 
their difference being a contrariety ; and why a female and a 
male animal are not different in species, though this difference 
belongs to animal in virtue of its own nature, and not as 
whiteness or blackness does; both ‘female’ and ‘male’ belong 
to it gua animal. This question is almost the same as the 
other, why one contrariety makes things different in species 
and another does not, e.g. ‘with feet’ and ‘with wings’ do, 35 
but whiteness and blackness do not. Perhaps it is because the 
former are modifications peculiar to the genus, and the latter are 
less so. And since one element is formula and one is matter, 
contrarieties which are in the formula make a difference in 1058 
species, but those which are in the concrete material thing do 
not make one. Therefore whiteness in a man, or blackness, 
does not make one, nor is there a difference in species between 
the white man and the black man, not even if each of them be 
denoted by one word. For ‘man’ plays the part of matter, 5 
and matter does not create a difference ; for it does not make 
individual men species of man, though the flesh and the bones 
of which this man and that man consist are other. The con- 
crete thing is other, but not other in species, because in the 
formula there is no contrariety, and man is the ultimate indi- 
visible kind. Callias is formula + matter ; ‘white man’, then, 10 
is so also, because it is the individual Callias that is white; 
‘man’, then, is white only incidentally. Nor do a brazen: 
and a? wooden circle differ in species ; and if a brazen triangle 
and a wooden circle differ in species, it is not because of the 

1 Cf. A. 28. 2 10589 13 read καὶ ξύλινος, οὐδέ. 

1058" METAPHYSICA 

15 Matter, but because there is a contrariety in the formula. But 
does the matter not make things other in species, when it is 
other in a certain way, or is there a sense in which it does? 
For why is this horse other than this man in species, although 
their matter is included with their formulae? Doubtless 
because there is a contrariety in the formula. For while there 
is a contrariety also between white man and black horse, 

20 and it is a contrariety in species, it does not depend on the 
whiteness of the one and the blackness of the other, since even 
if both had been white, yet they would have been other in 
species. And male and female are indeed modifications peculiar 
to ‘animal’, not however in virtue of its essence but in the 
matter, i.e. the body. This is why the same seed becomes 
female or male by being acted on in a certain way. We have 
stated, then, what it is to be other in species, and why some 

25 things differ in species and others do not. 

CHAPTER X 

Since contraries are other in form, and the perishable and 
the imperishable are contraries (for privation is a deter- 
minate incapacity’), the perishable and the imperishable must 
be different in kind.? 

Now so far we have spoken of the general terms themselves, 

30 80 that it might be thought not to be necessary that every 
imperishable thing should be different from every perishable 
thing in form, just as not every white thing is different in 
form from every black thing. For the same thing can be 
both, even at the same time if it is a universal (e.g. man 
can be both white and black), and if it is an individual it can 

1 1058> 27 read ἀδυναμία διωρισμένη. 

3 To translate γένος and εἶδος as ‘ genus’ and ‘ species’ makes nonsense 
of the argument of this chapter. They. have therefore been rendered 
‘kind’ and ‘form’. The only trace of the technical distinction is found 
in the last sentence of the chapter, and there it is not justified by what 
precedes. It looks as if the first part of the chapter had been written 
before the distinction was drawn, and Il. 10-14 (or perhaps only 1. 14) 
added under the supposition that a generic difference between the perish- 
able and the imperishable had been proved. For the absence of dis- 
tinction between γένος and εἶδος cf. 10715 25 with 27, Cat. 8527 with 9514, 
Hist. An. i. 490° 16 with 17, Pol. iv. 1290 33 with 36. To read εἴδει in 
1058 28 is useless in view of 1059* 10-14. 

1, BOOK X 1058° 

still be both; for the same man can be, though not at the 
same time, white and black. Yet white is contrary to black. 3: 

But while some contraries belong to certain things by 
accident (e.g. those now mentioned and many others), others 
cannot, and among these are both ‘ perishable’ and ‘ imperish- 
able’. For nothing is by accident perishable. What is acci- 1059* 
dental is capable of not being present, but perishableness 
is one of the attributes that belong of necessity to the things 
to which they belong; or else one and the same thing may be 
perishable and imperishable, if perishableness is capable of 5 
not belonging to it. Perishableness then must either be the 
essence or be present in the essence of each perishable thing. 
The same account holds good for imperishableness also; for 
both are attributes which are present of necessity. The 
characteristics, then, in respect of which and in direct conse- 
quence of which one thing is perishable and another imperish- 
able, are opposite, so that the things must be different 
in kind. 

Evidently, then, there cannot be Forms such as some ro 
maintain, for then one man! would be perishable and another ? 
imperishable. Yet the Forms are said to be the same in 
form with the individuals and not merely to have the same 
name ; but things which differ in kind ὃ are further apart than 
those which differ in form. 

1 The sensible individual. 2 The ideal man. 
§ As the perishable and the imperishable have been shown to do. 

AR. MET. Pp 

BOOK XI (kK) 

CHAPTER I 

THAT Wisdom is a science of first principles, is evident 
from the introductory chapters! in which we have raised 
objections to the statements of others about the first 

a0 principles ; but one might ask the question whether Wisdom 
is to be conceived as one science or as several. If as one, 
it may be objected that one science always deals with 
contraries, but the first principles are not contrary. If it 
is not one, what are these sciences with which it is to be 
identified ? 3 

Further, is it the business of one science or of more to 
examine the first principles of demonstration? If of one, 

25 Why of this rather than of any other? If of more, which 
must these be said to be? ὃ 

Further, does philosophy investigate all substances or not? 
If not all, it is hard to say which; but if, being one, it 
investigates them all, it is doubtful how the same science can 
embrace several subject-matters.‘ 

Further, does it deal with substances only or also with 

20 their accidents? If in the case of attributes demonstration is 
possible, in that of substances it is not. But if the two 
sciences are different, what is each of them and which is 
Wisdom? If we think of it as demonstrative, the science of 
the accidents is Wisdom, but if as dealing with first principles, 
the science of substances claims the title.® 

But again the science we are looking for must not be 
supposed to deal with the causes which have been mentioned 

35 in the Phystcs® For (1) it does not deal’ with the final 
cause (for this is the good, and this is found in the field of 
action and movement; and it is the first mover—for that 

1 Cf. Bk. A. 2 Cf. B. 996% 18-5 26. 

5 Cf. B. 996° 26- 997° 15. ‘ Cf. B. 997" 15-25. 

δ 1059* 32 read ἡ ἢ μὲν γὰρ ἀποδεικτική, σοφία ἡ περὶ τὰ συμβεβηκότα, ἣ δὲ 
περὶ τὰ πρῶτα, ἡ τῶν οὐσιῶν. Cf. B. 9078 25--34. 

δ᾽ The material, formal, efficient, and final causes (PAys. ii. 3). 
7 1059 35 read οὔτε. 

K. BOOK XI 1059 

is the nature of the end—but in the case of things unmov- 
able there is no first mover),! and (2) in general it is hard to 
say whether the science we are now looking for deals with 
perceptible substances or not with them, but with certain 1059? 
others. If (2) with others, it must deal either with the Forms 
or with the objects of mathematics. Now (i) evidently the 
Forms do not exist. (But it is hard to say, even if one suppose 
them to exist, why the same is not true of the other things 
of which there are Forms, as of the objects of mathematics. 5 
1 mean that the Platonists place the objects of mathematics 
between the Forms and perceptible things, as a third class 
of things besides the Forms and the things in this world ; but 
there is not a third man or horse besides the ideal and the 
individuals. If on the other hand it is not as they say, with 
what sort of things must the mathematician be supposed 
to deal? Certainly not with the things in this world ; for none ro 
of these is the sort of thing which the mathematical sciences 
inquire into.) Nor (ii) does the science which we are now 
seeking treat of the objects of mathematics ; for none of them 
can exist separately. But again (4) it does not deal with 
perceptible substances; for they are perishable. 

In general we might raise the question, to which science it 
belongs to discuss the difficulties about the matter of the 15 
objects of mathematics. Neither to physics (because the 
whole inquiry of the physicist is about the things that have in 
themselves a principle of movement and rest), nor yet to the: 
science which inquires into demonstration and science; for 
this is just the subject which 12 investigates. It remains 20 
then that it is the philosophy which we have set before 
ourselves that treats of those subjects.” 

One might discuss the question whether the science we are 
seeking should be said to deal with the principles which are 
by some called elements. All men suppose these to be 
present in concrete things; but it might be thought that 
the science we seek should treat rather of wmiversals; for 25 
every formula and every science is of universals and not 
of zujimae species,® so that as far as this goes it would deal 
with the highest classes. These would be being and unity ; 

1 Cf. B. 996% 21-1. =? Cf. B. 997% 34-9989 119. ὃ Cf. B. 998" 15. 

P 2 

RE EE IO ee eee 

1059” METAPHYSICA 

for these might most of all be supposed to contain all 
things that are, and to be most like principles because 
3o they are first by nature; for if they perish all other things are 
destroyed with them; for all things ave and are one. But 
inasmuch as, if one is to suppose them to be genera, they 
must be genera predicable of their differentiae, and no genus is 
predicable of any of its differentiae, in this way it would seem 
that we should not make them genera nor principles. Further, 
35 if the simpler is more of a principle than the less simple, and 
the ultimate members of the genus are simpler than the 
genus (for they are indivisible, but the genera are divided 
into many and differing species), the species might seem to be 
the principles, rather than the genera. But inasmuch as the 
species are involved in the destruction of the genera, the 
genera are more like principles; for that which involves 
1060° another in its destruction is a principle of it! These and 
others of the kind are the subjects that involve difficulties. 

CHAPTER II 

Further, must we suppose something apart from indvidual 
things, or is it these that the science we are seeking treats 
of? The objection to the latter view is that the individuals 

5 are infinite in number.” But the things that are apart from 
the individuals are genera or species; and the science we 
now seek treats of neither of these. The reason why this 
is impossible has been stated.? It is in general hard to say 
whether one must assume that there is a separable substance 
besides the sensible substances (i.e. the substances in this world), 
or that these are the real things and philosophy is concerned 

το with them. For we seem to seek another kind of substance, 
and this is our problem, i.e. to see if there is something which 
can exist apart by itself and belongs to no sensible thing.— 
Further, if there is another substance apart from and corre- 
sponding to sensible substances, which kinds of sensible 
substance must be supposed to have this corresponding to 

15 them? Why should one suppose men or horses to have it, 

1 Cf. B. 998 20-999® 23. 

2. 10608 4 Alexander reads φθαρτά for ἄπειρα, and this may be right. 
3 1059” 21-1060% I. 

K. BOOK XI 10608 

and not the other animals or even all lifeless things? On 
the other hand to set up other and eternal substances equal 
in number to the sensible and perishable substances would 
seem to fall beyond the bounds of probability.—But if the 
principle we now seek is not separable from corporeal things, 
what has a better claim to the name than matter? This, 20 
however, does not exist in actuality, but exists in potency, 
and it would seem rather that the form or shape is a more 
important principle than this; but the form is perishable,! so 
that there is no eternal substance at all which can exist apart 
and independent. But this is paradoxical ; for such a prin- 
ciple and substance seems to exist and is sought by nearly all 35 
the best thinkers as something that exists ; for how is there 
to be order unless there is something eternal and independent 
and permanent ἡ 2 

Further, if there is a substance or principle of such a nature 
as that which we are now seeking, and if this is one for all 
things, and the same for eternal and for perishable things, it 
is hard to say why, if there is the same principle, some of the 3° 
things that fall under the principle are eternal, and others are 
not eternal ; this is paradoxical. But if there is one principle 
of perishable and another of eternal things, we shall be in a 
like difficulty if the principle of perishable things, as well as 
that of eternal, is eternal ; for why, if the principle is eternal, 
are not the things that fall under the principle also eternal ? 
But if it is perishable it must have another principle, and 
that must have yet another, and this will go on to infinity.? 35 

If on the other hand we set up what are thought to be the 
most unchangeable principles, being and unity, firstly, if 
each of these does not indicate a ‘ this’ and a substance, how 1060° 
will they be separable and independent? Yet we expect the 
eternal and primary principles to be so. But if each of them 
does signify a ‘this’ and a substance, all things that are are 
substances ; for being is predicated of all things (and unity 5 
also of some); but that all things that are are substance is false. 
Further, how can they be right who say that the first principle 

1 It must be remembered that A. is only stating common opinions and 

the consequent difficulties. 
Cf. B. 999% 24-9 24. 3 Cf. B. 10008 5-1001 3. 

1060" METAPHYSICA 

is unity and this is substance, and generate number as 
the first product from unity and from matter, and assert 
1o that number is substance? How are we to think of ‘two’, 
and each of the other numbers composed of units, as one? 
On this point neither do they say anything nor is it easy 
to say anything. But if we suppose lines or what comes 
after these (I mean the primary plane figures) to be 
principles, these at least are not separable substances, but 
sections and divisions—the former of surfaces, the latter of 
15 solids (while points are sections and divisions of lines); and 
further they are limits of these same things ; and all these are 
in other things and none is separable. Further, how are we 
to suppose that there is a substance of unity and the point ? 
Every substance comes into being by a gradual process, but 
the point does not ; for the point is a division.! 
a0 ~=s AA furrther difficulty is raised by the fact that all knowledge 
is of universals and of the ‘such’, but substance does not 
belong to universals, but is rather a ‘ this ’"—a separable thing, 
so that if there is knowledge about the first principles, the 
question arises, how are we to suppose the first principle to 
be substance ὃ 3 
Further, is there anything apart from the concrete thing 
(by which I mean the matter and that which is joined with 
25 matter), or not? If not, we are met by the objection that 
all things that are in matter are perishable. But if there 
7s something, it must be the form or shape. It is hard 
to determine in which cases this exists apart and in which 
it does not; for in some cases the form is evidently not 
separable, e. g. in the case of a house.® 
Further, are the principles the same in kind or in number ? 
30 If in number, all things will be the same.‘ 

CHAPTER III 

Since the science of the philosopher treats of being gua 
being universally and not of some part of it, and ‘being’ has 

1 Cf. B. 1001* 4-1002° 11. 2 Cf. B. 1003* 5-17. 
ὃ Cf. B. 999 15-20, 1002” 12-32. * Cf. B. 999° 24-1000° 4. 

K. BOOK XI 1060° 

many senses and is not used in one only, it follows that if it 

is used equivocally and in virtue of no common nature, it does 

not fall under one science (for there is no one class in the 

case of equivocal terms); but if it is used in virtue of some 35 
common nature, it will fall under one science. The term seems 

to be used in the way we have mentioned, like ‘medical’ and 
‘healthy ’. For each of these also we use in many senses ; and 1061° 
each is used in this way because the former refers somehow 
to medical science and the latter to health. Other terms 
refer to other central concepts, but each term refers to one 
identical concept. For a prescription and a knife are called 
medical because the former proceeds from medical science, 
and the latter is useful to it. And a thing is called healthy 
in the same way ; one thing because it is indicative of health, 
another because it is productive of it. And the same is true 
in the other cases. Everything that is, then, is said to ‘be’ in 
this same way ; each thing is said to ‘ be’ because it is a modi- 
fication of being gua being or a permanent or a transient state 
or a movement of it, or something else of the sort. And since 10 
everything that is may be referred to some one common 
nature, each of the contrarieties also may be referred to the 
first differences and contrarieties of being, whether the first 
differences of being are plurality and unity or likeness and 
unlikeness, or some other differences; let these be taken as 
already discussed. It makes no difference whether that 15 
which is be referred to being or to unity. For even if they 
are not the same but different, they are convertible; for that 
which is one is also somehow being, and that which is being is 
one.—But as every pair of contraries falls to be examined by 
one and the same science, and in each pair one term is the 
privation of the other (though one might regarding some con- 20 
traries raise the question, how they can be privatively related, 
viz. those which have an intermediate, e.g. unjust and just ; 
in all such cases one must maintain that the privation is not 
of the whole definition, but of its extreme form; e.g. if the 
just man is ‘ by virtue of some permanent disposition obedient 
to the laws’, the unjust man need not have the whole defini- 25 
tion denied of him, but will be ‘in some respect deficient in 
obedience to the laws’, and in this respect the privation will 

σι 

1061" METAPHYSICA 

attach to him ; and similarly in all other cases); and since, as 
the mathematician investigates abstractions (for in his investi- 
30 gation he eliminates all the sensible qualities, e.g. weight and 
lightness, hardness and its contrary, and also heat and cold 
and the other sensible contrarieties, and leaves only the 
quantitative and continuous, sometimes in one, sometimes in 
two, sometimes in three dimensions, and the attributes of 
35 things gua quantitative and continuous, and does not consider 
them in any other respect, and examines the relative positions 
of some and the consequences of these, and the commensur- 
1061" ability and incommensurability of others, and the ratios of. 
others ; but yet we say there is one and the same science of 
all these things—geometry), the same is true with regard to 
being (for the attributes of this in so far as it is being, and the 
5 contrarieties in it gua being, it is the business of no other 
science than philosophy to investigate ; for to physics one would 
assign the study of things not gua being, but rather gua sharing 
in movement; while dzalectic and sophistic deal with the attri- 
butes of things that are, but not of things gua being, and not 
10 with being itself in so far as it is being) ;—therefore it remains 
that the philosopher studies the things we have named, in so 
far as they are being. Since all that is is said to ‘be’ in 
virtue of one common character though the term has many 
meanings, and contraries are in the same case (for they are 
referred to the first contrarieties and differences of being), 
1g and things of this sort can fall under one science, the difficulty 
we stated at the beginning! is solved —I mean the question 
how there can be one science of things which are many and 
different in genus. 

CHAPTER IV 

Since even the mathematician uses the common axioms only 

in a special application, it must be the business of first philo- 
ao sophy to examine the principles of mathematics also. That 
when equals are taken from equals the remainders are equal, 

is common to all quantities, but mathematics marks off a part 

1 10598 20-23. Cf.I.1, 2. The question raised in 1059* 29-34 has 
also incidentally been answered. 

K. BOOK XI 1061" 

of its proper matter and studies it separately, e.g. lines or 
angles or numbers or some other kind of quantity—not, how- 
ever, gua being but in so far as each of them is continuous in 
one or two or three dimensions; but philosophy does not 25 
inquire about particular subjects in so far as each of them 
has such and such attributes, but considers each subject 
in relation to being gua being—Physics is in the same 
position as mathematics; for physics studies the attributes 
and the principles of the things that are, gva moving and not 
gua being, whereas the primary science, we have said, deals 30 
with these, only in so far as the underlying subjects are 
existent, and not in virtue of any other character. Therefore 
both physics and mathematics must be regarded as parts of 
Wisdom.? 

CHAPTER V 

There is a principle in things, about which we cannot be 
deceived, but must always, on the contrary, recognize the truth, 35 
—viz. that the same thing cannot at one and the same time be 
and not be, or admit any other similar pair of opposites. About 1062" 
such matters there is no proof in the full sense, though there 
is proof ad hominem. For it is not possible to infer this truth 
itself from a more certain principle, yet this is necessary if 
there is to be proof of it in the full sense.2_ But he who wants 5 
to prove to the asserter of opposites that he is wrong must get 
from him an admission which shall de identical with the prin- 
ciple that the same thing cannot both be and not be at one and 
the same time, but shall not seem to be identical: for thus 
alone can he demonstrate his thesis to the man who says that 
opposite statements can be truly made about the same sub- 10 
ject. Those, then, who are to join in argument with one 
another must to some extent understand one another; for if 
this does not happen how caz they join in argument with one 
another? Therefore every word must be intelligible and sig- 
nify something, and not many things but only one; and if it 15 
signifies more than one thing, it must be made plain to which of 
these the word is being applied. He, then, who says this ‘is’ 

1 Cf. T. 10058 19-5 5, K. 10598 23-26. 
2 Cf. I. 1006 5-18. 

1062* METAPHYSICA 

and ‘is not’ denies what he afhirms, so that what the word 
signifies, he says it does not signify; and this is impossible. 
Therefore if ‘this is’ signifies something, one cannot truly 
assert the contradictory predicate of the same subject.’ 
a0 Further, if the word signifies something and this can be 
truly asserted of it, this connexion must be necessary; and 
it is not possible that that which is necessary should ever not 
be; it is not possible therefore to make the opposed assertions 
truly of the same subject.” Further, if the affirmation is no 
more true than the negation, he who says ‘man’ will be no 
25 more right than he who says ‘not-man’. It would seem also 
that in saying the man is not a horse we should be either more 
or not less right than in saying he is not a man, so that (on 
the view we are opposing) we shall be right in saying that the 
same person zs a horse; for it was assumed to be possible to 
make opposite statements equally truly. It follows then that 
the same person is a man and a horse, or any other animal.® 
30 While, then, there is no proof of the axiom in the full sense, 
there is a proof which may suffice for one who will make these 
suppositions. And perhaps if we had questioned Heraclitus 
himself in this way we might have forced him to confess that 
opposite statements can never be true of the same subjects. 
35 But, as it is, he adopted his opinion without understanding 
what his statement involved.* But in any case if what is said 
1062” by him is true, not even this itself is true—viz. that the same 
thing can at one and the same time both be and not be. For 
as, when the statements are separated, the affirmation is no 
more true than the negation, in the same way—the complex 
5 statement being like one affirmation—its negation will be no 
less 5 true than the whole taken as an affirmation.® Further, 
if it is not possible to affirm anything truly, this itself will be 
false—the assertion that there is no true affirmation. But if 
a true affirmation exists, this appears to refute what is said by 
το those who raise such objections and utterly destroy rational 
discourse.’ 
1 Cf. I. 1006 18-1007%20. 
5 Cf. I. 1007” 18-10088 2. 

5 1062” 6 read οὐδὲν ἧττον ἡ ἀπόφασις. 
7 Cf. I. 1012° 13-18. 

Cf. T. 1006 28-34. 
Cf. I. 1005 23-26. 
Cf. Γ. 1008* 4-7. 

2 
4 
6 

K. BOOK XI 1062 

CHAPTER VI 

The saying of Protagoras is like the views we have men- 
tioned; he said that man is the measure of all things, meaning 
simply that that which seems to each man assuredly is. If 15 
this is so, it follows that the same thing both is and is not, and 
is bad and good, and that the contents of all other opposite 
statements are true, because often a particular thing appears 
beautiful to some and ugly to others, and that which appears to 
each man is the measure. This difficulty may be solved by 20 
considering the source of the opinion. It seems to have arisen 
in some cases from the doctrine of the natural philosophers, 
and in others from the fact that all men have not the same 
views about the same things, but a particular thing appears 
pleasant to some and the contrary of pleasant to others.’ 

That nothing comes to be out of that which is not, but 
everything out of that which is, is a doctrine common to 25 
nearly all the natural philosophers. Since, then, a thing can 
become not-white, having been perfectly white and in no 
respect not-white, that which becomes not-white must come 
from that which is not -not-white?; so that a thing must come 
to be out of that which is not (so they argue), unless the same 
thing was at the beginning both not-white and white. But it is 30 
not hard to solve this difficulty ; for we have said in our works 
on physics? in what sense things that come to be come to be 
from that which is not, and in what sense from that which is.* 

But to lend oneself equally to the opinions and the fancies 
of disputing parties is foolish; for clearly one of them must be 
mistaken. And this is evident from what happens in sensa- 35 
tion; for the same thing never appears sweet to some and 
bitter to others, unless in the one case the sense-organ which 1063* 
discriminates the aforesaid flavours has been perverted and 
injured. And if this is so the one party must be taken to be 
the measure, and the other must not. And I say the same of 5 
good and bad, and beautiful and ugly, and all other such 
qualities. For to maintain the view we are opposing is just like 

1 Cf. I. 1009 6-16, 22-30. 3 1062) 28 read ἐκ μὴ ὄντος μὴ λευκοῦ. 
8 Phys. i. 8, De Gen. ef Corr. i. 317° 14. ‘ cf I. 1009® 30-36. 

1063" METAPHYSICA 

maintaining the truth of what appears to people who put their 
finger under their eye and make the object appear two instead 
of one, i.e. like saying that it is two (because it appears to be 

το of that number) and again one (for to those who do not inter- 
fere with their eye the one object appears one). 

In general, it is absurd to make the fact that the things of 
this earth are observed to change and never to remain in the 
same state, the basis of our judgements about the truth. For 
in pursuing the truth one must start from the things that are 

15 always in the same state and suffer no change. Such are the 
heavenly bodies ; for these do not appear to be now of one 
nature and again of another, but are manifestly always the 
same and share in no change.” 

Further, if there is movement, and something moved, and 
everything is moved out of something and into something, it 
follows that that which is moved must first be in that out of 

20 which it is to be moved, and then not be in it, and move into 
the other and come to be in it; but it follows that the con- 
tradictory statements are not true at the same time, as our 
opponents assert they are.® 

And if the things of this earth continuously flow and move in 
respect of quantity—if one were to suppose this, although it is 
not true—why should they not endure in respect of quality? 
For the assertion of contradictory statements about the same 

25 thing seems to have arisen largely from the belief that the 
quantity of bodies does not endure, which, our opponents 
hold, justifies them in saying that the same thing both is 
and is not four cubits long. But the essence depends on 
quality, and this is of determinate nature, though quantity 
is indeterminate.* 

Further, when the doctor orders people to take some par- 

30 ticular food, why do they take it? It is hard to see in what 
respect ‘this is bread’ is truer than ‘this is not bread’; so 
that it would make no difference whether one ate or not. But 
as a matter of fact they take the food which is offered, 
assuming that they know the truth about it and that it is 

1 Cf. Fr. 1or0> 1-26, 1ΟΙ18 31-9 1. 2 Cf. I. 1010% 25-32. 
8 1063® 21 read αὐτούς. Cf. T. 10108 35-5 1. 
* Cf. I. Lolo*® 22-25. 

K. BOOK XI 1063° 

bread. Yet they should not, if there were no fixed constant 
nature in sensible things, but all moved and flowed for ever." 

Again, if we are always changing and never remain the 35 
same, what wonder is it if to us, as to the sick, things never 
appear the same? For to them also, because they are not in 1063> 
the same condition as when they were well, sensible qualities 
do not appear alike; yet, for all that, the sensible things them- 
selves need not share in any change, though they produce 
different, and not identical, sensations in the sick. And the 5 
same must surely happen to the healthy if the aforesaid? change 
takes place. But if we do not change but remain the same, 
there will be something that endures.? 

As for those to whom these difficulties are suggested by the 
supposed necessity of a reason for everything, it is not easy 
to solve the difficulties to their satisfaction, unless they will 
posit something and no longer demand a reason for it ; for it 10 
is only thus that all reasoning and all proof is accomplished ;.. 
if they posit nothing, they destroy discussion and all reasoning. 
Therefore with such men there is no reasoning. But as 
for those who are perplexed by the traditional difficulties, 
it is easy to meet them and to dissipate the causes of their 
perplexity. This is evident from what has been said. 

It is manifest, therefore, from these arguments that contra- 15 
dictory statements cannot be truly made about the same 
subject at one time,* nor can contrary statements, because 
every contrariety depends on privation. This is evident if we 
reduce the formulae of contraries to their principle. 

Similarly, no intermediate between contraries can be pre- 
dicated of one and the same subject, of which one of thé 20 
contraries is predicated. If the subject is white we shall be 
wrong in saying it is neither white nor black, for it would 
follow that it is and is not white; for the first of the two terms 
we have put together® would be true of it, and this is the 
contradictory of white.’ 

We could not be right, then, in accepting the views either 
of Heraclitus or of Anaxagoras. If we were, it would follow 25 

1 Cf. Γ΄ 1008” 12-27. 3 Cf. 1063* 35. 
5 Cf. I. 1009* 38- 33. * Cf. Fr. 1009* 16-22, 1o11® 3-16. 
δ Cf. T. ror1> 15-22. ὅ Sc. ‘not white’ and ‘not black’. 7 Cf. 1. 7. 

1063° 

30 

35 

1064" 

METAPHYSICA 

that contraries would be predicated of the same subject, for 
when Anaxagoras says a part of everything is in everything, 
he says nothing is sweet any more than it is bitter, and so with 
any other pair of contraries, since in everything everything is 
present not potentially only, but actually and separately. 
And similarly all statements cannot be false nor all true, both 
because of many other difficulties which might be deduced as 
arising from this position, and because if all are false it will not 
be true even to say all are false, and if all are true it will not 
be false to say all are false.! 

CHAPTER VII 

Every science seeks certain principles and causes for each of 
its objects—e. g. medicine and gymnastics and each of the 
other sciences, whether productive or mathematical. For 
each of these marks off a certain class of things for itself and 

_ busies itself about this as about something existing and real,— 

not however gua real; the science that does ¢hzs is another 
distinct from these. Of the sciences mentioned each gets 

5 somehow the ‘ what’ in some class of things and tries to prove 

10 

the other truths, whether loosely or accurately. Some get the 
‘what’ through perception, others by hypothesis ; so that it 
is clear from an induction of this sort that there is no demon- 
stration of the substance, i.e. of the ‘ what ’. 

There is a science of nature, and evidently it must be 
different both from practical and from productive science. 
For in the case of productive science the principle of pro- 
duction is in the producer and not in the product, and is either 
an art or some other potency. And similarly in practical 
science the.movement is not in the thing done, but rather in 

15 the doers. But the science of the natural philosopher deals 

with the things that have zz themselves a principle of move- 
ment. It is clear from these facts, then, that natural science 
must be neither practical nor productive, but theoretical (for it 
must fall into one of these classes). And since each of the 

20 sciences must somehow know the ‘ what’ and use this as a 

principle, we must not fail to observe how the natural philo- 
sopher should define things and how he must state the formula 
1 Cf. Tr. 8. 

K. BOOK ΧΙ. 1064" 

of the essence—whether as akin to ‘snub’ or rather to 
‘concave’. For of these the formula of the ‘snub’ includes 
the matter of the thing, but that of the ‘concave’ is indepen- 
dent of the matter; for ‘snubness’ is found in a nose, so that 25 
we look for its formula without eliminating the nose, for the 
‘snub’ is a concave nose. Evidently then the formula of 
flesh and the eye and the other parts must always be stated 
without eliminating the matter. 

Since there is a science of being gua being and capable of 
existing apart, we must consider whether this is to be regarded 
as the same as physics or rather as different. Physics deals 30 
with the things that havea principle of movement in them- 
selves; mathematics is theoretical, and zs a science that deals 
with things that are at rest, but its subjects cannot exist apart. 
Therefore about that which can exist apart and is unmovable 
there is a science different from both of these, if there zs a 
substance of this nature (I mean separable and unmovable), 35 
as we shall try to prove there ἰ5.: And if there is such a kind 
- of thing in the world, here must surely be the divine, and this 
must be the first and most important principle. Evidently, 1064° 
then, there are three kinds of theoretical sciences—physics, 
mathematics, theology. The class of theoretical sciences is 
the best, and of these themselves the last named is best; for 
it deals with the highest of existing things, and each science 5 
is called better or worse in virtue of its proper object. 

One might raise the question whether the science of being 
gua being is to be regarded as universal or not. Each of the 
mathematical sciences deals with some one determinate class 
of things, but universal mathematics applies alike to all. Now 
if natural substances are the first of existing things, physics 10 
must be the first of sciences; but if there is another entity 
and substance, separable and unmovable, the knowledge of it 
must be different and prior to physics and universal because 
it is prior. | 

CHAPTER VIII 

Since ‘ being’ in general has several senses, of which one is 15 
‘being by accident’, we must consider first that which is in 

1 Cf. A. 6, 7. 3 Cf. E. 1, K. 1059% 26-29. 

1064" METAPHYSICA 

this sense. Evidently none of the traditional sciences busies 
itself about the accidental. For neither does architecture con- 
sider what will happen to those who are to use the house (e. g. 
ao whether they will have a painful life in it or not), nor does 
weaving, or shoemaking, or the confectioner’s art, do the like ; 
but each of these sciences considers only what is peculiar to 
it, i.e. its proper end. And as for the question whether the 
musical is also lettered, or! the argument that ‘ when he who 
is musical becomes lettered he will be both at once, not having 
25 been both before; and that which is, not having always been, 
must have been coming to be; therefore he must have been 
at once becoming musical and lettered’,—this none of the 
recognized sciences considers, but only sophistic ; for this 
alone busies itself about the accidental, so that Plato was not 
wrong when he said? that the sophist spends his time on 
non-being. | 
That a science of the accidental is not even possible, will 
be evident if we try to see what the accidental really is. We 
say that everything either is always and of necessity (neces- - 
sity not in the sense of violence, but that which we appeal to 
35 in demonstrations), or is for the most part, or is neither for 
the most part, nor always and of necessity, but merely as it 
chances ; e.g. there might be cold in the dog-days, but this 
occurs neither always and of necessity, nor for the most part, 
1065° though it might happen sometimes. The accidental, then, is 
what occurs, but not always nor of necessity, nor for the most 
part. Now we have said what the accidental is, and it is 
obvious why there is no science of such a thing ; for all science 
5 is of that which is always or for the most part, but the acci- 
dental is in neither of these classes. 

Evidently there are not causes and principles of the acci- 
dental, of the same kind as there are of the essential ; for if 
there were, everything would be of necessity. If A is when B 
is, and B is when C is, and if C exists not by chance but of 
necessity, that of which C was cause will exist of necessity, 

το down to the last causatum as it is called (but this was sup- 
posed to be accidental). Therefore all things will be of 

20 

1 1064> 23 read οὐδ᾽ εἰ τὸ μουσικὸν καὶ γραμματικόν, οὐδέ, following A. Bul- 
linger. Cf. E. 1026° 16. 2 Cf. Sophistes 237 A, 254 A. 

kK. BOOK XI 1065" 

necessity, and chance and the possibility of a thing’s either 
occurring or not occurring are removed entirely from the 
range of events. And if the cause be supposed not to exist 
but to be coming to be, the same results will follow; every- 15 
thing will occur of necessity. For to-morrow’s eclipse will 
occur if 4 occurs, and A if B occurs, and B if C occurs ; and | 
in this way if we subtract time from the limited time between 
now and to-morrow we shall come sometime to the already 
existing condition. Therefore since this exists, everything 20 
after this will occur of necessity, so that all things occur of 
necessity. 

As to that which ‘is’ in the sense of being true or of being 
by accident, the former depends on a combination in thought 
and is an affection of thought (which is the reason why it 
is the principles, not of that which ‘is’ in this sense, 
but of that which is outside and can exist apart, that are 
sought); and the /atter is not necessary but indeterminate 
(I mean the accidental); and of such a thing the causes are 25 
unordered and indefinite.? 

Adaptation to an end is found in events that happen by 
nature or as the result of thought. It is ‘luck’ when one of 
these events? happens by accident. For as a thing may exist, 
so it may be a cause, either by its own nature or by accident. 30 
Luck is a cause accidentally effecting such events adapted 
to an end as are usually effected by will. Therefore luck and 
thought are concerned with the same sphere ; for will cannot 
exist without thought. The causes from which lucky results 
might happen are indeterminate ; therefore luck is obscure to 
human calculation and is a cause by accident, but in the un- 
qualified sense a cause of nothing.* It is good or bad luck 35 
when the result is good or evil; and prosperity or misfortune 
when the scale is large.® 

Since nothing accidental is prior to the essential, neither 1065° 
are accidental causes prior. If, then, luck or spontaneity is 
a cause of the material universe, reason and nature are causes 
before it.® | 

1 Cf. E. 2—4. 

? Sc. which happen wszad/y by nature or as the result of thought. 

3 Cf. Phys. ii. 196 21-25. * Cf. Phys. ii. 197% 5-14. 
5 Cf. Phys. ii, 1978 25-27. 6 Cf. Phys. ii. 198* 5-13. 

AR. MET. Q 

1065° METAPHYSICA 

CHAPTER IX 

ς Some things exist only actually, some potentially, some 
potentially and actually ; one is a ‘ this’, another a quantity, 
another falls in one of the other categories... There is no 
movement apart from things; for change is always according 
to the categories of being; and there is nothing common to 
these and in no one category; but each of the categories 

το belongs to 41] its subjects in either of two ways (e. g. ‘ this- 
ness ’—for one kind of it is ‘ positive form’, and the other 
is ‘privation’; and as regards quality one kind is ‘ white’ 
and the other ‘black’, and as regards quantity one kind is 
‘complete’ and the other ‘incomplete’, and as regards spatial 
movement one is ‘upwards’ and the other ‘ downwards’, or 
one thing is ‘light’ and another ‘ heavy ’); so that there are 

15 as many kinds of movement and change as of being. Each 
kind of thing being divided into the potential and the com- 
pletely real, I call the actuality of the potential as such, move- 
ment. That what we say is true, is plain from the following 
facts. When the ‘ buildable ’, in so far as it is what we mean 
by ‘ buildable ’,? exists actually, it is being built, and this is 
the process of building. Similarly with learning, healing, and 

20 rolling, walking, leaping, ageing, ripening.* Movement takes 
place when the complete reality itself exists, and neither 
earlier nor later. The complete reality, then, of that which 
exists potentially, when it is completely real and actual, not 
gua itself, but gva movable, is movement. By gua I mean this: 
bronze is potentially a statue ; but yet the complete reality of 

25 bronze, gua bronze, is not movement. For it is not the same 
to be bronze and to bea certain potency. If it were absolutely 
the same in its definitory formula, the complete reality of 
bronze would have been a movement. But it is not the same.® 
This is evident in the case of contraries ; for to be capable of 
health and to be capable of illness are not the same; for if 

1 Cf. Phys. iii. 200° 26-28. 

2 i.e. not as so much matter, but as matter capable of being made into 
a building. 

3. Cf. Phys. ili. 200” 32-201 19. 4 Cf. Phys. iii. 201” 6, 7. 

5 1065 28 perhaps we should read τοῦτο, ‘but its complete reality 
is not movement.’ 

K. BOOK XI 1065> 

they were, health and illness would have been the samé. (It is 30 
that which underlies and is healthy or sick, whether it is 
moisture or blood, that is one ‘andthe same.) And since they 

are not the same, as colour and the visible are not the same, 

it is the complete reality of the potential as such, that is move- 
ment. Evidently it is this, and movement takes place when 35 
this 1 complete reality exists, and neither earlier nor later. For 1066° 
each thing is capable of being sometimes actual, sometimes not, 
e.g. the ‘ buildable’ gua ‘ buildable’; and the actuality of the 
‘buildable’ gua ‘buildable’ is building. For the actuality is 
either this—building—or the house. But when the house 
exists, it is no longer ‘ buildable’; the ‘buildable’ is what 
is being built. The actuality then must be the dut/ding,? and 
the building is a movement. And the same account applies 
to all other movements. 

That what we have said is right, is evident from what all 
others say about movement, and from the fact that it is not 
easy to define it otherwise. For firstly one cannot put it in 
another class. This is evident from what people say. Some 10 
call it difference and inequality and the unreal; none of these, 
however, is necessarily moved, and further, change is not to 
these nor from these but rather from opposite to opposite. 
The reason why people put movement in these classes is that 
it is thought to be something indefinite, and the principles on 15 
one side of the ‘list of contraries’? are indefinite because 
they are privative, for none of them is either a ‘this’ or a 
‘such’ or in any of the other categories. And the reason 
why movement is thought to be indefinite is that it cannot 
be classed either with the potency of things or with their 
actuality, for neither that which is capable of being of a 
certain quantity, nor that which is actually of a certain quan- 
tity, is moved of necessity. And movement is thought to be 20 
an actuality, but incomplete; the reason is that the potential, 
whose actuality it is, is incomplete. And therefore it is hard 
to grasp what movement is; for it must be classed either 

an 

1 1065" 35 read αὕτη. 

* The argument is that the Zouse cannot be the ἐνέργεια of the buildable, 
for when the house exists the buildable has ceased to exist; therefore its 
ἐνέργεια must be the Srocess of building. 

Cf, note on A. 986% 23. 

Q 2 

1066* METAPHYSICA 

with privation or with potency or with absolute actuality, but 

25 evidently none of these is possible. Therefore what remains 
is that it must be what we said—actuality and not actuality, 
in the sense we have defined—which is hard to understand 
but capable of existing.! 

And evidently movement is in the movable; for it is the 
complete realization of this by that which is capable of causing 
movement. And the actuality of that which is capable of 
causing movement is no other than that of the movable. For it 

30 must be the complete reality of both. For a thing is capable 
of causing movement because it caz do this, and is a mover 
because it is active; but it is on the movable that it is capable 
of acting, so that the actuality of both alike is one, just as there 
is the same interval from one to two as from two to one, and 
as the steep ascent and the steep descent are one, but the being 
of them is not one; the case of the mover and the moved is 
similar.” 

CHAPTER X 

35 The infinite is either that which is incapable of being tra- 
versed because it is not its nature to be traversed (this corre- 
sponds to the sense in which the voice is ‘ invisible’), or that 
which admits only of incomplete traverse or scarcely admits 
of traverse, or that which, though it naturally admits of 
traverse, is not traversed or limited; further, a thing may be 
infinite in respect of addition or of subtraction or of both. 

1066° The infinite cannot be a separate, independent thing. For if 
it is neither a spatial magnitude nor a plurality, but infinity 
itself is its substance and not an accident, it will be indivisible ; 

5 for the divisible is either magnitude or plurality. But if in- 
divisible, it is not infinite, except as the voice is invisible ; but 
people do not mean this, nor are we examining this sort of 
infinite, but the infinite as untraversable.? Further, how can 
an infinite exist by itself, unless number and magnitude 
also exist by themselves,—since infinity is an attribute of 
these?* Further, if the infinite is an accident of something 

10 else, it cannot be gua infinite an element in things, as the 

1 With 1065 22-1066% 27 cf. Phys. iii. 201% 27-202° 3. 

2 Cf. Phys. 111. 202% 13-21. 3 Cf. PAys. 111. 2048 3-14. 
* Cf. Phys. lii. 204% 17-19. 

Κι. BOOK XI 1066" 

invisible is not an element in speech, though the voice is 
invisible. And evidently the infinite cannot exist actually. 
For then any part of it that might be taken would be infinite ; 
for ‘to be infinite’ and ‘ the infinite’ are the same, if the infi- 
nite is substance and not predicated of a subject. Therefore 

it is either indivisible, or if it is secable, it is divisible into 
ever divisible parts; but the same thing cannot be many 15 
infinites, yet as a part of air is air, so a part of the infinite 
would be infinite, if the infinite is a substance and a principle. 
Therefore it must be insecable and indivisible. But the 
actually infinite cannot be indivisible ; for it must be a quan- 
tity. Therefore infinity belongs to a subject incidentally. 
But if so, as we have said, it cannot be it that is a principle, 20 
but rather that of which it is an accident—the air or the even 
number.? 

This inquiry is universal ; but that the infinite is not among 
sensible things, is evident from the following argument. If 
the definition of a body is ‘ that which is bounded by planes’, 
there cannot be an infinite body either sensible or intelligible ; 
nor a separate and infinite number, for number or that which 25 
has a number can be completely enumerated.? The truth is 
evident from the following concrete argument. The infinite 
can neither be composite nor simple. For (1) it cannot be 
a composite body, since the elements are limited in multitude. 
For the contraries must be equal and no ove of them must be 
infinite ; for if one of the two bodies falls at all short of the 30 
other in potency, the finite will be destroyed by the infinite. 
And that each should be infinite is impossible. For body is 
that which has extension in all directions, and the infinite is 
the boundlessly extended, so that the infinite body will be 
infinite in every direction. Nor (2) can the infinite body be 
one and simple—neither, as some say, something which is 35 
apart from the elements, from which they generate these * 
(for there is no such body apart from the elements ; for every- 
thing can be resolved into that of which it consists, but no 
such product of analysis is observed except the simple bodies), 
nor fire nor any other of the elements, For apart from the 1067* 

1 Cf. Phys. iii. 204% 14-17. 2 Cf. Pays. iii. 204% 20-32. 
8. Cf. Phys. iii, 204° 434-Ὁ 8. * Cf. Pays. iii. 204" 10-24. 

1067* METAPHYSICA 

question how any of them could be infinite, the All, even if it 
is finite, cannot either be or become one of them, as Hera- 
5 clitus says! all things sometime become fire. The same 
argument applies to the One, which the natural philosophers 
posit besides the elements. For everything changes from the 
contrary, e. g. from hot to cold.” | 
Further, every sensible body is somewhere, and whole and 
part have the same proper place, e.g. the whole earth and 
part of the earth. Therefore if (1) the infinite body is homo- 
geneous, it will be unmovable or it will be always moving. 
10 But the latter is impossible ; for why should it rather move 
down than up or anywhere else? E.g. if there is a clod 
which is part of an infinite body, where will this move or 
rest? The proper place of the body which is homogeneous 
with it is infinite. Will the clod occupy the whole place, 
then? And how? (This is impossible.) What then is its 
rest or its movement?® It will either rest everywhere, and 
then it cannot move; or it will move everywhere, and then it 
15 cannot be still. But (2) if the infinite body has unlike parts, 
the proper places of the parts are unlike also, and, firstly, the 
body of the All is not one except by contact, and, secondly, 
the parts will be either finite or infinite in variety of kind. 
Finite they cannot be; for then those of one kind will be infi- 
nite in quantity and those of another will not (if the All is 
infinite), 6. g. fire or water would be infinite, but such an infi- 
20 nite part would be destruction to its contrary.* But if the 
parts are zxfinite and simple, their places also are infinite and 
the elements will be infinite ; and if this is impossible, and the 
places are finite, the All also must be limited.* | 
In general, there cannot be an infinite body and also a 

1 Fr. 30, 31, Diels, Vorsokratiker. 2 Cf. Phys. iii. 204” 32-2058 7. 

ὃ 1067" 13 read ἡ μονὴ καὶ ἡ κίνησις. 

“ Cf. Phys. iii. 205% 10-25. Cf. 1066” 28-34, from which it appears 
that the argument is as follows. If a finite number of kinds is to make 
an infinite whole, at least one kind must be infinite in extent. They 
cannot all be infinite, for they limit one another. But if one is infinite 
and another finite, the former destroys the latter and there ceases to be 
the variety of kinds within the whole which is at present presupposed. 
Aristotle omits to mention that the supposition of a finite kind co-existing 
with an infinite kind is in itself absurd, because the finite limits the 
infinite. But this would only make his case stronger. 

5 Cf. Phys. iii, 2059 29-32. 

Κι, BOOK XI 10672 

proper place for all bodies, if every sensible body has either 
weight or lightness. For it must move either towards the 25 
middle or upwards, and the infinite—either the whole or the 
half—cannot do either ; for how will you divide it? Or how 
will part of the infinite be up and part down, or part extreme 
and part middle? Further, every sensible body is in a place, 
and there are six kinds of place,’ but these cannot exist in an 
infinite body. In general, if there cannot be an infinite place, 30 
there cannot be an infinite body ; (and there cannot be an 
infinite place,) for that which is in a place is somewhere, and 
this means either up or down or in one of the other directions, 
and each of these is a limit.’ 

The infinite is not the same in the sense that it is one 
thing whether exhibited in distance or in movement or in 
time, but the posterior among these is called infinite in virtue 35 
of its relation to the prior, i.e. a movement is called infinite in 
virtue of the distance covered by the spatial movement or 
alteration or growth, and a time is called infinite because of 
the movement which occupies it.* 

CHAPTER XI 

Of things which change, some change in an accidental sense, 1067 
like that in which ‘the musical’ may be said to walk, and 
Others are said, without qualification, to change, because 
something in them changes, i.e. the things that change in 
parts; the body becomes healthy, because the eye does. 
But there is something which is by its own nature moved 
primarily, and this is the essentially movable. The same 5 
distinction is found in the case of the mover; for it causes 
movement either in an accidental sense or in respect of a part 
of itself or essentially. There is something that primarily 
causes movement; and there is something that is moved, also 
the time in which it * is moved, and that from which and that 
into which it is moved.5 But the forms and the affections 
and the place, which are the terminals of the movement of 
moving things, are unmovable, e. g. knowledge or heat ; it is 10 

1 Sc. up and down, right and left, before and behind. 

3 Cf. Phys. iii. 205” 24-206° 7. 5 Cf. Phys. iii. 207” 21-25. 
4 1067" 8 read ἔτι ἐν ᾧ χρόνῳ. 5 Cf. Phys. v. 2245 21-35. 

1067” METAPHYSICA 

not heat that is a movement, but heating.’ Change which is 
not accidental is found not in all things, but between con- 
traries, and their intermediates, and between contradictories. 
We may convince ourselves of this by induction.” 
That which changes changes either from positive into 
15 positive, or from negative into negative, or from positive into 
negative, or from negative into positive. (By positive I mean 
that which is expressed by an affirmative term.) Therefore 
there must be three changes; for that from negative into 
ao Negative is not change; for the terms are neither contraries 
nor contradictories, because there is no opposition. The 
change from the negative into the positive which is its 
contradictory is generation—absolute change absolute gene- 
ration, and partial change partial generation ; and the change 
from positive to negative is destruction—absolute change 
absolute destruction, and partial change partial destruc- 
agtion. If, then, ‘that which is not’ has several senses,’ 
and movement can attach neither to that which implies 
putting together or separating,* nor to that which implies 
potency and is opposed to that which is in the full sense® 
(true, the not-white or not-good can be moved incident- 
ally, for the not-white might be a man; but that which is 
not a particular thing at all can in no wise be moved), that 
80 Which is not cannot be moved, and if this is so, generation 
cannot be movement ; for that which is not zs generated. 
For even if we admit to the fullest that its generation is acci- 
dental, yet it is true to say that ‘not-being’ is predicable 
of that which is generated absolutely. (Similarly res¢ cannot 
belong to that which is not.) These difficulties, then, follow, 
35 and also this, that everything that is moved is in a place, but 
that which is not is not in a place; for then it would be 
somewhere. Nor is destruction movement ; for the contrary 

1 Cf. Phys. v. 224 11-16. 2 Cf. Phys. ν. 224” 28-30. 

3 Cf. E. 1026% 33-5 2, 1027” 18-19. 

* i.e, to ‘that which is not ’ in the sense of ‘the judgement which is false ’. 

5 i.e. a thing cannot be moved when it does not exist actually, but 
exists potentially. 

δ i.e. even if the not-being (privation) which is the starting-point of 
generation can exist only as an accident of prime matter, still not-being 
zs the starting-point of absolute generation (i.e. generation of a substance, 
not of a quality). 

K. BOOK XI 1067" 

of movement is movement or rest, but the contrary of de- 

struction is generation. Since every movement is a change, 1068" 

and the kinds of change are the three named above, and 
of these those in the way of generation and destruction are 
not movements, and these are the changes from a thing to its 
contradictory, only the change from positive into positive can 
be movement. And the subjects are either contrary or inter- 5 
mediate ; for even privation must be regarded as contrary, and 
is expressed by a positive term, e.g. ‘naked’ or ‘toothless’! 
or ‘ black’. 

CHAPTER XII 

If the categories are classified as substance, quality, place, 
acting or being acted on, relation, quantity, there must be 
three kinds of movement—of quality, of quantity, of place. 
There is no movement in respect of substance (because there 10 
is nothing contrary to substance), nor in respect of relation 
(for it is possible that if one of two things in relation changes, 
the relative term which was true of the other thing ceases to be 
true,? though this other does not change at all,—so that their 
movement is accidental), nor of agent and patient, nor of mover 
and moved, because there is no movement of movement 
nor generation of generation, nor, in general, change of 15 
change. For there mzght be movement of movement in two 
senses ; (1) movement may be the subject moved, as a man 
is moved because he changes from white to black,—so that 
in this way movement might be either heated or cooled 
or change its place or increase. But this is impossible ; for 
change is not a subject. Or (2) some other subject may 2° 
change from a change into some other species of change (as a 
man changes from disease into health). But this also is not 
possible except incidentally. For every movement is change 
from something into something. (And so are generation and 
destruction ; but changes into things opposed in certain 25 
ways are not movements.®) A thing changes, then, at the 

1 ©Toothless’ is more obviously negative in form than the correspond- 
ing Greek word. 

2 1068" 12 read μεταβάλλοντος μὴ ἀληθεύεσθαι. So, apparently, Al. apud 
Simpl. in Phys. Cf. N. 1088* 34. 

5 1068" 25 read ὡδὶ ἢ ὡδὶ οὐ κινήσεις. Change between contraries is 

1068" METAPHYSICA 

same time from health into illness, and from this change 
itself into another. Clearly, then,’ if it has become ill, it 
will have changed into some change or other (though it may? 
be at rest), and, further, into a determinate change each 
time ; and that new change will be from something definite 
into some other definite thing; therefore it will be the 
30 Opposite change, that of growing well. We answer that this 
happens only incidentally, e.g. there is a change from the pro- 
cess of recollection to that of forgetting, only because ‘hat 
to which the process attaches is changing, now into a state of 
knowledge, now into one of ignorance.® 
Further, the process will go on to infinity, if there is to 
be change of change and generation of generation. If the 
change produced is change of change, the change that produces 
35 it must be so too; e.g. if the simple coming to be was once 
1068° coming to be, that which was coming to be it was also once 
coming to be ; therefore that which was simply coming to be it 
was not yet in existence, but something which was coming to 
be coming to be it was already in existence.* And this was 
once coming to be, so that there must have been a time at 
which it was not yet. Now since of an infinite number of 
terms there is not a first, the first in this series will not exist, 
5 and therefore no following term will exist. Nothing, then, 
can either come to be or move or change. Further, that which 
has a movement has also the contrary movement and rest, and 
that which comes to be also ceases to be. Therefore that 
which is coming to be is ceasing to be when it has come to 
be coming to be ; for it cannot cease to be at the very time at 
which it is coming to be coming to be, nor after it has come 
10 to be; for that which is ceasing to be must ὅσ Further, 

movement, change between contradictories is generation or destruc- 
tion. 

1 10689 27 read δῆλον δή. 

2 This is possible, though excluded by the theory in question. 

5 10689 33 read εἰς ἄγνοιαν. 

4 1068> 1 read καὶ τὸ γιγνόμενον eyiyvero’ ὥστε οὕπω ἦν τὸ γιγνόμενον 
ἁπλῶς ἀλλὰ γιγνόμενόν τι ἦν γιγνόμενον ἤδη. 

5 If that which comes to be comes to be coming to be, it also ceases to 
be. When? Not when it is only coming to be coming to be, for then it 18 
not and .*. cannot cease to be; nor after it has come to be, for then also 
‘that which comes to be’ is not and.*. cannot cease to be. .". It is ceasing 
to be, at the very time when it is coming to be. Which is absurd. 

K. BOOK XI 1068" 

there must be a matter underlying that which comes to be and 
changes. What will it be, then, that becomes movement or 
generation, as body or soul is that which suffers alteration ? 
And what is it that they move into? For their movement 
must be the movement of a definite A from a definite B into a 
definite C, not movement without qualification. How, then, 
can this condition be fulfilled? There can be no learning of 
learning, and therefore no generation of generation.” 

Since there is not movement either of substance or of 15 
relation or of activity and passivity, it remains that movement 
is in respect of quality and quantity and place; for each of 
these admits of contrariety. By quality I mean not that 
which is in the substance (for even the differentia is a quality), 
but the passive quality, in virtue of which a thing is said 
to be acted on or to be incapable of being acted on.? The 20 
unmovable is either that which is wholly incapable of being 
moved, or that which is moved with difficulty in a long time 
or begins slowly, or that which would naturally be moved, 
but cannot be moved when and where and as it would 
naturally be moved. This alone among unmovables I 
describe as being at rest ; for rest is contrary to movement, 25 
so that it must be a privation in that which is receptive of 
movement.4 

Things which are in one place (in the strictest sense) are 
together in place, and things which are in different places are 
apart. Things whose extremes are together fouch. That at 
which the changing thing, if it changes continuously according 
to its nature, naturally arrives before it arrives at the extreme 
into which it is changing, is defween.© That which is most 
distant in a straight line is contrary in place. That is succes- 30 
sive which is after the beginning (the order being determined by 
position or form or in some other way) and has nothing of the 
same class between it and that which it succeeds, e.g. lines 
succeed a line, units a unit, or one house another house. 
(There is nothing to prevent a thing of some other class from 

2 1068" 14 read κίνησιν, μὴ κίνησιν ἁπλῶς. ᾿ 

2 1068» 14 read μάθησις τῆς μαθήσεως, ὥστ᾽. With 1067» 14-1068? 15 cf. 
Phys. V. 2255 3-226° 16. 

Cf. PAys. v. 226% 23-29. 4 Cf. Phys. v. 226” 10-16. 
5 Cf, Phys. v. 2260 21-25. 

1068> METAPHYSICA 

being between.) For the successive succeeds something and is 
35 something later; ‘one’ does not succeed ‘two’, nor the first 
1069° day of the month the second. That which, being successive, 
touches, is contiguous. Since all change is between opposites, 
and these are either contraries or contradictories, and there 
is no middle term for contradictories, clearly that which is 
between is between contraries. The continuous is a species 
5 of the contiguous or of that which touches; two things are 
called continuous when the limits of each, with which they 
touch and are kept together, become one and the same, so 
that plainly the continuous is found in the things out of 
which a unity naturally arises in virtue of their contact. 
And plainly the successive is the first of these concepts; for 
the successive does not necessarily touch, but that which 
10 touches is successive. And if a thing is continuous, it touches, 
but if it touches, it is not necessarily continuous; and in 
things in which there is no touching, there is no organic 
unity. Therefore a point is not the same as a unit; for 
contact belongs to points, but not to units, which have only 
succession ; and there is something between two of the former, 
but not between two of the latter.’ 

1 Cf. Phys. v. 226" 32-2275 31. 

a a ee ............ ee ee tet .“---.... 

BOOK XII (A) 

CHAPTER I 

SUBSTANCE is the subject of our inquiry ; for the principles 
and the causes we are seeking are those of substances. For 
if the universe is of the nature of a whole, substance is its 
first part; and if it coheres merely by virtue of serial succes- 20 
sion, on this view also substance is first, and is succeeded by 
quality, and then by quantity. At the same time these latter 
are not even being in the full sense, but are qualities and 
movements of it,—or else even the not-white and the not- 
straight would be being; at least we say even these ave, 6. σ. 
‘there is a not-white!’, Further, none of the categories other 
than substance can exist apart. And the old philosophers 
also in effect testify to this; for it was of substance that 
they sought the principles and elements and causes. The 
thinkers of the present day tend to rank universals as sub- 
stances (for genera are universals, and these they tend to 
describe as principles and substances, owing to the abstract 
nature of their inquiry); but the old thinkers ranked parti- 
cular things as substances, e.g. fire and earth, but not what 
is common to both, body. 

There are three kinds of substance—one that is sensible 30 
(of which one subdivision is eternal and another is perishable, 
and which all recognize, as comprising e.g. plants and 
animals),—of this we must grasp the elements, whether one 
or many; and another that is immovable, and this certain 
thinkers assert to be capable of existing apart, some dividing 
it into two, others combining the Forms and the objects of 
mathematics into one class, and others believing only in the 35 
mathematical part of this class.2 The former two kinds of 
substance are the subject of physics (for they imply move- 

5 

hi This is an implication of the ordinary type of judgement, ‘x is not 
white.’ 

* The three views appear to have been held respectively by Plato, 
Xenocrates, and Speusippus. 

1069" METAPHYSICA 

ment); but the third kind belongs to another science, if there 
is no principle common to it and to the other kinds. 
Sensible substance is changeable. Now if change pro- 
ceeds from opposites or from intermediate points, and not 
5 from all opposites (for the voice! is not-white(, but it does 
not therefore change to white)), but from the contrary, there 
must be something underlying which changes into the con- 
trary state ; for the contraries do not change. 

CHAPTER II 

Further, something persists, but the contrary does not 
persist ; there is, then, some third thing besides the contraries, 
viz. the matter. Now since changes are of four kinds—either 
in respect of the essence or of the quality or of the quantity 

το or of the place, and change in respect of the individual nature 
is simple generation and destruction, and change in quantity is 
increase and diminution, and change in respect of an affection 
is alteration, and change in place is motion, changes will be 
from given states into those contrary to them in these several 
respects. The matter, then, which changes must be capable 

15. of both states. And since ‘that which is’ has two senses, we 
may say that everything changes from that which is potentially 
to that which is actually, e.g. from the potentially white to 
the actually white, and similarly in the case of increase and 
diminution. Therefore not only can a thing come to be, 
incidentally, out of that which is not, but also all things come 
to be out of that which is, but is potentially, and is not 

20 actually. And this is the ‘One’ of Anaxagoras; for instead 
of ‘all things were together’ and the‘ Mixture’ of Empedocles 
and Anaximander and the account given by Democritus, it 
is better to say all things were together potentially but not 
actually.2, Therefore these thinkers seem to have had some 
notion of matter. 

Now all things that change have matter, but* different 

1 1069” 5 read od λευκὸν yap ἡ φωνή. 

2 1069" 21 read ἕν᾽ βέλτιον yap ἣ ὁμοῦ πάντα καὶ Eun. τὸ μῖγμα καὶ ᾿Αναξ. 
καὶ ὧς Δημ. φησιν, ἦν ὁμοῦ πάντα δυνάμει, ἐνεργείᾳ δ᾽ οὔ, following in part 

H. Jackson, /. of P. xxix. 139. 
8 1069" 24 read ἀλλ᾽ ἑτέραν. 

A. BOOK XII 

matter ; and of eternal things those which are not generable 
but are movable in space have matter—not matter - for 
generation, however, but for motion from one place to 
another. 

(One might raise the question from what sort of non-being 
generation proceeds; for ‘non-being ᾿ has three senses.) 

If, then, a thing exists potentially, still it is not potentially 
any and every thing, but different things come from different 
things; nor is it satisfactory to say that ‘all things were 
together’; for they differ in their matter, since otherwise 
why did an infinity of things come to be, and not one thing? 
For ‘reason?’ is one, so that if matter also is one, that must 
have come to be in actuality which the matter was in 
potency.* The causes and the principles, then, are three, two 
being the pair of contraries of which one is definition and 
form and the other is privation, and the third being the 
matter. 

CHAPTER III 

Next we must observe that neither the matter nor the form 
comes to be—i.e. the proximate matter and form. For every- 
thing that changes is something and is changed by something 
and into something. That by which it is changed is the im- 
mediate mover ; that which is changed, the matter; that into 
which it is changed, the form. The process, then, will go on to 
infinity, if not only the bronze comes to be round but also the 
round or the bronze comes to be; therefore there must be 
a stop at some point. 

Next we must observe that each substance comes into being 
out of something that shares its name. (Natural objects and 
other things both rank as substances.) For things come into 
being either by art or by nature or by luck or by spontaneity. 
Now art is a principle of movement in something other 

1 Alexander points out that ἀπορήσειε... dv refers to 1.20. The three 
senses are probably the absolutely non-existent, the false, and the 
potential. 

2 Sc. the νοῦς of Anaxagoras’ doctrine, summarized by Ὁ. L. in the 
words, πάντα χρήματα ἦν ὁμοῦ" εἶτα νοῦς ἐλθὼν αὐτὰ διεκόσμησεν. 

8 Sc. an undifferentiated unity. 

1069” 

35 

30 

35 

1070° 

5 

1070" METAPHYSICA 

than the thing moved, nature is a principle in the thing itself 
(for man begets man‘), and the other causes are privations 
of these two. 
There are three kinds of substance—the matter, which 
το acquires individuality 3 by being perceived (for all things that 
are characterized by contact and not by organic unity are 
matter and substratum); the nature (i.e. the individual cha- 
racter) that it moves towards, which is a positive state ; and 
again, thirdly, the particular substance which is composed of 
these two, e.g. Socrates or Callias. Now in some cases the 
individual character does not exist apart from the composite 
15 substance, e.g. the form of house does not so exist, unless 
the art of building exists apart (nor is there generation and 
destruction of these forms, but it is in another way that the 
house apart from its matter, and health, and all ideals of art, 
exist and do not exist); but if the individual character exists 
apart from the concrete thing, it is only in the case of natural 
objects. And so Plato was not far wrong when he said that 
there are as many Forms as there are kinds of natural things 
(if there are Forms at all),—though not of such things® as 
20 fire, flesh, head; for all these are matter, and the last matter 
is the matter of that which is in the fullest sense substance. 
The moving causes exist as things preceding the effects, 
but causes in the sense of formulae are simultaneous with 
their effects. For when a man is healthy, then health also 
exists ; and the shape of a bronze sphere exists at the same 
time as the bronze sphere. But we must examine whether 
as any form also survives afterwards. For in some cases this 
may be so, e.g. the soul may be of this sort—not all soul 
but the reason; for doubtless it is impossible that αὐ soul 

1 This is not a good instance of what A. says about nature, for the 
principle of generation is not in the child but in the father. The defini- 
tion of nature applies better to other natural functions, such as growth. 
The note ἄνθρωπος yap ἄνθρωπον γεννᾷ is hastily thrown in because 
A. is thinking mainly of his favourite thesis of γένεσις ἐκ συνωνύμου. 
Hence Alexander says τοῦτο συνεχές ἐστι τῷ μετὰ ταῦτα ῥητέον ὅτι 
ἑκάστη ἐκ συνωνύμον γίνεται οὐσία. 

3 Only a quasi-individuality, it is to be observed. 

8 1070" 19 read ἀλλ᾽ ov τούτων. ἀλλ᾽ ov for MS. ἄλλα or ἀλλά seems 
necessary if οἷον. . . τελευταία is to be kept here. But there is much to 
be said for Alexander’s proposal to transfer these words to 1. 11, after 
ὑποκείμενον. 

A. BOOK XII 

should survive. Evidently then there is no necessity, on this 
ground at least, for the existence of the Ideas. For man is 
begotten by man, each man by an individual father; and 
similarly in the arts ; for the medical art is the formal cause 
of health. 

CHAPTER IV 

The causes and the principles of different things are in 
a sense different, but in a sense, if one speaks universally and 
analogically, they are the same for all. For we might raise 
the question whether the principles and elements are different 
or the same for substances and for relative terms, and similarly 
in the case of each of the categories. But it is paradoxical 
that they should be the same for all. For then from the 
same elements will proceed relative terms and substance. 
What then will this common element be? For (1) (a) there is 
nothing common to and distinct from substance and the other 
categories, viz. those which are predicated ; but the element is 
prior to the things of which it is an element. But again (6) 
substance is not an element in relative terms, nor is any of 
these an element in substance. Further, (2) how can all things 
have the same elements? For none of the elements can be 
the same as that which is composed of the elements, 6. g. ὁ or 
a cannot be the same as Ja. (None, therefore,! of the intel- 
ligibles,? e.g. unity or being, is an element; for these are 
predicable of each of the compounds as well.) None of the 
elements then would be either a substance or a relative term ; 
but it must be one or other. All things then have not the 
same elements. 

Or, as we are wont to put it, in a sense they have and ina 
sense they have not; 6. g. perhaps the elements of perceptible 
bodies are, as form, the hot, and in another sense the cold, 
which is the przvation ; and, as matter, that which directly and 
of itself is potentially these perceptible bodies ; and both these 
are substances and also the things composed of these, of 
which these are the principles (i.e. any unity which is produced 

1 1070? 7 read οὐδὲν δή. 

* This is apparently almost a technical name for the abstract terms 

which are found in all the categories alike. 
AR. MET. R 

1070% 

30 

35 

1070? 

5 

fe) 

1070" METAPHYSICA 

15 out of the hot and the cold, e.g. flesh or bone); for the 
product must be different from the elements. These things 
then have these elements and principles, but different things 
have different elements; and if we put the matter thus, all 
things have not the same elements, but analogically they 
have; i.e. one might say that there are three principles—the 
form, the privation, and the matter. But each of these is 

20 different for each class, e.g. in colour they are white, black, 
and surface. Again, there is light, darkness, and air; and out 
of these are produced day and night. 

Since not only the elements present in a thing are causes, 
but also something external, i.e. the moving cause, clearly 
while ‘ principle’ and ‘element’ are different both are causes, 
and ‘principle’ is divided into these two kinds!; and that 
which moves a thing or makes it rest is a principle and a sub- 

25 stance. Therefore analogically there are three elements, and 
four causes and principles ; but the elements are different in 
different things, and the proximate moving cause is different 
for different things. Health, disease, body; the moving cause 
is the medical art. Form, disorder of a particular kind, 

30 bricks ; the moving cause is the building art.2,— And since the 
moving cause in the case of natural things is, for instance, 
man, and in the products of thought it is the form or its con- 
trary, there are in a sense three causes, while in a sense there 
are four. For the medical art is in some sense health, and the 
building art is the form of the house, and man begets man : ὃ 
further, besides these there is that which as first of all things 

35 moves all things. 

CHAPTER V 

Some things can exist apart and some cannot, and it is the 
1071 former that are substances, And therefore all things have 
the same causes,* because, without substances, affections and 

1 1,8. the principles which are elements and those which are not. 

5 1070? 29 omit kai... 4 

8 ie. the efficient cause 1S identical with the formal. 

* i.e. the causes of substance are the causes of all things. Read ταὐτά 
in 10719 1. 

A, BOOK XII 1071" 

movements do not exist. Further, these causes will probably 
be soul and body, or reason and desire and body. 

And in yet another way, analogically identical things are 
principles, i.e. actuality and potency; but these also are not 5 
only different for different things but also apply in different 
senses to them. For in some cases the same thing exists at 
one time actually and at another potentially, e. g. wine or flesh 
or man does so. (And these too fall under the above-named 
causes! For the form exists actually, if it can exist apart, 
and so does the complex of form and matter, and the privation, 
e.g. darkness or the diseased. But the matter exists potenti- τὸ 
ally ; for this is that which can become both the actual things.) 
But the distinction of actuality and potentiality applies differ- 
ently to cases where the matter of cause and of effect is not 
the same, in which cases the form also is not the same but 
different ; e.g. the cause of man is (1) the elements in man 
(viz. fire and earth as matter, and the peculiar form), and the 
external cause, whatever it is, e.g. the father, and (2) besides 
these the sun and its oblique course, which are neither matter 
nor form nor privation of man nor of the same species with 
him, but moving causes.” 

Further, one must observe that some causes can be expressed 
in universal terms, and some cannot. The proximate prin- 
ciples of all things are the actual proximate individual, and 
another individual thing which exists as a potency.* The 

= 

5 

1 je. the division into potency and actuality stands in a definite 
relation to the previous division into matter, form, and privation. τὸ ἐξ 
ἀμφοῖν is not strictly in point, but is suggested by the frequent division of 
οὐσία into ὕλη, εἶδος, and τὸ ἐξ ἀμφοῖν. 

Aristotle distinguishes two ways in which things may be related as 
δύναμις and ἐνέργεια. (1) The same thing is δυνάμει what it later comes 
to be ἐνεργείᾳ. The δύναμις may be the same as the ἐνέργεια in form 
(e.g. father and son) or in matter (e.g. wine and vinegar). But (2) one 
thing may be called δύναμις and another ἐνέργεια though they have 
nothing in common. Here δύναμις and ἐνέργεια practically = agent and 
patient, and δύναμις is the δύναμις κατὰ κίνησιν λεγομένη (transeunt 
potentiality or rather power) spoken of in ©. 1. The movement of the 
sun in the ecliptic is the cause of generation and decay (PAéys. ii. 
194> 13, De Gen. et Corr. ii. 336% 15, 31) and is thus a transeunt 
δύναμις of each man who is born, while the material, formal, and proxi- 
mate efficient causes are δύναμεις of him in the other sense. 

δ e.g. the proximate causes of a child are the individual father (who on 
Aristotle’s view is the efficient and contains the formal cause) and the 
germ contained in the individual mother (which is the material cause). 

R2 

1071* METAPHYSICA 

20 universal causes, then, of which we spoke do not exist. For 
the zvdividual is the source of the individuals. For while man 
is the cause of man universally, there zs no universal man; 
but Peleus is the cause of Achilles, and your father of you, 
and this particular 6 of this particular da, though 4 in general is 
the cause of Ja taken without qualification. 

Then we must take account of the various species of sub- 
stances. And different things have different causes and 
a5 elements, as was said ; the causes of things that are not in the 
same class, e.g. of colours, sounds, substances, and quantities, 
are different except in an analogical sense ; and those of things 
in the same species are different, not in species, but in the sense 
that the causes of different individuals are different, your 
matter and form and moving cause being different from mine, 
while in their universal formula they are the same. And if we 

30 inquire ! what are the principles or elements of substances and 
relations and qualities—whether they are the same or different, 
clearly when the terms ‘principle’ and ‘element’ are used in 
several senses the principles and elements of all are the same, 
but when the senses are distinguished the causes are not 
the same but different, except that in a special sense the 
causes of all are the same. They are in a special sense the 
same, i.e. (1) by analogy, because matter, form, privation, 
and the moving cause are common to all things; and (2) 
the causes of substances may be treated as causes of all 
things in this sense, that when they are removed all things are 

35 removed ; further, (3) that which is first in respect of complete 
reality is the cause of all things. But in another sense there 
are different first 2 causes, viz. all the contraries which are 
neither stated as classes nor grouped under some ambiguous 
term ;* and, further, the matters of different things are 

1071” different. We have stated, then, what are the principles of 
sensible things and how many they are, and in what sense 
they are the same and in what sense different. 

1 10715 29 read τὸ δὲ ζητεῖν. 
2 ‘First’ is now taken in the sense of ‘ proximate’, not of ‘ ultimate’ as 
in τὸ πρῶτον ἐντελεχείᾳ. 

8 ὃς, but taken as individual qualities. All things include εἶδος and 
στέρησις, but each thing has a distinct εἶδος and στέρησις of its own. 

A. BOOK XII 

CHAPTER VI 

Since there were three kinds of substance, two of them 
physical and one unmovable, regarding the latter we must 
assert that it is necessary that there should be an eternal 
unmovable substance. For substances are the first of existing 
things, and if they are all destructible, all things are destruc- 
tible. But it is impossible that movement should either come 
into being or cease to be; for it must always have existed. 
Nor can time come into being or cease to be; for there could 
not be a before and an after if time did not exist. Movement 
also is continuous, then, in the sense in which time is ; for time 
is either the same thing as movement or an attribute of move- 
ment. And there is no continuous movement except movement 
in place, and of this only that which is circular is continuous. 

But if there is! something which is capable of moving 
things or acting on them, but is not actually doing so, there 
will not necessarily be movement : for that which has a potency 
need not exercise it. Nothing, then, is gained even if we 
suppose eternal substances, as the believers in the Forms do, 
- unless there is to be in them some principle which can cause 
movement ; and even this is not enough, nor is another sub- 
stance besides the Forms enough; for if it does not ac?, there 
will be no movement. Further, even if it acts, this will not 
be enough, if its essence is potency; for there will not be 
eternal movement: for that which is potentially may possibly 
not be. There must, then, be such a principle, whose very 
essence is actuality. Further, then, these substances must be 
without matter; for they must be eternal, at least if anything 
else is eternal. Therefore they must be actuality.” 

Yet there is a difficulty; for it is thought that everything 
that acts is able to act, but that not everything that is able to 
act acts, so that the potency is prior. But if this is so, nothing 
at all might exist; for it is possible for all things to be capable 
of existing but not yet to exist. Yet if we follow the mytho- 
logists who generate the world from night, or the natural 
philosophers who say that all things were together, the same 

1 1071} 12 read εἰ ἔστι κινητικόν. 2 yo71» 22 read ἐνέργεια. 

1071" 

5 

= 
ce] 

ee OR eer 

1071" METAPHYSICA 

impossible result ensues. For how will there be movement, if 
there is no actual cause? Wood will surely not move itself— 

30 the carpenter’s art must act on it; nor will the menses nor the 
earth set themselves in motion, but the seeds must act on the 
earth and the semen on the menses. 

This is why some suppose eternal actuality—e.g. Leucippus? 
and Plato”; for they say there is always movement. But why 
and what this movement is they do not say, nor, if the world 
moves in this way or that, do they tell us the cause of its 

35 doing so.2 Now nothing is moved at random, but there must 
be some cause,‘ e.g. as a matter of fact a thing moves in one 
way by nature, and in another by force or through the 
influence of reason or something else. Further, what sort of 
movement is primary? This makes a vast difference. But 
again Plato, at least, cannot even say what it is that he some- 

1072 times supposes to be the source of movement—that which 
moves itself;° for the soul is later, and simultaneous with the 
heavens, according to his account. To suppose potency 
prior to actuality, then, is in a sense right, and in a sense not ; 
and we have specified these senses.” 

5 That actuality is prior is testified by Anaxagoras (for his 
‘reason’ is actuality *) and by Empedocles in his doctrine of 
love and strife, and by those who say that there is always 
movement, e. g. Leucippus. 

Therefore chaos or night did not exist for an infinite time, 
but the same things have always existed (either passing 
through a cycle of changes or obeying some other law), since 
actuality is prior to potency. If, then, there is a constant 
cycle, something must always remain,® acting in the same way. 

ro And if there is to be generation and destruction, there must 
be something else! which is always acting in different ways. 
This must, then, act in one way in virtue of itself, and in another 

1 Cf. De Caela, iii. 300° 8. 2 Cf. Zimaeus, 30 A. 
8 1071” 34 read οὐδ᾽ εἰ ὡδὶ ἣ ὡδί, τὴν αἰτίαν. 
4 1071 35 read δεῖ τι διὰ τί ὑπάρχειν, following H. Jackson, /. of P. 

ΧΧΙΧ, 141. 
δ Cf. Phaedrus, 245 Ο; Laws, 894 E. 
5 Cf. Timaeus, 34 B. 7 Cf. 1071» 22-26. 

ὃ 1072% 5 read ἐνέργεια. So perhaps Alexander. 
® i.e. the sphere of the fixed stars, 
10 i.e, the spheres of the sun, moon, and planets. Cf. de Gen. ef Corr. ii. 

336° 23. 

A. BOOK XII 1072" 

in virtue of something else—either of a third agent, therefore, 
or of the first. But it must be in virtue of the first.. For 
otherwise this again causes the motion both of the third agent! 
and of the second. Therefore it is better to say ‘the first’. 
For it was the cause of eternal movement; and something 15 
else is the cause of variety, and evidently both together are 
the cause of eternal variety. This, accordingly, is the character 
which the motions actually exhibit. What need then is there 
to seek for other principles? 

CHAPTER VII 

Since (1) this is a possible account of the matter, and. (2) 
if it were not true, the world would have proceeded out of 
night and ‘all things together’ and out of non-being, these 20 
difficulties may be taken as solved. There is, then, something 
which is always moved with an unceasing motion, which is 
motion in a circle; and this is plain not in theory only but 
in fact. Therefore the first heavens? must be eternal. There is 
therefore also something which moves them. And since that 
which is moved and moves is intermediate, there is a mover ὃ 
which moves without being moved, being eternal, substance, 25 
and actuality. And the object of desire and the object of 
thought move in this way; they move without being moved. 
The primary objects of desire and of thought are the same. 
For the apparent good is the object of appetite, and the real 
good is the primary object of rational desire. But desire is 
consequent on opinion rather than opinion on desire ; for the 
thinking is the starting-point. And thought is moved by the 30 
object of thought, and one side of the list of opposites * is in 
itself the object of thought ; and in this, substance is first, and 
in substance, that which is simple and exists actually. (The one 
and the simple are not the same; for ‘one’ means a measure, 
but ‘simple’ means that the thing itself has a certain nature.) 

1 1072" 14 read αὐτῷ. 
net i.e. the outer sphere of the universe, that in which the fixed stars are 

8 10728 24 read κινοῦν μέσον, κινοῦν ἐστί. 
* Cf. note on A, 986 23. 

CE eee eee ee ee eee en ee em OE παρ 

1072" 

35 

1072" 

METAPHYSICA 

But the good, also, and that which is in itself desirable are on 
this same side of the list ; and the first in any class is always 
best, or analogous to the best.' 

That the final cause may be something unmovable, is shown 
by the distinction of its meanings. For the final cause is 
(2) something for whose good the action is done, and (4) 
something at which the action aims; and of these the latter 
is unmovable though the former is not. The final cause, 
then,? produces motion by being loved, and by that which 
it moves, it moves all other things. Now if something is 

5 moved it is capable of being otherwise than as it is. Therefore 

if the actuality of the heavens is primary motion, then in so 
far as they are in motion, in ¢4zs respect they are capable of 
being otherwise,—in place,’ even if not in substance. But 
since there is something which moves while itself unmoved, 
existing actually, this can in no way be otherwise than as it is. 
For motion in space is the first of the kinds of change, and 
motion in a circle the first kind of spatial motion ; and this 
the first mover produces.*| The first mover, then, of necessity 
exists; and in so far as it is necessary, it is good,® and in 
this sense a first principle. For the necessary has all these 
senses—that which is necessary perforce because it is contrary 
to the natural impulse, that without which the good is impos- 
sible, and that which cannot be otherwise but is absolutely 
necessary. 

On such a principle, then, depend the heavens and the world 
of nature. And its life is such as the best which we enjoy, 

1 Sc. where there is no best in the strict sense. The argument for the 
identity of the primary forms of τὸ ὀρεκτόν and τὸ νοητόν is not very clearly 
stated, but seems to be as follows. The ὀρεκτόν is the καλόν. (In 
parenthesis it is stated that desire depends on thought rather than 
thought on desire.) The positive side of the list of contraries is the 
object of thought, and the first term on this side (which must be the 
primary object of thought) is simple actual substance. But the object 
of desire, which we have seen to be the καλόν, is on the same side of the 
list, and therefore the first member of that list (the primary object of 
thought) must be the primary object of desire. 

3 1072” 3 read κινεῖ δή. 

5 1072" 5 read εἰ φορὰ πρώτη ἡ ἐνέργειά ἐστιν, 7 κινεῖται ταύτῃ γ᾽ ἐνδέχεται 
ἄλλως ἔχειν, κατὰ τόπον. : 

4 If it had any movement, it would have the first. But it produces 
this and therefore (on the principle that one movement belongs to one 

thing) cannot share in it. 
5 r e . ° ¢ 3 a” 4 Φ μὴ e 
1. 6. it is necessary in the sense of ov οὐκ ἄνευ τὸ εὖ, and is .*. good. 

A. BOOK XII 1072" 

and enjoy for but a short time. For it is ever in this state 15 
(which we cannot be), since its actuality is also pleasure. 
(And therefore! are waking, perception, and thinking most 
pleasant, and hopes and memories are so because of their 
reference to these.) And thought in itself deals with that 
which is best in itself, and that which is thought in the 
fullest sense with that which is best in the fullest sense. And 20 
thought thinks itself because it shares the nature of the object 
of thought ; for it becomes an object of thought in coming 
into contact with and thinking its objects, so that thought and 
object of thought are the same. For that which is capadle of 
receiving the object of thought, i.e. the essence, is thought. 
And it is active when it possesses this object. Therefore the 
latter (possession) rather than the former (receptivity)? is the 
divine element which thought seems to contain, and the act 
of contemplation is what is most pleasant and best. If, then, 
God is always in that good state in which we sometimes are, 
this compels our wonder; and if in a better this compels it 25 
yet more. And God zs in a better state. And life also 
belongs to God; for the actuality of thought is life, and God 
is that actuality; and God’s essential actuality is life most 
good and eternal. We say therefore® that God is a living 
being, eternal, most good, so that life and duration continuous 
and eternal belong to God; for this zs God. 

Those who suppose, as the Pythagoreans * and Speusippus® 
do, that supreme beauty and goodness are not present in the 
beginning, because the beginnings both of plants and of animals 
are causes, but beauty and completeness are in the effects of 
these,® are wrong in their opinion. For the seed comes from 35 
other individuals which are prior and complete, and the first 
thing is not seed but the complete being, e.g. we must say 1073 
that before the seed there is a man,—not the man produced 
from the seed, but another from whom the seed comes. 

It is clear then from what has been said that there is a sub- 
stance which is eternal and unmovable and separate from 

0 

Ow 

1 Sc. because they are activities or actualities. 

2 1072” 23 read ἐκείνου μᾶλλον τοῦτο. δ 1072” 28 read φαμὲν δή. 
* Cf. Ν᾿ 1091% 34. 

5 Cf. Z. 1028 21, N, 1091% 34, 10928 IT. 

6, 6. the animal or plant is more fair and perfect than the seed. 

1073° METAPHYSICA 

5 sensible things. It has been shown ! also that this substance 
cannot have any magnitude, but is without parts and indivisible. 
For it produces movement through infinite time, but nothing 
finite has infinite power. And, while every magnitude is either 
infinite or finite, it cannot, for the above reason, have finite 

10 magnitude, and it cannot have infinite magnitude because 
there is no infinite magnitude at all. But it is also clear that 
it is impassive and unalterable ; for all the other changes are 
posterior to? change of place. It is clear, then, why the first 
mover has these attributes. 

CHAPTER VIII 

We must not ignore the question whether we have to 
suppose one such substance or more than one, and if the latter, 
1s how many; we must also mention, regarding the opinions 
expressed by others, that they have said nothing, that can 
even be clearly stated, about the number of the substances. 
For the theory of Ideas has no special discussion of the 
subject; for those who believe in Ideas say the Ideas are 
20 numbers, and they speak of numbers now as unlimited, now 
as limited by the number 10; but as for the reason why there 
should be just so many numbers, nothing is said with any 
demonstrative exactness. 

We however must discuss the subject, starting from the 
presuppositions and distinctions we have mentioned. The 
first principle or primary being is not movable either in 

a5 itself or accidentally, but produces the primary eternal and 
single movement. And since that which is moved must be 
moved by something, and the first mover must be in itself 
unmovable, and eternal movement must be produced by 
something eternal and a single movement by a single thing, 
and since we see that besides the simple spatial movement of 
the universe, which we say the first and unmovable substance 
30 produces, there are other spatial movements—those of the 
planets—which are eternal (for the body which moves in 
a circle is eternal and unresting; we have proved these 

1 Cf. Phys. viii. 267" 17; De Caelo, i. 275" 22. 
3 i.e. impossible without. 

A. BOOK XII 

points in the physical treatises!), each of these movements 
also must be caused by a substance unmovable in itself and 
eternal. For the nature of the stars? is eternal, being a kind 
of substance, and the mover is eternal and prior to the moved, 
and that which is prior to a substance must be a substance. 
Evidently, then, there must be substances which are of the 
same number as the movements of the stars, and in their 
nature eternal, and in themselves unmovable, and without 
magnitude, for the reason before mentioned.® 

That the movers are substances, then, and that one of these 1073” 

is first and another second according to the same order as 
the movements of the stars, is evident. But in the number 
of movements we reach a problem which must be treated 
from the standpoint of that one of the mathematical sciences 
which is most akin to philosophy—viz. of astronomy ; for this 
science speculates about substance which is perceptible but 
eternal, but the other mathematical sciences, i.e. arithmetic 
and geometry, treat of no substance. That the movements are 
more numerous than the bodies that are moved, is evident to 
those who have given even moderate attention to the matter ; 
for each of the planets has more than one movement. But 
as to the actual number of these movements, we now—to give 
some notion of the subject—quote what some of the mathema- 
ticians say, that our thought may have some definite number 
to grasp; but, for the rest, we must partly investigate for our- 
selves, partly learn from other investigators, and if those who 
study this subject form an opinion contrary to what we have 
now stated, we must esteem both parties indeed, but follow 
the more accurate. 

Eudoxus supposed that the motion of the sun or of the moon 
involves, in either case, three spheres, of which the first is the 
sphere of the fixed stars, and the second moves in the circle 
which runs along the middle of the zodiac, and the third in the 
circle which is inclined across the breadth of the zodiac ; but the 
circle in which the moon moves is inclined at a greater angle 
than that in which the sun moves. And the motion of the 

1 Cf. PAys. viii. 8,9; De Caelo, i. 2, ii. 3-8. 

* This is to be understood as a general term including both fixed stars 
and planets. 

δ Cf. 1073° 5. 

1073* 

35 

5 

20 

1073° METAPHYSICA 

planets involves, in each case, four spheres, and of these also 
the first and second are the same as the first two mentioned 

25 above (for the sphere of the fixed stars is that which moves 
all the other spheres, and that which is placed beneath this 
and has its movement in the circle which bisects the zodiac is 
common to all), but the soles of the third sphere of each 
planet are in the circle which bisects the zodiac, and the 
motion of the fourth sphere is in the circle which is inclined 

30 at an angle to the equator of the third sphere ; and the poles 
of the third spheres are different for the other planets, but 
those of Venus and Mercury are the same. 

Callippus made the position of the spheres, i.e. the order 
of their intervals, the same as Eudoxus did, but while he 
assigned the same number as Eudoxus did to Jupiter and to 

35 Saturn, he thought two more spheres should be added to the 
sun and two to the moon, if we were to explain the observed 
facts, and one more to each of-the other planets. 

But it is necessary, if all the spheres combined are to 

10742 explain the phenomena, that for each of the planets there 
should be other spheres (one fewer than those hitherto as- 
signed) which counteract those already mentioned and bring 
back to the same position the first or outermost sphere of the 
star which in each case is situated below ! the star in question ; 
for only thus can all the forces at work produce the observed 

5 motion of the planets. Since, then, the spheres by which the 
planets themselves are moved are—eight for Saturn and Jupiter 
and twenty-five for the others, and of these only those by which 
the lowest-situated planet is moved need not be counteracted, 
the spheres which counteract those of the first or outermost two 
planets will be six in number, and the spheres which coun- 

το teract those of the next four planets will be sixteen, and the 
number of all the spheres—those which move the planets and 
those which counteract these—will be fifty-five. And if one 
were not to add to the moon and to the sun the movements 
we mentioned, all the spheres will be forty-nine in number.? 

Let this then be taken as the number of the spheres, 

1 i.e. inwards from, the universe being thought of as a system of 
concentric spheres encircling the earth. 
2 1074 13 Sosigenes’ conjecture ἐννέα appears to be necessary. 

A. BOOK XII 1074" 

so that both the unmovable and the perceptible substances τς 
and principles may probably be taken as just so many; the 
assertion of mecesstty must be left to more powerful thinkers. 

If there can be no spatial movement which does not 
conduce to the moving of a star, and if further every being 
and every substance which is immune from change and in 
virtue of itself has attained to the best must be considered an 20 
end, there can be no other being apart from these we have 
named, but this must be the number of the substances. For 
if there are others, they will cause change as being a final 
cause of movement; but there cannot be other movements 
besides those mentioned. And it is reasonable to infer this 
from a consideration of the bodies that are moved; for ifs 
everything that moves is for the sake of that which is moved, 
and every movement belongs to something that is moved, 
no movement can be for the sake of itself or of another 
movement, but all movements must be for the sake of the 
stars. For if a movement is to be for the sake of a move- 
ment, this latter also will have to be for the sake of something 
else; so that since there cannot be an infinite regress, the 30 
end of every movement will be one of the divine bodies which 
move through the heaven. 

Evidently there is but one heaven. For if there are many 
heavens as there are many men, the moving principles, of 
which each heaven will have one, will be one in form but 
in number many. But all things that are many in number 
have matter. (For one and the same formula applies to many 
things, e.g. the formula of man; but Socrates is ove.*) But 
the primary essence has not matter; for it is complete reality. 35 
So the unmovable first mover is one both in formula and in 
number; therefore also that which is moved always and con- 
tinuously is one alone; therefore there is one heaven alone. 

Our forefathers in the most remote ages have handed down 1074” 

1 The argument is:—Each unchangeable perfect substance is an end 
and must ὡς ὁρεκτόν produce a distinct motion. But every motion is 
ultimately for the sake of a φερόμενον, and as we have enumerated the 
motions necessary for the φερόμενα, there can be no more motions and 
therefore no more unchangeable perfect substances. 

2 i.e. the λόγος is common to all men, so that it must be matter which 
gives Socrates his uniqueness. 

8 

1ο 

15 

METAPHYSICA 

to us their posterity ἃ tradition, in the form of a myth, 
that these substances are gods and that the divine encloses 
the whole of nature. The rest of the tradition has been 
added later in mythical form with a view to the persuasion of 
the multitude and to its legal and utilitarian expediency ; 
they say these gods are in the form of men or like some of 
the other animals, and they say other things consequent 
on and similar to these which we have mentioned. Bat if we 
were to separate the first point from these additions and take 
it alone—that they thought the first substances to be gods, we 
must regard this as an imspired utterance, and reflect that, 
while probably each art and science has often been developed 
as far as possible and has again perished, these opinions have 
been preserved until the present, like relics of the ancient 
treasure. Only thus far, then, is the opinion of our ancestors 
and our earliest predecessors clear to us. 

CHAPTER IX 

The nature of the divine thought involves certain problems ; 
for while thought is held to be the most divine of things observed 
by us, the question what it must be in order to have that 
character involves difficulties. For if it thinks nothing, what 
is there here of dignity? It is just like one who sleeps. And 
if it thinks, but this depends on something else, then (as that 
which is its substance is not the act of thinking, but a potency) 

20 it cannot be the best substance ; for it is through thinking that 

its value belongs to it. Further, whether its substance is the 
faculty of thought or the act of thinking, what does it think? 
Either itself or something else; and if something else, either 
the same always or something different. Does it matter, 
then, or not, whether it thinks the good or any chance 

25thing? Are there not some things about which it is in- 

credible that it should think? Evidently, then, it thinks that 
which is most divine and precious, and it does not change ; 
for change would be change for the worse, and this would be 
already a movement.’ First, then, if ‘thought’ is not the act 

1 Sc. while vous is ex hypothes: unmovable. 

A. BOOK XII 1074? 

of thinking but a potency, it would be reasonable to suppose 
that the continuity of its thinking is wearisome to it. Secondly, 
there would evidently be something else more precious than 
thought, viz. that which is thought. For both thinking and 30 
the act of thought will belong even to one who has the worst 
of thoughts. Therefore if this ought to be avoided (and it 
ought, for there are even some things which it is better not 
to see than to see), the act of thinking cannot be the best 
of things. Therefore it must be itself that thought thinks 
(since it is the most excellent of things), and its thinking is 
a thinking on thinking. 

But evidently knowledge and perception and opinion and 35 
understanding have always something else as their object, 
and themselves only by the way. Further, if thinking and 
being thought are different, in respect of which does goodness 
belong to thought? For the act of thinking and the object 
of thought have not the same essence. We answer that in 
some cases the knowledge is the object. In the productive 1075? 
sciences (if we abstract from the matter) the substance in the 
sense of essence, and in the theoretical sciences the formula 
or the act of thinking, zs the object. As, then, thought and 
the object of thought are not different in the case of things 
that have not matter, they will be the same, i.e. the divine 5 
thinking will be one with the object of its thought. 

A further question is left—whether the object of the 
divine thought is composite; for if it were, thought would 
change in passing from part to part of the whole. We 
answer that everything which has not matter is indivisible. 
As human thought, or rather the thought of composite 
objects, is in a certain period of time (for it does not possess 
the good at this moment or at that, but its best, being 
something dzfferent from it, is attained only in a whole period 
of time), so throughout eternity is the thought which has ro 
itself for its object. 

1075" 

13 

20 

25 

20 

METAPHYSICA 

CHAPTER X 

We must consider also in which of two ways the nature of 
the universe contains the good or the highest good, whether 
as something separate and by itself, or as the order of the 
parts. Probably in both ways, as an army does. For the 
good is found both in the order and in the leader, and more 
in the latter; for he does not depend on the order but it 
depends on him. And all things are ordered together some- 
how, but not all alike,—both fishes and fowls and plants; 
and the world is not such that one thing has nothing to do 
with another, but they are connected. For all are ordered 
together to one end. (But it is as in a house, where the 
freemen are least at liberty to act at random, but all things 
or most things are already ordained for them, while the slaves 
and the beasts do little for the common good, and for the 
most part live at random ; for this is the sort of principle that 
constitutes the nature of each.) I mean, for instance, that 
all must at least come to be dissolved into their elements," 
and there are other functions similarly in which all share 
for the good of the whole. 

We must not fail to observe how many impossible or 
paradoxical results confront those who hold different views 
from our own, and what are the views of the subtler 
thinkers, and which views are attended by fewest diff- 
culties. All make all things out of contraries. But 
neither ‘all things’ nor ‘ out of contraries’ is right; nor do 
they tell us how the things in which the contraries are 
present can be made out of the contraries; for contraries 
are not affected by one another. Now for us this difficulty 
is solved naturally by the fact that there is a third factor. 
These thinkers however make one of the two contraries 
matter; this is done for instance by those who make the 
unequal matter for the equal, or the many matter for 
the one. But this also is refuted in the same way; for the 
matter which is one for all things is contrary to nothing. 

1 Sc. in order that higher forms of being may be produced by new com- 

binations of the elements. , 
2 i.e. the substratum. 

A. BOOK XII 1075" 

Further, all things, except the one, will, on the view we are 
criticizing, partake of evil; for the bad is itself one of the two 35 
elements. But the other school does not treat the good and 
the bad even as principles; yet in all things the good is in the 
highest degree a principle. The school we first mentioned is 
right in saying that it is a principle, but ow the good is a 
principle they do not say—whether as end or as mover or 
as form. 

Empedocles! also has a paradoxical view ; for he identifies 1075” 
the good with love. But this is a principle both as mover (for 
it brings things together) and as matter (for it is part of 
the mixture). Now even if it happens that the same thing 
is a principle both as matter and as mover, still the being, 5 
at least, of the two is not the same. In which respect then is 
love a principle? It is paradoxical also that strife should 
be imperishable; strife is the very nature of the bad. 

Anaxagoras makes the good a motive principle; for 
reason moves things, but moves them for an end, which must 
be something other than it, except according to our way 
of stating the case; for, on our view, the medical art is 
in a sense health. It is paradoxical also not to suppose to 
a contrary to the good, i.e. to reason. But all who speak 
of the contraries make no use of the contraries, unless we 
bring their views into shape. And why some things are 
perishable and others imperishable, no one tells us; for they 
make all existing things out of the same principles. Further, 
some make existing things out of the non-existent ; and others 15 
to avoid the necessity of this make all things one. 

Further, why should there always be becoming, and what is 
the cause of becoming ?—this no one tells us. And those who 
suppose two principles must suppose another, a superior 
principle, and so must those who believe in the Forms’; for 
why did things come to participate, or why do they participate, 
in the Forms? And all other thinkers are confronted by the 20 
necessary consequence that there is something contrary to 
Wisdom, i.e. to the highest knowledge; but we are not. 
For there is nothing contrary to that which is primary (for all 

1 Cf. A. 985° 4. 
2 1075» 19 read ἔτι ἄλλη ἀρχὴ κυριωτέρα. 

AR. MET. 5 

1075° METAPHYSICA 

contraries have matter and are potentially the same); and 
the ignorance which is contrary to philosophy would need a 
contrary object! ; but what is primary has no contrary. 

25 Again, if besides sensible things no others exist, there will 
be no first principle, no order, no becoming, no heavenly 
bodies, but each principle will have a principle before it, 
as in the accounts of the mythologists and all the natural 
philosophers. But if the Forms or the numbers are to exist, 
they will be causes of nothing; or if not that, at least not of 
movement. 

Further, how is extension, i. 6. a continuum, to be produced 
out of unextended parts? For number will not, either as 

30 mover or as form, produce a continuum. But again there 
cannot be any contrary that is also a productive or moving 
principle ; for it would be possible for it not to be. Or 
at least its action would be posterior to its potency. 
The world then would not be eternal. But it is; one of 
these premises, then, must be denied. And we have said how 
this must be done.? Further, in virtue of what the numbers, 

35 or the soul and the body, or in general the form and the thing, 
are one—of this no one tells us anything; nor can any one 
tell, unless he says, as we do, that the mover makes them one. 
And those who say* mathematical number is first and go on 
to generate one kind of substance after another and give 

1076° different principles for each, make the substance of the 
universe a mere series of episodes (for one substance has no 
influence on another by its existence or non-existence), and 
they give us many governing principles; but the world must 
not be governed badly. 
5 ‘The rule of many is not good; one is the ruler.’ ὅ 

1 1075” 23 read ἄγνοια ἔσται τοῦ ἐναντίου. The passage is very difficult, 
but this reading, which may have been Alexander’s, gives a tolerable 
sense. If there were an ignorance contrary to philosophy, it would have 
an object contrary to τὸ πρῶτον, which is the object of philosophy. But. 
τὸ πρῶτον has no contrary. 

3 Since contraries must contain matter, and matter implies potentiality 
and contingency. 

5 Cf. 1071} 22. 4 Cf. Z. 1028 21, N. 1090” 13, 

5 1076" 5 omit ἔστω. Cf. L/2ad, ii. 204. 

BOOK XIII (M) 

CHAPTER I 

WE have stated what is the substance of sensible things, 
dealing in the treatise on physics! with the material sub- 
stratum, and. later? with the substance which has actual 
existence. Now since our inquiry is whether there is or is τὸ 
not besides the sensible substances any which is immovable 
and eternal, and, if there is, what it is, we must first consider 
what is said by others, so that, if there is anything which they 
say wrongly, we may not be liable to the same objections, 
while, if there is any opinion common to them and us, we 
shall not quarrel with ourselves on that account; for one 15 
must be content to state some points better than one’s 
predecessors, and others no worse. 

Two opinions are held on this subject; it is said that the 
objects of mathematics—i.e. numbers and lines and the like— 
are substances, and again that the Ideas are substances. 
And since (1) some recognize these as two different classes— 
the Ideas and the mathematical numbers, and (2) some 20 
recognize both as having one nature, while (3) some others 
say that the mathematical substances are the only substances, 
we must consider 3 the objects of mathematics, not qualifying 
them by any other characteristic—not asking, for instance, 
whether they are Ideas or not, or whether they are the 
principles and substances of existing things or not, but only a5 
whether as the objects of mathematics they exist or not, and 
if they do, how they exist; then after this we must sepa- 
rately consider * the Ideas themselves in a general way, and 
only as far as systematic treatment demands; for most of 
what we have to say has been repeatedly stated in popular 
works. And the greater part of our account® must attack the 

1 Phys. i. 6-9. CE ch 2 Met. ΖΗΘ. 5 CE ‘ 8 Cf. ch, 2, 3. 
. Ch. 4, 5. Cf. ch. 6-9. 

5.2 

1076" - METAPHYSICA 

80 Inquiry already mentioned,! viz. whether the substances and 
the principles of existing things are numbers and Ideas; for 
after the discussion of the Ideas this remains as a third 
inquiry. 

If the objects of mathematics exist, then they must exist 
either in sensible objects, as some say, or separate from 

35 sensible objects (and this also is said by some), or if they 
exist in neither of these ways, either they do not exist, or 
they exist only in some special sense. So that the subject 
of our discussion will be not whether they exist but how 
they exist. | 

CHAPTER II 

That it is impossible for mathematical objects to exist 222 
sensible things and at the same time that the doctrine in 
question is a fanciful one, has been said already in our 

1076" discussion of difficulties ,—the reasons being that it is impos- 
sible for two solids to be in the same place, and that 
according to the same argument all the other powers and 
characteristics also® should exist in sensible things—none of 
them existing separately. This we have said already. But, 
further, it is obvious that on this theory it is impossible for 

s any body whatever to be divided; for it would have to be 
divided at a plane, and the plane at a line, and the line at 
a point, so that if the point cannot be divided, neither can 
the line, and if the line cannot, neither can the plane nor the 
solid. What difference then does it make whether sensible 
things are such indivisible entities, or, without being so them- 

το selves, have indivisible entities in them? The result will be 
the same; if the sensible things are divided the others will 
be divided too, or else not even the sensible things can be 
divided. | 

But, again, it is not possible that such entities should exist 
separately. For if besides the sensible solids there are to be 
other solids which are separate from them and prior to the 
sensible solids, it is plain that besides the planes also there 

1 Cf. 1. 24 πότερον ἀρχαί, &c. 2 Cf. B. 998% 7-19. 

3 Which nevertheless the theory in question represents as Ideas apart 
from sensible things. 

M. BOOK XIII 

must be other and separate planes and points and lines ; for 
consistency requires this. But if these exist, again besides 
the planes and lines and points of the mathematical solid 
there must be others which are separate. For the incomposite 
is prior to the compound; and if there are, prior to the 
sensible bodies, bodies which are not sensible, by the same 
argument the planes which exist by themselves must be 
prior to those which are in the motionless solids. Therefore 
these will be planes and lines other than those that exist 
along with the mathematical solids to which these thinkers 
assign separate existence; for the latter exist along with the 
mathematical solids, while the others are prior to the mathe- 
matical solids. Again, there will be, belonging to these planes, 
lines, and prior to them there will have to be, by the same 
argument, other lines and points; and prior to these points in 
the prior lines there will have to be other points, though there 
will be no others prior to these. Now (1) the accumulation 
becomes absurd; for we find ourselves with one set of solids 
apart from the sensible solids; three sets of planes apart 
from the sensible planes—those which exist apart from the 
sensible planes, and those in the mathematical solids, and those 
which exist apart from those in the mathematical solids ; 
four sets of lines, and five sets of points. With which of these, 
then, will the mathematical sciences deal? Certainly not 
with the planes and lines and points in the motionless solid ; 
for science always deals with what is prior. And (2) the same 
account will apply also to numbers ; for there will be another 
set of units apart from each set of points, and also apart from 
each set of realities, from the objects of sense! and again 
from those of thought; so that there will be various classes 
of mathematical numbers.” ; 

Again, how is it possible to solve the questions which we 
enumerated in our discussion of difficulties? For besides 
the sensible things there will be, on similar principles, the 
things with which astronomy and those with which geometry 
deals; but how is it possible that a heaven and its parts— 
or indeed anything which has movement—should exist apart 

1 1076” 38 read ὄντα, τὰ αἰσθητά, 2 1076” 39 omit ἄπειρα, 
8 B. 997" 12-34. 

1076 

15 

20 

30 

35 

1077" 

1077" METAPHYSICA 

from the sensible heaven? Similarly also. the objects of 
5 optics and harmonics will exist apart; for there will be voice 
and sight besides the sensible or individual voices and sights. 
Therefore it is plain that the other senses as well, and the 
other objects of sense, will exist apart; for why should one 
set of them do so and another not? And if this is so, animals 
also will exist apart, since the senses will. 
Again, there are certain mathematical theorems of a uni- 
to versal character, extending beyond these substances. Here 
then we shall have another substance intermediate between, 
and separate from, the Ideas and the intermediates,|—a sub- 
stance which is neither number nor points nor spatial mag- 
nitude nor time. And if this is impossible, plainly it is also 
impossible that the former substances should exist separate 
from sensible things. 
rs And, in general, conclusions contrary alike to the truth 
and to the usual views follow, if one supposes the objects of 
mathematics to exist thus as separate entities. For if they 
exist thus they must be prior to sensible spatial magnitudes, 
but in truth they must be posterior; for the incomplete 
spatial magnitude is in the order of generation prior, but in 
the order of substance posterior, as the lifeless is to the living. 
.a0 Again, what in the world will make ? mathematical magni- 
tudes one? For things in our perceptible world are one in 
virtue of soul, or of a part of soul, or of something else, reason- 
ably enough*; when these are not present, the thing is 
a plurality, and splits up into parts. But in the case of the 
subjects of mathematics, which are divisible and are quantities, 
what is the cause of their being one and holding together ? 
Again, the modes of generation of the objects of mathe- 
matics show that we are right. For the dimension first 
25 generated is length, then comes breadth, lastly depth, and 
the process is complete. If, then, that which is posterior in 
the order of generation is prior in the order of substance, the 
solid will be prior to the plane and the line. And in Zhis 
way also it is more complete and more whole, because it can 

1 A Platonic expression for τὰ μαθηματικά, which were regarded as 
intermediate between Ideas and sensible things. 
3 1077° 20 read rive καί ποτ᾽, ° 5 1077* 22 read τινί, εὐλόγως. 

M. BOOK XIII 1077" 

become animate. How, on the other hand, could a line or 
a plane be animate? The supposition passes the power of 3° 
our senses. 

Again, the solid is a sort of substance ; for it already has 
in a sense completeness. But how can lines be substances? 
Neither as a form or shape, as the soul perhaps is, nor as 
matter, like the solid; for we have no experience of anything 
that can be put together out of lines or planes or points, 35 
while if these had been a sort of material substance, we should 
have observed things which could be put together out of 
them. 

Grant that they are prior in formula. Still not all things 1077” 
which are prior in formula are prior in substance. For those 
things are prior in substance which when separated from other 
things surpass them in the power of independent existence, 
but those are prior in formula out of whose formulae the 
formulae of other things are compounded; and these two 
properties are not co-extensive. For if attributes, such as 5 
‘moving’ or ‘white’, do not exist apart from their sub- 
stances, the white is prior to the white man in formula, 
but not in substance. For it cannot exist separately, but is 
always along with the concrete thing; and by the concrete 
thing I mean the white man. Therefore it is plain that 
neither is the result of abstraction prior nor that which is 
produced by adding determinants posterior; for it is by ro 
adding a determinant to the white that we speak of the 
white man. 

‘It has, then, been sufficiently pointed out that the objects 
of mathematics are not substances in a higher sense than 
bodies are, and that they are not prior to sensibles in being, 
but only in formula, and that they cannot in any way exist 
separately. But since they could not exist 222 sensibles either, 
it is plain that they either do not exist at all or exist in 15 
a special sense and therefore do not ‘exist’ without qualifica- 
tion. For ‘exist’ has many senses, 

1077 METAPHYSICA 

CHAPTER III 

Just as the universal part of mathematics deals not with 
objects which exist separately, apart from extended magni- 
tudes and from numbers, but with magnitudes and numbers, 
not however gua such as to have magnitude or to be divisible,? 

20 Clearly it is possible that there should also be both propositions 
and demonstrations about sensible magnitudes, not however 
gua sensible but ga possessed of certain definite qualities.’ 
For as there are many propositions about things merely con- 

᾿ sidered as in motion, apart from the essence of each such 

25 thing and from their accidents, and as it is not therefore 
necessary that there should be either a mobile separate from 
sensibles, or a separate mobile substance in the sensibles, so 
too in the case of mobiles there will be propositions and 
sciences which treat them not gza mobile but only gua 
bodies, or again only gua planes, or only gua lines, or gua 
divisibles, or gua indivisibles having position, or only gua 
indivisibles. 

30 Thus since it is true to say without qualification that not 
only things which are separable but also things which are 
inseparable exist—for instance, that mobiles exist,—it is true 
also to say, without qualification, that the objects of mathe- 
matics exist, and with the character ascribed to them by 
mathematicians. And it is true to say of the other sciences 
too, without qualification, that they deal with such and such a 

35 subject—not with what is accidental to it (e.g. not with the 
white, if the white thing is healthy, and the science has 
the healthy as its subject), but with that which is the subject 

1078" of each science 8__with the healthy if it treats things gua 
healthy, with man if gva man. So too is it with geometry ; 
if its subjects happen to be sensible, though it does not treat 
them gua sensible, the mathematical sciences will not for 
that reason be sciences of sensibles—nor, on the other hand, 
of other things separate from sensibles. 

1 Cf. E, 10269 25, M. 1077° 9. 

2 i.e. as universal mathematics abstracts from the distinctions between 
different kinds of μαθηματικά, so geometry abstracts from the sensible 

characteristics of magnitudes and attends only to their spatial relations. 
8 1077” 36 read εἰ τὸ λευκὸν ὑγιεινόν, . . . ἐκείνου οὗ ἐστιν ἑκάστη. 

ee »., eee ae 

M. BOOK XIII 

Many properties attach to things in virtue of their own 
nature as possessed of some such differentia; e.g. there are 
attributes peculiar to the animal gua female or gua male, 
yet there is no ‘female’ nor ‘male’ separate from animals. 
And so also there are attributes which belong to things 
merely as lengths or as planes. And in proportion as we 
are dealing with things which are prior in formula and 
simpler, our knowledge will have more accuracy, i.e. simplicity. 
Thus a science which abstracts from the magnitude of things 
is more precise than one which takes it into account; and 
a science is most precise if it abstracts from movement, but 
if it takes account of movement, it is most precise if it deals 
with the primary movement, for this is the simplest; and 
of this again uniform movement is the simplest form. The 
same account may be given of harmonics and optics; for 
neither considers its objects gua sight or gua voice, but gua 
lines and numbers ; but the latter are attributes proper to the 
former. And mechanics too proceeds in the same way. 
Thus if we suppose attributes separated from their fellow- 
attributes and make any inquiry concerning them as such, 
we shall not for this reason be in error, any more than when 
one draws a line on the ground and calls it a foot long when 
it is not ; for the error is not included in the premises. 

Each question will be best investigated in this way—by 
supposing separate what is not separate, as the arithmetician 
and the geometer do. For a man gua man is one indivisible 
thing ; and the arithmetician supposes one indivisible thing, 
and then considers whether any attribute belongs to a man gua 
indivisible. But the geometer treats him neither gza man nor 
gua indivisible, but as a solid. For evidently the attributes 
which would have belonged to him even if he had not been 
indivisible, can belong to him apart from these attributes. 
Thus, then, geometers speak correctly—they talk about existing 
things, and their subjects do exist ; for being has two forms—it 
exists not only in complete reality but also as matter. 

Now since the good and the beautiful are different (for the 
former always implies conduct as its subject, while the 
beautiful is found also in motionless things), those who assert 

1 Sc. indivisibility and humanity. 10788 28 omit τὸ δυνατόν. 

1078* 

5 

20 

30 

1078* METAPHYSICA 

that the mathematical sciences say nothing of the beautiful 
or the good are in error. For these sciences say and prove 
35a very great deal about them; for if they do not expressly 
mention them, but prove attributes which are their results or 
their defining formulae, it is not true to say that they tell us 
nothing about them. The chief forms of beauty are order and 
1078" symmetry and definiteness, which the mathematical sciences 
demonstrate in a special degree. And since these (e.g. order 
and definiteness) are obviously causes of many things, evi- 
dently these sciences must treat this sort of causative principle 
5 also (i.e. the beautiful) as in some sense a cause. But we 
shall speak more plainly elsewhere! about these matters. 

CHAPTER IV 

So much then for the objects of mathematics ; we have 
said that they exist and in what sense they exist, and in what 
sense theyare prior and in what sense not prior. Now, regarding 

10 the Ideas, we must first examine the ideal theory by itself, not 
connecting it in any way with the nature of numbers, but 
treating it in the form in which it was originally understood 
by those who first maintained the existence of Ideas. The 
supporters of the ideal theory were led to it because they 
were persuaded of the truth of the Heraclitean doctrine that 

15 all sensible things are ever passing away, so that if knowledge 
or thought is to have an object, there must be some other 
and permanent entities, apart from those which are sensible ; 
for there can be no knowledge of things which are in a state 
of flux. Socrates occupied himself with the excellences of 
character, and in connection with them became the first to 
raise the problem of universal definitions—for in the realm of 

20 physics the problem was only touched on by Democritus, who 
defined, after a fashion, the hot and the cold ; while the Pytha- 
goreans had before this treated of a few things, whose definitions 
they connected with numbers—e. g. opportunity, justice, or mar- 
riage®, But it was natural that Socrates should seek the essence. 
For he was seeking to syllogize, and the essence is the starting- 

25 point of syllogisms. For there was as yet none of the dialectical 

1 Cf. A. 7. 10729 34, 10, N. 4. 2 Cf. Diels, Vorsokratiker, p. 270, § 4. 

M. BOOK XIII 1078> 

power which enables people even without knowledge of the 
essence to speculate about contraries and inquire whether the 
same science deals with contraries. For two things may 
be fairly ascribed to Socrates—inductive arguments and 
universal definition, both of which are concerned with the 30 
starting-point of science. But Socrates did not make the 
universals or the definitions exist apart; his successors, 
however, gave them separate existence, and this was the kind 
of thing they called Ideas. 

Therefore it followed for them, almost by the same argu- 
ment, that there must be Ideas of all things that are spoken 
of universally, and it was almost as if a man wished to count 
certain things, and while they were few thought he would not 
be able to count them, but made them more and then counted 35 
them ; for the Forms are almost more numerous than the 
groups of sensible things, yet it was in seeking the causes of 1079* 
sensible things that they proceeded from these to the Forms. 
For to each set of substances there answers a Form which 
has the same name and exists apart from the substances, and 
so also in the other categories ! there is one character common 
to many individuals, whether these be sensible or eternal. 

Again, of the ways in which it is proved that the Forms exist, 
none is convincing; for from some no inference necessarily 5 
follows, and from some it follows that there are Forms even 
of things of which the Platonists think there are no Forms. 

For according to the arguments from the sciences there will 
be Forms of all things of which there are sciences, and 
according to the argument that there is one attribute common 
to many things there will be Forms even of negations, and τὸ 
according to the argument that thought has an object when 
the individual object has perished, there will be Forms of 
perishable things ; for we can have an image of these. Again, 
of the most accurate arguments, some -lead to Ideas of 
relations, of which the Platonists say there is no independent 
class, and others involve the difficulty of the ‘third man’? . 
And in general the arguments for the Forms destroy that for 
whose existence the assertors of Forms are more anxious than 

1 1079* 3 read οὐσίας, τῶν re ἄλλων. 
2 Cf, Κ᾿ 1059” 8 and Plato, Parmenides, 131 E. 

1079* METAPHYSICA 

15 for the existence of the Ideas ; for it follows that not the dyad 
but number is first, and the relative is prior to the absolute’ 
—and besides this there are all the other points on which 
certain people, by following out the opinions held about the 
Forms, have come into conflict with the principles of the 
theory. 

Again, according to the assumption on which the belief in 

20 the Ideas rests, there will be Forms not only of substances but 
also of many other things ; for the concept is single, not only 
in the case of substances, but also in that of non-substances, 
and there are sciences of other things than substance; and a 
thousand other such conclusions also follow. But according 
to the necessities of the case and the opinions about the 

25 Forms, if they can be shared in there must be Ideas of sub- 
stances only. For they are not shared in incidentally, but 
each Form must be shared in as something not predicated of a 
subject. (E.g. if a thing shares in ‘ the double itself ’, it shares 
also in ‘eternal’, but incidentally ; for ‘the double’ happens to 

80 be eternal.) Therefore the Forms will be substance. And the 
same names indicate substance in this and in the ideal world 
(or what will be the meaning of saying that there is some- 
thing apart from the particulars—the one over many 9).2 And 
if the Ideas and the things that share in them have the same 
Form, there will be something common: for why should ‘ 2’ 

35 be one® and the same in all the perishable 2’s, or in the 
28 which are many but eternal,‘ and not the same in the 
‘2 itself’ as in the individual 2? But if they have not the 

1079" same Form, they will have only the name in common, and it 
is as if one were to call both Callias and a piece of wood 
‘man’, without observing any community between them.5 

But if we are to suppose that in other respects the common 
formulae apply to the Forms, e.g. that ‘plane figure’ and 

1 j,e, number, which is relative, is prior to the dyad, which the ideal 
theory supposes to be absolute. 

3 This seems to be an enthymeme, the conclusion to be supplied being 
that the Forms, since they are substances, must be of substances. 

8 1079 35 omit εἶναι. 

4 Sc. the abstract (eternal) 2’s of which we can say e.g. 2 + 2 = 4, 1.6. 
τὰ μεταξύ, which like the Ideas are eternal, but like sensible things are 
many. 

5 With 1078” 32-1079° 3 cf. A. 990% 34-991* 8. 

M. BOOK XIII 1079” 

the other parts of the formula apply to the circle-in-itself, 
but the name of that of which it is the Form is to be added,} 5 
we must inquire whether this is not absolutely meaningless. 
For to what will this be added? To ‘centre’ or to ‘plane’ or 
to all the parts of the formula? For all the elements in the 
essence are Ideas, e.g. ‘animal’ and ‘two-footed’. Further, 
the added notion must be an Idea, just as ‘plane’ must be 

a definite entity which will be present as genus in all its 10 
species, 

CHAPTER V 

Above all one might discuss the question what on earth the 
Forms contribute to sensible things, either to those that are 
eternal or to those which come into being and cease to be ; 
for they cause neither movement nor any change in them. 
But again they help in no wise towards the kxowledge of other 
things (for they are not even the substance of these, else they 
would have been in them), nor towards their being, at least if 
they are not zz the individuals which share in them; though in 
that sense? white might be thought to cause® the whiteness 
of the white thing in which it is mixed. But this argument, 
which was used first by Anaxagoras, and later by Eudoxus in 20 
his discussion of difficulties and by certain others, is too easily 
upset ; for it is easy to collect many insuperable objections to 
such a view. 

But further all other things cannot come from the Forms in 
any of the ways that are usually suggested. And to say that 
they are patterns and the other things share in them is to use 25 
empty words and poetical metaphors. For what is it that 
works, looking to the Ideas? And any thing can both be and 
come into being* without being copied from something else, 
so that, whether Socrates exists or not, a man like Socrates 
might come to be. And evidently this might be so even if 30 
Socrates were eternal. And according to the Platonic prin- 

= 

5 

1 So that the definition of ‘ideal circle’ would be ‘a plane figure whose 
circumference is at all points equidistant from the centre, and which is 
the Form of individual circles’. 

2 Sc. as present in the individual. 

3 4079” 18 read αἰτία δόξειεν ἂν εἶναι τὸ λευκόν. 

* 1079» 28 omit ὅμοιον. 

1079" METAPHYSICA 

ciples there will be several patterns of the same thing, and 
therefore several Forms, e.g. ‘animal’ and ‘two-footed’, and also 
‘man-himself’, will be Forms of man. Again, the Forms are 
patterns not only of sensible things, but of things-in-them- 
selves also, e.g. the genus is the pattern of the species of the 
genus; therefore the same thing will be pattern and copy. 
35 _ Again, it might be thought impossible that substance and 
1080* that whose substance it is should exist apart; how, therefore, 
could the Ideas, being substances of things, exist apart? © 
In the Phaedo ' it is stated in this way—that the Forms are 
causes both of being and of becoming. Yet though the Forms 
exist, still things do not come into being, unless there is some- 
thing to move them ; and many other things come into being 
5 (e.g. a house or a ring), of which they say there are no Forms. 
Clearly therefore even the things of which they say there are 
Ideas can both be and come into being owing to such causes 
as produce the things just mentioned,? and not owing to the 
Forms. But regarding the Ideas it is possible, both in this way 
το and by more abstract and more accurate arguments, to collect 
many objections like those we have considered. 

CHAPTER VI 

Since we have discussed these points, it is well to consider 
again the results regarding numbers which confront those who 
say that numbers are separable substances and first causes of 

1s things. If number is a real thing and its substance is nothing 
other than just number, as some say, it follows that either 
(1) there is a first? in it and a second, each being different in 
kind, and this is true of the units without qualification, and any 
go unit is inaddible to any unit,* or (2) they are all directly 
successive, and any of them are addible to any, as they say is 
the case with mathematical number; for in mathematical 
number no unit is in any way different from another. Or 

1 100 D. 3. With 1079? 12-10808 8 cf. A. 991% 8-Ὁ 9. 

8 10808 17 read πρῶτόν τι. 

* Aristotle begins #froc... καὶ τοῦτο 7, as though the first main division 
were to be subdivided, and then he were to come to the second main 

division. But really the subdivisions of the first division cover the whole 
ground, and it is clearer to make simply four divisions. 

M. BOOK XIII 1080° 

(3) some units must be addible and some not, e.g. 2 is first 
after 1,and then comes 3 and then the other numbers, and 
the units in each number are addible, e.g. those in the first 25 
2 are addible to one another, and those in the first 3 to one 
another, and so with the other numbers; but the units in the 
‘9 itself’ are not addible to those in the ‘3 itself’; and 
similarly in the case of the other successive numbers. 
Therefore while mathematical number is counted thus—after 30 
1, 2 (which consists of another 1 besides the former 1), and 3 
(which consists of another 1 besides these two), and the other 
numbers similarly, ideal number is counted thus—after I, a 
distinct 2 which does not include the first 1, and a 3 which does 
not include the 2, and the other numbers similarly. Or (4) one 35 
kind of number is like the first that was named, one like that 
which the mathematicians speak of, and that which we have 
named last must be a third kind. 

Again, these numbers must either be separable from things, 
or not separable but in sensible things (not however in the 1080 
way which we first considered,! but in the sense that sensible 
things consist of numbers which are present in them)—either 
some of them and not others, or all of them.” 

These are of necessity the only ways in which the numbers 
can exist. And of those who say that the 1 is the beginning 5 
and substance and element of all things, and that number is 
formed from the 1 and something else, almost every one has 
described number in one of these ways; only no one has said 
all the units are inaddible. And this has happened reasonably 
enough ; for there can be no way besides those mentioned, τὸ 
Some say both kinds of number exist, that which has a before 
and after® being identical with the Ideas, and mathematical 
number being different from the Ideas and from sensible 
things, and both being separable from sensible things; and 
others say mathematical number alone exists, as the first 
of realities, separate from sensible things. 15 

Now the Pythagoreans, also, believe in one kind of number 
—the mathematical; only they say it is not separate but 

1 Cf. 1076 38> 11. 
2 1080? 3 read αἰσθητά---ἣ τὸν μὲν αὐτῶν εἶναι τὸν δὲ μὴ ἢ πάντας εἶναι. 
δ i.e. in which the numbers differ in kind. 

1080” METAPHYSICA 

sensible substances are formed out of it. For they construct 
the whole universe out of numbers—only not numbers con- 
sisting of abstract units; they suppose the units to have 

20 Spatial magnitude. But how the first 1 was constructed so as 
to have magnitude, they seem unable to say. 

Another thinker says the first kind of number, that of the 
Forms, alone exists, and some say mathematical number is 
identical with this. 

The case of lines, planes, and solids is similar. For some 
think that those which are the objects of mathematics are 

25 different from those which come after the Ideas;! and of those 
who express themselves otherwise some speak of the objects of 
mathematics and in a mathematical way—viz. those who do 
not make the Ideas numbers nor say that Ideas exist; and 
others speak of the objects of mathematics, but not mathe- 
matically ; for they say that neither is every spatial magnitude 
divisible into magnitudes, nor do any two units taken at ran- 

30 dom make 2. All who say the 1 is an element and principle 
of things suppose numbers to consist of abstract units, except 
the Pythagoreans; but skhey suppose the numbers to have 
magnitude, as has been said before. It is clear from this 
statement, then, in how many ways numbers may be described, 

35 and that all the ways have been mentioned; and all are 
impossible, but some perhaps more than others. 

CHAPTER VII 

First let us inquire if the units are addible or inaddible, and if 

1081* inaddible, in which of the two ways we distinguished.” For it 
is possible that any unit is inaddible to any, and it is possible 

that those in the ideal 2 are inaddible to those in the ideal 3, 

and, generally, that those in each ideal number are inaddible to 

5 those in other ideal numbers. (1) If all units are addible and 
without difference, we get mathematical number and this alone, 

and the Ideas cannot be the numbers. For what sort of number 

will the ideal man or animal or any other Form be? There 

is one Idea of each thing, e.g. one of ideal man and another 

1 Cf. A. 992 13-18, | * Cf, 10808 18-20, 23-35, 

M. BOOK XIII 10812 

one of ideal animal; but the similar and undifferentiated 10 
numbers are infinitely many, so that any particular 3 is no 
more the ideal man than any other 4. But if the Ideas are 
not numbers, neither can they exist at all. For from what 
. principles will the Ideas come? Mumber comes from the 1 
and the indefinite dyad, and the principles and the elements 15 
are said to be principles and elements of number, and the 
Ideas cannot be ranked as either prior or posterior to the 
numbers. 

But (2) if the units are inaddible, and inaddible in the sense 
that none can be added to any other, number of this sort 
cannot be mathematical number; for mathematical number 
consists of undifferentiated units, and the truths proved of it 20 
suit this character. Nor can it be ideal number. For 2 will 
not come first after 1 and the indefinite dyad, and be followed 
directly by the successive numbers, as we say ‘2, 3, 4’ (for the 

. units in the ideal 2 are generated at the same time, whether, 
as the first holder of the theory said, from ‘unequals—coming 
into being when these were equalized—or in some other way) ; 
since, if one unit is to be prior to the other, it will be prior 
to the 2 composed of these; for when there is one thing prior 
and another posterior, the compound of these will be prior to 
one and posterior to the other.! 

Again, since the ideal 1 is first, and then there is a particular 30 
τ which is first among the others and next after the ideal 1, and 
again a third which is next after the second and next but one 
after the first 1, the units must be prior to the numbers by 
which they are named in counting’, e.g. there will be a third 

unit in 2 before 3 exists, and a fourth and a fifth in 3 before 
the numbers 4 and 5 exist.—None of these thinkers has said 35 
the units are inaddible in this way, but according to their 
principles even this way is reasonable, though in truth it is 
impossible. For it is reasonable that the units should have 1081" 
priority and posteriority if there is a first unit and a first 1, and 

5 

1 The theory of ideal number holds that 2 comes next after the original 
1, which with the ‘indefinite 2’ is the source of number. But if all units 
are different in species, one of the units in 2 is prior to the other and .". 
to 2, and comes next after the original1. Similarly between 2 and 3 there 
will be the first unit in 3, and soon. 10818 25 read ἐπεὶ εἰ, 

3 1081 33 read λέγονται. 

‘AR. MET. T 

1081" METAPHYSICA 

the 2’s also if there isa first 2; for after the first it is reasonable 

5 and necessary that there should be a second, and if a second, a 
third, and so with the others successively. (And to say both 
at the same time, that a #z¢ is first and another unit is second 
after the ideal 1, and that a 2 is first after it, is impossible.) 
But they make a first unit and 1, but not a second and a third, 
and a first 2, but not a second and a third. 

10 Clearly, also, it is not possible, if all the units are inaddible, 
that there should be an ideal 2 and 3; and similarly in the 
case of the other numbers. For whether the units are un- 
differentiated or each differs from each, number must be counted 

15 by addition, e.g. 2 by adding another one to the one, 3 by 
adding another one to the two, and 4 similarly. This being 
so, numbers cannot be generated, as they generate them, from 
the dyad and the 1; for 2 becomes part of 3, and 3 of 4, 
and the same happens in the case of the succeeding numbers, 

20 but ¢hey say 4 came from the first 2 and the indefinite 2,— 
which makes it two 2’s ofher than the ideal 2} ; if not, the 
ideal 2? will be a part of 4 and one other 2 will be added. 
And similarly 2 will consist of the ideal 1 and another 1; but 

25 if this is so, the other element cannot be an indefinite 2 ; for 
it generates one unit, but not, as the indefinite 2 does, a defi- 
nite 2. Again, besides the ideal 3 and the ideal 2 how can 
there be other 3’s and 2’s? And how do they consist of prior 
and posterior units? All these doctrines are mere fiction, 

80 and there cannot be a first 2 and then an ideal 3. Yet there 
must, if the 1 and the indefinite dyad are to be the elements. 
But if the results are impossible, it is also impossible that 
these are the generating principles. 

If the units, then, are differentiated, each from each, these 

35 results and others similar to these follow of necessity. But 
(3) if those in different numbers are differentiated, but those in 
the same number are alone undifferentiated from one another, 

1082 even so the difficulties that follow are no less. E.g. in the 
ideal 10 there are ten units, and the 10 is composed both of 
them and of two 53. But since the ideal 10° is not any 

1 The indefinite 2 being δυοποιός produces two 2’s by operating on the 
ideal 2, and it is these two 2’s which are distinct from the ideal 2. 

2 1081 23 read αὐτή. 

> 1082" 3 read αὐτή. 

M. BOOK XIII 1082" 

chance number nor composed of any chance 5’s—or, for that 
matter, units—the units in this 10 must differ. For if they do 5 
not differ, neither will the 5’s of which the 10 consists differ ; 
but since they differ, the units also will differ. But if they 
differ, will there be no other 5’s in the 10 but only these two, 
or will there be others? If there are not, this is paradoxical ; 
and if there are, what sort of 10 will consist of them? For 10 
there is no other 10 in 276 10 but itself. But it is also necessary 
that the 4 should not consist of any chance 2’s; for the inde- 
finite 2, as they say, took the definite 2 and made two 2’s; for 
its nature was to double what it took. 

Again, as to the 2 being a thing apart from the two units, 15 
and the 3 a thing apart from the three units, how is this pos- 
sible? Either by one’s sharing in the other!, as ‘ white man’ is 
different from ‘white’ and ‘man’ (for it shares in these), or 
when one is a differentia of the other, as ‘man’ is different 
from ‘animal’ and ‘two-footed’. -Again, some things are one 20 
by contact, some by intermixture, some by position; none of 
which relations can belong to the units of which the 2 or the 
3 consists ; but as two men are not a unity apart from both, 
so must it be with the units. And their being indivisible will 
make no difference to them; for points are indivisible, but yet 25 
a pair of them is nothing apart from the two. 

But this consequence also we must not forget, that it 
follows that there are prior and posterior 2’s, and similarly 
with the other numbers. For let the 2’s in the 4 be simul- 
taneous; yet these are prior to those in the 8, and as the 2 30 
generated them, they generated the 4’s in the ideal 8. There- 
fore if the first 2 is an Idea, these 2’s also will be Ideas. And 
the same account applies to the units ; for the units in the 
first 2 generate the four in 4, so that all the units come to be 
Ideas and an Idea will be composed of Ideas. Clearly 3; 
therefore those things also, of which these are Ideas, will be 
composite, e.g. one might say that animals are composed of 
animals, if there are Ideas of them. 1082 

In general, to differentiate the units in any way is an 
absurd fiction ; and by a fiction I mean that which is brought 
in forcibly to suit a hypothesis. For neither in quantity nor in 

1 10828 17 read θατέρου θατέρου. 
T 2 

1082 METAPHYSICA 

5 quality do we see unit differing from unit, and number must 
be either equal or unequal—all number but especially that 
which consists of abstract units—so that if one number is 
neither greater nor less than another, it is equal ; but what is 
equal and in no wise differentiated we take to be the same 
when we are speaking of numbers. If not, even the 2’s in 

10 this ideal 10 will be differentiated though they are equal ; for 
what reason will the man who says they are not differen- 
tiated be able to allege? 

Again, if every unit + another unit makes two, a unit from 
the ideal 2 and one from the ideal 3 will make a 2. Now 
this consists of differentiated units ; and will it be prior to the 

15 3 or posterior? It rather seems that it must be prior; for 
one of the units is simultaneous with the 3, and the other is 
simultaneous with the 2. And we, for our part, suppose that 
in general 1 and 1, whether the things are equal or unequal, is 
2, e.g. the good and the bad, or a man and a horse; but 
those who hold these views say that not even two znits 
are 2. 

If the number of the ideal 3 is not greater than that of the 

20 2, this is surprising ; and if it is, clearly there is a number in it 
equal to the 2, so that this is not different from the ideal 2. 
But this is not possible, if there is a first and a second num- 
ber.’ Nor will the Ideas be numbers. For in this particular 
point they are right who claim that the units must be different, 

25 if there are to be Ideas, as has been said before. For the 
Form is unique ; but if the units are not different, the 2’s and 
the 3’s also will not be different. Therefore they must say that 
when we count thus—‘ 1, 2, we do not add to the previous 

3o number ; for if we do, neither will the numbers be generated 
from the indefinite dyad, nor can a number be an Idea; for 
one Idea will be in another, and all the Forms will be parts 
of one Form. Therefore with a view to their hypothesis they 
are right, but absolutely they are wrong; for their view is 
very destructive, since they will admit that this question itself 

35 affords some difficulty—whether, when we count and say ‘1, 
2, 3, we count by addition or by partitions? But we do 

1 i.e. if there is a difference of kind between the numbers. 
2 i.e. (as Alexander explains) by starting with the notion of 10, and 

-M. BOOK XIII 1082? 

both; therefore it is absurd to infer from this so great a differ- 
ence of essence. 

CHAPTER VIII 

First of all it is well to determine what is the differentia of 1083" 
a number—and of a unit, if it has a differentia. Units must 
differ either in quantity or in quality ; and neither of these seems 
to be possible! But number gva number differs in quantity. 
And if the units also differed in quantity, number would differ 5 
from number, though equal in number of units. Again, are 
the first units greater or smaller, and do the later ones 
increase or diminish? All these are irrational suppositions. 
But neither can they differ in quality. For no attribute can 
attach to them ; for even to numbers quality is said to belong 10 
after quantity. Again, quality could not come to them either 
from the 1 or from the dyad; for the former has no quality, 
and the latter gives quantity; for its nature is what makes 
things to be many. If the facts are really otherwise, they 15 
should above all state this at the beginning and determine if 
possible, regarding the differentia of the unit, why it must 
exist, and, failing this, what differentia they mean. 

Evidently then, if the Ideas are numbers, the units can- 
not all be addible, nor can they be inaddible in either of 
the two ways.” But neither is the way in which some ao 
Others speak about numbers correct. These are those who 
do not think there are Ideas, either without qualification or as 
identified with certain numbers, but think the objects of 
mathematics exist and the numbers are the first of real things, 
and the ideal 1 is the starting-point of them. It is paradoxical 25 
that there should be a 1 which is first of 1’s, as-they say, but 
not a 2 which is first of 2's, nor a 3 of 3’s; for the same 
reasoning applies to all. If, then, the facts with regard to 
number are so, and one supposes mathematical number alone 
to exist, the 1 is not the starting-point. For this sort of 1 
must differ from the other units; and if this is so, there must 30. 
also be a 2 which is first of 2’s, and similarly with the other 
taking 1, 2, 3, &c., successively, as parts of it. Or the meaning may be 

simply ‘by splitting up a whole into its parts’. 
1 1083° 4 read ὑπάρχειν. 2 Cf. 10804 18-20, 23-35. 

1083* METAPHYSICA 

successive numbers. But if the 1 is the starting-point, the 
truth about the numbers must rather be what Plato used to 
say, and there must be a first 2 and 3, and the numbers must 

35 not be addible to one another. But if on the other hand one 
supposes this, many impossible results, as we have said, 
follow. But either this or the other must be the case, so that 
if neither is, number cannot exist separately. 

1083" It is evident from this that the third view! is the worst,— 
that ideal and mathematical number is the same. For two 
mistakes evidently meet in the one opinion. (1) Mathematical 

5 number cannot be of this sort, but the holder of this view has 
to spin it out by making suppositions peculiar to himself. 
And (2) he must also admit all the consequences that confront 
those who speak of number in the sense of ‘ Forms’. 

The doctrine of the Pythagoreans in one way affords fewer 
difficulties than those before named, but in another way has 
το Others peculiar to itself. For not thinking of number as 
capable of existing separately removes many of the impos- 
sible consequences ; but that bodies should be composed of 
numbers, and that this should be mathematical number, is 
impossible. For it is not true to speak of indivisible spatial 
magnitudes ; and however much there might be magnitudes 
15 of this sort, units at least have not magnitude; and how can 
a magnitude be composed of indivisibles? But arithmetical 
number, at least, consists of abstract units, while these thinkers 
identify number with real things ; at any rate they apply their 
propositions to bodies as if they consisted of those numbers. 
If then it is necessary, if number is a self-subsistent real 
ao thing, that it should be conceived in one of these ways which 
have been mentioned, and if it cannot be conceived in any of 
these, evidently number has no such nature as those who 
make it separable construct for it. 
Again, does each unit come from the great and the small, 
equalized, or one from the small, another from the great? 
25 (1) If the latter, neither does each thing contain all the ele- 
ments, nor are the units without difference ; for in one there 
is the great and in another the small, which is contrary in its 
nature to the great. Again, how is it with the units in the 

1 Cf. 1080 22. 

M. BOOK XIII 1083° 

ideal 3? There isone over. But perhaps it is for this reason that 
they give the ideal 1 the middle place in odd numbers.! (2) But 30 
if each of the two units consists of both the great and the 
small, equalized, how will the 2, which is one thing, consist of 
the great and the small? Or how will it differ from the unit? 
Again, the unit is prior to the 2; for when it is destroyed 
the 2 is destroyed. It must, then, be the Idea of an Idea 
since it is prior to an Idea, and it must have come into being 
before it. From what, then? Not from the indefinite dyad, 35 
for z¢s function was to double. 

Again, number must be either infinite or finite; for these 
thinkers think of number as capable of existing separately, so 
that it is not possible that neither of those alternatives should 
be true. Clearly it cannot be zzfinzte; for infinite number is 1084° 
neither odd nor even, but the generation of numbers is always 
the generation either of an odd or of an even number,—when 
I operates in one way? on an even number, an odd number 
is produced, and when 2 (or an odd number) operates in the 5 
other way,’ the numbers got from 1 by doubling (or the other 
even numbers) are produced. Again, if every Idea is an Idea 
of something, and the numbers are Ideas, infinite number will 
be an Idea of something, either of some sensible thing or of 
something else. Yet this is not possible in view of their 
hypothesis any more than it is reasonable in itself, if they 
conceive * of the Ideas as they do. 

But if number is fizite, how far does it go? With regard to ro 
this not only the fact but the reason should be stated. But if 
number goes only up to 10, as some say, firstly the Forms 
will soon run short; e.g. if 3 15 man-in-himself, what number 
will be the horse-in-itself ? The numbers which are Ideas of 
the several things go up to 10. It must, then, be one of the 15 
numbers within these limits; for it is these that are substances 
and Ideas. Yet they will run short; for the various forms of 
animal will exceed them. At the same time it is clear that if 
in this way ¢he 3 is the Idea of man, the other 3’s are so also 
(for those in the same number are similar), so that there will be 

1 Cf. Diels, Vorsokratiker, ed. 2, p. 270, ὃ 2. 
2 Sc. addition. ® Sc. multiplication. 
* 10848 Io read rdrrovai γ᾽. 

1084* METAPHYSICA 

20 an infinite number of men, and if each 3 is an Idea, each of the 
men will be man-in-himself, and if not, they will at least be 
men. And if the smaller number is part of the greater (being 
number of such a sort that the units in the same number are 
addible), then if the ideal 4 is an Idea of something, e.g. of 
‘horse’ or of ‘ white’, man will be a part of horse, if man is 2. 

25 It is paradoxical also that there should be an Idea of 10, but 
not of 11, nor of the succeeding numbers. Again, there both 
are and come to be certain things of which there are no 
Forms; why, then, are there not Forms of them alsor We 
‘infer that the Forms are not causes. Again, it is paradoxical if 

30 the number-series up to 10 is more of a real thing and a Form! 
than 10 itself. There is no generation of the former as one 
thing, and there is of the latter. But they try to form a theory 
on the assumption that the series of numbers up to Io isa 
complete series. At least they generate the derivatives—the 
void, proportion, the odd, and the others of this kind—within 

35 the decade. For some things, e. g. movement, rest, good, bad, 
they assign to the principles, and the others to the numbers. 
This is why they identify 1 with the odd; for if the odd 
implied 3, how would 5 be odd?? Again, spatial magnitudes 
and all such things are explained without going beyond a 

1084” definite number, e.g. first comes* the indivisible line,‘ then 
the 2, then the others up to το. 
Again, if number can exist separately, one might ask which 
is prior—1, or a number such as 2 or 3? Inasmuch as the 
s number is composite, 1 is prior, but inasmuch as the universal 
and the form is prior, the number is prior ; for each of the 
units is part of the number as its matter, and the number acts 
as form. And in a sense the right angle is prior to the acute, 
because it is definite and in virtue of its explanatory formula; 
but in a sense the acute is prior, because it is a part and the 
right angle is divided into acute angles. As matter, then, the 
το acute angle and the element and the unit are prior, but as 

1 1084" 29 read ὁ ἀριθμὸς ὁ μέχρι τῆς δεκάδος μᾶλλόν τι ὃν καὶ εἶδος. 

2 i,e. to account for the oddness of odd numbers they identify the odd 
with the 1, which is a principle present in all numbers, not with the 3, 
which on their theory is not present in other numbers. 

8 1084” 1 omit 7. 4 Cf. A. 992° 22. 

δ Cf. N. 1090” 21-24. 1 answers to the point (the ‘indivisible line’), 
2 to the line, 3 to the plane, 4 to the solid, andi +2+3+4= 10. 

M. BOOK XIII 

regards the form and the substance (in the sense of ‘the for- 
mula’), the right angle, and the whole consisting of the matter 
and the form, are prior ; for the concrete thing is nearer the 
form and the object formulated, but in generation it is later. 
How then is 1 the starting-point? Because it is not divisible, 
they say. But both the universal, and the particular or the 
element, are indivisible; but in different ways, one in formula 
‘and the other in time. In which way then is 1 the starting- 
point? As has been said, the right angle is thought to be 
prior to the acute, and the acute to the right, and each is 
one. They make 1 the starting-point in both ways. But this 
is impossible. For one kind of starting-point is the form or 
substance, the other the part or matter. For each of the 1’s 
in 2 exists in a sense; in truth it exists potentially (at least 
if the number is a unity and not like a heap, i.e. if different 
numbers consist of differentiated units, as they say), but not 
actually. 

The cause of the mistake they fell into is that they con- 
ducted their inquiry at the same time from the standpoint of 
mathematics and from that of universal formulae, so that 
(1) from the former standpoint they treated unity, their first 
principle, as a point; for the unit is a point without position. 
They put things together out of the smallest parts, as some 
others? have done. Therefore the unit becomes the matter of 
numbers and at the same time prior to 2; and again posterior, 
2 being treated as a whole, a unity, and a form. But (2) 
because their inquiry was universal they treated the unity 
which can be predicated of a number, as in this sense also? 
a part of the number. But these characteristics cannot belong 
at the same time to the same thing. 

If the ideal 1 must only fulfil this condition, that it is 
without a place in any particular number (for it differs in 
nothing from other 1’s except that it is the starting-point), 
and the 2 1s divisible but the unit is not, the unit must be 
liker the ideal 1 than the 2 is. But if the unit is liker it, z¢ 
must be liker to the unit than to the 2; therefore each of the 

1 Sc. the atomists. 
? i.e. they treated the unity which is predicable of a number, as well as 
the unit in a number, as a part of the number. 

1084° 

20 

30 

35 

1084" METAPHYSICA 

units in 2 must be prior to the 2. But they deny this; at 

1085" least they generate the 2 first. Again, if the ideal 2 is a unity 
and the ideal 3 is one also, both form a 2. From what, then, 
is this 2 produced ? 

CHAPTER IX 

Since there is not contact in numbers, but the units be- 

tween which there is nothing, e. g. those in 2 or in 3, are suc- 

5 cessive, one might ask whether they succeed the ideal 1 or not, 
and whether, of the terms that succeed it, 2 or either of the 
units in 2 is prior. 

Similar difficulties occur with regard to the classes of things 
posterior to number,—the line, the plane, and the solid. 
For some construct these out of the species of ‘great and 

10 small’ ; 6. σ΄, lines from ‘long and short ’, planes from ‘ broad 
and narrow’, masses from ‘deep and shallow’; which are 
species of ‘ great and small’. And the principle of the geo- 
metrical forms which answers to the 11 different Platonists 
describe in different ways. And in these also the impossi- 
bilities, the fictions, and the contradictions of all proba- 

15 bility are seen to be innumerable. For (1) the geometrical 
forms are severed from one another, unless the principles of 
these imply one another in such a way that the ‘broad and 
narrow’ is also ‘long and short’; but if this is so, the plane 
will be a line and the solid a plane. Again, how will angles 

ao and figures and such things be explained? And (2) the same 
happens as in regard to number; for ‘ long and short’, &c., are 
attributes of magnitude, but magnitude does not consist of 
these, any more than the line consists of ‘straight and curved’, 
or solids of ‘smooth and rough ’.® 

All these cases share a difficulty which occurs with regard 
to species of a genus, when one posits the universals, viz. 

25 whether it is the ideal animal or something other than the 
ideal animal that is in animals. True, if the universal is not 
separable, this will present no difficulty; but if the 1 and the 

11,6, that which is to the geometrical forms as the primary 1 is 
(according to the Platonic theory) to numbers. 

2 With 10858 7-19 cf. A. 9925 10-19. 

8 Cf. A. 992 1-6, N. 10888 15-21. 

M. BOOK XIII ᾿ 1085° 

numbers are separable, as those who express these views say, 

it is not easy to solve the difficulty, if one may call the im- 
possible ‘not easy’. For when we apprehend the unity in 
2, or in general in a number, do we apprehend a thing-in- 30 
itself or something else Ὁ} 

Some, then, generate spatial magnitudes from matter of this 
sort, others from the point—and the point is thought by them 
to be not 1 but something like 1—and from other matter like 
plurality, but not identical with it; about which principles 
none the less the same difficulties occur. For if the matter is 35 
one, line and plane and solid will be the same; for from the 
same elements will come one and the same thing. But if 
the matters are more than one, and there is one for the line 1085° 
and a second for the plane and another for the solid, they 
either imply one another or not, so that the same results will 
follow even so; for either the plane will not contain a line or 
it will be a line. 

A gain, how number can consist of the one and plurality, ες 
they make no attempt to explain; at least as they state the 
case, the same objections arise as confront those who con- 
struct number out of the one and the indefinite dyad. For 
the one view generates number from the universally predi- 
cated plurality, and not from a particular plurality; and the 
other generates it from a particular plurality, but the first ; 
for 2 is said to be a ‘first plurality’. Therefore there is τὸ 
practically no difference, but the same difficulties will follow, 
—is it intermixture or position or fusion or generation? 
and so on. Above all one might press the question, if each 
unit is one, what does it come from? Certainly each is not 
the one-in-itself. It must, then, come from the one-in-itself 
and plurality, or a part of plurality. To say that the unit is a 15 
plurality is impossible, for it is indivisible ; and to generate it 
from a part of plurality involves many other objections ; for 
(1) each of the parts must be indivisible (or it will be a plu- 
rality and the unit will be divisible) and the elements will not 
be the one and plurality; for the single units do not come from 20 
plurality and the one. Again, (2) the holder of this view does 
nothing but presuppose another number; for his plurality of 

1 1085% 31 read νοεῖ τι ἣ ἕτερον ; 

1085 METAPHYSICA 

indivisibles isa number. Again, (3) we must inquire, in view of 
this theory also,! whether the number is infinite or finite. For 

25 there was at first, as it seems, a finite? plurality, from which 
and from the one comes the finite number of units. And plu- 
rality in itself is different from infinite plurality ; what sort 
of plurality, then, is the element which co-operates with the 
one? 

One might inquire similarly about the point, ie. the 
element out of which they make spatial magnitudes. For 
surely this is not the one and only point; at any rate, then, 
let them say out of what each of the other points is formed. 

30 Certainly not of some distance + the point-in-itself. Nor 
again can parts of a distance be indivisible parts, as the parts 
of plurality out of which the units are said to be made are 
indivisible ; for number consists of indivisibles, but spatial 
magnitudes do not.’ | 

35 All these objections and others of the sort make it evident 
that number and spatial magnitudes cannot exist apart from 
things. Again, the fact that the chief thinkers disagree about 

1086" numbers is a sign that it is the incorrectness of the alleged 
facts themselves that brings confusion into the theories. For 
those who make the objects of mathematics alone exist apart 
from sensible things, seeing the difficulty about the Forms 
and their fictitiousness, abandoned ideal number and posited 

s mathematical. But those who wished to make the Forms 
at the same time numbers, but did not see, if one assumed 
these principles*, how mathematical number was to exist 
apart from ideal, made ideal and mathematical number the 
same—in ame, since in fact mathematical number is de- 
stroyed ; for they state hypotheses peculiar to themselves 
το and not those of mathematics. But he who first supposed 
that the Forms exist and that the Forms are numbers and 
that the objects of mathematics exist, naturally separated the 
two. Therefore it turns out that all of them are right in some 
respect, but on the whole not right. And they themselves 

1 Cf. 1083” 36. 2 1085» 24 omit καί. 

8 The point cannot have for an element of it (a) a distance, for this 
would destroy the simplicity of the point; or (4) part of a distance, for 

the part of a distance must be a distance. 
* 1086 7 read ταύτας. 

M. BOOK XIII 1086" 

confirm this, for their statements conflict. The cause is that 
their hypotheses and their principles are false. And it is 15 
hard to make a good case out of bad materials, according to 
Epicharmus!: ‘as soon as ’tis said, ‘tis seen to be wrong.’ 
But regarding numbers the questions we have raised and the 
conclusions we have reached are sufficient; for he who is 
already convinced might be further convinced by a longer 
discussion, but one not yet convinced? would not come any 20 
nearer to conviction. 

But regarding the first principles and the primary causes 
and elements, the views expressed by those who discuss only 
sensible substance have been ‘partly stated in our works on 
nature, and partly do not belong to the present inquiry ; but 
the views of those who say there are other substances besides 
the sensible must be discussed next after those we have been 2s 
mentioning. Since, then, some say that the Ideas and the 
numbers are such substances, and that the elements of these 
are elements and principles of real things, we must inquire 
regarding these what they say and in what sense they say it. 

Those who posit numbers only, and these mathematical, 
must be considered later*; but as regards those who believe 30 
in the Ideas one might survey at the same time their way 
of thinking and the difficulties into which they fall. For they 
at the same time treat the Ideas as universal substances, 
and again as separable and individual. That this is not 
possible has been shown before.5 The reason why those who 35 
say the Ideas are universal combined these two views in 
one, is that they did not make the Ideas substances identical 
with sensible things. They thought that the sensible particulars 
were in a state of flux and none of them remained, but 1086° 
that the universal was apart from these and different. And 
Socrates gave the impulse to this theory, as we said before,° by 
means of his definitions, but he did not separate them from the 
particulars ; and in this he thought rightly, in not separating 
them. This is plain from the results ; for without the universal 5 

1 Fr. 14, Diels, Vorsokratzker. 3 1086 20 read μὴ πεπεισμένος. 

3 Phys. 1. 4-6, ii. 3; De Caelo, iii. 3, 4; De Gen. et Corr. i. 1, ii. 5. 

‘ N. 1090 7-15, 25-30, 35-"Ὁ 20. 5 Β, 1003 5-17, M. 4, 5. 
. 4. 

1086° METAPHYSICA 

it is not possible to get knowledge, but the separation is the 
cause of the objections that arise with regard to the Ideas. 
His successors, treating it as necessary, if there are to be 
substances besides the ‘sensible and transient substances, that 
they must be separable, had no others, but gave separate 

το existence to these universally predicated substances, so that it 
followed that universals and individuals were almost the same 
sort of thing. This in itself, then, would be one difficulty 
in the view we have mentioned. 

CHAPTER X 

Let us now mention a point which presents a certain 
difficulty both to those who believe in the Ideas and to those 
15 who do not, and which was stated at the beginning among 
the problems.! If we do not suppose substances to be 
separate, and in the way in which particular things are said 
to be separate, we shall destroy that sort of substance which 
we wish to maintain; but if we conceive substances to be 
separable, how are we to conceive their elements and their 

principles ? 
ao_—=s If they are individual and not universal, (1) real things will be 
just of the same number as the elements, and (2) the elements 
will not be knowable. For (1) let the syllables in speech be 
substances, and their elements elements of substances; then 
there must be only one da and one of each of the syllables, 
25if they are not universal and the same in form but each is 
one in number and a ‘this’ and not merely possessed of a 
common name (and again they suppose each thing-in-itself 
to be one”). And if the syllables are unique, so are the parts 
of which they consist ; there will not, then, be more a’s than 
one, nor more than one of any of the other elements, on the 
3o same principle on which none of the other syllables can exist 
in the plural number. But if this is so, there will not be other 
things existing besides the elements, but only the elements. 
(2) Again, the elements will not be even knowable; for they 
are not universal, and knowledge is of universals. This is clear 

1 B. 999° 24, 1003° 5. 

2 This gives a further reason why each element must be a single 
individual. 

M. BOOK XIII 1086" 

both from demonstrations and from definitions ; for we do not 
conclude that this triangle has its angles equal to two right 
angles, unless every triangle has its angles equal to two right 35 
angles, nor that this man is an animal, unless every man is an 
animal. 

But if the principles are universal either the substances 
composed of them are universal, or! non-substance will be 1087 
prior to substance; for the universal is not a substance, and 
the element or principle is universal, and the element or 
principle is prior to the things of which it is the principle 
or element. 

All these difficulties follow naturally, when they make the 5 
Ideas out of elements and at the same time claim that Ideas 
should be separate unities, apart from the substances which 
have the same form. But if, e.g., in the case of the ele- 
ments of speech, the a’s and the J’s may quite well be 
many and there need be no ideal ὦ and ideal 4 besides 
the many, there may be, as far as this goes, an infinite 
number of similar syllables. The statement that all know- 10 
ledge is universal, so that the principles of things must also 
be universal and not separate substances, presents indeed, of 
all the points we have mentioned, the greatest difficulty, but 
yet the statement is in a sense true, although in a sense it 
is not. For knowledge, like the verb ‘to know’, means two 15 
things, of which one is potential and one actual. The po- 
tency, being, as matter, universal and indefinite, deals with the 
universal and indefinite ; but the actuality, being definite, 
deals with a definite object,—being a ‘this’, it deals with a 
‘this’. But per accidens sight sees universal colour, because 20 
this individual colour which it sees is colour; and this indi- 
vidual @ which the grammarian investigates isan a@. For if the 
principles must be universal, what is derived from them must 
also be universal, as in demonstrations ?; and if this is so, 
there will be nothing capable of separate existence—i.e. no 
substance. But evidently in a sense knowledge is universal, 
and in a sense it is not. 25 

1 1087* 1 read καθόλου, ἣ ἔσται. 
5. Sc. universal premises cannot give singular conclusions. 

BOOK XIV (nN) 

CHAPTER I 

REGARDING this kind of substance, what we have said must 
be taken as sufficient. All philosophers make the first prin- 

30 ciples contraries: as in natural things, so also in the case of 

unchangeable substances. But since there cannot be anything 
prior to the first principle of all things, the principle cannot 
be the principle and yet be an attribute of something else. 
To suggest this is like saying that the white is the first 
principle, not gva anything else but gua white, but yet that it 
is predicable of a subject, i.e. has whiteness as an attribute of 

35 something else; this is absurd, for then that subject will be 

prior. But all things which are generated from their con- 
traries involve an underlying subject ; a subject, then, must be 

1087” present in the case of contraries, if anywhere. All contraries, 

then, are always predicable of a subject, and none can exist 
apart. But appearances suggest that there is nothing contrary 
to substance, and argument confirms this. No contrary, then, 
is the first principle of all things in the full sense; the first 
principle is something different. 

But these thinkers make one of the contraries matter, 

5 some making the unequal—which they take to be the essence 

of plurality—matter for the one, which is the equal, and others 
making plurality matter for the one. (The former generate 
numbers out of the dyad of the unequal, i.e. of the great and 
small, and the other thinker we have referred to generates them 
out of plurality, while according to both it is generated dy the 
essence of the one.) For even the philosopher who says the 

ro unequal and one are the elements, and the unequal is a dyad 

composed of the great and small, treats the unequal, or the 
great and the small, as being one, and does not draw the dis- 
tinction that they are one in formula, but not in number. 
But they do not describe rightly even the principles which 
they call elements, for some name the great and the small 

N. BOOK XIV 1087” 

with the one and treat these three as elements of numbers, two 15 
being matter, one form ; while others name the many and few, 
because the great and the small are more appropriate in their 
nature to magnitude than to number ; and others name rather 
the universal character common to these—‘ that which exceeds 
and that which is exceeded’. None of these varieties of 
opinion makes any difference to speak of, in view of some 
of the consequences ; they affect only the abstract objections, 
which these thinkers take care to avoid because their own 20 
demonstrations are abstract,—with this exception, that if the 
exceeding and the exceeded are the principles, and not the great 
and the small, consistency requires that number should come 
from the elements before 2 does; for number is more universal 
than 2, as the exceeding and exceeded are more universal 
than the great and small. But as it is, they say one of δὲ 
these things but do not say the other. Others oppose the 
different and the other to the one, ‘and others oppose plurality 
to the one. But if, as they claim, things consist of contraries, 
and to the one either there is nothing contrary, or if there 
must be something it is plurality, and the unequal is contrary 
to the equal and the different to the same and the other to the 
thing itself, those who oppose the one to plurality have most 30 
claim to plausibility, but even their view is inadequate, for the 
one would on their view be a few ; for plurality is opposed to 
fewness, and the many to the few. 

‘The one’ evidently means a measure!. And in every case 
it is some underlying thing with a distinct nature of its own, 
e.g. in the scale a quarter-tone, in spatial magnitude a finger 35 
or a foot or something of the sort, in rhythms a beat or 
a syllable; and similarly in gravity it is a definite weight ; 
and in the same way in all cases, in qualities a quality, in 1088* 
quantities a quantity (and the measure is indivisible, in the 
former case in kind, and in the latter to the sense); which 
implies that the one is not, in any instance, in itself a sub- 
Stance. And this is reasonable; for ‘the one’ means the 
measure of some plurality, and ‘number’ means a measured 5 
pluwality and a plurality of measures. Thus it is natural that 
one is not a number; for the measure is not measures, but 

1 i.e. a unit or standard. 
AR. MET. U 

1088" METAPHYSICA 

both the measure and the one are starting-points. The measure 
must always be something predicable of all alike, e.g. if the 
things are horses, the measure is ‘horse’, and if they are 

romen, ‘man’. If they are a man, a horse, and a god, the 
measure is perhaps ‘living being’, and the number of them 
will be a number of living beings. If the things are ‘man’ 
and ‘ white’ and ‘ walking’, these will scarcely have a number, 
because all belong to a subject which is one and the same in 
number, yet the number of these will be a number of ‘ classes’, 
or of some equivalent term. 

15 Those who treat the unequal as one thing, and the dyad as 
an indefinite compound of great and small, say what is very 
far from being probable or possible. For (1) these are modifica- 
tions and accidents, rather than substrata, of numbers and 
magnitudes—the many and few of number, and the great and 

2o small of magnitude—like even and odd, smooth and rough, 
straight and curved. Again, (2) apart from this mistake, the 
great and the small, and the like, must be relative to some- 
thing; but the relative is least of all things—of all the 
categories—a real thing or substance, and is posterior to 
quality and quantity ; and the relative terms in question are 

25 accidents of quantity, as was said, but not its matter, since 
something with a distinct nature of its own must underlie both 
the relative in general and its parts and kinds. For there is 
nothing either great or small, many or few, or, in general, 
relative, which without having a nature of its own is many or 
few, great or small, or relative to something else. A sign that 

30 the relative is least of all a substance and a real thing is the 
fact that it alone has no proper generation or destruction or 
movement, as in quantity there is increase and diminution, in 
quality alteration, in place locomotion, in substance simple 
generation and destruction. The relative has no proper change; 

35 for, without changing, a thing will be now greater and now less 
or equal, if that with which it is compared has changed in 

1088" quantity. And the matter of each thing, and therefore of 
substance, must be that which is potentially of the nature in 
question ; but the relative is neither potentially nor actually 
substance. It is strange, then, or rather impossible, to make 

1 10888 9 read εἰ ἵπποι, τὸ μέτρον ἵππος, καὶ εἰ ἄνθρωποι, ἄνθρωπος. 

Ne δ)ὲ , “7... .. 
ΔΝ 

N. BOOK XIV 1088? 

not-substance an element in, and prior to, substance; for 
all the categories are posterior to substance. Again, (3) the 5 
elements are not predicated of the things of which they 
are elements, but many and few are predicated both apart and 
together of number, and long and short of the line, and 
both broad and narrow apply to the plane. If there is 
a plurality, then, of which the one term, viz. few, is always 
predicated,' e.g. 2 (which cannot be many, for if it were many, 
1 would be few), there must be also one which is absolutely 10 
many, e.g. 10 is many (if there is no number which is greater 
than 10), or 10,000. How then, in view of this, can number 
consist of few and many? Either both ought to be predicated 
of it, or neither; but according to the present account only 
the.one or the other is predicated. 

CHAPTER II 

We must inquire generally; whether eternal things can 
consist of elements. If they do, they will have matter; for τς 
everything that consists of elements is composite. Since, then, 
a thing must have come into being out of that of which it 
consists (even if, though it came into being, it exists for ever), 
and since everything comes to be what it comes to be out of 
that which is it potentially (for it could not have come to be 
out of that which had not this capacity, nor could it consist of 
such elements), and since the potential can be either actual or 
not,—this being so, however everlasting number or anything 20 
else that has matter is, it must be capable of not existing, just 
as that which is any number of years old is as capable of not 
existing as that which is a day old; if this is capable of not 
existing, so is that which has lasted for a time so long that it 
has no limit. They cannot, then, be eternal, since that which 
is capable of not existing is not eternal, as we had occasion 
to show in another context®. If that which we are now 25 
saying is true universally—that no substance is eternal unless 
it is actuality, and if the elements are matter that underlies 

* 1088" 9 read αἰεί, ὀλίγον or perhaps ὀλίγον αἰεί or αἰεί, τὸ ὀλίγον, as 

Alexander seems to have done. 
7 Cf. ©. 1050” 6, De Caelo, i. 12. 

U 2 

1088" METAPHYSICA 

substance, no eternal substance can have elements present in 
it, of which it consists. 
There are some who describe the element which acts with 
30 the one as the indefinite dyad, and object to ‘the unequal , 
reasonably enough, because of the ensuing difficulties ; but they 
have got rid only of those objections which inevitably arise 
from the treatment of the unequal, i.e. the relative, as an 
element; those which arise apart from this opinion must 
confront even these thinkers, whether it is ideal number, or 
35 mathematical, that they construct out of those elements. 
There are many causes which led them off into these 
explanations, and especially the fact that they framed the 
1089° difficulty in an obsolete form. For they thought that all 
things that are would be one—viz. Being itself, if one did not 
join issue with and refute the saying of Parmenides!: 
‘For never will this be proved*, that things that are 
not are.’ 
They thought it necessary to prove that that which is 
5 not is; for only thus—of that which is and something else— 
could the things that are be composed, if they are many. 
But firstly, if ‘being’ has many senses (for it means 
sometimes substance, sometimes quality, sometimes quantity, 
and at other times the other categories), what sort of ‘one’ 
are all the things that are, if non-being is to be supposed 
not to be? Is it the substances that are one, or the affections 
το and all the other categories as well*’—so that the ‘this’ and 
the ‘such’ and the ‘so much’ and the other categories that 
indicate each some class of being ‘ will all be one? But it is 
strange, or rather impossible, that the calling into play of one 
thing ὅ should bring it about that part of that which is is a ‘this’, 
part a ‘such’, part a ‘so much’, part ‘in such and such 
a place’. 
Secondly, of what sort of non-being and being do the 
15 things that are consist? For ‘non-being’ also has many senses, 
since ‘being’ has; and ‘not man’ means not being a certain 
substance, ‘not straight’ not being of a certain quality, ‘not 

1 Fr. 7, Diels, Vorsokratiker. 3 1089* 3 read τοῦτο δαμῇ. 
5 1089 10 read ὁμοίως ἅπαντα. * 1089* 11 read ὅσα ὅν τι. 
5 i. 6. non-being. 

y 

᾿- 

N. BOOK XIV 1089* 

three cubits long’ not being of a certain quantity. What sort 
of being and non-being, then, by their union pluralize the 
things that are? This thinker means by the non-being, 
the union of which with being pluralizes the things that 
are, the false and the character of falsity. This is also 20 
why it was said that we must assume something that is false, 
as geometers assume the line which is not a foot long to 
be a foot long. But this cannot be so. For neither do 
geometers assume anything false (for the proposition in 
question is extraneous to the inference), nor are the things that 
are generated from or resolved into non-being in this sense. 
But since ‘ non-being’ in the various cases? has as many senses 25 
as there are categories, and besides this the false is said not 
to be and so is the potential, generation proceeds from the 
latter, man from that which is not man but potentially man, 
and white from that which is not white but potentially white, 
and this whether it is one thing that is generated or many. 30 

The question evidently is, how being, in the sense of ‘the 
substances’, is many; for the things that are generated are 
numbers and lines and solids. It is strange to inquire how 
being in the sense of substance is many, and not how either 
qualities or quantities are many. For surely the indefinite 35 
dyad or the great and the small! are not a reason why there 
should be two kinds of white or many colours or flavours or 
shapes; for then these also would be numbers and units, 1089" 
But if they had attacked this point, they would have seen 
the cause of the plurality in substances also ; for the cause is 
the same or analogous. This aberration is the reason also 
why in seeking the opposite of being and the one, from which 
and being and the one the things that are proceed, they 5 
posited the relative term (i.e. the unequal), which is neither 
the contrary nor the contradictory of these, but is one kind 
of being as substance and quality are. 

They should have inquired also how relative terms are many 
and not one. But as it is, they inquire how there are many 
units besides the first 1, but do not go on to inquire how there 
are many unequals besides ¢#e unequal. Yet they use them τὸ 

1 1089® 20 read λέγειν. Cf. Pl. Soph. 237 A, 240. 
2 Cf il. 16-18. 

1089° METAPHYSICA 

and speak of great and small, many and few (from which 

proceed numbers), long and short (from which proceeds the 

line), broad and narrow (from which proceeds the plane), deep 

and shallow (from which proceed solids); and they speak 

of yet more kinds of relative term. What is the reason, 
15 then, why there is a plurality of these? 

It is necessary, as we say, to presuppose for each thing 
that which is it potentially; and the holder of these views 
further declared what that is which is potentially a ‘ this’ and 
a substance but is not in itself being—viz. that it is the 
relative (as if he had said ‘the qualitative’), which is neither 
potentially the one or being, nor the contradictory of the 

20 one nor of being, but one among beings. And it was much 
more necessary, as we said, if he was inquiring how beings 
are many, not to inquire about those in the same category— 
how there are many substances or many qualities—but how 
beings as a whole are many; for some are substances, some 
modifications, some relations. In the categories other than 

as substance there is another way of explaining how there 
can be plurality, viz. that, since they are not separable from 
substances, qualities and quantities are many only because 
their substrate becomes and is many. Yet there ought to 

_ be a matter for each category; only it cannot be separable 
from substances. But in the case of individual substances, it 
is possible to explain how the individual is many things, 

30 unless a thing is to be treated as both an individual and a 
general character’. The difficulty arising from these facts 
is rather this, how there are actually many substances and 
not one. 

But further, if the ‘this’ and the quantitative are not the 
same, we are not told how and why the things that are are 
many, but how quantities are many. For all ‘number’ means 

35 a quantity, and the ‘unit’, unless it means merely a measure, 
means the indivisible in quantity. If then the quantitative 
10g0% and substance are different, we are not told whence or how 
substance is many; but if any one says they are the same, 

he has to face many inconsistencies. 

One might fix one’s attention also on the question, regarding 

1 Which, Aristotle thinks, the Platonists assert the Idea to be. 

a 

N. BOOK XIV 1090% 

the numbers,—what justifies the belief that they exist. To the 
believer in the Ideas they provide a cause for existing things, 
since each number is an Idea, and the Idea is to other 5 
things somehow or other the cause of their being ; for let this 
supposition be granted them. But as for him who does not 
hold this view because he sees the inherent objections to the 
Ideas (so that it is not for this reason that he posits numbers), 
but who posits mathematical number, why must we believe τὸ 
his statement that such number exists, and of what use is 
such number to other things? Neither does he who says it 
exists maintain that it is the cause of anything (he rather says 
it is a thing in itself), nor is it observed to be the cause of 
anything; for the theorems of arithmeticians will all be found 
true even of sensible things, as was said. 15 

CHAPTER III 

Those who suppose the Ideas to exist and to be numbers, 
according to the theory which gives a separate existence 
to each, try at least to explain somehow why it is possible to 
assume that each is one thing apart from the many.? Since 
their reasons, however, are neither conclusive nor in them- 
selves possible, one must not, on this account at least, 
assert the existence of number. But the Pythagoreans, a0 
because they saw many attributes of numbers belonging to 
sensible bodies, supposed real things to be numbers—not 
separable numbers, however, but numbers of which real things 
consist. But why? Because the attributes of numbers are 
present in a musical scale and in the heavens and in many 
other things. But those who say that mathematical number 25 
alone exists cannot according to their hypotheses say anything 
of this sort ; nay, they used to say that those applied numbers 
could not be the subject of the sciences. But we maintain that 
they are, as we said before.* And itis evident that the objects 
of mathematics do not exist apart; for if they existed apart 

1 Cf. M. 3. 

3 τοροῦ 17 read ἑκάστου, mapa τὰ πολλὰ λαμβάνειν τὸ ἕν τι ἕκαστον πειρῶν- 

ταί γε λέγειν πως διὰ τί ἐστιν. 

8. Cf. A. 989° 29- 9908 20. * Cf. Μ. 3. 

1090* METAPHYSICA 

40 their attributes would not have been present in bodies. The 
Pythagoreans in this point are open to no objection; but in 
that they construct natural bodies out of numbers, things 
that have lightness and weight out of things that have not 
weight or lightness, they seem to speak of another heaven 

35 and other bodies, not of the sensible. But those who make 
number separable assume that it exists and is separable 
because the axioms would not be true of sensible things, 
while the statements of mathematics ave true and delight 
the soul; and similarly with the spatial magnitudes of 

1090” mathematics. It is evident, then, both that our rival theory 
will say the contrary of this, and that the difficulty we raised 
just now, why if numbers are in no way present in sensible 
things their attributes are present in sensible things, is solved 
for those who hold our views.' 

5 There are some who, because the point is the limit and 
extreme of the line, the line of the plane, and the plane of the 
solid, think there must be real things of this sort. We must 
therefore examine this argument too, and see whether it is 
not remarkably weak. For (1) extremes are not substances, 

το but rather all these things are mere limits. For even walking, 
and movement in general, has a limit, so that on their theory 
this will be an individual and a substance. But that is 
absurd. (2) Even if they are substances, they will all be the 
substances of particular sensible things ; for it is to these that 
the argument applied. Why then should they be capable of 
existing apart? 

Again, if we are not too easily satisfied, we may, regarding 

1s all number and the objects of mathematics, press this difficulty, 
that they contribute nothing to one another, the prior to the 
posterior; for if number did not exist, none the less spatial 
magnitudes would exist for those who maintain the existence 
of the objects of mathematics only, and if spatial magnitudes 
did not exist, soul and sensible bodies would exist. But the 
observed facts show that nature is not a series of episodes, like 
a3a bad tragedy. The believers in the Ideas escape this 
difficulty ; for they construct spatial magnitudes out of matter 
and number, lines out of 2, planes doubtless out of 3, solids 

1 rogo? 3 read λύεται. 

N. BOOK XIV 1090 

out of 4, or they use other numbers, which makes no differ- 
ence. But will these magnitudes be Ideas, or what is their 
manner of existence, and what do they contribute to things? 25 
These contribute nothing, as the objects of mathematics con- 
tribute nothing. But not even is any theorem true of them, 
unless we want to change the concepts of mathematics and 
invent doctrines of our own. But it is not hard to assume any 
random hypotheses and spin out a long string of conclusions. 30 
These thinkers, then, are wrong in this way, in wanting to unite 
the objects of mathematics with the Ideas. 

And those who first posited two kinds of number, that 
of the Forms and the other which is mathematical, neither 
have said nor can say in the least how mathematical number 
is to exist and of what it is to consist. For they place it 35 
between ideal and sensible number. If (1) it consists of the 
great and small, it will be the same as the other—ideal 
number. But of what other! great and small than she great 
and small can it consist? For he? makes spatial magnitudes 
out of ove other great and small.3 And if (2) he names some τοι 
other element, he will be making his elements rather many. 
And if the principle of each of the two kinds of number 
is a I, unity will be something common to these. And we 
must inquire how the one is these many things, while at the 
same time umber, according to him, cannot be eee 
except from one and the indefinite dyad. 

All this is absurd, and conflicts both with itself and with» 
the probabilities, and we seem to see in it Simonides’ ‘long 
story’*; for the long story comes into play, like those which 
slaves tell, when men have nothing sound to say. And the 
very elements—the great and the small—seem to cry out 
against the violence that is done to them; for they cannot in 10 

"any way generate numbers other than those got from 1 by 

doubling. 

It is strange also to attribute generation to eternal things, or 
rather this is one of the things that are impossible. There 
need be no doubt whether the Pythagoreans attribute genera- 

1 1ogo? 37 read ἐξ ἄλλον δὲ τίνος μικροῦ καὶ μεγάλου; 
3 Sc. Plato. "8 CE 1ogoP 21, 22. 
* Sim. Ceius, Fr. 189, Bergk. 

EE Eee LN OE ee eee Senin al 

1091" METAPHYSICA 

tion to them or not; for they obviously say that when the 
15 one had been constructed, whether out of planes or of surface 
or of seed or of elements which they cannot express, immedi- 
ately the nearest part of the unlimited began to be constrained 
and limited by the limit. But since they are constructing 
a world and wish to speak the language of natural science, 
it is fair to make some examination of their physical theories, 
20 but to let them off from the present inquiry; for we are 
investigating the principles at work in wxchangeable things, so 
that it is numbers of ¢4zs kind whose genesis we must study. 

CHAPTER IV 

These thinkers say there is no generation of the odd 
number, which evidently implies that there zs generation 
of the even; and some say the even is produced first from 
unequals—the great and the small—when these are equalized. 

25 The inequality, then, must belong to them Jdefore they are 
equalized. If they had always been equalized, they would 
not have been unequal before; for there is nothing before that 
which is always. Therefore evidently they are not giving 
their account of the generation of numbers merely as a logical 
account.! 

30 <A difficulty, and a reproach to any one who finds it xo 
difficulty, are contained in the question how the elements 
and the principles are related to the good and the beautiful ; 
the difficulty is this, whether any of the elements is such 
a thing as we mean by the good itself and the best, or this 
is not so, but these are later in origin than the elements. 
The mythologists seem to agree with some thinkers of 

35 the present day, who answer the question in the negative, and 
say that both the good and the beautiful appear in the nature 
of things only when that nature has made some progress. 
This they do to avoid a real objection which confronts those 

1091 who say, as some do, that the one isa first principle. (The 
objection arises not from their ascribing goodness to the 
first principle as an attribute, but from their making the one 

1 Cf. De Caelo, i. 279” 32--28ο5 Io. 

N. BOOK XIV 1091" 

a principle—and a principle in the sense of an element—and 
generating number from the one.) And the old poets agree 
with this inasmuch as they say that not those who are first in 
time, e.g. Night and Heaven or Chaos or Ocean, reign and 5 
rule, but Zeus.! These poets, however, speak thus only 
because they think of the rulers of the world as changing ; 
for those of them who combine two characters in that they do 
not? use mythical language throughout, e.g. Pherecydes and 
some others, make the original generating agent the Best, 
and so do the Magi, and some of the later sages also, 10 
e.g. Empedocles and Anaxagoras, of whom one made friend- 
ship an element, and the other made reason a principle. 
Of those who maintain the existence of the unchangeable 
substances some say the one itself is the good itself; but 
they thought its substance lay mainly in its unity. 

This, then, is the problem,—which of the two ways of 15 
speaking is right. It would be strange if to that which is 
primary and eternal and most self-sufficient this very quality 
—self-sufficiency and self-maintenance—belongs primarily in 
some other way than as a good. But indeed it can be for no 
other reason indestructible or self-sufficient than because its 
nature is good. Therefore to say that the first principle is 
good is probably correct ; but that this principle should be the 20 
one or, if not that, an element, and an element of numbers, is 
impossible. Powerful objections arise, to avoid which some 
have given up the theory (viz. those who agree that the 
one is a first principle and element, but only of mathematical 
number). For on this view all the units become identical 25 
with species of good, and there is a great profusion of goods. 
Again, if the Forms are numbers, all the Forms are identical 
with species of good. But let aman assume Ideas of anything 
he pleases. If these are Ideas only of goods, the Ideas will 

| not be substances; but if the Ideas are also Ideas of substances, 
all animals and plants and all individuals that share in Ideas 
will be good. 

These absurdities follow, and it also follows that the 30 
contrary element, whether it is plurality or the unequal, 
i.e. the great and small, is the bad-itself. Hence one 

1 Cf. 1071" 26, 3 rog1> 8 omit καί. 

1091" METAPHYSICA 

thinker avoided attaching the good to the one, because it 
would necessarily follow, since generation is from contraries, 

35 that badness is the fundamental nature of plurality. Others 
say inequality is the nature of the bad; it follows, then, that 
all things partake of the bad except one—the one itself, 
and that numbers partake of it in a more undiluted form than 

1092" spatial magnitudes, and that the bad is the space in which 
the good is realized, and that it partakes in and desires that 
which tends to destroy it; for contrary tends to destroy 
contrary. And if, as we said, the matter is that which is 
potentially each thing, e.g. that of actual fire is that which 
is potentially fire, the bad will be just the potentially good. 

5 ΑΙ] these objections, then, follow, partly because they make 
every principle an element, partly because they make con- 
traries principles, partly because they make the one a 
principle, partly because they treat the numbers as the first 
substances, and as capable of existing apart, and as Forms. 

CHAPTER V 

If, then, it is equally impossible not to put the good among 
first principles and to put it among them in this way, 
1o evidently the principles are not being correctly described, 
nor are the first substances. - Nor do we conceive the matter 
correctly if we compare the principles of the universe to that 
of animal sand plants, on the ground that the more complete 
always comes from the indefinite but incomplete—which is 
what leads this thinker to say that this is also true of the first 
principles of reality, so that the one itself is not even an existing 
15 thing. This is incorrect, for even in this world of animals and 
plants the principles from which these come are complete ; for 

it is a man that produces a man, and the seed is not first. 

It is strange, also, to generate place simultaneously with the 
mathematical solids} (for place is peculiar to the individual 
things, and hence they are separable in place, but mathe- 

a0 matical objects are nowhere), and to say that they must be 
somewhere, but not say what the place is. 

Those who say that the things that are come from elements 

* 1092° 18 read τοῖς στερεοῖς τοῖς μαθηματικοῖς. 

N. BOOK XIV 

and that the first of things that are are the numbers, should have 
first distinguished the senses in which one thing comes from 
another, and then said in which sense number comes from its 
elements. 

By intermixture? But not everything is capable of inter- 
mixture, and that which is produced by it is different from 
its elements, and on this view the one will not remain separate 25 
or a distinct entity ; but they want it to be so. 

By juxtaposition, like a syllable? But then (1) the elements 
must have position; and (2) he who thinks of the one and 
plurality must think of them apart; number then will be 
this—a unit avd plurality, or the one and the unequal. 

Coming from certain things means in one sense that 
these are still to be found in the product and in another that 
they are not; in which sense does number come from these 30 
elements? Only things that are generated can come from 
elements which are present in them. Does number come 
from its elements as from seed? But nothing can be excreted 
from that which is indivisible. Does it come from its con- 
trary, its contrary not persisting? But all things that come in 
this way come also from something else which does persist.! 
Since, then, one thinker places the 1 as contrary to plu- 35 
rality, and another places it as contrary to the unequal, 

treating the 1 as equal, number is treated as coming from 1092” 

contraries. There will then be something else that persists, 
from which and from one contrary the compound is or has 
come to be. Again, why in the world do the other things 
that come from contraries, or that have contraries, perish 
(even when all of the contrary is used to produce them), while 
number does not? Nothing is said about this. Yet whether 5 
present or not present in the compound the contrary destroys 
it, e.g. ‘strife’ destroys the ‘mixture’? (yet it-should not; for 
it is not to that that it is contrary). 

Once more, it has in no sense been determined in which way 
numbers are the causes of substances and of being—whether 
(1) as limits (as points are of spatial magnitudes). This is τὸ 
how Eurytus decided what was the number of what (e. g. of 

1 Cf. A. 1069” 3-9, Phys. 1. 7. 
* Cf. Empedocies, Fr. 17, Diels, Vorsokratiker. 

1092” METAPHYSICA 

man, or of horse), viz. by imitating the figures of living things? 
with pebbles, as some people bring numbers into the forms of 
triangle and square. Or (2) is it because harmony is a ratio 
15 of numbers, and so is man and everything else? But how are 
the attributes—white and sweet and hot—numbers? Evi- 
dently the numbers are not the essence ? nor causes of the form ; 
for the ratio is the essence, while the number is the matter. 
E.g. the essence of flesh or bone is number only in this way, 
‘three parts of fire and two of earth.’® And a number, what- 
ever it is, is always a number of certain things, either of parts 
10 of fire or earth or of units; but the essence is that there is so 
much of one thing to so much of another in the mixture; and 
this is no longer a number but a ratio of mixture of numbers, 
whether these are corporeal or of any other kind. 
Number, then, whether number in general or the number 
which consists of abstract units, is neither the cause as agent, 
25 nor the matter, nor the ratio and form of things. Nor, of 
course, is it the final cause. 

CHAPTER VI 

One might also raise the question what the good is that 
things get from numbers because their composition is ex- 
pressible by a number, either by one which is easily calculable 
or by an odd number. For in fact honey-water is no more 
wholesome if it is mixed in the proportion of three times three, 
but it would do more good if it were in no particular ratio but 
well diluted than if it were numerically expressible but strong. 

30 Again, the ratios of mixtures are expressed by the adding of 
numbers, not by mere numbers, e.g. it is ‘three parts to two’, 
not ‘three times two’. For the same genus must underlie 
things that are multiplied together; therefore the product 
1x2x3 must be measurable by 1, and 4x5x7 by 4, and 
therefore all products into which the same factor enters must 

35 be measurable by that factor. The number of fire, then, can- 
not be 2x5x3x/7, and at the same time that of water 2 x 3. 

If all things must share in number, it must follow that many 

1 Eurytus may have used φυτά in this wider sense, as Plato sometimes 

does. The ordinary Aristotelian sense ‘ plants’ would be difficult here. 
2 1092” 17 read οὐσία, 5 Cf. Empedocles, Fr. 96, Diels. 

N. BOOK XIV 10938" 

things are the same, and the same number must belong 
to one thing and to another. Is number the cause, then, and 
does the thing exist because of its number, or is this not 
certain? E.g. the motions of the sun have a number, and 5 
again those of the moon,—yes, and the life and prime of each 
animal. Why, then, should not some of these numbers be 
squares, some cubes, and some equal, others double? There is 
no reason why they should not, and indeed they must be com- 
prised within these descriptions, since all things were assumed 
to share in number and things that differed might fall under 
the same number. Therefore if the same number had belonged 
to certain things, these would have been the same as one 
another, since they would have had the same form of number ; 
e.g. sun and moon would have been the same. But why are 
these numbers causes? There are seven vowels, seven strings 
or scales, the Pleiades are seven, at seven animals lose their 
teeth (at least some, though some do not), and the champions 15 
who fought against Thebes were seven. Is it then because 
the number is what it is, that the champions were seven or the 
Pleias consists of seven stars? Surely the champions were 
seven because there were seven gates or for some other reason, 
and the Pleias we count as seven, as we count the Bear as 
twelve, while other peoples count more stars in both. Nay, 
they even say that 8, ¥,and Z are concords, and because there 
are three concords, the double consonants also are three. They 
quite neglect the fact that there might be a thousand such 
letters; for one sign might be attached to IP. But if they 
say that each of these three is equal to two of the other letters, 
and no other is so, and if the cause is that there are three 
parts of the mouth and sigma is applied singly to each, it is for 
this reason that there are only three, not because the concords 
are three; since as a matter of fact the concords are more 
than three, but of double consonants there cannot be more. 25 
These people are like the old Homeric scholars, who see small 
resemblances but neglect great ones. Some say that there are 
many ! such cases, e.g. that the middle strings are represented 
by nine and eight *, and that the epic verse has seventeen 

1 1093* 28 read τινες ὅτι πολλά, 

ἢ The ratios corresponding to the fourth and the fifth are respectively 8 
to 6 and 9 to 6. 

μή 

οΟ 

Ο 

Cy OO Oar 

1093" METAPHYSICA 

30 syllables, which is equal in number to the two strings; and 
the scansion is, in the right half of the line nine syllables, and 
109” in the left eight. And they say that the distance in the letters 
from alpha to omega is equal to that from the lowest note of 
the flute to the highest 1, and that the number of this note is 
5 equal to that of the whole system of the heavens. We must 
observe that no one could find difficulty either in stating such 
analogies or in finding them in eternal things, since they can 

be found even in perishable things. 

But the lauded characteristics of numbers and their con- 
traries, and generally the mathematical relations, if we view 
them as some do, making them causes of nature, seem to escape 

ro us; for none of them is a cause in any of the senses that have 
been distinguished in reference to the first principles.” Yet if 
mathematical objects be conceived as these thinkers conceive 
them, evidently goodness is predicable of them, and the odd, the 
straight, the equal, the potencies of certain numbers, are in the 
catalogue ὃ of the beautiful. For the seasons and a particular 

1s number go together ; and the other agreements that they col- 
lect from the theorems of mathematics all have this meaning.‘ 
Hence they are like coincidences. For they are accidents, but 
the things that agree are appropriate to one another, and one by 
analogy. For in each category of being an analogous term is 

20 found—as the straight line is in length, so is the plane in sur- 
face, perhaps the odd in number, and the white in colour. 

Again, it is not the zdeal numbers that are the causes of 
musical phenomena and the like (for equal ideal numbers 
differ from one another in form; for even the units do); so 
that we need not assume Ideas for this reason at least. 

These, then, are the results of the theory, and yet more 

25 might be brought together. The fact that our opponents have 
much trouble with the generation of ideal numbers and can 
in no way make a system of them, seems to indicate that the 
objects of mathematics are not separable from sensible things, 
as some say, and that they are not the first principles. 

1 1093” 3 omit νεάτην. So perhaps Alexander. 

2 Cf. A. I, 2. 3 Cf. note on A. 986% 23. 

* Sc. that numerical relations are found in things, but are not the cause 
of anything that happens. 

INDEX 

o®— 93> = 1000*—1093> 

a privative, its meanings 22° 32. 

Abstraction 36 3, 23, 613 29; 
)( qualification 9825 27, 30% 33, 
77” 10. 

Accident, accidental A. 30, E. 2,. 3, 
K. 8, 7® 15, 22—" 16, 13° 34-149 21, 
15> 17,1797,27%33; notknowable 
26> 3, 64> 30, 65 4; its cause 
matter 278 13; twofold 31> 22; 
the same by accident 37” 6; 
nothing accidentally perishable 
597 1; )( essential 65° 6. 

Action, concerned with individuals 
981* 17; )( motion 48? 18. 

Actuality (ἐνέργεια) ©. 6-9, K. 9; 
)ί potency 3° 1, 7 28, 69> 16, 71% 
6, Ὁ 22; coni. substance, form, 
definition, essence 42° 10, 43° 18, 
25, 28, 31, 50% 16, "2, 51} 31, 718 
8; )( matter 43° 6, 45° 35, 71> 91, 
76® 10; differs: with different 
matter 43°12; the actual identi- 
cal with the potential 4521; coni. 
complete reality (ἐντελέχεια) 47° 
30, 50° 23; )( knowledge 48° 15; 
)( motion 48> 28 ; coni. action 50 
23; God’s actuality pleasure 72> 
16; actual, syn, individual 14° 21. 

Addible numbers M. 6-8. 

Affection, modification (πάθος), its 
meanings 4.21; )( substance 983" 
10, 9855 11, 38> 28, 7181 ; coni. 
states 9868 17, 20° 19; coni. acci- 
dents, movements 989° 3, 71° 1; 
)( substratum 495 29; essential, 
proper affections 4° 6, 58% 37,» 22, 
78* 16; change in respect of 69° 12. 

Alcmaeon 986° 26. 

All (πάντα), coni. total 24° 8. 

Alteration 989 27, 425 36, 69” 12, 
885 32 

Analogy 435 5, 48° 37, ° 7, 89” 3, 
93° 19; the same by 16° 32, 188 
13, 705 32, ἢ 17, 715 4, 26, 93° 18. 

Anaxagoras 984 11-16, » 18, 9858 
18-21, 988° 17, 28, 989% 30- 21, 

AR. MET. 

9915 16, 9° 27, 12% 26, 63” 26-30, 
69” 20, 31, 725 5, 75° 8, 79° 20, 
gi>r1; uoted 7 25,9 25,56} 28, 

Anaximander 69” 22; referred to 
52 10, 53° 16. 

Anaximenes 984° 5; referred to 988% 
30, 996" 9, 53° 16. 

Antisthenes 24” 32; hisschool 43°24. 

Appearance (φαίνεσθαι, φαντασία) I. 
5,6, 980° 26, χοῦ 10. Cf. Jmage. 

Archytas 43* 22. 

Aristippus 996* 32; referred to 789 

Aristotle, references to An. Post. 
25° 34 (ἢ), 378; Phys. 983% 33, 
98 Ly 12, 9860 30, 988% 22, 993° 11, 
42° 9(?), 49° 36, 59% 34, 62> 31 (?), 
73° 5 (ἢ), 32 (Ὁ), 76° 9, 865 23; De 
Coelo 986* 12(?), 989° 24 (?), 73% 
5 (?), 32 (ἢ), 86% 23(?), 88° 24; De 
Gen. et Corr. 989% 24(?), 420 9(?), 
62> 31 (?), 86% 23 (2); Met. A. 995» 
5,996" 8, 14,997°4, 59°19; Β. 9935 
26, 4° 32, 53° 10, 76 1, 779 1, 865 
34 (0), θ15; IT. 45" 32(?); Δ. 268 
34; 28° 4, 11, 465 5, 49” 4, 525 15, 
5552, ἢ 7, 56° 35; E. 25% 34 (?); Z. 
42° 4, 18, 20, 43° 16, 458 7 (2), 
© 32(?), 49°27, 53°17; Η.375 20(?), 
39% 22(?); Θ. 1759, 218 20, 27> 20, 
880 24 (2); K. 258 34(?); A. 278 
19, 37° 13(?), 645 36, 78” 5 (ἢ) ; 
M. 37% 13(?), 425 22(?), go τς, 
28; N. 37° 13(?), 425 22(?), 78» 
5 (0), 86% 30; Ath. Nic. 981 25 ; 
lost works 9868 12(?), 48 2, ἢ 34, 

45 30. 

Arithmetic 982% 28, 5° 31, 90% 14; 
arithmetical number 83° 16. 

Art 980° 28 ; comes by experience 
9815 3; )( science 981 26; )( ex- 
perience 9814 25, °8, 31 ; genera- 
tion by art, reason, potency, spon- 
taneity Z. 7, 8, 25> 22, 3499; = 
form 34° 24, 705 15; comes by 
learning 46 37, 47° 33; )( nature 

INDEX 

425 12, 705 6, 173 architectonic 
arts 13° 14. 

Assertion, syn. affirmation 85 4-" 1, 
62° 24; )( affirmation, syn. con- 
tact 51> 24. 

Astronomy 989° 33, 997° 16, 35, 
998* 6, 53" 10, 73° 5, 778 2. 

Attribute )( substance 995” 20, 3°25. 

Axioms 996° 26, 5% 20, Ὁ 34, 90" 36. 

Beautiful, syn. good 13% 22, 91° 31 ; 
)( good 785 31; an original prin- 
ciple 72° 32. 

Becoming, v. Generation. 

Being (dv) A. 7, 19° 5, 288 10, 30% 
21, 42> 26, 45° 32, 618 8, 78* 30, 
89° 6; notagenus 998? 22, 45" 6; 
and unity I. 2, 986" 15, 998° 22, 
33, 1 5, 3> 22, 40} 16, 45 6, 53° 
25; being gza being, in general, 

without qualification )( particu- 

lar being I’. 1-2, E. 1, 60° 21: acci- 
dental being E. 2, 3, 17 7; being 
as truth E. 4, ©. 10, 65" 21; in 
full sense 27° 31, §151; primary 
being, substance 28° 14, 30; being 
of a thing 295 22, 52> 11, 75% 5; 
being not the substance of things 
18 5, 40” 18; completely real )( 
material 78° 30; non-being zs non- 
being 3°10; subject ofsophistic26 
14; as falsity E. 4, 6.10; source 
of becoming 62» 26, 69 18; three 
kinds 69> 27; ambiguous 89 #16; 
proof of its reality (Platonic) 805 1. 

Between, v. /xfermediate. 

Broad and narrow (Platonic) 9925 
12, 88> 8 

Callippus 73° 32. / 

Categories 45 29, 178 23, 240 13, 
26% 36, 27> 31, 28° 13, 33, 29° 23, 
34° 10, 515 35, 5551, 58° 14, 70° 
I, 889 30, 89% 27, ἢ 24. 

Cause A, 2, 135 16, > 9, 268 16; 
philosophy a study of first causes 
981> 28; of al/ causes? 995" 6, 
996° 18; primary 983% 25, 3° 31; 
proximate 44> 1; four causes 983° 
26, 70° 26; formal = final 44° 1; 
= efficient 70” 26; causes not 
infinite in number a. 2, 745 29; 
cause of accident accidental 27° 
8, 65° 6; generable without being 
generated Ε. 3. v. End, Essence, 
Final, Form, Formula, Matter, 
Motive, Principle. 

Change, by something to something 

9845 22, 69» 36; from opposite 
to opposite or intermediate 11> 
34, 57° 21, 31, 69 3; contraries 
do not change 69"7; coni. non-be- 
ing, substratum, matter, potency 
10" 15, 425 33, 69° 14, 24; four 
kinds 42% 32, 69° 9, 72” 8; change- 
able substance 69” 3. 

Complete A. 16, 23° 35 ; def. 55° 11; 
said to proceed from incomplete 
72” 34, 025 13. . 

Compound (σύνθετον) 238 31, © 1, 
29” 23, 43° 30, 75° 8, 88° τό. 

Concrete (σύνολον) 995” 34, 999° 33, 
295 5, 35° 20, 37% 26, 30, 77° 9. 

Contact 25 34, 14> 22, 68> 27, 705 
10, 825 20, 85% 3; syn. intuitive 
thought 51° 24, 725 21. 

Contiguous 69° I. 

Continuous, def. 69* 5 ; by nature, 
art, force 165 4, 23” 34, 40 15; in 
one, two, three dimensions 61° 33; 
continuity )( form 16° 9. 

Contradiction, law of I. 3-6, K. 5, 
6; no intermediate I. 7, 55° 1, 
69° 3; )( privation, contrariety 

gh i. 

Contrary I. 4, 5, 7, 13° 12, 18° 25, 
54° 25, ἢ 31, 58? 26, 928 2; con- 
traries said to be principles of 
being 986% 22, © 1, 4> 30, 75° 28, 
87" 30; knowledge of them one 
996* 20, 618 19, 785 26; reducible 
to one principle 4° 1, ἢ 27 ; con- 
trariety )( difference, otherness, 
contradiction, privation 4% 20, 54° 
32, 550 1; one of two contraries 
always privative 4> 27, 11° 18, 
55> 14, 27, 619 20, 63° 173 con- 
traries incompatible 11° 17, 63> 
26; coni, negation 12° 9; contra- 
riety in substance 18° 3: con- 
traries have same form 322; not 
produced from, compounded of, 
affected by one another 44°25, 57 
22, 69” 7, 75* 30; contrariety = 
greatest, complete difference 55* 
4, 16, 58" 11; one term one con- 
trary 55* 19; contraries relative 
56> 36; intermediate composed 
of contraries I. 7; which contra- 
rieties make difference of species 
I. 9; prime contrarieties in being 
61® 12, © 5, 133 sensible con- 
trarieties 61° 32; in place 68 29; 
)( opposite 69> 4; contraries in- 
volve matter 75» 22, 87° 1. 

INDEX 

Counter-earth 986* 12. 

Coupled term (συνδεδυασμένον) 30° 
16, 315 6, 43° 4. 

Cratylus 987% 32, 1o® 12. 

Definition Z. 10, 11, H. 6, 31% 2, 43° 
21; starting-point of discussion 
125 22,5 7; coni. essence 308 7, 
31911, 4482: not of the concrete 
and sensible 368 2, 39> 28; of the 
universal 36° 28; why one Z, 12, 
H. 6; definition by division 37 
28; scientific 39> 32; no Idea de- 
finable 40* 8; coni. number 43° 
34, 45° 7. v. Formula. 

Democritus 985» 5-20, 9° 27, > 11, 
15, 395 9, 429 12, 69" 22, 78> 20; 
referred to 84° 27. 

Demonstration 992” 31; principles 
of 993° 28, 996” 26, 5° 9, 11, 13, 
18, 22, 625 3; not everything de- 
monstrable 997° 7, 68 8, 118 13; 
essence not demonstrable 25> 14, 
645 9; sensible things not de- 
monstrable 39 28; demonstra- 
tion of necessary truths 39 31; 
absolute and ad hominem 62° 2; 
demonstrative science 9978 5-30. 

Destructible, destruction 994” 6, οΚ 
5) 22, 27, ° 25, 27> 29, 425 30, 43° 
15, 44° 36, 505 1, 67" 24, 695 31, 
ΤΙ, 705 15. 

Dialectic 987” 33, 995” 23, 4° 17, 

80 2 

79° 25. 

Differentia, difference 985" 13, 998° 
23, 45 13, 205 33, 35, ἢ 2, 15, 
42" 16; its meanings 188 12; )/( 
otherness, contrariety 4° 20, 54> 
23, 55° 4, 16, 58° 11; opposite, 
prior, contrary differentiae 16°25, 
576,113 generic, specific 18 26, 
54> 28, 589 7; definition by 42° 32, 
43°19; what makes it I. 9; matter 
does not make it 58> 6; first dif- 
ferences 61° 14; of numbers, 
units M. 6-8; three differences 
(Democritus) 985» 13, 42» 12. 

Diogenes 984° 5. 

Disposition Δ. 19. 

Divine, the 265 20, 64° 37; not 
jealous 982 32 ; encloses the uni- 
verse 74> 3; visible divine bodies 
265 18; the divinest knowledge 
9838 5. 

Division, mathematical 994» 24, 25 
19, > 3, 10, 48P 16, 60 14, 19; 
logical 37° 28. 

Dyad (two), indefinite 987° 26, 33, 
988" 13, 819 14, 22, ἢ 21, 32, 825 
13, > 30, 83° 36, 85 7, 87° 7, 88> 
28, 89° 35, 9185; ideal 3614, 81 
23, ἢ 27, 82 9, 12, 20, 22; the 
first number 999% 8, 85» 10, 88° 9. 

Egypt 981° 23. 
Eleatics referred to 986 10, 1° 
15. 

Element Δ. 3, M. 10, 989% 4, 992” 19, 
1518, 59> 23, 88> 4; whether only 
potential 25 33; coni. principle, 
cause 41 31, 70 25, 878 2, 91931; 
four elements (Empedocles) 984" 
8, 985° 32, 998* 30; of Ideas 987° 19. 

Empedocles 984% 8, 985% 2-10, 
21- 4, 9889 16, 27, 989% 20-30, 
993" 17, 9965 8, 998° 30, 0% 24- 

20, 18 12, 69> 21, 7286, 75» 2, 
gi r1; quoted οὗ 20, » 2, 6, 14, 
g 17, 14° 37; referred to 4> 33, 
50" 24 (2), 53° 15, 92° 7. 

End, syn. final cause 994° 9, 16, 
13* 33, 5905 37, 74° 30; coni. 
shape 23° 34; coni. actuality 
51° 15. 

Epicharmus !o* 6, 86° 16. 

Equal, def. 21% 12, 56% 22, 82» 7; 
how opposed to great and small 
I. §; syn. one (Plato) 87° 5. 

Equivocal, equivocation 3* 34, 30% 
32, 35525, 46° 6, 6oP 33, 86” 26. 

Eristic 125 19, 

Error )( ignorance 52°® 2. 

Essence (ri ἦν εἶναι) Z. 4-6, 8, 993° 
18, 994° 17, 25° 29, 38 14, 45°3; 
coni. definition 30% 7; coni. form 

33” 5. 

Eternal 987 16, 155 14, 50” 7, 51 
20; eternal sensible substance 69% 
31, Ὁ 25; necessity of an eternal 
substance A. 63 time eternal 
71> 7; eternal things, whether 
composite 88> 14; ungenerated 
915 12. 

Eudoxus 9915 17, 73° 17, 79” 21. 

Eurytus 92° Io. 

Even (Pythagorean) 9868 18, ggo® 
9, 915 24. 

Evenus 158 29. 

Evil, none apart from particular 
bad things 515 17; none among 
eternal things 518 20; said to be 
a first principle 75% 35, 91° 34; 
caused by strife (Empedocles) 
984° 32. 

X 2 

INDEX 

Excess and defect 992 6, 4° 12, 
42° 25, 35, 52° 30, 57% 13, 87° 
I 

Experience 98ο" 29; coni. science, 
art 981% 1, » 31; = knowledge 
of individual facts 981° 15. 

Falsity, def. 115 25; its meanings, 
A. 29; non-being in sense of 
falsity E. 4, ©. 10; )( impossi- 
bility 47> 14; a first principle 
(Plato) 89* 20. 

Female sex, coni. matter 24° 35; 
not a species I. 9. 

Final cause (οὗ évexa) 983" 31, 994° 
9, 13° 21, 33: b 26, 44° 1, κοῦ 7, 

ν . 

50" 36, 725 2. ν. End 
First, its meanings 285) 31. ν. 
Primary. 

Form, things referred to by naming 
their form 355 8; more real than, 
cause of, matter 29% 5,41 7: coni. 
essence 32” 1, 33° 5, 35° 32; syn. 
shape 999° 17, 15% 6, 17° 25, 33” 
5, 44” 22, 525 23, 60% 22,5 26; = 
art 34° 24, 705 15; not generated 
34> 7, 42° 30, 43 17, 44° 21, 
69" 35, 70" 15; coni. definition, 
formula 16° 9, 35% 21, 36% 28, » 5, 
42° 28, 435 19, 44° 12, 69" 33, 84> 
10; syn. substance 32° 1, 41> 8, 
sob 2, 84> 10; syn. positive state 
44” 33; )( becoming 505 4; )( 
matter 50* 15, 707 1, 84> 10; )/( 
privation 44° 33, 70° 12; its parts 
Z.10, 11. v. Shape, Species. 

Forms (Platonic), v. /deas. 

Formula (λόγος) 987° 31, 168 33, 
"Ὁ, 28° 34, 42° 28, 43" 19, » 26, 
47” 34, 50° 33; principles in the 

96° 1; formula of the essence 
is one 998” 12; )( word, coni. 
definition 6» 1, 30% 7; parts of Z. 
10, II, 16° 35, 239 23, 33° 23 
prior in 18> 33, 28% 32, 38> 27, 
49” 11, 54° 28, 77° 1, 78% το; )( 
concrete individual, matter 39° 20, 
58° 10, 17, 64% 23, 745 34; separ- 
able in 428 29; = final cause 44°1; 
= efficient 70” 30; coni. science 
46> 7, 59 26; analysis of 63> 18; 
cause as formula 70* 22; indi- 
visible in formula, in time, 84° 
15; one in formula, in number 

7012. 
Friendship (Empedocles) 9858 3,24, 
988* 33, Οὔ 11. 

‘From’, its meanings A.24, 991° 19, 
994° 22, 445 23, 92* 32. 
Full (Democritus) 985* 5, 9° 28. 

Generation, is of the concrete thing 
Z. 8, 9815 17, 34> 7, 425 30, 43 
17, 440 21, 69° 35, 705 15; 
posterior in generation, prior in 
nature, form, substance 9895 15, 
50° 4, 77° 27 ; two types 994° 22 ; 
from non-being, matter, privation, 
contraries, the potential 994° 27, 
325 20, 33° 9, 55° 11, 62° 26, 69> 
18, 88 17, 915 34; of something 
from something by something 
999 6, 10 21, 325 13, » 31, 338 
24, 44°24, 49°28; by nature, art, 
spontaneity Z. 7,9; )( making 32 
26 ; the generated must be divisible 
33" 12, 49° 35; from a member 
of the same species 348 21, 49» 
29, 70° 3 absolute and partial 
42> 7, 67> 22, 69” το, 885 33. 

Genus A. 28, 54° 30, 578 26, » 38, 
59> 27 ; proximate, ultimate 995» 
29, 998° 16, 9905 31, 23° 27, 
345 1, 37° 30, 59° 27; whether 
genera are first principles 998* 
21, 14> 11, 428 14, 69° 28; 
part of species 23 24; coni. 
definition, differentia, species Z. 
12, 998” 5, 13-999 23, 14° Io, 
165 24, » 32, 225 27, 230 18, 37> 
19, 305 26, 54” 27, 57} 7, 59> 36; 
being and unity not genera 998» 
22, 45" 6; is matter of species 
24> 8, 38° 6; other in genus 
240 9: )( universal 28> 34; not 
substantial Z. 13, 425 21, 5321; 
otherness of the genus 588 7. 

Geometry 983° 20, 9925 21, 997° 
27, 998" 2, 5° 11, 31, 51% 21, 61> 
3, 785 25, 805 21. 

God, a first principle 983°8; His life 
72» 14; identified with the One 
by Xenophanes 986 24; gods 
in human form 997" 10,74" 5; the 
stars held to be gods 74» 2. 

Good, syn. final cause 983* 31, 
59" 36; syn. beautiful 138 22, 
g1* 31; )( apparent good 135 27; 
how a first principle 75% 12, 38; 
)( beautiful 788 31; whether 
discussed by mathematics 788 31 ; 
how related to first principles 
915 30, 92° 9; Idea of 996° 28. © 

Great and small, how opposed to 

᾿ | 

INDEX 

equal I. §; (Plato) 987° 20, 26, 
988" 26, 9925 12, 998" 10, 83° 23, 
32; kinds of 992° 11, 858 9. 

Habit, having, state (és) Δ. 20, 
986* 17, 15° 34, 44 33, 46° 13, 
708 12; )( privation 55° 13. 

Harmonics 997" 21, 77° 5, 785 14, 

3° 22. 

Have, hold, its meanings A. 23. 

Hearing 980» 23. 

Heaven, only one 74° 31. 

Heraclitus 984° 7, 9878 33, 5° 25, 
10" 13, 12° 24, 34, 62% 32, 63 
25, 78° 13; referred to 989* 2, 
996° 9, 1° 15. 

Hermotimus 984° 19. 

Hesiod 989% 10, οὗ 9; referred to 
983» 28 ; quoted 984° 23. 

Hippasus 9845 7. 

Hippo 984° 3. 

Homer οὗ 28; quoted 76° 4. 

Homoeomerous 984° 14. 

Hot, the (Parmenides) 9875 1. 

Hypothesis )( necessary principle 
55 15, 

Ideas (Platonic) A. 6, 9, B. 6, Z. 6, 
14, M. 4, 5, 988? 1, 997° 2, 999° 6, 
30, 1* 4, 28° 20, 33% 27, 36° 13, 
425 11, §9° 10, 70* 27, 73° 18, 
75” 18, 76% 31, 83> 34, 865 31, 
b 14, 90* 16, » 20, 91528; elements 
of 987 19; of negations 900} 13, 
79® 9; of relations 990° 16, 
79* 12; of manufactured objects 
991» 6, 60> 28, 708 14; coni. 
numbers 991» 9, 76% 20, 80" 12, 
22, 815 21, 83> 3, 86° 4, 88 34, 
go” 33, 35, 91° 26; participable 
ggo? 28, 403 27; eternal sensibles 
997 12; as causes 33" 26; how 
related 39° 4; indefinable 40% 8; 
transcendent 405 9, 86° 33; uni- 
versal 425 15, 86° 33. 

Ignorance )( falsity, error 52° 2. 

Iliad, an artificial unity 458 13. 

Image (φάντασμα) 990° 14, 795 11. 
v. Appearance. 

Imitation (Pythagorean) 987° 11. ° 

Imperishable I. 10, 40 31. 

Impossible 19° 22; )( false 479 14. 

‘In,’ its meanings 23° 24. 

Inaddible numbers M. 6-8. 

Incapacity, its meanings 19 15, 46° 
29. 

Incomposite entities 51> 17, 27. 

Increase 42° 35; )( diminution 
69° 11, 88% 32. 

Individual (ἄτομον) 995 29, 999° 
12; (καθ᾽ ἕκαστον) action con- 
cerned with individuals 981° 17; 
is there anything apart from 
individuals ? 999* 26, 60* 3; syn. 
numerically one 999 33; are 
the first principles individual? 
Μ, 10, 3° 7, 715 20; syn. actual 
145 21; prior in order of percep- 
tion 18° 335 (τόδε rt) 30% 5, 70% 
Io. v. § This’. 

Indivisible (ἀδιαίρετον) 1. 1; in 
quantity, in kind 9908 3, 148 27, 
168 19, 21; in formula, in time 
84> 15; (ἄτομον) lines, magni- 
tudes 992" 22, 83> 13, 84° 1; 
species, form 998° 29, 345 8, 585 
18; indivisible in genus 18° 6. 

Induction ( demonstration, defini- 
tion 992 , 488 36; used 25> 
15, 54° 33, 55° 6, ἢ 17, 585 9, 648 
9; Socratic 78° 28. 

Infinite, the a. 2, K. 103; as sub- 
stance and principle 987% 16, 990* 
9, 4° 33; composed of great and 
small 987» 26; causes not infinite 
in number a. 2, 749 29; not 
thinkable 994 22, 30, 9995 27; 
by addition 994 30; how poten- 
tial 485 9; has no separate exis- 
tence 48°15; infinite regress 994° 
3, 8, 20, © 4, οὐ 28, 6 9 1o* 22, 
125 12, Ὁ 22, 22> 9, 30” 35, 325 
3, 33° 4, 41° 22, 60% 36, 70% 2, 
74* 29; no infinite magnitude 
73® 10; whether number is in- 
finite 83> 36; principles infinite 
in number (Anaxagoras) 984° 13. 

Intelligible )( sensible 990° 31, 
999” 2, 36" 3, 10, 455 34. 

Intermediate, def. 578 21, 68 27; 
no intermediate between contra- 
dictories 115 23, 128 1, 550 1, 699 
3; composed of contraries I. 7; 
Platonic 987° 16. 

Intuition (νόησις), coni. sensation, 
definition 368 6. v. Zhinking. 
Italian school 9878 10-31, 988 26. 
‘Itself,’ used to signify Ideas 40 34. 

Knowledge, desired by all 980* 21 ; 
springs from sensation 980° 28; 
)( art 981% 26; theoretical, pro- 
ductive, practical 982° 1, ἢ 9, 993° 

INDEX 

20, 28" 21, 462; pure, applied, 
superior, ancillary 9825 15, 30, 
> 4, 27, 996 10; its highest 
object 9825 1, 996 13; the 
divinest knowledge 983° 5; is of 
causes 983% 25, 993” 23, 994° 29, 
258 6; not of the sensible or 
accidental Z. 15, 987° 34, 26” 3, 
27% 20, 64 30, 65° 5, 77° 35; 
knowledge of contraries one 996* 
20, 618 19, 78° 26; is of species, 
form 998° 7, 31° 6, 358; )(sensa- 
tion 999” 3; of universals, indivi- 
duals 994° 21, 35 14, 59° 26, 60> 
20, 86° 6, 87® 15; one science 
to one genus 3” 10, 558 31; )( 
opinion 8> 28, 30, 39 33; prior 
in 18” 30, 284 32, 38° 27(?); ratio- 
cinative 25" 6; not of matter 
36* 8; coni. formula 289 32, 
46° 7, 59 26; )( actuality 48> 15; 
how a measure of objects 57% 9; 
its two meanings 87° 15. 

Leucippus 985> 4, 71» 32, 72° 7; 
referred to 84> 27. 

Like, def. 18° 15, 218 11, 54> 33 
said to be known by like οὗ 5 
Limit, its meanings A. 17 ; of bodies 

2 10, 60° 16 ; (Pythagorean) 987 
15, 990% 8, 4> 33. 
Line 28 5, 16 26, 36> 12, 438 33; 
perceptible lines 998° I; not com- 
osed of points 19 18; indivisible 
ine 992° 22, 84” 1. 
Logic (ἀναλυτικά) 5° 4. 
Love (Parmenides) 984» 24, 988° 

34. 

Luck (τύχη) 9815 5, 984° 14, 325 29, 
65* 30; generation by nature, art, 
spontaneity, luck Z. 7, 4905 3, 
70" 6. 

Lycophron 45° 10, 

Magi οἵ Io. 

Making )( generation 328 26; )( 
thinking 32” 15. 

Male and female I. 9. 

Many )( one I. 3, 6, 87 28 ; )( much 
56°15; matter of the one 75° 33; 
and few (Platonic) 87> 16. 

Mathematics 981 24, 985» 24, 992 
32, 996° 29, 4° 9, 26° 7, 9, 12, 19, 
615 28, » 32, 64% 32, 77” 18, 78% 33; 
mathematical objects )( percep- 
tible 989» 32, 990° 15, 365 4; )( 
Ideas B, 6, 28° 20, 76% 20, 83° 23, 

goo 27; many of one species 2» 
14; whether substances M. I-3, 
42° 11, 69° 35; not separable 59° 
13; mathematical matter 992° 2, 
59> 16; language 995° 6, 80” 
26; parts of mathematics 4° 7; 
mathematical sciences )( produc- 
tive 64* 1; mathematical number 
M. 6, 76% 20, 86° 5. 

Matter H. 3, 4, 983 7-984° 18, 998» 
23, 1598, 178 3, 42°25, 58° 6,14; 
def. 2953 20; syn. substratum 9835 

29, 985» 10, 988% 12, 992% 1, 22° 18, 

248, 42°26, 32,%9, 61°22, 7o* 11; 
a principle 983° 7, 98617, 46° 23; 
)( formula, form, complete reality, 
actuality 986" 20, 29% 5, 358 8, 38 
6, 41° 7, 43% 6, 45° 35, 50% 15, 70% 
1, 71° 21, 745 34, 76% 9, 785 30, 84> 
9; coni. female sex 24° 35 ; genus 
matter of species 24> 8, 385 6; 
coni. motion 268 3; cause of 
accident 278 13; whether sub- 
stance Z. 3, 425 27, 49* 36, 775 36; 
necessary, to explain generation 
and change 32° 17, 42° 32, 44> 27, 
69° 3; parts of matter )( of defini- 
tion Z. 10, 11; unknowable in 
itself 36° 8 ; sensible )( intelligible 
36° 9, > 36, 455. 34; indefinite 37% 
27, 400 1; coni. potency 39° 29, 
42° 27, Ὁ to, 4 5.23, 50® 15, 608 
21, 69> 14, 70° 12, 718 ro, 88? 1, 
925 3; not perishable 425 30; 
matter for locomotion, generation, 
ἄς, 42° 34, » 6, 69" 26; actuality 
varies with it 438 12; proximate 
matter 44° 18; )( substratum 44> 
9; proximate matter=shape 45> 
18 ; of mathematical objects 992” 
2, 59° 16; different things have 
different matter69"25 ; individual 
in appearance 70* Io; involved 
in contraries 75 22, 87° 1. 

Measure, def. of unity 52° 18, 87° 33; 
accurate, homogeneous with thing 
measured, indivisible 52° 36, 53° 
25, 88 2; how knowledge is a 
measure 57*9; man the measure 
ofall things 5 3* 36,6214, 19,63%4. 

Megaric school 46° 29. 

Melissus 986° 19. 

Memory 9805 20. 

Middle, excluded Ir. 7. 

Mind (νοῦς) A. 7, 9, 70% 26; in 
nature 9845 15; human 993? 11, 
75° 7; )( art, potency 25> 32; 

i δι. ιιδδινιννιι 

INDEX 

acts by contact 72> 21; divinest 
of things 74> 16; (Anaxagoras) 
984 16, 989 15, 17, 69° 31; 
(Parmenides) 9? 23. 

Mixture 989"2, 42°29, 82921, 925 24. 

Monists 986° 21. 

Motion (κίνησις), coni. sensation, 
matter 989” 32, 265 3, 36> 29; 
)( rest 4> 29, 10% 36, 12> 23, 25> 
21, 49 8; coni. activity, action 
20> 20, 228 7, Ὁ 5, 238 18; coni. 
nature 25> 20; )( action 48 18; 
)( actuality 485 28; eternal 49% 
35, 71° 7, 33; simple, continuous, 
unresting, uniform motion 53° 9, 
71 10, 729 21, 788 13. 

Motion, spatial (φορά) 69 12, 26, 
72> 5; the first kind of change 
72> 8, 735 12; simple 73° 29; of 
the planets A. 8. : 

Motive cause A. 3, 4, 9835 30, 984° 
27, 988° 27, 996? 7, 13? 9, 24) 708 
21; necessity of 991° 5, 80% 4; 
prior to the moved 10? 37, 70% 21 ; 
unmoved prime mover A. 7, 12» 
31; fire a motive cause 984" 6; 
the self-mover (Platonic) 725 1. 

Mutilated A. 27. 

Myth 982? 18, 983° 29, 9955 4, 0* 9, 
18, 71 27,74 1, 4, 75°26, 915 34. 

Nature, its meanings A. 4; )( habit, 
spontaneity, luck, thought 981° 4, 
325 12, 65° 27, 70P 30, 71> 35; 
)( generation 989° 15; not the 
whole of reality 5* 34; syn. 
matter 14> 33, 245 4; )( force 15» 
15, 528 23, 715 35; = that which 
contains its principle of motion 
in itself 14> 18, 25> 20, 49° 8, 
γον 8; by nature )( to us 29> 
7; )( art 325 12, 70® 7, 17; 
syn. form, complete reality, posi- 
tive state 32° 24, 44° 9, 70° 11; 
the only substance in destructible 
things 43” 23; )( potency 49° 8; 
natural objects, bodies, substances 
14° 19, 32, 280 10, 425 7, 70% 5, 
go* 32; )( unnatural 33> 33. 

Necessity, def. 6 31; its meanings 
26> 28, 64> 33; necessary, its 
meanings A. 5, 720 11; )( usual, 
accidental 25° 15, 18, 20, 26° 28, 
64> 33; objects of demonstration 
necessary truths 39” 31. 

Negation )( privation 45 12; coni. 
contrariety 12° 9; privative nega- 

tion 56° 17, 29; Ideas of nega- 
tions 990” 13, 79* 9. 

Non-rational potencies 46” 2, 485 
4, 50° 33. 

Number M. 6-9, N, 1-3, 5, 6, 205 13, 
57*® 3; numerical ratio 985? 32, 
991° 13, 17, 19, 993" 17, 1° 30, 53" 
16, 61» 1, 92” 14, 313 said to be 
limited by ten 986* 8, 73* 20, 845 
12; elements, attributes, genera- 
tion of number 986* 17, 4 10, 84> 
28,87 14,8912, 90%21, 91° 23,28; 
numbers as principles, substances 
985° 26, 986° 17, 987° 19, Ὁ 24, 15 
25, Ὁ 26, 36> 12, 76% 31, 80% 13, 83 
23, 905 3, 21, 92> 16, 263 prime 
numbers 987" 34; sensible )( in- 
telligible, ideal gq0* 32, go” 35; 
coni. Ideas 991 9, 76® 20, 80" 12, 
815 7, 21, 83> 3, 86% 4, 88> 34, 
go*® 16, > 33, 918 26; wherein 
does its unity consist? 992° 1, 
445 2, 45° 7; numerical unity 999” 
25, 32, 16> 31, 18° 13, 33> 31, 
395 28, 54° 34, 6o> 29, 87% 12; 
unity the origin and measure of 
number 16> 18, 52» 24; quality, 
differentia of number M. 6-8, 20° 
3; coni. definition 43 34, 455 
7; addible )( inaddible M. 6-8; 
mathematical, arithmetical num- 
ber 76® 20, 80% 21, 31, © 13, 83° 3, 
16, 86% 5, go? 34, 91” 24; related 
as prior and posterior 80° 12; 
number composed of abstract 
units 305 13, 80° 19, 30, 825 6, 83> 
16; infinite or finite? 83> 36; 
powers of two 845 6; )( formula 
87> 12; one not a number 889 6; 
numerical succession 85° 4; 
square, cube 93° 7. 

Odd (Pythagorean) 986% 18, 990% 
9, 918 22. 

One I. 1-3; its meanings Δ. 6, 525 
17; one in many 990” 7, 13, 991° 
2, 40 29; unity and being I. 2, 
998> 22, 1% 5, 3° 22, 40°16, 4556; 
not a genus 998> 22, 455 6; = 
indivisible 999 2, 41% 19; in 
quantity, species, number, genus, 
by analogy 909" 2, > 25, 32, 16Ὁ 
31, 185 13, 33. 31) 39° 28, 545 34, 
60° 20, 87912; unity of common 
reference, of succession, of com- 
mon predicability, of meaning, 3° 
33, 5* 11,615; one in continuity, 

INDEX 

form, formula 16" 9; origin and 
measure of number 16° 18, 52> 24; 
the one not substance I. 2, 40° 18; 
unity of number and of definition 
Z. 12, H. 6, 992" I, 4458 3; the 
one a measure 52° 18, 87 33; 
one and many I. 3, 6, 87> 28; )( 
simple 72® 32 ; the many, matter 
of the one 755 33; one by contact, 
mixture, &c. 825 20; primary one 
83* 25; in what sense a principle 
84> 18; one in formula, in number 
87> 12; not a number 888 6; 
(Pythagoreans) 986® 20, 987" 18, 
27, 15 10; (Eleatics) 986° 15, 1® 
33, 89% 2; (Plato) M. and N. 
passim, 987” 21, 992" 8, 1" 5; 
(Anaxagoras) 989° 17. 

Opinion )( knowledge 8 28, 30, 

33- 

Opposition, its kinds A. 1ο, 54° 24, 
55° 38, 57° 33; change to opposites 
11> 34, 575 31, 69” 4; opposite 
differentiae 168 25; potency of 
opposites 50° 8, 30; opposite )( 
contrary 69> 4. 

Order 984 15, 98514; not in sub- 
stance 38° 332. ἡ 

Other, def. 188 9; its meanings 54> 
14; in species I. 8, 9, 185 1; in 
genus 24> 9; otherness of the 
‘genus 58° 7; otherness )( differ- 
ence 54> 23. 

Parmenides 984° 3, 986° 18-987 2, 
18 32; quoted 984° 25, οὗ 21, 805 
3; referred to 4° 32. 

Part, its meanings A. 25, 34 32; 
parts of definition, of matter Z. 10, 
11. 

Participation 987> 13, 9915 14," 5, 
30513, 31518, 37% 18, 4:5 18, 8, 
79> 18; Ideas participable 990 
28, 405 27, 795 25. 

Pauson 50% 20. 

Perishable. v. Destructible. 

Petitio principii 6* 17, 20. 

Pherecydes 91° 9. 

Philosophy is knowledge desirable 
for its own sake, most accurate, 
communicable, most divine and 
honourable A. 2; starts from 
wonder 982 11; turned into 
mathematics 992* 32; is know- 
ledge of the truth 993" 20; treats 
of the axioms I. 3, K. 4, 995 8; 
treats of being as being I. 1, 2, 

K. 3; has distinct parts 45 2, 26% 
18; )( dialectic, sophistic 4° 17; 
theoretical, practical, ἄς, E. 1; 
first philosophy 26* 24; the philo- 
sopher fond of myth 982° 18; can 
speculate about anything 45 34. 

Phrynis 993° 16. 

Physics 986 14, 989° 30, 990* 3, 7, 
992” 4, 995" 18, 18 12, 5% 31, 34, 

I, 65 2, 25> 19, 26, 268 5, 12 
37° 14, 16, §9> 16, 61" 6, 28, 620 
22, 26, 69% 36, 71” 27, 75” 27, 
78° 10. 

Place 92° 17; change of 42° 34,69" 13. 

Elanets Δ. 8. 38° 26 
ato A. 0, 9, 988" 26, g90* 6, 30, 
996* 6, 15 9, 198 4, 28 19, 53° 
13, 83° 32; referred to Z. 14, 
M.and N. passim, 995» 16, 997" 1, 
998° 9, 1° 19, 25 11, > 12, 315 30, 
33° 27, 345 2, 44° 8, τοῦ 35, 515 
19, 59% 10, ἢ 3, Go? 6, 69% 26, 70* 
27, 71” 15, 73° 17, 78° 19, 27 ; his 
works quoted, ήῤῥίας Minor 
25° 6, Laws 72* 1 (ὃ), Phaedo 
991» 3, 80% 2, Phaedrus 725 1 (Ὁ), 
Sophistes 26 14, 308 2 δ, 64> 29, 
89* 20, Theaetetus 10 12, 752- 
maeus 19% 4 (?), 71 32, 72® 2. 

Platonists referred to M. and N. 
passim, 998* 7, 17, 28° 15 (ἢ), 24, 
31* 31, 36° 13, 40 2, 45° 16, 56° 
10, 69% 35, 755 32, 37. 

Plurality 57% 3, 87" 5, 91> 34; def. 
205 8, 545 22; )( unity 45 10, 16; 
first plurality 85° 9. 

Point 9925 19, 16} 26, 60> 18, 85> 28. 

Polus 981° 4. 

Position 985” 15, 16 26, 22> 2, 42> 
19, 77° 30, 84° 26, 

Possible ©. 4, 19° 28. 

Potency, power, def. A. 12, 6. 1-9; 
whether the elements exist in 
potency 2 33; potency or actu- 
ality prior 6. 8, 3*1; )( actuality 
7» 28, 69> 16, 719 6, ἢ 22; power 
in geometry 19° 33, 46° 7; )( 
reason, art, nature 25” 22, 274 
6, 33” 8, 49> 8, 645 13; coni. 
matter 39° 29, 42* 27, » 10, ξοϑ 
15, 60% 21, 69” 14, 70” 12, 715 10, 
88 1, 92 3; irrational, rational 
Θ. 2, 47° 31, 50° 33 ; the potential 
and the actual are one 4521; in 
what sense the infinite and the void 
are potential 48> 9; when a thing 
is In potency ©. 7; primary po- 

INDEX 

tency 49» 13; the potential not 
eternal 50” 7; potency is of oppo- 
sites 50° 8, 30, 51% 6, 71” 10. 

Practical knowledge 993” 21, 25° 
21, 25. 

Primary 305 10, 37° 3, 75°24; syn. 
self-subsistent 315 14; substance 
3251; coni. categories 34° 9. v. 
First. 

Prime numbers 987? 34. 

Principle, beginning (ἀρχή), its 
meanings A, 1; material 983° 7, 
24, 9845 6, 986° 17, 987% 4, 465 
23; efficient 984° 27, 46° 14, 3, 
49” 7, 70° 7, » 25; final 50° 7; 
formal 695 28, 76* 24, 80°6, 32; God 
a first principle 983° 8; contrary 
principles 986% 22, » 1, 4° 31, 
75® 28, 875) 30; principles of 
demonstration 993” 28, 996” 26, 
5> 9, 11, 13, 18, 22, 65 5, 625 3; 
a first principle necessary a. 2; 
whether genera are first principles 
998" 21, 425 14; whether one 
in kind or in number A, 4-5, 
999" 24, 60> 29; whether the 
same for things perishable and 
imperishable οὗ §; whether po- 
tential or actual 2 32; whether 
universal or individual M. 10, 
48 7, 60° 20, 695 26-30, 715 20; 
of being as such I. 1, E. 1, Κι τ; 
the simple a principle 59” 34; )/( 
element 41° 31, 70" 25; in what 
sense unity is a principle 84> 18 ; 
the principles, how related to the 
good 918 30, 92° 11; infinity of 
principles (Anaxagoras) 984° 13; 
ten (Pythagorean) 986* 22. 

Prior, its meanings A. 11; in 
generation, nature 989* 15; in 
knowledge, formula, perception 
185 30; in formula, knowledge, 
time 28° 32, 38 27 (?) ; in formula, 
substance, time 49" 11; in genera- 
tion, form, substance κοῦ 4; 
in formula 54° 28, 7858 10; in 
formula, substance 77 1; no 
Idea of a class which includes 
prior and posterior members 
9995 6; numbers related as prior 
and posterior 80> 12. 

Privation 48 12, 19” 7, 58 27; its 
meanings Δ, 22, 465 31; one of 
two contraries privative 4° 27, 11> 
18, 55> 14, 27, 615 20, 63° 17; 
)( state, form 19° 7, 44> 32, 55° 

13, 70° 12; primary 46°14; per- 
fect 55* 35, 615 20; )( negation, 
contrariety, 4° 12, 555 33; priva- 
tive negation 56° 17, 29. 

Production, v. Generation. 

Productive knowledge 982° 1, © 11, 
25> 21, 25; )( mathematical 
64° 1 

Proof, negative (ἔλεγχος) 65 11. 

Protagoras I. 5, 6, K. 6, 9985 3, 7Ὁ 
22, 47% 6, 53° 35. 

Pythagoras 986® 30 (ἢ). 

Pythagoreans 985» 23-οδόν 8, 987 
13-27, > 11, 23, 31, 989” 29-9908 
29, 996 6, 18 10, 36 18, 53° 12, 
72> 31, 7b 21, 80° 16, 31, 83” 8- 
19, 90* 20-35, 91° 13, 23 ; referred 
to 998° 7 (ἢ), 25 11, 4” 31, 17 20, 
25> 16, 755 36, > 28, 76° 17. 

Qua, def. 65” 24. 

Quality A. 14, 288 15, 68% 19; of 
number 20” 3; definite 63° 27; 
change of 69” 10; posterior to 
quantity 83° 11. 

Quantity Δ. 13; attributes of 20% 
19; known by a measure 52> 
20; indefinite 635 27; change of 
69" 10; prior to quality 835 11; 
motion and time incidentally 
quantitative 205 29. 

Ratio (λόγος) 985% 32, 991” 13, 17, 
19, 993° 17, 1° 30, 535 16, 61° 1, 
92° 14, 31. 

Reality, realization, complete (ἐντε- 
λέχεια) )( matter 38> 6, 78° 30; 
separates 39° 7; coni. substance 
44°9; )( actuality 475 30, 50* 23. 

Reason, v. Mind. 

Relative, the A, 15, 56° 34, 89» 7, 
14; Ideas of 990 16, 79" 12; )( 
absolute 990 20; least substan- 
tial of the categories 888 22, 30. 

Same, the 995" 21, 215 11; its 
meanings A. 9, 54° 32; in species 
18> 7, 49> 18, 29, 588 18; by 
accident 37° 6. 

Scale 985" 31, 986° 5 ; seven scales 

81 

Science, v. Knowledge. 

Sensation, sense (αἴσθημα) 10> 32, 
63 4; (αἴσθησις) sight our most 
precious sense 9805 23 ; sensation 
the source of all knowledge 980° 
28; )( wisdom 981" 10; )( know- 

INDEX 

ledge 999° 3; a physical alteration 
ΟἹ 133 special sensation always 
true 10” 2; conflict of sensations 
10> 4, 115 25: coni, intuition 3656. 

Sensible 987 83» 997” 12, 10* 3, 42 
25, 695 30, 78> 16; )( mathe- 
matical 989» 32, g9go® 153 no 
knowledge of sensible things Z. 
15, 987 34; )( intelligible, ideal 
990* 31, 999° 2, 36° 3, 10, 455 34, 
go> 35; are there non-sensible 
substances 9078 34, 2 12, 505 39; 
coni. motion 989" 32, 36" 29; 
contrarieties 61° 32. 

Sense-organ 638 2, 

Separable 175 25, 25528, 265 9, 
28 34, 405 9, 59°13, 604 8, 78> 
30, 868 33; in formula )( without 
qualification 425 29; in actuality 
)( in knowledge 48° 15. 

Separate (verb) 989” 3, 40 28, 78> 

1, 86 

) 4. 

Separate (adj.) 40} 6. 

Seven (Pythagorean) 935 13. 

Shape, coni, end 23° 34; coni. 
formula 42° 28; coni. actuality 
435) 25, 28, 31; = proximate 
matter 45» 18; coni. form 999° 17, 
15° 6, 17° 25, 33° 5, 44> 22, 528 
22, 60% 22, Ὁ 26, 

Sight, the most precious sense 
980* 23. 

Simonides 982” 30, 91° 7. 

Simple, coni. necessary 15° 12; 
coni. principle 59 35; )( one 
725 32 ; bodies 9845 6; concepts, 
substance 27> 27, 41> 9, 725 
32; movement 53° 9, 73° 29; 
generation 69» 10, 888 33. 

Snub Z, 5, 25° 31. 

Socrates 987° 1-4, 78° 17-31, 86” 3. 

Socrates the younger 36> 25. 

Sophistic 45 18; concerned with 
non-being 26 14; sophistical 
objections 328 6, 49” 33. 

Sophists 996* 32, 45 17, 26° 15. 

Sophocles 15% 30. 

Soul, partly falls within scope of 
physics 268 5 ; substance of living 
things 35> 14, 43° 35; = its 
essence 36% 2, 432; )( soulless 
things 468 36; )( reason, not all 
soul can survive death 70* 26. 

Species 998° 7 ; indivisible 998° 20, 
445 8 ; one in species 999% 2, 16> 
31, 18° 7, 49°18, 29, 585 18; part 
of genus 999° 4, 23" 18, 25; other 

in species I. 8, 9, 18° 1, 54> 28; 
genus part of species 23 24: 
genus matter of species 24° 8, 388 
6; species composed of genus 
and differentiae 39° 26, 57» 7. 
Speusippus 28> 21, 72> 31 : referred 
to 75* 36, ἢ 37, 80> 14 (?), 21 (?), 
QI® 34, 92 11. 
Spheres of the stars A. 8. 
Spontaneity, coni. luck, )( nature, 

art 984° 14, 32" 13, ἢ 23, 345 10, 
b o* 

4,70° 7. 

Stars A. 8; their nature 735 34. 

State, v. Hadzt. 

Strife (Empedocles) o* 27. 

Substance Z and H fassim; its 
meanings Δ, 8, A. 1; = ultimate 
subject 983” 10, 2° 3, 78 31, 17 
13, 105 5, 205 8, 38° 15, 428 26; 
)( affection, accident 983" 1ο, 
985» 10, 7® 31, 38> 28, 718 1; 
material 985” ro, 992” 1, 42> 9, 
44° 15, 40" 36, 775 36; are 
numbers substances? 9875 19, 1° 
26, 36” 12, 768 31; sensible sub- 
stance 9975 34, 42° 25, 69% 30, 
>33 = form 987” 21, 993° 18, 
32° 1, 35 22, 37% 29, 380 14, 41> 
9, 50° 2; are there non-sensible 
substances? 9075} 34, 59° 39; 
universals not substance Z. 13, 
3° 7, 53° 16, 60? 21, 69% 26-30, 
87* 2; primary being 285 14, 30; 
prior in formula, knowledge, 
time 288 32; alone separable 
285 34; four notions of it 28” 33; 
whether matter is substance Z. 3, 
42° 27, 4905 36, 77" 36; syn. indi- 
vidual 30° 19; primary 32> 1; 
= matter, form, and concrete 
thing 35% 1, 70> 13; )( concrete 
thing 35° 22, 375 29; )( genus 
428 21, 535 21; being not 
the substance of things go> 18; 
unity not the substance I. 2, 40° 
18; a principle and cause 415 9, 
Ὁ 30, 4352 : generally recognized 
substances 425 6; natural 425 8, 
70* 5; mathematical objects as 
substances M. I-3, 425 11, 697 35; 
coni. actuality, complete reality 
42? το, 43" 23, 35, 44° 95 50> 2, 
72* 26; prior in 49” 11, 50° 4, 
77 1; incomposite 51527; con- 
crete 54> 4; eternal, unmovable 
substance A. 6; why are there 
many substances? 89° 31.