ARISTOTLE 

Posterior Analytics 

Translated 
with a Commentary 
by 

JONATHAN BARNES 

Second Edition 

CLARENDON PRESS - OXFORD 

Also published in this series 

Categories and De Interpretatione 
J. L. ACKRILL 

De Anima Books I and HI 
D. W. HAMLYN 
Second edition with supplementary material by Christopher Shields 

De Generatione et Corruptione 
C. J. F. WILLIAMS 

De Partibus Animalium 1 and De Generatione Animalium 1 
D. M. BALME 
New impression with supplementary material by Allan Gotthelf 

Eudemian Ethics Books I, Il, and VHUI 
MICHAEL WOODS 
Second edition 

Metaphysics Books I, 4, and E 
CHRISTOPHER KIRWAN 
Second edition 

Metaphysics Books M and N 
JULIA ANNAS 

Physics Books I and IT 
WILLIAM CHARLTON 
New impression with supplementary material 

Physics Books III and IV 
EDWARD HUSSEY 
New impression with supplementary material 

Other volumes are in preparation 

CLARENDON ARISTOTLE SERIES 

General Editors 
J. L. ACKRILL ann LINDSAY JUDSON 

This book has been printed digitally and produced in a standard specification 
in order to ensure its continuing availability 

OXFORD 

UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP 
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide in 
Oxford New York 
Auckland Bangkok Buenos Aires Cape Town Chennai 
Dar es Salaam Delhi Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi Kolkata 
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi 
Sao Paulo Shanghai Singapore Taipei Tokyo Toronto 
with an associated company in Berlin 

Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press 
in the UK and in certain other countries 

Published in the United States 
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York 

© Oxford University Press 1975, 1993 

The moral rights of the author have been asserted 
Database right Oxford University Press (maker) 

Reprinted 2002 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, 
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate 
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction 
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, 
Oxford University Press, at the address above 

You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover 
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer 

ISBN 0-19-824089-9 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 

The major part of this book was written in the autumn of 1972, 
when I was a visiting member of the Institute for Advanced Study 
in Princeton. I am deeply grateful to the Institute for offering me 
ideal conditions in which to work on Greek philosophy. And I 
thank my College, Oriel, for enabling me to accept the offer by 
granting me a term’s Sabbatical leave. 

Many friends and colleagues on both sides of the Atlantic 
have helped and encouraged me. In Princeton, Professor Harold 
Cherniss allowed me to draw on his unparalleled knowledge of 
ancient philosophy; and Willis Doney regularly sustained my 
spirits with alcohol and advice. Parts of my notes, badly disguised 
as a paper, were read to groups at Princeton University, at 
Brooklyn College, at Dartmouth College, and at the University 
of Massachusetts in Amherst: my audience invariably pounced on 
my errors and improved my thoughts. Peggy Van Sant produced 
a beautiful typescript of the translation. 

In Oxford I have received valuable aid from Lesley Brown, 
Christopher Kirwan, Nicholas Measor, and Richard Robinson. 
Parts of an early draft were gently mauled by the members of the 
Oxford Aristotelian Society. A paper based on my notes to 4 3 
was read to a seminar in London organized by Professor D. M. 
Balme. The Librarian, and the Acting Librarian, of Oriel allowed 
me to browse freely among the books from Sir David Ross’s 
library. Mrs E. Hinkes typed out the notes with her customary 
care and skill. 

My greatest debt is to Professor John Ackrill. As editor of the 
Clarendon Aristotle series, he has patiently overlooked my pro- 
crastinations and has been in constant and kindly attendance 
at my labours; he annotated a first, stuttering translation; and 
his detailed and meticulous criticism has brought numerous and 
substantial improvements to the notes. As my mentor, he first 
guided my stumbling footsteps along the steep and stony path of 
Aristotelian studies. I thank him warmly. 

JONATHAN BARNES 
Oriel College, Oxford 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 

In the Introduction to the first edition of this book I lamented the 
fact that the Posterior Analytics was often misprized, or even 
ignored, by Aristotelian scholars. The lament was overblown; but 
it was not groundless. How things have changed. In the same 
year as my own book, there was published the monumental 
commentary on Book 4 by Mario Mignucci. A year earlier— 
but too late for me to consult—there had appeared Wolfgang 
Kullmann’s Wissenschaft und Methode; a year later followed 
Gilles-Gaston Granger’s La Théorie aristotélicienne de la science; 
and in 1978 the eighth Symposium Aristotelicum was devoted 
to the Posterior Analytics. Since then there have been over a 
hundred articles or books dedicated to one aspect or another of 
the work; and numerous publications on other parts of Aristotle’s 
philosophy have made more than passing reference to the Post- 
erior Analytics. Many of these studies have been primarily exe- 
getical in purpose; but there has also been a revival of strictly 
philosophical interest in the Posterior Analytics, and more than 
one author has urged that Aristotle’s philosophy of science is no 
more antiquated than his ethics or his metaphysics. 

Much of this recent stuff is shoddy—such now is the way of 
things in the learned world. But a part of it has been far from 
despicable; and amateurs of the Analytics may reasonably believe 
that the object of their love has become both more widely ad- 
mired and more deeply understood. 

The second edition differs from the first in several respects. 

The translation has been entirely redone. The original version 
was a creature of its time. Professing a stern fidelity to Aristotle’s 
Greek, it betrayed a profound misconception of that delicate 
virtue. It was written in a sort of dog English: always inelegant 
and sometimes barbarous, it appeared here as comic or disgusting 
and there as merely incomprehensible.’ The new translation is 
more faithful to Aristotle. It is also—and by the same token— 

1 The translation was justly castigated by reviewers: see e.g. S. Mansion, 
Antiquité Classique, 46 (1977), 627-8; STRIKER (1977); Dorothea Frede, 
Philosophical Review, 87 (1978), 288-91; EBERT (1980). (The list of 
Supplementary References gives details of works referred to by capitalized name 
and date.) 

vi 

PREFACE 

less vile in expression. The new Note on the Translation indicates 
the principles on which it is based.” 

The notes have not been rewritten in the same thoroughgoing 
fashion; but they have all been revised. Some of what I wrote still 
seems to me to be true, and it stands as it was. In other places 
I no longer believe my original text but have been unable to 
hit upon anything more satisfactory; and here too the original 
matter stands. More generally, the style of the commentary is 
unchanged—it is as abrupt and unattractive as it ever was.* None 
the less, the revisions are extensive: I have corrected (or sup- 
pressed) a number of manifest errors; I have come to hold—and 
hence to express—a different opinion on a number of substantial 
issues and on very many points of detail; and I have added a 
certain amount of new matter. Much of all this derives from 
discussions with friends and colleagues; some of it derives from 
the publications of other scholars. (And although I do not pretend 
to have read—let alone to have pondered—everything which has 
come out in the last fifteen years, I have tried to be a little more 
generous than before in my bibliographical references.) 

The Introduction remains as it was; but I have added a few 
supplementary notes. The Note on the Translation is new. The 
Synopsis and the Note on the Commentary are unchanged. Sup- 
plementary references have been adjoined to the List of Refer- 
ences. An English-Greek Glossary has been added, and the 
Greek~English Glossary has been appropriately modified. 

All in all, about a third of the revised version is new. I think 
that it warrants the title “second edition”. What other titles it 
warrants, the reader will decide. 

I am grateful to the General Editors of the Clarendon Aristotle 
series, and to the Clarendon Press, for encouraging me to under- 
take a new edition. And I am indebted to the members of my 
1991 Chalet reading party, who made the initial stages of the task 
far more fun than such things usually are. 

JONATHAN BARNES 
Les Charmilles 
July 1992 

2 A lightly amended version of the original translation was published in my 
revision of the Oxford Translation of Aristotle: The Complete Works of Aristotle 
(Princeton, NJ, 1984). 

3 After some thought, I have decided to leave the various symbolical 
formulations in the text, although they have distressed several readers (and 
perhaps helped none). And I have not had the time or the space to add the more 
general reflections on Aristotle’s arguments and theories which several reviewers 
of the first edition desiderated. 

vil 

CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
NOTE ON THE TRANSLATION 
TRANSLATION 

SYNOPSIS 
NOTE ON THE COMMENTARY 

COMMENTARY 

REFERENCES 
GLOSSARIES 

INDEXES 

xi 

XXiil 

75 

79 

81 

273 

281 

291 

INTRODUCTION 

I 

Aristotle’s sweet Analytics ravished generations of European 
scholars and scientists. The Prior Analytics displayed the pure 
discipline of logic, well-formed, elegant, seductive; the Posterior 
Analytics beckoned to deeper mysteries, offering a sure path to 
scientific progress, clear and imperious in its injunctions, delicious 
in its rigour. If a Bacon or a Locke sternly rejected the ancient 
pleasures of Aristotelianism, it was only the perverted excesses 
of scholasticism which fell to their condemnation: the original 
beauties of the Analytics still flashed and excited. 

All that has changed. What once was welcomed as a ravishing 
delight is now reviled as a corruption and a rape: by its mere- 
tricious charms (so the accusation reads) the Analytics imposed 
on the learned world a narrow, blinkered, logic, and a stultifying 
theory of science. Thought was fettered; and if the old thinkers 
and scientists sang, they sang in chains. 

The modern prosecutors generously allow the Prior Analytics a 
little merit for cultivating, with some formality, one small patch 
of logic; but they do not spare the Posterior Analytics: its first 
book, they allege, presents in the theory of ‘demonstration’ a 
barren and pernicious essay in scientific methodology; its second 
book, on definition, offers a farrago of doctrines about ‘essences’ 
and ‘real’ definitions which should embarrass even the most lib- 
erally disposed reader; and the general argument of both books is 
entangled in a thicket of wrangling, little of which is intelligible 
and none philosophically interesting. 

A historian of ideas, faced by this intemperate charge, might put 
in a plea of mitigation. After all, a work as influential as the 
Posterior Analytics surely deserves serious and even sympathetic 
study, however execrable the doctrines it enshrines. Moreover, 
the Posterior Analytics does in a sense provide the framework 
within which the rest of the Aristotelian corpus, including those 
parts still generally admired, is arranged and ordered. Modern 
scholarship has, it is true, repudiated the nineteenth century’s 
efforts to delineate Aristotle’s ‘system’; the corpus, it is now often 
claimed, presents no philosophical or scientific system, but offers 
a series of tentative theses and unresolved puzzles—Aristotle’s 

xi 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

thought is aporematic, not apodeictic. There are merits in this 
view, but it is extreme: we may allow that Aristotle’s philosophy 
fails actually to present a grand system, without giving up the 
conviction that it is potentially and in design systematic; if the 
Aristotelian corpus is not, as it stands, an Encyclopaedia of 
Unified Science, it nevertheless forms—or was intended to form— 
the basis for such a large project. There are hints enough, scat- 
tered throughout Aristotle’s writings, to show that he had a 
general conception of the range and classification of human know- 
ledge, and that he saw his own voluminous researches in the light 
of that conception. And there are hints, less frequent but no less 
clear, that the theory of the Posterior Analytics was meant to 
provide the proper formal account and presentation of the finished 
system. In a perfect Aristotelian world, the material gathered in 
the corpus will be systematically presented; and the logical struc- 
ture of the system will follow the pattern of the Posterior Ana- 
lytics. If that is so, then any faithful lover of Aristotle will take 
some pains over the Posterior Analytics. 

Such a speech might, I think, ensure a charitable sentence for the 
Posterior Analytics; but it will hardly secure a favourable verdict. 
The prosecution can be more forcibly met: its allegations are 
false and ill-founded. 

First, Book A does not contain a theory of scientific metho- 
dology. Aristotle does not pretend to be offering guidance to the 
scientist—or, for that matter, to the historian or the philosopher— 
on how best to pursue his researches or how most efficiently to 
uncover new truths; nor, of course, did Aristotle attempt to carry 
out his own scientific researches in accordance with the canons of 
the Analytics. Book A is not a methodology of research; a fortiori 
it is not a barren or a pernicious methodology. Rather, it is 
concerned with the organization and presentation of the results of 
research: its aim is to say how we may collect into an intelligible 
whole the scientist’s various discoveries—how we may so arrange 
the facts that their interrelations, and in particular their expla- 
nations, may best be revealed and grasped. In short, the primary 
purpose of demonstration is to expound and render intelligible 
what is already discovered, not to discover what is still unknown.“ 

The essential thesis of Book 4 is simple and striking: the 
sciences are properly expounded in formal axiomatized systems. 
What Euclid later did, haltingly, for geometry, Aristotle wanted 

Supplementary Notes, cued by letters, appear at the end of the Introduction. 

Xii 

INTRODUCTION 

done for every branch of human knowledge. The sciences are to 
be axiomatized: that is to say, the body of truth that each defines 
is to be exhibited as a sequence of theorems inferred from a few 
basic postulates or axioms. And the axiomatization is to be for- 
malized: that is to say, its sentences are to be formulated within a 
well-defined language, and its arguments are to proceed according 
to a precisely and explicitly specified set of logical rules. The 
notion of formal axiomatization has more than historical value: 
the birth and development of that notion are chronicled in the 
Posterior Analytics; and if some of Aristotle’s speculations are 
quaint or antiquated, many remain pertinent to any understanding 
of the nature of an axiomatic science.® 

So much for Book A. Book B, I think, can also be defended. The 
axioms of any science, it supposes, must be (or at least include) 
definitions or statements of essence; and its main burden is to ask 
how these definitions are to be elicited and exhibited. Unaris- 
totelians are inclined to object, with an appealing crudity of 
approach, that there are no such things as essences, and that if 
there are they are not expressed by definitions. The objection is 
wrong on both counts. 

Aristotle’s essentialism has little in common with its modern 
homonym. Aristotelian essences are what John Locke called ‘real’ 
essences: the essence of a kind K is that characteristic, or set of 
characteristics, of members of K upon which any other properties 
they have as members of K depend. That there are essences of 
this sort is at worst a trivial truth (if all the properties of K turn 
out to be essential), and at best a plausible formulation of one 
of the fundamental assumptions of some branches of scientific 
inquiry: one of the things a chemist does when he investigates the 
nature of a stuff is to seek an explanation of its superficial pro- 
perties and powers in terms of some underlying structure; one 
aim of the psychologist is to explain overt behaviour by means of 
covert states or dispositions. There is nothing archaic or ‘meta- 
physical’ about the doctrine of real essences: that doctrine merely 
supposes that among the properties of substances and stuffs some 
are explanatorily basic, others explanatorily derivative. I do not 
deny that there are difficulties with such a doctrine (it must at 
least answer the old rumblings of Locke); but I leave the reader 
to form his own opinion of their relevance and cogency. 

The second objection, that definitions cannot express real es- 
sences, is mere trifling. The suggestion that the word ‘‘definition” 
be restricted to statements of meaning is purely stipulative: if the 

xiii 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

stipulation is accepted, as a convenient way of avoiding ambiguity, 
nothing need happen to Aristotle’s theory beyond a change of 
name; and until one is proposed, we may either follow ordinary 
usage, which surely allows us to apply the word “‘definition” to 
statements of essence, or else avail ourselves of the scholastic 
distinction between ‘real’ and ‘nominal’ definition. The whole 
question is insignificant. 

Finally, can anything defend the tangled obscurities through which 
the two main doctrines of the Posterior Analytics fitfully gleam? 
Whether or not these entanglements are petty and uninteresting I 
cannot say here: that is a question for piecemeal discussion. It 
is undeniable, however, that Aristotle’s argument is sometimes 
dark and anfractuous, its course broken by digressions and dis- 
continuities. And such features are plausibly regarded as flaws. 

The presence of these infelicities can be explained (and to my 
mind excused) by reference to two commonplaces of Aristotelian 
scholarship. First, like all of Aristotle’s major treatises, the Post- 
erior Analytics was not prepared for publication: we have before 
us a set of Aristotle’s lecture notes, several times reworked. 
Much of the abruptness, digression, repetition, and inconcinnity 
which mark and perhaps disfigure Aristotle’s argument is, I think, 
hereby explained; and a commentator’s job is, in the most literal 
sense, to discover in these notes what Aristotle actually said, to 
write his book for him—to make the dry bones speak. 

Secondly, it is plain that the Posterior Analytics was first put 
together when Aristotle was still teaching in Plato’s Academy: 
many of the discussions in the book are evidently tailored to 
the intellectual controversies current in Plato’s circle; and what 
appears to us allusive or even irrelevant may have been instan- 
taneously intelligible to Aristotle’s audience—a thread of argu- 
mentation which we have to scrabble for, they will have picked 
up without a thought.© 

These brief remarks have, I hope, indicated the lines along which 
the Posterior Analytics can be defended against its modern de- 
tractors. Yet I cannot help feeling that there is something vaguely 
absurd in defending the book at all: it is, on any account, one of 
the most brilliant, original, and influential works in the history of 
philosophy; it determined the course of philosophy of science— 
and to some extent of science itself—for two millennia; it pub- 
lished, developed, and explored the notion of an axiomatic science; 

xiv 

INTRODUCTION 

it is stuffed with tight argument. How odd to defend—or to 
doubt—its accomplishments. 

Il 

The formal logic on which the theory of the Posterior Analytics is 
founded is laid down in the Prior Analytics: it is, of course, 
syllogistic. This commonplace view has, curiously, been the centre 
of a scholarly controversy: just what is the relation between 
demonstration and syllogistic? between the Posterior and the Prior 
Analytics? The controversy has been carried out in chronological 
terms. It has been asked whether Aristotle wrote the Prior before 
or after the Posterior Analytics; and it has been assumed that 
the relative proximity of the two works to Platonic notions and 
theories supplies the key to the problem. Both chronologies—the 
traditional one, claiming priority for the Prior Analytics, and the 
modern heterodoxy, inverting the order—have been defended 
and attacked with much ingenuity and scholarship. This is no 
place to indulge in a detailed assessment of the matter; but I shall 
venture to suggest two general conclusions which an impartial 
observer might draw from the debate. 

First, the chronological controversy has made it clear that the 
Analytics as they now stand were intended by Aristotle to form 
some sort of unity—to be twin parts of a single lecture course— 
and that they were intended to be read in their traditional order: 
the Posterior Analytics, taken as a whole, does indeed presup- 
pose the syllogistic of the Prior Analytics.? 

Secondly, the chronological question, if coarsely posed, assumes 
that Aristotle either wrote first the Prior and then the Posterior 
Analytics, or else vice versa; and this assumption is in all prob- 
ability false. The two works, as we have them today, represent 
the latest stage in an uncompleted series of revisions: two sets of 
notes were worked at, added to, and emended over a period of 
years; and in the course of their long careers they enjoyed the 
benefits of a mutual influence. It is plainly silly to say that one 
treatise was ‘written’ before or after the other. We can at best 
hope to show that passage X in treatise A was written, in its 
present form, after passage Y in treatise B. In so far as such 
hopes can be fulfilled, they may support a restrained speculation 
about the development of Aristotle’s thought: I am inclined to 
imagine that Aristotle first conceived his theory of axiomatization, 
then worked out the formal theory of syllogistic, and finally 
married the two theories.© 

XV 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Such speculations, however intriguing they may be, should not 
be allowed to obscure the central fact that the Posterior Analytics 
in the form in which we now read it stands firmly on the logic of 
the syllogism. And that fact constitutes at once the great glory 
and the great failing of the Posterior Analytics. The glorious 
aspect is obvious enough; for in his syllogistic Aristotle had 
limned a logical system of exemplary elegance and rigour, the 
application of which to the sciences might well be expected to 
achieve marvels of certainty and exactitude—the comparison 
with Frege and his Begriffsschrift is hackneyed but appropriate. 
The failing is equally evident: as we all know, syllogistic is only a 
fragment of logic; it is impossible to force all the arguments of 
a developed science—or of ordinary discourse—into syllogistic 
form. This fact indeed shows up in many places in the Posterior 
Analytics itself; for the vocabulary and techniques of syllogistic 
are time and again applied to refractory matter, and Aristotle’s 
scientific and mathematical examples often sit ill on the schematic 
theories they are intended to illustrate.* 

A dash of charity does much to mend the situation: many of 
Aristotle’s philosophical and logical points are not essentially tied 
to syllogistic, and they can be recast within the framework of a 
more capacious logic. The old wine can be rebottled. Yet some 
parts of Aristotle’s argument are not so readily modernized; 
and in certain chapters—I think in particular of B 11 and B 12— 
the syllogism is, alas, a positive embarrassment and a bar to 
understanding. 

Whatever attitude he adopts here, a reader of the Posterior 
Analytics must be reasonably at home in syllogistic. Although 
modern logicians have published several excellent studies of the 
system of the Prior Analytics, there is no settled orthodoxy of 
interpretation. For that reason I shall now sketch, in a brief and 
necessarily partial fashion, some fundamentals of syllogistic: my 
commentary on Aristotle’s text will presuppose the interpretation 
I offer here. 

Syllogistic is a theory of the relations that hold between syl- 
logistic propositions. A syllogistic proposition is a proposition of 
the form AxB, where A and B are terms (A the predicate, B the 
subject) and x is one of the four syllogistic relations—a, e, i, o. 
AaB gives the form of a universal affirmative proposition, “Every 
B is A” (e.g. “Every man is mortal’); Aristotle normally ex- 
presses such propositions by one of the following formulae: “A 
holds of every B”, “A is said of every B’, “A is predicated of 

XVi 

INTRODUCTION 

every B’’, “‘A follows every B’’. AeB is a universal negative, ‘““No 
B is A’. AiB is a particular affirmative (“Some B is A’’), and 
AoB is a particular negative (“Some B is not A”). 

Certain entailments hold between pairs of syllogistic proposi- 
tions. The most important of these are the Laws of Conversion 
(AeB ++ BeA; AiB 4k BiA; AaB + BiA), and the Laws of 
Subalternation (AaB | AiB; AeB | AoB). Both sets of laws 
underpin Aristotle’s development of syllogistic; and the latter 
bring out, in a starkly explicit way, the fact that universal pro- 
positions in syllogistic have ‘existential import’. 

A mood is an ordered sequence of three syllogistic propositions: 
the first two propositions (the putative premiss pair) have one 
term, the ‘middle’, in common; the third proposition (the osten- 
sible conclusion) conjoins the other two terms—the ‘extremes’— 
which appear once each in the premiss pair. Aristotle recognizes 
three arrangements of premiss pairs which define his three syl- 
logistic figures. They are: I AxB, BxC; Il MxN, MxX; III PxR, 
SxR. Evidently, there are 3 X 4 X 4 X 4, or 192, moods. 

In the Prior Analytics A 4-6, Aristotle accepts fourteen of 
these moods as sylogisms or valid argument forms. There is 
considerable controversy over the interpretation of the tie be- 
tween premiss pair and conclusion in an Aristotelian syllogism. In 
my view, an Aristotelian syllogism is best regarded as a sequent 
or argument form—a special case of the argument form P, QF R 
(where the turnstile, -, can be read as “so”).% The fourteen 
syllogisms have traditional names: I—Barbara, Celarent, Darii, 
Ferio; I1—Cesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco; W—Darapii, 
Felapton, Disamis, Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison. The names form 
ingenious mnemonics: it is worth noting here only that the three 
vowels in each name give in order the three syllogistic relations of 
the mood. Thus the first syllogism of the first figure goes under 
the name of Barbara, and is represented by the schema: AaB, 
BaCt Aac. 

In A 8-22 of the Prior Analytics Aristotle turns to ‘modal’ 
syllogistic, and considers moods at least one of whose component 
propositions contains one of the modal operators “necessarily”’ 
and “possibly”. This section of the Analytics is desperately dif- 
ficult and still baffles detailed interpretation. Fortunately, the 
general thrust of Aristotle’s argument is clear enough; and that is 
all that matters from the point of view of the Posterior Analytics. 

A demonstration is a species of modal syllogism. In a demon- 
stration all the propositions are necessary; and the paradigm 
demonstrative mood is Barbara. Thus if 0) P represents “Neces- 

XVii 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

sarily P’’, the explicit logical form of a paradigm demonstration 
will turn out to be: 0 AaB, 1 BaC} 0 Aac. Aristotle never sets 
this paradigm out with any clarity or emphasis; and in several 
passages, whether deliberately or by oversight, he lets the fetters 
of necessity relax and is even unfaithful to Barbara. For all that, 
it is, I think, surely right to take the syllogism in Barbara with 
necessary components as the model for demonstrative reasoning.” 

A demonstrative science can be displayed as a set of demon- 
strations. Each premiss of each demonstration in the set is either 
an axiom (an undemonstrable first principle) or else the con- 
clusion of a prior demonstration. The axioms are finite in number; 
so, therefore, are the derived conclusions, or theorems: if a 
science contains n axioms, it has 4(n(m — 1)) theorems. 

Just as Aristotle sometimes forgets his paradigm demonstration, 
so he sometimes ignores his model of demonstrative science. 
Moreover, he fails to realize all the implications, some of them 
depressingly restrictive, of that model. Aristotle’s account of the 
nature of a demonstrative science is neither as clear nor as con- 
stant as we might desire; nor could he share the elation of those 
modern logicians and scientists who see an infinity of truths 
flowing from a small stock of axioms. But the theory of demon- 
stration, though it is hampered by the constraints of syllogistic 
and marred by internal vacillations and confusions, is for all that 
an admirable and astounding invention. 

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

A. In an article first published in 1969, I argued that in A Pst! “Aristotle 
was not telling the scientist how to conduct his research: he was 
giving the pedagogue advice on the most efficient and economic 
method of bettering his charges. The theory of demonstration offers 
a formal account of how an achieved body of knowledge should be 
presented and taught.” The negative side of this thesis—that APst 
does not present a theory of scientific method—is, I still think, 
certainly true; and it has been widely accepted. The positive side— 
that APst was written primarily for pedagogues—has been less well 
received.” There is no doubt that the notion of teaching was closely 

' A list of abbreviations is given in the Notes on the Commentary. 
? For trenchant criticisms see e.g. KULLMANN (1974), 180-1; BURNYEAT (1981), 
115~20; GUARIGLIA (1985), 85~7. There is a survey of opinions in WIANS (19809). 

XVIII 

INTRODUCTION 

connected, in Aristotle’s mind, with the notion of demonstrative 
understanding: this is shown clearly enough by the various texts 
which I discussed in my original article.’ But it is absurd to suggest 
that APst is merely a treatise on teaching methods; and my refer- 
ences to schoolmasters and their charges—to which several critics 
took exception—were surely malapropos. Rather, and more gener- 
ally, APst is primarily* concerned to investigate how the various facts 
and theories which practising scientists discover or construct should 
be systematically organized and intelligibly presented. The connec- 
tion with teaching is this: in so far as a teacher is concerned to 
transmit a body of scientific knowledge, he will best do so by pre- 
senting it in a form in which its organization and explanatory coher- 
ence are intelligibly revealed. The paragraph to which this note is 
annexed still appears to me to represent the best general inter- 
pretation of Aristotle’s overall aim in APst. 

There is a second and separate question: What is the relationship 
between the theory set out in APst and Aristotle’s own scientific 
work (in particular, the scientific studies which he records in his 
various writings on biology and zoology)? It has long been noticed— 
and this was the starting-point for my 1969 article—that, on the 
surface at least, there seems to be little or no connection between the 
scientific writings and APst: thus the biological writings contain no 
explicit syllogisms, and they do not appear to exhibit any axiomatic 
structure. Various attempts have been made to explain, or to explain 
away, this apparent mismatch. Since APst does not describe a scien- 
tific methodology, it would be misconceived to complain that the 
methods which Aristotle follows and occasionally describes in the 
scientific work do not fit the prescriptions of APst. Again, in so far as 
the biological writings do not purport to present a finished science, 
we should not expect them to exhibit the organization and structure 
which A Pst describes. 

None the less, we might well expect to find in the biological works 
some inklings of the theories expounded in the Analytics. And such 
inklings are indeed to be found.* There is a particularly relevant 
passage near the beginning of the History of Animals: 

We must first grasp all the actual differences and the items which 
are incidental to all animals; and then we should attempt to 
discover their explanations. In this way our method will follow the 
natural path, once the inquiry about each item is accomplished; 
for from this will become clear both the items about which our 

3 And see further DE GANDT (1975—6). 

4 J do not say that this is the only concern which Aristotle has in the work: 
evidently, many other issues interest him. But his chief and primary concern is 
with the form of an achieved science. 

5 See especially KULLMANN (1974). 

XIX 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

demonstrations must be concerned and the items from which they 
must proceed. (4 6, 491*9-14) 

First, we collect the facts. Secondly, we look for the explanations. 
Thirdly, we construct the demonstrations. Very roughly speaking, 
HA is given to the first task, PA and GA to the second. No surviving 
treatise essays the third task; but the surviving works do in fact 
proceed with half an eye on that distant goal. 

Recent scholarship has thought to discover somewhat more pro- 
found and systematic connections between APst and the scientific 
corpus; and in some quarters it is again fashionable to speak, in a 
carefully qualified fashion, of a method promoted in APst and prac- 
tised in the scientific writings. (See e.g. BOLTON (1987), GOTTHELF 
(1987), LENNOX (1987), CHARLES (1990), on the biological works; and 
BOLTON (1991) on Phys.) Not all these recent suggestions are equally 
convincing (there are some cool reflections in LLoyD (1990), 29-34); 
and it is worth noting, in any case, that they tend to refer to the 
theories of definition discussed in APst B rather than to the theories 
of demonstration discussed in APst A. However that may be, it is 
plain that this is an area in which much work remains to be done. 

. I should not have suggested that APst invents the notion of an 
axiomatized science. Earlier mathematicians had adumbrated the 
Euclidean project (see esp. Lee, and the classic paper by VON FRITZ 
(1955); cf. KULLMANN (1974), 134-5); and Plato and his immediate 
successors in the Academy had given some philosophical attention 
to the matter (see e.g. KULLMANN (1974), 154-63). Nevertheless, 
Aristotle was a pioneer: he was the first to produce a full-fledged 
philosophical theory of axiomatized science; he was the first to in- 
vestigate, with some attempt at logical rigour, the structure of an 
axiomatic system and the formal constraints on the components of 
such a system; he was the first to insist on the independence of the 
special sciences from one another and to discuss the nature of the 
axioms which such independent sciences would require. The stut- 
tering practice of the mathematicians, and the grandiose and pro- 
grammatic notions of the Academy, were replaced by detailed and 
rigorous philosophical theorizing. 

. Whether or not A Pst was first written or sketched while Aristotle was 
still a member of the Academy, it remains true that the work—like 
any other work of Aristotle’s—contains frequent references, explicit 
and implicit, to Academic ideas; and in many cases we have only a 
shadowy knowledge of what these ideas were. In addition, it should 
be said that Aristotle was also thoroughly conversant with contem- 
porary scientific practice, and that APst also makes frequent refer- 
ence, explicit and implicit, to this practice. Here too we may find 
difficulties which Aristotle could not have anticipated; for our know- 
ledge of early Greek science is less than perfect. 

XX 

INTRODUCTION 

D. Note too that the aim of the Analytics as a whole is to give an 
account of demonstration: 

First we must say with what our inquiry is concerned and what it 
is about: it is concerned with demonstration and about demon- 
strative understanding. (APr A 1, 24*I0-11) 

These are the opening words of the work. See BRUNSCHWIG (1981); 
BARNES (1981), 27-9. 

E. In BARNES (1981), I argued in some detail that, first, “‘apodeictic does 
not depend essentially on the theory of the syllogism” (p. 33), and 
secondly—after Solmsen—that the main theory of APst A was de- 
veloped independently of, and indeed before, the syllogistic theory of 
APr (pp. 34-57). More recently, Robin Smith has shown that, even 
in its present form, APst does not presuppose the full syllogistic 
theory of APr: those passages which do invoke some feature of 
syllogistic imply something “‘decidedly simpler” than the full theory. 
(For various versions of this view see SMITH (19824), (19825), (1986), 
(1989), pp. xiii-xv.) 

F. That Aristotelian syllogistic is inadequate as a logic for the mathe- 
matical sciences was plainly seen and stated by Galen (e.g. lib prop 
xix. 39-40K), even though Galen’s contemporary, Alexander of 
Aphrodisias, blithely assumed the contrary (see e.g. in APr 260. 
9-261. 24; 268. 8-269. 25). The issue has been briskly handled by 
MUELLER (1974); see also KULLMANN (1981). 

G. Note, however, that Aristotle’s term “su/logismos” denotes not an 
argument-form but an argument. Barbara, say, is an argument-form; 
but Barbara is not itself an argument or a sullogismos: a particular 
argument or sullogismos may be ‘in’ Barbara, that is to say, it may 
have or exhibit the form Barbara. For a more rigorous account see 
BARNES (1981), 21-5; for a brief account of the theory of the syl- 
logism see BARNES et al. (1991), 208-15. 

H. It is in fact far from plain that the paradigm logical form for a 
demonstration is a modal syllogism in Barbara. Aristotle is indeed 
clear that all the propositions involved in a paradigm demonstration 
will be necessary; and it is also true (see e.g. p. 111) that some of his 
remarks might lead us to think that modal syllogistic is the logic of 
demonstrative reasoning, so that the propositions appearing in a 
paradigm demonstration will have the form ‘“‘Necessarily P’’. But 
Aristotle nowhere says that this is his view, nor do any of his illustra- 
tive examples contain an explicit modal operator. (And in so far as 
his theorizing is done with an eye on actual scientific practice, we 
should not expect to find such operators in his examples.) Moreover, 
the propositions involved in a demonstrative science—demonstrative 
propositions—are what I have called I-predications; that is to say, if 
AaB is a demonstrative proposition, then A holds of B ‘in itself’. 

XX 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Now it is plain that demonstrative propositions do not have the form 
“A holds of every B in itself”: rather, they have the form “A holds 
of every B’’, and they are demonstrative inasmuch as A in fact holds 
of every B in itself. Analogously, then, we must suppose that demon- 
strative propositions are necessary not in the sense that they are 
truths of the form “A holds necessarily of every B” but rather in the 
sense that they are propositions of the form “A holds of every B”’ 
which are true inasmuch as A necessarily holds of every B. Modal 
syllogistic remains acutely relevant to demonstrative science—but it 
is not the logic of demonstrative science. 

XXil 

NOTE ON THE TRANSLATION 

For the Greek I have used the OCT—the Oxford Classical Text— 
of the Analytics.' In a few places I have preferred a different 
reading: these differences are all marked in the footnotes to the 
translation, and the more significant of them are explained and 
justified in the commentary. 

I have consulted a few earlier translations, occasionally pillaging 
a phrase or two. I have gained most help from Tredennick’s 
version in the Loeb Classical Library.* 

Fidelity is the only virtue which a translator need cultivate. But 
fidelity is a complex virtue, which makes various—and sometimes 
incompatible—demands. In a translation of a philosophical work 
intended for philosophical readers it is, I assume, fidelity in the 
matter of sense which must be paramount. That is to say, each 
unit in the translation should in principle convey all and only the 
sense which is conveyed by the corresponding unit in the original 
text. It is plain that such semantic fidelity is an ideal to which real 
translations can only approximate. 

In recent years, English translators of ancient philosophical 
texts have shown themselves acutely and honourably conscious 
of their primary duty. Devotees of semantic fidelity, they have 
developed a number of devices and conventions which pretend to 
make their translations ever more faithful and ever more literal. 
The first version of my translation of the Posterior Analytics was 
an example—I may say, without boasting, a paradigm—of this 
genre: thus I attempted to put English and Greek words in 
one-one correspondence; I doggedly translated all Aristotle’s 
logical particles; I sometimes mirrored in English the syntax and 
even the word-order of Aristotle’s Greek. 

The genre is noble in aspiration, absurd in reality. It is 
not merely that it encourages the construction of an argot 
which is perplexing to all but the initiate. Rather, the goal of 
semantic fidelity is itself missed—and in at least two ways. First, 

1 W. D. Ross and L. Minio-Paluello (eds.), Aristotelis Analytica priora et 
posteriora (Oxford, 1964). I have checked the OCT’s apparatus criticus against 
the readings recorded by wiLLiAMs (1984). 

? In H. Tredennick and E. S. Forster (eds.), Aristotle: Posterior Analytics and 
Topica (London/Cambridge, Mass., 1960). 

XXIil 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

practitioners of the genre gaily set down sentences which no 
writer of English would ever countenance. (I offered my earlier 
readers the ‘sentence’: “For relatives are more together.”) Such 
sentences cannot be faithful English versions of anything—for 
they are not English versions of anything. Secondly, by nicely 
scrutinizing each individual Greek word, translators have often 
produced sentences which are wildly unfaithful to the Greek. (I 
am assured that a Platonic interlocutor’s response “‘kalos legeis” 
{‘‘You’re right”] has been turned by “You are speaking finely’’.) 
Such efforts betray a misconception of fidelity, for which the 
relevant semantic unity is rarely the word. 

Well, I am now cured of that malady—and as a result the new 
translation is (or so I believe) more rather than less faithful to 
Aristotle’s Greek. Of course, I have frequently failed: in some 
places scholars will find that interpretation sullies the pure water 
of translation; in other places readers will still find traces of the 
old distemper. But failure is the unavoidable fortune of the 
translator. 

Not that all the bétises in the new translation—the obscurities, 
the crabbed phrases, the jargon, the brutally abrupt transitions— 
are failures. On the contrary, some of them are successes. For 
Aristotle’s Greek, in the Posterior Analytics, is not an easy, 
undulating prose. He is usually rough and craggy. (John Aubrey 
said of a different ancient philosopher: “He writeth as a boar 
pisseth—by jerks.”) His arguments are rarely smooth and clean. 
He is sometimes ambiguous. He is frequently obscure. In parts 
he is downright unintelligible. A hard text requires a hard trans- 
lation: some, at least, of the oddities and anfractuosities of 
my English are deliberately chosen—in the name of semantic 
fidelity—to reflect the anfractuosities and oddities of Aristotle’s 
Greek. (And there is a bonus. Such features of the translation do 
something—not, alas, very much—to meet a second demand 
made by fidelity; for they do something to convey the style and 
tone of Aristotle’s writing.) 

Three more particular issues ask for a paragraph apiece. 

First, certain words occur frequently and thematically in the 
Posterior Analytics. They are not always technical terms, or even 
ordinary words used in a technical sense. (Some of the most 
significant of them are prepositions: the words kata, dia, and ek 
all play an important role in Aristotle’s philosophical vocabulary— 
and ‘philosophizing by prepositions’ was to be a characteristic 
feature of some parts of later Greek thought.) In many ways it is 
desirable to signal the occurrence of these words; and translators 

XXIV 

NOTE ON THE TRANSLATION 

sometimes make a practice of reserving a single English word (or 
family of words) for each such Greek word. But the practice is 
expensive: the cost is an artificiality which often leads to semantic 
infidelity. I have adopted a bourgeois compromise: for certain 
terms I have in principle aimed at one—one correspondence; but 
I have followed the principle only ‘for the most part’, relaxing 
my practice where fidelity and tolerable English demand. The 
Greek—English Glossary lists the main correspondences—and 
also notes the more significant relaxations. 

Secondly, there is the problem set by certain characteristically 
Aristotelian terms for which a particular translation is already en- 
trenched in the secondary literature. Thus “syllogism” is the en- 
trenched version of sullogismos, and “‘cause” is the entrenched 
version of aitia. If a translator believes that one of these en- 
trenched versions is a bad version (or that in the course of time 
it has become a bad version), then he finds himself in a dilemma: 
if he sticks to the convention, he fails in fidelity; if he offers 
something heterodox, he will surely seem quirky and he may 
actually mislead the unwary. On the whole I have chosen the 
second horn—thus the reader will not find, say, the word “syl- 
logism’”’ in my translation. In the more important cases, a note 
explains and attempts to justify the unorthodox version; and the 
Glossaries, again, offer a general guide. 

Finally, a point which is usually and easily overlooked. I have 
followed the traditional division of the Posterior Analytics into 
chapters: this division does not go back beyond the Renaissance. 
I have subdivided the chapters into sections and paragraphs: such 
subdivisions (in which I generally follow the OCT) are modern. 
And the paragraphs ;break into sentences: even these divisions 
are, in a sense, post-Aristotelian; for when Aristotle wrote, it was 
not usual to employ the devices of punctuation by means of 
which a modern author will make plain the articulation of his 
thought and avoid ambiguities. Greekless readers of the 
translation should bear all this in mind. They are not in a position 
to meddle with my punctuation; but, if they will, they may 
change my paragraphing and my capitulation without thereby 
tampering with Aristotle’s text. 

XXV 

BOOK ALPHA 

CHAPTER I 

All teaching and all learning of an intellectual kind proceed from 71? 
pre-existent knowledge. This will be clear if we study all the 
cases: the mathematical sciences are acquired in this way, and so 
is each of the other arts. Similarly with arguments, both deductive 5 
and inductive: they effect their teaching through what we already 
know, the former assuming items which we are presumed to 
grasp, the latter proving something universal by way of the fact 
that the particular cases are plain. (Rhetorical arguments too 
persuade in the same way—either through examples, which is 10 
induction, or through enthymemes, which is deduction.) 

There are two ways in which we must already have knowledge: 
of some things we must already believe that they are, of others 
we must grasp what the items spoken about are (and of some 
things both). E.g. of the fact that everything is either asserted or 
denied truly, we must believe that it is the case; of the triangle, 
that it means this; and of the unit both (both what it means and 15 
that it is). For these items are not all equally plain to us. 

It is possible to acquire knowledge when you have acquired 
knowledge of some items earlier and get knowledge of the others 
at the very same time (e.g. items which in fact fall under a 
universal of which you possess knowledge). Thus you already 
knew that every triangle has angles equal to two right angles; but 20 
you got to know that this figure in the semicircle is a triangle at 
the same time as you were being led to the conclusion. In some 
cases learning occurs in this way, and the last term does not 
become known through the middle term—this occurs when the 
items are in fact particulars and are not said of any underlying 
subject. 

Before you are led to the conclusion, i.e. before you are given a 25 
deduction, you should perhaps be said to understand it in one 
way—but in another way not. If you did not know whether there 
was such-and-such a thing simpliciter, how could you have known 
that it had two right angles simpliciter? Yet it is plain that you do 
understand it in this sense: you understand it universally—but 
you do not understand it simpliciter. (Otherwise the puzzle in the 

I 

30 

71 

10 

15 

20 

71" POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Meno will arise: you will learn either nothing or what you already 
know.) 

We should not argue in the way in which some who attempt to 
solve the problem do. (“Do you or don’t you know of every pair 
that it is even?” —When you say ‘“‘Yes’’, they bring forward some 
pair which you did not think existed, and hence which you did 
not think was even.) They try to solve the problem by denying that 
they know of every pair that it is even-—rather, they know it only 
of everything which they know to be a pair. Yet what they know 
is the item to which their demonstration applies and about which 
they made their assumptions; and they made their assumptions 
not about everything of which they know that it is a triangle or 
that it is a number, but about every number or triangle simpliciter. 
For no propositions of this sort are taken as assumptions (that 
what you know to be a number... , or what you know to be rect- 
ilineal .. .): rather, we assume that something holds of every case. 

But surely nothing prevents us from in one sense understanding 
and in another being ignorant of what we are learning. What is 
absurd is not that you should know in some sense what you are 
learning, but that you should know it in this way, i.e. in the way 
and in the sense in which you are learning it. 

CHAPTER 2 

We think we understand something simpliciter (and not in the 
sophistical way, incidentally) when we think we know of the 
explanation because of which the object holds that it is its ex- 
planation, and also that it is not possible for it to be otherwise. It 
is plain, then, that to understand is something of this sort. And 
indeed, people who do not understand think they are in such a 
condition, and those who do understand actually are. Hence if 
there is understanding simpliciter of something, it is impossible 
for it to be otherwise. 

Whether there is also another type of understanding we shall say 
later: here we assert that we do know things through demon- 
strations. By a demonstration I mean a scientific deduction; 
and by scientific I mean a deduction by possessing which we 
understand something. 

If to understand something is what we have posited it to be, 
then demonstrative understanding in particular must proceed 
from items which are true and primitive and immediate and more 

2 

TRANSLATION qr 
familiar than and prior to and explanatory of the conclusions. (In 
this way the principles will also be appropriate to what is being 
proved.) There can be a deduction even if these conditions are 
not met, but there cannot be a demonstration—for it will not 
bring about understanding. 

They must be true because you cannot understand what is not 
the case—e.g. that the diagonal is commensurate. They must 
proceed from items which are primitive and indemonstrable be- 
cause Otherwise you will not understand unless you possess a 
demonstration of these items (to understand something of which 
there is a demonstration non-incidentally is to possess a demon- 
stration of it). They must be explanatory and more familiar and 
prior—explanatory because we only understand something when 
we know its explanation; and prior, if they are explanatory and 
we already know them not only in the sense of grasping them but 
also of knowing that they are the case. 

Things are prior and more familiar in two ways; for it is not the 
same to be prior by nature and prior in relation to us, nor to be 
more familiar and more familiar to us. I call prior and more 
familiar in relation to us items which are nearer to perception, 
prior and more familiar simpliciter items which are further away. 
What is most universal is furthest away, and the particulars are 
nearest—these are opposite to each other. 

To proceed from primitives is to proceed from appropriate princi- 
ples (I call the same things primitives and principles). A principle 
of a demonstration is an immediate proposition, and a proposition 
is immediate if there is no other proposition prior to it. A pro- 
position is one part of a contradictory pair,’ one thing said of one. 
It is dialectical if it assumes either part indifferently and demon- 
strative if it determinately assumes one part because it is true. A 
statement is one part of a contradictory pair. A contradictory pair 
is a pair of opposites between which, in their own right, there is 
nothing. The part of a contradictory pair which says something of 
something is an affirmation; the part which takes something from 
something is a negation. 

An immediate deductive principle I call a posit if it cannot be 
proved but need not be grasped by anyone who is to learn 
anything. If it must be grasped by anyone who is going to learn 
anything whatever, I call it an axiom (there are items of this 

1 Reading dvtipdcews for the MS reading axoddvaewc. 

3 

25 

30 

Io 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

72> 

72 
kind); for it is of this sort of item in particular that we normally 
use this name. A posit which assumes either of the parts of a 
contradictory pair—what I mean is that something is or that 
something is not—I call a supposition. A posit which does not I 
call a definition. Definitions are posits (arithmeticians posit that a 
unit is what is quantitatively indivisible), but they are not sup- 
positions (for what a unit is and that a unit is are not the same). 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Given that you must be convinced about some object and know it 
in so far as you possess a deduction of the sort we call a demon- 
stration, and given that there is such a deduction in so far as these 
items—the items from which it proceeds—are the case, then you 
must not only already know the primitives (either all or some 
of them)—you must actually know them better. For something 
always holds better of that because of which it holds: e.g. that 
because of which we love something is better loved. Hence if we 
know and are convinced of something because of the primitives, 
then we know and are convinced of them better, since it is 
because of them that we know and are convinced of the posterior 
items. 

If you neither actually know something nor are more happily 
disposed towards it than you would be if you actually knew 
it, then you cannot be better convinced of it than you are of 
something which you know. But this will arise if someone who is 
convinced of something because of a demonstration does not 
already have some knowledge; for he must be better convinced of 
the principles (either all or some of them) than he is of the 
conclusion. 

Anyone who is going to possess understanding through a 
demonstration must not only get to know the principles better 
and be better convinced of them than he is of what is being 
proved: in addition, there must be no other item more convincing 
to him or more familiar among the opposites of the principles 
from which a deduction of the contrary error may proceed— 
given that anyone who understands anything simpliciter must be 
incapable of being persuaded to change his mind. 

CHAPTER 3 

Some people think that because you must understand the primi- 
tives there is no understanding at all; others that there is, but that 

4 

TRANSLATION 72” 
there are demonstrations of everything. Neither of these views is 
either true or necessary. 

The one party, supposing that you cannot understand in any 
other way,” claim that we are led back ad infinitum on the ground 
that we shall not understand the posterior items because of the 
prior items if there are no primitives. They are right—for it is 
impossible to survey infinitely many items. And if things come 
to a stop and there are priniciples, then these, they say, are 
unknowable since there is no demonstration of them and this is 
the only kind of understanding there is. But if you cannot know 
the primitives, then you cannot understand what proceeds from 
them simpliciter or properly, but only on the supposition that 
they are the case. 

The other party agrees about understanding, which, they say, 
arises only through demonstration. But they argue that nothing 
prevents there being demonstrations of everything; for it is poss- 
ible for demonstrations to proceed in a circle or reciprocally. 

We assert that not all understanding is demonstrative: rather, 
in the case of immediate items understanding is indemonstrable. 
And it is clear that this must be so; for if you must understand 
the items which are prior and from which the demonstration 
proceeds, and if things come to a stop at some point, then these 
immediates* must be indemonstrable. 

We argue in this way; and we also assert that there is not only 
understanding but also some principle of understanding by which 
we get to know the definitions. 

That it is impossible to demonstrate simpliciter in a circle is plain, 
if demonstrations must proceed from what is prior and more 
familiar. For it is impossible for the same thing at the same time 
to be both prior and posterior to something—except in differ- 
ent ways (i.e. one in relation to us and the other simpliciter), 
ways which induction makes familiar. But in that case, knowing 
simpliciter will not have been properly defined. Rather, it will be 
ambiguous. Or else the one demonstration is not a demonstration 
simpliciter in that it proceeds from what is more familiar to us. 
For those who say that demonstrations may proceed in a circle 
there arises the difficulty which I have just described. In addition, 
they say nothing more than that this is the case if this is the 
case—and it is easy to prove everything in this way. It will be 

? Reading &//we, with most MSS, for the OCT’s dime. 
3 Placing a comma before rather than after ra deca, with Schéne. 

5 

Io 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

73 

10 

15 

20 

25 

b 

72 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

plain that this follows if we posit three terms. (It makes no 
difference whether we say that the circle revolves through many 
terms or through few—or through few or two.) When if A is the 
case, of necessity B is, and if B then C, then if A is the case C 
will be the case. Thus given that if A is the case it is necessary 
that B is the case and if B is the case that A is the case (this is 
what it is to proceed in a circle), let A be C. Hence to say that if 
B is the case A is the case is to say that C is the case; and to say 
this is to say that if A is the case C is the case. But C is the same 
as A. Hence it follows that those who declare that demonstrations 
may proceed in a circlé say nothing more than that if A is the 
case A is the case. And it is easy to prove everything in this way. 

Moreover, even this is only possible for items which follow one 
another, as properties do. If a single item is laid down, I have 
proved that it is never necessary that anything else be the case 
(by a single item I mean that neither if a single term nor if a 
single posit is posited. ..): two posits are the first and fewest 
from which it is possible, if at all,* to deduce something. Now if 
A follows B and C, and these follow one another and A, in this 
case it is possible to prove all the postulates reciprocally in the 
first figure, as I have proved in my account of deduction. (I have 
also proved that in the other figures either no deduction at all 
comes about or else none concerning the assumptions.) But items 
which are not counterpredicated cannot ever be proved in a 
circle. Hence, since there are few counterpredicated items in 
demonstrations, it is clear that it is both empty and impossible to 
say that demonstrations may be reciprocal and that because of 
this there can be demonstrations of everything. 

CHAPTER 4 

Since it is impossible for that of which there is understanding 
simpliciter to be otherwise, what is understandable in virtue of 
demonstrative understanding will be necessary. (Understanding 
is demonstrative if we possess it inasmuch as we possess a 
demonstration.) A demonstration, then, is a deduction which 
proceeds from necessities. We must see, then, from what items, 
i.e. from what kind of items, demonstrations proceed. First let us 
define what we mean by “of every case’, by “‘in itself”, and 
by “universally”. 

* Placing a comma after, as well as before, cizep. 

6 

TRANSLATION 73° 
I say that something holds of every case if it does not hold of 
some cases and not of others, nor at some times and not at 
others. E.g. if animal holds of every man, then if it is true to call 
this a man, it is true-to call him an animal too; and if he is now 
the former, he is the latter too. Similarly if there is a point in 
every line. Evidence: this is how we bring objections if asked 
whether something holds of every case—we object either if it 
does not hold in some cases or if it does not hold at some time. 

Something holds of an item in itself both if it holds of it in what it 
is—e.g. line of triangles and point of lines (their essence comes 
from these items, which inhere in the account which says what 
they are)—and also if what it holds of itself inheres in the account 
which shows what it is—e.g. straight holds of lines and so does 
curved, and odd and even of numbers, and also prime and com- 
posite, and equilateral and oblong: in all these examples, there 
inheres in the account which says what they are in the former 
cases line and in the latter number. Similarly in other cases too it 
is such things which I say hold of items in themselves. What holds 
in neither way I call incidental, e.g. musical or white of animal. 

Again, certain items are not said of some other underlying 
subject: e.g. whereas what is walking is something different walk- 
ing (and similarly for what is white’), substances, i.e. whatever 
means this so-and-so, are not just what they are in virtue of being 
something different. Well, items which are not said of an under- 
lying subject I call things in themselves, and those which are said 
of an underlying subject I call incidental. 

Again, in another way what holds of something because of 
itself holds of it in itself, and what does not hold because of itself 
is incidental. E.g. if there was lightning while he was walking, 
that was incidental: it was not because of his walking that there 
was lightning—that, we say, was incidental. But what holds 
because of itself holds in itself—e.g. if something died while 
being sacrificed, it died in the sacrifice since it died because of 
being sacrificed, and it was not incidental that it died while being 
sacrificed. 

Thus in the case of what is understandable simpliciter, what- 
ever is said to hold of things in themselves in the sense of 
inhering in what is predicated or of being inhered in, holds of 
them both because of themselves and from necessity. For it is not 
possible for them not to hold, either simpliciter or as regards the 

° Omitting the OCT’s addition of (Zevxév). 

7 

30 

35 

73 

I0 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

10 

b 

73 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

opposites—e.g. straight or curved of line, and odd or even of 
number. For a contrary or privation is a contradictory® in the same 
kind: e.g. even is what is not odd among numbers, in so far as it 
follows. Hence if it is necessary to assert or deny, then what 
holds of something in itself necessarily holds of it. 

Let “‘of every case” and “‘in itself” be defined in this way. I call 
universal what holds of every case and in itself and as such. It is 
clear, then, that whatever is universal holds of its objects from 
necessity. (To hold of something in itself and to hold of it as 
such are the same thing: e.g. point and straight hold of lines in 
themselves—for they hold of them as lines; and two right angles 
hold of triangles as triangles—for triangles are in themselves 
equal to two right angles.) 

Something holds universally when it is proved of an arbitrary 
and primitive case. E.g. having two right angles does not hold 
universally of figures—you may indeed prove of a figure that it 
has two right angles, but not of an arbitrary figure, nor can you 
use an arbitrary figure in proving it; for quadrangles are figures 
but do not have angles equal to two right angles. An arbitrary 
isosceles does have angles equal to two right angles—but it is not 
primitive: triangles are prior. Thus if an arbitrary primitive case is 
proved to have two right angles (or whatever else), then it holds 
universally of this primitive item, and the demonstration applies 
to it universally in itself. To the other items it applies in another 
way, not in themselves—it does not apply to the isosceles univer- 
sally, but extends further. 

CHAPTER 5 

It must not escape our notice that we often make mistakes—what 
we are trying to prove does not hold primitively and universally 
although we think we are proving it universally and primitively. 
We make this error either when there is nothing higher we can 
take apart from the particular case, or when there is but it is | 
nameless and covers objects of different forms, or when the proof 
applies to something which is in fact a partial whole. (Although 
the demonstration will indeed apply to the items in the part and 
will hold of every case, it will nevertheless not apply to them 
primitively and universally. I say that a demonstration applies to 

© Deleting the # before évzidacic. 

8 

TRANSLATION 14° 

something primitively and as such when it applies to it primitively 
and universally.) 

If someone were to prove that perpendiculars do not meet, the 
demonstration might be thought to apply to them because it 
holds of every perpendicular. But this is not so, if it holds not 
because they are equal in this way but in so far as they are equal 
in any way at all. 

Again, if there were no triangles other than isosceles, then 
having two right angles would be thought to hold of them as 
isosceles. 

Again, it might be thought that proportion alternates for items 
as numbers and as lines and as solids and as times. In the past 
this used to be proved separately, although it is possible to prove 
it of all cases by a single demonstration: because all these items— 
numbers, lengths, times, solids—do not constitute a single named 
item and differ in form from one another, they used to be taken 
separately. Now, however, it is proved universally: what they 
suppose to hold of them universally does not hold of them as 
lines or as numbers but as this. 

For this reason, even if you prove of each triangle, either by one 
or by different demonstrations, that each has two right angles— 
separately of the equilateral and the scalene and the isosceles—, 
you do not yet know of triangles that they have two right angles, 
except in the sophistical way; nor do you know it of triangles 
universally,’ not even if there are no other triangles apart from 
these. For you do not know it of triangles as triangles, nor even 
of every triangle (except in number—not of every triangle as a 
form, even if there is none of which you do not know it). 

So when do you not know universally, and when do you know 
simpliciter? Well, plainly you would know simpliciter if it were 
the same thing to be a triangle and to be equilateral (either for 
each or for all). But if it is not the same but different, and if 
something holds of them as triangles, then you do not know it. 
Does it hold of them as triangles or as isosceles? And when does 
it hold of something in itself and primitively? And to what does 
the demonstration apply universally? Plainly, to the first item 
after the removal of which it does not® hold. E.g. two right angles 
will hold of bronze isosceles triangles—and also when being 
bronze and being isosceles have been removed. But not when 
figure or limit have been. But they are not the first. Then what is 

7 Reading «a86/ov tpfywvov with most MSS, for the OCT’s xa6’ d4ov tprydvov. 
8 Adding yj before ixdpyy. 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

74 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

74° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 
first? If triangle, it is in virtue of this that it holds of the other 
items, and it is to this that the demonstration applies universally. 

CHAPTER 6 

If demonstrative understanding proceeds from necessary prin- 
ciples (since what you understand cannot be otherwise), and if 
whatever holds of an object in itself is necessary (since either it 
holds in what it is, or else the object holds of what is predicated 
of it in what it is and the predicates are opposites one of which 
necessarily holds), then it is clear that demonstrative deductions 
will proceed from certain items of this sort; for everything holds 
either in this way or incidentally, and what is incidental is not 
necessary. 

We must either argue like this or else posit as a principle 
that demonstration is necessary,’ i.e. that if something has been 
demonstrated it cannot be otherwise—the deduction, therefore, 
must proceed from necessities. For from truths you can de- 
duce without demonstrating, but from necessities you cannot 
deduce without demonstrating—this is precisely the mark of 
demonstration. 

There is evidence that demonstration proceeds from necessities 
in the way in which we bring objections against those who think 
they are demonstrating: we say that it is not necessary, if we 
think, either in general or at least as far as their argument goes, 
that it is possible for it to be otherwise. 

From these considerations it is plain too that those people are 
naive who think that they assume their principles correctly if the 
propositions are reputable and true (e.g. the sophists who assume 
that to understand is to possess understanding). For it is not what 
is reputable that we count as a principle, but rather what is 
primitive in the kind with which the proof is concerned—and not 
every truth is appropriate. 

That the deduction must proceed from necessities is clear from 
the following consideration too. If, in a case where there is a 
demonstration, someone who does not possess an account of the 
reason why does not have understanding, and if it might be that 
A holds of C from necessity but that B, the middle term through 
which this was demonstrated, does not hold from necessity, then 
he does not know the reason why. For the conclusion does not 

° Retaining dvayxafov with the MSS, for the OCT’s dvayxaiwv. 

10 

TRANSLATION 74° 
hold because of the middle term, since it is possible for this not to 
be the case, whereas the conclusion is necessary. 

Again, if someone does not know something now, although 
he possesses the account and is preserved, and the object is 
preserved, and he has not forgotten, then he did not know it 
earlier either. But the middle term might perish if it is not 
necessary. Hence, being himself preserved and the object being 
preserved, he will possess the account—and yet he does not have 
knowledge. Therefore he did not have knowledge earlier either. 
And if, although the middle term has not perished, it is possible 
for it to perish, the result can occur and is possible; but it is 
impossible to have knowledge under such conditions. 

When the conclusion holds from necessity, nothing prevents 
the middle term through which it was proved from being non- 
necessary. For you can deduce a necessity from non-necessities, 
just as you can deduce a truth from non-truths. But when the 
middle term holds from necessity, the conclusion too holds from 
necessity—just as a conclusion from truths is always true. Let A 
be said of B from necessity, and B of C: then that A holds of C is 
also necessary. When the conclusion is not necessary, the middle 
term cannot be necessary either. Let A hold of C not from 
necessity, while A holds of B and B of C from necessity: then A 
will hold of C from necessity; but it was supposed not to. 

Since, then, if you understand something demonstratively, it 
must hold from necessity, it is plain that your demonstration must 
proceed through a middle term which is necessary. Otherwise 
you will understand neither the reason why nor that it is necessary 
for it to be the case: either you will wrongly think that you know 
it Gif you believe to be necessary what is not necessary) or else you 
will not even think you do (equally whether you know the fact 
through middle terms or the reason why through immediates). 

Of incidentals which do not hold of things in themselves in the 
way in which “‘in itself’ was defined, there is no demonstrative 
understanding. You cannot prove the conclusion from necessity, 
since it is possible for what is incidental not to hold (this is the 
sort of incidental I am speaking about). Yet one might perhaps 
wonder what purpose there could be in asking about such items if 
it is not necessary for the conclusion to be the case—you might as 
well ask an arbitrary question and then state the conclusion. But 
we should ask questions not on the grounds that the conclusion 
will be necessary because of the points proposed in the question 
but rather because it is necessary for anyone who accepts the 

II 

35 

75 

Io 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

75 

10 

15 

75° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

proposals to state the conclusion—and to state it truly if they 
hold truly. 

Since in each kind whatever holds of something in itself and as 
such holds of it from necessity, it is clear that scientific demon- 
strations are concerned with what holds of things in themselves 
and that they proceed from such items. For what is incidental is 
not necessary, so that you do not necessarily know why the con- 
clusion holds—not even if it is the case always but not in itself 
(e.g. deductions through evidence). For you will not understand 
in itself something that holds in itself, nor will you understand 
why it holds. (To understand why is to understand by way of the 
explanation.) Therefore the middle term must hold of the third 
term, and the first of the middle, because of itself. 

CHAPTER 7 

Thus you cannot prove anything by crossing from another kind— 
e.g. something geometrical by arithmetic. There are three things 
involved in demonstrations: one, what is being demonstrated, or 
the conclusion (this is what holds of some kind in itself); one, the 
axioms (axioms are the items from which the demonstrations 
proceed); third, the underlying kind whose attributes—i.e. the 
items incidental to it in itself—the demonstrations make plain. 

Now the items from which the demonstrations proceed may be 
the same; but where the kinds are different, as with arithmetic 
and geometry, you cannot attach arithmetical demonstrations to 
what is incidental to magnitudes—unless magnitudes are num- 
bers. (But I shall explain later how in some cases this is possible.) 
Arithmetical demonstrations always contain the kind with which 
the demonstrations are concerned, and so too do all other demon- 
strations. Hence the kind must be the same, either simpliciter or 
in some respect, if a demonstration is to cross. That it is imposs- 
ible otherwise is plain; for the extremes and the middle terms 
must come from the same kind, since if they do not hold in 
themselves, they will be incidentals. 

For this reason you cannot prove by geometry that there is 
a single science of contraries, nor even that two cubes make a 
cube. (Nor can you prove by any other science what pertains to a 
different science, except when they are so related to one another 
that the one falls under the other—as e.g. optics is related to 
geometry and harmonics to arithmetic.) Nor indeed anything that 
holds of lines not as lines and as depending on the principles 

12 

TRANSLATION 75° 
proper to them—e.g. whether straight lines are the most beauti- 
ful of lines, or whether they are contrarily related to curved lines; 
for these things hold of lines not in virtue of their proper kind but 
rather in virtue of something common. 

CHAPTER 8 

It is clear too that if the propositions from which a deduction 
proceeds are universal, then it is necessary for the conclusion of 
such a demonstration, i.e. of a demonstration simpliciter, to be 
eternal. There is therefore no demonstration of perishable things, 
nor any understanding of them simpliciter but only incidentally, 
because nothing holds of them universally'® but only at some 
time and in some way. 

When there is such a demonstration, one of the propositions 
must be non-universal and perishable—perishable because when 
it is the case the conclusion too will be the case, and non-universal 
because its subjects will sometimes exist and sometimes not 
exist.’ Hence you cannot deduce that anything holds universally 
but only that it holds now. 

The same goes for definitions too, since a definition is either 
a principle of a demonstration or a demonstration differing in 
arrangement or a sort of conclusion of a demonstration. 

Demonstration and understanding of things that come about 
often—e.g. of an eclipse of the moon—plainly hold always in so 
far as eclipses are such-and-such,'* but are particular in so far as 
they do not occur always. As with eclipses, so in the other cases. 

CHAPTER 9 

Since it is clear that you cannot demonstrate anything except 
from its own principles if what is being proved holds of it as such, 
understanding is not simply a matter of proving something from 
what is true and indemonstrable and immediate. Otherwise it will 
be possible to prove things in the way in which Bryson proved 
the squaring of the circle. Such arguments prove in virtue of a 

1 Reading xa0é/ov with the MSS for the OCT’s xa S4ov. 
" For the reading see notes. 
2 Reading toiaid’ with C for roid’ (OCT, with B). 

13 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

76° 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

75° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

common feature which will also hold of something else; and so 
the arguments also attach to other items which are not of a kind 
with them. Hence you do not understand the item as such but 
only incidentally—otherwise the demonstration would not attach 
to another kind as well. 

We understand something non-incidentally when we know it in 
virtue of that in virtue of which it holds and from what are its 
principles as such. E.g. we understand that having angles equal to 
two right angles holds of something when we know it in virtue of 
that of which it holds in itself and from its own principles. Hence 
if this too holds in itself of what it holds of, the middle term must 
be of the same kind. 

Otherwise, it will be like proving something in harmonics by 
arithmetic. Things of this sort are indeed proved in the same way, 
but there is a difference: the fact falls under one science (for the 
underlying kind is different), while the reason falls under the 
higher science which is concerned with the attributes which hold 
of it in itself. Hence from this consideration too it is clear that 
you cannot demonstrate anything simpliciter except from its own 
principles. But the principles of these sciences have a common 
feature. 

If this is clear, it is also clear that you cannot demonstrate the 
proper principles of anything. For then there will be principles of 
everything, and understanding them will be sovereign over every- 
thing. For you understand something better if your knowledge 
proceeds from higher explanations—your knowledge proceeds 
from what is prior when it proceeds from unexplainable explana- 
tions. Hence if you know better or best, your understanding 
will be better or best. But a demonstration does not attach to 
another kind—except that, as I have said, geometrical demon- 
strations attach to mechanical or optical demonstrations, and 
arithmetical demonstrations to harmonical. 

It is difficult to know whether you know something or not. For 
it is difficult to know whether or not our knowledge of something 
proceeds from its principles—and this is what it is to know 
something. We think we understand something if we possess a 
deduction from some true and primitive items. But this is not so: 
in addition, they must be of a kind with them.'* 

13 Omitting cof npe@toig with Solmsen. 

14 

TRANSLATION 76° 

CHAPTER I0 

I call principles in each kind those items of which it is not 
possible to prove that they are. Now what the primitives and 
what the items proceeding from them mean is assumed; but that 
they are must be assumed for the principles and proved for the 
rest. E.g. we must assume what a unit is or what straight and 
triangle are, and also that units and magnitudes are; but we must 
prove everything else. 

Of the items used in the demonstrative sciences some are proper 
to each science and others common—but common by analogy, 
since they are only useful in so far as they bear on the kind under 
the science. Proper: e.g. that a line is such-and-such, and straight 
so-and-so. Common: e.g. that if equals are removed from equals, 
the remainders are equal. It is sufficient to assume each of these 
in so far as it bears on the kind; for it will produce the same 
results even if it is assumed as holding not of everything but only 
for magnitudes (or, for arithmeticians, for numbers). 

Proper too are the items which are assumed to exist and 
concerning which the science studies what holds of them in 
themselves—e.g. units in arithmetic, and points and lines in 
geometry. They assume that there are such items, and that they 
are such-and-such. As for the attributes of these items in them- 
selves, they assume what each means—e.g. arithmetic assumes 
what odd or even or quadrangle or cube means and geometry 
what irrational or inflexion or verging means—and they prove 
that they are, through the common items and from what has been 
demonstrated. Astronomy proceeds in the same way. 

Every demonstrative science is concerned with three things: 
what it posits to exist (these items constitute the kind of which it 
studies the attributes which hold of it in itself); the so-called 
common axioms, i.e. the primitives from which its demonstrations 
proceed; and thirdly, the attributes, where it assumes what each 
of them means. There is no reason why some sciences should not 
ignore some of these items—e.g. they need not suppose that the 
kind exists, if it is clear that it does (for it is not equally plain that 
there are numbers and that there is hot and cold), and they 
need not assume what the attributes mean, if they are plain. In 
the same way, in the case of the common items, they do not 
assume what to remove equals from equals means, because this is 
familiar. None the less by nature there are these three things: that 

TS 

35 

40 

76” 

Io 

TS 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

77 

76° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

about which the science conducts its proofs, what it proves, and 
the items from which it proves. 

What must be the case and must be thought to be the case 
because of itself is not a supposition or a postulate. (Deductions, 
and therefore demonstrations, are not addressed to external 
argument but rather to argument in the soul, since you can 
always object to external argument, but not always to internal 
argument.) If you assume something which is provable without 
proving it yourself, then if it is something which the learner 
thinks to be the case, you are supposing it (and it is a supposition 
not simpliciter but only in relation to the learner); and if you 
make the same assumption when the learner has no opinion or 
actually a contrary opinion on the matter, then you are postu- 
lating it. It is in this that suppositions and postulates differ: a 
postulate is something not in accordance with the opinion of 
the learner which,'* though demonstrable, you assume and use 
without proving it. 

Terms are not suppositions (they are not said to be or not be 
anything’*). Rather, suppositions are found among propositions. 
Terms need only be grasped; and grasping something is not 
supposing—unless you are going to say that even hearing some- 
thing is supposing it. Rather, suppositions are items such that, if 
they are the case, then by their being the case the conclusion 
comes about. 

Geometers do not suppose falsehoods, as some people have 
asserted. They say that you should not use falsehoods but that 
geometers speak falsely when they say that a line which is not a 
foot long is a foot long or that a drawn line which is not straight is 
straight. But geometers do not conclude anything from the fact 
that the lines which they have themselves described are thus and 
so; rather, they rely on what these lines show. 

Again, every postulate and supposition is either universal or 
particular, and terms are neither of these. 

CHAPTER II 

There need not be any forms, or some one item apart from the 
many, in order for there to be demonstrations. It must, however, 
be true to say that one thing holds of many. For there will be no 
universals if this is not the case; and if there are no universals 

'* Omitting 4, with Hayduck. 
'S Reading Zéyovtar with the MSS for the OCT’s déerau. 

16 

TRANSLATION 17° 

there will be no middle terms, and hence no demonstrations. 
There must, therefore, be something—one identical item—which 
holds of several cases non-homonymously. 

No demonstration assumes that it is not possible to assert and 
deny at the same time—unless the conclusion too is to be proved 
in this form. Then it is proved by assuming that it is true to say 
the first term of the middle term and not true to deny it. It makes 
no difference if you assume that the middle term is and is not; 
and the same holds for the third term. For if you are given 
something of which it is true to say that it is a man, even if not 
being a man is also true of it, then provided only that it is true to 
say that a man is an animal and not not an animal, it will be true 
to say that Callias, even if not Callias, is nevertheless an animal 
and not not an animal. The explanation is that the first term is said 
not only of the middle term but also of something else, because 
it holds of several cases; so that even if the middle term both 
is it and is not it, this makes no difference with regard to the 
conclusion. 

Demonstrations by reduction to the impossible assume that 
everything is asserted or denied. They assume it not always and 
universally but in so far as is sufficient—and it is sufficient in so 
far as it bears on the kind. (By on the kind, what I mean is the 
kind about which you are producing your demonstrations, as I 
said earlier.) 

All the sciences associate with one another in respect of the 
common items (I call common the items which they use as the 
basis from which to demonstrate—not those about which they 
prove nor what they prove); and dialectic associates with them 
all, and so would any science which attempted to give universal 
proofs of the common items (e.g. that everything is asserted or 
denied, or that equals from equals leave equals, or any items of 
this sort). Dialectic is not concerned with any determined set of 
things, nor with any one kind. If it were, it would not ask 
questions; for you cannot ask questions when you are demon- 
strating because the same thing cannot be proved from opposite 
assumptions. (I have proved this in my account of deduction.) 

CHAPTER {2 

If a deductive question and a proposition stating one part of a con- 
tradictory pair are the same thing, and if there are propositions 

17 

Io 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

77 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

a 

T7 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

in each science from which the deductions in each proceed, then 
there will be scientific questions from which the deductions 
appropriate in each science proceed. 

It is plain, then, that not every question will be geometrical (or 
medical—and similarly in the other cases), but only those from 
which you can prove something with which geometry is con- 
cerned or which is proved from the same items as geometry 
(e.g. something in optics). And similarly in the other cases. For 
these items you should indeed supply arguments from the prin- 
ciples and conclusions of geometry, whereas for the principles 
a geometer as geometer should not supply arguments—and simi- 
larly in the other sciences. Thus we should not ask each scientist 
every question, nor should he answer everything he is asked 
about anything, but only those questions within the scope of his 
science. 

If you argue in this way with a geometer as geometer it is clear 
that you will argue correctly if you prove something from this 
basis. Otherwise you will argue incorrectly—and it is plain that 
in this way you will not refute a geometer either, except inciden- 
tally. Hence you should not argue about geometry among non- 
geometers—for those who argue poorly will escape detection. 
And the same goes for the other sciences. 

Since there are geometrical questions, are there also non- 
geometrical questions? And in each science, with regard to which 
sort of ignorance are questions, say, geometrical? And are ignor- 
ant deductions deductions from opposite assumptions (or para- 
logisms, though geometrical paralogisms)? Or are they deductions 
drawn from another art? E.g. is a musical question about geo- 
metry non-geometrical, whereas thinking that parallels meet 
is geometrical in one sense and non-geometrical in another 
way? There is an ambiguity here (as in the case of being non- 
rhythmical): in one sense, being non-geometrical is not possessing 
geometrical skill, and in another it is possessing it poorly. It is the 
latter type of ignorance, i.e. ignorance based on the relevant 
principles, which is contrary to understanding. 

In mathematics paralogisms do not occur in the same way: the 
ambiguity is always in the middle term (something is said of all of 
it and it again is said of all of something else—you do not say 
“all” of what is predicated), and you can as it were see these 
things in thought. In arguments, however, they escape notice. Is 
every circle a shape? If you draw one it is plain. Well, is the epic 
a circle? It is clear that it is not. 

18 

TRANSLATION 77° 

You should not bring an objection against it if the proposition 
is inductive. For just as there are no propositions which do not 
hold of several cases (for otherwise they will not hold of all 
cases—and deductions depend on universals), so it is plain that 
there are no objections of this type either. For propositions and 
objections are the same things: what you bring as an objection 
might become a proposition, either demonstrative or dialectical. 

It happens that some people argue non-deductively because 
they assume something which follows both terms. E.g/ Caeneus 
does so when he says that fire consists in multiple proportion; for 
fire, he says, is generated quickly, and so is multiple proportion. 
In this way there is no deduction; rather, there is a deduction if 
multiple proportion follows fastest proportion and the fastest 
changing proportion follows fire. 

Sometimes it is not possible to make a deduction from the 
assumptions; and sometimes it is possible but it is not seen. 

If it were impossible to prove truth from falsehood, it would be 
easy to make analyses; for then the propositions would convert 
from necessity. Let A be something that is the case; and if A is 
the case, then these things are the case (things which I know to be 
the case—call them 8B). From the latter, then, I shall prove that 
the former is the case. (In mathematics conversion is more com- 
mon because mathematicians assume nothing incidental—and in 
this too they differ from those who argue dialectically—but only 
definitions. ) 

They increase not through the middle terms but by additional 
assumptions—e.g. A of B, this of C, this again of D, and so on 
ad infinitum; also laterally—e.g. A both of C and of E. E.g. A is 
definite (or even indefinite) number; B is definite odd number; C 
is odd number: therefore A holds of C. And D is definite even 
number; FE is even number: therefore A holds of E£. 

CHAPTER 13 

Understanding the fact and the reason why differ, first in the 
same science—and in two ways. In one way, if the deduction 
does not proceed through immediates: in this case the primitive 
explanation is not assumed, but understanding the reason why 
occurs in virtue of the primitive explanation. In a second way, 

19 

35 

78° 

Io 

TS 

20 

25 

30 

35 

78° 

IO 

15 

20 

73° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

if, although the deduction does proceed through immediates, it 
proceeds not through the explanation but through the more 
familiar of the converting terms. For there is no reason why the 
non-explanatory counterpredicated term should not sometimes 
be more familiar, so that the demonstration will proceed through 
this term. 

E.g. a demonstration that the planets are near, through their 
not twinkling. Let C be the planets, B not twinkling, A being 
near. It is true to say B of C: the planets do not twinkle. And 
also to say A of B: what does not twinkle is near. (Let this be 
assumed through induction or through perception.) Thus it is 
necessary that A holds of C, and it has been demonstrated that 
the planets are near. Now this deduction gives not the reason 
why but the fact: it is not because the planets do not twinkle that 
they are near—rather, because they are near they do not twinkle. 

It is also possible to prove the latter through the former, and 
then the demonstration will give the reason why. E.g. let C be 
the planets, B being near, A not twinkling. B holds of C and A of 
B: hence A holds of C. The deduction gives the reason why, since 
the primitive explanation has been assumed. 

Again, consider the way in which they prove that the moon 
is spherical through its waxing: if what waxes in this way is 
spherical, and the moon waxes, it is clear that it is spherical. In 
this way the deduction gives the fact, whereas if the middle term 
is posited the other way about the deduction gives the reason 
why. (It is not because of its waxing that the moon is spherical: 
rather, because it is spherical it waxes in this way. Moon, C; 
spherical, B; waxing, A.) 

Where the middle terms do not convert and the non-explanatory 
term is more familiar, the fact is proved but not the reason why. 

Again, consider cases in which the middle term has outside 
position. Here too the demonstration gives the fact and not the 
reason why; for the explanation is not stated. E.g. why do walls 
not breathe?—--Because they are not animals. If this were explana- 
tory of their not breathing, then being an animal would have to 
be explanatory of breathing: i.e. if the negation is explanatory of 
something’s not holding, then the affirmation is explanatory of 
its holding (thus if an imbalance of the hot and cold elements 
explains not being healthy, their balance explains being healthy); 
and similarly, if the affirmation explains something’s holding, 
then the negation explains its not holding. But in the example set 
out above, the condition I have just stated is not satisfied—for 

20 

TRANSLATION 78° 

not every animal breathes. A deduction giving an explanation of 
this type comes about in the middle figure. E.g. let A be animal, 
B breathing, C wall. A holds of every B (for everything which 
breathes is an animal), but of no C: hence B too holds of no 
C—therefore walls do not breathe. 

Explanations of this sort resemble extravagant statements (i.e. 
when you argue by setting the middle term too far away)—e.g. 
Anacharsis’ argument that there are no flute-girls among the 
Scyths since there are no vines. 

Thus with regard to the same science—and with regard to the 
position of the middle term—there are these differences between 
a deduction giving the fact and a deduction giving the reason 
why. 

The reason why differs from the fact in another way in so far as 
each is studied by a different science. These are the cases which 
are related to each other in such a way that the one falls under 
the other, e.g. optics to geometry, mechanics to solid geometry, 
harmonics to arithmetic, star-gazing to astronomy. Some of these 
sciences bear almost the same name as one another—e.g. mathe- 
matical and nautical astronomy, and mathematical and acoustical 
harmonics. Here it is for the empirical scientists to know the fact 
and for the mathematical scientists to know the reason why. The 
latter possess demonstrations which give the explanations, and 
often they do not know the fact—just as people who study 
universals often do not know some of the particulars through lack 
of observation. 

The items in question are things which, being something differ- 
ent in their essence, make use of forms. For mathematics is 
concerned with forms: its objects are not said of any underlying 
subject—for even if geometrical objects are said of some under- 
lying subject, still it is not as being said of an underlying subject 
that they are studied. 

Related to optics as optics is related to geometry, there is 
another science—namely the study of the rainbow. Here it is for 
the natural scientists to know the fact and for the students of 
optics—either of optics simpliciter or of mathematical optics—to 
know the reason why. Many sciences which do not fall under 
one another are in fact related in this way—e.g. medicine to 
geometry: it is for the doctors to know the fact that curved 
wounds heal more slowly, and for the geometers to know the 
reason why. 

21 

25 

30 

35 

79 

10 

1S 

79° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

CHAPTER 14 

Of the figures, the first is especially scientific. The mathematical 
sciences carry out their demonstrations through it—e.g. arith- 

20 metic and geometry and optics—and so do almost all those 
sciences which inquire into the reason why. For deductions giving 
the reason why are carried out, either in general or for the most 
part and in most cases, through this figure. For this reason, then, 
it is especially scientific; for study of the reason why has most 
importance for knowledge. 

25 Next, only through this figure can you hunt for understanding 
of what a thing is. In the middle figure there are no positive 
deductions; but understanding what a thing is is understanding an 
affirmation. In the last figure, although there are positive deduc- 
tions, they are not universal; and what a thing is is something 
universal—it is not in a certain respect that man is a two-footed 
animal. 

30 ~=>s- Again, this figure has no need of the others; but they are thick- 
ened and increased through it until they come to the immediates. 

Thus it is clear that the first figure is most important for 
understanding. 

CHAPTER [5 

Just as it is possible for A to hold of B atomically, so it is also 
35 possible for it to not hold atomically. By holding or not holding 
atomically I mean that there is no middle term for them; for then 

they no longer hold or not hold in virtue of something else. 
When either A or B is in something as in a whole (or both are), 
then it is not possible for A to primitively not hold of B. Let A be 
in C as in a whole. If B is not in C as in a whole (it is possible 
that A is in something as in a whole and B is not in it), then there 
79” will be a deduction that A does not hold of B. For if C holds of 
every A and of no B, then A holds of no B. Similarly, if B is in 
something as in a whole, e.g. in D: D holds of every B and A of 
no D, so that A will hold of no B through a deduction. The proof 

5 will be the same if both terms are in something as in a whole. 

It is possible for B not to be in something which A is in as in a 
whole, or again for A not to be in something which B is in. This 
is clear from chains of terms which do not overlap one another. If 
nothing in the chain A, C, D is predicated of anything in B, E, F, 
1o and if A is in H as in a whole (H being in the same chain as A), 

22 

TRANSLATION 79° 
then it is clear that B will not be in H; for otherwise the chains 
will overlap. Similarly if B is in something as in a whole. 

If neither is in anything as in a whole, and if A does not hold of 
B, then it is necessary for A to atomically not hold of B. For if 
there is to be a middle term, then one of them must be in 
something as in a whole. The deduction will be either in the first 
or in the middle figure. If it is in the first, then B will be in 
something as in a whole (for the proposition with B as subject 
must be affirmative); and if it is in the middle, then one or other 
will be in something as in a whole (for if the privative is assumed 
with both as subject there is a deduction, although if both are 
negative there will not be one). 

Thus it is clear that it is possible for one thing to not hold of 
another atomically; and we have said when it is possible and how. 

CHAPTER 16 

Ignorance—what is called ignorance not in virtue of a negation 
but in virtue of a disposition—is error coming about through 
deduction. In the case of what holds or does not hold primitively 
it arises in two ways: either when you believe simpliciter that 
something holds or does not hold, or else when you get the 
belief through a deduction. For simple belief the error is simple; 
but when the belief comes about through a deduction there are 
several types of error. 

Let A hold of no B atomically: if you deduce that A holds of B, 
taking C as a middle term, then you will have erred through a 
deduction. It is possible for both the propositions to be false, and 
it is possible for only one of them to be false. If neither A holds 
of any of the Cs nor C of any of the Bs, and if each proposition 
has been assumed the other way about, then both will be false. It 
is possible for C to be so related to A and to B that it neither falls 
under A nor holds universally of B. For it is impossible for B to 
be in anything as in a whole (since A was said to not hold of it 
primitively), and it is not necessary that A hold universally of 
everything there is: hence both propositions may be false. 

It is also possible for one proposition to be true—not either of 
them but only AC. The proposition CB will always be false 
because B is not in anything; but AC may be true, e.g. if A holds 
atomically both of C and of B—when the same thing is predicated 

23 

25 

30 

35 

40 

807 

to 

T5 

20 

25 

30 

35 

80” 

807 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

primitively of several items, neither will be in the other. (It 
makes no difference if it holds non-atomically.) 

Error to the effect that something holds comes about by these 
means and in this way only; for in no other figure was there a 
deduction to the effect that something holds. Error to the effect 
that something does not hold comes about both in the first and in 
the middle figure. 

First let us say in how many ways it comes about in the first 
figure, i.e. in what conditions the propositions must be. It is 
possible when both are false, e.g. if A holds atomically both of C 
and of B: if A is assumed to hold of no C and C of every B, the 
propositions are false. It is also possible when one is false—and 
either one. It is possible for AC to be true and CB false—AC 
true because A does not hold of everything there is, and CB false 
because it is impossible for C, of none of which A holds, to hold 
of B (for then the proposition AC would no longer be true, and 
at the same time if they are both true the conclusion too will be 
true). It is also possible for CB to be true while the other 
proposition is false, i.e. if B is both in C and in A; for then one of 
them must fall under the other, so that if you assume that A 
holds of no C the proposition will be false. 

Thus it is clear that the deduction may be false both when one 
proposition is false and when both are. 

In the middle figure it is not possible for both propositions to 
be false as wholes. For when A holds of every B, you cannot take 
any term which will hold of all the one and of none of the 
other. If there is to be a deduction, then you must assume the 
propositions in such a way that something holds of one and does 
not hold of the other. Hence if they are false when assumed in 
this way, plainly they will be the other way about when assumed 
in the contrary way—but this is impossible. 

But there is no reason why each proposition should not be 
partially false—i.e. C might hold both of some A and of some B. 
For if C is then assumed to hold of every A and of no B, both 
propositions will be false—not, however, as wholes but partially. 
And if the privative is posited the other way about, the same 
holds. 

It is possible for one of them—either one—to be false. For 
what holds of every-A also holds of B; so if C is assumed to hold 
of the whole of A and not to hold of the whole of B, CA will be 
true and CB false. Again, what holds of no B will not hold of 
every A. (If of A, then of B too—but it was assumed not to hold 

24, 

TRANSLATION 80° 

of B.) So if C is assumed to hold of the whole of A and of no B, 
the proposition CB is true and the other proposition false. 

Similarly if the privative is transposed. For what holds of no A 
will not hold of any B; so if C is assumed not to hold of the whole 
of A and to hold of the whole of B, the proposition CA will be 
true and the other proposition false. Again, it is false to assume 
that what holds of every B holds of no A. For if it holds of every 
B, then it must also hold of some A; so if C is assumed to hold of 
every B and of no A, CB will be true and CA false. 

Thus it is clear that there may be erroneous deductions in the 
case of atomic truths when both the propositions are false and 
also when only one of them is. 

CHAPTER I7 

In the case of what holds non-atomically, when the deduction of 
the falsehood comes about through the appropriate middle term, 
it is not possible for both propositions to be false—rather, only 
the proposition on the major extreme can be false. (I call a 
middle term appropriate if the deduction of the contradictory 
comes about through it.) Let A hold of B through a middle term 
C. Since CB must be assumed as an affirmative if a deduction is 
to come about, it is plain that this will always be true; for it does 
not convert. And AC its false; for it is when this is converted that 
the contrary deduction comes about. 

Similarly too if the middle term is taken from another chain— 
e.g. D, if it is both in A as in a whole and predicated of every B. 
Then the proposition DB must stand and the other proposition 
must be converted, so that the former is always true and the 
latter always false. This sort of error is much the same as error 
through the appropriate middle term. 

If it is not through the appropriate middle term that the deduc- 
tion comes about, then when the middle term falls under A 
and holds of no B, both propositions must be false. For the 
propositions must be assumed in a way contrary to how they 
actually are if there is to be a deduction; and so assumed, both 
come out false. I.e. let A hold of the whole of D and D of none 
of the Bs: when they are converted there will be a deduction and 
the propositions will both be false. 

When the middle term, e.g. D, does not fall under A, AD will 
be true and DB false: AD is true because D was not in A; and 
DB is false because if it were true the conclusion too would be 
true—but it was false. 

25 

20 

25 

30 

35 

81? 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

81° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

When the error comes about through the middle figure, it is 
not possible for both propositions to be false as wholes. For when 
B falls under A it is not possible for anything to hold of all the 
one and of none of the other, as I said earlier. But it is possible 
for one—either one—to be false as a whole. Let C hold both of 
A and of B: if it is assumed to hold of A and not to hold of B, 
then CA will be true and the other proposition false. Again, if C 
is assumed to hold of B and of no A, then CB will be true and the 
other proposition false. 

If the deduction of the error is privative, we have said when and 
by what means the error will occur. If it is affirmative, then when 
it proceeds through the appropriate middle term it is impossible 
for both propositions to be false. For CB must stand if there is to 
be a deduction, as I said earlier. Hence AC will always be false; 
for this is the proposition which converts. 

Similarly if the middle term should be taken from another 
chain, as I said in the case of privative error. DB must stand and 
AD convert, and the error is the same as before. 

When the deduction is not through an appropriate middle 
term, then if D falls under A, this will be true and the other 
proposition false; for it is possible for A to hold of several things 
which do not fall under one another. If D does not fall under 
A, this will plainly always be false (for it is assumed as an 
affirmative), whereas it is possible for DB both to be true and to 
be false. For nothing prevents A from holding of no D and D of 
every B (e.g. animal of knowledge, knowledge of music); nor 
again A from holding of none of the Ds and D of none of the Bs. 
Thus it is clear that if the middle term does not fall under A it is 
possible for both propositions to be false and also for one—but 
not either—proposition to be false.!° 

Thus it is clear in how many ways and by what means errors in 
virtue of deduction may come about, both for immediates and for 
what is shown through demonstration. 

CHAPTER 18 

It is clear too that if some perception is wanting, some understand- 
ing must also be wanting—understanding which it is impossible 

"© Reading xai (cv tépav, ob pévtar) bnotépav Ecvyev. The OCT deletes the whole 
sentence. 

26 

TRANSLATION 81° 

to get if we learn either by induction or by demonstration, if 
demonstration depends on universals and induction on particu- 
lars, if it is impossible to study universals except through induc- 
tion (even the items we speak about on the basis of abstraction 
can be made familiar through induction, i.e. it can be shown 
that certain things hold of each kind—even if they are not 
separable—in so far as each is such-and-such), and if it is imposs- 
ible to make an induction without having perception (for par- 
ticulars are grasped by perception). It is not possible to get 
understanding of these items—neither from universals without 
induction nor through induction without perception. 

CHAPTER [9 

Every deduction proceeds through three terms. One type can 
prove that A holds of C because it holds of B and B of C; and the 
other type is privative, having one proposition to the effect that 
one thing holds of another and the other to the effect that 
something does not hold. Thus it is clear that the principles and 
the so-called suppositions are items of these types; for it is these 
which we must assume in order to conduct proofs—e.g. that A 
holds of C through B, and then that A holds of B through 
another middle term, and that B holds of C in the same way. 

If you are making deductions with regard to opinion and only 
dialectically, then plainly you need only inquire whether the 
deduction proceeds from the most reputable propositions poss- 
ible; so that even if there is not in truth any middle term for AB 
but there is thought to be one, anyone who makes a deduction 
through it has deduced something dialectically. But with regard 
to truth you must inquire from the basis of what actually holds. It 
is like this: since there are items which themselves are predicated 
of something else non-incidentally—by incidentally I mean this: 
we sometimes say, e.g., that that white thing is a man, and we do 
not then make the same sort of statement as when we say that the 
man is white; for whereas it is not the case that the man, being 
something different, is white, the white thing is a man because 
the man is incidentally a white thing. Well, there are some items 
which are predicated of things in themselves. 

Then let C be such that it itself no longer holds of anything else 
and B holds of it primitively (i.e. there is nothing else between 
them). Again, let E hold of F in the same way, and F of B. Now 
must this come to a stop, or is it possible for it to go on ad 
infinitum? 

27 

81> 

Io 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

82° 

1&6) 

15 

20 

81° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Again, if nothing is predicated of A in itself and A holds of H 
primitively and of nothing prior in between, and H holds of G, 
and this of B, must this come to a stop, or is it possible for this 
to go on ad infinitum? This differs from the earlier question to 
this extent: that question asked if it is possible to begin from 
something which holds of nothing else while something else holds 
of it and to go on upwards ad infinitum; whereas the second 
question has us begin from something which is predicated of 
something else while nothing is predicated of it and inquire if it is 
possible to go on downwards ad infinitum. 

Again, is it possible for the terms in between to be infinite if 
the extremes are determined? I mean e.g. if A holds of C, and B 
is a middle term for them, and for B and A there are different 
middle terms, and for these others, is it possible or impossible for 
these to go on ad infinitum? 

This is the same as to inquire whether demonstrations can 
proceed ad infinitum and whether there can be demonstrations of 
everything, or whether terms are bounded by one another. 

I say the same in the case of privative deductions and proposi- 
tions. E.g. if A does not hold of any B, either it does not hold 
of B primitively or else there will be something prior in between 
of which it does not hold (e.g. G, which holds of every B), and 
then another term yet prior to this (e.g. H, which holds of every 
G). For in these cases too either the prior terms of which A holds 
are infinite or they come to a stop. 

It is not the same for terms which convert. For among counter- 
predicated terms there is none of which any is predicated primi- 
tively or ultimately (in this respect at least every such term is 
related to every other in the same way; and if’” its predicates are 
infinite, thén the items we are puzzling over are infinite in both 
directions) —unless it is possible that the terms do not convert in 
the same way, one of them holding as an incidental and the other 
as a predicate. 

CHAPTER 20 

It is plain that the terms in between cannot be infinite if the 
predications come to a stop downwards and upwards. (By up- 

17 Reading ex’ [with Philoponus] . . . éx’ [with two MSS and Philoponus] . . . for 
the OCT’s éiz’... ei”... 

28 

TRANSLATION 823 

wards I mean toward the more universal and by downwards 
toward the particular.) Suppose that, when A is predicated of F, 
the terms in between—the Bs—are infinite. It is plain that it 
would be possible both that from A downwards one term should 
be predicated of another ad infinitum (for before F is reached the 
terms in between are infinite), and also that from F upwards 
there are infinitely many terms before A is reached. Hence if this 
is impossible, it is impossible for there to be infinitely many terms 
between A and F. 

If someone were to say that some of A, B, F are next to one 
another so that there are no terms between them, and that 
the other terms cannot be taken, this makes no difference. For 
whichever of the Bs I take, the terms in between in the direction 
of A or in the direction of F will either be infinite or not. It 
makes no difference which is the first term after which they are 
infinite—whether at once or not at once; for the terms after this 
are infinite. 

CHAPTER 21 

It is clear too that privative demonstrations will come to a stop if 
affirmative demonstrations come to a stop in both directions. 
Suppose that it is not possible either to go on upwards from the 
last term ad infinitum (I call last the term which itself holds of 
nothing else while something else holds of it, e.g. F), or to go on 
downwards from the first to the last (I call first the term which 
itself is said of another while nothing is said of it). If this is so, it 
will come to a stop in the case of negations too. 

A term can be proved not to hold of something in three ways. 
Either B holds of everything of which C holds and A of nothing 
of which B holds—in the case of BC, then, and in general of the 
second interval, we must arrive at immediates; for this interval is 
positive. And plainly if the other term does not hold of something 
else prior, e.g. of D, this will have to hold of every B; and if 
again it does not hold of something else prior to D, this will have 
to hold of every D. Hence since the path upwards comes to a 
stop, the path to A will also come to a stop, and there will be 
some first term of which it does not hold. 

Again, if B holds of every A and of no C, A holds of none of 
the Cs. If you must next prove this, then plainly it will be proved 
either in the above way or in this way or in the third way. The 
first way has been discussed, and the second will now be proved. 

29 

25 

30 

82” 

20 

25 

30 

35 

83" 

Io 

82> POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

If you prove?® in this way e.g. that!? D holds of every B and of no 
C, then” it is necessary for something to hold of B. And next, if 
this is to not hold of C, something else holds of D which does not 
hold of C. So since holding of ever higher terms comes to a stop, 
not holding will also come to a stop. 

The third way was this: if A holds of every B and C does not 
hold of it, C does not hold of everything of which A holds. Next 
this will be proved either in the ways described above or else in 
the same way. If the former, it comes to a stop; and if the latter, 
you will next assume that B holds of F, of not all of which C 
holds. And similarly next for E. Since we are supposing that 
things come to a stop in the downward direction, it is clear that 
C’s not holding will also come to a stop. 

It is clear that even if the proof follows not one path but all of 
them—sometimes in the first figure, sometimes in the second or 
third—that it will come to a stop even so. For the paths are 
finite, and necessarily anything finite taken a finite number of 
times is finite. 

So it is plain that it comes to a stop for privations if it does so 
for holding. That it comes to a stop in the latter case will be plain 
if we study the matter generally as follows. 

CHAPTER 22 

For items predicated in what something is, the case is plain: if it 
is possible to define anything, or if what it is to be something can 
be known, and if you cannot survey infinitely many items, then 
the items predicated in what something is must be finite. 

We argue universally as follows. You can say truly that the 
white thing is walking, and that that large thing is a log, and 
again that the log is large and the man is walking. When you 
speak in these two ways you make different sorts of statement. 
When I assert that the white thing is a log, I say that something 
which is incidentally white is a log, and not that the white thing is 
the underlying subject for the log. For it is not the case that, 
being white or just what is some particular white, it came to be a 
log—hence it is not a log except incidentally. But when I say that 
the log is white, I do not say that something different is white and 

8 Reading derxviy with most MSS for the OCT’s deuxvior. 
9 Reading oiov ét:—the OCT accidentally omits 6x. 
20 Omitting «i with one MS. 

30 

TRANSLATION 837 

that that is incidentally a log, as when I say that the musical thing 
is white (I am then saying that the man, who is incidentally 
musical, is white). Rather, the log is the underlying subject which 
came to be white not in virtue of being something different from 
just what is a log or a particular log. If we must legislate, let 
speaking in the latter way be predicating, and speaking in the 
former way either not predicating at all or else predicating not 
simpliciter but incidentally. (What is predicated is like the white, 
that of which it is predicated is like the log.) 

Let us suppose that what is predicated is always predicated 
simpliciter, and not incidentally, of what it is predicated of; for 
this is the way in which demonstrations demonstrate. Hence 
when one thing is predicated of one, either it is in what the item 
is or it indicates that it has some quality or quantity or relation or 
is doing something or undergoing something or is at some place 
or time. 

Again, terms which mean substances mean, of what they are 
predicated of, just what is that thing or just what is a particular 
sort of it. Terms which do not mean substances but are said of 
some other underlying subject which is neither just what is that 
thing nor just what is a particular sort of it, are incidental. E.g. 
white of a man: a man is neither just what is white nor just what 
is some particular white—rather, presumably, animal: a man is 
just what is an animal. Items which do not mean substances must 
be predicated of some underlying subject, and there cannot be 
anything white which is not white in virtue of being something 
different. (We can say goodbye to the forms. They are nonny- 
noes; and if there are any, they are irrelevant—for demon- 
strations are concerned with items of the kind I have described.) 

Again, if it cannot be that this is a quality of that and that of 
this—a quality of a quality—, then it is impossible for one thing 
to be counterpredicated of another in this way: it is possible to 
make a true statement, but it is not possible to counterpredicate 
truly. 

Either a term will be predicated as a substance, i.e. being 
either the kind or the difference of what is predicated—but it 
has been proved that these terms will not be infinite, either 
downwards or upwards. (E.g. man is two-footed, this animal, this 
something else... Nor: animal of man, man of Callias, Callias of 
another item in what it is. . .). You can define every substance of 
this type, but you cannot survey infinitely many items in thought. 
Hence the terms are not infinite either upwards or downwards; 
for you cannot define a substance of which infinitely many terms 

31 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

83 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

83° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

are predicated. (Terms will not be counterpredicated of one 
another as kinds; for then something would itself be just what is 
some of itself.) Nor is anything predicated of a quality, or of any 
of the other types of item—unless it is predicated incidentally. 
For all these items are incidental, and they are predicated of 
substances. 

They will not be infinite in the upward direction. For of each 
item there is predicated something which means either a quality 
or a quantity or the like, or else one of the items in its substance. 
But the latter are finite, and the kinds of predicate are finite— 
either quality or quantity or relation or doing or undergoing or 
place or time. 

We have supposed that one thing is predicated of one thing, 
and that items which do not signify what something is are not 
predicated of themselves. For these are all incidental (though 
some hold of things in themselves and some in another way), and 
we Say that all of them are predicated of an underlying subject, 
and that what is incidental is not an underlying subject. (We posit 
nothing to be of this type unless it is called what it is called in 
virtue of being something different and itself holds of other 
items.*') 

Thus one thing will not be said to hold of one thing either in 
the upward or in the downward direction: the incidentals are said 
of items in the substance of each thing, and these latter are not 
infinite; and in the upward direction there are both these items 
and the incidentals, neither of which are infinite. There must 
therefore be some term of which something is predicated primi- 
tively, and something else of this; and this must come to a 
stop, and there must be items which are no longer predicated of 
anything prior and of which nothing else prior is predicated. 

This is one way of demonstrating the point. There is also another. 
There is demonstration of things of which something prior is 
predicated. You cannot be more happily related to things of 
which there is demonstration than by knowing them, nor can you 
know them without a demonstration. Now if one thing is familiar 
through others, and if we neither know the latter nor are more 
happily related to them than by knowing them, then we shall not 
understand what is familiar through them. 

Thus if it is possible to know something by way of a 

a Reading &//oic with the MSS for the OCT"s &4ov, and deleting nai &/47’ atta 
[robto, OCT] xa® éxépov. 

32 

TRANSLATION 83° 

demonstration—simpliciter and not on the basis of something 
else, i.e. on the basis of a supposition—, then the predicates in 
between must come to a stop. If they do not come to a stop and 
there is always something above whatever term has been taken, 
then there will be demonstrations of all of them. Hence if it is 
not possible to survey infinitely many items, we shall not know 
through a demonstration items for which there is a demonstration. 
Thus if we are not more happily related to them than by knowing 
them, we shall be able to understand nothing through demon- 
stration simpliciter but only on the basis of a supposition. 

In general terms, you might be convinced of what we have said 
by these arguments; from an analytical point of view, the follow- 
ing considerations make it clear more concisely that the terms 
predicated cannot be infinite either in the upward or in the 
downward direction in the demonstrative sciences with which our 
inquiry is concerned. 

Demonstration applies to what holds of the objects in 
themselves—in themselves in two ways: both the items which 
hold of the objects and inhere in what they are, and also the 
items for which the objects of which they hold inhere in what 
they are (e.g. odd of number—odd holds of number and number 
itself inheres in its account; and conversely, plurality, or divisi- 
bility, inheres in the account of number). It is not possible for 
either of these to be infinite. Not as odd of number: then there 
would again be something else holding of odd in which odd 
inhered; and if this is prime,”* number will inhere in what holds 
of it. So if it is not possible for infinitely many such items to 
hold in a single item, they will not be infinite in the upward 
direction. Moreover, they must all hold of the primitive term, 
i.e. of number, and number of them, so that they will convert 
and not exceed it. Nor, again, can the terms inhering in what 
something is be infinite; for then it would not be possible to 
define it. 

Hence if all the predicated terms are said of things in them- 
selves, and if these are not infinite, then the terms leading 
upwards will come to a stop. Hence they will come to a stop in 
the downward direction too. And if so, then the terms in between 
any two terms will also always be finite. 

If this is so, it is thereby plain too that demonstrations must 
have principles and there cannot be demonstrations of everything 

72 Placing a comma after rather than before zpérov. 

33 

10 

TS 

20 

25 

30 

35 

84 

10 

15 

20 

84° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

(which, as we asserted at the beginning, is what some people 
say). For if there are principles, it is not the case that everything 
is demonstrable, nor is it possible to continue ad infinitum: for 
either of these things to be the case is simply for there to be no 
immediate and indivisible intervals but for all of them to be 
divisible. For it is by interpolating a term internally, and not 
by assuming an additional term, that what is demonstrated is 
demonstrated. Hence if it were possible for this to go on ad 
infinitum, it would be possible for there to be infinitely many 
middle terms between two terms. But this is impossible if the 
predicates come to a stop in the upward and the downward 
directions. And that they do come to a stop we have proved 
generally earlier and analytically just now. 

CHAPTER 23 

Now that this has been proved, it is clear that if one and the same 
term holds of two items—e.g. A both of C and of D—which are 
not predicated one of the other (either not at all or not of every 
case), then it will not always hold in virtue of something common. 
E.g. having angles equal to two right angles holds of isosceles and 
of scalene in virtue of something common (it holds of them as 
figures of a certain type and not as different items). But this is 
not always so. Let B be that in virtue of which A holds of C, 
D. It is plain that B too will hold of C and of D in virtue 
of some other common item, and this in virtue of another; so 
that infinitely many terms will fall between two terms. But this 
is impossible. 

Thus when one and the same term holds of several items it 
need not always do so in virtue of something common, since 
there are~* immediate intervals. (The terms must be in the same 
kind and depend on the same atoms, if the common feature is to 
be something holding of them in themselves; for we have seen 
that what is being proved cannot cross from one kind to another.) 

It is clear too that when A holds of B, then if there is a middle 
term you can prove that A holds of B, and the elements of this 
are~* as many as the middle terms. (It is the immediate propositions 

23 Reading éxemep, with the MSS, for eiep (OCT), and gory, against the MSS 
and the OCT, for Zora. 
24 Omitting taéca [thus the MSS: taitdé, OCT] xai. 

34 

TRANSLATION 84° 
which are the elements, either all of them or the universal 
ones.) But if there is no middle term, then there is no longer a 
demonstration—rather, this is the path to the principles. 

Similarly, if A does not hold of B, then if there is either a 
middle or a prior term of which A does not hold, there is a 
demonstration. If not, not—rather, it is a principle. And there 
are as many elements as terms; for the propositions containing 
the terms are the principles of the demonstration. And just as 
there are some indemonstrable principles to the effect that this is 
this, i.e. that this holds of this, so too there are some to the effect 
that this is not this, i.e. that this does not hold of this. Thus there 
will be principles to the effect that something is the case, and 
others to the effect that something is not the case. 

When you have to prove something, you should assume what is 

predicated primitively of B. Let it be C; and let D be similarly 
predicated of C. If you always continue in this way, no proposition 
and no term holding outside A will ever be assumed in the proof. 
Rather, the middle terms will always be thickened until they 
become indivisible and single. They are single when they become 
immediate, and a single proposition simpliciter is an immediate 
proposition. In other areas the principles are simple, though they 
are not the same everywhere: in weight, the ounce; in music, the 
semitone; and other things in other cases. So too in deduction the 
unit is the immediate proposition, and in demonstration and 
understanding it is comprehension. 

In deductions which prove that something holds, nothing falls 
outside. As for privative deductions, in one case nothing falls 
outside the term which must hold. Suppose e.g. that A does not 
hold of B through C (when C holds of every B and A of no C): if 
you must next prove that A holds of no C, you should assume a 
middle term for A and C; and it will always proceed in this way. 

If you have to prove that D does not hold of E inasmuch as C 
holds of every D and of no E, then the middle term will never fall 
outside E (this is the term of which it must hold). 

In the case of the third way, the middle term will never pass 
outside either the term of which we must make a privative pre- 
dication or the term which we must predicate privatively. 

CHAPTER 24 

Some demonstrations are universal, others particular; and some 
are positive, others privative. It is disputed which are better. 

35 

25 

30 

35 

857 

10 

T5 

20 

25 

30 

35 

85 

85° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Similarly for demonstrations which are said to demonstrate and 
those which lead to the impossible. First, let us inquire about 
universal and particular demonstrations; and when we have made 
this matter plain, let us speak about demonstrations which are 
said to prove and those which lead to the impossible. 

Some people might perhaps think, if they inquire along the fol- 
lowing lines, that particular demonstrations are better. 

If a demonstration in virtue of which we understand better is 
a better demonstration (this is what makes something a good 
demonstration), and if we understand something better when we 
know it in itself than when we know it in virtue of something 
else (e.g. we know musical Coriscus better when we know that 
Coriscus is musical than when we know that a man” is musical; 
and similarly in other cases), and if a universal demonstration 
shows that something else and not the thing itself is in fact so- 
and-so (e.g. of the isosceles it shows not that an isosceles but 
that a triangle is so-and-so), whereas a particular demonstration 
shows that the thing itself is so-and-so—well, then, if a demon- 
stration of something in itself is better, and if particular demon- 
strations rather than universal demonstrations are of this type, 
then particular demonstrations will be better. 

Again, if universals are not things apart from the particulars; 
and if a demonstration instils an opinion that the item with regard 
to which it demonstrates is some thing, i.e. that it occurs as a sort 
of natural object among the things which exist (e.g. a triangle 
apart from the individual triangles, a figure apart from the indi- 
vidual figures, a number apart from the individual numbers); and 
if a demonstration about something which exists is better than 
one about something which does not exist, and a demonstration 
by which we will not be led into error is better than one which 
will lead us into error; and if universal demonstrations are of this 
latter type (for as they proceed, they produce their proofs as they 
do in the case of proportion, e.g. that whatever is of such-and- 
such a type—neither line nor number nor solid nor plane but 
something apart from them—will be proportional)—well, then, if 
it is rather demonstrations of this sort which are universal, and if 
they are less about something which exists than are particular 
demonstrations, and if they instil false opinions, then universal 
demonstrations will be worse than particular ones. 

?> Reading avOpwxoc with the MSS for the OCT’s &v@pezec. 

36 

TRANSLATION 85° 
Or, first, does the former argument apply any better to the 
universal than to the particular case? For if having two right 
angles holds of something not as isosceles but as triangle, then if 
you know that an isosceles has two right angles, you will know it 
less as such than if you know that triangles have two right angles. 

In general, if something does not hold of triangles as triangles, 
and yet you prove it to hold, this will not be a demonstration; 
and if it does, then you know better if you know something as it 
holds. Thus if triangle extends further than isosceles (and if there 
is the same account, i.e. if triangles are not so-called in virtue of 
a homonymy), and if having two right angles holds of every 
triangle, then it is not the triangle as isosceles but rather the 
isosceles as triangle which has such an angle-sum. Hence if you 
know something universally, you know it better as it holds than if 
you know it particularly. Hence universal demonstrations are 
better than particular demonstrations. 

Again, if there is a single account of a universal and it is not 
homonymous, then it will be some thing no less than some of 
the particulars but actually more so, inasmuch as what is im- 
perishable is found among the universals and it is rather the 
particulars which are perishable. Again, there is no need to 
believe that a universal is some thing apart from the particulars 
on the grounds that it makes one thing plain, any more than in 
the case of those other items which mean not a substance but 
either a quality or a quantity or a relation or a doing. So if the 
belief is instilled, then the explanation lies not with the demon- 
stration but with the audience. 

Again, if demonstrations are probative deductions which give 
the explanation and the reason why, and if universals are more 
explanatory (for that of which something holds in itself is it- 
self explanatory for itself; and universals are primitive: hence 
universals are explanatory)—then universal demonstrations are 
better. For it is rather they which give the explanation and the 
reason why. 

Again, we seek the reason why up to a certain point, and we 
think we know something when it is not the case that it comes 
about or exists because something else does—in this sense the 
last term is an end and a limit. E.g. with what purpose did he 
come? In order to get the money. And that in order to pay back 
what he owed; and that in order not to act unjustly. Proceeding 
in this way, when it is no longer because of something else or 
with some other purpose, we say that it is because of this as an 
end that he came (or that it is or that it came about), and that 

37 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

86° 

10 

15 

20 

25 

85° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

then we best know why he came. Thus if the same goes for 
all explanations and for all reasons why, and if in the case of 
explanations in terms of purpose we know best in this way, then 
in the other cases too we know best when this no longer holds 
because something else does. So when we know that the external 
angles are equal to four right angles because it is isosceles, it still 
remains to ask why an isosceles is so—because it is a triangle, 
and this because it is a rectilineal figure. And if this is no longer 
so because something else is so, it is then that we know best. It is 
then too that it is universal. Hence universal demonstrations are 
better. 

Again, the more particular a demonstration is, the more it 
tends to what is infinite, while universal demonstrations tend to 
the simple and the limit. But as infinite, things are not under- 
standable, while as finite they are understandable. Hence they 
are more understandable as universal than as particular. Hence 
universals are more demonstrable. But of more demonstrable 
items there is more of a demonstration (for correlative items are 
more so-and-so at the same time as one another). Hence a uni- 
versal demonstration is better since it is more of a demonstration. 

Again, if a demonstration in virtue of which you know both 
this and something else is preferable to one in virtue of which 
you know this alone; and if someone who possesses a universal 
demonstration knows the particular fact too, whereas the latter 
does not know the universal fact,*° then in this way too universal 
demonstrations will be preferable. 

Again, thus: to prove something more universally is to prove it 
through a middle term which is nearer to the principles. Immedi- 
ates are nearest—indeed they are principles. Thus if a demon- 
stration which proceeds from a principle is more exact than 
one which does not proceed from a principle, then a demon- 
stration which proceeds more from a principle is more exact than 
one which is less so. But a more universal demonstration is of this 
type. Hence universal demonstrations will be superior. E.g. if 
you had to demonstrate A of D. The middle terms are B, C. B is 
higher, so that a demonstration through B is more universal. 

Some of these remarks are general. It is most plain that uni- 
versal demonstrations are more important from the fact that in 
grasping the prior of the propositions we know in a sense the pos- 
terior too, i.e. we grasp it potentially. E.g. if you know that every 
triangle has two right angles, you know in a sense of the isosceles 

76 Reading 76 with most MSS for the OCT’s tv. 
38 

TRANSLATION 86" 

too that it has two right angles—you know it potentially—, even 
if you do not know of the isosceles that it is a triangle. But if you 
grasp the latter proposition you do not know the universal in any 
sense, neither potentially nor actually. 

Universal demonstrations are objects of thought, particular 
demonstrations terminate in perception. 

CHAPTER 25 

So much, then, by way of showing that universal demonstrations 
are better than particular demonstrations. That probative demon- 
strations are better than privative demonstrations will be plain 
from what follows. 

Let one demonstration be better than another if, other things 
being equal, it depends on fewer postulates or suppositions or 
propositions—for if these items are equally familiar, knowledge 
will come about more quickly in this way, and this is preferable. 

The argument for the proposition that a demonstration de- 
pending on fewer items is better can be stated universally thus. If 
the middle terms are familiar and the prior terms are more 
familiar in the same way in each case, then let one demonstration 
show that A holds of E through the middle terms B, C, D, and 
let the other show that A holds of & through F, G. Thus that A 
holds of D and that A holds of EF are on a level. But that A holds 
of D is prior to and more familiar than that A holds of E; for 
the latter is demonstrated through the former, and that through 
which something is demonstrated is more convincing than it. 
Thus a demonstration through fewer items is better, other things 
being equal. 

Now both affirmative and negative demonstrations prove their 
conclusions through three terms and two propositions. But the 
former assume that something is the case, whereas the latter 
assume both that something is the case and that something is not 
the case. Hence the latter proceed through more items and are 
therefore worse. 

Again, since we have proved that it is impossible for there 
to be a deduction when both propositions are privative, and 
that one proposition must be privative while the other says that 
something holds, we must assume the latter in addition to the 
former. As a demonstration increases, the positive propositions 
necessarily become more numerous, whereas it is impossible for 
there to be more than one privative proposition in any deduction. 

39 

30 

35 

86” 

Io 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

87? 

Io 

86° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Let A hold of none of the Bs and let B hold of every C. If we 
must next increase both propositions, a middle term must be 
interpolated. Let it be D for AB, and E for BC. It is clear that E 
is positive, and that D is positive for B and privative in relation to 
A. For D holds of every B, and A must hold of none of the Ds. 
Thus we get a single privative proposition, AD. 

The same holds for the other deductions. The middle term for 
the positive terms is always positive in both directions, while for 
the privative it must be privative in one direction. Hence we get a 
single privative proposition, the others being positive. 

Now if the item through which something is proved is more 
familiar and more convincing than it, and if privative demon- 
strations are proved through positive demonstrations whereas the 
latter are not proved through the former, then positive demon- 
strations, being prior and more familiar and more convincing, 
will be better. 

Again, if universal immediate propositions are principles of 
deductions, and if the universal proposition is affirmative in pro- 
bative demonstrations and negative in privative demonstrations, 
and if affirmative propositions are prior to and more familiar than 
negative propositions (for negations are familiar because of 
affirmations, and affirmations are prior—just as being the case 
is prior to not being the case), then the principles of probative 
demonstrations are better than those of privative demonstrations; 
and a demonstration which uses better principles is better. 

Again, they are more principle-like; for without probative 
demonstrations there are no privative demonstrations. 

CHAPTER 26 

Since positive demonstrations are better than privative demon- 
strations, it is plain that they are also better than demonstrations 
leading to the impossible. But we must learn how they differ 
from one another. 

Let A hold of no B and B of every C: it is necessary for A to 
hold of no C. If the assumptions are made in this way, the 
privative demonstration that A does not hold of C will be pro- 
bative. The demonstration leading to the impossible goes like 
this. If we are to prove that A does not hold of B, we should 
assume that it does hold and that B holds of C—hence it follows 
that A holds of C. Let it be familiar and agreed that this is 
impossible. Then it is not possible for A to hold of B. Hence if B 
is agreed to hold of C, it is impossible for A to hold of B. 

40 

TRANSLATION 87? 

Thus the terms are similarly arranged, and the difference is a 
matter of which privative proposition is more familiar—that A 
does not hold of B or that A does not hold of C. When the 
conclusion (that it is not the case) is more familiar, we get a 15 
demonstration to the impossible; and when the proposition in the 
deduction is more familiar, we get a demonstrative proof. By 
nature the proposition AB is prior to AC. For the items from 
which a conclusion proceeds are prior to the conclusion; and that 
A does not hold of C is a conclusion whereas that A does not 20 
hold of B is an item from which the conclusion proceeds. For if it 
follows that something is rejected, we cannot infer that this is a 
conclusion and the other items are what it proceeds from. Rather, 
what a deduction proceeds from is something related as whole to 
part or part to whole—and the propositions AC and BC are not 
so related to one another. 25 

Thus if a demonstration which proceeds from what is more 
familiar and prior is superior, and if in both cases conviction 
proceeds from something’s not being the case but in the one from 
something prior and in the other from something posterior, then 
a privative demonstration will be better simpliciter than a demon- 
stration to the impossible. Hence positive demonstrations, which 
are better than privative demonstrations, are plainly also better 30 
than demonstrations to the impossible. 

CHAPTER 27 

One science is more exact than another and prior to it if it is 
concerned both with the facts and with the reason why and not 
with the facts separately from the science of the reason why; or if 

it is not said of an underlying subject and the other is said of 
an underlying subject (as e.g. arithmetic is more exact than 
harmonics); or if it proceeds from fewer items and the other 
from some additional posit (as e.g. arithmetic is more exact than 35 
geometry). By from an additional posit I mean e.g. that a unit is 

a positionless substance and a point a substance having position— 
the latter proceeds from an additional posit. 

CHAPTER 28 

A science is one if it is concerned with one kind—with whatever 
items come from the primitives and are parts or attributes of 
them in themselves. One science is different from another if their 
principles come neither from the same items nor those of the one 87° 

41 

IO 

I5 

20 

25 

30 

87° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

from those of the other. There is evidence for this when you 
come to the indemonstrables: they must be in the same kind as 
the items demonstrated. And there is evidence for this when the 
items which are proved through them are in the same kind and of 
a kind. 

CHAPTER 29 

It is possible for there to be several demonstrations of the same 
thing not only if you take non-continuous middle terms from the 
same chain—e.g. C and D and F for AB—but also if you take 
middle terms from different chains. E.g. let A be altering, D 
changing, B enjoying, and then G coming to rest. It is true to 
predicate D of B and A of D: anyone who is enjoying himself is 
changing, and what is changing is altering. Again, it is true to 
predicate A of G and G of B: everyone who is enjoying himself is 
coming to rest, and anyone who is coming to rest is altering. 
Hence the deductions proceed through different middle terms 
which do not come from the same chain. (But it is not the case 
that neither of the middle terms is said of the other, since there 
must be a term of some of which both of them hold.) 

Inquire in how many ways it is possible to produce deductions 
of the same thing in the other figures. 

CHAPTER 30 

You cannot understand through a demonstration what happens 
by chance. What happens by chance is neither necessary nor for 
the most part—it is what happens apart from these—and demon- 
strations are concerned with items of one or the other of these 
types. For every deduction proceeds either through necessary 
propositions or through what holds for the most part. If the 
propositions are necessary, the conclusion too is necessary; and if 
they hold for the most part, so too does the conclusion. Hence if 
what happens by chance is neither for the most part nor neces- 
sary, there will be no demonstration of it. 

CHAPTER 31 

You cannot understand anything through perception. Even if 
perception is of what is such-and-such, and not of what is a this so- 
and-so, nevertheless what you perceive must be a this so-and-so 

42 

TRANSLATION 87? 

at a place and at a time. It is impossible to perceive what is 
universal and holds in every case. For no universal is a this, nor is 
it found at some time: in that case it would not be universal, 
since it is what is found always and everywhere which we say is 
universal. 

Thus, since demonstrations are universal, and universals can- 
not be perceived, it is clear that you cannot understand anything 
through perception. Rather, it is plain that even if we could 35 
perceive that triangles have angles equal to two right angles, we 
would still seek a demonstration and would not, as some people 
say, already understand it. Particulars must be perceived, whereas 
we have understanding in so far as?’ we get to know universals. 

This is why, if we were on the moon and saw the earth screening 
it, we would not know the explanation of the eclipse. We would 88° 
perceive that it is now eclipsed but not why; for we have seen 
that there is no perception of universals. Nevertheless, if we 
observed this happening often and then hunted for the universal, 
we would possess a demonstration; for it is from many particulars 
that the universal becomes plain. 5 

Universals are valuable because they make the explanations 
plain. Hence universal demonstrations are more valuable than 
perception or thought—with regard to items which have an ex- 
planation different from themselves. (For the primitives, a dif- 
ferent account holds.) 

Thus it is clear that it is impossible to understand anything 
demonstrable by perceiving it—unless you say that possessing 10 
understanding through a demonstration is perceiving. 

Nevertheless, certain features in problems are referred to want 
of perception. In some cases if we saw we should not seek—not 
because we have knowledge by seeing but because we grasp the 
universal from seeing. E.g. if we saw the glass to be perforated 
and the light coming through it, it would also be plain why it 15 
does—even if?’ we see each piece of glass separately whereas we 
think at a single time that it is thus in every case. 

CHAPTER 32 

It is impossible for all deductions to have the same principles. 
First let us study the matter in general terms. 

7 Reading 1, with most MSS, for the OCT’s 76. 
28 Reading «ai ei for the OCT’s xaie: (the MSS are divided); and <6, with the 
MSS, for the OCT’s 7@. 

43 

20 

25 

30 

35 

88” 

10 

15 

88? POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Some deductions are true and some false. Even if it is pos- 
sible to deduce a truth from falsehoods, this only comes about 
once. E.g. suppose that A is true of C, and that B, the middle 
term, is false of C (A does not hold of B nor B of C): if middle 
terms are taken for these propositions, they will be false because 
every false conclusion proceeds from falsehoods, whereas true 
conclusions proceed from truths. But truths and falsehoods are 
different. 

Next, not even falsehoods proceed from the same items as one 
another: there are falsehoods which are in fact contrary to one 
another and cannot be the case together—e.g. that justice is 
injustice or cowardice, that a man is a horse or a cow, that what 
is equal to something is greater than it or less. 

On the basis of what we have laid down, we argue as follows. 
Not even all truths have the same principles. The principles of 
many truths are different in kind and do not attach to one 
another (e.g. units do not attach to points, since the former do 
not have position whereas the latter do). But they would have to 
attach either as middle terms or from above or from below (or 
else some of the terms would have to be inside and others 
outside). 

Nor is it possible to find some of the common principles from 
which everything will be proved. (I call common e.g. that every- 
thing is asserted or denied.) For existent things belong to dif- 
ferent kinds (some items hold of quantities alone and others of 
qualities), and it is with the help of them that proofs are con- 
ducted through the common items. 

Again, the principles are not much fewer than the conclusions; 
for the propositions are principles, and the propositions are 
formed either by assuming an additional term or by interpolating 
one. 

Again, the conclusions are infinite, the terms finite. 

Again, some principles are necessary and other contingent. 

Inquiring in this way, it is impossible for the principles to be 
the same and finite if the conclusions are infinite. If anyone were 
to mean the claim in some other sense, e.g. that these are the 
principles of geometry, these of calculation, these of medicine, he 
will simply be saying that the sciences have principles. And it is 
ridiculous to say that the principles are the same because they are 
the same as themselves—in this sense everything turns out to be 
the same. 

Nor yet is the claim that anything must be proved from every- 
thing the same as seeking the same principles for everything. 

44 

TRANSLATION 88> 

This is silly. It does not hold in the clear parts of mathematics, 
nor is it possible on analysis: the immediate propositions are 
principles, and a different conclusion is reached when an ad- 
ditional immediate proposition is assumed. And if someone were 
to say that it is the primitive immediate propositions which are 
principles, then there is one of these in each kind. 

If the claim is meant neither in the sense that anything must be 
proved from all the principles, nor in the sense that they are 
different in such a way that the principles of each science are 
different, it remains to consider whether the principles of every- 
thing are of a kind even though this depends on these principles 
and this on these. It is clear that this too is not possible; for it has 
been proved that the principles of things different in kind are 
themselves different in kind. Principles are of two types, those 
from which and those about which; and while the former are 
common, the latter are proper—e.g. number, magnitude. 

CHAPTER 33 

What is understandable and understanding differ from what is 
opinable and opinion because understanding is universal and 
comes through necessities. What is necessary cannot be other- 
wise, while there are some items which are true and are the case 
but which can also be otherwise. It is plain that understanding 
cannot be concerned with these items; for then what can be 
otherwise could not be otherwise. Nor is comprehension con- 
cerned with them (by comprehension I mean a principle of under- 
standing), nor indemonstrable understanding (this is belief in an 
immediate proposition). Now it is comprehension and under- 
standing and opinion (and what is called after them) which are 
true. Hence it remains that opinion is concerned with what is true 
or false but can also be otherwise. (Opinion is belief in a pro- 
position which is immediate and not necessary.) 

This agrees with how things appear to be. For opinion is 
unstable, and so too is the nature of the items we are talking 
about. In addition, no one thinks that he opines something when 
he thinks that it is impossible for it to be otherwise—he thinks 
that he understands it. Rather, it is when you think that it is so 
but that nothing prevents it from being otherwise that you think 
you opine something—implying that opinion applies to this sort 
of item and understanding to what is necessary. 

45 

20 

25. 

30 

35 

89? 

IO 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

89° 

89° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Then how is it possible to opine and understand the same thing? 
And why will opinion not be understanding if you posit that you 
can opine everything that you know? A knower and an opiner 
will follow the same path through the middle terms until they 
come to the immediates. Hence since the former knows, the 
opiner knows too. For just as you can opine the fact, so too can 
you opine the reason why—and this is the middle term. 

Or if you believe something which cannot be otherwise in the 
way in which you grasp?? the definitions through which demon- 
strations proceed, will you then not opine but understand it? 
While if you believe that it is true but not that these items hold of 
their subject in virtue of its essence and in virtue of its form, 
will you then opine and not truly understand it? Will you opine 
both the fact and the reason why if your opinion has come 
through immediates, and only the fact if it has not come through 
immediates? 

But there cannot be opinion and understanding of the same 
thing in every sense. Rather, just as in a certain way there can be 
both false and true opinion of the same thing, so there can be 
both understanding and opinion of the same thing. If there is true 
and false opinion of the same thing in the way some people say, 
then it follows that you are committed to absurdities—and in 
particular to the absurdity that you do not opine what you falsely 
opine. But since things are called the same in several senses, in 
one sense it is possible and in another not. To opine truly that the 
diagonal is commensurate is absurd. But because the diagonal 
with which the opinions are concerned is the same, in this sense 
they are of the same thing—although what it is to be each of 
them in respect of its account is not the same. In the same sense 
there is both understanding and opinion of the same thing. The 
former is of animal in such a way that it cannot not be an animal, 
and the latter in such a way that it can—e.g. if the former is of 
just what is man and the latter of man but not of just what is 
man. They are the same because man is the same, but they are 
not the same in the way they take man. 

It is clear from this that it is not possible to opine and to 
understand the same thing at the same time. For then you would 
at the same time have the belief that the same thing can be 
otherwise and cannot be otherwise—and this is not possible. 
In different people it is possible for there to be each of these 
attitudes with regard to the same thing, as I have said. But in the 

?° Retaining éye:, which is found in most MSS and deleted by the OCT. 

46 

TRANSLATION 89° 

same person it is not possible even in this way; for he would at 
the same time have a belief, e.g. that a man is just what is an 
animal (this is what it is for it not to be possible for a man not to 
be an animal), and also a belief that a man is not just what is an 
animal (let this be what it is for it to be possible). 

As for how the remaining items should be distributed among 
thought and comprehension and understanding and skill and 
prudence and wisdom—this is a matter in part for the study 
of nature and in part for moral study. 

CHAPTER 34 

Acumen is a talent for hitting upon the middle term in an imper- 
ceptible time. E.g. if someone sees that the moon always has 
its bright side toward the sun and quickly sees why this is so— 
because it gets its light from the sun; or he knows that someone is 
talking to a rich man because he is borrowing from him; or why 
they are friends—because they are enemies of the same man. 
Seeing the extreme terms he gets to know all the explanatory 
middle terms. 

The bright side’s being toward the sun, A; getting light from 
the sun, B; the moon, C. B, getting light from the sun, holds of 
C, the moon; and A, the bright side’s being toward that from 
which it gets light, of B: hence A holds of C through B. 

47 

IO 

TS 

20 

25 

30 

35 

90” 

IO 

BOOK BETA 

CHAPTER I 

The things we seek are equal in number to those we understand. 
We seek four. things: the fact, the reason why, if something is, 
what something is. 

When we seek whether this or that is the case, setting down a 
plurality of terms (e.g. whether the sun is eclipsed or not), we are 
seeking the fact. Evidence for this: on finding that it is eclipsed 
we stop; and if from the beginning we know that it is eclipsed, we 
do not seek whether it is. When we know the fact we seek the 
reason why (e.g. knowing that it is eclipsed or that the earth 
moves, we seek the reason why it is eclipsed or why it moves). 

These things we seek in this way; but certain items we seek in 
another way—e.g. if a centaur or a god is or is not. (I mean if 
one is or is not simpliciter and not if one is white or not.) And 
having come to know that it is, we seek what it is (e.g.: Then 
what is a god? or What is a man?). 

CHAPTER 2 

These and thus many are the things which we seek and which 
we find and know. When we seek the fact or if something is 
simpliciter, we are seeking whether or not there is a middle term 
for it; and when, having come to know either the fact or if it 
is—either partially or simpliciter—, we seek the reason why or 
what it is, we are then seeking what the middle term is. (By the 
fact that it is partially and simpliciter 1 mean this: partially—lIs 
the moon eclipsed? or Is it waxing? In such cases we seek if it is 
something or is not something. Simpliciter: if the moon, or night, 
is or is not.) 

Thus it results that in all our searches we seek either if there 
is a middle term or what the middle term is. For the middle term 
is the explanation, and in all cases it is the explanation which is 
being sought. Is it eclipsed?—-Is there some explanation or not? 
After that, having come to know that there is one, we seek 
what it is. For the explanation of its being not this or that but 
simpliciter,' or of its being not simpliciter but one of the items 

* Omitting vv obsiay. 

48 

TRANSLATION 90" 

which hold of it in itself or incidentally—this is the middle term. 
By “‘is simpliciter’”” | mean the underlying subject (e.g. the moon 
or the earth or the sun or a triangle), and by “‘‘one of the items” 
eclipse, equality, inequality, if it is in the middle or not. 

In all these cases it is clear that what it is and why it is are 
the same. What is an eclipse? Privation of light from the moon by 
the screening of the earth. Why is there an eclipse? or Why is the 
moon eclipsed? Because the light leaves it when the earth screens 
it. What is a harmony? A numerical ratio between high and low. 
Why does the high harmonize with the low? Because a numerical 
ratio holds between the high and the low. Can the high and 
the low harmonize?—Is the ratio between them numerical? As- 
suming that it is, then what is the ratio? 

That the search is for the middle term is shown by those cases 
in which the middle is perceptible. If we have not perceived the 
middle term, we seek it: e.g. we seek if there is a middle term for 
the eclipse or not. But if we were on the moon we would seek 
neither if there is an eclipse nor why there is: rather, these things 
would be plain at the same time. By perceiving we would come to 
know the universal: perception would tell us that the earth is now 
screening it (it is plain that it is now eclipsed); and from this the 
universal would come about. 

So, as we say, to know what something is is the same as to 
know why it is—either why it is simpliciter and not one of the 
items that hold of it, or why it is one of the items which hold of it 
(e.g. that it has two right angles, or that it is greater or less). 

CHAPTER 3 

It is plain, then, that whatever is sought, it is a search for a 
middle term. Let us now say how we can prove what something 
is, and in what way we can effect a reduction, and what defini- 
tions are, and what they are of; and first let us go through the 
puzzles which these matters raise. Let us begin our remarks in 
the way most appropriate to the neighbouring arguments. 

You might puzzle over whether you can know the same thing 
in the same respect both by a definition and by a demonstration, 
or whether this is impossible. 

Definitions are thought to be of what something is, and what 
something is is in every case universal and positive; but some de- 
ductions are privative and some are not universal—e.g. those in 

49 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

90 

Io 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

b 

90 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS> 

the second figure are all privative and those in the third are not 
universal. 

Next, there are not definitions even for all the positive deduc- 
tions in the first figure—e.g. that every triangle has angles equal 
to two right angles. The argument for this is as follows. To 
understand what is demonstrable is to possess a demonstration of 
it. Hence, since there are demonstrations of such things, plainly 
there will not also be definitions of them. For then someone 
might understand them in virtue of the definition without pos- 
sessing the demonstration, since there is no reason why he should 
possess them both at the same time. 

An adequate justification can also be got by induction: we have 
never yet got to know anything by defining it—neither anything 
holding in itself nor any incidental. 

Again, if a definition is the recognition of some essence, it is 
clear that such items are not essences. 

So it is plain that there are not definitions of everything of 
which there are demonstrations. 

Well then, is there a demonstration of everything of which there 
is a definition, or not? 

One argument in this case is the same as before. Of one thing, 
as one, there is one mode of understanding. Hence, if to under- 
stand what is demonstrable is to possess a demonstration of it, 
something impossible will follow: anyone who possesses the defi- 
nition of something without the demonstration will understand it. 

Again, the principles of demonstrations are definitions, and it 
has been proved earlier that there will not be demonstrations of 
principles—either the principles will be demonstrable and there 
will be principles of principles, and this will continue ad infinitum, 
or else the primitives will be indemonstrable definitions. 

But if the objects of definitions and of demonstrations are not all 
the same, are some of them the same? Or is this impossible? 
There is no demonstration of anything of which there is a defi- 
nition. For definitions are of what something is, i.e. of its essence; 
but all demonstrations clearly suppose and assume what a thing 
is—e.g. mathematical demonstrations assume what a unit is and 
what odd is; and similarly for other demonstrations. 

Again, every demonstration proves something of something, 
i.e. that it is or is not; but in a definition nothing is predicated 
of anything else—e.g. neither animal of two-footed nor this of 

50 

TRANSLATION go” 
animal, nor indeed figure of plane (for a plane is not a figure nor 
is a figure a plane). 

Again, proving what something is is different from proving that 
it is. Definitions show what something is, whereas demonstrations 
show that this is or is not true of that. And of different items 
there are different demonstrations—unless one demonstration 
stands to the other as a part to the whole. (I mean by this that 
the isosceles has been proved to have two right angles if every 
triangle has been proved to do so: one is a part and the other a 
whole.) But these items—that something is and what it is—are 
not related to one another in this way: neither is part of the 
other. 

It is clear, then, that there are not demonstrations of every- 
thing of which there are definitions, nor definitions of everything 
of which there are demonstrations; nor in general is it possible to 
have both of the same item. Hence it is plain that definitions and 
demonstrations are not the same, nor is the one included in 
the other; for then their underlying subjects would be similarly 
related. 

CHAPTER 4 

So much for these puzzles. Then are there deductions and demon- 
strations of what a thing is, or are there not, as the argument just 
now supposed? 

A deduction proves something of something through the middle 
term. What a thing is both is proper to it and is predicated in 
what it is; and such items necessarily convert: if A is proper to C, 
plainly it is also proper to B and B to C, so that all are proper to 
one another. Now if A holds of every B in what it is, and B is 
said universally of every C in what it is, then necessarily A is said 
of C in what it is. But if you do not make the assumptions in this 
double fashion, it will not be necessary for A to be predicated of 
C in what it is (if A holds of B in what it is, but B does not hold 
in what it is of what it is said of). Both will contain what it is; 
therefore B too will hold of C in what it is. Now if both contain 
what it is, i.e. what it is to be it, then what it is to be it will 
already be there in the middle term. In general, if you can prove 
what man is, let C be man and A what man is—whether two- 
footed animal or anything else. If this is deduced, it is neces- 
sary for A to be predicated of every B, and there will be an 

51 

91 

I0 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

gI 

Io 

15 

a 

91 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

intermediate account other than A,” so that this too will be what 
man is. So you assume what you have to prove—for B is* what 
man is. 

We must inquire in the case of two propositions and of primi- 
tives and immediates; for then what we are saying becomes 
especially clear. 

Those people who try to prove through conversion what soul is 
(or what man is, or anything else which exists) postulate what 
was set at the beginning. E.g. if someone were to claim that soul 
is what is itself explanatory of its own being alive, and that this is 
a number which moves itself: it is necessary to postulate that soul 
is just what is a number which moves itself, in the sense of being 
the same thing as it. 

It is not the case that if A follows B and B follows C, then A 
will be what it is to be C. Rather, it is true* to say only that A will 
hold of C—even if A is just what is some B and is predicated of 
every B. For what it is to be an animal is predicated of what it is 
to be a man (it is true that every case of what it is to be a man is 
what it is to be an animal, just as every man is an animal), but 
not in the sense of their being one thing. 

If, then, you do not make the assumptions in this way, you will 
not deduce that A is what it is to be C, i.e. its essence; and if you 
do make the assumptions in this way, you will already have 
assumed what it is to be C, namely B, and hence you will not 
have demonstrated it—for you have assumed what was set at the 
beginning. 

CHAPTER 5 

The path through the divisions does not deduce definitions either, 
as I said in my analysis of the figures. For it nowhere becomes 
necessary for the object to be such-and-such if these items are 
the case—just as someone who is giving an induction does not 
demonstrate anything. For you must not ask the conclusion, nor 
must it be the case simply inasmuch as it is granted. Rather, it 
must be the case if those items are the case, even if the answerer 
denies it. 

Retaining tostov (the OCT emends to toére). 
Retaining gor: (the OCT emends to éoraz). 
Reading jv after &/nOéc, with most MSS. 
Retaining 76 B, which the OCT deletes. 

52 

TRANSLATION gi” 

Is man an animal or inanimate? If® you assumed animal, you 
have not deduced it. Next, every animal is either terrestrial or 
aquatic: you assumed terrestrial. And that man is the whole—a 
terrestrial animal—is not necessary from what you have said; 
rather, you assume this too. It makes no difference whether you 
do this in many steps or in few—it is all the same. (Indeed, those 
who proceed in this way actually make non-deductive use even 
of what can be deduced.) For why should all this not be true of 
man and yet not show what a man is or what it is to be a man? 
Again, what prevents you from positing some additional item, or 
from removing something, or from passing over something in its 
essence? 

These points are ignored. It is possible to solve the difficulties 
if you assume everything in what the thing is, make the division 
consecutive by postulating what is primitive, and leave nothing 
out. [This is necessary if everything falls into the division and 
nothing is omitted; and this is necessary—for it must be atomic. |’ 
Nevertheless, there is no deduction here;® rather, the procedure 
lets us get to know what the thing is in some other way (if at all). 
This is not in the least absurd; for neither, presumably, does 
someone who gives an induction demonstrate anything—but he 
nevertheless shows something. If you state the definition on the 
basis of the division, you do not give a deduction. In the case of 
conclusions without middle terms, if someone says that if these 
items are the case then it is necessary for this to be the case, it is 
possible to ask why: so too in the case of divisional definitions. 
What is a man? An animal, mortal, footed, two-footed, wingless. 
Why? (At each additional posit.) He will say—and prove by 
the division, as he thinks—that everything is either mortal or 
immortal. But an account of this sort, taken as a whole, is no 
longer’ a definition, so that even if it.were demonstrated by the 
division, that would not mean that the definition was deduced. 

CHAPTER 6 

But can you in fact demonstrate what something is in its essence 
by arguing on the basis of a supposition and assuming that what it 

© Reading eiz’ (with most MSS) for the OCT’s eiz’. 

” For the text see notes. 

® Reading éveot: with most MSS (the OCT has oz). 

° Reading odxét with most MSS (the OCT prints obx éomv). 

53 

20 

25 

30 

35 

92 

Io 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

92" POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

is to be something is the property composed of the items in what 
it is, that these items alone are in what it is, and that the totality 
of them is proper to the thing? This is what it is to be that thing. 

Or in this case too have you again assumed what it is to be the 
thing? For you must prove it by way of the middle term. 

Again, just as in a deduction you do not assume what being 
deduced is (for the proposition on which the deduction depends 
is always whole or part), so too what it is to be something must 
not be in the deduction; rather, it must be separate from what 
has been supposed. Then if anyone disputes that something has 
been deduced, you may meet him by saying “This is what a 
deduction is”; and if anyone says that what it is to be something 
has not been deduced, you can say ‘“‘Yes it has; for we are 
supposing that this is what what it is to be something is”. Hence 
the deduction must be carried through without assuming what a 
deduction is or what what it is to be something is. 

Suppose you do prove something on the basis of a supposition— 
e.g. if being bad is being divisible, and if (for items which have a 
contrary) being something is being contrary to what its contrary 
is, and if the good is contrary to the bad, and the indivisible to 
the divisible, then being good is being indivisible. 

Here too in the proof you assume what it is to be something, 
and assume it in order to prove what it is to be something.—“‘But 
what it is to be something different.”—Granted; for in demon- 
strations too you assume that this is true of that—but not of the 
same item, nor of something which has the same account as it and 
converts with it. 

Moreover, both the deductions—the deduction proving by way, 
of division and the present deduction—face the same puzzle: why 
will man be a two-footed terrestrial’? animal and not an animal 
and terrestrial?!’ For the assumptions do not make it necessary 
that what is predicated form a unity—rather, it is as if the same 
man were musical and literate. 

CHAPTER 7 

Then how will a definer prove the essence of something or what it 
is? He will not, as in a demonstration, show from items agreed to 

19 Reading dixovy xeCév with the MSS for the OCT’s zevov dizovy. 
uy Omitting the OCT’s xai dinovy. 

54 

TRANSLATION 92" 

be the case that if they are the case then necessarily something 
else is the case (this is demonstration); nor, as in an induction, 
will he show by way of the particulars, which are plain, that 
everything is thus-and-so inasmuch as nothing is otherwise (for an 
induction does not prove what a thing is, but rather that it is 
or is not). What other way is left? He will hardly prove it by 
perception or by pointing his finger. 

Again, how will you prove what something is? Anyone who 
knows what a man or anything else is must also know that it 
exists. (Of that which does not exist, no one knows what it is. 

You may know what the account or the name means when I say_ 

“goat-stag’’, but it is impossible to know what a goat-stag is.) But 
if you are to prove what something is and also that it exists, how 
will you prove them by the same argument? Definitions make a 
single thing plain, and so do demonstrations; but what a man is 
and that men exist are different. 

Next, we say that everything which a thing is must be proved 
through a demonstration—except its essence. But existence is not 
the essence of anything; for the things that exist do not constitute 
a kind. There will therefore be a demonstration that the item 
exists. And this is what the sciences as a matter of fact do: a 
geometer assumes what triangle means and proves that triangles 
exist. So what will a definer prove if not what a triangle is? But 
then he will know by the definition what it is and yet not know if 
it exists; and this is impossible. 

It is clear too that, in the current methods of definition, definers 
do not prove that anything exists. Even if there is something 
equidistant from the middle, why does what has been defined 
exist? And why is this a circle?—You could say that it was a 
definition of mountain-copper. Definitions do not show that what 
they describe is possible, nor that the definitions are of what they 
say they are—it is always possible to ask why. 

Then if a definer proves either what something is or what its 
name means, and if there is certainly not a proof of what it is, 
then a definition will be an account which means the same as a 
name. But this is absurd. First, there will be definitions of non- 
substances and of things which do not exist—for you can mean 
things which do not exist. Again, all accounts will be definitions; 
for you can assign a name to any account whatever—and we shall 
all talk definitions and the J/liad will be a definition. Again, no 
demonstration would demonstrate that this name shows this—so 
definitions do not show this either. 

55 

92 

10 

1S 

20 

25 

30 

35 

Io 

15 

20 

92” POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

From these considerations it appears that definitions and de- 
ductions are not the same, and that there cannot be deductions 
and definitions of the same thing; and further that definitions 
neither demonstrate nor prove anything, and that it is not pos- 
sible to know what something is either by a definition or by a 
demonstration. 

CHAPTER 8 

We must inquire next which of these points have been correctly 
made and which not; and we must ask what a definition is, and 
whether there can be demonstrations and definitions of what 
something is in some way or in no way at all. 

As we said, to know what something is and to know the 
explanation of whether it is are the same; and the account of the 
fact that something is is the explanation. This is either the same 
as it or something else; and if it is something else, it is either 
demonstrable or indemonstrable. If it is something else and it is 
possible to demonstrate it, then the explanation must be a middle 
term and the proof must be in the first figure; for what is being 
proved is both universal and positive. 

Thus one way would be the one we have just examined—where 
we prove what something is by means of another definition.'* For 
in the case of what something is, the middle term must be what 
something is (and in the case of a property, it must be a property). 
Hence you will prove the one but you will not prove the other 
instance of what it is to be the same object. I have said earlier 
that this way will not be a demonstration; rather, it is a general 
deduction of what the thing is. 

Let us say in what way a demonstration is possible, starting again 
from the beginning. Just as we seek the reason why when we 
grasp the fact (sometimes indeed these two things become plain 
at the same time—but it is not possible to get to know the reason 
why before the fact), in the same way we plainly cannot grasp 
what it is to be something without grasping that it exists; for we 
cannot know what something is when we do not know whether 
it exists. But as to whether it exists, sometimes we grasp this 
incidentally, and sometimes by grasping something of the object 
itself—e.g. of thunder, that it is a sort of noise in the clouds; of 

12 Retaining the MS reading 14 (the OCT emends to tov). 
56 

TRANSLATION 93° 

an eclipse, that it is a sort of privation of light; of man, that he is 
a sort of animal; of soul, that it is something which moves itself. 

When we know incidentally that something exists, necessarily 
we have no grasp on what it is; for we do not even know that it 
exists, and to seek what something is without grasping that it 
exists is to seek nothing. But when we grasp something of the 
object, the business is easier. Hence in so far as we grasp that it 
exists, to that extent we also have some grasp on what it is. 

When we grasp something of what a thing is, suppose first that 
it is like this. Eclipse A, moon C, screening by the earth B. To 
ask whether it is eclipsed or not is to seek whether B is or not. 
This is no different from seeking whether there is an account of 
the eclipse; and if there is, we say that it is eclipsed. (Or: of 
which of the contradictory pair does the account hold—of its 
having two right angles or of its not having them?) 

When we discover it, we know at the same time the fact and 
the reason why—if we proceed through middle terms.'* Other- 
wise we know the fact but not the reason why: moon C, eclipse 
A, not being able to produce a shadow during full moon although 
nothing visible is between us and it B. If B, not being able to 
produce a shadow although nothing visible is between us and it, 
holds of C, and A, being eclipsed, holds of B, then it is plain that 
it is eclipsed but not yet why; and we know ¢hat there is an eclipse 
but we do not know what it is. 

When it is plain that A holds of C, then to seek why it holds is 
to seek what B is—whether screening or rotation of the moon or 
extinction. And this is the account of the one extreme, i.e. in this 
case of A; for an eclipse is a screening by the earth. 

What is thunder? Extinction of fire in cloud. Why does it 
thunder? Because the fire in the cloud is extinguished. Cloud C, 
thunder A, extinction of fire B. B holds of C, the cloud (the fire 
is extinguished in it); and A, noise, holds of B—and B is indeed 
an account of A, the first extreme. (If there is another middle 
term for this, it will come from the remaining accounts.) 

We have said how what something is is taken and becomes 
familiar. Although there are no deductions and no demonstra- 
tions of what something is, nevertheless what something is is 
made plain through deductions and through demonstrations. 
Hence without a demonstration you cannot get to know what 
something is (in cases where the explanation is something else), 

3 Reading di pécwv with most MSS for the OCT’s 67 duéowy. 

57 

25 

30 

35 

93 

Io 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

94 

10 

b 

93 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

and yet there are no demonstrations of what something is (as we 
said when we went through the puzzles). 

CHAPTER 9 

Of some things there is something else which is their explanation, 
of others there is not. Hence it is plain that in some cases what 
something is is immediate and a principle; and here you must 
suppose, or make clear in some other way, both that the thing 
exists and what it is. (Arithmeticians do this: they suppose both 
what a unit is and that there are units.) But in cases where there 
is a middle term and something else is explanatory of the essence, 
you can—as we have said—show what something is through a 
demonstration without demonstrating what it is. 

CHAPTER [0 

Since a definition is said to be an account of what something is, it 
is clear that one type will be an account of what its name, or 
some other name-like account, means—e.g. what triangle means. 
When we grasp that this exists, we seek why it is. But it is 
difficult to take anything in this way if we do not know that it 
exists. The explanation of the difficulty was given earlier: we do 
not even know whether it exists or not, except incidentally. (An 
account is one in two ways: by connection, like the /liad; and by 
showing one thing of one thing, non-incidentally.) 

One definition of definition is the one we have just stated. 
Another definition is an account which shows why something 
exists. Hence the former type means something but does not 
prove it, whereas the latter will clearly be like a demonstration 
of what something is, differing in arrangement from a demon- 
stration. For there is a difference between saying why it thunders 
and what thunder is. In the one case you will say: Because the 
fire is extinguished in the clouds. But: What is thunder?—A 
noise of fire being extinguished in the clouds. Hence the same 
account is given in different ways: in one way it is a continuous 
demonstration, in the other a definition. 

Again, a definition of thunder is noise in the clouds; and this is 
a conclusion of the demonstration of what it is. 

The definition of an immediate item is an indemonstrable posi- 
ting of what it is. 

58 

TRANSLATION 94° 

One type of definition, then, is an indemonstrable account of 
what something is; another is a deduction of what something is, 
differing in aspect from a demonstration; a third is a conclusion 
of the demonstration of what something is. 

From what we have said it is clear both in what sense there are 
demonstrations of what something is and in what sense there are 
not, and in what cases there are and in what cases there are not; 
and, further, in how many senses we speak about definitions, and 
in what sense they prove what something is and in what sense 
they do not, and in what cases they do and in what cases they do 
not; and, further, how they are related to demonstrations, and in 
what sense it is possible for there to be demonstrations and 
definitions of the same thing and in what sense it is not possible. 

CHAPTER II 

Since we think that we understand something when we know its 
explanation, and there are four sorts of explanation (one, what it 
is to be something; one, that if certain items hold it is necessary 
for this to hold; another, what initiated the change; and fourth, 
the purpose), all of them are proved through the middle term. 
An explanation of the type ‘if something holds it is necessary 
for this to hold’ occurs not when a single proposition is assumed 
but only when at least two are. This is so when the propositions 
have a single middle term. Thus when this one item is assumed, it 
is necessary for the conclusion to hold. The following case makes 
things plain. Why is the angle in a semicircle a right angle? It is a 
right angle if what holds? Let right be A, half of two rights B, the 
angle in a semicircle C. B explains why A, right, holds of C, the 
angle in a semicircle. For B is equal to A and C to B (it is half of 
two rights). Thus if B, half of two rights, holds, then A holds of C 
(that is, the angle in a semicircle is a right angle). And this is the 

same as what it is to be it, in so far as this is what its account: 

means. 

The middle term has also been proved to be explanatory of 
what it is to be something. '4 

Why did the Persian war come upon the Athenians? What is 
the explanation of the Athenians’ being warred upon? Because 
they attacked Sardis with the Eretrians—this initiated the change. 
War A, being first to attack B, Athenians C. B holds of C (being 

14 Reading zo with most MSS (26 OCT), and omitting the OCT’s dv. 

59 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

94 

20 

25 

30 

35 

b 

94 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

first to attack holds of the Athenians), and A holds of B (men 
make war on those who have first wronged them). Therefore A 
holds of B (being warred upon holds of those who first began), 
and this—B—of the Athenians (they first began it). Therefore 
here too the explanation, what initiated the change, is a middle 
term. 

Suppose it is the purpose which is explanatory—e.g. Why does 
he walk about?—In order to be healthy. Why is there a house?— 
In order that his belongings may be kept safe. In the one case 
with the purpose of being healthy, in the other with the pur- 
pose of keeping them safe. (There is no difference between 
‘Why should you walk about after dinner?’ and ‘For what pur- 
pose should you do so?’) A walk after dinner C, the foodstuffs’ 
not remaining on the surface B, being healthy A. Suppose that 
making the foodstuffs not remain on the surface at the mouth of 
the stomach holds of walking about after dinner, and that it 
is healthy. B, the foodstuffs’ not remaining on the surface, is 
thought to hold of walking about, C, and A, healthy, of B. Then 
what is explanatory—the purpose—for C of A’s holding of it?— 
It is B, not remaining on the surface. And this is as it were an 
account of A; for A will be elucidated in this way. Why is B 
explanatory for C? Because being in such a state is what being 
healthy is. (You should take the accounts instead, and then 
everything will be clearer.) 

Here the events occur in the opposite order compared to ex- 
planations in terms of change: there the middle term must occur 
first; here C, the last term, occurs first, and the ultimate thing to 
occur is the purpose. 

The same thing may hold both for some purpose and from 
necessity—e.g. light shining through a lantern: the finer body 
passes through the larger pores from necessity (if light does 
permeate in this way), and also for some purpose (in order that 
we may not stumble). If something may be the case in this way, 
may things also come about thus? E.g. if it thunders because 
when the fire is extinguished it is necessary for it to sizzle and 
make a noise, and also (if the Pythagoreans are right) for the 
purpose of threatening the denizens of Tartarus in order to make 
them afraid. 

There are very many things of this sort, especially among 
natural processes and products; for one type of nature makes 
them for some purpose and another makes them from necessity. 
(There are two types of necessity: one, in accordance with nature 

60 

TRANSLATION 95° 

and impulse; the other, by force and’° contrary to impulse—thus 
a stone travels both upwards and downwards from necessity, 
but not because of the same necessity.) Among the products of 
thought, some are never found spontaneously—e.g. a house or a 
statue—nor from necessity either, but rather for some purpose. 
Others also occur by chance—e.g. health and safety. It is es- 
pecially among things which can be both thus and otherwise, 
when their occurrence, not being by chance, is such that the end 
is good, that things come about for some purpose, and then 
either by nature or by skill. No chance items come about for any 
purpose. 

CHAPTER [2 

What explains why something is coming about (and why it has 
come about, and why it will be) is the same as what explains why 
it is the case: it is the middle term which is explanatory. But if 
something is the case, the explanatory item is the case; if it is 
coming about, it is coming about; if it has come about, it has 
come about; and if it will be, it will be. 

E.g. why has an eclipse come about?—-Because the earth has 
come to be in the middle. And it is coming about because it is 
coming to be there; it will be because it will be in the middle; and 
it is because it is. What is ice? Assume that it is solidified water. 
Water C, solidified A; the explanatory middle term is B, com- 
plete absence of heat. Thus B holds of C; and being solidified, A, 
holds of B. Ice is coming about if B is coming about; it has come 
about if it has come about; and it will be if it will be. 

When an item which is explanatory in this way and the item of 
which it is explanatory come about, then they both come about at 
the same time; when they are the case, they are the case at the 
same time; and similarly for “have come about” and for “will 
be”. But what of items which do not hold at the same time as one 
another? Can it be that, in continuous time, as we think, one 
such item is explanatory of another? Can the fact that this item 
has come about be explained by something else which has come 
about, the fact that this will be by something else which will be, 
the fact that this is coming about by something which came about 
earlier? 

15 Reading «ai for # (MSS, OCT). 
61 

95 

Io 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

95 

10 

15 

20 

a 

95 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Deductions start from what has come about later (although the 
principle in these cases is actually something which has already 
come about—hence similarly with what is coming about): they do 
not start from what is earlier (e.g. “Since this has come about, 
this has come about later’). And similarly for what will be the 
case. For whether the time is indeterminate or determined it will 
not be the case that since it is true to say that this has come about 
it is true to say that this—the later item—has come about: in the 
interval, when the one item has already come about, the state- 
ment will be false. The same account goes for what will be. 

Nor can you argue that since this has come about, this will be. 
For the middle term must be of the same type: something which 
came about for what came about, something which will be for 
what will be, something which is coming about for what is coming 
about, something which is the case for what is the case. But 
nothing can be of the same type both as “‘it has come about” and 
“St will be’’. 

Again, the intervening time can be neither indeterminate nor 
determined: in the interval the statement will be false. 

We must inquire what it is that holds things together so that after 
what has come about there are items which are coming about. Or 
is it plain that what is coming about is not next to what has come 
about? What came about is not next to what came about, since 
these things are limits and atomic: just as points are not next 
to one another, so items which came about are not—both are 
indivisible. For the same reason, what is coming about is not next 
to what has come about. What is coming about is divisible, 
whereas what has come about is indivisible: what is coming about 
stands to what has come about as a line stands to a point, and 
infinitely many items which have come about inhere in what is 
coming about. (But I must discuss this more clearly in my general 
account of change.) 

Let us make this assumption with regard to the explanatory 
middle term when events come about consecutively. Here too the 
middle term and the first term must be immediate. E.g. A has 
come about since C has come about (C has come about later, A 
earlier; but C is the principle since it is nearer to the present 
moment, which is the principle of time); and C has come about if 
D has come about. Thus if D has come about, A must have come 
about; and C is the explanation—for if D has come about, C 

62 

TRANSLATION 95° 

must have come about, and if C has come about, A must have 
come about earlier. 

If we take middle terms in this way, will they come to a stop 
somewhere at an immediate, or will something always fall in 
between them because of the infinity, i.e. because (as I have said) 
what has come about is not next to what has come about? How- 
ever that may be, we must begin from something which is im- 
mediate and first from the present moment. 

The same goes for “‘it will be’’. If it is true to say that D will 
be, then it must earlier have been true to say that A would be. C 
is explanatory of this; for if D will be, C will be earlier, and if C 
will be, A will be earlier. Here too the division is infinite in the 
same way: things which will be are not next to one another. But 
here too an immediate principle must be assumed. 

In concrete terms it is like this. If a house has come about, 
stones must have been cut and have come about. Why?—Because 
a foundation must have come about if a house has come about; 
and if a foundation has come about, stones must have come 
about earlier. Again, if there will be a house, in the same way 
there will be stones earlier. As before, the proof is through the 
middle term: there will be a foundation earlier. 

We observe among events a sort of circular coming about. This 
can be the case if the middle term and the extremes follow 
one another: they must convert (as I proved at the beginning) 
because the conclusions convert; and this is what being circular 
is. In concrete terms it looks like this. If the earth has been 
soaked, necessarily steam came about; if steam, cloud; if cloud, 
water; and if water came about, it is necessary for the earth to 
have been soaked. But this was the starting-point, so that things 
have come round in a circle: if any one item is the case, another 
is; if that, another; and if that, the first. 

Some things come about universally (they either are or come 
about in this way always and in every case), others not always but 
for the most part—e.g. not every male man has hair on his chin, 
but they do for the most part. In such cases the middle term must 
also hold for the most part. For if A is predicated universally of B 
and B universally of C, it is necessary for A to be predicated of C 
always and in every case (this is what it is to be universal—to 
hold in every case and always). But it was supposed to hold for 
the most part. Therefore the middle term B must also hold for 
the most part. For what holds for the most part, then, there will 

63 

25 

30 

35 

96° 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

96” 

10 

96° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

be immediate principles which hold or come about in this way for 
the most part. 

CHAPTER 13 

I have said earlier how what something is can be elucidated in 
the terms of a deduction, and in what way there are and are 
not demonstrations and definitions of what something is. Let us 
now say how we should hunt out the items predicated in what 
something is. 

Of the items which hold of something always, some extend 
further than it without going outside its kind. (I say that they 
extend further if they hold of it universally and also hold of 
something else.) E.g. there are items which hold of every triplet 
and also of non-triplets: existence holds of triplets and also of 
non-numbers; odd holds of every triplet and extends further (it 
also holds of quintuplets), but it does not go outside its kind—for 
quintuplets are numbers, and nothing outside number is odd. 

We should take items of this type up to the point at which we 
have first taken just so many that, while each extends further, all 
of them together do not extend further: this must be the essence 
of the object. E.g. number holds of every triplet, and so do 
odd and prime (in both senses—both as not being measured by 
number and as not being compounded from numbers). This, 
then, is precisely what a triplet is: a number that is odd, prime, 
and prime in this sense. Each of these items holds of all the odds 
as well, and the ultimate item holds of pairs as well; but all of 
them together hold of nothing apart from triplets. 

We have shown above that whatever is predicated in what 
something is is necessary’© (and what is universal is necessary), and 
in the case of triplets—and of anything else for which we take 
terms in this way—whatever we take is in what the item is: thus 
triplets will have these features from necessity. 

That they constitute the essence is plain from the following 
consideration. If this is not what being a triplet is, then it must be 
some sort of kind, either named or nameless; but then it will 
extend further than triplets—take us to be supposing that a kind 
is the sort of item which potentially extends further. Then if it 
holds of nothing other than atomic triplets, it will be what being a 
triplet is—take us, further, to be supposing that the essence of 

16 Reading évayxaia with the MSS (the OCT emends to xa6é/ov). 

64 

TRANSLATION 96° 

something is the last such predication to hold of the atoms. 
Hence the same will go for what being so-and-so is in the case of 
anything else which we prove in this way. 

When you are dealing with some whole, you should divide the 
kind into what is atomic in form, i.e. into the primitives (e.g. 
number into triplet and pair). Then you should try to get defi- 
nitions of these items (e.g. of straight line and circle and right 
angle). After this, having got what the kind is (e.g. whether it is a 
quantity or a quality), you should study its proper attributes 
through the primitive common items. For the characteristics of 
the items compounded from the atoms will be plain from the 
definitions, because definitions and what is simple are principles 
of everything, and it is of the simples alone that the charac- 
teristics hold in themselves—they hold of the other items in 
virtue of the simples. 

Divisions made according to differences are useful in this pursuit. 
I have said earlier in what way they yield proofs: only in the 
following way will they be useful for deducing what something is. 

They might indeed be thought to be of no use at all but to 
assume everything straight off—as if you were to make your 
assumptions at the beginning without a division. But it makes a 
difference which of the predicates are predicated first and which 
later—e.g. whether you say animal tame two-footed or two-footed 
animal tame. For if every item is made up from two things, and if 
animal tame constitutes a single item, and if man (or whatever 
the single thing in question may be) is next made up from this 
and the difference, then you must make a division before making 
your postulates. 

Again, only in this way is it possible to ensure that you omit 
nothing in what the thing is. For if, when the first kind has been 
taken, you then take one of the lower divisions, not everything 
will fall into it. E.g. not every animal is either whole-winged or 
split-winged—rather, every winged animal is (for it is this of 
which this is a difference). The first difference of animal is that 
into which every animal falls; and similarly for everything else, 
both the kinds outside it and the kinds subordinate to it (e.g. the 
first difference of bird is that into which every bird falls, and of 
fish into which every fish). If you continue in this way you can 
know that nothing has been omitted: otherwise you are bound to 
omit something without knowing it. 

If you are defining and dividing you do not need to know 

65 

25 

30 

35 

97 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

97" POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

everything there is. Yet some people say that it is impossible to 
know how one thing differs from another without knowing the 
other thing, and that you cannot know this without knowing its 
differences—for a thing is the same as that from which it does 
not differ and different from that from which it does differ. 

Now, first, this is false: one thing is not different from another 
in virtue of every difference. There are many differences between 
things which are the same in form—though not differences in 
respect of their essence or in themselves. 

Next, if you take the opposites, i.e. the difference, and assume 
that everything falls here or here, and if you assume that what 
you are seeking is in one of them, and you know this one, then it 
makes no difference whether you know or do not know the other 
things of which the differences are predicated. For it is clear that 
if you continue in this way until you come to items of which there 
is no longer a difference, you will have the account of the essence. 
(The claim that everything falls into the division—if they are 
opposites which have nothing in between them—is not a pos- 
tulate; for it is necessary for everything to be in one of them if it 
is to be!” a difference of the object.) 

To establish a definition through divisions, you must aim for 
three things: you must take what is predicated in what the thing 
is; you must order these items as first or second; and you must 
ensure that these are all there are. 

The first of these aims is achieved if you have the ability to 
establish things through the kind (just as, for incidentals, you 
need the ability to deduce that they hold). 

You will order the items as you should if you take the first 
term; and you will do this if you take the term which follows all 
the others but is not followed by them all (there must be some 
such term). Once this is taken, the same now goes for the lower 
terms: the second term will be the one which is first of the others, 
and the third the term which is first of the next group (if the 
topmost term is removed, the next will be first of the others). 
Similarly in the remaining cases. 

That these are all the terms there are is clear from the fol- 
lowing consideration. At the first term in the division you assume 
that every animal is either this or that, and that in fact this holds 
of it; next you take the difference of this whole; and you assume 
that there is no further difference of the ultimate whole—or 

17 Reading Zora: with most MSS (the OCT prints éozz). 
66 

TRANSLATION 97" 

rather, that what you get immediately after the ultimate differ- 
ence no longer differs in form from the complex. For it is plain 
that nothing extra has been posited (ali the terms you have taken 
are in what the thing is) and also that nothing is missing. (If 
anything were missing, it would have to be either a kind or a 
difference: now the first term, and also this term taken together 
with the differences, constitute the kind; and the differences are 
all grasped—there is no later one left; for then the ultimate term 
would differ in form, whereas it has been said not to differ.) 

You should look at items which are similar and undifferentiated, 
and first seek what they all have in common. Then do the same 
again for other items which are in the same kind as the first group 
and are of the same form as one another but of a different form 
from the first group. When you have got what all these have 
in common, you must do the same for the remaining groups 
(inquiring next whether the items you have taken have anything 
in common) until you come to a single account: this will be the 
definition of the object. If you arrive not at a single account but 
at two or more, then plainly what you are seeking is not one item 
but several. 

I mean, e.g., that if we were seeking what magnanimity is, we 
should inquire, in the case of some magnanimous men we know, 
what one feature they have in common as such. E.g. if Alcibiades 
and'® Achilles and Ajax are magnanimous, what one feature do 
they all have in common? Intolerance of insult—one made war, 
one waxed wroth, one killed himself. Next, take some others, 
e.g. Lysander and!° Socrates. If their common feature is being 
indifferent to good and bad fortune, I take these two items and 
inquire what indifference to fortune and not brooking dishonour 
have in common. If they have nothing in common, then there will 
be two forms of magnanimity. 

Every definition is always universal: doctors do not say what is 
healthy for some particular eye, but rather for every eye or else 
for some determinate form of eye. 

It is easier to define the particular than the universal (that is 
why you should move from the particulars to the universals). For 
homonymy more often escapes notice among universals than 
among undifferentiated items. 

18 Reading xai for # (MSS, OCT). 
19 Reading xai for # (MSS, OCT). 

67 

97 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

98° 

Io 

15 

20 

b 

97 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Just as in demonstrations a deduction must have been made, so 
in definitions there must be clarity; and this will be achieved if, 
by way of the particulars which you have mentioned,”° you give a 
separate definition for each kind (e.g. if you define similarity not 
for every case but for colours and shapes, and sharpness for 
sound); and if you continue in this way up to what is common, 
taking care not to run into homonymy. 

If you should not argue in metaphors, it is plain too that you 
should neither define by metaphors nor define what is said in 
metaphors; for then you will necessarily argue in metaphors. 

CHAPTER I4 

In order to get to grips with problems, you should make excerpts 
from the anatomies and the divisions. Do this by supposing the 
kind common to all the items and excerpting—if e.g. it is animals 
which are being studied—whatever holds of every animal. Having 
done this, next excerpt whatever follows every instance of the 
first of the remaining terms (if, e.g., it is bird, whatever follows 
every bird); and in this way always excerpt whatever follows the 
nearest term. It is plain that we shall now be in a position to state 
the reason why whatever follows the items falling under the 
common kind holds of them—e.g. why they hold of man or of 
horse. Let A be animal, B what follows every animal, and C, D, 
E individual animals. It is clear why B holds of D: it does so 
because of A. Similarly in the other cases. And the same account 
will go for the lower items. 

At present we argue in terms of the common names which 
have been handed down to us. But we should inquire not only 
in these cases—rather, if any other common feature has been 
observed to hold, we should extract it and then inquire what it 
follows and what follows it. E.g. having a manyplies and not 
having upper incisors follow having horns. Next, ask what items 
having horns follows. It is plain why the feature in question will 
hold of these items: it will hold because they have horns. 

Again, another method is to excerpt by analogy: you cannot 
take any one identical thing which pounce and spine and bone 
should be called; but there will be items which follow these 
features too, as though there were some single nature of this sort. 

20 Reading cipnuévwv with the MSS (the OCT prints eidqupéverv). 
68 

TRANSLATION 98" 

CHAPTER I5 

Some problems are the same inasmuch as they have the same 
middle term, e.g. because they are all cases of reciprocity. Of 
these, some are the same in kind—those which differ inasmuch 
as they hold of different items or in different ways: e.g. Why does 
it echo? or Why is it mirrored? and Why is there a rainbow? 
All these problems are the same in kind (they are all cases of 
reflection), but different in form. 

Other problems differ inasmuch as the one middle term falls 
under the other: e.g. Why does the Nile flow more abundantly at 
the end of the month?—Because the end of the month is more 
stormy.—And why is the end more stormy?—Because the moon 
is waning. These problems are related to one another in this way. 

CHAPTER 16 

Of explanations and what they are explanatory of, you might 
wonder whether when the explanandum holds the explanation 
also holds. Thus if a plant sheds its leaves or if there is an eclipse, 
will the explanation of the eclipse or of the shedding also hold— 
if this is e.g. having broad leaves or (for the eclipse) the earth’s 
being in the middle? If they do not hold, then something else 
will be explanatory. And if the explanation holds, does the ex- 
planandum also hold at the same time? E.g. if the earth is in the 
middle, there is an eclipse; or if a plant is broad-leaved, it sheds 
its leaves. 

If so, they will hold at the same time and will be proved by way 
of one another. Let shedding leaves be A, broad-leaved B, vine 
C. If A holds of B (everything broad-leaved sheds its leaves), and 
B holds of C (every vine is broad-leaved), then A holds of C and 
every vine sheds its leaves. B, the middle term, is explanatory. 
But you can also demonstrate that vines are broad-leaved by way 
of the fact that they shed their leaves. Let D be broad-leaved, E 
shedding leaves, F vine. E holds of F (every vine sheds its 
leaves), and D of E (everything which sheds its leaves is broad- 
leaved); therefore every vine is broad-leaved. Shedding its leaves 
is explanatory. 

If it is not possible for things to be mutually explanatory (for 
an explanation is prior to what it is explanatory of), and if the 
earth’s being in the middle is explanatory of the eclipse whereas 

69 

25 

30 

35 

98? 

20 

25 

30 

35 

98° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

the eclipse is not explanatory of the earth’s being in the middle— 
if, then, the demonstration through the explanation gives the 
reason why and the demonstration not through the explanation 
gives the fact, then you know that it is in the middle but you do 
not know why it is. It is clear that the eclipse is not explanatory 
of the earth’s being in the middle but rather the latter of the 
eclipse; for the earth’s being in the middle inheres in the account 
of the eclipse. Plainly, then, the latter becomes known through 
the former and not the former through the latter. 

Or is it possible for there to be several explanations of one thing? 
If the same thing can be predicated of several items primitively, 
let A hold of B primitively and also of another term, C, primi- 
tively, and let these hold of D, E. Therefore A will hold of D, E; 
and B is explanatory for D, and C for EF. Hence when the 
explanation holds the object must hold; but when the object 
holds it is not necessary for everything explanatory to hold— 
rather, something (but not everything) explanatory must hold. 

Or if problems are always universal and the explanation is some 
whole, then must what it is explanatory of be universal? E.g. 
shedding leaves is determined to some whole, even if this has 
forms, and it holds of these items universally (either of plants or of 
plants of such-and-such a form). Hence in these cases the middle 
term and what it is explanatory of must be equal and must 
convert. E.g. why do trees shed their leaves? If it is because of 
solidification of their moisture, then if a tree sheds its leaves 
solidification must hold, and if solidification holds—not of any- 
thing whatever but of a tree—then the tree must shed its leaves. 

CHAPTER 17 

Can it or can it not be the case that what is explanatory of some 
feature is not the same for every item but different for different 
items? If the conclusions have been demonstrated in themselves, 
and not in virtue of a sign or incidentally, then perhaps the 
explanations cannot be different (for the middle term is the 
account of the extreme); but if they have not been demonstrated 
in this way, perhaps they can be different? 

You can inquire incidentally both about what it is explanatory 
of and about what it is explanatory for—but such things are not 
thought to count as problems. Otherwise, the middle term will 

7O 

TRANSLATION 99° 

have a similar character—if the items are homonymous, the 
middle terms will be homonymous; and if they are in a kind, the 
middle terms will have a similar character. E.g. why do propor- 
tionals alternate? The explanation in the cases of lines and of 
numbers is different—and also the same: as lines it is different, 
as having such-and-such a ratio it is the same. And so in all cases. 
The explanation of a colour’s being similar to a colour and a 
figure to a figure is different for the different cases. Here simi- 
larity is homonymous: in the latter case it is presumably having 
proportional sides and equal angles; in the case of colours it is the 
fact that perception of them is one and the same (or something 
else of this sort). 

Items which are the same by analogy will have their middle 
terms the same by analogy too. 

An explanation, the feature of which it is explanatory, and the 
item for which it is explanatory, are interrelated in the following 
way. If the items are taken severally, then the feature of which it 
is explanatory extends further than them (e.g. having external 
angles equal to four right angles extends further than triangle or 
quadrangle); but if they are taken all together it extends equally 
(for they are all the items which have external angles equal to 
‘four right angles). Similarly for the middle term—and the middle 
term is an account of the first extreme (which is why all the 
sciences come about through definitions). 

E.g. shedding leaves both follows vine and exceeds it, and it 
follows fig and exceeds it—but it does not exceed all of them: 
rather, it is equal to them. If you take the primitive middle term, 
it is an account of shedding leaves. For there-will be first a middle 
term in the one direction (that all are such-and-such); and then a 
middle term for this (that the sap solidifies, or something of the 
sort). What is shedding leaves?—The solidifying of the sap at the 
connection of the seed. 

Schematically the matter will be elucidated in the following way, 
if you are seeking the interrelations between an explanation and 
the feature of which it is explanatory. Let A hold of every B and 
B of each of the Ds—and let B extend further. Thus B will apply 
universally to the Ds. (I call universal a term with which they do 
not convert; and I call primitive universal a term such that sever- 
ally they do not convert with it while all together they convert 
with and extend alongside it.) Thus B is explanatory of A for the 

71 

25 

30 

35 

99 

15 

20 

99° POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Ds. Therefore A must extend alongside”! further than B: if it 
does not, why will B be explanatory rather than A? 

If A holds of all the Es, then all of them together will be some 
one thing different from B. If not, how can you say that A holds 
of everything of which E holds whereas E does not hold of 
everything of which A holds? Why will there not be an explana- 
tion for them as there is for all the Ds? (But will the Es be 
some one thing? We must inquire into this. Let it be C.) 

Thus it is possible for there to be several explanations of the 
same feature—but not for items of the same form. E.g. the 
explanation of longevity for quadrupeds is their not having bile, 
while for birds it is their being dry (or something else). 

CHAPTER 18 

If the explanations do not at once arrive at what is atomic and if 
there is not one middle term only but several, then the explana- 
tions too are several. But which of the middle terms is ex- 
planatory for the particulars—the one which is primitive in the 
direction of the universal or the one which is primitive in the 
direction of the particular? Plainly, the one nearest to what it is 
explanatory for. For this term explains why the primitive term 
falls under the universal. E.g. C is explanatory for D of B’s 
holding of it. So C is explanatory of A for D, B is explanatory of 
A for C, and B is explanatory of A for itself. 

CHAPTER 19 

As for deductions and demonstrations, it is clear both what each 
of them is and also how they come about—and so too (which is 
the same thing) for demonstrative understanding. As for the 
principles—how they become familiar and what is the state which 
gets to know them—, this will be plain from what follows, when 
we have first set out the puzzles. 

I have said earlier that you cannot understand anything through 
a demonstration unless you know the primitive immediate prin- 
ciples. As for knowledge of the immediates, one might wonder 
whether it is the same or not the same, and whether there is or is 

21 Reading zapexteiverv, with the MSS (the OCT prints éxexteivev). 

72 

TRANSLATION 99° 
not” understanding in each case, or rather understanding in the 
one case and some other kind of knowledge in the other; and also 
whether the states, not being present in us, come about in us or 
rather are present in us without being noticed. 

It is absurd to suppose that we possess such states; for then 
we should possess pieces of knowledge more exact than demon- 
stration without its being noticed. But if we get them without 
possessing them earlier, how could we come to acquire know- 
ledge and to learn except from pre-existing knowledge? This is 
impossible, as I said in connection with demonstration. It is clear, 
then, both that we cannot possess these states and also that they 
cannot come about in us when we are ignorant and possess no 
state at all. We must therefore possess some sort of capacity— 
but not one which will be more valuable than these states in 
respect of exactness. 

And this is clearly true of all animals: they have a connate 
discriminatory capacity, which is called perception. Given that 
perception is present in them, in some animals the percepts are 
retained and in others they are not. If they are not, then the 
animal has no knowledge when it is not perceiving (either in 
general or with regard to items which are not retained). But some 
can still hold the percepts in their soul after perceiving them. 
When this occurs often, there is then a further difference: some 
animals come to have an account based on the retention of these 
items, and others do not. 

Thus from perception there comes memory, as we call it, 
and from memory (when it occurs often in connection with the 
same item) experience; for memories which are many in number 
form a single experience. And from experience, or from all the 
universal which has come to rest in the soul (the one apart from 
the many, i.e. whatever is one and the same in all these items), 
there comes a principle of skill or of understanding—of skill if it 
deals with how things come about, of understanding if it deals 
with how things are. 

Thus the states in question neither inhere in us in a deter- 
minate form nor come about from other states which are more 
cognitive; rather, they come about from perception—as in a 
battle, when a rout has occurred, first one man makes a stand, 
then another does, and then another, until a position of strength 
is reached.?> And the soul i is such as to be capable of undergoing 
this. 

2 Retaining # 0d, which the OCT deletes. 
23 Reading aixjv for épyjv (MSS, OCT). 

73 

25 

30 

35 

100 

5 

iO 

15 

100 

Io 

q5 

100* POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Let us say again what we have just said but not said clearly. 
When one of the undifferentiated items makes a stand, there is a 
primitive universal in the soul; for although you perceive par- 
ticulars, perception is of universals,—e.g. of man, not of Callias 
the man. Next, a stand is made among these items, until some- 
thing partless and universal makes a stand. E.g. such-and-such an 
animal makes a stand, until animal does; and with animal a stand 
is made in the same way. Thus it is plain that we must get to 
know the primitives by induction; for this is the way in which 
perception instils universals. 

Of the intellectual states by -which we grasp truth, some are 
always true and some admit falsehood (e.g. opinion and calcu- 
lation do—whereas understanding and comprehension are always 
true); and no kind apart from comprehension is more exact than 
understanding. Again, the principles of demonstrations are more 
familiar, and all understanding involves an account. Hence there 
will not be understanding of the principles; and since nothing 
apart from comprehension can be truer than understanding, there 
will be comprehension of the principles. This emerges both from 
our present inquiry and also because, just as demonstration is not 
a principle of demonstration, so understanding is not a principle 
of understanding. Thus if we have no other true kind apart from 
understanding, comprehension will be the principle of under- 
standing. And the principle will relate to the principle as under- 
standing as a whole is related to its object as a whole. 

74 

SYNOPSIS 

BOOK ALPHA 

[Ar] All learning depends on pre-existent knowledge in the learner 
(71°1). Some things the learner need not know in advance (71°17); 
though in a sense he knows the conclusion in advance (71°24)—this 
solves a puzzle others have botched (71°30). 

[A2] Understanding requires knowledge of the explanation, and is of 
what cannot be otherwise (71°9); hence demonstrative understanding 
proceeds from principles which are true, primitive, and immediate, and 
prior to, more familiar than, and explanatory of the conclusions (71 16). 
(There are two kinds of priority here: 71°33.) Some terminology for 
types of principle (72°5). The principles must be better known than the 
conclusions (72°25). [43] This account of understanding threatens a 
regress which leads either to scepticism (72° 7) or to the admission of 
circular proof (72°15); but in fact there is non-demonstrative under- 
standing of the principles Gz 18). Three arguments against circular 
proof (72°25). [44] What is understood must derive from necessary 
principles (73°21). Elucidations of what it is for something to hold of 
every case (73°28), in itself (four types: 73°34)—‘in itself predications of 
the first two types are necessary (73°16)—and universally (73°25). [45] 
Three ways in which you may wrongly think you have proved something 
universally (7474); further elucidation of when it is that we know something 
to hold universally (74" 25). [46] The principles, being necessary, are ‘in 
itself’ predications (74° 5). Four arguments that the principles are necessary 
(74°13)—though what is necessary can be inferred from what is con- 
tingent (75°1). Thus there is no demonstration of incidental predications 
(75°18), but only of ‘in itself? predications (75728). [47] Hence there 
can be no ‘kind crossing’—principles must be ‘appropriate’ to their 
conclusions (75738). [48] Nor can there be understanding of perishable 
things (75°21)-—though there is demonstration of what happens often 
(75°33). [49] The principles may not apply to another kind (75°37), 
unless that kind is subordinate (76°4). Hence proper principles cannot be 
proved (76°16). 

[Aro] Principles are unprovable (76°31). Principles are proper or com- 
mon (76°37); common principles, subjects, and attributes (76°3) form the 
three elements essential to demonstrative sciences (76°12). Suppositions 
and postulates (76°23): terms are not suppositions (76°35); and geometers 
do not use false suppositions (76°39). [411] Demonstration does not 
presuppose substantial universals (77°5). The Law of Contradiction is 
not normally assumed in demonstrations (77°10); the Law of Excluded 
Middle is only used in reductio proofs (77°22). The relation between 
dialectic and the sciences (77726). 

75 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

[412] Not all questions fall within the scope of any science (77°36); but 
there are different types of, e.g., non-geometrical questions, associated 
with different types of error (77 16)—though paralogism is rare in 
mathematics (77 27). Two other types of error (77°34). Analysis (78°6). 
How sciences increase (78°14). 

[413] The difference between understanding of the fact and of the 
reason why (78°22), illustrated (78°30). One science may prove the 
reason why of another subordinate science (78°34). [414] The first figure 
is most scientific, as yielding explanations, helping in the hunt for es- 
sences, and being self-sufficient (79°17). 

[A15] There are immediate negative propositions (79°33). 

[416] The varieties of ignorance (79°23): inferred dispositional ignor- 
ance of negative atomic facts (79°29), of positive atomic facts (80%6), 
[A17] of positive derivative facts (80°17), and of negative derivative facts 
(81°15); [A418] negative ignorance, due to failure of sense-perception 
(81°38). 

[Arg] Predications in demonstrations must be true and ‘natural’ (81°10). 
Can there be chains of such immediate predications that are infinite 
either (i) by having no highest term, or (ii) by having no lowest term, or 
(iii) while having both a highest and a lowest term (81°30)? Can there be 
an infinite series of counterpredicable terms (82°15)? [420] If the answers 
to (i) and (ii) are negative, then so is the answer to (iii) (82°21). [421] If 
the answers to (i) and (ii) are negative for affirmative predication, then 
they are so for negative predication (82°36). [422] (A) Essential predi- 
cations cannot form infinite chains (82°37); and since demonstration 
deals with ‘natural’ predications (83°1) and is about substances (83°24) 
and there cannot be an infinite chain of non-substantial predications 
(83°36), the answers to (i) and (ii) are negative (83°24). (B) If there is 
demonstration, there cannot be infinite chains of predications (83°32). 
(C) Demonstration deals with ‘in itself? predications, and these cannot 
form infinite chains (84? 7): [423] Hence attributes holding of different 
subjects need not do so in virtue of something common (84°3); and all 
mediated predications are demonstrable (84°19). 

[A24] Universal demonstration is better than particular: two arguments 
to the contrary refuted (85720); seven arguments for the thesis (85°23). 
[425] Four arguments to show that affirmative demonstration is better 
than negative (86°31). [426] Negative demonstration is distinct from 
reductio, and superior to it (87°1). 

[427] How one science may be more exact than another (87°31); [428] 
criteria of identity for sciences (87°38). 

[429] There may be different demonstrations of a single proposition 
(87°5). 

[430] Chance connections cannot be demonstrated (87°19). 

[431] Perception cannot give understanding since it does not grasp the 
universal (87°28) nor, therefore, the explanation (87°39). 

[432] Can all demonstrations have the same principles? Seven 

76 

SYNOPSIS 

arguments for a negative answer (88718); three unsatisfactory reinterpre- 
tations of the question (88°9). 

[433] Understanding is of what is necessary, opinion of what can be 
otherwise (88°30); but in a sense there can be opinion and understanding 
of the same thing (89°11). 

[A434] Acumen—the art of hitting on a middle term (89° 10). 

BOOK BETA 

[Br] There are four types of question (89°23), which [B2] reduce to two: 
Is there an explanatory middle term? and what is it? (8936). 

[B3] Can the same things be known both by demonstration and by 
definition (90 35)? Four arguments that not everything demonstrable is a 
definition (90°1); two arguments that not all definables are demonstrable 
(90°18); three arguments that no definitions are demonstrable (90°28). 
[84] Any attempt to prove a definition is bound to assume what it tries to 
prove (91712); illustrations (91 *35). [B5] The method of division does not 
demonstrate definitions (91°12); and [B6] attempts at hypothetical proof 
of definitions fail (9276). Neither division nor hypothetical proof could 
explain the unity of the definiendum (92°27). [B7| There is no way in 
which definitions can be proved (92°34). Three more arguments against 
the possibility of demonstrating definitions (92°4). It would be absurd if 
definitions merely said what terms meant, not what things are (92°26). 
[88] A new approach to the problem (93° i): we may grasp ‘something of 
the object’, and hence know that it is (93715); and this will enable us to 
construct a demonstration revealing, though not proving, the definition 
(93° 135): —[Bg] This of course only holds for mediable predications 
(93°21).—[Bro] Four types of definition (93°29). 

[B11] All four types of explanation can be exhibited in a demonstration 
(94°20); illustrations (94°24). Necessity and teleological explanation are 
compatible (94°27), and are especially common among natural pheno- 
mena (94534). [B12] Explanation and the types of predicative tie (9510). 
Can explanations be separated in time from what they explain (95*22)? 
and if they are, how can we know or prove them (95°27)? (The continuity of 
time: 95°1.) And how can such proofs be represented (95°13)? Cyclical 
processes (95°38). Phenomena occurring ‘for the most part’ (96"8). 

[B13] How to discover what a thing is (96*20). How to study ‘a whole’ 
(96°15). The utility of divisions in definition (96°25). A definer need not 
know everything that there is (97°6). Further reflections on the use of 
division in defining (97°23). Definitions may also be won by abstracting 
similarities (97°7). Definitions are universal (97°25); what is more specific 
is easier to define Cra 28); definitions should seek clarity (97°31), and 
shun metaphor (97°37). 

[B14] How to tackle problems: the use of division (9871); the importance 

77 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

of observing common features not marked in language (98°13), and 
of analogies (98720). [B15] How problems are connected (98°24). 

[B16] Must an explanatory middle term convert with the subject term 
(98°35)? Three arguments considered (98°4). [B17] Cases in which there 
might be different explanations of the same attribute (9971). Further 
considerations of the question (99°16). [B18] Is the highest or the lowest 
middle term explanatory (99°7)? 

[B19] How do we learn the principles? and by what state do we 
apprehend them (99°15)? They are not innately known (99°26). But we 
have an innate capacity— perception: in favoured cases perception leads 
to BIEMO!Y; memory to experience, and experience to understanding 
(99°34). Thus we learn the principles by ‘induction’ (x00" 14). The state 
by which we apprehend principles is comprehension (100°5). 

78 

NOTE ON THE COMMENTARY 

The Posterior Analytics is not an easy work to read, and individual 
sentences often call for individual elucidation. I take it that the first duty 
of a commentator is to explain his text: hence my notes contain more 
detailed paraphrase and exegesis than is customary in the Clarendon 
series. There is correspondingly less criticism, and less discussion at an 
abstract level, of the stances Aristotle assumes and the philosophical 
issues which he broaches. My notes will, I hope, at least put the reader 
in a better position to do that work for himself. 

My comments contain a certain quantity of symbolism; although this is 
sometimes displeasing to the eye, it seems to me to have the twin 
advantages of brevity and clarity. And the Analytics is, after all, a 
treatise on logic. Most of the symbols used are standard; all are explained 
at their first occurrence. The formalization adopted for syllogistic is 
briefly explained in the Introduction. I might note that genuine quotations 
from Aristotle are always enclosed in double inverted commas, while 
paraphrases of Aristotle’s sentences get single inverted commas. (Of 
course, double and single inverted commas are also used in several other 
standard ways.) 

Following the custom of the Clarendon series, I do not often acknowl- 
edge my debts to the secondary literature. Those modern works to which 
I do refer are cited by author’s name and page number only: full details 
can be found in the lists of References and of Supplementary References 
at the end of the Commentary. All references in the form “‘p. n’’ are to 
pages of this volume. 

I cite Aristotle’s works by title, Greek book letter, chapter number, 
and then page, column, and line in Bekker’s edition (e.g. APst A 10, 
76°40). References to the Posterior Analytics usually dispense with the 
book title. I use the following abbreviations: 

Cat Categories 

Int de Interpretatione 

APr Prior Analytics 

APst Posterior Analytics 

Top Topics (Top I = Sophistici Elenchi) 
Phys Physics 

Cael de Caelo 

GC de Generatione et Corruptione 
Metr Meteorologica 

An de Anima 

Sens de Sensu 

Mem de Memoria 

Long Vit de Longitudine Vitae 

HA Historia Animalium 

79 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

PA de Partibus Animalium 
MA de Motu Animalium 
GA de Generatione Animalium 
[Probl] Problems (spurious) 
Met Metaphysics 
EN Nicomachean Ethics 
EE Eudemian Ethics 
Pol Politics 
Rhet Rhetoric 
[Rhet ad Alex] Rhetorica ad Alexandrum (spurious) 
Poet Poetics 
The titles of some of Plato’s works are abbreviated, thus: 
Crat Cratylus 
[Def] Definitions (spurious) 
[Epin] Epinomis (spurious) 
Euthyd Euthydemus 
Gorg Gorgias 
Phil Philebus 
Rep Republic 
Soph Sophist 
Theaet Theaetetus 
Tim Timaeus 
Note also: 
Alexander, in APr Commentary on the Prior Analytics 
in APst Commentary on the Posterior Analytics 

Galen, lib prop 
Proclus, Comm in Eucl 

Sextus Empiricus, adv Math 
Sextus Empiricus, Pyrrh Hyp 
Themistins, in APst 
Theophrastus, Met 

On My Own Books 

Commentary on the First Book of 
Euclid’s Elements 

Against the Mathematicians 

Outlines of Pyrrhonism 

Commentary on the Posterior Analytics 
Metaphysics 

80 

COMMENTARY 

BOOK ALPHA 

CHAPTER I 

A I considers in general terms some of the conditions for the acquisition 
of knowledge; 4 2 introduces the special notions of ‘scientific’ knowledge 
or understanding, and of demonstration; and the succeeding chapters 
develop and elucidate these notions. 

71*1; The initial sentence, couched in the grand manner of Aristotelian 
exordia, expresses the contention that if a teaches b at ¢ that P, then 
before ¢ b had knowledge of something other than P on which his 
learning that is depends (cf. Top Z 4, 141°26-31; Met 4 9, 992°24-33; 
EN Z 3, 1139°26-8). Aristotle is not saying that all coming to know 
requires pre-existing knowledge but rather that all learning requires pre- 
existing knowledge. It follows that not all our knowledge can be learned: 
the implications of this are not disentangled until B 19, 99 26-30. 

More precisely, Aristotle is making a claim about ‘intellectual’ teaching 
and learning. The adjective “intellectual” (dianoétikos) normally indi- 
cates either what is ‘discursive’, as opposed to what is ‘intuitive’ (noétikos), 
or else what involves thought, as opposed to what is given by perception. 
The latter sense is the more likely here (see MiGNUCCI (1975), I-3). 
Aristotle’s claim is not intended as an analytic truth; for he proceeds to 
offer an inductive argument in its favour. 

The structure of the argument is uncertain. Some commentators discern 
an induction from three cases—the demonstrative sciences (71°34), the 
dialectical arts (71°5—9), and rhetoric (71°9-11). But dialectic and rhet- 
oric are more properly contrasted with teaching than taken as species of 
it (Top 12, 165" 4348—>11; Rhet A 1, 1355°24—-7). It is better to restrict the 
induction to 71°3-—4 and to start a second argument at 71°5. This second 
argument ends at 71°9, and expands as follows: ‘All teaching takes place 
either by deduction or by induction; but both deduction and induction 
require pre-existing knowledge in the learner: hence all teaching requires 
pre-existing knowledge in the learner.’ (The first premiss of this argument 
is thoroughly Aristotelian: see 4 18, 81°39-40; APr B 23, 68°13-14; and 
esp. EN Z 3, 1139°26-31, which expressly refers to the present passage; 
cf. Patzig, 132.) 71°9-11, on rhetoric, is parenthetical. 

qi*2: “... proceed from pre-existent knowledge’: the notion of depen- 
dence, or ‘proceeding from’, is here—and often—expressed by the 
preposition ek. “P is ek Q” may describe a logical relation, an epis- 
temological relation, or a causal relation: ‘““P follows from Q”, “‘knowl- 
edge that P is based on knowledge that Q”’, “the fact that P is explained 
by the fact that Q”’. In scientific knowledge, according to Aristotle, all 

81 

71°2 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

three relations coexist: my understanding that P is based on my knowl- 
edge that Q inasmuch as I infer P from Q, and Q states the explanation 
of the fact stated in P. (ek is also used of a relation between terms: e.g. A 
4, 73°36. Aristotle’s discussion of the different uses of ek in Met 4 24 
passes over these issues.) 

m1°2: ““...from pre-existent knowledge”: The principal ingredients 
in Aristotle’s vocabulary of knowledge are the three verbs eidenai, 
gignoskein, and epistasthai, together with the cognate nouns gndsis 
and epistémé. Aristotle also uses gnoérizein (gnorimos, “familiar”, 
Pp. 95), sunienai, and echein (as general as “‘have” in English, but 
translated as ‘“‘grasp” in its epistemological use). Nous (‘“comprehen- 
sion’: see p. 267) should also be mentioned. 

In non-philosophical contexts eidenai, gignoskein, and epistasthai may 
all be translated by “know” without much loss; but in Aristotle, or at 
least in APst, the verbs are not intersubstitutable. A detailed study 
of Plato’s usage of these words concluded that “whereas eidenai and 
epistasthai, and eidenai and gigndskein are frequently and clearly con- 
vertible in the text, it is not so clear that gigndskein and epistasthai are 
ever convertible; and there are passages where they seem to be in 
contrast” (Lyons, 177). The same conclusion appears to hold for APsz. 
Aristotle offers an explicit definition of epistasthai at A 2, 71°9-16, 
which carries with it the implication that gigndskein has a different sense. 
Regularly, but not invariably, he uses epistasthai in accordance with this 
definition; and he tacitly treats eidenai as a synonym. There is never any 
attempt to define gignoskein. 

My original translation adopted different English terms for each of the 
different elements in Aristotle’s vocabulary for knowledge. But I am no 
longer convinced that Aristotle intended or felt any semantic differences 
among these elements——with the exception of epistémé; and my original 
translations, quite apart from their barbarous nature, insinuated distinc- 
tions which are not found in the Greek. Hence the word “‘know” is now 
used promiscuously. The case is different with epistasthai and epistémé; 
and for them I retain ‘‘understand” and “understanding’’. It has been 
powerfully urged that epistémé, at least in APst, is in fact close to our 
own conception of understanding and distinct from our own conception 
of knowledge, so that my translation happily—and accidentally—hit 
upon the truth. (See esp. BURNYEAT (1981), 97— 108; cf. MORAVCSIK (1975).) 
This cannot be completely right, if only because ‘I understand that P’’, 
in its ordinary use, certainly means something quite different from 
Aristotle’s ‘‘epistamai that P”. (See more generally paTziG (1981), 143 
Nn. 2; IRWIN (1988), 530 n. 24.) None the less, we need some way of 
signalling occurrences of the Greek word, and I can find nothing less bad 
than “understand”. (See further, below p. 91.) 

71°5: “both deductive and inductive’’: ‘“‘A deduction (sullogismos) is an 
account ii which, certain things being posited, something different from 

82 

COMMENTARY F711 

the posits results from necessity by their being the case” (APr A 1, 
24°18~20; cf. Top A 1, 100°25~—7; Rhet A 2, 1356°16-18; APst A 10, 
76°38; B 5, 91°14). This shows that sullogismoi include much more 
than Aristotelian syllogisms (for an explanation of this term see above, 
p. xvii). As defined, Aristotelian sullogismoi do not encompass all valid 
deductive arguments; but it might none the less seem reasonable to sup- 
pose that Aristotle’s definition was an attempt to characterize deductive 
inference as such—hence we should translate by means of ‘‘deduction’’, 
“deduce’’, etc. (See further Patzig, 44~5; Barnes, 126-7.) At APr A 32, 
47°33-5, however, Aristotle distinguishes between a sullogismos and 
what he calls a ‘necessity’ (anagkaion). And it is in fact his notion of 
a ‘necessity’ which corresponds most closely to the modern notion of 
a deduction, i.e. of a deductively valid argument. A sullogismos is a 
special kind of ‘necessity’, and hence a special kind of deduction. None 
the less, ‘‘syllogism” is an equally misleading translation of ‘“‘sullogismos”’; 
for Aristotle’s claim that all su/logismoi can be reduced to his three 
syllogistic figures is not a trivial truth but a false metalogical claim. On 
balance, I still prefer “‘deduction’”’. See further BARNES (1981), 21-7. 
“Induction (epagdgé) is the passage from the particulars to the uni- 
versal” (Top A 12, 105713; cf. APst B 6, 92°37). For a full discussion see 
Ross, 481-5; and, most recently, CAUJOLLE-ZASLAWSKY (1990). “The 
particular” (to kath’ hekaston) is systematically ambiguous in Aristotle 
between “the individual” and “‘the specific’ (in other words, Aristotle 
muffs the distinction between universal/singular and general/specific: cf. 
Zabarella, 664A). The context does not always resolve the ambiguity. 

71°7: “the former assuming items. ..’’: throughout APs¢ Aristotle uses 
the terminology of the game of dialectic. In that game questioner and 
answerer pick a problem (probléma) for debate; the answerer elects 
to defend the answer P, and it is the questioner’s job to refute him 
(elenchein) by proving not-P. To do this he must question (erdtan) his 
partner, putting forward (proteinein) propositions (protaseis) for his 
acceptance or rejection; from the points which he assumes or takes 
(lambanein) from the answerer, he must then deduce (sullogizesthai) 
not-P. 

71°9: “Rhetorical arguments”: ‘example’ (paradeigma) and ‘enthy- 
meme’ (enthumémé) together exhaust rhetorical reasoning (Rhet A 2, 
1356°5-9; B 20, 1393°24: but contrast B 25, 1402°13). “Example” is 
often treated as the name given to inductive arguments in rhetorical 
contexts (e.g. Rhet A 2, 1356734—°11); but it is defined as inference from 
a particular to a particular, and thereby distinguished from induction 
(Rhet A 2, 1357°25-30; APr B 24, 69°13—19). Enthymemes are deduc- 
tions used in rhetorical contexts; the modern definition of ‘‘enthymeme” 
as “deduction lacking a premiss” is unaristotelian. 

71°11: The knowledge presupposed by a teacher is of two sorts: it 
consists of (a) knowledge of propositions, and (b) knowledge of terms 

83 

JVI POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

(cf. A 10, 76°31—6, °3—22). (Should Aristotle have added (c) knowledge 
of rules of inference?) 

Aristotle’s statement of this is complicated by two factors. The first 
turns on the peculiarities of the Greek verb einai, “‘to be” (on which see 
Kahn). Syntactically, einai may appear both absolutely (‘‘X is”) and with 
a complement (“‘X is Y”) (cf. B 1, 89°33, notes). Moreover, the variable 
in “X is” may be replaced either by a proper name (“‘Homer is”) or by a 
general term (‘‘Units are” or “The unit is’’) or by an oblique sentence 
(“That nothing can be affirmed or denied is”). The nearest English 
equivalents for these sentences use three different locutions: “Homer 
exists”, ‘““There are units’, “It is the case that nothing can be affirmed 
and denied”. In my translation barbarisms such as “The unit is” are 
countenanced only where they seem essential to the understanding of 
Aristotle’s argument; usually “F is” becomes ‘“There are Fs”, and ‘‘That 
P is” becomes “That P is the case” (sometimes ‘‘Fs occur” or “That P 
holds” are used)—the reader who prefers consistent barbarism may 
supply it for himself. 

Secondly, Aristotle is prepared to use all terms autonymously: where 
we distinguish between “X is Y” and ““X” means Y” he will write “X 
is Y” and “X means Y” (see Top I 14, 174°8-9). 

Thus instead of (a) and (b) Aristotle says that the learner must already 
know, in some cases (a’) that X is, and in others (b’) what X means. 

For some X the learner must already know both (a’) and (b’); for some X 
he need only know (b’). These cases are straightforward. Aristotle also 
seems to say that for some X the learner need only know (a’). Philoponus 
suggests that this is so if ““X”’ is replaced by an oblique sentence, since 
only terms and not sentences have meanings; but this suggestion is 
refuted by 4 10, 76°21 (cf. Int 4, 16°26). Others start from 71°16 (‘For 
these items are not all equally plain to us”), which has a close parallel at 
A 10, 76°18; and they imagine that e.g. ‘the hot’ is one of the things for 
which the learner need only know (a’). But in 4 10 Aristotle’s point is 
that some things (e.g. the meaning of the common axioms) are so 
familiar that a teacher need not expressly assume them; and this does 
not imply that the learner need not know them—on the contrary, it 
implies that the learner does know them. (But it must be admitted that 
71°16 has no plausible sense, apart from that suggested by 76°18.) There 
is no solution to this puzzle—the issue is taken up again, in a refined 
form, in B 8. 

71°13: + =“E.g. of the fact that...”: Aristotle has argued that if anyone is 
to learn anything, he must already know something: 

(1) (WP) (if a is to learn that P, then (4Q) (a already knows that Q)). 

He has not argued that there is something which anyone who is to learn 
anything must already know: 

(2) (AQ) (WP) (if a is to learn that P, then a already knows that Q). 
But he does maintain something very like (2)—-see 4 2, 72°16-—8, notes 

84 

COMMENTARY 71°13 

—and his examples here are evidently designed to satisfy something like 
(2). The first example is a loose formulation of an analogue to the Law 
of Excluded Middle (see Met I 7). 

(In (1) and (2) I use the universal and existential quantifiers, (V) and 
(A). (Wa) (. . .a---) may be read as: “Take anything you like, ... it---”. 
(da) (...a---) may be read as: “There’s something of which it’s true 
that...it---’. These devices are purely abbreviatory and are not 
intended to carry any ontological or metaphysical commitment.) 

7°15: “and of the unit both...”: what does it mean to assume ‘that 
the unit is’? And why must the arithmetician do so? Met M 3 gives 
Aristotle’s view on mathematical existence. It seems that ‘the unit is’—i.e. 
there are units—if there are objects which may be taken as single 
entities; that there are such objects is a trivial truth, and hence suitably 
taken for an axiom. For other mathematical objects, e.g. triangles, we 
have to prove that ‘they are’ (4A 10, 76°36). It is usually supposed that 
such a proof will take the form of a construction. (This fits Euclid’s 
practice: e.g. Elements i def. 10 assumes the definition of right angle, and 
i. 11 constructs right angles (cf. i def. 20~i. 1; i def. 22~i. 46 etc.). On 
the other hand, both the meaning and the constructibility of e.g. circles 
are taken as axiomatic (i def. 15; post. 3).) There is, however, no direct 
evidence for this view in Aristotle’s text; and it is hard to reconcile with 
the abstractionist account of mathematical objects in Met M 3. Cael A 10, 
279°32-280%10, shows that Aristotle did not believe that mathematical 
objects exist only if they are actually constructed. 

Arithmetic requires that there are units because it infers the properties 
of units from their essence and only things that are have essences; this 
reasoning only becomes explicit in Book B (cf. e.g. B 7, 92°4—11, notes). 

71°17: With this paragraph compare APr B 21, esp. 67°22-6. 

If at ¢ I learn that a is F by inference from the two premisses that a is 
G and that everything G is F, then I must have known before ¢ that 
everything G is F, but I may learn that a is G ‘“‘at the very same time” as 
I learn that a is F. (I learn it hama epagomenon: 71°21; cf. APr B 21, 
67°23. Epagein is used here, and at 71°24, in its non-technical sense of 
‘lead on’, i.e. ‘lead on’ to knowledge: see Ross, 506.) It is essential to 
the argument that the laggard premiss is about a particular (cf. APr 
B 21, 67°9); a is one of the things ‘‘under a universal of which you 
possess knowledge”’, i.e. a falls under G of which you know that it is F. 
Aristotle does not say that we may learn one of the premisses at the 
same time as we learn the conclusion: he says that we may learn one of 
the premisses at the same time as we are being led to the conclusion. If 
my teacher is to instruct me that a is F, then I must know that every G is 
F before I come to the class; but I need not have antecedent knowledge 
that a is G. (For a different interpretation, which takes epagein here in 
its technical sense, see MCKIRAHAN (1983).) 

Aristotle’s illustration has been read as a proof that the angle in a 

85 

7qI°17 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

semicircle is a right angle (for attempted reconstructions see Heath (2), 
37-9; Ross, 505-6). Nothing as elaborate as this is required, as APr B 
21, 67°12—16, shows: the illustration is a straightforward case of the 
schema I have just described, viz: 

(3) Every triangle has 2 R. 
(4) This figure in the semicircle is a triangle. 

Therefore: 
(5) This figure in the semicircle has 2 R. 

The theorem in (3), Euclid, i. 32, is one of Aristotle’s favourite 
illustrations; for his proof of it see Met @ 9, 1051°21-6; cf. Heath (1), i. 
317-21. 
71°23: +“‘...and the last term...’: since ‘the middle” refers to the 
middle term, to eschaton probably means “the last term’’ (its standard 
sense in APr) rather than “the individual” (which it may also mean). In 
either case the reference is to “‘this figure in the semicircle” (“C”’ at 
67°14). When Aristotle says that “in some cases learning occurs in this 
way’’, does he mean “‘in the way in which we learn (4)” or rather “‘in the 
way in which we learn (5)? Most commentators opt for the former 
interpretation (see MIGNUCCI (1975), 13). There are two difficulties with 
this: first, the close parallel at APr B 21, 6724-6, suggests that (5) rather 
than (4) is the relevant proposition; and secondly, the next clause—‘‘the 
last term does not become known through the middle term’”—sits un- 
easily with (4). (Aristotle would then imply that in other cases the 
proposition analogous to (4) is known through the middle term. This is 
obscure in itself; and it is puzzling in the context—if Aristotle is thinking 
of (4), then he should rather observe that in other cases the proposition 
analogous to (4) must be known in advance of the instruction.) But the 
second interpretation is also difficult, since it appears to affirm that (5) is 
not known on the basis of (3) and (4). The parallel passage in APr B 16 
suggests that Aristotle has the following thought in mind: ‘Given that 
you already know (3), then once you grasp (4) you will at once assent to 
(5)—you do not need to rehearse the argument ‘‘(3), and (4): so (5)” to 
yourself’. Yet, to say the least, our text does not express this thought at 
all clearly. However that may be, if (5)—or (4)—is not learned “through 
the middle’’, how is it learned? ——We ‘see’ it: ““. .. some things we know 
immediately, e.g. that it has angles equal to two right angles when we 
see that it is a triangle” (APr B 21, 67°24—6). For further references to 
sight or perception of mathematical objects see 4 12, 77°31; EN Z 8, 
1142°26-9; more often they are apprehended by a quasi-perceptual 
thought (noésis) (e.g. Met Z 10, 1036°2~6). This view is closely connected 
with Aristotle’s analysis of mathematical objects (see p. 85). 

7x°24: “‘...and are not said of any underlying subject”: ‘‘and’’ (kai), 
as often, has the force of “‘i.e.”’; it is individuals which are not said of 
any subject (cf. e.g. Cat 2, 1°39), so that this clause indicates which of 
the sorts of ‘particular’ Aristotle intends (see p. 83). 

86 

COMMENTARY 71°24 

71°24: Having explained that the learner must already know the pre- 
misses, Aristotle now adds that in a sense he also knows the conclusion. 
The puzzle is a special case of the celebrated dispute over ‘petitio principii 
and the syllogism’ (e.g. Mill, A System of Logic, u. iii. 2; Sextus 
Empiricus, Pyrrh Hyp ii. 195); it is set out more clearly at APr B 21, 
67°8—16. We take an apparently consistent set of propositions: 

(6) b knows that everything G is F; 

(7) ais G; 

(8) b does not know that there is such a thing as a. 
From (8) Aristotle invites us to infer: 

(9) b does not know that a is F. 

(“If you did not know...’’); yet from (6) and (7) we can apparently 
infer the contradictory of (9): 

(10) b knows that a is F. 

——“‘so that at the same time you will know and be ignorant of the same 
thing” (B 21, 67°16). 

Aristotle’s solution to the puzzle consists, characteristically, in ac- 
cepting both (9) and (10), and maintaining that since they express dif- 
ferent sorts of knowledge they are not inconsistent. The knowledge 
involved in (9) is ‘knowledge simpliciter’ (“‘simpliciter” modifies “know” 
in 71°26 and 27, despite the word-order). “‘Simpliciter’’ translates haplés: 
“A thing is noble or base simpliciter if you will say (sc. truly) without 
adding any qualification that it is noble or the opposite; e.g. you won’t 
say that sacrificing one’s father is noble, but that it is noble for certain 
people—therefore it is not noble simpliciter. But you will say that 
honouring the gods is noble, without adding any qualification; for it is 
noble simpliciter. Hence whatever seems to be noble or base or anything 
else, without adding any qualification, is called so simpliciter” (Top B 10, 
11§°29-35). Thus (9) uses “know” in an unqualified way; it expresses an 
ordinary knowledge claim. 

What qualification, then, must be understood with (10) if that too is 
to be reckoned true? The gloss, “you understand it universally”, is 
expanded a little at B 21, 67*16—21: “For knowing of every triangle that 
it contains two right angles is not simple, but in one case we know it 
by having universal knowledge, and in the other by having particular 
knowledge. So in this way with respect to universal knowledge you know 
of C that it contains two right angles, but you do not know this with 
respect to particular knowledge; so that you will not have contrary pieces 
of knowledge.” The first sentence of this extract suggests that it is (6) 
and not (10) which Aristotle has in mind; he seems to be offering two 
readings of “b knows that every G is F”. One of these readings is 
presumably (6) itself; the other may well be: 

(6') If anything is G, b knows that it is F. 

The distinction is clearly brought out by symbolization, when (6) and 
(6') appear as: 

87 

71°24 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

(*6) b knows that (Wx) (Gif Gx then Fx); 
(*6') (Vx) (if Gx then b knows that Fx). 

The same distinction probably reappears at A 5, 74°30-2; the common 
Greek idiom for “knowing that X is Y’’, viz. “knowing of X that it is 
Y” (cf. Lyons, 107-10), hovers ambiguously between (6) and (6’); and 
the distinction is just what is needed to solve Aristotle’s puzzle. For 
while (6) and (7) do not entail (10), (6’) and (7) do; and while (6), (7), 
and (8) are consistent, (6’), (7), and (8) are not. (But (6’) is not quite 
right. Better: 

(6') Of every G, b knows that it is F. 

I was alerted to this point by FEREJOHN (1988), 116 n. 12; cf. (1991), 
42-3.) 

Aristotle, however, does not follow out this line of thought; rather, his 
remarks return to (10), which, he claims, is true only if ‘‘know” is ex- 
panded to ‘“‘know with respect to universal knowledge’’. 4 24, 86°23-7, 
elucidates this by means of the notion of potential knowledge (cf. Met A 
2, 982°21-3): “b knows universally that a is G’’ means “b knows poten- 
tially that a is G, inasmuch as he has actual knowledge of a universal 
proposition which it falls under”. Does this solve Aristotle’s puzzle? 
Aristotle clearly sees that (6) and (7) do not entail (10) if (10) is read in 
the ordinary way; yet his answer does nothing to explain why (6) and (7) 
might seem to yield (10)—for his reading of (10) foists an utterly unnatural 
sense upon it, and his efforts on (10) blind him to the relevance of (6’). 

Aristotle thinks that there is more to be said for his reading of (10): 
without the distinction it relies upon, ‘“‘the puzzle in the Meno will arise”’ 
(71°29). In Plato’s Meno Meno, baffled in his search for virtue, asks: 
“And in what fashion, Socrates, will you seek that of which you do not 
even know if it exists? For what sort of thing from among those you don’t 
know will you set before you and seek? And even if you actually happen 
across it, how will you know this is what you did not know?—-socraTEs: 
I know what you mean, Meno. Do you see how you are spinning out an 
eristic argument to the effect that it is not possible for a man to seek 
either what he knows or what he does not know? For he wouldn’t seek 
what he knows—for he knows it, and such a person has no need of a 
search—nor what he does not know—for he does not know what he will 
seek” (8045~—°5). Plato’s problem is this: if someone wants to know what 
X is, then either (a) he already knows what X is—in which case he will 
learn only what he already knows and his search is inane; or else (b) he 
does not yet know what X is—in which case he cannot seek successfully, 
for he will know neither what he is looking for nor whether he has found 
it. Plato in effect accepts the bad argument in limb (6) of the dilemma, 
and rejects the good argument in (a) (see Meno 804—86°). And Aristotle 
follows him, maintaining that the seeker does in a sense already know 
what he is looking for. (The affinity to Plato is explicit in the language of 
APr B 21, 67°23-4.) 

88 

COMMENTARY 71°30 

71°30: The next stretch of argument leaves the Meno and considers an 
alternative solution to the puzzle in (6)-(10). (There is no evidence as to 
whose solution this was.) It accepts the validity of the arguments in 
(6)—(10), and consequently modifies a premiss: instead of (6) we should 
be content with: 

(6”) b knows that everything he knows to be G is F. 
In symbols: 
(*6") b knows that (Vx) (if b knows that Gx, then Fx). 

Plainly (6”) and (7) do not entail (10). 

Aristotle’s rejoinder, that propositions of the form contained in (6”) 
simply do not occur in ordinary scientific argument, is inadequate, since 
the solution is urging that such propositions should form the staple of a 
safe science. Perhaps Aristotle means to indicate, what is certainly true, 
that the solution will lead to a considerable impoverishment of scientific 
knowledge. A better reason for rejecting the solution is that it concedes 
far more than is necessary to the puzzle. 

CHAPTER 2 

71°9: The definiendum is understanding simpliciter (see p. 87). An 
example of ‘sophistical’ understanding is given at A 5, 74°27-32; such 
knowledge is ‘incidental’ because it is not of its subject as such. ‘Inciden- 
tal’ translates sumbebékos, the past participle of sumbainein (“‘result’, 
“happen”, etc.); ‘incidentals’ of X are, generally, predicates of X, and, 
specifically, non-essential predicates of X (cf. e.g. Top A 5, 1042-26). 
The standard translation of sumbebékos is ‘“‘accident”. On ‘incidental’ 
knowledge see also e.g. 4 2, 7128-9; A 6, 74°21-6; EN Z 3, 1139°31-5. 
It is a mistake to look for a uniform characterization of incidental 
knowledge (or, in general, of what it is to be incidentally F): you know 
something incidentally if your knowledge fails to satisfy one or another 
of the various conditions which knowledge simpliciter must satisfy. There 
are several ways to fail, and hence several ways of having only incidental 
knowledge. 

The definiens contains two conjuncts, one to do with explanation, the 
other with necessity. “Explanation” and its cognates render aitia and its 
cognates. As synonyms for aitia Aristotle uses to dioti and to dia ti 
(literally “the wherefore’ and ‘‘the because of what’”—I translate as 
“the reason why’’). Roughly speaking, to give an aitia for something is to 
say why it is the case, and X is an aitia of Y provided that Y is because 
of X (see Bonitz, 177*50-2). More formally, Aristotle will uses phrases 
of the form “‘X is aition of Z for Y” (e.g. “Having no bile is aition of 
longevity for quadrupeds”: cf. B 17, 99°4—6): i.e. Y is Z because of X. 
(In the context of APst at least, it seems that “because of X”’ can—and 
must—always be expanded into something of the form “because P”’: 
e.g. “because they have no bile”.) The standard English translation is 

89 

71°9 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

“cause” (with its cognates); but in many contexts this is false, or at any 
rate seriously misleading. Sometimes “reason” is the right translation; 
often “explanation” is best. (See esp. MORAVCSIK (1974), (1975).) In the 
first edition, I resolved to adhere to a single translation for all occurrences 
of the word; and I opted for “explanation”. This was criticized, usually 
on the grounds that an explanation, unlike an aitia, is a linguistic or a 
propositional item or else a ‘theoretical construction’. (See further FREE- 
LAND (1991), who argues—to my mind unconvincingly—that Aristotelian 
aitiai should not be construed as explanations.) But—in my version of 
English, at least—explanations are not necessarily linguistic or proposi- 
tional items, nor are they in any way tied to theories: my pupils are 
late, and the explanation (quite non-linguistic and theory-free) is that 
they overslept. There is, I still think, much to be said for keeping a 
single word for aitia; and the least bad single word is ‘explanation’. 
(Some may feel happier with Moravcsik’s ‘‘explanatory factor”; but that 
it too cumbersome for a translator.) 
The first conjunct of the definition of understanding, then, is: 

(1) a understands X only if a knows that Y is the explanation of X. 

For parallels to (1) see ©.g. Phys A 1, 18473 (where the verb for “know” 
is signoskein), B 2, 194°18 (eidenai); Mei A 3, 983°25—-6 (eidenai); a 2, 
994°29—30 (eidenai). The thesis derives from Plato’s celebrated sug- 
gestion that true opinion becomes knowledge if it is “tied down by 
calculation of an explanation” (aitias logismdi) (Meno 98°3; cf. e.g. Rep 
534°; Gorg 465°; Met A 1, 981728). (1) avoids circularity only if “under- 
stand” (epistasthai) and “know” (here gigndéskein) are kept apart in 
sense (see p. 82). And such a distinction in sense is also required if we 
are to reconcile (1) with Aristotle’s repeated affirmation that we seek 
the reason why after we have come to know the fact (see B 1, 89°29, 
note). 

The second conjunct of the definiens is ambiguously expressed: the 
clause “that it is not possible ...”’ may depend either on ‘“‘we think” or 
on “we know”, yielding in the first case: 

(2a) a understands X only if X cannot be otherwise, 
and in the second: 

(2b) a understands X only if a knows that X cannot be otherwise. 

Syntax perhaps favours (2a); it is easily paralleled (e.g. at A 4; 73°21; 
A 6, 74°6); and it finds a partial analogy at 4 33; 89°6-—10. But in favour 
of (2b) there may be cited first the fact that 71°15 infers (2a) as a con- 
sequence of the definition; and secondly, that 4 6, 75°14, unequivocally 
indicates (2b) in an apparent reference back to our definition. I plump 
for (2b). (But see EBERT (1980), 89~90.) 

The two necessary conditions for understanding are jointly sufficient; 
thus we have: 

go 

COMMENTARY 71°9 

(3) a understands X = g; a knows that Y is the explanation of X anda 
knows that X cannot be otherwise. 

In (3) I have used the nondescript variables X and Y: it becomes clear 
from the rest of 4 2 that understanding is, at least principally, a species 
of propositional knowledge; but Aristotle’s definition does not, I think, 
require this, and later discussions of condition (1) are careless of it. 

Aristotle offers a justification for (3). 71°9-13 argue: ‘We think under- 
standing to be so-and-so; therefore understanding is so-and-so’ (cf. EN Z 
3, 113920). Such ‘consensus’ arguments are common in Aristotle (cf. 
e.g. Phys 4 11, 218°21-33); and they are implicitly recognized as ap- 
propriate to principles such as (3) at Top A 2, 101 *36—>3. No doubt the 
consensus is not overt but rather latent in linguistic practice: ‘We use the 
term ‘“‘understand” thus-and-so; therefore understanding is so-and-so’ 
(cf. Met A 3, 98325). 71°13-15 is normally taken as a repetition of this 
argument; but in fact it adds the new observation that genuine under- 
standers actually are so-and-so. Perhaps this is supposed in some way to 
confirm the latent consensus (at least, its contradictory would prove the 
consensus mistaken). 

So interpreted, Aristotle’s argument for (3) seems to be factually 
mistaken; for (3) does not represent a correct analysis of the actual use 
of the Greek term epistasthai. Could we take (3) as a ‘stipulative’ 
definition, declaring that nothing shall count as genuine scientific knowl- 
edge if it does not offer explanations and restrict itself to what cannot be 
otherwise? The “we think” argument will then refer not to linguistic con- 
sensus but rather to the views of Aristotle and his fellows on the proper 
limits of scientific endeavour. This will hardly do (see EBERT (1980), 
89-90; BURNYEAT (1981), 108 n. 23); for Aristotle plainly takes himself to 
be articulating the common conception of epistémé or knowledge. 

Aristotle’s definition does not fit, and is surely not intended to fit, 
every legitimate use of the Greek words epistémé and epistasthai—and 
Aristotle himself frequently and unapologetically employs these words in 
ways which fall outside his definition. Nor, again, does his definition fit 
the ordinary use of epistasthai rather than the ordinary use of eidenai or 
gignoskein (see the passages from Phys and Met cited above. in con- 
nection with (1)). Rather, he takes himself—as the qualification at 71°9 
indicates—to be delineating ‘ ‘an ideal type of knowledge, knowledge 
strictly or properly speaking, to which other kinds of knowledge can be 
seen as approximating”. (I take these words from TAYLOR (1990), 122. 
Taylor’s article offers a critical survey of the various strands in Aristotle’s 
thought on epistemological matters.) Note, for example, EN Z 3, 
11391821: “What understanding is will be clear from the following 
account—if we are to be exact (akribologeisthai) and not deal in simi- 
larities: we all suppose that what we know cannot be otherwise.” Thus 
the ‘strict’ notion of knowledge requires that its objects be necessary; 
but there are other notions—the ‘similarities’ or approximations—which 
do not. (See also Theophrastus, Met 8, 9*10, 23—6—-which, however, 

oI 

71°9 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

may rather be concerned with the distinction between understanding 
theorems and understanding principles.) This high-grade knowledge, 
Aristotle maintains, is what the sciences characteristically aspire to. It 
comes in two forms: there is demonstrative knowledge, which forms the 
main subject of APst A, and there is the form of knowledge by which we 
grasp the first principles. (Both these forms, it should be stressed, fall 
under the general definition of 7110-12.) 

Is Aristotle right? And how—-a more perplexing question—may we 
appropriately judge whether or not he is right? To most readers, the 
definition appears far too strict—hence the idea that Aristotle may be 
making a stipulation (which might be deemed pointless but which could 
not be judged straightforwardly false), and hence too the notion (not 
evidently distinct from the stipulative suggestion) that he may be de- 
lineating a conception of ‘understanding’ which is distinct from any 
common conception of knowledge. Aristotle himself at times appears to 
find his definition too tight; for at times he allows that we may have 
proper epistémé of matters which hold not necessarily but only for the 
most part (see p. 192). Moreover, many of his own illustrative examples 
in APst concern knowledge of singular items—that the moon is now 
eclipsed, that the Athenians attacked Sardis,... But he would not be 
embarrassed by the objection that we all know any number of purely 
contingent facts: this knowledge, he would urge, is only knowledge by 
courtesy and in so far as it approximates to knowledge proper. (For a 
subtler consideration of these issues see VAN FRAASSEN (1980), 21-8.) 

A telling objection, I take it, would be this: the sort of knowledge which 
the sciences—the central and most reputable of the sciences—aspire to 
is not, or not in all cases, included in the Aristotelian definition. Thus 
we might urge that the biological sciences, say, are concerned with 
contingent truths: their theorems do not have the sort of necessity which 
we associate with the mathematical sciences. Conversely, we might urge 
that the mathematical sciences have no interest in explanations: their 
proofs (as some of the ancients maintained: p. 107) do not pretend to 
offer explanations of their theorems. (Indeed, we might surmise that 
Aristotle, observing the importance of necessity to the mathematical 
sciences and the importance of explanatoriness to the natural sciences, 
mistakenly concluded that both necessity and explanatoriness must be 
essential parts of any proper or scientific knowledge.) 

These objections would need to be elaborated and developed. But it is 
clear how Aristotle should attempt to meet them. He should first point 
out that his notion of necessity is not restricted to what we sometimes call 
logical or conceptual necessity—it certainly includes ‘natural’ necessity. 
(For varieties of necessity in Aristotle see sorABJI (1980), 222-4.) Hence 
the theorems of biology will indeed be necessary truths, their necessity 
being underwritten not by any analytical connection among concepts but 
by the essential natures of their subject-matter. (But why suppose that 
statements of essence are necessary? Thunder is, perhaps, essentially a 
noise caused by the quenching of fire in the clouds; for I say what 

g2 

COMMENTARY 71°9 

thunder is (ti esti) when I say that it is such a noise. Yet is it necessarily 
such a noise? For discussion of this issue see SORABJI (1980), ch. 13; 
(1981), 231-44.) 

He should secondly point out that his notion of explanation is also a 
generous one: his conception of an aitia can properly be applied not only 
in areas, like the biological sciences, where we are happy to speak of 
causal explanations, but also in mathematics, where the explanations are 
not, of course, causal in the modern sense. 

I do not know how successful this line of defence might be. (See 
further VAN FRAASSEN (1980); PATZIG (1981), 141-5.) 

41°16: ‘‘another type of understanding’’: the apprehension of the prin- 
ciples (see 7225-53; 4 3, 72°18-24; A 9, 76716—22 etc.). Aristotle’s 
terminology is not stable: here apprehension of the principles is classed 
as a sort of understanding (cf. Theophrastus, Met 9°8-16); but B 19 
contrasts the two states. Other passages vacillate; the point is trifling, as 
A 3, 72°18—25, perhaps realizes. ‘Another type” means “a type different 
from demonstrative understanding” rather than “a type different from 
that defined in (3) (Zabarella). 

71°18: “‘a scientific deduction”: for “deduction” see p. 83; “scientific” 
translates epistemonikos—“‘productive of understanding” better brings 
out the connection with epistasthai. 

71°19: The characteristics of demonstration are inferred from the de- 
finition of understanding; 4 2 concentrates on the implications of (1), 
leaving (2b) for 4 4. 

The six characteristics fall into two groups of three, the first group 
containing absolute features of demonstration, the second relative fea- 
tures; this explains the apparent perversity of listing both primitiveness 
and priority among the features: a proposition (e.g. Euclid’s fifth postu- 
late) might be primitive, i.e. have nothing prior to it, and yet not be 
prior to a given conclusion (e.g. that vines are deciduous). The three 
relative features entail a fourth, ‘appropriateness’; this is elucidated at 4 
6, 74°21-6 and in 4 7 (cf. GA B 8, 747°30-748"11). 

The six features properly characterize the principles or axioms of a 
demonstrative science. But Aristotle’s thought contains two irritating 
imprecisions. First, as I have already observed, the relation of depending 
on (einai ek: p. 81) may be either the epistemological relation holding 
between a’s knowledge that P and the propositions on which it is based, 
or the logical relation holding between a demonstrated conclusion and its 
premisses. Secondly, Aristotle does not distinguish clearly between the 
principles on which a demonstrated conclusion ultimately depends and 
the premisses from which it immediately derives. A more rigorous state- 
ment of his view is this: a has demonstrative understanding that P only if 
a has produced a sequence of deductions D;, D2,..., D, such that (i) 
the conclusion of D, is P; (ii) the conclusion of each D; for i > 1 is 
identical with a premiss of some D; where j < i; and (iii) each premiss of 

93 

71°19 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

each D;, is true, is prior to, more familiar than, and explanatory of the 
conclusion of D;, and either is primitive and immediate or else is the 
conclusion of some D;, where k > i. 

When Aristotle writes “They must be true...They must proceed 
from items which are primitive ...”, he is expressing himself carelessly; 
for we should expect either ‘They [sc. the items from which demon- 
strative understanding proceeds] must be true...They must be 
primitive ...’’, or else “It [sc. demonstrative understanding} must pro- 
ceed from what is true. ..It must proceed from what is primitive .. .”. 
But his carelessness may, as it were, hint at the more rigorous statement 
which I have just rehearsed. However that may be, he certainly gets 
closer to rigour at Top A 1, 100°27-9: ‘‘A deduction is a demonstration 
if it proceeds from items which are true and primitive or else from items 
which are ultimately known by way of what is primitive and true”’ (cf. 
APst A 10, 76°10; Rhet A 2, 1357°7: see BARNES (1981), 25-7). 

71°25: (A) Truth. If “they” in “they must be true” refers to the 
principles, the argument runs: ‘Since, by (3), a demonstrator must know 
the principles which explain the demonstrandum, and what is known 
must be the case, i.e. be true, it follows that the principles must be true.’ 
Against this interpretation some say, first, that 71°26 declares that one 
cannot understand what is not the case, whereas (3) requires only that 
the principles be known; and secondly, that the example of the incom- 
mensurability (of the diagonal of a square with its sides: cf. Heath (2), 
22-3; 196-7) regularly illustrates the conclusion of an inference, not a 
principle (e.g. APr A 23, 41°23-7; A 44, 50°35-8). But these objec- 
tions are minor (“understand” in 71°26 may have its ordinary sense 
of “know’); and no alternative construe gives Aristotle a plausible 
argument. 

71°26: (B) Primitiveness. The commentators offer a variety of glosses 
on “primitive”; the least implausible states that “primitive’’, “indemons- 
trable’’, and “immediate” are coextensive; for Aristotle offers only a 
single argument for these three features, and seems at times (e.g. 4 15, 
79°38) to use the three terms promiscuously. But there is an obvious 
analysis of ‘‘P is primitive’, viz. “‘there is no Q prior to P”’, i.e. “there is 
no Q from which knowledge of P must be derived”. Aristotle assumes 
that if P is indemonstrable it is primitive, and thus an argument that 
principles are indemonstrable proves also that they are primitive. 

(C) Immediacy. To be ‘immediate’ (amesos) is to lack a middle term: a 
syllogistic proposition AxC is immediate if and only if there is no term B, 
distinct from A and C, such that AxB, BxC + AxC is a syllogism 
(and AxB, BxC are true). The primary case of immediacy concerns a- 
propositions: AaC is immediate if and only if 4 (AB) (AaB & BaC). But 
immediate e-propositions are admitted in A 15. (“‘”’ signifies negation.) 

At 71°27 “indemonstrable” (anapodeiktos) replaces ‘immediate’. 
Sextus reports: “arguments are called anapodeiktoi in two ways—those 
that have not been demonstrated, and those that have no need of 

94 

COMMENTARY 71°30 

demonstration owing to its being at once patent in their case that they 
are conclusive” (adv Math viii. 223; cf. Diogenes Laertius, vii. 79). 
Anapodeiktos means “undemonstrated” at, e.g., APr B 1, 53°32; 2; EN 
Z 12, 1143” 12; and the sense “not needing demonstration” fits some 
contexts in APst. But here anapodeiktos contrasts with “that of which 
there is a demonstration’’, i.e. ‘‘that which is demonstrable”. Hence it 
might be thought to mean “indemonstrable” —and so I have translated 
it. But according to Aristotle (71°28), if it is demonstrable that P, then 
you can only understand that P by way of a demonstration. Hence 
something is demonstrable if and only if it needs demonstration; and 
something is indemonstrable if and only if it does not need demonstration. 

If P is indemonstrable, it does not follow that P is immediate, even if 
P is of the form AxC; for there may be a valid, but non-demonstrative, 
syllogism concluding to P (cf. 4 13 etc.). If P is immediate, it only 
follows that P is indemonstrable on the false assumption that all demon- 
strations are syllogisms. 

The apes at 7127-9 is obscure. The second sentence, “to under- 
stand ...”, amounts to: 

(4) If P is demonstrable, a understands P if and only if a has a 
demonstration of P. 

(‘“Non- -incidentally”, despite the word-order, goes with “understand”: 
see 71°9.) The first sentence, “otherwise you will not...’’, expresses a 
proposition which follows from (4), viz.: 

(5) If a principle 77 is demonstrable, then if a does not have a demon- 
stration of 77, a does not understand /7. 

(Thus ‘“‘understand” is again used of principles.) In order to infer from 
(5) that no principle is demonstrable, we need two further premisses: 

(6) Some principles are understood; 
(7) No one has a demonstration of any principle. 

Premiss (6) is reaffirmed in 4 3; and (7) is a truism. Premiss (4) clearly 
needs argument; it is restated and generalized at B 3, 90°10; 20-2 (see 
notes). 

q1°29: (D) Explanatoriness. If a has a demonstration of P, then a 
understands P and so knows the explanation of P. If the only knowl- 
edge necessary for having a demonstration of P is knowledge of the 
principles from which P is deducible, then the principles must contain 
the explanation of P. 

71°31: (E) Priority. Aristotle regularly distinguishes several varieties of 
priority (see esp. Cat 12; Met 4 11). He has in mind here not the curious 
‘explanatory’ priority of Cat 12, 14°9-23, nor temporal priority (for 
Aristotelian ‘causes’ need not precede their ‘effects’), but priority ‘in 
knowledge’ (P is ‘prior in knowledge’ to Q if knowledge that Q. requires 
pe Owe that P, but not vice versa). See esp. Met 4 11, 1018°30-7. 

71°30: (F) Familiarity. “Gnorimos” is sometimes translated “‘knowable” 

95 

71°30 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

and sometimes ‘known’; on the whole, the latter is better (see S. 
Mansion, 139 n. 20; Wieland, 71 n. 2; BURNYEAT (1981), 128 n. 53). 
“Known”, however, does not easily take a comparative form (‘“‘more 
known”’); “familiar” does, and is in any case marginally more suitable 
than “known” in non-comparative contexts. 

On occasion Aristotle distinguishes between priority and familiarity 
(e.g. APr B 16, 64°30~3), but 71°33-72°5 seems to show that they are 
identical here (see notes). 

The text at 71531 is ambiguous. Most interpreters put a semi-colon 
after “explanatory”, and take “and we already know them...” to 
restate the requirement of familiarity. Now the premisses (or principles) 
of a demonstration must be “more familiar (gnorimdtera)” than its 
conclusion, and they must also be progigndskomena (“we already know” 
them). But these two claims are quite distinct (see MIGNUCCI (1975), 26); 
hence the reference at 71°30 to what we already know cannot restate the 
familiarity condition. We should therefore repunctuate: remove the colon 
after “explanatory”, and take “we already know...” to provide a 
second argument for the priority condition. It follows that we shall find 
no explicit justification of the familiarity condition. (We should not seek 
one at 72*25—°3. There Aristotle is explicitly concerned, not with what is 
‘more familiar by nature’, but with what we must already know better. 
He argues that, in order to come to know something on the basis of a 
demonstration, we must already have a grasp of the principles which is 
better than the grasp which we are about to acquire of the conclusion.) 
But this should not be surprising; for, in this passage at least, Aristotle 
plainly treats priority (in the relevant sense) and greater familiarity as 
one and the same thing. (Hence we should properly speak of five, rather 
than six, conditions on the premisses or principles of demonstrations.) 

But there is a difficulty: Aristotle cites the fact that we must already 
know the principles as evidence that they are prior. It is plain, from the 
general considerations advanced at 71°1-17, that we must know the 
principles of a demonstration before we are led to its conclusion. But 
Aristotle cannot argue that if I know that P before I know that Q, then 
P is epistemically prior to Q. Such an argument ignores the contrast 
between what is more familiar by nature and what is more familiar to us, 
which the next paragraph develops. 

71°33: The distinction explained i in this section is common (see Top Z 
4; Phys A 1; cf. APr B 23, 68°35-7; Met Z 3, 1029°3-12; EN 4 4, 
1095°2—4; cf. MANSION (1984)). What it is to be more familiar ‘by nature’ 
or simpliciter is explained in Top Z 4: the genus and the differentia ‘‘are 
also more familiar than the species; for if the species is apprehended, it is 
necessary that the genus and the differentia are apprehended too... . but 
if the genus or the differentia is apprehended, it is not necessary that the 
species too is apprehended; so that the species is more unfamiliar” 

(141° 29- 34). Thus being more familiar by nature is the same as being 
prior in knowledge. 

96 

COMMENTARY 71°33 

Aristotle does not explain the notion of ‘familiarity in relation to us’. 
Since ‘“X is more familiar by nature than Y” is compatible with “‘Y is 
more familiar to a than X”, “Y is familiar to a’ cannot entail “a 
understands that P’”—but it does entail ‘“‘a knows that P’’, in a suitably 
weak sense of “know”. (Met Z 3 imagines that I become educated in so 
far as what is more familiar by nature becomes more familiar to me.) 
Both terms and propositions can be familiar. B is more familiar to me 
than A, perhaps, if I am better at recognizing Bs than As; Q is more 
familiar than P, perhaps, if I am more prone to assent to Q than to P. 

The question ‘““What things are most familiar by nature?” is, in a loose 
sense, conceptual; but the question “What things are most familiar to 
us?” is empirical, and, as Top Z 4, 141°36~142%4, recognizes, it has 
no unitary answer. Thus when Aristotle says that what is “nearer to 
perception” is more familiar to us, he must be speaking loosely; he can 
hardly be defining the notion of familiarity to us, despite the “I call’’. 
By and large, the untutored mind recognizes instances of perceptible 
properties more readily than instances of abstract properties, and is 
more inclined to assent to propositions about the immediately perceptible 
world than to propositions of a more abstract nature (cf. Top © 1, 156°6). 
Aristotle would presumably back the claim that X is more general than 
Y if it is ‘further from perception’ than Y by appealing to the theory 
of concept formation expounded in B 19. The connection between 
generality and perception is thus at best a contingent one. Generality 
and familiarity are, however, logically tied in the following way: if P is 
more familiar by nature than Q then P cannot be less general than Q. 

The six characteristics of demonstration call for two final comments. 
First, it may be useful to set out the logical relations between them: (C) 
entails (B), and (B) entails (A); (E) is equivalent to (F) and entails (D); 
further, (D) entails (A) (cf. APr B 2, 53°9). Secondly, it should be 
stressed that Aristotle does not require his principles to be ‘self-evident’. 
They must, it is true, be self-explanatory (cf. APr B 16, 64°35; Top A 1, 
100°; Phys B 1, 193°5), and some of them cannot be disbelieved (4 10, 
76°23, notes); but the later notion that the axioms of a science must be 
in some way evidently and patently true is not at all Aristotelian. (For an 
early example of the view see Speusippus, frag. 30 Lang = frag. 73 
Taran.) 

72°5: This section fires off a salvo of explanatory glosses; it is not very 
well integrated into the chapter. 

72°5: ‘‘To proceed from primitives . . .”: If ‘“X is primitive” is equivalent 
to “X is a principle’, then depending on primitives is depending on 
appropriate principles only if all principles are appropriate. This condi- 
tion is satisfied if ‘ ‘principle” is taken as a relative term (cf. e.g. Phys A 
2, 185°4), so that ‘‘X is a principle” is elliptical for “X is a principle of 
s”. “Principle” is used in a non-relative sense at 71°23, where it takes an 
argument to show that principles are appropriate. 

72°7; “A principle of a demonstration .. .”’: ‘‘proposition’’, and not the 

97 

72°7 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

customary ‘ ‘premiss”, is the translation of protasis; see the definitions at 
Top A 4, 101°27-36; @ 2, te 24; APr A 1, 24°16 (cf. p. 83). 

Having glossed ‘ ‘principle” a “immediate proposition”, Aristotle pro- 
ceeds to gloss each part of his ‘tees It is strange that he does not give 
the obvious explanation of ‘‘immediate”’ (p. 94). 

72°9: The MSS define a proposition as “one part of a statement” 
(apophanseds to heteron morion). The reading has worried many 
scholars; and it is in fact perfectly impossible (pace MIGNUCCI (1975), 
32-3): a ‘statement’ is said to be “one part of a contradictory pair” 
(72°11; cf. Int 17°23-6); since a contradictory pair is a pair of the form 
{P, not-P}, a statement is anything of the form “P” or “not-P”. Then 
if—with the MSS-—~a proposition is “one part of a statement’’, a pro- 
position must be something like a term (subject or predicate). And this 
flies in the face of everything Aristotle says about propositions. The 
change from apophanseéds to antiphaseos (cf. Int 11, 20°24), which I 
discover was made before me by Colli, is surely right. (The same error 
recurs in Alexander, in APr 11. 8; the reverse error is found in most MSS at 
APst A 2, 72°19.) The only difficulty is with the clause apophansis... 
morion (72°11-12). The presence of this clause in the text is awkward 
and unmotivated rather than inconsistent; and there are more awkward 
sentences in APst. None the less, I suspect that it was added as a 
(correct) gloss on the text, after antiphaseds had been corrupted; for the 
new word apophanseos clearly called for an explanation. 

729: “one thing said of one’: if this means more than “in subject- 
predicate form’, it may be meant to rule out equivocal predication (cf. 
Met I 4, 1006°32) or multiple predication (cf. Top I 6, 169°7-12; 30, 
181°36—9; Int 8, 18°18—23), or it may be intended to insist that subject 
and predicate are metaphysical unities (e.g. Int 11, 20°12-21). 

72°10: “It is dialectical if it assumes...”: cf. APr A 1, 24°22-5: 
“Demonstrative propositions differ from dialectical propositions because 
a demonstrative proposition is the assumption of one part of a contra- 
dictory pair. . . while a dialectical proposition is a request for one part of 
a contradictory pair.” The ‘dialectical’ arguer asks whether P is the case 
and is equally prepared to argue from either possible answer. Aristotle 
regularly says (e.g. Top A 1) that dialectical argument starts from ‘re- 
putable’ propositions (endoxa); that is presumably because the wise 
answerer will plump for whichever answer is the more ‘reputable’. (See 
further 4 11, 77°25, notes.) 

72°12: “A contradictory pair...”: Aristotle recognizes four sorts of 
‘opposition’ (cf. esp. Cat 10). In the Categories contradictory opposites 
are defined by the fact that “‘in the case of them alone it is necessary 
always for one of them to be true and one false” (10, 13 937-53), If there 
is nothing ‘between’ P and Q (cf. e.g. Met 7, 1011°23), i.e. no third 
possibility apart from P and Q, then one at least of P and Q must be true 
(and hence, since they are opposites, the other false). The addition of 

98 

COMMENTARY 72°12 

“in their own right” is perhaps intended to indicate that it is part of the 
nature of a contradiction, and not just a contingent fact, that there is no 
third possibility ‘between’ its parts. (“The sky is blue” and ‘The sky is 
clouded” are not contradictory, though as a matter of fact one or the 
other is true.) 

72°13: “‘... which says something of something .. .”: cf. Int 6, 17°25-6. 
Aristotle often uses the phrase “something of something” (ti kata tinos) 
for negations as well as affirmations. 

72°14: The classification of principles undertaken in this section is 
treated again in A Io. Aristotle’s use of the terminology he introduces 
here is not consistent; he refers to a customary use of ‘‘axiom”’ (cf. 4 10, 
76°14—perhaps the custom was mathematical: Met F 3, 1005 920; but cf. 
Einarson, 43-6), but he himself uses this term, and also “posit” and 
“supposition”, in a variety of ways (e.g. Ross, 510-11; Bonitz, 797°1- 
34; 80255-26). For some time this terminology remained in a state of 
flux, even inside the mathematical tradition (cf. Proclus, Comm in Eucl 
75. 10-77. 2; 178. 12-182. 14; see e.g. Heath (1), i. 117-24; (2), 53-7). 
See esp. VON FRITZ (1955). 

(A) Axioms and Posits: The distinction between axioms and posits is 
identical with that drawn at 4 10, 76°37-°2, between ‘common’ and 
‘proper’ principles; at least, Aristotle uses the terms “the common 
elements” (ta koina) and “the common axioms” (ta koina axiodmata) 
indiscriminately (Bonitz, 400°2—5), and he does not distinguish be- 
tween “axioms” and “‘common axioms” (cf. Euclid’s “common notions” 
koinai ennoiai). Though Aristotle held that in a sense the common 
axioms were familiar to everyone (Top I 11, 172227—30; Met B 1, 995°8; 
2, 996°27-9; 3, 1005724), by calling them common he indicates not this 
fact but the fact that they are shared by more than one science. 

A standard example | of an axiom is “Equals taken from equals leave 
equals” (A 10, 76741, °20; 11, 77°31; Euclid, i common notion 3); this 
appears to be a specifically mathematical principle, so that the axioms 
need not be common to all sciences. In that case “axiom” is best 
taken as a relative term—propositions are axioms for a science—and — 
Aristotle’s definition runs as follows: 

(8) P is an axiom for S = g; if anyone knows any proposition in S, 
then he knows that P. 

The commentators imply an ‘absolute’ definition: 
(9) P is an axiom = g; if anyone knows anything, he knows that P 

(cf. Met © 3, 1005°15). In that case, the ‘equals’ principle is not, strictly 
speaking, an axiom at all. 

“Theophrastus defines axioms thus: ‘An axiom is a sort of opinion, 
either applying to items of the same kind (e.g. equals from equals) or 
else simpliciter applying to everything (e.g. either the affirmation or the 
negation)’” (Themistius, in APst 7. 3-4 = frag. 33 Graeser). Thus he in 
effect accepts both (8) and (9) as accounts of the two different sorts 

99 

72°14 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

of axiom. As for Aristotle, we cannot take him to mean (8) as his 
definition; for in that case axioms would no longer be the same as the 
common principles. Yet it remains true that his examples do not fit (9). 
At An B 6, 418710-11, 16-20, he explains that ‘common sensibles’ 
are items which can be perceived by all the senses; but his examples 
indicate—and Sens 4, 442°4—10, shows that he knew—that an item is 
‘common’ if it can be perceived by more than one sense. Perhaps, then, 
he means—or should have said—that an axiom is a principle found in 
more than one science. Thus: 

(8*) P is an axiom = gg for at least two distinct sciences, S and S*, if 
anyone knows any proposition in S or in S*, then he knows that 

Are there axioms, as Aristotle asserts? If (9) is adopted, the only 
contenders for axiomhood are logical laws; and although it is false that 
learners must have explicit knowledge of some logical laws, it may be 
that in some weak sense of “know” all learners must ‘know’ some logical 
laws (e.g. they must order their beliefs in accordance with them). If (8) 
is preferred, we must imagine that, e.g., the ‘equals’ principle is used in 
all mathematical proofs; it seems to me improbable that this, or any 
analogous proposition, is true. (And the suspicion that there are in fact 
no axioms in this sense seems to be tacitly accepted by Aristotle himself: 
see note to 72°28.) 

(B) Suppositions and Definitions: 72°19 appears to allow that any type 
of proposition may function as a supposition (cf. EE B 10, 1227*10; 
>98—32); and “that something is” is most readily glossed as “‘that some- 
thing is the case’’. (The translation ‘“‘that it is something”, which is also 
possible, gives essentially the same sense.) Then a definition is a posit 
“which does not”, i.e. which does not suppose that anything is the 
case. In Book B Aristotle maintains that definitions entail existential 
propositions (cf. B.7, 92”4—11); but presumably they do not ‘suppose’, 
or directly assert, that. anything is the case. Thus definitions are not 
propositions at all, so that here “definition (horismos)’ means—as it 
certainly sometimes does mean—‘‘definiens’’. (Hence we should translate 
72°22-—3 as: “‘arithmeticians posit as a unit that which is quantitatively 
indivisible”.) But there is a powerful objection to this interpretation: 
definitions are posits, posits are principles, and principles (72°7) are 
propositions. And yet in that case definitions will be ‘one part of a 
contradictory pair’, and hence will be a kind of supposition. 

Hence we might better follow the majority of the commentators 
in construing “‘that something is” as ‘“‘that there are Fs’’, thus taking 
suppositions to be exclusively existential propositions. In favour of this is 
the fact that Aristotle’s examples are existential (72°24; A 10, 76°35); and 
the argument of 4 10, 76°3-22, may offer support. (We shall then be 
obliged to maintain that the word “supposition” is being used in a 
broader sense at such places as Phys @ 3, 253°5 (cf. A 2, 18512), where 
it is a supposition of natural science that nature is a source of change.) 

100 

COMMENTARY 72714 

But it is hard to believe that by “either of the parts of a contradictory 
pair” Aristotle could have meant “either the proposition that something 
exists or the proposition that something does not exist’; nor shall we 
think that negative existential propositions are among the principles of 
any science. 

The account of ‘posits’ remains baffling (see further MiGNuccI (1975), 
35-9; LANDOR (1981)). It is, however, reasonably clear what Aristotle 
ought to have said, namely: ‘Posits are of two kinds—those which say 
that something is (I call these suppositions), and those which say what 
something is (I call these definitions)’. Thus—as Aristotle’s example 
itself indicates—the distinction intended here is the same as the distinc- 
tion made earlier at A I, 71°11-17. 

Aristotle is clear that principles function as premisses of demon- 
strations (72°7); but it is not easy to see how they can do so. A typical 
axiom is the Law of Excluded Middle; and that is not expressible in 
syllogistic form. If suppositions are existential propositions, then they 
too are not syllogistic. Definitions might well seem wholly unamenable 
to syllogistic expression; Aristotle, however, explicitly says that they 
have subject-predicate form (B 3, 90°3-4; cf. Top H 3, 153°16)—the 
notion of definition which this presupposes is not elucidated until Book 
B. 

72°25: Aristotle’s argument in 72725—32 is this: 
(10) If a has demonstrative knowledge that P, then P is known to a 
because /7 is known to a. 
—where P is a conclusion, and /7 its principles. 
(11a) If b is F because ¢ is F, then ¢ is more F than b; 
(115) If b is F because of c, then ¢ is more F than b. 
Hence: 

(12) If a has demonstrative knowledge that P, then 7 is more known 
to a than P is. 

This argument is valid if it makes sense (cf. Met 4 2, 982°30—°4). The 
text at 72°19 is compatible both with (11a) and with (115). The ancient 
commentators, noting that a murderer is not more dead than his victim, 
preferred qa 1a); and their interpretation is supported by Met a 1, 
993°23-6: ‘“‘A thing is most so-and-so of the other things that are so- and- 
so if it is in virtue of it that being so-and-so holds of the others (e.g. fire 
is hottest; for this iis the explanation for the other things of their heat)” 
(cf. Phys © 5, 257°8). On the other hand, Aristotle adheres to: 

(13) If b is F because of c, then b is F because ¢ is F 

(‘generation is from synonyms’: Met Z 9, 1034°21~-32; @ 8, 1049°23-7); 
and the conjunction of (11a) and (13) is equivalent to (115). Zabarella 
points out that (11a) can only be defended if “‘F”’ is restricted to predi- 
cates for which “more F”’ makes sense—a father is not more a man than 

Io] 

72°25 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

his son. Even with this restriction (11a) seems to be too imprecise for 
assessment. 

Whatever the value of (11), can we accept (12)? Some would rule it 
out on the grounds that there are no degrees of knowledge—you cannot 
know that P ‘more’ than you know that Q. Aristotle was familiar with 
this line of argument (cf. Cat 8, 8°29-32; 974~8; 10°32-11°5), and the 
text provides, implicitly, his answer to it: part of the notion of knowing 
that P is being convinced that P; since I can be more convinced that P 
than I am that Q, I can be said, in a reasonably intelligible sense, to 
know that P ‘more’ than I know that Q. And (12) can then be defended 
on Lockean grounds: P is infected by any uncertainty that infects 7 and 
also by any uncertainty that infects the inference from 77 to P. If we 
allow the possibility of complete certainty, then (12) needs a slight 
modification: P cannot be more known that J7 is. 

72°28: “either all or some of them”: i.e. ‘not all the premisses of an 
inference need be known before its conclusion’; or, better, ‘to know 
P we need only know beforehand those principles of S on which P 
depends; there may be other principles of S which are not used in the 
deduction of P’ (cf. Met B 3, 998°25-7). 

72°32: Aristotle infers that a must already know /7 from the premiss 
that a must be more convinced of 77 than he is of P. The argument relies 
on one further premiss: 

(14) It is impossible that (a is more convinced of X than of Y, and a 
knows that Y, and a does not know that X, and a is not more 
happily disposed towards X than by knowing X). 

(The only happier disposition than knowledge is ‘comprehension’: cf. A 
22, 83°34; B 19, 100°8). These premisses warrant the inference that if a 
knows that P, then a knows that /7. But it does not follow that a knows 
1 before he knows P. And in any case (14) is false: many people 
are more convinced of certain false beliefs than they are of pieces of 
knowledge (cf. EN Z 3, 1146°29). 

72°37: The crucial sentence in this paragraph (“in addition, there must 
be...) is doubly ambiguous: first, the genitive t6n antikeimenOon, which 
I translate ‘among the opposites” might equally be read as “than the 
opposites”; and secondly, the antecedent of hdn (“from which . . .”) may 
be either ‘the opposites’ or “‘the principles”. There are thus four 
possible paraphrases: 

(A) Nothing must be more convincing than the opposites of the true 
principles, from which opposites may come a deduction of the 
contrary error; 

(B) Nothing must be more convincing than the opposites of those 
principles from which... ; 

(C) Nothing must be more convincing among the opposites of those 
principles from which... ; 

102 

COMMENTARY 72°37 

(D) Nothing must be more convincing among the opposites of the 
principles, from which opposites... 

In (C) and (D) “more convincing” may be expanded to ‘‘more convincing 
{than the true principles)” or to “more convincing (than what is being 
proved)”. 

(A) is traditional, but it obliges us to read “‘more convincing than the 
opposites” as “more convincing than that the opposites are false’. (B) 
takes ‘“‘the opposites of those principles from which...” as a tortuous 
paraphrase for “the true principles”. (C) says the same as (B), but with 
less convolution. (D) is the least implausible reading. If we take ‘‘the 
opposites (of /7)” to be explicated by “from which a deduction of the 
contrary error may proceed” (i.e. ‘from which AeC, the contrary of the 
true conclusion AaC, may be inferred’), then we have Aristotle saying 
that there must be no 77’ such that a is more convinced of 17’ than he is 
of 1 and /7' entails the contrary of P. The type of case this rules out is 
illustrated at APr B 21, 66°18-67°5. 

92°3: “given that anyone who understands...”: ‘If a knows that P, 
then he cannot be rationally persuaded that not-P; hence he must not be 
more convinced of /7’, for attention to that would then persuade him 
that not-P.’ The unpersuadability of knowers was an Academic com- 
monplace (Tim 29°; 51°; [Def] 414°; Top E 2, 130°15-16; 3, 131°23-6; 
etc; cf. APst A 33, 89%5, notes); it is hard to think of any satisfactory 
argument for it. 

CHAPTER 3 

72°5: Demonstrative knowledge is a special case of rational knowledge, 
or knowledge based upon reasons. The notion of rational knowledge 
appears to lead to an infinite and vicious regress: if I know that P, then 
my knowledge must be based on some premiss Q; hence I must know 
that Q—on the basis of some further premiss R. If I know that P, I 
know that Q; if I know that Q, I know that R; and so on: if I know 
anything, I know infinitely many things. 

This regress is adverted to in Plato’s Theaetetus (209°-210°; cf. 2019— 
202%: see Morrow); and it was discussed in the Academy (cf. Met a 2; 
Theophrastus, Met 9, 9°21; cf. Sextus, adv Math viii. 347). The present 
chapter considers three reactions to it—or rather, to the special case in 
which it is applied to demonstrative knowledge. All three reactions agree 
that it is impossible to know infinitely many things: one group concludes 
that knowledge is impossible; a second group denies that demonstrative 
knowledge yields a vicious regress; the third group denies that all knowl- 
edge is demonstrative. The first, sceptical, reaction is ascribed by some 
scholars to Antisthenes (Cherniss, 65; Ross, 513-14). The second 
reaction, which calls on the possibility of circular proof, has been at- 
tributed to followers of Xenocrates (Cherniss, 68; Ross, 514), or to 
the Academic geometer Menaechmus (see Proclus, Comm in Eucl 

103 

72°5 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

72. 23-73. 5); but I am inclined to ascribe it to the youthful Aristotle 
(see APr B 5-7; APst B 12, 95°38—96°7, notes; BARNES (1976)). The 
third view is advocated by Aristotle in our chapter. 

The matter of 4 3 was later developed, by the Pyrrhonists, into a 
general argument for scepticism. (See Sextus, Pyrrh Hyp i. 165-77; 
Diogenes Laertius, ix. 88—9: BARNES (1990), 113-44.) Suppose that you 
claim that P,. Then either (i) you ground P; on P2, P, on P3,..., P, on 
Pr4i,+-+, Where each P, is distinct from each of its predecessors; or (ii) 
you ground P; on P), P2 on P3,..., P, on Prsi,..., where P,4, is 
identical with one of its predecessors; or (iii) you ground P; on P2, P; on 
P3,..., P, on P,zs;, where P,,,; is ungrounded. But none of these 
possibilities is legitimate: (i) is an infinite regress, and we cannot grasp 
an infinite sequence of propositions; (ii) is circular, and circular argu- 
mentation is always vicious; (iii) ends in bare assertion, and bare assertion 
establishes nothing. Thus the Pyrrhonists follow Aristotle in rejecting 
possibilities (i) and (ii); and they add that Aristotle’s own option, (iii), 
is no better than the others. Plainly, to confute the Pyrrhonists an 
Aristotelian must claim either that ‘bare assertion’ is in some cases (viz. 
in the case of primitive propositions) a respectable operation, or else 
that his assent to the principles is something more substantial than ‘bare 
assertion’. It is in B 19 that we eventually find Aristotle’s implicit attempt 
to confute, proleptically, the Pyrrhonists. (On 4 3 see also IRWIN (1988), 
125-33.) 
72°97: ““...or necessary”: i.e., presumably, 
sound argument’. 

< 

...0r supported by a 

72°47: The sceptical argument is subtle and complicated. Aristotle’s 
concise account is helped if we take some science S$ as the potential 
object of demonstration; S is the ordered set (P,, Ps,..., Py,..-) 
where each P; is prior, in the relevant sense, to its predecessor. 

The sceptics use two premisses; first: 

(1) All understanding comes through demonstration 
(72°8—-where aillds gives the right sense—, 12, 16); in terms of S: 

(is) (Vi) Gf a understands P;, then a has demonstrated that P;). 
The second premiss is implicit at 72°9: 

(2) To understand any proposition by demonstration, one must 
understand it on the basis of one’s understanding of some prior 
proposition, 

i.e., in terms of S: 

(2s) (Vi) (if a has demonstrated that P;, then for some j greater than i 
a understands P, and a has inferred P; from P,). 

From (1s) and (2s) there follows: 

(3s) (Vi) Gif a understands P,, then for some j greater than i a under- 
stands P; and a has inferred P; from P)). 

104 

COMMENTARY 92° 

—so that if anyone understands anything, he understands infinitely many 
propositions. Since that is impossible, we can infer: 

(4s) 7 (Ad) (a understands P;). 

Aristotle applauds this argument. The objection that a certain line of 
argument ‘leads to infinity’ is very common in his works (Bonitz, 74°41- 
57); the nearest passage to ours is Met a 2, 994°16-27, which suggests 
first that Aristotle has in mind the impossibility of thinking an infinite 
sequence of thoughts (cf. 4 22, 82°29; 83°6; 84" 3), and secondly that he 
inferred this impossibility from the fact that ‘“‘a finite body cannot in a 
finite time traverse an infinite distance” (e.g. Cael A 5, 272°3, 29; Phys Z 
7, 238°33). (3s) implies that knowledge requires an infinite number of 
inferences, and hence an infinite sequence of thoughts: Aristotle is surely 
right to accept the inference to (4s). 

We might attempt to stop the inference by supposing that there is a 
last member of S. But let this be Py. Then, by (1s) and (2s), there 
follows: 

(5s) 7 (a understands P;,). 

And since if a does not understand P, then a does not understand P,_, 
we can again conclude, by a mathematical induction, to (4s). 

72°15: “but only on the supposition that they are the case”: this is 
ambiguous between “‘if 77 is the case, then a knows that P” and “a 
knows that if 77 is the case then P’’. The latter is favoured by the context 
of the argument, and by Aristotle’s few words on the ‘hypothetical 
syllogism’ (cf. esp. APr A 44, 50°16—°4). But probably Aristotle has not 
seen the distinction. 

72°15: The other party holds that “nothing prevents there being 
demonstrations of everything”. The most reasonable of several possible 
glosses on this seems to be: 

(6s) It is possible that (Vi) (a has demonstrated that P,). 

The second party agrees that we cannot produce infinitely many dem- 
onstrations, and therefore maintains that S contains finitely many 
propositions. Since the party stands by (1s), it must reject (2s); I shall 
shortly suggest a premiss it might have substituted for (2s). 

Since demonstration involves inference from known premisses, and S 
is, by hypothesis, finite, it is easy to see that (6s) requires: 

(7s) It is possible that (32) (3/) (i # j and a has demonstrated P; from 

P; and a has demonstrated P; from P;) 

-—I say that a demonstrates P from Q if Q is a premiss of a demon- 
stration of a premiss...of a demonstration that P. (7s) represents the 
claim that “it is possible for demonstrations to proceed in a circle or 
reciprocally”’. 

In APr Aristotle offers a formal definition of circular argument in 
terms of his syllogistic: ““To prove in a circle or reciprocally is to take 
the conclusion and the one proposition (with its predication the other 

105 

72°15 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

way about), and to conclude to the remaining proposition which was 
assumed in the other deduction” (APr B 5, 57°18-21; cf. 5834-5). 
More formally, a circular proof is a set of three interrelated inferences of 
the following form: (i) Ax,;B, BxzC + Ax3C; (ii) Ax3C, Bx,A + Bx2C; (iii) 
Ax3C, Cx,B + Ax,B. APr B 5-7 goes through the fourteen syllogistic 
moods and shows that perfect circles are possible only in Barbara, when 
we have: (iB) AaB, BaC + AaC; (iiB) AaC, BaA | BaC; (iiiB) AaC, 
CaBt AaB. Eight other moods allow ‘semicircular’ proof, comprising (i) 
and (ii) or (i) and (iii); and for four cases Aristotle draws a pseudo- 
circle. Later in the present chapter Aristotle refers back to his discussion 
of circular argument in APr B 5-7, and he evidently thinks that his 
remarks there yield a formal analysis of the sort of reasoning implicit in 
(7s). In fact, however, the correspondence is not exact; for in the 
syllogistic circles of APr it is not true that every proposition in the circle 
is proved. Here, as elsewhere, syllogistic does not readily provide a 
formalization of the argument structures considered in A Pst. 

72°18: Aristotle’s own reply to the sceptic falls into two parts. 

In Part (A) he first denies (1s); his statement that ‘in the case of 
immediate items understanding is indemonstrable” must be taken to 
entail: 

(8) a understands some immediate propositions. 

When he says that (8) “must be so” he is naturally taken to mean that it 
follows necessarily from the propositions he is about to state; but these 
propositions only yield: 

(9) If a understands any immediates, then something is understood 
non-demonstratively. 

And the sceptic can cheerfully accept (9). Perhaps in calling (8) necessary 
Aristotle means only that it is necessary for us to embrace it if we are to 
evade the sceptic’s position. This interpretation relieves Aristotle of a 
bad argument against the sceptic at the cost of leaving him with no 
argument at all. 

In Part (B) the key phrase is “principle of understanding” (72°24); the 
same phrase reappears at 4 33, 88°36, and at B 19, 100°15, where the 
“principle of understanding”’ is identified as ‘comprehension’ or nous 
and said to give knowledge of the principles. Some scholars distinguish 
between ‘comprehension’ and ‘indemonstrable understanding of the 
immediates’, both here and again at 4 33, 88°35. I do not think this view 
is tenable; and I prefer the simple and traditional course of identifying 
the two modes of cognition. In that case, Part (B) of the argument here 
makes the same point as Part (A); and “‘We argue...’ means: “We can 
put the point in that way, and we can also express it by saying that...’. 

It has caused some commentators difficulty that what is referred to as 
understanding at 72°18 becomes a principle of understanding at 72°24 

106 

COMMENTARY 72°18 

(see p. 93). In fact, the difference between 72°18 and 72 DOA jmerely 
marks two different ways of expressing the one fact urged in 72 18-24; 
according to which way is preferred, (15) will be rejected (we have non- 
demonstrative understanding of certain P;) or (2) will be modified (to 
understand P; we must know, but we need not understand, P,). 

It seems, then, that Aristotle is telling us that he rejects the sceptic’s 
conclusion but is not giving us any justification for his rejection; this 
justification is reserved for Book B, the major part of which is occupied 
with the problem of how we can know the principles of a science. 

72°22: “and if things come to a stop at some point”: the OCT’s 
punctuation gives: ‘‘and if the immediates stop at some point, these...” 
Punctuation before ta amesa gives the better sense. 

72°24: “by which we get to know the definitions”: by comprehension 
we grasp all the principles of a science, and not just the definitions. But 
Aristotle often speaks as though the only principles are the definitions AC 
3, 90°27; Top 4 3, 158°33,,° 4, 39; An A 1, 402°16-26; Met B 3, 998° 53 
Z 9, 1034730-2; M 4, 107823; EN Z 9, 1142726; 114326, 2). There is 
no need to invent, as the editors do, some special sense for horos here. 

72°25: The rest of the chapter gives three arguments against circular 
demonstration, and hence against the second reaction to the regress. 

The first argument is straightforward. If there is circular demonstration 
within S, then every P; is both prior and posterior to every other; put 
another way, for every i and j both i > j andj > i. The argument is valid; 
but it only shows that the circular reasoners must abandon (2s). 

The clause beginning “except...” (72°28) introduces and rebuffs a 
retort to this argument; the clause i IS very obscure. I offer what seems on 
the whole the least implausible paraphrase: ‘Unless of course P; is prior 
to P; in one sense of “prior” and P; to P; in another. (See A 2, 71>33- 
72°5: we are familiar with the latter sort of priority—priority relative to 
us—in arguments, because inductions regularly proceed from what is 
prior to us.) But in that case we shall have to suppose either that there 
are two sorts of understanding, so that the definition at 4 2, 719-16, 
which caters only for ‘natural’ priority, will be incomplete; or else that 
‘demonstration’ from what is prior to us is not demonstration in the 
unqualified sense’. 

This answer is, I think, stronger than it seems to be; its strength can 
best be appreciated if we recast the whole of Aristotle’s first argument. 

The circular reasoner must abandon (2s). What he will do, I suggest, is 
replace it by: 

(2s') (Wi) Gf a has demonstrated that P;, then for some j distinct from 

i, a understands P; and a has inferred P; from P)). 

This differs from (25) only by surrendering the notion of priority; that 
carries with it the surrender of explanatoriness (cf. 4 2, 71°31)— 
but then certain of Aristotle’s contemporaries had denied that 

107 

72°25 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

explanatoriness was a necessary ingredient at least in mathematical 
demonstrations (see Proclus, Comm in Eucl 202. 9- 25—for Aristotle’s 
view see B 11, 94°27-34; GA B 6, 742°23-33; EE B 6, 1222°31-4). 

But Aristotle has two retorts to this. First, he will point out that (2s’) 
still contains, implicitly, the notion of temporal priority; for if P; is 
inferred from P; then P; is known before P; (cf. 4 2, 71 >31-3), Thus 
Aristotle’s original argument is still applicable—it need only be recast in 
terms of temporal priority. Secondly, he will point out that although S is 
finite, nevertheless the circular reasoner is committed to the absurd view 
that anyone who understands any P; has performed infinitely many 
inferences—there are finitely many stops on his Circle Line, but he must 
call at each of them infinitely many times. 

Yet these retorts are far too quick. In particular, it is not clear that the 
notion of temporal priority is of any real importance to the argument. 
Rather, the central notion is the notion of epistemic priority (see p. 95); 
and the central question is this: Is epistemic priority asymmetrical and 
transitive? That is, if P is epistemically prior to Q, does it follow that Q 
is not epistemically prior to P? and if P is prior to Q and Q to R, does it 
follow that P is prior to R? It is easy to suppose—as Aristotle implicitly 
supposes—that epistemic priority is indeed both asymmetrical and 
transitive; and in that case his argument against the circular reasoners is 
sound. But the issue turns out to be far less clear-cut than Aristotle, and 
we, might initially think. See the discussion in BARNES (1990), 77-87. 

However that may be, the circular men might abandon (6s) in favour 
of: 

(10s) (Wi) (it is possible that a has demonstrated that P;). 

S is amenable to different axiomatizations; what are axioms under one 
systematization will be theorems under another. 

Now Aristotle need only say against this move that it fails to escape 
the sceptical argument, which merely has to be relativized to axiom- 
systems. But he would in fact say more than this: he would point out, 
correctly, that at most one of the axiomatizations of S$ will yield the sort 
of understanding defined at A 2, 71°33-72%5. Thus if Aristotle is right in 
pressing that definition as explicative of scientific knowledge, (10s) is 
false. 

72°32: The second argument asserts that the ‘other party’ proves only 
that if P, then P; and if that counts as proof of P, then any proposition is 
easily proved, since (WP) (if P then P). (Cf. APr B 16, 64>39—-65*9; 
Heath (2), 27-9). Although Aristotle talks of positing terms, the 
variables A, B, C are propositional (cf. 64°39). 

Aristotle asks us to posit three terms; but he then says that it does 
not matter whether we take “few or two” for the circular process 
(anakamptein: cf. An A 3, 407°23-30). Presumably he means that it is 
enough to conduct the argument for the case of the minimal circle of two 
terms (A, B: 73°1), but that to set out the argument three terms are 
needed (A, B, C: 72°38). 

108 

COMMENTARY 72°39 

The argument, which is less tortuous than I once supposed (see 
MIGNUCCI (1975), 52), begins with the general truth (72°37-9): 

(11) If (if A then B, and if B then C), then if A then C. 
The simplest case of circular reasoning is then represented (not wholly 
felicitously) by (7239-7371): 

(12) If A then B, and if B then A. 

Now, Aristotle says, “Let A be C (keisth6 to A eph’ hou to C)” 
(73°1-2). He means—as numerous parallels show—that “C” in (11) 
should represent ‘‘A’’ in (12). The next sentences (7372-3) are loosely 
formulated, but their purport is plain. “Hence... is to say that C is the 
case”: i.e. “if B then A” in (12) may be rewritten as “if B then C”. 
“And to say this is to say...”: i.e. given “if A then B, and if B then C”’ 
(which is what we are now saying), we may say “if A then C’’. “But C is 
the same as A” (7373-4): i-e. ““C” in (11) represents “‘A” in (12). Hence 
(73°5) we shall infer: 

(13) If A then A. 

The argument is open to several objections. First, in syllogistic no 
proposition can function both as the conclusion and as the sole premiss 
of an argument: how, then, can any demonstration amount to a proof of 
“Tf A, then A”? There is a satisfactory, if complex, answer to this; but 
Aristotle does not give it. Secondly, circular demonstration does not 
consist in the pair of implications conjoined in (12); for a demonstration 
is not an implication at all, but an argument of the form A} B, where 
the premiss A fulfils certain conditions. Aristotle’s argument can be 
reformulated to meet this point; its conclusion will then be, not that the 
circular men only prove that if P then P, but that all they do is to ‘prove’ 
P on the basis of P. 

Finally, nothing in Aristotle’s argument shows that the circular men 
“say nothing more than that if A is the case A is the case”. Aristotle is 
trying to express the principle that if someone claims to prove A on the 
assumption that B and at the same time B on the assumption that A, 
then all he is doing is showing that A holds on the assumption that it 
does hold. But Aristotle does not succeed in expressing, let alone in 
supporting, this principle. 
73°6: The third argument attaches closely to APr B 5-7; A, B, C 
resume their normal role as term-variables. Aristotle argues that circular 
demonstration requires convertible propositions (cf. APr B 5, 57°32~ 
58°15), and that these are rare in demonstrative sciences; hence at most 
a few circular demonstrations will be possible in any science. Aristotle’s 
argument is again muddy; its soundness is easily seen if we take a typical 
small circle: starting from (i) AaB, (ii) BaC, (iti) CaA, we first infer (a) 
AaC from (i) and (ii), (6) BaA from (ii) and (iii), and (c) CaB from (iii) 
and (i); then we join the circle by inferring (i) from (a) and (c), (ii) from 
(b) and (a), and (iii) from (c) and (b). Thus each of (a), (5), and (c) is 
convertible. (A and B ‘convert’ (antistrephein)——in the commonest sense 

109 

73°6 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

of that term—or are ‘counterpredicated’ (antikatégoreisthai: 73°16) if 
they ‘follow one another’, i.e. if both AaB and BaA. On other uses of 
antistrephein see Ross, 293.) See also BARNES (1981), 38-40. 

73°7: +“... as properties do’’: in Aristotle’s stricter usage, the notion of 
a property is defined thus: 
(14) A is a property of B = g, (i) (Wx) (necessarily: Ax if and only if 
Bx) & (ii) A is not part of the essence of B. 
(Top A 5, 102°18-30). In a laxer usage, condition (ii) is dropped. 
73°8: ‘“‘...I have proved...”: see APr 4 25, 4136-4240 (the com- 

mentators offer alternative references); the view is in fact built into 
Aristotle’s definition of sullogismos (p. 83). 

73°9: ‘‘...norifa single posit ...”: i.e. ‘.. . nor if only one proposition 
is premissed’. 
73°14: “...as I have proved in my account of deduction”: i.e. at APr 

B 5-7. The report is slightly misleading (see p. 106). 

73°16: “‘or else none concerning the assumptions”: In the second figure, 
one of the premisses and the conclusion are always negative. Hence-— 
since a pair of negative propositions never yields a syllogistic conclusion— 
there can be no syllogism to the other premiss and therefore no syllogistic 
circles. The same holds for Felapton in the third figure. In four of the 
remaining third figure moods one of the premisses and the conclusion 
are particular. Hence—since two particular propositions never yield a 
syllogistic conclusion—there can be no syllogism to the other premiss 
and therefore no syllogistic circles. Darapti remains. Here you cannot 
get a syllogism “‘concerning the assumptions’, i.e. you cannot infer from 
the conclusion and one of the premisses to the other premiss. But you 
can get a syllogistic conclusion from any two of the three components of 
Darapti, granted convertibility. (Darapti is: 

PaR, SaR: therefore PiS. 

Convert PiS and PaR, and you will get: 
SiP, RaP: therefore SiR 

—which is Disamis. Convert SaR, and you will get: 
PiS, RaS: therefore PiR 

—which is again Disamis.) 

CHAPTER 4 

A 4-6 take up the second of the two necessary conditions laid on 
understanding at 4 2, 71°9—16; the argument starts from the inference 
that ‘if there is understanding simpliciter of something, it is impossible 
for it to be otherwise” (71°16). 

73°21: If a knows X, X cannot be otherwise; hence if a knows X by 
demonstration, X cannot be otherwise; and hence (cf. Int 13, 22°6—7), if 

110 

COMMENTARY 73°21 

a knows X by demonstration, X is necessary (cf. EN Z 3, 1139°19—23). 
Aristotle next infers that if a demonstrates X from Y, then Y is necess- 
ary. This seems to commit him to the view that if P is necessary and P is 
deducible from Q, then Q is necessary; and he knew this view to be false 
(4 6, 75°2-4). 

One way of escape is to suppose that Aristotle is tacitly assuming that 
the premisses of a demonstration must be known; for if they are known 
they are necessary. Certainly, Aristotle would be justified in arguing in 
this way; but it is hard to read the argument into the text. 

A second approach points out that Aristotle never satisfactorily dis- 
tinguishes between propositions which express truths which are necessary 
(e.g. “Every man is an animal’) and propositions which express the 
necessity of certain truths (e.g. ““Necessarily: every man is an animal’’). 
We might suppose that, properly speaking, demonstrative conclusions 
are of the latter form (their medium is the apodeictic syllogism of APr A 
8). In that case, Aristotle’s argument for the necessity of demonstrative 
premisses will rely on the very plausible rule that if OD P is deducible 
from Q then Q is of the form 0 R. (The box, “1”, abbreviates 
“necessarily”.) This rule, however, is a special case of the scholastic 
adage peiorem semper conclusio sequitur partem; and, notoriously, 
Aristotle did not accept this rule (APr A 9, 30715—25—there is no good 
evidence that Aristotle changed his mind about the rule). Moreover, we 
should not in fact suppose that demonstrative conclusions must be of the 
form 1 P (see p. xxi). 

Aristotle has not got a decent argument here; 4 6 returns to the issue. 

73°25: The rest of the chapter gives a rigorous expansion of the 
common Aristotelian slogan that ‘knowledge i is of the universal’ (cf. e.g. 
A 33, 88°31; An B 5, 417°22; Met M 9, 1086°5; EN Z 6, 1140°31). 

73°26: “‘First let us define. ..”: It is helpful to bear in mind the gram- 
matical contexts of Aristotle’s three phrases, viz.: (i) “A is said of every 
B” (kata pantos), (ii) “‘A is said of B in itself” (kath’ hauto—more fully: 
“in virtue of itself’), and (iii) “A is said universally of B” (katholou). In 
(ii) the reference of ‘‘itself’’ (in Greek as in English) may be either to A 
or to B; the parallel with (i) and (iii) suggest that B is intended, but later 
paragraphs perhaps show that Aristotle was prepared to take it in either 
way. Both (i) and (iii) are standard Aristotelian ways of expressing the 
universally quantified proposition that every B is A: here in 4 4, kata 
pantos is used in a slightly non-standard way; katholou is defined in a 
fashion I think is unique (but perhaps see Met 4 9, 1017°35). Another 
strange use of katholou is introduced at B 17, 99°34. 

73°28: “We Say ‘is predicated of every’ when one cannot take anything 
of which the other term will not be said; and ‘of none’ similarly” (APr 
A 1, 2428-30). In our passage, the first part of the definition is “Not- 
(some B is A and some B is not A)”, and that is equivalent to “Either 
AaB or AeB”’. But 73°32-4 show that Aristotle means ‘of every” to 
have the sense he gave it in APr A I. 

II! 

73°28 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

The second, temporal, clause in the definition (cf. A 8; 4 31, 87°30-3; 
B 12, 96°9—19) is explained by APr A 15, 34°7-18: the “is” in “Every B 
is A” must not be taken elliptically for “‘is now’’—it is a ‘timeless’ use of 
the present tense. Aristotle’s ‘evidence’ is designed to show that the 
timeless reading is the normal one, at least in argumentative syllogistic 
contexts; but elsewhere (e.g. Top E 1) he distinguishes between “A 
holds of every B” and ‘“‘A always holds of B’’. (See also APr B 26, 
69°5-8.) 

73°34: Aristotle now distinguishes four ways in which A can hold of B 
‘in itself’; only the first two are directly relevant to the characterization 
of demonstrative propositions (cf. 73°16-18; A 6, 74°7-10; 4 22, 
84°12-17), but the third has a central role in the argument of 4A 22. Met 
A 18, 1022*24—36, discerns five uses of ‘‘in itself’; only one of these has 
a clear counterpart in our passage (1022°27-9 = 73°34-7: but see 
Kirwan, 168-9). 

Aristotle’s account of the first two uses of “‘in itself” is not elegant (see 
Ross, 520); but it fairly plainly yields the following two definitions: 

(1) A holds of B in itself = gp A holds of B and A inheres in the 
definition of B; 

(2) A holds of B in itself = gg A holds of B and B inheres in the 
definition of A. 

“Tn the first case, the subject takes the predicate into its definition; in the 
second, the predicate takes the subject into its definition” (Philoponus). 
In (1) “itself” certainly refers to B (Bs are A in virtue of their being B); 
in (2) ‘‘itself’’ may perhaps refer to A (Bs are A in virtue of A). The term 
ousia here evidently amounts to ‘“‘essence”’ (see further, p. 177; ef. p. 174 
on “what it is’’). 

It is useful to have some brief terminology for referring to these uses 
of “in itself’: A proposition is an J-predication if (i) it is of the form 
“Every B is A”, and (ii) it is true in virtue of the fact that A holds of B 
in itself. The proposition is an /z-predication if “‘in itself” is to be taken 
in sense (1), an /2-predication if ‘‘in itself” is to be taken in sense (2). 

There are puzzles in connection with both definitions. 

At Met 4 18, 102227, (1) is illustrated by ‘“‘Callias is a man in himself” 
(“‘itself’? becomes “himself”, and the gender makes the reference plain: 
cf. Met Z 4, 1029°15); “Animal holds of man in itself” will do equally 
well, and avoids the ticklish question of the place of singular terms in 
syllogistic. This suggests that an I1-predication is true if and only if every 
Bis A and Ba = g¢ P & Aa (where P is any proposition). I1-predications 
are thus, in the Kantian sense, analytic; whether they are what Locke 
called trifling propositions will depend upon what sort of definition 
Aristotle has in mind here. 

The examples in 4 4 do not fit this mould easily: “‘line of triangles and 
point of lines” seems to give the unpromising candidates “All triangles 
are lines” and “All lines are points”. Some think that, in Academic 
fashion, Aristotle supposes an ‘ontological’ dependency of lines on 

I12 

COMMENTARY 73°34 

points (cf. e.g. Met 4 8, 1017°18-20; N 3, 1090°5-7), and infers a 
definitional dependency (cf. Top Z 4, 141°15~22). Others imagine that 
Aristotle confuses “‘A is mentioned in the definition of B” (which does 
hold of line and triangle) with “Ba = gp P & Aa” (which does not). 
Philoponus reads “shape of triangles” for “line of triangles’, and 
invokes the non-Aristotelian definition of line as flowing point (cf. An A 
4, 40974; Proclus, Comm in Eucl 97. 8-13). Zabarella exhorts us to take 
the examples sano modo: “‘line”’ is elliptical for “‘contained by a line’, 
“point” for “bounded by a point” (cf. Bonitz, 578°1-3; Euclid, i 
def. 3). 

In definition (2), the second conjunct of the definiens does not cause 
such difficulties: number, say, is ‘in the definition of odd’ inasmuch as ‘“‘a 
is odd” = g; “a is a number not divisible by 2” (cf. Top J 13, 173°8). 
(Composite numbers are non-primes; equilaterals are squares; oblongs 
are non-squares: cf. Theaet 147°-148°; Euclid, viii def. 16-18). Com- 
pare Met Z 5, 1030°18—26: “. .. and neither concavity nor snubness is an 
affection of the nose incidentally, but they hold of it in itself—not as 
whiteness holds of Callias or of a man... but as maleness of animal and 
equality of quantity and every thing which is said to hold of something in 
itself. These are the things in which there inheres either the account or 
the name of that of which this is the affection and which cannot be made 
clear separately—as whiteness can be without man, but not femaleness 
without animal” (cf. Phys 4 2, 186°18—23). 

What examples can we find of I2-predications? The best case is given 
at B 16, 98°22, where eclipse is predicated of the earth’s being in the 
middle, and the latter term “‘inheres in the account” of the former: AaB, 
and B is in the definition of A. (The truth of the example is another, 
irrelevant, matter.) Aristotle’s examples in 4 4 are more puzzling. He 
can hardly have meant such trivial falsehoods as “Every number is odd’’, 
“Every line is straight”. Perhaps we should think rather of disjunctive 
predications such as ‘‘Every number is either odd or even’”’, “Every line 
is either straight or curved”. This suggestion appears to receive support 
from 7319-21 (see notes), A 12, 78°16-21, and A 22, 8420 (see 
notes). Nevertheless, such disjunctive examples are not easily read into 
73°37-40, still less into 1030°18—26; they do not seem to ‘say one thing 
of one thing’ (cf. 4 2, 7279); and they are likely to be, at best, rare in the 
sciences. (The only examples of disjunctive predicates in syllogistic that I 
have found are at APr 4 31, 46°3-19, 30-5; 46, 51°39—-41; 52°34-7; 
B 22, 683-16.) Retaining the simple predicate “‘odd’’, we might try 
taking not number but a kind of number as subject—e.g. “Every 
product of odd and odd is odd”. But there is no smell of this in the text. 

The older commentators take [2-predicates to include properties (see 
A 3, 73°7, note), and properties to include ‘in itself incidentals’ (see also 
KULLMANN (1974), 182-3). The queerly named ‘in itself incidentals’ are 
defined as follows: “Things are called incidental in another way too—i.e. 
what holds of a thing in itself without being in its essence, e.g. having 
two right angles of triangle” (Met 4 30, 1025°30-2). Predicates of this 
sort, holding of a subject in itself yet not inhering in its essence, are the 

113 

73°34 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

staple of demonstration (see 4 7, 75°2; cf. Bonitz, 713°43-71473). Hence 
the suggestion that I2-predicates are, or at least include, ‘in itself 
incidentals’ is an attractive one. But it will not do: ‘“‘being capable of 
understanding” is proper to man; but “All men are capable of under- 
standing” is not an I2-predication. Again, being deciduous is an ‘in itself 
incidental’ of vines, but not a property of them. The suggestion does, 
however, point to a major deficiency in Aristotle’s discussion in 4 4: the 
chapter does not elucidate the crucial notion of an ‘in itself incidental’. 
It has also been suggested that differentiae are 12-predicates of their 
genera, so that, e.g., mortal is an I2-predicate of animal (e.g. GRANGER 
(1981); FEREJOHN (1981), 291-2; (1991), 96—9). Presumably not all I2- 
predicates are differentiae (e.g. male is presumably an I2-predicate of 
animal, but it is not a differentia). On the other hand, some differentiae 
are certainly I2-predicates (e.g. odd and even). But Aristotle nowhere 
says that all differentiae are 12-predicates; and the fact that he sometimes 
takes differentiae to entail their genus (i.e. if D is a differentia of G, then 
Da entails Ga) does not in itself show that differentiae are I2-predicates. 
I have been assuming that all I-predications are universal. It has 
recently been urged that I2-predications are (typically) particular pro- 
positions: “Some numbers are odd’, “Some triangles are isosceles’’. 
(See FEREJOHN (1991), 99-108.) This proposal has one evident advan- 
tage: it allows us to produce, without difficulty, ‘rue I2-predications 
which (unlike the disjunctive examples I mentioned earlier) might well 
be thought to feature in the sciences. It has a disadvantage: there is no 
hint in the text that I2-predications are particular; and in any case it is 
only universal propositions which Aristotle will allow into the sciences. 

73°5: The third use of “in itself” distinguishes things that are (exist) in 
themselves, i.e. in their own right or independently, from things that 
exist ‘incidentally’. It is sometimes said that Aristotle here leaves logic 
and turns to ontology; but this ‘ontological’ use of “‘in itself” is founded 
on considerations of predication. 

It is convenient to discuss here all the passages in APst which bear on 
the matter; they are identifiable by the occurrence of the difficult phrase 
“things which are so-and-so in virtue of being something different”: AA, 
73°5-10; A 13, 79°6; A 19, 8125-9; A 22, 8371-23; 83°30-2; 83°23 (cf. 
Met A 6, 987°23; B 4, 1001°6, 10, 28; N 1, 108733, 353 1088728; Phys A 4, 
18878). From 4 19 and 22 it emerges ‘that the phrase helps to mark 
a distinction between two types of predication, which the ancient com- 
mentators conveniently named ‘natural’ and ‘unnatural’ predication. If 
the proposition X is Y is ‘natural’ Aristotle will say that Y is predicated 
of X (82° 20; 83°15), or that Y is predicated simpliciter of X (83°16), or 
that Y is predicated of X in itself (81°29); of ‘unnatural’ predications 
Aristotle will say that Y is not predicated of X at all (83°15), or that Y is 
incidental to X (8220), or that Y is predicated of X incidentally (81°24; 
83°8, 15; cf. APr A 27, 43°34). 

Aristotle gives as examples of natural predication: “The man is 

114 

COMMENTARY 13°5 

walking” (83°3), “The log is large” (83°3), “The log is white” (83°9); 
and as examples of unnatural predication: ““The walking thing is walking” 
(73°6), “The white thing is white” (73°7), “The white thing is walking” 
(83°2), “That large thing is a log” (8372), ““The white thing is a log” 
(8375), “The musical thing is white” (83°11). (Cf. “‘That white thing is 
Socrates’’; “What approaches is Callias”: APr 4 27, 43°35.) 

The distinction is marked by a variety of formulae: 

Natural Unnatural 

(A) “X is Y” does not mean 
“something different is Y, and 
that thing happens to be X”’ 
(83°10). 

(B) X is Y without being anything X, being something different, 
different (73°8; 7976; 83°13, 32, is Y (73°6; 1087735; 1088°28). 
523; 987°23; 1001°6, 10; 1888). 

(C) “X is Y” means ‘““That which 
happens to be X is Y”’ (83°6). 

(D) X is not said of any other X is said of another 
underlying subject (73°5; cf. underlying subject (73°9; 
1001°28; 18878). 1087735). 

(E) X is the underlying subject for Y X is not an underlying subject 
(83°13). for Y (83°6). 

(F) Being X, it came to be Y It is not the case that being X 
(83°13). it came to be Y (83°7). 

(G) X is a substance (987°23; 
I00I*10, 28). 

(A) allows us to infer that if X is Y is unnatural it means “‘something 
different is Y and that thing happens to be X”’. By “something different”’ 
Aristotle means “something different from just what is X or some 
particular X”° (see 83°14). Thus we can define unnatural predication as 
follows: 

(3) X is Y is unnatural = g “X is Y” means “For some Z distinct 
from X, Z is Y and it happens that Z is X. 

The force of “it happens that Z is X”’ is “‘it is not essential that Z is X°”’; 
hence the stipulation that Z is distinct from X is otiose. The predication, 
Z is Y, may be either essential or non-essential; in the analysis of “‘The 
white thing is a man” it will presumably be essential—e.g. “‘Socrates is a 
man’; in the analysis of ‘““The white thing is walking” it will be non- 
essential—e.g. “Socrates is walking’. If (3) is simplified, and if the 
relation of meaning is replaced by entailment (which may indeed be all 
Aristotle intends), then we can say that X is Y is unnatural if and only if: 

(4) If X is Y then (AZ) ((Z is Y) & (it happens that Z is X)). 

I take it that formula (C) and the commonest formula, (B), are merely 
abbreviated ways of expressing (A). 

115 

73°5 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

(D) and (E) express two supposed corollaries of (A): the subjects of 
unnatural predications turn out to be dependent entities in two ways. 

First, (D). It is true that (D) might be taken to express the trivial 
consequence of (4), that if X is Y is an unnatural predication then: 

(5) If X is Y then (AZ) (Z is X) 

—for this amounts to saying that X is predicated of something, or ‘‘said 
of another underlying subject’. But Aristotle means to say something 
more, viz. that the subject of an unnatural predication is ontologically 
parasitic on other entities. How is this claim connected with what has 
been said so far? 

It is often supposed that Aristotle was taken in by an ambiguity in his 
examples: to leukon estin anthropos, which I translate “the white thing is 
a man’’, can also mean ‘“‘whiteness is a man” (in general, to A in Greek 
does duty both for ‘“‘the A” and for ‘“‘A-ness”). Failing to see this 
ambiguity, Aristotle imagined that the subject of an unnatural predi- 
cation was always an abstract, and hence a dependent, entity. This 
reconstruction is made implausible by the fact that the ambiguity is not 
present in all Aristotle’s examples of unnatural predications; moreover, 
at Met Z 6, 1031°25, the existence of such ambiguities is explicitly 
noticed. Perhaps Aristotle supposed that if X is Y is an unnatural 
predication, then X is existent is also an unnatural predication; hence if 
X is Y is an unnatural predication then: 

(6) If X is existent then (AZ) (Z is X), 

and this might be taken as a formulation of ontological parasitism. 

(E) is supported by (F). The term “underlying subject” (to hupo- 
keimenon) is often said to be systematically ambiguous in Aristotle 
between a logical subject of predication and a metaphysical substratum 
for change. And the ambiguity is exploited in our passages if anywhere; 
for in (F), and hence in (E), the hupokeimenon grounds changes, while 
in (D) it grounds predication. How far Aristotle is trapped by this 
ambiguity, and indeed how far it is vicious, are large questions that 
cannot be entered into here. 

There are problems enough with (F). Aristotle can hardly be meaning 
to remark upon what changes in fact take place; for white things 
sometimes become statues (say), although “the white thing is a statue”’ is 
an unnatural predication. A fortiori, Aristotle’s remark is not about the 
logical impossibility of white things’ becoming statues, or the linguistic 
impropriety of our saying that they do. If Aristotle has a point at all, it 
must, I think, be this: the subjects of unnatural predications cannot be 
self-standing starting-points of change; if we do say ‘““That white thing 
became a statue” our remark only makes sense if it is taken as elliptical 
for something like “That block of marble, which is white, became a 
statue”. (F) might be an inference from (D): if the subjects of unnatural 
predications cannot exist without the existence of something to ‘support’ 
them, then plainly they cannot exist as independent starting-points of 
change. 

116 

COMMENTARY 73°5 

Finally, (G) is simply a restatement of (D). 

In sum, then, we can say this. If X is Y is a natural predication, then 
(a) X is Y does not entail that something else is Y and happens to be X; 
(b) X is not ontologically dependent on anything else; and (c) X is an 
independently identifiable subject of change. The latter two points are 
probably supposed to be inferences from (a). And in the third use of “in 
itself’, X is or exists in itself if X is Y is never an unnatural predication. 

73°10: We may now turn to the fourth use of ‘in itself”. If X and Y 
occur at the same time, yet neither occurs because of the other, then we 
may say something like “they just happened to coincide”, and the 
Greeks, according to Aristotle, would say sunebe, “it was incidental” 
(see further Met 4 30, 1025°4-30; what is ‘incidental’ i is, as 73°15 shows, 
the conjunction of X and Y—cf. APr A 13, 32°12). Since * ‘incidentally”’ 
may thus signify the absence of explanatory connection, “‘in itself” may 
do the opposite job and mark the presence of such a ‘connection. “In 
general, that in virtue of which (to kath’ ho) will hold in as many ways as 
the explanation” (Met 4 18, 1022*I9g—20); in other words, the ‘fourth 
use’ of “‘in itself’ is properly a use of kata X in general, and not of kath’ 
hauto in particular. The example at 73°14 (‘‘in the sacrifice”, i.e. ‘in 
virtue of the sacrifice’) implicitly concedes the point. 

The fourth use involves a connection between events: “E, occurs kata 

E,”’. Nevertheless, Aristotle introduces it in the language of predication 
or ‘holding’. If he supposed that £, and E, were always expressible by 
sentences of the form “a is F” and ‘“‘a is G’’, and if he plausibly took “‘a 
is F in virtue of being G” to entail “Every G is F”, then he may 
reasonably have passed from “FE, occurs kata E,” to “F holds of G 
in itself”. 
73°16: 73°16-18 plainly refers to I1- and I2-predications. The phrase- 
ology has caused difficulty. The solution (see MiGNuccI (1975), 75-6) is 
that Aristotle here uses tois kat@goroumenois (‘‘what is predicated’’) to 
refer to the subject terms of the propositions. The verb katégorein 
sometimes means “‘to apply a predicate to” (e.g. APr A 32, 47°1; 
perhaps APst A 22, 83°1), so that ta katégoroumena are the items to 
which predicates are applied. 

Aristotle says nothing to justify the claim that in I-predications A 
holds of B ‘because of itself’. Presumably he is relying on the fact that, if 
A is in the definition of B, then a thing’s being A explains its being B (in 
the sense of giving a ‘formal’ explanation: see, e.g. Phys B 3, 194°26-9). 

In I-predications A holds necessarily of B “either simpliciter or as re- 
gards the opposites’’. ““Simpliciter’”’ presumably refers to I1-predications, 
where it is taken as evident that necessarily every B is A. “As regards 
the opposites” then refers to I2-predications, and must mean that 
necessarily every B is either A or A’ (where A’ is the opposite of A). 
Aristotle has an argument for this. He needs to show that: 

(7) (Wx) Gf Bx, then (Ax or A’x)) 
is necessarily true, given that A and A’ include B in their definitions. 

117 

73°16 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

One of his premisses is some version of the Law of Excluded Middle 
(73°23); the other premiss is illustrated by the sentence “even is what is 
not odd among numbers, in so far as it follows”. I take this to mean: 
‘Even follows what is not odd among numbers’; i.e. ‘If a is a number, 
then if a is not odd, a is even’ (cf. e.g. Met I 4, 1055°23—6). Thus the 
premiss is: 

(8) (Wx) (if Bx then (if not Ax, then A’x)). 

From this (7) is readily derived, by means (if you like) of the Law of 
Excluded Middle. 

An I2-predication, then, will be necessary inasmuch as some proposi- 
tion such as 

Every number is either odd or even 

is necessary. And there are two difficulties here. First, unless all 
I2-predications actually are disjunctive in this way, then it is hard to 
see how they can be said to be necessary at all. Secondly, even if 
I2-predications are disjunctive, it is hard to see what their status as I2- 
predications has to do with their necessity. There is indeed a definitory 
link in them between subject and predicate, and they are indeed 
necessary. But these are two independent facts; and in particular, their 
necessity plainly does not depend upon the fact that their subject terms 
(in whole or in part) inhere in the definitions of their predicate terms. 
(See also soraBn (1980), 188-9.) 

73°21: It seems clear that Aristotle means to argue as follows: ‘Odd is 
contrary to, or a privation of, even. But contraries and privations are 
contradictories within their kind (i.e. if F and G are contraries within a 
kind K, then every element of K is either F or G). But of contradictories, 
necessarily one or the other holds. Hence of contrary pairs F and G, 
necessarily one or the other holds (within K).’ The received text will not 
yield this argument; and I can no see no other plausible argument in it. 
Hence I suggest a minor emendation. 

73°23: “...if it is necessary to assert...”: i.e. ‘if A holds of B 
in itself, then A holds necessarily of B’; but Aristotle expresses this 
remarkably badly. 

73°25: The rest of 4 4 elucidates a singular sense of “universally” 
(katholou). The sense has three components: first, “of every case”; 
secondly, ‘‘in itself” (either in use (1) or in use (2): 73°30); and thirdly, 
“as such’’. It follows from this definition and the argument at 73°16 that 
what is ‘universal’ is necessary (73°28). 

The idiom of “as such” or qua (héi) is worked hard throughout 
Aristotle’s philosophical writings (Bonitz, 312°36-44; Wieland, 197- 
202). It was a piece of Academic jargon; Aristotle’s mathematical 
contemporaries may have held that their theorems should be ‘as such’ 
predications (cf. Philip, in Proclus, Comm in Eucl 305. 25; cf. 254. 2-3). 

Most of the Aristotelian passages might reasonably be used to support 
the suggestion that A holds of B as such if and only if there is no term C 

118 

COMMENTARY 73°25 

which explains why A holds of B—in short, if and only if AaB is 
immediate. Clearly, if AaB is an I-predication, then A holds of B as 
such; and conversely—though not so clearly—if A holds of B as such, 
then AaB is an I-predication. (If it were not, then B would have a 
property not derivable from its essence; but the essence of B is precisely 
that from which all B’s properties are derivable.) Hence being an 
I-predication and holding as such are logically equivalent, or “‘the same 
thing” (73°29). (The commentators have worried unnecessarily about 
this.) 

In some passages, however, predicates which are not I-predicates are 
said to hold as such (e.g. Top E 4, 132°2; 13330, 5). And the example 
at 73°31, despite the implication of the context, must be numbered 
among these; for having 2 R is not an I-predicate of triangle (cf. p. 120). 
To grasp what is happening here we must anticipate some of the theses 
of A 7 and A 10. Those chapters suggest that the terms of a demon- 
strative science fall into two classes: one class lists the genus being 
studied together with its species, sub-species, etc. (e.g. animal, carnivore, 
cat, lion...), the other lists the attributes of the first class (e.g. being 
four-footed, having a single stomach, being warm-blooded . . .). The first 
class can be set out as a Porphyrean tree; linearly arranged, it will look 
like this: 

(5) 899, oc25 SYS ely St Sha BR 

sey 1s 
Here G is the genus, the S?s the species, and so on down to the infimae 
species, the S?s. Now to say that A holds of S* as such is to say that AaS* 
and there is no p smaller than & such that AaS?. 

The triangle example is plainly an ‘as such’ predication of this sort, if 
at all; and it is this type of predication which is discussed, under the title 
of ‘primitiveness’, at 73°32—7473. But in this sense, ‘as such’ predications 
need not be immediate and hence are not necessarily I-predications. 

73°32: This paragraph either gives a new definition of “universally”; or 
(better) provides, under the alias of “primitiveness”, an elucidation of 
the term “as such”; or (best) explains how we are to set about proving 
that A holds universally of B, in the sense just defined. 

The first condition for such a proof, that A be shown to hold of an 
arbitrary B, reappears in natural deduction systems of predicate logic: if 
I can prove Fa for some arbitrary individual a, then I may infer (Vx) Fx. 
The criteria for arbitrariness are, of course, precisely specified in modern 
systems, whereas Aristotle leaves the notion on an intuitive level. 

The second condition, that A be proved of B primitively, has no 
counterpart in modern logic, since it derives from the idiosyncratic 
elements in A 4’s notion of universality. 

A recipe for universal proof will thus read as follows. Construct the 
tree (*). First attempt to prove A of any arbitrary G; if this attempt 
fails, do the same with each S?; then with each S}; and so on. The first 
term for which the attempted proof does not fail is the term of which A 
holds universally. (What if A holds of S¥ and also of S} but not of any S? 

11g 

73°32 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

where p is smaller than k? Aristotle does not, I think, consider this 
possibility here; some of the argument in B 17-18 bears on the matter: 
see below.) 

74°1: “‘and the demonstration applies to it universally in itself’: “in 
itself” must be taken as equivalent to “as such”. Thus: ‘Suppose A 
belongs primitively to S? and derivatively to Sf and to S*. Then you can 
demonstrate A universally of S? as such; but when you demonstrate A of 
S* and of S¥ you will not be demonstrating A of Sf as such, nor of S¥ as 
such—e.g. you won’t demonstrate 2 R of isosceles as such.’ (For a 
completely different paraphrase see Mure.) 

The general thrust of 4 4 is clear enough. Aristotle starts from the 
fact that the objects of understanding—and hence of demonstrative 
understanding—are necessary; and he asks, in effect, what is the ground 
of their necessity. He answers that the necessity is ultimately grounded 
in essential or definitional connections. The elaboration of this answer is 
thick with difficulties of detail. There is also one major problem: is 
Aristotle talking about the principles of demonstrative understanding, 
or about demonstrated theorems, or about both? Aristotle’s text is 
ambiguous. On the one hand, the connection between 4 4 and the 
definition of understanding in A 2 implies that it is the necessity of 
the conclusion of a demonstration which Aristotle wants to illuminate: 
the end of 4 4 and the whole argument of 4 5 satisfy this implication. 
On the other hand, the programmatic remarks at 73°25 and the argu- 
ment of 4 6 imply that it is a further feature of demonstrative principles 
which is under consideration. Finally, 4 6, 75°29-30, says explicitly that 
both premisses and conclusions are 1-predications. 

Consider the following propositions, all of which we may suppose to 
be connected with the science of geometry: 

(1) Every triangle is a three-sided rectilineal plane figure. 
(2) Every isosceles is a triangle with exactly two equal sides. 
(3) Every triangle has three sides. 

(4) Every triangle has an angle-sum of 180°. 

(5) Every isosceles has an angle-sum of 180°. 

Let us suppose, plausibly, that (1) and (2) are among the principles of 
geometry. It is certain that (4) is among the theorems of geometry. What 
of (3) and (5)? We might reasonably expect that both these propositions 
are also theorems: (3) is a theorem inasmuch as it is an utterly trifling 
consequence of (1); (5) is a theorem inasmuch as it is a trifling conse- 
quence of (2) and (4). 

It is clear, too, that (1) and (2) are I1-predications: their predicates 
inhere in—indeed, they constitute-—the definition of their subjects. It is 
equally clear that (3) is an I-predication, and also that (5) is not an 
I-predication. What of (4)? This sentence appears frequently and in many 
different contexts as the paradigm of a demonstrable truth; and Aristotle 
calls it an ‘in itself incidental’. Yet surely it is not an I1-predication; for 

120 

COMMENTARY 74°1 

the definition of what a triangle is will not advert explicitly to its angle- 
sum. Equally surely, it is not an I2-predication; for the definition of what 
it is to have an angle-sum of 180° will not contain any reference to 
triangles (or to any other sort of figure). (On the problems raised by (4) 
see TILES (1983).) 

Hence we might conclude that the particular type of predication ana- 
lysed in A 4 straddles the distinction between principles and theorems. 
More precisely, certain I-predications are included among the principles 
of any science, namely, those I-predications which are primitive in 
the sense that they cannot be derived from higher I-predications. (And 
perhaps all principles are I-predications? But nothing assures us of 
this; and the status of the common axioms, and of the suppositions, 
might lead us to doubt it.) Other I-predications—namely, derivable 
I-predications—are included among the theorems. But the theorems will 
also include numerous propositions which, while being deducible from 
I-predications, are not themselves I-predications. Among these further 
theorems will be the relevant ‘in itself incidentals’ (all or at any rate 
some of them), which are by definition not I1-predications and which in 
fact are not—or at least not always—I2-predications. 

This is perhaps a coherent and even a reasonable position. But it 
cannot be pretended that Aristotle expressly adopts it. Thus we might 
well wish that he had said something about those demonstrative pro- 
positions which are not I-predications. (The most we get is the hint, at 
74°1-3, that there will be a demonstration of (5) ‘in another way, not 
in itself.) More specifically, we shall have to accuse Aristotle of a 
straightforward error when he says that (4) is ‘universal’, and therefore 
an [-predication. (But on any account of A 4, this is an error.) Again, the 
position is not consistent with the thesis that the logic of the sciences 
must be thoroughly syllogistic. For, within syllogistic, no ‘as such’ 
predications can be proved. Any predication of this sort will be a 
universal affirmative of the form AaB. Hence it can only be proved 
syllogistically in Barbara. Hence there must be a prior premiss CaB. 
Hence B will not belong to A as such. 

Perhaps we should distinguish between two types of demonstrable 
proposition (and two types of demonstration)? Thus ‘A-type’ demon- 
strations conclude to propositions like (5), which are not I-predications 
in any sense; whereas ‘B-type’ demonstrations conclude to I-predications. 
(The distinction is made by LENNOx (1987), 90-7: he illustrates the 
two different types of demonstration with examples drawn from the 
biological works; and he suggests that the distinction itself is alluded to 
at B 17, 9921-9.) Sometimes Aristotle is happy to regard A-type 
demonstrations as decent scientific proofs (e.g. B 14, 98*8—12); but 
sometimes—and most clearly in 4 4—he takes B-type demonstrations to 
be the paradigm of scientific proof. 

And yet the difficulty remains: how can the conclusion of any demon- 
stration be an I-predication? Consider a demonstration of the form 

AaB, BaCt Aac. 
121 

74°71 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

If AaC is an I1-predication, then A holds of C in virtue of itself, i.e. in 
virtue of the fact that Cs are C. Yet in so far as AaC is proved from AaB 
and BaC, A holds of C in virtue of B. It is true that if we have a B-type 
demonstration that AaC, then A does not hold of C because it holds of 
some higher kind, B, of which C is a sort. Perhaps it is then true that B 
is ‘‘an aspect of the subject’s specific nature, i.e. something proper to it 
which makes it that sort of thing” (LENNox (1987), 93). But from this we 
may not infer that A holds of C in itself. Admittedly, it is tempting to 
conclude that, in a sense, A holds of C in itself. But this conclusion will 
follow only if we introduce a new account of “‘in itself’, along the 
following lines: 

A holds of C in itself if and only if (i) AaC and (ii) there is no higher 
kind, K, under which C falls such that AaK. 

No doubt Aristotle does sometimes use “‘in itself” in this sense; but it is 
not a sense which he introduces in 4 4. 

Thus we may allow that the distinction between A-type and B-type 
demonstrations is genuine, and that it is made, implicitly at least, in 
Aristotle’s biological writings. But it does not solve the main problem set 
by 4 4. 

These questions were discussed by the ancient commentators (see 
Alexander, in APst frag. 12; MoRAUX (1979), 21-4); and they may well 
have been puzzled over by Theophrastus. In any event, he claimed, 
against Aristotle, that ‘as such’ and ‘in itself? are not ‘the same’: rather, 
all ‘as such’ predications are I-predications, but not all I-predications are 
‘as such’ predications. In particular, Theophrastus urged that (5) is an 
I-predication. (See Philoponus, 71. 4-13 = Theophrastus, frag. 34 
Graeser.) Now plainly (5) is not an I-predication in Aristotle’s sense, 
as Theophrastus must surely have seen. Hence we must infer that 
Theophrastus gave a new sense to I-predications. What this sense was we 
cannot guess; but it is reasonable to conjecture that it was designed to 
ensure that all scientific propositions, theorems as well as principles, may 
be classified as I-predications. 

CHAPTER 5 

A 5, an appendix to 4 4, explains and illustrates three types of case in 
which we are prone to think we have shown that A holds universally of 
B, when in fact it does not; the three cases form a hierarchy of mounting 
heinousness. 

The first case is described at 74°7—8 and illustrated at 74°16-17: if the 
only triangles we had met with were isosceles, we might come to believe 
that 2 R held universally of the isosceles (cf. Met Z 11, 10361); for we 
would have no concept of triangle as such (“‘there is nothing higher we 
can take apart from the particular case’’). This interpretation construes 
“particular” (to kath’ hekaston) at 74°8 as “species” (cf. above p. 83); 
others read it as ‘individual’, leaving the first error unillustrated. 

122 

COMMENTARY 74°5 

(At 74°8 the received text reads: “the particular or the particulars”’. 
Zabarella excised ‘‘or the particulars’; see Ross, 525.) 

The second case is stated at 74°8—9 and illustrated at 74717-25 (cf. B 
14, 98713-19). The general theory of proportion (Euclid, v) to which the 
illustration alludes (cf. 4 24, 85°36—°r) had recently been discovered 
by Eudoxus (cf. Eudoxus D 30-57 Lasserre; Heath (2), 43-6). For 
comparable generalizations see Proclus, Comm in Eucl 390. 8-392. 19 
and 67. 15 (on Theudius). 

At Met E 1, 1026°25-—7, Aristotle refers to a “‘universal mathematics”’; 
and this has rightly been taken as an allusion to the Eudoxan general- 
ization (see G.-G. GRANGER (1976), 308-9). It has been thought (see e.g. 
KULLMANN (1981), 252-4) that the admission of such a ‘universal’ 
mathematics contradicts Aristotle’s insistence on the distinctions be- 
tween the specific mathematical sciences and his prohibition on ‘kind 
crossing’ (see 4A 7, notes). But there is no inconsistency here; and Met FE 
1 itself shows that Aristotle simultaneously held both that there was 
a universal mathematics and that there were distinct mathematical 
subsciences. 

74°18: “that proportion alternates’: i.e. that a:b::c:d if and only if 
a:c::b:d (Euclid, v. 16). 

74°24: “‘... but as this’: i.e. as quantities, or as magnitudes, which all 
numbers, lengths etc. are. (Euclid uses ‘‘magnitude’’, the Aristotelians 
“quantity” (cf. Cat 6, 420-5); see Heath (2), 44). 

The third case is stated at 74°9—-I0 and illustrated by Euclid, i. 29 at 
74°13-16. 

74°9: “the proof applies to something which is in fact a partial whole”’: 
i.e. ‘C, of which A is proved, is actually a species of B, of which A holds 
universally’. C is a whole in so far as AaC, but partial with respect to B 
(i.e. a part of B: cf. EN E 4, 1130°14). 

74°14: “because it holds of every perpendicular’’: i.e. ‘Observing that 
all perpendiculars are parallel, we wrongly infer that this is what, in the 
strict sense, we demonstrate’. 

In outline, Aristotle’s illustration is clear enough. Take a straight line 
AB, and suppose that it is cut by a second straight line CD at E and bya 
third straight line FG at H, thus: 

123 

74°14 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Now if the angles DEB and GHB are each 90°, you might prove that 
“perpendiculars do not meet”’, i.e. that CD and FG are parallel. But this 
is not a genuine demonstration; for the proof depends not on the fact 
that DEB and GHB are each 90° but, quite generally, on the fact that 
DEB = GHB. 

The details, however, are obscure. (i) It is not clear exactly what 
theorem or exactly what proof Aristotle has in mind. (ii) The phrase 
hai orthai at 74°13 might be taken as elliptical either for hai orthai 
(grammai) (‘right lines’, i.e. perpendiculars) or for hai orthai (gdniai) 
(“right angles”). In the former case—which my translation adopts— 
there is an inelegance at 74°16, where “‘they are equal” must mean “the 
angles are equal’. In the latter case there is an inelegance at 74°13, 
where “right angles do not meet” must be taken to mean “(a pair of 
lines cutting another line at) right angles do not meet”. See MIGNUCCI 
(1975), 94-6. 
74°25: This section is commonly taken to present a second illustration 
of the second case of error; but the species of triangle do not lack a 
common name. 

We are to suppose that a man has proved something of each of 
the three sorts of triangle. With some obvious abbreviations this is 
expressible as: 

(1) a knows that: (Vx) (Ex > Rx) & a knows that: (Vx) (Sx > Rx) & 

a knows that: (Vx) (x > Rx). 
Aristotle’s point is simply that from (1) we can infer neither (74°27): 

(3) a knows that: (Wx) (Tx > Rx) 
nor (74°29): 

(4) a knows that: (R holds universally of T). 

Indeed, not even with the help of (74°29): 

(2) (Wx) (Tx > (Ex or Sx or Ix)) 
can we infer either (3) or (4). 

The connection of thought indicated by ‘for this reason” (74°25) is 
opaque; perhaps it is this: ‘(4) cannot be inferred from (1); for a in (1) is 
to all intents and purposes in the same position as the pre-Eudoxan 
students of proportion’. But the analogy is not as close as this implies. 
74°31: “except in number...”: Aristotle wants to distinguish two 
different ways in which you might be said to known of every triangle that 
it has 2 R. The second way must be the one represented by (3); there, a 
has knowledge in respect of the sort, triangle. The other way should be: 

(5) (WF) (if F is a species of T, then a knows that: (Wx) (Fx > Rx)). 
Unlike (3), (5) does follow from (1) and (2); so in this, ‘sophistical’ (cf. 4 1, 
71°24) sense, someone of whom (1) holds may be said to know of 
every triangle that it has 2 R. 

74°32: The final paragraph of 4 5 offers further elucidation of the issue 

124 

COMMENTARY 74°32 

discussed at A 4, 73°32-7473. The argument assumes that R holds of T 
as such, and that a knows that Rak. Then a will have knowledge 
simpliciter, i.e. will know that R holds universally of E only if being E 
and being T are the same, i.e. only if “E” and ““T” are synonymous. The 
qualification ‘(either for each or for all)” is puzzling. Since it would be 
absurd to think that “‘T’’ always meant “‘E”’, the sentence ‘“‘if it were the 
same thing to be a triangle and to be equilateral” must be taken as a 
brachylogy; the qualification then offers two alternative expansions of 
the brachylogy, viz.: ““T” means “E” and “7” means “J” and “7” 
means “‘S” (“for each”: i.e. “7” is ambiguous); or: “T” means “E or J 
or S”’ (‘‘for all’). (So Pacius; there are different suggestions in Mure and 
Ross.) 

At 74°37 Aristotle offers a recipe for discovering of what subject 
a given predicate holds universally and primitively. The text is un- 
usually telegraphic. Aristotle supposes a sequence of terms of increasing 
generality, thus: 

(£*) bronze isosceles, isosceles, triangle, figure, limit, . . . 

He takes the predicate ‘has 2R” and asks of which member of the 
sequence it holds universally. His answer is this: ‘Remove the members 
of (2*) one by one, beginning with the least general term. After a 
certain number of removals the predicate ‘‘has 2R”’ will no longer hold 
of all the items falling under the remaining terms. Take the first term 
after the removal of which “has 2R’’ no longer holds: “has 2R” holds 
universally of this term.’ 

The illustrative example at 74°38—°4 shows that this is Aristotle’s 
meaning. But it is hard—perhaps impossible—to extract it from the 
received text of 74°37—8. The text reads: the predicate holds universally 
“when, after the removal of items, it holds protéi’’. If we take ‘“‘protos” 
here to mean “first”, then Aristotle says the opposite of what he should 
say. If we take it to mean “primitive”, then Aristotle’s recipe is tauto- 
logous (‘It holds primitively of the term of which it holds primitively’)— 
and, in addition, the sense of “prétos” changes from 74°38 to 742. 
Hence I prefer to take “prdtos’’ in the sense of “‘first’’, and to insert a 
negative particle before the verb. 

74°1: The last few sentences may then be paraphrased as follows: 
‘But R does not hold of any member of the series if figure and limit 
are abstracted.—But figure and limit are not the first terms after whose 
abstraction R fails to hold.—Then what is the first term after whose 
abstraction R fails to hold?—Triangle; and so R holds primitively of 
triangle.’ 

CHAPTER 6 

A 6 first argues that demonstrative principles are I-predications; then 
offers four arguments to show that they are necessary propositions; and 
finally appends a number of loosely connected remarks. 

125 

74°5 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

74°5: The argument that demonstrative principles are I-predications 
has four premisses: 

(1) If P is demonstrated from J7, then J7 is necessary. 

(2) If 7 is an I-predication, then /7 is necessary. 

(3) All propositions are either I-predications or incidental predications. 
(4) No incidental predications are necessary. 

This argument is valid, but unhappy. First, the conclusion follows from 
(1), (3), and (4) alone; and the text gives the impression of offering an 
invalid argument from (1) and (2) and hastily supplementing this by (3) 
and (4). Secondly, Aristotle cannot have both (3) and (4): (3) is true if 
“incidental” is defined as “‘non-I” (4 4, 73°4); but then (4) is false, since 
predications of properties and ‘in itself incidentals’ are necessary but not 
I-predications. (4) is true if “incidental” is defined as “non-necessary” 
(Top A 5, 1026-7); but then (3) is false. Thirdly, (1) is supported by 
the assertion that ‘“‘what you understand cannot be otherwise”, which 
probably encapsulates the bad argument at 4 4, 73°21-4. (For “‘it holds 
in what it is”, 74°8, see A 22, 82°37, note.) 

74°13: The paragraph begins as though it were about to present a 
further argument for the thesis that the principles are I-predications; but 
in fact it offers the first argument for (1). (1) is to be inferred from the 
posit that “demonstration is necessary”’, i.e. from: 

(5) If P is demonstrated, P is necessary. 
The inference is supported by: 

(6) If P is inferred from 77, and 77 is necessary, then P is demonstrated. 
But (5) and (6) do not yield (1); and (6) is false. 

74°18: The second argument for (1) is similar in type to that at 4 4, 
73°32. ‘If someone claims to demonstrate that P by deducing it from /7, 
then we may object to the claim by urging that 77 is not necessary— 
either that it is not in fact necessary or else that nothing has been done 
to show that it is necessary. Hence we suppose that the principles of a 
demonstration must be necessary.’ Note that here, as often, Aristotle 
is content to argue from the actual practice of the sciences, and in 
particular from the way in which scientific argument is actually conducted. 

74°21: This paragraph constitutes a curious aside; we would expect 
the argument to run: ‘It is silly to be satisfied with premisses which 
are merely reputable and true—for demonstrative principles must be 
necessary.’ But in fact Aristotle appeals not to necessity but to pri- 
mitiveness and appropriateness. 

“Reputable”, and not “probable” or “‘plausible’”’, is the correct trans- 
lation of endoxos; criteria for repute among propositions are laid down 
at Top A 1, 100°21-3. 

The sophists’ assumption can be found in argumentative context at 
Euthyd 277°; Theaet 197°. 

126 

COMMENTARY 74°26 

74°26: The third argument for (1). Suppose I ‘demonstrate’ the necess- 
ary proposition AaC from non-necessary premisses: then I do not know 
why AaC; hence (cf. A 2, 71°10—-11) I do not understand AaC; hence 
(71°18) I have not given a demonstration that AaC. Aristotle explains 
that if the premisses are contingent then AaC cannot hold because of 
them; thus he is committed to the general law that if P holds because Q 
holds, then if O P then O Q. Perhaps he is treating explanations 
as expressions of necessary as well as sufficient conditions: if Q is a 
necessary condition for P, then P implies Q and so if 0 P then O Q. Or 
perhaps it just seemed absurd to suppose that a contingent fact could be 
sufficient to account for a necessity. 

74°28: “If, in a case where there is a demonstration...”: i.e. 
‘when AaC is in fact demonstrable’; or perhaps ‘when a man has 
‘demonstrated’—i. e. thinks, wrongly, that he has demonstrated—that 
AaC’ (at 74°30 “‘demonstrate” means ‘‘‘demonstrate’”). 

74°29: Does the supposition that “B... does not hold from necessity” 
mean that both AaB and BaC are contingent, or that just BaC is 
contingent? It is clear that Aristotle requires both premisses in a demon- 
stration to be necessary; and that perhaps supports the view that his 
supposition is the contradictory of this, viz. that one premiss is not 
necessary. In that case the would-be demonstrator may be imagined to 
be offering a syllogism in Barbara of the form: 0 AaB, BaCt 0 Aac. 
Notoriously, Aristotle held this mood to be valid (APr A 9, 30715—23). 
This is a piquant thought, but perhaps too subtle; and 75°4 favours the 
other reading of the supposition. 

74°32: The fourth argument for (1) relies on the complex premiss: 

(7) If, where f, is earlier than 4, (i) a does not know at f that P, and 
(ii) both at 4 and at f, a has a reason R for holding that P, and (iii) 
a was alive at ¢, and is alive at ,, and (iv) P is true at ¢, and true at 
f, and (v) a has not forgotten that P between ¢, and fp—then a did 
not know at ¢, that P. 

Here (ii) dilutes “possesses the account” to “has a reason’’; without this 
dilution the argument makes no sense. (iv) offers a sober version of the 
quaint phrase ‘‘the object i is preserved” (sdzomenos: see An B 3, 428°6; 
cf. the use of “ remain” , diamenein, at Top @ 2, 157°15, and of “perish”, 
phtheiresthai, at 74° 34: APr A 33, 47°31; Top E 9, 139°12; Met @ 3, 
1047°2). “The object’’ refers to the subject of the proposition P, and its 
‘preservation’ consists in its retaining the predicate ascribed to it by P 
(cf. Met @ 8, 105014). 

(7) appears to be true; indeed, (i) and (v) seem by themselves to imply 
the consequent of (7). (iii) seems peculiarly otiose (but cf. Met Ir 8, 
101225); it may be present purely for the sake of symmetry: knowledge 
is maintained from ¢, to t, provided that the knower is preserved; the 
object Known is preserved; and the relation between knower and object 
is preserved. 

127 

74°32 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Now let P be the conclusion AaC; and R the premisses AaB & BaC, 
which are supposed contingent. Thus R may ‘perish’, i.e. cease to be 
true; but if R is false at t2, then (i)—(v) are satisfied and it follows that a 
did not know at ¢; that AaC. 

This brings out clearly the presupposition already implicit in (iv), that 
a proposition may change its truth-value. This presupposition underlies 
the whole of Aristotle’s logic (cf. e.g. Cat 5, 4°34—°13; APst A 33, 
88°31-4; Top A 2, 123°15—17; I 22, 178°25-9; Met @ 10, 1051°13-15); 
but it works ill for Aristotle here. For we can now construct a counter- 
example to (7): let t; be 1950, t2 1960, P “‘No one has run a three-minute 
mile”, and R “No one has run a four-minute mile’; and suppose that I 
regularly assented to P from 1949 to 1961, and regularly gave R as my 
reason for holding P. Then (i)—(v) are satisfied; yet surely I may, in 
1950, have known that P—an ancient interest in athletics ensured that 
my belief that R was well-founded in 1950; the interest waned, and the 
belief, now turned false, remained. To avoid such counter-examples it is 
necessary to add a further condition to (7), viz. (vi) R has the same 
truth-value at ¢, and at ¢;—but with this addition Aristotle’s application 
of (7) no longer works. ; 

74°37: “And if, although the middle term has not perished...”: 
Aristotle has supposed that R is false at t,; but what if, though it is 
possible for R to be false at 4, nevertheless R is in fact true then? 
Aristotle’s answer relies on: 

(8) (A oe 
—where ‘“‘X”’ is “the result” (to sumbainon, 74°37), and the diamond, 
©}, represents possibilty (8) is a case of a general principle enunciated 

at APr A 15, 34°5-12, and Met @ 3, 1047°14—-17. What is “the result’’? If 
we assume: 

(9) a knows at t, that AaC, 
then (7), (9), and — R lead (Aristotle would argue) to: 
(10) (a knows at ¢, that AaC) & (a does not know at 4, that AaC). 

Hence, (by (8)) the assumption that On7R, together with (7) and (9), 
will entail that (10) is possible; but it is not. This argument can, I think, 
be made to work, though it needs a slightly stronger principle than (8). 

74°38: ‘‘but it is impossible to have knowledge under such conditions”: 
i.e. ‘it is impossible for (10) to be true’; or, perhaps better, “You cannot 
know that AaC if you rely on contingent premisses’ (Zabarella). 
75°1: ‘This section is a further aside; it propounds three theses, which 
generalize to: 

(11) Iti is not the case that if P follows from Q;, Qo, ..., Q,, and if 

OP, then for some i 0 Q;. 
(12) If . follows from Q;, Qo, ..., Q, and for every i 0 Q;, then 

128 

COMMENTARY 7571 

(13) If P follows from Q), Qo, ..., Q,, andif 4 O P, then for some i 

T Q;. 
(11) is supported by analogy with: 

(14) It is not the case that if P follows from Q;, Qo, ..., Q, and P is 
true, then for some i Q; is true. 

Aristotle argues for (14) at APr B 2-4 (see Patzig, appendix). (12) 
entails (13); both are illustrated by Barbara. In the case of (13) “the 
middle term is not necessary” means “‘it is not the case that 0 AaB & 
0 BaC”’; hence I have read the same interpretation into (12). 

75°12: If a infers AaC from AaB and BaC, when 0 AaC, 4 O AaB 
and — 0 BaC, then first a will not know why AaC holds (see 74°26-32), 
and secondly a will not know that [1 AaC (presumably because he 
cannot validly infer it from his premisses). These two implications 
answer to the two parts of the definition of understanding at A 2, 
71°10-12. (But the Greek at 75714 may rather mean: “you will under- 
stand neither why (it is necessary for it to be the case) nor...” (see 
BURNYEAT (1981), III n. 27).) 

75°15: “either you will wrongly think...’’: i.e. ‘either a, supposing 
wrongly that 0 AaB and O) BaC, does indeed think—but does not 
know—that DO) AaC; or else he will not even think that O AaC, alike if 
he simply infers AadC from AaB & BaC or if he knows “the reason 
why through immediates’’’. The last clause is baffling (cf. Ross, 529-30). 
Conceivably Aristotle is imagining a completely different argument, in 
which a infers DaF from DaE & EaF, where the premisses are immediate 
and necessary truths but a does not realize that they are. Then he does, 
in a sense, ‘know the reason why’’—for he knows the propositions which 
in fact give the reason why; but he does not think that 0 DaF. 

75°18: The thesis that there is no understanding of ‘incidentals’ is 
readily inferred from the matter of A 2 and 4 6 (see also A 30); but 
Aristotle’s argument here equivocates on “‘incidental’’ (see p. 126), and 
the longer argument at Met E 2, 1026°2—24 and 1027°19—28, is laborious 
and obscure. 

75°18: ‘Of incidentals which do not hold of things in themselves .. .”: 
this seems to mean ‘incidentals which are not “‘in itself” incidentals’ (cf. 
p. 113); but “‘in itself’ is immediately glossed by reference to A 4, 
73°34—5, and ‘in itself’ incidentals are not I-predicates. 

75°22: The puzzle is this: ‘If incidental predications are non-necessary, 
then what is the point of arguing for them in the way we do, i.e. of 
looking for relevant premisses from which to infer them (why do we 
bother to ask these particular questions about them)? For if Q is not 
necessary, any argument of the form “P, so necessarily Q” will be 
equally good—since no argument of that form will be any good.’ The 
puzzle is solved by distinguishing between necessitas consequentiae and 

129 

75°22 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

necessitas consequentis: if P + Q is a valid argument then it follows that 
0 (P > Q); but it does not follow that O Q. Aristotle is evidently trying 
to formulate this distinction; but he does not succeed. He contrasts with 
O° first: 

(15) O (if a says that P, then a says that Q), 
and then: 
(16) O (if P is true, then if a says that Q then a says truly that Q). 

Of these, (15) neither entails nor is entailed by 0 (P > Q), and (16), 
though entailed by it, does not entail it. (See further Patzig, ch. 2.) 
75°28: The final paragraph of the chapter returns to the thesis, and 
repeats the argument, of the first. 

75°30: + “‘...demonstrations are concerned with what holds of things in 
themselves and... proceed from such items’; i.e. ‘in a demonstration 
both conclusion and premisses are I-predications’. 

75°33: ‘‘(e.g. deductions through evidence)’: see APr B 27. 

75°34: “For you will not understand in itself...”: ie. ‘you will not 
understand that A holds of C in itself’. 

CHAPTER 7 

A 7 turns to ‘appropriateness’ (cf. 4 2, 71°23; see e.g. G.-G. GRANGER 
(1976), 68-72). Note that the modern division of APst into chapters is 
particularly misleading here. As the word “thus (ara)’ shows, the main 
thesis of 4 7 follows directly from the conclusion of 4 6: see 75°10-12, 
which rehearse 75°35-7. (See DE GANDT (1975-6), 73.) A principle 7 
may be inappropriate to a conclusion P either because it is ‘too general’ 
(e.g. If concerns animals in general, P only mules: cf. GA B 8, 747° 30- 
748°11), or because it is specific to a kind different from the kind P is 
concerned with (e.g. /7 concerns lions, P mules). It is the second sort of 
inappropriateness that Aristotle discusses here. 

75°38: This tripartition of the “things involved in demonstrations” 
recurs more than once (see p. 143). The first element seems straight- 
forward: it is “the conclusion”. But the parenthetical gloss (“‘this is what 
holds. ..”) indicates that the first element is not the conclusion as a 
whole, “AaC, but rather the predicate of the conclusion. And 4 Io, 
76°15, confirms this indication by talking simply of “the affections” (ta 
pathe). The second element both seems and is straightforward. Just as 

“the conclusion” is really the predicate of the conclusion, so the third 
element—“‘the underlying kind”’—is in fact the subject of the conclusion. 
This is made clear in the explanatory clause at 75°1, and is corroborated 
by Aristotle’s use of “underlying” (hupokeimenon), his standard term 
for ‘subject’. 

I shall postpone the difficult question of the relationship between this 
tripartition and the other ways in which Aristotle classifies the elements 

130 

COMMENTARY 95°13 

of a demonstrative science (see p. 143); the immediate problem is 
to determine how the tripartition bears on the requirement of ‘appro- 
priateness’ or the prohibition on kind crossing. 

A kind, or genos, is a sequence of terms of the type (2) of p. II9. 
Suppose two such kinds (£,) and (2), and let T, stand for an arbitrary 
term in (2,) and Tp for an arbitrary term in (2,). Then a demonstrative 
chain D will ‘cross’ from (2,) to (“,) if and only if D concludes to AaT, 
from premisses including AaT,. 

The burden of Aristotle’s argument is contained in 75°7~12: he 
assumes that the kind-crossing argument must contain the proposition 
Tals. This, like all demonstrative premisses, must be an I- -predication 
(75°11); hence T, and T, must come from the same kind (75°10)— 
presumably because if one ‘inheres in the account’ of the other it will 
necessarily fall under the same general kind. Thus if D crosses, T, and 
T, belong to the same kind. But, trivially, if D crosses, (X,) and (2;) are 
distinct; hence D does not cross. 

This argument tacitly assumes that a term belongs to at most one kind. 
If we suppose that we can distinguish terms which make up the ‘kind’ 
from attributes or affections of the kind, and if we adopt as constitutive 
of kind construction the principle that if A@B is an I-predication then A 
and B belong to the same kind, then it becomes possible to show that 
kind crossing is a logical impossibility; and this is what Aristotle in effect 
does. But plainly he hopes to do rather more than this: “kind” is 
occasionally used for “branch of knowledge” (e.g. Top F 1, 116716); 
and APst regularly supposes it proved that D cannot cross from e.g. 
arithmetic to geometry. Aristotle has not proved this; to do so he needs 
to prove that the existent ‘kinds’ or branches of knowledge are ‘kinds’ in 
the technical sense required by the argument of 4 7. He cannot prove 
this; and the example he discusses at A 13, 79°13—16, refutes it (see 
p. 160). (It has been argued that in MA Aristotle implicitly relaxes his 
prohibition on kind crossing, allowing in particular that cosmology and 
biology are not wholly separate sciences (see NUSSBAUM (1985), 107-42); 
but see KUNG (1982).) 

75°2: ‘Now the items from which .. .”: i.e. the axioms used in demon- 
strations from different kinds may be the same; for a more precise 
account see A 10, 76°37, notes. 

75°5: “unless magnitudes are numbers’: the hypothesis is jocular (cf. 
A 10, 76°38, note). Magnitudes (megethé), in Aristotle’s terminology, 
are the subject-matter of geometry (e.g. Cael A 1, 268°7—contrast 
Euclid’s usage, above, p. 123). 

” 

75°6: “how. - this is possible .. .”: cf. 75°9 (‘‘either simpliciter or in 
some respect’ ys 75°14-17; A 9, 76%9 —15, 23-5; A 12, 77°1—2; and esp. 
A 13, 78°34~79°16 (see notes there). 

75°13: That there is ‘a single science of contraries’ is an Aristotelian 
commonplace (see Bonitz, 247°13-21), with a wide range of application. 

131 

Toke POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Thus a doctor, say, cannot know about therapeutic drugs unless he 
knows about poisons; and he cannot know how to cure a patient unless 
he knows how to kill him. 

75°13: “two cubes make a cube”: i.e. if m = x° and n = y°, then for 
some z m-n = 2? (Euclid, ix. 4); cf. Heath (2), 46. 

75°17: “Nor indeed anything...”: this is not an illustration of kind 
crossing; Aristotle’s point is this: if Aa7, is an I-predication, then you 
cannot prove AaT;, by the principles of (2,) alone—you are bound to 
use at least one principle from (2,), viz. AaT,. By the earlier argument, 
this would in fact make (2,) and (2;) identical: Aristotle in effect allows 
this, but he singles out (2,), a sub-class of (2,), as a ‘subordinate’ 
science. His only motive for this can be the fact that in current scientific 
practice (2,) (e.g. geometry) was a science in its own right. 

75°18: ‘Whether straight lines are the most beautiful of lines”: Aristotle 
preferred the circle (Cael A 2, 269*19-30); for the place of beauty in 
mathematics see Met B 2, 996%29-°1; M 3, 1078°31-°6. 

75°19: ‘Whether they are contrarily related to curved lines”: cf. Cael 
Ad. 

75°20: .in virtue of something common”: sc. to lines and other 
genera. Contrariety i is a relation holding between things qua beings (cf. 
Met T 2, 1003°33—1004°2; and esp. 1005°11—13); qua what are things 
beautiful? 

“cr 

CHAPTER 8 

This chapter breaks rudely into the train of thought uniting 4 7 and 4 9; 
Zabarella proposed to place it after 4 10. It expands on matter already 
hinted at in 4 4, 73°28-34, and 4 6, 74°32-9. In an interesting passage 
at GA B 6, 742°17-34, Aristotle argues against the contrary view, which 
he ascribes to Democritus, that there cannot be demonstration of eternal 
objects. 

The argument at 75°21—6 goes as follows: Suppose that P is demon- 
strable. Then P is of the form AaC. Hence (by 4 4, 73°28) for all t, AaC 
holds at ¢ (P is “‘eternal’’). Hence Cs are not ‘perishable’, and there is no 
knowledge, in the full sense, of ‘“‘perishable things’. (Cf. EN Z 3, 
1139°22-4.) 

The commentators suppose Aristotle to be arguing that there is 
no demonstration of individuals; and they might have compared the 
argument at Met Z 15, 1039°27-10407. But in our passage Aristotle 
speaks explicitly of perishables; and he did not think that all individuals 
were perishable. 

It is true that the individual Socrates has perished, and that hence we 
can have no demonstrative understanding about him—no demonstrative 
deduction will conclude to a proposition of the form “‘A (Socrates)”’. It is 
also true that every human is perishable; but we shall not ascribe to 

132 

COMMENTARY 75°21 

Aristotle the view that no demonstration may conclude to a proposition 
of the form “Every human is A”. (The text might seem to suggest this 
view—but it cannot be Aristotle’s meaning.) Rather, although every 
human is perishable, there is a sense in which—on Aristotle’s view of 
nature—humans are imperishable: there will always be humans, humans 
will not die out. A demonstrative deduction may conclude to a proposi- 
tion of the form “Every C is A” only if Cs are imperishable in this sense, 
i.e. only if there will always be some Cs about. 

Two dubious moves have been discerned in Aristotle’s argument. 
First, the inference from ‘‘P is eternal” to “‘P is about eternal objects” 
seems to confuse the eternal holding of facts with the eternal existence of 
objects (cf. e. 8 Phys 4 12, 222°3- 93 @ 1, 252°2-4; Cael B 11, 281°4-7; 
GA B 6, 742°25-8; EN I 3, 1112°21-3; S. Mansion, 86-8; 115- ee 
Aristotle could be defended here if we took “Cs are imperishable” 
mean “‘Cs cannot cease to be A” (where A is the attribute focontnble 
of C)—cf. Met @ 8, 105014. But Aristotle thought that if Cs are 
perishable in the absolute sense (if they can cease to be), then they are 
perishable relative to every attribute (they can cease to be A); in terms 
of syllogistic, AaC is not true if there are no Cs. Secondly, the move 
from ‘“‘P is about eternal objects” to “P is about imperishable objects” 
seems to confuse what does perish with the perishable. There is con- 
siderable evidence that Aristotle consciously adhered to this ‘confusion’ 
(cf. Hintikka (1)). It is possible, however, that he has in mind here an 
argument of the type he deployed at A 6, 74°32-9. 

75°26: ‘If P is non-eternal, and a ‘demonstrates’ that P from Q and R, 
then ‘tone of the propositions must be non-universal and perishable”’.’ 
There is no reason to construe “one of the propositions” as ‘“‘the minor 
premiss”’; rather, it means “at least one of the premisses’”. ‘“Non- 
universal’? does not mean “singular”, as the reference to “its subjects” 
(75°29) shows. It might mean “particular” (i.e. ‘of the form AiC’); but 
then Aristotle could infer not merely that P is not omnitemporal but, 
more strongly, that P is only a particular judgement of the form AiC. 
Rather, he has in mind a proposition AaB which only holds for a given 
time. The text at 75°28 and 75°29 is uncertain. At 75°29 I translate 
the conjecture hote men estai hote d’ouk estai ta eph’ hon. This gives 
Aristotle a good argument: AaB is non-universal because sometimes the 
Bs will be (i.e. will exist; or perhaps, will be A) and sometimes they will 
not be. The MS readings give: ‘Some of the Bs will be (A) and others 
will not be (A)’; if this is correct, then particular judgements are 
intruded, misguidedly, into the argument of the chapter. At 75°28 
Aristotle means: ‘Either AaB or BaC is perishable; for (Vt) (AaB, & 
BaC,-» AaC,): hence if (Wt) AaB, and (Wt) BaC, then (Vt) AaC,. But by 
hypothesis AaC is perishable, i.e. (At) 4 AaC, (see Ross, 534). 

The long and the short of this is very simple: if a ‘demonstrates’ AaC 
from AaB and BaC, when AaC does not hold omnitemporally, then 
either AaB or BaC only holds for part of the time. 

133 

75°30 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

” 

75°30: “The same goes for definitions ...’’: i.e. ‘if Cs are perishable, 
then C cannot be defined’ (cf. Met Z 15, 1040°2). The argument relies on 
the classification of definitions at B 10, 94*11-14, and is scarcely intelli- 
gible apart from the argument of B Io. 

75°33: Given that we can only have knowledge of what is eternal, how 
can we know—as we surely do know—about, e.g., eclipses of the 
moon? For these do not, fortunately, always occur. (These cases are 
sometimes assimilated to what happens ‘for the most part’ (cf. esp. 
A 30); but the moon is not eclipsed for the most part.) 

Aristotle’s answer to this question is obscure—and the text is uncer- 
tain at a crucial point. If, with the OCT, we read héi men toioude, 
Aristotle asserts that ‘demonstrations of what happens often hold always 
(are universal) in so far as they hold of such-and-such a sort of thing’. 
The point is then simple and true: even though eclipses do not happen 
always, we may still produce universal demonstrations to the effect that 
every eclipse is thus and so. (Whether Aristotle is entitled to this answer 
is another matter; for—as this very chapter shows—-he wishes to con- 
strue universal propositions as requiring the eternal existence of their 
subjects.) But then the next clause in the text must mean that ‘demon- 
strations of what happens often are particular in so far as they do not 
hold always’; and it is difficult to make any sense of this. Hence I prefer 
the suggestion in VERDENIUS (1981), 347: read héi men toiaide and 
suppose that the subject to be understood is hai ekleipseis: demon- 
strations are universal in so far as the eclipses are such-and-such (i.e. in 
so far as the demonstrations involve propositions of the form “Every 
eclipse is ...”), and they are particular in so far as eclipses do not always 
occur. But it must be admitted that this construe is difficult. 

CHAPTER 9 

75°37: Aristotle now turns to the first of the two sorts of inappro- 
priateness (p. 130), where the principles of a proof are too general. 

The argument is hampered by the reference to Bryson, a Megarian 
contemporary of Aristotle’s (cf. Bonitz, 144°17—20; DORING (1972), 62-7). 
The problem of Bryson’s attempt to construct a square equal in area 
to a given circle (see Top I 11, 171°12—18; 172°2~7; cf. Cat 7, 7°30-3) 
“is one of the most baffling in the history of Greek geometry” (Heath 
(2), 48; see MORAUX (1979), 25-32; MUELLER (1982)). A 5, 74°I5-25, 
suggest a simpler example of the error Aristotle has in mind: an argu- 
ment of the sort Aristotle is objecting to might run: 

(1) All proportional numbers are B; 
(2) Everything B alternates. 

Therefore: 
(3) All proportional numbers alternate. 
We are to suppose that (1) and (2) are immediate truths (75°40). Even 

134 

COMMENTARY 95°37 

so, Aristotle says, the argument is unsatisfactory because it applies “to 
other items which are not of a kind with them” (76°1; Top J 11, 172*4—-6). 
Thus “numbers” can be replaced in (1) by, say, “lengths”; so that the 
argument proves “in virtue of a common feature”—viz. B, which is 
common to numbers and lengths. 

No doubt this is true; but what does it matter? Aristotle says that on 
the basis of (1)—-(3) “you do not understand the item as such”; this 
presumably means (cf. 4 6, 75°34) that you will not know that A belongs 
to C as such. That is true; but it is true because A does not belong to C 
as such—in general, if AaC is concluded from AaB and BaC then A will 
belong to C not as such but as B. If Aristotle’s words are to be pressed 
here, he will have to abandon the possibility of demonstrative knowledge. 

There is a further difficulty, which my supplementary example exposes 
in stark form. How can the premisses in such a case be “indemonstrable 
and immediate”? It is plain that (1) is not immediate; and it is plain, 
more generally, that if AaB and BaC are both immediate, then they 
must be ‘appropriate’ to the conclusion. 

76°4: The argument runs thus: “We understand A—or rather that 
AaC—if we have derived it through a term B which does in fact explain 
why AaC, and if our derivation rests on principles which are I-pre- 
dications of B.... Hence if BaC must also be an I-predication, then if 
we are to know AaC our middle term must be from the same kind as C.’ 
This suggests a different criticism of (1)-(3): B is not the term in 
virtue of which A belongs to C (cf. Top J 11, 171°17); B cannot explain 
why numbers that are proportional alternate, because it explains in 
general why proportional quantities alternate. This is perhaps an 
intelligible complaint; and it links with some of the things Aristotle 
says in B 18. But it must be said first, that if the complaint is justified 
then (1) and (2) cannot after ali both be immediate propositions; and 
secondly, that it indicates at most that (1)—(3) is not in itself enough to 
demonstrate (3)—a longer chain of demonstrations is needed for that. 

76°9: The paragraph is obscure. “Otherwise, it will be like...”: i.e. if 
the middle term is not in the same kind, then we shall have a proof of 
the sort which we find, e.g., in harmonics. “Things of this sort. . .”: i.e. 

proofs in harmonics are indeed like standard proofs—but there is also a 
crucial difference. Take a demonstration 

AaB, BaC} AaC 

—where AaC is a theorem of harmonics. Then AaB may be a principle 
of arithmetic, while BaC is a principle of harmonics. Thus the principles 
of the two sciences have something in common, namely, the term B. 
(And BaC is a ‘bridge’ principle, which links harmonics to arithmetic.) 
This may seem reasonably clear in itself. Yet it is quite unclear why the 
same may not be said, mutatis mutandis, of the Brysonian proof, which 
also works “in virtue of a common feature”—especially if (as Aristotle is 
apparently prepared to allow) the premisses of the Brysonian proof may 

135 

76°9 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

be indemonstrable and immediate. (For the matter in 7679-16 see notes 
to 4 13, 78°34~79°16.) 

76°16: Suppose that /7, is a proper principle of geometry, and it is 
demonstrated. This demonstration must depend on some principles, say 
IT; and i must also apply to some science other than geometry (“there 
will be principles of everything”, 76717). (If 17 applies only to geometry, 
then it is a proper principle of geometry; and /7, is, after all, a theorem 
and not a principle.) But this is not possible, since ‘‘a demonstration 
does not attach to another“kind” (76°22). 

This interpretation gives Aristotle a valid argument; but it is obliged to 
gloss “there will be the principles of everything” as “there will be 
principles of more than one science”. (But compare the use of “every- 
thing”, pas, at An B 6, 418*r1: see above, p. 100.) And it breaks the 
natural connection between this argument and those at 4 32, 88°23~9 
and Met B 4, 997°2-11, which unequivocally attack the notion of a 
single science which is sovereign over all others in the manner of 
Platonic dialectic (cf. Cherniss, 73 n. 55). 

Suppose that AaB is a principle of arithmetic, i.e. that it cannot be 
proved within arithmetic and contains terms specific to arithmetic. Any 
putative proof of this principle must—within syllogistic—use the 
premisses AaC and CaB. But both A and B are arithmetical terms. 
Hence AaB can after all be proved within arithmetic. Hence if there are 
any principles proper to a science, they cannot be proved at all. 

There is a subtle discussion of the passage in MIGNUCCI (1975), 178-84. 
According to Mignucci, when Aristotle refers to “the proper principles” 
he has in mind only those principles which are not common to a 
subordinate and a superordinate science: the principles of a subordinate 
science can be proved—from the principles of the superordinate science. 
Moreover, Aristotle intends only to show that the proper principles of 
one science cannot be proved from the principles of a co-ordinate science. 
Against the first of these points there is the following to be said. The 
argument which I have just offered will apply as well to the principles of 
harmonics as to the principles of arithmetic, and I do not think that 
Aristotle anywhere suggests that the principles of subordinate sciences 
can be proved. What is peculiar to the subordinate sciences is not that 
their principles can be proved but rather that in the proofs of their 
theorems you will (sometimes) invoke principles of the superordinate 
science as well as principles of the science itself. (Indeed, if all the 
principles of a subordinate science could be proved from the principles 
of a superordinate science, then the ‘subordinate science’ would be 
simply a fragment of the superordinate science and not a distinct science 
at all.) As for Mignucci’s second contention, it seems to me to have no 
support in the text, which claims quite generally (and quite rightly) that 
the proper principles of a science cannot be proved. 

The function of 76*18—22 is to show why understanding the putative 
principles of everything will be ‘sovereign’. Such understanding will be 

136 

COMMENTARY 76°16 

the best possible sort of understanding, since it will be based on the 
highest possible explanations, namely, on explanations which admit no 
further-explanation. 

The paragraph proves that Aristotle did not think that the proper 
principles of a science were demonstrable. Many commentators, both 
ancient and modern, have claimed that, in Aristotle’s view, metaphysics 
can prove the proper principles of the sciences (see e.g. Simplicius, in 
Phys 15. 29~16. 2); and they have accordingly supposed that 4 9 affirms 
only that the sciences cannot demonstrate their own proper principles. 
But the supposition is untenable; and the claim is ill-founded. (It has 
rested principally on 4 12, 77229-31, and on Met E 1, 1025°10-18; but 
for the latter text see GOMEZ-LOBO (1978).) 

CHAPTER I0 

A 10 elaborates the classifications of principles already introduced in 4 1 
and A 2. 

76°31: With this paragraph cf. 4 1, 71°11—16, and notes. 

Just as the propositions of a demonstrative science divide into 
primitive axioms and derived theorems, so the terms of such a science 
can be divided into primitive terms and defined terms. In several 
passages Aristotle appears to grasp both the distinction between 
primitive and defined terms, and the parallel between this distinction and 
the distinction between axioms and theorems: see 4 23, 84°15; 28, 87°38; 
B 9; Top Z 4, 141°27-31; Met A 9, 982°32; B 3, 998°5. Scholz, who has 
an excellent discussion of all this, argues that in our passage “the 
primitives” and “the principles” mean “the primitive terms”, and “the 
items proceeding from them” means “the defined terms”; for Aristotle’s 
examples are all of terms and not of propositions. 

Had Aristotle developed the line of thought present in these several 
passages he would doubtless have grasped the distinction Scholz ascribes 
to him. He was, of course, well aware that some of the terms in a science 
would be defined by means of others—the whole notion of an 
I-predication depends on this. But he did not, I think, reach any great 
degree of sophistication. First, the parallelism between propositions and 
terms is not explicitly noticed in APst; the definition of “principle” at 
A 2, 72°7, leaves no room for term-principles; and the several places in 
which termlike objects are referred to as principles reflect a general 
muddiness rather than a clear perception of the parallelism between 
terms and propositions. Secondly, the distinction between types of item 
at 76°31—6 is not one between defined and undefined terms; for Aristotle 
explicitly says that we assume the meanings both of the dependent items 
and of the primitives—i.e. in both cases we assume their definitions. 
(Scholz later recanted: see the passage quoted by DE GANDT (1975-6), 
56 n. 153.) 

There is a further difficulty. If we must assume the meanings both of 
the primitive and of the dependent terms, then how are the two sorts of 

137 

76°31 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

term to be distinguished? And what exactly do we do when we assume 
what a term means? It is natural to suppose that such an assumption will 
be expressed by a proposition of the form: 

T means so-and-so, 
or perhaps simply: 
Ts are so-and-sos 

—where this proposition is taken to show what T means. Let 2, be the 
set of terms {T), T>,...,7,} for a science S. If there is a defining 
proposition for every member of 2,, then 7; will be a dependent term just 
in case its defining proposition uses some other 7; in 2,. (For example, in 
geometry, the defining proposition for “triangle” will include the term 
“line”, which is itself a geometrical term.) What of the defining 
propositions for primitive terms? There seem to be two possibilities 
here. First, they might be ‘homophonic’, so that the defining proposition 
for, say, “point” might be simply: 

“Point” means a point. 
Secondly, they might be ‘analytical’, e.g.: 

“Point” means a unit with position. 

Presumably it is the second possibility which Aristotle embraces. But in 
that case we must surely ask why the terms used in the ‘analytical’ 
account of e.g. “point” are not themselves geometrical terms. 

76°37: The distinction between common and proper “items used in the 
demonstrative sciences”’—i.e. common and proper principles—has 
already been adumbrated in 4 7 and 4 9 (see also Rhet A 2, 1358°1—35). 
What exactly is the role of the common principles? Aristotle is clearly 
glossing his unqualified statement at 4 7, 75°2; but the precise 
qualification he is making is unclear. Let us take the common axiom: 

(1) Equals taken from equals leave equals 
and the application of the axiom to geometry: 

(2) Equal magnitudes taken from equal magnitudes leave equal 
magnitudes. 

(For (1) see Euclid, common notion 3. Note that (1) is restricted to 
quantities: thus a principle must count as ‘common?’ if it applies to more 
than one kind of thing—although 77°26 might suggest that “common” is 
elliptical for “common to all” (see above, p. 100).) Then take any 
geometrical proof (e.g. that of Euclid, i. 2) which relies on the axiom. 
Does Aristotle mean that the proof need contain only (2)? (He seems to 
state as much at 76°42.) Or that it must contain (2)? (This may be his 
meaning at 76°39: the axiom is only useful, i.e. only yields results, if 
applied in form (2).) Or that it must not contain (1)? (This may be the 
burden of his claim that the common axioms appear “by analogy”; and it 
is perhaps supported by the argument of 4 9.) The evidence from 

138 

COMMENTARY 76°37 

outside our passage is unsure: at Met f° 3, 1005°23—6 (cf. K 4, 1016°20-4) 
Aristotle in effect asserts that geometers only need (2) and as a matter 
of fact only use (2). At APr A 24, 4113-22, he appears to argue that 
(1) is necessary if the proof is not to ‘beg the question’. 

763: “Proper too...”: the proper principles illustrated at 76°40 were 
all definitions; Aristotle now adds existential propositions (or, more 
precisely, the subject-terms of such propositions). 

76°6: “They assume that there are such items, and that they are such- 
and-such”: i.e. ‘geometry (e.g.) assumes that there are lines and that a 
line is by definition such and such’. 

76°9: “Irrational or inflection or verging”: a line A is irrational in 
relation to B if there are no integers n, m such that A =nB/m; a line AC 
inflects at B if the angle ABC # 180°; and AB verges to a point C if the 
angle ABC = 180°. 

76°10: “through the common items and from what has been 
demonstrated”: Ross (56, 531) stresses the difference between the 
prepositions in this phrase (“through”, dia, and “from”, ek) and asserts 
that to prove from X is to use X as a premiss, while to prove through X 
is to use X as a rule of inference. But elsewhere Aristotle uses “from” of 
the common axioms (e.g. 75742; 76°14; 77°27) and “through” of 
premisses (e.g. 78730; Top A 1, 100726); and the account of the common 
principles which he has just given scarcely suggests that they are to be 
read as rules of inference. 

On the alleged distinction between dia and ek see the full discussion in 
MIGNUCCI (1975), 141-3. As far as I know, the two prepositions are used 
promiscuously in later Greek logical texts too; and I have found no clear 
recognition among the ancient logicians of the distinction between rules 
of inference and premisses (see BARNES (1990), III—18). On pp. 198-9 
Mignucci rightly underscores a further oddity in these lines: Aristotle 
makes no reference at all to the proper principles of a science, writing as 
though the demonstrations he has in mind here could rely simply on 
common axioms and previously proved theorems. There is a more 
general problem: how, in Aristotle’s view, will an arithmetician prove 
that ‘odd is’, i.e. that there are some odd numbers? In theory, Aristotle 
imagines that there will be a syllogism the conclusion of which states (or 
at least directly entails) that some numbers are odd and the premisses of 
which are either common axioms (in their arithmetical specification) or 
else theorems of arithmetic. I have no idea how Aristotle might hope to 
give concrete sense to this theoretical schema. 

76°11: See A 7, 75°39—°2. The assertion that a science may “ignore” 
some of these three elements is a bow to the enthymematic nature of 
actual scientific reasoning; for ‘by nature’ (i.e. when presented in their 
full, unabbreviated form) demonstrative arguments will show all three 
elements. Cf. e.g. APr A 44, 50°36; MA 7, 701°25-33. (See also A 1, 
71°11, note.) 

139 

76°23 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

76°23: The distinction between postulates and the type of supposition 
defined here is new. These things fit ill into the structure of 
demonstrative sciences: being provable, they are not principles; and 
being unproved, they are not theorems. Presumably Aristotle is thinking 
of the teacher who wants to start, as it were, from Book II of the 
Elements; he may use the theorems proved in Book I, but since he has 
not proved them himself or to this pupil he will be ‘postulating’ or 
‘supposing’ them. 

The clause at 76°23—4 is perhaps most naturally translated as follows: 
“What must be the case because of itself and must be thought to be the 
case”. (The word-order suggests that di’ hauto should be construed only 
with the first of the two conjuncts.) In that case, it would be reasonable 
to take “what must be the case because of itself” to refer in general to 
the principles of the science in question; and they form a proper contrast 
to the provable postulates and suppositions. But two things tell against 
this. 

First, there is Aristotle’s argument for the thesis he is propounding. 
The picturesque phraseology, no doubt suggested by Plato’s description 
of thought as “the argument which the soul has with itself about 
whatever it inquires into” (Theaet 189°), is unique in Aristotle; but the 
contrast it makes is familiar enough: it is simply that between saying that 
P and believing that P (a contrast usually made by Jogos and dianoia: 
e.g. Met Fr 5, 100917; cf. Bonitz, 433°22—33). Thus: ‘Demonstration 
starts from principles which must be admitted. It is no use objecting that 
a man can admit and refuse to admit whatever he likes. He may of 
course say what he likes, but there are some things which, once set 
before him, he cannot help believing; and demonstration, being 
concerned with teaching and truth, is directed to what a learner actually 
believes and not to what he merely says’ (cf. Top 0 5, 159°28-30; the 
same type of point at Met Fr 3, 1005°23-6; EN H 3, 1147°18—24). (It is 
odd of Aristotle to say that deduction in general is not aimed at ‘external 
argument’ (76°25); it can be, and by the sophists regularly was.) 

Secondly, there is the phrase “...and must be thought to be”: the 
phrase itself, and the argument just analysed, intimate a class of 
propositions which everyone is bound to believe—or rather, a class K 
such that if P is in K then if anyone entertains P he believes P. Met Fr 3, 
1005°11-34, argues that it is impossible to believe that the Law of 
Contradiction is false. This is as close as Aristotle gets to arguing of any 
axiom that it belongs to K: he nowhere argues that every axiom belongs 
to K—indeed Met Fr 3 implies that its argument only applies to the Law 
of Contradiction. (It is, I suppose, tempting to construe “must” in “must 
be thought” as hypothetical, offering the gloss: ‘anyone who is to learn 
the theorems of the science must assent to these propositions’ (cf. A 2, 
72°16). But so construed, the thesis is given no support by the following 
lines.) 

Thus it is not the principles in general but specifically the common 
axioms which are being contrasted with postulates and suppositions at 

140 

COMMENTARY 76°23 

76°23. But in that case, why did not Aristotle simply say that, since 
postulates and suppositions are by definition demonstrable, they are 
distinct from principles of whatever sort? A different interpretation of 
the text is perhaps possible. We might construe di’ hauto (“because of 
itself”) with dokein as well as with einai, and suppose that Aristotle is 
referring in general to the principles of a science and not specifically to 
the common axioms (let alone to a special class of those axioms). What 
must be the case ‘because of itself’ is what cannot be proved on the basis 
of anything else: you do not—or perhaps should not~—-suppose or 
postulate such items precisely because they are to be believed ‘because 
of themselves’. My revised translation opts for this second construe: it 
yields a better sense—-but it is, I think, less natural than the first 
construe. 

76°27: For the term “supposition” see 4 2, 72°18—20, notes. “Postu- 
late” (aitéma; aitein) is regularly used in a more relaxed way than 
the one suggested here (see Bonitz, 22756—°8; cf. [Rhet ad Alex] 20, 
1433°17-28); later, the term was used quite differently by Euclid, and in 
yet another sense by Archimedes (cf. Proclus, Comm in Eucl 180. 
23-184. 10; Heath (2), 53-7). 
If (A) P is provable, and 
(B) a assumes that P when demonstrating something to b, 

then if 
(i) b believes that P 
then 

a supposes that P and P is a supposition in relation to b; 
and if 

(ii) b either does not believe that P 
or believes that G@ where Q entails not-P, 

then 
a postulates that P and P is a postulate in relation to b. 

Thus “postulate” and “supposition” are relative terms; recognition of 
this is explicit in 76°30 and implicit in the phrase “if you make the same 
assumption” (76°31—i.e. in assuming that P a may suppose relative to b 
and postulate relative to ce). 

The final sentence of the section is perplexing. The MS text gives: “a 
postulate is what is hupenantios to the opinion of the learner or [é] what, 
though demonstrable, is assumed and used without being proved”. This 
is insane. The excision of é improves the text, but still leaves a difficulty; 
for then the account of what a postulate is appears to ignore the first 
disjunct in clause (ii). (See miGNuccI (1975), 210-11.) This difficulty 
would be solved were we to distinguish between enantios at 76°31 and 
hupenantios at 76°32, taking the latter term to mean not “contrary to” 
but rather something like “not in accordance with”. Then both the 

I4I 

76°27 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

disjuncts of (ii) are covered. I have translated the word in this way; but I 
confess that I have found no good parallel. 

76°35: “Terms” translates horoi, which may equally mean “defini- 
tions”. The commentators think that Aristotle is talking of definitions 
here: first, a contrast between definitions and suppositions properly 
follows a paragraph which has distinguished axioms from suppositions; 
secondly, confusion between terms and suppositions seems too crass to 
warn against (unless Aristotle thought Plato guilty of it at Rep 510°); 
thirdly, the language of 76°35—6 has appeared to parallel that of 4 2, 
72°18-24, which unequivocally talks of definitions. On the other side, 
definitions at 4 2, 72°20-4 are a species of thesis, and hence are proposi- 
tions; but horoi are here distinguished from suppositions by the fact that 
suppositions are propositions. This point seems to me to outweigh the 
opposing reasons. 

The text at 76°35-6 is controversial; but if horoi are terms, the 
received reading, which I have translated, may stand: “(terms) are not 
said to be or not be anything” means ‘in uttering a term, e.g. man, one is 
not yet saying that men are or are not anything.’ (See Int 3, 16°19~-22: 
“Said by themselves verbs are names and signify something . . . but they 
do not yet signify whether anything is or not”; cf. 1, 16°9—18.) 

oe 

76°38: “unless you are going to say...”: i.e. unless the grasping of a 
term is itself reckoned as a supposition. The suggestion is deliberately 
absurd (cf. 4 7, 75°5; 4 31, 88°10; Top B 1, 109732; Met I 4, 1006°20; 
M 4, 1079%2). 

76°39: The connection between this paragraph and its predecessor 
becomes clearer if the first clause is paraphrased as follows: ‘Nor do the 
falsehoods which (according to some) geometers utter function as 
suppositions in their demonstrations.’ This paraphrase is confirmed by 
the parallel discussions at APr A 41, 49°33-50°4; Met M 3, 1078°19-21; 
N 2, 1089°22-—5 (cf. Mem 1, 45071; Rep 510°). 

The geometer says, e.g., “Let AB be the given finite straight line” 
(Euclid, i. 1), and he draws a line in the sand. But “perceptible lines are 
not such as the geometer says them to be (for no perceptible thing is 
either straight or curved in this way; for a circle does not touch the 
tangent at a point, as Protagoras said in refutation of the 
geometers) .. .” (Met B 2, 997>35-998°4; see also Aristoxenus, Elementa 
Harmonica, B 33: “a geometer (who says, e.g., ‘Let this be a straight 
line’) does not make use of his faculty of perception; for he does not 
train his sight to judge badly or well what is straight or curved or 
anything of this sort”; cf. Heath (2), 204-5). 

Plato and Aristotle agree that when the geometer says “Let AB be a 
foot long” he does not refer to the line he is drawing in the sand; but 
they disagree about the nature of “what these lines show”. Both Plato 
and Aristotle apparently want the geometer to be saying truly of some 
line that it is straight; a modern geometer would be interested in the 
consequences of the supposition and not in its truth—he might even 

142 

COMMENTARY 76°39 

agree with Protagoras that all his suppositions were (strictly speaking) 
false, while maintaining that this impugned neither the validity nor the 
utility of geometry. 

76°42: “a line...is a foot long”: ie. ‘is one unit long’ (Mert J 1, 
1052°33); but in what proof would a geometer use such a premiss? 

77°3: A second argument for the thesis of 76°35 that terms are not 
suppositions. 

77°4: “either universal or particular”: Aristotle holds that definitions 
are universal propositions (A 14, 79°24-9; B 3, 90°3~7); this gives 
further proof that horos means “term” and not “definition” here. 

The various classifications of the elements of demonstrative science have 
now all been introduced. Aristotle himself makes no attempt to co- 
ordinate them; and so it may be of some use to assemble them here and 
to state their interconnections, where these are discoverable. 

(A) (i) of some things we must know beforehand that they are; (ii) of 
others what they mean; (iii) of others both that they are and what 
they mean (4 I, 7I*II-17). 

(B) Principles divide into (@j) axioms; and (ii) posits; and posits into 
(a) suppositions, and (b) definitions (A 2, 72714-22). 

(C) The elements of demonstrations are (i) axioms; (ii) affections- 
in-themselves; (iii) the underlying kind (4 7, 75°39—°2; 10, 
7611-22). 

(D) There are (i) principles or primitive things; (ii) what depends on 
them (4 10, 76°33). 

(E) (i) of some things we assume both that they are and what they 
mean; (ii) of others, what they mean (4 10, 76°32--6). 

(F) Of the things used in demonstrations (i) some are common; and 
(ii) others are proper (4 10, 76°37—°2; A 32, 88°28). 

(G) The sciences prove (i) through certain things; (ii) from certain 
things (4 10, 76°10). 

(H) In demonstrations there are by nature (i) that about which; (ii) 
that of which; and (iii) that from which the proof is (4 10, 76°22; 
A Il, 77°27-8; A 32, 88°27; Met B 2, 997°8, 19-21; HA A 6, 
419°13-17). 

(J) There are (i) axioms (?); (ii) suppositions; (iii) postulates; (iv) 
terms (A 10, 76°24~7744). 

Of these nine classifications, (A) is preparatory and gives way to (E); 
(G) is specious; and (J) is not properly a classification of demonstrative 
elements at all. The remaining six classifications are related as follows: 
(Bi) = (Ci), and perhaps (Biia) = (Fii); (Ci) = (Hiii), (Cii) = (Hii), and 
(Citi) = (Hi); (Di) = (Ei), and perhaps (Dii) = (Eii); (Eii) = (Cii); (Fi) 
= (Hiii), and perhaps (Fii) = (Hi) + (Hii). 

The distinctions which Aristotle should have made, and therefore can 

be supposed to be groping towards, are those between (A’) rules of 
inference and demonstrative propositions; (B’) propositions and terms; 

143 

IT 4 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

(C’) primitive and derived elements; (D’) common and proper elements. 
There is in Aristotle no trace of (A’), unless in (G) (see p. 139); (B’) is 
never made explicit in APst (see p. 137); (C’) is present, in a muddy 
form, in (D) and (E); and (D’) is identical with (F). 

CHAPTER II 

The first section of 4 11 dispenses with subsistent universals; the rest of 
the chapter takes up various questions about the role of the common 
axioms. Some commentators have felt the first section to be out of place; 
but it felicitously follows the Platonic issues canvassed at the end of A 10, 
and its thesis is put to use later in the chapter at 77*20. 

77°5: Demonstration requires that, in a sense, ‘there are universals': 
does not require, as the Platonists argued (e.g. Met A 9, 990°12), ae 
there are self-subsistent universals ‘apart from’ (para: see Bonitz, 
562°38-—44; cf. B 19, 100°7) the particulars; but it does require (cf. e. g- 
Met B 4, 999°26) that there are universal predicates true of (kata or epi: 
Bonitz, 368°34—55; 268°13—31) more than one thing. 

Aristotle means that demonstrative science requires true pairs of 
propositions of the form AaB & AaC, where B # C; but that it does not 
require subsistent universals. (Note that, pace IRWIN (1988), 118-19, this 
does not commit Aristotle to a ‘nominalist’ account of universals.) He 
does not put the matter cleanly. First, his proposition that “one thing 
holds of many” is naturally read as “(Ax) (dy) («@ #y & Ax & Ay)”; but 
it must be taken as “(4B) (AC) (B # C & AaB & AaC)”. Secondly, he 
normally says that ‘the universal’ is “what by nature is predicated of 
more than one thing”, i.e. ‘what can be predicated of more than one 
thing’ (e.g. Int 7, 17°39; Met Z 13, 1038°11; cf. APr A 1, 24°18 + 
24 '58-30). That there are universals in this sense does not imply that 

“one thing holds of many”. Thirdly, there is the requirement that the 
universal be ‘non-homonymous’. This is, J think, unlikely to be a 
rejection of ambiguous terms as such (Aristotle elsewhere seems 
prepared to argue that all terms are ambiguous: Top J 1, 165°6-17). 
Perhaps the meaning is this: it will not do to have a ‘universal’ A which 
holds of many things, B;, B2,...,B,, if “A” means something different 
in each AaB;. 

The word I translate “forms” (eidé) is regularly translated “Ideas”; 
and it is certain that Aristotle’s chief, if not his sole, target is Plato’s 
theory of Ideas (cf. A 22, 83°32-5; 24, 85° 32- 2; 85°15-22). But from a 
logical point of view Aristotle’s argument is not limited to Platonic 
universals; and eidos does not mean “Idea”. 

This section deals with a special case of what has become a standing 
crux in Aristotelian exegesis, the Problem of the Universality of 
Knowledge: the objects of knowledge are universal; everything real is 
particular: how, then, can we have knowledge of the real? (Cf. Met B 4, 
999°24—°24; M 10.) The answer Aristotle should have given is perfectly 

144 

COMMENTARY q7°5 

clear: knowledge is of universal propositions; only particular objects are 
real: universal propositions do not require universal objects as their 
subject-matter. Aristotle is groping for this answer in our passage; but he 
does not grasp it properly, and his more explicit treatments of the 
Problem are no better. Nevertheless, it is clearly a mistake to offer this 
Problem as a genuine difficulty for Aristotelian epistemology. 

77°10: This section is exceedingly difficult (see esp. Husik). The 
difficulties are caused partly by the extremely crabbed nature of 
Aristotle’s style, and partly by the fact that Aristotle’s main theme is 
obscured by a subsidiary subject. 

The main theme is this: demonstrations do not assume as a premiss 
the Law of Contradiction unless their conclusion too is to be (an 
instantiation of) LC. (Although LC is rarely a premiss, nevertheless all 
demonstrations in some sense depend on it: cf. Met F 3, 1005°32.) The 
body of the section discusses the case of those demonstrations which do 
premiss LC; of course, even in these cases, LC is only assumed “in so far 
as is sufficient” (cf. 77°23-4; and esp. A 10, 76°37--2, notes). The 
subsidiary point is this: in those atypical demonstrations, LC need be 
assumed in only one of the premisses. Aristotle’s argument falls into 
three parts, which I shall discuss in order. 

Part (A): 77°12-15 give the general form of LC-demonstrations. Their 
conclusions will, I suppose, look like: 

(3) not-(AaC & not-AaC). 
The LC premiss, as Aristotle offers it (77712), is: 

(1) (true: AaB) & (not-true: not-AaB). 
This simplifies (cf. e.g. Int 9, 18°34—°5) to: 

(1a) AaB & not-(not-AaB). 
To reach (3) we need a second premiss; plainly: 

(2) Bac. 
It is hard to see how (3) is meant to follow from (1) and (2); certainly 
there is no simple syllogism present. Rather than elucidate this, Aristotle 
proceeds to state his subsidiary point: “It makes no difference if you 
assume that the middle term is and is not.” This appears to mean that 
one does not have to assume as the second premiss: 

(2a) BaC & not-(not-BaC). 

Finally, Aristotle adds the puzzling sentence: “and the same holds for 
the third term”. Since there is no question of a third premiss, we are 
obliged, if this sentence is to be understood, to suppose that Aristotle is 
thinking of term-negations, i.e. is construing “not-XaY” as “(not-X)aY”. 
With this construe, we can expand the puzzling sentence as follows: 
‘Such demonstrations require the negative term not-A, but they require 
neither not-B nor not-C.’ Even so it remains obscure how we should 
state the further unnecessary assumption: the older commentators 
identify it as “not-Ba(not-C)”; Ross prefers “not-Ca(not-C)”. 

145 

77°10 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

However that may be, (2a) must now be restated with term-negations, 
thus: 

(2b) BaC & not-[(not-B)aC]. 
By parity of reasoning, instead of (1a) we should have: 
(1b) AaB & not-[(not-A)aB]. 
How, then, does (3) come from (1b) and (2)? Aristotle gives no clear 

indication, and I am unable to construct a valid line of syllogistic 
reasoning for him. I suggest, hesitantly, the following: from (1b) infer: 

(1c) AaB & (not-A)eB. 

Then from (1c) and (2), by Barbara and Celarent, infer: 

(3c) AaC & (not-A)eC, 
whence: 

(3d) AaC & not-(not-A)aC, 
from which (3) follows immediately. This reconstruction involves the 
false equivalence, “XeY < not-(XaY)”. Later in APst there are clear 
examples of this equivalence (see pp. 158, 163, 188), and that is why I 
presume to ascribe it to Aristotle here. (See also smrrH (1982a), 118-32, 
for an attempt to explain how Aristotle came to accept the equivalence.) 

Although (3) does indeed follow from (3d), so that it is possible to 
find some sort of argument behind the text, I find it very hard not to 
suspect that—despite the sentence at 77710—(3) does not really have 
any place in Aristotle’s thought. Rather, I suspect that he means to say 
this: ‘In a demonstration you need only affirm e.g. AaB—you do not 
also need to deny not-AaB. Unless, of course, you want your conclusion 
to include a denial as well as an affirmation. And even in these 
unorthodox cases you do not need to deny not-BaC as well as affirming 
BaC.” In these unorthodox demonstrations, then, you are not really 
assuming that ‘it is not possible to affirm and deny’; rather, you are 
assuming an affirmation and the negation of its denial. 

Part (B): 77°15—18 illustrate the argument-schema (1)—(3): “animal” 
is A, “man” B, and “Callias” C. (Here, as often, singular terms creep 
into Aristotelian syllogisms. Aristotle tacitly treats them as general 
terms, and I shall do the same here and elsewhere.) The text is probably 
corrupt ({ follow the readings of the OCT); and it is certainly 
compressed. I paraphrase thus: ‘Suppose that (2) BaC. [“You are given 
something of which it is true to say that it is a man”.] It does not matter 
whether (not-B)aC is also true. If in addition you assume that AaB and 
not-(not-A)aB, then you may infer that AaC and not-(not-A)aC.’ 

This leaves the phrase “even if not Callias”. The least implausible 
interpretation of the words is this: ‘even if the same is true of not- 
Callias; i.e. even if not-Callias is also a man and not a not-man’. And the 
phrase must connect with the puzzling reference to the “third term” at 
77°15. If this means that we need not also assume that not-Ba(not-C), 
then Aristotle’s remarks have some sort of sense: ‘The argument will go 

146 

COMMENTARY TIT 10 

through without the assumption that not-Ba(not-C). True, if we also 
have Ba(not-C), then we shall be able to conclude that Aa(not-C) and 
not-(Aa(not-C)). But this conclusion will not bar the way to the desired 
conclusion, namely (3d).’ 

There is a further question: Why does Aristotle go through this 
rigmarole? It is indeed true that demonstrations do not need to assume 
LC (or any specification of it). But why should Aristotle bother to say 
so? Had someone denied it, or said something which appeared to deny 
it? Again, it is perhaps true that a demonstration could assume LC (or 
rather, could assume something of the form (1a)). But why should 
Aristotle want to say so? Surely no scientific demonstrations ever do 
assume premisses of this form? The commentators offer various unsatis- 
factory answers to these questions. Perhaps Aristotle was simply in- 
terested in the logical intricacies which the section follows out. 

Part (C): 77°18-21 offer an ‘explanation’. What is explained appears 
from 77°21 to be the subsidiary point that (2a) is superfluous. The 
explanation is desperately obscure. The sentence “even if the middle 
term both is it and is not it” should refer to the fact that it does not 
matter if we assume “not-BaC” as well as (2); such an assumption is an 
innocent, if indolent, addition to the argument. Aristotle’s sentence thus 
paraphrases as: ‘even if both B and not-B appear as the middle term, i.e. 
even if both BaC and (not-B)aC are assumed’. 

The explanation of the innocence of “(not-B)aC” is supported by: 

(4) AaB & (AX) (X # B & AaX) 

—which is inferred from the principle enunciated in 7775-9. But it is 
hard to see how (4) bears on the issue at all. Waitz replaces (4) by 

(5) AaB & Aa(not-B). 

Then the presence of “(not-B)aC” does not matter because together 
with (5) it will yield AaC. If this is right, then Aristotle is arguing that we 
may assume “(not-B)aC” instead of, rather than in addition to (2). But 
the text will hardly bear this; and Aristotle is in any case not entitled to 
(5). (For a different interpretation see sMITH (19824), 120.) 

However that may be, Aristotle has certainly not grasped the correct 
explanation of the innocence of “({not-B)aC”: in general, if P & Q 
together entail R, then P & QO & S (for any S, including not-Q) entail R. 

97°22: Aristotle now turns to the Law of Excluded Middle. He does 
not explain how LEM is assumed in reductio ad impossibile. Reductio is 
a special case of ‘hypothetical’ reasoning, the general form of which 
consists of a conditional proposition if P then Q and a syllogism con- 
cluding to P; thus Q is proved * on the supposition (hupothesisy’ that P 
(cf. e.g. APr 4 23, 41°37—"r). Aristotle says that in reductio the con- 
ditional is so obvious that there i is no need to state or agree upon it (APr 
A 44, §0°35~-7; B 11, 61°25; 61°14; 12, 62°26). Patzig (156) infers that the 
conditional has the form if not-not-P then P; and we might suppose that 
Aristotle takes this to represent LEM, to which it is equivalent. But 

147 

TT 22 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Aristotle’s illustrations of ‘obvious’ conditionals do not support Patzig’s 
inference. 

Aristotle’s thought is surely a simple one. In a reductio proof you set 
out to infer a conclusion, Q, from a set of premisses, /7, by first assuming 
that not-Q. From /7 and not-Q you reach something impossible; hence 
you must reject not-Q. Thus—since either not-Q or Q—you infer that 
Q. LEM is thus employed, in a specific form (i.e. in the form “Q or 
not-Q”’), in the last stage of the reductio. Aristotle says that in a reductio 
you assume LEM. If we take this literally, we must suppose that (some 
specification of) LEM actually figures as a premiss in a reductio. There 
is, of course, no difficulty in formulating the reductio in this fashion—but 
neither Aristotle nor any other ancient logician does so in practice. 

77°25: “as I said earlier”: at 4 10, 76°37-°2. 

77°26: Dialectic is “a method by which we shall be able to argue about 
any problem which is presented to us” (Top A 1, 100°18—20; cf. 7 34, 
183°37-9; Met r 4, 1004°19~%0); thus it deals with what is ‘common’, 
and so, in a sense, with everything (e.g. Top 7 11, 172712; Rhet A 1, 
1345°I—3; 1355°8—9; 2, 1356°30-3). And so it “is not concerned with 
any determined set of things” (77°32). 

Dialectic also “‘covers the same kind as philosophy” (Met r3, 1004°22— 
a ‘kind’ only by courtesy, of course). “We must say whether it is the task 
of one or more sciences to investigate what the mathematicians call the 
axioms, and substance. It is clear that the investigation of these belongs 
to one science, that of the philosopher” (1005*19-22). The easy infer- 
ence from these two passages is that logic too investigates the axioms; 
but Aristotle does not draw this inference in the Organon (see IRWIN 
(1988), 537 n. 20). 

Thus dialectic might be thought to ‘associate with all the sciences’ in 
either of two ways: first, since it argues on every topic from general 
principles, it will presumably use any common element that any science 
uses. In this way, dialectic ‘associates’ with the sciences in the same sort 
of fashion in which they all associate with one another; for they do so in 
so far as each uses its own instantiations of the common elements (cf. A 
10, 76°38). Secondly, in its role as investigator of the principles, dialectic 
will actually discuss the common axioms which the sciences use. 77°30 
seems to show that Aristotle has the latter association uppermost in his 
mind. 

The phrase “any science which attempted to give... proofs” is 
regularly taken to refer to metaphysics or first philosophy (see p. 137). 
But, first, metaphysics, though it investigates the first principles, does 
not and cannot prove them (cf. Met r 4, 1006*5-11). And secondly, the 
heavily hypothetical syntax of our sentence makes it plain that Aristotle 
has no actual science in mind. 

Dialectic is not concerned with any single kind or genos of things; if it 
were, it would be demonstrative, and if it were demonstrative it would 
not ‘ask questions’ (but cf. 4 12, 77°36, and notes). “‘. .. none of the arts 

148 

COMMENTARY 77°26 

that prove some nature [i.e. that are about some determinate kind] asks 
questions; for it cannot grant either one of the parts (of a contradiction: 
cf. A 2, 729); for a deduction does not come about from both. But 
dialectic does ask questions; and if it did prove, even if it asked about 
some things, it would not ask about the primitives and the appropriate 
principles. For if they were not granted, it would no longer have any- 
thing from which to argue against the objection” (Top J 11, 172*15~21). 
77°33: In demonstrative argument you cannot ask questions “because 
the same thing cannot be proved from opposite assumptions”’; i.e.: 

(6) It is impossible to prove that Q both from P and from not-P. 

This is true, since proofs must have true premisses and both P and not-P 
cannot be true. Aristotle probably refers not to APr B 4, §7°36~-°17, 
which enunciates a false principle (cf. Patzig, appendix), but rather to 
APr B 15, which argues that ‘“‘whereas from falsehoods it is possible to 
deduce a truth, as was said earlier, it is not possible to deduce a truth 
from opposites” (64°7—9); this, viz.: 

(7) lf P and P’ are opposites and Q is true, then Q does not follow 
both from P and from P’ 

is sufficiently close to (6) to warrant Aristotle’s reference. 

CHAPTER 12 

77°36: Since Aristotle has just denied that the demonstrator asks ques- 
tions (4 II, 77°32—-5), it is strange to find him talking here of “‘scientific 
questions”. As a ‘question’ is said to be “a proposition stating one part 
of a contradictory pair” (cf. 4 2, 728) we might excuse Aristotle by 
supplying an etiolated sense for the word “question” here. But this 
kindness is not tolerable: first, propositions themselves are, at least in 
the Topics, unequivocally interrogative (see 4 4, 101°29-32; @ 2, 158°14~ 
24; ef. Int 11, 20° 22- 30—contrast APr A 1, 24*16—53). And secondly, 
the example at 77°33 contains a pair of naked and unabashed questions. 
Perhaps these questions, though interrogative in form, are not so in 
intent (they are, as we should say, rhetorical); perhaps they are ‘scien- 
tific’ questions only in the sense that they have to do with the subject- 
matter of the sciences and not in the sense that they form part of 
scientific argument itself; or perhaps 4 12 is part of an early stratum of 
APst, written before Aristotle had become clear about the relation 
between demonstrative argument and questioning. 

77°40: + “‘It is plain, then...”: i.e. ‘Given a demonstration Pt Q, Pisa 
geometrical proposition if and only if Q is a theorem either of geometry 
or else of one of the sciences subordinate to geometry’ (cf. 4 13, 
78°32- 79°16, notes). Aristotle’s syntax is contorted. 

77°3: “For these items...” 
dinate to geometry. 

: i.e. the theorems of the sciences subor- 

149 

IPS POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

77°5: Why should a geometer not “supply arguments” about the prin- 
ciples of geometry? The major part of the paragraph implies that Aris- 
totle is giving a bit of practical advice to the geometer (see esp. Phys A 2, 

185*14-17; cf. @ 3, 253°2-6; Met I 3, 1005°29-33). The advice is 
based on a simple logical point: to argue about P qua geometer is to try 
to infer P from the propositions of geometry; since the principles of 
geometry cannot be inferred from the propositions of geometry, any 
attempt to argue about them qua geometer is certain to fail—and there- 
fore better left alone (Top A 2, 101°37—"1). 

” 

q7°9: “If you argue in this way...”: either ‘if you argue from geo- 
metrical principles , . .’ (in which case we have another condemnation of 
Bryson (cf. 4 9, 75 ba —76°3): just as Bryson at best attained ‘incidental’ 
knowledge of geometrical theorems, so at best he refutes the geometers 
incidentally); or else ‘provided you do not argue about the principles of 
geometry’ (in which case the point is new but trivial; for the geometer is 
genuinely refuted though not ‘as geometer’, i.e. not on a point of 
geometry). 

77°16: Three questions are asked in this paragraph: (a) Are there non- 
geometrical questions? (b) Are there ignorant questions in geometry 
which are nevertheless in a sense geometrical? (c) What is a deduction of 
ignorance in geometry? The questions are answered only elliptically; and 
these answers depend on a distinction of meaning which applies alike to 
“non-geometrical” and to “ignorant”. (On ignorance see further 4 5, 
A 16-18.) 

77°18: “And are ignorant deductions... ?’: the commentators find 
three ignorant deductions in the text: (i) ‘deduction from the opposites’, 
i.c. a deduction taking as its premisses the contradictories of certain 
geometrical truths; (ii) a geometrical paralogism, i.e. an invalid argu- 
ment from true geometrical premisses; and (iii) deduction ‘from another 
art’, i.e. an argument from premisses which have nothing to do with 
geometry. 

Aristotle defines “‘paralogism” as follows: “Besides all the above- 
mentioned deductions there are the paralogisms that come about from 
things appropriate to certain sciences, as happens to be the case in geo- 
metry and the sciences cognate to it... (The pseudographer) constructs 
his deduction from assumptions that are appropriate to the science but 
not true; for he constructs his paralogism either by inscribing circles as 
he should not or by drawing lines as they should not be drawn” (Top A 1, 
101*5—17; cf. 7 11, 171°34—-8; Euclid’ s Pseudaria was a compilation of 
such paralogisms (see Heath (1), i. 7)). Thus a paralogism is a valid 
argument from false but pectic premisses. This sense appears to fit 
the present paragraph better than the sense “invalid argument’. In that 
case, (ii) collapses into (i), and the text requires the punctuation I have 
given it. The ‘musical question’ illustrates (iii); thinking that parallels 
meet (cf. APr B 17, 66°13) illustrates (i). 

150 

COMMENTARY 77°24 

77°24: “There is an ambiguity here”: the two ways of being non- 
geometrical answer to (iii) and (i) respectively. Aristotle holds that 
words of the form ‘“‘un-F”’ or “non-F”’ (in Greek, wwords prefixed by an 
alpha privative) are ambiguous: Met A 22, 1022 31-6 (cf. An B 10, 
422*26-31; EE I 2, 1230°38—°5; Phys E 2, 222°10-17). (Elsewhere he 
says that a thing cannot be non-F (as opposed to not being F ) unless it is 
capable of being F (Met I 4, 1055°4-11; cf. APr A 46, 51>25~8); pre- 
sumably that ruling is dropped here—for a musical question is hardly 
‘capable’ of being geometrical.) 

77°26: “It is the latter type of ignorance”: agnoia (“ignorance”) is 
an alpha-privative compound. (The old noun “unknowing” is an exact 
translation.) Hence it too has a pair of senses; to be ignorant about P 
(where P is some true proposition) is either not to know that P or to 
‘know badly’ that P—ie, to think that not-P. These two senses are 
distinguished at A 16, 79°23, as ‘ignorance in virtue of negation’ and 
‘ignorance in virtue of a disposition’. (Cf. Top Z 9, 148°3-9, criticizing 
Rep 585°; see Cherniss, 26.) 

The implicit answers to the three questions are, then: (a') There are 
non-geometrical questions, and that in two senses. (6’) Questions that 
are ignorant in the sense of exhibiting ‘bad’ knowledge are in a sense 
geometrical. (c’) Deduction from false geometrical propositions is de- 
duction of ignorance in geometry. 

77°27: ‘Paralogism depends on ambiguity in the middle term; ambi- 
guities are easily detected in mathematics: hence paralogism tends not to 
occur in mathematics.’ Here paralogism includes or comprises fallacy of 
equivocation (cf. Top I 4, 165°30— 16676); thus the term suffers an abrupt 
and unannounced shift of sense between the last paragraph and this. (If 
such a shift of sense is deemed intolerable, then we must suppose, with 
most scholars, that paralogismos at 77°20 means “invalid argument 
(from true premises)”. In that case (i) and (ii) will offer two distinct 
ways in which a deduction may be ‘non-geometrical’ in the sense of 
exhibiting poor geometrical skill: either (i) the deduction starts from 
premisses which have a geometrical content but are false; or else (ii) it 
has true geometrical premisses but proceeds invalidly to its conclusion 
(see MIGNUCCI (1975), 262—3.) If this is correct, then Aristotle’s example 
of a paralogism at 77°31-3 is ill chosen; for its second premiss (“The 
epic is a circle’’) is hardly a geometrical proposition.) 

Aristotle’s argument for his first premiss is that the middle term is the 
only one which occurs twice in the premisses (ditton—“ambiguous” or 
“twofold”—is a pun): any term may be equivocal, but only an equivocal 
middle term can give rise to fallacy. 

The argument for the second premiss is hard. The things that we “as it 
were see in thought” are presumably mathematical objects (cf. p. 86) 
(though the subject of ‘“‘they escape notice”? ought to be something like 
“equivocations”). Yet Aristotle’s illustration refers to the actual drawing 
of a diagram. The train of thought is perhaps this: ‘The first premiss of 

151 

79°27 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

the paralogism, that every circle is-a shape, is accompanied by a drawn 
circle which, as it were, guides our inward gaze toward geometrical 
circles; if we are then offered as a second premiss that epic poems are 
circles we at once see that such circles are quite different from the things 
we are contemplating. Thus we are not taken in by the attempted 
fallacy.’ (Cf. Top J 1, 165°6-16: fallacies of equivocation occur because 
we cannot always carry about with us examples of whatever we may talk 
about.) 

An alternative interpretation is possible if mathémasi is not taken in its 
narrow and normal sense of ‘‘mathematics”, but in its larger and original 
sense of ‘‘learnings”’; if we understand “learnings” as ‘didactic or demon- 
strative arguments’ (cf. e.g. Top I 20, 177°16), we may paraphrase the 
argument thus: ‘In didactic contexts you know that paralogism can only 
arise from an ambiguous middle term; and you can detect ambiguities 
by, as it were, mentally gazing at the things talked about: hence para- 
logism is rare.’ (See 78°10, note.) 

97°30: “you do not say “all” of what is predicated”’: i.e. ‘One does not 
quantify t the predicate in a syllogistic proposition’ (cf. Int 7, 17°13; APr 
A 27, 43°17- 22). Or perhaps, more pertinently: “The predicate (of the 
middle term) is not said to be all (something else)’—i.e. CaD is not 
premissed; and so C does not occur twice. 

77°31: “In arguments . . . they escape notice”: i.e. ‘in dialectical (as op- 
posed to mathematical, or to demonstrative) arguments’; or better: ‘if 
they are just stated (and not seen in thought)’. See 78°12, note. 

77°32: “Is every circle a shape? .. .”: cf. Top I 10, 171°10; the sense in 
which epic is describable as a ‘circle’ is uncertain. 

77°33: This puzzling paragraph may be designed to reveal yet another 
form of error. But there is something to be said for the suggestion that 
the antecedent of auto (“‘it’”’ in “objection against it’’) is the question “Is 
the epic a circle?” 

Aristotle’s argument seems to be this: 

(1) Deductive propositions must hold of more than one thing. 
(2) Any objection can serve as a deductive proposition. 

Hence: 
(3) Objections must hold of more than one thing. 

For the interpretation of (1) see A 11, 77°9, notes. An ‘objection’ 
(enstasis) is, in a wide sense, any means of blocking an argument (cf. 
Top © 10, 161°1-15; Rhet B 25, 1401°29-1403°15), and in a narrower 
sense ‘“‘a proposition opposite to a proposition” (APr B 26, 69°37). “But 
it differs from a proposition in that an objection may be particular but a 
proposition may not-——either never or at least not in universal deduc- 
tions” (69°38—°1r). This contradicts (3); nor can we say that (3) is re- 
stricted to demonstrative objections, since 77°39 explicitly denies this. 
The phrase “inductive proposition” (77°34) might mean either 

152 

COMMENTARY 77°33 

“proposition got by induction” or “proposition used in induction”; the 
latter sense is more likely. If the inductive proposition is the objection, 
then Aristotle may mean that you should not object to, e.g., “Epics are 
circles’ by means of the singular proposition “The /liad is not a circle’, 
since that proposition only holds of one thing, contrary to (3). This is, to 
say the least, a silly argument. If the inductive proposition is what the 
objection is aimed against, then Aristotle may mean that you should not 
object to, e.g., “The /liad is a circle’ by means of the singular prop- 
osition “The /liad is not a circle’’, since again that proposition offends 
against (3). But this is equally silly. 

On this desperate paragraph see MIGNUCCI (1975), 269-79. Mignucci’s 
tentative suggestion amounts to this: ‘If your opponent produces an 
argument which contains a singular proposition (an “inductive prop- 
osition’”), then you should not proceed by objecting to this proposition, 
i.e. by affirming its negation. For in that case your objection (i.e. the 
negation of his singular proposition) will not be able to function as a 
premiss in an argument to the contradictory of his conclusion.’ This 
suggestion makes more sense of the paragraph than do most; but it can 
hardly be said to make everything plain. 

77°40: To argue ‘non-deductively’ is to argue invalidly; the fallacy of 
inferring BaC from AaC & AaB (cf. APr A 28, 44°20-4) has little 
enough connection with the matter of the chapter. Caineus was a Lapith; 
Aristotle is probably referring to a play, perhaps to Antiphanes’ comedy 
Caineus which he cites at Poet 21, 1457 or. “Multiple proportion” pro- 
bably means “‘geometrical proportion”; it is generated quickly in the 
sense that the terms in a geometrical progression soon become large. 

78*5: “Sometimes. ..”: the commentators take Aristotle to mean that 
sometimes you can infer BaC from AaC and AaB, e.g. if AaB converts 
to BaA. But in no case does BaC follow from AaC & AaB; and it is 
preferable to take the sentence in isolation from its predecessors, as a 
true if unexciting jotting. 

78°6: Suppose ‘‘it were impossible to prove truth from falsehood”, i.e 
(4) If P entails Q, then necessarily if Q is true P is true. 
(I take it that ‘‘prove” is being used in the weak sense of ‘‘validly infer’’, 
and that Aristotle is adverting to the thesis which he refutes at length in 
APr B 2-4). Then “the propositions would convert”’, i.e 
(5) If P entails Q then Q entails P. 
(For this use of “convert” (antistrephein), cf. e.g. Top I 15, 167°1-3.) 
Hence in order to prove A we need only find some syllogistic con- 
junction B such that A entails B and B is true. 
78°7: “to make analyses”: i.e. ‘to discover premisses from which to 
prove the conclusion’. “In analysis we assume that which is sought as if it 
were already done, and we inquire what it is from which this results” 
(Pappus, Collectio ii. 634; cf. EN 3, 1112°20-4; Top I 16, 175717. The 

153 

73°7 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

ancient texts also describe a quite different procedure as analysis; and 
the whole matter is controversial.) 

78°10: “In mathematics conversion is more common...”: Definitions 
‘convert’ in the sense that if AaB is a definition then BaA (e.g. Top Z 1, 
139°31). Thus if we have one definitional premiss, AaB, and a putative 
conclusion, AaC, we can infer the second premiss BaC. But why does 
this bear on mathematics in particular? After all, definitions rather than 
incidental predications form the principles of all the sciences and not just 
of mathematics. (Does mathémasi mean “learnings” rather than ‘‘mathe- 
matics” (cf. 77°27, note)?) Again, how is this compatible with Aristotle’s 
assertion that conversion is rare in the sciences (A 3, 73°17)? Aristotle 
has observed that mathematical theorems often do ‘convert’; but he has 
not got to grips with his observation. 

78°12: “...in this too they differ”: “too” seems to refer back to 77°31; 
in that case it forces us to read en tois logois there as “in dialectical 
arguments” (perhaps cf. Top @ 3, 159°1I-2). 

78°14: This paragraph has no connection with the body of 4 12; Aris- 
totle, though he does not say so, is talking of the way in which a science 
‘increases’, i.e. gains more theorems (cf. APr A 25). Suppose that a 
science starts with the minimum number of principles, viz. two: AaB & 
BaC. It does not increase “through the middle terms”, i.e. by adding 
new principles of the form AaG, GaB, BaH, HaC; for if AaB and BaC 
are principles they are immediate. It may increase “by additional as- 
sumptions” in two ways. The first way is exemplified by “e.g. A of 
B...”; i.e. we take new principles CaD, DaE .. . The second, ‘lateral’, 
way is exemplified by “e.g. A both of C and of E”. Here AaC and AaE 
turn out to be the conclusions which the laterally increased science can 
obtain. The new principles must be AaD and DaE. The difference 
between the two methods of increase can be illustrated diagrammatically: 

A A 

| oN, 
~ 

vA \ 
s \ 

The concrete illustration of the second mode of increase is puzzling. The 
adjective ‘‘definite’’ (posos) is nowhere else applied to numbers by 
Aristotle (or, so far as I know, by anyone else). It has been taken to 
mean either “finite” or “particular” (so that B is, e.g., 7—-a particular 
odd number). The latter interpretation is wrong, since 7 cannot be 
predicated of C, “odd number”. The former interpretation, however, is 
very strange. “Odd number” (C) and “even number” (£) may stand for 

154 

COMMENTARY 78°14 

particular numbers, e.g. 7 and 8. A should then be simply “number”; 
some interpreters achieve this by reading the phrase “definite (or even 
indefinite) number” as “number (whether definite or indefinite)”’. 

CHAPTER I3 

The first part of 4 13 discusses some of the issues raised by Aristotle’s 
requirement that understanders ‘know the explanation’ of what they 
understand (A 2, 71°9—-16). In general see PATZIG (1981). 

We might well think we could distinguish between understanding a 
fact and understanding an explanation in less subtle ways than those 
Aristotle. devises; but in fact Aristotle, despite his language, is not 
concerned with this distinction at all: rather, he wants to distinguish 
between understanding a fact ‘through’ its explanation (i.e. knowing that 
P on the basis of Q, where Q explains why P is the case), and under- 
standing a fact not through its explanation (i.e. knowing that P on the 
basis of Q where Q does not explain why P is the case). Cases of the 
second type, which Aristotle divides into two groups, are not, strictly 
speaking, cases of understanding at all; perhaps with ordinary usage in 
mind, Aristotle is here countenancing a weaker sense of “‘understand” 
than his official one. 

78°22: Group (A)—‘‘first in the same science”—lasts until 78°34; Aris- 
totle announces two subdivisions within this group, but the commen- 
tators have discerned more than two. The passage may be divided, 
uncontroversially, into five sections. (i) 78°23-6 describes the first of the 
two cases which 78°23 announces, and (ii) 78°26—°11 describes the se- 
cond case. (iii) occupies 78° 11-13, (iv) is 78°13-27, and (v) is 78°28—34. 
Whereas (ii) discusses cases in which there are converting terms, (iii)—(v) 
deal with non-converting terms. Hence (iii)-(v) do not offer further 
instances of the second case announced at 78°23. Hence either (iii)—(v) 
offer illustrations of the first case announced at 78°23, or else they add 
further cases to the two which were initially announced. If we prefer the 
former option, then we must suppose that (i) and (iii)—(v) all consider 
syllogisms which do not proceed through immediates and in which the 
middle terms, while mentioning explanatorily relevant factors, do not 
pick out the primitive explanation. This supposition is perhaps consistent 
with the text; but it is not enormously plausible. 

78°23: Section (i): Aristotle has not said that in order to understand 
something we must know its primitive explanation, though his remarks at 
A 9, 76°18-22, come close to implying iit the statement is made ex- 
plicitly at Phys A 1, 184°12—14; B 3, 194° 17-20. The phrase ‘ ‘primitive 
explanation” (proton aition) can be taken in two ways: in a sequence 
P,, P2,..., Pn, where each P; explains its predecessor, either P,, (the 
‘ultimate’ explanation) or P2 (the ‘proximate’ explanation) may be called 
the “primitive explanation” of P, (cf. esp. Met 4 4, 1015*7-10, on 
prime, or ‘primitive’, matter). Aristotle does not say which sort of 
primitiveness he has in mind here: suppose that we have as immediate 

155 

78°23 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

propositions AaD, DaB, BaC, and we want to demonstrate AaC. We 
might do so either from AaD & DaC or from AaB & BaC; several 
passages (A 9, 76°18—22; 24, 85°23-86°3; Met a 2, 994°11-16) suggest 
that AaD & DaC, the ultimate explanation, is the required premiss-pair; 
but B 18 plumps rather for AaB & BaC, the proximate explanation, and 
the examples at 78°13-32 seem to support this view (cf. also Top Z 5, 
143°17-32). Aristotle certainly thinks that he has to decide which expla- 
nation ‘really’ explains AaC; but in a fully explicit demonstrative science, 
all the relevant immediate propositions will be used in the demonstrative 
chain leading to AaC, and it is fatuous to attempt to single out any 
subset of these as constituting the ‘real’ explanation of the fact. 

78°26: Section (ii): We argue: AaB, BaC + AaC. But B is not the 
explanatory term: it is in fact A that explains why B belongs to C and not 
B that explains why A belongs to C. We are misled by the fact that A 
and B are convertible (i.e. that AaB & BaA), and that B is “more 
familiar” (sc. in relation to us: A 2, 71°21), i.e. that we are more ready 
to assent to BaC than to Aac. 

Aristotle says that in this case our demonstration is ‘through im- 
mediates”; but though AaB may be immediate, BaC is not. 

78°30: 78°30-°11 illustrates section (ii) (for the examples see Cael B 8, 
290°13—24; B 11); there is a further illustration in B 16. Just as “‘under- 
standing” was used in a weak sense at 78°22, so “demonstrate” is used in 
an analogously weak sense at 78°36. 

It should be noted that both of Aristotle’s planetary syllogisms would 
count as explanatory on the orthodox modern account of scientific ex- 
planation; both infer a fact from a set of observationally significant 
general laws and boundary conditions. Thus if Aristotle is correct to 
distinguish between the two syllogisms, and to hold the one explanatory 
and the other not, then the orthodox account of scientific explanation is 
wrong. Moreover, the Humean notion of causation, which is a presup- 
position of that account, goes too: as far as Hume is concerned, the 
major premisses of both syllogisms are equally causal. (See further 
Brody; VAN FRAASSEN (1980), 28-35.) If Aristotle’s view is to be upheld, 
then he must tell us how we can judge that non-scintillation is explained 
by, and does not explain, proximity; any such account is obliged to wait 
upon the discussion of essence in Book B: it is finally offered at B 16, 
9821-4. 
78°11: Section (iii): At first sight we might take this as a case in which 
we infer AaC from AaB & BaC, where AaB does not convert and in 
point of fact A rather than B is explanatory. But if A is explanatory of 
BaC, then BaC is deducible from BaA & AaC; so that AaB does 
convert. 

Perhaps, then, the following argument illustrates Aristotle’s point: 
“The wallaby has a pouch; all pouched animals are mammals: therefore 
the wallaby is a mammal.” The second premiss does not convert; and the 
fact that wallabies are marsupial is more familiar than the fact that they 

156 

COMMENTARY 78°11 

are viviparous (which is, let us suppose, the actual explanation of their 
being mammals). If this illustration is apposite, then here as at 78°15 
“the explanation is not stated”’. 

78°13: Section (iv): Aristotle now turns to cases in which “the middle 
term has outside position’. This phrase has divided the commentators 
(see e.g. Alexander, in APst frag. 19; MIGNUCCI (1975), 304-12). Some 
take it to mean ‘‘in the second figure”. This is supported by the parallel 
phrase at APr 4 5, 26°39 (see Patzig, 10-14); and also by the fact that 
the illustration is a second figure syllogism and is expressly marked as 
such (78°24). We should then suppose that section (iii) deals implicitly 
with first figure syllogisms. But there are difficulties. First, 78°14 will 
then imply that no second figure syllogism can present a genuine demon- 
stration. But A 14 implies that demonstrations may be made in the 
second figure; and consider, e.g., the argument: 

Having lungs holds of all breathing things 
Having lungs holds of no walls. 

Breathing holds of no walls. 

This is a syllogism in Camestres; and its terms satisfy (let us allow) the 
conditions which Aristotle lays down for explanations. Moreover, the 
connection between sections (iv) and (v) is then hard to fathom. 

Other scholars therefore hold that the phrase “the middle term has 
outside position” refers not to the structure of a syllogism but rather to 
the remoteness of the explanation which it offers: it is then an accident 
that the case is illustrated by a second figure syllogism. This inter- 
pretation has the advantage of making sense of the sequence (iii), (iv), 
(v): section (iii) deals with cases where the middle term is non-immediate 
but ‘near’, section (iv) with remote middles, and section (v) with very 
remote middles. 

However that may be, the argument in section (iv) is illustrated by a 
syllogism in Camestres (AaB, AeC + BeC). The argument rests on a 
general principle about explanation (78°17-18) which requires a rather 
complicated formulation: 

(1) If (Wx) (if not-Fx, then not-Fx because not-Gx) then (Vx) (if Fx, 
then Fx because Gx). 

(For the illustration of (1) cf. e.g. Top Z 2, 139°21; Phys H 3, 2464. The 
corollary of (1)—78°20-1—is simply its contrapositive. Cf. Phys A 7, 
191°7; B 3, 195°12 = Met 4 2, 1013°12.) This principle is false: if my 
matches won’t strike because they are not dry, it does not follow that 
when matches do strike they strike because they are dry; non-striking 
may be adequately explained by the absence of just one of a set of 
conditions all of which must be employed in an explanation of successful 
striking. 

It turns out, however, that (1) is an unnecessarily strong principle for 
Aristotle’s purposes; all he needs is: 

157 

78°13 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

(2) If not-P is among the conditions explanatory of not-Q, then P is 
among the conditions explanatory of Q. 

And this principle seems to be true. 

(2) has now to be applied to the wall. If AeC is among the conditions 
for BeC—i.e. if the Camestres syllogism is genuinely explanatory—then 
if BaC were the case, AaC would be among its explanatory conditions. 
(The contradictory of BeC is BiC, not BaC; Aristotle seems to be 
assuming that only universal propositions figure in demonstrations—see 
p. 146.) But then the other condition for BaC would have to be BaA; 
and BaA is not true (“not every animal breathes”’—e.g. fish and insects 
don’t: PA 4 13, 697°21; 5, 678°1). (By “‘a deduction giving an explana- 
tion” at 77°23 Aristotle means a putatively explanatory deduction.) 

78°28: Section (v): On Anacharsis see e.g. Herodotus, iv. 76-7; 
Diogenes Laertius, i. 101-5. 

78°34: Group (B): Aristotle turns now to a topic he has already touched 
upon more than once (cf. 4 7, 75°6, note). The fons et origo of Aristotle’s 
discussion, as of so much in his classifications of the sciences, is Plato’s 
Philebus (55°—59°). 

Group (B) is quite distinct from group (A). If we suppose that AaB, 
BaC + AaC is a full-blooded explanatory demonstration, then (A) in- 
dicates how a man might miss it and be tempted instead by some related 
but non-explanatory argument; (B), on the other hand, indicates how 
the different propositions in the demonstration may fall under the pro- 
vince of different sciences (so that, e.g., even though AaC is a theorem 
of medicine, the doctor gua doctor cannot explain why it holds: AaB is a 
theorem of another art). 

In the five passages bearing on the topic Aristotle offers the following 
illustrations: 

(i) harmonics, arithmetic (75°16; 76*10, 24; 78°38; 87°34); 
(ii) optics, geometry (75°16; 76°24; 78°37); 
(iii) mechanics, stereometry (geometry) (76°24; 78°37); 
(iv) star-gazing, astronomy (78°39); 
(v) nautical astronomy, mathematical astronomy (79*1); 
(vi) acoustical harmonics, mathematical harmonics (792); 
(vii) study of the rainbow, optics (79710); 

(viii*) medicine, geometry (79°14). 

With the exception of (viii*), he implies or states that all these pairs are 
on a par. The following relations are said to hold between the members 
of each pair: 

(a) x falls under y (75°15; 78°36; 79%4; cf. 13); 

(b) x is proved through y (76*10); 

(c) the demonstrations of y apply to x (76022; cf. 75°4); 

(d) x is proved from the same things as y (77°2); 

(e) the kind of x is different from the kind of y (76712; cf. 752, 

9; 76°23); 
158 

COMMENTARY 78°34 

(f) the ‘in itself’ attributes of x are the same as those of y (76°13); 

(g) the fact belongs to x, the reason why to y (7611; 78°34; 79°11, 
15); 

(h) x is like particular, y like universal knowledge (79°5); 

(j) x is studied by empirical, y by mathematical scientists (7973); 

(k) x uses and y is about forms (79*7); 

(m) x is less exact than y (87°3I-3). 

These items raise a number of acute problems, only some of which can 
be indicated here. 

The first members of (i), (ii), and (iii)—harmonics, optics, and 
mechanics—are classed by Aristotle as “the more mathematical of the 
natural sciences” (cf. Phys B 2, 194°10; Met B 2, 997°15~21; M 3, 
10781418). Aristotle is said to have written works on all three sub- 
jects, but the surviving Mechanica (cf. Heath (2), 227-54) and Musical 
Problems are spurious. Pseudo-Euclid’s Optics contains an axiomatized 
mathematical treatment of the subject and no doubt is a sophisticated 
version of the sort of thing Aristotle had in mind. Mechanics was given a 
mathematical treatment by Archytas; but Plato spurned it, and it did not 
recover until Archimedes (cf. Solmsen, 130-5). Some commentators 
have been worried by the fact that Aristotle at 76°24 places mechanics 
under geometry rather than under stereometry; but the term “geometry”, 
in Greek as in English, may include stereometry (cf. e.g. Met M 3, 
1078°25). 

Astronomy, too, is one of the more mathematical of the sciences 
(Phys B 2, 194*10; Met B 2, 997°15—21; A 8, 989°33; 4 8, 1073°3-8— 
Aristotle wrote a treatise on this, too): and so we should expect (iv) 
to parallel its predecessors and pair astronomy with dynamics. The 
terminology of (iv) disappoints this expectation: “astronomy” there 
seems parallel to the first members of ()~ (iii), and its subordinate, 

“star-gazing” (literally “the appearances”, ta phainomena), looks obser- 
vational rather than mathematical (see esp. APr A 30, 46°19-21; cf. PA 
A 1, 639°7; note, however, that Euclid gave his axiomatic treatment of 
astronomy the title Phainomena. ) 

The pair (vii) shares a member with (ii), and thus together they yield a 
triad: 

(a) study of the rainbow, optics, geometry. 

The study of the rainbow (cf. Metr r 2-5) presumably stands as an 
example of what the science subordinate to optics studies. Study of the 
rainbow was later included in ‘catoptrics’ (cf. pseudo-Euclid’s Catop- 
trica). Aristotle did not have a term for catoptrics; when he talks of 
“optics simpliciter or mathematical optics” (79°12) he means that we 
should call the second member of (vii) mathematical optics since “‘optics”’ 
without qualification might include both members of (vii). 

(v) and (vi) appear comparable to (vii), the more so if the second 
member of (vii) is properly “mathematical optics’. Thus we might 
expect two more triads: 

159 

78°34 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

(8) acoustical harmonics, mathematical harmonics, arithmetic; 
(y) nautical astronomy, mathematical astronomy (or star-gazing), as- 
tronomy (or dynamics). 

(The pairs (v) and (vi) are distinguished at Rep 529°~530° (cf. [Epin] 
g90*) and 530°—531°; the distinction in (vi) was rejected by Aristoxenus, 
Elementa Harmonica, B 32-3.) The natural and orthodox account of 
(iv), however, obliges us to identify (iv) and (v), and hence to abandon 
(7). 

The commentators suppose that when Aristotle says that “some of 
these sciences bear almost the same name as one another (sundnumos)” 
(78°39) he is using sundnumos in the technical sense of Cat 1, 1°6~7 
(roughly, x is sundnumos with y if x and y are both F in the same sense 
of “F”’); but the non-technical sense, “having the same name as’’, seems 
more probable here (cf. Phil 57°). However that may be, the point is 
that there are two different sorts of astronomy and harmonics. 

Finally, (viti*) is not on a par with the other pairs, as Aristotle makes 
clear. Yet it is more scandalous than Aristotle allows. The doctor learns 
by observation that curved wounds heal slowly (cf. Cassius, Problems 1); 
the geometer explains this by the fact (say) that among plane figures 
circles have the highest area/periphery ratio. (The demonstration needs 
the further premiss that speed of healing is dependent on the area/ 
periphery ratio of a wound.) Thus, the geometer explains, or helps 
to explain, the doctor’s theorem: on any account of kind crossing, this 
violates the thesis of 4 7. 

It is clear that the constitutive relation for the pairs (i)—(vii) is (a), 
subordination (cf. esp. 76*I0—13; 79713). Relations (b)—(f) are in one 
way or another explicative of (a). (b) and (c) are too vague to be helpful. 
(d), too, is not very precise; it appears to imply that the principles of x 
are included in those of y. But it is implied by (e) that y has proper 
principles of its own; and it is not clear whether or why Aristotle thought 
that x uses the same instantiations of the common principles as y. 
Presumably (d) only means that some of the principles of x are also 
principles of y. 

(e) and (f) are thus crucial. 75°9 indicates that the kind of x is not 
wholly distinct from the kind of y; the obvious inference to make is that 
the elements in the kind of x are species of those of y: thus whereas line 
is one of the items in the kind of geometry, line from the eye to the object 
of vision or ray (opsis) is an item in the kind of optics (cf. [Euclid], 
Optics, definitions). And this gives a sense to the assertion that x falls 
under (hupo) y: the predicate terms of x, according to (f), are the same 
as those of y; we might then imagine that if AaC is a theorem of y, there 
is a term B in x such that C falls under B and AaB is a theorem of x. 
This gives a neat sense to Aristotle’s general account of the relation 
between x and y; but it seems to trivialize the notion of a subordinate 
science. 

Relation (g) is inferred from (e) and (f). If AaC is a theorem of y, and 
its demonstration proceeds from AaB & BaC, then by (e) C is a term of 

160 

COMMENTARY 78°34 

y and by (f) A and B are terms of x. Hence the explanation for AaC is 
not demonstrable within x but requires the principles of y. 

Relation (j) cannot be intended to apply to all the pairs (if it is applied 
both to (i) and to (vi) it leads to a contradiction) but only to (v), (vi), 
and (vii). Aristotle’s point at 78°40-79%4 is this: the facts of e.g. astro- 
nomy are discovered by empirical scientists, the theories supplied by the 
mathematicians. More striking is his claim that the mathematicians, who 
know the explanations, may be in ignorance of the facts. Plainly, they 
cannot know that P explains Q unless they know (the fact that) Q: 
Aristotle must mean that they may know P without knowing Q, although 
as a matter of fact P explains Q. The presence of (j) has been taken to 
show that Aristotle is muddling up two quite different things: in (a)—(y) 
the first two items are related as empirical to mathematical, whereas the 
second two are related as applied to pure. But the fact that the pairs do 
not share ail their relations does not show that they do not share some; 
and in particular, it does not show that the relation of subordination 
does not hold for (v)—(vii) as it does for (i)—(ii). The observational 
sciences bring forward propositions based on perception and induction 
(e.g. “The rainbow contains seven hues”). Suppose AaC is a theorem of 
catoptrics, and the explanation of this is by AaB & BaC: then C will 
belong to catoptrics, and A and B to optics; hence AaC is explained 
through optics and not through catoptrics. (It should perhaps be added 
that the surviving treatises on catoptrics are no more observational than 
the Euclidean Optics; and Aristotle’s treatment of the rainbow is one of 
the most mathematically sophisticated parts of his corpus (Heath (2), 
180-—90).) 

Relation (A) is readily intelligible; for the relation of AaB to AaC is 
precisely that between universal and particular. (On the thesis of 79*2-6 
cf. 4 1, 7124-8, and notes; see also Met A 1, 981712—°6—the con- 
nection made there between the subordinate sciences and practice is 
perhaps carried here in the name nautical astronomy.) 

Relation (k) is stated at 79°6-—9. The lines are difficult to understand. 
In the opening clause, ‘““The items in question are things which...”, 
“the items” has been referred both to acoustical harmonics and to 
mathematical harmonics. The former seems to give a slightly better 
argument, viz.: ‘Acoustical harmonics and the like, though they are 
essentially different from mathematical harmonics and the like, still 
make use of forms; for mathematics, on which they rest, is about forms.’ 
Aristotle’s argument that “mathematics is concerned with forms” 
appears to paraphrase as follows: ‘Mathematical objects are forms, 
because they are self-subsistent. Geometrical objects, perhaps, are not 
self-subsistent, but even so geometry studies them as though they were.’ 
This seems to credit Aristotle with a Platonist view of the objects of 
mathematics—-in which case we must suppose that the paragraph repre- 
sents an early (or a temporary) phase of his thought. But a better inter- 
pretation is possible. The key sentence is “for even if...”: Aristotle 
presumably means that the mathematical sciences are ‘about forms’ only 

161 

78°34 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

in the sense that they treat their objects as though they were self- 
subsistent forms. The geometers produce theorems of the type “Every 

triangle is...”: they use the term “‘triangle’’ as though it picked out a 
substance (just as a botanist’s theorems of the form “Every deciduous 
tree is...” pick out a substance). But in point of fact, triangles are not 

substances—and the reality behind the geometers’ theorems is the 
ordinary world of physical objects. (On Aristotle’s view of the objects of 
mathematics see BARNES (1985); MIGNUCCI (1987).) 

Finally, relation (m) is expounded in A 27 (notes). 

CHAPTER I4 

79°17: This paragraph seems to conflate two arguments. (A) ‘As a 
matter of fact the paradigmatic sciences use first figure syllogisms.’ This 
assertion is false; indeed, syllogistic reasoning as a whole is unsur- 
prisingly absent from Greek mathematics. Presumably Aristotle had 
observed that most mathematical arguments made use of affirmative 
universal propositions; and he inferred from this that they were, poten- 
tially at least, in Barbara. (B) ‘Demonstrations that reveal the expla- 
nation are usually in the first figure.’ Presumably because a-propositions, 
the paradigm explananda, are only deducible in Barbara. 

79°24: The next argument presupposes that knowledge of essences (of 
“what a thing is’’) is important for science; the nature and extent of this 
importance emerges in Book B. The connection between demonstration 
and knowledge of what a thing is is discussed at length in B 2-10. The 
main conclusion there is that there cannot be a demonstration whose 
conclusion expresses an essence: if the ‘hunt for essence’ is carried on 
syllogistically it will at best find its quarry caught in the concatenation of 
premisses and conclusion. It is true that the argument in our passage 
seems to envisage essences as being expressed in conclusions; but when 
the argument is restated at B 3, 90°3—-7, that appearance vanishes. 

79°29: “‘it is not in a certain respect... .’’: i.e. ‘it is not as such and such 
that men are two footed, so that only some men, viz. those who are such 
and such, are two-footed’. 

79°29: It is not figures but propositions which are ‘thickened’ or ‘in- 
creased’. Thus the second figure, say, needs the first figure inasmuch as 
any thickening of the premisses of a second figure syllogism must be 
done by way of a first figure syllogism. To ‘thicken’ or ‘increase’ a 
proposition AxB is to find a term C such that AyC, CzB+ AxB (cf. A 23, 
84°35; 25, 86°13; Einarson, 158); evidently, thickening may continue 
until the premisses it produces are immediate. 

Aristotle’s text implies the following proposition: if P, Q + R is a 
syllogism whose premisses must be thickened, then, whatever figure it is 
in, at least one of the two thickening syllogisms will be in the first figure. 
This is false: Ferio (1), Festino (II), and Ferison (II) may each be 
thickened by (say) Cesare (II) and Darapti (III). Aristotle might reply 

162 

COMMENTARY 79°29 

either that he is only interested in syllogisms with universal conclusions; 
or that after the first thickening process, his argument holds even for 
these three syllogisms. Thus no demonstrative chain of any length can be 
entirely independent of the first figure, whereas chains of any length may 
contain nothing but first figure arguments. 

CHAPTER I5 

The term “atomically” (atomos) is needlessly introduced as a synonym 
for amesos, “immediately” (I can find no distinction between the two 
terms; but see Hintikka (2), 60-1). Atomos has several other senses in 
the Organon (Bonitz, 120°32-°6). My translation of 4 15 prefers the 
barbarous “to not hold” to the ambiguous “not to hold”. 

79°36: The initial statement of the first two conditions under which 
AeB is not immediate or atomic suggests that they are: 

(1) (AX) (XaA & not-XaB); 
(2) (AX) (XaB & not-XaA) 

(For the sense of “in as in a whole” see APr 4 1, 2426-8). But 
Aristotle’s arguments show that instead of (1) and (2) he means: 

(1') (AX) (XaA & XeB); 
(2’) (AX) (XaB & XeA). 

Given (1’), there is a syllogism in Camestres yielding AeB, so that AeB 
cannot be atomic (79738—°1). Case (2') naturally yields Cesare, but the 
text presents Celarent (79°1-4). 

The third case is simply the conjunction of (1) and (2). But it must be 
observed that Aristotle’s statement at 79736-8 does not propound (1) 
and (2) at all. What he actually says amounts to this: ‘If either 
(3X) (XaA) or (AX) (XB) or (AX) (XaA & XaB), then it is not poss- 
ible for AeB to/hold atomically.’ This is straightforwardly false. Hence I 
previously took Aristotle to mean that AeB cannot be atomic under con- 
ditions (1) and (2); and MiGNuccl (1975), 337-40, argued that the ouk at 
79°37 modifies protds rather than endechetai, so that Aristotle actually 
says “If either... , then it is possible for AeB to hold non-primitively.” 
But 79°37-8, 80%, and 81°7—9 show that Aristotle meant just what he 
said—and hence that he erred. : 

795: A series of terms A, A,,..., A, is a chain (sustoichia: cf. Bonitz, 
736°33-737°19; Waitz, 338-40) if each holds universally of its pre- 
decessor. A chain a (A, Aj,..., An) and a chain f (B, By,..., Bm) 

overlap (cf. Bonitz, 264°51-265°6) if some member of a stands in the i- 
relation to some member of £. Suppose, then, that a and ~ do not 
overlap. Then, by definition, A,aA; and also A,eB (for if not-A,eB, then 
A,iB and there is an overlap). Thus (3X) (XaA & XeB). 

79°12: If AeB, and — (AX) (XaA) & 7 (AX) (XaB), then AeB is 
atomic. The proof is straightforward. 

163 

79°18 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

79°18: In the second figure there will be a proof of AeB either in 
Cesare (in which case the proposition with B as subject will be affir- 
mative) or else in Camestres (in which case the proposition with A as 
subject will be affirmative). This is plainly what Aristotle intends to say. 
What the received text (which I have translated) makes him say appears 
a flat contradiction—or else encourages the reader to look vainly for 
a distinction between negative and privative propositions. Perhaps we 
should boldly change amphoterois (“‘both”’) to hekateron (‘‘one or the 
other’)? 

CHAPTER 16 

A 16-18, on ignorance, attach to 4 5 and 4 12; for the two sorts of 
ignorance see 4 12, 77°26, note. In general, see LEAR (1980), 90-7. 

79°23: The classification Aristotle is after is this: 

Ignorance 
negative dispositional 
simple inferred 
of atomic of derivative 
facts facts 
positive negative positive negative 

This ‘division’ is accurately mirrored in the structure of A 16-18, but 
negligently stated at 79°23—7 (unless the text is corrupt). 

79°26: ‘‘when you believe simpliciter”: i.c. ‘when you have come to 
believe that P not on the basis of inference’. “simple” (haplous) may 
also mean “‘single’”; and Aristotle puns when he says that for simple 
belief (i.e. uninferred belief) the error is simple (i.e. there is only one 
way of being wrong). 

79°26: ‘that something holds or does not hold”: throughout 4 16-17 
only universal propositions are under consideration; “X holds of Y”’ is 
always XaY; and “‘X does not hold of Y” is always XeY (cf. A 15, 79°36, 
notes). 

79°29: (A) Inferred dispositional ignorance of negative atomic facts. I 
infer AaB from AaC & CaB, when in fact AeB is an atomic truth. 

Case (i), 79°33—40, in which both premisses are false, will hold if and 
only if AeC, CeB, and atomic AeB are compossible (cf. APr A 4, 
26°9—16). Aristotle’s argument must be paraphrased thus: ‘Atomic AeB 
is compatible with AeC, for some chosen C; but atomic AeB and AeC 
yield CeB (for if not-CeB, then CaB, and hence AeB is derivable).’ Case 

164 

COMMENTARY 79°29 

(ii), 79°40-80%2, would require the compossibility of AeC, CaB, and 
atomic AeB (cf. "APr A 4, 25°40-26°2: Celarent). Case (iii) requires the 
compossibility of AaC, CeB, and atomic AeB (cf. APr A 4, 26°2-9): 
‘Atomic AeB is compatible with atomic AaC; and together they entail 
CeB.’ As 80*5 points out, the stipulation that AaC is atomic is unneces- 
sary. (Note that “holds” and “is predicated” at 80°3 must cover both 
affirmative and negative holding and predication; cf. e.g. A 19, 82°14.) 

80°6: (B) Inferred dispositional ignorance of positive atomic facts. 
8079: (a) in Celarent: I infer AeB from AeC and CaB when in fact AaB 
is an atomic truth. 

There is no argument for case (i), 80°11-14, the compossibility of 
AaC, CeB, and atomic AaB (cf. APr A 4, 26°2-9). 

Case (ii), 80°14-20, requires the compossibility of AeC, CeB, and 
atomic AaB (cf. APr 4 4, 26°9-16): ‘Atomic AaB is compatible with 
AeC; and they yield CeB—for CaB & AaB would yield AiC and hence 
not-AeC; and CaB & AeC would yield AeB and hence not-AaB.” 

Case (iii), 80°21-4, requires the compossibility of AaC, CaB, and 
atomic AaB. The argument mirrors the previous one. 

80°26: ‘“‘the deduction may be false”: i.e. ‘the conclusion will be false’ 
(cf. e.g. APr B 18, 66°21). 

80°27: (8) In the second figure: Aristotle first asks whether both pre- 
misses can be false; his answer would have been best put by saying that it 
is possible for both premisses to be false, although it is not possible for 
their contraries both to be true. Instead of saying this, he distinguishes 
between total and partial falsity: “I mean by false as a whole the 
contrary proposition, i.e. if what holds of none is assumed to hold of all, 
or what holds of all of none” (APr B 2, 5474-6). Thus AaB is false as a 
whole if AeB, and AeB is false as a whole if AaB; and to say that the 
premisses cannot both be wholly false is just to say that their contraries 
cannot both be true. Partial falsity is not defined; but Aristotle plainly 
means that AaB is partially false if AoB & not-AeB; and AeB is partially 
false if AiB & not-AaB. Thus to say that both the premisses may be 
partially false is in fact to say something stronger than that both may be 
false. (Aristotle adopts this curious procedure because his attention in 
A 16- 17 is concentrated on universal propositions. The jargon of partial 
truth is a refinement of common usage; cf. e.g. Top Z 12, 149°8; © 2, 
17°28; 7, 160726.) 

AeB must be deduced either from CaA & CeB (Camestres), or from 
CeA & CaB (Cesare). If both premisses are wholly false ‘“‘they will be 
the other way about when assumed in the contrary way”, i.e. ‘their 
contraries will have the opposite truth-values’, i.e. ‘it will be the case 
that CeA & CaB, or that CaA & CeB’. But from AaB it follows that 

4 (AX) (XeA & XaB) & 4 (AX) (XaA & XeB). 

If both premisses are partially false, then CiA, CoA, CiB, CoB, and 
atomic AaB are compossible (cf. APr A 5, 27 36-9). 

165 

80°34 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

80734: “i.e. C might hold both of some A and of some B”: Ross 
paraphrases: ‘i.e. if CoA & CiB’, taking ‘“‘hold’” to cover both positive 
and negative holding. But if partial falsity is defined as I suggested, 
Aristotle needs the stronger condition: ‘i.e. if C/A & CoA & CiB & 
CoB’. If this is right, “hold” is taken in its normal positive sense, and 
“of some X”’ means “of some but not all X”’. 

80°38: “And if the privative is posited the other way about”: i.e. in 
Cesare. Aristotle does not ask whether one premiss might be wholly false 
and the other partially false. 

80°39: ‘‘For what holds of every A...”: i.e. ‘Assuming AaB, (VX) 
(XaA — XaB). So if you infer AeB from CaA & CeB, and CaA is true, 
then CeB is false’. This shows that AaB, CaA and CeB are not com- 
patible; but it does not show that CaA, CaB, and atomic AaB are 
compossible, which is what Aristotle needs to show. The same goes for 
the other three arguments in this paragraph. 

CHAPTER 17 

80°17: (C) Inferred dispositional ignorance of positive derivative facts: 
(a) in Celarent: In case (i), 80°17—26, AeB is inferred from AeC & CaB, 
when in fact AaB holds, and C is the ‘appropriate’ middle term—i.e. 
AaC, CaB + AaB is the proper demonstration of AaB. This is the 
“deduction of the contradictory (of AeB)”’. (“Contradictory” is used 
loosely: cf. e.g. Top 1 25, 180°23-31.) 

Thus in the erroneous deduction CaB must be true and AeC false. 
(AeC is the proposition “on the major extreme’, i.e. ‘containing the 
major term’ (cf. Bonitz, 641°39—50).) 
80°25: “for it does not convert”: i.e. ‘if it is replaced by its contrary, no 
valid inference is possible’; yet another sense for the Protean antistrephein. 
80°26: Case (ii), 80°26—32, is, logically speaking, exactly like case (i); 
for illustration see 4 29. 
80°32: In case (iii), 80°32~9, AaD & DeB hold; in case (iv), 80°40- 
81°4, AeD & DeB hold. In (iii) and (iv) D is ‘inappropriate’ because it 
cannot figure in a sound argument for AaB; in (ii) D is ‘inappropriate’ 
because the argument for AaB which it yields is, though sound, not 
demonstrative. 

81°5: (8) In the second figure: 81°8 refers back to 4 16, 80°27-33; from 
a logical point of view the arguments here only repeat what was said at 
80727~°r4. 

81°15: (D) Inferred dispositional ignorance of negative derivative facts. 
We infer AaB from AaC & CaB, when in fact AeB; Aristotle assumes 
that AeB is demonstrable by Celarent. Case (i), 81*15—20, parallels 
80°18—26; case (ii), 8120-4, parallels 80°26-32. 

Case (iii), 81°24—7, occurs when in fact AaD & DeB hold; case (iv), 

166 

COMMENTARY 81715 

81°27-31, occurs when AeD & DaB hold; and case (v), 81°31-2, occurs 
when AeD & DeB hold. Thus (iv) is identical with (ii). 

81°33: “Thus it is clear...”: The received text ascribes an unintel- 
ligible error to Aristotle. Ross excises the whole sentence; and he may 
be right. I have preferred to emend the text (on the model of 79°40-1). 
For a similar proposal see MIGNUCCI (1975), 382. 

CHAPTER 18 

81°38: (E) Negative Ignorance. Aristotle is clearly arguing for some 
sort of empiricist thesis; and his argument is clear enough in outline: ‘no 
knowledge without induction, no induction without perception; so no 
knowledge without perception’. But what exactly the thesis is, and how 
exactly the argument runs, are matters far less clear. Compare, in 
general, A 31 and B 19. 

The first sentence of the chapter could be read as: 

(1) (Ay) (a has not perceived y) > (AP) (P & a does not know that 
P). 

But Aristotle’s argument will not yield (1). The argument does yield: 
(2) (a has perceived nothing) — (a knows nothing). 

This is stated at An I’ 8, 432°7-8; but it is hard to read it into 81°38. It is 
better to read the thesis as saying: 

(3) (a lacks some sense-faculty) — (AP) (P & a does not know that 
P). 
Since the senses each have their proper objects (An B 6, 418711-16), (3) 
is entailed by: 

(4) (4A) (a has not perceived As) > (SP) (P & a does not under- 
stand that P). 

Aristotle can then be construed as arguing for (4) from the following 
premisses, not all of which are explicit in the text: 

(5) a understands that AaB — a has learned that AaB; 

(6) a has learned that AaB — (a has demonstrated that AaB) or 
(a has induced that AaB); 

(7) a has demonstrated that AaB — (AC) (a has inferred that 
AaB from AaC & CaB); 

(8) a has inferred P from Q — a has considered Q; 
(9) a has considered AaC — (3D) (a has induced that AaD); 

(10) a has induced that AaD — a has inferred AaD from n 
perceived instances of the type Ab & Db; 

(11) a has inferred P from a perceived case C — a has per- 
ceived C. 

From these premisses there follows: 

167 

81°38 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

(12) a understands that AaB — a has perceived As. 

Premiss (5) is s implicit at 81°39- 40. For (6)—expressed at 81°40—cf. e.g. 
APr A 23, 68°13; Phys @ 1, 252722; Met A 9, 992°30-2; EN Z 3, 1139 27 
(cf. above, p. 81). (7) is trifling, and (8)- (9) are found at 81°2, For 
(10)— —81°5—6—see esp. Top A 12, 105*13-16 (see above, p. 83). (11), 
again, is trifling. Since the argument is concerned with understanding, it 
is reasonable to limit its scope to universal propositions (but no doubt 
AeB should be allowed, as well as AaB). 

The conclusion does not quite yield (4); and some of the premisses 
leave something to be desired. But it is, I think, an easy, if tedious, 
matter to tidy up the argument in such a way that its only disputable 
feature is the proposition that, if A is any proper sensible, then a knows 
that Ab only if a has perceived some As. This proposition seems defens- 
ible to me; but to discuss it would involve a wholesale treatment of the 
foundations of empiricism. 

” 

81°38: “‘if some perception is wanting. ..”: ekleloipen, “is wanting”’, 
could also be translated ‘“‘has been lost”; but this deprives the argument 
of plausibility. 

81°: “induction on particulars”: particulars here are individuals, the 
objects of sense-perception (cf. p. 83). 

” 

81>3: “even the items...”: i.e. ‘even if C is an abstraction, it is 
possible to show by induction that, say, A holds of C as such (even 
though Cs are not separable, i.e. self-subsistent)’. The parenthesis is 
obscure, and the commentators offer several different glosses. It is clear 
enough, however, that Aristotle is offering an a fortiori defence of (9). 
Even if the defence succeeds, its conclusion is not strong enough; for it 
argues only that induction can make abstractions familiar, when Aristotle 
needs to argue that abstractions can only be made familiar by induction. 
An T 8, 432°3-6, offers a different and stronger argument for the view 
that ‘objects of comprehension, both what are called abstractions and 
the affections and qualities of sensible things, are in the sensible forms” 
and hence cannot be considered apart from perception. 

By ‘‘the items we speak about on the basis of abstraction” Aristotle 
means the quasi-objects which we consider when we mentally abstract 
from ordinary objects some of their actually inseparable properties; 
among such quasi- objects are the objects of mathematics (cf e.g. Cael 
I 1, 299°16; An A 1, 403°14-15; I 4, 429 ®38—20; 7, 431°12-17). Thus 
what Aristotle says commits him to the Millian view that some (not all) 
the propositions of mathematics are learned by induction. Aristotle’s 
philosophy of mathematics leads him toward the conception of mathe- 
matics as an applied science, or at least to the view that mathematical 
theorems state truths about the ordinary furniture of the world. Such a 
view sits well with the Millian thesis: applied mathematics is an empirical 
science. 

81°6: The last lines of the chapter are extremely puzzling (see MIGNUCCI 

168 

COMMENTARY 81°6 

(1975), 384-6). With much hesitation, I place a light stop after adunaton 
and a heavy stop after aisthésis at 81°6 (the OCT punctuates the other 
way about). And I take ow gar... aisthéseds at 81>6-9—despite the 
gar—to offer a brief summary of the argument of the whole chapter. For 
an alternative suggestion see VERDENIUS (1981), 351. 

CHAPTER I9 

A 19-23 form a continuous argument for the thesis that there cannot be 
predicational chains of infinite length; it follows from this thesis that 
there cannot be demonstrative chains of infinite length. There is a more 
general, but far briefer, argument against infinite explanatory chains in 
Met a 2. The thesis connects, and is connected (82*7), with the argument 
of 4 3. On the whole argument see LEAR (1980), 15-33. 

A 19g states the thesis and analyses the question of its truth into three 
subquestions; these questions are answered in the succeeding three 
chapters. 

81°10: “One type... the other...”: 
conclusions are in question. 

81°14: ‘Thus it is clear that the principles . ». are items of these types”: 
i.e. *,.. are propositions of the form A@B or AeB’. This is evident from 
the fact that the principles form the ultimate premisses from which 
demonstrations are derived. 

81°18: The predications in the syllogistic chains must be true and they 
must be natural. 

Truth: cf. in general APr A 30, 46°3-10; on opinion/truth cf. APr 
B 16, 6535-7; on “reputable” see A 6, 74°21, note. The words trans- 
lated “opinion”, ‘‘reputable’’, and “is thought” all come from the root 
dok-; and Aristotle plays on the fact: the dialectician starts from reput- 
able premisses (enDOXa), so he is content if there is thought (DOKei) 
to be a middle term, since he is only arguing with regard to opinion 
(kata DOXan—i.e. it is enough if his conclusions are believed). 

Natural Predication: see pp. 114-17; the significance of this stipulation 
emerges in A 22. 

only syllogisms with universal 

81°30: This section analyses the main question of the chapter into its 
three subquestions; Aristotle first considers chains of affirmative prop- 
ositions. The three subquestions are these: first, can the sequence of 
immediate propositions AaB, CaA, DaC,...continue indefinitely, or 
must it stop? Secondly, can the sequence of immediate propositions 
AaB, BaC, CaD,... continue indefinitely, or must it stop? Thirdly, can 
the non-immediate proposition AaB be indefinitely thickened by the 
interposition of propositions AaC, CaD,..., ZaB, or must the thick- 
ening stop? 

It is worth stating these questions a little more precisely. Take the 
sequence of terms: 

169 

81°30 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

eae, Seen er eee 

such that (Wi) (Wj) (@ > j — Aj,a@A,). (Aristotle thinks of a vertical line 
ascending from A,, to A,.) Then the three questions are: 

(i) Given that (S) has a first term—i.e. a term Ag such that 
7 (di) (Ap@A;)—can there be infinitely many terms to the right 
of (or ‘above’) Ay? 

(ii) Given that (S) has a last term—i.e. a term Aj, such that 
1 (ai) (A;aA,)—can there be infinitely many terms to the left of 
(or ‘below’) A;? 

(iii) Can there be two terms A,, A; in (S) such that there are infinitely 
many terms between A; and A;? (Equivalently, can there by any 
term in (S) which has no immediate neighbour? i.e. can there be 
an A; such that for all j neither A;aA; nor A,aA, is immediate?) 

Aristotle does not explicitly consider the possibility that every term in 
(S) has infinitely many terms to its right and infinitely many to its left. 

82°6: “This is the same as to inquire...”: “This” refers to question 
(iii): demonstration, in Aristotle’s view, requires the existence of im- 
mediate propositions; it does not require that there is only a finite 
number of them. The question whether there is demonstration of every- 
thing involves the issue of ‘circular’ proof (4 3, 72°25—73%20), and that is 
not taken up in these chapters; rather, Aristotle is backing up his stand 
at A 3, 72°18—25, against the view that there is no understanding. His 
remarks must be taken loosely: if there are no immediate propositions 
there will be premisses available for the proof of any given proposition— 
but of course no proof at all would be possible in such a situation. 

82°9: Negative propositions are now brought into the picture, and yield 
a fourth question. Aristotle says “I say the same...”; and so we might 
reasonably expect him to have in mind a sequence of terms, like (S), for 
which Aj;eA;. But the expectation is disappointed. (In effect such a 
sequence is considered implicitly in the next paragraph, at 82°15; for all 
the terms in such a sequence will convert with respect to the e-relation.) 
Rather, Aristotle is interested in ‘‘privative deductions and proposi- 
tions”; and the sequence he has in mind is this: 

(S*) ..., AeB,, AeBys1, ACByyr, 

where B,aB;. This sequence of privative propositions yields a sequence 
of privative deductions, all of them in Celarent. (AeB,+1, Bn+,aB, + 
AeB,; etc.) And Aristotle’s question is this: 

(iv) Can the sequence (S*) contain infinitely many members? 

When, in A 21, he turns to answer the question we shall find that it is 
broadened in scope: the limitation to syllogisms in Celarent is removed. 

82714: ‘The prior terms of which A holds”: “hold” is here used in the 
neutral sense (see p. 165). 

170 

COMMENTARY 82°15 

82°15: Aristotle now turns, parenthetically, to a sequence (S‘), in 
which all the terms are counterpredicable, i.e. such that every term in it 
is universally predicable of every other. He does not say whether (S) 
may contain counterpredicable terms, but his later argument indicates 
that it does not; if that is so, then he does not consider series of terms 
only some of which are counterpredicable. 

What does Aristotle mean to say about (S°)? “It is not the same”’ for it 
inasmuch as questions (i) and (ii) cannot be posed for it; and if it has 
infinitely many members, then both (i) and (ii) are answered affir- 
matively for (S). (This translates ei t’...ep’...; most MSS give 
eit’. ..eit?...: “whether its predicates ...or the items we are puzzling 
over...’’ This seems to make little sense.) 

82°16: “...there is none of which any is predicated primitively or 
ultimately”: i.e. ‘(S°) has no first subject of predication (i.e. no term 
which is not predicated of anything) and no ultimate subject of pre- 
dication (i.e. no term of whose predicate nothing is predicated).’ 

82719: “unless it is possible...”: i.e. ‘unless each counterpredicated 
pair contains one natural and one unnatural predication’. 

” 

CHAPTER 20 

A 20 argues correctly that if the answers to (i) and (ii) are negative, then 
the answer to (iii) is also negative. (He might have been content (pace 
LEAR (1980), 19-21) with the weaker thesis that if either the answer to 
(i) or the answer to (ii) is negative, then the answer to (iii) is negative: 
see SCANLAN (1982), 2-4.) 

82°30: An objector says that in the infinite series A, B, F (where B 
represents infinitely many terms: 82°25), it might be the case (a) that 
some of the predications are immediate, and (b) that the terms not 
appearing in immediate predications cannot be grasped. 

Aristotle does not bother to answer (6): he would agree that not all 
the terms of A—F can be grasped (cf. e.g. Met A 2, 994>20—7) but hold 
that A~F may still contain infinitely many terms (cf. e.g. Phys Ir 6, 
206°21—5). He does answer (a): what he should say is that A~F may 
have infinitely many members even if some subset, say B;- By, is finite; 
his actual answer is less clear. 

82°32: ‘whichever of the Bs I take. . .”: if this sentence is not to be the 
merest tautology it must be understood as follows: ‘Even if some subset 
of A—F is finite, it remains the case that for any B; either A~B; or Bj;-F 
is infinite.’ 

82°34: ‘It makes no difference ...”: Aristotle seems to have the fol- 
lowing argument in mind: ‘Suppose that BB, are immediately con- 
nected to one another: that makes no difference. For the series up to F is 
infinite whether it starts being infinite immediately after A or only after 

17 

82°34 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

B,?. But of course, if B,—F is infinite, then so too is A—F; a set does not 
‘start’ being infinite at any point. (But see LEAR (1980), 24-5.) 

CHAPTER 21 

The aim of A 21 is to show that there cannot be an infinite sequence of 
negative demonstrations if there are no infinite sequences of positive 
demonstrations. In effect, then, Aristotle will try to prove that if the 
answers to questions (i) and (ii) are negative, then a negative answer 
must also be given to question (iv). Or rather, to a revised version of 
question (iv). For question (iv), and its sequence (S*), was limited to 
syllogisms in Celarent; whereas in A 21 Aristotle wants to exclude any 
infinite sequence of negative syllogisms. 

There are nine syllogistic moods which yield a negative conclusion, 
so that there are—we might infer—nine different types of sequence 
for Aristotle to investigate. In fact, he limits himself to three ways. 
According to the received text, these three ways are Celarent, Camestres, 
and Bocardo. The commentators generally assume that the argument of 
A 21 is incomplete: in order to complete it, we must consider the 
remaining six negative moods. But I shall argue that the three ways 
which Aristotle has in mind are Celarent, Camestres, and Cesare, that he 
is limiting his attention (as he usually does in APst) to universal pro- 
positions, and that his argument is therefore complete as it stands. 

82°5: Suppose that we have a connected sequence of arguments in 
Celarent (AeB, BaC + AeC): can this sequence be infinite? Aristotle 
first remarks, truly but impertinently, that we cannot have an infinite se- 
quence of propositions leading to the second premiss, BaC: here “‘we must 
arrive at immediates”, since—by hypothesis—the sequence (S) has an 
uppermost or right-most member. (At 82°7 “interval” (diastéma) means 
“proposition”: see Bonitz, 189°11-17.) Secondly, Aristotle remarks— 
truly and pertinently—that if the sequence of proofs associated with AeB 
were infinitely long, then the sequence (S) would have no right-most or 
uppermost member. To see that this is correct it is enough to look at 
sequence (S*): associated with every AeB; there is a B,aB,;. Hence if 
there are infinitely many of the former, there are infinitely many of the 
latter, so that (S) will go on ad infinitum to the right. 

82°13: Camestres: the case is parallel to that of Celarent. Instead of 
(S*) we need to consider: 

(S**) 2.0, ApeB, AnsieB, Ans2eB,... 
where Aj;aA;. (Cesare requires a different—and a more complicated— 
sequence.) 
82°14: “If you must next prove this”: i.e. BeC. 
82°16: “‘the second will now be proved’: presumably ‘“‘proved” means 
something like “exhibited” (the root meaning of deiknunai is “‘show’’). 

172 

COMMENTARY 82°17 

82°17: “If you prove in this way ...”: for the text of this very difficult 
sentence I now follow MiGNuCccI (1975), 427-31. 

82°21: As the text stands, Aristotle here turns to Bocardo. But the text 
presents several peculiarities. First, in the lettering of Bocardo C stands 
unusually for the major and A for the minor term. Secondly, 82°24 says 
that “this [i.e. CoB] will be proved .. . in the ways described above’’; but 
neither Celarent nor Camestres yields an o-conclusion. Thirdly, if it is the 
three figures with which Aristotle is concerned, we must suppose that 
Celarent, Camestres, and Bocardo are representatives of their respective 
‘ways’ and not (as the text leads us to believe) those ‘ways’ themselves. 
Fourthly, it is hard to see why Aristotle should have made provision for 
particular conclusions to demonstrations; and it is harder to see why he 
should tacitly allow the scientific respectability of particular negatives 
without giving some analogous hint about particular affirmatives. 

Finally, the clinching argument: at 82°15 “the third way” cannot refer 
to the third figure—for Aristotle is referring to the proof of DeC, and 
universal negatives cannot be proved in the third figure. Here, then, we 
are obliged to take Aristotle to be referring to the three moods which 
yield a universal negative conclusion. Hence throughout 4 21 the three 
ways are these three moods. And Bocardo has no place in the chapter. 
(Compare A 23, 85°I-12, where the three tropoi are clearly the three 
moods with universal negative conclusions. Here too the MSS falsely 
shove Baroco into the text. See MIGNUCCI (1975), 512-14.) 

I conclude that 82°21-8 is a glossator’s addition. Aristotle meant to 
refer only to Celarent, Camestres, and Cesare, the three tropoi which 
yield e-conclusions; he sketched the argument for the first two moods 
and perhaps simply added “the third is proved likewise’. A later im- 
prover filled this note out, and filled it out wrongly. 

82°29: “It is clear that...”: Aristotle’s conclusion is true, but his 
argument for it is unsound; see LEAR (1980), 27-30, who provides a 
sound argument. 

82°31: A consequential emendation is necessary at 8230-1, where 
there is an explicit occurrence of the word “figure” (schéma). We might 
excise schématos or else replace it by tropou; but I suspect that the whole 
clause, from hote men to tritou, should be expunged. 

82°34: The term “general”, /ogikos, is often used by Aristotle to desig- 
nate an argument not employing notions or principles proper to any 
given science (thus it is more or less synonymous with dialektikos): “But 
perhaps a general demonstration would seem more persuasive than what 
has been said—I call it general for this reason, that the more universal it 
is, the further it is from the appropriate principles” (GA B 8, 747°27-30). 
Again: ‘‘A problem is general (/ogikon) if a quantity of fine arguments 
(logoi) might be raised against it” (Top E 1, 129*29-31)—the more 
general a proposition is, the more ways of testing it, and so possibly of 
refuting it, there are. (See further APst A 22, 84°7~8; 32, 88719~30; 
Bonitz, 432°5-11; cf. e.g. G.-G. GRANGER (1976), 98-9. 

173 

82°37 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

CHAPTER 22 

This chapter contains three arguments for the thesis that the set (S) is 
finite—i.e. for negative answers to questions (i) and (ii). The first two 
arguments are ‘general’, and occupy 82°37-83°31 and 83°32—84°6; the 
third argument, at 84°7—28, is ‘analytical’. 

82°37: Argument (A). The strategy of the first argument is this: Aris- 
totle first contends that there cannot be an infinite series of essential 
predicates (8237-8371); then he establishes, in a rambling and digres- 
sive passage, the parasitic nature of non-essential predication (83°1-39); 
and finally he infers that non-essential predicates cannot generate infinite 
sequences either (83°39—°31). 

As 83°1 shows, 82537—83"1 offers a self-contained argument against an 
infinite series of essential predicates. It is worth trying to set the argu- 
ment out fairly explicitly; and I shall begin with a few terminological 
points. 

I use “what a thing/something/it is” for to ti esti. This phrase reads 
literally “the what is it?”; hence “the answer to the question ‘What is 
it?””’, and so, for short, “‘what it is”. (There is no pronoun in the Greek 
answering to “it”; since “it”? in English is regularly anaphoric, it is often 
necessary to use ‘“‘a thing” or ‘‘something” in its place.) To answer the 
question “What is X?’’, as it is here used, one must state the ‘essence’ or 
give a definition of X. Sometimes, however, Aristotle uses the phrase in 
such a way that a proper answer to “What is X?” will state only the kind 
or genus under which X falls. To indicate that a complete definition, and 
not merely a specification of the genus, is in question Aristotle will 
sometimes use a different phrase, to ti én einai, which I render as “‘what 
it is to be a thing/something/it’”. The literal translation of this bizarre 
expression is “the what was to be?”’; hence “‘the answer to the question 
“What was to be?’”’, and so, for short, “‘what was to be’. The past tense 
here is a Greek idiom that does not go over into English; thus we get to 
“what is to be”. Several passages indicate that this is elliptical for “‘what, 
for so-and-so, it is to be such and such” or “what it is for a to be X”. 
Since the question, ““What is it for a to be X?” is to be understood as a 
request for a definition of “‘X”’ as it occurs in “a is X”’, stating what it is 
for a to be X amounts to giving a definition or account of X. 

The “‘items predicated in what something is” are presumably the same 
as the items which “‘inhere in the account which says what something is” 
(A 4, 73°35; cf. Top A 5, 102°32—5). Thus when Aristotle says that such 
items are finite, we might take him to mean merely that if a term is 
defined by the conjunction of a set of predicates {A;, Az,..., A,}, then 
n must be finite. And this is surely true. It has, however, little to do with 
sequences of terms such as (S); for the A,s will not by themselves 
generate such a sequence. 

Aristotle must be thinking of definition by genus and differentia: in 
order to define a term Gp I must give the genus G, and the specific 
difference D, of members of Go; and similarly, to define G, I must give 

174 

COMMENTARY 82°37 

Gz and Dz. Now each G; is “predicated in what Go is”-—genera are 
essential to their species. Moreover, genera are predicable of their species 
(e.g. Cat 3, 1°13), so that the Gjs will form a sequence. 

(Sg) ..., Go, Gi, Go,..., Gay... 
which has the same feature as (S): it is ordered by the a-relation; 

We can now construct an argument as follows: Suppose that a knows 
what it is for a thing to be a G,. Then, since being a G,, is being a G,+1 
that is D,,41, a knows what it is to be G,1. Hence if every term in (Sg) 
has a successor, a knows infinitely many truths of the form “being a G; is 
being a Gj, that is Dist” . Now infinite knowledge of this sort is 
impossible (cf. A 3, 72°10, notes); and evidently some people do have 
knowledge of some essences: hence (Sg) cannot be infinite in length. 

At 83° 2 Aristotle asserts that this argument disposes of infinite chains 
both in the upward and in the downward direction. But at most it deals 
with the upward direction: for all that Aristotle has said, every G; in (Sg) 
may be preceded by a G;_ 1. 

It is far from clear that Aristotle’s argument works even for the 
upward direction. In a weak sense of the phrase, many men do know 
what, say, a horse is; for they can pick horses out from other animals, 
they can name some of the salient features of horses, and perhaps they 
can offer an account of what the term “‘horse’’ means. But in this sense it 
does not seem to be the case that in order to know what G,, is you must 
know what G,,, 1 is—a child may, in this sense, know what a horse is 
without knowing what an animal is. If Aristotle replies that he is using a 
stronger notion of knowing what so and so is, then we may legitimately 
wonder why he is confident that anyone has any knowledge of this sort; 
certainly, if we suppose that to know what_X is is to grasp the real essence 
of X, then there is room for scepticism, in a Lockean vein, about our 
knowledge of what things are. 

83°71: Aristotle now turns to the second leg of argument (A), which 
attempts to establish the finitude of non-essential predicates. 83°1-24 
performs three preliminary tasks: (i), it distinguishes between ‘natural’ 
and ‘unnatural’ predication; (ii), it asserts that demonstration is con- 
cerned only with natural predication; and (iii), it connects this with the 
doctrine of the categories of being. 

For task (i) see the notes to 4 4, 73°5—10. Three points of detail arise. 
First, Ross finds two varieties of unnatural predication, typified by ““The 
white thing is a log” and ‘“‘The musical thing is white”. But Aristotle only 
recognizes two sorts of predication (83°4, 14); and he offers the same 
type of analysis for the two sentences just quoted (83*10-11). 

Secondly, at 83713 I translate hoper kai egeneto by “which came to be 
white”; logs become white but white things do not become logs (cf. 
83°6- 8). Ross translates ‘“‘which is what we made it in our assertion” (cf. 
Bonitz, 533. b35-8); even if the Greek can mean this, it seems to make 
little sense in the context. 

175 

83°71 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Thirdly, ‘“‘just what is some particular white” translates hoper leukon 
ti. Aristotle regularly uses ‘“‘Y is hoper X” to mean “‘X is the genus of Y” 
(cf. esp. Top I’ 1, 116723-8; APr A 39, 49°6—8; see Bonitz, 533°36- 
534°18). But sometimes it is used less strictly so that Y is hoper X if X is 
in the essence of Y (cf. e.g. Top 4 1, 120°21~6; Met I 4, 1007°33). The 
customary translation, ‘‘just what X is”, suggests precisely the wrong 
sense. (At 8377 the text should probably be emended to read ‘‘just what 
is white or some particular white” (hoper leukon on outh’ hoper leukon ti 
for leukon on outh’ hoper leukon ti). Philoponus seems to have read 
this.) 

Task (ii): By “this is the way in which demonstrations demonstrate” 
(83°20) Aristotle must mean ‘these are the sorts of predication occurring 
in demonstrations’. The two types of predication were illustrated ex- 
clusively by singular propositions; and these do not properly appear in 
demonstrations. Thus we must first apply the distinction to universal 
propositions; presumably such an application will yield the result that 
YaX is an unnatural predication if and only if: 

(1) YaX — (AZ) (YaZ & it happens that XaZ). 

If this is right, then demonstrations do deal with unnatural predications; 
indeed, in Aristotle’s view, any proposition of the form YaG—where G 
is any geometrical term, e.g. “triangle’’—will be unnatural. For triangles 
are not independent entities; it is (pace Ross) no answer to say that 
geometry proceeds ‘as if’ triangles and the like were independent entities. 

Why should Aristotle have thought that unnatural predications are not 
found in demonstrations? His thesis amounts to the claim that the 
subject-term of any scientific proposition will denote a substance: the 
items which metaphysics determines as the primary realities are the very 
items with which science is concerned. The constraints which this thesis 
imposes on the sciences—and not just on the mathematical sciences— 
are severe; and yet the attraction of the thesis is evident. Perhaps 
Aristotle had something like the following thought in mind. If a sentence 
expresses a true non-natural predication, then there will always be an 
associated sentence which expresses the natural truth which underlies the 
unnatural predication. (Thus “The sculptor, who is musical, made the 
statue’ can be associated with ‘““The musical man made the statue”’.) 
When a science appears to deal in unnatural predications, it may always 
be construed as dealing in the associated natural predications. 

Task (iii): Aristotle does not say elsewhere that the division of predi- 
cates into the ‘categories’ only applies to natural predications. Presum- 
ably his thought is that if X is Y is unnatural then Y is not, properly 
speaking, a predicate of X but rather of whatever it is that happens to be 
X; a fortiori Y will not express a quality or quantity or relation etc. of X. 

The first category, that of substance, is here designated by the phrase 
“what the item is”. This can only refer to essential predication; and 
the next paragraph expressly equates essential and substantial predi- 
cation. Thus it seems that Aristotle confuses substantial with essential 

176 

COMMENTARY 8371 

predicates—for even if all substantial predicates are essential (see Car 5, 

2>8—10, 29-37), the converse does not hold (see the example of white at 
8377, 29; cf. e.g. Top A 9, 103°27-37; Met Z 4, 1030718—27). Aristotle 
might, I think, retort that if only natural predicates fall under the 
categories, and if the subjects of natural predicates are substances, and if 
all essential predicates of substances are substantial, then all essential 
predicates are substantial. (See further Ackrill, 78-80.) 

83°21: Only eight of the ten categories are listed: cf. Cat 4, 1°25-2%4; 
Bonitz, 378°45-"15. 

83°22: ‘‘when one thing is predicated of one”: cf. A 2, 72°9, notes. 

83°24: This paragraph makes four further preliminary points. 

First, substantial predications are essential predications: if AaB and A 
is in the category of substance, then A is in the essence of B. 

Secondly, non-substantial predications are non-essential and so (in one 
of the many senses of the term) incidental. It is an obvious objection to 
this that differentiae, such as being two-footed, are essential and yet non- 
substantial (a di ifferentia states a quality: Top Z 6, 144°15-22; Met 4 14, 
1020733~°1). 83° shows that 4 22 counts differentiae as substances. 

Thirdly, non-substantial predicates do not signify ousiai. There are 
two main uses of the word ousia: in the form ‘‘x is an ousia’” it amounts 
to “x is a substance”’; in the form ‘‘x is the ousia of y” it amounts to “‘x is 
the essence of y”. Thus a crude account of ousia might say, without 
being unduly misleading, that ousia is ambiguous between “‘‘essence”’ and 
“substance’’. Ross takes ousia to mean ‘‘essence”’ at 83°30, thus making 
the third point the converse of the first. But ousia can hardly bear this 
meaning at 83°30 if it means ‘“‘substance” at 83°24. 

Fourthly, Aristotle again rejects independent Platonic forms (see 4 II, 
77°5-9 and notes); the Idea of White, for example, would be something 
which was white ‘without being anything different’. The argument here is 
precisely parallel to that at EN A 6, 1096°34—5 + °32-1097°14: ‘There 
are no Ideas, and even if there were they would have no bearing on our 
problems.’ Nonny-noes, feretismata, are the sounds produced by people 
who sing without uttering sentences (cf. [| Prob/] 1@ 10, 918730). 

83°36: Most commentators suppose that 83°36-°17 is a unit and deals 
with counterpredication. But in that case we must conclude that Aris- 
totle’s line of thought is infernally turbid, the reprise of 82°37—83°1 
at 83°1-7 being wholly out of place. I now incline to suppose (after 
MIGNUCCI (1975), 463-9) that the issue of counterpredication occupies 
only 83°36-9, and that at 83°39 Aristotle returns, after various pre- 
liminary observations, to the main argument. This supposition certainly 
does not make everything plain; but it is perhaps preferable to the 
orthodox view. 

83°36: ‘“‘Again...to counterpredicate truly”: text and interpretation 
are uncertain here; Aristotle’s premiss is either: ‘If X is a quality of Y, 

177 

83°36 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

then Y is not a quality of X’; or else ‘If X is a quality of Y, then Z is not 
a quality of X’. From either of these premisses Aristotle can correctly 
infer that X and Y are not counterpredicable; for even if we can “truly 
say” Y of X (cf. 8372) we cannot naturally predicate Y of X. It follows 
that (S°)—the set of counterpredicable terms—cannot contain any non- 
substantial terms; a fortiori, (S°) cannot contain infinitely many non- 
substantial terms. (Note that “quality” in this argument stands for any of 
the non-substantial categories of predicate.) 

83°39: “Hither a term. ..”: we now return to the main argument. Con- 
sider the sequence of predications: 
(2) aay An+2aB, An+14B, A,aB, ane 

Aristotle urges (a) that (2) cannot be infinite if the predications in it are 
essential (83°39—"10), and (b) that (£) cannot be infinite if the predi- 
cations in it are incidental (‘‘Nor is anything . . .”: 83°r0—12). Argument 
(a) is an elaboration of the argument at 82°37~8371. Aristotle claims, 
mistakenly, that the argument excludes a downward as well as an up- 
ward infinity of predicates. 

83°1: “...of what is predicated’: i.e. of the subject. For this use of 
“predicate” see A 4, 73°17, and note. 

$3°9: ‘‘Terms will not be counterpredicated . . .”: i.e. in terms of (Sg), 
it cannot be the case that GjaG; if j < i (a species cannot be predicated 
of its genus). This is perhaps true—but what is its function in the 
economy of Aristotle’s argument? I cannot discover any role for it, and 
I lamely enclose it within parentheses. 

83°10: ‘Nor is anything ...”: the text is elliptical (there is no verb ex- 
plicit in the Greek), and it is also ambiguous. I construe it as expressing 
what I have called argument (b), thus ‘(Or else, (b), the predicates in 
(£) are accidental. But in that case the sequence cannot be infinite;) for 
nothing at all is predicated—i.e. predicated simpliciter—of accidents.’ 

83°13: “They will not be...”: ‘Every A; is either an incidental or an 
essential predicate; every sequence of essential predications is finite, and 
there is only a finite number of kinds of incidental predicate: therefore, 
(2) is finite in the upward direction.’ This appears to be the argument; 
but there are two puzzling features about it. First, the fact that the 
number of kinds of predicate (of ‘categories’) is finite is irrelevant: even 
if there were infinitely many categories (and hence infinitely many in- 
cidental predicates), it would not follow that any sequence of predi- 
cations could be infinite. Secondly, it is unclear how the paragraph 
attaches to its predecessor. In so far as Aristotle says that the sequence 
will not be infinite in the upward direction, we might be inclined to infer 
that he has just shown that it will not be infinite in the downward 
direction. (And we shall be more strongly so inclined if we translate oud’ 
by “...in the upward direction either’. But oude need not bear this 
sense: see e.g. 84°22.) But nothing in the previous paragraph relates to 
the downward rather than to the upward direction—indeed, as I have 

178 

COMMENTARY 83°13 

said, it is precisely the downward direction for which Aristotle has not 
argued. (No doubt there cannot be a downward sequence of incidental 
predications, since every natural predication has a substance in subject 
position. But the downward sequence of essential predications has not 
been closed off.) 

83°17: The paragraph repeats some salient points of its predecessors, 
and prepares the way for the final statement of the argument. 

83°18: “items... are not predicated of themselves”: i.e. a sentence 
such as “The white thing is white’ does not express a natural predi- 
cation. White is not predicated ‘of itself’: rather, ‘““The white thing is 
white” is true in so far as ‘something different’ (some substance) is 
white. Cf. Top A 9, 105°35-9. 

83°19: “though some hold of things in themselves”: for ‘in itself inci- 
dentals’ see p. 113. 

83°22: “We posit nothing. ..”: i.e. ‘For in the case of every incidental 
predicate J, there are Js only in so far as for some substance-term S, S is 
I~-i.e. only in so far as J is predicated of something other than an I- 
term.’ (At 83°24 the MSS reading is untenable, but the sense is clear.) 

83°24: This concludes argument (A). Strangely enough, in the enunci- 
ation of the conclusion Aristotle omits the crucial word “‘infinitely”’. 

83°26: “‘the incidentals .. .”: this closes off the downward path: if X is 
Y is an incidental predication, then X is a substance-term; thus the 
downward series from X is Y (Z is X, A is Z,...} consists solely 
of substantial predications, and hence of essential predications. And 
essential predications are finite. 

83°27: ‘and in the upward direction . . .”’: this picks up the argument of 
8312-17. 

83°28: Aristotle’s statement of the general conclusion to the argument 
is itritatingly obscure. With some hesitation, I take him to mean this. 
‘Hence (a) ‘“‘there must be some term. ..’’, i.e. there must be immediate 
predications,... Dak, EaF,...[for, as A 20 has argued, if sequences 
are limited in the upward and in the downward directions, then there 
cannot be infinitely many terms in between]; and (b) ‘“‘this must come to 
a stop”, i.e. the sequence of immediate predications cannot extend ad 
infinitum in either direction; or in other words (bi) ‘there must be 
items. ..”, i.e. each sequence will have a last item, YaZ, such that Z is 
not predicated of anything, and (bii) there must be items “of which 
nothing else...”’, i.e. each sequence will have a first item, AaB, such 
that nothing is predicated of A.’ But it is not easy to read (bii) into the 
Greek. An alternative gloss on the last clause: ‘...or in other words 
(b*) there must be a term A, predicated of B, such that (i) A is not 
predicated of anything prior to B [AaB is primitive] and (ii) nothing is 
predicated of A’. This second interpretation is closer to the Greek; but it 
omits any mention of a /ast item in the sequence. 

179 

83°32 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

83°32: Argument (B). The gist of the argument, which has connections 
with 4 3, is this. Suppose an infinite sequence of propositions: 
Pi Pays Pinot. 

—where each P; is prior to its predecessor. Then each P; is demon- 
strable (‘‘there will be demonstrations of all of them’’: 84*2). Hence you 
know that P; only if you have demonstrated that P; on the basis of P;+;. 
Hence you must know that P;,,. Hence you must have demonstrated 
that P;, 1. Hence you know that P; only if you have demonstrated each 
of the infinite sequence of P;s. But this is impossible. Hence if there is 
any demonstrative knowledge, then not every (S) is infinite. (See 4 3, 
7255-18.) Aristotle cannot, of course, conclude that no (S) is infinite; 
nor even that if there is demonstration no (S) is infinite. 

83°38: “‘simpliciter and not on the basis of something else”: cf. 4 3, 
72°15, notes. 

841: “the predicates in between’: 1 paraphrased Aristotle’s argu- 
ment in terms of the priority of propositions; it is more complicated if 
expressed praperly in terms of the priority of predicates. AaC is demon- 
strable only if~4X) (AaX & XaC); and the supposition of the argu- 
ment, strictly expressed, is that there are infinitely many terms between 
A and C. 

84°7: Argument (C). Finally, the ‘analytic’ argument (cf. 4 21, 82°35, 
notes). In fact (C) is not an independent argument, for it uses the con- 
clusion of (A) at 84°26; and it is non-‘general’ only in so far as it refers to 
the fact that demonstrative propositions are I-predications. 84*19—25 
argues that there cannot be infinite sequences of I2-predicates, and 
84°25-6 argues that there cannot be infinite sequences of I1-predicates. 
The argument for I1-predicates consists merely in a reference to argu- 
ment (A), 82°37-83"1. 

The argument for I2-predicates is more complex. It seems to run like 
this: Take a sequence of I2-predicates: 

(Si) Tide, Sleedinss. 

Each J; inheres in the definition of J;,,; inhering in is clearly transitive, 
so that (Vi) (Vj) (j <i— J, imheres in the definition of /;). But then if 
(Si) is infinitely long, there will be infinitely many things inhering in the 
definition of one thing; but this is not possible (presumably, again, for 
the reasons given at 82°37—83°1). 

This argument is invalid: every J; will have finitely many predecessors. 
Philoponus saw this and suggested that Aristotle meant only that it is not 
possible for 7, to have infinitely many predicates, which it would have 
were (Si) infinite (at 84222 Philoponus read “hold of a single item” for 
“hold in a single item’’); but this replaces an invalid argument with no 
argument at all. Aristotle could have presented a valid argument against 
the downward infinity of (Si): since each /; contains all its predecessors, 
it can only have finitely many predecessors (again by 82°37—83"1). It is 

180 

COMMENTARY 84°7 

therefore tempting to change the text at 84°22 to read “‘they will not be 
infinite in the downward direction” (katé for and); but this is ruled out 
by 84726-8. 

84°20: “and if this is prime, number .. .”: J, is number, 1, odd (i.e. odd 
or even, since the Js convert), and J; prime (i.e. prime or composite: cf. 
A 4, 73°40); then J, inheres in everything which holds of J;. This, I take 
it, is Aristotle’s rather cumbersome way of indicating that inhering in 
is transitive. (This interpretation punctuates after préton (Philoponus). 
Most scholars punctuate before proton; ‘and if this is so, then, first, 
number. ..”’.) 

84°23: “‘Moreover, they must ...”: by construction J,a/;_;; but J;_; is in 
the definition of J;, so that Jj_ ial; hence every I,al; converts. (On ‘ex- 
ceeding’, huperteinein, see Bonitz, 793°17-19.) But if the content of this 
sentence is clear, its function in the argument is opaque (see MIGNUCCI 
(1975), 492-3). 

84°25: Aristotle’s argument assumes that all the I1-predicates of a 
term inhere in its definition. 

84°28: “Hence they will come to a stop in the downward direction 
too”: this does not follow (see notes to 82°37). 

84°29: “And if so...”: by the argument of 4 20. 

$4232: ‘‘as we asserted at the beginning”: 4 3, 72°6-7. 

84°32: ‘For if there are principles... .”: if we take the text au pied de la 
lettre Aristotle argues that if the terms are finite then there must be 

principles on the grounds that if there are principles then the terms are 
finite. 

84°36: “by interpolating. ..”: cf. 4 12, 78714, notes. 

None of the arguments in 4 22 is successful; and they cannot be refor- 
mulated in such a way as to furnish a proof of Aristotle’s contention. 
The fundamental insight from which Aristotle starts is the thesis that 
proofs can have only finitely many steps. But in 4 22 he makes or implies 
far bolder claims than this; for he supposes first that there are only 
finitely many things capable of proof, and secondly that there are only 
finitely many truths. Consideration of the infinite sequence of true and 
provable propositions in even elementary arithmetic is enough to dispose 
of these two bolder suppositions. 

CHAPTER 23 

84°3: From the conclusion of 4 22 Aristotle correctly infers: 

(1) It is not the case that: ((AaC & AaD & not-CaD & not-DaC) 
— (AX) (AaX & XaC & XaD)). 

The conjuncts not-CaD and not-DaC are needed, for otherwise C or D 
would itself be the common feature in virtue of which AaC & AaD (e.g. 

181 

84°3 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

2 R would belong both to triangle and to isosceles in virtue of triangle). 

84°15: ‘The terms must...”: ‘But C and D must belong to the same 
kind as one another, i.e. must be defined in terms of the same primitives 
(cf. A 10, 76°33, note), if there is a common item—a middle term 
B—such that BaC and BaD are I-predications’ (cf. 4 7). 

8419: Aristotle next infers that all mediated propositions are demon- 
strable and all immediate propositions principles. His argument supports 
neither of these views; and 4 13 shows that the first is false. 

$422: ‘either all of them or the universal ones”: there are in fact twice 
as many immediate premisses as middle terms, hence the strained paren- 
thesis. The ‘universal’ premiss, in this sense, is the premiss containing 
the most universal of the three terms, i.e. AaB; at A 25, 86°30, Aristotle 
repeats that this premiss (by itself) is the ‘principle’ of the demon- 
stration. (If this is right, then “either X or Y” here must mean “X—or 
rather, Y”’; see note on 8425.) 

84°23: ‘“‘this is the path to the principles”: the phrase is Platonic (cf. 
EN A 5, 1095°32); Aristotle means only that if AaB is immediate, it is a 
principle (cf. 84°26). 

84°25: “‘if there is either a middle or a prior term”. There is “a prior 
term (sc. than B) of which A does not hold” only in the case of Celarent. 
Thus it is probable, as Ross says, that Aristotle is thinking only of 
Celarent; and that here again “either X or Y” means ‘“‘X, or rather Y”’. 

84°26: “there are as many elements as terms”: i.e. as middle terms. 
84°31: 84°31-85*1 expand upon 84°r9-24; 8571-10 expand upon 
84°24-31. 

84°33: “No proposition and no term holding outside A”: the sense of 

“outside” here is obscure. What Aristotle says can be made true on the 
assumption that the following equivalence holds: 

(2) If AaB or AeB, then (i) C is outside A if and only if CaA, and 
(ii) C is outside B if and only if BaC. 

Ross in effect takes (2) to define ‘‘outside’’; it is more probable that 
Aristotle has some diagrammatic representation in mind, and that “‘out- 
side” refers literally to spatial position in the diagram. 

84°35: “‘they become indivisible and single’: AaB is single simpliciter 
just in case it cannot be ‘divided’ into two propositions AaX & XaB. The 
locution is not very felicitous in itself, and it encourages the fatuous 
comparisons with weight and pitch: just as the ounce, the ‘principle’ of 
weight, is not itself divisible into ounces, so the immediate proposition, 
the ‘principle’ (in a perfectly different sense) of deduction, is not ‘divis- 
ible’ into propositions. There is nothing in this comparison. (Aristotle’s 
point about measurement, however, is sound and simple: all measure- 
ment and counting requires a unit; this will differ materially from one set 
of measurables or countables to another, but it will have the same formal 

182 

COMMENTARY 84°35 

properties in all cases. Cf. Met A 6, 1016°17—24; I 1, 1052°24—1053714; 
N 1, 1087°33~1088714.) 

8571: First (85°1—7), Celarent: Aristotle says truly that the middle term 
may not fall outside A; he should have added that it may not fall outside 
B either; secondly (8527-10), Camestres: at 85°10, as at 85°3, “hold” is 
used neutrally; and thirdly (85?10-12), Cesare (see Ross). 

85°9: “and of no E”: the MSS add “or not of every (E)”, which Ross 
rightly excises. 

85°11: ‘‘the middle term will never pass outside. ..”: i.e. ‘The middle 
term will never be outside either B, the term of which we are to deny A 
(“of which we must make a privative predication’”’), or A, the term 
which is to be denied of B (‘“‘which we must predicate privatively”’).’ 

CHAPTER 24 

The three comparisons Aristotle sets himself to discuss at the beginning 
of this chapter occupy A 24, A 25, and 4 26. What Aristotle has in mind 
when he says that one demonstration is ‘better’ than another can only be 
gleaned from the arguments used to support his evaluations. 

85°13: Two terminological points need to be made. First, the terms 
“universal’’ and “particular” are used to make three distinctions: (a) that 
between syllogistic propositions of different ‘quantity—i.e. between a- 
and e-propositions on the one hand and i- and o-propositions on the 
other; (b) that between general and singular propositions; and (c) that 
between more general and more specific a- and e-propositions. Since 
Aristotle treats singular propositions as the limiting case of a- and e- 
propositions, he tends to conflate distinctions (b) and (c); and this 
conflation is evident in the present chapter. D, is a more universal 
demonstration than D, if either the conclusion of D; is more universal 
than that of Dz (e.g. 85°37—>1, 10-13) or the premisses of D,; are 
more universal than those of D, (e.g. 85°23-7; 85°27—-86°3). Aristotle 
switches without warning from one to the other of these notions. 

Secondly, e- and o-propositions, and demonstrations concluding to 
such propositions, are called indifferently negative (apophatiké) and 
privative (sterétiké);, a- and i-propositions, and demonstrations conclud- 
ing to them, are affirmative (kataphatiké) or positive (katégoriké). But 
demonstrations leading to a- and i-propositions are also called from time 
to time probative (deiktiké); this is peculiarly unfortunate since the term 
deiktiké is also used for ‘direct’ proofs as opposed to reductio argu- 
ments. Thus at 85°19 Aristotle says that, having treated the universal/ 
particular dispute, he will turn to “demonstrations which are said to 
prove (deiknunai)”’: this is naturally taken to mean ‘direct’ proofs; yet it 
is possible, and preferable, to refer the phrase to affirmative proofs—for 
then all three subjects for study are listed in their proper order. 

A 24 first cites two arguments for the superiority of particular over 

183 

85°13 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

universal proof; then rejects these arguments; and finally marshalls seven 
arguments for the superiority of universal proof. 

85°20: Argument (A‘). The illustrative example of Coriscus compares 
the following two situations: (i!) a! knows that Coriscus is musical; (ii) 
b! knows that a man (who is, at it happens, Coriscus) is musical. In this 
case a' knows Coriscus’ musical ability better than b'. The application of 
this to the example of the triangles should yield the following two 
situations: (i?) a* knows that isosceles triangles have 2 R; (ii) b* knows 
that triangles (which in fact include isosceles triangles) have 2 R. In this 
case a” knows the properties of isosceles triangles better than b*. And 
the generalization is straightforward: if (i°) a° knows that AaC, and (ii°) 
b° knows that AaB (where in fact BaC) then a°, who has the more 
particular knowledge, knows better—for he has better knowledge of the 
properties of Cs. 

85°31: Argument (B’) puts its conclusion differently from (A’): (A’) 
argued that it is better to have particular knowledge that P than to have 
universal knowledge that P; (B’) argues that it is better to know that P 
than to know that Q, where Q is on a higher plane of abstraction than P. 

85733: ‘‘a sort of natural object ...”: literally: “a sort of nature (phusis) 
... e.g. (a nature) of triangle . . .”. “Metaphorically and generally, every 
substance is called a nature, because nature is a sort of substance” (Met 
4 4, 1O15*I1—-13). 

85°38: “‘as...in the case of proportion”: cf. A 5, 74717-25, notes. 
Students of proportion theory are allegedly inclined to suppose that 
the magnitudes they talk about are somehow entities over and above 
numbers, lines, planes, etc. (cf. Met M 2, 1077°9-12, °17). The more 
general one’s proofs, the more numerous and the more abstract are the 
entities one feels tempted to postulate. 

85°4: Argument (A) tries to turn the tables on (A’): (A’) asserts that a” 
knows about / in its own right and not in virtue of something else, viz. T; 
Aristotle retorts that b? knows about R in its own right, in so far as it 
belongs to T as such. 

The generalization of the argument uses the odd phrase “know 
something as it holds” (ho eidds hekaston héi hekaston huparchei). | take 
it that ‘‘a knows A as A holds’? means ‘“‘a knows that AaZ, where A 
holds of Z as such”; but Aristotle does not express this with any great 
clarity. If this is right, Aristotle’s general point is this: a”s knowledge 
cannot be of something that holds of its subject as such, but bs know- 
ledge may be; thus by the principle that knowledge of something in itself 
is better than knowledge in virtue of something else, b° has the better 
knowledge. 

If I am right, Aristotle does not in fact succeed in turning the tables; 
for his argument does nothing to show that b° has better knowledge that 
AaC. Rather, he produces a point in favour of universal demonstration 

184 

COMMENTARY 85°10 

that roughly balances the first point in favour of particular demonstration. 

85°10: ‘Thus if triangle extends further. ..”: cf. A 4, 73°32-74°3. The 
conditions Aristotle states are not sufficient for R’s holding of T as such; 
he should conclude that “the isosceles, if anything, has such an angle- 
sum as triangle’’. 

85°15: Argument (B) makes two points against (B’). The first point at 
first sight reads like an avowal of Platonism. But the reference to what is 
‘imperishable’ (cf. A 6, 74°32-9; A 8) indicates the following gloss: 
genuinely universal propositions cannot change their truth-value and 
thus are more real than those particular propositions (i.e. singular 
propositions) that can. 

The second point is simpler: it is mistaken to infer from “‘‘F’ signifies 
some single feature in the objects to which it applies” to ‘“There exists 
some real object, F-ness”. And this inference is just as mistaken in the 
case of the terms used by the demonstrator as “in the case of those other 
items”—items such as colours and sizes. The presupposition of this 
argument is that the only thing about abstract demonstrations that might 
lead us to postulate universals is the fact that they talk about abstract 
things; and the argument is that this inducement is insufficient. On both 
counts Aristotle is right. 

85°23: Argument (C) claims that a deduction which uses AaB as a 
premiss is better than one which uses AaC as a premiss. 

The parenthetical argument for the explanatoriness of universal 
premisses is this: ‘A universal premiss is primitive, 1.e. immediate; but if 
AaB is immediate, then the only answer to the question: Why are Bs A? 
is: Because they are B. (B, of which A holds, is itself explanatory of its 
own being A: cf. 4 31, 88°7.) Thus if you want to know why Cs are A 
the answer which is most explanatory, because it gives the ultimate 
explanation, is that AaB.’ Here “universal”? does not have the meaning 
“seneral’’: if Aristotle is to attach the parenthesis to the main argument 
he needs two further premisses, first that primitive propositions are the 
most general propositions; and secondly, that if the most general pro- 
positions are the most explanatory, then if P is more general than Q, P is 
more explanatory than Q. 

8527: Argument (D) is presented as a new argument, though it is 
evidently closely tied to (C). It states quite clearly that knowing that P 
requires knowing the ultimate explanation of P (cf. A 13, 78°22, notes). 

As B 11 shows, Aristotle believes that the market-place example (for 
which cf. Phys B 5, 196°33—197°5) can be formulated within syllogistic, 
and that it is precisely parallel to the angle-sum example except in so far 
as it makes use of a different type of explanation. 

The theorem that the sum of the external angles of a polygon is 4 R 
(see B 17, 99°19) is not in Euclid, though it is standardly derived as a 
corollary of Pythagoras’ theorem (Euclid, i. 32: cf. Proclus, Comm in 
Eucl 382. 22-383. 16); Menaechmus proved it (Proclus, Comm in Eucl 
73. 1-4). 

185 

86°3 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

86°3: Argument (E). The ‘infinite’ items to which particular demon- 
stration tends are individuals (cf. €.g. Top B 2, 109 ®14); individuals are 
infinite in kind (cf. Phys 4 4, 187°7-9), ie. they are indeterminate in 
character: ‘“‘For if there is nothing apart from the particulars, and the 
particulars are infinite, how can one get understanding of the infinites? 
For we recognize everything in so far as it is one and the same and in so 
far as something universal holds of it’ (Met B 4, 999°26-9; cf. a 2, 
994” 20-7; F 5, 1010*25; Z 10, 1036°8). Aristotle thinks of individuals as 
in themselves bare particulars, devoid of all distinguishing properties; as 
individuals and infinite, things cannot be grasped; for to grasp something 
is to put it under a concept, to see it as an F. 

This correct point is the foundation of Aristotle’s argument; but the 
superstructure is built on its false shadow; for particular demonstrations 
do not tend to bare particulars—as a description becomes ever more 
specific it does not approach the nature of the bare particular. Nor does 
it follow from the fact that bare particulars cannot be known as such that 
the more abstract an argument is the better it is. 

It is worth noting that the sense in which ‘the infinite is unknowable’ in 
this passage is quite different from that of 4 22, 82° '37 (see notes); and a 
third way in which ‘the individual is unknowable’ is mentioned at Rhet 
A 2, 1356°30-3. 
86°5: ‘universal demonstrations tend to the simple” because principles 
are simple (A 23, 84°37); principles are ‘limits’ because there are no 
propositions ‘beyond’ them (there is a pun on peras, “limit”, and apeira, 
“infinites”’). 
86°9: “for correlative items...”: R* is a relative property if R* ao 
(Ax) (Rax); R*! and R*? are ‘correlative if (Ria <> (Ax) (R'ax)) & 
(R¥a o (Ax) (R’ax)) & R' is the converse of R*). Aristotle means that 
if R*! and R*? are correlative, then a is more R! to b if and only if b is 
more R? to a (a loves b more if and only if b is more loved by a.) The 
thesis only applies, to those relations which “admit the more and the 
less” (cf. Cat 7, 6°19-27): demonstrate and be demonstrated by admit 
the more and the less in so far as know and be known through do (see 

p. 102). 
86°10: Argument (F): See A 1, 71°24, notes; and below 86722-9. 

86°13: Argument (G) can be turned on its head. Suppose that AaB, 
BaC, CaD are all immediate; then Aristotle claims that AaB & BaD + 
AaD is “more exact” (akribés: see A 27) because it “proceeds from a 
principle”. But AaC & CaD| AaD equally “proceeds from a principle”’: 
in both demonstrations one premiss is an immediate principle and the 
other is at one remove from principlehood. Aristotle assumes without 
argument that it is better to have an immediate major premiss than an 
immediate minor. 

86°22: Argument (H) repeats and corrects (F); (D) and (F) are ‘gen- 
eral’ in the sense of 4 21, 82°35. 

186 

COMMENTARY 86°29 

86°29: Argument (J) is a jotting; presumably the thought is this: 
‘Demonstrations containing comprehensible propositions (i.e. proposi- 
tions known by comprehension or nous) are better than those containing 
propositions whose truth is apprehended by sense-perception. But the 
more universal a demonstration, the further from perception and the 
nearer to nous its propositions come.’ 

CHAPTER 25 

A 25 contains four arguments for the superiority of affirmative over 
negative demonstration. 

86°33: Argument (A), as it stands in the text, is embarrassingly bad: 
having shown that if D, has fewer premisses than D, then D, is prefer- 
able to Dz, the text observes that affirmative and negative demon- 
strations have equally many premisses, and infers that affirmative 
demonstration is the better. Only surgery can save Aristotle’s reputation: 
a bold sawbones will excise the “universal argument” at 8636-7, 
together with the false disjunction “postulates or suppositions or pro- 
positions” at 86°34. That leaves the following argument: D, is preferable 
to D, if it “depends on fewer items”’, i.e. if it makes fewer conceptual 
demands than D2. And probative deductions make fewer demands than 
privative ones; for the latter, as Aristotle points out, require the concept 
of negation. 

86°34: “postulates or suppositions or propositions”: cf. 4 10, 76°23-34. 
If the disjunction is Aristotelian, it probably only means “fewer pro- 
positions of whatever sort”. 

862: “Thus that A holds of D...”: AaD and AaE are “on a level” in 
that each depends on three premisses. 

865: ‘that through which... is more convincing”: cf. 4 2, 7229-32, 
notes. 

86°10: Argument (B): see A 21; and, for the terminology of ‘increasing’, 
A 14, 79°29. 
86°10: “we have proved”: cf. APr A 7, 2971929; 24, 416-31. 

86°15: “it is impossible .. .”: Aristotle states a trivial consequence of 
his syllogistic; but he undoubtedly has a more complicated consequence 
in mind. Suppose that a deduction in Celarent is to be increased. The 
first stage of the increase will consist of two syllogisms, one in Barbara 
and one (e.g.) again in Celarent. The next stage of increase will consist 
of four syllogisms, three in Barbara and one in (e.g.) Celarent. And in 
general, the n-th stage will contain 2” syllogisms and thus 2 x 2” or 2”*1 
premisses; of these premisses (2”*! — 1) will be affirmative and only one 
negative. 

86°23: “‘the same holds for the other deductions’: i.e. for Camestres 
and Cesare (but see Ross). 

187 

86°28 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

86°28: “‘privative demonstrations .. .”: the Greek is elliptical, no noun 
being expressed. Grammar allows “propositions” to be supplied after 
“privative’’, and logic encourages this supplement. But the consequent 
of the conditional shows that ‘“‘demonstrations”’ is the correct supple- 
ment; thus we must take “prove” loosely—D, is ‘proved through’ D> if 
D,’s conclusion is a premiss of Dj. 

86°30: Argument (C) is virtually identical with (A), if my interpretation 
of 86°36—°g is right. If “universal immediate propositions” refers to the 
major premiss, then the argument applies to Celarent and Cesare but not 
to Camestres. Probably Aristotle is thinking only of first figure syllogisms. 
Affirmation is prior to negation (cf. Int 5, 17°8; Cael B 3, 28625) 
in that we cannot understand a negation unless we understand the 
corresponding affirmation; for we cannot understand not-P unless we 
understand P (“just as being the case is prior to not being the case”’). 

86°37: Argument (D) is a jotting; it is hard to see how it could swell 
into a different argument from its predecessors. 

CHAPTER 26 

A single argument shows the preferability of negative over reductive 
argument; contrast Top @ 2, 157°34—6. 

87°3: The reductio which is compared to a direct proof in Celarent 
seems to be invalid. We are to prove that AeB (87°7), and so “‘we should 
assume that it does hold” (87°8)—i.e. AaB. AaB & BaC yield AaC, but 
the impossibility of AaC then licenses only AoB and not AeB; if, on the 
other hand, we assume AiB, AaC is not deducible. Aristotle himself 
makes both these points explicitly at APr B 11, 61°23—30, in the course 
of a long discussion on the relation of indirect to direct proof (B t1-14). 
His error here is explained, though not excused, by the fact that APst 
often limits its interest to universal propositions, and hence treats AaB 
and AeB as exhaustive alternatives (see p. 146). 
Let us suppose, then, that the two arguments to be compared are: 

(1) AeB, BaCt AeC; 
(2) AeC, BaC. Not-AeBt AaB.+ AaC.+ AeB 

—where (2) uses reductio. In (1) and (2) the arrangement of the terms 
into propositions is the same (87°12); thus preference between (1) and 
(2) must be based on the arrangement of the propositions in them. Since 
(1) is a demonstrative syllogism its premisses are prior to its conclusion 
(A 2, 71 >30); thus (2) uses as a premiss a proposition—AeC—which is 
posterior to its conclusion. Hence (2) is inferior to (1). 

Aristotle’s argument does not turn on the nature of reductio as such: it 
shows that any argument proving one of the premisses of a demon- 
stration by way of its conclusion is inferior to the demonstration itself; it 
does not show that every reductio must bear this relation to some 

188 

COMMENTARY 87°3 

demonstration. (For that, Aristotle might have appealed to APr 

B II-14.) 

87°15: ‘‘the conclusion (that it is not the case) is more familiar’: i.e. 

‘AeC (the genuine conclusion: 87°20—2) is more familiar to us than AeB 

(“the proposition in the deduction’”’)’. Or possibly we sneue translate: 
“that the conclusion is not the case is more familiar’, i.e. ‘that AaC, the 
‘conclusion’ of the reductio syllogism, is false is more ‘familiar to us. 

(cf. APr B 14, 62°35-7). 

87°21: “For if it follows. ..”: You might object: ‘Both (1) and (2) are 
sound arguments (let us grant), and the premisses of an argument are 
prior to its conclusion; hence in both cases the ordering of the pro- 
positions is perfectly proper.’ Aristotle should answer by stating that 
only in some valid arguments do premisses and conclusion stand in the 
relevant priority relation (cf. A 13); instead he tries to argue that (2) 
does not really contain premisses and conclusion at all. For the apparent 
premisses of (2) are not “related as whole to part or part to whole”. 
Aristotle sometimes uses this phrase in such a way that the premisses of 
all valid inferences must stand as part to whole or whole to part (see esp. 
APr A 41, 49°37~50°2; cf. 25, 4278-12; 32, 47710-14). Does Aristotle 
then mean to imply that all reductio arguments are invalid? The answer 
to this question should emerge from 87°24—5, where Aristotle specifies 
which items in the reductio fail to satisfy the part-whole condition. The 
MSS give: “The propositions AC and AB”; but these two propositions 
do not appear as (apparent) premisses in argument (2). I once suggested 
reading ‘““The propositions BC and AB”: Aristotle is then alluding to the 
derivation of AaC from AaB and BaC, and he means that AaB and BaC 
do not stand in the part—whole relation inasmuch as AaB is false. The 
OCT reads “The propositions AC and BC”; for AeC and BaC are 
indeed the (apparent) premisses on which AeB depends in argument (2). 
I now follow this reading—but without confidence, for AeC and BaC are 
the premisses of Felapton so that their presence can hardly mark an 
argument as invalid. See further STRIKER (1977), 317~18. 

CHAPTER 27 

“exact” translates akribés. The adjective is a favourite of Aristotle’s 
(Bonitz, 27°43-28°47), and he applies it to the senses (e.g. An B 9g, 
421°12), the intellect (e.g. Top Z 4, 141°13), units of measurement (e.g. 
Met I 1, 1053"1), definitions (e.g. Cael A 9, 279°29), and arguments (e.g. 
Rhet B 22, 1396°33- °3). Aristotle himself glosses the word by “‘clear” 
(saphés: Top B 4, 111°9); and in general being akribés seems to amount 
(vaguely enough) to being of good epistemic quality. In some contexts, 
the relevant quality is certainty; in others, rigour; in others, exactness or 
precision. In the first edition I translated akribés in a heterodox fashion 
by “certain”; but this, I now think, is misleading (see BURNYEAT (1981), 

189 

87°31 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

II5 n. 35), and I prefer the more orthodox “exact”. (Yet, in truth, I 
doubt if the notion of akribeia is itself very exact.) 

The view that the sciences differ in exactitude runs throughout 
Aristotle’s thought (see esp. EN A 3, 1094°11-27); its source is to be 
found at the end of Plato’s Philebus (56° seqq). See KULLMANN (1974), 
122-32; G.-G. GRANGER (1976), 312-15. 

A 27 offers three criteria for comparative exactness: (i) on the dis- 
tinction between sciences ‘of the fact’ and sciences both ‘of the fact’ and 
‘of the reason why’ see 4 13, 7839-79713, and notes. (ii) On sciences 
whose objects are not “said of an underlying subject” see p. 161. Cf. Met 
& 3, 995°15—16: “Mathematical exactitude of argument (akribologian) is 
not to be sought in all things, but in those which do not have matter” (cf. 
Cael I 7, 306°27). (iii) ‘Additional posit”, prosthesis, is the opposite of 
“abstraction”’, aphairesis: see Bonitz, 646°13—19; for the connection with 
exactness cf. Met A 2, 982°25-8; M 3, 1078°9-14 (where exactness is 
associated with simplicity). 

Elsewhere Aristotle mentions at least two further criteria: (iv) a 
science is less exact if its theorems hold only ‘for the most part’: EN A 3, 
1094°11—27; 15, 1112°1—g9. (v) At 4 24, 86716- 17, one demonstration is 
said to be more exact than another if its premisses are closer to the 
principles of the science (cf. EN Z 7, 1141°16-18). 

Criterion (iv) derives from (ii) (cf. e.g. GA 4 10, 778°4—-9); criterion 
(v) perhaps grounds (i). The criteria are held together, in a loose way, 
by the notion of priority (cf. 87°31): one science, S;, is prior to another, 
55, if S; in some way depends upon S,; and each of (i)—(v) expresses a 
mode of dependence. And if S, depends on S,, then there is a sense in 
which S, might be thought to be of better epistemic quality than S,: any 
good qualities which Sz has will derive from S,, and the good qualities 
will tend to dissipate in the course of the derivation. (This is a miserably 
flabby Mouene but I can find nothing less flabby in the text.) 

87°36: “a point a substance having position”: for the definition see 
Bonitz, 701°25-9; according to Proclus it is Pythagorean (Comm in Eucl 
95. 21; ef. Heath (1), i. 155-8). 

CHAPTER 28 

With 4 28 cf. A 7. 

87°38: ‘‘whatever items come from the primitives”: i.e. derived terms 
(cf. A 10, 76732, notes; for the verb sugkeitai see B 13, 96°21; Met A 25, 
1023°19—23). 

87°39: “‘parts or attributes of them in themselves”: ‘“‘them” may refer 
either to the primitive or to the derived terms. For the sense of “parts” 
see Met A 25, 1023°23: “Again, the items in the account which makes a 
thing clear are also parts of the whole’. Thus the “‘or” is epexegetic— 
“parts” means “attributes in themselves’. The “whatever...” clause is 
presumably explanatory of the notion of a kind; here, then, a kind 

190 

COMMENTARY 87°39 

is determined by its subject: -terms and by its predicate- -terms. This is 
singular: cf. e.g. 4 7, 75°42; Met B 2, 997°21; I 2, 1003°20; J 4, 1055731. 

87°40: ‘One science is different from another”: the text is usually read 
as asserting that S, # S, if and only if 4 (4Q) (Q > ™ & Q> J) 
—where //; is the set of principles of S;. But then difference between 
sciences is explained by reference to axioms, while identity is explained 
by reference to terms. Perhaps the relation of depending on is to be 
taken not as deducible from but as constructed from—i.e. as a relation 
between propositions and the terms they contain. Thus S, # S, if and 
only if the terms in 77, differ from those in /7J>. Since theorems cannot 
introduce new terms this condition amounts to saying that S, # Sy, if and 
only if the terms of S, differ from those of S,; and this is the con- 
tradictory of the identity criterion. 

87°: ‘There is evidence for this...”: It is hard to get a clear argu- 
ment from the text; perhaps Aristotle means this: ‘Suppose there are two 
putatively distinct sciences S$; and S$, with principles 47, and /7, and 
theorems 7, and T>. Then if all the items in 7) are in the same kind as 
one another, 7; is in the same kind as /7,. Similarly for T>. And if J, 
and /7, are different in kind, then S; and S, are distinct sciences.’ 

CHAPTER 29 

Aristotle shows only that there can be several valid arguments for the 
same conclusion, not that there can be several demonstrations of the 
same fact; the latter thesis entails that there may be several explanations 
for the same fact: how far this can be the case is discussed in B 16-18. 

87°6: “non-continuous middle terms from the same chain’’: X is “‘non- 
continuous” (mé. .. suneches) in relation to AaB if AaX and XaB are 
not both immediate. On chains cf. 4 15, 79°7, note. 

874; “but also... from different chains’: the two chains are A, D, B 
and A, G, B, where not-DaG and not-GaD. As 87°14 notes, the chains 
must overlap (cf. 4 15, 79°11, note) since (AY) (DaX & GaX)— 
whence, by Darapti, DiG. 

87°8: “E.g. let A be altering...”: the Platonic analysis of pleasure 
(EN H 11, 1152° 13: cf. e.g. Tim 64°; Phil 42°) is rejected in EN (cf. H 
12, 1152°25- 1153° 175 K 3, 1173°29—°20); it is used illustratively again at 
e.g. Rhet A 11, 1369°33. “Alter” (metaballein) and “change” (Kineisthai) 
are normally used interchangeably (but cf. Phys E 5, 229°30—-2, 11-14). 
It is not clear why coming to rest is not a species of change on this 
account. 

87°16: “Inquire in how many ways...”: for similar memoranda see 
APr A 21, 67°26; 26, 69°38; Top 1 6, a 5: etc. 

CHAPTER 30 

On chance see Phys B 4-6; EE © 2 = H 14; Rhet A 5, 1362*1-12. 
Demonstrations of what holds for the most part are discussed at B 12, 

IgI 

87°19 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

96°8~19 (see notes; cf. APr 4 27, 43°32~—6; Rhet A 2, 1356°16-18; 
1357'22—32). 

For Aristotle’s argument, see 4 6, 75°4-—7. There is a more general 
argument at Met E 3, 1026°27—1027°28, which purports to establish that 
there cannot be any sort of understanding of what is incidental or by 
chance. 

87°24: “if they hold for the most part, so too does the conclusion’”’: the 
notion of ‘what holds for the most part’ is of some importance in the 
Aristotelian scheme of things—in the world of sublunary nature, and 
also in the world of human practice, many things hold not always and 
invariably but only for the most part. Yet the notion raises difficulties. 
First, Aristotle categorically states that the objects of scientific knowledge 
are all necessary: if a understands that P, then it is necessary that P. But 
the objects of scientific knowledge include many items which happen ‘for 
the most part’, and what happens (only) for the most part does not 
happen by necessity. Aristotle must either relax his requirement that the 
objects of understanding be necessary, or else revise his view that many 
items in nature hold only for the most part. (KULLMANN (1974), 273-7, 
urges that what holds for the most part is necessary in so far as it is 
natural; but it is hard to reconcile this view with the Aristotelian texts.) 

Secondly, it is far from clear how we are to construe the notion of 
something’s holding ‘for the most part’. (1) “For the most part” is 
sometimes contrasted with ‘“‘every”, so that it is tempting to take it as a 
plural quantifier: “For the most part, As are B”’ will be true if and only if 
most As are B. See e.g. HA E 14, 545°14-18; PA I 2, 663°28. (2) “For 
the most part” is often contrasted with “always”, so that it is tempting to 
construe it in temporal terms: “For the most part, P”’ will be true if and 
only if ‘“P” is true for most of the time. See e.g. APst B 12, 96718—22; 
Top E 1, 129°6-16; Phys B 5, 196°10. (3) “For the most part” is 
frequently contrasted with “‘necessarily” (e.g. Int 9, 19718-22; APr A 13, 
32°5—10; Top B 6, 112°1—g) and assimilated to “‘possibly” (e.g. APr 4 3, 
25°14-15; A 13, 32°4~-11), so that it is tempting to read it as a sort of 
modal operator; and since it is often associated with “naturally” (e-8. 
APr A 3, 25°14; A 13, 32°4-13; Top E 5, 134°7-11; GA 4 19, 727°293 
4 8, 777°19—21) it might seem that “For the most part, P”’ will be true if 
and only if (say) it is a natural but not a necessary fact that P. These 
three interpretations are mutually incompatible; each fits some of the 
Aristotelian texts well; none fits all the Aristotelian texts. Aristotle’s 
immediate successors were apparently unhappy with what he said about 
‘for the most part’ propositions; and no later commentator has been able 
to produce a coherent interpretation. (See e.g. MIGNUCCI (1981); also 
Barnes, 133-6; MIGNUCCI (1975), 585-9I; BARNES (1982). The best 
attempt to find a coherent doctrine in Aristotle is in JuUDSON (1991): 
he argues that interpretation (1) is correct, denying that any passages 
unequivocally support (2) (84 n. 26) and urging that the equivalence 
on which (3) is based is substantive and not definitional (82 n. 23; 
95-8).) 

192 

COMMENTARY 87°24 

At 87°24 Aristotle claims that ‘for the most part’ premisses entail a 
‘for the most part’ conclusion. The claim is false on interpretation (1): 
“Most Cs are B” and “Most Bs are A” do not together entail ““Most Cs 
are A”—they do not even entail “Some Cs are A’. (Most centenarians 
are women, and most women are under 70.) The claim is also false on 
interpretation (2). If, say, “AaB” and ‘“‘BaC” are each true for most of 
the time, it follows that ‘““AaC” is true for some of the time, but it does 
not follow that it is true for most of the time. (If “AaB” is true on 
Mondays to Fridays, and “‘BaC”’ is true on Wednesdays to Sundays, then 
“AaC”’ will be true on Wednesdays to Fridays.) Finally, if Aristotle’s 
claim is interpreted in style (3), it may well seem to have some plausibi- 
lity. But in the absence of a clear analysis of what it is for something to 
hold ‘by nature’, we can say no more than that. 

CHAPTER 31 

With A 31 compare 4 18 and B 19. The general line of argument is clear, 
despite the suspicion that “universal” vacillates between ‘‘universally 
quantified proposition” and “universal property’: perception cannot 
constitute knowledge since if P truly reports a perception it must contain 
singular terms (references to particular individuals, times and places) 
and hence cannot be universal in the fashion required for understanding. 

87°29: ‘even if perception is of what is such and such’: “And similarly 
perception is affected by what has colour or flavour or sound—but not as 
each of them is called but as such and such” (An B 12, 424°21-4; cf. 6, 
418°20-5; APst B 19, 100°15). When, e.g., I see the son of Diares, the 
proper object of my perception is a coloured thing of such and such a 
shape. We see individuals incidentally; i.e. to see a is to see an F (where 
F is some sensible quality) which in fact is a. Thus perception is, in a 
sense, ‘of the universal’; and so (one might infer) reports of perception 
may encapsulate knowledge. Aristotle rejects the final inference, but his 
rejection relies on a tenuous distinction between having perception of X 
and perceiving X. His answer should be something like this: ‘Although a 
strictly correct reply to the question ‘““What are you perceiving?” must be 
of the form “an F’’ or perhaps “‘That F’’ and cannot be of the form ‘“‘a”’ 
(where “a” is a proper name), nevertheless any proposition reporting 
the contents of your perception must contain or imply some reference to 
individual objects, times, or places; and this must be so because the act 
of perception is necessarily tied to some individual time and place.’ 

87°35: ‘“‘even if we could perceive .. .”: Aristotle’s point is not that one 
cannot perceive mathematical objects at all (see p. 86), but that such 
perception, no less than perception of physical objects, can only be 
reported by sentences containing singular terms. 

87°37: ‘as some people say”: Zabarella refers to Heracliteans, Ross to 
Protagoras; but there is no good evidence for any identification. 

87°39: Since perception cannot yield universal propositions it cannot 

193 

87°39 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

yield explanations (cf. Met 4 1, 981°10—13); for to explain (Aristotle 
implies) is to subsume under some universal law. For the example see 
B 2, 90°26. 

88°2: “Nevertheless, if we observed...”: the ascent to explanation 
appears to have three stages: first, we simply observe several eclipses of 
the moon; then we hunt for what is common to all these cases, and thus 
adopt a universal proposition; and finally we formulate a demonstration 
using this universal proposition. At 88°11 Aristotle says that the hunting 
is not always necessary, and B 2 says that it is not so in the eclipse case. 

88°7: “which have an explanation. ..”: 

” 

: i.e. cases in which X is Y 
because it is Z (where Z # X); & A 24, 85°25, note. 

88*10: “unless you say that...”: cf. Met B 5, 999°3; APst A 10, 76°38, 
note. 
88711: ‘“‘Nevertheless, certain features. ..”: although perception is not 

a sufficient condition for knowledge, it is (as A 18 argued) a necessary 
condition—and gaps in our knowledge may be explicable by deficiencies 
in perception. It is, of course, impossible to provide genuine illustrations 
of such cases; and Aristotle’s example must be taken hypothetically: ‘If 
we could see the internal structure of glass—which might, perhaps, turn 
out to be porous—then we would know why light passes through it.’ 
(For the example see B 11, 94°28-31; cf. Empedocles frag. 84; [Probl] 
IA 58, 905°2—9; KE 9, 939710-15. The OCT has Aristotle refer to the 
properties of a burning-glass.) 

88716: “even if we see...”: i.e. ‘If we could see the internal struc- 
ture we should be able to grasp the explanation—even though we see 
each particular case separately and yet must grasp them all together in 
comprehending a universal fact.’ (The commentators take hama, “at 
a single time’, to mean “‘at the same time (sc. as the seeing)”. But 
sense, syntax, and the contrast with ‘“‘separately”, chdris, favour my 
interpretation.) 

CHAPTER 32 

The issue in 4 32 goes back to Plato’s Republic (511°), which describes 
the vision of a unified science all of whose theorems are derived from a 
single principle (cf. 4 9, 76*16-25; Met A 9, 992°24; A 4, 1070°5). 
Conceivably some Platonizing mathematicians had tried to realize this 
vision in the context of their own science (Solmsen, 111-12; but see 
Cherniss, 73 n. 55). 

The thesis that “‘all deductions have the same principles” is open to 
more than one interpretation: the arguments “in general terms” (cf. 
A 21, 82°34) seem to be aimed against: 

(1) There is a consistent set of principles 77, such that every proposi- 
tion whatever is deducible from /7,. 

This is certainly false, and certainly not a fair formulation of Plato’s 

194 

COMMENTARY 88718 

vision. When Aristotle leaves the ‘general’ arguments and turns to argue 
“on the basis of what we have laid down (sc. in the earlier part of 
APst)” (88°30), it is hard to know what he is attacking. Perhaps he has 
in mind something like: 

(2) There is a coherent set of principles /7, such that all scientific 
truths are deducible from /7). 

A 32 first offers seven arguments against (1) and (2); and then deals 
with three reinterpretations of the Platonic thesis. 

88°19: Argument (A): By “true (false) deduction” Aristotle means 
“deduction with a true (false) conclusion” (cf. Top I 18, 176°31~-3). 
Thus Aristotle wants to infer the falsity of (1) from the fact that some 
deducible propositions are true and others false. He relies on the prin- 
ciple that “every false conclusion proceeds from falsehoods, whereas 
true conclusions proceed from truths’. But the second part of this prin- 
ciple is false, as APr B 2-4 shows—and 88*20 acknowledges its falsity. 
Nor is it true, as 88°20—6 argues, that any chain of syllogisms whose last 
member has false premisses and a true conclusion can contain at most 
one true proposition. Aristotle’s argument relies on the principle that if 
the conclusion of a syllogism is false, then so are both its premisses. The 
principle is false, as APr B 2-4 knows. 

88°27: Argument (B) correctly observes that there are pairs of pro- 
positions whose members are incompatible with one another and both 
false. This disproves (1); it is surprising that under (A) Aristotle did not 
note that a truth and a falsity might be incompatible. 

88°30: Argument (C) in effect urges that /72 in (2) cannot be the axioms 
of any given science (cf. 4 7). “Principles” here seems to denote pri- 
mitive terms. Take the subject terms of any two sciences, say arithmetic 
and geometry, hierarchically arranged (see p. 119): 

(Za) A, A Babs ty Bag Ady EAE cts Ab 

(2g) G, GS, CIRO, G1 eae Co atreemnine 61 (at Can 6h 
Suppose that we have to prove some ae theprenh: of the form 
XaGi, from arithmetical principles. Then G} must attach to (Xa): it may 

do so in one of three ways (I simplify slightly): (i)..., A, Gi, 

Abyiy.. ... (“as a middle term’’); (ii)... , Ag, Gj (“from below”); (iii) Gi. 
A,.. (“from above’’). (The fourth possibility, ‘ ‘or else some of the 
terms...”, is the conjunction of (i) and (iii); Aristotle is thinking of 

the general case in which all geometrical theorems are proved from 
the principles of arithmetic, so that every Gj must attach to (Za). For the 
terminology see A 19, 81°40; 23, 84° 33, notes. ) Now if every G; attaches 
to (Xa) in this way, then for every T, in (Xa) and every T, in (Sg) either 
T,aT, or T,aT,. (By “X attaches to Y” (epharmottein: “cf. A 7, 75°4) 
Aristotle must mean “‘XaY or YaX”’.) But “unit” is in (Xa), and ‘‘point”’ 
in (2g), yet these terms are not tied together by the a-relation. 

If some 7, does not attach to (Xg), then some arithmetical truth cannot 
be derived from geometrical principles; and if some 7, does not attach to 

195 

88°30 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

any science other than (a), then there is some arithmetical truth which 
cannot be derived within any science other than arithmetic. Hence not 
all truths can be derived from the same set of principles. The weakness 
of Aristotle’s argument is the general weakness of his individuation of 
the sciences: it is not at all plain what the criteria for a scientific genus or 
kind are. Take the axioms of geometry and those of botany, and form 
their conjunction. From this conjunctive axiom-set, all the theorems of 
geometry and of botany can be derived. Why does this not constitute a 
new science? Plainly, because the conjoined set of axioms is not unified 
or coherent—it does not stick to a single kind. But then Aristotle owes 
us an account of unification or coherence. (Take a set of principles, 7, 
and the set of theorems, T, which are derivable from them. Suppose that 
both /7 and T can be divided into two exhaustive and exclusive subsets, 
1, and 11,, T, and T>, such that all the items in 7, derive from /7, and all 
the items in 7, derive from /J2: could we say that /7 lacks coherence 
under these conditions and only under these conditions?) 

88°36: Argument (D) claims that /7, cannot consist solely of common 
principles. Aristotle is usually taken to say that in addition to common 
principles every proof needs some ‘proper’ principles (cf. 4 10, 76737—2); 
alternatively he may mean to recall his view that the common principles 
have to be tailored to fit the genus to which they are being applied (cf. 
A 10, 76°37—°2). But neither of these interpretations fits the text well. 
Rather, Aristotle argues that some of the principles in any science will be 
restricted to items in the relevant ‘category’ (the ‘kinds of existent things’ 
are the categories): the common principles alone will not suffice-—in 
addition we need at least principles specific to a given category. Hence 
77, cannot form a coherent set. (But why cannot the principles of a 
science include reference to items from more than one category?) 

883: Argument (E): to find premisses for AxC you must get a third 
term B (either ‘interpolating’ it or assuming it in addition: 4 22, 84°36~-7). 
Hence there will be twice as many premisses as conclusions. (‘“The 
principles are not much fewer...” means “Tt is not the case that the 
principles are much fewer...” and not “The principles are only a little 
fewer...”) This argument makes the unwarranted assumption that if 
one set of principles sufficed for all deductions, there would be many 
fewer principles than conclusions. And it falsely asserts that “the pro- 
positions are principles”. (Ross offers a completely different interpre- 
tation, which attaches to APr A 25; but he does not give Aristotle a 
decent argument.) 

88°6: Argument (F): (i) If the terms are finite, the premisses are finite, 
and hence the conclusions too are finite; (ii) if the principles are finite 
they will be infinitely fewer than the conclusions, contrary to the previous 
argument. Perhaps, then, we should interpret Argument (F) a little less 
strictly: ‘The Platonists must be prepared to specify some pretty small, 
finite, set of principles; but their claim is that all true propositions are 
generable from this set: yet we have no idea how many such propositions 

196 

COMMENTARY 886 

there may be.’ In other words, the opponents, taking a finite set of n 
principles, thereby fix the number of true propositions at }(n(n — 1)); 
but the number of truths is ‘infinite’, i.e. it is, for all we know, much 
greater than 4(n(n — 1)) for any n the Platonists may care to fasten 
upon. 

887: Argument (G): There are contingent principles because there are 
contingent conclusions (i.e. ‘for the most part’ propositions: see A 30 and 
notes) and every contingent conclusion depends upon at least one con- 
tingent premiss (APr 4 24, 41>27-31). Aristotle does not explain why a 
single set of principles may not contain both necessary and contingent 
propositions. 

88°9: The First Reinterpretation yields: 

(3) For any scientific truth P there is a set of principles /7; such that P 
is deducible from /73. 

Here “the principles of the sciences are the same” is read as ‘the prin- 
ciples of the sciences are self-identical’. (“‘X is the same”? can mean—at 
least in Platonic Greek: e.g. Soph 256*°—“‘X is self-identical”.) The use 
of “calculation” (/ogismos) to denote arithmetic is Platonic (e.g. Rep 
510°; Phil 56°). 

88°15: Second Reinterpretation: ‘the principles of the sciences are the 
same’ in that ‘anything must be proved from everything’”—i.e. (88°22): 

(4) There is a set of principles 77, such that every scientific truth is 
deducible from /7, and from no subset of 74. 

According to the MSS, Aristotle sets himself to show that (4) is not “‘the 
same as seeking the same principles for everything’’, i.e. is not a reason- 
able interpretation of the Platonic view. But in fact he proceeds to argue 
that (4), whatever its relation to the Platonic view, is a naive falsity. (We 
should perhaps emend the text at 88°16 to eliminate this inconcinnity.) 
The falsity of (4) is both obvious to any mathematical tiro (for dif- 
ferent proofs use different principles), and analytically demonstrable. 
‘Suppose a proof AaB, BaC + AaC; to get a new conclusion AaD we 
need to add a premiss, CaD. Since CaD is added, it did not form one of 
the set of principles on which AaC depended; hence AaC does not 
depend on ail the principles.’ 
88°20: ‘And if someone were to say .. .””: i.e. ‘It is really only the first 
immediate proposition which is a principle, so that both AaC and AaD 
depend on the same principle, viz. AaB.’ Aristotle retorts that even so, 
each kind will have one such principle so that not all conclusions will 
depend on the same first immediate principles. (For different readings 
see Mure and Ross.) 
88°21: The Third Reinterpretation gives: 

(5) There are sets of principles 17%, 172,..., 7", such that all the 7%s 

197 

88°21 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

are of the same kind and every truth of science S* is deducible 
from the set 7%. 

This has been ascribed to Speusippus (Cherniss, 73 n. 55; KULLMANN 
(1974), 149 n. 43; TARAN (1981), 420-2). 

CHAPTER 33 

A 33-4 turn from the theory of demonstration to more general epistemo- 
logical matters. 

88°30: 88°30-89%10 seems to be arguing for: 

(1) It is not the case that: (a understands that P if and only if a opines 
that P). 

The conclusion rests on two premisses, the first of which is: 
(2) If a understands that P then necessarily-P, 

which was argued for in 4 6. For his second premiss Aristotle needs: 
(3) It is not the case that: (if a opines that P then necessarily-P). 

The argument down to 89%4 supports this premiss by arguing that objects 
of opinion include contingencies, on the grounds that contingencies 
cannot be the objects of any other cognitive attitude. And that (3) is 
indeed in Aristotle’s mind is confirmed by 89*11-16 (see notes). 

894-10, however, suggests a different premiss. Here Aristotle appeals 
to two sets of ‘appearances’ (phainomena) or commonly accepted beliefs. 
First, that opinion and non-necessities are alike ‘‘unstable” (abebaios: cf. 
Phil 59°). This appears to support not (3) but rather: 

(4) If a opines that P then not necessarily-P. 

By saying that opinion is unstable Aristotle does not mean that opiners 
are always hesitant, or lack ‘subjective certainty’ (see EN H 3, 1146°26-30; 
cf. Gorg 454°; but see perhaps EN @ 8, 1159722). Rather, stability is 
a matter of objective fixity (cf. Phaedo 90°; Rep 503°). Thus Aristotle 
may mean that opiners are inherently liable to change their minds (cf. 
A 2, 72°3, and notes); or he may be referring to his view that opinions 
are inherently liable to change their truth-value. (Cf. p. 128. See Met I 4, 
1008°16, where an opinion is stable if not both P and not-P are true; and 
further EN Z 3, 1139°21-2; APr B 21, 67°1; Top E 3, 131°21-2; 
Met Z 10, 103676; 15, 1040°2—all connected with opinions founded on 
perception.) 

The second ‘appearance’ or common belief perhaps represents an 
ordinary use of language (see 4 2, 71°9—16, and notes). To support (3) 
Aristotle needs something like: 

(5) We sometimes think we opine that P (say “I opine that P’’) even 
though we think that not necessarily-P. 

But what he in fact says implies: 
(6) Whenever we think that necessarily-P we think we know and do 

198 

COMMENTARY 88°30 

not opine that P (say “I know that P” and not “I opine that P’’). 

This seems directed at (4) rather than at (3). (Its falsity is illustrated 
every time a mathematician speaks tentatively.) 

(4) is stronger than (3); it entails it but is not entailed by it. (2) and (4) 
yield something stronger than (1), viz.: 

(7) — GP) (a understands that P & a opines that P). 

If we take Aristotle’s official argument to be the one from (2) and (3) 
to (1), then he might consistently accept: 

(8) If a understands that P, then a opines that P. 

If we prefer the argument from (2) and (4) to (5), then Aristotle cannot 
entertain (8). 

88°36: “by comprehension I mean...”: cf. 4 2, 72724, notes; the point 
of the parenthesis is to indicate that Aristotle is not thinking of the 
quasi-perceptual noésis of mathematical objects. 

88°36: “nor indemonstrable understanding’: indemonstrable under- 
standing and comprehension are identical; “nor” (oude) means “i.e. 
not’. 

8971: “‘and what is called after them”: presumably: ‘what is com- 
prehensible, understandable, or opinable’. 

89°73: “Opinion is belief in a proposition which is immediate and not 
necessary”: Aristotle has no reason to limit opinion to immediate pro- 
positions; and the sentence at once raises the unanswerable question of 
what attitude of mind governs mediated non-necessities. It should be 
excised. 

89°11: ‘How, then, can opinion and understanding be differentiated 
when they are directed towards the same object?’ Aristotle’s question 
appears to ask how (8) is possible, and hence to presuppose that (8) is 
possible. And that might be thought to clinch the view that Aristotle’s 
argument is from (2) and (3) to (1). It turns out, however, that Aristotle 
does not after all countenance the possibility of (8). 

The discussion of (8) occupies 89711—38. 

89°13: “A knower and an opiner will follow the same path’: Ross 
happily paraphrases ‘will keep pace with one another’. 

89°16: Aristotle’s suggestion amounts to this: If AaB is an I-predication 
and a believes that AaB, then a knows that AaB if and only if a believes 
that AaB is an I-predication; and a opines that AaB if and only if a does 
not believe that AaB is an I-predication. This is not very persuasive. 
First, on pain of a regress Aristotle will have to allow that opining that 
AaB is an I-predication and understanding that AaB is an I-predication 
are indistinguishable. Secondly, it is hard to see how opinion that AaB is 
an I-predication can amount to knowledge that AaB (or, in general, how 
belief that P can amount to knowledge that P’), given that any opinion 
may be adopted at random and irrationally. Aristotle’s suggestion omits 

199 

89°16 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

the essential trait of knowledge, that it must be reasonable (however that 
is ultimately to be explained). 

89°17: “if you believe something which cannot be otherwise. . .”: 89720 
shows that “what cannot be otherwise” is being used to denote predi- 
cates which are necessary to some given subject; similarly, “definitions”’ 
must refer to definientia. Thus: ‘If a believes of some necessary predicate 
A that it holds of B in itself—just as he will believe of a definiens D that 
it holds of B in itself—then he understands and does not merely opine 
that AaB.’ (The stressed ‘‘these items” (tauta ge) contrasts A with D.) 

89°20: “‘...in virtue of its essence and in virtue of its form”: i.e. ‘in 
itself’—the essence or form of X is, in one sense, its ‘account’; and A 
holds of B ‘in virtue of its account’ if AaB is an I-predication. 

89°23: I discuss the difficulties of the next paragraph under five heads. 

(i) The argument turns on the fact that ‘things are called the same in 
several senses”. Aristotle catalogues the senses more than once (e.g. 
Top A 7, 103°6—39; Met 4 9, 1017°27—1018*11; I 3, 1054°32—°3); but 
these passages throw no light on the present argument. What Aristotle 
means is that there is more than one criterion of identity for objects of 
cognitive attitudes, and that there cannot be both knowledge and opinion 
that P under all identity criteria. 

(ii) The paragraph distinguishes two ways in which one might be 
thought to have knowledge and opinion of the same thing; and it elu- 
cidates this distinction by an allegedly parallel distinction between two 
ways in which it might be thought that there could be true and false 
opinions of the same thing. The latter distinction is merely hinted at in 
the text. The first way probably occurs if: 

(9) (32) (at ta opines truly that P & at ¢ b opines falsely that P). 

The criterion of identity for objects of opinion is here identity of the 
propositional objects of those attitudes. As Aristotle says, (9) is absurd: 
there cannot be true and false opinion of the same thing in this way. 
(Temporal quantification is explicitly introduced at 89°38; it is needed in 
(9) if Aristotle is to allow for the possibility that P may change its truth- 
value.) It is not clear whether “some people say” (89726) that (9) is true, 
or only that (9) is a proper interpretation of ‘there is true and false 
opinion of the same thing”. 

Aristotle says that (9) leads to many absurdities, in particular to the 
conclusion that “‘you do not opine what you falsely opine’’. It is not clear 
just how the inference should go. Perhaps thus: ‘Suppose that a truly 
opines that P and that b falsely opines that P; then what b opines 
cannot be P—for P, as a’s case shows, is true, and what b opines is 
false. Thus a false opiner does not opine what he falsely opines.’ 
The argument will go equally well for the case of the true opiner; and 
we should perhaps omit “falsely” (pseudds) at 89°28. 

(iii) The second way of there being true and false opinion of the same 

200 

COMMENTARY 89723 

thing is contained in the sentence ‘“‘because the diagonal with which the 
opinions are concerned is the same”’ (89°31). Thus: 

(10) (Bt) (at f a opines truly that X is Y & at ¢ b opines falsely that 
X is Z). 
(It emerges later that Z must be read as not-Y.) 

In (10) “they are of the same thing—although what it is to be each of 
them in respect of its account is not the same” (89°32): i.e. ‘the essence 
of the two opinions is different’—the opinion that X is Y and the opinion 
that X is Z are about the same thing, but what it is to opine that X is Y 
and what it is to opine that X is Z are not the same. 

(iv) The application of (9) and (10) to the case of knowledge and 
opinion should yield: 

(11) (3¢) (at ¢ a understands that P & at t b opines that P); 
(12) (At) (at ta understands that X is Y & at t b opines that X is Z). 

where (11) is inadmissible but (12) permitted. Aristotle’s illustration of 
(12) appears to be: 

(12a) (At) (at ta understands that a man is just what is an animal & at 
tb opines that a man is an animal). 

Moreover, the argument at 89°1—5 requires that the object of b’s opinion is 
“a man is an animal, but not just what is an animal”. 

This position is even stricter than the one implicit in 8971 1-23: let “P’” 
abbreviate ‘“‘men are animals” and ‘“‘P” “men are just what are animals’. 
Then 8911-23, although it rules out anything answering to (8), still 
allows the possibility of: 

(13) (Ad) (at ¢ a understands that P & at ¢ b opines that P). 
But now (11) denies the possibility of (13): we are allowed only: 
(14) (2) (at ¢ a understands that P’ & at tb opines that P). 

(v) Finally, two small points. First, the use of “understanding (opinion) 
is of X”’ in 89°34—6 differs from its use earlier in A 33; for at 89734-6 X 
denotes the predicate of the proposition understood or opined. Secondly, 
by “they are the same” (89°36) Aristotle means ‘‘the objects of under- 
standing and opinion are the same’’; perhaps we should read tou autou 
for to auto. 

89°38: Aristotle asserts that (14) is possible only if a # b. His argument 
rests on the general principle: 

(15) ((a understands that P) or (a opines that P) > a believes that P). 

The word for “believe” is hupolambanein: although Aristotle sometimes 
uses this as a synonym for “‘opine”’ (doxazein), its official use is to mark 
out the genus of cognitive attitudes of which understanding and opinion 
are two species (cf. An F 3, 427°25). Thus the concern of 4 33 is not (as 
we might unwarily suppose) the distinction between knowledge and 
belief: that distinction it takes for granted, and investigates the dis- 

201 

89°38 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

tinction between the two species of belief, knowledge and (let us say) 
mere opinion. It seems an obvious suggestion that mere opinion might 
be defined as belief which is not knowledge, i.e.: 

(16) a opines that P = gs a believes that P & — (a knows that P). 

Had Aristotle got this clear the puzzles of the chapter could have 
been resolved more simply; for many of the contortions Aristotle goes 
through are due to his tendency to treat (mere) opinion and belief as 
identical. In particular, the argument that (14) requires that a + b might 
go, more cleanly, thus: ‘Given (16), (11) cannot hold if a = b. Now in 
(14), P’ immediately entails P. If R immediately entails Q, then if a 
knows that R a knows that Q. Hence (14) cannot hold if a = b.’ This 
argument is more respectable than the one Aristotle offers; whether or 
not it is sound depends on the question whether a decent sense can be 
given to the notion of immediate entailment. 

89°7: I take it that “the remaining items” are the other objects of 
cognitive attitudes rather than the other “operations of thought’’, as 
Ross somewhat vaguely has it. These questions are discussed at EN 
Z 3-7 (moral study) and An I 4-7 (the study of nature). 

CHAPTER 34 

For acumen, agchinoia, see EN Z 10, 1142°5-6; [Epin] 976°; [Def] 
412°. 

The sharp man quickly seizes upon what is in fact the correct explan- 
ation; but presumably he does not know the correct explanation until he 
has observed the relevant correlations in a number of cases (cf. 4 31, 
88*2—5, notes). 
89°14: “he gets to know all the explanatory middle terms”: i.e. ‘in all 
cases he apprehends the explanatory middle term’ (Pacius). 

202 

BOOK BETA 

CHAPTER If 

Aristotle’s four question-types, which he names to hoti, to dioti, ei estin, 
and ti estin, appear to come to this: we may ask: 

(1) whether it is the case that P; 

(2) why it is the case that P; 

(3) if X is; 

(4) what X is. 

(For the use of “‘is” in (3) see p. 84.) 

Aristotle has a attempts at expressing the distinction between (1) 
and (3). First, he employs different subordinating conjunctions: in the 
case of (1) we ask whether and we know that; in the case of (3) we ask if 
and we know if. But this is unsatisfactory; for in the case of (3) we can 
with equal propriety ask whether, and strictly speaking we know that and 
not if (“a knows if there are Xs” does not mean the same as “a knows 
that there are Xs”, and it is the latter which is the required analogue to 
“a knows that P”’). The second attempt renders the subordinate clause in 
(3) as “‘X is simpliciter (haplés)’”, and contrasts this with ‘(X is something 
(ti)” or “X is partially (epi merous)”. (‘X is Y” says that X is ‘partially’ 
because ‘‘X is” is a part of “X is Y”: cf. Top 15, 166°37—16774; for “X is 
something” cf. Top I 25, 180°32~8.) Thus (1) and (3) are to be distin- 
guished by the content and not the form of their interrogations; and we 
may therefore replace ““P” in (1) by “X is Y”’. B 2, 90°9-14, confirms 
that (1) asks after the possession of a predicate; and in addition it states 
unequivocally that (3) is restricted to subject-terms. Thus it lies near to 
interpret the four question-types as follows: Of any subject term S we 
may ask: 

(1a) if Sis P; 

(2a) why S is P; 

(3a) if there is such a thing as (an) S; 

(4a) what S is. 

There are objections to this reconstruction. First, we might well 
wonder if (1a)—(4a) represent all the questions we may ask. A possible 
reply is that (1a)—(4a) do indeed cover all the questions which a demon- 
strator might ask in connection with any given syllogistic proposition. 
(And B 2 makes it clear that only syllogistic propositions are in question.) 
Secondly, however, even a demonstrator might be inclined to ask: 

(5a) if there is such a thing as (a) P; 

(6a) what P is. 

A possible answer is that (5a) and (6a) analyse as cases of (1a) and (2a): 
see Met H 2, 1042°25-1043°12. Thirdly, the illustration of (3) at B 2, 

203 

89°23 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

go*s5, substitutes “night” for “X”: if we read (3) as (34), we must 
interpret “night” as a subject-term. But I suppose that this can be done. 

In sum, I incline to accept (1a)—(4a) as the proper interpretation of 
Aristotle’s four questions; at all events, I shall use this interpretation in 
what follows. (For a different account see GOMEZ-LOBO (1980).) 

89°26: ‘whether the sun is eclipsed”: either ‘whether the sun is now in 
eclipse’ (cf. B 2, 90°30) or ‘whether the sun suffers eclipses’. 

89°27: ‘Evidence for this. . .”: ‘“Surely in addition to (1)—(4) we can 
ask whether or not P?’ No: this merely reformulates (1). For suppose 
we are seeking whether or not P: if we find out that (hoti) P, we think 
our search is successfully terminated. Thus seeking whether or not P is 
seeking the fact (to hoti).’ 

89°29: ‘‘When we know the fact we seek the reason why” (cf. e.g. B 8, 
93°17; B 10, 93°32; APr A 30; HA A 6, 491°7; PA A 1, 639°5; IA 1, 
704>8: see KULLMANN (1974), 204-20). If P because Q, then P; and ifa 
knows that (P because Q), then a knows that P. Hence if you ask ‘““Why 
P?” you presuppose that P; and it is—not impossible but—futile to ask 
why P unless you actually take it to be the case that P. But if you under- 
stand that P, then you know that (P because Q). Hence when a asks why 
P, he knows, or truly supposes, that P, but he does not understand that 
P. (See ACKRILL (1981), 364-8). 

89°34: “‘... having come to know... that it is, we seek what it is”: see 
e.g. B 2, 89°38, 90°22; 7, 92°4—8; Phys Fr 4, 202°35. If a knows that_X is, 
then a knows what X is; and in asking “‘What is X?’’, a presupposes that 
X is. But in some cases (4 2, 72°23; 10, 76°34; B 2, 90°30; 9, 93°24), we 
start from knowledge of what X is and then prove that X is. There 
appears to be an inconsistency here: the appearance is (implicitly) shown 
to be illusory in B 7-8. 

89°34: ‘“‘Then what is a god?”: “Aristotle keeps the example of God 
but not that of centaur; for since there are no centaurs, we cannot seek 
or know what a centaur is, but only what its name signifies—as will be 
explained in more detail in chapter 8” (Pacius). 

CHAPTER 2 
89°39: Questions (1a) and (3a) of B 1 are reduced to: 
(7) Is there a middle term? 
and (2a) and (4a) are reduced to: 
(8) What is the middle term? 
In the case of (1a), (7) has the form: 
(71) Is there a Z such that X is Z and Z is Y? 
Or rather, we must think of something like: 
(71*) Is there a Z such that X is Z, Z is Y}+ X is Y is a demonstrative 
syllogism? 

204 

COMMENTARY 89°39 

For the search for a ‘middle term’, as 9076 makes clear, is the search for 
an explanatory middle term, i.e. the search for a middle term which 
may figure in a demonstrative proof. (This confirms the suggestion that 
Aristotle is not displaying a wholly general interest in any questions 
which anyone might think to ask: he is concerned exclusively with those 
questions which, in his view, are appropriate to scientific research.) 
However that may be, a negative answer to (71*) is compatible with an 
affirmative answer to (1a) if X is Y is immediate. Conceivably the use of 
“understand” at 89°23 is meant to indicate that B 1-2 are restricted to 
mediable propositions. 

The application of (7) to (3a) is less simple. Probably Aristotle has in 
mind: 

(73*) Is there a Z such that X is Z is an I-predication and there are 

Zs? 

Met Z 17 perhaps suggests that (3a) is analysable as ‘““M is F”’ where M 
is the matter and F the form of X; but it is not clear that such propo- 
sitions are mediable. A negative answer to (73*) is compatible with an 
affirmative answer to (3a) if S is unanalysable. 

Consequently, for (8) we need something like: 

(82*) What is the Z such that X is Z, Z is Yt X is Z is a demonstr- 
ative syllogism? 
The thesis that (82*) is equivalent to (2a) is discussed in more detail in B 
II. 
Similarly, for (4a) we need something like: 

(84*) What is the Z such that X is Z is an I-predication, and there are 
Zs? 
89°39: “either partially or simpliciter’”: i.e. ‘{i.e.) either (the fact that 
it is) partially or (the fact that it is) simpliciter. The two ways of 
distinguishing (1) from (3) are here put side by side (see p. 203). 

g0*6: The proposition that “the middle term is the explanation” (90°7) 
must be read as: ‘For any facts p' and p’, if p' explains p” then there is a 
demonstrative syllogism AaB, BaC + AaC such that AaC expresses p* 
and the middle term expresses p'.’ Thus since we are always asking for 
explanations, we are always after middle terms, and (1a)—(4a) reduce to 
(7) and (8). 

This may well seem to be simply false—and also to be known by 
Aristotle to be false. For the supposition seems to imply that everything 
can be explained. (If “Is it the case that P?’’ amounts to “Is there an 
explanation of why P?”, then if there is no explanation it follows that it 
is not the case that P.) Moreover, the supposition seems to imply that 
the very form of the question “Is it the case that P?” carries the notion 
of a possible explanation. But we can sensibly suppose that some events 
have no explanation; and Aristotle recognizes as much in his discussions 
of chance events. Here, again, it must be assumed that Aristotle is 
thinking only of scientific questions. Science does not deal with chance 

205 

90*6 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

events; and when we ask, in scientific vein, whether it is thé case that P, 
we presuppose that chance events have been excluded. (And if it turns 
out that it is a scientific principle that P? Then there is an explanation 
inasmuch as P is ‘self-explanatory’.) 

Ross thinks that questions (3) and (4) “which in ch. 1 referred to 
substances, have in ch. 2 come to refer so much more to attributes and 
events that the former reference has almost receded from Aristotle’s 
mind”. On the contrary, the present section provides the main evidence 
for the interpretation of (3) and (4) by (3a) and (4a). 

90°14: The purport of this paragraph is uncertain. If “‘all these cases” 
(90°14) are the predicates that Aristotle has just listed, then he may be 
making the point that to ask ‘“‘What is P?” is the same as asking ‘Why is 
S P?” (see p. 203). But 90°31~4 state unambiguously that the reduction 
of ‘what’ to ‘why’ questions goes through for subject-terms as well as for 
predicates: Any answer to the question: What is F? will answer the 
question: Why is a F? To say what a man is (e.g. that he is a featherless 
biped) is to explain—in one sense of explanation—why Socrates is a 
man (because he is a featherless biped). On this interpretation, the word 
“these” (90°14) has no referring function: Aristotle might better have 
said “‘in all cases’. 

go*21: “Can the high and the low harmonize? ...”: this last example 
seems to introduce two new questions: “Can X be Y?”; and “What sort 
of Z is X?” Aristotle probably does not mean to distinguish the first 
question from (1a) (cf. B 7, 92°19, note). His train of thought may be 
this: ‘Assuming we know what Y is (say that Y is Z), then our question: 
Is X Y? becomes: Is X Z? Suppose that X is Z. Then if our interest is in 
some special case of X, say X* (some particular pair of high and low 
notes), we know that X* is Z, but we will want to ask what particular 
case of Z X* is. And in fact this question amounts to asking what is the 
middle term Z* for X* is Z.’ 

90°24: ‘If, observing that X is Y, we actually perceive the middle term 
Z, we do not cast around for an answer to the question ‘““Why is X Y?” 
Hence in this case having Z is knowing the explanation; and so in 
general the middle term is the explanation.’ But a single glance cannot 
give us the explanation (4 31, 87°39—40). And although from perception 
(i.e. from a series of perceptions) “the universal would come about”, 
this does not distinguish the lunar from the mundane cases; for all 
universal knowledge comes about from perception (A 18), and thus all 
middle terms, if they can be known at all, are in this weak sense 
‘perceptible’. What Aristotle should say is that in some cases we do not 
have to cast around for a middle term: for moon-dwellers, observation of 
the eclipse involves observation of the interposition of the earth; and 
having observed several eclipses, they will at the same time have come 
by knowledge of the middle term. (The example is more ingenious than 
apposite; for moon-dwellers would hardly observe an eclipse of the 
moon.) 

206 

COMMENTARY 90°35 

CHAPTER 3 

B 3 begins the main burden of the book: to what extent, if at all, can 
definitions be demonstrated? The introductory chapters, as Aristotle 
stresses, are aporematic. 

go’1: “‘to the neighbouring arguments’: the thread connecting B 3 to 
B 1-2 is this: ‘To answer the four types of question one has to find a 
middle term; and this will express what something is; how, then, can we 
show that we have found a genuine middle term which does express what 
something is?’ Thus it is reasonable to take “neighbouring” to mean 
“immediately preceding” rather than “following”, even though the word 
echomenos normally has the latter reference. 

go’1: Aristotle sets himself at go2 to consider whether anything can 
both be a definition and be demonstrated; let us abbreviate this to: 

(1) (AP) (Dem:P & Def:P). 

go°1-17 presents four arguments against: 
(2) (WP) (Dem:P — Def:P), 

and go°18-27 offers two arguments against its converse: 
(3) (WP) (Def:P - Dem:P). 

Only at 90°28—91°6 does (1) officially enter the argument; Aristotle 
there gives three reasons for denying it. 

The three theses are not clearly stated inasmuch as Aristotle’s remarks 
about definition are neither uniform nor precise; it seems, however, that 
his meaning is adequately represented if we take “Def:P” to be true if 
and only if P is of the form AaB and Ba = g-Aa. 

go°4: Argument (A) against (2): cf. A 10, 77°4, note. 
907: Argument (B) against (2) has two premisses: 

(4) Dem:P — 0:(K,:P — Dem,:P); 
(5) Dem:P & Def:P > © (Ax) (Kdef,:P & not-Dem,:P). 

(“‘Kdef,:P’’ means ‘‘a knows that P by reason of knowing definitions 
only’; Kdef,:P thus entails K,: P—‘‘a knows that P’’.) The argument is 
valid. Premiss (4) is used at 4 22, 83°35 (see notes); and (5) seems to be 
true. Aristotle, I infer, accepts this argument in propria persona, even 
though it appears among the puzzles. As it is presented, Argument (B) 
claims to show only that not every conclusion of an argument in Barbara 
is knowable by definition; but in fact it establishes, if sound, the falsity of 
(1). 

90°13: Argument (C) against (2). 

g0°16: In Argument (D) against (2), ousia (see p. 177) is usually con- 
strued as ‘“‘substance” (cf. Met Z 4, 1030°4-7; 5, 1031°I~5). But it is 
better to take it as “essence”: the point is that such predicates as having 

207 

90°16 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

2 R, which Barbara may demonstrate, do not form part of the essence of 
their subjects. 

go°19: Argument (A) against (3) is the same as (B) against (2); premiss 
(4) is generalized, but the generalization is vague, since Aristotle does 
not explain his criteria for identifying ‘modes of understanding’. 

go” 24: Argument (B) cee (3): “it has been proved earlier”: cf. 4 3, 
72°18-33; A 22, 84%29- 

90°28: Argument (A) against (1) is an expansion of 90°16—17; that 
demonstrations assume ‘what a thing is’ has in effect been stated at 4 10, 
76°32-3; cf. A I, 71*11-17. 

90°33: Argument (B) against (1) takes “definition” in the sense of 
“definiens” (see p. 200); though “two: footed” and ‘‘animal” are not related 
as subject and predicate in “‘man is a two-footed animal” (Met Z 12, 
1037°19~-24; but cf. H 3, 1043°31), it is by no means so clear that ° ‘two- 
footed animal” is not here predicated of ‘“‘man”—indeed, 90°4 implies 
that it is. (The Greeks do not seem to have had a term for “plane 
figure’; perhaps, then, the definition Aristotle has in mind is that of 
triangle as ‘‘plane figure bounded by three straight lines”. He says “‘nor 
indeed figure of plane” because the unwary might forget the existence of 
non-plane figures.) 

90°38: Argument (C) against (1). 

g1°3: “unless one... as a part to the whole”: if D, concludes to AaB 

and D, to AaC, and in fact BaC, then D, is a ‘part’ of the whole D,, and 
AaC is a ‘part’ of AaB. See A 1, 71°24 and notes. 

CHAPTER 4 

91°12: Despite Aristotle’s remark, the puzzles (aporiai) continue until 
the end of B 7, and their topic is the same as before. 

91°14: “as the argument just now supposed”: i.e. ‘as B 3 argued’ (cf. 
GA E 8, 788°20, for this use of “suppose”). 

91°15: ‘Suppose that AaC gives a definition of C or expresses what C 
is. (Suppose, as I shall put it, that AageC.) Now if we are to prove that 
AaC, we must take as premisses AaB and BaC. There are four possi- 
bilities: (a) Aag:B & BagsC, (2) Aag:B & not-(Bag;C), (3) not-(Adg;B) & 
BagC, (4) not-(AagB) & not-(BaggC). Now it is clear that we can only 
prove that Aag;C in case (1). But in case (1) we already have Bag;C—i.e. 
we already have a definition of C—, and hence we are assuming what we 
were hoping to prove. If we do not make the assumptions “‘in this double 
fashion”’, i.e. by making double use of the subscript ‘df’, then we shall 
not be able to reach AagC.’ 

That this is the general structure of the argument seems clear. But 

208 

COMMENTARY QI715 

there are several difficulties of detail. First, Aristotle explicitly considers 
case (2); but he does not explicitly mention cases (3) and (4). Presumably 
case (3) falls to the same objection as case (1), in that it already assumes 
the definition of C. And if case (2) can be ruled out, then perhaps case 
(4) is ruled out a fortiori. 

Secondly, it is not clear precisely how case (2) is meant to be ruled 
out; and thirdly, it is not clear why Aristotle begins the argument by 
remarking that properties and definitions convert. These two difficulties 
may best be considered together. At 91°21~3 Aristotle considers case 
(2); and at 91°24 he remarks that “both will contain what it is”. We 
might take “both” to refer to AaB and AaC, both of which—in case 
(2)—do indeed carry the subscript “df”. And then we might take the 
following sentence (“therefore B too will hold...”) to encapsulate the 
following argument. ‘Suppose Aag:B and AagC. By conversion, AdgC 
yields CagA; and by transitivity of age (91°17-21), CagA and AagB 
yield Cag:B, which in turn, by conversion, gives BagC. But we were 
assuming that not-(BagrC). Hence case (2) leads to a contradiction.’ This 
is clever enough—but it demands a very generous reading of the text. 
Moreover, when the phrase “both contain what it is” is repeated at 
91°25, the word “both” clearly refers to AaB and BaC; hence we should 
probably construe the reference in the same way at 91°24. In that case, 
the sentence (and its successor) merely restate case (1). But this, too, 
is an unsatisfactory conclusion; for if it is correct, then there is no 
argument in the text to rule out case (2) (and in addition, the reference 
to conversion becomes entirely pointless). 

Fourthly, it is in any case false that definitions convert in-the sense 
that Aag;B implies BagA (rather, Aag;B implies not-(BagA)). Of course, 
if AagB, then AaB converts and BaA follows—but it is hard to see how 
this fact might bear upon Aristotle’s argument. 

Finally, it is far from clear that cases (2) and (4) can be excluded on 
purely logical grounds. For case (2) consider “two-footed animal” for A, 
“human” for B, “man” for C; for case (4) take “two-footed animal’, 
“creature capable of laughter’’, and “‘man”’. 

Thus Aristotle’s argument is less than satisfactory. But in so far as B 4 
is still part of the preliminary puzzling, we need not be too distressed. 

91°35: The theory that the soul is a ‘self-moving number’ was put 
forward by Xenocrates (frags. 60-5 Heinze =~ 165-212 Isnardi Parente; 
see Cherniss, 33-4). Xenocrates’ argument must be this: ‘The soul is 
what is explanatory of life; what is explanatory of life is a self-moving 
number: therefore the soul is a self-moving number.’ (This argument is, 
formally speaking, on a par with Aristotle’s own implied argument at An 
B 2, 413°t1-20.) Why does Aristotle say that Xenocrates here “proves 
through conversion’? And why does he think that Xenocrates postulates 
that “‘soul is just what is a number... .”? 

The commentators suppose that Xenocrates attempted to prove the first 
premiss of his argument from the conclusion and the conversion of the 

209 

91°35 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

second premiss. If this is right, then Aristotle’s strictures achieve an ad 
hominem success; but they do not show why a definition cannot be de- 
monstrated in the Xenocratean way as long as the demonstrated definition 
is not subsequently used to prove a premiss of its own demonstration. 

Aristotle’s criticism ceases to be ad hominem if we give up the sup- 
position that Xenocrates tried to prove the first premiss of his argument. 
We may then imagine that the argument is “through conversion” in the 
weak sense of using a convertible premiss (cf. 91°15—18); and that when 
Aristotle says “‘it is necessary to postulate that X is Y in the sense of 
being the same thing” he means “‘it is necessary to postulate that X is Z, 
where Z = Y”—-i.e. Xenocrates must postulate that the soul is a number 
inasmuch as he postulates that the soul is explanatory of its own life and 
being explanatory of one’s own life is (on his account) one and the same 
thing as being a self-moving number. 

g1°1: 91°1—7 reasserts the conclusion of the previous section: you can- 
not infer AagC from AaB & BaC—not even if AagyB. There are some 
difficulties of detail: 

91°3: “Rather, it is true to say only that A will hold of C”: i.e. ‘but you 
can conclude only AaC, not AagrC’. (The MS text is defensible.) 

913: “even if A is just what is some B”: i.e. ‘even if AagB’. But this is 
a hard gloss; and the MSS may well be corrupt. 

914: “For what it is to be an animal. . .”: i.e. ‘Suppose that being F is 
what it is to be an animal, and that being G is what it is to be a man. 
Then, just as animal belongs to every man, so FaG (this is the sense of 
the parenthesis). But of course being F is not the same as being G. 
Now substitute “F” for A, ‘‘animal’ for B and “man” for C in our 
syllogism: then AagB & BaC will alike be true; but AagC will be 
false—for in fact Gag (man) and F # G.’ 

g1°10: Aristotle accuses Kenocrates of ‘assuming what was set at the 
beginning’ (lambanein to en archéi—traditionally, ‘“‘to beg the question”’). 
Xenocrates does not literally assume his set thesis; but he assumes 
something which is ‘the same’ as it. Aristotle wrongly thinks that such 
assumptions are inevitably bad; and he misidentifies Xenocrates’ error 
by trying to bring it under this dialectical foul. 

CHAPTER 5 

Xenocrates’ straight road to the demonstration of definitions is impass- 
able. What, then, of Plato’s method of ‘division’?—cannot that demon- 
strate definitions? Aristotle argues that it cannot: “Division is a sort of 
weak deduction; for it postulates what it has to prove... But at first this 
escaped the notice of all those who made use of it, and they attempted to 
persuade us on the assumption that it was possible for there to be dem- 
onstrations about essences and what something is” (APr A 31, 46°32-7). 
The present chapter repeats the arguments of APr 4 31, to which it 

210 

COMMENTARY g1°12 

refers at 91°13; B 13 explains in what ways division is a useful tool in 
definition. (See also PA 4 2-3, which criticizes dichotomous division as 
a tool of definition and develops Aristotle’s mature view of the proper 
role and function of division: in general see Balme, 101-6; LLoyp (1961); 
KULLMANN (1974), 54-72, 342—6; PELLEGRIN (1981); BALME (1987).) 

91°12: Aristotle first points out that in a division the ‘conclusion’ is not 
deduced from the ‘premisses’, but is merely ‘asked’, i.e. taken as an 
assumption. (On ‘asking the conclusion’ see Top @ 2, 1587-13). 

g1°18: The divider wants to define man: he assumes that everything is 
A, or Aj, and then assumes that man is A;; next, he assumes that every 
A, is B, or Bz, and assumes that man is B,. Having carried on like this 
for as long as he pleases (the length makes no odds to the logic), he 
concludes that man is, by definition, A; B,... 

Aristotle appears to make four criticisms of this procedure. (i) Every 
step in the divider’s ‘proof’ is an assumption and not an inference. {ii) 
Even when he could deduce the divider does not. (iii) Even if the 
divider’s conclusion, that man is A; B,..., is true, he has no warrant 
for supposing that it gives the definition of man. (iv) The division gives 
no grounds for thinking that A, B,...contain all and only the elements 
of the definition of man. 

On (ii) see APr 4 31, 46°37, and 46°9: from his premisses the divider 
could, but does not, validly infer that man is A; 4 A, etc. 

Point (iti) is stated at 91°25. (Ross finds it at 91°20; but this says only 
that the final step (to ‘‘man is A; B,...”) is an assumption, like its 
predecessors.) 

Point (iv) seems to be a restatement of (iii); for what could be wrong 
with the conclusion that man is by definition A; B,...if not that A, 
B,...contains a non-definitory element (‘positing some additional 
item...) or omits some definitory element (“removing something or 
passing over something’’)? (On ‘passing over’ see Top Z 5, 143°15—28.) 
g1°28: The way of solving the difficulties—i.e. objections (iii) and 
(iv)—is developed at length in B 13. The word translated “ignored” 
(parietai) normally means “left aside” (Bonitz, 569°42—50); most of the 
commentators translate “these errors are committed”’. 

g129: ‘“‘make the division consecutive”: literally, “make consecutivity 
(to ephexés) for the division’; two things are ‘consecutive’ if there is no 
third thing of the same sort in pelveet them (cf. Phys E 3, 226°34-5). 

g1°31: “This is necessary . : this notorious crux has been variously 
emended. The text is intelligible as it stands in the MS tradition, but only 
by reference to B 13, 97°35—°6 (see notes); I suppose that some in- 
telligent reader, acquainted with B 13, jotted it in his margin whence it 
crept into the text. 

91°37: “‘conclusions without middle terms”: i.e. ‘conclusions drawn 
enthymematically’. (On ‘asking why’ see Top / 6, 168°28-33.) 

92°2: ‘He will say...”: ‘If you ask the divider why man is mortal, he 

211 

g2°2 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

will answer ‘‘Because all animals are either mortal or immortal” (and he 
thinks wrongly that this proposition is proved by his division). But the 
most that this will give him is the proposition that man is either mortal or 
immortal, and an account of this sort does not qualify as a definition. So 
even if the divider did succeed in proving something, what he proved 
would not be a definition.’ 

CHAPTER 6 

Can definitions be demonstrated, if not absolutely, at least hypothetically? 
With B 6 compare Top H 3. 

92°6: The first hypothetical argument is this: 

(1) A defines B if and only if A is proper to B, and A is a complex 
each of whose components is in B’s essence; 

(2) X1, X2,..., X, are the only things in Y’s essence; 
(3) X.—the complex of the X;s—is proper to Y. 
Hence: 

(4) X, defines Y. 

For (1) see B 4, 91°15-16; this is presumably the supposition or hypo- 
thesis, though Aristotle does not say so explicitly. 

“Next, note that a certain account of what a definition is and how one 
should define is the task of a different treatise, and that here we shall 
only say as much as suffices for our present need; hence we shall say just 
this—that it is possible for there to be a deduction of a definition and of 
what it is to be something” (Top H 3, 153°11-15). The next few lines 
offer an argument that is in all interesting respects the same as the 
present argument; and Aristotle sums up: “Now, that it is possible for 
there to be a deduction of a definition is evident” (153°23~—4). The 
relationship between APst B 6 and Top H 3 has aroused a considerable 
dispute (see esp. A. Mansion, 64-7): either, as I believe, the texts are 
incompatible, in which case it is reasonable to infer that APst B 6 was 
written to correct Top H 3; or else we must suppose that Top is prepared 
to admit as a ‘dialectical’ syllogism something which APst denies to be a 
demonstrative syllogism. See further BARNES (1981), 44-6. 

92°9: The first objection to argument (1)—(4) has been glossed in two 
ways: ‘Argument (1)—(4) needs to import a middle term if it is to work, 
and that term would have to be a definition of Y’; and: ‘Argument 
(1)-(4) uses as a middle term the definition of Y’. The second gloss is 
preferable; Aristotle means that (2) in effect expresses the definition of 
Y in as much as it lists all and only the elements in Y’s essence. 

92°11: The second objection runs: ‘In a deduction one does not premiss 
an account of what deduction is; hence in a deduction one does not 
premiss an account of what definition is.’ The inference is dismal and is 
only slightly improved by emendation to: ‘In a deduction one does 
not state what deduction is; so in a definition—however it may be 
established—one does not state what definition is’ (Philoponus). The 

212 

COMMENTARY 92°11 

premiss is peculiar: Aristotle must mean that it is illegitimate to use the 
definition of deduction as a deductive premiss; and he argues for this on 
the grounds that such a definition could not be ‘whole or part’, i.e. of the 
form AaB or AiB. But elsewhere Aristotle says that definitions are of 
the form AaB (see p. 143); and even if they were not, that would not 
matter. ((1)—(4) is in any case non-syllogistic.) Ross thinks that Aristotle 
is here drawing “‘the very important distinction between premisses from 
which we reason and principles according to which we reason”. But he 
does not seem to be doing this; rather he is stating, falsely, that certain 
propositions cannot figure as premisses from which we reason. 

92°13: “‘so too what it is to be something must not be in the deduction”: 
i.e. ‘an account of what we mean by ‘‘what it is to be something” must 
not figure as a premiss’; the same laxity of expression recurs at 92°18. 

92°15: “Then if anyone disputes. ..’’: this and the next sentence seem 
intended to provide a second reason for keeping the definition of defi- 
nition out of the premisses. When, in ordinary deductions, we are 
challenged to show that we have made a valid deduction, we want to say, 
pointing to the form of our argument, that that is what deduction is. If 
this answer is to have any force, it must not simply repeat something we 
have already said in the original premisses; hence our deductions must 
not assume ‘what deduction is’. Similarly, Aristotle suggests, anyone 
who wanted to demonstrate a definition would have to hold back the 
definition of definition, in order to produce it later if challenged. The 
point is feeble. 

92°20: The second hypothetical argument draws on an Academic method 
and example (see Ross; Cherniss, 36-8; TARAN (1981), 443-4: 92°20-—7 
= Speusippus, frag. 82 Taran). The method is discussed at some length 
at Top Z 9, 147°29—25 (cf. H 3, 153°26—°24), where Aristotle seems 
to hold that it can be used within certain limits. Here he rejects it 
entirely, at least as a method for demonstrating definitions. The example 
of good and bad appears at Top Z 9, 147°4—25, where Aristotle argues 
that it is wrong to define good in'terms of bad, but implies that a 
definition of bad in terms of good would be acceptable. Here, con- 
fusingly, the same example is employed to illustrate the illegitimacy of 
the Academic method as a whole. 

The text of this paragraph is in parts very uncertain; one reason for 
this is that Aristotle is trying to state highly technical propositions in an 
untechnical language. 

Let D(X, Y) abbreviate “X is the definition of Y’, and C(X, Y) “X 
and Y are contraries”’. Then the conclusion of the illustrative argument 
is: 

(9) D(indivisible, good), 
and three of its premisses are: 
(6) D(divisible, bad); 

213 

92°20 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

(7) C(good, bad); 

(8) C(indivisible, divisible). 

The fourth premiss, given at 92°21, states the general principle that 
warrants the inference of (9) from (6)—(8). The text at 92721 is uncertain, 
and Aristotle’s expression is in any case opaque; but it is plain what 
principle Aristotle’s argument needs. I paraphrase thus: ‘If X has a 
contrary, Y, then being X is a matter of being the contrary of what being 
Y is.’ One way of making this reasonably precise is this: 

(5) If CCX, Y), then D(W, X) if and only if (C(W, Z) and D(Z, Y)). 
This principle, together with (6)-(8), yields (9). 

Aristotle objects that (5)—(9), like its precursors, assumes what it sets 
out to prove. The obvious retort is that the illustration certainly assumes 
a definition—but a different definition from the one which it attempts to 
prove. Aristotle’s answer to this is telegraphic. One interpretation takes 
it thus: ‘Certainly, it is different in a sense. After all, if in an ordinary 
demonstration you want to prove AaC, you assume BaC where B is 
different from A. In ordinary cases, however, B is different from A 
(“not the same item’: 92°27) in the strong sense—i.e. A and B do not 
have the same account (92°27), and do not convert. But in (5)-(9) the 
terms, though verbally different, are not different in this strong sense.’ A 
and B must be different in the strong sense in ordinary demonstrations; 
for if B and A have the same account then AaB & BaC cannot be prior 
to and explanatory of AaC. Applied to (5)—(9), Aristotle’s point looks 
like this: ‘In (7) being contrary of bad is said of good; but by (6) being 
contrary of bad is identical, in the strong sense, with being contrary of 
divisible; and by (8) this is the same as being indivisible. But being 
indivisible is just what is said of good in (9). Hence in the strong sense 
we do assume, in (7), just what we try to prove in (9).’ 

92°27: None of the attempts to deduce definitions can account for the 
unity of the definiens; see further B 10, 93°35~7, and esp. Met Z 12 and 
H 6, which professedly carry on where APst leaves off. 

It is easy to see how the divider must face the problem of the unity of 
definition, but less easy to land the hypothetical reasoner with it. Perhaps 
we should think specifically of the first hypothetical argument: in premiss 
(2), the deducer lists the defining characteristics of his chosen term 
separately, and simply assumes, in (3), that they ‘form a unity’. 

CHAPTER 7 

B 3-6 have discussed the question whether definitions can be demon- 
strated; in B 7 Aristotle first puzzles over the more general question of 
whether the definer can offer any sort of proof (92*34—>3); then he 
produces three more arguments against the view that definers can prove 
what they express (924-25); and finally he reje ects the thesis that defi- 
nitions merely say what certain terms mean (92°26-34). 

214 

COMMENTARY 92°34 

92°34: Demonstration has already been ruled out; induction is dismissed 
with an argument resembling that of B 3, 90 °38— 91°6; and * ostensive’ de- 
finition i is passed over with a pun. (deiknunai, “prove”, means originally 

“point out’. Aristotle does not mean that ostension cannot convey the 
sense of a term (cf. Met E 1, 1025°12) but only that it cannot provide a 
proof.) 

92°4: The first argument runs like this. We know that 

(1) If a knows what X is, then a knows that there are Xs. 
Hence: 

(2) If a proves what X is, a thereby proves that there are Xs. 
But: 

(3) One proof proves one item, 
and: 

(4) What X is and that there are Xs are distinct items. 
Hence: 

(5) What X is cannot be proved. 

Premiss (1) is supported by: 

(6) If there are no Xs then a cannot know what Xs are. 

And this in turn is defended by the distinction between knowing what X 
is and knowing what “X”’ means (on the goat-stag see Bonitz, 767°5-7). 
The argument is presented here as a ‘puzzle’; Aristotle makes serious 
use of its different elements in B 8. 

92°12: The second argument runs: ‘We demonstrate that there are 
triangles, and we assume what “triangle”? means; hence all that a definer 
could prove would be what triangles are. But if he could do this, then he 
would be able to know what triangles are without knowing whether or 
not there are any triangles.’ 

92°13: ‘‘existence is not the essence of anything...”: ‘X is Y must be 
demonstrated for all non-essential values of Y; but ‘‘exists’’ is never an 
essential predicate: hence there are Xs is always demonstrated and not 
shown by, definition.’ (This paraphrase rests on Ross’s reading ho ti for 
hoti at 92°13; see also S. Mansion, 179 n. 88.) 

The second premiss is supported by the consideration that “the things 
that exist do not constitute a kind” (‘being is not a genus’). Aristotle 
offers a short, bad, argument for this at Met B 3, 998°22-7. The premiss 
requires the further claim that ‘existence is not a difference’; and else- 
where Aristotle urges that being is predicated of everything and thus 
cannot differentiate one set of things from another (cf. e.g. Top 4 1, 
121°18, °6; Met Z 16, 1040°16- 24; H 6, 1045°1—7). It is not clear how 
Aristotle would reconcile these views with his remark that goat-stags do 
not exist. 

215 

92°15 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

’ 

92°15: “‘And this is what the sciences as a matter of fact do...”: see 
A 1, 71°15, notes. 

92°19: The third argument aims at a different conclusion: it purports to 
show, not that definers do not prove what something is, but that they do 
not prove that anything is. (But Aristotle does not signal the change of 
interest, unless we may see a signal in the word “too” (kai) at 92°19; and 
it is possible that the text is awry.) Geometers define a circle as a plane 
figure all of whose extreme points are equidistant from its centre (cf. 
Rhet I 6, 1407°27; Euclid, i def. 15). Aristotle offers two criticisms of 
the view that this might amount to a proof. 

First, the geometers do not show that there are any circles. Having the 
definition, we may still ask why what satisfies the definiens exists: no 
doubt there is a plane figure of the sort defined—but why? And if the 
geometers have not told us why, they have not proved anything. (This 
interpretation is strained; but it is required—unless we emend the text.) 
92°23 says that the geometers do not show that the circle is possible (cf. 
B 2, 90°21). This anticipates the point later stressed by Leibniz that in a 
satisfactory definition the definiens must be consistent. Aristotle is com- 
monly taken to imply that consistency is sufficient for mathematical ex- 
istence; but this does not square with his general views on mathematical 
objects, and 92°23 only shows that consistency is a necessary condition 
for existence. 

Secondly, why should we suppose that the geometer has defined the 
circle and not something completely different? (Mountain-copper is yellow 
copper ore; cf. Critias 114°). “...for the defining account should not 
only make the fact clear, as the majority of definitions do, but the 
explanation too should inhere in it and appear through it. But as it is, 
the accounts of the terms are like conclusions: e.g. what is squaring?— 
there being an equilateral rectangle equal to an oblong. Such a definition 
is an account of the conclusion; but one which says that squaring is the 
discovery of a mean proportional states the explanation of the object” 
(An B 2, 413*10-20). Thus Aristotle’s contemporaries offered as defi- 
nitions propositions which are not immediate; but proper definitions, 
being principles, must be immediate. 

92°26: Aristotle seems to argue that because definitions cannot prove 
what A is, they can only state that “‘A”’ means ‘“‘B’’. In fact he need not 
be taken to argue thus. I paraphrase: ‘If definitions are proved, then they 
express either what something is or what a word means. We have shown 
that definers cannot prove what something is, and hence that definitions 
do not express what something is. Hence definers must prove, and 
definitions must express, what a word means.’ The argument depends on 
the hypothesis that definitions are proved, a hypothesis which Aristotle is 
of course arguing against. 

92°28: Argument (A): For the view that non-substances cannot be 
defined see esp. Met Z 5, 1031°I—11; 13, 1039°1r9-20. 

216 

b, 
COMMENTARY 92°30 

92°30: Argument (B) is repeated at Met Z 4, 1030°7—9, with the same 
example. “For it is not necessary if we set this down that there be a 
definition of this—whatever means the same as an account—but only of 
what means the same as a certain sort of account; and this will be the 
case if it is of some unity—not a unity by being continuous, like the Iliad 
or whatever is one by connection . . .” (1030°7—13; cf. H 6, 1045*12~14; 
Poet 20, 1457°28-30; APst B 10, 93°36; Int 5, 17°15-16). We might 
regard Humpty-Dumpty’s use of “glory” as an anti-social but logically 
innocent foible. Aristotle would not have done so, for the definiens of 
“glory” is not a unity. The argument is thus the same as that of B 6, 
9227-33. 

92°32: Argument (C) is obscure. I take it that by “no demonstration 
would demonstrate...” Aristotle means ‘‘no demonstration does dem- 
onstrate ...’’. Thus: ‘No demonstration gives a conclusion of the form 
“A” means “B’’; hence, if definitions are proved, definitions cannot 
express the idea that “A” means “B”’.’ 

CHAPTER 8 

B 8 begins Aristotle’s positive treatment of the issues introduced in 
B 3-7; it is excessively difficult and it has amassed a considerable body 
of literature (besides the commentators see e.g. S. Mansion, 183-96; 
G.-G. GRANGER (1976), 235-9; BOLTON (1976); ACKRILL (1981); SORABII 
(1981); GOMEZ-LOBO (1981); LANDOR (1985); GUARIGLIA (1985); DEMOSS 
and DEVEREUX (1988) ). 

93°3: 8B 2 argued that knowing what X is and knowing why there are Ys 
is ‘the same’ (cf. go*31-4). 

93°3: The clause at 93°5 (‘the account of the fact that something is is 
the explanation’’) is usually translated thus: “the reason for this is that 
the explanation is something’. I can make no sense of this; and I have 
altered the standard punctuation of the text to permit a different (and 
admittedly banal) translation. 

93°5-6: ‘self-explanatory’ cases (see above, p. 185) will be discussed in 
Bg. The commentators suppose that substances are self-explanatory and 
non-substances non-self-explanatory. There is no evidence for this in 
Aristotle’s text, and it does not fit the general context of his thought. 
Rather, it is the denotata of the primitive terms of any science which are 
self-explanatory: thus that there are men, say, will be ‘explained’ by the 
fact that there are featherless bipeds—even though men are substances; 
and conversely, that there are units is self-explanatory—even though 
units are non-substantial. 

Which explanations will be ‘indemonstrable’? Does Aristotle mean 
to say that some explanations cannot be revealed through a scientific 
demonstration, or is he jperhaps merely noting a logical possibility? The 
latter is suggested by 93°18. (For a different interpretation of 93°3-9 see 
LANDOR (1985).) 

217 

936 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

93°6: What does Aristotle mean when he says that the explanation is 
“either demonstrable or indemonstrable”’? Since the explanation has to 
be a middle term (93°8), we must take “demonstrable” in a weak sense: 
‘In some cases the explanation of P is demonstrable in that we can 
construct an explanatory demonstration concluding to P.’ P must then be 
of the form AaC (cf. 93°9); and yet P is supposed to say “that X is” (cf. 
93°4). Here at least we are obliged to suppose that in Aristotle’s view “X 
is” can be analysed as a syllogistic proposition (see p. 205). 

93°9: The way “just examined” is that of B 4, g1°14- y1; this is now 
dismissed as not a demonstration but only a “general deduction” (logikos 
sullogismos). The standard sense of logikos in A Pst (cf. A 21, 8234, note) 
does not fit here with any particular appropriateness, and Aristotle’ s two 
other uses of logikos sullogismos (Top © 12, 16227; Rhet A 1, 1355°13) 
do not help. Perhaps Aristotle wants to say only that the argument, 
though not demonstrative, is none the less sound. (See further Le Blond 
(1), 157-66. Much of the discussion has been vitiated by the ancient error 
of identifying the ‘general deduction’ with the argument at 93°16-35.) 

93°15: The rest of the chapter tries to show in what way it is possible to 
demonstrate what a thing is; Aristotle’s conclusion is that, in some cases 
at least, what something is can be revealed in but not proved by a 
demonstration. 

Aristotle first recalls the thesis of B 7, 92°4—5, that knowing what X is 
entails knowing that X is. But here he distinguishes two cases of knowing 
that there are Xs. (The issue is put quite generally; “X” is not restricted, 
as Ross states, to ‘properties and events’—cf. 93°24.) The first case is 
marked down as ‘incidental’ knowledge; the second occurs when we 
“grasp something of the object itself” (93°22). What is this ‘something’? 
It is often supposed that it is the ‘nominal definition’ of the object: we 
know that there is an eclipse, knowing what the word “eclipse” means 
(see €.g. BOLTON (1976); SORABJI (1980), 196). An ‘incidental’ knower 
will then be a man who does not know what “eclipse” means: he has 
seen what we have seen, but he cannot report his observation by saying, 
intelligibly, “‘There’s an eclipse’’. In a sense, he ‘‘does not even know 
that it exists” (93°26). Aristotle’s examples, however, (93°22- 4) can 
scarcely be interpreted as ‘nominal definitions’; and B 10, 93°32-5, 
seems to set possessors of nominal definitions in the opposite camp, 
among ‘incidental’ knowers. A second suggestion is that to know ‘some- 
thing of the object’ is to know some of its non-essential properties. This 
suggestion receives some support from the example at 93°36—>2, and it 
agrees with the general remarks at An A 1, 402 >o1-5; but again, this 
interpretation hardly fits with the examples at 93°22—4. It seems, then, 
that the ‘something’ which we grasp must be a part of the essence of the 
object. Met Z 17, 1041°2-9, and H 4, 1044°9-20, suggest that the 
‘something’ is the matter of the object, and that we are still in search of 
its form; alternatively, we might take the ‘something’ for the kind or 
genus of the object, and think that we are still in search of its difference. 

218 

COMMENTARY 93°15 

But neither suggestion fits all the examples at 93°22—4; and a less specific 
interpretation is better: if the set of predicates E,, E,,..., E, expresses 
what X is, then we “grasp something” of X if we know that X is E; for at 
least one i. (See further ACKRILL (1981), 370-6.) 

If this is right, what is it to have ‘incidental’ knowledge that there are 
Xs? The moon-gazer who does not know what “‘eclipse’’ means may still 
serve; but there will be more interesting cases than his if the nominal 
definition of “X”’ contains no reference to any of the features of the 
essence of X—for then someone might intelligently and truly say “There 
are Xs’, and yet not have any grasp at all of what it is to be X. (Ross 
thinks that we have incidental knowledge of something if we “‘have 
inferred it to exist because we know something else to exist of which we 
believe it to be a concomitant’; but the notion of inference is absent 
from the text.) 

Incidental knowledge that there are Xs does not help us; but a knowl- 
edge which grasps ‘something of the object’ does. This might lead to the 
following interpretation of Aristotle’s general claim that definitions may 
be revealed through, but not proved by, demonstrations. Take a standard 
demonstration in Barbara (cf. 93°8): AaB, BaC +t AaC. The conclusion 
represents our knowledge of ‘something of the object’, and thus gives a 
partial definition of C (e.g. a lunar eclipse is a deprivation of light). The 
middle term, B, explains why A holds of C (e.g. B may be “screening by 
the earth’). And from the whole demonstration we may read off a 
complete definition of C. 

(1) Deprivation of light holds of screening by the earth. 
(2) Screening of the earth holds of eclipse. 

Therefore: 
(3) Deprivation of light holds of eclipse. 

Thence we can see that a lunar eclipse is the deprivation of light by the 
screening of the earth. This interpretation, which gives a clear purpose 
to the grasp of ‘something of the object’, makes reasonably good sense 
in itself; and it receives strong support from B 10, 94°I-9 (see notes). 

93°29: Aristotle’s illustrative example is developed in a moderately 
clear fashion. First, we ask whether or not the moon is eclipsed; i.e. we 
ask if there is a middle term. (Strictly speaking we do not “seek whether 
B is or not” (93°31-2): rather, we seek whether or not there is a middle 
term at all.) When we have found a middle term, then, in favourable 
cases, we thereby grasp the explanation. (Aristotle describes the favour- 
able cases as those in which ‘“‘we proceed through middle terms”’, i.e. 
through ‘genuine’ middle terms which give the appropriate account. The 
OCT prints di’ amesén (‘through immediates”’), the reading of one MS, 
for dia meson. But, as A 13 shows, not all cases of proceeding ‘through 
immediates’ are favourable. See HADGOPOULOS (1977).) In unfavourable 
cases (93°36—°2) we have further seeking still to do. When we are 
successful, we may present a demonstration such as the following: 

219 

93°29 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS ° 

(4) Eclipse holds of screening by the earth. 
(5) Screening by the earth holds of the moon. 

Therefore: 
(6) Eclipse holds of the moon. 

But this syllogism is crucially different from syllogism (1)—(3). There, 
we read a definition of C out of the syllogism as a whole: here, the first 
premiss is a definition of A. (Aristotle is perfectly explicit on the point: 
93°6-7.) There, our antecedent grasp of ‘something of the object’ played 
an evident role in the argument: here, it seems to play no role at all. 
(Aristotle says nothing explicit on this point. Perhaps we should assume 
that our grasp of ‘something of the object’ is presupposed by the argu- 
ment: we are in a position to construct syllogism (4)—(6) in so far as (6) 
is plain (93°4); and in order for (6) to be plain, we must have some grasp 
on what an eclipse is.) 

93°7: In the thunder example we are again explicitly said to be pre- 
sented with a definition of A in the first premiss of the syllogism. (For 
Aristotle’s own account of thunder, quite different from the one used 
here, see Metr B 9.) And the example contains a further oddity. The 
term A is said first to be “thunder” and then to be “noise’’. If the 
thunder syllogism is to run precisely parallel to the eclipse syllogism, 
then A ought to be “thunder”. If A is “noise”, then we shall get the 
following syllogism: 

(7) Noise holds of extinction of fire. 

(8) Extinction of fire holds of the clouds. 

Therefore: 
(9) Noise holds of the clouds. 

None of the terms in this syllogism is defined in it, whether explicitly or 
implicitly. But we can read off from the syllogism the definition of a 
fourth term. Given our antecedent knowledge that thunder is a sort of 
noise in the clouds, we may draw a complete definition from (7)—(9): 
thunder is the noise of the extinction of fire in the clouds. 

In itself, (7)—(9) is as respectable as (4)—-(6). Moreover, Aristotle 
claims to show that definitions are “‘made plain through deductions and 
through demonstrations” (93°17—18); and this claim seems more appro- 
priate to (7)—(9)—and to (1)—(3)—than to (4)-(6). None the less, it is 
hard to avoid the suspicion that (7)—(9) is a phantom and that the identi- 
fication of A as “noise” at 93>11 is a mere carelessness on Aristotle’s 
part. (It might also be objected that (7)—(9) can scarcely be reconstructed 
as a genuine demonstration in Barbara, inasmuch as its conclusion 
cannot be represented as having the form AaC. This is true. But it 
applies equally to (4)-(6). Although Aristotle speaks expressly of first 
figure syllogisms at 93°8, it is difficult if not impossible to cast his 
illustrative arguments into orthodox syllogistic form.) 

93°12: “If there is another middle term...’’: i.e. ‘If, after all, AaB is 

220 

COMMENTARY 93°12 

not an immediate proposition, and B does not give the definition of A, 
then we must look at the other putative accounts of A which we have at 
our disposal.’ If this is what Aristotle means, then he is adverting to 
the possibility of unfavourable searches, which he had illustrated at 
93°36—>2. But the sentence is very obscure. 

93°15: Aristotle’s concluding remarks make three claims. (i) “There 
are no deductions and no demonstrations of what something is”: i.e. if 
AaB, BaC |} AaC is a demonstration, then AaC is not a definition. (In 
claim (1) “‘and”’ must have the force of “‘i.e.”: Aristotle allows that there 
can be ‘general’ deductions of definitions: 93715.) B 8 has said nothing to 
support this claim, which relies on the various arguments of B 3-7. (ii) 
“What something is is made plain... through demonstrations.” As we 
have seen, Aristotle has illustrated this claim in at least two, and perhaps 
three, different ways. It is tempting to disregard (7)-(9) as a minor 
aberration; and perhaps we should also dismiss (1)—(3), inasmuch as it 
receives no explicit illustration in the text of B 8. (But see below, 
B 10, 94°1, note.) Anyone who thus maintains that (4)—(6) represents 
Aristotle’s considered view must admit that it illustrates and supports 
claim (ii) only if that claim is interpreted in a peculiar way. (iii) ““Without a 
demonstration you cannot get to know what something is.” Strongly 
construed, this claim is entirely unsupported: B 8 has done nothing to 
show that we can only come to grasp a definition by first constructing an 
appropriate demonstration. But perhaps Aristotle has a weaker thesis in 
mind: whenever you have grasped a definition, you can always construct 
an appropriate demonstration without more ado. 

CHAPTER 9 

The results of B 8 are explicitly limited to things which are not self- 
explanatory (93°7, °19); Aristotle now argues that in the case of what is 
self-explanatory not even that weak connection between definition and 
demonstration holds. His argument is muddled. 

First, he argues from the fact that some propositions are self-explanatory 
or immediate to the conclusion that some essences are immediate and 
hence principles. To say that the essence of A is immediate should mean 
that the proposition stating the essence of A is immediate; but in this 
sense (B 8, 93°36) all essences are immediate. 

Secondly, all definitions are ‘supposed’ (or rather, posited: A 2, 
72°18-24; but see e.g. Met E 1, 1025>r1); ‘supposition’ is not a way of 
‘making clear’ but is compatible with various ways of making clear, 
including the ways described in B 8 and also the method of ostension (cf. 
Met |.c.; EN A 7, 1098°3-4). 

Through this muddle we might hope to discern a significant point: B 9 
hints at the distinction between primitive and derived terms (cf. 4 10, 
76°32, note). Primitive terms are ‘immediate’ in the sense that they are 
unanalysable; and as they are unanalysable, they have no parts which 

221 

93°21 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

can be exhibited in the terms of a demonstration and they must be made 
familiar in some way other than that described in B 8. (For a different 
interpretation see DESLAURIERS (1990).) 

CHAPTER I0 

93°29-94"10 appear to distinguish four sorts of definition; but the sum- 
mary at 94°11-14 enumerates just three sorts, apparently omitting the 
sort described at 93°29-37 (cf. A 7, 75°31-2). The older commentators 
explain that the sort of definition distinguished at 93°29-37 is nominal 
definition, and that Aristotle deliberately omitted this scientifically un- 
interesting notion from the enumeration at 94*11-14. (These lines do 
not, pace Ross, give a “definite statement that there are just three 
kinds” of definition; they list three kinds but do not say that the list is 
exhaustive.) Ross offers a different explanation. He argues that B 10 
only ever countenances three sorts of definition; he thinks that 93° aur 37 
does not have anything to do with nominal definition, and that 94°7-9 
does not introduce a new sort of definition into the discussion. 

93°30—1 are traditionally translated thus: “one type will be an account 
of what its name means, or some other name-like account’’; ‘“‘name-like 
account” (logos onomatédés) is then glossed as “nominal definition” 
(indeed it is the origin of this term) and “or” is read epexegetically. 
Thus: ‘One sort is an account of what a name means, i.e. is a nominal 
definition.’ Ross rightly objects that the gloss does not do justice to the 
word “other”, and that onomatoddés can scarcely mean “nominal”. His 
own version of the sentence is given in my translation, thus: ‘One sort is 
a statement of what a word or longer nominal phrase means.’ (For ‘ac- 
counts of accounts’ see, e.g. Top A 5, 10271; 7, 107°37; Z 11, 148°23-5.) 
But though Ross is correct on this point, he does not show that 93°29-37 
has nothing to do with nominal definition; and in fact the lines are ex- 
plicitly about ‘“‘what a name... means’’. Thus the first type of definition 
is ‘nominal’ definition—though Aristotle does not call it that. 

If, as Ross has it, 94°7—9 merely reminds us of 93°29-37, then it too 
must deal with nominal definition. But in fact it deals with the partial 
definitions of B 8, which express ‘something of the object itself’. And 
these are unlikely to be nominal definitions (see p. 218). 

Other scholars have essayed other ways of reducing the number of 
types of definition to three. Thus BOLTON (1976), 522 n. 14, agrees with 
Ross that 94°7—9 should be associated with 93°29-37; but he takes both 
passages to be concerned with nominal definitions. In support of this 
view he cites Phys A 1, 184°16, and An B 2, 413°11-20; but neither of 
these texts seems to confirm his interpretation. Again, CHARLES (1990), 
146 n. I, urges that 93°29— af describes not a genuine type of definition 
but only “a sort of definition’, where ‘‘a sort of” (tis) should be construed 
as an ‘alienating’ particle. (Thus Aristotle will describe self-control as a 
sort of virtue, although it is not a genuine virtue.) But this suggestion 
will not strike everyone as linguistically plausible. 

222 

COMMENTARY 93°29 

Thus we are, after all, stuck with four sorts of definition; and the 
traditional explanation of them seems the best. It should, however, be 
added that only two of the four are genuine cases of definition: a ‘defi- 
nition’ of the third sort is merely a part of a definition of the second sort; 
and the fourth sort (see notes to B 9) is the product of an Aristotelian 
confusion. 

Finally, a word about ‘nominal’ definitions. The phrase “nominal 
definition” is often bandied about as though its sense were clear and 
univocal. In fact, it seems to have been used to express several different 
notions, among them these: 

A nominal definition is: 

(a) Any truth of the form ‘““W means X”; 

(b) Any truth of the form “Y is X”’, where in fact ‘““Y°’ means X; 

(c) Any truth of the form “W means X” which also says what X is; 

(d) Any truth of the form ‘“‘Y is X”’, where ‘““Y” means X, which also 

says what X is. 

If we opt for either (c) or (d)—with e.g. BOLTON (1976), 523-6—then 
there will not even be nominal definitions of such terms as ‘“‘goat-stag’’, 
since there is no such thing as what a goat-stag is; and all definitions, 
including nominal definitions, will have ‘existential import’. There are 
severe difficulties with this view, and most scholars implicitly opt for (a) 
or (b). 
93°32: ‘When we grasp that this...”: i.e. ‘When we know that there 
are triangles we ask why there are; but if we have only a nominal 
definition it is hard to attain the explanation, since we do not yet know if 
there are any triangles.’ “in this way” (houtds) means “having only a 
nominal definition’; the ‘difficulty’ has been explained already at B 8, 
93°20 (where it was an impossibility). If this interpretation is correct, 
then we have ‘incidental’ knowledge that there are Xs when we know 
(only) the nominal definition of X (see p. 219). (For different inter- 
pretations see e.g. SORABJI (1981), 217 nN. 30; GUARIGLIA (1985), 92-7.) 

93°35: ‘‘An account is one in two ways.. .”: see B 7, 92°30, note. The 
unexpressed moral of this parenthesis is that every definition must be 
‘one account’; but that nominal definitions may be one in the first, 
Homeric, way, whereas real definitions must be one in the second way. 
93°36: ‘by showing one thing of one thing non-incidentally”: i.e. ‘by 
predicating one thing of one’ (cf. A 2, 72°9, note); but the parallels (cf. 
B 7, 92°30) make it probable that Aristotle means ‘reveals a unity’, and 
“of one thing” (kath’ henos) should perhaps be excised. 

93°38: A definition states what something is; what something is is the 
same as the reason why it is (see B 2, 90*14—23, notes): hence every 
definition ‘“‘shows why something exists”. How, then, can Aristotle use 
this phrase to characterize one species of definition? The commentators 
generally take Aristotle to be singling out a special sort of definition 
which applies only to a special sort of object or event. Objects or events 

223 

93°38 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

which are essentially caused or brought about in one specifiable way 
must be given a causal definition: X is Y caused by Z (“‘Thunder is noise 
in the clouds caused by the extinction of fire”). But there is no hint of 
this in the text, where Aristotle’s illustrative definitions do not contain 
any explicit references to causation. Rather, we should admit that this 
second ‘species’ of definition is in fact the only genuine sort of definition 
which Aristotle’s sciences will admit. Since the other three ‘species’ of 
definition enumerated in B ro are not definitions at all, Aristotle can 
correctly characterize the second ‘species’ by a description which applies 
to every definition. 

93°39: “Hence the former ...”: i.e. ‘Nominal definition states that X 
means Y but does not show that X is Y (or even that there are Xs).’ 

94°1: “like a demonstration ...”: The demonstration which Aristotle 
has in mind is this: 

(1) Noise in the clouds holds of extinction of fire. 
(2) Extinction of fire holds of thunder. 

Therefore: 
(3) Noise in the clouds holds of thunder. 

Here (3), the conclusion of the demonstration, is a partial or quasi 
definition of thunder, of the sort countenanced at 94°7-9. And from 
(1)—(3) as a whole we can read off a complete definition of thunder: 
Thunder is the noise of the extinction of fire in the clouds. Note that this 
syllogism is precisely parallel to syllogism (1)—(3) of B 8. B 10 contains 
nothing to parallel syllogism (4)—(6) of B 8. This suggests that, despite 
the attention given to (4)—(6) in B 8, the proper illustration of Aristotle’s 
thesis in that chapter is given by (1)—(3). (But see ACKRILL (1981), 
360-3, who urges that the differences between the two syllogisms, while 
genuine enough, are unimportant in their context: “‘against.an appro- 
priate background either syllogism can be used in illustration of Aris- 
totle’s theory about the relation of definition to demonstration’”.) 

” 

94°2: “differing in arrangement (thesis) .. .”: the same fact is expressed 
at 94°12 by the expression ‘‘differing in aspect” (ptosis). For the terms 
see Bonitz, 372°8-12; 658°58—659°31. There is no very clear parallel to 
their use here. Some interpreters take thesis in the sense of “suppo- 
sition”, and think that different things are ‘supposed’ in the demon- 
stration and the definition (see esp. Robin, 190-2); but this reasoning 
makes dubious sense and cannot be applied to ptosis. A standard mean- 
ing of ptosis is “grammatical form” (pfdsis = Latin casus, whence the 
English grammatical term ‘“‘case”)—cf. APr A 36, 48°37—49°5. Aristotle, 
then, may mean here that the demonstration and the definition use the 
same terms but in different grammatical forms; when he says that they 
differ in ‘arrangement’ (thesis) he may mean that they contain the same 
terms but arrange them in a different way. But it is probably wrong to 
see anything very significant in Aristotle’s terminology: he wants to point 

224 

COMMENTARY 94°2 

out that, though closely connected, the demonstration and the definition 
are not identical. 

94°7: ‘‘a continuous demonstration” (sunechés): i.e., probably, ‘a dem- 
onstration that has immediate premisses’. 

94°14: The summary refers to: (i) B 8, 93°15—°14 (‘in what sense there 
are demonstrations. ..”; (ii) B 9 (‘‘in what cases there are. ..’’); (iii) 
B to (“and, further, in how many senses. . .’’); (iv) B 8, 93°15->14 (‘in 
what sense they prove . . .”); (v) B 9 (“in what cases they do.. .’”’); (vi) B 
3-8 (“and, further, how they are related...”’). 

CHAPTER II 

Up to this point Aristotle has been speaking of the definition or ‘formal’ 
explanation as something revealed in, though not proved by, a demon- 
stration; in this chapter he argues that each of the four types of ex- 
planation is “proved through the middle term”. He means that the only 
scientific way of exhibiting an explanation of whatever sort is through a 
demonstrative syllogism. 

The structure of the chapter is admirably clear: Aristotle first lists the 
types of explanation and states that each can appear in a demonstrative 
deduction; then he attempts to prove his statement seriatim for each type 
of explanation; and finally he considers the possibility of there being 
more than one explanation for a thing. In detail, there is less clarity; in 
particular, Aristotle’s examples are often hard to understand and often 
seem, when understood, curiously inapposite. It is not without reason 
that Ross judged B 11 one of the most difficult chapters in Aristotle. 

Some scholars have passed a still less favourable judgement: the whole 
aim of the chapter, they say, is hopelessly misguided. Roughly, their ar- 
gument is this: ‘Only ‘formal’ explanations can appear in demonstrations, 
for otherwise the premisses will not be I-predications. Aristotle’s attempt 
to accommodate other types of explanation to demonstrative exhibition 
succeeds only in so far as he tacitly treats all explanations as though they 
were formal.’ (This view is forcefully advanced by Robin; see also Le 
Blond (1), 94~6.) It is true that if a demonstrative premiss A@B is an 
I-predication, then A and B are essentially, or ‘formally’, connected; but 
it does not follow that no demonstration can reveal any non-formal 
explanation. A formal explanation may incorporate non-formally ex- 
planatory elements; at any rate, Aristotle thinks that this can, and often 
does, occur: thus the definition of natural objects will typically include 
reference to their matter (e.g. Phys B 2); the definition of artefacts will 
typically include reference to their aim or function (e.g. Met Z 17, 
1041°27~-30; H 2, 1043°9); and the definition of events will typically 
include a reference to ‘what initiates change’ (cf. B 8). Thus B 11 can 
introduce non-formal explanations into demonstration without thereby 
extruding formal explanation: demonstration reveals the formal 

225 

94°20 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

explanation, and this in turn will reveal one or more of the three other 
types of explanation. (B 11 implies that all four explanations are logically 
on a par here; but that is only a minor slip.) 

94°20: Of the four canonical types of explanation or aitia (cf. Phys B 3; 
Met A 3; 4 2), three are unmistakably present here. Where we expect a 
name for the fourth member of the tetrad, ‘matter’, we find the phrase 
“if something holds it is necessary for this to hold’’. That is, we explain a 
fact p by producing another fact that necessitates it. (That this is Aris- 
totle’s meaning emerges clearly enough from 94°27—95%9.) The form in 
which Aristotle first states this is strongly reminiscent of his standard 
account of what a deduction is (APr A 1, 24>19); and indeed he identifies 
a necessitating cause of p with a premiss-set that entails P (the propo- 
sition expressing the fact p). Thus, loosely speaking, we can say that 
an explanation of the sort in question is a set of premisses that entail 
a statement of the explanandum. Now Aristotle twice says that the 
premisses of a deduction are the ‘matter’ or material explanation of its 
conclusion (Phys B 3, 195°15~18 = Met 4 2, 1013°17; Met A 1, 1013°15); 
and the commentators infer that the phrase “‘if something...” (94°21) 
means “deductive premisses” and denotes the material explanation. Thus 
we have the canonical tetrad under a non-canonical description. 

Ross assembles a battery of arguments against this conclusion; his 
most impressive gun is this: Aristotle expressly remarks at Phys B 9, 
200°15—30, that premisses are unlike material explanations in that the 
former necessitate their conclusions whereas the latter do not necessitate 
their explananda—the fact that there are bricks and mortar does not 
necessitate the construction of a house. If this is so, it is hard to think 
that Aristotle should designate the material explanation by a phrase which 
means “necessitating condition”. Ross himself identifies the necessitating 
explanation with the ‘ground’ or causa cognoscendi. 

I do not think that Ross’s solution will do—Aristotle is not concerned 
with epistemological ‘causes’ in B 11. Moreover, there is reason to believe 
that Aristotle had material factors in mind as necessitating causes; for at 
PA 4 2, 677°18, he uses the phrase “if something...” precisely to 
express material necessitation. It seems, then, that the non-canonical 
type of explanation is a special case of material explanation—viz. the 
case in which the fact that the matter of X is such and such does 
necessitate p. 

It is clear that such material explanations can be accommodated within 
demonstrative deductions. Moreover, it seems to be the case that if the 
matter of X is genuinely explanatory, then it can always be syllogistically 
accommodated in this way: if M is some material predicate, and X is 
necessarily M (as it might be, men are necessarily of flesh and bones), 
and if M really explains why X is Y (e.g. why men are mortal), then 
there will be a demonstration X is M, Mis Y} X is Y. 

Thus the non-canonical type of explanation is, after all, ‘matter’. Its 
unusual designation reflects the fact that citing the matter of X is not 

226 

COMMENTARY 94°20 

always genuinely explanatory. B 11 represents a sophisticated and not a 
naive version of the notion of material explanation; for it distinguishes 
between ascertaining in general the matter of X and ascertaining a 
material explanation of X’s being Y. (See further soraByr (1980), 51 
n. 24.) 

94°24: First, then, the material, or quasi-material explanation. Aristotle 
offers an abstract argument for the thesis that this type of explanation 
can appear in a demonstration. It seems to be this: ‘If p necessitates q, 
then P must be a conjunction of at least two elements and these must 
have a middle term in common; hence there will be a middle term which 
explains Q.’ The conclusion is a non sequitur; and the premiss relies first 
on the thesis that deductions require more than one premiss (cf. 4 3, 
73°9) and secondly on the implicit claim that if p necessitates q, then P 
entails Q. 

The abstract argument is followed by a geometrical illustration. (On 
explanation in geometry see p. 107—a ‘material’ explanation might seem 
peculiarly inapposite in mathematics, but the example is satisfactory 
enough.) The theorem is Euclid, iii. 31, and the proof which Aristotle 
presupposes is probably Euclid’s (see Nevak (1978)). The bit of it that 
concerns us can be set out syllogistically: 

(1) R belongs to every angle that is half of two rights; 
(2) Being half of two rights belongs to every angle in the semicircle. 

Therefore: 
(3) R belongs to every angle in the semicircle. 

(Aristotle himself gives hints of a non-syllogistic formulation by means of 
equations: that, of course, is how the geometers would have set the 
argument down.) 

The middle term in (1)—(3) expresses, in a sense, the ‘matter’ of the 
minor (the reference is to ‘intelligible’ matter, or extension: Met Z 10, 
1036°9—12; II, 1037°2—5; H 6, 1045°33-6); for, as the proof itself indi- 
cates, the angle in the semicircle is constructible out of the halves of 
two right angles, which are thus its ‘matter’ (cf. Met Z 10, 1035712). 
Evidently, too, being half of two rights necessitates being right. And 
anyone who wanted an explanation of (3) might properly, if elliptically, 
be told: ‘Because it’s half of two right angles’. 

94°34: ‘‘And this is the same as...”: the commentators paraphrase: ‘B 
is the essence of A; for the account of A states B.’ This ascribes to 
Aristotle the absurd view that being half of two right angles is the essence 
of being a right angle. (Reference to Euclid, i, def. 10 is no help.) The 
alternative is to paraphrase: ‘For B is the essence of C; for the account 
of C signifies B.’ Being half of two right angles is (part of) the essence of 
being an angle in the semicircle for the same reason that finding a mean 
proportional is the essence of squaring (An B 2, 413°17-20): the pro- 
perties of the latter in each case are dependent upon the former. (See 
the proof at Euclid, iii. 31.) 

227 

94°35 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

94°35: The text, sense, and import of this sentence are all obscure. As 
to the text, I have followed the majority of the MSS; as to the sense, I 
follow Zabarella in taking to meson as the subject of dedeiktai (the 
genitive, “of what it is...”, is ‘constitutive’—i.e. ‘explanatory in the 
sense of saying what it is...’). The sentence can be read in at least two 
ways. It may be taken in isolation, as Aristotle’s sole indication that the 
‘formal’ explanation can appear as a middle term; the point is here 
briefly expressed since it has already been laboriously argued for in B 8. 
Alternatively, the sentence may be tacked on to its predecessor, making 
the following argument: ‘This is the same as the essence, and we have 
already shown that the middle term is an essence.’ The word “‘also”’ (kai) 
favours the first interpretation. 

Of what does the middle term state the essence? 94°27-34 suggests 
that it is the essence of the minor term, C, which is at stake; but 
g4°19-21 and B 8, 93°6—7 (see notes) pick out the essence of the major 
term. Perhaps Aristotle thinks that the middle term may state the 
essence now of one and now of the other extreme; he does not observe, 
however, that this is only possible if the major premiss converts, and 
even then only in deductions of the sort illustrated in B 8. 

94°36: If the illustration of efficient explanation is put into syllogistic 
form, its terms are best read as follows: A, “‘warred upon”; B, “‘ag- 
gressor”; C, “the state of Athens” (for the facts see Herodotus, v. 
97-102). The syllogism so formed may in a sense exhibit the ‘efficient’ 
explanation of the war; but it is not a demonstration: its minor premiss is 
contingently true, its major contingently false. Ross remarks (647) that 
“it is only by exercising a measure of good-will that we can consider as 
syllogisms some of the ‘syllogisms’ put forward by Aristotle in this 
chapter”; he notes that Aristotle does not use the term sullogismos in 
B 11, and that elsewhere (EN Z 12, 1144731-3) he employs a concept of 
‘quasi-syllogism’. The moral (which Ross does not explicitly draw) is that 
the arguments of B I1 are not meant to be interpreted as full-blooded 
demonstrations, but as some weaker variety of explanatory deduction. I 
doubt this: first, the notion of a quasi-syllogism is unaristotelian, for the 
‘practical’ syllogisms of EN Z 12 are, logically speaking, on all fours with 
‘theoretical’ syllogisms (cf. MA 7——-but the issue is notoriously com- 
plicated); and secondly, B 11 stands in the middle of a discussion of 
scientific demonstration—for Aristotle to shift, without warning, to a 
laxer mode of explanation (which he nowhere describes or even mentions) 
would be intolerably gauche. 

Aristotle’s illustrative example is ill chosen; and it is not easy to find a 
good illustration. Perhaps something like this may serve: 

(4) All ducks have webbed feet. 
(5) All things with webbed feet are good swimmers and waders. 

Therefore: 

(6) All ducks are good swimmers and waders. 

228 

COMMENTARY 94°36 

The middle term, having webbed feet, explains why ducks are good 
swimmers; and the webbing is (part of) the efficient explanation of their 
swimming prowess. But there is a difficulty with the example: the pre- 
misses of an explanatory demonstration are all supposed to be necessary; 
yet it is not clear that (4) expresses a necessary fact about ducks. More 
generally, efficient explanations—unless they are trifling—will be at- 
tached only contingently to their explananda. (Perhaps Aristotle re- 
cognizes this at Met A 4, 1070” 22, where he distinguishes between “the 
explanations which inhere in (enhuparchein)” their explananda and ef- 
ficient explanations, which lie ‘“‘outside” them.) 

94°8: The section on ‘final’ explanation is miserably obscure. The first 
sketch of the valetudinarian example at 94°9 (cf. Top I 11, 1728; Phys 
B 3, 194°34 = Met 4 2, 1013°34) suggests the following argument: 

(A) Socrates is healthy. 
Healthy men take constitutionals. 

Socrates takes constitutionals. 

For here the middle term explains the conclusion, and does so by stat- 
ing Socrates’ purpose, health (though it does not state that health is 
Socrates’ purpose). Some scholars have changed the terms of (A): first, 
g4°11-12—“‘Why should you walk .. .”—indicates that the major term 
s “should take constitutionals”; secondly, the middle term is more 
appropriately taken as ‘“‘desirous of health’. The modified argument is a 
‘practical’ syllogism, stating the reason why Socrates should go for walks; 
to that extent it is less congenial to the chapter than (A) itself. 

However that may be, Aristotle’s fuller exposition of the example 
(94°12~21) is nothing like (A); rather it is something like this: 

(B) Good digesters are healthy. 

Perambulators are good digesters. 

Perambulators are healthy. 

(In this argument I take “hold of” in its normal logical sense: ‘“‘making 
the foodstuffs not remain on the surface holds of walking about’? means 
“Everyone who walks about digests well’’. Ross thinks that “holds of” 
means “‘is caused by”, and he accuses Aristotle of equivocation.) 

Unfortunately, (B) will not serve Aristotle’s purposes: the middle 
term does not answer the question “For what purpose are perambulators 
healthy?”—if indeed that question makes any sense at all. Pacius sup- 
posed that Aristotle must have been aware of this and can have had no 
intention of presenting (B) as an example of final reasoning; rather, 
the illustration of final explanation is contained in 94°8—10, and 94°11 
initiates a discussion of the interrelations between final and efficient 
explanation. There is no hint of this in the text; and I am inclined to 
think that (B) was indeed meant as an illustration of final explanation. 
But perhaps Aristotle became aware of its infelicity, and expressed his 
awareness in the Delphic injunction to ““metalambanein the accounts” in 
order that everything may become ‘‘clearer” (94°21)? 

229 

94°8 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

The word metalambanein is common enough in the Organon (Bonitz, 
460°35—49). Sometimes metalambanein X means “take X in a ee 
way” (e.g. APr A 17, 37°15; B 4, 56°8), where the vague “way” 
explicated by the context. Most commentators apply this usage to our 
passage and suppose that “taking the accounts in a different way” means 
“changing the order of the terms in (B)’’. The change which they prefer 
yields: 

(C) Healthy men are good digesters. 
Perambulators are healthy. 

Perambulators are good digesters. 

They choose (C), which has the conclusion BaC, for the following reason. 
At 94°20 the sentence which I translate as “Why is B explanatory for C”’ 
is elliptically expressed: the Greek text has no word answering to ‘‘ex- 
planatory”. Then ‘‘Why is B for C?” might rather be expanded to ““Why 
does B hold of C?”; and we may then take this question to be answered 
by the ‘changed’ argument, which must then be argument (C). 

Against this there are three objections. First, it is not clear that 
(C) is any improvement on (B): health is, perhaps, the purpose of 
perambulators; but it hardly answers the hardly sensible question ‘With 
what purpose are perambulators good digesters?’”’ Ross appeals to “the 
very strong teleological element in Aristotle’s biology”; but (C) is not a 
piece of biology. Secondly, in (C) the middle term is not an account, nor 
even ‘“‘as it were an account” (94°19—i.e. a partial account) of either 
of the extremes. Ross suggests that the phrase “metalambanein the 
accounts” caters for this objection by inviting us to change the definitions 
of the terms. If we define “‘good digestion” as, e.g., “movement of food 
designed to secure health” the middle term in (C) is after all a partial 
account of the major. But at 94°21 Aristotle says that having a good 
digestion gives the essence of health, thus precisely inverting the relation- 
ship Ross finds. Finally, the introduction of a revised argument at 94°20 
is intolerably abrupt. 

I thus suppose that the question ‘““Why is B explanatory for C?”, 
together with its answer, merely repeats 94°18—20. Thus argument (C) is 
not expressed in the text at all. 

We might then feel free to construct a different improvement on (B): 
instead of (C) let us offer: 

(D) Healthy men are perambulators. 
Good digesters are healthy. 

Good digesters perambulate. 

This is better than (C), but not good enough: healthy will not serve as an 
‘account’ of either extreme term. 

Metalambanein X is also used as elliptical for metalambanein X anti Y, 
or “take X instead of Y”. A common substituend for X i in this phrase i is 
tous logous, “the accounts” (e.g. Top E 2, 130739; Z 4, 142°3; 9, 147 ”14)5 
and metalambanein amounts to replacing a term by its definition. It is 

230 

COMMENTARY 94°8 

plausible to take metalambanein thus in our passage. Aristotle is then 
remarking, parenthetically, that if you replace “healthy” in (B) by its 
definition you will see more clearly that having a good digestion is a 
constituent in that definition. If that is so, the Delphic remark at 94°20 
does not pretend to modify example (B), but only to make it more 
persuasive: the attempt fails, and we are left with (B) and its faults. (For 
a somewhat different suggestion see Fortenbaugh.) 

These problems are, however, peculiar to the valetudinarian example. 
The text at 94°10 sketches another example which is precisely adapted to 
Aristotle’s purposes: 

(E) Shelters for belongings are roofed. 
Houses are shelters for belongings. 

Houses are roofed. 

‘Why (i.e. with what purpose) are houses roofed?’—‘In order to keep 
things safe.’ Thus the middle term gives the final explanation of the 
conclusion; and at the same time, it expresses (part of) the essence of 
house—houses are, in Aristotle’s view, necessarily shelters (An A 1, 
403°3—6; Met Z 17, 1041726-30). 

94°23: This paragraph presents two complementary theses about the 
temporal relations between the terms of efficient and final explanations. 
Suppose that C is A because of B; then (a) if the “‘because”’ is efficient, 
B is ‘first’-—i.e. (presumably) the temporal order is B, C, A; and (b) if 
the ‘“‘because” is final, B is last and C first—i.e. the temporal order is C, 
A, B. There is a minor difficulty in (a): Aristotle should surely have 
given the order as C, B, A. But the major difficulty with both (a) and (6) 
is this: if the explanations are to be given demonstratively, in arguments 
of the sort that have just been discussed, then all three terms in each 
case will be simultaneous; for if A holds of C of necessity then a thing 
cannot be C before it is A. Here, at least, Aristotle confuses his official 
analytic conception of explanation with the ordinary notion of expla- 
nation which allows it to link events that are separated in time. This 
confusion (strongly underlined by Robin) leads directly to the argument 
of the next few chapters. 

If we ignore the confusion, and extract (a) and (b) from their syllogistic 
contexts, we get: 

(a’) If a’s being F causes a’s being G, then a is F before a is G; 
(b’) If a’s being G is the purpose of a’s being F, then a is G after a is 
F, 

Both (a’) and (b’) are, I think, false: substitute ‘“‘sitting in the sun’’ for 
“being F” and “warm” for “G’’. ((a’) should not be confused with the 
thesis that if an event E’ causes FE, then E’ occurs before E.) Aristotle 
may have thought that efficient and final explanations were comple- 
mentary to one another in the sense that F efficiently explains G if and 
only if G finally explains F. But it is evident that there may be efficient 
explanations where no final explanations are appropriate; and it does not 

231 

94°23 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

seem to be the case that if a is F in order to be G, then a’s being F must 
bring about a’s being G. 

94°27: Aristotle offers two cases where two different types of expla- 
nation are equally appropriate. The first case asks why something ‘holds’, 
i.e. why a certain (type of) state of affairs obtains. The second case, 
which Aristotle appears to regard as less straightforward, asks why 
something ‘occurs’, i.e. why a certain (type of) event occurs. The second 
example is clear, but implausible: Why does it thunder?—both because 
the extinction of fire in the clouds necessitates thunder, and in order to 
terrify the damned.. The first example is more plausible but less plain. 
The question is: Why does light pass through the lantern? And the two 
answers seem to be: (a) because light is composed of fine particles which 
can pass through the pores of the horn sides of the lantern; and (6) in 
order to prevent our stumbling. Neither answer is felicitous: (a)-—-which 
Aristotle in fact rejects: GC A 8, 326° 7-21—seems to explain how light 
can pass through the lantern, and gives at most a necessary and not a 
necessitating condition for the transition of light. (5) fits some such 
question as: Why do people carry lanterns? and is quite inappropriate to 
the question Aristotle has framed. (There can hardly be a reference to 
the teleological workings of nature, since the lantern is not a natural ob- 
ject.) There are many better examples in Aristotle’s biological writings, 
e.g.: Why do stags shed their antlers? (a) In order that the stag may have 
less weight to carry about; and also (6) because their weight is so great 
that of necessity they fall off (PA I 2, 663°10-14). Here (a) rests on the 
teleological interpretation of natural events. Aristotle explicitly says that 
examples of the sort he wants are especially common among natural 
products and processes (94°35; cf. e.g. GA B 2, 743°16-18). PA provides 
numerous examples of this sort of thing (see KULLMANN (1974), 329-38): 
that a certain type of animal has a certain feature is explained both by 
the fact that the matter of the animal necessitates the feature and by the 
fact that having the feature is good for the animal. 

This passage is one of the earliest notes on the problem of the com- 
patibility of different types of explanation. At Phys B 3, 19575, Aristotle 
says that “it happens that... there are many explanations of the same 
thing, non- incidentally” = Met 4 2, 1013 ®s; cf. H 4, 1044°33). With 
the relaxed sense of “explanation” that is current in the Physics this 
assertion holds no particular difficulty. In APst, however, one of the two 
purportedly compatible types of explanation is a necessitating condition; 
and if Q is necessitated by R, it is hard to see how it can also be 
‘explained’ in terms of some purpose P. Suppose that the stag’s antlers 
must fall off, because of their weight. Then it may, of course, also be 
true that their falling off is good for the stag; but it can hardly be true 
that they fall off because this is good for the stag, or that they fall of in 
order to benefit the stag. 

In Phys and PA Aristotle looked more closely at the problem of 
conjoint teleological and necessitating explanation; and he answered 

232 

COMMENTARY 94°27 

the sort of difficulty I have just outlined by introducing the notion 
of ‘hypothetical’ necessity. This is a major retreat; for a condition is 
hypothetically necessary if it is a necessary condition, not if it is a 
necessitating condition; and reconciling hypothetical necessity with tele- 
ology does not reconcile necessitation and teleology. (See on all this 
Balme, 76-84; KULLMANN (1974), 329-38; COOPER (1987).) 

94°37: “There are two types of necessity’: cf. Met E 2, 1026°28-9; 
Rhet A 10, 1368°35—7; and in general Met 4 5. For the instance of the 
stone cf. EN B 1, 1103°20 (for the natural movements of the four 
elements see, e.g., Phys 4 8, 214°13-16; Cael 4 6). Force is discussed at 
Met A §, 1015°26-33; EN Ir 1, t110*1-4. Aristotle has no general 
discussion of natural necessity; his main accounts of the part played by 
necessity in nature turn on ‘hypothetical’ necessity (Phys B 9; PA A 1, 
642*2—°4), which he sharply distinguishes from the two sorts of necessity 
mentioned in our passage: “One might perhaps puzzle over what sort of 
necessity in meant by those who talk of things happening from necessity; 
for it can be neither of the two sorts distinguished in our philosophical 
works” (642°4—6; the reference is probably to our passage). See further 
Sorabji. 

95°3: “Among the products of thought. ..”: i.e. ‘among those types of 
thing which are normally produced as a result of planning and intention’. 
(See also Met Z 9.) Aristotle has just said that among natural objects, 
some are produced both by necessity and purposefully; he now adds 
that among artificial objects, some are produced by necessity, some by 
chance, and some purposefully. The two assertions are not exactly 
parallel: Aristotle does not say that in the case of artefacts one and the 
same thing may have both a necessitating and a final explanation. On 
chance see Phys B 4-6. 

95°6: “It is especially among things...”: one plausible paraphrase of 
this tortuous sentence goes: ‘Paradigmatically, X occurs for some purpose 
if (i) X could have failed to occur; (ii) X did not occur by chance; and 
(iii) the result of X’s occurrence is good.’ In the standard case, a pur- 
poseful act is neither necessary nor chance; and it is beneficial. (The 
third condition seems odd; and passages such as EN 4 1, 1094°1-2, help 
only in cases of agency and do not cover natural purposes.) The end 
of the chapter thus corrects an impression given by the immediately 
preceding argument: necessity and purpose are, indeed, compatible; but 
standardly purpose is found in the absence of necessity. 

” 

CHAPTER I[2 

This chapter (on which see WIELAND (1972)) continues the discussion of 
explanation. Aristotle persists in using the terminology of syllogistic, and 
the variables A, B, C,... remain term-variables; in many of the cases he 
describes, event-variables would be more appropriate. It is hard to find 
a single consistent representation for everything Aristotle says. Inter- 
pretation is eased by the introduction of two conventions. First, we need 

233 

95710 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

copula variables, ¢, y,..., which have as substituends words such as 
“is”, ““was”’, “is coming to be’’, “‘has come to be” etc. which can be fitted 
into the gap in “a...A”’. Secondly, it is useful to allow the device of a 
dummy subject, ‘there’, alongside genuine subjects such as “‘Socrates’”’, 
“men”. Thus ‘Socrates is wise’, “All men come to be grey”, and 

“There came to be clouds” all exemplify the formula “a ¢ A”. 
95"10: Suppose that: 
(1) ais A because b is B 

is true; then, Aristotle asserts, if a is coming to be A, a is coming to be A 
because b is coming to be B; and similarly for ‘“‘has come to be”, and 
“will be”. (Aristotle does not mention “was” and ‘“‘will come to be’: 
perhaps he—mistakenly—supposes that they are synonymous with “‘has 
come to be” and ‘“‘will be’’.) In general: 

(2) (A¢)(a ¢ A because b ¢ B) > (Vo)(a ¢ A—adA because b ¢ B). 

In Aristotle’s second illustration at 95*16—21, a ¢ A becomes “there is 
ice (e.g. on the pond)’. The initial question: What is ice? allows the 
transformation of ‘there is ice (on the pond)” into “(the pond’s) water is 
solidified” (cf. Met H 2, 1042°27; 1043710); and this transformation eases 
the syllogistic treatment of the example. 

95°22: Ross says that both illustrations of (2) take a middle term 
that is an efficient as well as a formal explanation. Strictly construed, 
the middle terms are not efficient explanations, but they are formal 
explanations. Nevertheless, thesis (2) is not limited to formal expla- 
nation; nor does it entail that every explanans must be contemporaneous 
with its explanandum. But both illustrations of (2) gave contemporaneous 
explanantia and explananda; and Aristotle now asks whether this was 
accidental, i.e. whether: 

() (Ad(ar)\t # t & ad A at t because b y B at 7’) 

can have true instantiations. (In fact, Aristotle appears to presuppose 
that in any true instance of (3)—or indeed of (1) or (2)—a and b will be 
identical. In other words, the schemacunderlying his discussion is: 

(4) a¢ A because a y B. 

This presupposition is equivalent to the thought that explanation is 
essentially something which links one term to another term.) 

95°22: ‘‘an item which is explanatory in this way .. .”: i.e. ‘explanations 
of the same type as the preceding illustration’-—formal explanations. 

95°24: “Can it be that in continuous time, as we think’’: i.e. ‘Given 
that time is, as we think, continuous, can it be that...’ or ‘Given that 
time is continuous, can it be, as we think, that...’ The point of the 
remark emerges later in the chapter. Aristotle argues for the continuity 
of time at Phys 4 10, 219*10-14; what he means is that for any two 
instants t; and t, where f, is later than t,, there is an instant 4 later than 
t, and earlier than ft (cf. e.g. Phys Z 3, 234°8; Bonitz, 728°37-45). 

234 

COMMENTARY 95°27 

95°27: Aristotle does not answer the question he has just posed; rather, 
he assumes that there are such non-contemporaneous pairs of explanans 
and explanandum and asks to what extent we can have knowledge of 
them. First he considers past pairs such as “Socrates died at noon 
because he drank a cup at hemlock at 10” (here “‘the time... is deter- 
mined’’: 95°32, i.e. the gap between explanans and explanandum is of a 
specified duration). He argues that we can infer “Socrates drank a cup of 
hemlock” from “Socrates died”, but we cannot infer ‘“‘Socrates died”’ 
from “Socrates drank a cup of hemlock”. His argument for the second 
point is sound: there are times—e.g. 11 o’clock—at which it is true to 
say ‘“‘Socrates drank a cup of hemlock”’ but false to say “Socrates died”’; 
hence the former does not entail the latter. 

It is, however, equally clear that we cannot infer “Socrates drank 
hemlock” from “Socrates died’. Thus when Aristotle says “deductions 
start from what has come about later” (9528), he does not mean that we 
can always infer from explanandum to explanans, but only that we can 
sometimes do so; and the favourable cases, it is reasonable to think, are 
those in which there is a formal connection between explanans and 
explanandum. Consider: “Socrates died of hemlock because he drank a 
cup of hemlock’. Here it seems that we can infer from explanandum to 
explanans, but not vice versa—and for precisely the reason Aristotle 
gives. (The inference requires that ‘the time is indeterminate’’.) 

95°28: ‘‘although the principle. ..”: presumably (if the text is right): 
‘but here it is the earlier event which is in fact the originative source of 
the later’. 

95°35: “Nor can you argue...”: Mure and Ross punctuate lightly 
before “nor”: ‘And the same account also goes for what will be the case, 
i.e. one cannot infer that since this has come about this will be.’ But 
Aristotle does not proceed to give “the same account”; and I have 
therefore reverted to the older punctuation. Aristotle’s first argument 
against the inference from “Socrates has drunk hemlock” to ‘Socrates 
will die” turns on the principle that “the middle term must be of the 
same type (homogonon)” as each of the extremes. The deduction, if it is 
to exhibit a middle term at all, must contain an inference of the form: 

(5) Ifa dg A, thena y B. 
WELL Ea ae 

(7) Ifa @ A, thenay C. 

From (5) Aristotle in effect infers that ¢ = y, and from (6) that y = z; 
hence ¢ = xy. But by hypothesis ¢ # y. Aristotle gives no argument for 
these inferences; they certainly do not follow from (3); and they appear 
to be invalid. 

Aristotle’s second argument (95*39—°1) is an application of the sound 
argument of 95°31-5. Aristotle has already said (95°35) that the argu- 
ment shows the invalidity of inferring from ‘Socrates will drink hemlock” 
to “Socrates will die’. Both applications of the good argument are bad. 

It seems merely false to say that from “Socrates will drink (has drunk) 

235 

95°35 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

a lethal dose of hemlock” we cannot infer “Socrates will die of hemlock”’. 
And Aristotle’s argument, which worked for the past, does not work for 
the future; for at any point after Socrates’ taking the lethal dose we can 
truly say “Socrates will die”. Has Aristotle got an answer to this? It 
would be both implausible and irrelevant to urge, sceptically, that we 
cannot know if the dose is lethal until we know that Socrates has actually 
died from it. It is true but irrelevant that if Socrates has taken a lethal 
dose and is not yet dead we cannot now truly say that he is dead (Ross). 
In certain passages Aristotle says, or appears to say, that if at it is true 
to say that a is A, it does not follow that at all times before ¢ it was true 
to say that a would be A (see Met E 3; Int 9; GC B 11). Thus we can 
truly say at noon that Socrates is dead of hemlock; but we could not 
truly have said at 11 o’clock that Socrates would die of hemlock at noon. 
The three chapters I have referred to are, however, notoriously hard. 
And in any case their thesis is hardly applicable to the particular cases 
with which we are concerned; for here we are not interested in saying “‘a 
will be A” until after the occurrence of the cause of a’s being A, i.e. until 
it is (on any account) determinately true that a will be A. 

gs°1: Aristotle reserves a thorough discussion of the issues broached in 
this section to the Physics (see 4 10-14; Z); unsurprisingly the section as 
it stands is opaque and unsatisfactory. 

Ross says that Aristotle here turns from epistemology to metaphysics. 
Yet the question of what holds events together (sunechei) is plainly akin 
to the question of why time is continuous (sunechés: 95°24); and the 
section can plausibly be connected to its predecessor if we imagine the 
following objection to its predecessor’s arguments: ‘Suppose that time is 
not continuous: then in some cases at least it will be legitimate to infer 
“ais A at ft” from “‘b is B at t,’, where f, is after t,; for if 4 is next toh 
there will be no time at which one can truly say the latter but not the 
former.’ 

“The now is what holds time together, as we said [sc. at 220°5]; for it 
holds together past and future time, and is a limit of time; for it is the 
beginning of the one and the end of the other” (Phys 4 12, 222*10-12). 
Our passage contains no hint of this answer to the metaphysical question; 
nor indeed is it clear that Aristotle offers any answer to it at all. Rather, 
his train of thought seems to run like this: ‘What holds time together? 
i.e. what attaches one instant to the next?—Well, time isn’t held to- 
gether in this sense; for it is not the case that every instant is next to 
another instant.’ (Aristotle proceeds to deny the contiguity of events not 
of instants; but the two denials are equivalent on the plausible and 
Aristotelian view that every point of time is occupied by an event (Phys 
A II, 219"1).) 

X is next to (echomenon) Y if it is consecutive upon Y and touches it 
(Phys E 3, 227°6); X is consecutive upon Y if there is no third thing, Z, 
of the same sort as X and Y, in between X and Y (2271); and X touches 
Y if the extreme points of X and Y are ‘together’ (227°7). But, Aristotle 

236 

COMMENTARY 95°1 

argues, past events, like points (or instants) have no parts and hence 
cannot be next to one another. Why does Aristotle assume that past 
happenings are thus instantaneous? Some, perhaps, like Plato’s birth or 
Alexander’s death, may have temporal location but no duration; but 
others, like Plato’s writing of the Republic or Alexander’s expedition to 
India, surely have duration. Why, then, should we not suppose that two 
period-events, A and B, are next to one another? i.e. that the last 
moment of A, ¢,, is identical with the first moment of B, t,? Aristotle’s 
answer in the Physics (Z 5-6) is that no event—or at least no change— 
has a first moment: for any instant tin B there is a prior moment ¢’ which 
is also in B. But Aristotle’s opponent may still maintain that A and B 
can be next to one another in a slightly weaker sense: f,, he may say, is 
the last moment of A and is not a moment of B; but any later moment ¢,, 
however close to t,, is a moment of B. And if that is so it will not be 
possible to find a time between A and B in which the statement that B is 
occurring is false. 

Although Aristotle says that present events cannot be next to past 
events “for the same reason” (95°7), he compares present events not to 
points but rather to lines. The reason is the same only generically: an 
indivisible (a point) cannot be next to anything at all, whether another 
indivisible (a point) or a divisible (a line). Thus a past point-event cannot 
be next to a present period-event; either it is included in the present 
event or else there are infinitely many point-events between it and the 
present. Why does Aristotle assume that present events are all period- 
events? And how can he reconcile this with the existence of past point- 
events, given that every past event was once present? Perhaps he was 
misled by the terms he used: the present participle ginomenon (“what is 
coming about’’) naturally suggests a continuing ‘process; the past parti- 
ciples gegonos, genomenon, gegenémenon, are more readily taken to 
denote what Ross calls ““completions of change”, or point-events. 

Why do “infinitely many items which have come about inhere in what 
is coming about’’? An answer can be extracted from Phys Z 6, 236°32- 
237°17: let AB represent the present period-event of a’s ¢-ing, and let C 
be an arbitrary point on AB—the present moment. At C it is true to say 
in respect of every point D on AC that a was ¢-ing at D. Since there are 
infinitely many such points, the present event AB contains infinitely 
many past events. 

It is tempting to take the presentness of AB literally, and to find in it 
the notion of the ‘specious present’; but it is more likely that AB 
represents any period-event which is not yet completed. 

95°13: Aristotle now explains how the inferences which 95*22—°1 found 
ee should be formally presented. 

95°13: “when events come about consecutively’: the previous section 
has implicitly denied that any events can come about consecutively 
(ephexés) in the technical sense of the term (Phys E 2, 236°34—237°6; 
see above). “Consecutively” is presumably being used loosely to 

237 

95°13 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

mean “not at the same time’: i.e. ‘in the case of explanations where 
explanans and explanandum are not contemporaneous’. 

” 

95°15: “Here too...”: the sentence probably states what it is that 
must be assumed in consecutive cases. ‘“‘Here too”: i.e. ‘as well as in the 
cases exemplified at 95*14-21’. ‘The middle term and the first term 
must be immediate”: probably ‘both premisses are immediate’ (i.e. “the 
middle” and ‘‘the first’? stand for “‘the premiss in which the middle is 
predicate”, and “‘the premiss in which the first is predicate’’), rather than 
‘the first premiss is immediate’ (i.e. “‘the middle and the first’? stands for 
“the premiss predicating the first of the middle’). 

>, 

95°17: “‘C is the principle...”: i.e. ‘C is the point from which our 
knowledge starts’ (contrast 95°28, where ‘‘principle” means “‘originative 
explanation”). Phys 4 11, 219°11, is cited by the commentators to 
explain how “the present. . . is the principle of time’’. But the discussion 
in Phys 4 11 (which does not use the phrase “principle of time’’) has no 
bearing on our passage. Aristotle is making an epistemological point: 
‘Our knowledge of events must be grounded on knowledge of the 
present.’ 

95°20: “‘and C is the explanation. . .”: the commentators suppose that 
“explanation” here means causa cognoscendi—C explains how we know, 
or why we believe, that A occurred; but C cannot explain A itself, since 
C is later than A. But the text does not suggest that ‘‘explanation” has 
an unusual reference here; rather, C does explain some fact in the 
world—-not A, however, but the connection between D and A: ‘What 
explains the fact that D requires A?——C, because D requires C and C A.’ 

95°23: “‘because of the infinity . . .”: ie. ‘because between any two past 
events there is a third’ (as 95>1-12 has argued). From the proposition 
that events are not consecutive, it does not follow that there are no 
true immediate propositions of the form (5). An event £3; may occur 
between FE, and £, without forming any sort of causal link between 
them. Aristotle assumes without argument that if a proposition of the 
form (5) is immediate, then the events denoted by its antecedent and its 
consequent must be contiguous; and his next sentence, ‘(However that 
may be...”, offers the absurd compromise that if neither premiss can be 
immediate, then at least the first premiss must be. 

95°24: ‘‘However that may be...”: i.e. ‘The first premiss must both be 
immediate and contain in its antecedent whichever of the three terms in 
the inference is nearest to the present moment’ (where “‘first from the 
present moment” means “‘nearest in time to now’’). Or: ‘The first premiss 
must be immediate, i.e. it must connect X with Y where X is a present 
event and Y is causally contiguous to X’ (where “‘first from the present 
moment” means ‘“‘non-mediately connected with the present event”). The 
first paraphrase is grammatically harder; the second commits Aristotle to 
the view that all causal inferences must start from a present event. 

95°30: ‘the division is infinite”: i.e. ‘there are infinitely many points at 

238 

COMMENTARY 95°30 

which the time-slice D—A can be cut’; for this use of “division” (here, 
tomé) cf. Phys Z 6, 237°9; @ 8, 262°20. 

95°31: The cases sketched in the two preceding sections are now illus- 
trated by a favourite example of Aristotle’s (Bonitz, 324°55-61). 

95°38: The last two sections of B 12 are appendixes. The first takes up 
again the question of circular arguments, which have already been 
discussed in 4 3 (the reference at 96*1 is probably to A 3, 73°6-20). 
The cyclical nature of the phenomena of the physical world impressed 
Aristotle. The locus classicus for this is GC B 11: “If what moves always 
in a circle moves something, necessarily the motion of this too will be 
circular—e.g. since the upper locomotion is circular, the sun moves thus; 
and if that is the case, because of this the seasons come about in a circle 
and revolve; and if these come about in this way, the things under them 
again will do so” (338°1—5; cf. Bonitz, 41476-14). The present passage 
indicates, I think, that Aristotle toyed with the idea of representing the 
natural cycles of GC B 11 by means of circular demonstrations: the 
reciprocations of nature would be mirrored in the reciprocal implications 
of logic. If that is so, then one upholder of the theory of circular proof 
was the young Aristotle (see p. 104; BARNES (1976), 290-2). 

Detailed interpretation of the present appendix is difficult; I offer the 
following paraphrase (which involves a new punctuation of the text) 
without great confidence: ‘Suppose we have an argument AaB, BaC + 
AaC, and that this explains a circular generation. Now we shall also have 
CaA; for the conclusion converts—for that “is what being circular is’. 
Hence in the case of circular generation the premisses convert too, as 
A 3 proved; i.e. middle and extremes ‘follow one another”—BaA and 
AaB, BaC and CaB.’ (The commentators give different accounts.) 

In the concrete example which Aristotle offers, the appearance of 
circularity is falsely imposed by the vagueness of the premisses. To say 
that the conclusion converts is to say that if it rains then there is an 
exhalation of steam, and if there is an exhalation of steam then it rains. 
But this is true only if the connective “if...then...” is taken in a 
temporal sense, or if temporal tags are grafted onto the argument (‘If it 
rains at ¢ then there are exhalations at ¢,; and if there are exhalations at 
t, then it rains at ”). It is reasonable to talk of cyclical events in such 
cases; but they cannot be expressed by means of ‘circular’ inferences of 
the sort Aristotle pictures. There is perhaps an inkling of this in GC B 
II: discussing circular generation Aristotle concludes that “in cases in 
which the changing substance is not imperishable but perishable, it is 
necessary for them to revolve in kind but not in number. Whence if 
water comes from air and air from water, these are the same in form but 
not in number” (338°16—18). The rain at f is “the same in form but not 
in number” as the rain at fh, i.e. it is a different occurrence of the 
same type of event. GC does not attempt any formalization of such 
circularities; and the formalization is, I think, beyond the powers of 
syllogistic. 

239 

96°8 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

96°8: On the substance of this second Appendix see A 30, 87°20, and 
notes. There Aristotle argued that ‘for the most part’ premisses entail 
‘for the most part’ conclusions; here he argues for the converse, that ‘for 
the most part’ conclusions require ‘for the most part’ premisses. His 
words seem at first blush to suggest that in order to infer a ‘for the most 
part’ conclusion both premisses must be ‘for the most part’. But his 
argument only supports the position that at least one premiss must be 
‘for the most part’; and this is what he explicitly holds at APr A 27, 
43°33—5: “In the case of for the most part problems, the deduction too 
must proceed from propositions which—either all or some of them—are 
for the most part.” The argument also shows that Aristotle held that For 
the most part Cs are A entails not-(AaC) (cf. Top B 5, 112 >s—7). We 
might think that For the most part Cs are A is entailed by AaC; and 
hence (since AaC can be consistently interpreted) that it does not entail 
not-(AaC). Aristotle, I suspect, was influenced by the fact that anyone 
who says For the most part Cs are A may be taken to imply not-AaC; and 
he interpreted this ‘conversational implicature’ as an entailment. 

However that may be, what are we to make of Aristotle’s claim at 
96°8? In full generality, the claim is this: if a conclusion of the form ‘“‘For 
the most part, P” follows from a set of premisses, Q,, Q2,..., Q,, then 
at least one of the Qs must have the form “‘For the most part, P’’. In 
APr A 27 Aristotle is doubtless thinking of a restricted version of the 
claim—-a version restricted to syllogistical inferences. The claim may 
well sound plausible; but until we find a coherent interpretation of ‘for 
the most part’’, we shall not be able to assess it—and we may be sure 
that Aristotle himself was not in a position to prove or disprove it. 

CHAPTER 13 

B 13 attempts to provide recipes for the discovery of definitions; this task 
is contrasted with that of B 3-10, which is alluded to at 96%20. There the 
main question was to what extent, if at all, essences can be exhibited 
in demonstrations; here Aristotle asks how we can get hold of such 
potential exhibits in the first place. 

Ross thinks that B 13 attempts the same task as B 8: what B 8 did for 
‘causal’ definitions, B 13 will do for the ‘immediate’ essences referred to 
in B g. There is no hint of this in the text, and the example of man 
at B 8, 93°24, is just the sort of thing Aristotle is primarily thinking 
about in 8 13. Other scholars say that B 13 is concerned solely with the 
definition of substances: that is refuted by 96°20, and by several of the 
examples discussed in the chapter. 

96°20: “how what something is can be elucidated in the terms (horoi)”’: 
i.e. ‘to what extent essences can be exhibited through the terms of a 
demonstration’. Horoi is often rendered “definitions” here; but the 
rendering has nothing to recommend it. 

96°24: If we want to define a term S we must look first for predicates 
Ay, A2,..., satisfying three conditions: (i) every S is A;; (ii) for some S’ 

240 

COMMENTARY 96°24 

distinct from S, every S’ is A;; and (iii) for all S’ distinct from S, if every 
S’ is A; then S and S’ belong to the same kind (are species of the same 
genus). Notice that this procedure presupposes both that S is a species, 
and that we have already identified its genus or kind. Aristotle’s illus- 
tration is complicated by the fact that he first takes a predicate, existing, 
which satisfies (i) and (ii) but not (iii), and only then gives one, odd, 
which satisfies (i), (ii), and (iii). 

The essence of S, we can now say (96°32), is a conjunction, ¢, of 
predicates A,, Az,..., A,, where, first, each A; satisfies ()—(iii), and 
secondly, Sad. 

So far, the recipe does not ensure that S has a unique essence: choose 
B distinct from each A; in ¢ but satisfying (i)-(iii); then the con- 
junction ¢ & B will satisfy all the requirements so far placed on essences. 
Aristotle’s answer to this is implicit in his use of the word “‘first’’ at 
96°33: we are to cease collecting Ajs at the first conjunction which has 
the specified properties. Since B was picked after @ had been established, 
¢ & B is not the essence of S$. But suppose that we have picked A), 
Az,..., An-1 (call it 6’); and that 6’ & A, (= ¢) and ¢’ & B both 
have the specified properties: how can we choose between these two 
alternative essences? We can do so only if “‘first’” refers not to the order 
of our selecting the Aj but rather to some objective ordering of them; 
one of the main efforts of the rest of the chapter is to work out how such 
an objective ordering can be achieved. 

96°36: “‘prime (in both senses. ..)”: i.e. being neither the product nor 
the sum of two integers. Often, though not invariably, Aristotle supposes 
that one is not a number (e.g. Met N 1, 1088°6-8; cf. Heath (2), 83-4); 
hence three is not the sum of two integers. Since the only numbers prime 
in this latter way are 2 and 3, number, odd, and prime in this sense are 
sufficient to define three. If we read ‘“‘and” in ‘“‘prime and prime in this 
sense’’ (96°38) as “‘i.e.”’, we get precisely these three notions as definitive 
of three; 96°36 then has to be taken as listing attributes that hold, but 
may not be definitive, of three. 

96°1: We may still wonder whether ¢ is the essence of S. 961-6 makes 
explicit the condition implicit in ‘talways” at 96724: the A;s, if they are to 
be essential (“in what a thing is’’) must be necessary predicates of S. 
Condition (i) should be rewritten as: (i’) necessarily every S is Aj. 
Similar modifications must be made to (ii) and (iii). (At 96°2 I translate 
the MS text, which makes Aristotle’s parenthesis otiose; Ross’s emen- 
dation removes this minor inelegance. ) 

There follows (96°6) an argument for the essential status of ¢: ‘If ¢ is 
not the essence of S, it is a kind or genus of S; if G is a genus of S then it 
is possible that G belongs to something which is not S (cf. e.g. Top 4 5, 
102°31); but necessarily—by construction—if a is @ then a is an S$ 
(“‘...it holds of nothing other than atomic (i.e. individual) triplets’’). 
Hence ¢ is the essence of S’. 

Aristotle has no explicit argument for his first premiss; and we might 
wonder how he excludes the possibility that ¢ is a property of S (idion: 

241 

9671 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

see A 3, 73°7 note). The commentators deal with this by assuming that ¢ 
is predicated ‘in what S is’, i.e. that ¢ is either a part or the whole of the 
essence of S. The text does not state this assumption; and if Aristotle is 
making it, it needs justification: the whole purpose of the chapter is to 
tell us how to hunt down what is predicated in S’s essence. Arguments 
which depend on the assumption that we have already done this are not 
very helpful. 

Aristotle’s answer is, I think, implicit in the word “last” at 96°12: he is 
assuming that the Ajs that satisfy (i)—(iii) are arranged in an ordered 
set w, (Aj, Az,..., Any---, Am). Let ¢; be the ordered set (Aj, 
A2,...Aj;). Then ¢,, according to 96°33, gives the essence of S if Sad, 
and for no j < n Sag. ¢, is now (96°12) called “the last such predication 
to hold of the atoms’: if we run back through the 9,8 starting at ¢,,, $n 
will be the last set which fails to satisfy (ii). 

Fairly clearly, the ordering relation for y is that of subsumption: i.e. 
(V;) (A;aA;41). Given this ordering for y, then if ¢, is not the essence of 
S and if not-(Sad,-1), ¢, is a genus of S. If this does something to 
explain Aristotle’s argument, if does not justify it; for he gives no 
argument for the assumption that w can be ordered by subsumption— 
and indeed it clearly cannot be. 

96°15: This section is exceedingly difficult; even its overall purpose 
is obscure. Aristotle is offering advice to anyone “dealing with some 
whole”. The traditional interpretation takes this phrase to designate the 
attempt to define a term which is intermediate between infima species 
and summum genus. Pacius thought that Aristotle was discussing the 
definition of a particular type of infima species. Waitz and Ross think 
that Aristotle is providing general guidance on how to approach a subject 
(e.g. geometry) which one wants to treat demonstratively. If this last 
suggestion is right, then the section is at best loosely connected with the 
rest of B 13. 

The section divides into two parts, 96°15—21 and 96°21~-5; I shall first 
take the parts separately. 

It is natural to take “what is atomic in form” (96°16) to designate 
infimae species (cf. Bonitz, 120°58—"4). Thus when ‘dealing with a whole’ 
we are enjoined to determine the infimae species of the kind we are 
interested in; to define these infimae species; and to find their kind and 
infer their attributes. 

The third injunction requires three glosses. First, ‘‘getting what the 
kind is” (96°19): i.e. ‘finding out into what genus, i.e. under what 
category, S falls’. But why should this form part of our study? Does 
Aristotle imply that unless we know the category of S we cannot discover 
its properties? Secondly, the “proper attributes” (96°20) of the chosen 
infima species are probably the ‘in itself incidentals’ which it is the 
task of demonstrations to establish. (An A 1, 402°15 refers to these as 
“incidental properties” and says at 402°16—403°1 that their study is 

242 

COMMENTARY 96°15 

useful in the search for essences; but it is hard to find a close connection 
between that passage and ours.) Thirdly, what are ‘“‘the primitive com- 
mon items’ (96°20)? Hardly the most common predicates of all, the 
categories. Ross thinks of the predicates common to all species of the 
kind in question; but this allows no sense to the word “primitive” 
(prétos). Reference to the use of “first” (protos) at 96°33 suggests rather 
that ‘‘the primitive common items” are the members of ¢,; the ‘in itself 
incidentals’ of S are to be inferred from its essence. On the other hand, 
comparison with 4 10, 76°10, suggests the common axioms: we should 
infer the attributes of S by way of the common axioms—first ascertaining 
the kind of S$ in order to ensure the right instantiation of those axioms. 
This suggestion is, I think, the most appealing; but it gives no clear sense 
to “primitive”’. 

I turn to 96°21-5. Comparison with 4 28, 87°38-9, encourages us 
to construe “‘the items compounded from the atoms” (96°21) as “the 
derived terms”, and to take “the atoms” (96°21) and “the simples” 
(96°23) to designate primitive terms. “The characteristics” (96°21, 24) 
then designates the predicates proper to the science in question. “The 
definitions” (96°22) will be the definitions of the derived terms. 

Thus: ‘If you start from the definitions of the derived terms and a 
knowledge of the attributes of the primitives, then you will be able to 
work out the attributes of the derived terms; for the definitions and the 
attributions of primitives act as principles, and attributes hold of derived 
terms in virtue of their holding of primitives.’ For example, in geometry 
if we start from the definition of isosceles as triangle with two equal sides 
and if we know that triangles have 2 R, then we shall easily demonstrate 
that the isosceles has 2 R. 

96°16—25 as a whole thus yields the following argument: ‘First pick 
out the atoms, and prove their attributes; for the attributes of non-atoms 
will be deducible from these; for attributes hold of non-atoms in virtue 
of holding of atoms.’ The argument seems neat; but it equivocates on the 
term “atom”: at its first occurrence it means “‘infima species”; at its 
second, “primitive term”; at its third and fourth, “primary subject of 
predication”’. It is easy to see that these senses do not coincide. 

“Atom” cannot be read univocally as “infima species”: it is hard to 
refer “the items compounded from the atoms” to the higher genera; it is 
impossible to suppose that attributes ‘“‘hold of the other things in virtue 
of” their holding of an infima species. 

Can “atom” be read univocally as “primitive term”? The suggestion 
explains Aristotle’s use of “the primitives” at 96°16; but it does not fit 
the arithmetical examples (triad and pair are not primitive terms), nor is 
it clear why Aristotle should refer to the primitives as “atomic in form”’. 

Evidently, ‘‘atom” cannot be read univocally as ‘“‘primary subject of 
predication’’. 

Pacius offers a compromise solution: ta atoma toi eidei ta prota 
(96°16: “‘what is atomic in form-—-the primitives’’) is to be translated as 
“the primary infimae species”; and that is glossed as ‘those infimae 

243, 

96°15 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

species from which the remaining ones are constructed’ (as the integers 
are constructed from the numbers 2 and 3, or as plane figures are 
constructible from triangles). Thus “‘atom” designates univocally this 
special type of infima species. Against this ingenious interpretation it 
must be said, first, that Aristotle gives no indication that what he has to 
say is limited to those ‘wholes’ whose infimae species form ordered series 
of the sort Pacius requires; on the contrary, he gives every appearance of 
making an entirely general point. And secondly, Pacius must ascribe a 
patently false view to Aristotle—viz. that the properties of non-primary 
infimae species are all properties of primary infimae species (Pacius 
actually says that ‘‘the quintuplet has the properties of the pair and the 
triplet from which it is compounded’’). 
If 96°16~25 has a coherent interpretation, it remains to be found. 

96°25: Aristotle now returns to the topic of ‘division’ which he has 
criticized in B 5: and he enlarges upon the hints of g1°28—35 that division 
may help in the discovery of definitions, even though it can have no 
probative force. The pursuit for which divisions will be useful is either 
the one described in 96°16—25 or else the “hunt” which is the general 
subject of B 13. They will be useful “for deducing” only in a weak sense 
of “‘deduce”’—sullogizesthai here has its original meaning of “‘compute” 
or “work out”. 

96°30: ‘‘But it makes a difference . . .”: sometimes permuting adjectives 
makes a difference to the sense of a phrase—e.g. yam might be defined 
as American sweet potato but not as sweet American potato. But such 
differences are rare, and are not exemplified by Aristotle’s illustration. 
Rather, Aristotle has in mind his thesis that essences are somehow 
unitary (‘animal tame constitutes a single item”: 96°33). 

A definitional formula for S has the form: 

(1) GD, D,...Dn, 

where G is the ultimate genus of S and the Djs are differentiae. Now (1) 
represents a unity composed of two elements, a genus and a difference; 
this can be shown by bracketing, thus: 

(2) (G D, Dz... Dy-1)Dn- 
The bracketed portion of (2) must again represent a unity of two ele- 

ments; and so on. Thus (1) must be a nested set of genera and dif- 
ferences, thus: 

(3) (( fe CG D,) D2) a! )Dn-1)Dn- 

Not every ordering of the Djs will be such that every pair of brackets in 
(3) encloses a unity. Aristotle appears to assume that only one such 
ordering will satisfy this requirement; and he thinks that division enables 
us to secure that ordering. 

Aristotle offers no argument in support of this conclusion. The com- 
mentators in effect identify (3) with the set ¢,. Thus they take the 

244 

COMMENTARY 96°30 

ordering principle for (3) to be subsumption; and they suppose that 
(X, Y) expresses a unity only if XaY. Finally they observe that division 
will ensure that (3) is ordered by the subsumption relation. 

The connection between unity and subsumption is made explicit in 
Met Z 12; and it is tacitly supposed later in our present chapter. None 
the less, it sits uneasily on the argument here; for Aristotle’s illus- 
tration—tame two-footed animal—fails to exhibit the required subsump- 
tion. (Not all birds are tame: HA E 13, 544°29; and, more generally, 
note the pertinent doubts at Top Z 6, 144°12—30.) 

96°31: “e.g. whether you say animal tame two-footed...”: I have 
followed the Greek closely here, preserving the word-order. Animal 
tame two-footed gives the acceptable bracketing (animal tame) two- 
footed. Two-footed animal tame must therefore be unacceptable. Two- 
footed animal surely constitutes as much of a ‘unity’ as tame animal: 
presumably ‘“‘two-footed animal” is unacceptable because it does not 
exhibit the subsumption relation (not all animals are two-footed). 

96°35: ‘“‘then you must make a division. . .”: i.e. ‘when one postulates 
the elements of the definition one must do so on the basis of a division’. 
The Greek permits three further interpretations, viz.: ‘one must, when 
making divisions, postulate (rather than try to prove)’; ‘it follows that, 
when making divisions, one postulates (rather than proves)’; ‘it follows 
that one postulates on the basis of division’. Ross argues cogently for the 
version I have adopted. 

96°35: Aristotle’s argument assumes that only one division of a kind 
divides it exhaustively; but the examples he has already used prove this 
to be false: both tame/wild and terrestrial/aquatic/aerial exhaustively 
divide animal. Thus the instruction to ‘take the first difference’ is not 
uniquely satisfiable; hence the divisional procedure cannot guarantee 
that “you omit nothing in what the thing is” (96°35). 

In Met Z 12 Aristotle argues that, in the strict sense, the definition of $ 
consists just of G and D,, the last difference; if that were so, then it 
would not of course matter whether any differences were omitted in the 
definitional procedure. 

97°6: “‘Eudemus says that in the opinion of Speusippus it is impossible 
to define anything that there is without knowing everything that there is” 
(Speusippus, frag. 31” Lang = 63a Taran—see further frags. 31°° Lang 
= 63b—e Taran; Cherniss, 59-63; TARAN (1981), 388-92). Speusippus 
did not infer that definition was impossible; rather he engaged in a 
heroic pursuit of omniscience. Aristotle first sets out the Speusippan 
argument (97°6-11), then offers two objections (97711—14, 14-22). 

Speusippus’ argument is drawn up against any sort of definition, and 
not specifically against divisional definition; Aristotle deals with it here 
because he can find objections based on the properties of divisions. It is 
not clear from our texts exactly how Speusippus’ argument should be set 
out. 

First, the references in the key sentence (“Yet some people say... 

245 

97°6 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

differences’: 97*8) are obscure. I paraphrase: ‘But (i) you cannot know 
how X differs from Y without knowing Y; and (ii) if you do not 
know how Y differs from other things, you do not know Y.’ Secondly, 
“knowing X” might, I think, mean either (A) “knowing what X is” or 
(B) “‘being able to recognize Xs”. These two interpretations generate 
two arguments for two different conclusions. Thirdly, the two arguments 
each require one premiss which is not found in the text. 

In Argument A, (i) becomes (6), (ii) becomes (5), and (4) must be 
supplied; thus: 

(4) Anyone who has defined X knows what X is; 

(5) Anyone who knows what X is knows, for every Y, how, if at all, 
X differs from Y;, 

(6) Anyone who knows how, if at all, X differs from Y knows what Y 
1S. 

Hence: 
(7) Anyone who has defined anything knows what everything is. 

In Argument B, (i) becomes (10), (ii) becomes (9), and (8) is supplied; 
thus: 

(8) Anyone who has defined X is able to recognize Xs; 
(9) Anyone who is able to recognize Xs knows, for every Y, whether 
or not Xs differ from Ys; 
(10) Anyone who knows whether or not Xs differ from Ys is able to 
recognize Ys. 

Hence: 

(11) Anyone who has defined anything is able to recognize 

everything. 

Speusippus supported his second premiss—i.e. either (5) or (9)—by 
observing that X is non-identical with Y if it differs from Y, and identical 
with Y if it does not differ from Y. Perhaps he meant that if you can 
recognize Xs (or know what Xs are), and X and Y are not the same, 
then you can pick out Xs from Ys—you know that (or how) X differs 
from Y. 

In his first objection Aristotle argues that the proposition used to 
support (5) or (9) is false: not all differences ground non-identity; S and 
S’ may both belong to G, and thus be the same in kind, while having 
many different attributes. Not all differences are essential (“in respect of 
their essence”: 97°13), and only essential differences need be known by 
a definer (but contrast Top A 18, 108°2~4). Dogs differ from cats, but 
they do not differ gua animal; thus you may know what an animal is 
without knowing how dogs differ from cats. (And you may know what 
an animal is without knowing anything at all about tapirs or pangolins.) 

Aristotle’s second objection turns on divisional procedure: ‘You will 
get a definition of XY given two assumptions—and neither assumption 
involves you in omniscience.’ The first assumption is that every species 
of G is either D, or D*,, where D*; is the opposite of D;. Evidently this 

246 

COMMENTARY 97°6 

does not involve us in omniscience. The second assumption is that S is 
D,. And we can clearly know this whether or not we know anything else 
that is D, or D*,: I can know that men are two-legged without knowing 
either that birds are two-legged or that cows are four-legged. The same 
assumptions hold for the genus (G D,)—that every S in (G D,) is either 
D, or D*,, and that S is D2. And thus one proceeds along (3), never 
needing to know anything about any species other than S. 

As it stands, Aristotle’s objection will only work against a Speusippan 
who is prepared to countenance divisional definitions; but his central 
point is not limited to divisional contexts and is effective against any 
Speusippan theorist: I can know that S is D, without knowing of any S’ 
whether it is D, or D*,. Speusippus’ second premiss—(5) or (9)—is 
simply false. 
97°20: “The claim that everything falls into the division...”: i.e. 
‘Every S in G is either D; or D*,, if D, is to constitute a genuine 
differentia of G’ (cf. 96°35—97°6). This is not a ‘postulate’ because it 
does not propound anything that a (Speusippan) interlocutor would not 
already believe (A 10, 76°23—34). 

97°23: This section contains Aristotle’s considered statement of the 
method of divisional definition; the divider will get a correct definition 
provided that (a) he collects essential predicates of S; (6b) he arranges 
these in their proper order; and (c) he ensures that none are omitted (cf. 
B 5, 91°28-32). Though Aristotle presents this as a partial vindication of 
the divisional method, it can hardly serve as such: proviso (a), even in 
Aristotle’s description, has no connection with division; and (b) and (c) 
do not require the setting-up of a formal division. 

(a) 97°26-8: By “‘the ability to establish things through the kind” 
Aristotle apparently means the capacity to use the fopoi or recipes which 
he sets out and discusses in Top 4: the recipes allow us to test whether or 
not G is a kind under which a sort S falls. Aristotle states that the same 
recipes will serve for differentiae (cf. Top A 4, 101°17—19), so that all the 
essential predicates of S will be discoverable by these means. The recipes 
for ‘deducing’ incidentals (i.e. contingent attributes of $) are offered in 
Top l.\n Top Z Aristotle offers a series of ftopoi for the establishment of 
definitions; it is strange that he does not refer to these here. 

(b) 97°28-34: By procedure (a) we have collected the A;s which 
are to be conjoined into ¢,, the defining set of S. In order to get the 
Ajs in their correct order, we must first select that A, from ¢, such 
that (Vi) (A; aA;) & not-(Vi) (A; aA;) [did Aristotle mean:...& 
not-(3i) (A; aA,)?]. A; is the first element in the definition of S. Let 
bn—A; be ¢;: now carry out the same procedure on ¢;: the element 
selected from ¢; will be the second element of the definition of S. Carry 
on in this way until all of ¢, is exhausted. 

This procedure assumes that at every stage there is a unique A; 
satisfying the selection requirements. If there is ever more than one such 
A,, then perhaps some arbitrary ordering procedure could be harmlessly 

247 

97°23 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

superadded; but if there is no such A; then the procedure breaks down. 
The assumption that there is always at least one such A; is equivalent to 
the assumption that (3) can always be ordered by subsumption. The 
falsity of this assumption has already been seen. 

(c) 97°35~-°6: The last paragraph is not one of Aristotle’s clearest; I 
offer the following paraphrase: “That ¢, is a complete definition of S is 
seen as follows: the defining process begins by taking the first A;, viz. Aj, 
and, noting that every S in A, is either Az or A*>, by grasping that S is 
Az; then it treats this new whole—viz. (A; A )—in the same way to 
elicit A3. When the final whole is reached—(. . . ((A,; A2).. .)A,) (call it 
A;)—it is clear that there is no further divisional pair A,,4,/A*,4, such 
that every S in A, is either A,,; or A*,4;—or rather that, whether or 
not there is such a pair, at any rate no A, belongs to a different sort from 
any S. Now A, cannot contain anything not in the definition of S, since 
the A,s were selected as essential predicates. Nor can there be any item 
A* which is not in A, but is in the definition of S. For A* would have to 
be either the kind or the difference of S; it cannot be the kind of S, since 
A;—or rather (...({A; A2)...)An—-1;)—is that; and it cannot be a 
difference because A, has no, or no relevant, differences.’ 

Aristotle’s argument is sound; but again only on the undefended and 
indefensible assumption that all the definitional elements of S can be 
uniquely arranged in a descending order. 

97°38: ‘‘—or rather...”: “or” is corrective; any differences there may 
be within A, will not be specific differences between S and some other 
species in Ag. 

‘ 

” 

97°2: “it would have to be either a kind... 

: an improved version of 
the argument at 96°6- 10. 

97°7: The illustration at 9715-25 (cf. EN 4 7-9; EE I 5) illuminates 
the abstract prescription of 97°7—15. Aristotle does not say whether this 
method of hunting definitions is alternative or complementary to the 
method of division. 

Aristotle thinks that we acquire general concepts by a process of 
abstraction (cf. Phys A 1; APst B 19); he now suggests that we can define 
those concepts by, so to speak, justifying our acquisition of them. 

Suppose we have to define S. We first take the infimae species of 
S—say S;, S2, S3—and consider the sets of individuals {a,, ay. ..} in S), 
{b,, by...} in S; and {c), e2...} in S3. The aj are all “similar and 
undifferentiated” (97°7) since they belong to the same infima species. 
Next, we collect the attributes common to all the ass—the set 6,—and 
similarly for the bjs and the es. Finally, ¢, is formed by selecting all and 
only the common members of ¢,, ¢p, and ¢, (¢, is the intersection of ¢, 
and ¢» and ¢,): is ¢, is non-empty, then its members conjunctively 
constitute the definition of S; if ¢, is empty, S is ambiguous (it will have 
three senses if ¢,, dp, and ¢, have no overlap at all, and two senses if 
any pair of ¢a, dp, and ¢ have a non-empty intersection). 

248 

COMMENTARY 97°7 

There are three standing objections to any such abstractionist account 
of the definition of general terms. First, it seems clear that the abstrac- 
tionist will often collect far too many attributes in ¢,: there are many 
predicates non-essential to men and yet shared by all men (e.g. “having 
hairless palms’’, ‘‘being red-blooded”’, “‘being less than 10 feet tall’’). 
The abstractionist will wrongly put these into his definition. 

Secondly, abstractionism is likely to produce a non-empty ¢, in cases 
of ambiguous S: if S is mole, ¢, will contain at least physical object, and 
this will then count as the definition of mole. The procedure will not 
allow us to distinguish between the animal and the artefact. 

Thirdly, abstractions cannot account for those general terms whose 
instances do not have any set of features in common. The stock example 
is the term game: the word “‘game””’, it is said, is not ambiguous; yet there 
are no features which all games—tennis, poker, polo, solitaire—have in 
common: rather, games are united by a looser ‘family resemblance’. 

Aristotle has at least a partial answer to these criticisms; it is implicit 
in his requirement that we find the features which belong to magnani- 
mous men as such (97°17)—i.e. the features each has in virtue of being a 
magnanimous man. All other features, whether peculiar to individual Ss 
or common to all our initial set, can be disregarded. This amounts to the 
stipulation that ¢, is constituted by those predicates which are common 
to every a; and which belong to a, in virtue of the fact that a; is an S. This 
saps, but does not entirely destroy, the force of the first objection: it 
ensures that ¢, will not contain any accidental features of S; but it does 
not exclude non-definitive necessary features of S from @,. 

The further stipulation——not explicit in Aristotle but obvious enough 
(see 96°32)—-that the conjuncts of 4, should together entail S, is suf- 
ficient to overcome the second objection. And the third objection seems 
to me to have no power. 

Aristotle’s ‘abstractionism’ is, I think, less objectionable than it seemed 
at first sight: that is so at least in part because abstraction, on closer 
examination, plays no very serious part in it. 

97°25: The last section of B 13 contains four notes only loosely 
interconnected. 

(a) 97°25: “Every definition is... universal’: i.e. ‘every definiens 
holds universally of its definiendum’. The doctor is not prescribing medi- 
cines to make eyes healthy but determining or defining what state of an 
eye—or of a particular sort of eye (e.g. a human eye)—“is a healthy 
state. The commentators attach this note to the preceding section: since 
the two putative definientia of magnanimity do not belong to all cases of 
magnanimity, the term ‘“‘magnanimous”’ must cover two definienda. 

(b) 97°28: “the particulars” and “undifferentiated items” are infimae 
Species, not individuals. The more general a term, the more easily its 
homonymy will escape our notice, because (presumably) we are likely to 
have to consider more cases of the more general term before we hit upon 
its homonymy. 

249 

97°31 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

(c) 97°31: On clarity in definition see Top Z 2, where homonymy and 
metaphor appear as the first two sources of obscurity. “The particulars 
which you have mentioned” (97°33) are individuals of the kind stated or 
laid down for definition. For the examples of similarity and sharpness see 
B 17, 99° 11-15; Top A 15, 106°12-20. 

(@) 97°37: For similar judgements on metaphor see e.g. Top 4 3, 
123°33-7; 1 17, 176°14-25; Metr B 3 357°24-32. On metaphor in gen- 
eral: Rhet F 2, 10-11; Poet 21, 1457°6—-33. 

CHAPTER I4 

“The things about which deductions are, are the problems” (Top 4 4, 
101°16). To set a problem is to pose a question of the form: “Is P the 
case or not?”; and to answer a problem is to ., Provide a deduction 
concluding either to P or to not-P (Top A 4, 101°15-36; 11, 104°1—5). 
To “get to grips with” a problem (98*1) is probably to acquire premisses 
appropriate to its solution (cf. APr A 27, 43°1). The method Aristotle 
offers is a good way of tackling problems just in so far as it leads to their 
easy solution. (See LENNOX (1987), 97-9.) 

The method consists in the construction (by division) of a tree of the 
genus and species of the subject under study, and in the assembly (by 
reference to the anatomies) of all those predicates holding universally of 
the genus or of its species. With this machinery our problems can be 
solved demonstratively: we want to know if S is P or not. $ is shown to 
be P provided that P is among the predicates assembled against some 
species S’ which is above S in the relevant tree. In such a case a 
deduction is forthcoming; and the machinery ensures that the deduction 
is demonstrative, thus answering the question why S is P. 

APr A 27, 43°1—40, describes a more elaborate machinery for tackling 
problems; the elaborations are due to the fact that non-demonstrative 
deductions are acceptable in the context of the chapter. 

98°2: ‘‘...the anatomies and the divisions’: the use of the divisions 
is straightforward (Aristotle himself compiled several books of ‘divisions’ 
—Bonitz, 104°21-33—and such compilation was a common practice in 
the Academy). The ‘anatomies’ are less clear. Aristotle wrote Anatomies, 
which seem to have been detailed anatomical descriptions of animals 
based on dissection (Bonitz, 104°3-17). Since Pacius, however, the 
commentators have felt the need to find a different sort of ‘anatomies’ in 
our passage, and they have supposed that Aristotle is referring to some 
logical exercises about which we know nothing. Such a supposition 
requires us to take “‘anatomies” in a singular sense; and the reasons 
advanced in its favour (and collected by Ross) seem very feeble. I prefer 
to refer “‘anatomies” to the Anatomies (cf. esp. PA I 14, 674°17 ~~ 98°17). 

98*10: “C, D, E, individual animals”: i.e. ‘individual species of 
animal’. 

98713: Cf. A 5, 74°17-25; APr A 35.—-Aristotle follows his own advice 

250 

COMMENTARY 98713 

and regularly attends to ‘anonymous’ characteristics—i.e. characteristics 
only describable by periphrasis. The illustration goes like this: ‘Why do 
cows have a third stomach?—Because they have no top incisors (and 
hence need some other aid to digestion).—And why do they have no top 
incisors?—Because they have horns (which use up all the tough tooth- 
material available to them)’ (PA I 14, 674°22-°17; cf. 2, 663°31-664°3). 
See further BALME (1987), 86-8; GOTTHELF (1987), 178— 85; LENNOX 
(1987), 114-18. 

98°13: “At present we argue...”: I take Aristotle to be referring to 
the ways of contemporary biologists, who limit themselves to attributes 
expressible by a single common term. The orthodox but less plausible 
reading translates: “At present we are speaking...”; and glosses: ‘In 
the last section we were speaking ...’. 

98°20: Analogies are a profound feature of Aristotle’s biology; for the 
present illustration see Bonitz, 535 *43-51 (and for the squid’s pounce: 
HA 4 1, 524°22-8; for the ‘ Spine’, here used specifically of the bone- 
structure of fish: Bonitz, 23°51-24714; on bones: PA B 9). “Why does 
X’s flesh remain rigid?—-Because X has a pounce (where X is “squid’’) 
or a spine (where X is “‘fish’’) or bones (where X is, e.g., ‘““man”). (Cf. 
PA B 8, 654°19-26; HA 4 7, 532°31—°3.) 

Aristotelian analogies are almost invariably functional; why then can 
we not “take any one identical thing which (all the analogous parts) 
should be called” (98°21)? If the parts all fulfil some function F, then the 
“one identical thing” can be named by the term “substance fulfilling 
function F”’’. Aristotle would argue that this term does not pick out any 
‘nature’; it is a purely formal description and (necessarily) does not 
specify the stuff or shape of the substance concerned; but a ‘nature’ 
needs material as well as formal specification. 

CHAPTER I5 

Aristotle means to describe two ways in which a pair of problems may be 
connected, but he does not express his meaning very clearly. Suppose 
two problems, Js S P or not? and Is S’ P' or not? These may be 
connected first (98°24-9) if S is P and S’ is P’ are both demonstrated 
through a middle term M or through middle terms M and M’ which are 
forms of some kind K; or secondly (98*29-34) if S = S’ and P’ is the 
middle term in the proof of S is P. 

On ‘reciprocity’, antiperistasis, see Ross; on reflection, anaklasis, see 
e.g. Metr B 9, 370°16—25. For echoes, | Probl] IA 8; mirrors, e.g., Sens 2, 
438°5-10; rainbows, A 13, 79°11, notes: in these three cases the middle 
term will be the same in kind but different in form, either as holding of 
different things (reflection of sound in the first case, of light in the latter 
two) or as holding in a different way (light is bent in one way by rain- 
drops, in another by mirrors). Aristotle wrote a book on the Flooding of 
the Nile, of which we have a Latin epitome (frags. 246-8 R°*); the 
problem was a standing one for Greek scientists. 

251 

98°35 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

CHAPTER 16 

The language of B 16 suggests at first that Aristotle is reopening the 
questions already answered in B 12 about the temporal relations between 
explanans and explanandum. But the argument of the chapter shows that 
the temporal language is being used in a logical sense: the problem of 
the chapter is, in short, to determine whether an explanans constitutes 
both a necessary and a sufficient condition for its explanandum. 

98°35: Thus suppose that C is A because of B; i.e. that AaC, through a 
middle term B. Then, Aristotle asks, is it the case (i) that BaA, and (ii) 
that AaB? It is evident from the whole of APst that the answer to (ii) is 
affirmative; Aristotle here suggests that the answer to (i) might be 
affirmative as well—for if B does not always hold when A holds, there 
must be some other explanation of A’s holding; so that B is not after all 
the correct explanation (98°2). It is this latter suggestion which is the 
controversial one, and which the rest of the chapter takes up. There are 
three arguments. 

98°4: Argument (A), that it cannot be the case that BaA: ‘If we had 
both AaB and BaA we should be able to demonstrate both AaC and 
BaC; but that, as A 3 showed, is not possible’ (98°4-16). To this 
objection Aristotle replies, in the manner of 4 13: “There would, indeed, 
be both a syllogism concluding to AaC and one concluding to BaC; but 
only the former would be a genuine demonstration of the reasoned 
fact—the latter is either no demonstration at all or else (as B 16 actually 
has it) only a demonstration of the fact’ (98°16—24). The illustrations 
and the argument run closely parallel to those of A 13; but B 16 adds one 
important point, won by the discussions of B 3-12: “‘an explanation is 
prior to what it is explanatory of” (98°17) and the priority is definitional 
(98°22). Thus the argument through B to AaC is the proper demon- 
stration provided only that B is an element in the definition of A, and 
not vice versa. 

9825: Argument (B), that it need not be the case that BaA. In Aris- 
totle’s terminology, ‘“B is explanatory of A” is elliptical for “B is ex- 
planatory of A for C’—i.e. “B explains why C is A’. Thus there are 
‘several explanations of one thing’ if there are distinct terms B, C, such 
that B explains why D is A, and C explains why E is A. If we have AaB, 
AaC, BaD, CaE, and if both AaB and AaC are immediate, then (granted 
certain other obvious assumptions) both B and C will be explanatory of 
the same thing, viz. A. For possible illustrations see A 13, 78°14—-21; 
A 29. 

98°29: ‘Hence when the explanation holds ...”: i.e. ‘If B is explana- 
tory of A for anything, then if B holds of X, A holds of X; but if A holds 
of X, and B is explanatory of A for something, it does not follow that B 
holds of X—there must be some Y explanatory of A for X, but it need 
not be B.’ 

o 

252 

COMMENTARY 98°32 

98°32: Argument (C), that BaA must hold. The editors take (C) to give 
Aristotle’s ‘real’ answer. But the section is as tentatively expressed as its 
predecessor; argument (C) is by no means conclusive; and the question 
of B 16 continues into B 17. Plainly B 16 is aporematic, and Aristotle’s 
considered view is not to be sought inside it. 

The argument is obscure; and both syntax and sense are in parts 
uncertain. The following comments are tentative. By “problems are 
always universal” I take Aristotle to mean that the conclusion of any 
explanatory demonstration will always be of the form AaC; and by “‘the 
explanation is some whole” he means that the premisses will have the 
form AaB and BaC. In that case, “‘what it is explanatory of must be 
universal’. What does this dark phrase signify? The illustrative example 
should help. “Shedding leaves” is substituted for A, and the whole 
to which it is “determined” is evidently C. A “holds of these items 
universally”, i.e. AaC. In addition, A “is determined to” C, even if C 
“has forms”. Here I suppose that Aristotle is harking back to his 
previous example, where we had both AaD and AaE: if this is so, he 
now suggests, then D and E will be forms or species of C, so that A will 
be limited to C; thus A is ‘determined to’ C inasmuch as CaA. Now given 
CaA and BaC, we may infer that BaA, so that ‘“‘the middle term and 
what it is explanatory of... must convert’. 

The argument, thus reconstructed, is valid (some reconstructions pre- 
sent Aristotle with an evidently invalid argument); but it lacks probative 
force. For Aristotle does not explain why A must be determined to C in 
this fashion: why, we must ask, should D and E be species of C? 

98°36-8 perhaps suggest a different line of thought. Suppose that 
trees in general shed their leaves because of solidification. Then (1) “if a 
tree...”: Le. if, e.g., oaks shed their leaves, then their moisture sol- 
idifies; and (2) “if solidification ...”: i.e. if the moisture of, e.g., oaks 
solidifies, then oaks shed their leaves. Aristotle is not thinking of leaf- 
shedding in general, but of the leaf-shedding of trees; and consequently 
he is not interested in solidification in general, but in solidification in 
trees. Perhaps, then, this is the sense in which A is “‘determined to” C; 
and if we assume that our terms are limited in this way (or, in a modern 
jargon, that the universe of discourse is limited to, e.g., trees), then A 
and B will convert: given that we are talking exclusively about trees, 
then every leaf-dropper is a solidifier and vice versa. 

CHAPTER 17 

99°t: Suppose that we have two arguments, (a) AaB, BaC + AaC, and 
(b) AaD, DaE | AaE; each is claimed to be an explanatory demon- 
stration. Aristotle considers briefly several cases (six, in all probability) 
in which this claim might be made. 

(i) Both (a) and (6) are full demonstrations (99*2). Then in (a) B is 
‘the account’ of A, and in (b) D is ‘the account’ of A. A single term 

253 

99*1 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

cannot have two accounts; hence if B and D are distinct, (a) and (b) are 
not both explanatory demonstrations. 

APst, however, does not commit Aristotle to the view that the middle 
term in a demonstration must express the whole definition of the major; 
the most it requires is that the middle should express part of the defi- 
nition of the major (and it probably does not require even this). But 
then it is clearly a possibility that both B and D should represent parts 
of the definition of A, and hence that (a) and (b) should both be 
explanatory. 

(ii) Either AaC or AaE is shown “‘in virtue of a sign” (99°3) (see APr 
B 27 for sign arguments). Aristotle implies (9974) that in this case it is 
possible for both (a) and (b) to be explanatory deductions; but sign 
arguments infer cause from effect, so that if either (a) or (b) is a sign 
argument it is not an explanatory deduction. 

(iii) Either AaC or AaE is proved incidentally (99°3). “But such 
things are not thought to count as problems” (99*6). If a genuine prob- 
lem has as its solution the conclusion that the moon is eclipsed (AaC), 
then we might “inquire incidentally .. . about what it is explanatory of” 
(99°5) by asking whether BaC (where B is any incidental attribute of 
eclipses, e.g. that of terrifying the superstitious); and we might inquire 
incidentally “‘about what it is explanatory for” by asking whether AaE 
(where E is any incidental attribute of the moon, e.g. being the home of 
Artemis). Only the latter case is strictly relevant here. AaE does not give 
rise to a ‘problem’ because it is an incidental connection, and such 
connections have no explanation. Hence, given (iii), (@) and (5) are not 
both explanatory demonstrations. 

At 99°6 the word “otherwise” (ei... mé) is generally expanded into: 
‘If they are treated as problems . . .’; in that case what I list as (iv) and (v) 
are in fact two examples of (iii). But Ross argues plausibly that ‘‘other- 
wise” is parallel to “if the conclusions have been demonstrated...” 
(99°2) and ‘‘if they have not. . .”’ (99°4); thus it introduces a further pair 
of cases, parallel and not subordinate to (iii). 

(iv) “if they are in a kind...”: i.e. ‘If C and E are both species of 
some kind G, then B and D will both be species of some kind G’; (and 
in that case neither (a) nor (6) will be properly explanatory. Explanation 
must come from a deduction with G’ as its middle term).’ The case is 
illustrated at 99*8—11. (For the illustration cf. 4 5, 74°18, notes.) The 
major premiss of the argument was implicit in the reasoning of B 16, 
98°34; again, Aristotle offers nothing in its support. 

(v) “if the items are homonymous... .”: i.e. ‘If C and E are homony- 
mous in (a) and (b), both bearing the ‘name’ A, but in a different sense, 
then B and D are homonymous in (a) and (b), for the same reason.’ 
Hence both (a) and (6b) may be demonstrative, but uninterestingly so; 
for, given (v), they do not supply genuine instances of different expla- 
nations for some one feature. 

Case (v) is illustrated at 99°11-15. The account of similar figures 
is the same as that found at Euclid, vi def. 1; the account of similar 
colours is singular: it presumably means that X and Y are similar in 

254 

COMMENTARY 99°71 

colour if they are perceptually indistinguishable in respect of colour. 

(vi) 99°15: if C and E are “‘the same by analogy” then so too are B 
and D (cf. B 14, 9820-3). Aristotle implies, I think, that here (a) and 
(b) do not offer different explanations for the same thing; but he seems 
to concede all that an opponent could want: in any pair of cases (a) and 
(b), there will of course be an analogy between B and D (for by 
construction each explains the occurrence of some one term A); yet for 
all that, B and D may be, in a clear sense, different terms. 

99°16: This section enlarges upon the argument of B 16, 9832-8. 

Suppose n arguments of the form: AaB, BaC, + AaC,; AaB, BaCy+ 
AaC;;...; AaB, BaC,,+ AaC,. Then “if the items are taken severally”, 
A “extends further” than each; i.e. (Wi) (AaC; > (Af) (i # j & AaC)). 
“But if they are taken all together it extends equally”; i.e. if C is the 
disjunction of all the Cs, then AaC & CaA. “Similarly for the middle 
term”: i.e. the same argument goes through if A is replaced by B. (For 
the mathematical illustration see A 24, 86°1; and with the argument in 
general cf. APr B 23, 68°18-29.) 

If we suppose that B is the primitive middle term (99725), i.e. that 
AaB is immediate, then B gives the definition of A. Working from the 
other direction, we can find some term D such that DaC; is immediate 
for every C; (99°26). Finally, there may be one or more middle terms 
between B and D (99*27). (The illustration is familiar from B 16; “the 
connection of the seed” (99729) is said to mean ‘“‘the joint between leaf 
and stem’’.) 

The argument in this section makes some little advance over 98°32--8. 
It is true that Aristotle gives us no new reason for thinking that A will be 
coextensive with—i.e. will convert with-—all the C;s taken together. The 
Cis are supposed to comprise all the species of some genus (e.g. the 
genus of trees); and A is doubtless intended to be ‘determined to’ this 
genus. But, again, there is no argument to show that it must be so 
determined. We do, however, get a new reason for holding that the first 
premiss, AaB, in an explanatory demonstration must convert, i.e. that 
BaA must also hold. For B is said to be the definition of A, and 
a definiens must have the same extension as its definiendum. More 
precisely, Aristotle claims that the primary major premiss in any demon- 
strative chain must be a definition and hence must convert. (‘Why may 
not B simply be part of the definition of A, the part which, so to speak, 
explains why A holds of C?’—Well, if D is the definition of A, and B is a 
part of D, then we shall be able to derive AaB from AaD and DaB, so 
that AaB will not be a primitive proposition.) 

99°30: This section ends (99°4-7) with a clear answer to Aristotle’s 
question: there cannot be different explanations of the same attribute for 
different individuals of the same species; but there can be different 
explanations of the same attribute for different types of thing. And 
Aristotle’s example (for which see Long Vit 4-6; PA 4 2, 677°30~°1; 

255 

99°30 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

APr A 23, 68°15—29) makes it unequivocally clear that in some cases at 
least the answers to the questions: Why is C A? and: Why is E A? may 
be different. 

The argument which leads to this conclusion is, however, uncertain. 
It begins by promising a ‘schematic’ presentation of the interrelation 
between explanans and explanandum. ‘‘Schematically” translates epi ton 
schématon, literally “in the case of the figures’. We would naturally 
suppose this to mean “considered syllogistically”; but the consideration 
that follows is not syllogistic, and we must, I suppose, follow the tra- 
ditional explanation of the phrase which refers the ‘figures’ to the letters 
used in setting out the examples. The two examples ‘schematically’ 
treated, moreover, do not illustrate the interrelations sketched in the 
preceding section (99*16-29); rather, they hark back to B 16, 98°25-31, 
with which the preceding section is at odds. 

Ross notes the connection with 98°25-31; but he thinks that he can 
reconcile the doctrine of 98°25-31 with that of 99716~-29: Aristotle, he 
thinks, “‘is taking for granted two syllogisms which connect B and C 
respectively with A through a middle term definitory of A”. Thus a com- 
plete demonstrative chain for, say, AaD, will begin with some premiss 
AaF where F is a definition of A; but lower down in the chain, the 
middle term will not be definitive and the premisses will not convert. 
And it is one of these lower, non-definitive, middle terms, say B, which 
is, properly speaking, explanatory of AaD. 

This account is, I think, self-consistent and consistent with the letter of 
the text; moreover, it effects a pleasant syncretism between the diver- 
gent views of the earlier parts of B 17 and B 16. But it is somewhat con- 
trived; and the text gives no hint of it: I suspect there is no reconciliation. 

99°34: “‘I call universal ...”: this use of katholou and the complemen- 
tary use of ‘“‘primitive universal” are unique. 

99°36: “‘...A must extend alongside further than B: if it does not, why 
will B be explanatory rather than A?” (99°36-7): i.e. ‘We must have 
AaB but not BaA. For suppose AaB & BaA: then we should have no 
reason to choose between AaB, BaCt AaC and BaA, AaCt BaC as our 
explanatory demonstration.’ Could Aristotle have written this, without 
gloss or apology, immediately after writing 99°21 (which says that AaB 
must convert) and 98°19~—24 (which explains how we should discriminate 
between the two candidate demonstrations)? 

99°38: If for every i AaE,, then “all of them together will be some one 
thing different from B”’’; i.e. for some C distinct from B we shall have 
CaE. Aristotle gives a reason for this; and then, in the parenthetical 
sentences, he indicates that he is not yet clear about the matter. “If 
not...”: i.e. ‘unless there is such a C you will not be able to say that 
AaE whereas not-EaA’. We are evidently still assuming that AaD, where 
D is distinct from E: hence not-EaA. Perhaps the thought is this: since E 
is distinct from A, there must be some reason why AaE, and unless you 
can grasp that reason, C, then you cannot properly affirm that AaE. 

256 

COMMENTARY 99°38 

“Why will there not be...”: i.e. ‘given that we have B in the case of the 
Ds, it is only reasonable to suppose that we shall have C in the case of 
the E,s’. This sentence is introduced by the word gar (“for’’); but it is 
not clear whether Aristotle intends it to offer an explanation of the 
immediately preceding sentence, or rather to provide a second reason 
for the general thesis of the paragraph. 

However that may be, the parenthesis at 99?2~—3 shows that Aristotle 
was aware of the weakness of the preceding lines. The general frailty of 
this section, and the fact that it fits ill into its context, lead to the sus- 
picion that, despite superficial appearances, it does not give Aristotle’s 
last word on the issue raised in B 16. In that case, we do not have 
Aristotle’s last word. 

CHAPTER 18 

This chapter considers ex professo a question which we have already met 
with incidentally (above, p. 155) and which the end of B 17 has tacitly 
posed again (and tacitly answered). Suppose we have a conclusion AaD 
mediated by n middle terms, B,, Bo,..., B, (AaB,, B,aD, and each 
B,aB;,, are immediate). Thus there are n candidate demonstrations of 
AaD.: which is the truly explanatory demonstration? which B; is explana- 
tory of A for D? Aristotle takes the simplest case, in which n = 2 (B, = 
B, B, = C); and he answers that C is explanatory. His argument for this 
answer is poor: ‘Since C certainly explains BaD, it explains AaD.’ Pacius 
observes that if you at first cite only B in explanation of AaD you will be 
obliged eventually to cite C if you are to give a full explanation; if this is 
true, it works equally well with B and C reversed. It is indeed surprising 
that Aristotle himself did not notice this point, and that he never 
questioned the tacit presupposition of 8 18 that just one of B and C must 
be ‘the’ explanation of AaD. For, given Aristotle’s notion of expla- 
nation, it seems very plausible to suggest that AaD is explained by 
reference to all the propositions used in its demonstration, or at least by 
reference to all the first principles on which its demonstration depends— 
and in either case all the terms which mediate AaD will be equally 
involved in its explanation. 

99°47: “If the explanations do not at once arrive at what is atomic”’: i.e. 
‘if the first middle term between A and D does not yield a pair of im- 
mediate propositions AaX, XaD’. Thus Mure and Ross; earlier editors 
attach the sentence to the end of B 17, and read ‘“‘what is atomic” as 
“what is individual”; this gives a good sense, but it makes the end of 
B 17 somewhat prolix and the beginning of B 18 somewhat abrupt. 

99°9: ‘the one which is primitive in the direction of the universal . . .”: 
i.e. B, which is immediately connected to A, the most general term in 
the series. 

99°11: ‘“‘the one nearest to what it is explanatory for”: the explanatory 

257 

gg? It POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

term is explanatory of A for D; and the ‘nearest’ term to D, i.e. the term 
immediately connected to D, is C. Thus “the nearest...” denotes C. 

g9’12: ‘this term explains why the primitive term falls under the 
universal”: “‘this term’’ refers to C, “the primitive term” to D, and “‘the 
universal” to B (as the next clause makes clear). 

This is, I think, the appropriate place to discuss a doctrine about which I 
have so far said nothing; I mean the doctrine of the Commensurate 
Universal. In its most extreme form this doctrine states that the pre- 
misses of a demonstration must be ‘universal’ in the strong sense of 
being about ‘commensurate’ universals—in short, that they must con- 
vert. (If AaB and BaA, then A and B are commensurate, or coexten- 
sive.) See e.g. KULLMANN (1974), 183. 

The terminology of the doctrine is not Aristotelian. Some think that 
Aristotle’s phrase for the commensurate universal is “primitive uni- 
versal” (see B 17, 99°34—A 4, 74°3, and B Ig, 100°16, connect ‘“‘primi- 
tive’ and “universal” in quite different ways); but this is plainly wrong 
(pace INWOOD (1979)). 

The doctrine is not explicit in Aristotle. Some have found it at A 4, 
74°3, where what holds universally of B is contrasted with what extends 
“further than B’’. Others have found the doctrine at B 17, 99716—29; but 
there (see p. 255) Aristotle allows immediate premisses which are non- 
commensurate (the DaC;js). 

Is the doctrine implicit in Aristotle? Four arguments have suggested 
that it is. First, the premisses of demonstrations are definitions, and 
definitions all convert (cf. A 12, 78*12).—But Aristotle does not, I think, 
really believe that all the premisses of every demonstration are full 
definitions (though see p. 107). Secondly, I2-predications convert, and 
every demonstration consists of I2-predications.—But it is not quite 
clear that every I2-predication must convert (see p. 113); and even if 
Aristotle does sometimes assume that every demonstration must contain 
at least one I2-predication, he neither justifies this assumption nor makes 
the stronger assumption that every demonstration must consist solely of 
I2-predications. 

Thirdly, there is an argument of Zabarella’s: “‘...no predicate can 
belong to its subject primitively unless it is coextensive with it; for if it 
extends further and belongs in another subject too, then it will not 
belong in that primitively, but in some other prior to it—viz. the com- 
mon kind which embraces these two subjects.”—-Zabarella assumes that 
if AaB and AaC, then for some D prior to B and C, AaD. But Aristotle 
argues against this principle at 4 23, 84°3-18; he implies its falsity at 
A 3, 73°17; and he countenances its negation at B 16, 98°26-8 (cf. APr 
B 21, 66°20). Finally, there is the position discussed in B 16-17, that 
explanatory middle terms must convert.—But in so far as B 16-17 reach 
any conclusion, it is against rather than for this position. 

There is, in any case, excellent evidence that Aristotle did not adhere 

“6 

258 

COMMENTARY 99°12 

to the doctrine of the commensurate universal: he says explicitly once, 
and he implies more than once, that convertible propositions are not the 
rule in demonstrations (A 3, 73°18; cf. A 12, 7876-12; A 13, 78°29, rr). 
What should Aristotle have said about the doctrine? Some of the 
principles of every demonstrative science are definitions; and definitions 
convert: hence some premisses of some demonstrations will deal with 
commensurate universals. But there is, as far as I can see, no reason for 
Aristotle to adopt anything stronger than this rather humdrum thesis. 

CHAPTER 19 

The subject of this celebrated chapter is our apprehension of first prin- 
ciples. Aristotle’s view on this topic has already been intimated in APst 
(cf. A 2, 71°16; 3, 7218-25) and it is worked out, in a fashion closely 
parallel to that of B 19, in the first chapter of the Metaphysics. The 
source of B 19 is to be found in Plato: “Is it the blood with which we 
think, or air, or fire? Or none of these but rather the brain, which 
supplies the senses of hearing and seeing and smelling—and from these 
memory and opinion might come about, and from memory and opinion, 
when they come to rest, understanding comes about in the same way?’ 
(Phaedo 96°; cf. Phaedrus, 249°). Socrates is reporting his early cogi- 
tations on natural science; and it is probable that the theory he describes 
here was advanced by some earlier thinker. 

B Ig raises numerous problems, of general and of detailed inter- 
pretation. It is well to begin by stating three puzzles which affect the 
chapter as a whole. First, B 19 is Janus-faced, looking in one direction 
towards empiricism, and in the other towards rationalism. The principles 
are apprehended by ‘induction’ (epagdgé) in an honest empiricist way; 
but they are also grasped by nous, or ‘intuition’ as it is normally trans- 
lated, in the easy rationalist fashion. It is a classic problem in Aristotelian 
scholarship to explain or reconcile these two apparently opposing aspects 
of Aristotle’s thought. (There is an excellent statement of the problem in 
Le Blond (1), 131-40; cf. 274, 371 n. 2; and Lee, 118-24.) 

Secondly, the opening section of B 19 pretends to broach a new 
subject, the apprehension of the principles. Yet a major portion of Book 
B has, it seems, been devoted to just this topic: definitions are principles, 
and a chief aim of the book has been to explain how we may come to 
grasp definitions. Does B 19 belong to a different stratum of Aristotle’s 
thought? Or are the two attempts to account for our apprehension of the 
principles complementary? 

Thirdly, most commentators have found a deep-seated ambiguity in 
B 19: its ‘principles’ vacillate between primitive propositions and primi- 
tive terms. On the one hand, if Aristotle means to talk about the prin- 
ciples of demonstrations, he should be speaking of propositions; on the 
other hand, much of the language of B I9 suggests that he is speaking of 
concept-acquisition. Was Aristotle guilty of a gross confusion? Or is 
there some way out? (There is a clear statement of this puzzle in 
Solmsen, 95-I01.) 

259 

99°15 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

I shall return briefly to these three puzzles at the end of my comments. 

The chapter begins with a short preamble (99"15-19), which indi- 
cates that the official goal of the Analytics, announced at APr A 1, 
24*10-11, has been achieved, and which then poses a further and supple- 
mentary object of study. The body of the chapter then divides into three 
parts: first, Aristotle states the two questions he wants to discuss (99°20- 
6); then fol lows a long answer to what I shall call the first question 
(99°26-100°5); and finally there is a short answer to the second question 
(ron? 5-17). 
99°20: The two questions about our “apprehension of the principles are 
stated at 99°18, and elaborated in g9°22-6. The first question about the 
principles asks “how they become familiar”. The second question asks 

“what is the state which gets to know them”’. Both questions presuppose 
that we do know the principles: Aristotle refers back (99°21) to 4 2, 
72°25-°4, where he argued that if we have demonstrative knowledge, 
then we know the principles; he takes it as evident that we do have 
demonstrative knowledge. 

The second question is reformulated at 99°22-4 in a somewhat neg- 
ligent manner. I paraphrase as follows: ‘Is knowledge of the principles 
the same sort of knowledge as knowledge of the theorems? i.e. do we 
have understanding of the principles as we do of the theorems, or is 
there rather some other sort of knowledge of the principles?’ 

The first question is restated at 99°25 in terms of the phrase ‘‘the states 
present in us”. “State” translates hexis, the verbal noun from echein 
(“have’’). Aristotle regularly uses the word of mental dispositions, es- 
pecially of cognitive and virtuous ones (Bonitz, 261°13-24). There is 
a temptation to slide from ‘‘disposition”’ to “faculty”; to Obsetye the 
apparent appropriateness of the term “faculty” for hexis at 99°18; and to 
conclude that hexis means “faculty” throughout 8 rg. If that is so, the 
first question comes to ask whether the faculty by which we apprehend 
the principles is innate or not. The question is indubitably Aristotelian; 
for the faculty turns out to be nous, and the problem of the origins of 
nous is debated (with notorious obscurity) at GA B 3 (cf. An A 4, 
408°18—19). 

Nevertheless, this is not Aristotle’s question in B 19. First, he talks of 
states (hexeis: plural) and not of a single state or faculty; secondly, the 
initial formulation of the question at 99°18 hardly suggests inquiry into 
the origins of a faculty; and thirdly, Aristotle’s answer simply cannot be 
accommodated to this question. Thus ‘states’, in the first question at 
least, are ‘havings’ or graspings: “the states are present in us’ ” (99? 25) 
means .‘the graspings are in us”, i.e. “we already grasp (the prin- 
ciples)”, ie. “‘we already know (the principles)’’. In reading the trans- 
lation it may help to bear in mind that the Greek for “‘state’’ is cognate 
with the Greek for “grasp” or “possess”; English does not allow this 
connection to appear. 

Are there ‘states’ “present in us’ > (enousai)? Eneinai, “be (present) 
n’”’, does not mean “be innate in” (cf. e.g. A 10, 76°30: sumphutos (e.g. 

260 

COMMENTARY 99°20 

Met A g, 993°1) is Aristotle’s word for “innate”’). Similarly, at 99°26 and 
31 echein (“possess”) does not mean “possess innately’. (Echein is the 
converse relation to eneinai; cf. EN H 3, 1147°34.) Nevertheless, when 
Aristotle asks if the states are ‘present in us’ he certainly means to ask 
whether or not they are innate: the contrast with “come about in us” 
(99°25) is enough to show this; and it is confirmed by passages in the 
Phaedo and Meno where Plato discusses innate knowledge under the 
heading of knowledge that is “‘present in us” (cf. Phaedo 73°; Meno 
85°). 
The first question thus runs: ‘Do we have innate knowledge of the 
principles, or is our knowledge acquired? And if it is acquired, how is it 
acquired?’ 

99°26: The First Question Answered: The dilemma with which Aris- 
totle’s discussion opens is stated again, in a slightly different context, at 
Met A 9, 992°24~993°2. 

If we suppose that knowledge of principles is innate (99° 26-7), then 
we have knowledge which is more exact than that given by demon- 
stration (for the reasons cited at 4 2, 72° 95-4) and yet this knowledge 
remains entirely unobserved. (“If it is in fact connate, it is wonderful 
how we should have the strongest sort of understanding (epistémé) with- 
out its being noticed”: Met 4A 9, 993°1.) The commentators all take 
Aristotle to mean that we could not have such knowledge without 
noticing it ourselves; and it is true that Aristotle supposes knowledge, 
like perception, to be a self-conscious state (cf. Met A 9, 1074°35—6); but 
the text, both in APst and in Met A 9, is more likely to mean: “it could 
not escape others’ notice that we have such knowledge’’. Aristotle is 
making the correct and pertinent point that infants evidently do not have 
the strong abstract knowledge which the innate hypothesis ascribes to 
them. 

Aristotle accepts this argument as conclusive. The standard reaction to 
it—present already in Plato (Meno 86°6; Phaedo 73°6)—is to say that 
the knowledge is present in infants but does not emerge without the 
operation of some external stimulation. Aristotle would doubtless have 
adopted Locke’s answer to this reaction: it reduces innatism to the 
uncontroversial hypothesis that human infants have certain innate cogni- 
tive capacities the exercise of which waits upon experience. 

If, then, we suppose that knowledge of the principles is acquired 
(99°27- 34), we should infer, by the general principle enunciated in 4 1, 
that it is derived from some pre-existing knowledge: we cannot acquire 
knowledge of the principles if we “‘are ignorant and possess no state at 
all” (99" 32). Thus, Aristotle concludes, we must have (sc. innately) 
some ‘capacity’ or faculty from whose deliverances we can derive our 
knowledge of the principles; and the deliverances of that faculty must of 
course be less exact than our knowledge of the principles themselves— 
for otherwise the argument of 99°26-7 could be deployed again. 

Aristotle’s argument here is not good: if he is to apply the general 

261 

99°26 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

principle of A 1, then he must conclude that we have some innate items 
of knowledge; and these items, by 4 2, will be more exact than our 
resulting knowledge of the principles. Aristotle’s conclusion, that we 
have an innate cognitive capacity, has nothing to do with the principle of 
A 1. The fact is that 4 1, which deals with the ‘intellectual learning’ of 
derived propositions, is inapplicable in B 19, which is concerned with a 
non-intellectual acquisition of underivable principles. Our knowledge of 
the principles does not depend upon any other knowledge at all; and that 
is merely to say that knowledge of principles is not deduced knowledge. 
(But see BOLTON (1991), 5 n. 4.) But Aristotle’s argument is readily 
repaired: he need only say that our knowledge of the principles, if it is 
acquired, must depend upon the exercise of some capacity or other. 
Aristotle does not have an argument for this assertion: why, it might be 
asked, should not the principles be put into our minds by chance or 
divine providence? Aristotle might have maintained that the facts were 
against this view: our acquisition of the principles does not seem to be a 
haphazard affair, but to proceed in a regular and intelligible fashion. He 
might also have argued that the haphazard acquisition of a belief is not 
enough to support a knowledge of the principles: knowledge must be 
connected with its object; it cannot result from the chance entertainment 
of a proposition. Thus what is wanted is a causal account of the acqui- 
sition of the principles—an account which will link our knowledge of 
them with the facts they state. 

99 °34: There is such a capacity, innate in all animals, viz. perception. 

(It is a definitional truth, in Aristotle’ s view, that animals can perceive 
(e.g. An B 2, 413°1-4; Bonitz, 19°42—7).) To justify the claim that 
perception can yield knowledge of the principles, Aristotle needs to give 
an account of the cognitive path from perception to comprehension, this 
account makes up the rest of his answer to the first question. 

At 100°3—9 four stages along the path are distinguished: understanding 
is based upon experience, experience upon memory, and memory upon 
perception. This tallies closely with Met A 1, 980°27-—981°3. At 99°34—- 
100°3, however, only three stages appear: perception breeds memory, 
memory leads to an ‘account’. Most commentators elicit a fourth stage 
from 99 "39, but that is implausible | (see below). Pacius supposes that 
99°34—100°3 does not prefigure 100*3-9 but rather distinguishes three 
types of creature, only the highest of which can undergo the cognitive 
development that 100*3~9 describes. This ingenious suggestion cannot 
be squared with the developmental language of 100°2— 3. Thus it seems 
best to take 100°3~—9 as correcting and amplifying 99° 34- 100°3; the 
three-stage account is expanded to four stages. (At 100°3 the particle 
men oun (“Thus’ ’) should perhaps be translated “‘or rather’’.) 

Stage (A) is perception. Aristotle frequently says that perception krinei 
or is kritikos (e.g. An B 6, 418°14—16; II, 424 “5— 105 I 2, 426°8—14). 
Krinein may mean either “‘judge’’ or “discriminate” , and to say that 
perception is kritiké is to say either that perception makes judgements or 
that it can discriminate. It has been disputed which of these two things 

262 

COMMENTARY 99°34 

Aristotle means to say. On the whole, it seems more probable that he 
had discrimination rather than judgement in mind; and J have therefore 
translated kritikos at 99°35 by “discriminatory”. The point is not entirely 
trifling: if Aritikos is taken here to mean ‘“‘judgemental’”’, and if a capacity 
to judge presupposes some conceptual mastery, then Stage (A) will 
already involve the possession of concepts, and the four-stage account 
cannot coherently function as an account of concept-acquisition. 

Stage (B) deals with the ability to retain a percept, i.e. with (a type of) 
memory. This stage raises several questions. First, Aristotle occasionally 
talks of memory in terms of something’s ‘remaining’ in the mind (Mem 
1, 450°10-11; cf. Crat 437°; [Def] 415°—the English “retention” sug- 
gests something less passive than the Greek moné, which is literally a 
‘remaining’); but what ‘remains’ is properly not a percept or sense- 
impression but a ‘phantasm’ or mental] image, which is as it were the 
trace or imprint of a percept (e.g. Mem 1, 450725—°11), and memory 
requires in addition to this retention the ability to resurrect these im- 
prints (cf. Mem 2, 452°10-11). 

Secondly, at Met A 1, 980°29, and again at Mem 1, 450°15—21, Aris- 
totle asserts that some animals do and others do not ‘have memory (cf. 
99°36). Mem specifies that the memory-less creatures are those which do 
not perceive time. The zoological works do not take up the point or 
attempt to identify the animals in question. 

Finally, there is a textual crux at 99°39, which seriously affects the 
sense of the passage. The MSS begin the sentence with the words en hois 
d’enestin aisthanomenois...(one MS has the trivial variant estin for 
enestin): “‘some animals can, while perceiving, ...”. The present parti- 
ciple, aisthanomenois, is puzzling, since Stage (B) is concerned with what 
some animals can do when they are not or no longer perceiving. Tren- 
delenburg inserted a negative particle, mé, before the participle: “some 
animals can, while not perceiving, ...”; Ueberweg proposed the past 
participle, aisthomenois, in place of the present participle: “some animals 
can, after they have perceived, ...’’. One or other of these emendations 
should probably be accepted, and I have followed Ueberweg and the 
OCT. (Other remedies are possible; but the general sense is not really in 
doubt.) 

In the OCT, the sentence continues thus: . . . echein eti en téi psuchéi. 
This reading is found in only one MS (the OCT’s critical apparatus is 
inaccurate). Four MSS offer hen ti in place of en téi. The majority 
reading gives the following sense: ‘some animals can. .. still hold some 
single item in their soul’. This ‘single item’ might be identified with the 

“single experience” which is generated by many memories of the same 
thing (100°5); so that 99°34-100°3 will after all describe four, and not 
three, stages on the road to understanding. But “holding some single 
item” is a poor way of describing experience inasmuch as experience is 
distinguished from knowledge by the fact that it grasps the constituents 
of a unity but not the unity itself; and, further, 100°2 generates Stage (D) 
directly from Stage (B) without mentioning any intermediate grasping 

263 

99°34. POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

of ‘ some single item’. Thus it is unlikely that Stage (C) should be read 
into 99°39; and in that case it seems best to follow the OCT and read en 
téi rather than hen ti. 

Stage (C) is ‘experience’ (empeiria); it is only spelled out in the 
amplified account of 100°3-9. What is experience? And does the ex- 
perienced man formulate any sort of universal proposition? Experience 
depends on the presence of many memories of the same thing (Met At, 
980°29). We might, then, imagine the experienced man saying something 
like: ‘‘All the Bs ’ve ever come across have been A” (cf. A 1, 71°34, for 
this form of expression); and the depth of his experience is determined 
by the number of Bs he has witnessed. He differs from the man of 
knowledge in that his universal judgement is limited to past, observed, 
cases of A’s holding of B. On the other hand, Met A 1, 981°5~9, suggests 
that the man of experience simply remembers many propositions of the 
form “This B is A” (“Socrates was cured of fever by taking hellebore’’), 
and does not formulate any general proposition. The distinction between 
these two ways of taking “‘experience” is not perhaps very great: each 
seems to provide a perfectly reasonable account of what it is to rely on 
experience. 

Stage (D) contains some puzzles. First, the reference to an ‘account’ 
(i.e. a definition) at 100°2, and the language of 100°6—8, suggest concept- 
acquisition. On the other hand, the distinction between skill and under- 
standing (100°8) is readily explained propositionally: the propositions of 
understanding simply state facts; those of skill also give instructions for 
acting or producing (cf. EN Z 4, 1140710-13). 

This account comes “‘from experience, or from all the universal which 
has come to rest in the soul’’ (10076). ‘Resting’ here amounts to no more 
than presence (the phrase comes from Phaedo 96°—Int 3, 16°20, and 
Phys H 3, 247°10, have nothing to do with the case). And the connective 

“or” is presumably epexegetic—‘‘i.e.” (cf. Le Blond (1), 129 n. 1). 
What, then, is ‘“‘all the universal”? The parallel in Met 4 1 runs: ‘“‘Skill 
comes about when from the many thoughts of experience a single uni- 
versal belief about similar things comes about” ,(981*5—7). The jump to 
“universal belief’? is presumably inductive. The passage plainly deals 
with propositional knowledge. It refers to many thoughts, where our 
passage refers to all the universal. We might gloss “all the universal’ in 
terms of ‘perfect’ induction: proper knowledge that every B is A only 
comes about when ai/ the relevant particular propositions are known (cf. 
APr B 23, 68°27— 9). But it is hard to believe that Aristotle ever sup- 
posed ‘experience’ to be capable of providing the materials for a ‘perfect’ 
induction. Perhaps, then, Aristotle is thinking primarily of concept- 
acquisition: we understand a notion, A, when ‘all’ A rests in our minds; 
and that, presumably, will occur either when the successive impressions 
of particular As have etched a complete image in our minds, or else 
when we have enough concurrent images of As to extract all and only 
the essential attributes of A. (“All the universal’’ is identified as “the 
one apart from the many”: this phrase regularly denotes ‘separate’, 

264 

COMMENTARY 99°34 

Platonic universals (cf. A 11, 77°5, notes); but it does not always do so 
(see Cherniss, 77 n. 56) and quite evidently it does not do so here.) 
The ‘account’ of 100*r becomes at 100*8 ‘‘a principle of... under- 
standing” (for the phrase see 4 3, 72°24, notes). Aristotle is doubtless 
thinking primarily of a ‘principle of understanding’, or comprehension, 
of the principles. But nothing in the four-stage account restricts it to 
principles: we might, then, take B 19 as a general description of the 
acquisition of universal knowledge—and the parallel in Met A 1 talks in 
general of “‘skill and understanding”. Suppose, then, that P is a principle 
and Q is not, but that a acquires knowledge both of P and of Q by the 
process described in B 19. Now by 4 2 a’s knowledge of P must be 
superior to his knowledge of Q; and so a single process may lead to 
knowledge of different worth when applied to different objects. That is, 
I think, a trifle paradoxical: the paradox does not arise if Aristotle is 
thinking only of concept-acquisition. 
100°10: This paragraph sums up the answer to the first qu uestion, point- 
ing out that it satisfies the two conditions laid down at 99°32-4. 

1oo*10: + ‘“‘inhere in us in a determinate form (aphdrismenai)”: i.e. ‘are 
innately present in us in an actualized state’; cf. Bonitz, 129730-4. 

100°12: ‘‘as in a battle...”: the metaphor is repeated, in a slightly 
different context, at [Probl] IZ 7, 917°28-32; KZ 8, 941°9~—13. At 100713 
the MSS read archén. The commentators take this to mean “until they 
come to a starting-point”, and suppose an Aristotelian pun (since arché 
also means “‘first principle’). But the pun is frigid, and I cannot imagine 
what ‘starting-point’ the routed soldiers might come to. The phrase 
ought to mean something like “until they reach a certain strength’. I 
doubt if the received text can bear this meaning; and I continue, with a 
parent’s partiality, to favour the emendation alkén. (The word aiké is 
Aristotelian; and the phrase eis alkén elthein is found at Euripides, 
Phoen 421.) 

100°14: +‘... what we have just said”’: _ just” translates palai, a word 
which may also mean “some time ago”. Waitz, taking it in the latter 
sense, refers to B 13, 97°7~25; but it is hard to see how the present 
passage could have been offered as a clearer version of that earlier text, 
and I take Aristotle to be referring to what he has just said—perhaps, in 
particular, to 100°3-9 (see BRUNSCHWIG (1981), 84-6). However that 
may be, Aristotle is trying to explain how we apprehend the highest 
universals (cf. in general Phys A 1): we are to proceed, by successive 
‘stands’, from low universals such as man (‘“‘such-and-such an animal”: 
100°2) up through animal, until we reach ‘‘something partless and uni- 
versal” (100°2) i.e. the appropriate category (in the illustrative case, 
substance). The categories are ameré in that they have no logical ‘parts’ 
(cf. e.g. Met 4 25, 1023 24): “the so-called kinds are universal and 
indivisible (for there is no account of them)” (Met 4 3, 1014°9-10). 
They are “the universals” par excellence in that they are the highest 
universals. 

265 

100714 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Several points of detail require notice: 

100°16: ‘one of the undifferentiated items”: i.e. an infima species (cf. B 
13, 97°31)—not an individual, for the ‘stand’ of a single individual 
cannot yield anything universal (see 100*5—8). (I here follow the ortho- 
dox interpretation. It has recently been suggested that the adiaphora 
here are “unities composed of (as yet) undifferentiated things”; these 
unarticulated unities, which are the same as “‘all the universal” (10076), 
are then identified with the ‘confused’ universals from which we are said 
to start out at Phys A 1, 183°22—4. See BOLTON (1991), 6-9.) 

100*16: ‘‘there is a primitive universal in the soul’’: if this translation is 
correct, a ‘primitive’ universal must be the same as an infima species. 
The text might perhaps better be rendered: ‘‘then for the first time there 
is a universal in the soul”. 

” 

100°17: “for although you perceive...”: This remark attempts to 
cope with an objection that has been in the air since 99°35: the process 
Aristotle describes produces universals; but it starts from perception and 
perception is of particulars—how, then, can the gap between particulars 
and universals be jumped? Aristotle’s answer is that perception in fact 
gives us universals from the start (cf. 4 31, 87°29, notes). He means that 
we perceive things as As; and that this, so to speak, lodges the universal, 
A, in our minds from the start—although we shall not, of course, have 
an explicit or articulated understanding of A until we have advanced to 
Stage (D). (It should be noted that this account is intended to hold for 
all perceivers: it is not peculiar to human perception, nor does it involve 
the intellect in any way. Even a fly sees an F.) 

Aristotle’s illustration is in some ways unfortunate. It is essential for 
him to pick an infima species, like man; for his task is to show how we 
climb the Porphyrean tree from infima species to summum genus. Yet it 
is not clear how we are to apprehend man in the first place. Aristotle’s 
theory of perception divides the objects of perception into two classes, 
essential and incidental (cf. An B 6). Essential objects are either proper 
to a given sense (e.g. colours to sight, sounds to hearing) or common 
(e.g. motion, shape, size). Incidental objects cover everything else; if X 
is an incidental object of perception, then I perceive X only if there is 
some essential object Y such that I perceive Y and Y is X. Individuals 
are the prime examples of incidental objects (An B 6, 418°21; IF 1, 
425°25). There is very little evidence for man, but what there is makes it 
an incidental object (An I 6, 430°29); and it is in any case hard to see 
how man could be either a proper or a common sensible. Man, then, is 
not directly implanted in our minds by the senses, as Aristotle’s words in 
B ig suggest; but in that case we need an account, which Aristotle 
nowhere gives, of how such concepts as man are derived from the data 
of perception. 

1001: ‘‘Next, a stand is made among these items”: just as the different 
impressions of the ‘primitive’ universal rallied until that universal made a 
stand, so now the different ‘primitive’ universals will rally until the 

266 

COMMENTARY 100°1 

secondary universal can make a stand. Thus man, horse, lion, etc. will 
give rise to land animal. Presumably some process of abstraction is 
required to move from the several primitives to the single secondary 
universal. 

1004: ‘‘we must get to know the primitives by induction”: the ‘primi- 
tives’ here are principles rather than the ‘primitive’ universals of 100716 
(cf. EN Z 3, 1139°30-1). Ross supposes that these ‘primitives’ are 
axioms, i.e. propositional principles; and he thinks that 100°3—5 contains 
the following argument: ‘(We have just seen that) pérception . . . instils 
the universal (concepts by induction); thus it is clear, (by analogy), that 
we get to know the primitive (propositions) by induction.’ It is, I think, 
difficult to extract this from the text; if only because Aristotle never in 
B 19 makes explicit the distinction between primitive concepts and primi- 
tive propositions. 

It is possible to make sense of 100°3--5 by construing the ‘primitives’ 
as terms—specifically, as terms for the summa genera. Thus: “We come 
to understand topmost terms by induction; for (first, the movement 
upward from first to higher universals is, as we have just seen, plainly 
inductive; and secondly,) the acquisition of the first, lowest, universals is 
inductively based.’ Here “induction” is used, in a weak sense, to refer to 
any cognitive progress from the less to the more general; and perception 
“instils universals’’ by induction simply because our first grasp of the 
universal A depends on our having perceived a quantity of individual As. 
Thus construed, 100°3-5 says no more than that concept acquisition 
proceeds from the less to the more general. (For induction as the way to 
the princ ae also e.g. Phys A 2, 185713; Met E 1, 1025°10-18; EN 
A 7, 1098°3 

100°5: The Second Question Answered: What is the state, or hexis, that 
grasps the principles? Aristotle answers that it is nous or comprehension. 
Thus: 

(1) If P is a principle and a apprehends P, then a comprehends P. 

There is a parallel argument in EN Z 6; and (1) has been anticipated at 
A 23, 85°1; 24, 86729; and 33, 88°35. 

The commentators translate nous by “intuition”. The word “intuition” 
is a term of art; when it has a determinate sense (and does not merely 
stand for knowing we know not how), it implies a sort of mental ‘vision’: 
intuition is mental sight; intuited truths are just ‘seen’ to be true; 
intuiting that P is coming to know that P without any ratiocination 
and without using sense-perception—it is ‘seeing’ that P. The term 
“intuition”’ has a hallowed connection with B 19; indeed, the classical 
distinction between ‘intuitive’ and ‘demonstrative’ knowledge, which is 
common property to rationalists and empiricists, derives ultimately from 
this chapter. 

Tradition apart, does anything speak in favour of translating nous by 
“intuition”? The best argument I can provide is this: in EN Z 11, 
Aristotle says that “nous deals with what is ultimate in both directions; 

267 

100°5 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

for nous, and not reason (logos), deals with both the primitive defi- 
nitions and the ultimate items’. And he adds that “‘one needs to have 
perception of the latter, and that is nous” (1143°35—°5). The nous which 
deals with individuals, in particular mathematical individuals (cf. 4 12, 
77°31, notes), is, or is like, perception; and this nous is identified in EN 
with the nous which deals with definitions or first principles, and hence 
with the nous of B 19: therefore, the nous of B 19 is a sort of perception; 
and if that is so, we can hardly jib at the translation “‘intuition”’. 

Given this translation, we can now see that in B 1g Aristotle re- 
cognizes, at least tacitly, the notorious frailty of induction: induction, 
according to B 19, cannot by itself get us to the principles; there is a 
chasm which induction will not leap—we must fly over it on the back of 
intuition. The principles, in short, are apprehended by induction plus 
intuition, or by ‘intuitive induction’. 

This, I suppose, is the orthodox view of B 19. (For a recent defence of 
the ‘intuitionist’ interpretation of B 19 see IRWIN (1988), 134-6, 531-2; 
contra BOLTON (1991), 15-17.) Some scholars find it artificial in its 
reconciliation of the inductive and the intuitive elements in Aristotle’s 
account; they prefer to accept it as a sad truth that Aristotle entertained 
two mutually inconsistent theories about our knowledge of the principles, 
and could not decide between them. 

There is a powerful objection to the orthodox view which tells equally 
against this reaction to it: both the orthodoxy and its enemies assume 
that nous and induction are elements in the answer to a single question. 
But this assumption is false: Aristotle carefully distinguishes his first 
question from his second; and he clearly indicates that induction figures 
in the answer to the first, nous in the answer to the second. If the 
questions are genuinely distinct, their answers cannot conflict in the way 
the unorthodox fear, nor need they be reconciled after the fashion of the 
orthodoxy. 

We may go a little further. It is Aristotle’s first question, not his 
second, which asks about the process or method by which we gain 
knowledge of the principles; and the method is, in a word, inductive. 
Nous, which answers the second question, is not intended to pick out 
some faculty or method of acquiring knowledge: nous, the state or 
disposition, stands to induction as understanding (epistémé) stands to 
demonstration. Understanding is not a means of acquiring knowledge. 
Nor, then, is nous. 

If this argument is sound, then “intuition” will not do as a translation 
for nous; for intuition is precisely a faculty or means of gaining know- 
ledge. Hence in my translation I abandon “intuition” and use instead the 
colourless word ‘‘comprehension’’. Aristotle’s use of nous and its cog- 
nates is vast and various (Bonitz, 486°37—487°20; 491718—°34): nothing 
in it imposes a translation like “intuition” or opposes ‘‘comprehension”’. 
There remains the argument based on EN Z 11: IJ think that this does 
have some force, and that Aristotle’s thoughts about the role of nous 
were not as clear as I have pretended; but the argument in Z 11 is 

268 

COMMENTARY 1005 

difficult in itself, and without parallel elsewhere; and the identification of 
nous of the principles with quasi-perceptual nous is probably denied 
implicitly at 4 33, 88°36 (see note). In any case, the evidence provided 
by the structure of B Ig is stronger than an argument culled from an 
aside in EN. (See further Wieland, 62-9; Kosman; Lesher.) 

What, then, is the significance of Aristotle’s second question, and of 
his answer to it? The substantive points about our knowledge of prin- 
ciples have already been made; they are that (a) we cannot demonstrate 
the principles, but (6) the principles can be known. The first question is 
the obvious one: how can (b) be true, given (a). What other question 
remains? Only, I think, a terminological one: If a knows that P and P is 
a theorem, then it is proper to say that a understands that P: if a knows 
that P and P is an axiom, what is the mot juste for his knowledge? It is 
worth asking the question, since it is useful to have different terms to 
designate the different types of knowledge required for axioms and for 
theorems. But nothing important hangs on the answer; and though 
Aristotle had reasons for choosing nous, an invented term might have 
had greater advantages. 

Did Aristotle recognize the comparative triviality of his second ques- 
tion? He does not spend much time on it here. Elsewhere, in 4 3 (see 
notes) he is happy enough to say that we understand (epistasthai) the 
principles: what matters is not that nous rather than epistémé is their 
mode of apprehension, but that they are not susceptible to demonstrative 
epistémeé. 

None the less, Aristotle does argue for (1), his answer to the second 
question. The argument falls into two parts, the first occupying 100°5— 12, 
the second occupying 100°12—17. 

The first part makes use of four premisses: 

(2) If a apprehends that P, then either a understands that P or a 
comprehends that P. 

(1 use “‘a apprehends that P” to mean ‘“‘a stands in some propositional 
attitude ¢ to P, such that (Vy) (necessarily, if y ¢s that P, then P).’’) 

(3) If P is truer and more exact than Q and a understands that O and 
a apprehends that P, then a comprehends that P. 

(This, I take it, is the force of saying that only comprehension is truer 
and more exact than understanding.) 

(4) If P is a principle and Q a theorem, then P is more familiar than 

(Cf. A 2, 7225-4.) 
(5) If a understands that P, then a has an account of P. 

(Cf. EN Z 6, 1140°33—to ‘have an account of P” is presumably to give, 
or be able to give, a deductive argument for P.) 
As an intermediate conclusion Aristotle offers: 

(6) If P is a principle, a does not understand that P. 

269 

100°5 POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

From (2)—(5) we are to infer (1) via (6). The argument is enthymematic, 
and can be filled out in more than one way. First, we might add the 
further premiss: 

(7) If a has an account of P, then P is not a principle. 

This, of course, is a truism. From (5) and (7) we can infer (6); and (2) 
and (6) together entail (1). It is this argument, or something very similar 
to it, which EN Z 6 uses in proof of (1). Thus construed, the argument is 
not, strictly speaking, sound; for (2) is false (cf. EN Z 6, 1141°5). But 
the point of the argument is plain enough, and plausible: nous is regu- 
larly used of non-ratiocinative knowledge, and hence is appropriate for 
knowledge of the principles. 

The second way of filling out Aristotle’s argument requires some 
premiss linking familiarity with truth and exactness; then (1) will follow 
from (3) and (4). Again, the argument will not be sound, but it will serve 
to express a reasonable point: the principles, being the source of truth 
and exactness for the theorems, are (by the thesis of A 2, 72°29) more 
true and more exact than them-—hence nous, which is often used of an 
exalted grade of apprehension (see esp. Phil 59°), is appropriate. 

I turn to ro0°12-17. The main premiss here, founded on a weak 
analogy, is that ‘‘understanding is not a principle of understanding”’. I 
take this to amount to: 

(8) If a’s apprehension that P is an ultimate ground for his under- 
standing that Q, then a does not understand that P. 

From (2) and (8) there follows: 

(9) If a apprehends that P, and a’s apprehension that P is an ultimate 
ground for his understanding that Q, then a comprehends that P. 

And (9), together with the truistic: 

(10) If P is a principle, a’s apprehension that P is an ultimate ground 
for his understanding that QO 
entails (1). 

‘And in this way the principle of understanding, nous, apprehends the 
principles of a science; and understanding as a whole apprehends the 
body of the science as a whole.’ Aristotle’s conclusion, like his exordium, 
is aphoristic. I do not think that we are expected to pay philosophical 
attention to it—nor, for that matter, to the second question as a whole. 
Nous has no philosophical importance in A Pst. 

I return, finally, to the three general puzzles about B 19 which I posed at 
the beginning of my comments on the chapter. 

First, the Janus character of B 1g has proved illusory: the answer 
Aristotle gives to the first question is whole-heartedly empiricist; and 
only a failure to distinguish between the two questions of B 19 will 
permit a rationalistic interpretation. Nous is an answer to the second 
question, not a rival, rationalistic, answer to the first: ‘intuition’ as a 
mode of discovery is absent from APst. 

270 

COMMENTARY 100°5 

Secondly, the relation between B 19 and the earlier parts of Book B 
remains obscure; unless we accept Waitz’s account of 100714, we shall 
find no recognition in B 19 of any earlier discussion of how we might 
acquire knowledge of the principles. My own guess, for what it is worth, 
is that B 19 began life as an independent essay on the subject; and was at 
some later stage tacked on to the discussions of B 1-18. (The preamble 
to the chapter supports this guess.) But B 19 does not contradict the 
preceding parts of B; and it may be more attractive to see in it a 
generalization of the thesis implicit in earlier chapters: B 19 states for- 
mally and in abstract terms what B 13, say, had informally implied and 
concretely illustrated. (BRUNSCHWIG (1981), 81-96, has urged that “we 
cannot hold that the problem of knowledge of the principles has been 
examined before it is officially introduced in B 19”; for B 3-18 do not 
formally discuss the question ‘How can we know the principles?’—rather, 
they continue the discussion of demonstration and concern themselves 
with the question “To what extent, if at all, can demonstration deal with 
essences?’ This account of B 3-18 seems to be, as it were, true de jure: 
de facto, however, it remains the case that the chapters contain a 
quantity of material directly relevant to the question ‘How can we know 
the principles?’ Note that the ancient commentators, from Theophrastus 
onwards (frag. 36 Graeser; cf. MORAUX (1979), 81-9), puzzled over the 
relationship between the two books of APst: what is B about? and how 
does it connect to 4?) 

Finally, in my detailed comments on the first question I have tried to 
indicate how the text lies with regard to a propositional or a conceptual 
account of the principles. Aristotle’s answer can be told in either way. 
Thus propositionally, we have the following four stages: (P1) a sees that 
this swan is white; (P2) a remembers that this swan is white; (P3) a 
grasps that this swan and that swan and... and the other swan is white; 
(P4) a understands that. all swans are white. Conceptually, the sequence 
is: (CI) a sees a swan; (C2) a retains a memory image of a swan; (C3) a 
has retained many such images of swans; (C4) a has the notion of swan. 

Some parts of the text tell strongly for one story, some for the other; 
and I feel obliged to concede that Aristotle did not realize that he was 
vacillating between two stories. This conclusion can perhaps be made 
more palatable by a pair of considerations: first, at stage (C4) a ‘has the 
notion of swan’ in a strong sense—he has an ‘account’ or definition of 
what it is to be a swan. Thus the conceptual sequence terminates in 
something which either is a propositional principle or at least immediately 
yields one. Secondly, Aristotle had a persistent tendency to treat defi- 
nitions as the paradigm—or even as the sole—case of propositional 
principles (above, p. 107). Thus he might have imagined that the dis- 
tinction between (P1)—(P4) and (C1)—(C4) was a trifling pedantry: the 
ascent to (C4) yields any interesting results which might be extracted 
from (P4); and it offers the further advantage of accounting for our 
conceptual equipment. (See further KAHN (1981), 387-97.) 

271 

REFERENCES 

The most useful commentaries on A Pst are those of: 

J. Philoponus, Jn Aristotelis Analytica Posteriora Commentaria, ed. 
M. Wallies, Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca, xiii. 3 (Berlin, 1909) 

J. Zabarella, In duos Aristotelis libros Posteriorum Analyticorum Com- 
mentaria (Venice, 1582) 

J. Pacius, In Aristotelis Organon commentarius analyticus (Frankfurt, 
1597) 

T. Waitz, Aristotelis Organon (Leipzig, 1844-6) 

W. D. Ross, Aristotle’s Prior and Posterior Analytics (Oxford, 1949). 

In addition, the mathematical passages are all analysed in: 

T. L. Heath (2), Mathematics in Aristotle (Oxford, 1949) 

and the passages bearing on Plato and the Academy are discussed in: 

H. F. Cherniss, Aristotle’s Criticism of Plato and the Academy (Baltimore, 
1944). 

There are helpful footnotes to G. R. G. Mure’s version of APst in volume 

i of the ‘Oxford Translation’ (Oxford, 1928). And there is invaluable 

comparative material in: 

H. Bonitz, Index Aristotelicus (Berlin, 1870). 

Several articles bearing on APst are included in: 

J. Barnes, M. Schofield, R. Sorabji (eds.), Aristotle—I: Science (London, 
1975). 

Among books, see especially: 

J. M. Le Blond (1), Logique et méthode chez Aristote (Paris, 1939) 

S. Mansion, Le Jugement d’ existence chez Aristote (Louvain, 1976”) 

W. Wieland, Die aristotelische Physik (Géttingen, 19707). 

On the object and aim of Book 4 see: 

H. Scholz, “Die Axiomatik der Alten”, Blatter fiir deutsche Philosophie, 4 
(1930-1), 259-78 (repr., in translation, in Barnes, Schofield, and 
Sorabji) 

J. Barnes, ‘“Aristotle’s Theory of Demonstration”, Phronesis, 14 (1969), 
123-52 (repr. in Barnes, Schofield, and Sorabji) 

J. Jope, “Subordinate Demonstrative Science in the Sixth Book of 
Aristotle’s Physics”, Classical Quarterly, 22 (1972), 278-92. 

On the connection between Book 4 and Greek mathematics see: 

T. L. Heath (1), The Thirteen Books of Euclid’s Elements (Cambridge, 
1925°) 

H. D. P. Lee, “Geometrical Method and Aristotle’s Account of First 
Principles”, Classical Quarterly, 29 (1935), 113-24. 

273 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Definition, the main subject of Book B, is treated in: 

J. M. Le Blond (2), ‘La Définition chez Aristote’’, Gregorianum, 20 
(1939), 351-80 (repr., in translation, in vol. iii of Barnes, Schofield, 
and Sorabji) 

R. Sorabji, ‘Aristotle and Oxford Philosophy”, American Philosophical 
Quarterly, 6 (1969), 127-35. 

The chronology of the Analytics (and much else) is discussed in: 
F. Solmsen, Die Entwicklung der aristotelischen Logik und Rhetorik 
(Berlin, 1929). 

Solmsen and Ross engaged in a long controversy (see Philosophical 

Review for 1949 and 1951, and the introduction to Ross’s edition of the 

Analytics); there is a clear account of the matter by: 

A. Mansion, “L’Origine du syllogisme et la théorie de la science chez 
Aristote’’, in S. Mansion (ed.), Aristote et les problémes de méthode 
(Louvain, 1961). 

On Aristotle’s syllogistic see especially: 
G. Patzig, Aristotle’s Theory of the Syllogism (Dordrecht, 1969), 
which contains ample references to the rest of the vast literature. The 
terminology of syllogistic, and of the Analytics in general, is analysed in: 
B. Einarson, “On Certain Mathematical Terms in Aristotle’s Logic’, 
American Journal of Philology, 57 (1936), 33-54 and 151-72. 

Among studies bearing on more particular aspects of APst I refer to the 
following: 

L. A. Kosman, “Understanding, Explanation and Insight in the Posterior 
Analytics”, in E. N. Lee, A. P. D. Mourelatos, and R. M. Rorty (eds.), 
Exegesis and Argument, Phronesis supp. vol. 1 (Assen, 1973) 

—relevant mainly to A 2 and B 19. On A 2 see also: 

J. Lyons, Structural Semantics, Publications of the Philological Society, xx 
(Oxford, 1963). 

On A 3 see: 

G. R. Morrow, ‘Plato and the Mathematicians: An Interpretation of 
Socrates’ Dream in the Theaetetus”’, Philosophical Review, 79 (1970), 
309-33. 

On the various issues raised by A 4 see, in addition to Sorabji’s article: 

K. J. J. Hintikka (1), “Necessity, Universality and Time in Aristotle’, 
Ajatus, 30 (1957), 65-90 (repr. in vol. iii of Barnes, Schofield, and 
Sorabji) 

K. J. J. Hintikka (3), Time and Necessity (Oxford, 1973) 

C. A. Kirwan (ed.), Aristotle’s Metaphysics Books r, 4, E, Clarendon 
Aristotle series (Oxford, 1971). 

Hintikka’s work bears also on A 6 and 4 8; and on 4 10 see: 
K. J. J. Hintikka (2), ‘““On the Ingredients of an Aristotelian Science’, 
Nous, 6 (1972), 55-69. 

274 

REFERENCES 

A 11 is treated by: 

I. Husik, “Aristotle on the Law of Contradiction and the Basis of the 
Syllogism’’, Mind, 15 (1906), 215-22 (repr. in I. Husik, Philosophical 
Essays (Oxford, 1952)). 

On 4 13 see: 

B. A. Brody, “Towards an Aristotelian Theory of Scientific Explanation’, 
Philosophy of Science, 39 (1972), 20-31. 

Some of the problems in 4 19-22 are eased by: 

R. Demos, ‘‘The Structure of Substance according to Aristotle”, Philo- 
sophy and Phenomenological Research, 5 (1944-5), 255-68. 

D. W. Hamlyn, “Aristotle on Predication”, Phronesis, 6 (1961), 110-25. 

J. L. Ackrill (ed.), Avistotle’s Categories and de Interpretatione, Claren- 
don Aristotle series (Oxford, 1963). 

On B 1~2, and in general on the verb einai in APst see: 
C. H. Kahn, The Verb Be in Ancient Greek, Foundations of Language 
supp. vol. 16 (Dordrecht, 1973). 

Some of the issues in B 11 are discussed in: 

W. W. Fortenbaugh, ‘“Nicomachean Ethics, I, 1096°26-—9”, Phronesis, 
II (1966), 185-94 

M. Mignucci, “Di un Passo Controverso degli ‘‘Analitici Secondi” di 
Aristotele”, in Scritti in Onore di Carlo Giacon (Padua, 1972) 

D. M. Balme (ed.), Aristotle’s de Partibus Animalium I and de Gen- 
eratione Animalium /, Clarendon Aristotle series (Oxford, 1972). 

On B 12 see Demos’s paper, and especially: 

L. Robin, ‘Sur la conception aristotélicienne de la causalité”’, Archiv fiir 
Geschichte der Philosophie, 23 (1910), 1-28 and 184-210. 

On B 19, in addition to Kosman’s paper, see: 

J. H. Lesher, “The Meaning of NOYZ in the Posterior Analytics’, 
Phronesis, 18 (1973), 44-68. 

275 

SUPPLEMENTARY REFERENCES 

AckritL, J. L. (1981), “‘Aristotle’s Theory of Definition: Some Ques- 
tions on Posterior Analytics, 1. 8-10”, in BERTI (1981). 

ALBERTI, ANTONINA (ed.) (1990), Logica, mente e persona (Florence). 

Ba.mE, D. M. (1987), “‘Aristotle’s Use of Division and Differentiae”’, in 
GOTTHELF and LENNOX (1987). 

BARNES, JONATHAN (1976), ‘‘Aristotle, Menaechmus, and Circular Proof’, 
Classical Quarterly, 26: 278-92. 

(1981), “Proof and the Syllogism’”, in BERTI (1981). 

(1982), “Sheep have Four Legs”, in Proceedings of the World 

Congress on Aristotle, iii (Athens). 

(1985), “Aristotelian Arithmetic”, Revue de la _philosophie 

ancienne, 3: 97-133. 

(1990a), The Toils of Scepticism (Cambridge). 

~— (1990b), “Logical Form and Logical Matter”, in ALBERTI (1990). 

BARNES, JONATHAN, BOBZIEN, SUSANNE, FLANNERY, KEvin, and IERO- 
DIAKONOU, KATERINA (1991), Alexander of Aphrodisias: On Aristotle, 
Prior Analytics, 7. r-7 (London). 

Berti, Enrico (ed.) (1981), Aristotle on Science: The Posterior Analytics 
(Padua). 

BOLTON, Rosert (1976), “Essentialism and Semantic Theory in Aristo- 
tle’, Philosophical Review, 85: 514-44. 

—— (1987), ‘‘Definition and Scientific Method in Aristotle’s Posterior 
Analytics and Generation of Animals”, in GOTTHELF and LENNOX (1987). 
—— (1991), ‘‘Aristotle’s Method in Natural Science: Physics, 1’, in 
JUDSON (1991). 

BRUNSCHWIG, JACQUES (1981), “L’Objet et la structure des Seconds 
Analytiques @aprés Aristote’’, in BERTI (1981). 

BurnyeatT, M. F. (1981), “Aristotle on Understanding Knowledge”, in 
BERTI (1981). 

CAUJOLLE-ZASLAWSKY, F. (1990), “Etude préparatoire a une interpréta- 
tion du sens aristotélicien d’éxaywyj”’, in DEVEREUX and PELLEGRIN 
(1990). 

CHARLES, Davip (1990), “Aristotle on Meaning, Natural Kinds and 
Natural History”, in DEVEREUX and PELLEGRIN (1990). 

Cooper, JoHn M. (1987), “Hypothetical Necessity and Natural Tele- 
ology’, in GOTTHELF and LENNOX (1987). 

Corcoran, JouHN (ed.) (1974), Ancient Logic and its Modern Interpre- 
tations (Dordrecht). 

De Ganpt, FRANcoIs (1975-6), “La mathésis d’Aristote: Introduc- 
tion aux ‘Analytiques Seconds”, Revue des sciences philosophiques et 
théologiques, 59: 564-600; 60: 37-84. 

276 

REFERENCES 

Demoss, Davip, and DEVEREUX, DANIEL (1988), “Essence, Existence, 
and Nominal Definition in Aristotle’s Post. Analytics, II. 8-10”, 
Phronesis, 32: 133-54. 

DESLAURIERS, MARGUERITE (1990), “‘Aristotle’s Four Types of Definition’, 
Apeiron, 23: 1-26. 

DEVEREUX, DANIEL, and PELLEGRIN, PIERRE (eds.) (1990), Biologie, 
Logique et Métaphysique chez Aristote (Paris). 

DOriNG, Kiaus (1972), Die Megariker (Amsterdam). 

EBERT, THEODOR (1980), Review of MIGNUCCI (1975) and Barnes, Aristo- 
tle: Posterior Analytics, Archiv fiir Geschichte der Philosophie, 62: 
85-91. 

EveRSON, STEPHEN (ed.) (1990), Epistemology: Companions to Ancient 
Thought, I (Cambridge). 

FEREJOHN, MICHAEL T. (1981), ‘“‘Aristotle on Necessary Truth and 
Logical Priority”, American Philosophical Quarterly, 18: 285-93. 

—— (1988), “‘Meno’s Paradox and de re Knowledge in Aristotle’s 
Theory of Demonstration”, History of Philosophy Quarterly, 5: 
99-117. 

—— (1991), The Origins of Aristotelian Science (New Haven, Conn.). 

FREELAND, CYNTHIA A. (1991), “Accidental Causes and Real Expla- 
nations”, in JUDSON (19918). 

GomeEz-Loso, ALFONSO (1978), “‘Aristotle’s First Philosophy and the Prin- 
ciples of Particular Sciences”, Zeitschrift fiir philosophische Forschung, 
32: 183-94. 

~— (1980), “The So-called Question of Existence in Aristotle, An. 
Post. 2. 1-2”, Review of Metaphysics, 34: 71-89. 

——- (1981), ‘‘Definitions in Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics”, in 0’MEARA 
(1981). 

GOTTHELF, ALLAN (1987), “First Principles in Aristotle’s Parts of 
Animals”, in GOTTHELF and LENNOX (1987). 

—— and Lennox, JAMEs (eds.) (1987), Philosophical Issues in Aristotle’s 
Biology (Cambridge). 

GRAESER, ANDREAS (ed.) (1987), Mathematics and Metaphysics in Aristo- 
tle, Berner Reihe philosophischer Studien, vi (Bern/Stuttgart). 

GRANGER, GILLES-GaASsTON (1976), La Théorie aristotélicienne de la 
science (Paris). 

GRANGER, HERBERT (1981), “The Differentia and the Per Se Accident in 
Aristotle”, Archiv fiir Geschichte der Philosophie, 66: 118-29. 

GuakIGLia, OsvaLpo N. (1985), “Die Definition und die Kausalerklarung 
bei Aristoteles”, in MENNE and OEFFENBERGER (1985). 

HaADGOPOULOS, DEMETRIUS J. (1977), “‘did uéowy OF 61° Guécwv?— Posterior 
Analytics, II, viii, 93a36”, Apeiron, 11: 32-9. 

INwoop, Brap (1979), “A Note on Commensurate Universals in the 
Posterior Analytics”, Phronesis, 24: 320-9. 

Irwin, T. H. (1988), Aristotle’s First Principles (Oxford). 

Jupson, Linpsay (19914), ‘““Chance and ‘Always or For the Most Part’ in 
Aristotle”, in JUDSON (1991D). 

277 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

Jupson, Linpsay (ed.) (1991b), Aristotle’s Physics (Oxford). 

KAHN, CHARLES H. (1981), “The Role of nous in the Cognition of First 
Principles in Posterior Analytics, II. 19’, in BERTI (1981). 

KRETZMANN, NorMan (ed.) (1982), Infinity and Continuity in Ancient 
and Mediaeval Thought (Ithaca, NY). 

KULLMANN, WOLFGANG (1974), Wissenschaft und Methode: Interpre- 
tationen zur aristotelischen Theorie der Naturwissenschaft (Berlin). 

—— (1981), ‘““Die Funktion der mathematischen Beispiele in Aristoteles’ 
Analytica Posteriora’’, in BERTI (1981). 

Kuna, Joan (1982), ‘“‘Aristotle’s de Motu Animalium and the Separability 
of the Sciences”, Journal of the History of Philosophy, 20: 65-76. 

LaNDoR, BLAKE (1981), “Definitions and Hypotheses in Posterior Ana- 
lytics, 7219-25 and 76°35-77°4”, Phronesis, 26: 308-18. 

— (1985), “Aristotle on Demonstrating Essence’’, Apeiron, 19: 116-32. 

LEAR, JONATHAN (1980), Aristotle and Logical Theory (Cambridge). 

LENNOX, JAMES (1987), “Divide and Explain: the Posterior Analytics in 
Practice”, in GOTTHELF and LENNOX (1987). 

Lioyp, G. E. R. (1961), ““The Development of Aristotle’s Theory of the 
Classification of Animals”, Phronesis, 6: 59-81 (repr. with additions 
in LLOYD (1991)). 

—— (1990), “‘Aristotle’s Zoology and his Metaphysics: the status quaes- 
tionis’”’, in DEVEREUX and PELLEGRIN (1990) (repr. in LLOYD (1991)). 

-—— (1991), Methods and Problems in Greek Science (Cambridge). 

McKiraHAN, RICHARD D. (1983), “Aristotelian Epagoge in Prior Ana- 
lytics, 2. 21 and Posterior Analytics, 1. 1”, Journal of the History of 
Philosophy, 21: 1-13. 

MANSION, SUZANNE (1984), ‘“‘‘Plus connu en soi’, ‘Plus connu pour 
nous’: une distinction épistémologique importante chez Aristote’’, in 
S. MANSION, Etudes Aristotéliciennes (Louvain-la-Neuve). 

MENNE, A., and OEFFENBERGER, N. (eds.) (1982, 1985, 1988, 1990), Zur 
modernen Deutung der aristotelischen Logik, i-iv (Hildesheim). 

Micnucci, Mario (1975), L’Argomentazione dimostrativa in Aristotele 
(Padua). 

——— (1981), “‘Q¢ éxi 1d nods et nécessaire dans la conception aristoté- 
licienne de la science’’, in BERTI (1981) (repr. in MENNE and OEFFEN- 
BERGER (1988)). 

——— (1987), “‘Aristotle’s Arithmetic”, in GRAESER (1987). 

Moravux, P. (1979), Le Commentaire d’Alexandre d’Aphrodisie aux 
“Seconds Analytiques” d’Aristote, Peripatoi, xiii (Berlin). 

Moravesik, JuLius M. E. (1974), ‘Aristotle on Adequate Explanations”, 
Synthése, 28: 3-27. 

—— (1975), ‘“‘Aitia as Generative Factor in Aristotle’s Philosophy”’, 
Dialogue, 14: 622-38. 

MUELLER, IAN (1974), “Greek Mathematics and Greek Logic’, in cor- 
CORAN (1974). 

— (1982), “Aristotle and the Quadrature of the Circle”, in KRETZMANN 
(1982). 

278 

REFERENCES 

Novak, JosepH A. (1978), ““A Geometrical Syllogism: Posterior Ana- 
lytics, I. 11”, Apeiron, 12: 26-33. 

Nusspaum, MarTHA C. (1985), Aristotle’s de Motu Animalium (first edn. 
1978; Princeton, NJ). 

O'Meara, D. J. (ed.) (1981), Studies in Aristotle, Studies in Philosophy 
and the History of Philosophy, ix (Washington, DC). 

Patzic, GUNTHER (1981), “Erkenntnisgriinde, Realgriinde und 
Erklarungen (zu Anal. Post. A 13)’, in BERTI (1981). 

PELLEGRIN, PIERRE (1981), ‘Division et syllogisme chez Aristote’’, Revue 
philosophique de la France et de l’étranger, 171: 169-87. 

SCANLAN, MICHAEL (1982), “On Finding Compactness in Aristotle’, 
History and Philosophy of Logic, 4: 1-8. 

SMITH, Rosin (19824), “The Relationship of Aristotle’s Two Ana- 
lytics’’, Classical Quarterly, 32: 327-35. 

(1982b), “The Syllogism in Posterior Analytics 1’, Archiv fiir 

Geschichte der Philosophie, 64: 113-35. 

(1986), “Immediate Propositions and Aristotle’s Proof Theory”, 

Ancient Philosophy, 6: 47-68. 

(1989), Aristotle: Prior Analytics (Indianapolis). 

SoRABII, RICHARD (1980), Necessity, Cause and Blame (London). 

—— (1981), “Definitions: Why Necessary and in What Way?”, in BERTI 
(1981). 

STRIKER, GISELA (1977), Review of Barnes, Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics, 
Zeitschrift fiir philosophische Forschung, 31: 316-20. 

TarAn, Leonarpo (1981), Speusippus of Athens, Philosophia Antiqua, 
xxxix (Leiden). 

Taytor, C. C. W. (1990), “‘Aristotle’s Epistemology”, in EVERSON (1990). 

Tites, J. E. (1983), “Why the Triangle has Two Right Angles Kath’ 
Hauto”, Phronesis, 27: 1-16. 

VAN FRAASSEN, Bas C. (1980), “A Re-examination of Aristotle’s 
Philosophy of Science’”’, Dialogue, 19: 20-45. 

VERDENIUS, W. J. (1981), ‘““Notes on Some Passages in Book I’, in BERTI 
(1981). 

Von Fritz, Kurt (1955), “Die ARXAI in der griechischen Mathematik”, 
Archiv fir Begriffsgeschichte, 1: 12-103 (repr. in VON FRITZ (1971)). 
(1971), Grundprobleme der Geschichte der antiken Wissenschaft 

(Berlin). 

WIANS, WILLIAM (1989), ‘Aristotle, Demonstration, and Teaching”, 
Ancient Philosophy, 9: 245-53. 

WIELAND, WOLFGANG (1972), “‘Zeitliche Kausalstrukturen in der aristo- 
telischen Logik”, Archiv fiir Geschichte der Philosophie, 54: 229-37 
(repr. in MENNE and OEFFENBERGER (1988) ). 

WILLIAMS, Mark F. (1984), Studies in the Manuscript Tradition 
of Aristotle’s Analytica, Beitrage zur klassischen Philologie, clxi 
(KGnigstein). 

279 

GLOSSARIES 

The glossaries list technical and semi-technical terms, and a few others 
besides. For the most part, the equivalences which they give hold only 

for the most part. 

I Greek—English 

Note that compound verbs are usually entered under their simple form. 

ayvoeiv etc. 
ayyxivoia 
aic@dvec8ai 
aicO@nua 
aicOnaic 
aigOytiKdc 
aiteiaOai 
aitnua 
aitia 
aitiatoc 
Qitioc 
dxodovbeiv 

napaKodovesiy etc. 

apa 
axpipys etc. 
aAnOng etc. 
Gyecos 
dudiopytety 
avayelv 

dvayoyn 
dvayKaios ete. 
dvaipeiv 
davahoyia 
avadvais 
dvtixeio@ai etc. 
dytiatpéger etc. 
aéoty 

aéiopa 
dnatdodai etc. 
&reipog 
anos 

anre¢ 
anodiddvai 
azopia etc. 
anopavoig 

be ignorant of (see p. 151) 
acumen 

perceive 

percept 

perception 

empirical (7972) 
postulate (see p. 141) 
postulate 

explanation (see p. 89) 
explanandum (76°20: explainable) 
explanatory 

follow 

be interrelated with 
extreme terms 

exact (see p. 189) 

true 

immediate (see p. 94) 
dispute 

lead back; refer 
reduction 

necessary 

reject 

analogy 

analysis 

be opposed, opposite to 
convert (see pp. 109, 153, 166) 
claim 

axiom (see p. 99) 

err 

infinite 

simple 

simpliciter (see p. 87) 
elucidate (78°22: set out) 
puzzle 

statement 

281 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

apxn ete. principle; beginning; start (see p. 238) 
&topos atomic (see p. 163) 
aaupeiy etc. remove (81°3: abstraction) 
yévoc kind 
yiyvec@ar become; come about; occur 
napaytyvec@ar be acquired 
yiyvoookery etc. know (see p. 82) 
yveatud¢ cognitive 
yveopilerv get to know (acquire knowledge, become known) 
yvebpyyloc familiar (see p. 95) 
prepiapos recognition 
deucvbvar etc. prove 
dene tiK6¢ probative (see p. 183) 
dnodenxvivar etc. demonstrate 
dvanddemt0¢ indemonstrable (see p. 94) 
énideik vival show 
OnAOS plain 
dndoby show 
diaipety etc. divide 
SiakéyeoOai argue (92°32: talk) 
OradextiKog dialectical 
Oiadextixh dialectic 
didvora thought 
S1AVONTIKOS intellectual 
didotHa interval 
6 O16 ti the reason why 
dtadopa etc. difference 
6 O16tt the reason why 
66€a etc. opinion 
OBVOLLIC capacity 
Svvepet potentially 
eidévai know (see p. 82) 
mpoewéval know already 
eid0¢ form 
elvau be (the case); exist; hold; occur (see p. 84) 
éx from (see pp. 81, 139) 
éxdéyetv excerpt 
édéyyerv refute 
éupddrec@ar interpolate 
éunintev fall 
napeunintery fall in between 
évaytiog contrary 
dnevaytioc not in accordance with 
Evdoeog reputable (see p. 126) 
évexa tivoc etc. with what purpose 
évotacic objection 

282 

énaywyy etc. 

éxeabai 

éxiotac@at 
éniothun 
éNloTHUOVIKOG 
éniatytocg 

épwtdy 
épwmtnua 

éayatocg 

épappotteiv 

épecifc 

bye 
éyOpevocg 
&EIC 

Cytetv etc. 

if 

Oéaic etc. 
Oewopetv etc. 
Onpeverv etc. 

1610¢ 
iotacOar 

Ka aité 
xa éxaatov 
Kadoiov 
Katanvxvoba@ai 
KatacKend lev 
Katyyopsiv etc. 
KATH YOpIKOS 
xiveiv etc. 
Koos 
KOpI0G 
Kopias 
xtKAoc etc. 
Aappdavev 
éxdau avery 
petahappdavery 
mpoolapPaverv 

brohapPavery etc. 

AavOdaverv 
Aéyew 
Aoyig Log 
Aoyosg 
Aoyikosg 
pavOdyery etc. 
HuaOnua 

GLOSSARIES 

induction (see p. 83) 

follow 

understand (see p. 82) 
understanding; science 
scientific 

understandable 

ask (see p. 83) 

question 

last 

attach to (see p. 195) 
consecutively 

have; grasp; possess; contain 
next to (901: neighbouring) 
state (see p. 260) 

seek 
as 

(see t6évai etc.) 
study (88°3: observe) 
hunt 

proper (see p. II0) 

come to a stop; make a stand 

in itself (see p. ITI) 

particular (see p. 83) (99°18: severally) 
universal(ly) (see pp. 111, 256) (95°12: general) 
thicken 

establish 

predicate (see p. 117) 

positive 

change; move 

common (see p. 99) 

important for (76718: sovereign) 
properly 

circle 

get; take; assume 

extract 

take instead (se p. 230) 

assume in addition 

believe 

escape notice 

say; argue; call; mean; state; speak about; describe 
calculation 

account; argument; ratio 

general (see pp. 173, 218) 

learn 
mathematics (see p. 152) 

283 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

paOnpatiKéc mathematical 
pégov middle term 
petaBaivery cross 
petaBadde alter 
voeiv etc. think 
vois comprehension (see p. 267) 
oixeiog appropriate 
olov €.g.5 1.e. 
bpavopos etc. homonymous 
ovopua name 
onep just what is (see p. 176) 
opie etc. define 
diopitew define 
6pos term; definition 
TO Ott the fact 
obaia substance; essence (see p. 177) 
naOnya attribute 
naGoc attribute 
napa apart from (see p. 144) 
neépaively bound 
nenepacpévos etc. finite 
mEpac limit 
niotebery etc. be convinced of 
npayya object 
npopanua problem (see p. 250) 
TpOTAaGIC proposition (see p. 97) 
TpOtEpos prior; former; earlier; before; already (see p. 95) 
RP@Otos first; primitive; prime 
ntBoi¢ aspect (see p. 224) 
onuaivery mean 
onpeiov evidence 
oxonety etc. inquire 
atépnaic etc. privation 
atolyeiov element 
ODYYEVHC of a kind 
avddoyilecOar etc. deduce (see pp. 83, 244) 
daviA6yiat0c non-deductive 
ooupebnros incidental (see p. 89) 
ovunépacua conclusion 
ODVEXIHS continuous 
ovviévan grasp (only at: 71°7, #12, °32; 76°37) 
avatoixia chain (see p. 163) 
oxnua figure 
o@lelv preserve (see p. 127) 
tedevtaioc ultimate 
6 ti éotl what something is (see p. 174) 

284 

10 ti HY elval 
tiOEval 
béats 
petatiPéval 
npoaGeaig 
bnotiOévai 
bnOOEaIC 
onapyelv 
évenapyetv 
bmoKeipevov 
pavar 
avtiipaaic 
anogavai etc. 
anopaais 
xatadavai etc. 
pavepocg 
paoKelv 
pOeipery etc. 
poaig 
Pvoiky 
A@pIg 
wevdyc etc. 
yoni 
a éni tO nOAD 

abstraction 
account (n.)} 
acquire knowledge 
acumen 

affirm 

alter 

analogy 

analysis 

apart from 
appropriate (adj.) 
argue 

argument 

as 

ask 

aspect 

assert 

assume 

assume in addition 
atomic 

GLOSSARIES 

what it is to be something (see p. 174) 

posit; position 

posit; position (75°32; 9422: arrangement) 

transpose 
additional posit 
suppose 

supposition (see p. 100) 

hold (of); occur 
inhere in 
underlying subject 

say; assert 
contradictory pair 
deny 

negation 

affirm 

clear 

say; declare 
perish (see p. 127) 

nature; natural object 

natural science 
separately 

false 
soul 

for the most part (see p. 192) 

II English-Greek 

adaipeaic 

AOVOS 

yveopilery 

ayyivoia 
Katagavar 
petapaniew 
avaioyia 

avaAvais 

napa (see p. 144) 
oixsiog 
d1aréyecOai 

AG VOC 

fi 
épwtav (see p. 83) 
nrdais (See p. 224) 
davai 

Aappave 
mpochappavetv 
&topuos (see p. 163) 

285 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

attach to égappotte (see p. 195) 
attribute (n.) ndOnua, NAGos 
beginning apyy 

believe brohappavew 

bound (vb.) nepaiverv 
calculation Aoyia pos 

capacity Sbvapis 

chain ovotoizia (see p. 163) 
claim (vb.) aéiobv 

clear (adj.) gavepos 

cognitive pr@atixes 

common Koos 
comprehension voic (see p. 267) 
conclusion ovpnépacya 
consecutively ebecis 

continuous ODVEXHS 
contradictory pair avribaaig 

contrary évaytiog 

convert avrotpégerv (See pp. 109, 153, 166) 
convinced of, be TIGTEDELV 

cross (vb.) petapaiverv 

declare oddoxeiv 

deduce ov ioyilec Oat 
deduction avdloyicpdc (see p. 83) 
define opilerv, Stopiteiy 
definition bpos 

demonstrate dnodemvbvar 
dialectic OIQAEKTIKH 
difference diagopa 

dispute (vb.) dudiaBnteiv 

divide draupeiy 

division dtaipeois 

e.g. oiov 

element atolyeioy 

elucidate dnodévat 
empirical aicOntKés 

err anatadoGat 

escape notice AavOdverv 

essence obaia 

establish KatacKevacev 
evidence onusiov 

exact (adj.) axpiping (see p. 189) 
excerpt (vb.) éxdéyery 
explanandum aitiatos 
explanation aitia (see p. 89) 
explanatory aitios 

286 

extract (vb.) 
extreme terms 

fact, the 
fall 
false 
familiar 
figure 
finite 
follow 
form 

general (adj.) 
get to know 
grasp (vb.) 
hold (of) 
homonymous 
hunt (vb.) 
ie. 
ignorance 
immediate 
important 
incidental 
indemonstrable 
induction 
infinite 
inhere in 

in itself 
inquire 
intellectual 
interpolate 
interval 

just what is 
kind (n.) 
kind, ofa 
know 
knowledge 
last (adj.) 
learn 

limit (n.) 
mathematics 
mean (vb.) 
middle term 

most part, for the 

name (n.) 
nature 

GLOSSARIES 

éxhappaverv 

axpa 

TO Ott 

éuninterv 

wevdAcg 

yveapipoc (see p. 95) 
onua 
HEMEPACMEVOS 
éxecOai, dxohovbeiv 
eldoc 

doyikés (see pp. 173, 218) 
preopitetv 

éyelv, ovviéval 

omapyeiy 

OU@VOLLOG 

Onpebev 

olov 

ayvoia (see p. 151) 
&pecoc (see p. 94) 
KUpIOG 

ovupeBnxds (see p. 89) 
dvanddeixtos (see p. 94) 
éxayoyy (see p. 83) 
&neipoc 

évonapyery 

xa@ aité (see p. IIT) 
oxoneiyv 

OlQVONTIKOG 

éupairiec@ai 

Oldotyua 

énep (see p. 176) 
yEVOS 
oyyEevAg 

yipvwoxaty, cidévar (see p. 82) 

yay 

éayatocg 

HavOdvery 

mEpac 

udOnpa (see p. 152) 
onpaivery 

Hégov 

dig éni t6 nodd (see p. 192) 
bvopua 
pbais 

287 

POSTERIOR ANALYTICS 

natural object pbaig 
natural science pvaixy 
negation dnogaais 
next to éYOMEVOS 
non-deductive dovirdyiatos 
object (n.) mpaypa. 
objection Evotacic 
opinion doéa 
opposite dvrikeipevoc 
particular xa’ éxactov (see p. 83) 
perceive aigOdvec@ai 
percept aic@nua 
perception aic@nats 
perish Ocipetv 
plain Ofjhog 

posit (n.) éaIs 

posit (vb.) widévat 
positive KAatHyOpmKoS 
postulate (vb.) aiteicOai 
postulate (n.) aitnua 
potentially Ovvauet 
predicate (vb.) Katyyopetlv 
preserve o@leiv 
prime RP@TOS 
primitive Ap@tog 
principle apy 

prior TpOTEPOS 
privation otépnars 
probative dem tiK6¢ 
problem npopanua (see p. 250) 
proper i1oc (see p. 110) 
properly Kvpiws 
prove deikvbvaL 
purpose, with what veka tivoc 
puzzle (n.) dnopia 
question (n.) épadtnya 
ratio DOyos 
reason why, the TO 61a ti, TO Ot6Tt 
recognition yrwpig pos 
reduction dvaywyy 
refer dvayery 
reject avaupeiv 
remove adaipeiv 
reputable évdoEoc 
science éniotnun 

288 

scientific 
seek 
separately 
show 
simple 
simpliciter 
soul 
sovereign (adj.) 
start 

state (n.) 
statement 
study 
substance 
suppose 
supposition 
term 
thicken 
think 
thought 
transpose 
true 

ultimate 
underlying subject 
understand 
understanding 
universal 

what it is to be something 
what something is 

GLOSSARIES 

EXIGTHLOVIKOG 
onteiv 

XOpIS 

oniobv, éniderxvbva 
anhois 

anid (see p. 87) 
yoxn 

Kbplog 

apxy 

ay 

81g (see p. 260) 
anodavaig 

Oecopeiv 

obcia 

bnotiOévar 

bn0GEoIS 

Opoc 

Katanvkvobabai 

yosiv 

dlavora 

petatiOevar 

GAN Ons 

teAEvt aoc 

bmoKEipEevov 

énxiotac6ai (see p. 82) 
émioTH UN 

xadodov (see pp. III, 256) 
76 ti Hy evar (see p. 174) 
16 ti éoti (see p. 174) 

289 

INDEX OF NAMES! 

Academy xiv, xx, 103, 118, 213 

Alexander of Aphrodisias xxi, 98, 122, 
157 

Anacharsis 158 

Antiphanes 153 

Antisthenes 103 

Archimedes 141, 159 

Archytas 159 

Aristoxenus 142, 160 

Bryson 134, 150 
Caineus 153 

Democritus 132 
Diogenes Laertius 95, 104, 158 

Empedocles 194 

Euclid xii, xx, 85, 86, 99, 113, 123, 
131, 132, 138, 141, 142, 150, 159, 
160, 161, 185, 216, 227, 254 

Eudemus 245 

Eudoxus 123 

Frege xvi 
Galen xxi 
Heraclitus 193 

Herodotus 158, 228 
Hume 156 

' Modern scholars are not indexed. 

Leibniz 216 
Locke xiii, 112, 175, 261 

Menaechmus 103, 185 
Mill 87, 168 

Pacius 125, 202, 204, 229, 242, 243, 
244, 250, 257, 263 

Pappus 153 

Philip of Opus 118 

Philoponus 84, 112, 113, 180, 181, 213 

Plato xx, 88, 90, 103, 113, 126, 140, 
142, 144, 151, 158, 159, 160, 161, 
177, 182, 185, 190, 191, 194-5, 197, 
198, 210, 259, 261, 264, 270 

Proclus 99, 103, 108, 113, 118, 123, 
141, 185, 190 

Protagoras 142, 193 

Pyrrho 104 

Pythagoras 185, 190 

Sextus Empiricus 87, 94, 103, 104 
Simplicius 137 
Speusippus 97, 198, 213, 245-7 

Theophrastus 91, 93, 99, 103, 122, 271 
Theudius 123 

Xenocrates 103, 209-10 

Zabarella 93, IOI, 113, 123, 128, 132, 
193, 228, 258 

291 

INDEX OF PASSAGES? 

ARISTOTLE 

An B 2, 413*10-20: 216 
12, 424°21-4: 193 
I 8, 432°3-6: 168 
AP? A 1, 247 10-11: xx—Xxi 
24°22-5: 98 
24°18—20: 82-3 
24°28-30: 111 
27, 43°33-5: 240 
31, 46°32-7: 210 
B 2, 54°4-6: 165 
5, 57° 18-21: 105-6 
21, 67° 12-26: 85-8 
26, 69°37—"1: 152 
EN Z 3, 1139°18-21: 91 
11, 1143°35-"5: 267-8 
GA B 8, 747°27-30: 173 
GC B 11, 338°1-5: 239 
338°16-18: 239 
HA A 6, 491°9—14: xix~xx 
Int 3, 16°19—22: 142 
Met A 1, 981°5-7: 264 
9, 99371: 261 
a 1, 993°23~6: IOI 
3, 995° 15-16: 190 
B 2, 997°35—998"4: 142 
4, 999°26-9: 186 
T 4, 1005719-22: 148 
4 3, 1014°9- 10: 265 
4, 1015*11-13: 184 
18, 1022*19-20: II7 
25, 1023°23: 190 
30, 1025°30-2: 113 
Z 4, 1030°7-9: 217 

5, 1030°18—26: 113 
A 4, 1070°22: 229 
PA A 1, 64274-6: 235 
Phys B 3, 195°5: 232 
A 12, 222°10-12: 236 
Top A 1, 100°18—20: 148 
100*27-9: 94 
10§°5-17: 150 
4, 101°16: 250 
B 10, 115°29-35: 87 
E 1, 129°29-31: 173 
Z 4, 141°29~34: 96 
H 3, 153° 11-15: 212 
FIl, 172°1§-21: 149 

ARISTOXENUS 

Elementa Harmonica B 33: 142 

PAPPUS 
Collectio ii. 634: 153 

PLATO 
Meno 80°: 88 
987: 90 
Phaedo 96°: 259 
Theaet 189°: 140 

SEXTUS EMPIRICUS 
adv Math viii. 23: 94-5 

THEOPHRASTUS 
frag 33 Graeser 99 
34 122 

2 The index lists texts, outside APst, which are either cited or discussed in the 
Commentary. 

292 

INDEX OF 

abstraction: 
and concepts 248-9, 264, 266-7 
and mathematical objects 85, 168, 
190 
see also mathematics 
acumen 202 
alpha privative 151 
see also negatives 
analogy 138-9, 251, 255 
analysis 153-4 
anatomy 250 
anonymous characteristics 124, 251 
appropriateness 93, 97, 126, 130, 
134-7, 166, 173 
arithmetic 135, 158, 195~6, 197 
see also numbers 
‘as such’ 118~19, 121-2, 135, 184 
astronomy 158, 159, 160, I61 
atomicity 163, 243, 257 
axioms 99~100, I21, 131, 138-9, 
140-1, 143, 160, 240 
and dialectic 148 
finite xviii, 196 
relative to sciences 99-100 
see also principles; sciences 

‘be’ 84, 100, 203, 218 
see also copula; existence 
beauty 132 
begging the question 87, 208, 210 
belief 201-2 
see also opinion 
biology xix~xx, 92, 122, 230, 232, 251 

categories 176-7, 178-9, 196, 242, 
265, 266, 267 
catoptrics 159, 161 
causa cognoscendi 226, 238 
cause 89-90, 156, 224, 231, 254 
see also definitions; explanation 
certainty 102, 198 
chains of terms 131, 163, 169, 191, 256 
chance [91-2, 205-6, 233, 262 
not knowable 192 

SUBJECTS? 

change 116, 175, IQI 
no first moment of 237 
chronology of A.’s works xv, xxi, 
103-4, 131, 149, 212, 214, 239, 
259, 271 
circular proof 103-4, 105-6, 107-10, 
170, 239 
common beliefs 91, 198 
‘common to all’ gg—100, 136, 138 
comprehension 102, 106-7, 187, 199, 
265, 267 
concepts: 
acquisition of 97, 248, 259, 263, 
264-5, 267, 271 
and perception 186 
see also abstraction; terms 
consecutiveness 211, 236-7, 237-8 
see also time 
contingency 92, 127, 197, 228 
see also necessity 
contradictory pairs 98, 98-9, 101, 118 
contraries 118, 131-2, 141-2, 165, 
213-14 
conversion I09—I0, 153, 154, 156, 
166, 209, 210, 239, 255, 256, 
258-9 
laws of xvii 
see also definitions 
conviction 102-3 
copula 233-4, 235 
see also ‘be’ 
counterpredication 110, I7I, 177, 178 
see also conversion 

deductions 82-3, 140, 212-13, 218, 
226, 227 

see also syllogisms 

definitions: 
causal 224, 240 
and conversion 154, 209, 255, 258 
= definiens 100, 200, 208 
definition of 213, 223-4 
and demonstration 207-22, 254 
discovery of 240-9 

3 The index covers the Introduction and the Commentary: it does not cover 
Aristotle’s text. A little supplementary material may be found in the Glossaries. 

293 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

definitions (cont.): 
and existence 100 
by genus and differentia 174-5, 218, 
241, 244-7 
and IJ-predication 112-13, 180-1 
nominal 218-19, 222, 223, 224 
partial 224 
and predication 208 
and principles 100-1, 107, 139, 216, 
255, 258, 271 
real xiii-xiv, 120, 175 
in A.’s scientific works xx 
and substances 216 
and suppositions 142 
types of 134, 222-5 
universal 134, 143, 213, 249 
see also essence 
demonstration: 
affirmative){negative 187-8 
defined xvii-xviii 
direct)(reductive 188-9 
elements of 130-1, 139, 143-4 
of essences? 162, 207-22 
negative 170, 172-3 
two types of? 121-2 
universal)(particular 183-7 
see also definitions; sciences 
demonstrative propositions: 
\(dialectical 98 
necessary xviii, xxi—Xxii 
dependence 81-2, 93, 112-13, 116, 
139, 143, 191 
see also priority 
dialectic 81, 83, 98, 136, 148, 152, 154, 
169, 173, 210, 212 
differentiae 174-5, 177, 215, 218, 
244-5, 247 
essential)(non-essential 246-7, 248 
and J2-predications 114 
see also definitions 
division 210-12, 244-5, 246-7, 
247-8, 250 
ducks 228~9 

eclipse 113, 134, 194, 204, 206, 218- 
20, 254 
empiricism 167-8, 194, 259, 267, 270 
see also sciences 
essence 119, 174, 200, 207-8, 215, 
218, 227, 241, 244, 247-8 
and existence 85, 204, 218 
discovery of 162 

and explanation 204-5, 206, 217 
immediate 221, 240 
and necessity 92-3, 120, 241 
real xiii~-xiv 
and substance 176-7, 179 
see also definition; predication 
essentialism xiii—xiv 
eternal items 112, 132-4 
events 117, 223-4, 225, 231, 232 
contiguity of 236-7, 238 
past)(present 236-7 
exactness 189-90, 261, 262, 269-70 
existence 215, 218-19 
and essence 85, 204, 218 
incidental 114, 116 
see also ‘be’ 
existential import xvii, 133, 223 
existential propositions 100-1, 139, 
203, 205, 218, 234 
negative 101 
see also suppositions 
experience 262, 263-4 
explanation 92, 93, 95, 107-8, 156, 
157-8, 185, 219, 223~4 
discovery of 194, 202, 206 
efficient 228-9, 231, 234 
)(fact 90, 155-62, 190, 204, 252 
final 185, 229-31, 231-2 
formal 117, 225, 228, 234 
material 226-7 
and middle terms 205-6 
and necessary conditions 252-9 
and necessitation 226, 227, 228-9, 
232-3 
plural 191, 232-3 
primitive 155-6, 257 
rival 253-5, 257-8 
terminology for 89-90, 252 
and time 234-6, 252 
types of 117, 185, 225-35 
ultimate 136-7, 155-6, 185, 257 
and understanding 89~90 
universal 193-4, 253 
see also self-explanatoriness 

falsity, partial 165-6 
familiarity 95-6, 96-7, 156, 189 
by nature)(to us 96-7 
family resemblance 249 
finitude: 
of axioms xviii, 196 
of predications 169-81 

294 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

of proofs 181 

of theorems xviii, 196-7 

see also infinity 
‘for the most part’ 92, 134, 190, 

191-3, 197,240 ~ 

form 205, 218 

see also explanation; matter 
future, knowledge of 235-6 

genus 250, 254-5 
‘being is not a genus’ 215 
in definitions 174-5, 218, 241, 
244-5 
as individuating sciences 119, 
130-1, 135-6, 148, 158, 160, 182, 
190-1, 196 
geometry 134, 142-3, 150, 158, 159, 
160, 195-6, 227 
examples from 85-6, 94, 119, 
122-3, 123-4, 139, 185, 216 
objects of 123, 131, 142-3 
see also mathematics 
goat-stag 215, 223 

harmonics 135, 158, 160, 161 

homonymy 98, 144, ISI, 152, 249, 
250, 254 

hypothesis, see supposition 

ideas, Platonic 144, 161, 177, 185, 
264-5 
identity 197, 200-1, 214, 246 
ignorance 150-1, I51, 164-7 
immediacy 106, 119, 129, 135, 154, 
156, 163, 169, 170, 179, 182, 185, 
186, 197, 216, 221, 238, 252, 255, 
257 
defined 94-5, 98 
incidentals 89, 113, 117, 126, 177, 247, 
254, 266 
in itself 113-14, 120-1, 126, 129, 
179, 242-3 
unknowable 129, 192 
‘indemonstrable’ 94~5, 106, 135, 217 
individuals 86, 122, 132-3, 168, 186, 
250, 255, 266 
unknowable 132, 186 
see also singular terms 
induction 83, 107, 152-3, 161, 167-8, 
215, 259, 264, 267, 268 
infinity 197, 237, 238-9 
of individuals 186 

regress 103-5 
and thought 105, 108 
and time 237, 238-9 
see also finitude 
‘in itself? xxi-xxii, 111, 122 
types of 112-17 
see also incidentals; I-predication 
innatism 260-1, 262 
intuition 259, 267-8, 270 
I-predication xxi, 112~14, 117, 119, 
120-2, 126, 129, 130, I31, 135, 
199-200, 205, 225 
I1-predication 112-13, 181 
I2-predication 113-14, 180-1, 258 
and necessity 117-18, 200 

‘just what is X’ 115, 176, 201, 209 

kind, see genus 
kind crossing 123, 131, 132, 135-6, 
160, 195-6 
see also sciences 
knowledge: 
acquisition of 81-6 
degrees of 96, 102, 186 
of eternal items 132-4 
and explanation 92-3, 127 
fixity of 103, 198 
ideal type of g1-2 
incidental 89, 218, 219, 223 
of necessities 90-3, I10—11, 120, 
126, 192 
)(opinion 90, 198-202 
potential 88, 261 
pre-existing 81, 83-5, 85-6, 96, 
102, 143, 261-2 
self-aware 261 
sorts of 83, 87 
terminology for 82, 88, 90, 91, 260, 
269 
universal)(particular 87-8, 184-5 
of universals 111, 144-5, 168 

law of contradiction 140, 145 

law of excluded middle 85, 101, 118, 
147-8 

light 194, 232, 251 

magnanimity 249 
mathematics xx, xxi, 99, 151, 154, 159, 
161, 168, 190, 194 
arguments in 162 

295 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

mathematics (cont.): 
examples from 99, 117-18, 132, 
216; see also geometry 
explanations in 92, 107-8, 227 
objects of 151-2, 161-2, 168, 190; 
existence of 85; perception of 86, 
151, 193, 199, 268 
universal 123 
matter 190, 205, 218, 225, 226-7, 232 
intelligible 227 
meaning 84, 137-8, 143, 185, 215, 
216, 222 
measurement 182-3 
mechanics 158, 159 
medicine 158, 160 
memory 263, 264 
Meno, puzzle of 88 
mental images 263, 264 
metaphor 250 
metaphysics 137, 148, 236 
middle term 157, 204-5, 207, 219, 
225, 228, 229, 231, 234, 235, 251, 
254 
see also immediacy 
modal logic xvii—xviii, xxi, II 1, 127, 
128-9 

nature 100, 133, 184, 192, 225, 233, 
251 
cyclical 239 
familiarity by 96 
necessity xviii, xxI—xxll, IIO—-I1, 120, 
200, 229, 241 
consequentis)(consequentiae 129-30 
and essence 92-3, 120 
hypothetical 232-3 
and I-predication 117-18, 126 
and knowledge 90-3, L10-I1, 120, 
126, 192 
and principles 126-9 
\(syllogism 83 
types of 92-3, 233 
negatives 101, 145-6, 151, 170, 
172-3, 187, 188 
now 236 
see also time 
numbers 112, 154-5, 241 
see also mathematics 

objections 126, 152-3 
‘of every’ 111-12 

see also universality 
omniscience 245 

‘one of one’ 98, 223 

ontology 114-17, 184, 185 
opinion)(knowledge 90, 198-202 
Opposition 98-9 

optics 158, 159, 160, 161 
ostension 215, 221 

paralogisms I50-1, 151, 152 
‘particular’ 83, 86, 122-3, 183, 249, 
250 
see also individuals; singular 
particular propositions 114, 133, 173, 
183 
peiorem rule 111, 127 
perception 97, 100, 142, 161, 167-8, 
187, 193, 194, 262-3, 266, 268 
and discrimination 262-3 
and individuals 168, 193, 266 
objects of 167, 193, 266 
and universals 193, 206, 266 
see also mathematics 
posits 99-100, 143, 221 
postulates 140-1, 143, 187, 245, 247 
predication: 
disjunctive 113, 117-18 
essential 115, 174, 175, 176-7, 178, 
179 
and events I17 
multiple 98 
natural)(unnatural 114-17, 169, 
175, 176-7, 179 
see also {-predication 
primitiveness 94, 97, I119~20, 125, 
126, 155-6, 185, 195, 217, 243, 
258, 267 
see also explanation; terms 
principles: 
acquisition of 261-7 
apprehension of 93, 104, 106~7, 
262, 267-71 
classification of 99-101 
common){proper 99, 136-7, 138, 
143, 196 
are I-predications 126, 130, 135 
are necessary 126-9 
negative 164, 169 
)(premisses 93-4, 213 
relative to sciences 97 
)(theorems 120-1, 137, 140 
universal 169, 182 
priority 96, 104, 180, 182, 188-9, 190, 
252 
types of 95, 107~8 

296 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

privation 118 
problems 250, 251, 253, 254 
proof, see demonstration 
property I10, 113, 113-14, 209, 242, 
243 
proportion, theory of 123, 124, 135, 
153, 184 
propositions 83, 97-8, 149, 152, 187 
‘single’ 182 
)(terms 97, 98, 108, 143, 259, 267, 
271 
see also demonstrative; existential; 
particular; singular; universal 
puns 151, 164, 186, 215, 265 
purpose, see explanation 

quantification of the predicate 152 
questions 83, 148-9, 203-4, 205, 250 

rainbow 158, 159, I61, 251 

rationalism 259, 267, 270 

reasons 90 

see also explanation 

reductio ad impossibile 147-8, 183, 
188-9 

reputable items 98, 126, 169 

rhetoric 81, 83 

rules of inference 84, 139, 143-4, 213 

scepticism 103-4, 106-7, 108, 236 
sciences: 
actual practice of xx, xxi, 89, 92, 
109, 113, 114, 126, I31, 132, 139, 
147, 150, 162, 216, 251 
axiomatized xii—Xiil, xx, 108, 159 
demonstrative xviii 
development of 154 
empirical 159, 161, 168 
exactitude of 189-90 
method in xii, xviii, xx 
subordinate 132, 135-6, 149, 158, 
159-60; see also kind crossing 
unified 136, 194-5 
see also genus 
self-evidence 97 
self-explanatoriness 97, 185, 206, 217, 
221-2 
sign arguments 254 
‘simpliciter’ 87, 117, 159, 164, 203 
singular propositions 92, 132, 153, 
176, 183, 185 
singular terms 92, 112, 146, 193 
skill 264 

‘something of the object’ 218-20, 222 
soul 209-10 
species 241, 250, 254-5 
infima 119, 242—4, 248, 249, 266 
specious present 237 
statements 98 
substances 114-17, 162, 176, 184, 
207-8, 216, 217, 240 
and essence 176-7, 179 
suppositions 100-1, 121, 140-2, 143, 
187, 221, 224 
syllogisms xxi, 110, 228, 256 
in A.’s scientific works? xix 
)(deduction 83 
hypothetical 105, 147-8, 212—14 
)Cnecessity’ 83 
‘practical’ 228, 229 
syllogistic xvi-xvii, 83, 94-5, 110, 
113, 121-2, 136, 157, 162-3, 172, 
173, 187, 203, 240 
inadequacy of xvi, xxi, 101, 105-6, 
109, 145-6, 162, 185, 220, 227, 
228, 233-4, 239 

teaching xvili-xix, 81, 83-4, 85, 140, 
152, 262 
teleology 230 
see also explanation 
terms XVi, 142, 143 
negative 145-6 
primitive)(defined 137-8, 144, 190, 
221~2, 243 
)(propositions 97, 98, 108, 143, 259, 
267, 271 
)(suppositions 142 
see also chains; middle; singular 
thunder 220, 224, 232 
time: 
continuity of 234-5, 236-7 
and explanation 231-2, 234-6, 252 
and modality 133 
and universality 112, 132, 192 
‘topics’ 247 
truth 94, 169, 236 
degrees of 269-70 
truth-value, change of 128, 185, 198, 
200 

underlying subject 115-16, 143 
understanding 82, 155 
definition of 89-91, 129 
demonstrative 93-4 
of principles 106-7 

207 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

understanding (cont.): and perception 193, 206, 266 
sophistical 89, 124 and principles 169, 182, 264 
see also knowledge subsistent 144, 264-5; see also 

unity 98, 214, 217, 223, 244-5 ideas, Platonic 

universality: and time 111-12, 133 
commensurate universals 258-9 universal propositions 144-5, 158, 168 
defined 118, 183, 193, 256 
and definitions 134, 143, 213, 249 ‘what something is’ 174, 201, 203-4 
highest universals 265, 266-7 see also essence 
and knowledge 111, 144-5, 168 whole and part 123, 189, 203, 213, 242 

298