THE 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST 

H&ntoon 

HENRY FROWDE 

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PHESS WAREHOUSE 

7 FATHRNOBTER ROW 

THE 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST 

TRANSLATED 

BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS 

AND EDITED BY 

F. MAX MULLER 

VOL. IV 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
1880 

f All rights reserved 1 

THE ZEND-AVESTA 

PART I 

THE V E'N D i D AI) 

TRANSLATED BY 

JAM ES darmesteter 

(SH’forti 

AT THE CLARENDON TRESS 
l 880 

[All rights reserved J 

Chapter I. 

II. 

HI. 

IV. 

V. 

CONTENT 

INTRODUCTION. 

The Discovery ok the Zend-Avesta . . xi 

The Interpretation of the Zend-Avesta xw 
The Formation ok the Zend-Avesta . xw 
The Origin of the Avesta Religion . hi 
The VendIdad lxxxiii 

•TRANSLATION 01- THE VENDlDAD. 

Farcard I. An enumeration of sixteen lands created 
by Ahura Mazda, and of as many plagues 

CREATED IN OPPOSITION HV ANGRA MaINYU . I 

Fargaud II. Myths ok Yima 10 

Fargard III. The Earth 21 

I (i~6). The five places where the Earth fools most joy . 22 

II (7"ii). The five places where the Earth feels most 

sorrow 24 

III (12-35). The five things which most rejoice the Earth 25 

IV (36-42). Corpses ought not to be buried in the Earth 31 

Fargard IV. Contracts and Outrages .... 33 

1(0 34 

II a (2). Classification of contracts 34 

1 1 b (3—4). Damages for breach of contract *35 

lie (5-10). Kinsmen responsible 36 

II d (11-16). Penalties for breach of contract ... 37 

III (17-55). Outrages 3 ?) 

(18). Definitions 39 

(18-21). Menaces 39 

(22-25). Assaults 4(J 

(26-29). Blows 41 

(30-33). Wounds 43 

(34-36). Wounds causing blood to flow ... 42 

(37-39). Broken bones 43 

(40-43). Manslaughter 44 

(44-45). Contracts 45 

(46* 49 [bis] - 55). False oaths 45 

(47—49). Praise of physical weal 4r> 

CULL 

viii CONTENTS. 

I1 Mil? 

Fargard V 48 

I ( r— 7). If a man defile the fire or the earth involuntarily, 

or unconsciously, it is no sin 49 

II (8-9). Water and fire do not kill 50 

III f 10—14). Disposal of the dead during winter . . 51 

IV (15-20). How the Dakhmas are cleansed by water from 

the heavens • .53 

V (21-26). On the excellence ofjmrity and of the law that 

shows how to recover it, when lost 55 

VI (27-38). On the defiling power of the Nasu being 
greater or less, according to the greater or less dignity 

of the being that dies 57 

VII (39-44). On the management of sacrificial implements 

defiled by the dead 60 

VIII (45-62). On the treatment of a woman who has been 

delivered of a still-born child ; and what is to be done 
with her clothes 61 

Fargard VI 66 

I (1-9). How long the earth remains unclean, when defiled 

by the dead 66 

II (10-25). Penalties for defiling the ground with dead 

matter 67 

III (26-41). Purification of the different sorts of water, 

when defiled by the dead 69 

IV (42-43). Purification of the Haoma .... 72 

V (44-51). The place for corpses ; the Dakhmas . . 72 

Fargard VII 74 

I (1-5). How long after death the Nasu falls upon the 

dead 74 

I I (6-9). How far the defiling power of the Nasu extends 76 

III (10-22). Cleansing of clothes defiled by the dead . 77 

IV (23-24). Eating of corpses an abomination ... 79 

V (25-27). Bringing corpses to fire or water an abomina- 
tion So 

VI (28-35). Cleansing of wood and corn defiled by the dead 81 

Vila (36-40). Physicians ; their probation 83 

VI lb (41-44). Their fees 84 

VIII (45-49). Purification of the earth, of the Dakhmas. 

The Dakhmas and the Daevas 86 

IX (60-72). Treatment of a woman who has brought forth 

a still-born child 89 

X (73~75)- Cleansing of vessels defiled by the dead . 91 

XI (76). Cleansing of the cow . . . . § . .92 

XII (77). Unclean libations 92 

CONTENTS. 

IX 

Fargard VIII 93 

I (1-3). Purification of the house where a man has died 93 

II (4-13). Funerals 94 

III (14-22). Purification of the ways along which the 

corpse has been carried 97 

IV (23-25). No clothes to be wasted on a corpse . . 99 

V (26-32). Unlawful lusts 100 

VI (33“34). A corpse when dried up does not contaminate 103 

VII (35-72). Purification of the man defiled by the dead 103 

VIII (73-80). Purification of the fire defiled by the dead no 

IX (81-96). The Bahrain fire 112 

X (97-107). Purification in the wilderness. . . .116 

Fargard IX. The Nine Nights* BarashnOm . . . 119 

la (1,-11)* Description of the place for cleansing the un- 
clean (the Barashnum-gfth) 1 19 

I b (12-36). Description of the cleansing . . . .122 

II (37-44)* Fees of the cleanser 129 

III (47-57)- The false cleanser; his punishment . .131 

Fargard X. Spells recited during the process of 
THE CLEANSING 

133 

Fargard XI. Special spells for the cleansing of the 

SEVERAL OHJKCTS 

138 

Fargard XII. The Upaman: how long it lasts for 

DIFFERENT RELATIVES 

144 

Fargard XIII. The Dog 

I (1-7). The dog of Ormazd and the dog of Ahriman 
I a (1-4). The dog Vanghapara (the hedge-hog) 

I b (5~7). The dog Zairimyangura (the tortoise) 

II (8-16). Offences against the dog 

III (17-19). On the several duties of the dog . 

IV (20-28). On the food due to the dog . 

V (29-38). On the mad dog ; how lie is to be kept, and cured 

VI (39 -40). On the excellence of the dog .... 

VII (41-43). On the wolf-dog 

VI II (44-48). On the virtues and vices of the dog . 

IX (49-50). Praise of the dog 

' X (50-54). The water dog 

151 

152 

152 

153 
153 
156 
156 

r59 

160 

161 
161 
163 
163 

Fargard XIV. The atonement for the murder of a 

water dog 165 

Fargard XV 172 

I (i-8).g Qn five sins the commission of which makes the 
sinner a Peshotanu t . 172 

X 

CONTENTS. 

II (9-19). On unlawful unions and attempts to procure 

abortion 174 

III (20-45). On the treatment of a bitch big with young 175 

IV (46-51). On the breeding of dogs . . . .180 

Fargard XVI 181 

I (1-11). On the uncleanness of women during their sick- 
ness 181 

II (11-12). How it can be removed 183 

III (13-18). Sundry laws relating to the same matter . 184 

Fargard XVII. Hair and Nails 185 

Fargard XVIII 189 

I (1-13). On the unworthy priest and enticers to heresy. 189 

II (14-29). The holiness of the cock 192 

III (30-60). The four paramours of the Dru^ . ." .196 

IV (61-71). On unlawful lusts 200 

Fargard XIX 203 

I (1-10). Angra Mainyu attempts first to kill, then to seduce 

Zarathurtra 204 

II (11-42). Ahura Mazda reveals the law to Zarathujtra . 207 

III (43-47). Angra Mainyu flees down to hell . . .217 

Fargard XX. Tiirita and the origin of medicine . 219 

Fargard XXI. Waters and Light 223 

I (1). Praise of the holy bull 224 

II (2-3). Invocation addressed to hail as a healing power 224 

III a (4-7). Joint invocation addressed to the waters and 

to the light of the sun 225 

III b (8-1 1). Joint invocation addressed to the waters 
and to the light of the moon 226 

III c (12-17). Joint invocation addressed to the waters 

and to the light of the stars 227 

IV (18-21). Spells against disease 228 

Fargard XXII. Angra Mainyu creates 99,999 diseases : 
Ahura Mazda applies for healing to the Holy 
Word and to Airyaman 229 

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the Transla- 
tions of the Sacred Books of the East .... 237 

INTRODUCTION 

CHAPTER I. 

The Discovery of the Zend-Avesta. 

The Zend-Avesta is the sacrfcd book of the Parsis, that 
is to say, of the few remaining followers of that religion 
which reigned over Persia at the time when the second 
successor of Mohammed overthrew the Sassanian dynasty \ 
and which has been called Dualism, or Mazdcism, or Ma- 
gism, or Zoroastrianism, or Fire-worship, according as its 
main tenet, or its supreme God1 2, or its priests, or its sup- 
posed founder, or its apparent object of worship has been 
most kept in view. In less than a century after their defeat, 
nearly all the conquered people were brought over to the 
faith of their new rulers, cither by force, or policy, or the 
attractive power of a simpler form of creed. Rut many of 
those who clung to the faith of their fathers, went and 
sought abroad for a new home, where they might freely 
worship their old gods, say their old prayers, and perform 
their old rites. That home they found at last among the 
tolerant Hindus, on the western coast of India and in the 
peninsula of Guzcrat 3. There they throve and there they 
live still, while the ranks of their co-religionists in Persia 
are daily thinning and dwindling away 4. 

As the Parsis are the ruins of a people, so are their 

1 At the battle of Nih&vand (642 a.c.) a Ahura Mazda. 

8 They settled first at San^iin, not far from Daman ; thence they spread over 

Surat, Nowsari, Broach, and Kambay ; and within the last two centuries they 
have settled at Bombay, which now contains the bulk of the Farsi people, 
nearly 150,000 souls. 

4 A century ago, it is said, they still numbered nearly 100,000 souls ; but 
there now remain#no more than 8000 or 9000 souls, scattered in Yezd and the 
surrounding villages (Dosabhoy Framjee, The Parsees). 

xii vendIdAd. 

sacred books the ruins of a religion. There has been no 
other great belief in the world that ever left such poor and 
meagre monuments of its past splendour. Yet great is the 
value which that small book, the Avesta, and the belief of 
that scanty people, the Parsis, have in the eyes of the his- 
torian and theologist, as they present to us the last reflex 
of the ideas which prevailed in Iran during the five cen- 
turies which preceded and the seven which followed the 
birth of Christ, a period which gave to the world the Gos- 
pels, the Talmud, and the Qur’an. Persia, it is known, had 
much influence on each of the movements which produced, 
or proceeded from, those 'three books; she lent much to 
the first hcresiarchs, much to the Rabbis, much to Moham- 
med. By help of the Parsi religion and the Avesta, wc arc 
enabled to go back to the very heart of that most mo- 
mentous period in the history of religious thought, which 
saw the blending of the Aryan mind with the Semitic, and 
thus opened the second stage of Aryan thought. 

Inquiries into the religion of ancient Persia began long 
ago, and it was the old foe of Persia, the Greek, who first 
studied it. Aristotle1, Ilermippus2, and many others3 
wrote of it in books of which, unfortunately, nothing more 
than a few fragments or merely the titles have come down 
to us. We find much valuable information about it, scat- 
tered in the accounts of historians and travellers, extending 
over ten centuries, from Herodotus down to Agathias and 
Procopius. It was never more eagerly studied than in the 
first centuries of the Christian era ; but that study had no 
longer anything of the disinterested and almost scientific 
character it had in earlier times. Religious and philosophic 
sects, in search of new dogmas, eagerly received whatever 
came to them bearing the name of Zoroaster. As Xanthus 
the Lydian, who is said to have lived before Herodotus, 
had mentioned Zoroastrian Ao'yia4, there came to light, in' 
those later times, scores of oracles, styled Aoyia tov Zwpoacr- 

1 Diogenes Laertius, Prooemium 8. 

2 Pliny, Ilist. Nat. XXX, i, 2. Cf. infra, III, ri. t 

3 Dinoii. Theopompus, Ilermodorus, Heraclides Cumanus. 

4 See Nicolaus Damazccnus, Didot, Fragm. Hist. Ill, 409. 

INTRODUCTION, I. 

Xlll 

rpov, or ‘ Oracula Chaldalca sivc Magica,’ the work of Neo- 
Platonists who were but very remote disciples of the Median 
sage. As his name had become the very emblem of wisdom, 
they would cover with it the latest inventions of their ever- 
deepening theosophy. Zoroaster and Plato were treated 
as if they had been philosophers of the same school, and 
Hicroclcs expounded their doctrines in the same book. 
Proclus collected seventy Tetrads of Zoroaster and wrote 
commentaries on them 1 ; but we need hardly say that 
Zoroaster commented on by Proclus was nothing more or 
less than Proclus commented on by Proclus. Prodicus the 
Gnostic had secret books of Zdroaster 2 ; and upon the 
whole it ,may be said that in the first centuries of Chris- 
tianity, the religion of Persia was more studied and 
less understood than it had ever been before. The real 
object aimed at, in studying the old religion, was to form a 
new one. 

Throughout the Middle Ages nothing was known of 
Mazdcism but the name of its founder, who from a Magus 
was converted into a magician and master of the hidden 
sciences. It was not until the Renaissance that real in- 
quiry was resumed. The first step was to collect all the 
information that could be gathered from Greek and Roman 
writers. That task was undertaken and successfully com- 
pleted by Barnab£ Brisson 3. A nearer approach to the 
original source was made in the following century by 
Italian, English, and French travellers in Asia. Pietro 
della Valle, Henry Lord, Mandelslo, Ovington, Chardin, 
Gabriel du Chinon, and Tavernier found Zoroaster’s last 
followers in Persia and India, and made known their exist- 
ence, their manners, and the main features of their belief to 
Europe. Gabriel du Chinon saw their books and recog- 
nised that they were not all written in the same language, 
their original holy writ being no longer understood except 

1 Fabricius, Graeca Bibliotheca, fourth cd. p. 309 seq. 

2 Clemens Alexandrinus, Stromata I. Cf. infra, III, ii, and Porphyrius, de 
vita Plotini, § 16. 

8 ‘ De regio PtVsarum principatu libri tres,’ Paris, 1 590. The second book 
is devoted to the religion and manners of the ancient Persians. 

XIV 

VENDfDAD. 

by means of translations and commentaries in another 
tongue. 

In the year 1700, a professor at Oxford, Thomas Hyde, 
the greatest Orientalist of his time in Europe, made the 
first systematic attempt to restore the history of the old 
Persian religion by combining the accounts of the Moham- 
medan writers with ‘ the true and genuine monuments of 
ancient Persia1.’ Unfortunately the so-called genuine 
monuments of ancient Persia were nothing more than 
recent compilations referring to the last stage of Parsiism. 
But notwithstanding this defect, which could hardly be 
avoided then, and notwithstanding its still worse fault, a 
strange want of critical acumen the book of Thomas 
Hyde was the first complete and true picture of modern 
Parsiism, and it made inquiry into its history the order of 
the day. A warm appeal made by him to the zeal of 
travellers, to seek for and procure at any price the sacred 
books of the Parsis, did not remain ineffectual, and from 
that time scholars bethought themselves of studying Par- 
siism in its own home. 

Eighteen years later, a countryman of Hyde, George 
Boucher, received from the Parsis in Surat a copy of the 
Vendidfid Sadah, which was brought to England in 1723 
by Richard Cobbe. But the old manuscript was a sealed 
book, and the most that could then be made of it was to 
hang it by an iron chain to the wall of the Bodleian Library, 
as a curiosity to be shown to foreigners. A few years later, 
a Scotchman, named Fraser, went to Surat, with the view of 
obtaining from the Parsis, not only their books, but also a 
knowledge of their contents. He was not very successful 
in the first undertaking, and utterly failed in the second. 

In 1754 a young man, twenty years old, Anquetil 
Duperron, a scholar of the Ecole des Langues Orientalcs 
in Paris, happened to sec a facsimile of four leaves of the 

1 1 Veterum Persarum et Parthorum ct Medorum religionis historia,1 
Oxford, 1 700. 

a Thus he recognised in Abraham the first lawgiver of ancient Persia, in 
Magism a Sabean corruption of the primeval faith, and* in Zoroaster a 
reformer, who had learnt the forgotten truth from the exiled Jews in Babylon. 

INTRODUCTION, I. 

XV 

Oxford Vendiddd, which had been sent from England, a 
few years before, to Etienne Fourmont, the Orientalist. 
He determined at once to give to France both the books 
of Zoroaster and the first European translation of them. 
Impatient to set off, without waiting for a mission from the 
government which had been promised to him, he enlisted 
as a private soldier in the service of the French East India 
Company; he embarked at Lorient on the 24th of February 
3 755> anc* a^cr three years of endless adventures and dan- 
gers through the whole breadth of Hindustan, at the very 
time when war was raging between France and England, 
he arrived at last in Surat, wh'cre he stayed among the 
Parsis for. three years more. Here began another struggle, 
not less hard, but more decisive, against that mistrust and 
ill-will of the Parsis which had disheartened Fraser; but he 
came out of it victorious, and succeeded at last in winning 
from the Parsis both their books and their knowledge. He 
came back to Paris on the 14th of March 1764, and de- 
posited on the following day at the Bibliothcque Royale 
the whole of the Zend-Avesta and copies of most of the 
traditional books. He spent ten years in studying the 
material he had collected, and published in 1771 the first 
European translation of the Zend-Avesta1. 

A violent dispute broke out at once, as half the learned 
world denied the authenticity of the Avcsta, which it pro- 
nounced a forgery. It was the future founder of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, William Jones, a young Oxonian then, 
who opened the war. He had been wounded to the quick 
by the scornful tone adopted by Anquetil towards Hyde 
and a few other English scholars: the Zend-Avesta suf- 
fered for the fault of its introducer, Zoroaster for Anquetil. 
In a pamphlet written in French2, with a verve and in a 
style which showed him to be a good disciple of Voltaire, 
W. Jones pointed out, and dwelt upon, the oddities and 

1 ‘Zend-Avesta, ouvrage de Zoroastre, contcnant les Idees Theologiques, 
Physiques et Morales de ce Legislates. . . . Traduit en Fran<jois sur l’Original 
Zend.* Par M. Anquetil Du Perron, 3V0IS. in 40, Paris, 1771. 

* ‘Lettre k M.’A*** du P***, dans laquelle est compris Pexamen de sa 
traduction des livres attributes k Zoroastre.’ 

XVI 

VENDIDAD. 

absurdities with which the so-called sacred books of Zo- 
roaster teemed. It is true that Anquetil had given full scope 
to satire by the style he had adopted : he cared very little 
for literary elegance, and did not mind writing Zend and 
Persian in French ; so the new and strange ideas he had to 
express looked stranger still in the outlandish garb he gave 
them. Yet it was less the style than the ideas that 
shocked the contemporary of Voltaire1. His main argu- 
ment was that books, full of such silly tales, of laws and 
rules so absurd, of descriptions of gods and demons so 
grotesque, could not be the work of a sage like Zoroaster, 
nor the code of a religion so much celebrated for its simpli- 
city, wisdom, and purity. His conclusion was. that the 
Avesta was a rhapsody of some modern Guebre. In fact 
the only thing in which Jones succeeded was to prove in a 
decisive manner that the ancient Persians were not equal 
to the lu mi c res of the eighteenth century, and that the 
authors of the Avesta had not read the Encyclopedic. 

Jones’s censure was echoed in England by Sir John 
Chardin and Richardson, in Germany by Meiners. Richard- 
son tried to give a scientific character to the attacks of 
Jones by founding them on philological grounds2. That 
the Avesta was a fabrication of modern times was shown, 
lie argued, by the number of Arabic words lie fancied he 
found both in the Zend and Pahlavi dialects, as no Arabic 
element was introduced into the Persian idioms earlier than 
the seventh century; also by the harsh texture of the 
Zend, contrasted with the rare euphony of the Persian ; 
and, lastly, by the radical difference between the Zend 
and Persian, both in words and grammar. To these objec- 
tions, drawn from the form, he added another derived from 
the uncommon stupidity of the matter. 

In Germany, Meiners, to the charges brought against the 
new found books, added another of a new and unexpected 
kind, namely, that they spoke of ideas unheard of before, 
and made known new things. ‘Pray, who would dare 

1 Cf. the article on Zoroaster in the Dictionnaire philosophique. 

a ‘ A Dissertation on the Languages, Literature, and Manners of Eastern 
Nations,’ Oxford, 1777. 

INTRODUCTION, I. 

XVII 

ascribe to Zoroaster books in which arc found numberless 
names of trees, animals, men, and demons unknown to the 
ancient Persians ; in which are invoked an incredible num- 
ber of pure animals and other things, which, as appears 
from the silence of ancient writers, were never known, or at 
least never worshipped, in Persia ? What Greek ever spoke 
of Horn, of Jemshid, and of such other personages as the 
fabricators of that rhapsody exalt with every kind of praise, 
as divine heroes1?’ Yet, in the midst of his Ciceronian 
nonsense, Meiners inadvertently made a remark which, if 
correctly interpreted, might have led to important dis- 
coveries. He noticed that many points of resemblance arc 
to be found between the ideas of the Parsis and those of 
the Brahmans and Musulmans. lie saw in this a proof 
that Parsiism is a medley of Brahmanical and Musulman 
tales. Modern scholarship, starting from the same point, 
came to that twofold conclusion, that, on the one hand, 
Parsiism was one of the elements out of which Mohammed 
formed his religion, and, on the other hand, that the old 
religions of India and Persia flowed from a common source. 
4 Not only does the author of that rubbish tell the same 
tales of numberless demons of either sex as the Indian 
priests do, but he also prescribes the same remedies in 
order to drive them away, and to balk their attempts.5 In 
these words there was something like the germ of compara- 
tive mythology; seldom has a man approached the truth 
so closely and then departed from it so widely. 

Anquetil and the Avesta found an eager champion in 
the person of Kleukcr, professor in the University of Riga. 
As soon as the French version of the Avesta appeared, he 
published a German translation of it, and also of Anquetil’s 
historical dissertations 2. Then, in a series of dissertations 
of his own3, he vindicated the authenticity of the Zend 
books. Anquetil had already tried to show, in a memoir 

1 ‘De Zoroastris vita, institutis, doctrina et libris,’ in the Novi Com- 
mentarii Societatis Regiae, Goettingen, 1778-1779. 

a ‘ Zend-Avesty . . . nach dem Franzoesischen des Ilerrn Anquetil Du Perron,* 
3 vols. in 40, 1776. 

3 • Anhang zuin Zend-Avesta,’ 2 vols. in 40, 1781. 

[4] b 

XVlii VENDfDAD. 

on Plutarch, that the data of the Avesta fully agree with 
the account of the Magian religion given in the treatise on 
‘Isis and Osiris.5 Kleuker enlarged the circle of comparison 
to the whole of ancient literature. He tried also to appeal 
to internal evidence, an attempt in which he was less suc- 
cessful. The strength of his defence was seldom greater 
than the strength of the attack. Mciners had pointed out 
the mythical identity of the Mount Alborg* of the Parsis 
with the Mount Meru of the Hindus, as a proof that the 
Parsis had borrowed their mythology from the Hindus : 
the conclusion was incorrect, but the remark itself was riot 
so. Kleuker fancied that he could remove the difficulty by 
stating that Mount Alborg is a real mountain, nay, a doubly 
real mountain, since there are two mountains of that name, 
the one in Persia, the other in Armenia, whereas Mount 
Meru is only to be found in Fairyland. Seldom were worse 
arguments used in the service of a good cause. Meiners 
had said that the name of the Parsi demons was of Indian 
origin, as both languages knew them by the Latin name 
‘ Dcus.5 This was an incorrect statement, and yet an impor- 
tant observation. The word which means ‘ a demon 5 in 
Persia means quite the contrary in India, and that radical 
difference is just a proof of the two systems being indepen- 
dent of one another. Kleuker pointed out the incorrectness 
of the statement ; but, being unable to account for the iden- 
tity of the words, he flatly denied it. 

Kleuker was more successful in the field of philology : he 
showed, as Anquetil had done, that Zend has no Arabic ele- 
ments in it, and that Pahlavi itself, which is more modern than 
Zend, does not contain any Arabic, but only Semitic words 
of the Aramean dialect, which are easily accounted for by 
the close relations of Persia with Aramean lands in the time 
of the Sassanian kings. He showed, lastly, that Arabic words 
appear only in the very books which Parsi tradition itself 
considers modern. 

Another stanch upholder of the Avesta was the numis- 
matologist Tychscn, who, having begun to read the book 
with a prejudice against its authenticity, quitted it with 
a conviction to the contrary. ‘There is nothing in it,5 he 

INTRODUCTION, I. 

XIX 

writes, 1 but what befits remote ages, and a man philo- 
sophising in the infancy of the world. Such traces of a 
recent period as they fancy to have found in it, are either 
due to misunderstandings, or belong to its later portions. 
On the whole there is a marvellous accordance between the 
Zend-Avesta and the accounts of the ancients with regard 
to the doctrine and institutions of Zoroaster. Plutarch 
agrees so well with the Zend books that I think no one 
will deny the close resemblance of doctrines and identity 
of origin. Add to all this the incontrovertible argument to 
be drawn from the language, the antiquity of which is estab- 
lished by the fact that it was necessary to translate a part 
of the Zend books into Pahlavi, a language which was 
growing obsolete as early as the time of the Sassanides. 
Lastly, it cannot be denied that Zoroaster left books, which 
were, through centuries, the groundwork of the Magic reli- 
gion, and which were preserved by the Magi, as shown by a 
series of documents from the time of Hermippus. There- 
fore I am unable to see why we should not trust the Magi 
of our days when they ascribe to Zoroaster those traditional 
books of their ancestors, in which nothing is found to indi- 
cate fraud or a modern hand V 

Two years afterwards, in 1793, was published in Paris a 
book which, without directly dealing with the Avesta, was 
the first step taken to make its authenticity incontrovertible. 
It was the masterly memoir by Sylvestre de Sacy, in which 
the Pahlavi inscriptions of the first Sassanides were deci- 
phered for the first time and in a decisive manner. De 
Sacy, in his researches, had chiefly relied on the Pahlavi 
lexicon published by Anquetil, whose work vindicated itself 
thus— better than by heaping up arguments — by promoting 
discoveries. The Pahlavi inscriptions gave the key, as is 
well known, to the Persian cuneiform inscriptions, which 
were in return to put beyond all doubt the genuineness 
of the Zend language. 

Tychscn, in an appendix to his Commentaries , pointed 

1 ‘ Commentatio prior observationcs histo rico-cri ticas de Zoroastre ejnsque 
scriptis et placitis exhibens.* Goettingen, in the Novi Comment. Soc. Reg. 1791. 

b 2 

XX 

VENDiDAD. 

to the importance of the new discovery : * This,5 he writes, 
‘ is a proof that the Pahlavi was used during the reign of 
the Sassanides, for it was from them that these inscrip- 
tions emanated, as it was by them — nay, by the first of 
them, Ardcshir Babagfm — that the doctrine of Zoroaster 
was revived. One can now understand why the Zend books 
were translated into Pahlavi. Here, too, everything agrees, 
and speaks loudly for their antiquity and genuineness/ 
About the same time Sir William Jones, then president 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, which he had just founded, 
resumed in a discourse delivered before that Society the same 
question he had solved in such an off-hand manner twenty 
years before. He was no longer the man to say, ‘ Si£d-il a un 
homme ne dans ce siccle de s’infatuer de fables indiennes?’ 
and although he had still a spite against Anquetil, he spoke 
of him with more reserve than in 1771. However, his 
judgment on the Avesta itself was not -altered on the 
whole, although, as he himself declared, he had not thought 
it necessary to study the text. But a glance at the Zend 
glossary published by Anquetil suggested to him a remark 
which makes Sir William Jones, in spite of himself, the 
creator of the comparative grammar of Sanskrit and Zend. 
‘ When I perused the Zend glossary,’ he writes, ‘ I was 
inexpressibly surprised to find that six or seven words in ten 
are pure Sanscrit, and even some of their inflexions formed 
by the rules of the Vyacaran1, as yushmacam, the geni- 
tive plural of yushmad. Now M. Anquetil most certainly, 
and the Persian compiler most probably, had no knowledge 
of Sanscrit, and could not, therefore, have invented a list of 
Sanscrit words ; it is, therefore, an authentic list of Zend 
words, which has been preserved in books or by tradition ; 
it follows that the language of the Zend was at least a dia- 
lect of the Sanscrit, approaching perhaps as nearly to it as 
the Pracrit, or other popular idioms, which we know to have 
been spoken in India two thousand years ago V This con- 
clusion, that Zend is a Sanskrit dialect, was incorrect, the 
connection assumed being too close; but it was a great 

1 The Sanskrit Grammar. 

9 Asiatic Researches, II, § 3. 

INTRODUCTION, I. 

XXI 

thing that the near relationship of the two languages should 
have been brought to light. 

In 1 798 Father Paulo de St. Barthelemy further developed 
Jones’s remark in an essay on the antiquity of the Zend 
language1 *. He showed its affinity with the Sanskrit by a 
list of such Zend and Sanskrit words as were least likely to 
be borrowed, viz. those that designate the degrees of rela- 
tionship, the limbs of the body, and the most general and 
essential ideas. Another list, intended to show, on a special 
topic, how closely connected the two languages are, contains 
eighteen words taken from the liturgic language used in 
India and Persia. This list was not very happily drawn up, 
as out of the eighteen instances there is not a single one 
that stands inquiry ; yet it was a happy idea, and one which 
has not even yet yielded all that it promised. Ill’s conclu- 
sions were that in a far remote antiquity Sanskrit was spoken 
in Persia and Media, that it gave birth to the Zend language, 
and that the Zend-Avesta is authentic : 4 Were it but a recent 
compilation,’ he writes, ‘ as Jones asserts, how is it that the 
oldest rites of the Parsis, that the old inscriptions of the 
Persians, the accounts of the Zoroastrian religion in the clas- 
sical writers, the liturgic prayers of the Parsis, and, lastly, 
even their books do not reveal the pure Sanskrit, as written 
in the land wherein the Parsis live, but a mixed language, 
which is as different from the other dialects of India as 
French is from Italian?5 This amounted, in fact, to say- 
ing that the Zend is not derived from the Sanskrit, but 
that both are derived from another and older language. 
The Carmelite had a dim notion of that truth, but, as he 
failed to express it distinctly, it was lost for years, and had 
to be re-discovered. 

The first twenty-five years of this century were void of re- 
sults, but the old and sterile discussions as to the authenticity 
of the texts continued in England. In 1808 John Leyden 
regarded Zend as a Prakrit dialect, parallel to Pali ; Pali 
being identical with the Magadhi dialect and Zend with the 

1 4 De ontiquitate et affmitate linguae samscredamicae ct germanicae/ Rome, 

J798. 

xxii vend! DAD. 

Saurascni \ In the eyes of Erskinc Zend was a Sanskrit 
dialect, imported from India by the founders of Mazdeism, 
but never spoken in Persia1 2. His main argument was that 
Zend is not mentioned among the seven dialects which 
were current in ancient Persia according to the Farhang-i 
Jehangiri3, and that Pahlavi and Persian exhibit no close 
relationship with Zend, 

In Germany, Meiners had found no followers. The 
theologians appealed to the Avesta in their polemics4 * 6, 
and Rhode sketched the religious history of Persia after 
the translations of Anquctil r>. 

Erskine’s essay provoked a decisive answer0 from Em- 
manuel Rask, one of the most gifted minds in the new 
school of philology, who had the honour of being a pre- 
cursor of both Grimm and Burnouf. He showed that the 
list of the Jehangiri referred to an epoch later than that to 
which Zend must have belonged, and to parts of Persia 
different from those where it must have been spoken ; lie 
showed further that modern Persian is not derived from 
Zend, but from a dialect closely connected with it ; and, 
lastly, lie showed what was still more important, that Zend 
was not derived from Sanskrit. As to the system of its 
sounds, Zend approaches Persian rather than Sanskrit ; 
and as to its grammatical forms, if they often remind one 
of Sanskrit, they also often remind one of Greek and Latin, 
and frequently have a special character of their own. Rask 
also gave the paradigm of three Zend nouns, belonging to 
different declensions, as well as the right pronunciation of 
the Zend letters, several of which had been incorrectly 
given by Anquctil. This was the first essay on Zend 
grammar, and it was a masterly one. 

1 Asiatic Researches, X. 2 Ibid. X. 

3 A large Persian dictionary compiled in India in the reign of Jehangir. 

4 ‘ Erlauterungcn zum Neucn Testament aus einer neuerbffneten Morgenland- 

ischen Quelle, ’I5oi> p&yoi diro dvaroXwv? Riga, 1 775- 

n ‘ Die Heiligc Sage . . . des Zcnd-Volks,’ Francfort, 1820. 

6 ‘ Ueber das Alter und die Echtheit dcr Zend-Sprache und des Zend Avesta ’ 
(iibersetzt von F. H. von der Hagen), Berlin, 1826. Remarks on the Zend 
Language and the Zend-Avesta (Transactions of the Bombay branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society, III, 524). 

INTRODUCTION, I. 

xxiii 

The essay published in 1831 by Peter von Bohlen on the 
origin of the Zend language threw the matter forty years 
back. According to him, Zend is a Prakrit dialect, as it 
had been pronounced by Jones, Leyden, and Erskinc. His 
mistake consisted in taking Anquetil’s transcriptions of the 
words, which are often so incorrect as to make them look 
like corrupted forms when compared with Sanskrit. And, 
what was worse, he took the proper names in their modern 
Parsi forms, which often led him to comparisons that would 
have appalled Menage. Thus Ahriman became a Sanskrit 
word ariman, which would have meant ‘the fiend;’ yet 
Bohlen might have seen in Anquetil’s work itself that Ahri- 
man is nothing but the modern form of Angra Mainyu, 
words which hardly remind one of the Sanskrit ariman. 
Again, the angel Vohu-mano, or ‘good thought,’ was 
reduced, by means of the Parsi form Bah man, to the San- 
skrit bahuman, ‘a long-armed god.’ 

At last came Burnouf. From the time when Anquctil 
had published his translation, that is to say, during seventy 
years, no real progress had been made in knowledge of the 
Avesta texts. The notion that Zend and Sanskrit are two 
kindred languages was the only new idea that had been 
acquired, but no practical advantage for the interpretation 
of the texts had resulted from it. Anquetil’s translation 
was still the only guide, and as the doubts about the authen- 
ticity of the texts grew fainter, the authority of the transla- 
tion became greater, the trust reposed in the Avesta being 
reflected on to the work of its interpreter. The Parsis had 
been the teachers of Anquetil ; and who could ever under- 
stand the holy writ of the Parsis better than the Parsis 
themselves? There was no one who even tried to read 
the texts by the light of Anquetil’s translation, to obtain 
a direct understanding of them. 

About 1825 Eugene Burnouf was engaged in a course of 
researches on the geographical extent of the Aryan lan- 
guages in India. After he had defined the limits which 
divide the races speaking Aryan languages from the native 
non-brahmanical tribes in the south, he wanted to know if 
a similar boundary had ever existed in the north-west ; and 

XXIV 

vendJdAd. 

if it is outside of India that the origin of the Indian lan- 
guages and civilisation is to be sought for. He was thus 
led to study the languages of Persia, and, first of all, the 
oldest of them, the Zend. But as he tried to read the texts 
by help of Anquetil’s translation, he was surprised to find 
that this was not the clue he had expected. lie saw that 
two causes had misled Anquctil : on the one hand, his 
teachers, the Parsi dasturs, either knew little themselves or 
taught him imperfectly, not only the Zend, but even the 
Pahlavi intended to explain the meaning of the Zend ; so 
that the tradition on which his work rested, being incorrect 
in itself, corrupted it from the very beginning ; on the other 
hand, as Sanskrit was unknown to him and comparative 
grammar did not as yet exist, he could not supply the 
defects of tradition by their aid. Burnouf, laying aside tradi- 
tion as found in Anquctil’s translation, consulted it as found 
in a much older and purer form, in a Sanskrit translation of 
the Yasna made in the fifteenth century by the Parsi Ncrio- 
sengh in accordance with the old Pahlavi version. The 
information given by Neriosengh he tested, and either con- 
firmed or corrected, by a comparison of parallel passages 
and by the help of comparative grammar, which had just 
been founded by Bopp, and applied by him successfully 
to the explanation of Zend forms. Thus he succeeded 
in tracing the general outlines of the Zend lexicon and 
in fixing its grammatical forms, and founded the only 
correct method of interpreting the A vesta. He also gave 
the first notions of a comparative mythology of the Avesta 
and the Veda, by showing the identity of the Vedic Yama 
with the Avesta Yima, and of Traitana with Thraetaona and 
Feridun. Thus he made his ‘Commcntaire sur le Yasna’ 
a marvellous and unparalleled model of critical insight and 
steady good sense, equally opposed to the narrowness of 
mind which clings to matters of fact without rising to their 
cause and connecting them with the series of associated 
phenomena, and to the wild and uncontrolled spirit of com- 
parison, which, by comparing everything, confounds every- 
thing. Never sacrificing either tradition to comparison or 
comparison to tradition, he knew how to pass from the one 

INTRODUCTION, II. 

XXV 

to the other, and was so enabled both to discover facts and 
to explain them. 

At the same time the ancient Persian inscriptions at 
Persepolis and Behistun were deciphered by Burnouf in 
Paris, by Lassen in Bonn, and by Sir Henry Rawlinson in 
Persia. Thus was revealed the existence, at the time of 
the first Achremenian kings, of a language closely con- 
nected with that of the Avesta, and the last doubts as to 
the authenticity of the Zend books were at length removed. 
It would have required more than an ordinary amount of 
scepticism to look still upon the Zend as an artificial 
language, of foreign importation, without root in the land 
where it was written, and in the conscience of the people 
for whom it was written, at the moment when a twin lan- 
guage, bearing a striking likeness to it in nearly every 
feature, was suddenly making itself heard from the mouth 
of Darius, and speaking from the very tomb of the first 
Ach.xmenian king. That unexpected voice silenced all 
controversies, and the .last echoes of the loud discussion 
which had been opened in 1771 died away unheeded \ 

CHAPTER II. 

The Interpretation of tiie Zend-Avesta. 

The peace did not last long, and a year after the death 
of Burnouf a new controversy broke out, which still con- 
tinues, the battle of the methods, that is, the dispute 
between those who, to interpret the Avesta, rely chiefly or 
exclusively on tradition, and those who rely only on com- 
parison with the Vedas. The cause of the rupture was 
the rapid progress made in the knowledge of theVedic 
language and literature: the deeper one penetrated into 
that oldest form of Indian words and thoughts, the 
more striking appeared its close affinity with the Avesta 
words and thoughts. Many a mysterious line in the 

1 The attacks of John Romer (‘ Zend : Is it an Original Language?’ London, 
1855) called for^h a refutation only in Bombay (Dhanjibai Framji, ‘On the 
Origin and the Authenticity of the Aryan Family of Languages, the Zend- 
Avesta and the Huzvarash,’ 1861). 

XXVI 

VENDiDAD. 

Avcsta received an unlooked-for light from the poems of 
the Indian /i/shis, and. the long-forgotten past and the 
origin of many gods and heroes, whom the Parsi worships 
and extols without knowing who they were and whence 
they came, were suddenly revealed by the Vedas. Em- 
boldened by its bright discoveries, the comparative method 
took pity on its slower and less brilliant rival, which was 
then making its first attempts to unravel the Pahlavi tradi- 
tional books. Is it worth while, said the Vedic scholars1, to 
try slowly and painfully to extract the secret of the old 
book from that uncouth literature? Nay, is there any hope 
that its secret is there ? Translating the Avesta in accord- 
ance with the Pahlavi is not translating the Avcsta, but only 
translating the Pahlavi version, which, wherever it has been 
deciphered, is found to wander strangely from the true 
meaning of the original text. Tradition, as a rule, is wont 
to enforce the ideas of its own ages into the books of past 
ages. From the time when the Avcsta was written to the 
time when it was translated, many ideas had undergone 
great changes : such ideas, tradition must needs either mis- 
understand or not understand at all, and tradition is always 
either new sense or nonsense. The key to the Avesta is 
not the Pahlavi, but the Veda. The Avesta and the Veda 
are two echoes of one and the same voice, the reflex of one 
and the same thought: the Vedas, therefore, are both the 
best lexicon and the best commentary to the Avcsta. 

The traditional school 2 replied that translating Zend by 
means of Sanskrit and the Avesta by means of the Vedas, 
because Zend and the Avesta are closely related to San- 
skrit and the Vedas, is forgetting that relationship is not 
identity, and that what interests the Zend scholar is not to 
know how far Zend agrees with Sanskrit, but what it is in 
itself : what he seeks for in the Avesta, is the Avesta, not 
the Veda. Both the Vedic language and the Vedas are 
quite unable to teach us what became in Persia of those 
elements, which are common to the two systems, a thing 
which tradition alone can teach us. By the comparative 

1 Roth, Bcnfey, Ilaug. Cf. Revue Critique, 1877, II, 81. 2 Spiegel, Justi. 

INTRODUCTION, II. 

XXV11 

method, the Zend meregha, which means ‘a bird/ would 
assume the meaning of 4 gazelle ’ to accord with the San- 
skrit mrzga ; ratu, 4 a part of the day/ would be extended 
to 4 a season’ out of regard for ritu ; mainyu, 4 a spirit/ and 
dahyu, 4 a province/ would be degraded to ‘anger’ and to 
4 a set of thieves/ and ‘the demons/ the Da6vas, would 
ascend from their dwelling in hell up to heaven, to meet 
their philological brothers, the Indian Dcvas. The tradi- 
tional method, as it starts from matters of facts, moves 
always in the field of reality ; the comparative method 
starts from an hypothesis, moves in a vacuum, and builds 
up a fanciful religion and a fanciful language. 

Such being the methods of the two schools, it often hap- 
pened that a passage, translated by two scholars, one of 
each school, took so different an aspect that a layman 
would have been quite unable to suspect that it was one 
and the same passage he had read twice. Yet the di- 
vergence between the two methods is more apparent than 
real, and proceeds from an imperfect notion of the field in 
which each of them ought to work. They ought not to 
oppose, but assist one another, as they are not intended to 
instruct us about the same kind of facts, but about two 
kinds of facts quite different and independent. No lan- 
guage, no religion, that has lived long and changed much, 
cah be understood at any moment of its development, 
unless we know what it became afterwards, and what it was 
before. The language and religion of the Avcsta record 
but a moment in the long life of the Iranian language and 
thought, so that wc arc unable to understand them, unless 
we know what they became and whence they came. What 
they became we learn directly from tradition, since the tradi- 
tion arose from the very ideas which the Avesta expresses ; 
whence they came wc learn indirectly from the Vedas, be- 
cause the Vedas come from the same source as the Avesta. 
Therefore it cannot happen that the tradition and the Veda 
will really contradict one another, if we take care to ask 
from each only what it knows, from one the present, and 
the past from the other. Each method is equally right 
and equally efficacious, at its proper time and in its right 

xxvm 

VEND IdAd. 

place. The first place belongs to tradition, as it comes 
straight from the A^festa. The second inquiry, to be suc- 
cessful, requires infinite prudence and care : the Veda is not 
the past of the Avesta, as the Avcsta is the past of tra- 
dition ; the Avcsta and Veda are not derived from one 
another, but from one and the same original, diversely 
altered in each, and, therefore, there are two stages of 
variation between them, whereas from the Avcsta to tradi- 
tion there is only one. The Veda, if first interrogated, 
gives no valuable evidence, as the words and gods, common 
to the two systems, may not have retained in both the 
same meaning they had in the Indo-Iranian period : they 
may have preserved it in one and lost it in the other, or 
they may have both altered it, but each in a different way. 
The Veda, generally speaking, cannot help in discovering 
matters of fact in the Avcsta, but only in explaining them 
when discovered by tradition. If we review the discoveries 
made by the masters of the comparative school, it will be 
seen that they have in reality started, without noticing it, 
from facts formerly established by tradition. In fact tradi- 
tion gives the materials, and comparison puts them in order. 
It is not possible, cither to know the Avcsta without the 
former, or to understand it without the latter. 

The traditional school, and especially its indefatigable 
and well-deserving leader, Spiegel, made us acquainted with 
the nature of the old Iranian religion by gathering together 
all its materials; the comparative school tried to explain 
its growth. The traditional school published the text and 
the traditional translations, and produced the first Parsi 
grammar, the first Pahlavi grammar, and the first transla- 
tion of the Avesta which had been made since Anquetil. 
The danger with it is that it shows itself too apt to stop at 
tradition, instead of going from it to comparison. When it 
undertakes to expound the history of the religion, it cannot 
but be misled by tradition. Any living people, although 
its existing state of mind is but the result of various 
and changing states through many successive ages, yet, at 
any particular moment of its life, keeps the remains of its 
former stages of thought in order, under the control of the 

INTRODUCTION. II. 

XXIX 

principle that is then predominant. Thus it happens that 
their ideas are connected together in a way which seldom 
agrees with their historical sequence : chronological order is 
lost to sight and replaced by logical order, and the past is 
read into the present. Comparison alone can enable us to 
put things in their proper place, to trace their birth, their 
growth, their changes, their former relations, and lead us 
from the logical order, which is a shadow, to the historical 
order, which is the substance. 

The comparative school developed Indo-Iranian mytho- 
logy. Roth showed after Burnouf how the epical history of 
Iran was derived from the same source as the myths of 
Vcdic India, and pointed out the primitive identity of 
Ahura Mazda, the supreme god of Iran, with Varuwa, the 
supreme god of the Vcdic age. In the same direction 
Windischmann, in his c Zoroastrian Essays 5 and in his 
studies on Mithra and Anahita, displayed singular sagacity. 
But the dangers of the method came to light in the works 
of Haug, who, giving a definite form to a system still 
fluctuating, converted Mazdeism into a religious revolu- 
tion against Vedic polytheism, found historical allusions to 
that schism both in the Avesta and in the Veda, pointed 
out curses against Zoroaster in the Vedas, and, in short, 
transformed, as it were, the two books into histqrical 
pamphlets l. 

In the contest about the authenticity of the Avesta, one 
party must necessarily have been right and the other 
wrong ; but in the present struggle the issue is not so 
clear, as both parties arc partly right and partly wrong. 
Both of them, by following their principles, have rendered 
such services to science as seem to give each a right to 
cling to its own method more firmly than ever. Yet it is 
to be hoped that they will sec at last that they must be 
allies, not enemies, and that their common work must be 
begun by the one and completed by the other. 

1 It would be unjust, when speaking of Haug, not to recall the invaluable 
services he rendered in the second part of his career, as a Pahlavi scholar. 
He was the firs? who thought of illustrating the Pahlavi in the books by the 
Pahlavi in the inscriptions, and thus determined the reading of the principal 
elements in the manuscript Pahlavi. 

XXX 

VENDlDAD. 

CHAPTER III. 

The Formation of the Zend-Avesta. 

§ i. The collection of Zend fragments, known as the 
Zend-Avesta \ is divided, in its usual form, into two parts. 

The first part, or the Avcsta properly so called, contains 
the Vendidad, the Visp£rad, and the Yasna. The Ven- 
did*id is a compilation of religious laws and of mythical 
tales ; the Visperad is a collection of litanies for the sacri- 
fice ; and the Yasna is composed of litanies of the same 
kind and of five hymns or Gathas written in a special 
dialect, older than the general language of the Avcsta. 

These three books arc found in manuscripts in two dif- 
ferent forms : either each by itself, in which case they are 
generally accompanied by a Fahlavi translation; or the 
three mingled together according to the requirements of 
the liturgy, as they are not each recited separately in their 
entirety, but the chapters of the different books are inter- 
mingled ; and in this case the collection is called the 
Vendidad Sadah or ‘ Vendidad pure/ as it exhibits the 
original text alone, without a translation. 

The second part, generally known as the Khorda 
Avesta or ‘ Small Avcsta/ is composed of short prayers 
which are recited not only by the priests, but by all the 
faithful, at certain moments of the day, month, or year, and 
in presence of the different elements ; these prayers are 
the five Gah, the thirty formulas of the Sirozah, the three 
Afrigan, and the six Nyayii*. But it is also usual to include 
in the Khorda Avesta, although forming no real part of it, 
the Ya$ts or hymns of praise and glorification to the several 

1 A very improper designation, as Zend means ‘ a commentary or explana- 
tion,’ and was applied only to explanatory texts, to the translations of the 
Avesta. Avesta (from the old Persian abasta, ' the law ;* see Oppert, Journal 
Asiatiquc, 1872, Mars) is the proper name of the original texts. What it is 
customary to call ‘ the Zend language ’ ought to be named • the Avesta lan- 
guage ; * the Zend being no language at all ; and, if the word be used as the 
designation of one, it can be rightly applied only to the lahlavi. The ex- 
pression ‘Avesta and Zend* is often used in the Pahlavi commentary to 
designate ‘ the law with its traditional and revealed explanation.* 

INTRODUCTION, III. 

XXXI 

Izads, and a number of fragments, the most important of 
which is the Hadh6kht Nosk. 

§ 2. That the extent of the sacred literature of Mazdeism 
was formerly much greater than it is now, appears not only 
from internal evidence, that is, from the fragmentary cha- 
racter of the book, but is also proved by historical evidence. 
In the first place, the Arab conquest proved fatal to the 
religious literature of the Sassanian ages, a great part of 
which was cither destroyed by the fanaticism of the con- 
querors and the new converts, or lost during the long 
exodus of the Parsis. Thus the Pahlavi translation of the 
Vendidad, which was not finished before the latter end of the 
Sassanian dynasty, contains not a few Zend quotations from 
books which arc no longer in existence ; other quotations, 
as remarkable in their importance as in their contents, are 
to be found in Pahlavi and Parsi tracts, like the Niran- 
gistan and the Aogcmaide. The Bundahu* contains much 
matter which is not spoken of in the existing Avcsta, but 
which is very likely to have been taken from Zend books 
which were still in the hands of its compiler. It is a tradi- 
tion with the Parsis, that the Ya^ts were originally thirty 
in number, there having been one for each of the thirty 
Izads who preside over the thirty days of the month ; yet 
there are only eighteen still extant. 

The cause that preserved the A vesta is obvious ; taken 
as a whole, it does not profess to be a religious encyclo- 
pedia, but only a liturgical collection, and it bears more 
likeness to a Prayer Book than to the Bible. It can be 
readily conceived that the Vendidad Sadali, which had to 
be recited every day, would be more carefully preserved 
than the Ya$ts, which are generally recited once a month ; 
and these again more carefully than other books, which, 
however sacred they might be, were not used in the per- 
formance of worship. Many texts, no doubt, were lost in 
consequence of the Arab conquest, but mostly such as would 
have more importance in the eyes of the theologian than in 
those of the priest. We have a fair specimen of what these 
lost texts rflay have been in the few non-liturgical frag- 
ments which we still possess, such as the VLrt&sp Ya^t and 

XXX11 

VENdIdAd. 

the blessing of Zoroaster upon King Vijtasp, which belong 
to the old epic cycle of Iran, and the Hadhdkht Nosk, 
which treats of the fate of the soul after death. 

§ 3. But if we have lost much of the Sassanian sacred 
literature, Sassanian Persia herself, if we may trust Parsi 
tradition, had lost still more of the original books. The 
primitive Avesta, as revealed by Ormazd to Zoroaster and 
by Zoroaster to Virtasp, king of Bactria, was supposed to 
have been composed of twenty-one Nosks or Books, the 
greater part of which was burnt by Iskander the Rtimi 
(Alexander the Great). After his death the priests of the 
Zoroastrian religion met together, and by collecting the 
various fragments that had escaped the ravages of the war 
and others that they knew by heart, they formed the present 
collection, which is a very small part of the original book, 
as out of the twenty-one Nosks there was only one that was 
preserved in its entirety, the Vendidad 1. 

This tradition is very old, and may be traced back from 
the present period even to Sassanian times2. It involves 
the assumption that the Avesta is the remnant of the sacred 
literature of Persia under the last Ach;emenian kings. To 
ascertain whether this inference is correct, and to what 
extent it may be so, we must first try to define, as accu- 
rately as we can, the exact time at which the collection, 
now in existence, was formed. 

§ 4. The Ravaet quoted above states that it was formed 
‘after the death of Iskander/ which expression is rather 
vague, and may as well mean ‘ centuries' after his death 5 as 
‘ immediately after his death/ It is, in fact, hardly to be 
doubted that the latter was really what the writer meant ; 
yet, as the date of that Ravaet is very recent, we had better 
look for older and more precise traditions. We find such 
a one in the Dinkar/, a Pahlavi hook which enjoys great 
authority with the Parsis of our days, and which, although 
it contains many things of late origin 3, also comprises many 

1 Ravaet ap. Anquctil, Memoires de l’Acad. des Inscr. et Belles-Lettres 

XXXVIII, 216; Spiegel, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesell- 
schaft IX, 1 74. • 

2 J. Darmesteter, La legendc d’ Alexandre chez les Parses. 

9 We find in it a description of the four classes, which strikingly reminds 

INTRODUCTION, III. 

XXXlll 

old and valuable traditions. According to a proclamation, 
ascribed to Khosrav Anosharv&n (531-579), the collection of 
the Avesta fragments was begun in the reign of the last 
Arsacides, and was finished under Shapfir II (309-380). 
King Valkash (Vologeses), it is said, first ordered all the 
fragments of the Avesta which might have escaped the 
ravages of Iskander, or been preserved by oral tradition, to 
be searched for and collected together. The first Sassanian 
king, Ardeshir Babagan, made the Avesta the sacred book 
of Iran, and Mazdeism the state religion : at last, Adarbad 
Mahraspand, under Shapflr II, purified the Avesta and 
fixed the number of the Nasks, and Shapfir proclaimed to 
the heterodox1: ‘ Now that we have recognised the law of 
the world here below, they shall not allow the infidelity of 
any one whatever 2, as I shall strive that it may be so V 

§ 5. The authenticity of this record has been called in 
question, chiefly, I think, on account of the part that it 
ascribes to an Arsacide prince, which seems hardly to agree 
with the ideas generally entertained about the character of 
the Sassanian revolution4. Most Parsi and Muhammcdan 
writers agree that it w^s the Sassanian dynasty which raised 
the Zoroastrian religion from the state of humiliation into 
which the Greek invasion had made it sink, and, while it 
gave the signal for a revival of the old national spirit, made 
Mazdeism one of the corner stones of the new establish- 
ment5. Therefore it seems strange to hear that the first step 
taken to make Mazdeism a state religion was taken by one 
of those very Philhellenic Parthian princes, who were so 
fully imbued with Greek ideas and manners. Yet this is the 

one of the Brahmanical account of the origin of the castes (Chap. XLII ; cf. 
the first pages of the Shikan Gumani), and which was certainly borrowed 
from India; whether at the time of the last Sassanians, when Persia learnt 
so much from India, or since the settlement of the Parsis in India, we are 
unable to decide : yet the former seems more probable. 

1 G v£t rastakan. We are indebted to Mr. West for the right translation 
of this word. 

a Thus translated by West (Glossary of the Book of Arda Viraf, p. 27), 

3 Haug, Essay on Pahlavi, p. 145 seq., 149 seq. 

4 Spiegel, Ennische Alterthumskunde III, 782, n. r. 

5 S. de Sacy, Memoires sur quelques antiquites de la Perse. Cf. Masudi, 

II, 125. 

XXXIV 

vendIdad. 

very reason why we ought to feel some hesitation in rejecting 
this document, and its being at variance with the general 
Parsi view speaks rather for its authenticity ; for as it was 
the general post-Sassanian tradition that the restoration of 
Mazdcism was the work of the first Sassanian kings, no 
Parsi would ever have thought of making them share what 
was in his eyes their first and best title of honour with any 
of the despised princes of the Parthian dynasty. 

§ 6. It is difficult, of course, to prove directly the authen- 
ticity of this record, the more so as we do not even know 
who was the king alluded to. There were, in fact, four 
kings at least 1 who bore the name of Valkhash : the most 
celebrated and best known of the four was Vologeses I, the 
contemporary of Nero. Now that Zoroastrianism prevailed 
with him, or at least with members of his family, we see 
from the conduct of his brother Tiridates, who was a Ma- 
gian (Magus) 2 ; and by this term we must not understand a 
magician 3, but a priest, and one of the Zoroastrian religion. 
That he was a priest appears from Tacitus’ testimony4; that 
he was a Zoroastrian is shown by his scruples about the 
worship of the elements. When he came from Asia to Rome 
to receive the crown of Armenia at the hands of Nero, he 
wanted not to come by sea, but rode along the coasts5 6, 
because the Magi were forbidden to defile the seac. This 
is quite in the spirit of later Zoroastrianism, and savours 
much of Mazdeism. That Vologeses himself shared the reli- 
gious scruples of his brother appears from his answer to Nero, 

1 Perhaps five (see de Longperier, Memoire sur la Numismatique dcs Arsa- 
cides, p. in). 

2 ‘ Magus ad eum Tiridates venerat * (Pliny, Nat. Hist. XXX, 6). 

3 Pliny very often confounds Magism and Magia, Magians and Magicians. 
We know from Pliny, too, that Tiridates refused to initiate Nero into his 
art: but the cause was not, as he assumes, that it was 'a detestable, frivolous, 
and vain art,* but because Mazdean law forbids the holy knowledge to be 
revealed to laymen, much more to foreigners (Yast IV, io; cf. Philostrati 
Vita Soph. I, io). 

4 ‘Nec recusaturum Tiridatcm accipiendo diademati in urbem venire, nisi 
sacerdotii religione attineretur* (Ann. XV, 24). 

5 He crossed only the Hellespont. i 

6 1 Navigarc noluerat, quoniam inspuere in maria, aliisque mortalium necessi- 
tatibus violare naturam earn fas non putaut ' (Pliny, 1.1. Cf. Introd. V, 8 seq.) 

INTRODUCTION, III. 

XXXV 

who insisted upon his coming to Rome also : * Come your- 
self, it is easier for you to cross such immensity of sea V 
§ 7. Thus we hear on one hand from the Parsis that the 
first collection of the Avesta was made by an Arsacide 
named Vologeses ; and we hear, on the other hand, from 
a quite independent source, that an Arsacide named Volo- 
gescs behaved himself as a follower of the Avesta might 
have done. In all this there is no evidence that it is Volo- 
geses I who is mentioned in the Dinkar/', much less that 
he was really the first editor of the Avesta ; but it shows 
at all events that the first attempt to recover the sacred 
literature of Iran might very well have been made by an 
Arsacide, and that we may trust, in this matter, to a docu- 
ment which has been written perhaps by a Sassanian king, 
but, at any rate, in a Sassanian spirit. In fact, in the 
struggle between Ardavan and Ardeshir, there was no 
religious interest at stake, but only a political one ; and we 
are expressly told by Hamza that between Ardeshir and 
his adversaries there was perfect accordance in religious 
matters2. It can, therefore, be fairly admitted that even in 
the time and at the court of the Philhellenic Parthians a 
Zoroastrian movement may have originated, and that there 
came a time when they perceived that a national religion 
is a part of national life. It was the merit of the Sassa- 
nides that they saw the drift of this idea which they had 
the good fortune to carry out ; and this would not be the 
only instance, in the history of the world, of an idea being 
sown by one party and its advantages reaped by their 
adversaries. 

1 Dio Cassius, LXIII, 4. The answer was mistaken for an insult by Nero, 
and, as it seems, by Dio himself. In fact Vologeses remained to the last 
faithful to the memory of Nero (Suet. Nero, 57). What we know moreover of 
his personal character qualifies him for taking the initiative in a religious work. 
He seems to have been a man of contemplative mind rather than a man of 
action, which often excited the anger or scorn of his people against him ; 
and he had the glory of breaking with the family policy of Parthian kings 
(Tacitus, Annales, XV, 1, 2). It was under his reign that the first interference 
of religion with politics, of which the history of Persia speaks, took place, 
as he was called by the people of Adiabene against their king Izates, who 
had become a Jew (Josephus, Antiq. XX, 4, 2). 

3 Hamzac Ispahensis Annales, ed. Gottwaldt, p. 31 (in the translation). 

C 2 

XXXVI 

vendIdAd. 

§ 8. Another presumptive evidence of the groundwork 
of the Avesta being anterior to the age of the Sassanians 
is given by the language in which it is written. That lan- 
guage not only was not, but had never been, the national 
language of Persia. It is indeed closely connected with 
the ancient Persian, as found in the cuneiform inscriptions 
of the Achrcmenian kings, from which modern Persian is 
derived ; but the relations between ancient Persian and 
Zend are of such a kind that neither language can be con- 
ceived as being derived from the other ; they arc not one 
and the same language in two different stages of its deve- 
lopment, but two independent ‘dialects in nearly the same 
stage, which is a proof that they did not belong to the 
same country, and, therefore, that Zend was not the lan- 
guage of Persia. Now the language used in Persia after 
the death of Alexander, under the Arsacidcs and wSassa- 
nides, that is, during the period in which the Avesta must 
have been edited, was Pahlavi, which is not derived from 
Zend, but from ancient Persian, being the middle dialect 
between ancient and modern Persian. Therefore, if the 
Sassanian kings had conceived the project of having reli- 
gious books of their own written and composed, it is not 
likely that they would have had them written in an old 
foreign dialect, but in the old national language, the more 
so, because, owing both to their origin and their policy, they 
were bound to be the representatives of the genuine old 
Persian tradition. Therefore, if they adopted Zend as the 
language of religion, it must have been because it was already 
so when they appeared, that is to say, because the only 
remnants of sacred literature then extant were written in 
Zend, and the editors of the Avesta had Zend writings 
before them. 

This docs not, of course, prove that all we find in the 
Avesta is prc-Sassanian, and that the editors did not com- 
pose new Zend texts. Although Zend was not only a 
dead language, but also a foreign one, it was not an 
unknown language: that it was well understood by the 
learned class, the priests, appears from the Pahlavi trans- 
lation, which was made by them, and which, the deeper 

INTRODUCTION, III. 

xxxvii 

one enters into the meaning of the text, has the fuller 
•justice done to its . merits. The earliest date that can be 
ascribed to that translation, in its present form, is the last 
century of the Sassanian dynasty, as it contains an allusion 
to the death of the heresiarch Mazdak, the son of Bamdad \ 
who was put to death in the beginning of the reign of 
Khosrav Andsharv&n (about 531). Now the ability to 
translate a dead language is a good test of the ability to 
write in it, and in the question of the age of the Zend texts 
the possibility of new ones having been composed by the 
editors cannot be excluded d priori. Nay, wc shall see 
further on that there are passages in these texts which look 
very modern, and may have been written at the time when 
the book took its last and definitive form. But whatever 
may be the proportion of the new texts to the old ones 
(which I believe to be very small), it is quite certain that 
the bulk of the Avesta is prc-Sassanian. 

§ 9. The date assigned by the Dinkart to the final 
edition of the Avesta and to its promulgation as the sacred 
law of the nation, agrees with what we know of the reli- 
gious state of Iran in the times of Shapfir II. Mazdeism 
had just been threatened with destruction by a new religion 
sprung from itself, the religion of Man!, which for a while 
numbered a king amongst its followers (Shapfir I, 240- 
270). Mazdeism was shaken for a long time, and when 
Man! was put to death, his work did not perish with him. 
In the Kissah-i San^ah, Zoroaster is introduced prophe- 
sying that the holy religion will be overthrown three times 
and restored three times; overthrown the first time by 
Iskander, it will be restored by Ardeshir; overthrown 
again, it will be restored by Shapiir II and Adarbad Mah- 
raspand ; and, lastly, it will be overthrown by the Arabs 
and restored at the end of time by Soshyos. The Parsi 
traditions about Adarb&d, although they are mixed with 
much fable, allow some historical truth to show itself. 
He was a holy man under Shapur II, who, as there were 
many religipns and heresies in Iran and the true religion 

1 Vide infra, p. xli, note 3. 

xxxviii 

vendidAd. 

was falling into oblivion, restored it through a miracle, as 
he gave a sign of its truth by allowing melted brass to be 
poured on his breast, without his being injured. Setting 
aside the miracle, which is most probably borrowed from 
the legend of Zoroaster, this account receives its true inter- 
pretation from the passages in the Kissah-i San^ah and 
the Dinkar/, which imply that Adarbad restored Mazdeism, 
which had been shaken by the Manichean heresy, and that 
in order to settle it upon a solid and lasting base, he gave 
a definitive form to the religious book of Iran and closed 
the Holy Writ. And even nowadays the Parsi, while 
reciting the Patet, acknowledges Adarb&d as the third 
founder of the Avcsta ; the first being Zoroaster, who re- 
ceived it from Ormazd ; the second Camasp, who received it 
from Zoroaster ; and the third Adarbdd, who taught it and 
restored it to its purity. 

Therefore, so far as we can trust to inferences that rest 
upon such scanty and vague testimonies, it seems likely 
that the Avesta took its definitive form from the hands of 
Adarbfid Mahraspand, under King Sliaptir II, in conse- 
quence of the dangers with which Mani’s heresy had 
threatened the national religion. As the death of Mani 
and the first persecution of his followers took place some 
thirty years before Shapur’s accession to the throne, it may 
be presumed that the last revision of the Avesta was made 
in the first years of the new reign, when the agitation 
aroused by Mani s doctrines and imperfectly allayed by the 
persecution of his disciples had not yet subsided, and the 
old religion was still shaking on its base1. 

§ io. It follows hence that Zend texts may have been 
composed even as late as the fourth century A. D. This is, 
of course, a mere theoretical possibility, for although the 
liturgical parts of the Yasna, the Visperad, the Sirdzah, and 

1 Shapftr II ascended the throne about 309 (before being bom, as the tradi- 
tion goes) : and as he appears from the Dinkar/ to have taken a personal part 
in the work of Adarbdd, the promulgation of the Avesta can hardly have taken 
place at an earlier date than 325-330. Adarbad and the Fathers at Nicaea 
lived and worked in the same age, and the Zoroastrian threats "of the king of 
Iran and the Catholic anathemas of the Kaisar of Rdm may have been issued 
on the same day. 

INTRODUCTION, III. 

XXXIX 

the Khorda Avesta must be ascribed to a later time than 
the Gathas, the Vendidad, and the Ya^ts, and may belong 
to some period of revision, they certainly do not belong to 
the period of this last revision. Adarbad was only the 
last editor of the Avesta, and it is likely, nay, it is beyond 
all question, that the doctors of the law, before his time, 
had tried to put the fragments in order, to connect them, 
and to fill up the gaps as far as the practical purposes of 
liturgy required it. Therefore instead of saying that there 
are parts of the Avesta that may belong to so late a period 
as the fourth century, it is more correct to say that no part 
of it can belong to a later date. 

There are two passages in the Vendidad which seem to 
contain internal evidence of their date, and in both cases 
it points to Sassanian times, nay, the second of them points 
to the age of Manichcism. The first is found in the 
eighteenth Fargard (§ 10) : Ahura Mazda, while cursing 
those who teach a wrong law, exclaims : 

( And he who would set that man at liberty, when bound 
in prison, does no better deed than if he should flay a man 
alive and cut off his head.’ 

This anathema indicates a time when Mazdcism was a 
state religion and had to fight against heresy; it must, 
therefore, belong to Sassanian times. These lines are fully 
illustrated by a Parsi book of the same period1, the 
Mainy6-i-Khard : 

r Good government is that which maintains and orders 
the true law and custom of the city people and poor un- 
troubled, and thrusts out improper law and custom ; . . . 
and keeps in progress the worship of God, and duties, and 
good works; . . . and will resign the body, and that also which 
[is] its own life, for the sake of the good religion of the 
Mazdayasnians. And if [there] be any one who shall stay 
[away] from the way of God, then it orders him to return 
thereto, and makes him a prisoner, and brings [him] back 
to the way of God ; and will bestow, from the wealth that 
is his, the share of God, and the worthy, and good works, 

See the book of the Mainyo-i-Khard, ed. West ; Introduction, p. x seq. 

xl 

vend!dAd. 

and the poor ; and will deliver up the body on account 
of the soul. A good king who [isj of that sort, is called 
like the Yazads and the Amesh&spends V 
What doctrines are alluded to by theVendidad is not 
explained : it appears from the context that it had in view 
such sects as released the faithful from the yoke of religious 
practices, as it anathematizes, at the same time, those who 
have continued for three years without wearing the sacred 
girdle. We know too little of the Manichean liturgy to guess 
if the Manicheans are here alluded to: that Man! should 
have rejected many Zoroastrian practices is not unlikely, 
as his aim was to found a universal religion. While he 
pushed to extremes several of the Zoroastrian tenets, espe- 
cially those which had taken, or might receive, a moral or 
metaphysical meaning, he must have been very regardless 
of practices which could not be ennobled into moral sym- 
bolism. However it may be with regard to the foregoing 
passage, it is difficult not to sec a direct allusion to 
Manichcism in lines like the following (IV, 47 scq.) : 

‘Verily I say it unto thee, O Spitama Zarathuftra ! the 
man who has a wife is far above him who begets no sons ; 
he who keeps a house is far above him who has none ; he 
who has children is far above the childless man ; he who 
has riches is far above him who has none. 

‘ And of two men, he who fills himself with meat is filled 
with the good spirit much more than he who does not so ; 
the latter is all but dead ; the former is above him by the 
worth of an Asperena, by the worth of a sheep, by the 
worth of an ox, by the worth of a man. 

4 It is this man that can strive against the onsets of Asto- 
vidhotu ; that can strive against the self-moving arrow; 
that can strive against the winter fiend, with thinnest gar- 
ment on ; that can strive against the wicked tyrant and 
smite him on the head ; it is this man that can strive 
against the ungodly Ashemaogha1 2 who does not eat V 

1 Chap. XV, 1 6 seq. as translated by West. 

a Ashemaogha, ‘ the confounder of Asha ’ (see IV, 37), is the name of the 
fiends and of the heretics. The Parsis distinguish two sorts of Ashemao- 
ghas, the deceiver and the deceived; the deceiver, while alive, is mar- 

INTRODUCTION, III. 

xli 

That this is a bit of religious polemics, and that it refers 
to definite doctrines and tenets which were held at the 
time when it was written, can hardly be doubted. It may 
remind one of the Christian doctrines ; and. in fact, it was 
nearly in the same tone, and with the same expressions, 
that in the fifth century King Yazdgard branded the Chris- 
tians in Armenia 4. But however eager the Christian pro- 
paganda may have been for a time in Persia, they never 
endangered the state religion. The real enemy was the 
heresy sprung from Mazdeism itself; and Christianity, 
coming from abroad, was more of a political than a reli- 
gious foe. And, in point of fact, the description in the 
above passage agrees better with the Manichcan doctrines 
than with the Christian 5. Like Mani, Christian teachers 
held the single life holier than the state of matrimony, yet 
they had not forbidden marriage, which Mani did ; they 
put poor Lazarus above Dives, but they never forbade trade 
and husbandry, which Mani did ; and, lastly, they never 
prohibited the eating of flesh, which was one of the chief 
precepts of Mum0. Wc find, therefore, in this passage, an 
illustration, from the Avesta itself, of the celebrated doc- 
trine of the three seals with which Mani had sealed the 
bosom, the hand, and the mouth of his disciples (signa- 
culum sinus, manus, oris)0. 

garzan, ‘ worthy of death,’ and after death is a darvand (a fiend, or one of the 
damned) ; the deceived one is only margarz&n. 

8 The Pahlavi translation illustrates the words 'who does not eat’ by the 
gloss, ‘ like Mazdak, son of Bam dad/ which proves that this part of the com- 
mentary is posterior to, or contemporary With the crushing of the Mazilakian 
sect (in the first years of Khosrav Anosharvan, about 531). The words * against 
the wicked tyrant’ are explained by the gloss, ‘like Zarvandad / may it not 
be Kobad, the heretic king, or ‘Yazdgard the sinner/ the scorner of the 
Magi? 

4 Elisacus, pp. 29, 52, in the French translation by Garabed. 

5 At least with orthodox Christianity, which seems to have alone prevailed in 
Persia till the arrival of the Ncstorians. The description would apply very 
well to certain gnostic sects, especially that of Cerdo and Marcio, which is no 
wonder, as it was through that channel that Christianity became known to Man?. 
Masndi makes M&ni a disciple of Kardun (ed. B. de Meynard, II, 167), and the 
care which his biographer (ap. Fliigcl, Mani, pp. 51, 85) takes to determine the 
length of time wtiich intervened between Marcio and Mani seems to betray some 
dim recollection of an historical connection between the two doctrines. 

6 The patriarch of Alexandria, Timotheus, allowed the other patriarchs, 

xlii 

VENDfDAD. 

§ ii. Wc must now go a step farther back, and try to 
solve the question whence came the original texts out of 
which the editors of the Avesta formed their collection. 
Setting aside the Dinkar/, we have no oriental document 
to help us in tracing them through the age of the Arsa- 
cidcs, a complete historical desert, and we arc driven for 
information to the classical writers who arc, on this point, 
neither very clear nor always credible. The mention of 
books ascribed to Zoroaster occurs not seldom during that 
period, but very often it applies to Alexandrian and 
Gnostic apocrypha1. Yet there are a few passages which 
make it pretty certain that there was a Mazdean literature 
in existence in those times. Pausanias, travelling through 
Lydia in the second century of our era, saw and heard 
Magian priests singing hymns from a book2; whether 
these hymns were the same as the Gatlias, still extant, we 
cannot ascertain, but this shows that there were Gathas. 
The existence of a Zoroastrian literature might be traced 
back as far as the third century before Christ, if Pliny could 
be credited when he says that Hermippus :i had given an 
analysis of the books of Zoroaster, which are said to have 
amounted to 2,000,000 lines 4. For want of external evi- 
dence for ascertaining whether the original texts were 
already in existence in the later years of the Achmmenian 
dynasty, we must seek for internal evidence. A comparison 
between the ideas expressed in our texts and what wc 
know of the ideas of Achaemenian Persia may perhaps 
lead to safer inferences. 

§ 12. That all the Avesta ideas were already fully 
developed in the time, or, at least, at the end of the 

bishops, and monks to eat meat on Sundays, in order to recognise those who 
belonged to the Manichean sect (Fliigcl, Man!, p. 279). 

1 ‘ Those who follow the heresy of Prodicus boast of possessing secret books 
of Zoroaster,’ Clemens Alex. Stromata I. Cf. the airoieakvil/eis Zupoaurpov forged 
by Adelphius or Aquilinus (ap. Porphyr. Vita Plotini, § 16). 

a ’EiraSet 8^ im\*y6picvos €K fitfiXiov (V, 27, 3). 

3 See Windischmann, Zoroastrische Studien, 288. 

4 1 Hermippus, qui de tota arte ea (magia) diligentissime scripsit et viciens 
centiens inilia versuum a Zoroastre condita indicibus quoque voluminum ejus 
positis cxplanavit.' . . . (Hist. Nat. XXX, 1, 2). He had written a book it tpl 
pdycov (Diog. Laert. Proocm. 8). 

INTRODUCTION, III. 

xliii 

Achaemenian dynasty, appears from the perfect accord- 
ance of the account of Mazdeism in Theopompos1 with the 
data of the Zend books. All the main features of Mazdean 
belief, namely, the existence of two principles, a good and 
an evil one, Ormazd and Ahriman, the antithetical crea- 
tions of the two supreme powers, the division of all the 
beings in nature into two corresponding classes, the limited 
duration of the world, the end of the struggle between 
Ormazd and Ahriman by the defeat and destruction of the 
evil principle, the resurrection of the dead, and the ever- 
lasting life, all these tenets of the Avesta had already been 
established at the time of Philip and Aristotle. Therefore 
wc must admit that the religious literature then in existence, 
if there were any, must have differed but little, so far as its 
contents were concerned, from the Avesta ; its extent was 
greater of course, and wc have a proof of this in this very 
account of Theopompos, which gives us details nowhere to 
be found in the present texts, and yet the authenticity of 
which is made quite certain by comparative mythology 2 3. 
Therefore there is nothing that forbids us to believe, with 
the Parsis, that the fragments of which the Avesta is com- 
posed were already in existence before the Greek invasion”. 

§ 13. Put it docs not follow hence that the Achaemenian 
Avesta was the sacred book of the Achnemenians and of 
Persia, and it must not be forgotten that the account in 
Plutarch is not about the religion of Persia, but about the 
belief of the Magi and the lore of Zoroaster. Now if we 
consider that the two characteristic features of Avestean 
M agism arc, so far as belief goes, the admission of two 
principles, and so far as practice is concerned, the prohibi- 
tion of burying the dead, we find that there is no evidence 

1 In Plutarch, De Iside et Osiridc, §§ 46-47. 

2 Men, when raised from the dead, shall have no shadow any longer (fi'fjTt 
oKi&v irotovvras). In India, gods have no shadows (Nalus) ; in Persia, Ra- 
shid addin was recognised to be a god from his producing no shadow (Guyard, 
Un grand maitre des Assassins, Journal Asiatique, 1877, I, 392); the plant of 
eternal life, Ilaoma, has no shadow (Henry Lord). 

3 Persian tradition cannot be much relied on, when it tries to go back beyond 
Alexander, and on that special point it seems to be more an inference of later 
ages, than a real tradition ; but the inference happens to be right. 

xliv 

vendJdad. 

that Achaemcnfan Persia admitted the former, and there is 
evidence that she did not admit the latter. But, at the 
same time, it appears that both the belief and the practice 
were already in existence, though peculiar to one class, the 
sacerdotal class, the Magi. 

The question whether the Achcemenian kings believed 
in dualism and knew of Ahriman, is not yet settled. Much 
stress has often been laid on the absence of the name of 
Ahriman in the religious formulae engraved by Darius and 
Xerxes on the rocks at Pcrsepolis and Naq^-i Rustam1. 
But it is never safe to draw wide conclusions from negative 
facts : Darius and Xerxes speak of Auramazda quite in the 
style of the Avesta, and their not speaking of Ahriman is 
no sufficient proof of their not knowing him ; they did not 
intend to publish a complete creed, nor had they to inscribe 
articles of faith. 

The account of the Persian religion in Herodotus also 
leaves, or seems to leave, Ahriman unnoticed. But it must 
be borne in mind that he does not expound the religious 
conceptions of the Persians, but only their religious cus- 
toms ; he describes their worship more than their dogmas, 
and not a single tenet is mentioned. He seems even not 
to know anything of Ormazd, who was, however, most 
certainly the supreme god of Persia in his days ; yet, in 
fact, he clearly alludes to Ormazd, when he states that the 
Persians worship Zeus on the summits of mountains, and 
call by the name of Zeus the whole circle of the heavens, 
which exactly agrees with the character of Ormazd 2 3. In 
the same way the existence of Ahriman is indirectly 
pointed to by the duty enforced upon the faithful to perse- 
cute and kill noxious animals, as it was only on account of 

1 Professor Oppert thinks he has found in Darius’ inscriptions an express 
mention of Ahriman (Le peuple et le languc des Modes, p. 199); yet the 
philological interpretation of the passage seems to me still too obscure to 
allow of any decisive opinion. Plutarch introduces Artaxerxes I speaking of 
’Apcijidvios, but whether the king is made to speak the language of his own 

time, or that of Plutarch’s time, is left doubtful. As to the allusions in Isaiah 
(xlv), they do not necessarily refer to dualism in particular, but to all religions 
not monotheistic. (Cf. Ormazd et Ahriman, § 241.) 

3 Vide infra, IV, 5. 

INTRODUCTION, III. 

xlv 

their being creatures of the evil principle and incarnations 
of it, that this custom was enjoined as a religious duty l. 
It appears, it is true, from the words of Herodotus, that 
it was only a custom peculiar to the Magi 2 ; but it shows, 
at least, that the belief in Ahriman was already then in 
existence, and that dualism was constituted, at least, as a 
Magian article of faith. 

If we pass now from dogma to practice, we find that the 
most important practice of the Avesta law was either dis- 
regarded by the Achaemcnian kings, or unknown to them. 
According to the Avesta burying corpses in the earth is one 
of the most heinous sins that can be committed 3 ; we know 
that under the Sassanians a prime minister, Seoses, paid 
with his life for an infraction of that law 4 *. Corpses were 
to be laid down on the summits of mountains, there to 
be devoured by birds and dogs ; the exposure of corpses 
was the most striking practice of Mazdean profession, and 
its adoption was the sign of conversion f>. Now under the 
Achamienian rule, not only the burial of the dead was not 
forbidden, but it was the general practice. Persians, says 
Herodotus, bury their dead in the earth, after having coated 
them with wax G. But Herodotus, immediately after stating 
that the Persians inter their dead, adds that the Magi do 
not follow the general practice, but lay the corpses down on 
the ground, to be devoured by birds. So what became a 
law for all people, whether laymen or priests, under the rule 
of the Sassanians, was only the custom of the Magi, under 
the Achexmenians. 

The obvious conclusion is that the ideas and customs 
which arc found in the Avesta were already in existence 
under the Achaemenian kings ; but that taken as a whole, 
they were not the general ideas and customs of the whole 
of Persia, but only of the sacerdotal caste7. There were 

1 Vide infra, IV, 35 ; cf. Fargard XIII, 5 seq. ; XIV, 5. 

9 Ilerod. I, 140. 8 Vide infra, V, 9. 

4 Procopius, De Bello Persico, 1, 1 1 . 

5 Ibid. 1, 12. 6 Ilerod. 1, 140. 

7 There are other features of the Avesta religion which appear to have 

been foreign to Persia, but are attributed to the Magi. The Avaetvodatha, 

the holiness of marriage between next of kin, even to incest, was unknown to 

xlvi 

vendidAd. 

therefore, practically, two religions in Iran, the one for 
laymen and the other for priests. The Avesta was ori- 
ginally the sacred book only of the Magi, and the progress 
of the religious evolution was to extend to laymen what 
was the custom of the priests. 

§ 14. We are now able to understand how it was that the 
sacred book of Persia was written in a non-Persian dialect : 
it had been written in the language of its composers, the 
Magi, who were not Persians. Between the priests and the 
people there was not only a difference of calling, but also 
a difference of race, as the sacerdotal caste came from a 
non-Persian province. What that province was we know 
both from Greek historians and from Parsi traditions. 

All classical writers, from Herodotus down to Ammianus, 
agree in pointing to Media as the seat and native place of 
the Magi. ‘ In Media/ says Marccllinus (XXIII, 6), 4 are the 
fertile fields of the Magi . . . (having been taught in the 
magic science by King Hystaspes) they handed it down to 
their posterity, and thus from Hystaspes to the present age 
an immense family was developed, hereditarily devoted to 
the worship of the gods. ... In former times their number 
was very scanty . . . , but they grew up by and by into the 
number and name of a nation, and inhabiting towns without 
walls they were allowed to live according to their own laws, 
protected by religious awe/ Putting aside the legendary ac- 
count of their origin, one sees from this passage that in the 
time of Marccllinus1 (fourth cent. A.D.) there was in Media a 
tribe, called Magi, which had the hereditary privilege of pro- 
viding Iran with priests. Strabo, writing three centuries before 
Marcellinus, considered the Magi as a sacerdotal tribe 
spread over the land2. Lastly, we see in Herodotus (III, 65) 
that the usurpation of the Magian Smerdis was interpreted 

Persia under Cambyses (ITerod. Ill, 31), but it is highly praised in the Avesta, 
and was practised under the Sassanians (Agathias II, 31); in the times before 
the Sassanians it is mentioned only as a law of the Magi (Diog. Laert. Prooem. 
6 ; Catullus, Carm. XC). 

1 Or of the historians from whom he copies. Still he seems to speak from 
contemporary evidence. Sozomenus (Hist. Eccles. II, 9) states that the care 
of worship belonged hereditarily to the Magi ‘ as to a sacerdotal race,* Samp 
71 <f>v\ov UpariKuv. 

8 rwv M&ywv <pv\ov (XV, 14). 

INTRODUCTION, III. 

xlvii 

by Cambyses as an attempt of the Mcdcs to recover the 
hegemony they had lost, and when we learn from Herodotus 
(I, 101) that the Medes were divided into several tribes, 
Busae, Paraetakeni, Strouchatcs, Arizanti, Budii, and Magi, 
without his making any remark on the last name, we can 
hardly have any doubt that the priests known as Magi 
belonged to the tribe of the Magi, that they were named 
after their origin, and that the account of Marcellinus may 
be correct even for so early a period as that of Herodotus. 

§ 15. Parsi traditions agree with Greek testimonies. 

That the priesthood was hereditary, we sec from the state- 
ment in the Bundahi.?, that all the Maubeds arc descend- 
ants from King Minochihr1, and even nowadays the priest- 
hood cannot extend beyond the priestly families ; the son 
of a Dastur is not obliged to be a Dastur, but no one that 
is not the son of a Dastur can become one2. 

That they came from Media, we see from the traditions 
about the native place of Zoroaster, their chief and the 
founder of their religion. Although epic legends place the 
cradle of Mazdean power in Bactria, at the court of King 
Vfotasp, Bactria was only the first conquest of Zoroaster, it 
was neither his native place, nor the cradle of his religion. 
Although there are two different traditions on this point, 
both agree in pointing to Media ; according to the one he 
was born in Rai, that is in Media, properly so called ; 
according to the other he was born in Shiz, that is in 
Media Atropatcne. 

The former tradition seems to be the older ; it is ex- 
pressed directly in the Pahlavi Commentary to Vendidad I, 
16 3 * ; and there is in the Avesta itself (Yasna XIX, 18 (50)) a 
passage that either alludes to it or shows how it originated. 

‘ How many masters are there ? 5 

1 Bundahis 79, 13. 

2 Dosabhoy Framjee, The Parsees, &c. p. 277. 

8 ‘Ragha of the three races,’ that is to say, Atropatene (vide infra); some 

say it is * Rai.’ It is * of the three races ’ because the three classes, priests, 
warriors, husbandmen, ‘ were well organized there. Some say that Zartust 
was bom there . . . , those three classes were born from him.’ Cf. Bundahis 

79, 15, and Farg. II, 43, n. 2. Rai is the Greek 'Fayai. 

xlviii 

vendIdad. 

i There are the master of the house, the lord of the 
borough, the lord of the town, the lord of the province, and 
the Zarathujtra (the high-priest) as the fifth. So is it in 
all lands, except in the Zarathu^trian realm ; for there are 
there only four masters, in Ragha, the Zarathujtrian city V 
‘Who are they?’ 

‘They are the master of the house, the lord of the 
borough, the lord of the town, and Zarathujtra is the 
fourth2 3/ 

This amounts to saying that the high-priest, the Mau- 
bedan Maubcd, held in Rai the position of the da//vyuma, 
or lord of the land, and was the chief magistrate. It may 
be suspected that this was the independent sacerdotal state 
which is spoken of in Marcellinus, and this suspicion is 
raised to a certain degree of probability by the following 
lines in Yaqilt : 

1 Ustfinawand, a celebrated fortress in the district of Dan- 
bawand, in the province of Rai. It is very old, and was 
strongly fortified. It is said to have been in existence for 
more than 3000 years, and to have been the stronghold of 
the Masmoghan of the land during the times of paganism. 
This word, which designates the high-priest of the Zoroas- 
trian religion, is composed of mas, “great,1 ” and moghan, 
which means “magian.” Khaled besieged it, and destroyed 
the power of the last of them V 

According to another tradition Zarathuilra was born in 
Atropatcnc. The very same commentary which describes 
Ragha as being identical with Rai, and the native place of 
Zartu^t, also informs us that Ragha was thought by others 

1 Or possibly, ‘ in the Zarathustrian Ragha.’ 

2 The Commentary has here : • that is to say, he was the fourth master in 
his own land.’ 

Their spreading and wandering over Mazdean lands appears from Yasna 
XL11, 6 (XLI, 54) : 1 We bless the coming of the Athravans, who come from 
afar to bring holiness to countries ;* cf. infra, p. lii, note 1, and Farg. XIII, 22. 

3 Dictionnairc geographique de la Perse, traduit par Barbier de Meynard, 
p. 33. Cf. Spiegel, Eranische Alterthumskunde III, 565. A dim recollection 
of this Magian dynasty seems to survive in the account ap. Diog. Laert. 
(Proocm. 2) that Zoroaster was followed by a long series of Magi, Osthanae 
Astrampsychi, and Pazatae, till the destruction of the Persian empire by 
Alexander. 

INTRODUCTION, III. 

xlix 

to be Atropatenc. Traditions, of which unfortunately we 
have only late records, make him a native of Shiz, the 
capital of Atropatcne1: c In Shiz is the fire temple of 
Azerckhsh, the most celebrated of the Pyraea of the Magi; 
in the days of the fire worship, the kings always came on 
foot, upon pilgrimage. The temple of Azerckhsh is ascribed 
to Zeratusht, the founder of the Magian religion, who went, 
it is said, from Shiz to the mountain of Sebilan, and, after 
remaining there some time in retirement, returned with the 
Zend-Avesta, which, although written in the old Persian 
language, could not be understood without a commentary. 
After this he declared himself to be a prophet2.’ 

Now we read in the BundahL? that Zartu^t founded his 
religion by offering a sacrifice in Iran Ve^ ( Airyanem Vae^o) 
Although this detail referred originally to the mythical cha- 
racter of Zoroaster, and Iran Vcg- was primitively no real 
country, yet as it was afterwards identified with the basin 
of the Aras (Vanguhi Daitya)4, this identification is a proof 
that the cradle of the new religion was looked for on the 
banks of the Aras. In the A vesta itself we read that Zoro- 
aster was born and received the law from Ormazd on a 
mountain, by the river Dare^a 5, a name which strikingly 
reminds one of the modern Darah river, which falls from 
the Sebilan mount into the Aras. 

To decide which of the two places, Rai or Atropatene, 
had the better claim to be called the native place of Zoro- 
aster is of course impossible. The conflict of the two 
traditions must be interpreted as an indication that both 
places were important scats of the Magian worship. That 
both traditions may rely on the Avesta is perhaps a sign 
that the Avesta contains two scries of documents, the one 
emanating from the Magi of Ragha, and the other from the 

1 The Persian Gazn, the Byzantine Gaza, Ganzaka, the site of which was 
identified by Sir Heniy Rawlinson with Takht i Suleiman (Memoir on the Site 
of the Atropatenian Ecbatana, in the Journal of the Royal Geographical Society, 

X,65). 

* Kazwini, apud Rawlinson 1. c. p. 69. 

8 Bund. 79,12. 4 See Farg. I, p. 3. 

8 See Farg. XIX, 4, 11. 

M 

d 

1 vendidAd. 

Magi of Atropatene1; Which of the two places had the 
older claim is also a question hardly to be settled in the 
present state of our knowledge2. 

Whether Magism came from Ragha to Atropatene, or 
from Atropatene to Ragha, in cither case it had its origin 
in Media*. That Persia should have submitted in religious 
matters to a foreign tribe will surprise no one who thinks 
of the influence of the Etruscan augurs in Rome. The 
Magi might be hated as Medes, but they were respected 
and feared as priests. When political revolutions gave vent 
to national hate, the Persian might willingly indulge it, and 
revel in the blood of the foreign priest 4 ; yet whenever he 
had to invoke the favour of the gods, he was obliged to 
acknowledge that he could not do without the detested 
tribe, and that they alone knew how to make themselves 
heard by heaven 5. When and how the religious hegemony 
of Media arose we cannot say : it is but natural that Media G, 

1 This would be a principle of classification which unfortunately applies 
only to a small part of the Avesta. 

a Still, if we follow the direction of the Zoroastrian legend, Magism must 
have spread from west to east, from Atropatene to Ragha, from Ragha to 
Bactria ; and Atropatene must thus have been the first cradle of Mazdcism. 
Its very name points to its sacred character; oriental writers, starting from the 
modem form of the name, Adarbigun, interpret it as ‘the seed of fire,* with an 
allusion to the numerous fire springs to be found there. Modem scholars have 
generally followed the historical etymology given by Strabo, who states that, 
alter the death of Alexander, the satrap Atropates made himself an independent 
sovereign in his satrapy, which was named after him Atropatene. This looks 
like a Greek etymology (scarcely more to be trusted than the etymology of 
' Payat , from, frfjywm), and it is hardly to be believed that the land should 
have lost its former name to take a new one from its king; it was not a 
new-fangled geographical division, like Lotharingia, and had lived a life of 
its own for a long time before. Its name Atarpatakan seems to mean 4 the land 
of the descent of fire,’ as it was there that fire came down from heaven (cf. 
Ammianus 1. c.) 

3 The Pahlavi names of the cardinal points show that Media was the centre 
of orientation in Magian geography (Garrez, Journal Asiatique, 1869, II). 

4 Magophonia (Herod. Ill, 79). 

8 'Cls avTovt fiovov 9 djeovofiivovt (Diog. Lacrt. Prooem.) ; cf. Herod. 1, 132 ; 
Ammian. 1. 1. 

• An echo of the old political history of Media seems to linger in Yast V, 
29, which shows Azi Dahika reigning in Babylon (Bawru); as Azi, in his 
legendary character, represents the foreign invader, this passage can hardly 
be anything but a far remote echo of the struggles between Media and 
the Mesopotamian empires. The legend of Azi is localised only in Medic 

INTRODUCTION, III. 

having risen sooner to a high degree of civilisation, should 
have given to religion and worship a more systematic and 
elaborate form, and in religion, as in politics, the best organ- 
ised power must sooner or later get the upper hand. It is 
likely that it began with the conquest of Media by Cyrus : 
Media capta ferum victorem cepit. . . . Cyrus is said to have 
introduced the Magian priesthood into Persia (Xenophon, 
Cyrop. VIII, i, 23), which agrees with the legend mentioned 
by Nikolaus that it was on the occasion of the miraculous 
escape of Croesus that the Persians remembered the old 
koyla of Zoroaster forbidding the dead to be burnt. 

The Medic origin of the Magi accounts for a fact which 
perplexes at first sight, namely, the absence of the name of 
the Magi from the book written by themselves1 ; which is 
natural enough if the word Magu was not the name of the 
priest as a priest, but as a member of the tribe of the Magi. 
The proper word for a priest in the Avesta is Athravan, 
literally, ‘ fire-man,’ and that this was his name with the 
Persians too appears from the statement in Strabo (XV, 733) 
that the Magi arc also called II vpaiQoi. It is easy to con- 
ceive that the Persians, especially in ordinary parlance, 
would rather designate their priests after their origin than 
after their functions2; but the Magi themselves had no 
reason to follow the Persian custom, which was not always 
free from an implication of spite or scorn. The only passage 
into which the word found its way is just one that betrays 
the existence of this feeling : the enemy of the priests is 

lands : he addresses his prayers to Ahriman by the banks of the Sipit rfit 
(Bundahis 52, 11), his adversary Feridun is bom in Ghilan, he is bound to 
Mount Damavand (near Rai). 

1 In their own language, the Zend ; of which the modem representatives, if 
there be any left, should therefore be looked for in Atropatene or on the banks 
of the Caspian sea. The research is complicated by the growing intrusion of 
Persian words into the modem dialects, but as far as I can see from a very 
inadequate study of the matter, the dialect which exhibits most Zend features is 
the Tabs dialect, on the southern bank of the Aras. 

9 The Pahlavi has ‘one who hates the Magu-men.* In the passage LIII 
(LII), 7, mag^us is not a Magian, and it is translated by magt, ‘holiness, 
godliness,’ related to the Vedic magha. Afterwards the two words were con- 
founded, whence came the Greek statement that p&yot means at the same 
time ‘a priest* and ‘a god* (Apollon. Tyan. Ep. XVII). 

d 2 

Hi 

vend}dAd. 

‘not called, as would be expected, an Athrava-Zbij, ‘ a 
hater of the Athravans ’ (cf. the Indian Brahma-dvish), but 
a Moghu-/bij, ‘a hater of the Magi1.* The name, it is 
true, became current in Pahlavi and modern Persian, but it 
was at a time when the old national quarrels between Media 
and Persia were quenched, and the word could no longer 
carry any offensive idea with it. 

§ 16. The results of the foregoing research may be summed 
up as follows : — 

The original texts of the Avesta were not written by 
Persians, as they are in a language which was not used in 
Persia, they prescribe certain customs which were unknown 
to Persia, and proscribe others which were current in Persia. 
They were written in Media, by the priests of Ragha and 
Atropatene, in the language of Media, and they exhibit 
the ideas of the sacerdotal class under the Acliaemcnian 
dynasty. 

It does not necessarily follow from this, that the original 
fragments were already written at the time of Herodotus2. 

1 A further echo of the anti-Magian feelings may be heard in Yasna IX, 24 
(75) • ‘ Haorria overthrew Keresani, who rose up to seize royalty, and he said, 
“ No longer shall henceforth the Athravans go through the lands and teach 
at their will.” * This is a curious instance of how easily legendary history may 
turn myths to its advantage. The struggle of Ilaoma against Keresani is an 
old Tndo-European myth, Keresani being the same as the Vcdic Kmanu, who 
wants to keep away Soma from the hands of men. His name becomes in the 
Avesta the name of an anti-Magian king [it may be Darius, the usurper (?)], 
and ten centuries later it was turned into an appellation of the Christian Kaisars 
of Rum (Kalasyak = * €/c/c\7jata[/c6s] ; Tarsaka). 

a If the interpretation of the end of the Behistun inscription (preserved only in 
the Scythian version) as given by Professor Oppert be correct, Darius must have 
made a collection of religious texts known as Avesta, whence it would follow, 
with great probability, that the present Avesta proceeded from Darius. The 
translation of the celebrated scholar is as follows: ‘J’ai fait une collection 
de textes (dippimas) ailleurs en langue arienne qui autrefois n’existait pas. Et 
j ai fait un texte de la Lei (de 1*A vesta ; Haduk ukku) et un commentaire de la 
Loi, et la Benediction (la pricre, le Zend) et les Traductions.’ (Le peuple et 
la langue des Modes, pp. 155, 186.) The authority of Oppert is so great, and at 
the same time the passage is so obscure, that I hardly know if there be more 
temerity in rejecting his interpretation or in adopting it. Yet I beg to observe 
that the word dippimas is the usual Scythian transliteration of the Persian 
dipi, * an inscription,’ ami there is no apparent reason for departing from that 
meaning in this passage ; if the word translated ‘ la Loi/ ukku, really represents 
here a Persian word Abasta, it need not denote the Avesta, the religious book, 

INTRODUCTION, ITT. 

liii 

But as the Magi of that time sang songs of their gods 
during sacrifice, it is very likely that there was already a 
sacred literature in existence. The very fact that no sacri- 
fice could be performed without the assistance of the Magi 
makes it highly probable that they were in possession of 
rites, prayers, and hymns very well composed and arranged, 
and not unlike those of the Brahmans ; their authority can 
only be accounted for by the power of a strongly defined 
ritual and liturgy. There must, therefore, have been a 
collection of formulae and hymns, and it is quite possible 
that Herodotus may have heard the Magi sing, in the fifth 
century B. c., the very same Gathas which are sung nowa- 
days by the Mobeds in Bombay. A part of the A vesta, 
the liturgical part, would therefore have been, in fact, a 
sacred book for the Persians. It had not been written by 
them, but it was sung for their benefit. That Zend hymns 
should have been sung before a Persian-speaking people is 
not stranger than Latin words being sung by Frenchmen, 
Germans, and Italians ; the only difference being that, 
owing to the close affinity of Zend to Persian, the Persians 
may have been able to understand the prayers of their 
priests. 

§ 17. It may, therefore, be fairly admitted that, on the 
whole, the present texts are derived from texts already 
existing under the Achamienian kings. Some parts of the 
collection are undoubtedly older than others ; thus, the 
Gftthas are certainly older than the rest of the Avesta, as 
they are often quoted and praised in the Yasna and the 
Vendidad ; but it is scarcely possibly to go farther than a 
logical chronology. One might feel inclined, at first sight, 
to assign to a very recent date, perhaps to the last revision of 
the Avesta, those long enumerations of gods so symmetrically 
elaborated in the Yasna, Visperad, and Vendidad. But the 
account of Mazdeism given by Plutarch shows that the 

as in that case the word would most certainly not have been translated in 
the Scythian version, but only transliterated; the ideogram for ‘Benediction, 
pricre,' may refer to religious inscriptions like Perscpolis I ; the import of the 
whole passage would therefore be that Darius caused other inscriptions to be 
engraved, and wrote other edicts and religious formulae (the word ‘ traductions ’ 
is only a guess). 

llV VENDIDAD. 

work of co-ordination was already terminated at the end of 
the Achaemenian period, and there is no part of the Avesta 
which, so far as the matter is concerned, may not have been 
written in those times. Nay, the Greek accounts of that 
period present us, in some measure, with a later stage of 
thought, and are pervaded with a stronger sense of sym- 
metry, than the Avesta itself. Such passages as the latter 
end of the Zamyad Ya^t and Vcndid&d X, 9 seq. prove 
that, when they were composed, the seven Arch-D&vs were 
not yet pointedly contrasted with the seven Amshaspands, 
and therefore those passages might have been written 
long before the time of Philip. The theory of time and 
space as first principles of the world, of which only the 
germs are found in the Avesta, was fully developed in the 
time of Eudemos, a disciple of Aristotle. 

§ 18. To what extent the Magian dogmatical conceptions . 
were admitted by the whole of the Iranian population, or 
how and by what process they spread among it, we cannot 
ascertain for want of documentary evidence. As regards 
■their observances we are better instructed, and can form an 
idea of how far and in what particulars they differed from 
the other Iranians. The new principle they introduced, or, 
rather, developed into new consequences, was that of the 
purity of the elements. Fire, earth, and water had always 
been considered sacred things, and had received worship 1 : 
the Magi drew from that principle the conclusion that bury- 
ing the dead or burning the dead was defiling a god : as 
early as Herodotus they had already succeeded in preserving 
fire from that pollution, and cremation was a capital crime. 
The earth still continued to be defiled, notwithstanding the 
example they set ; and it was only under the Sassanians, 
when Mazdeism became the religion of the state, that they 
won this point also. 

The religious difference between the Persians and their 
Medic priests was therefore chiefly in observances. Out of 
the principles upon which the popular religion rested, the 
sacerdotal class drew by dint of logic, in a puritan spirit, 

1 Cf. v, 8. 

INTRODUCTION, III. 

lv 

the necessity of strict observances, the yoke of which was 
not willingly endured by the mass of the people. Many 
acts, insignificant in the eyes of the people, became repug- 
nant to their consciences and their more refined logic. The 
people resisted, and for a time Magian observances were 
observed only by the Magi. The slow triumph of Magism 
can be dimly traced through the Achtxmenian period. 
Introduced by Cyrus, it reigned supreme for a time with 
the Pseudo-Smerdis, and was checked by Darius1. It seems 
to have resumed its progress under Xerxes ; at least, it was 
reported that it was to carry out Magian principles that he 
destroyed the Greek temples, and that the first who wrote 
on the Zoroastrian lore was a Magian, named Osthanes, 
who had accompanied him to Greece2. New progress 
marked the reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus. The epic 
history of Iran, as preserved in the Shah Namah, passes 
suddenly from the field of mythology to that of history with 
the reign of that king, which makes it likely that it was in 
his time that the legends of Media became national in 
Persia, &nd that his reign was an epoch in the political 
history of Magism3. But the real victory was not won 
till six centuries later, when national interest required a 
national religion. Then, as happens in every revolution, 
the ultra party, that had pushed to the extreme the princi- 
ples common to all, took the lead ; the Magi ascended the 
throne with Ardeshir, one of their pupils 4, and the Magian 

1 Darius rebuilt the temples which the Magus Gaumala had destroyed 
(Behistun I, 63). The Magi, it is said, wanted the gods not to be imprisoned 
within four walls (Cic. dc Legibus II, 10) : Xerxes behaved himself as their 
disciple, at least in Greece. Still the Magi seem to have at last given way 
on that point to the Perso- Assyrian customs, and there were temples even 
under the Sassanians. 

2 Pliny, Hist. Nat. XXX, 1,8. 

3 Cf. Westergaard, Preface to the Zend-Avesta, p. 17. This agrees with 
what we know of the fondness of Artaxerxes for religious novelties. It was 
he who blended the worship of the Assyrian Anat-Mylitta with that of the 
Iranian Anahita (the ascription of that innovation to Artaxerxes Mnemon by 
Clemens Alexandrinus (Stiomata I) must rest on a clerical error, as in the 
time of Herodotus, who wrote under Longimanus, the worship of Mylitta had 
already been introduced into Persia (1, 131)). 

4 Agathias II, 26. 

lvi 

vend!dad. 

observances became the law of all Iran. But their triumph 
was not to be a long one ; their principles required an effort 
too continuous and too severe to be ever made by any but 
priests, who might concentrate all their faculties in watching 
whether they had not dropped a hair upon the ground. A 
working people could not be imprisoned in such a religion, 
though it might be pure and high in its ethics. The 
triumph of Islam was a deliverance for the consciences of 
many *, and Magism, by enforcing its observances upon the 
nation, brought about the ruin of its dogmas, which were 
swept away at the same time : its triumph was the cause 
and signal of its fall1 2. 

CHAPTER IV. 

The Origin of the A vesta Religion, 

§ 1. What was the religion of the Magi which we find 
reflected in the A vesta ? and whence did it arise ? 

Magism, in its general form, may be summed up as 
follows : — 

The world, such as it is now, is twofold, being the work of 
two hostile beings, Ahura Mazda, the good principle, and 
Angra Mainyu, the evil principle ; all that is good in the 
world comes from the former, all that is bad in it comes 
from the latter. The history of the world is the history of 
their conflict, how Angra Mainyu invaded the world of 
Ahura Mazda and marred it, and how he shall be expelled 
from it at last. Man is active in the conflict, his duty in it 
being laid before him in the law revealed by Ahura Mazda 
to Zaratluutra. When the appointed time is come, a son of 
the lawgiver, still unborn, named Saoshyawt, will appear, 
Angra Mainyu and hell will be destroyed, men will rise 
from the dead, and everlasting happiness will reign over the 
world. 

1 De Gobineau, llistoire dcs Perses, II, 632 seq. 

'‘We ought to discuss here the Scythian theory of Magism ; but thus far we 
ha\e been unable to find anywhere a clear and consistent account of its thesis 
and of its arguments. Nothing is known of any Scythian religion, and what is 
ascribed to a so-called Scythian influence, the worship of the elements, is one 
of the oldest and most essential features of the Aryan religions. 

INTRODUCTION, IV. 

Ivii 

We have tried in another book 1 to show that the religion 
of the Magi is derived from the same source as that of the 
Indian Rishis, that is, from the religion followed by the 
common forefathers of the Iranians and Indians, the Indo- 
Iranian religion. The Mazdean belief is, therefore, com- 
posed of two different strata ; the one comprises all the 
gods, myths, and ideas which were already in existence 
during the Indo-Iranian period, whatever changes they 
may have undergone during the actual Iranian period ; the 
other comprises the gods, myths, and ideas which were 
only developed after the separation of the two religions. 

§ 2r. There were two general ideas at the bottom of the 
Indo-Iranian religion ; first, that there is a law in nature, 
and, secondly, that there is a war in nature. 

There is a law in nature, because everything goes on in 
a serene and mighty order. Days after days, seasons after 
seasons, years after years come and come again ; there is a 
marvellous friendship between the sun and the moon, the 
dawn has never missed its appointed time and place, and 
the stars that shine in the night know where to go when 
the day is breaking. There is a God who fixed that never- 
failing law, and on whom it rests for ever2. 

There is a war in nature, because it contains powers that 
work for good and powers that work for evil : there arc 
such beings as benefit man, and such beings as injure him : 
there are gods and fiends. They struggle on, never and 
nowhere more apparent than in the storm, in which, under 
our very eyes, the fiend that carries off the light and streams 
of heaven fights with the god that gives them back to man 
and the thirsty earth. 

There were, therefore, in the Indo-Iranian religion a 
latent monotheism and an unconscious dualism 3 ; both of 
which, in the further development of Indian thought, slowly 
disappeared ; but Mazdeism lost neither of these two notions, 

1 Ormazd et Ahriman, Paris, 1877. We beg, for the sake of brevity, to 
refer to that book for further demonstration. 

8 Cf. Max MUller, Lectures on the Origin and Growth of Religion, p. 249. 

3 J. Darmesteter, The Supreme God in the Indo-European Mythology, in 
the Contemporary Review, October, 1879, p. 283. 

lviii 

vendIdad. 

nor did it add a new one, and its original action was to cling 
strongly and equally to both ideas and push them to an 
extreme. 

§ 3. The God that has established the laws in nature is 
the Heaven God. He is the greatest of gods, since there is 
nothing above him nor outside of him ; he has made every- 
thing, since everything is produced or takes place in him ; he 
is the wisest of all gods, since with his eyes, the sun, moon, 
and stars, he sees everything1 *. 

This god was named either after his bodily nature Varana, 
‘ the all-embracing sky V or after his spiritual attributes 
Asura, ‘the Lord/ Asura vii’vavedas, ‘the all-knowing 
Lord,’ Asura Mazdha, ‘the Lord of high knowledge3.’ 

§ 4. The supreme Asura of the Indo-Iranian religion, the 
Heaven god, is called in the Avesta Ahura Mazda, ‘the 
all-knowing Lord4;’ his concrete name Varana, which 
became his usual name in India (Varuwa), was lost in Iran, 
and remained only as the name of the material heaven, and 
then of a mythical region, the Varena, which was the seat 
of the mythical fight between a storm god and a storm 
fiend r>. 

§ 5. The spiritual attributes of the Heaven god were daily 
more and more strongly defined, and his material attributes 
were thrown farther into the background. Yet many features, 
though ever dimmer and dimmer, betray his former bodily 
or, rather, his sky nature. He is white, bright, seen afar, 
and his body is the greatest and fairest of all bodies ; he 
has the sun for his eye, the rivers above for his spouses, the 
fire of lightning for his son ; he wears the heaven as a 
star-spangled garment, he puts on the hard stone of heaven, 
he is the hardest of all gods0. He dwells in the infinite 
luminous space, and the infinite luminous space is his place, 

1 ibid. 

a Ovpav6s\ or Dyaus, ‘the shining sky* [Z«t5s, Jup-piter], or Svar. 

3 Or perhaps ‘ the Lord who bestows intelligence ’ (Benfey, 4 Asura Medha 
and Ahura Mazdao ’). 

4 This is, at least, the meaning that attached to the name in the consciences 
of the composers of the Avesta. 

8 Vide infra, § 12. 

• Orm. Ahr. §§ 27-36. 

INTRODUCTION, IV. 

. lix 

his body1. In the time of Herodotus, Persians, while in- 
voking Auramazda, the creator of earth and heaven, still 
knew who he was, and called the whole vault of the sky 
Zeus, that is to say, called it the supreme god2. 

§ 6. In the Indo-Iranian religion, the supreme Asura, 
although he was the supreme god, was not the only god. 
There were near him and within him many mighty beings, 
the sun, wind, lightning, thunder, rain, prayer, sacrifice, which 
as soon as they struck the eye or the fancy of man, were at 
once turned into gods. If the Heaven Asura, greater in 
time and space, eternal and universal, everlasting and ever 
present, was without effort raised to the supreme rank by 
his twofold infinitude, there were other gods, of shorter but 
mightier life, who maintained against him their right to 
independence. The progress of religious thought might as 
well have gone on to transfer power from him to any of 
these gods, as to make his authority unrivalled. The former 
was the case in India : in the middle of the Vedic period, 
Indra, the dazzling god of storm, rose to supremacy in the 
Indian Pantheon, and outshines Varu//a with the roar and 
splendour of his feats ; but soon to give way to a new and 
mystic king, Prayer or Brahman3. 

Not so did Mazdeism, which struggled on towards unity. 
The Lord slowly brought everything under his unquestioned 
supremacy, and the other gods became not only his subjects, 
but his creatures. This movement was completed as early 
as the fourth century B.C. Nowhere can it be more clearly 
traced than in the Amesha Spewtas and Mithra. 

§ 7. The Indo-Iranian Asura was often conceived as 
sevenfold : by the play of certain mythical formulae and 
the strength of certain mythical numbers, the ancestors of 
the Indo-Iranians had been led to speak of seven worlds, 
and the supreme god was often made sevenfold, as well as 
the worlds over which he ruled4. The names and the several 

1 Bundahis I, 7; Ya$na LVIII, 8 (LVII, 22). 

2 Herod. I, 131. 

3 Cf. ‘The Supreme God/ 1. 1. p. 287. 

4 The seven worlds became in Persia the seven Karshvare of the earth : the 
earth is divided into seven Karshvare, only one of which is known and 

lx 

vendIdad. 

attributes of the seven gods had not been as yet defined, 
nor could they be then ; after the separation of the two 
religions, these gods, named Aditya, ‘the infinite ones,’ 
in India, were by and by identified there with the sun, and 
their number was afterwards raised to twelve, to correspond 
to the twelve successive aspects of the sun. In Persia, the 
seven gods are known as Amesha Spe/ztas, ‘the undying 
and well-doing ones;’ they by and by, according to the 
new spirit that breathed in the religion, received the names 
of the deified abstractions1, Vohu-man6 (good thought), 
Asha Valmta (excellent holiness), Khshathra vairya (per- 
fect sovereignty), Spe//ta Armaiti (divine piety), Ilaurvata/ 
and Amereta/ (health and immortality). The first of them 
all was and remained Ahura Mazda ; but whereas formerly 
he had been only the first of them, he was now their father. 
‘ I invoke the glory of the Amesha Spewtas, who all seven 
have one and the same thinking, one and the same speaking, 
one and the same doing, one and the same father and lord, 
Ahura Mazda2.5 

§ 8. In the Indo-Iranian religion, the Asura of Heaven 
was often invoked in company with Mitra3, the god of the 
heavenly light, and he let him share with himself the 
universal sovereignty. In the Veda, they are invoked as a 
pair (Mitra-Varu/ja), which enjoys the same power and rights 
as Varu//a alone, as there is nothing more in Mitra-Varu//a 
than in Varu//a alone, Mitra being the light of Heaven, 
that is, the light of Varu//a. But Ahura Mazda could no 
longer bear an equal, and Mithra became one of his 

accessible to man, the one on which we live, namely, Uvaniratha; which 
amounts to saying that there are seven eai ths. Farsi mythology knows also 
of seven heavens, //vaniratha itself was divided into seven climes (Orm. Ahr. 
§ 7 2). An enumeration of the seven Karshvare is to he found in Karg. XIX, 39. 

1 Most of which were already cither divine or holy in the Indo-lranian period: 
health and- immortality are invoked in the Vedas as in the Avesta (see 
J. Dahncstcter, Haurvata^ et Ameicta*, §§ 49 seq.); Asha Vahista is revered 
in the Vedas as Uita (vide infra, § 30); Spe/tta Armaiti is the Vcdic god- 
dess Aramati (§ 30); Khshathra vairya is the same as the Frahmanical 
Kshatra ; Vohu-mano is a personification of the Vedic sumati (Orm. Ahr. 
§§ 196-201). 

» Yast XIX, 16. 

3 Mitra means literally * a friend ; * it is the light as friendly to man (Orm. 
Ahr. §§ 59-61). 

INTRODUCTION, IV. 

lxi 

creatures : ‘ This Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, I have 
created as worthy of sacrifice, as worthy of glorification, as 
I, Ahura Mazda, am myself1.’ But old formulae, no longer 
understood, in which Mithra and Ahura, or, rather, Mithra- 
Ahura, are invoked in an indivisible unity, dimly remind 
one that the Creator was formerly a brother to his 
creature. 

§ 9. Thus came a time when Ahura was not only the 
maker of the world, the creator of the earth, water, trees, 
mountains, roads, wind, sleep, and light, was not only he 
who gives to man life, shape, and food, but was also the 
father of Tii’trya, the rain-bestowing god, of Verethraghna, 
the fiend-smiting god, and of Haoma, the tree of eternal 
life, the father of the six Amcsha Spe//tas, the father of 
all gods2. 

Yet, with all his might, he still needs the help of some 
god, of such as free the oppressed heavens from the grasp 
of the fiend. When storm rages in the atmosphere he offers 
up a sacrifice to Vayu, the bright storm god, who moves in 
the wind, he entreats him : ‘ Grant me the favour, thou 
Vayu whose action is most high 3, that I may smite the 
world of Angra Mainyu, and that he may not smite mine I 
Vayu, whose action is most high, granted the asked-for 
favour to the creator Ahura Mazda4/ And when Zoro- 
aster is born, Ahura entreats Ardvi Sura Anahita that the 
new-born hero may stand by him in the fight 5 (see § 40). 

1 He preserved, however, a high situation, both in the concrete and in the 
abstract mythology. As the god of the heavenly light, the lord of vast luminous 
space, of the wide pastures above (cf. § 16), he became later the god of the sun 
(Deo invicto Soli Mithrae; in Persian Mi hr is the Sun). As light and truth arc 
one and the same thing, viewed with the eyes of the body and of the mind, he 
became the gocl of truth and faith. He punishes the Mithra-drug*, ‘him who lies 
to Mithra’ (or ‘who lies to the contract,’ since Mithra as a neuter noun means 
‘friendship, agreement, contract’); he is a judge in hell, in company with 
Rashnu, ‘the true one,’ the god of truth, a mere offshoot of Mithra in his moral 
character (Farg. IV, 54). 

2 Cf. Plut. de Iside, XLVII. 

5 Or, who workest in the heights above. 

4 Yt. XV, 3. 

a In the same way his Greek counterpart, Zeus, the god of heaven, the lord 
and father both of gods and men, when besieged by the Titans, calls Thetis, 
Prometheus, and the llecatonchirs to help him. 

lxii 

VENDIDAD. 

§ io. Whereas in India the fiends were daily driven 
farther and farther into the background, and by the pre- 
valence of the metaphysical spirit gods and fiends came 
to be nothing more than changing and fleeting creatures of 
the everlasting, indifferent Being, Persia took her demons in 
real earnest ; she feared them, she hated them, and the vague 
and unconscious dualism that lay at the bottom of the 
Indo-Iranian religion has its unsteady outlines sharply 
defined, and became the very form and frame of Mazdeism. 
The conflict was no more seen and heard in the passing 
storm only, but it raged through all the avenues of space 
and time. The Evil became a power of itself, engaged in 
an open and never-ceasing warfare with the Good. The 
Good was centred in the supreme god, in Ahura Mazda, 
the bright god of Heaven, the all-knowing Lord, the Maker, 
who, as the author of every good thing, was ‘the good 
Spirit/ Spc/zta Mainyu. In front of him and opposed to 
him slowly rose the evil Spirit, Angra Mainyu. 

Wc will briefly explain what became, in Mazdeism, of 
the several elements of the Indo-Iranian dualism, and then 
we will show how the whole system took a regular form. 

§ ii. The war in nature was waged in the storm. The 
Vedas describe it as a battle fought by a god, Indra, armed 
with the lightning and thunder, against a serpent, A hi, 
who has carried off the dawns or the rivers, described as 
goddesses or as milch cows, and who keeps them captive in 
the folds of the cloud. 

This myth appears in a still simpler form in the Avesta : 
it is a fight for the possession of the light of hv aren6 
between Atar and Kz\ Dah&ka k 
Atar means ‘ fire ;* he is both a thing and a person. He 
is sometimes described as the weapon of Ahura1 2, but usually 
as his son3, as the fire that springs from heaven can be 
conceived either as flung by it, or as born of it 4. 

Azi Dahaka, ‘the fiendish snake,* is a three-headed 

1 Yt. XIX, 47-52. 

2 Yasna LI (L), 9. 

* Farg. Ill, 15 ; V, 10; XV, 26, &c. 

4 Cf. Clermont-Ganneau, in the Revue Critique, 1877, No. 52. 

INTRODUCTION, IV, 

Ixiii 

dragon, who strives to seize and put out the /*T/aren6 : he 
takes hold of it, but Atar frightens him away aud recovers 
the light. 

The scene of the fight is the sea Vouru-kasha, a sea 
from which all the waters on the earth fall down with the 
winds and the clouds ; in other words, they fight in the 
sea above *, in the atmospheric field of battle a. 

§ 12. The same myth in the Vedas was described as 
a feat of Traitana or Trita Aptya, ‘Trita,*the son of 
waters,1 2 * * 5 who killed the three-headed, six-eyed fiend, and 
let loose the cows3. ‘The son of waters4’ is both in the 
Vedas and in the Avesta a name- of the fire-god, as 
born from the cloud, in the lightning. The same tale is told 
in the same terms in the Avesta : Thraetaona Athwya 
killed Az\ Dahaka (the fiendish snake), the three-mouthed, 
three-headed, six-eyed, . . . the most dreadful Dru^ created 
by Angra Mainyu5. The scene of the battle is ‘the four- 
cornered Varena6 *,’ which afterwards became a country on 
the earth, when Thraetaona himself and Azi became earthly 
kings, but which was formerly nothing less than ‘the four- 
pointed VaruwaV that is, ‘the four-sided Ovpavos’ the 
Heavens. 

§ 13. The fight for the waters was described in a myth 
of later growth, a sort of refacimento, the myth of Tirtrya 
and Apaosha. Apaosha8 keeps away the rain: Tiitrya0, 
worsted at first, then strengthened by a sacrifice which has 
been offered to him by Mazda, knocks down Apaosha10 
with his club, the fire Vazfota n, and the waters stream freely 

1 The Avarcno, Persian khurrah and farr, is properly the light of sove- 
reignty, the glory from above which makes the king an earthly god. He 
who possesses it reigns, he who loses it falls down ; when Yima lost it he 
perished and Azi Dahaka reigned ; as when light disappears, the fiend rules 
supreme. Vide infra, § 39 ; and cf. Yt. XIX, 32 seq. 

2 See Farg. V, 15 seq. ' 8 Rv. 1, 158, 5 ; X, 99, 6. 

4 Generally, apam napat. 5 Yasna IX, 8 (25). 

6 Cathru-gaosho Varenfi ; v. Vendidad 1, 18. 

7 Catur-asrir Vanwo, Rv. 1, 152, 2. Cf. Orm. Ahr. § 65. 

• ‘The extinguisher* (?). 9 Cf. § 36. 

10 Called also Spengaghra (Farg. XIX, 40). 

11 It is the groaning of the fiend under the stroke of that club that is heard in 

thunder (Bundahis 17, 11 ; cf. Farg. XIX, 40). 

Ixiv 

vendIdAd. 

down the seven Karshvare, led by the winds, by the son of 
the waters, and by the light that dwells in the waters l. 

§ 14. The god that conquers light is chiefly praised in 
the Vedas under the name of Indra Vntrahan, ‘ Indra the 
ficnd-smitcr.’ His Iranian brother is named Verethraghna, 
which became by and by the genius of Victory (Bahram). 
Yet although he assumed a more abstract character than 
Indra, he retained the mythical features of the storm god 2, 
and his original nature was so little forgotten that he was 
worshipped on earth as a fire, the Bahram fire, which was 
believed to be an emanation from the fire above 3, and the 
most powerful protector of the land against foes and fiends. 

§ 15. In the Indo:Iranian mythology, Vayu was the word 
for both the atmosphere and the bright god who fights and 
conquers in it. . 

As a god, Vayu became in Mazdcism Vayu, ‘ a god con- 
queror of light, a smiter of the fiends, all made of light, 
who moves in a golden car, with sonorous rings V Ahura 
Mazda invokes him for help against Angra Mainyu 5. 

§ 16. Another name of Vayu is Rama //z/astra: this 
word meant originally ‘ the god of the resting-place with 
good pastures,’ the clouds in the atmosphere being often 
viewed as a herd of cows0, and the Indian Vayu as a 
good shepherd7. Hence came the connection of Rama 
hv astra with Mithra, ‘ the lord of the wide pastures V In 
later times, chiefly owing to a mistake in language (Zwastra 
being thought to be related to the root Az/arcz, ‘ to taste 
Rama hv astra became the god who gives a good flavour to 
aliments ®. 8 - 

§ 17. Considered as a thing, as the atmosphere, Vayu is 
the place where the god and the fiend meet : there is there- 
fore a part of it which belongs to .the good and another 
part which Belongs to the evil10. Hence came the later 
notion that between Ormazd and Ahriman there is a void 
space, Vai, in which their meeting takes place11. 

1 Yt VIII. 2 Yt. xiv. » Cf. V, 8. 

4 Yt. XV. 5 Cf. above, p. lxi. 6 See above, §11. 

7 Cf. Atharva-vcda II, 26, 1 ; Rv. I, 134, 4. 

8 Farg. Ill, 2 ; Yasna 1, 3 (9). 9 Neriosengh ad Yasna, 1. 1. 

J0 Yt. XV, 5. u Bundahis 1, 15. 

INTRODUCTION, IV. 

lxv 

Hence came also the distinction of two Vai the good 
one and the bad one, which, probably by the natural con- 
nection of Vayu, the atmosphere, with the heavens 2 whose 
movement is Destiny 3, became at last the good Fate and the 
bad Fate, or Destiny bringing good and evil, life and death 4. 

§ 1 8. A^i is not always vanquished; he may also conquer; 
and it is just because the serpent has seized upon the sky 
and darkened the light, that the battle breaks out. A,sri 
has carried off the sovereign light, the hv areno, from Yima 
Khshaeta, ‘the shining Yima5. 

In the course of time Thraetaona, Yima, and Azl Da- 
haka became historical: it was told how King Jemshid 
(Yima Khshaeta) had been overthrown and killed by the 
usurper Zohak (Dahaka), a man with two snakes’ heads upon 
his shoulders, and how Zohak himself had been overthrown 
by a prince of the royal blood, Feridun (Thraetaona). 
Yet Zohak, though vanquished, could not be killed ; he 
was bound to Mount Damavand, there to lie in bonds till 
the end of the world, when he shall be let loose, and then 
killed by Keresaspa0. The fiend is as long-lifed as the 
world, since as often as he is vanquished he appears again, 
as dark and fearful as ever7. 

§ 19. While the serpent passed thus from mythology into 
legend, he still continued under another name, or, more 
correctly, under another form of his name, azi, a word 
which the Parsis converted into a pallid and lifeless abstrac- 
tion by identifying it with a similar word from the same 
root, meaning ‘ want.’ But that he was the very same 
being as A-cri, the snake, appears from his adversaries : 
like A^i, he fights against Atar, the fire, and strives to 
extinguish it 8, and together with the Pairikas, he wants to 
carry off the rain-floods, like the Indian Ahi !'. 

§ ao. Mazdeism, as might be expected from its main 

1 Mainyo i-Khard II, 1 15 ; cf. Farg. V, 8, n. 3. 

a Cf. Farg. XIX, 16. 3 Orm. Ahr. § 257. 

1 Farg. V, 8-9, text and notes. 

8 See above, p. lxiii, n. 1, and Yast XIX. 8 Cf. § 39. 

7 Cf. Roth, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenl. Gesellschaft II, 216. 

8 Farg. XVIII, 19 seq. 

8 Yasna LXVIII, 7 (LXVII, 18). 

[4] 

e 

lxvi vend!dAd.: 

principle, is very rich in demons. There are whole classes 
of them which belong terthe Indo-Iranian mythology. 

The Vedic Yatus are found unaltered in the Avesta. 
The Yatu in the Vedas is the demon taking any form he 
pleases, the fiend as a wizard : so he is in the Avesta also, 
where the name is likewise extended to the Yatu-man, the 
..sbVcercr. 

§ 2i. With the Yatus are often associated the Pairikas 
(the Paris)1. 

The Pairika corresponds in her origin (and perhaps as to 
her name) to the Indian Apsaras 2. 

The light for which the storm god struggled was often 
compared, as is well known, to a fair maid or bride carried 
off by the fiend. There was a class of myths, in which, 
instead of being carried off, she was supposed to have given 
herself up, of her own free will, to the demon, and to have 
betrayed the god, her lover. In another form of myth, still 
more distant from the naturalistic origin, the Pairikas were 
‘ nymphs of a fair, but erring line,’ who seduced the heroes 
to lead them to their ruin. Afterwards the Pari became 
at length the seduction of idolatry3. 

In their oldest Avesta form they arc still demoniac 
nymphs, who rob the gods and men of the heavenly waters: 
they hover between heaven and earth, in the midst of the 
sea Vouru-kasha, to keep off the rain-floods, and they work 
together with Azi and Apaosha 4. 

Then we sec the Pairika, under the name of Knathaiti, 
cleave to Keresaspa5. Keresaspa, like Thraetaona, is a 
great smiter of demons, who killed the snake Srvara, a twin- 
brother of Asi Dahaka 6. It was related in later tales that 
he was born immortal, but that having despised the holy 
religion he was killed, during his sleep, by a Turk, Niy&z7, 
which, being translated into old myth, would mean that he 

1 Farg.VIII, 80. a Orm.Ahr. § 142. 

* Ibid. p. 176, n. 6. Then pairikam, the accusative of pairika, was inter- 
preted as a Pahlavi compound, pari-kdm, * love of the Paris' (Comm, ad Farg. 
XIX. 5). 

4 Yast VIII, 8, 39, 49-56; Yasna XVI, 8 (XVII, 46). 

8 Farg. 1, 10. • Yasna IX, II (34) ; Yast XIX, 40. 

7 BundahU 69, 13. On Niy&z, see Orm. Ahr. p. 216, n. 9. 

INTRODUCTION, IV. IxVli 

gave himself up to the Pairika Khnatliaiti, who delivered 
him asleep to the fiend. Yet he must rise from his sleep, at 
the end of time, to kill Axri, and Khnatliaiti will be killed 
at the same time by Saoshya///1, the son of Zarathortra, 
which shows her to be a genuine sister of Ad. 

§ 22 . Then come the host of storm fiends, the Drvawfe, 
the Dvara///s, the Dregva;^s, all names meaning ‘ the run- 
ning ones/ and referring to the headlong course of the 
fiends in storm, ‘ the onsets of the wounding crew.’ 

One of the foremost amongst the Drva;//s, their leader 
in their onsets, is Aeshma, 4 * the raving/ c a fiend with the 
wounding spear/ Originally a mere epithet of the storm 
fiend, Aeshma was afterwards converted into an abstract, 
the demon of rage and anger, and became an expression 
for all moral wickedness, a mere name of Ahriman. 

§ 23. A class of demons particularly interesting are the 
Varcnya daevas2 *. The phrase, an old one belonging to the 
Indo-European mythology, meant originally ‘ the gods in 
heaven/ ovp&vioi. OtoC; when the daevas were converted 
into demons (see § 41), they became ‘ the fiends in the 
heavens/ the fiends who assail the sky ; and later on, as 
the meaning of the word Varcna was lost, ‘the fiends of 
the Varena land •/ and finally, nowadays, as their relation 
to Varena is lost to sight, they are turned by popular ety- 
mology, now into demons of lust, and now into demons of 
doubt a. 

§ 24. To the Pairika is closely related Bflshyasta the 
yellow, the long-handed 4. She lulls back to sleep the 
world as soon as awaked, and makes the faithful forget in 
slumber the hour of prayer 6. But as at the same time she 
is said to have fallen upon Keresaspa 6, one sees that she 
belonged before to a more concrete sort of mythology, and 
was a sister to Khnathaiti and to the Pairikas. 

§ 25. A member of the same family is Cahi, who was 

1 Farg. XIX, 5. 

2 F arg. X, 14. The Mazainy a daeva (see Farg. X, 16 n.) are often invoked 

with them (Yast V, 22 ; XIII, 37; XX, 8). 

8 Aspendidrji. 4 Farg. XI, 9. 

6 Farg. XVIII, 16 seq. 6 Bundahis 69, 15. 

e 2 

lxviii 

vendJdad. 

originally the god’s bride giving herself up to the demon, 
and became then, by the progress of abstraction, the demon 
of unlawful love and unchastity1. The courtezan is her 
incarnation, as the sorcerer is that of the Yatu. 

§ %6. Death gave rise to several personations. 

Sauru, which in our texts is only the proper name of a 
demon2, was probably identical in meaning, as he is in 
name, with the Vedic Saru, ‘ the arrow,* a personification 
of the arrow of death as a godlike being 3. 

The same idea seems to be conveyed by Ishuj hv&- 
thakht6, ‘the self-moving arrow4,’ a designation to be 
accounted for by the fact that 5aru, in India, before 
becoming the arrow of death, was the arrow of lightning 
with which the god killed his foe. 

A more abstract personification is Ithy4?*6marshaonem^,, 

‘ the unseen death,* death which creeps unawares. 

Asto vidotuj, ‘the bone-divider V who, like the Yama 
of the Sanskrit epic, holds a noose around the neck of all 
living creatures7. 

§ 27. In the conflict between gods and fiends man is 
active : he takes a part in it through the sacrifice. 

The sacrifice is more than an act of worship, it is an act 
of assistance to the gods. Gods, like men, need drink and 
food to be strong ; like men, they need praise and encourage- 
ment to be of good cheer8. When not strengthened by the 
sacrifice, they fly helpless before their foes. TLrtrya, worsted 
by Apaosha, cries to Ahura: ‘ O Ahura Mazda! men do 
not worship me with sacrifice and praise : should they wor- 
ship me with sacrifice and praise, they would bring me the 
strength of ten horses, ten bulls, ten mountains, ten rivers.* 
Ahura offers him a sacrifice, he brings him thereby the 

1 Orm. Ahr. § 145. Cf. Farg. XXI, 1. 

2 Vide infra, § 41 ; Farg. X, 9; Bundahis 5, 19. 

3 Orm. Ahr. § 21a. 4 Farg. IV, 49. 5 Farg. XIX, 1. 

6 Farg. IV, 49. His mythical description might probably be completed by 
the Rabbinical ancl Arabian tales about the Breaking of the Sepulchre and the 
angels Monkir and Nakir (Sale, the Coran, Introd. p. 60, and Bargbs, Journal 
Asiatique, 1843). 

7 See Farg. XIX, 29, n. 2. Closely related to Asto-vtdotu is Vizarcsha 
(ibid.) ; on Buiti, see Farg. XIX, 1, n. 3. 

8 See Orm. Ahr. §§ 87—88. 

INTRODUCTION, IV. 

lxix 

strength of ten horses, ten bulls, ten mountains, ten rivers, 
TLrtrya runs back to the battle-field and Apaosha flies 
before him \ 

§ 28. The sacrifice is composed of two elements, offerings 
and spells. 

The offerings are libations of holy water (zaothra)1 2, holy 
meat (myazda)3, and Haoma. The last offering is the most 
sacred and powerful of all. 

Ilaoma, the Indian Soma, is an intoxicating plant, the 
juice of which is drunk by the faithful for their own benefit 
and for the benefit of their gods. It comprises in it the 
powers of life of all the vegetable kingdom. 

There are two Haomas : one is the yellow or golden 
Haoma, which is the earthly Haoma, and which, when pre- 
pared for the sacrifice, is the king of healing plants4 ; the 
other is the white Haoma or Gaokerena, which grows up 
in the middle of the sea Vouru-kasha, surrounded by the 
ten thousand healing plants 5 *. It is by the drinking of 
Gaokerena that men, on the day of the resurrection, will 
become immortal °. 

§ 29. Spell or prayer is not less powerful than the offer- 
ings. In the beginning of the world, it was by reciting the 
Honovcr (Ahuna Vairya) that Ormazd confounded Ahri- 
man7. Man, too, sends his prayer between the earth and 
the heavens, there to smite the fiends, the Ka/;?'aredhas 
and the Ka/^aredhis, the Kayadhas and the Kayadhis, the 
Za//das and the Yatus 8. 

§ 30. A number of divinities sprang from the hearth of 
the altar, most of which were already in existence during 
the Indo-Iranian period. 

Piety, which every day brings offerings and prayers to 
the fire of the altar, was worshipped in the Vedas as 
Aramati, the goddess who every day, morning and evening, 

1 Yt. VIII, 23 seq. 

a Prepared with certain riles and prayers ; it is the Vedic hotra. 

3 A piece of meat placed on the draona (Farg. V, 25, n. 3). 

4 Bundahis 58, 10. 5 Farg. XX, 4. • 

0 Bundahis 42, 12 ; 59, 4. 

7 Bundahis. Cf. Farg. XIX, 9, 43; Yasna XIX. 

8 Yasna LXI (LX). 

lxx 

VENDIDAD. 

streaming with the sacred butter, goes and gives up her- 
self to Agni \ She was praised in the Avesta in a more 
sober manner as the abstract genius of piety ; yet a few 
practices preserved evident traces of old myths on her 
union with Atar, the fire-god 1 2. 

Agni, as a messenger between gods and men, was known 
to the Vedas as NanWansa; hence came the .Avesta mes- 
senger of Ahura, Nairyo-sangha 3. 

The riches that go up from earth to heaven in the offerings 
of man and come down from heaven to earth in the gifts of the 
gods were deified as Rata4, the gift, Ashi, the felicity5 *, and 
more vividly in Pare/*di the keeper of treasures, who comes 
on a sounding chariot, a sister to the Vcdic Puramdhi. 

The order of the world, the Vcdic Hit a, the Zend Asha, 
was deified as Asha Vahfrta, 4 the excellent Asha7/ 

§ 3 t. Sraosha is the 'priest god8: he first tied the 
Baresma into bundles, and offered up sacrifice to Ahura ; 
he first sang the holy hymns : his weapons arc the Ahuna- 
Vairya and the Yasna, and thrice in each day, in each night, 
he descends upon this Karshvarc to smite Angra Mainyu 
and his crew of demons. It is he who, with his club 
uplifted, protects the living world from the terrors of the 
night, when the fiends rush upon the earth ; it is he who 
protects the dead from the terrors of death, from the 
assaults of Angra Mainyu and Vidotas*9. It is through a 
sacrifice performed by Ormazd, as a Zoti, and Sraosha, as 
a Raspi lu, that at the end of time Ahriman will be for ever 
vanquished and brought to nought n. 

§ 32. Thus far, the single elements of Mazdcism do 
not essentially differ from those of the Vedic and Indo- 
European mythologies generally. Yet Mazdeism, as a 
whole, took an aspect of its own by grouping these ele- 
ments in a new order, since by referring everything either 

1 Orra. Ahr. § 205. 

3 Farg. XXII, 7. 

5 Nerioscngh. 

7 Parsi Ardibehcit. 

• Farg. VII, 52, n.4; XIX, 46, n. 8. 

15 Cf. Farg. V, 57, n. 

8 Farg. XVIII, 51 seq. 
4 Farg. XIX, 19. 

6 Orm. Ahr. § 200. 

0 Yasna LVI. 

11 Bundahis 76, 11. 

INTRODUCTION, IV. 

to Ahura Mazda or Angra Mainyu as its source, it came to 
divide the world into two symmetrical halves, in both of 
which a strong unity prevailed. The change was summed 
up in the rising of Angra Mainyu, a being of mixed nature, 
who was produced by abstract speculation from the old 
Indo-European storm fiend, and who borrowed his form 
from the supreme god himself. On the one hand, as the 
world battle is only an enlarged form of the mythical storm 
fight, Angra Mainyu, the fiend of fiends and the leader of 
the evil powers, is partly an abstract embodiment of their 
energies and feats ; on the other hand, as the antagonist of 
Ahura, he is modelled after him, and is partly, as it were, a 
negative projection of Ahura1. 

Ahura is all light, truth, goodness, and knowledge; 
Angra Mainyu is all darkness, falsehood, wickedness, and 
ignorance \ 

Ahura dwells in the infinite light ; Angra Mainyu dwells 
in the infinite night. 

Whatever the good Spirit makes, the evil Spirit mars. 
When the world was created, Angra Mainyu broke into it a, 
opposed every creation of Ahura’s with a plague of his 
own2 * 4, killed the first-born bull that had been the first 
offspring and source of life on earth 5, he mixed poison 
with plants, smoke with fire, sin with man, and death with 
life. 

§ 33- Under Ahura were ranged the six Amcsha Spe//tas. 
They were at first mere personifications of virtues and moral 
or liturgical powers0; but as their lord and father ruled 
over the whole of the world, they took by and by each 
a part of the world under their care. The choice was not 
altogether artificial, but partly natural and spontaneous. 
The empire of waters ai^d trees was vested in Haurvata/ 
and Amcrcta/, health and immortality, through the influence 
of old Indo-Iranian formulae, in which waters and trees were 
invoked as the springs of health and life. More complex 
trains of ideas and partly the influence of analogy fixed the 

1 Orm. Ahr. § 85. 

3 Yast XIII, 77! 

5 Cf. Farg. XXI, 1. 

2 Bundahis I; cf.Yasna XXX. 

4 Cf. Farg. I. 

6 See above, p. lx. 

lxxii 

vendIdAd. 

field of action of the others. Khshathra Vairya, the 
perfect sovereignty, had molten brass for its emblem, as the 
god in the storm established his empire by means of that 
‘ molten brass,’ the fire of lightning ; he thus became the king 
of metals in general. Asha Vahijta, the holy order of the 
world, as maintained chiefly by the sacrificial fire, became 
the genius of fire. Armaiti seems to have become a goddess 
of the earth as early as the Indo-Iranian period, and Vohu- 
mano had the living creation left to his superintendence \ 

§ 34. The Amesha Spe^tas projected, as it were, out of 
themselves, as many Daevas or demons, who, either in their 
being or functions, were, most of them, hardly more than 
dim inverted images of the very gods they were to oppose, 
and whom they followed through all their successive evolu- 
tions. Haurvata/ and Amereta/, health and life, were 
opposed by Tauru and Zairi, sickness and decay, who 
changed into rulers of thirst and hunger when Haurvata^ 
and Amcretatf had become the Amshaspands of waters and 
trees. 

Vohu-man6, or good thought, was reflected in Ako- 
mano, evil thought. Sauru, the arrow of death 2, Indra, a 
name or epithet of fire as destructive3, Naunhaithya, an 
old Indo-Iranian divinity whose meaning was forgotten in 
Iran and misinterpreted by popular etymology 4, were 
opposed, respectively, to Khshathra Vairya, Asha VahLrta, 
and Spc//ta Armaiti, and became the demons of tyranny, 
corruption, and impiety. 

Then came the symmetrical armies of the numberless 
gods and fiends, Yazatas and Drvaw/s. 

§ 35. Everything in the world was engaged iri the conflict. 
Whatever works, or is fancied to work, for the good of man 
or for his harm, for the wider spread of life or against it, 
comes from, and strives for, either Ahura or Angra Mainyu. 

Animals are enlisted under the standards of either the 
one spirit or the other 5. In the eyes of the Parsis, they 

' Orm. Ahr. §§ 202-206. 

2 See above, p. lxviii. 3 See § 41. 4 Ibid. 

■r* A strict discipline prevails among them. Every class of animals has a chief 
or r a t u above it ^Bund. XXIV). The same organisation extends to all the beings 

INTRODUCTION, IV. 

Ixxiii 

belong either to Ormazd or Ahriman according as they are 
useful or hurtful to man ; but, in fact, they belonged origin- 
ally to either the one or the other, according as they had 
been incarnations of the god or of the fiend, that is, as they 
chanced to have lent their forms to either in the storm 
talcs k In a few cases, of course, the habits of the animal 
had not been without influence upon its mythic destiny: 
but the determinative cause was different. The fiend was 
not described as a serpent because the serpent is a subtle 
and crafty reptile, but because the storm fiend envelops the 
goddess of light, or the milch cows of the raining heavens, 
with the coils of the cloud as with a snake’s folds. It was 
not animal psychology that disguised gods and fiends as 
dogs, otters, hedge-hogs, and cocks, or as snakes, tortoises, 
frogs, and ants, but the accidents of physical qualities and 
the caprice of popular fancy, as both the god and the fiend 
might be compared with, and transformed into, any object, 
the idea of which was suggested by the uproar of the storm, 
the blazing of the lightning, the streaming of the water, or 
the hue and shape of the clouds. 

Killing the Ahrimanian creatures, the Khrafstras2, is 
killing Ahriman himself, and sin may be atoned for by this 
means3. Killing an Ormazdcan animal is an abomination, 
it is killing God himself. Persia was on the brink of 
zoolatry, and escaped it only by misunderstanding the 
principle she followed4. 

in nature: stars, men, gods have their respective ratus, Tiitrya, Zoroaster, 
Ahura. 

1 Orm. Ahr. §§ 227- 231. 

2 Farg. Ill, 10; XIV,' 5 seq., 8, n. 8 ; XVIII, 70, &c. 

3 There is scarcely any religious custom that can be followed through so con- 
tinuous a series of historical evidence : fifth century b.c., Herodotus 1, 140 ; first 
century a. n., Plutarch, l)e Isid. XLVI ; Quacst Conviv. IV, 5, 2 ; sixth century, 
Agathias 11, 24; seventeenth century, G. du Chinon. 

* Thus arose a classification which was often at variance with its supposed 
principle. As the god who rushes in the lightning was said to move on a raven's 
wings, with a hawk’s flight, birds of prey belonged to the realm of Ormazd. The 
Tarsi theologians were puzzled at this fact, but their ingenuity proved equal to 
the emergency : Ormazd, while- creating the hunting hawk, said to him : * O thou 
hunting hawk ! 1 have created thee ; but I ought rather to be sorry than glad of 
it : for thou doest the will of Ahriman much more than mine : like a wicked 
man who never has money enough, thou art never satisfied with killing birds. 

lxxiv 

VENDi DAD. 

§ 36. The fulgurating conqueror of Apaosha, TLrtrya, 
was described in mythic talcs sometimes as a boar with 
golden horns, sometimes as a horse with yellow ears, some- 
times as a beautiful youth. But as he had been compared 
to a shining star on account of the gleaming of lightning, 
the stars joined in the fray, where they stood with TLrtrya 
on Ahura’s side; and partly for the sake of symmetry, 
partly owing to Chaldacan influences, the planets passed 
into the army of Ahriman. 

§ 37. Man, according to his deeds, belongs to Ormazd or 
to Ahriman. He belongs to Ormazd, he is a man of Asha, 
a holy one, if he offers sacrifice to Ormazd and the gods, 
if he helps them by good thoughts, words, and deeds, if 
he enlarges the world of Ormazd by spreading life over the 
world, and if he makes the realm of Ahriman narrower by 
destroying his creatures. A man of Asha is the Athravati 
(priest) who drives away fiends and diseases by spells, the 
Katlia&ta (warrior) who with his club crushes the head of 
the impious, the Vastryo (husbandman) who makes good 
and plentiful harvests grow up out of the earth. He who 
does the contrary is a Drva nt> ‘ demon/ an Anashavan, ‘ foe 
of Asha/ an Ashcmaogha, * confoundcr of Asha/ 

The man of Asha who has lived for Ahura Mazda will 
have a scat near him in heaven, in the same way as in India 
the man of A7ta, the faithful one, goes to the palace of 
Varu//a, there to live with the forefathers, the Pitr/s, a life 
of everlasting happiness l. Thence he will go out, at the 
end of time, when the dead shall rise, and live a new and 
all-happy life on the earth freed from evil and death. 

But hadst thou not been made by me, Ahriman, bloody Ahriman, would have 
made thee with the size of a man, and there would no more be any small creature 
left alive* (Bundahis XIV). Inversely Ahriman created a lovely bird, the 
peacock, to show that he did not do evil from any incapacity of doing well, but 
through wilful wickedness (Eznik) ; Satan is still nowadays invoked by the 
Yezidis as Melck Tans (‘ angel peacock ‘). 

1 From the worship of the Pitn's was developed in Iran the worship of the 
Fravasliis, who being at first identical with the Pitns, with the souls of the 
departed, became by and by a distinct principle. The Fravashi was independent 
of the circumstances of life or death, an immortal part of the individual which 
existed before man and outlived him. Not only man was endowed with a 
Fravashi, but gods too, and the sky, fire, waters, and plants (Orm. Ahr. 
§§112-113). 

INTRODUCTION, IV. lxXV 

§ 38. This brings us to speak of a series of myths which 
have done much towards obscuring the close connection 
between the Avesta and the Vedic mythologies: I mean 
the myths about the heavenly life of Yima. 

In the Veda Yama, the son of Vivasvat, is the first man 
and, therefore, the first of the dead, the king of the dead. 
As such he is the centre of gathering for the departed, and 
he presides over them in heaven, in the Yamasadanam, as 
king of men, near Varu/za the king of gods. 

His Avesta twin-brother, Yima, the son of Vivanghat, is 
no longer the first man, as this character had been trans- 
ferred to another hero, of later growth, Gay6 Maratan ; yet 
he has kept nearly all the attributes which were derived 
from his former character : on the one hand he is the first 
king, and the founder of civilisation ; on the other hand, 
‘ the best mortals’ gather around him in a marvellous palace, 
in Airyancm Vaqg*6, which appears to be identical with the 
Yamasadanam from Yama meeting there with Ahura and 
the gods, and making his people live there a blessed life l. 
But, by and by, as it was forgotten that Yima was the first 
man and the first of the dead, it was also forgotten that his 
people were nothing else than the dead going to their 
common ancestor above and to the king of heaven : the 
people in the Vara were no longer recognised as the human 
race, but became a race of a supernatural character, dif- 
ferent from those who continued going, day by day, from 
earth to heaven to join Ahura Mazda 2. 

§ 39. But the life of the world is limited, the struggle is 
not to last for ever, and Ahriman will be defeated at last. 

The world was imagined as lasting a long year of twelve 
millenniums. There had been an old myth, connected with 
that notion, which made the world end in a frightful winter3, 
to be succeeded by an eternal spring, when the blessed 
would come down from the Vara of Yima to rcpeople the 
earth. But as storm was the ordinary and more dramatic 
form of the strife, there was another version, according to 

1 Sec Farg. II. 

3 Cf. Farg. II, Introd. and § 21 seq. 

2 Farg. XIX, 28 seq. 

lxxvi 

VENDiDAD. 

which the world ended in a storm, and this version became 
the definitive one. 

The serpent, Az\ Dahaka, let loose, takes hold of the 
world again. As the temporary disappearance of the light 
was often mythically described either as the sleeping of the 
god, or as his absence, or death, its reappearance was indi- 
cative of the awakening of the hero, or his return, or the 
arrival of a son born to him. Hence came the tales about 
Keresaspa awakening from his sleep to kill the snake 
finally1 ; the talcs about Peshotanu, Aghraeratha, Khumbya, 
and others living in remote countries till the day of the last 
fight is come 2 ; and, lastly, the tales about Saoshya/^, the 
son who is to be born to Zarathu-rtra at the end of time, 
and to bring eternal light and life to mankind, as his father 
brought them the law and the truth. This brings us to the 
question whether any historical reality underlies the legend 
of Zarathujrtra or Zoroaster. 

§ 40. Mazdeism has often been called Zoroaster’s religion 
in the same sense as Islam is called Muhammed’s religion, 
that is, as being the work of a man named Zoroaster, a view 
which was favoured, not only by the Parsi and Greek 
accounts, but by the strong unity and symmetry of the 
whole system. Moreover, as the moral and abstract spirit 
which pervades Mazdeism is different from the Vedic spirit, 
and as the word dev a, which means a god in Sanskrit, 
means a demon in the Avesta, it was thought that Zoro- 
aster’s work had been a work of reaction against Indian 
polytheism, in fact, a religious schism. When he lived no 
one knows, and every one agrees that all that the Parsis 
and the Greeks tell of him is mere legend, through which 
no solid historical facts can be arrived at. The question is 
whether Zoroaster was a man converted into a god, or a god 
converted into a man. No one who reads, with a mind free 
from the yoke of classical recollections, I do not say the 
Book of Zoroaster (which may be charged with being a 
modern romance of recent invention), but the Avesta itself, 
will have any doubt that Zoroaster is no less an essential 

1 See above, p. lxv. 

2 Bundahis XXX. 

INTRODUCTION, IV. 

lxxvii 

part of the Mazdean mythology than the son expected to 
be born to him, at the end of time, to destroy Ahriman x. 

Zoroaster is not described as one who brings new truth 
and drives away error, but as one who overthrows the 
demons : he is a smiter of fiends, like Vercthraghna, Apam 
NapS./, TLrtrya, Vayu, or Keresaspa, and he is stronger and 
more valiant than Kereslspa himself2; the difference between 
him and them is that, whereas they smite the fiend with 
material weapons, he smites them chiefly with a spiritual 
one, the word or prayer. We say ‘ chiefly’ because the holy 
word is not his only weapon; he repels the assaults of 
Ahriman with stones as big as a house which Ahura has 
given to him 3, and which were furnished, no doubt, from the 
same quarry as the stones which arc cast at their enemies 
by Indra, by Agni, by the Maruts, or by Thor, and which 
are { the flame, wherewith, as with a stone V the storm god 
aims at the fiend. Therefore his birth 6, like the birth of 
every storm god, is longed for and hailed with joy as the 
signal of its deliverance by the whole living creation, because 
it is the end of the dark and arid reign of the demon : ‘ In 
his birth, in his growth did the floods and trees rejoice ; in 
his birth, in his growth the floods and trees did grow up ; in 
his birth, in his growth the floods and trees exclaimed with 
joy V Ahura himself longs for him and fears lest the hero 
about to be born may not stand by him : ‘ He offered up a 
sacrifice to Ardvi Sfira Anahita, he, the Maker, Ahura 
Mazda ; he offered up the Haoma, the Myazda, the Bares- 
ma, the holy words, he besought her, saying: Vouchsafe 
me that boon, O high, mighty, undefiled goddess, that I 
may bring about the son of Pourushaspa, the holy Zara- 

1 The same view as to the mythological character of Zoroaster was main- 
tained, although with different arguments, by Professor Kern in an essay ‘ Over 
het woord Zarathustra/ as I see from a short abstract of it which Professor 
Max Muller kindly wrote for me. 

a Yast XIX, 38. 3 Farg. XIX, 4. 4 Rig-veda II, 30, 4. 

5 A singular trait of his birth, according to Pliny, who is on this point in 
perfect accordance with later Parsi tradition, is that, alone of mortals, he 
laughed while being born ; this shows that his native place is in the very same 
regions where the Vedic Maruts are bom, those storm genii ‘born of the 
laughter of the lightning ’ (‘ I laugh as I pass in thunder ’ says the Cloud in 
Shelley ; cf the Persian Khandah i barq, ‘ the laughter of the lightning’). 

• Yast XIII, 93. 

lxxviii 

vend{dAd. 

thu^tra, to think according to the law, to speak according 
to the law, to work according to the law!’ Ardvi Sura 
Anahita granted that boon to him who was offering up 
libations, sacrificing and beseeching1. 

Zarathujtra stands by Ahura. The fiends come rushing 
along from hell to kill him, and fly away terrified by his 
/rnireno: Angra Mainyu himself is driven away by the 
stones he hurls at him 2. But the great weapon of Zara- 
thujtra is neither the thunder-stones he hurls, nor the glory 
with which he is surrounded, it is the Word 2. 

In the voice of the thunder the Greeks recognised the 
warning of a god which the wise understand, and they 
worshipped it as ’'Qacra Aios &yy^kos, ‘ the Word, messenger 
of Zeus;’ the Romans worshipped it as a goddess, Fama; 
India adores it as ‘ the Voice in the cloud,* Va£ Ambhrz;/i, 
which issues from the waters, from the forehead of the 
father, and hurls the deadly arrow against the foe of 
Brahman. So the word from above is cither a weapon 
that kills, or a revelation that teaches : in the mouth of 
Zarathujtra it is both : now * he smites down Angra Mainyu 
with the Ahuna vairya (Honovcr) as he would do with 
stones as big as a house, and he burns him up with the 
Ashem vohu as with melted brass3;* now he converses 
with Ahura, on the mountain of the holy questions, in the 
forest of the holy questions4. Any storm god, whose voice 
descends from above to the earth, may become a godlike 
messenger, a lawgiver, a Zarathu^tra. Nor is Zarathu^tra 
the only lawgiver, the only prophet, of whom the Avesta 
knows: Gay6 Maratan, Yima, the bird Kanriptan6, each of 
whom, under different names, forms, and functions, are one 
and the same being with Zarathuitra, that is to say, the 
godlike champion in the struggle for light, knew the law as 
well as Zarathartra. But as mythology, like language and 
life, likes to reduce every organ to one function, Zara- 
thujtra became the titulary lawgiver6. 

1 Yast V, 18. 8 Orm. Ahr. § 162 seq. 8 Yast XVII, 18. 

4 Farg. XXII, 19. 8 Farg. II, 3, 42 ; Ya*t XIII, 87. 

6 The law is generally known as Datem v$da6v6-ddtem (of. V, 1); 
as emanating from Ahura it is Mathra Spewta, 1 the holy word,' which is the 
soul of Ahura (Farg. XIX, 14). 

INTRODUCTION, IV. 

lxxix 

As he overwhelmed Angra Mainyu' during his lifetime 
by his spell, he is to overwhelm him at the end of time 
by the hands of a son yet unborn. 4 Three times he came 
near unto his wife Hrdgvi, and three times the seed fell 
upon the ground. The Ized Neriosengh took what was 
bright and strong in it and intrusted it to the Ized Anahita. 
At the appointed time, it will be united again with a ma- 
ternal womb : 99,999 Fravashis of the faithful watch over 
it, lest the fiends destroy it V A maid bathing in the lake 
Kasava will conceive by it and bring forth the victorious 
Saoshya;// (Soshyos), who will come from the region of the 
dawn to free the world from death and decay, from cor- 
ruption and rottenness, ever living and ever thriving, when 
the dead shall rise and immortality commence1 2. 

All the features in Zarathartra point to a god : that the 
god may have grown up from a man, that pre-existent 
mythic elements may have gathered around the name of 
a man, born on earth, and by and by surrounded the 
human face with the aureole of a god, may of course be 
maintained, but only on condition that one may distinctly 
express what was the real work of Zoroaster. That he 
raised a new religion against the Vedic religion, and cast 
down into hell the gods of older days can no longer be 
maintained, since the gods, the ideas, and the worship of 
Mazdeism are shown to emanate directly from the old 
religion, and have nothing more of a reaction against it than 
Zend has against Sanskrit. 

§ 41. The only evidence in favour of the old hypothesis 
of a religious schism is reduced to the evidence of a few 
words which might & priori be challenged, as the life of 
words is not the same as the life of the things they express, 
the nature of things does not change with the meaning of 
the syllables which were attached to them for a while, and 
the history of the world is not a chapter of grammar. And, 
in fact, the evidence appealed to, when more closely con- 
sidered, proves to speak against the very theory it is meant 

1 Bund. XXXIII ; Eznik. The whole of the myth belongs to the Avesta 
period, as appears from Yast XIII, 61; Vendidad XIX, 5. 

2 Yast XIX, 89 seq. 

lxxx 

VENDtDAD. 

to support. The word Asura, which in the Avesta means 
‘the Lord,’ and is the name of the supreme God, means 
1 a demon 5 in the Brahmanical literature ; but in the older 
religion of the Vedas it is quite as august as in the Avesta, 
and is applied to the highest deities, and particularly to 
Varu//a, the Indian brother of Ahura. This shows that 
when the Iranians and Indians sallied forth from their 
common native land, the Asura continued for a long time 
to be the Lord in India as well as in Persia; and the 
change took place, not in Iran, but in India. The descent 
of the word daeva from ‘a god5 to ‘a demon’ is a mere 
accident of language. There were in the Indo-Iranian 
language three words expressive of divinity: Asura, ‘the 
Lord,’ Ya^ata,4 the one who is worthy of sacrifice,’ Daeva, 
4 the shining one.’ Asura became the name of the supreme 
God, Ya^ata was the general name of all gods. Now as 
there were old Indo-Iranian formulae which deprecated the 
wrath of both men and devas (gods), or invoked the aid of 
some god against the hate and oppression of both men and 
devas1, that word daeva, which had become obsolete 
(because Asura and Ya^*ata met all the wants of religious 
language), took by and by from formulae of this kind a dark 
and fiendish meaning. What favoured the change was the 
want of a technical word for expressing the general notion 
of a fiend, a want the more felt as the dualistic idea acquired 
greater strength and distinctness. Etymology was unable 
to preserve the Daevas from this degradation, as the root 
div, 4 to shine,’ was lost in Zend, and thus the primitive 
meaning being forgotten, the word was ready to take any 
new meaning which chance or necessity should give to it. 
But only the word descended into hell, not the beings it 
denoted ; neither Varu//a, nor Mitra, nor the Adityas, nor 
Agni, nor Soma, in fact none of the old Aryan deities fell 
or tottered. Though the word Indra is the name of a fiend 
in the Avesta, the Vedic god it denotes was as bright and 
as mighty in Iran as in India under the name of Vere- 
thraghna : and as we do not know the etymological mcan- 

1 Rig-vcda VI, 62, S ; VII, 52, 1 ; VIII, 19, 6 ; Ya*t X, 34; Yasna IX (60). 

INTRODUCTION, IV. 

lxxxi 

ing of the name, it may have been such epithet as could be 
applied to a fiend as well as to a god. The same can be said 
of Nmmghaithya. Moreover, both Indra and Naunghaithya 
are in the Avesta mere names : neither the Avesta nor old 
tradition knows anything about them, which would look 
very strange, had they been vanquished in a religious 
struggle, as they should have played the foremost part at 
the head of the fiends. As to the third comparison estab- 
lished between the Iranian demon Sauru and the Indian 
god .Sarva, it fails utterly, as Sauru is the Vedic £aru, 
a symbol of death, and both are therefore beings of the 
same nature. 

§ 42. Therefore, so far as the Vedic religion and the 
Avesta religion are concerned, there is not the abyss of 
a schism between them. They are quite different, and 
must be so, since each of them lived its own life, and 
living is changing; but nowhere is the link broken that 
binds both to their common source. Nowhere in the Avesta 
is the effort of any man felt who, standing against the 
belief of his people, enforces upon them a new creed, by 
the ascendancy of his genius, and turns the stream of their 
thoughts from the bed wherein it had flowed for centuries. 
There was no religious revolution : there was only a long 
and slow movement which led, by insensible degrees, the 
vague and unconscious dualism of the Indo-Iranian religion 
onwards to the sharply defined dualism of the Magi. 

It does not follow hence, of course, that there was nothing 
left to individual genius in the formation of Mazdeism ; the 
contrary is evident a priori from the fact that Mazdeism 
expresses the ideas of a sacerdotal caste. It sprang from 
the long elaboration of successive generations of priests, and 
that elaboration is so far from having been the work of one 
day and of one man that the exact symmetry which is the 
chief characteristic of Mazdeism is still imperfect in the 
Avesta on certain most important points. For instance, 
the opposition of six arch-fiends to the six arch-gods which 
we find in Plutarch and in the Bundahi* was still unknown 
when the Xth Fargard of the Vendidad and the XIXth 
Yast were composed, and the stars were not yet members 

[4] f 

lxxxii 

vendIdAd. 

of the Ormazdean army when the bulk of the VUIth Ya-rt 
was written. 

The reflective spirit that had given rise to Mazdeism 
never rested, but continued to produce new systems ; and 
there is hardly any religion in which slow growth and con- 
tinual change is more apparent. When the Magi had 
accounted for the existence of evil by the existence of two 
principles, there arose the question how there could be two 
principles, and a longing for unity was felt, which found its 
satisfaction in the assumption that both are derived from 
one and the same principle. This principle was, according 
to divers sects, either Space, or Infinite Light, or Boundless 
Time, or Fate1. Of most of these systems no direct trace is 
found in the Avcsta 2, yet they existed already in the time 
of Aristotle 3 * * * * 8. 

They came at last to pure monotheism. Some forty 
years ago when the Rev. Dr. Wilson was engaged in his 
controversy with the Parsis, some of his opponents repelled 
the charge of dualism by denying to Ahriman any real 
existence, and making him a symbolical personification of 
bad instincts in man. It was not difficult for the Doctor to 
show that they wore at variance with their sacred books, 
and critics in Europe occasionally wondered at the progress 
made by the Parsis in rationalism of the school of Voltaire 
and Gibbon. Yet there was no European influence at the 
bottom ; and long before the Parsis had heard of Europe 
and Christianity, commentators, explaining the myth of 
Tahmurath, who rode for thirty years on Ahriman as a 
horse, interpreted the feat of the old legendary king as the 

1 All these four principles are only abstract forms of Ormazd himself, at 

least in his first naturalistic character of the Heaven God. Heaven is Infinite 

Space, it is Infinite Light, and by its movement it gives rise to Time and to 

Fate (Orm. Ahr. §§ 244-259). Time is twofold : there is the limited time that 

measures the duration of the world (see above, § 39) and lasts 12,000 years, 

which is Zrvan daregh6-Avadita, ‘ the Sovereign Time of the long period ;* 

and there is ‘ the Boundless Time/ Zrvan akarana (Farg. XIX, 9). 

8 When Vendtdad XIX, 9 was written, the Zervanitic system seems to have 
been, if not fully developed, at least already existent. 

8 Eudemos (ap. Damascius, ed. Kopp, 3 84) knows of xp6voi and rliro* as the 
first principles of the Magi ; Boundless Time is already transformed into a 
legendary hero in Berosus (third century u. c.) 

INTRODUCTION, V. 

lxxxiii 

curbing of evil passion and restraining the Ahriman in the 
heart of man That idealistic interpretation was current as 
early as the fifteenth century, and is prevalent now with 
most of the Dasturs1 2. To. what extent that alteration may 
have been influenced by Islamism, can hardly be decided ; 
there are even some faint signs that it began at a time 
when the old religion was still flourishing ; at any rate, no 
one can think of ascribing to one man, or to one time, that 
slow change from dualism to monotheism, which is, however, 
really deeper and wider than the movement which, in pre- 
historic times, brought the Magi from an imperfect form of 
dualism to one more perfect. 

CHAPTER V. 

The Vend id Ad. 

§ j . According to Parsi tradition the Vcndid&d 3 is the 
only Nosk, out of the twenty-one, that was preserved in its 
entirety4. This is a statement to which it is difficult to 
trust ; for, if there is anything that shows how right the 
Parsis are in admitting that the Avesta is only a collection 
of fragments, it is just the fragmentary character of the 
Vendidad. 

The Vendid&d has often been described as the book of 
the laws of the Parsis ; it may be more exactly called the 
code of purification, a description, however, which is itself 
only so far correct that the laws of purification arc the 
object of the largest part of the book. 

1 Aogemaide, ed. Geiger, p. 36, § 92 ; Mirkhond, History of the Early Kings 
of Persia, tr. Shea, p. 98. Cf. Revue Critique, 1879, II, 163. 

8 ‘ The Parsis are now strict monotheists, and whatever may have been the 
views of former philosophical writings, their one supreme deity is Ahura Mazda. 
Their views of Angra Mainyu seem to differ in no respect from what is supposed 
to be the orthodox Christian view of the devil.’ Haug’s Essays, and ed. p. 53. 
Mandelslo, in the seventeenth century, speaks of Parsiism as a monotheistic 
religion. 

3 The word Vendidad is a corruption ofVldaevo-datem (datem), 'the anti- 
demoniac law.* It is sometimes applied to the whole of the law (Vendidad 
S&dah). 

* See above, p. xxxii. 

lxxxiv 

VEND! DAD. 

The first two chapters deal with mythical matter, with- 
out any direct connection with the general object of the 
Vendidad, and are remnants of an old epic and cosmogonic 
literature. The first deals with the creations and counter- 
creations of Ahura Mazda and Angra Mainyu ; the second 
speaks of Yima, the founder of civilisation. Although 
there was no particular reason for placing them in the 
Vendidad, as soon as they were admitted into it they 
were put at the beginning, because they referred to the 
first ages o.f the world. Three chapters of a mythical 
character, about the origin of medicine, were put at the 
end of the book, for want of any better place, but might 
as well have been kept apart1, as was the so-called Ilad- 
hokht Nosk fragment. There is also another mythical 
Fargard, the nineteenth, which, as it treats of the revelation 
of the law by Ahura to Zarathartra, would have been more 
suitably placed at the beginning of the Vendidad proper, 
that is, as the third Fargard. 

The other seventeen chapters deal chiefly with religious 
observances, although mythical fragments, or moral digres- 
sions, are met with here and there, which arc more or less 
artificially connected with the text, and which were most 
probably not written along with the passages which they 
follow ~. 

§ 2. A rough attempt at regular order appears in these 
seventeen chapters : nearly all the matter contained in the 
eight chapters from V to XII deals chiefly with impurity 
from the dead and the way of dispelling it ; but the subject 
is again treated, here and there, in other Fargards 3, and 
matter irrelevant to the subject has also found its way into 
these same eight Fargards 4. Fargards XIII and XIV are 
devoted to the dog, but must be completed with a part of 
the XVth. Fargards XVI, XVII, and most part of XVIII 
deal with several sorts of uncleanness, and their proper 

* As an introduction to a code of laws on physicians ; see I' arg. VII, 36-44. 

a For instance, Farg. V, 15-20 ; III, 24-29; 30-32; 33; IV, 47-49. 

3 HI« 14-12; 36seq.; XIX, u-25. 

4 The passages on medicine (VII, 36-44), and on the sea Vouru-kasha (V, 
15-20). 

INTRODUCTION, V. 

lxxxv 

place should rather have been after the Xllth Fargard. 
Fargard III is devoted to the earth1 ; Fargard IV stands by 
itself, as it deals with a matter which is treated only there, 
namely, civil and penal laws 2. 

No better order prevails within these several parts: 
prescriptions on one and the same subject arc scattered 
about through several Fargards, without any subject being 
treated at once in a full and exhaustive way; and this 
occasions needless repetitions3. 

The main cause of this disorder was, of course, that the 
advantage of order is rarely felt by Orientals ; but it was 
further promoted by the very form of exposition adopted by 
the first composers of the Vendidad. The law is revealed 
by Ahura in a scries of answers to questions put to him by 
ZarathuJtra 4 ; and as these questions are not of a general 
character, but refer to details, the matter is much broken 
into fragments, each of which, consisting of a question with 
its answer, stands by itself, as an independent passage. 

We shall treat in the following pages, first of the laws of 
purification, then of the civil laws, and, lastly, of the penalties 
both religious and civil. 

A. 

§ 3. The first object of man is purity, yaosdau : ‘purity 
is for man, next to life, the greatest good V 

Purity and impurity have not in the Vcndld&d the 
exclusively spiritual meaning which they have in our 
languages : they do not refer to an inward state of the 

1 It contains two digressions, the one on funeral laws, the other on hus- 
bandry. See Farg. Ill, Introd. 

a It contains one digression on physical weal, which must have belonged 
originally to Farg. 111. See Farg. IV, Introd. 

8 V, 27-30 -VII, 6-9; V, 45-54 = VII, 60-69; V, 57-62 = VII, 17-22. 

4 The outward form of the Vendidad has been often compared with that of 
the Books of Moses. But in reality, in the Bible, there is no conversation 
between God and the lawgiver : the law comes down unasked, and God gives 
commands, but gives no answers. In the Vendidad, on the contrary, it is the 
wish of man, not the will of God, that is the first cause of the revelation. 
Man must ask of Ahura, who knows everything, and is pleased to answer 
(XVIII, 13 seq.) ; the law is * the question to Ahura,* ahuri frasno. 

s Farg. V, 2i, from Yasna XLVIII (XLV11), 5. 

1 XXX VI 

VENDiDAD. 

person, but chiefly to a physical state of the body. Im- 
purity or uncleanness may be described as the state of 
a person or thing that is possessed of the demon ; and the 
object of purification is to expel the demon. 

The principal means by which uncleanness enters man 
is death, as death is the triumph of the demon. 

When a man dies, as soon as the soul has parted from 
the body, the Dru^ Nasu or Corpse-Dru^ falls upon the 
dead from the regions of hell, and whoever thenceforth 
touches the corpse becomes unclean, and makes unclean 
whomsoever he touches l. 

The Dru^* is expelled from the dead by means of the 
Sag-did, fcthe look of the dog:’ ‘a four-eyed dog* or ‘a 
white one with yellow ears5 is brought near the body and is 
made to look at the dead ; as soon as he has done so, the 
Drug* flees back to hell 2. 

The Drug* is expelled from the living, whom she has 
seized through their contact with the dead, by a process of 
washings with ox’s urine (gomez or nirang) and with 
water, combined with the Sag-did 

The real import of these ceremonies is shown by the 
spells which accompany their performance : ‘ Perish, O 
fiendish Drug*! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish, O 
world of the fiend ! Perish away, O Drug* ! Rush away, 
O Drug*! Perish away, O Drug*! Perish away to the 
regions of the north, never more to give unto death the 
living world of the holy spirit ! * 

Thus, in the death of a man, there is more involved than 
the death of one man: the power of death, called forth 
from hell, threatens from the corpse, as from a stronghold, 
the whole world of the living, ready to seize whatever may 
fall within his reach, and 4 from the dead defiles the living, 
from the living rushes upon the living.’ When a man dies 
in a house, there is danger for three days lest somebody 
else should die in that house 4. 

1 Farg. VII, i seq. 

8 In the shape of a fly. ' The fly that came to the smell of the dead body 
was thought to be the corpse-spirit that came to take possession of the dead in 
the name of Ahriman* (Justi, Persien, p. 88). 

s Farg. VIII, 35-72 ; IX, 1 2-36. 4 Saddar 78. 

INTRODUCTION, V. 

lxxxvii 

The notion or feeling, out of which these ceremonies grew, 
was far from unknown to the other Indo-European peoples : 
what was peculiar to Mazdeism was that it carried it to an 
extreme, and preserved a clearer sense of it, while elsewhere 
it grew dimmer and dimmer, and faded away. In fact, 
when the Greek, going out of a house where a dead man 
lay, sprinkled himself with water from the ipbavCov at the door, 
it was death that he drove away from himself. The Vedic 
Indian, too, although his rites were intended chiefly for the 
benefit of the dead, considered himself in danger and, while 
burning the corpse, cried aloud : * Away, go away, O Death ! 
injure not our sons and our men !* (Rig-vcda X, 18, 1.) 

§ 4. As to the rites by means of which the Drug- is 
expelled, they are the performance of myths. There is 
nothing in worship but what existed before in mythology. 
What we call a practice is only an imitation of gods, an 
opoLucns 0e <3, as man fancies he can bring about the things 
he wants, by performing the acts which are supposed to 
have brought about things of the same kind when practised 
by the gods. 

The Parsis, being at a loss to find four-eyed dogs, inter- 
pret the name as meaning a dog with two spots above the 
eyes1: but it is clear that the two-spotted dogs services 
are only accepted for want of a four-eyed one, or of a white 
one with yellow ears, which amounts to saying that there 
were myths, according to which the death-fiend was driven 
away by dogs of that description. This reminds one at 
once of the three-headed Kerberos, watching at the doors 
of hell, and, still more, of the two brown, four-eyed dogs of 
Yama, who guard the ways to the realm of death2. 

The identity of the four-eyed dog of the Parsi with 
Kerberos and Yama’s dogs appears, moreover, from the 
Parsi tradition that the yellow-eared dog watches at the 

1 In practice they are still less particular : 1 the Sag-did may be performed 
by a shepherd’s dog, by a house dog, by a Vohunazga dog (see Farg. XIII, 
19, n.), or by a young dog (a dog four months old), Comm, ad Farg. VII, 2. 
As birds of prey are as fiend-smiting as the dog (see above, p. lxxiii, n. 4), they 
are Nasu-smiters like him, and one may appeal to their services, when there 
is no dog at hand (see Farg. VII, 3, n. 5). 

2 Rig-veda X, 14, 10 seq. 

Ixxxviii 

VENDfDAD. 

head of the ATinva* bridge, which leads from this to the 
next world, and with his barking drives away the fiend 
from the souls of the holy ones, lest he should drag them 
to hell 1. 

Wherever the corpse passes by, death walks with it ; 
all along the way it has gone, from the house to its last 
resting-place, a spirit of death is breathing and threatening 
the living. Therefore, no man, no flock, no being whatever 
that belongs to the world of Ahura, is allowed to pass by 
that way until the deadly breath, that blows through it, has 
been blown away to hell 2 3. The four-eyed dog is made to 
go through the way three times, or six times, or nine times, 
while the priest helps the look of the dog with his spells, 
dreaded by the Drug*. 

§ 5. The use of gomez in cleansing the unclean is also 
derived from old mythic conceptions The storm floods 
that cleanse the sky of the dark fiends in it were described 
in a class of myths as the urine of a gigantic animal in the 
heavens. As the floods from the bull above drive away 
the fiend from the god, so they do from man here below, 
they make him ‘free from the death-demon’ (franasu), 
and the death-fiend flees away hellwards, pursued by 
the fiend-smiting spell : 4 Perish thou, O Drug* . . . , never 
more to give over to Death the living world of the good 
spirit !’ 

§ 6. As unclcanncss is nothing else than the contagion of 
death, it is at its greatest intensity when life is just departing. 
The Nasu at that moment defiles ten persons around the 

1 Gr. Rav. p. 592. Allusions to this myth are found in Farg. XIII, 9, and 
XIX, 30. The Commentary ad Farg. XIII, 17 has: ‘There are dogs who 
watch over the earthly regions ; there are others who watch over the fourteen 
heavenly regions.’ The birth of the yellow-eared dog is described in the 
Ravaet (l. c.) as follows : ‘Ormazd, wishing to keep the body of the first man, 
Gaydmart, from the assaults of Ahriman, who tried to kill him, cried out: 
“ O thou yellow-eared dog, arise I '* and directly the dog barked and shook his 
two cars ; and the unclean Satan and the fiends, when they saw the dreadful 
looks of the yellow-eared dog, and heard his barking, were sore afraid and fled 
down to hell.’ 

2 Farg. VIII, 14-22. 

3 Orm. Ahr. § 124. The use of gomez has been lately found to be known in 

Basse-Bretagnc (Luzel, Le Nirang des Tarsis en Basse- Bretagne, Melusine, 493). 

INTRODUCTION, V. 

lxxxix 

corpse 1 : when a year is over, the corpse defiles no longer 2 . 
Thus the notion of uncleanness is quite the reverse of what 
is thought elsewhere : the corpse, when rotten, is less unclean 
than the body still all but warm with life ; death defiles 
least when it looks most hideous, and defiles most when it 
might look majestic. The cause is that in the latter case 
the death-demon has just arrived in the fulness of his 
strength, whereas in the former case time has exhausted 
his power. 

§ 7. As the focus of the contagion is in the corpse, it 
must be disposed of so that death may not spread abroad. 
O11 this point the old Indo-European customs have been 
completely changed by Mazdcism. The Indo-Europeans 
either burnt the corpse or buried it : both customs arc held 
to be sacrilegious in the Avesta. 

§ 8. This view originated from the notion of the holiness 
of the elements being pushed to an extreme. The elements, 
fire, earth, and water arc holy, and during the Indo-Iranian 
period they were already considered so, and in the Vedas 
they arc worshipped as godlike beings. Yet this did not 
prevent the Indian from burning his dead ; death did not 
appear to him so decidedly a work of the demon, and the 
dead man was a traveller to the other world, whom the 
fire kindly carried to his heavenly abode ‘on his undecay- 
ing, flying pinions, wherewith he killed the demons/ The 
fire was in that, as in the sacrifice, the god that goes from 
earth to heaven, from man to god, the mediator, the god 
most friendly to man. In Persia it remains more distant 
from him ; being an earthly form of the eternal, infinite, 
godly light 3, no death, no unclcanncss can be allowed to 
enter it, as it is here below the purest offspring of the good 
spirit, the purest part of his pure creation. Its only function 
is to repel the fiends with its bright blazing. In every 
place where Parsis are settled, an everlasting fire is kept, 
the Bahr&m fire, which, ‘ preserved by a more than Vestal 

1 Farg. V, 27 ; cf. n. 5. 

2 Farg. VIII, 33 34. 

3 Ignem coelitus delapsum (Ammian. Marcel. XXVII, 6); Cedrcnus; 
Elisaeus; Recogn. Clement. IV, 29 ; Clem. Homil. IX, 6; Henry Lord. 

xc 

vend{dad. 

care1/ and ever fed with perfumes and dry well-blazing 
wood, whichever side its flames are brought by the wind, it 
goes and kills thousands and thousands of fiends, as Bahram 
docs in heaven2. If the necessities of life oblige us to 
employ fire for profane uses, it must be only for a time 
an exile on our hearth, or in the oven of the potter, and it 
must go thence to the Right- Place, of the fire (D&ityo 
Gatu), the altar of the Bahram fire, there to be restored to 
the dignity and rights of its nature3. 

At least, let no gratuitous and wanton degradation be 
inflicted upon it : even blowing it with the breath of the 
mouth is a crime4; burning the dead is the most heinous 
of sins : in the times of Strabo it was a capital crime 5 6, and 
the Avesta expresses the same, when putting it in the 
number of those sins for which there is no atonement0. 

Water was looked upon in the same light. Bringing 
dead matter to it is as bad as bringing it to the fire7. The 
Magi are said to have overthrown a king for having built 
bath-houses, as they cared more for the cleanness of water 
than for their own8. 

§ 9. Not less holy was the earth, or, at least, it became 
so. There was a goddess who lived in her, Spe/rta Ar- 
maiti 9 ; no corpse ought to defile her sacred breast : 
burying the dead is, like burning the dead, a deed for 
which there is no atonement10. It was not always so in 
Persia : the burning of the dead had been forbidden for 

1 J- Fryer, A New Account of East Tndia and Persia, 1698, p. 265. 

2 Farg. VIII, 81-96; 79 -80. Cf. above, p. lxiv. 

* Extinguishing it is a mortal sin (Ravaets ; Elisaeus; cf. Strabo XV, 14). 

4 A custom still existing with the Tazik, an Iranian tribe in Eastern Persia 
(de Khanikoff, Ethnographic de la Perse). Strabo XV, 14. Manu has the 
same prescription (IV, 53). Cf. Farg. XIV, 8, n. 7. 

* Strabo XV, 14; cf. Herod. Ill, 16. 

6 Farg. I, 17; cf. Farg. VIII, 74. 

7 Farg. VII, 25-27; Strabo XV, 14; Herod. 1, 138. 

* King llalash (Josue le Stylite, traduction Martin, § xx). It seems as if 
there were a confusion between Balash and Kav&t ; at any rate, it shows that 
bathing smacked of heresy. Jews were forbidden to perform the legal ablutions 
(Hirst, Culturgeschichte der Juden, 9). 

9 See above, p. lxxii. 

10 Farg. I, 13. 

INTRODUCTION, V. 

XC1 

years1, while the burying was still general2. Cambyses 
had roused the indignation of the Persians by burning the 
corpse of Amasis : yet, years later, Persians still buried 
their dead. But the priests already felt scruples, and feared 
to defile a god. Later on, with the ascendancy of the 
Magian religion, the sacerdotal observances became the 
general law 3. 

§ io. Therefore the corpse is laid on the summit of a 
mountain, far from man, from water, from tree, from fire, 
and from the earth itself, as it is separated from it by a 
layer of stones or bricks 4. Special buildings, the Daklimas, 
were erected for this purpose5. There far from the world 
the dead were left to lie, beholding the sun 6. 

§ ii. Not every corpse defiles man, but only those of 
such beings as belong to the world of Ahura. They arc 
the only ones in whose death the demon triumphs. The 
corpse of an Ahrimanian creature does not defile; as its 
life was incarnate death, the spring of death that was in it 
is dried up with its last breath : it killed while alive, it can 

1 From the reign of Cyrus (of. above, p. li). 2 Cf. above, p. xlv. 

3 Still the worship of the earth seems not to have so deeply penetrated the 

general religion as the worship of fire. The laws about the disposal of the 
dead were interpreted by many, it would seem, as intended only to secure the 
purity of water and fire, and they thought that they might be at peace with 
religion if they had taken care to bury the corpse, so that no part of it might 
be taken by animals to fire or water (Farg. Ill, 41, n. 7). 

4 Farg. VI, 44 seq. ; VIII, 10 seq. Cf. IX, ii, n. 4. Moreover, the Dakhma 
is ideally separated from the ground by means of a golden thread, which is 
supposed to keep it suspended in the air (Ravaet, ap. Spiegel, Uebcrsetzung des 
Avesta II, XXXVI). 

5 ‘ The Dakhma is a round building, and is designated by some writers, 
“ The Tower of Silence.” A round pit, about six feet deep, is surrounded by an 
annular stone pavement, about seven feet wide, on which the dead bodies are 
placed. This place is enclosed all round by a stone wall some twenty feet 
high, with a small door on one side for taking the body in. The whole is 
built up of and paved with stone. The pit has communication with three 
or more closed pits, at some distance into which the rain washes out the liquids 
and the remains of the dead bodies' (Dadabhai Naoroji, The Manners and 
Customs of the Parsees, Bombay, 1864, p. 16). Cf. Farg. VI, 50. A Dakhma 
is the first building the Parsis erect when settling on a new place (Dosabhoy 
Framjce). 

* The Avesta and the Commentator attach great importance to that point : 
it is as if the dead man’s life were thus prolonged, since he can still behold the 
sun. ‘ Grant us that we may long behold the sun,’ Said the Indian Rishi. 

xcu 

vendJdAd; 

do so no more when dead; it becomes clean by dying1. 
None of the faithful are defiled by the corpse of an Ashe- 
maogha or of a Khrafstra. Nay, killing them is a pious 
work, as it is killing Ahriman himself2. 

§ 12 . Not only real death makes one unclean, but partial 
death too. Everything that goes out of the body of man 
is dead, and becomes the property of the demon. The 
going breath is unclean, it is forbidden to blow the fire with 
it 3, and even to approach the fire without screening it from 
the contagion with a Pen6m 4. Parings of nails and cut- 
tings or shavings of hair arc unclean, and become weapons 
in the hands of the demons unless they have been protected 
by certain rites and spells 5. Any phenomenon by which 
the bodily nature is altered, whether accompanied with 
danger to health or not, was viewed as a work of the demon, 
and made the person unclean in whom it took place. One 
of these phenomena, which is a special object of attention 
in theVendidad, is the uncleanness of women during their 
menses. The menses are sent by Ahriman0, especially 
when they last beyond the usual time : therefore a woman, 
as long as they last, is unclean and possessed of the demon: 
she must be kept confined, apart from the faithful whom 
her touch would defile, and from the fire which her very 
look would injure; she is not allowed to cat as much as she 
wishes, as the strength she might acquire would accrue to 
the fiends. Her food is not given to her from hand to hand, 
but is passed to her from a distance7, in a long leaden 
spoon. The origin of all these notions is in certain physical 
instincts, in physiological psychology, which is the reason 
why they are found among peoples very far removed from 
one another by race or religion 8. But they took in Persia 
a new meaning as they were made a logical part of the 
whole religious system. 

§ 13. A woman that has been just delivered of a child 

1 Farg. V, 35 seq. 

3 See above, p. xc. 
5 Farg. XVII. 

7 Farg XVI, 15. 

a See above, p. lxxiii. 

4 See Farg. XIV, 8, n. 7. 

6 Farg. I, 18-19; XVI, 11. Cf. Bund. III. 
8 Cf. Leviticus. See Fliny VII, 13. 

INTRODUCTION, V. 

XClll 

is also unclean \ although it would seem that she ought to 
be considered pure amongst the pure, since life has been 
increased by her in the world, and she has enlarged the 
/■calm of Ormazd. But the strength of old instincts over- 
came the drift of new principles. Only the case when the 
woman has been delivered of a still-born child is examined 
in the Vcndiddd. She is unclean as having been in contact 
with a dead creature ; and she must first drink gomez to 
wash over the grave in her womb. So utterly unclean is 
she, that she is not even allowed to drink water, unless she 
is in danger of death ; and even then, as the sacred element 
has been defiled, she is liable to the penalty of a Pcsh6- 
tanu1 2 *. It appears from modern customs that the treatment 
is the same when the child is born alive : the reason of 
which* is that, in any case, during the first three days after 
delivery she is in danger of death A great fire is lighted 
to keep away the fiends, who use then their utmost efforts 
to kill her and her child 4. She is unclean only because the 
death-fiend is in her. 

§ 14. Logic required that the sick man should be treated 
as an unclean one, that is, as one possessed. Sickness, 
being sent by Ahriman, ought to be cured like all his other 
works, by washings and spells. In fact, the medicine of 
spells was considered the most powerful of all5, and 
although it did not oust the medicine of the lancet and 
that of drugs, yet it was more highly esteemed and less 
mistrusted. The commentator on the Vendidad very 
sensibly observes that if it does not relieve, it will surely 
do no harm which seems not to have been a matter of 
course with those who heal by the knife and physic. It 

1 Farg. V, 45 seq. 2 Karg. VII, 70 scq. 

3 ‘ When there is a pregnant woman in a house, one must take care that there 
be fire continually in it ; when the child is brought forth, one must burn a 
candle, or, better still, a fire, for three days and three nights, to render the Devs 
and Dru»s unable to harm the child; for there is great danger during those 
three days and nights after the birth of the child’ (Saddar 16). 

* ‘ When the child is being born, one brandishes a sword on the four sides* 
lest fairy Aal kill it* (Polack, Persien I, 223). In Rome, three gods, Interci- 

dona, Pilumnus, and Deverra, keep her threshold, lest Sylvanus come in ami 
harm her (Augustinus, De Civ. D. VI, 9). 

5 I arg. VII, 44. 6 Ibid. p. 86, n. 1. 

XC1V 

vend!dAd. 

appears from the last Fargard that all or, at least, many 
diseases might be cured by spells and Barashnfim washing. 
It appears from Herodotus and Agathias that contagious 
diseases required the same treatment as uncleanness : thef 
sick man was excluded from the community of the faithful 1, 
until cured and cleansed according to the rites2. 

§ 15. The unclean are confined in a particular place, 
apart from all clean persons and objects, the Armfot-g&h 3, 
which may be described, therefore, as the Dakhma for the 
living. All the unclean, all those struck with temporary 
death, the man who has touched dead matter, the woman 
in her menses, or just delivered of child, the leper4, or the 
man who has made himself unclean for ever by carrying 
a corpse alone5, stay there all the time of their un- 
cleanness. 

§ 16. Thus far for general principles. From the diversity 
of circumstances arises a system of casuistry, the develop- 
ment of which may be followed first through the glosses to 
the Vendidad, in which the labours of several generations 
of theologians are embodied, and, later on, through the 
Ravdcts. We will give a few instances of it, as found in 
the Vendidad itself. 

The process of the cleansing varies according to the 
degree of unclcanncss ; and, again, the degree of unclean- 
ness depends on the state of the thing that defiles and the 
nature of the thing that is defiled. 

The uncleanness from the dead is the worst of all, and it 
is at its utmost when contracted before the Nasu has been 
expelled from the corpse by the Sag-did 6 : it can be cured 
only by means of the most complicated system of cleansing, 
the nine nights’ Barashnftm 7. 

1 Herod. 1, 138. 2 Agathias II, 23. 

8 The Armc.st-gah for women in their menses is called Dashtanistan. 

4 Herod. 1.1.; Farg. II, 29. 

5 Farg. Ill, 21, n. 2. 

6 Farg. VIII, 35-36; 98-99; cf. VII, 29-30, and n. 1 to 30. 

7 Fwg. IX. The Barashnum, originally meant to remove the uncleanness 
from the dead, became a general instrument of holiness. Children when putting 
on the Kosli (Farg. XVIII, 9, n. 4) perform it to be cleansed from the natural 
uncleanness they have contracted in the womb of their mothers. It is good for 
every one to perform it once a year. 

INTRODUCTION, V. 

XCV 

If the Nasu has already been expelled from the corpse, 
as the defiling power was less, a simple washing once made, 
the Ghosel, is enough1. 

The defiling power of the Nasu reaches farther, if the 
death has just taken place, and if the dying creature occu- 
pied a higher rank in the scale of beings 2 * ; for the more 
recent the victory of the demon, or the higher the being he 
has overcome, the stronger he must have been himself. 

Mcnstruous women are cleansed by the Ghosel 

As for things they are more or less deeply defiled ac- 
cording to their degree of penetrability : metal vessels can 
be cleansed, earthen vessels cannot 4 ; leather is more easily 
cleansed than woven cloth5; dry wood than soft wood0. 
Wet matter is a better conductor of uncleanness than dry 
matter, and corpses cease to defile after a year7. 

B. 

§ 17. In the cases heretofore reviewed, only religious 
purposes are concerned. There is another order of laws, 
in which, although religion interferes, yet it is not at the 
root; namely, the laws about contracts and assaults, to 
which the fourth Fargard is devoted, and which are the 
only remains extant of the civil and penal legislation of 
Zoroastrianism. 

The contracts were divided into two classes, according 
to their mode of being entered into, and according to the 
value of their object 8. As to their mode they arc word- 
contracts or hand-contracts : as to their object, they are 
sheep-contracts, ox-contracts, man-contracts, or field-con- 
tracts, which being estimated in money value are contracts 
to the amount of 3, 12, 500 istirs, and upwards9. 

No contract can be made void by the will of one party 

2 Farg. V, 27 seq. ; VII, 1 seq. 
* Farg. VII, 73 seq. 

1 Farg. VIII, 36. 

3 Farg. XVI, 12. 

5 Farg. VII, 14 seq. 6 Farg. VII, 28 seq. 

7 Farg. VIII, 33-34. 8 See p. 34, n. 3. 

9 An i stir (<rrarfy) is as much as four dirhems 

estimated by modem tradition a little more than a rupee. 

The dirhem is 

XCV1 

vend$dAd. 

alone ; he who breaks a contract is obliged to pay the value 
of the contract next higher in value. 

The family and the next of kin are, it would seem, 
answerable for the fulfilment of a contract, a principle of 
the old Indo-European civil law1. 

§ 18. Assaults are of seven degrees : dgerepta, avaoirLyta2, 
stroke, sore wound, bloody wound, broken bone, and man- 
slaughter. The gravity of the guilt docs not depend on the 
gravity of the deed only, but also on its frequency. Each 
of these seven crimes amounts, by its being repeated with- 
out having been atoned for, to the crime that immediately 
follows in the scale, so that an agerepta seven times repeated 
amounts to manslaughter. 

C. 

§ 19. Every crime makes the guilty man liable to two 
penalties, one here below, and another in the next world. 

The penalty here below consists of a certain number of 
stripes with the Aspahe-a^tra or the Sraosh6-£arana3. 

The unit for heavy penalties is two hundred stripes ; the 
crime and the criminal thus punished are called Pcshd-tanu 
orTanu-pcrctha(Parsi: Tanafuhr). The two words literally 
mean, ‘ one who pays with his own body/ and ‘ payment 
with one’s body/ and seem to have originally amounted to 

1 Farg. IV, 5 scq. 3 Two different sorts of menaces ; see IV, 54. 

3 The general formula is literally, 4 Let (the priest ; probably, the Sraosha- 
varez') strike so many strokes with the Aspahe-astra, so many strokes with the 
Sraosho-Xarana.* A.stra moans in Sanskrit ‘ a goad,’ so that Aspahe-astra may 
mean ‘ a horse-goad ; * but Aspendiarji translates it by durra, ‘ a thong,’ which 
suits the sense better, and agrees with etymology too (' an instrument to drive 
a horse, a whip;’ astra, from the root az, ‘to drive;’ it is the Aspahe-astra 
which is referred to by Sozomenos II, 13: ifx6.<Jtv w^iots avrtiv k&aaa- 

viaav 0 i fiayoi (the SraosM-varez), (Sia$6n<voi irpo<Tfcwr}<xai rtiv 77X101/). Sraosho- 
fcarana is translated by Hbuk, ‘ a whip,* which agrees with the Sanskrit trans- 
lation of the si-srdsh^aranam sin, ‘yat tribhir goJarmasataghatfiis prayas- 
Aityam bhavati t&vanmatram, a sin to be punished with three strokes with a 
whip.* It seems to follow that Aspahe-astra and Sraosho-larana are one and 
the same instrument, designated with two names, first in reference to its shape, 
and then to its use (Sraosho-^arana meaning * the instrument for penalty,’ or 

4 the instrument of the Sraosh£-varez ? ’). The Aspahe-astra is once called astra 
m airy a, 4 the astra for the account to be given,’ that is, 4 for the payment of the 
penalty’ (Farg. XVIII, 4). 

INTRODUCTION, V. 

XCVI1 

‘worthy of death, worthiness of death;* and in effect the 
word Pesho-tanu is often interpreted in the Palilavi Com- 
mentary by margarzan, ‘worthy of death.* But, on the 
whole, it was attached to the technical meaning of i one who 
has to receive two hundred strokes with the horse-whip1.* 
The lowest penalty in the Vendid&d is five stripes, and the 
degrees from five stripes to Peshdtanu are ten, fifteen, 
thirty, fifty, seventy, ninety, two hundred. For instance, 
agerepta is punished with five stripes, avaoiruta with ten, 
stroke with fifteen, sore wound with thirty, bloody wound 
with fifty, broken bone with seventy, manslaughter with 
ninety; a second manslaughter, committed without the 
former being atoned for, is punished with the Peshotanu 
penalty. In the same way the six other crimes, repeated 
eight, or seven, or six, or five, or four, or three times make 
the committer go through the whole scries of penalties up 
to tlje Peshotanu penalty. 

§ 20. If one reviews the different crimes described in the 
Vcndidad, and the respective penalties prescribed for them, 
one cannot but wonder at first sight at the strange inequality 
between crime and penalty. Bcccaria would have felt un- 
comfortable while reading the Vcndidad. It is safer to kill 
a man than to serve bad food to a shepherd’s dog, for the 
manslaycr gets off with ninety stripes, whereas the bad 
master is at once a Pesh6tanu 2, and will receive two hun- 
dred stripes. Two hundred stripes are awarded if one tills 
land in which a corpse has been buried within the year3, 
if a woman just delivered of child drinks water4, if one 
suppresses the menses of a woman5 *, if one performs a 
sacrifice in a house where a man has just died0, if one 
neglects fastening the corpse of a dead man so that birds or 
dogs may not take dead matter to trees and rivers7. Two 
hundred stripes if one throws on the ground a bone of a 
man’s corpse, of a dog’s carcase as big as two ribs, four 

1 Farg. IV, 20, 2i, 24, 25, 28, 29, 32, 33, 35, 36, 38, 39, 41,42; V, 44; VI, 

5, 9, *9* 48. &c. 

a Farg. IV, 40, and XIII, 24. 

4 Farg. VII, 70 seq. 

6 Farg. V, 39. 

■W 

g 

3 Farg. VI, 5. 

* Farg. XVI, 13 seq. 
7 Farg. VI, 47 seq. 

XCViii VENDIDAD. 

hundred if one throws a bone as big as a breast bone, six 
hundred if one throws a skull, one thousand if the whole 
corpse1. Four hundred stripes if one, being in a state of 
unclcanness, touches water or trees2, four hundred if one 
covers with cloth a dead man’s feet, six hundred if one 
covers his legs, eight hundred if the whole body3. Five 
hundred stripes for killing a whelp, six hundred for killing 
a stray dog, seven hundred for a house dog, eight hundred 
for a shepherd’s dog4 *, one thousand stripes for killing a 
VanhApara dog, ten thousand stripes for killing a water 
dog fi. 

Capital punishment is expressly pronounced only against 
the false cleanser6 and the ‘carrier alone7/ 

Yet any one who bethinks himself of the spirit of the old 
Aryan legislation will easily conceive that there may be in 
its eyes many crimes more heinous, and to be punished 
more severely, than manslaughter: offences against man 
injure only one man ; offences against gods endanger all 
mankind. No one should wonder at the unqualified cleanser 
being put to death who reads Demosthenes’ Ncaera ; the 
Persians who defiled the ground by burying a corpse were 
not more severely punished than the Greeks were for de- 
filing with corpses the holy ground of Delos 8, or than the 
conquerors at Arginousac ; nor would the Athenians, who 
put to death Atarbes have much stared at the awful 
revenge taken for the murder of the sacred dog. There is 
hardly any prescription in the Vend id Ad, however odd and 
absurd it may seem, but has its counterpart or its explana- 
tion in other Aryan legislations : if we had a Latin or a 
Greek Vendidad, I doubt whether it would look more 
rational. 

§ 21. Yet, if theoretically the very absurdity of its prin- 
ciples is nothing peculiar to the Mazdean law, nay, is a 
proof of its authenticity, it may be doubted whether it could 

1 Farg. VI, io seq. 2 Farg. VIII, 104 seq. 

3 Farg. VIII, 23 seq. 4 Farg. XIII, 8 seq. 

Farg. XIV, 1 seq. 0 Farg. IX, 47 seq. 

7 Farg. Ill, 14 seq. Yet there were other capital crimes. See below, § 23. 

• Diodor. XII, 58. 9 Aelianus, Hist. Var. V, 17. 

INTRODUCTION, V. 

XC1X 

ever have been actually applied in the form stated in the 
texts. It may be doubted whether the murder of a shepherd’s 
dog could have been actually punished with eight hundred 
stripes, much more whether the murder of a water dog 
could have been really punished with ten thousand stripes, 
unless we suppose that human endurance was different in 
ancient Persia from what it is elsewhere, or even in modern 
Persia herself1. Now as we sec that in modern tradition 
bodily punishment is estimated in money value, that is to 
say, converted iiito fines, a conversion which is alluded to in 
the Pahlavi translation 2, it may readily be admitted that as 
early as the time of the last edition of the Vendidad, that 
conversion had already been made. In the Ravaets, two 
hundred stripes, or a Tanafuhr, arc estimated as equal to 
three hundred istirs or twelve hundred dirhems, or thirteen 
hundred and fifty rupees ; a stripe is therefore about equal 
to six rupees :i. How far that system prevailed in practice, 
whether the guilty might take advantage of this commuta- 
tion of his own accord, or only with the assent of the 
judge, we cannot decide. It is very likely that the riches 
of the fire-temples came for the most part from that source, 
and that the sound of the dirhems often made the Sraosho- 
/v’arana fall from the hands of the Mobcds. That the system 
of financial penalties did not, however, suppress the system 
of bodily penalties, appears from the customs of the Parsis 
who apply both, and from the Pahlavi Commentary which 
expressly distinguishes three sorts of atonement : the atone- 
ment by money (khvastak), the atonement by the Sra- 
osho-^arana, and the atonement by cleansing. 

§ 23. This third element of atonement is strictly religious. 
It consists in repentance, which is manifested by avowal 
of the guilt and by the recital of a formula of repentance, 

1 In the time of Chardin, the number of stripes inflicted on the guilty never 
exceeded three hundred ; in the old German law, two hundred ; in the Hebrew 
law, forty. 

2 Ad Farg. XIV, 2. 

3 In later Parstism every sin (and every good deed) has its value in money 
fixed, and may thus be weighed in the scales of Rashnu. If the number of sin 
dirhems outweigh the number of the good deed dirhems, the soul is saved. 
Herodotus noticed the same principle of compensation in the Persian law of 
his time (1, 137 ; cf. VII, 194). 

VENDfDAD. 

the. Patet. The performance of the Patet has only a 
religious effect : it saves the sinner from penalties in the 
other world, but not from those here below : it delivers him 
before God, but not before man. When the sacrilegious 
cleanser has repented his sin, he is not the less flayed and 
beheaded, but his soul is saved l. Yet, although it has no 
efficacy in causing the sin to be remitted, the absence of it 
has power to cause it to be aggravated 2 *. 

§ 23. Thus far for sins that can be atoned for. There 
are some that arc an&peretha, ‘inexpiable/ which means, 
as it seems, that they arc punished with death here below, 
and with torments in the other world. 

Amongst the anfiperctlia sins arc named the burning of 
the dead, the burying of the dead a, the eating dead matter 4, 
unnatural sin r\ and self-pollution °. Although it is not 
expressly declared that these sins were punished with 
death, yet we know it of several of them, cither from 
Greek accounts or from Parsi tradition. There arc also 
whole classes of sinners whose life, it would seem, can be 
taken by any one who detects them in the act, such as the 
courtezan, the highwayman, the Sodomite, and the corpse- 
burner7. 

§ 24. Such are the most important principles of the Maz- 
dcan law that can be gathered from the Vcndidad. These 
details, incomplete as they are, may give us an idea, if not 
of the Sassanian practice, at least of the Sassanian ideal. 
That it was an ideal which intended to pass into practice, 
we know from the religious wars against Armenia, and 
from the fact that very often the superintendence of jus- 
tice and the highest offices of the state were committed to 
Mobeds. 

We must now add a few words on the plan of the fol- 
lowing translation. As to our method we beg to refer to 
the second chapter above. It rests on the Parsi tradition, 
corrected or confirmed by the comparative method. The 

1 Farg. IX, 49, n. ; cf. Ill, 20 seq. 2 Farg. IV, 20, 24, 28, 32, 35, &c. 

3 Farg. I, 13, 17 ; Strabo XV, 14. * Farg. VII, 23 seq. 

5 Farg. 1, 1 2 ; cf. VIII, 32. « Farg. VIII, 27. 

7 Seep, in, n. 1 ; Farg. XVIII, 64. 

INTRODUCTION, V. 

Cl 

Parsi tradition is found in the Pahlavi Commentary \ the 
understanding of which was facilitated to us first by the 
Gujarathi translation and paraphrase of Aspendiarji1 2, and 
by a Persian transliteration and translation belonging to 
the Haug collection in Munich 3, for the use of which we 
were indebted to the obliging kindness of the Director of 
the State Library in Munich, Professor von Halm. The 
Ravaets and the Saddar4 frequently gave us valuable 
information as to the traditional meaning of doubtful pas- 
sages. As for the works of European scholars, we arc 
much indebted to the Commentary on the Avcsta by Pro- 
fessor Spiegel, and to the translations in the second edition 
of Martin Ilaug’s Essays. 

We have followed the text of the Avcsta as given by 
Westergaard ; the division into paragraphs is according to 
Westergaard ; but we have given in brackets the corre- 
sponding divisions of Professor Spiegel’s edition. 

Many passages in the Vcndidad Sadah are mere quota- 
tions from the Pahlavi Commentary which have crept into 
the Sadah text : we have not admitted them into the text. 
They are generally known to be spurious from their not 
being translated in the Commentary5: yet the absence of 
a Pahlavi translation is not always an unmistakable sign of 
such spuriousness. Sometimes the translation has been lost 
in our manuscripts, or omitted as having already been given 
in identical or nearly identical terms. When we thought 

1 Our quotations refer to the text given in Spiegel’s edition, but corrected 

after the London manuscript. 

3 Bombay, 1842, 2 vols. in 8°. 

3 Unfortunately the copy is incomplete : there are two lacunae, one from I, 

11 to the end of the chapter; the other, more extensive, from VI, 26 to IX. 
The perfect accordance of Ter si an translation with the Gujarathi of Aspen- 

diarji shows that both arc derived from one and the same source. Their 
accordance is striking even in mistakes; for instance, the Pahlavi avastar 

a transliteration of the Zend a-vaslra, ‘without pastures’ 
(VII, 28), is misread by the Persian translator Avastar, ‘ he who wishes,* 

owing to the ambiguity of the Pahlavi letter /*> (av or hv ), and it is translated 
by Aspendiaiji .Kahdn&r, ‘ the wisher.* 

4 The prose Saddar (as found in the Great Ravaet), which differs considerably 
from the Saddar in verse, as translated by Hyde. 

8 Without speaking of their not being connected with the context. See 
Farg. I, 4, 15, 20 ; II, 6, 20 ; V, 1 ; VII, 53“54- 

cu 

VENDiDAD. 

that this was the case, we have admitted the untranslated 
passages into the text, but in brackets \ 

We have divided the principal Fargards into several 
sections according to the matter they contain : this divi- 
sion, which is meant as an attempt to resolve the Vcndidad 
into its primitive fragments, has, of course, no traditional 
authority, the divisions into paragraphs being the only ones 
that rest upon the authority of the manuscripts. 

The translation will be found, in many passages, to differ 
greatly from the translations published heretofore1 2. The 
nature of this series of translations did not allow us to give 
full justificatory notes, but we have endeavoured in most 
cases to make the explanatory notes account to scholars 
for the new meanings we have adopted, and, in some cases, 
we hope that the original text, read anew, will by itself 
justify our translation3. 

We must not conclude this introduction without ten- 
dering our warmest thanks to Mr. E. W. West, who kindly 
revised the MS. of the translation before it went to press, 
and who has, we hope, succeeded in making our often 
imperfect English more acceptable to English readers. 

JAMES DARMESTETER. 

Paris, 

November, 1879. 

1 Farg. VIT, 3 ; VI IT, 95. Formulae and enumerations arc often left untrans- 
lated, although they must he considered part of the text (VII T, 72; XI, 9, 12 ; 
XX, 6, &c.) 

- Complete translations of thcVendidad have been published by Anquctil 
Duperron in France (Paris, 1771), by Professor Spiegel in Germany (Leipzig, 
1S52), by Canon de Ilarlez in Belgium (Louvain, 1877). The translation of 
Professor Spiegel was translated into English by ^Professor Blecck, who added 
useful information from inedited Gujarathi translations (Hertford. 1864). 

3 The following is a list of the principal abbreviations used in this volume: — 

Asp. = Aspendiarji’s translation. 

Bund.-Bundahis; Arabic numbers refer to the chapter (according to Justi’s 
edition) ; Roman numbers refer to the page and line. 

Comm. » The Pahlavi Commentary. 

Gr. Rav.*=Le Grand Ravaet (in the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris, Supple- 
ment Persnn, No. 47). 

Orm. Ahr. = Ormazd et Ahriman, Paris, Vieweg, 1877. 

vendIdAd. 

vend! dAd. 

Fargarp I. 

This chapter is an enumeration of sixteen lands created by 
Ahura Mazda, and of as many plagues created in opposition by 
Angra Mainyu. 

Many attempts have been made, not only to identify these six- 
teen lands, but also to draw historical conclusions from their order 
of succession, as representing the actual order of the migrations 
and settlements of the old Iranian tribes \ But there is nothing in 
the text that would authorise us to look to it even for legendary 
records, much less for real history. We have here nothing more 
than a geographical description of Iran, such as might be expected 
in a religious work like the Vendidad, that is to say, one that 
contains mythical lands as well as real countries. It is not easy to 
decide with perfect certainty, in every case, whether we have to do 
with a land of the former or of the latter kind, owing partly to our 
deficient knowledge of the geography of ancient Iran, partly to the 
fact that names, originally belonging to mythical lands, are often 
in later times attached to real ones. 

Of these sixteen lands there are certainly nine which have really 
existed, and of which we know the geographical position, as we 
are able to follow their names from the records of the Achaemenian 
kings or the works of classical writers down to the map of modern 
Iran. They are the following : — 

1 Rhode, Die heilige Sage des Zendvolks, p. 61 ; Ileeren, Idcen 
zur Geschichte, I, p. 498 ; Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde I, 
p. 526 ; Haug in Bunsen's work, Aegypten’s Stellung, V, 2nd part, 
p. 104; Kiepert, Monatsberichte der Berliner Akadcmic, 1856, 
p. 621.— New light was thrown on this record by M. Br£al in his 
paper ‘De la gdographie de fAvcsta' (in the Melanges de mytho- 
logie et de linguistique, p. 187 seq.) 

[4] - B 

2 

vendIdAd. 

ZEND NAME. 

OLD PERSIAN. 

GREEK. 

MODERN NAME. 

Sughdha (2) 

Suguda 

Soyfkavrj 

(Samarkand) 

Mfluru(3) 

Margu 

M apyiavr) 

Merv 

Bakhdhi(4) 

Bakhtri 

JlaKTpa 

Balkh 

Ilaroyu (6) 

Haraiva 

VA pcia 

Hari-rfid 

Vchrkana (9) 

Varkdna 

'YpKtxvia 

Gorg&n 

Iiarahvaiti (10) 

Harauvati 

*A pd\(OTOf 

Ilarftt 

IIaetuma//t(n) 

'l&TvpavBpos 

Helmend 

Ragha (12) 

Raga 

*P ayat 

Rai 

Ilapta hi//du (15) 

IIi//davas 

ilvboi 

(Pait^ab) 

The real existence of Nisfiya (5) is certain, although its position 
cannot be exactly determined (see the note to § 8). 

For the other lands we are confined for information to the 
Pahlavi Commentary. Aakhra( 1 3) is only transliterated, whether the 
name was then too much known to require any further explana- 
tion or too little to allow of any. Urva (8) is described as being 
Masan (‘the land of Masan’ or ‘the land of the Great’), a name 
which applied, in the Sassanian ages, to the land around Ispahan 
(Firdausi, ed. Mohl, V, 270). 

For ‘ Varena, the fouf-cornered’ (14), the Commentary hesitates 
between the Padashkhvargar mountains (the Elborz) and Kirman, 
a hesitation easily accounted for by the fact that Varena is the seat 
of the struggle between AsLr Dahaka and Thraetaona, between the 
storm serpent and the storm god, and was formerly ‘the four- 
sided Heaven' (see Introd. IV, 12, 23). Modern tradition decides in 
favour of Padashkhvargar, probably because the serpent was at last 
bound to Dcmavand, the highest peak in that chain. The claims of 
Kirman were probably founded on the popular etymology of its 
name, ‘ the land of snakes.’ 

‘Vackereta, of the evil shadows’ (8), is identified with Kapul 
(Cabul) ; whether rightly or wrongly, we are unable to decide ; 
yet, as it is spoken of only as the seat of the adventures of Kere- 
saspa (see Introd. IV, 21), it may be suspected that this assimilation 
rests merely on the fact that, in later tradition, the legend of Kere- 
saspa was localised in the table-land of Peshyans&i, in Kabulistan 
(Bund. XXX). 

In the enumeration there is no apparent order whatever, and 
Ormazd, in his creations, seems to travel all over the map, forward 
and backward, without the slightest regard to the cardinal points. 
Yet, the starting point and the final point have not been arbitrarily 
chosen: the first land created was ‘the Airyana Vae&A by the 
Vanguhi Daitya,' and the last was the land by the Rangha. Now, 

FARGARD I. 

3 

the Vanguhi and the Rangha were originally the celestial rivers that 
came down from heaven (as two heavenly Gahgas) to surround 
the earth, the one in the east, the other in the west (Bund. 
XX) ; this is why the creation begins with a land by the Vanguhi 
and ends with a land by the Rangha. 

In the Sassanian ages, when the Tigris was definitively the border 
of Iran in the west, the Rangha was identified with it, and the 
sixteenth land is accordingly described in the Commentary as 
being Arvastan-i-Rfim, or Roman Mesopotamia. But all the Avesta 
passages in which the Rangha is cited refer to its mythical nature, 
as the river in the far-off horizon, as the surrounding Okeanos, and, 
now and then, still resembling its Vcdic homonym, the Rasa, as 
the river that divides the gods from the fiends. 

The first land, the Airyana Vae^o by the Vanguhi Daitya, remained 
to the last a mythical region. It was originally the abode of Yima 
and of the righteous, that is to say, a particular form of paradise 
(see Introd. IV, 38, and Farg. II). Later on, it was looked for in 
the countries north of Adarbaijan, probably in order that it should 
be as near as possible to the seat of the Zoroastrian religion, yet 
without losing its supernatural character by the counter-evidence 
of facts. This brought about the division of the Vanguhi Daitya 
into two rivers: as the Airyana Vae^o was localised in the country 
north of Adarbaijan, the river in it must become identified with the 
A raxes (Aras) ; but, at the same time, it continued to surround 
the world eastward under the name of Veh (Vanguhi), which was the 
Sassanian name of the Oxus — Indus 1. It seems that in the time of 
Herodotus, the Araxcs and the Oxus were considered one and the 
same river 2, as the Oxus and the Indus were later on ; this would 
account for his strange statement that the Araxcs, which is con- 
fessedly with him the Oxus or Yaxartes, springs from the land 
of the Matianians, like the Cyndes, and flows eastwards (I, 202 ; 
IV, 40 ; cf. Ill, 36 ; IV, 1 1 ) ; and, at the same time, this would 
account both for how the Airyana Vae#6 could be localised in the 
basin of the Araxes and how the Oxus could flow eastwards to 
fall into the Arabian sea 3. 

1 The Oxus and the Indus were believed to be one and the same 
river (Bund. 1. c.; sec Garrcz, Journal Asiatique, 1869, II, 195 seq.) 

2 Running under the Caspian sea, as Arcthusa runs under the 
Sicilian sea and the Rangha itself under the Persian gulf (Bund. 
XX ; cf. Garrez 1. c.) 

3 Whether in the time when this Fargard was written, the Airyana 

B 2 

4 

vendIdAd. 

It follows hence that no historical conclusions can be drawn from 
this description : it was necessary that it should begin with the 
Vanguhi and end with the Rangha. To look to it for an account 
of geographical migrations, is converting cosmology into history. 

Of the counter-creations of Angra Mainyu there is little to be 
said: they are different vices and plagues, which are generally 
unconnected with the country to the creation of which they answer. 
Some of them are expressed by &ra£ Xryo^wi, the meaning of 
which is doubtful or unknown. 

If we assume that only lands belonging to the Iranian world 
were admitted into the list, the mention of the Seven Rivers would 
indicate that the first Fargard was not composed earlier than the 
time when the basin of the Indus became a part of Iran, that is, 
not earlier than the reign of Darius the First. 

1. Ahura Mazda1 spake unto Spitama2 Zara- 
thiutra * saying : 

2. I have made every land dear to its dwellers, 
even though it had no charms whatever in it 4 : had 
I not made every land dear to its dwellers, even 
though it had no charms whatever in it, then the 
whole living world would have invaded the Airyana 
VaiVo \ 

3 (5). The first of the good lands and countries 

Va&;6 was still believed to be in the far-off lands of the rising sun, 
or already on the banks of the Aras, we leave undecided. 

1 See Introd. IV, 4. 

2 Literally ‘the most beneficent/ an epithet of Zarathujtra, 
which was later mistaken for a family name, ‘ the Spitamide.’ 

3 See Introd. IV, 40. 

4 ‘Every one fancies that the land where he is born and has 
been brought up is the best and fairest land that I have created.’ 
(Comm.) 

6 Sec following clause. Clause 2 belongs to the Commentary ; 
it is composed of quotations that illustrate the alternative process 
of the creation : ‘First, Ahura Mazda would create a land of such 
kind that its dwellers might like it, and there could be nothing more 
delightful. Then he who is all death would bring against it a 
counter-creation.’ 

FARGARD I. 

5 

which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the Airyana 
Vaefo \ by the good river Daitya 2. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft the serpent 
in the river 3 and winter, a work of the Daevas 4. 

4 (9). There are ten winter months there, two 
summer months ; and those are cold for the waters ®, 
cold for the earth, cold for the trees 7. Winter falls 
there, with the worst of its plagues. 

5 (13). The second of the good lands and 
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the 
plains8 in Sughdha®. 

1 See the Tntrod. to the Fargard. 

2 ‘ The good Daitya/ ‘ The DSitik (Daitya) comes from Iran 
X&g (Airyana Vae^o), it flows through the mountains of Gor^istan 
(Georgia/ Bund. p. 51, 19). It was therefore, in the time of the 
Sassanides, a name of the Araxes. 

3 ‘ There are many Khrafstras in the Daitik, as it is said, The 
Daitfk full of Khrafstras’ (Bund. p. 51, 20). The serpent in the 
river was originally the mythical Serpent, Asij, who overthrew and 
killed the king of Iran Ve^, Yima (see Introd. IV, 18); then it was 
identified, as appears from the Bundahis, with the snakes that 
abound on the banks of the Araxes (Morier, A Second Journey, 
p. 250). 

4 As Iran Ycg is a place of refuge for mankind and all life 
from the winter that is to destroy the world (see Farg. II, 21 seq.), 
winter was thought, by a mythical misunderstanding, to be the 
counter-creation of Iran Y&g : hence the glacial description of that 
strange paradise (see the following clause). 

c Vendidad Sadah : ‘ It is known that [in the ordinary course of 
nature] there are seven months of summer and five of winter’ 
(see Bund. XXV). 

0 Some say : ‘Even those two months of summer are cold for 
the waters . . / (Comm.; cf. Mainyo-i-khard XLIV, 20, and above, 
n. 4). 

7 Vend. Sadah : ‘There reigns the core and heart of winter/ 

8 Doubtful : possibly the name of a river (the Zarafshand). 

9 Suguda; Sogdiana. 

6 

VENDIDAD. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft the fly 
Skaitya1 2, which brings death to the cattle. 

6 (17). The third of the good lands and countries 
which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the strong, holy 
M6uru 8. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft sinful lusts 3. 

7 (21). The fourth of the good lands and coun- 
tries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the 
beautiful Bdkhdhi 4 * * with high-lifted banners. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft the Bravara r*. 

8 (25). The fifth of the good lands and countries 
which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was Nisaya w, that 
lies between Mourn and Bdkhdhi. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft the sin of 
unbelief7. 

9 (29). The sixth of the good lands and countries 

1 A word unknown : possibly ‘ the cattle fly.’ It is a fly that 
hides itself among the corn and the fodder, and thence stings with 
a venomous sting the ox that cats of it (Comm, and Asp.) 

2 Margu; Margiana; Merv. 

3 Translated according to the Comm, and Asp. 

4 Bakhtri; Bactra; Balkh. 

B ‘ The corn-carrying ants ’ (Asp. ; cf. Farg. XIV, 5). 

* There were several towns of this name, but none between 
Mduru and Bakhdhi. But the sentence may be translated also : 
‘ Nisaya between which and Bakhdhi Mount lies,' which would 
point to Ni<raia, the capital of Parthia {liapdavna-a ap. Isid. of 
Charax 12); cf. Pliny 6, 25 (29). 

7 ‘ One must believe in the law, and have no doubt whatever 

about it in the heart, and firmly believe that the good and right 
law that Ormazd sent to the world is the same law that was brought 
to us by Zardurt ’ (Saddar 1). 

FARGARD I. 

7 

which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was Haroyu 1 with 
its lake2. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft the stained 
mosquito 3. 

10 (33). The seventh of the good lands and 
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was 
Vaekereta4, of the evil shadows. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft the Pairika 
Knathaiti, who clave unto Keresaspa r'. 

11 (37). The eighth of the good lands and 

countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was Urva 
of the rich pastures #. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft the sin 
of pride7. 

12 (41). The ninth of the good lands and 

countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was 

Khnewta in Vehrkana s. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he .counter-created by his witchcraft a sin for 
which there is no atonement, the unnatural sin 

13 (45). The tenth of the good lands and 

countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the 
beautiful Harahvaiti 

1 Haraiva ; Arcia; the basin of the I lari river, or Herat. 

2 Doubtful. . 8 Doubtful. 

4 ‘Kapur (Comm.; see the Introd. to the Fargard). 

5 See Introd. IV, 21. 

6 According to Asp. Tus (in Khorasan); more probably the 
land around Ispahan. See the Introd. to the Fargard. 

7 Or better, tyranny: ‘the great are proud there ’ (Comm.) 

8 Varkana; Hyrcania. ‘Khnewta is a river in Vehrkana * 
(Comm.); consequently the river Gorman. 

9 See Farg.VlII, 31. 10 Harauvati; *A pd*©™*; Harftt. 

8 

vend!dad. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft a sin for 
which there is no atonement, the burying of the 
dead 1. 

14 (49). The eleventh of the good lands and 
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the 
bright, glorious Haetumawt 2. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft the evil 
witchcraft of the Y&tus3. 

15 (5 3). And this is how the Y atu’s nature shows 
itself : it shows itself by the look 4 ; and then, when- 
ever the wizard goes and howls forth his spells 5 6, 
most deadly works of witchcraft go forth 

16 (59). The twelfth of the good lands and 
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was Ragha 
of the three races 7. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft the sin 
of utter unbelief8. 

17 (63}. The thirteenth of the good lands and 

1 See Farg. Ill, 36 seq. 

2 The basin of the 'E Tv/iavdpos or Erymanthus ; now Ilclmend. 

Cf. Farg. XIX, 39. 

s The wizards ; see Introd. IV, 20. 4 The evil eye. 

6 As a l’rfijr. Witchcraft is exercised either by the eye or by the 
voice (Asp.) 

6 Vendid&d Sadah: ‘Then they come forth to kill and to strike 
to the heart.’ A gloss cites, as productions of the wizard, ‘ snow 
and hail’ (cf. Hippocrates, De Morbo Sacro 1, and Pausanias 2, 
34, 4). To that gloss seems to belong the corrupt Zend sentence 
that follows, and that may mean ‘they increase the plague of 
locusts’ (cf. Farg. VII, 26). 

7 Rai-. See Introd. Ill, 15. 

* ‘ They doubt themselves and cause other people to doubt ’ 
(Comm.) 

FARGARD I. 

9 

countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the 
strong, holy A'akhra '. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft a sin 
for which there is no atonement, the burning of 
corpses 2. 

j8 (67). The fourteenth of the good lands and 
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the 
four-cornered Varena 3, for which was born Thrae- 
taona, who smote A2L? Dah&ka. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft abnormal 
issues in women 4 and the oppression of foreign 
rulers ®. 

19 (72). The fifteenth of the good lands and 
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the 
Seven Rivers". 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft abnormal 
issues in women and excessive heat. 

20 (76). The sixteenth of the good lands and 
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the 
land by the floods of the Rangha 7, where people live 
without a head8. 

' A land unknown. Asp.: China, which is certainly wrong. 
There was a town of that name in Khorasan (A’arkh). 

2 See Farg. VIII, 73. 

3 See the Introd. to the Farg. 4 Farg. XVI, 11 seq. 

6 Possibly an allusion to Aaij Dahaka (Zohak), who, as a king, 
represents the foreign conqueror (in later tradition the Tazi or 
Arab ; possibly in older tradition the Assyrian). 

3 The basin of the affluents of the Indus, the modern Pafi^ab 
(=the Five Rivers). 

7 ‘ Arvast&n-i-Rfim (Roman Mesopotamia),’ (Comm.; see the 
Introd. to the Farg.) 

3 It is interpreted in a figurative sense as meaning ‘ people who 

10 

VF.NDIDAD. 

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, 
and he counter-created by his witchcraft winter, a 
work of the Daevas *. 

21 (81). There are still other lands and coun- 
tries, beautiful and deep, desirable and bright, and 
thriving. 

Fargard II. 

Yima (Gamshed). 

This Fargard may be divided into two parts. 

First part (1-20). Aliura Mazda proposes to Yima, the son of 
Vivanghat, to receive the law from him and to bring it to men. 
On his refusal, he bids him keep his creatures and make them 
prosper. Yima accordingly makes them thrive and increase, keeps 
death and disease away from them, and three times enlarges the 
earth, which had become too narrow for its inhabitants. 

Second part (2 1 to the end). On the approach of a dire winter, 
which is to destroy every living creature, Yima, being advised by 
Ahura, builds a Vara to keep there the seeds of every kind of animals 
and plants, and the blessed live there a most happy life under his 
rule. 

The tale in the first part refers to Yima as the first man, the first 
king, and the founder of civilisation (sec Intiod.1V, 38); the talc in 

do not hold the chief for a chief* (Comm.), which is the translation 
for asraosha (Comm, ad XVI, 18), ‘rebel against the law/ and 
would well apply in the Sassanian ages to the non-Mazdean people 
of Arvastan-i-Rum. I think we must adopt the literal meaning, 
and recognise in this passage the source, or at least the oldest 
form, of those tales about people without a head, with eyes on 
their shoulders, which Pliny received from the half-Persian Ctesias 
(Hist. N. VII, 2 ; V, 8 ; cf. Aul. Cell. IX, 4; Sanct. August. Dc 
Civit. Dei, XVI, 8). Persian geographers mention such people, they 
place them in the Oriental islands near China, whence they sent 
ambassadors to the Khan of the Tatars (Ouseley, Catalogue). The 
mythical origin of those tales may be traced in Indian and Greek 
mythology (Orm. Ahr, § 222 ; cf. Pausanias IX, 20). 

1 Vendidad Sadah : ‘ And the oppression of the land that comes 
from taosa(?)/ 

FARGARD II. 

II 

the second part is a combination of the myths of Yima, as the first 
dead and the king of the dead over whom he rules in a region of 
bliss, and of old myths about the end of the world. The world, 
lasting a long year of twelve millenniums, was to end by a dire 
winter, like the Eddie Fimbul winter, to be followed by an everlast- 
ing spring, when men, sent back to earth from the heavens, should 
enjoy, in an eternal earthly life, the same happiness that they had 
enjoyed after their death in the realm of Yima. Hut as in the 
definitive form which was taken by Mazdean cosmology the world 
was made to end by fire, its destruction by winter was no longer the 
last incident of its life, and therefore, the Var of Yima, instead of 
remaining, as it was originally, the paradise that gives back to 
earth its inhabitants, came to be nothing more than a sort of Noah’s 
ark (see Introd. IV, 39, and Orm. Ahr. §§ 94, 131, 184, 185). 

I. 

1. Zarathmtra asked Ahura Mazda : 

O Ahura Mazda, most beneficent Spirit, Maker 
of the material world, thou Holy One! 

Who was the first mortal, before myself, Zara- 
tluutra, with whom thou, Ahura Mazda, didst 
converse l, whom thou didst teach the law of Ahura, 
the law of Zarathustra ? 

2 (4). Ahura Mazda answered : 

The fair Yima, the great shepherd, O holy Zara- 
thiutra ! he was the first mortal, before thee, 
Zaratlnutra, with whom I, Ahura Mazda, did 
converse, whom I taught the law of Ahura, the 
law of Zarathu-stra. 

3 (7). Unto him, O Zarathiutra, I, Ahura Mazda, 
spake, saying: ‘Well, fair Yima, son of Vivanghat, 
be thou the preacher and the bearer of my law ! ’ 

And the fair Yima, O Zarathustra, replied unto 
me, saying: 

1 ‘ On the law’ (Comm.) 

12 

vendIdAd. 

‘ I was not born, I was not taught to be the 
preacher and the bearer of thy law1.’ 

4(11). Then I, Ahura Mazda, said thus unto 
him, O Zarathiwtra : 

‘ Since thou wantest not to be the preacher and 
the bearer of my law, then make thou my worlds 
thrive, make my worlds increase : undertake thou to 
nourish, to rule, and to watch over my world.’ 

5 (14). And the fair Yima replied unto me, O 
Zarathustra, saying: 

‘Yes! I will make thy worlds thrive, I will make 
thy worlds increase. Yes! I will nourish, and rule, 
and watch over thy world. There shall be, while 
I am king, neither cold wind nor hot wind, neither 
disease nor death.’ 

7 (17)2 * 4 * * * 8. Then I, Ahura Mazda, brought two 
implements unto him : a golden ring and a poniard 
inlaid with gold*, behold, here Yima bears the 
royal sway 1 

8 (20). Thus, under the sway of Yima, three 
hundred winters passed away, and the earth was 
replenished with flocks and herds, with men and 

1 In the Vedas, Yama, as the first man, is the first priest too; he 

brought worship here below as well as life, and ‘ first he stretched 

out the thread of sacrifice.’ Yima had once the same right as his 
Indian brother to the title of a founder of religion : he lost it as, 
in the course of the development of Mazdeism, Zaratlnutra became 
the titular law-giver (cf. Introd. IV, 40; Orm. Ahr. § 156). 

4 The § 6 is composed of unconnected Zend quotations, that 

are no part of the text and are introduced by the commentator for 
the purpose of showing that ‘although Yima did not teach the law 

and train pupils, he was nevertheless a faithful and a holy man, 

and rendered men holy too (?).’ 

8 As the symbol and the instrument of sovereignty. ‘He reigned 
supreme by the strength of the ring and of the poniard ’ (Asp.) 

FARGARD II. 

13 

dogs and birds and with red blazing fires, and there 
was no more room for flocks, herds, and men. 

9. Then I warned the fair Yima, saying : 4 O fair 
Yima, son of Vlvanghat, the earth has become full 
of flocks and herds, of men and dogs and birds 
and of red blazing fires, and there is no more room 
for flocks, herds, and men/ 

10. Then Yima stepped forward, towards the 
luminous space, southwards, to meet the sun1, and 
(afterwards) he pressed the earth with the golden 
ring, and bored it with the poniard, speaking thus : 

‘ O Spe/Jta Armaiti 2, kindly open asunder and 
stretch thyself afar, to bear flocks and herds and 
men/ 

11. And Yima made the earth grow larger by 
one-third than it was before, and there came flocks 
and herds and men, at his will and wish, as many 
as he wished3. 

1 Thence is derived the following tradition recorded by G. du 
Chinon : 1 Ils en nomment un qui s’allait tous les jours promener 
dans le Ciel du Soleil d’ou il aportait la sciance dcs Astrcs, aprez 
les avoir visites dc si prez. Ils nomment ce grand personnage 
Gemachid* (Relations nouvelles du Levant, Lyon, 1671, p. 478). 
There is no direct connexion, as it seems, between the two acts 
of Yima, namely, between his going to the heaven of the sun- and 
his enlarging the surface of the earth. The meaning of the first 
is given, perhaps, by the tale about the dream of Cyrus : 4 lie 
saw in a dream the sun at his feet : thrice he tried vainly to seize 
it with his hands, as the sun was rolling and sliding away. The 
Magi said to him that the threefold effort to seize the sun presaged 
to him a reign of thirty years5 (Dino ap. Cicero, De Divin. I, 23). 
Yima goes three times to the sun, to take thence royal power 
for three times three hundred years. In Aryan mythology, the 
sun is, as is well known, the symbol and source of royalty: 
Persian kings in particular are 4 the brothers of the sun.' 

2 The genius of the earth (see Introd. IV, 33). 

* The happiness which Yima made reign on the earth is also 

14 

vendIdad. 

12 (23). Thus, under the sway of Yima, six 
hundred winters passed away, and the earth was 
replenished with flocks and herds, with men and 
dogs and birds and with red blazing fires, and there 
was no more room for flocks, herds, and men. 

x 3. And I warned the fair Yima, saying : ‘ O fair 
Yima, son of Vlvanghat, the earth has become full 
of flocks and herds, of men and dogs and birds 
and of red blazing fires, and there is no more room 
for flocks, herds, and men.’ 

14. Then Yima stepped forward, towards the 
luminous space, southwards, to meet the sun, and 
(afterwards) he pressed the earth with the golden 
ring, and bored it with the poniard, speaking thus : 

‘ O Spewta Armaiti, kindly open asunder and 
stretch thyself afar, to bear flocks and herds and 
men.’ 

15. And Yima made the earth grow larger by 
two-thirds than it was before, and there came flocks 
and herds and men, at his will and wish, as many 
as he wished. 

16 (26). Thus, under the sway of Yima, nine 
hundred winters passed away, and the earth was 
replenished with flocks and herds, with men and 
dogs and. birds and with red blazing fires, and there 
was no more room for flocks, herds, and men. 

17(28). And I warned the fair Yima, saying: 

‘ O fair Yima, son of Vlvanghat, the earth has be- 
come full of flocks and herds, of men and dogs and 
birds and of red blazing fires, and there is no more 
room for flocks, herds, and men.’ 

described Ys. IX, 4 ; Yt. IX, 8 seq. ; Yt. XV, 15. In the Shah 
Namah he is the founder of civilisation, of social order, of arts 
and sciences, and the first builder (cf. § 25 seq.) 

FARGARD II. 

15 

18 (31). Then Yima stepped forward, towards the 
luminous space, southwards, to meet the sun, and 
(afterwards) he pressed the earth with the golden 
ring, and bored it with the poniard, speaking thus : 

‘ O Spewta Armaiti, kindly open asunder and 
stretch thyself afar, to bear flocks and herds and 
men.’ 

19 (37). And Yima made the earth grow larger 
by three-thirds than it was before, and there came 
flocks and herds and men, at his will and wish, as 
many as he wished. 

II. 

21 (42) h The Maker, Ahura Mazda, of high 
renown1 2 * in the Airyana Vae^o, by the good river 
Daitya :1, called together a meeting of the celestial 
gods. 

The fair Yima, the good shepherd, of high renown2 
in the Airyana Vae^o, by the good river Daitya, 
called together a meeting of the excellent mortals 4. 

To that meeting came Ahura Mazda, of high 
renown in the Airyana V aef 6, by the good river 
Daitya ; he came together with the celestial gods. 

To that meeting came the fair Yima, the good 
shepherd, of high renown in the Airyana V ae^o, by 
the good river Dditya ; he came together with the 
excellent mortals. 

22 (46). And Ahura Mazda spake unto Yima, 
saying : 

‘ O fair Yima, son of V Ivanghat ! U pon the material 

1 § 20 belongs to the Commentary. 

2 Or perhaps, ‘ whose voice was loud,’ &c. (while proclaiming 
the law). 

•' See Farg. I, Introd., and notes to § 2. 

4 Primitively the souls of the righteous (sec Introd. IV, 38). 

1 6 vendIdad. 

world the fatal winters are going to fall, that shall 
bring the fierce, foul frost ; upon the material world 
the fatal winters 1 are going to fall, that shall make 
snow-flakes fall thick, even an aredvi deep on the 
highest tops of mountains 2. 

23 (52). And all the three sorts of beasts shall 
perish, those that live in the wilderness, and those 
that live on the tops of the mountains, and those 
that live in the bosom of the dale, under the shelter 
of stables. 

24 (57). Before that winter, those fields would 
bear plenty of grass for cattle : now with floods 
that stream, with snows that melt, it will seem a 
happy land in the world, the land wherein footprints 
even of sheep may still be seen 3. 

25 (61). Therefore make thee a Vara4, long as a 

1 The Commentary has here : Malkosan, which is the plural of 
the Hebrew Malkox, ‘rain;’ this seems to be an attempt to 
identify the Iranian legend with the biblical tradition of the deluge. 
The attempt was both a success and a failure; Malkoj entered 
the Iranian mythology and became naturalised there, but it was 
mistaken for a proper noun, and became the name of a demon, 
who by witchcraft will let loose a furious winter on the earth to 
destroy it (Saddar 9). What may be called the diluvial version 
of the myth is thus summed up in the Mainyd-i-khard : ‘ By him 
(Gamshid) the enclosure of Jam-kard was made ; when there is 
that rain of Malakosan, as it is declared in the religion, that 
mankind and the remaining creatures and creations of Hormezd, 
the lord, will mostly perish; then they will open the gate of that 
enclosure of Jam-kard, and men and cattle and the remaining 
creatures and creation of the creator Hdrmezd will come from 
that enclosure and arrange the world again* (XXVII, 27 scq. ; 
edited and translated by E. West). 

2 ‘Even where it (the snow) is least, it will be one Vitasti two 
fingers deep’ (Comm.); that is, fourteen fingers deep. 

8 Doubtful. 

4 Literally, ‘ an enclosure.' This Vara is known in later mytho- 
logy as the Var-Gam-kard, ‘ the Var made by Yima/ 

FARGARD II. 

1 7 

riding-ground on every side of the square ', and 
thither bring the seeds of sheep and oxen, of men, 
of dogs, of birds, and of red blazing fires. 

Therefore make thee a Vara, long as a riding- 
ground on every side of the square, to be an abode 
for men; a Vara, long as a riding-ground on every 
side of the square, to be a fold for flocks. 

26 (65). There thou shalt make waters flow in a 
bed a hathra long ; there thou shalt settle birds, by 
the ever-green banks that bear never-failing food. 
There thou shalt establish dwelling places, con- 
sisting of a house with a balcony, a courtyard, and 
a gallery 1 2 3. 

27 (70). Thither thou shalt bring the seeds2 of 
men and women, of the greatest, best, and finest 
kinds on this earth ; thither thou shalt bring the 
seeds of every kind of cattle, of the greatest, best, 
and finest kinds on this earth. 

28 (74). Thither thou shalt bring the seeds of 
every kind of tree, of the greatest, best, and finest 
kinds on this earth ; thither thou shalt bring the 
seeds of every kind of fruit, the fullest of food and 
sweetest of odour. All those seeds shalt thou bring, 
two of every kind, to be kept inexhaustible there, so 
long as those men shall stay in the Vara. 

29 (80). There shall be no humpbacked, none 
bulged forward there ; no impotent, no lunatic ; no 
poverty, no lying; no meanness, no jealousy; no 

1 ‘Two hathras long on every side’ (Comm.) A hathra is 
about an English mile. 

2 The last three words are una£ Xcyopcva of doubtful meaning. 

3 To be sown in the ground, and to grow up into life in due 
time (? see § 41, text and note). 

[4] C 

1 8 vendIdad. 

decayed tooth, no leprous to be confined1, nor any 
of the brands wherewith Angra Mainyu stamps the 
bodies of mortals. 

30 (87). In the largest part of the place thou 
shalt make nine streets, six in the middle part, three 
in the smallest. To the streets of the largest part 
thou shalt bring a thousand seeds of men and 
women ; to the streets of the middle part, six hun- 
dred; to the streets of the smallest part, three 
hundred. That Vara thou shalt seal up with the 
golden ring 2, and thou shalt make a door, and a 
window self-shining within. 

31 (93). Then Yima said within himself: ‘How 
shall I manage to make that Vara which Ahura 
Mazda has commanded me to make ?’ 

And Ahura Mazda said unto Yima : ‘ O fair 
Yima, son of Vivanghat ! Crush the earth with a 
stamp of thy heel, and then knead it with thy 
hands, as the potter docs when kneading the 
potter’s clay3.’ 

[32. And Yima did as Ahura Mazda wished ; 
he crushed the earth with a stamp of his heel, he 
kneaded it with his hands, as the potter does when 
kneading the potter’s clay4.] 

33 (9 1)- And Yima made a Vara, long as a 
riding-ground on every side of the square. There 
he brought the seeds of sheep and oxen, of men, of 

1 SeeIntrod.V, 14. a Doubtful. 

* In the Shah Namah Gamshid teaches the Dtvs to make and 
knead clay; and they build palaces at his bidding. It was his 
renown, both as a wise king and a great builder, that caused the 

Musulmans to identify him with Solomon. 

4 From the Vendid&d S&dah. 

FARGARD II. 

19 

dogs, of birds, and of red blazing fires. He made 
a Vara, long as a riding-ground on every side of 
the square, to be an abode for men; a Vara, long as 
a riding-ground on every side of the square, to be a 
fold for flocks. 

34 (101). There he made waters flow in a bed a 
hathra long; there he settled birds, by the ever- 
green banks that bear never-failing food. There he 
established dwelling places, consisting of a house 
with a balcony, a courtyard, and a gallery. 

35 (106). Thcre he brought the seeds of men and 
women, of the greatest, best, and finest kinds on this 
earth ; there he brought the seeds of every kind of 
cattle, of the greatest, best, and finest kinds on 
this earth. 

36(110). There he brought the seeds of every 
kind of tree, of the greatest, best, and finest kinds 
on this earth ; there he brought the seeds of every 
kind of fruit, the fullest of food and sweetest of 
odour. All those seeds he brought, two of every 
kind, to be kept inexhaustible there, so long as 
those men shall stay in the Vara. 

37 ( 1 16). And there were no humpbacked, none 
bulged forward there ; no impotent, no lunatic ; no 
poverty, no lying ; no meanness, no jealousy ; no 
decayed tooth, no leprous to be confined, nor any 
of the brands wherewith Angra Mainyu stamps the 
bodies of mortals. 

38 (123). In the largest part of the place he made 
nine streets, six in the middle part, three in the 
smallest. To the streets of the largest part he 
brought a thousand seeds of men and women; to 
the streets of the middle part, six hundred ; to the 
streets of the smallest part, three hundred. That 

c 2 

20 

vendIdAd. 

Vara he sealed up with the golden ring, and he 
made a door, and a window self-shining within. 

39 (I29)- O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! What [lights are there to give light1] 
in the Vara which Yima made ? 

40(131). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘ There are 
uncreated lights and created lights 2. There the 
stars, the moon, and the sun are only once (a year) 
seen to rise and set 3, and a year seems only as a 
day. 

41 (I33)- ‘Every fortieth year, to every couple 
two are born, a male and a female4. And thus 
it is for every sort of cattle. And the men in the 
Vara which Yima made live the happiest life5/ 

1 From the Vcndiddd Sadah. 

2 Heavenly lights and material lights. The Commentary has 
here the following Zend quotation : ‘ All uncreated light shines 
from above ; all the created lights shine from below/ 

We give here the description of Iran-ve^ according to a later 
source, the Mainy6-i-khard (as translated by West) : * Hdrmezd 
created Ara-ves better than the remaining places and districts; 
and its goodness was this, that men's life is three hundred years ; 
and cattle and sheep, one hundred and fifty years ; and their pain 
and sickness are little, and they do not circulate falsehood, and 
they make no lamentation and weeping; and the sovereignty of 
the demon of Avarice, in their body, is little, and in ten men, if they 
eat one loaf, they are satisfied ; and in every forty years, from one 
woman and one man, one child is born ; and their law is goodness, 
and religion the primeval religion, and when they die, they are 
righteous (= blessed); and their chief is Gopatsh&h, and the ruler 
and king is Srosh* (XLIV, 24). 

3 Doubtful. 

4 From the seeds deposited in the Vara (see §§ 27 seq., 35 seq.) ; 
in the same way as the first human couple grew up, after forty 
years, in the shape of a Reivas shrub, from the seed of Gay6mar</ 
received by Spewta Armaiti (the Earth. See Bund. XV). 

5 ‘They live there. for 150 years; some say, they never die/ 
(Comm.) The lattSr are right, that is to say, are nearer the mythical 

FARGARD III. 

42 (137). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Who is he who brought the law of 
Mazda into the Vara which Yima made ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : * It was the bird Kar- 
shipta1, O holy ZarathurtraP 

43 (140). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Who is the lord and ruler there ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Urvatarf-nara2, O Zara- 
thuitra! and thyself, Zarathustra.' 

Fargard IIL 

The Earth. 

I (1-6). The five places where the Earth feels most joy. 

II (7-1 1). The five places where the Earth feels most sorrow. 

III ( 1 2-35). The five things which most rejoice the Earth. 

IV (36-42). Corpses ought not to be buried in the Earth. 

There is a resemblance as to words between the first and 

truth, as the inhabitants of the Vara were primitively the departed 
and therefore immortal. 

1 ‘ The bird Karshipta dwells in the heavens : were he living on 
the earth, he would be the king of birds, lie brought the law 
into the Var of Yima, and recites the Avesta in the language of 
birds' (Bund. XIX and XXIV). As the bird, because of the 
swiftness of his flight, was often considered an incarnation of 
lightning, and as thunder was supposed to be the voice of a god 
speaking from above, the song of the bird was often thought to be 
the utterance of a god and a revelation (see Orm. Ahr. § 157). 

2 Zarathwtra had three sons during his lifetime (cf. Introd. IV, 
40), Isar/-vastra, Hvare-Z’ithra, and Urvatar/-nara, who were respec- 
tively the fathers and chiefs of the three classes, priests, warriors, 
and husbandmen. They play no great part in Mazdean mytho- 
logy, and are little more than three subdivisions of Zarathu^tra 
himself, who was * the first priest, the first warrior, the first hus- 

bandman ' (Yt. XIII, 88). ZarathusLra, as a heavenly priest, was, 
by right, the ratu in Air) ina Vae^o, wfrpt»jy fenrritdj^e religion 
by a sacrifice (Bund. XXXIII 

library 

22 

VEND! DAD. 

second parts, but there is none as to matter; no clause in the 
‘former has its counterpart in the latter. There is more resem- 
blance between the second part and the third ; as the first three 
clauses of the third part (§§ 12, 13, 22) relate to the same things 
as the second, third, and fourth clauses of the second part (§§ 8, 
9, 10). 

Parts I and II are nothing more than dry enumerations. Part 
III is more interesting, as it contains two long digressions, the one 
(§§ 14-21) on funeral laws, the other (§§ 24-33) on holiness of 
husbandry. The fourth part of the chapter may be considered as 
a digression relating to the first clause of the third part (§ 12). 

The things which rejoice or grieve the Earth are those that pro- 
duce fertility and life or sterility and death, either in it or on it. 

The subject of this chapter has become a commonplace topic 
with the Parsis, who have treated it more or less antithetically in 
the Mainyo-i-khard (chaps. V and VI) and in the Ravaets (Gr. 
Rav. pp. 434-437)- 

The second digression (§§ 24-33) translated in Haug’s 
Essays, p. 235 seq. 

I. 

1. 0 Maker of the material world, thou Holy 
One ! Which is the first place where the Earth 
feels most happy ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the place whereon 
one of the faithful steps forward, O Spitama Zara- 
thuitra ! with the holy wood in his hand l, the 
baresma2 in his hand, the holy meat in his hand, 

1 The wood for the fire altar. 

2 The baresma (now called barsom) is a bundle of sacred 
twigs which the priest holds in his hand while reciting the 
prayers. They were formerly twigs of the pomegranate, date, or 
tamarind tree, or of any tree that had no thorns, and were plucked 
with particular ceremonies, which alone made them fit to be used 
for liturgic purposes (cf. Farg. XIX, 18 seq.) The Parsis in India 
found it convenient to replace them by brass wires, which, when 
once consecrated, can be used for an indefinite period. It is the 
baresma which is alluded to by Strabo, when speaking of the 
bundle of thin twigs of heath, which the Magi hold in their hand 

FARGARD III. 

23 

the holy mortar 1 in his hand, fulfilling the law with 
love, and beseeching aloud Mithra, the lord of wide 
pastures, and Rcima Hvk stra2.’ 

2, 3 (6-10). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One 1 Which is the second place where the 
Earth feels most happy ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ It is the place whereon 
one of the faithful erects a house with a priest 
within, with cattle, with a wife, with children, and 
good herds within ; and wherein afterwards the 
cattle go on thriving, holiness is thriving 3, fodder is 
thriving, the dog is thriving, the wife is thriving, 
the child is thriving, the fire is thriving, and every 
blessing of life is thriving.’ 

4(11). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! Which is the third place where the 
Earth feels most happy ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘It is the place where 
one of the faithful cultivates most corn, grass, and 
fruit, O Spitama Zaratluutra ! where he waters 
ground that is dry, or dries ground that is too 
wet.’ 

5 (15). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! Which is the fourth place where the 
Earth feels most happy ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ It is the place where 
there is most increase of flocks and herds.’ 

while reciting their hymns (ray mafias 7roiovvrai tto\vp 

jjdfldco V flVptKtV GW A €7TTQ)V fillTp^V KaT€\()VTe ?, XV, 3, 14). 

1 The Havana or mortar used in crushing the Haoma or 
Horn (see Introd. IV, 28). 

2 The god that gives good folds and good pastures to cattle 
(see Introd. IV, 16). 

3 By the performance of worship. 

VENDiDAD. 

'H 

6 (18). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Which is the fifth place where the 
Earth feels most happy ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘It is the place where 
flocks and herds yield most dung.’ 

II. 

7 (21). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Which is the first place where the 
Earth feels sorest grief? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ It is the neck of Arc- 
zflra1, whereon the hosts of fiends rush forth from 
the burrow of the Druf V 

8 (25). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Which is the second place where the 
Earth feels sorest grief? 

Ahura Mazda answered : * It is the place wherein 
most corpses of dogs and of men lie buried 3. 

9 (28). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Which is the third place where the 
Earth feels sorest grief? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It is the place whereon 
stand most of those Dakhmas on which corpses of 
men are deposited4.’ 

10 (31). O Maker of the material world, thou 

1 The neck of Arezflra (A r e z u r a h e griva) is ‘a mount at the 
gate of hell, whence the demons rush forth ’ (Bund. 22, 16) ; it is 
also called ‘ the head of Arezflra’ (Farg. XIX, 45), or ‘ the back of 
Arezflra ’ (Bund. 21,17). Arezfira was first the name of a fiend 
who was killed by Gayotnarr/ (Mainyo-i-khard XXVII, 15); and 
mount Arezflra was most likely the mountain to which he was 
bound, as Azi Dahaka was to Demavend (see Introd. IV, 18). 

5 Hell. 8 See Introd. V, 9. 

4 With regard to Dakhmas, see Introd. V, ro. ‘ Nor is the Earth 
happy at that place whereon stands a Dakhma with corpses upon 
it ; for that patch of ground will never be clean again till the day of 

FARGARD III. 

25 

Holy One! Which is the fourth place where the 
Earth feels sorest grief? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ It is the place wherein 
are most burrows of the creatures of Angra 
Mainyu V 

11 (34). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Which is the fifth place where the 
Earth feels sorest grief? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It is the place whereon 
the wife and children of one of the faithful 2, O 
Spitama Zaratlnutra ! are driven along the way of 
captivity, the dry, the dusty way, and lift up a voice 
of wailing.’ 

III. 

12 (38). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! Who is the first that rejoices the 
Earth with greatest joy? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘It is he who digs out 
of it most corpses of dogs and men V 

13 (41). O Maker of the material world, thou 

resurrection’ (Gr. Rav. 435, 437). Although the erection of Dakh- 
mas is enjoined by the law, yet the Dakhma in itself is as unclean 
as any spot on the earth can be, since it is always in contact with 
the dead (cf. Farg.VII, 55). The impurity which would otherwise 
be scattered over the whole world, is thus brought together to 
one and the same spot. Yet even that spot, in spite of the Ravaet, 
is not to lie defiled for ever, as every fifty years the Dakhmas ought 
to be pulled down, so that their sites may be restored to their 
natural purity (V. i. Farg. VII, 49 seq. and this Farg. § 13). 

1 ‘Where there are most Khrafstras’ (Comm.); cf. Introd. 
V, xi. 

9 Killed by an enemy. 

9 There is no counterpart give!! to the first grief (§ 7), because, 
as the Commentary naively expresses it, ‘ it is not possible so to 
dig out hell, which will be done at the end of the world’ (Bund. 
XXXI, sub fin.) 

26 

YEN D{ DAD. 

Holy One ! Who is the second that rejoices the - 
Earth with greatest joy ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ It is he who pulls 
down most of those Dakhmas on which corpses of 
men are deposited/ 

14 (44). Let no man alone by himself carry a 
corpse l. If a man alone by himself carry a corpse, 
the Nasu 2 rushes upon him, to defile him, from the 
nose of the dead, from the eye, from the tongue, 
from the jaws, from the sexual organ, from the 
hinder parts. This Dru^, this Nasu, falls upon 
him, stains him even to the end of the nails, and he 
is unclean, thenceforth, for ever and ever. 

15 (49). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! What shall be the place of that man 
who has carried a corpse alone 3 4 ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘It shall be the place 
on this earth wherein is least water and fewest 
plants, whereof the ground is the cleanest and the 
driest and the least passed through by flocks and 
herds, by Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda, by the con- 
secrated bundles of baresma, and by the faithful.’ 

1 No ceremony in general can be performed by one man alone. 

Two Mobeds are wanted to perform the Vendid&d service, two 
priests for the Barash num, two persons for the Sag-did (Anquctil, 

II, 584 n.) It is never good that the faithful should be alone, as 
the fiend is always lurking about, ready to take advantage of any 
moment of inattention. If the faithful be alone, there is no one to 
make up for any negligence and to prevent mischief arising from it. 
Never is the danger greater than in the present case, when the 
fiend is close at hand, and in direct contact with the faithful. 

4 See Introd. V, 3. 

8 As the Nasu has taken hold of him, he has become a Nasu 
incarnate, aud must no longer be allowed to come into contact 
with men, whom he would defile. 

FARGARD III. 

27 

16 (55). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! How far from the fire? How far from 
the water? How far from the consecrated bundles 
of baresma ? How far from the faithful ? 

17 (57). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Thirty paces 
from the fire, thirty paces from the water, thirty 
paces from the consecrated bundles of baresma, 
three paces from the faithful. 

18, 19 (58-63). ‘There, on that place, shall the 
worshippers of Mazda erect an enclosure l, and 
therein shall they establish him with food, therein 
shall they establish him with clothes, with the 
coarsest food and with the most worn-out clothes. 
That food he shall live on, those clothes he shall 
wear, and thus shall they let him live, until he has 
grown to the age of a Hana, or of a Zaurura, or of 
a Paimta-khshudra 2 *. 

20, 21 (64-71). ‘And when he has grown to the 
age of a 1 lana, or of a Zaurura, or of a Pairbta- 
khshudra, then the worshippers of Mazda shall 
order a man strong, vigorous, and skilful*, to flay 
the skin off his body and cut the head off his neck 4, 
on the top of the mountain : and they shall deliver 
his corpse unto the greediest of the corpse-eating 
creatures made by Ahura Mazda, to the greedy 
ravens, with these words : “ The man here has re- 
pented of all his evil thoughts, words, and deeds. 

1 The Armert-g&h, the place for the unclean; scclntrod. V, 15. 

2 Hana means, literally, ‘an old man;’ Zaurura, ‘a man 
broken down by age;’ Pairirta-khshudra, ‘one whose seed is 
dried up.’ These words seem to have acquired the technical 
meanings of ‘ fifty, sixty, and seventy years old.’ 

* ‘ Trained to operations of that sort’ (Comm.); a headsman. 

4 Cf. Farg. IX, 49, text and note. 

28 

vendIdAd. 

If he has committed any other evil deed, it is re- 
mitted by his repentance 1 : if he has committed no 
other evil deed, he is absolved by his repentance, 
for ever and ever2.”’ 

22 (72). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Who is the third that rejoices the 
Earth with greatest joy? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘It is he who fills up 
most burrows of the creatures of Angra Mainyu.’ 

2 3 (75)- O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! Who is the fourth that rejoices the 
Earth with greatest joy ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ It is he who cultivates 
most corn, grass, and fruit, O Spitama Zarathiutra ! 
who waters ground that is dry, or dries ground that 
is too wet 3. 

24 (79). ‘ Unhappy is the land that has long lain 
unsown with the seed of the sower and wants a 
good husbandman, like a Avell-shapen maiden who 
has long gone childless and wants a good husband. 

25 (84). ‘He who would till the earth, O Spitama 
Zarathustra ! with the left arm and the right, with 
the right arm and the left, unto him will she bring 

1 The performance of the Patet. See Introd. V, 22. 

2 It seems as if the law had formerly directed that he should be 
immediately put to death ; but that afterwards, when the rigour of 
the law had abated, the object which had previously been fulfilled 
by his death, was then attained by his confinement. He was 
allowed to live in confinement till he was old and all but dead, and 
he was put to death by the law, just before he would have died in 
the usual course of nature (see §§ 19, 20). Certain Ravaets put 
the ‘carrier alone' among the number of the margarz&n (East 
India Office Library, Zend MSS. VIII, 144); he is not only to be 
punished in this world, but in the other too ; he is condemned to 
feed in hell on corpses of men (Ar<& Viraf XXXVIII). 

3 Cf. § 4. 

FARGARD III. 

29 

forth plenty, like a loving bride on her bed, unto 
her beloved ; the bride will bring forth children, the 
earth will bring forth plenty of fruit. 

26, 27 (87-90). ‘ He who would till the earth, O 
Spitama Zarathu^tra ! with the left arm and the 
right, with the right arm and the left, unto him thus 
says the Earth : “ O thou man ! who dost till me 
with the left arm and the right, with the right arm 
and the left [hither shall people ever come and beg 
(for bread1)], here shall I ever go on bearing, 
bringing forth all manner of food, bringing forth 
profusion of corn2.” 

28, 29 (91-95). ‘He who does not till the earth, 
O Spitama Zarathu-stra ! with the left arm and the 
right, with the right arm and the left, unto him thus 
says the Earth : “ O thou man ! who dost not till 
me with the left arm and the right, with the right 
arm and the left, ever shalt thou stand at the door 
of the stranger, among those who beg for bread ; 
ever shalt thou wait there for the refuse that is 
brought unto thee 3, brought by those who have 
profusion of wealth.”’ 

30 (96). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! What is the food that fills the law of 
Mazda4 ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ It is sowing corn again 
and again, O Spitama Zarathurtra ! 

31 (99). ‘He who sows corn, sows holiness: he 

1 From the Vendidad Sadah. 

4 Or ‘ bearing corn first for thee.’ ‘ When something good 
grows up, it will grow up for thee first ’ (Comm.) 

3 ‘They take for themselves what is good and send to thee 
what is bad’ (Comm.) 

* Literally, ‘ What is the stomach of the law ?’ 

30 

vendIdAd. 

makes the law of Mazda grow higher and higher : 
he makes the law of Mazda as fat as he can with a 
hundred acts of adoration, a thousand oblations, ten 
thousand sacrifices \ 

32 (105). ‘When barley is coming forth, the 
Daevas start up1 2 ; when the corn is growing rank 3> 
then faint the Daevas’ hearts; when the corn is 
being ground 4, the Dafivas groan ; when wheat is 
coming forth, the Daevas are destroyed. In that 
house they can no longer stay, from that house they 
are beaten away, wherein wheat is thus coming 
forth \ It is as though red hot iron were turned 
about in their throats, when there is plenty of corn. 

33 (1 1 1). ‘ Then let (the priest) teach people this 

holy saying: “No one who does not eat, has 
strength to do works of holiness, strength to do 
works of husbandry, strength to beget children. By 
eating every material creature lives, by not eating 
it dies away ®.” ’ 3 | 2- \ ' 

34(116). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Who is the fifth that rejoices the 
Earth with greatest joy ? 

1 The translation ‘acts of adoration’ and ‘oblations’ is doubt- 
ful : the words in the text are <hrn£ \ey6/i(va, which arc traditionally 
translated ‘ feet’ and ‘ breasts.’ The Commentary has as follows : 

‘ He makes the law of Mazda as fat as a child could be made by 
means of a hundred feet, that is to say, of fifty servants walking to 
rock him ; of a thousand breasts, that is, of five hundred nurses ; 
of ten thousand sacrifices performed for his weal.’ 

8 John Barleycorn got up again, 

And sore surpris’d them all. 

8 Doubtful; possibly, * When sudhus (a sort of grain) is coming 
forth.’ 

4 Doubtful; possibly, ‘When pirtra (a sort of grain) is coming 
forth.’ 

8 Doubtful. 

* See Farg. IV, 47. 

FARGARD III. 

31 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ [It is he who tilling 
the earth, O Spitama Zarathustra ! kindly and 
piously gives1 to one of the faithful.] 

35 (118). ‘ He who tilling the -earth, 0 Spitama 
Zarathuitra ! would not kindly and piously give to 
one of the faithful, he shall fall down into the dark- 
ness of Spewta Armaiti 2, down into the world of 
woe, the dismal realm, down into the house of 
hell.’ 

IV. 

36 (122). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall bury in the earth either 
the corpse of a dog or the corpse of a man, and if 
he shall not disinter it within half a year, what is 
the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Five hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-astra 3, five hundred stripes with 
the Sraosh6-/£’arana.' 

37 (126). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall bury in the earth either 
the corpse of a dog or the corpse of a man, and if 
he shall not disinter it within a year, what is the 
penalty that he shall pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ A thousand stripes 
with the Aspahe-astra, a thousand stripes with the 
Sraosho-^arana.’ 

38 (130). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall bury in the earth either 
the corpse of a dog or the corpse of a man, and if 
he shall not disinter it within the second year, what 

1 The Asho-d&d or alms. The bracketed clause is from the 

Vendid&d S&dah. 

* The earth. 

8 See Introd. V, 19. 

32 

vendIdad. 

is the penalty for it ? What is the atonement for 
it? What is the cleansing from it? 

39(135). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘For that 
deed there is nothing that can pay, nothing that can 
atone, nothing that can cleanse from it; it" is a 
trespass for which there is no atonement, for ever 
and ever.’ 

40 (137). When is it so ? 

‘ It is so, if the sinner be a professor of the law 
of Mazda, or one who has been taught in it 1. But 
if he be not a professor of the law of Mazda, nor 
one who has been taught in it 2 3, then this law of 
Mazda takes his sin from him, if he confesses it 2 
and resolves never to commit again such forbidden 
deeds. 

41 (142). ‘The law of Mazda indeed, O Spitama 
Zarathustra ! takes away from him who confesses it 
the bonds of his sin 4 ; it takes away (the sin of) 
breach of trust 5 6; it takes away (the sin of) mur- 
dering one of the faithful0; it takes away (the sin 
of) burying a corpse7; it takes away (the sin of) 

1 As he must have known that he was committing sin. 

9 If he did not know that he was committing sin. 

3 If he makes Patet (see Introd. V, 22), and says to himself, ‘I 
will never henceforth sin again’ (Comm.) 

4 If not knowingly committed ; see § 40 and the following notes. 

* Draosha : refusing to give back a deposit (Comm, ad IV, 1) : 

‘ He knows that it is forbidden to steal, but he fancies that robbing 
the rich to give to the poor is a pious deed’ (Comm.) 

6 Or better, ‘ a Mazdean,’ but one who has committed a capital 
crime ; ‘ lie knows that it is allowed to kill the margarzan, but he 
does not know that it is not allowed to do so without an order 
from the judge.' Cf. VIII, 74 note. 

7 ‘He knows that it is forbidden to bury a corpse; but he fancies 
that if one manages so that dogs or foxes may not take it to the fire 
and to the water, he behaves piously ’ (Comm.) See Introd. V, 9. 

FARGARD IV. 

'33 

deeds for which there is no atonement ; it takes 
away the heaviest penalties of sin 1 ; it takes away 
any sin that may be sinned. 

42 (149). ‘ In the same way the law of Mazda, 
O Spitama Zaratlnwtra! cleanses the faithful from 
every evil thought, word, and deed, as a swift-rushing 
mighty wind cleanses the plain -. 

‘So let all the deeds thou doest be henceforth 
good, O Zarathustra ! a full atonement for thy sin is 
effected by means of the law of Mazda.’ 

Fargard IV. 

Contracts and Outrages. 

I- 16. Contracts (see Introd. V, 17) : — 

2. Classification of contracts ; 

3-4. Damages for breach of contract ; 

5-10. Kinsmen responsible ; 

II- 16. Penalties for breach of contract. 

17- 55. Outrages (see Introd. V, 18) : — 

18- 21. Menaces; 

22-25. Assaults; 

26-29. Blows; 

30-33. Wounds; 

34-36. Wounds causing blood to flow; 

37-39/ Broken bones; 

40-43. Manslaughter; 

46, 49 (bis)— 55. False oaths. 

Clauses 44-45 refer to contracts, and ought to be placed after 
§ 16. Clauses 47-49, which are in praise of physical weal, have 
been probably misplaced here from the preceding Fargard (see 
Farg. Ill, 33). The right order of this chapter would, therefore, 
seem to be as follows: 1-16; 44-45; 17—43 5 46; 49(bis)-55. 

1 Or, possibly, * the sin of usury.’ ‘ He knows that it is lawful 
to take high interest, but he docs not know that it is not lawful to 
do so from the faithful ’ (Comm.) 

2 ‘From chaff’ (Comm.) 

[4] D 

34 

vendIdad. 

I. 

i. He that does not restore (a thing lent), when 
it is asked for back again, steals the thing ; he robs 
the man1. So he does every day, every night, as 
long as he keeps in his house his neighbour s pro- 
perty, as though it were his own 2. 

II a. 

2 (4). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy 
One! How many in number are thy contracts, O 
Ahura Mazda ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : * They arc six in num- 
ber 3. The first is the word-contract 4 ; the second 

1 4 1 Te is a thief when he takes with a view not to restore; he is a 
robber when, being asked to restore, he answers, I will not' (Comm.) 

2 Every moment that he holds it unlawfully, he steals it anew. 
‘ The basest thing with Persians is to lie ; the next to it is to be in 
debt, for this reason among many others, that he who is so, must 
needs sink to lying at last’ (Herod. I, 183). The debtor in ques- 
tion is of course the debtor of bad faith, ‘ he who says to a man, 
Give me this, I will restore it to thee at the proper time, and he 
says to himself, I will not restore it' (Comm.) 

The following classification is in fact twofold , the contracts 
being defined in the first two clauses by their mode of being 
entered into, and in the last four by their amount. Yet it appears 
from the following clauses that even the word-contract and the 
hand-contract became at last, or were misunderstood as, indicative 
of a certain amount. The commentators, however, were unable 
to determine that amount, or, at least, they do not state how much 
it was, which they do with regard to the last four. 

4 The contract entered into by simple word of mouth. * The 
immortal Zartujt Isfitam&n asked of the good, beneficent Hormazd, 
“ Which is the worst of the sins that men commit ? ” The good, 
beneficent Hormazd answered, “There is no sin worse than when 
a man, having given his word to another, there being no witness 
but myself, Hormazd, one of them breaks his word and says, 
I don't know anything about it . . . there is no sin worse than this ” ' 
(Gr. Rav. 94). 

FARGARD IV. 

35 

is the hand-contract 1 ; the third is the contract to 
the amount of a sheep 2 ; the fourth is the contract 
to the amount of an ox 3 ; the fifth is the contract to 
the amount of a man4; the sixth is the contract 
to the amount of a field5 6 7, a field in good land, a 
fruitful one, in good bearing0/ 

II b. 

3 (13). If a man make the word-contract a mere 
word \ it shall be redeemed by the hand-contract ; 
he shall give in pledge 8 the amount of the hand- 
contract. 

4 (16).. The hand-contract 9 shall be redeemed by 
the sheep-contract; he shall, give in pledge the 
amount of the sheep-contract. The sheep-contract 
shall be redeemed by the ox-contract ; he shall give 
in pledge the amount of the ox-contract. The ox- 
contract shall be redeemed by the man-contract ; he 

1 ‘When they strike hand in hand and make then agreement 
by word* (Gr. Rav. 1. 1.) It would be of interest to know whether 
word and hand are to be taken in the strict meaning or if they 
allude to certain formulas and gestures like those in the Roman 
stipulatio. 

2 ‘Viz. to the amount of 3 istirs [in weight]/ (Comm.) An 
istir {(TTaTTjp) is as much as 4 dirhems (dpaxw). On the value 
of the dirhem, see Introd. V, 22. 

3 ‘To the amount of 12 istirs (=48 dirhems),' (Comm.) 

4 ‘ To the amount of 500 istirs (=2000 dirhems)/ The exact 

translation would be rather, ‘The contract to the amount of a 
human being/ as the term is applied to promises of marriage and 
to the contract between teacher and pupil. 

6 ‘Upwards of 500 istirs/ 

6 A sort of gloss added to define more accurately the value of 
the object and to indicate that it is greater than that of the pre- 
ceding one. 

7 If he fail to fulfil it. 8 Or, ‘ as damages (?)/ 

9 The breach of the hand-contract. 

D 2 

36 

VENDIDAD. 

shall give in pledge the amount of the man-contract. 
The man-contract shall be redeemed by the field- 
contract ; he shall give in pledge the amount of the 
field-contract. 

lie. 

5 (24). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man break the word-contract, how 
many are involved in his sin1? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘His sin makes his 
Nabdnazdwtas* answerable for the3 three hundred- 
fold atonement.’ 

6 (26). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man break the hand-contract, how 
many are involved in his sin ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ His sin makes his 
N abanazdi.s'tas answerable for the six hundred-fold 
atonement V 

1 Literally, how much is involved? The joint responsibility of 
the family was a principle in the Persian law, as it was in the old 
German law, which agrees with the statement in Am. Marccllinus : 
* Leges apud eos impendio formidatae, et abominandac aliac, per 
quas ob noxam unius omnis propinquitas periL^ (XX11I, 6). 

2 The next of kin to the ninth degree. 

8 See § 11. This passage seems to have puzzled tradition. 
The Commentary says, ‘ How long, how many years, has one to 
fear for the breach of a word-contract? — the Nabanazdirtas have 
to fear for three hundred years;’ but it does not explain farther 
the nature of that fear ; it only tries to reduce the circle of that 
liability to narrower limits : ‘ only the son born after the breach is 
liable for it; the righteous arc not liable for it; when the father 
dies, the son, if righteous, has nothing to fear from it/ And 
finally, the Ravaets leave the kinsmen wholly aside ; the penalty 
falling entirely upon the real offender, and the number denoting 
only the duration of his punishment in hell : ‘ He who breaks a 
word-contract, his soul shall abide for three hundred years in hell' 
(Gr. Rav. 94). 

4 See § 12. c His soul shall abide for six hundred years in heir 
(Gr. Rav. 1. 1.) 

FARGARD IV. 

37 

7 (28). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man break the sheep-contract, 
how many are involved in his sin ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘His sin makes his 
NabS.nazdi.ytas answerable for the seven hundred- 
fold atonement1 2 * 4/ 

8 (30). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man break the ox-contract, how 
many are involved in his sin ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘His sin makes his 
Nabanazdbtas answerable for the eight hundred- 
fold atonement V 

9 (32). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man break the man-contract, how 
many are involved in his sin ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ His sin makes his 
NabSnazdutas answerable for the nine hundred-fold 
atonement V 

10 (34). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man break the field-contract, how 
many are involved in his sin ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ His sin makes his 
Nabanazdii'tas answerable for the thousand-fold 
atonement V 

II d. 

11 (36). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man break the word-contract, 
what is the penalty that he shall pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Three hundred stripes 

1 See§ 13. ‘Ilis soul shall abide for seven hundred years in 
hell’ (Gr. Rav. 1. 1.) 

2 See § 14. ‘ His soul shall abide for eight hundred years in hell.’ 

8 See § 15. ‘ His soul shall abide for nine hundred years in hell.’ 

4 See § 16. ‘ His soul shall abide for a thousand years in hell.’ 

38 

VEND? DAD. 

with the Aspahe-ai'tra, three hundred stripes with 
the Sraosho-Z’arana V 

12 (39). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man break the hand-contract, 
what is the penalty that he shall pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Six hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-astra, six hundred stripes with 
the Sraosho-z&arana V 

13 (42). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man break the sheep-contract, 
what is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Seven hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-artra, seven hundred stripes with 
the Sraosho-X’arana V 

14 (45). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man break the ox-contract, what 
is the penalty that he shall pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Eight hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-ajtra, eight hundred stripes with 
the Sraosho-Z’arana V 

15 (48). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man break the man-contract, what 
is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Nine hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-ajtra, nine hundred stripes with 
the S raosh o-/’a ran a R.’ 

16(51). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man break the field-contract, what 
is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

1 One tanafuhr and a half, that is 1800 dirhems. 

2 Three tanaffihrs, or 3600 dirhems. 

2 Three tanaffihrs and a half, or 4200 dirhems. • 
4 Four tanaffihrs, or 4800 dirhems. 

6 Four tanaffihrs and a half, or 5400 dirhems. 

FARGARD IV. 

39 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ A thousand stripes 
with the Aspahe-aitra, a thousand stripes with the 
Sraosho-^arana V 

III a. 

17(54). If a man rise up to smite a man, it is 
an Agerepta 1 2. If a man. come upon a man to 
smite him, it is an Avaoimta. If a man actually 
smite a man with evil aforethought, it is an A red us. 
Upon the fifth Aredus3 he becomes a Peshotanu4. 

18 (58). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! He that committeth an Agerepta, 
what penalty shall he pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Five stripes with the 
Aspahe-astra, five stripes with the Sraosho-Z’arana ; 
on the second Agerepta, ten stripes with the 
Aspahe-astra, ten stripes with the Sraoshd-iarana ; 
on the third, fifteen stripes with the Aspahe-aitra, 
fifteen stripes with the Sraosho-ztarana. 

19 (63). ‘ On the fourth, thirty stripes with the 

1 Five tanaffthrs, or Cooo dirhems. 

3 In this paragraph are defined the first three of the eight out- 
rages with which the rest of the Fargard deals. Only these three 
are defined, because they are designated by technical terms. We 
subjoin the definitions of them found in a Sanskrit translation of 
a Patet (Paris, Bibl. Nat. f. B. 5, 154), in which their etymological 
meanings arc better preserved than in the Zend definition itself : — 

Agerepta, ‘ seizing,’ is when a man seizes a weapon with a view 
to smite another. 

Avaoirirta, ‘brandishing,’ is when a man brandishes a weapon 
with a view to smite another. 

Aredur is when a man actually smites another with a weapon, 
but without wounding him, or inflicts a wound which is healed 
within three days. 

3 Viz. on the sixth commission of it, as appears from § 28. 

4 He shall receive two hundred stripes, or shall pay 1200 dir- 
hems (see Introd. V, 19). 

40 

VENDiDAD. 

Aspahe-astra, thirty stripes with the Sraosho-^arana; 
on the fifth, fifty stripes with the Aspahe-astra, fifty 
stripes with the Sraosho-^arana ; on the sixth, sixty 
stripes with the Aspahe-a.ctra, sixty stripes with the 
SraoshcV/'arana ; on the seventh, ninety stripes with 
the Aspahe-astra, ninety stripes with the Sraosho- 
A’arana.’ 

20 (67). If a man commit an Agerepta for the 
eighth time, without having atoned for the pre- 
ceding, what penalty shall he pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He is a Peshdtanu: 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-aitra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-£arana.’ 

21 (70). If a man commit an Agerepta1 * 3 and refuse 
to atone for it -, what penalty shall he pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘He is a Peshotanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-/’arana.’ 

22 (73). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man commit an AvaoirLsta, what 
penalty shall he pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Ten stripes with the 
Aspahe-a.ftra, ten stripes with the Sraosho-Z’arana ; 
on the second Avaoiri.rta, fifteen stripes with the 
Aspahe-astra, fifteen stripes with the Sraoshd-^arana. 

23 (75). ‘ On the. third, thirty stripes with the 
Aspahe-a-rtra, thirty stripes with the Sraosho-Z’arana; 
on the fourth, fifty stripes with the Aspahe-a^tra, 
fifty stripes with the Sraosho-A’arana ; on the fifth, 
seventy stripes with the Aspahe-artra, seventy 

1 Even though the Agerepta has been committed for the first 

time. 

3 If he does not offer himself to bear the penalty, and does not 
p.rform the Patet (see Introd. V, 22). 

FARGARD IV. 

4* 

stripes with the Sraosho-Z’arana ; on the sixth, 
ninety stripes with the Aspahe-astra, ninety stripes 
with the Sraosho-Z’arana/ * 

24 (76). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man commit an Avaoimta for the 
seventh time, without having atoned for the pre- 
ceding, what penalty shall he pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He is a Peshotanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-Airana.’ 

25 (77). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man commit an Avaoimta, and 
refuse to atone for it, what penalty shall he pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘He is a Peshotanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-Airana.’ 

26 (79). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man commit an Arcdiw, what 
penalty shall he pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Fifteen stripes with 
the Aspahe-astra, fifteen stripes with the Sraosho- 
<£arana. 

27(81). ‘On the second Arcdar, thirty stripes 
with the Aspahe-artra, thirty stripes with the 
Sraosho-Z’arana ; on the third, fifty stripes with the 
Aspahe-attra, fifty stripes with the Sraosho-Z’arana ; 
on the fourth, seventy stripes with the Aspahc-artra, 
seventy stripes with the Sraosho-^arana ; on the 
fifth, ninety stripes with the Aspahe-astra, ninety 
stripes with the Sraosh6-/'arana.’ 

28. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy 
One ! If a man commit an Aredus for the sixth 
time, without having atoned for the preceding, what 
penalty shall he pay ? 

42 

VF.NdIdAd. 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He is a Peshotanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-attra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

29 (82). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man commit an Aretlus, and re- 
fuse to atone for it, what penalty shall he pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : 1 He is a Peshotanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraoslio-^arana.’ 

30 (85). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man smite another and hurt him 
sorely, what is the penalty that he shall pay? 

31(87). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Thirty stripes 
with the Aspahe-aytra, thirty stripes with the 
Sraoshd-Aarana ; the second time, fifty stripes with 
the Aspahe-astra, fifty stripes with the Sraosho- 
/’arana ; the third time, seventy stripes with the 
Aspahe-a.stra, seventy stripes with the Sraosho- 
Z’arana; the fourth time, ninety stripes with the 
Aspahe-aytra, ninety stripes with the Sraosho- 
£arana.’ 

32 (89). If a man commit that deed for the fifth 
time, without having atoned for the preceding, what 
is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He is a Peshotanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-aytra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

33 (90). If a man commit that deed and refuse to 
atone for it, what is the penalty that he shall pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He is a Peshotanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahd-aytra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

34 (93)- O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man smite another so that the 

FARGARD IV. 

43 

blood comes, what is the penalty that he shall 
pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Fifty stripes with the 
Aspahe-aytra, fifty stripes with the Sraosho-Z’arana ; 
the second time, seventy stripes with the Aspahe- 
aytra, seventy stripes with the Sraosh6-/C’arana ; the 
third time, ninety stripes with the Aspahe-aytra, 
ninety stripes with the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

35 (95)* If he commit that deed for the fourth 
time, without having atoned for the preceding, what 
is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He is a Pesh6tanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-aytra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

36 (96). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man smite another so that the 
blood comes, and if he refuse to atone for it, what is 
the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He is a Peshotanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-aytra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-/tarana.’ 

37 (99)' O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man smite another so that he 
breaks a bone, what is the penalty that he shall 
pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Seventy stripes with 
the Aspahe-aytra, seventy stripes with the Sraoshd- 
>£arana ; the second time, ninety stripes with the 
Aspahe-aytra, ninety stripes with the Sraosho- 
^arana.’ 

38 (102). If he commit that deed for the third 
time, without having atoned for the preceding, what 
is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He is a Peshotanu : 

44 vend! DAD. 

two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

39 (104). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man smite another so that he 
breaks a bone, and if he refuse to atone for it, what 
is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He is a Peshotanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-a^tra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

40 (106). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man smite another so that he 
gives up the ghost, what is the penalty that he shall 

pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘Ninety stripes with the 
Aspahe-artra, ninety stripes with the Sraoshd- 
/arana.’ 

41 (109). If he commit that deed again, without 
having atoned for the preceding, what is the penalty 
that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He is a Peshotanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-Airana.’ 

42 (112). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man smite another so that he 
gives up the ghost, and if he refuse to atone for it, 
what is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He is a Peshotanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

43 (115). And they shall thenceforth in their 
doings walk after the way of holiness, after the 
. word of holiness, after the ordinance of holiness. 

FARGARD IV. 

45 

lie1. 

44 (i 1 8). If men of the same faith, either friends 
or brothers, come to an agreement together, that 
one may obtain from the other, either goods a, or a 
wife 8, or knowledge i, let him who wants to have 
goods have them delivered to him; let him who wants 
to have a wife receive and wed her; let him who 
wants to have knowledge be taught the holy word. 

45 (123). He shall learn on, during the first part 
of the day and the last, during the first part of the 
night and the last, that his mind may be increased 
in knowledge and wax strong in holiness : so shall 
he sit up, giving thanks and praying to the gods, 
that he may be increased in knowledge : he shall 
rest during the middle part of the day, during the 
middle part of the night, and thus shall he continue 
until he can say all the words which former Aethra- 
paitis 5 have said. 

Ill b. 

46 (128). Before the water and the blazing fire'1, 

1 We return here to contracts; the proper place of §§ 44-45 is 
after § 16. 

2 The goods-contract is a general expression for the sheep, ox, 
and field-contracts (sec above, § 2). 

:| Woman is an object of contract, like cattle or fields ; she is 
disposed of by contracts of the fifth sort, being more valuable than 
cattle and less so than fields. She is sold by her father or her 
guardian, often from the cradle. ‘ Instances are not wanting of the 
betrothal of a boy of three years of age to a girl of two’ (see 
Dosabhoy Framjee’s work on The Parsces, p. 77 J cf. ‘A Hill to 
Define and Amend the Law relating to Succession, Inheritance, 
Marriage, &c.,’ Bombay, 1864). 

* The contract between pupil and teacher falls into the same 
class (the man-contract, see p. 35, n. 4). 

6 A teaching priest (Parsi H6rbad). 

6 Doubtful. This clause is intended, as it seems, against false 

46 

VENDiuAD. 

O Spitama Zarathustra ! let no one make bold to 
deny having received from his neighbour the ox or 
the garment (he has received from him). 

47 (130). . . . Verily I say it unto, thee, O Spitama 
Zarathiutra ! the man who has a wife is far above 
him who begets no sons 1 ; he who keeps a house is 
far above him who has none ; he who has children 
is far above the childless man ; he who has riches is 
far above him who has none. 

48 (134). And of two men, he who fills himself 
with meat is filled with the good spirit 2 much more 
than he who does not do so 3 ; the latter is all but 
dead ; the former is above him by the worth of an 
Asperena *, by the worth of a sheep, by the worth 
of an ox, by the worth of a man. 

49 (T37)- ^ >s this man that can strive against 
the onsets of Ast6-vldhotu 6 ; that can strive against 

oaths. The water and the blazing fire are the water and the fire 
before which the oath is taken (see § 54 n.) ; putting aside §§ 47-49, 
which are misplaced from Farg. Ill, 34, one comes to § 50, in 
which the penalty for a false oath is described. 

1 4 In Persia there arc prizes given by the king to those who 
have most children' (Herod. I, 136). ‘He who has no child, the 
bridge (of paradise) shall be barred to him. The first question the 
angels there will ask him is, whether he has left in this world a sub- 
stitute for himself; if he answers, No, they will pass by and he will 
stay at the head of the bridge, full of grief and sorrow' (Saddar 1 8 ; 
Hyde 19). The primitive meaning of this belief is explained by 
Brahmanical doctrine ; the man without a son falls into hell, because 
there is nobody to pay him the family worship. 

a Or, 4 with Vohu Mano,' who is at the same time the god of 
good thoughts and the god of cattle (see Introd. IV, 33). 

3 4 There are people who strive to pass a day without eating, 
and who abstain from any meat ; we strive too and abstain, namely, 
from any sin in deed, thought, or word : ... in other religions, they 
fast from bread; in ours, we fast from sin' (Saddar 83 ; Hyde 25). 

4 A dirhem. 6 See Introd. IV, 26. 

FARGARD IV. 

47 

the self-moving arrow 1 ; that can strive against the 
winter fiend, with thinnest garment on ; that can 
strive against the wicked tyrant and smite him on 
the head ; it is this man that can strive against the 
ungodly Ashemaogha who does not eat 2. 

49 (bis). . . . The very first time when that deed3 has 
been done, without waiting until it is done again *. 

50(143). Down there5 the pain for that deed 
shall be as hard as any in this world : should one 
cut off the limbs from his perishable body with 
knives of brass, yet still worse shall it be. 

51 (146). Down there the pain for that deed shall 
be as hard as any in this world: should one nail5 
his perishable body with nails of brass, yet still 
worse shall it be. 

52 (149). Down there the pain for that deed shall 
be as hard as any in this world : should one by 
force throw his perishable body headlong down a 
precipice a hundred times the height of a man, yet 
still worse shall it be. 

53 (I52)- Down there the pain for that deed 
shall be as hard as any in this world : should one 
by force impale 7 his perishable body, yet still worse 
shall it be. 

54(154). Down there the pain for that deed 
shall be as hard as any in this world : to wit, that 
deed which is done, when a man, knowingly lying, 
confronts the brimstoned, golden8, truth-knowing9 

1 See Introd. IV, 26. 2 See Introd. Ill, 10. 

3 The taking of a false oath. 4 See Introd. V, 18. 

6 In hell. 6 Doubtful. 7 Doubtful. 

3 The water before which the oath is taken contains some incense, 
brimstone, and one danak of molten gold (Gr. Rav. 101). 

9 Doubtful. Possibly ‘bright.’ 

48 

vendSdAd. 

water with an appeal unto Rashnu r and a lie unto 
Mithra 2. 

55 (I56)* O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! He who, knowingly lying, confronts the 
brimstoned, golden, truth-knowing water with an 
appeal unto Rashnu and a lie unto Mithra, what is 
the penalty that he shall pay 3 ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Seven hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-artra, seven hundred stripes with 
the Sraosh6-£arana.’ 

Fargard V. 

This chapter and the following ones, to the end of the twelfth, 
deal chiefly with uncleanness arising from the dead, and with the 
means of removing it from men and things. 

The subjects treated in this Fargard are as follows : — 

I (1-7). If a man defile the fire or the earth involuntarily, or 
unconsciously, it is no sin. 

II (8-9). Water and fire do not kill. 

III (10-14). Disposal of the dead during winter. 

IV (15-20). IIow the Dakhmas are cleansed by water from the 
heavens. 

V (21-26). On the excellence of purity and of the law that 
shows how to recover it, when lost. 

VI (27-38). On the defiling power of the Nasu being greater or 
less, according to the greater or less dignity of the being that dies. 

VII (39-44). On the management of sacrificial implements 
defiled by the dead. 

•l The god of truth. The formula is as follows: 4 Before the 
Amshaspand Bahman, before the Amshaspand Ardibehesht, here 
lighted up . . . &c., I swear that I have nothing of what is thine, 
N. son of N., neither gold, nor silver, nor brass, nor clothes, nor 
any of the things created by Ormazd’ (1. 1. 96). 

a See Introd. IV, 8. He is a Mithra- dru^, ‘one who lies to 
Mithra/ 

3 In this world. 

FARGARD V. 

49 

VIII (45-62). On the treatment of a woman who has been 
delivered of a still-born child; and what is to be done with her 
clothes. 

Ia. 

1. There dies a man in the depths of the vale: 
a bird takes flight from the top of the mountain 
down into the depths- of the vale, and it eats up the 
corpse of the dead man there : then, up it flics from 
the depths of the vale to the top of the mountain : 
it flies to some one of the trees there, of the hard- 
wooded or the soft-wooded, and upon that tree it 
vomits, it deposits dung, it drops pieces from the 
corpse. 

2 (7). Now, lo ! here is a man coming up from 
the depths of the vale to the top of the mountain; 
he comes to the tree whereon the bird is sitting; 
from that tree he wants to take wood for the fire. 
He fells the tree, he hews the tree, he splits it into 
logs, and then he lights it in the fire, the son of 
Ahura Mazda. What is the penalty that he shall 
pay1? 

3(11). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘There is no 
sin upon a man for any dead matter that has been 
brought by dogs, by birds, by wolves, by winds, or 
by flies. 

4 (12). ‘For were there sin upon a man for any 
dead matter that might have been brought by dogs, 
by birds, by wolves, by winds, or by flies, how soon 
this material world of mine would have in it only 
Peshotanus2, shut out from the way of holiness, 

1 For defiling the fire by bringing dead matter into it, see Farg. 
VII, 25 seq. The Vendidad Sadah has here, ‘ Put ye only proper 
and well-examined fuel (in the fire).’ For the purification of un- 
clean wood, see Farg. VII, 28 seq. 

a ‘People guilty of death’ (Comm.; cf. Introd.V, 19). 

[4] E 

5° 

vend!dad. 

whose souls will cry and wail 1 ! so numberless are 
the beings that die upon the face of the earth/ 

lb. 

5 (15). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Here is a man watering a corn field. 
The water streams down the field; it streams again ; 
it streams a third time ; and the fourth time, a dog, 
a fox, or a wolf carries a corpse into the bed of the 
stream : what is the penalty that the man shall 
pay 2 ? 

6 (19). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ There is no 
sin upon a man for any dead matter that has been 
brought by dogs, by birds, by wolves, by winds, or 
by flies. 

7 (20). ‘ For were there sin upon a man for any 
dead matter that might have been brought by dogs, 
by birds, by wolves, by winds, or by flies, how soon 
this material world of mine would have in it only 
Peshotanus, shut out from the way of holiness, 
whose souls will cry and wail! so numberless are 
the beings that die upon the face of the earth.' 

II a. 

8 (23). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Does water kill 3 * * * * 8 ? 

1 After their death, ‘ When the soul, crying and beaten off, is 
driven far away from paradise’ (Comm.) Possibly, ‘Whose soul 
shall fly (from paradise) amid howls’ (cf. Farg. XIII, 8). 

a For defiling the earth and the water : ‘ If a man wants to irri- 

gate a field, he must first look after the water-channel, whether 

there is dead matter in it or not If the water, unknown to 

him, comes to a corpse, there is no sin upon him. If he has not 

looked after the rivulet and the stream, he is unclean’ (Saddar 75; 

Hyde 85). 

8 Water and fire belong to the holy part of the world, and come 

FARGARD V. 

51 

Ahura Mazda answered : ' Water kills no man : 
Ast6-vidh6tu 1 ties the noose around his neck, and, 
thus tied, Vaya2 carries him off: then the flood 
takes him up 3, the flood takes him down 4, the flood 
throws him ashore; then birds feed upon him, and 
chance brings him here, or brings him there8.’ 

II b. 

9 (29). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Does fire kill ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘Fire kills no man : 
Ast6-vldh6tu ties the noose around his neck, and, 
thus tied, Vaya carries him off. The fire burns up 
life and limb, and then chance brings him here, or 
brings him there6.’ 

III. 

10 (34). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If the summer is past and the winter 
has come, wrhat shall the worshippers of Mazda 
do7? 

from God: how then is it that they kill ? ‘Let a Gueber light a 
sacred fire for a hundred years, if he once fall into it, he shall be 
burnt/ Even the Mobeds, if we may trust Elisaeus, complained 
that the fire would burn them without regard for their piety, when 
to adore it they came too near (Vartan’s War, p. 2 1 1 of the French 
translation by l’Abbd Garabed). The answer was that it is not 
the fire nor the water that kills, but the demon of Death and Fate. 

‘ Nothing whatever that I created in the world, said Ormazd, does 
harm to man; it is the bad Nai (lege Vai) that kills the man' (Gr. 
Rav. 124). 

1 Literally, ‘binds him;’ see Introd. IV, 26; cf. Farg. XIX, 29. 

2 ‘The bad Vai’ (Comm.); see Introd. IV, 17. 

3 To the surface. 4 To the bottom. 

6 Or perhaps, ‘ When he departs, it is by the will of Destiny 
that he departs ’ (Comm.) 

6 See preceding note. 

7 In case a man dies during the snowy season, while it is diffi- 

52 

VEND1DAD. 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘In every house, in 
every borough1, they shall raise three small houses 
for the dead 2.’ 

11 (37). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! How large shall be those houses for 
the dead? 

Ahura Mazda answered : * Large enough not to 
strike the skull, or the feet, or the hands of the 
man, if he 8 should stand erect, and hold out his 
feet, and stretch out his hands : such shall be, 
according to the law, the houses for the dead. 

12 (41). ‘And they shall let the lifeless body lie 
there, for two nights, or for three nights, or a month 
long, until the birds begin to fly4, the plants to grow, 
the floods to flow, and the wind to dry up the waters 
from off the earth 6. 

13 (44). ‘And as soon as the birds begin to fly, 
the plants to grow, the floods to flow, and the wind 
to dry up the waters from off the earth, then the 
worshippers of Mazda shall lay down the dead (on 
the Dakhma) his eyes towards the sun. 

14 (46). ‘ If the worshippers of Mazda have not, 
within a year, laid down the dead (on the Dakhma), 

cult or impossible to take the corpse to the Dakhma, which usually 
stands far from inhabited places. The same case is treated more 
clearly and fully in Farg.VIII, 4 seq. 

1 In every isolated house, in every group of houses. 

* Thence is derived the modern usage of the Z&d-marg, a small 
mud house where the corpse is laid, to lie there till it can be taken 
to the Dakhma (Anquetil, Zend-Avesta II, 583). The object of 
that provision is to remove the uncleanness of the dead from the 
place of the living. An older form of the same provision is found 
in Farg.VIII, 8. 

* ‘ Being in life ’ (Comm.) 4 To come back. 

6 'Until the winter is past’ (Comm.) 

FARGARD V. 

53 

his eyes towards the sun, thou shalt prescribe for 
that trespass the same penalty as for the murder of 
one of the faithful. [And there shall it lie] until 
the corpse has been rained on, until the Dakhma 
has been rained on, until the unclean remains have 
been rained on, until the birds have eaten up the 
corpse.’ 

IV. 

15 (49). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Is it true that thou, Ahura Mazda, 
sendest the waters from the sea Vouru-kasha 1 
down with the wind and with the clouds? 

16 (51). That thou, Ahura Mazda, makest them 
flow down to the corpses2 3 * * * * *? that thou, Ahura Mazda, 
makest them flow down to the Dakhmas ? that thou, 
Ahura Mazda, makest them flow down to the un- 
clean remains ? that thou, Ahura Mazda, makest 
them flow down to the bones ? and that then thou, 
Ahura Mazda, makest them flow back unseen ? that 
thou, Ahura Mazda, makest them flow back to the 
sea Pilitika a ? 

1 7 (53). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ It is even so 

1 The sea above, the clouds. Sec Introd. IV, n. 

2 Zoroaster seems to wonder that Ormazd fears so little to in- 
fringe his own laws by defiling waters with the dead. In a Ravact, 
he asks him blurftly why he forbids men to take corpses to the 
water, while he himself sends rain to the Dakhmas (Gr. Rav. 125). 

3 The sea where waters are purified before going back to their 

heavenly seat, the sea Vouru-kasha (see § 19). Pftitika, ‘the 

clean/ is very likely to have been originally a name or epithet of 

the sea Vouru-kasha. When the mythic geography of Mazdeism 

was reduced into a system, the epithet took a separate existence, as 
it gave a ready answer to that question, which, it may be, was 
raised first by the name itself : ‘ Where are the waters cleansed 

which have been defiled here below, and which we see falling again 

to us pure and clean ? 9 

54 

vendIdad. 

as thou hast said, O righteous Zarathustra ! I, 
Ahura Mazda, send the waters from the sea Vouru- 
kasha down with the wind and with the clouds. 

18 (55). ‘ I, Ahura Mazda, make them stream 
down to the corpses; I, Ahura Mazda, make them 
stream down to the Dakhmas; I, Ahura Mazda, 
make them stream down to the unclean remains; I, 
Ahura Mazda, make them stream down to the 
bones ; then I, Ahura Mazda, make them flow back 
unseen; I, Ahura Mazda, make them flow back to 
the sea Phitika b 

19 (56). ‘The waters stand there boiling, boiling 
up in the heart of the sea PAitika, and, when 
cleansed there, they run back again from the sea 
Pititika to the sea Vouru-kasha, towards the well- 
watered tree z, whereon grow the seeds of my 
plants of every kind [by hundreds, by thousands, by 
hundreds of thousands]. 

20(60). ‘Those plants, I, Ahura Mazda, rain 
down upon the earth 2, to bring food to the faithful, 
and fodder to the beneficent cow ; to bring food to 
my people that they may live on it, and fodder to 
the beneficent cow’.’ 

1 In later mythology, the sea Vouru-kasha and the sea Puitika 
were assimilated to the Arabian sea and to the gulf of Oman : the 
moving to and fro of the waters from heaven to earth and from 
the earth to heaven was interpreted as the coming and going of 
the tide (Bund. XIII). 

2 The tree of all seeds (Harvisptokhm), which grows in the 
middle of the sea Vouru-kasha ; the seeds of all plants are on it. 
There is a godlike bird, the Sinamru, sitting on that tree ; when- 
ever he flies off the tree, there grow out of it a thousand boughs ; 
whenever he alights on it, there break a thousand boughs, the seeds 
of which are scattered about, and rained down on the earth by 
Tutar (Tirlrya), the rain-god (Yt. XII, 17; Minokhired LXII, 37 
seq. ; Bundahir XXVII ; cf. Farg. XX, 4 seq.) 

FARGARD V. 

55 

V. 

21 (63). ‘This1 is the best of all things, this is 
the fairest of all things, even as thou hast said, O 
righteous Zarathustra ! ’ 

With these words the holy Ahura Mazda rejoiced 
the holy Zarathiutra 2 : ‘ Purity is for man, next to 
life, the greatest good 3 * 5, that purity that is procured 
by the law of Mazda to him who cleanses his own 
self with good thoughts, words, and deeds V 

22 (68). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! This law, this fiend-destroying law 
of Zarathiutra, by what greatness, goodness, and 
fairness is it great, good, and fair above all other 
utterances ? 

2 3 (69)- Ahura Mazda answered: ‘As much 
above all other floods as is the sea Vouru-kasha, 
so much above all other utterances in greatness, 
goodness, and fairness is this law, this fiend- 
destroying law of Zaratluutra. 

24 (71). ‘As much as a great stream flows swifter 
than a slender rivulet, so much above all other 
utterances in greatness, goodness, and fairness is 
this law, this fiend-destroying law of Zarathurtra. 

‘As high as the great treer’ stands above the 
small plants it overshadows, so high above all other 

1 The cleansing, the purification. 

2 ‘ When Zoroaster saw that man is able to escape sin by per- 
forming good works, he was filled with joy ’ (Comm.) 

3 As uncleanness is nothing less than a form of death (see 
Introd. V, 3). 

1 That is to say, ‘Who performs the rites of cleansing according 
to the prescriptions of the law.’ 

5 ‘ The royal cypress above small herbs ’ (Comm.) 

56 

vendIdAd. 

utterances in greatness, goodness, and fairness is this 
law, this fiend-destroying law of Zarathiutra. 

25, 26 (73-81). ‘As high as heaven is above the 
earth that it compasses around, so high above all 
other utterances is this law, this fiend-destroying law 
of Mazda. 

‘ [Therefore], when the Ratu has been applied to \ 
when the Sraosha-varez has been applied to 2 ; 
whether for a draona-service3 that has been under- 
taken 4, or for one that has not been undertaken fl ; 
whether for a draona that has been offered up, or 
for one that has not been offered up ; whether for a 
draona that has been shared, or for one that has 
not been shared 8 ; the Ratu has power to remit him 

1 ‘ To take the rule ' (Comm.), which probably means, ‘ to know 
what sort of penance he must undergo;' as, when a man has 
sinned with the tongue or with the hand, the Dastur (or Ratu) must 
prescribe for him the expiation that the sin requires. The Ratu is 
the chief priest, the spiritual head of the community. 

2 ‘ To weep for his crime' (Comm.), which may mean, ‘ to recite 
to him the Patet, or, to receive at his hand the proper number of 
stripes.' It is difficult to say exactly what were the functions of the 
Sraosha-varez, which seem to have been twofold. The cock is 
compared to him, as being ‘ the one who sets the world in motion,' 
and wakes men for prayer (Farg. XVIII, 14, text and note), 
which would make him a sort of Zoroastrian Muezzin; at the same 
time he is the priest of penance. His name may refer to either of 
his functions, according as it is translated, ‘ the one who causes 
hearing,' or ‘the executor of punishment;' in the first case he 
would be the priest who pronounces the favete linguis, the 
jrausha/; in the other case he would be the priest who wields 
the Sraosho-^arana (see Introd. V, 19). 

3 A service in honour of any of the angels, or of deceased per- 
sons, in which small cakes, called draona, are consecrated in their 
names, and then given to those present to eat. 

4 When it ought not to be. 

When it ought to be. 

6 The meaning of the sentence is not certain ; it alludes to 

FARGARD V. 

57 

one-third of the penalty he had to pay1: if he has 
committed any other evil deed, it is remitted by 
his repentance ; if he has committed no other evil 
deed, he is absolved by his repentance for ever 
and ever2.’ 

VI. 

27 (82). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If there be a number of men resting in 
the same place, on adjoining carpets, on adjoining 
pillows, be there two men near one another, or five, 
or fifty, or a hundred, close by one another ; and of 
those people one happens to die; how many of 
them does the Drutf Nasu envelope with infection, 
pollution, and unclcanness 3 ? 

28(86). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘If the dead 
one be a priest, the Druf Nasu rushes forth4, O 
Spitama Zarathiutra ! she falls on the eleventh and 
defiles the ten s. 

religious customs which arc not well known. The Commentary 
interprets it as amounting to, 1 Whether he has thought what he 
ought not to have thought, or has not thought what he ought to 
have thought ; whether he has said what he ought not to have said, 
or has not said what he ought to have said ; whether he has done 
what he ought not to have done, or has not done what he ought to 
have done.’ 

1 When the Ratu remits one-third of the sin, God remits the 
whole of it (Saddar 29). 

2 Cf. Farg. Ill, 2i. 3 Sec Introd. V, 3. 

1 In opposition to the case when the dead one is an Ashc- 
maogha (§ 35), as no Nasu issues then. 

8 Literally, ‘ If she falls on the eleventh, she defiles the tenth.’ 
The word if refers to the supposition that there are eleven persons 
at least, and the words ‘ she defiles the tenth’ must lie understood 
to mean ‘ she defiles to the tenth.’ In the Ravaets, the Avesta dis- 
tinctions are lost, and the defiling power of the Nasu is the same, 
whatever may have been the rank of the dead : ‘ If there be a 

5» 

VEND! DAD. 

‘ If the dead one be a warrior, the Dru^ Nasu 
rushes forth, O Spitama Zarathmtra ! she falls on 
the tenth and defiles the nine. 

‘ If the dead one be a husbandman, the Dru^ 
Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama Zarathmtra ! she 
falls on the ninth and defiles the eight. 

29(92). ‘If it be a shepherd’s dog, the Drug- 
Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama Zarathmtra ! she 
falls on the eighth and defiles the seven. 

‘If it be a house dog, the Dru^ Nasu rushes 
forth, O Spitama Zarathmtra! she falls on the 
seventh and defiles the six. 

30(96). ‘If it be a Vohunazga dog1, the Drug" 
Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama Zarathmtra ! she 
falls on the sixth and defiles the five. 

‘ If it be a young dog 2, the Dru^- Nasu rushes 
forth, O Spitama Zarathmtra! she falls on the fifth 
and defiles the four. 

31 (100). ‘If it be a Sukuruna dog3, the Dru^- 
Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama Zarathmtra ! she 
falls on the fourth and defiles the three. 

‘ If it be a Ga.su dog 4, the Dru^ Nasu rushes 
forth, O Spitama Zarathmtra ! • she falls on the 
third and defiles the two. 

32(104). ‘If it be an Aiwizu dog, the Dru^ 

number of people, sleeping in the same place, and if one of them 
happen to die, all those around him, in any direction, as far as the 
eleventh, become unclean if they have been in contact with one 
another ' (Gr. Rav. 470). 

1 A dog without a master (see Farg. XIII, 19). 

2 A dog not more than four months old. 

8 According to Aspendiarji, a siyd-gosh, or ‘black-eared* 
lynx, the messenger of the lion. 

4 This name and the two following, Aiwizu and VIzu, are left 
untranslated, not being clear, in the Pahlavi translation. 

FAUGARD V. 

59 

Nasu rushes forth, 0 Spitama Zarathustra ! she 
falls on the second and defiles the next. 

‘ If it be a Vlzu dog, the Dru^ Nasu rushes forth, 
O Spitama Zarathustra ! she falls on the next, she 
defiles the next.’ 

33 (108). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If it be an Urupi dog1 *, how many of 
the creatures of the good spirit does it directly 
defile, how many does it indirectly defile in dying ? 

34(110). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘An Urupi 
dog does neither directly nor indirectly defile any of 
the creatures of the good spirit, but him who smites 
and kills it ; to him the uncleanness clings for ever 
and ever V 

35 (ri3)- O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If the dead one be a wicked, two- 
footed ruffian, an ungodly Ashemaogha 3, how many 
of the creatures of the good spirit does he directly 
defile, how many does he indirectly defile in dying ? 

36(115). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘No more 
than a frog does whose venom is dried up, and that 
has been dead more than a year4. Whilst alive, 
indeed, O Spitama Zarathuitra ! that wicked, two- 

1 A weasel. The weasel is one of the creatures of Ahura, for ‘it 
has been created to fight against the serpent garza and the other 
khrafstras that live-in holes’ (Bund. 47, 8). 

* Not that the unclean one cannot be cleansed, but that his 
uncleanness does not pass from him to another. 

3 See Introd. IV, xo; V, 11. 

4 The frog is a creature of Ahriman’s, and one of the most 
hateful ; for, in the sea Vouru-kasha, it goes swimming around the 
white Horn, the tree of everlasting life, and would gnaw it down, 
but for the godlike fish Kar-mahi, that keeps watch and guards 
the tree wherever the frog would slip in (Bund. XVIII ; cf. Orm. 
Ahr. § 146). 

6o 

vendIdad. 

legged ruffian, that ungodly Ashemaogha, directly 
defiles the creatures of the good spirit, and indi- 
rectly defiles them. 

37(119). ‘Whilst alive he smites the water1 2 3; 
whilst alive he blows out the fire 9 ; whilst alive he 
carries off the cow 9 ; whilst alive he smites the 
faithful man with a deadly blow, that parts the soul 
from the body4 * ; not so will he do when dead. 

38 ( 1 20). ‘ Whilst alive, indeed, O Spitama Zara- 
thiutra! that wicked, two-legged ruffian, that un- 
godly Ashemaogha, never ceases depriving the 
faithful man of his food, of his clothing, of his 
house, of his bed, of his vessels6; not so will he 
do when dead.’ 

VII. 

39 (122). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When into our houses here below we 
have brought the fire, the baresma, the cups, the 
Haoma, and the mortar *, O holy Ahura Mazda! if 
it come to pass that either a dog or a man dies 
there, what shall the worshippers of Mazda do ? 

40(125). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Out of the 
house, O Spitama Zarathmtra ! shall they take the 
fire, the baresma, the cups, the Haoma, and the 
mortar; they shall take the dead one out to the 
proper place7 whereto, according to the law, corpses 
must be brought, to be devoured there.’ 

41 (128). O Maker of the material world, thou 

1 By defiling it (a capital crime ; see Introd. V, 8, and Farg. 

VII, 25). 

2 He extinguishes the Bahr&m fire (a capital crime; Introd. V, 8). 

3 As a cattle-lifter. 4 As an assassin. 

6 By defiling or by stealing them. 

6 In order to perform a sacrifice. 1 The Dakhma. 

FARGARD V. 6 1 

Holy One! When shall they bring back the fire 
into the house wherein the man has died ? 

42 (129). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘They shall 
wait for nine nights in winter, for a month in sum- 
mer, and then they shall bring back the fire to 
the house wherein the man has died.’ 

43(131). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! And if they shall bring back the fire 
to the house wherein the man has died, within the 
nine nights, or within the month, what penalty 
shall they pay? 

44 (134). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘They shall be 
Peshotanus : two hundred stripes with the Aspahe- 
astra, two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-X’arana.’ 

VIII. 

45 (135) 0 Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If in the house of a worshipper of 
Mazda there be a woman with child, and if being a 
month gone, or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, 
or seven, or eight, or nine, or ten months gone, she 
bring forth a still-born child, what shall the wor- 
shippers of Mazda do ? 

4^ (I39)* Ahura Mazda answered: ‘The place in 
that Mazdean house whereof the ground is the 
cleanest and the driest, and the least passed through 
by flocks and herds, by Fire, the son of Ahura 
Mazda, by the consecrated bundles of baresma, and 
by the faithful;’ — 

47 (143). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! How far from the fire ? How far from 
the water ? How far from the consecrated bundles 
of baresma ? How far from the faithful ? 

§§ 45-54=Farg. VII, 60-69. 

62 

vendIdAd. 

48 (144). Ahura Mazda answered :* ‘Thirty paces 
from the fire ; thirty paces from the water ; thirty 
paces from the consecrated bundles of baresma; 
three paces from the faithful ; — 

49 (145). ‘ On that placd shall the worshippers of 
Mazda erect an enclosure \ and therein shall they 
establish her with food, therein shall they establish 
her with clothes.’ 

50 (147). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! What is the food that the woman shall 
first take ? 

51(148). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘She shall 
drink gAmez I 2 mixed with ashes, three cups of it, or 
six, or nine, to wash over the grave within her 
womb. 

52 (151). ‘Afterwards she may drink boiling3 
milk of mares, cows, sheep, or goats, with pap or 
without pap4; she may take cooked meat without 
water, bread without water, and wine without 
water 

53 (154)- O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! How long shall she remain so ? How 
long shall she live only on that sort of meat, bread, 
and wine ? 

54(155). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Three nights 

I The Armert-gdh (cf. Farg. Ill, ig seq., and Introd. V, 15). 

* Urine of the ox : it destroys the Nasu in her womb (Introd. 
V, 5). The ashes work to the same end, as they are taken from 
the Bahram fire (Comm.), the earthly representative of the fire of 
lightning, and the most powerful destroyer of fiends (see Introd. 
V, 8, and Farg. VIII, 80 seq.) ‘Three cups, or six, or nine, 
according to her strength ’ (Asp.) 

3 Doubtful. * Doubtful. 

II See Introd. V, 13. ‘The water would be defiled;’ cf. Farg. 
VII, 70 seq. 

FARGARD V. 

63 

long shall she remain so ; three nights long shall she 
live on that sort of meat, bread, and wine. Then, 
when three nights have passed, she shall wash her 
body, she shall wash her clothes, with g6m£z and 
water, by the nine holes1, and thus shall she be 
clean.’ 

55 (157). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! How long shall she remain so ? How 
long, after the three nights have gone, shall she sit 
confined, and live separated from the rest of the 
worshippers of Mazda, as to her seat, her food, and 
her clothing ? 

56 (158). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Nine nights 
long shall she remain so : nine nights long, after the 
three nights have gone, shall she sit confined, and 
live separated from the rest of the worshippers of 
Mazda, as to her seat, her food, and her clothing. 
Then, when the nine nights have gone, she shall 
wash her body, and cleanse her clothes with gomez 
and water2.’ 

57 (160)3. O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Can those clothes, when once washed 
and cleansed, ever be used either by a Zaotar, or by 
a Hdvanan, or by an Atare-vakhsha, or by a Fra- 
baretar, or by an Abereaf, or by an Asndtar, or by a 

1 She shall perform the nine nights' Barashnfim, for the 
details of which see Farg. IX. 

4 The modern custom is somewhat different: ‘If a woman 
brings forth a still-born child, after a pregnancy of one month to 
ten months, the first food she shall take is nirang (=gdmez) . . . 
fire and ashes ; and she is not allowed until the fourth day to take 
water or salt, or any food that is cooked with water or salt: on the 
fourth day they give her nirang, that she may cleanse herself and 
wash her clothes with it, and she is not allowed to wash herself and 
her clothes with water until the forty-first day’ (Gr. Rav. 568). 

* §§ 57-62 =Farg. VII, 17-22. 

64 

vendJdAd. 

Rathwiskar, or by a Sraoshd-varez \ or by any 
priest, warrior, or husbandman 2 ? 

58(162). Ahura Mazda answered: 'Never can 
those clothes, even when washed and cleansed, be 
used either by a Zaotar, or by a Havanan, or by an 
Atare-vakhsha, or by a Frabaretar, or by an Aberer/, 
or by an Asndtar, or by a Rathwiskar, or by a 
Sraosha-varez, or by any priest, warrior, or husband- 
man. 

59 (164). 1 But if there be in a Mazdean house a 
woman who is in her sickness, or a man who has 
become unfit for work3, and who must sit in the 
place of infirmity4, those clothes shall serve for their 
coverings and for their sheets 5, until they can with- 
draw and move their hands 6. 

1 These are the names of the different priests who were engaged 
in the sacrifices. The Havanan strains the Haoma ; the Atare- 
vakhsha kindles the fire ; the Frabaretar brings all that is necessary 
for the sacrifice (Anquetil) ; the Aberc d brings the water (Anquetil 
and Zand-Pahlavi Glossary, 21); the Asnatar cleanses the vessels. 
Those are the priests who are entrusted with the preparatory or 
accessory proceedings ; the essential duties are performed by the 
Zaotar and the Rathwukar, the former chanting the hymns and 
saying the prayers, the latter performing the various operations 
during the sacrifice. Nowadays there are only two priests, the 
Zaotar (Zfiti) and the Ralhwijkar (Raspi), the latter performing all 
the accessory services formerly performed by several priests. As 
to the Sraosha-varez, see above, § 25, note 2. 

2 In short, by any of the faithful, when in state of purity. 

3 An ArmeJt; literally, ‘an infirm person/ that is to say, one 
who is unclean, during the time of his uncleanness (Farg. IX, 
33 seq.), when all work is forbidden to him (cf. Introd.V, 15). 

4 The Armcrt-gah (cf. Introd. V, 15). 

B The clothing defiled by the dead can only serve for Dasht&n 
women, even after it has been washed and exposed for six months 
to the light of the sun and of the moon (Saddar 91 ; cf. Farg. VII, 
10 seq.) 

6 Until they are clean. The unclean must have their hands 

FARGARD V. 

65 

60(168). ‘Ahura Mazda, indeed, does not allow 
us to waste anything of value that we may have, 
not even so much as an Asperena’s1 weight of 
thread, not even so much as a maid lets fall in 
spinning. 

61 (171). ‘Whosoever throws any clothing on a 
dead body2, even so much as a maid lets fall in 
spinning, is not a pious man whilst alive, nor shall 
he, when dead, have a place in the happy realm :i. 

62 (174). ‘ He shall go away into the world of the 
fiends, into that dark world4, made of darkness, 
the offspring of darkness 6. To that world, to the 

wrapped in an old piece of linen, lest they should touch and defile 
anything clean. 

1 See Farg. IV, 48, note 4. 

2 Cf. Farg. VIII, 23 scq. It appears from ihosc passages that 
the dead must lie on the mountain naked, or * clothed only with 
the light of heaven’ (Farg. VI, 31). The modern custom is to 
clothe them with old clothing (l)adabhai Naoroji, Manners and 
Customs of the Parsis, p. 15). ‘ When a man dies and receives 
the order (to depart), the older the shroud they make for him, the 
better. It must be old, worn out, but well washed : they must not 
lay anything new on the dead. For it is said in the Zend Vcndidad, 

I f they put on the dead even so much as a thread from the distaff 
more than is necessary, every thread shall become in the other 
world a black snake clinging to the heart of him who made that 
shroud, and even the dead shall rise against him and seize him 
by the skirt, and say, That shroud which thou madcst for me has 
become food for worms and vermin ' (Saddar 1 2). The Greeks 
entertained quite different ideas, and dressed the dead in their 
gayest attire, as if for a feast. Yet the difference is only in appear- 
ance; for, after the fourth day, when the soul is in heaven, then ' 
rich garments arc offered up to it, which it will wear in its celestial 
life (Saddar 87, Hyde 64). 

8 The Behesht or paradise. 

4 ‘ Where darkness can be seized with the hand * (Comm. ; cf. 
Aogemaid6 28); something more than the ‘visible darkness/ 

6 The Commentary has, ‘the place of those who impregnate 

[4] F 

66 

vendIdAd. 

dismal realm, you are delivered by your own doings, 
by your own souls, O sinners ! ’ 

Fargard VI. 

1 (1-9). How long the earth remains unclean, when defiled by 
the dead. 

II (10-25). Penalties for defiling- the ground with dead matter. 

III (26-41). Purification of the different sorts of water, when 
defiled by the dead. 

IV (42-43). Purification of the ITaoma. 

V (44-51). The place for corpses; the Dakhmas. 

1. 

1. How long shall the ground lie fallow whereon 
dogs or men have died ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ A year long shall the 
ground lie fallow whereon dogs or men have died, 
O holy Zarathuitra ! 

2 (3). ‘ A year long shall no worshipper of Mazda 
sow or water that part of the ground whereon dogs 
or men have died ; he may sow as he likes the rest 
of the ground ; he may water it as he likes '. 

3 (5). ‘ If within the year they shall sow or water 
the ground whereon dogs or men have died, the sin 
is the same as if they had brought dead matter to 
the water, to the earth, and to the plants V 

4 (7). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy 
One ! If worshippers of Mazda shall sow or water, 

darkness, for the Dru^ who conceives seed from the sinner comes 
from that place’ (cf. Farg. XVIII, 30 seq.) 

1 Cf. Farg. VII, 45 seq. 

a ‘To the water which they pour out, to the earth which they 
plough, to the plants which they sow ’ (Comm.) 

FARGARD VI. 

6 7 

within the year, the ground whereon dogs or men 
have died, what is the penalty that they shall pay ? 

5 (9). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They are Pesho- 
tanus : two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra, 
two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-Z’arana V 

6 (10). O Maker of the material worid, thou Holy 
One! If worshippers of Mazda want to make the 
ground fit to be tilled again 2, that they may water it, 
sow it, and plough it, what shall they do ? 

7 (12). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘They shall look 
on the ground for any bones, hair, flesh, dung, or 
blood that may be there.’ 

8 (13). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy 
One ! If they shall not look on the ground for any 
bones, hair, flesh, dung, or blood that may be there, 
what is the penalty that they shall pay? 

9 (15). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘They are Peshd- 
tanus : two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-a^tra, 
two hundred stripes with the S r aosho-zDar ana . ’ 

II. 

10 (16). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One 1 If a man shall throw on the ground 
a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as 
the top joint of the little finger, and if grease or 
marrow flow from it on to the ground, what penalty 
shall he pay? 

11 (18). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Thirty stripes 
with the Aspahe-astra, thirty stripes with the 
Sraosho-ztarana.’ 

1 ‘If they plough and sow it, one tanfifuhr (see Introd. V, 19); 
if they pour water on it, one tanafuhr; if they plough, sow, and 
water it, two tanafuhrs ’ (Comm.) 

2 Even when a year’s space is past, the ground is not free ipso 
facto. 

F 2 

68 

VENDIDAD. 

12 (20). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man shall throw on the ground 
a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as 
the top joint of the fore-finger, and if grease or 
marrow flow from it on to the ground, what penalty 
shall he pay? 

13 (24). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Fifty stripes 
with the Aspahe-artra, fifty stripes with the Sraosho- 
Z’arana.’ 

14 (25). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall throw on the ground a 
bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as 
the top joint of the middle finger, and if grease or 
marrow flow from it on to the ground, what penalty 
shall he pay? 

15(29). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘Seventy stripes 
with the Aspahe-astra, seventy stripes with the 
Sraosho-^arana.’ 

16 (30). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man shall throw on the ground a 
bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as a 
finger or as a rib, and if grease or marrow flow from 
it on to the ground, what penalty shall he pay? 

17 (34). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘Ninety stripes 
with the Aspahe-astra, ninety stripes with the 
Sraosho-^arana.’ 

18 (35). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man shall throw on the ground a 
bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as two 
fingers or as two ribs, and if grease or marrow flow 
from it on to the ground, what penalty shall he pay ? 

19 (39)’ Ahura Mazda answered: ‘ He is a Pesh6- 
tanu : two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-artra, 
two hundred stripes with the Sraoshd-ziarana.’ 

FARGARD VI. 

69 

20 (40). 0 Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall throw on the ground 
a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as 
an arm-bone or as a thigh-bone, and if grease or 
marrow flow from it on to the ground, what penalty 
shall he pay ? 

2 1 (44). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Four hundred 
stripes with the Aspahe-astra, four hundred stripes 
with the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

22 (45). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man shall throw on the ground 
a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as 
a man’s skull, and if grease or marrow flow from it 
on to the ground, what penalty shall he pay ? 

23(49). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Six hundred 
stripes with the Aspahe-aJtra, six hundred stripes 
with the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

24 (50). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man shall throw on the ground 
the whole body of a dead dog, or of a dead man, 
and if grease or marrow flow from it on to the 
ground, what penalty shall he pay ? 

25 (53). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘A thousand 
stripes with the Aspahe-artra, a thousand stripes with 
the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

III. 

26 (54). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a worshipper of Mazda, walking, or 
running, or riding, or driving, come upon a corpse in 
a stream of running water, what shall he do ? 

27(56). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Taking off 
his shoes, putting off his clothes, boldly, O Zara- 
thiutra ! he shall enter the river, and take the dead 
out of the water ; he shall go down into the water 

70 

vendIdAd. 

ankle-deep, knee-deep, waist-deep, or a man’s full 
depth, till he can reach the dead body V 

28 (61). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If, however, the body be already falling 
to pieces and rotting, what shall the worshipper of 
Mazda do ? 

29 (63). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He shall draw 
out of the water as much of the corpse as he can 
grasp with both hands, and he shall lay it down on 
the dry ground ; no sin attaches to him for any 
bone, hair, grease, flesh, dung, or blood that may 
drop back into the water.’ 

30 (65). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! What part of the water in a pond does 
the Druf Nasu defile with infection, pollution, and 
uncleanness ? 

3 [ (66). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Six steps on 
each of the four sides. As long as the corpse has 
not been taken out of the water, so long shall that 
water be unclean and unfit to drink. They shall, 
therefore, take the corpse out of the pond, and lay 
it down on the dry ground. 

32 (69). ‘And of the water they shall draw off the 
half, or the third, or the fourth, or the fifth part, 
according as they are* able ; and after the corpse has 
been taken out and the water has been drawn off, 
the rest of the water is clean, and both cattle and 
men may drink of it at their pleasure, as before.’ 

33 (72). O Maker of the material world, thou 

* ‘ If he is able to draw out the corpse and does so, it is a pious 
deed worth a taqSfflhr (that is, one by which a tanafOhr sin can be 
cancelled) ; if he is able to draw it out and does not do so, it is a 
tantfflhr sin. GftgSrasp says, It is a margarzan sin (a capital crime),’ 
(Comm.) 

FARGARD VI. 

71 

Holy One ! What part of the water in a well does 
the Driyf Nasu defile with infection, pollution, and 
uncleanness ? 

34 (73). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ As long as 
the corpse has not been taken out of the water ', so 
long shall that water be unclean and unfit to drink. 
They shall, therefore, take the corpse out of the 
well, and lay it down on the dry ground. 

35 (73)- ‘And of the water in the well they shall 
draw off the half, or the third, or the fourth, or the 
fifth part, according as they arc able ; and after the 
corpse has been taken out and the water has been 
drawn off, the rest of the water is clean, and both 
cattle and men may drink of it at their pleasure, 
as before.’ 

36 (74). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! What part of a sheet of snow or hail 
does the Driif Nasu defile with infection, pollution, 
and uncleanness ? 

37(75). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Three steps 
on each of the four sides. As long as the corpse 
has not been taken out of the water, so long shall 
that water be unclean and unfit to drink. They 
shall, therefore, take the corpse out of the water, 
and lay it down on the dry ground. 

38(78). ‘After the corpse has been taken out, 
and the snow or the hail has melted, the water is 
clean, and both cattle and men may drink of it at 
their pleasure, as before.’ 

39 (79)- O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! What part of the water of a running 

1 All the water in the well is unclean, c as the well has the length 
and breadth of a man’s stature’ (Brouillons d’Anquetil, Vended, 
p. 206). 

7 2 

vendJdAd. 

stream does the Druf Nasu defile with infection, 
pollution, and uncleanness ? 

40 (80). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Three steps 
down the stream, nine steps up the stream, six steps 
across. As long as the corpse has not been taken 
out of the water, so long shall the water be unclean 
and unfit to drink. They shall, therefore, take the 
corpse out of the water, and lay it down on the dry 
ground. 

41 (83). ‘After the corpse has been taken out and 
the stream has flowed three times1, the water is clean, 
and both cattle and men may drink of it at their 
pleasure, as before.’ 

IV. 

42 (84). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! Can the Haoma that has been touched 
by the corpse of a dead dog, or the corpse of a dead 
man, be made clean again ? 

43(85). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It can, O 
holy Zarathuytra ! If it has been strained for the 
sacrifice, no corpse that has been brought unto it, 
makes corruption or death enter it 2. If it has not 
been strained for the sacrifice, the stem is defiled 
the length of four fingers. That length of stem shall 
be buried in the ground, in the middle of the house, 
for a year long. When the year is passed, the faithful 
may drink of its juice at their pleasure, as before.’ 

V. 

44 (92). O Maker of the material world, thou 

1 When three waves have passed. 

2 Because the Haoma is the plant of life ; when strained for the 
sacrifice, it is the king of healing plants (Bund. XXIV) ; the dead 
shall become immortal by tasting of the white Haoma (ib.XXXI). 

FARGARD VI. 

73 

Holy One ! Whither shall we bring, where shall 
we lay the bodies of the dead, O Ahura Mazda ? 

45 (93). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ On the high- 
est summits \ where they know there arc always 
corpse-eating dogs and corpse-eating birds, O holy 
Zarathujtra ! 

46 (95). ‘ There shall the worshippers of Mazda 
fasten the corpse, by the feet and by the hair, with 
brass, stones, or lead, lest the corpse-eating dogs 
and the corpse-eating birds shall go and carry the 
bones to the water and to the trees. 

47 (98). ‘If they shall not fasten the corpse, so 
that the corpse-eating dogs and the corpse-eating 
birds may go and carry the bones to the water and to 
the trees, what is the penalty that they shall pay ?’ 

48(100). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘They shall 
be Peshotanus : two hundred stripes with the 
Aspahe-astra, two hundred stripes with the Sraosho- 
Atrana.’ 

49 (101). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One1 2 ! Whither shall we bring, where shall we 
lay the bones of the dead, O Ahura Mazda ? 

50(102). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘The wor- 
shippers of Mazda shall erect a building 3 out of the 
reach of the dog, of the fox, and of the wolf, and 
wherein rain-water cannot stay4. 

1 ‘On the top of a mountain’ (Comm.) See Introd. V, 10; cf. 
VIII, xo. 

2 The foregoing clauses (§§ 44-47) refer to the place where the 
corpse must be laid; the following (49-51) refer to the building, 
which must be erected on that place, if possible, to receive the 
corpse. 

9 The Dakhma. 

4 The rain-water that washes away the remains of corpses (V, 
16 seq.) must not remain on the Dakhmas (cf. Comm, ad VIII, 7), 

74 vendidAd. 

5 1 (105). ‘Such a building shall they erect, if they 
can afford it, with stones, mortar, and earth1; if they 
cannot afford it, they shall lay down the dead man 
on the ground, on his carpet and his pillow, clothed 
with the light of heaven, and beholding the sun.’ 

Fargard VII. 

I (1-5). IIow long after death the Nasu falls upon the dead. 

II (6-9). How far the defiling power of the Nasu extends. 

III (To-22). Cleansing of clothes defiled by the dead. 

IV (23-24). Eating of corpses an abomination. 

V (25-27). Bringing corpses to fire or water an abomination. 

VI (28-35). Cleansing of wood and com defiled by the dead. 

VII a (36-40). Physicians; their probation. 

VII b (40-44). Their fees. 

VIII (45-59). Purification of the earth, of the Dakhmas. The 
Dakhmas and the Daevas. 

IX (60-72). Treatment of a woman who has brought forth a 
still-born child. 

X (73-75). Cleansing of vessels defiled by the dead. 

XI (76). Cleansing of the cow. 

XII (77). Unclean libations. 

This chapter would offer tolerable unity, but for a digression on 
medicine, which would be better placed as an introduction to the 
last three chapters. Sections II and IX, parts of which have already 
been found in Fargard V, arc more suitably placed here. This 
chapter, as a whole, deals with the action of the Dru^ Nasu, 
from the moment she takes hold of the corpse, and shows how and 
when the several objects she has defiled become clean, namely, 
clothes, wood, corn, earth, women, vessels, and cows. 

I. 

I. Zarathiutra asked Aluira Mazda: ‘ O Ahura 
Mazda, most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material 

but is brought out through trenches dug for that purpose (cf. 
Introd. V, 10). 

1 This word is doubtful. 

FARGARD VII. 

75 

world, thou Holy One ! When a man dies, at what 
moment does the Dru^ Nasu rush upon him 1 ? ’ 

2 (3). Ahura Mazda anSwered : ‘ Directly after 
death, as soon as the soul has left the body, O 
Spitama Zarathustra ! the Dru^ Nasu comes and 
rushes upon him, from the regions of the north a, in 
the shape of a raging fly, with knees and tail sticking 
out, all stained with stains, and like unto the foulest 
Khrafstras 3. 

(3. ‘On him she stays until the dog has seen the 
corpse 4 or eaten it up, or until the flesh-eating birds 
have taken flight towards it6. When the dog has seen 
it or eaten it up, or when the flesh-eating birds have 
taken flight towards it, then the I)ru^ Nasu rushes 
away to the regions of the north in the shape of a 
raging fly, with knees and tail sticking out, all stained 
with stains, and like unto the foulest Khrafstras/] 

4 (5). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy 
One ! If the man has been killed by a dog, or by a 
wolf, or by witchcraft, or by the artifices of hatred ,J, 
or by falling down a precipice, or by the law 7, or by a 
murderer, or by the noose 8, how long after death docs 
the Drue- Nasu come and rush upon the dead? 

1 See Introd. V, 3. 

- Hell lies in the north; cf. XIX, 1 ; Yt.XXII, 25; Bundahir 36, 1 2. 

•1 See Introd. V, 3. 

4 Until the Sag-did lias been performed (sec Introd. V, 4). 

5 The Sag-did may be performed by birds of prey as well as 

by dogs (see Introd. V, 4). The dog smites the Nasu when it brings 
its muzzle near to the dead, the bird (mountain hawk, sparrow (?), 
or eagle) when its shadow passes over the body (Comm, ad § 2 ; cf. 
§ 29). § 3 is from the Vendidad Sadah. 

* ‘ By poison ’ (Comm.) 

7 Literally, ‘by men;’ that is to say, pul to death by the com- 
munity according to law (Comm.) 

s If he has strangled himself. Or possibly, ‘ by want.' 

76 

VEND} DAD. 

5 (6). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ At the next 
watch after death the Druf Nasu comes and 
rushes upon the dead, from the regions of the 
north, in the shape of a raging fly, with knees and 
tail sticking out, all stained with stains, and like 
unto the foulest Khrafstras.’ 

II1 2. 

6 (7). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy 
One! If there be a number of men resting in the 
same place, on adjoining carpets, on adjoining 
pillows, be there two men near one another, or five, 
or fifty, or a hundred, close by one another; and of 
those people one happens to die ; how many of 
them does the Dru^ Nasu envelope with infection, 
pollution, and uncleanness ? 

7(11). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘If the dead 
one be a priest, the Dru^ Nasu rushes forth, () 
Spitama Zaratluutra ! she falls on the eleventh and 
defiles the ten. 

‘ If the dead one be a warrior, the Dru^ Nasu 
rushes forth, O Spitama Zaratluutra ! she falls on 
the tenth and defiles the nine. 

‘ If the dead one be a husbandman, the Driy 
Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama Zaratluutra! she falls 
on the ninth and defiles the eight. 

8(17). ‘If it be a shepherd’s dog, the Dru^ Nasu 
rushes forth, O Spitama Zaratluutra ! she falls on 
the eighth and defiles the seven. 

1 The day is divided into five watches or ratu. If the man 
dies a natural death, the Dru^ comes directly ; if the death be 
violent and unlooked for, the Dru# is taken unawares, and it 
requires time for her to be warned of it and to come. 

- §| 6-9=Farg. V, 27-30. 

FARGARD VII. 

77 

‘If it be a house dog, the Dru<r Nasu rushes 
forth, O Spitama Zarathiwtra! she falls on the 
seventh and defiles the six. 

9(21). ‘If it be a Vohunazga dog, the Dru^ 
Nasu rushes forth, 0 Spitama Zarathustra ! she 
falls on the sixth and defiles the five. 

‘If it be a young dog, the Dni'r Nasu rushes 
forth, O Spitama Zarathustra! she falls on the fifth 
and defiles the four V 

. . . ‘ those clothes shall serve for their coverings 
and for their sheets1 2.’ . . . 

III. 

10 (26). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! What part of his bedding2 and pillow 
does the Dru«‘ Nasu defile with infection, unclean- 
ness, and pollution ? 

11(27). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘The Dru^ 
Nasu defiles with infection, uncleanness, and pollu- 
tion the upper sheet and the inner garment V 

12 (28). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! Can that garment be made clean, O 
holy Ahura Mazda ! that has been touched by the 
carcase of a dog or the corpse of a man ? ’ 

13 (29). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It can, O holy 
Zarathiutra ! ’ 

. How so ? 

1 This enumeration is less complete than that in the fifth Fargard, 
as it comprises only the first four sorts of dogs, viz. only those that 
can perform the Sag-did (Comm, ad § 2). 

2 This phrase, which forms part of § 19, is wrongly inserted 
here. 

The bedding on which he has died. 

* That is to say, only those clothes which have been in direct « 
contact with the dead. 

78 

VENdIdAd. 

‘ If, indeed, the garment has been defiled with 
seed, or sweat, or dirt, or vomit, the worshippers of 
Mazda shall rend it to pieces, and bury it under the 
ground \ 

14 (33)- ‘ But if it has not been defiled with seed, 
or sweat, or dirt, or vomit, then the worshippers 
of Mazda shall wash it with gdmez. 

1 5 (35). ‘ If it be leather, they shall wash it with 
gomez three times, they shall rub it with earth three 
times, they shall wash it with water three times, and 
afterwards they shall expose it to the air for three 
months at the window of the house. 

‘ If it be woven cloth, they shall wash it with 
gomez six times2, they shall rub it with earth six 
times, they shall wash it with water six times, and 
afterwards they shall expose it to the air for six 
months at the window of the house. 

*6 (37)- ‘ The spring named Ardvl Sftra, O Spi- 
tania Zarathuitra ! that spring of mine, purifies the 
seed in man, the fruit in a woman’s womb, the milk 
in a woman’s breast *.’ 

T74(4i). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Can those clothes, when once washed 
and cleansed, ever be used either by a Zaotar, or by 
a Havanan, or by an Atare-vakhsha, or by a Fra- 
baretar, or by an Aberetf, or by an Asnatar, or by a 
Rathwii'kar, or by a Sraosha-varez, or by any priest, 
warrior, or husbandman ? 

1 According to the Commentary only that part which has been 
defiled is rent off ; the rest may still be used. 

2 See Introd. V, 16. 

3 This clause is a quotation from Yasna LXV, 5, intended to 
illustrate the- cleansing power of water. Ardvi Sura is the goddess 
of the waters. 

4 §§ 17-22 =Farg.V, 51-62. 

FARGARD VII. 

79 

1 8 (43). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Never can 
those clothes, even when washed and cleansed, be 
used either by a Zaotar, or by a Havanan, or by an 
Atare-vakhsha, or by a Frabaretar, or by an Abere</, 
or by an Asnatar, or by a Rathwbkar, or by a 
Sraoshd-varez, or by any priest, warrior, or hus- 
bandman. 

19 (45). ‘ But if there be in a Mazdean house a 
woman who is in her sickness, or a man who has 
become unfit for work, and who must sit in the 
place of infirmity, those clothes shall serve for their 
coverings and for their sheets, until they can with- 
draw and move their hands. 

20 (49). ‘ Ahura Mazda, indeed, does not allow 
us to waste anything of value that we may have, 
not. even so much as an Asperena’s weight of 
thread, not even so much as a maid lets fall in 
spinning. 

21 (52). ‘Whosoever throws any clothing on a 
dead body, even so much as a maid lets fall in 
spinning, is not a pious man whilst alive, nor shall 
he, when dead, have a place in the happy realm. 

22 (55). ‘He shall go away into the world of the 
fiends, into that dark world, made of darkness, the 
offspring of darkness. To that world, to the dismal 
realm, you are delivered by your own doings, by 
your own souls, 0 sinners ! ’ 

IV. 

23 (59). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Can he be clean again who has eaten 
of the carcase of a dog or of the carcase of a man 1 ? 

1 The carcase-cater lodges the Nasu in himself; he becomes a 
Nasu, and therefore must be destroyed ; cf. infra § 76 seq. 

80 VENDIDAL). 

24(60). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He cannot, 
O holy Zarathustra ! I lis burrow1 2 shall be dug out, 
his life shall be torn out, his bright eyes shall be put 
out ; the Dr 11^ Nasu falls upon him, takes hold of 
him even to the end of the nails, and he is unclean, 
thenceforth, for ever and ever 

V. 

25 (65). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! Can he be clean again, O holy Ahura 
Mazda! who has brought a corpse with filth into the 
waters, or unto the fire, and made either unclean ? 

26 (66). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘He cannot, 
O holy Zarathmtra ! Those wicked ones it is, those 
men turned to Nasus3, that most increase gnats and 
locusts 4 ; those wicked ones it is, those men turned 
to Nasus, that most increase the grass-destroying 
drought. 

2 7 (69). ‘ Those wicked ones it is, those men 
turned to Nasus, that increase most the power of 
the winter, produced by the fiends, the cattle- 
killing, thick-snowing, overflowing, the piercing, 

1 His house, as he is assimilated to a devouring Khrafstra. 

2 Till the resurrection. ‘It is prescribed in the Vcndtdad that 
if a man shall eat of a carcase, his house and family shall be 
destroyed, his heart shall be torn out of his body, his eyes shall 
be put out, and his soul shall abide in hell till the resurrection ' 
(Saddar 71, Hyde 79). ‘He who cats of a carcase with sinful 
intent is both unclean and margarzan; Barashnfim and Nireng 
are of no avail for him, he must die. If there has been no sinful 
intent, he may wash himself ; one may give him the ashes and the 
gomfiz (Comm.); he is unclean, he is not margarz&n’ (Old 
Rav. 1 15 b). 

3 Doubtful; possibly, ‘those Nasu- makers/ 

4 ‘ It is said in the A vesta that when there are many gnats and 
locusts it is owing to corpses having been brought to water and to 
fire’ (Saddar 72, Hyde Bo). 

FARGARD VII. 

8l 

fierce, mischievous winter1. Upon them comes 
and rushes the Druf Nasu, she takes hold of them 
even to the end of the nails, and they are unclean, 
thenceforth, for ever and ever 2.‘ 

VI. 

28 (72). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Can the wood be made clean, O holy 
Ahura Mazda! whereunto dead matter has been 
brought from a dead dog, or from a dead man ? 

29 (73)* Ahura Mazda answered : ‘It can, O holy 
Zarathustra !’ 

How so ? 

4 If the Nasu has not yet been smitten3 by the 
corpse-eating dogs, or by the corpse-eating birds 4 5 6, 
they shall lay down, apart on the ground, the wood 
on the length of aVitasti* all around the dead 
matter, if the wood be dry ; on the length of a 
Fr&r&thni 0 all around, if it be wet ; then they shall 
sprinkle it once over with water, and it shall be 
clean 7 *. 

1 ‘ In the same way (by the bringing of corpses to water and to 
fire), winter grows colder, and summer grows warmer' (Saddar 72, 
Hyde 80). 

2 Whoever shall do that deed, shall pay for it in this world and 
in the next ; they shall flay his body in the presence of the as- 
sembly, they shall tear him limb from limb, and his corpse shall be 
thrown away to dogs and ravens, . . . and when his soul comes 
to the other world, he shall suffer tortures from the d6vs (Gr. Rav. 
I>- 123>* 

3 That is to say, if the Sag -did has not yet been performed. 

* See above, p. 75, n. 5. 

5 Twelve fingers. 

6 The Frar&thni is, as it seems, as much as one foot (fourteen 
fingers, Vd. II, 22, Comm.) 

7 4 After a year/ according to the Commentary. 

[4] G 

82 

vendIdAd. 

30 (78). ‘ But if the Nasu has already been 
smitten1 by the corpse-eating dogs, or by the corpse- 
eating birds, they shall lay down, apart on the 
ground, the wood on the length of a Frdrdthni all 
around the dead matter, if the wood be dry ; on the 
length of a F rabazu 2 all around, if it be wet ; then 
they shall sprinkle it once over with water, and it 
shall be clean. 

31 (81). ‘This is the quantity of wood around 
the dead matter, that they shall lay down, apart on 
the ground, according as the wood is dry or wet ; 
according as it is hard or soft; they shall sprinkle it 
once over with water, and it shall be clean.’ 

32 (83). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Can the corn or the fodder be made 
clean, O holy Ahura Mazda ! whereunto dead mat- 
ter has been brought from a dead dog, or from a 
dead man? 

33 (84). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It can, 0 holy 
Zarathm'tra !’ 

How so? 

* If the Nasu has not yet been smitten by the 
corpse-eating dogs, or by the corpse-eating birds, they 
shall lay down, apart on the ground, the corn on the 
length of a Frardthni all around the dead matter, if 
the corn be dry ; on the length of a F rabazu all 

5 It appears from the similar passages (VIII, 35, 36, and 98, 99) 
and from the general principles of unclcanness (see Introd.V, 16) 
that the words ‘If the Nasu has not yet been smitten,’ in § 29, 
have been misplaced there from § 30, and that the corresponding 
words in § 30 belong to § 29 ; because uncleanness spreads less far, 
when the Sag-did has taken place. 

2 A measure of unknown extent ; an arm’s length,’ it would 
seem. 

FARGARD VII. 83 

around, if it be wet; then they shall sprinkle it 
once over with water, and it shall be clean. 

34 (89). ‘ But if the Nasu has already been 
smitten1 by the corpse-eating dogs, or by the corpse- 
eating birds, they shall lay down, apart on the 
ground, the corn on the length of a Frdbazu all 
around the dead matter, if the corn be dry ; on the 
length of a Vib&zu2 all around, if it be wet; then 
they shall sprinkle it once over with water, and it 
shall be clean. 

35 (92). ‘ This is the quantity of corn around the 
dead matter, that they shall lay down, apart on the 
ground, according as the corn is dry or wet; accord- 
ing as it is sown or not sown ; according as it is 
reaped or not reaped ; according as it is ground or 
not ground 3 ; according as it is (kneaded) 4 or not 
kneaded; they shall sprinkle it once over with water, 
and it shall be clean.’ 

Vila. 

36 (94). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a worshipper of Mazda want to 
practice the art of healing, on whom shall he first 
prove his skill ? on worshippers of Mazda or on 
worshippers of the Daevas ? 

37 (96). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘On worship- 
pers of the Daevas shall he first prove himself, 

1 The same observation applies to the first words of §§ 33, 34, 
as was observed of §§ 29, 30. 

2 A measure of unknown extent ; ‘ an ell,’ it would seem. 

3 This clause is preceded and followed, in the Vendid&d Sadah, 
by clauses which seem to refer to the process of grinding being 
more or less advanced. 

4 This word is supplied, as it appears, from the context, and 
from the Pahlavi translation, to be wanting. 

G 2 

84 vendIdAd. 

rather than on worshippers of Mazda. If he treat 
with the knife a worshipper of the Daevas and he 
die ; if he treat with the knife a second worshipper of 
the Daevas and he die ; if he treat with the knife for 
the third time a worshipper of the Daevas and he 
die, he is unfit to practise the art of healing for ever 
and ever. 

38 (99). ‘ Let him therefore never attend any 
worshipper of Mazda ; let him never treat with the 
knife any worshipper of Mazda, nor wound him with 
the knife. If he shall ever attend any worshipper 
of Mazda, if he shall ever treat with the knife any 
worshipper of Mazda, and wound him with the knife, 
he shall pay for it the same penalty as is paid for 
wilful murder1. 

39 (102). ‘ If he treat with the knife a worshipper 
of the Daevas and he recover ; if he treat with the 
knife a second worshipper of the Daevas and he 
recover ; if for the third time he treat with the knife 
a worshipper of the Daevas and he recover ; then 
he is fit to practise the art of healing for ever and 
ever 2. 

40 (104). ‘ He may henceforth at his will attend 
worshippers of Mazda ; he may at his will treat with 
the knife worshippers of Mazda,* and heal them with 
the knife. 

VII b, 

41 (105). ‘A healer shall heal a priest for a holy 

1 For baodho-varsta, which word is wrongly understood by the 
Parsis as the designation of a penalty, consisting in the amputation 
of six fingers (Asp.) 

2 ‘ Some say, One who has been qualified may become dis- 
qualified; one who has been disqualified shall never become 
qualified ' (Comm, ad § 43). 

FARGARD VII. 

«5 

blessing 1 ; he shall heal the master of a house for 
the value of an ox of low value ; he shall heal the 
lord of a borough 2 for the value of an ox of average 
value; he shall heal the lord of a town for the value 
of an ox of high value ; he shall heal the lord of a 
province for the value of a chariot and four 3. 

42 (no). ‘He shall heal the wife of the master 
of a house for the value of a she-ass ; he shall heal 
the wife of the lord of a borough for the value of a 
cow ; he shall heal the wife of the lord of a town for 
the value of a mare ; he shall heal the wife of the 
lord of a province for the value of a she-camel. 

43 (114). ‘He shall heal the son of the lord of a 
borough for the value of an ox of high value ; he 
shall heal an ox of high value for the value of an ox 
of average value ; he shall heal an ox of average 
value for that of an ox of low value ; he shall heal 
an ox of low value for the value of a sheep; he shall 
heal a sheep for the value of a meal of meat 4 5. 

44 (118). ‘ If several healers offer themselves to- 
gether, O Spitama Zarathurtra ! namely, one who 
heals with the knife, one who heals with herbs, and 
one who heals with the holy word f>, it is this one 

1 ‘Thus he will become holy (i.e. he will go to paradise); there 
is no equivalent in money. Some say, Tt is given when the priest 
has not 3000 stirs’ (Comm.) 

2 A group of several houses ; Aspendiarji and Anquelil say, ‘ a 
street.’ 

3 ‘ A value of seventy stirs ’ (Comm.) 

4 Cf. the tariff of fees for the cleanser, Farg. IX, 37 seq. 

5 ‘ By spells ’ (Comm. ; cf. Odyssea XIX, 457). This classifi- 
’cation was not unknown to Asclepios : he relieved the sick ‘ now 

with caressing spells, now with soothing drink or balsam, now with 
the knife’ (Pindaros, Pyth. Ill, 51). 

86 

VENdIdaD. 

who will best drive away sickness from the body of 
the faithful V 

VIII. 

45 (122). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! How long after the corpse of a dead 
man has been laid down on the ground, clothed 
with the light of heaven and beholding the sun, is 
the ground itself again1 2 ? 

46(123). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘When the 
corpse of a dead man has lain on the ground 
for a year, clothed with the light of heaven, and 
beholding the sun, then the ground is itself again, 
O holy Zaratluutra 3 ! ’ 

47 (124). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! How long after the corpse of a dead 
man has been buried in the earth, is the earth itself 
again ? 

48(125). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘When the 
corpse of a dead man has lain buried in the earth 
for fifty years, O Spitama Zarathustra ! then the 
earth is itself again4.’ 

49 (126). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! How long after the corpse of a dead 

1 ‘ It may be that he may not relieve, but he will not harm ’ 
(Comm.) The Vcndidad Sadah, instead of ‘it is this one,’ &c., 
reads as follows : ‘ Let them address themselves to the one who 
heals with the holy word ; for he is the best healer among all 
healers, who heals by the holy word ; this one it is who will drive 
away sickness from the body of the faithful.’ The treatment by 
the holy word seems not to consist only in the recitation of spells, 
but the spells must be accompanied by the ceremony of the Ba- 
rashnum (see Farg. XXII and Introd. V, 14). 

2 Restored to the purity of its nature, and fit to till; as it* 
remains Nasu till that time. 

3 See Farg. VI, 1 seq. 

4 Cf. Farg. Ill, 36 seq. 

FARGARD VII. 

87 

man has been laid down on a Dakhma, is the 
ground, whereon the Dakhma stands, itself again? 

50(127). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Not until 
the dust of the corpse, O Spitama Zarathurtra ! 
has mingled with the dust of the earth1. Urge 
every one in the material world, O Spitama Zara- 
thuitra ! to pull down Dakhmas 2. 

51 (129). ‘ He who should pull down Dakhmas, 
even so much thereof as the size of his own body, 
his sins in thought, word, and deed are remitted as 
they would be by a Patet ; his sins in thought, 
word, and deed are atoned for3. 

52 (132). ‘ Not for his soul shall the two spirits 
wage war with one another 4 ; and when he enters 
the blissful world, the stars, the moon, and the sun 
shall rejoice in him ; and I, Ahura Mazda, shall 
rejoice in him, saying : “ Hail, O man ! thou who 
hast just passed from the decaying world into the 
undecaying one ! ” ’ 

55 s (137). O Maker of the material world, thou 

1 A space of time estimated at fifty years (Comm.) Cf. Farg. 

HI, 13. 

2 Cf. Farg. Ill, 9, text and note, and § 13. 

3 ‘ A t ana (fill r sin is remitted thereby ’ (Comm.) 

4 When a man dies, hell and paradise, fiends and gods struggle 
for the possession of his soul : Astovidhdtur, Vizarcslia, and the bad 
Vayu drag the souls of the wicked to hell ; Mithra, Sraosha, Rashnu, 
and the good Vayu take the souls of the good to paradise (sec 
Farg. XIX, 29 seq. ; Yt. XXII ; Mainyo-i-khard II). The struggle 
lasts for three days and three nights (the sadis), during which time 
the relatives of the dead offer up prayers and sacrifices to Sraosha, 
Rashnu, and Vayu, to assure him their protection (cf. IX, 56). 

0 §§ 53) 54 belong to the Commentary ; they are composed of 
disconnected quotations, part of which refers to the different deeds 
by which a tanaffthr sin may be redeemed, while the other part 
refers to the rules of what may be called the book-keeping of good 
actions and sins. 

88 

vendIdAd. 

Holy One ! Where are the fiends ? Where are 
the worshippers of the fiends ? What is the place 
whereon the troops of fiends rush together ? What 
is the place whereon the troops of fiends come 
rushing along ? What is the place whereon they 
rush together to kill their fifties and their hundreds, 
their hundreds and their thousands, their thousands 
and their tens of thousands, their tens of thousands 
and their myriads of myriads ? 

56 (138). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Those Dakh- 
mas that are built upon the face of the earth, O Spi- 
tama Zarathustra ! and whereon are laid the corpses 
of dead men, that is the place where the fiends are, 
that is the place whereon the troops of fiends rush 
together, that is the place whereon the troops of 
fiends come rushing along, that is the place whereon 
they rush together to kill their fifties and their 
hundreds, their hundreds and their thousands, their 
thousands and their tens of thousands, their tens of 
thousands and their myriads of myriads. 

57 (140). ‘On those Dakhmas, O Spitama Zara- 
thustra ! those fiends take food and void filth, (eating 
up corpses) in the same way as you, men, in the 
material world, eat cooked meal and cooked meat. 
It is, as it were, the smell of their feeding that you 
smell there, O men ! 

58(143). ‘Thus the fiends revel on there, until 
that stench is rooted in the Dakhmas. Thus from 
the Dakhmas arise the infection of diseases, itch, 
hot fever, humours1, cold fever, rickets, and hair 
untimely white. There death has most power on 
man, from the hour when the sun is down. 

1 Doubtful (na£za). 

FARGARD VII. 

89 

59 (148). 1 2 * And if there be people of evil spirit 
who do not seek for better spirit, the Gainis 1 make 
those diseases grow stronger by a third on their 
thighs, on their hands, on their plaited hair V 

IX. 

60 4 ( 1 5 1). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If in the house of a worshipper of 
Mazda there be a woman with child, and if being a 
month gone, or two, or three, or four, or five, or 
six, or seven, or eight, or nine, or ten months gone, 
she bring forth a still-born child, what shall the 
worshippers of Mazda do ? 

61 (155). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ The place in 
that Mazdean house whereof the ground is the 
cleanest and the driest, and the least passed through 
by flocks and herds, by Fire, the son of Ahura 
Mazda, by the consecrated bundles of baresma, and 
by the faithful — 

62 (158). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! How far from the fire ? How far from 
the water ? How far from the consecrated bundles 
of baresma ? How far from the faithful ? 

63 (159). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Thirty paces 
from the fire ; thirty paces from the water ; thirty 
paces from the consecrated bundles of baresma ; 
three paces from the faithful; — 

1 ‘ The Gahi ’ (Comm.) The Gaini seems to be the Gahi as 
bringing sickness (cf. Farg. XXI, 2). 

2 The general meaning of the sentence is that the Dakhmas are 
seats of infection, of which the action becomes worse and stronger 
when people live in impiety and vices. 

8 Doubtful. 

4 §§ 6o-69=Farg. V, 45-54- 

90 

VENDfDAD. 

64 (160). ‘On that place shall the worshippers of 
Mazda erect an enclosure, and therein shall they 
establish her with food, therein shall they establish 
her with clothes.’ 

65 (162). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! What is the food that the woman shall 
first take ? 

66 (163). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ She shall 
drink gomez mixed with ashes, three cups of it, or 
six, or nine, to wash over the grave in her womb. 

67 (166). ‘ Afterwards she may drink boiling 
milk of mares, cows, sheep, or goats, with pap or 
without pap; she may take cooked meat without 
water, bread without water, and wine without 
water.’ 

68 (169). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! How long shall she remain so ? How 
long shall she live only on that sort of meat, bread, 
and wine ? 

69 (1 70). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Three nights 
long shall she remain so ; three nights long shall 
she live on that sort of meat, bread, and wine. 
Then, when three nights have passed, she shall 
wash her body, she shall wash her clothes, with 
gomez and water, by the nine holes, and thus shall 
she be clean.’ 

70(172). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! But if fever befall her unclean body, if 
that twofold plague, hunger and thirst, befall her, 
may she be allowed to drink water ? 

71 (175). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘She may; 
the first thing for her is to have her life saved. 
Having been allowed by one of the holy men, by 
a holy faithful man, who knows the holy know- 

FARGARD VII. 

9t 

ledge1, she shall drink of the strength-giving water. 
But you, worshippers of Mazda, fix ye the penalty 
>for it. The Ratu being applied to, the Sraoshd- 
varez being applied to 2, shall prescribe the penalty 
to be paid 3.’ 

72 (181). What is the penalty to be paid? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ The deed is that of a 

Peshotanu : two hundred stripes with the Aspahe- 
a.rtra, two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-Airana V 

X. 

73 (183). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! Can the eating vessels be made clean 
that have been touched by the carcase of a dog, 
or by the corpse of a man ? 

74(184). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘They can, 
O holy Zaratliustra ! ’ 

How so ? 

‘ If they be of gold, you shall wash them once 
with gomez, you shall rub them once with earth, 
you shall wash them once with water, and they 
shall be clean. 

‘ If they be of silver, you shall wash them twice 
with gomez, you shall rub them twice with earth, 
you shall wash them twice with water, and they 
shall be clean. 

[75. ‘ If they be of brass, you shall wash them 
thrice with gomez, you shall rub them thrice with 

1 The Dastur. * Sec Farg. V, 25. 

3 For the water having been defiled. 

1 A penalty to be undergone by the husband, at least in modern 
practice : ‘ If through fear of death or of serious illness she has 
drunk water before the appointed time, her husband shall make 
Patet for her fault before the Dastur ’ (Old Rav. 98 b). 

92 

vendIdAd. 

earth, you shall wash them thrice with water, and 
they shall be clean. 

‘ If they be of steel, you shall wash them four 
times with gomez, you shall rub them four times 
with earth, you shall wash them four times with 
water, and they shall be clean. 

‘ If they be of stone, you shall wash them six 
times with gomez, you shall rub them six times 
with earth, you shall wash them six times with 
water, and they shall be clean \] 

* If they be of earth, of wood, or of clay, they 
are unclean for ever and ever 

XI. 

76 (189). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! Can the cow be made clean that has 
eaten of the carcase of a dog, or of the corpse of 
a man ? 

77(190). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘She can, O 
holy Zarathiutra ! The priest shall not, within a 
year, take from her to the baresma neither the milk 
and cheese that accompany the libation, nor the meat 
that accompanies the libation a. When a year has 
passed, then the faithful may eat of her as before V 

XII. 

78 (193). Who is he, O holy Ahura Mazda! who, 

1 From the Vcndidad Sddah. 2 See Introd. V, 16. 

The offering of the libation waters (Zaothra) is accompanied 
with offerings of milk, cheese, and meat, which the priest eats 
holding the baresma in his hand. 

4 ‘ Whatever comes from her, if dropped, is clean ; if taken, 
unclean. If she be big with young, the young is born clean, if 
conceived before her eating of the corpse ; if conceived afterwards, 
it is born unclean ’ (Comm.) 

FARGARD VIII. 

93 

with a godly intent, with a godly wish, goes astray 
from the ways of God? Who is he who, with a 
godly intent, falls into the ways of the Drii®' 1 ? 

79(194). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘The one 
who, with a godly intent, with a godly wish, goes 
astray from the ways of God ; the one who with a 
godly intent falls into the ways of the Druf, is he 
who offers up for libation water defiled by the 
dead ; or who offers up libations in the dead of 
the night V 

Fargard VIII. 

I (1-3). Purification of the house where a man has died. 

II (4-13). Funerals. 

III (14-22). Purification of the ways along which the corpse 
has been carried. 

IV (23-25). No clothes to be wasted on a corpse. 

V (26-32). Unlawful lusts. 

VI (33-34). A corpse when dried up does not contaminate. 

VII (35-72). Purification of the man defiled by the dead. 

VIII (73-80). Purification of the fire defiled by the dead. 

IX (81-96). The Bahrain fire. 

X (97-107). Purification in the wilderness. 

This chapter, putting aside section V, may be entitled : Funerals 
and Purification. Logical order may easily be introduced into it , 
by arranging the sections as follows: I, IV, II, III, VI, VII, X, 
VIII, IX. 

I. 

1 . If a dog or a man die under the timber-work 
of a house or the wattlings of a hut, what shall the 
worshippers of Mazda do ? 

’ Possibly, works for the Dru^. 

* ‘ From what hour may the good waters be offered up ? From 
sunrise to sunset. He who offers up the good waters after sunset, 
before sunrise, does no better deed than if he should shed them 
downright into the jaws of the venomous snake ’ (Nirangistan, in 
the Zand-Pahlavi Glossary, p. 76). 

94 

VENdIdAD. 

2 (4). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall look 
for a Dakhma, they shall look for a Dakhma all 
around. If they find it easier to remove the dead 
than to remove the house, they shall take out the 
dead, they shall let the house stand, and shall per- 
fume it with Urvasni, or Vohu-gaona, or Vohu-kereti, 
or Hadha-naepata, or any other sweet-smelling 
plant *. 

3 (8). ‘ If they find it easier to remove the house 
than to remove the dead a, they shall take away the 
house, they shall let the dead lie on the spot, and 
shall perfume the house with Urvasni, or Vohu- 
gaona, or Vohu-kereti, or Hadha-naepata, or any 
other sweet-smelling plant.’ 

II. 

4(11). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy 
One ! If in the house of a worshipper of Mazda a 
dog or a man happens to die, and it is raining1 2 3, or 
snowing, or blowing 4, or the darkness is coming on, 
when flocks and men lose their way, what shall the 
worshippers of Mazda do 4 ? 

1 ‘ So, when a clog or a man dies, the first thing to do is to take 
the corpse out (from the house), and to purify the house, inside and 
outside, with perfumes burnt on the fire' (Comm.) Cf. XI, 4. 
Urvasni is the rasan plant, a sort of garlic; Vohu-gaona, Vohu- 
kereti, and 1 Jadha-naepata are respectively (according to Aspen- 
diarji) benzoin, aloe, and pomegranate. 

2 If the house is simply a hut or a tent. 

a * No corpse must be taken to the Dakhma when rain is falling, 
or threatening. If one is overtaken by rain on the way, if there be 
a place to lay it down, they shall lay it down ; if there be none, 
they must go on and take it to the Dakhma, they must not retrace 

their steps When arrived at the Dakhma, if they find it full 

of water, they may nevertheless lay down the corpse 9 (Comm.) 

4 If it is the season of rain or snow. Cf. V, 10 seq. 

FARGARD VIII. 

95 

5 (14). Ahura Mazda, answered: ‘The place in 
that house whereof the ground is the cleanest and 
the driest, and the least passed through by flocks 
and herds, by Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda, by 
the consecrated bundles of baresma, and by the 
faithful — 

6 (16). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! How far from the fire ? How far 
from the water ? How far from the consecrated 
bundles of baresma? How far from the faithful? 

7(17). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Thirty paces 
from the fire; thirty paces from the water; thirty 
paces from the consecrated bundles of baresma; 
three paces from the faithful ; — 

8(18). ‘On that place they shall dig a grave, 
half a foot deep if the earth be hard, half the 
height of a man if it be soft ; [they shall cover the 
surface of the grave with ashes or cowdung] 1 2 ; they 
shall cover the surface of it with dust of bricks, of 
stones, or of dry earth 

9 (21). ‘And they shall let the lifeless body lie 
there, for two nights, or three nights, or a month 
long, until the birds begin to fly, the plants to grow, 
the floods to flow, and the wind to dry up the waters 
from off the earth. 

10 (23). ‘ And when the birds begin to fly, the 
plants to grow, the floods to flow, and the wind to 
dry up the waters from off the earth, then the wor- 
shippers of Mazda shall make a breach in the wall 

1 Vendidad Sadah. 

2 In the similar case in V, 10, it is prescribed to isolate the 
corpse in a permanent dead house (the Zad-marg) ; the rule pre- 
scribed here seems to be older, as it is now obsolete ; it was 
besides less convenient. 

96 

VENDIDAD. 

of the house1, and they shall call for two men, 
strong and skilful2 3, and those, having stripped their 
clothes off2, shall take the body to the building 
of clay, stones, and mortar 4, raised on a place where 
they know there are always corpse-eating dogs and 
corpse-eating birds. 

11 (29). ‘Afterwards the corpse-bearers shall sit 
down, three paces from the dead; then the holy 
Ratu s shall proclaim to the worshippers of Mazda 
thus : “ Let the worshippers of Mazda here bring 
the urine wherewith the corpse-bearers there shall 
wash their hair and their bodies ! ” ’ 

12 (32). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Which is the urine wherewith the 
corpse-bearers shall wash their hair and their 
bodies ? Is it of sheep or of oxen ? Is it of 
man or of woman ? 

13 (35). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ It is of sheep 
or of oxen ; not of man nor of woman, except these 
two : the nearest kinsman (of the dead) or his 
nearest kyiswoman. The worshippers of Mazda 

1 ‘ The master and mistress of the house are carried away 

through a breach (made in the wall of the house) ; others through 
the door ' (Comm.) In some parts of Germany the dead must 
not be carried away through the usual house-door, as the dead 
and the living must not pass through the same door. 

3 The corpse-bearers or nasu- kasha. ‘The corpse must be 
carried by two persons (see Farg. Ill, 13 seq.), no matter who they 
are ; they may be a man and a woman, or two women ’ (Comm.) 

3 ‘ As they are exchanged for the special clothes in which they 
carry corpses’ (Comm.), the so-called ^amah-i dakhma, ‘the 
Dakhma clothes.’ 

4 The Dakhma (see Farg. VI, 50 seq.) 

8 The priest who directs the funerals, ‘ the chief of the Nasu- 
kashas’ (Comm.) 

FARGARD VIII. 

97 

shall therefore procure the urine wherewith the 
corpse-bearers shall wash their hair and their 
bodies V 

III. 

14 (38). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Can the way, whereon the carcases of 
dogs or corpses of men have been carried, be passed 
through again by flocks and herds, by men and 
women, by Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda, by 
the consecrated bundles of baresma, and by the 
faithful ? 

15 (40). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘It cannot be 
passed through again by flocks and herds, nor by 
men and women, nor by Fire, the son of Ahura 
Mazda, nor by the consecrated bundles of baresma, 
nor by the faithful. 

16(41). ‘You shall therefore cause the yellow 
dog with four eyes, or the white dog with yellow 
ears 2, to go three times through that way 3. When 
either the yellow dog with four eyes, or the white 
dog with yellow ears, is brought there, then the 
Dru^ Nasu flies away to the regions of the north, in 
the shape of a raging fly, with knees and tail sticking 
out, all stained with stains, and like unto the foulest 
Khrafstras*. 

17 (45). * If the dog goes unwillingly, they shall 
cause the yellow dog with four eyes, or the white 

1 When back in the village they perform the regular Barash- 
nhm with consecrated gomez (Comm.) 

* See Introd. V, 4. 

* ‘ Afrag says, the dog goes straight along the length of the 
way; Maidyo-mah says, he goes across it from side to side' 
(Comm.) 

4 Cf. Farg.VII, 3. 

W 

II 

98 

vendIdAd. 

dog with yellow ears, to go six times 1 through that 
way. When either the yellow dog with four eyes, 
or the white dog with yellow ears, is brought there, 
then the Dru \g Nasu flies away to the regions of the 
north, in the shape of a raging fly, with knees and 
tail sticking out, all stained with stains, and like 
unto the foulest Khrafstras. 

18 (47). ‘ If the dog goes unwillingly, they shall 
cause the yellow dog with four eyes, or the white 
dog with yellow ears, to go nine times through that 
way. When either the yellow dog with four eyes, 
or the white dog with yellow ears, has been brought 
there, then the Druf Nasu flies away to the regions 
of the north, in the shape of a raging fly, with knees 
and tail sticking out, all stained with stains, and like 
unto the foulest Khrafstras. 

19(49). ‘An Athravan shall first go along the 
way and shall say aloud these fiend-smiting words : 
“Yathd ahfl vairyd2: — the will of the Lord is 
the law of holiness ; the riches of Vohu-mano3 shall 
be given to him who works in this world for Mazda, 
and wields according to the will of Ahura the power 
he gave to him to relieve the poor. 

20(52). ‘“K^m nd mazdd : — whom hast thou 
placed to protect me, O Mazda ! while the hate of 

1 ‘ Three times suffice if the dog goes of his own accord ; if he 
goes by force, it counts as nothing ; if he goes but with reluctance, 
that shall suffice ’ (Comm, ad § 18). 

*, A prayer in frequent use, and considered of great efficacy, 
generally known as the Ahuna Vairya or Honover. It was by 
reciting it that Ormazd in his first conflict with Ahriman drove 
him back to hell (Bund. I). 

3 Of paradise, as Vohu-mano (Good Thought) is the door- 
keeper of heaven (cf. Farg. XIX, 31). 

FARGARD VIII. 

99 

the fiend is grasping me ? Whom but thy Atar 
and Vohu-mano 1, by whose work the holy world 
goes on ? Reveal to me the rules of thy law ! 

‘“Ktf verethrem g& : — who is he who will 
smite the fiend in order to maintain thy ordinances ? 
Teach me clearly thy rules for this world and for 
the next, that Sraosha2 may come with Vohu-mano 
and help whomsoever thou pleasest. 

2 1 (60). ‘ “ Keep us from our hater, O Mazda 
and Armaiti Spe«ta! Perish, O fiendish Dru^! 
Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish, O world of 
the fiend! Perish away, O Druf ! Rush away, O 
Dru^! Perish away, O Druf ! Perish away to the 
regions of the north, never more to give unto death 
the living world of the holy spirit ! ” 

22(63). ‘Then the worshippers of Mazda may 
at their will bring by those ways sheep and oxen, 
men and women, and Fire, the son of Ahura 
Mazda, the consecrated bundles of baresma, and 
the faithful. 

* The worshippers of Mazda may afterwards 3 pre- 
pare meals with meat and wine in that house ; it 
shall be clean, and there will be no sin, as before.’ 

IV. 

23 (65). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall throw clothes, either of 

1 When Ahriman broke into the world he was repelled by Atar 
and Vohu-manfi (Yasht XIII, 77; cf. Orm. Ahr. § 107). 

4 Sraosha lights for the soul of the good after death (see p. 87, 
note 4). Km n& mazdS and ke verethrem are lines taken 
from the Gathas (Yasna XL VI, 7 ; XLIV, 16) and diverted from 
their primitive meaning to suit the present case. 

3 On the fourth day. For three days and nights after the death 
it is forbidden to cook meat in the house (Comm.) 

H 2 

IOO 

VENDtnAD. 

skin or woven, upon a dead body, enough to cover 
the feet, what is the penalty that he shall pay1? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Four hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-astra, four hundred stripes with the 
Sraoshd-zfarana.’ 

24 (68). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall throw clothes, either 
of skin or woven, upon a dead body, enough to 
cover both legs, what is the penalty that he shall 

pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : * Six hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-astra, six hundred stripes with the 
Sraosho-Airana.’ 

25 (71). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man shall throw clothes, either of 
skin or woven, upon a dead body, enough to cover 
the whole body, what is the penalty that he shall 
pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ A thousand stripes 
with the Aspahe-astra, a thousand stripes with the 
Sraosho-Z’arana.’ 

V. 

26 (74). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man involuntarily emits his seed, 
what is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Eight hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-aitra, eight hundred stripes with 
the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

27 (77). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man voluntarily emits his seed, 
what is the penalty for it ? What is the atonement 
for it ? What is the cleansing from it ? 

1 See Farg. V, 60 ; VII, 20. 

FARGARD VIII. 

101 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘ For that deed there is 
nothing that can pay, nothing that can atone, nothing 
that can cleanse from it ; it is a trespass for which 
there is no atonement, for ever and ever.’ 

28(83). When is it so ? 

‘ It is so, if the sinner be a professor of the law of 
Mazda, or one who has been taught in it. But if he 
be not a professor of the law of Mazda, nor one who 
has been taught in it, then this law of Mazda takes 
his sin from him, if he confesses it and resolves never 
to commit again such forbidden deeds. 

29 (88). ‘The law of Mazda indeed, O Spitama 
Zarathuitra ! takes away from him who confesses it 
the bonds of his sin; it takes away (the sin of) 
breach of trust ; it takes away (the sin of) mur- 
dering one of the faithful ; it takes away (the sin of) 
burying a corpse ; it takes away (the sin of) deeds 
for which there is no atonement ; it takes away the 
heaviest penalties of sin ; it takes away any sin that 
may be sinned. 

3° (95). ‘In the same way the law of Mazda, O 
Spitama Zarathaytra ! cleanses the faithful from 
every evil thought, word, and deed, as a swift- 
rushing mighty wind cleanses the plain. 

* So let all the deeds thou doest be henceforth 
good, O Zarathujtra ! a full atonement for thy sin is 
effected by means of the law of Mazda V 

31 (98). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Who is the man that is a Da6va ? 
Who is he that is a worshipper of the Daevas? that 
is a male paramour of the Daevas ? that is a female 
paramour of the Daevas ? that is a she-Daeva ? 

1 See Farg. Ill, 38-42, text and notes. 

102 

VENDtDAD. 

that is in his inmost self a Daeva ? that is in his 
whole being a Daeva 1 ? Who is he that is a 
Daeva before he dies, and becomes one of the un- 
seen Daevas after death2 ? 

32 (102). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘The man 
that lies with mankind as man lies with womankind, 
or as woman lies with mankind, is the man that is 
a Daeva; this one is the man that is a worshipper 
of the Daevas, that is a male paramour of the 
Daevas, that is a female paramour of the Daevas, 
that is a she-Daeva ; this is the man that is in his 
inmost self a Daeva, that is in his whole being a 
Daeva ; this is the man that is a Daeva before he 
dies, and becomes one of the unseen Daevas after 
death : so is he, whether he has lain with mankind 
as mankind, or as womankind3 * *.’ 

1 The text has a Vispo-daeva, a curious expression which comes 

from the time when daeva still meant ‘ a god 1 (see Tntrod. IV, 41). 
In the time of the Indo-Iranian, nay, as early as the time of the 
Indo-European religion, it was the custom, beside special invoca- 
tions to the several gods, to address one to all the gods, for fear 
of the resentment of those who might have been forgotten or 
ignored; thus the Greeks never failed to invoke all gods and 
goddesses (&ois naa-i teal mivais) ; in the same way the Indian 
invoked visve dev as, * all the gods/ which, in course of time, gave 
rise to a special class of gods. Hence, in Mazdeism, arose a class 
of fiends, the vtsp6 daeva; but tradition lost the meaning of the 
wwd, and the vispo daevo became ‘one who is entirely a Daeva 
by his wickedness 9 (Comm.) « 

2 Demons are often the restless souls of the wicked, excluded 
from heaven. The Persian sect of the Mah&badians believed that 
the soul that had not spoken and done good became an Ahriman 
or gin (Dabistdn). 

3 The guilty may be killed by any one, without an order from 

the Dastur (see § 74 n.), and by thjs execution an ordinary capital 

crime may be redeemed (Comm, ad VII, 52). 

FARGARD VIII. 

10’, 

VI. 

33 (107). 0 Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Shall the man be clean who has 
touched a corpse that has been dried up and dead 
more than a year ? 

34(108). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He shall. 
The dry mingles not with the dry l 2. Should the dry 
mingle with the dry, how soon this material world 
of mine would have in it only Peshotanus, shut out 
from the way of holiness, and whose souls will cry 
and wail ! so numberless are the beings that die 
upon the face of the earth V 

VII. 

35 (iii). O Maker of the material world, tho 1 
Holy One ! Can the man be made clean that has 
touched the corpse of a dog or the corpse of a 
man ? 

36 (1 1 3). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He can, O 
holy Zarathostra ! ’ 

How so ? 

‘ If the Nasu has already been smitten by the 
corpse-eating dogs, or by the corpse-eating birds, 

1 See Introd. V. This principle still prevails even with Musul- 
man Persians: 'Pour encourir leur immondicit£ dans lattouchc- 
ment des Chretiens et autres idolatres, il est ndeessaire que s’ils les 
touchent, leurs vetements soient mouiltes. C’est h cause, disent-ils, 
qu’&ans secs Timmondicit^ ne s'attache pas; .... ce qui est 
cause que dans les villes oh leurs Mullas et Docteurs orit plus 
d’autoritd, ils font par fois d^fendre par leurs Kans que lorsquil 
pleut, les Chrdtiens ne sortent pas de leurs maisons, de crainte 
que par accident, venans h les heurter, ils ne soient rendus im- 
mondes* (G. du Chinon, p. 88 seq.; cf. Chardin). 

2 See Farg. V, 4. 

104 

vendIdad. 

he shall cleanse his body with gomez and water, and 
he shall be clean1. 

37 (i 1 7). ‘If the Nasu has not yet been smitten 
by the corpse-eating dogs, or by the corpse-eating 
birds2, then the worshippers of Mazda shall dig 
three holes in the ground 3, and he shall thereupon 
wash his body with gom£z, not with water. They 
shall then lift and bring my dog4 *, they shall bring 
him (thus shall it be done and not otherwise) in 
front of the man8. 

38(121). ‘The worshippers of Mazda shall dig 
three other holes 6 in the ground, and he shall there- 
upon wash his body with gomez, not with water. 
They shall then lift and bring my dog, they shall 
bring him (thus shall it be done and not otherwise) 
in front of the man. Then they shall wait until he 
is dried7 even to the last hair on the top of his 
head. 

39 (125). ‘They shall dig three more holes8 in 
the ground, and he shall thereupon wash his body 
with water, not with gomez. 

40 (127). ‘ He shall first wash his hands; if his 

1 If the Sag- did has been performed, a simple ghosel is enough 
(see Introd. V, 16). 

2 If the Sag-did has not been performed, the Barashnfim is 
necessary (see Introd. V, 16). 

The first three holes, which contain gomez. For the dis- 
position of the holes, see the following Fargard. 

4 Three times ; every time that the unclean one passes from one 
hole to another (Comm, ad IX, 32). 

“To look at him, or, rather, at the Nasu in him, whilst the 
priest sings the ‘ fiend-smiting spells.’ 

• Containing gdmSz too. 

7 He rubs himself dry with handfuls of dust (see IX, 29 seq.) 

h Containing water. 

FARGARD VIII. 

105 

hands be not first washed, he makes the whole of 
his body unclean. When he has washed his hands 
three times, after his hands have been washed, thou 
shalt sprinkle with water the forepart of his skull.’ 

41 (131). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the fore- 
part of the skull, whereon does the Dru^ Nasu 
rush 1 ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ In front, between the 
brows, the Druf Nasu rushes.’ 

42 (134). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach in front 
between the brows, whereon does the Dru^ Nasu 
rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ On the back part of 
the skull the Dru^ Nasu rushes.’ 

43 C1 37)* O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the back 
part of the skull, whereon does the Dr 11^ Nasu 
rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ In front, on the jaws, 
the Dru^ Nasu rushes.’ 

44 (140). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach in front, 
on the jaws, whereon does the Dru^ Nasu rush? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘ Upon the right car the 
Druf Nasu rushes.’ 

45 (143)- O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the right 
ear, whereon does the Drug- Nasu rush ? 

1 The Nasu is expelled symmetrically, from limb to limb, from 
the right side of the body to the left, from the forepart to the 
back parts, and she flies, thus pursued, downwards from the top of 
the head to the tips of the toes. 

io6 

vendIdAd. 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Upon the left ear the 
Drug Nasu rushes.’ 

46 (146). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! When the good waters reach the left 
ear, whereon does the Drug Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Upon the right shoulder 
the Drug Nasu rushes.’ 

47 (149). 0 Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the right 
shoulder, whereon does the Drug Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Upon the left shoulder 
the Dm"- Nasu rushes.’ 

48 (152). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the left 
shoulder, whereon does the Drug Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Upon the right arm-pit 
the Drug Nasu rushes.’ 

49 (155)> O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the right 
arm-pit, whereon does the Drug Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘ Upon the left arm-pit 
the Drug Nasu rushes.’ 

50 ( 1 58). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the left 
arm-pit, whereon does the Drug Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘In front, upon the 
chest, the Drug Nasu rushes.’ 

51 (161). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! When the good waters reach the 
chest in front, whereon does the Drug" Nasu 
rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Upon the back the 
Drug Nasu rushes.’ 

52 (164). O Maker of the material world, thou 

FARGARD VIII. 

107. 

Holy One ! When the good waters reach the back, 
whereon does the Drug- Nasu rush? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Upon the right nipple 
the Drug- Nasu rushes.’ 

53 (167). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the right 
nipple, whereon does the Drug Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Upon the left nipple 
the Drug- Nasu rushes.’ 

54(170). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the left 
nipple, whereon does the Drug- Nasu rush? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Upon the right rib the 
Drug- Nasu rushes.’ 

55 (x73)* O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the right 
rib, whereon does the Drug- Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Upon the left rib the 
Drug- Nasu rushes.’ 

56(176). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! When the good waters reach the left 
rib, whereon does the Drug- Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ U pon the right hip the 
Drug- Nasu rushes.’ 

57 (I79)- O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the right 
hip, whereon does the Drug- Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Upon the left hip the 
Drug- Nasu rushes.’ 

58 (182). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the left 
hip, whereon does the Drug- Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘Upon the sexual parts 
the Dnig- Nasu rushes. If the unclean one be a 

108 VENJjIdAd. 

man, thou shalt sprinkle him first behind, then 
before ; if the unclean one be a woman, thou shalt 
sprinkle her first before, then behind. 

59 (187). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the 
sexual parts, whereon does the Dru^ Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ U pon the right thigh 
the Dru^- Nasu rushes.’ 

60 (190). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! When the good waters reach the 
right thigh, whereon does the Drii^ Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Upon the left thigh 
the Dru"- Nasu rushes.’ 

61 (193). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the left 
thigh, whereon does the Drug” Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ U pon the right knee 
the Dru^ Nasu rushes.’ 

62 (196). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the right 
knee, whereon does the l)ru<f Nasu rush? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ U pon the left knee the 
Dru^ Nasu rushes.’ 

63 (199). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the left 
knee, whereon does the Dru^ Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Upon the right leg the 
Druf Nasu rushes.’ 

64 (202). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the right 
leg, whereon does the Dru/ Nasu rush? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ U pon the left leg the 
Dru^- Nasu rushes.’ 

65 (205). O Maker of the material world, thou 

FARGARD VIII. 

109 

Holy One ! When the good waters reach the left 
leg, whereon does the Dru^1 Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Upon the right ankle- 
the Dru^ Nasu rushes.’ 

66 (208). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the right 
ankle, whereon does the Druf Nasu rush? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Upon the left ankle 
the Dru^- Nasu rushes.’ 

67(211). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the left 
ankle, whereon does the Dru^ Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Upon the right instep 
the Druff" Nasu rushes.’ 

68 (214). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the right 
instep, whereon does the Dru^ Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Upon the left instep 
the Dru^- Nasu rushes.’ 

69 (217). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When the good waters reach the left 
instep, whereon does the Dru^ Nasu rush ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ She is driven to the 
sole of the foot, where what is seen of her is like 
the wing of a fly. 

70 (220). ‘ He shall press his toes upon the 
ground, and shall raise up his heels ; thou slialt 
sprinkle his right sole with water ; then the Dru^ 
Nasu rushes upon the left sole. Thou slialt sprinkle 
the left sole with water; then the Druf Nasu is 
driven to the toes, where what is seen of her is like 
the wing of a fly. 

71 (225). ‘He shall press his heels upon the 
ground and shall raise up his toes ; thou shalt 

no 

vendIdAd. 

sprinkle his right toe with water; then the Dru^ 
Nasu rushes upon the left toe. Thou shalt sprinkle 
the left toe with water; then the Druf Nasu 
flies away to the regions of the north, in the shape 
of a raging fly, with knees and tail sticking out, 
all stained with stains, and like unto the foulest 
Khrafstras. 

[72. ‘And thou shalt say aloud these fiend-smiting 
and most-healing words : 

‘ “ The will of the Lord is the law of holiness,” &c. 

‘ “ Whom hast thou placed to protect me, O 
Mazda ! while the hate of the fiend is grasping 
me ? ” &c. 

‘ “ Who is he who will smite the fiend in order to 
maintain thy ordinances ? ” &c. 1 

‘ “ Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti 
Spewta! Perish, O fiendish Dru^! Perish, O 
brood of the fiend ! Perish, O world of the fiend ! 
Perish away, O Druf ! Rush away, O Dru^ ! 
Perish away, O Druf ! Perish away to the regions 
of the north, never more to give unto death the 
living world of the holy spirit 2 ! ”’] 

VIII. 

73 (229). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If worshippers of Mazda, walking, or 
running, or riding, or driving, come upon a corpse- 
burning fire, whereon a corpse is being cooked or 
roasted, what shall they do ? 

74 (233)* Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall 
kill the man that burns the corpse ; surely they shall. 

1 As in §§ 19, ao. 

8 From the Vendiddd Sddah. 

FARGARD VIII. 

Ill 

kill him \ They shall take off the cauldron, they 
shall take off the tripod. 

75 (1 237)* ‘Then they shall kindle wood from that 
fire ; either wood of those trees that have the seed 
of fire in them, or bundles of the very wood that was 
prepared for that fire ; and they shall separate and 
disperse it, that it may die out the sooner. 

76 (242). ‘ Thus they shall lay a first bundle on 
the ground2, a Vitasti3 * * * * 8 away from the corpse-burning 
fire, and they shall separate and disperse it, that it 
may die out the sooner. 

77 (245). ‘ They shall lay down a second bundle 
on the ground, a Vitasti away from the corpse- 
burning fire, and they shall separate and disperse 
it, that it may die out the sooner. 

‘ They shall lay down a third bundle on the 
ground, a Vitasti away from the corpse-burning fire, 
and they shall separate and disperse it, that it may 
die out the sooner. 

‘ They shall lay down a fourth bundle on the 
ground, a Vitasti away from the corpse-burning fire, 
and they shall separate and disperse it, that it may 
die out the sooner. 

1 ‘ He who burns Nasd (dead matter) must be killed. Burning 
or roasting Nasd from the dead is a capital crime. . . . Four men 
can be put to death by any one without an order from the Dastur : 
the Nasd-burner, the highwayman, the Sodomite, and the criminal 
taken in the deed’ (Comm.) 

2 In a hole dug for that purpose ; such is at least the custom 

nowadays. The ceremony seems to be an imitation of the Ba- 

rashndm. The unclean fire, represented by the nine bundles, 

passes through the nine holes, as the unclean man does (see above, 

§ 37 seq. and Farg. IX, 12 seq.), and leaves at each of them some 

of the uncleanness it has contracted. 

8 A span of twelve fingers. 

I 12 

VENdIdAD. 

‘ They shall lay down a fifth bundle on the 
ground, a Vitasti away from the corpse-burning fire, 
and they shall separate and disperse it, that it may 
die out the sooner. 

‘They shall lay down a sixth bundle on the 
ground, a Vitasti away from the corpse-burning fire, 
and they shall separate and disperse it, that it may 
die out the sooner. 

‘ They shall lay down a seventh bundle on the 
ground, a Vitasti away from the corpse-burning fire, 
and they shall separate and disperse it, that it may 
die out the sooner. 

‘ They shall lay down an eighth bundle on the 
ground, a Vitasti away from the corpse-burning fire, 
and they shall separate and disperse it, that it may 
die out the sooner. 

78 (245). ‘ They shall lay down a ninth bundle on 
the ground, a Vitasti away from the corpse-burning 
fire, and they shall separate and disperse it, that it 
may die out the sooner. 

79, 80 (246). ‘ If a man shall then piously bring 
unto the fire, O Spitama Zaratlnutra! wood of 
Urvdsna, or Vohu-gaona, or Vohu-kereti, or Hadha- 
naepata, or any other sweet-smelling wood, whereso- 
ever the wind shall bring the perfume of the fire, 
thereunto Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda, shall go 
and kill thousands of unseen Da&vas, thousands of 
fiends, the brood of darkness, thousands of couples 
of Ydtus and PairikasV 

IX. 

81 (251). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man bring a corpse-burning fire 

1 See Introd. IV, 20-21. 

FARGARD VIII. 

to the DAityo-gAtu l, what shall be his reward when 
his soul has parted with his body ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought ten thou- 
sand fire-brands to the DAityo-gAtu.’ 

82 (254). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man bring to the DAityo-gAtu the 
fire wherein excrement has been burnt2, what shall be 
his reward when his soul has parted with his body? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought a thou- 
sand fire-brands to the DAityo-gAtu.’ 

83 (257). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man bring to the DAityo-gAtu the 
fire wherein cowdung has been burnt3 4, what shall be 
his reward when his soul has parted with his body? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought five 
hundred fire-brands to the DAityo-gAtu.’ 

84 (258). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man bring to the DAityo-gAtu the 
fire from the kiln of a brick-maker \ what shall be 

1 * The proper abode/ the Bahrain fire (see Tnlrod. V, 8). The 
Bahrain fire is composed of a thousand and one fires belonging to 
sixteen different classes (ninety-one corpse-burning fires, eighty 
dyers' fires, &c.) As the earthly representative of the heavenly 
fire, it is the sacred centre to which every earthly fire longs to 
return, in order to be united again, as much as possible, with its 
native abode. The more it has been defiled by worldly uses, the 
greater is the merit acquired by freeing it from defilement. 

2 c The fire of the lac-makers and of the dyers ' (Asp. and Gr. 
Rav. 120). 

3 4 The fire of a bath/ according to Aspendiarji ; but sec 
Introd. V, 8. 

4 Or, ‘ from a lime-kiln 1 (Comm.) 

[4] I 

VENdJdAd. 

114 

his reward when his soul has parted with his 
body ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought four 
hundred fire-brands to the Ddityo-gdtu.’ 

85 (259). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man bring to the Ddityo-gatu the. 
fire from a potter’s kiln, what shall be his reward 
when his soul has parted with his body? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought to the 
Ddityo-gatu as many fire-brands as there were pots 
baked in that fire V 

86 (260). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man bring to the Daityo-gatu the 
fire of the reapers \ what shall be his reward when 
his soul has parted with his body ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought to the 
Ddityo-gdtu as many fire-brands as there were 
plants in the crop1.’ 

87 (261). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man bring to the Ddity6-gdtu the 
fire of a goldsmith, what shall be his reward when 
his soul has parted with his body? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought a 
hundred fire-brands to the Ddityo-gdtu.’ 

88 (262). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man bring to the Ddityo-gatu the 
fire of a silversmith, what shall be his reward when 
his soul has parted with his body ? 

Doubtful. 

FARGARD VIII. 

n5 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought ninety 
fire-brands to the Diityd-gdtu.’ 

89 (263). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man bring to the Ddityo-gdtu the 
fire of a worker in brass, what shall be his reward 
when his soul has parted with his body? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought eighty 
fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.’ 

90 (264). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man bring to the Daityo-g&tu the 
fire of a blacksmith, what shall be his reward when 
his soul has parted with his body ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought seventy 
fire-brands to the Ddityd-g&tu.’ 

91 (265). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man bring to the Ddityo-gatu the 
fire of an oven 1, what shall be his reward when his 
soul has parted from his body ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought sixty 
fire-brands to the Daity6-gdtu.’ 

92 (266). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man bring' to the Daityd-gdtu the 
fire from under a cauldron2, what shall be his reward 
when his soul has parted with his body ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought fifty 
fire-brands to the Ddityo-gatu.’ 

93 (267). O Maker of the material world, thou 

1 A baker’s fire. 

* The kitchen-fire. 

I 2 

VENDfDAD. 

1 16 

Holy One! If a man bring to the D&ityd-g&tu the 
fire from an encampment *, what shall be his reward 
when his soul has parted with his body ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought forty 
fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.’ 

94 (268). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man bring a herdsman’s fire to the 
Daityo-gatu, what shall be his reward when his soul 
has parted with his body ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought thirty 
fire-brands to the Daityd-gatu.’ 

[95 (269)1 2. O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man bring to the Daityo-gatu the 
fire of the field 3, what shall be his reward when his 
soul has parted with his body ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought twenty 
fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.’] 

96 (270). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man bring to the D&ityo-gatu the 
fire of his own hearth, what shall be his reward 
when his soul has parted with his body ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘His reward shall be 
the same as if he had, here below, brought ten 
fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.’ 

X. 

97 (271). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! Can a man be made clean, O holy 

1 Doubtful. 

8 From the Vendidad Sadah. 8 The hunter’s fire. 

FARGARD VIII, 

117 

Ahura Mazda! who has touched a corpse in a 
distant place in the fields 1 ? 

98(272). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He can, O 
holy Zarathiutra.’ 

How so? 

‘ If the Nasu has already been smitten by the 
corpse-eating dogs or the corpse-eating birds, he 
shall wash his body with gomez ; he shall wash it 
thirty times, he shall rub it dry with the hand thirty 
times, beginning every time with the head 2. 

99 (278). 1 If the Nasu has not yet been smitten 
by the corpse-eating dogs or the corpse-eating birds, 
he shall wash his body with gomez ; he shall wash 
it fifteen times, he shall rub it dry with the hand 
fifteen times 3. 

100 (280). ‘ Then he shall run a distance of a 
Hathra4. He shall run until he meets some man 
on his way, then he shall cry out aloud : “ Here am 
I, one who has touched the corpse of a man, without 
any wilful sin of mind, tongue, or hand, and who 
wishes to be made clean.” Thus shall he run until 
he overtakes the man. If the man will not cleanse 
him, he takes upon his own head the third of his 
trespass. 

101 (287). ‘ Then he shall run another Hathra, 
he shall run off again until he overtakes a man ; if 

1 Where the regular process of purification cannot be per- 
formed. 

2 If the Sag-did has been performed, the Si- slid (thirtyfold 
washing) is enough. Cf. above, §§ 35, 36. 

3 If the Sag-did has not been performed, he cleanses himself in 
a summary way till he comes to a place where the Barashnfim can 
be performed. 

4 See p. 17, n. r. 

vendIdAd. 

i iS 

the man will not cleanse him, he takes upon his own 
head the half of his trespass. 

102 (291). ‘Then he shall run a third H&thra, 
he shall run off a third time until he overtak es a 
man ; if the man will not cleanse him, he takes upon 
his own head the whole of his trespass. 

103 (294). ‘ Thus shall he run forwards until he 
comes near a house, a borough, a town, an inhabited 
district, and he shall cry out with a loud voice : 
“ Here am I, one who has touched the corpse of a 
man, without any wilful sin of mind, tongue, or hand, 
and who wishes to be made clean.” If they will not 
cleanse him, he shall cleanse his body with gom£z 
and water; thus shall he be clean1 2.’ 

104 (300). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If he found water on his way, the 
water requires an atonement - ; what is the penalty 
that he shall pay ? 

105.(303). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Four hun- 
dred stripes with the Aspahe-a^tra, four hundred 
stripes with the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

1 06 (304). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If he found trees n on his way, the fjre 
requires an atonement ; what is the penalty he shall 

pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : * Four hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-ajtra, four hundred stripes with the 
Sraosho-Z'arana. 

1 ‘ He may then attend to his business ; he may work and till ; 
some say he must abstain from sacrifice (till he has undergone the 
Barashnftm)/ (Comm.) 

2 As he defiled it by crossing it. # 

8 ‘ Trees fit for the fire ’ (Comm.) If he touches those trees, the 
fire to which they are brought becomes unclean by his fault. 

FARGARD IX. 

119 

10; (308). ‘ This is the penalty, this is the atone- 
ment, which saves him who submits to it ; he who 
does not submit to it, shall surely be an inhabitant 
in the mansion of the DrufV 

Fakgard IX. 

The nine nights’ Barashnftm. 

Ia(i-n). Description of the place for cleansing the unclean 
(the Barashnftm-gah). 

I b ( 1 2-36). Description of the cleansing. 

II (3,7-44). Fees of the cleanser. 

III (47-57). The false cleanser; his punishment. 

§§ 45, 46 belong better to the following Fargard. 

The ceremony described in this Fargard is known among the 
Parsis as Barashnfim nft shaba, or ‘nine nights' Barashnfim/ 
because it lasts for nine nights (see § 3s)2. It is the great purifi- 
cation, the most efficacious of all ; it not only makes the defiled 
man clean, but it opens to him the heavens (see Farg. XIX, 33 ; 
cf. Introd. V, 16). So, although it was formerly intended only for 
the man defiled by the dead, it became, during the Parsi period, 
a pious work which might be performed without any corpse having 
been touched ; nay, its performance was prescribed, once at least, at 
the time of the Nft zfidi (at the age of fifteen, when the young 
Parsi becomes a member of the community), in order to wash away 
the natural uncleanness that has been contracted in the maternal 
womb (Saddar 36, Hyde 40) 3. 

I a. 

1. Zarathustra asked Ahura Mazda: ‘O most 

1 Hell. Cf. Farg. XIV, 18. 

2 As to the word Barashndm, it seems not to refer to the cere- 
mony itself, and to be nothing more than the Zend word baresh- 
nflm, ‘ the top of the head, the skull,’ the part of the body that is 
first to be washed (§ rj). 

s For the plan of the Barashnum-gah, see Anquetil II, p. 456. 

120 

vendIdAd. 

beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! How shall they manage here below, 
who want to cleanse the body of one defiled by the 
dead ?’ 

2 (4). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘A godly man, O 
Spitama Zarathu^tra ! who speaks truth, who learns 
the Holy Word, and who knows best the rites of 
cleansing according to the law of Mazda1, such a 
man shall fell the trees off the surface of the ground 
on a space of nine Vibazus2 3 square. 

3 (9). 1 It should be the part of the ground where 
there is least water and where there are fewest 
trees, the part which is the cleanest and driest, and 
the least passed through by sheep and oxen, and by 
Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda, by the consecrated 
bundles of baresma, and by the faithful.’ 

4(11). How far from the fire? How far from 
the water ? How far from the consecrated bundles 
of baresma ? How far from the faithful ? • 

5(12). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Thirty paces 
from the fire, thirty paces from the water, thirty 
paces from the consecrated bundles of baresma, three 
paces from the faithful. 

6 (13). ‘Then thou shalt dig a hole, two fingers 
deep if the summer has come, four fingers deep if 
the winter and ice have come ?. 

7 (14). ‘Thou shalt dig a second hole, two fingers 
deep if the summer has come, four fingers deep if 
the winter and ice have come. 

‘ Thou shalt dig a third hole, two fingers deep if 

1 A priest. 

2 The Vibazu seems to have been as much as ten paces. 

3 See Introd. V, 16. 

FARGARD IX. 

I 2 1 

• 

the summer has come, four fingers deep if the winter 
and ice have come. 

‘ Thou shalt dig a fourth hole, two fingers deep if 
the summer has come, four fingers deep if the winter 
and ice have come. 

‘ Thou shalt dig a fifth hole, two fingers deep if 
the summer has come, four fingers deep if the winter 
and ice have come. 

‘ Thou shalt dig a sixth hole *, two fingers deep if 
the summer has come, four fingers deep if the winter 
and ice have come/ 

8 (14). How far from one another ? 

‘ One pace.’ 

How much is the pace ? 

‘ As much as three feet. 

9 (16). ‘Then thou shalt dig three holes more-, 
two fingers deep if the summer has come, four 
fingers deep if the winter and ice have come/ 

How far from the former six? 

‘ Three paces.’ 

What sort of paces? 

‘ Such as are taken in walking.’ 

How much are those (three) paces ? 

‘ As much as nine feet. 

10 (22). ‘Then thou shalt draw a furrow all 
around with a metal knife.’ 

How far from the holes ? 

‘ Three paces.’ 

What sort of paces ? 

‘ Such as are taken in walking.’ 

1 These six holes contain gomez. ‘The holes must be dug 
from the north to the south ’ (Comm.) 

8 The three holes to contain water. 

122 

vend!dad. 

How much are those (three) paces ? 

‘As. much as nine feet. 

11 (24)- ‘ Thou shalt draw twelve furrows1; three 
of which thou shalt draw around (the first) three 
holes ; three thou shalt draw around (the first) six 
holes; three thou shalt draw around the nine holes; 
three thou shalt draw around the three holes, out- 
side the six holes '2. At each of the three times 
nine feet 3 4, thou shalt place stones as steps to the 
holes ; or potsherds, or stumps, or clods, or any hard 
matter V 

I b. 

12 (31)- ‘ Then the unclean one shall walk to the 
holes ; thou, O Zarathu-ftra ! shalt stand outside by 
the furrow, and thou shalt recite, Nemas/C-a ya 

1 ‘ The furrows must be drawn during the day ; they must be 
drawn with a knife ; they must be drawn with recitation of spells. 
While drawing the furrows the cleanser recites three Ashem-vohus 
(“ holiness is the best of all good,” &c.), the Fravarane (“ I declare 
myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathurtra, a foe of 
the fiend,” &c.), the Klishnfiman of Serosh, and the Ba? of Serosh; 
they must be drawn from the north’ (Comm, ad § 32). The furrow, 
or kesh, plays a greater part in the Mazdean liturgy than in 
any other. By means of the furrow, drawn with proper spells, 
and according to the laws of spiritual war, man either besieges the 
fiend or intrenches himself against him (cf. Karg. XVII, 5). In the 
present case the Dru^, being shut up inside the kesh and thus 
excluded from the world outside, and being driven back, step 
by step, by the strength of the holy water and spells, finds at 
last no place of refuge but hell, and the world is freed from her 
presence. 

* ‘ The three holes for water, the six holes for gomez ’ (Comm.) 

3 The nine feet between the holes containing gomSz and those 
containing water, the nine feet between the first holes and the fur- 
rows, and the nine feet between the last hole and the furrows. 

4 lhat the foot of the unclean one may not touch the earth (see 
Introd. V, 10). 

FARGARD IX. 

123 

drmaitu tei&L1; and the unclean one shall repeat, 
Nemas^d yd dritiaitis tedZ’d. 

1:3 (35). ‘ The Dru^" becomes weaker and weaker 
at every one of those words which are to smite the 
fiend Angra Mainyu, to smite Aeshma of the bloody 
spear 2 *, to smite the Mdzainya fiends s, to smite all 
the fiends. 

14 (40). ‘ Then thou shalt sprinkle him with 
gomez from a spoon of brass or of lead; thou 
shalt take a stick with nine knots4, O Spitama 
Zarathu.stra ! and thou shalt fasten the leaden spoon 
to the upper part of the stick. 

1 5 (43). ‘ They shall wash his hands first. If his 
hands be not washed first, lie makes his whole body 
unclean. When he has washed his hands three 
times, after his hands have been washed, thou shalt 
sprinkle the forepart of his skull ; then the Dru^ 
Nasu rushes in front, between his brows5. 

16(50). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle him in front be- 
tween the brows ; then the Druf Nasu rushes upon 
the back part of the skull. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the back part of the skull ; 
then the Driif Nasu rushes upon the jaws. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the jaws ; then the Drtgy 
Nasu rushes upon the right ear? 

1 7 (5d)- ‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the right ear ; then 
the Drug Nasu rushes upon the left ear. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the left ear ; then the Dru^ 
Nasu rushes upon the right shoulder. 

1 Yasna XLIX, 10. 2 Sec Introd. IV, 22. 3 See Introd. IV, 23. 

4 So long that the cleanser may take gdmez or water from the 

holes and sprinkle the unclean one, without touching him and with- 

out going inside the furrows. 

5 Cf. Farg. VIII, 40-71. 

124 

vendIdad. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the right shoulder ; then the 
Dru g Nasu rushes upon the left shoulder. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the left shoulder ; then the 
Dru^ Nasu rushes upon the right arm-pit. 

18(64). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right arm- 
pit; then the Dru^* Nasu rushes upon the left 
arm-pit. 

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left arm-pit; then the 
Dru^ Nasu rushes upon the chest. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the chest ; then the Druf 
Nasu rushes upon the back. 

19 (7°)- ‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the back ; then the 
Dru^ Nasu rushes upon the right nipple. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the right nipple ; then the 
Dru^ Nasu rushes upon the left nipple. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the left nipple ; then the 
Dru^ Nasu rushes upon the right rib. 

20 (76). ‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the right rib ; 
then the Dru^- Nasu rushes upon the left rib. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the left rib ; then the Druf 
Nasu rushes upon the right hip. 

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right hip; then the Dru^ 
Nasu rushes upon the left hip. 

21 (82). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left hip; then 
the Dru»- Nasu rushes upon the sexual parts. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the sexual parts. If the un- 
clean one be a man, thou shalt sprinkle him first 
behind, then before ; if the unclean one be a woman, 
thou shalt sprinkle her first before, then behind ; then 
the Druf Nasu rushes upon the right thigh. 

22(88). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right thigh; 
then the Druf Nasu rushes upon the left thigh. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the left thigh ; then the 
Dru^ Nasu rushes upon the right knee. 

FARGARD IX. 

125 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the right knee ; then the 
Druf Nasu rushes upon the left knee. 

23 (94). ‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the left knee ; then 
the Druf Nasu rushes upon the right leg. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the right leg; then the Druf 
Nasu rushes upon the left leg. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the left leg ; then the Druf 
Nasu rushes upon the right ankle. 

1 Thou shalt sprinkle the right ankle ; then the 
Druf Nasu rushes upon the left ankle. 

24 (102). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left ankle; then 
the Druf Nasu rushes upon the right instep. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the right instep ; then the 
Dr iif Nasu rushes upon the left instep. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the left instep ; then 
the Druf Nasu is driven to the sole of the 
foot, where what is seen of her is like the wing 
of a fly. 

25 (108). ‘ He shall press his toes upon the 
ground and shall raise up his heels ; thou shalt 
sprinkle his right sole ; then the Druf Nasu rushes 
upon the left sole. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the left sole ; then the Druf 
Nasu is driven to the toes, where what is seen of 
her is like the wing of a fly. 

26(113). ‘He shall press his heels upon the 
ground and shall raise up his toes; thou shalt 
sprinkle his right toe ; then the Druf Nasu rushes 
upon the left toe. 

‘ Thou shalt sprinkle the left toe ; then the Druf 
Nasu flies away to the regions of the north, in the 
shape of a raging fly, with knees and tail sticking 
out, all stained with stains, and like unto the foulest 
Khrafstras. 

126 

VENdIdAd. 

27 (118). ‘And thou shalt say those fiend-smiting 
and most-healing words : — 

‘ “Yathd ahh vairyo: — The will of the Lord is 
the law of holiness; the riches ofVohu-mand shall 
be given to him who works in this world for Mazda, 
and wields according to the will of Ahura the power 
he gave to him to relieve the poor. 

‘ “ Kem nd mazdd : — Whom hast thou placed to 
protect me, O Mazda ! while the hate of the fiend is 
grasping me ? Whom, but thy Atar and Vohu-man6, 
by whose work the holy world goes on ? Reveal to 
me the rules of thy law ! 

‘ “Ke vercthrem^d: — Who is he who will smite 
the fiend in order to maintain thy ordinances ? 
Teach me clearly thy rules for this world and for 
the next, that Sraosha may come with Vohu-mano 
and help whomsoever thou pleasest. 

‘ “ Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti 
Spewta! Perish, O fiendish Dru^! Perish, O brood 
of the fiend ! Perish, O world of the fiend ! Perish 
away, O Drug! Rush away, O Druf! Perish 
away, O Dru^! Perish away to the regions of the 
north, never more to give unto death the living 
world of the holy spirit 1 ! ” 

28(119). ‘At the first hole the man becomes 
freer from the Nasu ; then thou shalt say those 
fiend-smiting and most-healing words: — “Yathd 
ahd vairyd,” &c. 2 

‘ At the second hole he becomes freer from the 
Nasu ; then thou shalt say those fiend-smiting and 
most-healing words: — “Yathd ahd vairyd,” &c. 

1 Cf. Farg. VIII, 19-21. 

2 As in preceding clause. 

FARGARD IX. 

127 

‘At the third hole he becomes freer from the 
Nasu ; then thou shalt say those fiend-smiting and 
most-healing words: — “Yathd ahft vairyo,” &c. 

‘At the fourth hole he becomes freer from the 
Nasu ; then thou shalt say those fiend-smiting and 
most-healing words: — ‘‘Yathd ah Cl vairyo,” &c. 

‘At the fifth hole he becomes freer from the 
Nasu ; then thou shalt say those fiend-smiting and 
most-healing words: — “YathCL ah Cl vairy6,” &c. 

‘ At the sixth hole he becomes freer from the 
Nasu; then thou shalt say those fiend-smiting and 
most-healing words: — “Yathd ah Cl vairyo,” &c. 

29(120). ‘Afterwards the unclean one shall sit 
down, inside the furrows l, outside the furrows of the 
six holes, four fingers from those furrows. There 
he shall cleanse his body with thick handfuls of 
dust. 

30 (123). ‘ Fifteen times shall they take up dust 
from the ground for him to rub his body, and they 
shall wait there until he is dry even to the last hair 
on his head. 

31 (125). ‘When his body is dry, then he shall 
step over the holes (containing water). At the first 
hole he shall wash his body once with water ; at the 
second hole he shall wash his body twice with water; 
at the third hole he shall wash his body thrice with 
water. 

32(130). ‘Then he shall perfume (his body)2 
with perfumes from Urv&sna, or Vohu-gaona, or 
Vohu-kereti, or Hadha-naepata, or from any sweet- 

1 Between the furrows of the six holes containing g6mez and 
the furrows of the holes containing water. 

* Or, possibly, ‘his clothes’ (see Farg. XIX, 24). 

128 

vend! dad. 

smelling plant ; then he shall put on his clothes, and 
shall go back to his house. 

33 ( 1 33)* ‘He shall sit down there in the place of 
infirmity1, inside the house, apart from the other 
worshippers of Mazda.- He shall not go near the 
fire, nor near the water, nor near the earth, nor near 
the cow, nor near the trees, nor near the faithful, 
either man or woman. Thus shall he continue until 
three nights have passed. When* three nights have 
passed, he shall wash his body, he shall wash his 
clothes with gomez and water to make them clean. 

34(137). ‘Then he shall sit down again in the 
place of infirmity, inside the house, apart from the 
other worshippers of Mazda. He shall not go near 
the fire, nor near the water, nor near the earth, nor 
near the cow, nor near the trees, nor near the faithful, 
either man or woman. Thus shall he continue until 
six nights have passed. When six nights have 
passed, he shall wash his body, he shall wash his 
clothes with gomez and water to make them clean. 

35 (141). ‘Then he shall sit down again in the 
place of infirmity, inside the house, apart from the 
other worshippers of Mazda. He shall not go near 
the fire, nor near the water, nor near the earth, nor 
near the cow, nor near the trees, nor near the 
faithful, either man or woman. Thus shall he con- 
tinue, until nine nights have passed. When nine 
nights have passed, he shall wash his body, he shall 
wash his clothes with gomez and water to make 
them clean. 

36 (145). ‘ He may thenceforth go near the fire, 
near the water, near the earth, near the cow, near 

1 The Arm&?t-gah (see Introd.V, 15). 

FARGARD IX. 

129 

the trees, and near the faithful, either man or 
woman. 

II.1 

37 (146). ‘ Thou shalt cleanse a priest for a holy 
blessing 2 ; thou shalt cleanse the lord of a province 
for the value of a camel of high value ; thou shalt 
cleanse the lord of a town for the value of a stallion ; 
thou shalt cleanse the lord of a borough for the 
value of a bull ; thou shalt cleanse the master of a 
house for the value of a cow three years old. 

38(151). ‘Thou shalt cleanse the wife of the 
master of a house for the value of a ploughing3 
cow; thou shalt cleanse a menial for the value of 
a draught cow 4 ; thou shalt cleanse a young child 
for the value of a lamb. 

39 (154). ‘ These are the different cattle that the 
worshippers of Mazda shall give to him who has 
cleansed them, if they can afford it ; if they cannot 
afford it, they shall give him any other reward that 
may make him leave their houses well-pleased with 
them, and free from anger. 

40 (157)- ‘For if the man who has cleansed them 
leave their houses displeased with them, and full of 
anger, then the Dru^ Nasu enters them by the nose, 
by the eyes, by the tongue, by the jaws, by the 
sexual organs, by the hinder parts. 

41 (159). ‘And the Druf Nasu rushes upon them 
even to the end of the nails, and they are unclean 
thenceforth for ever and ever. 

‘It grieves the sun indeed, O Spitama Zarathustra! 

1 Cf. the tariff for the fees of physicians, Farg.VII, 41-43. 

4 See Farg.VII, 41, note. 

3 Doubtful. 4 Doubtful. 

[4] 

K 

130 

VEND! DAD. 

to shine upon a man defiled by the dead ; it grieves 
the moon, it grieves the stars. 

42 (162). ‘That man delights them, 0 Spitama 
Zarathurtra ! who cleanses from the Nasu those 
whom she has defiled ; he delights the fire, he de- 
lights the water, he delights the earth, he delights 
the cow, he delights the trees, he delights the 
faithful, both men and women.’ 

43 (164). Zarath lustra asked Ahura Mazda: ‘O 
Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What 
shall be his reward, after his soul has' parted from 
his body, who has cleansed from the Nasu any one 
defiled by her ?’ 

44(166). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘The welfare 
of the blessed abode thou canst promise to that 
man, for his reward in the other world.’ 

45 1 (167). ZarathuJtra asked Ahura Mazda : ‘ O 
Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How 
shall I fight against that Driif who from the dead 
rushes upon the living ? How shall I fight against 
that Nasu who from the dead defiles the living?’ 

46(169). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Say aloud 
those words in the Gathas that are to be said twice ; 
say aloud those words in the Gathas that are to be 
said thrice ; say aloud those words in the Gathas 
that are to be said four times ; . and the Druf shall 
fade away like the self-moving arrow 2, like the 
carpet of the earth3 when the year is over, like its 
garment3 which lasts a season.’ 

1 This clause and the following one as far as * and the Drug' ’ 

are further developed in the following Fargard. 

s See Introd. IV, 26. 8 The grass. 

FARGARD IX. 

13 1 

III. 

47 (172). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man who does not know the rites 
of cleansing according to the law of Mazda, offers to 
cleanse the unclean, what shall the worshippers of 
Mazda do ? How shall I then fight against that 
Dru^ who from the dead rushes upon the living ? 
How shall I fight against that Dri\£‘ who from the 
‘ dead defiles the living ? 

48(175). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Then, O 
Spitama Zarathustra ! the Dru£" Nasu waxes 
stronger than she was before. Stronger then are 
sickness and death and the working of the fiend 
than they were before.’ 

49 (177). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! What is the penalty that he shall 
pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ The worshippers of 
Mazda shall bind him ; they shall bind his hands 
first ; then they shall strip him of his clothes, they 
shall flay him alive, they shall cut off his head, and 
they shall give over his corpse unto the greediest of 
the birds of the beneficent spirit, unto the corpse- 
eating birds, unto the ravens, with these words 1 : — 

‘ “ The man here has repented of all his evil 
thoughts, words, and deeds. 

50 (183). If he has committed any other evil 

1 * The cleanser who has not performed the cleansing according 
to the rites, shall be taken to a desert place ; there they shall nail 
him with four nails, they shall take off the skin from his body, and 
cut off his head. If he has performed Patet for his sin, he shall be 
holy (that is, he shall go to paradise) ; if he has not performed 
Patet, he shall stay in hell till the day of resurrection1 (Fraser Ravaet, 
p. 398). Cf. Farg. Ill, 20 seq. 

K 2 

132 

vendIdAd. 

deed, it is remitted by his repentance; if he has 
committed no other evil deed, he is absolved by his 
repentance for ever and ever 1.” ’ 

51 (187). Who is he, O Ahura Mazda! who 
threatens to take away fulness and increase from 
the world, and to bring in sickness and death ? 

52 (188). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ It is the un- 
godly Ashemaogha 2, O Spitama Zarathu-rtra! who 
in this material world cleanses the unclean without 
knowing the rites of cleansing according to the law 
of Mazda. 

53 (190). ‘For until then, 0 Spitama Zarathiutra! 
sweetness and fatness would flow out from that 
land and from those fields, with health and healing, 
with fulness and increase and growth, and a growing 
of corn and grass V 

54 (191). 0 Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When are sweetness and fatness to 
come back again to that land and to those fields, 
with health and healing, with fulness and increase 
and growth, and a growing of corn and grass ? 

55, 56(192, 193). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Sweet- 
ness and fatness will never come back again to that 
land and to those fields, with health and healing, 
with fulness and increase and growth, and a growing 
of corn and grass, until that ungodly Ashemaogha 
has been put to death, and the holy Sraosha has 
been in that place, offered up a sacrifice4, for three 

1 See Farg. Ill, 20 seq., and Introd. V. 

2 See Introd. IV. 3 Cf. XIII, 52 seq. 

4 The so-called zanda ravan, ‘the sacrifice that makes the 

soul living,’ that is to say, that makes it enter heaven. It is pro- 
bably to be performed only in case the sinner has performed the 
Patet (see the note to § 49). 

FARGARD X. 

133 

days and three nights, with fire blazing, with baresma 
tied up, and with Haoma uplifted. 

57 (196). ‘Then sweetness and fatness will come 
back again to that land and to those fields, with 
health and healing, with fulness and increase and 
growth, and a growing of corn and grass/ 

Fargard X. 

During the process of cleansing, the voice works with the hand. 
The spells which must be recited while the unclean one is cleansing 
himself have already been mentioned in the preceding Fargard, but 
we find here a detailed list of spells which are to be spoken twice, 
or thrice, or four times. The exact time when they are to be 
uttered is not mentioned, and we do not know whether they are to 
accompany those prescribed in the last Fargard, and are, therefore, 
to be repeated as often as the unclean one is washed, or whether 
they are only intended to close the whole ceremony. 

These spells, like the former ones, are taken from the hymns or 
Gathas, the oldest and holiest part of the A vesta. They were not 
written for this particular purpose, but, as happens in all religions, 
advantage was taken of whatever there might be in the old sacred 
hymns which could be more or less easily applied to the special 
circumstances of the case. (The recitation of these lines is followed 
by an exorcism, written in the ordinary language of the Avcsta, 
which has been expressly composed for the occasion. J 

1. Zarathiutra asked Ahura Mazda: ‘O Ahura 
Mazda! most beneficent spirit, Maker of the ma- 
terial world, thou Holy One! How shall I fight 
against that Druf who from the dead rushes upon 
the living ? How shall I fight against that Dru^ 
who from the dead defiles the living ?’ 

2 (3). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Say aloud those 
words in the G&thas that are to be said twice 1 ; say 

1 The so-called bij-dmrhta. 

134 

VENDIDAD. 

aloud those words in the G&thas that are to be said 
thrice say aloud those words in the Gdthas that 
are to be said four times V 

3 (7). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy 
One ! Which are those words in the Gathas that 
are to be said twice ? 

4 (10). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ These are the 
words in the Gathas that are to be said twice, and 
thou shalt twice say them aloud : — 

ahyd yasd . . . urvdnem (Yasna XXVIII, 2), 
humatenam . . . mahl (Yas. XXXV, 2), 
ashahya dartf sair£ . . . ahubya (Yas. XXXV, 8), 
yathd tft 1 . . . ahurd (Yas. XXXIX, 4), 
humdim thwd . . . hudaustemd (Yas. XLI, 3), 
thwoi staotaras-fd . . . ahurd (Yas. XLI, 5), 
ujtd ahmdi . . . mananghd (Yas. XLIII, 1), 
spcwtd mainyfi . . . ahuro (Yas. XLVII, 1), 
vohu khshathrem . . . vareshane (Yas. LI, 1), 
vahistd LtL . . . xkyaothand/a (Yas. LI 1 1, 1). 

5 (10). ‘And after thou hast twice said those 
words, thou shalt say aloud these fiend-smiting and 
most-healing words : — 

‘ “ I drive away Angra Mainyu from this house, 
from this borough, from this town, from this land ; 
from the very body of the man defiled by the dead, 
from the very body of the woman defiled by the 
dead ; from the master of the house, from the lord 
of the borough, from the lord of the town, from the 
lord of the land ; from the whole of the holy world. 

6(12). “‘I drive away the Nasu, I drive away 
direct defilement, I drive away indirect defilement, 
from this house, from this borough, from this town, 

1 The thrii-imrfita. 

2 The kathruf-&mrftta. 

FARGARD X. 

135 

from this land; from the very body of the man de- 
filed by the dead, from the very body of the woman 
defiled by the dead ; from the master of the house, 
from the lord of the borough, from the lord of the 
town, from the lord of the land ; from the whole of 
the holy world.” ’ 

7 (13). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! Which are those words in the Gathas 
that are to be said thrice ? 

8 (16). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ These are the 
words in the Gathas that are to be said thrice, and 
thou shalt thrice say them aloud: — 

ashem vohu . . . (Yas. XXVII, 14), 
ye sevwtd . . . paid (Yas. XXXIII, 11), 
hukhshathrotemai . . . vahi.stai (Yas. XXXV, 5}, 
du^varendij . . . vahyo (Yas. LI II, 9). 

9 (16). ‘After thou hast thrice said those words, 
thou shalt say aloud these fiend-smiting and most- 
healing words : — 

‘“I drive away Indra1, I drive away Sauru ', I 
drive away the daeva N^unghaithya l, from this 
house, from this borough, from this town, from this 
land ; from the very body of the man defiled by the 
dead, from the very body of the woman defiled by 
the dead ; from the master of the house, from the 
lord of the borough, from the lord of the town, from 
the lord of the land; from the whole of the holy 
world. 

10(18). ‘“I drive away Tauru2, I drive away 
Zairi 2, from this house, from this borough, from this 
town, from this land ; from the very body of the 
man defiled by the dead, from the very body of the 

See Introd. IV, 41. ' 

8 See Introd. IV. 34. 

1 36 vendIdAd. 

woman defiled by the dead ; from the master of the 
house, from the lord of the borough, from the lord 
of the town, from the lord of the land; from the 
whole of the holy world.” ’ 

11(19). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! Which are those words in the Gathas 
that are to be said four times ? 

12 (22). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ These are the 
words in the Gfithas that are to be said four times, 
and thou shalt four times say them aloud : — 

yathft ahCi vairyo . . . 1 (Yas. XXVII, 13), 

rnazdA arf moi . . . d«u ahfim2 (Yas. XXXIV, 15), 

A airyama ishyo . . . masatd mazdctu 3 (Yas. LIV, 1). 

13 (22). ‘After thou hast said those words four 
times, thou shalt say aloud these fiend-smiting and 
most-healing words : — 

‘ “ I drive away Aeshma, the fiend of the wounding 
spear 4 * *, I drive away the daeva Akatasha ®, from 
this house, from this borough, from this town, from 
this land ; from the very body of the man defiled by 
the dead, from the very body of the woman defiled 
by the dead; from the master of the house, from the 
lord of the borough, from the lord of the town, from 
the lord of the land ; from the whole of the holy 
world. 

14 (24). ‘“I drive away the Varenya daevas 8, I 
drive away the wind-daeva 7, from this house, from 

1 Translated Farg. VIII, 19. 8 Translated Farg. XI, 14. 

3 Translated Farg. XX, 11. 

4 See Introd. IV, 22. 

6 ‘ The worker of evil/ a personification of the evil powers, it 

may be a mere name of Ahriman. 

0 See Introd. IV, 23. 

7 The demon Vat eh, who raises storms (Brouillons d’Anquetil). 

FARGARD X. 

137 

this borough, from this town, from this land ; from 
the very body of the man defiled by the dead, from 
the very body of the woman defiled by the dead ; 
from the master of the house, from the lord of the 
borough, from the lord of the town, from the lord of 
the land ; from the whole of the holy world.” 

15 (25). ‘These are the words in the Gathas that 
are to be said twice ; these are the words in the 
Gathas that are to be said thrice ; these are the 
words in the Gathas that are to be said four times. 

16 (26). ‘These are the words that smite down 
Angra Mainytt ; these arc the words that smite 
down Aeshma, the fiend of the wounding spear; 
these are the words that smite down the Mazainya 
daevas 1 ; these are the words that smite down all 
the dafivas. 

1 7 (30). ‘ These are the words that stand against 
that Dru^, against that Nasu, who from the dead 
rushes upon the living, who from the dead defiles 
the living. 

18(32). ‘Therefore, O Zarathustra! thou shalt 
dig nine holes2 in the part of the ground where 
there is least water and where there are fewest 
trees; where there is nothing that may be food 
either for man or beast ; for purity is for man, next 
to life, the greatest good ; that purity that is pro- 

1 According to tradition, ‘the Divs in Mazanderan;’ Mazan- 
deran is known, in fact, as a land of fiends and sorcerers; a reputa- 
tion for which it is very likely indebted to the neighlxmring mount 
Damavand, to which Azir Dahaka is said to be bound. Yet one 
may doubt whether it gave its name to the Mazainya daevas, or if 
it took its name from them. Mazainya was, most probably, like 
Varenya, an epithet of the Divs, which, in course of time, became 
the name of a class of demons. 

2 The nine holes for the Barashnfam; see above, p. i20,§ 6 seq. 

138 VENDfDAD. 

cured by the law of Mazda for him who cleanses 
himself with good thoughts, words, and deeds. 

19(38). ‘Make thyself pure, O righteous man! 
any one in the world here below can win purity for 
himself, namely, when he cleanses himself with good 
thoughts, words, and deeds. 

20. ‘ The will of the Lord is the law of holiness,’ 
&c. 1 

‘ Whom hast thou placed to protect me, O Mazda ! 
while the hate of the fiend is grasping me?’ &c. 

‘ Who is he who will smite the fiend in order to 
maintain thy ordinances?’ &c. 

‘ Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti 
Spewta ! Perish, O fiendish Dru^ ! . . . Perish away 
to the regions of the north, never more to give unto 
death the living world of the holy spirit!’ 

Fargard XI. 

This chapter, like the preceding, is composed of spells intended 
to drive away the Nasu. But they are of a more special character, 
as they refer to the particular objects to be cleansed, such as the 
house, the fire, the water, &c. Each incantation consists of two 
parts, a line from the Gathas which alludes, or rather is made to 
allude, to the particular object, and a general exorcism, in the usual 
dialect, which is the same for all the objects. 

i. Zarathustra asked Ahura Mazda: ‘O Ahura 
Mazda! most beneficent spirit, Maker of the material 
world, thou Holy One! How shall I cleanse the 
house ? how the fire ? how the water ? how the 
earth? how the cow? how the tree? how the faithful 
man and the faithful woman ? how the stars ? how 
the moon? how the sun? how the boundless light? 

1 The rest as in Farg. VIII, 19, 20. 

FARGARD XI. 

139 

how all good things, made by Mazda, the offspriflg 
of the holy principle ?’ 

2 (4). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Thou shalt chant 
the cleansing words, and the house shall be clean ; 
clean shall be the fire, clean the water, clean the 
earth, clean the cow, clean the tree, clean the faithful 
man and the faithful woman, clean the stars, clean 
the moon, clean the sun, clean the boundless light, 
clean all good things, made by Mazda, the offspring 
of the holy principle. 

3 (7). ‘ So thou shalt say these fiend-smiting and 
most-healing words; thou shalt chant the Ahuna- 
Vairya five times : “ The will of the Lord is the law 
of holiness,” &c. 

‘ The Ahuna-Vairya preserves the person of man: 
“ The will of the Lord is the law of holiness,” &c. 

‘ “ Whom hast thou placed to protect me, O 
Mazda ! while the hate of the fiend is grasping 
me ?” &c. 

‘ “ Who is he who will smite the fiend in order to 
maintain thy ordinances?” &c. 

‘ “ Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti 
Spe«ta!” &C.1 

4 (9). ‘ If thou wantest to cleanse the house, say 
these words aloud : “ He is my greatest support as 
long as lasts this dreary world 2.” 

‘ If thou wantest to cleanse the fire, say these 
words aloud : “ Thy fire, first of all, do we approach 
with worship, O Ahura Mazda3!” 

1 As in Farg. VIII, 19, 20. 

2 Yasna XLIX, 1. The allusion is not quite clear, but there 
seems to be a comparison between the small house of man and 
that great house the world. 

* Yasna XXXVI, 1. 

vendIdad. 

140 

*5(13). ‘If thou wantest to cleanse the water, say 
these wprds aloud : “Waters we worship, the waters 
in the tree, the waters in the stream, the waters in 
the rain 1 *.” 

‘ If thou wantest to cleanse the earth, say these 
words aloud : “ This earth we worship, this earth 
with the women, this earth which bears us and those 
women who arc thine, O Ahura "!” 

6 (17). ‘If thou wantest to cleanse the cow, say 
these words aloud : “ For the cow we order thee to 
do these most excellent deeds, that she may have a 
resting place and fodder3.’’ 

‘ If thou wantest to cleanse the trees, say these 
words aloud : “ Out of him4 5 * *, through his holiness 
Mazda made the plants grow up \” 

7(21). ‘If thou wantest to cleanse the faithful 
man or the faithful woman, say these words aloud : 
“ May the beloved Airyaman come hither, for the 
men and women of Zarathu.ytra to rejoice, for the 
faithful to rejoice; with the desirable reward that is 
won by means of the law, and with that boon for 
holiness that is vouchsafed by Ahura8!” 

1 Yasna XXXVIII, 3. ^ 

- Yasna XXXVIII, 1. ‘ Who are thine,’ that is, ‘who are thy 
wives these women are, or rather were, the rivers in heaven, which 
were considered as the wives of the heaven-god; the rain waters 
are called ‘Ahura’s spouses,’ Ahuranis (Yasna LX VIII); cf. Orm. 
Ahr. § 32 and Introd. IV. Tradition wrongly recognises in these 
women the Faroers of godly men. 

8 Yasna XXXV, 4. ‘ Let those excellent deeds be done for the 
behoof of cattle, that is to say, let stables be made, and water and 
fodder be given ’ (Comm.) 

4 The first-born bull from whose body, after his death, grew up 
all kinds of plants (Bund. IV ; cf. Orm. Ahr. §129 seq.) 

5 Yasna XLVIII, 6. Cf. Farg. XVII, 5. 

8 Yasna LIV, 1. Cf. Farg. XX, ‘ 1 1. There is no special spell 

for the cleansing of the sun, the moon, the stars, and the boundless 

FARGARD XI. 

141 

8 (25). ‘Then thou shalt say these fiend-smiting 
and most-healing words. Thou shalt chant the 
Ahuna-Vairya eight times : — 

“‘The will of the Lord is the law of holiness,” &c. 

‘ “ Whom hast thou placed to protect me, O 
Mazda ?” &c. 

‘ “ Who is he who will smite the fiend &c. 

‘ “ Keep us from our hater, O Mazda !” &c. 1 

9 (26). ‘ I drive away Aeshma 2, I drive away the 
Nasu, I drive away direct defilement, I drive away 
indirect defilement. 

[I drive away Khrfi, I drive away Khrftighni3; I 
drive away Bftidhi, I drive away BftidhLa4; I drive 
away Ku/itli, I drive away Kuwdisa.6] 

‘ I drive away the yellow Bushyasta, I drive away 
the long-handed Bfishyfista®; [I drive away Mfiidhi7, 
I drive away Kapasti.8] 

light (see §§ 1, 2), because they are not defiled by the unclean one, 
they are only pained by seeing him (Farg. IX, 41) ; as soon as he 
is clean, they arc freed from the pain. 

1 As in Farg. VIII, 19, 20. 2 See Introd. IV, 22. 

3 Khrfi and KI11 fiighni are not met with elsewhere ; their names 
mean, apparently, ‘ wound ’ and ‘ the wounding one whether they 
belonged to concrete mythology, or were mere abstractions, is dif- 
ficult to decide. They may have been mere names or epithets of 
ASshma khrCiidru, ‘Aeshma of the wounding spear/ 

4 Buidhisa is ‘the offspring of Buidhi/ but the meaning of 
B (lid hi is unknown. 

6 Kuwdisa is ‘the offspring of Ku//di;’ Kuadi is contracted 
from Kavawdi or Kavawda; the Indian homonym kavandha 
means literally ‘a tub/ and by a mythical metaphor ‘a raining 
cloud* (Rig-veda V, 85, 3; IX, 74, 7) ; he becomes then the 
demon in the cloud (Farg. XIX, 41). He is known in Greek 
mythology under the name of KmvQos (Kuhn, Herabkunft des 
Feuers, p. 134). 

6 See Introd. IV, 24; cf. Farg. XVIII, 16. 

7 A demon unknown. Aspeftdiarji translates it by ‘ Destruction/ 

8 Unknown. . AspendiSrji calls it ‘ Revenge/ 

142 

VENDiDAD. 

‘ I drive away the Pairika 1 that comes upon the 
fire, upon the water, upon the earth, upon the cow, 
upon the tree. I drive away the demon of unclean- 
ness that comes upon the fire, upon the water, upon 
the earth, upon the cow, upon the tree. 

10 (32). ‘I drive thee away, O mischievous Angra 
Mainyu ! from the fire, from the water, from the 
earth, from the cow, from the tree, from the faithful 
man and from the faithful woman, from the stars, 
from the moon, from the sun, from the boundless 
light, from all good things, made by Mazda, the 
offspring of the holy principle. 

1 1 (33)- ‘ Then thou shalt say these fiend-smiting 
and most-healing words ; thou shalt chant four 
Ahuna -Vairyas : — 

‘“The will of the Lord is the law of holiness,” &c. 

‘ “ Whom hast thou placed to protect me ?” &c. 

‘ “ Who is he who will smite the fiend?” &c. 

‘ “ Keep us from our hater, O Mazda!” &c.2 

12 (34). ‘Away is Aeshma driven; away is the 
Nasu driven; away is direct defilement; away is 
indirect defilement driven. 

[‘ Away is Khrti, away is Khrflighni driven ; away 
is BAidhi, away is BiYidhka driven ; away is Ku/zdi, 
away is Ku«di.sa driven.] 

‘ Away is BAshyasta driven, the yellow ; away is 
BAshyasta driven, the long-handed; [away is MAidhi, 
away is Kapasti driven.] 

‘ Away is the Pairika driven that comes upon the 
fire, upon the water, upon the earth, upon the cow, 
upon the tree. Away is the demon of uncleanness 
driven that comes upon the fire, upon the water, 
upon the earth, upon the cow, upon the tree. 

1 See Introd. IV, 21. a As in Farg.VIII, 19, 20. 

FARGARD XI. 

143 

1 3 (40). ‘ Away art thou driven, O mischievous 
Angra Mainyu! from the fire, from the water, from 
the earth, from the cow, from the tree, from the 
faithful man and from the faithful woman, from the 
stars, from the moon, from the sun, from the bound- 
less light, from all good things, made by Mazda, the 
offspring of the holy principle. 

14 (41). ‘Then thou shalt say these fiend-smiting 
and most-healing words ; thou shalt chant “ Mazdd 
ad moi” four times : “O Mazda! teach me excellent 
words and excellent works, that through the good 
thought and the holiness of him who offers thee due 
praise, thou mayest, O Lord ! make the world thrive 
for ever and ever, at thy will, under thy sovereign 
rule V’ 

15. ‘I drive away Aeshma, I drive away the 
Nasu,’ &c. 1 2 

16. ‘I drive thee away, O mischievous Angra 
Mainyu! from the fire, from the Water,’ &c.3 

1 7. ‘ Then thou shalt say these fiend-smiting and 
most-healing words ; thou shalt chant the Airyama- 
ishyo four times : “ May the beloved Airyaman 
come hither!” &c.4 

18. ‘Away is Aeshma driven; away is the Nasu 
driven,’ &c.° 

19. ‘Away art thou driven, O mischievous Angra 
Mainyu ! from the fire, from the water,’ &c. 6 

20. ‘ Then thou shalt say these fiend-smiting and 
most-healing words ; thou shalt chant five Ahuna- 
Vairyas : — 

‘ “The will of the Lord is the law of holiness,” &c. 

1 Yasna XXXIV, 15. 2 The rest as in § 9. 

3 The res^as in § 10. % 4 As in § 7. 

* As in § 12. 6 As in § 13. 

144 

vendIdAd. 

‘ “Whom hast thou placed to protect me?” &c. 

‘ “ Who is he who will smite the fiend ?” &C.1 
‘ “ Keep us from our hater, 0 Mazda and Armaiti 
Spewta! Perish, O fiendish Druf ! Perish, O 
brood of the fiend! Perish, O world of the fiend! 
Perish away, O Dru^! Rush away, O Dru^-! 
Perish away, 0 Dru^ ! Perish away to the regions 
of the north, never more to give unto death the 
living world of the holy spirit ! ” ’ 

Fargard XII. 

This chapter is found only in the Vendidad Sadah; it is missing 
in the Zend-Pahlavi Vendidad. This is owing, as it seems, only to 
the accidental loss of some folios in the one manuscript from which 
all the copies as yet known have been derived ; and, in fact, even 
in the most ancient manuscripts the following Fargard is numbered 
the thirteenth (Westergaard, Zend-Avesta, preface, p. 5). 

The directions in thp preceding chapter are general, and do not 
depend on the relationship of the faithful with the deceased person ; 
but those in this Fargard arc of a special character, and apply only 
to the near relatives of the dead. Their object is to determine how 
long the time of ‘staying* (up a man) should last for different relatives. 
What is meant by this word is not explained; but, as the word upa- 
man is usually employed to indicate the staying of the unclean in 
the Armcwt-gah, apart from the faithful and from every clean object, 
it seems to follow that the relatives of a dead person were considered 
unclean from the mere fact of being related to him, and were, on 
this account, shut out of the frequented parts of the house. So, 
besides the general uncleanness arising from actual contact with a 
corpse, there was another form of unclcanness arising from rela- 
tionship with the dead. The natural link that connects the mem- 
bers of one and the same family is of such a kind that no one can 
die without death entering all of them. Whether this is the pri- 
mitive form of mourning, or only a later form of it, we will not 
discuss here. 

See Farg.Vlfl, 19, 20. 

FARGARD XII. 

145 

On the other hand, the house is unclean too, at least with regard 
to the relatives ; for the time of ‘ staying ’ is followed by a purifica- 
tion of the house, that is not to be confounded with that described in 
the eighth Fargard, which takes place directly after the death and, 
as it appears, opens the house again only to those who were not 
connected with the dead man. Even nowadays, in Persia, the 
house where a- relative has died is unlucky, and is looked upon 
with even more repugnance than is shown in the Avcsta. The ■ 
son deserts the house where his father has died ; he could not live 
and walk in it, ‘the unlucky step,’ the bad qadim is in it; ‘every 
man’s house must die with him;’ therefore, he lets it fall into ruin, 
and builds another house farther off'; a custom to which there 
seems to be some allusion in the Pahlavi Commentary (ad I, 9). 

i. If one’s father or mother dies, how long shall 
they stay2, the son for his father, the daughter for 
her mother ? How long for the righteous ? How 
long for the sinners ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘They shall stay thirty 
days for the righteous, sixty days for the sinners.’ 

2 (5). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! How shall I cleanse the house ? How 
shall it be clean again ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall wash their 
bodies three times, they shall wash their clothes 
three times, they shall chant the Gathas three times; 
they shall offer up a sacrifice to my Fire, they shall 
offer up the bundles of baresma, they shall bring 
libations to the good waters ; then the house shall 
be clean, and then the waters may enter, then the 
fire may enter, and then the Amesha-Spewtas may 
enter 4, O Spitama Zarathmtra ! ’• 

1 Chardin, Voyages, III, p. 7, 33 (ed. d’Amsterdam, 1711). Cf. 
Polack, Pcrsien (I, p. 52). * See the Introd. to the Farg. 

3 How long if the dead person died in a state of holiness? How 
long if in the state of a Peshotanu ? 

1 All the other objects over which the Amesha-Spentas preside 
(such as the cow, the metals, &c.) 

[4] L 

146 

VEND^DAD. 

3 (9). If one’s son or daughter dies, how long 
shall they stay, the father for his son, the mother 
for her daughter? How long for the righteous? 
How long for the sinners ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall stay thirty 
days for the righteous, sixty days for the sinners.’ 

4(13). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! How shall I cleanse the house? How 
shall it be clean again ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : * They shall wash their 
bodies three times, they shall wash their clothes 
three times, they shall chant the G&thas three 
times ; they shall offer up a sacrifice to my Fire, 
they shall offer up the bundles of baresma, they 
shall bring libations to the good waters ; then the 
house shall be clean, and then the waters may enter, 
then the fire may enter, and then the Amesha- 
Spewtas may enter, O Spitama Zarathwtra ! ’ 

5 (17). If one’s brother or sister dies, how long 
shall they stay, the brother for his brother, the 
sister for her sister ? How long for the righteous ? 
How long for the sinners ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall stay thirty 
days for the righteous, sixty days for the sinners.’ 

6 (21). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! How shall I cleanse the house? How 
shall it be clean again ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall wash their 
bodies three times, they shall wash their clothes 
three times, they shall chant the G&thas three 
times; they shall offer up a sacrifice to my Fire, they 
shall offer up the bundles of baresma, they shall 
bring libations to the good waters ; then the house 
shall be clean, and then the Waters may enter, then 

FARGARD XII. 

147 

the fire may enter, and then the Amesha-Spewtas 
may enter, O Spitama Zarathustra !’ 

7 (25). If the master of the, house 1 dies, or if the 
mistress of the house dies, how long shall thfey stay? 
How long for the righteous ? How long for the 
sinners ? 

« 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘They2 shall stay six 
months for the righteous, a year for the sinners.’ 

8 (28). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! How shall I cleanse the house ? How 
shall it be clean again ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall wash their 
bodies three times, they shall wash their clothes 
three times, they shall chant the Gathas three 
times; they shall offer up a sacrifice to my Fire, they 
shall offer up the bundles of baresma, they shall 
bring libations to the good waters ; then the house 
shall be clean, and then the waters may enter, then 
the fire may enter, and then the Amesha-Spe?itas 
may enter, O Spitama Zarathustra ! ’ 

9 (31). If one’s grandfather or grandmother dies, 
how long shall they stay, the grandson for his grand- 
father, the granddaughter for her grandmother? 
How long for the righteous ? How long for the 
sinners ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall stay twenty- 
five days for the righteous, fifty days for the 
sinners.’ 

10 (34). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! How shall I cleanse the house ? How 
shall it be clean again ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall wash their 

1 The chief of the/amity, the paterfamilias. 

2 All the familia, both relatives and servants. 

1 48 

vendIdad. 

bodies three times, they shall wash their clothes 
three times, they shall chant the Gathas three 
times; they shall offer up a sacrifice to my Fire, they 
shall offer up the bundles of baresma, they shall 
bring libations to the good waters ; then the house 
shall be clean, and then the waters may enter, then 
the fire may enter, and then the Amesha-Spewtas 
may enter, O Spitama Zarathustra !’ 

11 (37). If one’s grandson or granddaughter 
dies, how long shall they stay, the grandfather for 
his grandson, the grandmother for her grand- 
daughter ? How long for the righteous P How 
long for the sinners ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall stay twenty- 
five days for the righteous, fifty days for the sinners.’ 

12 (40). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! How shall I cleanse the house ? How 
shall it be clean again ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall wash their 
bodies three times, they shall wash their clothes 
three times, they shall chant the G&thas three 
times; they shall offer up a sacrifice to my Fire, 
they shall offer up the bundles of baresma, they 
shall bring libations to the good waters; then 
the house shall be clean, and then the waters may 
enter, then the fire may enter, and then the Amesha- 
Spewtas may enter, O Spitama Zarathmtra ! ’ 

13 (43)- If one’s uncle or aunt dies, how long 
shall they stay, the nephew for his uncle, the niece 
for her aunt ? How long for the righteous ? How 
long for the sinners ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall stay twenty 
days for the righteous, forty days for the sinners.’ 

!4 (45)- O Maker of the material world, thou 

FARGARD XII. 

149 

Holy One ! How shall I cleanse the house ? How 
shall it be clean again ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall wash their 
bodies three times, they shall wash their clothes 
three times, they shall chant the Gdthas three 
times; they shall offer up a sacrifice to my Fire, they 
shall offer up the bundles of baresma, they shall 
bring libations to the good waters ; then the house 
shall be clean, and then the waters may enter, then 
the fire may enter, and then the Amesha-Spewtas 
may enter, O Spitama Zarathiutra ! ’ 

15 (48). If one’s male cousin or female cousin 
dies, how long shall they stay ? How long for the 
righteous ? How long for the sinners ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall stay fifteen 
days for the righteous, thirty days for the sinners.’ 

16 (50). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! IIow shall I cleanse the house ? How 
shall it be clean again ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ' They shall wash their 
bodies three times, they shall wash their clothes 
three times, they shall chant the Gdthas three 
times; they shall offer up a sacrifice to my Fire, they 
shall offer up the bundles of baresma, they shall 
bring libations to the good waters ; then the house 
shall be clean,- and then the waters may enter, then 
the fire may enter, and then the Amesha-Spewtas 
may enter, O Spitama Zarathiutra ! ’ 

17 (53). If the son or the daughter of a cousin 
dies, how long shall they stay? How long for the 
righteous ? How long for the sinners ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘They shall stay ten 
days for the righteous, twenty days for the sinners.’ 

18 (55). O Maker of the material world, thou 

vendIdAd. 

150 

Holy One! How shall I cleanse the house? ’ How 
shall It be clean again ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall wash their 
bodies three times, they shall wash their clothes 
three times, they shall chant the G&thas three 
times ; they shall offer up a sacrifice to my Fire, they 
shall offer up the bundles of baresma, they shall 
bring libations to the good waters ; then the house 
shall be clean, and then the waters may enter, then 
the fire may enter, and then the Amesha-Spewtas 
may enter, O Spitama Zaratlnutra ! ’ 

19 (58). If the grandson of a cousin or the 
granddaughter of a cousin dies, how long shall 
they stay? How long for the righteous? How 
long for the sinners ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall stay five 
days for the righteous, ten days for the sinners.’ 

20 (60). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! How shall I cleanse the house ? How 
shall it be clean again ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall wash their 
bodies three times, they shall wash their clothes 
three times, they shall chant the Gathas three times; 
they shall offer up a sacrifice to my Fire, they shall 
offer up the bundles of baresma, they shall bring 
libations to the good waters ; then the house shall 
be clean, and then the waters may enter, then the 
fire may enter, and then the Amesha-Spewtas may 
enter, O Spitama Zarathustra !’ 

2 1 (63). If a stranger dies who does not profess 
the true faith, or the true law1, what part of the 

1 The case of a stranger (no relative) who professes the true 
faith is not provided for here, because it has been sufficiently con- 
sidered in the preceding chapters. 

FARGARD XIII. 

151 

creation of the good spirit does he directly defile (in 
dying) ? What part does he indirectly defile ? 

221 (65). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ No more than 
a frog does whose venom is dried up, and that has 
been dead more than a year. Whilst alive, indeed, 
O Spitama Zarathiutra ! that wicked, two-legged 
ruffian, that ungodly Ashemaogha, directly defiles 
the creatures of the good spirit, and indirectly 
defiles them. 

23(70). ‘Whilst alive he smites the water; 
whilst alive he blows out the fire; whilst alive he 
carries off the cow ; whilst alive he smites the faith- 
ful man with a deadly blow, that parts the soul from 
the body; not so will he do when dead. 

24 (71). ‘Whilst alive, indeed, O Spitama Zara- 
thustra! that wicked, two-legged ruffian, that ungodly 
Ashemaogha* never ceases depriving the faithful 
man of his food, of his clothing, of his house, of his 
bed, of his vessels ; not so will he do when dead.’ 

Fargard XIII. 

The Dog. 

I (1-7). The dog of Qrmazd and the dog of Ahriman. 

(a. 1-4). The dog Vanghdpara (‘ the hedge-hog’). 

(b. 4-7). The dog Zairimyangura (‘ the tortoise’). 

II (8-16). Offences against the dog. 

III (17-19). On the several duties of the dog. 

IV (20-28). On the food due to the dog. 

V (29-38). On the mad dog ; how he is to be kept, and cured. 

VI (39-40). On the excellence of the dog. 

VII (41-43). On the wolf-dog. 

1 §§ 22-24 are the same as Farg.V, 36-38. 

152 

vendJdad. 

VIII (44-48). On the virtues and vices of the dog. 

IX (49-50). Praise of the dog. 

X (5°-54)- The water dog. 

See Introd. IV, 35. 

Ia. 

1. Which is the good creature among the creatures 
of the good spirit that from midnight till the sun is 
up goes and kills thousands of the creatures of the 
evil spirit ? 

2 (3). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ The dog with 
the prickly back, with the long and thin muzzle, the 
dog Vanghapara1, which evil-speaking people call 
the Duiaka 2 * ; this is the good creature among the 
creatures of the good spirit that from midnight till 
the sun is up goes and kills thousands of the crea- 
tures of the evil spirit. 

3 (6). ‘And whosoever, O Zarathiutra ! shall kill 
the dog with the prickly back, with the long and 
thin muzzle, the clog Vanghapara, which evil-speaking 
people call the Dusaka, kills his own soul for nine 
generations, nor shall he find a way over the A’invarf 
bridge2, unless he has, while alive, atoned for his 
sin by offering up a sacrifice to Sraosha 4. 

1 The hedge-hog. As it struggles from midnight till the dawn, 
this supposes the existence of a myth, in which the rays of the sun, 
beginning from midnight to pierce the veil of darkness, were com- 
pared to the prickles of a heavenly hedge-hog. 

2 Duzaka is the popular name of the hedge-hog (Pers. zuzah). 
The name Vangh&para must have referred to its mythical quali- 
ties. It is not without importance which name is given to it : 
‘ When called by its high name, it is powerful’ (Comm.) ; cf. § 6, 
and Farg. XVIII, 1 5. The nature of every being lies partly in 
its name. 

* The bridge leading to paradise ; see Farg. XIX, 30. 

* Cf. § 54. Aspendiarji translates : ‘ He cannot atone for it in 
his life even by performing a sacrifice *to Sraosha.’ 

FARGARD XIII. 

153 

4(10). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man kill the dog with the prickly 
back, with the*long and thin muzzle, the dog Van- 
gh&para, which evil-speaking people call the Du^aka, 
what is the penalty that he shall pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘A thousand stripes 
with the Aspahe-a^tra, a thousand stripes with the 
Sraosh6-/C’arana.' 

I b. 

5 (13). Which is the evil creature among the 
creatures of the evil spirit that from midnight till 
the sun is up goes and kills thousands of the crea- 
tures of the good spirit? 

6 (15). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘The da£va Zai- 
rimyangura \ which evil-speaking people call the 
Zairimyika 2, this is the evil creature among the 
creatures of the evil spirit that from midnight till 
the sun is up goes and kills thousands of the crea- 
tures of the good spirit. 

7 (18). ‘And whosoever, O Zarathustra! shall kill 
the daeva Zairimyangura, which evil-speaking people 
call the Zairimy&ka, his sins in thought, word, and 
deed are redeemed as they would be by a Patet ; his 
sins in thought, word, and deed are atoned for. 

II. 

8(21). ‘Whosoever shall smite either a shep- 
herd’s dog, or a house dog, or a Vohunazga dog3, or 

1 The tortoise (Asp.) 

* ‘When not so called it is less strong’ (Comm.) Zairimyaka 
is a lucky name, as it is connected with a word (zairimya) which 
denotes the freshness of water and verdure ; and it seems to desig- 
nate the tortoise as ‘ the fresh- water creature’ (Asp.) ; therefore the 
name is corrected into 1 the in’urer (?) of fresh water.’ 

3 See § 19 n. 

154 

vendIdAd. 

a trained dog1, his soul when passing to the other 
world, shall fly2 amid louder howling and fiercer 
pursuing than the sheep does when the wolf rushes 
upon it in the lofty forest. 

9 (24). ‘No soul will come and meet his departing 
soul and help it through the howls and pursuit 3 in 
the other world ; nor will the dogs that keep the 
Kinvad bridge1 help his departing soul through the 
howls and pursuit in the other world. 

10 (26). ‘If a man shall smite a shepherd’s dog so 
that it becomes unfit for work, if he shall cut off 
its ear or its paw, and thereupon a thief or a wolf 
break in and carry away sheep from the fold, without 
the dog giving any warning, the man shall pay for 
the lost sheep, and he shall pay for the wound of the 
dog as for wilful wounding s. 

1 1 (31). ‘If a man shall smite a house dog so that 
it becomes unfit for work, if he shall cut off its ear 
or its paw, and thereupon a thief or a wolf break in 
and carry away goods from the house, without the 
dog giving any warning, the man shall pay for the 
lost goods, and he shall pay for the wound of the 
dog as for wilful wounding.’ 

12 (36). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall smite a shepherd’s dog, 
so that it gives up the ghost and the soul parts from 
the body, what is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Eight hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-astra, eight hundred stripes with 
the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

A hunting dog (?). 9 ‘ From paradise’ (Comm.) 

Of the Divs. <, 4 See Introd.V, 4. 

Baodh6-varrta ; see Farg.VII, 38 n. 

FARGARD XIII. 

155 

13 (39). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall smite a house clog so 
that it gives up the ghost and the soul parts from 
the body, what is the penalty that he shall pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Seven hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-aitra, seven hundred stripes with 
the Sraoshd--£’arana.’ 

14 (42). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall smite a Vohunazga dog 
so that it gives up the ghost and the soul parts from 
the body, what is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Six hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-a.stra, six hundred stripes with 
the Sraosho-Z'arana.’ 

15(45). 0 Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall smite a young dog 1 so 
that it gives up the ghost and the soul parts from 
the* body, what is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Five hundred stripes 
with the Aspahe-astra, five hundred stripes with 
the Sraosho-^’arana.’ 

16 (48). ‘ This is the penalty for the murder of a 
Gaza dog, of a Vim dog2, of a Sukuruna dog3, of a 
sharp-toothed Urupi dog4, of a swift-running Raopi 5 
dog ; this is the penalty for the murder of any kind 
of dog but the water dog6.’ 

1 A dog not older than four months. 

2 Unknown. Cf.V, 31, 32. 3 A lynx. Cf. V, 31. 

4 A weazcl. Cf.V, 33. 

3 A fox. The fox belongs to the good creation, as he fights 

against the demon Khava (Bund. XIX; cf. Orm. Ahr. § 228). 

0 The beaver. ‘For the penalty in that case is most heavy’ 

(Comm.) Cf. § 52 seq. and Farg. XIV. 

vendJdad. 

156 

III. 

1 7 (49). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Which is the dog that must be called a 
shepherd’s dog? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ It is the dog who goes 
a Y u^yesti 1 round about the fold, watching for the 
thief and the wolf.’ 

18 (51). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Which is the dog that must be called 
a house dog ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It is the dog who goes 
a Hathra round about the house, watching for the 
thief and the wolf.’ 

19 (53)- O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Which is the dog that must be called 
a Vohunazga dog ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘It is the dog who 
claims none of those talents, and only seeks for his 
subsistence 2.’ 

IV. 

20 (55)- O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man give bad food to a shepherd’s 
dog, of what sin is he guilty ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘It is the same guilt as 
though he should serve bad food to a master of a 
house of the first rank V 

1 A measure unknown ; it seems to have been the average dis- 
tance of fourteen houses (see the gloss ad § 1 7 in the Introd. V, 4, 
Farg. XV, 45, and Bund. p. 31, 7). 

2 ‘ He cannot do the same as the shepherd’s dog and the house 

dog do, but he catches Khrafstras and smites the Nasu’ (Comm.) 
It is ‘the dog without a master’ (gharib), the vagrant dog; he is 
held in great esteem (§ 22) and is one of the dogs who can be used 
for the Sag-did (Introd. V, 4). 1 

9 Invited as a guest. 

FARGARD XIII. 1 57 

21 (57). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man give bad food to a house dog, 
of what sin is he guilty ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : * It is the same guilt 
as though he should serve bad food to a master of 
a house of middle rank.’ 

22 (59). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man give bad food to aVohunazga 
dog, of what sin is he guilty ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘ It is the same guilt as 
though he should serve bad food to a holy man, in 
the character of a priest1, who should come to his 
house.’ 

23 (61). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man give bad food to a young 
dog, of what sin is he guilty? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ It is the same guilt as 
though he should serve bad food to a young man, 
born of pious parents, and who can answer for 
himself2 3.’ 

24 (63). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall give bad food to a shep- 
herd’s dog, what is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘He is a Peshotanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-a.y|$a, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-zkirana V 

1 The Vohunazga dog has no domicile, therefore he is not com- 
pared with the master of a house ; as he smites the Nasu, he is 
like a holy man, of the wandering class, a sort of begging friar. 

* Probably, ‘Who has performed the nfi-zftd, fifteen years old.’ 
The young dog enters the community of the faithful at the age of 
four months, when he can smite the Nasu. 

3 ‘ I also saw the soul of a man, whom demons, just like dogs, 
ever tear. That man gives bread to the dogs, and they eat it not ; 

158 vendIdAd. 

25 (66). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall give bad food to a house 
dog, what is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Ninety stripes with the 
Aspah£-aytra, ninety stripes with the Sraosh6- 
^arana.' 

26 (69). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man shall give bad food to a 
Vohunazga dog, what is the penalty that he shall 
Pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Seventy stripes with 
the Aspahe-astra, seventy stripes with the Sraosh6- 
A'arana.’ 

27 (72). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a man shall give bad food to a 
young dog, what is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Fifty stripes with the 
Aspahe-astra, fifty stripes with the Sraosh6-A’arana. 

28 (75). ‘ For it is the dog, of all the creatures of 
the good spirit, that most quickly decays into age, 
while not eating near eating people, and watching 
goods none of which it receives. Bring ye unto him 
milk and fat with meat ; this is the right food for 
the dog1.’ 

but they ever devour the breast, legs, belly, and thighs of the man. 
And I asked thus : What sin was committed by this body, whose 
soul suffers so severe a punishment ? Srosh the pious and A taro the 
angel said thus : This is the soul of that wicked man who, in the 
world, kept back the food of the dogs of shepherds and house- 
holders ; or beat and killed them’ (Ardai Viraf XLVIII, translated 
by Haug). 

1 ‘ Whenever one eats bread one must put aside three mouthfuls 
and give them to the dog ... for among all the poor there is none 
poorer than the dog’ (Saddar 31; Hyde 35). 

FARGARD XIII. 

159 

V. 

29 (80). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If there be in the house of a wor- 
shipper of Mazda a mad dog, or one that bites 
without barking, what shall the worshippers of 
Mazda do? 

30(82). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘They shall' put 
a wooden collar around his neck, and they shall tie 
him to a post, an asti 1 thick if the wood be hard, 
two astis thick if it be soft. To that post they shall 
tie him ; by the two sides 2 of the collar they shall 
tie him. 

31 (86). ‘If they shall not do so, and the mad 
dog, or the dog that bites without barking, smite a 
sheep or wound a man, the dog shall pay for it as 
for wilful murder 3. 

32 (88). ‘ If the dog shall smite a sheep or wound 
a man, they shall cut off his right ear. If he shall 
smite another sheep or wound another man, they 
shall cut off his left ear. 

33 (90). ‘If he shall smite a third sheep or wound 
a third man, they shall cut off his right foot 4. If he 
shall smite a fourth sheep or wound a fourth man, 
they shall cut off his left foot. 

1 A measure of unknown amount. Aspendi&rji reads irti, ‘a 
brick’ thick. 

2 By the forepart and the back part of it. 

3 As there is no essential difference between man and beast, the 
beast must answer for its guilt. According to Solon’s law, the dog 
who has bitten any one must be delivered to him tied up to a block 
four cubits long (Plutarchus, Solon 24); the horse who has killed 
a man is put to death (Eusebius, Prep. Evang. 5). 

4 ‘ They only cut off a piece, of flesh from the foot’ (Brouillons 
d’Anquetil). 

l60 VENDtDAD. 

34 (92). ‘ If he shall for the fifth time smite a 
sheep or wound a man, they shall cut off his tail. 

‘ Therefore they shall tie him to the post ; by the 
two sides of the collar they shall tie him. If they 
shall not do so, and the mad dog, or the dog that 
bites without barking, smite a sheep or wound a 
man, he shall pay for it as for wilful murder.’ 

35 (97)- O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If there be in the house of a wor- 
shipper of Mazda a scentless dog, or a mad dog, 
what shall the worshippers of Mazda do ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall attend him 
to heal him, in the same manner as they would do 
for one of the faithful.' 

36 (100). 0 Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If they try to heal him and fail, what 
shall the worshippers of Mazda do ? 

37 (102). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall 
put a wooden collar around his neck, and they shall 
tie him to a post, an a-fti thick if the wood be hard, 
two astis thick if it be soft. To that post they shall 
tie him ; by the two sides of the collar they shall tie 
him. 

38 (102). ‘ If they shall not do so, and the scent- 
less dog fall into a hole, or a well, or a precipice, or 
a river, or a canal, and he be wounded and die thereof, 
they shall be Peshotanus. • 

VI. 

39(106). ‘The dog, O Spitama Zarathurtra ! I, 
Ahura Mazda, have made self-clothed and self-shod, 
watchful, wakeful, and sharp-toothed, born to take 
his food from man and to watch over man’s goods. 
I, Ahura Mazda, have made the dog strong of body 

FARGARD XIII. 

161 

against the evil-doer, and watchful over your goods, 
when he is of sound mind. 

40(112). ‘And whosoever shall awake at his 
voice, neither shall the thief nor the wolf steal any- 
thing from his house, without his being warned ; the 
wolf shall be smitten and torn to pieces ; he is 
driven away, he flees away.’ 

VII. 

41 (115). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Which of the two wolves deserves 
more to be killed, the one that is born of a he-dog 
and of a she-wolf, or the one that is born of a she- 
dog and of a he-wolf ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Of these two wolves, 
the one that is born of a he-dog and of a she-wolf 
deserves more to be killed than the one that is born 
of a she-dog and of a he-wolf. 

42 (1 1 7). ‘ For there are born of a he-dog and of 
a she-wolf such dogs as fall on the shepherd’s dog, 
on the house dog, on theVohunazga dog, on the 
trained dog, and destroy the folds ; such dogs are 
born as are more murderous, more mischievous, 
more destructive to the folds than any other dogs. 

43 (121). ‘And there arc born of a he-dog and of 
a she-wolf such wolves as fall on the shepherd’s dog, 
on the house dog, on the Vohunazga dog, on the 
trained dog, and destroy the folds ; such wolves are 
born as are more murderous, more mischievous, 
more destructive to the folds than any other wolves. 

VIII. 

44 (124). ‘A dog has the characters of eight 
different sorts of peopje : — 

‘ He has the character of a priest, 

[4] 

M 

162 

vendIdAd. 

‘ He has the character of a warrior, 

‘ He has the character of a husbandman, 

‘ He has the character of a strolling singer, 

' He has the character of a thief, 

‘ He has the character of a wild beast, 

‘ He has the character of a courtezan, 

‘ He has the character of a child. 

45 (126). ‘He eats broken food, like a priest1; he 
is grateful, like a priest ; he is easily satisfied 2, like 
a priest; he wants only a small piece of bread, 
like a priest; in these things he is like unto a 
priest. 

‘ He marches in front, like a warrior ; he fights for 
the beneficent cow, like a warrior 3; he goes first out 
of the house, like a warrior 4 *; in these things he is 
like unto a warrior. 

46 (135). ‘ He is watchful and sleeps lightly, like 
a husbandman ; he goes first out of the house, like a 
husbandman3; he returns last into the house, like 
a husbandman 6 ; in these things he is like unto a 
husbandman. 

‘ He sings like a strolling singer ; he is intrusive 7, 
like a strolling singer ; he is meagre, like a strolling 
singer ; he is poor, like a strolling singer ; in these 
things he is like unto a strolling singer. 

47(143). ‘He likes darkness, like a thief; he 
prowls about in darkness, like a thief; he is a shame- 

1 A wandering priest (see p. 157, n. 1). 

2 Doubtful. 

3 ‘He keeps away the wolf. and the thief’ (Comm.) 

4 This clause is, as it seems, repeated here by mistake from § 46. 

6 When taking the cattle out of the stables. 

* When bringing the cattle back to the stables. 

7 Doubtful. 

FARGARD XIII. 

I63 

less eater, like a thief ; he is an unfaithful keeper, 
like a thief1; in these things he is like unto a 
thief. 

‘ He likes darkness, like a wild beast 2; he prowls 
about in darkness, like a wild beast ; he is a shame- 
less eater, like a wild beast; he is an unfaithful 
keeper, like a wild beast ; in these tilings he is like 
unto a wild beast. 

48 (153). ‘He sings, like a courtezan; he is in- 
trusive, like a courtezan ; he walks about the roads, 
like a courtezan ; he is meagre, like a courtezan ; he 
is poor, like a courtezan ; in these things he is like 
unto a courtezan. 

‘ He likes sleeping, like a child ; he is apt to run 
away3, like a child; he is full of tongue, like a child; 
he goes on all fours4, like a child ; in these things 
he is like unto a child 

IX. 

49 (163). ‘If those two clogs of mine, the shep- 
herd’s dog and the house dog, pass by the house of 
any of my faithful people, let them never be kept 
away from it. 

‘For no house could subsist on the earth made by 
Ahura, but for those two dogs of mine, the shep- 
herd’s dog and the house dog5.’ 

' X. 

50(166). O Maker of the material world, thou 

1 * When one trusts him with something, he eats it’ (Comm.) 

* According to Asp. 

8 He is fearful. * Doubtful. 

8 ‘ But for the dog not a single head of cattle would remain in 
existence’ (Saddar 31; Hyde 35). 

M 2 

164 VENDfDAD. 

Holy One! When a dog dies, with marrow and 
seed 1 dried up, whereto does his ghost go ? 

51 (167). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ It passes to 
the spring of the waters 2, O Spitama Zarathustra ! 
and there out of every thousand dogs and every 
thousand she-dogs, two water dogs are formed, a 
water dog and a water she-dog3. 

52 (170). ‘ He who kills a water dog brings about 
a drought that dries up pastures. Before that 
time, 0 Spitama Zaratlnutra ! sweetness and fat- 
ness would flow out from that land and from those 
fields, with health and healing, with fulness and 
increase and growth, and a growing of corn and 
grass.’ 

53 (171). 0 Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When are sweetness and fatness to 
come back again to that land and to those fields, 
with health and healing, with fulness and increase 
and growth, and a growing of corn and grass? 

54, 55 (r 72). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Sweet- 
ness and fatness will never come back again to that 
land and to those fields, with health and healing, with 
fulness and increase and growth, and a growing of 
corn and grass, until the murderer of the water dog 
has been smitten to death and the holy soul of the 
dog has been offered up a sacrifice, for three days 

1 Marrow is the scat of life, the spine is ‘ the column and the 
spring of life' (Yt. X, 71); the sperm comes from it (Bundahw 
XVI). The same theory prevailed in India, where the sperm is 
called ma^a-samudbhava, ‘what is bom from marrow;' it was 
followed by Plato (Timaeus 74, 91 ; cf. Plut. De Plac. Philos. V, 3, 4), 
Jind disproved by Aristotle (De Part. Anim. Ill, 7). 

2 To the spring of Ardvt SCira, the goddess of waters. 

8 There is therefore in a single ws.ter dog as much life fed holi- 
ness as in a thousand dogs. This accounts for the following. 

FARGARD XIV. 165 

and three nights with fire blazing, with baresma tied 
up, and with Haoma uplifted \ 

56 (1 74). [‘ Then sweetness and fatness will come 
back again to that land and to those fields, with 
health and healing, with fulness and increase and 
growth, and a growing of corn and grass V] 

Fargard XIV. 

This Fargard is nothing more than an appendix to the last 
clauses in the preceding Fargard (§ 50 seq.) IIow the murder of 
a water dog may be atoned for is described in it at full length. 
As the water dog is the holiest of all dogs and, as it were, a link 
between the dog and God, the process of atonement must he one 
of an extraordinary character. It is this chapter, more than any 
other, which may make it doubtful whether the legislation of the 
Vcndidad has ever existed as real and living law. See, however, 
Introduction V, 20. 

1. Zarathiutra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Ahura 
Mazda, most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the mate- 
rial world, thou Holy One! He who smites one of 
those water dogs that are born one from a thousand 
dogs and a thousand she-dogs1 2 3 4 5, so that he gives up 
the ghost and the soul parts from the body, what is 
the penalty that he shall pay ?’ 

2 (4). Ahura Mazda answered : 'He shall pay 
ten thousand stripes with the Aspahe-astra, ten 
thousand stripes with the Sraosho-^arana ® 

1 The zanda ravan, the same sacrifice as is offered up for three 
days and three nights after the death of a man for the salvation of 
his soul. Cf. p. 132, n. 4. 

2 Cf. Farg. IX, 53~57- 

3 See preceding page; cf. Introd. IV, 35, and Orm. Ahr. § 230. 

4 See preceding Fargard, §*51. 

5 He shall pay 50 tanafuhrs (=15000 istirs = 60000 dirhems; 

VEND? DAD. 

1 66 

‘ He shall godly and piously bring unto the fire 
of Ahura Mazda 1 ten thousand loads of hard, well 
dried, well examined 2 wood, as an atonement unto 
the soul (of the water dog). 

3 (6). ‘He shall godly and piously bring unto the 
fire of Ahura Mazda ten thousand loads of soft 
wood, of Urvisna, Vohu-gaona, Vohu-kereti, Hadha- 
naepata 3, or any sweet-scented plant, as an atone- 
ment unto the soul (of the water dog). 

4 (7). ‘ He shall godly and piously tie and con- 
secrate ten thousand bundles of baresma ; he shall 
offer up to the good waters ten thousand Zaothra 
libations with the Haoma and the sacred meat4, 
cleanly prepared and well strained, cleanly prepared 
and well strained by a pious man r’, as an atonement 
unto the soul (of the water dog). 

5 (9). ‘He shall kill ten thousand snakes of those 
that go upon the belly; he shall kill ten thousand 

sec Introd. V, 21). ‘If he can afford it, he will atone in the manner 
slated in the Avcsta ; if he cannot afford it, it will be sufficient to 
perform a complete Iza.me (sacrifice)/ (Comm.) 

1 To the altar of the RahrSm fire. 

2 * It is forbidden to take any ill-smelling thing to the fire and to 
kindle it on it; it is forbidden to kindle green wood, and even 
though the wood were hard and dry, one must examine it three 
times, lest there may be any hair or any unclean matter upon if 
(Gr. Rav.) Although the pious An/a Viraf had always taken the 
utmost care never to put on the fire any wood but such as was 
seven years old, yet, when he entered paradise, Atar, the genius of 
fire, shewed him reproachfully a large tank full of the water which 
that wood had exuded (see An/a Viraf X). 

3 See above, p. 94, n. 1. 

4 Possibly, milk. 

B A Mobcd called sardar, ‘chief/ who prepares, cleanses, and 
disposes everything for the performance of the Yasna (Comm, and 
Anquetil, Brouillons ad Farg. XVIII, 72). 

FARGARD XIV. 

I67 

snakes of those that have the shape of a dog1-; he 
shall kill ten thousand tortoises ; he shall kill ten 
thousand land frogs 3 ; he shall kill ten thousand 
water frogs; he shall kill ten thousand corn-carrying 
ants 3 ; he shall kill ten thousand ants of those that 
bite and dig holes and work mischief4. 

6 (16). ‘He shall kill ten thousand earth worms; 
he shall kill ten thousand horrid flies fl. 

‘ He shall fill up ten thousand holes for the un- 
clean 6. 

1 ‘ Mar banak snakes: they are dog-like, because they sit 
on their hindparts' (Comm.) The cat seems to be the animal 
intended by this name. In a paraphrase of this passage in a Parsi 
Ravaet, the cat is numbered amongst the Khrafstras which it is 
enjoined to kill to redeem a sin (India Office Library, VIII, 13); 
cf. G. du Chinon, p. 462: ‘Les animaux que les Gaures ont en 
horreur sont les serpents, les couleuvres, les lezars, et autres de 
ccttc espece, les crapaux, les grenoui'lles, les ^crcvisses, les rats 
ct souris, et sur tout le chat/ 

2 ‘ Those that can go out of water and live on the dry ground ' 
(Comm.) ‘ Pour les grenoui’lles ct crapaux, ils disent que ce sont 
ceux (eux ?) qui sont cause de ce que les homines meurent, gatans 
les eaus oh ils habitent continuellement, et que d’autant plus qu’il y 
en a dans le pais, dautant plus les eaus causent-elles des maladies 
et enfin la mort/ G. du Chinon, p. 465. 

3 ‘ Un jour que j’&ois surpris de la guerre qu’ils font aux fourmis, 
ils me dirent que ces animaux ne faisaient que voler par des amas 
des grains plus qu'il n’dtoit ndeessaire pour leur nourriture/ G. du 
Chinon, p. 464. Firdusi protested against the proscription : ‘ Do 
no harm to the corn-carrying ant; a living thing it is, and its life is 
dear to it/ The celebrated high-priest of the Parsis, the late Moola 
Firooz, entered those lines into his Pand Namah, which may be- 
token better days for this wise and careful creature. 

4 Doubtful. The Commentary has, ‘that is, darak ants (wood 
ants; termites?)/ 

B Corpse flies. 

* ‘The holes at which the^unclean are washed’ (Comm.; cf. Farg. 
IX, 6 scq.) 

i68 

vend}dad. 

‘ He shall godly and piously give to godly men 
twice seven sets of implements for the fire, as an 
atonement unto the soul (of the water dog), namely: 

7 (20). ‘ Two (loads of the) proper materials for 
fire 1 ; a broom 2 ; a pair of tongs ; a pair of round 
bellows 8 extended at the bottom, contracted at the 
top ; an adze with a sharp edge and a sharp-pointed 
handle 4, a saw with sharp teeth and a sharp-pointed 
handle, by means of which the worshippers of Mazda 
procure wood for the fire of Ahura Mazda. 

8 (26). ‘ He shall godly and piously give to godly 
men a set of the priestly instruments of which the 
priests make use, as an atonement unto the soul 
(of the water dog), namely : The Astra °, the meat- 
vessel ®, the Paitidana \ the Khrafstraghna 8, the 

1 Doubtful : the intended materials would be two loads of wood, 
and two loads of incense to burn upon the wood (Asp.) 

2 To cleanse the Atash-dftn or fire-vessel (Yasna IX, i). 

3 Or, a fan. 

4 Asp. ; literally, ‘ sharp-kneed/ 

The Aspahe-ajtra; see Introd. V, r 9. 

6 Possibly, the milk-vessel. 

7 As everything that goes out of man is unclean, his breath 
defiles all that it touches ; priests, therefore, while on duty, and even 
laymen, while praying or eating, must wear a mouth-veil, the 
Paitidana (Parsi Penom), consisting ‘of two pieces of white 
cotton cloth, hanging loosely from the bridge of the nose to, at 
least, two inches below the mouth, and tied with two strings at the 
back of the head' (Haug, Kssays, 2nd ed. p. 243, n. 1; cf. Comm, 
ad Farg. XVIII, 1, and Anquctil II, 530). This principle appears 
not to have been peculiar to the Zoroastrian Aryans, for the Sla- 
vonian priest in Arkona was enjoined to go out of the temple, 
whenever he wanted to draw breath, ‘lest the presence of the god 
should be defiled by contact with mortal breath ' (ne dei presentia 
mortalis spiritus contagio pollueretur, Saxo Grammaticus, ap. Klek, 
Einleitung in die Slavische Literatur, p. 105). Cf. Introd. V, 8. 

8 The ‘ Khrafstra-killer ; ’ an instrument for killing snakes, &c. 

FARGARD XIV. 

169 

Sraosho-^arana *, the cup for the Myazda 2, the cups 
for the juice3, the mortar made according to the 
rules, the Haoma cups4, and the baresma. 

9 (32). ‘He shall godly and piously give to godly 
men a set of all the war implements of which the 
warriors make use a, as an atonement unto the soul 
(of the water dog) ; the first being a javelin the 
second a knife 7, the third a club, the fourth a bow 8, 
the fifth a quiver with shoulder-belt and thirty 
brass-headed arrows10, the sixth a sling with arm- 
string and with thirty sling stones, the seventh a 
cuirass 11 , the eighth a hauberk la, the ninth a tunic I3, 
the tenth a helmet, the eleventh a girdle, the twelfth 
a pair of greaves14. 

1 See Introd. V, 19. 

2 Doubtful. 

The cup in which the juice of the hom and of the ur varan 
(the twigs of hadha-naepata which are pounded together with the 
hom) is received from the mortar (Comm.) 

4 The cup on which twigs of Ilaoma are laid before being 
pounded, the so-called tashtah (Anquetil II, 533); ‘some say, 
the hom-straincr' [a saucer with nine holes], Comm. 

h The armament detailed in the text agrees partly with that of 
the Persians and Medians described by Hcrodotos (VII, 61, 62). 
It would be desirable for archaeologists to ascertain to what time 
and, if possible, to what province this description refers, as such 
information might throw some light upon the age of this part of 
the Avesta at least. 

* At^/xay (3pax*as elx^v. 

7 *Ky irapa top bejjib v prjpbp irapaioi>ptvp.eva ck rrjs £d>vrjs, 

8 T 6£a be peydXa. 

9 Doubtful. *Y7 to be (fiaperpeapes (Kpepauro, 

10 * O'itTTovs be KoXaplpov r. 

11 Aeiribos aibrjperjs o\jnv Ix^voeibeos. 

u 1 Going from the helm to the cuirass ' (Comm.) 

13 ‘Under the cuirass ' (Comm.); 1 repl be to au>pa kiO&vus xHPim 

bo)TOV$ TTOiKlXov;. • 

14 JJepl be ra ciceXea dva£vplbas. 

170 VEND? DAD. 

10(41). ‘He shall godly and piously give to 
godly men a set of all the implements of which the 
husbandmen make use, as an atonement unto the 
soul (of the water dog), namely : A plough with 
share and yoke ', an ox whip a mortar of stone, a 
hand-mill for grinding corn, 

1 1 (48). ‘ A spade for digging and tilling ; one 
measure of silver and one measure of gold.’ 

O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One ! 
How much silver ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘The price of a stallion/ 

0 Maker of the material world, thou Holy One ! 
How much gold ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ The price of a camel. 

12 (54). ‘He shall godly and piously procure a 
rill of running water for godly husbandmen, as an 
atonement unto the soul (of the water dog)/ 

O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One ! 
How large is the rill ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ The depth of a dog, 
and the breadth of a dog:i. 

1 3 (57). ‘He shall godly and piously give a piece 
of arable land to godly men, as an atonement unto 
the soul (of the water dog)/ 

O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One ! 
How large is the piece of land ? . 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ As much as can be 
watered with such a rill on both sides4. 

14 (60). ‘ He shall godly and piously procure 
for godly men a house with ox-stalls, with nine 

1 Doubtful. * Doubtful. 

9 Which is estimated ‘ a foot deep, a foot broad ’ (Comm.) 
4 Doubtful. 

FARGARD XIV. 1 71 

h&thras and nine nematas1 *, as an atonement unto 
the soul (of the water dog) V 

O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! 
How large is the house ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Twelve Vltaras3 in the 
largest part of the house, nine Vit&ras in the middle 
part, six Vitaras in the smallest part. 

‘ He shall godly and piously give to godly men 
goodly beds with cushions, as an atonement unto 
the soul (of the water dog). 

15 (64). ‘He shall godly and piously give to a 
godly man a virgin maid, whom no man has known, 
as an atonement unto the soul (of the water dog).’ 

O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One ! 
What maid ? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ A sister or a daughter 
of his, at the age of puberty, with ear-rings in her 
ears, and past her fifteenth year. 

16 (67). ‘ He shall godly and piously give to 
holy men twice seven head of small cattle, as an 
atonement unto the soul (of the water dog). 

‘ He shall bring up twice seven whelps. 

‘ He shall throw twice seven bridges over canals. 

1 7 (70). ‘He shall put into repair twice nine 
stables that are out of repair. 

‘ He shall cleanse twice nine dogs from skin 
humours, hair wax, vermin4, and all the diseases 
that are produced on the body of a dog. 

1 Meaning unknown. 

* lie shall build a caravansary, which is considered a pious 
work (Mainyo-i-khard IV, 6 ; XXXVII, 36). 

3 A word of unknown meaning ; probably a measure, but pos- 
sibly ‘ a passage or alley.’ * 

4 Those three words are doubtful. 

172 VENDIDAD. 

‘ He shall treat twice nine godly men to their fill 
of meat, bread, strong drink, and wine. 

18 (73). ‘This is the atonement, this is the 
penalty that he shall undergo to atone for the 
deed that he has done. 

‘ If he shall undergo it, he shall enter the world 
of the holy ones : if he shall not undergo it, he shall 
fall down into the world of the wicked, into that 
dark world, made of darkness, the offspring of 
darkness V 

Fargard XV. 

1 (r-8). On five sins the commission of which makes the sinner 
a Peshotanu. 

II (9-1 9). On unlawful unions and attempts to procure mis- 
carriage. 

III (20-45). On the treatment of a bitcli big with young. 

IV (46-51). O11 the breeding of dogs. 

I. 

r. How many are the sins that men commit and 
that, being committed and not confessed, nor atoned 
for, make their committer a Peshotanu1 2 ? 

2 (4). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ There are five 
such sins, O holy Zara thus tra ! It is the first of 
these sins that men commit when a man teaches one 
of the faithful a foreign, wrong creed3, a foreign, 
wrong law, and he does so with a full knowledge 
and conscience of the sin : this is a sin that makes 
him a Peshotanu. 

1 Cf. Farg. V, 62. 

2 See Introd. V, 19. 

3 Literally, ‘another wrong creed;* the Commentary has, ‘that 
is, a creed that is not ours.' See Introd. Ill, 10. 

FARGARD XV. 

173 

3(9). ‘It is the second of these sins that men 
commit when a man gives too hard bones or too hot 
food to a shepherd’s dog or to a house dog ; 

4 (11). ‘If the bones stick in the dog’s teeth or 
stop in his throat, or if the hot food burn his mouth 
or his tongue, so that mischief follows therefrom, 
and the dog dies, this is a sin that makes the man a 
Peshotanu *. 

5 (16). ‘It is the third of these sins that men 
commit when a man smites a bitch big with young 
or affrights her by running after her, with shouting 
or with clapping of hands - ; 

6 (18). ‘ If the bitch fall into a hole, or a well, or 
a precipice, or a river, or a canal, so that mischief 
follows therefrom, and she dies, this is a sin that 
makes the man a Peshotanu -*. 

7 (22). ‘ It is the fourth of these sins that men 
commit when a man has intercourse with a woman 
who has an issue of blood, either out of the ordinary 
course or at the usual period : this is a sin that 
makes him a Peshotanu1 * * 4 5. 

8 (25). ‘ It is the fifth of these sins that men 
commit when a man has intercourse with a woman 
quick with child r', whether the milk has already 

1 He who gives too hot food to a clog so as to burn his throat is 
margarzan (guilty of death); he who gives bones to a dog so as 
to tear his throat is margarzan (Gr. Rav. 639). 

s Or, ‘with stamping on the ground ’ (? Saddar 31). 

' If a bitch is big with young and a man shouts or throws 
stones at her, so that the whelps come to mischief and die, he is 
margarzan (Gr. Rav. 639). 

4 See Farg. XVI, 14 seq. 

5 When she has been pregnant for four months and ten days, as 
it is then that the child is fotmed and a soul is added to its body 
(Anquetil II, 563). 

174 

VENDtDAD. 

come to her breasts or has not yet come': if mis- 
chief follow therefrom, and she die, this is a sin that 
makes the man a Peshotanu \ 

II. 

9 (30). ‘If a man come near unto a damsel, either 
dependent on the chief of the family or not depend- 
ent, either delivered unto a husband or not deli- 
vered2, and she conceives by him, let her not, from 
dread of the people, produce in herself the menses, 
against the course of nature, by means of water and 
plants 3. 

10(34). ‘And if the damsel, from dread of the 
people, shall produce in herself the menses against 
the course of nature, by means of water and plants, 
there is a sin upon her head 4. 

1 1 (36). ‘ If a man come near unto a damsel, 
either dependent on the chief of the family or not 
dependent, either delivered unto a husband or .not 
delivered, and she conceives by him, let her not, 

1 Or better, * if the child die/ c If a man come to his wife [during 
her pregnancy] so that she is injured and bring forth a still-born 
child, he is margarzan’ (Old Rav. 115 b). 

2 ‘ Whether she has a husband in the house of her own parents 
or has none ; whether she has entered from the house of her own 
parents into the house of a husband [depending on another chief 
of family] or has not’ (Comm.) 

3 By means of drugs. 

4 ‘It is a tanafdhr sin for her: it is sin on sin* (the first sin being 
to have allowed herself to be seduced), Comm. 1 If there has been 
no sin in her (if she has been forced), and if a man, knowing her 
shame, wants to take it off her, he shall call together her father, 
mother, sisters, brothers, husband, the servants, the menials, and 
the master and the mistress of the house, and he shall say, “ This 
woman is with child by me, and I rejoice in it;” and they shall 
answer, “ We know it, and we are glad that her shame is taken off 
her;” and he shall support her as a husband does' (Comm.) 

FARGARD XV. 

*75 

from dread of the people, destroy the fruit in her 
womb. 

12 (38). ‘And if the damsel, from dread of the 
people, shall destroy the fruit in her womb, the sin 
is on both the father and herself, the murder is on 
both the father and herself ; both the father and 
herself shall pay the penalty for wilful murder1. 

13 (40). ‘If a man come near unto a damsel, 
either dependent on the chief of the family or not 
dependent, either delivered unto a husband or not 
delivered, and she conceives by him, and she says, 
“ I have conceived by thee;” and he replies, “ Go 
then to the old woman 2 and apply to her that she 
may procure thee miscarriage ; ” 

14 (43). ‘And the damsel goes to the old woman 
and applies to her that she may procure her mis- 
carriage ; and the old woman brings her some Banga, 
or Shaeta, or Ghnana, or Frasp&ta3, or some other 
of the drugs that produce miscarriage and [the man 
says], “Cause thy fruit to perish ! ” and she causes her 
fruit to perish ; the sin is on the head of all three, 
the man, the damsel, and the old woman. 

III. 

15(49). ‘If a man come near unto a damsel, 
either dependent on the chief of the family or not 
dependent, either delivered unto a husband or not 

1 For baodho-varrta; see above, p. 84, § 38, and n. 1. 

2 The nurse (Asp.) 

2 Banga is bang or mang, a narcotic made from hempseed; 
shaeta means literally gold, and must have been some yellow 
plant or liquor; ghn£na is ‘that which kills [the fruit in the 
womb];’ fraspata is ‘that which expels [the fruit] so that it 
perishes’ (Comm.) 

176 

vendIdad. 

delivered, and she conceives by him, so long shall 
he support her, until the child is born. 

16 (51). ‘ If he shall not support her, so that the 
child comes to mischief1, for want of proper support, 
he shall pay the penalty for wilful murder.’ 

17 (54). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If she be near her time and be lying 
on the high road, which is the worshipper of Mazda 
that shall support her ? 

18 (56). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘If a man come 
near unto a damsel, either dependent on the chief 
of the family or not dependent, either delivered unto 
a husband or not delivered, and she conceives by 
him, so long shall he support her, until the child 
is born 2. 

19(58). ‘ If he shall not support her 3 ... . 

‘ It lies with the faithful to look in the same way 
after every pregnant female, either two-footed or 
four-footed, either woman or bitch.’ 

20(61). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If (a bitch4) be near her time and be 
lying on the high road, which is the worshipper of 
Mazda that shall support her? 

21 (63). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He whose 
house stands nearest, the care of supporting her is 

1 And dies. 2 § i8=§ 15. 

8 The sentence is left unfinished : Aspendiarji fills it with the 
words in § 16, ‘ so that the child,’ &c. It seems as if §§ 17, 18 were 
no part of the original text, and as if § 17 were a mere repetition 
of § 20, which being wrongly interpreted as referring to a woman 
would have brought about the repetition of § 15 as an answer. 

See § 20. 

* The subject is wanting in the :text : it is supplied from the 
Commentary as the sense requires it. 

FARGARD XV. 1 77 

his 1 2 ; so long shall he support her until the whelps 
are born. 

22 (65). ‘ If he shall not support her, so that the 
whelps come to mischief, for want of proper support, 
he shall pay the penalty for wilful murder.’ 

23 (68). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a bitch be near her time and be 
lying in a camel-stall, which is the worshipper of 
Mazda that shall support her ? 

24 (70). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘ He who built 
the camel-stall or who holds it*, the care of sup- 
porting her is his ; so long shall he support her, 
until the whelps are born. 

25 (76)- ‘ If he shall not support her, so that the 
whelps come to mischief, for want of proper support, 
he shall pay the penalty for wilful murder.’ 

26 (77)- O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a bitch be near her time and be 
lying in a horse-stall, which is the worshipper of 
Mazda that shall support her? 

27 (78). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He who built 
the horse-stall or who holds it, the care of supporting 
her is his ; so long shall he support her, until the 
whelps are born. 

28 (81). ‘ If he shall not support her, so that the 
whelps come to mischief, for want of proper support, 
he shall pay the penalty for wilful murder.’ 

29 (84). O Maker of the material world, thou 

1 ‘ The bitch is lying on the high road : the man whose house 
has its door nearest shall take care of her. If she dies, he shall 
carry her off [to dispose of the body according to the law]. One 
must support her for at least three nights : if one cannot support 
her any longer, one intrusts hef to a richer man’ (Comm, and Asp.) 

2 ‘In pledge or for rent’ (Asp.; cf. Comm, ad § 42). 

[4] N 

1 78 

vend} DAD. 

Holy One ! If a bitch be near her time and be 
lying in an ox-stall, which is the worshipper of 
Mazda that shall support her? 

30 (86). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He who built 
the ox-stall or who holds it, the care of supporting 
her is his ; so long shall he support her, until the 
whelps are born. 

31 (89). ‘ If he shall not support her, so that the 
whelps come to mischief, for want of proper support, 
he shall pay the penalty for wilful murder.’ 

32 (92). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a bitch be near her time and be 
lying in a sheep-fold, which is the worshipper of 
Mazda that shall support her? 

33 (94). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He who built 
the sheep-fold or who holds it, the care of supporting 
her is his ; so long shall he support her, until the 
whelps are born. 

34 (97)* ‘If he shall not support her so that the 
whelps come to mischief, for want of proper support, 
he shall pay the penalty for wilful murder.’ 

35 (100). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a bitch be near her time and be 
lying on the earth-wall1, which is the worshipper of 
Mazda that shall support her ? 

36(102). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He who 
erected the wall or who holds it, the care of sup- 
porting her is his ; so long shall he support her, 
until the whelps are born. 

37 (105). ‘ If he shall not support her, so that 
the whelps come to • mischief, for want of proper 
support, he shall pay the penalty for wilful murder.’ 

1 The wall around the house, 

FARGARD XV. 

179 

38 (108). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a bitch be near her time and be 
lying in the moat1, which is the worshipper of 
Mazda that shall support her ? 

39 (no). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He who dug 
the moat or who holds it, the care of supporting her 
is his ; so long shall he support her, until the whelps 
are born. 

40 (1 1 2). ‘ If he shall not support her, so that the 
whelps come to mischief, for want of proper support, 
he shall pay the penalty for wilful murder.’ 

41 (113). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If a bitch be near her time -and be 
lying in the middle of a pasture-field, which is the 
worshipper of Mazda that shall support her ? 

42 ( 1 1 5). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He who 
sowed the pasture-field or who holds it, the care 
of supporting her is his. 

43 (t 17)- ‘He shall with kind charity2 take her to 
rest upon a litter of any foliage fit for a litter; so 
long shall he support her, until the young dogs are 
capable of self-defence and self-subsistence.’ 

44(122). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! When are the dogs capable of self- 
defence and self-subsistence ? 

45(123). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘When they 
are able to run about in a circuit of twice seven 
houses around3. Then they may be let loose, 
whether it be winter or summer. 

‘ Young dogs ought to be supported for six 
months, children for seven years. 

1 The moat before the earth-wall. 

* Doubtful. * 

* Probably the distance of one yu^y&rti; cf. Farg. XIII, 17. 

i8o vendIdAd. 

‘ Atar1, the son of Ahura Mazda, watches as well 
(over a pregnant bitch) as he does over a woman.' 

IV. 

46(127). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One! If worshippers of Mazda want to have 
a bitch so covered that the offspring shall be one 
of a strong nature, what shall they do ? 

47(129). Ahura Mazda, answered : ‘They shall 
dig a hole in the earth, in the middle of the fold, 
half a foot deep if the earth be hard, half the height 
of a man if the earth be soft. 

48 (13 1). ‘They shall first tie up the bitch there, 
far from children and from the Fire, the son of 
Ahura Mazda2, and they shall watch by her until a 
dog comes there from anywhere. They shall after- 
wards let another dog come near her, and then a 
third besides3, each being kept apart from the 
former, lest they should assail one another. 

49 (134)4. ‘ The bitch being thus covered by 
three dogs, grows big with young, and the milk 
comes to her teats and she brings forth a young 
one that is born from (three) dogs.’ 

50(135). He who smites a bitch who has been 
covered by three dogs, and who has already milk, 
and who shall bring forth a young one born from 
(three) dogs, what is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

1 The fire: when a woman is in labour, one lights up a great fire 
in order to protect her and her child from the fiends (Introd. V, 1 3). 

2 ‘ From children, lest she shall bite them ; from the fire, lest 
it shall hurt her’ (Comm.) 

2 Cf. Justinus III, 4 : maturiorem futuram conceptionem rati, si 
earn singulae per plures viros experirentur. 

* The text of this and the following clause is corrupt, and the 
meaning doubtful. 

FARGARD XVI. l8l 

51 (137). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Seven hun- 
dred stripes with the Aspahe-astra, seven hundred 
stripes with the Sraosho-X’arana.’ 

Fargard XVI. 

I (1-11). On the uncleanness of women during their sickness. 

II (11-12). How it can be removed. 

III (13-18). Sundry laws relating to the same matter. See 
Introd. V, 12. 

I. 

i. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy 
One ! If there be in the house of a worshipper of 
Mazda a woman who has an issue of blood, either 
out of the ordinary course or at the usual period, 
what shall the worshippers of Mazda do ? 

2 (3). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ They shall clear 
the way1 of the wood there, both in growing trees 
and in logs - ; they shall strew dry dust on the 
ground11; and they shall erect a building there4, 
higher than the house by a half, or a third, or a 
fourth, or a fifth part, lest her look should fall upon 
the fire "’/ 

3 (9). O Maker of the material \yorld, thou Holy 
One! How far from the fire? How far from the 
water ? How far from the consecrated bundles of 
baresma ? How far from the faithful ? 

4 (10). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Fifteen paces 
from the fire, fifteen paces from the water, fifteen 

1 The way to the Dashtanistan (see Introd. V, 12). 

a Lest the wood shall be touched and defiled by the woman on 
her way to the Dashtanistan. 

3 Lest the earth shall be touched and defiled by her. Cf. Farg. 

IX, 11, and Introd. V, 10. * 

4 The DashtanistSn. 5 See Introd. V, 12. 

1 82 

VENDED. 

paces from the consecrated bundles of baresma, 
three paces from the faithful.’ 

5 (n). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy 
One ! How far from her shall he stay, who brings 
food to a woman who has an issue of blood, either 
out of the ordinary course or at the usual period ? 

6(12). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Three paces1 * 
from her shall he stay, who brings food to a woman 
who has an issue of blood, either out of the ordinary 
course or at the usual period.’ 

In what kind of vessels shall he bring the food ? 
In what kind of vessels shall he bring the bread ? 

‘ In vessels of brass, or of lead, or of any common 
metal V 

7(15). How much food shall he bring to her? 
How much bread shall he bring ? 

‘(Only) two danares3 of long bread, and one da- 
nare of milk pap, lest she should gather strength 4 5. 

‘ If a child has just touched her, they shall first 
wash his hands and then his body 

8 (21). ‘If she still see blood after three nights 

1 The food is held out to her from a distance in a metal spoon. 

! Earthen vessels, when defiled, cannot be made clean; but 
metal vessels can (see Farg. VII, 73 seq.) 

3 A danare is, according to Anquetil, as much as four tolas; 
a tola is from 105 to 175 grains. 

4 1 Soshyos says: For three nights cooked meat is not allowed 
to lier, lest the issue shall grow stronger.’ As the fiend is in her, 
any strength she may gain accrues to Ahriman. 

5 A child whom she suckles. The meaning is, Even a child, if 
he has touched her, must undergo the rites of cleansing. The 
general rule is given in the Commentary : ‘ Whoever has touched 
a Dashtan woman must wash his body and his clothes with gomez 
and water.’ The ceremony in question is the simple Ghosel, not 
the Barashnfim, since the woman herself performs the former only 
(vide infra, § u seq.; cf. Introd.V, 16). 

FARGARD XVI. 183 

have passed, she shall sit in the place of infirmity 
until four nights have passed. 

‘ If she still see blood after four nights have 
passed, she shall sit in the place of infirmity until 
five nights have passed. 

9. ‘ If she still see blood after five nights have 
passed, she shall sit in the place of infirmity until 
six nights have passed. 

‘ If she still see blood after six nights have 
passed, she shall sit in the place of infirmity until 
seven nights have passed. 

10. ‘ If she still see blood after seven nights have 
passed, she shall sit in the place of infirmity until 
eight nights have passed. 

‘ If she still see blood after eight nights have 
passed, she shall sit in the place of infirmity until 
nine nights have passed. 

11. ‘If she still sec blood after nine nights have 
passed, this is a work of the Daevas which they 
have performed for the worship and glorification of 
the Daevas ‘. 

II. 

‘The worshippers of Mazda shall clear the way1 2 
of the wood there, both in growing trees and in 
logs ; 

12 (26). ‘They shall dig three holes in the earth, 
and they shall wash the woman with gome/, by two 
of those holes and with water by the third. 

‘ They shall kill Khrafstras, to wit : two hundred 
corn-carrying ants, if it be summer; two hundred of 

1 Sec Introd. V, 12. 

2 The way to the Baraahnftm-gah, where the cleansing takes 
place. 

184 

VENDtoAD. 

any other sort of the Khrafstras made by Angra 
Mainyu, if it be winter1.’ 

III. 

13(30). If a worshipper of Mazda shall suppress 
the issue of a woman who has an issue of blood, 
either out of the ordinary course or at the usual 
period, what is the penalty that he shall pay? 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ He is a Peshotanu : 
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-a^tra, two 
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-^arana.’ 

14 (33). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! If a man shall again and again wilfully 
touch the body of a woman who has an issue of 
blood, either out of the ordinary course or at the 
usual period, so that the ordinary issue turns to 
the dye of the unusual one, or the unusual issue 
to the dye of the ordinary one, what is the penalty 
that he shall pay ? 

15 (36). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ For the first 
time he comes near unto her, for the first time he 
lies by her, thirty stripes with the Aspahe-a.rtra, 
thirty stripes with the Sraosho -Parana; for the 
second time he comes near unto her, for the second 
time he lies by her, fifty stripes with the Aspahe- 
astra, fifty stripes with the Sraosho-^arana ; for 
the third time he comes near unto her, for the 
third time he lies by her, seventy stripes with 
the Aspahe-astra, seventy stripes with the Sraoshd- 
/■arana.’ 

16. For the fourth time he comes near unto her,, 
for the fourth time he lies by her, if he shall press 
the body under her clothes, if he shall press the 

1 See Introd. IV, 3^. 

FARGARD XVII. 1 85 

unclean thigh, but without sexual intercourse, what 
is the penalty that he shall pay ? 

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Ninety stripes with 
the Aspahe-astra, ninety stripes with the Sraosho- 
-fcarana. 

1 7 (39)" ‘Whosoever shall lie in sexual inter- 
course with a woman who has an issue of blood, 
either out of the ordinary course or at the usual 
period, does no better deed than if he should burn 
the corpse of his own son, born of his own body and 
dead of naeza1, and drop its fat into the fire 2 3. 

18(41). ‘All suph sinners, embodiments of the 
Dru^, are scorners of the law: all scorners of the law 
are rebels against the Lord : all rebels against the 
Lord are ungodly men ; and any ungodly man shall 
pay for it with his life V 

Fargard XVII. 

Hair and Nails. 

Anything that has been separated from the body of man is con- 
sidered dead matter (Inlrod. V, 12), and is accordingly supposed to 
fall into the possession of the demon and to become the abode of 
death and uncleanness. Therefore, hair and nails, as soon as cut 
off, are at once the property of Ahriman, and the demon has to be 
driven away from them by spells, in the same way as he is from 
the bodies of the dead. They are withdrawn from his power by 

1 A disease (Farg. VII, 58). There is another word naeza, ‘a 
spear/ so that one may translate also ‘ killed by the spear ’ (Asp.) 

2 ‘ Not that the two deeds are equal, but neither is good ' 
(Comm.) The sin in question is a simple tanafuhr (Farg. XV, 7), 
and therefore can be atoned for by punishment and repentance, 
whereas the burning of a corpse is a crime for which there is no 
atonement (Farg. I, 17; VIII, 73 seq. ; Inlrod. V, 8). 

3 Literally, ‘is a Peshotanu;' ‘he is a tanaffihr sinner, that is to 
say, margarzan (worthy of death)/ Comm. 

i86 

VENDtDAD. 

the recital of certain prayers, and by being deposited in the earth 
inside consecrated circles, which are drawn around them as an 
intrenchment against the fiend (see above, p. 122, n. 1). 

This chapter, which has gi\Ten full scope to the ironical humour 
of many, is an invaluable document in the eyes of the mythologist, 
as he finds in it, if not the origin and explanation, at least the oldest 
record of world-wide superstitions. Not only in Bombay, but all 
over the world, people are found who believe that hair and nails 
are weapons in the hands of the evil one. The Esthonians, on the 
shores of the Baltic, take the utmost care not to drop the parings of 
their nails on the ground, lest the devil should pick them up, to make 
a visor to his cap, which will give him full power to injure men, 
unless the sign of the cross has been made over them1. 
The G audios in the Chilian pampas fear to throw their hair to the 
winds, but deposit it in holes dug in a wall2. In Li<%e good 
people are advised not to throw away their hair, nor to leave it in 
the teeth of the comb, lest a witch take hold of it and cast a spell 
over them 

I. 

1. Zarathurtra asked Ahura Mazda: ‘O Ahura 
Mazda, most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material 
world, thou Holy One ! Which is the most deadly 
deed whereby a man increases most the baleful 
strength of the Daevas, as he would do by offering 
them a sacrifice ?’ 

2 (3). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It is when a man 
here below combing his hair or shaving it off, or 
paring off his nails drops them4 in a hole or in a 
crack \ 

1 Cf. infra, ‘Thou shalt chant the Ahuna-Vairya/ &c., §§ 6, 8, 9. 

2 Cf. infra, §§ 5, 7. 

9 Mdlusine, Recueil de Mythologie populaire, publid par H. 
Gaidoz et E. Rolland, Paris, 1878; pp. 79, 549, 583. To the 
same train of ideas seems to belong the Eddie myth of Naglfar, 
the fatal ship wrought out of the nails of the dead, which is to take 
the crew of the demon to the shore of the earth when the last day 
of the world is come (Gylfagiinning, 51). 

4 Without performing the requisite^ ceremonies. 

6 Doubtful. 

FARGARD XVII. 

I8; 

3 (6). ‘ Then for want of the lawful rites being 
observed, Daevas are produced in the earth ; for 
want of the lawful rites being observed, those Khraf- 
stras are produced in the earth which men call lice, 
and which eat up the corn in the corn-field and the 
clothes in the wardrobe. 

4(10). ‘Therefore, O Zarathustra! whenever here 
below thou shalt comb thy hair or shave it off, or 
pare off thy nails, thou shalt take them away ten 
paces from the faithful, twenty paces from the fire, 
thirty paces from the water, fifty paces from the 
consecrated bundles of baresma. 

5 (13). ‘Then thou shalt dig a hole, a d i .v t i 1 deep 
if the earth be hard, a vitasti deep if it be soft; 
thou shalt take the hair down there and thou shalt 
say aloud these fiend-smiting words : “ Out of him 
by his piety Mazda made the plants grow up2.” 

6(17). ‘ Thereupon thou shalt draw three furrows 
with a knife of metal around the hole, or six furrows 
or nine, and thou shall chant the Ahuna-Vairya 
three times, or six, or nine. 

II. 

7 (19). ‘For the nails, thou shalt dig a hole, out 

1 A dijti=ten fingers. A vitasti = twelve fingers. 

2 See above, XI, 6 ; the choice of this line was determined by 
the presence of the word plants in it: man was considered a 
microcosm, and every element in him was supposed to come from 
a similar element in nature, to which it was to return after death, 
and whence it was to come back again at the time of the resur- 
rection: his bones from the earth, his blood from the water, his 
hair from the trees, his life from the fire (Bundahij XXXI, 
Ulamai Isldm); an old Aryan theory, traces of which are also to 
be found in India (Rig-veda X, 16, 3), in Greece (Ilias VII, 99 ; 
Empedocles, fr. 378 ; cf. Epicharmus ap. Plut. Consol, ad Apoll. 15), 
and in Scandinavia (Edda, Grimnismal 40). 

1 88 

vendIdAd. 

of the house, as deep as the top joint of the little 
finger; thou shalt take the nails down there and 
thou shalt say aloud these fiend-smiting words : 
“ The words that are heard from the pious in holi- 
ness and good thought V’ 

8 (24). ‘ Then thou shalt draw three furrows with 
a knife of metal around the hole, or six furrows or 
nine, and thou shalt chant the Ahuna-Vairya three 
times, or six, or nine. 

9 (26). ‘ And then : “ Look here, O Asho-ziuta 
bird1 2 3 ! here are the nails for thee : look at the nails 
here! May they be for thee so many spears, knives, 
bows, falcon-winged arrows, and sling-stones against 
the Mdzainya Daevas 

10 (29). ‘ If those nails have not been dedicated 
(to the bird), they shall be in the hands of the 
Mazainya Daevas so many spears, knives, bows, 
falcon-winged arrows, and sling stones (against the 
Mazainya Daevas)4. 

1 Yasna XXXIII, 7. There is here only a play upon the word 
sruye, ‘ is heard/ which chances to be homonymous with the dual 
of srva, ‘ nails of both hands/ 

a 4 The owl/ according to modern tradition. The word literally 
means 4 friend of holiness/ ‘ For the bird Ashozu.rta they recite the 
Avcsta formula ; if they recite it, the fiends tremble and do not 
take up the nails ; but if the nails have had no spell uttered over 
them, the fiends and wizards use them as arrows against the bird 
Ashozujta and kill him. Therefore, when the nails have had a spell 
uttered over them, the bird takes and eats them up, that the fiends 
may not do any harm by their means ' (Bundahij XIX). 

3 See above, p. 137, n. 1. The nails are cut in two and the frag- 

ments are put in the hole with the point directed towards the 
north, that is to say, against the breasts of the Devs (see above, 
p. 75, n. 2). See Anquetil, Zend-Avesta II, 117; India Office 
Library, VIII, 80. ' 

4 Repeated by mistake from § 10. 

FARGARD XVIII. 

189 

ii (30). ‘All such sinners, embodiments of the 
Druf, are scorners of the law : all scorners of the 
law are rebels against the Lord : all rebels against 
the Lord are ungodly men ; and any ungodly man 
shall pay for it with his life V 

Fargard XVIII. 

I (1-13). On the unworthy priest and enticers to heresy. 

II (14-29). The holiness of the cock. 

III (30-60). The four paramours of the Drug'. 

IV (61-71). On unlawful lusts. 

The text and the Palilavi commentary of this Fargard are trans- 
lated in Haug’s Essays, 'pp. 243 seq., 364 scq. 

I. 

I. ‘There is many a one, O holy Zaratlnutra ! ’ 
said Ahura Mazda, ‘who wears a Paitiddna but 
who has not girded his loins with the law :i ; when 
such a man says, “ I am an Athravan,” he lies ; do 
not call him an Athravan, O holy Zarathuxtra!’ thus 
said Ahura Mazda. 

2 (5). ‘ He holds a Khrafstraghna 1 in his hand, 
but he has not girded his loins with the law ; when 
he says, “ I am an Athravan,” he lies ; do not call 
him an Athravan, O holy Zaratluutra ! ’ thus said 
Ahura Mazda. 

1 See preceding Fargard, § 18. 

2 See above, p. 168, n. 7. 

3 The word translated girded is the word used of the Kostt, the 
sacred girdle which the Parsi must never part with (see § 54) ; the 
full meaning, therefore, is, ‘ girded with the law as with a Kristi ’ 
(cf. Yasna IX, 26 [81]), that is to say, ‘ never forsaking the law,’ or, 
as the Commentary expresses it, 4 one whose thought is all on the 
law ’ (cf. § 5). 

4 See above, p. 168, n. 8. 

190 

VENDED. 

3 (7). ‘ He holds a twig 1 in his hand, but he has 
not girded his loins with the law; when he says, 
“ I am an Athravan,” he lies ; do not call him an 
Athravan, O holy Zarathiwtra ! ’ thus said Ahura 
Mazda. 

4 (9). ‘He wields the A.vtra mairya2, but he has 
not girded his loins with the law; when he says, 
“ I am an Athravan,” he lies ; do not call him an 
Athravan, O holy Zarathiutra f’ thus said Ahura 
Mazda. 

5 (11). ‘ He who sleeps on throughout the night, 
who does not perform the Yasna nor chant the 
hymns, who does not worship by word or by deed, 
who does neither learn nor teach, with a longing for 
(everlasting) life, he lies when he says, “ I am an 
Athravan,” do not call him an Athravan, O holy 
Zarathiutra ! ’ thus said Ahura Mazda. 

6 (14). ‘Him thou shalt call an Athravan, O holy 
Zarathiutra ! who throughout the night sits up and 
demands of the holy Wisdom3, which makes man 
free from anxiety, with dilated heart, and cheerful at 
the head of the A'inva^ bridge 4, and which makes 
him reach that world, that holy world, that excellent 
world, the world of paradise. 

7 (18). ‘(Therefore) demand of me, thou upright 
one! of me, who am the Maker, the best of all 
beings, the most knowing, the most pleased in an- 
swering what is asked of me ; demand of me, that 

' The bundles of baresma or the urvaran (see p. 22, n. 2; 
p. 169, n. 3). 

3 The Aspah6-ar tra ; see Introd. V, 19. 

3 That is to say, studies the law and learns from those who 
know it (cf. Introd. V, 2). 

* See Farg. XIX, 30. ‘ It gives him a stout heart, when standing 
before the A’inva/ bridge ’ (Comm.) 

FARGARD XVIII. 

191 

thou mayst be the better, that thou mayst be the 
happier V 

8 (21). Zarathuitra asked Ahura Mazda: ‘ O Maker 
of the material world, thou Holy One! What is it 
that makes the unseen power of Death increase ?’ 

' 9(22). Ahura Mazda answered: 4 It is the man 
that teaches a wrong law2; it is the man who con- 
tinues for three years 3 without wearing the sacred 
girdle4, without chanting the G&thas, without wor- 
shipping the good waters. 

10 (25). ‘And he who should set that man at 

1 See Introd. V, 2. 

2 ‘The deceiver Ashemaogha* (Comm.); the heretic. Cf. Farg. 
XV, 2, and Introd. Ill, 10. 

3 Doubtful. 

4 The Kosti, which must be worn by every Farsi, man or woman, 
from their fifteenth year of age (see below, § 54 seq.) ; it is the badge 
of the faithful, the girdle by which he is united both with Ormazd and 
with his fellow believers. He who does not wear it must be refused 
water and bread by the members of the community ; he who wears 
it becomes a participator in the merit of all the good deeds per- 
formed all over the Zarathustrian world (Saddar 10 and 46 ; Hyde 
10 and 50). The K6sti consists 'of seventy-two interwoven fila- 
ments, and should three times circumvent the waist. . . . Each of 
the threads is equal in value to one of the seventy-two Hahs of the 
Izashne ; each of the twelve threads in the six lesser cords is equal 
in value to the dawazdih hamaist . . .; each of the lesser cords 
is equal in value to one of the six Gahanbars ; each of the three cir- 
cumventions of the loins is equal in value to humat,good thought, 
hukhat, good speech, huaresta, good work; the binding of each 
of the four knots upon it confers pleasure on each of the four 
elements, fire, air, water, and the earth 9 (Edal Daru, apud Wilson, 
The Parsi Religion Unfolded, p. 163). In the Brahmanical system 
also the faithful are bound to their god by means of a sacred girdle, 
the Mekhall 

Another piece of clothing which every Parsi is enjoined to wear 
is the Sadarah, or sacred shirt, a muslin shirt with short sleeves, 
that does not reach lower thfern the hips, with a small pocket at the 
opening in front of the shirt (see § 54 seq.) 

192 

vendIdAd. 

liberty, when bound in prison *, does no better deed 
than if he should flay a man alive and cut off his 
head 2 *. 

ii (27). ‘ The blessing uttered on a wicked, un- 
godly Ashemaogha does not go past the mouth (of 
the blesser) ; the • blessing for two Ashemaoghas 
does not go past his tongue ; the blessing for three 
is no word at all ; the blessing for four is a curse 
against himself. 

12(29). ‘Whosoever should give some Haoma 
juice to a wicked, ungodly Ashemaogha, or some 
Myazda consecrated with blessings, does no better 
deed than if he should lead a thousand horse against 
the cities of the worshippers of Mazda, and should 
slaughter the men thereof, and drive off the cattle 
as plunder. 

II. 

13(32). ‘Demand of me, thou upright one! of 
me, who am the Maker, the best of all beings, the 
most knowing, the most pleased in answering what 
is asked of me ; demand of me, that thou mayst be 
the better, that thou mayst be the happier.’ 

14(33). Zarathiutra asked Ahura Mazda: ‘Who 
is the Sraosha-varez 1 of Sraosha 4 ? the holy, strong 
Sraosha, who is the incarnate Word, a mighty- 
speared and lordly god.’ 

1 See Introd. Ill, 10. Cf. § 12. 

2 Doubtful. The Commentary seems to understand the sentence 
as follows : ‘ He who should free him from hell would thus perform 
no less a feat than if he should cut off the head of a man and then 
make him alive again.’ 

* ‘Who is he who sets the world in motion?’ (Comm.) See 
above, p. 56, n. i. ' 

4 See Introd. IV, 31. 

FARGARD XVIII. 

193 

15 (34). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It is the bird 
named Parddarr \ which ill-speaking people call 
Kahrkatfis2, O holy Zarathustra ! the bird that 
lifts up his voice against the mighty dawn: 

16(37). ‘“Arise, O men! recite the Ashem ya</ 
valmtem that smites down the Daevas3. Lo! 
here is BOshyasta, the long-handed4, coming upon 
you, who lulls to sleep again the whole living world, 
as soon as it has awoke : ‘ Sleep ! ’ she says, ‘ sleep 
on, O man ! the time 6 is not yet come.’ ” 

17 (41). ‘For the three excellent things be never 
slack, namely, good thoughts, good words, and good 
deeds ; for the three abominable things be ever 
slack, namely, bad thoughts, bad words, and bad 
deeds.’’ 

18 (43). ‘In the first part of the night, Fire, the 
son of Ahura Mazda, calls the master of the house 
for help, saying : 

19 (43). Up! arise, thou master of the house! 
put on thy girdle on thy clothes, wash thy hands, 
take wood, bring it unto me, and let me burn bright 

1 ‘ He who foresees’ the coming dawn ; the cock. 

2 ‘When he is not called so, he is powerful’ (Comm.) Cf.XIII,2,6. 

* The cock is called ‘the drum of the world.’ As crowing in 

the dawn that dazzles away the fiends, he shared with it the honour 
of the victory, and was believed to crow away the demons : ‘ The 
cock was created to fight against the fiends and wizards ; ... he 
is with the dog an ally of Srosh against demons’ (liundahir XIX). 

‘ No demon can enter a house in which there is a cock ; and, above 
all, should this bird come to the residence of a demon, and move 
his tongue to chaunt the praises of the glorious and exalted Creator, 
that instant the evil spirit takes to flight ’ (Mirkhond, History of 
the Early Kings of Persia, translated by Shea, p. 57 5 efi Saddar 
3a, Hyde 35, and J. Ovington, A Voyage to Suratt,^i696, p. 371). 

4 See Introd. IV, 24. * 

0 ‘ To perform thy religious duties ’ (Comm.) 

[4] 0 

194 

VENdIdAd. 

with the clean wood, carried by' thy well-washed 
hands \ Here comes Azi1 2, made by the Daevas, 
who is about to strive against me, and wants to put 
out my life.” 

20(46). ‘In the second part of the night, Fire, 
the son of Ahura Mazda, calls the husbandman for 
help, saying : 

21(46). ‘“Up! arise, thou husbandman! Put 
on thy girdle on thy clothes, wash thy hands, take 
wood, bring it unto me, and let me burn bright with 
the clean wood, carried by thy well-washed hands. 
Here comes Azi, made by the Daevas, who is abput 
to strive against me, and wants to put out my life.” 

22 (48). ‘ In the third part of the night, Fire, 
the son of Ahura Mazda, calls the holy Sraosha 
for help, saying : “ Come thou, holy, tail-formed 
Sraosha, [then he brings unto me some clean wood 
with his well-washed hands]3 : here comes Azi, made 
by the Daevas, who is about to strive against me, 
and wants to put out my life.” 

23 (51). ‘And then the holy Sraosha wakes up 
the bird named Parodar.?, which ill-speaking people 
call Kahrkatas, and the bird lifts up his voice 
against the mighty dawn : 

24 (52). ‘“Arise, O men ! recite the Ashem ya</ 
vahii'tem that smites down the Daevas. Lo ! here 
is Bhshyasta, the long-handed, coming upon you, 
who lulls to sleep again the whole living world as 

1 The Parsi, as soon as he has risen, must put on the K6sti, 
wash his hands, and put wood on the fire. 

2 See Introd. IV, 19. 

8 The text seems to be corrupt : it must probably be emendated 
into ‘ bring into me . . / 

FARGARD XVIII. 

195 

soon as it has awoke : ‘ Sleep ! ’ she says, ‘ sleep on, 
O man ! the time is not yet come.’ ” 

25 (52). ‘ “ For the three excellent things be 
never slack, namely, good thoughts, good words, 
and good deeds ; for the three abominable things be 
ever slack, namely, bad thoughts, bad words, and 
bad deeds.” 

26 (53). ‘ And then bed-fellows address one 
another : “ Rise up, here is the cock calling me 
up.” Whichever of the two first gets up .shall 
first enter paradise : whichever of the two shall 
firgj, with well-washed hands, bring clean wood unto 
the Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda, the Fire, well 
pleased with him and not angry, and fed as it 
required, will thus bless him : 

27 (58). ‘ “ May herds of oxen grow for thee, and 
increase of sons : may thy mind be master of its 
vow, may thy soul be master of its vow, and mayst 
thou live on in the joy of the soul all the nights of 
thy life.” 

‘ This is the blessing which the Fire speaks unto 
him who brings him dry wood, well examined by the 
light of the day, well cleansed with godly intent. 

28 (64). ‘ And whosoever will kindly and piously 
present one of the faithful with a pair of these my 
Parodarf birds, a male and a female, it is as though 
he had given 1 a house with a hundred columns, a 
thousand beams, ten thousand large windows, ten 
thousand small windows. 

29 (67). ‘ And whosoever shall give to mj* Paro- 
darr bird his fill of meat, I, Ahura Mazda, need npt 

1 ‘ In the day of recompense ' (Comm.) ; he shalj be rewarded as 
though he had given a house, &c. . . . he shall receive such a 
house in paradise. 

O 2 

196 

vendIdad. 

interrogate him any longer ; he shall directly go to 
paradise.’ 

III. 

30 (70). The holy Sraosha asked the Druf, with 
his club uplifted against her : ‘ O thou wretched and 
wicked Driif! Thou then, alone in the material 
world, dost bear offspring without any male coming 
unto thee ? ’ 

31 (74). Then the Drug demon, the guileful one, 
answered : ‘ O holy, tail-formed Sraosha! It is not 
so, nor do I, alone in the material world, bear 
offspring without any male coming unto me. ^ 

32 (77). ‘ There are four males who are mine. 

‘And they make me conceive progeny as other 

males make their females.’ 

33 (78). The holy Sraosha asked the Druf, with 
his club uplifted against her : ‘ O thou wretched and 
wicked Dru^ ! Who is the first of those males of 
thine ?’ 

34 (79)' Then the Druf demon, the guileful one, 
answered : ‘O holy, tail-formed Sraosha! He is the 
first of my males who, being entreated by one of 
the faithful, does not give him anything, be it ever 
so little, of the riches he has treasured up \ 

35 (82). ‘ That man makes me conceive progeny 
as other males make their females.’ 

36 (83). The holy Sraosha asked the Druf, with 
his club uplifted against her : ‘ O thou wretched and 
wicked Druf ! What is the thing that can counter- 
act that?’ 

37 (84). Then the Druf demon, the guileful one, 
answered : ‘ O holy, tail-formed Sraosha ! This is 

1 Cf. Farg. Ill, 34. 

FARGARD XVIII. 

IQ7 

the thing that counteracts it, namely, when a man 
unasked, kindly and piously, gives to one of the 
faithful something, be it ever so little, of the riches 
he has treasured up. 

38 (87). ‘ He does thereby as thoroughly destroy 
the fruit of my womb as a four-footed wolf does, 
tvho tears the child out of a mother’s womb.’ 

39 (88). The holy Sraosha asked the Druf, with 
his club uplifted against her : ‘ O thou wretched and 
wicked Driif ! Who is the second of those males 
of thine ?’ 

40 (89). Then the Dru^ demon, the guileful one, 
answered : ‘ O holy, tail-formed Sraosha! He is the 
second of my males who, making water, lets it fall 
along the upper forepart of his foot. 

41 (92). ‘ That man makes me conceive progeny 
as other males make their females.’ 

42 (93). The holy Sraosha asked the Dru^, with 
his club uplifted against her : ‘ O thou wretched and 
wicked Dru^ ! What is the thing that can counter- 
act that ? ’ 

43 (94)’ Then the Druf demon, the guileful one, 
answered : ‘ O holy, tail-formed Sraosha ! This is 
the thing that counteracts it, namely, when the man 
rising up 1 and stepping three steps further off, shall 
say three Ahuna-Vairya, two humatanam, three 
hukhshathrotemam, and then chant the Ahuna- 
Vairya and offer up one Ye«he h&tam. 

1 ‘ Nec stando mingens . . . facile visitur Persa ’ (Amm. Marc. 
XXIII, 6) ; An& Viraf XXIV ; Mainyo-i-khard II, 39 ; Saddar 56, 
Hyde 60. Cf. Manu IV, 47 seq., and Polack, Persien I, 67 : ‘ Von 
einem in Paris weilenden Perser hinterbrachte man dem Konig, urn 
seine Emancipation und Abtriinnigkeit vom Gesetz zu beweisen, 
dass er Schvveinefleisch esse und stehend die Function verrichte.' 

198 

vendIdad. 

44 (98). ‘ He does thereby as thoroughly destroy 
the fruit of my womb as a four-footed wolf does, 
who tears the child out of a mothers womb.’ 

45 (99)- The holy Sraosha asked the Drug", 
with his club uplifted against her: ‘O thou wretched 
and wicked Dru^- ! Who is the third of those males 
of thine ?’ 

46 (100). Then the Dru^ demon, the guileful 
one, answered : ‘O holy, tail-formed Sraosha! He is 
the third of my males who during his sleep emits 
seed. 

47 (102). ‘That man makes me conceive progeny 
as other males make their females.’ 

48 (103). The holy Sraosha asked the Dru^, with 
his club uplifted against her : ‘ O thou wretched and 
wicked Dru^! What is the thing that can counter- 
act that?’ 

49 (104). Then the Druf demon, the guileful one, 
answered: ‘O holy, tail-formed Sraosha! this is the 
thing that counteracts it, namely, if the man, when 
he has risen from sleep, shall say three Ahuna- 
Vairya, two humatanam, three hukhshathro- 
temam, and then chant the Aluina-Vairya and 
offer up one Ye«he hdtam. 

50(107). ‘He does thereby as thoroughly destroy 
the fruit of my womb as a four-footed wolf does 
who tears the child out of a mother’s womb.’ 

51 (108). Then he shall speak unto Spewta Ar- 
maiti ’, saying : ‘ O Spewta Armaiti, this man do 
I deliver unto thee; this man deliver thou back 
unto me, against the mighty day of resurrection; 
deliver him back as one who knows the Gathas, who 

* The genius of the earth (cf. Farg. II, 10). 

FARGARD XVIII. 

199 

knows the Yasna, and the revealed law1, a wise and 
clever man, who is the Word incarnate. 

52 (112). ‘Then thou shalt call his name “Fire- 
creature, Fire-seed, Fire-offspring, Fire-land,” or any 
name wherein is the word Fire 2.’ 

53(113). The holy Sraosha asked the Druf, with 
his club uplifted against her : ‘ O thou wretched and 
wicked Dru/ ! Who is the fourth of those males of 
thine ?’ 

54 ( 1 14). Then the Dru^- demon, the guileful one, 
answered : ‘ O holy, tail-formed Sraosha ! This one 
is my fourth male who, either man or woman, being 
more than fifteen years of age, walks without wear- 
ing the sacred girdle and the sacred shirt 3. 

55(115). ‘At the fourth step4 we Daevas, at 
once, wither him even to the tongue and the mar- 
row, and he goes thenceforth with power to destroy 
the world of the holy spirit, and he destroys it like 
the Y&tus and the Zawdas 5 6.’ 

56 (1 17). The holy Sraosha asked the Drug) with 
his club uplifted against her : ‘ O thou wretched and 
wicked Drug; what is the thing that can counteract 
that?’ 

57 (118). Then the Drug* demon, the guileful one, 
answered : ‘ O holy, tail-formed Sraosha ! There is 
no means of counteracting it ; 

1 Literally, ' the answers made to the questions (of Zarathurtra).’ 

* Cf. Introd. IV, go, and Orm. Ahr. § 205. 

3 The Kdsti and the Sadarah; see above, p. 191, n. 4. It is the 
sin known as kushac/ duvarirni (Mainyo-i-khard II, 35; Ar</a 
VirdfXXV, 6). 

4 ‘Going three steps without K6sti is only a three Sraosho- 

y&arana sin; from the fourth step, it is a tanaffthr* sin’ (Comm.) 

6 For the Yatus, see Introd. IV, 20 ; the za»da is a hobgoblin. 

200 

vendJdAd. 

58 (120). ‘ When a man or a woman, being more 
than fifteen years of age, walks without wearing the 
sacred girdle or the sacred shirt. 

59 (120). ‘ At the fourth step we Daevas, at once, 
wither him even to the tongue and the marrow, and 
he goes thenceforth with power to destroy the world 
of the holy spirit, and he destroys it like the Ydtus 
and the Zawdas.’ 

IV. 

60 (122). Demand of me, thou upright one! of 
me who am the Maker, the best of all beings, the 
most knowing, the most pleased in answering what 
is asked of me ; demand of me that thou mayst be 
the better, that thou mayst be the happier. 

61(123). Zarathwtra asked Ahura Mazda : ‘Who 
grieves thee with the sorest grief ? Who pains thee 
with the sorest pain ?’ 

62(124). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It is the 
Cahi1, O Spitama Zarathurtra! who goes a-whoring 
after the faithful and the unfaithful, after the wor- 
shippers of Mazda and the worshippers of the Daevas, 
after the wicked and the righteous 2. 

63(125). ‘Her look dries up one third of the 
mighty floods that run from the mountains ; her 
look withers one third of the beautiful, golden hued, 
growing plants ; 

64 (127). ‘ Her look withers one third of the grass 

1 The courtezan, as an incarnation of the female demon (7ahi 
(see Introd. IV, 15). 

a ‘ [Whether she gives up her body to the faithful or to the un- 
faithful], there is* no difference; when khe has been with three men, 
she is guilty of death ’ (Comm.) 

FARGARD XVIII. 

201 

wherewith Spewta Armaiti 1 is clad 2, and her touch 
withers in the faithful one third of his good thoughts, 
of his good words, of his good deeds, one third of 
his strength, of his fiend-killing power, and of his 
holiness 3. 

65 (129). ‘Verily I say unto thee, O Spitama 
Zarathmtra ! such creatures ought to be killed even 
more than gliding snakes4, than howling wolves, 
than the wild she-wolf that falls upon the fold, or 
than the she-frog that falls upon the waters with her 
thousandfold brood.’ 

66 (133). Demand of me, thou upright one! of 
me who am the Maker, the best of all beings, the 
most knowing, the most pleased in answering what 
is asked of me ; demand of me that thou mayst be 
the better, that thou mayst be the happier. 

67-68(133). Zarathustra asked Ahura Mazda: ‘If 
a man shall come unto a woman who has an issue 
of blood, either out of the ordinary course or at the 
usual period, and he does so wittingly and know- 
ingly5 * * 8, and she allows it wilfully, wittingly, and 

1 The earth. 

4 Doubtful. The Pahlavi translation has, ‘ One third of the 
strength of Spewta Armaiti.’ 

3 ‘ If a Crahi (courtezan) look at running waters, they fall j if at 

trees, they are stunted ; if she converse with a pious man, his intel- 
ligence and his holiness are withered by it’ (Saddar 67; Hyde 74). 

Cf. Manu IV, 40 scq. 

* ^ It is wrilteH’ lTT the law (the Avesta) : ‘0 Zartart Isfitaman 1 with 

regard to woman, I*>ay to thee that any woman that has given up 
her body to two men in one day is sooner to be killed than a wolf, 
a lion, or a snake : any one who kills such a woman will gain as 
much merit by it as if he had provided with wood a thousand fire- 
temples, or destroyed the dens of adders, scorpions, lions, wolves, 
or snakes ’ (Old Rav. 59 b).* 

8 ‘ Knowing her state and knowing that it is a sin ’ (Comm.) 

202 

VENDfDAD. 

knowingly, what is the atonement for it, what is 
the penalty that he shall pay to atone for the 
deed they have done ? ’ 

69(136). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘If a man 
shall come unto a woman who has an issue of 
blood, either out of the ordinary course or at the 
usual period, and he does so wittingly and know- 
ingly, and she allows it wilfully, wittingly, and 
knowingly ; 

7° {l * 37)' ‘He shall slay a thousand head of small 
cattle ; he shall godly and piously offer up to the 
fire 1 the entrails - thereof together with Zaothra- 
libations ; he shall bring the shoulder bones to the 
good waters 3. 

71 (140). ‘He shall godly and piously bring unto 
the fire a thousand loads of soft wood, of Urvdsna, 
Vohu-gaona, Vohu-kereti, Hadhd-naepata, or of any 
sweet-scented plant 4 5. 

72(142). ‘He shall tie and consecrate a thou- 
sand bundles of baresma; he shall godly and piously 
offer up to the good waters a thousand Zaothra- 
' libations, together with the Haoma and the meat, 
cleanly prepared and well strained by a pious man, 
together with the roots of the’ tree known as 
Hadha-naepata i!. 

73 (144). ‘ He shall kill a thousand snakes of 

1 To the Bahrain fire. 

a The omentum (afsman) or epipleon. Strabo XV, 13 : roC 
fViriXoi) ti fwcpbv riBtaai, &>s \tyovai nvfs, (Vi to Mp. ‘ Ascending six 
steps they showed me in a Room adjoining to the temple, their Fire 
which they fed with Wood, and sometimes Burn on it the Fat of the 
Sheep’s Tail.’ AVoyage Round the World, Dr. J.F.Gemelli, 1698. 

’ The meat is eaten by the faithful (Asp.); cf. Herod. 1, 132. 

4 Cf. Farg. XiV, 3 seq. 

5 Sec above, p. 94, n. 1. 

FARGARD XIX. 

203 

those that go upon the belly, two thousand of the 
other kind 1 : he shall kill a thousand land frogs and 
two thousand water frogs ; he shall kill a thousand 
corn-carrying ants and two thousand of the other 
kind2 * 4. 

74 (147). ‘ He shall throw thirty bridges over 
canals; he shall undergo a thousand stripes with the 
Aspahe-astra, a thousand stripes with the Sraoshd- 
£arana ;i. 

75 (149). ‘ This is the atonement, this is the 
penalty that he shall pay to atone for the deed 
that he has done. 

76 (150). ‘If he shall pay it, he shall enter the 
world of the holy ones ; if he shall not pay it, he 
shall fall down into the world of the wicked, into 
that dark world, made of darkness, the offspring of 
darkness V 

Fargard XIX. 

I (1-11). Angra Mainyu attempts to kill Zaratlnutra, and, when 
he fails, tempts him. Zarathurtra withstands both assaults with 
weapons both material and spiritual. 

II (11-43). Zarathujtra applies to Ahura Mazda for a revelation 
of the law. He is taught how the fiend may be repelled, how the 
creation of Mazda is to be worshipped, how unclcanncss is to be 
washed away, and what becomes of the soul after death. 

III (43-47). Angra Mainyu and his host, driven to despair, and 
feeling themselves powerless, flee down into hell. 

This chapter may be entitled ‘The Revelation,’ and considered 
as the frame-work ofthe Vendidad, the remainder of which should 
have its place between the first and the third part ; as the first part 

1 ‘Two thousand mar banak’ (Comm.) See above, p. 157, n. 1. 

2 ‘Two thousand d£rak' j(Comm.) See abovc4 p. 157, n. 4. 

8 Five tanaffihrs, that is six thousand dirhems. 

4 §§ 75* 76=Farg. XIV, 18. 

204 

vendIdAd. 

shows the fiend’s struggles to prevent the revelation, and the third 
shows the effects of it ; the second being, as it were, an abstract of 
the law, an abridged Venditlad. 

The text and the Pahlavi commentary of this Fargard are translated 
in Haug’s Essays, p. 253 seq., p. 333 seq., and p. 379 seq. 

I. 

i. From the region of the north, from the regions 
of the north ', forth rushed Angra Mainyu, the 
deadly, the Daeva of the Daevas1 2. And thus spake 
the guileful one, he the evil-doer Angra Mainyu, 
the deadly : ‘ Druf, rush down upon him ! destroy 
the holy Zarathuxtra ! ’ The Dr of came rushing 
along, the demon Bfiiti3 4, the unseen death, the 
hell-born. 

2 (5). Zarathuxtra chanted aloud the Ahuna- 
Vairya * : ‘The will of the Lord is the law of 
holiness; the riches of Vohu-man6 shall be given 
to him who works in this world for Mazda, and 
wields according to the will of Ahura the power he 
gave to him to relieve the poor.’ 

(He added): ‘Offer up prayers to the good waters 
of the good Dfiitya5 ! 

‘ Profess the law of the worshippers of Mazda!’ 

The Druf dismayed, rushed away, the demon 
Buiti, the unseen death, the hell-born. 

1 From hell ; cf. p. 75, n. 2. 

s ‘ The fiend of fiends,’ the arch-fiend. 

* ‘ How does death enter the body of man ? There are several 
Drupes from Ahriman, who come into the body and the soul of 
man : one of whom is a Drug- known as Bftt ; she is the forerunner 
of death ; when the time of the end is at hand, she produces in the 
body of man such excessive heat that he falls ill ’ (Dadar i Dadfikht, 
British Museum, Add. 8994, 130 a). 

4 See above, p. 98, n. 2. 

5 The river in Airyaha Vaejo ; see Farg. I, 3, and Introd. Ill, 15. 

FARGARD XIX. 

205 

3 (7). And the Dru^-, the guileful one, said unto 
Angra Mainyii: ‘O baneful Angra Mainyu! I see no 
way to kill him, so great is the glory of the holy 
Zarathiutra.’ 

Zarathiutra saw (all this) from within his soul: 
‘ The evil-doing Daevas and Drvawts1 (thought he) 
take counsel together for my death.’ 

4(11). Up started Zarathiutra, forward went 
Zarathiutra, unshaken by the evil spirit, by the 
hardness of his malignant riddles 2 3, swinging stones 
in his hand, stones as big as a house s, which he 
obtained from the Maker, Ahura Mazda, he the 
holy Zarathiutra. 

‘At what on this wide, round earth, whose ends 
lie afar, at what dost thou swing (those stones), 
thou who standest by the river Dare^a 4 *, upon the 
mountains, in the mansion of Pourusaspa fl ?’ 

5 (16). Thus Zarathiutra answered Angra Mainyu: 
‘ O evil-doer, Angra Mainyu ! I will smite the crea- 
tion of the Daeva; I will smite the Nasu, a creature 
of the Daeva ; I will smite the Pairika Knathaiti 6, 
till the fiend-smiter Saoshyawt come up to life out 

1 See Introd. IV, 22. 

2 This is a fragment of an old myth in which Zarathurtra and 
Angra Mainyu played respectively the parts of Oedipus and the 
Sphinx. See, for further explanation, Orm. Ahr. §§ 163-165. 

3 See Introd. IV, 40. The Commentary has, ‘ Some say, those 
stones are the Ahuna^Vairya.’ In another attempt to account for a 
mythical expression, which was no longer understood, those thunder- 
bolts were turned into the nine-knotted stick used in the Barashnftm 
(see Farg. IX, 14 ; Comm, and Asp.) 

* See Introd. Ill, 15. 

* The father of Zarathurtra. 

* Cf. Farg. 1, 10, and Introd. IV, 21. 

206 

VENDfDAD. 

of the lake Kasava, from the region of the dawn, 
from the regions of the dawn V 

6 (20). Again to him said the guileful one, the 
Maker of the evil world, Angra Mainyu : ‘ Do not 
destroy my creatures, O holy Zarathmtra ! Thou art 
the son of Pourmaspa1 2, just born of thy mother3. 
Renounce the good law of the worshippers of 
Mazda, and thou shalt gain such a boon as the 
murderer 4 * * gained, the ruler of the nations/ 

7 (24). Thus in answer to him said Spitama 
Zarathmtra: ‘No! never will I renounce the good 
law of the worshippers of Mazda, though my body, 
my life, my soul should burst ! ’ 

8 (27). Again to him said the guileful one, the 
Maker of the evil world, Angra Mainyu : ‘ By whose 
Word wilt thou strike, by whose Word wilt thou 
repel, by whose weapon will the good creatures 
(strike and repel) my creation who am Angra 
Mainyu ? ’ 

9 (29). Thus in answer to him said Spitama 
Zarathmtra : ‘ The sacred mortar, the sacred cup, 
the Haoma, the Words taught by Mazda, these are 
my weapons, my best weapons ! By this Word will 
I strike, by this Word will I repel, by this weapon 
the good creatures (will strike and repel thee), O 
evil-doer, Angra Mainyu ! To me Spewta Mainyu 
gave it, he gave it to me in the boundless Time 8 ; 

1 See Introd. IV, 39-40. 2 ‘ I krfow thee ’ (Comm.) 

3 Doubtful (cf. § 46) ; possibly, ‘ I was invoked by thy mother.’ 
The Commentary has, ‘ Some explain thus : Thy forefathers wor- 

shipped me : worship me also.’ 

4 Ajis Dahaka or Zohak, who, as a legendary king, is said to 

have ruled the world for a thousand years (Introd. IV, 1 1). 

* See Introd. IV, 42. The Ahuna -Vairya was revealed before 

FARGARD XIX. 

207 

to me the Amesha Spewtas, the all-ruling, the all- 
beneficent, gave it.’ 

10 (35). Zarathuitra chanted aloud the Ahuna- 
Vairya. The holy Zarathiutra said aloud : ‘ This I 
ask thee: teach me the truth, O Lord1! . . 

II. 

11(37). Zarathurtra asked Ahura Mazda: ‘O 
Ahura Mazda, most beneficent spirit, Maker of the 
material world, thou Holy One ! [he was sitting by 
the T)are^a, on the mountain2, praying to Ahura 
Mazda, to the good Vohu-man6, to Asha Vahwta, 
Khshathra Vairya, and Spewta Armaiti ;] 

1 2 (39). ‘ How shall I make the world free from 
that Druf, from the evil-doer Angra Mainyu ? How 
shall I drive away direct defilement ? How indirect 
defilement ? How shall I drive the Nasu from the 
house of the worshippers of Mazda ? How shall 
I cleanse the faithful man ? How shall I cleanse 
the faithful woman ?’ 

13(42). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Invoke, O 
Zarathartra ! the good law of Mazda. 

‘ Invoke, O Zarathustra ! the Amesha Spe«tas 
who rule over the seven Karshvares of the 
earth 8_ 

‘ Invoke, 0 Zarathuxtra ! the sovereign Heaven, 
the boundless Time4, and Vayu5, whose action is 
most high. 

the creation of the world (Yasna XIX), and consequently in the 
boundless Time. 

1 This verse is the beginning of a Gatha (Yasna XLIV), in which 
Zarathurtra applies to Ahura Mazda to be taught the mysteries of 
the world and of the law. 

2 See § 4 and Introd. Ill, 15. 8 See Introd. IV, 7. 

4 See Introd. IV, 42. 6 See Introd. IV, 15. 

208 

vendIdAd. 

‘ Invoke, O Zarathustra ! the powerful Wind, 
made by Mazda, and Spewta [Armaiti]1, the fair 
daughter of Ahura Mazda. 

14(46). ‘Invoke, O Zarathustra! my Fravashi 2, 
who am Ahura Mazda, the greatest, the best, the 
fairest of all beings, the most solid 3, the most intel- 
ligent, the best shapen, the highest in holiness, and 
whose soul is the holy Word 4 ! 

1 Invoke, O Zarathustra ! this creation of mine, 
who am Ahura Mazda.’ 

15 (50). Zarathmtra took those words from me, 
(and said) : ‘ I invoke the holy creation of Ahura 
Mazda. 

‘I invoke Mithrafi, the lord of wide pastures, a 
god armed with beautiful weapons, with the most 
glorious of all weapons, with the most fiend-smiting 
of all weapons. 

‘ I invoke the holy, tail-formed Sraosha G, who 
wields a club in his hand, to bear upon the heads of 
the fiends. 

16 (54). ‘ I invoke the most glorious holy Word. 

‘ I invoke the sovereign Heaven, the boundless 
Time, and Vayu, whose action is most high. 

‘ I invoke the mighty Wind, made by Mazda, and 
Spe«ta (Armaiti), the fair daughter of Ahura Mazda. 

‘ I invoke the good law of Mazda, the fiend- 
destroying law of Zarathiutra.’ 

1 7 (58). Zarathurtra asked Ahura Mazda : ‘ O 
Maker of the good world, Ahura*. Mazda! With 

1 See Introd. IV, 30. a See Introd. IV, 37. 

, See Introd. IV, 5. * Miithra Spewta ; see Introd. IV, 40. 

* See Introd. IV, 8. 

6 See Introd. IV, 31, and cf. Farg. XVIII, 2a seq. 

FARGARD XIX. 

209 

what manner of sacrifice shall I worship, with what 
manner of sacrifice shall I worship and forward this 
creation of Ahura Mazda?’ 

18 (60). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Go, O Spitama 
Zarathu.ftra ! towards that tree1 that is beautiful, 
high-growing, and mighty amongst the high-growing 
trees, and say thou these words : “ Hail to thee ! 
O good, holy tree, made by Mazda! Ashem 
vohu2!” 

19 (63). ‘ Let the faithful man cut off a twig of 
baresma, long as a ploughshare, thick as a barley- 
corn 3. The faithful one, holding it in his left hand, 
shall not leave off keeping his eyes upon it 4 *, whilst 
he is offering up the sacrifice to Ahura Mazda and 
to the Amesha-Spe;ztas, and to the high and beau- 
tiful golden Haomas, and to Vohu-man6r’ and to the 
good RAta 6 7 8, made by Mazda, holy and excellent V 

20(67). Zarathustra asked Ahura Mazda: ‘O thou, 
all-knowing Ahura Mazda! thou art never asleep, 
never intoxicated, thou Ahura Mazda ! Vohu-mano * 
gets directly defiled: Vohu-mano gets indirectly de- 

1 The tree, whatever it is, from which the baresma is taken. 
See p. 22, n. 2. 

2 See§ 22. 3 Doubtful. 

4 The Parsis arc recommended to keep their eyes on the baresma 

during the sacrifice : 4 A man is offering the Darun, he has said all 

the required Avesta, but he has not looked at the baresma : what 
is the rule ? It would have been better if he had looked at it : 
however he may proceed to the meal ’ (Old Rav. 97 b). 

• See Introd. IV, ?. 0 See Inlrod. IV, 30. 

7 Doubtful. Possibly, ‘While he is offering up the high and 
beautiful Haomas, and Vohu-man6 (good thoughts) and the good 
R$ta (sacrificial presents).’ 

8 Vohu-mand is often used as a designation of the faithful one, 
literally, ‘the good-minded;’* this is the meaning which is given to 
it in this passage by the Commentary, and it certainly belongs 

[4] P . 

210 

vendIdAd. 

filed; the Daevas defile him from the bodies smitten 
by the Daevas 1 : let Vohu-man6 be made clean.’ 

21(70). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Thou shalt 
take some gomez from a bull ungelded and such as 
the law requires it2; thou shalt take the man who 
is to be cleansed 3 to the field made by Ahura 4, and 
the man that is to cleanse him shall draw the 
furrows ®. 

22 (73). ‘He shall recite a hundred Ashem 
vohu : “Holiness is the best of all good. Happy, 
happy the man who is holy with perfect holiness ! ” 

‘He shall chant two hundred Ahuna-Vairya : 
“ The will of the Lord is the law of holiness ; the 
riches of Vohu-man6 shall be given to him who 
works in this world for Mazda, and wields according 
to the will of Ahura the power he gave to him to 
relieve the poor.” 

‘He shall wash Vohu-mano four times with the 
gomez from the ox, and twice with the water made 
by Mazda ". 

to it in the second part of § 25 ; but in the first part of the same 
clause it is translated ‘clothes,’ a meaning which is not unlikely 
in itself, as Vohu-mano, being the Amshaspand of cattle, may 
designate, and in fact did designate, the skins of cattle and leather 
(Comm, ad Farg. XVIII, 2). On the whole the description in the 
text applies to the cleansing both of the man and of the clothes, and 
Vohu-man6 sometimes means the one, and sometimes the other. 

1 From dead bodies. 

2 The so-called VarasiS; ‘it must be of a white colour; if a 
single hair on its body be found other than white, the animal is 
rejected as unfit for the purpose ' (Sorabji Kavasji Khamb&ta, in 
the Indian Antiquary, VII, 180). 

3 Or better, ‘ the things that are to be cleansed.’ 

4 The place of the cleansing, the Barashnflm-gah (see Farg. 
fX, 3). 

* See Farg. IX, 10. 

* This can hardly refer to the cleansing of the man, as the man 

FARGARD XIX. 

21 1 

23 (76). ‘ Thus Vohu-mano shall be made clean, 
and clean shall be the man. Then he shall take up 
Vohu-mano1 with his left arm and his right, with his 
right arm and his left : and thou shalt lay down 
Vohu-mand under the mighty structure of the bright 
heavens, by the light of the stars made by the gods, 
until nine nights have passed away 2. 

24 (80). ‘ When nine nights have passed away, 
thou shalt bring libations unto the fire, thou shalt 
bring hard wood unto the fire, thou shalt bring 
incense of Vohu-gaona unto the fire, and thou 
shalt perfume Vohu-mano therewith. 

25 (82). ‘ Thus shall Vohu-mano become clean, 
thus shall the man be clean3: he shall take up 
Vohu-mano with the right arm and the left, with 
the left arm and the right, and Vohu-mano * shall 
say aloud : “ Glory be to Ahura Mazda ! Glory be 
to the Amesha-Spewtas ! Glory be to all the other 
holy beings.” ’ 

26 (85). Zarathustra asked Ahura Mazda : ‘ O 
thou all-knowing Ahura Mazda : Should I urge 
upon the godly man, should I urge upon the godly 
woman, should I urge upon the wicked Daeva- 
worshipper who lives in sin, that they have once 
to leave behind them the earth made by Ahura, 

ought to be washed six times with g6mcz and three times with 
water (see Farg. VIII, 37 seq. ; IX, 28 seq.) 

1 ‘ The clothes ’ (Comm.) 

a The clothes of tile unclean shall be exposed to the air for nine 
nights, all the time while he himself is confined in the Arm&rt-gfih. 
The rules for the cleansing of clothes that have been worn by the 
dead himself are different (see Farg. VII, 12 seq.) 

3 ‘ Thus Vohu-man6 shall be clean — the clothes ; thustheman 
shall be clean — he who wears those clothes’ (Comm.) 

4 The faithful one. 

212 

vendIdad. 

that they have to leave the water that runs, the corn 
that grows, and all the rest of their wealth 1?’ 

Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ Thou shouldst, O holy 
Zarathuitra.’ 

27 (89). O Maker of the material world, thou 
Holy One ! Where are the rewards given ? Where 
does the rewarding take place ? Where is the 
rewarding fulfilled ? Whereto do men come to 
take the reward that, in their life in the material 
world, they have won for their souls ? 

28 (90). Ahura Mazda answered : ‘ When the 
man is dead, when his time is over, then the hellish, 
evil-doing Daevas assail him ; and when the third 
night is gone, when the dawn appears and 
brightens up, and makes Mithra, the god with 
beautiful weapons, reach the all-happy mountains, 
and the sun is rising : 

29 (94). ‘ Then the fiend, named Vlzaresha, 
carries off in bonds 2 the souls of the wicked 
Daeva-worshippers who live in sin. The soul 
enters the way made by Time, and open both to 
the wicked and to the righteous. At the head of 
the Khwad bridge, the holy bridge made by 
Mazda 3, they ask for their spirits and souls the 

1 ‘Linquenda tellus, et domus ct placens 

Uxor, nec harum, quas colis arborum. . . .' 

The translation is doubtful in its details ; yet there is little doubt 
that the sentence refers to future life (cf. § 27). Aspendiarji trans- 
lates, ‘ Shall the godly man . . . arise (from tlje dead) . . . ? ’ which 
seems to be the meaning of the Pahlavi Commentary too. 

* ‘ Every one has a noose cast around his neck : when a man 
dies, if he has been a righteous man, the noose falls from his neck ; 
if a wicked, they drag him with that noose down into hell' (Comm. ; 
cf. Farg. V, 8, add Introd. IV, 26). 

* The JPlnvarf bridge extends over hell and leads to paradise : 
for the souls of the righteous it widens to the length of nine javelins ; 

FARGARD XIX. 

reward for the worldly goods which they gave 
away here below1. 

30 (98). 4 Then comes the well-shapen, strong 
and tail-formed maid 2, with the dogs at her sides 
one who can distinguish 4, who is graceful 5, who 
does what she wants, and is of high understanding. 

4 She makes the soul of the righteous one go 
up above the Hara-berezaiti above the K'mv&d 
bridge she places it in the presence of the heavenly 
gods themselves. 

31 (102). ‘Up rises Vohu-mano7 from his golden 
seat; Vohu-mano exclaims : 44 How hast thou come 
to us, thou holy one, from that decaying world into 
this undecaying one 8 ? ” 

for the souls of the wicked it narrows to a thread, and they fall down 
into hell (cf. Ar</a VirafV, i). This bridge is known in many 
mythologies ; it is the Sirath bridge of the Musulmans ; not long 
ago they sang in Yorkshire of ‘ the Brig o’ Dread, na brader than 
a thread' (Thoms, Anecdotes, 89), and even nowadays the peasant 
in Nifcvre tells of a little board — 

4 Pas pu longue, pas pu large 
Qu'un ch’veu de la Sainte Viargc/ 
which was put by Saint Jean d’Archange between the earth and 
paradise : 

‘Ceux qu'saront la raison (=l'oraison?) d’Dieu 
Par dessus passeront. 

Ceux qu’la sauront pas 

Au bout mourront.’ (Mdlusine, p. 70.) 

1 Cf. Farg. Ill, 34, .35; XVIII, 33 seq. 

2 The soul of the dead, on the fourth day, finds itself in the 
presence of a maid, of divine beauty or fiendish ugliness, according 
as he himself was gofcd or bad, and she leads him into heaven or 
hell : this maid is his own conscience ( Yasht XXII). 

8 The dogs that keep the ATinva^/ bridge (see Farg. XIII, 9). 

4 The good from the wicked. 6 Doubtful. 

6 The heavenly mountain, whence the sun rises, and upon which 
the abode of the gods rests. * 

7 The door-keeper of paradise ; a Zoroastrian Saint-Pierre. 

8 Cf. Farg. VII, 52. 

214 

VEND? DAD. 

32 (105). ‘ Gladly pass the souls of the righteous 
to the golden seat of Ahura Mazda, to the golden 
seat of the Amesha-Spewtas, to the Garo-nm&nem l, 
the abode of Ahura Mazda, the abode of the 
Amesha-Spetttas, the abode of all the other holy 
beings. 

33 (108). ‘As to the godly man that has been 
cleansed 2, the wicked evil-doing Daevas tremble at 
the perfume of his soul after death, as a sheep does 
on which a wolf is falling 3. 

34 (x 10). ‘The souls of the righteous are gathered 
together there : Nairyo-sangha4 is with them; a friend 
of Ahura Mazda is Nairyo-sangha. 

‘ Do thou thyself invoke, O Zarathiutra ! this 
world of Ahura Mazda.’ 

35 (1 14). Zarath lustra took those words from 
Ahura Mazda: ‘ I invoke the holy world, made by 
Ahura Mazda. 

‘ I invoke the earth made by Ahura, the water 
made by Mazda, the holy trees. 

‘ I invoke the sea Vouru-kasha®. 

‘ I invoke the shining sky. 

‘ I invoke the eternal and sovereign luminous 
space #. 

1 The Garothmdn of the Parsis; literally, ‘the house of 
songs.’ 

s That has performed the BarashnQm. 

3 Ormazd is all perfume, Ahriman is infection and stench (Bun- 
dahir I ; Eznig, Rcfutatio Haeresiarum II) ; 'the souls of their fol- 
lowers partake of the same qualities, and by the performance of 
the BarashnQm both the body and the soul are perfumed and 
sweetened. 

4 The messenger of Ahura Mazda (cf. Farg. XXII, 7). 

3 See Introd. IV, 1 r. 

* See Introd. IV, 42. 

FARGARD XIX. 

215 

36 (120). 1 1 invoke the bright, all glorious, bliss- 
ful abode of the holy ones. 

‘ I invoke the Gar6-nmdnem, the abode of Ahura 
Mazda, the abode of the Amesha-Spewtas, the abode 
of all the other holy beings. 

‘ I invoke the sovereign place of eternal weal \ 
and the K'mva.d bridge made by Mazda. 

37 (123). ‘I invoke the good Saoka2, whose looks 
go far and wide. 

‘ I invoke the mighty Fravashis3 of the righteous. 

‘ I invoke the whole creation of weal. 

‘I invoke Vercthraghna4 * 6, made by Ahura, who 
wears the glory made by Mazda *. 

‘ I invoke Tistrya 8, the bright and glorious star, 
in the shape of a golden-horned bull. 

38 (127). ‘I invoke the holy, beneficent Gdthas 7, 
who rule over the rat 11s3: 

‘ I invoke the Ahunavaiti Gdtha ; 

‘ I invoke the Ustavaiti Gdtha; 

‘ I invoke the Spewta-mainyu Gdtha ; 

‘ I invoke the Vohu-khshathra Gdtha ; 

1 Misvana gatva, another name of the heavenly spaces.; it 
designates heaven as the abode and source of all blessings, of all 
savah, or saoka. 

2 A personification of the Ormazdean weal. 

3 See Introd. IV, 37. 

4 See Introd. IV, 14, and Yasht XIV. 

6 The ^z»areno or light of sovereignty (Introd. IV, n). 

6 See Introd. IV, 13, and Yasht VIII. 

7 The five collections of hymns which form the oldest and holiest 
part of the Yasna and of the Avesta (Yasna XXVIII-XXXIV ; 
XLIII-XLVI; XLVII-L; LI; L1II); they are named after their 
first words. 

8 The chiefs of creation (Introd. IV, 35); ‘they rule over the 
ratus insomuch as it is \>y their means that other beings are 
invoked ' (Comm.) 

21 6 

VEND? DAD. 

‘ I invoke the Vahi.yt6i.fti Githa. 

39(129). ‘I invoke the Karshvares of Arzahe 
and Savahe; 

‘ I invoke the Karshvares of Fradadhafshu and 
Vidadhafshu ; 

‘ I invoke the Karshvares of Vourubaresti and 
Vouruzare.fti ; 

‘ I invoke the bright Hv aniratha 1 ; 

‘ I invoke the bright, glorious Haetumawt2; 

‘ I invoke the good Ashi 3; 

[‘ I invoke the good K\st\ 4 ;] 

‘ I invoke the most right Avista ,r> ; 

‘ I invoke the glory of the Aryan regions0; 

‘ I invoke the glory of the bright Yima, the great 
shepherd 7. 

40(133). ‘Let him be worshipped with sacrifice, 
let him be gladdened, gratified, and satisfied, the 
holy Sraosha, the tail-formed, fiend-smiting, holy 
Sraosha *. 

‘ Bring libations unto the Fire, bring hard wood 
unto the Fire, bring incense of Vohu-gaona unto the 
Fire. 

’ Offer up the sacrifice to the Vazi-fta fire, which 

1 See Introd. IV, 7. 2 See Farg. I, 14. 

3 See Introd. IV, 30. 

1 An angel of knowledge ; the clause is found only in the Ven- 
didad Sadah. 

5 Religious knowledge. 

8 The light of sovereignty, ^areno, whidii if secured by the 
Aryans makes them rule over their enemies (cf. Introd. IV, n). 

7 See Introd. IV, 18, and Farg. II. 

8 This praise of Sraosha was probably introduced here with 
reference to the jgreat part he plays in the fate of the soul after 
death, and to the performance of the sadis ritual (see above, 
p. 87, n. 4). 

FARGARD XIX. 

217 

smites the fiend Spen^aghra 1 : bring unto it the 
cooked meat and the offerings of boiling milk 2. 

41 (1 37)- ‘Offer up the sacrifice to the holy 
Sraosha, that the holy Sraosha may smite down 
the fiend Kuwda3, who is drunken without drink- 
ing. He will fall upon the men of the Dru^, the 
slothful ones 4 * * 7, the wicked Daeva-worshippers, who 
live in sin. 

[42s. ‘ I invoke the Kara fish0, who lives beneath 
waters in the bottom of the deep lakes. 

‘ I invoke the ancient and sovereign Merezu the 
greatest seat of battle in the creation of the two 
spirits 8. 

‘ I invoke the seven bright Sravah 9 with their 
sons and their flocks. 

III. 

43. ‘ They run about to and fro, their minds 
waver to and fro10, Angra Mainyu the deadly, the 

1 Seelntrod. IV, 13. a Doubtful. 

3 The same as Ku«di; see Farg. XI, 9. 

4 Those who neglect their religious duties. The translation is 

doubtful. 

8 From the Vcndfdad Sadah, The clause may have belonged 
to the original text ; it is preceded by another clause which certainly 
did not belong to it, and part of which is cited in the Commen- 
tary ad Farg. VIII, 103, where it would have been more suitably 
placed: ‘ When he has been cleansed in the next inhabited place, 
he may then sow and till the pasture fields, as food for the sheep 
and as food for the ox.’ 

8 The Kar-m&lft (sec above, p. 59, n. 4). 

7 According to Professor Justi, ‘the milky way’ (Handbuch der 
Zendsprache s. v.), an Iranian representative of the Eddie liifrost. 
There is much probability in that translation. 

8 Doubtful. , 

9 A word of unknown meaning. 

10 Up and down, in hope and despair. 

218 

vendIdad. 

Daeva of the Daevas ; I«dra the Daeva, Sduru the 
Daeva, Nawnghaithya the Daeva, Taurvi and Zairi1, 
Aeshma of the wounding spear2 3, Akatasha the 
Daeva ', Zaurva4 * *, baneful to the fathers, Btaiti the 
Daeva °, Driwi 8 the Daeva, Daiwi 7 the Daeva, 
Kasvi 8 the Daeva, Paitisha 0 the most Daeva-like 
amongst the Da&vas.] 

44 (140). ‘And he said, the guileful, the evil- 
doing Daeva, Angra Mainyu the deadly: “What! 
let the wicked, evil-doing Daevas gather together 
at the head of Arezhra10.” 

45 ( 1 4 1 ). ‘ They rush, they run away, the wicked, 
evil-doing Da&vas ; they run away with shouts, the 
wicked, evil-doing Daevas ; they run away casting 
the evil eye, the wicked, evil-doing Daevas : “ Let 
us gather together at the head of Arezura ! 

46 (143). ‘ “ For he is just born the holy Zara- 
thurtra, in the house of Pourushaspa. How can we 
procure his death ? He is the stroke that fells the 
fiends : he is a counter-fiend to the fiends ; he is a 
Druf to the Driyf. Down are the Daeva-wor- 
shippers, the Nasu made by the Daeva, the false- 
speaking Lie!” 

47 (147). ‘They run away, they rush away, the 
wicked, evil-doing Daevas, into the depths of the 
dark, horrid world of hell. 

1 See Introd. IV, 34. 2 Seelntrod. IV, 22. 

3 See above, p. 136, n. 5, * Old age. 

5 See above, p. 204, n. 3. * 

3 Poverty; see above, Farg. II, 29. 

1 Lying; see above, Farg. II, 29. 

8 Meanness; see above, Farg. II, 29. 

* ‘ Opposition, ,pr counter-action,’ a personification of the doings 

of Ahriman and of his marring power. 

10 At the gate of hell; see above, p. 24, n. r. 

FARGARD XX. 

219 

‘Ashem vohu: Holiness is the best of all 
good.’ 

Fargard XX. 

Thrita, the First Healer. 

Thrita was the first who drove back death and disease, as Ahura 
Mazda had brought to him down from heaven ten thousand healing 
plants that had been growing up around the tree of eternal life, 
the white Hum or Gaokerena. 

This Thrita is mentioned only once again in the Avesta, in 
Yasna IX, 7, where he appears to have been one of the first priests 
of Haoma. This accounts for his medical skill; as Haoma is a 
source of life and health, his first priests must have been the first 
healers. 

Thrita was originally the same as Thra&aona1. On one hand, 
wc see that in the Rig-veda the great feat of Thraetaona is ascribed 
to Trita as well as to Traitana, and Trita Aptya, ‘the son of the 
waters/ was as well the celestial priest who pours Haoma into rain 
as the celestial hero who kills the snake in storms. On the other 
hand, we see that Thraetaona fulfilled the same functions as Thrita : 
according to Hamza he was the inventor of medicine 2 3 ; the Tavids8 
against sickness are inscribed with his name, and we find in the 
Avesta itself the Fravashi of Thraetaona invoked ‘ against itch, hot 
fever, humours, cold fever4 * 6 *, vavareshi, against the plagues created 
by the serpent V We see from this passage that disease was under- 
stood as corning from the serpent; in other words, that it was 
considered a sort of poisoning fi, and this is the reason why the 

1 See Introd. IV, 14. 

2 Ed. Gottwaldt, p. 23; cf. Mirkhond, Early Kings of Persia, 
Shea, p. 152. 

3 Formules of exorcism. 

4 Cf. Farg. VII, 58. 

fi Yasht XIII, 131. 

6 This theory, which modern science would not utterly reject, 
accounts for the great part.which the serpent plgys in the worship 

of Asklepios ; as sickness comes from him, from him too must or 

may come the healing. 

220 

VENDlDAD. 

killer of the serpent was invoked to act against it. Thus Thrita- 
Thraetaona had a double right to the title of the first of the healers, 
both as a priest of Haoma and as the conqueror of the serpent1. 

i . Zarathiutra asked Ahura Mazda : ‘ Ahura 
Mazda, most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the 
material world, thou Holy One ! Who was he 
who first of the healthful2, the wise, the happy, 
the wealthy, the glorious, the strong men of yore 3, 
drove back sickness to sickness, drove back death 
to death 4 *, and first turned away the point of the 
poniard and the fire of fever from the bodies of 
mortals.’ 

2(ir). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘ Thrita it was 
who first of the healthful, the wise, the happy, the 
wealthy, the glorious, the strong man of yore, drove 
back sickness to sickness, drove back death to 
death, and first turned away the point of the poniard 
and the fire of fever from the bodies of mortals. 

3 (12). ‘ He asked for a source of remedies6; he 
obtained it from Khshathra -Vairya B, to withstand 
sickness and to withstand death, to withstand pain 
and fever, to withstand the disease 7, rottenness and 

1 It seems as if in the Vedas, too, Trita had been a healing god 

(Rig-veda VIII, 47, 13 seq.) 

3 Whom no weapon could wound, like Isfendiar (Comm.) 

3 Or better, Paradhata (or Peshdad), 1 the kings of yore,’ which 
became the name of the first Iranian dynasty. 

4 ‘ That is to say, wIjo kept sickness in bonds, who kept death 
in bonds ’ (Comm.) 

* Doubtful. 4 

“ As Khshathra -Vairya presides over metals, it was a knife he 
received, ‘ of which the point and the base were set in gold.’ He 
was therefore the first who healed with the knife (cf. Farg.VII, 44); 
and it appears frqm § 4 that he was aljo the first who healed with 
herbs. As for the healing with the holy word, sec Farg. XXII. 

1 Doubtful. 

FARGARD XX. 

221 

infection which Angra Mainyu had created by his 
witchcraft against the bodies of mortals1. 

4 (15). ‘And I Ahura Mazda brought down the 
healing plants that, by many hundreds, by many 
thousands, by many myriads, grow up all around 
the one Gaokerena'2. 

5 (18). ‘All this (health) do we call by our 
blessing-spells, by our prayers, by our praises, upon 
the bodies of mortals3. 

7(i9)4. ‘To thee, O Sickness, I say avaunt! to 
thee, O Death, I say avaunt ! to thee, O Pain, 
I say avaunt! to thee, O Fever, I say avaunt! 
to thee, O Disease, I say avaunt 8 ! 

1 The Vcndidad Sadah has here eight names of diseases : to 
withstand Sarana (head-ache), to withstand Sarastya (cold fever), 
to withstand Azana, to withstand A saliva, to withstand Kuru- 
gha, to withstand Azi vSka, to withstand Duruka, and to withstand 
Astairya. 

s The white Horn, which is the king of healing plants (see 
Introd. IV, 28). The healing plants are said to have been created 
ten thousand in number, in order to oppose so many diseases that 
had been created by Ahriman (Bundahi.r IX ; cf. Farg. XXII, 2). 
In India also, healing plants are said to have Soma for their king, 
and to have come down from heaven : ‘ Whilst coming down from 
heaven, the plants said: lie will never suffer any wound, the mortal 
whom we touch’ (Rig-veda X, 97, 17 ; cf. HaurvatiV et Amcrcta/, 
§§ 4*5-47)- 

3 Or possibly, All those (plants) do we bless, all those (plants) 
do we pray, all those (plants) do we praise, for (the weal of) the 
bodies of mortals. 

4 Vendidad S&dah : 6. To withstand sickness, to withstand death, 
to withstand pain, to withstand fever, to withstand SArana, to with- 
stand Sarastya, to withstand Azana, to withstand Azahva, to with- 
stand Kurugha, to withstand Azivaka, to withstand Duruka, to 
withstand Astairya, to withstand the disease, rottenness, and infec- 
tion which Angra Mainyu fcas created by his wi^fheraft against the 
bodies of mortals. 

6 Vendid&d Sadah: To thee, 0 Sarana, I say avaunt ! to thee, 

222 

vend!dAd. 

8(21). ‘By their might may we smite down 
the Dru^! By their might may we smite the 
Dru^! May they give to us strength and power, 
O Ahura 1 ! 

9 2 (23). ‘I drive away sickness, I drive away 
death, I drive away pain and fever3, I drive away 
the disease, rottenness, and infection which Angra 
Mainyu has created by his witchcraft against the 
bodies of mortals. 

10 (25). ‘I drive away all manner of diseases and 
deaths, all the Y&tus and Pairikas4, and all the 
wicked Cainis6. 

1 1 (26). ‘ May the much-desired Airyaman6 come 
here, for the men and women of Zaratlnutra to 
rejoice, for the faithful to rejoice; with the desirable 
reward that is won by means of the law, and with 
that boon for holiness that is vouchsafed by Ahura! 

12 (29). ‘May the much-desired Airyaman smite 

O S&rastya, I say avaunt! to thee, O Azana, I say avaunt! to 
thee, 0 Azahva, I say avaunt ! to thee, 0 Kurugha, I say avaunt ! 
to thee, O Azivaka, I say avaunt! to thee, O Duruka, I say 
avaunt! to thee, O A stair y a, I say avaunt! 

1 This clause is borrowed, with some alteration, from Yasna 
XXXI, 4 ; the original text is, ‘ May the strong power come to 
me, by the might of which we may smite down the Dru^ ! ' 

2 The Vendidad Sadah has, ‘I drive away I shire, I drive away 
AghfiirS, I drive away Aghra, I drive away Ughra.* 

3 The Vendidad Sadah has, ‘ I drive away Sarana, I drive away 
Sarastya, I drive away Azana, I drive away Azahva, I drive away 
Kurugha, I drive away Azivaka, I drive away Duruka, I drive 
away Astairya/ 

4 See Introd. IV, 20-21. 

5 ‘ Gai ' (Comm.), that is Gahi (see Introd. IV, 5) ; cf. p. 89, 
note 1, and Farg. XXII, 2, note. 

8 Or better, ‘ Afryaman, the bestower of good.* On Airyaman, 
see Farg. XXII. Clauses 11-12 are borrowed from Yasna LIV, 
1, and form the prayer known as Airyama-ishyfi. 

FARGARD XXI. 

22’ 

all manner of diseases and deaths, all the Y&tus and 
Pairikas, and all the wicked Gainis.’ 

[13. Yath£ ahft vairy6 : — the will of the Lord 
is the law of holiness; the riches of Vohu-mand 
shall be given to him who works in this world for 
Mazda, and wields according to the will of Ahura 
the power he gave to him to relieve the poor. 

K*m n& mazdi : — whom hast thou placed to 
protect me, O Mazda! while the hate of the fiend is 
grasping me ? Whom but thy Atar and Vohu- 
mand, by whose work the holy world goes on ? 
Reveal to me the rules of thy law! 

Ke verethrem g&: — who is he who will smite 
the fiend in order to maintain thy ordinances ? 
Teach me clearly thy rules for this world and for 
the next, that Sraosha may come with Vohu-mano 
and help whomsoever thou pleasest. 

Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti 
Spewta! Perish, O fiendish Dru^-! Perish, O brood 
of the fiend ! Perish, O world of the fiend ! Perish 
away, O Dru/! Perish away to the regions of the 
north, never more to give unto death the living 
world of the holy spirit !] 1 

Fargard XXI. 

Waters and Light. 

I (1). Praise of tb# holy bull. 

II (2-3). Invocation addressed to rain as a healing power. 

III a (4-7). Joint invocation addressed to the waters and to the 
light of the sun. 

Ill b (8-1 1 ). Joint invocation addressed to the waters and to the 
light of the moon. • % 

1 From the Vendidad Sadah. 

224 

VENDIdAD. 

IIIc (12-17). Joint invocation addressed to the waters and to 
the light of the stars. 

IV (18-21). Spells against disease. 

I. 

1. Hail, holy bull 1 ! Hail to thee, beneficent 
bull ! Hail to thee, who makest increase ! Hail to 
thee, who makest growth! Hail to thee, who dost 
bestow thy gifts upon the excellent faithful, and 
who wilt bestow them on the faithful yet unborn ! 
Hail to thee, whom the Cahi kills2, and the ungodly 
Ashemaogha, and the wicked tyrant. 

II. 

2 (3). ‘ Come, come on, O clouds, along the sky, 
through the air, down on the earth, by thousands of 
drops, by myriads of drops : ’ thus say, O holy 
Zarathmtra ! ‘ to destroy sickness altogether, to 
destroy death altogether, to destroy altogether the 
sickness made by the 6*aini 3, to destroy altogether 
the death made by the Gaini, to destroy altogether 
Gadha and Apagadha 4. 

3 (9). ‘If death come at eve, may healing come 
at daybreak ! 

‘ If death come at daybreak, may healing come at 
night ! 

1 The primeval bull who was created by Ormazd and killed by 
Ahriman with the help of the (?ahi. The praise of the holy bull 
serves as an introduction to the praise of the waters. There were 
old myths in which a cloud was compared to a bull in the atmo- 
sphere, from whom rain was supposed to conie. (See Orm. Ahr. 
§122 seq. ; cf. Introd.V, si Clause 1 is to be recited when one 
meets an ox or any kind of cattle, Gr. Rav. 386.) 

* Possibly, ‘ who dost kill the 6-ahi 1 (by means of gfimez). 

3 The Gahi (sqe Farg. XX, 10) as .bringing sickness (cf. Farg. 
VII, 59)- 

4 Names of diseases. 

FARGARD XXI. 

225 

' If death come at night, may healing come at 
dawn ! 

‘ Let showers shower down new waters, new earth, 
new trees, new health, and new healing powers. 

Ill a. 

4 (15). ‘As the sea Vouru-kasha is the gathering 
place of waters \ rise up, go up the aerial way and 
go down on the earth; go down on the earth and go 
up the aerial way2. Rise up and roll along! thou in 
whose rising and growing Ahura Mazda made the 
aerial way 

5(20). ‘Up! rise up and roll along! thou swift- 
horsed sun, above Hara Berezaiti, and produce 
light for the world (and mayst thou [O man !] rise 
up there, if thou art to abide in Gar6-nmdncnr’)r', 
along the path made by Mazda, along the way made 
by the gods, the watery way they opened. 

J Waters and light are believed to flow from the same spring and 
in the same bed : ‘ As light rises up from llara Berezaiti [Alborz, 
the mountain by which the earth is surrounded], so waters spring 
up from it and come back to it’ (Bund. XX) ; every day the sun, 
moon, and stars rise up from Alborz, and every day all die waters 
on the earth come back together to the sea Vouru-kasha, and 
there collected come down again to the earth from the peaks of 
Alborz (Bund. VII, Gr. Rav. 431 ; cf. Farg. V, 15 seq.) As light 
comes from three different sources, the sun, the moon, and the 
stars, the waters are invoked three times, first in company with the 
sun, then with the moon, lastly with the stars, as if there should 
be three different movements of the rain connected with the three 
movements of light. 

2 Waters come down from the sky to the earth and come up 
back from the earth to the sky (see Farg. V, 15 seq.) 

3 Doubtful. . • 

4 * If thou art a righteous man ’ (Comm.) 

6 The translation of this clause is doubtful. 

[4] Q • 

226 

VENdIdAD. 

6(23). ‘And thou shalt keep away the evil by 
this holy spell 1 : Of thee [O child !] I will cleanse 
the birth and growth; of thee [O woman!] I will 
make the body and the strength pure ; I make thee 
a woman rich in children and rich in milk ; 

7 (27). ‘A woman 2 3 rich in seed, in milk, in fat, in 
marrow, and in offspring. I shall make for thee a 
thousand springs flow and run towards the pastures 
that will give food to the child. 

Ill b. 

8 (30). ‘As the sea Vouru-kasha is the gathering 
place of waters, rise up, go up the aerial way, and 
go down on the earth ; go down on the earth and 
go up the aerial way. Rise up and roll along ! thou 
in whose rising and growing Ahura Mazda made 
the earth \ 

9 (31). ‘Up! rise up, thou moon, that dost keep 
in thee the seed of the bull4, rise up above Hara 
Berezaiti, and produce light for the world (and 
mayst thou [O man !] rise up there, if thou art to 

1 Doubtful ; the text is corrupt. The spell refers to the cleansing 
and generative power of the waters; cf. the invocation to Ardvi 
SGra, Farg. VII, 16 : the waters are supposed to make females 
fertile as they make the earth. This spell was probably pronounced 
to facilitate childbirth. 

2 Or better, ‘ a female there are, in the text, two words for 
‘ milk,’ the one referring to the milk of women, the other to the 
milk of cows. 

3 Doubtful. 

4 When the bull died, ‘ what was bright and strong in his seed 
was brought to the sphere of the moon, and when it was cleansed 
there in the ligljt of the astre, two creatures were shaped with it, 
a male and a fesiale, from which came two hundred and seventy- 
two kinds of animals' (Bund. IV, X; cf. Orm. Ahr. §§ 125 and 
127). 

FARGARD XXI. 

227 

abide in Garo-nm&nem), along the path made by 
Mazda, along the way made by the gods, the. 
watery way they opened. 

10(32). ‘And thou shalt keep away the evil by 
this holy spell : Of thee [O child !] I will cleanse 
the birth and growth ; of thee [O woman !] I will 
make the body and the strength pure ; I make thee 
a woman rich in children and rich in milk ; 

11 (32). ‘A woman rich in seed, in milk, in fat, in 
marrow, and in offspring. I shall make for thee a 
thousand springs flow and run towards the pastures 
that will give food to the child. 

Ill c. 

12 (32). ‘As the sea Vouru-kasha is the gathering 
place of waters, rise up, go up the aerial way, and 
go down on the earth ; go down on the earth and 
go up the aerial way. Rise up and roll along ! thou 
in whose rising and growing Ahura Mazda made 
everything grow1. 

13 (33)* ‘Up! rise up, ye stars, that have in you 
the seed of waters z, rise up above Hara Berezaiti, 
and produce light for the world (and mayst thou [O 
man!] rise up there, if thou art to abide in Gard- 
nmdnem), along the path made by Mazda, along 
the way made by the gods, the watery way they 
opened. 

14 (34). ‘And thou shalt keep away the evil by 
this holy spell : ©f thee [O child !] I will cleanse the 
birth and growth ; of thee [O woman !] I will make 

1 Doubtful. 

* When Tijtrya,»the storm god who gives raifc, became a star 
(see Introd. IV, 36), it was thought that there was a relation 
between the stars and rain. 

Q 2 * 

228 

vendIdad. 

the body and the strength pure; I make thee a 
woman rich in children and rich in milk; 

15 (34). ‘A woman rich in seed, in milk, in fat, in 
marrow, and in offspring. I shall make for thee a 
thousand springs flow and run towards the pastures 
that will give food to the child. 

16 (34). ‘As the sea Vouru-kasha is the gathering 
place of waters, rise up and gather together, go up 
the aerial way and go down on the earth ; go down 
on the earth and go up the aerial way. Rise up 
and roll along! 

1 7 (35). ‘Up! rise up! away will the Ka/wu/i 1 
fly and cry, away will Ayehi 2 fly and cry, away will 
the Gahi, who is addicted to the Yatti, fly and cry. 

IV. 

[18. ‘I drive away Ishire, I drive away Aghtiire, 
I drive away Aghra, I drive away Ughra; I drive 
away sickness, I drive away death, I drive away 
pain and fever ; I drive away Sarana, I drive away 
Sarasti, I drive away Asana, I drive away A^ahva, 
1 drive away Kurugha, I drive away Asivaka, I drive 
away Duruka, I drive away Astairya ; I drive away 
the disease, rottenness, and infection which Angra 
Mainyu has created by his witchcraft against the 
bodies of mortals. 

19. ‘I drive away all manner of diseases and 
deaths, all the Y&tus and Pairikas, and all the 
wicked Gainis. 

20. ‘ May the much-desired Airyaman come here, 
for the men and women of Zarathustra to rejoice, for 
the faithful to rejoice; with the desirable reward 

jf. - _ 

1 * He who diminishes light, Ahriman ' (Comm.) 

2 ‘ Sterility, Ahriman ’ (Comm.) 

FARGARD XXII. 

229 

that is won by means of the law, and with that boon 
for holiness that is vouchsafed by Ahura ! 

21. ‘May the much-desired Airyaman smite all 
manner of diseases and deaths, all the Ydtus and 
Pairikas, and all the wicked <7ainis. 

22. ‘Yathd ahti vairyo: — the will of the 
Lord . . . h 

‘ K*m na mazda: — whom hast thou placed to 
protect me . . . 1 ? 

‘ Ke verethrem : — who is he who will smite 

the fiend . . . 1 ? 

23. ‘ Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and 
Armaiti Spe/rta! Perish, O fiendish Dr 11^! Perish, 
O brood of the fiend ! Perish, O world of the fiend ! 
Perish away, 0 Dru^! Perish, away to the regions 
of the north, never more to give unto death the 
living world of the holy spirit ! ’ 

Fargard XXII. 

Angra Mainyu creates 99,999 diseases: Ahura Mazda applies 
for healing to the holy word and to Airyaman. 

Airyaman is an old Indo-Iranian god : in the Rig-veda he is an 
Adilya (Aryaman), who is seldom invoked alone, but nearly always 
in company with Mitra and Varuwa. IJis name, like Mitra's, 
means, ‘ the friend/ and, like Mitra, he is the god of heavenly light, 
kind, beneficent, and helpful to man. 

In the Avesta the word Airyaman has the same meaning as in 
the Veda; but the character of the god is more fully developed, 
and whereas he has #no distinct personality in the Vedic hymns, 
he appears here in the character of a healing god, which is derived 
in a very natural manner from his primitive and general character. 

Airyaman abides in a mansion called the mansion of Airyaman 
(Airyamnfi nmanenj), which ^ the same as ‘ the flight mansion in 

1 As in preceding Fargard, § 13. 

230 

VENDI DAD. 

which Mitra, Aryaman, Varu«a abide,' according to the "Vedas, 
that is to say, the sky, In later Parsism, Airyaman appears as 
‘ the Ized of Heaven V 

This Fargard is unfinished or, more correctly, the end of it is 
understood. Airyaman, called out from his mansion, comes and 
digs nine furrows. It is no doubt in order to perform the Bara- 
shnflm * or some ceremony of that kind, in order to cleanse the 
unclean, that is to say, the sick man1 * 3, and to restore him to health 
by virtue of the Nirang and of the holy word. The Fargard ends 
therefore with spells against sickness and against death. 

I. 

i. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathmtra, 
saying: ‘I, Ahura Mazda, the Maker of all good 
things, when I made this mansion4, the beautiful, 
the shining, seen afar (there may I go up, there 
may I pass!) 

2 (5). ‘ Then the ruffian looked at me 5 * ; the 
ruffian Angra Mainyu, the deadly, wrought by his 
witchcraft nine diseases, and ninety, and nine hun- 
dred, and nine thousand, and nine times ten thou- 
sand diseases. So mayst thou heal me, O Mathra 
Spettta “, thou most glorious one ! 

3 (8). ‘Unto thee will I give in return a thou- 
sand fleet, swift-running steeds; offer them up7 as 
a sacrifice unto the good Saoka 8, made by Mazda 
and holy. 

‘ Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet, 

1 Aspendiarji. 8 See Farg. IX; cf. infra, § 20, n. 

* See Introd. V, 14. 

4 ‘ The Garotman ’ (Comm.), paradise. * 

5 And cast on me the evil eye ; ‘ it was by casting the evil eye 
on the good creatures of Ormazd that Ahriman corrupted them’ 

(Eznig, Refutatio Haeresiarum II). 

" The holy wprd. , , 

7 Possibly, ‘ I offer them up as a sacrifice.’ 

* An incarnation of weal ; here invoked as procuring health. 

FARGARD XXII. 

231 

high-humped camels ; offer them up as a sacrifice 
unto the good Saoka, made by Mazda and holy. 

4 (12). ‘Unto thee will I give in return a thou- 
sand brown oxen that do not push 1 ; offer them up 
as a sacrifice unto the good Saoka, made by Mazda 
and holy. 

‘ Unto thee will I give in return a thousand young 
of all species of small cattle ; offer them up as a 
sacrifice unto the good Saoka, made by Mazda and 
holy. 

5 (16). ‘And I will bless thee with the fair, holy 
blessing-spell, the friendly, holy blessing-spell, that 
makes the empty swell to fulness and the full to 
overflowing, that comes to help him who was 
sickening, and makes the sick man sound again. 

6 (20). ‘ Mathra Spewta, the all-glorious, replied 
unto me : “ How shall I heal thee ? How shall 1 
drive away from thee those nine diseases, and those 
ninety, those nine hundred, those nine thousand, 
and those nine times ten thousand diseases?’” 

II. 

7 (22). The Maker Ahura Mazda called for 
Nairyo-sangha 2 : Go thou, Nairyd-sangha, the 
herald, and drive towards the mansion of Airya- 
man, and speak thus unto him : 

8 (23). Thus speaks Ahura Mazda, the Holy 
One, unto thee: ‘I, Ahura Mazda, the Maker of 
all good things, when I made this mansion, the 

1 Possibly, ‘in which there is no blemish.’ 

2 The messenger of Ahura Mazda. He was originally the same 
as the Vedic NarfUansa, a name of Agni, chiefly as the sacrificial 
fire, that is, as th$ messenger that goes from J|ie heavens to the 
earth, and from the earth to the heavens. Mazdeism still knows 
that he is a form of Atar, the Fire (Yasna XVII, 1 1 [68]). 

vendJdAd. 

232 

beautiful, the shining, seen afar (there may I go 
up, there may I pass !) 

9 (24). ‘ Then the ruffian looked at me ; the 
ruffian Angra Mainyu, the deadly, wrought by his 
witchcraft nine diseases, and ninety, and nine 
hundred, and nine thousand, and nine times ten 
thousand diseases. So mayst thou heal me, O 
Airyaman, the much-desired! 

10 (26). * Unto thee will I give in return a 
thousand fleet, swift-running steeds ; offer them 
up as a sacrifice unto the good Saoka, made by 
Mazda and holy. 

‘ Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet, 
high-humped camels; offer them up as a sacrifice 
unto the good Saoka, made by Mazda and holy. 

1 1 (30). ‘ U nto thee will I give in return a thou- 
sand brown oxen that do not push ; offer them up 
as a sacrifice unto the good Saoka, made by Mazda 
and holy. 

‘Unto thee will I give in return a thousand young 
of all species of small cattle ; offer them up as a 
sacrifice unto the good Saoka, made by Mazda and 
holy. 

12 (34). ‘And I will bless thee with the fair, 
holy blessing-spell, the friendly, holy blessing-spell, 
that makes the empty swell to fulness and the full 
to overflowing, that comes to help him who was 
sickening, and makes the sick man sound again.’ 

i 

III. 

13 (38). In obedience to Ahura’s words he went, 
Nairyo-sangha, the herald ; he drove towards the 
mansion of Airyaman, he spake unto Airyaman, 
saying : 

FARGARD XXtI. 

233 

14 (38). Thus speaks Ahura Mazda, the Holy 
One, unto thee: ‘I, Ahura Mazda, the Maker of 
all good things, when I made this mansion, the 
beautiful, the shining, seen afar (there may I go up, 
there may I pass !) 

1 5 (39). ‘ Then the ruffian looked at me ; the 
ruffian Angra Mainyu, the deadly, wrought by his 
witchcraft nine diseases, and ninety, and nine hun- 
dred, and nine thousand, and nine times ten 
thousand diseases. So mayst thou heal me, O 
Airyaman, the much-desired! 

16 (40). ‘ Unto thee will I give in return a thou- 
sand fleet, swift-running steeds ; offer them up as a 
sacrifice unto the good Saoka, made by Mazda and 
holy. 

‘ Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet, 
high-humped camels; offer them up as a sacrifice 
unto the good Saoka, made by Mazda and holy. 

1 7 (44). ‘ U nto thee will I give in return a thou- 
sand brown oxen that do not push ; offer them up 
as a sacrifice unto the good Saoka, made by Mazda 
and holy. 

‘ Unto thee will I give in return a thousand 
young of all species of small cattle ; offer them up. 
as a sacrifice unto the good Saoka, made by Mazda 
and holy. 

18(48). ‘And I will bless thee with the fair, 
holy blessing-spell, the friendly, holy blessing-spell, 
that makes the* empty swell to fulness and the full 
to overflowing, that comes to help him who was 
sickening, and makes the sick man sound again.’ 

. . iv. 

19 (52). Quickly was it done, nor was it long, 
eagerly set off the much-desired Airyaman, towards 

234 

vendIdAd. 

the mountain of the holy questions towards the 
forest of the holy questions. 

20 (54). Nine stallions brought he with him, the 
much-desired Airyaman1 2. 

Nine camels brought he with him, the much- 
desired Airyaman. 

Nine bulls brought he with him, the much- 
desired Airyaman. 

Nine head of small cattle brought he with him, 
the much-desired Airyaman. 

He brought with him the nine twigs 3 ; he drew 
along nine furrows4. 

[21 5. ‘I drive away I shire, I drive away Aghhire, 
I drive away Aghra, I drive away Ughra; I drive 
away sickness, I drive away death, I drive away 
pain and fever ; I drive away Sarana, I drive away 
Sirastya, I drive away A^ana, I drive away As'ahva, 
I drive away Kurugha, I drive away Aaivdka, I drive 
away Duruka, I drive away Astairya ; I drive away 
the disease, rottenness, and infection which Angra 
Mainyu has created by his witchcraft against the 
bodies of mortals. 

22. ‘I drive away all manner of diseases and 
deaths, all the Ydtus and Pairikas, and all the 
wicked Cainis, 

1 The mountain where ‘ the holy conversations ' between Ormazd 
and Zoroaster took place (cf. Farg. XIX, n, and In trod. 40). 

2 According to Aspendiarji, * He brought with him the strength 
of nine stallions/ to infuse it into the sick man^cf. Yasht VIII, 24). 

3 That is to say, * the nine-knotted stick ' (Asp.; cf. Farg. IX, 1 4). 

4 To perform the Barashnfim, * the great service of the Nirang- 
Dtn, through which all evil, moral and natural, including evil 
passions, disease, and death will be removed ' (Wilson, The Parsi 
Religion, p. 341). 

5 From the Vendtdad Sadah. 

FARGARD XXII. 

235 

23. ' May the much-desired Airyaman come here 
for the men and women of Zarathustra to rejoice, 
for the faithful to rejoice ; with the desirable reward 
that is won by means of the law, and with that boon 
for holiness that is vouchsafed by Ahura. 

24. ‘ May the much-desired Airyaman smite all 
manner of diseases and deaths, all the Ydtus and 
Pairikas, and all the wicked Gainis. 

25. ‘YathcL ahft vairyo: — the will of the Lord 
is the law of holiness ; the riches of Vohu-man6 shall 
be given to him who works in this world for Mazda, 
and wields according to the will of Ahura the power 
he gave him to relieve the poor. 

* Kem n£ mazdd: — whom hast thou placed to 
protect me, O Mazda! while the hate of the fiend 
is grasping me ? Whom but thy Atar and Vohu- 
man6, by whose work the holy world goes on ? 
Reveal to me the rules of thy law! 

‘Ktf verethrem — who is he who will smite 

the fiend in order to maintain thy ordinances ? 
Teach me clearly thy rules for this world and for 
the next, that Sraosha may come with Vohu-man6 
and help whomsoever thou pleasest. 

* Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti 
Sperata! Perish, O fiendish Dru^! Perish, O brood 
of the fiend ! Perish, O world of the fiend ! Perish 
away, O Drug-! Perish away to the regions of the 
north, never more to give unto death the living 
world of the boly spirit!’] 

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the Translations 
of tiie Sacred Books of the East. 

TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS. 

r n n n. 

D . 

a joj 

n * c 

» - L)0j U 

» - lJuJ'U 

_ ft 

fc * 

a, ^ 3/ 
^ 5 

r P If I* (r 

j - fi * 

«* r3 I- 

O ft 09 

S o o 

£ ft « ft 

CO N » O O h N 

238 TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS 

Chinese. 

>• 

• . *1 

•** ^ • • • • 

a • 

• CO 

• • 

. N « . 

• , 

Hebrew. 

#• 

• • • 

et; i f r 

r\J\ . 

•3D *• M • 

! 

;‘b ; 

3 . <3 0 . -o 

D-0 • 

j 5 

l 

• 4b 

3 * <3 0 • *o 

SO i 

•«T 

• N-/ 

• b 

:3 y*, 

. 

Pehlevi. 

• sp <J 

^ • • CJ • • 

-*5 • 

rs • 

: * 

i ! 

•d 

3 

N 

O' 

O 

init. 

t 

: ?* 

8.\) : ^ ; 

| * 

: ^ 

c 

1 

I 

P“ 

• ft • 

|b ft • hr 5* • 

Me is 

• * 

6 

cs 

< 

S 

Cl, 

III Class. 

* 

• • M • « SJ 

NH 5S 

• • E- . . ft 

• • • • 

• • 1 

a * 

• 

^ /—v 

• «ri r^“ 

« : ^ s- 

d 

£ 

? 

II Class. 

•»S» 

w 

• . 

• • N 

• • 

• t 

1 

s 

Class. 

k* 

• 

. . . 

t 

th 

d 

dh 

fl -• • 

• CO 

• N • • 

00 

3 t 

•7s ra 

r§ a 

8 -a 1 1 
3 1 s 3 

a 

£ 

.SJ s s s 

Qh 

m 

0> O h N 

rH N N N 

I 

I 

0 

•g 

C 

CO tH <0 
55 CJ N N 

S 00 O) O 
<N (N N CO 

'0 »H N 

| fa fc 

fH N 
09 «0 

3 2 

s g 

'£ '£ 

i 8. \ 8. 1 

h (N M ^ U5 CD N 

CO CO CO CO CO CO co 

Dontales moiiificataQ 
(linguales, &c.) 

38 Tenuis 

FOR THE SACRED BOOKS OF TI1E EAST, 

39 

56 Spiritus asper 

57 ,, lenis . 

58 Anusv&ra . . . 

59 Visarga . . . , 

240 TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALNIaEETS. 

3 <5 o> <© 

H 

^ I* !* 

"I'A 

j |> § 

-1'^ 

1 ca .2 q *0 

- * 

> - • O 

sb 

\l 

' 0^ 

Z 3 I'T- 

A- ^ 

i?/ • 
So • 

U) ■ 

l 

P ^ ivr*ivr |$? I#1 (jp p* p • 

O «) >1 o3 <ci •« 

3 S3 

S 3 »J» 

.2 c8 P« 

> be A 

<u p n 

3= .3 

0 3 

” 'S 
* .2 

cfl • 
bD » 

s > 

fi.-3 « 

d 

?.S c3 

r0J 

Ph 

■s 

r-H 

33 

j» 

0 

22 

33 

3 

0 

22 

33 

3 

0 

u 

33 

0 

1 

0 

bo 

G 

r3 

3 

03 

.£ 

’cS 

OS 

3 

.2 

fc4 

03 

•1 

3 

11 

«3 

*3 

u 

-H 

3 

4) 

bo 

3 

* 

1 

►J 

0 

Qh 

Q 

3 

j 

N 

CQ 

T* 

CO 

N 

00 

05 

o 

rH 

<N 

bo «S 

S "3 

S f. 

p 

3 

3 

bo 

3 

0 

3 

o 

fii i 
£L .- 

3 5 

o 5 

3 
bo 
, c 
1 0 
X 

0, 

IOWSOOOOHNW 

rtHHHHCJNNN 

24 Gutturalis fracta . . . . 

25 Palatalis fracta, 

26 Labialis fracta 

27 Gutturo-labialis fracta . 

September % ki88$. 

(Elatenhon ess, (fcxfotti 

A SELECTION OF 

BOOKS 

' PUBLISHED FOR THE UNIVERSITY BY 

HENRY FROWDE, 

AT THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, 
7 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON. 

ALSO TO BE HAD AT THE 

CLARENDON PRESS DEPOSITORY, OXFORD. 

LEXICONS, GRAMMARS, &c. 

(See also Clarendon Press Series, pp. 22, 25, 26.) 

A Grcek-English Lexicon , by Henry George 

Liddell, D.D., and Robert Scot tj D.D. Seventh Edition, Revised 
and Augmented throughout. 1885. 4to. cloth, 1/. 16s. 

A copious Greek-Englisk Vocabulary , compiled 

from the best authorities. 1850. 241110. bound, 3s. 

A Practical Introduction to Greek Accentuation, 

by H. W. Chandler, M.A. Second Edition. 1881. 8vo. cloth, 
1 os. 6d. 

A Latin Dictionary , founded on Andrews' edi- 

tion of Freund's Latin Dictionary, revised, enlarged, and in great 
part rewritten by Charlton T. Lewis, l’h.D., and Charles Short, 
LL.D., Professor of Latin in Columbia College, New York. 1879. 
4to, cloth, 1/. 5 s. 

The Book of Hebrew Roots, by Abu '1-Walld 

Marw&n ibn Jon&h, otherwise called Rabbi Ydn&h. Now first edited* 
with an Appendix, by Ad. Neubauer. 1875. 4to. cloth. 2 L *is. 6<f. 

a 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

A Treatise on the use of the Tenses in Hebrew. 

By S. R. Driver, M.A. Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged. 
1881. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d . 

Hebrew Accentuation of Psalms , Proverbs , and 

Job. By William Wickesj D.D. 1881. Demy 8vo. stiff cover, 5s. 

Thesaurus Syriacus : collegerunt Quatremere, 

Bernstein, Lorsbach, Amoldi, Field: edidit R. Payne Smith, 
S.T.P. 

Fasc. I-VI. 1868-83. sm. fol. each, 1 /. is. 

Vol. I, containing Fasc. I-V. sm. fol. cloth, 5/. 5 s. 

A Practical Grammar of the Sanskrit Language, 

arranged with reference to the Classical Languages of Europe, for 
the use of English Students, by Monier Williams, M.A., Boden 
Professor of Sanskrit. Fourth Edition, 1877. 8vo. cloth, 15s. 

A Sanskrit-English Dictionary , Etymologically 

and Philologically arranged, with special reference to Greek, Latin, 
German, Anglo-Saxon, English, and other cognate Indo European 
Languages. By RJonier Williams, M.A., Boden Professor of San- 
skrit. 1872. 4to. cloth, 4 1. 14s. 6d. 

Nalop&khydnam. Story of Nala, an Episode 

of the Maha-Bhdrata: the Sanskrit text, with a copious Vocabulary, 
and an improved version of Dean Milman’s Translation, by Monier 
Williams, M.A. Second Edition, Revised and Improved. 1879. 
8vo. cloth, 15s. 

Sakuntald. A Sanskrit Drama, in seven Acts. 

Edited by Monier Williams, M.A. Second Edition, 1876. Svo. 

Cloth, 215. 

An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, based on the MS. 

Collections of the late Joseph Bosworth, D.D., Professor of Anglo- 
Saxon, Oxford. Edited ana enlarged by Prof. T. N. Toller, M.A., 
Owens College, Manchester. (To be completed in four parts). 
Parts I and II. 1882. 4to. 155. each. 

An Icelandic-English Dictionary , based on the 

MS. collections of the late Richard Cleasby. Enlarged and com- 
pleted by G. Vigfusson, M.A. With an Introduction, and Life of 
Richard Cleasby, by G. Webbe Dasent, D.C.L. 1874. 4to. cloth, 
3/. 7 «. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

3 

A List of English Words the Etymology of 

which is illustrated by comparison with Icelandic . Prepared in the 
form of an Appendix to the above. By W. W. Skeat, M.A., 
1876. stitched, 2 s, 

A Handbook of the Chinese Language. Parts 

I and II, Grammar and Chrestomathy. By James Summers. 
1863. 8vo. half bound, il. 8s. 

An Etymological Dictionary of the English 

Language, arranged on an Historical Basis. By W. W. Skeat, M.A., 
Elrington and Boswortli Professor of Anglo-Saxon in the University 
of Cambridge. 188a. 4to. cloth, 2/. 4s. 

A Concise Etymological Dictionary of the 

English Language. By W. W. Skeat, M.A. 1882. Crown 8vo. 
cloth, 5s. 6 d. 

GREEK CLASSICS, &c. 

Aristotle: The Politics, translated into English, 

with Introduction, Marginal Analysis, Notes, and Indices, by B. 
Jowett, M.A., Regius Professor of Greek. Medium 8vo. In tflP* 
Press . 

Aristophanes: A Complete Concordance to. 

By Ilenry Dunbar, M.D. 4to. In the Press . 

Heraclili Ephesii Reliquiae. Recensuit I. By- 

water, M.A. Appendicis loco additae sunt Diogenis Lacrtii Vita 
Ileracliti, Parliculae Ilippocratei De Diaeta Libri Primi, Epistolae 
Hcracliteae. 1877. 8vo. cloth, price 6s. 

Homer: A Complete Concordance to the Odys- 

sey and Hymns of Ilomer; to which is added a Concordance to 
the Parallel Passages in the Iliad, Odyssey, and Hymns, l'y 
Henry Dunbar, M.D., Member of the General Council, University 
of Edinburgh. 1880. 4to. cloth, il. is. 

Plato: The Apology, with a revised Text and 

English Notes, and a Digest of Platonic Idioms, by James Riddell, 
M.A. 1878. 8vo. cloth, 8s. 6d . 

Plato: Philebus, with a revised Text and English 

Notes, by Edward Poste, M.A. i860. 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d. 

Plato : . Sophistes and Politicus, with a revised 

Text and English Notes, by L. Campbell, M.A. 1867. 8vo. 
cloth, 185, 

a 

4 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

Plato : Theaetelus, with a revised Text and 

English Notes, by L. Campbell, M.A. Second Edition. 8vo. cloth, 
ios. 6d. 

Plato : The Dialogues, translated into English, 

with Analyses and Introductions, by B. Jowett, M.A., Regius 
Professor of Greek. A new Edition in 5 volumes, medium 8vo. 
1875, cloth, 3/. ios. 

Plato : The Republic , translated into English, 

with an Analysis and Introduction, by B. Jowett, M.A. Medium 
8vo. cloth, 1 2s. 6 d, 

Plato: Index to. Compiled for the Second 

Edition of Professor Jowctt’s Translation of the Dialogues. By 
Evelyn Abbott, M.A. 1875. 8vo. paper covers, 2 s. 6d. 

Thucydides : Translated into English, with In- 

troduction, Marginal Analysis, Notes, and Indices. By B. Jowett, 
M.A., Regius Professor of Greek. 2 vols. 1881. Medium 8vo. 
cloth, 1/. 12s. 

THE HOLY SCRIPTURES, &c. 

The Holy Bible in the earliest English Versions, 

made from the Latin Vulgate by John WyclifTe and his followers: 
edited by the Rev. J. Forshall and Sir F. Madden. 4 vols. 1S50. 
Royal 4to. cloth, 3 l. 3s. 

Also reprinted from the above, with Introduction and 
Glossary by W. W. Skeat, M.A. 

The New Testament in English , according to 

the Version by John WyclifTe, about a.d. 1380, and Revised by 
John Purvey, about a.d. 1388. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 6s. 

The Books of Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Eccle- 

siasfes, and the Song of Solomon: according to the Wycliffitc Version 
made by Nicholas de Hereford, about a.d. 1381, and Revised by 
John Purvey, about a.d. 1388. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d. 

The Holy Bible: an exact reprint, page for 

page, of the Authorized Version published in the year 1611. ■ 
Demy4to. half bound, 1 /. is. t 

Vctus Testamentum ex Versione Septuaginta 

Interpretum secundum exemplar Vaticanum Romae editum. Accedit 
potior varietas Codicis Alexandria. Tomi III. Editio Altera. 
iSmo. cloth, 18s. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

Origcnis Hexaplorum quae supersunt ; sive, 

Veterum Interprctum Graecorum in totum Velus Testament um 
Frogmen ta. Edidit Fridericus Field, A.M. 2 vols. 1875. 4to. 
cloth, 5/. 5s. 

Libri Psalmorum Versio antiqua Latina, cum 

Faraphrasi Anglo-Saxonica. Edidit B. Thorpe, F.A.S. 1835. 
8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

Libri Psalmorum Versio antiqua Gallica e Cod. 

MS. in 13ibl. Bodlciana adservato, una cum Versione Metrica 
aiiisque Monunieutis pervetustis. Nunc priinum descripsit et edidit 
Franciscus Michel, Phil. Doct. i860. Svo. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

The Psalms in Hebrew without points. 1879. 

Crown 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6 d. 

The Book of Wisdom: the Greek Text, the 

Latin Vulgate, and the Authorised English Version; with an In- 
troduction, Critical Apparatus, and a Commentary. By William 
J. Deane. M.A., Oriel College, Oxford ; Rector of Ashen, Essex. 
Small 4to. cloth, 1 2.s. 6d. 

The Book of Tobit. A Chaldee Text, from a 

unique MS. in the Bodleian Library ; with other Rabbinical Texts, 
English Translations, and the Itala. Edited by Ad. Neubauer, M. A . 
1878. Crown Svo. cloth, 6a. 

A Commentary on the Book of Proverbs. Attri- 

buted to Abraham Ihn Ezra. Edited from a Manuscript in the 
Bodleian Library by S. R. Driver, M.A. Crown 8vo. paper cover, 
3s. 6 d. 

Horae Hebraicae et Talmudicae , a J. Lightfoot. 

A new Edition, by R. Gandcll, M.A. 4 vols. 1859. Svo. cloth, 

1 /. is. 

Novum Testamentum Graece. Antiquissimorum 

Codicum Tcxtus in online parallelo dispositi, Accedit collatio 
Codicis Sinaitici. Edidit E. 11. liansell, S.T.B. Tomi III. 1864. 
Svo. half morocco, 2/. 12s 6J, 

Novum Testdmentum Graece. Accedunt paral- 

lela S. Scripturae loca, necnon vetus capitulorum notatio et canones 
Eusebii. Edidit Carolus Lloyd, S.T.P.R., necnon Episcopus 
Oxoniensis. i8mo. cloth, 3 s. 

The same on writing paper, with large margin, cloth, 10s. 

6 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

Novum Testamentum Graece juxta Exemplar ' 

Millianum. i8mo. cloth, 2s. 6d. 

The same on writing paper, with large margin, cloth, 95. 

Evangelia Sacra Graece. fcap. 8vo. limp, is. 6 d. 
The Greek Testament, with the Readings 

adopted by the Revisers of the Authorised Version : — 

(1) Pica type. Second Edition, with Marginal References. 

Demy 8vo. cloth, ios. 6d. 

(2) Long .Primer type. Fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d. 

(3) The same, on writing paper, with wide margin, cloth, 15s. 

The Parallel New Testament, Greek and Eng- 

lish; being the Authorised Version, 1611; the Revised Version, 
1881 ; and the Greek Text followed in the Revised Version. 8vo. 
cloth, 1 2s. 6d. 

The Revised Version is the joint property of the Universities of Oxford 
and Cambridge. 

The Gospel of St. Mark in Gothic, according to 

the translation made by Wulfila in the Fourth Century. Edited 
with a Grammatical Introduction and Glossarial Inde* by W. W. 
Skcat, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo cloth, 4J. 

Canon Aluratorianus : the earliest Catalogue 

of the Books of the New Testament. Edited with Notes and a 
Facsimile of the MS. in the Ambrosian library at Milan, by S. P. 
Tregelles, LL.D. 1867. 4to. cloth, ios. 6 d. 

FATHERS OF THE CHURCH, &o. 

St. Athanasius : Orations against the Arians. 

With an Account of his Life by William Bright, D.D. 1873. 
Crown 8yo. cloth, 9s, 

St. Athanasius : Historical Writings, according 

to the Benedictine Text. With an Introduction by William Bright, 
D.D. 1881. Crown 8vo. cloth, ios. 6rf. € 

St. Augustine: Select Anti-Pelagian Treatises, 

and the Acts of the Second Council of Orange. With an Intro- 
duction by William Bright, D.D. Crown 8vo. doth, 9s. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. ' 7 

The Canons of the First Four General Councils 

of Nicaea, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon. 1877. Crown 
$vo. cloth, 2 s. 6d. 

Notes on the Canons of the First Four General 

Councils . By William Bright, D.D. 1882. Crown 8vo. cloth, 
5s. 6d. 

Cyrilli Archiepiscopi Alexandrini in XII Pro- 

phctas . Edidit P. E. Pusey, A.M. Tomi II. 1868. 8vo. cloth, 
2/. .25. 

Cyrilli A rchiepiscopi A lexandrini in D. Joannis 

Evangelium . Accedunt Fragmenta Varia necnon Tractatus ad 
Tiberium Diaconum Duo. Edidit post Aubertum P. E. Pusey, 
A.M. Tomi III. 1872. 8vo. 2/. 5s. 

Cyrilli Archiepiscopi Alexandrini Commentarii 

in Lucae Evangelium quae supersunt Syriace. E MSS. apud Mus. 
Britan, edidit R. Payne Smith, A.M. 1858. 4to. cloth, 1 /. 2s. 

The same , translated by R. Payne Smith, M,A. 

2 vols. 1859. 8vo. cloth, 14s. 

Ephraemi Syri, Rabulae Episcopi Edesseni, 

Balaei, aliorumque Opera Selecta. E Codd. Syriacis MSS in 
Museo Britannico et Bibliotheca Bodlciana asservatis primus edidit 
J. J. Overbeck. 1865. 8vo, cloth, .1/. is. 

Eusebius' Ecclesiastical History , according to 

the text of Burton, with an Introduction by William Bright, D.D. 
18S1. Crown 8vo. cloth, 8s. 6d. 

Irenaeus: The Third Book of St. Irenaeus , 

Bishop of Lyons, against Heresies. With short Notes and a 
Glossary by H. Deane, B.D., Fellow of St. John’s College, Oxford. 
1874 Crown 8vo. cloth, 5s. 6d. 

Patrum Apostolicorum , S. dementis Romani, 

S. Ignatii, S Polycarpi, quae supersunt. Edidit Guil. Jacobson, 
S.T.P.R. Tomi II. Fourth Edition, 1863. 8yo. cloth, if. is. 

Socratei Ecclesiastical History , according to 

the Text of Hussey, with an Introduction by William Blight, D.D. 
1878. Crown 8vo. cloth, 7s 6d, 

.8 CLARENDON P'RESS, OXFORD. 

ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY, &c. 

Baedae Historia Ecclesiastica. Edited, with Eng- 

lish Notes, by G. H. Moberly, M.A. 1881. Crown 8yo. cloth, ios. 6tf. 

Bright {W., D.D). Chapters of Early English 

Church History. 1878. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 

Barnet's History of the Reformation of the 

Church of England. A new Edition. Carefully revised, and the 
Kecords collated with the originals, by N. Pocock, M.A. 7 vols. 
1865. 8 vo. Price reduced to 1 /. ios. 

Councils and Ecclesiastical Documents relating 

to Great Britain and Ireland. Edited, after Spelman and Wilkins, 
by A. W. Had dan, B.D., and W. Stubbs, M.A., Regius Professor 
of Modern History, Oxford. Vols. I. and III. 1869-71. Medium 
Svo. cloth, each il. is. 

Vol. II. Part I. 1873. Medium 8vo. cloth, 10$. 6 d. 

Vol. II. Part II. 1878. Church of Ireland; Memorials of St. 
Patrick. Stiff covers, 3s. 6 d. 

Hammond (C. E). Liturgies , Eastern and 

Western . Edited, with Introduction, Notes, and a Liturgical 
Glossary. 1878. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

An Appendix to tlie above. 1879. Crown 8vo. paper covers, is. 6d. 

John, Bishop of Ephesus. The Third Part of 

his Ecclesiastical History. [In Syriac.] Now first edited by 
William Cureton, M.A. 1853. 4to. cloth, 1 /. 12s. 

The same, translated by R. Payne Smith, M.A. 

i860. 8vo. cloth, 10s, 

The Leofric Missal, as used in the Cathedral 

of Exeter during the Episcopate of its first Bishop, A.D. 1050-1072 ; 
together with some Account of the Red Book of Derby, the Missal 
of Robert of Jumi&ges, and a few other early MS. Service Books 
of the English Church. Edited, with Introduction and Notes, by 
E. E. Warren, B.D. 4to, half morocco, 35J. 

The Lihirgy and Ritual of the Celtic Church. 

By F. E. WTarren, B.D. 1881. 8vo. clojb, 14s. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

9 

The Ancient Lihirgy of the Church of England, 

according to the uses of Sarum, York, Hereford, and Bangor, and 
the Roman Liturgy arranged in parallel columns, with preface and 
notes. By William Maskell, ALA. Third Edition. 1882. 8yo. 
cloth, 15 s. 

Monument a Ritualia Ecclesiae Anglicanae. The 

occasional Offices of the Church of England according to the old 
use of Salisbury the Prymer in English, and other prayers and 
forms, with dissertations and notes. By William Maskell, M.A. 
Second Edition. 1882. 3 vols. Svo. cloth, 2/. 10s. 

Records of the Reformation. The Divorce, 

1527-1333. Mostly now for the first time printed from MSS. in 
the British Museum and other libraries. Collected and arranged 
by N. Pocock, M.A. 1870. 2 vols. 8vo. cloth, 1/. 16s. 

Shirley ( W. W). Some Account of the Church 

in the Apostolic Agt \ Second Edition, 1874. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 
3s. 6d. 

Stubbs (IV.). Registrum Sacrum Anglicanum. 

An attempt to exhibit the course of Episcopal Succession in EflJ^ 
land. 1858. small 4 to. cloth, 8s. 6d. 

ENGLISH THEOLOGY. 

Butler's Works , with an Index to the Analogy. 

2 vols. 1874. 8vo. cloth, 1 is. 

Butler s Sermons. 8vo. cloth, 5s. 6 d. 

Butler’s Analogy of Religion. 8vo. cloth, 5^ 6d. 
Heurtley's Harmonia Symbolical Creeds of the 

Western Church. 1858. 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d. 

Homilies appointed to be read in Churches. 

Edited by J. Griffiths, M.A. 1859. Svo. cloth, 7s. 6d. 

Hooker's Works, with his Life by Walton, ar- 
ranged by Join Keble, M.A. Sixth Edition, 1874. 3 vols. 8vo. 
doth, 1 /. 1 is. 6d. * 

Hooker's Works; the text as arranged by John 

Keble, M.A. 2 vols. 1875. Svo. cloth, 1 is. 

10 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

Pearson's Exposition of the Creed. Revised 

and corrected by E. Burton, D.D. Sixth Edition, 1877. 8vo. cloth, 
105. 6d. 

Water land' s Review of the Doctrine of the 

Eucharist , with a Preface by the present Bishop of London. 1880. 
' Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d. 

Wheatly' s Illustration of the Book of Common 

Prayer, A new Edition, 1846. 8vo. cloth, 5s. 

Wyclif. A Catalogue of the Original Works 

of John Wyclif by W. W. Shirley, D.D. 1865. 8vo. 'cloth, 35. 6 d, 

Wyclif. Select English Works. By T. Arnold, 

M.A. 3 vols. 1869-1871. 8vo. cloth. Price reduced to 1 1, is. 

Wyclif. Trialogus. With the Supplement now 

first edited. By Gotthard Lechler. 1869 8vo. cloth. Price reduced 

to 75. 

HISTORICAL AND DOCUMENTARY WORKS. 

British Barrows , a Record of the Examination 

of Sepulchral Mounds in various parts of England. By William 
Greenwell, M.A., F.S. A. Together with Description of Figures of 
Skulls, General Remarks on Prehistoric Crania, and an Appendix 
by George Rolleston, M.D., F.R.S. 1877. Medium 8vo. cloth, 25 *. 

Britton. A Treatise upon the Common Law of 

England, composed by order of King Edward I. The French Text 
carefully revised, with an English Translation, Introduction, and 
Notes, by F. M. Nichols, M.A. 2 vols. 1865. Royal 8vo. cloth, 
I/. 1 6s. 

Clarendons ( Edw . Earl of) History of the 

Rebellion and Civil Wars in England. 7 vols. 1839. i8mo. cloth, 

I/. 15. 

Clarendon's {Edw. Earl of) itistory of the 

Rebellion and Civil Wars tfi England. Also his Life, written by 
himself, in which is included a Continuation of his History of the 
Grand Rebellion. With copious Indexes. In one volume, royal 
8yo. 1842. cloth, 1/. 25. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

ii 

Clinton's Epitome of the Fasti Hellenici. 1851. 

8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d . 

Clinton's Epitome of the Fasti Romani. 1854. 

8vo. cloth, 7 s. 

Freemans (E. A.) History of the Norman 

Conquest of England ; its Causes and Results. In Six Volumes. 
8vo. cloth, 5/. 9s. 6rf. 

Vols. I— II together, 3rd edition, 1877. 1/. 16s. 

Vol. Ill, 2nd edition, 1874. iZ. is. 

Vol. IV, 2nd edition, 1875. i/. is. 

Vol. V, 1876. 1 Z. is. 

Vol. VI. Index. 1879. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

Freeman (E. A.). The Reign of William Rufus 

and the Accession of Henry the First. 2 vols. 8vo. cloth, iZ. 16s. 

Gascoigne's Theological Dictionary (“ Lib9r* 

Veritatum ’*) : Selected Passages, illustrating the condition of’ 
Church and State, 1403-1458. With an Introduction by James 
E. Thorold Rogers, M.P. Small 4to. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

Magna Carta, a careful Reprint. Edited by 

W. Stubbs, M.A., Regius Professor of Modem History. 1879. 
4to. stitched, is. 

Olaf Passio et Miracula Bead Olavi. Edited 

from a Twelfth-Century MS. in the Library of Corpus Christi 
College, Oxford, with an Introduction and Notes, by Frederick 
Metcalfe, M.A. Small 4to. stiff cover, 6s. 

Protests of the Lords, including those which 

have been expunged, from 1624 to 1874; with Historical Intro- 
ductions. Edited by James E. Thorold Rogers, M.A. 1875. 3 vols. 
8vo. cloth, 2Z. 25. 

Rogers's History of Agriculture and Prices in 

England, a.d. 1259-1793. - 

Vols. I and II (1259-14C0). 1866. 8vo. cloth, 2Z. 25. 

Vols. Ill and IV (1401-1582). 1882. 8vo. cloth, 2Z. ios. 

12 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

Sturlunga Saga , including the Islendinga Saga * 

of Lawman Sturla Thordsson and other works. Edited by Dr. 
Gudbraud Vigfusson. In 2 vols. 1878* 8vo. cloth, 2/. 2 $. 

Two of the Saxon Chronicles parallel, with 

Supplementary Extracts from the Others. Edited, with Intro- 
duction, Notes, and a Glossarial Index, by J. Earle, M.A. 1865. 
8vo. cloth, 1 6s. 

Statutes made for the University of Oxford, and 

for the Colleges rind Halls therein, by the University of Oxford 
Commissioners. 1882. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 6d. 

Also separately, 

Statutes made for the University, is. 

Statutes made for the Colleges, is. each. 

Statuta Universitatis Oxonicnsis. 1882. 8vo. 

cloth, 5s. 

J'he Student’s Handbook to the University and 

Colleges of Oxford . Seventh Edition. 1883. Extra fcap. 8vo. 
cloth, 2 s. 6<i. 

MATHEMATICS, PHYSICAL SCIENCE, &e. 

Astronomical Observations made at the Uni- 

versity Observatory, Oxford, under the direction of C. Pritchard, 
M.A., Savilian Professor of Astronomy. No. I. 1878. Royal 8vo. 
paper covers, 3s. 6d. 

Treatise on Infinitesimal Calculus. By Bartho- 

lomew Price, M.A., E.R.S., Professor of Natural Philosophy, Oxford. 
Vol. I. Differential Calculus. Second Edition, 8vo. cloth, 14s. 6d. 
Vol. II. Integral Calculus, Calculus of Variations, and Differential 
Equations. Second Edition, 18C5. 8vo. cloth, 18s. 

Vol. 111. Statics, including Attractions ; Dynamics of a Material 
Particle. Second Edition, 1868. 8vo. cloth, 16s. 

Vol. IV. Dynamics of Material Systems ; together with a chapter 
on Theoretical Dynamics, by W. F. Donkin, M.A., F.R.S. 1862. 
8vo. cloth, 1 6s. t 

Rigaud's Correspondence of Scientific Men of 

the 17th Century, with Table of Contents by A. de Morgan, and 
Index by the Rev. J. Rigaud, M.A., Fellow of Magdalen College, 
Oxford. 2 vols. 1841-1862. 8vo. cloth, 18s. 6d. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

13 

Vesuvius. By John Phillips, M.A., F.R.S., 

Professor of Geology, Oxford. 1869. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

Geology of Oxford and the Valley , of the 

Thames . By the same Author. 1871. 8vo. cloth, 21s. 

Synopsis of the Pathological Series in the 

Oxford Museum . By II. W. Aclnnd, M.D., F.R.S., TS67. 8vo. 
cloth, 2s. 6 d. 

Thesaurus Entomologicus Hopei anus, or a De- 

scription of the rarest Insects in the Collection given to the 
University by the Rev. William Hope. By J. O. Westwood, M.A., 
F.L.S. With 40 Plates. 1874. Small folio, half morocco, 7 /. 10s. 

Text-Book of Botany , Morphological and Phy- 

siological . By Dr. Julius Sachs, Professor of Botany in the Uni- 
versity of Wiirzburg. A New Edition . Translated by S. II. Vines, 
M.A. 1882. Royal 8vo. 1/. ns. Gd. 

Johannes Muller on Certain Variations in the 

Vocal Organs of the Passeres that have hitherto escaped notice. 
Translated by F. J. Bell. B.A., and edited with an Appendix, by 
A. H. Garrod, M.A., F.R.S. With Plates. 1S78. 4to. pa^* m 
covers, p. 6d. 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

Corpus Poeticvm Boreale. The Poetry of the 

Old Northern Tongue, from the Earliest Times to the Thirteenth 
Century. Edited, classified, and translated, with Introduction, 
Excursus, and Notes, by Gudbrand Vigfusson, M.A., and F. York 
Powell, M.A. 2 vols. 1883. 8vo. cloth, 42J. Just ready. 

Bacon’s Novum Organum. Edited, with Eng- 

lish notes, by G. W. Kit chin, M.A. 1855. 8vo. cloth, 95. 6d. 

Bacon’s Novum Organum. Translated by G. 

W. Kitchin, M.A. 1855. 8vo. cloth, 9s. 6 d. (Sec also p. 38.) 

The Works of George Berkeley, D.D., formerly 

Bishop of Cloyne; 'including many of his writings hitherto un- 
published. With Prefaces, Annotations, and an Account of his 
Life and Philosophy, by Alexander Campbell Fraser, M.A. 4 vols. 
1871. 8vo. clotfc, 2 /. 185. 

The Life , Letters , &c. 1 vol. cloth, t6s. (See also p. 38.) 

The Logic of Hegel ; translated from the En- 

cyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences. With Prolegomena by 
.William Wallace, M.A. 1874. 8vo. cloth, 14s. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

*4 

Smith's Wealth of Nations. A new Edition, 

with Notes, by J. E.Thorold Rogers, M.A. 2 vols. 1880. cloth, 21s. 

A Course of Lectures on Art, delivered , before 

the University of Oxford in Hilary Term, 1870, by John Ruskin, 
M.A., Slade Professor of Fine Art. 8vo. cloth, 6s. 

Aspects of Poetry ; being Lectures delivered 

at Oxford by John Campbell Shairp, LL.D., Professor of Poetry, 
Oxford. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

A Critical Account of the Drawings by Michel 

Angelo and Raffaello in the University Galleriest Oxford . By J. 
C. Robinson, F.S.A. 1870. Crown 8vo. cloth, 4s. 

Catalogue of the Castellani Collection of A nti- 

guides in the University Galleries , Oxford. By W. S. W. Vaux, M.A., 
F.R.S. Crown 8vo. stiff cover, is. 

Jfcamtr aUoofes of tfie lEasst. 

Translated by various Oriental Scholars, and edited by 
F. Max Muller. 

Vol. I. The Upanishads. Translated by F. Max 

Muller. Part I. The AHndogya-upanishad, The Talavakara- 
upanishad, The Aitareya-dra/syaka, The Kaushitaki-brdhmawa- 
upanishad, and The Vd^asaneyi-sawhita-upanishad. 8vo. cloth, 
1 os. 6d . 

Vol. II. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, as taught 

in the Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, Vasishr/za, and Baudhayana. 
Translated by Prof. Georg Biihler. Part I. Apastamba and 
Gautama. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

Vol. III. The Sacred Books of China. The Texts 

of Confucianism. Translated by James Legge, Part I. The Shft 
King, The Religious portions of the Shih King, and The Hsiao 
King. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 6d. 

Vol. IV. The Zend-Avesta. Translated by James 

Darmesteter. Part I. The Vendidad. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

Vol. V. The Pahlavi Texts.. Translated by E. W. 

West. Part I. The Bundahis, Bahman Yast, and Shayast Id- 
shdyast. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 6d. 

Vols. VI and IX. The Qur^n. Parts I and II. 

Translated By E. H. Palmer. 8vo. cloth, a Is, 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

*5 

Vol. VII. The Institutes of Vish«u. Translated 

by Julius Jolly. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

Vol. VIII. The Bhagavadgltd, with The Sanatsu^itiya, 

and The AnugitA. Translated by K&shinath Trimbak Telang. 
8vo. cloth, 105. 6d . 

Vol. X. The Dhammapada, translated from P&li by 

F. Max Muller ; and The Sutta-Nip&ta, translated from P&li by 
V. Fausboll ; being Canonical Books of the Buddhists. 8vo. cloth, 
105. 6d. 

Vol. XI. Buddhist Suttas. Translated from Pdli by 

T. W. Rhys Davids. I. The Mahaparinibbana Suttanta ; 2. The 
Dhamma-£akka*ppavattana Sutta ; 3. The Tevi^a Suttanta; 4. 
The Akankheyya Sutta ; 5. The Aetokhila Sutta ; 6. The Mahi- 
sudassana Suttanta ; 7. The Sabbasava Sutta. 8vo. cloth, 105. 6rf. 

Vol. XII. The 5atapatha-Brahma;/a, according to 

the Text of the Madhyandina School. Translated by Julius 
Eggeling. Part I. Books I and II. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 6d . 

Vol. XIII. Vinaya Texts. Translated from the P&li 

by T. W. Rhys Davids and Hermann Oldenberg. Part I. The 
Patimokkha. The Mahavagga, I IV. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6 d. 

Vol. XIV. ’The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, as taught ’ 

in the Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, Vasish///a and Baudha- 
yana. Translated by Georg Biihler. Part II. Va»ish///a and 
Baudhayana. 8vo. cloth, 105. 6d. 

Vol. XVI. The Sacred Books of China. The Texts 

of Confucianism. Translated by James Legge. Part II. The Yt 
King. 8vo. cloth, toj. 6d. 

Vol. XVII. Vinaya Texts. Translated from the Pali 

by T. W. Rhys Davids and Hermann Oldenberg. Part II. The 
Mahavagga, V-X. The Aullavagga, I- III. 8vo. cloth, 105. 6d. 

Vol. XVIII. Pahlavi Texts. Translated by E. W. 

West. Part II. The Dk/istan-1 Dlnik and The Epistles of 
Maniu£ihar. 8vo. cloth, 1 2s. 6d. 

Vol. XIX. The Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king. A Life of 

Buddha by Artaghosha Bodhisaltva, translated from Sanskrit into 
Chinese by Dharmaraksha, a.d. 420, and from Chinese into English 
by Samuel Beal. 8vo. cloth, 105. Od. 

Vol. XXIII. The Zend-Avesta. Part II. The 

Sirozahs, Yarts, and Nyayb. Translated by James Darmesteter. 
8vo. cloth, 10 s.*6d. 

The following Volumes are in the Press:— 

Vol. XV. The Upanishads. Translated by F. 

Max Muller, Part II. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

16 

Vol. XX. Manu. Translated by Georg Biihler. 

Vol. XXI. The Saddharma-pu«</arlka. Translated by 

H. Kern. 

Vol. XXII. The A&tr&nga Sdtra. Translated by 

H. Jacobi. 

Vol. XXIV. The Upanishads. Translated by F. 

Max Muller. Part III. 

gtoeftota ©xonfensta : 

Classical Series. Vol. I. Part I. The English 

Manuscripts of the Nicomachcan Ethics , described in relation to 
Bekker’s Manuscripts and other Sources. By J. A. Stewart, M.A., 
Classical Lecturer, Christ Church. Smalt 4to. 3s. 6d. 

Classical Series. Vol. I. Part II. Nonius Mar - 

celhiSy dc Competidiosa Poctrina, Ilarlcian MS. 2719. Collated 
by J. H. Onions, M. A., Senior Student of Christ Church. Small 
’ 4to. 3 s. 6d. 

Classical Series. Vol. I. Part III. Aristotle's Physics . 

Book VII. Collation of various MSS. ; with an Introduction 
by R. Shute, M.A. Smalt 4to. 2 s. 

Classical Series. Vol. I. Part IV. Bentley s Plan- 

tine Emendations. From his copy of Gronovius. By E. A. Son- 
ncnschein, M.A. Small 4to. 2 s. 0 d. 

Semitic Series. Vol. I. Part I. Commentary on 

Ezra and Nchcmiah. By Rabbi Saadiah. Edited by 1 1. J. Mathews, 
M.A., Exeter College, Oxford. Small 4I0. 3s. 6d. 

Aryan Series. Vol. I. Part I. Buddhist Texts 

from Japan . Edited by F. Max Muller, M.A. Small 410. *3/. 6d. 

Aryan Series. Vol. I. Part II. SukhAvatl- Vytlha. 

Description of Sukhavali, the Land of Bliss. Edited tor F. Max 
Muller, M. A., and Bunyiu Nanjio. Small 4 to. Js. 6d. * 

Mediaeval and Modern Series. Vol. I. Part I. 

Si nonoma Bartholomei ; A Glossary from a Fourteenth-Century 
MS. in the Library of Pembroke College. Oxford. Edited by J. 
L. G. Mowat, M.A., Fellow of Pembroke College. Small 4to. 
3s. 6d. c 

Mediaeval and Modern Series. Vol. I. Part III. 

The Saltair Na Kami. A Collection of Early Middle Irish Poems. 
Edited from a MS. in the Bodleian Library by Whitley Stokes, 
LL.D. Small 4to. •js. 6d. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

>7 

Clmtiwn | }xm J&ero 

The Delegates of the Clarendon Press having undertaken 
the publication of a series of works, chiefly educational, and 
entitled the Clarendon $r m Strie*, have published, or have 
in preparation, the following. 

Those to which prices are attaohed are already published ; the 
others are in preparation. 

I. ENGLISH. 

A First Reading Book. By Marie Eichens of 

Berlin; and edited by Anne J. Clough. Extra fcap. 8vo. stiff 
covers, 4 d. 

Oxford Reading Book , Part I. For Little 

Children. Extra fcap. 8vo. stiff covers, 6d. 

Oxford Reading Book , Part II. For Junior 

Classes. Extra fcap. 8vo. stiff covers, 6d. 

An Elementary English Grammar and Exercise 

Book. By O. W. Tancock, M. A., Head Master of Norwich School. 
Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, is. 6d. 

An English Grammar and Reading Book, for 

Lower Forms in Classical Schools. By O. W. Tancock, M.A., 
Head Master of Norwich School. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 
8vo. doth, 3 s. 6d. 

Typical Selections from the best English Writers , 

with Introductory Notices. Second Edition. In Two Volumes. 
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3$. 6 d. each. 

Vol. I. Latimer to Berkeley. Vol. II. Pope to Macaulay. 

The Philology of the English Tongue. By J. 

Earle, M.A., formerly Fellow of Oriel College, and Professor of 
Anglo-Saxon, Oxford. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 
7 s. 6 d. 

C 

i8 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

A Book for the Beginner in Anglo-Saxon. By 

John Earle, M.A., Professor of Anglo-Saxon, Oxford. Second 
Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d. 

An A nglo-Saxon Reader. In Prose and V erse. 

With Grammatical Introduction, Notes, and Glossary. By Henry 
Sweet, M.A. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 8s. od. 

An Anglo-Saxon Primer, with Grammar, Notes, 

and Glossary. By the same Author. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d . 

The Ormulum ; with the Notes and Glossary 

of Dr. R. M. White. Edited by Rev. R. Holt, M.A. 1878. 2 vols. 
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 21s. 

Specimens of Early English. A New and Re- 

vised Edition, With Introduction, Notes, and Glossarial Index. 
By R. Morris, LL.D., and W.-W. Skeat, M.A. 

Part I. From Old English Homilies to King Horn (a.d. 1150 
to a.d. 1300). Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 9s. 

Part II. From Robert of Gloucester to Gower (a.d. 1298 to 
a.d. 1393). Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6 d. 

Specimens of English Literature, from the 

‘Ploughmans Crede* to the ‘Shepheardes Calender* (a.d. 1394 to 
a.d. 1579). With Introduction, Notes, and Glossarial Index, By 
W. W. Skeat, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6 d. 

The Vision of William concerning Piers the 

Plowman, by William Langland. Edited, with Notes, by W. W. 
Skeat, M.A. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d. 

Chaucer. The Prioresses Tale; Sir Thopas\ 

The Monkes Tale ; The Clerkes Tale ; The Squieres Tale, &c. 
Edited by W. W. Skeat, M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 
8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d, 

« 

Chaucer. The Tale of the Man of Lawe ; 

The Pardoneres Tale ; The Second Nonnes Tale ; The Chariouns 
Yemannes Tale. By the same Editor. Second Edition. Extra 
fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d. (See also p. 20.) 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

*9 

Old English Drama. Marlowe's Tragical His- 

tory of Dr. Faustus, and Greene’s Honourable History of Friar 
Bacon and Friar Bungay. Edited by A. W. Ward, M.A., Professor 
of History and English Literature in Owens College, Manchester. 
1878. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 5$. 6 d. 

Marlowe. Edward II. With Introduction, 

Notes, &c. By O. W. Tancock, M.A., Head Master of Norwich 
School. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 

Shakespeare. Hamlet. Edited by W. G. Clark, 

M.A., and W. Aldis Wright, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. stiff covers, 2s. 

Shakespeare. Select Plays. Edited by W. 

Aldis Wright, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. stiff covers. 

The Tempest, is. 6d. 

As You Like It, is. 6d. 
Julius Caesar, as. 

Richard the Third, 2s. 6d. 
Twelfth Night. In the 

King Lear, is. 6d. 

A Midsummer Night’s Dream, is. 6d. 
Coriolanus, as* 6d. 

Henry the Fifth, as. 

Press. (For other Plays, see p. 20.) 

Milton. Areopagitica. With Introduction and 

Notes. By J. W. Hales, M.A., late Fellow of Christ’s College, 
Cambridge. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 

Bunyan. Holy War. Edited by E. Venables, 

M.A. In the Press. (See also p. 21.) 

Lockes Conduct of the Understanding. Edited, 

with Introduction, Notes, &c., by T. Fowler, M.A., Professor of 
Logic in the University of Oxford. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 
8vo. cloth, 2s. 

Addison. Selections from Papers in the Spec- 

tator. With Notes. By T. Arnold, M.A., University College. 
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d. 

Burke. Four Letters on the Proposals for 

, Peace with the Regicide Directory of France. Edited, with In- 
troduction and Notes, by E. J. Payne, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo* 
cloth, 5 s. (See also p. 21.) 

ao CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

Also the following in paper oovera 

Goldsmith. The Deserted Village. 2 d. 

Gray. Elegy and Ode on Eton College. 2 d. 
Johnson. Vanity of Human Wishes. With 

Notes by E. J. Payne, M.A. 4 d. 

Keats. Hyperion , Book I. With Notes by 

W. T. Arnold, B.A. 4 d. 

Milton. With Notes by R. C. Browne, M.A. 

Lycidas, id. L’ Allegro, 3 d. II Penseroso, 4c?. Comus, 6d. 

Samson Agonistes, 6d. 

Parnell. The Hermit, id. 

Scott. Lay of the Last Minstrel. Introduction 

and Canto I, with Preface and Notes by W. Minto, M.A. 6 d. 

A SERIES OF ENGLISH CLASSICS, 

^ ^ Designed to meet the rfants of Students in English Litera- 
ture, by the late Rev. J. S. BBEWEB, M.A., of Queen’s College, 
Oxford, and Professor of English Literature at King’s College, 
London. 

1. Chaucer. The Prologue to the Canterbury 

Tales ; The Knightes Tale ; The Nonne Prestes Tale. Edited by 
R, Morris, Editor of Specimens of Early English, &c., &c. Sixth 
Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d. (See also p. 18.) 

2. Spenser’s Faery Queene. Books I and II. 

Designed chiefly for the use of Schools. With Introduction, Notes, 
and Glossary. By G. W. Kitchin, M.A. 

Book I. Eighth Edition.. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, as. 6d. 

Book II. Sixth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo, cloth, as. 6 d. 

3. Hooker. Ecclesiastical Polity, Book I. Edited 

by R. W. Church, M.A., Dean of St. Paul’s ; formerly Fellow of 
Oriel College, Oxford. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, as. 

4. Shakespeare. Select Plays. Edited by W. 

G. Clark, M.A., Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge ; and W. 
Aldis Wright, M.A., Trinity College, Cambridge. Extra fcap. 
8vo. stiff covers. 

I. The Merchant of Venice, is. 

II. Richard the. Second, is. 6d. 

III. Macbeth, is. 6d. (For other Plays, see p. 19.) 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

21 

5. Bacon. 

I. Advancement of Learning. Edited by W. Aldis Wright 
M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4*. 6d. 

II. The Essays. With Introduction and Notes. By J. R. 
Thursfield, M.A., Fellow and formerly Tutor of Jesus 
College, Oxford. In Preparation. 

6. Milton. Poems. Edited by R. C. Browne, 

M.A. 2 vols. Fifth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d, 

Sold separately, Vol. I. 4s. ; Vol. II. 3s. (Sec also p. 20.) 

7. Dryden. Select Poems. Stanzas on the 

JDeath of Oliver Cromwell ; Astrsea Redux ; Annus Mirabilis ; 
Absalom and Achitophel; Religio Laid; The Hind and the 
Panther. Edited by W. D. Christie, M.A. Second Edition. Extra 
• fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d. 

8. Bunyan. The Pilgrims Progress , Grace 

Abounding, Relation of the Imprisonment of Mr. John Bunyan. 
Edited, with Biographical Introduction and Notes, by E. Venables, 
M.A. 1879. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 5 s, 

9. Pope. With Introduction and Notes. By 

Mark Pattison, B.D., Rector of Lincoln College, Oxford. 

I. Essay on Man. Sixth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. is. 6d.' 
II. Satires and Epistles. Third E^tion. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2s. 

10. Johnson. Rasselas ; Lives of Pope and 

Dryden. Edited by Alfred Milnes, B.A. (London), late Scholar of 
Lincoln College, Oxford. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d. 

11. Burke. Select Works. Edited, with In- 

troduction and Notes, by E. J. Payne, M.A., of Lincoln's Inn, 
Barrister-at-Law, and Fellow of University College, Oxford. 

I. Thoughts on the Present Discontents ; the two Speeches on 
America. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d. 
II. Reflections on the French Revolution. Second Edition. 
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 5$. (See also p. 19.) 

12. Cowper. Edited, with Life, Introductions, 

. and Notes, by H. T. Griffith, B.A., formerly Scholar of Pembroke 
College, Oxfonf. 

I. The Didactic Poems of 1782, with Selections from the Minor 
Pieces, a.d. 1779-1783. Extra fcap. 8vo, cloth, 3s. 

II. The Task, with Tirocinium, and Selections from the Minor 
Poems, a.d. 1784-1799. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3*. 

22 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. . 

II. LATIN. 

An Elementary Latin Grammar. By John B. 

Allen, M.A., Head Master of Perse Grammar School, Cambridge. 
Third Edition, Revised and Corrected. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d. 

A First Latin Exercise Book. By the same 

Author. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, as. 6d. 

A Second Latin Exercise Book. By the same 

Author. In the Press . 

Anglice Reddenda , or Easy Extracts, Latin and 

Greek, for Unseen Translation. By C. S. Jcrram, M.A. Second 
Edition, Revised and Enlarged, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6 d. 

Passages for Translation into Latin. For the 

use of Passmen and others. Selected by J. Y. Sargent, M.A., 
Fellow and Tutor of Magdalen College, Oxford. Fifth Edition. 
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6 d. 

First Latin Reader. By T. J. Nunns, M.A. 

Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 

Second Latin Reader. In Preparation. 

Caesar. The Commentaries (for Schools). With 

Notes and Maps. By Charles E. Moberly, M.A. 

Part I. The Gallic War, Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 
cloth, 4*. 6d. 

Part IT. The Civil War . Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s, 6d. 

The. Civil War. Book I. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 

Cicero. Selection of interesting and descrip- 

tive passages. With Notes. By Henry Walford, M.A. In three 
Parts. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 45. 6d. Each 
Part separately, limp, is. 6d. 

Part I. Anecdotes from Grecian and Roman History. 

Part II. Omens and Dreams : Beauties of Nature. 

Part III. Rome’s Rule of her Provinces. 

Cicero. The De~ Amicitia and De Senectute. 

With Notes by W. Heslop, M.A. In the Pr&s. 

Cicero. Selected Letters (for Schools). With 

Notes. By the late C. E. Prichard, M.A,, and E. R. Bernard, 
M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3$. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

®3 

Cicero. Select Orations (for Schools). In Ver- 

rem I. De Imperio Gn. Pompeii. Pro Archia. Philippica IX. 
With Notes. By J. R. King, M.A. Second Edition . Extra fcap. 
8vo. cloth, 2 s. 6d . 

Cornelius Nepos. With Notes. By Oscar 

Browning, M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d. 

Livy. Selections (for Schools). With Notes 

and Maps. By H. Lee- Warner, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. In Parts, 
limp, each is. 6d. 

Part I. The Caudine Disaster. 

Part II. Hannibal’s Campaign in Italy. 

Part III. The Macedonian War. 

Livy. Books V-VII. With Introduction and 

Notes. By A. R. Cluer, B.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d. 

Ovid. Selections for the use of Schools. With 

Introductions and Notes, and an Appendix on the Roman Calendar. 
By W. Ramsay, M.A. Edited by G. G. Ramsay, M.A., ProfelSor 
of Humanity, Glasgow. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 
5 s. 6d. 

Pliny. Selected Letters (for Schools). With 

Notes. By the late C. E. Prichard, M.A., and E. R. Bernard, M.A. 
Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3$. 

Catulli Veronensis Liber. Iterum recognovit, 

apparatum criticum prolegomena appendices addidit, Robinson 
Ellis, A.M. 1878. Demy 8vo. cloth, 16$. 

A Commentary on Catullus. By Robinson 

Ellis, M.A. 1876. Demy 8vo. cloth, 16s. 

Catulli Veronensis Carmina Selecta, secundum 

recognitionem Robinson Ellis, A.M. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 35. 6d. 

■» 

Cicero de Oratore. With Introduction and 

Notes, by A. S. Wilkins, M.A., Professor of Latin, Owens College, 
Manchester* 

Book I. 18^9. 8 vo. cloth, 6s. Book II. 1881. 8vo. cloth, 5 s. 

*4 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. ■ 

Cicero's Philippic Orations. With Notes. By 

J. R. King, M.A. Second Edition. 1879. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

Cicero. Select Letters. With English Intro- 

ductions, Notes, and Appendices. By Albert Watson, M.A. Third 
Edition. 1881. Demy 8vo, cloth, 185, 

Cicero. Select Letters. Text. By the same 

Editor. Extra fcap, 8vo. cloth, 45. 

Cicero pro Cluentio. With Introduction and 

Notes. By W. Ramsay, M.A. Edited by G. G. Ramsay, M.A. 
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d. 

Horace. With a Commentary. Volume I. 

The Odes, Carmen Seculare, and Epodes. By Edward C. Wick- 
ham, M.A., Head Master of Wellington College. Second Edition. 
1877. Demy 8vo. cloth, 12s. 

Horace. A reprint of the above, in a size 

suitable for the use of Schools. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 5 s. 6d. 

Livy , Book I. With Introduction, Historical 

Examination, and Notes. By J. R. Seeley, M.A., Regius Professor 
of Modem History, Cambridge. Third Edition. 1881. 8vo. 
cloth, 6s. 

Ovid. P. Ovidii Nasonis Ibis. Ex Novis 

Codicibus Edidit. Scholia Vetera Commentarium cum Prolego- 
menis Appendice Indice addidit, R. Ellis, A.M. Demy 8vo. 
cloth, 1 os. 6d* 

Persius. The Satires. With a Translation 

and Commentary. By John Conington, M.A. Edited by Henry 
Nettleship, M.A. Second Edition. 1874. 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d. 

4, 

Virgil. With Introduction and Notes, by T. L. 

Papillon, M.A., Fellow of New College, Oxford. Two vols. 
crown 8vo. cloth, 10 «. 6d* 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

*5 

Selections from the less known Latin Poets. By 

North Finder, M.A. 1869. Demy 8vo. cloth, 15s. 

Fragments and Specimens of Early Latin. 

With Introductions and Notes. 1874. By John Wordsworth, M.A. 
8 vo. cloth, 1 8s. 

Tacitus. The 'Annals. Books I-VI. With 

Introductory Essays and Notes. By H. Fumcaux, M.A., late 
Fellow and Tutor of Corpus Christi College. In the Press . 

Vergil-: Suggestions Introductory to a Study 

of the Aeneid. By H. Nettleship, M.A. 8vo, sewed, is. 6d. 

Ancient Lives of Vergil; with an Essay on the 

Poems of Vergil, in connection with his Life and Times. By 
H. Nettleship, M.A. 8vo. sewed, 2s. 

The Roman Satura : its original form in con- 

nection with its literary development. By H. Nettleship, M.A. 
8vo. sewed, is. • • 

A Manual of Comparative Philology. By 

T. L. Papillon, M.A., Fellow and Lecturer of New College. 
Third Edition. 1882. Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s. 

The Roman Poets of the A ugustan Age. 

Virgil. By William Young Sellar, M.A., Professor of Humanity 
in the University of Edinburgh. ■ New Edition. 1883. Crown 8vo. 
cloth, QS. 

The Roman Poets of the Republic. By the same 

Author. New Edition, Revised and Enlarged. 1881. 8vo. cloth, 

14s. 

* III. GREEK. 

A Greek Primer, for the use of beginners in 

that Language. By the Right Rev. Charles Wordsworth, D.C.L., 
Bishop of St. Andrews. Sixth Edition, Revised and Enlarged. 
Eptra fcap. 8vc* doth, is. 6 d, 

Graecae Grammatical Rudimenta in usum 
Scholarum. Auctore Carolo Wordsworth, DC.L. Twentieth 
Edition, 1882, nmo. cloth, 45. 

26 CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

A Greek-English Lexicon, abridged from Liddell 

and Scott's 4to. edition, chiefly for the use of Schools. Nineteenth 
Edition. Carefully Revised throughout. 1881. Square iamo. 
cloth, 7s. 6d. 

Greek Verbs, Irregular and Defective; their 

forms, meaning, and quantity ; embracing all the Tenses used by 
Greek writers, with references to the passages in which they are 
found. By W. Veitch. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth, ios. 6d. 

The Elements of Greek A ccentuation (for Schools) : 

abridged from his larger work by II. W. Chandler, M.A.,-Waynflete 
. Professor of Moral and Metaphysical Philosophy, Oxford. Extra 
fcap..8vo. cloth. 2 s. 6d. 

A Series of Graduated Greek Readers : — 

First Greek Reader. By W. G. Rushbrooke, 

M.L , formerly Fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge, Second 
Classical Master at the City of London School. Second Edition. 
' Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d. 

Second Greek Reader. By A. M. Bell, M.A. 

Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d. 

. Third Greek Reader. In Preparation. 
Fourth Greek Reader ; being Specimens of 

Greek Dialects . With Introductions and Notes. By W. W. 
Merry, M.A., Fellow and Lecturer of Lincoln College. Extra 
fcap. 8 vo. cloth, 4s. 6d. 

Fifth Greek Reader. Part I. Selections 

from Greek Epic and Dramatic Poetry, with Introductions and 
Notes. By Evelyn Abbott, M.A., Fellow of Balliol College. 
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6c/. 

Part II. By the same Editor. In Preparation. 

The Golden Treasury of A ncient Greek Poetry ; 

being a Collection of the finest passages in the Greek Classic Poets, 
with Introductory Notices and Notes. By R. S. Wright, M.A., 
Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 8s. 6d. 

A Golden Treasury of Greek Prose, being a 

collection of the finest passages in the principal Greek Prose 
Writers, with Introductory Notices and Notes. By R. S. Wright, 
M.A., and J. E. L. Shadwell, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

aj 

Aeschylus. Prometheus Bound (for Schools). 

With Introduction and Notes, by A. 0. Prickard, M.A., Fellow of 
New College. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 

Aeschylus. Agamemnon. With Introduction 

and Notes by Arthur Sidgwick, M.A., Tutor of Corpus Christi 
College, Oxford; late Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, and 
Assistant Master of Rugby School. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 

Aeschylus. The Choephoroe. With Introduction 

and Notes by the same Editor. Preparing. 

Aristophanes. In Single Plays, edited, with 

English Notes, Introductions, &c., by W. W. Merry, M.A. Extra 
fcap. 8vo. 

The Clouds, as. The Achamians, as. 

Other Plays will follow. 

Arrian. Selections (for Schools). With Notes. 

By J. S. Phillpotts, B.C.L., Head Master of Bedford School. • • 1 

Cedes. Tabula. With Introduction and Notes 

by C. S. Jerram, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6 d, 

Euripides. Alcestis (for Schools). By C. S. 

Jerram, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s, 6 d. 

Euripides. Helena. Edited with Introduction, 

Notes, and Critical Appendix, for Upper and Middle Forms. By 
C. S. Jerram, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3 s. 

Herodotus. Selections from. Edited, with In- 

troduction, Notes, and a Map, by W. W. Merry, M.A„ Fellow and 
Lecturer of Lincoln College. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. Gd. 

Homer. Odyssey , Books I-XII (for Schools). 

By W. W. Merry, M.A. Twenty-fourth Thousand. Extra fcap. 8vo. 
cloth, 4s. 6d. % 

Book II, separately, is. 6d. 

^Horner. Odyssey , Books XIII-XXIV (for 

Schools). By the same Editor. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 5$. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

s8 

Homer. Iliad, Book I (for Schools). By 

D. B. Monro, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth,' 2s. 

Homer. Iliad, Books I-XII (for Schools). 

By D. B. Monro, M.A. In the Press . 

Homer. Iliad, Books VI and XXI. With 

Introduction and Notes. By Herbert Hailstone, M.A., late Scholar 
of St. Peter’s College, Cambridge. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, is. 6 d. 
each. 

Lucian. Vera Historia (for Schools). By 

C. S. Jerram, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, is. 6d . 

Plato. Selections (for Schools). Edited with 

Notes by J. Purves, M.A., Fellow and late Lecturer of Balliol 
College, Oxford. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d* 

Sophocles. In Single Plays, with English Notes, 

&c. By Lewis Campbell, M.A., Professor of Greek in the Univer- 
sity of St. Andrew’s, and Evelyn Abbott, M.A., Balliol College, 
Oxford. Extra fcap. 8vo. limp. 

Oedipus Tyrannus. New and Revised Edition. 2s. 

Oedipus Coloneus, Antigone, is. 9 d. each. 

Ajax, Electra, Trachiniae, Philoctctes, 2s. each. 

Sophocles. Oedipus Rex : Dindorf’s Text, with 

Notes by the present Bishop of St. David’s. Ext. fcap. 8vo. limp, 
15. 6d, 

Theocritus (for Schools). With Notes. By 

H. Kynaston, M.A. (late Snow). Head Master of Cheltenham 
College. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6 d. 

Xenophon . Easy Selections (for J unior Classes). 

With a Vocabulary, Notes, and Map. By J. S. Phillpotts, B.C.L., 
and C. S. Jerram, M.A. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 
3s. 6d. 

Xenophon. Selections (for Schools). With Notes 

and Maps. By J. S. Phillpotts, B.C.L., Head Master of Bedford 
School. Fourth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cK>th, 3 s. 6d . 

Xenophon. Anabasis, Book II. \Vith Notes 

and Map. By C. S. Jerram, M.A. Extra fcap, 8vo, cloth, as. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

*9 

Aristotlis Politics. By W. L. Newman, M.A., 

Fellow of Balliol College, Oxford. 

Aristotelian Studies. I. On the Structure of 

the Seventh Book of the Nicomachean Ethics. By. J. C. Wilson, 
M.A., Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. 1879. Medium 8vo. 
stiff, 5s. 

Demosthenes and Aeschines. The Orations of 

Demosthenes and ^Eschines on the Crown. With Introductory 
Essays and Notes. By G. A. Simcox, M.A., and W. H. Simcox, 
M.A. 1872. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 

Homer. Odyssey, Books I— XI I. Edited with 

English Notes, Appendices, etc. By W. W, Merry, M.A., and the 
late James Riddell, M.A. 1876. Demy 8vo. cloth, 16s. 

Homer. Iliad. With Introduction and Notes. 

By D. B. Monro, M.A., Provost of Oriel College, Oxford. 
paring. 

A Grammar of the Homeric Dialect. By D. B, 

Monro, M.A., Provost of Oriel College. Demy 8vo. cloth, 
1 os. 6d. 

Sophocles. The Plays and Fragments. With 

English Notes and Introductions, by Lewis Campbell,* M.A., Pro- 
fessor of Greek, St. Andrews, formerly Fellow of Queen’s College, 
Oxford. 2 vols. 

Vol. I. Oedipus Tyrannus. Oedipus Coloneus. Antigone. 
Second Edition. 1879. 8vo. cloth, 16$. 

Vol. II. Ajax. Electra. Trachiniae. Philoctetes. Fragments. 
1881. 8 vo. cloth, 16s. 

Sophocles. The Text of the Seven Plays. By 

the same Edito^ Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4 s. 6 d, 

A Manual of Greek Historical Inscriptions. 

By E. L. Hicks, M.A., formerly Fellow and Tutor of Corpus 
Christi College. Oxford. Demy 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

3« 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

IV. FRENCH. 

An Etymological Dictionary of the French 

Language, with a Preface on the Principles of French Etymology. 
By A. Brachet. Translated into English by G. W. Kitchin, M.A. 
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, 75. 6d. 

Bracket's Historical Grammar of the French 

Language. Translated into English by G. W. Kitchin, M.A. 
Fourth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d. 

A Primer of French Literature. By George 

Saintsbury, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 

A Short History of French Literature. By 

George Saintsbury, M.A. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d . 

Specimens of French Literature, from Villon to 

Hugo. Selected and arranged by George Saintsbury, M.A. 
Crown 8vo. cloth, 9 s. 

Corneilles Horace. Edited with Introduction 

and Notes by George Saintsbury. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, ox. 6 d. 

French Classics, Edited by GUSTAVE HASSON, B.A. 

Corneilles Cinna, and Molieres Les Femmes 

Savantes . With Introduction and Notes. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth. 

25, 6 d. 

Racine’s Andromaque, and Corneillds Le Men - 

teur. With Louis Racine’s Life of his Father. Extra fcap. 8vo. 
cloth, 25. 6d. 

Molieres Les Fourberies de Scapin, and Ra- 

cine's Atkalie. With Voltaire’s Life of Molifere. Extra fcap. 8vo. 
cloth, 25. 6d. 

Selections from the Correspondence of Madame 

de Sbigni and her chief Contemporaries. Intended more especially 
for Girls* Schools. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 35. 

Voyage autour de ma Chambre, %y Xavier de 

Maistre ; Ourika, by Madame de Duras; La Dot de Suzette, by 
Fievie ; Les Jumeaux de l’Hotel Corneille, by Edmond About ; 
M&aventures d’un fecolier, by Rodolphe Topffer . Extra fcap. 8vo. 
cloth, 25. 6d, 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

3* 

Regnard's Le Joueur and Brueys • and Pala- 

prat's Le Grondeur. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, as, 6d. 

Louis XIV and his Contemporaries ; as de- 

scribed in Extracts from the best Memoirs of the Seventeenth 
Century. With English Notes, Genealogical Tables, &c. Extra 
fcap. 8vo. cloth, as. 6d. 

V. GERMAN. 

LANGE’S German Course. By HERMANN LANGE, 
Teacher of Modern Languages, Manchester : 

The Germans at Home; a Practical Introduc- 

tion to German Conversation, with an Appendix containing the 
Essentials of German Grammar. Second Edition. 8vo. cloth, 
25. 6d. 

The German Manual; a German Grammar, 

a Reading Book, and a Handbook of German Conversation. Jjyo. 
cloth, 7s. 6 d. 

A Grammar of the German Language. 8vo. 

cloth, 3 s. 6d. 

This 1 Grammar ’ is a reprint of the Grammar contained in 
* The German Manual,' and, in this separate form, is in- 
tended for the use of Students who wish to make them- 
selves acquainted with German Grammar chiefly for the 
purpose of being able to read German books. 

German Composition; Extracts from English 

and American writers for Translation into German, with Hints 
for Translation in footnotes. Nearly ready . 

Lessing's Laokoon. With Introduction, Eng- 

lish Notes, etc. By A. Hamann, Phil. Doc., M.A. Extra fcap. 
8vo. cloth, 4 s. %f. 

Wilhelm Tell. A Drama. By Schiller. Trans- 

lated into English Verse by E. Massie, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. 
cloth, 5 s. 

3® 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

Also, Edited by 0. A. BTJCHHEIM, Phil. Doo., Professor 
in King’s College, London : 

Goethes Egmont. With a Life of Goethe, &c. 

Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 35. 

Schiller's Wilhelm Tell. With a Life of Schiller; 

. an* historical and critical Introduction, Arguments, and a complete 
Commentary. Fourth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d. 

Lessing’s Minna von Barnhelm. A Comedy. 

With a Life of Lessing, Critical Analysis, Complete Commentary, 
dec. Fourth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d. 

Schiller's Historische Skizzen; Egmonts Leben 

und Tod, and Belagerung von Antwerpen. Second Edition. Extra 
fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2 s. 6 d. 

Goethe's Iphigenie auf Tauris. A Drama. With 

* Critical Introduction and Notes. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 

Modern German Reader. A Graduated Collec- 

tion of Prose Extracts from Modern German writers 
Part I. With English Notes, a Grammatical Appendix, and a com- 
plete Vocabulary. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d. 
Parts II and III in Preparation. 

Lessing's Nathan der Weise. With Introduc- 

tion, Notes, etc. Extra fcap. Svo. cloth, 45. 6d, 

In Preparation. 

Becker's {K. F) Friedrich der Grosse. 

Schiller's Maria Stuart. With Notes, Intro- 

duction, dec. 

Schiller's Jungfrau von Orleans. „ With Notes, 

Introduction, dec. 

Selections from the Poems of Schiller and 

Goethe, 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

33 

VI. MATHEMATICS, &c. 

Figures Made Easy : a first Arithmetic Book. 

(Introductory to ‘ The Scholar’s Arithmetic/) By. Lewis Hensley, 
M.A., formerly Fellow and Assistant Tutor of Trinity College, 
Cambridge. Crown 8vo. cloth, 6d. 

Answers to the Examples in Figures made Easy , 

together with two thousand additional Examples fortned from the 
Tables in the same, with Answers. By the same Author. Crown 
8 vo. cloth, is. 

The Scholar’s Arithmetic ; with Answers to 

the Examples. By the same Author. Crown 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d. 

The Scholar's Algebra. An Introductory work 

on Algebra. By the same Author. Crown 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d. 

Book-keeping. By R. G. C. Hamilton, Financial 

Assistant Secretary to the Board of Trade, and John Ball (of the 
Firm of Quilter, Ball, and Co.), Co-Examiners in Book-keening 
for the Society of Arts. New and enlarged Edition. Extra leap. 
8vo. limp cloth, 2 s. 

A Course of Lectures on Pure Geometry. By 

Henry J. Stephen Smith, M.A., F.R.S., Fellow of Corpus Christi 
College, and Savilian Professor of Geometry in the University of 
Oxford. 

Acoustics. By W. F. Donkin, M.A., F.R.S., 

Savilian Professor of Astronomy, Oxford. 1870. Crown 8vo. cloth, 
7 s, 6d . 

A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism. By 

J. Clerk Maxwell, M.A., F.R.S., Professor of Experimental Physics 
in the University of Cambridge. * Second Edition. 2 yols. Demy 
8vo. cloth, 1 /. ns. 6d. 

An Elementary Treatise on Electricity. By 

the same Author. Edited by William Garnett, M.A. Demy 8vo. 
cloth, 7s. 6rf. 

A Treatise on Statics. By G. M. Minchin, M.A., 

Professor of Applied Mathematics in the Indian Engineering College, 
Cooper’s Hilt Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged. 1879. 
8vo. cloth, 14s, 

D 

34 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

Uniplanar Kinematics of Solids and Fluids. 

By G. M. Minchin, M.A. Crown 8vo- cloth, ft. 6d. 

A Treatise on the Kinetic Theory of Gases. 

By Henry “William Watson, M.A., formerly Fellow of Trinity 
College, Cambridge. 1876. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d. 

A Treatise on the Application of Generalised 

Coordinates to the Kinetics of a Material System. By H. W. 
Watson, M.A., and S. H. Burbury, M.A. 1879. 8vo. cloth, 6s. 

Geodesy. By Colonel Alexander Ross Clarke, 

C.B., R.E. 1880. 8 vo. cloth, 12s. 6<i. 

VII. PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 

A Handbook of Descriptive Astronomy. By 

G. F. Chambers, F.R.A.S. Third Edition. 1877. Demy 8vo. 
^rlotll, 28$. 

A Cycle of Celestial Objects. Observed, Re- 

duced, and Discussed by Admiral W. fl. Smyth, R.N. Revised, 
condensed, and greatly enlarged by G. F. Chambers, F.R.A.S. 
1881. 8yo. cloth, 2 is. 

Chemistry for Students. By A. W. Williamson, 

Phil. Doc., F.R.S., Professor of Chemistry, University College, 
London. A new Edition, with Solutions. 1873. Extra fcap. 8vo. 
cloth, 8 s. 6d. 

A Treatise on Heat, with numerous Woodcuts 

and Diagrams. By Balfour Stewart, LL.D., F.R.S., Professor of 
Natural Philosophy in Owens College, Manchester. Fourth 
Edition. 1 88 1. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 7 s. 6d, 

Lessons on Thermodynamics. By R. E. Baynes, 

M.A., Senior Student of Christ Church, Oxford, and Lee's Reader 
in Physics. 1878. Crown 8vo. cloth, ft. 6d. 

Forms of Animal Life. By G. Rolleston, 

M.D., F.R.S., Linacre Professor of Physiology, Oxford. Illustrated 
by Descriptions and Drawings of Dissections. A New Edition in 
the Press. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

35 

Exercises in Practical Chemistry. Vol. I. 

Elementary Exercises. By A. G. Vernon Harcourt, M.A.; and 
H. G. Madan, M.A. Third Edition. Revised by H. G. Madan, 
M.A. Crown 8vo. cloth, 9s. 

Tables of Qualitative Analysis. Arranged by 

H. G. Madan, M.A. Large 4to. paper covers, 4s. 6rf. 

Crystallography: By M. H. N. Story-Maske- 

lyne, M.A., Professor of Mineralogy, Oxford ; and Deputy Keeper 
in the Department of Minerals, British Museum. Ii^the Press, 

VIII. HISTORY. 

The Constitutional History of England, in its 

Origin and Development. By William Stubbs, D.D., Regius Pro- 
fessor of Modem History. Library Edition. Three vols. demy 8vo. 
cloth, 2/. 8s. 

Also in 3 vols. crown 8vo. price 12s. each. 

Select Charters and other Illustrations of TZng- 

lish Constitutional History, from the Earliest Times to the Reign 
of Edward I. Arranged and Edited by W. Stubbs, M.A. Fourth 
Edition. 1881. Crown 8vo. cloth, 8s. 6d. 

A History of England, principally in the Seven- 

teenth Century. By Leopold Von Ranke. Translated by Resident 
Members of the University of Oxford, under the superintendence 
of G. W. Kitchin, M.A., and C. W. Boase, M.A. 1875. 6 vols. 
8vo. cloth, 3/. 35. 

A Short History of the Norman Conquest of 

England. By E. A. Freeman, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d. 

Genealogical Tables illustrative of Modern His - 

tory. By H. B. George, M.A. Second Edition. Small 4to. 
cloth, 1 2S. 

A History of France. With numerous Maps, 

Plans, and Tables. By G. W. Kitchin, M.A. In Three Volumes. 
1873—77. C^pwn 8vo. cloth, each 10s. Cd. 

Vol. 1. Second Edition. Down to the Year 1453. 

Vol. 2. From 1453-1624. 

Vol. 3. From 1624-1793. 

36 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

A History of Germany and of the Empire , 

down to the close of the Middle Ages. By J. Bryce, D.C.L., 
Regius Professor of Civil Law in the University of Oxford. 

A History of British India. By S. J. Owen, 

M.A., Reader in Indian History in the University of Oxford. 

A Selection from the Despatches , Treaties , and 

other Papers of the Marquess Wellesley, K.G., during his 
Government of India. Edited by S. J. Owen, M.A., formerly 
Professor of History in the Elphinstone College, Bombay. 1877. 
8 vo. clotn, 1/. 4s. 

A Selection from the Despatches, Treaties, and 

other Papers relating to India of Field-Marshal the Duke of 
Wellington, K.G. By the same Editor. 1880. 8vo. cloth, 245. 

A History of the United States of America. 

By E. J. Payne, M.A., Barrister-^t-Law, and Fellow of University 
College, Oxford. In the Press. 

, AJffistory of Greece from its Conquest by the 

Romans to the present time, b.c. 146 to a.d. 1864. By George 
Finlay, LL.D. A new Edition, revised throughout, and in part 
re-written, with considerable additions, by the Author, and Edited 
by H. F. Tozer, M.A., Tutor and late Fellow of Exeter College, 
Oxford. 1877. 7 vols. 8vo. cloth, 3/. 10s. 

A Manual of Ancient History. By George 

Rawlinson, M.A., Camden Professor of Ancient History, formerly 
Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. Second Edition. Demy 8vo. 
cloth, 14s. 

A History of Greece. By E. A. Freeman, M.A,, 

formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford. 

Italy and her Invaders, a.d. 376-476. By T. 

Hodgkin, Fellow of University College, London. Illustrated with 
Plates and Maps. 2 vols. 8vo. cloth, 1/. 125. 

IX. LAW. 

The Elements of Jurisprudence. f,By Thomas 

Erskine Holland, D.C.L., Chichele Professor of International Law 
and Diplomacy, and Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford. Second 
Edition. Demy 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

37 

The Institutes of Justinian, edited as a recen- 

sion of the Institutes of Gaius. By the same Editor. Second 
Edition, 1881. Extra fcap. 8rt>. cloth, 5s. 

Select Titles from the Digest of Justinian. By 

T. E. Holland, D.C.L., Chichele Professor of International Law 
and Diplomacy, and Fellow of All Souls’ College, Oxford, and 
C. L. Shadwell, B.C.L., Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. 8vo. 
cloth, 14s. 

Also sold in Parts, in paper covers, as follows : — 

Part I. Introductory Titles. 2 s. 6d. 

Part II. Family Law. is. 

Part III. Property Law. 2 s. 6d. 

Part IV. Law of Obligations (No. 1). 3s. 6d.« 

Part IV. Law of Obligations (No. 2). 4s. 6d. 

Imperatoris Iustiniani Institutionum Libri 

Quattmr ; with Introductions, Commentary, Excursus and Trans- 
lation. By J. B. Moyle, B.C.L., M.A., of Lincoln's Inn, Barrister- 
at-Law, and Fellow and Tutor of New College, Oxford. 2 vols. 
8vo. cloth, 21 s. 

Gaii Institutionum Juris Civilis Commentarii 

Quatuor; or, Elements of Roman Law by Gaius. With a Trans- 
lation and Commentary by Edward Poste, M.A., Barrister-at-Law, 
and Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. Second Edition. 1875. 8vo. • 
cloth, 1 8s. 

An Introduction to the Principles of Morals 

and Legislation. By Jeremy Bentham. Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d. 

Elements of Law considered with reference to 

Principles of General Jurisprudence. By William Markby, M.A., 
Judge of the High Court of Judicature, Calcutta. Second Edition, 
with Supplement. 1874. Crown 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6c t. Supplement 
separately, 25. 

Alberici Gentilis, I.C.D., I.C. Professoris Re- 

gii, De lure Belli Libri Tres. Edidit Thomas Erskine Holland 
I.C.D., Iuris Gentium Professor Chicheleianus, Coll. Omn. Anim. 
Socius. necnon in Univ. Perusin. Iuris Professor Honorarius. 1877. 
Small 4to. halftnorocco, 21s. 

International Law. By William Edward Hall, 

M.A., Barrister-at-Law. Demy 8vo. cloth, 21$, 

3« 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

An Introduction to the History of the Law of 

Real Property , with original Authorities. By Kenelm E. Digby, 
M.A., of Lincoln’s Inn, Barrist£r-at-Law. Second Edition. 1876. 
Crown 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d. 

Principles of the English Law of Contract, 

and of Agency in its Relation to Contract. By Sir William R. 
Anson, Bart., D. C.L., Warden of All Souls College, Oxford. 
Second Edition. Demy 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d. 

X. MENTAL AND MORAL PHILOSOPHY. 

Bacon. Novum Organum. Edited, with In- 

troduction, Notes# &c., by T. Fowler, M.A., Professor of Logic in 
the University of Oxford. 1878. 8 vo. cloth, 14s. 

Locke's Conduct of the Understanding. Edited, 

with Introduction, Notes, &c., by T. Fowler, M.A., Professor of 
Logic in the University of Oxford. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 
8 vo, cloth, 2$. 

Selections from Berkeley, with an Introduction 

and Notes. For the use of Students in the Universities. By 
Alexander Campbell Fraser, LL.D. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 
cloth, 75. 6d. {See also p. 13.) 

The Elements of Deductive Logic, designed 

mainly for the use of Junior Students in the Universities. By T. 
Fowler, M.A., Professor of Logic in the University of Oxford. 
Seventh Edition, with a Collection of Examples. Extra fcap. 8vo. 
cloth, 3s. 6d. 

The Elements of Inductive Logic, designed 

mainly for the use of Students in the Universities. By the same 
Author. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 6s. 

Prolegomena to Ethics. By the late Thomas 

Hiil Green, M.A., Fellow of Balliol College, and Whyte’s Professor 
of Moral Philosophy in the University of Oxford. Edited by 
A. C. Bradley, M.A. Demy 8vo. cloth, 1 zs. 6d. 

A Manual of Political Economy, for the use 

of Schools. By J. E. Thorold Rogers, M.A., formerly Professor 
of Political Economy, . Oxford. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 
cloth, 4s. 6d. 

CLARENDON PRESS , OXFORD. 

39 

XI. ART, &c. 

A Handbook of Pictorial Art. By R. St. J. 

Tyrwhitt, M.A., formerly Student and Tutor of Christ Church, 
Oxford. With coloured Illustrations, Photographs, and a chapter 
on Perspective by A. Macdonald. Second Edition. 1875. 8vo. 
half morocco, 18s. 

A Music Primer for Schools. By J. Trdiitbeck, 

M.A., Music Master in Westminster School, and R. F. Dale, M.A., 
B.Mus., Assistant Master in Westminster School. Crown 8vo. 
cloth, is. 6 d. 

A Treatise on Harmony . By Sir F. A. Gore 

Ouseley, Bart., Professor of Music in the University of Oxford. 
Third Edition. 4to. cloth, 10s. 

A Treatise on Counterpoint , Canon, and Fugue, 

based upon .that of Cherubini. By the same Author. Second 
Edition. 4to. cloth, 166'. 

A Treatise on Musical Form and General 

Composition . By the same Author. 4to. cloth, 10s. 

The Cultivation of the Speaking Voice. By 

John Hullah. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. Cut. 

XII. MISCELLANEOUS. 

The Construction of Healthy Dwellings ; 

namely Houses, Hospitals, Barracks, Asylums, &c. By Douglas 
Galton, late Royal Engineers, C.B., F.R.S., &c. Demy 8vo. 
cloth, ios. 6d. 

A Treatise on Rivers and Canals , relating to 

the Control and Improvement of Rivers, and the Design, Construc- 
tion, and Development of Canals. By I-eveson Francis Vernon- 
Harcourt, M.A., Balliol College, Oxford, Member of the Institution 
of Civil Engineers. 2 vols. (Vol. I, Text, Vol. II, Plates.) 8vo. 
cloth, 21s. 

A System of Physical Education : Theoretical 

and Practical. By Archibald Maclaren. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 
7s. 6d. \ 

Specimens of Lowland Scotch and Northern 

English. By Dr. J. A. H. Murray. Preparing. 

40 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

English Plant Names from the Tenth to the 

Fifteenth Century. By J. Earle, M.A. Small fcap. 8vo. cloth, 5$. 

An Icelandic Prose Reader, with Notes, Gram- 

mar, and Glossary by Dr. Gudbrand Vigfusson and F. York 
Powell, M.A. 1879. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d, 

Dante. ' Selections from the Inferno. With 

Introduction and Notes. By H. B. Cotterill, B.A. Extra fcap. 
8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d, 

Tasso. La Gerusalemme Liberata. Cantos 

i, ii. With Introduction and Notes. By the same Editor. Extra 
fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d, 

The Modern Greek Language in its relation 

to Ancient Greek. By E. M. Geldart, B.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. 
cloth, 4&. 6d. 

Outlines of Textual Criticism applied to the 

ri\ew Testament. By C. E. Hammond, M.A., Fellow and Tutor 
of Exeter College, Oxford. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 
cloth, js. 6 d. 

A Handbook of Phonetics, including a Popular 

Exposition of the Principles of Spelling Reform. By Henry Sweet, 
M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s, 6d. 

LONDON: HENRY FROWDE, 

Oxford University Tress Warehouse, 7 Paternoster Row, 
OXFORD: CLARENDON PRESS DEPOSITORY, 
zi6 High Street. 

The Delegates of the Press invite suggestions and advice from 
all persons interested in education ; and will be thankful for hints , &c. 
addressed to the Secretary to the Delegates, Clarendon Press , 
Oxford . 

290/MAX 

3729