THE 

DIALOGUES OF PLATO 

JO WETT 

Bonbon 

* 

HKNRWFROWDK 

Oxford University Press Warehouse 
‘Amrn Corner. K.C.* ! 

®Ww 2)orft 

112 Fourth Avenue 

THE 0 

DIALOGUES CiF PLATO 

• *, 

T R A NfjT?ATK1 ) *t\TO F.NGI.IRH 

WITH ANALYSES 'AND INTRODUCTIONS 

% 

JL JOWETT, M.A. 

MASTER OK HA (riOr. rOM.K'.K 

KFGirS PROFESSOR OF GRFFK IN T1IK TJNIVFRSnY OF OXIORP 

doc i o r in iiu.oi.oov or i in* i'nivf.hsity of i f Ynr- n f 

IN FIVE VOLUMES 

VOL. II 

TIM RP KP1TTOX 

RGV+RED 9 AND CORRECTED THR O UGl/O l fy, WITH MARGINAL ANALYSES 

• ^ — ~-j 

AND AN INDEX OF ST EJECTS AND PROPER NAMES 

Oxford 

AT T1IK CLARENDON PR1&S 

,M DCCC XC 11 

Oxford 

tfRINTKD AT TIIB CLARF.NDO N 1* R K S S 
BY HORACE HART PRINTER IO I HE UNIVERSE! V 

CONTENTS 

, pa«;i 

MENO , 

EUTHYPHRO . * 65 

APOLOGY . 95 

CRITO 137 

PHAEDO . . . , . .157 

GORGIAS ........... 267 

APPENDIX I 423 

LgSSER HIPPIAS . . . .433 

ALCIBIADES I 4S7 

• • 

# MENEXENUS 5 u 

APPENDIX II 535 

I ALCIBIADES II . i \ ‘ . .539 

• > 
ERYXIAS * sss 

M E N O. 

INTRODUCTION. 

steph. Tms^Dialogue begins abruptly with a question of Meno, who 
asks ‘\yhether virtue can be taught.’ Socrates replies that he 

7 1 does not as yet know what virtue.is, and has never known any 
one who did. ‘Then he cannot have met Gorgias when he was 
at Athens.’ Yes, Socrates had met him, but he has a bad 
memory, and has forgStten what Gorgias - said. Will Me'no ftll 
him his owm notion, which is probably not very different from 

72 that of Gorgias? ‘O yes— nothing .easier : there is the virtue 
of a man, of a woman, of an old man, and of a child ; tfiere is 
a virtue of every age and state of life, all of which may be easily 
described.’ 

73 Socrates reminds Meno that this is only an enumeration of the 

virtues "and not a definition of the notion whicJa is common to 
• * • 
them all. # In a second attempt Meno defines virtue to be ‘the 

'power of command.’ But to this, again, exceptions are taken. 

For there fnust be a virtue of those who obey, as well as of those 

who command ; and the power of command must be justly or not 

unjustly exercised. Meno is very ready to admit that justice is 

wirtyc : ‘Would you say virtue or a virtue, for* ther^ ar<* other 

74 virt*we>, su^ji as courage, temperance, ancf the like ; just as round 
is a figure, and black and white are colours, and yet there are 
other figures and other colours. Let Meno take the examples 
of figure and colour, and try to define them.’ Meno confessed 
his inability, and aftiif a process of interrogation, in which So- 

75 crates explains (o him the natur% of a ‘simile in multfs,’ Socrates 
himself -defines figure as ‘the accompaniment of ct^our.’ But 

jsome one may object that he Soes not know the meaning of the 

word ‘ colour ; * and if he is a candid friend, and not a mere* 

* * • 

disputant, So<yates is willing to^furnish him with a simpler andi 

B 2 

Meno. 

Analysis. 

4 

Analysis 75 - 81 . 

Meno. more philosophical definition, into whj/ch no disputed word is 
Analysis, allowed to intrude ‘ Figure is the limit of form.’ Meno impe- 76 
riously insists that he must still have a definition of colour. 
Some raillery follows; and at length Socrates is induced to r^ply,. 
‘that colour is the effluence pf form, sensible, and in due propor- 

f I G 

tion to the sigbt.’ This definition is exactly suited to the taste 
of Meno, who welcomes the familiar language of Gorgias and 
Empedocles. Socrates is of opinion that the more abstract or 
dialectical definition of figure is far better. 

Now that Meno has been made to understand the nature of 
a general definition* he answers in the spirit of a Greek gentle- 
man, and in the words of a poet, ‘that virtue is to delight in 77 
things honourable, and to have the power of getting them/ 
This is a nearer approximation than he has yet made to a com- 
plete definition, and, regarded as a piece of proverbial or popular 
mbralityi is not far from the truth. But the objection is urged, 
‘that the honourable is the good,’ and as every one equally de- 
sires the good, the point of the definition is contained in the words, 78 
* the p'ower of getting them.’ ‘ And they must be got justly or 
with justice.’ The definition will then stand thus : ‘Virtue is the 
power of getting good with justice.’ But justice is a part of 79 
virtue, and therefore virtue is the getting of good with a part of 
virtue. The definition repeats the word defined. 

Meno complains that the conversation of Socrates has the effect 80 
of a torpedo’s shock upon him. When he talks with other 
persons he has plenty to say about virtue ; in the presence of 
Socrates, his thoughts desert him. Socrates replies that he is 
only the cause of perplexity in others, because he is himself 
perpltxec^ Ho proposes to continue the enquiry. But ^iow, 
asks Meno, can he enquire either into what he kn^ws ar into 
what he does not know? This is a sophistical puzzle, which, 81 
as Socrates remarks, saves a great deal of trouble to him who 
^ &ccepts it. But the puzzle has a real difficulty latent under it, 
to which Socrates will endeavour to find a* reply. The difficulty 
is the origin of knowledge 

•He has Jjeard from priests and priestesses, and from -the poet 
Pindar, of an immortal soul which is born again and again in ^ 
^successive periods of existence, returning into this world when 
^he has paid the penalty of ancient crime, and, haying wandered 

5 

Analysis 81 - 93 . 

over all places of the up^er and under world, and seen and known 
all things at one time or f other, is by asyciation oirt of one thing 
capable of recovering all. For nature is of one kindred ; and 
8:ieve*y soul has a seed or germ which may be d^velojjed into all 
* | knowledge. T*he existence # of this latent knowledge is further 

proved by the interrogafion of one pf Meno’j* slaves, who, in 
the skilful hands of Socrates, is made to acknowledge some 
elementary relations of geometrical ^figures. The theorem that 
83 the square of the diagonal is double the square of the side— that 
famous discovery of primitive mathematics, in honour of which 
the legendary Pythagoras is said to have sacrificed a hecatomb — 
is elicited from him. The first step in the process of teaching 
has made him conscious of his own ignorance. He has had the 
‘ torpedo’s shock' given him, and is the better for the operation. 

86 But whence had the uneducated man this knowledge ? He had ^ 

never learnt geometry in this world ; ndr was it ‘born faith hfm; 
he must therefore have had it when he was not a man. And 
as he always either was or was not « man, he must have always 
had it.. (Cp. Ph^edo, 73 B.) # 

After Socrates has given this specimen of the true nature of 
teaching, the original question of the teachableness of virtue is 
renewed. Again he professes a desire to know ‘ what virtue is ' 

87 first. IJjit he is willing to argue the question, as mathematicians 
say, under an hypothesis. He will assume that if virtue is know- 

88 ledge, then \^rtue can be taught. (This was the stage of the 
argument at which the Protagoras concluded.) 

So?rates has no difficulty in showing that virtue is a good, 
and that goods, whether of body or mind, must be under the 
direction of knowledge. Upon the assumption? just jnad#, then, 

89 viiffR; is Reachable. But. .where are. the, teachers? There are 
none to be found. This is extremely discouraging. Virtue is Tib 

(l sooner discovered to be teachable, than the discovery follows that 
it is not taught. Virtue, therefore, is and is not teachable. • 

00 In this dilemma appeal is made to Anytus, a respectable and 
well-to-do citizen of the old school, and a family friend of Meno, 
91 who happens to be present. He is asked ‘ whether Meno shall 
q? go to the Sophists and be taught.’ The suggestion throws him into# 
93 a rage. ‘ To whom, then, shall Meno go?' asks Socrates. T& 
any Athenian gentleman— to the great Athenian statesmen of past 

Meno . 
Analysis. 

6 

Meno . 
Analysis. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

Analysts 93 - 100 . 

times. Socrates replies here, as elsewl^re (Laches, 179 C foil. ; 
Prot. 3i9 ( foll.J, that Theijiistoclcs, PericJbs, and other great men, 94 
had sons to whom they would surely, if they coulcj have done so, 
have impacted tiheir own political wisdom ; but no one ever heard 
that these sqns of theirs were remarkable for anything except 
riding and wrestling and similar accomplishments. Anytus is 
angry at the imputation which is cast on his favourite statesmen, 
and on a class to which tie supposes himself to belong (cp. 

95 A); he breaks off with a significant hint. The mention of 95 
another opportunity of talking with him (99 E), and the suggestion 
that Meno may do t?he Athenian people a service by pacifying 
him (100), are evident allusions to the trial of Socrates. 

Socrates returns to the consideration of the question ‘ whether 
I virtue is teachable,* which was Vienied on the ground that there 
, are no teachers of it : (for the Sophists are bad teachers, and the 96 
rest of the world do not profess to teach). But’ there is another 
point which we failed to observe, and in which Gorgias has never 
instructed Meno, nor ProdidUs Socrates. This is the nature of 
right opinion. For virtue may be under the guidance of right 97 
opinion as well as of knowledge ; and right opinion is for prac- 
tical purposes as good as knowledge, but is incapable of being 
\ taught, and is also liable, like the images of Daedalus, to ‘walk off,’ 98 
\because not bouftd Jiy the tie of the cause. This is the sort of 
instinct which is possessed by statesmen, who are no,* wise or 
knowing persons, but only inspired or divine. The, higher virtue, 99 
which is identical with knowledge, is an ideal only. If the states- 
man had this knowledge, and could teach what he knew, he Would 
be like Tiresias in the world below, — ‘ he alone has wisdom, 100 
but th* re§t flit *iike shadows.* , 

t This Dialogue is an attempt to answer the question, Can virtue 
be taught ? fv No one would either ask or answer such a question 
ift modern Times. But in the age of Socrates it was only by an 
effort that the mind could rise to a generarP notion of virtue as 
distinct fron* the particular virtues of courage, liberality, and the 
likS. And jyhen a hazy conception of this ideal was attained, it 
t was only by a further effort that the question of the teachableness * 
of virtue could be resolved. . . 

♦ The answer which is given by Plato is paradoxical enough, 

7 

Virtue , knowledge , opinion . 

and seems rather intendVl to stimulate than to satisfy enquiry. 
Virtue is knowledge, ancf therefore virtue can be taught. But 
virtue is not taught, and therefore in this higher and ideal sense 
then* is no virtue and no knowledge. The te^chin^ of the 
Sophists is confessedly inadequate, a*id Meno, who is their pupil, 
is ignorant of the very nature of general termsf He can only 
produce out of their armoury the sophism, ‘that you can neither 
enquire into what*you know nor into what you do not know ; ’ 
to which Socrates replies by his theory of reminiscence. 

To the doctrine that virtue is knowledge, Plato has been con- 
stantly pending in the previous Dialogues. But the new truth is 
no sooner found than it vanishes away. ‘ If there is knowledge, 
there must be teachers; and where are the teachers?* There 
is no knowledge in the higher s£nse of systematic, connected, 
reasoned knowledge, such as may one day be attained, and such 
as Plato himself •seems to see in some far off vision of 'a single 
science. And there are no teachers in the higher sense of the 
word ; that is to say, no real teachcrs*who will arouse the spirit of 
enquiry.in their pupils, and not merely instruct them in rhetoric 
or impart to them ready-made information for a fee of ‘one* or 
of ‘ fifty drachms.* Plato is desirous of deepening the notion of 
education, and therefore he asserts the paradox that there are 
no educators. This paradox, though different* in form, is not 
really different from the remark which is often made in modern 
times by tho^p who would depreciate either the methods of 
education commonly employed, or the standard attained— that 
‘ there* is no true education among us.’ • 

There remains still a possibility which must not be overlooked. 
Even if there be no true knowledge, # as is ^>rovc*l by ‘the 
wreffhed state of education,* there may be right opinion, which 

wm 

is a sort of guessing or divination resting on no knowledge of 
causes, and incommunicable to others. This is the gift which 
our statesmen have, as is proved by the circumstance that they 
are unable to iin^arf \heir knowledge to their sons. Those who 
are possessed of it cannot be^said to be nfen of science or 
philosophers, but they are inspired and divine. p 
• There may be some trace of irony in this curious passage, which 
forms th^ concluding portion of the Dialogue. But Plato certainly 
does not mean to intimate that ^he supernatural or divine is the - 

Mcno. 

Intkoduc- 

Ti(i. 

8 

Reminiscence and immortality . 

Mem. ^rue basis of human life. To him knowiedge, if only attainable in 
Introduc- this world, i^ of all thirds the most dHine. Yet, like other phi- 
losophers, he is willing to admit that ‘probability is the guide 
of life 1 ; ' and fre is at the same time desirous of contrasting the 
wisdom whi^i governs the v/orld wi,th a higher wisdom. Thpre 
are many instincts, judgments, and Anticipations of the human 
^nind which cannot be reduced to rule, and of which the grounds 
cannot always be given in words. A person ni’ay have some skill 
or latent experience which he is able to use himself and is yet 
unable to teach others, because he has no principles, and is 
incapable of collecting or arranging his ideas. He has practice, 

, but not theory ; art, but not science. This is a true fact of 
psychology, which is recognized by Plato in this passage. But 
he is far from saying, as somfe have imagined, that inspiration 
or divine grace is to be regarded as higher than knowledge. 
He would not have preferred the poet or man of action to the 
philosopher, or the virtue of custom to the virtue based upon 
ideas. ' 

Also here, as in the Ion and Phaedrus, Plato appears to 
acknowledge an unreasoning element in the higher nature of 
man. The philosopher only has knowledge, and yet the states- 
man and the poet are inspired. There may be a sort of irony 
in regarding in' this way the gifts of genius. But th^re is no 
reason to suppose that he is deriding them, any moue than he 
is deriding the phenomena of love or of enthusiasm in the 
Symposium, or of oracles in the Apology, or of divine intimations 
when he is speaking of the daemonium of Socrates. HeVecog- 
nizes the lower form of right opinion, as well as the higher one of 
science, in*the spirit of one who desires to include in his pkilo- 
sophy every aspect of human life ; just as he recegnizeS* the 
existence of popular opinion as a fact, and the Sophists as the 
expression of it. 

* This Dialogue contains the first intimation of the doctrine of 
' v reminiscence and of the immortality of thtf 'sqjil. The proof is 
very slight,* even* slighter that! in the Phaedo and Republic. 
^Because m$n had abstract ideas in a previous state, they must 
, have always had them, and their souls therefore must have* 
always existed (86 A). For the^ must always* have be*sn either 

Butler’st&nalogy. 

Some lesser traits of the Dialogue . 

men or not men. TheVallacy of the latter words is transparent. 
And Socrates himself appears to be cor^cious of their weakness ; 
for he adds immediately afterwards, ‘ I have said some things 
of •which I am not altogether confident.’ (Cp t Phaedo 114 D, 
•415 D.) It may be observed, however, that the % fanciful notion 
of pre-existence is combined with a fcrue but partial view of the j 
origin and unity of knowledge, and of the association of ideas.. 
Knowledge is pfior to any particular knowledge, and exists not in 
the previous state of the individual, but of the race. It is potential, 
not actual, and can only be appropriated by strenuous exertion. 

Th^ idealism of Plato is here presented in a less developed 
form than in the Phaedo and Phaedrus. Nothing is said of the 
pre-existence of ideas of justice, temperance, and the like. Nor is 
Socrates positive of anything *but the duty of enquiry (86 B). 
The doctrine of reminiscence too is explained more in accord- 
ance with fact*and experience as arising out of the affinities of 
^nature (are ttJs <f)v(re a>s o\rjs (rvyyfvovs ovarjs). Modern philosophy 
says that all things in nature arc dependent on one another ; the 
ancient philosopher had the same truth latent in his mind when 
he affirmed that out of one thing all the rest may be recovered. 
The subjective was converted by him into an objective; the 
mental phenomenon of the association of ideas (cp. Phaedo 73 
foil.) became a real chain of existences.. T*he germs of two 
valuable principles of education may also be gathered from the 
‘words^of priests and priestesses:’ (1) that true knowledge is 
v a knowledge of causes (cp. Aristotle’s theory of eVior^) ; and 
(2) *that the process of learning consists not in what is brought 
to the learner, but in what is drawn out of him. 

• Some lesser points of the dialogue may be n< 5 ted, s*ich is (1) the 
aSPte observation that Meno prefers the familiar definition, which 
is embellished with poetical language, to the better and truer one 
(76 D) ; or (2) the shrewd reflection, which may admit of an 
application to modern as well as to ancient teachers, that ^hc 
Sophists havirjg ifl&de large fortunes ; this must surely be a crite- 
rion of their powers of teaching, for that no ffian could get a living 
by sh'oemaking who was no£ a good shoemaker (9ifC) ; or (3) the 
remark conveyed, almost in a word, that the verbal sceptic jS 
saved »the labour of thoughj and enquiry (ovBep Bel toiovtq 

(TjTrjcrcvs, 8cf E). Characteristic also of the temper of the Socrartc 

• • 

Meno . 

Introduc 

•ion. 

IO 
Meno . 

Introduc- 

tion^ 

Characters of Meno and Anytus. 

enquiry is, (4) the proposal to discuss the/teachableness of virtue 
under an hypothesis, aftgr the manner* of the mathematicians 
(87 A) ; and (5) the repetition of the favourite doctrine which 
occurs so frequently in the earlier a*nd more Socratic Dialogues, 

1 ^ ^ 

and gives a colour to all of thorn — that mankind only desire evij * 
through ignorance (77, 78 ^foll.) ; (6) thd experiment of eliciting 
from the slave-boy the mathematical truth which is latent in him, 
and (7) the remark (84 B) tlxat he is all the better for knowing 
his ignorance. 

The character of Meno, like that of Critias, has no relation to the 
actual circumstances othis life. Plato is silent about his treaqhery 
to the ten thousand Greeks, which Xenophon has recorded, as he 
is also silent about the crimes of Critias. He is a Thessalian 
Alcibiadcs, rich and luxurious — ajspojlt child jof fortujT£, and is 
described as the hereditary friend of the great king. Like 
Alcibiades ‘he is inspired with an ardent desiVe of knowledge, and 
is equally willing to learn of Socrates and of the Sophists. lie may 
be regarded as standing in thc*same relation to Gorgias as Hippo- 
crates irfthe Protagoras to the other great Sophist. He ^s the 
sophisticated youth on whom Socrates tries his cross-examining 
powers, just as in the Charmides, the Lysis, and the Euthydcmus, 
ingenuous boyhood is made the subject of a similar experiment. 
He is treated by operates in a half-playful manner suited to his 
character ; at the same time he appears not quite to uncjprstand 
the process to which he is being subjected. For he is exhibited 
as ignorant of the very elements of dialectics, in which the Sophists 
have failed to instruct .their disciple. His definition of virtu £ as 
4 the power and desire of attaining things honourable,’ like the first 
definition of Rustic® in the Republic, is taken from a poet. His 
• answers have a sophistical ring, and at the same time §howthe 
sophistical incapacity to grasp a general notion. 

Anytus is the type of the narrow-minded man of the world, who 
is indignant at innovation, and equally detests the popular teacher 
and the true philosopher. He seems, like Aristophanes, to regard 
the new opinions, whether of Socrates or the Sophists, as fatal to 
Athenian greatness. He is of the same class as Callicles m the 
Gorgias, but of a different variety ; t$ie immoral and sophistical 
ddbtrines of Callicles are not attributed to him. ^he moderation 
v^th which he is described is remarkable, if he be the accuser of 

Relation of the Meno to other Dialogues . i i 

Socrates, as is apparent^ indicated by his parting words. Per- Meno, 
haps Plato may have bceA desirous of shewing that fhe accusation Introduc- 
of Socrates was not to be attributed to badness or malevolence, but T 
rather to a tendency in men*s minds. Or he yiay have been 
i»^gardless of the historical truth of Jthe characters of his dialogue, 
as in the case of Meno anti Critias. L^ke Chaertphon (Apol. 21) 
the real Anytus was a democrat, and had joined Thrasybulus in 
the conflict with the thirty. • 

The Protagoras arrived at a sort of hypothetical conclusion, that 
if ‘virtue is knowledge, it can be taught.’ In the Euthydemus, 

Socratps himself offered an example of the manner in which the 
true teacher may draw out the mind of youth ; this was in contrast 
to the quibbling follies of the Sophists. In the Meno the subject 
is more developed ; the foundations of the enquiry are laid deeper, 
and the nature of knowledge is more distinctly explained. There 
is a prpgrcssion* by antagonism of two opposite aspects of philo- 
sophy. But at the moment when we approach nearest, the truth 
doubles upon us and passes out of <nir reach. We seem to find 
that thp ideal of knowledge is irreconcilable with experience. In 
human life there is indeed the profession of knowledge, but right 
opinion is our actual guide. There is another sort of progress 
from the general notions of Socrates, who asked simply, ‘ what is 
friendslyp?’ ‘what is temperance?’ ‘what is # courage?’ as in the 
Lysis, Cljarmides, Laches, to the transcendentalism of Plato, who, 
in the second % stage of his philosophy, sought to find the nature of 
knowledge in a prior and future state of existence. 

THfe difficulty in framing general notions whfch has appeared in 
this and in all the previous Dialogues recurs in the Gorgias and 
Thcactetus as well as in the Republic. In thO Gorgias too the 
stai^smer^ reappear, but in stronger opposition to the philosopher. 

They are no longer allowed to have a divine insight, but, though 
acknowledged to have been clever men and good speakers, are 
denounced as ‘bjjygud leaders of the blind.’ The doctrine of tfte 
immortality of^he*soul is also carried further, being made the 
foundation not only of a theory $f knowledge, but of. a doctrine of 
rewards and punishments. In the Republic the relation of know- 
ledge to virtue is described in a manner more consistent with,'’ 

modern, distinctions. The existence of the virtues without the 

» 

possession c£ knowledge in thg higher or philosophical sense ic* 

12 

Date of the Dialogue . 

Meno. admitted to be possible. Right opinion A again introduced in the 
Introduc- Theaetetus afe an account of knowledge, but is rejected on the 
ground that it is irrational (as here, because it is not bound by the 
tie of the caused and also because the conception of false opinion 
is given up ^s hopeless. The doctrines of Plato are necessary 
different at different tim^s of his life* as new distinctions are 
realized, or new stages of thought attained by him. We are not 
therefore justified, in order* to take away the Appearance of in- 
consistency, in attributing to him hidden meanings or remote 
allusions. 

There are no external criteria by which we can determine the 
date of the Meno. There is no reason to suppose that any of the 
Dialogues of Plato were written before the death of Socrates ; the 
Meno, which appears to be one*of the earliest of them, is proved 
to have been of a later date by the allusion of Anytus (94 E, 95 A. 
Cp* also 80 B, 100 B). 

We cannot argue that Plato was more likely to have written, as 
he has done, of Meno before than after his miserable death ; for we 
have already seen, in the examples of Charmides and Critics, that 
the characters in Plato are very far from resembling the same 
characters in history. The repulsive picture which is given of him 
in the Anabasis of Xenophon (ii. 6), where he also appears as the 
friend of Aristippus ‘ and a fair youth having lovers,’ has ^10 other 
trait of likeness to the Meno of Plato. 9 

The place of the Meno in the series is doubtfully indicated by 

internal evidence. The main character of the Dialogue is ^Socrates ; 

but to the ‘general definitions’ of Socrates is added the Platonic 

doctrine of reminiscence. . The problems of virtue and knowledge 

have been ^JiscuSied in the Lysis, Laches, Charmides, and Prqfa- 

goras; the puzzle about knowing and learning h^ alrwidy 

appeared in the Euthydemus. The doctrines of immortality and 

pre-existence are carried further in the Phaedrus and Phaedo ; 

the distinction between opinion and knowledge is more fully 

developed in the Theaetetus. The lessons of«Prodicus, whom he 

facetiously calls bis master, arg still running ^n the mind of 

SoCrates. ynlike the later Platonic Dialogues, the Meno .arrives 

^at no conclusion. Hence we are ^ed to place the Dialogue at 

Some point of time later than the Protagoras, and earlier than 
. • • 
rfhe Phaedrus and Gorgias. The place which is assigned to it in 

The popular notion of the ideas of Plato . 

this work is due mainlj^jto the desire to bring together in a single 
volume all the Dialogue^ which contain allusions t9 the trial and 
death of Socrates. * * 

N On thf> Ideas % of Plato. * 

• * 

Plato’s doctrine of ideas has attained an imaginary clearness 
and definiteness *which is not to be* found in his own writings. 
The popular account of them is partly derived from one or two 
passages in his Dialogues interpreted without regard to their 
poetical environment. It is due also to th<^ misunderstanding of 
him by the Aristotelian school; and the erroneous notion has 
been further narrowed and has become fixed by the realism of 
the schoolmen. This popular view of the Platonic ideas may be 
summed up in some such formula as the following: ‘Truth con- 
sists not in particular?, but in universals, which have a place’ in 
the mind of God, or in some far-off heaven. These were revealed 
to men in a former state of existence, and are recovered by remin- 
iscence (dvdfiprjarLs) or association from sensible things. The sen- 
sible things are not realities, but shadows only, in relation to the 
truth.’ These unmeaning propositions are hardly suspected to be 
a caricature of a great theory of knowledge, which Plato in various 
ways and under many figures of speech is seeking to unfold. 
Poetry has been converted into dogma ; and it is not remarked that 
the Platonic ideas are to be found only in about a third of Plato’s 
writings tmd are not confined to him. The forms which they assume 
are Numerous, and if taken literally, inconsistent with one another. 
At one time we are in the clouds of mythology, at another among 
thf abstractions of mathematics or metaphysics*; we ^as.^ imper- 
ceptibly from one to the other. Reason*and fancy are mingled in 
the same passage. The ideas are sometimes described as marly, 
coextensive with the universals of sense and also with the fifst 
principles of ethics ; or again they are absorbed into the single 
idea of good, and subordinated to it. They are not more certain 
than facts, burthey are equally pertain (Phaedo ioo A). They are 
both personal and impersonal. They are abstract terms : they are 
also the causes of things ; anti they are even transformed into the* 
demons or spirits by whose help God made the world. And tlte 
idea of goocj (Rep. vi. 505 ff.) may without violence be converter} 

1 

13 

Metio. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

y 

14 

Meno. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

Many modes of describing the ideas , 

into the Supreme Being, who ‘ because J^e was good ’ created all 
things (Tim. 39 E). t 

It would be a mistake ?o try and reconcile these differing modes 
of thought. They are not to be regarded seriousfy as having a 
distinct meaning. They are parables, prophecies, fnyths, symbols, 
revelations, Aspirations after an unknown world. They derive 
their origin from a deep religious and contemplative feeling, and 
also from an observation of curious mental phenomena. They 
gather up the elements of the previous philosophies, which they 
put together in a new form. Their great diversity shows the 
tentative character of early endeavours to think. They have not 
yet settled down into a single system. Plato uses them, though he 
also criticises them ; he acknowledges that both he and others are 
always talking about them, especially about the Idea of Good ; and 
that they are not peculiar to himself (Phaedo 100 B ; Rep. vi. 505 ; 
•Soph. 5^.8 ff.). But in his later writings he ^ems t6 have laid aside 
the old forms of them. As he proceeds he makes for himself new 
modes of expression more akin to the Aristotelian logic. 

Yet amid all these varieties and incongruities, there is a com- 
mon meaning or spirit which pervades his writings, both those 
in which he treats of the ideas and those in which he is silent 
about them. This is the spirit of idealism, which in the history of 
philosophy has had many names and taken many forms, and has 
in a measure influenced those who seemed to be most averse to it. 
It has often been charged with inconsistency and fancifulness, and 
yet has had an elevating effect on human nature, and has exercised 
a wonderful charm ^and interest over a few spirits who havei>een 
lost in the thought of it. It has been banished again and again, 
but has^always r^urned. It has attempted to leave the earth and 
soar heavenwards, but Soon has found that only in experience 
could any solid foundation of knowledge be laid. It has degener- 
ated into pantheism, but has again emerged. No other know- 
ledge has given an equal stimulus to the mind. It is the science of 
sciences, which are also ideas, and under eithy aspect require to 
be defined. They can only be thought of in due j 5 K>portion when 
conceived in relation to one another. They are the glasses through 
# which the kingdoms of science are«seen, but at a distance. All 
Uie greatest minds, except when living in an age of reaction against 
tfiem, have unconsciously fallen uriUer their power. 

• but a common meaning or spirit in them. 15 

The account of the Pltyonic ideas in the Meno is the simplest and Meno. 
clearest, and we shall bgst illustrate their nature by giving this Intromjc- 
first and then comparing the manner in*Which they aredescribed 
elsewhere, c.%. in the Phaedwis, Phacdo, Republic ; to which may 
be added the Criticism of them in the Parmenides, the personal 
form which is attribute^ to them in the Tim^eils, the logical 
character which they assume in the Sophist and Philebus, and the 
allusion to them ip the Laws (xii. 96^). In the Cratylus they dawn 
upon him with the freshness of a newly-discovered thought (439). 

The Meno (81 ff.) goes back to a former state of existence, in 
which men did and suffered good and evil, and received the 
reward or punishment of them until their sin was purged away 
and they were allowed to return to earth. This is a tradition of 
the olden time, to which pries^ and poets bear witness. The 
souls of men returning to earth bring back a latent memory of 
ideas, which w<sre known to them in a former state. The fbcollec* 
tion is awakened into life and consciousness by the sight of the 
things which resemble them on earth. The soul evidently pos- 
sesses such innate ideas before she has had time to acquire them. 

This is proved by an experiment tried on one of Mcno’s slaves, 
from whom Socrates elicits truths of arithmetic and geometry, 
which he had never learned in this world. lie must therefore 
have brought them with him from another. 

The ftotion of a previous state of existence Is found in the verses 
of Empedocles and in the fragments of Heracleitus. It was the 
natural answer to two questions, ‘Whence came the soul ? What 
is tl]p origin of evil ? * and prevailed far and wide in the East. It 
found its way into Hellas probably through the medium of Orphic 
and Pythagorean rites and mysteries. It wag easier to think 
of* 3 former than of a future life, because such a life has really j 
existed fftr the race though not for the individual, and all men 
come into the world, if not ‘trailing clouds of glory,’ at any r£te 
able to enter into the inheritance of the past. In the Phaedrus 
(245 ff.), as well in the Meno, it is this former rather than 
a future life which Plato i| disposed to dwell. There the 
Gods, and men following in their train, go forth to contemplate 
the heavens, and are borne* round in the revolutions of them.. 

There they see the divine forms of justice, temperance, and the 
like, in \heir unchangeable beauty, but not without an effort more. 

1 6 * The conception of them in Meno , Phaedrus, Pkaeda , 

Meno. than human. The soul of man is likenec^to a charioteer and two 
Introduc- steeds, one r^ortal, the other immortal. The charioteer and 
^ the mortal steed are irf fierce conflict; at length .the animal 
principle is finally overpowered, though not extinguished, by the 
combined energfes of the passionate and rational elements. This 
is one of those 4 p^ssages in Plato which, ^partaking both of a philo^ 
sophical and poetical character, is necessarily indistinct and in- 
consistent. The magnificent ^figure under which r the nature of the 
soul is described has not much to do with the popular doctrine of 
the ideas. Yet there is one little trait in the description which 
shows that they are present to Plato’s mind, namely, the remark 
that the soul, which had seen truths in the form of the universal 
(248 C, 249 C), cannot again return to the nature of an animal. 

In the Phaedo, as in the Meno^ the origin of ideas is sought for 
in a previous state of existence. There was no time when they 
*coUld Htive been acquired in this life, and therefore they must 
have been recovered from another. The process of recovery is 
no other than the ordinary law of association, by which in daily 
life the 'sight of one thing or person recalls another to our minds, 
and by which in scientific enquiry from any part of knowledge we 
may be led on to infer the whole. It is also argued that ideas, or 
rather ideals, must be derived from a previous state of existence be- 
cause they are moj-e perfect than the sensible forms of them which 
are given by experience (74 ff.). But in the Phaedo the fioctrine 
of ideas is subordinate to the proof of the immortality of the soul. 
i If the soul existed in a previous state, then it will efcist in a 
future state, for a law of alternation pervades all things.’ And, ‘ If 
the ideas exist, then the soul exists ; if not, not.’ It is to be ob- 
served, Jjoth in th$ Meno and the Phaedo, that Socrates expresses 
himself witfi diffidence. *He speaks in the Phaedo (114 D, ji^D) 
of the words with which he has comforted himself and his friends, 
aitd will not be too confident that the description which he has 
gwen of the soul and her mansions is exactly true, but he ‘ ventures 
to think that something of the kind is true.’ ^And in the Meno, 
after dwelling upon the immortality of the soul, he>dds, 4 Of some 
things which I have said I am not altogether confident ’ (cp. 86 C, 
«and Apology, pp. 40 ff . ; Gorgias 52^6). From this class of un- 
certainties he exempts the difference between truth and appear- 
ance, of which he is absolutely corfrinced (98 Bj. 

17 

• in the Republic and Timaeus . 

In the Republic the i\feas are spoken of in two ways, which 
though not contradictory are different. In the tenth book (596 
ff.) they are .represented as the genera or general ideds under 
whi^h individuals having a common name are contained. For 
example, there fe the bed which the carpenter ma^es, the picture 
of* 1 the bed which is drawn by the painter, the J^ecl existing in 
nature of which God is the author. Of the latter all visible beds 
are only the shadows or reflections. and similar illustrations 

or explanations arc put forth, not for their own sake, or as an 
exposition of Plato’s theory of ideas, but with a view of showing 
that poetry and the mimetic arts are concerned with an inferior 
part of the soul and a lower kind of knowledge. On the other 
hand, in the 6th and 7th books qf the Republic we reach the 
highest and most perfect conception, which Plato is able to attain, 
of the nature of knowledge. The ideas are now finally seen to be 
one as well as m&ny, causes as well as ideas, and to have S unify 
which is the idea of good and the cause of all the rest. They 
seem, however, to have lost their fir^t aspect of universals under 
which individuals are contained, and to have been converted into 
forms of another kind, which arc inconsistently regarded from the 
one side as images or ideals of justice, temperance, holiness and 
the like ; from the other as hypotheses, or mathematical truths or 
principles. # 

In the*Timaeus, which in the series of PTato’s works imme- 
diately follows the Republic, though probably written some time 
afterwards, no mention occurs of the doctrine of ideas. Geometri- 
cal fo$ms and arithmetical ratios furnish tl^e laws according to 
which the world is created. But though the conception of the 
ideas as genera or species is forgotten or laid aside, the distjpetion 
of the visible and intellectual is as firing maintained as ever (30, 
37). The idea of good likewise disappears and is superseded by 
the conception of a personal God, who works according to a final 
cause or principle of goodness which he himself is. No doubt i» 
expressed by Plato, ^ither in the Timaeus or in any other dialogue, 
of the truths wMch he conceives Jp be the first and highest. It is 
not the existence of God or the idea of good which he approaches 
in a tentative or hesitating maftner, but the investigations of phy- 
siology. These he regards, not seriously, as a part of philosophy, c 
but as an innocent recreation ('fim. 59 D). 

Meno. 

Introduc- 

11C0. 

VOL. II. 

1 8 The ideas in the Parmenides , Sophist , Philebus , Laws . 

Passing on to the Parmenides (128 -i3f% we find in that dialogue 
Introduc- not an exposition or defence of the doctrine of ideas, but an assault 
upon th£m, which is put into the mouth of the veteran Parmenides, 
and might be ascribed to Aristotle* himself, or to Abe of his disci- 
ples. The doctrine which is assailed takes two or^three forms, but 
fails in any o^ them to escape the dialectical difficulties which are 
urged against it. It is admitted that there are ideas of all things, 
but the manner in which individuals partake of them, whether of 
the whole or of the part, and in which they become like them, or 
how ideas can be either within or without the sphere of human 
knowledge, or how the human and divine can have any relation to 
each other, is held to be incapable of explanation. And yet, if 
there are no universal ideas, what becomes of philosophy? (Par- 
menides 130-135). In the Sophist the theory of ideas is spoken 
of as a doctrine held not by Plato, but by another sect of philoso- 
pners, called * the Friends of Ideas/ probdbly thd Mcgarians, who 
were very distinct from him, if not opposed to him (Sophist 242 
ff.). Nor in what may be termed Plato’s abridgement of the 
history of philosophy (Soph. 241 ft’.), is any mention made such 
as we And in the first book of Aristotle’s Metaphysics, of the 
derivation of such a theory or of any part of it from the Pytha- 
goreans, the Eleatics, the Heracleiteans, or even from Socrates. 
In the Philebus, probably one of the latest of the Platonic 
Dialogues, the conception of a personal or semi-personal deity 
expressed under the figure of mind, the king of all, who is also 
the cause, is retained. The one and many of the* Phaedrus 
and Theaetetus is still working in the mind of Plato, ar.d the 
correlation of ideas, not of ‘all with all/ but of ‘some with 
some/ is ^asserted and explained. But they are spoken of in 
a different manner, ancf are not supposed to be recovered from 
a former state of existence. The metaphysical conception of 
truth passes into a psychological one, which is continued in the 
laws, and is the final form of the Platonic philosophy, so far 
as can be gathered from his own writings (see especially Laws 
v. 727 ff.). In the Laws he hacps once more off the old string, 
afld returns to general notions these he acknowledges to be 
many, and yet he insists that thejr are also one. The guardian 
‘must be made to recognize the truth, for which he has con- 
tended long ago in the Protagoras, that the virtues are four, 

• Ancient and modern philosophy. 19 

but they arc also in sonie serlse one (Laws xii. pp. 965-966 ; cp. Meno . 
Protagoras 329.). • # * Intr^duc- 

So various* and if regarded on the surface only, inconsistent, are T ' 

thc^statements of Plato respecting the doctrine jf ideas. If we 
attempted to hSrmonize or to combine them, we should make out 
of them, not a system, but ttoe caricature # of a systeai. They are the 
ever- varying expression of Plato’s Idealism. The terms used in 
them are in their substance and general meaning the same, although 
they seem to be different. They pass from the subject to the object, 
from earth (diesseits) to heaven (jenseits) without regard to the 
gulf which later theology and philosophy «have made between 
them. They are also intended to supplement or explain each 
other. They relate to a subject of which Plato himself would have 
said that ‘he was not confident «of the precise form of his own 
statements, but was strong in the belief that something of the kind _ 
was true.’ It is* the spirit, not the letter, in which they agree — 
the spirit which places the divine above the human, the spiritual 
above the material, the one above the many, the mind before 
the body. 

The stream of ancient philosophy in the Alexandrian and Roman 
times widens into a lake or sea, and then disappears underground 
to reappear after many ages in a distant land. Jt begins to flow 
again under new conditions, at first confined between high and 
narrow banks, but finally spreading over the continent of Europe. 

It is and # is not the same with ancient philosophy. There is a 
great# deal in modern philosophy which is, inspired by ancient. 

There is much in ancient philosophy which was ‘born out of due 
time ’ and before men were capable of understanding jt. 3 lo the 
fathers of modern philosophy, their own thoughts appeared to 
be new an 3 original, but they carried with them an echo or shadow 
of the past, coming back by recollection from an elder world. Of 
this the enquirers of the seventeenth century, who to themselves 
appeared to be working out independently the enquiry into all 
truth, were unconscious. The}* stood in a new relation to 
theology and natural philosophy, and for a time # maintairfed 
towards both an attitude of* reserve and separation. Yet the 
similarities between modern and ancient thought are greater far* 

than the differences. All philosophy, even that part of it which is ~ 

f 9 

c 2 

20 

Metio. 

Introduc* 

tiC.*. 

T ’ 

Modern philosophy has a reminiscence of ancient'; 

said to be based upon experience, is reaiily ideal ; and ideas are 
not only derived from ( facts, but they 1 are also prior to them 
and extend far beyond them, just as the mind is 'prior to the 
senses. t ' < 

Early Greejk speculation culminates in the ideas of Plato, ox 
rather in the single idea of good . His followers, and perhaps he 
himself, having arrived at this elevation, instead of going forwards 
went backwards from philosophy to psychology, from ideas to 
numbers. But what we perceive to be the real meaning of them, 
an explanation of the nature and origin of knowledge, will always 
continue to be one of the first problems of philosophy. 

Plato also left behind him a most potent instrument, the forms of 
logic — arms ready for use, but not yet taken out of their armoury. 
They were the late birth of the tarly Greek philosophy, and were 
f the only part of it which has had an uninterrupted hold on the 
mmd of Europe. Philosophies come and go ; but the detection of 
fallacies, the framing of definitions, the invention of methods still 
continue to be the main elements of the reasoning process. 

Modern philosophy, like ancient, begins with very simple con- 
ceptions. It is almost wholly a reflection on self. It might be 
described as a quickening into life of old words and notions latent 
in the semi-barbarous Latin, and putting a new meaning into 
them. Unlike amcipnt philosophy, it has been unaffected by im- 
pressions derived from outward nature : it arose within the limits 
of the mind itself. From the time of Descartes to Hume and 
Kant it has had little or nothing to do with facts of science. On 
the other hand, the ancient and mediaeval logic retained & con- 
tinuous influence over it, and a form like that of mathematics was 
easily* impressed upon it ; the principle of ancient philosophy 
which is most apparent in it is scepticism ; we must doubt nearly 
every traditional or received notion, that we may hold fast one or 
two. The being of God in a personal or impersonal form was 
& mental necessity to the first thinkers of modern times : from 
this alone all other ideas could be deduced. <There had been an 
obscure presentiment of 1 cogitcty ergo sum ’ more’ than 2000 years 
previously, The Eleatic notion that being and thought were 
the same was revived in a new form by Descartes. But now it 
gave birth to consciousness and self-reflection : it awakened the 
‘ego* in human nature. The njind naked and aljstract has no 

begins with simple ideas : Des Cartes . ' 2 1 

other certainty but the conviction of its own existence. i I think, Meno. 
therefore I am ; ’ and thistthought is God ^linking imme, who has Introduce 
also communicated to the reason of man his own attributes of ^ 
thought and extension — these # arc truly imparted to him because 
God is true (cp. Rep. ii. 382 ff). It has been often remarked 
that Descartes, having begun by dismissing all presuppositions, 
introduces several: he passes almost at once from scepticism 
to dogmatism. It is more important for the illustration of" 

Plato to observe that he, like Plato, insists that God is true and 
incapable of deception (Rep. ii. 382)— that he proceeds from 
general ideas, that many elements of mathejnatics may be found 
in him. A certain influence of mathematics both on the form and 
substance of their philosophy is. discernible in both of them. 

After making the greatest opposition between thought and ex- 
tension, Descartes, like Plato, supposes them to be reunited for 
a time, not in their ovfn nature but by a special divine act 
Phaedrus 246 C), and he also supposes all the parts of the human 
body to meet in the pineal gland, that alone affording a principle 
of unity in the material frame of man. It is characteristic* of the 
first period of modern philosophy, that having begun (like the 
Presocratics) with a few general notions, Des Cartes first falls 
absolutely under their influence, and then quickly discards them. 

At the same time he is less able to observe facts, because they are 
too mucft magnified by the glasses through which they are seen. 

The common logic says ‘ the greater the extension, the less the 
comprehension/ and we may put the same thought in another 
way *md say of abstract or general ideas, Jh 5 t the greater the 
abstraction of them, the less are they capable of being applied to 
particular and concrete natures. • * 

Not very different from Descartes in his relation to ancient 
philosophy is his successor Spinoza, who lived in the following 
generation. The system of Spinoza is less personal and also less 
dualistic than that of Descartes. In this respect the difference 
between them is lijfe that between Xenophanes and Parmenides. 

The teaching Gf Spinoza might* be described generally as the 
Jewish , religion reduced to an abstraction and taking the form 
of the Eleatic philosophy. L 3 ke Parmenides, he is overpowered 
and intoxicated with the idea of Being or God. The greatness of 
* both philosophies consists in fhe immensity of a thought which 4 

22 Parallels of ancient and modern philosophy. • 

Me no. excludes all other thoughts; their weakness is the necessary 

Jntroduc. separation of this thought from actual existence and from practical 
T ^ N ‘ life. In neither of them is there any clear opposition/between the 
inward and outward world. The Substance of Spfnoza has /wo 
attributes, whicfi alone are cognizable by man, thought and exten- 
sion ; these afe Jn extreme opposition fo one another, and also in 
inseparable identity. They may be regarded as the two aspects 
or expressions under which* God or substance i$ unfolded to man. 
Here a step is made beyond the limits of the Eleatic philosophy. 
The famous theorem of Spinoza, ‘ Omnis determinatio est negatio,’ 
is already contained in the ‘negation is relation’ of Plato’s 
Sophist. The grand description of the philosopher in Republic vi, 
as the spectator of all time ai;d all existence, may be paralleled 
with another famous expression^ Spinoza, ‘ Contemplatio rerum 
sub specie eternitatis.’ According to Spinoza finite objects are 
1 uitreal* for they are conditioned by what is alibn to them, and 
by one another. Human beings are included in the number of 
them. Hence there is no reality in human action and no place 
for right and wrong. Individuality is accident. The boasted 
freedom of the will is only a consciousness of necessity. Truth, 
he says, is the direction of the reason towards the infinite, in 
which all things repose ; and herein lies the secret of man’s well- 
being. In the exaltation of the reason or intellect, in the denial of 
the voluntariness of* evil (Timaeus 86 C, D ; Laws, ix. 860/ Spinoza 
approaches nearer to Plato than in his conception of an infinite 
substance. As Socrates said that virtue is knowledge, sb Spinoza 
would have maintained that knowledge alone is good and*what 
contributes to knowledge useful. Both are equally far from any 
real experience er observation of nature. And the same difficulty 
is found in both when \ve seek to apply their ideas to life and 
practice. There is a gulf fixed between the infinite substance and 
finite objects or individuals of Spinoza, just as there is between 
the ideas of Plato and the world of sense. 

Removed from Spinoza by less than a gej&eration is the phi- 
losopher Leibnitz, who after deepening and intensifying the 
opposition between mind and matter, reunites them by his pre- 
, concerted fiarmony (cp. again Pha6Irus 246 C). To him all the 
particles of matter are living beings which reflect on one an- 
9 other, and in the least of them th*e whole is contained. Here we 

Spinoza , Leibnitz, Bacon , Locke , Berkeley, Hume . 

catch a reminiscence both of the opoiopepri or similar particles 
of Anaxagoras, and of tty? world-animal of the Tingaeus. 

In Bacon ^nd Locke we have another development in which 
the^mind of man is supposed to receive knowledge by a new 
method and to*work by observation and experfencc. But we 
may remark that it is the* idea of experience, rafhlr than expe- 
rience itself, with which the mind is filled. It is a symbol of know- 
ledge rather thai\ the reality which, is vouchsafed to us. The 
Organon of Bacon is not much nearer to actual facts than the 
Organon of Aristotle or the Platonic idea of good. Many of the 
old rags and ribbons which defaced the garment of philosophy 
have been stripped off, but some of them still adhere. A crude 
conception of the ideas of Plato survives in the * forms * of Bacon. 
And on the other hand, there jre many passages of Plato in 
which the importance of the investigation of facts is as much 
insisted upon sfls by Bacon. Both are almost equally sflper#>r* 
to the illusions of language, and arc constantly crying out against 
them, as against other idols. 

Locke cannot be truly regarded as the author of sensaticfnalism 
any more than of idealism. His system is based upon experience, 
but with him experience includes reflection as well as sense. His 
analysis and construction of ideas has no foundation in fact ; it is 
only the dialectic of the mind i talking to herself.’ The philosophy 
of Berkley is but the transposition of two words. For objects of 
sense he would substitute sensations. He imagines himself to 
have chaagecf the relation of the human mind towards God and 
natuijp ; they remain the same as before, though he has drawn the 
imaginary line by which they are divided at a different point. 
He has annihilated the outward world, but it instantly reappears 
governed by the same laws and described under the same names. 

A like femark applies to David Hume, of whose philosophy 
the central principle is the denial of the relation of cause anti 
effect. He would deprive men of a familiar term which they can 
ill afford to lose ; J)ut he seems not to have observed that this 
alteration is merely verbal anc^does not in any degree affect 
the nature of things. Still less did he remark that he was arguing 
from the necessary imperfettion of language against the most 
certain facts. And here, again, we may find a parallel with the* 
ancients. He goes beyond fadts in his scepticism, as they did in < 

23 

Meno . 
Introduc- 

Tl<^ 

24 

Meno. 

Introduc- 

* ^N. 

Philosophy and the history of philosophy. 

their idealism. Like the ancient Sophists, he relegates the more 
important principles of ethics to custom and probability. But 
crude and unmeaning as this philosophy is, it exercised a great 
influence on his successors, not unlike that which Locke exer- 
cised upon Berkeley and Berkeley upon Hume himself. All 
three were botfr sceptical and ideal .,in almost equal degrees. 
Neither they nor their predecessors had any true conception of lan- 
guage or of the history of philosophy. Humc’s t paradox has been 
forgotten by the world, and did not any more than the scepticism of 
the ancients require to be seriously refuted. Like some other phi- 
losophical paradoxes, it would have been better left to die out. It 
certainly could not be refuted by a philosophy such as Kant’s, in 
which, no less than in the previously mentioned systems, the 
history of the human mind and fhe nature of language are almost 
wholly ignored, and the certainty of objective knowledge is 
transferred to the subject ; while absolute truth is reduced to a 
figment, more abstract and narrow than Plato’s ideas, of ‘thing 
in itself,’ to which, if we reason strictly, no predicate can be 
applied. 

The question which Plato has raised respecting the origin 
and nature of ideas belongs to the infancy of philosophy; in 
modern times it would no longer be asked. Their origin is 
only their history, so far as we know it ; there can be no other. 
We may trace them in language, in philosophy, in mythology, 
in poetry, but we cannot argue a priori about them. We may 
attempt to shake them off, but they are always returning, 
and in every sphere of science and human action are tending^to go 
beyond facts. They are thought to be innate, because they have 
been familiar to qs all our lives, and we can no longer dismiss them 
from our mind. Many of them express relations of terms to which 
nothing exactly or nothing at all in rerum naturd corresponds. 
We are not such free agents in the use of them as we sometimes 
ijnaginc. Fixed ideas have taken the most complete possession 
of some thinkers who have been most determined to renounce 
them, and have been vehemently affirmed when- they could be 
le^st explained and were incapable of proof. The world has often 
been led aWay by a word to whkh no distinct meaning could 
<be attached. Abstractions such as ‘ authority,’ ‘ equality,’ ‘ utility,’ 
‘liberty,’ ‘pleasure,’ ‘experience,’ ‘•■consciousness,* ‘chance,’ ‘sub- 

• Possibility of a new method. 

stance/ ‘matter/ ‘atom/ and a heap of other metaphysical and 
theological terms, are t\je source of quite as much error and 
illusion and have as little relation to actual facts as the ideas 
of^JPlato. Few students of theology or philosophy have suffi- 
ciently reflected how quickly the bloom of a philosophy passes 
away ; or how hard it is f$>r one age to understand iShe writings of 
another; or how nice a judgment is required of those who are 
seeking to exprc^^ the philosophy jof one age in the terms of 
another. The ‘eternal truths’ of which metaphysicians speak 
have hardly ever lasted more than a generation. In our own day 
schools or systems of philosophy which have once been famous 
have died before the founders of them. We are still, as in Plato’s 
age, groping about for a new method more comprehensive than 
any of those which now prevail ; % ^nd also more permanent. And 
we seem to see at a distance the promise of such a method, which 
can hardly be any other than the method of idealized exp§ricitee 7 # 
having roots which strike far down into the history of philosophy. 
It is a method which does not divorce the present from the past, 
or the part from the whole, or the abstract from the compete, or 
theory from fact, or the divine from the human, or one science from 
another, but labours to connect them. Along such a road we 
have proceeded a few steps, sufficient, perhaps, to make us reflect 
on the want of method which prevails in our owii^day. In another 
age, all* the branches of knowledge, whether relating to God or 
man or nature, will become the knowledge of ‘ the revelation of 
a single jfcience’ (Symp. 210, 211), and all things, like the stars in 
heaven, will shed their light upon one another? 

25 

Meno. 

Introdu^p 

T^N. 

MEN a 

Steph. 

71 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE . 

Me no. A Slave of Meno. 

SOCRATES. ANYTUS. 

• 

Meno. Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is ac- Mato. 
quired by teaching of by practice ; or if neither by te&chiTTg* SoCRMKS> 
nor by practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or Meno * 
in what other way ? 

Socrates . O Meno, there was a time when the ThesSalians Meno asks 
were famous among the other Hellenes only for their riches f^owvir 
and their riding; but now, if I am not mistaken, they are tuecanbe 
equally famous for their wisdom, especially at Larisa, which ^^ cd? ’ 
is the native city of your friend Aristippus^ And this is giving an 
Gorgias? doing ; for when he came there$ the flower of the g”^ t r es 
Aleuadae, among them your admirer Aristippus, and the musten- 
other chiefs bf the Thessalians, fell in love with his wisdom. jg 

Andjie has taught you the habit of answering questions in a virtue?’ 
grand and bold style, which becomes those who know, and 
is the style in which he himself answers all cqmers ; and any 
Hdllene who likes may ask him anything. How different is 
our lot ! #ny dear Meno. Here at Athens there is a dearth 
of the commodity, and all wisdom seems to have emigrated 
from us to you. I am certain that if you were to ask any 
Athenian whether virtue was natural or acquired, he would 
laugh in you^ face, and say: * Stranger, you have far too 
good an opinion of me, if you think that I can answer 
your question. For I literally do not know whaf virtue is, 
and much less whether it is acquired by teaching or not.’. 

And I myself, Meno, living as I do in this region of poverty, 
am as poor*as the rest of the world; and I confesg with 9 

28 

Metto. 

Z v;RATUS, 

Menu. 

He does 
not know, 
.and never 
met with 
any one 
who did. 

Meno de- 
scribed th : 
different 
kinds of 
virtue, but 
is unable to 
give a com- 
mon notion 
- of them. 

The definition of virtue . 

shame that I know literally nothing about virtue ; and 
when I do < not kno\y the 1 quid ’ of anything how can I 
know the ‘ quale’? How, if I knew nothing at r!l of Meno, 
could I tell if he was fair, or the opposite of fair ; rich ?nd 
noble, or the reverse of rich and noble ? Do you think that 
I could ? c < 

Men . No, indeed. But are you in earnest, Socrates, in 
saying that you do not know what virtue is? And am I 
to carry back this report of you to Thessaly? 

Soc. Not only that, my dear boy, but you may say further 
that I have never known of any one else who did, in my 
judgment. 

Men. Then you have never met Gorgias when he was 
at Athens ? 

Soc . Yes, I have. 

~ Men. And did you not think that he knew? 

Soc. I have not a good memory, Meno, and therefore I 
cannot now tell what I thought of him at the time. And 
I dare say that he did know, and that you know what he 
said : please, therefore, to remind me of what he said ; or, if 
you would rather, tell me your own view ; fof I suspect that 
you and he think much alike. 

Men. Very true. 

Soc. Then as he is not here, never mind him, and do you 
tell me : By the gods, Meno, be generous, and tell me what 
you say that virtue is ; for I shall be truly delighted to find 
that I have beer mistaken, and that you and Gorgias do 
really have this kndwledge ; although I have been just saying 
that I have never found anybody who had. 

Men. There will be. no difficulty, Socrates, in answering 
your question. Let us take first the virtue of a man— he 
should know how to administer the state, and in the ad- 
ministration of it to benefit his friends and harm his enemies ; 
and he must also be careful not to suffer harm himself. 
A woman's virtue, if you wish to know about that, may also 
be easily described : her duty is to order her house, and 
keep what is indoors, and obey her husband. Every age, 
every condition of life, young or old, male or female, bond 
or free, has a different virtue : ( there are virtues numberless, 
and no lack of definitions of, them ; for virtue is relative 

The nature of definition . 

29 

to the actions and ages of each of us in all that we do. And 
the same may be said of vice, Socrates * 

Soc . Hov^fortunate I am, Meno ! When I ask you for 
one virtue, you present me \vith a swarm of them 2 , which are 
in your keeping. Suppose that I carry on the figure of the 
swarm, and ask of you, What is the ^nature of tfie bee ? and 
you answer that there are many kinds of bees, and I reply : 
But do bees differ as bees, because there are many and 
different kinds of them ; or are they not rather to be dis- 

SoCRATES,. 

Menct. 

Meno, not 
without 
difficulty 
and by help 
of many il- 
lustrations, 
is made to 
understand 
the nature 

tinguished by some other quality, as for example beauty, size, of common 
or shape ? How would you answer me ? t notions. 

Men, I should answer that bees do not differ from one 

another, as bees. 

Soc . And if I went on to s#y : That is what I desire to 
know, Meno ; tell me what is the quality in which they 
do not differ, • but are all alike; — would you be able 'fit' 
answer ? 

Men . 1 should. 

Soc . And so of the virtues, however many and different 
they may be, they have all a common nature which makes 
them virtues ; and on this he who would answer the question, 

‘ What is virtue ? 9 would do well to have his eye fixed : Do 
you understand ? 

Men .• I am beginning to understand ; but I do not as yet 
take hold of the question as I could wish. 

Soc . Whtffi you say, Meno, that there is one virtue of 
a man, another of a woman, another of a •child, and so on, 
docs this apply only to virtue, or would you say the same of 
health, and size, and strength ? Or is the nature of health 
always the same, whether in man or woman ? * 

Men . k should say that health is the same, both in man and 

woman. » 

Soc . And is not this true of size and strength? If a Health and 
woman is strong, she will be strong by reason of the same stren s th » 
form and of # th? same strength subsisting in her which 
there is in the man. I mean to say that strength, as 
strength, whether of man jr woman, is the same* Is there 
any difference ? 

Cp. Atist. Pol. i. 13, § 10. 

Cp. Tbeaet. 146 D. 

30 

Meno . 

^Ir'-.RATES, 

Me^. 

and virtue 
and tem- 
perance 
and justice 
are the 
same both 
in men and 
women. 

Then what 
is virtue ? 
Gorgias 
and Meno 
reply, ' The 
power of 
governing 
mankind.* 

The sameness of virtue . 

Men. I think not. 

Soc . And ( will not virtue, as virtud, be the same, whether 73 
in a child or in a grown-up person, in a wor^an or in a 
man ? ' 

Men. I cannot help feeling, Socrates, thal this case is 
different from >he others. ' 

Soc. But why ? Were you not saying that the virtue of a 
man was to order a state, , and the virtue of, a woman was to 
order a house ? 

Men. I did say so. 

Soc. And can either house or state or anything be well 
ordered without temperance and without justice ? 

Men. Certainly not. 

Soc. Then they who order f a state or a house temperately 
or justly order them with temperance and justice ? 

'~~Meft. Certainly. 

Soc. Then both men and women, if they are to be good 
men and women, must have the same virtues of temperance 
and justice ? 

Men. True. 

Soc. And can either a young man or an elder one be good, 
if they are intemperate and unjust ? 

Men. They cannot. 

Soc. They must be temperate and just ? * 

Men. Yes. 

Soc . Then all men are good in the same way, *and by parti- 
cipation in the same virtues ? 

Men. Such is the B inference. 

Soc. And they surely would not have been good in the 
same Svayy unless their virtue had been the same ? r 

Men. They would not. 

c Soc. Then now that the sameness of all virtue has been 
proven, try and remember what you and Gorgias say that 
virtue is. 

Men. Will you have one definition of th£ln all ? 

Soc. That is what I am seeking. 

*Men. Ifcyou want to have one definition of them all, I know 
not what to say, but that virtue is the power of governing 
mankind. c 

Soc. And does this definition of virtue include all virtue ? 

The nature of definition . 

3i 

Is virtue the same in a child and in a slave, Meno ? Can Meno. 
the child govern his father, or the slave his master; and sockates! 

— 1_ _ 1 i- _ 1 ^ Meno** ’ 

But this 
cannot 
apply to all 
persons. 

would he who governed be any longer a slave ? 

Men. I think not, Socrates. 

Soc. No, indeed ; there would be small reason in that. 

Yet once more, fair friend; according to you#^rtue is 'the 
power of governing ; 9 but do you not add 'justly and not 
unjustly ’ ? # 

Men . Yes, Socrates ; I agree there ; for justice is virtue. 

Soc . Would you say 'virtue/ Meno, or 'a virtue 9 ? 

Men . What do you mean ? 

Soc . I mean as I might say about anything ; that a round, 
for example, is ' a figure 9 and not simply ' figure/ and I 
should adopt this mode of speaking, because there are other 
figures. 

Men . Quite sight ; ^nd that is just what I am saying* abo*iA» 
virtue — that there are other virtues as well as justice. 

74 Soc . What are they ? tell me the names of them, as I would 
tell you the names of the other figures if you asked me* 

Men . Courage and temperance and wisdom and magna- Meno 
nimity are virtues : and there are many others. names l ! ie 

^ 1 • -1 • virtues, but 

Soc . Yes, Meno; and again we are in the same case: in i s unable to 
searching after one virtue we have found many, though not in s et at the 
the same way as before ; but we have been#un&ble to find the notion of 
common*virtue which runs through them all. them - 

Men . ^Vhy, Socrates, even now I am not able to follow 
you in the attempt to get at one common no^on of virtue as of 
othef things. • 

Soc. No wonder ; but I will try to get nearer if I can, for 
yoif know that all things have a common ndtion.# Sifppose 
now that # some one asked you the question which I asked 
before : Meno, he would say, what is figure ? And if you 
answered ' roundness/ he would reply to you, in my way of 
speaking, by asking whether you would say that roundness i§ 

' figure 9 or ' a figure ; J and you would answer ' a figure/ 

Men. Certainly. • 

Soc. And for this reason — that there are other figures ? • 

Men. Yes. # 

Soc. And if he proceeded to ask, What other figures are'" 
there ? you would have told h^m. 

Illustrations . 

Men. I should. 

Soc . And <f he similarly asked wha*. colour is, and you an- 
swered whiteness, and the questioner rejoinedyAVould you 
say that whiteness is colour or a colour ? you would reply,. A 
colour, because there are other colours as wellf 
Men . I should. * 

Soc. And if he had said, Tell me what they are?— you 
would have told him of other colours which, are colours just 
as much as whiteness. 

Men. Yes. 

Soc. And suppose that he were to pursue the matter in my 
culty about wa y> he would say : Ever and anon we are landed in particu- 
the nature lars, but this is not what I want ; tell me then, since you call 
of b igure. ^em by a common name, and say that they arc all figures, 
even when opposed to one another, what is that common 
nrr/ture which you designate as figure - which contains straight 
as well as round, and is no more one than the other — that 
would be your mode of speaking ? 

Men. Yes. 

Soc. And in speaking thus, you do not mean to say that the 
round is round any more than straight, or the straight any 
more straight than round ? 

Men. Certainly not. 

Soc. You only 'assert that the round figure is not more 
a figure than the straight, or the straight than the round ? 

Men. Very true. - tl 

Soc. To what .then do we give the name of figure? Try 
and answer. Suppose that when a person asked you this 
question either about figure or colour, you were to reply, 
Man/I d<r not understand what you want, or know what you 75 
are saying ; he would look rather astonished and, say : Do 
you not understand that I am looking for the 'simile in 
multis * ? And then he might put the question in another 
form: Meno, he might say, what is that 'simile in multis* 
which you call figure, and which includes not only round and 
straight figures, but all ? Ccftild you not answer that ques- 
tion, Men$ ? I wish that you would try ; the attempt will be 
good practice with a view to the answer about virtue. 

Men. I would rather that you should answer, Socrates. 

Soc. Shall I indulge you ? t 

32 

Meno . 

_^TRATES, 

He has a 

33 

Definition of colour and figure . 

Men . By all means. jfcfew. 

Sor. And then you wilfr tell me 

Men . I wil}^ 

Sor. Then I must do my best, for there is a prize to be won. 

Men . Certainly. 

Soc . Well, I will try atid explain to you v*4iat figure is. Figure is 
What do you say to this answer ? — Figure is the only thing ^rates^ 
which always follqyvs colour. Will you be satisfied with it, to be that 
as I am sure that I should be, if you would let me have always foi- 
a similar definition of virtue ? lows colour. 

Men. But, Socrates, it is such a simple answer. 

Soc. Why simple ? 

Men . Because, according to you, figure is that which 
always follows colour. # 

(Soc. Granted). 

Men. But if a«perso* were to say that he does not Know**** 
what colour is, any more than what figure is — what sort of 
answer would you have given him ? 

Soc. I should have told him the truth. And if he were 
a philosopher of the eristic and antagonistic sort, I should 
say to him : You have my answer, and if I am wrong, your 
business is .to take up the argument and refute me. But if 
we were friends, and were talking as you and I are now, 

I should *eply in a milder strain and more in* the dialectician's 
vein ; that? is to say, I should not* only speak the truth, but I 
should m^Jce use of premisses which the person interrogated 
would be willing to admit. And this is the way in which 
I shall endeavour to approach you. YouVill acknowledge, 
will you not, that there is such a thing as an end, or 
termination, or extremity? — all which words I use in # the 
same senso, although I am aware that Prodicus might draw 
distinctions about them : but still you, I am sure, would speak 
of a thing as ended or terminated— that is all which I am 
saying — not anything very difficult. 

Men. Yes, I shc^Ud; and I believe that I understand your 
meaning. * 

6 Soc. And you would speak^of a surface and also o £ a solidj 
as for example in geometry. 

Men. Yes. # 

Soc. Well Ihen, you are now in a condition to understand. 
vol. ii. 0 D 

about virtue ? Socrates^ 

Meno. ^ 

34 

Meno. 

''CRATES, 

Meno. 

And now, 
what is 
colour? 

Meno, 
Gorgias, 
and Empe- 
docles are 
all agreed 
that colour 
is an efflu- 
ence of ex- 
istence, pro- 
portioned 
to certain 
par:r~ o s. 

The imperiousness of Meno . 

my definition of figure. I define figure to be that in which 
the solid erids ; or, miore concisely, the limit of solid. 

Men . And now, Socrates, what is colour ? 

Soc. You are outrageous, Meno, in thus plaguing a poor 
old man to give you an answer, when you will not take 
the trouble bf remembering what is Gorgias’ definition 
of virtue. 

Men . When you have told me what I ask, I will tell you, 
Socrates. 

Soc. A man who was blindfolded has only to hear you 
talking, and he would know that you are a fair creature and 
have still many lovers. 

Men. Why do you think so ? 

Soc. Why, because you always speak in imperatives : like 
all beauties when they are in their prime, you are tyrannical ; 
'tfnd also, as I suspect, you have found out that I have a 
weakness for the fair, and therefore to humour you I must 
answer. 

Men. Please do. 

Soc. Would you like me to answer you after the manner of 
Gorgias, which is familiar to you ? 

Men. I should like nothing better. 

Soc. Do not he and you and Empedocles say that there are 
certain effluences of existence ? 

Men. Certainly. 

Soc. And passages into which and through Which the efflu- 
ences pass ? * 

Men. Exactly. 

Soc. And some of the effluences fit into the passages, and 
some of’ifhem are too small or too large? 

Men. True. 

Soc. And there is such a thing as sight ? 

Men. Yes. 

Soc. And now, as Pindar says, 1 read my meaning : ’ — colour 
is an effluence of form, commensurate witll'sight, and palpable 
to sense. 

Men. That, Socrates, appear^ to me to be an admirable 
answer. 

Soc . Why, yes, because it happens to be one which you 
have been in the habit of hearing : and your«wit will have 

35 

The definition of virtue . 

discovered, I suspect, that you may explain in the same way 
the nature of sound an& smell, and <ff many other similar 
phenomena. \ 

Men. Quite ^rue. • 

Soc. The answer, Meno, was in the orthodox §olemn vein, 
and therefore was more* acceptable #to you tlian the other 
answer about figure. 

Men. Yes. • 

Soc. And yet, O son of Alexidemus, I cannot help thinking 
that the other was the better ; and I am sure that you would 
be of the same opinion, if you would only stay and be 
initiated, and were not compelled, as you said yesterday, to 
go away before the mysteries. 

Men. But I will stay, Socratos if you will give me many 
77 such answers. 9 

Soc. Well thdh, for fhy own sake as well as for yours, I wiff 
do my very best ; but I am afraid that I shall not be able to 
give you very many as good : and now, in your turn, you are 
to fulfil your promise, and tell me what virtue is in the 
universal ; and do not make a singular into a plural, as the 
facetious say of those who break a thing, but deliver virtue to 
me whole and sound, and not broken into a number of pieces : 
I have given you the pattern. # 

Men. Well then, Socrates, virtue, as I take it, is when he, 
who desires the honourable, is able to provide it for himself ; 
so the poeft says, and I say too — 

* Virftie is the desire of things honourable and the’po\ver of attaining them/ 

Soc . And does he who desires the honourable also desire 
the good. * 

Men. Certainly. 

Soc . Then are there some who desire the evil and others 
who desire the good ? Do not all men, my dear sir, desire 
good ? 

Men. I think^iof 

Soc. There are some who desire evil ? 

Men. Yes. # 

Soc. Do you mean that they think the evils which they 
desire, to be good ; or do they know that they are evil and 
yet desire thefh ? 

Mene. 

Socratw^ 

Meno. 

Virtue, ac- 
cording to 
Meno, is 
the desire 
of the 
honourable 
and the 
good. His 
definition is 
analysed by 
Socrates. 

d a 

The desire of good and evil . 

Men. Both, I think. 

Soc. And '’do you really imagine, hteno, that a man knows 
evils to be evils and desires them notwithstanding ? 

Men. Certainly I do. 

Soc. And ( desire is 'of possession ? 

Men. Yes, dlf possession. * 

Soc. And does he think that the evils will do good to him 
who possesses them, or does he know that *they will do him 
harm ? 

Men. There are some who think that the evils will do them 
good, and others wfro know that they will do them harm. 

Soc. And, in your opinion, do those who think that they 
will do them good know that they are evils ? 

Men. Certainly not. 

Soc. Is it not obvious that those who are ignorant of their 
nature do not desire them ; but they ddkire wKat they suppose 
to be goods although they are really evils ; and if they are 
mistaken and suppose the evils to be goods they really desire 
goods? 

Men. Yes, in that case. 

Soc. Well, and do those who, as you say, desire evils, and 
think that evils are hurtful to the possessor of them, know 
that they will be hurt by them ? 

Men. They must know it. 

Soc. And must they not suppose that those who are hurt 78 
are miserable in proportion to the hurt which is Inflicted upon 
them ? ( c 

Men. How can it be otherwise ? 

Soc. But ar^ not the miserable ill-fated ? 

Men. Yes, indeed. 

Soc. And does any one desire to be miserable and ill-fated ? 

Men. I should say not, Socrates. 

Soc. But if there is no one who desires to be miserable, 
there is no one, Meno, who desires evil ; for what is misery 
but the desire and possession of evil ? v ’ . 
c Men. That appears to be the truth, Socrates, and I admit 
that nob6dy desires evil. c 

Soc. And yet, were you not saying just now that virtue 
is the desire and power of attaining good ? 

Mgn. Yes, I did say so. 4 

36 

Meno. 

Sd‘ 'TES, 
Meno. 

Men desire 
evil, but 
not what 
they think 
to be evil. 

The self-contradiction of Meno. 

37 

Soc. But if this be affirmed, then the desire of good is com- Meno. 
mon to all, and one m&n is no bette# than another in that socrat,#. ’ 
respect ? Meno - 

■Men. True^ # The desire 

Soc. And if one man is not better than another in desiring 
good, he must be better ill the power.of attainihg it ? mon to all 

Men. Exactly. of them. 

Soc. Then, according to your definition, virtue would appear Virtue is 

to be the power of attaining good ? ofattatatag 

Men. I entirely approve, Socrates, of the manner in which good with 
you now view this matter. justice. 

Soc. Then let us see whether what you say is true from 
another point of view ; for very likely you may be right : — 

You affirm virtue to be the pou^r of attaining goods ? 

Men . Yes. 

Soc. And the goodsPwhich you mean are such as health a?*? 
wealth and the possession of gold and silver, and having 
office and honour in the state— those are what you would call 
goods ? • 

Men. Yes, I should include all those. 

Soc. TJien, according to Meno, who is the hereditary 
friend of the great king, virtue is the power of getting silver 
and gold ; and would you add that they must be gained 
piously justly, or do you deem this to be elf no consequence? 

And is any mode of acquisition, even if unjust or dishonest, 
equally fc) b5 deemed virtue ? 

Men. Not virtue, Socrates, but vice. • 

Soc. Then justice or temperance or hofiness, or some other 
part of virtue, as would appear, must accompany the acquisi- 
tion, and without them the mere acquisition of goad will not 
be virtue# 

Men. Why, how can there be virtue without these ? , 

Soc. And the non-acquisition of gold and silver in a dis- 
honest manner for oneself or another, or in other words the 
want of them, # m<^ be equally virtue ? 

Men. True. 

Soc. Then the acquisition of such goods is no more virftie 
than the non-acquisition and want of them, but whatever is^ 
accompanied by justice or Ipnesty is virtue, and whatever 
79 is devoid of justice is vice. 

38 

Meno. 

-Sqcrates, 

MeSiJ. 

But this 
definition 
repeats the 
thing de- 
fined 

virtues the 
power of 
attaining 
good with 
a part of 
virtue. 

But if we do 
not know 
the nature 
of virtue as 
a whole, 
how can we 
know what 
a part of 
virtue is ? 

The whole cannot be defined by a part . 

Men. It cannot be otherwise, in my judgment. 

Soc. And* were we ^iot saying just now that justice, tem* 
perance, and the like, were each of them a part <^f virtue ? 

Men. Yes. 

a < / 

Soc. And so, Meno, this is the way in which you mock me. 

Men. Why to you say that, Socrates ? 

Soc. Why, because I asked you to deliver virtue into my 
hands whole and unbroken, and I gave youra pattern accord- 
ing to which you were to frame your answer ; and you have 
forgotten already, and tell me that virtue is the power of 
attaining good justly, or with justice ; and justice you acknow- 
ledge to be a part of virtue. 

Men. Yes. 

Soc. Then it follows from your own admissions, that virtue 
is doing what you do with a part of virtue ; for justice and 
<J?e like are said by you to be parts of virtue. * 

Men. What of that ? 

Soc. What of that ! Why, did not I ask you to tell me the 
nature^ of virtue as a whole ? And you are very far from 
telling me this; but declare every action to be virtue which is 
done with a part of virtue ; as though you had told me and I 
must already know the whole of virtue, and this too when 
frittered away into little pieces. And, therefore, my dear 
Meno, I fear that I must begin again and repeat the same 
question : What is virtue? for otherwise, I can only say, that 
every action done with a part of virtue is virtue ; what else 
is the meaning o f saying that every action done with justice 
is virtue ? Ought I not to ask the question over again; for 
can any one >vho does not know virtue know a part of 
virtue’ ? * 

Men. No ; I do not say that he can. « 

Soc. Do you remember how, in the example of figure, we 
rejected any answer given in terms which were as yet un- 
explained or unadmitted ? 

Men. Yes, Socrates ; and we were quite Kgl\t in doing so. 

Soc. But then, my friend, do not suppose that we can 
explain to^any one the nature of virtue as a whole through 
L some unexplained portion of virtue, or anything at all in that 
fashion ; we should only havq, to ask over again the old 
* question, What is virtue ? Am J not right ? 

39 

The torpedo's shock . 

* Men . I believe that you are. Mem. 

Soc . Then begin again* and answer rrk, What, according to Socrates^ 
you and your friend Gorgias, is the definition of virtue ? MeN0, 

Men . O Soo^tes, I used to be told, before I kgew you, that Meno 
go you were always doubting yourself and making others doubt ; §0™^ to 
and now you are casting y<?ur spells over me, anfl I am simply a torpedo 
getting bewitched and enchanted, and am at my wits* end. ^ucifhas 
And if I may veitture to make a jest upon you, you seem taken away 
to me both in your appearance and in your power over others hls sense 

J rr J r and speech. 

to be very like the flat torpedo fish, who torpifies those who 
come near him and touch him, as you have; now torpified me, 

I think. For my soul and my tongue are really torpid, and I 
do not know how to answer you; and though I have been 
delivered of an infinite variety of#speeches about virtue before 
now, and to many persons — and very good ones they were, as 
I thought — at tlfis mofhent I cannot even say what virtue is'/ * 

And I think that you are very wise in not voyaging and going 
away from home, for if you did in other places as you do 
in Athens, you would be cast into prison as a magician. # 

Soc . You are a rogue, Meno, and had all but caught me. 

Men. What do you mean, Socrates ? 

Soc. I can tell why you made a simile about me. 

Men. Why ? # 

Soc. order that I might make another simile about you. Socrates is 
For I know that all pretty young gentlemen like to have pretty ^ulnessTn^ 
similes made "about them — as well they may — but I shall not others be- 
returq the compliment. As to my being a tofpedo, if the tor- ^ is 
pedo is torpid as well as the cause of torpidity in others, then dull, 
indeed I am a torpedo, but not otherwise ; /or I perplex 
others, not because I am clear, but because I am utferly per- 
plexed myself. And now I know not what virtue is, and you 
seem to be in the same case, although you did once perhaps* 
know before you touched me. However, I have no objection 
to join with you in the enquiry. 

Men . And h^w will you enquire, Socrates, into that which 
you do not know ? What will you put forth as the subject of 
enquiry ? And if you find v^hat you want, how will«you ever 
know that this is the thing which ypu did not know ? 

Soc. I know, Meno, what you mean ; but just see what How can 
a tiresome dispute you are introducing. You argue^that ^ouTwhl? 

40 

Meno. 

^Socrates, 

m1B.no. 

you do not 
know, and 
if you know 
why should 
you en- 
quire? 

The an- 
cient poets 
tell us that 
the soul of 
man is im- 
mortal and 
has a recol- 
lection of 
all that she 
has ever 
known in 
former 
states of 
being. 

Pindar and the poets. 

a man cannot enquire either about that which he knows, or* 
about that ‘which he floes not know*; for if he knows, he has 
no need to enquire ; and if not, he cannot ; for he does not 
know the very subject about which he is to enquire 3 . 

Men . Well, Socrates, and is not the argument sound ? Si 
Soc. I triiilk not. , * 

Men. Why not ? 

Soc. I will tell you why : I have heard* from certain wise 
men and women who spoke of things divine that — 

Men. What did they say ? 

Soc . They spoke of a glorious truth, as I conceive. 

Men. What was it ? and who were they ? 

Soc. Some of them were priests and priestesses, who had 
studied how they might bq- able to give a reason of their 
profession : there have been poets also, who spoke of these 
‘things by inspiration, like Pindar, and 1 many others who were 
inspired. And they say— mark, now, and see whether their 
words are true — they say that the soul of man is immortal, 
and *at one time has an end, which is termed dying, and 
at another time is born again, but is never destroyed. And 
the moral is, that a man ought to live always in perfect holi- 
ness. ' For in the ninth year Persephone sends the souls of 
those from whom she has received the penalty of ancient crime 
back again front beneath into the light of the sun dbove, and 
these are they who become noble kings and mighty men and great 
in wisdom and are called saintly heroes in after ages' The 
soul, then, as being immortal, and having been born again 
many times, and having seen all things that exist, whether 
in this world or in the world below, has knowledge of them 
all ; r and» it is no wonder that she should be able to call to re- 
membrance all that she ever knew about virtue,* and about 
everything ; for as all nature is akin, and the soul has learned 
all things, there is no difficulty in her eliciting or as men say 
learning, out of a single recollection all the rest, if a man is 
strenuous and does not faint ; for all enquiry find all learning 
is but recollection. And therefore we ought not to listen 
tb this sophistical argument atyout the impossibility of en- * 
quiry: for it will make us idle, and is sweet only to the 

Cp. Aristot. Rost. Anal. I. i. 6. 

The crucial experiment. 

• sluggard ; but the other saying will make us active and in- 
quisitive. In that confiding, I will gladly enquire with you 
into the nature of virtue. 

Men. Yes, % Socrates ; but what do you meai* by saying that 
we do not learn, and that what we call learnings only a pro- 
cess of recollection ? C&n you teach me how*this is ? 

Soc. I told you, Meno, just now that you were a rogue, and 
now you ask whether I can teach you, when I am saying that 
82 there is no teaching, but only recollection ; and thus you 
imagine that you will involve me in a contradiction. 

Men . Indeed, Socrates, I protest that I had no such intention. 
I only asked the question from habit ; but if you can prove 
to me that what you say is true, I wish that you would. 

Soc. It will be no easy matter, but I will try to please 
you to the utmost of my power. Suppose that you call 
one of your rfumerotis attendants, that I may demonstrate 
on him. 

Men. Certainly. Come hither, boy. 

Soc. He is Greek, and speaks Greek, does he not?* 

Men. Yes, indeed ; he was born in the house. 

Soc. Attend now to the questions which I ask him, and 
observe whether he learns of me or only remembers. 

Men. I will. 

5 oc.*Tell me, boy, do you know that* a figure like this 
is a square ? 

Boy. i do*. 

Soc. And you know that a square figure has these four 
lines equal ? 

Boy. Certainly. 

Soc. And these fines which I have drawn tWhough the 
middle of the square are also equal ? 

Boy. Yes. 

Soc. A square may be of any size ? 

Boy. Certainly. 

Soc. And jf offe side of the figure be of two feet, and the 
other side be of two feet, how much will the whole be ? Let 
me explain : if in one direction the space was df two feet, 
and in the other direction of one foot, the whole wouldi 
be of two feet taken once ? 

Boy. YeS 

41 

Meno. 

Socrates', 

Mkno, 

Meno's 

Slave, 

A Greek 
slave is in- 
troduced, 
from whom 
certain ma- 
thematical 
conclusions 
which he 
has never 
learned are 
elicited by 
Socrates. 

42 

Meno. 

SoOhXTES, 

Meno, 

Meno's 

Slave. 

He is partly 
guessing. 

Socrates and the boy. 

Soc . But since this side is also of two feet, there are twice 
two feet ? * 

Boy . There are. 

Soc . Then tfie square is of twice two feet ? 

Boy . Yes. f 

Soc . And hota many are twice two feet ? count and tell me. 

Boy . Four, Socrates. 

Sac. And might there not be another square twice as large 
as this, and having like this the lines equal ? 

Boy. Yes. 

Soc . And of how .many feet will that be ? 

Boy . Of eight feet. 

Soc. And now try and tell me the length of the line which 
forms the side of that double* square : this is two feet — what 
will that be ? 

^ Boy. Clearly, Socrates, it will be doiible. " 

Soc. Do you observe, Meno, that I am not teaching the 
boy anything, but only asking him questions; and now 
he fancies that he knows how long a line is necessary in 
order to produce a figure of eight square feet ; does he not ? 

Men. Yes. 

Soc. And does he really know ? 

Men. Certaiply not. 

Soc. He only guesses that because the square is ^double, 
the line is double. 

Men. True. 

Soc. Observe him while he recalls the steps in regular 
order. (To the Boy.) Tell me, boy, do you assert that a 83 
double space ^omes from a double line? Remember that 
I am not Speaking of an oblong, but of a figure equal every 
way, and twice the size of this — that is to say of eight feet ; 
and I want to know whether you still say that a double 
square comes from a double line ? 

Boy. Yes. 

Soc. But does not this line become doubled if we add 
another such line here ? 

Boy. Certainly. , 

Soc . And four such lines will make a space containing 
eight feet? 

Boy . Yes. 

43 

Socrates and the boy . 

Soc. Let us describe such a figure : Would you not say 
that this is the figure of eight feet ? 

Boy . Yes. 

Soc. And a^e there not these four divisions *in the figure, 
each of which is equal to the figure of four feet ? # 

Boy. True. ~/T\~T 

Soc. And is not that four times four? / 

Boy. Certainly? A 

Soc. And four times is not double ? / \ 

Boy. No, indeed. \. | / 

Soc. But how much? & ~ — 

Boy. Four times as much. 

Soc. Therefore the double line, boy, 

has given a space, not twice, bu4 four times as much. 

Boy. True. 

Soc. Four tinles fout are sixteen — are they not? 

Boy. Yes. 

Soc. What line would give you a space of eight feet, as 
this gives one of sixteen feet do you see ? 

Boy. Yes. 

Soc. And the space of four feet is made from this half 
line ? 

Boy. Yes. 

Soc. Good; and is not a space of eigfit feet twice the 
size of this, and half the size of the other ? 

Boy. Oertfunly. 

Soc. Such a space, then, will be made out # of a line greater 
than this one, and less than that one ? 

Boy. Yes; I think so. 

Soc. Very good ; I like to hear you say what ySu think. 
And now lell me, is not this a line of two feet and that of 
four ? 

Boy. Yes. 

Soc . Then the line which forms the side of eight feet 
ought to be rqpre # than this line of two feet, and less than 
the other of four feet ? 

Boy . It ought. 

Soc. Try and see if you can tell me how much it will be. 

Boy. Three feet. • 

Soc . Then*if we add a half to this line of two, that will be 

Socrates, * 
Meno's 
Slave. 

He has now 
learned to 
realize his 
own ignor- 
ance, and 
therefore 
vflfl endea- 
vour to 
nSnedy it. 

44 

The progress of the boy's education. 

Meno. 

Sucrates, 

Meno, 

Meno's 

Slave. 

the line of three. Here are two and there is one; and on 
the other side, here dre two also and there is one : and that 
makes the figure of which you speak ? 

Boy. Yes.*. , 

Soc. But < if there are three feet this way and three feet 
that way, the *whole space will be three times three feet ? 

Boy . That is evident. 

Soc . And how much are three times three feet ? 

Boy . Nine. 

Soc. And how much is the double of four ? 

Boy. Eight. 

Soc. Then the figure of eight is not made out of a line of 
three ? 

Boy. No. 

Soc. But from what line ? — tell me exactly ; and if you 84 
would rather not reckon, try and shoVfr me the line. 

Boy. Indeed, Socrates, I do not know. 

Soc. Do you see, Meno, what advances he has made in his 
power of recollection ? He did not know at first, and he 
does not know now, what is the side of a figure of eight feet : 
but then he thought that he knew, and answered confidently 
as if he knew, and had no difficulty ; now he has a difficulty, 
and neither lyiows nor fancies that he knows. 

Men. True. 

Soc. Is he not better off in knowing his ignorance ? 

Men. I think that he is. 

Soc. If we have made him doubt, and given him the ‘ tor- 
pedo’s shock,’ have we done him any harm ? 

Men. I thiqk not. 

Soc. We have certainly, as would seem, assisted him in 
some degree to the discovery of the truth ; and now he will 
wish to remedy his ignorance, but then he would have been 
ready to tell all the world again and again that the double 
space should have a double side. 

Men. True. 1 0 

Soc. But do you suppose that he would ever have enquired 
into or learned what he fancied that he knew, though he 
was really ignorant of it, until he had fallen into perplexity 
under the idea that he did not know, and had desired to 
knoyr? 

45 

Construction of the figure of eight feet square . 

* Men. I think not, Socrates. 

Soc. Then he was the better for the torpedo’s tduch ? 

Men . I think so. 

Soc . Mark npw the farther development. I shall only ask 
him, and not teach him, and he shall share the enquiry with 
me : and do you watch ind see if you find tne telling or 
explaining anything to him, instead of eliciting his opinion. 
Tell me, boy, is not this a square of four feet which I have 
drawn ? 

Boy. Yes. 

Soc . And now I add another square equal to the former 
one? 

Boy. Yes. 

Soc. And a third, which is eqyal to either of them ? 

Boy. Yes. 

Soc. Suppose»that fill up the vacant corner ? 

Boy. Very good. 

Soc. Here, then, there are four equal spaces? 

Boy. Yes. 

Soc. And how many times larger is this space than this 
other ? 

Boy. Four times. 

Soc. But it ought to have been twice only, as you will 
remember. # 

Boy. True. 

Soc. And does not this line, reaching from corner to corner, 
85 bisect each of these spaces ? 

Boy. Yes. 

Soc. And are there not here four equal lines which contain 
this # space ? 

Boy. There are. 

Soc. Look and see how much this space is. 

Boy. I do not understand. 

Soc. Has not each interior line cut off half of the four' 
spaces ? 

Boy. Yes. 

Soc. And how many such # spaces are there in this^ection ? 

Boy. Four. 

Soc. And how many in this^ 

Boy. Two? 

Meno. 

Socrates, 

Meno, 

Meno’s 

Slave. 

The boy 
arrives at 
another 
true con- 
clusion : 

which is, 
that the 
square of 
the dia- 
gonal is 
double the 
square of 
the side. 

46 

Mem. 

Socrates, 

Memo, 

Meno’s 

Slavs. 

At present 
he is in a 
dream ; he 
will soon 
grow 
clearer. 

The doctrine of reminiscence „ 

Soc. And four is how many times two ? 

Boy . Twice. t* 

Soc . And this space is of how many feet ? 

Boy . Of ei^ht feet. 

Sor. And from what line do you get this figure ? 

Boy. Fromvhis. t , 

Soc. That is, from the line which extends from corner to 
corner of the figure of four feet ? * 

Boy . Yes. 

Soc. And that is the line which the learned call the dia- 
gonal. And if this is the proper name, then you. Mend's 
slave, are prepared to affirm that the double space is the 
square of the diagonal ? 

Boy. Certainly, Socrates. , 

Soc. What do you say of him, Meno ? Were not all these 
answers given out of his own head ? * 

Men. Yes, they were all his own. 

Soc. And yet, as we were just now saying, he did not 
know? 

Men. True. 

Soc. But still he had in him those notions of his — had he 
not ? 

Men. Yes. 

Soc. Then lie who does not know may still hafve true 
notions of that which he does not know ? 

Men. He has. 

Soc. And at present these notions have just been stirred up 
in him, as in a dream ; but if he were frequently askecf the 
same questions^ in different forms, he would know as well as 
any one at last ? 

Men. I dare say. « 

t Soc. Without any one teaching him he will recover his 
knowledge for himself, if he is only asked questions ? 

Men. Yes. 

Soc. And this spontaneous recovery of krfbwlf dge in him is 
recollection ? 

Men. Tcue. ^ 

Soc. And this knowledge which he now has must he not 
either have acquired or always possessed ? 

Men. Yes. 

Socrates is more confident of some things than of others . 

Soc. But if he always possessed this knowledge he would 
always have known ; or«if he has acquired the knowledge he 
could not have acquired it in this life, unless he has been 
taught geometry ; for he may be made to do the same with 
all geometry and every other branch of knowledge. Now, 
has any one ever taught him all this ? You mtsf know about 
him, if, as you say, he was born and bred in your house. 

Men. And I ary certain that no one ever did teach him. 

Soc . And yet he has the knowledge ? 

Men . The fact, Socrates, is undeniable. 

Soc . But if he did not acquire the knowledge in this life, 
86 then he must have had and learned it at some other time ? 

Men. Clearly he must. 

Soc. Which must have been^the time when he was not a 
man? 

Men. Yes. 

Soc . And if there have been always true thoughts in him, 
both at the time when he was and was not a man, which only 
need to be awakened into knowledge by putting questions to 
him, his soul must have always possessed this knowledge, for 
he always either was or was not a man ? 

Men. Obviously. 

Soc. And if the truth of all things always existed in the 
soul, tl*en the soul is immortal. Wherefore be of good 
cheer, aifd try to recollect what you do not know, or rather 
what you domot remember. 

Men. I feel, somehow, that I like what ycyi are saying. 

SSc. And I, Meno, like what I am saying. Some things I 
have said of which I am not altogether confident. But that 
we^shali be better and braver and less helpless if*we "think 
that we qpght to enquire, than we should have been if we 
indulged in the idle fancy that there was no knowing and nq 
use in seeking to know what we do not know;— that is a 
theme upon which I am ready to fight, in word and deed, to" 
the utmost of my power. 

Men. There again, Socrates, your words seem to me 
excellent. # • 

Soc . Then, as we are agreed that a man should enquire 
about that which he does not Jcnow, shall you and I make an 
effort to enquire together into^he nature of virtue ? 

47 

Meno. 

Socrates, 
Meno. m 

Either this 
knowledge 
was ac- 
quired by 
him in a 
former state 
of exist- 
ence, or 
was always 
known to 
him. 

Better to 
enquire 
than to 
fancy that 
there i^no 
such thing 
as enquiry 
and no use 
in it. 

4 8 

Meno. 

Socrates, 

Meno. 

Socrates 
cannot 
enquire 
whether 
virtue can 
be taught 
until he 
knows what 
virtue is, 
except 
upon an 
hypothesis, 
such as geo- 
metricians 
sometimes 
employ : 
e. g. can a 
triangle of 
given area 
be inscribed 
in a given 
circle, if 
when the 
side of it is 
produced 
this or that 
conse- 
quence 
follows ? 
[The 

hypothesis 
appears to 
be rather 
trivial and 
to have no 
mathema- 
tical value.] 

c 

Upon the 
hypothesis 
' that virtue 
is know- 
ledge,' can 
it be taught? 

The nature of hypothesis . 

Men . By all means, Socrates. And yet I would much 
rather returh to my on’ginal question, Whether in seeking to 
acquire virtue we should regard it as a thing to be taught, or 
as a gift of nature, or as coming to men in some other way ? 

Soc. Had I the command of you as well as of myself, 
Meno, I would 1 not havf enquired whether virtue is given by 
instruction or not, until we had first ascertained 'what it is.* 
But as you think only of controlling me who am your slave, 
and never of controlling yourself, — such being your notion of 
freedom, I must yield to you, for you are irresistible. And 
therefore I have now to enquire into the qualities of a thing of 
which I do not as yet know the jiature. At any rate, will you 
condescend a little, and allow the question ' Whether virtue is 
given by instruction, or in any other way/ to be argued upon 
hypothesis ? As the geometrician, when he is asked Whether 87 
a certain triangle is capable of being ‘inscribed in a certain 
circle \ will reply : ' I cannot tell you as yet ; but I will offer 
a hypothesis which may assist us in forming a conclusion : If 
the figure be such that ? when you have produced a given side 
of it 2 , the given area of the triangle falls short by an area 
* corresponding to the part produced 3 , then one consequence 
follows, and if this is impossible then some other ; and there- 
fore I wish to assume a hypothesis before I tell you whether 
this triangle is capable of being inscribed in the citele : , — 
that is a geometrical hypothesis. And we too, as we know not 
the nature and qualities of virtue, must ask, whether* virtue is 
or is not taught, cinder a hypothesis : as thus, if virtue is of 
such a class of mental goods, will it be taught or not ? Let 
the first hypothesis be that virtue is or is not knowledge, — 
in that ca*>e will it be taught or not ? or, as we were just Aow 
saying, ' remembered 9 ? For there is no use in* disputing 
about the name. But is virtue taught or not? or rather, 
does not every one see that knowledge alone is taught ? 

Men . I agree. 

Soc . Then if virtue is knowledge, virtue Vil\. be taught? 

Men. Certainly. 

6 * 

1 Or, whether a certain area is capable of being inscribed as a triangle in a 
certain circle. 

2 Or, when you apply it to the given lint, i. e. the diameter of the circle (airov). 

3 O^ similar to the area so applied. * ' 

Virtue and knowledge . 

49 

Soc. Then now we have made a quick end of this question : 
if virtue is of such a nature, it will be taj ght ; and*if not, not? 

Men. Certainly. 

Soc. The next question is, whether virtue is knowledge or 
of another species ? 

Men. Yes, that appears* to be the question twhich comes 
next in order. 

Soc. Do we nqf say that virtue is a good ? — This is a 
hypothesis which is not set aside. 

Men. Certainly. 

Soc. Now, if there be any sort of good which is distinct 
from knowledge, virtue may be that good ; but if knowledge 
embraces all good, then we shall be right in thinking that 
virtue is knowledge ? 

Men. True. 

Soc. And virtue makes us good ? 

Men. Yes. 

Soc. And if we are good, then we are profitable ; for all 
good things are profitable ? 

Men. Yes. 

Soc. Then virtue is profitable ? 

Men. That is the only inference. 

Soc. Then now let us see what are the things which 
severall^profit us. Health and strength, «anc? beauty and 
wealth— these, and the like of these, we call profitable ? 

Men. Tcue.. 

Soc. And yet these things may also sometimes do us 
harm * would you not think so ? 

Men. Yes. 

Soe. And what is the guiding principle which* makes them 
profitable oj the reverse ? Are they not profitable when they 
are rightly used, and hurtful when they are not rightly used ? 

Men. Certainly. 

Soc. Next, let us consider the goods of the soul : they are 
temperance, justice* courage, quickness of apprehension, 
memory, magnanimity, and the like ? 

Men. Surely. 

Soc. And such of these as are not knowledge, but of 
another sort, are sometimes profitable and sometimes hurtful; 
as, for exampje, courage wanting prudence, which is only 

VOL. II. e # 

Mcno. 

Socrates, 

Meno. 

‘Of course.' 

But is vir- 
tue know- 
ledge ? 

Virtue is a 
good, and 
profitable : 
and all 
profitable 
things are 
either pro- 
fitable or 
the reverse 
according 
as they are 
or are not 
under the 
guidance of 
knowledge. 

5 ° 

Meno. 

Socrates, 

Meno. 

And so all 
virtue must 
be a sort of 
wisdom or 
knowledge. 

Virtue is 
either c 
wholly 
partly wis- 
dom. i 

V 7 irtue is knowledge . 

a sort of confidence? When a man* has no sense he is 
harmed by Courage, brat when he hao sense he is profited ? 

Men . True. 

Soc. And the same may be said of temperance and quick- 
ness of apprehension ; whatever things are learned or done 
with sense are profitable, but whew done without sense they 
are hurtful ? 

Men. Very true. 0 

Soc. And in general, all that the soul attempts or en- 
dures, when under the guidance of wisdom, ends in hap- 
piness ; but when she is under the guidance of folly, in the 
opposite ? 

Men. That appears to be true. 

Soc. If then virtue is a quality of the soul, and is admitted 
to be profitable, it must be wisdom or prudence, since none 
of the things of the soul are either profitable or hurtful in 
themselves, but they are all made profitable or hurtful by 
the addition of wisdom or of folly ; and therefore if virtue is 
profitable, virtue must be a sort of wisdom or prudence ? 

Men. I quite agree. 

Soc. And the other goods, such as wealth and the like, of 
which we were just now saying that they are sometimes good 
and sometimes evil, do not they also become profitable or 
hurtful, accordingly as the soul guides and uses thorn rightly 
or wrongly; just as the things of the soul herself are benefited 
when under the guidance of wisdom and harmed by folly? 

Men. True. 

Soc. And the wise soul guides them rightly, and the foolish 
soul wrongly ? 

Men. i Yes.* 

Soc. And is not this universally true of hum#n nature ? 
All other things hang upon the soul, and the things of the 
soul herself hang upon wisdom, if they are to be good ; and 89 
so wisdom is inferred to be that which profits — and virtue, as 
we say, is profitable ? 

Men. Certainly. 

1 Soc. And thus we arrive at the conclusion that virtue is 
either wholly or partly wisdom 

Men. I think that what yqu are saying, Socrates, is very 
true. 

5i 

Can vritue be taught ? 

Soc. But if this is true, then the ,good are not by nature 
good ? 

Men . I think not. 

Soc . If they had been, there would assuredly have been 
discerners of characters among us who would # have known 
our future great men ; aftd on their showing $?e should have 
adopted them, and when we had got them, we should have 
kept them in the citadel out of the way of harm, and set 
a stamp upon them far rather than upon a piece of gold, in 
order that no one might tamper with them ; and when they 
grew up they would have been useful to the state ? 

Men. Yes, Socrates, that would have been the right way. 

Soc. But if the good are not by nature good, are they 
made good by instruction ? • 

Men. There appears to be no other alternative, Socrates. 
On the supposition th;ft virtue is knowledge, there can l>e no 
doubt that virtue is taught. 

Soc. Yes, indeed; but what if the supposition is erroneous ? 

Men. I certainly thought just now that we were right* 

Soc. Yes, Meno; but a principle which has any soundness 
should stand firm not only just now, but always. 

Men. Well ; and why are you so slow of heart to believe 
that knowledge is virtue ? ^ 

Soc. will try and tell you why, Meno.* I do not retract 
the assertion that if virtue is knowledge it may be taught ; 
but I feas th£t I have some reason in doubting whether virtue 
is knowledge : for consider now and say whether virtue, 
and not only virtue but anything that is taught, must not have 
teachers and disciples ? 

Men. Surely. 

Soc. A»d conversely, may not the art of which neither 
teachers nor disciples exist be assumed to be incapable o i 
being taught? *** 

Men. True ; but do you think that there are no teachers of 
virtue ? 

Soc. I have certainly often enquired whether there were any, 
and taken great pains to finc^them, and have never siffcceedea ; 
and many have assisted me in the search, and they were 
the persons whom I thought the most likely to know. 

90 Here at the moment when Hie is wanted we fortur\£tely 

Meno. 

Socrates, 

Meno. 

If this is 
true, virtue 
must be 
taught; but 
then where 
are the 
teachers ? 

Can Anytus 
tell us who 
they are ? 

52 

Meno . 

OCRATES. 

Anytus. 

The arts are 
taught by 
the profes- 
sors of 
them. 

And have 
we not 
heard of 
those who 
profess to 
teach virtue 
at a fixed 
price ? 

The appeal to Anytus . 

have sitting by us Anytus, the very person of whom we 
should make enquiry*; to him then* let us repair. In the 
first place, he is the son of a wealthy and wise father, 
Anthemion, w$ho acquired his wealth, not by accident or gift, 
like Ismenia^ the Theban (who has recently made himself as 
rich as Polycrates), but by his owfi skill and industry, and 
who is a well-conditioned, modest man, not insolent, or over- 
bearing, or annoying; moreover, this sop. of his has re- 
ceived a good education, as the Athenian people certainly 
appear to think, for they choose him to fill the highest offices. 
And these are the sort of men from whom you are likely to 
learn whether there are any teachers of virtue, and who they 
are. Please, Anytus, to help me and your friend Meno in 
answering our question, Who are the teachers? Consider 
the matter thus : If we wanted Meno to be a good physician, 
to whom should we send him ? Should we r not send him to 
the physicians ? 

Any. Certainly. 

Soc. Or if we wanted him to be a good cobbler, should we 
not send him to the cobblers ? 

Any. Yes. 

Soc. And so forth ? 

Any. Yes. , 

Soc. Let me trouble you with one more question. ° When 
we say that we should be right in sending him to* the phy- 
sicians if we wanted him to be a physician, do \fre mean that 
we should be right in sending him to those who profess the 
art, rather than to those who do not, and to those who 
demand payment for teaching the art, and profess to teach it 
to any one who will come and learn ? And if these were' our 
reasons, should we not be right in sending him ? < 

Any . Yes. 

Soc. And might not the same be said of flute-playing, and 
of the other arts? Would a man who wanted to make 
another a flute-player refuse to send him to thqse who profess 
to teach the art for money, and be plaguing other persons to 
give him 'instruction, who are not, professed teachers and who 
never had a single disciple in that branch of knowledge which 
he wishes him to acquire — wculd not such conduct be the 
height of folly ? 

Anytus attacks , Socrates defends , the Sophists. 

Any. Yes, by Zeus, and of ignorance too. 

9 1 Soc. Very good. Aitd now you arefin a position to advise 
with me about my friend Meno. He has been telling me, 
Anytus, that he desires to attain that kind of wisdom and virtue 
by which men order the state or the house, an3 honour their 
parents, and know when* to receive £nd when fo send away 
citizens and strangers, as a good man should. Now, to whom 
should he go in-order that he may learn this virtue ? Does 
not the previous argument imply clearly that we should send 
him to those who profess and avouch that they are the com- 
mon teachers of all Hellas, and are ready to impart instruction 
to any one who likes, at a fixed price ? 

Any. Whom do you mean, Socrates ? 

Soc. You surely know, do you not, Anytus, that these are 
the people whom mankind call Sophists? 

Any. By Heracles* Socrates, forbear ! I only hopfe that 
no friend or kinsman or acquaintance of mine, whether citizen 
or stranger, will ever be so mad as to allow himself to be cor- 
rupted by them ; for they arc a manifest pest and corrupting 
influence to those who have to do with them. 

Soc. What, Anytus? Of all the people who profess that 
they know how to do men good, do you mean to say that 
these are the only ones who not only do them no good, but 
positi\*ly corrupt those who are entrusted tfl them, and in 
return for this disservice have the face to demand money? 
Indeed,*I cannot believe you ; for I know of a single man, 
Protagoras, who made more out of his craft than the illustrious 
Phidias, who created such noble works, or any ten other 
statuaries. How could that be ? A mender of old shoes, or 
pafccher up of clothes, who made the shoes or clothesVorse 
than he Received them, could not have remained thirty days 
undetected, and would very soon have starved ; whereas 
during more than forty years, Protagoras was corrupting all 
Hellas, and sending his disciples from him worse than hi 
received them^ arftl he was never found out. For, if I am not 
mistaken, he was about seventy years old at his death, forty 
of which were spent in the practice of his profession ; aTid 
during all that time he ha3 a good reputation, which to this 
day he retains : and not only J^rotagoras, but many others are 
well spoken* of ; some who li^ed before him, and others who 

53 

Meno. 

Socrates, 

Anytus. 

Anytus 
inveighs 
against the’ 
corrupting 
influence 
of the So- 
phists. 

Why surely 
they cannot 
really be 
corrupters ? 
See what 
fortunes 
they make, 
and what 
an excellent 
reputation 
many of 
them bear ! 

54 

Meno. 

Socrates, 

Anytus. 

The wisest 
men in 
Hellas 
could not 
have been 
out of their 
minds ? 

No the 
people who 
gave their 
money to 
them were 
out of their 
minds. 

How can 
Anytus 
know that 
they are 
bad, if he 
does not 
know them 
at all f 

Then who 
will teach 
Meno 
virtue ? 

Any Athe- • 
nian gen- • 
tleman who 
has learned « 

The rage of Anytus at the Sophists . 

are still living. Now, when you say that they deceived and 92 
corrupted the youth, ure they to be supposed to have cor- 
rupted them consciously or unconsciously ? Can those who 
were deemed by many to be the wisest men of Hellas have 
been out of their minds ? 

Any. Out of their minds! No, Socrates; the young men 
who gave their money to them were out of their minds, and 
their relations and guardians who entrusted their youth to the 
care of these men were still more out of their minds, and 
most of all, the cities who allowed them to come in, and did 
not drive them out, citizen and stranger alike. 

Soc. Has any of the Sophists wronged you, Anytus? 
What makes you so angry with them ? 

Any . No, indeed, neither I ; nor any of my belongings has 
ever had, nor would I suffer them to have, anything to do 
with them. «, 1 

Soc. Then you are entirely unacquainted with them ? 

Any. And 1 have no wish to be acquainted. 

Soc. 1 Then, my dear friend, how can you know whether a 
thing is good or bad of which you are wholly ignorant ? 

Any. Quite well ; I am sure that I know what manner of 
men these are, whether I am acquainted with them or not. 

Soc. You must be a diviner, Anytus, for I really cannot 
make out, judging from your own words, how, if you ure not 
acquainted with them, you know about them. But I am not 
enquiring of you who are the teachers who will corrupt Meno 
(let them be, if yp,u please, the Sophists) ; I only ask you to 
tell him who there is in this great city who will teach him how 
to become eminent in the virtues which I was just now de- 
scribing. .He is the friend of your family, and you will oblige 
him. 

Any. Why do you not tell him yourself? 

Soc. I have told him whom I supposed to be the teachers 
6f these things ; but I learn from you that I am utterly at 
fault, and I dare say that you are right. Arid now I wish that 
you, on your part, would tell me to whom among the 
Athenians.he should go. Whom would you name ? 

Any. Why single out individuals ? Any Athenian gentle- 
man, taken at random, if he wijl mind him, will do far more 
good to him than the Sophists. . 

The lesson taught by the example of Themistocles , 

55 

Soc. And did those gentlemen grow of themselves ; and 
without having been taifght by any cfie, were they never- 
93 theless able to teach others that which they had never learned 
themselves ? 

Any . I imagine that they learned of the previous generation 
of gentlemen. Have there aot been mar^y good itfei? in this city? 

Soc. Yes, certainly, Anytus ; and many good statesmen also 
there always hav^ been and there are still, in the city of 
Athens. But the question is whether they were also good 
teachers of their own virtue ; — not whether there are, or have 
been, good men in this part of the world, but whether virtue 
can be taught, is the question which we have been discussing. 
Now, do we mean to say that the good men of our own and of 
other times knew how to impart to others that virtue which 
they had themselves ; or is virtue a thing incapable of being 
communicated or impasted by one man to another ? Tlfat is 
the question which I and Meno have been arguing. Look at 
the matter in your own way : Would you not admit that 
Themistocles was a good man ? 

Any. Certainly ; no man better. 

Soc. And must not he then have been a good teacher, if 
any man ever was a good teacher, of his own virtue? 

Any. Yes, certainly, — if he wanted to be so. 

Soc. 43ut would he not have wanted? He “would, at any 
rate, have* desired to make his own son a good man and a 
gentleman ; he could not have been jealous of him, or have 
intentionally abstained from imparting to hijp his own virtue. 
Did “you never hear that he made his son Cleophantus a 
famous horseman ; and had him taught to stand upright on 
horseback and hurl a javelin, and to do many other marvellous 
things ; agd in anything which could be learned from a master 
he was well trained ? Have you not heard from our elders 
of him ? 

Any. I have. ' 

Soc. Then no otie could say that his son showed any want 
of capacity ? 

Any. Very likely not. • 

Soc. But did any one, olcf or young, ever say in your hear- 
ing that Cleophantus, son of TJiemistocies, was a wise or good 
man, as his father was ? , 

Meno. 

Socrates, 

Anytus. 

of a previ- 
ous genera- 
tion of gen- 
tlemen. 

Good men 
may not 
have been 
good 
teachers. 
There 
never was a 
better man 
than The- 
mistocles ; 
but he did 
not make 
much of his 
own son. 

56 

Meno. 

Socratks, 

Anytus. 

He had him 
taught ac- 
complish- 
ments be- 
cause there 
was no one 
to teach 
virtue. 

Aristides 
was also a 
good man, 
and Peri- 
cles and 
Thucydi- 
des they 
made their 
sons good 
horsemen, 
and wrest- 
lers, and 
the like, 
but they 
did not 
have them 
taught to 
be good, 
because vir- 
tue cannot 
be taught. 

Aristides , Pericles , Thucydides the son of Me lesias. 

Any . I have certainly never heard any one say so. 

Soc. And if virtue could have been taught, would his father 
Themistocles have sought to train him in these minor accom- 
plishments, and allowed him who, as you must remember, was 
his own son' to be no better than his neighbours in those 
qualities in 'which he himself excelled ? 

Any. Indeed, indeed, I think not. 

Soc. Here was a teacher of virtue whoip you admit to be 
among the best men of the past. Let us take another, — Aris- 94 
tides, the son of Lysimachus : would you not acknowledge 
that he was a good man ? 

Any. To be sure I should. 

Soc. And did not he train his son Lysimachus better than 
any other Athenian in all that could be done for him by the 
help of masters ? But what has been the result ? Is he a bit 
better than any other mortal? lie, is an .acquaintance of 
yours, and you see what he is like. There is Pericles, again, 
magnificent in his wisdom ; and he, as you are aware, had 
two sons, Paralus and Xanthippus. 

Any. I know. 

Soc. And you know, also, that he taught them to be un- 
rivalled horsemen, and had them trained in music and gym- 
nastics and all sorts of arts —in these respects they were on a 
level with the 'best — and had he no wish to make goodrmen of 
them? Nay, he must have wished it. But virtue, as I sus- 
pect, could not be taught. And that you may no$ suppose the 
incompetent teachers to be only the meaner sort of Athenians 
and few in number, remembej again that Thucydides had two 
sons, Melesias and Stephanus, whom, besides giving them a 
good' edupatiofi in other things, he trained in wrestling, vmd 
they were the best wrestlers in Athens : one of theip he com- 
mitted to the pare of Xanthias, and the other of Eudorus, who 
had the reputation of being the most celebrated wrestlers of 
'that day. Do you remember them ? 

Any. I have heard of them. * 

Soc . Now, can there be a doubt that Thucydides, whose 
children yere taught things for which he had to spend money, 
would have taught them to be good men, which would have 
cost him nothing, if virtue could have been taught? Will 
you reply that he was a mean man, and had not many friends 

The Sophists again. 

among the Athenians and allies ? Nay, but he was of a great 
family, and a man of irffluence at Athens and iA all Hellas, 
and, if virtue could have been taught, he would have found 
out some Athenian or foreigner who would haye made good 
men of his sons, if he could not himself spare the time from 
cares of state. Once mt>re, I suspect, frierftl Anytus, that 
virtue is not a thing which can be taught ? 

Any. Socrates* I think that you are too ready to speak 
evil of men : and, if you will take my advice, I would recom- 
mend you to be careful. Perhaps there is no city in which 
it is not easier to do men harm than to do them good, and 
95 this is certainly the case at Athens, as I believe that you 
know. 

Soc. O Meno, I think that i\nytus is in a rage. And he 
may well be in a rage, for he thinks, in the first place, that I 
am defaming tfyese gentlemen; and in the second place,* he is 
of opinion that he is one of them himself. But some day 
he will know what is the meaning of defamation, and if he 
ever does, he will forgive me. Meanwhile I will return to 
you, Meno ; for I suppose that there are gentlemen in your 
region too ? 

Men. Certainly there are. 

Soc. And are they willing to teach the young? and do 
they pmfess to be teachers ? and do they agree that virtue is 
taught? ' 

Men. Ho indeed, Socrates, they are anything but agreed ; 
you may hear them saying at one time tkkat virtue can be 
taugjht, and then again the reverse. 

Soc. Can we call those teachers who do not acknowledge 
the possibility of their own vocation ? 

Men. I ^hink not, Socrates. 

Soc. And what do you think of these Sophists, who are the; 
only professors ? Do they seem to you to be teachers of 
virtue ? 

Men. I often wcfhder, Socrates, that Gorgias is never heard 
promising to teach virtue : and when he hears others promising 
he only laughs at them ; but he thinks that men stoould b*e 
taught to speak. 

Soc. Then do you not think Jhat the Sophists are teachers ? 

Men. I cannot tell you, Socrates ; like the rest of the world, 

57 

Meno . 

SOCRATBS, 

Anytus, 

Meno. 

Anytus 
gives an an- 
gry warn- 
ing to 
Socrates. 

The Thes- 
salian gen- 
try are not 
agreed 
about the 
possibility 
of teaching 
virtue. * 

Gorgias 
professes 
to teach 
rhetoric, 
but laughs 
a^those 
who pre- 
tend to 
teach vir- 
tue. 

58 

Meno. 

Socrates, 

Meno. 

Theognis 
implies in 
one passage 
that virtue 
can, and in 
another 
that it can- 
not, be 
taught. 

How can 
they be 
teachers 
who are so 
inconsistent 
with them- 
selves ? 

The Sophists no teachers of virtue . 

I am in doubt, and sometimes I think that they are teachers 
and sometimes not. 1 

Soc. And arc you aware that not you only and other poli- 
ticians have dpubts whether virtue can be taught or not, but 
that Theognis the poet says the very same thing ? 

Men . Where does he\say so? 

Soc. In these elegiac verses 1 : — 

'Eat and drink and sit with the mighty, and make 'yourself agreeable to 
them ; for from the good you will learn what is good, but if you mix with 
the bad you will lose the intelligence which you already have.’ 

Do you observe that here he seems to imply that virtue can 
be taught ? 

Men. Clearly. 

Soc. But in some other . verses he shifts about and 
says 2 : — 

'If understanding could be created and put into a man, then they’ [who 
were able to perform this feat] ' would have obtained great rewards.’ 

And again : — 

‘ Never would a bad son have sprung from a good sire, for he would have 96 
heard the voice of instruction ; but not by teaching will you ever make a bad 
man into a good one.* 

And this, as you may remark, is a contradiction of the other. 
Men. Clearly. * «. 

Soc. And is there anything else of which the professors are 
affirmed not only not to be teachers of others, but to ri be igno- 
rant themselves, fc and bad at the knowledge of that which they 
are professing to teach ? or is there anything about which fcven 
the acknowledged ‘ gentlemen’ are sometimes saying that 
‘this ‘thing can 1 be taught/ and sometimes the opposite ? Can 
you say that they are teachers in any true sense whose ideas 
are in such confusion ? 

Men. I should say, certainly not. 

Soc. But if neither the Sophists nor the gentlemen are 
teachers, clearly there can be no other teachers ? 

Men. No. 

• Soc. .fyid if there are no teachers, neither are there dis- 
ciples ? 

Men. Agreed. 

Theog. 33 ff. 

a Theog. 435 

Knowledge and Opinion . 

Soc. And we have admitted that a thing cannot be taught of 
which there are neither tlachers nor di^tiples ? 

Men. We have. 

Soc . And there are no teachers of virtue to found any- 
where ? 9 

Men . There are not. # / * 

Soc . And if there are no teachers, neither are there scholars? 

Men. That, I think, is true. 

Soc. Then virtue cannot be taught ? 

Men. Not if we are right in our view. But I cannot believe, 
Socrates, that there are no good men : And if there are, how 
did they come into existence ? 

Soc. I am afraid, Meno, that you and I are not good for 
much, and that Gorgias has been as poor an educator of you 
as Prodicus has been of me. Certainly we shall have to 
look to ourselves, and* try to find some one who will help 
in some way or other to improve us. This I say, because 
I observe that in the previous discussion none of us remarked 
that right and good action is possible to man under other 
guidance than that of knowledge (tWr^);~and indeed if 
this be denied, there is no seeing how there can be any good 
men at all. 

Men. How do you mean, Socrates? 

Soc. 3 mean that good men are necessarily useful or 
97 profitable.* Were we not right in admitting this? It must 
be so. • • 

Men. Yes. -• 

So?. And in supposing that they will be useful only if they 
are true guides to us of action— there we were ^Iso right J 

Min. Yes. 

Soc. But when we said that a man cannot be a good guide 
unless he have knowledge (< pp6vrj(ris) f in this we were wrong. 

Men. What do you mean by the word * right * ? 

Soc. I will explain. If a man knew the way to Larisa, or 
anywhere else, jmd # went to the place and led others thither, 
would he not be a right and good guide ? 

Men. Certainly. % * 

Soc. And a person who had a right opinion about the way, 
but had never been and did nottknow, might be a good guide 
also, might ho not ? • * 

59 

Meno. 

Socrates, 

Meno. 

If there are 
no teachers 
and no 
scholars, 
virtue can- 
not be 
taught. 

But were 
we not mis- 
taken in our 
view? 

There may 
be another 
guide to 
good action 
as well as 
knowledge, 

6o 

Meno. 

Socrates, 

Meno. 

Right 
opinion is 
as good a 
guide to 
action as 
knowledge. 

But right 
opinions 
are apt to 
walk away, 
like the * 
images of 
Daedalus. 

The images of Daedalus . 

Men. Certainly. 

Soc. Anid while hd has true opinion about that which the 
other knows, he will be just as good a guide if he thinks the 
truth, as he jyho knows the truth ? 

Men . Exactly. 

Soc . Then’crue opiijion is as good a guide to correct action 
as knowledge ; and that was the point which we omitted in 
our speculation about the nature of virtue,. when we said that 
knowledge only is the guide of right action ; whereas there is 
also right opinion. 

Men . True. 

Soc. Then right opinion is not less useful than knowledge ? 

Men. The difference, Socrates, is only that he who has 
knowledge will always be right; but he who has right 
opinion will sometimes be right, and sometimes not. 

Soc. What do you mean ? Can «he be* wrong who has 
right opinion, so long as he has right opinion ? 

Men. I admit the cogency of your argument, and therefore, 
Socrates, I wonder that knowledge should be preferred to 
right opinion- or why they should ever differ. 

Soc. And shall I explain this wonder to you ? 

Men. Do tell me. 

Soc. You would not wonder if you had ever observed the 
images of Dacdulus 1 ; but perhaps you have not gol? them in 
your country ? 

Men. What have they to do with the questiovi ? , 

Soc. Because they require to be fastened in order to keep 
them, and if they are not fastened they will play truaift and 
run away. 

Men. Welf, what of that? • 

Soc. I mean to say that they are not very v^juable pos- 
sessions if they are at liberty, for they will walk off like 
runaway slaves ; but when fastened, they are of great value, 
for they are really beautiful works of art. Now this is an 
illustration of the nature of true opinions : while they abide 98 
with us they are beautiful and fruitful, but they run away out 
bf the human soul, and do not remain long, and therefore 
they are not of much value until they are fastened by the 
tie of the cause; and this fastening of them, friend Meno, 

1 Cp. Euthyphro 11 B. t 

Recapitulation of the argument . 

is recollection, as you and I have agreed to call it. But 
when they are bound, In the first pftace, the/ have the 
nature of knowledge ; and, in the second place, they are 
abiding. And this is why knowledge is more honourable and 
excellent than true opinion, because fastened by a chain. 

Men. What you are saving, Socrates, seenfs to be very 
like the truth. 

Soc . I too speak rather in ignorance ; I only conjecture. 
And yet that knowledge differs from- true opinion is no 
matter of conjecture with me. There are not many things 
which I profess to know, but this is most certainly one 
of them. 

Men . Yes, Socrates; and you are quite right in saying so. 

Soc . And am I not also right, in saying that true opinion 
leading the way perfects action quite as well as knowledge ? 

Men . There again, S«crates, I think that you are right! 

Soc. Then right opinion is not a whit inferior to knowledge, 
or less useful in action ; nor is the man who has right opinion 
inferior to him who has knowledge ? 

Men. True. 

Soc. And surely the good man has been acknowledged by 
us to be useful ? 

Men. Yes. 

Soc. Seeing then that men become good and useful to 
states, not only because they have knowledge, but because 
they hav% right opinion, and that neither knowledge nor 
right opinion is given to man by nature *er acquired by 
him— (do you imagine either of them to be given by nature ? 

Men. Not I.) 

Sdb. Then if they are not given by nature, neither are* the 
good by nature good ? 

Men. Certainly not. 

Soc. And nature being excluded, then came the question 
whether virtue is acquired by teaching ? 

Men. Yes. 

Soc. If virtue was wisdom [or knowledge 1, then, as we 
thought, it was taught ? 

Men. Yes. 

Soc. And if it was taught it \^as wisdom ? 

Men. Certainly. 

61 

Meno. 

Socrates, 

Meno. 

62 

Diviners and divine men. 

Meno. 

OCRATES, 

Meno. 

If virtue 
and know- 
ledge can- 
not be 
taught, the 
only right 
guides 
of men 
are true 
opinions. 

Right 
opinion is 
in politics 
what divi- 
nation is in 
religion ; 
diviners, 
prophets, 
poets, 
statesmen, 
may all he 
truly called 
‘ divine 
men.’ l 

Soc. And if there were teachers, it might be taught ; and 
if there wefe no teachers, not ? c 

Men . True. 

Soc . But purely we acknowledged that there were no 
teachers of virtue? 

Men. Yes. 1 i v 

Soc. Then we acknowledged that it was not taught, and 
was not wisdom ? v 

Men. Certainly. 

Soc. And yet we admitted that it was a good ? 

Men. Yes. 

Soc . And the right guide is useful and good ? 99 

Men. Certainly. 

Soc. And the only right guides are knowledge and true 
opinion— -these are the guides of man ; for things which 
happen by chance are not under the <jguidar.ee of man : but 
the guides of man are true opinion and knowledge. 

Men. I think so too. 

Soc. But if virtue is not taught, neither is virtue knowledge. 

Men. Clearly not. 

Soc . Then of two good and useful things, one, which is 
knowledge, has been set aside, and cannot be supposed to 
be our guide in political life. 

Men. I think Not. ,r 

Soc. And therefore not by any wisdom, and not because 
they were wise, did Themistocles and those others of whom 
Anytus spoke govern states. This was the reason why they 
were unable to make others like themselves — because' their 
virtue was not grounded on knowledge. 

Men. That is probably true, Socrates. 

Soc. But if not by knowledge, the only alternative which 
remains is that statesmen must have guided states by right 
opinion, which is in politics what divination is in religion ; 
for diviners and also prophets say many things truly, but 
they know not what they say. 

Men. So I believe. 

1 Soc . And may we not, Meno, truly call those men ‘ divine' 
who, having no understanding, yet succeed in many a grand 
deed and word ? 

Men. Certainly. 

The conclusion . 

63 

Soc. Then we shall also be right in calling divine those 
whom we were just now Speaking of as tliviners aftd prophets, 
including the whole tribe of poets. Yes, and statesmen 
above all may be said to be divine and illumined, being 
inspired and possessed of God, in which concfltion they say 
many grand things, not knowing what/they sa^ # 

Men . Yes. 

Soc. And the *vomen too, Meno, call good men divine — 
do they not? and the Spartans, when they praise a good 
man, say 'that he is a divine man/ 

Men . And I think, Socrates, that they are right ; although 
very likely our friend Anytus may take offence at the word. 

Soc. I do not care* as for Anytus, there will be another 
opportunity of talking with him. To sum up our enquiry — 
the result seems to be; if we are at all right in our view, that 
virtue is neither natural nor acquired, but an instinct given 
100 by God to the virtuous. Nor is the instinct accompanied 
by reason, unless there may be supposed to be among states- 
men some one who is capable of educating statesmen. And 
if there be such an one, he may be said to be among the 
living what Homer says that Tiresias was among the dead, 

' he alone has understanding; but the rest are flitting shades ; * 
and he and his virtue in like manner will be a reality among 
shadows. • * 

Men. That is excellent, Socrates. 

Soc. 'Chen* Meno, the conclusion is that virtue comes to 
the virtuous by the gift of God. But we sfiall never know 
the Certain truth until, before asking how virtue is given, 
we enquire into the actual nature of virtue. I fear that 
I must go away, but do you, now that you*are perstiaded 
yourself, gersuade our friend Anytus. And do not let him be 
so exasperated ; if you can conciliate him, you will have done 
good service to the Athenian people. 

Meno. 

Socrates, 

Meno. 

Virtue 
comes by 
the gift of 
God. 

EUTHYPHRO. 

VOL. IX. 

INTRODUCTION. 

In the Meno, Anytus had parted from Socrates with the signi- 
ficant words: ‘That in any city, and particularly in the city of 
Athens, it is easier to do men harm than to do them good * (94 E) ; 
and Socrates was anticipating another opportunity of talking with 
him (99 E). In the Euthyphro, Socrates is awaiting his trial for 
impiety. But before the trial begins, Plato would like to put the 
w T orld on their trial, and convince them of ignorance in that 
very matter touching which Socrates is accused. An incident 
which may perhaps really have occurred in the family of Euthy- 
phro, a learned Athenian diviner and soothsayer, furnishes the 
occasion of the discussion. 

eph. This Euthyphro and Socrates are represented*as Meeting in the 

2 porch of the King Archon. (Cp. Theaet. sub fin.) Both have 
legal business in hand. Socrates is defendant in a suit for impiety 

3 which Meletus has brought against him (it is j^marked by the 
way fhat he is not a likely man himself to have brought a suit 
against another); and Euthyphro too is plaintiff in an action for 

4 murcter, which he has brought against his own father. The latter 

has originated in the following manner : — A poor dependant of 
the family had slain one of their domestic slaves in Naxos. The 
guilty person was bound and thrown into a ditch by the command 
of Euthyphro’s father, who sent to the interpreters of religion 
at Athens to ask vftiat should be done with him. Before the 
messenger came back the criminal had died from hunger and 
exposure. % 

This is the origin of the charge of murder which Euthyphro 
brings against his father. Socrates is confident that before he 
could have undertaken the responsibility of such a prosecution, 

Euthyphro . 

Introduc- 

tion. 

Analysis. 

F 2 

68 

Analysis 5 - 9 . 

Euthyphro. he must haye been perfectly informed of the nature of piety and 5 
Analysis, impiety ; and as he is going to be tried for impiety himself, he 
thinks that he cannot do better than learn of Euthyphro (who will 
be admitted by everybody, including the judges, to be an un- 
impeachable. authority) what piety island what is impiety. What 
then is piety ? 

Euthyphro, who, in the abundance of his knowledge, is very 
willing to undertake all the responsibility, replies : That piety is 
doing as I do, prosecuting your father (if he is guilty) on a charge 
of murder; doing as the gods do— as Zeus did to Cronos, and 
Cronos to Uranus. 

Socrates has a dislike to these tales of mythology, and he fancies 6 
that this dislike of his may be the reason why he is charged with 
impiety. ‘ Are they really true ? * ‘ Yes, they are ; ’ and Euthy- 
phro will gladly tell Socrates some more of them. But Socrates 
would like first of all to have a more satisfactory answer to the 
question, ‘What is piety ? * ‘ Doing as I do, charging a father with 
murder,’ may be a single instance of piety, but can hardly be 
regarded as a general definition. 

Euthyphro replies, that ‘ Piety is what is dear to the gods, 7 
and impiety is what is not dear to them.’ But may there not 
be differences of opinion, as among men, so also among the 
gods ? Especially, about good and evil, which have # no fixed 
rule ; and these are precisely the sort of differences which 
give rise to quarrels. And therefore what may be dear to one 8 
god may not be dear to another, and the same action may 
be both pious and impious ; e. g. your chastisement of your 
father, Euthyphro, may be dear or pleasing to Zeus (who in- 
flicted a similar chastisement on his own father), but not 
equally pleasing to Cronos or Uranus (who suffered at the 
hands of their sons). 

Euthyphro answers that there is no difference of opinion, either 
among gods or men, as to the propriety of punishing a murderer. 
Yes, rejoins Socrates, when they know him to be a murderer ; but 
you are assuming the point at issue. If all the* circumstances of 
l the casf are considered, are you able to show that your father 9 
was guilty of murder, or that all the gods are agreed in approving 
of our prosecution of him ? A.nd must you not allow that what 
is hated by one god may be liked by another? Waiving this last, 

6 9 

Analysis 9 - 15 . 

however, Socrates proposes to amend the definition, and say that Euthyphro . 
‘ what all the gods love is pious, and what fhey all hate is impious/ analysis. 
To this Euthyphro agrees. 

10 Socrates proceeds to analyze the new form of^the definition. 

He shows that in other cases the act precedes the state; e.g. 

• § * , 
the act of being carried, loved, &c. precedes the state of being 

carried, loved, & c., and therefore that which is dear to the gods is 

dear to the gods\ecause it is first loved of them, not loved of 

them because it is dear to them. But the pious or holy is loved 

by the gods because it is pious or holy, which is equivalent to 

saying, that it is loved by them because it is dear to them. Here 

1 1 then appears to be a contradiction,— Euthyphro has been giving an 
attribute or accident of piety only, and not the essence. Euthyphro 
acknowledges himself that his explanations seem to walk away 
or go round in a circle, like the moving figures of Daedalus, 
the ancestor of Socrates, who has communicated his art to his 
descendants. 

12 Socrates, who is desirous of stimulating the indolent intelligence 

of Euthyphro, raises the question in another manner: ‘Is all the 
pious just?* ‘Yes/ ‘ Is all the just pious ? ’ ‘No.’ ‘Then what 

part of justice is piety?’ Euthyphro replies that piety is that 
part of justice which ‘attends’ to the gods, as there is another 

13 part ofjustice which ‘attends’ to men. But \^hat*s the meaning 
of ‘attending’ to the gods? The word ‘attending,’ when applied 
to dogs, horsq^, and men, implies that in some way they are made 
better, feut how do pious or holy acts make the gods any better ? 
Euthyphro explains that he means by pious acts, acts of service 
or ministration. Yes ; but the ministrations of the husbandman, 
the •physician, and the builder have an end. Tfc what e»d do 

14 we serve the gods, and what do we help them to accomplish? 
Euthyphro replies, that all these difficult questions cannot be 
resolved in a short time; and he would rather say simply that 
piety is knowing hbw to please the gods in word and deed, by ■ 
prayers and sacrifites. In other words, says Socrates, piety is ‘a 

15 science of asking and giving ’—asking what we want and giving 
what they want ; in short, a mode of doing business between gods 
and men. But although they # are the givers of all good, how can 
we give them any good in return? ‘Nay, but we give them 
honour.’ Thpn we give them not what is beneficial, but what is 

70 

Religion of the letter and of the spirit. 

Kuthyphro . pleasing or dear to them ; and this is the point which has been 
Analysis, already disproved. ' 

Socrates, although weary of the subterfuges and evasions of 
Euthyphro, rejnains unshaken in his conviction that he must know 
the nature of piety, or he would never have prosecuted his old 
father. He is still hoping that he will' condescend to instruct him. 
But Euthyphro is in a hurry and cannot stay. And Socrates’ last 16 
hope of knowing the nature of piety before hef is prosecuted for 
impiety has disappeared. As in the Euthydemus the irony is 
carried on to the end. 

IN tk>n UC The Euthyphro is manifestly designed to contrast the real 
nature of piety and impiety with the popular conceptions of 
them. But when the popular conceptions of them have been 
overthrown, Socrates does not offer any definition of his own : 
as in the Laches and Lysis, he prepares fnc wa^ for an answer to 
the question which he has raised ; but true to his own character, 
refuses to answer himself. 

Euthyphro is a religionist, and is elsewhere spoken of, if he be 
the same person, as the author of a philosophy of names, by 
whose 4 prancing steeds ’ Socrates in the Cratylus is carried away 
(p. 396). He has the conceit and self-confidence of a Sophist; no 
doubt that he j? right in prosecuting his father has ever entered 
into his mind. Like a Sophist too, he is incapable either of 
framing a general definition or of following the course of an 
argument. His wrong-headedness, one-sidedness, narrowness, 
positiveness, are cnaracteristic of his priestly office. His failure 
to apprehend an argument may be compared to a similar defect 
which is observable in the rhapsode Ion. But he is not a bad irian, 
and he is friendly to Socrates, whose familiar sign he recognizes 
with interest. Though unable to follow him he is very willing to 
be led by him, and eagerly catches at any suggestion which saves 
* him from the trouble of thinking. Moreover he is the enemy of 
Meletus, who, as he says, is availing himself of the popular dislike 
to innovations in religion in order to injure Socrates ; at the same 
time he is amusingly confident that he has weapons in his own 
armoury which would be more tharta match for him. He is quite 
sincere in his prosecution of his father, who has accidentally been 
guilty of homicide, and is not wholly free from blame. To purge 

The three definitions of piety . 7 1 

away the crime appears to him in the light of a duty, whoever may Euthyphro . 
be the criminal. Introduc- 

Thus begins the contrast between the religion of the letter, or SOM * 
of the narrow and unenlightened conscience, and the higher 
notion of religion which Socrates vainly endeavours to elicit from 
him. i Piety is doing as I do * is the ide # a of religion which first 
occurs to him, and to many others who do not say what they think 
with equal frankness. For men are not easily persuaded that 
any other religion is better than their own ; or that other nations, 
e. g. the Greeks in the time of Socrates, were equally serious in 
their religious beliefs and difficulties. The chief difference 
between us and them is, that they were slowly learning what 
we are in process of forgetting. Greek mythology hardly 
admitted of the distinction between accidental homicide and 
murder : that the pollution of blood was the same in both cases 
is also the feeling of the Athenian diviner. He had not as yet 
learned the lesson, which philosophy was teaching, that Homer 
and Hesiod, if not banished from the state, or whipped out of the 
assembly, as Heracleitus more rudely proposed, at any rate were 
not to be appealed to as authorities in religion ; and he is ready to 
defend his conduct by the examples of the gods. These are the 
very tales which Socrates cannot abide ; and his dislike of them, 
as he syspects, has branded him with the reputation of impiety. 

Here is one answer to the question, ‘Why Socrates was put to 
death/ suggested by the way. Another is conveyed in the words, 

‘ The Athenians do not care about any man being thought wise 
until# he begins to make other men wise; and then for some 
reason or other they are angry : ’ which may be said to be the 
rule«of popular toleration in most other countrfes, and ribt at 
Athens only. In the course of the argument (7 A, B) Socrates 
remarks that the controversial nature of morals and religion arises 
out of the difficulty of verifying them. There is no measure or 
standard to which they can be referred. 

The next definition, 1 Piety is that which is loved of the gods/ 
is shipwrecked on a refined distinction between the state and the 
act, corresponding respectively to the adjective (<f>kov\ and the 
participle (^uXov/icpoy), or rather perhaps to the participle and the 
Verb (^hXov/acpoi/ and <£iXetTcu). The act is prior to the state (as 
in Aristotle tjie fVpycta precedes the dwafjus ) ; and the state of 

72 

Genuineness of the Dialogue . 

Euthyphro. being loved is preceded by the act of being loved. But piety 
Introduc- or holiness is preceded by the act of being pious, not by the act of 
TlON ’ being loved ; and therefore piety and the state of being loved 
are different, r Through such subtleties of dialectic Socrates is 
working his jvay into a deeper region of thought and feeling. He 
means to say that the^words Moved of the gods’ express an 
attribute only, and not the essence of piety. 

Then follows the third and last definition, 1 Piety is a part of 
justice.’ Thus far Socrates has proceeded in placing religion on 
a moral foundation. He is seeking to realize the harmony of 
religion and morality, which the great poets Aeschylus, Sophocles, 
and Pindar had unconsciously anticipated, and which is the uni- 
versal want of all men. To this the soothsayer adds the cere- 
monial element, ‘attending upon the gods.’ When further inter- 
rogated by Socrates as to the nature of this ‘attention to the 
gods,’ he replies, that piety is an affair of business, a science 
of giving and asking, and the like. Socrates points out the an- 
thropomorphism of these notions. (Cp. Symp. 202 E ; Rep. ii. 
365 E ; Politicus 290 C, D.) But when we expect him to go on and 
show that the true service of the gods is the service of the spirit 
and the co-operation with them in all things true and good, he 
stops short ; this was a lesson which the soothsayer could not 
have been made fo understand, and which every one must learn 
for himself. 

There seem to be altogether three aims or interests in this 
little Dialogue : (1) the dialectical development of the idea of 
piety; (2) the antithesis of true and false religion, which ir car- 
ried to a certain extent only; (3) the defence of Socrates. 

The subtle Connection with the Apology and the Crito^ the 
holding back of the conclusion, as in the Charmides, Lysis, 
Laches, Protagoras, and other Dialogues ; the deep insight into 
the religious world ; the dramatic power and play of the two 
characters ; the inimitable irony, are reasons for believing that 
the Euthyphro is a genuine Platonic writing. < The spirit in which 
the popular representations of mythology are d&nounced recalls 
Republic II (378 ff.) The virtue of piety has been already men- 
tioned as one of five in the Pritagoras, but is not reckoned 
among the four cardinal virtues of Republic IV (428 ff.). The 
figure of Daedalus (15 C) has occurred in the Meno (97 D) ; that 

73 

Date of the Dialogue. 

of Proteus (15 D) in the Euthydemus (288 B) and Io (541 E). Euthyphro. 
The kingly science has already appeared ^in the Euthydemus, and Introduc- 
will reappear in the Republic and Statesman. But neither from 1<0N ‘ 
these nor any other indications of similarity or difference, and 
still less from arguments respecting the suitableness of this little 
work to aid Socrates at the time of his trial or the reverse, can any 
evidence of the date be obtained. 

EUTHYPHRO. 

S 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE, . 

Socrates. Euthyphro. 

Scene:— T he Porch of the King Archon. 

steph. Euthyphro . Why have you left the Lyceum, Socrates? 

2 and what are yow doing in the Porch of the King Archon? 
Surely you cannot be concerned in a suit before the King, 
like myself? 

Socrates. Not in a suit, Euthyphro ; impeachment is the 
word which the Athenians use. 

Euth. What! I suppose that some one has been prose- 
cuting you, for I cannot believe that you are the prosecutor 
of another. 

Soc. ^Certainly not. 

Euth. Then some one else has been prosecuting you ? 

Soc. ^es. * 

Euth . And who is he ? •• 

S8c. A young man who is little known, Euthyphro ; and I 
hardly know him : his name is Meletus, and hejs of the deme 
of Pitthis. Perhaps you may remember his appearance ; he 
has a beafc, and long straight hair, and a beard which is ill 
grown. 

Euth. No, I do not remember him, Socrates. But what is 
the charge which he brings against you ? 

Soc. What is tlfe charge ? Well, a very serious charge, 
which shows a good deal of character in the young man, and 
for which he is certainly npt to be despised. He«says he 
knows how the youth are corrupted and who are their cor- 
ruptors. I fancy that he must be a wise man, and seeing 
that I am th« reverse of a wise man, he has found me out, 

Euthyphro . 

Socrates, 

Euthyphro. 

Euthyphro 
and So- 
crates meet 
at the Porch 
of the King 
Archon. 
Both have 
legal busi- 
ness on 
hand. 

Meletus has 
brought a 
charge 
against 
Socrates. 

;6 

Euthyphro. 

Socrates, 

Euthyphro. 

The nature 
of the 
charge 
against 
Socrates. 

The ways of the Athenian people . 

and is going to accuse me of corrupting his young friends. 
And of this our mother the state is to be the judge. Of all 
our political men he is the only one who seems to me to 
begin in the irght way, with the cultivation of virtue in youth ; 
like a good ljusbandman, he makes the young shoots his first 3 
care, and clears away 'us who are the destroyers of them. 
This is only the first step ; he will afterwards attend to the 
elder branches ; and if he goes on as he has 'begun, he will be 
a very great public benefactor. 

Euth . I hope that he may ; but I rather fear, Socrates, that 
the opposite will turn out to be the truth. My opinion is that 
in attacking you he is simply aiming a blow at the foundation 
of the state. But in what way does he say that you corrupt 
the young? 

Soc. He brings a wonderful accusation against me, which 
at first hearing excites surprise : he says that I am a poet or 
maker of gods, and that I invent new gods and deny the 
existence of old ones ; this is the ground of his indictment. 

Euth . I understand, Socrates ; he means to attack you 
about the familiar sign which occasionally, as you say, comes 
to you. He thinks that you are a neologian, and he is going 
to have you up before the court for this. He knows that 
such a charge is readily received by the world, as I myself 
know too well; 'for when I speak in the assembly about 
divine things, and foretell the future to them, they laugh at 
me and think me a madman. Yet every word thaw I say is 
true. But they 'kre jealous of us all ; and we must be brave 
and go at them. 

Sof. Their .laughter, friend Euthyphro, is not a matter of 
much consequence. For a man may be thought wise;' but 
the Athenians, I suspect, do not much trouble themselves 
about him until he begins to impart his wisdom to others; 
and then for some reason or other, perhaps, as you say, from 
jealousy, they are angry. 

Euth . I am never likely to try their temper jn this way. 

Soc . I dare say not, for you are reserved in your behaviour, 
and seldom impart your wisdonp But I have a benevolent 
habit of pouring out myself to everybody, and would even 
pay for a listener, and I am afraid that the Athenians may 
think me too talkative. Now if, as I was saying, they would 

77 

Euthyphro charges his father with murder. 

only laugh at me, as you say that they laugh at you, the time Euthyphro , 
might pass gaily enough in the court ; but perhaps they may Socrates, 
be in earnest, and then what the end will be you soothsayers Euthyphr<v 
only can predict. # 

Eath . I dare say that the affair will end # in nothing, 

Socrates, and that you will win yotir cause ; and I think 
that I shall win my own. 

Soc. And wh?ft is your suit, Euthyphro ? are you the 
pursuer or the defendant? 

Euth . I am the pursuer. 

Soc . Of whom ? 

[ Euth . You will think me mad when I tell you. 

Soc . Why, has the fugitive wings ? 

Euth. Nay, he is not very volatile at his time of life. 

Soc . Who is he ? 

Euth . My father. 

Soc . Your father ! my good man ? 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc. And of what is he accused ? 

Euth. Of murder, Socrates. 

Soc. By the powers, Euthyphro ! how little does the com- The irony 
mon herd know of the nature of right and truth. A man ofSocrates - 
must be an extraordinary man, and have made great strides 
in wisflom, before he could have seen his faay to bring such 
an action. 

Indeed, Socrates, he must. 

Soc. I suppose that the man whom youpffather murdered Euthyphro 
was one of your relatives — clearly he was ; for if he had been g^re^obii- 
a stranger you would never have thought of prosecuting him. gation to 

Euth. I am amused, Socrates, at your making a distinction P rosec y te 

. 1.1. , ,. ,. a homicide, 

between Qne who is a relation and one who is not a relation ; even if he 

for surely the pollution is the same in either case, if you be his own 

knowingly associate with the murderer when you ought to^ 

clear yourself and him by proceeding against him. The real 

question is whether the murdered man has been justly slain. 

If justly, then your duty is to let the matter alone ; but if 

unjustly, then even if the murderer lives under the same roof 

with you and eats at the same table, proceed against him. . 

Now the man who is dead was a poor dependant of mine who 

worked for us as a field labourer on our farm in Naxos, and * 

7 « 

The murderer murdered. 

Euthyphro. 

SoCRATFS, 

Euthyphro. 

Socrates, 
who is ac- 
cused of 
false theo- 
logy, thinks 
that he 
cannot do 
better than 
became the 
disciple of 
so great a 
theologian 
as Euthy- 
phro. 

one day in a fit of drunken passion he got into a quarrel with 
one of our domestic servants and slew him. My father bound 
him hand and foot and threw him into a ditch, and then sent 
to Athens to<ask of a diviner what he should do with him. 
Meanwhile \\e never attended to him and took no care about 
him, for he regarded him as a murderer ; and thought that no 
great harm would be done even if he did die. Now this was 
just what happened. For such was the effect of cold and 
hunger and chains upon him, that before the messenger 
returned from the diviner, he was dead. And my father and 
family are angry with me for taking the part of the murderer 
and prosecuting my father. They say that he did not kill 
him, and that if he did, the dead man was but a murderer, 
and I ought not to take any notice, for that a son is impious 
who prosecutes a father. Which shows, Socrates, how little 
they know what the gods think about piety afld impiety. 

Soc. Good heavens, Euthyphro ! and is your knowledge of 
religion and of things pious and impious so very exact, that, 
supposing the circumstances to be as you state them, you are 
not afraid lest you too may be doing an impious thing in 
bringing an action against your father ? 

Enth. The best of Euthyphro, and that which distinguishes 
him, Socrates^ from other men, is his exact knowledge of all 5 
such matters. What should I be good for without it ?* 

Soc . Rare friend ! I think that I cannot do better than be 
your disciple. Then before the trial with Melefus comes on 
I shall challenge- him, and say that I have always had a 
great interest in religious questions, and now, as he charges 
me with rash imaginations and innovations in religion, I have 
become your disciple. You, Meletus, as I shall say to Him, 
acknowledge Euthyphro to be a great theologian, and sound 
in his opinions ; and if you approve of him you ought to 
approve of me, and not have me into court ; but if you disap- 
prove, you should begin by indicting him who is my teacher, 
and who will be the ruin, not of the young, fyut of the old ; 
that is to say, of myself whom he instructs, and of his old 
father whom he admonishes and c chastises. And if Meletus 
refuses to listen to me, but will go on, and will not shift the 
indictment from me to you, I cannot do better than repeat 
this challenge in the court. 

79 

Socrates becomes the disciple of Euthyphro. 

Euth . Yes, indeed, Socrates; and if he attempts to indict 
me I am mistaken if I do not find a flaw in him ; the court 
shall have a great deal more to say to him than to me. 

Soc . And I, my dear friend, knowing this, a$i desirous of 
becoming your disciple. For I observe that no # one appears 
to notice you — not even 'this Meletus ; but his sharp eyes 
have found me out at once, and he has indicted me for 
impiety. And tftfcrefore, I adjure you to tell me the nature 
of piety and impiety, which you said that you knew so well, 
and of murder, and of other offences against the gods. 
What are they? Is not piety in every action always the 
same ? and impiety, again— is it not always the opposite 
of piety, and also the same with itself, having, as impiety, 
one notion which includes whatever is impious ? 

Euth . To be sure, Socrates. 

Soc. And what is piety, and what is impiety ? 

Euth. Piety is doing as I am doing ; that is to say, prose- 
cuting any one who is guilty of murder, sacrilege, or of any 
similar crime — whether he be your father or mother, or 
whoever he may be — that makes no difference ; and not to 
prosecute them is impiety. And please to consider, Socrates, 
what a notable proof I will give you of the truth of my 
words, a proof which I have already given t£ others: — of 
the principle, I mean, that the impious, Whoever he may 
be, ought not to go unpunished. For do not men regard 
6 Zeus as • the* best and most righteous of the gods ? — and 
yet they admit that he bound his father ^€ronos) because 
he vyftckedly devoured his sons, and that he too had punished 
his own father (Uranus) for a similar reason, jn a nameless 
mantier. And yet when I proceed against my father, they 
are angry # with me. So inconsistent are they in their way 
of talking when the gods are concerned, and when I am 
concerned. 

Soc. May not this be the reason, Euthyphro, why I am 
charged with impidty — that I cannot away with these stories 
about the gods ? and therefore I suppose that people think 
me wrong. But, as you ^who are well informed about* 
them approve of them, I cannot do better than assent to 
your superior wisdom. What else can I say, confessing 
as I do, that I know nothing about them ? Tell me, for 

Euthyphro . 

Socrates, 

Euthyphro. 

He asks, 

* What is 
piety ? ’ 

Piety is 
doing as 
I am doing ; 
—like Zeus, 
I am pro- 
ceeding 
against my 
father. 

Does Eu- 
thyphro 
believe 
these amaz- 
ing stories 
about the 
gods ? 

8o 

Euthyphro. 

Socrates, 

Euthyphro. 

Yes, and 
things more 
amazing 
still. 

A more 
correct defi- 
nition : — 
Piety is that 
which is 
dear to th^ 
gods. 

What is piety ? 

the love of Zeus, whether you really believe that they are 
true. 

Euth. Yes, Socrates; and things more wonderful still, of 
which the wo,rld is in ignorance. 

Soc . Andjdo you really believe that the gods fought with 
one another, and had dire quarrels, battles, and the like, 
as the poets say, and as you may see represented in the 
works of great artists ? The temples aYe full of them ; 
and notably the robe of Athene, which is carried up to 
the Acropolis at the great Panathenaea, is embroidered 
with them. Are all these tales of the gods true, Euthyphro ? 

Euth. Yes, Socrates; and, as I was saying, I can tell you, 
if you would like to hear them, many other things about the 
gods which would quite amaze you. 

Soc. I dare say ; and you shall tell me them at some other 
time when I have leisure. But just at present I would rather 
hear from you a more precise answer, which you have not as 
yet given, my friend, to the question, What is 'piety'? 
When asked, you only replied, Doing as you do, charging 
your father with murder. 

Euth. And what I said was true, Socrates. 

Soc. No doubt, Euthyphro ; but you would admit that there 
are many other pious acts ? 

Euth. There aVe. 4 

Soc. Remember that I did not ask you to give me two 
or three examples of piety, but to explain the general idea 
which makes all pious things to be pious. Do you not 
recollect that there was one idea which made the impious 
impious, and the pious pious ? 

Euth. I remember. ‘ 

Soc. Tell me what is the nature of this idea*, and then 
I shall have a standard to which I may look, and by which 
I may measure actions, whether yours or those of any one 
else, and then I shall be able to say that such and such an 
action is pious, such another impious. 

Euth. I will tell you, if you like. 

Soc. I should very much like. 

Euth . Piety, then, is that which is dear to the gods, and 
impiety is that which is not de#r to them. 

Soc. Very good, Euthyphro; you have now given me the 7 

The quarrels of the gods . 

81 

sort of answer which I wanted. But whether what you say 
is true or not I cannot as yet tell, although I make no doubt 
that you will prove the truth of your words. 

Euth. Of course. 

Soc. Come, then, and let us examine what we are saying. 
That thing or person which is dear to the gods* is pious, and 
that thing or person which is hateful to the gods is impious, 
these two being the extreme opposites of one another. Was 
not that said ? 

Euth. It was. 

Soc . And well said ? 

Euth. Yes, Socrates, 1 thought so ; it was certainly said. 

Soc. And further, Euthyphro, the gods were admitted to 
have enmities and hatreds and differences ? 

Euth . Yes, that was also said. 

Soc. And what .sort of difference creates enmity and anger? 
Suppose for example that you and I, my good friend, differ 
about a number ; do differences of this sort make us enemies 
and set us at variance with one another ? Do we not go at 
once to arithmetic, and put an end to them by a sum ? 

Euth . True. 

Soc. Or suppose that we differ about magnitudes, do we 
not quickly end the difference by measuring? 

Euth. mV e ry true. 

Soc. And we end a controversy about heavy and light by 
resorting Jo a*veighing machine? 

Euth. To be sure. 

Soa But what differences are there which cannot be thus 
decided, and which therefore make us angry and set us 
at enmity with one another ? I dare say the *answer does 
not occur to you at the moment, and therefore I will suggest 
that these enmities arise when the matters of difference are 
the just and unjust, good and evil, honourable and dis- 
honourable. Are not these the points about which men 
differ, and about which when we are unable satisfactorily 
to decide our differences, you and I and all of us quarrel, 
when we do quarrel 1 ? 

Euth. Yes, Socrates, the ftature of the differences about 
which we quarrel is such as you describe. 

1 Cp. i Alcib. hi foil. 

Euthyphro . 

Socrates, 

Euthyphro. 

Differences 
about num- 
bers and 
figures 
create no 
ill-will be- 
cause they 
can be set- 
tled by a 
sum or by a 
weighing 
machine, 
but enmi- 
ties about 
the just 
and unjust 
are the 
occasions 
of quarrels, 
both among 
gods and 
men. 

VOL. II. 

G 

82 

Euthyphro . 

Socrates, 

Euthyphro. 

Men and 
gods alike 
love the 
things 
which they 
deem noble 
and just, 
but they 
are not 
agreed what 
these are. 

Would all the gods approve of Euthyphro s conduct ? 

Soc . And the quarrels of the gods, noble Euthyphro, when 
they occur, are of a like nature ? 

Euth . Certainly they are. 

Soc. They have differences of opinion, as you say, about 
good and evil, just and unjust, honourable and dishonourable : 
there woulcl have been no quarrels among them, if there had 
been no such differences — would there now? 

Euth. You are quite right. 

Soc. Does not every man love that which he deems noble 
and just and good, and hate the opposite of them ? 

Euth. Very true. 

Soc. But, as you say, people regard the same things, some 
as just and others as unjust, — about these they dispute; and 
so there arise wars and fightings among them. 1 

Euth. Very true. 

Soc. Then the same things are hated by the gods 
and loved by the gods, and arc both hateful and dear to 
them? 

Euth. True. 

Soc. And upon this view the same things, Euthyphro, will 
be pious and also impious ? 

Euth. So I should suppose. 

Soc. Then, my friend, I remark with surprise that you 
have not answered the question which I asked. For I 
certainly did not ask you to tell me what action is both pious 
and impious : but now it would seem that what is loved 
by the gods is* .also hated by them. And therefore, Euthy- 
phro, in thus chastising your father you may very ‘likely 
be doing what is agreeable to Zeus but disagreeable to 
Crdnos or Uranus, and what is acceptable to Hephaestus but 
unacceptable to Here, and there may be other gods who 
have similar differences of opinion. 

Euth. But I believe, Socrates, that all the gods would be 
agreed as to the propriety of punishing a murderer : there 
would be no difference of opinion about that. 

Soc. Well, but speaking of men, Euthyphro, did you ever 
•hear any one arguing that a murderer or any sort of evil-doer 
ought to be let off ? c 

Euth. I should rather say that these are the questions 
which they are always arguing, especially in jourts of law : 

83 

Or condemn his father s ? 

they commit all sorts of crimes, and there is nothing which Euthyphro .. 
they will not do or say in their own defence. 

Soc. But do they admit their guilt, Euthyphro, and yet say 
that they ought not to be punished ? 

Euth. No ; they do not. 

Soc . Then there are some things which they do not venture 
to say and do : for they do not venture to argue that the guilty 
are to be unpunished, but they deny their guilt, do they not? 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc . Then they do not argue that the evil-doer should not 
be punished, but they argue about the fact of who the evil-doer 
is, and what he did and when ? 

Euth. True. 

Soc . And the gods are in the same case, if as you assert 
they quarrel about just and unjust, and some of them say 
while others deny that injustice is done among them. For 
surely neither God nor man will ever venture to say that the 
doer of injustice is not to be punished ? 

Euth. That is true, Socrates, in the main. 

Soc. But they join issue about the particulars — gods and 
men alike ; and, if they dispute at all, they dispute about some 
act which is called in question, and which by some is affirmed 
to be just, by others to be unjust. Is not that tri^e? 

Euth. •Quite true. 

) Soc. Well then, my dear friend Euthyphro, do tell me, for 
my better* instruction and information, what proof have you 
that in the opinion of all the gods a servant Who is guilty of 
murder, and is put in chains by the master of the dead man, 
and dies because he is put in chains before he who bound him 
can learn from the interpreters of the gods what he ought to 
do with hirn> dies unjustly; and that on behalf of such an one 
a son ought to proceed against his father and accuse him of 
murder. How would you show that all the gods absolutely 
agree in approving of his act ? Prove to me that they do, and 
I will applaud ypur wisdom as long as I live. 

Euth. It will be a difficult task ; but I could make the matter 
very clear indeed to you. # • 

Soc. I understand ; you mean to say that I am not so quick 
of apprehension as the judges : Ibr to them you will be sure to 
prove that the«act is unjust, and hateful to the gods. 

SOCKATES, 

Euthyphro. 

Neither 
God nor 
man will 
say that the 
doer of evil 
is not to be 
punished, 
but they 
are doubtful 
about parti- 
cular acts. 
What proof 
is there that 
all the gods 
approve of 
the prose- 
cution of 
your father? 

G 2 

84 - 

Euthyphro 

Socrates, 

Euthyphro. 

Let us say 
then that 
what all the 
gods ap- 
prove is 
pious and 
holy. 

But does 
the state 
follow the 
act, or the 
act the 
state ? 

The priority of the act to the state . 

Euth. Yes indeed, Socrates ; at least if they will listen to me. 

Soc. But they will be sure to listen if they find that you are 
a good speaker. There was a notion that came into my mind 
while you w£re speaking ; I said to myself : 'Well, and what 
if Euthyphro (loes prove to me that all the gods regarded the 
death of the serf as unjust, how do I know anything more of 
the nature of piety and impiety? for granting that this action 
may be hateful to the gods, still piety ancl impiety are not 
adequately defined by these distinctions, for that which is 
hateful to the gods has been shown to be also pleasing and 
dear to them.' And therefore, Euthyphro, I do not ask you 
to prove this; I will suppose, if you like, that all the gods 
condemn and abominate such an action. But I will amend 
the definition so far as to say that what all the gods hate is 
impious, and what they love pious or holy; and what some of 
them love and others hate is both or neither. Shall this be 
our definition of piety and impiety ? 

Euth . Why not, Socrates ? 

Soc. Why not ! certainly, as far as I am concerned, 
Euthyphro, there is no reason why not. But whether this 
admission will greatly assist you in the task of instructing me 
as you promised, is a matter for you to consider. 

Euth . Ye$, I should say that what all the gods love is 
pious and holy, and the opposite which they all liate, im- 
pious. 

Soc. Ought we to enquire into the truth of this, Euthyphro, 
or simply to accept the mere statement on our own authority 
and that of others ? What do you say ? 

Euth. We*should enquire ; and I believe that the statement 
will stand the test of enquiry. 

Soc. We shall know better, my good friend,* in a little 
while. The point which I should first wish to understand is 
whether the pious or holy is beloved by the gods because it io 
is holy, or holy because it is beloved of the gods. 

Euth. I do not understand your meaning, Socrates. 

, Soc. I will endeavour to explain : we speak of carrying and 
we sp£ak of being carried, of leading and being led, seeing 
and being seen. You know that in all such cases there is a 
difference, and you know alsA in what the difference lies ? 

Euth. I think that I understand. 

The priority of the act to the state . 

85 

Euthyphro. 

SOCRATKS, 

Euthyphro. 

Soc . And is not that which is beloved distinct from that 
which loves ? 

Euth . Certainly. 

Soc. Well ; and now tell me, is that which is parried in this 
state of carrying because it is carried, or for^some other 
reason ? 

Euth. No ; that is the reason. 

Soc. And the^ame is true of what is led and of what is 
seen ? 

Euth . True. 

Soc. And a thing is not seen because it is visible, but con- 
versely, visible because it is seen ; nor is a thing led because 
it is in the state of being led, or carried because it is in the 
state of being carried, but the converse of this. And now I 
think, Euthyphro, that my meaning will be intelligible ; and 
my meaning is,* that any state of action or passion implies 
previous action or passion. It does not become because it is 
becoming, but it is in a state of becoming because it becomes ; 
neither does it suffer because it is in a state of suffering, but 
it is in a state of suffering because it suffers. Do you not 
agree? 

Euth . Yes. 

Soc. Is not that which is loved in some state either of 
becoming or suffering ? 

Eutlu Yes. 

Soc. And the same holds as in the previous instances ; the The latter 
state of being loved follows the act of being 4#ved, and not the 

act the state. 

Euth. Certainly. 

and there- 
fore we can 

- .• only say 

Soc. And what do you say of piety, Euthyphro : is not that what 
piety, according to your definition, loved by all the gods ? is lovedPby 

r ,t Zr all the gods 

Eutll. Yes. is j n a state 

Soc. Because it is pious or holy, or for some other reason ? to be loved 

Euth. No, that is the reason. *bwho™nLs 

Soc. It is loved because it is holy, not holy because it is has a wider 
loved? # meaning 

Euth . Yes. # 

Soc. And that which is dear to th^ gods is loved by them, 
and is in a state to be loved of them because it is loved of 
them? 

than this. 

86 

The essence and the attribute. 

Euthyphro. 

Socrates, 

Euthyphro. 

What is the 
essential 
meaning of 
holiness or 
piety ? 

Euth . Certainly. 

Soc . Then that which is dear to the gods, Euthyphro, is 
not holy, nor is that which is holy loved of God, as you 
affirm ; but tfeey are two different things. 

Euth . Hojy do you mean, Socrates ? 

Soc . I mean* to say that the holy has been acknowledged 
by us to be loved of God because it is holy, not to be holy 
because it is loved. 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc. But that which is dear to the gods is dear to them 
because it is loved by them, not loved by them because it is 
dear to them. 

Euth. True. 

Soc. But, friend Euthyphro, if that which is holy is the 
same with that which is dear to God, and is loved because it 
is holy, then that which is dear to God would have been u 
loved as being dear to God ; but if that which is dear to God 
is dear to him because loved by him, then that which is holy 
would have been holy because loved by him. But now you 
see that the reverse is the case, and that they are quite 
different from one another. For one (OeocfnXes) is of a kind to 
be loved because it is loved, and the other (oow) is loved 
because it is of a kind to be loved. Thus you appear to me, 
Euthyphro, when I ask you what is the essence of holiness, 
to offer an attribute only, and not the essence — the attribute 
of being loved by all the gods. But you stfll uefuse to 
explain to me tfce nature of holiness. And therefore, if you 
please, I will ask you not to hide your treasure, but to* tell 
me once more what holiness or piety really is, whether dear 
to the gods or not (for that is a matter about which weVill 
not quarrel) ; and what is impiety ? 

Euth. I really do not know, Socrates, how to express what 
I mean. For somehow or other our arguments, on whatever 
ground we rest them, seem to turn round and walk away 
from us. • 

Soc. Your words, Euthyphro, are like the handiwork of my 
Ancestor* Daedalus ; and if I were the sayer or propounder of 
them, you might say that my arguments walk away and will 
not remain fixed where they are placed because I am a 
descendant of his. But now, since these notions are your 

Socrates ‘ a greater than Daedalus ! 

own, you must find some other gibe, for they certainly, as 
you yourself allow, show an inclination to be on the move. 

En th. Nay, Socrates, I shall still say that you are the 
Daedalus who sets arguments in motion ; not? I, certainly, 
but you make them move or go round, for they jvould never 
have stirred, as far as I am concerned. 

Soc. Then I must be a greater than Daedalus : for whereas 
he only made his* own inventions to move, I move those of 
other people as well. And the beauty of it is, that I would 
rather not. For I would give the wisdom of Daedalus, and 
the wealth of Tantalus, to be able to detain them and keep 
them fixed. But enough of this. As I perceive that you are 
lazy, 1 will myself endeavour to show you how you might 
instruct me in the nature of piety ; and I hope that you will 
not grudge your labour. Tell me, then, — Is not that which is 
pious necessarily* just ? 

Ent/i . Yes. 

Soc. And is, then, all which is just pious? or, is that which 
12 is pious all just, but that which is just, only in part and not all, 
pious ? 

Enth. I do not understand you, Socrates. 

Soc . And yet I know that you are as much wiser than I am, 
as you are younger. But, as I was saying, revered friend, 
the abundance of your wisdom makes you lazy. Please to 
exert yourself, for there is no real difficulty in understanding 
me. What I* mean I may explain by an illustration of what 
I doyiot mean. The poet (Stasinus) sings — 1 

‘ Of Zeus, the author and creator of all these things, 

You will not tell : for where there is fear there is al|o reverence.’ 

Now I disagree with this poet. Shall I tell you in what 
respect ? • 

Euth. By all means. 

Soc. I should not say that where there is fear there is also 
reverence ; for I atji sure that many persons fear poverty and 
disease, and the like evils, but I do not perceive that they 
reverence the objects of their fear. 

Euth . Very true. 

Soc. But where reverence is, there is fear ; for he who has 
a feeling of reverence and sharrfe about the commission of any 
action, fears dnd is afraid of an ill reputation. 

87 

Euthyphro. 

SOCRAI LS, 
Euthyphko. 

All which 
is pious is 
just : — is 
therefore 
all which is 
just pious? 

We may 
say, e. g. , 
that wher- 
ever there is 
reverence 
there will be 
fear, but 
not that 
wherever 
tl^ore is fear 
there will be 

reverence. 

88 

Euthyphro in the hands of Socrates . 

Euthyphro. Eutk. No doilbt. 

Socrates, Soc. Then we are wrong in saying that where there is fear 
Euthyphro. t h ere j s a i so reverence ; and we should say, where there is 
reverence there is also fear. But there is not always rever- 
ence where *there is fear ; for fear is a more extended notion, 
and reverence is a part of fear, just as the odd is a part of 
number, and number is a more extended notion than the 
odd. I suppose that you follow me now ? 

Euth. Quite well. 

Soc. That was the sort of question which I meant to raise 
when I asked whether the just is always the pious, or the 
pious always the just ; and whether there may not be justice 
where there is not piety; for justice is the more extended 
notion of which piety is only a part. Do you dissent ? 

Euth. No, I think that you are quite right. 

Soc. Then, if piety is a part of justice, P suppose that we 
should enquire what part? If you had pursued the enquiry 
in the previous cases ; for instance, if you had asked me what 
is an even number, and what part of number the even is, I 
should have had no difficulty in replying, a number which 
represents a figure having two equal sides. Do you not 
agree ? 

Euth. Yes l I quite agree. 

Piety or Soc. In like manner, I want you to tell me what*part of 
that n part 1S j ust * ce P^ty or holiness, that I may be able to tell Meletus 
of justice not to do me injustice, or indict me for impiety,' as } am now 
which at- adequately instfifcted by you in the nature of piety or holi- 
the gods. ness, and their opposites. 

Eyith. Piety or holiness, Socrates, appears to me to be that 
part of justice which attends to the gods, as there is the other 
part of justice which attends to men. t 

Soc. That is good, Euthyphro ; yet still there is a little 13 
point about which I should like to have further information, 
What is the meaning of ' attention'? For attention can 
hardly be used in the same sense when applied to the gods as 
when applied to other things. For instance, horses are said 
to require attention, and not e^ery person is able to attend 
to them, but only a person skilled in horsemanship. Is it 
not so? 

Euth. Certainly. 

What is the meaning of attention ? 

89 

Soc. I should suppose that the art of horsemanship is the Euthyphro . 
art of attending to horses ? Socrates, 

Eutll. YeS. Euthyphro. 

Soc . Nor is every one qualified to attend to dogs, but only 
the huntsman ? 

Euth . True. 

Soc. And I should also conceive that the art of the hunts- 
man is the art of* attending to dogs ? 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc. As the art of the oxherd is the art of attending to 
oxen ? 

Euth. Very true. 

Soc. In like manner holiness or piety is the art of attending 
to the gods ? — that would be your meaning, Euthyphro ? 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc. And is not attention always designed for the good or Attention 
benefit of that to which the attention is given ? As in the *° other f 1S 

designed to 

case of horses, you may observe that when attended to by the benefit and 
horseman’s art they are benefited and improved, are they not ? improve 

rr j V y J them. But 

Euth. True. how are the 

Soc. As the dogs are benefited by the huntsman’s art, and gods bene- 
the oxen by the art of the oxherd, and all other things are 
tended or attended for their good and not for thpir hurt? 

Euth. Certainly, not for their hurt. 

Soc. But for their good ? 

Euth.* Of course. 

Soc. And does piety or holiness, which h&fc been defined to 
be the art of attending to the gods, benefit or improve them ? 

Would you say that when you do a holy act you make <*ny of 
the gods better ? 

Euth . No, no ; that was certainly not what I meant. 

Soc. And I, Euthyphro, never supposed that you did. I 
asked you the question about the nature of the attention, 
because I thought that you did not. 

Euth. You $0 me justice, Socrates ; that is not the sort of 
attention which I mean. 

Soc. Good : but I must stjill ask what is this attention to the 
gods which is called piety ? 

Euth . It is such, Socrates*, as servants show to their 
masters. 

ft ted or im- 
proved by 
the holy acts 
of men ? 

The atten- 
tion to the 
gods called 
piety is 

90 

Euthyphro. 

Socrates, 

Euthyphro. 

such as ser- 
vants show 
their mas- 
ters. 

But in what 
way do men 
help the 
work of 
God? 

Etithyphro grows impatient of the argument. 

Soc . I understand — a sort of ministration to the gods. 

Enth. Exactly. 

Soc . Medicine is also a sort of ministration or service, 
having in vi£w the attainment of some object — would you 
not say of health ? 

Euth . I should. 

Soc. Again, there is an art which ministers to the ship- 
builder with a view to the attainment of some result ? 

Euth. Yes, Socrates, with a view to the building of a ship. 

Soc. As there is an art which ministers to the house- 
builder with a view to the building of a house ? 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc. And now tell me, my good friend, about the art which 
ministers to the gods : what work does that help to accom- 
plish ? For you must surely know if, as you say, you are of 
all men living the one who is best instructed in religion. 

Euth. And I speak the truth, Socrates. 

Soc. Tell me then, oh tell me — what is that fair work which 
the gods do by the help of our ministrations ? 

Euth. Many and fair, Socrates, are the works which they do. 

Soc. Why, my friend, and so are those of a general. But 
the chief of them is easily told. Would you not say that 
victory in wai^is the chief of them ? 

Euth. Certainly. 

Soc. Many and fair, too, are the works of the husbandman, 
if I am not mistaken ; but his chief work is the production of 
food from the eaffh ? 

Euth. Exactly. 

Soc. And of the many and fair things done by the gods, 
which is the chief or principal one ? 

Euth. I have told you already, Socrates, that to learn all 
these things accurately will be very tiresome. Let me simply 
say that piety or holiness is learning how to please the 
gods in word and deed, by prayers and c sacrifices. Such 
piety is the salvation of families and states, just as the 
impious, which is unpleasing to the gods, is their ruin and 
destruction. 

Soc. I think that you could have answered in much fewer 
words the chief question whidh I asked, Euthyphro, if you 
had chosen. But I see plainly that you are not disposed to 

9 1 

Piety a science of asking and giving . 

instruct me — clearly not : else why, when we reached the Euthyphro. 
point, did you turn aside? Had you only answered me I Socrates, 
should have truly learned of you by this time the nature Euthyphro - 
of piety. Now, as the asker of a question ; b necessarily 
dependent on the answerer, whither he leads I giust follow ; 
and can only ask again, what is the pious, and what is piety ? 

Do you mean that they are a sort of science of praying and 
sacrificing? 

Euth. Yes, I do. 

Soc. And sacrificing is giving to the gods, and prayer is 
asking of the gods ? 

Euth. Yes, Socrates. 

Soc . Upon this view, then, piety is a science of asking and 
giving ? 

Euth. You understand me capitally, Socrates. 

Soc . Yes, my friend ; the reason is that I am a votary 
of your science, and give my mind to it, and therefore 
nothing which you say will be thrown away upon me. Please 
then to tell me, what is the nature of this service to the 
gods? Do you mean that we prefer requests and give gifts 
to them ? 

Euth. Yes, I do. 

Soc. Is not the right way of asking to ask of them what we 
want ? # 

Euth. Certainly. 

Soc. Atfid the right way of giving is to give to them in Men give to 
return what they want of us. There would >be no meaning the go ds » 
in an art which gives to any one that which he does not gods give 
want. to men » 

EUth. Very true, Socrates. busLcss 

Soc. Thpn piety, Euthyphro, is an art which gods and men with one* 
have of doing business with one another ? 

Euth. That is an expression which you may use, if you 
like. 

Soc. But I have’no particular liking for anything but the 
truth. I wish, however, that you would tell me what benefit 
accrues to the gods from our^gifts. There is no doubt about* 

15 what they give to us; for there is no good thing which they 
do not give ; but how we can give any good thing to them in 
return is far .from being equally clear. If they give every- 

92 

Euthyphro . 

Socrates, 

Euthyphro. 

Again, the 
argument 
walks away. 

Neverthe- 
less, So- 
crates is 
confident 
that Euthy- 
phro knows 
the truth, 
but will not 
tell him. 

E tit hyp hr o is fairly puzzled ’ 

thing and we give nothing, that must be an affair of business 
in which we have very greatly the advantage of them. 

Euth. And do you imagine, Socrates, that any benefit 
accrues to thfc gods from our gifts ? 

Soc. But if # not, Euthyphro, what is the meaning of gifts 
which are conferred by us upon the gods ? 

Euth. What else, but tributes of honour; and, as I was 
just now saying, what pleases them ? 

Soc. Piety, then, is pleasing to the gods, but not beneficial 
or dear to them ? 

Euth. I should say that nothing could be dearer. 

Soc. Then once more the assertion is repeated that piety is 
dear to the gods ? 

Euth. Certainly. 

Soc. And when you say this, can you wonder at your 
words not standing firm, but walking away ? Will you accuse 
me of being the Daedalus who makes them walk away, not 
perceiving that there is another and far greater artist than 
Daedalus who makes them go round in a circle, and he is 
yourself; for the argument, as you will perceive, comes 
round to the same point. Were we not saying that the holy 
or pious was not the same with that which is loved of the 
gods? Have you forgotten ? 

Euth. I quite remember. 

Soc. And are you not saying that what is loved of the gods 
is holy; and is not this the same as what is dear to fchem— do 
you see ? 

Euth. True. 

Soc. Then^either we were wrong in our former assertion ; 
or, if we were right then, we are wrong now. 

Euth. One of the two must be true. 

Soc. Then we must begin again and ask, What is piety? 
That is an enquiry which 1 shall never be weary of pursuing 
as far as in me lies ; and I entreat you not to scorn me, but 
to apply your mind to the utmost, and'tell^me the truth. 
For, if any man knows, you are he; and therefore I must 
detain you, like Proteus, until f you tell. If you had not 
certainly known the nature of piety and impiety, I am con- 
fident that you would never, on behalf of a serf, have charged 
your aged father with murder. You would i?ot have run 

Euthyphro departs . 

93 

such a risk of doing wrong in the sight of the gods, and you 
would have had too much respect for the opinions of men. 
I am sure, therefore, that you know the nature of piety and 
impiety. Speak out then, my dear Euthyphro; and do not 
hide your knowledge. 

Euth . Another time, Socrates; for I am in a hurry, and 
must go now. 

Soc. Alas ! my companion, and will you leave me in 
despair? I was hoping that you would instruct me in the 
nature of piety and impiety; and then I might have cleared 
myself of Meletus and his indictment. I would have told 
1 6 him that I had been enlightened by Euthyphro, and had 
given up rash innovations and speculations, in which 1 
indulged only through ignorance, and that now I am about 
to lead a better life. 

Euthyphro. 

Socrates, 

Euthyphro. 

Euthyphro 
is in a hurry 
to depart, 
and finally 
leaves So- 
crates to 
his fate. 

APOLOGY. 

INTRODUCTION. 

In what relation the Apology of Plato stands to the real defence 
of Socrates, there are no means of determining. It certainly 
agrees in tone and character with the description of Xenophon, 
who says in the Memorabilia (iv. 4, 4) that Socrates might have 
been acquitted * if in any moderate degree he would have con- 
ciliated the favour of the dicasts ; * and who informs us in another 
passage (iv. 8, 4), on the testimony of Hermogenes, the friend of 
Socrates, that he had no wish to live ; and that the divine sign 
refused to allow him to prepare a defence, and also that Socrates 
himself declared this to be unnecessary, on the ground that all his 
life long he had been preparing against that hour. For the speech 
breathes throughout a spirit of defiance, 1 ut non supplex aut reus 
sed magister aut dominus videretur esse judicum * (Cic. de Orat. i. 
54) ; and the loose and desultory style is an imitation 6f the ‘ accus- 
tomed manner* in which Socrates spoke in ‘the agora and among 
the table^ of the money-changers.* The allusion in the Crito 
(45 B) may, perhaps, be adduced as a further % cvidence of the 
literal accuracy of some parts (37 C, D). But in the main it must 
be regarded as the ideal of Socrates, according to Plato’s concep- 
tion of him, appearing in the greatest and most public scene of his 
life, and in the height of his triumph, when he is weakest, and 
yet his mastery over mankind is greatest, and his habitual irony 
acquires a new meaning and a sort of tragic pathos in the face of 
death. The facts of his life are summed up, and the features of 
his character are brought out as if by accident in the course of the 
defence. The conversational manner, the seeming want of arrange- 
ment, the ironical simplicity, are found to result in a perfect work' 
of art, which is the portrait of Socrates. 

Yet some of the topics may# have been actually used by 
Socrates ; and «the recollection of his very words may have rung 

VOL. 11. H 

Apology. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

98 

The Platonic defence of Socrates. 

Apology . in the ears of his disciple. The Apology of Plato may be com- 

Introduc- pared generally with those speeches of Thucydides in which he 
has embodied his conception of the lofty character and policy of 
the great Pericles, and which at the same time furnish a com- 
mentary on the situation of affairs from the point of view of the 
historian. So in the Apology there is an ideal rather than a 
literal truth ; much is said which was not said, and is only Plato’s 
view of the situation. Plato was not, like Xenophon, a chronicler 
of facts ; he does not appear in any of his writings to have aimed 
at literal accuracy. He is not therefore to be supplemented from 
the Memorabilia and Symposium of Xenophon, who belongs to 
an entirely different class of writers. The Apology of Plato is not 
the report of what Socrates said, but an elaborate composition, 
quite as much so in fact as one of the Dialogues. And we may 
perhaps even indulge in the fancy that the actual defence of 
Socrates was as much greater than the Platonic defence as the 
master was greater than the disciple. But in any case, some 
of the words used by him must have been remembered, and some 
of the facts recorded must have actually occurred. It is significant 
that Plato is said to have been present at the defence (Apol.38 B), 
as he is also said to have been absent at the last scene in the 
Phaedo (59 B). Is it fanciful to suppose that he meant to give 
the stamp of authenticity to the one and not to the other? — 
especially when we consider that these two passages are the only 
ones in which Plato makes mention of himself. The circumstance 
that Plato was to be one of his sureties for the payment of the fine 
which he proposed has the appearance of truth. More suspicious 
is the statement that Socrates received the first impulse to his 
favourite calling of cross-examining the world from the Oracle of 
Delphi ; for he must already have been famous before Chaerephon 
went to consult the Oracle (Riddell, i. p. xvi), and the story is of a 
kind which is very likely to have been invented. On the whole we 
arrive at the conclusion that the Apology is true to the character 
of Socrates, but we cannot show that any 'single sentence in it 
was actually spoken by him. It breathes the spirit of Socrates, 
' but has«been cast anew in the mould of Plato. 

There is not much in the other Dialogues which can be com- 
pared with the Apology. Tha same recollection of his master 
may have been present to the mind of Plato when depicting the 

99 

Analysis 17 - 19 . 

sufferings of the Just in the Republic (ii. 361 foil., vi. 500 A). The Apology. 
Crito may also be regarded as a sort of appendage to the Apology, Imtroduc- 
in which Socrates, who has defied the judges, is nevertheless T1 ° N ' 
represented as scrupulously obedient to the laws. *The idealiza- 
tion of the sufferer is carried still further in the Gcygias (476 foil.), 
in which the thesis is maintained, that ‘to suffer is better than to 
do evil ;* and the girt of rhetoric is described as only useful for the 
purpose of self-accusation. The parallelisms which occur in the 
so-called Apology of Xenophon are not worth noticing, because 
the writing in which they are contained is manifestly spurious. 

The statements of the Memorabilia (i. 2 ; iv. 8) respecting the 
trial and death of Socrates agree generally with Plato ; but 
they have lost the flavour of Socratic irony in the narrative of 
Xenophon. 

The Apology or Platonic defence of Socrates is divided into three 
parts : 1st. The defence properly so called ; 2nd. The shorter 
address in mitigation of the penalty ; 3rd. The last words of pro- 
phetic rebuke and exhortation. 

Steph. The first part commences with an apology for his colloquial Analysis. 
l ? style; he is, as he has always been, the enemy of rhetoric, and 
knows of no rhetoric but truth ; he will not falsify his character by 

18 making a speech. Then he proceeds to divide hi» accusers into 
two classes ; first, there is the nameless accuser — public opinion. 

All the world from their earliest years had heard that he was 
a corrupter of youth, and had seen him caricatured in the Clouds 
of Aristophanes. Secondly, there are the professed accusers, who 
are but the mouth-piece of the others. The accusations of both 
might be summed up in a formula. The first say, 'Socrates is an 
evil-doer and a curious person, searching into things under the 
earth and above the heaven ; and making the worse appear the 
better cause, and teaching all this to others.’ The second, 

‘ Socrates is an evil-doer and corrupter of the youth, who does 
not receive the gods^whom the state receives, but introduces other 
new divinities.* * These last words appear to have been the actual 

indictment (cp. Xen. Mem. i. 1) ; and the previous formula, which* 

• • 

is a summary of public opinion, assumes the same legal style. 

19 The answer begins by clearing up a confusion. In the repre- 
sentations of tjie Comic poets, and in the opinion of the multitude, 

h 2 

IOO 

Analysis 20 - 23 . 

Apology, he had been identified with the teachers of physical science and 

Analysis, with the Sophists. But this was an error. For both of them 
he professes a respect in the open court, which contrasts with his 
manner of speaking about them in other places. (Cp. for Anaxa- 
goras, Phaedo e8 B, Laws xii. 967 ; for the Sophists, Meno 95 D, 
Rep. vi. 492, Tim. 19 E, Thcaet. 154 E, Soph. 265 foil., etc.) But at 
the same time he shows that he is not one of them. Of natural 
philosophy he knows nothing ; not that he despises such pursuits, 
but the fact is that he is ignorant of them, and never says a word 
about them. Nor is he paid for giving instruction — that is another 
mistaken notion he has nothing to teach. But he commends 20 
Evenus for teaching virtue at such a 1 moderate ’ rate as five 
minae. Something of the ‘ accustomed irony,’ which may per- 
haps be expected to sleep in the ear of the multitude, is lurking 
here. 

He then goes on to explain the reason why he is in such an evil 
name. That had arisen out of a peculiar mission which he had 
taken upon himself. The enthusiastic Chaerephon (probably in 21 
anticipation of the answer which he received) had gone to 
Delphi and asked the oracle if there was any man wiser than 
Socrates; and the answer was, that there was no man wiser. 
What could be the meaning of this— that he who knew nothing, 
and knew that he knew nothing, should be declared by the oracle 
to be the wisest of men ? Reflecting upon the answer, he deter- 
mined to refute it by finding ‘ a wiser and first he went to the 
politicians, and tjien to the poets, and then to the craftsmen, but 22 
always with the same result — he found that they knew nothing, or 
hardly anything more than himself ; and that the little advantage 
which in some cases they possessed was more than counter- 

1 balanced by their conceit of knowledge. He knew nothing, and 

knew that he knew nothing : they knew little or nothing, and 
imagined that they knew all things. Thus he had passed his 23 
life as a sort of missionary in detecting the pretended wisdom 
of mankind ; and this occupation had quite' absorbed him and 
taken him away both from public and private ’ affairs. Young 
hien of £he richer sort had made a pastime of the same pursuit, 
‘which was not unamusing.’ And hence bitter enmities had 
arisen; the professors of knowledge had revenged themselves 
by calling him a villainous corrupter of youth, an<j by repeating 

Analysis 24 - 30 . 

the commonplaces about atheism and materialism and sophistry, 

24 which are the stock-accusations against all philosophers when 
there is nothing else to be said of them. 

The second accusation he meets by interrogating Meletus, who 
is present and can be interrogated. ‘ If he is th^ cprrupter, who 
is the improver of the citizens ?’ (Cp. Meno 91 C.) ‘All men 

25 everywhere. , But how absurd, how contrary to analogy is this ! 
How inconceivable too, that he should make the citizens worse 
when he has to live with them. This surely cannot be intentional ; 

26 and if unintentional, he ought to have been instructed by Meletus, 
and not accused in the court. 

But there is another part of the indictment which says that he 
teaches men not to receive the gods whom the city receives, and 
has other new gods. ‘ Is that the way in which he is supposed to 
corrupt the youth V ‘ Yes, it is.* ‘ Has he only new gods, or none 
at all?’ ‘None at all.’ ‘What, not even the sun and moon?* 

‘ No ; why, he says that the sun is a stone, and the moon earth.’ 
That, replies Socrates, is the old confusion about Anaxagoras; 
the Athenian people are not so ignorant as to attribute to the 
influence of Socrates notions which have found their way into the 
drama, and may be learned at the theatre. Socrates undertakes 

27 to show that Meletus (rather unjustifiably) has been compounding 
a riddle in this part of the indictment : ‘ There aae no gods, but 
Socrates believes in the existence of the sons of gods, which is 
absurd.’ 

28 Leaving Meletus, who has had enough words spent upon him, 
he ^returns to the original accusation. The question may be 
asked, Why will he persist in following a profession which leads 
him to death? Why?— because he must remain at*his post where 
the god has placed him, as he remained at Potidaea, and Amphi- 

29 polis, and iDelium, where the generals placed him. Besides, he is 
not so overwise as to imagine that he knows whether death is 
a good or an evil ; and he is certain that desertion of his duty 

30 is an evil. Anytus*s quite right fn saying that they should never 
have indicted him if they meant to let him go. For he will cer- 
tainly obey God rather than man ; and will continue to preach to 
all men of all ages the necessity of virtue and improvement ; and 
if they refuse to listen to him hj will still persevere and reprove 
them. This is his way of corrupting the youth, which he will not 

IOI 

Apology, 

Analysis. 

102 

Analysis 30 - 35 . 

Apology, cease to follow in obedience to the god, even if a thousand deaths 
■Analysis. await him. 

He is desirous that they should let him live— not for his own 
sake, but for theirs; because he is their heaven-sent friend (and 31 
they will newr^have such another), or, as he may be ludicrously 
described, he is the gadfly who stirs the generous steed into 
motion. Why then has he never taken part }n public affairs? 
Because the familiar divine voice has hindered him ; if he had 
been a public man, and had fought for the right, as he would 
certainly have fought against the many, he would not have lived, 
and could therefore have done no good. Twice in public matters 32 
he has risked his life for the sake of justice — once at the trial 
of the generals ; and again in resistance to the tyrannical com- 
mands of the Thirty. 

But, though not a public man, he has passed his days in in- 
structing the citizens without fee or reward this was his mission. 
Whether his disciples have turned out well or ill, he cannot justly 
be charged with the result, for he never promised to teach them 33 
anything. They might come if they liked, and they might stay 
away if they liked : and they did come, because they found an 
amusement in hearing the pretenders to. wisdom detected. If 
they have been corrupted, their elder relatives (if not themselves) 
might surely come into court and witness against him, and there 
is an opportunity still for them to appear. But their fathers 34 
and brothers all appear in court (including ‘this’ Plato), to 
witness on his behalf; and if their relatives are corrupted, 
at least they are uncorruptcd; ‘and they are my witnesses. 
For they know that I am speaking the truth, and that Meletus 
is lying.’ 

This is about all that he has to say. He will not entreat the 
judges to spare his life ; neither will he present a spectacle of 
weeping children, although he, too, is not made of ‘ rock or oak.’ 35 
Some of the judges themselves may have complied with this 
practice on similar occasions, and he trusts tkat they will not be 
angry with him for not following their example! But he feels 
that such conduct brings discredit on the name of Athens : he 
feels, too, that the judge has sworn'not to give away justice; and 
he cannot be guilty of the impiety of asking the judge to break his 
oath, when he is himself being tried for impiety. 

A nalysis 36 - 4 1 . 103 

36 As he expected, and probably intended, he is convicted. And Apology . 
now the tone of the speech, instead of being more conciliatory, analysis. 
becomes more lofty and commanding. Anytus proposes death 

as the penalty : and what counter-proposition sl>fdl he make ? 

He, the benefactor of the Athenian people, whose whole life has 
been spent in doing them good, should at least have the Olympic 

37 victor’s reward of maintenance in the Prytaneum. Or why 
should he propose any counter-penalty when he does not know 
whether death, which Anytus proposes, is a good or an evil? 
and he is certain that imprisonment is an evil, exile is an evil. 

Loss of money might be no evil, but then he has none to give; 

38 perhaps he can make up a mina. Let that be the penalty, or, 
if his friends wish, thirty minae ; for which they will be excellent 
securities. 

[He is condemned to death .] 

He is an old man already, and the Athenians will gain nothing 
but disgrace by depriving him of a few years of life. Perhaps he 
could have escaped, if he had chosen to throw down his arms and 
entreat for his life. But he does not at all repent of the manner 
of his defence; he would rather die in his own fashion than live 

39 in theirs. For the penalty of unrighteousness* is swifter than 
death ; that penalty has already overtaken his accusers as death 
will soon overtake him. 

And nW, as one who is about to die, he will prophesy to them. 
They have put him to death in order to escaj 5 (* the necessity of 
giving an account of their lives. But his death ‘will be the seed’ 
of many disciples who will convince them of their*evfl ways, and 
will come forth to reprove them in harsher terms, because they 
are younger and more inconsiderate. 

40 He would like to say a few words, while there is time, to those 
who would have acquitted him. He wishes them to know that 
the divine sign neyer interrupted him in the course of his de- 
fence ; the reason of which, as he conjectures, is that the death to 
which he is going is a good and not an evil. For either death i§ 
a long sleep, the best of sleeps, or a journey to another\vorld in 
which the souls of the dead are gathered together, and in which 

41 there may be a hope of seeing the heroes of old - in which, too, 

104 

Apology. 

Analysis. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

Analysis 41-42. 

there are just judges ; and as all arc immortal, there can be no 
fear of any one suffering death for his opinions. 

Nothing evil can happen to the good man either in life or death, 
and his own death has been permitted by the gods, because it was 
better for him to depart ; and therefore he forgives his judges 
because they hhve done him no harm, although they never meant 
to do him any good. 

He has a last request to make to them — that' they will trouble 42 
his sons as he has troubled them, if they appear to prefer riches 
to virtue, or to think themselves something when they are 
nothing. 

‘ Few persons will be found to wish that Socrates should have 
defended himself otherwise/ — if, as we must add, his defence was 
that with which Plato has provided him. But leaving this ques- 
tion, which does not admit of a precise solution, we may go on 
to ask what was the impression which Plato in the Apology 
intended to give of the character and conduct of his master in 
the last great scene? Did he intend to represent him (1) as 
employing sophistries; (2) as designedly irritating the judges? 
Or are these sophistries to be regarded as belonging to the 
age in which he lived and to his personal character, and this 
apparent haughtiness as flowing from the natural elevation of 
his position ? 

For example, when he says that it is absurd to suppose that 
one man is the forrupter and all the rest of the world the im- 
provers of the youth ; or, when he argues that he never could 
have corrupted the men with whom he had to live; or, when 
he proves his belief in the gods because he believes in the sons 
of gods, is he serious or jesting? It may be observed that these 
sophisms all occur in his cross-examination of Meletus, who is 
easily foiled and mastered in the hands of the great dialectician. 
Perhaps he regarded these answers as good enough for his 
accuser, of whom he makes very light. Also these is a touch of 
irony in them, which takes them out of the category of sophistry. 
(Cp. Euthyph. 2.) 

That the manner in which he defends himself about the lives of 
his disciples is not satisfactory, % can hardly be denied. Fresh in 

105 

Character of the defence . 

the memory of the Athenians, and detestable as they deserved to Apology . 
be to the newly restored democracy, were the names of Alci- Introduc- 
biades, Critias, Charmides. It is obviously not a sufficient 1I0N * 
answer that Socrates had never professed to teaoh them any- 
thing, and is therefore not justly chargeable witj^ Jheir crimes. 

Yet the defence, when taken out of this ironical form, is doubtless 
sound : that his teaching had nothing to do with their evil lives. 

Here, then, the sophistry is rather in form than in substance, 
though we might desire that to such a serious charge Socrates 
had given a more serious answer. 

Truly characteristic of Socrates is another point in his answer, 
which may also be regarded as sophistical. He says that ‘if 
he has corrupted the youth, he must have corrupted them in- 
voluntarily.’ But if, as Socrates argues, all evil is involuntary, 
then all criminals ought to be admonished and not punished. In 
these words the Socratic doctrine of the involuntariness of evil is 
clearly intended to be conveyed. Here again, as in the former 
instance, the defence of Socrates is untrue practically, but may be 
true in some ideal or transcendental sense. The commonplace 
reply, that if he had been guilty of corrupting the youth their 
relations would surely have witnessed against him, with which he 
concludes this part of his defence, is more satisfactory. 

Again, when Socrates argues that he must believe in the gods 
because he believes in the sons of gods, we must remember that 
this is a refutation not of the original indictment, which is con- 
sistent eflough — ‘ Socrates does not receive the gods whom the 
city receives, and has other new divinities Dut of the inter- 
pretation put upon the words by Meletus, who has affirmed that 
he is a downright atheist. To this Socrates fairly answers, in 
accordance with the ideas of the time, that a downright atheist 
cannot believe in the sons of gods or in divine things. The 
notion that demons or lesser divinities are the sons of gods is 
not to be regarded as ironical or sceptical. He is arguing ( ad 
hominem * according^to the notions of mythology current in his 
age. Yet he abstains from saying that he believed in the gods 
whom the State approved. He does not defend himself, as % 
Xenophon has defended him* by appealing to his practice of 
religion. Probably he neither wholly believed, nor disbelieved, in 
the existence of the popular gods ; he had no means of knowing 

106 Did Socrates intend to irritate his judges ? 

Apology . about them. According to Plato (cp. Phaedo 118B; Symp. 

Introduc- 220 D), as well as Xenophon (Memor. i. i, 30), he was punctual 
in the performance of the least religious duties; and he must 
have believed in his own oracular sign, of which he seemed to 
have an internal witness. But the existence of Apollo or Zeus, 
or the other gods whom the State approves, would have appeared 
to him both uncertain and unimportant in comparison of the duty 
of self-examination, and of those principles of truth and right 
which he deemed to be the foundation of religion. (Cp. Phaedr. 
230 ; Euthyph. 6, 7 ; Rep. ii. 373 ff.). 

The second question, whether Plato meant to represent Socrates 
as braving or irritating his judges, must also be answered in the 
negative. Ilis irony, his superiority, his audacity, ‘regarding not 
the person of man,* necessarily flow out of the loftiness of his 
situation. He is not acting a part upon a great occasion, but he is 
what he has been all his life long, ‘ a king of men.’ He would 
rather not appear insolent, if he could avoid it ( ov\ ws avdafii£6nevos 
touto Xlyto), Neither is he desirous of hastening his own end, for 
life and death are simply indifferent to him. But such a defence 
as would be acceptable to his judges and might procure an 
acquittal, it is not in his nature to make. He will not say or 
do anything that might pervert the course of justice ; he cannot 
have his tongue bound even ‘ in the throat of death/ With his 
accusers he will only fence and play, as he had fenced with other 
‘improvers of youth,’ answering the Sophist according to his 
sophistry all his life long. He is serious when he is* speaking 
of his own ini^fon, which seems to distinguish him froiji all 
other reformers of mankind, and originates in an accident. The 
dedication of himself to the improvement of his fellow-citizens is 
not so remarkable as the ironical spirit in which he goes about 
doing good only in vindication of the credit of the orficle, and in 
the vain hope of finding a wiser man than himself. Yet this 
singular and almost accidental character of his mission agrees 
with the divine sign which, according to ouf notions, is equally 
accidental and irrational, and is nevertheless accepted by him as 
# the guiding principle of his life. Socrates is nowhere represented 
to us as*a freethinker or sceptic. There is no reason to doubt his 
sincerity when he speculates on the possibility of seeing and 
knowing the heroes of the Trojan war in another world. On 

Socrates and the Sophists . 107 

the other hand, his hope of immortality is uncertain; — he also Apology . 
conceives of death as a long sleep (in this respect differing from Introduo 
the Phaedo), and at last falls back on resignation to the divine TION ’ 

will, and the certainty that no evil can happen to tlfe good man 
either in life or death. His absolute truthfulness scarps to hinder 
him from asserting positively more than this ; and he makes no 
attempt to veil his % ignorance in mythology and figures of speech. 

The gentleness of the first part of the speech contrasts with the 
aggravated, almost threatening, tone of the conclusion. He charac- 
teristically remarks that he will not speak as a rhetorician, that is 
to say, he will not make a regular defence such as Lysias or one 
of the orators might have composed for him, or, according to some 
accounts, did compose for him. But he first procures himself a 
hearing by conciliatory words. He does not attack the Sophists; 
for they were open to the same charges as himself ; they were 
equally ridiculed by the Comic poets, and almost equally hateful 
to Anytus and Meletus. Yet incidentally the antagonism between 
Socrates and the Sophists is allowed to appear. He is poor and 
they are rich ; his profession that he teaches nothing is opposed 
to their readiness to teach all things ; his talking in the market- 
place to their private instructions ; his tarry-at-home life to their 
wandering from city to city. The tone which he assumes towards 
them is one of real friendliness, but also of concealed irony. To- 
wards Anaxagoras, who had disappointed him in his hopes of 
learning about mind and nature, he shows a less kindly feeling, 
which is also the feeling of Plato in other passages (Laws xii. 

967 Q). But Anaxagoras had been dead thirty *y ears, and was 
beyond the reach of persecution. 

It has been remarked that the prophecy of a new generation of 
teachers who would rebuke and exhort the Athenian people in 
harsher and more violent terms was, as far as we know, never 
fulfilled. No inference can be drawn from this circumstance as to 
the probability of the words attributed to him having been actually 
uttered. They express the aspiration of the first martyr of philo- 
sophy, that he \tfould leave behind him many followers, accom- 
panied by the not unnatural feeling that they would be fiercer and 1 
more inconsiderate in their words when emancipated from his 
control. # 

The above remarks must be understood as applying with any 

io8 

Apology . 
Introduc- 

TION. 

Is the Apology the real speech of Socrates ? 

degree of certainty to the Platonic Socrates only. For, although 
these or similar words may have been spoken by Socrates him- 
self, we cannot exclude the possibility, that like so much else, e.g. 
the wisdom *f Critias, the poem of Solon, the virtues of Charmides, 
they may h^e been due only to the imagination of Plato. The 
arguments of those who maintain that the Apology was composed 
during the process, resting on no evidence, do not require a serious 
refutation. Nor are the reasonings of Schleiermacher, who argues 
that the Platonic defence is an exact or nearly exact reproduction 
of the words of Socrates, partly because Plato would not have 
been guilty of the impiety of altering them, and also because many 
points of the defence might have been improved and strengthened, 
at all more conclusive. (See English Translation, p. 137.) What 
effect the death of Socrates produced on the mind of Plato, we 
cannot certainly determine ; nor can we say how he would or 
must have written under the circumstances. We observe that the 
enmity of Aristophanes to Socrates does not prevent Plato from 
introducing them together in the Symposium engaged in friendly 
intercourse. Nor is there any trace in the Dialogues of an attempt 
to make Anytus or Meletus personally odious in the eyes of the 
Athenian public. 

APOLOGY. 

steph. How you, O Athenians, have been affected by my accusers, 
17 I cannot tell; but I know that they almost made me forget 
who I was — so persuasively did they speak ; and yet they 
have hardly uttered a word of truth. But of the many false- 
hoods told by them, there was one which quite amazed me ; — 
I mean when they said that you should be upon your guard 
and not allow yourselves to be deceived by the force of my 
eloquence. To say this, when they were certain to be detected 
as soon as I opened my lips and proved myself to be anything 
but a great speaker, did indeed appear to me most shameless 
—unless by the force of eloquence they mean the force of 
truth ; for if such is their meaning, I admit that I am eloquent. 
But in how different a way from theirs ! Well, as I was 
saying, they have scarcely spoken the truth at all ; but from me 
you shall, hear the whole truth : not, however, delivered after 
their manner in a set oration duly ornamentecj with words and 
phrases. No, by heaven ! but I shall use the words and argu- 
ments which occur to me at the moment ; for I am confident 
in the justice of my cause 1 : at my time of life I ought not to 
be appearing before you, O men of Athens, in the character 
of a juvenile orator — let no one expect it of me. And I must 
beg of you to grant me a favour If I defend myself in my 
accustomed manner, and you hear me using the words which 
I have been in the habit of using in the agora, at the tables of 
the money-changers, or anywhere else, I would ask you not to 
be surprised, and not to interrupt me on this account. For 
I am more than seventy yeafs of age, and appearing now for 
the first time in a court of law, t I am quite a stranger to the 

Apology . 

Socrates. 

Socrates 
begs to be 
allowed to 
speak in his 
accustomed 
manner. 

1 Or, I am certain that I am right in taking this course. 

I IO 

Apology. 

Socrates. 

The judges 
must excuse 
Socrates if 
he defends 
himself in 
his own 
fashion. 

He has to 
meet two 
sorts of ac- 
cusers. 

Socrates and his accusers . 

language of the place ; and therefore I would have you regard 
me as if I were really a stranger, whom you would excuse if iS 
he spoke in his native tongue, and after the fashion of his 
country:— Am I making an unfair request f>f you? Never 
mind the manner, which may or may not be good ; but think 
only of the truth of my words, and give heed to that : let the 
speaker speak truly and the judge decide justly. 

And first, I have to reply to the older charges and to my 
first accusers, and then I will go on to the later ones. For of 
old I have had many accusers, who have accused me falsely 
to you during many years ; and I am more afraid of them than 
of Anytus and his associates, who arc dangerous, too, in their 
own way. But far more dangerous are the others, who began 
when you were children, and took possession of your minds 
with their falsehoods, telling of one Socrates, a wise man, who 
speculated about the heaven above, and searched into the 
earth beneath, and made the worse appear the better cause. 
The disseminators of this tale are the accusers whom I dread ; 
for their hearers are apt to fancy that such enquirers do not 
believe in the existence of the gods. And they are many, and 
their charges against me are of ancient date, and they were 
made by them in the days when you were more impressible 
than you arc now — in childhood, or it may have been in youth 
— and the cause when heard went by default, for there was 
none to answer. And hardest of all, I do not know and 
cannot tell the names of my accusers ; unless in the chance 
case of a Comi£ poet. All who from envy and malice have 
persuaded you — some of them having first convinced them- 
selves — all this class of men are most difficult to deal with ; 
for I cannot have them lip here, and cross-examine them, and 
therefore I must simply fight with shadows in my oivn defence, 
and argue when there is no one who answers. I will ask you 
then to assume with me, as I was saying, that my opponents 
are of two kinds ; one recent, the other ancient : and I hope 
that you will see the propriety of my answering the latter first, 
for these accusations you heard long before the others, and 
much oftener. 

Well, then, I must make my defence, and endeavour to clear 19 
away in a short time, a slander which has lasted a long time. 
May I succeed, if to succeed be for my good and yours, *or 

1 1 1 

The Clouds of A ristophanes . 

likely to avail me in my cause ! The task is not an easy one ; Apology . 

I quite understand the nature of it. And so leaving the event Socrates. 
with God, in obedience to the law I will now make my defence. 

I will begin at the beginning, and ask what is the accusation There is the 
which has given rise to the slander of me, anlitin fact has a ^ ct J sat !° n 
encouraged Meletus to prefer this charge against me. Well, tres ; which 
what do the slanderers say ? They shall be my prosecutors, jj^hTis 
and I will sum up their words in an affidavit : ' Socrates is an a student of 
evil-doer, and a curious person, who searches into things natural phi- 
under the earth and in heaven, and he makes the worse 
appear the better cause; and he teaches the aforesaid doc- 
trines to others.’ Such is the nature of the accusation : it is 
just what you have yourselves seen in the comedy of Aristo- 
phanes who has introduced a man whom he calls Socrates, 
going about and saying that he walks in air, and talking a 
deal of nonsense concerning matters of which I do not pre- 
tend to know cither much or little — not that I mean to speak 
disparagingly of any one who is a student of natural philo- 
sophy. I should be very sorry if Meletus could bring so grave 
a charge against me. But the simple truth is, O Athenians, 
that I have nothing to do with physical speculations. Very 
many of those here present are witnesses to the truth of this, 
and to them I appeal. Speak then, you who have heard me, 
and tell your neighbours whether any of you have ever known 
me hold forth in few words or in many upon such matters. 

. . . Yoti hear their answer. And from what they say of 
thisj^art of the charge you will be able to jCidge of the truth 
of the rest. 

As little foundation is there for the report that I am a There is the 
teacher, and take money; this accusation has no more truth 
in it than frhe other. Although, if a man were really able to phist who 
instruct mankind, to receive money for giving instruction 
would, in my opinion, be an honour to him. There is 
Gorgias of Leontium, and Prodicus of Ceos, and Hippias 
of Elis, who go the round of the cities, and are able to 
persuade the young men to leave their own citizens by whom 
20 they might be taught for nothing, and come to them whom 
they not only pay, but are thankful if they may be allowed to 

1 Aristoph., Clouds, 235 ff. 

112 

Evenus the Parian . 

Apology, pay them. There is at this time a Parian philosopher 
Socrates, residing in Athens, of whom I have heard ; and I came to 
Theironi- hear of him in this way: — I came across a man who has 
cal question spent a woAd of money on the Sophists, Callias, the son of 
crates put Hipponicus^ $nd knowing that he had sons, I asked him: 
to Callias. ' Callias/ I said, 'if your two sons were foals or calves, 
there would be no difficulty in finding some, one to put over 
them ; we should hire a trainer of horses, or a farmer prob- 
ably, who would improve and perfect them in their own 
proper virtue and excellence ; but as they are human beings, 
whom are you thinking of placing over them ? Is there any 
one who understands human and political virtue? You must 
have thought about the matter, for you have sons ; is there 
any one?’ 'There is/ he said. 'Who is he?* said I ; 'and 
of what country? and what does he charge?’ ' Evenus the 
Parian/ he replied ; ' he is the man, and his charge is five 
minae.’ Happy is Evenus, I said to myself, if he really has 
this wisdom, and teaches at such a moderate charge. Had I 
the same, I should have been very proud and conceited ; but 
the truth is that I have no knowledge of the kind. 

I dare say, Athenians, that some one among you will reply, 
'Yes, Socrates, but what is the origin of these accusations 
which are brought against you ; there must have been some- 
thing strange which you have been doing ? All these rumours 
and this talk about you would never have arisen if you had 
been like other men : tell us, then, what is the cause* of them, 
for we should be ‘sorry to judge hastily of you.’ Now I regard 
this as a fair challenge, and I will endeavour to explain to you 
the reason why I am called wise and have such an evil fame. 
Please to attend then. And although some of you may think 
that I am joking, I declare that I will tell you the entire truth. 
Men of Athens, this reputation of mine has come of a certain 
The ac- sort of wisdom which I possess. If you ask me what kind of 
agaJnsTme w ^ sc ^ om ; I reply, wisdom such as may perhaps be attained by 
have arisen man, for to that extent I am inclined to believe that I am 
o- w Ofa r w j se . w h ereas the persons of whom I was speaking have 

which I a superhuman wisdom, which I yiay fail to describe, because 

practise. j have ft no t myself ; and he who says that I have, speaks 

falsely, and is taking away my character. And here, O men 
of Athens, I must beg you not to interrupt me, even if I seem 

The God of Delphi . 

to say something extravagant. For the word which I will 
speak is not mine. I will refer you to a witness who is 
worthy of credit ; that witness shall be the God of Delphi — 
he will tell you about my wisdom, if I have any,*and of what 
sort it is. You must have known Chaerephon p fcte was early 
21 a friend of mine, and also a friend of yours, for he shared in 
the recent exile of the people, and returned with you. Well, 
Chaerephon, as you know, was very impetuous in all his 
doings, and he went to Delphi and boldly asked the oracle to 
tell him whether — as I was saying, I must beg you not to 
interrupt — he asked the oracle to tell him whether any one 
was wiser than 1 was, and the Pythian prophetess answered, 
that there was no man wiser. Chaerephon is dead himself ; 
but his brother, who is in court, will confirm the truth of what 
I am saying. 

Why do I mention this ? Because I am going to explain 
to you why I have such an evil name. When I heard the 
answer, I said to myself, What can the god mean ? and what 
is the interpretation of his riddle ? for I know that I have 
no wisdom, small or great. What then can he mean when 
he says that I am the wisest of men ? And yet he is a 
god, and cannot lie ; that would be against his nature. After 
long consideration, I thought of a method of trying the 
question. I reflected that if I could only find a man wiser 
than myself, then I might go to the god with a refutation in 
my hand- I should say to him, 1 Here is a man who is wiser 
than I am ; but you said that I was the wisest** Accordingly 
I w&it to one who had the reputation of wisdom, and observed 
him — his name 1 need not mention ; he was a politician whom 
I selected for examination — and the result was as follows: 
When I bggan to talk with him, I could not help thinking 
that he was not really wise, although he was thought wise by 
many, and still wiser by himself ; and thereupon I tried to 
explain to him that he thought himself wise, but was not 
really wise ; and th% consequence was that he hated me, and 
his enmity was shared by several who were present and 
heard me. So I left him, saying to myself, as I went away: 
Well, although I do not suppose that either of us knows 
anything really beautiful and gqod, I am better off than he is, 
— for he knows nothing, and thinks that he knows ; I neither 

VOL. II. i 

1*3 

Apology . 

Socrates. 

My prac- 
tice of it 
arose out of 
a declara- 
tion of the 
Delphian 
Oracle that 
I was the 
wisest of 
men. 

I went 
about 
searching 
after a man 
who was 
wiser than 
myself: at 
first among 
the politi- 
cians ; then 
among th£ 
philoso- 
phers ; and 
found that 
I had an 
advantage 
over them, 
because I 
had no 
* conceit of 
knowledge. 

1 14 Socrates goes on his way asking questions . 

Apology, know nor think that I know. In this latter particular, then, 
Socrates. I seem to have slightly the advantage of him. Then I went 
to another who had still higher pretensions to wisdom, and 
my conclusion was exactly the same. Whereupon I made 
another ene;rr^y of him, and of many others besides him. 

Then I went to one man after another, being not uncon- 
scious of the enmity which I provoked, and I lamented and 
feared this : but necessity was laid upon me, — the word of 
God, I thought, ought to be considered first. And I said to 
myself, Go I must to all who appear to know, and find out 
the meaning of the oracle. And I swear to you, Athenians, 22 
by the dog I swear ! — for I must tell you the truth — the result 
of my mission was just this : I found that the men most in 
repute were all but the most foolish ; and that others less 
esteemed were really wiser and better. I will tell you the 
tale of my wanderings and of the * Herculean’ labours, as I 
may call them, which I endured only to find at last the oracle 
I found that irrefutable. After the politicians, I went to the poets ; tragic, 
were the* dithyrambic, and all sorts. And there, I said to myself, you 
worst pos- will be instantly detected ; now you will find out that you are 
Si re\ e js of" more ig norant ^an they are. Accordingly, I took them some 
their own of the most elaborate passages in their own writings, and 
writings. asked what was the meaning of them — thinking that they would 
teach me something. Will you believe me? I am almost 
ashamed to confess the truth, but I must say that there is 
hardly a person present who would not have talked better 
about their po.etry than they did themselves. Then I knew 
that not by wisdom do poets write poetry, but by a soi t of 
genius and inspiration ; they are like diviners or soothsayers 
who also say many fine things, but do not understand the 
1 meaning of them. The poets appeared to me to be much in 

the same case; and I further observed that upon the strength of 
their poetry they believed themselves to be the wisest of men 
in other things in which they were not wise. So I departed, 
conceiving myself to be superior to them for the same reason 
that I was superior to the politicians. 

The artisans* At last I went to the artisans, for I was conscious that I 
real know- knew nothing at all, as I may say, and I was sure that they 
ledge, but knew many fine things ; and here I was not mistaken, for 
atso aeon- did know many things of which I was ignorant, and in 

Why he was so greatly disliked : 

1 1 5 

this they certainly were wiser than I was. But I observed 
that even the good artisans fell into the same error as the 
poets ; — because they were good workmen they thought that 
they also knew all sorts of high matters, and flhis defect in 
them overshadowed their wisdom ; and ther/fcfcre I asked 
myself on behalf of the oracle, whether I would like to be as 
I was, neither having their knowledge nor their ignorance, or 
like them in both ; and I made answer to myself and to the 
oracle that I was better off as I was. 

This inquisition has led to my having many enemies of 
2 3 the worst and most dangerous kind, and has given occasion 
also to many calumnies. And I am called wise, for my 
hearers always imagine that I myself possess the wisdom 
} which I find wanting in others : but the truth is, O men 
! of Athens, that God only is wise ; and by his answer he 
intends to show that the wisdom of men is worth little or 
nothing; he is not speaking of Socrates, he is only using 
my name by way of illustration, as if he said, He, O men, is 
the wisest, who, like Socrates, knows that his wisdom is 
in truth worth nothing. And so I go about the world, 
obedient to the god, and search and make enquiry into the 
wisdom of any one, whether citizen or stranger, who appears 
to be wise ; and if he is not wise, then in vindication of 
the oracle I show him that he is not wise ; and my occu- 
pation quite absorbs me, and I have no time to give either 
to any public matter of interest or to any concern of my 
own, but I am in utter poverty by reason of cny devotion to 
the*god. 

There is another thing : — young men of the richer classes, 
who have not much to do, come about me of their own 
accord ; thyey like to hear the pretenders examined, and they 
often imitate me, and proceed to examine others ; there are 
plenty of persons, as they quickly discover, who think that 
they know something, but really know little or nothing ; and 
then those who aVe examined by them instead of being 
angry with themselves are angry with me : This confounded 
Socrates, they say ; this v^lainous misleader of youth ! — • 
and then if somebody asks them, Why, what evil does he 
practise or teach ? they do «not know, and cannot tell ; 
but in order that they may not appear to be at a loss, they 

Apology . 

Socrates. 

ceit that 
they knew 
things 
which were 
beyond 
them. 

The oracle 
was in- 
tended to 
apply, not 
to Socrates, 
but to all 
men who 
know that 
their wis- 
dom is 
worth 
nothing. 

There are 
my imita- 
tors who go 
about de- 
tecting pre- 
tenders, 
and the en- 
mity which 
they arouse 
falls upon 
me. 

1 16 

Apology. 

Socrates, 

Meletus. 

The second 
class of ac- 
cusers. 

Meletus , Anytus , and Lycon . 

repeat the ready-made charges which are used against all 
philosophers about teaching things up in the clouds and 
under the earth, and having no gods, and making the worse 
appear the better cause ; for they do not like to confess that 
their pretene$ of knowledge has been detected — which is 
the truth ; and as they are numerous and ambitious and 
energetic, and are drawn up in battle array and have per- 
suasive tongues, they have filled your ears with their loud 
and inveterate calumnies. And this is the reason why my 
three accusers, Meletus and Anytus and Lycon, have set 
upon me ; Meletus, who has a quarrel with me on behalf 
of the poets ; Anytus, on behalf of the craftsmen and poli- 
ticians ; Lycon, on behalf of the rhetoricians : and as I said z 
at the beginning, I cannot expect to get rid of such a mass 
of calumny all in a moment. And this, O men of Athens, is 
the truth and the whole truth ; I have concealed nothing, 

I have dissembled nothing. And yet, I know that my 
plainness of speech makes them hate me, and what is their 
hatred but a proof that I am speaking the truth?— Hence 
has arisen the prejudice against me ; and this is the reason 
of it, as you will find out either in this or in any future 
enquiry. 

I have sai^j enough in my defence against the first class of 
my accusers ; I turn to the second class. They are headed 
by Meletus, that good man and true lover of his country, 
as he calls himself. Against these, too, I must try*to make 
a defence : — L^: their affidavit be read : it contains something 
of this kind : It says that Socrates is a doer of evil, who 
corrupts the youth ; and who does not believe in the gods of 
the state, but has other new divinities of his own. Such is 
the charge; and now let us examine the particular counts. 
He says that I am a doer of evil, and corrupt the youth ; but 
I say, O men of Athens, that Meletus is a doer of evil, in 
that he pretends to be in earnest when he is only in jest, 
and is so eager to bring men to trial from a pretended zeal 
# and interest about matters in which he really never had the 
smallest interest. And the trutfi of this I will endeavour to 
prove to you. 

Come hither, Meletus, and'let me ask a question of you. 
You think a great deal about the improvement of youth? 

Meletus is cross-examined by Socrates . 117 

Yes, I do. Apology. 

Tell the judges, then, who is their improver ; for you must Socrates, 
know, as you have taken the pains to discover th^ir corrupter, Meletus * 
and are citing and accusing me before them. Speak, then, AH men are 
and tell the judges who their improver is. — Obldl*ve, Meletus, tobTim- 
that you are silent, and have nothing to say. But is not this P rovers of 
rather disgraceful, and a very considerable proof of what the stogie* 

I was saying, that you have no interest in the matter ? Speak exception 
up, friend, and tell us who their improver is. of Socrates. 

The laws. 

But that, my good sir, is not my meaning. I want to 
know who the person is, who, in the first place, knows 
the laws. 

The judges, Socrates, who are present in court. 

What, do you mean to say, Meletus, that they are able 
to instruct and improve youth ? 

Certainly they are. 

What, all of them, or some only and not others ? 

All of them. 

By the goddess Here, that is good news! There are 
plenty of improvers, then. And what do you say of the 
25 audience, — do they improve them ? 

Yes, they do. 

And the senators ? 

Yes, the senators improve them. 

But ptrhaps the members of the assembly corrupt them ? — 
or clo they too improve them ? 

They improve them. 

Then every Athenian improves and elevates them ; all 
with the exception of myself ; and I alone am their corrupter ? 

Is that what you affirm ? 

That is what I stoutly affirm. 

I am very unfortunate if you are right. But suppose I gisk But this 
you a question : How about horses ? Does one man do 
them harm and all the world good? Is not the exact opposite fact does 
the truth? One man is able to do them good, or at least n ° taccord 

. . _ 1 . . • with the 

not many ; — the trainer of horses, that is to say, does them analogy of 
good, and others who have to do with them rather injure theani - 
them ? Is not that true, Meldtus, of horses, or of any other # 
animals? Most assuredly it is; whether you and Anytus 

1 18 

Apolog)>. 

Socrates, 

Meletus. 

When I do 
harm to my 
neighbour 
I must do 
harm to 
myself : 
and there- 
fore I can- 
not be sup- 
posed to 
injure them 
intention- 
ally. 

Meletus is checkmated by Socrates . 

say yes or no. Happy indeed would be the condition of 
youth if they had one corrupter only, and all the rest of 
the world were their improvers. But you, Meletus, have 
sufficiently shown that you never had a thought about the 
young : youf Y-arelessness is seen in your not caring about 
the very things which you bring against me. 

And now, Meletus, I will ask you another question — by 
Zeus I will : Which is better, to live among bad citizens, or 
among good ones? Answer, friend, I say; the question 
is one which may be easily answered. Do not the good 
do their neighbours good, and the bad do them evil ? 

Certainly. 

And is there any one who would rather be injured than 
benefited by those who live with him ? Answer, my good 
friend, the law requires you to answer — does any one like to 
be injured ? 

Certainly not. 

And when you accuse me of corrupting and deteriorating 
the youth, do you allege that I corrupt them intentionally or 
unintentionally ? 

Intentionally, I say. 

But you have just admitted that the good do their neigh- 
bours good, and the evil do them evil. Now, is that a truth 
which your superior wisdom has recognized thus early in life, 
and am I, at my age, in such darkness and ignorance as not 
to know that if a man with whom I have to live is corrupted 
by me, I am vCry likely to be harmed by him; and y^t I 
corrupt him, and intentionally, too— so you say, although 
neither I nor any other human being is ever likely to be 
convinced by you. But either I do not corrupt them, or 26 
I corrupt them unintentionally ; and on either view of the 
case you lie. If my offence is unintentional, the law has no 
cognizance of unintentional offences: you ought to have 
taken me privately, and warned and admonished me; for 
if I had been better advised, I should have left off doing what 
I only did unintentionally — no doubt I should ; but you 
would have hothing to say to me and refused to teach me. 
And now you bring me up in this court, which is a place not 
of instruction, but of punishmeht. 

It will be very clear to you, Athenians, as I was saying, 

He neither knows nor cares about the interests of youth. 

that Meletus has no care at all, great or small, about the 
matter. But still I should like to know, Meletus, in what 
I am affirmed to corrupt the young. I suppose you mean, 
as I infer from your indictment, that I teach them not to 
acknowledge the gods which the state acknowledges, but 
some other new divinities or spiritual agencies in their 
stead. These are the lessons by which I corrupt the youth, 
as you say. 

Yes, that I say emphatically. 

Then, by the gods, Meletus, of whom we are speaking, tell 
me and the court, in somewhat plainer terms, what you mean ! 
for I do not as yet understand whether you affirm that I teach 
other men to acknowledge some gods, and therefore that I do 
believe in gods, and am not an entire atheist — this you do not 
lay to my charge, — but only you say that they are not the 
same gods which the city recognizes —the charge is that they 
are different gods. Or, do you mean that I am an atheist 
simply, and a teacher of atheism ? 

I mean the latter — that you are a complete atheist. 

What an extraordinary statement ! Why do you think so, 
Meletus? Do you mean that I do not believe in the god- 
head of the sun or moon, like other men ? 

I assure you, judges, that he does not : for tie says that 
the sun is stone, and the moon earth. 

Friend Meletus, you think that you are accusing Anaxa- 
goras : a*hd you have but a bad opinion of the judges, if you 
fanjy them illiterate to such a degree as ndt to know that 
these doctrines are found in the books of Anaxagoras the 
Clazomenian, which are full of them. And so, forsooth, the 
youth are said to be taught them by Socrates, when there 
are not imfrequently exhibitions of them at the theatre 1 
(price of admission one drachma at the most) ; and they 
might pay their money, and laugh at Socrates if he pretends 
to father these extraordinary views. And so, Meletus, you 
really think that I do not believe in any god ? 

I swear by Zeus that you believe absolutely in none at all. 

Nobody will believe you, JMeletus, and I am ’pretty sure 
that you do not believe yourself. I cannot help thinking, 

1 Probably in allusion to Aristophanes who caricatured, and to Euripides 
who borrowed the notions of Anaxagoras, as well as to other dramatic poets. 

1 19 

Apology . 

Socrates, 

Meletus. 

Socrates 
is declared 
by Meletus 
to be an 
atheist and 
to corrupt 
the religion 
of the 
young. 

Meletus has 
confounded 
Socrates 
with Anax- 
agoras ; 

and he has 
* contra- 
dicted him- 
self in the 
indictment. 

120 

Apology . 

Socrates, 

Meletus. 

How can 
Socrates 
believe in 
divine 
agencies 
and not 
believe in 
gods? 

Meletus is again checkmated by Socrates . 

men of Athens, that Meletus is reckless and impudent, and 
that he has written this indictment in a spirit of mere wanton- 
ness and youthful bravado. Has he not compounded a 27 
riddle, thinking to try me? He said to himself: — I shall 
see whetheVHhe wise Socrates will discover my facetious 
contradiction, or whether I shall be able to deceive him and 
the rest of them. For he certainly does appear to me to 
contradict himself in the indictment as much as if he said 
that Socrates is guilty of not believing in the gods, and yet 
of believing in them — but this is not like a person who is in 
earnest. 

I should like you, O men of Athens, to join me in ex- 
amining what I conceive to be his inconsistency; and do 
you, Meletus, answer. And I must remind the audience 
of my request that they would not make a disturbance if 
I speak in my accustomed manner : 

Did ever man, Meletus, believe in the existence of human 
things, and not of human beings ? . . . I wish, men of Athens, 
that he would answer, and not be always trying to get up an 
interruption. Did ever any man believe in horsemanship, 
and not in horses? or in flute-playing, and not in flute- 
players? No, my friend ; I will answer to you and to the 
court, as yqu refuse to answer for yourself. There is no 
man who ever did. But now please to answer the next 
question : Can a man believe in spiritual and divine agencies, 
and not in spirits or demigods ? 

He cannot. ' t 

How lucky I am to have extracted that answer, by the 
assistance of the court ! But then you swear in the in- 
dictment that I teach and believe in divine or spiritual 
agencies (new or old, no matter for that); at Sny rate, I 
believe in spiritual agencies, — so you say and swear in the 
affidavit ; and yet if I believe in divine beings, how can I help 
believing in spirits or demigods ;— must 1 , not? To be sure 
I must ; and therefore I may assume that your silence gives 
. consent. Now what are spirits or demigods? are they not 
either gods or the sons of gods ? 

Certainly they are. 

But this is what I call the facetious riddle invented by 
you : the demigods or spirits are gods, and you say first that 

The example of Achilles . 

I do not believe in gods, and then again that I do believe in 
gods ; that is, if I believe in demigods. For if the demigods 
are the illegitimate sons of gods, whether by the nymphs 
or by any other mothers, of whom they are said to be the 
sons — what human being will ever believe t$at there are 
no gods if they are the sons of gods? You might as well 
affirm the existence of mules, and deny that of horses and 
asses. Such nonsense, Meletus, could only have been in- 
tended by you to make trial of me. You have put this into 
the indictment because you had nothing real of which to 
accuse me. But no one who has a particle of understanding 
will ever be convinced by you that the same men can believe 
in divine and superhuman things, and yet not believe that 
28 there are gods and demigods and heroes. 

I have said enough in answer to the charge of Meletus : 
any elaborate defence is unnecessary; but I know only too 
well how many are the enmities which I have incurred, and 
this is what will be my destruction if I am destroyed ; —not 
Meletus, nor yet Anytus, but the envy and detraction of the 
world, which has been the death of many good men, and will 
probably be the death of many more ; there is no danger of 
my being the last of them. 

Some one will say: And are you not ashamed, Socrates, of 
a course of life which is likely to bring you to an untimely 
end ? To him I may fairly answer : There you are mistaken : 
a man $ho is good for anything ought not to calculate the 
chance of living or dying ; he ought only to consider whether 
in doing anything he is doing right or wrong — acting the part 
of a good man or of a bad. Whereas, upon your view, the 
heroes who fell at Troy were not good for much, and the son 
of Thetis above all, who altogether despised danger in com- 
parison with disgrace; and when he was so eager to slay 
Hector, his goddess mother said to him, that if he avenged 
his companion Patroclus, and slew Hector, he would die 
himself— ' Fate/ she said, in these or the like words, 'waits 
for you next after Hector ; ’ he, receiving this warning, 
utterly despised danger and death, and instead of fearing 
them, feared rather to live in dishonour, and not to avenge 
his friend. 'Let me die forthwith/ he replies, 'and be 
avenged of my enemy, rather than abide here by the beaked 

121 

Apology. 

Socrates. 

Let no man 
fear death 
or fear any- 
thing but 
disgrace. 

122 

Apology . 
Socrates. 

Socrates, 
who has 
often faced 
death in 
battle, will 
not make 
any condi- 
tion in order 
to save his 
own life ; 
for he does 
not know 
whether 
death is a 
good or an 
evil. 

The motives of Socrates 

ships, a laughing-stock and a burden of the earth/ Had 
Achilles any thought of death and danger? For wherever 
a man’s place is, whether the place which he has chosen or 
that in whicfi he has been placed by a commander, there he 
ought to remain in the hour of danger ; he should not think 
of death or of anything but of disgrace. And this, O men of 
Athens, is a true saying. 

Strange, indeed, would be my conduct, O men of Athens, 
if I who, when I was ordered by the generals whom you 
chose to command me at Potidaea and Amphipolis and 
Delium, remained where they placed me, like any other man, 
facing death — if now, when, as I conceive and imagine, God 
orders me to fulfil the philosopher’s mission of searching into 
myself and other men, I were to desert my post through fear 29 
of death, or any other fear; that would indeed be strange, 
and I might justly be arraigned in court for denying the 
existence of the gods, if I disobeyed the oracle because I was 
afraid of death, fancying that I was wise when I was not 
wise. For the fear of death is indeed the pretence of 
wisdom, and not real wisdom, being a pretence of knowing 
the unknown ; and no one knows whether death, which men 
in their fear apprehend to be the greatest evil, may not be 
the greatest r good. Is not this ignorance of a disgraceful 
sort, the ignorance which is the conceit that a man knows 
what he does not know ? And in this respect only I believe 
myself to differ from men in general, and may perhaps claim 
to be wiser than they are : — that whereas I know but little of 
the world below, I do not suppose that I know: but I do 
know that injustice and disobedience to a better, whether 
God or man, is evil and dishonourable, and I will never fear 
or avoid a possible good rather than a certain evil. And 
therefore if you let me go now, and are not convinced by 
Anytus, who said that since I had been prosecuted I must be 
put to death; (or if not that I ought never to have been 
prosecuted at all) ; and that if I escape now, your sons will 
all be utterly ruined by listening to my words — if you say to 
me, Socrates, this time we will, not mind Anytus, and you 
shall be let off, but upon one condition, that you are not to 
enquire and speculate in this way any more, and that if you 
are caught doing so again you shall die;— if this was the 

explained by himself. 

condition on which you let me go, I should reply: Men of 
Athens, I honour and love you ; but I shall obey God rather 
than you, and while I have life and strength I shall never 
cease from the practice and teaching of philosophy, exhorting 
any one whom I meet and saying to him after* my manner : 
You, my friend, — a citizen of the great and mighty and wise 
city of Athens, — are you not ashamed of heaping up the 
greatest amount of money and honour and reputation, and 
caring so little about wisdom and truth and the greatest 
improvement of the soul, which you never regard or heed at 
all ? And if the person with whom I am arguing, says : 
Yes, but I do care ; then I do not leave him or let him go at 
once ; but I proceed to interrogate and examine and cross- 
examine him, and if I think that he has no virtue in him, but 
only says that he has, I reproach him with undervaluing the 
30 greater, and overvaluing the less. And I shall repeat the 
same words to every one whom I meet, young and old, 
citizen and alien, but especially to the citizens, inasmuch as 
they are my brethren. For know that this is the command 
of God ; and I believe that no greater good has ever 
happened in the state than my service to the God. For I do 
nothing but go about persuading you all, old and young alike, 
not to take thought for your persons or your properties, 
but first and chiefly to care about the greatest improvement 
of the soul. I tell you that virtue is not given by money, 
but that ’from virtue comes money and every other good 
of man, public as well as private. This is my teaching, 
and if this is the doctrine which corrupts the youth, I am 
a mischievous person. But if any one says that this is not 
my teaching, he is speaking an untruth. Wherefore, O men 
of Athens, »I say to you, do as Anytus bids or not as Anytus 
bids, and either acquit me or not; but whichever you do, 
understand that I shall never alter my ways, not even if I 
have to die many times. 

Men of Athens, do not interrupt, but hear me ; there was 
an understanding between us that you should hear me to the 
end : I have something moi£ to say, at which you may be 
inclined to cry out; but I believe that to hear me will be 
good for you, and therefore I beg that you will not cry out. 
I would have you know, that if you kill such an one as I am, 

123 

Apology . 

Socrates. 

He must 
always be a 
preacher of 
philosophy. 

‘ Necessity 
is laid 
upon me : * 
‘ I must 
obey God 
rather than 
man.' 

124 

The disinterestedness of Socrates . 

Apology, you will injure yourselves more than you will injure me. 
Socrates. Nothing will injure me, not Meletus nor yet Anytus— they 
Neitheryou cannot, for a bad man is not permitted to injure a better than 
can ever tUS himself. I*do not deny that Anytus may, perhaps, kill him, 
injure me. or drive hkif into exile, or deprive him of civil rights ; and 
he rnay imagine, and others may imagine, that he is inflicting 
a great injury upon him : but there I do not agree. For the 
evil of doing as he is doing — the evil of unjustly taking away 
the life of another— is greater far. 

And now, Athenians, I am not going to argue for my own 
sake, as you may think, but for yours, that you may not sin 
against the God by condemning me, who am his gift to you. 
For if you kill me you will not easily find a successor to me, 

I am the who, if I may use such a ludicrous figure of speech, am a 
th<f Athe- sort given to the state by God ; and the state is 

nian pco- a great and noble steed who is tardy in his motions owing to' 
u^thTmby ver y size, anc * re fi u i res to he stirred into life. I am that 
God, and* gadfly which God has attached to the state, and all day long 31 
they will anc [ [ n a \\ places am always fastening upon you, arousing and 
another, if persuading and reproaching you. You will not easily find 
they kill another like me, and therefore I would advise you to spare 
n u me. I dare say that you may feel out of temper (like a 
person who # is suddenly awakened from sleep), and you think 
that you might easily strike me dead as Anytus advises, and 
then you would sleep on for the remainder of your lives, unless 
God in his care of you sent you another gadfly*. When 
I say that I am given to you by God, the proof of my mission 
is this : — if I had been like other men, I should not have 
neglected all my own concerns or patiently seen the neglect 
of them during all these years, and have been doing yours, 
coming to you individually like a father or elder brother, 
exhorting you to regard virtue ; such conduct, I say, would 
be unlike human nature. If I had gained anything, or if my 
exhortations had been paid, there would have been some 
sense in my doing so ; but now, as you will perceive, not 
even the impudence of my accusers dares to say that I have 
ever exacted or sought pay of apy one ; of that they have no 
witness. And I have a sufficient witness to the truth of what 
I say — my poverty. r 

Some one may wonder why I go about in private giving 

His fearlessness in the performance of public duties . 125 

advice and busying myself with the concerns of others, but 
do not venture to come forward in public and advise the 
state. I will tell you why. You have heard me speak at 
sundry times and in divers places of an oracle or* sign which 
comes to me, and is the divinity which Meletus* Ridicules in 
the indictment. This sign, which is a kind of voice, first 
began to come to me when I was a child ; it always forbids 
but never commands me to do anything which I am going to 
do. This is what deters me from being a politician. And 
rightly, as I think. For I am certain, O men of Athens, that 
if I had engaged in politics, I should have perished long ago, 
and done no good either to you or to myself. And do not 
be offended at my telling you the truth : for the truth is, that 
no man who goes to war with you or any other multitude, 
honestly striving against the many lawless and unrighteous 
32 deeds which are done in a state, will save his life ; he who 
will fight for the right, if he would live even for a brief space, 
must have a private station and not a public one. 

I can give you convincing evidence of what I say, not 
words only, but what you value far more— actions. Let. me 
relate to you a passage of my own life which will prove to you 
that I should never have yielded to injustice from any fear of 
death, and that ‘ as I should have refused to yield * I must have 
died at once. I will tell you a tale of the courts, not very 
interesting perhaps, but nevertheless true. The only office 
of state which I ever held, O men of Athens, was that of 
senator : the tribe Antiochis, which is my tribp, had the pre- 
sidency at the trial of the generals who had not taken up the 
bodies of the slain after the battle of Arginusae ; and you 
proposed to try them in a body, contrary to law, as you all 
thought afterwards ; but at the time I was the only one of the 
Prytanes who was opposed to the illegality, and I gave my 
vote against you ; and when the orators threatened to im- 
peach and arrest me, and you called and shouted, I made up 
my mind that I wduld run the risk, having law and justice 
with me, rather than take part in your injustice because I 
feared imprisonment and death. This happened in the days 
of the democracy. But when the oligarchy of the Thirty was 
in power, they sent for me and Jour others into the rotunda, 
and bade us bring Leon the Salaminian from Salamis, as they 

Apology. 

Socrates. 

The in- 
ternal sign 
always for- 
bade him 
to engage 
in politics ; 
and if he 
had done 
so, he 
would have 
perished 
long ago. 

He had 
shown that 
he would 
sooner die 
than com- 
mit injus- 
tice at the 
trial of the 
generals 
and under 
the tyranny 
of the 
Thirty. 

126 

Apology. 

Socrates. 

He is 

always talk- 
ing to the 
citizens, but 
he teaches 
nothing ; 
he takes no 
pay and has 
no secrets. 

The reason why people delight in talking to hint . 

wanted to put him to death. This was a specimen of the sort 
of commands which they were always giving with the view of 
implicating as many as possible in their crimes ; and then I 
showed, ncft in word only but in deed, that, if I may be 
allowed to ^se such an expression, I cared not a straw for 
death, and that my great and only care was lest I should do 
an unrighteous or unholy thing. For the strong arm of that 
oppressive power did not frighten me into doing wrong ; and 
when we came out of the rotunda the other four went to 
Salamis and fetched Leon, but I went quietly home. For 
which I might have lost my life, had not the power of the 
Thirty shortly afterwards come to an end. And many will 
witness to my words. 

Now do you really imagine that I could have survived all 
these years, if I had led a public life, supposing that like a 
good man I had always maintained the right and had made 
justice, as I ought, the first thing? No indeed, men of 
Athens, neither I nor any other man. But I have been 33 
always the same in all my actions, public as well as private, 
and never have I yielded any base compliance to those who 
are slanderously termed my disciples, or to any other. Not 
that I have any regular disciples. But if any one likes to 
come and hear me while I am pursuing my mission, whether 
he be young or old, he is not excluded. Nor do I converse 
only with those who pay ; but any one, whether he be rich or 
poor, may ask and answer me and listen to my words ; and 
whether he turns out to be a bad man or a good one, neither 
result can be justly imputed to me ; for I never taught or 'pro- 
fessed to teach him anything. And if any one says that he 
has ever learned or heard anything from me in private which 
all the world has not heard, let me tell you that he o is lying. 

But I shall be asked, Why do people delight in continually 
conversing with you ? I have told you already, Athenians, 
the whole truth about this matter : they like to hear the cross- 
examination of the pretenders to wisdom ; ' there is amusement 
in it. Now this duty of cross-examining other men has been 
imposed upon me by God ; and has been signified to me by 
oracles, visions, and in every way in which the will of divine 
power was ever intimated \o any one. This is true, O 
Athenians; or, if not true, would be soon refuted. If I am or 

Who are his accusers ? 

127 

have been corrupting the youth, those of them who are now Apology . 
grown up and have become sensible that I gave them bad Socrates. 
advice in the days of their youth should come forward as 
accusers, and take their revenge; or if they do'not like to 
come themselves, some of their relatives, fathers* brothers, or 
other kinsmen, should say what evil their families have 
suffered at my hands. Now is their time. Many of them I The 
see in the court. There is Crito, who is of the same age and 
of the same deme with myself, and there is Critobulus his son, men of 
whom I also see. Then again there is Lysanias of Sphettus, 
who is the father of Aeschines — he is present ; and also there posedto 
is Antiphon of Cephisus, who is the father of Epigenes ; and have cor ~ 
there are the brothers of several who have associated with me. Income 
There is Nicostratus the son of Theosdotides, and the brother forward 
of Theodotus (now Theodotus himself is dead, and therefore against^ 
he, at any rate, will not seek to stop him) ; and there is him. 
Paralus the son of Demodocus, who had a brother Theages ; 

34 and Adeimantus the son of Ariston, whose brother Plato is 
present ; and Aeantodorus, who is the brother of Apollodorus, 
whom I also see. I might mention a great many others, some 
of whom Meletus should have produced as witnesses in the 
course of his speech ; and let him still produce them, if he has 
forgotten — I will make way for him. And let him say, if he 
has any testimony of the sort which he can produce. Nay, 
Athenians, the very opposite is the truth. For all these are 
ready to .witness on behalf of the corrupter, of the injurer of 
their kindred, as Meletus and Anytus call m<j ; not the cor- 
rujJted youth only — there might have been a motive for that — 
but their uncorrupted elder relatives. Why should they too 
support me with their testimony ? Why, indeed, except for 
the sake of truth and justice, and because they know that I 
am speaking the truth, and that Meletus is a liar. 

Well, Athenians, this and the like of this is all the defence 
which I have to offer. Yet a word more. Perhaps there 
may be some one ^vho is offended at me, when he calls to 
mind how he himself on a similar, or even a less serious 
occasion, prayed and entreated the judges with many tears, 
and how he produced his children in court, which was a 
moving spectacle, together wjfh a host of relations and 
friends ; whereas I, who am probably in danger of my life, 

128 

Apology. 

Socrates. 

He is flesh 
and blood, 
but he will 
not appeal 
to the pity 
of his 

judges : or 
make a 
scene in the 
court such 
as he has 
often wit- 
nessed. 

The judge 
should not 
be influ- 
enced by 
his feel- 
ings, but 
convinced 
by reason. 

He zvill not demean himself by entreaties . 

will do none of these things. The contrast may occur to his 
mind, and he may be set against me, and vote in anger 
because he is displeased at me on this account. Now if there 
be such a pterson among you,— mind, I do not say that there 
is, — to him,I*may fairly reply: My friend, I am a man, and 
like other men, a creature of flesh and blood, and not 'of 
wood or stone/ as Homer says ; and I have a family, yes, 
and sons, O Athenians, three in number, one almost a man, 
and two others who are still young ; and yet I will not bring 
any of them hither in order to petition you for an acquittal. 
And why not? Not from any self-assertion or want of re- 
spect for you. Whether I am or am not afraid of death is 
another question, of which I will not now speak. But, having 
regard to public opinion, I feel that such conduct would be 
discreditable to myself, and to you, and to the whole state. 
One who has reached my years, and who has a name for wis- 
dom, ought not to demean himself. Whether this opinion of 
me be deserved or not, at any rate the world has decided that 
Socrates is in some way superior to other men. And if those 35 
among you who are said to be superior in wisdom and 
courage, and any other virtue, demean themselves in this 
way, how shameful is their conduct ! I have seen men of 
reputation, when they have been condemned, behaving in the 
strangest manner : they seemed to fancy that they were going 
to suffer something dreadful if they died, and that they could 
be immortal if you only allowed them to live ; and I think 
that such are a dishonour to the state, and that any stranger 
coming in would have said of them that the most eminent fnen 
of Athens, to whom the Athenians themselves give honour 
and command, are no better than women. And I say that 
these things ought not to be done by those of us vyho have a 
reputation; and if they are done, you ought not to permit 
them ; you ought rather to show that you are far more disposed 
to condemn the man who gets up a doleful scene and makes 
the city ridiculous, than him who holds hiS peace. 

But, setting aside the question of public opinion, there 
seems to be something wrong in asking a favour of a judge, 
and thus procuring an acquittal, instead of informing and con- 
vincing him. For his duty is, t not to make a present of justice, 
but to give judgment ; and he has sworn that he will judge 

The reward which Socrates truly merits . 

according to the laws, and not according to his own good 
pleasure ; and we ought not to encourage you, nor should 
you allow yourselves to be encouraged, in this habit of perjury 
— there can be no piety in that. Do not then require me to 
do what I consider dishonourable and impious »zyid wrong, 
especially now, when I am being tried for impiety on the 
indictment of Meletus. For if, O men of Athens, by force of 
persuasion and entreaty I could overpower your oaths, then 
I should be teaching you to believe that there are no gods, 
and in defending should simply convict myself of the charge 
of not believing in them. But that is not so — far otherwise. 
For I do believe that there are gods, and in a sense higher 
than that in which any of my accusers believe in them. And 
to you and to God I commit my cause, to be determined by 
you as is best for you and me. 

There are many reasons why I am not grieved, O men of 
36 Athens, at the vote of condemnation. I expected it, and am 
only surprised that the votes are so nearly equal ; for I had 
thought that the majority against me would have been far 
larger; but now, had thirty votes gone over to the other side, 
I should have been acquitted. And I may say, I think, that 
I have escaped Meletus. I may say more; for Without the 
assistance of Anytus and Lycon, any one may see that he 
would nob have had a fifth part of the votes, as the law 
requires, in which case he would have incurred a fine of a 
thouSand drachmae. 

And so he proposes death as the penalty. And what shall 
I propose on my part, O men of Athens? Clearly that 
which is my flue. And what is my due ? What return shall be 
made to the man who has never had the wit to be idle during 
his whole life ; but has been careless of what the many care 
for — wealth, and family interests, and military offices, and 
speaking in the assdfribly, and magistracies, and plots, and 
parties. Reflecting that I was really too honest a man to 
be a politician and live, I did not go where I could do no 
good to you or to myself ; but where I could do the greatest 
good privately to every one of you, thither I went, and sought 
to persuade every man among you that he must look to him- 

VOL. II. K 

129 

Apology . 
Socrates. 

Socrates all 
his life long 
h&s been 
seeking to 
do the 
greatest 
good to the 
Athenians. 

130 

Apology. 

Socrates. 

Should he 
not be re- 
warded 
with main- 
tenance in 
the Pryta- 
neum ? 

The con- 
sciousness 
of inno- 
cence gives 
him confi- 
dence. 

No alterna- 
tive in his» 
own judg- 
ment pre- 
ferable to 
death. 

Socrates accepts his fate . 

self, and seek virtue and wisdom before he looks to his private 
interests, and look to the state before he looks to the interests 
of the state; and that this should be the order which he 
observes in all his actions. What shall be done to such an 
one? Doubtless some good thing, O men of Athens, if he 
has his reward ; and the good should be of a kind suitable to 
him. What would be a reward suitable to a poor man who 
is your benefactor, and who desires leisure that he may 
instruct you ? There can be no reward so fitting as main- 
tenance in the Prytaneum, O men of Athens, a reward which 
he deserves far more than the citizen who has won the prize 
at Olympia in the horse or chariot race, whether the chariots 
were drawn by two horses or by many. For I am in want, 
and he has enough ; and he only gives you the appearance of 
happiness, and I give you the reality. And if 1 am to estimate 
the penalty fairly, I should say that maintenance in the Pry- 37 
taneum is the just return. 

Perhaps you think that I am braving you in what 1 am 
saying now, as in what I said before about the tears and 
prayers. But this is not so. I speak rather because I am 
convinced that I never intentionally wronged any one, 
although I cannot convince you — the time has been too 
short ; if there were a law at Athens, as there is in other 
cities, thaf a capital cause should not be decided in one 
day, then I believe that I should have convinced you. But 
I cannot in a moment refute great slanders; and, as I am 
convinced that I never wronged another, I will assuredly not 
wrong myself. I will not say of myself that I deservff any 
evil, or propose any penalty. Why should I ? Because I 
am afraid of the penalty of death which Meletus proposes? 
When I do not know whether death is a good or e an evil, why 
should I propose a penalty which would certainly be an evil ? 
Shall I say imprisonment ? And why should I live in prison, 
and be the slave of the magistrates of the year — of the Eleven ? 
Or shall the penalty be a fine, and imprisonment until the fine 
is paid? There is the same objection. I should have to lie 
in prison, for money I have none, and cannot pay. And if I 
say exile (and this may possibly be the penalty which you will 
affix), I must indeed be blinded by the love of life, if I am so 
irrational as to expect that when you, who are my own 

The penalty — death . 13 1 

citizens, cannot endure my discourses and words, and have Apology. 
found them so grievous and odious that you will have no Socrates. 
more of them, others are likely to endure me. No indeed, 
men of Athens, that is not very likely. And what a life 
should I lead, at my age, wandering from city* to city, ever 
changing my place of exile, and always being driven out ! 

For I am quite sure that wherever I go, there, as here, the 
young men will flock to me ; and if I drive them away, their 
elders will drive me out at their request ; and if I let them 
come, their fathers and friends will drive me out for their 
sakes. 

Some one will say: Yes, Socrates, but cannot you hold 
your tongue, and then you may go into a foreign city, and no 
one will interfere with you? Now I have great difficulty in 
making you understand my answer to this. For if I tell you For whcr- 
that to do as you say would be a disobedience to the God, 
and therefore that I cannot hold my tongue, you will not must speak 
38 believe that I am serious ; and if I say again that daily to out * 
discourse about virtue, and of those other things about which 
you hear me examining myself and others, is the greatest 
good of man, and that the unexamined life is not worth 
living, you are still less likely to believe me. Yet I say what 
is true, although a thing of which it is hard for me to per- 
suade you. Also, I have never been accustomed to think that 
I deserve to suffer any harm. Had I money I might have 
estimated the offence at what I was able to pay, and not have 
been much the worse. But I have none, aad therefore I 
must ask you to proportion the fine to my means. Well, 
perhaps I could afford a mina, and therefore I propose that 
penalty : Plato, Crito, Critobulus, and Apollodorus, my 
friends here, bid me say thirty minae, and they will be the 
sureties. Let thirty minae be the penalty; for which sum 
they will be ample security to you. 

Not much time will be gaiped, O Athenians, in return for They will 
the evil name which you will get from the detractors of the b ® a ^ c . used 
city, who will say that you killed Socrates, a wise man ; for wise man. 
they will call me wise, even although I am not wise, when 

k 2 

J3 2 

Apology . 

Socrates. 

Why could 
they not 
wait a few 
years? 

The prophecy of Socrates. 

they want to reproach you. If you had waited a little while, 
your desire would have been fulfilled in the course of nature. 
For I am far advanced in years, as you may perceive, and 
not far from death. I am speaking now not to all of you, but 
only to thore who have condemned me to death. And I have 
another thing to say to them : You think that I was convicted 
because I had no words of the sort which would have pro- 
cured my acquittal — I mean, if I had thought fit to leave 
nothing undone or unsaid. Not so; the deficiency which 
led to my conviction was not of words— certainly not. But I 
had not the boldness or impudence or inclination to address 
you as you would have liked me to do, weeping and wailing 
and lamenting, and saying and doing many things which you 
have been accustomed to hear from others, and which, as I 
maintain, are unworthy of me. I thought at the time that I 
ought not to do anything common or mean when in danger : 
nor do I now repent of the style of my defence ; I would 
rather die having spoken after my manner, than speak in 
your manner and live. For neither in war nor yet at law 
ought I or any man to use every way of escaping death. 39 
Often in battle there can be no doubt that if a man will throw 
away his arms, and fall on his knees before his pursuers, 
he may escape death ; and in other dangers there are other 
ways of escaping death, if a man is willing to say and do any- 
thing. The difficulty, my friends, is not to avoid death, but 
to avoid unrighteousness ; for that runs faster than~death. I 
am old and move slowly, and the slower runner has over- 
taken me, and my accusers are keen and quick, and the faster 
runner, who is unrighteousness, has overtaken them. And 
now I depart hence condemned by you to suffer the penalty 
of death, — they too go their ways condemned by the truth 
to suffer the penalty of villainy and wrong ; and I must abide 
by my award— let them abide by theirs. I suppose that these 
things may be regarded as fated,— and I think that they are 
well. 

And now, O men who have condemned me, I would fain 
prophesy to you ; for I am abput to die, and in the hour of 
death men are gifted with prophetic power. And I prophesy 
to you who are my murderers, that immediately after my 
departure punishment far heavier than you have inflicted on 

*33 

The silence of his familiar spirit . 

me will surely await you. Me you have killed because you 
wanted to escape the accuser, and not to give an account of 
your lives. But that will not be as you suppose : far other- 
wise. For I say that there will be more accusers of you than 
there are now ; accusers whom hitherto I have Restrained : 
and as they are younger they will be more inconsiderate with 
you, and you will be more offended at them. If you think 
that by killing men you can prevent some one from censuring 
your evil lives, you are mistaken ; that is not a way of escape 
which is either possible or honourable ; the easiest and the 
noblest way is not to be disabling others, but to be improving 
yourselves. This is the prophecy which I utter before my 
departure to the judges who have condemned me. 

Friends, who would have acquitted me, I would like also 
to talk with you about the thing which has come to pass, while 
the magistrates are busy, and before I go to the place at 
which I must die. Stay then a little, for we may as well talk 
40 with one another while there is time. You are my friends, 
and I should like to show you the meaning of this event which 
has happened to me. O my judges — for you I may truly call 
judges — I should like to tell you of a wonderful circumstance. 
Hitherto the divine faculty of which the internal oracle is the 
source has constantly been in the habit of opposing me even 
about trifles, if I was going to make a slip or error in any 
matter; and now as you see there has come upon me that 
which may be thought, and is generally believed to be, the last 
and*worst evil. But the oracle made no sign # of opposition, 
either when I was leaving my house in the morning, or when 
I was on my way to the court, or while I was speaking, at any- 
thing which I was going to say; and yet I have often been 
stopped in fhe middle of a speech, but now in nothing I either 
said or did touching the matter in hand has the oracle opposed 
me. What do I take to be the explanation of this silence ? 
I will tell you. It ^ an intimation that what has happened 
to me is a good, and that those of us who think that death is 
an evil are in error. For the customary sign would surely 
have opposed me had I been going to evil and not to good. 

Let us reflect in another way, and we shall see that there 
is great reason to hope that death is a good ; for one of two 
things — either death is a state of nothingness and utter 

Apology, 

SOCRATKS. 

They arc 
about to 
slay So- 
crates be- 
cause he 
has been 
their ac- 
cuser : other 
accusers 
will rise up 
and de- 
nounce 
them more 
vehement- 

iy. 

He believes 
that what is 
happening 
to him will 
be good, 
because the 
internal 
oracle gives 
no sign of 
opposition. 

Death 
either a 
good or 
nothing : 

The Homeric heroes. 

i?4 

Apology . 

Socrates. 

— a pro- 
found sleep. 

How 

blessed to 
have a just 
judgment 
passed on 
us ; to con- 
verse with 
Homer and 
Hesiod ; to 
see the 
heroes of 
Troy, and 
to continue 
the search 
after know- 
ledge in 
another 
world ! 

unconsciousness, or, as men say, there is a change and 
migration of the soul from this world to another. Now if 
you suppose that there is no consciousness, but a sleep like 
the sleep of him who is undisturbed even by dreams, death 
will be an Unspeakable gain. For if a person were to select 
the night in which his sleep was undisturbed even by dreams, 
and were to compare with this the other days and nights 
of his life, and then were to tell us how many days and 
nights he had passed in the course of his life better and 
more pleasantly than this one, I think that any man, 1 
will not say a private man, but even the great king will 
not find many such days or nights, when compared with 
the others. Now if death be of such a nature, I say that to 
die is gain ; for eternity is then only a single night. But if 
death is the journey to another place, and there, as men say, 
all the dead abide, what good, O my friends and judges, 
can be greater than this? If indeed when the pilgrim 
arrives in the world below, he is delivered from the pro- 41 
fessors of justice in this world, and finds the true judges 
who are said to give judgment there, Minos and Rhada- 
manthus and Aeacus and Triptolemus, and other sons of 
God who were righteous in their own life, that pilgrimage 
will be worth making. What would not a man give if he 
might converse with Orpheus and Musaeus and Hesiod 
and Homer? Nay, if this be true, let me die again and 
again. I myself, too, shall have a wonderful interest in 
there meeting and conversing with Palamedes, and Ajax 
the son of Telamon, and any other ancient hero who has 
suffered death through an unjust judgment ; and there will 
be no small pleasure, as I think, in comparing my own 
sufferings with theirs. Above all, I shall then ‘be able to 
continue my search into true and false knowledge ; as in this 
world, so also in the next ; and I shall find out who is wise, 
and who pretends to be wise, and is no/.. What would not 
a man give, O judges, to be able to examine the leader of 
the great Trojan expedition; or Odysseus or Sisyphus, or 
numberless others, men and f women too! What infinite 
delight would there be in conversing with them and asking 
them questions! In another world they do not put a man 
to death for asking questions : assuredly not. For besides 

135 

The last word \ 

being happier than we are, they will be immortal, if what is 
said is true. 

Wherefore, O judges, be of good cheer about death, and 
know of a certainty, that no evil can happen to a good man, 
either in life or after death. He and his are ncft neglected 
by the gods ; nor has my own approaching end happened 
by mere chance. But I see clearly that the time had arrived 
when it was better for me to die and be released from 
trouble; wherefore the oracle gave no sign. For which 
reason, also, I am not angry with my condemners, or with 
my accusers ; they have done me no harm, although they 
did not mean to do me any good ; and for this I may gently 
blame them. 

Still I have a favour to ask of them. When my sons are 
grown up, I would ask you, O my friends, to punish them ; 
and I would have you trouble them, as I have troubled you, 
if they seem to care about riches, or anything, more than 
about virtue ; or if they pretend to be something when they 
are really nothing, — then reprove them, as I have reproved 
you, for not caring about that for which they ought to care, 
and thinking that they are something when they are really 
42 nothing. And if you do this, both I and my sons will have 
received justice at your hands. 

The hour of departure has arrived, and we go our ways - 
I to die, and you to live. Which is better God only knows. 

Apology. 

Socrates. 

Do to my 
sons as I 
have done 
to you. 

CRITO. 

INTRODUCTION. 

The Crito seems intended to exhibit the character of Socrates Crito. 
in one light only, not as the philosopher, fulfilling a divine mis- i NT Ronuc. 
sion and trusting in the will of heaven, but simply as the good 1ION * 
citizen, who having been unjustly condemned is willing to give 
up his life in obedience to the laws of the state 

Steph. The days of Socrates are drawing to a close ; the fatal ship Analysis. 

43 has been seen off Sunium, as he is informed by his aged friend 
and contemporary Crito, who visits him before the dawn has 
broken ; he himself has been warned in a dream that on the 

44 third day he must depart. Time is precious, and Crito has come 
early in order to gain his consent to a plan of escape. This 
can be easily accomplished by his friends, who will incur no 

45 danger in making the attempt to save him, but will be disgraced 
for ever if they allow him to perish. He should think of his 
duty to his children, and not play into the hands of his enemies. 

Money is already provided by Crito as well as by Simmias and 

46 others, and he will have no difficulty in finding friends in 
Thessaly and other places. 

Socrates is afraid that Crito is but pressing upon him the 
opinions of the many : whereas, all his life long he has followed 
the dictates of reason only and the opinion of the one wise or 
skilled man. There was a time when Crito himself had allowed 
the propriety of this. And although some one will say * the many 
can kill us,’ that makes no c^fference ; but a good life, in other 
words, a just and honourable life, is alone to be valued. All 
considerations of loss of reputation or injury to his children 
should be dismissed : the only question is whether he would be 

140 

Crito. 

Analysis. 

Analysis 47 - 54 . 

right in attempting to escape. Crito, who is a disinterested 47 
person not having the fear of death before his eyes, shall answer 
this for him. Before he was condemned they had often held dis- 
cussions, in which they agreed that no man should either do evil, 4$ 
or return evif for evil, or betray the right. Are these principles 
to be altered because the circumstances of Socrates are altered ? 
Crito admits that they remain the same. Then is his escape con- 49 
sistent with the maintenance of them ? To this Crito is unable or 
unwilling to reply. 

Socrates proceeds : — Suppose the Laws of Athens to come 50 
and remonstrate with him : they will ask ‘ Why does he seek 
to overturn them?’ and if he replies, ‘they have injured him,* 
will not the Laws answer, ‘Yes, but was that the agreement? 
Has he any objection to make to them which would justify him in 51 
overturning them? Was he not brought into the world and edu- 
cated by their help, and are they not his parents? He might 52 
have left Athens and gone where he pleased, but he has lived 
there for seventy years more constantly than any other citizen.* 
Thus he has clearly shown that he acknowledged the agreement, 
which he cannot now break without dishonour to himself and 
danger to his friends. Even in the course of the trial he might 
have proposed exile as the penalty, but then he declared that he 
preferred dea\h to exile. And whither will he direct his foot- 
steps ? In any well-ordered state the Laws will consider him as 53 
an enemy. Possibly in a land of misrule like Thessaly hq may be 
welcomed at first, and ^ ie unseemly narrative of his escape will 
be regarded by the inhabitants as an amusing tale. But if Vie 
offends them he will have to learn another sort of lesson. Will 
he continue to give lectures in virtue? That would hardly be 
decent. And how will his children be the gainers if he takes 
them into Thessaly, and deprives them of Athenian citizenship ? 54 
Or if he leaves them behind, does he expect that they will be 
better taken care of by his friends because he is in Thessaly? 
Will not true friends care for them equally whether he is alive 
or dead? 

Finally, they exhort him to thiyk of justice first, and of life 
and children afterwards. He may now depart in peace and 
innocence, a sufferer and not a* doer of evil. But if he breaks 
agreements, and returns evil for evil, they will be angry with him 

Did Socrates do well to die ? 14 1 

while he lives ; and their brethren the Laws of the world below Crito. 
will receive him as an enemy. Such is the mystic voice which Analysis. 
is always murmuring in his ears. 

That Socrates was not a good citizen was a charge made Introduc- 
against him during his lifetime, which has been often repeated 
in later ages. The crimes of Alcibiades, Critias, and Charmides, 
who had been his pupils, were still recent in the memory of the 
now restored democracy. The fact that he had been neutral in 
the death-struggle of Athens was not likely to conciliate popular 
good-will. Plato, writing probably in the next generation, under- 
takes the defence of his friend and master in this particular, not 
to the Athenians of his day, but to posterity and the world at 
large. 

Whether such an incident ever really occurred as the visit of 
Crito and the proposal of escape is uncertain : Plato could easily 
have invented far more than that (Phaedr. 275 B ) ; and in the 
selection of Crito, the aged friend, as the fittest person to make 
the proposal to Socrates, we seem to recognize the hand of the 
artist. Whether any one who has been subjected by the laws of 
his country to an unjust judgment is right in attempting to escape, 
is a thesis about which casuists might disagree. Shelley (Prose 
Works, p. 78) is of opinion that Socrates ‘ did well to die/ but not 
for the 4 sophistical’ reasons which Plato has put into his mouth. 

And there would be no difficulty in arguing that Socrates should 
have lived and preferred to a glorious death the good which he 
might still be able to perform. ‘A rhetorician’ would have had 
much to say upon that point ’ (50 B). It may be observed however 
that Plato never intended to answer the question of casuistry, but 
only to exhibit the ideal of patient virtue which refuses to do the 
least evil in order to avoid the greatest, and to show his master 
maintaining in death the opinions which he had professed in his 
life. Not ‘the world/ but the ‘one wise man/ is still the 
paradox of Socrates in his last hours. He must be guided by 
reason, although her conclusions may be fatal to him. The 
remarkable sentiment that the wicked can do neither good 
nor evil is true, if taken in thfe sense, which he means, of moral 
evil; in his own words, ‘the^ cannot make a man wise or 
foolish/ 

142 

Crito. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

The personification of the Laws . 

This little dialogue is a perfect piece of dialectic, in which 
granting the ‘common principle' (49 D), there is no escaping 
from the conclusion. It is anticipated at the beginning by the 
dream of Socrates and the parody of Homer. The personi- 
fication of thp Laws, and of their brethren the Laws in the world 
below, is one of the noblest and boldest figures of speech which 
occur in Plato. 

CRITO. 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE . 
Socrates. Crito. 

Scene : — The Prison of Socrates. 

steph. Socrates. Why have you come at this hour, Crito? it must 
43 be quite early ? 

Crito. Yes, certainly. 

Soc. What is the exact time ? 

Cr . The dawn is breaking. 

Soc. I wonder that the keeper of the prison would let 
you in. 

Cr. He knows me, because I often come, Socrates ; more- 
over, I have done him a kindness. 

Soc. .And are you only just arrived ? 

Cr. No, I came some time ago. 

* Soc. Then why did you sit and say nothing, instead of at 
once awakening me ? 

Cr. I should not have liked myself, Socrates, to be in such 
great trouble and unrest as you are — indeed I should not : I 
have been watching with amazement your peaceful slumbers ; 
and for that reason I did not awake you, because I wished to 
minimize the pain. I have always thought you to be of a 
happy disposition ; but never did I see anything like the easy, 
tranquil manner in which you bear this calamity. 

Soc. Why, Crito, when a man has reached my age he ought 
not to be repining at the approach of death. 

Cr. And yet other old memfind themselves in similar mis- 
fortunes, and age does not prevent them from repining. 

Crito. 

Socrates, 

Crito. 

Crito ap- 
pears at 
break of 
dawn in 
the prison 
of Socrates, 
whom he 
finds 
asleep. 

1 44 

Crito. 

Socrates, 

Crito. 

The ship 
from Delos 
is expected. 

A vision 
of a fair 
woman 
who pro- 
phesies in 
the lan- 
guage of 
Homer that 
Socrates 
will die on 
the third 
day. 

The vision of Socrates . 

Sor/That is true. But you have not told me why you 
come at this early hour. 

Cr ’. I come to bring you a message which is sad and pain- 
ful ; not, as I believe, to yourself, but to all of us who are 
your friends,! and saddest of all to me. 

Soc . What? Has the ship come from Delos, on the arrival 
of which I am to die ? 

Cr. No, the ship has not actually arrived, but she will prob- 
ably be here to-day, as persons who have come from Sunium 
tell me that they left her there ; and therefore to-morrow, So- 
crates, will be the last day of your life. 

Soc. Very well, Crito ; if such is the will of God, I am 
willing ; but my belief is that there will be a delay of a day. 

" Cr . Why do you think so ? 

Soc. I will tell you. I am to die on the day after the arrival 
of the ship. 

Cr. Yes ; that is what the authorities say. 

Soc. But I do not think that the ship will be here until to- 
morrow ; this I infer from a vision which I had last night, or 
rather only just now, when you fortunately allowed me to 
sleep. 

Cr. And what was the nature of the vision ? 

Soc. There appeared to me the likeness of a woman, fair 
and comely, clothed in bright raiment, who called to me and 
said : O Socrates, 

• 

‘The third day hence to fertile Phthia shalt thou go 1 .’ 

V 

Cr. What a singular dream, Socrates ! 

Soc. There can be no doubt about the meaning, Crito, I 
think. 

Cr. Yes; the meaning is only too clear. But, oh ! my be- 
loved Socrates, let me entreat you once more to take my 
advice and escape. For if you die I shall not only lose a 
friend who can never be replaced, but there is another evil : 
people who do not know you and me will believe that I might 
have saved you if I had been willing to give money, but that 
I did not care. Now, can theue be a worse disgrace than 
this — that I should be thought to value money more than the 

44 

Homer, II. ix. 363. 

The devotion of his friends . 

life of a friend ? For the many will not be persuaded that I 
wanted you to escape, and that you refused. 

Soc . But why, my dear Crito, should we care about the 
opinion of the many ? Good men, and they are the only 
persons who are worth considering, will think of ttoese things 
truly as they occurred. 

Cr. But you see, Socrates, that the opinion of the many 
must be regarded, for what is now happening shows that they 
can do the greatest evil to any one who has lost their good 
opinion. 

Soc . I only wish it were so, Crito ; and that the many 
could do the greatest evil ; for then they would also be able 
to do the greatest good — and what a fine thing this would be ! 
But in reality they can do neither ; for they cannot make a 
man either wise or foolish ; and whatever they do is the result 
of chance. 

Cr. Well, I will not dispute with you ; but please to tell me, 
Socrates, whether you are not acting out of regard to me and 
your other friends : are you not afraid that if you escape from 
prison we may get into trouble with the informers for having 
stolen you away, and lose either the whole or a great part of 
45 our property; or that even a worse evil may happen to us? 
Now, if you fear on our account, be at ease ; for in order to 
save you, we ought surely to run this, or even a greater 
risk ; be persuaded, then, and do as I say. 

Soc . Yes, Crito, that is one fear which you mention, but by 
no means the only one. 

Cr. Fear not — there are persons who are willing to get 
you out of prison at no great cost ; and as for the informers, 
they are far from being exorbitant in their demands — a little 
money will satisfy them. My means, which are certainly 
ample, are at your service, and if you have a scruple about 
spending all mine, here are strangers who will give you the 
use of theirs; and one of them, Simmias the Theban, has 
brought a large sum of money for this very purpose ; and 
Cebes and many others are prepared to spend their money in 
helping you to escape. I say, # therefore, do not hesitate on 
our account, and do not say, as you did in the court *, that you 

• 

1 Cp. Apol. 37 C, 1 ). 

VOL. II. L 

*45 

Crito. 

SOCRATKS, 

Crito. 

Crito by a 
variety of 
arguments 
tries to in- 
duce So- 
crates to 
make his 
escape. 
The means 
will be 
easily pro- 
vided and 
without 
danger to • 
any one. 

146 

Crito . 

Socrates, 

Crito. 

He is not 
justified in 
throwing 
away his 
life ; he will 
be desert- 
ing his 
children, 
and will 
bring the 
reproach of 
cowardice 
on his 
friends. 

Socrates is 
one of those 
who must 
be guided* 
by reason. 

The argtiments of Crito. 

will have a difficulty in knowing what to do with yourself any- 
where else. For men will love you in other places to which 
you may go, and not in Athens only; there are friends of 
mine in Thessaly, if you like to go to them, who will value and 
protect you, and no Thessalian will give you any trouble. 
Nor can I think that you are at all justified, Socrates, in 
betraying your own life when you might be saved ; in acting 
thus you arc playing into the hands of your enemies, who 
are hurrying on your destruction. And further I should say 
that you are deserting your own children ; for you might 
bring them up and educate them ; instead of which you go 
away and leave them, and they will have to take their chance ; 
and if they do not meet with the usual fate of orphans, there 
will be small thanks to you. No man should bring children 
into the world who is unwilling to persevere to the end in 
their nurture and education. But you appear to be choosing 
the easier part, not the better and manlier, which would have 
been more becoming in one who professes to care for virtue 
in all his actions, like yourself. And indeed, I am ashamed 
not only of you, but of us who are your friends, when I reflect 
that the whole business will be attributed entirely to our want 
of courage. The trial need never have come on, or might 
have been managed differently; and this last act, or crowning 
folly, will seem to have occurred through our negligence and 
cowardice, who might have saved you, if we had been good for 46 
anything; and you might have saved yourself, for there was 
no difficulty at all. See now, Socrates, how sad and discredit- 
able are the consequences, both to us and you. Make up 
your mind then, or rather have your mind already made up, 
for the time of deliberation is over, and there is only one 
thing to be done, which must be done this very night, and if 
we delay at all will be no longer practicable or possible ; I 
beseech you therefore, Socrates, be persuaded by me, and do 
as I say. 

Soc. Dear Crito, your zeal is invaluable, if a right one ; but 
if wrong, the greater the zeal the greater the danger ; and 
therefore we ought to consider whether I shall or shall not do 
as you say. I 1 or I am and always have been one of those 
natures who must be guided by reason, whatever the reason 
may be which upon reflection appears to me to be the best ; 

The answer of Socrates . 

147 

and now that this chance has befallen me, I cannot repudiate Crito. 
my own words : the principles which I have hitherto honoured Socrates, 
and revered I still honour, and unless we can at once find Cr,to ’ 
other and better principles, I am certain not to agree with you ; 
no, not even if the power of the multitude could inflict many 
more imprisonments, confiscations, deaths, frightening us like 
children with hobgoblin terrors \ What will be the fairest 
way of considering the question? Shall I return to your 
old argument about the opinions of men ? — we were saying 
that some of them are to be regarded, and others not. 

Now were we right in maintaining this before I was con- 
demned ? And has the argument which was once good 
now proved to be talk for the sake of talking— mere childish 
nonsense ? That is what I want to consider with your help, 

Crito : — whether, under my present circumstances, the argu- 
ment appears to be in any way different or not ; and is to be 
allowed by me or disallowed. That argument, which, as I 
believe, is maintained by many persons of authority, was to 
the effect, as I was saying, that the opinions of some men are 
to be regarded, and of other men not to be regarded. Now 
47 you, Crito, are not going to die to-morrow— at least, there is no 
human probability of this— and therefore you are disinterested 
and not liable to be deceived by the circumstances in which 
you are placed. Tell me then, whether I am right in saying Ought he 
that some opinions, and the opinions of some men only, are to |heop?nion 
be valued, and that other opinions, and the opinions of other of the many 
men, are not to be valued. I ask you whether # I was right in 
maintaining this ? 

Cr. Certainly. 

Soc. The good are to be regarded, and not the bad ? 

Cr. Yes. 

Soc. And the opinions of the wise are good, and the 
opinions of the unwise are evil? 

Cr. Certainly. 

Soc. And what was said about another matter? Is the 
pupil who devotes himself to the practice of gymnastics 
supposed to attend to the praise and blame and opinion of 
every man, or of one man inly — his physician or trainer, 
whoever he may be ? . 

1 Cp. Apol. 30 C. 

or of the 
few, of the 
wise or of 
the unwise? 

148 

Crito. 

Socrates, 

Crito. 

The 

opinion of 
the one 
wise man 
is to be 
followed . 

First principles . 

Cr. Of one man only. . 

Soc. And he ought to fear the censure and welcome the 
praise of that one only, and not of the many? 

Cr. Clearly so. 

Soc. And he ought to act and train, and eat and drink in 
the way which seems good to his single master who has 
understanding, rather than according to the opinion of all 
other men put together? 

Cr. True. 

Soc . And if he disobeys and disregards the opinion and 
approval of the one, and regards the opinion of the many 
who have no understanding, will he not suffer evil ? 

Cr. Certainly he will. 

Soc. And what will the evil be, whither tending and what 
affecting, in the disobedient person ? 

Cr. Clearly, affecting the body; that is what is destroyed 
by the evil. 

Soc. Very good ; and is not this true, Crito, of other 
things which we need not separately enumerate? In 
questions of just and unjust, fair and foul, good and evil, 
which are the subjects of our present consultation, ought we 
to follow the opinion of the many and to fear them ; or the 
opinion of the one man who has understanding? ought we 
not to fear and reverence him more than all the rest of the 
world : and if we desert him shall we not destroy and injure 
that principle in us which may be assumed to be improved 
by justice and deteriorated by injustice there is such a 
principle ? 

Cr. Certainly there is, Socrates. 

Soc. Take a parallel instance : — if, acting under the advice 
of those who have no understanding, we destroy that which 
is improved by health and is deteriorated by disease, would 
life be worth having ? And that which has been destroyed 
is— the body? 

Cr. Yes. 

Soc. Could we live, having an evil and corrupted body? 

Cr. Certainly not. 

Soc. And will life be worth having, if that higher part of 
man be destroyed, which is improved by justice and depraved 
by injustice? Do we suppose that principle, whatever it 

149 

The application of them to the present case . 

48 may be in man, which has to do with justice and injustice, to 
be inferior to the body? 

Cr . Certainly not. 

Soc . More honourable than the body? 

Cr. Far more. 

Soc . Then, my friend, we must not regard what the many 
say of us : but what he, the one man who has understanding 
of just and unjust, will say, and what the truth will say. 
And therefore you begin in error when you advise that we 
should regard the opinion of the many about just and unjust, 
good and evil, honourable and dishonourable. — 'Well/ 
some one will say, 'but the many can kill us/ 

Cr. Yes, Socrates; that will clearly be the answer. 

Soc. And it is true : but still I find with surprise that the 
old argument is unshaken as ever. And I should like to 
know whether I may say the same of another proposition — 
that not life, but a good life, is to be chiefly valued ? 

Cr. Yes, that also remains unshaken. 

Soc. And a good life is equivalent to a just and honourable 
one — that holds also ? 

Cr. Yes, it does. 

Soc. h rom these premisses I proceed to argue the question 
whether I ought or ought not to try and escape without the 
consent of the Athenians : and if I am clearly right in 
escaping, then I will make the attempt ; but if not, I will 
abstain. * The other considerations which you mention, of 
money and loss of character and the duty of educating one’s 
children, are, I fear, only the doctrines of the multitude, who 
would be as ready to restore people to life, if they were able, 
as they are to put them to death -and with as little reason. 
But now, since the argument has thus far prevailed, the only 
question which remains to be considered is, whether we 
shall do rightly either in escaping or in suffering others to 
aid in our escape and paying them in money and thanks, 
or whether in reality we shall not do rightly ; and if the 
latter, then death or any other calamity which may ensue 
on my remaining here must not be allowed to enter into the 
calculation. 

Cr . I think that you are right, Socrates ; how then shall 
we proceed ? 

Crito. 

Socrates, 

Crito. 

No matter 
what the 
many say 
of us. 

Not life, 
but a good 
life, to be 
chiefly 
valued. 

Admitting 
these prin- 
ciples, 
ought I to 
try and es- 
cape or not? 

*50 

First principles. 

Crito . 

Socrates, 

Crito. 

May we 
sometimes 
do evil that 
good may 
come? 

May we 
render evil 
for evil ? 

Soc . Let us consider the matter together, and do you 
either refute me if you can, and I will be convinced ; or else 
cease, my dear friend, from repeating to me that I ought to 
escape against the wishes of the Athenians : for I highly 
value your attempts to persuade me to do so, but I may not 
be persuaded against my own better judgment. And now 
please tmconsider my first position, and try how you can 49 
best ansvro: me. 

Cr. I wiffiy 

Soc . Are we to say that we are never intentionally to do 
wrong, or that in one way we ought and in another way we 
ought not to do wrong, or is doing wrong always evil and 
dishonourable, as I was just now saying, and as has been 
already acknowledged by us ? Are all our former admis- 
sions which were made within a few days to be thrown 
away ? And have we, at our age, been earnestly discoursing 
with one another all our life long only to discover that we 
are no better than children? Or, in spite of the opinion of 
the many, and in spite of consequences whether better or 
worse, shall we insist on the truth of what was then said, 
that injustice is always an evil and dishonour to him who 
acts unjustly ? Shall we say so or not ? 

Cr. Yes. 

Soc . Then we must do no wrong ? 

Cr . Certainly not. 

Soc. Nor when injured injure in return, as the many 
imagine; for we must injure no one at all 1 ? 

Cr. Clearly not. 

Soc . Again, Crito, may we do evil ? 

Cr. Surely not, Socrates. 

Soc. And what of doing evil in return for evil, which is the 
morality of the many — is that just or not? 

Cr. Not just. 

Soc. For doing evil to another is the same as injuring 
him? 

Cr. Very true. 

Soc. Then we ought not to Retaliate or render evil for evil 
to any one, whatever evil we may have suffered from him. 

e.g. cp. Rep. i. 335 E. 

The address of the Laws . 151 

But I would have you consider, Crito, whether you really Crito. 
mean what you are saying. For this opinion has never been Socrates, 
held, and never will be held, by any considerable number of CRlTa 
persons ; and those who are agreed and those who are not 
agreed upon this point have no common ground, and can 
only despise one another when they see how widely they 
differ. Tell me, then, whether you agree with and assent to Or is evil 
my first principle, that neither injury nor retaliation nor ^^ecmed 
warding off evil by evil is ever right. And shall that be the evil? Are 
premiss of our argument? Or do you decline and dissent youoft . h ® 

1 0 lit- same mmd 

from this? For so I have ever thought, and continue to as formerly 
think; but, if you are of another opinion, let me hear what ab °utaii 
you have to say. I f, however, you remain of the same mind 
as formerly, I will proceed to the next step. 

Cr. You may proceed, for I have not changed my mind. Crito as- 
Soc. Then I will go on to the next point, which may be ^ lSl ^ 
put in the form of a question Ought a man to do what he Socrates 8 ^ 
admits to be right, or ought he to betray the right ? desert or 

Cr. He ought to do what he thinks right. not ‘ 

Soc. But if this is true, what is the application ? In 
50 leaving the prison against the will of the Athenians, do I 
wrong any? or rather do I not wrong those whom I ought 
least to wrong? Do I not desert the principles which were 
acknowledged by us to be just — what do you say? 

Cr. I cannot tell, Socrates ; for I do not know. 

Soc. Then consider the matter in this way Imagine that The Laws 
I am about to play truant (you may call the proceeding by 
any name which you like), and the laws and the government him.— Can 
come and interrogate me: 'Tell us, Socrates/ they say; ? n S ^j e c ^ xlst 
' what are you about ? are you not going by an act of yours i aw j S set 
to overturn us— the laws, and the whole state, as far as in aside? 
you lies? Do you imagine that a state can subsist and not 
be overthrown, in which the decisions of law have no power, 
but are set aside and trampled upon by individuals?’ What 
will be our answer, Crito, to these and the like words ? 

Any one, and especially a rhetorician, will have a good deal 
to say on behalf of the law \^hich requires a sentence to be* 
carried out. He will argue that this law should not be set 
aside; and shall we reply, 1 Yes* ; but the state has injured us 
and given an unjust sentence.’ Suppose I say that? 

152 

Crito. 

Socrates, 

Crito. 

Has he any 
fault to find 
with them ? 

No man has 
any right 
to strike a 
blow at his 
country any 
more than 
at his 
father or 
mother. 

The address of the Laws . 

Cr. Very good, Socrates. 

Soc. 'And was that our agreement with you?’ the law 
would answer ; ' or were you to abide by the sentence of the 
state ? * And if I were to express my astonishment at their 
words, the# law would probably add : ' Answer, Socrates, 
instead of opening your eyes — you are in the habit of asking 
and answering questions. Tell us, — What complaint have 
you to make against us which justifies you in attempting to 
destroy us and the state ? In the first place did we not 
bring you into existence ? Your father married your mother 
by our aid and begat you. Say whether you have any ob- 
jection to urge against those of us who regulate marriage?’ 
None, I should reply. 'Or against those of us who after 
birth regulate the nurture and education of children, in 
which you also were trained ? Were not the laws, which 
have the charge of education, right in commanding your 
father to train you in music and gymnastic?* Right, I 
should reply. 'Well then, since you were brought into the 
world and nurtured and educated by us, can you deny in the 
first place that you are our child and slave, as your fathers 
were before you ? And if this is true you are not on equal 
terms with 11s ; nor can you think that you have a right to do 
to us what we are doing to you. Would you have any right 
to strike or revile or do any other evil to your father or your 
master, if you had one, because you have been struck or 
reviled by him, or received some other evil at his hands? — 
you would noj say this? And because we think right to 5 1 
destroy you, do you think that you have any right to destroy 
us in return, and your country as far as in you lies? Will 
you, O professor of true virtue, pretend that you are justified 
in this? Has a philosopher like you failed to discover that 
our country is more to be valued and higher and holier far 
than mother or father or any ancestor, and more to be re- 
garded in the eyes of the gods and of men of understanding? 
also to be soothed, and gently and reverently entreated when 
angry, even more than a father, and either to be persuaded, 
’or if not persuaded, to be obeyed? And when we are 
punished by her, whether with imprisonment or stripes, the 
punishment is to be endured, in silence ; and if she lead us 
to wounds or death in battle, thither we follow as is right ; 

* Listen to us , Socrates' 

153 

neither may any one yield or retreat or leave his rank, but Crito. 
whether in battle or in a court of law, or in any other place, Socrates, 
he must do what his city and his country order him ; or he Crito * 
must change their view of what is just : and if he may do no 
violence to his father or mother, much less may he do 
violence to his country.’ What answer shall we make to 
this, Crito? Do the laws speak truly, or do they not? 

Cr. I think that they do. 

Soc. Then the laws will say: 'Consider, Socrates, if we 
are speaking truly that in your present attempt you are 
going to do us an injury. For, having brought you into 
the world, and nurtured and educated you, and given you 
and every other citizen a share in every good which we had 
to give, we further proclaim to any Athenian by the liberty 
which we allow him, that if he docs not like us when he has 
become of age and has seen the ways of the city, and made 
our acquaintance, he may go where he pleases and take his 
goods with him. None of us laws will forbid him or interfere 
with him. Any one who does not like us and the city, and The Laws 
who wants to emigrate to a colony or to any other city, may J l 1 g B ^ s that 
go where he likes, retaining his property. But he who has made an 
experience of the manner in which we order justice and ad- impl,ed 

. . .. . . . agreement 

minister the state, and still remains, has entered into an %vith them 
implied contract that he will do as we command him. And wh,ch he 

..... . .... ~ is not at 

he who disobeys us is, as we maintain, thrice wrong; first, liberty to 

because' in disobeying us he is disobeying his parents; break at his 

secondly, because we are the authors of his education ; pleasurc ‘ 

thirdly, because he has made an agreement with us that he 

52 will duly obey our commands ; and he neither obeys them 

nor convinces us that our commands are unjust ; and we do 

not rudely impose them, but give him the alternative of 

obeying or convincing us;— that is what we offer, and he 

does neither. 

* These arc the sort of accusations to which, as we were 
saying, you, Socrates, will be exposed if you accomplish 
your intentions ; you, above all other Athenians.’ Suppose . 
now I ask, why I rather <Jian anybody else? they will 
justly retort upon me that I above all other men have 
acknowledged the agreement* ' There is clear proof,’ 
they will say, 'Socrates, that we and the city were not dis- 

*54 

Crito. 

Socrates, 

Crito. 

This agree- 
ment he is 
now going 
to break. 

The address of the Laws. 

pleasing to you. Of all Athenians you have been the most 
constant resident in the city, which; as you never leave, you 
may be supposed to love 1 . For you never went out of the 
city either to see the games, except once when you went to 
the Isthmus, or to any other place unless when you were on 
military service ; nor did you travel as other men do. Nor 
had you any curiosity to know other states or their laws : 
your affections did not go beyond us and our state ; we were 
your special favourites, and you acquiesced in our govern- 
ment of you ; and here in this city you begat your children, 
which is a proof of your satisfaction. Moreover, you might 
in the course of the trial, if you had liked, have fixed the 
penalty at banishment; the state which refuses to let you go 
now would have let you go then. But you pretended that you 
preferred death to exile 2 , and that you were not unwilling to 
die. And now you have forgotten these fine sentiments, 
and pay no respect to us the laws, of whom you are the 
destroyer; and are doing what only a miserable slave would 
do, running away and turning your back upon the compacts 
and agreements which you made as a citizen. And first of 
all answer this very question : Are we right in saying that 
you agreed to be governed according to us in deed, and 
not in word only? Is that true or not?' How shall we 
answer, Crito? Must wc not assent? 

Cr. We cannot help it, Socrates. 

Soc . Then will they not say : ‘You, Socrates, are breaking 
the covenants and agreements which you made with us at 
your leisure, not in any haste or under any compulsion or 
deception, but after you have had seventy years to think 
of them, during which time you were at liberty to leave 
the city, if we were not to your mind, or if our covenants 
appeared to you to be unfair. You had your choice, and 
might have gone either to Lacedaemon or Crete, both which 
states are often praised by you for their good government, 
or to some other Hellenic or foreign state. Whereas you, 55 
.above all other Athenians, seemed to be so fond of the state, 
or, in other words, of us her laws (and who would care about 
a state which has no laws?), that you never stirred out of her; 

1 Cp. Phaedr. 230 C. 

3 Cp. Apol. 37 D. 

‘ Listen to tis , Socrates' 

*55 

the halt, the blind, the maimed were not more stationary Crito. 
in her than you were. And now you run away and forsake Socrates. 
your agreements. Not so, Socrates, if you will take our 
advice ; do not make yourself ridiculous by escaping out of 
the city. 

‘ For just consider, if you transgress and err in this sort of if he does 
way, what good will you do either to yourself or to your 
friends? That your friends will be driven into exile and friends and 
deprived of citizenship, or will lose their property, is hj m - 
tolerably certain ; and you yourself, if you fly to one of the seif, 
neighbouring cities, as, for example, Thebes or Megara, 
both of which are well governed, will come to them as an 
enemy, Socrates, and their government will be against you, 
and all patriotic citizens will cast an evil eye upon you as 
a subverter of the laws, and you will confirm in the minds of 
the judges the justice of their own condemnation of you. 

For he who is a corrupter of the laws is more than likely to 
be a corrupter of the young and foolish portion of mankind. 

Will you then flee from well-ordered cities and virtuous 
men ? and is existence worth having on these terms ? Or 
will you go to them without shame, and talk to them, 
Socrates? And what will you say to them? What you 
say here about virtue and justice and institutions and laws 
being the best things among men ? Would that be decent 
of you? # Surely not. But if you go away from well- 
governed states to Crito’s friends in Thessaly, where there 
is great disorder and licence, they will be charmed to hear 
the tale of your escape from prison, set off with ludicrous 
particulars of the manner in which you were wrapped in a 
goatskin or some other disguise, and metamorphosed as the 
manner is of runaways ; but will there be no one to remind 
you that in your old age you were not ashamed to violate 
the most sacred laws from a miserable desire of a little more 
life ? Perhaps not, if you keep them in a good temper ; but 
if they are out of temper you will hear many degrading 
things ; you will live, but how ? — as the flatterer of all men, • 
and the servant of all men ; f and doing what ? — eating and 
drinking in Thessaly, having gone abroad in order that you 
may get a dinner. And where will be your fine sentiments 
54 about justice and virtue ? Say that you wish to live for the 

There is no answer . 

156 

Crito. 

Socrates, 

Crito. 

Let him 
think of 
justice first, 
and of life 
and chil- 
dren after- 
wards. 

The mystic 
voice. 

sake of your children —you want to bring them up and 
educate them— will you take them into Thessaly and deprive 
them of Athenian citizenship? Is this the benefit which 
you will confer upon them? Or are you under the im- 
pression th # at they will be better cared for and educated 
here if you are still alive, although absent from them ; for 
your friends will take care of them ? Do you fancy that if 
you are an inhabitant of Thessaly they will take care of them, 
and if you are an inhabitant of the other world that they 
will not take care of them? Nay; but if they who call 
themselves friends are good for anything, they will— to be 
sure they will. 

1 Listen, then, Socrates, to us who have brought you up. 
Think not of life and children first, and of justice afterwards, 
but of justice first, that you may be justified before the 
princes of the world below. For neither will you nor any 
that belong to you be happier or holier or juster in this life, 
or happier in another, if you do as Crito bids. Now you 
depart in innocence, a sufferer and not a doer of evil ; a 
victim, not of the laws but of men. But if you go forth, 
returning evil for evil, and injury for injury, breaking the 
covenants and agreements which you have made with us, 
and wronging those whom you ought least of all to wrong, 
that is to say, yourself, your friends, your country, and us, 
we shall be angry with you while you live, and our brethren, 
the laws in the world below, will receive you as an enemy; 
for they will khow that you have done your best to destroy 
us. Listen, then, to us and not to Crito/ 

This, dear Crito, is the voice which I seem to hear mur- 
muring in my ears, like the sound of the flute in the ears of 
the mystic ; that voice, I say, is humming in my ears, and 
prevents me from hearing any other. And I know that 
anything more which you may say will be vain. Yet speak, 
if you have anything to say. 

Cr . I have nothing to say, Socrates. 

Soc. Leave me then, Crito, to fulfil the will of God, and to 
follow whither he leads. 

PHAEDO. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Steph. After an interval of some months or years, and at Phlius, a 
57 town of Peloponnesus, the tale of the last hours of Socrates is 
narrated to Echecrates and other Phliasians by Phaedo the 
‘ beloved disciple.' The Dialogue necessarily takes the form of a 

58 narrative, because Socrates has to be described acting as well as 
speaking. The minutest particulars of the event are interesting 
to distant friends, and the narrator has an equal interest in them. 

During the voyage of the sacred ship to and from Delos, which 
has occupied thirty, days, the execution of Socrates has been 
deferred. (Cp. Xen. Mem. iv. 8. 2.) The time has been passed by 

59 him in conversation with a select company of disciples. But now 
the holy season is over, and the disciples meet earlier than usual 
in order that they may converse with Socrates for the last time. 
Those who were present, and those who might have been 
expected to be present, are mentioned by name. There are 
Simmia3 and Cebes (Crito 45 B), two disciples of Philolaus whom 
Socrates ‘by his enchantments has attracted froifi Thebes' (Mem. 
iii. 11. 17), Crito the aged friend, the attendant of the prison, who 
is as good as a friend— these take part in the conversation. 
There are present also, Hermogenes, from whom Xenophon 
derived his information about the trial of Socrates (Mem. iv. 8. 4), 
the ‘madman' Apollodorus (Symp. 173 D), Euclid and Terpsion 
from Megara (cp. Theaet. sub init.), Ctesippus, Antisthenes, 
Mencxenus, and some other less- known members of the Socratic 
circle, all of whom are silent auditors. Aristippus, Cleombrotus, 

60 and Plato are noted as absent. Almost as soon as the friends of 
Socrates enter the prison Xanthippe and her children are sent 
home in the care of one of Crito’s servants. Socrates himself has 
just been released from chains, and is led by this circumstance to 

Phaedo . 
Analysis. 

i6o 

Phaedo. 

Analysis. 

Analysis 60-64. 

make the natural remark that ‘ pleasure follows pain.’ (Observe 
that Plato is preparing the way for his doctrine of the alternation 
of opposites.) 4 Aesop would have represented them in a fable as 
a two-headed creature of the gods.’ The mention of Aesop 
reminds Cebfcs of a question which had been asked by Evenus 
the poet (cp. Apol. 20 A}: ‘Why Socrates, who was not a 
poet, while in prison had been putting Aesop into verse ? ’ — ‘ Be- 
cause several times in his life he had been warned in dreams that 61 
he should practise music ; and as he was about to die and was not 
certain of what was meant, he wished to fulfil the admonition in 
the letter as well as in the spirit, by writing verses as well as by 
cultivating philosophy. Tell this to Evenus ; and say that 1 would 
have him follow me in death.’ ‘ He is not at all the sort of man to 
comply with your request, Socrates.’ ‘ Why, is he not a philo- 
sopher?* ‘Yes.’ ‘Then he will be willing to die, although he 
will not take his own life, for that is held to be unlawful.’ 

Ccbes asks why suicide is thought not to be right, if death is to 62 
be accounted a good? Well, (1) according to one explanation, 
because man is a prisoner, who must not open the door of his 
prison and run away— this is the truth in a ‘mystery.’ Or (2) 
rather, because he is not his own property, but a possession of 
the gods, and has no right to make away with that which does 
not belong to him. But why, asks Ccbes, if he is a possession of 
the gods, should he wish to die and leave them ? for he is under 
their protection ; and surely he cannot take better care of himself 
than they take of him. Simmias explains that Ccbes is really 63 
referring to Socrates, whom they think too unmoved at the 
prospect of leaving the gods and his friends. Socrates answers 
that he is going to other gods who are wise and good, and 
perhaps to better friends ; and he professes that he is ready to 
defend himself against the charge of Cebes. The company shall 
be his judges, and he hopes that he will be more successful in 
convincing them than he had been in convincing the court. 

The philosopher desires death— which the wicked world will 64 
insinuate that he also deserves : and perhaps he does, but not in 
any sense which they are capable of understanding. Enough of 
them : the real question is, Wh&t is the nature of that death 
which he desires? Death is the separation of soul and body— 
and the philosopher desires such a separation. He would like to 

Analysis 64 - 73 . 

be freed from the dominion of bodily pleasures and of the senses, 

65 which are always perturbing his mental vision. He wants to get 
rid of eyes and ears, and with the light of the mind only to 
behold the light of truth. All the evils and impurities and neces- 

66 sides of men come from the body. And death separates him from 
these corruptions, which in life he cannot wholly lay aside. Why 

67 then should he repine when the hour of separation arrives ? 
Why, if he is dead while he lives, should he fear that other death, 

68 through which alone he can behold wisdom in her purity ? 

Besides, the philosopher has notions of good and evil unlike 
those of other men. For they are courageous because they are 

69 afraid of greater dangers, and temperate because they desire 
greater pleasures. But he disdains this balancing of pleasures 
and pains, which is the exchange of commerce and not of virtue. 
All the virtues, including wisdom, are regarded by him only as 
purifications of the soul. And this was the meaning of the 
founders of the mysteries when they said, ‘ Many are the wand- 
bearers but few are the mystics.' (Cp. Matt. xxii. 14 : ‘ Many are 
called, but few are chosen.') And in the hope that he is one of 
these mystics, Socrates is now departing. This is his answer to 
any one who charges him with indifference at the prospect of 
leaving the gods and his friends. 

70 Still, a fear is expressed that the soul upon leaving the body 
may vanish away like smoke or air. Socrates in answer appeals 
first of all to the old Orphic tradition that the souls of the dead 
are in the world below, and that the living come from them. 
This he attempts to found on a philosophical assumption that 

7 1 all opposites— e. g. less, greater; weaker, stronger; sleeping, 
waking; life, death— are generated out of each other. Nor can 
the process of generation be only a passage from living to dying, 

72 for then all would end in death. The perpetual sleeper (En- 
dymion) would be no longer distinguished from the rest of 
mankind. The circle of nature is not complete unless the living 
come from the dead as well as pass to them. 

The Platonic doctrine of reminiscence is then adduced as a 
confirmation of the pre-existence of the soul. Some proofs of« 

73 this doctrine are demanded. Cfhe proof given is the same as that 
of the Meno (82 foil.), and is derived from the latent knowledge of 
mathematics, which may be elicited from an unlearned person 

VOL. II. M 

161 

Phaedo. 

Avai/ysir. 

162 

Phaedo . 
Analysis. 

Analysis 73 - 80 . 

when a diagram is presented to him. Again, there is a power of 
association, which from seeing Simmias may remember Cebes, or 
from seeing a picture of Simmias may remember Simmias. The 74 
lyre may recall the player of the lyre, and equal pieces of wood 
or stone may be associated with the higher notion of absolute 
equality. But here observe that material equalities fall short of 
the conception of absolute equality with which they are com- 
pared, and which is the measure of them. And the measure or 
standard must be prior to that which is measured, the idea of 75 
equality prior to the visible equals. And if prior to them, then 
prior also to the perceptions of the senses which recall them, and 
therefore either given before birth or at birth. But all men have 76 
not this knowledge, nor have any without a process of remi- 
niscence ; which is a proof that it is not innate or given at birth, 
unless indeed it was given and taken away at the same instant. 
But if not given to men in birth, it must have been given before 
birth- this is the only alternative which remains. And if we had 
ideas in a former state, then our souls must have existed and 
must have had intelligence in a former state. The pre-existence 77 
of the soul stands or falls with the doctrine of ideas. 

It is objected by Simmias and Cebes that these arguments only 
prove a former and not a future existence. Socrates answers this 
objection by recalling the previous argument, in which he had 
shown that the living come from the dead. But the fear that the 
soul at departing may vanish into air (especially if there is a wind 
blowing at the time) has not yet been charmed away. ' He pro- 78 
ceeds: When we fear that the soul will vanish away, let us ask 
ourselves what is that which we suppose to be liable to dis- 
solution ? Is it the simple or the compound, the unchanging or 
the changing, the invisible idea or the visible object of sense? 
Clearly the latter and not the former ; and therefore not the soul, 79 
which in her own pure thought is unchangeable, and only when 
using the senses descends into the region of change. Again, the 
soul commands, the body serves : in this respect too the soul is 80 
akin to the divine, and the body to the mortal. And in every 
.point of view the soul is the image of divinity and immortality, 
and the body of the human and mortal. And whereas the body is 
liable to speedy dissolution, the soul is almost if not quite indis- 
soluble. (Cp. Tim. 41 A.) Yet even the body may be preserved 

Analysis 80 - 85 . 

for ages by the embalmer’s art : how unlikely, then, that the soul 
will perish and be dissipated into air while on her way to the 
good and wise God ! She has been gathered into herself, holding 

81 aloof from the body, and practising death all her life long, and she 
is now finally released from the errors and follies and passions of 
men, and for ever dwells in the company of the gods. 

But the soul which is polluted and engrossed by the corporeal, 
and has no eye except that of the senses, and is weighed down 
by the bodily appetites, cannot attain to this abstraction. In her 
fear of the world below she lingers about the sepulchre, loath to 
leave the body which she loved, a ghostly apparition, saturated 
with sense, and therefore visible. At length entering into some 

82 animal of a nature congenial to her former life of sensuality or 
violence, she takes the form of an ass, a wolf or a kite. And of 
these earthly souls the happiest are those who have practised 
virtue without philosophy ; they are allowed to pass into gentle 
and social natures, such as bees and ants. (Cp. Rep. x. 619 C, 
Meno 100 A.) But only the philosopher who departs pure is 
permitted to enter the company of the gods. (Cp. Phaedrus 249.) 
This is the reason why he abstains from fleshly lusts, and not 
because he fears loss or disgrace, which is the motive of other 

83 men. He too has been a captive, and the willing agent of his 
own captivity. But philosophy has spoken to him, and he has 
heard her voice ; she has gently entreated him, and brought him 
out of the ‘ miry clay,* and purged away the mists of passion and 
the illusions of sense which envelope him ; his sojil has escaped 
from the influence of pleasures and pains, which are like nails 

84 fastening her to the body. To that prison-house she will not 
return ; and therefore she abstains from bodily pleasures— not 
from a desire of having more or greater ones, but because she 
knows that only when calm and free from the dominion of the 
body can she behold the light of truth. 

Simmias and Cebes remain in doubt ; but they are unwilling to 
raise objections at such a time. Socrates wonders at their 
reluctance. Let them regard him rather as the swan, who, 

85 having sung the praises of Apojlo all his life long, sings at his 
death more lustily than ever. (Cp. 60 D.) Simmias acknow- 
ledges that there is cowardice in not probing truth to the bottom. 
4 And if truth divine and inspired is not to be had, then let a man 

163 

Phaedo . 
Analysis. 

M 2 

164 Analysis 85 - 93 . 

Phatdo . take the best of human notions, and upon this frail bark let him 

AnalVsis. sail through life/ He proceeds to state his difficulty : It has 86 

been argued that the soul is invisible and incorporeal, and 
therefore immortal, and prior to the body. But is not the soul 
acknowledged to be a harmony, and has she not the same 
relation to the body, as the harmony— which like her is invisible 
— has to the lyre ? And yet the harmony does not survive the 

lyre. Cebes has also an objection, which like Simmias he ex- 

presses in a figure. He is willing to admit that the soul is more 
lasting than the body. But the more lasting nature of the soul 87 
does not prove her immortality ; for after having worn out many 
bodies in a single life, and many more in successive births and 
deaths, she may at last perish, or, as Socrates afterwards restates 
the objection, the very act of birth may be the beginning of her 
death, and her last body may survive her, just as the coat of an 
old weaver is left behind him after he is dead, although a man is 88 
more lasting than his coat. And he who would prove the im- 
mortality of the soul, must prove not only that the soul outlives 
one or many bodies, but that she outlives them all. 

The audience, like the chorus in a play, for a moment interpret 
the feelings of the actors ; there is a temporary depression, and 89 
then the enquiry is resumed. It is a melancholy reflection that 
arguments, like men, are apt to be deceivers; and those who 
have been often deceived become distrustful both of arguments 
and of friends. But this unfortunate experience should not make 
us either haters of men or haters of arguments. The want of 90 
health and truth is not in the argument, but in ourselves. 
Socrates, who is about to die, is sensible of his own weakness ; 91 
he desires to be impartial, but he cannot help feeling that he has 
too great an interest in the truth of the argument. And therefore 
• he would have his friends examine and refute him, if they think 

that he is in error. 

At his request Simmias and Cebes repeat their objections. 
They do not go to the length of denying the pre-existence of 92 
ideas. Simmias is of opinion that the soul is a harmony of the 
body. But the admission of the pre-existence of ideas, and 
therefore of the soul, is at variance with this. (Cp. a parallel 
difficulty in Theaet. 203, 204.) For a harmony is an effect, 93 
whereas the soul is not an effect, but a cause ; a harmony follows, 

Analysis 93-98. 165 

but the soul leads ; a harmony admits of degrees, and the soul Phaedo . 
has no degrees. Again, upon the supposition that the soul is Analysis. 
a harmony, why is one soul better than another ? Are they more 
or less harmonized, or is there one harmony within another? 

94 But the soul does not admit of degrees, and cannot therefore be 
more or less harmonized. Further, the soul is often engaged in 
resisting the affections of the body, as Homer describes Odysseus 

95 ‘ rebuking his heart.’ Could he have written this under the idea 
that the soul is a harmony of the body? Nay rather, are we not 
contradicting Homer and ourselves in affirming anything of the 
sort? 

The goddess Harmonia, as Socrates playfully terms the argu- 
ment of Simmias, has been happily disposed of; and now an 
answer has to be given to the Theban Cadmus. Socrates re- 

96 capitulates the argument of Cebes, which, as he remarks, involves 
the whole question of natural growth or causation ; about this he 
proposes to narrate his own mental experience. When he was 
young he had puzzled himself with physics : he had enquired 
into the growth and decay of animals, and the origin of thought, 
until at last he began to doubt the self-evident fact that growth 
is the result of eating and drinking; and so he arrived at the 
conclusion that he was not meant for such enquiries. Nor was 
he less perplexed with notions of comparison and number. At 
first he had imagined himself to understand differences of greater 
and less, and to know that ten is two more than eight, and the 
like. But now those very notions appeared to him to contain a 

97 contradiction. For how can one be divided into*two? or two be 
compounded into one? These are difficulties which Socrates 
cannot answer. Of generation and destruction he knows nothing. 

But he has a confused notion of another method in which matters 
of this sort are to be investigated. (Cp. Rep. iv. 435 D; vii. 

533 A ; Charm. 170 foil.) 

Then he heard some one reading out of a book of Anaxagoras, 
that mind is the cause of all things. And he said to himself ; If 
mind is the cause of all things, surely mind must dispose them all 

98 for the best. The new teacher will show me this ‘ order of the* 
best * in man and nature. Ho\fc great had been his hopes and how 
great his disappointment ! For he found that his new friend was 
anything but consistent in his use of mind as a cause, and that he 

1 66 . Analysis 98 - 102 . 

Phaedo . soon introduced winds, waters, and other eccentric notions. (Cp. 

Analysis. Arist. Metaph. i. 4, 5.) It was as if a person had said that Socrates 

is sitting here because he is made up of bones and muscles, 99 
instead of telling the true reason -that he is here because the 
Athenians have thought good to sentence him to death, and he has 
thought good to await his sentence. Had his bones and muscles 
been left by him to their own ideas of right, they would long ago 
have taken themselves off. But surely there is a great confusion 
of the cause and condition in all this. And this confusion also 
leads people into all sorts of erroneous theories about the position 
and motions of the earth. None of them know how much stronger 
than any Atlas is the power of the best. But this ‘best’ is still 
undiscovered ; and in enquiring after the cause, we can only hope 
to attain the second best. 

Now there is a danger in the contemplation of the nature of 
things, as there is a danger in looking at the sun during an eclipse, 100 
unless the precaution is taken of looking only at the image reflected 
in the water, or in a glass. (Cp. Laws x. 897 D ; Rep. vii. 516 foil.) 

‘I was afraid,’ says Socrates, ‘that I might injure the eye of the 
soul. I thought that I had better return to the old and safe method 
of ideas. Though I do not mean to say that he who contemplates 
existence through the medium of ideas sees only through a glass 
darkly, any more than he who contemplates actual effects.’ 

If the existence of ideas is granted to him, Socrates is of opinion 
that he will then have no difficulty in proving the immortality of 
the soul. He will only ask for a further admission -that beauty 
is the cause of' the beautiful, greatness the cause of the great, 
smallness of the small, and so on of other things. This is a safe 101 
and simple answer, which escapes the contradictions of greater 
and less (greater by reason of that which is smaller !), of addition 
and subtraction, and the other difficulties of relation. These 
subtleties he is for leaving to wiser heads than his own ; he prefers 
to test ideas by the consistency of their consequences, and, if 
asked to give an account of them, goes back to some higher idea or 
hypothesis which appears to him to be the best, until at last he 
.arrives at a resting-place. (Rep. vi. 510 foil. ; Phil. 16 foil.) 

The doctrine of ideas, which hai long ago received the assent of 102 
the Socratic circle, is now affirmed by the Phliasian auditor to 
command the assent of any man of sense. The narrative is con- 

Analysis 102- 107. 

tinued ; Socrates is desirous of explaining how opposite ideas may 
appear to co-exist but do not really co-exist in the same thing or 
person. For example, Simmias may be said to have greatness 
and also smallness, because he is greater than Socrates and less 
than Phaedo. And yet Simmias is not really great aifd also small, 
but only when compared to Phaedo and Socrates. I use the 
illustration, says Socrates, because I want to show you not only 
that ideal opposites exclude one another, but also the opposites in 
us. I, for example, having the attribute of smallness remain small, 
and cannot become great : the smallness which is in me drives out 

i°3 greatness. 

One of the company here remarked that this was inconsistent 
with the old assertion that opposites generated opposites. But 
that, replies Socrates, was affirmed, not of opposite ideas either in 
us or in nature, but of opposition in the concrete— not of life and 
death, but of individuals living and dying. When this objection 
has been removed, Socrates proceeds : This doctrine of the mutual 
exclusion of opposites is not only true of the opposites themselves, 
but of things which are inseparable from them. For example, 
cold and heat are opposed ; and fire, which is inseparable from 
heat, cannot co-exist with cold, or snow, which is inseparable 
from cold, with heat. Again, the number three excludes the 

104 number four, because three is an odd number and four is an even 
number, and the odd is opposed to the even. Thus we are able to 
proceed a step beyond ‘ the safe and simple answer.* We may 
say, not only that the odd excludes the even, but that the number 

105 three, which participates in oddness, excludes the even. And in 
like manner, not only docs life exclude death, but the soul, of 
which life is the inseparable attribute, also excludes death. And 
that of which life is the inseparable attribute is by the force of the 

106 terms imperishable. If the odd principle were imperishable, then 
the number three would not perish but remove, on the approach 
of the even principle. But the immortal is imperishable ; and 
therefore the soul on the approach of death does not perish but 
removes. 

107 Thus all objections appear to be finally silenced. And now the* 
application has to be made : If the soul is immortal, ‘ what manner 
of persons ought we to be ? * having regard not only to time but to 
eternity. For death is not the end of all, and the wicked is not 

167 

Phaedo. 

Analysis. 

1 68 

Analysis 107 - 112 . 

PhaeJo. released from his evil by death ; but every one carries with him 

Analysis, into the world below that which he is or has become, and that 
only. 

For after death the soul is carried away to judgment, and when 
she has received her punishment returns to earth in the course of 
ages. The wise soul is conscious of her situation, and follows the 108 
attendant angel who guides her through the windings of the world 
below ; but the impure soul wanders hither and thither without 
companion or guide, and is carried at last to her own place, as the 
pure soul is also carried away to hers. i In order that you may 
understand this, I must first describe to you the nature and con- 
formation of the earth.’ 

Now the whole earth is a globe placed in the centre of the 
heavens, and is maintained there by the perfection of balance. 109 
That which we call the earth is only one of many small hollows, 
wherein collect the mists and waters and the thick lower air ; but 
the true earth is above, and is in a finer and subtler element. 
And if, like birds, we could fly to the surface of the air, in the same 
manner that fishes come to the top of the sea, then we should 
behold the true earth and the true heaven and the true stars. Our 11a 
earth is everywhere corrupted and corroded ; and even the land 
which is fairer than the sea, for that is a mere chaos or waste of 
water and mud and sand, has nothing to show in comparison of 
the other world. But the heavenly earth is of divers colours, 
sparkling with jewels brighter than gold and whiter than any snow, 
having flowers and fruits innumerable. And the inhabitants ill 
dwell some on the shore of the sea of air, others in ‘ islets of the 
blest,’ and they hold converse with the gods, and behold the sun, 
moon and stars as they truly are, and their other blessedness is of 
a piece with this. 

The hollows on the surface of the globe vary in size and shape 
from that which we inhabit : but all are connected by passages 
and perforations in the interior of the earth. And there is one 
huge chasm or opening called Tartarus, into which streams of fire 
and water and liquid mud are ever flowing ; of these small por- 
tions find their way to the surface and form seas and rivers and 112 
volcanoes. There is a perpetual mhalation and exhalation of the 
air rising and falling as the waters pass into the depths of the 
earth and return again, in their course forming lakes and rivers, 

Analysis 112-116. 169 

but never descending below the centre of the earth ; for on either Phaedo . 
side the rivers flowing either way are stopped by a precipice. Analysis. 
These rivers are many and mighty, and there are four principal 
ones, Oceanus, Acheron, Pyriphlegethon, and Cocytus. Oceanus 
is the river which encircles the earth ; Acheron takes an opposite 
direction, and after flowing under the earth through desert places, 

1 13 at last reaches the Acherusian lake,— this is the river at which the 
souls of the dead await their return to earth. Pyriphlegethon is a 
stream of fire, which coils round the earth and flows into the 
depths of Tartarus. The fourth river, Cocytus, is that which is 
called by the poets the Stygian river, and passes into and forms the 
lake Styx, from the waters of which it gains new and strange 
powers. This river, too, falls into Tartarus. 

The dead are first of all judged according to their deeds, and 
those who are incurable are thrust into Tartarus, from which they 
never come out. Those who have only committed venial sins are 
first purified of them, and then rewarded for the good which they 

1 14 have done. Those who have committed crimes, great indeed, but 
not unpardonable, are thrust into Tartarus, but are cast forth at 
the end of a year by way of Pyriphlegethon or Cocytus, and these 
carry them as far as the Acherusian lake, where they call upon 
their victims to let them come out of the rivers into the lake. And 
if they prevail, then they are let out and their sufferings cease : if 
not, they are borne unceasingly into Tartarus and back again, 
until they at last obtain mercy. The pure souls also receive their 
reward, and have their abode in the upper earth, and a select few 
in still fairer ‘ mansions.’ 

Socrates is not prepared to insist on the literal accuracy of this 
description, but he is confident that something of the kind is true. 

He who has sought after the pleasures of knowledge and rejected 
the pleasures of the body, has reason to be of good hope at the 
approach of death ; whose voice is already speaking to him, and 
who will one day be heard calling all men. 

115 The hour has come at which he must drink the poison, and not 
much remains to be done. How shall they bury him ? That is a 
question which he refuses to entertain, for they are burying, not ' 

1 16 him, but his dead body. His friends had once been sureties that 
he would remain, and they shall now be sureties that he has run 
away. Yet he would not die without the customary ceremonies of 

17 o 

Phaedo . 
Analysis. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

Analysis 11 6-118. 

washing and burial. Shall he make a libation of the poison? In 117 
the spirit he will, but not in the letter. One request he utters in 
the very act of death, which has been a puzzle to after ages. With 
a sort of irony he remembers that a trifling religious duty is still 118 
unfulfilled, just as above (60 E) he desires before he departs to 
compose a few verses in order to satisfy a scruple about a dream 
— unless, indeed, we suppose him to mean, that he was now 
restored to health, and made the customary offering to Asclepius 
in token of his recovery. 

1. The doctrine of the immortality of the soul has sunk deep 
into the heart of the human race ; and men are apt to rebel against 
any examination of the nature or grounds of their belief. They 
do not like to acknowledge that this, as well as the other 1 eternal 
ideas ’ of man, has a history in time, which may be traced in Greek 
poetry or philosophy, and also in the Hebrew Scriptures. They 
convert feeling into reasoning, and throw a network of dialectics 
over that which is really a deeply-rooted instinct. In the same 
temper which Socrates reproves in himself (91 B) they are disposed 
to think that even fallacies will do no harm, for they will die with 
them, and while they live they will gain by the delusion. And 
when they consider the numberless bad arguments which have 
been pressed into the service of theology, they say, like the com- 
panions of Socrates, ‘ What argument can we ever trust again ? ' 
But there is a better and higher spirit to be gathered from the 
Phaedo, as well as from the other writings of Plato, which says 
that first principles should be most constantly reviewed (Phaedo 
107 B, and Crat. 436), and that the highest subjects demand of us 
the greatest accuracy (Rep. vi. 504 E) ; also that we must not 
become misologists because arguments are apt to be deceivers. 

2. In former ages there was a customary rather than a reasoned 
belief in the immortality of the soul. It was based on the 
authority of the Church, on the necessity of such a belief to 
morality and the order of society, on the evidence of an historical 

•fact, and also on analogies and figures of speech which filled up 
the void or gave an expression in words to a cherished instinct. 
The mass of mankind went on their way busy with the affairs of 
this life, hardly stopping to think about another. But in our own 

The immortality of the soul. 1 7 1 

day the question has been reopened, and it is doubtful whether Phtudo . 
the belief which in the first ages of Christianity was the strongest iktroduc- 
motive of action can survive the conflict with a scientific age in TI0N ' 
which the rules of evidence are stricter and the mind has become 
more sensitive to criticism. It has faded into the cfistance by a 
natural process as it was removed further and further from the 
historical fact on which it has been supposed to rest. Arguments 
derived from material things such as the seed and the ear of corn 
or transitions in the life of animals from one state of being to 
another (the chrysalis and the butterfly) are not ‘in pari materia’ 
with arguments from the visible to the invisible, and are therefore 
felt to be no longer applicable. The evidence to the historical 
fact seems to be weaker than was once supposed : it is not con- 
sistent with itself, and is based upon documents which are of 
unknown origin. The immortality of man must be proved by 
other arguments than these if it is again to become a living belief. 

We must ask ourselves afresh why we still maintain it, and seek 
to discover a foundation for it in the nature of God and in the first 
principles of morality. 

3. At the outset of the discussion we may clear away a con- 
fusion. We certainly do not mean by the immortality of the soul 
the immortality of fame, which whether worth having or not can 
only be ascribed to a very select class of the whole race of man- 
kind, and even the interest in these few is comparatively short- 
lived. To have been a benefactor to the world, whether in a higher 
or a lower sphere of life and thought, is a great thing : to have the 
reputation of being one, when men have passed out of the sphere 
of earthly praise or blame, is hardly worthy of consideration. 

The memory of a great man, so far from being immortal, is really 
limited to his own generation so long as his friends or his 
disciples are alive, so long as his books continue to be read, so 
long as his political or military successes fill a page in the history 
of his country. The praises which are bestowed upon him at his 
death hardly last longer than the flowers which are strewed upon 
his coffin or the ‘immortelles* which are laid upon his tomb. 
Literature makes the most of its heroes, but the true man is* 
well aware that far from enjoying an immortality of fame, in a 
generation or two, or even in a much shorter time, he will be 
forgotten and the world will get on without him. 

172 

Phaedo. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

The immortality of the soul. 

4. Modern philosophy is perplexed at this whole question, which 
is sometimes fairly given up and handed over to the realm of faith. 
The perplexity should not be forgotten by us when we attempt to 
submit the Phaedo of Plato to the requirements of logic. For 
what idea can we form of the soul when separated from the body? 
Or how can the soul be united with the body and still be inde- 
pendent ? Is the soul related to the body as the ideal to the real, 
or as the whole to the parts, or as the subject to the object, or as 
the cause to the effect, or as the end to the means ? Shall we say 
with Aristotle, that the soul is the entelechy or form of an 
organized living body ? or with Plato, that she has a life of her own ? 
Is the Pythagorean image of the harmony, or that of the monad, 
the truer expression ? Is the soul related to the body as sight to 
the eye, or as the boatman to his boat? (Arist. dc Anim. ii. 1, 11, 
12.) And in another state of being is the soul to be conceived of 
as vanishing into infinity, hardly possessing an existence which 
she can call her own, as in the pantheistic system of Spinoza ? or 
as an individual informing another body and entering into new 
relations, but retaining her own character ? (Cp. Gorgias, 524 B, C.) 
Or is the opposition of soul and body a mere illusion, and the true 
self neither soul nor body, but the union of the two in the ‘ I ’ 
which is above them ? And is death the assertion of this individu- 
ality in the higher nature, and the falling away into nothingness 
of the lower ? Or are we vainly attempting to pass the boundaries 
of human thought ? The body and the soul seem to be insepar- 
able, not only in fact, but in our conceptions of them ; and any 
philosophy which too closely unites them, or too widely separates 
them, either in this life or in another, disturbs the balance of 
human nature. No thinker has perfectly adjusted them, or been 
entirely consistent with himself in describing their relation to one 
another. Nor can we wonder that Plato in the infancy of human 
thought should have confused mythology and philosophy, or have 
mistaken verbal arguments for real ones. 

5. Again, believing in the immortality of the soul, we must still 
ask the question of Socrates, ‘ What is that which we suppose to be 

• immortal ? ’ Is it the personal and individual element in us, or the 
spiritual and universal ? Is it tfte principle of knowledge or of 
goodness, or the union of the two? Is it the mere force of life 
which is determined to be, or the consciousness of self which 

i73 

The immortality of the soul. 

cannot be got rid of, or the fire of genius which refuses to be 
extinguished ? Or is there a hidden being which is allied to the 
Author of all existence, who is because he is perfect, and to whom 
our ideas of perfection give us a title to belong ? Whatever answer 
is given by us to these questions, there still remains the necessity 
of allowing the permanence of evil, if not for ever, at any rate for 
a time, in order that the wicked ‘ may not have too good a bargain/ 
For the annihilation of evil at death, or the eternal duration of it, 
seem to involve equal difficulties in the moral government of the 
universe. Sometimes we are led by our feelings, rather than by 
our reason, to think of the good and wise only as existing in 
another life. Why should the mean, the weak, the idiot, the infant, 
the herd of men who have never in any proper sense the use of 
reason, reappear with blinking eyes in the light of another world ? 
But our second thought is that the hope of humanity is a common 
one, and that all or none will be partakers of immortality. Reason 
does not allow us to suppose that we have any greater claims than 
others, and experience may often reveal to us unexpected flashes 
of the higher nature in those whom we had despised. Why 
should the wicked suffer any more than ourselves ? had we been 
placed in their circumstances should we have been any better 
than they ? The worst of men are objects of pity rather than of 
anger to the philanthropist ; must they not be equally such to 
divine benevolence ? Even more than the good they have need of 
another life ; not that they may be punished, but that they may be 
educated. These are a few of the reflections which arise in our 
minds when we attempt to assign any form to odr conceptions of 
a future state. 

There are some other questions which are disturbing to us 
because we have no answer to them. What is to become of the 
animals in a future state ? Have we not seen dogs more faithful 
and intelligent than men, and men who are more stupid and brutal 
than any animals ? Does their life cease at death, or is there some 
‘ better thing reserved 1 also for them ? They may be said to have 
a shadow or imitation of morality, and imperfect moral claims 
upon the benevolence of man and upon the justice of God. We, 
cannot think of the least or lowest of them, the insect, the bird, 
the inhabitants of the sea or the desert, as having any place in a 
future world, and if not all, why should those who are specially 

Phaedo. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

174 

Phaedo. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

The immortality of the soul. 

attached to man be deemed worthy of any exceptional privilege ? 
When we reason about such a subject, almost at once we de- 
generate into nonsense. It is a passing thought which has no real 
hold on the mind. We may argue for the existence of animals in 
a future stateVrom the attributes of God, or from texts of Scripture 
(* Are not two sparrows sold for one farthing ? ’ & c.), but the truth is 
that we are only filling up the void of another world with our own 
fancies. Again, wc often talk about the origin of evil, that great 
bugbear of theologians, by which they frighten us into believing 
any superstition. What answer can be made to the old common- 
place, ‘ Is not God the author of evil, if he knowingly permitted, 
but could have prevented it ? ’ Even if we assume that the in- 
equalities of this life are rectified by some transposition of human 
beings in another, still the existence of the very least evil if it 
could have been avoided, seems to be at variance with the love 
and justice of God. And so we arrive at the conclusion that we 
are carrying logic too far, and that the attempt to frame the world 
according to a rule of divine perfection is opposed to experience 
and had better be given up. The case of the animals is our own. 
We must admit that the Divine Being, although perfect himself, has 
placed us in a state of life in which we may work together with 
him for good, but we are very far from having attained to it. 

6. Again, ideas must be given through something ; and wc are 
always prone to argue about the soul from analogies of outward 
things which may serve to embody our thoughts, but are also 
partly delusive. For we cannot reason from the natural to the 
spiritual, or from the outward to the inward. The progress of 
physiological science, without bringing us nearer to the great 
secret, has tended to remove some erroneous notions respecting 
the relations of body and mind, and in this we have the advantage 
of the ancients. But no one imagines that any seed of immortality 
is to be discerned in our mortal frames. Most people have been 
content to rest their belief in another life on the agreement of the 
more enlightened part of mankind, and on the inseparable con- 
nection of such a doctrine with the existence of a God -also in a 
less degree on the impossibility of doubting about the continued 
existence of those whom we love* and reverence in this world. 
And after all has been said, the figure, the analogy, the argument, 
are felt to be only approximations in different forms to an 

i75 

The immortality of the soul. 

expression of the common sentiment of the human heart. That 
we shall live again is far more certain than that we shall take any 
particular form of life. 

7. When we speak of the immortality of the soul, we must ask 
further what we mean by the word immortality. # For of the 
duration of a living being in countless ages we can form no con- 
ception ; far less than a three years’ old child of the whole of life. 
The naked eye might as well try to see the furthest star in the 
infinity of heaven. Whether time and space really exist when 
we take away the limits of them may be doubted ; at any rate the 
thought of them when unlimited is so overwhelming to us as to 
lose all distinctness. Philosophers have spoken of them as forms 
of the human mind, but what is the mind without them ? As then 
infinite time, or an existence out of time, which are the only 
possible explanations of eternal duration, are equally inconceivable 
to us, let us substitute for them a hundred or a thousand years 
after death, and ask not what will be our employment in eternity, 
but what will happen to us in that definite portion of time ; or 
what is now happening to those who passed out of life a hundred 
or a thousand years ago. Do we imagine that the wicked are 
suffering torments, or that the good are singing the praises of 
God, during a period longer than that of a whole life, or of ten 
lives of men ? Is the suffering physical or mental ? And does 
the worship of God consist only of praise, or of many forms of 
service ? Who are the wicked, and who are the good, whom we 
venture to divide by a hard and fast line ; and in which of the two 
classes should we place ourselves and our friends^ May we not 
suspect that we are making differences of kind, because we are 
unable to imagine differences of degree ? — putting the whole 
human race into heaven or hell for the greater convenience of 
logical division ? Are we not at the same time describing them 
both in superlatives, only that we may satisfy the demands of 
rhetoric? What is that pain which does not become deadened 
after a thousand years ? or what is the nature of that pleasure or 
happiness which never wearies by monotony ? Earthly pleasures 
and pains are short in proportion as they are keen ; of any others 
which are both intense and lasting we have no experience, and 
can form no idea. The words or figures of speech which we use 
are not consistent with themselves. For are we not imagining 

Phaedo. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

1 76 The immortality of the soul. 

Phaedo . Heaven under the similitude of a church, and Hell as a prison, or 

Introduc- perhaps a madhouse or chamber of horrors ? And yet to beings 
nCN * constituted as wc are, the monotony of singing psalms would be 
as great an infliction as the pains of hell, and might be even 
pleasantly interrupted by them. Where are the actions worthy 
of rewards greater than those which are conferred on the greatest 
benefactors of mankind ? And where are the crimes which ac- 
cording to Plato’s merciful reckoning, — more merciful, at any rate, 
than the eternal damnation of so-called Christian teachers, — for 
every ten years in this life deserve a hundred of punishment in 
the life to come ? We should be ready to die of pity if we could 
see the least of the sufferings which the writers of Infernos and 
Purgatorios have attributed to the damned. Yet these joys and 
terrors seem hardly to exercise an appreciable influence over the 
lives of men. The wicked man when old, is not, as Plato supposes 
(Rep. i. 330 D, E), more agitated by the terrors of another world 
when he is nearer to them, nor the good in an ecstasy at the joys 
of which he is soon to be the partaker. Age numbs the sense of 
both worlds ; and the habit of life is strongest in death. Even the 
dying mother is dreaming of her lost children as they were forty 
or fifty years before, ‘ pattering over the boards,’ not of reunion 
with them in another state of being. Most persons when the last 
hour comes are resigned to the order of nature and the will of 
God. They are not thinking of Dante’s Inferno or Paradiso, or of 
the Pilgrim’s Progress. Heaven and hell are not realities to 
them, but words or ideas ; the outward symbols of some great 
mystery, they'hardly know what. Many noble poems and pic- 
tures have been suggested by the traditional representations of 
them, which have been fixed in forms of art and can no longer be 
altered. Many sermons have been filled with descriptions of 
celestial or infernal mansions. But hardly even in childhood did 
the thought of heaven and hell supply the motives of our actions, 
or at any time seriously affect the substance of our belief. 

8. Another life must be described, if at all, in forms of thought 
and not of sense. To draw pictures of heaven and hell, whether 
in the language of Scripture or any other, adds nothing to our real 
knowledge, but may perhaps disguise our ignorance. The truest 
conception which we can form of a future life is a state of progress 
or education— a progress from evil to good, from ignorance to 

The immortality of the soul. 177 

knowledge. To this we are led by the analogy of the present life, Phaedo. 
in which we see different races and nations of men, and different Introduc. 

men and women of the same nation, in various states or stages of TI0N * 

cultivation ; some more and some less developed, and all of them 
capable of improvement under favourable circumstaifces. There 
are punishments too of children when they are growing up 
inflicted by their parents, of elder offenders which are imposed by 
the law of the land, of all men at all times of life, which are 

attached by the laws of nature to the performance of certain 

actions. All these punishments are really educational ; that is to 
say, they are not intended to retaliate on the offender, but to teach 
him a lesson. Also there is an element of chance in them, which 
is another name for our ignorance of the laws of nature. There 
is evil too inseparable from good (cp. Lysis 220 E) ; not always 
punished here, as good is not always rewarded. It is capable of 
being indefinitely diminished ; and as knowledge increases, the 
element of chance may more and more disappear. 

For we do not argue merely from the analogy of the present 
state of this world to another, but from the analogy of a probable 
future to which we are tending. The greatest changes of which 
we have had experience as yet are due to our increasing know- 
ledge of history and of nature. They have been produced by a 
few minds appearing in three or four favoured nations, in a com- 
paratively short period of time. May we be allowed to imagine 
the minds of men everywhere working together during many 
ages for the completion of our knowledge ? May not the science 
of physiology transform the world ? Again, the majority of man- 
kind have really experienced some moral improvement ; almost 
every one feels that he has tendencies to good, and is capable of 
becoming better. And these germs of good are often found to be 
developed by new circumstances, like stunted trees when trans- 
planted to a better soil. The differences between the savage and 
the civilized man, or between the civilized man in old and new 
countries, may be indefinitely increased. The first difference is 
the effect of a few thousand, the second of a few hundred years. 

We congratulate ourselves that slavery has become industry ; that * 
law and constitutional government have superseded despotism 
and violence ; that an ethical religion has taken the place of 
Fetichism. There may yet come a time when the many may b^ 

VOL. 11. n 

1 78 

The immortality of the soul. 

Phaedo. as well off as the few ; when no one will be weighed down by ex- 

Introduc- cessive toil ; when the necessity of providing for the body will not 
interfere with mental improvement ; when the physical frame may 
be strengthened and developed ; and the religion of all men may 
become a reasonable service. 

Nothing therefore, either in the present state of man or in the 
tendencies of the future, as far as we can entertain conjecture of 
them, would lead us to suppose that God governs us vindictively 
in this world, and therefore we have no reason to infer that he 
will govern us vindictively in another. The true argument from 
analogy is not, ‘This life is a mixed state of justice and injustice, 
of great waste, of sudden casualties, of disproportionate punish- 
ments, and therefore the like inconsistencies, irregularities, in- 
justices are to be expected in another; * but ‘This life is subject to 
law, and is in a state of progress, and therefore law and progress 
may be believed to be the governing principles of another/ All 
the analogies of this world would be against unmeaning punish- 
ments inflicted a hundred or a thousand years after an offence 
had been committed. Suffering there might be as a part of 
education, but not hopeless or protracted ; as there might be a 
retrogression of individuals or of bodies of men, yet not such 
as to interfere with a plan for the improvement of the whole (cp. 
Laws, x. 903). 

9. But some one will say : That we cannot reason from the seen 
to the unseen, and that we are creating another world after the 
image of this, just as men in former ages have created gods in 
their own likeness. And we, like the companions of Socrates, 
may feel discouraged at hearing our favourite ‘ argument from 
analogy ’ thus summarily disposed of. Like himself, too, we may 
adduce other arguments in which he seems to have anticipated us, 
though he expresses them in different language. For we feel that 
the soul partakes of the ideal and invisible; and can never fall 
into the error of confusing the external circumstances of man with 
his higher self; or his origin with his nature. It is as repugnant 
to us as it was to him to imagine that our moral ideas are to be 
attributed only to cerebral forces. The value of a human soul, 
like the value of a man’s life to himself, is inestimable, and cannot 
be reckoned in earthly or material things. The human being alone 
has the consciousness of truth and justice and love, which is the 

The immortality of the soul. 

consciousness of God. And the soul becoming more conscious 
of these, becomes more conscious of her own immortality. 

io. The last ground of our belief in immortality, and the strong- 
est, is the perfection of the divine nature. The mere fact of the 
existence of God does not tend to show the continued existence of 
man. An evil God or an indifferent God might have had the 
power, but not the will, to preserve us. He might have regarded 
us as fitted to minister to his service by a succession of existences, 
— like the animals, without attributing to each soul an incom- 
parable value. But if he is perfect, he must will that all rational 
beings should partake of that perfection which he himself is. In 
the words of the Timaeus, he is good, and therefore he desires 
that all other things should be as like himself as possible. And 
the manner in which he accomplishes this is by permitting evil, or 
rather degrees of good, which are otherwise called evil. For all 
progress is good relatively to the past, and yet may be com- 
paratively evil when regarded in the light of the future. Good 
and evil are relative terms, and degrees of evil are merely the 
negative aspect of degrees of good. Of the absolute goodness of 
any finite nature we can form no conception ; we are all of us in 
process of transition from one degree of good or evil to another. 
The difficulties which are urged about the origin or existence of 
evil are mere dialectical puzzles, standing in the same relation to 
Christian philosophy as the puzzles of the Cynics and Megarians 
to the philosophy of Plato. They arise out of the tendency of the 
human mind to regard good and evil both as relative and absolute ; 
just as the riddles about motion are to be explained by the double 
conception of space or matter, which the human mind has the 
power of regarding either as continuous or discrete. 

In speaking of divine perfection, we mean to say that God is 
just and true and loving, the author of order and not of disorder, 
of good and not of evil. Or rather, that he is justice, that he is 
truth, that he is love, that he is order, that he is the very progress 
of which we were speaking; and that wherever these qualities 
are present, whether in the human soul or in the order of nature, 
there is God. We might still see him everywhere, if we had. 
not been mistakenly seeking f car him apart from us, instead of in 
us; away from the laws of nature, instead of in them. And 
we become united to him not by mystical absorption, but by 

179 

Phaedo. 

Introduc* 

TION. 

N 2 

1 80 The immortality of the soul. 

Phaedo. partaking, whether consciously or unconsciously, of that truth 
Introduc. and justice and love which he himself is. 

Thus the belief in the immortality of the soul rests at last on 
the belief in God. If there is a good and wise God, then there is 
a progress of mankind towards perfection ; and if there is no pro- 
gress of men towards perfection, then there is no good and wise 
God. We cannot suppose that the moral government of God of 
which we see the beginnings in the world and in ourselves will 
cease when we pass out of life. 

ii. Considering the ‘ feebleness of the human faculties and the 
uncertainty of the subject,’ we are inclined to believe that the fewer 
our words the better. At the approach of death there is not 
much said ; good men are too honest to go out of the world pro- 
fessing more than they know. There is perhaps no important 
subject about which, at any time, even religious people speak so 
little to one another. In the fulness of life the thought of death 
is mostly awakened by the sight or recollection of the death of 
others rather than by the prospect of our own. We must also 
acknowledge that there arc degrees of the belief in immortality, 
and many forms in which it presents itself to the mind. Some 
persons will say no more than that they trust in God, and that 
they leave all to Him. It is a great part of true religion not 
to pretend to know more than we do. Others when they quit 
this world are comforted with the hope ‘That they will see 
and know their friends in heaven/ But it is better to leave them 
in the hands of God and to be assured that ‘ no evil shall touch 
them.’ There are others again to whom the belief in a divine 
personality has ceased to have any longer a meaning ; yet they 
are satisfied that the end of all is not here, but that something still 
remains to us, ‘ and some better thing for the good than for the 
evil/ They are persuaded, in spite of their theological nihilism, 
that the ideas of justice and truth and holiness and love are 
realities. They cherish an enthusiastic devotion to the first prin- 
ciples of morality. Through these they see, or seem to see, 
* darkly, and in a figure, that the soul is immortal. 

But besides differences of theological opinion which must ever 
prevail about things unseen, the hope of immortaility is weaker 
or stronger in men at one time of life than at another; it even 

The immortality of the soul. 1 8 1 

varies from day to day/ It comes and goes ; the mind, like the Phaedo . 
sky, is apt to be overclouded. Other generations of men may introduc. 
have sometimes lived under an ‘eclipse of faith,’ to us the total * 1Qh * 
disappearance of it might be compared to the ‘ sun falling from 
heaven.’ And we may sometimes have to begin again and acquire 
the belief for ourselves ; or to win it back again when it is lost. 

It is really weakest in the hour of death. For Nature, like a 
kind mother or nurse, lays us to sleep without frightening us ; 
physicians, who are the witnesses of such scenes, say that under 
ordinary circumstances there is no fear of the future. Often, as 
Plato tells us, death is accompanied ‘ with pleasure.’ (Tim. 81 D.) 

When the end is still uncertain, the cry of many a one has been, 

‘ Pray, that I may be taken.* The last thoughts even of the best 
men depend chiefly on the accidents of their bodily state. Pain 
soon overpowers the desire of life ; old age, like the child, is laid 
to sleep almost in a moment. The long experience of life will 
often destroy the interest which mankind have in it. So various 
are the feelings with which different persons draw near to death ; 
and still more various the forms in which imagination clothes it. 

For this alternation of feeling cp. the Old Testament, —Psalm vi. 5, 
xvi. to, xc ; Isaiah xxxviii. 18 ; Eccles. viii. 8 ff., iii. 19, iv. 2. 

12. When we think of God and of man in his relation to God ; 
of the imperfection of our present state and yet of the progress 
which is observable in the history of the world and of the human 
mind ; of the depth and power of our moral ideas which seem to 
partake of the very nature of God Himself ; when we consider the 
contrast between the physical laws to which we are subject and 
the higher law which raises us above them and is yet a part of 
them ; when we reflect on our capacity of becoming the ‘spectators 
of all time and all existence,’ and of framing in our own minds the 
ideal of a perfect Being ; when we see how the human mind in all 
the higher religions of the world, including Buddhism, notwith- 
standing some aberrations, has tended towards such a belief— we 
have reason to think that our destiny is different from that of 
animals; and though we cannot altogether shut out the childish 
fear that the soul upon leaving the body may ‘ vanish into thinr 
air,’ we have still, so far as the ftature of the subject admits, a hope 
of immortality with which we comfort ourselves on sufficient 
grounds. The denial of the belief takes the heart out of human 

182 

Phaedo. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

The immortality of the soul. 

life ; it lowers men to the level of the rrfhterial. As Goethe also 
says, < He is dead even in this world who has no belief in another.’ 

13. It is well also that we should sometimes think of the forms 
of thought under which the idea of immortality is most naturally 
presented to us. It is clear that to our minds the risen soul can 
no longer be described, as in a picture, by the symbol of a creature 
half bird, half-human, nor in any other form of sense. The multi- 
tude of angels, as in Milton, singing the Almighty’s praises, are a 
noble image, and may furnish a theme for the poet or the painter, 
but they are no longer an adequate expression of the kingdom of 
God which is within us. Neither is there any mansion, in this 
world or another, in which the departed can be imagined to dwell 
and carry on their occupations. When this earthly tabernacle is 
dissolved, no other habitation or building can take them in : it is 
in the language of ideas only that we speak of them. 

First of all there is the thought of rest and freedom from pain ; 
they have gone home, as the common saying is, and the cares of 
this world touch them no more. Secondly, we may imagine 
them as they were at their best and brightest, humbly fulfilling 
their daily round of duties -selfless, childlike, unaffected by the 
world ; when the eye was single and the whole body seemed to 
be full of light ; when the mind was clear and saw into the pur- 
poses of God. Thirdly, we may think of them as possessed by a 
great love of God and man, working out His will at a further 
stage in the heavenly pilgrimage. And yet we acknowledge that 
these arc the things which eye hath not seen nor ear heard and 
therefore it hath not entered into the heart of man in any sensible 
manner to conceive them. Fourthly, there may have been some 
moments in our own lives when we have risen above ourselves, 
or been conscious of our truer selves, in which the will of God has 
superseded our wills, and we have entered into communion with 
Him, and been partakers for a brief season of the Divine truth 
and love, in which like Christ we have been inspired to utter the 
prayer, < I in them, and thou in me, that we may be all made 
perfect in one.’ These precious moments, if we have ever 
known them, are the nearest approach which we can make to the 
idea of immortality. 

14. Returning now to the earlier stage of human thought which 

The immortality of the soul. 183 

is represented by the writings of Plato, we find that many of the Phaedo . 
same questions have already arisen : there is the same tendency introruc- 
to materialism ; the same inconsistency in the application of the TIOI " e 
idea of mind; the same doubt whether the soul is to be regarded 
as a cause or as an effect ; the same falling back on ftioral convic- 
tions. In the Phaedo the soul is conscious of her divine nature, 
and the separation from the body which has been commenced in 
this life is perfected in another. Beginning in mystery, Socrates, 
in the intermediate part of the Dialogue, attempts to bring the 
doctrine of a future life into connection with his theory of know- 
ledge. In proportion as he succeeds in this, the individual seems 
to disappear in a more general notion of the soul ; the contempla- 
tion of ideas ‘ under the form of eternity * takes the place of past 
and future states of existence. 1 1 is language may be compared to 
that of some modern philosophers, who speak of eternity, not in the 
sense of perpetual duration of time, but as an ever-present quality 
of the soul. Yet at the conclusion of the Dialogue, having ‘ arrived 
at the end of the intellectual world ’ (Rep. vii. 532 B), he replaces 
the veil of mythology, and describes the soul and her attendant 
genius in the language of the mysteries or of a disciple of Zoroaster. 

Nor can we fairly demand of Plato a consistency which is wanting 
among ourselves, who acknowledge that another world is beyond 
the range of human thought, and yet are always seeking to repre- 
sent the mansions of heaven or hell in the colours of the painter, 
or in the descriptions of the poet or rhetorician. 

15. The doctrine of the immortality of the soul was not new to 
the Greeks in the age of Socrates, but, like the u^lity of God, had 
a foundation in the popular belief. The old Homeric notion of a 
gibbering ghost flitting away to Hades ; or of a few illustrious 
heroes enjoying the isles of the blest ; or of an existence divided 
between the two ; or the Hesiodic, of righteous spirits, who 
become guardian angels,— had given place in the mysteries and 
the Orphic poets to representations, partly fanciful, of a future 
state of rewards and punishments. (Laws ix. 870.) The reticence 
of the Greeks on public occasions and in some part of their 
literature respecting this ‘underground’ religion, is not to be, 
taken as a measure of the diffusion of such beliefs. If Pericles in 
the funeral oration is silent on the consolations of immortality, the 
poet Pindar and the tragedians on the other hand constantly 

184 The immortality of the soul. 

rhaedo. assume the continued existence of the dead in an upper or under 

Introduc- world. Darius and Laius arc still alive ; Antigone will be dear to 
her brethren after death; the way to the palace of Cronos is found 
by those who ‘have thrice departed from evil/ The tragedy of 
the Greeks te not ‘rounded’ by this life, but is deeply set in 
decrees of fate and mysterious workings of powers beneath the 
earth. In the caricature of Aristophanes there is also a witness 
to the common sentiment. The Ionian and Pythagorean philoso- 
phies arose, and some new elements were added to the popular 
belief. The individual must find an expression as well as the 
world. Either the soul was supposed to exist in the form of a 
magnet, or of a particle of fire, or of light, or air, or water ; or of a 
number or of a harmony of number ; or to be or have, like the 
stars, a principle of motion (Arist. de Anim. i. 1, 2, 3). At length 
Anaxagoras, hardly distinguishing between life and mind, or 
between mind human and divine, attained the pure abstraction ; 
and this, like the other abstractions of Greek philosophy, sank 
deep into the human intelligence. The opposition of the intelli- 
gible and the sensible, and of God to the world, supplied an 
analogy which assisted in the separation of soul and body. If 
ideas were separable from phenomena, mind was also separable 
from matter; if the ideas were eternal, the mind that conceived 
them was eternal too. As the unity of God was more distinctly 
acknowledged, the conception of the human soul became more 
developed. The succession, or alternation of life and death, had 
occurred to Heracleitus. The Eleatic Parmenides had stumbled 
upon the modern thesis, that ‘ thought and being are the same/ 
The Eastern belief in transmigration defined the sense of indi- 
viduality; and some, like Empedocles, fancied that the blood 
which they had shed in another state of being was crying against 
them, and that for thirty thousand years they were to be ‘ fugitives 
and vagabonds upon the earth/ The desire of recognizing a lost 
mother or love or friend in the world below (Phaedo 68) was a 
natural feeling which, in that age as well as in every other, has 
given distinctness to the hope of immortality. Nor were ethical 
considerations wanting, partly derived from the necessity of 
punishing the greater sort of criminals, whom no avenging power 
of this world could reach. The voice of conscience, too, was heard 
reminding the good man that he was not altogether innocent. 

The immortality of the soul . 185 

(Rep. i. 330.) To these indistinct longings and fears an expression Phaedo. 
was given in the mysteries and Orphic poets : a ‘heap of books* introduc- 
(Rep. ii. 364 E), passing under the names of Musaeus and Orpheus TluM ‘ 
in Plato’s time, were filled with notions of an under- world. 

16. Yet after all the belief in the individuality of the soul after 
death had but a feeble hold on the Greek mind. Like the person- 
ality of God, the personality of man in a future state was not 
inseparably bound up with the reality of his existence. For the 
distinction between the personal and impersonal, and also 
between the divine and human, was far less marked to the Greek 
than to ourselves. And as Plato readily passes from the notion of 
the good to that of God, he also passes almost imperceptibly to 
himself and his reader from the future life of the individual soul 
to the eternal being of the absolute soul. There has been a 
clearer statement and a clearer denial of the belief in modern 
times than is found in early Greek philosophy, and hence the 
comparative silence on the whole subject which is often remarked 
in ancient writers, and particularly in Aristotle. For Plato and 
Aristotle are not further removed in their teaching about the 
immortality of the soul than they are in their theory of knowledge. 

17. Living in an age when logic was beginning to mould 
human thought, Plato naturally cast his belief in immortality 
into a logical form. And when we consider how much the doc- 
trine of ideas was also one of words, it is not surprising that 
he should have fallen into verbal fallacies : early logic is always 
mistaking the truth of the form for the truth of the matter. 

It is easy to see that the alternation of opposites is not the 
same as the generation of them out of each other ; and that the 
generation of them out of each other, which is the first argu- 
ment in the Phaedo, is at variance with their mutual exclusion 
of each other, whether in themselves or in us, which is the 
last. For even if we admit the distinction which he draws at 
p. 103, between the opposites and the things which have the 
opposites, still individuals fall under the latter class ; and we have 
to pass out of the region of human hopes and fears to a conception 
of an abstract soul which is the impersonation of the ideas. Such* 
a conception, which in Plato •himself is but half expressed, is 
unmeaning to us, and relative only to a particular stage in the 
history of thought. The doctrine of reminiscence is also a 

1 86 The immortality of the soul . 

Phaedo. fragment of a former world, which has no place in the philosophy 

Introduc. of modern times. But Plato had the wonders of psychology just 
TI0N * opening to him, and he had not the explanation of them which is 
supplied by the analysis of language and the history of the human 
mind. The question, ‘Whence come our abstract ideas?’ he 
could only answer by an imaginary hypothesis. Nor is it difficult 
to see that his crowning argument is purely verbal, and is but the 
expression of an instinctive confidence put into a logical form : — 
‘ The soul is immortal because it contains a principle of imperish- 
ableness.’ Nor does he himself seem at all to be aware that 
nothing is added to human knowledge by his ‘safe and simple 
answer,’ that beauty is the cause of the beautiful ; and that he is 
merely reasserting the Eleatic being ‘ divided by the Pythagorean 
numbers,’ against the Heracleitean doctrine of perpetual genera- 
tion. The answer to the ‘very serious question’ of generation 
and destruction is really the denial of them. P'or this he would 
substitute, as in the Republic, a system of ideas, tested, not by 
experience, but by their consequences, and not explained by 
actual causes, but by a higher, that is, a more general notion. Con- 
sistency with themselves is the only test which is to be applied to 
them. (Rep. vi. 510 foil., and Phaedo 101 foil.) 

18. To deal fairly with such arguments, they should be trans- 
lated as far as possible into their modern equivalents. ‘If the 
ideas of men arc eternal, their souls are eternal, and if not the 
ideas, then not the souls.’ Such an argument stands nearly in the 
same relation to Plato and his age, as the argument from the 
existence of Gofi to immortality among ourselves. ‘ If God exists, 
then the soul exists after death ; and if there is no God, there is no 
existence of the soul after death.’ For the ideas are to his mind 
the reality, the truth, the principle of permanence, as well as of 
intelligence and order in the world. When Simmias and Cebes 
say that they are more strongly persuaded of the existence of 
ideas than they are of the immortality of the soul, they represent 
fairly enough the order of thought in Greek philosophy. And we 
might say in the same way that we are more certain of the 
.existence of God than we are of the immortality of the soul, and 
are led by the belief in the one«to a belief in the other. The 
parallel, as Socrates would say, is not perfect, but agrees in as 
far as the mind in either case is regarded as dependent on some- 

The immortality of the soul. 

thing above and beyond herself. The analogy may even be 
pressed a step further : ‘We are more certain of our ideas of truth 
and right than we are of the existence of God, and are led on in the 
order of thought from one to the other.’ Or more correctly : ‘ The 
existence of right and truth is the existence of God, and can never 
for a moment be separated from Him.’ 

19. The main argument of the Phaedo is derived from the 
existence of eternal ideas of which the soul is a partaker; the 
other argument of the alternation of opposites is replaced by this. 
And there have not been wanting philosophers of the idealist 
school who have imagined that the doctrine of the immortality of 
the soul is a theory of knowledge, and that in what has preceded 
Plato is accommodating himself to the popular belief. Sucli a 
view can only .be elicited from the Phaedo by what may be 
termed the transcendental method of interpretation, and is ob- 
viously inconsistent with the Gorgias and the Republic. Those 
who maintain it are immediately compelled to renounce the . 
shadow which they have grasped, as a play of words only. But 
the truth is, that Plato in his argument for the immortality of the 
soul has collected many elements of proof or persuasion, ethical 
and mythological as well as dialectical, which are not easily to be 
reconciled with one another ; and he is as much in earnest about 
his doctrine of retribution, which is repeated in all his more 
ethical writings, as about his theory of knowledge. And while 
we may fairly translate the dialectical into the language of Hegel, 
and the religious and mythological into the language of Dante or 
Bunyan, the ethical speaks to us still in the same voice, and 
appeals to a common feeling. 

20. Two arguments of this ethical character occur in the 
Phaedo. The first may be described as the aspiration of the soul 
after another state of being. Like the Oriental or Christian 
mystic, the philosopher is seeking to withdraw from impurities of 
sense, to leave the world and the things of the world, and to find 
his higher self. Plato recognizes in these aspirations the fore- 
taste of immortality; as Butler and Addison in modern times 
have argued, the one from the moral tendencies of mankind, the < 
other from the progress of the ^bul towards perfection. In using 
this argument Plato has certainly confused the soul which has 
left the body, with the soul of the good and wise. (Cp. Rep. x. 

187 

Phaedo . 

Introduc- 

tion. 

i88 

The immortality of the soul. 

Phaedo. 611 C.) Such a confusion was natural, and arose partly out of 
Introduc- the antithesis of soul and body. The soul in her own essence, 
noN ‘ and the soul * clothed upon ’ with virtues and graces, were easily 
interchanged with one another, because on a subject which 
passes expression the distinctions of language can hardly be 
maintained. 

21. The other ethical proof of the immortality of the soul is 
derived from the necessity of retribution. The wicked would be 
too well off if their evil deeds came to an end. It is not to be 
supposed that an Ardiaeus, an Archelaus, an Ismenias could ever 
have suffered the penalty of their crimes in this world. The 
manner in which this retribution is accomplished Plato repre- 
sents under the figures of mythology. Doubtless he felt that it 
was easier to improve than to invent, and that in religion espe- 
cially the traditional form was required in order to give veri- 
similitude to the myth. The myth too is far more probable to 
that age than to ours, and may fairly be regarded as ‘ one guess 
among many’ about the nature of the earth, which he cleverly 
supports by the indications of geology. Not that he insists on 
the absolute truth of his own particular notions : ‘ no man of 
sense will be confident in such matters ; but he will be confident 
that something of the kind is true’ (114 D). As in other passages 
(Gorg. 527 A, Tim. 29 D ; cp. Crito, 107 B), he wins belief for his 
fictions by the moderation of his statements ; he does not, like 
Dante or Swedenborg, allow himself to be deceived by his own 
creations. 

The Dialogue must be read in the light of the situation. And 
first of all we are struck by the calmness of the scene. tLike the 
spectators at the time, we cannot pity Socrates ; his mien and 
his language are so noble and fearless. He is the same that he 
ever was, but milder and gentler, and he has in no degree lost 
his interest in dialectics ; he will not forego the delight of an 
argument in compliance with the jailer’s intimation that he should 
not heat himself with talking. At such a time he naturally 
• expresses the hope of his life, that he has been a true mystic and 
not a mere routineer or wand-beirer : and he refers to passages 
of his personal history. To his old enemies the Comic poets, and 
to the proceedings on the trial, he alludes playfully; but he 

Socrates and his friends . 189 

vividly remembers the disappointment which he felt in reading Phaedo . 
the books of Anaxagoras. The return of Xanthippe and his i NTR oduc- 
children indicates that the philosopher is not ‘made of oak or TION ‘ 
rock/ Some other traits of his character may be noted ; for 
example, the courteous manner in which he inclines his head to 
the last objector, or the ironical touch, ‘ Me already, as the tragic 
poet would say, the voice of fate calls ; ’ or the depreciation of the 
arguments with which * he comforted himself and them ; * or his 
fear of ‘ misology ; * or his references to Homer ; or the playful 
smile with which he ‘ talks like a book ’ about greater and less ; 
or the allusion to the possibility of finding another teacher among 
barbarous races (cp. Polit. 262 D) ; or the mysterious reference to 
another science (mathematics ?) of generation and destruction for 
which he is vainly feeling. There is no change in him ; only now 
he is invested with a sort of sacred character, as the prophet or 
priest of Apollo the God of the festival, in whose honour he first 
of all composes a hymn, and then like the swan pours forth his 
dying lay. Perhaps the extreme elevation of Socrates above his 
own situation, and the ordinary interests of life (compare his jeu 
d'esprit about his burial, in which for a moment he puts on the 
‘ Silcnus mask ’), create in the mind of the reader an impression 
stronger than could be derived from arguments that such a one 
has in him ‘a principle which does not admit of death/ 

The other persons of the Dialogue may be considered under 
two heads : (1) private friends; (2) the respondents in the argu- 
ment. . 

First there is Crito, who has been already introduced to us 
in the Euthydemus and the Crito ; he is the equal in years of 
Socrates, and stands in quite a different relation to him from his 
younger disciples. He is a man of the world who is rich and 
prosperous (cp. the jest in the Euthydemus, 304 C), the best 
friend of Socrates, who wants to know his commands, in whose 
presence he talks to his family, and who performs the last duty of 
closing his eyes. It is observable too that, as in the Euthydemus, 

Crito shows no aptitude for philosophical discussions. Nor - 
among the friends of Socrates ^nust the jailer be forgotten, who 
seems to have been introduced by Plato in order to show the 
impression made by the extraordinary man on the common. 

190 

Phaedo : Simmias : Cedes. 

Phaedo. The gentle nature of the man is indicated by his weeping at the 
Introduc- announcement of his errand and then turning away, and also by 
the words of Socrates to his disciples : 4 How charming the man 
is ! since I have been in prison he has been always coming to 
me, and is as good as could be to me.’ We are reminded too that 
he has retained this gentle nature amid scenes of death and 
violence by the contrasts which he draws between the behaviour 
of Socrates and of others when about to die. 

Another person who takes no part in the philosophical dis- 
cussion is the excitable Apollodorus, the same who, in the Sym- 
posium, of which he is the narrator, is called 4 the madman,’ and 
who testifies his grief by the most violent emotions. Phaedo is 
also present, the 4 beloved disciple * as he may be termed, who 
is described, if not 4 leaning on his bosom,’ as seated next to 
Socrates, who is playing with his hair. lie too, like Apollodorus, 
takes no part in the discussion, but he loves above all things to 
hear and speak of Socrates after his death. The calmness of his 
behaviour, veiling his face when he can no longer restrain his 
tears, contrasts with the passionate outcries of the other. At a 
particular point the argument is described as falling before the 
attack of Simmias. A sort of despair is introduced in the minds 
of the company. The effect of this is heightened by the de- 
scription of Phaedo, who has been the eye-witness of the scene, 
and by the sympathy of his Phliasian auditors who are beginning 
to think 4 that they too can never trust an argument again.* And 
the intense interest of the company is communicated not only to 
the first auditors, but to us who in a distant country read the 
narrative of their emotions after more than two thousand years 
have passed away. 

The two principal interlocutors are Simmias and Cebes, the 
disciples of Philolaus the Pythagorean philosopher of Thebes. 
Simmias is described in the Phaedrus (242 B) as fonder of an 
argument than any man living ; and Cebes, although finally 
persuaded by Socrates, is said to be the most incredulous of 
human beings. It is Cebes who at the commencement of the 
• Dialogue asks why ‘suicide is held to be unlawful,* and who 
first supplies the doctrine of recollection in confirmation of the 
pre-existence of the soul. It is Cebes who urges that the pre- 
existence does not necessarily involve the future existence of 

19 1 

Place of Dialogue in the series . 

the soul, as is shown by the illustration of the weaver and his 
coat. Simmias, on the other hand, raises the question about 
harmony and the lyre, which is naturally put into the mouth of 
a Pythagorean disciple. It is Simmias, too, who first remarks on 
the uncertainty of human knowledge, and only at last concedes to 
the argument such a qualified approval as is consistent with the 
feebleness of the human faculties. Cebes is the deeper and more 
consecutive thinker, Simmias more superficial and rhetorical ; 
they arc distinguished in much the same manner as Adeimantus 
and Glaucon in the Republic. 

Other persons, Menexenus, Ctesippus, Lysis, are old friends ; 
Evenus has been already satirized in the Apology ; Aeschines 
and Epigenes were present at the trial ; Euclid and Terpsion will 
reappear in the Introduction to the Theaetetus, Hermogenes has 
already appeared in the Cratylus. No inference can fairly be 
drawn from the absence of Aristippus, nor from the omission of 
Xenophon, who at the time of Socrates’ death was in Asia. The 
mention of Plato’s own absence seems like an expression of 
sorrow, and may, perhaps, be an indication that the report of the 
conversation is not to be taken literally. 

The place of the Dialogue in the series is doubtful. The doctrine 
of ideas is certainly carried beyond the Socratic point of view ; in 
no other of the writings of Plato is the theory of them so com- 
pletely developed. Whether the belief in immortality can be 
attributed to Socrates or not is uncertain ; the silence of the 
Memorabilia, and of the earlier Dialogues of Plato, is an argument 
to the contrary. Yet in the Cyropaedia Xenopho?i (viii. 7, 19 foil.) 
has put language into the mouth of the dying Cyrus which recalls 
the Phaedo, and may have been derived from the teaching of 
Socrates. It may be fairly urged that the greatest religious 
interest of mankind could not have been wholly ignored by one 
who passed his life in fulfilling the commands of an oracle, and 
who recognized a Divine plan in man and nature. (Xen. Mem. 
1, 4.) And the language of the Apology and of the Crito confirms 
this view. 

The Phaedo is not one of the Socratic Dialogues of Plato ; nor,# 
on the other hand, can it be assigned to that later stage of the 
Platonic writings at which the doctrine of ideas appears to be for- 
gotten. It belongs rather to the intermediate period of the Platonic 

Phaedo . 

Introduc- 

tion. 

192 

Phaedo . 

Introduc- 

tion. 

Contents of the Dialogue . 

philosophy, which roughly corresponds to the Phaedrus, Gorgias, 
Republic, Theaetetus. Without pretending to determine the real 
time of their composition, the Symposium, Meno, Euthyphro, 
Apology, Phaedo may be conveniently read by us in this order as 
illustrative of the life of Socrates. Another chain may be formed of 
the Meno, Phaedrus, Phaedo, in which the immortality of the soul 
is connected with the doctrine of ideas. In the Meno the theory 
of ideas is based on the ancient belief in transmigration, which 
reappears again in the Phaedrus as well as in the Republic and 
Timaeus, and in all of them is connected with a doctrine of retri- 
bution. In the Phaedrus the immortality of the soul is supposed 
to rest on the conception of the soul as a principle of motion, 
whereas in the Republic the argument turns on the natural con- 
tinuance of the soul, which, if not destroyed by her own proper 
evil, can hardly be destroyed by any other. The soul of man in 
the Timaeus (42 foil.) is derived from the Supreme Creator, and 
either returns after death to her kindred star, or descends into the 
lower life of an animal. The Apology expresses the same view as 
the Phaedo, but with less confidence'; there the probability of 
death being a long sleep is not excluded. The Theaetetus also 
describes, in a digression, the desire of the soul to fly away and be 
with God — * and to fly to him is to be like him* (176 B). The 
Symposium may be observed to resemble as well as to differ from 
the Phaedo. While the first notion of immortality is only in the 
way of natural procreation or of posthumous fame and glory, the 
higher revelation of beauty, like the good in the Republic, is the 
vision of the eternal idea. So deeply rooted in Plato’s mind is the 
belief in immortality ; so various are the forms of expression which 
he employs. 

As in several other Dialogues, there is more of system in the 
Phaedo than appears at first sight. The succession of arguments 
is based on previous philosophies ; beginning with the mysteries 
and the Heracleitean alternation of opposites, and proceeding to 
the Pythagorean harmony and transmigration ; making a step by 
the aid of Platonic reminiscence, and a further step by the help of 
.the roCs of Anaxagoras ; until at last we rest in the conviction that 
the soul is inseparable from the ideas, and belongs to the world of 
the invisible and unknown. Then, as in the Gorgias or Republic, 
the curtain falls, and the veil of mythology descends upon the 

193 

The Dialogue a Drama. 

argument. After the confession of Socrates that he is an interested 
party, and the acknowledgment that no man of sense will think 
the details of his narrative true, but that something of the kind is 
true, we return from speculation to practice. He is himself jnore 
confident of immortality than he is of his own arguments ; and the 
confidence which he expresses is less strong than that which his 
cheerfulness and composure in death inspire in us. 

Difficulties of two kinds occur in the Phaedo— one kind to be 
explained out of contemporary philosophy, the other not admitting 
of an entire solution, (i) The difficulty which Socrates says that 
he experienced in explaining generation and corruption ; the 
assumption of hypotheses which proceed from the less general to 
the more general, and are testec^by their consequences ; the puzzle 
about greater and less ; the resort to the method of ideas, which 
to us appear only abstract terms,— these are to be explained out 
of the position of Socrates and Plato in the history of philosophy. 
They were living in a twilight between the sensible and the in- 
tellectual world, and saw no way of connecting them. They could 
neither explain the relation of ideas to phenomena, nor their corre- 
lation to one another. The very idea of relation or comparison 
was embarrassing to them. ' Yet in this intellectual uncertainty 
they had a conception of a proof from results, and of a moral truth, 
which remained unshaken amid the questionings of philosophy. 
(2) The other is a difficulty which is touched upon in the Republic 
as well as in the Phaedo, and is common to modern and ancient 
philosophy. Plato is not altogether satisfied with his safe and 
simple method of ideas. He wants to have proved to him by facts 
that all things are for the best, and that there is one mind or 
design which pervades them all. But this ‘ power of the best 1 he 
is unable to explain ; and therefore takes refuge in universal ideas. 
And are not we at this day seeking to discover that which Socrates 
in a glass darkly foresaw ? 

Some resemblances to the Greek drama may be noted in all the 
Dialogues of Plato. The Phaedo is the tragedy of which Socrates 
is the protagonist and Simmias and Cebes the secondary per- 
formers, standing to them in the same relation as to Glaucon and 
Adeimantus in the Republic. Ntt Dialogue has a greater unity of 
subject and feeling. Plato has certainly fulfilled the condition of 
Greek, or rather of all art, which requires that scenes of death and 

Phaedo. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

VOL. II. 

O 

194 

Phaedo. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

Artistic beauty of the Dialogue . 

suffering should be clothed in beauty. The gathering of the friends 
at the commencement of the Dialogue, the dismissal of Xanthippe, 
whose presence would have been out of place |t a philosophical 
discussion, but who returns again with her children to take a final 
farewell, the dejection of the audience at the temporary overthrow 
of the argument, the picture of Socrates playing with the hair of 
Phaedo, the final scene in which Socrates alone retains his com- 
posure— are masterpieces of art. And the chorus at the end might 
have interpreted the feeling of the play : ‘ There can no evil 
happen to a good man in life or death.’ 

‘ The art of concealing art ’ is nowhere more perfect than in 
those writings of Plato which describe the trial and death of 
Socrates. Their charm is their simplicity, which gives them veri- 
similitude ; and yet they touch, as if incidentally, and because they 
were suitable to the occasion, on some of the deepest truths of 
philosophy. There is nothing in any tragedy, ancient or modern, 
nothing in poetry or history (with one exception), like the last 
hours of Socrates in Plato. The master could not be more fitly 
occupied at such a time than in discoursing of immortality ; nor 
the disciples more divinely consoled. The arguments, taken in 
the spirit and not in, the letter, are our arguments ; and Socrates 
by anticipation may be even thought to refute some ‘eccentric 
notions ’ current in our own age. For there are philosophers 
among ourselves who do not seem to understand how much 
stronger is the power of intelligence, or of the best, than of Atlas, 
or mechanical force. How far the words attributed to Socrates 
were actually*uttered by him we forbear to ask ; for no answer 
can be given to this question. And it is better to resign our- 
selves to the feeling of a great work, than to linger among critical 
uncertainties. 

PHAEDO. 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE. 

PilAEDO, who is the narrator 
of the Dialogue to 
Echecrates of Phlius. 

Socrates. 

Attendant of the Prison. 

Apollodorcs. 
Sim mi as. 
Cebes. 

Crito. 

Scene:— The Prison of Socrates. 

Place of the Narration Phlius. 

steph. Echccrates. Were you yourself, Phaedo, in the prison with 
57 Socrates on the day when he drank the poison ? 

Phaedo . Yes, Echecrates, I was. 

' Ech . I should so like to hear about his death. What did 

he say in his last hours? We were informed that he died 
by taking poison, but no one knew anything more; for no 
Phliasian ever goes to Athens now, and it is a long time 
since any stranger from Athens has found his way hither ; 
so that we had no clear account. 

58 Phaed. Did you not hear of the proceedings at the trial ? 

Ech . Yes; some one told us about the trial, and we could 
not understand why, having been condemned, he should 
have been put to death, not at the time, but long afterwards. 
What was the reason of this ? 

Phaed . An accident, Echecrates: the stern of the ship 
which the Athenians send to Delos happened to have been 
crowned on the day before ho was tried. 

Ech . What is this ship ? 

Phaed . It is the ship in which, according to Athenian 
tradition, Theseus went to Crete when he took with him the 

o 2 

Phaedo . 

Echecrates, 

Phaedo. 

The death 
of Socrates 
was de- 
ferred by 
the holy 
season of 
the mission 
to Delos. 

196 

Phaedo . 

Echecrates, 

Phaedo. 

Phaedo is 
requested 
by Eche- 
crates to 
give an ac- 
count of the 
death of 
Socrates. 

He de- 
scribes his 
noble and 
fearless de- 
meanour. 

The narrative of Phaedo . 

fourteen youths, and was the saviour of them and of himself. 
And they are said to have vowed to Apollo at the time, that 
if they were saved they would send a yearly mission to 
Delos. Now this custom still continues, and the whole 
period of the voyage to and from Delos, beginning when the 
priest of Apollo crowns the stern of the ship, is a holy 
season, during which the city is not allowed to be polluted 
by public executions; and when the vessel is detained by 
contrary winds, the time spent in going and returning is 
very considerable. As I was saying, the ship was crowned 
on the day before the trial, and this was the reason why 
Socrates lay in prison and was not put to death until long 
after he was condemned. 

Ech. What was the manner of his death, Phaedo ? What 
was said or done? And which of his friends were with 
him? Or did the authorities forbid them to be present — 
so that he had no friends near him when he died ? 

Phaed. No ; there were several of them with him. 

Ech . If you have nothing to do, I wish that you would 
tell me what passed, as exactly as you can. 

Phaed. I have nothing at all to do, and will try to gratify 
your wish. To be reminded of Socrates is always the 
greatest delight to me, whether I speak myself or hear 
another speak of him. 

Ech . You will have listeners who are of the same mind 
with you, and I hope that you will be as exact as you 
can. • 

Phaed. I had a singular feeling at being in his company. 
For I could hardly believe that 1 was present at the death of 
a friend, and therefore I did not pity him, Echecrates he 
died so fearlessly, and his words and bearing were so noble 
and gracious, that to me he appeared blessed. I thought 
that in going to the other world he could not be without 
a divine, call, and that he would be happy, if any man ever 59 
was, when he arrived there; and therefore I did not pity 
.him as might have seemed natural at such an hour. But I 
had not the pleasure which I .usually feel in philosophical 
discourse (for philosophy was the theme of which we spoke). 

I was pleased, but in the pleasure there was also a strange 
admixture of pain ; for I reflected that he was soon to die, and 

The last morning: Xanthippe . 

this double feeling was shared by us all ; we were laughing 
and weeping by turns, especially the excitable Apollodorus 
— you know the sort of man ? 

Ech. Yes. 

Phaed. He was quite beside himself; and I and all of us 
were greatly moved. 

Ech . Who were present ? 

Phacd. Of native Athenians there were, besides Apollo- 
dorus, Critobulus and his father Crito, Hermogenes, Epi- 
genes, Aeschines, Antisthenes ; likewise Ctesippus of the 
deme of Paeania, Menexenus, and some others ; Plato, if I 
am not mistaken, was ill. 

Ech . Were there any strangers? 

Phaed. Yes, there were ; Simmias the Theban, and Cebes, 
and Phaedondes ; Euclid and Terpsion, who came from 
Megara. 

Ech. And was Aristippus there, and Cleombrotus? 

Phaed. No, they were said to be in Aegina. 

Ech. Any one else ? 

Phaed. I think that these were nearly all. 

Ech. Well, and what did you talk about? 

Phaed. I will begin at the beginning, and endeavour to 
repeat the entire conversation. On the previous days we 
had been in the habit of assembling early in the morning at 
the court in which the trial took place, and which is not far 
from the prison. There we used to wait talking with one 
another until the opening of the doors (for* they were not 
opened very early) ; then we went in and generally passed 
the day with Socrates. On the last morning we assembled 
sooner than usual, having heard on the day before when 
we quitted the prison in the evening that the sacred ship 
had come from Delos; and so we arranged to meet very 
early at the accustomed place. On our arrival the jailer who 
answered the door, instead of admitting us, came .out and 
told us to stay until he called us. ' For the Eleven/ he said, 
'are now with Socrates; they are taking off his chains, and 
giving orders that he is to .die to-day/ He soon returned 
60 and said that we might come in. On entering we found 
Socrates just released from chains, and Xanthippe, whom 
you know, sitting by him, and holding his child in her arms. 

197 

Phaedo. 

Echecrates, 

Phaedo. 

The So- 
cratic cir- 
cle : — the 
absence of 
Plato is 
noted. 

The meet- 
ing at the 
prison. 

The friends 
are denied 
admission 
while the 
Eleven are 
with So- 
crates. 

198 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

Socrates, 
whose 
chains have 
now been 
taken off, 
is led by the 
feeling of 
relief to 
remark on 
the curious 
manner in 
which 
pleasure 
and pain 
are always 
conjoined. 

Having 
been told 
in a dream 
that he 
should 
compose 
music, in 
order to 
satisfy a 
scruple 
about the 
meaning of 
the dream 
he has been 

Evenus the poet . 

When she saw us she uttered a cry and said, as women will : 
'O Socrates, this is the last time that either you will con- 
verse with your friends, or they with you/ Socrates turned 
to Crito and said : ‘ Crito, let some one take her home/ 
Some of Crito’s people accordingly led her away, crying out 
and beating herself. And when she was gone, Socrates, 
sitting up on the couch, bent and rubbed his leg, saying, as 
he was rubbing: How singular is the thing called pleasure, 
and how curiously related to pain, which might be thought 
to be the opposite of it ; for they are never present to a man 
at the same instant, and yet he who pursues cither is generally 
compelled to take the other ; their bodies are two, but they 
are joined by a single head. And I cannot help thinking 
that if Aesop had remembered them, he would have made a 
fable about God trying to reconcile their strife, and how, 
when he could not, he fastened their heads together; and 
this is the reason why when one comes the other follows: 
as I know by my own experience now, when after the pain 
in my leg which was caused by the chain pleasure appears to 
succeed. 

Upon this Cebes said : I am glad, Socrates, that you have 
mentioned the name of Aesop. For it reminds me of a 
question which has been asked by many, and was asked of 
me only the day before yesterday by Evenus the poet — he 
will be sure to ask it again, and therefore if you would like 
me to have an answer ready for him, you may as well tell me 
what I should say to him : — he wanted to know why you, who 
never before wrote a line of poetry, now that you are in 
prison are turning Aesop's fables into verse, and also com- 
posing that hymn in honour of Apollo. 

Tell him, Cebes, he replied, what is the truth — that I had 
no idea of rivalling him or his poems ; to do so, as I knew, 
would be no easy task. But I wanted to see whether I could 
purge away a scruple which I felt about the meaning of 
certain dreams. In the course of my life I have often had 
intimations in dreams 'that I should compose music/ The 
same dream came to me sometimes in one form, and some- 
times in another, but always saying the same or nearly the 
same words : 4 Cultivate and make music,' said the dream. 

And hitherto I had imagined that this was only intended to 

Philolaus of Thebes . 

exhort and encourage me in the study of philosophy, which 
6 1 has been the pursuit of my life, and is the noblest and best 
of music. The dream was bidding me do what I was already 
doing, in the same way that the competitor in a race is 
bidden by the spectators to run when he is already running. 
But I was not certain of this; for the dream might have 
meant music in the popular sense of the word, and being 
under sentence of death, and the festival giving me a respite, 
I thought that it would be safer for me to satisfy the scruple, 
and, in obedience to the dream, to compose a few verses before 
I departed. And first I made a hymn in honour of the god 
of the festival, and then considering that a poet, if he is 
really to be a poet, should not only put together words, but 
should invent stories, and that I have no invention, I took 
some fables of Aesop, which 1 had ready at hand and which 
I knew — they were the first I came upon —and turned them 
into verse. Tell this to Evenus, Cebes, and bid him be of 
good cheer; say that I would have him come after me if he 
be a wise man, and not tarry ; and that to-day I am likely 
to be going, for the Athenians say that I must. 

Simmias said : What a message for such a man 1 having 
been a frequent companion of his I should say that, as far as 
I know him, he will never take your advice unless he is 
obliged. 

Why, said Socrates, — is not Evenus a philosopher? 

I think that he is, said Simmias. 

Then he, or any man who has the spirit <3f philosophy, 
will be willing to die ; but he will not take his own life, for 
that is held to be unlawful. 

Here he changed his position, and put his legs off the 
couch on to the ground, and during the rest of the con- 
versation he remained sitting. 

Why do you say, enquired Cebes, that a man ought not to 
take his own life, but that the philosopher will be ready to 
follow the dying ? 

Socrates replied : And have you, Cebes and Simmias, who 
are the disciples of Philolaus,, never heard him speak of this? 

Yes, but his language was obscure, Socrates. 

My words, too, are only an echo ; but there is no reason 
why I should not repeat what I have heard : and indeed, as 

199 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Simmias, 

Cebes. 

writing 
verses while 
he was in 
prison. 

Evenus the 
poet had 
been curi- 
ous about 
the mean- 
ing of this 
behaviour 
of his, and 
Socrates 
gives him 
the expla- 
nation of it, 
bidding 
him be of 
good cheer, 
and come 
after him. 

‘ But he will 
not come.’ 

Socrates 
replies that 
a philoso- 
pher like 
Evenus 
should be 
ready to 

200 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

SlMMIAS, 

Cebes. 

die, though 
he must not 
take his 
own life. 

This inci- 
dental re- 
mark leads 
to a dis- 
cussion on 
suicide. 

Man is a 
prisoner 
who has no 
right to run 
away; and 
he is also a 
possession 
of the gods 
and must 
not rob his 
masters. 

And why 
should he 
wish to 
leave the 
best of ser- 
vices ? 

Cebes speaking in his native dialect . 

I am going to another place, it is very meet for me to be 
thinking and talking of the nature of the pilgrimage which I 
am about to make. What can I do better in the interval 
between this and the setting of the sun ? 

Then tell me, Socrates, why is suicide held to be un- 
lawful ? as I have certainly heard Philolaus, about whom you 
were just now asking, affirm when he was staying with us at 
Thebes ; and there are others who say the same, although I 
have never understood what was meant by any of them. 

Do not lose heart, replied Socrates, and the day may come 62 
when you will understand. I suppose that you wonder why, 
when other things which are evil may be good at certain 
times and to certain persons, death is to be the only ex- 
ception, and why, when a man is better dead, he is not 
permitted to be his own benefactor, but must wait for the 
hand of another. 

Fery true, said Cebes, laughing gently and speaking in 
his native Boeotian. 

I admit the appearance of inconsistency in what I am 
saying ; but there may not be any real inconsistency after all. 
There is a doctrine whispered in secret that man is a 
prisoner who has no right to open the door and run away ; 
this is a great mystery which I do not quite understand. 
Yet I too believe that the gods are our guardians, and that 
we men are a possession of theirs. Do you not agree ? 

Yes, I quite agree, said Cebes. 

And if one* of your own possessions, an ox or an ass, for 
example, took the liberty of putting himself out of the way 
when you had given no intimation of your wish that he 
should die, would you not be angry with him, and would you 
not punish him if you could ? 

Certainly, replied Cebes. 

Then, if we look at the matter thus, there may be reason in 
saying that a man should wait, and not take his own life until 
God summons him, as he is now summoning me. 

Yes, Socrates, said Cebes, there seems to be truth in what 
you say. And yet how can you reconcile this seemingly true 
belief that God is our guardian and we his possessions, with 
the willingness to die which you were just now attributing to 
the philosopher ? That the wisest of men should be willing 

Simmias and Cebes, 

to leave a service in which they are ruled by the gods who 
are the best of rulers, is not reasonable ; for surely no wise 
man thinks that when set at liberty he can take better care of 
himself than the gods take of him. A fool may perhaps 
think so — he may argue that he had better run away from 
his master, not considering that his duty is to remain to the 
end, and not to run away from the good, and that there 
would be no sense in his running away. The wise man will 
want to be ever with him who is better than himself. Now 
this, Socrates, is the reverse of what was just now said ; for 
upon this view the wise man should sorrow and the fool 
rejoice at passing out of life. 

63 The earnestness of Cebes seemed to please Socrates. 
Here, said he, turning to us, is a man who is always enquir- 
ing, and is not so easily convinced by the first thing which 
he hears. 

And certainly, added Simmias, the'objcction which he is 
now making does appear to me to have some force. For 
what can be the meaning of a truly wise man wanting to fly 
away and lightly leave a master who is better than himself? 
And I rather imagine that Cebes is referring to you ; he 
thinks that you are too ready to leave us, and too ready to 
leave the gods whom you acknowledge to be our good 
masters. 

Yes, replied Socrates; there is reason in what you say. 
And so you^think that I ought to answer your indictment as 
if I were in a court ? * 

We should like you to do so, said Simmias. 

Then I must try to make a more successful defence before 
you than I did before the judges. For I am quite ready to 
admit, Simmias and Cebes, that I ought to be grieved at 
death, if I were not persuaded in the first place that I am 
going to other gods who are wise and good (of which I am 
as certain as I can be of any such matters), and secondly 
(though I am not so sure of this last) to men departed, better 
than those whom 1 leave behind; and therefore I do not, 
grieve as I might have done, for I have good hope that there 
is yet something remaining for the dead, and as has been 
said of old, some far better thing for the good than for the 
evil. 

201 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Simmias, 

Cebes. 

You your- 
self, So- 
crates, are 
too ready 
to run 
away. 

Socrates 
replies that 
he is going 
to other 
gods who 
are wise 
and good. 

202 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 
Sim mias, 
Crito. 

The true 
philosopher 
is always 
dying 
why then 
should he 
avoid the 
death which 
he desires ? 

* How the 
world will 
laugh when 
they hear 
this ! * 

Yes, they 
do not un- 
derstand 

The gaoler s importunity . 

But do you mean to take away your thoughts with you, 
Socrates? said Simmias. Will you not impart them to us? 
—for they are a benefit in which we too are entitled to share. 
Moreover, if you succeed in convincing us, that will be an 
answer to the charge against yourself. 

I will do my best, replied Socrates. But you must first let 
me hear what Crito wants ; he has long been wishing to say 
something to me. 

Only this, Socrates, replied Crito : —the attendant who is 
to give you the poison has been telling me, and he wants me 
to tell you, that you are not to talk much ; talking, he says, 
increases heat, and this is apt to interfere with the action 
of the poison ; persons who excite themselves are sometimes 
obliged to take a second or even a third dose. 

Then, said Socrates, let him mind his business and be pre- 
pared to give the poison twice or even thrice if necessary ; 
that is all. 

I knew quite well what you would say, replied Crito ; but I 
was obliged to satisfy him. 

Never mind him, he said. 

And now, O my judges, I desire to prove to you that the 
real philosopher has reason to be of good cheer when he is 
about to die, and that after death he may hope to obtain the 64 
greatest good in the other world. And how this may be, 
Simmias and Cebes, I will endeavour to explain. For I 
deem that the true votary of philosophy is likely to be 
misunderstood by other men ; they do not perceive that he 
is always pursuing death and dying ; and if this be so, and 
he has had the desire of death all his life long, why when 
his time comes should he repine at that which he has been 
always pursuing and desiring ? 

Simmias said laughingly: Though not in a laughing 
humour, you have made me laugh, Socrates; for I cannot 
help thinking that the many when they hear your words will 
say how truly you have described philosophers, and our 
.people at home will likewise say that the life which philoso- 
phers desire is in reality death, and that they have found 
them out to be deserving of the death which they desire. 

And they are right, Simmias, in thinking so, with the 
exception of the words ' they have found them out ; ' for they 

Simmias and Socrates . 

have not found out either what is the nature of that death 
which the true philosopher deserves, or how he deserves or 
desires death. But enough of them : — let us discuss the 
matter among ourselves. Do we believe that there is such a 
thing as death ? 

To be sure, replied Simmias. 

Is it not the separation of soul and body? And to be 
dead is the completion of this ; when the soul exists in 
herself, and is released from the body and the body is 
released from the soul, what is this but death ? 

Just so, he replied. 

There is another question, which will probably throw light 
on our present enquiry if you and I can agree about it : — 
Ought the philosopher to care about the pleasures —if they 
are to be called pleasures — of eating and drinking? 

Certainly not, answered Simmias. 

And what about the pleasures of love— should he care for 
them ? 

By no means. 

And will he think much of the other ways of indulging the 
body, for example, the acquisition . of costly raiment, or 
sandals, or other adornments of the body? Instead of 
caring about them, does he not rather despise anything more 
than nature needs ? What do you say ? 

I should say that the true philosopher would despise them. 

Would you not say that he is entirely concerned with the 
soul and not with the body? He would like, as far as he 
can, to get away from the body and to turn to the soul. 

Quite true. 

In matters of this sort philosophers, above all other men, 
65 may be observed in every sort of way to dissever the soul 
from the communion of the body. 

Very true. 

Whereas, Simmias, the rest of the world are of opinion 
that to him who has no sense of pleasure and no part in 
bodily pleasure, life is not worth having ; and that he who .is 
indifferent about them is as good as dead. 

That is also true. 

What again shall we say of the actual acquirement of 
knowledge ?— is the body, if invited to share in the enquiry, 

203 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Simmias. 

the nature 
of death, 
or why 
the philo- 
sopher 
desires or 
deserves it. 

Life is best 
when the 
soul is most 
freed from 
the con- 
cerns of the 
body, and 
is alone and 
by herself. 

204 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Simmias. 

The senses 
are untrust- 
worthy 
guides : 
they mis- 
lead the 
soul in the 
search for 
truth. 

And there- 
fore the 
philosopher 
runs away 
from the 
body. 

Another 
argument. 
The abso- 
lute truth 
of justice, 
beauty, and 
other ideas 
is not per- 
ceived by 
the senses, 
which only 
introduce a 
disturbing 
element. 

The doctrine of ideas . 

a hinderer or a helper? I mean to say, have sight and 
hearing any truth in them ? Are they not, as the poets are 
always telling us, inaccurate witnesses ? and yet, if even they 
are inaccurate and indistinct, what is to be said of the other 
senses ? — for you will allow that they are the best of them ? 

Certainly, he replied. 

Then when does the soul attain truth ? — for in attempting 
to consider anything in company with the body she is 
obviously deceived. 

True. 

Then must not true existence be revealed to her in thought, 
if at all? 

Yes. 

And thought is best when the mind is gathered into herself 
and none of these things trouble her — neither sounds nor 
sights nor pain nor any pleasure, — when she takes leave of 
the body, and has as little as possible to do with it, when she 
has no bodily sense or desire, but is aspiring after true 
being ? 

Certainly. 

And in this the philosopher dishonours the body ; his soul 
runs away from his body and desires to be alone and by 
herself? 

That is true. 

Well, but there is another thing, Simmias : Is there or is 
there not an absolute justice? 

AssuredlyThere is. 

And an absolute beauty and absolute good ? 

Of course. 

But did you ever behold any of them with your eyes ? 

Certainly not. 

Or did you ever reach them with any other bodily sense ? 
— and I speak not of these alone, but of absolute greatness, 
and health, and strength, and of the essence or true nature of 
everything. Has the reality of them ever been perceived by 
yo.u through the bodily organs ? or rather, is not the nearest 
approach to the knowledge of their several natures made by 
him who so orders his intellectual vision as to have the most 
exact conception of the essence of each thing which he 
considers ? 

The bodily nature. 

205 

Certainly. 

And he attains to the purest knowledge of them who goes 
to each with the mind alone, not introducing or intruding in 
the act of thought sight or any other sense together with 
66 reason, but with the very light of the mind in her own clear- 
ness searches into the very truth of each ; he who has got 
rid, as far as he can, of eyes and ears and, so to speak, of the 
whole body, these being in his opinion distracting elements 
which when they infect the soul hinder her from acquiring 
truth and knowledge— who, if not he, is likely to attain to the 
knowledge of true being? 

What you say has a wonderful truth in it, Socrates, replied 
Simmias. 

And when real philosophers consider all these things, will 
they not be led to make a reflection which they will express 
in words something like the following ? 1 Have we not found,’ 

they will say, 'a path of thought which seems to bring us and 
our argument to the conclusion, that while we are in the 
body, and while the soul is infected with the evils of the body, 
our desire will not be satisfied ? and our desire is of the truth. . 
For the body is a source of endless trouble to us by reason of 
the mere requirement of food ; and is liable also to diseases 
which overtake and impede us in the search after true being : 
it fills us full of loves, and lusts, and fears, and fancies of all 
kinds, and endless foolery, and in fact, as men say, takes 
away from us the power of thinking at all. Whence come 
wars, and fightings, and factions ? whence but from the body 
and the lusts of the body ? Wars are occasioned by the love 
of money, and money has to be acquired for the sake and in 
the service of the body ; and by reason of all these impedi- 
ments we have no time to give to philosophy ; and, last and 
worst of all, even if we are at leisure and betake ourselves to 
some speculation, the body is always breaking in upon us, 
causing turmoil and confusion in our enquiries, and so 
amazing us that we are prevented from seeing the truth. 
It has been proved to us by experience that if we would have 
pure knowledge of anything we must be quit of the body— 
the soul in herself must behold things in themselves: and 
then we shall attain the wisdom which we desire, and of 
which we say that we are lovers ; not while we live, but after 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Simmias. 

The soul 
in herself 
must per- 
ceive things 
in them- 
selves. 

206 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

SlMMlAS, 

Purification 
is the separ- 
ation of the 
soul from 
the body. 

The hope of the departing soul. 

death ; for if while in company with the body, the soul 
cannot have pure knowledge, one of two things follows — 
either knowledge is not to be attained at all, or, if at all, after 
death. For then, and not till then, the soul will be parted 67 
from the body and exist in herself alone. In this present 
life, I reckon that we make the nearest approach to know- 
ledge when we have the least possible intercourse or com- 
munion with the body, and are not surfeited with the bodily 
nature, but keep ourselves pure until the hour when God 
himself is pleased to release us. And thus having got rid of 
the foolishness of the body we shall be pure and hold con- 
verse with the pure, and know of ourselves the clear light 
everywhere, which is no other than the light of truth.’ For 
the impure are not permitted to approach the pure. These 
are the sort of words, Simmias, which the true lovers of 
knowledge cannot help saying to one another, and thinking. 
You would agree; would you not? 

Undoubtedly, Socrates. 

But, O my friend, if this be true, there is great reason to 
hope that, going whither I go, when I have come to the end 
of my journey, I shall attain that which has been the pursuit 
of my life. And therefore I go on my way rejoicing, and not 
I only, but every other man who believes that his mind has 
been made ready and that he is in a manner purified. 

Certainly, replied Simmias. 

And what is purification but the separation of the soul 
from the body, as I was saying before ; the habit of the soul 
gathering and collecting herself into herself from all sides 
out of the body ; the dwelling in her own place alone, as in 
another life, so also in this, as far as she can ; — the release 
of the soul from the chains of the body? 

Very true, he said. 

And this separation and release of the soul from the body 
is termed death ? 

To be sure, he said. 

And the true philosophers, and they only, are ever seeking 
to release the soul. Is not the separation and release of the 
soul from the body their especial study ? 

That is true. 

And, as I was saying at first, there would be a ridiculous 

The true philosopher . 

207 

contradiction in men studying to live as nearly as they can in 
a state of death, and yet repining when it comes upon them. 

Clearly. 

And the true philosophers, Simmias, are always occupied 
in the practice of dying, wherefore also to them least of all 
men is death terrible. Look at the matter thus if they 
have been in every way the enemies of the body, and are 
wanting to be alone with the soul, when this desire of theirs 
is granted, how inconsistent would they be if they trembled 
and repined, instead of rejoicing at their departure to that 
place where, when they arrive, they hope to gain that which 
68 in life they desired — and this was wisdom— and at the same 
time to be rid of the company of their enemy. Many a man 
has been willing to go to the world below animated by the 
hope of seeing there an earthly love, or wife, or son, and 
conversing with them. And will he who is a true lover of 
wisdom, and is strongly persuaded in like manner that only 
in the world below he can worthily enjoy her, still repine at 
death ? Will he not depart with joy? Surely he will, O my 
friend, if he be a true philosopher. For he will have a firm 
conviction that there, and there only, he can find wisdom in 
her purity. And if this be true, he would be very absurd, as 
I was saying, if he were afraid of death. 

He would indeed, replied Simmias. 

And when you see a man who is repining at the approach 
of death, is not his reluctance a sufficient proof that he is not 
a lover of wisdom, but a lover of the body, ,and probably 
at the same time a lover of either money or power, or both ? 

Quite so, he replied. 

And is not courage, Simmias, a quality which is specially 
characteristic of the philosopher? 

Certainly. 

There is temperance again, which even by the vulgar is 
supposed to consist in the control and regulation of the 
passions, and in the sense of superiority to them — is not 
temperance a virtue belonging to those only who despise the 
body, and who pass their lives in philosophy ? 

Most assuredly. 

For the courage and temperance of other men, if you will 
consider them, are really a contradiction. 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Simmias. 

And there- 
fore the 
true philo- 
sopher who 
has been 
always try- 
ing to dis- 
engage 
himself 
from the 
body will 
rejoice in 
death. 

He alone 
possesses 
the true 
secret of 
virtue, 
which in or- 
dinary men 
is merely 
based on a 
calculation 
of lesser 
and greater 
evils. 

208 

The exchange of virtue. 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 
Sim mias. 

Ordinary 
men are 
courageous 
only from 
cowardice ; 
temperate 
from intem- 
perance. 

True virtue 
is insepar- 
able from 
wisdom. 

How SO? 

Well, he said, you are aware that death is regarded by 
men in general as a great evil. 

Very true, he said. 

And do not courageous men face death because they are 
afraid of yet greater evils ? 

That is quite true. 

Then all but the philosophers are courageous only from 
fear, and because they are afraid ; and yet that a man should 
be courageous from fear, and because he is a coward, is 
surely a strange thing. 

Very true. 

And are not the temperate exactly in the same case? 
They are temperate because they are intemperate— which 
might seem to be a contradiction, but is nevertheless the sort 
of thing which happens with this foolish temperance. For 
there are pleasures which they are afraid of losing ; and in 
their desire to keep them, they abstain from some pleasures, 
because they are overcome by others ; and although to be 
conquered by pleasure is called by men intemperance, to 69 
them the conquest of pleasure consists in being conquered 
by pleasure. And that is what I mean by saying that, in a 
sense, they are made temperate through intemperance. 

Such appears to be the case. 

Yet the exchange of one fear or pleasure or pain for 
another fear or pleasure or pain, and of the greater for the 
less, as if they were coins, is not the exchange of virtue. O 
my blessed Simmias, is there not one true coin for which all 
things ought to be exchanged ?— and that is wisdom; and 
only in exchange for this, and in company with this, is any- 
thing truly bought or sold, whether courage or temperance 
or justice. And is not all true virtue the companion of 
wisdom, no matter what fears or pleasures or other similar 
goods or evils may or may not attend her ? But the virtue 
which is made up of these goods, when they are severed 
from wisdom and exchanged with one another, is a shadow 
* of virtue only, nor is there any freedom or health or truth in 
her ; but in the true exchange there is a purging away of all 
these things, and temperance, and justice, and courage, and ' 
wisdom herself are the purgation of them. The founders of 

209 

The incredulity of Cedes. 

the mysteries would appear to have had a real meaning, and 
were not talking nonsense when they intimated in a figure 
long ago that he who passes unsanctified and uninitiated into 
the world below will lie in a slough, but that he who arrives 
there after initiation and purification will dwell with the 
gods. For 'many,’ as they say in the mysteries, 'are the 
thyrsus-bearers, but few are the mystics/ — meaning, as I 
interpret the words, 'the true philosophers/ In the number 
of whom, during my whole life, I have been seeking, accord- 
ing to my ability, to find a place whether I have sought in 
a right way or not, and whether I have succeeded or not, J 
shall truly know in a little while, if God will, when I myself 
arrive in the other world — such is my belief. • And therefore 
I maintain that I am right, Simmias and Cebes, in not 
grieving or repining at parting from you and my masters 
in this world, for I believe that I shall equally find good 
masters and friends in another world. But most men do 
not believe this saying ; if then I succeed in convincing you 
by my defence better than I did the Athenian judges, it will 
be well. i 

Cebes answered : I agree, Socrates, in the greater part of 
70 what you say. But in what concerns the soul, men are apt 
to be iflcredulous ; they fear that when she has left the body 
her place may be nowhere, and that on the very day of death 
she may perish and come to an end — immediately on her re- 
lease from the body, issuing fojth dispersed like smoke or 
air and in her flight vanishing away into nothingness. If 
she could only be collected into herself after she has obtained 
release from the evils of which you were speaking, there 
would be good reason to hope, Socrates, that what you say 
is true. But surely it requires a great deal of argument and 
many proofs to show that when the man is dead his soul 
yet exists, and has any force or intelligence. 

True, Cebes, said Socrates; and shall I suggest that we 
converse a little of the probabilities of these things ? 

I am sure, said Cebes, that I should greatly like to know 
your opinion about them. 

’ I reckon, said Socrates, that no one who heard me now, 
not even if he were one of my old enemies, the Comic poets, 
could accuse me of idle talking about matters in which I 
VOL. 11. p 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

The thyr- 
sus-bearers 
and the 
mystics. 

Fears are 
entertained 
lest the soul 
when she 
dies should 
be scattered 
to the 
winds. 

The discus- 
sion suited 
to the occa- 
sion. 

210 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

All things 
which have 
opposites 
are gene- 
rated out of 
opposites. 

And there 
are inter- 
mediate 
processes 

The alternation of all existence . 

have no concern : — If you please, then, we will proceed with 
the enquiry. 

Suppose we consider the question whether the souls of men 
after death are or are not in the world below. There comes 
into my mind an ancient doctrine which affirms that they 
go from hence into the other world, and returning hither, are 
born again from the dead. Now if it be true that the living 
come from the dead, then our souls must exist in the other 
world, for if not, how could they have been born again ? 
And this would be conclusive, if there were any real evidence 
that the living are only born from the dead ; but if this is not 
so, then other arguments will have to be adduced. 

Very true, replied Cebes. 

Then let us consider the whole question, not in relation to 
man only, but in relation to animals generally, and to plants, 
and to everything of which there is generation, and the proof 
will be easier. Are not all things which have opposites 
generated out of their opposites? I mean such things as 
good and evil, just and unjust — and there are innumerable 
other opposites which are generated out of opposites. And I 
want to show that in all opposites there is of necessity a 
similar alternation ; I mean to say, for example, that any- 
thing which becomes greater must become greater after being 
less. 

True. 

And that which becomes less must have been once greater 
and then have become less. 7 1 

Yes. 

And the weaker is generated from the stronger, and the 
swifter from the slower. 

Very true. 

And the worse is from the better, and the more just is from 
the more unjust. 

Of course. 

And is this true of all opposites? and are we convinced 
that all of them are generated out of opposites ? 

Yes. 

And in this universal opposition of all things, are there not 
also two intermediate processes which are ever going on, from 
one to the other opposite, and back again ; where there is a 

21 I 

Life and death like waking and sleeping . 

greater and a less there is also an intermediate process of 
increase and diminution, and that which grows is said to 
wax, and that which decays to wane ? 

Yes, he said. 

And there are many other processes, such as division and 
composition, cooling and heating, which equally involve a 
passage into and out of one another. And this necessarily 
holds of all opposites, even though not always expressed in 
words — they are really generated out of one another, and 
there is a passing or process from one to the other of them ? 

Very true, he replied. 

Well, and is there not an opposite of life, as sleep is the 
opposite of waking ? 

True, he said. 

And what is it ? 

Death, he answered. 

And these, if they are opposites, are generated the one 
from the other, and have their two intermediate processes 
also ? 

Of course. 

Now, said Socrates, I will analyze one of the two pairs of 
opposites which I have mentioned to you, and also its inter- 
mediate processes, and you shall analyze the other to me. 
One of them I term sleep, the other waking. The state of 
sleep is opposed to the state of waking, and out of sleeping 
waking is generated, and out of waking, sleeping ; and the 
process of generation is in the one case falling asleep, and in 
the other waking up. Do you agree ? 

I entirely agree. 

Then, suppose that you analyze life and death to me in the 
same manner. Is not death opposed to life ? 

Yes. 

And they are generated one from the other ? 

Xes. 

What is generated from the living ? 

The dead. 

And what from the dead ? 

I can only say in answer — the living. 

Then the living, whether things or persons, Cebes, are 
generated from the dead ? 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

or passages 
into and 
out of one 
another, 
such as in- 
crease and 
diminution, 
division 
and com- 
position, 
and the 
like. 

Life is op- 
posed to 
death, as 
waking is 
to sleeping, 
and in like 
manner 
they are 
generated 
frgm one 
another. 

P 2 

2 12 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Ceres. 

If there 
were no 
compensa- 
tion or 
return in 
nature, all 
things 
would pass 
into the 
state of 
death. 

The sleep- 
ing Endy- 
mion would 
be unmean- 
ing in a 
world of • 
sleepers. 

The circle of nature . 

That is clear, he replied. 

Then the inference is that our souls exist in the world 
below ? 

That is true. 

And one of the two processes or generations is visible — for 
surely the act of dying is visible ? 

Surely, he said. 

What then is to be the result? Shall we exclude the 
opposite process? and shall we suppose nature to walk on 
one leg only? Must we not rather assign to death some 
corresponding process of generation ? 

Certainly, he replied. 

And what is that process ? 

Return to life. 

And return to life, if there be such a thing, is the birth 
of the dead into the world of the living? 7 2 

Quite true. 

Then here is a new way by which wc arrive at the con- 
clusion that the living come from the dead, just as the dead 
come from the living ; and this, if true, affords a most certain 
proof that the souls of the dead exist in some place out of 
which they come again. 

Yes, Socrates, he said ; the conclusion seems to flow 
necessarily out of our previous admissions. 

And that these admissions were not unfair, Cebes, he said, 
may be shown, I think, as follows : If generation were in a 
straight lind only, and there were no compensation or circle 
in nature, no turn or return of elements into their opposites, 
then you know that all things would at last have the same 
form and pass into the same state, and there would be no 
more generation of them. 

What do you mean ? he said. 

A simple thing enough, which I will illustrate by the case 
of sleep, he replied. You know that if there were no alter- 
nation of sleeping and waking, the tale of the sleeping 
Endymion would in the end have no meaning, because all 
other things would be asleep too, and he would not be dis- 
tinguishable from the rest. Or if there were composition 
only, and no division of substances, then the chaos of 
Anaxagoras would come again. And in like manner, my 

213 

The doctrine of recollection . 

dear Cebes, if all things which partook of life were to die, Phaedo . 

and after they were dead remained in the form of death, and Socrates, 
did not come to life again* all would at last die, and nothing 
would be alive— what other result could there be? For if the 
living spring from any other things, and they too die, must 
not all things at last be swallowed up in death ? 1 

There is no escape, Socrates, said Cebes ; and to me your 
argument seems to be absolutely true. 

Yes, he said, Cebes, it is and must be so, in my opinion ; 
and we have not been deluded in making these admissions ; 
but I am confident that there truly is such a thing as living 
again, and that the living spring from the dead, and that the 
souls of the dead are in existence, and that the good souls 
have a better portion than the evil. 

Cebes added : Your favourite doctrine, Socrates, that Thedoc- 
knowledge is simply recollection, if true, also necessarily collection 3 * 
implies a previous time in which we have learned that which implies a 
we now recollect. But this would be impossible unless our p revlousex " 
73 soul had been in some place before existing in the form of 
man ; here then is another proof of the soul’s immortality. 

But tell me, Cebes, said Simmias, interposing, what argu- 
ments are urged in favour of this doctrine of recollection. I 
am not very sure at the moment that I remember them. 

One excellent proof, said Cebes, is afforded by questions. You put a 
If you put a question to a person in a right way, he will give ^^rson l ° 
a true answer of himself, but how could he do this unless and he 
there were knowledge and right reason already in him? 

And this is most clearly shown when he is taken to a diagram mind, 
or to anything of that sort 2 . 

But if, said Socrates, you are still incredulous, Simmias, I 
would ask you whether you may not agree with me when you 
look at the matter in another way ; — I mean, if you are still 
incredulous as to whether knowledge is recollection ? 

Incredulous I am not, said Simmias ; but I want to have 
this doctrine of recollection brought to my own recollection, 
and, from what Cebes has said, I am beginning to recollect 
and be convinced : but I should still like to hear what you * 
were going to say. 

This is what I would say, he replied : — We should agree, 

1 But cp. Rep. x. 6ii A. a Cp. Meno 83 ff. 

214 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Simmias. 

A person 
may recol- 
lect what he 
has never 
seen toge- 
ther with 
what he has 
seen. How 
is this ? 

Recollec- 
tion is the 
knowledge 
of some 
person or 
thing de- 
rived from 
some other 
person or 
thing which 
may be 
either like 
or unlike 
them. 

The association of ideas . 

if I am not mistaken, that what a man recollects he must 
have known at some previous time. 

Very true. 

And what is the nature of this knowledge or recollection ? 

I mean to ask, Whether a person who, having seen or heard 
or in any way perceived anything, knows not only that, but 
has a conception of something else which is the subject, not 
of the same but of some other kind of knowledge, may not be 
fairly said to recollect that of which he has the conception ? 

What do you mean ? 

I mean what I may illustrate by the following instance : — 
The knowledge of a lyre is not the same as the knowledge of 
a man ? 

True. 

And yet what is the feeling of lovers when they recognize 
a lyre, or a garment, or anything else which the beloved has 
been in the habit of using ? Do not they, from knowing the 
lyre, form in the mind’s eye an image of the youth to whom 
the lyre belongs ? And this is recollection. In like manner 
any one who sees Simmias may remember Cebes ; and there 
are endless examples of the same thing. 

Endless, indeed, replied Simmias. 

And recollection is most commonly a process of recovering 
that which has been already forgotten through time and 
inattention. 

Very true, he said. 

Well ; and may you not also from seeing the picture of a 
horse or a lyre remember a man ? and from the picture of 
Simmias, you may be led to remember Cebes ; 

True. 

Or you may also be led to the recollection of Simmias 
himself? 

Quite so. 74 

And in all these cases, the recollection may be derived 
from things either like or unlike ? 

It may be. 

And when the recollection is derived from like things, then 
another consideration is sure to arise, which is — whether the 
likeness in any degree falls short or not of that which is 
recollected ? 

The ideal equality and the material equals . 

Very true, he said. 

And shall we proceed a step further, and affirm that there 
is such a thing as equality, not of one piece of wood or stone 
with another, but that, over and above this, there is absolute 
equality ? Shall we say so ? 

Say so, yes, replied Simmias, and swear to it, with all the 
confidence in life. 

And do we know the nature of this absolute essence ? 

To be sure, he said. 

And whence did we obtain our knowledge ? Did we not 
see equalities of material things, such as pieces of wood and 
stones, and gather from them the idea of an equality which is 
different from them? For you will acknowledge that there 
is a difference. Or look at the matter in another way : — Do 
not the same pieces of wood or stone appear at one time 
equal, and at another time unequal ? 

That is certain. 

But are real equals ever unequal ? or is the idea of equality 
the same as of inequality ? 

Impossible, Socrates. 

Then these (so-called) equals are not the same with the idea 
of equality ? 

I should say, clearly not, Socrates. 

And yet from these equals, although differing from the idea 
of equality, you conceived and attained that idea ? 

Very true, he said. 

Which might be like, or might be unlike them ? 

Yes. 

But that makes no difference : whenever from seeing one 
thing you conceived another, whether like or unlike, there 
must surely have been an act of recollection ? 

Very true. 

But what would you say of equal portions of wood and 
stone, or other material equals ? and what is the impression 
produced by them ? Are they equals in the same sense in 
which absolute equality is equal ? or do they fall short of 
this perfect equality in a measure ? 

Yes, he said, in a very great measure too. 

And must we not allow, that when I or any one, looking at 
any object, observes that the thing which he sees aims at 

215 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Simmias. 

The im- 
perfect 
equality of 
pieces of 
wood or 
stone sug- 
gests the 
perfect idea 
of equality. 

But if the 
material 
equals when 

2l6 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Si mm ias. 

compared 
to the ideal 
equality fall 
short of it, 
the ideal 
equality 
with which 
they are 
compared 
must be 
prior to 
them, 

though only 
known 
through the 
medium of 
them. 

That higher 
sense of 
equality 
must have 
been known* 
to us before 
we were 
born, was 
forgotten at 
birth, and 

The ideal equality . 

being some other thing, but falls short of, and cannot be, that 
other thing, but is inferior, he who makes this observation 
must have had a previous knowledge of that to which the 
other, although similar, was inferior ? 

Certainly. 

And has not this been our own case in the matter of equals 
and of absolute equality ? 

Precisely. 

Then we must have known equality previously to the time 
when we first saw the material equals, and reflected that all 75 
these apparent equals strive to attain absolute equality, but 
fall short of it ? 

Very true. 

And we recognize also that this absolute equality has only 
been known, and can only be known, through the medium of 
sight or touch, or of some other of the senses, which are all 
alike in this respect ? 

Yes, Socrates, as far as the argument is concerned, one of 
them is the same as the other. 

From the senses then is derived the knowledge that all 
sensible things aim at an absolute equality of which they fall 
short ? 

Yes. 

Then before we began to see or hear or perceive in any 
way, we must have had a knowledge of absolute equality, or 
we could not have referred to that standard the equals which 
are derived from the senses ? — for to that they all aspire, and 
of that they fall short. 

No other inference can be drawn from the previous state- 
ments. 

And did we not see and hear and have the use of our other 
senses as soon as we were born ? 

Certainly. 

Then we must have acquired the knowledge of equality at 
some previous time ? 

Yes. 

That is to say, before we were born, I suppose ? 

True. 

And if we acquired this knowledge before we were born, 
and were born having the use of it, then we also knew before 

The two alternatives . 

217 

we were born and at the instant of birth not only the equal or 
the greater or the less, but all other ideas ; for we are not 
speaking only of equality, but of beauty, goodness, justice, 
holiness, and of all which we stamp with the name of essence 
in the dialectical process, both when we ask and when we 
answer questions. Of all this we may certainly affirm that 
we acquired the knowledge before birth ? 

We may. 

But if, after having acquired, we have not forgotten what 
in each case we acquired, then we must always have come 
into life having knowledge, and shall always continue to know 
as long as life lasts — for knowing is the acquiring and retain- 
ing knowledge and not forgetting. Is not forgetting, Simmias, 
just the losing of knowledge ? 

Quite true, Socrates. 

But if the knowledge which we acquired before birth was 
lost by us at birth, and if afterwards by the use of the senses 
we recovered what we previously knew, will not the process 
which we call learning be a recovering of the knowledge 
which is natural to us, and may not this be rightly termed 
recollection ? 

Very true. 

76 So much is clear — that when we perceive something, either 
by the help of sight, or hearing, or some other sense, from 
that perception we are able to obtain a notion of some other 
thing like or unlike which is associated with it but has been 
forgotten. Whence, as I was saying, one of two alternatives 
follows: — either we had this knowledge at birth, and con- 
tinued to know through life ; or, after birth, those who are 
said to learn only remember, and learning is simply recol- 
lection. 

Socrates, 

Simmias. 

covered by 
the use of 
the senses. 

What is 
called 
learning 
therefore is 
only a re- 
collection 
of ideas 
which we 
possessed 
in a previ- 
ous state. 

Yes, that is quite true, Socrates. 

And which alternative, Simmias, do you prefer? Had we 
the knowledge at our birth, or did we recollect the things 
which we knew previously to our birth ? 

I cannot decide at the moment. 

At any rate you can decide whether he who has knowledge* 
will or will not be able to render an account of his knowledge ? 
What do you say ? 

Certainly, he will. 

218 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 
Si mm ias. 

But if so, 
our souls 
must have 
existed be- 
fore they 
were in the 
form of 
man ; or if 
not the 
souls, then 
not the 
ideas. 

The pre-existence of the soul ' 

But do you think that every man is able to give an account 
of these very matters about which we are speaking ? 

Would that they could, Socrates, but I rather fear that 
to-morrow, at this time, there will no longer be any one 
alive who is able to give an account of them such as ought 
to be given. 

Then you are not of opinion, Simmias, that all men know 
these things ? 

Certainly not. 

They are in process of recollecting that which they learned 
before ? 

Certainly. 

But when did our souls acquire this knowledge ? — not since 
we were born as men ? 

Certainly not. 

And therefore, previously ? 

Yes. 

Then, Simmias, our souls must also have existed without 
bodies before they were in the form of man, and must have 
had intelligence. 

Unless indeed you suppose, Socrates, that these notions are 
given us at the very moment of birth ; for this is the only 
time which remains. 

Yes, my friend, but if so, when do we lose them ? for they 
are not in us when we are born — that is admitted. Do we 
lose them at the moment of receiving them, or if not at what 
other time ? <• 

No, Socrates, I perceive that I was unconsciously talking 
nonsense. 

Then may we not say, Simmias, that if, as we are always 
repeating, there is an absolute beauty, and goodness, and 
an absolute essence of all things ; and if to this, which is now 
discovered to have existed in our former state, we refer all 
our sensations, and with this compare them, finding these ideas 
to be pre-existent and our inborn possession — then our souls 
must have had a prior existence, but if not, there would be no 
force in the argument ? There is the same proof that these 
ideas must have existed before we were born, as that our 
souls existed before we were born ; and if not the ideas, then 
not the souls. 

215 

Simmias and Cebes are not quite satisfied . 

Yes, Socrates ; I am convinced that there is precisely the 
same necessity for the one as for the other; and the argu- 
77 ment retreats successfully to the position that the existence 
of the soul before birth cannot be separated from the exist- 
ence of the essence of which you speak. For there is 
nothing which to my mind is so patent as that beauty, good- 
ness, and the other notions of which you were just now speak- 
ing, have a most real and absolute existence ; and I am 
satisfied with the proof. 

Well, but is Cebes equally satisfied ? for I must convince 
him too. 

I think, said Simmias, that Cebes is satisfied : although he 
is the most incredulous of mortals, yet I believe that he is 
sufficiently convinced of the existence of the soul before 
birth. But that after death the soul will continue to exist is 
not yet proven even to my own satisfaction. I cannot get 
rid of the feeling of the many to which Cebes was referring 
— the feeling that when the man dies the soul will be dis- 
persed, and that this may be the extinction of her. For 
admitting that she may have been born elsewhere, and 
framed out of other elements, and was in existence before 
entering the human body, why after having entered in and 
gone out again may she not herself be destroyed and come 
to an end ? 

Very true, Simmias, said Cebes ; about half of what was 
required has been proven; to wit, that our souls existed 
before we were born : — that the soul will exist* after death as 
well as before birth is the other half of which the proof is 
still wanting, and has to be supplied ; when that is given 
the demonstration will be complete. 

But that proof, Simmias and Cebes, has been already 
given, said Socrates, if you put the two arguments together 
— I mean this and the former one, in which we admitted 
that everything living is born of the dead. For if the soul 
exists before birth, and in coming to life and being born can 
be born only from death and dying, must she not after death 
continue to exist, since she has to be born again ? — Surely* 
the proof which you desire has been already furnished. 
Still I suspect that you and Simmias would be glad to probe 
the argument further. Like children, you are haunted with 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Simmias, 

Cebes. 

Simmias 
and Cebes 
are agreed 
in thinking 
that the 
previous 
existence of 
the soul is 
sufficiently 
proved, but 
not the 
future ex- 
istence. 

But if the 
soul passes 
from death 
to birth, 
she must 
exist after 
death as 
well as be- 
fore birth. 

2 20 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

The fear 
that the 
soul will 
vanish into 
air must be 
charmed 
away. 

What is the 
element 
which is 
liable to be 
scattered?— 
Not the 
simple and 
unchange- 
able, but 
the com- 
posite and 
changing. 

The child within us! 

a fear that when the soul leaves the body, the wind may 
really blow her away and scatter her; especially if a man 
should happen to die in a great storm and not when the sky 
is calm. 

Cebes answered with a smile : Then, Socrates, you must 
argue us out of our fears — and yet, strictly speaking, they 
are not our fears, but there is a child within us to whom 
death is a sort of hobgoblin : him too we must persuade not 
to be afraid when he is alone in the dark. 

Socrates said : Let the voice of the charmer be applied 
daily until you have charmed away the fear. 

And where shall we find a good charmer of our fears, 78 
Socrates, when you are gone? 

Hellas, he replied, is a large place, Cebes, and has 
many good men, and there are barbarous races not a few : 
seek for him among them all, far and wide, sparing 
neither pains nor money ; for there is no better way of 
spending your money. And you must seek among your- 
selves too ; for you will not find others better able to make 
the search. 

The search, replied Cebes, shall certainly be made. And 
now, if you please, let us return to the point of the argument 
at which we digressed. 

By all means, replied Socrates ; what else should I 
please ? 

Very good. 

Must we not, said Socrates, ask ourselves what that is 
which, as we imagine, is liable to be scattered, and about 
which we fear ? and what again is that about which we have 
no fear ? And then we may proceed further to enquire 
whether that which suffers dispersion is or is not of the 
nature of soul — our hopes and fears as to our own souls will 
turn upon the answers to these questions. 

Very true, he said. 

Now the compound or composite may be supposed to be 
naturally capable, as of being compounded, so also of being 
•dissolved ; but that which is uncompounded, and that only, 
must be, if anything is, indissoluble. 

Yes ; I should imagine so, said Cebes. 

And the uncompounded may be assumed to be the same 

The seen and the unseen . 

221 

and unchanging, whereas the compound is always changing 
and never the same. 

I agree, he said. 

Then now let us return to the previous discussion. Is 
that idea or essence, which in the dialectical process we 
define as essence or true existence — whether essence of 
equality, beauty, or anything else— -are these essences, I say, 
liable at times to some degree of change ? or are they each 
of them always what they are, having the same simple self- 
existent and unchanging forms, not admitting of variation at 
all, or in any way, or at any time ? 

They must be always the same, Socrates, replied Cebes. 

And what would you say of the many beautiful — whether 
men or horses or garments or any other things which are 
named by the same names and may be called equal or 
beautiful, — are they all unchanging and the same always, or 
quite the reverse? May they not rather be described as 
almost always changing and hardly ever the same, either 
with themselves or with one another? 

The latter, replied Cebes; they are always in a state of 
change. 

79 And these you can touch and see and perceive with the 
senses, but the unchanging things you can only perceive 
with the mind — they are invisible and are not seen ? 

That is very true, he said. 

Well then, added Socrates, let us suppose that there are 
two sorts of existences — one seen, the other unseen. 

Let us suppose them. 

The seen is the changing, and the unseen is the un- 
changing ? 

That may be also supposed. 

And, further, is not one part of us body, another part 
soul ? 

To be sure. 

And to which class is the body more alike and akin ? 

Clearly to the seen — no one can doubt that. 

And is the soul seen or not seen ? 

Not by man, Socrates. 

And what we mean by ‘ seen ’ and ' not seen * is that which 
is or is not visible to the eye of man ? 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

The soul 
and the 
ideas be- 
long to the 
class of the 
unchang- 
ing, which 
is also the 
unseen. 

222 

Phacdo. 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

The soul 
which is 
unseen, 
when she 
makes use 
of the bodily 
senses, is 
dragged 
down into 
the region 
of the 

changeable, 
and must 
return into 
herself 
before she 
can attain 
to true 
wisdom . 

The soul is 
of the 
nature of 
the un- 
changeable, 
the body of 
the chang- 
ing ; the 
soul rules, 
the body 
serves ; the 
soul is in 
the likeness 
of the 
divine, the 
body of the 
mortal. 

The nature of the soul . 

Yes, to the eye of man. 

And is the soul seen or not seen ? 

Not seen. 

Unseen then ? 

Yes. 

Then the soul is more like to the unseen, and the body to 
the seen ? 

That follows necessarily, Socrates. 

And were we not saying long ago that the soul when using 
the body as an instrument of perception, that is to say, when 
using the sense of sight or hearing or some other sense (for 
the meaning of perceiving through the body is perceiving 
through the senses) — were we not saying that the soul too is 
then dragged by the body into the region of the changeable, 
and wanders and is confused ; the world spins round her, 
and she is like a drunkard, when she touches change? 

Very true. 

But when returning into herself she reflects, then she 
passes into the other world, the region of purity, and 
eternity, and immortality, and unchangeableness, which are 
her kindred, and with them she ever lives, when she is 
by herself and is not let or hindered ; then she ceases 
from her erring ways, and being in communion with the un- 
changing is unchanging. And this state of the soul is 
called wisdom ? 

That is well and truly said, Socrates, he replied. 

And to which class is the soul more nearly alike and akin, 
as far as may be inferred from this argument, as well as 
from the preceding one ? 

I think, Socrates, that, in the opinion of every one who 
follows the argument, the soul will be infinitely more like 
the unchangeable— even the most stupid person will not 
deny that. 

And the body is more like the changing ? 

Yes. 

Yet once more consider the matter in another light: 
When the soul and the body are united, then nature orders So 
the soul to rule and govern, and the body to obey and serve. 
Now which of these two functions is akin to the divine? 
and which to the mortal? Does not the divine appear to 

223 

The passing of the soul. 

you to be that which naturally orders and rules, and the 
mortal to be that which is subject and servant ? 

True. 

And which does the soul resemble ? 

The soul resembles the divine, and the body the mortal — 
there can be no doubt of that, Socrates. 

Then reflect, Cebes : of all which has been said is not this 
the conclusion ? — that the soul is in the very likeness of the 
divine, and immortal, and intellectual, and uniform, and 
indissoluble, and unchangeable ; and that the body is in the 
very likeness of the human, and mortal, and unintellectual, 
and multiform, and dissoluble, and changeable. Can this, 
my dear Cebes, be denied ? 

It cannot. 

But if it be true, then is not the body liable to speedy 
dissolution ? and is not the soul almost or altogether in- 
dissoluble? 

Certainly. 

And do you further observe, that after a man is dead, the 
body, or visible part of him, which is lying in the visible 
world, and is called a corpse, and would naturally be dis- 
solved and decomposed and dissipated, is not dissolved or 
decomposed at once, but may remain for some time, nay 
even for a long time, if the constitution be sound at the 
time of death, and the season of the year favourable? For 
the body when shrunk and embalmed, as the manner is in 
Egypt, may remain almost entire through infinite ages ; and 
even in decay, there are still some portions, such as the 
bones and ligaments, which are practically indestructible: — 
Do you agree ? 

Yes. 

And is it likely that the soul, which is invisible, in passing 
to the place of the true Hades, which like her is invisible, 
and pure, and noble, and on her way to the good and wise 
God, whither, if God will, my soul is also soon to go, — that 
the soul, I repeat, if this be her nature and origin, will be 
blown away and destroyed immediately on quitting the 
body, as the many say? That can never be, my dear 
Simmias and Cebes. The truth rather is, that the soul 
which is pure at departing and draws after her no bodily 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

Even from 
the body 
something 
may be 
learned 
about the 
soul ; for 
the corpse 
of a man 
lasts for 
some time, 
and when 
embalmed, 
in a manner 
for ever. 

How un- 
likely then 
that the 
soul should 
at once pass 
away ! 

224 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

Rather 
when free 
from bodily 
impurity 
she departs 
to the seats 
of the 
blessed. 

But the 
souls of 
the wicked 
are dragged 
down by 
the corpo- 
real ele- 
ment. 

The impure soul made corporeal . 

taint, having never voluntarily during life had connection with 
the body, which she is ever avoiding, herself gathered into 
herself;— and making such abstraction her perpetual study — 
which means that she has been a true disciple of philo- 81 
sophy; and therefore has in fact been always engaged in 
the practice of dying? For is not philosophy the study of 
death ? — 

Certainly — 

That soul, I say, herself invisible, departs to the invisible 
world — to the divine and immortal and rational : thither 
arriving, she is secure of bliss and is released from the error 
and folly of men, their fears and wild passions and all 
other human ills, and for ever dwells, as they say of the 
initiated, in company with the gods 1 . Is not this true, 
Cebes ? 

Yes, said Cebes, beyond a doubt. 

But the soul which has been polluted, and is impure at the 
time of her departure, and is the companion and servant of 
the body always, and is in love with and fascinated by the 
body and by the desires and pleasures of the body, until she 
is led to believe that the truth only exists in a bodily form, 
which a man may touch and see and taste, and use for the 
purposes of his lusts, — the soul, I mean, accustomed to hate 
and fear and avoid the intellectual principle, which to the 
bodily eye is dark and invisible, and can be attained only by 
philosophy ;— do you suppose that such a soul will depart 
pure and unalloyed ? 

Impossible, he replied. 

She is held fast by the corporeal, which the continual 
association and constant care of the body have wrought into 
her nature. 

Very true. 

And this corporeal element, my friend, is heavy and 
weighty and earthy, and is that element of sight by which 
a soul is depressed and dragged down again into the visible 
world, because she is afraid of the invisible and of the world 
below — prowling about tombs and sepulchres, near which, 
as they tell us, are seen certain ghostly apparitions of souls 

1 Cp. Apol. 40 E. 

Transmigration of men into animals . 

which have not departed pure, but are cloyed with sight and 
therefore visible \ 

That is very likely, Socrates. 

Yes, that is very likely, Cebes; and these must be the 
souls, not of the good, but of the evil, which are compelled 
to wander about such places in payment of the penalty of 
their former evil way of life ; and they continue to wander 
until through the craving after the corporeal which never 
leaves them, they are imprisoned finally in another body. 
And they may be supposed to find their prisons in the same 
natures which they have had in their former lives. 

What natures do you mean, Socrates ? 

What I mean is that men who have followed after gluttony, 
and wantonness, and drunkenness, and have had no thought 
of avoiding them, would pass into asses and animals of that 
S2 sort. What do you think ? 

I think such an opinion to be exceedingly probable. 

And those who have chosen the portion of injustice, and 
tyranny, and violence, will pass into wolves, or into hawks 
and kites ; — whither else can we suppose them to go? 

Yes, said Cebes; with such natures, beyond question. 

And there is no difficulty, he said, in assigning to all of 
them places answering to their several natures and pro- 
pensities ? 

There is not, he said. 

Some are happier than others ; and the happiest both in 
themselves and in the place to which they go ajre those who 
have practised the civil and social virtues which are called 

1 Compare Milton, Comus, 463 foil. : — 

* But when lust. 

By unchaste looks, loose gestures, ancl foul talk, 

But most by lewd and lavish act of sin, 

Lets in defilement to the inward parts, 

The soul grows clotted by contagion, 

Imbodies, and imbrutes, till she quite lose, 

The divine property of her first being. 

Such are those thick and gloomy shadows damp 
Oft seen in charnel vaults and sepulchres, 

Lingering, and sitting by a new made grave, 

As loath to leave the body that it lov’d, 

And linked itself by carnal sensuality 
To a degenerate and degraded state/ 

225 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

C EBKS. 

They wan- 
der into the 
bodies of 
the animals 
or of birds 
which are of 
a like 

nature with 
themselves. 

VOL. 11. 

226 
Phaedo . 

SoCRATEtf, 

Cebes. 

The new 
conscious- 
ness which 
is awakened 
by philoso- 
phy. 

The deliverance of the soul by philosophy . 

temperance and justice, and are acquired by habit and atten- 
tion without philosophy and mind \ 

Why are they the happiest ? 

Because they may be expected to pass into some gentle 
and social kind which is like their own, such as bees or wasps 
or ants, or back again into the form of man, and just and 
moderate men may be supposed to spring from them. 

Very likely. 

No one who has not studied philosophy and who is not 
entirely pure at the time of his departure is allowed to enter 
the company of the Gods, but the lover of knowledge only. 
And this is the reason, Simmias and Cebes, why the true 
votaries of philosophy abstain from all fleshly lusts, and hold 
out against them and refuse to give themselves up to them, — 
not because they fear poverty or the ruin of their families, 
like the lovers of money, and the world in general ; nor like 
the lovers of power and honour, because they dread the dis- 
honour or disgrace of evil deeds. 

No, Socrates, that would not become them, said Cebes. 

No indeed, he replied ; and therefore they who have any 
care of their own souls, and do not merely live moulding and 
fashioning the body, say farewell to all this ; they will not 
walk in the ways of the blind : and when philosophy offers 
them purification and release from evil, they feel that they 
ought not to resist her influence, and whither she leads they 
turn and follow. 

What do you mean, Socrates ? 

I will tell you, he said. The lovers of knowledge are con- 
scious that the soul was simply fastened and glued to the 
body — until philosophy received her, she could only view real 
existence through the bars of a prison, not in and through 
herself; she was wallowing in the mire of every sort of 
ignorance, and by reason of lust had become the principal 
accomplice in her own captivity. This was her original 83 
state ; and then, as I was saying, and as the lovers of 
knowledge are well aware, philosophy, seeing how terrible 
was her confinement, of which she was to herself the cause, 
received and gently comforted her and sought to release her, 
pointing out that the eye and the ear and the other senses 
1 Cp. Rep. x. 619 C. 

227 

Why the philosopher is temperate . 

are full of deception, and persuading her to retire from them, 
and abstain from all but the necessary use of them, and be 
gathered up and collected into herself, bidding her trust in 
herself and her own pure apprehension of pure existence, and 
to mistrust whatever comes to her through other channels 
and is subject to variation ; for such things are visible and 
tangible, but what she sees in her own nature is intelligible 
and invisible. And the soul of the true philosopher thinks 
that she ought not to resist this deliverance, and therefore ab- 
stains from pleasures and desires and pains and fears, as far 
as she is able ; reflecting that when a man has great joys or 
sorrows or fears or desires, he suffers from them, not merely 
the sort of evil which might be anticipated — as for example, 
the loss of his health or property which he has sacrificed to 
his lusts — but an evil greater far, which is the greatest and 
worst of all evils, and one of which he never thinks. 

What is it, Socrates ? said Cebes. 

The evil is that when the feeling of pleasure or pain is 
most intense, every soul of man imagines the objects of this 
intense feeling to be then plainest and truest : but this is not 
so, they are really the things of sight. 

Very true. 

And is not this the state in which the soul is most en- 
thralled by the body ? 

How so ? 

Why, because each pleasure and pain is a sort of nail 
which nails and rivets the soul to the body, vfntil she be- 
comes like the body, and believes that to be true which the 
body affirms to be true ; and from agreeing with the body 
and having the same delights she is obliged to have the same 
habits and haunts, and is not likely ever to be pure at her 
departure to the world below, but is always infected by the 
body ; and so she sinks into another body and there ger- 
minates and grows, and has therefore no part in the com- 
munion of the divine and pure and simple. 

Most true, Socrates, answered Cebes. 

And this, Cebes, is the reason why the true lovers of 
knowledge are temperate and brave ; and not for the reason 
which the world gives. 

84 Certainly not. 

q 2 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

The philo- 
sopher con- 
siders not 
only the 
conse- 
quences of 
pleasures 
and pains, 
but, what is 
far worse, 
the false 
lights in 
which they 
show 
objects. 

228 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Cebes, 

SlMMIAS. 

The soul 
which has 
been eman- 
cipated 
from plea- 
sures and 
pains will 
not be 
blown away 
at death. 

Simmias 
and Cebes 
have their 
doubts, but 
think that 
this is not 
the time to 
express 
them. 

Socrates re- 
bukes their 
want of 
confidence 
in him. , 

What is the 
meaning of 
the swans’ 
singing? 

The first great argument concluded \ 

Certainly not ! The soul of a philosopher will reason in 
quite another way ; she will not ask philosophy to release 
her in order that when released she may deliver herself up 
again to the thraldom of pleasures and pains, doing a work 
only to be undone again, weaving instead of unweaving her 
Penelope’s web. But she will calm passion, and follow 
reason, and dwell in the contemplation of her, beholding the 
true and divine (which is not matter of opinion), and thence 
deriving nourishment. Thus she seeks to live while she 
lives, and after death she hopes to go to her own kindred 
and to that which is like her, and to be freed from human 
ills. Never fear, Simmias and Cebes, that a soul which has 
been thus nurtured and has had these pursuits, will at her 
departure from the body be scattered and blown away by the 
winds and be nowhere and nothing. 

When Socrates had done speaking, for a considerable time 
there was silence ; he himself appeared to be meditating, as 
most of us were, on what had been said ; only Cebes and 
Simmias spoke a few words to one another. And Socrates 
observing them asked what they thought of the argument, 
and whether there was anything wanting? For, said he, 
there are many points still open to suspicion and attack, if 
any one were disposed to sift the matter thoroughly. Should 
you be considering some other matter I say no more, but if 
you are still in doubt do not hesitate to say exactly what you 
think, and let us have anything better which you can sug- 
gest ; and if you think that I can be of any use, allow me to 
help you. 

Simmias said : I must confess, Socrates, that doubts did 
arise in our minds, and each of us was urging and inciting 
the other to put the question which we wanted to have 
answered but which neither of us liked to ask, fearing that 
our importunity might be troublesome at such a time. 

Socrates replied with a smile : O Simmias, what are you 
saying? I am not very likely to persuade other men that 
I do not regard my present situation as a misfortune, if I 
cannot even persuade you that I am no worse off now than at 
any other time in my life. Will you not allow that I have as 
much of the spirit of prophecy in me as the swans? For 
they, when they perceive that they must die, having sung all 

229 

Simmias and Cebes have still their difficulties . 

their life long, do then sing more lustily than ever, rejoicing 
85 in the thought that they are about to go away to the god 
whose ministers they are. But men, because they are them- 
selves afraid of death, slanderously affirm of the swans that 
they sing a lament at the last, not considering that no bird 
sings when cold, or hungry, or in pain, not even the night- 
ingale, nor the swallow, nor yet the hoopoe ; which are said 
indeed to tune a lay of sorrow, although I do not believe this 
to be true of them any more than of the swans. But because 
they are sacred to Apollo, they have the gift of prophecy, 
and anticipate the good things of another world ; wherefore 
they sing and rejoice in that day more than ever they did 
before. And I too, believing myself to be the consecrated 
servant of the same God, and the fellow-servant of the 
swans, and thinking that I have received from my master 
gifts of prophecy which are not inferior to theirs, would not 
go out of life less merrily than the swans. Never mind 
then, if this be your only objection, but speak and ask any- 
thing which you like, while the eleven magistrates of Athens 
allow. 

Very good, Socrates, said Simmias ; then I will tell you my 
difficulty, and Cebes will tell you his. I feel myself (and I 
daresay that you have the same feeling), how hard or rather 
impossible is the attainment of any certainty about questions 
such as these in the present life. And yet I should deem 
him a coward who did not prove what is said about them to 
the uttermost, or whose heart failed him before he had ex- 
amined them on every side. For he should persevere until 
he has achieved one of two things : either he should dis- 
cover, or be taught the truth about them ; or, if this be 
impossible, I would have him take the best and most irre- 
fragable of human theories, and let this be the raft upon 
which he sails through life —not without risk, as I admit, if 
he cannot find some word of God which will more surely and 
safely carry him. And now, as you bid me, I will venture to 
question you, and then I shall not have to reproach myself 
hereafter with not having said at the time what I think. For 
when I consider the matter, either alone or with Cebes, the 
argument does certainly appear to me, Socrates, to be not 
sufficient. 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Simmias, 

Cebes. 

They do 
not lament, 
as men sup- 
pose, at 
their ap- 
proaching 
death ; but 
they rejoice 
because 
they are 
going to the 
God, whose 
servants 
they are. 

Socrates, 
who is their 
fellow-ser- 
vant, will 
not leave 
the world 
less 

cheerily. 

Simmias 
insists that 
they must 
probe truth 
to the 
bottom. 

230 

Phatdo. 

Socrates, 

SlMMIAS. 

The har- 
mony does 
not survive 
the lyre ; 
how then 
can the 
soul, which 
is also a 
harmony, 
survive the 
body? 

The doubt of Simmias . 

Socrates answered : I dare say, my friend, that you may 
be right, but I should like to know in what respect the argu- 
ment is insufficient. 

In this respect, replied Simmias : — Suppose a person to 
use the same argument about harmony and the lyre — might 
he not say that harmony is a thing invisible, incorporeal, 
perfect, divine, existing in the lyre which is harmonized, but 86 
that the lyre and the strings are matter and material, compo- 
site, earthy, and akin to mortality ? And when some one 
breaks the lyre, or cuts and rends the strings, then he who 
takes this view would argue as you do, and on the same 
analogy, that the harmony survives and has not perished — 
you cannot imagine, he would say, that the lyre without the 
strings, and the broken strings themselves which are mortal 
remain, and yet that the harmony, which is of heavenly 
and immortal nature and kindred, has perished — perished 
before the mortal. The harmony must still be some- 
where, and the wood and strings will decay before anything 
can happen to that. The thought, Socrates, must have 
occurred to your own mind that such is our conception of the 
soul; and that when the body is in a manner strung and 
held together by the elements of hot and cold, wet and dry, 
then the soul is the harmony or due proportionate admixture 
of them. But if so, whenever the strings of the body are 
unduly loosened or overstrained through disease or other 
injury, then the soul, though most divine, like other harmo- 
nies of music or of works of art, of course perishes at once ; 
although the material remains of the body may last for a 
considerable time, until they are either decayed or burnt. 
And if any one maintains that the soul, being the harmony 
of the elements of the body, is first to perish in that which is 
called death, how shall we answer him ? 

Socrates looked fixedly at us as his manner was, and said 
with a smile : Simmias has reason on his side ; and why does 
not some one of you who is better able than myself answer 
him? for there is force in his attack upon me. But perhaps, 
before we answer him, we had better also hear what Cebes 
has to say that we may gain time for reflection, and when 
they have both spoken, we may either assent to them, if 
there is truth in what they say, or if not, we will maintain 

The doubt of Cedes . 

our position. Please to tell me then, Cebes, he said, what 
was the difficulty which troubled you ? 

Cebes said : I will tell you. My feeling is that the argu- 
ment is where it was, and open to the same objections which 
87 were urged before ; for I am ready to admit that the exist- 
ence of the soul before entering into the bodily form has 
been very ingeniously, and, if I may say so, quite sufficiently 
proven ; but the existence of the soul after death is still, in 
my judgment, unproven. Now my objection is not the same 
as that of Simmias ; for I am not disposed to deny that the 
soul is stronger and more lasting than the body, being of 
opinion that in all such respects the soul very far excels the 
body. Well then, says the argument to me, why do you 
remain unconvinced ? — When you see that the weaker con- 
tinues in existence after the man is dead, will you not admit 
that the more lasting must also survive during the same 
period of time? Now I will ask you to consider whether 
the objection, which, like Simmias, I will express in a figure, 
is of any weight. The analogy which I will adduce is that 
of an old weaver, who dies, and after his death somebody 
says : — He is not dead, he must be alive ; — see, there is the 
coat which he himself wove and wore, and which remains 
whole and undecayed. And then he proceeds to ask of some 
one who is incredulous, whether a man lasts longer, or the 
coat w r hich is in use and wear ; and when he is answered 
that a man lasts far longer, thinks that he has thus certainly 
demonstrated the survival of the man, who* is the more 
lasting, because the less lasting remains. But that, Simmias, 
as I would beg you to remark, is a mistake ; anyone can see 
that he who talks thus is talking nonsense. For the truth is, 
that the weaver aforesaid, having woven and worn many 
such coats, outlived several of them ; and was outlived by the 
last ; but a man is not therefore proved to be slighter and 
weaker than a coat. Now the relation of the body to the 
soul may be expressed in a similar figure ; and any one may 
very fairly say in like manner that the soul is lasting, and the 
body weak and shortlived in comparison. He may argue in 
like manner that every soul wears out many bodies, especi- 
ally if a man live many years. While he is alive the body 
deliquesces and decays, and the soul always weaves another 

*3 * 

Phaedo. 

SOCRATKS, 

Cebes. 

A weaver 
may outlive 
many coats 
and himself 
be outlived 
by the last : 

so the soul 
which has 
passed 
through 
many 

bodies may 
in the end 
be worn out. 

232 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Cebes, 

Echecrates. 

The despair 
of the 
audience at 
hearing the 
overthrow 
of the 
argument. 

The dejection of the audience . 

garment and repairs the waste. But of course, whenever 
the soul perishes, she must have on her last garment, and 
this will survive her ; and then at length, when the soul is 
dead, the body will show its native weakness, and quickly 
decompose and pass away. I would therefore rather not 
rely on the argument from superior strength to prove the 
continued existence of the soul after death. For granting 88 
even more than you affirm to be possible, and acknowledging 
not only that the soul existed before birth, but also that the 
souls of some exist, and will continue to exist after death, 
and will be born and die again and again, and that there is a 
natural strength in the soul which will hold out and be born 
many times — nevertheless, we may be still inclined to think 
that she will weary in the labours of successive births, and 
may at last succumb in one of her deaths and utterly perish ; 
and this death and dissolution of the body which brings 
destruction to the soul may be unknown to any of us, for no 
one of us can have had any experience of it : and if so, then 
I maintain that he who is confident about death has but a 
foolish confidence, unless he is able to prove that the soul is 
altogether immortal and imperishable. But if he cannot 
prove the soul’s immortality, he who is about to die will 
always have reason to fear that when the body is disunited, 
the soul also may utterly perish. 

All of us, as we afterwards remarked to. one another, had 
an unpleasant feeling at hearing what they said. When we 
had been so % firmly convinced before, now to have our faith 
shaken seemed to introduce a confusion and uncertainty, not 
only into the previous argument, but into any future one ; 
either we were incapable of forming a judgment, or there 
were no grounds of belief. 

Ech . There I feel with you — by heaven I do, Phaedo, and 
when you were speaking, I was beginning to ask myself the 
same question : What argument can I ever trust again ? For 
what could be more convincing than the argument of Socrates, 
which has now fallen into discredit ? That the soul is a har- 
mony is a doctrine which has always had a wonderful attrac- 
tion for me, and, when mentioned, came back to me at once, 
as my own original conviction. And now I must begin again 
and find another argument which will assure me that when 

Socrates conies to the rescue . 

the man is dead the soul survives. Tell me, I implore 
you, how did Socrates proceed ? Did he appear to share 
the unpleasant feeling which you mention ? or did he calmly 
meet the attack? And did he answer forcibly or feebly? 
Narrate what passed as exactly as you can. 

Phaed. Often, Echecrates, I have wondered at Socrates, 
89 but never more than on that occasion. That he should be 
able to answer was nothing, but what astonished me was, 
first, the gentle and pleasant and approving manner in which . 
he received the words of the young men, and then his quick 
sense of the wound which had been inflicted by the argument, 
and the readiness with which he healed it. He might be 
compared to a general rallying his defeated and broken 
army, urging them to accompany him and return to the field 
of argument. 

Ech. What followed ? 

Phaed \ Y.ou shall hear, for I was close to him on his right 
hand, seated on a sort of stool, and he on a couch which was 
a good deal higher. He stroked my head, and pressed the 
hair upon my neck —he had a way of playing with my hair ; 
and then he said : To-morrow, Phaedo, I suppose that these 
fair locks of yours will be severed. 

Yes, Socrates, I suppose that they will, I replied. 

Not so, if you will take my advice. 

What shall I do with them ? I said. 

To-day, he replied, and not to-morrow, if this argument dies 
and we cannot bring it to life again, you add I will both 
shave our locks : and if I were you, and the argument got 
away from me, and I could not hold my ground against 
Simmias and Cebes, I would myself take an oath, like the 
Argives, not to wear hair any more until I had renewed the 
conflict and defeated them. 

Yes, I said ; but Heracles himself is said not to be a match 
for two. 

Summon me then, he said, and I will be your Iolaus until 
the sun goes down. 

I summon you rather, I rejoined, not as Heracles sum- 
moning Iolaus, but as Iolaus might summon Heracles. 

That will do as well, he said. But first let us take care 
that we avoid a danger. 

233 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Phaedo, 

Echecrates. 

The won- 
derful man- 
ner in which 
Socrates 
soothes his 
disap- 
pointed 
hearers and 
rehabili- 
tates the 
argument. 

234 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Phaedo. 

The danger 
ofbecoming 
haters of 
ideas 

greater than 
ofbecoming 
haters of 
men. 

There are 
few very 
bad or very 
good men ; 
(although 
bad argu- 
ments may 
be more 
numerous 
than bad 
men) ; the 
main point 
is that he 
who has 
been often 
deceived by 
either is apt 
to lose faith 
in them. 

We must not become misologists . 

Of what nature ? I said. 

Lest we become misologists, he replied : no worse thing 
can happen to a man than this. For as there are misan- 
thropists or haters of men, there are also misologists or 
haters of ideas, and both spring from the same cause, which 
is ignorance of the world. Misanthropy arises out of the too 
great confidence of inexperience ; — you trust a man and think 
him altogether true and sound and faithful, and then in a 
little while he turns out to be false and knavish ; and then 
another and another, and when this has happened several 
times to a man, especially when it happens among those 
whom he deems to be his own most trusted and familiar 
friends, and he has often quarrelled with them, he at last 
hates all men, and believes that no one has any good in him 
at all. You must have observed this trait of character ? 

I have. 

And is not the feeling discreditable ? Is it not obvious 
that such an one having to deal with other men, was clearly 
without any experience of human nature ; for experience 
would have taught him the true state of the case, that few are 
the good and few the evil, and that the great majority are in 90 
the interval between them. 

What do you mean ? I said. 

I mean, he replied, as you might say of the very large and 
very small — that nothing is more uncommon than a very 
large or very small man ; and this applies generally to all 
extremes, whether of great and small, or swift and slow, or 
fair and foul, or black and white : and whether the instances 
you select be men or dogs or anything else, few are the 
extremes, but many are in the mean between them. Did you 
never observe this? 

Yes, I said, I have. 

And do you not imagine, he said, that if there were a com- 
petition in evil, the worst would be found to be very few? 

Yes, that is very likely, I said. 

Yes, that is very likely, he replied ; although in this 
respect arguments are unlike men — there I was led on by 
you to say more than I had intended ; but the point of com- 
parison was, that when a simple man who has no skill in 
dialectics believes an argument to be true which he afterwards 

Avoid scepticism . 

imagines to be false, whether really false or not, and then 
another and another, he has no longer any faith left, and 
great disputers, as you know, come to think at last that they 
have grown to be the wisest of mankind ; for they alone per- 
ceive the utter unsoundness and instability of all arguments, 
or indeed, of all things, which, like the currents in the 
Euripus, are going up and down in never-ceasing ebb and 
flow. 

That is quite true, I said. 

Yes, Phaedo, he replied, and how melancholy, if there be 
such a thing as truth or certainty or possibility of knowledge 
— that a man should have lighted upon some argument or 
other which at first seemed true and then turned out to be 
false, and instead of blaming himself and his own want of 
wit, because he is annoyed, should at last be too glad to 
transfer the blame from himself to arguments in general : and 
for ever afterwards should hate and revile them, and lose 
truth and the knowledge of realities. 

Yes, indeed, I said ; that is very melancholy. 

Let us then,* in the first place, he said, be careful of allow- 
ing or of admitting into our souls the notion that there is no 
health or soundness in any arguments at all. Rather say that 
we have not yet attained to soundness in ourselves, and that 
we must struggle manfully and do our best to gain health of 
mind — you and all other men having regard to the whole of 
your future life, and I myself in the prospect of death. For 
91 at this moment I am sensible that I have not the temper of 
a philosopher ; like the vulgar, I am only a partisan. Now 
the partisan, when he is engaged in a dispute, cares nothing 
about the rights of the question, but is anxious only to con- 
vince his hearers of his own assertions. And the difference 
between him and me at the present moment is merely this — 
that whereas he seeks to convince his hearers that what he 
says is true, I am rather seeking to convince myself; to 
convince my hearers is a secondary matter with me. And 
do but see how much I gain by the argument. For if what I 
say is true, then I do well to be persuaded of the truth ; but' 
if there be nothing after death, still, during the short time 
that remains, I shall not distress my friends with lamenta- 
tions, and my ignorance will not last, but will die with me, 

235 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 
who is soon 
to die, has 
too much 
at stake on 
the argu- 
ment to be 
a fair judge. 
Simmias 
and Cebes 
must help 
him to con- 
sider the 
matter 
impartially. 

Simmias and Cedes reassured and answered . 

and therefore no harm will be done. This is the state of 
mind, Simmias and Cebes, in which I approach the argument. 
And I would ask you to be thinking of the truth and not of 
Socrates : agree with me, if I seem to you to be speaking the 
truth ; or if not, withstand me might and main, that I may 
not deceive you as well as myself in my enthusiasm, and like 
the bee, leave my sting in you before I die. 

And now let us proceed, he said. And first of all let me 
are^inclhied sure ^ at * have * n m y m * n d what you were saying, 
to fear that Simmias, if I remember rightly, has fears and misgivings 
the soul w h et h er the sou i although a fairer and diviner thing than 
before the the body, being as she is in the form of harmony, may not 
they'stm 1 P er ^ fi rst - °ther hand, Cebes appeared to grant 

hold to the that the soul was more lasting than the body, but he said that 
doctrine of no one cou ld know whether the soul, after having worn out 
cence. many bodies, might not perish herself and leave her last 
body behind her; and that this is death, which is the 
destruction not of the body but of the soul, for in the body 
the work of destruction is ever going on. Are not these, 
Simmias and Cebes, the points which we have to consider? 

They both agreed to this statement of them. 

He proceeded : And did you deny the force of the whole 
preceding argument, or of a part only ? 

Of a part only, they replied. 

And what did you think, he said, of that part of the 
argument in which we said that knowledge was recollection, 
and hence inferred that the soul must have previously 
existed somewhere else before she was enclosed in the 9 2 
body? 

Cebes said that he had been wonderfully impressed by that 
part of the argument, and that his conviction remained 
absolutely unshaken. Simmias agreed, and added that he 
himself could hardly imagine the possibility of his ever 
thinking differently. 

The ele- But, rejoined Socrates, you will have to think differently, 
hTrmony m y Theban friend, if you still maintain that harmony is a 
are prior to* compound, and that the soul is a harmony which is made out 
strin S s set in the frame of the body ; for you will surely 
body is not never allow yourself to say that a harmony is prior to the 
prior to the elements which compose it. 

soul . 

236 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Cebes, 

Simmias. 

Simmias 

Harmony not prior to the elements of harmony . 

Never, Socrates. 

But do you not see that this is what you imply when you 
say that the soul existed before she took the form and body 
of man, and was made up of elements which as yet had no 
existence? For harmony is not like the soul, as you 
suppose ; but first the lyre, and the strings, and the sounds 
exist in a state of discord, and then harmony is made last of 
all, and perishes first. And how can such a notion of the 
soul as this agree with the other ? 

Not at all, replied Simmias. 

And yet, he said, there surely ought to be harmony in a 
discourse of which harmony is the theme ? 

There ought, replied Simmias. 

But there is no harmony, he said, in the two propositions 
that knowledge is recollection, and that the soul is a harmony. 
Which of them will you retain ? 

I think, he replied, that I have a much stronger faith, 
Socrates, in the first of the two, which has been fully 
demonstrated to me, than in the latter, which has not been 
demonstrated at all, but rests only on probable and plausible 
grounds; and is therefore believed by the many. I know 
too well that these arguments from probabilities are im- 
postors, and unless great caution is observed in the use of 
them, they are apt to be deceptive— in geometry, and in 
other things too. But the doctrine of knowledge and recol- 
lection has been proven to me on trustworthy grounds : and 
the proof was that the soul must have existed before she 
came into the body, because to her belongs the essence of 
which the very name implies existence. Having, as I am 
convinced, rightly accepted this conclusion, and on sufficient 
grounds, I must, as I suppose, cease to argue or allow others 
to argue that the soul is a harmony. 

Let me put the matter, Simmias, he said, in another point 
93 of view : Do you imagine that a harmony or any other 
composition can be in a state other than that of the elements, 
out of which it is compounded ? 

Certainly not. • 

Or do or suffer anything other than they do or suffer? 

He agreed. 

Then a harmony does not, properly speaking, lead the 

237 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Simmias. 

Simmias ac- 
knowledges 
that his 
argument 
does not 
harmonize 
with the 
proposition 
that know- 
ledge is re- 
collection. 

238 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Simmias. 

Harmony 
admits of 
degrees, but 
in the soul 
there are no 
degrees ; 

and there- 
fore there 
cannot be a 
soul or har- 
mony with- 
in a soul. 

Harmony is an effect , not a cause . 

parts or elements which make up the harmony, but only 
follows them. 

He assented. 

For harmony cannot possibly have any motion, or sound, 
or other quality which is opposed to its parts. 

That would be impossible, he replied. 

And does not the nature of every harmony depend upon 
the manner in which the elements are harmonized ? 

I do not understand you, he said. 

I mean to say that a harmony admits of degrees, and is 
more of a harmony, and more completely a harmony, when 
more truly and fully harmonized, to any extent which is 
possible; and less of a harmony, and less completely a 
harmony, when less truly and fully harmonized. 

True. 

But does the soul admit of degrees ? or is one soul in the 
very least degree more or less, or more or less completely, a 
soul than another ? 

Not in the least. 

Yet surely of two souls, one is said to have intelligence 
and virtue, and to be good, and the other to have folly and 
vice, and to be an evil soul : and this is said truly ? 

Yes, truly. 

But what will those who maintain the soul to be a harmony 
say of this presence of virtue and vice in the soul? — will 
they say that here is another harmony, and another discord, 
and that the virtuous soul is harmonized, and herself being 
a harmony has another harmony within her, and that the 
vicious soul is inharmonical and has no harmony within her? 

I cannot tell, replied Simmias ; but I suppose that some- 
thing of the sort would be asserted by those who say that 
the soul is a harmony. 

And we have already admitted that no soul is more a soul 
than another ; which is equivalent to admitting that harmony 
is not more or less harmony, or more or less completely a 
harmony ? 

* Quite true. 

And that which is not more or less a harmony is not more 
or less harmonized ? 

True. 

239 

The soul not a harmony . 

And that which is not more or less harmonized cannot 
have more or less of harmony, but only an equal harmony ? 

Yes, an equal harmony. 

Then one soul not being more or less absolutely a soul 
than another, is not more or less harmonized ? 

Exactly. 

And therefore has neither more nor less of discord, nor 
yet of harmony ? 

She has not. 

And having neither more nor less of harmony or of dis- 
cord, one soul has no more vice or virtue than another, if 
vice be discord and virtue harmony ? 

Not at all more. 

94 Or speaking more correctly, Simmias, the soul, if she is a 
harmony, will never have any vice; because a harmony, 
being absolutely a harmony, has no part in the inharmonical. 

No. 

And therefore a soul which is absolutely a soul has no 
vice? 

How can she have, if the previous argument holds? 

Then, if all souls are equally by their nature souls, all 
souls of all living creatures will be equally good ? 

I agree with you, Socrates, he said. 

And can all this be true, think you ? he said ; for these 
are the consequences which seem to follow from the assump- 
tion that the soul is a harmony ? 

It cannot be true. 

Once more, he said, what ruler is there of the elements of 
human nature other than the soul, and especially the wise 
soul ? Do you know of any ? 

Indeed, I do not. 

And is the soul in agreement with the affections of the 
body ? or is she at variance with them ? For example, when 
the body is hot and thirsty, does not the soul incline us 
against drinking? and when the body is hungry, against 
eating ? And this is only one instance out of ten thousand of 
the opposition of the soul to the things of the body. 

Very true. 

But we have already acknowledged that the soul, being a 
harmony, can never utter a note at variance with the tensions 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Simmias. 

If the soul 
is a har- 
mony, all 
souls must 
be equally 
good. 

240 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 
Sim mias, 
Cebes. 

The soul 
leads and 
does not 
follow. She 
constrains 
and repri- 
mands the 
passions. 

Enough of Harmonia. 

and relaxations and vibrations and other affections of the 
strings out of which she is composed ; she can only follow, 
she cannot lead them ? 

It must be so, he replied. 

And yet do we not now discover the soul to be doing the 
exact opposite— leading the elements of which she is believed* 
to be composed ; almost always opposing and coercing them 
in all sorts of ways throughout life, sometimes more violently 
with the pains of medicine and gymnastic ; then again more 
gently ; now threatening, now admonishing the desires, 
passions, fears, as if talking to a thing which is not herself, 
as Homer in the Odyssee represents Odysseus doing in the 
words — 

‘ He beat his bieast, and thus reproached his heart: 

Endure, my heart ; far worse hast thou endured ! * 

Do you think that Homer wrote this under the idea that the 
soul is a harmony capable of being led by the affections of 
the body, and not rather of a nature which should lead and 
master them— herself a far diviner thing than any harmony? 

Yes, Socrates, I quite think so. 

Then, my friend, we can never be right in saying that the 
soul is a harmony, for we should contradict the divine 95 
Homer, and contradict ourselves. 

True, he said. 

Thus much, said Socrates, of Harmonia, your Theban 
goddess, who has graciously yielded to us ; but what shall I 
say, Cebes, to her husband Cadmus, and how shall I make 
peace with him ? 

I think that you will discover a way of propitiating him, 
said Cebes; I am sure that you have put the argument with 
Harmonia in a manner that I could never have expected. 
For when Simmias was mentioning his difficulty, I quite 
imagined that no answer could be given to him, and there- 
fore I was surprised at finding that his argument could not 
sustain the first onset of yours, and not impossibly the other, 
whom you call Cadmus, may share a similar fate. 

Nay, my good friend, said Socrates, let us not boast, lest 
some evil eye should put to flight the word which I am about 
to speak. That, however, may be left in the hands of those 

Let us now proceed to the Theban Cadmus . 

above; while I draw near in Homeric fashion, and try the 
mettle of your words. Here lies the point: — You want to 
have it proven to you that the soul is imperishable and im- 
mortal, and the philosopher who is confident in death appears 
to you to have but a vain and foolish confidence, if he believes 
that he will fare better in the world below than one who has 
led another sort of life, unless he can prove this : and you 
say that the demonstration of the strength and divinity of 
the soul, and of her existence prior to our becoming men, 
does not necessarily imply her immortality. Admitting the 
soul to be longlived, and to have known and done much in a 
former state, still she is not on that account immortal ; and 
her entrance into the human form may be a sort of disease 
which is the beginning of dissolution, and may at last, after 
the toils of life are over, end in that which is called death. 
And whether the soul enters into the body once only or 
many times, does not, as you say, make any difference in 
the fears of individuals. For any man, who is not devoid of 
sense, must fear, if he has no knowledge and can give no 
account of the soul’s immortality. This, or something like 
this, I suspect to be your notion, Cebes ; and I designedly 
recur to it in order that nothing may escape us, and that 
you may, if you wish, add or subtract anything. 

But, said Cebes, as far as I see at present, I have nothing 
to add or subtract : I mean what you say that I mean. 

Socrates paused awhile, and seemed to be absorbed in 
reflection. At length he said: You are raising a tre- 
mendous question, Cebes, involving the whole nature of 
96 generation and corruption, about which, if you like, I will 
give you my own experience ; and if anything which I say is 
likely to avail towards the solution of your difficulty you may 
make use of it. 

I should very much like, said Cebes, to hear what you have 
to say. 

Then I will tell you, said Socrates. When I was young, 
Cebes, I had a prodigious desire to know that department of 
philosophy which is called the investigation of nature; to 
know the causes of things, and why a thing is and is 
created or destroyed appeared to me to be a lofty pro- 
fession; and I was always agitating myself with the con- 

VOL. II. R 

241 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

Recapitula- 
tion of the 
argument of 
Cebes. 

The specu- 
lations of 
Socrates 
af>out 
physics 
made him 
forget the 
commonest 
things. 

242 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Cf.bes. 

Difficulty of 
explaining 
relative 
notions. 

Socrates incapable of enquiring into nature . 

sideration of questions such as these : — Is the growth of 
animals the result of some decay which the hot and cold 
principle contracts, as some have said ? Is the blood the 
element with which we think, or the air, or the fire ? or 
perhaps nothing of the kind — but the brain may be the 
originating power of the perceptions of hearing and sight 
and smell, and memory and opinion may come from them, 
and science may be based on memory and opinion when they 
have attained fixity. And then I went on to examine the 
corruption of them, and then to the things of heaven and 
earth, and at last I concluded myself to be utterly and abso- 
lutely incapable of these enquiries, as I will satisfactorily 
prove to you. For I was fascinated by them to such a degree 
that my eyes grew blind to things which I had seemed to 
myself, and also to others, to know quite well ; I forgot what 
I had before thought self-evident truths; e.g. such a fact as 
that the growth of man is the result of eating and drinking ; 
for when by the digestion of food flesh is added to flesh and 
bone to bone, and whenever there is an aggregation of con- 
genial elements, the lesser bulk becomes larger and the small 
man great. Was not that a reasonable notion ? 

Yes, said Cebes, 1 think so. 

Well ; but let me tell you something more. There was a 
time when I thought that I understood the meaning of greater 
and less pretty well ; and when* I saw a great man standing 
by a little one, l fancied that one was taller than the other by 
a head ; or. one horse would appear to be greater than 
another horse : and still more clearly did I seem to perceive 
that ten is two more than eight, and that two cubits are more 
than one, because two is the double of one. 

And what is now your notion of such matters? said Cebes. 

I should be far enough from imagining, he replied, that I 
knew the cause of any of them, by heaven I should ; for I 
cannot satisfy myself that, when one is added to one, the one 
to which the addition is made becomes two, or that the two 97 
units added together make two by reason of the addition. I 
cannot understand how, when separated from the other, each 
of them was one and not two, and now, when they are 
brought together, the mere juxtaposition or meeting of them 
should be the cause of their becoming two : neither can I 

243 

The inconsistency of Anaxagoras . 

understand how the division of one is the way to make two ; Phaedo. 
for then a different cause would produce the same effect,— as Socrates. 
in the former instance the addition and juxtaposition of one 
to one was the cause of two, in this the separation and sub- 
traction of one from the other would be the cause. Nor am 
I any longer satisfied that I understand the reason why one 
or anything else is either generated or destroyed or is at all, 
but I have in my mind some confused notion of a new 
method, and can never admit the other. 

Then I heard some one reading, as he said, from a book The great 
of Anaxagoras, that mind was the disposer and cause of all, ^onTwhich 
and I was delighted at this notion, which appeared quite Socrates 
admirable, and I said to myself : If mind is the disposer, 
mind will dispose all for the best, and put each particular in of Anaxa- 
the best place ; and I argued that if any one desired to find al °™ s a ' s that 
out the cause of the generation or destruction or existence of Mind, 
anything, he must find out what state of being or doing or 
suffering was best for that thing, and therefore a man had only 
to consider the best for himself and others, and then he 
would also know the worse, since the same science com- 
prehended both. And I rejoiced to think that I had found in 
Anaxagoras a teacher of the causes of existence such as I de- 
sired, and I imagined that he would tell me first whether the 
earth is flat or round; and whichever was true, he would 
proceed to explain the cause and the necessity of this being 
so, and then he would teach me the nature of the best and 
show that this was best ; and if he said that the earth was in 
the centre, he would further explain that this position was 
the best, and I should be satisfied with the explanation 
98 given, and not want any other sort of cause. And I thought 
that I would then go on and ask him about the sun and moon 
and stars, and that he would explain to me their comparative 
swiftness, and their returnings and various states, active and 
passive, and how all of them were for the best. For I could 
not imagine that when he spoke of mind as the disposer of 
them, he would give any other account of their being as they 
are, except that this was best ; and I thought that when he * 
had explained to me in detail the cause of each and the 
cause of all, he would go on to explain to me what was best 
for each and what was good for all. These hopes I would 

r 2 

244 Confusion of the causes and conditions of actions. 

Phaedo . not have sold for a large sum of money, and I seized the 
Socrates. books and read them as fast as I could in my eagerness to 
know the better and the worse. 

The great- What expectations I had formed, and how grievously was 
dSppohit- * disappointed ! As I proceeded, I found my philosopher 
ment. altogether forsaking mind or any other principle of order, 
but having recourse to air, and ether, and water, and other 
eccentricities. I might compare him to a person who began 
by maintaining generally that mind is the cause of the 
actions of Socrates, but who, when he endeavoured to ex- 
plain the causes of my several actions in detail, went on to 
show that I sit here because my body is made up of bones 
and muscles ; and the bones, as he would say, are hard and 
have joints which divide them, and the muscles are elastic, 
and they cover the bones, which have also a covering or 
environment of flesh and skin which contains them ; and as 
the bones are lifted at their joints by the contraction or 
relaxation of the muscles, I am able to bend my limbs, and 
this is why I am sitting here in a curved posture — that is 
what he would say ; and he would have a similar explanation 
of my talking to you, which he would attribute to sound, and 
air, and hearing, and he would assign ten thousand other 
causes of the same sort, forgetting to mention the true cause, 
which is, that the Athenians have thought fit to condemn me, 
and accordingly I have thought it better and more right to 
remain here and undergo my sentence ; for I am inclined to 
think that these muscles and bones of mine would have gone 99 
off long ago to Megara or Boeotia — by the dog they would, 
if they had been moved only by their own idea of what was 
best, and if I had not chosen the better and nobler part, 
instead of playing truant and running away, of enduring any 
punishment which the state inflicts. There is surely a 
strange confusion of causes and conditions in all this. It 
may be said, indeed, that without bones and muscles and the 
other parts of the body I cannot execute my purposes. But 
to say that I do as I do because of them, and that this is the 
way in which mind acts, and not from the choice of the best, 
is a very careless and idle mode of speaking. I wonder that 
they cannot distinguish the cause from the condition, which 
the many, feeling about in the dark, are always mistaking 

245 

The power of the best . 

and misnaming. And thus one man makes a vortex all Phaedo . 
round and steadies the earth by the heaven ; another gives Socrates, 
the air as a support to the earth, which is a sort of broad Cebes * 
trough. Any power which in arranging them as they are 
arranges them for the best never enters into their minds ; 
and instead of finding any superior strength in it, they rather 
expect to discover another Atlas of the world who is stronger 
and more everlasting and more containing than the good ; — of 
the obligatory and containing power of the good they think 
nothing ; and yet this is the principle which I would fain 
learn if any one would teach me. But as I have failed either 
to discover myself, or to learn of any one else, the nature of 
the best, I will exhibit to you, if you like, what I have found 
to be the second best mode of enquiring into the cause. 

I should very much like to hear, he replied. 

Socrates proceeded : — I thought that as I had failed in the The eye of 
contemplation of true existence, I ought to be careful that I the soul * 
did not lose the eye of my soul ; as people may injure their 
bodily eye by observing and gazing on the sun during an 
eclipse, unless they take the precaution of only looking at 
the image reflected in the water, or in some similar medium. 

So in my own case, I was afraid that my soul might be Theab- 
blinded altogether if I looked at things with my eyes or tried stract as 
to apprehend them by the help of the senses. And I thought piainer^han 
that I had better have recourse to the world of mind and thecon- 
ioo seek there the truth of existence. I dare say that the simile crete * 
is not perfect— for I am very far from admitting that he who 
contemplates existences through the medium of thought, sees 
them only 1 through a glass darkly,’ any more than he who 
considers them in action and operation. However, this was 
the method which I adopted : I first assumed some principle 
which I judged to be the strongest, and then I affirmed as 
true whatever seemed to agree with this, whether relating to 
the cause or to anything else ; and that which disagreed I re- 
garded as untrue. But I should like to explain my meaning 
more clearly, as I do not think that you as yet under- 
stand me. 

No indeed, replied Cebes, not very well. 

There is nothing new, he said, in what I am about to tell 
you ; but only what I have been always and everywhere 

246 

The ideas. 

Phaedo. 

SOCHATES, 

Cebes. 

If the ideas 
have an 
absolute 
existence 
the soul is 
immortal. 

All things 
exist by 
participa- 
tion in 
general 
ideas. 

We thus 
escape cer- 
tain contra- 
dictions 
of relation. 

repeating in the previous discussion and on other occasions : 

I want to show you the nature of that cause which has 
occupied my thoughts. I shall have to go back to those 
familiar words which are in the mouth of every one, and first 
of all assume that there is an absolute beauty and goodness 
and greatness, and the like ; grant me this, and I hope to be 
able to show you the nature of the cause, and to prove the 
immortality of the soul. 

Cebes said : You may proceed at once with the proof, for 
I grant you this. 

Well, he said, then I should like to know whether you 
agree with me in the next step ; for I cannot help thinking, 
if there be anything beautiful other than absolute beauty 
should there be such, that it can be beautiful only in so far 
as it partakes of absolute beauty — and I should say the same 
of everything. Do you agree in this notion of the cause ? 

Yes, he said, I agree. 

He proceeded : I know nothing and can understand 
nothing of any other of those wise causes which are alleged ; 
and if a person says to me that the bloom of colour, or form, 
or any such thing is a source of beauty, I leave all that, 
which is only confusing to me, and simply and singly, and 
perhaps foolishly, hold and am assured in my own mind that 
nothing makes a thing beautiful but the presence and par- 
ticipation of beauty in whatever way or manner obtained ; 
for as to the manner I am uncertain, but I stoutly contend 
that by beauty all beautiful things become beautiful. This 
appears to me to be the safest answer which I can give, 
either to myself or to another, and to this I cling, in the per- 
suasion that this principle will never be overthrown, and that 
to myself or to any one who asks the question, I may safely 
reply, That by beauty beautiful things become beautiful. Do 
you not agree with me ? 

I do. 

And that by greatness only great things become great and 
greater greater, and by smallness the less become less ? 

True. 

Then if a person were to remark that A is taller by a head 
than B, and B less by a head than A, you would refuse to 101 
admit his statement, and would stoutly contend that what 

247 

The puzzles of relation . 

you mean is only that the greater is greater by, and by rhaedo. 
reason of, greatness, and the less is less only by, and by Socrates, 
reason of, smallness ; and thus you would avoid the danger Cebes - 
of saying that the greater is greater and the less less by the 
measure of the head, which is the same in both, and would 
also avoid the monstrous absurdity of supposing that the 
greater man is greater by reason of the head, which is small. 

You would be afraid to draw such an inference, would 
you not ? 

Indeed, I should, said Cebes, laughing. 

In like manner you would be afraid to say that ten 
exceeded eight by, and by reason of, two ; but would 
say by, and by reason of, number ; or you would say 
that two cubits exceed one cubit not by a half, but by 
magnitude ? — for there is the same liability to error in all 
these cases. 

Very true, he said. 

Again, would you not be cautious of affirming that the 
addition of one to one, or the division of one, is the cause of 
two ? And you would loudly asseverate that you know of no 
way in which anything comes into existence except by parti- 
cipation in its own proper essence, and consequently, as far 
as you know, the only cause of two is the participation in 
duality— this is the way to make two, and the participation in 
one is the way to make one. You would say: I will let 
alone puzzles of division and addition — wiser heads than 
mine may answer them ; inexperienced as I am, and ready to 
start, as the proverb says, at my own shadow, I cannot afford 
to give up the sure ground of a principle. And if any one 
assails you there, you would not mind him, or answer him, 
until you had seen whether the consequences which follow 
agree with one another or not, and when you are further 
required to give an explanation of this principle, you would 
go on to assume a higher principle, and a higher, until you 
found a resting-place in the best of the higher; but you 
would not confuse the principle and the consequences in 
your reasoning, like the Eristics — at least if you wanted to 
discover real existence. Not that this confusion signifies to 
them, who never care or think about the matter at all, for 
they have the wit to be well pleased with themselves however 

248 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Simmias, 

Cebes, 

Echecrates, 

Phaedo. 

There may 
still remain 
the contra- 
diction of 
the same 
person 
being both 
greater and 
less, but 
this is only 
because he 
has great- 
ness or 
smallness 
relatively to 
another 
person. 

The effect of the argument on the company. 

great may be the turmoil of their ideas. But you, if you are 102 
a philosopher, will certainly do as I say. 

What you say is most true, said Simmias and Cebes, both 
speaking at once. 

Ech. Yes, Phaedo ; and I do not wonder at their assent- 
ing. Any one who has the least sense will acknowledge the 
wonderful clearness of Socrates* reasoning. 

Phaed . Certainly, Echecrates; and such was the feeling 
of the whole company at the time. 

Ech . Yes, and equally of ourselves, who were not of the 
company, and are now listening to your recital. But what 
followed ? 

Phaed. After all this had been admitted, and they had 
agreed that ideas exist, and that other things participate in 
them and derive their names from them, Socrates, if I 
remember rightly, said : — 

This is your way of speaking ; and yet when you say that 
Simmias is greater than Socrates and less than Phaedo, do 
you not predicate of Simmias both greatness and smallness ? 

Yes, I do. 

But still you allow that Simmias does not really exceed 
Socrates, as the words may seem to imply, because he is 
Simmias, but by reason of the size which he has ; just as 
Simmias does not exceed Socrates because he is Simmias, 
any more than because Socrates is Socrates, but because 
he has smallness when compared with the greatness of 
Simmias ? 

• True. 

And if Phaedo exceeds him in size, this is not because 
Phaedo is Phaedo, but because Phaedo has greatness rela- 
tively to Simmias, who is comparatively smaller ? 

That is true. 

And therefore Simmias is said to be great, and is also 
said to be small, because he is in a mean between them, 
exceeding the smallness of the one by his greatness, and 
allowing the greatness of the other to exceed his smallness. 

He added, laughing, I am speaking like a book, but I 
believe that what I am saying is true. 

Simmias assented. 

I speak as I do because I want you to agree with me in 

Greatness absolute and relative . 

249 

thinking, not only that absolute greatness will never be 
great and also small, but that greatness in us or in the con- 
crete will never admit the small or admit of being exceeded : 
instead of this, one of two things will happen, either the 
greater will fly or retire before the opposite, which is the 
less, or at the approach of the less has already ceased to 
exist ; but will not, if allowing or admitting of smallness, be 
changed by that; even as I, having received and admitted 
smallness when compared with Simmias, remain just as I 
was, and am the same small person. And as the idea of 
greatness cannot condescend ever to be or become small, in 
like manner the smallness in us cannot be or become great ; 
nor can any other opposite which remains the same ever 
103 be or become its own opposite, but either passes away or 
perishes in the change. 

That, replied Cebes, is quite my notion. 

Hereupon one of the company, though I do not exactly 
remember which of them, said : In heaven’s name, is not 
this the direct contrary of what was admitted before — that 
out of the greater came the less and out of the less the 
greater, and that opposites were simply generated from 
opposites ; but now this principle seems to be utterly denied. 

Socrates inclined his head to the speaker and listened. I 
like your courage, he said, in reminding us of this. But 
you do not observe that there is a difference in the two 
cases. For then we were speaking of opposites in the 
concrete, and now of the essential opposite which, as is 
affirmed, neither in us nor in nature can ever be at variance 
with itself: then, my friend, we were speaking of things in 
which opposites are inherent and which are called after 
them, but now about the opposites which are inherent in 
them and which give their name to them; and these 
essential opposites will never, as we maintain, admit of 
generation into or out of one another. At the same time, 
turning to Cebes, he said : Are you at all disconcerted, 
Cebes, at our friend’s objection ? 

No, I do not feel so, said Cebes; and yet I cannot deny 
that I am often disturbed by objections. 

Then we are agreed after all, said Socrates, that the oppo- 
site will never in any case be opposed to itself? 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

The idea of 
greatness 
can never 
be small ; 
and the 
greatness in 
us drives 
out small- 
ness. 

Yet the 
greater 
comes from 
the less, and 
the less 
from the 
greater. 

Distin- 
guish : — 
The things 
in which the 
opposites 
inhere 
generate 
into and out 
of one an- 
other : 
never the 
opposites 
themselves. 

250 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Cebks. 

Snow may 
be con- 
verted into 
water at the 
approach of 
heat, but 
not cold 
into heat. 

A seeming contradiction solved . 

To that we are quite agreed, he replied. 

Yet once more let me ask you to consider the question 
from another point of view, and see whether you agree with 
me : — There is a thing which you term heat, and another 
thing which you term cold ? 

Certainly. 

But are the}' the same as fire and snow? 

Most assuredly not. 

Heat is a thing different from fire, and cold is not the 
same with snow ? 

Yes. 

And yet you will surely admit, that when snow, as was 
before said, is under the influence of heat, they will not 
remain snow and heat ; but at the advance of the heat, the 
snow will either retire or perish ? 

Very true, he replied. 

And the fire too at the advance of the cold will either 
retire or perish ; and when the fire is under the influence of 
the cold, they will not remain as before, fire and cold. 

That is true, he said. 

And in some cases the name of the idea is not only 
attached to the idea in an eternal connection, but anything 
else which, not being the idea, exists only in the form of the 
idea, may also lay claim to it. I will try to make this 
clearer by an example : — The odd number is always called 
by the name of odd ? 

Very true. 

But is this the only thing which is called odd ? Are there 
not other things which have their own name, and yet are 104 
called odd, because, although not the same as oddness, they 
are never without oddness? — that is what I mean to ask — 
whether numbers such as the number three are not of the 
class of odd. And there are many other examples : would 
you not say, for example, that three may be called by its 
proper name, and also be called odd, which is not the same 
with three ? and this may be said not only of three but also 
of five, and of every alternate number — each of them without 
being oddness is odd ; and in the same way two and four, 
and the other series of alternate numbers, has every number 
even, without being evenness. Do you agree? 

Essential opposites and things which admit opposites . 

Of course. 

Then now mark the point at which I am aiming : —not 
only do essential opposites exclude one another, but also 
concrete things, which, although not in themselves opposed, 
contain opposites ; these, I say, likewise reject the idea 
which is opposed to that which is contained in them, and 
when it approaches them they either perish or withdraw. 
For example ; Will not the number three endure annihilation 
or anything sooner than be converted into an even number, 
while remaining three ? 

Very true, said Cebes. 

And yet, he said, the number two is certainly not opposed 
to the number three ? 

It is not. 

Then not only do opposite ideas repel the advance of one 
another, but also there are other natures which repel the 
approach of opposites. 

Very true, he said. 

Suppose, he said, that we endeavour, if possible, to deter- 
mine what these are. 

By all means. 

Are they not, Cebes, such as compel the things of which 
they have possession, not only to take their own form, but 
also the form of some opposite ? 

What do you mean ? 

I mean, as I was just now saying, and as I am sure that 
you know, that those things which are possessed by the 
number three must not only be three in number, but must 
also be odd. 

Quite true. 

And on this oddness, of which the number three has the 
impress, the opposite idea will never intrude ? 

No. 

And this impress was given by the odd principle ? 

Yes. 

And to the odd is opposed the even ? 

True. 

Then the idea of the even number will never arrive at 
three ? 

No. 

25 1 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

Not only 
essential 
opposites, 
but some 
concrete 
things 
which con- 
tain oppo- 
sites, ex- 
clude each 
other. 

That is to 
say the 
opposites 
which give 
an impress 
to other 
things. 

252 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

Natures 
may not 
be opposed, 
and yet may 
not admit 
of oppo- 
sites ; e. g. 
three is not 
opposed to 
two, and 
yet does not 
admit the 
even any 
more than 
two admits 
of the odd. 

The merely 
verbal truth 
may be re- 
placed by a 
higher one. 

Recapitulation . 

Then three has no part in the even ? 

None. 

Then the triad or number three is uneven ? 

Very true. 

To return then to my distinction of natures which are 
not opposed, and yet do not admit opposites— as, in the 
instance given, three, although not opposed to the even, 
does not any the more admit of the even, but always brings 
the opposite into play on the other side ; or as two does not 
receive the odd, or fire the cold — from these examples (and 105 
there are many more of them) perhaps you may be able to 
arrive at the general conclusion, that not only opposites will 
not receive opposites, but also that nothing which brings the 
opposite will admit the opposite of that which it brings, in 
that to which it is brought. And here let me recapitulate — 
for there is no harm in repetition. The number five will 
not admit the nature of the even, any more than ten, which 
is the double of five, will admit the nature of the odd. The 
double has another opposite, and is not strictly opposed to 
the odd, but nevertheless rejects the odd altogether. Nor 
again will parts in the ratio 3 : 2, nor any fraction in which 
there is a half, nor again in which there is a third, admit 
the notion of the whole, although they are not opposed to 
the whole : You will agree ? 

Yes, he said, I entirely agree and go along with you in that. 

And now, he said, let us begin again ; and do not you 
answer my question in the words in which I ask it : let me 
have not the old safe answer of which I spoke at first, but 
another equally safe, of which the truth will be inferred by 
you from what has been just said. I mean that if any one 
asks you 'what that is, of which the inherence makes the 
body hot/ you will reply not heat (this is what I call the 
safe and stupid answer), but fire, a far superior answer, 
which we are now in a condition to give. Or if any one 
asks you 'why a body is diseased/ you will not say from 
disease, but from fever; and instead of saying that oddness 
is the cause of odd numbers, you will say that the monad is 
the cause of them : and so of things in general, as I dare 
say that you will understand sufficiently without my ad« 
ducing any further examples. 

253 

Application of the argument to the soul . 

Yes, he said, I quite understand you. 

Tell me, then, what is that of which the inherence will 
render the body alive ? 

The soul, he replied. 

And is this always the case ? 

Yes, he said, of course. 

Then whatever the soul possesses, to that she comes 
bearing life? 

Yes, certainly. 

And is there any opposite to life ? 

There is, he said. 

And what is that ? 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Cebes. 

We may 
now say, 
not life 
makes alive, 
but the 
soul makes 
alive; and 
the soul has 
a life-giving 
power 
which does 
not admit 
of death 

Death. andis there- 

fore im- 

Then the soul, as has been acknowledged, will never mortal, 
receive the opposite of what she brings. 

Impossible, replied Cebes. 

And now, he said, what did we just now call that principle 
which repels the even ? 

The odd. 

And that principle which repels the musical or the just ? 
The unmusical, he said, and the unjust. 

And what do we call that principle which does not admit 

of death ? 

The immortal, he said. 

And does the soul admit of death ? 
No. 

Then the soul is immortal ? 

Yes, he said. 

And may we say that this has been proven ? 

Yes, abundantly proven, Socrates, he replied. 

106 Supposing that the odd were imperishable, must not three iliustra- 
be imperishable ? t,ons - 

Of course. 

And if that which is cold were imperishable, when the 
warm principle came attacking the snow, must not the snow 
have retired whole and unmelted— for it could never have 
perished, nor could it have remained and admitted the heat? • 

True, he said. 

Again, if the uncooling or warm principle were imperish- 
able, the fire when assailed by cold would not have perished 

254 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Crbrs. 

The im- 
mortal is 
imperish- 
able, and 
therefore 
the soul is 
imperish- 
able. 

At death 
the soul re- 
tires into 
another 
world. 

The mortal and immortal principles . 

or have been extinguished, but would have gone away un- 
affected ? 

Certainly, he said. 

And the same may be said of the immortal : if the immortal 
is also imperishable, the soul when attacked by death cannot 
perish ; for the preceding argument shows that the soul will 
not admit of death, or ever be dead, any more than three or 
the odd number will admit of the even, or fire, or the heat in 
the fire, of the cold. Yet a person may say : 1 But although 
the odd will not become even at the approach of the even, 
why may not the odd perish and the even take the place of 
the odd ? ’ Now to him who makes this objection, we cannot 
answer that the odd principle is imperishable ; for this has 
not been acknowledged, but if this had been acknowledged, 
there would have been no difficulty in contending that at the 
approach of the even the odd principle and the number three 
took their departure; and the same argument would have 
held good of fire and heat and any other thing. 

Very true. 

And the same may be said of the immortal : if the immortal 
is also imperishable, then the soul will be imperishable as 
well as immortal ; but if not, some other proof of her imperish- 
ableness will have to be given. 

No other proof is needed, he said ; for if the immortal, being 
eternal, is liable to perish, then nothing is imperishable. 

Yes, replied Socrates, and yet all men will agree that God, 
and the essential form of life, and the immortal in general, 
will never perish. 

Yes, all men, he said- that is true; and what is more, 
gods, if I am not mistaken, as well as men. 

Seeing then that the immortal is indestructible, must not 
the soul, if she is immortal, be also imperishable ? 

Most certainly. 

Then when death attacks a man, the mortal portion of him 
may be supposed to die, but the immortal retires at the 
approach of death and is preserved safe and sound ? 

. True. 

Then, Cebes, beyond question, the soul is immortal and 
imperishable, and our souls will truly exist in another 107 
world ! 

255 

Revelation in a myth . 

I am convinced, Socrates, said Cebes, and have nothing Phaedo. 
more to object ; but if my friend Simmias, or any one else, Socrates, 
has any further objection to make, he had better speak out, 
and not keep silence, since I do not know to what other 
season he can defer the discussion, if there is anything which 
he wants to say or to have said. 

But I have nothing more to say, replied Simmias ; nor can 
I see any reason for doubt after what has been said. But I 
still feel and cannot help feeling uncertain in my own mind, 
when I think of the greatness of the subject and the feeble- 
ness of man. 

Yes, Simmias, replied Socrates, that is well said : and I 
may add that first principles, even if they appear certain, 
should be carefully considered ; and when they are satis- 
factorily ascertained, then, with a sort of hesitating confidence 
in human reason, you may, I think, follow the course of the 
argument ; and if that be plain and clear, there will be no 
need for any further enquiry. 

Very true. 

But then, O my friends, he said, if the soul is really im- 4 Where- 
mortal, what care should be taken of her, not only in respect 
of the portion of time which is called life, but of eternity ! things, what 
And the danger of neglecting her from this point of view does manner of 
indeed appear to be awful. If death had only been the end migh^wc to 
of all, the wicked would have had a good bargain in dying, be? ’ 
for they would have been happily quit not only of their body, 
but of their own evil together with their souls. But now, 
inasmuch as the soul is manifestly immortal, there is no 
release or salvation from evil except the attainment of the 
highest virtue and wisdom. For the soul when on her pro- 
gress to the world below takes nothing with her but nurture 
and education ; and these are said greatly to benefit or 
greatly to injure the departed, at the very beginning of his 
journey thither. 

For after death, as they say, the genius of each individual, Theattenci- 
to whom he belonged in life, leads him to a certain place in aat & eail,s 

11 , i n of each 

which the dead are gathered together, whence after judg- brings him 
ment has been given they pass into the world below, follow- death 
ing the guide, who is appointed to conduct them from this judgment, 
world to the other : and when they have there received their 

2 5 6 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Simmias. 

The differ- 
ent desti- 
nies of pure 
and impure 
souls. 

Description 
of the divers 
regions of 
earth. 

The purgation of souls . 

due and remained their time, another guide brings them back 
again after many revolutions of ages. Now this way to the 
other world is not, as Aeschylus says in the Telephus, a 108 
single and straight path — if that were so no guide would be 
needed, for no one could miss it ; but there are many partings 
of the road, and windings, as I infer from the rites and 
sacrifices which are offered to the gods below in places where 
three ways meet on earth. The wise and orderly soul follows 
in the straight path and is conscious of her surroundings ; 
but the soul which desires the body, and which, as I was 
relating before, has long been fluttering about the lifeless 
frame and the world of sight, is after many struggles and 
many sufferings hardly and with violence carried away by 
her attendant genius ; and when she arrives at the place 
where the other souls are gathered, if she be impure and 
have done impure deeds, whether foul murders or other 
crimes which are the brothers of these, and the works of 
brothers in crime— from that soul every one flees and turns 
away ; no one will be her companion, no one her guide, but 
alone she wanders in extremity of evil until certain times are 
fulfilled, and when they are fulfilled, she is borne irresistibly 
to her own fitting habitation ; as every pure and just soul 
which has passed through life in the company and under the 
guidance of the gods has also her own proper home. 

Now the earth has divers wonderful regions, and is indeed 
in nature and extent very unlike the notions of geographers, 
as I believe on the authority of one who shall be nameless. 

What do you mean, Socrates? said Simmias. I have 
myself heard many descriptions of the earth, but I do not 
know, and I should very much like to know, in which of these 
you put faith. 

And I, Simmias, replied Socrates, if I had the art of 
Glaucus would tell you ; although I know not that the art of 
Glaucus could prove the truth of my tale, which I myself 
should never be able to prove, and even if I could, I fear, 
Simmias, that my life would come to an end before the argu- 
ment was completed. I may describe to you, however, the 
form and regions of the earth according to my conception of 
them. 

That, said Simmias, will be enough. 

257 

The lower regions of earth . 

Well then, he said, my conviction is, that the earth is a 
round body in the centre of the heavens, and therefore has 
>9 no need of air or of any similar force to be a support, but is 
kept there and hindered from falling or inclining any way by 
the equability of the surrounding heaven and by her own 
equipoise. For that which, being in equipoise, is in the 
centre of that which is equably diffused, will not incline any 
way in any degree, but will always remain in the same state 
and not deviate. And this is my first notion. 

Which is surely a correct one, said Simmias. 

Also I believe that the earth is very vast, and that we who 
dwell in the region extending from the river Phasis to the 
Pillars of Heracles inhabit a small portion only about the sea, 
like ants or frogs about a marsh, and that there are other in- 
habitants of many other like places ; for everywhere on the 
face of the earth there are hollows of various forms and sizes, 
into which the water and the mist and the lower air collect. 
But the true earth is pure and situated in the pure heaven — 
there are the stars also ; and it is the heaven which is com- 
monly spoken of by us as the ether, and of which our own 
earth is the sediment gathering in the hollows beneath. But 
we who live in these hollows are deceived into the notion that 
we are dwelling above on the surface of the earth ; which is 
just as if a creature who was at the bottom of the sea were to 
fancy that he was on the surface of the water, and that the sea 
was the heaven through which he saw the sun and the other 
stars, he having never come to the surface by reason of his 
feebleness and sluggishness, and having never lifted up his 
head and seen, nor ever heard from one who had seen, how 
much purer and fairer the world above is than his own. And 
such is exactly our case : for we are dwelling in a hollow of 
the earth, and fancy that we are on the surface ; and the air 
we call the heaven, in which we imagine that the stars move. 
But the fact is, that owing to our feebleness and sluggishness 
we are prevented from reaching the surface of the air : for if 
any man could arrive at the exterior limit, or take the wings 
of a bird and come to the top, then like a fish who puts his 
head out of the water and sees this world, he would see a 
world beyond ; and, if the nature of man could sustain the 
sight, he would acknowledge that this other world was the 

VOL. n. s 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Simmias. 

The earth 
is a round 
body kept 
in her place 
by equi- 
poise and 
the equa- 
bility of the 
surrounding 
element. 

Mankind 
lives only 
in a small 
portion of 
the earth 
at a dis- 
tance from 
the surface. 

If, like 
fishes who 
now and 
then put 
their heads 
out of the 
water, we 
could rise to 
the top of 
the atmo- 

258 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 
Sim mias. 
sphere, wc 
should 
behold the 
true heaven 
and the 
true earth. 

The upper 
earth is in 
every re- 
spect far 
fairer than 
the lower. 
There is 
gold and 
purple, and 
pure light, 
and trees 
and flowers 
lovelier far 
than our 
own, and 
all the 
stones are 
more pre- 
cious than 
our pre- 
cious 
stones. 

The earth seen from above . 

place of the true heaven and the true light and the true earth. 

For our earth, and the stones, and the entire region which no 
surrounds us, are spoilt and corroded, as in the sea all things 
are corroded by the brine, neither is there any noble or 
perfect growth, but caverns only, and sand, and an endless 
slough of mud ; and even the shore is not to be compared to 
the fairer sights of this world. And still less is this our world 
to be compared with the other. Of that upper earth which is 
under the heaven, I can tell you a charming tale, Simmias, 
which is well worth hearing. 

And we, Socrates, replied Simmias, shall be charmed to 
listen to you. 

The tale, my friend, he said, is as follows : — In the first 
place, the earth, when looked at from above, is in appear- 
ance streaked like one of those balls which have leather 
coverings in twelve pieces, and is decked with various 
colours, of which the colours used by painters on earth are 
in a manner samples. But there the whole earth is made 
up of them, and they are brighter far and clearer than ours ; 
there is a purple of wonderful lustre, also the radiance of 
gold, and the white which is in the earth is whiter than any 
chalk or snow. Of these and other colours the e*irth is 
made up, and they are more in number and fairer than the 
eye of man has ever seen ; the very hollows (of which I was 
speaking) filled with air and water have a colour of their 
own, and are seen like light gleaming amid the diversity of 
the other colours, so that the whole presents a single and 
continuous appearance of variety in unity. And in this fair 
region everything that grows— trees, and flowers, and fruits 
— are in a like degree fairer than any here ; and there are 
hills, having stones in them in a like degree smoother, and 
more transparent, and fairer in colour than our highly- 
valued emeralds and sardonyxes and jaspers, and other 
gems, which are but minute fragments of them : for there all 
the stones are like our precious stones, and fairer still 1 . The 
reason is, that they are pure, and not, like our precious 
stones, infected or corroded by the corrupt briny elements 
which coagulate among us, and which breed foulness and 
disease both in earth and stones, as well as in animals and 
1 Cp. Rev., esp. c. xxi. v. i8 ff. 

The chasm of Tartarus . 

259 

plants. They are the jewels of the upper earth, which also 
11 shines with gold and silver and the like, and they are set in 
the light of day and are large and abundant and in all 
places, making the earth a sight to gladden the beholder’s 
eye. And there are animals and men, some in a middle 
region, others dwelling about the air as we dwell about the 
sea; others in islands which the air flows round, near the 
continent; and in a word, the air is used by them as the 
water and the sea are by us, and the ether is to them what 
the air is to us. Moreover, the temperament of their 
seasons is such that they have no disease, and live much 
longer than we do, and have sight and hearing and smell, 
and all the other senses, in far greater perfection, in the same 
proportion that air is purer than water or the ether than 
air. Also they have temples and sacred places in which the 
gods really dwell, and they hear their voices and receive 
their answers, and are conscious of them and hold converse 
with them ; and they see the sun, moon, and stars as they 
truly are, and their other blessedness is of a piece with this. 

Such is the nature of the whole earth, and of the things 
which are around the earth ; and there are divers regions in 
the hollows on the face of the globe everywhere, some of 
them deeper and more extended than that which we inhabit, 
others deeper but with a narrower opening than ours, and 
some are shallower and also wider. All have numerous 
perforations, and there are passages broad and narrow in 
the interior of the earth, connecting them with one another ; 
and there flows out of and into them, as into basins, a vast 
tide of water, and huge subterranean streams of perennial 
rivers, and springs hot and cold, and a great fire, and great 
rivers of fire, and streams of liquid mud, thin or thick (like 
the rivers of mud in Sicily, and the lava streams which 
follow them), and the regions about which they happen to 
flow are filled up with them. And there is a swinging or 
see-saw in the interior of the earth which moves all this up 
and down, and is due to the following cause: — There is 
a chasm which is the vastest of them all, and pierces right 
1 12 through the whole earth; this is that chasm which Homer 
describes in the words, — 

‘Far off, where is the inmost depth beneath the earth;* 

Phaedo. 

Socrates. 

The blessed 
gods dwell 
there and 
hold con- 
verse with 
the in- 
habitants. 
Description 
of the in- 
terior of the 
earth and 
of the sub- 
terranean 
seas and 
rivers. 

260 

The four rivers of the world below. 

Phaedo. 

Socrates. 

Oceanus, 
Acheron, 
Pyriphlege* 
thon, and 
Styx (or 
Cocytus). 

and which he in other places, and many other poets, have 
called Tartarus. And the see-saw is caused by the streams 
flowing into and out of this chasm, and they each have the 
nature of the soil through which they flow. And the reason 
why the streams are always flowing in and out, is that the 
watery element has no bed or bottom, but is swinging and 
surging up and down, and the surrounding wind and air do 
the same; they follow the water up and down, hither and 
thither, over the earth— just as in the act of respiration the 
air is always in process of inhalation and exhalation ; — and 
the wind swinging with the water in and out produces 
fearful and irresistible blasts : when the waters retire with a 
rush into the lower parts of the earth, as they are called, 
they flow through the earth in those regions, and fill them 
up like water raised by a pump, and then when they leave 
those regions and rush back hither, they again fill the 
hollows here, and when these are filled, flow through sub- 
terranean channels and find their way to their several 
places, forming seas, and lakes, and rivers, and springs. 
Thence they again enter the earth, some of them making a 
long circuit into many lands, others going to a few places 
and not so distant; and again fall into Tartarus, some at a 
point a good deal lower than that at which they rose, and 
others not much lower, but all in some degree lower than 
the point from which they came. And some burst forth 
again on the opposite side, and some on the same side, and 
some wind round the earth with one or many folds like the 
coils of a serpent, and descend as far as they can, but always 
return and fall into the chasm. The rivers flowing in either 
direction can descend only to the centre and no further, for 
opposite to the rivers is a precipice. 

Now these rivers are many, and mighty, and diverse, and 
there are four principal ones, of which the greatest and outer- 
most is that called Oceanus, which flows round the earth in 
a circle ; and in the opposite direction flows Acheron, which 
passes under the earth through desert # places into the i 
Acherusian lake : this is the lake to the shores of which the 
souls of the many go when they are dead, and after waiting 
an appointed time, which is to some a longer and to some a 
shorter time, they are sent back to be born again as animals. 

26 i 

The geography of the world below . 

The third river passes out between the two, and near the place Phaedo . 
of outlet pours into a vast region of fire, and forms a lake Socrates. 
larger than the Mediterranean Sea, boiling with water and 
mud ; and proceeding muddy and turbid, and winding about 
the earth, comes, among other places, to the extremities of 
the Acherusian lake, but mingles not with the waters of the 
lake, and after making many coils about the earth plunges 
into Tartarus at a deeper level. This is that Pyriphlege- 
thon, as the stream is called, which throws up jets of fire in 
different parts of the earth. The fourth river goes out on 
the opposite side, and falls first of all into a wild and savage 
region, which is all of a dark blue colour, like lapis lazuli ; 
and this is that river which is called the Stygian river, and 
falls into and forms the Lake Styx, and after falling into the 
lake and receiving strange powers in the waters, passes 
under the earth, winding round in the opposite direction, and 
comes near the Acherusian lake from the opposite side to 
Pyriphlegethon. And the water of this river too mingles 
with no other, but flows round in a circle and falls into 
Tartarus over against Pyriphlegethon ; and the name of the 
river, as the poets say, is Cocytus. 

Such is the nature of the other world ; and when the dead The judg- 
arrive at the place to which the genius of each severally of the 
guides them, first of all, they have sentence passed upon 
them, as they have lived well and piously or not. And 
those who appear to have lived neither well nor ill, go to 
the river Acheron, and embarking in any vessels which 
they may find, are carried in them to the lake, and there 
they dwell and are purified of their evil deeds, and having 
suffered the penalty of the wrongs which they have done to 
others, they are absolved, and receive the rewards of their 
good deeds, each of them according to his deserts. But 
those who appear to be incurable by reason of the greatness 
of their crimes— who have committed many and terrible 
deeds of sacrilege, murders foul and violent, or the like 
— such are hurled into Tartarus which is their suitable 
. destiny, and they never come out. Those again who have 
committed crimes, which, although great, are not irre- 
mediable— who in a moment of anger, for example, have 
done some violence to a father or a mother, and have 

262 

Phaedo. 

Socrates. 

These 
descriptions 
are not true 
to the letter, 
but some- 
thing like 
them is 
true. 

The mansions of the blessed . 

repented for the remainder of their lives, or, who have taken 114 
the life of another under the like extenuating circumstances 
— these are plunged into Tartarus, the pains of which they 
are compelled to undergo for a year, but at the end of the 
year the wave casts them forth — mere homicides by way of 
Cocytus, parricides and matricides by Pyriphlegethon — and 
they are borne to the Acherusian lake, and there they lift up 
their voices and call upon the victims whom they have slain 
or wronged, to have pity on them, and to be kind to them, 
and let them come out into the lake. And if they prevail, 
then they come forth and cease from their troubles ; but if 
not, they are carried back again into Tartarus and from 
thence into the rivers unceasingly, until they obtain mercy 
from those whom they have wronged : for that is the sen- 
tence inflicted upon them by their judges. Those too who 
have been pre-eminent for holiness of life are released from 
this earthly prison, and go to their pure home which is 
above, and dwell in the purer earth ; and of these, such as 
have duly purified themselves with philosophy live hence- 
forth altogether without the body, in mansions fairer still, 
which may not be described, and of which the time would 
fail me to tell. 

Wherefore, Simmias, seeing all these things, what ought 
not we to do that we may obtain virtue and wisdom in this 
life ? Fair is the prize, and the hope great ! 

A man of sense ought not to say, nor will I be very con- 
fident, that the description which I have given of the soul and 
her mansions is exactly true. But I do say that, inasmuch 
as the soul is shown to be immortal, he may venture to 
think, not improperly or unworthily, that something of the 
kind is true. The venture is a glorious one, and he ought to 
comfort himself with words like these, which is the reason 
why I lengthen out the tale. Wherefore, I say, let a man be 
of good cheer about his soul, who having cast away the 
pleasures and ornaments of the body as alien to him and 
working harm rather than good, has sought after the pleasures 
of knowledge ; and has arrayed the soul, not in some foreign 
attire, but in her own proper jewels, temperance, and justice, 
and courage, and nobility, and truth— in these adorned she 115 
is ready to go on her journey to the world below, when her 

263 

The last words of Socrates and his friends. 

hour comes. You, Simmias and Cebes, and all other men, Phaedo. 
will depart at some time or other. Me already, as a tragic Socrates, 
poet would say, the voice of fate calls. Soon I must drink CriT0, 
the poison ; and I think that I had better repair to the bath 
first, in order that the women may not have the trouble of 
washing my body after I am dead. 

When he had done speaking, Crito said : And have you 
any commands for us, Socrates — anything to say about your 
children, or any other matter in which we can serve you ? 

Nothing particular, Crito, he replied : only, as I have 
always told you, take care of yourselves; that is a service 
which you may be ever rendering to me and mine and to 
all of us, whether you promise to do so or not. But if you 
have no thought for yourselves, and care not to walk according 
to the rule which I have prescribed for you, not now for the 
first time, however much you may profess or promise at the 
moment, it will be of no avail. 

We will do our best, said Crito : And in what way shall we 
bury you ? 

In any way that you like ; but you must get hold of me, 
and take care that I do not run away from you. Then he 
turned to us, and added with a smile : — I cannot make Crito 
believe that I am the same Socrates who have been talking 
and conducting the argument ; he fancies that I am the other 
Socrates whom he will soon see, a dead body — and he asks, 

How shall he bury me? And though I have spoken many The dead 
words in the endeavour to show that when I have drunk the body which 
poison I shall leave you and go to the joys of the blessed, — not the true 
these words of mine, with which I was comforting you and Socrates, 
myself, have had, as I perceive, no effect upon Crito. And 
therefore I want you to be surety for me to him now, as 
at the trial he was surety to the judges for me : but let 
the promise be of another sort; for he was surety for me 
to the judges that I would remain, and you must be my 
surety to him that I shall not remain, but go away and 
depart ; and then he will suffer less at my death, and not be 
grieved when he sees my body being burned or buried. I 
would not have him sorrow at my hard lot, or say at the 
burial, Thus we lay out Socrates, or, Thus we follow him to 
the grave or bury him ; for false words are not only evil in 

264 

Phaedo . 

Socrates, 

Crito, 

The Jailer. 

He takes 
leave of his 
family. 

The 

humanity 
of the 
jailer. 

Crito would 
detain 
Socrates a 
littje^ while. 

Socrates is ready to depart . 

themselves, but they infect the soul with evil. Be of good 
cheer then, my dear Crito, and say that you are burying my 
body only, and do with that whatever is usual, and what you 1 
think best. 

When he had spoken these words, he arose and went 
into a chamber to bathe ; Crito followed him and told us to 
wait. So we remained behind, talking and thinking of the 
subject of discourse, and also of the greatness of our sorrow ; 
he was like a father of whom we were being bereaved, and 
we were about to pass the rest of our lives as orphans. 
When he had taken the bath his children were brought to 
him — (he had two young sons and an elder one); and the 
women of his family also came, and he talked to them and 
gave them a few directions in the presence of Crito ; then 
he dismissed them and returned to us. 

Now the hour of sunset was near, for a good deal of time 
had passed while he was within. When he came out, he sat 
down with us again after his bath, but not much was said. 
Soon the jailer, who was the servant of the Eleven, entered 
and stood by him, saying : — To you, Socrates, whom I know 
to be the noblest and gentlest and best of all who ever came 
to this place, I will not impute the angry feelings of other 
men, who rage and swear at me, when, in obedience to the 
authorities, I bid them drink the poison — indeed, I am sure 
that you will not be angry with me ; for others, as you are 
aware, and not I, are to blame. And so fare you well, and 
try to bear lightly what must needs be— you know my 
errand. Then bursting into tears he turned away and 
went out. 

Socrates looked at him and said : I return your good 
wishes, and will do as you bid. Then turning to us, he said, 
How charming the man is : since I have been in prison he 
has always been coming to see me, and at times he would 
talk to me, and was as good to me as could be, and now see 
how generously he sorrows on my account. We must do as 
he says, Crito ; and therefore let the cup be brought, if the 
poison is prepared : if not, let the attendant prepare some. 

Yet, said Crito, the sun is still upon the hill-tops, and I 
know that many a one has taken the draught late, and after 
the announcement has been made to him, he has eaten and 

265 

The closing scene . 

drunk, and enjoyed the society of his beloved ; do not hurry 
— there is time enough. 

Socrates said: Yes, Crito, and they of whom you speak 
are right in so acting, for they think that they will be 
gainers by the delay; but I am right in not following their 
example, for I do not think that I should gain anything by 
ii 7 drinking the poison a little later; I should only be ridiculous 
in my own eyes for sparing and saving a life which is already 
forfeit. Please then to do as I say, and not to refuse me. 

Crito made a sign to the servant, who was standing by ; 
and he went out, and having been absent for some time, 
returned with the jailer carrying the cup of poison. Socrates 
said : You, my good friend, who are experienced in these 
matters, shall give me directions how I am to proceed. The 
man answered : You have only to walk about until your legs 
are heavy, and then to lie down, and the poison will act. At 
the same time he handed the cup to Socrates, who in the 
easiest and gentlest manner, without the least fear or change 
of colour or feature, looking at the man with all his eyes, 
Echecrates, as his manner was, took the cup and said : What 
do you say about making a libation out of this cup to any 
god? May I, or not? The man answered : We only pre- 
pare, Socrates, just so much as we deem enough. I under- 
stand, he said : but I may and must ask the gods to prosper 
my journey from this to the other world — even so — and so be 
it according to my prayer. Then raising the cup to his lips, 
quite readily and cheerfully he drank off the poison. And 
hitherto most of us had been able to control our sorrow ; but 
now when we saw him drinking, and saw too that he had 
finished the draught, we could no longer forbear, and in spite 
of myself my own tears were flowing fast ; so that I covered 
my face and wept, not for him, but at the thought of my own 
calamity in having to part from such a friend. Nor was I the 
first ; for Crito, when he found himself unable to restrain his 
tears, had got up, and I followed; and at that moment, 
Apollodorus, who had been weeping all the time, broke out in 
a loud and passionate cry which made cowards of us all. 
Socrates alone retained his calmness : What is this strange 
outcry? he said. I sent away the women mainly in order 
that they might not misbehave in this way, for I have been 

Phaedo. 

Socrates, 

Chito, 

The Jailer. 

Socrates 
thinks that 
there is 
nothing to 
be gained 
by delay. 

The poison 
is brought. 

He drinks 
the poison. 

The com- 
pany of 
friends are 
unable to 
control 
themselves. 

Says 

Socrates, 

* A man 
lihQuld die 
in peace.' 

266 

The end. 

Fhaedo. 

Socrates, 

Crito, 

PlIAEDO. 

The debt to 
Asclepius. 

told that a man should die in peace. Be quiet then, and 
have patience. When we heard his words we were ashamed, 
and refrained our tears ; and he walked about until, as he 
said, his legs began to fail, and then he lay on his back, 
according to the directions, and the man who gave him the 
poison now and then looked at his feet and legs ; and after a 
while he pressed his foot hard, and asked him if he could 
feel ; and he said, No ; and then his leg, and so upwards and 118 
upwards, and showed us that he was cold and stiff. And he 
felt them himself, and said : When the poison reaches the 
heart, that will be the end. He was beginning to grow cold 
about the groin, when he uncovered his face, for he had 
covered himself up, and said — they were his last words -he 
said : Crito, 1 owe a cock to Asclepius ; will you remember 
to pay the debt ? The debt shall be paid, said Crito ; is 
there anything else ? There was no answer to this question ; 
but in a minute or two a movement was heard, and the 
attendants uncovered him ; his eyes were set, and Crito 
closed his eyes and mouth. 

Such was the end, Echecrates, of our friend; concerning 
whom I may truly say, that of all the men of his time whom I 
have known, he was the wisest and justest and best. 

GORGIAS. 

INTRODUCTION. 

In several of the dialogues of Plato, doubts have arisen among 
his interpreters as to which of the various subjects discussed in 
them is the main thesis. The speakers have the freedom of con- 
versation ; no severe rules of art restrict them, and sometimes we 
are inclined to think, with one of the dramatis personae in the 
Theaetetus (177 C), that the digressions have the greater interest. 
Yet in the most irregular of the dialogues there is also a certain 
natural growth or unity ; the beginning is not forgotten at the end, 
and numerous allusions and references are interspersed, which 
form the loose connecting links of the whole. We must not neglect 
this unity, but neither must we attempt to confine the Platonic 
dialogue on the Procrustean bed of a single idea. (Cp. Introduc- 
tion to the Phaedrus.) 

Two tendencies seem to have beset the interpreters of Plato in 
this matter. First, they have endeavoured to hang the dialogues 
upon one another by the slightest threads ; and have thus been led 
to opposite and contradictory assertions respecting their order and 
sequence. The mantle of Schleiermacher has descended upon his 
successors, who have applied his method with the most various 
results. The value and use of the method has been hardly, if at 
all, examined either by him or them. Secondly, they have extended 
almost indefinitely the scope of each separate dialogue ; in this way 
they think that they have escaped all difficulties, not seeing that 
what they have gained in generality they have lost in truth and 
distinctness. Metaphysical conceptions easily pass into one 
another ; and the simpler notions of antiquity, which we can only 
realize by an effort, imperceptibly blend with the more familiar 
theories of modern philosophers. An eye for proportion is needed 
(his own art of measuring) in the study of Plato, as well as of other 
great artists. We may readily admit that the moral antithesis of 

Gorgias. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

270 

The subject of the Dialogue. 

Gorgias . good and pleasure, or the intellectual antithesis of knowledge and 
Introduc- opinion, being and appearance, are never far off in a Platonic dis- 
skm, cussion. But because they are in the background, we should not 
bring them into the foreground, or expect to discern them equally 
in all the dialogues. 

There may be some advantage in drawing out a little the main 
outlines of the building ; but the use of this is limited, and may be 
easily exaggerated. We may give Plato too much system, and 
alter the natural form and connection of his thoughts. Under the 
idea that his dialogues are finished works of art, we may find a 
reason for everything, and lose the highest characteristic of art, 
which is simplicity. Most great works receive a new light from a 
new and original mind. But whether these new lights are true or 
only suggestive, will depend on their agreement with the spirit of 
Plato, and the amount of direct evidence which can be urged in 
support of them. When a theory is running away with us, criti- 
cism does a friendly office in counselling moderation, and recalling 
us to the indications of the text. 

Like the Phaedrus, the Gorgias has puzzled students of Plato by 
the appearance of two or more subjects. Under the cover of rhetoric 
higher themes are introduced ; the argument expands into a 
general view of the good and evil of man. After making an inef- 
fectual attempt to obtain a sound definition of his art from Gorgias, 
Socrates assumes the existence of a universal art of flattery or 
simulation having several branches ; —this is the genus of which 
rhetoric is only one, and not the highest species. To flattery is 
opposed the true and noble art of life which he who possesses 
seeks always to impart to others, and which at last triumphs, if 
not here, at any rate in another world. These two aspects of 
life and knowledge appear to be the two leading ideas of the 
dialogue. The true and the false in individuals and states, in the 
treatment of the soul as well as of the body, are conceived under 
the forms of true and false art. In the development of this oppo- 
sition there arise various other questions, such as the two famous 
paradoxes of Socrates (paradoxes as they are to the world in 
•general, ideals as they may be more worthily called) : (i) that to 
do is worse than to suffer evil ; and (2) that when a man has done 
evil he had better be punished than unpunished ; to which may be 
added (3) a third Socratic paradox or ideal, that bad men do what 

The character of the Dialogue. 

they think best, but not what they desire, for the desire of all is 
towards the good. That pleasure is to be distinguished from good 
is proved by the simultaneousness of pleasure and pain, and by 
the possibility of the bad having in certain cases pleasures as great 
as those of the good, or even greater. Not merely rhetoricians, 
but poets, musicians, and other artists, the whole tribe of statesmen, 
past as well as present, are included in the class of flatterers. 
The true and false finally appear before the judgment-seat of the 
gods below. 

The dialogue naturally falls into three divisions, to which the 
three characters of Gorgias, Polus, and Callicles respectively 
correspond ; and the form and manner change with the stages of 
the argument. Socrates is deferential towards Gorgias, playful and 
yet cutting in dealing with the youthful Polus, ironical and sarcastic 
in his encounter with Callicles. In the first division the question 
is asked — What is rhetoric ? To this there is no answer given, for 
Gorgias is soon made to contradict himself by Socrates, and the 
argument is transferred to the hands of his disciple Polus, who 
rushes to the defence of his master. The answer has at last to be 
given by Socrates himself, but before he can even explain his 
meaning to Polus, he must enlighten him upon the great subject of 
shams or flatteries. When Polus finds his favourite art reduced to 
the level of cookery, he replies that at any rate rhetoricians, like 
despots, have great power. Socrates denies that they have any 
real power, and hence arise the three paradoxes already men- 
tioned. Although they are strange to him, Polus is at last convinced 
of their truth ; at least, they seem to him to follow legitimately 
from the premises. Thus the second act of the dialogue closes. 
Then Callicles appears on the scene, at first maintaining that 
pleasure is good, and that might is right, and that law is nothing ' 
but the combination of the many weak against the few strong. 
When he is confuted he withdraws from the argument, and leaves 
Socrates to arrive at the conclusion by himself. The conclusion is 
that there are two kinds of statesmanship, a higher and a lower — 
that which makes the people better, and that which only flatters 
them, and he exhorts Callicles to choose the higher. The dialogue * 
terminates with a mythus of a final judgment, in which there will 
be no more flattery or disguise, and no further use for the teaching 
of rhetoric. 

271 

Gorgias . 

Introduc- 

tion. 

272 

Contrast of Gorgias and Polus. 

Gorgias. The characters of the three interlocutors also correspond to the 
Introduc- parts which are assigned to them. Gorgias is the great rhetorician, 
TI0N * now advanced in years, who goes from city to city displaying his 
talents, and is celebrated throughout Greece. Like all the Sophists 
in the dialogues of Plato, he is vain and boastful, yet he has also 
a certain dignity, and is treated by Socrates with considerable 
respect. But he is no match for him in dialectics. Although he 
has been teaching rhetoric all his life, he is still incapable of de- 
fining his own art. When his ideas begin to clear up, he is un- 
willing to admit that rhetoric can be wholly separated from justice 
and injustice, and this lingering sentiment of morality, or regard for 
public opinion, enables Socrates to detect him in a contradiction. 
Like Protagoras, he is described as of a generous nature; he 
expresses his approbation of Socrates’ manner of approaching a 
question ; he is quite 1 one of Socrates’ sort, ready to be refuted as 
well as to refute,’ and very eager that Callicles and Socrates should 
have the game out. He knows by experience that rhetoric exer- 
cises great influence over other men, but he is unable to explain 
the puzzle how rhetoric can teach everything and know nothing. 

Polus is an impetuous youth, a runaway ‘colt,’ as Socrates 
describes him, who wanted originally to have taken the place of 
Gorgias under the pretext that the old man was tired, and now avails 
himself of the earliest opportunity to enter the lists. He is said to 
be the author of a work on rhetoric (462 C), and is again mentioned 
in the Phaedrus (267 B), as the inventor of balanced or double 
forms of speech (cp. Gorg. 448 C, 467 C ; Symp. 185 C). At first 
he is violent and ill-mannered, and is angry at seeing his master 
overthrown. But in the judicious hands of Socrates he is soon 
restored to good-humour, and compelled to assent to the required 
conclusion. Like Gorgias, he is overthrown because he com- 
promises; he is unwilling to say that to do is fairer or more 
honourable than to suffer injustice. Though he is fascinated by the 
power of rhetoric, and dazzled by the splendour of success, he is 
not insensible to higher arguments. Plato may have felt that there 
would be an incongruity in a youth maintaining the cause of 
•injustice against the world. He has never heard the other side of 
the question, and he listens to the paradoxes, as they appear to 
him, of Socrates with evident astonishment. He can hardly under- 
stand the meaning of Archelaus being miserable, or of rhetoric 

Callicles , the man of the world. 273 

being only useful in self-accusation. When the argument with Gorgias. 
him has fairly run out, Introduc- 

Callicles, in whose house they are assembled, is introduced on T,ON ' 

the stage : he is with difficulty convinced that Socrates is in 
earnest ; for if these things are true, then, as he says with real 
emotion, the foundations of society are upside down. In him 
another type of character is represented ; he is neither sophist 
nor philosopher, but man of the world, and an accomplished 
Athenian gentleman. He might be described in modern language 
as a cynic or materialist, a lover of power and also of pleasure, 
and unscrupulous in his means of attaining both. There is no 
desire on his part to offer any compromise in the interests of 
morality ; nor is any concession made by him. Like Thrasymachus 
in the Republic, though he is not of the same weak and vulgar 
class, he consistently maintains that might is right. His great 
motive of action is political ambition ; in this he is characteristically 
Greek. Like Anytus in the Meno, he is the enemy of the Sophists ; 
but favours the new art of rhetoric, which he regards as an excel- 
lent weapon of attack and defence. He is a despiscr of mankind 
as he is of philosophy, and secs in the laws of the state only a 
violation of the order of nature, which intended that the stronger 
should govern the weaker (cp. Rep. ii. 358-360). Like other men 
of the world who are of a speculative turn of mind, he generalizes 
the bad side of human nature, and has easily brought down his 
principles to his practice. Philosophy and poetry alike supply 
him with distinctions suited to his view of human life. He has a 
good will to Socrates, whose talents he evidently admires, while he 
censures the puerile use which he makes of them, lie expresses 
a keen intellectual interest in the argument. Like Anytus, again, 
he has a sympathy with other men of the world ; the Athenian 
statesmen of a former generation, who showed no weakness and 
made no mistakes, such as Miltiades, Themistocles, Pericles, are 
his favourites. His ideal of human character is a man of great 
passions and great powers, which he has developed to the utmost, 
and which he uses in his own enjoyment and in the government 
of others. Had Critias been the name instead of Callicles, about 
whom we know nothing from other sources, the opinions of the 
man would have seemed to reflect the history of his life. 

And now the combat deepens. In Callicles, far more than in any 

VOL. II. T 

274 The representation of Socrates in the Gorgias. 

Gorgias. sophist or rhetorician, is concentrated the spirit of evil against 

Introduc- which Socrates is contending, the spirit of the world, the spirit of 
the many contending against the one wise man, of which the 
Sophists, as he describes them in the Republic, are the imitators 
rather than the authors, being themselves carried away by the great 
tide of public opinion. Socrates approaches his antagonist warily 
from a distance, with a sort of irony which touches with a light 
hand both his personal vices (probably in allusion to some scandal 
of the day) and his servility to the populace. At the same time, he 
is in most profound earnest, as Chaerephon remarks. Callicles 
soon loses his temper, but the more he is irritated, the more pro- 
voking and matter of fact does Socrates become. A repartee of 
his which appears to have been really made to the ‘ omniscient ’ 
Hippias, according to the testimony of Xenophon (Mem. iv. 4, 6, 
10), is introduced (490 E). He is called by Callicles a popular 
declaimer, and certainly shows that he has the power, in the words 
of Gorgias, of being ‘as long as he pleases/ or ‘as short as he 
pleases* (cp. Protag. 336 D). Callicles exhibits great ability in 
defending himself and attacking Socrates, whom he accuses of 
trifling and word-splitting ; he is scandalized (p. 494) that the 
legitimate consequences of his own argument should be stated in 
plain terms ; after the manner of men of the world, he wishes to 
preserve the decencies of life. But he cannot consistently main- 
tain the bad sense of words; and getting confused between the 
abstract notions of better, superior, stronger, he is easily turned 
round by Socrates, and only induced to continue the argument by 
the authority of Gorgias. Once, when Socrates is describing the 
manner in which the ambitious citizen has to identify himself with 
the people, he partially recognizes the truth of his words. 

The Socrates of the Gorgias may be compared with the Socrates 
of the Protagoras and Meno. As in other dialogues, he is the 
enemy of the Sophists and rhetoricians ; and also of the statesmen, 
whom he regards as another variety of the same species. His 
behaviour is governed by that of his opponents ; the least forward- 
ness or egotism on their part is met by a corresponding irony on 
• the part of Socrates. He must speak, for philosophy will not allow 
him to be silent. He is indeed more ironical and provoking than 
in any other of Plato’s writings : for he is ‘ fooled to the top of his 
bent * by the worldliness of Callicles. But he is also more deeply 

275 

The representation of Socrates in the Gorgias. 

in earnest. He rises higher than even in the Phaedo and Crito : 
at first enveloping his moral convictions in a cloud of dust and 
dialectics, he ends by losing his method, his life, himself, in them. 
As in the Protagoras and Phaedrus, throwing aside the veil of 
irony, he makes a speech, but, true to his character, not until his 
adversary has refused to answer any more questions. The pre- 
sentiment of his own fate is hanging over him. He is aware that 
Socrates, the single real teacher of politics, as he ventures to call 
himself, cannot safely go to war with the whole world, and that in 
the courts of earth he will be condemned. But he will be justified 
in the world below. Then the position of Socrates and Callicles 
will be reversed; all those things ‘unfit for ears polite’ which 
Callicles has prophesied as likely to happen to him in this life, 
the insulting language, the box on the ears, will recoil upon his 
assailant. (Compare Rep. x. 613, I), E, and the similar reversal 
of the position of the lawyer and the philosopher in the Theae- 
tetus, 173-176.) 

There is an interesting allusion to his own behaviour at the 
trial of the generals after the battle of Arginusae, which he 
ironically attributes to his ignorance of the manner in which a 
vote of the assembly should be taken (473 E). This is said to 
have happened ‘ last year ’ (b. c. 406), and therefore the assumed 
date of the dialogue has been fixed at 405 b. c., when Socrates 
would already have been an old man. The date is clearly 
marked, but is scarcely reconcilable with another indication of 
time, viz. the ‘recent’ usurpation of Archelaus, which occurred 
in the year 413 (470 D) ; and still less with the ‘ recent ’ death 
(503 B) of Pericles, who really died twenty-four years previously 
(429 b. c.) and is afterwards reckoned among the statesmen of a 
past age (cp. 517 A) ; or with the mention of Nicias, who died in 
413, and is nevertheless spoken of as a living witness (472 A, B). 
But we shall hereafter have reason to observe, that although 
there is a general consistency of times and persons in the 
Dialogues of Plato, a precise dramatic date is an invention of his 
commentators (Preface to Republic, p. ix). 

The conclusion of the Dialogue is remarkable, (1) for the truly 
characteristic declaration of Socrates (p. 509 A) that he is ignorant 
of the true nature and bearing of these things, while he affirms at 
the same time that no one can maintain any other view without 

T 2 

Gorgias. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

276 Socrates the only true politician. 

Gorgias. being ridiculous. The profession of ignorance reminds us of the 
Introduc- earlier and more exclusively Socratic Dialogues. But neither in 
1ION * them, nor in the Apology, nor in the Memorabilia of Xenophon, 
does Socrates express any doubt of the fundamental truths of 
morality. He evidently regards this ‘ among the multitude of 
questions* which agitate human life ‘as the principle which alone 
remains unshaken* (527 B). He does not insist here, any more 
than in the Phaedo, on the literal truth of the myth, but only on 
the soundness of the doctrine which is contained in it, that doing 
wrong is worse than suffering, and that a man should be rather 
than seem ; for the next best thing to a man’s being just is that 
he should be corrected and become just ; also that he should 
avoid all flattery, whether of himself or of others ; and that 
rhetoric should be employed for the maintenance of the right 
only. The revelation of another life is a recapitulation of the 
argument in a figure. 

(2) Socrates makes the singular remark, that he is himself the 
only true politician of his age. In other passages, especially in 
the Apology, he disclaims being a politician at all. There he is 
convinced that he or any other good man who attempted to resist 
the popular will would be put to death before he had done any 
good to himself or others. Here he anticipates such a fate for 
himself, from the fact that he is ‘ the only man of the present day 
who performs his public duties at all.’ The two points of view 
are not really inconsistent, but the difference between them is 
w’orth noticing : Socrates is and is not a public man. Not in the 
ordinary sense, like Alcibiades or Pericles, but in a higher one ; 
and this will sooner or later entail the same consequences on 
him. He cannot be a private man if he would ; neither can he 
separate morals from politics. Nor is he unwilling to be a poli- 
tician, although he foresees the dangers which await him ; but he 
must first become a better and wiser man, for he as well as 
Callicles is in a state of perplexity and uncertainty (527 D, E). 
And yet there is an inconsistency : for should not Socrates too 
have taught the citizens better than to put him to death (519) ? 

• And now, as he himself says (506 D), we will ‘resume the 
argument from the beginning.’ 

Analysis. 

Socrates, who is attended by his inseparable disciple, Chaere- 

277 

Analysis 447 - 451 . 

Steph. phon, meets Callicles in the streets of Athens. He is informed 
447 that he has just missed an exhibition of Gorgias, which he 
regrets, because he was desirous, not of hearing Gorgias display 
his rhetoric, but of interrogating him concerning the nature of his 
art. Callicles proposes that they shall go with him to his own 
house, where Gorgias is staying. There they find the great 

448 rhetorician and his younger friend and disciple Polus. 

Soc. Put the question to him, Chaercphon. Ch. What question? 
Soc. Who is he ? — such a question as would elicit from a man the 
answer, ‘I am a cobbler.’ Polus suggests that Gorgias may be 
tired, and desires to answer for him. ‘ Who is Gorgias ? ’ asks 
Chaercphon, imitating the manner of his master Socrates. ‘One of 
the best of men, and a proficient in the best and noblest of experi- 
mental arts,’ etc., replies Polus, in rhetorical and balanced phrases. 
Socrates is dissatisfied at the length and unmeaningness of the 
answer ; he tells the disconcerted volunteer that he has mistaken 
the quality for the nature of the art, and remarks to Gorgias, that 
Polus has learnt how to make a speech, but not how to answer a 
question. He wishes that Gorgias would answer him. Gorgias is 
willing enough, and replies to the question asked by Chaercphon, 
— that he is a rhetorician, and in Homeric language, ‘boasts 

449 himself to be a good one.’ At the request of Socrates he promises 
to be brief ; for ‘ he can be as long as he pleases, and as short as 
he pleases.’ Socrates would have him bestow his length on 
others, and proceeds to ask him a number of questions, which arc 
answered by him to his own great satisfaction, and with a brevity 
which excites the admiration of Socrates. The result of the 
discussion may be summed up as follows 

45° Rhetoric treats of discourse ; but music and medicine, and 
other particular arts, are also concerned with discourse ; in what 
way then does rhetoric differ from them? Gorgias draws a 
distinction between the arts which deal with words, and the arts 
which have to do with external actions. Socrates extends this 
distinction further, and divides all productive arts into two 
classes : (i) arts which may be carried on in silence ; and (2) arts 
which have to do with words, or in which words are coextensive 
with action, such as arithmetic, geometry, rhetoric. But still 

451 Gorgias could hardly have meant to say that arithmetic was the 
same as rhetoric. Even in the arts which are concerned with 

Gorgias. 

Analysis. 

278 Analysis 451-456. 

Gorgias. words there arc differences. What then distinguishes rhetoric 

Analysis, from the other arts which have to do with words? ‘The words 
which rhetoric uses relate to the best and greatest of human 
things.* But tell me, Gorgias, what are the best? ‘Health first, 
beauty next, wealth third,* in the words of the old song, or how 
would you rank them ? The arts will come to you in a body, each 452 
claiming precedence and saying that her own good is superior to 
that of the rest— How will you choose between them ? ‘ I should 
say, Socrates, that the art of persuasion, which gives freedom to 
all men, and to individuals power in the state, is the greatest 453 
good.* But what is the exact nature of this persuasion ?— is the 
persevering retort : You could not describe Zeuxis as a painter, 
or even as a painter of figures, if there were other painters of 
figures; neither can you define rhetoric simply as an art of 
persuasion, because there are other arts which persuade, such as 
arithmetic, which is an art of persuasion about odd and even 
numbers. Gorgias is made to see the necessity of a further 
limitation, and he now defines rhetoric as the art of persuading in 454 
the law courts, and in the assembly, about the just and unjust. 

But still there are two sorts of persuasion : one which gives 
knowledge, and another which gives belief without knowledge ; 
and knowledge is always true, but belief may be either true or 455 
false,— there is therefore a further question : which of the two 
sorts of persuasion does rhetoric effect in courts of law and 
assemblies? Plainly that which gives belief and not that which 
gives knowledge ; for no one can impart a real knowledge of such 
matters to a crowd of persons in a few minutes. And there is 
another point to be considered -.—when the assembly meets to 
advise about walls or docks or military expeditions, the rhetorician 
is not taken into counsel, but the architect, or the general. How 
would Gorgias explain this phenomenon ? All who intend to 
become disciples, of whom there are several in the company, and 
not Socrates only, are eagerly asking About what then will 
rhetoric teach us to persuade or advise the state ? 

Gorgias illustrates the nature of rhetoric by adducing the 
• example of Themistocles, who persuaded the Athenians to build 
their docks and walls, and of Pericles, whom Socrates himself has 
heard speaking about the middle wall of the Piraeus. He adds 456 
that he has exercised a similar power over the patients of his 

A nalysis 4 5 6-46 1 . 279 

brother Herodicus. He could be chosen a physician by the Gorgias . 

assembly if he pleased, for no physician could compete with a Analysis. 
rhetorician in popularity and influence. He could persuade the 
multitude of anything by the power of his rhetoric ; not that the 
rhetorician ought to abuse this power any more than a boxer 

457 should abuse the art of self-defence. Rhetoric is a good thing, 
but, like all good things, may be unlawfully used. Neither is the 
teacher of the art to be deemed unjust because his pupils are 
unjust and make a bad use of the lessons which they have learned 
from him. 

Socrates would like to know before he replies, whether Gorgias 
will quarrel with him if he points out a slight inconsistency into 
which he has fallen, or whether he, like himself, is one who loves 

458 to be refuted. Gorgias declares that he is quite one of his sort, 
but fears that the argument may be tedious to the company. The 
company cheer, and Chaerephon and Callicles exhort them to 
proceed. Socrates gently points out the supposed inconsistency 
into which Gorgias appears to have fallen, and which he is 
inclined to think may arise out of a misapprehension of his own. 

459 The rhetorician has been declared by Gorgias to be more per- 
suasive to the ignorant than the physician, or any other expert. 

And he is said to be ignorant, and this ignorance of his is 
regarded by Gorgias as a happy condition, for he has escaped the 
trouble of learning. But is he as ignorant of just and unjust as he 

460 is of medicine or building ? Gorgias is compelled to admit that if 
he did not know them previously he must learn them from his 
teacher as a part of the art of rhetoric. But he who has learned ^ 
carpentry is a carpenter, and he who has learned music is a 
musician, and he who has learned justice is just. The rhetorician 
then must be a just man, and rhetoric is a just thing. But Gorgias 
has already admitted the opposite of this, viz. that rhetoric may 
be abused, and that the rhetorician may act unjustly. How is the 

461 inconsistency to be explained ? 

The fallacy of this argument is twofold ; for in the first place, 
a man may know justice and not be just— here is the old con- 
fusion of the arts and the virtues nor can any teacher be ^ 
expected to counteract wholly the bent of natural character ; and 
secondly, a man may have a degree of justice, but not sufficient 
to prevent him from ever doing wrong. Polus is naturally 

28 o 

Analysis 461 - 464 . 

Gorgias . exasperated at the sophism, which he is unable to detect; of 

Analysis, course, he says, the rhetorician, like every one else, will admit 
that he knows justice (how can he do otherwise when pressed by 
the interrogations of Socrates ?), but he thinks that great want of 
* manners is shown in bringing the argument to such a pass. 
Socrates ironically replies, that when old men trip, the young set 462 
them on their legs again ; and he is quite willing to retract, if he 
can be shown to be in error, but upon one condition, which is 
that Polus studies brevity. Polus is in great indignation at not 
being allowed to use as many words as he pleases in the free 
state of Athens. Socrates retorts, that yet harder will be his own 
case, if he is compelled to stay and listen to them. After some 
altercation they agree (cp. Protag. 338), that Polus shall ask and 
Socrates answer. 

‘What is the art of Rhetoric ?* says Polus. Not an art at all, 
replies Socrates, but a thing which in your book you affirm to 
have created art. Polus asks, ‘What thing?’ and Socrates 
answers, An experience or routine of making a sort of delight 
or gratification. ‘ But is not rhetoric a fine thing ? ’ I have not 
yet told you what rhetoric is. Will you ask me another question 
— What is cookery? ‘What is cookery?’ An experience or 
routine of making a sort of delight or gratification. Then they 
are the same, or rather fall under the same class, and rhetoric 463 
has still to be distinguished from cookery. ‘ What is rhetoric ? * 
asks Polus once more. A part of a not very creditable whole, 
which may be termed flattery, is the reply. ‘ But what part ? ’ A 
shadow of a part of politics. This, as might be expected, is 
wholly unintelligible, both to Gorgias and Polus ; and, in order 464 
to explain his meaning to them, Socrates draws a distinction 
between shadows or appearances and realities; c.g. there is real 
health of body or soul, and the appearance of them ; real arts and 
sciences, and the simulations of them. Now the soul and body 
have two arts waiting upon them, first the art of politics, which 
attends on the soul, having a legislative part and a judicial part ; 
and another art attending on the body, which has no generic 
name, but may also be described as having two divisions, one of 
which is medicine and the other gymnastic. Corresponding with 
these four arts or sciences there are four shams or simulations of 
them, mere experiences, as they may be termed, because they 

Analysis 464-472. 281 

give no reason of their own existence. The art of dressing up is Gorgias. 
the sham or simulation of gymnastic, the art of cookery, of medicine ; Analysis. 

465 rhetoric is the simulation of justice, and sophistic of legislation. 

They may be summed up in an arithmetical formula : — 

Tiring : gymnastic : : cookery : medicine : : sophistic : legislation. 

And, 

Cookery : medicine : : rhetoric : the art of justice. 

And this is the true scheme of them, but when measured only by 
the gratification which they procure, they become jumbled together 
and return to their aboriginal chaos. Socrates apologizes for the 

466 length of his speech, which was necessary to the explanation of 
the subject, and begs Polus not unnecessarily to retaliate on him. 

‘ Do you mean to say that the rhetoricians are esteemed 
flatterers ? ’ They are not esteemed at all. ‘ Why, have they not 

467 great power, and can they not do whatever they desire?' They have 
no power, and they only do what they think best, and never what 
they desire ; for they never attain the true object of desire, which 
is the good. ‘As if you, Socrates, would not envy the possessor 
of despotic power, who can imprison, exile, kill any one whom he 

-469 pleases.' But Socrates replies that he has no wish to put any one 
to death ; he who kills another, even justly, is not to be envied, 
and he who kills him unjustly is to be pitied ; it is better to suffer 
than to do injustice. He does not consider that going about with 
a dagger and putting men out of the way, or setting a house on 

470 fire, is real power. To this Polus assents, on the ground that 
such acts would be punished, but he is still of opinion that evil- 
doers, if they are unpunished, may be happy enough. He 
instances Archelaus, son of Perdiccas, the usurper of Macedonia. 

471 Does not Socrates think him happy? — Socrates would like to 
know more about him ; he cannot pronounce even the great king 
to be happy, unless he knows his mental and moral condition. 

Polus explains that Archelaus was a slave, being the son of a 
woman who was the slave of Alcetas, brother of Perdiccas king 
of Macedon— and he, by every species of crime, first murdering 
his uncle and then his cousin and half-brother, obtained the • 
kingdom. This was very wicked, and yet all the world, including 

472 Socrates, would like to have his place. Socrates dismisses the 
appeal to numbers ; Polus, if he will, may summon all the rich 

282 

Analysis 472-475. 

Gorgias . men of Athens, Nicias and his brothers, Aristocrates, the house of 
Analysis. Pericles, or any other great family— this is the kind of evidence 
which is adduced in courts of justice, where truth depends upon 
numbers. But Socrates employs proof of another sort ; his 
appeal is to one witness only,— that is to say, the person with 
whom he is speaking ; him he will convict out of his own mouth. 
And he is prepared to show, after his manner, that Archelaus 
cannot be a wicked man and yet happy. 473 

The evil-doer is deemed happy if he escapes, and miserable if 
he suffers punishment ; but Socrates thinks him less miserable if 
he suffers than if he escapes. Polus is of opinion that such a para- 
dox as this hardly deserves refutation, and is at any rate sufficiently 
refuted by the fact. Socrates has only to compare the lot of the 
successful tyrant who is the envy of the world, and of the wretch 
who, having been detected in a criminal attempt against the state, 
is crucified or burnt to death. Socrates replies, that if they are 
both criminal they are both miserable, but that the unpunished is 
the more miserable of the two. At this Polus laughs outright, 
which leads Socrates to remark that laughter is a new species of 
refutation. Polus replies, that he is already refuted ; for if he will 
take the votes of the company, he will find that no one agrees with 474 
him. To this Socrates rejoins, that he is not a public man, and 
(referring to his own conduct at the trial of the generals after the 
battle of Arginusac) is unable to take the suffrages of any company, 
as he had shown on a recent occasion ; he can only deal with one 
witness at a time, and that is the person with whom he is arguing. 

But he is certain that in the opinion of any man to do is worse 
than to suffer evil. 

Polus, though he will not admit this, is ready to acknowledge 
that to do evil is considered the more foul or dishonourable of the 
two. But what is fair and what is foul ; whether the terms are 
applied to bodies, colours, figures, laws, habits, studies, must they 
not be defined with reference to pleasure and utility ? Polus 475 
assents to this latter doctrine, and is easily persuaded that the 
fouler of two things must exceed either in pain or in hurt. But the 
. doing cannot exceed the suffering of evil in pain, and therefore 
must exceed in hurt. Thus doing is proved by the testimony of 
Polus himself to be worse or more hurtful than suffering. 

1 here remains the other question : Is a guilty man better off 

Analysis 476 - 482 . 

476 when he is punished or when he is unpunished ? Socrates replies, 
that what is done justly is suffered justly : if the act is just, the 
effect is just ; if to punish is just, to be punished is just, and there- 
fore fair, and therefore beneficent ; and the benefit is that the soul 

477 is improved. There are three evils from which a man may suffer, 
and which affect him in estate, body, and soul these are, poverty, 
disease, injustice ; and the foulest of these is injustice, the evil of 
the soul, because that brings the greatest hurt. And there are 

478 three arts which heal these evils - trading, medicine, justice— and 
the fairest of these is justice. Happy is he who has never com- 

479 mitted injustice, and happy in the second degree he who has been 
healed by punishment. And therefore the criminal should himself 

480 go to the judge as he would to the physician, and purge away his 
crime. Rhetoric will enable him to display his guilt in proper 
colours, and to sustain himself and others in enduring the necessary 

481 penalty. And similarly if a man has an enemy, he will desire not • 
to punish him, but that he shall go unpunished and become worse 
and worse, taking care only that he does no injury to himself. 
These are at least conceivable uses of the art, and no others have 
been discovered by us. 

Here Callicles, who has been listening in silent amazement, asks 
Chaerephon whether Socrates is in earnest, and on receiving the 
assurance that he is, proceeds to ask the same question of Socrates 
himself. For if such doctrines are true, life must have been turned 
upside down, and all of us are doing the opposite of what we ought 
to be doing. 

Socrates replies in a style of playful irony, that before men can 
understand one another they must have some common feeling. 
And such a community of feeling exists between himself and 
Callicles, for both of them are lovers, and they have both a pair of 

482 loves ; the beloved of Callicles are the Athenian Demos and Demos 
the son of Pyrilampes ; the beloved of Socrates are Alcibiades 
and philosophy. The peculiarity of Callicles is that he can never 
contradict his loves ; he changes as his Demos changes in all his 
opinions; he watches the countenance of both his loves, and 
repeats their sentiments, and if any one is surprised at his sayings 
and doings, the explanation of them is, that he is not a free agent, 
but must always be imitating his two loves. And this is the ex- 
planation of Socrates' peculiarities also. He is always repeating 

283 

Gorgias. 

Analysis. 

284 Analysis 482-486. 

Gorgias. what his mistress, Philosophy, is saying to him, who, unlike his 
Analysis, other love, Alcibiades, is ever the same, ever true. Callicles must 
refute her, or he will never be at unity with himself; and discord 
in life is far worse than the discord of musical sounds. 

Callicles answers, that Gorgias was overthrown because, as Polus 
said, in compliance with popular prejudice he had admitted that if 
his pupil did not know justice the rhetorician must teach him ; and 
Polus has been similarly entangled, because his modesty led him 
to admit that to suffer is more honourable than to do injustice. By 
custom 4 yes,’ but not by nature, says Callicles. And Socrates is 483 
always playing between the two points of view, and putting one in 
the place of the other. In this very argument, what Polus only 
meant in a conventional sense has been affirmed by him to be a 
law of nature. For convention says that 4 injustice is dishonour- 
able/ but nature says that 4 might is right.’ And we arc always 
taming down the nobler spirits among us to the conventional level. 

But sometimes a great man will rise up and reassert his original 
rights, trampling under foot all our formularies, and then the light 484 
of natural justice shines forth. Pindar says, 4 Law, the king of 
all, does violence with high hand ; ’ as is indeed proved by the 
example of Heracles, who drove off the oxen of Gcryon and never 
paid for them. 

This is the truth, Socrates, as you will be convinced, if you leave 
philosophy and pass on to the real business of life. A little phi- 
losophy is an excellent thing; too much is the ruin of a man. He 
who has not 4 passed his metaphysics ’ before he has grown up to 
manhood will never know the world. Philosophers are ridiculous 
when they take to politics, and I dare say that politicians are 
equally ridiculous when they take to philosophy : 4 Every man/ as 
Euripides says, 4 is fondest of that in which he is best/ Philosophy 485 
is graceful in youth, like the lisp of infancy, and should be cultivated 
as a part of education ; but when a grown-up man lisps or studies 
philosophy, I should like to beat him. None of those over-refined 
natures ever come to any good ; they avoid the busy haunts of men, 
and skulk in corners, whispering to a few admiring youths, and 
never giving utterance to any noble sentiments. 

For you, Socrates, I have a regard, and therefore I say to you, 
as Zethus says to Amphion in the play, that you have 4 a noble soul 486 
disguised in a puerile exterior.’ And I would have you consider 

Analysis 486 - 491 . 

the danger which you and other philosophers incur. For you 
would not know how to defend yourself if any one accused you in 
a law-court,— there you would stand, with gaping mouth and dizzy 
brain, and might be murdered, robbed, boxed on the ears with 
impunity. Take my advice, then, and get a little common sense ; 
leave to others these frivolities ; walk in the ways of the wealthy 
and be wise. 

Socrates professes to have found in Callicles the philosopher’s 
touchstone ; and he is certain that any opinion in which they both 
agree must be the very truth. Callicles has all the three qualities 

487 which are needed in a critic — knowledge, good-will, frankness ; 
Gorgias and Polus, although learned men, were too modest, and 
their modesty made them contradict themselves. But Callicles is 
well-educated ; and he is not too modest to speak out (of this he 
has already given proof), and his good-will is shown both by his 
own profession and by his giving the same caution against philo- 
sophy to Socrates, which Socrates remembers hearing him give 

488 long ago to his own clique of friends. lie will pledge himself to 
retract any error into which he may have fallen, and which Callicles 
may point out. But he would like to know first of all what he and 
Pindar mean by natural justice. I)o they suppose that the rule of 
justice is the rule of the stronger or of the better ? ‘There is no 
difference.’ Then are not the many superior to the one, and the 
opinions of the many better? And their opinion is that justice is 
equality, and that to do is more dishonourable than to suffer wrong. 

489 And as they are the superior or stronger, this opinion of theirs 
must be in accordance with natural as well as conventional justice. 
‘ Why will you continue splitting words ? Have I not told you that 
the superior is the better ? ’ But what do you mean by the better? 
Tell me that, and please to be a little milder in your language, if 

490 you do not wish to drive me away. ‘ I mean the worthier, the 
wiser.’ You mean to say that one man of sense ought to rule 
over ten thousand fools ? ‘ Yes, that is my meaning.’ Ought the 
physician then to have a larger share of meats and drinks? or 
the weaver to have more coats, or the cobbler larger shoes, or the 

491 farmer more seed? ‘You are always saying the same things, 
Socrates.’ Yes, and on the same subjects too ; but you are never 
saying the same things. For, first, you defined the superior to be 
the stronger, and then the wiser, and now something else what 

285 

Gorgias. 

Analysis. 

286 

Analysis 491 - 494 . 

Gorgias. do you mean ? ‘ I mean men of political ability, who ought to 

Analysis, govern and to have more than the governed/ Than themselves ? 

i What do you mean ? ’ I mean to say that every man is his own 
governor. ‘ 1 see that you mean those dolts, the temperate. But 
my doctrine is, that a man should let his desires grow, and take 
the means of satisfying them. To the many this is impossible, 492 
and therefore they combine to prevent him. But if he is a king, 
and has power, how base would he be in submitting to them ! To 
invite the common herd to be lord over him, when he might have 
the enjoyment of all things ! For the truth is, Socrates, that 
luxury and self-indulgence are virtue and happiness ; all the rest 
is mere talk.’ 

Socrates compliments Callicles on his frankness in saying what 
other men only think. According to his view, those who want 
nothing are not happy. ‘Why,’ says Callicles, ‘if they were, 
stones and the dead would be happy.’ Socrates in reply is led 
into a half-serious, half-comic vein of reflection. ‘ Who knows,’ as 
Euripides says, ‘ whether life may not be death, and death life ? ’ 
Nay, there are philosophers who maintain that even in life we are 493 
dead, and that the body (o-w/xa) is the tomb (tr^a) of the soul. And 
some ingenious Sicilian has made an allegory, in which he repre- 
sents fools as the uninitiated, who are supposed to be carrying 
water to a vessel, which is full of holes, in a similarly holey sieve, 
and this sieve is their own soul. The idea is fanciful, but never- 
theless is a figure of a truth which I want to make you acknow- 
ledge, viz. that the life of contentment is better than the life of 
indulgence. Are you disposed to admit that? ‘Far otherwise.’ 
Then hear another parable. The life of self-contentment and self- 
indulgence may be represented respectively by two men, who are 
filling jars with streams of wine, honey, milk,— the jars of the one 
are sound, and the jars of the other leaky’; the first fills his jars, 
and has no more trouble with them ; the second is always filling 494 
them, and would suffer extreme misery if he desisted. Are you 
of the same opinion still ? ‘ Yes, Socrates, and the figure expresses 
what I mean. For true pleasure is a perpetual stream, flowing in 
. and flowing out. To be hungry and always eating, to be thirsty 
and always drinking, and to have all the other desires and to 
satisfy them, that, as I admit, is my idea of happiness.’ And to be 
itching and always scratching ? ‘ I do not deny that there may be 

Analysis 494-501. 287 

happiness even in that.’ And to indulge unnatural desires, if they Gorgtas. 
are abundantly satisfied ? Callicles is indignant at the introduction analysis. 
of such topics. But he is reminded by Socrates that they are 

495 introduced, not by him, but by the maintainer of the identity of 
pleasure and good. Will Callicles still maintain this? ‘Yes, for 
the sake of consistency, he will.’ The answer does not satisfy 
Socrates, who fears that he is losing his touchstone. A profession 
of seriousness on the part of Callicles reassures him, and they 
proceed with the argument. Pleasure and good are the same, 
but knowledge and courage are not the same either with pleasure 
or good, or with one another. Socrates disproves the first of these 
statements by showing that two opposites cannot coexist, but must 

496 alternate with one another - to be well and ill together is impos- 
sible. But pleasure and pain are simultaneous, and the cessation 
of them is simultaneous ; e. g. in the case of drinking and thirsting, 

497 whereas good and evil are not simultaneous, and do not cease 
simultaneously, and therefore pleasure cannot be the same as 
good. 

Callicles has already lost his temper, and can only be persuaded 
to go on by the interposition of Gorgias. Socrates, having already 
guarded against objections by distinguishing courage and know- 
ledge from pleasure and good, proceeds : — The good are good by 
the presence of good, and the bad are bad by the presence of evil. 

498 And the brave and wise are good, and the cowardly and foolish 
are bad. And he who feels pleasure is good, and he who feels 
pain is bad, and both feel pleasure and pain in nearly the same 
degree, and sometimes the bad man or coward in a greater degree. 

499 Therefore the bad man or coward is as good as the brave or may 
be even better. 

Callicles endeavours now to avert the inevitable absurdity by 
affirming that he and all mankind admitted some pleasures to be 
good and others bad. The good are the beneficial, and the bad 
are the hurtful, and we should choose the one and avoid the other. 

But this, as Socrates observes, is a return to the old doctrine of 
himself and Polus, that all things should be done for the sake of 
the good. 

500 Callicles assents to this, and Socrates, finding that they are 
agreed in distinguishing pleasure from good, returns to his old 

501 division of empirical habits, or shams, or flatteries, which study 

288 

Analysis 501 - 506 . 

Gorgias. pleasure only, and the arts which are concerned with the higher 
Analysis, interests of soul and body. Does Callicles agree to this division ? 

Callicles will agree to anything, in order that he may get through 
the argument. Which of the arts then are flatteries? Flute- 
playing, harp-playing, choral exhibitions, the dithyrambics of 
Cinesias arc all equally condemned on the ground that they give 
pleasure only; and Meles the harp-player, who was the father of 502 
Cinesias, failed even in that. The stately muse of Tragedy is bent 
upon pleasure, and not upon improvement. Poetry in general is 
only a rhetorical address to a mixed audience of men, women, and 
children. And the orators are very far from speaking with a view 
to what is best ; their way is to humour the assembly as if they 
were children. 

Callicles replies, that this is only true of some of them ; others 
have a real regard for their fellow-citizens. Granted ; then there 
are two species of oratory ; the one a flattery, another which has 
a real regard for the citizens. But where are the orators among 
whom you find the latter ? Callicles admits that there are none 503 
remaining, but there were such in the days when Themistocles, 
Cimon, Miltiadcs, and the great Pericles were still alive. Socrates 
replies that none of these were true artists, setting before them- 
selves the duty of bringing order out of disorder. The good man 504 
and true orator has a settled design, running through his life, to 
which he conforms all his words and actions ; he desires to im- 
plant justice and eradicate injustice, to implant all virtue and 
eradicate all vice in the minds of his citizens. He is the physician 505 
who will not allow the sick man to indulge his appetites with a 
variety of meats and drinks, but insists on his exercising self- 
restraint. And this is good for the soul, and better than the 
unrestrained indulgence which Callicles was recently approving. 

Here Callicles, who had been with difficulty brought to this 
point, turns restive, and suggests that Socrates shall answer his 
own questions. ‘Then/ says Socrates, ‘one man must do for 
two ; * and though he had hoped to have given Callicles an ‘ Am* 
phion * in return for his ‘ Zethus,* he is willing to proceed ; at the 506 
, same time, he hopes that Callicles will correct him, if he falls into 
error. He recapitulates the advantages which he has already 
won 

The pleasant is not the same as the good— Callicles and I are 

289 

A nalysis 506 - 5 1 1 . 

agreed about that, — but pleasure is to be pursued for the sake of 
the good, and the good is that of which the presence makes us 
good ; we and all things good have acquired some virtue or other. 
And virtue, whether of body or soul, of things or persons, is not 
attained by accident, but is due to order and harmonious arrange- 

507 ment. And the soul which has order is better than the soul 
which is without order, and is therefore temperate and is there- 
fore good, and the intemperate is bad. And he who is temperate 
is also just and brave and pious, and has attained the perfection of 
goodness and therefore of happiness, and the intemperate whom 
you approve is the opposite of all this and is wretched. He 
therefore who would be happy must pursue temperance and avoid 
intemperance, and if possible escape the necessity of punishment, 
but if he have done wrong he must endure punishment. In this 

508 way states and individuals should seek to attain harmony, which, 
as the wise tell us, is the bond of heaven and earth, of gods and 
men. Callicles has never discovered the power of geometrical 
proportion in both worlds; he would have men aim at dispro- 
portion and excess. But if he be wrong in this, and if self-control 
is the true secret of happiness, then the paradox is true that the only 
use of rhetoric is in self-accusation, and Polus was right in saying 
that to do wrong is worse than to suffer wrong, and Gorgias was 
right in saying that the rhetorician must be a just man. And you 
were wrong in taunting me with my defenceless condition, and in 
saying that I might be accused or put to death or boxed on the 
ears with impunity. For I may repeat once more, that to strike is 

509 worse than to be stricken — to do than to suffer. What I said then 
is now made fast in adamantine bonds. I myself know not the 
true nature of these things, but I know that no one can deny my 
words and not be ridiculous. To do wrong is the greatest of evils, 

510 and to suffer wrong is the next greatest evil. He who would 
avoid the last must be a ruler, or the friend of a ruler ; and to be 
the friend he must be the equal of the ruler, and must also re- 
semble him. Under his protection he will suffer no evil, but will 
he also do no evil ? Nay, will he not rather do all the evil which 

5 1 1 he can and escape ? And in this way the greatest of all evils will 
befall him. ‘But this imitator of the tyrant,* rejoins Callicles, 
‘ will kill any one who does not similarly imitate him.* Socrates 
replies that he is not deaf, and that he has heard that repeated 

Gorgias. 

Analysis. 

VOL. II. 

U 

290 

Analysis 51 1-515. 

Gorgias. many times, and can only reply, that a bad man will kill a good 
Analysis, one. * Yes, and that is the provoking thing.’ Not provoking to a 
man of sense who is not studying the arts which will preserve 
him from danger ; and this, as you say, is the use of rhetoric in 
courts of justice. But how many other arts are there which also 
save men from death, and are yet quite humble in their pre- 
tensions— such as the art of swimming, or the art of the pilot ? 
Does not the pilot do men at least as much service as the rhetori- 
cian, and yet for the voyage from Aegina to Athens he does not 
charge more than two obols, and when he disembarks is quite un- 
assuming in his demeanour? The reason is that he is not certain 5 12 
whether he has done his passengers any good in saving them from 
death, if one of them is diseased in body, and still more if he is 
diseased in mind— who can say? The engineer too will often 
save whole cities, and yet you despise him, and would not 
allow your son to marry his daughter, or his son to marry yours. 

But what reason is there in this? For if virtue only means the 
saving of life, whether your own or another’s, you have no right to 
despise him or any practiser of saving arts. But is not virtue 
something different from saving and being saved ? I would have 513 
you rather consider whether you ought not to disregard length of 
life, and think only how you can live best, leaving all besides to 
the will of Heaven. For you must not expect to have influence 
either with the Athenian Demos or with Demos the son of Pyri- 
lampes, unless you become like them. What do you say to this ? 

‘There is some truth in what you are saying, but I do not 
entirely believe you.’ 

That is because you are in love with Demos. But let us have a 
little more conversation. You remember the two processes— one 
which was directed to pleasure, the other which was directed to 
making men as good as possible. And those who have the care 
of the city should make the citizens as good as possible. But who 514 
would undertake a public building, if he had never had a teacher 
of the art of building, and had never constructed a building before ? 
or who would undertake the duty of state-physician, if he had 
• never cured either himself or any one else? Should we not 
examine him before we entrusted him with the office ? And as 
Callicles is about to enter public life, should we not examine him ? 
Whom has he made better? For we have already admitted that 515 

Analysis 515-526. 

this is the statesman’s proper business. And we must ask the 
same question about Pericles, and Cimon, and Miltiades, and The- 
mistocles. Whom did they make better? Nay, did not Pericles 
make the citizens worse ? For he gave them pay, and at first he 
was very popular with them, but at last they condemned him to 

516 death. Yet surely he would be a bad tamer of animals who, 
having received them gentle, taught them to kick and butt, and 
man is an animal ; and Pericles who had the charge of man only 
made him wilder, and more savage and unjust, and therefore he 
could not have been a good statesman. The same tale might 
be repeated about Cimon, Themistocles, Miltiades. But the 

517 charioteer who keeps his seat at first is not thrown out when he 
gains greater experience and skill. The inference is, that the 
statesman of a past age were no better than those of our own. 
They may have been cleverer constructors of docks and harbours, 
but they did not improve the character of the citizens. I have 
told you again and again (and I purposely use the same images) 
that the soul, like the body, may be treated in two ways— there is 

518 the meaner and the higher art. You seemed to understand what 
I said at the time, but when 1 ask you who were the really good 
statesmen, you answer — as if I asked you who were the good 
trainers, and you answered, Thearion, the baker, Mithoecus, the 
author of the Sicilian cookery-book, Sarambus, the vintner. And 
you would be affronted if I told you that these are a parcel of 
cooks who make men fat only to make them thin. And those 
whom they have fattened applaud them, instead of finding fault 
with them, and lay the blame of their subsequent disorders on 
their physicians. In this respect, Callicles, you are like them ; you 
applaud the statesmen of old, who pandered to the vices of the 
citizens, and filled the city with docks and harbours, but neglected 

519 virtue and justice. And when the fit of illness comes, the citizens 
who in like manner applauded Themistocles, Pericles, and others, 
will lay hold of you and my friend Alcibiades, and you will suffer 
for the misdeeds of your predecessors. The old story is always 
being repeated — ‘ after all his services, the ungrateful city banished 
him, or condemned him to death.' As if the statesman should not 
have taught the city better ! He surely cannot blame the state for 
having unjustly used him, any more than the sophist or teacher 

520 can find fault with his pupils if they cheat him. And the sophist 

291 

Gorgias. 

Analysis. 

U 2 

292 Analysis 520-524. 

Gorgias. and orator are in the same case; although you admire rhetoric 
Analysis, and despise sophistic, whereas sophistic is really the higher of the 
two. The teacher of the arts takes money, but the teacher of 
virtue or politics takes no money, because this is the only kind of 
service which makes the disciple desirous of requiting his teacher. 

Socrates concludes by finally asking, to which of the two modes 
of serving the state Callicles invites him: — ‘to the inferior and 
ministerial one/ is the ingenuous reply. That is the only way of 521 
avoiding death, replies Socrates ; and he has heard often enough, 
and would rather not hear again, that the bad man will kill the 
good. But he thinks that such a fate is very likely reserved for 
him, because he remarks that he is the only person who teaches 
the true art of politics. And very probably, as in the case which 522 
he described to Polus, he may be the physician who is tried by a 
jury of children. He cannot say that he has procured the citizens 
any pleasure, and if any one charges him with perplexing them, or 
with reviling their elders, he will not be able to make them under- 
stand that he has only been actuated by a desire for their good. 

And therefore there is no saying what his fate may be. ‘ And do 
you think that a man who is unable to help himself is in a good 
condition ?’ Yes, Callicles, if he have the true self-help, which is 
never to have said or done any wrong to himself or others. If I 
had not this kind of self-help, I should be ashamed ; but if I die 
for want of your flattering rhetoric, I shall die in peace. For 
death is no evil, but to go to the world below laden with offences 
is the worst of evils. In proof of which I will tell you a tale 
Under the rule of Cronos, men were judged on the day of their 523 
death, and when judgment had been given upon them they departed 
—the good to the islands of the blest, the bad to the house of ven- 
geance. But as they were still living, and had their clothes on at 
the time when they were being judged, there was favouritism, and 
Zeus, when he came to the throne, was obliged to alter the mode 
of procedure, and try them after death, having first sent down 
Prometheus to take away from them the foreknowledge of death. 
Minos, Rhadamanthus, and Aeacus were appointed to be the 524 
• judges ; Rhadamanthus for Asia, Aeacus for Europe, and Minos 
was to hold the court of appeal. Now death is the separation of 
soul and body, but after death soul and body alike retain their 
characteristics ; the fat man, the dandy, the branded slave, are all 

293 

Analysis 524 - 527 . 

distinguishable. Some prince or potentate, perhaps even the great 
king himself, appears before Rhadamanthus, and he instantly 

5 2 5 detects him, though he knows not who he is ; he sees the scars of 
perjury and iniquity, and sends him away to the house of torment. 

For there are two classes of souls who undergo punishment— 
the curable and the incurable. The curable are those who are 
benefited by their punishment ; the incurable are such as Arche- 
laus, who benefit others by becoming a warning to them. The 
latter class are generally kings and potentates ; meaner persons, 
happily for themselves, have not the same power of doing in- 
justice. Sisyphus and Tityus, not Thersitcs, are supposed by 
Homer to be undergoing everlasting punishment. Not that there 
is anything to prevent a great man from being a good one, as is 

526 shown by the famous example of Aristeides, the son of Lysima- 
chus. But to Rhadamanthus the souls are only known as good or 
bad ; they are stripped of their dignities and preferments ; he 
despatches the bad to Tartarus, labelled either as curable or in- 
curable, and looks with love and admiration on the soul of some 
just one, whom he sends to the islands of the blest. Similar is 
the practice of Aeacus; and Minos overlooks them, holding a 
golden sceptre, as Odysseus in Homer saw him 

* Wielding a sceptre of gold, and giving laws to the dead.’ 

My wish for myself and my fellow-men is, that we may present 
our souls undefiled to the judge in that day ; my desire in life is to 

527 be able to meet death. And I exhort you, and retort upon you 
the reproach which you cast upon me,— that you will stand before 
the judge, gaping, and with dizzy brain, and any one may box you 
on the ear, and do you all manner of evil. 

Perhaps you think that this is an old wives’ fable. But you, 
who arc the three wisest men in Hellas, have nothing better to 
say, and no one will ever show that to do is better than to suffer 
evil. A man should study to be, and not merely to seem. If he 
is bad, he should become good, and avoid all flattery, whether of 
the many or of the few. 

Follow me, then ; and if you are looked down upon, that will do, 
you no harm. And when we have practised virtue, we will betake 
ourselves to politics, but not until we are delivered from the 
shameful state of ignorance and uncertainty in which we are at 

Gorgias. 

Analysis. 

294 

The logic and dialectic of the Dialogue . 

Gorgias . present. Let us follow in the way of virtue and justice, and not in 

Analysis, the way to which you, Callicles, invite us ; for that way is nothing 
worth. 

Introduc- We will now consider in order some of the principal points of 

TION. 

the dialogue. Having regard (i) to the age of Plato and the 
ironical character of his writings, we may compare him with him- 
self and with other great teachers, and we may note in passing the 
objections of his critics. And then (2) casting one eye upon him, 
we may cast another upon ourselves, and endeavour to draw out 
the great lessons which he teaches for all time, stripped of the 
accidental form in which they are enveloped. 

(1) In the Gorgias, as in nearly all the other dialogues of Plato, 
we are made aware that formal logic has as yet no existence. 
The old difficulty of framing a definition recurs. The illusive 
analogy of the arts and the virtues also continues. The ambiguity 
of several words, such as nature, custom, the honourable, the good, 
is not cleared up. The Sophists are still floundering about the 
distinction of the real and seeming. Figures of speech are made 
the basis of arguments. The possibility of conceiving a universal 
art or science, which admits of application to a particular subject- 
matter, is a difficulty which remains unsolved, and has not 
altogether ceased to haunt the world at the present day (cp. Char- 
mides, *66 ff.). The defect of clearness is also apparent in 
Socrates himself, unless we suppose him to be practising on the 
simplicity of his opponent, or rather perhaps trying an experiment 
in dialectics. Nothing can be more fallacious than the contra- 
diction which he pretends to have discovered in the answers of 
Gorgias (see Analysis). The advantages which he gains over 
Polus are also due to a false antithesis of pleasure and good, and 
to an erroneous assertion that an agent and a patient may be 
described by similar predicates a mistake which Aristotle partly 
shares and partly corrects in the Nicomachean Ethics, V. i. 4 ; 
xi. 2. Traces of a 4 robust sophistry’ are likewise discernible in 
his argument with Callicles (pp. 490, 496, 516). 

• (2) Although Socrates professes to be convinced by reason 

only, yet the argument is often a sort of dialectical fiction, by 
which he conducts himself and others to his own ideal of life 
and action. And we may sometimes wish that we could have 

295 

The ideal of suffering virtue. 

suggested answers to his antagonists, or pointed out to them the 
rocks which lay concealed under the ambiguous terms good, 
pleasure, and the like. But it would be as useless to examine 
his arguments by the requirements of modern logic, as to criticise 
this ideal from a merely utilitarian point of view. If we say that 
the ideal is generally regarded as unattainable, and that mankind 
will by no means agree in thinking that the criminal is happier 
when punished than when unpunished, any more than they 
would agree to the stoical paradox that a man may be happy on 
the rack, Plato has already admitted that the world is against 
him. Neither does he mean to say that Archclaus is tormented 
by the stings of conscience ; or that the sensations of the impaled 
criminal arc more agreeable than those of the tyrant drowned in 
luxurious enjoyment. Neither is he speaking, as in the Pro- 
tagoras, of virtue as a calculation of pleasure, an opinion which 
he afterwards repudiates in the Phaedo. What then is his 
meaning? His meaning we shall be able to illustrate best by 
parallel notions, which, whether justifiable by logic or not, have 
always existed among mankind. We must remind the reader 
that Socrates himself implies that he will be understood or 
appreciated by very few. 

lie is speaking not of the consciousness of happiness, but of 
the idea of happiness. When a martyr dies in a good cause, 
when a soldier falls in battle, we do not suppose that death or 
wounds are without pain, or that their physical suffering is 
always compensated by a mental satisfaction. Still we regard 
them as happy, and we would a thousand times rather have their 
death than a shameful life. Nor is this only because we believe 
that they will obtain an immortality of fame, or that they will 
have crowns of glory in another world, when their enemies and 
persecutors will be proportionably tormented. Men are found in 
a few instances to do what is right, without reference to public 
opinion or to consequences. And we regard them as happy on 
this ground only, much as Socrates’ friends in the opening of the 
Phaedo are described as regarding him ; or as was said of 
another, ‘ they looked upon his face as upon the face of an angel.’ 
We are not concerned to justify this idealism by the standard of 
utility or public opinion, but merely to point out the existence of 
such a sentiment in the better part of human nature. 

Gorgias . 

Introduc- 

tion. 

296 

Plato's theory of punishment . 

Gorgias. The idealism of Plato is founded upon this sentiment. He 
Introduc- would maintain that in some sense or other truth and right are 
a l one to be sought, and that all other goods are only desirable as 
means towards these. He is thought to have erred in ‘con- 
sidering the agent only, and making no reference to the happi- 
ness of others, as affected by him.’ But the happiness of others 
or of mankind, if regarded as an end, is really quite as ideal and 
almost as paradoxical to the common understanding as Plato’s 
conception of happiness. For the greatest happiness of the 
greatest number may mean also the greatest pain of the indi- 
vidual which will procure the greatest pleasure of the greatest 
number. Ideas of utility, like those of duty and right, may be 
pushed to unpleasant consequences. Nor can Plato in the 
Gorgias be deemed purely self-regarding, considering that 
Socrates expressly mentions the duty of imparting the truth 
when discovered to others. Nor must we forget that the side of 
ethics which regards others is by the ancients merged in politics. 
Both in Plato and Aristotle, as well as in the Stoics, the social 
principle, though taking another form, is really far more prominent 
than in most modern treatises on ethics. 

The idealizing of suffering is one of the conceptions which have 
exercised the greatest influence on mankind. Into the theological 
import of this, or into the consideration of the errors to which the 
idea may have given rise, we need not now enter. All will agree 
that the ideal of the Divine Sufferer, whose words the world 
would not receive, the man of sorrows of whom the Hebrew 
prophets spoke, has sunk deep into the heart of the human race. 
It is a similar picture of suffering goodness which Plato desires 
to pourtray, not without an allusion to the fate of his master 
Socrates. He is convinced that, somehow or other, such an one 
must be happy in life or after death. In the Republic, he en- 
deavours to show that his happiness would be assured here in 
a well-ordered state. But in the actual condition of human 
things the wise and good are weak and miserable ; such an one is 
like a man fallen among wild beasts, exposed to every sort of 
. wrong and obloquy. 

Plato, like other philosophers, is thus led on to the conclusion, 
that if ‘the ways of God ’ to man are to be ‘justified,’ the hopes of 
another life must be included. If the question could have been 

297 

Plato's theory of punishment . 

put to him, whether a man dying in torments was happy still, Gorgias . 

even if, as he suggests in the Apology, ‘ death be only a long Introduc- 
slecp,’ we can hardly tell what would have been his answer. noM * 
There have been a few, who, quite independently of rewards and 
punishments or of posthumous reputation, or any other influence 
of public opinion, have been willing to sacrifice their lives for the 
good of others. It is difficult to say how far in such cases an 
unconscious hope of a future life, or a general faith in the victory 
of good in the world, may have supported the sufferers. But this 
extreme idealism is not in accordance with the spirit of Plato, 
lie supposes a day of retribution, in which the good are to be 
rewarded and the wicked punished (522 E). Though, as he says 
in the Phaedo, no man of sense will maintain that the details of 
the stories about another world are true, he will insist that some- 
thing of the kind is true, and will frame his life with a view to 
this unknown future. Even in the Republic he introduces a 
future life as an afterthought, when the superior happiness of the 
just has been established on what is thought to be an immutable 
foundation. At the same time he makes a point of determining 
his main thesis independently of remoter consequences (x. 612 A). 

(3) Plato’s theory of punishment is partly vindictive, partly 
corrective. In the Gorgias, as well as in the Phaedo and Re- 
public, a few great criminals, chiefly tyrants, are reserved as 
examples. But most men have never had the opportunity of 
attaining this pre-eminence of evil. They are not incurable, and 
their punishment is intended for their improvement. They are to 
suffer because they have sinned ; like sick men, they must go to 
the physician and be healed. On this representation of Plato’s the 
criticism has been made, that the analogy of disease and injustice 
is partial only, and that suffering, instead of improving men, may 
have just the opposite effect. 

Like the general analogy of the arts and the virtues, the 
analogy of disease and injustice, or of medicine and justice, is 
certainly imperfect. But ideas must be given through some- 
thing ; the nature of the mind which is unseen can only be repre- 
sented under figures derived from visible objects. If these . 
figures are suggestive of some new aspect under which the mind 
may be considered, we cannot find fault with them for not exactly 
coinciding with the ideas represented. They partake of the 

298 . Plato's theory of punishment. 

Gorgias. imperfect nature of language, and must not be construed in too 
Introduc- strict a manner. That Plato sometimes reasons from them as if 
T10N ’ they were not figures but realities, is due to the defective logical 
analysis of his age. 

Nor does he distinguish between the suffering which improves 
and the suffering which only punishes and deters. He applies to 
the sphere of ethics a conception of punishment which is really 
derived from criminal law. He does not see that such punish- 
ment is only negative, and supplies no principle of moral growth 
or development. He is not far off the higher notion of an 
education of man to be begun in this world, and to be continued 
in other stages of existence, which is further developed in the 
Republic. And Christian thinkers, who have ventured out of the 
beaten track in their meditations on the ‘ last things,’ have found 
a ray of light in his writings. But he has not explained how or 
in what way punishment is to contribute to the improvement 
of mankind. He has not followed out the principle which he 
affirms in the Republic, that 4 God is the author of evil only with 
a view to good,’ and that ‘they were the better for being 
punished.’ Still his doctrine of a future state of rewards and 
punishments may be compared favourably with that perversion 
of Christian doctrine which makes the everlasting punishment of 
human beings depend on a brief moment of time, or even on the 
accident of an accident. And he has escaped the difficulty which 
has often beset divines, respecting the future destiny of the 
meaner sort of men (Thcrsites and the like), who are neither 
very good nor very bad, by not counting them worthy of eternal 
damnation. 

We do Plato violence in pressing his figures of speech or 
chains of argument ; and not less so in asking questions which 
were beyond the horizon of his vision, or did not come within the 
scope of his design. The main purpose of the Gorgias is not to 
answer questions about a future world, but to place in antagonism 
the true and false life, and to contrast the judgments and opinions 
of men with judgment according to the truth. Plato may be 
accused of representing a superhuman or transcendental virtue in 
the description of the just man in the Gorgias, or in the com- 
panion portrait of the philosopher in the Theaetetus; and at the 
same time may be thought to be condemning a state of the 

299 

Good and pleasure . 

world which always has existed and always will exist among 
men. But such ideals act powerfully on the imagination of 
mankind. And such condemnations are not mere paradoxes 
of philosophers, but the natural rebellion of the higher sense 
of right in man against the ordinary conditions of human 
life. The greatest statesmen have fallen very far short of the 
political ideal, and are therefore justly involved in the general 
condemnation. 

Subordinate to the main purpose of the dialogue are some other 
questions, which may be briefly considered : — 

a . The antithesis of good and pleasure, which as in other 
dialogues is supposed to consist in the permanent nature of the 
one compared with the transient and relative nature of the other. 
Good and pleasure, knowledge and sense, truth and opinion, 
essence and generation, virtue and pleasure, the real and the 
apparent, the infinite and finite, harmony or beauty and discord, 
dialectic and rhetoric or poetry, are so many pairs of opposites, 
which in Plato easily pass into one another, and are seldom kept 
perfectly distinct. And we must not forget that Plato’s con- 
ception of pleasure is the Heracleitean flux transferred to the 
sphere of human conduct. There is some degree of unfairness in 
opposing the principle of good, which is objective, to the principle 
of pleasure, which is subjective. For the assertion of the perma- 
nence of good is only based on the assumption of its objective 
character. Had Plato fixed his mind, not on the ideal nature of 
good, but on the subjective consciousness of happiness, that 
would have been found to be as transient and precarious as 
pleasure. 

b. The arts or sciences, when pursued without any view to 
truth, or the improvement of human life, are called flatteries. 
They are all alike dependent upon the opinion of mankind, from 
which they are derived. To Plato the whole world appears to be 
sunk in error, based on self-interest. To this is opposed the one 
wise man hardly professing to have found truth, yet strong in the 
conviction that a virtuous life is the only good, whether regarded 
with reference to this world or to another. Statesmen, Sophists, 
rhetoricians, poets, are alike brought up for judgment. They are 
the parodies of wise men, and their arts are the parodies of true 
arts and sciences. All that they call science is merely the result 

Gorgias . 

Introduc- 

tion. 

300 

Corgi as. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

, Relation of the Gorgias to the other Dialogues . 

of that study of the tempers of the Great Beast, which he describes 
in the Republic. 

c. Various other points of contact naturally suggest themselves 
between the Gorgias and other dialogues, especially the Republic, 
the Philebus, and the Protagoras. There are closer resem- 
blances both of spirit and language in the Republic than in any 
other dialogue, the verbal similarity tending to show that they 
were written at the same period of Plato’s life. For the Republic 
supplies that education and training of which the Gorgias suggests 
the necessity. The theory of the many weak combining against 
the few strong in the formation of society (which is indeed a 
partial truth), is similar in both of them, and is expressed in 
nearly the same language. The sufferings and fate of the just 
man, the pow T erlcssness of evil, and the reversal of the situation 
in another life, arc also points of similarity. The poets, like the 
rhetoricians, are condemned because they aim at pleasure only, 
as in the Republic they arc expelled the State, because they are 
imitators, and minister to the weaker side of human nature. 
That poetry is akin to rhetoric may be compared with the analo- 
gous notion, which occurs in the Protagoras, that the ancient 
poets were the Sophists of their day. In some other respects the 
Protagoras rather offers a contrast than a parallel. The character 
of Protagoras may be compared with that of Gorgias, but the con- 
ception of happiness is different in the two dialogues; being 
described in the former, according to the old Socratic notion, as 
deferred or accumulated pleasure, while in the Gorgias, and in 
the Phaedo, pleasure and good are distinctly opposed. 

This opposition is carried out from a speculative point of view 
in the Philebus. There neither pleasure nor wisdom are allowed 
to be the chief good, but pleasure and good are not so completely 
opposed as in the Gorgias. For innocent pleasures, and such as 
have no antecedent pains, are allowed to rank in the class of 
goods. The allusion to Gorgias’ definition of rhetoric (Philebus, 
58 A, B ; cp. Gorg. 452 D, E), as the art of persuasion, of all arts 
the best, for to it all things submit, not by compulsion, but of their 
own free will — marks a close and perhaps designed connection 
between the two dialogues. In both the ideas of measure, order, 
harmony, are the connecting links between the beautiful and the 
good. 

Some minor points 

In general spirit and character, that is, in irony and antagonism 
to public opinion, the Gorgias most nearly resembles the Apology, 
Crito, and portions of the Republic, and like the Philebus, though 
from another point of view, may be thought to stand in the same 
relation to Plato’s theory of morals which the Theaetetus bears to 
his theory of knowledge. 

d. A few minor points still remain to be summed up : (i) The 
extravagant irony in the reason which is assigned for the pilot’s 
modest charge (p. 512) ; and in the proposed use of rhetoric as an 
instrument of self-condemnation (p. 480) ; and in the mighty 
power of geometrical equality in both worlds (p. 508). (2) The 

reference of the inythus to the previous discussion should not be 
overlooked : the fate reserved for incurable criminals such as 
Archelaus (p. 525) ; the retaliation of the box on the ears (p. 527) ; 
the nakedness of the souls and of the judges who are stript of the 
clothes or disguises which rhetoric and public opinion have hitherto 
provided for them (p. 523 ; cp. Swift’s notion that the universe is 
a suit of clothes, Tale of a Tub, section 2). The fiction seems to 
have involved Plato in the necessity of supposing that the soul 
retained a sort of corporeal likeness after death (p. 524). (3) The 

appeal to the authority of Homer, who says that Odysseus saw 
Minos in his court ‘ holding a golden sceptre,’ which gives veri- 
similitude to the tale (p. 526). 

It is scarcely necessary to repeat that Plato is playing ‘both 
sides of the game,’ and that in criticising the characters of Gorgias 
and Polus, we are not passing any judgment on historical indivi- 
duals, but only attempting to analyze the ‘ dramatis personae ’ as 
they were conceived by him. Neither is it necessary to enlarge 
upon the obvious fact that Plato is a dramatic writer, whose real 
opinions cannot always be assumed to be those which he puts into 
the mouth of Socrates, or any other speaker who appears to have 
the best of the argument ; or to repeat the observation that he is 
a poet as well as a philosopher ; or to remark that he is not to be 
tried by a modern standard, but interpreted with reference to his 
place in the history of thought and the opinion of his time. 

It has been said that the most characteristic feature of the Gor- 
gias is the assertion of the right of dissent, or private judgment. 
But this mode of stating the question is really opposed both to the 
spirit of Plato and of ancient philosophy generally. For Plato is 

301 

Gorgias. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

302 

Gorgias . 

Introduc- 

tion. 

The irony of Socrates. 

not asserting any abstract right or duty of toleration, or advantage 
to be derived from freedom of thought ; indeed, in some other 
parts of his writings (e. g. Laws, xj, he has fairly laid himself 
open to the charge of intolerance. No speculations had as yet 
arisen respecting the ‘liberty of prophesying;* and Plato is not 
affirming any abstract right of this nature : but he is asserting the 
duty and right of the one wise and true man to dissent from the 
folly and falsehood of the many. At the same time he acknow- 
ledges the natural result, which he hardly seeks to avert, that he 
who speaks the truth to a multitude, regardless of consequences, 
will probably share the fate of Socrates. 

The irony of Plato sometimes veils from us the height of ideal- 
ism to which he soars. When declaring truths which the many 
will not receive, he puts on an armour which cannot be pierced 
by them. The weapons of ridicule are taken out of their hands 
and the laugh is turned against themselves. The disguises which 
Socrates assumes are like the parables of the New Testament, or 
the oracles of the Delphian God ; they half conceal, half reveal, his 
meaning. The more he is in earnest, the more ironical he 
becomes ; and he is never more in earnest or more ironical than 
in the Gorgias. He hardly troubles himself to answer seriously 
the objections of Gorgias and Polus, and therefore he sometimes 
appears to be careless of the ordinary requirements of logic. Yet 
in the highest sense he is always logical and consistent with him- 
self. The form of the argument may be paradoxical ; the sub- 
stance is an appeal to the higher reason. He is uttering truths 
before they can be understood, as in all ages the words of philo- 
sophers, when they are first uttered, have found the world un- 
prepared for them. A further misunderstanding arises out of the 
wildness of his humour ; he is supposed not only by Callicles, but 
by the rest of mankind, to be jesting when he is profoundly 
serious. At length he makes even Polus (p. 468) in earnest. 
Finally, he drops the argument, and heedless any longer of the 
forms of dialectic, he loses himself in a sort of triumph, while at 
the same time he retaliates upon his adversaries. From this 
confusion of jest and earnest, we may now return to the ideal 
truth, and draw out in a simple form the main theses of the 
dialogue. 

3©3 

Worse to do than to suffer injustice . 

First Thesis : — 

It is a greater evil to do than to suffer injustice. 

Compare the New Testament — 

‘It is better to suffer for well doing than for evil doing.' — i Pet. iii. 17. 

And the Sermon on the Mount — 

‘ Hlessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness' sake.’ — Matt. v. 10. 

The words of Socrates are more abstract than the words of Christ, 
but they equally imply that the only real evil is moral evil. The 
righteous may suffer or die, but they have their reward ; and even 
if they had no reward, would be happier than the wicked. The 
world, represented by Polus, is ready, when they are asked, to 
acknowledge that injustice is dishonourable, and for their own 
sakes men are willing to punish the offender (cp. Rep. ii. 360 D). 
But they are not equally willing to acknowledge that injustice, even 
if successful, is essentially evil, and has the nature of disease and 
death. Especially when crimes are committed on the great scale 
- the crimes of tyrants, ancient or modern — after a while, seeing 
that they cannot be undone, and have become a part of history, 
mankind are disposed to forgive them, not from any magnanimity 
or charity, but because their feelings arc blunted by time, and ‘ to 
forgive is convenient to them.’ The tangle of good and evil can no 
longer be unravelled ; and although they know that the end cannot 
justify the means, they feel also that good has often come out of evil. 
But Socrates would have us pass the same judgment on the tyrant 
now and always ; though he is surrounded by his satellites, and 
has the applauses of Europe and Asia ringing in his ears ; though 
he is the civilizer or liberator of half a continent, he is, and always 
will be, the most miserable of men. The greatest consequences 
for good or for evil cannot alter a hair’s breadth the morality of 
actions which are right or wrong in themselves. This is the 
standard which Socrates holds up to us. Because politics, and 
perhaps human life generally, are of a mixed nature we must not 
allow our principles to sink to the level of our practice. 

And so of private individuals— to them, too, the world occasion- 
ally speaks of the consequences of their actions if they are 
lovers of pleasure, they will ruin their health ; if they are false or 

Gorgias. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

304 Better to suffer for wrong doing than not to suffer . 

Gorgias. dishonest, they will lose their character. But Socrates would 
Introduc- speak to them, not of what will be, but of what is— of the present 
consequence of lowering and degrading the soul. And all higher 
natures, or perhaps all men everywhere, if they were not tempted 
by interest or passion, would agree with him— they would rather 
be the victims than the perpetrators of an act of treachery or of 
tyranny. Reason tells them that death comes sooner or later to 
all, and is not so great an evil as an unworthy life, or rather, if 
rightly regarded, not an evil at all, but to a good man the greatest 
good. For in all of us there are slumbering ideals of truth and 
right, which may at any time awaken and develop a new life 
in us. 

Second Thesis 

It is better to suffer for wrong doing than not to suffer. 

There might have been a condition of human life in which the 
penalty followed at once, and was proportioned to the offence. 
Moral evil would then be scarcely distinguishable from physical ; 
mankind would avoid vice as they avoid pain or death. But 
nature, with a view of deepening and enlarging our characters, 
has for the most part hidden from us the consequences of our 
actions, and we can only foresee them by an effort of reflection. 
To awaken in us this habit of reflection is the business of early 
education, which is continued in inaturer years by observation 
and experience. The spoilt child is in later life said to be un- 
fortunate — he had better have suffered when he was young, and 
been saved from suffering afterwards. But is not the sovereign 
equally unfortunate whose education and manner of life are always 
concealing from him the consequences of his own actions, until at 
length they are revealed to him in some terrible downfall, which 
may, perhaps, have been caused not by his own fault ? Another 
illustration is afforded by the pauper and criminal classes, who 
scarcely reflect at all, except on the means by which they can 
compass their immediate ends. We pity them, and make allow- 
ances for them ; but we do not consider that the same principle 
. applies to human actions generally. Not to have been found out 
in some dishonesty or folly, regarded from a moral or religious 
point of view, is the greatest of misfortunes. The success of our 
evil doings is a prbof that the gods have ceased to strive with us, 

Better to suffer for wrong-doing than not to suffer. 

and have given us over to ourselves. There is nothing to remind 
us of our sins, and therefore nothing to correct them. Like our 
sorrows, they are healed by time ; 

* While rank corruption, mining all within, 

Infects unseen.’ 

The * accustomed irony ’ of Socrates adds a corollary to the argu- 
ment : ~ ‘ Would you punish your enemy, you should allow him to 
escape unpunished’ — this is the true retaliation. (Compare the 
obscure verse of Proverbs, xxv. 21, 22, ‘Therefore if thine enemy 
hunger, feed him,* etc., quoted in Romans xii. 20.) 

Men are not in the habit of dwelling upon the dark side of their 
own lives : they do not easily see themselves as others see them. 
They are very kind and very blind to their own faults; the 
rhetoric of self-love is always pleading with them on their own 
behalf. Adopting a similar figure of speech, Socrates would have 
them use rhetoric, not in defence but in accusation of themselves. 
As they are guided by feeling rather than by reason, to their 
feelings the appeal must be made. They must speak to them- 
selves ; they must argue with themselves ; they must paint in 
eloquent words the character of their own evil deeds. To any 
suffering which they have deserved, they must persuade them- 
selves to submit. Under the figure there lurks a real thought, 
which, expressed in another form, admits of an easy application to 
ourselves. For do not we too accuse as well as excuse our- 
selves? And we call to our aid the rhetoric of prayer and 
preaching, which the mind silently employs while the struggle 
between the better and the worse is going on within us. And 
sometimes we are too hard upon ourselves, because we want to 
restore the balance which self-love has overthrown or disturbed ; 
and then again we may hear a voice as of a parent consoling us. 
In religious diaries a sort of drama is often enacted by the con- 
sciences of men ‘accusing or else excusing them.’ For all our life 
long we are talking with ourselves What is thought but speech ? 
What is feeling but rhetoric ? And if rhetoric is used on one side 
only we shall be always in danger of being deceived. And so the 
words of Socrates, which at first sounded paradoxical, come 
home to the experience of all of us. 

Third Thesis 

We do not what we will, but what we wish. 

305 

Gorgias. 

Introduc- 

I ION. 

VOL. II. 

X 

306 IVe do not what we will , but what we wish. 

Gorgias . Socrates would teach us a lesson which we are slow to learn - that 

Introduc- good intentions, and even benevolent actions, when they are not 
prompted by wisdom, are of no value. We believe something to 
be for our good which we afterwards find out not to be for our 
good. The consequences may be inevitable, for they may follow 
an invariable law, yet they may often be the very opposite of what 
is expected by us. When we increase pauperism by almsgiving ; 
when we tie up property without regard to changes of circum- 
stances ; when we say hastily what we deliberately disapprove ; 
when we do in a moment of passion what upon reflection we 
regret; when from any want of self-control we give another an 
advantage over us— we are doing not what we will, but what we 
wish. All actions of which the consequences are not weighed 
and foreseen, are of this impotent and paralytic sort ; and the 
author of them has ‘the least possible power* while seeming to 
have the greatest. For he is actually bringing about the reverse 
of what he intended. And yet the book of nature is open to him, 
in which he who runs may read if he will exercise ordinary atten- 
tion ; every day offers him experiences of his own and of other 
men’s characters, and he passes them unheeded by. The con- 
templation of the consequences of actions, and the ignorance of 
men in regard to them, seems to have led Socrates to his famous 
thesis : — ‘ Virtue is knowledge ; ’ which is not so much an error or 
paradox as a half truth, seen first in the twilight of ethical philo- 
sophy, but also the half of the truth which is especially needed in 
the present age. For as the world has grown older men have 
been too apt to imagine a right and wrong apart from con- 
sequences ; while a few, on the other hand, have sought to resolve 
them wholly into their consequences. But Socrates, or Plato for 
him, neither divides nor identifies them ; though the time has not 
yet arrived either for utilitarian or transcendental systems of 
moral philosophy, he recognizes the two elements which seem to 
lie at the basis of morality 1 . 

1 Compare the following: ‘Now, and for us, it is a time to Hellenize and 
to praise knowing ; for we have Hebraized too much and have overvalued 
doing. But the habits and discipline received from Hebraism remain for our 
race an eternal possession. And as humanity is constituted, one must never 
assign the second rank to-day without being ready to restore them to the first 
to-morrow.* Sir William W. Hunter, Preface to Orissa. 

3°7 

We ought to be, not to seem. 

Fourth Thesis : — Gorgias. 

To be and not to seem is fhe end of life. Introduc- 

1 ION. 

The Greek in the age of Plato admitted praise to be one of the 
chief incentives to moral virtue, and to most men the opinion of 
their fellows is a leading principle of action. Hence a certain ele- 
ment of seeming enters into all things ; all or almost all desire to 
appear better than they are, that they may win the esteem or 
admiration of others. A man of ability can easily feign the lan- 
guage of piety or virtue ; and there is an unconscious as well as 
a conscious hypocrisy which, according to Socrates, is the worst 
of the two. Again, there is the sophistry of classes and pro- 
fessions. There are the different opinions about themselves and 
one another which prevail in different ranks of society. There is 
the bias given to the mind by the study of one department of 
human knowledge to the exclusion of the rest ; and stronger far 
the prejudice engendered by a pecuniary or party interest in 
certain tenets. There is the sophistry of law, the sophistry of 
medicine, the sophistry of politics, the sophistry of theology. All 
of these disguises wear the appearance of the truth ; some of 
them are very ancient, and we do not easily disengage ourselves 
from them ; for we have inherited them, and they have become a 
part of us. The sophistry of an ancient Greek sophist is nothing 
compared with the sophistry of a religious order, or of a church in 
which during many ages falsehood has been accumulating, and 
everything has been said on one side, and nothing on the other. 

The conventions and customs which we observe in conversation, 
and the opposition of our interests when we have dealings with 
one another (‘ the buyer saith, it is nought — it is nought/ etc.)* are 
always obscuring our sense of truth and right. The sophistry of 
human nature is far more subtle than the deceit of any one 
man. Few persons speak freely from their own natures, and 
scarcely any one dares to think for himself : most of us im- 
perceptibly fall into the opinions of those around us, which we 
partly help to make. A man who would shake himself loose 
from them, requires great force of mind ; he hardly knows 
where to begin in the search after truth. On every side he 
is met by the world, which is not an abstraction of theologians, 
but the most real of all things, being another name for ourselves 

X 2 

308 The true and the false statesman. 

Gorgias . when regarded collectively and subjected to the influences of 
Introduc- society. 

tion. Then comes Socrates, impressed as no other man ever was, 

with the unreality and untruthfulness of popular opinion, and tells 
mankind that they must be and not seem. IIow are they to be? 
At any rate they must have the spirit and desire to be. If they 
are ignorant, they must acknowledge their ignorance to themselves ; 
if they are conscious of doing evil, they must learn to do well ; if 
they are weak, and have nothing in them which they can call 
themselves, they must acquire firmness and consistency ; if they 
are indifferent, they must begin to take an interest in the great 
questions which surround them. They must try to be what they 
would fain appear in the eyes of their fellow-men. A single 
individual cannot easily change public opinion; but he can be true 
and innocent, simple and independent ; he can know what he does, 
and what he does not know ; and though not without an effort, he 
can form a judgment of his own, at least in common matters. In 
his most secret actions he can show the same high principle (cp. 
Rep. viii. 554 D) which he shows when supported and watched by 
public opinion. And on some fitting occasion, on some question 
of humanity or truth or right, even an ordinary man, from the 
natural rectitude of his disposition, may be found to take up arms 
against a whole tribe of politicians and lawyers, and be too much 
for them. 

Who is the true and who the false statesman ? — 

The true statesman is he who brings order out of disorder ; 
who first organizes and then administers the government of his 
own country ; and having made a nation, seeks to reconcile the 
national interests with those of Europe and of mankind. He is 
not a mere theorist, nor yet a dealer in expedients ; the whole and 
the parts grow together in his mind ; while the head is conceiving, 
the hand is executing. Although obliged to descend to the world, 
he is not of the world. His thoughts are fixed not on power or 
riches or extension of territory, but on an ideal state, in which all 
the citizens have an equal chance of health and life, and the 
• highest education is within the reach, of all, and the moral and 
intellectual qualities of every individual are freely developed, and 
‘ the idea of good ’ is the animating principle of the whole. Not 
the attainment of freedom alone, or of order alone, but how to 

The true and the false statesman. 

unite freedom with order is the problem which he has to 
solve. 

The statesman who places before himself these lofty aims has 
undertaken a task which will call forth all his powers. He must 
control himself before he can control others ; he must know man- 
kind before he can manage them. He has no private likes or 
dislikes ; he does not conceal personal enmity under the disguise 
of moral or political principle : such meannesses, into which men 
too often fall unintentionally, are absorbed in the consciousness of 
his mission, and in his love for his country and for mankind. He 
will sometimes ask himself what the next generation will say of 
him ; not because he is careful of posthumous fame, but because 
he knows that the result of his life as a whole will then be more 
fairly judged. He will take time for the execution of his plans; 
not hurrying them on when the mind of a nation is unprepared 
for them ; but like the Ruler of the Universe Himself, working in 
the appointed time, for he knows that human life, 4 if not long in 
comparison with eternity’ (Rep. vi. 498 D), is sufficient for the 
fulfilment of many great purposes. He knows, too, that the 
work will be still going on when he is no longer here ; and he 
will sometimes, especially when his powers arc failing, think 
of that other 4 city of which the pattern is in heaven * (Rep. ix. 
592 B). 

The false politician is the serving-man of the state. In order to 
govern men he becomes like them ; their 4 minds are married in 
conjunction ; ’ they 4 bear themselves ’ like vulgar and tyrannical 
masters, and he is their obedient servant. The true politician, if he 
would rule men, must make them like himself; he must 4 educate 
his party ’ until they cease to be a party ; he must breathe into 
them the spirit which will hereafter give form to their institu- 
tions. Politics with him are not a mechanism for seeming what he 
is not, or for carrying out the will of the majority. Himself a 
representative man, he is the representative not of the lower but 
of the higher elements of the nation. There is a better (as well as 
a worse) public opinion of which he seeks to lay hold ; as there is 
also a deeper current of human affairs in which he is borne up 
when the waves nearer the shore are threatening him. He 
acknowledges that he cannot take the world by force— two or three 
moves on the political chessboard arc all that he can foresee -two 

309 

Gorgias. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

310 The true and the false statesman. 

Gorgias. or three weeks or months are granted to him in which he can pro- 
Introdvc- vide against a coming struggle. But he knows also that there are 
permanent principles of politics which are always tending to the 
well-being of states - better administration, better education, the 
reconciliation of conflicting elements, increased security against 
external enemies. These are not ‘ of to-day or yesterday/ but are 
the same in all times, and under all forms of government. Then 
when the storm descends and the winds blow, though he knows 
not beforehand the hour of danger, the pilot, not like Plato’s cap- 
tain in the Republic, half-blind and deaf, but with penetrating eye 
and quick ear, is ready to take command of the ship and guide her 
into port. 

The false politician asks not what is true, but what is the opinion 
of the world — not what is right, but what is expedient. The only 
measures of which he approves are the measures which will pass. 
He has no intention of fighting an uphill battle ; he keeps the 
roadway of politics. He is unwilling to incur the persecution and 
enmity which political convictions would entail upon him. He 
begins with popularity, and in fair weather sails gallantly along. 
But unpopularity soon follows him. For men expect their leaders 
to be better and wiser than themselves : to be their guides in 
danger, their saviours in extremity ; they do not really desire them 
to obey all the ignorant impulses of the popular mind ; and if they 
fail them in' a crisis they arc disappointed. Then, as Socrates says, 
the cry of ingratitude is heard, which is most unreasonable ; for 
the people, who have been taught no better, have done what might 
be expected of them, and their statesmen have received justice at 
their hands. 

The true statesman is aware that he must adapt himself to times 
and circumstances. He must have allies if he is to fight against 
the world ; he must enlighten public opinion ; he must accustom 
his followers to act together. Although he is not the mere executor 
of the will of the majority, he must win over the majority to him- 
self. He is their leader and not their follower, but in order to lead 
he must also follow. He will neither exaggerate nor undervalue 
. the power of a statesman, neither adopting the ‘ laissez faire ’ nor 
the ‘ paternal government ’ principle ; but he will, whether he is 
dealing with children in politics, or with full-grown men, seek to 
do for the people what the government can do for them, and what, 

The true and the false statesman. 3 1 1 

from imperfect education or deficient powers of combination, they Gorgias. 
cannot do for themselves. He knows that if he does too much for introduc- 
them they will do nothing ; and that if he does nothing for them TI(m 
they will in some states of society be utterly helpless. For the many 
cannot exist without the few ; if the material force of a country is 
from below, wisdom and experience are from above. It is not a 
small part of human evils which kings and governments make or 
cure. The statesman is well aware that a great purpose carried 
out consistently during many years will at last be executed. He 
is playing for a stake which may be partly determined by some 
accident, and therefore he will allow largely for the unknown 
element of politics. But the game being one in which chance and 
skill are combined, if he plays long enough he is certain of victory. 

He will not be always consistent, for the world is changing ; and 
though he depends upon the support of a party, he will remember 
that he is the minister of the whole. He lives not for the present, 
but for the future, and he is not at all sure that he will be appre- 
ciated either now or then. For he may have the existing order of 
society against him, and may not be remembered by a distant 
posterity. 

There are always discontented idealists in politics who, like 
Socrates in the Gorgias, find fault with all statesmen past as well 
as present, not excepting the greatest names of history. Mankind 
have an uneasy feeling that they ought to be better governed than 
they are. Just as the actual philosopher falls short of the one 
wise man, so does the actual statesman fall short of the ideal. And 
so partly from vanity and egotism, but partly also from a true sense 
of the faults of eminent men, a temper of dissatisfaction and criti- 
cism springs up among those who are ready enough to acknow- 
ledge the inferiority of their own powers. No matter whether a 
statesman makes high professions or none at all— they are 
reduced sooner or later to the same level. And sometimes the more 
unscrupulous man is better esteemed than the more conscientious, 
because he has not equally deceived expectations. Such senti- 
ments may be unjust, but they are widely spread ; we constantly 
find them recurring in reviews and newspapers, and still oftener 
in private conversation. 

We may further observe that the art of government, while in 
some respects tending to improve, has in others a tendency to 

312 

The true and the false statesman. 

Gorgias . degenerate, as institutions become more popular. Governing for 
Introduc. the people cannot easily be combined with governing by the 
71Qh ‘ people : the interests of classes are too strong for the ideas of the 
statesman who takes a comprehensive view of the whole. Accord- 
ing to Socrates the true governor will find ruin or death staring 
him in the face, and will only be induced to govern from the fear 
of being governed by a worse man than himself (Rep. i. 347 C). 
And in modern times, though the world has grown milder, and 
the terrible consequences which Plato foretells no longer await 
an English statesman, any one who is not actuated by a blind 
ambition will only undertake from a sense of duty a work in which 
he is most likely to fail ; and even if he succeed, will rarely be 
rewarded by the gratitude of his own generation. 

Socrates, who is not a politician at all, tells us that he is the only 
real politician of his time. Let us illustrate the meaning of his 
words by applying them to the history of our own country. He 
would have said that not Pitt or Fox, or Canning or Sir R. Peel, 
are the real politicians of their time, but Locke, Hume, Adam 
Smith, Bentham, Ricardo. These during the greater part of their 
lives occupied an inconsiderable space in the eyes of the public. 
They were private persons ; nevertheless they sowed in the minds 
of men seeds which in the next generation have become an irre- 
sistible power. ‘ Herein is that saying true, One soweth and 
another reapeth.* We may imagine with Plato an ideal statesman 
in whom practice and speculation are perfectly harmonized ; for 
there is no necessary opposition between them. But experience 
shows that they are commonly divorced — the ordinary politician 
is the interpreter or executor of the thoughts of others, and hardly 
ever brings to the birth a new political conception. One or two 
only in modern times, like the Italian statesman Cavour, have 
created the world in which they moved. The philosopher is 
naturally unfitted for political life ; his great ideas are not under- 
stood by the many ; he is a thousand miles away from the questions 
of the day. Yet perhaps the lives of thinkers, as they are stiller 
and deeper, are also happier than the lives of those who are more 
* in the public eye. They have the promise of the future, though 
they are regarded as dreamers and visionaries by their own 
contemporaries. And when they are no longer here, those who 
would have been ashamed of them during their lives claim kindred 

The true office of the poet . 313 

with them, and are proud to be called by their names. (Cp. Gorgias. 
Thucyd. vi. 16.) Introduc- 

Who is the true poet ? T *° M ‘ 

Plato expels the poets from his Republic because they are allied 
to sense ; because they stimulate the emotions ; because they are 
thrice removed from the ideal truth. And in a similar spirit he 
declares in the Gorgias that the stately muse of tragedy is a votary 
of pleasure and not of truth. In modern times we almost ridicule 
the idea of poetry admitting of a moral. The poet and the prophet, 
or preacher, in primitive antiquity are one and the same ; but in 
later ages they seem to fall apart. The great art of novel writing, 
that peculiar creation of our own and the last century, which, 
together with the sister art of review writing, threatens to absorb 
all literature, has even less of seriousness in her composition. Do 
we not often hear the novel writer censured for attempting to 
convey a lesson to the minds of his readers ? 

Yet the true office of a poet or writer of fiction is not merely to 
give amusement, or to be the expression of the feelings of mankind, 
good or bad, or even to increase our knowledge of human nature. 

There have been poets in modern times, such as Goethe or Words- 
worth, who have not forgotten their high vocation of teachers ; 
and the two greatest of the Greek dramatists owe their sublimity to 
their ethical character. The noblest truths, sung of in the purest 
and sweetest language, are still the proper material of poetry. 

The poet clothes them with beauty, and has a power of making 
them enter into the hearts and memories of men. He has not only 
to speak of themes above the level of ordinary life, but to speak of 
them in a deeper and tenderer way than they arc ordinarily felt, 
so as to awaken the feeling of them in others. The old he makes 
young again ; the familiar principle he invests with a new dignity ; 
he finds a noble expression for the common-places of morality and 
politics. He uses the things of sense so as to indicate what is 
beyond; he raises us through earth to heaven. He expresses 
what the better part of us would fain say, and the half-conscious 
feeling is strengthened by the expression. He is his own critic, 
for the spirit of poetry and of criticism are not divided in him. His 
mission is not to disguise men from themselves, but to reveal to 
them their own nature, and make them better acquainted with the 
world around them. True poetry is the remembrance of youth, 

3i.4 

The true office of the poet. 

Gorgias. of love, the embodiment in words of the happiest and holiest 
Introduc. moments of life, of the noblest thoughts of man, of the greatest 
deeds of the past. The poet of the future may return to his greater 
calling of the prophet or teacher ; indeed, we hardly know what 
may not be effected for the human race by a better use of the 
poetical and imaginative faculty. The reconciliation of poetry, as 
of religion, with truth, may still be possible. Neither is the ele- 
ment of pleasure to be excluded. For when we substitute a higher 
pleasure for a lower we raise men in the scale of existence. Might 
not the novelist, too, make an ideal, or rather many ideals of social 
life, better than a thousand sermons ? Plato, like the Puritans, is 
too much afraid of poetic and artistic influences. But he is not 
without a true sense of the noble purposes to which art may be 
applied (Rep. iii. 401). 

Modern poetry is often a sort of plaything, or, in Plato’s 
language, a flattery, a sophistry, or sham, in which, without any 
serious purpose, the poet lends wings to his fancy and exhibits 
his gifts of language and metre. Such an one seeks to gratify the 
taste of his readers ; he has the ‘ savoir faire ,’ or trick of writing, 
but he has not the higher spirit of poetry. He has no conception 
that true art should bring order out of disorder (504 A) ; that it 
should make provision for the soul’s highest interest (501 C) ; that 
it should be pursued only with a view to ‘ the improvement of the 
citizens * (502, 503). He ministers to the weaker side of human 
nature (Rep. x. 603-605) ; he idealizes the sensual; he sings the 
strain of love in the latest fashion ; instead of raising men above 
themselves he brings them back to the ‘tyranny of the many 
masters,’ from which all his life long a good man has been 
praying to be delivered. And often, forgetful of measure and 
order, he will express not that which is truest, but that which is 
strongest. Instead of a great and nobly-executed subject, perfect 
in every part, some fancy of a heated brain is worked out with the 
strangest incongruity. He is not the master of his words, but his 
words— perhaps borrowed from another— the faded reflection of 
some French or German or Italian writer, have the better of him. 

. Though we are not going to banish the poets, how can we 
suppose that such utterances have any healing or life-giving 
influence on the minds of men ? 

‘ Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter : ' Art then 

The triumph of right and truth. 315 

must be true, and politics must be true, and the life of man must Gorgias . 
be true and not a seeming or sham. In all of them order has to i N troduc- 
be brought out of disorder, truth out of error and falsehood. This TI0N * 
is what we mean by the greatest improvement of man. And so, 
having considered in what way ‘ we can best spend the appointed 
time, we leave the result with God ’ (512 E). Plato does not say 
that God will order all things for the best (cp. Phaedo, 97 C), but 
he indirectly implies that the evils of this life will be corrected in 
another. And as we are very far from the best imaginable world 
at present, Plato here, as in the Phaedo and Republic, supposes a 
purgatory or place of education for mankind in general, and for 
a very few a Tartarus or hell. The myth which terminates the 
dialogue is not the revelation, but rather, like all similar descrip- 
tions, whether in the Bible or Plato, the veil of another life. For 
no visible thing can reveal the invisible. Of this Plato, unlike 
some commentators on Scripture, is fully aware. Neither will he 
dogmatize about the manner in which we are ‘ born again 9 (Rep. 
vi. 498 D). Only he is prepared to maintain the ultimate triumph 
of truth and right, and declares that no one, not even the wisest 
of the Greeks, can affirm any other doctrine without being 
ridiculous. 

There is a further paradox of ethics, in which pleasure and 
pain are held to be indifferent, and virtue at the time of action and 
without regard to consequences is happiness. From this elevation 
or exaggeration of feeling Plato seems to shrink : he leaves it to 
the Stoics in a later generation to maintain that when impaled or 
on the rack the philosopher may be happy (cp. Rep. ii. 361 ff.). 

It is observable that in the Republic he raises this question, but it 
is not really discussed ; the veil of the ideal state, the shadow of 
another life, are allowed to descend upon it and it passes out of 
sight. The martyr or sufferer in the cause of right or truth is 
often supposed to die in raptures, having his eye fixed on a city 
which is in heaven. But if there were no future, might he not 
still be happy in the performance of an action which was attended 
only by a painful death ? He himself may be ready to thank God 
that he was thought worthy to do Him the least service, without 
looking for a reward ; the joys of another life may not have been 
present to his mind at all. Do we suppose that the mediaeval 

3x6 

Gorgias. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

Virtue indifferent to reward. 

saint, St. Bernard, St. Francis, St. Catharine of Sienna, or the 
Catholic priest who lately devoted himself to death by a lingering 
disease that he might solace and help others, was thinking of the 
* sweets’ of heaven? No; the work was already heaven to 
him and enough. Much less will the dying patriot be dreaming 
of the praises of man or of an immortality of fame ; the sense of 
duty, of right, and trust in God will be sufficient, and as far as the 
mind can reach, in that hour. If he were certain that there were 
no life to come, he would not have wished to speak or act other- 
wise than he did in the cause of truth or of humanity. Neither, 
on the other hand, will he suppose that God has forsaken him or 
that the future is to be a mere blank to him. The greatest act of 
faith, the only faith which cannot pass away, is his who has not 
known, but yet has believed. A very few among the sons of 
men have made themselves independent of circumstances, past, 
present, or to come. He who has attained to such a temper of 
mind has already present with him eternal life ; he needs no 
arguments to convince him of immortality ; he has in him already 
a principle stronger than death. He who serves man without the 
thought of reward is deemed to be a more faithful servant than he 
who works for hire. May not the service of God, which is the 
more disinterested, be in like manner the higher? And although 
only a very few in the course of the world’s history — Christ him- 
self being one of them — have attained to such a noble conception 
of God and of the human soul, yet the ideal of them may be 
present to us, and the remembrance of them be an example to us, 
and their lives may shed a light on many dark places both of 
philosophy and theology. 

The Myths of Plato. 

The myths of Plato are a phenomenon unique in literature. 
There are four longer ones : these occur in the Phaedrus (244-256), 
Phaedo (110-115), Gorgias (523-527), and Republic (x. 614-621). 
That in the Republic is the most elaborate and finished of them. 
Three of these greater myths, namely those contained in the 
Phaedo, the Gorgias and the Republic, relate to the destiny of 
human souls in a future life. The magnificent myth in the 

The myths of Plato. 3 1 7 

Phaedrus treats of the immortality, or rather the eternity of the Gorgias. 
soul, in which is included a former as well as a future state of Introduc- 
existence. To these may be added, (i) the myth, or rather fable, 1!0N * 
occurring in the Statesman (268-274), in which the life of inno- 
cence is contrasted with the ordinary life of man and the 
consciousness of evil : (2) the legend of the Island of Atlantis, an 
imaginary history, which is a fragment only, commenced in the 
Timaeus (21-26) and continued in the Critias : (3) the much less 
artistic fiction of the foundation of the Cretan colony which is intro- 
duced in the preface to the Laws (iii. 702), but soon falls into the 
background : (4) the beautiful but rather artificial tale of Prometheus 
and Epimetheus narrated in his rhetorical manner by Protagoras 
in the dialogue called after him (320-328) : (5) the speech at the be- 
ginning of the Phaedrus (231-234), which is a parody of the orator 
Lysias ; the rival speech of Socrates and the recantation of it (237- 
241). To these may be added (6) the tale of the grasshoppers, and 
(7) the tale of Thamus and of Thcuth, both in the Phaedrus 
(259 and 274-5): (8) the parable of the Cave (Rep. vii. ad /«//.), 
in which the previous argument is recapitulated, and the nature 
and degrees of knowledge having been previously set forth in the 
abstract are represented in a picture : (9) the fiction of the earth- 
born men (Rep. iii. 4T4 ; cp. Laws ii. 664), in which by the 
adaptation of an old tradition Plato makes a new beginning for his 
society : (10) the myth of Aristophanes respecting the division of 
the sexes, Sym. 189: (11) the parable of the noble captain, the pilot, 
and the mutinous sailors (Rep. vi. 488), in which is represented the 
relation of the better part of the world, and of the philosopher, to 
the mob of politicians : (12) the ironical tale of the pilot who plies 
between Athens and Aegina charging only a small payment for 
saving men from death, the reason being that he is uncertain 
whether to live or die is better for them (Gor. 51 1) : (13) the treat- 
ment of freemen and citizens by physicians and of slaves 
by their apprentices,— a somewhat laboured figure of speech 
intended to illustrate the two different ways in which the laws 
speak to men (Laws iv. 720), There also occur in Plato continuous 
images ; some of them extend over several pages, appearing and 
reappearing at intervals : such as the bees stinging and stingless 
(paupers and thieves) in the Eighth Book of the Republic (554), 
who are generated in the transition from timocracy to oligarchy : 

318 The myths of Plato. 

Gorgias. the sun, which is to the visible world what the idea of good is to 

Introduc- the intellectual, in the Sixth Book of the Republic (508-9) : the 
8 composite animal, having the form of a man, but containing under 

a human skin a lion and a many-headed monster (Rep. ix. 
588-9) : the great beast (vi. 493), i.e. the populace : and the wild 
beast within us, meaning the passions which are always liable to 
break out (ix. 571) : the animated comparisons of the degradation 
of philosophy by the arts to the dishonoured maiden (vi. 495-6), 
and of the tyrant to the parricide, who ‘beats his father, having 
first taken away his arms ’ (viii. 569) : the dog, who is your only 
philosopher (ii. 376 B) : the grotesque and rather paltry image of 
the argument wandering about without a head (Laws vi. 752), 
which is repeated, not improved, from the Gorgias (509 D) : the 
argument personified as veiling her face (Rep. vi. 503 A), as 
engaged in a chase (iv. 427 C), as breaking upon us in a first, 
second and third wave (v. 457 C, 472 A, 473 C): on these figures 
of speech the changes are rung many times over. It is observ- 
able that nearly all these parables or continuous images are found 
in the Republic; that which occurs in the Theaetetus (149 ff.), 
of the midwifery of Socrates, is perhaps the only exception. To 
make the list complete, the mathematical figure of the number of 
the state (Rep. viii. 546), or the numerical interval which separates 
king from tyrant (ix. 587-8), should not be forgotten. 

The myth in the Gorgias is one of those descriptions of another 
life which, like the Sixth Aeneid of Virgil, appear to contain 
reminiscences of the mysteries. It is a vision of the rewards and 
punishments which await good and bad men after death. It 
supposes the body to continue and to be in another world what 
it has become in this. It includes a Paradiso, Purgatorio, and 
Inferno, like the sister myths of the Phaedo and the Republic. 
The Inferno is reserved for great criminals only. The argument 
of the dialogue is frequently referred to, and the meaning breaks 
through so as rather to destroy the liveliness and consistency of 
the picture. The structure of the fiction is very slight, the chief 
point or moral being that in the judgments of another world there 
is no possibility of concealment : Zeus has taken from men the 
power of foreseeing death, and brings together the souls both of 
them and their judges naked and undisguised at the judgment- 
seat. Both are exposed to view, stripped of the veils and clothes 

The myths of Plato . 319 

which might prevent them from seeing into or being seen by one Gorgias. 
another. Introduc- 

The myth of the Phaedo is of the same type, but it is more THm 

cosmological, and also more poetical. The beautiful and in- 
genious fancy occurs to Plato that the upper atmosphere is an 
earth and heaven in one, a glorified earth, fairer and purer than 
that in which we dwell. As the fishes live in the ocean, mankind 
are living in a lower sphere, out of which they put their heads for 
a moment or two and behold a world beyond. The earth which 
we inhabit is a sediment of the coarser particles which drop from 
the world above, and is to that heavenly earth what the desert and 
the shores of the ocean are to us. A part of the myth consists of 
description of the interior of the earth, which gives the oppor- 
tunity of introducing several mythological names and of providing 
places of torment for the wicked. There is no clear distinction of 
soul and body; the spirits beneath the earth are spoken of as 
souls only, yet they retain a sort of shadowy form when they cry 
for mercy on the shores of the lake ; and the philosopher alone is 
said to have got rid of the body. All the three myths in Plato 
which relate to the world below have a place for repentant 
sinners, as well as other homes or places for the very good and 
very bad. It is a natural reflection which is made by Plato else- 
where, that the two extremes of human character are rarely met 
with, and that the generality of mankind are between them. 
Hence a place must be found for them. In the myth of the 
Phaedo they are carried down the river Acheron to the Ache- 
rusian lake, where they dwell, and are purified of their evil 
deeds, and receive the rewards of their good. There are also 
incurable sinners, who are cast into Tartarus, there to remain as 
the penalty of atrocious crimes ; these suffer everlastingly. And 
there is another class of hardly-curable sinners who are allowed 
from time to time to approach the shores of the Acherusian lake, 
where they cry to their victims for mercy ; which if they obtain 
they come out into the lake and cease from their torments. 

Neither this, nor any of the three greater myths of Plato, nor 
perhaps any allegory or parable relating to the unseen world, is 
consistent with itself. The language of philosophy mingles with 
that of mythology; abstract ideas are transformed into persons, 
figures of speech into realities. These myths may be compared 

320 

The myths of Plato. 

Gorgias. with the Pilgrim’s Progress of Bunyan, in which discussions of 
Introdvc. theQlogy are mixed up with the incidents of travel, and mytho- 
1ION ' logical personages are associated with human beings : they are 
also garnished with names and phrases taken out of Homer, and 
with other fragments of Greek tradition. 

The myth of the Republic is more subtle and also more con- 
sistent than either of the two others. It has a greater veri- 
similitude than they have, and is full of touches which recall the 
experiences of human life. It will be noticed by an attentive 
reader that the twelve days during which Er lay in a trance after 
he was slain coincide with the time passed by the spirits in their 
pilgrimage. It is a curious observation, not often made, that good 
men who have lived in a well-governed city (shall we say in a 
religious and respectable society ?) are more likely to make 
mistakes in their choice of life than those who have had more 
experience of the world and of evil. It is a more familiar remark 
that we constantly blame others when we have only ourselves to 
blame; and the philosopher must acknowledge, however re- 
luctantly, that there is an element of chance in human life with 
which it is sometimes impossible for man to cope. That men 
drink more of the waters of forgetfulness than is good for them is 
a poetical description of a familiar truth. We have many of us 
known men who, like Odysseus, have wearied of ambition and 
have only desired rest. We should like to know what became of 
the infants 1 dying almost as soon as they were born,’ but Plato only 
raises, without satisfying, our curiosity. The two companies of 
souls, ascending and descending at either chasm of heaven and 
earth, and conversing when they come out into the meadow, the 
majestic figures of the judges sitting in heaven, the voice heard 
by Ardiaeus, are features of the great allegory which have an 
indescribable grandeur and power. The remark already made 
respecting the inconsistency of the two other myths must be 
extended also to this : it is at once an orrery, or model of the 
heavens, and a picture of the Day of Judgment. 

The three myths are unlike anything else in Plato. There is 
an Oriental, or rather an Egyptian element in them, and they 
have an affinity to the mysteries and to the Orphic modes of 
worship. To a certain extent they are un-Greek; at any rate 
there is hardly anything like them in other Greek writings which 

321 

The myth in the Phaedrus. 

have a serious purpose ; in spirit they are mediaeval. They are 
akin to what may be termed the underground religion in all 
ages and countries. They are presented in the most lively and 
graphic manner, but they are never insisted on as true ; it is only 
affirmed that nothing better can be said about a future life. Plato 
seems to make use of them when he has reached the limits of 
human knowledge ; or, to borrow an expression of his own, when 
he is standing on the outside of the intellectual world. They are 
very simple in style ; a few touches bring the picture home to the 
mind, and make it present to us. They have also a kind of 
authority gained by the employment of sacred and familiar 
names, just as mere fragments of the words of Scripture, put 
together in any form and applied to any subject, have a power of 
their own. They are a substitute for poetry and mythology ; and 
they are also a reform of mythology. The moral of them may be 
summed up in a word or two : After death the Judgment ; and 
‘there is some better thing remaining for the good than for the 
evil. , 

All literature gathers into itself many elements of the past : for 
example, the tale of the earth-born men in the Republic appears 
at first sight to be an extravagant fancy, but it is restored to 
propriety when we remember that it is based on a legendary 
belief. The art of making stories of ghosts and apparitions credible 
is said to consist in the manner of telling them. The effect is 
gained by many literary and conversational devices, such as the 
previous raising of curiosity, the mention of little circumstances, 
simplicity, picturesqueness, the naturalness of the occasion, and 
the like. This art is possessed by Plato in a degree which has 
never been equalled. 

The myth in the Phaedrus is even greater than the myths which 
have been already described, but is of a different character. It 
treats of a former rather than of a future life. It represents the 
conflict of reason aided by passion or righteous indignation on the 
one hand, and of the animal lusts and instincts on the other. The 
soul of man has followed the company of some god, and seen truth 
in the form of the universal before it was born in this world. Our 
present life is the result of the struggle which was then carried on. 
This world is relative to a former world, as it is often projected 
into a future. We ask the question, Where were men before 

Gorgias. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

VOL. II. 

Y 

322 

The myth in the Statesman. 

Gorgias. birth ? as we likewise enquire, What will become of them after 
Introduc- death ? The first question is unfamiliar to us, and therefore seems 
TION ’ to be unnatural ; but if we survey the whole human race, it has been 
as influential and as widely spread as the other. In the Phaedrus 
it is really a figure of speech in which the ‘ spiritual combat * of this 
life is represented. The majesty and power of the whole passage 
— especially of what may be called the theme or proem (beginning 
‘ The mind through all her being is immortal ’)— can only be ren- 
dered very inadequately in another language. 

The myth in the Statesman relates to a former cycle of existence, 
in which men were born of the earth, and by the reversal of the 
earth’s motion had their lives reversed and were restored to youth 
and beauty : the dead came to life, the old grew middle-aged, and 
the middle-aged young ; the youth became a child, the child an 
infant, the infant vanished into the earth. The connection between 
the reversal of the earth’s motion and the reversal of human life 
is of course verbal only, yet Plato, like theologians in other ages, 
argues from the consistency of the talc to its truth. The new order 
of the world was immediately under the government of God ; it 
was a state of innocence in which men had neither wants nor cares, 
in which the earth brought forth all things spontaneously, and God 
was to man what man now is to the animals. There were no great 
estates, or families, or private possessions, nor any traditions of 
the past, because men were all born out of the earth. This is what 
Plato calls the ‘ reign of Cronos ; ’ and in like manner he connects 
the reversal of the earth’s motion with some legend of which he 
himself was probably the inventor. 

The question is then asked, under which of these two cycles of 
existence was man .the happier,— under that of Cronos, which was 
a state of innocence, or that of Zeus, which is our ordinary life ? 
For a while Plato balances the two sides of the serious controversy, 
which he has suggested in a figure. The answer depends on 
another question : What use did the children of Cronos make of 
their time? They had boundless leisure and the faculty of dis- 
coursing, not only with one another, but with the animals. Did 
they employ these advantages with a view to philosophy, gathering 
from every nature some addition to their store of knowledge ? or, 
Did they pass their time in eating and drinking and telling stories 
to one another and to the beasts ? — in either case there would be no 

Transition in Plato from the abstract to the concrete . 323 

difficulty in answering. But then, as Plato rather mischievously Gorgias. 
adds, * Nobody knows what they did/ and therefore the doubt must i NT roduc- 
remain undetermined. 

To the first there succeeds a second epoch. After another 
natural convulsion, in which the order of the world and of human 
life is once more reversed, God withdraws his guiding hand, and 
man is left to the government of himself. The world begins again, 
and arts and laws are slowly and painfully invented. A secular 
age succeeds to a theocratical. In this fanciful tale Plato has 
dropped, or almost dropped, the garb of mythology. He suggests 
several curious and important thoughts, such as the possibility of a 
state of innocence, the existence of a world without traditions, and 
the difference between human and divine government. He has 
also carried a step further his speculations concerning the abolition 
of the family and of property, which he supposes to have no place 
among the children of Cronos any more than in the ideal state. 

It is characteristic of Plato and of his age to pass from the 
abstract to the concrete, from poetry to reality. Language is the 
expression of the seen, and also of the unseen, and moves in a 
region between them. A great writer knows how to strike both 
these chords, sometimes remaining within the sphere of the visible, 
and then again comprehending a wider range and soaring to the 
abstract and universal. Even in the same sentence he may employ 
both modes of speech not improperly or inharmoniously. It is 
useless to criticise the broken metaphors of Plato, if the effect of 
the whole is to create a picture not such as can be painted on 
canvas, but which is full of life and meaning to the reader. A 
poem may be contained in a word or two, w'hich may call up not 
one but many latent images ; or half reveal to us by a sudden flash 
the thoughts of many hearts. Often the rapid transition from one 
image to another is pleasing to us : on the other hand, any single 
figure of speech if too often repeated, or worked out too much at 
length, becomes prosy and monotonous. In theology and philo- 
sophy we necessarily include both ‘ the moral law within and the 
starry heaven above/ and pass from one to the other (cp. for 
examples Psalm xviii. 1-25, xix. 1-9, etc.). Whether such a use 
of language is puerile or noble depends upon the genius of the 
writer or speaker, and the familiarity of the associations employed. 

v 2 

324 The myths not written, , but spoken words. 

Gorgias . In the myths and parables of Plato the ease and grace of conver- 

Introduc- sation is not forgotten : they s are spoken, not written words, stories 
iION * which are told to a living audience, and so well told that we are 
more than half-inclined to believe them (cp. Phaedrus 274). As 
in conversation too, the striking image or figure of speech is not 
forgotten, but is quickly caught up, and alluded to again and again ; 
as it would still be in our own day in a genial and sympathetic 
society. The descriptions of Plato have a greater life and reality 
than is to be found in any modern writing. This is due to their 
homeliness and simplicity. Plato can do with words just as he 
pleases ; to him they are indeed ‘ more plastic than wax ’ (Rep. 
ix. 588 D). We are in the habit of opposing speech and writing, 
poetry and prose. But he has discovered a use of language in 
which they are united ; which gives a fitting expression to the 
highest truths; and in which the trifles of courtesy and the famili- 
arities of daily life are not overlooked. 

GORGI AS. 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE . 

Callicles. Socrates. Chaerephon. 

Gorgias. Polus. 

Scene : The house of Callicles. 

steph. Callicles . The wise man, as the proverb says, is late for a 

fray, but not for a feast. 

Socrates. And are we late for a feast ? 

Cal. Yes, and a delightful feast ; for Gorgias has just been 
exhibiting to us many fine things. 

Soc. It is not my fault, Callicles ; our friend Chaerephon 
is to blame ; for he would keep us loitering in the Agora. 

Chaerephon . Never mind, Socrates; the misfortune of 
which I have been the cause I will also repair ; for Gorgias 
is a friend of mine, and I will make him give the exhibition 
again either now, or, if you prefer, at some other time. 

Cal. What is the matter, Chaerephon — does Socrates want 
to hear Gorgias ? 

Chaer. Yes, that was our intention in coming. 

Cal. Come into my house, then ; for Gorgias is staying 
with me, and he shall exhibit to you. 

Soc. Very good, Callicles ; but will he answer our ques- 
tions ? for I want to hear from him what is the nature of his 
art, and what it is which he professes and teaches ; he may, 
as you [Chaerephon] suggest, defer the exhibition to some 
other time. 

Cal. There is nothing like asking him, Socrates ; and in- 
deed to answer questions is a part of his exhibition, for he 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

Chaere- 

phon. 

326 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Gorgias, 

Chaere- 

hion, 

PoLUS. 

Polus offers 
to take the 
place of 
Gorgias in 
the argu- 
ment. 

The ques- 
tion is 
asked, 

' What is 
Gorgias ? ’ 

Gorgias is ready to answer all comers . 

was saying only just now, that any one in my house might 
put any question to him, and that he would answer. 

Soc. How fortunate ! will you ask him, Chaerephon— ? 

Chaer. What shall I ask him ? 

Soc. Ask him who he is. 

Chaer . What do you mean ? 

Soc. I mean such a question as would elicit from him, if he 
had been a maker of shoes, the answer that he is a cobbler. 

Do you understand ? 

Chaer. I understand, and will ask him : Tell me, Gorgias, 
is our friend Callicles right in saying that you undertake to 
answer any questions which you are asked ? 

Gorgias. Quite right, Chaerephon : I was saying as much 
only just now ; and I may add, that many years have elapsed 448 
since any one has asked me a new one. 

Chaer. Then you must be very ready, Gorgias. 

Gor. Of that, Chaerephon, you can make trial. 

Polus. Yes, indeed, and if you like, Chaerephon, you may 
make trial of me too, for I think that Gorgias, who has been 
talking a long time, is tired. 

Chaer. And do you, Polus, think that you can answer 
better than Gorgias? 

Pol. What does that matter if I answer well enough for 
you? 

Chaer. Not at all : — and you shall answer if you like. 

Pol. Ask : — 

Chaer. My question is this : If Gorgias had the skill of his 
brother Herodicus, what ought we to call him ? Ought he 
not to have the name which is given to his brother ? 

Pol. Certainly, 

Chaer. Then we should be right in calling him a phy- 
sician ? 

Pol. Yes. 

Chaer. And if he had the skill of Aristophon the son of 
Aglaophon, or of his brother Polygnotus, what ought we to 
call him ? 

Pol. Clearly, a painter. 

Chaer. But now what shall we call him— what is the art in 
which he is skilled ? 

Pol. O Chaerephon, there are many arts among mankind 

Gorgias supersedes Polus. 

which are experimental, and have their origin in experience, 
for experience makes the days of men to proceed according 
to art, and inexperience according to chance, and different 
persons in different ways are proficient in different arts, and 
the best persons in the best arts. And our friend Gorgias is 
one of the best, and the art in which he is a proficient is the 
noblest. 

Soc. Polus has been taught how to make a capital speech, 
Gorgias ; but he is not fulfilling the promise which he made 
to Chaerephon. 

Gor. What do you mean, Socrates ? 

Soc. I mean that he has not exactly answered the question 
which he was asked. 

Gor. Then why not ask him yourself? 

Soc. But I would much rather ask you, if you are disposed 
to answer : for I see, from the few words which Polus has 
uttered, that he has attended more to the art which is called 
rhetoric than to dialectic. 

Pol. What makes you say so, Socrates ? 

Soc. Because, Polus, when Chaerephon asked you what 
was the art which Gorgias knows, you praised it as if you 
were answering some one who found fault with it, but you 
never said what the art was. 

Pol. Why, did I not say that it was the noblest of arts ? 

Soc. Yes, indeed, but that was no answer to the question : 
nobody asked what was the quality, but what was the nature, 
of the art, and by what name we were to describe Gorgias. 

449 And I would still beg you briefly and clearly, as you 
answered Chaerephon when he asked you at first, to say 
what this art is, and what we ought to call Gorgias : Or 
rather, Gorgias, let me turn to you, and ask the same ques- 
tion, — what are we to call you, and what is the art which you 
profess ? 

Gor. Rhetoric, Socrates, is my art. 

Soc . Then I am to call you a rhetorician ? 

Gor. Yes, Socrates, and a good one too, if you would call 
me that which, in Homeric language, 'I boast myself 
to be.* 

Soc. I should wish to do so. 

Gor. Then pray do. 

327 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Gorgias, 

Polus. 

Answer : — 
Gorgias is 
one of the 
best profi- 
cients in the 
noblest art. 

This is no 
answer. 

Better 
Gorgias is a 
rhetorician 
and a 
teacher of 
rhetoric. 

328 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Gorgias. 

And rhe- 
toric is con- 
cerned with 
discourse. 

The admirable brevity of Gorgias. 

Soc . And are we to say that you are able to make other 
men rhetoricians ? 

Gor \ Yes, that is exactly what I profess to make them, not 
only at Athens, but in all places. 

Soc. And will you continue to ask and answer questions, 
Gorgias, as we are at present doing, and reserve for another 
occasion the longer mode of speech which Polus was attempt- 
ing ? Will you keep your promise, and answer shortly the 
questions which are asked of you ? 

Gor. Some answers, Socrates, are of necessity longer ; but 
I will do my best to make them as short as possible ; for a 
part of my profession is that I can be as short as any one. 

Soc. That is what is wanted, Gorgias ; exhibit the shorter 
method now, and the longer one at some other time. 

Gor. Well, I will; and you will certainly say, that you 
never heard a man use fewer words. 

Soc. Very good then ; as you profess to be a rhetorician, 
and a maker of rhetoricians, let me ask you, with what is 
rhetoric concerned : I might ask with what is weaving con- 
cerned, and you would reply (would you not?), with the 
making of garments ? 

Gor. Yes. 

Soc. And music is concerned with the composition of 
melodies ? 

Gor. It is. 

Soc. By Here, Gorgias, I admire the surpassing brevity of 
your answers. 

Gor. Yes, Socrates, I do think myself good at that. 

Soc. I am glad to hear it ; answer me in like manner about 
rhetoric : with what is rhetoric concerned ? 

Gor. With discourse. 

Soc. What sort of discourse, Gorgias ?— such discourse as 
would teach the sick under what treatment they might get 
well ? 

Gor. No. 

Soc. Then rhetoric does not treat of all kinds of dis- 
course ? 

Gor. Certainly not. 

Soc. And yet rhetoric makes men able to speak ? 

Gor. Yes. 

How is rhetoric distinguished from more special arts ? 329 

Soc. And to understand that about which they speak ? • Gorgias. 

Gor . 01 COUrse. Socrates, 

Soc. But does not the art of medicine, which we were just Gorg,as - 
45° now mentioning, also make men able to understand and 
speak about the sick ? 

Gor . Certainly. 

Soc. Then medicine also treats of discourse ? 

Gor. Yes. 

Soc. Of discourse concerning diseases ? 

Gor. Just so. 

Soc. And does not gymnastic also treat of discourse con- 
cerning the good or evil condition of the body ? 

Gor. Very true. 

Soc. And the same, Gorgias, is true of the other arts : — all But so are 
of them treat of discourse concerning the subjects with which arts 
they severally have to do. 

Gor. Clearly. 

Soc. Then why, if you call rhetoric the art which treats of 
discourse, and all the other arts treat of discourse, do you 
not call them arts of rhetoric ? 

Gor. Because, Socrates, the knowledge of the other arts • 
has only to do with some sort of external action, as of the 
hand ; but there is no such action of the hand in rhetoric 
which works and takes effect only through the medium of 
discourse. And therefore I am justified in saying that rhe- 
toric treats of discourse. 

Soc. I am not sure whether I entirely understand you, but 
I dare say I shall soon know better ; please to answer me a 
question you would allow that there are arts? 

Gor. Yes. 

Soc. As to the arts generally, they are for the most part ^ 
concerned with doing, and require little or no speaking ; in 
painting, #nd statuary, and many other arts, the work may 
proceed in silence ; and of such arts I suppose you would 
say that they do not come within the province of rhetoric. 

Gor. You perfectly conceive my meaning, Socrates. 

Soc. But there are other arts which work wholly through You mean 
the medium of language, and require either no action or very rhetoric ^ 
little, as, for example, the arts of arithmetic, of calculation, of belongs to 
geometry, and of playing draughts ; in some of these speech arts which*" 

330 

Rhetoric and arithmetic . 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Gorgias. 

is chiefly 
concerned 
with words. 

And yet 
you would 
not call 
arithmetic 
rhetoric. 

Illustra- 

tions. 

is pretty nearly co-extensive with action, but in most of them 
the verbal element is greater— they depend wholly on words 
for their efficacy and power: and I take your meaning to 
be that rhetoric is an art of this latter sort? 

Gor. Exactly. 

Soc . And yet I do not believe that you really mean to call 
any of these arts rhetoric ; although the precise expression 
which you used was, that rhetoric is an art which works and 
takes effect only through the medium of discourse ; and an 
adversary who wished to be captious might say, ' And so, 
Gorgias, you call arithmetic rhetoric/ But I do not think 
that you really call arithmetic rhetoric any more than geo- 
metry would be so called by you. 45 1 

Gor . You are quite right, Socrates, in your apprehension of 
my meaning. 

Soc. Well, then, let me now have the rest of my answer : — 
seeing that rhetoric is one of those arts which works mainly 
by the use of words, and there are other arts which also use 
words, tell me what is that quality in words with which rhe- 
toric is concerned : — Suppose that a person asks me about 
some of the arts which I was mentioning just now; he might 
say, ' Socrates, what is arithmetic ? ’ and I should reply to 
him, as you replied to me, that arithmetic is one of those arts 
which take effect through words. And then he would pro- 
ceed to ask: * Words about what?' and I should reply, 
Words about odd and even numbers, and how many there are 
of each. And if he asked again : ' What is the art of calcula- 
tion ? ’ I should say, That also is one of the arts which is 
concerned wholly with words. And if he further said, * Con- 
cerned with what ? 5 I should say, like the clerks in the 
assembly, i as aforesaid * of arithmetic, but with a difference, 
the difference being that the art of calculation considers not 
only the quantities of odd and even numbers, but also their 
numerical relations to themselves and to one another. And 
suppose, again, I were to say that astronomy is only words — 
he would ask, 'Words about what, Socrates?’ and I should 
answer, that astronomy tells us about the motions of the 
stars and sun and moon, and their relative swiftness. 

Gor. You would be quite right, Socrates. 

Soc. And now let us have from you, Gorgias, the truth 

33i 

The old drinking song. 

about rhetoric : which you would admit (would you not?yto 
be one of those arts which act always and fulfil all their 
ends through the medium of words ? 

Gor . True. 

Soc. Words which do what ? I should ask. To what 
class of things do the words which rhetoric uses relate ? 

Gor. To the greatest, Socrates, and the best of human 
things. 

Soc. That again, Gorgias, is ambiguous ; I am still in the 
dark : for which arc the greatest and best of human things ? 

I dare say that you have heard men singing at feasts the old 
drinking song, in which the singers enumerate the goods of 
life, first health, beauty next, thirdly, as the writer of the 
song says, wealth honestly obtained. 

452 Gor. Yes, I know the song; but what is your drift? 

Soc. I mean to say, that the producers of those things 
which the author of the song praises, that is to say, the 
physician, the trainer, the money-maker, will at once come 
to you, {md first the physician will say : 1 0 Socrates, 
Gorgias is deceiving you, for my art is concerned with the 
greatest good of men and not his/ And when I ask, Who 
are you ? he will reply, ‘lama physician.' What do you 
mean? I shall say. Do you mean that your art produces 
the greatest good? ' Certainly,' he will answer, 4 for is not 
health the greatest good? What greater good can men 
have, Socrates ? ' And after him the trainer will come and 
say, 4 1 too, Socrates, shall be greatly surprised if Gorgias 
can show more good of his art than I can show of mine.' 
To him again I shall say, Who are you, honest friend, and 
what is your business ? 4 1 am a trainer,' he will reply, 4 and 
my business is to make men beautiful and strong in body.’ 
When I have done with the trainer, there arrives the 
money-maker, and he, as I expect, will utterly despise them 
all. 'Consider, Socrates,' he will say, 'whether Gorgias or 
any one else can produce any greater good than wealth.' 
Well, you and I say to him, and are you a creator of 
wealth ? 4 Yes,’ he replies. And who are you ? * A money- 
maker.' And do you consider wealth to be the greatest 
good of man? 4 Of course,' will be his reply. And we 
shall rejoin : Yes; but our friend Gorgias contends that his 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Gorgias. 

Rhetoric 
has to do 
with words 
about the 
greatest 
and best 
of human 
things. 

But which 
are they ? 

332 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Gorgias. 

Freedom 
and power, 

and the 
word which 
gives them. 

Rhetoric is 
the art of 
persuading, 
says Gor- 
gias. 

Gorgias is brought to the point. 

art produces a greater good than yours. And then he will 
be sure to go on and ask, 'What good? Let Gorgias 
answer.* Now I want you, Gorgias, to imagine that this 
question is asked of you by them and by me ; What is that 
which, as you say, is the greatest good of man, and of which 
you are the creator ? Answer us. 

Gor. That good, Socrates, which is truly the greatest, 
being that which gives to men freedom in their own persons, 
and to individuals the power of ruling over others in their 
several states. 

Soc . And what would you consider this to be ? 

Gor. What is there greater than the word which per- 
suades the judges in the courts, or the senators in the 
council, or the citizens in the assembly, or at any other 
political meeting?— if you have the power of uttering this 
word, you will have the physician your slave, and the trainer 
your slave, and the money-maker of whom you talk will be 
found to gather treasures, not for himself, but for you who 
are able to speak and to persuade the multitude. 

Soc. Now I think, Gorgias, that you have very accurately 
explained what you conceive to be the art of rhetoric ; and 
you mean to say, if I am not mistaken, that rhetoric is the 453 
artificer of persuasion, having this and no other business, 
and that this is her crown and end. Do you know any 
other effect of rhetoric over and above that of producing 
persuasion ? 

Gor. No : the definition seems to me very fair, Socrates ; 
for persuasion is the chief end of rhetoric. 

Soc. Then hear me, Gorgias, for I am quite sure that if 
there ever was a man who entered on the discussion of a 
matter from a pure love of knowing the truth, I am such 
a one, and I should say the same of you. 

Gor. What is coming, Socrates ? 

Soc. I will tell you : I am very well aware that I do not 
know what, according to you, is the exact nature, or what 
are the topics of that persuasion of which you speak, and 
which is given by rhetoric ; although I have a suspicion 
about both the one and the other. And I am going to ask — 
what is this power of persuasion which is given by rhetoric, 
and about what? But why, if I have a suspicion, do I ask 

333 

Socrates insists on taking ‘ one step at a time! 

instead of telling you ? Not for your sake, but in order that Gorgias. 
the argument may proceed in such a manner as is most sockates, 
likely to set forth the truth. And I would have you observe, Gorgias * 
that I am right in asking this further question : If I asked, 

'What sort of a painter is Zeuxis?* and you said, 'The 
painter of figures,’ should I not be right in asking, 'What 
kind of figures, and where do you find them?* 

Gor. Certainly. 

Soc. And the reason for asking this second question 
would be, that there are other painters besides, who paint 
many other figures ? 

Gor. True. 

Soc. But if there had been no one but Zeuxis who painted 
them, then you would have answered very well ? 

Gor. Quite so. 

Soc. Now I want to know about rhetoric in the same way; But so is 
— is rhetoric the only art which brings persuasion, or do ^ 1 * metlc 
other arts have the same effect? I mean to say— Does he painting, 
who teaches anything persuade men of that which he teaches 
or not ? 

Gor. He persuades, Socrates, - there can be no mistake 
about that. 

Soc. Again, if we take the arts of which we were just now 
speaking : — do not arithmetic and the arithmeticians teach us 
the properties of number ? 

Gor. Certainly. 

Soc. And therefore persuade us of them ? 

Gor. Yes. 

Soc. Then arithmetic as well as rhetoric is an artificer of 
persuasion ? 

Gor. Clearly. 

Soc. And if any one asks us what sort of persuasion, and 
about what, — we shall answer, persuasion which teaches the 
quantity of odd and even ; and we shall be able to show that 
454 all the other arts of which we were just now speaking are 
artificers of persuasion, and of what sort, and about what. 

Gor. Very true. 

Soc. Then rhetoric is not the only artificer of persuasion ? 

Gor. True. 

Soc. Seeing, then, that not only rhetoric works by per- 

334 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Gorcias. 

Of what 
persuasion 
is rhetoric 
the arti- 
ficer ? 

Of persua- 
sion in the 
courts and 
assemblies 
about the 
just and 
unjust. 

Knowledge 
and belief 
are not the 
same 

things ; for 
there may 
be a false 
belief, but 
not a false 
knowledge. 

Knowledge and belief. 

suasion, but that other arts do the same, as in the case of 
the painter, a question has arisen which is a very fair one : 
Of what persuasion is rhetoric the artificer, and about what ? 
— is not that a fair way of putting the question ? 

Gor. I think so. 

Soc. Then, if you approve the question, Gorgias, what is 
the answer ? 

Gor . I answer, Socrates, that rhetoric is the art of per- 
suasion in courts of law and other assemblies, as I was just 
now saying, and about the just and unjust. 

Soc . And that, Gorgias, was what I was suspecting to be 
your notion ; yet I would not have you wonder if by-and-by 
I am found repeating a seemingly plain question ; for I ask 
not in order to confute you, but as I was saying that the 
argument may proceed consecutively, and that we may not 
get the habit of anticipating and suspecting the meaning of 
one another’s words ; I would have you develope your own 
views in your own way, whatever may be your hypothesis. 

Gor . I think that you are quite right, Socrates. 

Soc . Then let me raise another question ; there is such 
a thing as ‘ having learned ’ ? 

Gor. Yes. 

Soc . And there is also ‘ having believed ’? 

Gor. Yes. 

Soc. And is the 1 having learned* the same as 1 having 
believed,’ and are learning and belief the same things? 

Gor. In my judgment, Socrates, they are not the same. 

Soc. And your judgment is right, as you may ascertain in 
this way : — If a person were to say to you, * Is there, 
Gorgias, a false belief as well as a true?' — you would reply, 
if I am not mistaken, that there is. 

Gor. Yes. 

Soc. Well, but is there a false knowledge as well as a 
true? 

Gor. No. 

Soc. No, indeed ; and this again proves that knowledge 
and belief differ. 

Gor. Very true. 

Soc. And yet those who have learned as well as those 
who have believed are persuaded ? 

What do we really mean concerning rhetoric ? 

Gor. Just so. 

Soc . Shall we then assume two sorts of persuasion, — one 
which is the source of belief without knowledge, as the other 
is of knowledge ? 

Gor. By all means. 

Soc. And which sort of persuasion does rhetoric create in 
courts of law and other assemblies about the just and unjust, 
the sort of persuasion which gives belief without knowledge, 
or that which gives knowledge ? 

455 Gor. Clearly, Socrates, that which only gives belief. 

Soc. Then rhetoric, as would appear, is the artificer of a 
persuasion which creates belief about the just and unjust, 
but gives no instruction about them ? 

Gor. True. 

Soc. And the rhetorician does not instruct the courts of 
law or other assemblies about things just and unjust, but he 
creates belief about them ; for no one can be supposed to 
instruct such a vast multitude about such high matters in a 
short time ? 

Gor. Certainly not'. 

Soc. Come, then, and let us see what we really mean about 
rhetoric ; for I do not know what my own meaning is as yet. 
When the assembly meets to elect a physician or a ship- 
wright or any other craftsman, will the rhetorician be taken 
into counsel? Surely not. For at every election he ought 
to be chosen who is most skilled ; and, again, when walls 
have to be built or harbours or docks to be constructed, not 
the rhetorician but the master workman will advise ; or when 
generals have to be chosen and an order of battle arranged, 
or a position taken, then the military will advise and not the 
rhetoricians : what do you say, Gorgias ? Since you profess 
to be a rhetorician and a maker of rhetoricians, I cannot do 
better than learn the nature of your art from you. And here 
let me assure you that I have your interest in view as well 
as my own. For likely enough some one or other of the 
young men present might desire to become your pupil, and in 
fact I see some, and a good many too, who have this wish, 
but they would be too modest to question you. And there- 
fore when you are interrogated by me, I would have you 
imagine that you are interrogated by them. ‘What is the 

335 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Gorgias. 

And rhe- 
toric is only 
the creator 
of a belief, 
but gives 
no instruc- 
tion. 

Neither is 
the rheto- 
rician taken 
into counsel 
when any- 
thing has to 
be done. 

336 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Gorgias. 

But, says 
Gorgias, 
he will 
persuade 
people to 
do it. 

The rheto- 
rician more 
than a 
match for 
a man of 
any other 
profession. 

Gorgias and his brother Herodicus . 

use of coming to you, Gorgias ? * they will say — ' about what 
will you teach us to advise the state? — about the just and 
unjust only, or about those other things also which Socrates 
has just mentioned ? 9 How will you answer them ? 

Gor . I like your way of leading us on, Socrates, and I will 
endeavour to reveal to you the whole nature of rhetoric. 
You must have heard, I think, that the docks and the walls 
of the Athenians and the plan of the harbour were devised 
in accordance with the counsels, partly of Themistocles, and 
partly of Pericles, and not at the suggestion of the builders. 

Soc . Such is the tradition, Gorgias, about Themistocles ; 
and I myself heard the speech of Pericles when he advised 
us about the middle wall. 

Gor . And you will observe, Socrates, that when a decision 456 
has to be given in such matters the rhetoricians are the 
advisers ; they are the men who win their point. 

Soc . I had that in my admiring mind, Gorgias, when I 
asked what is the nature of rhetoric, which always appears 
to me, when I look at the matter in this way, to be a marvel 
of greatness. 

Gor \ A marvel, indeed, Socrates, if you only knew how 
rhetoric comprehends and holds under her sway all the 
inferior arts. Let me offer you a striking example of this. 

On several occasions I have been with my brother Herodicus 
or some other physician to see one of his patients, who 
would not allow the physician to give him medicine, or 
apply the knife or hot iron to him ; and I have persuaded 
him tD do for me what he would not do for the physician 
just by the use of rhetoric. And I say that if a rhetorician 
and a physician were to go to any city, and had there to 
argue in the Ecclesia or any other assembly as to which of 
them should be elected state-physician, the physician would 
have no chance ; but he who could speak would be chosen if 
he wished ; and in a contest with a man of any other pro- 
fession the rhetorician more than any one would have the 
power of getting himself chosen, for he can speak more 
persuasively to the multitude than any of them, and on 
any subject. Such is the nature and power of the art 
of rhetoric 1 And yet, Socrates, rhetoric should be used 
like any other competitive art, not against everybody, — the 

33 7 

The apology of Gorgias. 

rhetorician ought not to abuse his strength any more than 
a pugilist or pancratiast or other master of fence ; — because 
he has powers which are more than a match either for 
friend or enemy, he ought not therefore to strike, stab, or 
slay his friends. Suppose a man to have been trained in 
the palestra and to be a skilful boxer, — he in the fulness of 
his strength goes and strikes his father or mother or one of 
his familiars or friends ; but that is no reason why the trainers 
or fencing-masters should be held in detestation or banished 
from the city;— surely not. For they taught their art for a 
good purpose, to be used against enemies and evil-doers, in 
self-defence not in aggression, and others have perverted 
457 their instructions, and turned to a bad use their own strength 
and skill. But not on this account are the teachers bad, 
neither is the art in fault, or bad in itself ; I should rather 
say that those who make a bad use of the art are to blame. 
And the same argument holds good of rhetoric ; for the 
rhetorician can speak against all men and upon any subject, 
— in short, he can persuade the multitude better than 
any other man of anything which he pleases, but he should 
not therefore seek to defraud the physician or any other 
artist of his reputation merely because he has the power ; he 
ought to use rhetoric fairly, as he would also use his athletic 
powers. And if after having become a rhetorician he makes 
a bad use of his strength and skill, his instructor surely 
ought not on that account to be held in detestation or 
banished. For he was intended by his teacher to make 
a good use of his instructions, but he abuses them. And 
therefore he is the person who ought to be held in detesta- 
tion, banished, and put to death, and not his instructor. 

Soc. You, Gorgias, like myself, have had great experience 
of disputations, and you must have observed, I think, that 
they do not always terminate in mutual edification, or in the 
definition by either party of the subjects which they are 
discussing ; but disagreements are apt* to arise— somebody 
says that another has not spoken truly or clearly; and then 
1 they get into a passion and begin to quarrel, both parties 
conceiving that their opponents are arguing from personal 
feeling only and jealousy of themselves, not from any 
interest in the question at issue. And sometimes they will 

VOL. II. L 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Gorgias. 

His pupils 
may make 
a bad use 
of his in- 
structions, 
but he is 
not to be 
blamed for 
this. 

If Gorgias. 
like So- 
crates, is 
one of those 
who rejoice 
in being 
refuted, he 
would like 
to cross- 
examine 
him ; if not, 
not. 

338 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Gorgias, 

Chaere- 

PHON, 

Callicles. 

Delight of 
the audi- 
ence at the 
prospect of 
an argu- 
ment. 

The inconsWwcg of Gorgias. 

go on abusing one another until the company at last are quite 
vexed at themselves for ever listening to such fellows. Why 
do I say this ? Why, because I cannot help feeling that you 
are now saying what is not quite consistent or accordant with 
what you were saying at first about rhetoric. And I am 
afraid to point this out to you, lest you should think that I 
have some animosity against you, and that I speak, not for 
the sake of discovering the truth, but from jealousy of you. 
Now if you are one of my sort, I should like to cross-examine 
you, but if not I will let you alone. And what is my sort ? 458 
you will ask. I am one of those who are very willing to be 
refuted if I say anything which is not true, and very willing 
to refute any one else who says what is not true, and quite as 
ready to be refuted as to refute ; for I hold that this is the 
greater gain of the two, just as the gain is greater of being 
cured of a very great evil than of curing another. For I 
imagine that there is no evil which a man can endure so great 
as an erroneous opinion about the matters of which we are 
speaking; and if you claim to be one of my sort, let us have 
the discussion out, but if you would rather have done, no 
matter ; — let us make an end of it. 

Gor. I should say, Socrates, that I am quite the man whom 
you indicate ; but, perhaps, we ought to consider the audience, 
for, before you came, I had already given a long exhibition, 
and if we proceed the argument may run on to a great length. 
And therefore I think that we should consider whether we 
may not be detaining some part of the company when they 
are wanting to do something else. 

Chaer . You hear the audience cheering, Gorgias and 
Socrates, which shows their desire to listen to you ; and for 
myself, Heaven forbid that I should have any business on 
hand which would take me away from a discussion so 
interesting and so ably maintained. 

Cal . By the gods, Chaerephon, although I have been pre- 
sent at many discussions, I doubt whether I was ever so much 
delighted before, and therefore if you go on discoursing all 
day I shall be the better pleased. 

Soc. I may truly say, Callicles, that I am willing, if 
Gorgias is. 

Gok After all this, Socrates, I should be disgraced if I 

339 

The rhetorician need jpftTy knozv appearance . 

refused, ^specially as I have promised to answer all comers ; 
in accordance with the wishes of the company, then, do you 
begin, and ask of me any question which you like. 

Soc . Let me tell you then, Gorgias, what surprises me in 
your words ; though I dare say that you may be right, and I 
may have misunderstood your meaning. You say that you 
can make any man, who will learn of you, a rhetorician ? 

Gor . Yes. 

Soc. Do you mean that you will teach him to gain the ears 
of the multitude on any subject, and this not by instruction 
459 but by persuasion ? 

Gor. Quite so. 

Soc. You were saying, in fact, that the rhetorician will 
have greater powers of persuasion than the physician even 
in a matter of health ? 

Gor. Yes, with the multitude, — that is. 

Soc. You mean to say, with the ignorant; for with those 
who know he cannot be supposed to have greater powers of 
persuasion. 

Gor. Very true. 

Soc. But if he is to have more power of persuasion than 
the physician, he will have greater power than he who knows ? 

Gor. Certainly. 

Soc. Although he is not a physician : — is he ? 

Gor. No, 

Soc. And he who is not a physician must, obviously, be 
ignorant of what the physician knows. 

Gor. Clearly. 

Soc. Then, when the rhetorician is more persuasive than 
the physician, the ignorant is more persuasive with the 
ignorant than he who has knowledge? — is not that the 
inference ? 

Gor. In the case supposed yes. 

Soc. And the same holds of the relation of rhetoric to all 
the other arts ; the rhetorician need not know the truth about 
things ; he has only to discover some way of persuading 
the ignorant that he has more knowledge than those who 
know? 

Gor. Yes, Socrates, and is not this a great comfort? — not 
to have learned the other arts, but the art of rhetoric only, 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Gorgias. 

The rheto- 
rician has 
greater 
powers of 
persuasion 
with the 
mob than 
e. g. the 
physician. 

The more 
ignorant 
therefore 
will have 
more power 
than he 
who knows. 

340 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Gorgias. 

And is the 
rhetorician 
as ignorant 
of good and 
evil, just 
and unjust, 
as about 
special arts; 
or will 
Gorgias 
teach him 
these things 
first ? 

He must 
be taught. 

The false analogy of the arts . 

and yet to be in no way inferior to the professors of 
them? 

Soc. Whether the rhetorician is or is not inferior on this 
account is a question which we will hereafter examine if the 
enquiry is likely to be of any service to us; but I would 
rather begin by asking, whether he is or is not as ignorant of 
the just and unjust, base and honourable, good and evil, as 
he is of medicine and the other arts ; I mean to say, does 
he really know anything of what is good and evil, base or 
honourable, just of unjust in them ; or has he only a way 
with the ignorant of persuading them that he not knowing is 
to be esteemed to know more about these things than some 
one else who knows ? Or must the pupil know these things 
and come to you knowing them before he can acquire the art 
of rhetoric? If he is ignorant, you who are the teacher of 
rhetoric will not teach him — it is not your business ; but 
you will make him seem to the multitude to know them, 
when he does not know them ; and seem to be a good man, 
when he is not. Or will you be unable to teach him rhetoric 460 
at all, unless he knows the truth of these things first ? What 
is to be said about all this ? By heaven, Gorgias, I wish that 
you would reveal to me the power of rhetoric, as you were 
saying that you would. 

Gor. Well, Socrates, I suppose that if the pupil does chance 
not to know them, he will have to learn of me these things as 
well. 

Soc . Say no more, for there you are right ; and so he 
whom you make a rhetorician must either know the nature 
of the just and unjust already, or he must be taught by 
you. 

Gor . Certainly. 

Soc. Well, and is not he who has learned carpentering a 
carpenter ? 

Gor. Yes. 

Soc. And he who lias learned music a musician ? 

Gor. Yes. 

Soc. And he who has learned medicine is a physician, in 
like manner? He who has learned anything whatever is 
that which his knowledge makes him. 

Gor. Certainly. 

The inconsistency of Gorgias pointed out . 

Soc. And in the same way, he who has learned what is just 
is just ? 

Gor. To be sure. 

Soc. And he who is just may be supposed to do what is 
just? 

Gor. Yes. 

Soc. And must not 1 the just man always desire to do what 
is j ust ? 

Gor. That is clearly the inference. 

Soc. Surely, then, the just man will never consent to do 
injustice ? 

Gor. Certainly not. 

Soc . And according to the argument the rhetorician must 
be a just man ? 

Gor. Yes. 

Soc. And will therefore never be willing to do injustice ? 

Gor. Clearly not. 

Soc. But do you remember saying just now that the trainer 
is not to be accused or banished if the pugilist makes a wrong 
use of his pugilistic art ; and in like manner, if the rhetorician 
makes a bad and unjust use of his rhetoric, that is not to be 
laid to the charge of his teacher, who is not to be banished, 
but the wrong-doer himself who made a bad use of his rhetoric 
— he is to be banished— was not that said? 

Gor. Yes, it was. 

Soc. But now we are affirming that the aforesaid rhetorician 
will never have done injustice at all ? 

Gor. True. 

Soc. And at the very outset, Gorgias, it was said that 
rhetoric treated of discourse, not [like arithmetic) about odd 
and even, but about just and unjust ? Was not this said ? 

Gor. Yes. 

Soc. I was thinking at the time, when I heard you saying 
so, that rhetoric, which is always discoursing about justice, 
could not possibly be an unjust thing. But when you added, 
shortly afterwards, that the rhetorician might make a bad use 
461 of rhetoric I noted with surprise the inconsistency into which 
you had fallen ; and I said, that if you thought, as I did, that 

34 * 

Gorgias. 

SoCHATES, 

Gorgias. 

He who 
has learned 
what is just, 
is admitted 
to be just 
and to act 
justly. But 
if so, the 
rhetorician, 
having 
learned 
what is just, 
must act 
justly, and 
can never 
therefore 
make an ill 
use of rhe- 
toric. 

1 Omitting the words rbv faropiKhv 8bccuov that and 84 in next clause. 

342 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

The para- 
doxes of 
Socrates 
arouse the 
ire of Polus. 

Socrates 
is willing 
enough to 
receive his 
correction, 
if he will 
only be 
brief. 

‘ Am I to 
be deprived 
of speech 
in a free 
state?’ 

* Am I to be 
compelled 
to listen ? ' 

A change in the parts . 

there was a gain in being refuted, there would be an advantage 
in going on with the question, but if not, I would leave off. 

And in the course of our investigations, as you will see your- 
self, the rhetorician has been acknowledged to be incapable 
of making an unjust use of rhetoric, or of willingness to do 
injustice. By the dog, Gorgias, there will be a great deal of 
discussion, before we get at the truth of all this. 

Polus. And do even you, Socrates, seriously believe what 
you are now saying about rhetoric ? What ! because Gorgias 
was ashamed to deny that the rhetorician knew the just and 
the honourable and the good, and admitted that to any one 
who came to him ignorant of them he could teach them, 
and then out of this admission there arose a contradiction — 
the thing which you so dearly love, and to which not he, but 
you, brought the argument by your captious questions — [do 
you seriously believe that there is any truth in all this?] For 
will any one ever acknowledge that he does not know, or 
cannot teach, the nature of justice ? The truth is, that there 
is great want of manners in bringing the argument to such a 
pass. 

Soc. Illustrious Polus, the reason why we provide ourselves 
with friends and children is, that when we get old and 
stumble, a younger generation may be at hand to set us on 
our legs again in our words and in our actions : and now, if I 
and Gorgias are stumbling, here are you who should raise us 
up ; and I for my part engage to retract any error into which 
you may think that I have fallen— upon one condition : 

Pol. What condition ? 

Soc. That you contract, Polus, the prolixity of speech in 
which you indulged at first. 

Pol. What ! do you mean that I may not use as many 
words as I please ? 

Soc. Only to think, my friend, that having come on a visit 
to Athens, which is the most free-spoken state in Hellas, you 
when you got there, and you alone, should be deprived of the 
power of speech — that would be hard indeed. But then con- 
sider my case : — shall not I be very hardly used, if, when you 
are making a long oration, and refusing to answer what you 
are asked, I am compelled to stay and listen to you, and may 462 
not go away ? I say rather, if you have a real interest in the 

Socrates asks instead of answering . 

343 

argument, or, to repeat my former expression, have any Gorgias. 
desire to set it on its legs, take back any statement which you Socrates, 
please ; and in your turn ask and answer, like myself and PoLUS * 
Gorgias— refute and be refuted : for I suppose that you would 
claim to know what Gorgias knows— would you not? 

Pol Yes. 

Soc . And you, like him, invite any one to ask you about 
anything which he pleases, and you will know how to answer 
him ? 

Pol To be sure. 

Soc. And now, which will you do, ask or answer ? 

Pol I will ask ; and do you answer me, Socrates, the same 
question which Gorgias, as you suppose, is unable to answer : 

What is rhetoric ? 

Soc. Do you mean what sort of an art ? 

Pol Yes. 

Soc. To say the truth, Polus, it is not an art at all, in my Socrates in 

opinion. his answer 

r . contrives to 

Pol Then what, in your opinion, is rhetoric ? give Polus 

Soc. A thing which, as I was lately reading in a book of alesson * 
yours, you say that you have made an art. 

Pol What thing ? 

Soc. I should say a sort of experience. 

Pol Does rhetoric seem to you to be an experience ? 

Soc. That is my view, but you may be of another mind. 

Pol An experience in what ? 

Soc. An experience in producing a sort of delight and 
gratification. 

Pol And if able to gratify others, must not rhetoric be 
a fine thing ? 

Soc. What are you saying, Polus ? Why do you ask me 
whether rhetoric is a fine thing or not, when I have not as 
yet told you what rhetoric is ? 

Pol Did I not hear you say that rhetoric was a sort of 
experience ? 

Soc. Will you, who are so desirous to gratify others, afford 
a slight gratification to me ? 

Pol I will. 

Soc. Will you ask me, what sort of an art is cookery ? 

Pol What sort of an art is cookery ? 

Once more , ' What is rhetoric ? ' 

344 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus, 

Gorgias. 

He puts 
rhetoric 
and cook- 
ery in the 
same class ; 

and that 
class is 
flattery. 

Soc. Not an art at all, Polus. 

Pol. What then ? 

Soc. I should say an experience. 

Pol. In what ? I wish that you would explain to me. 

Soc. An experience in producing a sort of delight and 
gratification, Polus. 

Pol . Then are cookery and rhetoric the same ? 

Soc. No, they are only different parts of the same pro- 
fession. 

Pol. Of what profession ? 

Soc. I am afraid that the truth may seem discourteous ; 
and I hesitate to answer, lest Gorgias should imagine that 
I am making fun of his own profession. For whether or 
no this is that art of rhetoric which Gorgias practises I 463 
really cannot tell : — from what he was just now saying, 
nothing appeared of what he thought of his art, but the 
rhetoric which I mean is a part of a not very creditable 
whole. 

Gor. A part of what, Socrates ? Say what you mean, and 
never mind me. 

Soc. In my opinion then, Gorgias, the whole of which 
rhetoric is a part is not an art at all, but the habit of a 
bold and ready wit, which knows how to manage mankind : 
this habit I sum up under the word ‘ flattery ; * and it appears 
to me to have many other parts, one of which is cookery, 
which may seem to be an art, but, as I maintain, is only an 
experience or routine and not an art: — another part is 
rhetoric, and the art of attiring and sophistry are two 
others: thus there are four branches, and four different 
things answering to them. And Polus may ask, if he likes, 
for he has not as yet been informed, what part of flattery 
is rhetoric : he did not see that I had not yet answered him 
when he proceeded to ask a further question : Whether I 
do not think rhetoric a fine thing ? But I shall not tell him 
whether rhetoric is a fine thing or not, until I have first 
answered, 'What is rhetoric ?’ For that would not be 
right, Polus; but I shall be happy to answer, if you will 
ask me, What part of flattery is rhetoric ? 

Pol. I will ask, and do you answer ? What part of flattery 
is rhetoric ? 

Shams and flatteries. 

Soc . Will you understand my answer ? Rhetoric, accord- 
ing to my view, is the ghost or counterfeit of a part of 
politics. 

Pol. And noble or ignoble ? 

Soc . Ignoble, I should say, if I am compelled to answer, 
for I call what is bad ignoble though I doubt whether 
you understand what I was saying before. 

Gor . Indeed, Socrates, I cannot say that I understand 
myself. 

Soc. I do not wonder, Gorgias ; for I have not as yet 
explained myself, and our friend Polus, colt by name and 
colt by nature, is apt to run away 1 . 

Gor. Never mind him, but explain to me what you mean 
by saying that rhetoric is the counterfeit of a part of politics. 

Soc. I will try, then, to explain my notion of rhetoric, and 
464 if I am mistaken, my friend Polus shall refute me. We may 
assume the existence of bodies and of souls ? 

Gor. Of course. 

Soc. You would further admit that there is a good con- 
dition of either of them ? 

Gor. Yes. 

Soc. Which condition may not be really good, but good 
only in appearance ? I mean to say, that there are many 
persons who appear to be in good health, and whom only 
a physician or trainer will discern at first sight not to be in 
good health. 

Gor. True. 

Soc. And this applies not only to the body, but also to the 
soul : in either there may be that which gives the appearance 
of health and not the reality ? 

Gor. Yes, certainly. 

Soc. And now I will endeavour to explain to you more 
clearly what I mean : The soul and body being two, have 
two arts corresponding to them : there is the art of politics 
attending on the soul; and another # art attending on the 
body, of which I know no single name, but which may be 
described as having two divisions, one of them gymnastic, 
and the other medicine. And in politics there is a legislative 

345 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Poll’s, 

Gorgias. 

Rhetoric is 
the shadow 
of a part of 
politics. 

' But what 
in the world 
does this 
mean ? ’ 

Returning 
to first 
principles, 
Socrates 
assumes 
the exist- 
ence of 
souls and 
bodies 
which may 
or may not 
be in a 
good con- 
dition, real 
or ap- 
parent. 

To the soul 
corresponds 
the art of 
politics 
which has 
two parts, 
legislation 
and justice, 
and to the 
body cor- 

1 There is an untranslatable play on the name ‘ Polus,’ which means ‘ a colt.’ 

346 

Corgias. 

Socrates. 

responds 
another 
nameless 
art of train- 
ing which 
has two 
parts, medi- 
cine and 
gymnastic ; 
and these 
four have 
four shams 
corre- 
sponding 
to them. 

The shams 
are cook- 
ing, dress- 
ing up, 
sophistry, 
rhetoric. 

Rhetoric and Sophistic . 

part, which answers to gymnastic, as justice does to medicine ; 
and the two parts run into one another, justice having to do 
with the same subject as legislation, and medicine with the 
same subject as gymnastic, but with a difference. Now, 
seeing that there are these four arts, two attending on the 
body and two on the soul for their highest good; flattery : 
knowing, or rather guessing their natures, has distributed 
herself into four shams or simulations of them ; she puts 
on the likeness of some one or other of them, and pretends 
to be that which she simulates, and having no regard for 
men’s highest interests, is ever making pleasure the bait of 
the unwary, and deceiving them into the belief that she is 
of the highest value to them. Cookery simulates the dis- 
guise of medicine, and pretends to know what food is the 
best for the body; and if the physician and the cook had 
to enter into a competition in which children were the 
judges, or men who had no more sense than children, as 
to which of them best understands the goodness or badness 
of food, the physician would be starved to death. A flattery 
I deem this to be and of an ignoble sort, Polus, for to you 465 
I am now addressing myself, because it aims at pleasure 
without any thought of the best. An art I do not call it, but 
only an experience, because it is unable to explain or to give 
a reason of the nature of its own applications. And I do not 
call any irrational thing an art ; but if you dispute my words, 

I am prepared to argue in defence of them. 

Cookery, then, I maintain to be a flattery which takes the 
form of medicine ; and tiring, in like manner, is a flattery 
which takes the form of gymnastic, and is knavish, false, 
ignoble, illiberal, working deceitfully by the help of lines, and 
colours, and enamels, and garments, and making men affect 
a spurious beauty to the neglect of the true beauty which is 
given by gymnastic. 

I would rather not be tedious, and therefore I will only 
say, after the manner ‘of the geometricians, (for I think that 
by this time you will be able to follow,) 

as tiring : gymnastic : : cookery : medicine ; 
or rather, 

as tiring : gymnastic : : sophistry : legislation ; 

Hard words pass between Polus and Socrates . 

and 

as cookery : medicine : : rhetoric ’.justice. 

And this, I say, is the natural difference between the rhetori- 
cian and the sophist, but by reason of their near connection, 
they are apt to be jumbled up together; neither do they 
know what to make of themselves, nor do other men know 
what to make of them. For if the body presided over itself, 
and were not under the guidance of the soul, and the soul 
did not discern and discriminate between cookery and 
medicine, but the body was made the judge of them, and 
the rule of judgment was the bodily delight which was given 
by them, then the word of Anaxagoras, that word with which 
you, friend Polus, are so well acquainted, would prevail far and 
wide : ' Chaos ’ would come again, and cookery, health, and 
medicine would mingle in an indiscriminate mass. And now 
I have told you my notion of rhetoric, which is, in relation to 
the soul, what cookery is to the body. I may have been 
inconsistent in making a long speech, when I would not 
allow you to discourse at length. But I think that I may be 
excused, because you did not understand me, and could 
make no use of my answer when I spoke shortly, and there- 
466 fore I had to enter into an explanation. And if I show an 
equal inability to make use of yours, I hope that you will 
speak at equal length ; but if I am able to understand you, 
let me have the benefit of your brevity, as is only fair : And 
now you may do what you please with my answer. 

Pol. What do you mean ? do you think that rhetoric is 
flattery ? 

Soc. Nay, I said a part of flattery; if at your age, Polus, 
you cannot remember, what will you do by-and-by, when 
you get older ? 

Pol . And are the good rhetoricians meanly regarded in 
states, under the idea that they are flatterers ? 

Soc. Is that a question or the beginning of a speech ? 

Pol. I am asking a question. 

Soc. Then my answer is, that they are not regarded at all. 

Pol. How not regarded? Have they not very great 
power in states ? 

Soc. Not if you mean to say that power is a good to the 
possessor. 

347 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

Socrates 
excuses 
himself for 
the length 
at which he 
has spoken. 

Polus can- 
not be 
made to 
understand 
that rheto- 
ricians have 

24 » 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polls. 

no real 
power in a 
state, be- 
cause they 
do not do 
what they 
ultimately 
will, but 
only what 
they think 
best. 

For a fool 
and a flat- 
terer cannot 
know what 
is good. 

Polus is greatly irritated by Socrates . 

Pol. And that is what I do mean to say. 

Soc. Then, if so, I think that they have the least power of 
all the citizens. 

Pol. What ! are they not like tyrants ? They kill and 
despoil and exile any one whom they please. 

Soc. By the dog, Polus, I cannot make out at each deliver- 
ance of yours, whether you are giving an opinion of your 
own, or asking a question of me. 

Pol. I am asking a question of you. 

Soc. Yes, my friend, but you ask two questions at once. 

Pol. How two questions ? 

Soc. Why, did you not say just now that the rhetoricians 
are like tyrants, and that they kill and despoil or exile any 
one whom they please ? 

Pol. I did. 

Soc. Well then, I say to you that here are two questions 
in one, and I will answer both of them. And I tell you, 
Polus, that rhetoricians and tyrants have the least possible 
power in states, as I was just now saying; for they do 
literally nothing which they will, but only what they think 
best. 

Pol. And is not that a great power ? 

Soc. Polus has already said the reverse. 

Pol. Said the reverse ! nay, that is what I assert. 

Soc. No, by the great — what do you call him? — not you, 
for you say that great power is a good to him # who has the 
power. 

Pol. I do. 

Soc. And would you maintain that if a fool does what he 
thinks best, this is a good, and would you call this great 
power ? 

Pol. I should not. 

Soc. Then you must prove that the rhetorician is not a 
fool, and that rhetoric is an art and not a flattery— and so 467 
you will have refuted me ; but if you leave me unrefuted, 
why, the rhetoricians who do what they think best in states, 
and the tyrants, will have nothing upon which to congratulate 
themselves, if, as you say, power be indeed a good, admitting 
at the same time that what is done without sense is an evil. 

Pol. Yes ; I admit that. 

349 

What men ivill is not what they think best. 

Soc . How then can the rhetoricians or the tyrants have 
great power in states, unless Polus can refute Socrates, and 
prove to him that they do as they will ? 

Pol. This fellow — 

Soc. I say that they do not do as they will ; — now refute 
me. 

Pol. Why, have you not already said that they do as they 
think best? 

Soc. And I say so still. 

Pol. Then surely they do as they will ? 

Soc. I deny it. 

Pol. But they do what they think best ? 

Soc. Aye. 

Pol. That, Socrates, is monstrous and absurd. 

Soc. Good words, good Polus, as I may say in your own 
peculiar style ; but if you have any questions to ask of 
me, either prove that I am in error or give the answer 
yourself. 

Pol. Very well, I am willing to answer that I may know 
what you mean. 

Soc. Do men appear to you to will that which they do, or 
to will that further end for the sake of which they do a 
thing? when they take medicine, fof example, at the bidding 
of a physician, do they will the drinking of the medicine 
which is painful, or the health for the sake of which they 
drink? 

Pol. Clearly, the health. 

Soc. And when men go on a voyage or engage in business, 
they do not will that which they are doing at the time ; for 
who would desire to take the risk of a voyage or the trouble 
of business? — But they will, to have the wealth for the sake 
of which they go on a voyage. 

Pol. Certainly. 

Soc. And is not this universally true? If a man does 
something for the sake of something ^lse, he wills not that 
which he does, but that for the sake of which he does it. 

Pol. Yes. 

Soc. And are not all things either good or evil, or inter- 
mediate and indifferent ? 

Pol. To be sure, Socrates. 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Por.rs. 

A man can- 
not will 
unless he 
knows the 
ultimate 
good for 
the sake of 
which he 
acts. 

Good is the end of human action . 

Soc. Wisdom and health and wealth and the like you 
would call goods, and their opposites evils ? 

Pol. I should. 

Soc. And the things which are neither good nor evil, and 468 
which partake sometimes of the nature of good and at other 
times of evil, or of neither, are such as sitting, walking, 
running, sailing ; or, again, wood, stones, and the like : — 
these are the things which you call neither good nor evil ? 

Pol. Exactly so. 

Soc. Are these indifferent things done for the sake of the 
good, or the good for the sake of the indifferent ? 

Pol. Clearly, the indifferent for the sake of the good. 

Soc. When we walk we walk for the sake of the good, and 
under the idea that it is better to walk, and when we stand 
we stand equally for the sake of the good ? 
v Pol. Yes. 

Soc. And when we kill a man we kill him or exile him or 
despoil him of his goods, because, as we think, it will con- 
duce to our good ? 

Pol. Certainly. 

Soc. Men who do any of these things do them for the sake 
of the good ? 

Pol. Yes. 

Soc. And did we not admit that in doing something for the 
sake of something else, we do not will those things which we 
do, but that other thing for the sake of which we do them ? 

Pol. Most true. 

Soc . Then we do not will simply to kill a man or to exile 
him or to despoil him of his goods, but we will to do that 
which conduces to our good, and if the act is not conducive 
to our good we do not will it ; for we will, as you say, that 
which is our good, but that which is neither good nor evil, or 
simply evil, we do not will. Why are you silent, Polus? 

Am I not right ? 

Pol. You are right. ' 

Soc. Hence we may infer, that if any one, whether he be 
a tyrant or a rhetorician, kills another or exiles another or 
deprives him of his property, under the idea that the act is 
for his own interests when really not for his owj interests, he 
may be said to do what seems best to him ? 

350 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

Will is the correlative of good. 

35i 

Pol Yes. 

So?. But does he do what he wills if he does what is evil ? 
Why do you not answer ? 

Pol Well, I suppose not. 

Soc. Then if great power is a good as you allow, will such 
a one have great power in a state ? 

Pol He will not. 

Soc . Then I was right in saying that a man may do what 
seems good to him in a state, and not have great power, and 
not do what he wills ? 

Pol As though you, Socrates, would not like to have the 
power of doing what seemed good to you in the state, rather 
than not; you would not be jealous when you saw any one 
killing or despoiling or imprisoning whom he pleased, 
Oh, no ! 

469 Soc . Justly or unjustly, do you mean? 

Pol I11 either case is he not equally to be envied ? 

Soc . Forbear, Polus ! 

Pol. Why # forbear ’ ? 

Soc. Because you ought not to envy wretches who are not 
to be envied, but only to pity them. 

Pol And are those of whom I spoke wretches ? 

Soc. Yes, certainly they are. 

Pol And so you think that he who slays any one whom he 
pleases, and justly slays him, is pitiable and wretched? 

Soc. No, I do not say that of him : but neither do I think 
that he is to be envied. 

Pol Were you not saying just now that he is wretched ? 

Soc. Yes, my friend, if he killed another unjustly, in which 
case he is also to be pitied ; and he is not to be envied if he 
killed him justly. 

Pol At any rate you will allow that he who is unjustly put 
to death is wretched, and to be pitied ? 

Soc. Not so much, Polus, as he who kills him, and not so 
much as he wh<y is justly killed. • 

Pol How can that be, Socrates ? 

Soc. That may very well be, inasmuch as doing injustice is 
the greatest of evils. 

Pol But is it the greatest? Is not suffering injustice a 
greater evil ? * 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

No man 
does what 
he wills 
who does 
what is evil. 

He who 
makes a 
bad use of 
power is not 
to be en- 
vied, but 
pitied. 

352 

Gorgias. 

SOCRATFS, 

POLUS. 

Better to 
suffer than 
to do injus- 
tice. 

A tyrant 
has no real 
power any 
more than 
a man who 
runs out 
into the 
Agora 
carrying a 
dagger. 

A paradox. 

Soc . Certainly not. 

Pol . Then would you rather suffer than do injustice ? 

Soc . I should not like either, but if I must choose between 
them, I would rather suffer than do. 

Pol. Then you would not wish to be a tyrant ? 

Soc. Not if you mean by tyranny what I mean. 

Pol. I mean, as I said before, the power of doing whatever 
seems good to you in a state, killing, banishing, doing in all 
things as you like. 

Soc. Well then, illustrious friend, when I have said my 
say, do you reply to me. Suppose that I go into a crowded 
Agora, and take a dagger under my arm. Polus, I say to 
you, I have just acquired rare power, and become a tyrant ; 
for if I think that any of these men whom you see ought to 
be put to death, the man whom I have a mind to kill is as 
good as dead ; and if I am disposed to break his head or 
tear his garment, he will have his head broken or his garment 
torn in an instant. Such is my great power in this city. 
And if you do not believe me, and I show you the dagger, 
you would probably reply : Socrates, in that sort of way any 
one may have great power— he may burn any house which he 
pleases, and the docks and triremes of the Athenians, and all 
their other vessels, whether public or private — but can you 
believe that this mere doing as you think best is great 
power ? 

Pol. Certainly not such doing as this. 

Soc. But can you tell me why you disapprove of such a 470 
power ? 

Pol. I can. 

Soc. Why then ? 

Pol. Why, because he who did as you say would be certain 
to be punished. 

Soc. And punishment is an evil ? 

Pol. Certainly. 

Soc. And you wotfld admit once more, my good sir, that 
great power is a benefit to a man if his actions turn out to his 
advantage, and that this is the meaning of great power ; and 
if not, then his power is an evil and is no power. But let us 
look at the matter in another way do we not acknowledge 
that the things of which we were speaking, the infliction of 

353 

Is A rckelaus happy ? 

death, and exile, and the deprivation of property are some- 
times a good and sometimes not a good ? 

Pol. Certainly. 

Soc . About that you and I may be supposed to agree ? 

Pol. Yes. 

Soc. Tell me, then, when do you say that they are good 
and when that Jthey are evil — what principle do you lay 
down ? 

Pol. I would rather, Socrates, that you should answer as 
well as ask that question. 

Soc. Well, Polus, since you would rather have the answer 
from me, I say that they are good when they are just, and 
evil when they are unjust. 

Pol. You are hard of refutation, Socrates, but might not a 
child refute that statement ? 

Soc. Then I shall be very grateful to the child, and equally 
grateful to you if you will refute me and deliver me from my 
foolishness. And I hope that refute me you will, and not 
weary of doing good to a friend. 

Pol. Yes, Socrates, and 1 need not go far or appeal to 
antiquity ; events which happened only a few days ago are 
enough to refute you, and to prove that many men who do 
wrong are happy. 

Soc. What events ? 

Pol. You see, I presume, that Archelaus the son of Per- 
diccas is now the ruler of Macedonia ? 

Soc . At any rate I hear that he is. 

Pol. And do you think that he is happy or miserable ? 

Soc. I cannot say, Polus, for I have never had any ac- 
quaintance with him. 

Pol. And cannot you tell at once, and without having an 
acquaintance with him, whether a man is happy ? 

Soc. Most certainly not. 

Pol. Then clearly, Socrates, you would say that you 
did not even know whether the greaf king was a happy 
man ? 

Soc. And I should speak the truth ; fo* I do not know how 
he stands in the matter of education and justice. 

Pol. What ! and does all happiness consist in this ? 

Soc. Yes, indeed, Polus, that is my doctrine ; the men and 

VOL. II. 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

Even what 
we com- 
monly 
call the 
evils of life 
may be 
goods in 
disguise. 

Is the 
great king 
happy ? 

A a 

354 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

Polus at- 
tempts to 
prove the 
happiness 
of the un- 
just by the 
story of 
Archelaus, 
who has 
lately by 
many 
crimes 
gained the 
throne of 
Macedonia. 

Socrates 
sees no 
force in 
such argu- 
ments. 

Certainly not , if ffi is wicked \ 

women who are gentle and good are also happy, as I main- 
tain, and the unjust and evil ar£ miserable. 

Pol. Then, according to your doctrine, the said Archelaus 471 
is miserable ? 

Soc. Yes, my friend, if he is wicked. 

Pol. That he is wicked I cannot deny ; for he had no title 
at all to the throne which he now occupies, he being only the 
son of a woman who was the slave of Alcetas the brother of 
Perdiccas ; he himself therefore in strict right was the slave 
of Alcetas ; and if he had meant to do rightly he would have 
remained his slave, and then, according to your doctrine, 
he would have been happy. But now he is unspeakably 
miserable, for he has been guilty of the greatest crimes : in 
the first place he invited his uncle and master, Alcetas, to 
come to him, under the pretence that he would restore to 
him the throne which Perdiccas had usurped, and after 
entertaining him and his son Alexander, who was # his own 
cousin, and nearly of an age with him, and making them 
drunk, he threw them into a waggon and carried them off by 
night, and slew them, and got both of them out of the way; 
and when he had done all this wickedness he never dis- 
covered that he was the most miserable of all men, atad was 
very far from repenting : shall I tell you how he showed his 
remorse ? he had a younger brother, a child of seven years 
old, who was the legitimate son of Perdiccas, and to him 
of right the kingdom belonged ; Archelaus, however, had no 
mind to bring him up as he ought and restore the kingdom to 
him ; that was not his notion of happiness ; but not long 
afterwards he threw him into a well and drowned him, and 
declared to his mother Cleopatra that he had fallen in while 
running after a goose, and had been killed. And now as he 
is the greatest criminal of all the Macedonians, he may be 
supposed to be the most miserable and not the happiest 
of them, and I dare say that there are many Athenians, and 
you would be at the' head of them, who would rather be any 
other Macedonian than Archelaus ! 

Soc. I praised you at first, Polus, for being a rhetorician 
rather than a reasoner. And this, as I suppose, is the sort 
of argument with which you fancy that a child might refute 
me, and by which I stand refuted when I say that the unjust 

355 

Socrates^ctlone in hi/ opinion . 

man is not happy. But, my good friend, where is the 
refutation? I cannot admit a word which you have been 
saying. 

Pol \ That is because you will not; for you surely must 
think as I do. 

Soc . Not so, my simple friend, but because you will refute 
me after the manner which rhetoricians practise in courts of 
law. For there the one party think that they refute the 
other when they bring forward a number of witnesses of 
good repute in proof of their allegations, and their adversary 
472 has only a single one or none at all. But this kind of proof 
is of no value where truth is the aim ; a man may often be 
sworn down by a multitude of false witnesses who have a 
great air of respectability. And in this argument nearly 
every one, Athenian and stranger alike, would be on your 
side, if you should bring witnesses in disproof of my state- 
ment; — you may, if you will, summon Nicias the son of 
Niceratus, and let his brothers, who gave the row of tripods 
which stand in the precincts of Dionysus, come with him ; or 
you may summon Aristocrates, the son of Scellius, who is 
the giver of that famous offering which is at Delphi ; summon, 
if you will, the whole house of Pericles, or any other great 
Athenian family whom you choose ; — they will all agree with 
you : I only am left alone and cannot agree, for you do not 
convince me ; although you produce many false witnesses 
against me, in the hope of depriving me of my inheritance, 
which is the truth. But I consider that nothing worth speaking 
of will have been effected by me unless I make you the one 
witness of my words ; nor by you, unless you make me the one 
witness of yours ; no matter about the rest of the world. For 
there are two ways of refutation, one which is yours and that 
of the world in general ; but mine is of another sort — let us 
compare them, and see in what they differ. For, indeed, we 
are at issue about matters which to # know is honourable 
and not to know disgraceful ; to know or not to know 
happiness and misery— that is the chief of them. And what 
knowledge can be nobler? or what "ignorance more dis- 
graceful than this? And therefore I will begin by asking 
you whether you do not think that a man who is unjust 
and doing injustice can be happy, seeing that you think 

a a 2 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

The multi- 
tude of wit- 
nesses are 
nothing to 
him. 

He must 
convince 
his oppo- 
nent and 
himself by 
argument. 

356 

Gorgias, 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

According 
to Polus 
the unjust 
man may 
be happy 
if he is un- 
punished : 
Socrates 
maintains 
that he is 
more 
happy, or 
less un- 
happy, if he 
meets with 
retribution. 

A greater paradox than the last ; 

Archelaus unjust, and yet happy? May I assume this to be 
your opinion ? 

Pol. Certainly. 

Soc. But I say that this is an impossibility — here is one 
point about which we are at issue : — very good. And do you 
mean to say also that if he meets with retribution and punish- 
ment he will still be happy ? 

Pol. Certainly not ; in that case he will be most miserable. 

Soc. On the other hand, if the unjust be not punished, then, 
according to you, he will be happy ? 

Pol. Yes. 

Soc. But in my opinion, Polus, the unjust or doer of unjust 
actions is miserable in any case, — more miserable, however, if 
he be not punished and does not meet with retribution, and 
less miserable if he be punished and meets with retribution at 
the hands of gods and men. 

Pol. You are maintaining a strange doctrine, Socrates. 

Soc. I shall try to make you agree with me, O my friend, 
for as a friend I regard you. Then these are the points at 
issue between us— are they not ? 1 was saying that to do is 

worse than to suffer injustice? 

Pol. Exactly so. 

Soc. And you said the opposite ? 

Pol. Yes. 

Soc. I said also that the wicked are miserable, and you re- 
futed me ? 

Pol. By Zeus I did. 

Soc. In your own opinion, Polus. 

Pol. Yes, and I rather suspect that I was in the right. 

Soc. You further said that the wrong-doer is happy if he 
be unpunished ? 

Pol . Certainly. 

Soc. And I affirm that he is most miserable, and that those 
who are punished are less miserable— are you going to refute 
this proposition also *? 

Pol. A proposition which is harder of refutation than the 
other, Socrates. 0 

Soc. Say rather, Polus, impossible ; for who can refute the 
truth ? 

Pol. What do you mean? If a man is detected in an 

473 

357 

which Polus begins by laughing at ; 

unjust attempt to make himself a tyrant, and when detected 
is racked, mutilated, has his eyes burned out, and after having 
had all sorts of great injuries inflicted on him, and having 
seen his wife and children suffer the like, is at last impaled 
or tarred and burned alive, will he be happier than if he 
escape and become a tyrant, and continue all through life 
doing what he likes and holding the reins of government, the 
envy and admiration both of citizens and strangers ? Is that 
the paradox which, as you say, cannot be refuted ? 

Soc. There again, noble Polus, you are raising hobgoblins 
instead of refuting me; just now you were calling witnesses 
against me. But please to refresh my memory a little ; did 
you say — * in an unjust attempt to make himself a tyrant’ ? 

Pol Yes, I did. 

Soc . Then I say that neither of them will be happier than ' 
the other,- neither he who unjustly acquires a tyranny, nor 
he who suffers in the attempt, for of two miserables one 
cannot be the happier, but that he who escapes and becomes 
a tyrant is the more miserable of the two. Do you laugh, 
Polus? Well, this is a new kind of refutation, — when any 
one says anything, instead of refuting him to laugh at him. 

Pol. But do you not think, Socrates, that you have been 
sufficiently refuted, when you say that which no human being 
will allow ? Ask the company. 

Soc . O Polus, I am not a public man, and only last year, 
when my tribe were serving as Prytanes, and it became my 
duty as their president to take the votes, there was a laugh at 
474 me, because I was unable to take them. And as I failed 
then, you must not ask me to count the suffrages of the 
company now ; but if, as I was saying, you have no better 
argument than numbers, let me have a turn, and do you 
make trial of the sort of proof which, as I think, is required ; 
for I shall produce one witness only of the truth of my words, 
and he is the person with whom I am arguing ; his suffrage I 
know how to take ; but with the man^ I have nothing to do, 
and do not even address myself to them. May I ask then 
whether you will answer in turn and have your words put to 
the proof? For I certainly think that I and you and every 
man do really believe, that to do is a greater evil than to 
suffer injustice : and not to be punished than to be punished. 

Govgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

What non- 
sense ! 

Do you 
mean that 
the man 
who expires 
among tor- 
tures is 
happier 
than the 
successful 
tyrant ? 

Neither is 
to be called 
happy if 
both are 
wicked. 

Why refute 

what 

nobody 

believes? 

Ask the 

company. 

Socrates 
never coul 
count 
heads. 
[This is his 
description 
of one of 
the noblest 
actions of 
his life. J 

Say rather, 
why affirm 
what every 
body 
knows ? 

358 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

Polus, while 
denying 
that to do 
injustice is 
worse than 
to suffer, 
acknow- 
ledges it to 
be more 
disgraceful. 
Hence the 
shipwreck 
of his argu- 
ment. 

but ends by acknowledging the truth of it . 

Pol And I should say neither I, nor any man : would you 
yourself, for example, suffer rather than do injustice ? 

Soc . Yes, and you, too ; I or any man would. 

Pol \ Quite the reverse ; neither you, nor I, nor any man. 

Soc . But will you answer ? 

Pol To be sure, I will ; for I am curious to hear what you 
can have to say. 

Soc . Tell me, then, and you will know, and let us suppose 
that I am beginning at the beginning : which of the two, 
Polus, in your opinion, is the worst ? — to do injustice or to 
suffer ? 

Pol I should say that suffering was worst. 

Soc . And which is the greater disgrace ? — Answer. 

Pol To do. 

Soc. And the greater disgrace is the greater evil ? 

Pol Certainly not. 

Soc. I understand you to say, if I am not mistaken, that 
the honourable is not the same as the good, or the disgrace- 
ful as the evil ? 

Pol Certainly not. 

Soc. Let me ask a question of you : When you speak of 
beautiful things, such as bodies, colours, figures, sounds, 
institutions, do you not call them beautiful in reference to 
some standard : bodies, for example, are beautiful in propor- 
tion as they are useful, or as the sight of them gives pleasure 
to the spectators ; can you give any other account of personal 
beauty ? 

Pol I cannot. 

Soc. And you would say of figures or colours generally 
that they were beautiful, either by reason of the pleasure 
which they give, or of their use, or of both ? 

Pol Yes, I should. 

Soc. And you would call sounds and music beautiful for 
the same reason ? 

Pol I should. * 

Soc. Laws and institutions also have no beauty in them 
except in so far as they are useful or pleasant or both ? 

Pol I think not. 

Soc. And may not the same be said of the beauty of know- 
ledge ? 

475 

359 

The standard of utility . 

Pol To be sure, Socrates; and I very much approve of 
your measuring beauty by the standard of pleasure and 
utility. 

Soc. And deformity or disgrace may be equally measured 
by the opposite standard of pain and evil ? 

Pol \ Certainly. 

Soc. Then when of two beautiful things one exceeds in 
beauty, the measure of the excess is to be taken in one or 
both of these ; that is to say, in pleasure or utility or both ? 

Pol. Very true. 

Soc . And of two deformed things, that which exceeds in 
deformity or disgrace, exceeds either in pain or evil — must it 
not be so ? 

Pol. Yes. 

Soc . But then again, what was the observation which you 
just now made, about doing and suffering wrong? Did you 
not say, that suffering wrong was more evil, and doing wrong 
more disgraceful ? 

Pol. I did. 

Soc. Then, if doing wrong is more disgraceful than suffer- 
ing, the more disgraceful must be more painful and must 
exceed in pain or in evil or both : does not that also follow ? 

Pol. Of course. 

Soc. First, then, let us consider whether the doing of in- 
justice exceeds the suffering in the consequent pain : Do the 
injurers suffer more than the injured? 

Pol. No, Socrates ; certainly not. 

Soc. Then they do not exceed in pain ? 

Pol. No. 

Soc. But if not in pain, then not in both ? 

Pol. Certainly not. 

Soc. Then they can only exceed in the other ? 

Pol. Yes. 

Soc. That is to say, in evil ? 

Pol. True. • 

Soc. Then doing injustice will have an excess of evil, and 
will therefore be a greater evil than suffering injustice ? 

Pol. Clearly. 

Soc. But have not you and the world already agreed that 
to do injustice is more disgraceful than to suffer? 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

All things 
may be 
measured 
by the 
standard of 
pleasure 
and utility 
or of pain 
and evil. 

If to do is, 
as Polus ad- 
mits, more 
disgraceful 
than to 
endure 
wrong, it 
must also 
be more 
evil. 

358 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

Polus, while 
denying 
that to do 
injustice is 
worse than 
to suffer, 
acknow- 
ledges it to 
be more 
disgraceful. 
Hence the 
shipwreck 
of his argu- 
ment. 

but ends by acknowledging the truth of it. 

Pol And I should say neither I, nor any man : would you 
yourself, for example, suffer rather than do injustice ? 

Soc. Yes, and you, too ; I or any man would. 

Pol Quite the reverse ; neither you, nor I, nor any man. 

Soc . But will you answer? 

Pol To be sure, I will ; for I am curious to hear what you 
can have to say. 

Soc . Tell me, then, and you will know, and let us suppose 
that I am beginning at the beginning : which of the two, 
Polus, in your opinion, is the worst? — to do injustice or to 
suffer ? 

Pol I should say that suffering was worst. 

Soc. And which is the greater disgrace ? — Answer. 

Pol To do. 

Soc. And the greater disgrace is the greater evil ? 

Pol Certainly not. 

Soc. I understand you to say, if I am not mistaken, that 
the honourable is not the same as the good, or the disgrace- 
ful as the evil ? 

Pol Certainly not. 

Soc. Let me ask a question of you : When you speak of 
beautiful things, such as bodies, colours, figures, sounds, 
institutions, do you not call them beautiful in reference to 
some standard : bodies, for example, are beautiful in propor- 
tion as they are useful, or as the sight of them gives pleasure 
to the spectators ; can you give any other account of personal 
beauty ? 

Pol I cannot. 

Soc. And you would say of figures or colours generally 
that they were beautiful, either by reason of the pleasure 
which they give, or of their use, or of both ? 

Pol. Yes, I should. 

Soc. And you would call sounds and music beautiful for 
the same reason ? 

Pol 1 should. ' 

Soc. Laws and institutions also have no beauty in them 
except in so far as they are useful or pleasant or both ? 

Pol I think not. 

Soc. And may not the same be said of the beauty of know- 
ledge ? 

475 

359 

The standard of utility . 

Pol . To be sure, Socrates; and I very much approve of 
your measuring beauty by the standard of pleasure and 
utility. 

Soc. And deformity or disgrace may be equally measured 
by the opposite standard of pain and evil ? 

Pol . Certainly. 

Soc . Then when of two beautiful things one exceeds in 
beauty, the measure of the excess is to be taken in one or 
both of these ; that is to say, in pleasure or utility or both ? 

Pol. Very true. 

Soc . And of two deformed things, that which exceeds in 
deformity or disgrace, exceeds either in pain or evil — must it 
not be so ? 

Pol Yes. 

Soc . But then again, what was the observation which you 
just now made, about doing and suffering wrong? Did you 
not say, that suffering wrong was more evil, and doing wrong 
more disgraceful ? 

Pol I did. 

Soc. Then, if doing wrong is more disgraceful than suffer- 
ing, the more disgraceful must be more painful and must 
exceed in pain or in evil or both : does not that also follow ? 

Pol Of course. 

Soc . First, then, let us consider whether the doing of in- 
justice exceeds the suffering in the consequent pain : Do the 
injure rs suffer more than the injured ? 

Pol No, Socrates ; certainly not. 

Soc. Then they do not exceed in pain ? 

Pol No. 

Soc. But if not in pain, then not in both ? 

Pol Certainly not. 

Soc. Then they can only exceed in the other ? 

Pol Yes. 

Soc. That is to say, in evil ? 

Pol. True. • 

Soc. Then doing injustice will have an excess of evil, and 
will therefore be a greater evil than suffering injustice? 

Pol Clearly. 

Soc. But have not you and the world already agreed that 
to do injustice is more disgraceful than to suffer? 

(aorgias. 

SOCRATKS, 

Pol us. 

All things 
may be 
measured 
by the 
standard of 
pleasure 
and utility 
or of pain 
and evil. 

If to do is, 
as Polus ad- 
mits, more 
disgraceful 
than to 
endure 
wrong, it 
must also 
be more 
evil. 

The two sorts of refutation. 

360 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

Polus is 
refuted out 
of his own 
mouth. 

The next 
question : 

Is it better 
for the 
guilty to 
suffer or 
not to suffer 
punish- 
ment? 

Pol Yes. 

Soc . And that is now discovered to be more evil ? 

Pol. True. 

Soc . And would you prefer a greater evil or a greater dis- 
honour to a less one ? Answer, Polus, and fear not ; for you 
will come to no harm if you nobly resign yourself into the 
healing hand of the argument as to a physician without 
shrinking, and either say 1 Yes 9 or * No * to me. 

Pol I should say 1 No.’ 

Soc. Would any other man prefer a greater to a less evil ? 

Pol No, not according to this way of putting the case, 
Socrates. 

Soc. Then I said truly, Polus, that neither you, nor I, nor 
any man, would rather do than suffer injustice ; for to do in- 
justice is the greater evil of the two. 

Pol That is the conclusion. 

Soc. You see, Polus, when you compare the two kinds of 
refutations, how unlike they are. All men, with the excep- 
tion of myself, are of your way of thinking; but your single 
assent and witness are enough for me, — I have no need of any 476 
other ; I take your suffrage, and am regardless of the rest. 
Enough of this, and now let us proceed to the next ques- 
tion ; which is, Whether the greatest of evils to a guilty man 
is to suffer punishment, as you supposed, or whether to 
escape punishment is not a greater evil, as I supposed. 
Consider You would say that to suffer punishment is 
another name for being justly corrected when you do wrong? 

Pol I should. 

Soc. And would you not allow that all just things are 
honourable in so far as they are just ? Please to reflect, and 
tell me your opinion. % 

Pol. Yes, Socrates, I think that they are. 

Soc. Consider again 1 Where there is an agent, must 
there not also be a patient? 

Pol. I should say $>o. 

Soc. And will not the patient suffer that which the agent 
does, and will note the suffering have the quality of the 
action ? I mean, for example, that if a man strikes, there 
must be something which is stricken ? 

Pol. Yes. 

Correspondence of suffering and action . 361 

Soc. And if the striker strikes violently or quickly, that Gorgias. 
which is struck will be struck violently or quickly ? Socrates, 

Pol True. PoLUS ' 

Soc . And the suffering to him who is stricken is of the 
same nature as the act of him who strikes ? 

Pol Yes. 

Soc. And if a man burns, there is something which is 
burned ? 

Pol. Certainly. 

Soc. And if he burns in excess or so as to cause pain, the 
thing burned will be burned in the same way ? 

Pol. Truly. 

Soc. And if he cuts, the same argument holds — there will 
be something cut ? 

Pol Yes. 

Soc. And if the cutting be great or deep or such as will 
cause pain, the cut will be of the same nature ? 

Pol. That is evident. 

Soc. Then you would agree generally to the universal pro- 
position which I was just now asserting : that the affection of 
the patient answers to the act of the agent ? 

Pol. I agree. 

Soc. Then, as this is admitted, let me ask whether being 
punished is suffering or acting? 

Pol Suffering, Socrates ; there can be no doubt of that. 

Since the 
affection of 
the patient 
answers to 
the act of 
the agent, 
it follows 
that he who 
is punished 
justly 

Soc. And suffering implies an agent ? 

Pol Certainly, Socrates ; and he is the punisher. 

suffers 
justly, and 
therefore 

Soc. And he who punishes rightly, punishes justly ? 
Pol. Yes. 

honour- 

ably, 

Soc. And therefore he acts justly? 

Pol Justly. 

Soc . Then he who is punished and suffers retribution, 
suffers justly? 

Pol That is evident. 

Soc. And that which is just has* been admitted to be 
honourable ? 

Pol Certainly. • 

Soc. Then the punisher does what is honourable, and the 
punished suffers what is honourable ? 

Pol True. 

362 

Gorgias, 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

and is de- 
livered from 
the greatest 
of all evils, 
the evil of 
the soul, 
which, 
being the 
most dis- 
graceful, is 
also the 
most 

painful or 
hurtful. 

Sophistry of Socrates . 

Soc. And if what is honourable, then what is good, for the 
honourable is either pleasant or useful ? 

Pol. Certainly. 

Soc . Then he who is punished suffers what is good ? 

Pol. That is true. 

Soc. Then he is benefited ? 

Pol. Yes. 

Soc. Do I understand you to mean what I mean by the 
term ‘benefited’? I mean, that if he be justly punished 
his soul is improved. 

Pol. Surely. 

Soc. Then he who is punished is delivered from the evil 
of his soul ? 

Pol. Yes. 

Soc. And is he not then delivered from the greatest evil ? 
Look at the matter in this way: — In respect of a man’s 
estate, do you see any greater evil than poverty? 

Pol. There is no greater evil. 

Soc. Again, in a man’s bodily frame, you would say that 
the evil is weakness and disease and deformity? 

Pol. I should. 

Soc. And do you not imagine that the soul likewise has 
some evil of her own ? 

Pol. Of course. 

Soc. And this you would call injustice and ignorance and 
cowardice, and the like ? 

Pol. Certainly. 

Soc. So then, in mind, body, and estate, which are three, 
you have pointed out three corresponding evils — injustice, 
disease, poverty? 

Pol. True. 

Soc. And which of the evils is the most disgraceful ? — Is 
not the most disgraceful of them injustice, and in general the 
evil of the soul ? 

Pol. By far the most! 

Soc. And if the most disgraceful, then also the worst? 

Pol. What do you mean, Socrates ? 

Soc . I mean to say, that what is most disgraceful has been 
already admitted to be most painful or hurtful, or both. 

Pol. Certainly. 

4 77 

Analogy of soul and body. 

363 

Soc. And now injustice and all evil in the soul has been 
admitted by us to be most disgraceful ? 

Pol. It has been admitted. 

Soc . And most disgraceful either because most painful and 
causing excessive pain, or most hurtful, or both ? 

Pol. Certainly. 

Soc. And therefore to be unjust and intemperate, and 
cowardly and ignorant, is more painful than to be poor and 
sick ? 

Pol. Nay, Socrates ; the painfulness does not appear to 
me to follow from your premises. 

Soc. Then, if, as you would argue, not more painful, the 
evil of the soul is of all evils the most disgraceful ; and the 
excess of disgrace must be caused by some preternatural 
greatness, or extraordinary hurtfulness of the evil. 

Pol. Clearly. 

Soc. And that which exceeds most in hurtfulness will be 
the greatest of evils ? 

Pol. Yes. 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

Polus 

stumbles at 
the notion 
which he 
has already 
admitted, 
that the evil 
of the soul 
is more 
painful 
than that 
of the body. 

Soc. Then injustice and intemperance, and in general the 
depravity of the soul, are the greatest of evils ? 

Pol. That is evident. 

Soc. Now, what art is there which delivers us from 
poverty? Docs not the art of making money? 

Pol. Yes. 

Soc. And what art frees us from disease ? Does not the 
art of medicine ? 

Pol. Very true. 

Soc. And what from vice and injustice? If you are not 
able to answer at once, ask yourself whither we go with the 
sick, and to whom we take them. 

Pol. To the physicians, Socrates. 

Soc. And to whom do we go with the unjust and intem- 
perate ? 

Pol. To the judges, you mean. 

Soc. —Who are to punish them? 

Pol. Yes. • 

Soc. And do not those who rightly punish others, punish 
them in accordance with a certain rule of justice ? 

Pol. Clearly. 

364 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

Punish- 
ment is the 
deliverance 
from evil, 
and he who 
is punished, 
like him 
who is 
healed, is 
happier 
than he 
who is not 
punished 
or not 
healed. 

Happiest 
of all is he 
who is just ; 

The judge and the physician . 

Soc. Then the art of money-making frees a man from 
poverty; medicine from disease; and justice from intem- 
perance and injustice? 

PoL That is evident. 

Soc . Which, then, is the best of these three ? 

PoL Will you enumerate them ? 

Soc . Money-making, medicine, and justice. 

PoL Justice, Socrates, far excels the two others. 

Soc . And justice, if the best, gives the greatest pleasure or 
advantage or both ? 

PoL Yes. 

Soc . But is the being healed a pleasant thing, and are 
those who are being healed pleased? 

PoL I think not. 

Soc . A useful thing, then ? 

PoL Yes. 

Soc . Yes, because the patient is delivered from a great 
evil; and this is the advantage of enduring the pain — that 
you get well ? 

PoL Certainly. 

Soc . And would he be the happier man in his bodily con- 
dition, who is healed, or who never was out of health ? 

PoL Clearly he who was never out of health. 

Soc . Yes; for happiness surely does not consist in being 
delivered from evils, but in never having had them. 

PoL True. 

Soc . And suppose the case of two persons who have some 
evil in their bodies, and that one of them is - healed and 
delivered from evil, and another is not healed, but retains 
the evil — which of them is the most miserable ? 

PoL Clearly he who is not healed. 

Soc. And was not punishment said by us to be a deliver- 
ance from the greatest of evils, which is vice ? 

PoL True. 

Soc . And justice pbnishes us, and makes us more just, and 
is the medicine of our vice ? 

PoL True. c 

Soc. He, then, has the first place in the scale of happiness 
who has never had vice in his soul ; for this has been shown 
to be the greatest of evils. 

365 

479 

The escape from punishment an evil . 

Pol. Clearly. 

Soc . And he has the second place, who is delivered from 
vice? 

Pol. True. 

Soc. That is to say, he who receives admonition and 
rebuke and punishment? 

Pol. Yes. 

Soc. Then he lives worst, who, having been unjust, has no 
deliverance from injustice ? 

Pol. Certainly. 

Soc. That is, he lives worst who commits the greatest 
crimes, and who, being the most unjust of men, succeeds in 
escaping rebuke or correction or punishment ; and this, as 
you say, has been accomplished by Archelaus and other 
tyrants and rhetoricians and potentates 1 ? 

Pol. True. 

Soc. May not their way of proceeding, my friend, be com- 
pared to the conduct of a person who is afflicted with the 
worst of diseases and yet contrives not to pay the penalty to 
the physician for his sins against his constitution, and will 
not be cured, because, like a child, he is afraid of the pain of 
being burned or cut: — Is not that a parallel case? 

Pol. - Yes, truly. 

Soc. He would seem as if he did not know the nature of 
health and bodily vigour ; and if we are right, Polus, in our 
previous conclusions, they are in a like case who strive to 
evade justice, which they see to be painful, but are blind to 
the advantage which ensues from it, not knowing how far 
more miserable a companion a diseased soul is than a 
diseased body; a soul, I say, which is corrupt and un- 
righteous and unholy. And hence they do all that they 
can to avoid punishment and to avoid being released from 
the greatest of evils ; they provide themselves with money 
and friends, and cultivate to the utmost their powers of 
persuasion. But if we, Polus, are right, do you see what 
follows, or shall we draw out the consequences in form ? 

Pol. If you please. 

Soc . Is it not a fact that injustice, and the doing of in- 
justice, is the greatest of evils ? 

1 Cp. Rep. ix. 579, 580. 

Gorgias . 

Socrates. 

Polus. 

happy in 
the second 
degree he 
who is de- 
livered from 
injustice by 
punish- 
ment, most 
deluded 
and most 
unhappy of 
all he who 
lives on, en- 
joying the 
fruit of his 

3 66 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus. 

Archelaus 
then is 
more miser- 
able than 
his victims. 

Injustice, 
if not re- 
moved, will 
become the 
cancer of 
the soul. 

The only 
use of 
rhetoric is 
that it 
enables a 
man to 

The case of Archelaus regarded in a nezv light . 

Pol. That is quite clear. 

Soc. And further, that to suffer punishment is the way to 
be released from this evil ? 

Pol. True. 

Soc. And not to suffer, is to perpetuate the evil ? 

Pol. Yes. 

Soc. To do wrong, then, is second only in the scale of 
evils ; but to do wrong and not to be punished, is first and 
greatest of all ? 

Pol. That is true. 

Soc. Well, and was not this the point in dispute, my 
friend? You deemed Archelaus happy, because he was a 
very great criminal and unpunished : I, on the other hand, 
maintained that he or any other who like him has done 
wrong and has not been punished, is, and ought to be, the 
most miserable of all men ; and that the doer of injustice is 
more miserable than the sufferer; and he who escapes 
punishment, more miserable than he who suffers. — Was not 
that what I said ? 

Pol. Yes. 

Soc. And it has been proved to be true ? 

Pol. Certainly. 

Soc. Well, Polus, but if this is true, where is the great use 480 
of rhetoric? If we admit what has been just now said, 
every man ought in every way to guard himself against 
doing wrong, for he will thereby suffer great evil? 

Pol. True. 

Soc. And if he, or any one about whom he cares, does 
wrong, he ought of his own accord to go where he will be 
immediately punished ; he will run to the judge, as he would 
to the physician, in order that the disease of injustice may 
not be rendered chronic and become the incurable cancer of 
the soul; must we not allow this consequence, Polus, if our 
former admissions are to stand : — is any other inference 
consistent with them ? 

Pol. To that, Socrates, there can be but one answer. 

Soc. Then rhetoric* is of no use to us, Polus, in helping a 
man to excuse his own injustice, or that of his parents or 
friends, or children or country; but may be of use to any 
one who holds that instead of excusing he ought to accuse— 

36 7 

Of what use then is rhetoric ? 

himself above all, and in the next degree his family or any of 
his friends who may be doing wrong; he should bring to 
light the iniquity and not conceal it, that so the wrong-doer 
may suffer and be made whole ; and he should even force 
himself and others not to shrink, but with closed eyes like 
brave men to let the physician operate with knife or searing 
iron, not regarding the pain, in the hope of attaining the 
good and the honourable; let him who has done things 
worthy of stripes, allow himself to be scourged, if of bonds, 
to be bound, if of a fine, to be fined, if of exile, to be exiled, 
if of death, to die, himself being the first to accuse himself 
and his own relations, and using rhetoric to this end, that 
his and their unjust actions may be made manifest, and that 
they themselves may be delivered from injustice, which is 
the greatest evil. Then, Polus, rhetoric would indeed be 
useful. Do you say 'Yes’ or 'No* to that? 

Pol. To me, Socrates, what you are saying appears very 
strange, though probably in agreement with your premises. 

Soc. Is not this the conclusion, if the premises are not dis- 
proven ? 

Pol. Yes; it certainly is. 

Soc. And from the opposite point of view, if indeed it be 
our duty to harm another, whether an enemy or not — I 
except the case of self-defence— then I have to be upon my 
481 guard — but if my enemy injures a third person, then in 
every sort of way, by word as well as deed, I should try to 
• prevent his being punished, or appearing before the judge ; 
and if he appears, I should contrive that he should escape, 
and not suffer punishment : if he has stolen a sum of money, 
Jet him keep what he has stolen and spend it on him and his, 
regardless of religion and justice ; and if he have done 
things worthy of death, let him not die, but rather be im- 
mortal in his wickedness ; or, if this is not possible, let him 
at any rate be allowed to live as long as he can. For such 
purposes, Polus, rhetoric may be usefifl, but is of small if of 
any use to him who is not intending to commit injustice ; at 
least, there was no such use discovered by us in the previous 
discussion. 

Cal. Tell me, Chaerephon, is Socrates in earnest, or is he 
joking? 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Polus, 

Callicles. 

expose his 
own injus- 
tice and to 
petition for 
speedy 
punish- 
ment. 

A slighter 
and second- 
ary use of 
rhetoric in 
self-defence 
against an 
enemy, or in 
preventing 
the punish- 
ment of an 
enemy. 

Is Socrates in earnest ? 

368 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callias, 

Chaere- 

fhon. 

Callicles 

asks in 

amazement 

whether 

Socrates 

really 

means what 
he says. 

I am only 
repeating 
the words of 
philosophy, 
whose lover 
I am. For 
as you love 
the Athe- 
nian people, 
and their 
namesake 
Demus, so 
I have two 
loves, philo- 
sophy and 
Alcibiades. 

The son of 
Cleinias is 
inconstant, 
but philo- 
sophy is 
ever the 
same : she 
it is whom 
you have 
to refute : 

I am only 
her mouth- 
piece. 

Chaer . I should say, Callicles, that he is in most profound 
earnest; but you may as well ask him. 

Cal \ By the gods, and I will. Tell me, Socrates, are you 
in earnest, or only in jest? For if you are in earnest, and* 
what you say is true, is not the whole of human life turned 
upside down ; and are we not doing, as would appear, in 
everything the opposite of what we ought to be doing ? 

Soc. O Callicles, if there were not some community of feel- 
ings among mankind, however varying in different persons — 

I mean to say, if every man’s feelings were peculiar to him- 
self and were not shared by the rest of his species — I do not 
see how we could ever communicate our impressions to one 
another. I make this remark because I perceive that you 
and I have a common feeling. For we are lovers both, and 
both of us have two loves apiece I am the lover of Alci- 
biades, the son of Cleinias, and of philosophy ; and you of 
the Athenian Demus, and of Demus the son of Pyrilampes. 
Now, I observe that you, with all your cleverness, do not 
venture to contradict your favourite in any word or opinion 
of his ; but as he changes you change, backwards and for- 
wards. When the Athenian Demus denies anything that 
you are saying in the assembly, you go over to his opinion ; 
and you do the same with Demus, the fair young son of 
Pyrilampes. For you have not the power to resist the words 
and ideas of your loves; and if a person were to express 
surprise at the strangeness of what you say from time to time 
when under their influence, you would probably reply to 482 
him, if you were honest, that you cannot help saying what 
your loves say unless they are prevented ; and that you can. 
only be silent when they are. Now you must understand 
that my words are an echo too, and therefore you need not 
wonder at me ; but if you want to silence me, silence philo- 
sophy, who is my love, for she is always telling me what I 
am now telling you, my friend ; neither is she capricious like 
my other love, for the % son of Cleinias says one thing to-day 
and another thing to-morrow, but philosophy is always true. 
She is the teacher at *whose words you are now wondering, 
and you have heard her yourself. Her you must refute, and 
either show, as I was saying, that to do injustice and to escape 
punishment is not the worst of all evils ; or, if you leave her 

Polus and Callicles. 

369 

word unrefuted, by the dog the god of Egypt, I declare, O Gorgias. 
Callicles, that Callicles will never be at one with himself, but Socrates, 
that his whole life will be a discord. And yet, my friend, I Callicles * 
would rather that my lyre should be inharmonious, and that 
there should be no music in the chorus which I provided ; 
aye, or that the whole world should be at odds with me, and 
oppose me, rather than that I myself should be at odds with 
myself, and contradict myself. 

Cal. O Socrates, you are a regular declaimer, and seem to Polus was 
be running riot in the argument. And now you are declaim- becaus^he 
ing in this way because Polus has fallen into the same refused to 
error himself of which he accused Gorgias : — for he said |^ e a bold 
that when Gorgias was asked by you, whether, if some one 
came to him who wanted to learn rhetoric, and did not 
know justice, he would teach him justice, Gorgias in his 
modesty replied that he would, because he thought that man- 
kind in general would be displeased if he answered ‘No;* 
and then in consequence of this admission, Gorgias was 
compelled to contradict himself, that being just the sort of 
thing in which you delight. Whereupon Polus laughed at 
you deservedly, as I think; but now he has himself fallen 
into the same trap. I cannot say very much for his wit 
when he conceded to you that to do is more dishonourable 
than to suffer injustice, for this was the admission which 
led to his being entangled by you ; and because he was 
too modest to say what he thought, he had his mouth 
stopped. For the truth is, Socrates, that you, who pretend 
to be engaged in the pursuit of truth, are appealing now to 
the popular and vulgar notions of right, which are not natural, 
but only conventional. Convention and nature are generally Callicles 
at variance with one another : and hence, if a person is too ^fuvthe 
483 modest to say what he thinks, he is compelled to contradict rule of 
himself ; and you, in your ingenuity perceiving the advantage 
to be thereby gained, slyly ask of him who is arguing con- sense of the 
ventionally a question which is to be d&ermined by the rule term * 
of nature ; and if he is talking of the rule of nature, you slip 
away to custom : as, for instance, you «lid in this very dis- 
cussion about doing and suffering injustice. When Polus 
was speaking of the conventionally dishonourable, you 
assailed him from the point of view of nature ; for by the rule 

VOL, 11. b b 

Convention and nature. 

37 ° 

Gorgias. 

Callicles. 

Convention 
was only 
introduced 
by the weak 
majority in 
order to 
protect 
themselves 
against the 
few strong. 

A man of 
courage 
would 
easily break 
down the 
guards of 
convention. 

of nature, to suffer injustice is the greater disgrace because 
the greater evil ; but conventionally, to do evil is the more 
disgraceful. For the suffering of injustice is not the part of 
a man, but of a slave, who indeed had better die than live ; 
since when he is wronged and trampled upon, he is unable 
to help himself, or any other about whom he cares. The 
reason, as I conceive, is that the makers of laws are the 
majority who are weak ; and they make laws and distribute 
praises and censures with a view to themselves and to their 
own interests ; and they terrify the stronger sort of men, and 
those who are able to get the better of them, in order that 
they may not get the better of them; and they say, that 
dishonesty is shameful and unjust; meaning, by the word 
injustice, the desire of a man to have more than his neigh- 
bours ; for knowing their own inferiority, I suspect that they 
are too glad of equality. And therefore the endeavour to 
have more than the many, is conventionally said to be shame- 
ful and unjust, and is called injustice 1 , whereas nature herself 
intimates that it is just for the better to have more than the 
worse, the more powerful than the weaker; and in many 
ways she shows, among men as well as among animals, and 
indeed among whole cities and races, that justice consists in 
the superior ruling over and having more than the inferior. 

For on what principle of justice did Xerxes invade Hellas, 
or his father the Scythians? (not to speak of numberless 
other examples). Nay, but these are the men who act 
according to nature; yes, by Heaven, and according to the 
law of nature : not, perhaps, according to that artificial law, 
which we invent and impose upon our fellows, of whom we 
take the best and strongest from their youth upwards, and 
tame them like young lions, —charming them with the sound 484 
of the voice, and saying to them, that with equality they must 
be content, and that the equal is the honourable and the just. 

But if there were a man who had sufficient force, he would 
shake off and break through, and escape from all this ; he 
would trample under foot all our formulas and spells and 
charms, and all our daws which are against nature : the slave 
would rise in rebellion and be lord over us, and the light of 
natural justice would shine forth. And this I take to be the 

1 Cp. Rep. ii. 359. 

37i 

Might is right. 

sentiment of Pindar, when he says in his poem, that 

1 Law is the king of all, of mortals as well as of immortals;’ 
this, as he says, 

‘ Makes might to be right, doing violence with highest hand ; as I infer from 
the deeds of Heracles, for without buying them — ’ 1 

— I do not remember the exact words, but the meaning is, 
that without buying them, and without their being given to 
him, he carried off the oxen of Geryon, according to the law 
of natural right, and that the oxen and other possessions of 
the weaker and inferior properly belong to the stronger and 
superior. And this is true, as you may ascertain, if you will 
leave philosophy and go on to higher things : for philosophy, 
Socrates, if pursued in moderation and at the proper age, is 
an elegant accomplishment, but too much philosophy is the 
ruin of human life. Even if a man has good parts, still, if he 
carries philosophy into later life, he is necessarily ignorant 
of all those things which a gentleman and a person of honour 
ought to know ; he is inexperienced in the laws of the State, 
and in the language which ought to be used in the dealings 
of man with man, whether private or public, and utterly 
ignorant of the pleasures and desires of mankind and of human 
character in general. And people of this sort, when they 
betake themselves to politics or business, are as ridiculous as 
I imagine the politicians to be, when they make their appear- 
ance in the arena of philosophy. For, as Euripides says, 

* Every man shines in that and pursues that, and devotes the greatest portion 
of the day to that in which he most excels 3 / 

485 but anything in which he is inferior, he avoids and depre- 
ciates, and praises the opposite from partiality to himself, and 
because he thinks that he will thus praise himself. The true 
principle is to unite them. Philosophy, as a part of education, 
is an excellent thing, and there is no disgrace to a man while 
he is young in pursuing such a study ; but when he is more 
advanced in years, the thing becomes ridiculous, and I feel 
towards philosophers as I do towards those who lisp and 
imitate children. For I love to see a little child, who is not 

1 Fragm. Tncert. 151 (Bockh). 2 Antiope, fragm. 20 (Dindorf). 

B b 2 

Gorgias . 
Calliclks. 

Pindar. 

A little 
philosophy 
not a bad 
thing in 
youth. 

Euripides. 

372 

Philosophy not to be carried too far. 

Gorgias, 

Callicles. 

But the 
study 
should 
not be con- 
tinued into 
later life. 

of an age to speak plainly, lisping at his play ; there is an 
appearance of grace and freedom in his utterance, which is 
natural to his childish years. But when I hear some small 
creature carefully articulating its words, I am offended ; the 
sound is disagreeable, and has to my ears the twang of slavery. 
So when I hear a man lisping, or see him playing like a 
child, his behaviour appears to me ridiculous and unmanly 
and worthy of stripes. And I have the same feeling about 
students of philosophy; when I sec a youth thus engaged, — 
the study appears to me to be in character, and becoming a 
man of a liberal education, and him who neglects philosophy 
I regard as an inferior man, who will never aspire to anything 
great or noble. But if I see him continuing the study in 
later life, and not leaving off, I should like to beat him, 
Socrates ; for, as I was saying, such a one, even though he 
have good natural parts, becomes effeminate. He flies from 
the busy centre and the market-place, in which, as the poet 
says, men become distinguished ; he creeps into a corner for 
the rest of his life, and talks in a whisper with three or four 
admiring youths, but never speaks out like a freeman in a 
satisfactory manner. Now I, Socrates, am very well inclined 
towards you, and my feeling may be compared with that of 
Zethus towards Amphion, in the play of Euripides, whom I 
was mentioning just now : for I am disposed to say to you 
much what Zethus said to his brother, that you, Socrates, are 
careless about the things of which you ought to be careful ; 
and that you 

‘ Who have a soul so noble, are remarkable for a puerile exterior ; 
Neither in a couit of justice could you state a case, or give any reason 
or proof, 

Or offer valiant counsel on another’s behalf.’ 

And you must not be offended, my dear Socrates, for I am 
speaking out of good-will towards you, if I ask whether you 
are not ashamed of being thus defenceless ; which I affirm 
to be the condition not of you only but of all those who will 
carry the study of philosophy too far. For suppose that 
some one were to thke you, or any one of your sort, off to 
prison, declaring that you had done wrong when you had 
done no wrong, you must allow that you would not know 
what to do:— there you would stand giddy and gaping, and 

373 

Callicles makes an appeal to the poets . 

not having a word to say ; and when you went up before the Gorgias . 
Court, even if the accuser were a poor creature and not good Socrates 
for much, you would die if he were disposed to claim the Call,cles - 
penalty of death. And yet, Socrates, what is the value of 

* An art which converts a man of sense into a fool/ 

who is helpless, and has no power to save either himself or 
others, when he is in the greatest danger and is going to be 
despoiled by his enemies of all his goods, and has to live, 
simply deprived of his rights of citizenship? — he being a 
man who, if I may use the expression, may be boxed on the 
ears with impunity. Then, my good friend, take my advice, 
and refute no more : 

* Learn the philosophy of business, and acquire the reputation of wisdom. 

But leave to others these niceties/ 

whether they are to be described as follies or absurdities : 

* For they will only 

Give you poverty for the inmate of your dwelling/ 

Cease, then, emulating these paltry splitters of words, and 
emulate only the man of substance and honour, who is well 
to do. 

Soc. If my soul, Callicles, were made of gold, should I not Callicles 
reioice to discover one of those stones with which they test the desired 
gold, and the very best possible one to which I might bring of Socrates, 
my soul ; and if the stone and I agreed in approving of her 
training, then I should know that I was in a satisfactory 
state, and that no other test was needed by me. 

Cal. What is your meaning, Socrates? 

Soc . I will tell you; I think that I have found in you the 
desired touchstone. 

Cal . Why? 

Soc . Because I am sure that if you agree with me in any 
of the opinions which my soul forms, I have at last found the 
truth indeed. For I consider that if a man is to make a 
487 complete trial of the good or evil of the soul, he ought to 
have three qualities — knowledge, goodwill, outspokenness, 
which are all possessed by you. Many whom I meet are un- 
able to make trial of me, because they are not wise as you are ; 
others are wise, but they will not tell me the truth, because 

374 

Gorgias . 
Socrates. 

Other men 
have not 
the know- 
ledge or 
frankness 
or good-will 
which is 
required ; 
and they 
are too 
modest. 

His sin- 
cerity is 
shown by 
his consis- 
tency. 

The gain of having an adversary like Callicles. 

they have not the same interest in me which you have; 
and these two strangers, Gorgias and Polus, are undoubtedly 
wise men and my very good friends, but they are not out- 
spoken enough, and they are too modest. Why, their 
modesty is so great that they are driven to contradict them- 
selves, first one and then the other of them, in the face of 
a large company, on matters of the highest moment. But 
you have all the qualities in which these others are deficient, 
having received an excellent education ; to this many Athe- 
nians can testify. And you are my friend. Shall I tell you 
why I think so? I know that you, Callicles, and Tisander of 
Aphidnae, and Andron the son of Androtion, and Nausicydes 
of the deme of Cholarges, studied together : there were four 
of you, and I once heard you advising with one another as 
to the extent to which the pursuit of philosophy should be 
carried, and, as I know, you came to the conclusion that the 
study should not be pushed too much into detail. You were 
cautioning one another not to be overwise ; you were afraid 
that too much wisdom might unconsciously to yourselves be 
the ruin of you. And now when I hear you giving the same 
advice to me which you then . gave to your most intimate 
friends, I have a sufficient evidence of your real good-will 
to me. And of the frankness of your nature and freedom 
from modesty 1 am assured by yourself, and the assurance 
is confirmed by your last speech. Well then, the inference 
in the present case clearly is, that if you agree with me in 
an argument about any point, that point will have been 
sufficiently tested by us, and will not require to be submitted 
to any further test. For you could not have agreed with 
me, either from lack of knowledge or from superfluity of 
tnodesty, nor yet from a desire to deceive me, for you are 
my friend, as you tell me yourself. And therefore when you 
and I are agreed, the result will be the attainment of perfect 
truth. Now there is no nobler enquiry, Callicles, than that 
which you censure me for making, — What ought the character 
of a man to be, and what his pursuits, and how far is he to 
go, both in tnaturer *years and in youth? For be assured 
that if I err in my own conduct I do not err intentionally, 488 
but from ignorance. Do not then desist from advising me, 
now that you have begun, until I have learned clearly what 

Callicles is drawn into a contradiction . 

this is which I am to practise, and how I may acquire it. 
And if you find me assenting to your words, and hereafter 
not doing that to which I assented, call me 4 dolt/ and deem 
me unworthy of receiving further instruction. Once more, 
then, tell me what you and Pindar mean by natural justice : 
Do you not mean that the superior should take the property 
of the inferior by force; that the better should rule the 
worse, the noble have more than the mean? Am I not 
right in my recollection ? 

CaL Yes; that is what I was saying, and so I still aver. 

Soc . And do you mean by the better the same as the 
superior? for I could not make out what you were saying 
at the time — whether you meant by the superior the stronger, 
and that the weaker must obey the stronger, as you seemed 
to imply when you said that great cities attack small ones 
in accordance with natural right, because they are superior 
and stronger, as though the superior and stronger and better 
were the same ; or whether the better may be also the in- 
ferior and weaker, and the superior the worse, or whether 
better is to be defined in the same way as superior : — this is 
the point which I want to have cleared up. Are the superior 
and better and stronger the same or different? 

CaL I say unequivocally that they are the same. 

Soc . Then the many are by nature superior to the one, 
against whom, as you were saying, they make the laws ? 

CaL Certainly. 

Soc. Then the laws of the many are the laws of the 
superior ? 

CaL Very true. 

Soc . Then they are the laws of the better ; for the superior 
class are far better, as you were saying ? 

CaL Yes. 

Soc. And since they are superior, the laws which are made 
by them are by nature good ? 

CaL Yes. 

Soc. And are not the many of opinion, as you were lately 
489 saying, that justice is equality, and that to do is more dis- 
graceful than to suffer injustice ? — is that so or not ? Answer, 
Callicles, and let no modesty be found to come in the way 1 ; 

1 Cp. what is said of Gorgias by Callicles at p. 482. 

375 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

But still 
he would 
ask, What 
Callicles 
means 
by the 
superior ? 

He means 
the better 
and 

stronger, 
and there- 
fore the 
many who 
make the 
laws, which 
are noble 
because 
they are 
made by 
the better. 

And the 
many are 
also of 
opinion 
that to do 

376 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

is more 
disgraceful 
than to 
suffer 
injustice. 

' Of course 
I don't 
mean the 
mob.’ 

Then once 
more, — 
Who are 
the better? 

He flounders impatiently . 

do the many think, or do they not think thus ? — I must beg 
of you to answer, in order that if you agree with me I may 
fortify myself by the assent of so competent an authority. 

Cal Yes; the opinion of the many is what you say. 

Soc . Then not only custom but nature also affirms that 
to do is more disgraceful than to suffer injustice, and that 
justice is equality ; so that you seem to have been wrong 
in your former assertion, when accusing me you said that 
nature and custom are opposed, and that I, knowing this, 
was dishonestly playing between them, appealing to custom 
when the argument is about nature, and to nature when the 
argument is about custom ? 

Cal. This man will never cease talking nonsense. At 
your age, Socrates, are you not ashamed to be catching at 
words and chuckling over some verbal slip ? do you not 
see — have I not told you already, that by superior I mean 
better : do you imagine me to say, that if a rabble of slaves 
and nondescripts, who are of no use except perhaps for 
their physical strength, get together, their ipsissima verba 
are laws ? 

Soc. Ho ! my philosopher, is that your line ? 

Cal Certainly. 

Soc. I was thinking, Callicles, that something of the kind 
must have been in your mind, and that is why I repeated 
the question, — What is the superior? I wanted to know 
clearly what you meant; for you surely do not think that 
two men are better than one, or that your slaves are better 
than you because they are stronger ? Then please to begin 
again, and tell me who the better are, if they are not the 
stronger; and I will ask you, great Sir, to be a little milder 
in your instructions, or I shall have to run away from you. 

Cal You are ironical. 

Soc. No, by the hero Zethus, Callicles, by whose aid you 
were just now saying (486 A) many ironical things against 
me, I am not : — tell nfe, then, whom you mean by the better ? 

Cal I mean the more excellent. 

Soc. Do you not t>ee that you are yourself using words 
which have no meaning and that you are explaining nothing ? 
— will you tell me whether you mean by the better and 
superior the wiser, or if not, whom ? 

Callicles grows more and more exasperated , ' 

490 CaL Most assuredly, I do mean the wiser. 

Sor. Then according to you, one wise man may often 
be superior to ten thousand fools, and he ought to rule 
them, and they ought to be his subjects, and he ought to 
have more than they should. This is what I believe that 
you mean (and you must not suppose that I am word- 
catching), if you allow that the one is superior to the ten 
thousand ? 

CaL Yes; that is what I mean, and that is what I conceive 
to be natural justice— that the better and wiser should rule 
and have more than the inferior. 

Soc . Stop there, and let me ask you what you would say 
in this case : Let us suppose that we are all together as we 
are now; there are several of us, and we have a large 
common store of meats and drinks, and there are all sorts 
of persons in our company having various degrees of strength 
and weakness, and one of us, being a physician, is wiser in 
the matter of food than all the rest, and he is probably 
stronger than some and not so strong as others of us— will 
he not, being wiser, be also better than we are, and our 
superior in this matter of food ? 

CaL Certainly. 

Soc. Either, then, he will have a larger share of the meats 
and drinks, because he is better, or he will have the distribu- 
tion of all of them by reason of his authority, but he will not 
expend or make use of a larger share of them on jiis own 
person, or if he does, he will be punished ; — his share will 
exceed that of some, and be less than that of others, and if 
he be the weakest of all, he being the best of all will have 
the smallest share of all, Callicles am I not right, my 
friend ? 

CaL You talk about meats and drinks and physicians and 
other nonsense ; I am not speaking of them. 

Soc . Well, but do you admit that the wiser is the better? 
Answer 1 Yes * or # No/ 

CaL Yes. 

Soc . And ought not the better to hav 5 a larger share ? 

CaL Not of meats and drinks. 

Soc . I understand : then, perhaps, of coats— -the skilfullest 
weaver ought to have the largest coat, and the greatest 

377 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

The wiser : 
the one 
wise among 
ten thou- 
sand fools, 
—he ought 
to rule. 

But this is 
contrary to 
the analogy 
of the other 
arts. 

Callicles is 
disgusted 
at the com- 
monplace 
parallels of 
Socrates. 

37 « 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

Socrates is 
accused of 
always 
saying the 
same 

things : he 
accuses 
Callicles 
of never 
saying the 
same about 
the same. 

Socrates grows more and more ironical . 

number of them, and go about clothed in the best and finest 
of them ? 

Cal. Fudge about coats ! 

Soc. Then the skilfullest and best in making shoes ought 
to have the advantage in shoes; the shoemaker, clearly, 
should walk about in the largest shoes, and have the greatest 
number of them ? 

Cal. Fudge about shoes ! What nonsense are you 
talking ? 

Soc. Or, if this is not your meaning, perhaps you would 
say that the wise and good and true husbandman should 
actually have a larger share of seeds, and have as much seed 
as possible for his own land ? 

Cal. How you go on, always talking in the same way, So- 
crates ! 

Soc. Yes, Callicles, and also about the same things. 491 

Cal. Yes, by the Gods, you are literally always talking of 
cobblers and fullers and cooks and doctors, as if this had to 
do with our argument. 

Soc. But why will you not tell me in what a man must be 
superior and wiser in order to claim a larger share ; will you 
neither accept a suggestion, nor offer one ? 

Cal. I have already told you. In the first place, I mean 
by superiors not cobblers or cooks, but wise politicians who 
understand the administration of a state, and who are not 
only wise, but also valiant and able to carry out their 
designs, and not the men to faint from want of soul. 

Soc. See now, most excellent Callicles, how different my 
charge against you is from that which you bring against me, 
for you reproach me with always saying the same ; but I re- 
proach you with never saying the same about the same 
things, for at one time you were defining the better and the 
superior to be the stronger, then again as the wiser, and now 
you bring forward a new notion ; the superior and the better 
are now declared by you to be the more courageous : I wish, 
my good friend, that you would tell me, once for all, whom 
you affirm to be the^better and superior, and in what they 
are better ? 

Cal . I have already told you that I mean those who are 
wise and courageous in the administration of a state— -they 

379 

The delights of successful wickedness . 

ought to be the rulers of their states, and justice consists in 
their having more than their subjects. 

Soc . But whether rulers or subjects will they or will they 
not have more than themselves, my friend ? 

CaL What do you mean ? 

Soc . I mean that every man is his own ruler ; but perhaps 
you think that there is no necessity for him to rule himself ; 
he is only required to rule others ? 

Cal \ What do you mean by his 1 ruling over himself* ? 

Soc . A simple thing enough ; just what is commonly said, 
that a man should be temperate and master of himself, and 
ruler of his own pleasures and passions. 

CaL What innocence ! you mean those fools, — the tem- 
perate ? 

Soc . Certainly : — any one may know that to be my 
meaning. 

CaL Quite so, Socrates ; and they are really fools, for how 
can a man be happy who is the servant of anything ? On 
the contrary, I plainly assert, that he who would truly live 
ought to allow his desires to wax to the uttermost, and not to 
chastise them ; but when they have grown to their greatest 
492 he should have courage and intelligence to minister to 
them and to satisfy all his longings. And this I affirm to be 
natural justice and nobility. To this however the many can- 
not attain ; and they blame the strong man because they are 
ashamed of their own weakness, which they desire to con- 
ceal, and hence they say that intemperance is base. As I 
have remarked already, they enslave the nobler natures, and 
being unable to satisfy their pleasures, they praise temper- 
ance and justice out of their own cowardice. For if a man 
had been originally the son of a king, or had a nature 
capable of acquiring an empire or a tyranny or sovereignty, 
what could be more truly base or evil than temperance — to a 
man like him, I say, who might freqjy be enjoying every 
good, and has no one to stand in his way, and yet has 
admitted custom and reason and the opinion of other men to 
be lords over him ?— must not he be in a miserable plight 
whom the reputation of justice and temperance hinders from 
giving more to his friends than to his enemies, even though 
he be a ruler in his city ? Nay, Socrates, for you profess to 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

Callicles re- 
asserts his 
doctrine 
that the 
esteem in 
which 
virtue and 
justice are 
held is due 
only to 
men’s fear 
for them- 
selves. No 
man who 
has the 
power to 
enjoy 
himself 
practises 
self-control. 

380 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

To live 
without 
pleasure or 
passion is 
to be dead. 

No ; the 
true death, 
as Pytha- 
gorean 
philosophy 
tells us, is 
to pour 
water out 
of a vessel 
full of holes 
into a 
colander 
full of holes. 

The soul of the ignorant . 

be a votary of the truth, and the truth is this that luxury 
and intemperance and licence, if they be provided with 
means, are virtue and happiness — all the rest is a mere 
bauble, agreements contrary to nature, foolish talk of men, 
nothing worth \ 

Soc. There is a noble freedom, Callicles, in your way of 
approaching the argument ; for what you say is what the 
rest of the world think, but do not like to say. And I must 
beg of you to persevere, that the true rule of human life may 
become manifest. Tell me, then you say, do you not, that 
in the rightly-developed man the passions ought not to be 
controlled, but that we should let them grow to the utmost 
and somehow or other satisfy them, and that this is virtue? 

Cal. Yes; I do. 

Soc. Then those who want nothing are not truly said to 
be happy ? 

Cal. No indeed, for then stones and dead men would be 
the happiest of all. 

Soc. But surely life according to your view is an awful 
thing; and indeed 1 think that Euripides may have been 
right in saying, 

‘ Who knows if life be not death and death life 

and that we are very likely dead ; I have heard a philosopher 493 
say that at this moment we are actually dead, and that the 
body {a S)fia) is our tomb (< rrj^a * 2 ), and that the part of the soul 
which is the seat of the desires is liable to be tossed about by 
words and blown up and down ; and some ingenious person, 
probably a Sicilian or an Italian, playing with the word, 
invented a tale in which he called the soul — because of its 
believing and make-believe nature — a vessel 8 , and the ig- 
norant he called the uninitiated or leaky, and the place in 
the souls of the uninitiated in which the desires are seated, 
being the intemperate and incontinent part, he compared to 
a vessel full of holes, ‘because it can never be satisfied. He 
is not of your way of thinking, Callicles, for he declares, that 
of all the souls in Hades, meaning the invisible world (d«8cs), 
these uninitiated or leaky persons are the most miserable, 

1 Cp. Rep. i. 348. 2 Cp. Phaedr. 250 C. 

3 An untranslateable pun, — 8tek rb iridaviv re Ka\ irurr itchy wv 6 fx acre tcIBov. 

The sound and leaky vessels . 

and that they pour water into a vessel which is full of holes 
out of a colander which is similarly perforated. The co- 
lander, as my informer assures me, is the soul, and the soul 
which he compares to a colander is the soul of the ignorant, 
which is likewise full of holes, and therefore incontinent, 
owing to a bad memory and want of faith. These notions 
are strange enough, but they show the principle which, if I 
can, I would fain prove to you; that you should change your 
mind, and, instead of the intemperate and insatiate life, choose 
that which is orderly and sufficient and has a due provision 
for daily needs. Do I make any impression on you, and are 
you coming over to the opinion that the orderly are happier 
than the intemperate ? Or do I fail to persuade you, and, 
however many tales I rehearse to you, do you continue of 
the same opinion still ? 

Cal . The latter, Socrates, is more like the truth. 

Soc . Well, I will tell you another image, which comes out 
of the same school : — Let me request you to consider how 
far you would accept this as an account of the two lives of 
the temperate and intemperate in a figure : — There are two 
men, both of whom have a number of casks ; the one man 
has his casks sound and full, one of wine, another of honey, 
and a third of milk, besides others filled with other liquids, 
and the streams which fill them are few and scanty, and he 
can only obtain them with a great deal of toil and difficulty; 
but when his casks arc once filled he has no need to feed 
them any more, and has no further trouble with them or care 
about them. The other, in like manner, can procure streams, 
though not without difficulty ; but his vessels are leaky and 
unsound, and night and day he is compelled to be filling 
494 them, and if he pauses for a moment, he is in an agony of 
pain. Such are their respective lives : — And now would you 
say that the life of the intemperate is happier than that of 
the temperate ? Do I not convince you that the opposite is 
the truth ? % 

Cal . You do not convince me, Socrates, for the one who 
has filled himself has no longer any p>easure left ; and this, 
as I was just now saying, is the life of a stone : he has 
neither joy nor sorrow after he is once filled ; but the pleasure 
depends on the superabundance of the influx. 

381 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Calucles. 

The tem- 
perate man 
is the 
sound, the 
intemperate 
the leaky 
vessel. 

The life of 
desire and 
pleasure is 
not to be 
compared 
to a full 
vessel, but 

382 

Callicles no longer a test , 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

to an ever- 

running- 

stream. 

Callicles 
professes a 
virtuous 
indignation 
at the very 
mention of 
the conse- 
quences of 
his own 
doctrine. 

Soc . But the more you pour in, the greater the waste ; and 
the holes must be large for the liquid to escape. 

Cal . Certainly. 

Soc . The life which you are now depicting is not that of a 
dead man, or of a stone, but of a cormorant ; you mean that 
he is to be hungering and eating ? 

Cal Yes. 

Soc . And he is to be thirsting and drinking ? 

Cal Yes, that is what I mean ; he is to have all his desires 
about him, and to be able to live happily in the gratification 
of them. 

Soc. Capital, excellent ; go on as you have begun, and 
have no shame ; I, too, must disencumber myself of shame : 
and first, will you tell me whether you include itching and 
scratching, provided you have enough of them and pass your 
life in scratching, in your notion of happiness ? 

Cal What a strange being you are, Socrates ! a regular 
mob-orator. 

Soc. That was the reason, Callicles, why I scared Polus 
and Gorgias, until they were too modest to say what they 
thought ; but you will not be too modest and will not be 
scared, for you are a brave man. And now, answer my 
question. 

Cal I answer, that even the scratch er would live plea- 
santly. 

Soc. And if pleasantly, then also happily ? 

Cal To be sure. 

Soc. But what if the itching is not confined to the head ? 
Shall I pursue the question ? And here, Callicles, I would 
have you consider how you would reply if consequences are 
pressed upon you, especially if in the last resort you are 
asked, whether the life of a catamite is not terrible, foul, 
miserable ? Or would you venture to say, that they too are 
happy, if they only get enough of what they want ? 

Cal Are you not dshamed, Socrates, of introducing such 
topics into the argument ? 

Soc. Well, my fine^ friend, but am I the introducer of these 
topics, or he who says without any qualification that all who 
feel pleasure in whatever manner are happy, and who admits 
of no distinction between good and bad pleasures? And I 495 

383 

because he will not say what he thinks. 

would still ask, whether you say that pleasure and good are 
the same, or whether there is some pleasure which is not a 
good ? 

Cal. Well, then, for the sake of consistency, I will say that 
they are the same. 

Soc. You are breaking the original agreement, Callicles, 
and will no longer be a satisfactory companion in the search 
after truth, if you say what is contrary to your real opinion. 

Cal. Why, that is what you are doing too, Socrates. 

Soc. Then we are both doing wrong. Still, my dear friend, 
I would ask you to consider whether pleasure, from whatever 
source derived, is the good ; for, if this be true, then the dis- 
agreeable consequences which have been darkly intimated 
must follow, and many others. 

Cal. That, Socrates, is only your opinion. 

Soc. And do you, Callicles, seriously maintain what you 
are saying ? 

Cal. Indeed I do. 

Soc. Then, as you are in earnest, shall we proceed with 
the argument ? 

Cal. By all means l . 

Soc. Well, if you are willing to proceed, determine this 
question for me : — There is something, I presume, which you 
would call knowledge ? 

Cal. There is. 

Soc. And were you not saying just now, that some courage 
implied knowledge ? 

Cal. I was. 

Soc. And you were speaking of courage and knowledge as 
two things different from one another? 

Cal. Certainly I was. 

Soc. And would you say that pleasure and knowledge are 
the same, or not the same ? 

Cal. Not the same, O man of wisdom. 

Soc. And would you say that cdhrage differed from 
pleasure ? 

Cal. Certainly. 

Soc. Well, then, let us remember that Callicles, the Achar- 
nian, says that pleasure and good are the same ; but that 
1 Or, * I am in profound earnest.’ 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Calucles. 

Callicles, 
having ad- 
mitted that 
pleasure 
and good 
are the 
same, is led 
to make 
the further 
admission 
that plea- 
sure and 
knowledge 
and cour- 
age are 
different. 

384 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

A man may 
have good 
and evil by 
turns, but 
not at the 
same time. 

The law of contradiction . 

knowledge and courage are not the same, either with one 
another, or with the good. 

CaL And what does our friend Socrates, of Foxton, say — 
does he assent to this, or not ? 

Soc. He does not assent; neither will Callicles, when he 
sees himself truly. You will admit, I suppose, that good and 
evil fortune are opposed to each other ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. And if they are opposed to each other, then, like 
health and disease, they exclude one another ; a man cannot 
have them both, or be without them both, at the same time ? 

Cal. What do you mean ? 

Soc. Take the case of any bodily affection:— a man may 
have the complaint in his eyes which is called ophthalmia ? 

Cal. To be sure. 496 

Soc. But he surely cannot have the same eyes well and 
sound at the same time ? 

Cal. Certainly not. 

Soc. And when he has got rid of his ophthalmia, has he got 
rid of the health of his eyes too? Is the final result, that he 
gets rid of them both together ? 

Cal. Certainly not. 

Soc. That would surely be marvellous and absurd ? 

Cal. Very. 

Soc. I suppose that he is affected by them, and gets rid of , 
them in turns ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. And he may have strength and weakness in the same 
way, by fits ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. Or swiftness and slowness ? 

Cal. Certainly. 

Soc. And does he have and not have good and hap- 
piness, and their opposites, evil and misery, in a similar 
alternation 1 ? 

Cal. Certainly he has. 

Soc. If then there be anything which a man has and has 
not at the same time, clearly that cannot be good and evil — 
do we agree ? Please not to answer without consideration. 

1 Cp. Rep. iv. 436. 

3«5 

The lazv of contradiction . 

Cal. I entirely agree. Gorgias. 

Soc . Go back now to our former admissions.— Did you say Socrates, 
that to hunger, I mean the mere state of hunger, was pleasant Callicles. 
or painful ? 

Cal. I said painful, but that to eat when you are hungry is 
pleasant. 

Soc. I know ; but still the actual hunger is painful : am I 
not right ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. And thirst, too, is painful ? 

Cal. Yes, very. 

Soc. Need I adduce any more instances, or would you 
agree that all wants or desires are painful ? 

Cal. I agree, and therefore you need not adduce any more 
instances. 

Soc. Very good. And you would admit that to drink, when 
you are thirsty, is pleasant ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. And in the sentence which you have just uttered, the 
word 'thirsty’ implies pain ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. And the word 4 drinking ’ is expressive of pleasure, 
and of the satisfaction of the want ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. There is pleasure in drinking ? 

Cal. Certainly. 

Soc. When you are thirsty ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. And in pain ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. Do you see the inference that pleasure and pain are But he may 
simultaneous, when you say that being thirsty, you drink ? 

For are they not simultaneous, and do they not affect at the pa in at the 
same time the same part, whether of the soul or the body ? — same time * 
which of them is affected cannot be supposed to be of any 
consequence : Is not this true ? 

Cal. It is. • 

Soc. You said also, that no man could have good and evil 
fortune at the same time ? 

Cal. Yes, I did. 

VOL. II. 

C C 

386 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles, 

Gorgias. 

Therefore 
pleasure 
and pain 
are not the 
same as 
good and 
evil. 

The dialectical process 

Soc. But you admitted, that when in pain a man might also 497 
have pleasure ? 

Cal. Clearly. 

Soc. Then pleasure is not the same as good fortune, or 
pain the same as evil fortune, and therefore the good is not 
the same as the pleasant ? 

Cal. I wish I knew, Socrates, what your quibbling means. 

Soc. You know, Callicles, but you affect not to know. 

Cal. Well, get on, and don’t keep fooling: then you will 
know what a wiseacre you are in your admonition of me. 

Soc. Docs not a man cease from his thirst and from his 
pleasure in drinking at the same time ? 

Cal. I do not understand what you are saying. 

Gor. Nay, Callicles, answer, if only for our sakes; — we 
should like to hear the argument out. 

Cal. Yes, Gorgias, but I must complain of the habitual 
trifling of Socrates ; he is always arguing about little and 
unworthy questions. 

Gor. What matter? Your reputation, Callicles, is not at 
stake. Let Socrates argue in his own fashion. 

Cal. Well, then, Socrates, you shall ask these little peddling 
questions, since Gorgias wishes to have them. 

Soc. I envy you, Callicles, for having been initiated into 
the great mysteries before you were initiated into the lesser. 

I thought that this was not allowable. But to return to our 
argument : — Does not a man cease from thirsting and from 
the pleasure of drinking at the same moment ? 

Cal. True. 

Soc. And if he is hungry, or has any other desire, does he 
not cease from the desire and the pleasure at the same 
moment ? 

Cal. Very true. 

Soc. Then he ceases from pain and pleasure at the same 
moment ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. But he does not cease from good and evil at the same 
moment, as you ha\e admitted do you still adhere to what 
you said ? 

Cal. Yes, I do ; but what is the inference? 

Soc. Why, my friend, the inference is that the good is not 

to the man of the world is foolishness. 

the same as the pleasant, or the evil the same as the painful ; 
there is a cessation of pleasure and pain at the same moment ; 
but not of good and evil, for they are different. How then 
can pleasure be the same as good, or pain as evil ? And I 
would have you look at the matter in another light, which 
could hardly, I think, have been considered by you when you 
identified them : Are not the good good because they have 
good present with them, as the beautiful are those who have 
beauty present with them ? 

Cal Yes. 

Soc. And do you call the fools and cowards good men? 
For you were saying just now that the courageous and the 
wise are the good — would you not say so ? 

Cal Certainly. 

Soc. And did you never see a foolish child rejoicing ? 

Cal Yes, I have. 

Soc . And a foolish man too ? 

Cal Yes, certainly; but what is your drift? 

498 Soc. Nothing particular, if you will only answer. 

Cal Yes, I have. 

Soc. And did you ever see a sensible man rejoicing or 
sorrowing ? 

Cal Yes. 

Soc. Which rejoice and sorrow most — the wise or the 
foolish ? 

Cal They are much upon a par, I think, in that respect. 

Soc. Enough : And did you ever see a coward in battle ? 

Cal To be sure. 

Soc. And which rejoiced most at the departure of the 
enemy, the coward or the brave ? 

Cal I should say ‘most* of both; or at any rate, they re- 
joiced about equally. 

Soc. No matter; then the cowards, and not only the brave, 
rejoice ? 

Cal Greatly. * 

Soc. And the foolish ; so it would seem ? 

Cal Yes. 

Soc. And are only the cowards pained at the approach of 
their enemies, or are the brave also pained ? 

Cal Both are pained. 

387 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicliss. 

Another 
point of 
view. 

C C 2 

388 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

Good is in 
proportion 
to pleasure, 
and the bad 
are often 
as much 
or more 
pleased 
than the 
good. 

A far-fetched argument , 

Soc. And are they equally pained ? 

Cal . I should imagine that the cowards are more pained. 

Soc . And are they not better pleased at the enemy’s de- 
parture ? 

Cal. I dare say. 

Soc . Then are the foolish and the wise and the cowards 
and the brave all pleased and pained, as you were saying, in 
nearly equal degree ; but are the cowards more pleased and 
pained than the brave ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. But surely the wise and brave are the good, and the 
foolish and the cowardly are the bad ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. Then the good and the bad are pleased and pained in 
a nearly equal degree ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. Then are the good and bad good and bad in a nearly 
equal degree, or have the bad the advantage both in good 
and evil? [i. e. in having more pleasure and more pain.] 

Cal. I really do not know what you mean. 

Soc. Why, do you not remember saying that the good were 
good because good was present with them, and the evil 
because evil ; and that pleasures were goods and pains 
evils ? 

Cal. Yes, I remember. 

Soc. And are not these pleasures or goods present to those 
who rejoice — if they do rejoice ? 

Cal. Certainly. 

Soc. Then those who rejoice are good when goods are 
present with them ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. And those who are in pain have evil or sorrow present 
with them ? 

Cal. Yes. f 

Soc. And would you still say that the evil are evil by reason 
of the presence of evil ? 

Cal. I should. r ' 

Soc . Then those who rejoice are good, and those who are 
in pain evil ? 

Cal. Yes. 

3«9 

of which Callicles fails to see the drift. 

Soc. The degrees of good and evil vary with the degrees 
of pleasure and of pain ? 

Cal Yes. 

Soc. Have the wise man and the fool, the brave and the 
coward, joy and pain in nearly equal degrees ? or would you 
say that the coward has more ? 

Cal I should say that he has. 

Soc. Help me then to draw out the conclusion which 
follows from our admissions ; for it is good to repeat and 
499 review what is good twice and thrice over, as they say. 
Both the wise man and the brave man we allow to be good ? 

Cal Yes. 

Soc. And the foolish man and the coward to be evil? 

Cal Certainly. 

Soc. And he who has joy is good ? 

Cal Yes. 

Soc. And he who is in pain is evil ? 

Cal Certainly. 

Soc. The good and evil both have joy and pain, but, per- 
haps, the evil has more of them ? 

Cal Yes. 

Soc. Then must we not infer, that the bad man is as good 
and bad as the good, or, perhaps, even better ? — is not this a 
further inference which follows equally with the preceding 
from the assertion that the good and the pleasant are the 
same : — can this be denied, Callicles ? 

Cal I have been listening and making admissions to you, 
Socrates ; and I remark that if a person grants you anything 
in play, you, like a child, want to keep hold and will not give 
it back. But do you really suppose that I or any other 
human being denies that some pleasures are good and others 
bad? 

Soc. Alas, Callicles, how unfair you are 1 you certainly treat 
me as if I were a child, sometimes saying one thing, and then 
another, as if you were meaning to deceive me. And yet I 
thought at first that you were my friend, and would not have 
deceived me if you could have helped. Cut I see that I was 
mistaken ; and now I suppose that I must make the best 
of a bad business, as they said of old, and take what I 
can get out of you. — Well, then, as I understand you to 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

Therefore 
the bad 
man is as 
good as the 
good, or 
perhaps 
even better. 

Socrates 

begins 

again with 

some 

obvious 

truisms. 

390 The unfairness of Callicles who, when beaten , 

Gorgias. say, I may assume that some pleasures are good and others 

Socrates, evil ? 

Callicles. Q d YeS . 

Soc. The beneficial are good, and the hurtful are evil ? 

Cal . To be sure. 

Soc. And the beneficial are those which do some good, and 
the hurtful are those which do some evil ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. Take, for example, the bodily pleasures of eating and 
drinking, which we were just now mentioning — you mean to 
say that those which promote health, or any other bodily ex- 
cellence, are good, and their opposites evil ? 

Cal. Certainly. 

Soc . And in the same way there are good pains and there 
are evil pains ? 

Cal. To be sure. 

Soc. And ought we not to choose and use the good 
pleasures and pains? 

Cal. Certainly. 

Soc. But not the evil ? 

Cal. Clearly. 

Soc. Because, if you remember, Polus and I have agreed 
that all our actions are to be done for the sake of the good ; 

— and will you agree with us in saying, that the good is the 
end of all our actions, and that all our actions are to be done 
for the sake of the good, and not the good for the sake of 500 
them ? — will you add a third vote to our two ? 

Cal. I will. 

Soc. Then pleasure, like everything else, is to be sought 
for the sake of that which is good, and not that which is good 
for the sake of pleasure ? 

Cal. To be sure. 

Soc. But can every man choose what pleasures are good 
and what are evil, or must he have art or knowledge of them 
in detail ? 4 

Cal. He must have art. 

Soc. Let me now remind you of what I was saying to 
Gorgias and Polus ; I was saying, as you will not have for- 
gotten, that there were some processes which aim only at 
pleasure, and know nothing of a better and worse, and there 

39i 

pretends that his answers are not serious . 

are other processes which know good and evil. And I 
considered that cookery, which I do not call an art, but only 
an experience, was of the former class, which is concerned 
. with pleasure, and that the art of medicine was of the class 
which is concerned with the good. And now, by the god of 
friendship, I must beg you, Callicles, not to jest, or to 
imagine that I am jesting with you ; do not answer at 
random and contrary to your real opinion ; — for you will ob- 
serve that we are arguing about the way of human life ; and to 
a man who has any sense at all, what question can be more 
serious than this ? — whether he should follow after that way 
of life to which you exhort me, and act what you call the 
manly part of speaking in the assembly, and cultivating 
rhetoric, and engaging in public affairs, according to the 
principles now in vogue ; or whether he should pursue the 
life of philosophy ; — and in what the latter way differs from 
the former. But perhaps we had better first try to dis- 
tinguish them, as I did before, and when we have come to 
an agreement that they are distinct, we may proceed to con- 
sider in what they differ from one another, and which of 
them we should choose. Perhaps, however, you do not 
even now understand what I mean ? 

Cal . No, I do not. 

Soc. Then I will explain myself more clearly : seeing that 
you and I have agreed that there is such a thing as good, 
and that there is such a thing as pleasure, and that pleasure 
is not the same as good, and that the pursuit and process of 
acquisition of the one, that is pleasure, is different from the 
pursuit and process of acquisition of the other, which is 
good — I wish that you would tell me whether you agree 
with me thus far or not — do you agree? 

Cal. I do. 

Soc. Then I will proceed, and ask whether you also agree 
501 with me, and whether you think that I spoke the truth when 
I further said to Gorgias and Polua that cookery in my 
opinion is only an experience, and not an art at all; and 
that whereas medicine is an art, and attends to the nature and 
constitution of the patient, and has principles of action and 
reason in each case, cookery in attending upon pleasure 
never regards either the nature or reason of that pleasure to 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

Socrates 
repeats his 
distinction 
between 
true arts 
and flat- 
teries or 
shams, 

392 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

to which 
Callicles 
pretends 
to give 
assent. 

There are 

arts which 

delight 

mankind 

but which 

never 

consider 

the soul's 

higher 

interest. 

Callicles grows more and more 

which she devotes herself, but goes straight to her end, nor 
ever considers or calculates anything, but works by experience 
and routine, and just preserves the recollection of what she 
has usually done when producing pleasure. And first, I 
would have you consider whether I have proved what I was 
saying, and then whether there are not other similar pro- 
cesses which have to do with the soul — some of them pro- 
cesses of art, making a provision for the soul’s highest 
interest — others despising the interest, and, as in the 
previous case, considering only the pleasure of the soul, 
and how this may be acquired, but not considering what 
pleasures are good or bad, and having no other aim but to 
afford gratification, whether good or bad. In my opinion, 
Callicles, there are such processes, and this is the sort of 
thing which I term flattery, whether concerned with the 
body or the soul, or whenever employed with a view to 
pleasure and without any consideration of good and evil. 
And now I wish that you would tell me whether you agree 
with us in this notion, or whether you differ. 

Cal. I do not differ ; on the contrary, I agree ; for in that 
way I shall soonest bring the argument to an end, and shall 
oblige my friend Gorgias. 

Soc. And is this notion true of one soul, or of two or 
more? 

Cal. Equally true of two or more. 

Soc . Then a man may delight a whole assembly, and yet 
have no regard for their true interests ? 

Cal Yes. 

Soc . Can you tell me the pursuits which delight mankind 
— or rather, if you would prefer, let me ask, and do you 
answer, which of them belong to the pleasurable class, and 
which of them not ? In the first place, what say you of flute- 
playing? Does not that appear to be an art which seeks 
only pleasure, Callicles, and thinks of nothing else ? 

Cal I assent. ‘ 

Soc . And is not the same true of all similar arts, as, for 
example, the art of playing the lyre at festivals ? 

Cal Yes. 

Soc. And what do you say of the choral art and of dithy- 
rambic poetry ? — are not they of the same nature ? Do you 

impatient of the argument . 393 

imagine that Cinesias the son of Meles cares about what Gorgias. 

502 will tend to the moral improvement of his hearers, or about Socrates, 
what will give pleasure to the multitude ? callio.es. 

Cal There can be no mistake about Cinesias, Socrates. 

Soc . And what do you say of his father, Meles the harp- 
player ? Did he perform with any view to the good of his 
hearers ? Could he be said to regard even their pleasure ? 

For his singing was an infliction to his audience. And of 
harp-playing and dithyrambic poetry in general, what would ' 
you say? Have they not been invented wholly for the sake 
of pleasure ? 

Cal. That is my notion of them. 

Soc. And as for the Muse of Tragedy, that solemn and 
august personage — what are her aspirations? Is all her 
aim and desire only to give pleasure to the spectators, or 
does she fight against them and refuse to speak of their 
pleasant vices, and willingly proclaim in word and song 
truths welcome and unwelcome ? — which in your judgment 
is her character ? 

Cal There can be no doubt, Socrates, that Tragedy has 
her face turned towards pleasure and the gratification of the 
audience. 

Soc. And is not that the sort of thing, Callicles, which we 
were just now describing as flattery ? 

Cal Quite true. 

Soc. Well now, suppose that we strip all poetry of song 
and rhythm and metre, there will remain speech 1 ? 

Cal To be sure. 

Soc. And this speech is addressed to a crowd of people ? 

Cal Yes. 

Soc. Then poetry is a sort of rhetoric ? 

Cal True. 

Soc . And do not the poets in the theatres seem to you to 
be rhetoricians ? 

Cal Yes. 

Soc. Then now we have discovered a sort of rhetoric Poetry is of 
which is addressed to a crowd of men, Vomen, and children, 
freemen and slaves. And this is not much to our taste, for 
we have described it as having the nature of flattery. 

1 Cp. Rep. iii. 392 foil. 

394 

Gorgias. 

Socrates. 

Callicles. 

Oratory, 
too, as 
practised 
regards the 
interest of 
the speaker 
rather than 
the good of 
the people. 

There 
might be a 
higher style 
of oratory ; 
and Calli- 
cles thinks 
that such 
really ex- 
isted in the 
great days 
of old, 
the days of 
Miltiades 
and The- 
mistocles 
and 

Pericles. 

Yet even 
these 

famous men 
had no 
ideal or 
standard. 

.. Poetry a sort of rhetoric . 

Cal. Quite true. 

Soc. Very good. And what do you say of that other 
rhetoric which addresses the Athenian assembly and the 
assemblies of freemen in other states ? Do the rhetoricians 
appear to you always to aim at what is best, and do they 
seek to improve the citizens by their speeches, or are they 
too, like the rest of mankind, bent upon giving them pleasure, 
forgetting the public good in the thought of their own 
interest, playing with the people as with children, and trying 
to amuse them, but never considering whether they are 
better or worse for this ? 

Cal. I must distinguish. There are some who have a real S°3 
care of the public in what they say, while others are such as 
you describe. 

Soc . I am contented with the admission that rhetoric is of 
two sorts; one, which is mere flattery and disgraceful de- 
clamation ; the other, which is noble and aims at the 
training and improvement of the souls of the citizens, and 
strives to say what is best, whether welcome or unwelcome, 
to the audience ; but have you ever known such a rhetoric ; 
or if you have, and can point out any rhetorician who is of 
this stamp, who is he ? 

Cal. But, indeed, I am afraid that I cannot tell you of any 
such among the orators who are at present living. 

Soc. Well, then, can you mention any one of a former 
generation, who maybe said to have improved the Athenians, 
who found them worse and made them better, from the day 
that he began to make speeches ? for, indeed, I do not know 
of such a man. 

Cal. What ! did you never hear that Themistocles was a 
good man, and Cimon and Miltiades and Pericles, who is 
just lately dead, and whom you heard yourself? 

Soc. Yes, Callicles, they were good men, if, as you said at 
first, true virtue consists only in the satisfaction of our own 
desires and those of 4 others ; but if not, and if, as we were 
afterwards compelled to acknowledge, the satisfaction of 
some desires makes *Us better, and of others, worse, and we 
ought to gratify the one and not the other, and there is an 
art in distinguishing them, — can you tell me of any of these 
statesmen who did distinguish them ? 

The good man , like the good artist , a lover of order . 395 

Ca 7 . No, indeed, I cannot. Gorgias . 

Soc. Yet, surely, Callicles, if you look you will find such Socrates, 
a one. Suppose that we just calmly consider whether any Callicles * 
of these was such as I have described. Will not the good Som ! , 

0 standard 

man, who says whatever he says with a view to the best, needed 
speak with a reference to some standard and not at random ; other l , han 
just as all other artists, whether the painter, the builder, the interest, 
shipwright, or any other look all of them to their own work, 
and do not select and apply at random what they apply, but ' 
strive to give a definite form to it ? The artist disposes all 
504 things in order, and compels the one part to harmonize and 
accord with the other part, until he has constructed a regular 
and systematic whole ; and this is true of all artists, and in 
the same way the trainers and physicians, of whom we spoke 
before, give order and regularity to the body : do you deny 
this? 

Cal. No; I am ready to admit it. 

Soc. Then the house in which order and regularity prevail Order is 
is good ; that in which there is disorder, evil ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. And the same is true of a ship ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. And the same may be said of the human body ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. And what would you say of the soul ? Will the good 
soul be that in which disorder is prevalent, or that in which 
there is harmony and order ? 

Cal. The latter follows from our previous admissions. 

Soc. What is the name which is given to the effect of 
harmony and order in the body? 

Cal. I suppose that you mean health and strength ? 

Soc. Yes, I do; and what is the name which you 
would give to the effect of harmony and order in the 
soul? Try and discover a name for this as well as for the 
other. 

Cal. Why not give the name yourself, Socrates ? 

Soc. Well, if you had rather that* I should, I will; and 
you shall say whether you agree with me, and if not, you 
shall refute and answer me. ' Healthy/ as I conceive, is the 
name which is given to the regular order of the body, 

good, dis- 
order evil, 
in a ship, 
in a human 
body, in a 
human 
soul. 

396 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

From 
order and 
law spring 
temperance 
and justice. 

The true 
rhetorician 
will seek to 
implant 
these vir- 
tues, to 
implant 
justice 
and take 
away 
injustice. 

The body 
of the sick 
and the 
soul of the 
wicked 
must be 
chastised 
and im- 
proved. 

Callicles again turns restive . 

whence comes health and every other bodily excellence : is 
that true or not ? 

Cal True. 

Soc . And 'lawful’ and 'law’ are the names which are 
given to the regular order and action of the soul, and these 
make men lawful and orderly : — and so we have temperance 
and justice : have we not ? 

Cal \ Granted. 

Soc . And will not the true rhetorician who is honest and 
understands his art have his eye fixed upon these, in all the 
words which he addresses to the souls of men, and in all his 
actions, both in what he gives and in what he takes away ? 
Will not his aim be to implant justice in the souls of his 
citizens and take away injustice, to implant temperance and 
take away intemperance, to implant every virtue and take 
away every vice ? Do you not agree ? 

CaL I agree. 

Soc. For what use is there, Callicles, in giving to the body 
of a sick man who is in a bad state of health a quantity of 
the most delightful food or drink or any other pleasant 
thing, which may be really as bad for him as if you gave him 505 
nothing, or even worse if rightly estimated. Is not that 
true ? 

Cal. I will not say No to it. 

Soc . For in my opinion there is no profit in a man’s life if 
his body is in an evil plight —in that case his life also is evil : 
am I not right ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. When a man is in health the physicians will gener- 
ally allow him to eat when he is hungry and drink when he 
is thirsty, and to satisfy his desires as he likes, but when he 
is sick they hardly suffer him to satisfy his desires at all : 
even you will admit that ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. And does not ‘the same argument hold of the soul, 
my good sir ? While she is in a bad state and is senseless 
and intemperate and ifnjust and unholy, her desires ought to 
be controlled, and she ought to be prevented from doing 
anything which does not tend to her own improvement. 

Cal : Yes. 

397 

Then * One man must do for two ! 

Soc. Such treatment will be better for the soul herself? 

Cal. To be sure. 

Soc . And to restrain her from her appetites is to chastise 
her? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. Then restraint or chastisement is better for the soul 
than intemperance or the absence of control, which you 
were just now preferring ? 

Cal. I do not understand you, Socrates, and I wish that 
you would ask some one who does. 

Soc . Here is a gentleman who cannot endure to be im- 
proved or to subject himself to that very chastisement of 
which the argument speaks ! 

Cal. I do not heed a word of what you are saying, and 
have only answered hitherto out of civility to Gorgias. 

Soc. What are we to do, then ? Shall we break off in the 
middle ? 

Cal. You shall judge for yourself. 

Soc. Well, but people say that * a tale should have a head 
and not break off in the middle/ and I should not like to 
have the argument going about without a head 1 ; please 
then to go on a little longer, and put the head on. 

Cal. How tyrannical you are, Socrates! I wish that you 
and your argument would rest, or that you would get some 
one else to argue with you, 

Soc. But who else is willing?— I want to finish the 
argument. 

Cal. Cannot you finish without my help, either talking 
straight on, or questioning and answering yourself? 

Soc. Must I then say with Epicharmus, 'Two men spoke 
before, but now one shall be enough , ? I suppose that there 
is absolutely no help. And if I am to carry on the enquiry 
by myself, I will first of all remark that not only I but all of 
us should have an ambition to know what is true and what is 
false in this matter, for the discover^ of the truth is a com- 
mon good. And now I will proceed to argue according to 
506 my own notion. But if any of youathink that I arrive at 
conclusions which are untrue you must interpose and refute 
me, for I do not speak from any knowledge of what I am 
1 Cp. Laws vi. 752 A. 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

Callicles 
does not 
wish to be 
improved. 

398 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Gorgias, 

Callicles. 

The plea- 
sant not the 
same as the 
good, and 
is to be 
sought only 
for the sake 
of the 
good ; and 
we are good 
when good 
is present 
in us, and 
good is the 
effect of 
order and 
truth and 
art. 

Recapitulation of the argument . 

saying; I am an enquirer like yourselves, and therefore, if 
my opponent says anything which is of force, I shall be the 
first to agree with him. I am speaking on the supposition 
that the argument ought to be completed ; but if you think 
otherwise let us leave off and go our ways. 

Gor. I think, Socrates, that we should not go our ways 
until you have completed the argument ; and this appears to 
me to be the wish of the rest of the company; I myself 
should very much like to hear what more you have to say. 

Soc. I too, Gorgias, should have liked to continue the 
argument with Callicles, and then I might have given him an 
'Amphion * in return for his ' Zethus 11 ; but since you, Calli- 
cles, are unwilling to continue, I hope that you will listen, 
and interrupt me if I seem to you to be in error. And if you 
refute me, I shall not be angry with you as you are with me, 
but I shall inscribe you as the greatest of benefactors on the 
tablets of my soul. 

Cal. My good fellow, never mind me, but get on. 

Soc. Listen to me, then, while I recapitulate the argument : 

— Is the pleasant the same as the good? Not the same. 
Callicles and I are agreed about that. And is the pleasant 
to be pursued for the sake of the good ? or the good for the 
sake of the pleasant ? The pleasant is to be pursued for the 
sake of the good. And that is pleasant at the presence of 
which we are pleased, and that is good at the presence of 
which we are good ? To be sure. And we are good, and all 
good things whatever are good when some virtue is present 
in us or them ? That, Callicles, is my conviction. But the 
virtue of each thing, whether body or soul, instrument or 
creature, when given to them in the best way comes to them 
not by chance but as the result of the order and truth and 
art which are imparted to them : Am I not right ? I maintain 
that I am. And is not the virtue of each thing dependent on 
order or arrangement? Yes, I say. And that which makes 
a thing good is the proper order inhering in each thing? 
Such is my view. And is not the soul which has an order of 
her own better than t^iat which has no order? Certainly. 
And the soul which has order is orderly? Of course. And 
that which is orderly is temperate ? Assuredly. And the 507 

1 p- 485- 

The intercommunion of the virtues . 

temperate soul is good? No other answer can I give, Calli- 
cles dear ; have you any ? 

Cal. Go on, my good fellow. 

Soc. Then I shall proceed to add, that if the temperate 
soul is the good soul, the soul which is in the opposite 
condition, that is, the foolish and intemperate, is the bad soul. 
Very true. 

And will not the temperate man do what is proper, both in 
relation to the gods and to men ; — for he would not be tem- 
perate if he did not ? Certainly he will do what is proper. 
In his relation to other men he will do what is just ; and in 
his relation to the gods he will do what is holy ; and he who 
does what is just and holy must be just and holy? Very 
true. And must he not be courageous? for the duty of a 
temperate man is not to follow or to avoid what he ought not, 
but what he ought, whether things or men or pleasures or 
pains, and patiently to endure when he ought ; and therefore, 
Callicles, the temperate man, being, as we have described, 
also just and courageous and holy, cannot be other than 
a perfectly good man, nor can the good man do otherwise 
than well and perfectly whatever he does ; and he who does 
well must of necessity be happy and blessed, and the evil 
man who does evil, miserable : now this latter is he whom 
you were applauding — the intemperate who is the opposite of 
the temperate. Such is my position, and these things I 
affirm to be true. And if they are true, then I further affirm 
that he who desires to be happy must pursue and practise 
temperance and run away from intemperance as fast as his 
legs will carry him : he had better order his life so as not to 
need punishment; but if either he or any of his friends, 
whether private individual or city, are in need of punishment, 
then justice must be done and he must suffer punishment, if 
he would be happy. This appears to me to be the aim which 
a man ought to have, and towards which he ought to direct 
all the energies both of himself and the state, acting so 
that he may have temperance and justice present with him 
and be happy, not suffering his lusts to be unrestrained, and 
in the never-ending desire to satisfy them leading a robber’s 
life. Such a one is the friend neither of God nor man, for 
he is incapable of communion, and he who is incapable of 

399 

Gorgias . 

Socrates. 

Callicles. 

The tem- 
perate soul 
is the good 
soul, just in 
relation to 
men, and 
holy in 
relation to 
gods, and 
is therefore 
happy; and 
the intem- 
perate is 
the reverse 
of all this. 

400 

Gorgias. 

Socrates. 

If it be ad- 
mitted that 
virtue is 
happiness 
and vice 
misery, 
then what 
Socrates 
said about 
the use of 
rhetoric in 
self-accusa- 
tion turns 
out to be 
true. 

Geometry in both worlds . 

communion is also incapable of friendship. And philoso- 
phers tell us, Callicles, that communion and friendship 
and orderliness and temperance and justice bind together 508 
heaven and earth and gods and men, and that this universe is 
therefore called Cosmos or order, not disorder or misrule, 
my friend. But although you are a philosopher you seem to 
me never to have observed that geometrical equality is 
mighty, both among gods and men ; you think that you ought 
to cultivate inequality or excess, and do not care about 
geometry. — Well, then, either the principle that the happy 
are made happy by the possession of justice and temperance, 
and the miserable miserable by the possession of vice, must 
be refuted, or, if it is granted, what will be the consequences ? 

All the consequences which I drew before, Callicles, and 
about which you asked me whether I was in earnest when I 
said that a man ought to accuse himself and his son and his 
friend if he did anything wrong, and that to this end he 
should use his rhetoric— all those consequences are true. 
And that which you thought that Polus was led to admit out 
of modesty is true, viz. that, to do injustice, if more disgrace- 
ful than to suffer, is in that degree worse; and the other 
position, which, according to Polus, Gorgias admitted out of 
modesty, that he who would truly be a rhetorician ought to 
be just and have a knowledge of justice, has also turned out 
to be true. 

And now, these things being as we have said, let us 
proceed in the next place to consider whether you are right 
in throwing in my teeth that I am unable to help myself 
or any of my friends or kinsmen, or to save them in the 
extremity of danger, and that I am in the power of another 
like an outlaw to whom any one may do what he likes, — he 
may box my ears, which was a brave saying of yours; or 
take away my goods or banish me, or even do his worst and 
kill me; a condition which, as you say, is the height of 
disgrace. My answer^to you is one which has been already 
often repeated, but may as well be repeated once more. I 
tell you, Callicles, that to be boxed on the ears wrongfully is 
not the worst evil which can befall a man, nor to have my 
purse or my body cut open, but that to smite and slay me 
and mine wrongfully is far more disgraceful and more evil ; 

401 

The paradoxes are proven . 

aye, and to despoil and enslave and pillage, or in any way at Gorgias. 
all to wrong me and mine, is far more disgraceful and evil to Socrates, 
the doer of the wrong than to me who am the sufferer. Callio.es. 

509 These truths, which have been already set forth as I state 
them in the previous discussion, would seem now to have 
been fixed and riveted by us, if I may use an expression 
which is certainly bold, in words which are like bonds of 
iron and adamant ; and unless you or some other still more 
enterprising hero shall break them, there is no possibility of 
denying what I say. For my position has always been, that 
I myself am ignorant how these things are, but that I have 
never met any one who could say otherwise, any more than 
you can, and not appear ridiculous. This is my position The great- 
still, and if what I am saying is true, and injustice is the est evil to 
greatest of evils to the doer of injustice, and yet there is if burthere^ 
possible a # greater than this greatest of evils 1 , in an unjust is a greater 
man not suffering retribution, what is that defence of which be punished 
the want will make a man truly ridiculous? Must not the fordoing 
defence be one which will avert the greatest of human evils? m J ustlce * 
And will not the worst of all defences be that with which 
a man is unable to defend himself or his family or his 
friends? — and next will come that which is unable to avert 
the next greatest evil ; thirdly that which is unable to avert 
the third greatest evil; and so of other evils. As is the 
greatness of evil so is the honour of being able to avert them 
in their several degrees, and the disgrace of not being able to 
avert them. Am I not right, Callicles ? 

Cal . Yes, quite right. 

Soc. Seeing then that there are these two evils, the doing 
injustice and the suffering injustice — and we affirm that to do 
injustice is a greater, and to suffer injustice a lesser evil — by 
what devices can a man succeed in obtaining the two 
advantages, the one of not doing and the other of not suffer- 
ing injustice? must he have the power, or only the will to 
obtain them? I mean to ask whether^ man will escape in- 
justice if he has only the will to escape, or must he have 
provided himself with the power ? • 

Cal . He must have provided himself with the power; that 
is clear. 

1 Cp. Republic, 9. 578 ff. 
vol. 11. n d 

402 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

The tyrant 
naturally 
hates both 
his su- 
periors and 
inferiors : 
he likes 
only those 
who resem- 
ble him in 
character. 

The tyrant and his satellites . 

Soc. And what do you say of doing injustice? Is the will 
only sufficient, and will that prevent him from doing injustice, 
or must he have provided himself with power and art ; and 
if he have not studied and practised, will he be unjust still ? 
Surely you might say, Callicles, whether you think that Polus 
and I were right in admitting the conclusion that no one 
does wrong voluntarily, but that all do wrong against their 
will ? 

Cal . Granted, Socrates, if you will only have done. 5 xo 

Soc . Then, as would appear, power and art have to be pro- 
vided in order that we may do no injustice ? 

Cal. Certainly. 

Soc. And what art will protect us from suffering injustice, 
if not wholly, yet as far as possible ? I want to know whether 
you agree with me ; for I think that such an art is the art of 
one who is either a ruler or even tyrant himself, of the equal 
and companion of the ruling power. 

Cal. Well said, Socrates ; and please to observe how 
ready I am to praise you when you talk sense. 

Soc. Think and tell me whether you would approve of an- 
other view of mine : To me every man appears to be most 
the friend of him who is most like to him — like to like, as 
ancient sages say : Would you not agree to this ? 

Cal. I should. 

Soc. But when the tyrant is rude and uneducated, he may 
be expected to fear any one who is his superior in virtue, and 
will never be able to be perfectly friendly with him. 

Cal. That is true. 

Soc. Neither will he be the friend of anyone who is greatly 
his inferior, for the tyrant will despise him, and will never 
seriously regard him as a friend. 

Cal. That again is true. 

Soc. Then the only friend worth mentioning, whom the 
tyrant can have, will be one who is of the same character, and 
has the same likes and dislikes, and is at the same time 
willing to be subject and subservient to him ; he is the man 
who will have power .in the state, and no one will injure him 
with impunity:— is not that so ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc . And if a young man begins to ask how he may be- 

The bad man will kill the good ’ 

come great and formidable, this would seem to be the way — 
he will accustom himself, from his youth upward, to feel 
sorrow and joy on the same occasions as his master, and will 
contrive to be as like him as possible ? 

Cal Yes. 

Soc. And in this way he will have accomplished, as you 
and your friends would say, the end of becoming a great man 
and not suffering injury ? 

Cal Very true. 

Soc. But will he also escape from doing injury ? Must not 
the very opposite be true, if he is to be like the tyrant in his 
511 injustice, and to have influence with him? Will he not 
rather contrive to do as much wrong as possible, and not be 
punished ? 

Cal True. 

Soc. And by the imitation of his master and by the power 
which he thus acquires will not his soul become bad and 
corrupted, and will not this be the greatest evil to him ? 

Cal You always contrive somehow or other, Socrates, to 
invert everything : do you not know that he who imitates the 
tyrant will, if he has a mind, kill him who does not imitate 
him and take away his goods ? 

Soc. Excellent Callicles, I am not deaf, and I have heard 
that a great many times from you and from Polus and from 
nearly every man in the city, but I wish that you would hear 
me too. I dare say that he will kill him if he has a mind — 
the bad man will kill the good and true. 

Cal And is not that just the provoking thing ? 

Soc. Nay, not to a man of sense, as the argument shows: do 
you think that all our cares should be directed to prolonging 
life to the uttermost, and to the study of those arts which 
secure us from danger always ; like that art of rhetoric 
which saves men in courts of law, and which you advise me 
to cultivate ? 

Cal Yes, truly, and very good advice* too. 

Soc. Well, my friend, but what do you think of swimming ; 
is that an art of any great pretensions ? • 

Cal No, indeed. 

Soc. And yet surely swimming saves a man from death, 
and there are occasions on which he must know how to swim. 

d d 2 

403 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

And the 
way to be a 
great man 
and not to 
suffer injury 
is to be- 
come like 
him. And 
ther$ can be 
no greater 
evil to 
him than 
this. 

But how 
provoking 
that the bad 
man should 
slay the 
good ! 

Nay, but 
we should 
not always 
study the 
arts which 
save us from 
death;— the 
art of swim- 
ming, the 
art of the 
pilot, &c. 

404 

Gorgias. 

Socrates. 

The pilot 
demands 
a very 
moderate 
payment as 
the fare of a 
passenger 
from 

Athens to 
Aegina, 
because 
he is not 
certain 
whether 
salvation 
from death 
be a good 
or an evil. 

The 

engineer, 
too : — how 
much better 
than the 
pleader ! 

Who can say whether to be saved 

And if you despise the swimmers, I will tell you of another 
and greater art, the art of the pilot, who not only saves the 
souls of men, but also their bodies and properties from the 
extremity of danger, just like rhetoric. Yet his art is modest 
and unpresuming : it has no airs or pretences of doing any- 
thing extraordinary, and, in return for the same salvation 
which is given by the pleader, demands only two obols, if he 
brings us from Aegina to Athens, or for the longer voyage 
from Pontus or Egypt, at the utmost two drachmae, when he 
has saved, as I was just now saying, the passenger and his 
wife and children and goods, and safely disembarked them at 
the Piraeus, — this is the payment which he asks in return for 
so great a boon ; and he who is the master of the art, and has 
done all this, gets out and walks about on the sea-shore by 
his ship in an unassuming way. For he is able to reflect and 
is aware that he cannot tell which of his fellow-passengers he 
has benefited, and which of them he has injured in not allow- 
ing them to be drowned. He knows that they are just the 
same when he has disembarked them as when they embarked, 512 
and not a whit better either in their bodies or in their souls ; 
and he considers that if a man who is afflicted by great and 
incurable bodily diseases is only to be pitied for having 
escaped, and is in no way benefited by him in having been 
saved from drowning, much less he who has great and incur- 
able diseases, not of the body, but of the soul, which is the 
more valuable part of him ; neither is life worth having nor 
of any profit to the bad man, whether he be delivered from 
the sea, or the law-courts, or any other devourer ; — and so he 
reflects that such a one had better not live, for he cannot 
live well 1 . 

And this is the reason why the pilot, although he is our 
saviour, is not usually conceited, any more than the engineer, 
who is not at all behind either the general, or the pilot, or 
any one else, in his saving power, for he sometimes saves 
whole cities. Is there any comparison between him and the 
pleader ? And if he were to talk, Callicles, in your grandiose 
style, he would bui*y you under a mountain of words, de- 
claring and insisting that we ought all of us to be engine- 
makers, and that no other profession is worth thinking about ; 

1 Cp. Rep. iii. 407 E. 

405 

from death be good or evil ? 

he would have plenty to say. Nevertheless you despise him Gorgias. 
and his art, and sneeringly call him an engine-maker, and Socrates, 
you will not allow your daughters to marry his son, or marry Callicles - 
your son to his daughters. And yet, on your principle, what He too is 
justice or reason is there in your refusal ? What right have of your 
you to despise the engine-maker, and the others whom I was saviours ; 
just now mentioning? I know that you will say, ‘I am sp^sehhn, 6 " 
better, and better born.’ But if the better is not what I say, whereas 
and virtue consists only in a man saving himself and his, 
whatever may be his character, then your censure of the him highly, 
engine-maker, and of the physician, and of the other arts of 
salvation, is ridiculous. O my friend ! I want you to see that 
the noble and the good may possibly be something different 
from saving and being saved May not he who is truly a 
man cease to care about living a certain time ? —he knows, as 
women say, that no man can escape fate, and therefore he is 
not fond of life ; he leaves all that with God, and considers 
in what way he can best spend his appointed term whether 
by assimilating himself to the constitution under which he 
5 I 3 lives, as you at this moment have to consider how you may 
become as like as possible to the Athenian people, if you 
mean to be in their good graces, and to have power in the 
state ; whereas I want you to think and see whether this is I want you 
for the interest of either of us ; — I would not have us risk ^ h °°J^ der 
that which is dearest on the acquisition of this power, like you can 
the Thessalian enchantresses, who, as they say, brine: down P osslbl y be * 

77 J J 7 ° 4 come great 

the moon from heaven at the risk of their own perdition, among the 

But if you suppose that any man will show you the art of p^p 1 ® 

, . . i , .. . , unless you 

becoming great in the city, and yet not conforming yourself become 
to the ways of the city, whether for better or worse, then I like them - 
can only say that you are mistaken, Callicles ; for he who 
would deserve to be the true natural friend of the Athenian 
Demus, aye, or of Pyrilampes’ darling who is called after 
them,' must be by nature like them, and not an imitator only. 

He, then, who will make you most like them, will make you 
as you desire, a .statesman and orator: for every man is 
pleased when he is spoken to in his own language and spirit, 
and dislikes any other. But perhaps you, sweet Callicles, 
may be of another mind. What do you say? 

Cal . Somehow or other your words, Socrates, always 

Reiteration. 

406 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

Callicles in- 
clines for an 
instant to 
the Gospel 
of Socrates, 
but the love 
of the world 
and of 
popularity 
overcomes 
him. 

Two pro- 
cesses of 
training ; 
one having 
a view to 
pleasure, 
the other to 
good. 

And we 
must train 
our citizens 
with a view 
to their 
good ; and, 
as in other 
arts, we 
must show 
that we can 
be trusted 
to improve 
them. 

appear to me to be good words ; and yet, like the rest of the 
world, I am not quite convinced by them 1 . 

Soc. The reason is, Callicles, that the love of Demus which 
abides in your soul is an adversary to me ; but I dare say that 
if we recur to these same matters, and consider them more 
thoroughly, you may be convinced for all that. Please, then, 
to remember that there are two processes of training all 
things, including body and soul ; in the one, as we said, we 
treat them with a view to pleasure, and in the other with a 
view to the highest good, and then we do not indulge but 
resist them : was not that the distinction which we drew? 

Cal. Very true. 

Soc. And the one which had pleasure in view was just a 
vulgar flattery : — was not that another of our conclusions ? 

Cal. Be it so, if you will have it. 

Soc. And the other had in view the greatest improvement 
of that which was ministered to, whether body or soul ? 

Cal. Quite true. 

Soc. And must we not have the same end in view in the 
treatment of our city and citizens? Must we not try and 
make them as good as possible? For we have already dis- 
covered that there is no use in imparting to them any other 514 
good, unless the mind of those who are to have the good, 
whether money, or office, or any other sort of power, be 
gentle and good. Shall we say that ? 

Cal. Yes, certainly, if you like. 

Soc. Well, then, if you and I, Callicles, were intending 2 to 
set about some public business, and were advising one another 
to undertake buildings, such as walls, docks or temples of the 
largest size, ought we not to examine ourselves, first, as to 
whether we know or do not know the art of building, and 
who taught us ? — would not that be necessary, Callicles ? 

Cal. True. 

Soc . In the second place, we should have to consider 
whether we had ever constructed any private house, either of 
our own or for our friends, and whether this building of ours 
was a success or nolt; and if upon consideration we found 
that we had had good and eminent masters, and had been 

1 Cp. Symp. 216: 1 Alcib. 135. 
a Reading with the majority of MSS. rrpd£ovTts. 

407 

The silence of Callicles. 

successful in constructing many fine buildings, not only with 
their assistance, but without them, by our own unaided skill 
— in that case prudence would not dissuade us from proceed- 
ing to the construction of public works. But if we had no 
master to show, and only a number of worthless buildings or 
none at all, then, surely, it would be ridiculous in us to 
attempt public works, or to advise one another to undertake 
them. Is not this true ? 

Cal . Certainly. 

Soc . And does not the same hold in all other cases? If 
you and I were physicians, and were advising one another 
that we were competent to practise as state-physicians, 
should I not ask about you, and would you not ask about 
me, Well, but how about Socrates himself, has he good 
health? and was any one else ever known to be cured by 
him, whether slave or freeman ? And I should make the 
same enquiries about you. And if we arrived at the con- 
clusion that no one, whether citizen or stranger, man or 
woman, had ever been any the better for the medical skill 
of either of us, then, by Heaven, Callicles, what an absurdity 
to think that we or any human being should be so silly as to 
set up as state-physicians and advise others like ourselves to 
do the same, without having first practised in private, 
whether successfully or not, and acquired experience of the 
art ! Is not this, as they say, to begin with the big jar 
when you are learning the potter’s art; which is a foolish 
thing ? 

15 Cal. True. 

Soc . And now, my friend, as you are already beginning to 
be a public character, and are admonishing and reproaching 
me for not being one, suppose that we ask a few questions 
of one another. Tell me, then, Callicles, how about making 
any of the citizens better? Was there ever a man who was 
once vicious, or unjust, or intemperate, or foolish, and became 
by the help of Callicles good and noble ? Was there ever 
such a man, whether citizen or stranger, slave or freeman ? 
Tell me, Callicles, if a person were t<? ask these questions 
of you, what would you answer ? Whom would you say 
that you had improved by your conversation ? There may 
have been good deeds of this sort which were done by you 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

And now, 
Callicles, 
what are 
you who 
are a public 
character 
doing for 
the im- 
provement 
of the 
citizens ? 

408 

Gorgias . 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

Cal lid es 
makes no 
answer. 

Or how did 
Peridesand 
the great 
of old 
benefit the 
dtizens? 

Pericles 
corrupted 
them by 
giving them 
pay. 

He made 
them worse 
instead of 
better, for 
they all but 
put him to 
death. 

Pericles a bad political shepherd. 

as a private person, before you came forward in public. 
Why will you not answer.? 

Cal. You are contentious, Socrates. 

Soc. Nay, I ask you, not from a love of contention, but 
because I really want to know in what way you think that 
affairs should be administered among us — whether, when you 
come to the administration of them, you have any other aim 
but the improvement of the citizens ? Have we not already 
admitted many times over that such is the duty of a public 
man? Nay, we have surely said so; for if you will not 
answer for yourself I must answer for you. But if this is 
what the good man ought to effect for the benefit of his own 
state, allow me to recall to you the names of those whom 
you were just now mentioning, Pericles, and Cimon, and 
Miltiades, and Themistocles, and ask whether you still think 
that they were good citizens. 

Cal. I do. 

Soc. But if they were good, then clearly each of them 
must have made the citizens better instead of worse? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. And, therefore, when Pericles first began to speak in 
the assembly, the Athenians were not so good as when he 
spoke last ? 

Cal. Very likely. 

Soc. Nay, my friend, 'likely* is not the word; for if he 
was a good citizen, the inference is certain. 

Cal. And what difference does that make ? * 

Soc. None ; only I should like further to know whether 
the Athenians are supposed to have been made better by 
Pericles, or, on the contrary, to have been corrupted by him ; 
for I hear that he was the first who gave the people pay, 
and made them idle and cowardly, and encouraged them in 
the love of talk and of money. 

Cal. You heard that, Socrates, from the laconising set 
who bruise their ears/ 

Soc. But what I am going to tell you now is not mere 
hearsay, but well knbwn both to you and me : that at first, 
Pericles was glorious and his character unimpeached by any 
verdict of the Athenians — this was during the time when 516 
they were not so good — yet afterwards, when they had been 

409 

For he taught the citizens only to kick and butt . 

made good and gentle by him, at the very end of his life 
they convicted him of theft, and almost put him to death, 
clearly under the notion that he was a malefactor. 

Cal . Well, but how does that prove Pericles’ badness ? 

Soc. Why, surely, you would say that he was a bad 
manager of asses or horses or oxen, who had received them 
originally neither kicking nor butting nor biting him, and 
implanted in them all these savage tricks? Would he not 
be a bad manager of any animals who received them gentle, 
and made them fiercer than they were when he received 
them ? What do you say ? 

Cal. I will do you the favour of saying 'yes.* 

Soc . And will you also do me the favour of saying whether 
man is an animal ? 

Cal. Certainly he is. 

Soc . And was not Pericles a shepherd of men ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. And if he was a good political shepherd, ought not 
the animals who were his subjects, as we were just now 
acknowledging, to have become more just, and not more 
unjust? 

Cal. Quite true. 

Soc. And are not just men gentle, as Homer says? — or 
are you of another mind ? 

Cal . I agree. 

Soc. And yet he really did make them more savage than 
he received them, and their savageness was shown towards 
himself ; which he must have been very far from desiring. 

Cal. Do you want me to agree with you ? 

Soc. Yes, if I seem to you to speak the truth. 

Cal. Granted then. 

Soc. And if they were more savage, must they not have 
been more unjust and inferior? 

Cal. Granted again. 

Soc. Then upon this view, Pericles was not a good states- 
man ? 

Cal . That is, upon your view. 

Soc. Nay, the view is yours, after what you have admitted. 
Take the case of Cimon again. Did not the very persons 
whom he was serving ostracize him, in order that they might 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

Cimon was 
ostracised ; 

410 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

Themis- 
tocles was 
exiled ; 
Miltiades 
was nearly 
thrown 
from the 
rock. 

The older 
statesmen 
no better 
than the 
existing 
ones. 

The older 
statesmen 
not able 
really to 
elevate the 
state to a 
higher 
level, but 
more 

capable of 
gratifying 
its desires. 

The old argument repeated \ 

not hear his voice for ten years ? and they did just the same 
to Themistocles, adding the penalty of exile ; and they voted 
that Miltiades, the hero of Marathon, should be thrown into 
the pit of death, and he was only saved by the Prytanis. 
And yet, if they had been really good men, as you say, these 
things would never have happened to them. For the good 
charioteers are not those who at first keep their place, and 
then, when they have broken-in their horses, and themselves 
become better charioteers, are thrown out - that is not the 
way either in charioteering or in any profession. — What do 
you think ? 

Cal. I should think not. 

Soc . Well, but if so, the truth is as I have said already, 517 
that in the Athenian State no one has ever shown himself to 
be a good statesman— you admitted that this was true of 
our present statesmen, but not true of former ones, and you 
preferred them to the others; yet they have turned out 
to be no better than our present ones ; and therefore, if 
they were rhetoricians, they did not use the true art of 
rhetoric or of flattery, or they would not have fallen out 
of favour. 

Cal. But surely, Socrates, no living man ever came near 
any one of them in his performances. 

Soc. O, my dear friend, I say nothing against them re- 
garded as the serving-men of the State ; and I do think that 
they were certainly more serviceable than those who are 
living now, and better able to gratify the wishes of the State ; 
but as to transforming those desires and not allowing them 
to have their way, and using the powers which they had, 
whether of persuasion or of force, in the improvement of 
their fellow-citizens, which is the prime object of the truly 
good citizen, I do not see that in these respects they were a 
whit superior to our present statesmen, although I do admit 
that they were more clever at providing ships and walls and 
docks, and all that. You and I have a ridiculous way, for 
during the whole time that we are arguing, we are always 
going round and rotind to the same point, and constantly 
misunderstanding one another. If I am not mistaken, you 
have admitted and acknowledged more than once, that there 
are two kinds of operations which have to do with the body, 

with illustrations taken from common life . 

and two which have to do with the soul : one of the two is 
ministerial, and if our bodies are hungry provides food for 
them, and if they are thirsty gives them drink, or if they are 
cold supplies them with garments, blankets, shoes, and all 
that they crave. I use the same images as before inten- 
tionally, in order that you may understand me the better. 
The purveyor of the articles may provide them either whole- 
sale or retail, or he may be the maker of any of them, — the 
baker, or the cook, or the weaver, or the shoemaker, or the 
currier ; and in so doing, being such as he is, he is naturally 
supposed by himself and every one to minister to the body. . 
For none of them know that there is another art — an art of 
gymnastic and medicine which is the true minister of the 
body, and ought to be the mistress of all the rest, and to 
use their results according to the knowledge which she has 
and they have not, of the real good or bad effects of meats 
518 and drinks on the body. All other arts which have to do 
with the body are servile and menial and illiberal ; and 
gymnastic and medicine are, as they ought to be, their 
mistresses. Now, when I say that all this is equally true of 
the soul, you seem at first to know and understand and 
assent to my words, and then a little while afterwards you 
come repeating, Has not the State had good and noble 
citizens? and when I ask you who they are, you reply, 
seemingly quite in earnest, as if I had asked, Who are or 
have been good trainers ? — and you had replied, Thearion, 
the baker, Mithoecus, who wrote the Sicilian cookery-book, 
Sarambus, the vintner : these are ministers of the body, 
first-rate in their art ; for the first makes admirable loaves, 
the second excellent dishes, and the third capital wine ; — to 
me these appear to be the exact parallel of the statesmen 
whom you mention. Now you would not be altogether 
pleased if I said to you, My friend, you know nothing of 
gymnastics ; those of whom you are speaking to me are only 
the ministers and purveyors of luxury, who have no good or 
noble notions of their art, and may very likely be filling and 
fattening men’s bodies and gaining their approval, although 
the result is that they lose their original flesh in the long 
run, and become thinner than they were before; and yet 
they, in their simplicity, will not attribute their diseases and 

411 

Gorgias . 
Socrates. 

You might 
as well say 
that the 
cook or the 
baker is 
a good 
trainer as 
that they 
were great 
statesmen. 

412 Nonsense about the cry of ingratitude which 

Gorgias . loss of flesh to their entertainers; but when in after years 
Socrates. the unhealthy surfeit brings the attendant penalty of disease, 
he who happens to be near them at the time, and offers them 
advice, is accused and blamed by them, and if they could they 
would do him some harm ; while they proceed to eulogize 
the men who have been the real authors of the mischief. 
And that, Callicles, is just what you are now doing. You 
praise the men who feasted the citizens and satisfied their 
desires, and people say that they have made the city great, 
not seeing that the swollen and ulcerated condition of the 
.State is to be attributed to these elder statesmen; for they 
have filled the city full of harbours and docks and walls and 
revenues and all that, and have left no room for justice and 
temperance. And when the crisis of the disorder comes, 519 
the people will blame the advisers of the hour, and applaud 
Themistocles and Cimon and Pericles, who are the real 
authors of their calamities ; and if you are not careful they 
may assail you and my friend Alcibiades, when they are 
losing not only their new acquisitions, but also their original 
possessions ; not that you are the authors of these misfortunes 
of theirs, although you may perhaps be accessories to them. 

The states- A great piece of work is always being made, as I see and 
. am to ld> now as °f old, about our statesmen. When the 
neither has State treats any of them as malefactors, I observe that there 
^cuse’theh- * s a & reat u P roar and indignation at the supposed wrong 
followers of which is done to them ; ' after all their many services to the 
wronging State, that they should unjustly perish/ — so the tale runs, 
should have *>ut the cry is all a lie; lor no statesman ever could be un- 
taughtthem justly put to death by the city of which he is the head. The 
case of the professed statesman is, I believe, very much like 
that of the professed sophist ; for the sophists, although they 
are wise men, are nevertheless guilty of a strange piece of 
folly; professing to be teachers of virtue, they will often 
accuse their disciples of wronging them, and defrauding 
them of their pay, ancf showing no gratitude for their services. 

Yet what can be more absurd than that men who have be- 
come just and goocf, and whose injustice has been taken 
away from them, and who have had justice implanted in 
them by their teachers, should act unjustly by reason of the 
injustice which is not in them ? Can anything be more 

is shown to statesmen at Athens. 413 

irrational, my friend, than this? You, Callicles, compel me Gorgias. 
to be a mob-orator, because you will not answer. Socrates, 

Cal. And you are the man who cannot speak unless there Callicles - 
is some one to answer ? 

Soc. I suppose that I can ; just now, at any rate, the 
speeches which I am making are long enough because you 
refuse to answer me. But I adjure you by the god of 
friendship, my good sir, do tell me whether there does 
not appear to you to be a great inconsistency in saying 
that you have made a man good, and then blaming him for 
being bad ? 

Cal. Yes, it appears so to me. 

520 Soc. Do you never hear our professors of education speak- 
ing in this inconsistent manner? 

Cal. Yes, but why talk of men who are good for nothing? 

Soc. I would rather say, why talk of men who profess to 
be rulers, and declare that they are devoted to the improve- 
ment of the city, and nevertheless upon occasion declaim 
against the utter vileness of the city: — do you think that 
there is any difference between one and the other? My 
good friend, the sophist and the rhetorician, as I was saying 
to Polus, are the same, or nearly the same ; but you ignorantly 
fancy that rhetoric is a perfect thing, and sophistry a thing to 
be despised ; whereas the truth is, that sophistry is as much Sophistry 
superior to rhetoric as legislation is to the practice of law, or is much 

.. . it* T superior to 

gymnastic to medicine. 1 he orators and sophists, as 1 am rhenric. 
inclined to think, are the only class who cannot complain of 
the mischief ensuing to themselves from that which they 
teach others, without in the same breath accusing themselves 
of having done no good to those whom they profess to 
benefit. Is not this a fact ? 

Cal. Certainly it is. 

Soc. If they were right in saying that they make men He who 
better, then they are the only class who can afford to leave teaches 

£ honesty 

their remuneration to those who have been benefited by ought to 
them. Whereas if a man has been benefited in any other teach his 
way, if, for example, he has been taugl?t to run by a trainer, 
he might possibly defraud him of his pay, if the trainer left the lesson, 
the matter to him, and made no agreement with him that he 
should receive money as soon as he had given him the 

414 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

Callicles 
advises 
Socrates 
to be the 
servant of 
the state, 
and not run 
the risk of 
popular 
enmity. 

The physician of the state 

utmost speed ; for not because of any deficiency of speed do 
men act unjustly, but by reason of injustice. 

Cal . Very true. 

Soc. And he who removes injustice can be in no danger 
of being treated unjustly : he alone can safely leave the 
honorarium to his pupils, if he be really able to make them 
good — am I not right 1 ? 

Cal. Yes. 

Soc. Then we have found the reason why there is no dis- 
honour in a man receiving pay who is called in to advise 
about building or any other art? 

Cal. Yes, we have found the reason. 

Soc. But when the point is, how a man may become best 
himself, and best govern his family and state, then to say 
that you will give no advice gratis is held to be dishonour- 
able? 

Cal. True. 

Soc. And why ? Because only such benefits call forth a 
desire to requite them, and there is evidence that a benefit 
has been conferred when the benefactor receives a return ; 
otherwise not. Is this true ? 

Cal. It is. 

Soc. Then to which service of the State do you invite 
me? determine for me. Am I to be the physician of the 521 
State who will strive and struggle to make the Athenians as 
good as possible ; or am I to be the servant and flatterer of 
the State ? Speak out, my good friend, freely and fairly as 
you did at first and ought to do again, and tell me your 
entire mind. 

Cal. I say then that you should be the servant of the 
State. 

Soc. The flatterer ? well, sir, that is a noble invitation. 

Cal. The Mysian, Socrates, or what you please. For if 
you refuse, the consequences will be — 

Soc. Do not repeal the old story — that he who likes will 
kill me and get my money ; for then I shall have to repeat 
the old answer, that «he will be a bad man and will kill the 
good, and that the money will be of no use to him, but that 

Cp. Protag. 328. 

and the flatterer of the state. 

he will wrongly use that which he wrongly took, and if 
wrongly, basely, and if basely, hurtfully. 

Cal. How confident you are, Socrates, that you will never 
come to harm ! you seem to think that you are living in 
another country, and can never be brought into a court of 
justice, as you very likely may be brought by some miserable 
and mean person. 

Soc. Then I must indeed be a fool, Callicles, if I do not 
know that in the Athenian State any man may suffer any- 
thing. And if I am brought to trial and incur the dangers 
of which you speak, he will be a villain who brings me to 
trial —of that I am very sure, for no good man would accuse 
the innocent. Nor shall I be surprised if I am put to death. 
Shall I tell you why I anticipate this? 

Cal. By all means. 

Soc. I think that I am the only or almost the only 
Athenian living who practises the true art of politics ; I am 
the only politician of my time. Now, seeing that when I 
speak my words are not uttered with any view of gaining 
favour, and that I look to what is best and not to what is 
most pleasant, having no mind to use those arts and graces 
which you recommend, I shall have nothing to say in the 
justice court. And you might argue with me, as I was 
arguing with Polus : — I shall be tried just as a physician 
would be tried in a court of little boys at the indictment of 
the cook. What would he reply under such circumstances, 
if some one were to accuse him, saying, 1 O my boys, many 
evil things has this man done to you : he is the death of 
you, especially of the younger ones among you, cutting and 
522 burning and starving and suffocating you, until you know 
not what to do ; he gives you the bitterest potions, and 
compels you to hunger and thirst. How unlike the variety 
of meats and sweets on which I feasted you V What do 
you suppose that the physician would be able to reply when 
he found himself in such a predicament? If he told the 
truth he could only say, ‘All these evil things, my boys, I 
did for your health,’ and then would there not just be a 
clamour among a jury like that ? How they would cry out ! 

Cal. I dare say. 

Soc . Would he not be utterly at a loss for a reply ? 

415 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

Socrates 
has no fear 
of popular 
enmity, but 
is quite 
aware that 
he will 
incur it, 
because 
he is the 
only true 
politician 
of his time, 

416 

Gorgias. 

Socrates, 

Callicles. 

and he has 
no defence 
against 
men such 
as his 

opponents : 

that is to 
say, he has 
the defence 
of truth, but 
not such a 
defence 
as men 
ordinarily 
produce. 

The philo- 
sopher has 
no reason 
to dread 
death, as 
Socrates 
will prove 
by a rela- 
tion of what 

The myth. 

Cal. He certainly would. 

Soc. And I too shall be treated in the same way, as I well 
know, if I am brought before the court. For I shall not 
be able to rehearse to the people the pleasures which I have 
procured for them, and which, although I am not disposed 
to envy either the procurers or enjoyers of them, are deemed 
by them to be benefits and advantages. And if any one says 
that I corrupt young men, and perplex their minds, or that 
I speak evil of old men, and use bitter words towards them, 
whether in private or public, it is useless for me to reply, as 
I truly might:— All this I do for the sake of justice, and 
with a view to your interest, my judges, and to nothing else/ 
And therefore there is no saying what may happen to me. 

Cal. And do you think, Socrates, that a man who is thus 
defenceless is in a good position ? 

Soc . Yes, Callicles, if he have that defence, which as you 
have often acknowledged he should have — if he be his own 
defence, and have never said or done anything wrong, either 
in respect of gods or men ; and this has been repeatedly ac- 
knowledged by us to be the best sort of defence. And if any 
one could convict me of inability to defend myself or others 
after this sort, I should blush for shame, whether I was con- 
victed before many, or before a few, or by myself alone ; and 
if I died from want of ability to do so, that would indeed grieve 
me. But if I died because I have no powers of flattery or 
rhetoric, I am very sure that you would not find me repining 
at death. For no man who is not an utter fool and coward 
is afraid of death itself, but he is afraid of doing wrong. 

For to go to the world below having one’s soul full of in- 
justice is the last and worst of all evils. And in proof of 
what I say, if you have no objection, I should like to tell you 
a story. 

Cal. Very^well, proceed; and then we shall have done. 

Soc. Listen, then, as story-tellers say, to a very pretty 523 
tale, which I dare sa^ that you may be disposed to regard as 
a fable only, but which, as I believe, is a true tale, for I 
mean to speak the 4 ruth. Homer tells us 1 , how Zeus and 
Poseidon and Pluto divided the empire which they inherited 
from their father. Now in the days of Cronos there existed 
1 II. xv. 187. foil. 

4i7 

The myth . 

a law respecting the destiny of man, which has always been, 
and still continues to be in Heaven, — that he who has lived 
all his life in justice and holiness shall go, when he is dead, 
to the Islands of the Blessed, and dwell there in perfect 
happiness out of the reach of evil ; but that he who has lived 
unjustly and impiously shall go to the house of vengeance 
and punishment, which is called Tartarus. And in the time 
of Cronos, and even quite lately in the reign of Zeus, the 
judgment was given on the very day on which the men were 
to die ; the judges were alive, and the men were alive ; and 
the consequence was that the judgments were not well given. 
Then Pluto and the authorities from the Islands of the 
Blessed came to Zeus, and said that the souls found their 
way to the wrong places. Zeus said : 1 1 shall put a stop to 
this ; the judgments are not well given, because the persons 
who are judged have their clothes on, for they are alive; and 
there are many who, having evil souls, are apparelled in fair 
bodies, or encased in wealth or rank, and, when the day of 
judgment arrives, numerous witnesses come forward and 
testify on their behalf that they have lived righteously. The 
judges are awed by them, and they themselves too have their 
clothes on when judging ; their eyes and ears and their whole 
bodies are interposed as a veil before their own souls. All 
this is a hindrance to them ; there are the clothes of the 
judges and the clothes of the judged. — What is to be done? 
I will tell you : — In the first place, I will deprive men of 
the foreknowledge of death, which they possess at present : 
this power which they have Prometheus has already received 
my orders to take from them : in the second place, they shall 
be entirely stripped before they are judged, for they shall be 
judged when they are dead ; and the judge too shall be naked, 
that is to say, dead — he with his naked soul shall pierce 
into the other naked souls; and they shall ^ie suddenly 
and be deprived of all their kindred, and leave their brave 
attire strewn upon the earth — conducteS in this manner, the 
judgment will be just. I knew all about the matter before 
any of you, and therefore I have made fny sons judges ; two 
from Asia, Minos and Rhadamanthus, and one from Europe, 
524 Aeacus. And these, when they are dead, shall give judg- 
ment in the meadow at the parting of the ways, whence the 
VOL. 11. e e 

Gorgias. 

Socrates. 

happens in 
the world 
below. 

Before the 
days of 
Zeus, the 
judgments 
of another 
world too 
much re- 
sembled the 
judgments 
of this. 

Zeus takes 
measures 
for the cor- 
rection and 
improve- 
ment of 
them. 

418 

Gorgias. 

Socrates. 

As the body 
is, so is the 
soul after 
death ; they 
both retain 
the traces 
of what 
they were 
in life, 

and they 
are pun- 
ished ac- 
cordingly. 

The souls of the departed . 

two roads lead, one to the Islands of the Blessed, and the 
other to Tartarus. Rhadamanthus shall judge those who 
come from Asia, and Aeacus those who come from Europe. 
And to Minos I shall give the primacy, and he shall hold 
a court of appeal, in case either of the two others are in any 
doubt then the judgment respecting the last journey of 
men will be as just as possible/ 

From this tale, Callicles, which I have heard and believe, 

I draw the following inferences : — Death, if I am right, is in 
the first place the separation from one another of two things, 
soul and body ; nothing else. And after they are separated 
they retain their several natures, as in life; the body keeps 
the same habit, and the results of treatment or accident are 
distinctly visible in it : for example, he who by nature or 
training or both, was a tall man while he was alive, will 
remain as he was, after he is dead ; and the fat man will 
remain fat ; and so on ; and the dead man, who in life had a 
fancy to have flowing hair, will have flowing hair. And if he 
was marked with the whip and had the prints of the scourge, 
or of wounds in him when he was alive, you might see the 
same in the dead body ; and if his limbs were broken or mis- 
shapen when he was alive, the same appearance would be 
visible in the dead. And in a word, whatever was the habit 
of the body during life would be distinguishable after death, 
either perfectly, or in a great measure and for a certain time. 
And I should imagine that this is equally true of the soul, 
Callicles ; when a man is stripped of the body, all the natural 
or acquired affections of the soul are laid open to view. — 
And when they come to the judge, as those from Asia come 
to Rhadamanthus, he places them near him and inspects 
them quite impartially, not knowing whose the soul is : per- 
haps he may lay hands on the soul of the great king, or of 
some other king or potentate, who has no soundness in him, 
but his soul is marked with the whip, and is full of the prints 
and scars of perjuries and crimes with which each action has 
stained him, and he is all crooked with falsehood and im- 525 
posture, and has no ‘straightness, because he has lived with- 
out truth. Him Rhadamanthus beholds, full of all deformity 
and disproportion, which is caused by licence and luxury 
and insolence and incontinence, and despatches him igno- 

The Homeric heroes in the world belozv . 

miniously to his prison, and there he undergoes the punish- 
ment which he deserves. 

Now the proper office of punishment is twofold : he who 
is rightly punished ought either to become better and profit 
by it, or he ought to be made an example to his fellows, that 
they may see what he suffers, and fear and become better. 
Those who are improved when they are punished by gods 
and men, are those whose sins are curable ; and they are 
improved, as in this world so also in another, by pain and 
suffering ; for there is no other way in which they can be 
delivered from their evil. But they who have been guilty of 
the worst crimes, and are incurable by reason of their crimes, 
are made examples ; for, as they are incurable, the time has 
passed at which they can receive any benefit. They get no 
good themselves, but others get good when they behold them 
enduring for ever the most terrible and painful and fearful 
sufferings as the penalty of their sins — there they are, hang- 
ing up as examples, in the prison-house of the world below, 
a spectacle and a warning to all unrighteous men who come 
thither. And among them, as I confidently affirm, will be 
found Archelaus, if Polus truly reports of him, and any other 
tyrant who is like him. Of these fearful examples, most, as 
I believe, are taken from the class of tyrants and kings and 
potentates and public men, for they are the authors of the 
greatest and most impious crimes, because they have the 
power. And Homer witnesses to the truth of this ; for they 
are always kings and potentates whom he has described as 
suffering everlasting punishment in the world below : such 
were Tantalus and Sisyphus and Tityus. But no one ever 
described Thersites, or any private person who was a villain, 
as suffering everlasting punishment, or as incurable. For to 
commit the worst crimes, as I am inclined to think, was not 
in his power, and he was happier than those vwho had the 
526 power. No, Callicles, the very bad men come from the 
class of those who have power \ And yet in that very class 
there may arise good men, and worthy of all admiration they 
are, for where there is great power to d(? wrong, to live and 
to die justly is a hard thing, and greatly to be praised, and 
few there are who attain to this. Such good and true men, 
1 Cp. Rep. x. 615 E. 
e e 2 

419 

Gorgias. 

Socrates. 

The proper 
office of 
punishment 
is either to 
improve or 
to deter. 

The meaner 
sort of men 
are incapa- 
ble of great 
crimes. 

Great men 
have some- 
times been 
good men ; 
but power 
is apt to 
corrupt 
them. 

420 

The spiritual combat. 

Gorgias . 
Socrates. 

The im- 
partiality of 
the judges 
in another 
world. 

however, there have been, and will be again, at Athens and 
in other states, who have fulfilled their trust righteously; and 
there is one who is quite famous all over Hellas, Aristeides, 
the son of Lysimachus. But, in general, great men are also 
bad, my friend. 

As I was saying, Rhadamanthus, when he gets a soul of 
the bad kind, knows nothing about him, neither who he is, 
nor who his parents are ; he knows only that he has got hold 
of a villain ; and seeing this, he stamps him as curable or in- 
curable, and sends him away to Tartarus, whither he goes 
and receives his proper recompense. Or, again, he looks 
with admiration on the soul of some just one who has lived 
in holiness and truth ; he may have been a private man or 
not; and I should say, Callicles, that he is most likely to 
have been a philosopher who has done his own work, and 
not troubled himself with the doings of other men in his life- 
time ; him Rhadamanthus sends to the Islands of the Blessed. 
Aeacus docs the same ; and they both have sceptres, and 
judge ; but Minos alone has a golden sceptre and is seated 
looking on, as Odysseus in Homer 1 declares that he saw 
him : 

‘ Holding a sceptre of gold, and giving laws to the dead.’ 

Now I, Callicles, am persuaded of the truth of these things, 
and I consider how I shall present my soul whole and 
undefiled before the judge in that day. Renouncing the 
honours at which the world aims, I desire only to know the 
truth, and to live as well as I can, and, when I die, to die as 
well as I can. And, to the utmost of my power, I exhort all 
other men to do the same. And, in return for your exhorta- 
tion of me, I exhort you also to take part in the great combat, 
which is the combat of life, and greater than every other 
earthly convict. And I retort your reproach of me, and say, 
that you will not be able to help yourself when the day of 
trial and judgment, of which I was speaking, comes upon 
you ; you will go before the judge, the son of Aegina, and, 
when he has got ydu in his grip and is carrying you off, you 527 
will gape and your head will swim round, just as mine would 
in the courts of this world, and very likely some one will 

1 Odyss. xi. 569. 

42 

The better path . 

shamefully box you on the ears, and put upon you any sort of 
insult. 

Perhaps this may appear to you to be only an old wife’s tale, 
which you will contemn. And there might be reason in your 
contemning such talcs, if by searching we could find out any- 
thing better or truer : but now you see that you and Polus 
and Gorgias, who are the three wisest of the Greeks of our 
day, are not able to show that we ought to live any life which 
does not profit in another world as well as in this. And of 
all that has been said, nothing remains unshaken but the 
saying, that to do injustice is more to be avoided than to suffer 
injustice, and that the reality and not the appearance of virtue 
is to be followed above all things, as well in public as in 
private life ; and that when any one has been wrong in any- 
thing, he is to be chastised, and that the next best thing to a 
man being just is that he should become just, and be chastised 
and punished ; also that he should avoid all flattery of him- 
self as well as of others, of the few or of the many: and 
rhetoric and any other art should be used by him, and all his 
actions should be done always, with a view to justice. 

Follow me then, and I will lead you where you will be 
happy in life and after death, as the argument shows. And 
never mind if some one despises you as a fool, and insults 
you, if he has a mind ; let him strike you, by Zeus, and do 
you be of good cheer, and do not mind the insulting blow, for 
you will never come to any harm in the practice of virtue, if 
you are a really good and true man. When we have prac- 
tised virtue together, we will apply ourselves to politics, if 
that seems desirable, or we will advise about whatever else 
may seem good to us, for we shall be better able to judge 
then. In our present condition we ought not to give our- 
selves airs, for even on the most important subjects we are 
always changing our minds ; so utterly stupid gre we ! Let 
us, then, take the argument as our guide, which has revealed 
to us that the best way of life is to praAise justice and every 
virtue in life and death. This way let us go; and in this 
exhort all men to follow, not in the way to which you trust 
and in which you exhort me to follow you ; for that way, Cal- 
licles, is nothing worth. 

Gorgias, 

Socrates. 

APPENDIX I. 

APPENDIX I. 

It seems impossible to separate by any exact line the genuine 
writings of Plato from the spurious. The only external evidence 
to them which is of much value is that of Aristotle ; for the 
Alexandrian catalogues of a century later include manifest 
forgeries. Even the value of the Aristotelian authority is a good 
deal impaired by the uncertainty concerning the date and author- 
ship of the writings which are ascribed to him. And several of 
the citations of Aristotle omit the name of Plato, and some of 
them omit the name of the dialogue from which they are taken. 
Prior, however, to the enquiry about the writings of a particular 
author, general considerations which equally affect all evidence to 
the genuineness of ancient writings are the following : Shorter 
works are more likely to have been forged, or to have received an 
erroneous designation, than longer ones ; and some kinds of com- 
position, such as epistles or panegyrical orations, are more liable 
to suspicion than others; those, again, which have a taste of 
sophistry in them, or the ring of a later age, or the slighter 
character of a rhetorical exercise, or in which a motive or some 
affinity to spurious writings can be detected, or which seem to 
have originated in a name or statement really occurring in some 
classical author, are also of doubtful credit ; while there is no 
instance of any ancient writing proved to be a forgery, which 
combines excellence with length. A really great and original 
writer would have no object in fathering If is works on Plato ; and 
to the forger or imitator, the ‘literary hack* of Alexandria and 
Athens, the Gods did not grant originality or genius. Further, in 
attempting to balance the evidence for and against a Platonic 
dialogue, we must not forget that the form of the Platonic writing 
was common to several of his contemporaries. Aeschines, Euclid, 

Appendix 1 

426 Criteria of genuineness. 

Appendix i. Phaedo, Antisthenes, and in the next generation Aristotle, are all 
said to have composed dialogues ; and mistakes of names are 
very likely to have occurred. Greek literature in the third century 
before Christ was almost as voluminous as our own, and without 
the safeguards of regular publication, or printing, or binding, 
or even of distinct titles. An unknown writing was naturally 
attributed to a known writer whose works bore the same 
character; and the name once appended easily obtained authority. 
A tendency may also be observed to blend the works and 
opinions of the master with those of his scholars. To a later 
Platonist, the difference between Plato and his imitators was not 
so perceptible as to ourselves. The Memorabilia of Xenophon 
and the Dialogues of Plato are but a part of a considerable 
Socratic literature which has passed away. And we must con- 
sider how wc should regard the question of the genuineness of 
a particular writing, if this lost literature had been preserved 
to us. 

These considerations lead us to adopt the following criteria of 
genuineness : (1) That is most certainly Plato’s which Aristotle 
attributes to him by name, which (2) is of considerable length, of 
(3) great excellence, and also (4) in harmony with the general 
spirit of the Platonic writings. But the testimony of Aristotle 
cannot always be distinguished from that of a later age (see 
above) ; and has various degrees of importance. Those writings 
which he cites without mentioning Plato, under their own names, 
e. g. the Hippias, the Funeral Oration, the Phaedo, etc., have an 
inferior degree of evidence in their favour. They may have been 
supposed by him to be the writings of another, although in the 
case of really great works, e. g. the Phaedo, this is not credible ; 
those again which are quoted but not named, are still more 
defective in their external credentials. There may be also a 
possibility that Aristotle was mistaken, or may have confused the 
master and his scholars in the case of a short writing ; but this is 
inconceivable about a v more important work, e. g. the Laws, 
especially when we remember that he was living at Athens, and 
a frequenter of the groves of the Academy, during the last twenty 
years of Plato’s life. Nor must we forget that in all his numerous 
citations from the Platonic writings he never attributes any 
passage found in the extant dialogues to any one but Plato. And 

Inferior works not necessarily spurious. 427 

lastly, we may remark that one or two great writings, such as the Appendix I. 
Parmenides and the Politicus, which are wholly devoid of Aristo- 
telian (1) credentials may be fairly attributed to Plato, on the 
ground of (2) length, (3) excellence, and (4) accordance with the 
general spirit of his writings. Indeed the greater part of the 
evidence for the genuineness of ancient Greek authors may be 
summed up under two heads only : (1) excellence ; and ( 2 ) uni- 
formity of tradition — a kind of evidence, which though in many 
cases sufficient, is of inferior value. 

Proceeding upon these principles we appear to arrive at the 
conclusion that nineteen-twentieths of all the writings which have 
ever been ascribed to Plato, are undoubtedly genuine. There is 
another portion of them, including the Epistles, the Epinomis, the 
dialogues rejected by the ancients themselves, namely, the Axio- 
chus, De justo, De virtute, Demodocus, Sisyphus, Eryxias, which 
on grounds, both of internal and external evidence, we are able 
with equal certainty to reject. But there still remains a small 
portion of which we are unable to affirm either that they are 
genuine or spurious. They may have been written in youth, or 
possibly like the works of some painters, may be partly or wholly 
the compositions of pupils ; or they may have been the writings 
of some contemporary transferred by accident to the more cele- 
brated name of Plato, or of some Platonist in the next generation 
who aspired to imitate his master. Not that on grounds either of 
language or philosophy we should lightly reject them. Some 
difference of style, or inferiority of execution, or inconsistency of 
thought, can hardly be considered decisive of their spurious 
character. For who always docs justice to himself, or who 
writes with equal care at all times? Certainly not Plato, who 
exhibits the greatest differences in dramatic power, in the form- 
ation of sentences, and in the use of words, if his earlier writings 
are compared with his later ones, say the Protagoras or Phaedrus 
with the Laws. Or who can be expected to think in the same 
manner during a period of authorship extending over above fifty 
years, in an age of great intellectual activity, as well as of political 
and literary transition ? Certainly not# Plato, whose earlier 
writings are separated from his later ones by as wide an interval 
of philosophical speculation as that which separates his later 
writings from Aristotle. 

428 The Lesser Hippias . 

Appendix l. The dialogues which have been translated in the first Appendix, 
and which appear to have the next claim to genuineness among 
the Platonic writings, are the Lesser Hippias, the Menexcnus or 
Funeral Oration, the First Alcibiades. Of these, the Lesser 
Hippias and the Funeral Oration are cited by Aristotle ; the first 
in the Metaphysics, iv. 29, 5, the latter in the Rhetoric, iii. 14, 11. 
Neither of them are expressly attributed to Plato, but in his 
citation of both of them he seems to be referring to passages in 
the extant dialogues. From the mention of ‘Hippias* in the 
singular by Aristotle, we may perhaps infer that he was un- 
acquainted with a second dialogue bearing the same name. 
Moreover, the mere existence of a Greater and Lesser Hippias, 
and of a First and Second Alcibiades, docs to a certain extent 
throw a doubt upon both of them. Though a very clever and 
ingenious work, the Lesser Hippias does not appear to contain 
anything beyond the power of an imitator, who was also a careful 
student of the earlier Platonic writings, to invent. The motive or 
leading thought of the dialogue ma}' be detected in Xen. Mem. 
iv. 2, 21, and there is no similar instance of a ‘ motive * which is 
taken from Xenophon in an undoubted dialogue of Plato. On the 
other hand, the upholders of the genuineness of the dialogue will 
find in the Hippias a true Socratic spirit ; they will compare the 
Ion as being akin both in subject and treatment ; they will urge 
the authority of Aristotle ; and they will detect in the treatment of 
the Sophist, in the satirical reasoning upon Homer, in the reductio 
ad absurdum of the doctrine that vice is ignorance, traces of a 
Platonic authorship. In reference to the last point we are 
doubtful, as in some of the other dialogues, whether the author is 
asserting or overthrowing the paradox of Socrates, or merely 
following the argument ‘whither the wind blows.* That no con- 
clusion is arrived at is also in accordance with the character 
of the earlier dialogues. The resemblances or imitations of the 
Gorgias, Protagoras, and Euthydemus, which have been observed 
in the Hippias, cannot %with certainty be adduced on either side 
of the argument. On the whole, more may be said in favour of 
the genuineness of the J-Iippias than against it. 

The Menexenus or Funeral Oration is cited by Aristotle, and is 
interesting as supplying an example of the manner in which the 
orators praised ‘the Athenians among the Athenians,* falsifying 

Menexenus : Alcibiades I. 429 

persons and dates, and casting a veil over the gloomier events of Appendix i. 
Athenian history. It exhibits an acquaintance with the funeral 
oration of Thucydides, and was, perhaps, intended to rival that 
great work. If genuine, the proper place of the Menexenus 
would be at the end of the Phaedrus. The satirical opening and 
the concluding words bear a great resemblance to the earlier 
dialogues ; the oration itself is professedly a mimetic work, like 
the speeches in the Phaedrus, and cannot therefore be tested by 
a comparison of the other writings of Plato. The funeral oration 
of Pericles is expressly mentioned in the Phaedrus, and this may 
have suggested the subject, in the same manner that the Cleito- 
phon appears to be suggested by the flight mention of Cleitophon 
and his attachment to Thrasymachus in the Republic, cp. 465 A ; 
and the Theages by the mention of Theages in the Apology and 
Republic ; or as the Second Alcibiades seems to be founded upon 
the text of Xenophon, Mem. i. 3, 1. A similar taste for parody 
appears not only in the Phaedrus, but in the Protagoras, in the 
Symposium, and to a certain extent in the Parmenides. 

To these two doubtful writings of Plato I have added the First 
Alcibiades, which, of all the disputed dialogues of Plato, has the 
greatest merit, and is somewhat longer than any other of them, 
though not verified by the testimony of Aristotle, and in many 
respects at variance with the Symposium in the description of the 
relations of Socrates and Alcibiades. Like the Lesser Hippias 
and the Menexenus, it is to be compared to the earlier writings of 
Plato. The motive of the piece may, perhaps, be found in that 
passage of the Symposium in which Alcibiades describes himself 
as self-convicted by the words of Socrates (2 t 6 B, C). For the 
disparaging manner in which Schleiermacher has spoken of this 
dialogue there seems to be no sufficient foundation. At the same 
time, the lesson imparted is simple, and the irony more trans- 
parent than in the undoubted dialogues of Plato. ^We know, too, 
that Alcibiades was a favourite thesis, and that at least five or six 
dialogues bearing this name passed current in antiquity, and are 
attributed to contemporaries of Socrates and Plato. (1) In the 
entire absence of real external evidence (for the catalogues of the 
Alexandrian librarians cannot be regarded as trustworthy) ; and 
(2) in the absence of the highest marks either of poetical or philo- 
sophical excellence; and (3) considering that we have express 

430 Various degrees of genuineness. 

Appendix i. testimony to the existence of contemporary writings bearing the 
name of Alcibiades, we are compelled to suspend our judgment 
on the genuineness of the extant dialogue. 

Neither at this point, nor at any other, do we propose to draw 
an absolute line of demarcation between genuine and spurious 
writings of Plato. They fade off imperceptibly from one class to 
another. There may have been degrees of genuineness in the 
dialogues themselves, as there are certainly degrees of evidence 
by which they are supported. The traditions of the oral dis- 
courses both of Socrates and Plato may have formed the basis of 
semi-Platonic writings ; some of them may be of the same mixed 
character which is apparent in Aristotle and Hippocrates, although 
the form of them is different. But the writings of Plato, unlike 
the writings of Aristotle, seem never to have been confused with the 
writings of his disciples : this was probably due to their definite 
form, and to their inimitable excellence. The three dialogues 
which we have offered in the Appendix to the criticism of the 
reader may be partly spurious and partly genuine ; they may be 
altogether spurious that is an alternative which must be frankly 
admitted. Nor can we maintain of some other dialogues, such as 
the Parmenides, and the Sophist, and Politicus, that no consider- 
able objection can be urged against them, though greatly over- 
balanced by the weight (chiefly) of internal evidence in their 
favour. Nor, on the other hand, can we exclude a bare possibility 
that some dialogues which are usually rejected, such as the 
Greater Hippias and the Cleitophon, may be genuine. The nature 
and object of these semi-Platonic writings require more careful 
study and more comparison of them with one another, and with 
forged writings in general, than they have yet received, before 
we can finally decide on their character. We do not consider 
them all as genuine until they can be proved to be spurious, as is 
often maintained and still more often implied in this and similar 
discussions ; but should say of some of them, that their genuine- 
ness is neither proven rior disproven until further evidence about 
them can be adduced. And we are as confident that the Epistles 
are spurious, as that the Republic, the Timaeus, and the Laws are 
genuine. 

On the whole, not a twentieth part of the writings which pass 
under the name of Plato, if we exclude the works rejected by the 

The doubtful works neither numerous nor important. 43 1 

ancients themselves and two or three other plausible inventions, Appfndix i. 
can be fairly doubted by those who are willing to allow that a 
considerable change and growth may have taken place in his 
philosophy (see above). That twentieth debatable portion 
scarcely in any degree affects our judgment of Plato, either as 
a thinker or a writer, and though suggesting some interesting 
questions to the scholar and critic, is of little importance to the 
general reader. 

LESSER H1PPIAS. 

VOL. II. 

INTRODUCTION. 

The Lesser Hippias may be compared with the earlier dia- 
logues of Plato, in which the contrast of Socrates and the Sophists 
is most strongly exhibited. Hippias, like Protagoras and Gorgias, 
though civil, is vain and boastful : he knows all things ; he can 
make anything, including his own clothes ; he is a manufacturer 
of poems and declamations, and also of seal-rings, shoes, strigils ; 
his girdle, which he has woven himself, is of a finer than Persian 
quality. He is a vainer, lighter nature than the two great 
Sophists (cp. Protag. 314, 337), but of the same character with 
them, and equally impatient of the short cut-and-thrust method of 
Socrates, whom he endeavours to draw into a long oration. At 
last, he gets tired of being defeated at every point by Socrates, 
and is with difficulty induced to proceed (compare Thrasymachus, 
Protagoras, Callicles, and others, to whom the same reluctance is 
ascribed). 

Steph. Hippias like Protagoras has common sense on his side, when 
363 he argues, citing passages of the Iliad in support of his view, that 
Homer intended Achilles to be the bravest, Odysseus the wisest 
of the Greeks. But he is easily overthrown by the superior 
dialectics of Socrates, who pretends to show that Achilles is not 
-369 true to his word, and that no similar inconsistency is to be found 
in Odysseus. Hippias replies that Achilles unintentionally, but 
370 Odysseus intentionally, speaks falsehood. But is if better to do 
wrong intentionally or unintentionally ? Socrates, relying on the 
analogy of the arts, maintains the former, Hippias the latter of the 
-372 two alternatives. . . . All this is quite conceivgd in the spirit of Plato, 
who is very far from making Socrates always argue on the side of 
truth. The over-reasoning on Homer, which is of course satirical, 
is also in the spirit of Plato. Poetry turned logic is even more 

f f 2 

Lesser 

Hippias. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

Analysis. 

436 

Lesser 

Hippias. 

Analysis. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

Analysis 372 - 376 . 

ridiculous than 4 rhetoric turned logic,’ and equally fallacious. 
There were reasoners in ancient as well as in modern times, who 
could never receive the natural impression of Homer, or of any 
other book which they read. The argument of Socrates, in which 
he picks out the apparent inconsistencies and discrepancies in the 
speech and actions of Achilles, and the final paradox, ‘that he 
who is true is also false,* remind us of the interpretation by 
Socrates of Simonides in the Protagoras, and of similar reasonings 
in the first book of the Republic. The discrepancies which 
Socrates discovers in the words of Achilles are perhaps as great 
as those discovered by some of the modern separatists of the 
Homeric poems 

At last, Socrates having caught Hippias in the toils of the -376 
voluntary and involuntary, is obliged to confess that he is wan- 
dering about in the same labyrinth ; he makes the reflection on 
himself which others would make upon him (cp. Protagoras, sub 
fin.). He does not wonder that he should be in a difficulty, but 
he wonders at Hippias, and he becomes sensible of the gravity of 
the situation, when ordinary men like himself can no longer go to 
the wise and be taught by them. 

It may be remarked as bearing on the genuineness of this 
dialogue : (1) that the manners of the speakers are less subtle and 
refined than in the other dialogues of Plato; (2) that the sophistry 
of Socrates is more palpable and unblushing, and also more un- 
meaning; (3) that many turns of thought and style are found in it 
which appear also in the other dialogues : - whether resemblances 
of this kind tell in favour of or against the genuineness of an 
ancient writing, is an important question which will have to be 
answered differently in different cases. For that a writer may 
repeat himself is as true as that a forger may imitate ; and Plato 
elsewhere, either of set purpose or from forgetfulness, is full of 
repetitions. *The parallelisms of the Lesser Hippias, as already 
remarked, are not of Ihe kind which necessarily imply that the 
dialogue is the work of a forger. The parallelisms of the Greater 
Hippias with the othar dialogues, and the allusion to the Lesser 
285, 286 A, B (where Hippias sketches the programme of his next 
lecture, and invites Socrates to attend and bring any friends with 
him who may be competent judges), are more than suspicious : — 

437 

The Dialogue probably genuine. 

they are of a very poor sort, such as we cannot suppose to have Lesser 
been due to Plato himself. The Greater Hippias more resembles 
the Euthydemus than any other dialogue ; but is immeasurably 
inferior to it. The Lesser Hippias seems t^have more merit 
than the Greater, and to be more Platonic in spirit. The character 
of Hippias is the same in both dialogues, but his vanity and boast- 
ing are even more exaggerated in the Greater Hippias. His art 
of memory is specially mentioned in both. He is an inferior type 
of the same species as Hippodamus of Miletus (Arist. Pol. II. 8, 

§ i). Some passages in which the Lesser Hippias may be advan- 
tageously compared with the undoubtedly genuine dialogues of 
Plato are the following : — Less. Hipp. 369 B : cp. Rep. vi. 487 
(Socrates’ cunning in argument): || ib. D, E: cp. Laches 188 
(Socrates* feeling about arguments) : || 372 B, C : cp. Rep. i. 338 B 
(Socrates not unthankful) : (| 373 B : cp. Rep. i. 340 D (Socrates 
dishonest in argument). 

The Lesser Hippias, though inferior to the other dialogues, may 
be reasonably believed to have been written by Plato, on the 
ground (1) of considerable excellence ; (a) of uniform tradition 
beginning with Aristotle and his school. That the dialogue falls 
below the standard of Plato’s other works, or that he has attributed 
to Socrates an unmeaning paradox (perhaps with the view of 
showing that he could beat the Sophists at their own weapons ; or 
that he could 4 make the worse appear the better cause ’ ; or 
merely as a dialectical experiment)— are not sufficient reasons for 
doubting the genuineness of the work. 

LESSER HIPPIAS. 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE . 

Eudicus, Socrates, Hippias. 

steph. Eudicus. Wiiy are you silent, Socrates, after the magnifi- 
363 cent display which Hippias has been making ? Why do 
you not either refute his words, if he seems to you to have 
been wrong in any point, or join with us in commending 
him? There is the more reason why you should speak, 
because we are now alone, and the audience is confined to 
those who may fairly claim to take part in a philosophical 
discussion. 

Socrates. I should greatly like, Eudicus, to ask Hippias 
the meaning of what he was saying just now about Homer. 
I have heard your father, Apemantus, declare that the Iliad 
of Homer is a finer poem than the Odyssey in the same 
degree that Achilles was a better man than Odysseus; 
Odysseus, he would say, is the central figure of the one poem 
and Achilles of the other. Now, I should like to know, if 
Hippias has no objection to tell me, what he thinks about 
these two heroes, and which of them he maintains to be the 
better ; he has already told us in the course of his exhibition 
many things of various kinds about Homer an<i divers other 
poets. 

Eud. I am sure that Hippias will be delighted to answer 
anything which you would like to ask ; tell me, Hippias, if 
Socrates asks you a question, will you Answer him ? 

Hippias . Indeed, Eudicus, I should be strangely incon- 
sistent if I refused to answer Socrates, when at each Olympic 
festival, as I went up from my house at Elis to the temple of 

Lesser 
Hippias . 

Socrates, 

Eudicus, 

Hippias. 

The Iliad 
of Homer a 
finer work 
than the 
Odyssey, 
because 
Achilles, 
the hero of 
the poem, is 
greater than 
Odysseus. 

440 

Lesser 
Hippias . 

Socrates, 

Hippias. 

Achilles the 
bravest, 
Nestor the 
wisest, and 
Odysseus 
the wiliest 
of the 
Greeks at 
'I roy. 

Achilles and Odysseus . 

Olympia, where all the Hellenes were assembled, I con- 
tinually professed my willingness to perform any of the 
exhibitions which I had prepared, and to answer any 
questions which any one had to ask. 

Soc. Truly, Hippias, you are to be congratulated, if at 364 
every Olympic festival you have such an encouraging opinion 
of your own wisdom when you go up to the temple. I doubt 
whether any muscular hero would be so fearless and con- 
fident in offering his body to the combat at Olympia, as you 
are in offering your mind. 

Hip. And with good reason, Socrates ; for since the day 
when I first entered the lists at Olympia I have never found 
any man who was my superior in anything \ 

Soc . What an ornament, Hippias, will the reputation of 
your wisdom be to the city of Elis and to your parents ! 

But to return: what say you of Odysseus and Achilles? 
Which is the better of the two ? and in what particular does 
either surpass the other? For when you were exhibiting 
and there was company in the room, though I could not 
follow you, I did not like to ask what you meant, because a 
crowd of people were present, and I was afraid that the 
question might interrupt your exhibition. But now that 
there are not so many of us, and my friend Eudicus bids me 
ask, I wish you would tell me what you were saying about 
these two heroes, so that I may clearly understand ; how 
did you distinguish them ? 

Hip. I shall have much pleasure, Socrates, in explaining 
to you more clearly than I could in public my views about 
these and also about other heroes. I say that Homer 
intended Achilles to be the bravest of the men who went to 
Troy, Nestor the wisest, and Odysseus the wiliest. 

Soc . O rare Hippias, will you be so good as not to 
laugh, if I find a difficulty in following you, and repeat my 
questions several times over ? Please to answer me kindly 
and gently. 

Hip. I should be greatly ashamed of myself, Socrates, 
if I, who teach others and take money of them, could not, 
when I was asked by you, answer in a civil and agreeable 
manner. 

1 Cp. Gorgias 448 A. 

44i 

The courtesy of Hippias . 

Soc. Thank you : the fact is, that I seemed to understand Lesser 
what you meant when you said that the poet intended hippias. 
Achilles to be the bravest of men, and also that he intended 
Nestor to be the wisest ; but when you said that he meant 
Odysseus to be the wiliest, I must confess that I could not 
understand what you were saying. Will you tell me, and 
then I shall perhaps understand you better; has not Homer 
made Achilles wily? 

Hip . Certainly not, Socrates ; he is the most straight- 
forward of mankind, and when Homer introduces them 
talking with one another in the passage called the Prayers, 

Achilles is supposed by the poet to say to Odysseus : — 

365 1 Son of Laertes, sprung from heaven, crafty Odysseus, I will speak out 

plainly the word which I intend to carry out in act, and which will, I believe, 
be accomplished. For I hate him like the gates of death who thinks one 
thing and says another. But I will speak that which shall be accomplished.’ 

Now, in these verses he clearly indicates the character of 
the two men ; he shows Achilles to be true and simple, and 
Odysseus to be wily and false ; for he supposes Achilles to 
be addressing Odysseus in these lines. 

Soc . Now, Hippias, I think that I understand your Wily 
meaning ; when you say that Odysseus is wily, you clearly 
mean that he is false ? 

Hip. Exactly so, Socrates ; it is the character of Odysseus, 
as he is represented by Homer in many passages both of 
the Iliad and Odyssey. 

Soc . And Homer must be presumed to have meant that 
the true man is not the same as the false ? 

Hip. Of course, Socrates. 

Soc. And is that your own opinion, Hippias? 

Hip. Certainly ; how can I have any other ? 

Soc. Well, then, as there is no possibility of asking 

Homer what he meant in these verses of his, let us leave 

§ 

him ; but as you show a willingness to take up his cause, 
and your opinion agrees with what you declare to be his, 
will you answer on behalf of yourself £nd him ? 

Hip. I will ; ask shortly anything which you like. 

So£. Do you say that the false, like the sick, have no 
power to do things, or that they have the power to do things? 

442 

Lesser 

ILippias. 

Socrates, 

Hippias. 

And the 
false have 
the power 
of deceiving 
mankind ; 
they are 
prudent 
and know- 
ing and 
wise, and 
have the 
ability to 
speak 
falsely. 

True and False . 

Hip . I should say that they have power to do many things, 
and in particular to deceive mankind. 

Soc . Then, according to you, they are both powerful and 
wily, are they not ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. And are they wily, and do they deceive by reason of 
their simplicity and folly, or by reason of their cunning and 
a certain sort of prudence ? 

Hip. By reason of their cunning and prudence, most 
certainly. 

Soc. Then they are prudent, I suppose ? 

Hip. So they are — very. 

Soc. And if they are prudent, do they know or do they not 
know what they do ? 

Hip. Of course, they know very well; and that is why 
they do mischief to others. 

Soc. And having this knowledge, are they ignorant, or are 
they wise ? 

Hip. Wise, certainly; at least, in so far as they can 
deceive. 

Soc. Stop, and let us recall to mind what you are saying ; 366 
are you not saying that the false are powerful and prudent 
and knowing and wise in those things about which they are 
false? 

Hip. To be sure. 

Soc. And the true differ from the false —the true and the 
false are the very opposite of each other ? 

Hip. That is my view. 

Soc. Then, according to your view, it would seem that 
the false are to be ranked in the class of the powerful and 
wise? 

Hip. Assuredly. 

Soc. And vhen you say that the false are powerful and 
wise in so far as they^re false, do you mean that they have 
or have not the power of uttering their falsehoods if they 
like? 

Hip. I mean to say that they have the power. 

Soc. In a word, then, the false are they who are wise and 
have the power to speak falsely ? 

Hip. Yes. 

True and False. 

443 

Soc . Then a man who has not the power of speaking 
falsely and is ignorant cannot be false ? 

Hip. You are right. 

Soc . And every man has power who does that which he 
wishes at the time when he wishes. I am not speaking of 
any special case in which he is prevented by disease or 
something of that sort, but I am speaking generally, as I 
might say of you, that you are able to write my name when 
you like. Would you not call a man able who could do that ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. And tell me, Hippias, are you not a skilful calculator 
and arithmetician ? 

Hip. Yes, Socrates, assuredly 1 am. 

Soc. And if some one were to ask you what is the sum of 
3 multiplied by 700, you would tell him the true answer in 
a moment, if you pleased ? 

Hip. Certainly I should. 

Soc. Is not that because you are the wisest and ablest of 
men in these matters ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. And being as you are the wisest and ablest of men 
in these matters of calculation, are you not also the best ? 

Hip. To be sure, Socrates, I am the best. 

Soc. And therefore you would be the most able to tell the 
truth about these matters, would you not ? 

Hip. Yes, I should. 

Soc. And could you speak^lsehoods about them equally 
well? I must beg, Hippias, that you will answer me with 
the same frankness and magnanimity which has hitherto 
characterized you. If a person were to ask you what is the 
sum of 3 multiplied by 700, would not you be the best and 
most consistent teller of a falsehood, having always the 
power of speaking falsely as you have t)f sptaking truly, 
about these same matters, if you wanted to tell a falsehood, 
367 and not to answer truly? Would the ignorant man be 
better able to tell a falsehood in matters of calculation than 
you would be, if you chose? Might he not sometimes 
stumble upon the truth, when he wanted to tell a lie, because 
he did not know, whereas you who are the wise man, if you 
wanted to tell a lie would always and consistently lie ? 

Lesser 

Hippias. 

Socrates, 

Hippias. 

They must 
truly know 
that about 
which they 
falsely 
speak or 
they will 
fall into the 
error of 
speaking 
the truth by 
mistake. 

444 

Lesser 

Hippias. 

Socp \TES, 
Hippias. 

Therefore 
the same 
man must 
be true if he 
is to be 
truly false, 
in astron- 
omy, in 
geometry, 
and in all 
the sciences. 

True is false and false is true . 

Hip. Yes; there you are quite right. 

Soc. Does the false man tell lies about other things, but 
not about number, or when he is making a calculation ? 

Hip . To be sure ; he would tell as many lies about number 
as about other things. 

Soc . Then may we further assume, Hippias, that there arc 
men who are false about calculation and number ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. Who can they be ? For you have already admitted 
that he who is false must have the ability to be false : you 
said, as you will remember, that he who is unable to be false 
will not be false ? 

Hip. Yes, I remember; it was so said. 

Soc. And were you not yourself just now shown to be best 
able to speak falsely about calculation ? 

Hip. Yes; that was another thing which was said. 

Soc. And are you not likewise said to speak truly about 
calculation ? 

Hip. Certainly. 

Soc. Then the same person is able to speak both falsely 
and truly about calculation ? And that person is he who is 
good at calculation— the arithmetician? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. Who, then, Hippias, is discovered to be false at cal- 
culation? Is he not the good man? For the good man is 
the able man, and he is the true man. 

Hip. That is evident. 

Soc. Do you not see, then, that the same man is false and 
also true about the same matters? And the true man is 
not a whit better than the false ; for indeed he is the same 
with him and not the very opposite, as you were just now 
imagining. 

Hip. Not^n that instance, clearly. 

Soc. Shall we examine other instances ? 

Hip. Certainly, if you are disposed. 

Soc. Are you not also skilled in geometry ? 

Hip. I am. • 

Soc. Well, and does not the same hold in that science 
also ? Is not the same person best able to speak falsely or 
to speak truly about diagrams ; and he is — the geometrician ? 

The admirable versatility of Hippias . 

445 

368 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc . He and no one else is good at it ? 

Hip . Yes, he and no one else. 

Soc. Then the good and wise geometer has this double 
power in the highest degree ; and if there be a man who is 
false about diagrams the good man will be he, for he is able 
to be false ; whereas the bad is unable, and for this reason is 
not false, as has been admitted. 

Hip. True. 

Soc. Once more — let us examine a third case ; that of the 
astronomer, in whose art, again, you, Hippias, profess to be 
a still greater proficient than in the preceding— do you not ? 

Hip. Yes, I am. 

Soc. And does not the same hold of astronomy ? 

Hip. True, Socrates. 

Soc. And in astronomy, too, if any man be able to speak 
falsely he will be the good astronomer, but he who is not 
able will not speak falsely, for he has no knowledge. 

Hip. Clearly not. 

Soc. Then in astronomy also, the same man will be true 
and false ? 

Hip. It would seem so. 

Soc. And now, Hippias, consider the question at large 
about all the sciences, and see whether the same principle 
does not always hold. I know that in most arts you are the 
wisest of men, as I have heard you boasting in the agora at 
the tables of the money-changers, when you were setting 
forth the great and enviable stores of your wisdom ; and you 
said that upon one occasion, when you went to the Olympic 
games, all that you had on your person was made by your- 
self. You began with your ring, which was of your own 
workmanship, and you said that you could engrave rings; 
and you had another seal which was also of ycjur own work- 
manship, and a strigil and an oil flask, which you had made 
yourself; you said also that you had made the shoes which 
you had on your feet, and the cloak and the short tunic ; but 
what appeared to us all most extraordinary and a proof of 
singular art, was the girdle of your tunic, which, you said, 
was as fine as the most costly Persian fabric, and of your 
own weaving ; moreover, you told us that you had brought 

Lesser 

Hippias. 

Socrates, 

Hippias. 

Socrates 
compli- 
ments Hip- 
pias on his 
skill in en- 
graving 
gems, in 
making 
clothes and 
shoes and 
the finest 
fabrics, 
in writing 
poetry and 
prose of the 
most varied 
kind, and 
on the art 
of memory 
which he 
has in- 
vented. 

446 

Lesser 

Hippias, 

Socrates, 

Hippias. 

Yet he who 
knows and 
remembers 
all things 
can call to 
mind no 
instance in 
which the 
false is not 
also true, 
although 
he was say- 
ing just 
now that 
Achilles is 
true and 
Odysseus 
false. 

Socrates is always iveaving the meshes of an argument. 

with you poems, epic, tragic, and dithyrambic, as well as 
prose writings of the most various kinds ; and you said that 
your skill was also pre-eminent in the arts which I was just 
now mentioning, and in the true principles of rhythm and 
harmony and of orthography; and if I remember rightly, 
there were a great many other accomplishments in which you 
excelled. I have forgotten to mention your art of memory, 
which you regard as your special glory, and I dare say that I 
have forgotten many other things ; but, as I was saying, only 
look to your own arts — and there are plenty of them— and to 
those of others ; and tell me, having regard to the admissions 
which you and I have made, whether you discover any 
department of art or any description of wisdom or cunning, 
whichever name you use, in which the true and false are 
different and not the same : tell me, if you can, of any. But 369 
you cannot. 

Hip. Not without consideration, Socrates. 

Soc. Nor will consideration help you, Hippias, as I 
believe ; but then if I am right, remember what the con- 
sequence will be. 

Hip. I do not know what you mean, Socrates. 

Soc. I suppose that you are not using your art of memory, 
doubtless because you think that such an accomplishment is 
not needed on the present occasion. I will therefore remind 
you of what you were saying : were you not saying that 
Achilles was a true man, and Odysseus false and wily? 

Hip. I was. 

Soc. And now do you perceive that the same person has 
turned out to be false as well as true? If Odysseus is false 
he is also true, and if Achilles is true he is also false, and so 
the two men are not opposed to one another, but they are 
alike. 

Hip. O Socrates, you are always weaving the meshes of an 
argument, selecting the most difficult point, and fastening 
upon details instead of grappling with the matter in hand as a 
whole. Come now, and I will demonstrate to you, if you will 
allow me, by many satisfactory proofs, that Homer has made 
Achilles a better man than Odysseus, and a truthful man too ; 
and that he has made the other crafty, and a teller of many 
untruths, and inferior to Achilles. And then, if you please, 

The perverted ingenuity of Socrates. 

you shall make a speech on the other side, in order to prove 
that Odysseus is the better man ; and this may be compared 
to mine, and then the company will know which of us is the 
better speaker. 

Soc. O Hippias, I do not doubt that you are wiser than I 
am. But I have a way, when anybody else says anything, of 
giving close attention to him, especially if the speaker appears 
to me to be a wise man. Having a desire to understand, I 
question him, and I examine and analyse and put together 
what he says, in order that I may understand ; but if the 
speaker appears to me to be a poor hand, I do not interrogate 
him, or trouble myself about him, and you may know by this 
who they are whom I deem to be wise men, for you will see 
that when I am talking with a wise man, I am very attentive 
to what he says ; and I ask questions of him, in order that I 
may learn, and be improved by him. And I could not help 
remarking while you were speaking, that when you recited 
the verses in which Achilles, as you argued, attacks Odysseus 
as a deceiver, that you must be strangely mistaken, because 
Odysseus, the man of wiles, is never found to tell a lie ; but 
370 Achilles is found to be wily on your own showing. At any 
rate he speaks falsely ; for first he utters these words, which 
you just now repeated, — 

( He is hateful to me even as the gates of death who thinks one thing and 
says another : * — 

And then he says, a little while afterwards, he will not be 
persuaded by Odysseus and Agamemnon, neither will he 
remain at Troy; but, says he, — 

‘ To-morrow, when I have offered sacrifices to Zeus and all the Gods, having 
loaded my ships well, I will drag them down into the deep; and then you shall 
see, if you have a mind, and if such things are a care to you, early in the 
morning my ships sailing over the fishy Hellespont, and my men eagerly 
plying the oar; and, if the illustrious shaker of the earth £ives me a good 
voyage, on the third day I shall reach the fertile Pljthia.’ 

And before that, when he was reviling Agamemnon, he 
said, — » 

* And now to Phthia I will go, since to return home in the beaked ships is 
far better, nor am I inclined to stay here in dishonour and amass wealth and 
riches for you.* 

447 

Lesser 

Hippias. 

Socrates, 

Hifpias. 

Socrates 
pays Hip- 
pias the 
compliment 
which he 
always pays 
to a wise 
man, of 
attending 
to him. 

He proves 
by example 
that 

Achilles, the 
true man, is 
always 
littering 
falsehoods, 
Odysseus, 
the false 
man, never. 

448 

Lesser 

Hippias. 

Socrates, 

Hippias. 

Aye, but the 
falsehood of 
Achilles is 
accidental ; 
that of 
Odysseus 
intentional. 

To err intentionally is better than 

But although on that occasion, in the presence of the whole 
army, he spoke after this fashion, and on the other occasion 
to his companions, he appears never to have made any pre- 
paration or attempt to draw down the ships, as if he had the 
least intention of sailing home ; so nobly regardless was he 
of the truth. Now I, Hippias, originally asked you the 
question, because I was in doubt as to which of the two 
heroes was intended by the poet to be the best, and because 
I thought that both of them were the best, and that it would 
be difficult to decide which was the better of them, not only 
in respect of truth and falsehood, but of virtue generally, for 
even in this matter of speaking the truth they are much upon 
a par. 

Hip . There you are wrong, Socrates; for in so far as 
Achilles speaks falsely, the falsehood is obviously uninten- 
tional. He is compelled against his will to remain and 
rescue the army in their misfortune. But when Odysseus 
speaks falsely he is voluntarily and intentionally false. 

Soc. You, sweet Hippias, like Odysseus, are a deceiver 
yourself. 

Hip. Certainly not, Socrates ; what makes you say so ? 371 

Soc. Because you say that Achilles docs not speak falsely 
from design, when he is not only a deceiver, but besides 
being a braggart, in Homer’s description of him is so cun- 
ning, and so far superior to Odysseus in lying and pretending, 
that he dares to contradict himself, and Odysseus does not 
find him out ; at any rate he does not appear to say anything 
to him which would imply that he perceived his falsehood. 

Hip. What do you mean, Socrates ? 

Soc . Did you not observe that afterwards, when he is 
speaking to Odysseus, he says that he will sail away with the 
early dawn ; but to Ajax he tells quite a different story? 

Hip. Where is that ? 

Soc. Where he says, — 

‘ I will not think about bloody war until the son of warlike Priam, illus- 
trious Hector, comes to the tents and ships of the Myrmidons, slaughtering the 
Argives, and burning the ships with fire ; and about my tent and dark ship, I 
suspect that Hector, although eager for the battle, will neverthelfcss stay his 
hand.' 

Now, do you really think, Hippias, that the son of Thetis, 

449 

to err voluntarily . 

who had been the pupil of the sage Cheiron, had such a bad 
memory, or would have carried the art of lying to such an ex- 
tent (when he had been assailing liars in the most violent 
terms only the instant before) as to say to Odysseus that he 
would sail away, and to Ajax that he would remain, and that he 
was not rather practising upon the simplicity of Odysseus, 
whom he regarded as an ancient, and thinking that he would 
get the better of him by his own cunning and falsehood ? 

Hip . No, I do not agree with you, Socrates; but I believe 
that Achilles is induced to say one thing to Ajax, and another 
to Odysseus in the innocence of his heart, whereas Odysseus, 
whether he speaks falsely or truly, speaks always with a 
purpose. 

Soc. Then Odysseus would appear after all to be better 
than Achilles ? 

Hip . Certainly not, Socrates. 

Soc . Why, were not the voluntary liars only just now 
shown to be better than the involuntary? 

Hip. And how, Socrates, can those who intentionally err, 
and voluntarily and designedly commit iniquities, be better 
372 than those who err and do wrong involuntarily ? Surely 
there is a great excuse to be made for a man telling a false- 
hood, or doing an injury or any sort of harm to another in 
ignorance. And the laws are obviously far more severe on 
those who lie or do evil, voluntarily, than on those who do 
evil involuntarily. 

Soc. You see, Hippias, as I have already told you, how 
pertinacious I am in asking questions of wise men. And I 
think that this is the only good point about me, for I am full 
of defects, and always getting wrong in some way or other. 
My deficiency is proved to me by the fact that when I meet 
one of you who are famous for wisdom, and to whose wisdom 
all the Hellenes are witnesses, I am found out to know 
nothing. For speaking generally, I hardly ever have the 
same opinion about anything which you have, and what pr^of 
of ignorance can be greater than to differ from wise men ? 
But I have one singular good quality, twhich is my salva- 
tion ; 1 am not ashamed to learn, and I ask and enquire, and 
am very grateful to those who answer me, and never fail to 
give them my grateful thanks ; and when I learn a thing I 

VOL. 11. g g 

Lesser 

Hippias. 

Socrates, 

Hippias. 

That proves 
Odysseus to 
be better 
than 
Achilles. 

Socrates is 
convinced 
of his own 
ignorance 
because he 
never 

agrees with 
wise men. 
But he is 
willing to 
learn, 

450 

Lesser 

Hippias. 

Socrates, 

Hippias, 

Eunices. 

and he 
desires to 
be cured by 
Hippias of 
his ignor- 
ance in as 
few words 
as possible. 

Hippias grows impatient . 

never deny my teacher, or pretend that the lesson is a dis- 
covery of my own ; but I praise his wisdom, and proclaim 
what I have learned from him. And now I cannot agree in 
what you are saying, but I strongly disagree. Well, I know 
that this is my own fault, and is a defect in my character, 
but I will not pretend to be more than I am ; and my opinion, 
Hippias, is the very contrary of what you are saying. For I 
maintain that those who hurt or injure mankind, and speak 
falsely and deceive, and err voluntarily, arc better far than 
those who do wrong involuntarily. Sometimes, however, I 
am of the opposite opinion ; for I am all abroad in my 
ideas about this matter, a condition obviously occasioned by 
ignorance. And just now 1 happen to be in a crisis of my 
disorder at which those who err voluntarily appear to me 
better than those who err involuntarily. My present state of 
mind is due to our previous argument, which inclines me to 
believe that in general those who do wrong involuntarily are 
worse than those who do wrong voluntarily, and therefore I 
hope that you will be good to me, and not refuse to heal me ; 
for you will do me a much greater benefit if you cure my soul 
of ignorance, than you would if you were to cure my body of 
disease. I must, however, tell you beforehand, that if you 3 73 
make a long oration to me you will not cure me, for I shall 
not be able to follow you ; but if you will answer me, as you 
did just now, you will do me a great deal of good, and I do 
not think that you will be any the worse yourself. And I 
have some claim upon you also, O son of Apemantus, for 
you incited me to converse with Hippias; and now, if Hip- 
pias will not answer me, you must entreat him on my behalf. 

Eud . But I do not think, Socrates, that Hippias will 
require any entreaty of mine ; for he has already said that he 
will refuse to answer no man. — Did you not say so, Hippias? 

Hip . Yes, I did; but then, Eudicus, Socrates is always 
troublesome in an argument, and appears to be dishonest \ 

Soc. Excellent Hippias, I do not do so intentionally (if I 
did, it would show me to be a wise man and a master of wiles, 
as you would argue*), but unintentionally, and therefore you 
must pardon me ; for, as you say, he who is unintentionally 
dishonest should be pardoned. 

1 Cp Gorgias 499, 505 ; Rep. vi. 487. 

The analogy of bodily exercises. 

Eud . Yes, Hippias, do as he says; and for our sake, and 
also that you may not belie your profession, answer whatever 
Socrates asks you. 

Hip . I will answer, as you request me; and do you ask 
whatever you like. 

Soc. I am very desirous, Hippias, of examining this ques- 
tion, as to which are the better — those who err voluntarily or 
involuntarily ? And if you will answer me, I think that I can 
put you in the way of approaching the subject : You would 
admit, would you not, that there are good runners ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. And there are bad runners ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. And he who runs well is a good runner, and he who 
runs ill is a bad runner ? 

Hip. Very true. 

Soc. And he who runs slowly runs ill, and he who runs 
quickly runs well ? 

IJip. Yes. 

Soc. Then in a race, and in running, swiftness is a good, 
and slowness is an evil quality? 

Hip. To be sure. 

Soc. Which of the two then is a better runner? He who 
runs slowly voluntarily, or he who runs slowly involuntarily? 
Hip. He who runs slowly voluntarily. 

Soc. And is not running a species of doing ? 

Hip. Certainly. 

Soc. And if a species of doing, a species of action ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. Then he who runs badly does a bad and dishonour- 
able action in a race ? 

Hip. Yes; a bad action, certainly. 

Soc. And he who runs slowly runs badly ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. Then the good runner does this bad and disgraceful 
action voluntarily, and the bad involuntarily ? 

Hip . That is to be inferred. 

Soc. Then he who involuntarily does evil actions, is worse 
in a race than he who does them voluntarily? 

Hip. Yes, in a race. 

451 

Lesser 

Hippias. 

Socrates, 

Hippias, 

Kudicus. 

Socrates by 
citation of 
instances 
not ‘ in pari 
materia ’ 
proves that 
it is better 
to do evil 
intention- 
ally ; 

e. g. in 
running, 

G g 2 

452 

Lesser 
Hippias . 

Socrates, 

Hippias. 

in wrest- 
ling, 

in the 
action of 
the body, 

in singing, 

in the use 
of the feet, 

The analogy of the human faculties y 

Soc. Well ; but at a wrestling match — which is the better 374 
wrestler, he who falls voluntarily or involuntarily ? 

Hip . He who falls voluntarily, doubtless. 

Soc. And is it worse or more dishonourable at a wrestling 
match, to fall, or to throw another ? 

Hip. To fall. 

Soc. Then, at a wrestling match, he who voluntarily does 
base and dishonourable actions is a better wrestler than he 
who does them involuntarily ? 

Hip. That appears to be the truth. 

Soc . And what would you say of any other bodily exercise 
— is not he who is better made able to do both that which is 
strong and that which is weak— that which is fair and that 
which is foul?— so that when he does bad actions with the 
body, he who is better made does them voluntarily, and he 
who is worse made does them involuntarily. 

Hip. Yes, that appears to be true about strength. 

Soc. And what do you say about grace, Hippias? Is not 
he who is better made able to assume evil and disgraceful 
figures and postures voluntarily, as he who is worse made 
assumes them involuntarily ? 

Hip. True. 

Soc. Then voluntary ungracefulness comes from excellence 
of the bodily frame, and involuntary from the defect of the 
bodily frame ? 

Hip. True. 

Soc. And what would you say of an unmusical voice; 
would you prefer the voice which is voluntarily or involun- 
tarily out of tune ? 

Hip. That which is voluntarily out of tune. 

Soc. The involuntary is the worse of the two ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. And<would you choose to possess goods or evils? 

Hip. Goods. 

Soc. And would you rather have feet which are voluntarily 
or involuntarily lame ? 

Hip. Feet which &re voluntarily lame. 

Soc. But is not lameness a defect or deformity ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. And is not blinking a defect in the eyes? 

of implements , arts, etc., confirms the view of Socrates. 

Hip . Yes. 

Soc. And would you rather always have eyes with which 
you might voluntarily blink and not see, or with which you 
might involuntarily blink ? 

Hip . I would rather have eyes which voluntarily blink. 

Soc. Then in your own case you deem that which volun- 
tarily acts ill, better than that which involuntarily acts 
ill? 

Hip. Yes, certainly, in cases such as you mention. 

Soc. And does not the same hold of ears, nostrils, 
mouth, and of all the senses — those which involuntarily 
act ill are not to be desired, as being defective ; and those 
which voluntarily act ill are to be desired as being good ? 

Hip. I agree. 

Sac. And what would you say of instruments ; — which are 
the better sort of instruments to have to do with? — those 
with which a man acts ill voluntarily or involuntarily? For 
example, had a man better have a rudder with which he will 
steer ill, voluntarily or involuntarily? 

Hip. He had better have a rudder with which he will 
steer ill voluntarily. 

Soc. And does not the same hold of the bow and the lyre, 
the flute and all other things ? 

Hip. Very true. 

Soc. And would you rather have a horse of such a temper 
that you may ride him ill voluntarily or involuntarily ? 

375 Hip. I would rather have a horse which I could ride ill 
voluntarily. 

Soc. That would be the better horse ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. Then with a horse of better temper, vicious actions 
would be produced voluntarily ; and with a horse of bad 
temper involuntarily ? 

Hip. Certainly. 

Soc. And that would be true of a dog, or of any other 
animal ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. And is it better to possess the mind of an archer who 
voluntarily or involuntarily misses the mark? 

Hip. Of him who voluntarily misses. 

453 

Lesser 

Ilippias. 

Socrates, 

Hippias. 

eyes, 

ears, 

of instru- 
ments. 

It is true 
also of 
animals, 

in the prac- 
tice of 
archery, 

454 

Hippicts cannot agree zoith Socrates, 

Lesser 

Hippias. 

Socrates, 

Hippias. 

of medicine, 

in the 
characters 
of slaves. 

Soc. This would be the better mind for the purposes of 
archery ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. Then the mind which involuntarily errs is worse than 
the mind which errs voluntarily? 

Hip. Yes, certainly, in the use of the bow. 

Soc. And what would you say of the art of medicine ; — has 
not the mind which voluntarily works harm to the body, 
more of the healing art ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. Then in the art of medicine the voluntary is better 
than the involuntary ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. Well, and in lute-playing and in flute-playing, and in 
all arts and sciences, is not that mind the better which 
voluntarily does what is evil and dishonourable, and goes 
wrong, and is not the worse that which does so involun- 
tarily ? 

Hip . That is evident. 

Soc. And what would you say of the characters of slaves ? 
Should we not prefer to have those who voluntarily do 
wrong and make mistakes, and are they not better in their 
mistakes than those who commit them involuntarily ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. And should we not desire to have our own minds in 

the best state possible ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. And will our minds be better if they do wrong and 
make mistakes voluntarily or involuntarily ? 

Hippias Hip. O, Socrates, it would be a monstrous thing to say 
the'eon- 1 ^ ose w ^° do wron g voluntarily are better than those 

elusion. who do wrong involuntarily ! 

Soc. And ret that appears to be the only inference. 

Hip. I do not think so. 

Socrates re- Soc. But I imagined, Hippias, that you did. Please to 
thear^ eS answer once more • Is not justice a power, or knowledge, or 
ment* gU both ? Must not justice, at all events, be one of these ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. But if justice is a power of the soul, then the soul 
which has the greater power is also the more just ; for that 

nor Socrates with himself, 

which has the greater power, my good friend, has been 
proved by us to be the better. 

Hip . Yes, that has been proved. 

Soc. And if justice is knowledge, then the wiser will be 
the juster soul, and the more ignorant the more unjust? 

Hip . Yes. 

Soc . But if justice be power as well as knowledge — then 
will not the soul which has both knowledge and power be 
the more just, and that which is the more ignorant be the 
more unjust ? Must it not be so ? 

Hip . Clearly. 

Soc. And is not the soul which has the greater power and 
wisdom also better, and better able to do both good and evil 
in every action ? 

Hip. Certainly. 

376 Soc. The soul, then, which acts ill, acts voluntarily by 
power and art — and these either one or both of them are 
elements of justice ? 

Hip. That seems to be true. 

Soc. And to do injustice is to do ill, and not to do injustice 
is to do well ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. And will not the better and abler soul when it 
does wrong, do wrong voluntarily, and the bad soul in- 
voluntarily? 

Hip. Clearly. 

Soc . And the good man is he who has the good soul, and 
the bad man is he who has the bad ? 

Hip. Yes. 

Soc. Then the good man will voluntarily do wrong, and 
the bad man involuntarily, if the good man is he who has the 
good soul ? 

Hip. Which he certainly has. 

Soc. Then, Hippias, he who voluntarily does wrong and 
disgraceful things, if there be such a man, will be the good 
man? 

Hip. There I cannot agree with you.' 

Soc. Nor can I agree with myself, Hippias; and yet that 
seems to be the conclusion which, as far as we can see at 
present, must follow from our argument. As I was saying 

455 

Lesser 

Hippias. 

SOCRATHS, 

Hippias. 

Hippias, 
who has ad- 
mitted the 
previous 
deductions, 
rebels at 
the final 
one. 

Socrates is 
himself dis- 
satisfied. 
What re- 
mains if 
Socrates 

456 

Socrates thinks the matter serious. 

Lesser 

Hippias. 

Socrates, 

and a wiser 
than So- 
crates are 
alike in 
doubt ? 

before, I am all abroad, and being in perplexity am always 
changing my opinion. Now, that I or any ordinary man 
should wander in perplexity is not surprising; but if you 
wise men also wander, and we cannot come to you and rest 
from our wandering, the matter begins to be serious both to 
us and to you. 

ALCIBIADES I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

The First Alcibiades is a conversation between Socrates and 
Alcibiades. Socrates is represented in the character which he 
attributes to himself in the Apology of a know-nothing who 
detects the conceit of knowledge in others. The two have met 
already in the Protagoras and in the Symposium ; in the latter 
dialogue, as in this, the relation between them is that of a lover 
and his beloved. But the narrative of their loves is told differently 
in different places ; for in the Symposium Alcibiades is depicted 
as the impassioned but rejected lover ; here, as coldly receiving 
the advances of Socrates, who, for the best of purposes, lies in 
wait for the aspiring and ambitious youth. 

Steph. Alcibiades, who is described as a very young man, is about to 
103 enter on public life, having an inordinate opinion of himself, and 
an extravagant ambition. Socrates, ‘ who knows what is in man/ 
-106 astonishes him by a revelation of his designs. But has he the 
knowledge which is necessary for carrying them out ? He is 
107 going to persuade the Athenians— about what ? Not about any 
particular art, but about politics— when to fight and when to make 
peace. Now, men should fight and make peace on just grounds, 
and therefore the question of justice and injustice must enter into 
-109 peace and war; and he who advises the Athenians must know 
the difference between them. Does Alcibiades know? If he 
does, he must either have been taught by some master, or he 
must have discovered the nature of then? himself. If he has had 
a master, Socrates would like to be informed who he is, that he 
no may go and learn of him also. Alcibiades admits that he has 
never learned. Then has he enquired for himself? He may 
have, if he was ever aware of a time when he was ignorant. But 
he never Was ignorant ; for when he played with other boys at dice, 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

Analysis. 

460 

Analysts 110 - 126 . 

Alcibiades he charged them with cheating, and this implied a knowledge of 
just and unjust. According to his own explanation, he had learned 
Analysis. 0 f t h e mu itit u d e . Why, he asks, should he not learn of them the 
nature of justice, as he has learned the Greek language of them ? 

To this Socrates answers, that they can teach Greek, but they in 
cannot teach justice ; for they are agreed about the one, but they 
are not agreed about the other: and therefore Alcibiades, who 112 
has admitted that if he knows he must either have learned from 
a master or have discovered for himself the nature of justice, is 
convicted out of his own mouth. 1 13 

Alcibiades rejoins, that the Athenians debate not about what is 
just, but about what is expedient ; and he asserts that the two 
principles of justice and expediency arc opposed. Socrates, by a 114 
series of questions, compels him to admit that the just and the 
expedient coincide. Alcibiades is thus reduced to the humiliating -1 17 
conclusion that he knows nothing of politics, even if, as he says, 
they arc concerned with the expedient. 

However, he is no worse than other Athenian statesmen ; and 
he will not need training, for others are as ignorant as he is. 

He is reminded that he has to contend, not only with his own 
countrymen, but with their enemies— with the Spartan kings and -120 
with the great king of Persia ; and he can only attain this higher 
aim of ambition by the assistance of Socrates. Not that Socrates 
himself professes to have attained the truth, but the questions 
which he asks bring others to a knowledge of themselves, and 
this is the first step in the practice of virtue. 

The dialogue continues : — We wish to become as good as -124 
possible. But to be good in what ? Alcibiades replies —' 1 Good in 
transacting business.’ But what business ? 4 The business of the 125 
most intelligent men at Athens.’ The cobbler is intelligent in 
shoemaking, and is therefore good in that ; he is not intelligent, 
and therefore not good, in weaving. Is he good in the sense 
which Alcibiades means, who is also bad ? 4 1 mean,* replies 
Alcibiades, 4 the man who is able to command in the city/ But to 
command what— horses or men ? and if men, under what circum- 
stances ? 4 1 mean to say, that he is able to command men living 
in social and political relations.’ And what is their aim ? 4 The 
better preservation of the city/ But when is a city better? 126 
4 When there is unanimity, such as exists between husband and 

Analysis 1 27-1 35. 461 

127 wife/ Then, when husbands and wives perform their own Alcibiades 
special duties, there can be no unanimity between them ; nor can 

a city be well ordered when each citizen docs his own work only. Anai * ys,s * 
Alcibiades, having stated first that goodness consists in the 
unanimity of the citizens, and then in each of them doing his own 
separate work, is brought to the required point of self-contra- 

128 diction, leading him to confess his own ignorance. 

But he is not too old to learn, and may still arrive at the truth, 

129 if he is willing to be cross-examined by Socrates. He must know 
himself ; that is to say, not his body, or the things of the body, 
but his mind, or truer self. The physician knows the body, and 
the tradesman knows his own business, but they do not neces- 
sarily know themselves. Self-knowledge can be obtained only 

-132 by looking into the mind and virtue of the soul, which is the 
diviner part of a man, as we see our own image in another’s eye. 

And if we do not know ourselves, we cannot know what belongs 
to ourselves or belongs to others, and are unfit to take a part in 
-134 political affairs. Both for the sake of the individual and of the 
state, we ought to aim at justice and temperance, not at wealth or 
power. The evil and unjust should have no power,— they should 

135 be the slaves of better men than themselves. None but the 
virtuous are deserving of freedom. 

And are you, Alcibiades, a freeman ? f I feel that I am not ; but 
1 hope, Socrates, that by your aid I may become free, and from 
this day forward I will never leave you.’ 

The Alcibiades has several points of resemblance to the un- Introduc- 
tion. 

doubted dialogues of Plato. The process of interrogation is of the 
same kind with that which Socrates practises upon the youthful 
Clcinias in the Euthydemus; and he characteristically attributes 
to Alcibiades the answers which he has elicited from him. The 
definition of good is narrowed by successive questions, and virtue 
is shown to be identical with knowledge. Heraj as elsewhere, 

Socrates awakens the consciousness not*of sin but of ignorance. 
Self-humiliation is the first step to knowledge, even of the com- 
monest things. No man knows how ignorant he is, and no man 
can arrive at virtue and wisdom who has not once in his life, at 
least, been convicted of error. The process by which the soul is 
elevated is not unlike that which religious writers describe under 

462 

Alcilriades 

/. 

Introduc- 

tion. 

Genuineness of the dialogue. 

the name of i conversion,’ if we substitute the sense of ignorance 
for the consciousness of sin. 

In some respects the dialogue differs from any other Platonic 
composition. The aim is more directly ethical and hortatory; 
the process by which the antagonist is undermined is simpler 
than in other Platonic writings, and the conclusion more decided. 
There is a good deal of humour in the manner in which the pride 
of Alcibiades, and of the Greeks generally, is supposed to be 
taken down by the Spartan and Persian queens ; and the dialogue 
has considerable dialectical merit. But we have a difficulty in 
supposing that the same writer, who has given so profound and 
complex a notion of the characters both of Alcibiades and 
Socrates in the Symposium, should have treated them in so thin 
and superficial a manner in the Alcibiades, or that he would have 
ascribed to the ironical Socrates the rather unmeaning boast that 
Alcibiades could not attain the objects of his ambition without his 
help (105 D foil.) ; or that he should have imagined that a mighty 
nature like his could have been reformed by a few not very 
conclusive words of Socrates. For the arguments by which 
Alcibiades is reformed arc not convincing; the writer of the 
dialogue, whoever he was, arrives at his idealism by crooked and 
tortuous paths, in which many pitfalls are concealed. The ana- 
chronism of making Alcibiades about twenty years old during the 
life of his uncle, Pericles, may be noted ; and the repetition of the 
favourite observation, which occurs also in the Laches and Pro- 
tagoras, that great Athenian statesmen, like Pericles, failed in the 
education of their sons. There is none of the undoubted dialogues 
of Plato in which there is so little dramatic verisimilitude. 

ALCIBI ADES I. 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE . 

Alciriades, Socrates. 

steph. Socrates . I dare say that you may be surprised to find, 
103 O son of Cleinias, that I, who am your first lover, not having 
spoken to you for many years, when the rest of the world 
were wearying you with their attentions, am the last of your 
lovers who still speaks to you. The cause of my silence has 
been that I was hindered by a power more than human, of 
which I will some day explain to you the nature ; this im- 
pediment has now been removed ; I therefore here present 
myself before you, and I greatly hope that no similar 
hindrance will again occur. Meanwhile, I have observed 
that your pride has been too much for the pride of your 
admirers; they were numerous and high-spirited, but they 
have all run away, overpowered by your superior force of 
104 character ; not one of them remains. And I want you to 
understand the reason why you have been too much for 
them. You think that you have no need of them or of any 
other man, for you have great possessions and lack nothing, 
beginning with the body, and ending with the soul. In the 
first place, you say to yourself that you are the fairest and 
tallest of the citizens, and this every one who has eyes may 
see to be true ; in the second place, tfiat you are among the 
noblest of them, highly connected both on the father’s and 
the mother’s side, and sprung from^one of the most dis- 
tinguished families in your own state, which is the greatest in 
Hellas, and having many friends and kinsmen of the best 
sort, who can assist you when in need ; and there is one 

AtcibiaJes 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alciriades. 

The pride of 
Alcibiadcs 
has been 
too much 
for his 
lovers. 

464 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

Alcibiades 
a lover, not 
of pleasure, 
but of am- 
bition ; and 
he requires 
the help of 
Socrates 
for the 
accomplish- 
ment of his 
designs. 

The extravagant aspiration 

potent relative, who is more to you than all the rest, Pericles 
the son of Xanthippus, whom your father left guardian of 
you, and of your brother, and who can do as he pleases 
not only in this city, but in all Hellas, and among many and 
mighty barbarous nations. Moreover, you are rich ; but I 
must say that you value yourself least of all upon your 
possessions. And all these things have lifted you up ; you 
have overcome your lovers, and they have acknowledged that 
you were too much for them. Have you not remarked their 
absence ? And now I know that you wonder why I, unlike 
the rest of them, have not gone away, and what can be my 
motive in remaining. 

Alcibiades. Perhaps, Socrates, you are not aware that I was 
just going to ask you the very same question — What do you 
want? And what is your motive in annoying me, and 
always, wherever I am, making a point of coming 1 ? I do 
really wonder what you mean, and should greatly like to 
know. 

Soc . Then if, as you say, you desire to know, I suppose that 
you will be willing to hear, and I may consider myself to be 
speaking to an auditor who will remain, and will not run 
away? 

Al. Certainly, let me hear. 

Soc. You had better be careful, for I may very likely be as 
unwilling to end as I have hitherto been to begin. 

Al. Proceed, my good man, and I will listen. 

Soc. I will proceed ; and, although no lover likes to speak 
with one who has no feeling of love in him 2 , I will make an 
effort, and tell you what I meant : My love, Alcibiades, which 105 
1 hardly like to confess, would long ago have passed away, as 
I flatter myself, if I saw you loving your good things, or 
thinking that you ought to pass life in the enjoyment of them. 
But I shall reveal other thoughts of yours, which you keep to 
yourself ; whereby you will know that I have always had my 
eye on you. Suppose' that at this moment some God came 
to you and said : Alcibiades, will you live as you are, or die 
in an instant if you are forbidden to make any further ac- 
quisition? — I verily believe that you would choose death. 
And I will tell you the hope in which you are at present 
1 Cp. Symp. 213 C. 2 Cp. Symp. 217 Eff. 

465 

in which Alcibiades indulges. 

living : Before many days have elapsed, you think that you 
will come before the Athenian assembly, and will prove to 
them that you are more worthy of honour than Pericles, or 
any other man that ever lived, and having proved this, you 
will have the greatest power in the state. When you have 
gained the greatest power among us, you will go on to other 
Hellenic states, and not only to Hellenes, but to all the bar- 
barians who inhabit the same continent with us. And if the 
God were then to say to you again : Here in Europe is to be 
your seat of empire, and you must not cross over into Asia or 
meddle with Asiatic affairs, I do not believe that you would 
choose to live upon these terms ; but the world, as I may say, 
must be filled with your power and name — no man less than 
Cyrus and Xerxes is of any account with you. Such I know 
to be your hopes — I am not guessing only — and very likely 
you, who know that I am speaking the truth, will reply, Well, 
Socrates, but what have my hopes to do with the explanation 
which you promised of your unwillingness to leave me? 
And that is what I am now going to tell you, sweet son 
of Cleinias and Dinomache. The explanation is, that all 
these designs of yours cannot be accomplished by you 
without my help ; so great is the power which I believe 
myself to have over you and your concerns ; and this 
I conceive to be the reason why the God has hitherto for- 
bidden me to converse with you, and I have been long 
expecting his permission. For, as you hope to prove your 
own great value to the state, and having proved it, to attain 
at once to absolute power, so do I indulge a hope that I shall 
have the supreme power over you, if I am able to prove my 
own great value to you, and to show you that neither 
guardian, nor kinsman, nor any one is able to deliver into 
your hands the power which you desire, but I only, God 
being my helper. When you were young 1 andjyour hopes 
were not yet matured, I should have vested my time, and 
106 therefore, as I conceive, the God forbade me to converse with 
you; but now, having his permission, I will speak, for now 
you will listen to me. f 

Al. Your silence, Socrates, was always a surprise to me. 
I never could understand why you followed me about, and 

1 Cp. Symp. 1 81 E. 

H h 

Alcibiades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

And this is 
the reason 
why So- 
crates has 
clung to 
him ; he is 
hoping 
when Alci- 
biades has 
become the 
ruler of 
Athens to 
rule over 
him. 

Alcibiades 
does not 

VOL. II. 

466 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

deny the 
impeach- 
ment. 

Alcibiades 
is willing to 
answer 
questions. 

He is going 
to advise 
the Athe- 
nians about 
matters 
which he 
knows 
better than 
they. 

The qualifications of Alcibiades for statesmanship 

now that you have begun to speak again, I am still more 
amazed. Whether I think all this or not, is a matter about 
which you seem to have already made up your mind, and 
therefore my denial will have no effect upon you. But 
granting, if I must, that you have perfectly divined my pur- 
poses, why is your assistance necessary to the attainment of 
them ? Can you tell me why ? 

Soc. You want to know whether I can ‘make a long speech, 
such as you are in the habit of hearing ; but that is not my 
way. I think, however, that I can prove to you the truth of 
what I am saying, if you will grant me one little favour. 

AL Yes, if the favour which you mean be not a troublesome 
one. 

Soc . Will you be troubled at having questions to answer ? 

AL Not at all. 

Soc. Then please to answer. 

Al. Ask me. 

Soc . Have you not the intention which I attribute to 
you? 

AL I will grant anything you like, in the hope of hearing 
what more you have to say. 

Soc. You do, then, mean, as I was saying, to come forward 
in a little while in the character of an adviser of the 
Athenians ? And suppose that when you are ascending the 
bema, I pull you by the sleeve and say, Alcibiades, you are 
getting up to advise the Athenians— do you know the matter 
about which they are going to deliberate, better than they ? — 
How would you answer ? 

AL I should reply, that I was going to advise them about a 
matter which I do know better than they. 

Soc. Then you are a good adviser about the things which 
you know? 

AL Certainly. 

Soc. And do you know anything but what you have learned 
of others, or found out yourself? 

Al. That is all. 

Soc. And would you have ever learned or discovered any- 
thing, if you had not been willing either to learn of others or 
to examine yourself? 

Al. I should not. 

are tested by Socrates. 

Soc. And would you have been willing to learn or to 
examine what you supposed that you knew? 

At. Certainly not. 

Soc. Then there was a time when you thought that you did 
not know what you are now supposed to know ? 

A l . Certainly. 

Soc. I think that I know tolerably well the extent of your 
acquirements ; and you must tell me if I forget any of them : 
according to my recollection, you learned the arts of writing, 
of playing on the lyre, and of wrestling ; the flute you never 
would learn ; this is the sum of your accomplishments, unless 
there were some which you acquired in secret ; and I think 
that secrecy was hardly possible, as you could not have come 
out of your door, either by day or night, without my seeing 
you. 

At. Yes, that was the whole of my schooling. 

107 Soc. And are you going to get up in the Athenian assembly, 
and give them advice about writing ? 

At. No, indeed. 

Soc. Or about the touch of the lyre ? 

At. Certainly not. 

Soc. And they are not in the habit of deliberating about 
wrestling, in the assembly ? 

At. Hardly. 

Soc. Then what are the deliberations in which you propose 
to advise them ? Surely not about building ? 

At. No. 

Soc. For the builder will advise better than you will about 
that ? 

At. He will. 

Soc. Nor about divination ? 

At. No. 

Soc. About that again the diviner will ad vise# better than 
you will ? # 

At. True. 

Soc. Whether he be little or great, good or ill-looking, 
noble or ignoble— makes no difference. * 

At. Certainly not. 

Soc. A man is a good adviser about anything, not because 
he has riches, but because he has knowledge ? 

h h 2 

467 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

But when 
did he ever 
learn about 
these 
matters ? 

468 

Ale Made s 
I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

He will 
advise them 
about war 
and peace, 
and with 
whom they 
had better 
go to war, 
and when 
and how 
long. 

The cross-examination of 

AL Assuredly. 

Soc. Whether their counsellor is rich or poor, is not a 
matter which will make any difference to the Athenians when 
they are deliberating about the health of the citizens ; they 
only require that he should be a physician. 

AL Of course. 

Soc. Then what will be the subject of deliberation about 
which you will be justified in getting up and advising them? 

AL About their own concerns, Socrates. 

Soc. You mean about shipbuilding, for example, when the 
question is what sort of ships they ought to build ? 

AL No, I should not advise them about that. 

Soc. I suppose, because you do not understand ship- 
building : — is that the reason ? 

AL It is. 

Soc. Then about what concerns of theirs will you advise 
them ? 

AL About war, Socrates, or about peace, or about any 
other concerns of the state. 

Soc . You mean, when they deliberate with whom they 
ought to make peace, and with whom they ought to go to 
war, and in what manner ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And they ought to go to war with those against whom 
it is better to go to war ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And when it is better ? 

AL Certainly. 

Soc. And for as long a time as is better ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. But suppose the Athenians to deliberate with whom 
they ought to close in wrestling, and whom they should 
grasp by the hand, would you, or the master of gymnastics, 
be a better adviser qf them ? 

Al. Clearly, the master of gymnastics. 

Soc. And can you tell me on what grounds the master of 
gymnastics would decide, with whom they ought or ought not 
to close, and when and how? To take an instance: Would 
he not say that they should wrestle with those against whom 
it is best to wrestle ? 

Alcibiades is continued. 

469 

At. Yes. 

108 Soc . And as much as is best ? 

AL Certainly. 

Soc . And at such times as are best ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc . Again ; you sometimes accompany the lyre with the 
song and dance ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. When it is well to do so ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And as much as is well ? 

AL Just so. 

Soc. And as you speak of an excellence or art of the best 
in wrestling, and of an excellence in playing the lyre, I wish 
you would tell me what this latter is; — the excellence of 
wrestling I call gymnastic, and I want to know what you call 
the other. 

AL I do not understand you. 

Soc. Then try to do as I do ; for the answer which I gave 
is universally right, and when I say right, I mean according 
to rule. 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And was not the art of which I spoke gymnastic ? 

AL Certainly. 

Soc. And I called the excellence in wrestling gymnastic ? 

AL You did. 

Soc. And I was right ? 

AL I think that you were. 

Soc. Well, now, — for you should learn to argue prettily — 
let me ask you in return to tell me, first, what is that art of 
which playing and singing, and stepping properly in the dance, 
are parts, — what is the name of the whole ? I think that by 
this time you must be able to tell. 

AL Indeed I cannot. 

Soc. Then let me put the matter ift another way: what 
do you call the Goddesses who are the patronesses of 
art? 

AL The Muses do you mean, Socrates ? 

Soc. Yes, I do; and what is the name of the art which is 
called after them ? 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

Alcibiades 
should 
learn to 
argue 
nicely. 

470 

What is the better? 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

What is the 
meaning 
of ' the 
better, ’ 

4 the more 
excellent.’ 

The term 
better, 
when ap # - 
plied to 
food, 

means more 
wholesome. 

Al \ I suppose that you mean music. 

Soc . Yes, that is my meaning; and what is the excellence 
of the art of music, as I told you truly that the excellence of 
wrestling was gymnastic— what is the excellence of music— 
to be what ? 

AL To be musical, I suppose. 

Soc . Very good ; and now please to tell me what is the 
excellence of war and peace; as the more musical was the 
more excellent, or the more gymnastical was the more excel- 
lent, tell me, what name do you give to the more excellent in 
war and peace ? 

AL But I really cannot tell you. 

Soc . But if you were offering advice to another and said 
to him — This food is better than that, at this time and in this 
quantity, and he said to you — What do you mean, Alcibiades, 
by the word ‘ better ’ ? you would have no difficulty in reply- 
ing that you meant ‘ more wholesome/ although you do not 
profess to be a physician : and when the subject is one of 
which you profess to have knowledge, and about which you 
are ready to get up and advise as if you knew, are you not 
ashamed, when you are asked, not to be able to answer the 
question ? Is it not disgraceful ? 

AL Very. 

Soc . Well, then, consider and try to explain what is the 
meaning of 1 better/ in the matter of making peace and going 
to war with those against whom you ought to go to war ? To 
what does the word refer ? 

AL I am thinking, and I cannot tell. 

Soc . But you surely know what are the charges which we 
bring against one another, when we arrive at the point of 
making war, and what name we give them ? 

AL Yes, certainly; we say that deceit or violence has been 
employed, or that we have been defrauded. 

Soc. And liow does this happen ? Will you tell me how? 
For there may be a difference in the manner. 

AL Do you mean by ‘how/ Socrates, whether we suffered 
these things justly or unjustly? 

Soc. Exactly. 

AL There can be no greater difference than between just 
and unjust. 

109 

What is the better ? 

47i 

Soc. And would you advise the Athenians to go to war with 
the just or with the unjust? 

AL That is an awkward question ; for certainly, even if a 
person did intend to go to war with the just, he would not 
admit that they were just. 

Soc . He would not go to war, because it would be 
unlawful ? 

AL Neither lawful nor honourable. 

Soc. Then you, too, would address them on principles of 
justice ? 

AL Certainly. 

Soc. What, then, is justice but that better, of which I spoke, 
in going to war or not going to war with those against whom 
we ought or ought not, and when we ought or ought not to 
go to war ? 

Al. Clearly. 

Soc. But how is this, friend Alcibiades? Have you for- 
gotten that you do not know this, or have you been to the 
schoolmaster without my knowledge, and has he taught you 
to discern the just from the unjust? Who is he? I wish 
you would tell me, that I may go and learn of him— you shall 
introduce me. 

AL You are mocking, Socrates. 

Soc. No, indeed ; I most solemnly declare to you by Zeus, 
who is the God of our common friendship, and whom I never 
will forswear, that I am not ; tell me, then, who this instructor 
is, if he exists. 

Al. But, perhaps, he does not exist ; may I not have 
acquired the knowledge of just and unjust in some other way ? 

Soc. Yes; if you have discovered them. 

AL But do you not think that I could discover them? 

Soc. I am sure that you might, if you enquired about 
them. 

AL And do you not think that I would enquire? 

Soc . Yes ; if you thought that you dfd not know them. 

AL And was there not a time when I did so think ? 

Soc. Very good ; and can you telk me how long it is 
110 since you thought that you did not know the nature of the 
just and the unjust? What do you say to a year ago? 
Were you then in a state of conscious ignorance and enquiry ? 

Alcibiades 

/. 

In going to 
war or not 
going to 
war, the 
better is the 
more just. 

But where 
did Alci- 
biades 
acquire this 
notion of 
just and 
unjust ? 

472 

Alcibiades 

/. 

SOCKATFS, 

Alcibiades. 

He always 
had them. 

The nature of just and unjust . 

or did you think that you knew ? And please to answer 
truly, that our discussion may not be in vain. 

Al. Well, I thought that I knew. 

Soc. And two years ago, and three years ago, and four 
years ago, you knew all the same ? 

AL I did. 

Soc . And more than four years ago you were a child — were 
you not? 

AL Yes. 

Soc . And then I am quite sure that you thought you knew. 

AL Why are you so sure ? 

Soc. Because I often heard you when a child, in your 
teacher’s house, or elsewhere, playing at dice or some other 
game with the boys, not hesitating at all about the nature of 
the just and unjust ; but very confident — crying and shouting 
that one of the boys was a rogue and a cheat, and had been 
cheating. Is it not true ? 

Al. But what was I to do, Socrates, when anybody cheated 
me ? 

Soc. And how can you say, ' What was I to do ’? if at the 
time you did not know whether you were wronged or not ? 

Al. To be sure I knew ; I was quite aware that I was being 
cheated. 

Soc. Then you suppose yourself even when a child to have 
known the nature of just and unjust? 

Al. Certainly ; and I did know then. 

Soc. And when did you discover them — not, surely, at the 
time when you thought that you knew them ? 

AL Certainly not. 

Soc. And when did you think that you were ignorant — if 
you consider, you will find that there never was such a time ? 

Al. Really, Socrates, I cannot say. 

Soc. Then^you did not learn them by discovering them? 

Al. Clearly not. 

Soc. But just before you said that you did not know them by 
learning; now, if yoii have neither discovered nor learned 
them, how and whence do you come to know them ? 

Al. I suppose that I was mistaken in saying that I knew 
them through my own discovery of them ; whereas, in truth, 
I learned them in the same way that other people learn. 

Could the many have taught the principles of justice ? 

Soc. So you said before, and I must again ask, of whom ? 
Do tell me. 

Al. Of the many. 

Soc. Do you take refuge in them ? I cannot say much for 
your teachers. 

Al. Why, are they not able to teach ? 

Soc. They could not teach you how to play at draughts, 
which you would acknowledge (would you not) to be a much 
smaller matter than justice ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And can they teach the better who are unable to teach 
the worse ? 

Al. I think that they can ; at any rate, they can teach many 
far better things than to play at draughts. 

Soc. What things ? 

Al. Why, for example, I learned to speak Greek of them, 
and I cannot say who was my teacher, or to whom I am to 
attribute my knowledge of Greek, if not to those good-for- 
nothing teachers, as you call them. 

Soc. Why, yes, my friend ; and the many are good enough 
teachers of Greek, and some of their instructions in that line 
may be justly praised. 

Al. Why is that? 

Soc. Why, because they have the qualities which good 
teachers ought to have. 

Al. What qualities ? 

Soc. Why, you know that knowledge is the first qualifica- 
tion of any teacher ? 

Al. Certainly. 

Soc. And if they know, they must agree together and not 
differ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And would you say that they knew the things about 
which they differ ? 

Al. No. 

Soc. Then how can they teach thent ? 

Al. They cannot. • 

Soc. Well, but do you imagine that the many would differ 
about the nature of wood and stone ? are they not agreed if 
you ask them what they are ? and do they not run to fetch 

473 

Alcibiades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

He learned 
them of the 
many, 

as he 
learned 
Greek ; — 
of those 
who knew 
it. 

Yes : the 
many can 
teach things 
about 

474 

Alcibiades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Alciuiadrs. 

which they 
are agreed. 

But could 
the many 
teach things 
about 
which 
they are 
disagreed ? 

And one of 
these things 
is justice. 

That wars are caused by differences about just 

the same thing, when they want a piece of wood or a stone ? 
And so in similar cases, which I suspect to be pretty nearly 
all that you mean by speaking Greek. 

AL True. 

Soc . These, as we were saying, are matters about which 
they are agreed with one another and with themselves ; both 
individuals and states use the same words about them ; they 
do not use some one word and some another. 

AL They do not. 

Soc. Then they may be expected to be good teachers of 
these things ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And if we want to instruct any one in them, we shall 
be right in sending him to be taught by our friends the 
many ? 

AL Very true. 

Soc. But if we wanted further to know not only which 
are men and which are horses, but which men or horses 
have powers of running, would the many still be able to 
inform us ? 

Al. Certainly not. 

Soc. And you have a sufficient proof that they do not know 
these things and are not the best teachers of them, inasmuch 
as they are never agreed about them ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And suppose that we wanted to know not only what 
men are like, but what healthy or diseased men are like — 
would the many be able to teach us ? 

AL They would not. 

Soc. And you would have a proof that they were bad 
teachers of these matters, if you saw them at variance ? 

AL I should. 

Soc. Well, but are the many agreed with themselves, or 
with one another, about the justice or injustice of men and 112 
things ? 1 

AL Assuredly not, Socrates. 

Soc. There is no subject about whichr they are more at 
variance ? 

AL None. 

Soc. I do not suppose that you ever saw or heard of men 

475 

and unjust proved out of Homer . 

quarrelling over the principles of health and disease to such 
an extent as to go to war and kill one another for the sake of 
them? 

AL No, indeed. 

Soc. But of the quarrels about justice and injustice, even 
if you have never seen them, you have certainly heard from 
many people, including Homer ; for you have heard of the 
Iliad and Odyssey? 

AL To be sure, Socrates. 

Soc . A difference of just and unjust is the argument of 
those poems ? 

AL True. 

Soc . Which difference caused all the wars and deaths of 
Trojans and Achaeans, and the deaths of the suitors of 
Penelope in their quarrel with Odysseus. 

AL Very true. 

Soc. And when the Athenians and Lacedaemonians and 
Boeotians fell at Tanagra, and afterwards in the battle of 
Coronea, at which your father Cleinias met his end, the 
question was one of justice — this was the sole cause of the 
battles, and of their deaths. 

AL Very true. 

Soc. But can they be said to understand that about which 
they are quarrelling to the death ? 

AL Clearly not. 

Soc. And yet those whom you thus allow to be ignorant 
are the teachers to whom you are appealing. 

AL Very true. 

Soc. But how are you ever likely to know the nature of 
justice and injustice, about which you are so perplexed, if 
you have neither learned them of others nor discovered them 
yourself? 

AL From what you say, I suppose not. 

Soc. See, again, how inaccurately you speak, Alcibiades ! 

AL In what respect? 

Soc. In saying that I say so. 

AL Why, did you not say that I knew nothing of the just 
and unjust ? 

Soc. No ; I did not. 

AL Did I, then? 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

Did not a 
question 
of justice 
cause the 
war be- 
tween the 
Trojans and 
Achaeans, 
and be- 
tween the 
Athenians 
and 

Lacedae- 
monians ? 

And yet 
they did not 
know what 
they were 
fighting 
about ? 

476 

Is it Socrates or A Icibiades 

Aleibiades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

The 

answerer, 
not the 
questioner, 
has been 
drawing 
these 

inferences. 

How can 
you teach 
what you 
do not 
know? 

Soc. Yes. 

AL How was that? 

Soc . Let me explain. Suppose I were to ask you which 
is the greater number, two or one ; you would reply ' two 1 ? 

AL I should. 

Soc. And by how much greater ? 

Al. By one. 

Soc. Which of us now says that two is more than one ? 

AL I do. 

Soc. Did not I ask, and you answer the question ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. Then who is speaking? I who put the question, or 113 
you who answer me ? 

AL I am. 

Soc . Or suppose that I ask and you tell me the letters 
which make up the name Socrates, which of us is the 
speaker ? 

AL I am. 

Soc. Now let us put the case generally : whenever there is 
a question and answer, who is the speaker, — the questioner 
or the answerer ? 

AL I should say, Socrates, that the answerer was the 
speaker. 

Soc. And have I not been the questioner all through? 

AL Yes. 

Soc . And you the answerer ? 

AL Just so. 

Soc. Which of us, then, was the speaker ? 

Al. The inference is, Socrates, that I was the speaker. 

Soc. Did not some one say that Aleibiades, the fair son of 
Cleinias, not understanding about just and unjust, but think- 
ing that he did understand, was going to the assembly to 
advise the Athenians about what he did not know ? Was 
not that said f 

AL Very true. • 

Soc. Then, Aleibiades, the result may be expressed in the 
language of Euripide^ I think that you have heard all this 
* from yourself, and not from me 9 ; nor did I say this, which 
you erroneously attribute to me, but you yourself, and what 
you said was very true. For indeed, my dear fellow, the 

477 

who is the real speaker? 

design which you meditate of teaching what you do not 
know, and have not taken any pains to learn, is downright 
insanity. 

Al. But, Socrates, I think that the Athenians and the rest 
of the Hellenes do not often advise as to the more just or 
unjust ; for they see no difficulty in them, and therefore they 
leave them, and .consider which course of action will be 
most expedient ; for there is a difference between justice 
and expediency. Many persons have done great wrong and 
profited by their injustice ; others have done rightly and 
come to no good. 

Soc. Well, but granting that the just and the expedient are 
ever so much opposed, you surely do not imagine that you 
know what is expedient for mankind, or why a thing is 
expedient ? 

Al. Why not, Socrates ?— But I am not going to be 
asked again from whom 1 learned, or when I made the 
discovery. 

Soc. What a way you have ! When you make a mistake 
which might be refuted by a previous argument, you insist on 
having a new and different refutation ; the old argument is a 
worn-out garment which you will no longer put on, but some 
H4one must produce another which is clean and new. Now I 
shall disregard this move of yours, and shall ask over again, 
— Where did you learn and how do you know the nature of 
the expedient, and who is your teacher? All this I com- 
prehend in a single question, and now you will manifestly be 
in the old difficulty, and will not be able to show that you 
know the expedient, either because you learned or because 
you discovered it yourself. But, as I perceive that you are 
dainty, and dislike the taste of a stale argument, I will 
enquire no further into your knowledge of what is expedient 
or what is not expedient for the Athenian people, and simply 
request you to say why you do not explain whether justice 
and expediency are the same or different ? And if you like 
you may examine me as I have examined you, or, if you 
would rather, you may carry on the dtecussion by yourself. 

AL But I am not certain, Socrates, whether I shall be 
able to discuss the matter with you. 

Soc. Then imagine, my dear fellow, that I am the demus 

Alcibiades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

But the 
expedient, 
not the 
just, is the 
subject 
about 
which men 
cbmmonly 
debate. 

Alcibiades 
insists that 
he will not 
have the 
old argu- 
ment over 
again. 

478 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

He who can 
persuade 
many can 
persuade 
one. 

Alcibiades 
should 
therefore be 
able to 
persuade 
Socrates. 

Is the just the same 

and the ecclesia ; for in the ecclesia, too, you will have to 
persuade men individually. 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And is not the same person able to persuade one in- 
dividual singly and many individuals of the things which he 
knows? The grammarian, for example, can persuade one 
and he can persuade many about letters. 

Al True. 

* Soc. And about number, will not the same person persuade 
one and persuade many ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And this will be he who knows number, or the arith- 
metician ? 

Al. Quite true. 

Soc. And cannot you persuade one man about that of which 
you can persuade many ? 

Al. I suppose so. 

Soc. And that of which you can persuade either is clearly 
what you know ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And the only difference between one who argues as 
we are doing, and the orator who is addressing an assembly, 
is that the one seeks to persuade a number, and the other an 
individual, of the same things. 

Al. I suppose so. 

Soc. Well, then, since the same person who can persuade 
a multitude can persuade individuals, try conclusions upon 
me, and prove to me that the just is not always expedient. 

Al. You take liberties, Socrates. 

Soc. I shall take the liberty of proving to you the opposite 
of that which you will not prove to me. 

Al. Proceed. 

Soc. Answef my questions— that is all. 

Al. Nay, I should like you to be the speaker. 

Soc. What, do you not wish to be persuaded ? 

Al. Certainly I do. 

Soc. And can you be persuaded better than out of your 
own mouth ? 

Al. I think not. 

Soc. Then you shall answer ; and if you do not hear the 

479 

as the expedient or not ? 

words, that the just is the expedient, coming from your own 
lips, never believe another man again. 

Al. I won’t ; but answer I will, for I do not see how I can 
come to any harm. 

15 Soc. A true prophecy ! Let me begin then by enquiring of 
you whether you allow that the just is sometimes expedient 
and sometimes not ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And sometimes honourable and sometimes not ? 

Al. What do you mean ? 

Soc. I am asking if you ever knew any one who did what 
was dishonourable and yet just ? 

Al. Never. 

Soc. All just things are honourable ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And are honourable things sometimes good and some- 
times not good, or are they always good ? 

Al. I rather think, Socrates, that some honourable things 
are evil. 

Soc. And are some dishonourable things good ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. You mean in such a case as the following : — In time 
of war, men have been wounded or have died in rescuing a 
companion or kinsman, when others who have neglected the 
duty of rescuing them have escaped in safety ? 

Al. True. 

Soc. And to rescue another under such circumstances is 
honourable, in respect of the attempt to save those whom we 
ought to save ; and this is courage ? 

Al. True. 

Soc. But evil in respect of death and wounds ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc . And the courage which is shown in the^ rescue is one 
thing, and the death another ? 

Al. Certainly. 

Soc. Then the rescue of one’s friend^ is honourable in one 
point of view, but evil in another ? 

Al. True. 

Soc. And if honourable, then also good : Will you consider 
now whether I may not be right, for you were acknowledging 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

A man may 
do what is 
expedient 
and not 
just, but he 
cannot do 
what is 
honourable 
and not 
just and 
good. 

480 

Ahibiades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

But good 
may con- 
tain an ele- 
ment of evil. 
Good and 
evil are to 
be judged 
of by their 
conse- 
quences. 

The comparative eligibility of goods. 

that the courage which is shown in the rescue is honourable ? 
Now is this courage good or evil? Look at the matter 
thus : which would you rather choose, good or evil ? 

Al. Good. 

Soc . And the greatest goods you would be most ready to 
choose, and would least like to be deprived of them ? 

AL Certainly. 

Soc . What would you say of courage ? At what price 
would you be willing to be deprived of courage ? 

AL I would rather die than be a coward. 

Soc . Then you think that cowardice is the worst of evils ? 

AL I do. 

Soc . As bad as death, I suppose ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And life and courage are the extreme opposites of 
death and cowardice ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And they are what you would most desire to have, 
and their opposites you would least desire ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. Is this because you think life and courage the best, 
and death and cowardice the worst ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And you would term the rescue of a friend in battle 
honourable, in as much as courage does a good work ? 

Al. I should. 

Soc. But evil because of the death which ensues ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. Might we not describe their different effects as fol- 
lows : — You may call either of them evil in respect of the evil 
which is the result, and good in respect of the good which is 
the result of either of them ? 1 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And they are honourable in so far as they are good, 
and dishonourable in so far as they are evil ? 

AL True. 

Soc. Then when ycu say that the rescue of a friend in 
battle is honourable and yet evil, that is equivalent to saying 
that the rescue is good and yet evil ? 

AL I believe that you are right, Socrates. 

481 

The honourable , the good , the expedient , all one . 

Soc. Nothing honourable, regarded as honourable, is evil ; 
nor anything base, regarded as base, good. 

AL Clearly not. 

Soc. Look at the matter yet once more in a further light : 
he who acts honourably acts well ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc . And he who acts well is happy ? 

AL Of course. 

Soc . And the happy are those who obtain good ? 

AL True. 

Soc . And they obtain good by acting well and honourably ? 
AL Yes. 

Soc . Then acting well is a good ? 

AL Certainly. 

Soc . And happiness is a good ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. Then the good and the honourable are again identi- 
fied. 

AL Manifestly. 

Soc. Then, if the argument holds, what we find to be 
honourable we shall also find to be good ? 

AL Certainly. 

Soc. And is the good expedient or not ? 

AL Expedient. 

Soc. Do you remember our admissions about the just ? 

Al. Yes; if I am not mistaken, we said that those who 
acted justly must also act honourably. 

Soc. And the honourable is the good ? 

Al. Yes. 

Alcibiades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

The 

honourable 
is identified 
with the 
good, and 
the good 
is the 
expedient, 

Soc. And the good is expedient ? 
AL Yes. 

Soc. Then, Alcibiades, the just is expedient ? 
Al. I should infer so. 

and there- 
fore the just 

Soc . And all this I prove out of your own mouth, for I ask 
and you answer ? 

Al. I must acknowledge it to be true. 

Soc . And having acknowledged that the just is the same 
as the expedient, are you not (let me ask) prepared to 
ridicule any one who, pretending to understand the prin- 
ciples 6f justice and injustice, gets up to advise the noble 

which is 
the honour- 
able is 
also the 
expedient. 
All this 
has been 
proved by 
Alcibiades 
himself. 

VOL. II. 

I i 

482 

Atcibiadcs 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

Yet he still 
finds him- 
self in a 
perplexity, 

and this is 
because he 
thinks that 
he knows, 
but if he 
knew that 
he were 
ignorant he 
would be 
in no 

perplexity. 

The conceit of knowledge 

Athenians or the ignoble Peparethians, that the just maybe 
the evil ? 

Al. I solemnly declare, Socrates, that I do not know what I 
am saying. Verily, I am in a strange state, for when you 
put questions to me I am of different minds in successive 
instants. 

Soc . And are you not aware of the nature of this per- 
plexity, my friend ? 

AL Indeed I am not. 

Soc . Do you suppose that if some one were to ask you 
whether you have two eyes or three, or two hands or four, 
or anything of that sort, you would then be of different 
minds in successive instants ? 

AL I begin to distrust myself, but still I do not suppose 117 
that I should. 

Soc. You would feel no doubt; and for this reason — 
because you would know ? 

AL I suppose so. 

Soc. And the reason why you involuntarily contradict 
yourself is clearly that you are ignorant ? 

Al. Very likely. 

Soc. And if you are perplexed in answering about just 
and unjust, honourable and dishonourable, good and evil, 
expedient and inexpedient, the reason is that you are 
ignorant of them, and therefore in perplexity. Is not that 
clear ? 

AL I agree. 

Soc. But is this always the case, and is a man neces- 
sarily perplexed about that of which he has no know- 
ledge ? 

AL Certainly he is. 

Soc . And do you know how to ascend into heaven ? 

AL Certainly not. 

Soc. And in this case, too, is your judgment perplexed ? 

AL No. 

Soc . Do you see the reason why, or shall I tell you ? 

AL Tell me. 

Soc. The reason is, that you not only do not know, my 
friend, but you do not think that you know. 

AL There again ; what do you mean ? 

and the consciousness of ignorance. 

483 

Alcibiades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

Soc . Ask yourself ; are you in any perplexity about things 
of which you are ignorant? You know, for example, that 
you know nothing about the preparation of food. 

AL Very true. 

Soc . And do you think and perplex yourself about the 
preparation of food : or do you leave that to some one who 
understands the art ? 

AL The latter. 

Soc. Or if you were on a voyage, would you bewilder 
yourself by considering whether the rudder is to be drawn 
inwards or outwards, or do you leave that to the pilot, and 
do nothing? 

AL It would be the concern of the pilot. 

Soc. Then you are not perplexed about what you do not 
know, if you know that you do not know it ? 

Al. I imagine not. 

Soc. Do you not see, then, that mistakes in life and 
practice are likewise to be attributed to the ignorance which 
has conceit of knowledge? 

AL Once more, what do you mean ? 

_ x 1 . . . 1 . 1 1 know, nor 

Soc. I suppose that we begin to act when we think that we t h OS e who 
know what we are doing ? do not 

AL Yes. 

The people 
who make 
mistakes 
are neither 
those who 

know, but 
those who 

Soc. But when people think that they do not know, they think that 

they know 
and do not 
know. 

entrust their business to others ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And so there is a class of ignorant persons who do 
not make mistakes in life, ‘because they trust others about 
things of which they are ignorant ? 

AL True. 

Soc \ Who, then, are the persons who make mistakes? 
They cannot, of course, be those who know ? 

Al. Certainly not. % 

Soc . But if neither those who kno^ nor those who know 
1 18 that they do not know, make mistakes, there remain those 
only who do not know and think that they know. 

Al. Yes, only those. • 

Soc . Then this is ignorance of the disgraceful sort which is 
mischievous ? 

AL Yes. 

1 1 2 

484 

Ahibtades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Aj.cibiaoes, 

And you, 
like other 
statesmen, 
rush into 
politics 
without 
being 
trained. 
Pericles, 
alone of 
them all, 
associated 
with the 
philoso- 
phers. 

Pericles and the philosophers . 

Soc. And most mischievous and most disgraceful when 
having to do with the greatest matters ? 

Al. By far. 

Soc. And can there be any matters greater than the just, 
the honourable, the good, and the expedient ? 

Al. There cannot be. 

Soc. And these, as you were saying, are what perplex you ? 
Al. Yes. 

Soc. But if you are perplexed, then, as the previous argu- 
ment has shown, you are not only ignorant of the greatest 
matters, but being ignorant you fancy that you know 
them ? 

Al. I fear that you are right. 

Soc. And now see what has happened to you, Alcibiades ! 
I hardly like to speak of your evil case, but as we are alone 
I will : My good friend, you are wedded to ignorance of the 
most disgraceful kind, and of this you are convicted, not by 
me, but out of your own mouth and by your own argument ; 
wherefore also you rush into politics before you are educated. 
Neither is your case to be deemed singular. For I might say 
the same of almost all our statesmen, with the exception, 
perhaps, of your guardian, Pericles. 

Al. Yes, Socrates; and Pericles is said not to have got 
his wisdom by the light of nature, but to have associated 
with several of the philosophers ; with Pythocleides, for 
example, and with Anaxagoras, and now in advanced life 
with Damon, in the hope of gaining wisdom. 

Soc. Very good ; but did you ever know a man wise in 
anything who was unable to impart his particular wisdom ? 
For example, he who taught you letters was not only wise, 
but he made you and any others whom he liked wise. 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And yeu, whom he taught, can do the same ? 

Al. True. < 

Soc. And in like manner the harper and gymnastic-master? 

Al. Certainly. 

Soc. When a persdn is enabled to impart knowledge to 
another, he thereby gives an excellent proof of his own 
understanding of any matter. 

Al. I agree. 

485 

The higher standard. 

Soc. Well, and did Pericles make any one wise; did he 
begin by making his sons wise ? 

Al. But, Socrates, if the two sons of Pericles were simpletons, 
what has that to do with the matter ? 

Soc . Well, but did he make your brother, Cleinias, wise ? 

AL Cleinias is a madman ; there is no use in talking of 
him. m 

Soc . But if Cleinias is a madman and the two sons of 
Pericles were simpletons, what reason can be given why he 
neglects you, and lets you be as you are ? 

AL I believe that I am to blame for not listening to him. 

Soc. But did you ever hear of any' other Athenian or 
foreigner, bond or free, who was deemed to have grown 
119 wiser in the society of Pericles, as I might cite Pythodorus, 
the son of Isolochus, and Callias, the son of Calliades, who 
have grown wiser in the society of Zeno, for which privilege 
they have each of them paid him the sum of a hundred 
minae 1 to the increase of their wisdom and fame. 

AL I certainly never did hear of any one. 

Soc. Well, and in reference to your own case, do you 
mean to remain as you are, or will you take some pains 
about yourself? 

AL With your aid, Socrates, I will. And indeed, when I 
hear you speak, the truth of what you are saying strikes 
home to me, and I agree with you, for our statesmen, all but 
a few, do appear to be quite uneducated. 

Soc. What is the inference ? 

Al. Why, that if they were educated they would be trained 
athletes, and he who means to rival them ought to have 
knowledge and experience when he attacks them ; but now, 
as they have become politicians without any special training, 
why should I have the trouble of learning and practising? 
For I know well that by the light of nature I shall get the 
better of them. 

Soc. My dear friend, what a sentiment ! And how un- 
worthy of your noble form and youf high estate ! 

AL What do you mean, Socrates ; why do you say so ? 

Soc. I am grieved when I think of our mutual love. 

AL At what ? 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

And even 
he could 
not teach 
his own 
sons, or 
your 
brother 
C’leinias, 
nor did any 
one ever 
grow wiser 
in his 
society. 

But if other 
statesmen 
are un- 
educated, 
what need 
has Alci- 
biades of 
education ? 

The lover 
is pained at 
hearing 
from the 
lips of 
Alcibiades 

1 About £406. 

486 

Alcibiadcs 

/. 

Solrates, 

Alcibiadks. 

bo un- 
worthy a 
sentiment. 
He should 
have a 
higher am- 
bition than 
this. 

His rivals 
should be 
the Spartan 
and Persian 
kings, not 
any chance 
persons. 

The Spartan kings . 

Soc. At your fancying that the contest on which you are 
entering is with people here. 

Al. Why, what others are there ? 

Soc . Is that a question which a magnanimous soul should 
ask ? 

Al. Do you mean to say that the contest is not with these ? 

Soc . And suppose that you were going to $teer a ship into 
action, would you only aim at being the best pilot on board ? 
Would you not, while acknowledging that you must possess 
this degree of excellence, rather look to your antagonists, 
and not, as you are now doing, to your fellow combatants? 
You ought to be so' far above these latter, that they will not 
even dare to be your rivals ; and, being regarded by you as 
inferiors, will do battle for you against the enemy ; this is 
the kind of superiority which you must establish over them, if 
you mean to accomplish any noble action really worthy of 
yourself and of the state. 

Al. That would certainly be my aim. 

Soc. Verily, then, you have good reason to be satisfied, if 
you are better than the soldiers ; and you need not, when 
you are their superior and have your thoughts and actions 
fixed upon them, look away to the generals of the enemy. 

Al. Of whom are you speaking, Socrates? 

Soc. Why, you surely know that our city goes to war 120 
now and then with the Lacedaemonians and with the great 
king? 

Al. True enough. 

Soc. And if you meant to be the ruler of this city, would 
you not be right in considering that the Lacedaemonian and 
Persian king were your true rivals ? 

Al. I believe that you are right. 

Soc. Oh no, my friend, I am quite wrong, and I think that 
you ought rather to turn your attention to Midias the quail- 
breeder and others like him, who manage our politics; in 
whom, as the women would remark, you may still see the 
slaves’ cut of hair, chopping out in their minds as well as 
on their pates ; and they come with their barbarous lingo to 
flatter us and not to rule us. To these, I say, you should 
look, and then you need not trouble yourself about your own 
fitness to contend in such a noble arena : there is no reason 

The greatness of the royal family of Persia . 

why you should either learn what has to be learned, or 
practise what has to be practised, and only when thoroughly 
prepared enter on a political career. 

Al. There, I think, Socrates, that you are right ; I do not 
suppose, however, that the Spartan generals or the great 
king are really different from anybody else. 

Soc. But, my^dear friend, do consider what you are saying. 

Al. What am I to consider? 

Soc. In the first place, will you be more likely to take care 
of yourself, if you are in a wholesome fear and dread of them, 
or if you are not ? 

AL Clearly, if I have such a fear of them. 

Soc . And do you think that you will sustain any injury if 
you take care of yourself? 

AL No, I shall be greatly benefited. 

Soc. And this is one very important respect in which that 
notion of yours is bad. 

AL True. 

Soc. In the next place, consider that what you say is 
probably false. 

AL How so ? 

Soc. Let me ask you whether better natures are likely to 
be found in noble races or not in noble races ? 

AL Clearly in noble races. 

Soc. Are not those who are well born and well bred most 
likely to be perfect in virtue ? 

AL Certainly. 

Soc. Then let us compare our antecedents with those of 
the Lacedaemonian and Persian kings ; are they inferior to 
us in descent? Have we not heard that the former are 
sprung from Heracles, and the latter from Achaemenes, and 
that the race of Heracles and the race of Achaemenes go 
back to Perseus, son of Zeus ? 

121 AL Why, so does mine go back to Eurysaces, and he to 
Zeus ! • 

Soc . And mine, noble Alcibiades, t <5 Daedalus, and he to 
Hephaestus, son of Zeus. But, for, all that, we are far 
inferior to them. For they are descended 'from Zeus/ 
through a line of kings— either kings of Argos and Lace- 
daemon, or kings of Persia, a country which the descendants 

487 

Alcibiades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

We too 
have our 
pride of 
birth, but 
how in- 
ferior are 
we to those 
who are 
descended 
from Zeus 
through a 
line of 
kings ! 

488 

Alcibiades 

I. 

SOCRATKS. 

The wealth 
and dignity 
of the 
Spartan 
kings is 
great, but it 
is as no- 
thing com- 
pared with 
that of the 
Persians. 

The birth of 
the Persian 
princes is 
a world- 
famous 
event, and 
the utmost 
pains is 
taken with 
their educa- 
tion, which 
is entrusted 
to great 
and noble 
persons. 

The education of the Persian princes . 

of Achaemenes have always possessed, besides being at 
various times sovereigns of Asia, as they now are ; whereas, 
we and our fathers were but private persons. How ridiculous 
would you be thought if you were to make a display of your 
ancestors and of Salamis the island of Eurysaces, or of 
Aegina, the habitation of the still more ancient Aeacus, 
before Artaxerxes, son of Xerxes. You should consider 
how inferior we are to them both in the derivation of our 
birth and in other particulars. Did you never observe how 
great is the property of the Spartan kings ? And their 
wives are under the guardianship of the Ephori, who are 
public officers and watch over them, in order to preserve as 
far as possible the purity of the Heracleid blood. Still 
greater is the difference among the Persians; for no one 
entertains a suspicion that the father of a prince of Persia 
can be any one but the king. Such is the awe which invests 
the person of the queen, that any other guard is needless. 
And when the heir of the kingdom is born, all the subjects 
of the king feast; and the day of his birth is for ever after- 
wards kept as a holiday and time of sacrifice by all Asia ; 
whereas, when you and I were born, Alcibiades, as the 
comic poet says, the neighbours hardly knew of the im- 
portant event. After the birth of the royal child, he is 
tended, not by a good-for-nothing woman-nurse, but by the 
best of the royal eunuchs, who are charged with the care of 
him, and especially with the fashioning and right formation 
of his limbs, in order that he may be as shapely as possible ; 
which being their calling, they* are held in great honour. 
And when the young prince is seven years old he is put 
upon a horse and taken to the riding-masters, and begins to 
go out hunting. And at fourteen years of age he is handed 
over to the royal schoolmasters, as they are termed : these 
are four chosen men, reputed to be the best among the 
Persians of a certain age; and one of them is the wisest, 
another the justest, a third the most temperate, and a fourth 
the most valiant. Tht first instructs him in the magianism 
of Zoroaster, the son 0 of Oromasus, which is the worship of 122 
the Gods, and teaches him also the duties of his royal office ; 
the second, who is the justest, teaches him always to speak 
the truth ; the third, or most temperate, forbids him to allow 

489 

The wealth of the Spartans. 

any pleasure to be lord over him, that he may be accustomed Alcibiades 
to be a freeman and king indeed,— lord of himself first, and 
not a slave ; the most valiant trains him to be bold and SocRATES * 
fearless, telling him that if he fears he is to deem himself a 
slave; whereas Pericles gave you, Alcibiades, for a tutor When 
Zopyrus the Thracian, a slave of his who was past all other 
• work. I might enlarge on the nurture and education of nobody 
your rivals, but that would be tedious ; and what I have said kne ^ or 

• _ . iri . *1,1 cared, and 

is a sufficient sample of what remains to be said. I have Hiseduca- 
only to remark, by way of contrast, that no one cares about tion was 

i_-i i- T 1 1 handed 

your birth or nurture or education, or, I may say, about that over to a 
of any other Athenian, unless he has a lover who looks after worn out 
him. And if you cast an eye on the wealth, the luxury, the guardian's! 
garments with their flowing trains, the anointings with 
myrrh, the multitudes of attendants, and all the other 
bravery of the Persians, you will be ashamed when you 
discern your own inferiority ; or if you look at the temper- 
ance and orderliness and ease and grace and magnanimity 
and courage and endurance and love of toil and desire of 
glory and ambition of the Lacedaemonians — in all these 
respects you will see that you are but a child in comparison 
of them. Even in the matter of wealth, if you value yourself 
upon that, I must reveal to you how you stand ; for if you 
form an estimate of the wealth of the Lacedaemonians, you 
will see that our possessions fall far short of theirs. For no 
one here can compete with them either in the extent and 
fertility of their own and the Messenian territory, or in the 
number of their slaves, anti especially of the Helots, or of 
their horses, or of the animals which feed on the Messenian 
pastures. But I have said enough of this : and as to gold 
and silver, there is more of them in Lacedaemon than in all 
the rest of Hellas, for during many generations gold has 
been always flowing in to them from the wjiole Hellenic 
world, and often from the barbarian ^also, and never going 
123 out, as in the fable of Aesop the fox said to the lion, 1 The 
prints of the feet of those going in are distinct enough ; * but 
who ever saw the trace of money going out of Lacedaemon ? 
and therefore you may safely infer that the inhabitants are 
the richest of the Hellenes in gold and silver, and that their 
kings are the richest of them, for they have a larger share of 

490 

Alcibiades 

L 

Socrates. 

The 
country 
called the 
* queen’s 
girdle,’ the 
' queen’s 
veil,’ and 
the like. 

The queen 
of Persia or 
of Sparta, 
if they 
heard that 
a youth of 
twenty, 
without 
resources 
and without 
education, 
was going 
to attack 
their son or 
husband, 
would 
deem him 
mad. 

The great inferiority of Alcibiades . 

these things, and they have also a tribute paid to them which 
is very considerable. Yet the Spartan wealth, though great 
in comparison of the wealth of the other Hellenes, is as 
nothing in comparison of that of the Persians and their 
kings. Why, I have been informed by a credible person 
who went up to the king [at Susa], that he passed through a 
large tract of excellent land, extending for yearly a day’s ■ 
journey, which the' people of the country called the .queen’s 
girdle, and another, which they called her veil ; and several 
other fair and fertile districts, which were reserved for the 
adornment of the queen, and are named after her several 
habiliments. Now/I cannot help thinking to myself, What 
if some one were to go to Amestris, the wife of Xerxes and 
mother of Artaxerxes, and say to her, There is a certain 
Dinomache, whose whole wardrobe is not worth fifty minae 
—and that will be more than the value— and she has a son 
who is possessed of a three- hundred acre patch at Erchiac, 
and he has a mind to go to war with your son — would she 
not wonder to what this Alcibiades trusts for success in the 
conflict? ‘He must rely,’ she would say to herself, ‘upon 
his training and wisdom— these are the things which 
Hellenes value.’ And if she heard that this Alcibiades who 
is making the attempt is not as yet twenty years old, and is 
wholly uneducated, and when his lover tells him that he 
ought to get education and training first, and then go and 
fight the king, he refuses, and says that he is well enough as 
he is, would she not be amazed, and ask, ‘On what, then, 
does the youth rely?’ And if wfc replied : He relies on his 
beauty, and stature, and birth, and mental endowments, she 
would think that we were mad, Alcibiades, when she com- 
pared the advantages which you possess with those of her 
own people. And I believe that even Lampido, the daughter 124 
of Leotychidqs, the wife of Archidamus and mother of Agis, 
all of whom were kings, would have the same feeling ; if, in 
your present uneducated state, you were to turn your thoughts 
against her son, she too*would be equally astonished. But 
how disgraceful, that we should not have as high a notion of 
what is required in us as our enemies’ wives and mothers 
have of the qualities which are required in their assailants ! 

O my friend, be persuaded by me, and hear the Delphian 

The necessity of education . 

491 

inscription, 1 Know thyself* — not the men whom you think, Alcibiades 
but these kings are our rivals, and we can only overcome L 
them by pains and skill. And if you fail in the required ^ubiades 
qualities, you will fail also in becoming renowned among 
Hellenes and Barbarians, which you seem to desire more 
than any other man ever desired anything. 

AL I entirely believe you ; but what are the sort of pains 
which are required, Socrates, — can you tell me ? 

Soc . Yes, I can; but we must take counsel together con- 1 too need 
cerning the manner in which both of us may be most ; 

improved. For what I am telling you of the necessity of who is my 
education applies to myself as well as to you : and there s uar ; dian » 

. . . inspires me 

is only one point in which I have an advantage over you. with the 

AL What is that ? lthaii that 

Soc . I have a guardian who is better and wiser than your bring you 
guardian, Pericles. to honour. 

AL Who is he, Socrates ? 

Soc . God, Alcibiades, who up to this day has not allowed 
me to converse with you ; and he inspires in me the faith 
that I am especially designed to bring you to honour. 

AL You are jesting, Socrates. 

Soc. Perhaps ; at any rate, I am right in saying that all 
men greatly need pains and care, and you and I above all 
men. 

Al. You are not far wrong about me. 

Soc. And certainly not about myself. 

Al. But what can we do ? 

Soc. There must be n<5 hesitation or cowardice, my 
friend. 

Al. That would not become us, Socrates. 

Soc . No, indeed, and we ought to take counsel together : We must 
for do we not wish to be as good as possible ? take 

a 1 ttt 1 counsel 

AL We do. * together, 

Soc. In what sort of virtue ? ( not ab ? ut 

AL Plainly, in the virtue of good men. or navaf" 

Soc. Who are good in what ? * affairs), but 

AL Those, clearly, who are good ih the management of 
affairs. 

Soc. What sort of affairs ? Equestrian affairs ? 

AL Certainly not. 

492 

Goodness and wisdom identified. 

Alcibiades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

about the 
things 
which 
occupy the 
minds of 
wise men. 

And the 
wise are 
those 
who take 
counsel for 
the better 
order and 

Soc . You mean that about them we should have recourse 
to horsemen ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc . Well ; naval affairs ? 

Al. No. 

Soc . You mean that we should have recourse to sailors 
about them? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. Then what affairs ? And who do them ? 

Al. The affairs which occupy Athenian gentlemen. 125 

Soc. And when you speak of gentlemen, do you mean the 
wise or the unwise ?* 

Al. The wise. 

Soc. And a man is good in respect of that in which he is 
wise ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And evil in respect of that in which he is unwise ? 

Al. Certainly. 

Soc. The shoemaker, for example, is wise in respect of the 
making of shoes ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. Then he is good in that ? 

Al. He is. 

Soc. But in respect of the making of garments he is un- 
wise? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. Then in that he is bad ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. Then upon this view of the matter the same man is 
good and also bad ? 

Al. True. 

Soc. But would you say that the good are the same as the 
bad? 

Al. Certainly not. 

Soc. Then whom do you call the good ? 

Al. I mean by the goo’d those who are able to rule in the 
city. * 

Soc . Not, surely, over horses? 

Al. Certainly not. 

Soc. But over men ? 

493 

The analogy of other employments . 

Al. Yes. 

Soc . When they are sick ? 

AL No. 

Soc. Or on a voyage ? 

Al. No. 

Soc . Or reaping the harvest ? 

AL No. • 

Soc. When they are doing something or nothing? 

Al. When they are doing something, I should say. 

Soc. I wish that you would explain to me what this some- 
thing is. 

AL When they are having dealings with one another, and 
using one another’s services, as we citizens do in our daily 
life. 

Soc. Those of whom you speak are ruling over men who 
are using the services of other men ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. Are they ruling over the signal-men who give the 
time to the rowers ? 

AL No; they are not. 

Soc. That would be the office of the pilot ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. But, perhaps you mean that they rule over flute- 
players, who lead the singers and use the services of the 
dancers ? 

Al. Certainly not. 

Soc. That would be the business of the teacher of the 
chorus ? f 

AL Yes. 

Soc. Then what is the meaning of being able to rule over 
men who use other men ? 

Al. I mean that they rule over men who have common 
rights of citizenship, and dealings with one another. 

Soc. And what sort of an art is this ? Suppose that I ask 
you again, as I did just now, What art makes men know 
how to rule over their fellow-sailors,— -how would you 
answer ? • 

AL The art of the pilot. 

Soc. And, if I may recur to another old instance, what art 
enables them to rule over their fellow-singers ? 

Alcihiadts 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

improve- 
ment of the 
city. 

Illustra- 

tions. 

494 

Alcibiades 

L 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

And this 
improve- 
ment is 
given by 
friend- 
ship and 
agreement, 

How is a state improved? 

Al. The art of the teacher of the chorus, which you were 
just now mentioning. 

Soc. And what do you call the art of fellow-citizens ? 

Al. I should say, good counsel, Socrates. 

Soc. And is the art of the pilot evil counsel ? 

AL No. 

Soc. But good counsel ? 

AL Yes, that is what I should say, — good counsel, of which 126 
the aim is the preservation of the voyagers. 

Soc. True. And what is the aim of that other good counsel 
of which you speak ? 

AL The aim is the better order and preservation of the city. 

Soc. And what is that of which the absence or presence 
improves and preserves the order of the city ? Suppose you 
were to ask me, what is that of which the presence or absence 
improves or preserves the order of the body? I should 
reply, the presence of health and the absence of disease. 
You would say the same ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And if you were to ask me the same question about 
the eyes, I should reply in the same way, 'the presence of 
sight and the absence of blindness ; * or about the ears, I 
should reply, that they were improved and were in better, 
case, when deafness was absent, and hearing was present in 
them. 

AL True. 

Soc . And what would you say of a state ? What is that by 
the presence or absence of whidi the state is improved and 
better managed and ordered ? 

Al. I should say, Socrates : — the presence of friendship and 
the absence of hatred and division. 

Soc. And do you mean by friendship agreement or dis- 
agreement ? 

AL Agreement. 

Soc. What art makes cities agree about numbers ? 

Al. Arithmetic. 

Soc. And private mdividuals ? 

Al. The same. 

Soc. And what art makes each individual agree with 
himself? 

The art of measure. 

495 

Al. The same. Alcibiades 

Soc . And what art makes each of us agree with himself 
about the comparative length of the span and of the cubit ? SoCRATES » 

_ , _ Alcibiades. 

Does not the art of measure ? 

Al Yes. 

Soc . Individuals are agreed with one another about this ; 

• and states, eqitfilly ? 

Al Yes. 

Soc . And the same holds of the balance ? 

Al True. 

Soc. But what is the other agreement of which you speak, 
and about what ? what art can give that agreement ? And 
does that which gives it to the state give it also to the in- 
dividual, so as to make him consistent with himself and with 
another ? 

Al I should suppose so. 

Soc. But what is the nature of the agreement ?— answer, 
and faint not. 

Al I mean to say that there should be such friendship and 
agreement as exists between an affectionate father and mother 
and their son, or between brothers, or between husband and 
wife. 

Soc. But can a man, Alcibiades, agree with a woman about 
the spinning of wool, which she understands and he does not ? 

Al No, truly. 

Soc. Nor has he any need, for spinning is a female 
accomplishment. 

Al. Yes. 

such as 
exists 

between the 
members of 
a family, 
however 
they may 
differ in 
their 
qualities 
and accom- 
plishments. 

127 Soc. And would a woman agree with a man about the 
science of arms, which she has never learned ? 

Al Certainly not. 

Soc. I suppose that the use of arms would be regarded by 
you as a male accomplishment ? t 

Al It would. 

Sqc. Then, upon your view, women and men have two sorts 
of knowledge ? 

Al Certainly. • 

Soc. Then in their knowledge there is no agreement of 
women and men ? 

Al There is not. 

496 

Alcibiades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

If every- 
body is do- 
ing his own 
business, 
how can 
this pro- 
mote 

friendship ? 
And yet 
when in- 
dividuals 
are doing 
each his 
own work, 
they are 
doing what 
is just. 

Apparent antagonism of friendship and jtistice. 

Soc. Nor can there be friendship, if friendship is agree- 
ment? 

AL Plainly not. 

Soc. Then women are not loved by men when they do their 
own work ? 

Al. I suppose not. 

Soc . Nor men by women when they do their own work ? 
AL No. 

Soc. Nor are states well administered, when individuals do 
their own work ? 

AL I should rather think, Socrates, that the reverse is the 
truth \ 

Soc . What ! do you mean to say that states are well ad- 
ministered when friendship is absent, the presence of which, 
as we were saying, alone secures their good order? 

AL But I should say that there is friendship among them, 
for this very reason, that the two parties respectively do their 
own work. 

Soc. That was not what you were saying before ; and what 
do you mean now by affirming that friendship exists when 
there is no agreement ? How can there be agreement about 
matters which the one party knows, and of which the other is 
in ignorance ? 

AL Impossible. 

Soc . And when individuals are doing their own work, are 
they doing what is just or unjust ? 

AL What is just, certainly. 

Soc. And when individuals do H what is just in the state, is 
there no friendship among them ? 

AL I suppose that there must be, Socrates. 

Soc . Then what do you mean by this friendship or agree- 
ment about which we must be wise and discreet in order that 
we may be good men ? I cannot make out where it exists or 
among whom ; according to you, the same persons may some- 
times have it, and sometimes not. 

AL But, indeed, Socrates, I do not know what I am saying ; 
and I have long beesi, unconsciously to myself, in a most 
disgraceful state. 

Soc . Nevertheless, cheer up ; at fifty, if you had discovered 

1 Cp. Rep. i. 332 foil. 

497 

Alcibiades is 'puzzled \ 

your deficiency, you would have been too old, and the time 
for taking care of yourself would have passed away, but yours 
is just the age at which the discovery should be made. 

Al. And what should he do, Socrates, who would make the 
discovery ? 

Soc. Answer questions, Alcibiades ; and that is a process 
•which, by the grace of God, if I may put any faith in my 
oracle, will be very improving to both of us. 

AL If I can be improved by answering, I will answer. 

128 Soc. And first of all, that we may not peradventure be 
deceived by appearances, fancying, perhaps, that we are 
taking care of ourselves when we are not, what is the meaning 
of a man taking care of himself? and when does he take care ? 
Does he take care of himself when he takes care of what 
belongs to him ? ' 

AL. I should think so. 

Soc. When does a man take care of his feet? Does he 
not take care of them when he takes care of that which 
belongs to his feet ? 

AL I do not understand. 

Soc. Let me take the hand as an illustration ; does not a 
ring belong to the finger, and to the finger only? 

AI. Yes. 

Soc. And the shoe in like manner to the foot? 

AL Yes. 

Soc . And when we take care of our shoes, do we not take 
care of our feet ? 

Al. I do not comprehend, ^Socrates. 

Soc. But you would admit, Alcibiades, that to take proper 
care of a thing is a correct expression ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And taking proper care means improving? 

AL Yes. # 

Soc. And what is the art which improves our shoes? 

Al. Shoemaking. 

Soc. Then by shoemaking we take* care of our shoes ? 

AL Yes. • 

Soc. And do we by shoemaking take care of our feet, or by 
some other art which improves the feet ? 

AL By some other art. 

k k 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiaoes. 

The way to 
clear up 
difficulties 
is to answer 
questions. 
Alcibiades 
is willing to 
have re- 
course to 
this method 
of improve- 
ment. 

VOL. II. 

498 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

It has been 
shown by 
examples 
that a man 
does not 
take care of 
himself, 
when he 
only takes 
care of 
what be- 
longs to 
him. 

A man 
must know 
himself 

He is learning by examples . 

Soc. And the same art improves the feet which improves 
the rest of the body ? 

AL Very true. 

Soc. Which is gymnastic ? 

A/. Certainly. 

Soc. Then by gymnastic we take care of our feet, and by 
shoemaking of that which belongs to our feet J 

Al. Very true. 

Soc. And by gymnastic we take care of our hands, and by 
the art of graving rings of that which belongs to our hands ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And by gymnastic we take care of the body, and by 
the art of weaving and the other arts we take care of the 
things of the body ? 

Al, Clearly. 

Soc. Then the art which takes care of each thing is 
different from that which takes care of the belongings of each 
thing ? 

Al. True. 

Soc. Then in taking care of what belongs to you, you do 
not take care of yourself? 

Al. Certainly not. 

Soc. For the art which takes care of our belongings appears 
not to be the same as that which takes care of ourselves ? 

Al. Clearly not. 

Soc. And now let me ask you what is the art with which we 
take care of ourselves ? 

Al. I cannot say. 

Soc. At any rate, thus much has been admitted, that the art 
is not one which makes any of our possessions, but which 
makes ourselves better ? 

AL True. 

Soc. But should we ever have known what art makes a shoe 
better, if we clid not know a shoe ? 

Al. Impossible. 1 

Soc. Nor should w£ know what art makes a ring better, if 
we did not know a rir.g ? 

Al. That is true. 

Soc. And can we ever know what art makes a man better, 129 
if we do not know what we are ourselves ? 

499 

The knowledge of self. 

Al. Impossible. Alcibiades 

Soc. And is self-knowledge such an easy thing, and was he L 
to be lightly esteemed who inscribed the text on the temple at Socrates, 

Delphi ? Or is self-knowledge a difficult thing, which few 

, before he 

are able to attain ? can im- 

Al. At times I fancy, Socrates, that anybody can know 
himself ; at otl^pr times the task appears to be very difficult. W h a t be- 

Soc. But whether easy or difficult, Alcibiades, still there is lon & s to 
no other way; knowing what we are, we shall know how to 
take care of ourselves, and if we are ignorant we shall not 
know. 

AL That is true. 

Soc . Well, then, let us see in what way the self-existent 
can be discovered by us ; that will give us a chance of dis- 
covering our own existence, which otherwise we can never 
know. 

AL You say truly. 

Soc. Come, now, I beseech you, tell me with whom you 
are conversing? — with whom but with me? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. As I am, with you ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. That is to say, I, Socrates, am talking ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And Alcibiades is my hearer ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And I in talking use words ? 

Al. Certainly. • 

Soc . And talking and using words have, I suppose, the 
same meaning ? 

Al. To be sure. 

Soc . And the user is not the same as the thing which he 
uses ? # 

AL What do you mean ? 

Soc. I will explain ; the shoemaker, for example, uses a 
square tool, and a circular tool, and other tools for cutting ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. But the tool is not the same as the cutter and user of 
the tool ? 

AL Of course not. 

K k 2 

500 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

He is dis- 
tinct from 
what he 
uses ; and 
therefore 
distinct 
from his 
own body. 

But he must 
be one of 
three 
things 

More analogies and examples . 

Soc. And in the same way the instrument of the harper is 
to be distinguished from the harper himself? 

Al. It is. 

Soc. Now the question which I asked was whether you 
conceive the user to be always different from that which he 
uses? 

Al. I do. 

Soc. Then what shall we say of the shoemaker ? Does he 
cut with his tools only or with his hands ? 

Al. With his hands as well. 

Soc. He uses his hands too ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And does he use his eyes in cutting leather ? 

Al. He does. 

Soc. And we admit that the user is not the same with the 
things which he uses ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. Then the shoemaker and the harper are to be distin- 
guished from the hands and feet which they use ? 

Al. Clearly. 

Soc . And does not a man use the whole body? 

Al. Certainly. 

Soc. And that which uses is different from that which is 
used ? 

Al. True. 

Soc. Then a man is not the same as his own body ? 

Al. That is the inference. 

Soc. What is he, then ? * 

Al. I cannot say. 

Soc. Nay, you can say that he is the user of the body. 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And the user of the body is the soul ? 

Al. Yes, the soul. ' 

Soc. And the soul rules ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. Let me make an assertion which will, I think, be uni- 
versally admitted. “ 

Al. What is it? 

Soc. That man is one of three things. 

Al. What are they? 

The true self or being of a man . 

Soc . Soul, body, or both together forming a whole. 

Al. Certainly. 

Soc . But did we not say that the actual ruling principle of 
the body is man ? 

Al. Yes, we did. 

Soc . And does the body rule over itself? 

Al. Certainly not. 

Soc. It is subject, as we were saying ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. Then that is not the principle which we are seeking ? 

AL It would seem not. 

Soc. But may we say that the union t>f the two rules over 
the body, and consequently that this is man ? 

AL Very likely. 

Soc. The most unlikely of all things; for if one of the 
members is subject, the two united cannot possibly rule. 

AL True. 

Soc. But since neither the body, nor the union of the two, 
is man, either man has no real existence, or the soul is man ? 

AL Just so. 

Soc. Is anything more required to prove that the soul is 
man ? 

AL Certainly not ; the proof is, I think, quite sufficient. 

Soc. And if the proof, although not perfect, be sufficient, 
we shall be satisfied ; — more precise proof will be supplied 
when we have discovered that which we were led to omit, 
from a fear that the enquiry would be too much protracted. 

AL What was that ? • 

Soc. What I meant, when I said that absolute existence 
must be first considered ; but now, instead of absolute exist- 
ence, we have been considering the nature of individual 
existence, and this may, perhaps, be sufficient ; for surely 
there is nothing which may be called more properly our- 
selves than the soul ? # 

AL There is nothing. • 

Soc. Then we may truly conceive *that you and I are con- 
versing with one another, soul to soul? 

AL Very true. 

Soc. And that is just what I was saying before—that 
I, Socrates, am not arguing or talking with the face of 

501 

A let diodes 
I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

Soul, body, 
or the union 
of the two. 
What is the 
ruling 
principle 
in him ? 
Clearly the 
soul. 

There 
remains a 
question of 
absolute 
existence, 
which has 
not been 
considered 
by us, or 
rather is 
being con- 
sidered by 
us when we 
speak of 
the soul. 

You and I 
are talking 
soul to soul. 

502 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiadbs. 

But if the 
soul is the 
man, he 
who knows 
only the 
arts which 
concern 
man does 
not know 
himself. 

The lover 
of the soul 
is the true 
lover. 

The man and his belongings . 

Alcibiades, but with the real Alcibiades ; or in other words, 
with his soul. 

Al. True. 

Soc. Then he who bids a man know himself, would have 
him know his soul ? 

AL That appears to be true. 

Soc . lie whose knowledge only extends t to the body, i z i 
knows the things of a man, and not the man himself? 

AL That is true. 

Soc. Then neither the physician regarded as a physician, 
nor the trainer regarded as a trainer, knows himself? 

AL He does not. ' 

Soc. The husbandmen and the other craftsmen are very 
far from knowing themselves, for they would seem not 
even to know their own belongings ? When regarded in 
relation to the arts which they practise they are even further 
removed from self-knowledge, for they only know the belong- 
ings of the body, which minister to the body. 

AL That is true. 

Soc. Then if temperance is the knowledge of self, in re- 
spect of his art none of them is temperate ? 

AL I agree. 

Soc. And this is the reason why their arts are accounted 
vulgar, and are not such as a good man would practise ? 

AL Quite true. 

Soc. Again, he who cherishes his body cherishes not him- 
self, but what belongs to him ? 

AL That is true. 

Soc. But he who cherishes his money, cherishes neither 
himself nor his belongings, but is in a stage yet further 
removed from himself? 

AL I agree. 1 

Soc. Then the money-maker has really ceased to be 
occupied with his own concerns? 

AL True. 

Soc. And if any one 1 has fallen in love with the person of 
Alcibiades, he loves pot Alcibiades, but the belongings of 
Alcibiades ? 

Al. True. 

Soc. But he who loves your soul is the true lover ? 

Socrates , the only true lover of Alcibiades . 

AL That is the necessary inference. 

Soc . The lover of the body goes away when the flower of 
youth fades? 

AL True. 

Soc . But he who loves the soul goes not away, as long as 
the soul follows after virtue ? 

. AL Yes. 

Soc . And I am the lover who goes not away, but remains 
with you, when you are no longer young and the rest are gone ? 

AL Yes, Socrates ; and therein you do well, and I hope 
that you will remain. 

Soc . Then you must try to look your best. 

AL I will. 

Soc. The fact is, that there is only one lover of Alcibiades 
the son of Cleinias; there neither is nor ever has been 
seemingly any other; and he is his darling, — Socrates, the 
son of Sophroniscus and Phaenarete. 

AL True. 

Soc. And did you not say, that if I had not spoken first, 
you were on the point of coming to me, and enquiring why I 
only remained ? 

Al. That is true. 

Soc. The reason was that I loved you for your own sake, 
whereas other men love what belongs to you; and your 
132 beauty, which is not you, is fading away, just as your true 
self is beginning to bloom. And I will never desert you, if 
you are not spoiled and deformed by the Athenian people ; 
for the danger which I most fear is that you will become a 
lover of the people and will be spoiled by them. Many a 
noble Athenian has been ruined in this way. For the demus 
of the great-hearted Erechtheus is of a fair countenance, but 
you should see him naked ; wherefore observe the caution 
which I give you. 

AL What caution ? 

Soc. Practise yourself, sweet friencf, in learning what you 
ought to know, before you enter ©n politics ; and then you 
will have an antidote which will keep you out of harm’s way. 

AL Good advice, Socrates, but I wish that you would ex- 
plain to me in what way I am to take care of myself. 

Soc. Have we not made an advance? for we are at any 

503 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

He only 
remains 
and goes 
not away, 
so long as 
the soul of 
•his beloved 
follows 
after virtue. 

And So- 
crates will 
never desert 
Alcibiades 
so long as 
he is not 
spoiled by 
the Athe- 
nian people. 

504 

Alcibiades 

I, 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

He who 
would take 
care of him- 
self must 
first of all 
know him- 
self. 

The eye 
which 
would see 
itself must 
look into 
the pupil of 
another, 
which is 
the divinest 
part of the 
eye, and 
will then 
behold 
itself. 

How is a man to take care of himself? 

rate tolerably well agreed as to what we are, and there is no 
longer any danger, as we once feared, that we might be 
taking care not of ourselves, but of something which is not 
ourselves. 

AL That is true. 

Soc. And the next step will be to take care of the soul, and 
look to that ? , 

Al. Certainly. 

Soc . Leaving the care of our bodies and of our properties 
to others ? 

AL Very good. 

Soc . But how can we have a perfect knowledge of the 
things of the soul? — For if we know them, then I suppose we 
shall know ourselves. Can we really be ignorant of the 
excellent meaning of the Delphian inscription, of which we 
were just now speaking? 

AL What have you in your thoughts, Socrates ? 

Soc . I will tell you what I suspect to be the meaning and 
lesson of that inscription. Let me take an illustration from 
sight, which I imagine to be the only one suitable to my 
purpose. 

AL What do you mean ? 

Soc. Consider ; if some one were to say to the eye, 1 See 
thyself/ as you might say to a man, 1 Know thyself,’ what is 
the nature and meaning of this precept? Would not his 
meaning be : — That the eye should look at that in which it 
would see itself? 

Al. Clearly. 

Soc. And what are the objects in looking at which we see 
ourselves ? 

Al. Clearly, Socrates, in looking at mirrors and the like. 

Soc . Very trke ; and is there not something of the nature 
of a mirror in our own eyes ? 

AL Certainly. 

Soc. Did you ever' observe that the face of the person 
looking into the eye 6f another is reflected as in a mirror ; 
and in the visual orgap which is over against him, and which 133 
is called the pupil, there is a sort of image of the person 
looking ? 

AL That is quite true. 

The argument recapitulated with some corrections . 

Soc. Then the eye, looking at another eye, and at that in 
the eye which is most perfect, and which is the instrument of 
vision, will there see itself? 

AL That is evident. 

Soc . But looking at anything else either in man or in the 
world, and not to what resembles this, it will not see itself? 

AL Very true. 

Soc. Then if the eye is to see itself, it must look at the eye, 
and at that part of the eye where sight which is the virtue of 
the eye resides ? 

AL True. 

Soc . And if the soul, my dear Alcibiades, is ever to know 
herself, must she not look at the soul ; and especially at that 
part of the soul in which her virtue resides, and to any other 
which is like this ? 

AL I agree, Socrates. 

Soc. And do we know of any part of our souls more divine 
than that which has to do with wisdom and knowledge ? 

Al. There is none. 

Soc. Then this is that part of the soul which resembles the 
divine ; and he who looks at this and at the whole class of 
things divine, will be most likely to know himself ? 

AL Clearly. 

Soc. And self-knowledge we agree to be wisdom ? 

AL True. 

Soc. But if we have no self-knowledge and no wisdom, can 
we ever know our own good and evil ? 

AL How can we, Socrates ? 

Soc. You mean, that if you did not know Alcibiades, there 
would be no possibility of your knowing that what belonged 
to Alcibiades was really his ? 

AL It would be quite impossible. • 

Soc. Nor should we know that we were the persons to 
whom anything belonged, if we did not know ourselves? 

AL How could we ? * 

Soc. And if we did not know our <?wn belongings, neither 
should we know the belongings of ourielongings ? 

AL Clearly not. 

Soc. Then we were not altogether right in acknowledging 
just now that a man may know what belongs to him and yet 

505 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

And the 
soul which 
would know 
herself 
must look 
especially 
at that 
part of 
herself in 
which she 
resembles 
the divine. 

He who 
knows not 
himself and 
his belong- 
ings, will 
not know 
others and 
their be- 
longings, 

506 

Alcibiades 

I. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

and there- 
fore he will 
not know 
the affairs 
of states. 

And, if he 
knows not 
what he is 
doing, he 
will be 
miserable 
and will 
make others 
miserable. 

Happiness without virtue impossible . 

not know himself ; nay, rather he cannot even know the be- 
longings of his belongings ; for the discernment of the things 
of self, and of the things which belong to the things of self, 
appear all to be the business of the same man, and of the 
same art. 

Ah So much may be supposed. 

Soc. And he who knows not the things wjiich belong to 
himself, will in like manner be ignorant of the things which 
belong to others ? 

Ah Very true. 

Soc. And if he knows not the affairs of others, he will not 
know the affairs of states ? 

Ah Certainly not. 

Soc. Then such a man can never be a statesman ? 

Ah He cannot. 

Soc. Nor an economist ? 

Ah He cannot. 

Soc. He will not know what he is doing? 

Ah He will not. 

Soc. And will not he who is ignorant fall into error? 

Ah Assuredly. 

Soc. And if he falls into error will he not fail both in his 
public and private capacity ? 

Ah Yes, indeed. 

Soc. And failing, will he not be miserable ? 

Ah Very. 

Soc. And what will become of those for whom he is 
acting ? ■» 

Al. They will be miserable also. 

Soc. Then he who is not wise and good cannot be happy ? 

Ah He cannot. 

Soc. The bad, then, are miserable ? 

Ah Yes, very. 

Soc. And if so, not he who has riches, but he who has 
wisdom, is delivered from his misery? 

Ah Clearly. * * 

Soc. Cities, then, if they are to be happy, do not want 
walls, or triremes, or docks, or numbers, or size, Alcibiades, 
without virtue 1 ? 

134 

Cp. Arist. Pol. vii. 1. § 5. 

The divine mirror . 

507 

Al. Indeed they do not. 

Soc . And you must give the citizens virtue, if you mean to 
administer their affairs rightly or nobly ? • 

AL Certainly. # . 

Soc . But can a man give that \vhich he has not ? 

AL Impossible. 

• Soc. Then y # ou or any one who means to govern and 
superintend, not only himself and the things of himself, but 
the state and the things of the state, must in the first place 
acquire virtue. 

AL That is true. 

Soc . You have not therefore to obtain* power or authority, 
in order to enable you to do what you wish for yourself and 
the state, but justice and wisdom. 

AL Clearly. 

Soc. You and the state, if you act wisely and justly, will 
act according to the will of God ? 

Al. Certainly. 

Soc. As I was saying before, you will look only at what is 
bright and divine, and act with a view to them ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. In that mirror you will see and know yourselves and 
your own good ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And so you will act rightly and well ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. In which case, I will be security for your happiness. 

AL I accept the security.# 

Soc . But if you act unrighteously, your eye will turn to 
the dark and godless, and being in darkness and ignorance 
of yourselves, you will probably do deeds of darkness. 

AL Very possibly. * 

Soc. For if a man, my dear Alcibiades, has the power to 
do what he likes, but has no understanding, what is likely to 
135 be the result, either to him as an indivfdual or to the state — 
for example, if he be sick and is able* to do what he likes, 
not having the mind of a physician — hewing moreover tyran- 
nical power, and no one daring to reprove him, what will 
happen to him ? Will he not Be likely to have his consti- 
tution ruined ? 

Alcibiades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

He must 
give the 
citizens 
wisdom and 
justice, and 
he cannot 
give what 
he has not 
got. 

If he acts 
wisely and 
justly he 
will act 
according 
to the will 
of God. 

In the 
mirror of 
the divine 
he will see 
his own 
good and 
will act 
rightly and 
be happy. 

5°8 

Alcibiades 

/. 

SoCRATKS, 

Alcibiades. 

Not power, 
but virtue, 
should be 
the aim 
both of in- 
dividuals 
and of 
states : and 
he only is a 
freeman 
who has 
virtue. 

The conversion of Alcibiades . 

Al, That is true. 

Soc . Or again, in a ship, if a man having the power to do 
what he dikes, has no intelligence or skill in navigation, do 
you see what will happen to him and to his fellow-sailors ? 

AL Yes; I see that they will all perish. 

Soc . And in like manner, in a state, and where there is 
any power and authority which is wanting in virtue, will not. 
misfortune, in like manner, ensue ? 

AL Certainly. 

Soc. Not tyrannical power, then, my good Alcibiades, 
should be the aim either of individuals or states, if they 
would be happy, bih virtue. 

AL That is true. 

Soc . And before they have virtue, to be commanded by a 
superior is better for men as well as for children 1 ? 

AL That is evident. 

Soc . And that which is better is also nobler ? 

Al. True. 

Soc . And what is nobler is more becoming ? 

Al. Certainly. 

Soc. Then to the bad man slavery is more becoming, 
because better? 

AL True. 

Soc. Then vice is only suited to a slave ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And virtue to a freeman ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And, O my friend, is no* 1 the condition of a slave to 
be avoided ? 

AL Certainly, Socrates. 

Soc. And are you now conscious of your own state ? And 
do you know whether you are a freeman or not ? 

AL I think that I am very conscious indeed of my own 
state. 

Soc. And do you know how to escape out of a state which 
I do not even like to 'name to my beauty ? 

AL Yes, I do. , 

Soc. How? 

Al. By your help, Socrates. 

1 Cp. Arist. Pol. i. 5. § 7. 

5°9 

The power of the state may be too much for us . 

Soc . That is not well said, Alcibiades. 

AL What ought I to have said ? 

Soc, By the help of God. • 

AL I agree ; and I further say, that our relations are 
likely to be reversed. From this day forward, I must and 
will follow you as you have followed me; I will be the 
1 disciple, and yc$u shall be my master. 

Soc . O that is rare ! My love breeds another love : and 
so like the stork I shall be cherished by the bird whom I 
have hatched. 

AL Strange, but true ; and henceforward I shall begin to 
think about justice. * 

Soc . And I hope that you will persist; although I have 
fears, not because I doubt you ; but I see the power of the 
state, which may be too much for both of us. 

Alcibiades 

/. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

MENEXENUS. 

INTRODUCTION. 

The Menexenus has more the character of a rhetorical exercise Menexenus. 
than any other of the Platonic works. The writer seems to have Introduce 
wished to emulate Thucydides, and the far slighter work of Lysias. 1 
In his rivalry with the latter, to whom in the Phaedrus Plato shows 
a strong antipathy, he is entirely successful, but he is not equal to 
Thucydides. The Menexenus, though not without real Hellenic 
interest, falls very far short of the rugged grandeur and political 
insight of the great historian. The fiction of the speech having 
been invented by Aspasia is well sustained, and is in the manner 
of Plato, notwithstanding the anachronism which puts into her 
mouth an allusion to the peace of Antalcidas, an event occurring 
forty years after the date of the supposed oration. But Plato, like 
Shakespeare, is careless of such* anachronisms, which are not 
supposed to strike the mind of the reader. The effect produced 
by these grandiloquent orations on Socrates, who does not recover 
after having heard one of them for three days and more, is truly 
Platonic. 

Such discourses, if we may form a judgment from the three 
which are extant (for the so-called Funeral Oration of Demos- 
thenes is a bad and spurious imitation of Thucydides and Lysias), 
conformed to a regular type. * They began with Gods and ancestors, 
and the legendary history of Athens, to which succeeded an almost 
equally fictitious Account of later times. The Persian war usually 
formed the centre of the narrative ; in the age of Isocrates and 
Demosthenes the Athenians were still living on %he glories of 
Marathon and Salamis. The Menexenus*veils in panegyric the 
weak places of Athenian history. The war of Athens and Boeotia is 
a war of liberation; the Athenians gave back the Spartans taken at 
Sphacteria out of kindness— indeed, the only fault of the city was 
too great kindness to their enemies, fvhcwere more honoured than 
the friends of others (cp. Thucyd. ii. 41, which seems to contain the 

l 1 

VOL. 11. 

5 1 4 The authenticity of the Dialogue. 

Menexenus. germ of the idea) ; we democrats are the aristocracy of virtue, and 
Introduc- the like. These are the platitudes and falsehoods in which history 
TI0N * is disguised. The taking of Athens is hardly mentioned. 

The author of the Menexenus, whether Plato or not, is evidently 
intending to ridicule the practice, and at the same time to show 
that he can beat the rhetoricians in their own line, as in the Phae- 
drus he may be supposed to offer an example of what Lysias 
might have said, and of how much better he might have written in 
his own style. The orators had recourse to their favourite loci 
communes , one of which, as we find in Lysias, was the shortness 
of the time allowed them for preparation. But Socrates points out 
that they had them always ready for delivery, and that there was 
no difficulty in improvising any number of such orations. To 
praise the Athenians among the Athenians was easy, — to praise 
them among the Lacedaemonians would have been a much more 
difficult task. Socrates himself has turned rhetorician, having 
learned of a woman, Aspasia, the mistress of Pericles ; and any 
one whose teachers had been far inferior to his own — say, one 
who had learned from Antiphon the Rhamnusian— would be quite 
equal to the task of praising men to themselves. When we 
remember that Antiphon is described by Thucydides as the best 
pleader of his day, the satire on him and on the whole tribe of 
rhetoricians is transparent. 

The ironical assumption of Socrates, that he must be a good 
orator because he had learnt of Aspasia, is not coarse, as Schleier- 
macher supposes, but is rather to be regarded as fanciful. Nor 
can we say that the offer of Socrates to dance naked out of love for 
Menexenus, is any more un-Platohic than the threat of physical 
force which Phaedrus uses towards Socrates (286 C). Nor is 
there any real vulgarity in the fear which Socrates expresses that 
he will get a beating from his mistress, Aspasia : .his is the natural 
exaggeration of what might be expected from an imperious woman. 
Socrates is noC to be taken seriously in all that he says, and Plato, 
both in the Symposium and elsewhere, is not slow to admit a sort 
of Aristophanic humour. How a great original genius like Plato 
might or might not have written, what was his conception of 
humour, or what limits he would have prescribed to himself, if 
any, in drawing the picture of 1 the Silenus Socrates, are problems 
which no critical instinct can determine. 

515 

The authenticity of the Dialogue. 

On the. other hand, the dialogue has several Platonic traits, Menexenus. 
whether original or imitated may be uncertain. Socrates, when Introuuc- 
he departs from his character of a ‘know nothing’ and* delivers a • 
speech, generally pretends tha| what he is speaking is not his own 
composition. Thus in the Cratylus he is run away with (410 E) ; 
in the Phaedrus he has heard somebody say something (235 C) — 
is inspired by th^e genius loci (238 D) ; in the Symposium he derives 
his wisdom from Diotima of Mantinca, and the like. But he does 
not impose on Menexenus by his dissimulation. Without violating 
the character of Socrates, Plato, who knows so well how to give 
a hint, or some one writing in his name, intimates clearly enough 
that the speech in the Menexenus like that in the Phaedrus 
is to be attributed to Socrates. The address of the dead to the 
living at the end of the oration may also be compared to the 
numerous addresses of the same kind which occur in Plato, in 
whom the dramatic clement is always tending to prevail over the 
rhetorical. The remark has been often made, that in the Funeral 
Oration of Thucydides there is no allusion to the existence of the 
dead. But in the Menexenus a future state is clearly, although 
not strongly, asserted. 

Whether the Menexenus is a .genuine writing of Plato, or an 
imitation only, remains uncertain. In either case, the thoughts 
are partly borrowed from the Funeral Oration of Thucydides ; and 
the fact that they are so, is not in favour of the genuineness of the 
work. Internal evidence seems to leave the question of author- 
ship in doubt. There are merits and there are defects which might 
lead to cither conclusion. The form of the greater part of the 
work makes the enquiry difficult ; the introduction and the finale 
certainly wear the look either of Plato or of an extremely skilful 
imitator. The excellence of the forgery may be fairly adduced 
as an argument *that it is not a forgery at all. Ii^ this uncertainty 
the express testimony of Aristotle, who quotes, in the Rhetoric l , 
the well-known words, ‘It is easy to praise theAfhenians among 
the Athenians,’ from the Funeral Oratiom, may perhaps turn the 
balance in its favour. It must be remjembered also that the work 
was famous in antiquity, and is included in the Alexandrian 
catalogues of Platonic writings. 

• . 

1 i-9, 3o; iii. 14, n- . 

L 1 2 

MENEXENUS. 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE. 

Socrates and Menexenus. 

steph. Socrates . Whence come you, Menexenus? Are you from Menexcnus.. 

2 34 the Agora ? Socrates, 

Menexenus. Yes, Socrates; I have been at the Council. Menexenus. 

Soc . And what might you be doing at the Council ? And 
yet I need hardly ask, for I see that you, believing yourself 
to have arrived at the end of education and of philosophy, 
and to have had enough of them, are mounting upwards 
to things higher still, and, thgugh rather young for the post, 
are intending to govern us elder men, like the rest of your 
family, which has always provided some one who kindly 
took care of us. 

Men. Yes, Socrates, I shall be ready to hold office, if you 
allow and advise that I should, but not if you think other- 
wise. I went to the council chamber because I heard that 
the Council was about to fchoose some one who was to speak 
over the dead. For y©u know that there is to be a public 
funeral ? 

Soc. Yes, l know. And whom did they choose? 

Men. No one; they delayed the election until to-morrow, 
but I believe that either Archinus or Dion wiy be chosen. 

Soc. O Menexenus ! death in battle is certainly in many The gain of 
respects a noble thing. The dead man gets a fine and costly m 
funeral, although he may have been poor, and an elaborate 
speech is made over him by a wise # man who has long ago 
prepared what he has to say, ^Jthough he who is praised may 
not have been good for much. The speakers praise hin^for 
what he has done and for what he has not done — that is the 

5*8 

Menexenus. 

Socrates, 

Menexenus. 

The effect 
upon So- 
crates of 
panegyrical 
oratory. 

Socrates 
always 
making fun 
of the rhe- 
toricians. 

Could So- 
crates him- 
self make 
a funeral 
oration ? 

Easy to praise Athenians among Peloponnesians . 

beauty of them — and they steal away our souls with their 
embellished words; in every conceivable form they praise 235 
the city ; and they praise those who died in war, and all our 
ancestors who went before us; and they praise ourselves 
also who are still alive, until I feel quite elevated by their 
laudations, and I stand listening to their words, Menexenus, 
and become enchanted by them, and all in a moment I 
imagine myself to have become a greater and nobler and 
finer man than I was before. And if, as often happens, there 
are any foreigners who accompany me to the speech, I 
become suddenly conscious of having a sort of triumph over 
them, and they seem to experience a corresponding feeling 
of admiration at me, and at the greatness of the city, which 
appears to them, when they are under the influence of the 
speaker, more wonderful than ever. This consciousness of 
dignity lasts me more than three days, and not until the fourth 
or fifth day do I come to my senses and know where I am ; 
in the meantime I have been living in the Islands of the Blest. 
Such is the art of our rhetoricians, and in such manner does 
the sound of their words keep ringing in my ears. 

Men . You are always making fun of the rhetoricians, 
Socrates; this time, however, I am inclined to think that the 
speaker who is chosen will not have much to say, for he has 
been called upon to speak at a moment’s notice, and he will 
be compelled almost to improvise. 

Soc. But why, my friend, should he not have plenty to 
say? Every rhetorician has speeches ready made; nor is 
there any difficulty in improvising that sort of stuff. Had 
the orator to praise Athenians among Peloponnesians, or 
Peloponnesians among # Athenians, he must be a good 
rhetorician who c6uld succeed and gain credit.. But there is 
no difficulty in a man’s winning applause when he is con- 
tending for fame among the persons whom he is praising. 

Men . Do you think not, Socrates ? 

Soc. Certainly 'not.’ 

Men. Do you think that you could speak yourself if there 
should be a necessity, and if the Council were to choose you? 

Soc. That I should be able to speak is no great wonder, 
Menexenus, considering that I have an excellent mistress in 
the art of rhetoric, — she who has made so many good 

A spasm the teacher both of Pericles and of Socrates . 519 

speakers, and one who was the best among all the Hellenes Menexenus . 
— Pericles, the son of Xanthippus. Socrates, 

Men . And who is she? I suppose that you mean* Aspasia. Mei ip enus - 
Soc. Yes, I do; and besides her I had Connus, the son of Yes; for he 
236 Metrobius, as a master, and he was my master in music, as ^y^ llof 
she was in rhetoric. No wonder that a man who has 
•received such ^n education should be a finished speaker; 
even the pupil of very inferior masters, say, for example, one 
who had learned music of Lamprus, and rhetoric of Antiphon 
the; Rhamnusian, might make a figure if he were to praise 
the Athenians among the Athenians. 

Men . And what would you be able ti say if you had to 
speak ? ** 

Soc . Of my own wit, most likely nothing; but yesterday The funeral 
I heard Aspasia composing a funeral oration about these °^p£ sed 
very dead. For she had been told, as you were saying, that by Aspasia. 
the Athenians were going to choose a speaker, and she 
repeated to me the sort of speech which he should deliver, 
partly improvising and partly from previous thought, putting 
together fragments of the funeral oration which Pericles 
spoke, but which, as I believe, she composed. 

Men. And can you remember what Aspasia said ? 

Soc. I ought to be able, for she taught me, and she was 
ready to strike me because I was always forgetting. 

Men. Then why will you not rehearse what she said ? 

Soc. Because I am afraid that my mistress may be angry 
with me if I publish her speech. 

Men. Nay, Socrates, lek us have the speech, whether 
Aspasia’s or any one else^s, no matter. I hope that you will 
oblige me. 

Soc. But I ajn afraid that you will laugh at me if I con- 
tinue the games of youth in old age. • 

Men. Far otherwise, Socrates; let us by all means have 
the speech. 

Soc. Truly I have such a disposition to oblige you, that if 
you bid me dance naked I should nbt like to refuse, since we 
are alone. Listen then : If I rememUer rightly, she began 
as follows, with the mention of the dead 1 : — 

There is a tribute of deeds and 6f words. The departed 

1 Thucyd. ii. 35-46. 

520 

Menexmus. 

Socrates. 

The de- 
parted 
were the 
children of 
the soil ; 

and their 
country is 
dear to the 
Gods, who 
contended 
for the 
possession 
of her. 

The panegyric on the dead . 

have already had the first, when going forth on their destined 
journey they were attended on their way by the state and by 
their friends; the tribute of words remains to be given to 
them, as is meet and by law ordained. For noble words are 
a memorial and a crown of noble actions, which are given to 
the doers of them by the hearers. A word is needed which 
will duly praise the dead and gently admonish the living, 
exhorting the brethren and descendants of the departed to 
imitate their virtue, and consoling their fathers and mothers 
and the survivors, if any, who may chance to be alive of the 237 
previous generation. What sort of a word will this be, and 
how shall we rightly begin the praises of these brave men ? 
lit' their life they rejoiced their own friends with their 
valour, and their death they gave in exchange for the 
salvation of the living. And I think that we should praise 
them in the order in which nature made them good, for they 
were good because they were sprung from good fathers. 
Wherefore let us first of all praise the goodness of their 
birth ; secondly, their nurture and education ; and then let 
us set forth how noble their actions were, and how worthy 
of the education which they had received. 

And first as to their birth. Their ancestors were not 
strangers, nor are these their descendants sojourners only, 
whose fathers have come from another country; but they are 
the children of the soil, dwelling and living in their own 
land. And the country which brought them up is not like 
other countries, a stepmother to her children, but their own 
true mother; she bore them ajjd nourished them and re- 
ceived them, and in her bosom they now repose. It is meet 
and right, therefore, that we should begin by praising the 
land which is their mother, and that will be a way of praising 
their noble birth. 

The country is worthy to be praised, not only by us, but 
by all mankind ; first, and above all, as being dear to the 
Gods. This is proved by the strife and contention of the 
Gods respecting her. ‘ And ought not the country which the 
Gods praise to be ppaised by all mankind? The second 
praise which may be fairly claimed by her, is that at the 
time when the whole eat th was sending forth and creating 
diverse animals, tame and wild, she our mother was free and 

521 

The pre-eminence of Attica . 

pure from savage monsters, and out of all animals selected Menexenus. 
and brought forth man, who is superior to the rest in under- Socrates. 
standing, and alone has justice and religion. And a great first 
proof that she brought fortfy the common ancestors of us and brought 
of the departed, is that she provided the means of support approved 
for her offspring. For as a woman proves her motherhood her true 
• .by giving mjjk to her young ones (and she who has no 

fountain of milk is not a mother), so did this our land prove providing 
that she was the mother of men, for in those days she alone food {o L her 
ajid first of all brought forth wheat and barley for human spring. 

238 food, which is the best and noblest sustenance for man, 
whom she regarded as her true offspring. And these are 
truer proofs of motherhood in a country than in a woman, 
for the woman in her conception and generation is but the 
imitation of the earth, and not the earth of the woman. And 
of the fruit of the earth she gave a plenteous supply, not 
only to her own, but to others also ; and afterwards *she made 
the olive to spring up to be a boon to her children, and to 
help them in their toils. And when she had herself nursed The Gods 
them and brought them up to manhood, she gave them Gods 
to be their rulers and teacherg, whose names are well known, primitive 
and need not now be repeated. They are the Gods who first men » and 
ordered our lives, and instructed us in the arts for the supply f^ts? em 
of our daily needs, and taught us the acquisition and use of 
arms for the defence of the country. 

Thus born into the world and thus educated, the ancestors 
of the departed lived and made themselves a government, 
which I ought briefly to dommeinorate. For government is 
the nurture of man, and* the government of good men is good, 
and of bad men bad. And I must show that our ancestors We have 
were trained finder a good government, and for this reason a good 
they were good, and our contemporaries are^lso good, among ment. which 
whom our departed friends are to be reckoned. Then as if some - 
now, and indeed always, from that time to this, speaking a demo- 
generally, our government was an aristocracy — a form of f rac y* but 
government which receives various names, according to the aristocracy, 
fancies of men, and is sometimes called democracy, but is for the best 
really an aristocracy or government of the best which has the Seconsent 
approval of the many. For kings* we have always had, first of the 
hereditary and then elected, and authority is mostly in the many * 

522 

Menexenus. 

Socrates. 

The princf- 
pie of our 
government 
is equality; 
the only 
superiority 
is that of 
virtue and 
wisdom. 

The great- 
ness of 
Persia. 

The mythical glories of Athens . 

hands of the people, who dispense offices and power to those 
who appear to be most deserving of them. Neither is a man 
rejected from weakness or poverty or obscurity of origin, nor 
honoured by reason of the opposite, as in other states, but 
there is one principle— he who appears to be wise and good 
is a governor and ruler. The basis of this our government is 
equality of birth ; for other states are made up of all sorts and * r 
unequal conditions of men, and therefore their governments 
are unequal ; there are tyrannies and there are oligarchies, 
in which the one party are slaves and the others masters. 

But we and our citizens are brethren, the children all of one 239 
mother, and we do Aot think it right to be one another’s 
masters or servants ; but the natural equality of birth compels 
us to seek for legal equality, and to recognize no superiority 
except in the reputation of virtue and wisdom. 

And so their and our fathers, and these, too, our brethren, 
being nobly born and having been brought up in all freedom, 
did both in their public and private capacity many noble deeds 
famous over the whole world. They were the deeds of men 
who thought that they ought to fight both against Hellenes 
for the sake of Hellenes on behalf of freedom, and against 
barbarians in the common interest of Hellas. Time would 
fail me to tell of their defence of their country against the 
invasion of Eumolpus and the Amazons, or of their defence 
of the Argives against the Cadmeians, or of the Heracleids 
against the Argives ; besides, the poets have already declared 
in song to all mankind their glory, and therefore any com- 
memoration of their deeds in prost which wc might attempt 
would hold a second place. They already have their reward, 
and I say no more of them ; but there are other worthy deeds 
of which no poet has worthily sung, and which are still wooing 
the poet’s muse. 0 Of these I am bound to make honourable 
mention, and sfiall invoke others to sing of them also in lyric 
and other strains, in a manner becoming the actors. And 
first I will tell how the Persians, lords of Asia, were enslaving 
Europe, and how the children of this land, who were our 
fathers, held them back. Of these I will speak first, and 
praise their valour, as is me9t and fitting. He who would 
rigjitly estimate them should place himself in thought at that 
time, when the whole of Asia was subject to the third king of 

w 

The battle of Marathon . 523 

Persia. The first king, Cyrus, by his valour freed the Menexenus. 
Persians, who were his countrymen, and subjected the Medcs, Socrates. 
who were their lords, and he ruled over the rest of Asia, as • 
far as Egypt ; and after him fame his son, who ruled all the 
accessible part of Egypt and Libya ; the third king was 
Darius, who extended the land boundaries of the empire to 
24cf Scythia, and with his fleet held the sea and the islands. None 
presumed to be his equal ; the minds of all men were en- 
thralled by him —so many and mighty and warlike nations 
had the power of Persia subdued. Now Darius had a quarrel Yet at 
against us and the Eretrians, because, as he said, we had Marathon 
conspired against Sardis, and he sent 500,000 men in trans- Darius was 
ports and vessels of war, and 300 ships, and Datis as com- 
mander, telling him to bring the Eretrians and Athenians to Athenians 

the king, if he wished to keep his head on his shoulders. He almost 
# • « single- 

sailed against the Eretrians, who were reputed to be amongst handed. 

the noblest and most warlike of the Hellenes of that day, and 

they were numerous, but he conquered them all in three days ; 

and when he had conquered them, in order that no one might 

escape, he searched the whole country after this manner : his 

soldiers, coming to the borders pf Eretria and spreading from 

sea to sea, joined hands and passed through the whole country, 

in order that they might be able to tell the king that no one 

had escaped them. And from Eretria they went to Marathon 

with a like intention, expecting to bind the Athenians in the 

same yoke of necessity in which they had bound the Eretrians. 

Having effected one-half of their purpose, they were in the 

act of attempting the other, •and none of the Hellenes dared 

to assist either the Eretrians or the Athenians, except the 

Lacedaemonians, and they arrived a day too late for the 

battle ; but the # rest were panic-stricken and kept quiet, too 

happy in having escaped for a time. He who has present to 

his mind that conflict will know what manner of men they 

were who received the onset of the barbarians at Marathon, 

and chastened the pride of the whole of Asia, and by the 

victory which they gained over the barbarians first taught 

other men that the power of the Persians was not invincible, 

but that hosts of men and the myltitude of riches alike yield 

to valour. And I assert that those men are the fathers nqt 

only of ourselves, but of our liberties and of the liberties of 

524 

Menexenus. 

Socrates. 

The men of 
Marathon 
should have 
the first 
place : 
those who 
followed in 
the war 
were their 
disciples, 
except the 
men who 
defeated 
the Persians 
at Salamis 
and first 
made proof 
of them at 
sea : these 
have the 
seepnd 
place. 

And the 
third place 
is to be 
assigned to 
those who 
fought at 
Plataea. 

Euryme- 
don ; 
Cyprus ; 
Egypt. 

Salamis , Artemisium , and Plataea . 

all who are on the continent, for that was the action to which 
the Hellenes looked back when they ventured to fight for 
their owft safety in the battles which ensued : they became 
disciples of the men of Marathon. To them, therefore, I 
assign in my speech the first place, and the second to those 241 
who fought and conquered in the sea fights at Salamis and 
Artemisium ; for of them, too, one might have many things to * 
say — of the assaults which they endured by sea and land, and 
how they repelled them. I will mention only that act of 
theirs which appears to me to be the noblest, and which 
followed that of Marathon and came nearest to it ; for the 
men of Marathon Wly showed the Hellenes that it was 
possible to ward off the barbarians by land, the many by the 
few ; but there was no proof that they could be defeated by 
ships, and at sea the Persians retained the reputation of being 
invincible in numbers and wealth and skill and strength. 
This is*’ the glory of the men who fought at sea, that they 
dispelled the second terror which had hitherto possessed the 
Hellenes, and so made the fear of numbers, whether of ships 
or men, to cease among them. And so the soldiers of Mara- 
thon and the sailors of Salamis became the schoolmasters of 
Hellas; the one teaching and habituating the Hellenes not 
to fear the barbarians at sea, and the others not to fear them 
by land. Third in order, for the number and valour of the 
combatants, and third in the salvation of Ilellas, 1 place the 
battle of Plataea. And now the Lacedaemonians as well as 
the Athenians took part in the struggle ; they were all united 
in this greatest and most terrible conflict of all; wherefore 
their virtues will be celebrated in 4 imes to come, as they are 
now celebrated by us. But at a later period many Hellenic 
tribes were still on the side of the barbarians* and there was 
a report that the great king was going to make a new attempt 
upon the Hellenes, and therefore justice requires that we 
should also make mention of those who crowned the previous 
work of our salvation, and drove and purged away all bar- 
barians from the sea. These were the men who fought 
by sea at the river Eurymedon, and who went on the ex- 
pedition to Cyprus, and \yho sailed to Egypt and divers 
o c ther places ; and they should be gratefully remembered by 
us, because they compelled the king in fear for himself to 

Wars and expeditions of the Athenians . 525 

look to his own safety instead of plotting the destruction of Menexenus. 

Hellas. Socrates. 

242 And so the war against the barbarians was fought out to 
the end by the whole city on their own behalf, and on behalf 
of their countrymen. There was peace, and our city was held 
in honour ; and then, as prosperity makes men jealous, there 
^lcceeded a jealousy of her, and jealousy begat envy, and so 
she became engaged against her will in a war with the 
Hellenes. On the breaking out of war, our citizens met the 
Lacedaemonians at Tanagra, and fought for the freedom of 
the Boeotians ; the issue was doubtful, and was decided by 
the engagement which followed. For vlhen the Lacedaemo- Tanagra; 
nians had gone on their way, leaving the Boeotians, vfllffm 0eno P h y ta - 
they were aiding, on the third day after the battle of Tanagra, 
our countrymen conquered at Oenophyta, and righteously 
restored those who had been unrighteously exiled. And they 
were the first after the Persian war who fought on behalf of 
liberty in aid of Hellenes against Hellenes ; they were brave 
men, and freed those whom they aided, and were the first too 
who were honourably interred in this sepulchre by the state. 
Afterwards there was a mighty war, in which all the Hellenes 
joined, and devastated our country, which was very ungrateful 
of them ; and our countrymen, after defeating them in a naval 
engagement and taking their leaders, the Spartans, at Sphagia, Sphacteria. 
when they might have destroyed them, spared their lives, and 
gave them back, and made peace, considering that they should 
war with their fellow-countrymen only until they gained a 
victory over them, and not because of the private anger of the 
state destroy the commoji interest of Hellas; but that with 
barbarians they should war to the death. Worthy of praise 
are they also who waged this war, and are here interred ; for 
they proved, if any one doubted the superior prowess of the 
Athenians in the former war with the barbarians, that their 
doubts had no foundation — showing by their Victory in the 
civil war with Hellas, in which they stibdued the other chief 
state of the Hellenes, that they could ^conquer single-handed 
those with whom they had been allied Jn the war against the 
barbarians. After the peace there followed a third war, which TheSicilian 
was of a terrible and desperate natufe, and in this many brave ex ped» tlon « 
men who are here interred lost their lives — many of them had 

526 

Menexenus . 
Socrates. 

Cyzicus. 

Hellas be- 
trayed to 
the Persian. 

Arginusae. 

The taking 
of the city 
is obscurely 
intimated. 

The great 
reconcilia- 
tion of 
kindred. 

Victories and reverses of the Athenians . 

won victories in Sicily, whither they had gone over the seas 243 
to fight for the liberties of the Leontines, to whom they were 
bound by oaths ; but, owing to the distance, the city was 
unable to help them, and they lost heart and came to misfor- 
tune, their very enemies and opponents winning more renown 
for valour and temperance than the friends of others. Many 
also fell in naval engagements at the- Hellespont, after having 
in one day taken all the ships of the enem’y, and defeated 
them in other naval engagements. And what I call the 
terrible and desperate nature of the war, is that the ot^er 
Hellenes, in their extreme animosity towards the city, should 
have entered into negotiations with their bitterest enemy, the 
king: of Persia, whom they, together with us, had expelled ; — 
him, without us, they again brought back, barbarian against 
Hellenes, and all the hosts, both of Hellenes and barbarians, 
were united against Athens. And then shone forth the power 
and valour of our city. Her enemies had supposed that she 
was exhausted by the war, and our ships were blockaded at 
Mitylene. But the citizens themselves embarked, and came 
to the rescue with sixty other ships, and their valour was 
confessed of all men, for they conquered their enemies and 
delivered their friends. And yet by some evil fortune they 
were left to perish at sea, and therefore are 1 not interred here. 
Ever to be remembered and honoured are they, for by their 
valour not only that sea-fight was won for us, but the entire 
war was decided by them, and through them the city gained 
the reputation of being invincible, even though attacked by 
all mankind. And that reputation was a true one, for the 
defeat which came upon us was oqr own doing. We were 
never conquered by others, and to this day we are still 
unconquered by them ; but we were our own conquerors, and 
received defeat at our own hands. Afterwards there was 
quiet and peace abroad, but there sprang up war at home ; 
and, if men are destined to have civil war, no one could have 
desired that his city should take the disorder in a milder form. 
How joyful and naturkl was the reconciliation of those who 
came from the Piraeus and those who came from the city; 
with what moderation did they order the war against the 
tyrants in Eleusis, and in ‘a manner how unlike what the other 

1 Reading ov kcivtcu, or taking avic before &vaipc9ivrfs with Kuvrca. 

An Athenian version of the history of Hellas . ’ 527 

244 Hellenes expected ! And the reason of this gentleness was Menexenus. 
the .veritable tie of blood, which created among them a friend- Socrates. 
ship as of kinsmen, faithful not in word only, but in deed. # 

And we ought also to remember those who then fell by one 

• another’s hands, and on such occasions as these to reconcile 
them with sacrifices and prayers, praying to those who have 

• power over them, that they may be reconciled even as we are 
reconciled. A)r they did not attack one another out of 
malice or enmity, but they were unfortunate. And that such 
wjs the fact we ourselves arc witnesses, who are of the same 
race with them, and have mutually received and granted for- 
giveness of what we have done and suffered. After this there Change in 
was perfect peace, and the city had rest ; and her feeling*^as 

that she forgave the barbarians, who had severely suffered at mans (1) to 
her hands and severely retaliated, but that she was indignant 
at the ingratitude of the Hellenes, when she remembered how ( 2 ) t0 the’ 
they had received good from her and returned evil, having Persian 
made common cause with the barbarians, depriving her of the kmg ' 
ships which had once been their salvation, and dismantling 
our walls, which had preserved their own from falling. She 
thought that she would no longer defend the Hellenes, when 
enslaved either by one another or by the barbarians, and did 
accordingly. This was our feeling, while the Lacedaemonians 
were thinking that we who were the champions of liberty had 
fallen, and that their business was to subject the remaining 
Hellenes. And why should I say more? for the events of 
which I am speaking happened not long ago and we can all 
of us remember how the chief peoples of Hellas, Argives and 
Boeotians and Corinthiaps, came to feel the need of us, and, 
what is the greatest miracle of all, the Persian king himself 
was driven to such extremity as to come round to the opinion, 
that from this city, of which he was the destroyer, and from 
no other, his salvation would proceed. 

And if a person desired to bring a deserved accusation 
against our city, he would find onl/ one charge which he 
could justly urge —that she was too Compassionate and too 
favourable to the weaker side. And iig this instance she was 
not able to hold out or keep her resolution of refusing aid to 

245 her injurers when they were fieirfg enslaved, but she was 
softened, and did in fact send out aid, and delivered tfie 

528 The end of the war. 

Menexenus. Hellenes from slavery, and they were free until they after- 

socrates. wards enslaved themselves. Whereas, to the great king £he 
. refused to give the assistance of the state, for she could not 
forget the trophies of Marathon and Salamis and Plataea; 
but she allowed exiles and volunteers to assist him, and they 
were his salvation. And she herself, when she was com- 
pelled, entered into the war, and built walls and ships, and 
fought with the Lacedaemonians on behalf of the Parians. 
Now the king fearing this city and wanting to stand aloof, 
when he saw the Lacedaemonians growing weary of the war 
at sea, asked of us, as the price of his alliance with us and 
the other allies, to Cgive up the Hellenes in Asia, whom 
th^ilracedaemonians had previously handed over to him, he 
thinking that we should refuse, and that then he might have 
a pretence for withdrawing from us. About the other allies he 
was mistaken, for the Corinthians and Argives and Boeotians, 
and the other states, were quite willing to let them go, and 
swore and covenanted, that, if he would pay them money, 
they would make over to him the Hellenes of the continent, 
and we alone refused to give them up and swear. Such was 
the natural nobility of this city, so sound and healthy was 
the spirit of freedom among us, and the instinctive dislike of 
the barbarian, because we are pure Hellenes, having no 
admixture of barbarism in us. For we are not like many 
others, descendants of Pelops or Cadmus or Egyptus or 
Danaus, who are by nature barbarians, and yet pass for 
Hellenes, and dwell in the midst of us; but we are pure 
Hellenes, uncontaminated by any foreign element, and 
therefore the hatred of the foreigner has passed unadulter- 
ated into the life-blood of the city. And so, notwithstanding 
our noble sentiments, we were again isolated, because we 
were unwilling *to be guilty of the base and unholy act of 
giving up Hellenes to barbarians. And we were in the 
same case as 1 when we were subdued before; but, by the 
favour of Heaven, we fnanaged better, for we ended the war 
without the loss of oiir *ships or walls or colonies ; the 
enemy was only too g\ad to be quit of us. Yet in this war 
we lost many brave men, such as were those who fell owing 
to^the ruggedness of the ground at the battle of Corinth, or 
by treason at Lechaeum. Brave men, too, were those who 

Address of the departed to their sons. • 529 

delivered the Persian king, and drove the Lacedaemonians Menexenus. 

246 from* the sea. I remind you of them, and you must Socrates 
celebrate them together with me, and do honour to their 
memories. * • 

• Such were the actions of fche men who are here interred, 
and of others who have died on behalf of their country; 

, many and glorious things I have spoken of them, and there 
are yet many rhore and more glorious things remaining to 
be told— many days and nights would not suffice to tell of 

them. Let them not be forgotten, and let every man remind 
their descendants that they also are soldiers who must not 
desert the ranks of their ancestors, orjfrom cowardice fall 
behind. Even as I exhort you this day, and in all fx^we 
time, whenever I meet with any of you, shall continue to 
remind and exhort you, O ye sons of heroes, that you strive 
to be the bravest of men. And I think that I ought now to 
repeat what your fathers desired to have said to ^ou who 
are their survivors, when they went out to battle, in case 
anything happened to them. I will tell you what I heard 
them say, and what, if they had only speech, they would 
fain be saying, judging from what they then said. And you 
must imagine that you hear tlTem saying what I now repeat 
to you : — 

'Sons, the event proves that your fathers were brave men ; 
for we might have lived dishonourably, but have preferred 
to die honourably rather than bring you and your children 
into disgrace, and rather than dishonour our own fathers 
and forefathers ; considerirjg that life is not life to one who 
is a dishonour to his race, and that to such a one neither 
men nor Gods are friendly, either while he is on the earth 
or after death in the world below. Remember our words, 

then, and whatever is your aim let virtue be4he condition of 
the attainment of your aim, and know that without this all 
possessions and pursuits are dishonourable Ad evil. For 
neither does wealth bring honour to*the owner, if he be a 
coward ; of such a one the wealth belongs to another, and 
not to himself. Nor does beauty apd strength of body, 
when dwelling in a base and cowardly man, appear comely, 
but the reverse of comely, makfng *the possessor more con- 
spicuous, and manifesting forth his cowardice. And £11 

VOL. n. m m 

53 ° Consolation of parents . 

Menexenus. knowledge, when separated from justice and virtue, is seen 

Socrates. to be cunning and not wisdom ; wherefore make this your 

first and last and constant and all-absorbing aim, to exceed, 247 
if possible, not only us but all your ancestors in virtue ; and 
know that to excel you in virtue only brings us shame, but , 
that to be excelled by you is a source of happiness to us. 
And we shall most likely be defeated, and you will most 
likely be victors in the contest, if you learn so to order 
your lives as not to abuse or waste the reputation of your 
ancestors, knowing that to a man who has any self-respect, 
nothing is more dishonourable than to be honoured, not 
for his own sake, |gut on account of the reputation of his 
a^gstors. The honour of parents is a fair and noble 
treasure to their posterity, but to have the use of a treasure 
of wealth and honour, and to leave none to your successors, 
because you have neither money nor reputation of your own, 
is alikq base and dishonourable. And if you follow our 
precepts you will be received by us as friends, when the 
hour of destiny brings you hither ; but if you neglect our 
words and are disgraced in your lives, no one will welcome 
or receive you. This is the message which is to be delivered 
to our children. 

' Some of us have fathers and mothers still living, and we 
would urge them, if, as is likely, we shall die, to bear the 
calamity as lightly as possible, and not to condole with one 
another; for they have sorrows enough, and will not need 
any one to stir them up. While we gently heal their 
wounds, let us remind them that the Gods have heard the 
chief part of their prayers ; for they prayed, not that their 
children might live for ever, but that they might be brave 
and renowned. And this, which is the greatest good, they 
have attained. « A mortal man cannot expect to have every- 
thing in his own life turning out according to his will ; and 
they, if they 1 bear their misfortunes bravely, will be truly 
deemed brave fathers of the brave. But if they give way to 
their sorrows, either they, will be suspected of not being our 
parents, or we of not being such as our panegyrists declare. 

Let not either of the two alternatives happen, but rather let 
them be our chief and true panegyrists, who show in their 
lives that they are true men, and had men for their sons. 

53* 

The state the protector both of parents and orphans . # 

Of old the saying, “ Nothing too much,” appeared to be, and Menexenus . 
really was, well said. For he whose happiness rests with Socrates. 

248 himself, if possible, wholly, and if not, as far as is possible, 

— who is not hanging in suspense on other men, or changing 
• with the vicissitude of their fortune, — has his life ordered for 
the best. He is the temperate and valiant and wise; and 
•when his riches come and go, when his children are given 
and taken awa}, he will remember the proverb—" Neither 
rejoicing overmuch nor grieving overmuch,” for he relies 
upon himself. And such we would have our parents to be — 
that is our word and wish, and as such we now offer our- 
selves, neither lamenting overmuch, nor /earing overmuch, if 
we are to die at this time. And we entreat our fathers«Hi?d 
mothers to retain these feelings throughout their future life, 
and to be assured that they will not please us by sorrowing 
and lamenting over us. But, if the dead have any know- 
ledge of the living, they will displease us most by»making 
themselves miserable and by taking their misfortunes too 
much to heart, and they will please us best if they bear their 
loss lightly and temperately. For our life will have the 
noblest end which is vouchsafed to man, and should be 
glorified rather than lamented.* And if they will direct their 
minds to the care and nurture of our wives and children, 
they will soonest forget their misfortunes, and live in a better 
and nobler way, and be dearer to us. 

'This is all that we have to say to our families : and to the 
state we would say— Take care of our parents and of our 
sons : let her worthily cherish the old age of our parents, and 
bring up our sons in the # right way. But we know that she 
will of her own accord take care of them, and does not need 
any exhortation of ours/ 

This, O ye children and parents of the deacfr, is the message 
which they bid us deliver to you, and which I do deliver 
with the utmost seriousness. And in their nlme I beseech 
you, the children, to imitate your fatlTers, and you, parents, 
to be of good cheer about yourseWe3; for we will nourish 
your age, and take care of you both publicly and privately in 
any place in which one of us may meet one of you who are 
the parents of the dead. And tfie c&re of you which the city 
shows, you know yourselves ; for she has made provision l5y 

Mm2 

532 

Menexenus. 

Socrates, 

Menexenus. 

This 

speech, So- 
crates, was 
not com- 
posed by 
Aspasia, 
but by 
yourself. 

‘ Aspasia must not be told of this speech / 

law concerning the parents and children of those who die in 
war ; the highest authority is specially entrusted with the 249 
duty of watching over them above all other citizens, and they 
will see that your fathers and mothers have no wrong done 
to them. The city herself shares in the education of the 
children, desiring as far as it is possible that their orphan- 
hood may not be felt by them ; while they are children she is 
a parent to them, and when they have arrived at man's estate 
she sends them to their several duties, in full armour clad ; 
and bringing freshly to their minds the ways of their fathers, 
she places in their hands the instruments of their fathers’ 
virtues; for the szYe of the omen, she would have them 
froTn the first begin to rule over their own houses arrayed in 
the strength and arms of their fathers. And as for the dead, 
she never ceases honouring them, celebrating in common for 
all rites which become the property of each ; and in addition 
to this, holding gymnastic and equestrian contests, and 
musical festivals of every sort. She is to the dead in the 
place of a son and heir, and to their sons in the place of a 
father, and to their parents and elder kindred in the place of 
a guardian — ever and always caring for them. Considering 
this, you ought to bear your calamity the more gently ; for 
thus you will be most endeared to the dead and to the living, 
and your sorrows will heal and be healed. And now do you 
and all, having lamented the dead in common according to 
the law, go your ways. . 

You have heard, Menexenus, the oration of Aspasia the 
Milesian. « 

Men . Truly, Socrates, I marvel .that Aspasia, who is only 
a woman, should be able to compose such a speech ; she 
must be a rare one. 

Soc. Well, if you are incredulous, you may come with me 
and hear her. 

Men. I have often met Aspasia, Socrates, and know what 
she is like. 1 

Soc. Well, and do yo'u not admire her, and are you not 
grateful for her speech ? 

Men. Yes, Socrates, I am very grateful to her or to 
him who told you, and still more to you who have told 
me. 

Menexenus promises to keep the secret . 533 

Soc . Very good. But you must take care not to tell of me, Menexenus . 
and frhen at some future time I will repeat to you many other Socrates, 
excellent political speeches of hers. • Me^xenus. 

Men . Fear not ; only let me hear them, and I will keep 
• the secret. 

Soc . Then I will keep my promise. 

APPENDIX II. 

ALCIBIADES II. 
ERYXI AS. 

APPENDIX II. 

• The two dialogues which arc translated in the second appendix Appendix II. 
are not mentioned by Aristotle, or by any early authority, and 
have no claim to be ascribed to Plato. * They are example^ of 
Platonic dialogues to be assigned probably to the second or third 
generation after Plato, when his writings were well known at 
Athens and Alexandria. They exhibit considerable originality, 
and are remarkable for containing several thoughts of the sort 
which we suppose to be modern rather than ancient, ancf which 
therefore have a peculiar interest for us. The Second Alcibiades 
shows that the difficulties about prayer which have perplexed 
Christian theologians were not unknown among the followers of 
Plato. The Erj'xias was doubted by the ancients themselves : yet 
it may claim the distinction of being, among all Greek or Roman 
writings, the one which anticipates in the most striking manner 
the modern science of political economy and gives an abstract 
form to some of its principal doctrines. 

For the translation of these two dialogues I am indebted to my 
friend and secretary, Mr. Knight. 

That the Dialogue which goes by the name of the Second 
Alcibiades Wa»genuine writing of Plato will not be maintained by 
any modern critic, and was hardly believed by the ancients 
themselves. The dialectic is poor and weak. TJiere is no power 
over language, or beauty of style ; and # there is a certain abrupt- 
ness and aypoutia in the conversation, # which is very un-Platonic. 
The best passage is probably that*about the poets, p. 147:— the 
remark that the poet, who is of a reServed disposition, is un- 
commonly difficult to understanding the ridiculous interpretation 
*>f Homer, are erifirely in the spirit of Plato (cp. Protag. 339 foil. ; 
Ion 534; Apol. 22 D). The characters are ill-drawn. Socrates 

538 Characteristics, iSfc. 

Appendix ii. assumes the ‘ superior person ’ and preaches too much, while 
Alcibiades is stupid and heavy-in-hand. There are traces of Stoic 
r influence in' the general tone and phraseology of the Dialogue 

(cp. 138 B, $7T(DF /XT} 'Kt}(TCI TIS ... K(lK(i l ,139 C, OTl TTOS a(f>p(OP fAaiVCTai) .* 

and the writer seems to have been acquainted with the ‘ Laws * of 
Plato (cp. Laws 3. 687, 688; 7. 801 ; 11. 931 B). An incident from 
the Symposium (213 E) is rather clumsily introduced (15 1 A), and* 
two somewhat hackneyed quotations (Symp. 174 D, Gorg. 484 E) 
recur at 140 A and 146 A. The reference to the death of Arche- 
laus as having occurred ‘quite lately’ (141 D) is only a fiction, 
probably suggested by^ the Gorgias, 470 D, where the story of 
Arofeelaus is told, and a similar phrase occurs, — ra yap Kal 

npwrjv yeyoi >6ra ravra , k.t.X. There are several passages which are 
either corrupt or extremely ill-expressed (see pp. 144, 145, 146, 
147, 150). But there is a modern interest in the subject of the 
dialogue ; # and it is a good example of a short spurious work, 
which may be attributed to the second or third century before 
Christ. 

\lcibiades II. 

* PERSONS OP TEE DIALOGUE. 

Socrates and Alcibia*des. * 

steph. Soc. Are you going, Alcibiades, to offer prayer to Zeus ? 

138 Al. Yes, Socrates, I am. 

Soc. You seem to be troubled and to cast youre^es on the 
ground, as though you were thinking about something. 

AL Of what do you suppose that I am thinking? 

Soc. Of the greatest of all things, as I believe. Tell me, 
do you not suppose that the Gods sometimes partly grant 
and partly reject the requests which we make in public and 
private, and favour some persons and not others ? 

AL Certainly. 

Soc. Do you not imagine, then, that a man ought to be 
very careful, lest perchance without knowing it he implore 
great evils for himself, deeming that he is asking for good, 
especially if the Gods are in the mood to grant whatever he 
may request ? There is the story of Oedipus, for instance, 
who prayed that his children might divide their inheritance 
between them by the sword : he did not, as he might have 
done, beg frteft his present evils might be averted, but called 
down new ones. And was not his prayer accomplished, and 
did not many and terrible evils thence arfee, upon which 
1 need not dilate ? • 

AL Yes, Socrates, but you a^e speaking of a madman ; 
surely you do not think that any one in his senses would 
venture to make such a prayer ? 

Soc . Madness, then, you consider to be the opposite of 
^discretion ? * • 

Al. Of course. 

Alcibiades 

II. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

The danger 
of a prayer 
which is 
ill-advised. 

540 

Akibiades 

II. 

SOCKATES, * 

Alcibiades. 

Alcibiades 
first desires 
and after- 
wards 
admits 

Do opposites admit of iniemiediates? 

Soc. And some men seem to you to be discreet, and others 
the contrary? 

Al. They do. 

Soc. Well, then, let us discuss who these are. We ac- 
knowledge that some are discreet, some foolish, and that 
some are mad ? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And again, there are some who arc in health ? 

Al. There are. 

Soc. While others are ailing ? 

Al. Yes. i 

5pc. And they are rfot the same ? 

Al. Certainly not. 

Soc. Nor are there any who are in neither state ? 

Al. No. 

Soc. A man must either be sick or be well ? 

Al. 'That is my opinion. 

Soc. Very good : and do you think the same about dis- 
cretion and want of discretion ? 

Al. How do you mean ? 

Soc. Do you believe that a man must be either in or out of 
his senses ; or is there some third or intermediate condition, 
in which he is neither one nor the other ? 

Al. Decidedly not. 

Soc. He must be either sane or insane? 

Al. So I suppose. 

Soc. Did you not acknowledge that madness was the 
opposite of discretion ? • 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. And that there is no third or middle term between 
discretion and indiscretion ? f *- 

Al. True. 

Soc. And th^re cannot be two opposites to one thing ? 

Al. There cannot. 

Soc. Then madness qnd want of sense are the same ? 

Al. That appears to be the case. 

, Soc. We shall be in' the right, therefore, Alcibiades, if we 
say that all who are senseless are mad. For example, if 
airing persons of your own age or older th<m yourself ther^ 
are some who are senseless, — as there certainly are, — they are 

54i 

140 

Some eleqifyitary questions of logic . 

mad. For tell me, by heaven, do you not think that in the 
city the wise are few, while the foolish, whom you call mad, 
are many ? 

AL I do. 

Soc. But how could we live in safety with so many crazy 
people ? Should we not long since have paid the penalty at 
their hands, ^nd have been struck and beaten and endured 
every other form of ill-usage which madmen are wont to 
inflict? Consider, my dear friend: may it not be quite 

otherwise ? 

0 

Al. Why, Socrates, how is that possible? I must have 
been mistaken. i 

Soc . So it seems to me. But perhaps we may consider 
the matter thus : — 

AL How? 

Soc. I will tell you. We think that some are sick ; do we 
not ? v 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And must every sick person either have the gout, or 
be in a fever, or suffer from ophthalmia ? Or do you believe 
that a man may labour under some other disease, even 
although he has none of these complaints ? Surely, they are 
not the only maladies which exist-? 

Al. Certainly not. 

Soc. And is every kind of ophthalmia a disease? 

AL Yes. 

Soc. And every disease ophthalmia ? 

AL Surely not. But J» scarcely understand what I mean 
myself. ^ 

Soc. Perhaps, if you give me your best attention, ‘ two of 
us * looking together, we may find what we seek. 

AL I am attending, Socrates, to the best bf my power. 

Soc . We are agreed, then, that every form of ophthalmia is 
a disease, but not every disease ophthalmia? 

AL We are. 0 

Soc . And so far we seem to be %*iglit. For every one who 
suffers from a fever is sick ; but the* sick, I conceive, do not 
all have fever or gout or ophthalmia, although each of these is 
a disease, which^according to tliosb whom we call physicians, 
may require a different treatment. They are not all alfke, 

Alcibiades 

II. 

Socrates, 
Alcibiades. 
that differ- 
ences of 
kind do not 
exclude 
differences 
of degree. 

The sick 
may have 
many kinds 
of sickness ; 

542 

Alcibiades 

II. 

Socrates, f 
Alcibiades. 

so there are 
different 
kinds of 
want of 
sense.# 

Men often, 
like Oedi- 
pus, pray 
unadvis- 
edly. 

Illustrations of genera f nf species . 

nor do they produce the same result, but each has its own 
effect, and yet they are all diseases. May we not take /m 
illustration from the artizans ? 

At. Certainly. 

Soc. There are cobblers and cdrpenters and sculptors and « 
others of all sorts and kinds, whom we need not stop to 
enumerate. All have their distinct employment^ and all are # . 
workmen, although they are not all of them ccfcblers or car- 
penters or sculptors. 

Al No, indeed. 

Soc. And in like manner men differ in regard to want of 
sense. Those who aifc most out of t>> eir wits we call ‘ mad- 
men/ fohile wc term those who are less far gone ‘ stupid ’ or 
‘ idiotic/ or, if we prefer gentler language, describe them as 
‘ romantic’ or ‘ simple-minded/ or, again, as ‘innocent’ or 
‘inexperienced’ or ‘foolish.’ You may even find other 
names if^ou seek for them ; but by all of them lack of sense 
is intended. They only differ as one art appeared to us to 
differ from another or one disease from another. Or what is 
your opinion ? 

Al. I agree with you. 

Soc . Then let us return to the point at which we di- 
gressed. We said at first that we should have to consider 
who were the wise and who the foolish. For we acknow- 
ledged that there are these two classes? Did we not? 

Al. To be sure. 

Soc. And you regard those as sensible who know what 
ought to be done or said ? , 

Al. Yes. 

Soc . The senseless are those who do not know this ? 

Al. True. 

Soc . The latteV will say or do what they ought not without 
their own knowledge ? 

Al. Exactly/ 

Soc. Oedipus, as I wks saying, Alcibiades, was a person of 141 
this sort. And even novr-a-days you will find many who 
(have offered inauspicious prayers], although, unlike him, 
they were not in anger nor thought that they were asking 
evil. He neither sought/ nor supposed tfyjt he sought for 
good, but others have had quite the contrary notion. I be- 

543 

The desire fo ^ j^ood is sometimes really evil \ 

lieve that if the God whom you are about to consult should Alcibiadts 
appear to you, and, in anticipation of your request, enquired IL 
whether you would be contented to become tyrant of Athens, Socrates, 
and if this seemed in your eyes a small and mean thing, LCIB1ADKS * 
should add to it the dominion of all Hellas; and seeing that 
even then you would not be satisfied unless you were ruler 
J>f the whole of Europe, should promise, not only that, but, if 
*you so desirNi, should proclaim to all mankind in one and 
the same day that Alcibiades, son of Cleinias, was tyrant: — 
in such a case, I imagine, you would depart full of joy, as one 
who had obtained the greatest of goods. 

Al. And not only I. ^Socrates, but ar^ one else who should 
meet with such luck. * * 

Soc. Yet you would not accept the dominion and lordship 
of all the Hellenes and all the barbarians in exchange for 
your life ? 

AL Certainly not : for then what use could !• m^ke of 
them ? 

Soc. And would you accept them if you were likely to use 
them to a bad and mischievous end ? 

AL I would not. 

Soc. You see that it is nof safe for a man either rashly to 
accept whatever is offered him, or himself to request a thing, 
if he is likely to suffer thereby or immediately to lose his life. 

And yet we could tell of many who, having long desired and 
diligently laboured to obtain a tyranny, thinking that thus 
they would procure an advantage, have nevertheless fallen 
victims to designing ene/nies. You must have heard of Archeiaus 
what happened only the other day, how Archeiaus of 
Macedonia was slain by his beloved 1 , whose love for the 
tyranny was not less than that of Archeiaus for him. The 
tyrannicide 'expected by his crime to became tyrant and 
afterwards to have a happy life ; but when he had held the 
tyranny three or four days, he was in his 4 urn conspired 
against and slain. Or look at certain? of our own citizens,— 
and of their actions we have been hot hearers, but eyewit- 
nesses,— who have desired to obtain^military command : of 
142 those who have gained their object, some are even to this day 

• . 

Cp. Aristotle, Pol. y. 10, § 17. 

544 

Alcibiades 

//. 

Socrates, f 

Al CIUIADES. 

Men never 
refuse the 
goods of 
fortune, 
however 
great the 
evils which 
may attend 
them. 

The blindness of hi^n^nity. 

exiles from the city, while others have lost their lives. And 
even they who seem to have fared best, have not only go r ne 
through many perils and terrors during their office, but after 
their return home they have been beset by informers worse 
than they once were by their foe's, insomuch that several of < 
them have wished that they had remained in a private station 
rather than have had the glories of command. I L indeed, such^ . 
perils and terrors were of profit to the commcmwealth, there 
would be reason in undergoing them ; but the very contrary is 
the case. Again, you will find persons who have prayed for 
offspring, and when their prayers were heard, have fallen 
into the greatest patns and sufferngs. For some have 
begotfen children who were utterly bad, and have therefore 
passed all their days in misery, while the parents of good 
children have undergone the misfortune of losing them, and 
have been so little happier than the others that they would 
have *prdferred never to have had children rather than to 
have had them and lost them. And yet, although these and 
the like examples are manifest and known of all, it is rare to 
find any one who has refused what has been offered him, or, 
if he were likely to gain aught by prayer, has refrained from 
making his petition. The mass of mankind would not de- 
cline to accept a tyranny, or the command of an army, or any 
of the numerous things which cause more harm, than good: 
but rather, if they had them not, would have prayed to obtain 
them. And often in a short space of time they change their 
tone, and wish their old prayers unsaid. Wherefore also I 
suspect that men are entirely wrong when they blame the 
gods as the authors of the ills which, befall them 1 : ' their own 
presumption/ or folly (whichever is the right word) — 

‘ Has brought these unmeasured woes upon th^n^V 

He must have been a wise poet, Alcibiades, who, seeing as I 
believe, his frends foolishly praying for and doing things 
which would not really profit them, offered up a common 
prayer in behalf of them all : — 

* King Zeus, grant us good whether prayed for or unsought by us; 1 43 

4 hut that which wc ask' amiss, do thou avert 3 .’ 

1 Cp. Rep. x. 619 C. , a Horn. Odyss. i. 32. 

? The author of these lines, which are probably of* Pythagorean origin, ^is 
unknown. They are found also in the Anthology (Anth. Pal. 10. 108). 

Some ignorance \i\ better than some knowledge . 

In my opinion, I say, the poet spoke both well and pru- 
dently ; but if you have anything to say in answer to him, 
speak out. • 

Al. It is difficult, Socrates, to oppose what has been well 
said. And I perceive how many are the ills of which ig- 
norance is the cause, since, as would appear, through 
ignorance we^iot only do, but what is worse, pray for the 
greatest evils. No man would imagine that he would do so ; 
he would rather suppose that he was quite capable of praying 
foi; what was best : to call down evil seems more like a curse 
than a prayer. 

Soc. But perhaps, my* good friend, softie one who is wi^r 
than either you or I will say that we have no right to Slame 
ignorance thus rashly, unless we can add what ignorance we 
mean and of what, and also to whom and how it is respectively 
a good or an evil ? 

Al. How do you mean ? Can ignorance possibly fte letter 
than knowledge for any person in any conceivable case ? 

Soc. So I believe you do not think so ? 

Al. Certainly not. 

Soc. And yet surely I may> not suppose that you would 
ever wish to act towards your mother as they say that 
Orestes and Alcmaeon and others have done towards their 
parent. 

Al. Good words, Socrates, prithee. 

Soc . You ought not to bid him use auspicious words, who 
says that you would not be willing to commit so horrible a 
deed, but rather him who 1 affirms the contrary, if the act 
appear to you unfit even to be mentioned. Or do you think 
that Orestes, had he been in his senses and knew what was 
best for him ^ do, would ever have dared to venture on such 
a crime ? 

Al. ^Certainly not. % 

Soc. Nor would any one else, I fancy? 

Al. No. 

Soc. That ignorance is bad then, It would appear, which is 
of the best and does not know what is Itest ? 

Al. So I think, at least. # 

Soc. And both tVthe person who is ignorant and everybody 
else ? 

545 

Aid Hades 
II. 

Set RATES, 
Ai.cibiades. 

Orestes and 
Alcmaeon. 

Ignorance 
of the best 
is bad : 
ignorance 
of the bad 
good. 

VOL. II. 

n n 

546 

Alcibiades 

II. 

Socrates,* 

Ai.cibiaces. 

A man 
might be 
presented 
from com- 
mitting 
murder by 
ignorance 
of the 
person 
whom he 
was going 
to murder. 

Cases in which ignorance mqy (be an advantage . 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. Let us take another case. Suppose that you were 
suddenly to get into your head that it would be a good thing 144 
to kill Pericles, your kinsman and guardian, and were to 
seize a sword and, going to the doors of his house, were to 
enquire if he were at home, meaning to slay only him and no 
one else the servants reply, ( Yes * : (Mind^/i' do not mean * 
that you would really do such a thing ; but there is nothing, 
you think, to prevent a man who is ignorant of the best, 
having occasionally the whim that what is worst is best ? r 

AL No.) 

# 5or.— If, then, yoiS went indoors, %id seeing him, did not 
know him, but thought that he was some one else, would you 
venture to slay him ? 

AL Most decidedly not J [it seems to me ] \ 

Soc . For you designed to kill, not the first who offered, 
but Pericles himself? 

AL Certainly. 

Soc. And if you made many attempts, and each time failed 
to recognize Pericles, you would never attack him ? 

AL Never. 

Soc. Well, but if Orestes in like manner had not known 
his mother, do you think that he would ever have laid hands 
upon her ? 

AL No. 

Soc. He did not intend to slay the first woman he came 
across, nor any one else’s mother, but only his own ? 

AL True. n 

Soc. Ignorance, then, is better for those who are in such 
a frame of mind, and have such ideas ? 

AL Obviously. , m- 

Soc. You acknowledge that for some persons in certain 
cases the ignorance of some things is a good and not a c n evil, 
as you formerly supposed ? 

AL I do. 

Soc. 2 And there is still another case which will also 
t perhaps appear strange to you, if you will consider it ? 2 

AL What is that, Socrates ? 

• 1 These words are omitted in severa^SfSS. t 

2 The reading is here uncertain. 

547 

The knowledge of the best . 

Soc. It may be, in short, that the possession of all the 
sciences, if unaccompanied by the knowledge of the best, will 
more often than not injure the possessor. Consider the 
» matter thus: — Must we not,»when we intend either to do or 
say anything, suppose that we know or ought to know that 
, which we propose so confidently to do or say ? 

Al. Yes, in :^y opinion. 

Soc. We may take the orators for an example, who from 
*45 time to time advise us about war and peace, or the building 
of 'walls and the construction of harbours, whether they 
understand the business^in hand, or on^y think that they do. 
Whatever the city, in a word, does to another city, or i*i the 
management of her own affairs, all happens by the counsel 
of the orators. 

At. True. 

Soc. But now see what follows, if I can ! [make it # clear to 
you] 1 . You would distinguish the wise from the foolish ? 

Al. Yes. 

Soc. The many are foolish, the few wise ? 

Al. Certainly. 

Soc. And you use both the lerms, 'wise* and 'foolish/ in 
reference to something? 

Al. I do. 

Soc. Would you call a person wise who can give advice, 
but does not know whether or when it is better to carry out 
the advice ? 

Al. Decidedly not. 

Soc. Nor again, I suppose, a person who knows the art of 
war, but does not know whether it is better to go to war or 
for how long ? 

Al. No. * * 

Soc M Nor, once more, a person who knows how to kill 
another or to take away his property or to d.nve him from 
his native land, but not when it is better to do so or for 
whom it is better ? 4 • 

Al. Certainly not. 

Soc. But he who understands anything of the kind and J 
has at the same time the knowledge of the best course of 
action : — and the Sest and the useful are surely the same?-* 

1 Some words appear to have dropped out here. 

N n 2 

Alcibiades 

II. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades. 

All know- 
ledge if 
unaccom- 
panied by 
a know- 
ledge of the 
best is 
hurtful. 

I 

Examples. 

548 

Cleverness in the arts \nh wisdom. 

Alcibi cubes 
II. 

Socrates/ 

Alcibiades. 

r 

A state 
would be 
bad which 
was com- 
posed only 
of skilful 
artists and 
clever poli- 
ticians, but 
where no 
one had 
the know- 
ledge of 
the best. 

AL Yes. 

Soc .— Such an one, I say, we should call wise and a useful 
adviser both of himself and of the city. What do you think ? 

AL I agree. , t 

Soc. And if any one knows how to ride or to shoot with 
the bow or to box or to wrestle, or to engage in any other 
sort of contest or to do anything whatever ^?Iich is in tht? 
nature of an art, — what do you call him who knows what is 
best according to that art? Do you not speak of one who 
knows what is best in riding as a good rider ? * 

AL Yes. 

f 

'Soe And in a similar way you speak of a good boxer or 
a good flute-player or a good performer in any other art ? 

AL True. 

Soc . But is it necessary that the man who is clever in any 
of these* arts should be wise also in general ? Or is there 
a difference between the clever artist and the wise man ? 

AL All the difference in the world. 

Soc. And what sort of a state do you think that would be 
which was composed of good archers and flute-players and 
athletes and masters in other arts, and besides them of 
those others about whom we spoke, who knew how to go to 
war and how to kill, as well as of orators puffed up with 
political pride, but in which not one of them all had this 
knowledge of the best, and there was no one who could tell 
when it was better to apply any of these arts or in regard to 146 
whom ? 

AL I should call such a state bad, Socrates. 

Soc. You certainly would when* you saw each of them 
rivalling the other and esteeming that of the greatest im- 
portance in the, state, * ~ 

* Wherein he himself most excelled l .* « 

• 

— I mean that which, was best in any art, while he was 
entirely ignorant of what was best for himself and for the 
state, because, as I think, he trusts to opinion which is 
•devoid of intelligence. In such a case should we not be 
right if we said that the state would be full of anarchy and 
lawlessness ? V, 

Kuripides, Antiope, fr. 20 (Dindorf). 

True 

a knowledge of the best . 

549 

Al. Decidedly. Alcibiades 

Soc. But ought we not then, think you, either to fancy //# 
that we know or really to know, what we confidently propose awimadks 
to do or say ? 

• AL Yes. 

Soc. And if a person does that which he knows or sup- 

• fioses that he'^knows, and the result is beneficial, he will act 
advantageously\)oth for himself and for the state ? 

AL Tfue. 

Soc. And if he do the contrary, both he and the state will 
suffer ? 

AL Yes. * • 

Soc. Well, and are you of the same mind, as before ? # 

AL I am. 1 

Soc. But were you not saying that you would call the 
many unwise and the few wise ? 

AL I was. * * 

Soc. And have we not come back to our old assertion that 
the many fail to obtain the best because they trust to opinion 
which is devoid of intelligence ? 

Al. That is the case. , 

Soc. It is good, then, for the many, if they particularly 
desire to do that which they know or suppose that they 
know, neither to know nor to suppose that they know, in 
cases where if they carry out their ideas in action they will 
be losers rather than gainers ? 

Al. What you say is very true. 

Soc. Do you not see that I was really speaking the truth 
when 1 affirmed that th# possession of any other kind of 
knowledge was more likely to injure than to benefit the 
possessor, unl^s he had also the knowledge of the best? 

AL I do now, if I did not before, Socrates. 

Sot. The state or the soul, therefore, which fishes to have The soul 
a right existence must hold firmly to this knowledge, just as 
the sick man clings to the physician, or the passenger ledge of 
147 depends for safety on the pilot. Aitd if the soul does not set ^ o ^ he 
sail until she have obtained this she will be all the safer in #setssail 
the voyage through life. But wljen she rushes in pursuit of on the 
wealth or bodily^rftrength or anything else, not having the nf^ age ° 
knowledge of the best, so much the more is she likely to 

55 ° 

Alcibiades 

II. 

SoCRATES.f 

Alcibiades. 

The poets 
spoke in 
riddles 
a hidden 
truth. 

The meaning of tye fypoets. 

meet with misfortune. And he who has the love of learning 1 , 
and is skilful in many arts, and does not possess the know- 
ledge of the best, but is under some other guidance, will 
make, as he deserves, a sorry voyage : — he will, I believe, 
hurry through the brief space f of human life, pilotless in 
mid-ocean, and the words will apply to him in which the poet 
blamed his enemy: — >. 

1 Full many a thing he knew; 

But knew them all badly 2 / 

Al. How in the world, Socrates, do the words of the poet 
a£ ply to him ? They seem to me to*jhave no bearing on the 
pointf whatever. 

Soc . Quite the contrary, my sweet friend : only the poet is 
talking in riddles after the fashion of his tribe. For all 
poetry has by nature an enigmatical character, and it is by 
no «iea*is everybody who can interpret it. And if, more- 
over, the spirit of poetry happen to seize on a man who is of 
a begrudging temper and does not care to manifest his 
wisdom but keeps it to himself as far as he can, it does 
indeed require an almost superhuman wisdom to discover 
what the poet would be at. You surely do not suppose that 
Homer, the wisest and most divine of poets, was unaware of 
the impossibility of knowing a thing badly: for it was no less 
a person than he who said of Margites that ‘he knew many 
things, but knew them all badly.’ The solution of the riddle 
is this, I imagine: — By ‘badly’ Homer meant 'bad’ and 
'knew’ stands for 'to know.’ Put the words together; — the 
metre will suffer, but the poet’s meaning is clear; — 'Margites 
knew all these things, but it was bad for him to know them.’ 
And, obviously, if it was bad for him to know so many 
things, he must have be$n a good-for-notHiSg, unless the 
argument has played us false. t 

AL But I Uo not think that it has, Socrates : at least, if 
the argument is fallacious, it would be difficult for me to find 
another which I could ' tryst. 

Soc . And you are rjght in thinking so. 

AL Well, that is my opinion. 

1 Or, reading * abundant learnito&.’ 

2 A fragment from the pseudo-IIomeric poem, ‘ Margites.’ 

The prayty l of the Lacedaemonians . 

Soc. But tell me, by Heaven : — you must see now the 
nature and greatness of the difficulty in which you, like 
others, have your part. ^ For you change abbut in all 
directions, and never come to rest anywhere : what you once 
most strongly inclined to suppose, you put aside again and 
148 quite alter your mind. If the God to whose shrine you are 
•^oing should, appear at this moment, and ask before you 
made your prater, ' Whether you would desire to have one 
of the things which we mentioned at first, or whether he 
shpuld leave you to make your own request :* — what in either 
case, think you, would be the best way to take advantage of 
the opportunity ? '• 

AL Indeed, Socrates, I could not answer you without 
consideration. It seems to me to be a wild thing 1 to make 
such a request ; a man must be very careful lest he pray for 
evil under the idea that he is asking for good, when shortly 
after he may have to recall his prayer, and, as you nvere 
saying, demand the opposite of what he at first requested. 

Soc. And was not the poet whose words I originally 
quoted wiser than we are, when he bade us [pray God] to 
defend us from evil even though we asked for it ? 

AL I believe that you are right. 

Soc . The Lacedaemonians, too, whether from admiration 
of the poet or because they have discovered the idea for 
themselves, are wont to offer the prayer alike in public and 
private, that the Gods will give unto them the beautiful # as 
well as the good : — no one is likely to hear them make any 
further petition. And yet nip to the present time they have 
not been less fortunate #than other men ; or if they have 
sometimes met with misfortune, the fault has not been due to 
their prayer. ## For surely, as I conceive, the Gods have 
power either to grant our requests, or to send us the con- 
trary^of what we ask. # 

And now I will relate to you a story which I have heard 
from certain of our elders. It chanced that when the 
Athenians and Lacedaemonians vfere at war, our city lost 
every battle by land and sea and never gained a victory.^ 

1 The Homeric word pdpyos is said tc/be here employed in allusion to the 
quotation from the ‘Wargites ’ which Socrates has just made ; but it is pot 
used in the sense which it has in Homer. 

551 

Alcibiades 

II. 

S*c rates, 
Alcibiades. 

Alcibiades 
is too un- 
stable to 
be able to 
trust his 
own 
prayers. 

552 

Alcibiades 

//. 

Socrates. 0 

t 

The silent 
grayer of 
the Lace- 
daemonians 
better than 
all the 
offerings of 
the other 
Hellenes. 

The word of the jp facie 

The Athenians being annoyed and perplexed how to find 
a remedy for their troubles, decided to send and enquire at 
the shrind of Ammon. Their .envoys were also to ask, 
'Why the Gods always granted the victory to the Lace- 
daemonians?’ 'We,’ (they were to say,) 'offer them more 
and finer sacrifices than any other Hellenic state, and adorn 
their temples with gifts, as nobody else does^/noreover, wv * 
make the most solemn and costly processions to them every 
year, and spend more money in their service tharv all the 
rest of the Hellenes put together. But the Lacedaemonians 149 
take no thought of such matters, and pay so little respect to 
thf Gods that they f havc a habit eft sacrificing blemished 
animals to them, and in various ways are less zealous than 
we are, although their wealth is quite equal to ours.’ When 
they had thus spoken, and had made their request to know 
what remedy they could find against the evils which troubled 
themjthe prophet made no direct answer,— clearly because 
he was not allowed by the God to do so ; — but he summoned 
them to him and said : 'Thus saith Ammon to the Athenians : 
"The silent worship of the Lacedaemonians pleaseth me 
better than alj the offerings of. the other Hellenes.”’ Such 
were the words of the God, and nothing more. He seems 
to have meant by ‘silent worship’ the prayer of the 
Lacedaemonians, which is indeed widely different from the 
usual requests of the Hellenes. For they either bring to 
the altar bulls with gilded horns or make offerings to the 
Gods, and beg at random for what they need, good or bad. 
When, therefore, the Gods head them using words of ill 
omen they reject these costly processions and sacrifices of 
theirs. And we ought, I think, to be very careful and con- 
sider well what we should say and what e leave unsaid. 
Homer, too, will furnish ifs with similar stories. For he 
tells us how tfyp Trojans in making their encampment, 

' Offered up whole hecatombs to the immortals,’ 

and how the' ' sweet savofir ’ was borne ‘ to the heavens by 
the winds : * 

t ' 

* But the blessed Godsi wede averse and received it not. 
t For exceedingly did they hate the holy Iliuih, % 

Both Priam and the people of the spear-skilled king.’ 

553 

about the Athfyibns and the Lacedaemonians . 

So that it was in vain for them to sacrifice and offer gifts, 
seeing that they were hateful to the Gods, who are not, like 
vile usurers, to be gained over by bribes. And it is foolish 
for us to boast that we ar^ superior to the Lacedaemonians 
* by reason of our much worship. The idea is inconceivable 
15° that the Gods have regard, not to the justice and purity of 
^•ur souls, but to costly processions and sacrifices, which men 
may celebrate^ear after year, although they have committed 
innumerable crimes against the Gods or against their fellow-' 
men or the state. For the Gods, as Ammon and his prophet 
declare, are no receivers of gifts, and they scorn such un- 
worthy service. Wheifcfore also it would seem that wisdom 
and justice are especially honoured both by the Gods flnd'by 
men of sense ; and they are the wisest and most just who 
know how to speak and act towards Gods and men. But 
I should like to hear what your opinion is about these 
matters. * # 

Al. I agree, Socrates, with you and with the God, whom, 
indeed, it would be unbecoming for me to oppose. 

Soc. Do you not remember saying that you were in great 
perplexity, lest perchance yop should ask for evil, supposing 
that you were asking for good ? 

Al I do. 

Soc. You see, then, that there is a risk in your ap- 
proaching the God in prayer, lest haply he should refuse 
your sacrifice when he hears the blasphemy which you utter, 
and make you partake of other evils as well. The wisest 
plan, therefore, seems to *me that you should keep silence ; 
for your 'highmindedn«ss ’ — to use the mildest term which 
men apply to folly — will most likely prevent you from using 
the prayer pf the Lacedaemonians. You had better wait 
until we find out how we should behave fowards the Gods 
and*towards men. 

Al And how long must I wait, Socrates, and who will be 
my teacher? I should be very glad 1 to see the man. 

Soc . It is he who takes an especial interest in you. But 
first of all, I think, the darkness must-be taken away in 
which your soul is now enveloped, just as Athene in Homer 
^removes the mi£,t from the eyes of Diomede that 

1 lie may distinguish between God and mortal man.’ 

Alcibiades 

II. 

Socrates, 

/Alcibiades. 

Alcibiades 
cannot tell 
whether he 
is asking 
for good 
or evil. 

' Therefore 
let his 
words be 
few.' 

554 

Alcibiades 

II. 

Socrates, 

Alcibiades# 

Alcibiades and his • thicker. 

Afterwards the means may be given to you whereby you 
may distinguish between good and evil. At present, I fear, 
this is beyqnd your power. 

Al. Only let my instructor t^ke away the impediment, 
whether it pleases him to call il mist or anything else ! I 1 
care not who he is ; but I am resolved to disobey none of 
his commands, if I am likely to be the better for*them. 

Soc. And surely he has a wondrous care fo/^ you. 15 

Al. It seems to be altogether advisable to put-off the 
sacrifice until he is found. , 

Soc. You are right: that will be safer than running such 
a tremendous risk. 

Al. «But how shall we manage, Socrates ? — At any rate 
I will set this crown of mine upon your head, as you have 
given me such excellent advice, and to the Gods we will 
offer crowns and perform the other customary rites when 
I see # tha£ day approaching: nor will it be long hence, if 
they so will. 

Soc. I accept your gift, and shall be ready and willing to 
receive whatever else you may proffer. Euripides makes 
Creon say in the play, when he beholds Teiresias with his 
crown and heal s that he has gained it by his skill as the first- 
fruits of the spoil : — 

* An auspicious omen I deem thy victor’s wreath : 

For well thou knowcst that wave and storm oppress us.* 

And so I count your gift to be a token of good-fortune ; for 
I am in no less stress than Creon, and would fain carry off 
the victory over your lovers. 

ERYXIAS. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Much cannot be said in praise of the style or conception of the Eryxias . 
Eryxias. It is frequently^obscurc ; like exercise of a student, introduc. 
it is full of small imitations of Plato : — Phaeax returning lrom an rloh, 
expedition to Sicily (cp. Socrates in the Charmides from the 1 
army at Potidaea), the figure of the game at draughts, 395 B, 
borrowed from Rep. vi. 487, etc. It has also in many passages 
the ring of sophistry. On the other hand, the rather unhandsome 
treatment which is exhibited towards Prodicus is quite unlike the 
urbanity of Plato. 

Yet there are some points in the argument which are deserving 
of attention. (1) That wealth*depends upon thp need of it or 
demand for it, is the first anticipation in an abstract form of one of 
the great principles of modern political economy, and the nearest 
approach to it to be found in an ancient writer. (2) The resolution 
of wealth into its simplest implements going on to infinity is a 
subtle and refined thought. (3) That wealth is relative to circum- 
stances is a sound conception. (4) That the arts and sciences 
which receive payment are likewise to be comprehended under 
the notion of wealth, also touches a question of modern political 
economy. (5) The distinction of post hoc and propter hoc , often 
lost sight of in* modern as well as^in ancient times. These meta- 
physical conceptions and distinctions show considerable power of 
thought in the writer, whatever we may think ofrhis merits as an 
imitator of Plato. 

E R Y X I A S. 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE. 

Socrates. Erasistratus. 

Eryxias. Critias. 

Scene : —The portico of a temple of Zeus. 

steph. It happened by chance that Eryxias the Steirian was walk- 
392 ing with me in the Portico of Zeus the Deliverer, when there 
came up to us Critias and Erasistratus, the latter the son of 
Phaeax, who was the nephew of Erasistratus^ Now Erasis- 
tratus had just arrived from Sicily and that part of the world. 
As they approached, he said, Hail, Socrates ! 

Soc. The same to you, I said ; have you any good news 
from Sicily to tell us ? 

Eras. Most excellent. But, if you please, let us first sit 
down ; for I am tired with my yesterday’s journey from 
Megara. 

Soc . Gladly, if that is^your desire. 

Eras. What would you wish to hear first ? he said. What 
the Sicilians^^re doing, or how they are disposed towards our 
city ? To my mind, they are Very like wasps : so long as 
you' only cause them a little annoyance they are quite un- 
manageable ; you must destroy their nests if you wish to get 
the better of •them. And in a simrtar way, the Syracusans, 
unless we set to work in earnest, ^nd go against them with a 
great expedition, will never submit *0 otir rule. The petty 
injuries which we at present inflict merely irritate them 
^enough to m%Jc? them utterly intractable. And now they 
have sent ambassadors to Athens, and intend, I suspect, to 

Eryxias. 

Socrates, 

Erasistr*-. 

TUS. * 

The 

trouble- 

some 

Sicilians. 

560 

The nature of' wealth. 

Eryxias. 

Socrates, 
Erasistka- 
tus. f 

The 

wicked 

millionaire. 

Wealth 
consists of 
things 
which are 
valuable. 

play us some trick.— While we were talking, the Syracusan 
envoys chanced to go by, and Erasistratus, pointing to pne 
of them, said to me, That, Socrates, is the richest man in 
all Italy and Sicily. For who )(as larger estates or more 
land at his disposal to cultivate if he please ? And they 
are of a quality, too, finer than any other land in Hellas. 
Moreover, he has all the things which go «to make up~ 
wealth, slaves and horses innumerable, g € Id and silver 
without end. 

I saw that he was inclined to expatiate on the riches of tjie 
man ; so I asked him, Weil, Erasistratus, and what sort of 
character does he beaf in Sicily? • 

He is esteemed to be, and really is, the wickedest of 393 
all the Sicilians and Italians, and even more wicked than he 
is rich; indeed, if you were to ask any Sicilian whom he 
thought to be the worst and the richest of mankind, you 
would n^er hear any one else named. 

I reflected that we were speaking, not of trivial matters, 
but about wealth and virtue, which are deemed to be of the 
greatest moment, and I asked Erasistratus whom he con- 
sidered the wealthier,— he who was the possessor of a talent 
of silver or he\vho had a field worth two talents ? 

Eras. The owner of the field. 

Soc. And on the same principle he who had robes and 
bedding and such things which are of greater value to him 
thap* to a stranger would be richer than the stranger ? 

Eras. True. 

Soc. And if any one gave you *a choice, which of these 
would you prefer ? « 

Eras. That which was most valuable. 

Soc . In which way do you think you would be the 
richer? * • 

Eras. By choosing as I said. 

Soc . And he 1 appears to you to be the richest who has 
goods of the greatest vafue ? 

Eras , He does. f < 

Soc. And are net thq healthy richer than the sick, since 
health is a possession more valuable than riches to the sick ? 
Surely there is no one wh<3 would not prefer fo be poor and 
well, rather than to have all the King of Persia's wealth and 

Is wisdom tk)^ m\st valuable of all^t kings ? 

to be ill. And this proves that men set health above wealth, Eryxias. 
else they would never choose the one in preference to the Socrates, 
oth*er. E T RA S * ISTRA * 

Eras, True. 1 iPryxias. 

Soc . And if anything ap^pared to be more valuable than 
health, he would be the richest who possessed it ? 

Eras, He would. 

VSoc. Suppos^ that some one came to us at this moment 
and were to ask, Well, Socrates and Eryxias and Erasis- 
tratus, can you tell me what is of the greatest value to men ? 

I^it not that of which the possession will best enable a man 
to advise how his own and his friends* affairs should be 
administered ? — What will be our reply*? 

Eras, I should say, Socrates, that happiness was the most 
precious of human possessions. 

Soc. Not a bad answer. But do we not deem those men 
who are most prosperous to be the happiest ? 

Eras. That is my opinion. 

Soc. And are they not most prosperous who commit the 
fewest errors in respect either of themselves or of other 
men ? 

Eras. Certainly. 

Soc. And they who know what is evil and what is 
good ; what should be done and what should be left un- 
394 done ; — these behave the most wisely and make the fewest 
mistakes ? 

Erasistratus agreed to this. 

Soc . Then the wisest and those who do best and the most 
fortunate and the riches? would appear to be all one and 
the same, if wisdom is really the most valuable of our 
possessions ? 

Yes, said Efyxias, interposing, but what yse would it be if Of what 

a man had the wisdom of Nestor and wanted the necessaries u ® e wou J d 
• wisdom be, 

of life, food and drink and clothes and the # like? Where if a man 

would be the advantage of wisdom then ? Of how could he had not . tbe 

u * necessaries 

be the riches? of men who might e^en have to go begging, Q f life ? 
because he had not wherewithal to live ? 

I thought that what Eryxias was spying* had some weighs, 

and I replied, Would the wisetmap really suffer in this way, 
i# he were so itt-provided ; whereas if he had the houses of 

VOL. II. 

o o 

562 

Eryxias. 

Socrates, 

Eryxias. 

The 

wisdom of 
Nestor 
better and 
even more 
saleable 
than the 
house of 
Polytion. 

And in the 
arts is not 
wisdom 
better than 
riches ? 

Eryxias is 
supposed 
to reply 
that argu- 
ments can 
prove any- 
thing and 
convince 
no one. 

Comparative claims of wis&omjand of riches . 

Polytion, and the house were full of gold and silver, he 
would lack nothing? 

Eryx. Yes ; for then he might dispose of his property and 
obtain in exchange what he needed, or he might sell it for 
money with which he could supply his wants and in a moment % 
procure abundance of everything. * 

Soc. True, if he could find some one who preferred such a 
house to the wisdom of Nestor. But if the^e are persons 
who set great store by wisdom like Nestor’s and the advan- 
tages accruing from it, to sell these, if he were so disposed, 
would be easier still. Or is a house a most useful arid 
necessary possession, and does it make a great difference in 
the comfort of life to have a mansion like Polytion’s instead 
of living in a shabby little cottage, whereas wisdom is of small 
use and it is of no importance whether a man is wise or 
ignorant about the highest matters ? Or is wisdom despised 
of men ?nd can find no buyers, although cypress wood and 
marble of Pentelicus are eagerly bought by numerous pur- 
chasers ? Surely the prudent pilot or the skilful physician, 
or the artist of any kind who is proficient in his art, is more 
worth than the things which are especially reckoned among 
riches ; and ho who can advise well and prudently for himself 
and others is able also to sell the product of his art, if he so 
desire. 

Eryxias looked askance, as if he had received some unfair 395 
treatment, and said, I believe, Socrates, that if you were 
forced to speak the truth, you would declare that you were 
richer than Callias the son of Hipponicus. And yet, although 
you claimed to be wiser about things of real importance, you 
would not any the more be richer than he. 

I dare say, Eryxias, I said, that you may regard these argu- 
ments of ours as a kind of game ; you think 'that they have 
no relation to facts, but are like the pieces in the gaipe of 
draughts which the player can move in such a way that his 
opponents are unable tQ, make any countermove \ And per- 
haps, too, as regards riches you are of opinion that while 
facts remain the same, there are arguments, no matter 
whether true or false, which enable the user of them to prove 
that the wisest and the ricljest»are one and the same, although 

* 1 Cp. Rep. vi. 487. ? * 

The triangularhrgument of Socrates, Eryxias, Critias. 563 

Eryxias 
disclaims 
the answer 
which is 
attributed 
to him. 

he is in the wrong and his opponents are in the right. Eryxias. 

here would be nothing strange in this ; it would be as if Socrates, 
two persons were to dispute about letters, one declaring that* ^^ s s ’ 
the word Socrates began v^ith an S, the other that it began with 
an A, and the latter could ^ain the victory over the former. 

% Eryxias glanced at the audience, laughing and blushing at 
# once, as if he had had nothing to do with what had just been 
said, and replied, — No, indeed, Socrates, I never supposed 
that our arguments should be of a kind which would never 
convince any one of those here present or be of advantage to 
them. For what man of sense could ever be persuaded that 
the wisest and the richest are the sa»e? The truth is^that 
we are discussing the subject of riches, and my notidh is that 
we should argue respecting the honest and dishonest means 
of acquiring them, and, generally, whether they are a good 
thing or a bad. 

Very good, I said, and I am obliged to you fo? th£ hint : 
in future we will be more careful. But why do not you your- 
self, as you introduced the argument, and do not think that 
the former discussion* touched the point at issue, 
whether you consider richer to be a good or an evil ? 

I am of opinion, he said, that they are a good. He was 
about to add something more, when Critias interrupted him : 

— Do you really suppose so, Eryxias ? 

Certainly, replied Eryxias ; 1 should be mad if I did not : 
and I do not fancy that you would find any one else of & con- 
trary opinion. 

And I, retorted Critias, should say that there is no one 
whom I could not compel to admit that riches are bad for 
396 some men. But surely, if they were a good, they could not 
appear bad far any one ? 

Here I interposed and sai<$ to them If you two were 
haring an argument about equitation and what was the best 
way of riding, supposing that I knew the art -myself, I should 
try to bring you to an agreement. *For I should be ashamed 
if I were present and did not tio what I could to prevent 
your difference. And I should <k> th^ same if you were 
quarrelling about any other art and were likely, unless you 
agreed on the^p&int in dispute, t8 part as enemies instead of 
as friends. But now, when we are contending about a tiling 

The argu- 
ment is 
renewed 
from a 

tell us fresh p** 

of view. 
Eryxias 
declares 
riches to be 
a good ; 
Critias 
maintains 
that they 
are some- 
times an 
evil. 

0 0 2 

564 

Eryxias. 

Socrates, 

Ervxias, 

Critias. 

Socrates 
encourages 
the two 
disputants 
to follow 
up the 
argument. 

Wealth 
may furnish 
the oppor- 
tunity of 
crime. 

The irony of Socrates. 

( f 

of which the usefulness continues during the whole of life, 
and it makes an enormous difference whether we are to 
• regard it as beneficial or not, — a thing, too, which is esteemed 
of the highest importance by th^/ Hellenes: — (for parents, 
as soon as their children are, as they think, come to years of 
discretion, urge them to consider how wealth may b£ ac-' 
quired, since by riches the value of a man is judged) : — * 
When, I say, we are thus in earnest, and you, Who agree in 
other respects, fall to disputing about a matter of such 
moment, that is, about wealth, and not merely whether 
it is black or white, light or heavy, but whether it is a 
goo^ or an evil, whereby, although yoii are now the dearest 
of frienas and kinsmen, the most bitter hatred may arise 
betwixt you, I must hinder your dissension to the best of my 
power. If I could, I would tell you the truth, and so put an 
end to the dispute; but as I cannot do this, and each of you 
supposes that you can bring the other to an agreement, I am 
prepared, as far as my capacity admits, to help you in solving 
the question. Please, therefore, Critias, try to make us 
accept the doctrines which you yourself entertain. 

Crit . I should like to follow up^ the argument, and will ask 
Eryxias whether he thinks that there are just and unjust 
men ? 

Eryx. Most decidedly. 

Crit. And does injustice seem to you an evil or a good ? 

EYyx . An evil. 

Crit. Do you consider that he who bribes his neighbour’s 
wife and commits adultery with her, acts justly or unjustly, 
and this although both the state and the laws forbid ? 

Eryx. Unjustly. 

Crit. And if the wicked man has wealth anej^s willing to 397 
spend it, he will carry out his evil purposes? whereas he 
who is short of means cannot do what he fain would, r and 
therefore does ‘not sin ? In such a case, surely, it is better 
that a person should not be wealthy, if his poverty prevents 
the accomplishment of his 'desires, and his desires are evil ? 

Or, again, should you cail sickness a good or an evil ? 

4 Eryx . An evil. 

Crit. Well, and do you* think that some qien are inten^ 
perate ? 

The argument of Critia 5 ? 

1 • 

Eryx, Yes. 

, Crit. Then, if it is better for his health that the intemperate 
man should refrain from meat and drink and <jther pleasant 
things, but he cannot ov\^ng to his intemperance, will it not 
. also be better that he should be too poor to gratify his lust 
Vather than that he should have a superabundance of means ? 

# For thus he will not be able to sin, although he desire never 
so much. • 

Critias appeared to be arguing so admirably that Eryxias, 
# if he # had not been ashamed of the bystanders, would 
probably have got up and struck him. For he thought that 
he had been robbed# of a great po^pession when it became 
obvious to him that he had been wrong in his former opinion 
about wealth. I observed his vexation, and feared that they 
would proceed to abuse and quarrelling : so I said, — I heard 
that very argument used in the Lyceum yesterday by a wise 
man, Prodicus of Ceos ; but the audience thoi^hUthat he 
was talking mere nonsense, and no one could be persuaded 
that he was speaking the truth. And when at last a certain 
talkative young gentleman came in, and, taking his seat, 
began to laugh and jeer^at Prodicus, tormenting him and 
demanding an explanation of his argument, lie gained the ear 
of the audience far more than Prodicus. 

Can you repeat the discourse to us ? said Erasistratus. 

Soc . If i can only remember it, I will. The youth began 
by asking Prodicus, In what way did he think that •riches 
were a good and in what an evil? Prodicus answered, as 
you did just now, that J;hey were a good to good men and to 
those who knew in wbat way they should be employed, while 
to the bad and the ignorant they were an evil. The same is 
true, he wf nt on to say, of all other things ; men make them 
to be what they are themsel\ies. The spying of Archilochus 
i^true 

• 

4 Men’s thoughts correspond to the things which*they meet with.* 

• s 

398 Well, then, replied the youtlj, if any one makes me wise in 

that wisdom whereby good men become wise, he must also 
make everything else good to me. Not that he concerns 
himself at all ^with these ofher# things, but he has converted 
my ignorance into wisdom. If, for example, a person teach 

565 

Eryxias. 

Socrates, 

Eryxias, 

Ckitias, 

Erasistka- 

TUS. 

Eryxias 
takes 
offence 
at Critias, 
whose 
argument, 
as Socrates 
pretends, 
is Snly the 
repetition 
of one 
which had 
been used 
by Pro- 
dicus of 
Ceos on 
the da^ m 
before; 

and had 
been re- 
futed by 
an im- 
pertinent 
youth. 

566 ' ^ Prodicus corrected. ^ 

< t 

Eryxias . me grammar or music, he will at the same time teach me all 

Socrates* that relates to grammar or music, and so when he makes m$ 

good, he mafyes things good to me. 

Prodicus did not altogether agr^4 : still he consented to 
what was said. 9 

And do you think, said the youth, that doing good things*' 
is like building a house, — the work of human agency ; or do * 
things remain what they were at first, good oi* bad, for all 
time? 

Prodicus began to suspect, I fancy, the direction which the # 
argument was likely to take, and did not wish to be put down 
by a mere stripling before all those present : — (if they two 
had * been alone, he would not have minded) : — so he 
answered, cleverly enough : I think that doing good things 
is a work of human agency. 

And is virtue in your opinion, Prodicus, innate or acquired 
by instruction ? 

The latter, said Prodicus. 

Then you would consider him a simpleton who supposed 
that he could obtain by praying to the Gods the knowledge 
of grammar or music or any other art, which he must either 
learn from another or find out for himself? 

Prodicus agreed to this also. 

And when you pray to the Gods that you may do well and 
receive good, you mean by your prayer nothing else than 
that you desire to become good and wise : — if, at least, 
things are good to the good and wise and evil to the evil. 
But in that case, if virtue is acquired «by instruction, it would 
appear that you only pray to be tai^ht what you do not 
know. 

Hereupon I said to Prodicus that it was no m^fortune to 
him if he had beerf proved to «be in error in supposing that 
the Gods immediately granted to us whatever we asked 5 lf, 

I added, whenever you go up to the Acropolis you earnestly 
entreat the Gods to grant you good things, alfchough you 
know not whether they can yield your request, it is as though 
you went to the doors of t the grammarian and begged him, 
although you had never made a study of the art, to give you 
a knowledge of grammar which ‘would enable you forthwith % 
to do the business of a grammarian. 

Wliat constitutes wealth ? • 

• • 

567 

Socrates, 

JErasistra- 

*tus. 

Prodicus 
is desired 
to leave 
the gym- 
nasium 
because 
he is dis- 
turbing the 
minds of 
youth. 

While I was speaking, Prodicus was preparing to retaliate Eryxias. 

>9 upon his youthful assailant, intending to employ the argu- 
ment of which you have j^st made use ; for he was annoyed 
to have it supposed that heV^ffered a vain prayer to the Gods. 

• But the master of the gymnasium came to him and begged 
him te leave because he was teaching the youths doctrines 
which were unsuited to them, and therefore bad for them. 

I have told*you this because I want you to understand 
how mgn are circumstanced in regard to philosophy. Had 
Brodicus been present ancfc said what you have said, the 
audience would have thought him raving, and he would 
have been ejected frdm the gymnatium. But you have 
argued so excellently well that you have not only pefsuaded 
your hearers, but have brought your opponent to an agree- 
ment. For just as id the law courts, if two witnesses testify 
to the same fact, one of whom seems to be an honest fellow 
and the other a rogue, the testimony of the rogue *oftCn has 
the contrary effect on the judges’ minds to what he intended, 
while the same evidence if given by the honest man at once 
strikes them as perfectly true. And probably the audience 
have something of the sam^ feeling about yourself and Pro- 
dicus; they think him a Sophist and a braggart, and regard 
you as a gentleman of courtesy and worth. For they do not 
pay attention to the argument so much as to the character of 
the speaker. 

But truly, Socrates, said Erasistratus, though you ma'y be 
joking, Critias does seem to me to be saying something 
which is of weight. • 

Soc. I am in profound earnest, I assure you. But why, 
as you have begun your argument so prettily, do you not go 
on -with thcb^est? There is still something lacking, now 
you have agreed that [wealth] te a good to some and an evil 
to others. It remains to enquire what constitutes wealth ; 
for unless you know this, you cannot poss&ly come to an 
understanding as to whether it is a good or an evil. I am 
ready to assist you in the enquiry to the utmost of my power: 
but first let him who affirms that riches # are a good, tell us 
what, in his opinion, is wealth* 

* Eras. Indeqrf* Socrates, I have no notion about wealth 
beyond that which men commonly have. I suppose that 

Socrates 
jesting pro- 
fesses to be 
in earnest. 

568 

Eryxias. 

Socrates, 

Erasistra- 

TUS. * 

What is 
money ? 

It is ob- 
served that 
different 
kinds of 
money 
pass 

current in 
different 
countries, 
—Carthage, 
Lacedae- 
mon, 
Ethiopia, 
Scythia. 

* Different kinds of money. 

wealth is a quantity of money 1 ; and this, I imagine, would 
also be Critias* definition. ‘ * 

Soc . Then now we have to consider, What is money ? Or 
else later on we shall be found $ differ about the question. 

For instance, the Carthaginians use money of this sort. ' 
Something which is about the size of a stater is tied up in a 400 
small piece of leather: what it is, no one knows but the makers# • 
A seal is next set upon the leather, which thten passes into 
circulation, and he who has the largest number of such 
pieces is esteemed the richest an# 1 , best off. And yet if any ope 
among us had a mass of such coins he would be no wealthier 
than if he had so many pebbles fi^rn the mountain. At 
Lacedaemon, again, they use iron by weight which has been 
rendered useless : and he who has the greatest mass of such 
iron is thought to be the richest, although elsewhere it has 
no value. In Ethiopia engraved stones are employed, of 
which*' a ^Lacedaemonian could make no use. Once more, 
among the Nomad Scythians a man who owned the house of 
Polytion would not be thought richer than one who possessed 
Mount Lycabettus among ourselves. 'And clearly those things 
cannot all be regarded as possessions ; for in some cases the 
possessors would appear none the richer thereby : but, as I 
was saying, some one of them is thought in one place to be 
money, and the possessors of it are the wealthy, whereas in 
some other place it is not money, and the ownership of it 
doe£ not confer wealth ; just as the standard of morals varies, 
and what is honourable to some men is dishonourable to 
others. And if we wish to enquire why a house is valuable to 
us but not to the Scythians, or why«the Carthaginians value 
leather which is worthless to us, or the Lacedaemonians find 
wealth in iron and we do not, can we not get, an answer in 
some such way as this : Would an Athenian, who had a 
thousand talents weight of the stones which lie about in the 
Agora and which we do not employ for any purpose, be 
thought to be any the richer ? * 

Eras. He certainly would not appear so to me. 

Soc . But if he possessed a thousand talents weight of Some 
precious stone, we should say fhat he was very rich ? 

Eras. Of course. * * % \ 

1 Cp. Arist. Pol. i. y, §§ 10, 14. 

vftealfii must be useful. 

Soc. The reason is that the one|is useless and the other Eryxias. 
useful ? Socrates* 

Eras. Yes. , . . Eras “ tra ' 

Soc . And in the same \yay among the Scythians a house 
► has no value because they have no use for a house, nor 
would a Scythian set so much store on the finest house in 
rfhe world as on a leather coat, because he could use the 
one and not Hie other. Or again, the Carthaginian coinage 
is not wealth in our eyes, for we could not employ it, as we 
c*m silver, to procure what We need, and therefore it is of no 
use to us. 

Eras . True. 4 • 

Soc . What is useful to us, then, is wealth, and # what is Wealth is 
useless to us is not wealth ? usef^, but 

. other 

But how do you rrtean, Socrates ? said Eryxias, interrupt- things are 
401 ing. Do we not employ in our intercourse with one another 
► speech and violence (?) and various other things ? •These wealth, 
are useful and yet they are not wealth. 

Soc. Clearly we have not yet answered the question, 

What is wealth ? That wealth must be useful, to be wealth » * 

at all, — thus much is acknowledged by every one. But what 
particular thing is wealth, if not all things ? Let us pursue 
the argument in another way ; and then we may perhaps 
find what we are seeking. What is the use of wealth, 
and for what purpose has the possession of riches been 
invented, — in the sense, I mean, in which drugs have*been 
discovered for the cure of disease ? Perhaps in this way we 
may throw some light onPthe question. It appears to be clear 
that whatever constitutes wealth must be useful, and that 
wealth is one class of useful things; and now we have to 
enquire, Wb^t is the use of those useful things which con- 
stitute wealth? For all things probably may be said to be 
useful which we use in production, just as all things which 
have life are animals, but there is a special kind of animal 
which we calf ' man.* Now if any j>ne were to ask us, What 
is that of which, if we were rid, \le should not want medicine 
and’ the instruments of medicine, we nfight reply --that this 
would be the case if disease were absent from our bodies 
*md either neyef* came to them at all or went away again as 
soon as it appeared ; and wc may therefore conclude that 

57 ° 

Eryxias. 

Socrates, 

Eryxias. 

If the body 
had no 
wants or 
feelings 
there would 
be no need 
of mofley. 

iVealth is what is wanted: 

f • ' 

medicine is the science^ which is useful for getting rid of 
disease. But if we are further asked, What is that from 
► which, if wo were free, we should f have no need of wealth? 
can we give an answer? If we l>ave none, suppose that we 
restate the question thus : — If a man could live without food ' # 
or drink, and yet suffer neither hunger nor thirst, wovld he 
want either money or anything else in order to supply hisp * 
needs ? # 

Eryx . He would not. m 

Soc. And does not this applyrin other cases? If we did 
not want for the service of the body the things of which we 
now stand in need, and heat and coW and the other bodily 
sensaticihs were unperceived by us, there would be no use in 
this so-called wealth, if no one, that is, had any necessity for 
those things which now make us wish for wealth in order 
that we may satisfy the desires and needs of the body in 
respeft of our various wants. And therefore if the possession 
of wealth is useful in ministering to our bodily wants, and 
bodily wants were unknown to us, we should not need 
wealth, and possibly there would € be no such thing as 
wealth. « 

Eryx. Clearly not. 

Soc. Then our conclusion is, as would appear, that wealth 
is what is useful to this end ? 

Eryxias once more gave his assent, but the small argu- 
ment considerably troubled him. 

Soc. And what is your opinion about another question : — 4°2 
Would you say that the same thing l:an be at one time useful 
and at another useless for the production of the same result ? 

Eryx. I cannot say more than that if we require the same 
thing to produce the same result, then it seei^a to me to be 
useful ; if not, not. * 

Soc. Then if without the aid of fire we could make a brazen 
statue, we shoiffd not want fire for that purpose ; and if we 
did not want it, it woulc[ be useless to us? And the argu- 
ment applies equally in oth£r cases. 

Eryx.'- Clearly. * « 

Soc. And therefore conditiops which are not required for 
the existence of a thing are not useful for the*p*oduction of it 4 
hfryx. Of course not. 

akd when ceasing to $e wanted ceases to le wealth. 

1 § 1 

Soc. And if without gold or silver pr anything else which 
we do* not use directly for the body in the way that we do 
food and drink and bedding, and houses,— if withoitf these we 
could satisfy the wants of thj body, they would be of no use 
‘ to us for that purpose ? • 

^ ryx % They would not. 

•S oc. They would no longer be regarded as wealth, because 
they are useless, •whereas that would be wealth which enabled 
us to obtain what was useful to us ? 

%ryx. C) Socrates, you will Jiever be able to persuade me 
that gold and silver and similar things are not wealth. But 
I am very strongly of opinion that things which are useless 
to us are not wealth, and that the money which is useful for 
this purpose is of the greatest use ; not that these things 
are not useful towards life, if by them we can procure 
wealth. 

Soc. And how would you answer another question ?* THere 
are persons, are there not, who teach music and grammar 
and other arts for pay, and thus procure those things of 
which they stand in need V 

Eryx. There are. # 

Soc . And these men by the arts which they profess, and in 
exchange for them, obtain the necessities of life just as we do 
by means of gold and silver ? 

Eryx. 1 'rue. 

Soc. Then if they procure by this means what they want 
for the purposes of life, that art will be useful towards life ? 
For do we not say that silver is useful because it enables us 
to supply our bodily need* ? 

Eryx. We do. 

Soc . Then i£ # these arts are reckoned among things useful, 
the arts are wealth for the same reason as gofd and silver are, 
for, cWarly, the possession of them gives wealth. # Yet a little 
while ago we found it difficult to accept the argument which 
403 proved that the wisest are the wealthiest. But now there 
. seems no escape from this conclusion. Suppose that we 
are asked, ‘ Is a horse useful to everybody?’ will not our 
reply be, ( No, but only to those who know how to use £ 
ho$se ? * ^ 

Eryx. Certainly. 

57 * 

Eryxias. 

Socrates, 

Eryxias. 

9 

The arts 
too are 
wealth, for 
by them 
the needs 
of life are a 
satisfied. 

572 

Eryxias. 

Socrates, 
Eryxias, 
Critias. * 

Thf good 
only know 
how to use 
things. 

Wealth If wealth when we*kno f w hdw to use it. 

^ I • 1 

Soc. And so, too, niysic is not useful to every one, but 
only to him who knows how to use it ? 

Eryx. X rue - 

Soc . And the same is the case with everything else ? 

Eryx. Yes. ? 

Soc. Then gold and silver and all the other ^lem£nts 
which are supposed to make up wealth are only useful to tjie • 
person who knows how to use them ? • 

Eryx. Exactly. 

Soc. And were we not sayin^before that it was th£ business 
of a good man and a gentleman to know where and how 
anything should be gsed ? 

Eryx. Yes. 

Soc. The good and gentle, therefore, will alone have profit 
from these things, supposing at leasfr that they know how to 
use them. But if so, to them only will they seem to be 
wealth* It appears, however, that where a person is ignorant , 
of riding, and has horses which are useless to him, if some 
one teaches him that art, he makes him also richer, for what 
was before useless has now become useful to him, and in 
giving him knowledge he has also conferred riches upon 
him. 

Eryx. That is the case. 

Soc. Yet I dare be sworn that Critias will not be moved a 
whit by the argument. 

•< Crit . No, by heaven, I should be a madman if I were. But 
why do you not finish the argument which proves that gold 
and silver and other things whicU seem to be wealth are not 
real wealth ? For I have been exceedingly delighted to hear 
the discourses which you have just been holding. 

Soc. My argument, Critias (I said), appears # to have given 
you the same kind of pleasure which you might have derived 
from some^rhapsode’s recitation of Homer; for you ^o not 
believe a wo^I of what has been said. But come now, give 
me an answer to this Question . Are not certain things useful 
to the builder when he i^jbuilding a house? 

Crih They arei • 

Soc. And would you say that those things are useful which 
are employed in hous^ building, -ston€s^and bricks jnd 
bfcams and the like, and also the instruments with which the 

The Elements bf wealth aye infinite. 

" I 

573 

builder built the house, the beams find stones which they Eryxias. 
provided, and again the instruments’ by which these were Socrates, 
obtained ? c.mu. 

f # 

Crit . It seems to me that they are all useful for building. 

Soc. And is it not true V>f every art, that not only the 
nfifterials but the instruments by which we procure them and 
> without which the work could not go on, are useful for 
that art ? 

Crit . Certainly. 

Soc . Ahd further, the instriynents by which the instruments 
4 are procured, and so on, going back from stage to stage ad 
infinitum, — are not all these, in your ^pinion, necessary in 
order to carry out the work ? 

Crit . We may fairly- suppose such to be the case. 

Soc . And if a man has food and drink and clothes and the 
other things which are useful to the body, would he need 
gold or silver or any other means by which he could*pi*cure be useless 
that which he now has ? 

Crit . I do not think so. 

Soc . Then you consider that a man never wants any of food ; and 
these things for the use of the body? noTbe at** 

Crit. Certainly not. one time 

Soc . And if they appear useless to this end, ought they not another ^ 
always to appear useless? For wc have already laid down time useful 
the principle that things cannot be at one time useful and at 
another time not, in the same process. , 

Crit. But in that respect your argument and mine are the 
same. For you maintain, if they are useful to a certain end, 
they can never become pseless ; whereas I say that in order 
to accomplish some resuffs bad things are needed, and good 
for others. 

Soc. But can a bad thing bo used to i?arry out a good 
purpose ? 

Crit. I should say not. < 

Soc. And W£ call those actions good which a man does for 
the sake of virtue ? 

Crit. Yes. _ ^ 

Soc. But can a man learn any kind of knowledge which js 
imparted by wo»d of mouth* if he is wholly deprived of 
the sense of h&ring ? 

A sophism. 
Gold and 
silver would 

if they were 
not needed 
to obtain 

in the same 
actions. 

574 

Eryxias. 

Socrates, 

Critias. 

There are 
indirect 
means to- 
wards ends. 

Wealth 
may be 
gained dis- 
creditably, 
but spent 
* Ml the ac- 
quisition 
of virtue. 

Difference 
between 
causes and 
ante- 
cedents. 

1 • Good knds nqay be 'attained by held means . < . 

* t • # 

Crit Certainly not, I think. 

Soc. And will not hlaring be useful for virtue, if virtue is 
taught by hearing and we use the sense of hearing in giving 
instruction ? 

Crit. Yes. / # - 

Soc . And since medicine frees the sick man from 4iis 

£ 

disease, that art too may sometimes appear useful in the , 
acquisition of virtue, e. g. when hearing is procured by the 
aid of medicine. 

Crit Very likely. ^ • 

Soc . But if, again, we obtain by wealth the aid of medicine, 
shall we not regard ^ealth as useful*for virtue ? 

Crit\ True. 

Soc . And also the instruments by which wealth is pro- 
cured ? • 

Crit Certainly. 

S<$£. i*hen you think that a man may gain wealth by bad 4 
and disgraceful means, and, having obtained the aid of medi- 
cine which enables him to acquire the power of hearing, may 
use that very faculty for the acquisition of virtue ? 

Crit Yes, I do. 

Soc. But c^fii that which is evil be useful for virtue? 

Crit No. 

Soc. It is not therefore necessary that the means by which 
we obtain what is useful for a certain object should always be 
useful for the same object : for it seems that bad actions may 
sometimes serve good purposes ? The matter will be still 4 c 
plainer if we look at it in this vyay : — If things are useful 
towards the several ends for whiejj they exist, which ends 
would not come into existence without them, how would you 
regard them? Can ignorance, for instance, be useful for 
knowledge, or disease for h§alth, or vice for virtue ? 

Crit Never. 

Soc. And y^we have already agreed — have we not? — that 
there can be no knowledge where there has /lot previously 
been ignorance^ nor heiltfy.where there has not been disease, 
nor virtue where -Jiere j^as not been vice ? « 

• Crit I think that we have. 

Soc . But then it would* see^n that the antecedents without 
which a thing cannot exist are not necessarily useful to it. 

he wfio nfyds inostnor zu/to hieeds least Me happier 9 575 

Otherwise igfiorancl vJould appearl useful for krjwledge, Eryxias. 
disease for health, and vice for virjue. Socrates, 

*Critias still showed great reluctance to accept any argu- CR,TlAS * 
ment which went to prove? that all these things Were useless. 

I saw that it was as difficul|to persuade him as (according to 
^Jje proverb) it is to boil a stone, so I said : Let us bid 
'goodF-bye* to the discussion, since we cannot agree whether 
these things are useful and la part of wealth or not. But 
what shall we say to another question : Which is the 
happier ^nd better man, — he who requires the greatest quan- 
tity of necessaries for body mid diet, or he who requires only 
the fewest and least ? Jhe answer will perhaps become more 
obvious if we suppose some one, comparing the man^himself 
at different times, to consider whether, his condition is better 
when he is sick or When he is well ? 

# Crit. That is not a question which needs much consideration. 

Soc. Probably, I said, every one can unde*5fcin^that 
hetfith is a better condition than disease. But when have we 
the greatest and the most various needs, when we are sick or 
when we are well ? 

Crit. When we are sick. 

Health is a 
better con- 
dition than 
disease ; 
and it 
needs l€^. 

Soc . And when we are in the worst statg we have the 
greatest and most especial need and desire of bodily 
pleasures ? 

Crit. True. 

Soc . And seeing that a man is best off when he is least in So he is 
need of such things, does not the same reasoning apply to 
the case of any two persons, of whom one has many and fewest 
great wants and desires* and the other few and moderate? desires * 
For instance, some mev are gamblers, some drunkards, and 
some gluttons : and gambling and the love of drink and 
greediness af£ all desires ? • # 

Qpt. Certainly. 

Soc. But desires are only the lack of sofhething : and 
those who have the greatest desire^are in ahorse condition 
than those wfio have none or very sdight ones^? 

406 Crit . Certainly I consider tnat those ^who have stfclf 

wants are bad, and that the greatA their wants tff? worse 
they are. • # 

0 Soc. And cjfD we think it possible that a thing should be 

576 

Eryxias . 

Socrates, 

Critias. 

r The ticket are thole** who *are mos\ in want. ^ 

useful f<£r a purpose ifnless we have need %f it for that 
purpose ? r * r 

Crit. No. 

Soc. Thefi if these things are c useful for supplying the 
needs of the body, we must want ,'.hem for that purpose ? 

Crit. That is my opinion. >i* 

Soc. And he to whom the greatest number of things are 
useful for his purpose, will also want the greatest number of 
means of accomplishing it, supposing that we necessarily feel 
the want of all useful things ? 

Crit. It seems so. 1 * 

Soc. The argument proves then that he who has great 
riches l^as likewise need of many things for the supply of the 
wants of the body; for wealth appears useful towards *hat 
end. And the richest must be in the worst condition, since 
they seem to be most in want of such things.