A HANDBOOK 

OF 

GREEK RELIGION 

BY 

ARTHUR FAIRBANKS 

NEW YORK-:- CINCINNATI-:- CHICAGO 

AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY 

Copyright, igso, by 

american book company. 

Ehtihud at Stations ps' Hai-i,, London. 

FAIRBANKS. ORBRK RBUCIOK. 
W. P. 3 

PREFACE 

Although the mythology of Greece is a familiar subject, and 
Greek religious antiquities have long been studied, Greek re- 
ligion, as such, is a comparatively unknown field. In the pres- 
ent volume, religious antiquities, forms of revelation, and worship 
and belief are discussed in Part I. from the standpoint of their 
religious significance. It may be that readers who are more 
interested in the content than in the form of Greek religion will 
pass from the Introduction directly to Parts II and III, but 
Part I has been left in its logical place. Greek mythology, on 
the other hand, finds no place in the discussion. If too much 
emphasis has been laid on the difference between mythology 
and religion, it may be regarded as a natural reaction from the 
usual identification of two quite different interests of the Greek 

mind. 

For various reasons Greek religion is not, like Greek my- 
thology, an easy subject to handle. There is one mythology, 
or at least a tendency to one mythology, as over against many 
almost unrelated forms of worship. Moreover, mythology lent 
itself to literary treatment, while many of the data for Greek 
religion come in fragmentary form from late authors. As to 
other sources, inscriptions are very important, but they deal 
only with detail; while archaeological remains are often difficult 
to interpret. Although no complete pictuie is possible, it is 
hoped that this presentation of the subject will give a point of 
view which will be helpful in understanding Greek authors as 
well as in determining the contribution of Greece to the religious 
conceptions and forces of the later world. 

ARTHUR FAIRBANKS. 
April, 1 910. 

5 

CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Introduction 13 

Was there a Greek religion? Mythology and religion. The 
local shrine. What did religion mean to the Greeks? 

PART I 

FORMS OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF AND PRACTICE IN 

ANCIENT GREECE 

CHAPTER 

I. Revei-ation and Inspiration . - ... . -39 

The Greek conception of revelation. Theophany in the Ho- 
meric poems. Signs in the ordinary course of nature. Signs in 
nature: birds. Minor signs in nature : chance words, etc. Divi- 
nation by means of sacrificial victims. Inspiration : (o) dreams ; 
(£) prophets. Oracles. 

II. The Worship of the Gods ....... 65 

Sacred places. Sacred times. Sacred persons; priests and 
attendants. Forms of worship: (<r) prayers, hymns, curses, 

oaths ; (6) votive offerings, processions, athletic contests ; (V) the 
sacrificial meal ; (</) propitiatory sacrifice, purification. Worship 

from the standpoint uf the state ; panhellenic worship. Wor- 
ship of the individual and the home. The Eleusinian mysteries. 

III. The Greek Gods " 138 

The gods in their relation to the world. The nature of the 

gods as individuals. Zeus, Hera, Athena, Apollo, Artemis. Gods 
associated with the earth, the waters, and the heavens. Gods of 
human activities and emotions. Heroes. 

IV. The Soul and the Future Life 168 

The epic conception of the soul. Traces of an early worship 
of the dead. Funeral rites. The worship of souls. The gods 
of the underworld. Transfiguration of the future life in the wor- 
ship of Dionysus and of Demeter. 

7 

8 CONTENTS 

PART II 
HISTORICAL SKETCH OF RELIGION IN GREECE 

CIIAHEH PAGE 

I. The Beginnings ov Greek Religion 189 

Periods; methods of investigation. The type of early religion 
in Greece. Early religion in the light of archaeological remains. 

Early religion as inferred from the following period. 

II. Religion in the Greek "Middle Auks" . - . .215 

Changes in the period 1 100-700 B.C. Religion in the Homeric 
poems. The thcogony of Hesiod. 

III. Religion in the Seventh and Sixth Centuries b.c . . 230 

Social and political changes ; literature. Changes in belief 
and worship. The rise of Dionysus worship. The Orphic move- 
ment. 

IV. Religion in the Fifth and Fourth Centuries b.c; Hel- 

lenism at its Hkksht ....... 249 

The Persian wars and the exaltation of the Athenian state. 
The first Athenian empire. The Feloponnesian war. The fourth 
century. 

V. The Outcome of Greek Religion 273 

Religion in the Hellenistic age. The influence of Greek re- 
ligion on Roman religion. Greek religion and Christianity. 

PART III 
RELIGION AND OTHER PHASES OF LIFE IN GREECE 

I. Religion in Relation to Art and Ijterature . . . 294 
The general connection of art and religion. The influence of 
religion on art and literature. The influence of art and literature 
On religion. 

II. Religion and the Organization of Society .... ^ofc 

Religion and ethics. Religion and the social group. Religion 
and the state. 
HI. Religion and Philosophy . ....... 3 22 

Early Greek philosophy ; criticism of religion. Plato and his 
successors; the philosophic statement of religion. 
IV. The Distinctive Nature of Greek Religion . . . 334 

** Monotheism" in Greece. The nature of a god in Greece. 
Sin and the remedy for sin. The conception of the religious life. 
Appendix T. The Historical Development of a Greek God . 350 
Appendix II. Table of Religious Festivals at Athens . . 3°4 
Appendix III. Bibliography ........ 366 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

KK.I'Ht PAGE 

i. Zeus from Mylasa (Boston) . 15 

Photograph. 

2. Late Greek Relief 20 

Baumcistcr, £>cnkmaier 9 I. 97, fig. 103. 

3. Section of the Frieze of the Parthenon (Athens) . . . , 24 

Photograph. 

4. Aphrodite from Melos (Louvre) . - . 31 

Photograph. 

5. Athenian Red-figured Vase Painting . 45 

Millin, Peintures des vases atUiqucs t \ 9 pi. 35. 

6. Athenian Red-figured Vase Painting (Gotha) 48 

Aloti. Inst. 9, pi. 53. 

7. View of the Gift's at Delphi ........ 59 

Photograph. 

&. Plan of the Precinct of Apollo at Delphi . . • » . 61 

Luckenbach, Oiympui and £>elphi, p. 4$. 

9. View of the Ruins of the Shrine of Apollo at Delphi ... 62 
Photograph. 

to. I&rly Black-figured Vase Painting (British Museum) ... 68 
Jour. Hell. Stud. I , pi. 7, 

11. Athenian Black-figured Vase Painting ("Lefcythos, Athens) . . 69 

Jahr. Inst. 6 (1891) 36, fig. 23. 

12. The Great Altar at Pergamon (restoration) ...... 70 

Krgebnisse der Jlusgrtibungen su Pergamon 9 III, pi. 19. 

13- Ground Plan of the Parthenon 72 

ttaurneister, Denkmater f 2. 1172, fig. 1 362. 

14. Section of the Frieze of the Parthenon 73 

Photograph. 

15- Coin of Megalopolis (Reign of Car a call a) 73 

Irnhoof-Blumer and Gardner, Numismatic Commentary on 
Paus*inias r pi. V. vi. 

16. Gem by Aspasius .......... 74 

Furtwangler, Antike Gemmett, pi. 49. 12. 

17. Athenian Retl-figured Vase Painting (Stainnos in the British 

Museum) ........... 77 

Gerhard, Auserlesene Vasenlnlder, pi. 155. 

18. Marhle Seat for the Priest of Dionysus in the Theatre at Athens . 80 

Photograph. 

9 

io LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

FIGtntK PAGE 

19. Relief from the Asclepieum at Athens ...... 90 

Kttll. Corr. JIcJL 2 (1878), pi. 8. 

20. Relief from Thessaly (Thebes) ....... 92 

Daremberg-Saglio, p. 376, fig. 2543. 

21. Clay Tablet from Corinth . . • . • • « . 93 

Ant. £>enk. I, Taf. 8, fig 20. 

22. Marble Relief (Athens) . 94 

Ath m Mttlh. 18 (1893), Taf. 11. 

23. Votive Frog from the Peloponnese 95 

Daremherg-Sag!it>, p. 375, fig. 2538. 

24. Athenian Red -figured Vase Tainting (Starnnos in Munich) . . 99 

Gerhard, Atts. Vas Taf. 81. 

25. Athenian Reel-figured Vase Painting (Krater in Boston) . . 101 

From a drawing. 

26. Athenian Red-figured Vas- Painting (Kylix in Athens) . . . 104 

four. /Ml, St**/. 10 (1X89). pi. I. 

27. Relief in Thebes ........ 9 . 108 

Stengel, Griech. CultusalU Taf. I, fig. 2. 

28. Scene on a Greek Gem . . . . . . . . . 1 10 

Baumeister, Denkmalcr, 2. 914, fig. 9S8. 

29. Athenian Red-figured Vase Painting (Amphora in Munich) . .113 

lienndorf, Griech. Sic, Vets. Taf. 9. 

30. Scene from Panathenaic Amphora (lirilish Museum) . . .114 

Baumcistcr, Denkmalcr t 2. 1 152, fig. 1346. 

31. liar, of the Ruins at Olympia ........ 116 

Ilachttnati, Olympia* 20. 

32. Athenian Red-figured Vase Painting ...... 123 

Panofka, Griechen uiut Grief hi nnen 9 fig, 14. 

33. Relief in Athens .......... 123 

A th. Mi lift. 17 (1892) 229. 

34- Plan of the Ruins of the Asclepius Precinct ai Fpidaurus . . 125 

Frazer, }\iu$ani<is. 

35. Ground Plan of the Telesterion at Fleusis ..... 128 

Borrmann, GesthUhte der />ankunst, I, fig. 1 20. 

36. View of the Ruins at F.leusis ........ 129 

Photograph. 

37. Vase with Figures in Relief (St. Petersburg) . . . . .130 

Baumeister, Denkmnler % 1.4-4, fig. 520. 

38. Marble Funerary Urn fTcrme Museum, Rome) • • » • 133 

/Jul/. Comm. Arch. /torn. 7 ( 1879), pi. 2. 

39. Fragment of a Small Votive Figure (Eleusis) . . . • .134 

Ath. MiUk. 17 (1892) 129, fig. 4. 

40. Marble Relief from Eleusis 136 

Photograph. 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

ix 

8. 76 

FIGURB 

41. Coin of Elis (Hadrian) ...... 

Gardner, Types of Greek Coins, pL 15- '9- 

42. Hera Ludovisi (Tcrme Museum, Rome) 

Photograph. 

43. Bronze Statuette of "Athena Promachus" (Boston) 

Photograph. 

44. Coin of Croton ....... 

Fried lander-Sallet, JJas Mgl. Afunzknb. in Berlin* pi. 

45. CoinofGela (about 485 B.C.) .... 

Hill, Handbook of Greek and Roman Coins, pi. 3. 7. 

46. Coin of Selinus (about 460 B.C.) ■ ■ ■ 

1 till, Ifandtwok of Greek and Roman Coins, pi. 6. 2. 

47. Athenian Red-figured Vase Painting (St. Petersburg) 

Baurneister, Denkmaler, 1. 104, fig. I io. 

48. Athenian White Lekythos (Jena) .... 

Schadow, Eine attische GrahUkyt/urs, fig. I. 

49. Handle of a Greek Bronze Mirror (fourth century B.C., Boston) 

Photograph. 

50. Athenian Red-figured Vase Painting 

Photograph. 

51. Athenian Red-figured Vase Painting (Krater, Paris) 

Furtwangler-Reichhold, pi. 60. 

52. Athenian White Lekythos (Vienna) • • • 

Benndorf, Griech. Sic Vas. Taf. 33. 

53. Street of Tombs at Athens (Cerameicus) . , 

Photograph. 

54. Terra Cotta Figurines from Tombs at Tanagra (Boston) 

Photograph. 

55. Athenian White Lekythoi (Athens) 

Photograph. 

56. Apulian Red -figured Vase Painting .... 

Baurneister, Detikmatcr, 3. I928, fig. 2042 B. 

57. Section and Plan of Domed Tomb (Tholos) at Mycenae 

Tsountas-Manatt, The Mycenaean Age, figs. 42 and 

58. Attic Black-figured Vase Painting . 

Ja/ir. InsL 13 (1898), fig. 4. 

Plan of the Dictaean Cave .... 
Brit. School Ann. 6 (1899) 94, pi. 8. 

60. The " Shrine of the Double Axes" at Cnossos . 

Brit. School Ann. 8 (1901) 97, fig. 35. 

61. Libation Tables and Dishes .... 
Brit. School Ann. 6 (1899), pi. n. 

Steatite Vase from Hagia Triada ... 
Monumenii Antichi* "3» Tav. 1 and 3. 

59 

62 

43- 

PAGE 

■49 
150 

■5* 
■5" 

■53 

"•4 

■57 
.58 

160 

162 

171 

173 

"75 

"77 
181 

183 

r$8 
199 
200 
201 
203 
204 

i2 LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

rtCl'RB PACK 

63. Steatite Offertory Scene . 205 

Brit. S€hool Ann. 9 (1902; 129, fig. 85. 

64. Gem from Vaphio .......... 206 

'E0.'Ap X . 1889. pi. "°> 35- 

65. Thin Gold Placque from Mycenae .•••.*. 207 

photograph. 

66. Faience Figure from Cnossoa ........ 208 

Brit. School Ann. 9 C'9°2) 75» fig- 54- 

67. Gold King from Mycenae ......... 209 

Schuchhardt, Sthliemanm Ausgrabungen, p. 313- 

68* Marble Relief from the Peiraeus (Berlin) ..... 212 

Harrison, J'rolegornena to (Jie ~ ttafy of Greek Jfeiieion* 19, fig. 2. 

69. Athenian Red-figured Vase Fainting (Kylix by flieron, Berlin) . 235 

Boetticher, ita-umkultus, Taf. 42. 

70. Terra Co tta Relief from Campania 246 

Baumeister, Denkmaier* 1. 449, fig. 496. 

71. Figure uf Isis with Sistron ....,,,, 276 

Baumeister, Denkmaler 9 1. 761, fig. 812. 

72. Athenian Black-figured Vase Painting (Loutrophoros from Cape 

Colias) 2S7 

A/on, Inst. Tav. 8. 5. 

73- Coin of Naxos (about 460 B.C.) ....... 301 

Hill. Greek and Roman Coins, pi. 6. I. 

74. Marble Statue of Dionysus from Tivoli (Terme Museum, Rome) 302 

Photograph. 

75. Athenian Red-figured Vase Fainting ...... 308 

Rochette, Mon. inedit. Tav. 36. 

76. Marble Relief in Athens . 318 

Photograph. 

INTRODUCTION 

1 . Was there a Greek Religion ? — The rich and varied 
mythology of Greece is studied by the historian, by the poet, 
by every reader of the ancient classics, and it has been studied 
with more or less interest ever since the Homeric poems were 
composed ; but the question whether these gods were worshipped 
is rarely asked. Such a strange condition of affairs is due partly 
to the nature of these gods, partly to a narrow conception of what 
religion is, partly to the fact that the Greeks had no religious 
dogma and left no sacred writings. The picture of the Greek 
gods in myth certainly does not inspire religious sentiments or 
suggest worship. And it is not difficult to see that myths have 
become so familiar as quite to overshadow any religious side 
which the gods may have had for their worshippers. Not only 
Greek poetry, but the poetry of Rome and of every later European 
literature as well, has constantly drawn its inspiration from these 
myths. The question remains whether worship and the religious 
sentiment expressed in worship were really an important factor in 
ancient Greek life. 

The answer to this question depends on our definition of 
religion. Religion to-day lays emphasis on one God, ever present 
in the world, but something more than the world itself, a god 
whose wisdom and love are manifested with increasing clearness. 
Moreover religion rests on the revelation of this god to man, and 
the revelation is stated, however imperfectly, in creeds and 
dogmas. A god of absolute holiness, the human soul with eternal 
possibilities of blessedness or woe, a conscience stamping every 
act as right or wrong, divine love as a constant ally of the good, — 
such, perhaps, we understand to be the ultimate factors of religion. 

13 

i 4 GREEK RELIGION 

They were not present in Greece. The gods were not holy, nor 
did religion judge human life from the ethical standpoint- That 
a god should care for men as men is a thought which belongs 
only to later periods of Greek religion. There was no religious 
dogma, no revelation of the divine will except in particular cases. 
But if religion is the belief in a personal being or beings, higher 
than man and interested in his welfare, if it is the yearning of the 
human heart for the protection and sympathy of its gods, if prayer 
and sacrifice and the effort to please the gods are religion, we find 
it in Greece. A Greek city was dotted with shrines where men 
worshipped, as few cities are supplied with churches to-day- The 
calendar was primarily a device for locating festivals to the gods, 
sacred days which numbered quite as many in the year as our 
Sundays. When St. Paul found at Athens not only temples for 
many gods, but also an altar " to the Unknown God," erected to 
correct any possible omission, he might well call the Athenians a 
11 very religious " people. 1 From the earliest effort to win aid from 
vaguely conceived spirits up to the ideal of Zeus the father-god 
and of Apollo who reveals his will, we may trace a development 
continuous if irregular. And in rites of feasting and dance and 
sacred drama, to us strange indeed, were formed conceptions 
religious enough to affect our Christianity profoundly. 

A superficial investigation is sufficient to establish the fact 
that religious practices w£re as numerous and as far-reaching 
in Greece as among any known people. That religion rested 
somewhat lightly on men's shoulders, that religious rites were for 
the most part occasions of joy and gladness, is no reason for 
refusing to recognize their genuine meaning. It only remains to 
ask whether the meaning they did have is sufficient to justify an 
investigation of the facts. And to this question also the answer 
is not difficult The greater thinkers of Greece, as well as the 
greater artists, found deep and important meaning in the re- 
ligion of the people. No reader of Sophocles and of Plato fails 
to be impressed with their insight into religious truth ; and our 

1 Acts 17. 23. 

INTRODUCTION 

*S 

copies of great temple statues, imperfectly as they reproduce the 
originals, yet are sufficient to show how the artist found and inter- 
preted a real religious sentiment. As Aristotle remarks, 1 the name 
of father applied to Zeus is equivalent to "paternal ruler" and 
includes the idea of his loving care for men. The inherent like- 
ness of man and god, the 
human-ness of god and the 
divine-ness of man, has 
rarely been grasped more 
clearly than by the Greeks. 
It was recognized that the 
idea of communion under- 
lies worship, and that in 
the service of a god man 
grows like him. We may 
frankly acknowledge that 
such conceptions were not 
explicitly recognized by the 
people, and still claim that 
there is a Greek religion 
deserving of study. 

Nor was this religion 
without its continuing po- 
tency in later Europe. 
It will appear later in the 
discussion that Greek life 
was so shot through with 
these religious threads that 
no phase of it would have been the same, if its religious side 
had been neglected. The Greek conceptions and ideals which 
reappear in modern life are not free from this stamp* Further, 
it will also appear in the later discussion that Christianity itself 
was modified and its forms at least were enriched by much 
material from Greek religious rites. Indeed one might claim that 

* Arisioile. Poltt r. ia. 

Fig. i. — Zeus from Myi.asa (Boston) 

The head is perhaps closer than any oilier 
marble copy to the statue of Zeus at Olym- 
pia by Pheidias. 

,6 GREEK RELIGION 

Greek religion has exercised about as much influence, though in- 
directly, on various phases of modern life, as Greek mythology 
has exercised on modern literature. 

And if Greek religion is to be studied for the influence it has 
had on modern life, as well as for its immediate influence on other 
phases of Greek life, the interest of the study will be much in- 
creased by its connection with " comparative religion " so-called 
(/>. the history of other worships and beliefs as compared with 
Christianity). It is strange indeed that the religions of India and 
China, and even of savage races, should have been studied dili- 
gently to the neglect of religion in Greece and Rome- This latter 
branch of study, however, may profit by one tenet which has been 
established by the study of religion in other fields, viz., that in 
considering the Greek gods and their worship the student is not 
to search for Christian conceptions in another field, but rather to 
investigate the facts and interpret them in the light of the highest 
religious experience he knows. 

In the brief presentation of the subject here attempted,y?ri7, 
the attention of the reader is asked to the phenomena of religion 
at Athens in the fifth and fourth centuries B-c. ; sc£ond!y, the main 
periods in the history of Greek religion are sketched ; and thirdly^ 
questions as to the influence and significance of Greek religion 
receive further consideration. So varied are the details of religious 
worship that ordinarily the usages of Athens alone have been pre- 
sented ; it is only in the effort to reconstruct the religious history 
of earlier ages that a broader outlook is imperatively necessary. 
In order to secure the proper standpoint for such a study as is 
here proposed, a few general topics are treated in the following 
pages of the introduction. 

2. Mythology and Religion. — It has been assumed in the pre- 
ceding section that Greek religion is something quite different 
from Greek mythology, yet the fact remains that they are often 
confused. And inasmuch as every reader first becomes acquainted 
with the Greek gods through myth, it is essential for the student 
of religion to seek a clear-cut conception of the relation between 

INTRODUCTION 17 

religion and mythology. Myths I have defined elsewhere 1 as 
"stories of the acts of superhuman beings, often improbable to us, 
but believed to be true by those who related them," The beings 
which appear in myths are inevitably personal, for the myth tells 
of their actions ; and the myth as inevitably assumes the story 
form. Some of the tales appear to us weird, immoral, hardly "true 
to life " ; yet they were believed as distinctly as the child believes 
in his Santa Claus. Nor was it till they had really become an ele- 
ment of literature that any one could think of taking license with 
them. Myths, thus conceived, stand close to philosophy and to 
poetry : to philosophy, for problems of nature and of human Life 
are treated in these stories ; to poetry, for it is the naive poetic 
imagination which conceives the forces of the world as personal 
beings. Their existence depended on their power to satisfy the 
intelligence and gratify the aesthetic sense of those who repeated 
them. But while myths often expressed deep truths and were 
ordinarily accepted as true statements of facts, the myth proper 
was never an article of dogma. Among other races the so-called 
myths were sometimes codified, sometimes created, by the priests. 
In Egypt, for instance, and in India, the stories of the gods bore 
this hieratic stamp. The nature of the priesthood in Greece, 8 
however, was such that myths were kept comparatively free from 
the artificial influence of any organized theology. 

In contrast with mythology, religion is primarily a matter of 
practice {worship) and of emotions expressed in worship (such as 
reverence and the sense of dependence). It certainly includes 
belief also, but in Greece the intellectual element remained rather 
in the background, for belief was not definitely formulated from 
the religious standpoint- It is a most natural error, and an error 
involving some measure of truth, to hold that Greek belief about 
the gods was expressed in the form of myth. The differences 
between the gods of mythology and the gods of worship may be 
discussed under three headings : 

(1) Religion and mythology represent the gods from vitally dif- 
l The Mythology of Greece and Home (1907). p. X. a Cp. infra, p. 76 f. 

GREEK K1-.L1GIOIS — 2 

18 GREEK RELIGION 

ferent standpoints. Most of the superhuman beings in myths are 
fundamentally the same as the gods to whom men look for help 
in worship ; in myth, however, the imagination is absolutely untram- 
melled by any considerations of religion or morality. The Athena 
springing full-armed from the brain of Zeus, or (in the Iliad) 
seeking to block her lather's plans, is far enough from the goddess 
whom Pheidias represented in gold and ivory, that spirit of wis- 
dom who stood for all that was best in the Athenian people. In 
the Homeric poems the Apollo worshipped by Chryses {Iliad, 2) 
and the Apollo wounding Patroclus from behind on the battlefield 
{Iliad, 16) have little in common; nor does Apollo slaying the 
Python while a babe in arms suggest the sage spirit of Delphi to 
whom the Greek world looked for guidance. Mythology is not a 
peculiar form of theology in poetic guise ; myths were originally 
believed to be true, but they were never a religious creed ; they 
were often incorporated in hymns of worship, but in themselves 
they had little enough to do with worship. 

(2) It appears, further, that the supernatural beings of religion 
by no means coincide with the supernatural beings of myth. The 
greater gods appear in both lists ; in addition mythology includes 
all manner of inferior beings, such as nymphs, satyrs, centaurs, 
which rarely or never are worshipped, and a long list of heroes 
very few of whom are worshipped. On the other hand the lesser 
spirits who receive worship in some one locality, are rarely heeded 
by myth ; or if the name appears in myth it may mean a person 
radically different from the one worshipped. At Athens such 
divine beings as Adrasteia, Alcon, Ariste, Dexion, Eirene, Eucleia, 
Hesychos, Nemesis, Tritopatreis, received worship but had no 
direct place in myth. It has often been assumed that the origin 
of religion is to be explained by means of mythology. So far as 
Greece is concerned the indebtedness seems on the whole to be 
reversed. Mythology really derived much of its content from 
religious ritual, while beings which originated in myth did not 
ordinarily come to be worshipped. The gods of myth and religion 
form two groups which overlap but are not identical, a fact which 

INTRODUCTION 19 

seems simple enough when the difference of standpoint is once 
fully grasped. If there were no other proof that myth is not the 
religious doctrine of the Greek gods, it would be sufficient to 
point out that these two groups of gods do not coincide. 

(3) And where the same names appear in both lists their sig- 
nificance is by no means the same. For worship the gods are 
located at definite shrines, where they bear specific names 
(epithet) ; in myth they are as universal as the known world, and 
their local relations are no more than favorite haunts. In myth 
the functions of each god are sharply defined and his personal 
character corresponds to his specific functions ^ the god of wor- 
ship has widespread power to bless, a power by no means limited 
to his function in myth. The process by which myths arose has 
left the gods, some in a non-moral form, some in a form distinctly 
at variance with human standards of morality. Worship did not 
always make of them moral beings, but inasmuch as the relation 
between god and worshippers is of a moral nature, and further, 
inasmuch as the Greek gods (like men) were members of the 
moral universe, the tendency in Greece is toward an ultimate 
union of religion and morality. Finally, mythology exists by mak- 
ing its gods very human, and as it develops into a system the gods 
acquire definite personal characters. For the worshipper a god 
never loses that vague mysterious side which stirs the emotion of 
awe, for there is no limiting influence in worship to define the 
divine nature. Even the sense that gods are akin to man is often 
blunted in religious ritual. That the gods handled by myth should 
remain gods at all, that real worship should be possible when chil- 
dren were brought up on these stories of Aphrodite and Poseidon 
and Ares, is a lasting tribute to the religious spirit of the Greeks. 

While the differences between religion and mythology are such 
that the two must be studied separately and with very different 
aims, the fact remains that the more important gods do appear 
both in myth and in worship. More than this, there can be no 
question that myths were passed on from mouth to mouth at the 
only international gatherings in Greece, the greater religious festi- 

20 

GREEK RELIGION 

vals. The influence of these gatherings would be most marked on 
that class of myths which recite the story of a particular shrine. 
Much of the Homeric hymn to Demeter (cp. Part I, Chap, ii, p. 
135) describes in mythical form the origin of her worship at Eleusis, 
and the practices of worship were the influence shaping the myth 
as to the origin of the cult. So the marvellous birth of Athena and 

Fro. 2. — Late Greek Relief 

Apollo is represented as a victorious musician at Delphi, receiving a libation 

from Nike. 

the contest of Athena with Poseidon are connected with the wor- 
ship of the goddess on the Acropolis. There is no evidence that 
priests ever had much to do with these myths. The popular 
demand created an explanation for the existence of the shrine, its 
importance, and the character of its worship. As the shrine grew 
in influence its myths would be carried far and wide by pilgrim 
visitors from different parts of the country, till they found a place 
in the generally accepted Greek mythology. The practice of 
holding musical contests at religious festivals increased the oppor- 
tunity for the development of these myths, for the poet's theme 
was almost inevitably chosen from the legend of the shrine where 
he sang. At Delphi it was Apollo's birth, or his coming to Delphi, 

Introduction *i 

or his victory Over the dragon — perhaps all three themes at once 
— which was celebrated in these contests. In this way a myth 
might find its way into actual hymns of worship, though here there 
would be occasion only for the bare outline of the story. 

The mythical account of Hera's marriage to Zeus is apparently 
derived from religious practices in the worship of the goddess of 
marriage, though in this instance the rites were somewhat widely 
prevalent instead of belonging to one great festival. So the story 
of the second birth of Dionysus from the thigh of Zeus seems to 
be a poetic statement of the fact that Dionysus worship was 
introduced into Greece under the protecting aegis of Zeus. In- 
terpreted thus, it states in poetic form an important fact in the 
history of Greek religion. Although myths did not in Greece 
receive a hieratic stamp to mark them as sacred legend, the two 
classes of myths just noted — myths which give facts of religious 
history, and myths which arise in the eflbrt to explain religious prac- 
tice — are not to be neglected by the student of religion itself. 

Again, it appears that after myths have been taken up into 
literature they are employed by the poets to teach deep religious 
lessons. Pindar and Simonides feel quite free to modify tales of 
the gods to accord with their own religious ideas ; while tragedy 
consistently handles the great problems of life under the form of 
myth. On the other hand, we have no indication that officials of 
religion, priests or prophets, recognized sacred story as within 
their province- Where myth becomes a vehicle of religious teach- 
ing, its real nature as myth is essentially modified before it can 
serve a dogmatic purpose. 

It is unreasonable, however, to suppose that the beliefs con- 
nected with worship were not modified, often radically modified, 
under the influence of myths. The characteristics of the greater 
gods in myth as enumerated above (pp. 18—19) affected the concep- 
tions of the worshipper both directly and through the medium of 
worship. When the Athenians worshipped Athena as Itonia, or 
Hippia, or Skiras, or Hygieia, — and every cult had some such 
distinctive epithet — the picture of Homer's Athena, one Athena 

22 GkEEK RELIGION 

who embodied all these forms and who was honored in all the 
Greek woi-ld cannot have been wholly absent from their minds. 
And it is inconceivable that the idea of gods human enough to 
sympathize with the needs and desires of men, as they appear in 
the literary handling of myth, should not often have lent new 
meaning to ritual. This human side of the gods of myth found 
its noblest expression in art 3 certainly art as well as literature was 
a medium through which myth affected ritual- 

So far, then, as the present discussion of Greek religion is con- 
cerned, myth as such is definitely excluded ; it is, however, appar- 
ent to the reader that myths will come into consideration at many 
points because of the light they throw on ritual itself and on the 
religious ideas associated with ritual. 

3. The Local Shrine. — The contrast between religion and myth 
appears most sharply in connection with a conception which is 
fundamental to the whole structure of Greek religion, the concep- 
tion of the local shrine. All Greek worship centres about these 
various shrines ; each shrine (temple or altar) is independent of 
any other religious authority, and the god of each shrine is ordi- 
narily treated as if he were independent of gods worshipped else- 
where. The local nature of Greek religion meant that there were 
as many religions as there were cities, or rather as many as there 
were individual shrines all over Greece. The first task of the 
student is to grasp the meaning of that multiform centre of Greek 
religion, the local shrine. 

We may consider the local shrine first in connection with 
the god there worshipped. At the hundreds of points where 
Athena was worshipped in Greece, the goddess was never twice con- 
ceived in exactly the same manner. Even where the epithet at- 
tached to her name is the same, we have no assurance that it is 
really the same goddess. For instance, the Athena Itonia of one 
shrine is by no means identical with the Athena Itonia of another 
shrine. At Athens Apollo Pythios, Apollo Patroos, Apollo Agyieus, 
Apollo Thargelios, are practically independent beings for worship. 
At the one festival of the Panathenaea separate sacrifices are offered 

INTRODUCTION 23 

to Athena Polias, to Athena Nike, and to Athena Hygieia, as if they 
were independent gods. 1 This principle is diametrically opposed 
to the pictures of the gods in myth, and it is by no means easy to 
grasp ; yet it is fundamental for the knowledge of Greek religion. 
Our problem, moreover, is not to determine how the gods of myth 
were split into these different forms, but rather to investigate how 
the gods of worship were brought under a few names and in myth 
were made definite, personal beings.* 

The same facts may be considered from the standpoint of the 
city. The cults of any one city or tribe or family belong to that 
one social unit, and make no appeal to outsiders. In the mind 
of her worshippers Hera of Argos is almost as independent of 
Hera worshipped elsewhere, as Trophonius at Lebadeia is inde- 
pendent of other earth-spirits* Each cult centre in Athens is 
theoretically separate from every other ; its forms of worship, its 
times of worship, its priests, are peculiar to itself. A few cult 
centres, it is true, are branches of important cults elsewhere, 8 but 
by far the greater number have no such connections. The wor- 
shippers at these shrines are indeed composed of much the same 
people j the priests are appointed and accounts audited by the 
same state; myth suggests that much the same gods are found 
elsewhere. Except for these somewhat external bonds of union, 
each cult stood alone and by itself. 

We may go farther and say that each god or goddess was treated 
in worship much as if no other gods existed. The third book of 
the Odyssey illustrates this statement. At the sacrifice to Posei- 
don there is no thought of any other god ; and the next day, when 
sacrifice is offered to Athena, there is no mention of Poseidon's 
existence. With another sort of animal for the sacrifice and a 
slightly different ritual, the entire attention of the worshipper is 
absorbed in another god. This state of mind may be better under- 

' " Whether Aphrodite is one person or two, ix. Ourania and Pandemos, I do 
not know; for even Zeus, who seems to be one and the same, has many epithets 
added to his name." Socrates in Xenophon, Symp. 8. 9. 

s Cp. Rohde, £He Religion <Ur Grit£hcn t 8-9. B Cp. infra, p. 68. 

24 

GREEK RELIGION 

stood by comparison with the worship of saints in some Catholic 
countries ; in the worship of some one saint the other saints are 
forgotten and at times the thought of the Supreme Deity is ob- 
scured in the mind of the worshipper. So at Athens the different 
cults were mutually exclusive, while they existed amicably side by 
side. When Dionysus was worshipped, Athena and Artemis and 

Fig. 3. — Section of the Frieze of the Parthenon (Athens) 

Three gods (Poseidon, Apollo, and Artemis?) are represented 
as "guests" at the Fanathenaic festival of Athena. 

Poseidon may sometimes have been mentioned in prayers ; at 
some festivals gods other than the one worshipped may have been 
invited to join the repast ; ' nevertheless the worshipper's atten- 
tion was concentrated on one god just as truly as if no other gods 
existed. Without interfering at all with the polytheism of belief, 
worship was essentially monotheistic ; or to use the term invented 
to describe just this state of affairs, worship was "henotheistic." 
The connection of the state with these local centres of worship 

1 Compare the gods at the Panathenaic festival, as represented on the Parthenon 
frieze. 

INTRODUCTION 25 

may better be considered along with the general question as to 
the connection between religion and the state. It is enough to 
say here that the Greeks found it a practical necessity as well as a 
convenient and natural procedure to supervise the temples and 
shrines through the state. All these centres of worship belonged 
to the people as a whole (or to some group of the people which 
the state recognized), and the benefits of worship came to the 
people as a whole rather than to individuals. Voluntary religious 
associations for the benefit of individuals were unimportant until 
after the fifth century B.C. So it came about that priests 
were appointed, temples built, and the finances supervised by the 
people as a whole acting through the state. Similarly religious 
law was administered in courts established by the state and main- 
tained by its authority. Thus each local cult maintained the bond 
between the state and some one point in the world of the gods. 

A more important result of the facts now under discussion was 
the absence of any central religious authority for belief or for 
practice. It is characteristic of Greek religion that its gods were 
accepted, not defined. The ritual of each shrine was something 
definite, prescribed in form, celebrated at particular times; the 
gods, considered as universal beings, were simply powerful spirits 
who demanded such worship at the different cult centres. Were 
it not for mythology we should know little of the gods, but perhaps 
we should know as much as the Greeks themselves. And it has 
already been pointed out that the myths were in no sense theolog- 
ical dogma. They contain no definitions either of the gods or of 
any religious truth ; they were not intended to edify or to instruct } 
even though they were accepted as true, they were not a state- 
ment of belief. It is for this reason that the myths were free to 
develop along poetic lines. Nowhere else than in Greece were 
myths of the gods such pure products of the untrammelled imagi- 
nation, nowhere else can they be studied simply as artistic pro- 
ductions. 

The greater poets of the fifth century were not entirely content 
to treat the gods in this manner. In their writings we find some 

26 GREEK RELIGION 

attempt to define the nature of god, and the relation of man to 
god. More exactly there is some effort to purify myth that it may 
better accord with religious sentiment. Yet this end is always 
subordinated to the demands of the poetical ideal. Moreover, a 
poetic theology may have considerable influence, but it is binding 
not even on its creator. The attempts of philosophy to deal with 
theological problems belong to a much later date, and have still 
less significance for Greek religion. Religious phenomena were 
among the last to receive philosophical criticism ; it is in the early 
history of Christian thought, rather than in Greek religion, that 
the reaction of philosophy on religion and the consequent develop- 
ment of theology may be traced. Greek religion remained to the 
end a religion without theology. 

The real reason for the absence of dogma is found in the Greek 
conception of authority in religious matters. Where a priestly 
caste existed, it was for their interest to develop belief in their 
own authority or in the authority of sacred writings which were 
wholly in their 'charge. Accordingly priest-religions come to be 
based on an authoritative revelation of the divine will through the 
priests. Ot even without conscious interposition by a priestly 
caste sacred books may gain an authority only to be explained by 
assuming that they are a direct revelation of the divine will. The 
emphasis laid on the Bible as a religious authority at the time of 
the Reformation has made this conception of revelation entirely 
familiar to the modern reader. But in Greece there was neither a 
class of priests nor any sacred book to serve as an authority 
on religious matters. That the Greek conception of revelation 
differed in to to from the conception in priest- religions and in 
book-religions was a necessary result (see Part I, Chap, i) ; we must 
look elsewhere to find the standard of authority for Greek religion. 

The only authority for ritual or for belief in Greece was the tra- 
dition of each particular local shrine. 1 Ritual was the habit of 
worship at any one shrine, not codified in any rules, but passed on 

1 Tyler, Theology of the Greek Poets, ao8 £.; cp. Schoemann, Griech. Ait. a. 169 
and references. 

INTRODUCTION 

*7 

with the authority of an immemorial antiquity ; similarly, the only 
theology was the habit of thought about the god of that shrine, 
which was developed in its worshippers. A particular form of 
worship was observed primarily because such had always been the 
form of worship. If a reason were asked, it was readily found in 
the statement that what had gratified the god in the past was most 
likely to gratify him again. And if any change in ritual occurred, 
it could be justified by the claim that the expedient was success- 
ful in gratifying the god, for he continued to show his favor. 
Ordinarily no reason was asked ; it was enough to carry on the 
worship as it had been carried on ; in other words, the authority 
of religious tradition was recognized without question. 

The counterpart to this proposition, however, must be stated at 
once. Tradition never was absolutely binding so as to preclude 
any change ; it had authority only as a good and useful custom. 
In the course of time Greek thought of the gods changed, and the 
change was gradually reflected in the belief and practice at each 
shrine where they were worshipped. Quite commonly, however, 
these changes consisted in additions to practices already in vogue. 
The result is that we may detect at many cult centres the different 
strata of traditional practices, continuing long after their original 
meaning had been forgotten. 

The task of the student of Greek religion is at once revealed by 
this state of affairs. He might be glad to learn about the origin 
of religion in Greece, but that question is relatively unimportant. 
He finds an immense mass of data as to the worship at different 
shrines, data concerning practices which belong to long-separated 
epochs and which have never been really unified* If he is able 
to oudine a historical hypothesis which shall account for the facts 
at his disposal, assigning different practices to the period in which 
they originated and explaining the religious ideas or ideals to 
which they were due, his task is accomplished. The multiplicity 
of data, the different possible explanations, and the relatively little 
attention which has been given to the subject explain the lack of 
agreement as yet in regard to it. 

28 GREEK RELIGION 

Greek religion, then, was without dogma, or any other authority 
except the tradition of each particular shrine ; before leaving this 
proposition, we must state certain corollaries or deductions from 
it. In the first place it means, as was said above, that there were 
as many forms of religion, if not as many different religions, as 
there were local shrines. It does not mean that there was not a 
constant interchange of ideas and even of cult-forms, as worship- 
pers passed from one shrine to another. From the interchange of 
ideas and practices there gradually arose two general types of sac- 
rifice, one a glad feast in honor of the gods who protected and 
prospered the state, the other a solemn rite to pacify deities who 
were angry or to prevent the anger of gods easily stirred to wrath. 1 
But while these two types of sacrifice stand out with some dis- 
tinctness, while there was a distinct tendency toward common prac- 
tices and common beliefs at other points, the independent author- 
ity of each shrine remained unquestioned and at most shrines some 
peculiar practices were always retained. 

A second corollary of the above proposition is that it was only 
habit, habit not enforced by any statement of its content, which 
tended toward unity of belief among a group of worshippers ; conse- 
quently the same practices were often interpreted very differently 
by those who shared them. So long as the people did not ask any 
formulation of religious ideas, and so long as it was not for the in- 
terest of any one class of the people (*!£*. the priests) to perform 
this task, it was never done. Every one was free to think of the 
gods as he chose. Aristophanes might make fun of them, Plato 
might reconstitute the idea of them entirely ; it made no differ- 
ence so long as public worship went on undisturbed. At a festival 
of Asclepius one might be a scoffer, one an implicit believer in the 
god's power to heal, many indifferent to anything except the cus- 
tom of the city or the meat distributed at the sacrifice. We shall 
not look among such a people for any Hebrew prophet, any 
intense preacher of spiritual truth in whom the religious con- 
sciousness of the nation was focussed. On the other hand the 

1 Cp. infra, p. 97 f. and 105 f. 

INTRODUCTION 29 

conditions favored the development of a religion which touched 
human life at every point, and which gave to every human ideal 
its personal expression in the divine world. 

Finally we may note that this complete absence of dogma was 
most important for the evolution of religion in Greece, Perhaps 
there never was a people with any degree of culture whose spirit- 
ual development was more free and spontaneous. The only con- 
servative force, a force always paramount in the history of religious 
phenomena, and not at all peculiar to Greece, was the force of 
tradition. But as ritual was passed on from one generation to an- 
other, the interpretation of the rites was easily forgotten. On the 
one hand a great spiritual force might be quickly dissipated ; on 
the other hand a new spiritual impulse readily found expression 
either in the old rites themselves, or in some accretion to the old 
ritual. This quick and complete response of religion, to concep- 
tions regnant in each phase of civilization makes the history of 
religion a most valuable commentary on the development of the 
Greek people; nowhere better than in Greece can the natural 
evolution of religious conceptions and practices be studied, while 
at the same time the task which confronts the student of this reli- 
gion is rendered peculiarly difficult- 

4. What did Religion mean to the Greeks? — The question as 
to the significance of Greek religion is better asked at the conclu- 
sion of the chapters which follow, 1 than in an introduction to 
them ; some consideration of the topic, however, may make the 
discussion of worship and belief more intelligible. Some word is 
the more necessary because of the emphasis which has often been 
laid on the investigation of the origin of religion. Perhaps the study 
of Greek religion has suffered unduly from this trend of modern 
thought, because matters seemed so clear and simple. With equal 
confidence the origin of the Greek gods has been assigned to a 
habit of deifying natural phenomena, and again to a habit of offer- 
ing worship to the souls of ancestors. The worship of ancestors 
was a real and widespread element of Greek religion, but it 

iPart III. Chap. iv. 

30 GREEK RELIGION 

remains to be proved that the worship of any single god did arise 
or could have arisen from this source. Similarly, the hypothesis 
that the Greek gods arose from some habit of deifying natural 
phenomena neither can be proved nor does it serve to explain 
the facts- 
It seems clear that the Greeks did not worship physical objects, 
whether sun or river or growing tree or any idol. On the con- 
trary, their religion served to people the world with superhuman 
beings, human in their nature and in their humanity expressing 
Greek thought of the world and its phenomena. Zeus was both 
father of gods and men, and the spirit of the sky ; rain came from 
Zeus, the lightning was his weapon, his worship belonged naturally 
on high peaks, his home was on Olympus. Dionysus was the god 
of the vine, even so that the juice of the grape seemed to be the 
essence of that spirit which makes for growth in all vegetation. 
The dark wavy locks of Poseidon recalled the dark, tossing sea, in 
the depths of which were the stables of Poseidon's steeds. Yet 
Dionysus was a human god visiting one spot after another to be- 
stow on men his gift of the wine ; Poseidon was a boisterous spirit, 
lover of horses, fond of the battlefield, watching over the children 
borne to him by human wives. Apollo, who came to be associated 
with the sun, was the god of shepherds, himself once serving as a 
shepherd j he was the prophet who made known to men the divine 
will, the musician, the healer of disease. And Aphrodite, as rep- 
resented in the statue found at Melos, was the most human of the 
gods, not a human passion deified for worship, but rather the spirit 
in whom was manifested human love as a fundamental principle 
of the universe. 

If we turn from the greater gods to the world near at hand, we 
find the same interpretation of nature in personal, all but human, 
beings. The sailor sees spiritual forces in the storm or the dan- 
gerous hidden shoal ; not the gods of Olympus, but spirits of the 
sea sympathize with him and save him in trouble. The farmer's 
daily work is religious in that the grain, the foes that threaten the 
grain, the very earth on which it grows, are animated by a nature 

Fig. 4. — Aphrodite from Melos (Louvre) 

3i 

32 GREEK RELIGION 

like his own, whose blessing he may gain by worship ; these ritea are 
indeed thrown into the shadow by the brilliancy of the Olympian 
worship, yet enough persists to show that the facts of farming are 
interpreted in terms of religion. And there are many festivals like 
those of Dionysus and Demeter which show that even in city life 
the Greeks did not lose this spiritual touch with nature. 

The Greeks did not worship natural objects, but they expressed 
their thought of nature in spiritual beings, for the most part 
friendly to man, who were members of that same community to 
which the human world belonged. To-day the sublime and the 
beautiful in nature afford us aesthetic gratification as facts out- 
side ourselves; similarly Hebrew poetry reflects a sense for the 
grandeur and beauty of nature ; in Greek religion the attitude 
toward nature was very different, for in the forces there at work 
the Greek recognized a life like his own, with which he himself 
was most intimately associated. The joy of spring, the sadness 
of dying vegetation, are poetry for us ; for the Greek they repre- 
sented the joy and sadness of that community of nature in which 
he was an integral part. In a word, the Greeks were idealists ; 
their religion was not a worship of nature, but a worship of spirits 
(almost human spirits) in nature; by peopling their world with 
such spirits, they made nature an intelligible, not to say a social, 
fact. 

As for the humanity of the Greek gods, it found an almost ex- 
aggerated expression in myth. The Homeric gods exhibit human 
frailty and sin on the same large scale as human virtue and power. 
Families which claimed a history traced their descent from the 
gods. Not only did myths tell of the presence of gods in the 
society of men ; we must go further and say that worship was 
based on the belief in such a relation as actually existing. The 
gods of other peoples were now more vague, now more closely 
bound up with objects in nature, more abstract, more to be 
dreaded, perhaps more lofty than the Greek gods ; none stood 
in closer sympathy with man. It is practically true that these 
gods differed from man only in degree, that the king differed 

INTRODUCTION 33 

from his subjects hardly less than the gods differed from men. 
In many religions the development of the gods was away from 
men toward moral or philosophical ideals; the Greek gods be- 
came more perfect only as they more perfectly expressed all the 
possibilities of human nature. Artemis was never so fully identi- 
fied with the moon, Zeus with the sky, nor even Gaia with the 
earth, as to obscure in any degree their essentially human charac- 
ter. It is in the grain goddess Demeter that one finds the best 
example of the mother's love, sorrowing but finally triurnphant- 
In worship as in myth Leto is the mother proud of her successful 
children, Hera the queenly wife,. Persephone the gentle daughter, 
Artemis the maiden loving wild nature, — each stands out a per- 
sonality because she personifies so clearly some human relation. 

It is from this standpoint that one may best understand the 
relation to religion of such human ideals as the ideal of beauty 
and of morality. As beings intimately related to man, the gods 
shared the Greek impulse toward the beautiful. And this means 
not merely that the highest expression of the artist's power was 
found in the creation of divine images, and in the erection of 
suitable homes for the gods represented by these images. It 
does certainly mean that even traditions of ancient holy objects 
must eventually yield to the power of a Pheidias to give some 
adequate conception of the physical beauty of the gods. It 
means that the temple, the home of the god, must be the most 
perfect building that could be erected. We may even go so far 
as to say that the principle of beauty was what largely determined 
Greek thought as to the character and the rule of the gods. The 
unity and symmetry of their personality, the graciousness of their 
nature, the kindly spirit of their relations to each other and to 
men, are a reflection of that aesthetic ideal which was so domi- 
nant in Greek life. And the world was beautiful, the physical world 
and the social world, for its unity and order came from the gods. 1 

The connection between religion and morality may be dismissed 
for the present with the statement that the gods were moral beings 

1 See Part III. Chap. i. 
GREEK RELIGION 3 

34 

GREEK RELIGION 

only in the sense that men were moral beings. It was character- 
istic of the Greek mind not to judge human life and activity by 
stern moral standards. The consciousness of right and wrong 
did not enter into every human act. And the gods were human 
enough so that they could not be conceived as the embodiment 
of moral ideals, or indeed as beings which never transgressed 
moral law. Their rule was on the whole righteous, nor was more 
demanded of a king or a god in Greece before the days of phi- 
losophers and theologians, 

Nowhere docs the essentially human nature of the Greek gods, 
and at the same time their relation to the physical world, come 
out more clearly than in the consideration of the ** divine govern- 
ment " of the world. These gods did not create the world out of 
nothing, for man has no such mysterious faculty which he could 
transfer from himself to the gods. The existence of matter was 
assumed ; and as it was man's task to subdue physical agencies to 
serve human ends, so it belonged to the gods to bring the physical 
world under the rule of reason. So Poseidon granted safety to 
sailors; Athena and Hephaestus taught men the arts and crafts; 
and Demeter showed them how to cultivate the grain. Yet it was 
in the social world, in the relations of men to each other and to 
the community, that the rule of the greater gods was most clearly 
manifest. The activities of the gods, as men came in contact with 
them, were not universal forces, but particular acts which ordina- 
rily had in view some particular end. The relation of the gods 
to each other in their rule of the world was like the relation of 
members in some human council, in that the social unity of such 
a council came to express the essential unity of the city they gov- 
erned. That the sway of reason in the world and consequently 
the unity of the world was to be an achievement, that the gods 
belonged in the same society with men working together toward 
this common goal, and that men might therefore look for the par- 
ticular aid of the gods in every phase of human activity, — such 
were the principles of divine government as conceived by the 
Greeks. 

INTRODUCTION 35 

The general significance of worship in Greece is quite in line 
with what has been said as to the nature of the gods and the char- 
acter of their rule. Among primitive peoples religious ritual is the 
effort to drive away or to control for good the mysterious forces 
in the world ; and the method is ordinarily what we should call 
magic, though at times there is found something like barter be- 
tween men and spirits. Magic was not at all foreign to Greek 
thought, but it was entirely foreign to the worship of the greater 
gods. On the other hand, it was quite possible for Plato 1 to 
describe piety as a sort of trade between men and gods, or as a 
knowledge of the right way to ask for what one wants and to give 
the gods in exchange what they want ; although one must be 
blinder than Euthyphro, if he fails to see Plato's satire. Worship, 
in truth, was no more magic or barter than it was purely spiritual 
adoration. 

The only standpoint from which worship can be understood is 
found in the distinct recognition that the gods were superior 
members of that same society in which men live. For Greek 
worship is no less human than the Greek gods. That the sympo- 
sium after the banquet should begin and end with prayer j that 
the chief function of religion should be no painful rite, no long 
and tedious service, no task of the intellect, but a joyous feast on 
sacrificed flesh ; that comedy and tragedy should de\*elop in con- 
nection with the religion of Dionysus ; that art should be so human 
in its service of the gods ; that even gymnastic contests and horse- 
racing should come within the pale of religion, — all this is so far 
from our conception of divine worship as at first to puzzle and 
confuse the student. The key to the puzzle is simply that every 
side of man found expression in this human religion. Political 
assemblies began with worship that was no empty form ; for the 
gods cared for the state just as did its citizens. Marriage and the 
bringing up of children was at every point under the protection 
of the gods. Needing bread and wine, men worshipped Demeter 

* Euthyphro, 14 E; Polititui t 390 D; cp. C.f.A. I. 397 (Kajbel, Epigr. grate* 
753)- 

36 GREEK RELIGION 

and Dionysus; needing health, Asclepius ; needing care for their 
flocks, Apollo or Hermes or Pan. For a knowledge of the future 
they could consult the oracles. With the thought of death before 
them, they listened to the invitation to the mysteries where they 
might obtain the blessing of the queen of the dead. While it is 
universally true that religion arises to meet human need, perhaps 
nowhere is this need met at so many points and in so purely 
human a manner as in Greece. 

The conception of the gods as higher members of the same 
social world with man involves a double idea of the nature of 
worship ; it was only right in the first place for men to pay divine 
rulers their due, and secondly it was reasonable to seek connection 
with the gods. Both in the practice of bringing to the gods votive 
offerings of some intrinsic value, and in the usual forms of sacri- 
fice, the gods were treated in much the same manner as human 
rulers. From this point of view worship might be described baldly 
as a tax paid to the gods to insure the continuance of their favor 
to their subjects. The difference between barter and a tax paid to 
the gods lies in the fact that barter presupposes some equality 
between the two parties, while a tax involves a recognition of the 
ruler's superiority. Further, the ancient idea of taxation makes 
it something very different from the businesslike transaction fa- 
miliar to us. The Athenian words for the few extraordinary taxes 
paid by full citizens were eitrtpopd and Aeiroupyta, the first a " con- 
tribution" paid only in the stress of war, the second a "service" 
which in theory (though not in practice) was voluntarily performed 
by such citizens as possessed sufficient property. It is in fact the 
second of these words, XetTovpyia (English, liturgy) 9 which was at 
times used as a name for worship. We may say with entire truth, 
then, that worship was like that form of taxation with which the 
Athenians were familiar, in that it was a voluntary gift which was 
rightly expected from men on certain occasions. 

While this conception of worship applies especially to votive 
offerings, the second idea is predominant in the common type of 
sacrifice. The normal form of worship at a festival of any god 

INTRODUCTION 37 

consisted first in processions and secondly in a common meal 
shared alike by the god and his worshippers. The procession was 
no whit different from such triumphal processions as have been 
familiar to European thought from the greater days of Rome on 
till the present- At Athens a great concourse of men, headed by 
priests and carrying sacred utensils, brought honor both to the city 
and to its gods as it slowly made its way to the place of worship. 
And the use of the common meal as a form of worship is not 
entirely foreign to our thought, for it is perpetuated in the Lord's 
Supper of the Christian church* Only, the point emphasized in 
Greece was not so much the sacredness of the food as the belief 
that a common meal renewed the vital bond of union between 
the god and his worshippers. Among other peoples the effort 
for union with a deity appears oftentimes in forms strange and 
fanatical ; in Greece that phase of religion is ordinarily kept 
in the background by the national sense of proportion. The con- 
nection with the gods which was secured by worship was primarily 
a social matter, the same sort of bond which united any two 
persons in the common pleasure of a banquet. Music and 
dance together with food and wine emphasized the belief that 
the god and his worshippers were united in one society; and 
the connection with the gods then became a matter of actual 
experience. 

The meaning of a religion depends primarily on the need it 
satisfies. It may be essentially spiritual and mystic in its answer 
to vague longings, or ethical in that it expresses a stern command 
of duty ; it may be aesthetic, giving form to ideals of beauty, or 
philosophical, when men seek for absolute truth as their pearl of 
great price. All these tendencies appear, the ethical least of them 
all, in Greek religion. Its most important appeal to men, how- 
ever, was on the social side. Facing strange facts and mighty 
forces, the Greek sought for a sympathetic chord in them ; and he 
found it as his imagination peopled the world with gods. To use 
the happy phrase of Mr. Dickinson, religion "made him at home 
in the world." 

38 GREEK RELIGION 

"All that is unintelligible in the world - . . has bet n drawn, as it were, from 
Us dark retreat, clothed in radiant furm t and presented to the mind as a glori- 
fied image of itself. Every phenomenon of nature, night and * rosy-fingered 
dawn,' earth and sun, winds, rivers and seas, sleep and death — all have been 
transformed into divine and conscious agents, to be propitiated by prayer, 
interpreted by divination, and comprehended by passions and desires iden- 
tical with those which stir and control mankind." . . . "There were other 
powers, equally strange, dwelling in nnan*s own heart. . . . With these too he 
felt the need to make himself at home, and these too, to satisfy his need, he 
shaped into creatures like himself. ... In Aphrodite, mother of Eros, he 
incarnated the passion of love, ... in Ares the lust of war, in Athene wis- 
dom, in Apollo music and the arts." And thus religion made him "at home 
in the world." ■ 

It is perhaps necessary to repeat the statement that the Greeks 
did not worship natural objects. Where we interpret the facts 
and processes of nature as a mechanical system, the Greek made 
them part of his social system. Danger was made intelligible*, 
solitude filled with consciousness, human life enriched with new 
meaning, in that the world became a great society in which man 
might find his true home. 

1 G. Lowes Dickinson, The Greek View of £J/e, p. 7, 8. 

PART I 

FORMS OF RELIGIOUS BELIEF AND PRAC 
TICE IN ANCIENT GREECE 

CHAPTER I 

REVELATION AND INSPIRATION 

1. The Greek Conception of Revelation. — The fundamental 
difference between the conception of revelation in Greek religion 
and in Christianity lies in the fact that the Greeks, like most other 
races, assumed the existence of the gods, formed their notions of 
the divine character by making* the gods in their own image, and 
looked to special revelation only as the source of practical guid- 
ance. 1 When a colony was to be founded, the god at Delphi 
would be consulted as to the best time and the best place ; the 
omens for battle must be favorable, or the battle was delayed ; 
the sick and suffering looked for divine direction as to means of 
cure; a sneeze or a chance word expressed the approval of the 
gods, while an ominous dream deterred or encouraged the dreamer 
in his undertakings- Though signs and prophets and oracles 
were not regarded as revealing the nature of the gods, they yet 
were part of the apparatus of religion. In the history of Greek 
religion they are to be considered because of the light they throw 
incidentally on the character of the gods, the religious nature of 
man, and the divine government of the world, as these were 
conceived by the Greeks. 

For the study of religious antiquities it is convenient to divide 
the subject according to the nature of the signs ; signs from birds 
or dreams which occur without human intervention would belong 

* See Introduction, p. 28. 

39 

4 o GREEK RELIGION 

to one class, signs sought by consulting the entrails of a victim or 
answers sought from an oracle would belong to a second class. 
But from the standpoint of religion this difference is merely 
accidental. It is more important to note how the knowledge of 
the future is obtained, than whether it comes sought or unsought. 
Signs in the external world presuppose that the course of nature 
and of human history is in the hands of the gods, directed by 
them in such wise that learned men can ascertain their will from 
it. On the other hand, the mind of the dreamer, the prophet, 
the Pythian priestess, is immediately influenced by the will of the 
gods, so that under this inspiration the human mind gains new 
power to see what would otherwise be hidden. Divination by 
signs was called by the Stoics 1 "artificial" or scientific, in that 
success rested upon a developed science of signs. Inspiration of 
prophets was called natural, or u without art," for the results came 
directly without any intervention of human learning. The history 
of religion accepts this division, not because of the presence or 
absence of human science, but because the presupposition as to 
the working of the gods is different in the two cases. 

Note, — In this chapter, as in the chapter on sacrifice and worship, the 
data from the Homeric poems are separated to some extent from the data 
obtained from other authors. The reader should bear in mind that this course 
is not followed because the Homeric poems are more important than other 
sources, or because they represent an earlit-r stage in the development of reli- 
gion. The Greeks themselves assigned a unique place to the epic; sometimes 
they consciously modified their religious views to accord with it; far more often 
they unconsciously yielded to its influence. Again, on the other hand, the 
nature of the poetry is such that data from this, source can only be used with 
caution and with allowance for some special peculiarities. Under these 
circumstances it has seemed wise to separate the discussion of the epic, 
wherever possible, from the general treatment under each theme. 

2. Theophany in the Homeric Poems. — In the later historical 
period visions of the gods, except in dreams, are not supposed 

1 (Plutarch) F)e vita Homeric aia, p. 456; Cicero, De drvmatione, r. 18/34, 
49/1X9; a- 11/2*6- 

REVELATION AND INSPIRATION 41 

to occur ; the tendency toward what was rational or " matter of 
fact M led the Greek mind to look in other directions for the 
manifestation of the divine will. The epic, starting with the 
assumption that its heroes were separated from the gods by only 
two or three generations, made large use of direct visions of the 
gods. Granted that Aeneas is the son of Aphrodite, Achilles of 
Thetis, Sarpedon of Zeus, granted that the line of Priam in Troy, 
of Idomeneus in Crete, of Agamemnon in Mycenae is to be traced 
directly back to Zeus, it is clear that in the H good old times " no 
barrier separated men and gods. As gods had so recently favored 
mortal men and women with their love, so in the time of the siege 
of Troy they watched over their favorites and appeared occasion- 
ally to warn them of danger or guide them in perplexity. 1 

"Not to all men do the gods appear visibly," 2 nor do all 
the gods deign to come so close to men, Zeus and Hera, 
generally Poseidon, remain on Olympus; Iris and Hermes are 
common messengers to men, while Athena and Apollo appear at 
times in order to carry out their plans or the plans of Zeus. In 
those parts of the poems assigned to an earlier date, the gods 
appear more commonly as gods. The angry Achilles feels the 
hand of Athena on his auburn hair and hears her rebuking voice, 
just as later he hears her word that the hour has come for him to 
kill Hector. 8 Each message is but the expression of Achilles' own 
thought; the goddess is felt and heard, but apparently she is 
not seen by others or even by Achilles himself. Again the gods 
assume the form of a man, often a man known to people to whom 
they go. Aphrodite comes as an old woman, Apollo as Agenor, 
Poseidon as Calchas;* in the first books of the Odyssey Athena 
comes to Teiemachus as Mentes, and later as Mentor accompanies 
him on his journey. This type of theophany plays a large part 
especially in the Odyssey* Thirdly, in a few instances, the gods 
come directly on to the battlefield ; Aphrodite is wounded by 
Diomedes till her divine blood flows, Ares is dazed by a blow of 

1 Odyssey, 3. 375 f. ■ /Had, 1. 197; 23. 2x5. 

2 Odyssey ; 16. 161. * Iliad, 3. 386; 21. 600; 13. 45. 

42 GREEK RELIGION 

Athena, Apollo shouts so loud as to frighten back the Greeks. 1 
This third type may be dismissed with the statement that the gods 
are made ridiculous to amuse the poet's audience. The second 
type represents a successful attempt to bring the gods on the 
stage with other characters of the epic drama. The first type 
alone is the direct expression of religious feeling. 

The study of all such appearances of the gods shows that this 
motif of the epic poet did have its basis in religion. Except as his 
audience believed that the gods were really near to men, that 
the gods did care for individual men and could bless or injure 
them by changing the course of events, it would have been idle 
for the poet even to make fun of the gods by bringing them into 
his song. He rarely tried to make the gods ridiculous ; ordi- 
narily he succeeded in his effort to make real gods genuine actors 
in his story* The influence of the epic practice is seen in the 
Attic drama, where occasionally the gods are brought on the stage. 

3. Signs in the Ordinary Course of Nature. — Except in the 
case of armies preparing for battle, signs in the ordinary course 
of nature were more important than signs secured by divination. 
The Greeks paid special attention to meteorological phenomena 
and {in earlier times) to the flight of birds. In the Iliad thunder 
and lightning indicated the will of Zeus, god of the sky. Some- 
times the occurrence of these phenomena caused fear to both 
Greeks and Trojans; more commonly the unsuccessful side was 
frightened, the successful side encouraged, by such a token of 
the presence of Zeus. 8 A thunderbolt in front of the horses of 
Diomedes stopped his victorious advance. 8 Lightning on the 
right hand signified definitely the favor of Zeus. 4 The only 
mention of thunder as a sign of approval is when Odysseus's 
prayer for a favorable sign was answered by a thunderbolt. 5 The 
same causes which in myth made the thunderbolt the attribute 
of Zeus, led the epic poets to emphasize this sign of the presence 

* Iliad, s- 339 f- ; *I. 406 f. ; 4. 508. * Iliad % 8. 133. 

■ /Had, 7. 478 ; 17. 595. * Iliad, 9. 036. 

fi Odyssey \ ao. 100 f. 

REVELATION AND INSPIRATION 43 

and favor of Zeus. He is the god of the sky and the divine ruler 
of the world; naturally he signifies his will to man by phenomena 
in the sky. It is not entirely clear whether the epic poet made 
this deduction himself, or whether there was in some localities 
a vivid belief in the significance of thunder and lightning. The 
Athenian sacred embassy to Delphi waited for lightning from 
Zeus Astrapaios before setting out, and Xenophon alludes to 
lightning as a veritable sign ; ' other references to it are almost 
wholly lacking in later literature. 

Other meteorological phenomena influenced men who were 
rated as superstitious. An eclipse of the moon so affected Nicias 
that he did not withdraw the Athenian army before Syracuse ; 
Pelopidas, on the other hand, was not himself influenced by an 
eclipse of the sun. 8 Some claimed that a meteor foretold the 
Spartan victory at Aegospotami, and that later a comet predicted 
the downfall of Sparta from her primacy in Greece. 8 At Athens 
the assembly was dissolved whenever rain indicated that Zeus 
was not propitious. An earthquake in Delos is said to have 
been the forerunner of the Peloponnesian war. 4 It is clear that 
only the superstitious paid much attention to this class of signs; 
men generally looked elsewhere to ascertain the will of the gods. 
Further, it should not be forgotten that the science of astrology 
found little or no place in Greece- 

Nor did other portents or prodigies receive great emphasis 
with thinking men. Herodotus and Plutarch collected stories of 
portentous marvels, a priestess who grew a beard, fish that 
leaped in the frying-pan, divine images that moved or shed 
drops of perspiration, — stories uncommon enough to show a 
general absence of superstition. 3 The seer Lampon prophesied 
the future greatness of Pericles from a ram with one horn, but 
Artaxagoras, cutting open the head, showed why only one horn 

1 Xenophon, Apol. is ; cp. Bacchylides, 17. 55. 

a Plutarch, Nicias^ 33, p. 538; De superstition*, 8, p. 169; Pelopidas, 31, p. 395. 

■ Plutarch, Lysander, »a. p. 439; Diodorus Siculus, 15. 50. 

4 Thucydides, 2. 8. 3. ; Herodotus, 6. 98; Xenophon, Hell. 3. a. 24. 

c Herodotus, 1. 175. 9. 120; Plutarch, Nicias, 13, p. 531 ; Timoieon, 12, p. 241. 

44 GREEK RELIGION 

had grown. 1 Such a scientific spirit was not favorable to belief 
in portents. 

4. Signs in Nature: Birds. — In the Homeric poems the most 
important method for learning the will of the gods, was to observe 
the flight of birds ; the most important function of the prophet 
was to interpret signs from birds. Their freedom from human 
control, their access to the sky where lived the gods, the con- 
nection which was assumed between particular birds and particular 
gods — all contributed to their significance. Not, of course, that 
all birds were harbingers of future events ; it was the eagle of 
Zeus, the hawk of Apollo, the heron flying at night, which intimated 
the plans of the gods- 8 Often the mere presence of an eagle 
on the right hand (toward the east) was enough, especially 
when it came in answer to prayer/* The eagle with a goose in 
its talons or the hawk with a dove signified success when it appeared 
on the right; yet even such a sign might be disregarded when 
the course of events tended the other way.* That Troy should 
be taken in the tenth year was indicated by the sparrow and 
her eight young devoured by a serpent. 6 At times the act of 
the bird was a definite type of the event, as when Apollo's 
hawk is seen scattering the feathers of a dove, or when the 
eagle of Zeus kills the geese eating grain in Odysseus*s hall.* 
Calchas and Halitherses, who interpret such signs, are the 
great seers of the poems. Other evidence may be brought to 
show that here the epic belief is based on real practice, while 
it can hardly be doubted that the emphasis laid on bird-signs 
in the epic tended to increase the importance attached to them 
in fact. 

Prometheus, in the play of Aeschylus, claims to have taught 
men to discern the flight, of taloned birds, which are favorable, 
which unfavorable, and to understand their habits, their quarrels, 

* Plutarch, Periclts, 6, p. 154. 

* Odyssey. 2. 146: 15- 525. 532: Mi**?, 24- 3*S: so. 274. 

* Iliad, 13. 821 ; 24. 292 ; Odyssey, 24. 311. 

* Odyssey, 15. 160 ; 20. 342; Hind, 8. 247 ; 12. 200 f. 

* Iliad, a. 308 £. • Odyssey, 15. 525 C ; 19. 536 t 

REVKLATION AND INSPIRATION 

45 

their mating. 1 The eagle, the vulture, and the crow were specially 
significant, rather for their dominant cruel habits than for any 
connection with one particular god. Their appearance in the 
east, or their flight toward the east, was in itself favorable. 2 Seers 
like Teiresias are said to have had a regular place where they 

FIG. 5.. — ATHENIAN RED-FIGURED VASE PAINTING 

Above a four-horse chariot (driven by a goddess) appears an eagle flying. 

might observe the appearance or the conflicts of birds of prey. 3 
Two eagles tearing a hare with its young signified for the Greeks 
the utter destruction of Troy by the army which Agamemnon and 
Menelaus led; similarly the Persian queen Atossa feared for the 
great army of Xerxes when she saw a hawk pursuing an eagle and 
plucking feathers from its head as the eagle flew toward the shrine 
of Apollo. 4 While omens from birds were undoubtedly important 
in some localities in early limes, in the greater days of Greece they 
became rather a part of the poet's apparatus. The increasing 
importance of oracles and of an organized, unified system of reli- 

I Aeschylus, Prom. 488 f. 

» Cp. Plato, Ug. 6, p. 760 D. 

8 Sophocles, Ant. 999; Euripides, fiacch. 347. 
4 Aeschylus, Agam. 114 f. ; /Vtj- 5905 f. 

46 GREEK RELIGION 

gious practice tended to eclipse the simple observance of natural 
signs. 

5. Minor Signs in Nature: Chance Words, etc. — Just as light- 
ning and the flight of birds suggest the intervention of the gods, 
for here human life comes in contact with what cannot be fore- 
seen or calculated, so the rumor which starts no one knows where, 
and gains in certainty and definiteness no one knows how, comes 
to be regarded as the messenger of Zeus to man. When Agamem- 
non proposed to test the temper of his army by suggesting that 
they abandon the siege of Troy and return home, it was Rumor, 
messenger of Zeus, which urged them to accept his suggestion ; 
Athena, in the form of Mentes, bade Telemachus look to Rumor 
for news of his father ; so Rumor spread the word that the suitors 
had been killed. 1 

Again, the chance word, suggesting to the hearer something 
totally different from what was intended by the speaker, was often 
regarded as a sign. When Zeus answered Odysseus's prayer for a 
sign by sending a thunderbolt, Odysseus overheard the comment 
of women grinding at the mill. 9 It was mere comment for them 
to say that Zeus was about to punish the suitors ; to Odysseus it 
seemed that Zeus had first sent the thunderbolt, then had given 
him the interpretation of its meaning. Such chance words or 
chance happenings seem always to have influenced superstitious 
persons in Greece. Cyrus hailed it as an omen when he was told 
that the watchword was " Preserver Zeus and victory " ; the Greeks 
were encouraged to fight at Mycale by the name of the Samian 
messenger, Hegesistratus, "Army-leader" ; and when Alexander 
forced the Pythian priestess to mount the tripod at an unusual 
time, her exclamation that he could not be resisted was all the 
oracle he asked for. 8 Pausanias speaks of oracles which depended 
on the first chance word one heard after sacrificing to the god. 4 

1 //tad, 3.93; Odyssty, 1. 282; 24.413. 
2 Odyssey, sec 105 J cp. 2. 35; l8_ 117. 

• Xenophon, rfnab. «. 8. 16; Herodotus, 9. 91; PlutaTCh, Alexander, 14, p. 671. 

* Pausanias, 7. 22. 3 ; 9. u. 7. 

* REVELATION AND INSPIRATION 47 

Such an interpretation of chance words does not seem so strange, 
when one recalls that not many years ago the Bible was used in 
much the same way : to obtain guidance the book was opened at 
random and perhaps in the last word on the page was sought a sug- 
gestion of the right course. An example of chance events re- 
garded as signs occurs in Plutarch : 1 an army advancing to meet 
the enemy were discouraged by the sight of asses laden with pars- 
ley, for parsley was used to make crowns for the dead. A sneeze, 
on the other hand, was favorable ; as Xenophon spoke of the hope 
of safety, a soldier sneezed, and the army accepted it as a good 
omen from Zeus. 3 

The theory of these signs, in so far as any theory may be assumed, 
is definitely religious. It is assumed that all nature is under the 
direction of the gods, and that the gods wish to guide men by giv- 
ing them some indications of their favor or disapproval. Omens 
are sought in events not easily explained by natural causes ; they 
are vague, in order that responsibility may still be left with men ; 
their range increases rapidly with superstitious men ; the sense of 
their reality and importance, however, rests on the deep-set belief 
that the gods wish to guide men by signs in nature. Because the 
gods are consistent, experience is the source of principles by 
which signs can be correctly interpreted. 

6. Divination by means of Sacrificial Victims. — In the fifth 
and fourth centuries divination from the flight of birds had all but 
passed out of use and signs in nature were only occasionally noted ; 
the will of the gods was ascertained by the consultation of oracles 
or by divination in connection with sacrificial victims* Whether 
this means of divination existed in early times and was passed 
over by the epic, 8 or was introduced later ; whether it was devel- 
oped from the Greek religious consciousness, or adopted from 
other nations, it is not easy to say. In any case its meaning is 

1 Plutarch, Timoleon* 26, p. 248. 

2 Xenophon, Anab. 3- 2. 9 ; cp. Aristophanes, A~ves t 720. 

8 The word 8vo<r*6o* {e.g. Iliad, 24. 221) according to the usage of the epic 
seems to mean no more than " attendant at the sacrifice." 

4 8 

GREEK RELIGION 

found in the belief that animals sacrificed to the gods must be 
perfect ; if they come unwillingly to the altar, if the inner parts 
are deformed or discolored, if the sacrifice does not burn properly, 
then it is a bad omen, for the gods are displeased. 

On this theory any sacrifice may have prophetic import. The 
priest, sometimes a special seer, is on the lookout for tokens sig- 

Fic. 6.— Athenian Red-figured Vase Painting (Gotha) 

A servant carefully watches the roasting meat, while Nike fills the priest's phiale 
for a libation, in the presence of Apollo with a cithara. 

nificant of the divine will. If the bull " comes boldly to the altar 
as though led of the gods," and perhaps bows its own head to the 
blow, 1 heaven favors the worshippers ; even if the result is brought 
about by the skill of the priest, it is interpreted in the same way ; 
but for an animal to die on the way to the altar forebodes some 
dreadful evil. 2 Then after the victim is opened, the character of 

1 Aeschylus, Agam. 1298; cp« Plutarch, Lucullus t 24, p. 507; Paton-Hicks, In- 
scriptions of Cos, 37, 1. ai. 

2 SchoL on Aristophanes, Pax t 060; Plutarch, Pyrrhus, 6, p.. 386. 

REVELATION AND INSPIRATION 49 

the liver and gall bladder is most significant. A sound liver, 
smooth, of good color, and with well-shaped lobes, means that the 
sacrifice is acceptable and that the god is ready to grant the wishes 
of the worshipper. 1 As the sacrifice is burning on the altar, the 
manner in which the flame envelops the moist meat also indicates 
the attitude of the gods j * when 

**Hephaestus T s flame 
Shone not from out the offering; but there oozed 
Upon the ashes, trickling from the bones, 
A moisture, and it smouldered, and it spat, 
Avid, lo ! the gall was scattered to the air, 
And forth from out the fat that wrapped them round 
The thigh bones fell," 

then "evil falls upon the State." 8 The bursting of the gall blad- 
der, and the behavior of the bones at the base of the tail (oo-</>vs) f 
were especially significant. 4 Many of the passages that may be 
cited, in regard to divination from sacrificial victims do not refer 
to sacrifices offered for this purpose, but to occurrences in con- 
nection with the regular worship (Qwla)* Now the priest himself, 
now the king or general interpreted such omens, or again a seer 
might be needed- The explanation of the procedure is very sim- 
ple : since an imperfect sacrifice must fail of its end, the gods 
need only direct the course of events so that the animal was 
imperfect or the fire did not burn properly, when they desired 
to indicate their disapproval of the worshipper or his plans. 

"What has been said of ordinary sacrifices applies with all the 
more force to special sacrifices in the presence of danger. Before 
a battle, a dangerous march, or any difficult undertaking, it was 
the practice of the Greeks to offer (in addition to the regular 
sacrifice) a peculiar sacrifice to propitiate the possible wrath of 

1 Aeschylus, Prom, 493 f. ; Xenophon. Hell. 3. 4. 15; Plutarch, Cimem, x8, p. 490. 
Cp- Virgil, Aen. 4. 64. 

3 Aeschylus, Prom. 498; Euripides, Phoen. 1255 f. and scholion. 
■Sophocles, Ant. 1006 f„ trans. Plumptre; Apollonius Rhodius, 1.436! 

4 Sophocles* Ant. 1009; Schol. on Aristophanes, Pax, 1053. 
6 Xenophon. Anab. z. 2. 3 ; 5. 5. 3. 

GREEK RELIGION 4 

SO GREEK RELIGION 

the gods and secure their special favor (o-^ytu). 1 The marks of 
divine approval or disapproval were the same as in connection 
with ordinary sacrifices ; only, for the very reason that these were 
propitiatory rites in the face of danger, the general and the seer 
watched them with so much the greater care. The importance 
of this method of divination, especially in the case of an army, lay 
in the fact that it furnished a speedy and reliable means of ascer- 
taining the purposes of the gods before battle. The position of 
the seer in the army was only less important than that of the gen- 
eral ; the seer's advice could be rejected, but, as at the battle of 
Plataea, it was customary to suffer some losses rather than to send 
the soldiers into battle without the belief that the gods were on 
their side. 2 In case the omens were unfavorable, the attack might 
be given up entirely. 8 However, the practice grew up of repeat- 
ing these sacrifices until the omens were favorable. 4 Of course it 
was always conceivable that the seer might be mistaken ; he might 
even wish to deceive the general and ruin his plans, so that it was 
desirable for the general himself to know something of hieroscopy/ 
The theory of these special sacrifices was very simple. In case 
any god or hero were angry with the army or offended by some 
neglect, he would cause them disaster. Accordingly, propitiatory 
sacrifices were offered, in the belief that if the sacrifice were 
accepted, the general might be confident that the gods would 
help him. Then the sacrifice could be repeated, for unfavorable 
omens might mean only that the time had not come which the 
gods wished to designate as favorable. It is a narrow line that 
separates religiousness from superstition at this point j still, it is 
probably fair to regard the practice of divination by sacrifice in 
the fifth century b.c. as based on a real faith in divine intervention. 

1 Herodotus, 9. 4T ; 9. 61 f. ; Xenophon, Attab. 1. 8. 15; 6. 5. 21. 

2 Xenophon, Lacrd. rep- 13. 3 ; Pausanias, 3. 1 1. 6 ; Herodotus, 9. 33 f. ; Xeno- 
phon. Hell. 4. 6. 10. 

* Herodotus, 6. 76; Thucydides* 5. 54. 

* Herodotus, 9. 61 ; Xenophon, An ah. 6. 4. 17 ; Hell. 3. 1. 17 ; Plutarch, Aristi- 
des, 17-18. p. 329. 

6 Xenophon, Anab. 5. 6. 29; C)rrop m 1. 6. 2; Plato, Lathes, 199 A, 

REVELATION AND INSPIRATION 51 

7. Inspiration: (a) Dreams. — In contrast with the revelation 
of the divine will through signs in the external world, we find a 
knowledge of the future that is gained by inspiration. Gods differ 
from men in that their vision is not necessarily limited by the here 
and the now ; the gods are but human spirits with superior powers ; 
it is a natural inference that occasionally men may see beyond the 
limitations of the present into the future. Such superhuman gifts, 
when they are found in human beings^ are naturally connected 
with those classes of mental phenomena that are not readily 
explained. In sleep the ordinary channels of perception seem to 
be closed; the mind seems to wander at liberty; in Greece no 
less than elsewhere dreams were regarded as portending future 
events. Occasionally an individual, a blind man perhaps or some 
one endowed with unusually sensitive nature, is credited with a 
knowledge not possessed by the common crowd. Or, again, the 
apparatus of religion is organized to obtain responses to the ques- 
tioner, and we have the oracle. I use the word inspiration to 
cover these three types, not because the Greeks had any such 
clear-cut belief as theearly Hebrews that a divinespirit overmastered 
the mind of the prophet, but rather because we have no better 
word to indicate that we are dealing with a knowledge of the 
future which is assigned to the mind itself, independent of any 
events in the external world. 

Just because it is so natural to regard dreams as portentous, 
because there is nothing " magical " about them, they find a con- 
siderable place in the Homeric poems. Their value is explained 
by ascribing them to the gods, their treacherousness by saying 
that they are often sent to deceive. " Twain are the gates of 
shadowy dreams, the one is fashioned of horn and one of ivory. 
Such dreams as pass through the portals of sawn ivory are deceit- 
ful, and bear tidings that are unfulfilled. But the dreams that come 
forth through the gates of polished horn bring a true issue, whoso- 
ever of mortals beholds them. 111 To make dreams concrete and 
definite, they are described as visions in sleep. Achilles has a 

1 Odyssey, 19. 56a f . trans. Butcher and Lang. 

52 GREEK RELIGION 

vision of Patroclus urging the burial of his body ; Penelope sees 
her sister standing Over her and bidding her cease her tears, or, 
again, she sees a sign of birds and hears its explanation. 1 In 
some instances the gods appear to men in dreams, just as they 
appear to waking men, ordinarily in the form of some friend 
whose presence is not unexpected.* Or the dream may take the 
form of a sign, such as waking men see ; so Penelope dreams that 
an eagle slays the geese devouring grain at her hearth. 8 In both 
foTms of dreams, great stress is laid on the feeling that they are 
real visions. 

In later times Greek students of nature recognized that dreams 
were often determined by the state of the body; Aristotle 4 went 
so far as to say definitely that dreams do not come from the gods ; 
in general, however, men maintained that some dreams had super- 
natural meaning. Just as the Homeric poems distinguished true 
and false dreams, so Aeschylus represents Prometheus as teaching 
men to distinguish what were true and what false.* The science 
of dreams, thus initiated by Prometheus, grew in importance; 
Lysimachus, nephew of the great Aristeides, was but one of a host 
of men who expounded dreams for the superstitious ; and in 
course of time elaborate treatises on the subject were published, 
some of which are still extant/ Although interpreters of dreams 
were sometimes classed with seers and prophets as men gifted by 
the gods with superhuman insight, the more general view was 
that they were students of the science of dreams who interpreted 
dreams on the basis of experience. 

In general the dreams recorded in Greek literature are, like 
Penelope's dream of the slaughtered geese, simply signs appearing 
in sleep. When Xenophon dreamed that lightning from Zeus 
struck his father's house, it was a sign which he could inter- 
pret either as favorable or unfavorable. The mother of Phalaris 

1 Iliad. 23. 65 ; Odyssey, 4. 796 f. ; 19. 535 t. 

3 Cp. the second type of theophany, supra, p. 41. 

a Odyssey, 19, 536 f, « Aristotle, De insomniU, 2, 

* Iliad, 1. 63; 2. 6; cp. Odyssey, 19. 561 ; 20. 90 ; Aeschylus, Prom. 485 f. 

6 Hippocrates, -1. 633, De inso-mniis ; Artemidorus, Oneir* 

REVELATION AND INSPIRATION 53 

dreamed that an image of Hermes in the house poured out blood 
from a cup, and the whole house boiled with blood, — a sign of 
her son's life of cruelty. 1 Socrates inferred the day of his death 
from the dream of a woman quoting Homer, " on the third day 
thou shalt come to fertile Phthia " ; dreams also foretold by signs 
to Polycrates and to Cirnon that they were about to die. 2 

The explanation of dreams offered by the Greeks is more 
important for the student of religion than their form or content. 
Nor is he interested in the mythical statements of the poets, that 
they are children of Night or of Earth. 3 In Homer dreams are 
sent by direct act of the greater gods. That the divine origin of 
dreams is denied by Aristotle, and affirmed of some dreams by 
Herophilus, 4 indicates that the view continued to be held in later 
times. The more general belief is presented in a striking frag- 
ment of Pindar ; speaking of the soul, the u image of life " which 
alone continues to exist after death, he establishes its immortality 
on the ground that this " alone is from the gods; it sleeps while 
the limbs of the body are active, but when they sleep it gives in 
dreams clear knowledge of future joys and troubles,"* Plato 
makes large place for dreams in which man's lower nature, his 
passions and desires, are controlling, while reason is inactive ; at 
the same time he maintains that the man in -whom reason is wont 
to rule may have the power of divination when sleep frees the 
soul from the bonds of the body. 6 Such became the widely 
current view of Greek thinkers. The body is a hindrance or 
limitation to the divine spirit which inhabits it. In death the 
limitation disappears; in sleep, as at the moment of death, the 
soul feels this limitation far less, an ' can recall the past or foresee 
the future with clear vision. 7 Dreams and prophetic inspiration 
rest on the same basis. 

1 Cicero, De dhnn. I. 23/46. 

a Plato, Crilo, 44 B; Herodolus, 3. 124; Plutarch, Cimon t 18, p. 490. 

* Hesiod, Tfuog. 211 ; Euripides, IpK Taur* 1262. 

* Plutarch, De platitis* 5. a, p. 904 F. 

* Pindar, Frag. 108 (Bcrgk) ; cp, Aeschylus, &**m> 104, 

* Plato, Poittiti, o, 571 C; Fimatus, 71 IX 

7 Xenophon, Cyrpp. 8. 7. 21 ; Cicero, Oe divirt. 1. 30/63. 

54 GREEK RELIGION 

8. Inspiration : (/>) Prophets. — In the Homeric poems the 
prophet or seer is a man gifted by the gods to discern things 
beyond the reach of ordinary perception. Teiresias retains in 
Hades his prophetic gift along with his other mental powers, by 
the special favor of Persephone ; at the request of Odysseus he 
warns him of future dangers, recounts the state of affairs at Ithaca, 
and indicates the means of propitiating Poseidon. His prophetic 
power consists in a ** knowledge of the ancient divine decrees," 
decrees in which the ultimate safety of Odysseus is assured, though 
the fate of his companions depends on their observance of the 
prophet's warning. 1 Such vision of what is far away, or in the 
future, is regarded as a gift of the gods. Just as Hera put it in the 
mind of Agamemnon to stir up the Greeks against the enemy, 
so the immortals made known the future to their favorites, so 
Helenus knew the purpose of the gods and Apollo granted the 
gift of prophecy to Calchas. 2 Sometimes this knowledge comes 
in answer to prayer, more often the favor of the god grants it 
without any request. That it is the direct gift of the Olympians 
is in harmony with the epic conception of these divine rulers ; that 
it is definite, though somewhat limited, is perhaps to be explained 
by the fact that within the general course of events the gods left 
many choices open to men. 

Although some direct knowledge of the future is assigned to 
prophets in the epic, their more important task is to interpret 
dreams, signs, and omens. To the ordinary man these signs were 
sometimes clear ; it required the art of Calchas, however, to inter- 
pret the sign at Aulis which portended the ten years' siege of 
Troy 3 ; and as a rule the prophet would find more meaning in a 
sign and expound it with greater authority. For this reason, the 
army going to Troy had its official seer, Calchas ; Telemus declared 
the divine decrees to the Cyclopes ; even the suitors in the house 
of Odysseus had both bard and seer. 4 

l Odyssey, n. 139; cp. 10. 473. 

s //rnd. 8. 318; 7. 44 (and 53) ; 1. 7a and 385. Cp. Odyssey, 1. aoi- 

• Iliad. 3. 333 f. * Odyssey, 9. 507 f. ; 33. 318 £. 

REVELATION AND INSPIRATION 55 

In addition to these " official " prophets, wandering soothsayers 
and seers are occasionally mentioned. Such Penelope summoned 
to her halls in her desire to learn of Odysseus, 1 Prophet, physi- 
cian, and carpenter are classed together as skilled craftsmen. 2 
When prophecy thus becomes a trade pursued for gain, it is natu- 
ral that the suitors in the house of the absent Odysseus should 
discredit it, and that Agamemnon should accuse Calchas of fore- 
telling only what is evil. 8 

It is only fair to credit in part to the ideab of the poet that 
somewhat elevated conception of the seer which is found in the 
Homeric poems. Prophecy was a trade, but this is only inciden- 
tally mentioned ; no doubt ecstatic rites were often practised, but 
Homer does not allude to them ; the interpretation of signs rested 
largely on experience, but the epic lays no stress on this fact; 
prophecies must have been either vague or often unfulfilled, but 
in the poems they show a clear vision of the future- The epic 
conception of prophecy is distinct and definite : the gods gra- 
ciously accord to men they love a clear insight into the divine 
purposes; because he is a friend of the gods, the prophet can 
often foretell the future. 

The seers and prophets of later times may be grouped under 
four headings. {1) The seers who accompanied the Greek army 
to interpret signs and conduct the sacrifices have already been 
mentioned. Their presence was important, not because the signs 
were so difficult to discern* but rather because some official inter- 
preter of the divine will lent greater sanction. At the same time, 
as Xenophon points out/ a prophet like Silanus may see more and 
see more clearly than the general. His superior powers rest partly 
on experience, partly on divine enlightenment. To secure a noted 
seer likeTeisamenus the Spartans made the one exception to their 
universal rule, granting the prize of Spartan citizenship to him and 

* Odyssey, I. 415. * Odyssey. 2. 201 ; fliad, r. 106. 

3 Odyssey, 17. 384: cp. a. 158, 170. * Anabasis. 1. 7. 18. 

fi I 50c rates (19. 5-6) speaks of the books of the seer Potemaenetus by means of 
which one Thrasytlus became proficient in the art. 

56 GREEK RELIGION 

to his brother. 1 In all probability such seers were attached to the 
early kings of Greece ; certainly the position assigned in story to 
Teiresias 2 corresponds closely to that of the seers in the Greek 
army. 

(2) The transition is easy from these attendants of the army 
to the great families of seers connected with such shrines as 
Olympia. Homer recognizes that the divine gift runs in families 
like that of Melampus, a seer family widely renowned in early 
legend. 8 The Clytiadae of Elis traced their descent from Melam- 
pus. 4 Even more influential in the historic period were the 
Iamidae, whose praises Pindar sang in the sixth Olympian Ode. 
It was the special right of this family to practise divination by 
means of the ashes of burnt offerings on the great altar of Zeus at 
Olympia. Such was its influence that members of the family 
found occupation as seers in all parts of the Greek world. To 
the Iamidae belonged Teisamenus, the seer at the battle of Plataea, 
and Callias whom the people of Croton received and honored. 6 
No doubt the lore of generations would be preserved in such a 
family, while their position at Olympia enabled them to claim 
powers due to close connection with Zeus. 

(3) The seers and prophets already considered were entirely 
free from that kind of wild inspiration which nature peoples 
attribute to possession by a divine spirit. Yet the word for prophet 
(fiaim? from jxatvofMLt, /o rage) is a relic of this belief; Greek 
thought makes full place for that inspiration which renders men 
cf&ot, 0*a<f>6prjTOL, possessed by a god. " There is also a madness 
which is the special gift of heaven, and the source of the chiefest 
blessings among men. For prophecy is a madness - , . and in 
proportion as prophecy is higher and more perfect than divination 
... is madness superior to a sane mind, for the one is only 
of human, but the other of divine origin."' Plato cites as exam- 

1 Herodotus. 9. 33. 

2 Apparently the name is from the root which appears in rtpas, sign. 
■ Odyssey \ 11. 391 ; 15. 225 f. 6 Pindar, Ofym, 8. 2. 

4 Pausanias, 6. 17. 6. • Herodotus, 9. 33; 5. 44. 

* Plato. JPhaedr. 044, trans. Jowett, Cp. Aristotle, frob. XXX 

REVELATION AND INSPIRATION 57 

pies the Pythia at Delphi and the priestesses at Dodona; Cas- 
sandra is " frenzied, by some god's might swayed " when w the 
dread pang of true prophet's gift with preludes of great evil 
dizzies" her; 1 a seer like Amphilytus greeted Peisistratus, He- 
rodotus says, with inspired hexameters. 2 Ventriloquism was some- 
times used to delude the people into thinking they heard words 
inspired of a god. 3 But while Greek thought clearly recognized 
and explained such divine inspiration, it found small place in 
actual practice- The original Sibyl may have been a historical 
person who was subject to prophetic frenzy ; the oracles of the 
Sibyl, of Musaeus, Bacis, or Glanis are known as collections 
referred to a more or less mythical past. 

(4) In everyday life it was the " chresmologist," the man who 
possessed a collection of ancient oracles which he interpreted to 
meet the need of the questioner, who ordinarily played the r61e 
of the prophet for Greece. Such collections sometimes belonged 
to the state, as the "parchmeuts of Loxias" at Argos, and the 
oracles brought from the Athenian acropolis to Sparta : often they 
were in private possession. 4 Not only these ancient oracles, but 
the responses of the Pythia, were interpreted by men who prac- 
tised the trade of the chresmologist. 5 Samples of the kind of 
oracle such a man would produce from his o*»"n collection with 
the authority of Bacis or Musaeus, may be found in Herodotus.* 
Aristophanes 7 has no more bitter satire than for these men who 
successfully practised on the credulity of the people. That 
prophecy was a trade practised for the money rewards it would 
bring, and that oracles were constantly being forged to meet 
emergencies and inserted in the old collections, the Greeks dis- 
tinctly recognized. 8 Even the seer who attended the army must 

1 Aeschylus, Agatn. 1x40, 1215. trans. PLumptre. s Herodotus, 1. 6a. 

8 Plutarch, De defect, orac. 9, p. 414 K; cp. Philochorus, Frag. 192. 
* Herodotus, 5.90; Euripides, Frag. 629; Pausanias, 10. 12. 11 ; Herodotus, 
7.6. 

5 Herodotus, 7. 141 f. • Herodotus, 8. 20; 8. 96; 9. 43. 

7 Aristophanes, Eq. and Av. passim. 

8 Herodotus, 7. 6; Sophocles, Atit, 1036, 1055; Aristophanes, Vcsp. 52^ 

58 GREEK RELIGION 

be watched by the general- Such was the inevitable result whet 
men sought from the gods not a revelation of the divine nature, 
but some knowledge by which they might secure prosperity for 
themselves or for their state. The wonder is that such prophets 
could continue to shelter themselves under the cloak of religion. 
The honor often accorded to them is inexplicable except on the 
assumption that some of them were shrewd men honestly trying 
to give wise advice. 1 

9. Oracles. — The most satisfactory means of ascertaining the 
future, for here men could actually ask questions of some mouth- 
piece of the gods, were the oracles, at Dodona and Ammon, at 
Branchidae and Colophon, at J*ebadeia and Oropus, most impor- 
tant of all at Delphi. A Greek " oracle" was simply a centre of 
religious worship where some form of divination was systematized. 
The oracles of Trophonius 3 and Asclepius were dream oracles, 
shrines in which the sick slept seeking means of cure, or where 
men who desired other knowledge of the future obtained it 
through dreams. The oracles of Zeus were given through signs. 
At Olympia signs from sacrifices to the god, at Ammon signs from 
the movement of the image as carried by the priests, at Dodona 
signs from the rustling leaves of Zeus's oak, were interpreted by 
the official servants of the god. 3 Apollo was the god of inspira- 
tion ; at more than one shrine of Apollo his servant was thought 
to be overcome by the spirit of the god till the answers which 
came through human lips were in reality from the divine spirit 
within. To determine the religious significance of oracles for 
Greece, it is sufficient to consider the most important of them, 
the shrine of Apollo Pythios at Delphi. 

The story goes that sheep grazing on the rocky slopes of Par- 
nassus were affected by gases and performed strange antics as 
they passed a certain spot ; that the shepherds, then others fol- 
lowing their example, found that when they breathed these gases 

1 Herodolus. 9. 33; Pausanias. 10. 9. 7. * Pausanias, 9. 39. 5 t 

'Schol. on Pindar, Olym. 6. 119; Diodoms, 17. 50; Odyssey, 14. 337 (cp. 
Aeschylus, Prom. 833) . 

REVELATION AND INSPIRATION 59 

they could see into the future ; that finally a temple of Apollo 
was built over the chasm, and the Pythian priestess, seated on a 
tripod, breathed the gases till the god inspired her to answer the 
questions of those who came to consult the oracle. 1 The priest- 
ess was a native of Delphi, a maiden or in late times an aged 

Fig. 7. — View of the Cliffs at Delphi 

woman clothed as a maiden, in Plutarch's day the daughter of a 
peasant. 2 After bathing in the water of Castalia, and drinking 
from the spring Cassotis, she chewed leaves of Apollo's laurel and 
mounted the tripod. 8 To-day there is no cleft beneath the ruins 
of the temple; a recent German student of Delphi 4 has noted 

1 Diodorus, 16. 2*»; Aristotle, De murtdo, 4 ; Pausanias, 10. 5. 6-7 ; Plutarch, De 
defect, etrac. 46, p. 435 D : StralJO, 8. 419. 

fl Euiipides, Ion % 1322; Diodorus, 16. 26; Plutarch, De Pyth, orac. 22, p. 405 C 

8 LAician, Hermot. 60, p. 801 ; Jits ace. i, p. 792. 

* Pomtow, Beitr^e ear Topographic von Delphi (1880), 32 Anm. 2. 

60 GREEK RELIGION 

currents of ice-cold air with a sharp acid smell issuing from the 
earth in the vicinity. Gas or no gas, the ritual would be sufficient 
to produce hypnotic effects in a susceptible priestess. Unwill- 
ingly, " struggling against Apollo's power," she mounted the tripod. 
Meantime the questioners had sacrificed to Apollo, lots had deter- 
mined their order, and the questions in written form were handed 
to the head official (Trpo^jyri/s). 1 Within the shrine the official pro- 
pounded the question to the raving priestess, her answer, only partly 
intelligible, he put into a sort of hexameter verse, and returned it 
in writing, sealed, to the questioner. 2 All the imposing ritual of 
a wealthy shrine was devised to gain credence for this answer. 

More than two hundred supposed deliverances of the oracle 
are preserved to us in literature* Most of these are given by late 
authors and their validity is very doubtful. Some fifty of them, 
however, are quoted in Herodotus; and of these it may be 
affirmed that he obtained at least half at Delphi itself. Whether 
they are genuine or forged by Delphic priests in the form of 
genuine oracles, they illustrate the claims of the shrine. 8 Nat- 
urally the historian quotes very few that deal with private life. 
We do read how Croesus enquired about his dead son, Halyattes 
about his illness, Teisamenus as to offspring. 4 Oftentimes the 
answer gave some other information than what was asked, infor- 
mation that in the case of Teisamenus led to its own fulfilment. 
A long series of the oracles quoted by Herodotus deal with the 
internal needs of states : where cure from pestilence is sought, 
some moral or religious cause is assigned in answer and some 
moral or religious cure suggested ; for political confusion, an 
arbitrator is assigned, or a code of laws sanctioned, or a king con- 
firmed in his position ; 6 changes in worship, also, are rejected or 

* Plutarch, Quaes, graec. 9, p. 393 D; De defect, orac. 49, p. 437 A; Schol. on 
Aristophanes, Plut. 39. 

a Plutarch. De PytJi. orac. S, p. 396 D; Suidas, sjv. tA rpla. 

9 '• Herodotus and the Oracle at Delphi," Classical Journal, 1 (1906) 37 t. 

* Herodotus, x. 85 ; 1. 19; 9. 33. 

e Herodotus. 4. 151 f.; 5, 8a; 4. x6i; 1. 65; 6. 53; 1. 13; 4. 163: 5-07; 7- 178; 
Demosthenes, 31. 53 t 

REVELATION AND INSPIRATION 

61 

Fig. 8, — Plan of the I'kecinct or Apollo at Deli-hi 

62 

CxREEK RELIGION 

approved by the Delphic god. Other oracles deal with external 
politics. The shrine claimed the right to suggest colonies, to 
determine their destination, and to establish the form of govern- 
ment. 1 Tn case of war, the answers of the oracle now predicted 
failure, now suggested an alliance, at times they urged moderation 

Fig. 9. — View os- the. Runs of rut Shrine of Apollo at Delphi 

in victory, or warned of treachery, or finally they promised suc- 
cess. 2 Necessarily very many of the answers were vague, in most 
general terms, perhaps susceptible of opposite meanings. AVhen 
Croesus inquired whether he should march against the Persians, 
he was told that if he crossed the river Halys he should destroy 
a great kingdom — his own kingdom, as the event proved. 3 The 
fact remains that they often contained very shrewd advice ; for 
this reason and because the answers were often such as to cause 

1 Herodotus, 5. 42 ; 4. 150. a Herodotus, 6. 19 ; 7. 140; 5. 79; 4. 163. 

* Herodotus, I- 53; Aristotle, Rhtt. 3. 5. 

REVELATION AND INSPIRATION 63 

their own fulfilment, the claims of the oracle to foretell the future 
found considerable justification. 

In particular the answers of the oracle stood for progress in 
ethics and in religion. Glaucus, who asked whether he could 
break an oath, 1 so the priests said, was told that for even propos- 
ing the question his family should utterly perish. A late story 
tells of three men attacked by robbers ; the one who ran away 
was condemned by the oracle for refusing his aid ; the second, 
who killed his companion in trying to aid him, was told that his 
hands were made even purer by manslaughter with pure inten- 
tion. 2 Extreme cruelty was assigned as the cause of divine wrath 
which led to pestilence. 3 As the penalty for murder the oracle 
advised some money recompense instead of more shedding of 
blood. 4 In religion the influence of the oracle was directed 
toward the development of local worship ; not that it in any way 
sought to check the worship of the Olympian deities, but its 
policy was to establish that local worship of heroes in which there 
was a more vital religion for the people than in the splendid state 
cults. 

What estimate are we to place on oracles which consist of the 
incoherent cries of a delirious woman interpreted by shrewd 
priests ? In antiquity the shrine had such a reputation that not 
only Greece, but Asia Minor, and the Roman world came here to 
consult the god. The early fathers of the Christian church con- 
sistently held that the inspiration of the Pythia was real, the work 
of evil spirits. One of the first to attack this doctrine was the 
Hollander, Van Dale/ who explained the oracles as the result of 
conscious deception deliberately practised by the priests. His 
theory leaves unexplained the influence of the oracle for purer 
morals; nor can we believe that freedom-loving Greeks would 
have yielded submission for centuries to the dictates of such de- 
liberate imposition. Both the Pythian priestess, the " prophet," 

1 Herodotus. 6. 86. 8 Herodotus, 6 t 139, 

a Aelian. Var. hist. 3. 44. 4 Herodotus. 8. 114. 

6 £>e oraculis veterum ethnicorum dissertationcs ducu, Amsterdam, 1700. 

64 GREEK RELIGION 

and the priests must have been well informed as to the political 
condition of the Greek states ; if one may judge from the oracles 
that remain, they were inspired by high ideals and a real desire 
for the welfare of Greece ; the oracles further reveal certain defi- 
nite principles, e.g. as to colonies, the worship of heroes, recom- 
pense for murder, principles that applied to large numbers of the 
questions asked. When the shrine " medized " or " philippized," 
the latter a word of Demosthenes, 1 it was because the Greek 
people were overmastered by fear of Xerxes and of Philip ; actual 
corruption of the oracle, wholly improbable in these cases, was 
proven only in a very few instances which were promptly punished 
by the Delphians themselves. 8 So far as the delirious priestess is 
concerned, she was no doubt open to unconscious suggestion from 
the official " prophet " who put the question to her ; in giving 
metrical form to her answers we can hardly doubt that, however 
much he was really responsible for the content of the reply, he 
ordinarily acted in the honest conviction that he was giving what 
Apollo had suggested through the priestess. 

The fact remains unquestioned that Delphi was, as it has often 
been called, the " Vatican of antiquity," a holy city, a centre of 
moral teaching, and an authoritative guide in matters of politics 
as well as in matters of religion. 

1 Aeschines, 3. 130. 

3 Herodotus, 6. 66; Plutarch, LysaruUr, 25, p. 447. 

CHAPTER II 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 

1. Sacred Places. — While the gods of Homer have in Olympus 
their dwellings made by Hephaestus, each god has also favorite 
haunts on the earth where he is wont to receive the worship 
of men. In later ages also men worshipped in places which sug- 
gested the presence of the gods, and where men worshipped was 
the place at which a god liked to be present.. Mountain tops 
high in heaven and often covered with thunder clouds suggested 
the presence of Zeus, grottoes and springs the presence of nymphs, 
underground caverns, gods or spirits from the world below ; in 
any thick grove might dwell a god. The goddess of the hearth 
dwelt inside the home, gods of the market-place in the busy centre 
of trade, so that it was a purely empirical deduction when Xeno- 
phon 1 stated that ordinarily a sanctuary should be located "in 
some conspicuous place, apart from the daily life of men " ; such 
a principle, in so far as it was based on fact, would mean that the 
gods more commonly gave token of their presence in places 
apart from the daily life of men. For where the gods were mani- 
festly present, worship would, of course, most surely reach them. 
The assumption that a god may be found again where he has once 
been present, is perhaps the most important principle in deter- 
mining a place of worship. 

Centres of local worship, sacred places where the gods come to 
enjoy the gifts men bring to them, are recognized in the Homeric 
poems. On his way to Troy Agamemnon stopped at every altar 

GREEK REf.ICUON — 5 65 

1 Xcnophon, Afem. 3. 8. 10. 
- e fie 

66 GREEK RELIGION 

of Zeus to offer sacrifices. 1 Two shrines of the nymphs near 
Ithaca are described, wild spots where wayfarers stopped to honor 
the spirits of fertility. 2 Chryses, Maron, and Onetor were priests 
attached to shrines of Apollo or Zeus, whose duty it was to keep 
up the worship at these sacred spots. 3 Such a shrine included an 
altar and ordinarily a grove sacred to the god ; its position might 
be determined by the nature of the god worshipped, as in the 
case of the shrine of Zeus on Mt. Ida, and that of the river god, 
Spercheius ; in any case it was a favorite resort of the god. 4 
When it was inside a city, or contained treasures of the god, a 
stone wall protected it from intrusion. In the palace also, the 
camp of an army, the hut of a swineherd, were altars on which 
parts of each animal killed for food were sacrificed to the gods. 6 
In almost every instance it is clear that worship was carried on, 
not inside any building, but in the open air. The temples (or 
temple) which Chryses built must have been very simple, perhaps 
mere booths used in worship ; the temples of the Phaeacians, and 
the temple vowed to Helios by the companions of Odysseus were 
more substantial ; however, it was only the temples of Athena and 
of Apollo on the Trojan acropolis that played any part in the poems. 6 
In the earlier period of the epic worship was described as taking 
place beside an altar in the open air ; but when the poems took 
final shape, at least in the more important city shrines of Ionia, 
substantial houses for the god had taken the place of the simple 
altar near a grove. 

In later times the sacred precinct (t^wos) might be a very 
limited space about the temple, or in the country it might cover 
several miles. Sometimes it was holy ground that none could 
enter, like 

* Iliad. 8. 238 ; cp. " Local Culls in Homer,** The JVrw World, December, 1895. 

* Odyssey, 13. 349 ; 17. 210. 

" Iliad, I. it, 39; 16. 604 : Odyssey, 9. 197. 

4 Iliad, 2. 305, 506 ; Odyssey, 6. 162, 291, 321 ; Iliad, 22. 170 ; 23, 148. 

* Iliad, 11. 773 ; 2. 400 f. ; Odyssey, 14. 420. 

« Iliad, 1. 39; Odyssey, 6. 10; ia. 346; Iliad, 6. 88, 274, 279,297; 5.446-448; 
7. 83 ; cp. Cauer, Grundfragcn ater Homcrkritik, 197 f. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 67 

** the holy grove. 
By foot of man untrod, 
Where dwell the Virgin Ones invincible;" 1 

again it could be entered only at certain periods by persons duly 
purified, 8 or there might be ownership by the god without any 
such restrictions. The whole Crisaean plain was dedicated to the 
Delphic gods to lie fallow. 8 Ordinarily, however, such properties 
served as a source of income to the shrine of the god ; contracts 
still extant tell of the exact manner in which the land was to be 
used, the amount to be paid to the god, and the care with which 
he was protected against loss. 4 Such properties were often given 
to Greek shrines, as later to Christian churches, to be a source of 
income. Along with the lands, the gods owned and leased now 
houses, now factories, flocks of sheep, poultry, or rights in fish- 
eries. 5 Rentals from these sources, a share in taxes, some per- 
quisites from the animals sacrificed, and fines imposed for failure 
to obey divine commands, constituted the income of the shrine. 
The management of the income was in the hands of the priests, 6 
though ordinarily the priests were state officials. 

In the city of Athens we know of more than two hundred such 
shrines (including altars to one god in the precinct of another 
god) which were centres of worship. Speaking generally we may 
say that in no two of these shrines was the same god worshipped 
under the same aspect of his being. 7 Athena was worshipped on 

1 Sophocles, Oett. Col. 125 f,, trans, Plumptre, 

2 E.g. the shrine of Hippodameia at Olympia was entered once a year by 
women. Fausanias, 6. 30. 4. 

8 Aeschines, 3. 107-108 ; cp. Plutarch, PericUs, 30. p. 168. 

* M&. for the shrine ofCodrus, Nelt-us, and Basile. C./.A. IV. 1. a, p. 66, no. 53 a; 
cp. also Bull. Corr. Hell. 4 (1880) 295 f.; 16 (189a) 278 f., and farther references 
given by Stengel. Die griec hisc /ken Kultuuittertiimer, 19—21. 

6 CJ.A. I.283; II- 617; AltrriHinervot Perganton. 8. X. p. 36. no. 40; Still. Corr. 
HeU. 6 (1882) 20, I. 158 f.; 14 <l8$o) 399 f. 

• In the case of important shrines a special state commission (at Athens the 

raiiiat Tdjv ltpu)i- xfiVfJ-d-Ttov) was often appointed to take charge of the temple 
finances. 

r Cp. Introduction, p. 22. 

68 

GREEK RELIGION 

the Acropolis as Athena Polias, guardian of the city, as Athena 
Nike, and as Athena Hygieia ; on the Areopagus she was Athena 
Areia ; elsewhere in the city were shrines of Athena Hephaistia, 
Athena Hippia, Athena Skims, etc. These different shrines did 
not exist for the convenience of worshippers, like churches in a 
modern city, but the goddess was worshipped at each point in a 
different aspect of her nature. Oftentimes they represented some ■ 
old worship at Athens; or they were branches of honored cults 
elsewhere, like the worship of Apollo Pythios on the banks of the 
Ilissus, or that of Artemis Brauronia on the Acropolis, branches 
established that Athens might worship the god of Delphi and the 
goddess of Brauron ; sometimes they seem to be offshoots of 
another Athenian cult, established to emphasize some one aspect 

Fig, io. — Early Black-figured Vase Fainting (British Museum) 

A procession headed by a priestess with tray of offerings and a man playing the 
double flute is conducting; a bull to the altar of Athena; behind the altar is a 
statue of Athena and a serpent. 

of the god. An examination of these cults confirms the impres- 
sion that worship was carried on primarily in the name of the city, 
so that one shrine to one aspect of a god was all sufficient; and 
further that each god or goddess was at the same time one and 
many-fold, one in mythological theory, many-fold in worship- 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 

69 

The centre of worship, ordinarily within a sacred precinct, was 
the altar (/?c*>/xos). The attempt has been made to prove that 
Cireek altars were in the first instance scats f >r the unseen god, 
present with his worshippers ; then later, tables to receive the 
offering or hearths where it could be burnt. 1 No other explana- 
tion has been offered for the peculiar shapes of altars depicted in 
early vase paintings, than that the higher part represents a seat, 
the lower part a footstool where men might humbly lay their gifts. 
The material of which the altar was made and its form, were 

Fig. 11. — Athenian Black-figured Vase Painting (Lekythos, Aihens) 

Sacrifice before the departure of a warrior ; on an altar of brick the tail of the 
animal is seen in the fire, over which an attendant is roasting meat on a spit. 

determined partly by its position and use, partly by local tradition. 
In the house a table or a pillar, or even some portable tray, 
received the fruits and flowers men offered to the god. 2 A heap 
of stones or sod might serve the traveller as an altar. 3 Before the 
temple there was built perhaps a large structure of cut stone/ or 
an altar was hewn from the natural rock; the ashes of former 
sacrifices, the piled up horns of previous victims, a mound of 
earth or stones even a few inches high, were the altars prescribed 
by holy tradition at some shrines ; ° again at Syracuse there are 

1 Reichel, C/eber -vorhellenische GStterkulte. 

3 In general see de Molin, De ara afiud Graecos, 1884, and the article "Altar"* 
by Reisch in Pauly-Wissowa, RtaUncycIopaedie. 

• Apollonius Rhodius. 1. 403 ; a. 69s. 

4 E*g. the altar of the Chians at Delphi, Herodotus 2. 135. 

6 Pausanias. 5. 13. 8; 9. tl. 7; Callimachus, Hymn to Apollo, 60; AliertUmer 
von Pergatnon, 8. I, no- 68. 

7° 

GREEK RELIGION 

still seen the remains of a rock altar a stadium in length, 1 and 
sculptured slabs testify to the magnificence of the great altar of 
Zeus at Pergamon. Oftentimes the * 4 hearth " where the victims 
were burned was a distinct part of the altar.* 

The most important question for the history of religion is con- 
cerned with the difference between the altar proper for the gods 
above and the hearth altar (co-^apa) for the gods and spirits of the 

KB* 

*■"- fc fift* *£? W* *"* 

Fig. la. — The Great Altar at Pergamon (restoration) 

lower regions. Whether this latter type was made of earth or 
stone, it was a low structure so built that the blood of the victims 
might run down through it into the earth itself. At the shrine in 
Samothrace and at the Kabeirion near Thebes,* this hearth 
included a covered stone bowl with such an aperture for the blood 
to percolate into the earth below. Fire carried the odor of fat 
thigh pieces to the gods above : the gods below drank, the blood 
of victims slain to propitiate their wrath. 

Almost without exception the Greek temple was a home for the 
god, not a place where men assembled for worship. In such a 
home some symbol or image denoted the god's presence ; valu- 
able gifts — wreaths or vessels of precious metal, works of art, 

1 Diodorus, 16. 83. s Aristophanes, Ach. 887 ; Vesp* 938. 

8 Ath. MiMJL 13 (xS83) 95 and illustration. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 71 

or money — and the utensils of worship belonged there; 1 at times 
it might even serve as the treasury for the city of which the god 
was the patron deity. Often the treasures belonging to the god 
were sufficiently large so that loans could be made to the state in 
time of need. 2 About the home of the god might be grouped 
the houses of his priests, 3 stalls for animals destined to be sacri- 
ficed, and occasionally dwellings where sick people could be 
brought to be healed by the god- All this precinct (rcjucvos) was 
sacred. The man accused of a crime could flee here for safety # 
and, though there was a difference in the rights accorded to differ- 
ent temples, a suppliant of the god was not to be lightly treated. 
To remove an innocent person from the altar of the god where 
he had taken refuge was a sacrilege that stirred the divine anger. 
The right to shelter any man, innocent or guilty, was accorded only 
to a few shrines.* Bowls of holy water (irtpiftpaifTijpui) served to 
purify those who approached the god. 6 

The temple itself ordinarily faced the east, for the worship of 
the gods above belonged to the morning. Three steps ran around 
it, three, we are told, in order that the worshipper might place the 
right foot on the first and third. 8 The essential part of the temple 
was the chamber in which stood the symbol or image of the god 
(cella y vaos ; the word aSvrov is properly applied to an inner room, 
but sometimes it is used for the cella). The simpler form of 
temple consisted of a cella with columns at the front, or at both 
front and back ; in the case of larger buildings one or even two 
rows of columns ran around the entire building, but the building 
proper still retained the extra columns at the end, inside the outer 

l Cp. the inventory of the objects in the temple of Apollo at Delos about 180 B.C, 
Bull. Corr, Hell, 6 (1882) 29 U; Diltenberger, SyUoge, 588. 

s Cp. the proposal of the Corinthians to borrow from the temple funds at Delphi 
and Olympia, Thucydides, a. 121 ; the temples also received deposits of money, 
like a modern bank, cp. Posidonius in Athenaeus, 6. 24, p. 233 F; cp. Pausanias 
XO. 14. 7. 

8 Strabo 12. p. 575 : Euripides, Iph. Taur. 65. 

* E.g. the shrine of Athena Alea in Tegea (Xenophon, Hell. 3. 5. 35 ; Pau- 
franius, 3. 5. 6), and of Zeus I.ykaios at Megalopolis (Thucydides, 5. 16). 

* Herodotus, 1. 51 ; Pollux, X. 8. a Vitruvius, 3. 4. 4. 

72 

GREEK RELIGION 

row. The Parthenon at Athens is a typical Greek temple of this 
second type. It had eight columns at each end, and seventeen 
on each side ; behind the eight columns were six more columns 
in front of the building itself. The base on which the columns 
rested was 69.51 metres in length and 30.86 metres wide. In the 
case of the Parthenon a sculptured frieze ran around the upper 
wall of the building, inside the outer row of columns; the colon- 
nade had a richly decorated ceiling; over the architrave proper 

o • • • id ir 1. ii »c 

«-j ■ ■ ■ 1 ■ ■ 1 1 * 1 1 1 1 . r ■ ■ 1 . 1 1 

i_i_ 

« ar »Q NET. 

1 I ' ■ ' ■ 

Fig. 13. — Ground Ptan of the Parthenon 

on the outside sculptured slabs (metopes) were set between sup- 
porting blocks (triglyphs) ; and in the pediments or gable ends 
weTe placed groups of figures. The frieze represented the great 
annual procession at the Panathenaic festival; it began at the 
west of the building with young men preparing to join the proces- 
sion ; on the sides of the temple were to be seen the youth on 
horseback, men in armor in chariots, animals brought to the 
sacrifice, and persons carrying the necessary utensils ; while at 
the front officials of the goddess received the procession in the 
presence of the gods of Attica. The metopes represented the 
contest of the gods and giants, and other contests in which law 
and order triumphed over barbarian force. In the east pediment 
was to be seen the birth of Athena from the head of Zeus, in the 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 

73 

west pediment the contest of Athena with Poseidon for the land 
of Attica. The building itself consisted of two parts, a long room 

Fig, 14. — section of the Frieze of the Parthenon 

Cattle are being driven to the Acropolis in the Panathenaic 
procession, to be sacrificed to Athena. 

facing the east in which stood the great gold and ivory image of 
the goddess with its altar table, and a square room behind (the 
Uap&cvwv proper) where were kept utensils, votive 
offerings, and other property of the goddess. 

In early times there was no cult image, properly 
so called, although perhaps some sacred stone or 
pillar marked the spot where the god was present 
for his worshippers. Whether the Homeric poems 
mention real cult images, is a matter of dispute. 1 Fig. 15. — Coin 
Figures of the god in clay or wood seem to have OF Megai.opo- 

i_ 1 rr - 1 -■ • LIS (Caracalla) 

been presented as votive offerings, and it is not 

improbable that in many cases one of these offer- .. eT ™~ ^ ul ° 

■ J Heracles, draped. 

mgs became the cult image (ayuA/xa) of the god. 
Hestia, goddess of the fire on the hearth, never was represented 
by any images, for she was herself present in the fire. The earlier 
cult images were rude objects of wood (£oai>a) with but little 
resemblance to the human form ; we know something of them, 

1 See /Had, 6. 93, 303. 

74 GREEK RELIGION 

* 

for in many temples they were never replaced, or were preserved 
as relics. 1 By far the commonest form of earlier cult image to 
persist was the herm (ipp.^) or term; the god Hermes continued 
to be represented by a square pillar with a head or a mask at the 
top, and occasionally other gods, especially Dionysus, were repre- 
sented by similar " herrns." To cleanse the image, perhaps to 

decorate it with fresh garments, was often an 

important part of the annual worship at the 

temple. 2 With the great development of plastic 

art in the fifth and fourth centuries almost every 

temple received a new image in which the nature 

of the god found adequate artistic expression. 

These images were of bronze, of marble, of gold 

and ivory with a wooden core. 8 So the Athena 

Fig. 16. — Gem by which stood in the Parthenon was a framework 

asfasius covered with delicately tinted plates of ivory for 

The head of Athena the flesh parts, while the garments and acces- 

is apparently cop- sor j es were made from plates of gold. As the 

ied from th e statue . ,. , , i • ,1 ■ , * 

in the Parthenon. m o m "ng light streamed in through the great 

door this image seemed truly to embody the 
goddess of war and wisdom whose nature so fitly expressed the 
spirit of the Athenian people. To such an image our word " idol H 
hardly applies- It did indeed represent the goddess herself 
present in her home, but she was in no wise limited to its gold 
and its ivory; not the image, but the goddess, received the 
homage of the Athenians. 

2. Sacred Times. — Just as some places are sacred because the 
presence of the god has been felt there and he may be expected 
to visit the spot again, so some times are sacred ; i.e. on these 
days the god has visited his temple, and on these days he may be 
expected to be present with his worshippers once more/ On this 

i The meaning of the term xotmon in Pausanias is discussed by Fraser, Pausanias 
sc 69. 

2 Pausanias, 3. 16. 3; 6. 35. 5; Euripides, fyh. Taur. 1x99. 
8 Cp. Lucian, Gallus, 34 : Valerius Maximus 1. Ext. 7. 
* Aristophanes, Nub. 615 f. ; cp. Odyssey, 3. 44. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 75 

basis the calendar becomes a religious institution, for days and 
years are reckoned by the recurring worship of the gods. Per- 
haps for the reason that these occasions of worship differed in 
different localities, they find small mention in the Homeric poems. 
The feast of Apollo at Ithaca, which is in progress at the time of 
the trials of Odysseus's bow, is an indication, if any proof be 
needed, that the practice of observing set days as religious festi- 
vals dates back to early times. 1 In general, howeveT, sacrifices 
are described as taking place when men are passing some sacred 
spot, or in connection with the main meal of the day, or in times 
of special need; 2 as the gods are divested of local features in 
the epic, so local occasions of worship are neglected in favor of 
occasions universally recognized. 

In the periods of which we have fuller information, it becomes 
clear that the Greeks laid much stress on sacred times. There 
are no traces of anything like the Jewish Sabbath or the Christian 
Sunday ; in its stead each state had a series of religious festivals 
which occurred at irregular intervals through the year. Many of 
these caused little or no interference to regular business ; many, 
on the other hand, were of sufficient importance to involve a sus- 
pension of public and private business in favor of the festival. 
The Athenians set aside more than fifty days each year specifically 
for public worship of the gods, and only one day in the year, it is 
said, was without its appointed offering to some god. 3 Certain 
days in each month were sacred to a god, the first and seventh 
to Apollo, the fourth to Hermes and to Aphrodite, the sixth to 
Artemis, the third, thirteenth, fifteenth, and twenty-eighth to 
Athene.* Each shrine had a monthly or an annual festival vary- 
ing in importance with the character of the shrine : it might be 
some simple offering shared only by a few people of the neighbor- 
hood ; it might be the Panathenaea or the Eleusinia, national 
feasts that lasted for days, splendid with processions and sacrifices, 

1 l had, 9. 534; Odyssey, 20. 156, 276 f. 

S Iliad, 8. 238 ; a. 403 f. ; Odyssey, 14. 431 ; 9. 551 ; Iliad, 7. 177. 

8 Thucydides, a. 38 and schoL. * Schoemann, GrUch. Alt. a. 456. 

76 GREEK RELIGION 

solemn with mysterious ritual (eoprcu, «vii^yiJ/>e«). 1 The different 
elements that entered into this worship will be considered in the 
following sections. Finally biennial and quadrennial festivals were 
celebrated with special pomp at Delphi, Olympia, and other great 
religious centres. Oftentimes it is possible to ascertain the reason 
why a festival was celebrated at a given time, or at least the reason 
assigned by the worshippers for its celebration at that time. 2 Agri- 
cultural festivals, including those celebrated to Zeus the heaven- 
god, Demeter, goddess of the grain, Dionysus, god of the vine, 
Apollo, protector of the growing crops, etc., were determined by 
the season of the year, Asclepius was worshipped on the anni- 
versary of the establishment of his cult in Athens ; in other in- 
stances also the mythical anniversary of the coming of the god 
was the cause assigned for the festival. The birth of Artemis and 
of Apollo was celebrated on the sixth and seventh of each month ; 
and the twenty-eighth of the month was recognized in worship as 
the birthday of Athena. At Delphi the return of Apollo in the 
spring and that of Dionysus in the autumn were the occasion of 
special religious rites. In all these instances the principles hold 
good that the gods are likely to appear again at the date when 
they have appeared at their shrines before, and that worship 
should be offered to them when their presence is expected- 

3. Sacred Persons; Priests and Attendants. — Although priests 
are mentioned several times in the Homeric poems, all the sacri- 
fices of which an account is given are performed by the head of a 
household or by a king. The priest (tcpci>$, aprprjp) is the person 
who presides over some local shrine, directing the worship and 
making such sacrifices as its ritual demands. Such a priest, at 
least in Troy, was appointed by the people ; Theano, priestess of 
Athena, and Onetor, priest of Idaean Zeus, were married ; Hyp- 
senor, priest of the Scamander, was not prevented by his sacred 
office from taking part in the defence of the city ; Maron, priest 

1 In Appendix II is given a lift of the more important festivals of Athens; cp. 
also A. Mommsen. Die Feste der Stadt Atherr, 1898. 
3 Cp. Schot-rnann, OrUcJk. Alt. 2. 459 f. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 

77 

of Apollo at Ismarus, dwelt with wife and child in the sacred grove 
of Apollo- 1 In virtue of his office the priest was greatly honored 
by the people, " honored as a god M the poet says. For this rea- 
son the Aetolians sent priests to treat with a besieging enemy; 

Fio. 17. — Athenian RED-FIGURED VASE Painting (Stamnos, British Museum) 
The priest raises his left hand in attitude of worship before the altar, above which 
Nike flies to fill the vessel in his right hand: opposite him are youths with 
spits and a Mute player. 

Odysseus protected Maron when Ismarus was taken ; Chryses, 
trusting in the respect due to his position, entered the camp of 
the enemy to demand of the Oreelcs his captured daughter. 2 It 
appears from these instances that while the priest was not cut off 
from the activities of ordinary life, his connection with the god 
brought him such privileges and immunities as might be granted 
to the special servant of any powerful ruler. 

* Iliad, 5. 76 f. ; 6. so8 f. ; x6. 604 : Odyssey, 9. 197 t 
a Iliad, 9. 575 ; 1. n f. ; Odyssey, 9. 199. 

7 8 GREEK RELIGION 

The conception of the priest as the person in charge of some 
one shrine held good in later periods. In Greece the priest was 
not a " holy man " ; even if one does not accept literally the state- 
ment of Isocrates x that any one is good enough to become a 
priest, the office was not one that required any unusual qualifica- 
tion in morals or piety. Nor was it necessary for the priest to 
have any special education; such esoteric knowledge as was 
needed for his duties he could easily acquire after taking office. 
Inasmuch as there was no organic connection between the priests 
of different shrines, and there were no priests except those con- 
nected with particular shrines, the Greek cities were free from 
all the dangers of priestcraft. At the same time religion must 
remain entirely unorganized, except as it came under the direction 
of the state. 

The choice of a priest must conform to conditions which dif- 
fered with each shrine. Ordinarily the gods were served by men 
and the goddesses by women ; but the opposite was not rare, as 
at Tegea where a boy was priest of Athena, and at Thespiae 
where the priestess of Heracles was a young woman. 2 In some 
places young boys and girls were demanded by the ritual as 
priests ; a in some, old men or women ; more commonly the priest 
was a person in the prime of life. Physical perfection, even physi- 
cal beauty, was necessary to please the god ; an " unlucky " man 
would not be chosen, for ill luck was in some way connected with 
divine anger; again, as acting for the state, the priest must be 
of citizen parents. 4 Ordinarily the requirements of a priesthood 
were few and simple; any one who conformed to these conditions 
might be appointed to the office. 

The term of office for a priest in some instances lasted as long 
as he met the conditions as to age or purity, or during his lifetime ; 
not infrequently it lasted only a year. The method of filling the 

' Isocrates, a. 6. p. 16. fl Pausartias. 8 . 47. 3 I 9- *7- 6- 

8 Eg. Pausanias, a. 33.2; 10. 34. 8. 

* Plato, Leg. 6, p. 759 C; Antiphanes, quoted by Athcnaeus. 7. 55. p. 300 A; 
Dittenberger, Syllogt, 594. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 79 

office varied with the requirements of each shrine. When the 
worship was confined to a particular family in its origin, or where 
one family had performed some special service for the honor of 
the god, such as giving the money to build the temple, the priest- 
hood was often limited to that family. 1 At Eleusis, for instance, 
the hierophant was always one of the Kumolpidae j the other main 
officials belonged to the family of the Kerykes. 2 In these cases 
the successor to a priest might be selected within the family by 
some fixed principle (eg. the oldest son of the former priest), or 
by lot, or by the testament of his predecessor. Where no such 
limitation existed, the king or in a democracy the people appointed 
many of the priests. 5 Occasionally the right to a priesthood was 
sold to the highest bidder, in which case only those could buy the 
right who conformed to all the requirements of the office. 4 At 
Athens probably the commonest method of appointment was to 
cast lots among approved candidates. 6 These methods of appoint- 
ment are further evidence that the priesthood was a sacred office 
only in a very limited sense of the term. The requirements made 
in behalf of the god were few and simple ; they concerned mainly 
the physical character of the candidate ; when these were satisfied, 
the ritual might be performed so as to secure the god's favor- 
Naturally no elaborate consecration was necessary when the de- 
mands of the god were so simple. 

The emoluments of the priest's office consisted of money and 
of other privileges which had a money value, such as a portion 
from every sacrifice, in addition to some public honors. The 
prices paid for the priesthoods in the city of Erythrae varied from 
10 to 4610 drachmas, prices that probably represent the annual 
net value of the office plus what the buyer was ready to pay for 
the honor that went with it. 6 The priestess of Athena Nike re- 
ceived in money 50 drachmas a year ; part of the money gifts to 

1 E.&. the priesthood of Zeus Karios, Herodotus. 5. 66; and the descendants 
of Telines at Gela, ibid, 7. 153. 

3 Dittenberger in Hermes, 20 (1885) if. 8 Cp. Dionysius Halicam. a. ax. 

* Inscription from Erythrae, DittenberRer, Sylkge, 600. 

fi Plato, Leg. 6, 759 C; CMA* II. 567 b, 6aa. 6 Dittenberger, Sytlogd 600. 

So 

GREEK RELIGION 

Athena Polias fell to the share of her priestess ; at some shrines a 
gift to the priest in money went with each sacrifice. 1 In connec- 
tion with the administration of the temple property the priest 
might receive a percentage of the net gain. 1 Oftentimes he had 
the right to a dwelling on the temple ground, and was abundantly 
provided with food by his share in the sacrifices. 3 He might also 

have the use of temple land 
for grazing purposes or farm- 
ing, and a personal share in 
other rights belonging to the 
temple. Many priests were 
freed from military services 
and all taxes, though this 
right was sometimes more 
than counterbalanced by the 
demand that the priest him- 
self contribute toward sup- 
porting a magnificent wor- 
ship. The honor shown to 
a priest varied with the im- 

At 
Athens very many of the 
piiests received front seats 
at the theatre and at public functions ; in some cities the years 
were named from the persons holding an important priest- 
hood ; at the successful termination of his office a priest might be 
rewarded by the people with a gold crown or even with a statue. 4 
That a man should undertake the office of priest from a purely 
unselfish motive, a desire either to please the god or to serve the 
people, was a conception that found no place in Greek religion. 
Nor is the reason far to seek; almost all worship is for the benefit 

Fig. 18. — Marble Seat for the Priest portance of his shrine. 
of Dionysus in the Theatre at 

ATHENS 

1 Ditlenberger, Syttoge, 911. a Dittenberger, SyJIoge,&o\. 

'Sirabo. 12. p. 575; Schol. on Aristophanes, Vesp. 695, and PiuL 1105; von 
Prott, Fasti Graeci, n. 6. 

* CJ.A. 111. 261 f. ; Thucydides, s. 2; CJ^J. II. 477b. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS Si 

of the state, tribe, or family ; the priest who acts as their agent 
earns his pay from them, and ordinarily he does not gain any 
enduring personal relation with the god whose worship he super- 
vises. 

During his duties as priest, a man often received a special 
title, Furphoros at Epidauros, Stephanephoros at Magnesia and 
elsewhere, JLoutropharos at Sicyon. The Uieropkant at Eleusis is 
said to have laid aside his personal name while holding the office. 
Commonly the priest, at least while officiating, wore an unusual 
garment, an ungirded robe (chiton) of white or purple, or white 
with purple border. 1 The staff of the priest, the key of the 
priestess, sometimes a torch, the crown or the fillet of the god on 
their heads, were part of the insignia of office. Still it should be 
remembered that neither the office nor its insignia as a rule kept 
the priest from the business of ordinary life. 

The requirements for the priests in the matter of ceremonial 
purity are not fully known. Every worshipper, like Hector in the 
Iliad? must avoid approaching the god with soiled hands or unclean 
garment ; for the priest this requirement was no doubt rigidly 
enforced. Many priests might be married; others must remain 
celibates, at least during their term of office. In some instances 
particular foods were unclean ; cheese was forbidden the priestess 
of Athena Polias, fish the priestess of Hera at Argos, beans and 
goat flesh must be abjured by both priest and worshipper at a 
shrine of Lindos on the island of Rhodes/ Such requirements, so 
far as we know, were isolated and unusual, the remains of some 
ancient " taboo " at these shrines. 

Though so little stress was laid on the sacredness of the priest, 
it was always thought that he had a connection with the god more 
intimate than that of other worshippers. When they came to 
sacrifice at the shrine, bringing their petition or paying a vow, they 
were obliged to engage the services of the priest in order to make 

1 Strabo, 14, p. 648; Alhenaeus, 5, pp. an B, 215 B. * Iliad, 6. 366. 

•Strabo.cj. p. 395; Aelian.ZDr not. anim.g. 65; C./.G. Ins. I. 789; cp. Plutarch. 
Symp. 8. 8. 4. p. 730 D. 

GREEK RELIGION 6 

82 GREEK RELIGION 

sure that their sacrifice was offered in due form to gratify the god. 
For the regular worship of the shrine, the hymns, prayers, and 
sacrifices demanded by its ritual, the priest was alone responsible. 1 
He directed it personally] and if the god gave evidence of his 
favor to the people, the priest was the one to be honored. More- 
over it was the priest who preserved the shrine from impurity, 
guarded its votive offerings from theft, managed (with the " treas- 
urers," rafuat) whatever properties it possessed. 2 When fugitives 
sought asylum there, it was his duty to receive them and protect 
them as best he could ; when masters brought slaves to be freed, 
it was he who published their freedom by dedicating them to the 
god, or buying them for the god. s The priest took up questions 
of impiety and brought the guilty man before the courts in the 
name of the god. As a matter of fact he did represent the wor- 
shippers in the divine presence, and he might speak the will of 
the god to men, both blessing and cursing ; 4 his office was dis- 
tinctly sacred and holy, but it was the peculiarity of Greek religion 
to separate rather sharply the man from the office he held, with 
the result that the priest was sacred only at such times as he was 
acting in his official capacity. 

So far as the other officials of the temple are concerned, 5 we 
may be satisfied to indicate the tasks which fell to them. In 
earlier times, and later at small shrines, one or two slaves belong- 
ing either to the shrine or to the priest could furnish him all the 
help he needed in carrying on the worship. Only the large 
shrines demanded a varied list of attendants. In this list would 
be included (i) heralds, and others who assisted in performing 
the sacrifices, e^r. the hieropoioi ; (2) those whose duty it was 
under the supervision of the priests to take proper care of the 

1 P3ato,Z-y. 10. 909D j Aristotle, Derepub. 7 (6). 8. 18, p. 1522b. Cp. CJ.A. II . 610. 

3 Dittenbcrgcr, Syiloge, 604. 

» Foucart, Mimoirc sur I' affranchisement des esclaues, Paris, 1886; Weil, Ath. 
Mitth, 4 (1879) 25 f. 

4 [Lysias] 6. $z, p. 107; cp. Plato, Politicus, 290 C, for the distinction of priest 
and seer (/m£»t-i»). 

6 Aristotle, De rtpub. 7 (6). 8. x8 f., p. 132a b. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 83 

temple and its utensils, the sacred precinct, and the properties of 
the shrine {vcotKopot) ; and (3) the officials who under the priest 
managed the finances of such shrines as had any considerable 
property (Uoorafucu, k<oX«k aerut). To this list might be added 
musicians, and those who were appointed to perform some special 
function at one of the greater festivals {e*g. dpprj<f»6poi and Kavq- 
tfxjpoc at the Panathenaea). 1 

In addition to the priests and attendants who were always 
attached to some one shrine, there were state officials of religion 
whose duties were more general. 2 The kings at Sparta and the 
archon eponymos at Athens had a general supervision of all cult 
matters j in particular, cases of sacrilege were tried before them, 
on complaint of priest or citizen. When a new cult was to be 
established or some important change made in ritual, the senate and 
the people voted on the question ; either the priest or some 
special commission executed their decision. 8 A commission of 
hieropoioi at Athens (Upviroiol war* Ivuxvriv) provided the victims 
for some of the greater sacrifices and had some supervision of the 
administration of all the temples ; other state commissions were 
appointed regularly (eg. on temple repairs, tcpu>v iTrio-Kcvacrrai ) with 
more specific functions. 4 Some of the state officials retained the 
duty of the earlier kings to sacrifice on behalf of the people. The 
prytanies offered sacrifices at the opening of an assembly, the pole- 
march sacrificed to Artemis and Knyalius, the generals (oTpai-jpyoi) 
sacrificed for the army.* These religious duties of state officials 
were only secondary. In general the organization of religion 
crystallized about the individual shrines ; it was the duty of the 
state to give such supervision as was necessary to keep up in due 
form the ritual at these shrines. 

4. Forms of Worship : (a) Prayers, hymns, curses, oaths. — 
In the Homeric poems a wish is often accompanied by an appeal 

1 C/.C 27x5; Aristotle. Athen. Pot. 18; Pausanias, i. 27. 3 ; C.l.A. Ilk 917-918. 

a Aristoile, Athen. Pol. 30; Schoemann, Gritch. Alt. 2. 433 £ 

8 Hermes, 21 (1886) 91, 1. 9; C./.A. II. 477 b. 

4 Cp. Sclioemann. Oriech. Alt. 2. 427 f. and references. 

* C./.A. II. 392, 408 ; Aristotle, Athen. Pol, 58; C.l.A. II. 30a. 

84 GREEK RELIGION 

to the greater gods, " Father Zeus and Athena and Apollo," " May 
Athena grant me power in war," " Lord Zeus, may Telemachus be 
blessed among men and gain his heart's desire; 7 ' 1 such simple 
prayers constantly express the poet's conception of man's depen- 
dence on the gods. Prayer or a prayer-hymn regularly accom- 
panies the sacrifice to express the attitude of the worshipper and 
the special purpose of the sacrifice. It may consist of a joyful 
paean, a chant of worship (oAoAiry?}) , or a formal petition. 2 Prayer 
is appropriate also when some token may indicate the presence of 
the gods or when one passes a shrine. In dire need the heroes 
seek divine help, Chryses when his daughter is refused by Aga- 
memnon, the Trojan women when Hector tells of the army's 
repulse, Odysseus worn out with swimming or fearing the out- 
come of the struggle with the suitors; 4 the heroes prayed in 
need, and in most instances help came. Nor should the regular 
worship at the principal meal of the day be forgotten, nor Odys- 
seus's prayer before retiring at night.* 

The choice of the god to whom prayer was made depended on 
what god was nearest ; nearest in place, nearest in ties of personal 
relation, or nearest in his interest in the subject of the prayer. 6 
It is part of the epic conception of Zeus that prayer was offered 
to him more frequently than to any other god. 

The longer and more forma! prayers 7 included (i) an invoca- 
tion citing some titles of the god and perhaps mentioning the 
sphere of his activity; (2) an alleged ground for answering the 
prayer — former sacrifices to the god, former answers to prayer by 
the god, or an appeal to his pity j and (3) the petition proper. 
The reason why prayer should be answered was in almost every 
instance the bond which united the man and his god ; it was not 
a bargain, do ut des, but a social relation, cemented, to be sure, 
by mutual gifts. 

1 Iliad, 4. 288; Odyssey, 7. 3x1; Iliad, 17. 561 ; Odyssey, X7. 354. 

2 Iliad, 1.473'. Odyssey t 4. 767. 8 Odyssey, so. 1x2; 13.356. 
4 II rad, 1.37 f.; 6. 115,040; 16.514!.; Odyssey, 5. 444 f. ; 20.98. 

6 Odyssey, ia_ 337. • Odyssey, 13. 356; ao. 100; Iliad. x6. 227 ff. 

7 Ef. Iliad, x. 39; x. 451; 5. 115; 16. 333; x6. 514; Odyssey % 2. 263. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 85 

The religiousness of prayer in the epic lies in the frank, full 
recognition that " all men need the gods." ' When Hector es- 
caped him, Diomedes assumed that he must have prayed to 
Apollo before entering the battle ; the man who prayed to the 
immortals did not come in last in the race or fail with the bow ; 
the wall which the Greeks made without prayer could not prove 
a protection for them. 2 Any deeper or more personal feeling 
than would be exhibited toward a powerful and kindly human 
chief is not suggested. Even the striking passage on " Prayers 
of penitence . - . daughters of great Zeus . . . that have their 
task to go in the steps of sin . . _ to heal the harm," 3 out of line 
as it is with the main spirit of the poem, hardly suggests that 
prayer opens the way to any intimate spiritual relation with the 
gods- 
It so happens that later literature does not contain many exam- 
ples of prayers, though the Attic drama still shows epic influence 
in this particular. 4 Men pray to the gods, for from the gods come 
all good things. It was especially at the beginning of any new 
undertaking that the need of divine help was felt. At daybreak 
Helios was greeted with prayer ; dinner began and ended with 
prayer ; a prayer was offered when men entered the athletic 
games, or went on a hunt, that they might be successful ; prayers 
were offered before exhibitions in the theatre, at the opening of 
the assembly, and especially when setting out for war ; the farmer 
prayed when !ie began ploughing, and offered his first-fruits with 
thanks to the gods ; 6 Demosthenes began his oration on the crown 
with a prayer that the judges might be guided to a just decision by 

1 Odyssey, 1.48. • Mad, 23. 546 ; 23. 863; 7.448-463. 

8 Iliad, 9. 502 f. 

« Btf, Aeschylus, Sufpl. 627 f.; Sept. Theb, 1461".; Aristophanes, Eauii. 551 £; 
Nub 563 f . ; cp. Xenophon, Oeccn. 6. X. 

a Before a rte-w undertaking, Plato, Tim. 27 C ; JLeg. 712 B; Daybreak, Plato, 
Symp.vaaT); £^g\ 887 E; Meals, Diotogenesin Stobaeus, Flor. 43. 130; Xenophon, 
Hell. 4. 7. 4; Hunt, Arrian, Cyneget, 34; Xenophon, Q/rreget, 6. 13; Theatre, De- 
mostbenes, 21, $*~*p\ Assembly* Aeschines, 1, 33; Thucydides, 8. 70; H<*r, Thu- 
cydides, 2. 74; 6. 32 ; Farming, Hesiod, J£rga t 336; Diodorus Sic, Mxc. 33. 13. 

86 GREEK RELIGION 

the gods, and we are told that Pericles never spoke without a 
prayer that he might "utter no unfitting word." 1 In the orators 
the phrase " pray to the gods M means hardly more than u de- 
sire ; " 2 such is the natural result when the Athenians prayed for 
whatever they desired with little thought of worship. On the other 
hand, Socrates simply prayed the gods to send good things, on 
the ground that they knew best what was good ; for he thought 
that "those who prayed for gold or silver or power to rule or any 
such thing " were asking for what might turn out to be either good 
or bad. 8 A fable of Babrius * illustrates the folly of prayer for par- 
ticular things : a farmer vows sacrifices to Hermes, Pan, and the 
Nymphs in case he finds the thief of his cattle ; the thief proves to 
be a lion, and he must vow yet greater sacrifices to escape it himself. 
Prayers for the city that it may be free from dissension, trouble, and 
untimely death, again "that the Greeks may have prosperity," that 
barley, wine, and figs may be abundant, that women may bear chil- 
dren, that the citizens regain all good things they have lost, and 
that weapons of war be no longer needed,* — such prayers show a 
truer sense of dependence on the gods. Only a few writers like 
Aeschylus and Pindar and Xenophon give any real spiritual content 
to prayer.* 

The choice of the right god when one prayed was no light 
matter. In the country Socrates prayed to Pan ; Zeus Boulaios 
received the prayers of the assembly, Zeus Ktesios, prayers in the 
home/ Women ordinarily prayed to Demeter and Persephone, 
or in love matters to Aphrodite. 8 The choruses in the drama 
invoke the greater gods of their native city. Before battle men 

1 Demosthenes, 18. i; Plutarch, PerUles, 8, p. 156. 

2 E#. Demosthenes, 3. 18; 18. 89. 

* Xenophon, Mem. 1. 3. 2. Cp. [Plato] Alcib. 148 B-X49; Plutarch. Inst. Laccn. 

=7. P- 339 A. 

* Babrius, 33. 

6 Athenaeus, 15, p. 694 C; Aristophanes, Pax, 1320 f ; cp. s&ves, 878 t. 
•Aeschylus, Suppl. 670; Pindar, Ofym. 13. 115 ; PytA. 1. 29; Ntm. 8. 35; 
Xenophon, Mem. a. a. 14. 

1 Plato, Pha<drus x 379 B ; Antiphon, 6. 45; l&aeus, 8. 16. 

* Aristophanes, Thesm. 386 £ 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 87 

prayed to the Muses, perhaps because they were attendants of 
the archer god Apollo. 1 The lead plates recovered at Dodona 2 
show that one of the frequent questions propounded to the oracle 
was the question as to what god should be invoked for aid under 
some special conditions. In Homer men prayed to the gods with 
whom they had some personal connection ; in later times they 
sought the god presiding over that special province in which their 
request fell. The name of the god, however, was not at all so 
important as, for instance, in India or at Rome. 

The grounds for expecting prayer to be answered were much 
the same as in the epic ; because the request was a just one, 
because the man was a worshipper of the god, because the god 
pitied his need- 3 Commonly there was an appeal to remember 
the sacrifices that had been offered, coupled with vows of special 
sacrifices in case the prayer was answered. There was no assurance 
in the mind of the worshipper that the god would hear or grant 
his prayer. 4 Impurity or sin of the worshipper might stand in the 
way. Some things in the rule of the world were fixed by divine 
decree and could not be changed by prayer. Moreover it was 
necessary that the man work with the god, if he was to gain his 
petition : the carter whose wagon was stuck in the mud must goad 
on his oxen and push the wheels before Heracles would help him. 5 

Thanksgiving rarely went with petition as a part of prayer. 
When a state was freed from danger a special sacrifice was offered 
(xapuTTTJptov) , and in a few instances this sacrifice was repeated 
year after year. 6 The individual expressed his gratitude to the 
god ordinarily by a votive offering, 7 A real sacrifice of thanks- 

1 Plu larch, Ly£urg. ax, p. 53. 

2 Carapanos, Ik-done et ses mines, pi. 34-36. 

a /»rf Ciwjff, Aeschylus, Choepk. 783; Former Worship ', Herodotus, x, 87; 
Sophocles, EUctra, 1376 ; Future Worship, Aeschylus, JEum. 387 £ ; Persona/ 
Relation, Isocrates, 9. 14; Pity, Aeschylus, Suppl. 215. 

* Pindar, Olyrn. 8.8 ; Xenophon, Qrrop. 1. 6. 6; Hesiod, Brga, 7^5- Aeschylus. 

AffM*- 396. 

6 Xenophon, Cyrop. 1. 6. 5-6; Babrius, 20. 

* Plutarch, de gloria Ath. 7, p. 349 F. 

7 See $ 5 infra, p. 92 f. Cp. Xenophon, Ages. xx. a ; Anth. Pal. 6. 174; 6. 303, etc 

88 GREEK RELIGION 

giving is described by Xenophon : the prayer is, if Zeus Patroos, 
Helios, and ye other gods, receive these offerings because ye have 
granted many favors and as the expression of thanksgiving for 
granting me guidance by omens." l 

Is such prayer religious? It can of course be interpreted as a 
mere bargain with the gods; there is little doubt that the case 
sometimes lay thus in the mind of the worshipper ; it seems to 
me, however, that without question a genuine religious feeling did 
commonly exist, that the prayer was ordinarily a request from real 
gods and the votive offering was something other than mere pay- 
ment of a debt incurred. Certainly the prayers for moral guidance 
and help which occur in Pindar, the prayer of Xenophon's knight* 
that he may please the gods and do his duty in thought, word, and 
deed, and many prayers in the Attic drama, rise far above any 
mere bargain with the gods. 

No sharp line exists between prayer and the prayer-hymn. The 
paeans to Apollo, the dithyrambs to Dionysus, the processional 
hymns (Trpoo-o&a), the hymns sung with the sacred dance about 
the altar, are a most important part of religious worship. 8 No 
doubt each temple had its own ritual hymns. 4 The hymns of 
Isyllus at Epidaurus and the hymns recently found at Delphi are 
examples of hymns actually used in worship. 5 They illustrate how 
invocation of the god, recital of his deeds, and petition were com- 
bined in connection with sacrifice. 

When men appeared before the gods they stood with bare heads, 
or in extreme need they might grasp the feet of the divine image. 8 
Their attitude expressed trust rather than humility or fear ; the 

* Xenophon, Cyrop. 8. 7. 3 ; cp. 4. 1. a. 
2 Xenophon, Hipp. 1. X- 

s Pausanias, 10. 7. a; Proclus in Photius, Debt. 985; Athenaeus, 14, p. 610 B. 

* Aristotle, Poi. 5 (8). 7. p. 1341 b; Plutarch, de mtts. 6, p. 1133 B; C./.G. 3715. 
6 Wilamowitz, Isyllos von Epidauros, 18R6; Bull. Ccrr. Hell. 17 (1893) 561 f.; 

18 (1894) 345 f.; 19 (1895) 393 f- ; Fairbanks, "The Greek Paean." Cornell Studies, 
XII. 

* £tf. Sophocles. Elec. 453; Voullieme, Quomodo veteres adoraverint; "Atti- 
tudes of Worship in Greece" The BMUal World, 1B97. 98 U 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 89 

Greek did not kneel or bow his head, but looked toward the god 
with glad confidence- In presenting a sacrifice he raised his right 
hand, palm out, as though he would touch the god; in need he 
held out both hands, palm up, as though he would grasp the god 
or receive the gift he craved. 1 Without any trace of the mystical 
or magical, his prayer was a request from a god whose interest in 
him and care for him he did not question. 

The curse is a prayer (apa) not for good to one's self, but for 
evil to another, a form of prayer common among the Hebrews, 
though it finds little place in Christianity. At Athens the herald 
pronounced a curse on traitors at the opening of each assembly ; 
on criminals who were beyond the reach of direct punishment by 
the state, punishment was invoked from the gods ; temples were 
protected by curses against any who should desecrate them. 2 Thus 
a curse was pronounced by the Eumolpidae on the absent Alci- 
biades for sacrilege, and when he was acquitted of the charge the 
curse was formally withdrawn, 3 

The curses of individuals belong to a different sphere. It is 
characteristic of the unorganized state of Greek religion that 
Olympian gods were not invoked in these curses, but that the 
magical element was in the ascendant. Where the appeal for ven- 
geance was made to gods, it was directed to the gods of the lower 
regions.* It was not enough to utter the curse ; in order to make 
it truly effective it was written on lead tablets and buried by the 
house of the cursed person or in the shrine of some chthonic god. 5 
" I bind tongue, hands, feet, etc. of A. B." is a common formula ; 
the reason for the curse is omitted. Oftentimes the writing is con- 
fused, confused enough to puzzle the person against whom it is 
directed* but clear enough for the gods to understand. 

A third group includes curses against those who might disturb 

1 M&. Wad, 5. 174 ; Euripides, Elcc, 592. 

2 Demosthenes, 23. 97 ; Isocrates, 4. 157; Dittenberger,^/to^,s84; C/.Caoig. 

• Diodorus Sic* 13. 69; Plutarch. Alcib, 22, p. 202; 33, p. 210. 
4 Iliad, 9. 566 f. ; but cp. Odyssey, 17. 494. 

* C.I.G. 5773; Newton, Etiscovtrtis in Otidos, II. 2. 720 f.; Wtinsch, Defixionum 
tabeliae Attune. 

9 o GREEK RELIGION 

a grave, either to rob it of valuables or to place in it the corpse of 
one who had no right there. Curses invoking the vengeance of 
the gods of the dead on those who disturbed the grave are not 
infrequently found buried with the dead. 1 

The oa tk is nothing but a curse which a man or a group of men 
place on themselves in case they break their word. In the epic 

Fig. 19. — Relief from the Asci.epieum at Athens 

The worshipper at the left grasps the altar with his right hand in the presence 

of Asclepius and his daughter Epione. 

Achilles and Hector swear by their sceptres that they are stating 
the truth; Agamemnon invokes the gods to punish him as a per- 
jurer if he has harmed Bnseis ; when the issue of war is staked on 
a duel, wine is mixed and poured out, and sheep are slain, with a 
prayer to Zeus, the all-seeing sun, rivers, and the earth, that they 

1 Rohde. Psyche. 630 f. and references there cited. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 91 

guard the oath. 1 The ritual is symbolic, for the prayer is added 
that the perjurer's blood may be poured out like the wine, that he 
may die like the sheep. The skill in false swearing which Hermes 
gave Autolycus seems to be the power to deceive his associates 
without rendering himself liable to the curse of the oath." 

The form of the oath in Greece was to pledge something valu- 
able, the sceptre as the sign of royal power, or one's life, or one's 
welfare, or one's children, with a prayer that the gods take them away 
if the oath were broken. 3 In treaties between states it was custom- 
ary to invoke as witnesses one or more of the chief gods of each 
state. In common life at Athens, if one may judge from the com- 
edies of Aristophanes, Poseidon was frequently invoked in oaths. 
The oath of Socrates, " by the goose," was a satire on the ready use 
of oaths by his countrymen. Very solemn oaths were taken at a 
shrine, sometimes grasping the altar of the god, as though to be sure 
the gods heard the oath. 4 As the Homeric heroes shed blood and 
poured out wine with an oath as symbolizing the death that should 
come to them if their oath were broken, so Olympian gods swore 
by the Styx, the river of death, as if invoking death on the god 
who swore falsely. 5 

At Athens citizens swore allegiance to the state, every official 
took oath on entering and leaving office, and the oath was ad 
ministered to those who came before the courts. As the officials, 
in particular the jurors, were numerous, this form of oath was far 
more common than in our own day. Perjury, however, was not 
punished by the state ; the oath remained a matter of religion, 
binding only on those who feared the gods. 

The ordeal may be regarded as a form of oath. 6 The guards in 
Sophocles's Antigone are ready to take hot irons in their hands, to 
go through fire, or to swear by the gods that they are guiltless. 

* /Had, 1. 333 ; 10. 331 ; 9. 132 ; 3. X03 f., 369 f. fl Odyssey, 19. 396. 
8 Sophocles, Track. 1189 ; Lysias, «a. 10 ; 32. 13 ; Lycurgus, Ltocr. 79. 

* Andocides, 1. 98,136; Thucydades, 5. 50 ; I-ycurgus. Leocr. 20; Demosthenes, 

23.68. 

* Eiesiod, Tkeog. 784 f. ; cp. Dummler, Delf>kika t 1894. 

6 Sophocles, Ant. 264 f. ; Pausanias, 7. 25. 8 ; cp. Bckker, CharikUs, t. 378 £ 

9 2 

GREEK RELIGION 

To drink the blood of a bull is mentioned as a characteristic 
Greek ordeal. 1 The references to such ordeals in which a man 
submits his case to the gods are few, nor does the practice find 
any place in Greek courts of law. 

5. Forms of Worship : {<o) Votive offerings, //recessions, ath- 
letic contests. — The Greek votive offering was a gilt to some god, 

ordinarily in acknowledg- 
ment of special blessing. 2 
It was often promised 
beforehand, as Odysseus 
promised to make rich gifts 
(the arms of Dolon and a 
sacrifice) to Athena, and 
Hector vowed to decorate 
Apollo's temple with the 
arms of the conquered* 3 
In great need Hecabe car- 
ried a beautiful garment 
to the temple of Athena 
and laid it on the knees of 
the goddess to secure her 
favor. 4 When Telemachus 
thinks Odysseus a god, he 

Fig. 20. — Relief from Thessaly (Thebes) 

Two locks of hair hang in a niche below the 
inscription " Philombrotus, Apthonetus, 
(sons) of Deinomachus, (to) Poseidon." 

«« 

prays, "Be gracious," and promises sacrifices and golden gifts; so 
the companions of Odysseus think to propitiate Helios* Gar- 
ments and gold accompany the thank-offerings of Aegisthus; 
Achilles offers to Patroclus the hair which had been vowed to 
Spercheius in case he returned home in safety 5 a tithe of agri- 
cultural products is mentioned in the story of Artemis and the 
Calydonian boar. 6 In a word men appear before a god, as before 

1 Aristophanes, Eoait. S3 : Pausanias, 7. 25. 13. 

8 See Schoemann, Griech. Alt. 2. 218 f_; Reisch, Die griechische Weihgcschenkc ; 
and especially Rouse, Greek Votive Offerings^ roos. 

» Jliad, lo. 463. 570; 7. 81 f. A Iliad, 6. 303. 

6 Odyssey, x6. 185 ; 13. 346 f. 

• Odyssey, 3. 274; I had, 23. 146. cp. to. 15; 9. 534. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 

93 

a king, with some gift ; the purpose may be to secure the god's 
favor, or it may be to maintain friendly relations, as when the 
host sends away his guest with a gift. 

In later times the votive gift is either a thank-offering, pure 
and simple, or the payment of a vow. Such gifts were offered by 
the state in gratitude for signal divine 
favor, such as victory in war or delivery 
from pestilence; tithes or first-fruits 
were also brought to certain shrines in 
gratitude for the regular harvests- At 
the shrine of Demeter at Eleusis, for 
instance, offerings of the first-fruits were 
received regularly from many Greek 
states and constituted a considerable 
part of the regular income of the 
shrine. 1 The temple of Apollo at 
Phigaleia was erected in gratitude for 
deliverance from the plague. 8 " The ^3+** T *frlfO' t fcX»B / 
statue of Apollo the Averter by Calamis, F|G- 3X ._clay tah 

Ao«>**T 

LET FROM 

Corinth 

that of the Locust Apollo (assigned 

to Pheidias), the Hermes Carrying a An artist is represented at work 

ram at Tanagra, commemorated special on an «l uestnan sta1uc - 

cases of divine favor. 3 The victory at Marathon led the Athenians 
to build a treasure-house for votive offerings at Delphi, and later to 
erect the statue of Athena Promachos on the Acropolis. 4 The 
temple of Zeus at Olympia is said to have been built with the 
spoils of war. 5 The arms of the enemy might be dedicated in a 
"trophy," or hung in a temple, as shields were fastened on the 
architrave of the Parthenon. 6 After the battle of Salamis, ships 
were dedicated to the gods ; the serpent tripod set up at Delphi 
after Plataea is one of the most interesting of these offerings ; 

1 C./.A., IV. i, a, p, 59, no. 27 b. » Pausanias, 1, 3. 4; 1. 24. 8; 9. 22. I. 

2 Pausanias, 8. 41. 8. * Pausanias, xo. 11. 5; 1. 28. 2, 
e Pausanias, 5. 10. 2. 

* Arrian, Anab. 1. 16. 7 ; Plutarch, Af<X<wd<r s i6\ p. 273 : cp. Pausanias, 5. 10. 4^ 

94 

GREEK RELIGION 

the Colossus of Rhodes was an offering from the spoils of 
war. 1 

The votive gifts of individuals illustrate much the same prin- 
ciple. It is probable that the farmer made some offering of first- 
fruits to the gods j the hunter 
and fisherman dedicated tokens 
of their success ; merchants 
and manufacturers sought favor 
of the gods by giving speci- 
mens of their handiwork or 
their tools, representations of 
men at work, and occasional 
gifts of money, if not regular 
tithes. 8 Men healed from 
illness expressed their grati- 
tude by dedicating an image 
of the healing god, or of the 
snake of Asclepius, of the cured 
member, of a surgical instru- 
ment, or perhaps some utensil 
for the temple service. 8 The 
thirsty soldier dedicated a 
metal frog to indicate how he 
found water ; a votive lion sug- 
gested the shepherd's escape 
from danger ; the traveller 
rescued at sea brought to the 
gods many a token of his grati- 
tude.* The warrior might 
offer to the gods either arms 
taken from the enemy, or the arms in which he had won victory, 
or some relief depicting divine aid in battle.* The successful 

Fig. as. — Marble Relief 

A man whose leg has been cured offers 
a model of the leg to a god of healing. 

1 Herodotus. 9. 80 f. : Pliny, /Vat. /fist. 34. 41. 

a Rouse, Greek Votive Offerings. 39 t 

* Anthot. Pal. 6. 43; 6. not \ Rouse^ Md., aa6 t 

* Rouse, ibid., 187 t 
6 Rouse, ibid., 98 1 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 95 

athlete dedicated his quoit or jumping weights, the wreath he had 
won, perhaps a statue of the god, or a statue of himself. 1 So the 
victors in other contests brought to the gods either their prizes, 
Such as the tripod given for the successful tragedy at Athens, or 
other token of their gratitude. The officials who were honored 
with a crown from the state, dedicated this in some temple where 
it stood as a memorial of their honor. 3 The im- 
portant incidents of family life, marriage, birth, 
puberty, led to votive gifts, such as the dolls and 
maiden's garments dedicated to Artemis before 
marriage. 3 The worshippers at Eleusis sometimes 
dedicated the garments in which they had been 
initiated ; an ancient votive statue represents one 
Rhombos or Kombos carrying the calf he had 
sacrificed to the gods ; at most shrines are found F1GT23.— Votive 
dedicated vessels used in sacrifice, models of Frou from 
animals sacrificed, and small images of the god THE Pelqpow- 
worshipped at the shrine. 4 The sword of Pelops, 
the spear of Achilles, the necklace of Eriphyle, SC rJ ed °? Amon 
the cup of Nestor,* 5 were among the votive offer- son of Sonous to 
ings pointed out in temples to visitors of later Brason" (per- 

time. J*» a IocaI 

hero) . 

It appears from the above summary that the gifts 
of the state were likely to be temples, lands, means of income, or 
objects to adorn the shrine. The gifts of the individual had more 
definite reference to his own experiences. He might give an image 
of the god; more often he brought trophies, crowns, instruments of 
his craft, a representation of himself as warrior, athlete, craftsman, 
or worshipper, — some token of the blessing he had received from 
the god. The nature of the gift indicates the belief that the gods 
were like men, ready to help dependent friends and pleased by 
some token which was brought thera in recognition of their help. 

1 Rouse, ibid., 149 f. * Rouse, ibid., 340 £ 

s Rouse, ibid, t 259 f. * Rouse, ibid., 274 f. 

6 Pausanias, 6. 19. 6; 3. 3. 8 ; 9. 41. a; Athenaeus, n, p. 466 E. 

96 GREEK RELIGION 

While vows and votive gifts in Homer ordinarily accompanied 
some request, the fundamental meaning of the later offerings was 
the recognition of the god's help in human need ; whether they 
took the form of a tax on man's gain (like the tithe), or of a pay- 
ment for divine help, or of an informal gift in token of gratitude, 
all alike expressed man's sense of dependence on the gods- We 
have seen that men could make their gifts at the same time a 
means of honor to themselves. With the degeneration of religious 
sentiment the votive wreath and the portrait statue lost their 
religious meaning and became a means of self-glorification. 

The number, value, and artistic importance of the votive offer- 
ings which were accumulated at the greater shrines of Greece made 
them at the same time treasuries and museums. According to an 
inscription of about the year 180 b.c. the temple of Apollo on 
the island of Delos possessed 1600 vessels of gold and silver, many 
of them valuable for their inset gems and artistic reliefs as well as 
for their weight of precious metal, in addition to rings, necklaces, 
crowns or wreaths of gold, tripods, statues, etc. 1 The protection 
and care of these objects brought no small responsibility on the 
officials of the temple. 

The procession and the celebration of athletic contests at reli- 
gious festivals may be mentioned in connection with votive offer- 
ings, for by these means also the gods were honored in much the 
same way as human rulers, though in ancient Greece little was 
known of processions other than religious. The religious proces- 
sion is not at all unfamiliar to-day. Tokens of worship are still 
carried through the streets by earnest throngs, in time of need 
or of joy or again at some recurring church festival. Thus the 
church still expresses homage to God and to its saints as a state 
honors its ruler. At each great festival the people gathered in a 
procession which conducted to the shrine the animals and utensils 
for sacrifice. At the Panathenaea the new robe for Athena was 
carried in the greatest procession of all, the procession pictured on 
the Parthenon frieze. 2 A regular procession street led from the 

* Dittenberger, Syllogc, 588. ■ Cp. \ 8, infra, p. 114. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 97 

gate of the city to the market-place, and then on to the entrance of 
the Acropolis. Before the dramatic representations in the theatre, 
poet and actor and people joined in solemn procession bringing 
sacrifices to Dionysus. At these and other great festivals the pur- 
pose of the procession was to present gifts and sacrifices to the 
gods with all possible honor from a large number of people. 

The athletic contest, far as it may seem from our conception 
of religious worship, resembles the procession in that it also was a 
means of doing honor to human rulers. In the Iliad elaborate 
games were celebrated by Achilles in honor of his dead friend 
Patroclus. 1 What pleased the living man would gratify his ghost ; 
thus feasting and athletic games became part of the funeral of great 
men- Perhaps by transfer from the funeral, perhaps as an exhi- 
bition of human prowess brought as an offering to the god, such 
games became a regular part of the great religious festivals. They 
were celebrated to Athena at Athens, to Demeter at Eleusis, to 
Apollo at Delphi ; at Olympia they quite eclipsed other ele- 
ments in the worship of Zeus.* In the Olympic games contests in 
wrestling, boxing, running, and throwing dated back to very early 
times ; chariot races and races on horseback added to the splen- 
dor of the festival as time went on, and the number of contests was 
increased by dividing the contestants into classes by age. In 
the great games of Greece (at Olympia, Delphi, Nemea, and the 
Isthmus) the prize was simply a wreath from trees sacred to the 
god. The character of the prize, the religious procession, and 
finally the sacrifices, kept in evidence the religious character of 
the games and of the shrines where they were conducted. 

6, Forms of Worship: (^) TIu sacrift£tal tneaL — That wor- 
ship should consist in killing pigs or bulls with elaborate ceremony, 
or that blood should have any efficacy in appeasing a god, is 
totally foreign to our religious ideas ; symbolism borrowed from 
the worship of the ancient Hebrews alone gives it some place in 
religious thought to-day. In almost every form of primitive reli- 
gion, however, the communion meal in which gods and men shaTe 

* Iliad. 23. 357 f. fl Cp. { 8, infra, p. 117 L 

GREEK RELIGION 7 

98 GREEK RELIGION 

consecrated food, and the use of blood to pacify angry deities or 
to remove some taint from man, constitute a large part of worship. 
The communion meal will be considered in this section, propitia- 
tory and mystic sacrifice in the following. 

The normal form of worship in Greece consisted in the sacrifice 
of a domestic animal at the altar with hymn and prayer ; parts of it 
were burned for the god, the rest eaten by the worshippers- The 
word "to sacrifice" (Uptvuv) is regularly used as meaning "to 
kill for food." The practice of killing animals in a household 
sacrifice when meat was needed continued in the Athens of Peri- 
cles i even when meat was to be sold in a butchershop, some 
practices of sacrifice were probably observed. 1 

In the epic the occasions of sacrifice were (i) in time of danger 
or before some important undertaking, and (2) at any banquet 
when flesh was eaten. 2 The swineherd Eumaeus sacrificed a pig 
with prayer for his master, that he might have meat to set before 
the unrecognized Odysseus ; every banquet of the princes began 
with sacrifice and prayer. 5 Special banquet sacrifices were insti- 
tuted when a god indicated his presence either by some special 
sign or by granting success in war. Before setting out for Troy, 
before other journeys, before battle, this type of sacrifice was 
offered.* A banquet sacrifice was successful in propitiating Apollo, 
but Odysseus offered a ram to Zeus in vain.* The occasions of 
sacrifice in Homer are in harmony with the view of the gods as 
superior members of society ; when the gods ate with men, they, 
like other guests, were united with men by ties of guest-friendship. 

This same conception held good later. The individual sacri- 
ficed when he wished meat for a banquet. The events of do- 
mestic life — birth, coming of age, marriage — furnished special 
occasions of sacrifice and banquet. In such cases the sacrifice 

* Plato, Pol it i a, i r p. 328 C ; Athenaeus, 14, p. 659 F; Artemidorus, Oneir. 5. 2, 

3 Odyssey, 14. 350; cp. "The Significance of Sacrifice in the Homeric Poems/' 
The Ale-w World, 1898. 

* Eg- Iliad, 2. 402 t ; 1 r. 772. ■* Iliad, a. 305 f> ; 2. 402 L 
c Iliad, 1. 457 ; Odyssey, 9. 551. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 

99 

would regularly be performed at home. When a vow was to be 
paid, the worshipper would present the sacrifice at the shrine of 
the god to whom the vow was made, and often the festal meal 
would take place at the shrine itself. In the regular worship of 
the state, sacrifices of this type were offered at each shrine yearly 
or monthly in accordance with the religious calendar there in 

Fig. 34. — Athenian Reivfigureo Vase Painting (Ktamnos. Munich) 

A bull is given water before being sacrificed ; the tripod, which was given as a 
pri ze in dithyrambic contests in honor of Dionysus, indicates the occasion of 
the sacrifice. 

force. Additional sacrifices were called for when some impor- 
tant undertaking was hegun ; if an expedition proved successful, 
or the state received other special marks of divine care, a thank- 
offering of this type was in place. 1 Often a vow was made before 
the battle, as at Marathon the Athenians vowed to sacrifice to 
Artemis as many goats as there were Persians killed, 2 in which 

* Thucydides, 8. 70; Xenophon, Htll. 7. a. 23; 4. 3. 14. Cp. Lasaulx, Stxdie* 
des ciassischen Altertums, 364 f. s Cp. Xenophon, Anab. 3. a. za. 

ioo GREEK RELIGION 

case the payment of the vow would be a great sacrificial meal of 
thanksgiving. The hekatomb ("hundred oxen") early became 
a general designation for the great sacrifices offered by the state. 
In a word the communion meal, the "meat offering" of our Old 
Testament* is the appropriate offering to the Olympian gods on 
all occasions except one ; when they have clearly shown that they 
are angry, man does not propose this meal which he shares with 
the gods. Otherwise, in time of doubt or joy or as part of daily 
life, men worshipped the gods by a ritual which emphasized the 
social ties uniting them with the gods. 

In preparation for the communion meal, it was necessary first 
to select a suitable animal. It must be a domestic animal, from 
the flock or herd raised by human hand, and a perfect specimen 
of its kind. At some shrines the sex, age, and the color of the 
victim were determined in the ritual ; e.g> at the Panathenaic 
festivals cows were offered, while Poseidon preferred a black bull. 
Occasionally the ritual required a special kind of wood ; in sacri- 
fices to Zeus at Olynvpia only white poplar was used on the altar, 
and if the fire became defiled by the presence of death or from 
any other cause, pure fire must be procured, it might be from a 
house near by, or from Apollo's shrine at Delphi. 1 Then those 
who were to share the sacrifice put on festal array, white garments, 
and wreaths of flowers on their heads ; the animal also was deco- 
rated with garlands and sometimes the horns of oxen were cov- 
ered with gold leaf. 2 

The ritual of sacrifice was somewhat as follows : Under the 
direction of the priest (or father or king) a basket containing the 
sacrificial utensils and a bowl of water were borne around the altar 
from left to right. 3 After the water had been consecrated by 
thrusting into it a brand from the altar, the worshippers dipped 
their hands in it, and it was sprinkled on altar, victim, and offerer. 

* Paysanias, 5. 14. 3 ; Plutarch, eirist. so, p. 331 ; Full, Ccrr. Hell. 18 (1894) 87, 92. 
a Odyssey. 4. 759—766; Aeschines, 3. 77; Aristophanes, Thesm. 447 f, ; Odyssey, 
3. 436; C.I.A. I V. r. 2, p. 59. no. 37 b. 

8 Eur i pi des, Elec. 800 f. ; Aristophanes, Pax, 948 1 ; Zys* 1 139 ; Odyssey, 3. 441 f. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 

EOX 

Salted barley-corns from the basket Were thrown on the animal's 
head and into the altar fire. From the head of the victim, stand- 
ing unbound before the altar, a lock of hair was cut and burned, 
and libation was poured on the altar with prayer. 1 The prelimi- 
nary rites were thus completed. 

. After silence had been proclaimed, the music of flutes began, 
and the animal was slain. 2 The larger animals were felled with 

Fig. 25. — Athenian Red-figurkd Vase Painting (Krater, Boston) 

In the presence of " Teiresias " and several attendants the sacrificing priest or 
king is about to sprinkle barley-corns on the altar. 

a blow from the sacrificial axe; then the head was raised toward 
heaven, and the throat cut in such wise that the blood would 
spurt on the altar, or would be caught in a vessel and poured on 
the altar. At this point, in Homer, the women raised a cry of 
worship (oAoAvyr/). 8 After the animal had been skinned and cut 
up the inner parts were first disposed of, a part burned on the 

1 Aristophanes. Thesm. 295; Odyssey, 14. 421 f. ; Iliad, 3. 273. 
a Odyssey, 3. 443, 449; //tad, 1. 459; cp. Herodotus, 1. 132. 
» Odyssey, 3. 450 ; cp. 4. 767. 

io2 GREEK RELIGION 

altar with incense, the remainder roasted and eaten. If the 
entrails were of normal shape and color, it was an omen that 
the sacrifice was acceptable to the gods. 1 In the epic, men 
wrapped the thigh pieces (fXTjpta) in fat and burned them on the 
altar; later the end of the back and tail (oo-«£ik), along with other 
bones on which more or less meat had been left, were burned 
with a libation. Then came the feast in which the offerers shared 
the roasted meat, while music and dance expressed men's joy in 
the service of the god. At some great festivals, the whole people 
shared the banquet and hundreds of victims were consumed. 

If we ask the question as to what of real worship there was in 
butchering an animal to feast on its flesh with song and carousal, 
several answers may be given.* The motive might be fear, as 
though the gods were hungry wolves diverted from attacking men 
by the pieces of meat thrown to them. While references to the 
envy of the gods lend some color to such a view, yet in the Greek 
banquet-sacrifice the gods are always represented as benevolent 
beings, ready to bless men who did them honor. There is no 
question that the "fragrance of fat thighs" burned on the altar a 
was thought to lure the gods to the presence of their worshippers. 
So Poseidon left Olympus and went to the distant Aethiopians to en- 
joy the feasts they prepared, and on another occasion all the gods 
went there on the same errand. 4 To burn a portion of the victim 
was to send it up to the gods. And the gods were pleased both 
because they liked the food, and because they liked to be honored 
with splendid ceremonial and abundant victims. In general the 
larger the sacrifices the more one might count on the divine 
favor to be gained by means of them irrespective of the righteous- 
ness of the worshipper/ Only rarely does some Greek writer 
speak of the spirit of the worshippers as more important than the 

1 See Chap. i. § 6, p. 49. 

* Cp. " The Significance of Sacrifice in the Homeric Poems," The New World, 
June, 1898. 

* E& Iliad, 8. 549. 4 Odyssey, 1. 22; //**?«*, t. 423, 

* Plato, Politia, 2, p. 36a C ; Iliad, 1. 65; Odyssey, 3. 273; cp- Xenophon, Anab. 5. 
7.32. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 103 

number of animals offered. 1 Mention is made of the spirit of 
piety which leaves some meat on the bones that are burned on 
the altar, as compared with the mean habit of scraping the bones 
clean. In origin, it would seem that the life of each animal was 
brought to the altar (t.e. the blood was sprinkled on the altar) 
because the animal was in some sense sacred to the god. Prac- 
tically the sense of worship lay in the feeling that the gods shared 
the banquet with men; the gods were honored when men dedi- 
cated to them flesh and bread and wine to be shared in commun- 
ion meal ; in this meal men gained a fresh sense that the gods 
were present with their worshippers to bless them. 

Along with portions of the animal or as a separate sacrifice, fruit 
or cakes were sometimes burned on the altar that the gods might 
also share these portions of the feast." Occasionally poor people 
offered cakes in the shape of animals, or fruit fixed to imitate ani- 
mals, while at the Diasia in Athens these were the only sacrifices 
permitted. 8 Instead of being bumed, cakes might be presented 
before the god (like the Hebrew shewbread) and later eaten by the 
priests- To the goddesses of nature, Demeter, I^to, Artemis, and 
the great mother of the gods, it was only natural to offer as a sac- 
rifice the fruits of nature; in the worship of the home, fruit and 
flowers seem to have been the regular offering.* With this gift of 
fruit and flowers should be mentioned the use of incense ; it was 
burned with the burnt sacrifice on the altar, and it was offered in 
censers (Ov/AiaT-qpia) in the temples before the images of the gods.* 

Libations of wine mixed with water are frequently poured out 
to the gods. The epic heroes 6 pour wine on the altar at the sac- 
rifice, and at the banquet a libation is made before drinking- A 

* Isocratea, a. 20; [Plato], Aicibiad, 13, p. 150. 

2 Odyssey, 15. 322; Athenaeus, 4, p. 146 F (Menander). 

8 Pollux, 1.30; Suidas. s.v. fiofa tfiSofios; ThuCydideS. 1. Ia6.6, and schol.; Pau- 

sanias 1. 26. 5 : 8. a. 3. 

1 Pausanias, 8. 37. 7 ; Xenophon, Artab. 5. 3. 9 ; iTrdpypa™* Uiitenberger, Sylloge^ 

630. 

6 Von Fritze, Die Rauchop/er 6ei den Griechen, 1894. 
6 K. Bernhardt, Das Ttan&opfer bei Homer, 1885. 

104 

GREEK RELIGION 

vow or prayer is more effective if it is attended with a gift of wine 
to the gods ; before any important undertaking if a burnt sacrifice 
is not offered, at least wine is freshly mixed and poured out with 
a prayer for success. 

In later usage libations at the sacrifice and at the banquet 
are universal ; the practice of making libations of wine to reen- 

force a prayer is not so 
often mentioned as in 
the epic. In these in- 
stances the libation is 
made from mixed wine 
and water, since the 
gods, like men, did not 
drink wine unmixed. 1 
The Athenians offered 
a mixture of milk, 
honey, and water (with- 
out wine, /xtXttcparov) to 
such lesser gods as the 
Muse Mnemosyne, Eos, 
Helios, Selene, the 
Nymphs, and to Aphro- 
dite Ourania.* Zeus 

Fig. 26. — Athenian Red-figured Vase 
Painting (Kyiix, Aihens) 

A youth with kylix and pitcher pours a libation on H fa Athens fe _ 

an altar; inscription, " Atnenoaotos Kalos. J r 

ceived no animal offer- 
ing and no wine. The Eumenides and gods of the lower world 
generally received "soothing libations" without wine. 8 In some 
cults it is possible that this peculiarity dated back to a time when 
wine was not yet in use ; in other instances it may be due to the 
feeling that wine is not "soothing," not a suitable drink for gods 
easily made angry. 

1 E.g. Thucydides. 6. 33. «. 

*Schol. Sophocles. Otd. Col. 100 (Polcmon). 

8 Pausanias, 1. 26. 5; Aeschylus, Eum. 107; Sophocles, Oed. Cot. 100, 481; 
Euripides, Iph. Taur. 160 f. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 105 

7. Forms of Worship: (d) Propitiatory sacrifice^ purification. 
— To angry gods or gods easily roused to anger the Greeks 
offered sacrifices very different from the glad communion meal 
described in the preceding section. There is little doubt that 
human sacrifice was occasionally practised by the Greeks, though 
it is difficult to find well authenticated cases of it in Greek history- 
When the Greeks set out for Troy, story describes the sacrifice 
of Iphigeneia, 1 and that of Polyxena as they set out for home. 
Creon is said to have sacrificed his son to save Thebes from 
a besieging army, while Codrus gave up his own life to save 
Athens on a similar occasion. 2 Epimenides is reported to have 
sacrificed a youth when he purified Athens from the plague. 
These cases are mythical, but they represent the principle that 
when the lives of many are in danger from war or plague, the vol- 
untary sacrifice of some man may turn aside the anger of gods. 
If the story could be traced to some earlier authority than Plu- 
tarch, we might easily believe that Themistocles sacrificed three 
captive Persians before the battle of Salamis. 8 In the worship of 
Zeus Lykaios in Arcadia, of Zeus at Rhodes, of Apollo at Leucas, 
human sacrifice is said to have been offered up to the time when 
it was strictly forbidden by the emperor Libanius.* A criminal 
condemned to death, however, was the victim ; his death in the 
service of religion was said to purify the city from evil.* 

In actual practice the propitiatory sacrifices before a battle or 
a voyage were of animals, sometimes said to be substituted for 
men. At some few regular centres of worship, particularly in cults 
of Dionysus and of Artemis, goats or cattle were also said to be 
substituted for human beings, and human garments were put on 
the animals as if the gods would be better pleased by such an 
illusion. 6 It is, then, entirely possible that some of the propitia- 
tory sacrifices to be described in this section involved the sub- 

1 tOvaev airrov irat&a . . . tirv&bv ^prjxlwf A-rjudrwy, Aeschylus, Agam. I417. 
a Euripides. Pkoen. 911 f.; LycurguS. Leocr. 86 f. 
8 Plutarch, Themistocles, 13; cp. Aristidcs.q* 

* Pausanias, 8. a. 3 and 6; Strabo. 10, p. 452. e Harpocration, s.v. Qapfiaicdt. 

* Pausanias. 9. 8. a; Aelian, De not. anita. 12. 34; Paroemix>gr.grat£. 1, p. 402. 

106 GREEK RELIGION 

stitution of animals where men had once been sacrificed; the 
principle, however, would hold good in an extremely small num- 
ber of cases, and can in no sense be used to explain this type of 
sacrifice. As for the fact that these propitiatory sacrifices are not 
mentioned in the epic, 1 it can hardly be explained on the ground 
that they are not properly Greek. They are not normally offered 
to the Olympian gods, the gods of the epic, consequently there 
was no occasion for mentioning them. The fundamental fact that 
the epic neglects one whole side of Greek religion, the worship of 
local spirits, agricultural deities, and the dead, together with magi- 
cal rites and propitiatory rites, must be considered in another 
connection. 8 

The ordinary sacrifice of propitiatory character differed from 
the communion meal in occasion, in ritual, and in the gods to 
whom it was offered. The communion- meal offering assumed that 
the gods were favorable, whether it was offered when they had 
already signalized their favor or before some important undertak- 
ing. On the other hand the propitiatory sacrifice meant that men 
felt the anger of the gods in the danger or trouble which was 
already on them ; or again when it was offered before battle or 
before a voyage or before sowing grain, it was intended to pacify 
the possible anger of the gods before any damage had been done. 3 
The ritual was different. A black animal was ordinarily chosen ; 4 
it was brought to a low mound of earth (irrx^f**-) instead of the 
regular altar ; its head was bowed toward the earth and the blood 
allowed to soak into the ground, for the spirits of evil were mainly 
spirits of the world below ; fi most important of all it was not tasted 
by the worshippers, but wholly burned, as though the gods took 
pleasure in its utter destruction.* No libations were made with 
the sacrifice, nor were the libations on other occasions to these 

1 Apollo 5s propitiated by a banquet sacrifice, Iliad, i. 447 1 
s See Tart II, Chap, ii, infra, 

* Herodotus, 6. na; Xenophon, Anab, 1. 8. 15; 4. 3. 17. 
4 Cp. Pausanias, S. 34. 3. 

* Odyssey, xo. 537, and schol. ; Kaibel, Epigr am. graec. 1034. 

* Schol. on Sophocles, Ocd. CoL 4a. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 107 

gods like those to the gods above. Instead of cakes such as men 
ate, a peculiar cake or porridge (niXavos) was made of meal, 
honey, and sometimes poppy seed ; this was never tasted, but 
burned on the low altar of the spirits of the deep. 1 For this 
ritual, a series of words was used entirely different from those used 
for the communion meal (<r<f>txyux, crayc£ecr0ut, 7reXavos, etc.). And 
the gods were different, or at least different in attitude. 8 They 
were easily angered, dangerous to approach even when they had 
rich blessings to bestow; many times the fearful evidence they 
had given of their anger was the occasion for these sacrifices. In 
this group of divinities were included (1) the dead, and those gods 
who were rulers of souls; (2) local spirits, called heroes, who 
were regarded in much the same way as the dead ; (3) agricul- 
tural deities; and (4) many gods of the sea, river gods, and the 
winds. Occasionally propitiatory sacrifices were offered to some 
of the Olympian gods, especially when some old nature deity had 
become merged with a god of Olympus. 

So far as the souls of the dead are concerned, their worship will 
be considered in connection with the rites of burial. The chthonic 
gods, gods who have to do with souls and the world below, include 
Hades and Persephone, Hermes conductor of souls, Hecate, the 
Eumenides, etc. To the rulers of the dead and Hermes is di- 
rected the ritual used in the citation of souls, as depicted in the 
JPersians of Aeschylus. The Eumenides or Erinyes seem to have 
been originally the spirits of dead men that have been wronged ; 
they receive propitiatory sacrifices to avert their wrath. These 
chthonic gods normally received propitiatory sacrifice, though 
sometimes the communion-meal offering was appropriate. 

The worship of heroes, local spirits supposed to be souls of the 
dead with peculiar powers and associations, is an interesting phase 
of Greek religion. They seem to be half souls lingering by the 

1 Hermes, 29 (1884) 281, 625; Aeschylus, Pers. 203; A ristophanes, Plut. 661 
antf schol. 

2 See "The Chthonic Gods of Greek Religion," Am, Jour. Phil. 21 (1900) 

io8 

GREEK RELIGION 

tomb, half g&ds with strange power to bless and to curse; their 
worship corresponds to their nature in that we find evidence of 
double sacrifices to some heroes, communion- meal offerings as 
to gods with the usual ritual, and propitiatory sacnfces of black 
animals on another altar as to heroes. 1 Because they were easily 
roused to anger, because plagues and other misfortunes were at- 
tributed to heroes, the 
uneaten propitiatory 
sacrifice was ordinarily 
the more appropriate. 

The worship of agri- 
cultural gods is in many 
places not differenti- 
ated from that of the 
rulers of the dead, for 
the same mother earth 
receives the dead and 
gives birth to the grain. 
The uncertainty of the 
crops is understood to 
mean that agricultural 
gods are easily provoked to wrath. In the worship of Demeter, god- 
dess of the grain, of Dionysus, god of plant-life, and of Apollo who 
wards off pestilence from the crops as well as from the flocks, we 
find propitiatory rites as well as communion-meal offerings ; the 
propitiation here commonly is of the type described below as 
mystic or purificatory sacrifice. 

Other gods who are easily moved to anger also receive propitia- 
tory sacrifices. Artemis, who stood so close to nature, was wor- 
shipped in this way before battle; Poseidon, with temper like that 
of the sea, the Winds, never to be depended on, the River gods, 
now bringing fertility but soon raging with wild fury, these and 

Fig* 27.— Relief in Thebes 

At the left the " hero ,r stands beside his horse be- 
fore a low altar (e>x«pa>; a line of worshippers at 
the right bring a pig and a libation. 

1 H^afrXc? tr<f>af uis %pwt ivayl^ovrm . . . ojs 0r</> Qvav, Pausdnias, 2. Xo. 1; 
Herodotus, 2. 44; Isocrates, 10. 63 ; cp. Pausanias, 8. 34. 3. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 109 

similar divinities receive sacrifices of this type (o-^ayta) when men 
have occasion to fear their possible wrath. 

Although propitiatory sacrifice, like the communion-meal offer- 
ing, has been reduced to one more or less defined type in the 
period when we become acquainted with the ritual, it probably 
represents rites of different origin and different meaning. Only 
one form, the purification to be considered in the next paragraph, 
can be clearly differentiated from the others. It seems clear, 
however, that propitiatory sacrifices were offered to the dead and 
to gods connected with the dead, because no gift could be so 
welcome as the blood — sometimes human blood — which was 
believed to revive their weakened power of thought and conscious- 
ness. The body of the animal was burned because it was not safe 
to treat it in any other way. In the case of the winds, river gods, 
and sea gods, perhaps such sacrifices were offered because blood 
was the most potent charm man had at his command- To secure 
the favor of gods who were or might be angry, a human sacrifice 
or even an animal substitute might be all that was necessary, an 
object on which the lightning stroke of wrath was discharged and 
made harmless. The "envy of the gods" was a familiar thought 
to the Greeks ; Polycrates vainly hoped to avoid it by inflicting 
on himself the loss of his valuable ring ; * but that the Greek gods 
so regularly took pleasure in the destruction of something valuable 
as to give rise to all sacrifice of this type, does not seem to me a 
safe principle of explanation. 

• 
Rites of purification are not as important in Greek religion as 

in the religions of many other peoples. Still there does attach to 
murder, and in fact to death in any form, a taint which incapaci- 
tates men to appear before the gods. Childbirth also demands a 
lustration. Furthermore before marriage and before participating 
in the mysteries an individual must be purified ; at certain seasons 
and after such troubles as a plague, the city needs purification ; 
before a political assembly or gathering in the theatre the place is 

* Herodotus, 3. 41. 

no 

GREER RELIGION 

Fie. 28. — Scene on a 
Greek Gem 

purified with religious rites to guard against the evil which the 
possible presence of some polluted person might cause. In the 
case of murder it is the spirit of the dead man who pursues the 
murderer until it is appeased ; * in other cases the taint is con- 
ceived as a sort of spiritual entity which 
inheres in those who come near what 
defiles, and against which special care 
is needed. Apparently the rites of 
purification were originally rites of 
riddance by which spirits of evil were 
effectually driven away ; s with the recog- 
nition of all-ruling greater gods, the 
same rites came to be understood as 
the means of removing some taint 
which made these gods angry. 

In the ceremony of purification the 
subject sits with veiled head while he is 

The three daughters of Me- sprinkled with the blood of a sucking 
tomput (?) are being puri- . and r - g offered 8 Hbations 

fieo from their insanity by a 
bearded priest, who holds without wine accompany the ceremony 

above them a young pig and and cakes are burned on the altar. 

a branch for sprinkling; at Under sorne circumstances sea water 

the right is a young attendant, . _ _ . - ■ 

at the left possibly Artemis or s P r,n g water > c * a Y> sulphur, etc., find 
standing beside a column. a place in the ceremony. The skin of 

a ram sacrificed to Zeus Meilichios (Am* 
kwSlov) had peculiar power to absorb the taint of evil. 4 The mur- 
derer flees to another city and seeks purification there as a sup- 
pliant ; those about to be married or to be initiated in the myste- 
ries are purified by their friends ; the assembly-place and theatre 
are sprinkled with pigs' blood by city officials.* It is only when 
a city or a people is to be purified that some priest or prophet is 

1 Rohde. Rfuin. Mux. 50 (1895) 6f. ■ Aeschylus. Choeph. 967. 

* Apollonius Rhod. 4. 702 f. and sctiol. ; Pausarrias, 5. 16. 8. 

* Preller, Polemon, 139 f. 

8 Herodotus, j. 35; Aeschylus, £ttm. 835, and schol. ; Dittenberger, Syllogt* 
653. 68. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS in 

needed- In the celebrated case of the plague at Athens after the 
murder of the Cylonidae, we are told that the seer Epimenides 
was fetched from Crete to direct the purification- 1 The first step 
consisted in the removal from the land of all the guilty persons, 
including the bones of those who had died in the meantime. 
Then black and white sheep were brought to the altar where the 
sacrilege had been committed, let loose to follow their own course, 
and sacrificed on the spot where each chanced to lie down. 
Some writers add that a youth also was sacrificed. In time of 
plague Tanagra was purified by Hermes himself who bore a ram 
on his shoulders around the walls of the city; 2 the evil spirits 
" entered into M the ram, as into the swine of Gadara, and were 
borne away. 

The regular purifications had to do mainly with agriculture. At 
the Thesmophoria pigs were thrown into a hole in the ground as 
a sacrifice to Eubouleus and Persephone; later the decayed re- 
mains of the flesh were mixed with seed by superstitious persons. 8 
In the early spring at the Diasia individuals offered animals (or 
cakes in the forms of animals) to propitiate Zeus Meilichios ; the 
purpose apparently was to remove any taint which might cause 
damage to the crops as the result of divine anger. Again in early 
summer at the Thargelia danger was averted from the ripening 
crop by purification of the city ; in addition to the sacrifice of ani- 
mals, two men (<f>apfutKoi) were escorted through the city to 
gather up all taint of evil ; they were then driven from the coun- 
try, or in earlier time, slain in sacrifice. 4 

The meaning of the rites of purification is to be sought in two 
directions. First, men felt the necessity of removing the guilt ; 
the murderer must leave the country, before either he or the coun- 
try can be purified ; an animal or a man led through the city with 
proper rites may attract the taint of evil and carry it off when he 
is driven from the land ; mere washing may be enough to remove 

1 Diogenes Laer. I. no ; Aristotle. Athen. Pol. i. a Pansanias, 9. aa* r. 

* Rhein, Mus, 35 ( 1870) 549 ; cp. I-asaui x, Studien des classuchen Attcrtums^ 262 f 

* Harpocration, sjv. *papna»c6? m 

H2 GREEK RELIGION 

the evil. But secondly, in explaining the use of pigs' blood, it 
cannot be forgotten that the pig is the favorite sacrifice of Deme- 
ter, in a sense the animal sacred to her. When a temple of Aphro- 
dite is to be purified, the blood of her sacred animal, the dove, is 
used; in the worship of Hecate, the blood of the dog sacred to 
Hecate purifies the worshipper ; so before the mysteries of Deme- 
ter the blood of her sacred animal, the pig, is used for the same 
purpose. 1 In these instances the blood of the sacred animal 
" purifies " the worshipper by producing a mystic connection be- 
tween him and the goddess. It is quite possible that in purifica- 
tion for murder, where no particular god is concerned, pigs' blood 
came to be used by transfer from the worship of the grain goddess. 
8. Worship from the Standpoint of the State; Panhellenic 
Worship. — The different elements of worship, which have been 
described in the last four sections, were used both in the religion 
of the state and in the religion of the individual and the home. 
In a state like Athens each element in the political organization 
had its religious side. The larger family group (ycvoe) worshipped 
the ancestral god or hero (&eb$ Trarpalos) from whom descent was 
claimed; 2 the local deme had its own festivals, some of which 
dated back to a very early epoch ; the political groups of demes 
(<£i.-Aa£) were built upon a religious basis with a common worship 
of some hero (as Cecrops, Erechtheus, Pandion). The phratry 
also had its religious festival, known as the Apatouria : on the first 
day the members of the phratry joined in a common sacrificial 
meal, on the second sacrifices were offered to Zeus Phratrios and 
Athena, and on the third day fathers acknowledged their new-born 
children by enrolling them in the phratry list and offering a sacri- 
fice (fidoi') in connection with a banquet for the members of the 
phratry. 3 On this third day the fathers brought their children of 
school age to show what progress they had made, and prizes were 

1 Bull. Corr. Hell. 13 (1889) 163; Schol. Aristophanes, Pax, 277; Schol. Aris- 
tophanes, Ran. 338; At-lian. De nat. anim. 10. 16. 
a Aristotle. Athen. Pol. m. 6. 

8 C.l.A. II, 841 b (Dittenberger. ^£&ge,439) ; #"& Corr. Hell. 19 (*$95) *» 
Hermes, 31 (1896) 508. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 

"3 

offered for excellence in repeating selections from the poets. 1 It 
was part of the marriage ceremony to register the wife as a mem- 
ber of her husband's phratry, on which occasion also the members, 
of the phratry were in- 
vited to a sacrificial 
feast- 

The worship at 
every shrine, as we 
have seen, was under 
the supervision of the 
state ; so far as the 
benefits to be derived 
from it were con- 
cerned, the regular 
worship was carried on 
in behalf of the state 
as a whole, as well as 
in behalf of individ- 
uals. It has been 
pointed out that all 
shrines were in the 
last instance admin- 
istered by the state 
through the priests. 
Special sacrifices be- 
fore the meeting of 
the assembly or before 
battle were offered by 
city officials for the city-state. In time of plague, the city, under 
guidance of the Delphic oracle, performed rites of purification 
to free itself from the taint of evil. 2 

At most shrines the worship centred about one annual festival, 
and in a few instances we read of temples which were closed all 
the rest of the year. A regular monthly or even daily worship was 

* Plato, Tim. 21 B. a See Pari II. Chap, iit 

CREEK RELIGION 8 

Fig. 29. — Athenian Red-figured Vase 
Paintings (Amphora, Munich) 

At the right a young athlete is bearing away a Pan- 
athenaic amphora as a prize; the figure at the left 
carries myrtle twigs and a votive tablet. 

ii4 

GREEK RELIGION 

not uncommon, while we must assume that many temples were 
open for worship every day ; moreover, though the greater festi- 
vals were annual, it was not unusual for the celebration to be espe- 
cially magnificent once in four years. The Panathenaea at Athens 
was such an annual festival, which after the time of Peisistratus 

was celebrated with 
special pomp every 
fourth year. 

In order to get a 
clearer conception of 
the city festival, we 
may describe briefly 
the Panathenaea. The 
arrangements for the 
festival were in charge 
of a commission ap- 
pointed for the pur- 
pose. In the fourth 
century the greater 
Panathenaea began 

with musical and gym- 
nastic contests which 
lasted for several days. 
On the night before 
the culminating day (Hekatombaion 28) a torch race was held, 
a relay race in which that series of runners was victorious 
which first succeeded in bringing its torch still burning to the 
goal. Next morning early, the great procession carried to the 
temple the new garment that chosen maidens had woven for the 
goddess and embroidered with scenes from the battle of the gods 
and giants. After Athens had become a sea power, this peplos 
was stretched like a sail on yards and mast, in this wise to be borne 
up through the city. There followed in the procession the citizens 
of Athens, officials religious and secular, old men chosen for their 
beauty bearing olive boughs (daWo<f>6poi) , envoys from the col- 

FlG. 30. — SCKNE FROM PANATHENAIC 

Amphora (British Museum) 

Athena is advancing as into battle; the inscription 
reads " I am one of the prizes from Athens," 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS x 15 

onies, victors in the athletic contests, those who bore utensils of 
sacrifice, priests and attendants driving cattle to be offered to 
the goddess, and marshals directing the procession. At the great 
altar before the temple of Athena the animals were sacrificed, 
that all the people of the city might share the great banquet in 
honor of the city's goddess. On the last day came a boat race at 
the Peiraeus, for Athena had brought glory to her city through its 
fleet. Among the contests of the previous days the war dance 
(pyrrich) and the combination of chariot and foot race, in which 
a man (cbro/Ja-n?*) was driven across the stadium only to leap from 
the chariot and run back to the starting-point, were peculiar to 
this festival ; other athletic contests resembled those at the greater 
games (e.g. at Olympia), except that the prize was a large jar of 
oil from Athena's sacred grove of olive trees. 1 It is said that 
Peisistratus introduced the practice of having the Homeric poems 
recited by bards ; Pericles pursued the same policy in adding 
other musical contests with cithara and flute and song. For these 
contests the first prize was a gold or silver wreath, with gifts of 
money for the first five successful contestants. In honor of Athena 
and of Apollo musical contests were as important as athletic games. 
From local festivals of somewhat this type, we may assume that 
the Panhellenic festivals were developed. Common language and 
common descent never proved strong enough bands to connect 
the Greek city-states into one nation ; military genius and power 
of organization were never united long enough to overcome the 
love of local independence ; the influence of a few great shrines 
was almost the only force tending toward one Greek nation. The 
Delphic oracle was universally recognized, and at times the con- 
gress of states meeting at Delphi had considerable influence in 
settling minor disputes, or in establishing some principles of inter- 
state law. The games at Delphi, the Isthmus, and Neraea, but 
far more the games celebrated at Olympia, for the time they were 
in progress united all the Greek states in one enthusiasm for what 
was distinctively Greek. 

» Aristotle, Athcn. PeL Go. 

n6 

GREEK RELIGION 

Fig. 31. — Plan ok the Ruins at Olympia 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 117 

German excavators have laid bare the ruins of the sacred pre- 
cinct of Zeus at Olympia, the great temple of Zeus from the fifth 
century, the altar of heaped-up ashes on which the people of Elis 
offered daily sacrifice, the old temple of Hera, the shrine of the 
hero Pelops, the prytaneum where the victors were feasted, the 
gymnasium where the contestants trained, the stadium where 
the races were held, the treasure-houses for the votive offerings of 
the different cities, besides many remains of the latter classical 
period. 1 

In late summer every fourth year heralds proclaimed a sacred 
peace for the celebration of the Olympic games, for as early as 
the seventh century the different Greek states sent participants 
and spectators to the scene. First came the contestants, to carry 
on their training here at the spot where the contest was to be held. 
Embassies to the games from the different states would soon begin 
to arrive, while merchants in great numbers brought their wares 
for sale ; artist and poet came to help celebrate the victors by 
their art ; orators found opportunity to win fame in addressing the 
crowds ; for more than 1000 years (till it was forbidden in 393 a.d.) 
the festival proved a splendid focus of all that was best in the 
common life of the Greeks. 

The first day of the festival was devoted to the great sacrifice 
to Zeus, in whose honor the games were held, and to the necessary 
preliminaries. Judges {Hdlanodikai) and contestants appeared 
before Zeus Horkios, the former to swear that they would act with 
impartial justice, the latter to swear that they had observed the 
rules for training during the preceding ten months, and that they 
would refrain from everything dishonorable in the games. The 
judges then made up the final list of contestants, omitting; those 
whom they found unworthy, investigating the Hellenic descent of 
the applicants, and arranging the contests of youths so as to pre- 
vent any unfairness. The second day saw the running and wrest- 
ling and boxing of the youths under twenty, those only excepted 

1 A convenient presentation of the subject is Hachtrnann, Olympia und seine 
FcstspUU, 1899. 

n8 GREEK RELIGION 

who had been adjudged strong enough to compete with men. On 
the next day the men, entirely naked and anointed with oil, 
entered the lists. The running would not appeal to a modern 
athlete, for the course was strewn with soft sand and the runners 
waved their arms vigorously in their efforts to cover such a course. 
The Olympic period was named for the victor in the single course 
of about 200 yards (600 Greek feet =192.27 metres). This 
single course was followed by the endurance race of 24 courses, 
nearly three miles, and the double course. In the wrestling three 
throws (t/>u££«v) were necessary for a victory. The celebrated 
Milo of Croton won this prize six times j the seventh time he was 
conquered by a fellow-citizen who had learned how to avoid his 
fatal grip. The boxers had their arms and hands wound with leather 
thongs, to which leaden weights were later added. The skill of 
the contestants lay in parrying and avoiding the blows till one ac- 
knowledged himself beaten; more than once a boxer was crippled 
or killed by his opponent. The last contest, the pafikration^ was 
the severest of all. Wrestling and boxing were combined and even 
throttling was permitted, a battle royal in which only the strongest 
and most skilful might participate. 

On the fourth day came the horse races, the pentathlon, and 
the foot race in armor. The hippodrome is said to have provided 
a course up and back, just less than a mile in length. At one end 
of the central dividing wall was a statue of Hippodameia crown- 
ing Pelops, victor in the chariot race. On either side and at the 
east end sat the spectators. Each car, a low two-wheeled affair 
with body open behind, was confined behind a rope in its own 
little compartment at the west end; by a somewhat artificial 
device these ropes were dropped in such a way as to permit the 
drivers to begin the race together. The race included twelve 
courses ; if the length of the course is correctly given, the race of 
about 1 1 miles must have been a test of endurance rather than 
of speed. At Delphi on one occasion no less than 41 cars took 
part in a single race ; such scenes of confusion as Sophocles 
describes, car crashing into car, driver and horses in most irami- 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 119 

nent danger in the melee, must often have added to the excite- 
ment. 1 The prize of victory was awarded not to the driver for his 
skill, but to the owner who had raised or secured such excellent 
horses. The races of two-horse cars, of colts, etc., need hardly 
be mentioned beside the main race of four-horse chariots. 

The pentathlon was a peculiarly Greek contest in that it tended 
to develop skill in all forms of athletics. The long jump, the 
200 yards dash, throwing a discus of about four pounds, throwing 
the spear, and wrestling, one after the other, tested the man's 
powers in every direction ; only those who came up to a high 
standard in the early contests, entered the wrestling, and the victor 
here was victor in the series. The race of men in armor, a double 
course, completed the games, and in the evening those who had 
received the palm branch of victory were banqueted* 

The prizes were publicly bestowed on the fifth and last day. 
Wreaths of wild olive, cut with due ceremony from the tree desig- 
nated by the oracle, had been lying in the temple before the image 
of Zeus ; 2 now the judges placed them on the brows of the victors 
and heralds proclaimed name and state of the victors to the 
applauding crowd. After the victors had sacrificed to Zeus, the 
embassies from the different states joined in a magnificent proces- 
sion from one altar to another. The people of Elis served a ban- 
quet to the victors, a Pindar was engaged to sing their praises, 
they were escorted home in triumph, their crowns were dedicated 
in the principal temple at home, and they received substantial 
tokens of their countrymen's favor. At Olympia also, the victor 
might dedicate a statue to the god, though only to him who had 
won three victories was a portrait statue permitted. 

Not even the war with Persia, that great struggle to vindicate 
Greek freedom against what claimed to be a world power, united 
the different states of Greece as they were united in the Panhel- 
lenic games. Men offered to the gods the exhibition of their 
strength and skill as an expression of the worship of all Greece, 

* Pindar, Pyth. 5. 49 ; Sophocles, EUc. 698 f. 

3 Pindar, Ofym. 3. 13 f. ; Pausanias. 5. 7. 7 ; 5. 20. 1 ; cp. Lucia n, Attach. 15. 

i2o GREEK RELIGION 

and every state accepted this worship as the common inheritance 
of one people. 

9. Worship of the Individual and the Home. — The variety of 
worship in the city was to some extent reflected in the home. 
The goddess of the home as such was Hestia (Vesta), the per- 
sonified hearth flame. Her round altar wound with white fillets 
stood in the main room (dvSpcur) , for the hearth had from earliest 
days been the centre of home life. 1 The city also had its central 
hearth, where burned the fire of Hestia, symbol that the city was 
a larger home. Every sacrifice is said to have begun and ended 
with the worship of Hestia. In the home sacrifices of animals 
were offered to the gods of the hearth (&oi i^iamoi), including 
Hestia- Every day libations were twice offered to her at meals. 
And on all Occasions which emphasized the home — departing on a 
journey or returning home, the reception of the new wife, birth, 
death, the coining of new slaves — on all such occasions the god- 
dess of the home was worshipped. 

At Athens the first shrine as one entered the house was a stone 
in the form of a truncated cone which stood just outside the door. 
This was at the same time altar and symbol of the god. Here to 
Apollo the Guardian men prayed in time of plague or other trouble ; 
the home comer stopped to worship here 3 on receipt of good 
news fragrant herbs burned on this altar. 2 At the door the bridal 
pair stopped to receive on this altar the new fire for their home. 

The patron deities of the race (6W1 Trdrptoi) had their worship 
perhaps in a side room off" the main hall. The goddess of the city, 
Athena, as well as the gods of the family, the deme, the tribe, the 
phratry, might find a place here ; in fact men brought to their 
homes the worship of any city god in which they were interested. 
Small images of these gods were kept in cupboard -shrines, shrines 
the front of which often had the form of a temple (vcuolkoc), and 

1 Comulus, De no/, deor. 28 j Diodorus Sic. 5. 68 ; the material is gathered (but 
nol critically handled) by Petersen. Der Hausgottesdienst tUr alien Griecken. 1851. 

2 Sophocles, Eitc. 637; Trach. 209; Aeschylus, Agam m \<&o f.; Aristophanes, 
Vesf. 875. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 121 

were worshipped both at family feasts and at the time of their 
public worship. 1 As an altar of Zeus stood in the court of the 
palace in early times, 9 so there may often have been an altar of 
Zeus Herkeios in the open court of later houses, for he was wor- 
shipped in the home as well as publicly in the city. Probably 
images of marriage gods were installed in the bedroom of husband 
and wife. 

Finally gods of property and of good fortune found their place 
in the home. Zeus Ktesios was worshipped here to safeguard 
health and wealth. 3 His presence is said to have been symbolized 
by a two-handled vessel ; for purposes of worship the vessel, wound 
with wool, was filled with water, oil, and fruits of all kinds. Plutus, 
good fortune, Agathodaemon (success), and Hermes, god of trade, 
seem to have been worshipped occasionally with Zeus Ktesios. 

These different shrines — that of Apollo Agyieus at the door, of 
Hestia in the main room (jindroti} 9 of the gods of the family and 
the gods of property perhaps in side rooms, of marriage in the 
bridal chamber — were not necessarily all present in every house, 
but they stand for the normal worship of the home. The worship 
of each day and of recurring festivals was brought to them.* It 
remains to speak of the special worship associated with the spe- 
cial events of family life. 

The religious ceremonies connected with birth had a double 
aim, to remove ceremonial uncleanness and to obtain divine favor 
for the new-born child. The olive wreath hung on the front door 
at the birth of a son or the woolen fillets at the birth of a daughter, 
which betokened the work of the future housewife or the honor 
to be won by the man, warned visitors from a house ceremonially 
impure. The ceremony of purification, the Amphidromia, is said 
by some authors to have taken place on the fifth day after birth, 
though it seems ordinarily to have been combined with the birth- 

1 C|>. Schol. Acschines, X. 10. 

* Iliad, n. 774; cp. P\Mo,PofJtia, 1, p. 32S C. 

* Is.ieus, 8. 16; Athenaeus, ii, p. 473 C (Anticleidcs). 

* Hesiod, Erga, 336 f. ; J^rag. 178. 

1*2 greek: religion 

day feast on the tenth day. 1 After the mother, nurse, etc., had 
been purified, the women of the house laid aside their garments 
and ran around the hearth carrying the young child. The gifts 
which were brought consisted mainly of delicacies for the feast 
that followed ; one was never missing, the special cake (jfapCotos) 
which the slaves of the household prepared for the occasion. The 
sacrifice before the banquet (ra ytvWXui) * was offered to the gods 
who preside over the growth of children, for example Apollo and 
Artemis.* The feast itself was peculiar in that the women of the 
family were present ;. according to late authors delicacies of the 
table abounded, games like the ceftabus were shared even by 
the women, and the festivities were prolonged far into the night. 

The enrolment of the young child as a member of the phratry 
has already been mentioned. At least in the Hellenistic age it 
was not unusual for those who had been initiated in the Eleusiman 
mysteries to have their young children consecrated to the same 
service of Demeter (d<£* larla.<s fLvgfigiws). 4 It was the practice at 
Athens to bring young girls under the protection of the maiden 
Artemis for the five years before they were marriageable-* When 
a young man reached maturity and at about the age of eighteen 
began to assume the duties of citizenship, the change in his mode 
of life received the sanction of religion- 6 The long hair of youth 
was cut and dedicated to Apollo, ordinarily at Athens, in excep- 
tional cases at Delphi ; the young men took the oath of citizen- 
ship and were registered in the official list ; we read also of a 
drink-offering to Heracles accompanied with festivities on this 
occasion. 

Marriage was a religious rite(TcA.os), not because any sacramen- 
tal bond united husband and wife, but because the blessing of the 
gods was sought for the new home. 7 Preliminary sacrifices (to, 

i Suidas, s.v. &itpi8p6fua; Hesychius. s.v. Bpo/MtAtfuov r)tiap. 

8 Euripides, Ion, 653 ; Aristophanes, Aves, 494. 

3 Schoirinann, Opusc. 2. 227. * Suida*, sv. Apxror, apicrcvtrai. 

* C.TM. III. 809, 8a8f. etc. ■ Hesychius, otvitrri)puu. 

7 Cp. l-asau'x. Stud ten des classischen Aitcrtums. 261,. 426 f. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 

123 

-irpoyufxia) were offered by the parents of bride and groom to the 
gods of marriage (fool ynprfXzoi) , Zeus Teleios, Hera Teleia, Arte- 

Fig. 38. — Athenian Red-figured vase Painting 

A bride is being led toward her new home; the central figures are Apollo and 

Artemis as gods of marriage. 

mis, and at Athens, Athena- The bride consecrated to the gods 
her playthings, her maiden garment, sometimes an offering of her 
hair. To avert evil both bride 
and groom 1 took purificatory 
baths in water brought with 
special rites. The wedding 
feast itself at the house of the 
bride's father included sacri- 
fices to the household gods 
with prayers for the prosperity 
of the new home. The wed- 
ding procession in the early 
evening was accompanied by 
musicians invoking Hymen, the 
god of marriage. On reach- 
ing their new home the hus- 
band and wife worshipped at 
its different shrines, ending with 
the gods of marriage in the 
bridal chamber ; in Boeotia, 

Fro. 33. — Relief in Athens 

An attendant is holding the head of a sick 
man in the presence of Asclepius. 

according to Plutarch, the priestess of De meter formally blessed 

* Pollux, 3. 38 and 4.3 ; Euripides, Phoen. 347 and schoL 

124 GREEK RELIGION 

the new wife in the name of the goddess who presided over the 
mysteries of marriage. 1 

In sickness men turned to the gods for help. The warriors of 
Homer all had some skill in dealing with wounds, but Machaon, 
son of Asclepius, was divinely gifted to treat them successfully. 
The physician of the gods was Paieon (the god of healing, appar- 
ently of healing charms) ; from him the physicians of Egypt claimed 
descent. In spite of the epic aversion to magic, we read of charms 
used to stay the dark blood of Odysseus's wounds. The plague 
described in the beginning of the Iliad was from Apollo ; not 
** soothing herbs" nor charms, but the direct intercession of 
Apollo's priest was the power that checked it 8 

Later Greek medicine was intimately connected with the wor- 
ship of Asclepius- The school of Cos, of which Hippocrates is 
the best-known representative, was not independent of the cele- 
brated shrine of Asclepius on that island ; one of Galen's four 
" schools " was that of the Asclepiadae in Asia. The sick man 
had his choice between visiting a "drugsener ,> in the market- 
place, 8 or calling in a man of some education who practised for 
money, or going directly to the shrine of healing. Although at 
such shrines healing virtues were ascribed to the god alone, there 
is no question that the priests were versed in medical lore ;* many 
of the cures which patients believed were due to the touch of the 
divine hand can only have been due to surgical operations by the 
priests. The most famous shrine of healing was the temple of 
Asclepius at Epidaurus, with which the worship of the same god 
at Tricca, Cos, Pergamon, and Athens was closely related. The 
records at Epidaurus testify to the remarkable cures there achieved. 3 
These may have been due in a measure to the healthy location, 
the waters, and the wise advice of priests who inherited the knowl- 

* A thenaeus, 7, p. 309 D ; Petersen, Uausgottesdienst, n. 145 and 160 ; Plutarch, 
Confug. praec. 138 B ; Preller, Bemeier and Persephone , 353, n. 58. 

a Iliad, it. 514 1 ; Odyssey, 4- 231 ; 19. 457 ; Iliad. 1. 456. 

8 Lucian, Apologia. 7. p. 714. * Plato, Pblitia, *o, p. 599 C. 

■ Dittenbeiger, Sylloge. 802-804; Merriam, " Aesculapia as revealed by inscrip- 
tJons, M GaiUartTs Medical Journal, IX, HO. 5. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 

* 2 5 

CO 

as 

1 

is 

CO 

EI 

-J 

< 

u 

X 

o 
2; 

OS 
to 

o 

3 

— 

I 
± 

a 
G 

126 GREEK RELIGION 

edge of generations. The central feature of the treatment was 
the incubatio (eyKotfti^rts), the sleep »n the shrine during which the 
god appeared to the patients in a dream either to heal them di- 
rectly by divine touch or to give them medical advice. 1 Aris- 
tophanes gives an entertaining account of the way Plutus, god of 
wealth, was cured of blindness at the shrine of Asclepius in Athens. 2 
The order of the attendant that all patients go to sleep, the appear- 
ance of the priest, then of the god attended by laso and Panaceia 
and the boy with a chest of drugs, the serpents that licked dis- 
eased parts — all these represent Athenian belief as to the method 
of healing there pursued. Votive offerings of the part cured, eyes 
or ears or hands or breasts, together with liberal fees testified to 
the gratitude of the patient. 

Properly speaking the rites connected with death and burial 
belong with the worship of the home ; but because of the light 
they throw on the conception of what follows death, they will be 
treated in Chapter IV. 

Lastly we must consider the private worship, /.*. the worship 
independent of the state, in the religious associations (fitaxrot, 
opyeu>vts). s Associations under the patronage of some god played 
a large part in Greek life after the fifth century ; for the most part 
they may be grouped in two classes : associations formed for the 
worship of some foreign god, and clubs or societies formed for 
various ends, but with one of the state gods as patron. In both 
classes the organization was much the same; those who were 
elected to membership paid an initiation fee and made themselves 
subject to the laws of the society ; officers (priest, treasurer, etc*) 
were elected annually ; all members were on the same democratic 
footing, governing the society by "decrees," imposing fines or 
granting honors by their votes, in much the same manner as was 
done in the assembly of the state. It was a peculiarity of many 
of these societies, especially those formed for the worship of a 
foreign god, that women, freedmen, and slaves were admitted on 
the same terms as citizens. 

* Philostratus. *?/. Apoli. x. 8-10; Aristides, Orat. 1. 570. 3 PluH*s t 655 f. 

6 Foucart, Dcs associations religieuses ches Us Grccs, 1873. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 127 

The clubs or societies under the patronage of a state god were 
of most varied character. The biographer of Sophocles states 1 
that he formed a society (Aiuros) of educated men who honored 
the Muses. The actors in the theatre had associations in many 
cities with Dionysus as their patron. We read of a society of 
sixty ben-trivants at Athens, whose banquets were celebrated 
enough to attract the attention of Philip of Macedon ; Heracles 
was their patron deity. 2 Even the courtesans of Paros had their 
society with ils priest and temple servants. 3 The list of such soci- 
eties included benefit clubs, which loaned money without interest 
and paid funeral expenses, " trades-unions" of artisans in the same 
occupation, literary and philosophical clubs, as well as those 
formed for purely social ends. Just as each group in the state 
had its religious side in the worship of some god or hero, so each 
club, whatever its purpose, recognized some god in whose worship 
the club joined. 

The distinctively religious associations consisted primarily of 
foreigners who united in the worship of the gods of their home 
cities. In the days of its prosperity thousands of foreign residents 
took up their abode at Athens, especially in the Peiraeus. No 
law forbade them from carrying on the worship of the Mother of 
the Gods, or the Thracian Bendis, or the Tyrian Heracles, in their 
own manner. 4 It was only when they wished to build a temple 
that the express permission of the city was needed. For example, 
when the people of Citium wished to build a temple to their 
Aphrodite, the matter was brought before the Boule and the 
Assembly, and received favorable action. 5 Occasionally one of 
these cults, like that of Artemis Bendis, was adopted by the 
Athenian state. For Athenian citizens to join associations for the 
worship of these strange gods was not unusual, although it was 
regarded as discreditable. Demosthenes's account of such private 

1 Vita Soph. {6. s At ncnaeus, 14. p. 614 D ; 6, p. 360 B. 

*Ath. MUth. 18 (1893) ai f. 

*Cp. Plato, Politia, i, p. 327 and schol.; Dittenberger, Sy/Ugr, 633. 
6 Dittenberger, Sylloge, 551. 

128 

GREEK RKL1GION 

worship 1 may fairly be regarded as expressing the sentiment of 
the Athenians toward these crude, weird cults; and yet with all 
their crudeness and immoral practices, they were not without 
influence in suggesting to the Athenians a more personal type of 
religion than that which found expression in the formal worship of 
the state. With the decay of the city's power and the gradual 
neglect of its public worship, private religious associations in some 
cases took over the worship of the state. A recently discovered 

inscription describes in detail the 
organization of the Iobakchoi, 2 an 
association which carried on the 
Bacchus worship after the true 
Athenian manner in a temple built 
above the old state shrine of 
Dionysus Lenaios. The fact re- 
mains that in the best days of Greece 
the state and the family, rather 
than the private association, were 
the organizing forces of religion. 

10. The Eleusinian Mysteries. — 
The cults of some foreign gods won 
adherents from the Greeks them- 
selves, because they made a personal 
appeal ; they met a need which the 
inherited ritual and splendid ceremony of the state cults did not even 
recognize ; it is, then, no mere chance that so-called mysteries be- 
came a large factor in Greek religion. The public worship of the 
state was so bound up with the political and social conception of the 
state that it meant little for the individual. And when these state- 
ideals began to break down, when the personality of the individual 
in its strength and in its weakness began to be more clearly recog- 
nized, men sought some more immediate personal relation with a 
god. That the worship of Sabazius, 8 for example, gained a hold 

Fig. 35. — Ground Plan of 
the telesterion at eleus1s 

1 Demosthenes, r8. 260. 

*Ath. Mitth. 19 (1894) 248; Maas, Orpheus \ 18 f. 

* Cp. p. 341. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 

129 

among the Greeks is proof of this tendency in religion. What 
these private worships furnished in a form often unworthy and dis- 
creditable, might better be secured in the old and respected 
worship of Demeter at Eleusis. Apparently Elensis grew up as a 

Fig. 36. — View of the Ruins at Eleusis 

community of Demeter. worshippers governed by priests of Demeter. 
Only after bitter conflict with the developing power of Athens, was 
this agricultural priest -state brought under Athenian sway; in its 
religious influence the conquered state prevailed, the worship of the 
goddesses became the most important cult of Athens, it gradually 
gained adherents all over Greece, and flourished with Olympia and 
Delphi in Roman days. Excavations on the site of the shrine 
have brought striking testimony to the development of these 
" mysteries/ 1 Because this worship furnished the appeal of reli- 
gion to the individual and the assurance of a real life after death, 

GRKFK RELIGION 9 

«3° 

GREEK RELIGION 

white at the same time it had the respect due to an old and 
sacred Attic cult, its rapid growth is not difficult to explain. 

The shrine of Demeter at Kleusis occupied a slope facing the 
bay of Salamis and not far from the water. In Roman days one 
entered the precinct through a larger and a smaller gateway ; just 
inside the latter was a temple of Pluto where the rape of Per- 
sephone was said to have taken place ; a little farther on was the 
temple of Demeter herself. The main building, the Telesterion, 
differed from other Greek religious houses in that it was a place of 
assembly large enough to accommodate the crowds of worship- 

Fig. 37. — Vase with Figures in Relief (Si. Petersburg) 

The Eleusinian officials are standing between seated gods and goddesses. 

pers, not simply a home for some god. The lower story, once 
surrounded on all sides by some twelve steps on which the 
initiated might sit or stand, remains in part to-day ; of the second 
story only the entrance platform is left. The lower hall was so 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 151 

filled with supporting columns that the view of any rites celebrated 
there must have been seriously obstructed ; the upper hall is said 
to have had similar rows of seats about it and in the centre a 
stage, open to the sky and surrounded with columns. 1 

The celebration of the mysteries was in charge of the hierophant, 
selected for life from the Eleusinian family of the Eumolpidae, who 
was known only by his official title after his election to the position. 
The name indicates that it was his function to exhibit and explain 
the secret symbols. The dadcuchos (torch-carrier), the herald, 
and the altar-priest were chosen for life from the family of the 
Kerykes. These officials with their assistants had charge of the 
sacrifices, purifications, and other ritual; while the arcJwn basileus 
of Athens with one or more civic commissions exercised super- 
vision over the shrine in the name of the state. 

Much confusion on this subject has been due to a misunder- 
standing of the word " mysteries." If there had been any 
large body of secret doctrine, some traces of it would certainly 
have reached us through the watchful enemies of the old religion. 
We are expressly told that Greek mysteries consisted of things 
done or acted, and sentences pronounced (t« S/>o>/xei/a teal to 
Acyopcvai)* Such ritual-dramas were not foreign to other Greek 
cults; at Delphi, for instance, the purification of Apollo after 
killing the dragon was represented by the worshippers once 
in eight years. At Eleusis the drama was perhaps more symbolic, 
more secret, more sacred. For the Greek a mystery meant a 
ritual-drama, beheld and shared only by the initiated. 

In the fifth century the mysteries included two festivals. The 
so-called " lesser mysteries" at Agrae early in March served as 
a preparation for the rites at Eleusis, in that only those who 
had first been initiated here were eligible candidates for the 
"greater mysteries." It was in March that Persephone returned 
from the lower world to her mother, so that it is natural for her to 
be the central figure in a rite at this season of the year; of the 

1 Plutarch. Pericles, 13. p. 159. 

8 Pausanias, 2. 37. 3 f. (at Lcrna) ; 3. 22. 2 (to Dionysus). 

132 GREEK RELIGION 

festival at Agrae we know hardly more than that Persephone and 
Dionysus, not Demeter, were in the foreground. 

The " greater mysteries " were preceded by a truce between the 
Greek states to permit worshippers from outside Attica to travel 
thither unmolested. 1 Candidates for initiation obtained a director 
or "confessor" (^.i/o-Ta-yai-yoV), whose duty it was to advise them 
as to necessary purifications, to instruct them as to the meaning 
of the ritual, and to serve as their guide during the whole 
ceremony. On the fifteenth of Boedromion (i.e. the beginning 
of September) began the fast which was rigidly observed during 
the daytime and prohibited some kinds of food at night. The 
next day formal proclamation was made by the hierophant and 
dadouchos in front of the Painted Porch (urok •7roi.KiXrj) 9 warning 
away the impure and barbarians, and inviting others to share 
the worship of Demeter. The day was named ctAaoc ftrorai 
because those who were to take part in the mysteries bathed 
(and cleansed the pigs they were to sacrifice) in the sea near 
Athens. Two days more were spent at Athens in sacrifices to 
Demeter and to Asclepius as well, for as Asclepius had himself 
been purified for initiation in the mysteries, so thereafter new- 
comers might have an " Epidaurian initiation " (ra *Ein8avoui 
ftvcty). 2 The ceremonies at Athens ended with the lacchus 
procession to Eleusis on the nineteenth of Boedromion. All 
who were to share the worship at Eleusis, early in the fifth 
century some 30,000 in number, 3 set out along the Sacred Way 
bearing the image of the god lacchus (a form of Dionysus which 
had been adopted into the Eleusinian worship) together with 
symbols brought from Eleusis (ra icpd), and chanting hymns tr» 
the god. Though the distance is barely thirteen miles, sacrifices 
at different shrines and other ceremonies along the way delayed 

1 References for the following account are to be found in Mommsen, Feste det 
Stadt Atktn, ao4 i. 

fl It may he that this initiation might talce the place of initiation in the lesser 
mysteries in the spring ; see Mommsen, ibid., p. 230, 

« Herodotus, 8. 65. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 133 

the slowly moving multitude until it was late at night before 
they arrived. 

During the next three days (and nights, mvwxtfks) the worship 
at Eleusis included (1) sacrifices on the different altars of the 
precinct, (2) the initiation of new-comers, which included sacri- 
fices, purifications, and some instruction as to the rites they 
were to share now for the first time, and (3) the mysteries 

Fig. 38. — Marble Funerary Urn (Terme Museum, Rome) 

At the right the initiate is sacrificing ; in the center the purification is represented, 
and at the left he sees the vision of the goddesses. Demeter and Persephone. 

proper. The latter consisted of two parts, the second of which 
was reserved for those who had shared the first stage at least 
once in a former year. The night of the twenty-second was 
spent in torch-dances and visits to the spots made sacred by 
the Demeter legend ; the fast of the previous nine days was 
ended by taking a peculiar drink, the kykeon (KVKt&v, made from 
barley meal, mint, and water), and symbols kept from proiane 
view were exhibited to the mystae or handled by them. Perhaps 
also some sacred formulae were then for the first time imparted 
to the initiates. 1 

* Clement of Alexandria {Protr. 2. ai) gives the " confession " of the initiates 
in the following form : iv^rrevffa, 4ictov t6v Kvtceutva, f\afiov tic Kiaryjs, 
£yy€vcrdfii*vos AnAl/up* c/s k&\o.0ov ko\ 4k KaXdOov cis KL^rrrjv. This indicates 
that the mystae tasted cakes contained in the mystic cista. For the symbols see 
Apuleius. ApoL de magia, c 55. 

134 

GREEK RELIGION 

On their second visit to Eleusis the mystae were admitted 
to the crowning ceremony of all, the - " visions " (c7rcwrreta). 
Gathered in the great hall of the mysteries (r«X<cm?ptov) they 
saw scenes representing Demeter's joy in the recovery of her 
daughter, representing the underworld where this same Persephone 

is queen, representing 
perhaps the birth of 
Iacchus, the estab- 
lishment of the Festival 
at Eleusis, and the 
sending out of Trip- 
tolemus to distribute 
among men the grain 
of Demeter. To call 
these scenes a drama 
suggests something 
more pretentious than 
the evidence warrants ; 
the ritual of the pre- 
ceding night might 
better receive that 
name. In these " vis- 
ions " symbols were 
sufficient to suggest 

Persephone stands by the sealed Demeter, perhaps - . - ... 

in Ihe form in which the reunion of the two god- SCeneS ° f the ^miliar 

desses was exhibited to the worshippers at Eleusis. Story, while images 

of the gods showed 
Persephone with Hades in the lower world, the mourning Demeter, 
and Persephone reunited with her mother. Apparently the rites 
ended with this blessing by the hierophant : " Dread and rever- 
end are the goddesses ; most blessed of men on the earth he 
whom they truly love ; speedily they are his escorts to the great 
home, to Plutus who grants abundance to mortal men." * 

The ** Homeric hymn " to Demeter contains the cult legend 

1 Homeric Hymn to Demeter, 487 f. 

Fig. 39. — Fragment of a Small Votive 

Figure (Eleusis) 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 135 

which serves as a commentary on the ritual. Persephone, pluck- 
ing flowers with her attendant maidens, was seized by the king of 
the dead and borne away to his realm below. Demeter, who 
had heard her daughter's last cry as she disappeared beneath 
the surface of the earth, hurried over sea and land for nine 
days in search of her. Learning that Hades had carried her 
off, Demeter came to Eleusis in the guise of an old woman, 
where the daughters of the king found her sitting by the Par- 
thenian well. She was persuaded to break her fast and come 
to the king's house. At length her divinity was revealed, and 
she established the mystic rites, but still the mourning mother 
did not permit the grain to sprout. The hymn closes with the 
account of Demeter's joy when Persephone was restored to her, 
and with expressions of gratitude for the gift of the grain and 
for the revelation of the mysteries. 

The worshippers came to Eleusis veiled like Demeter, they 
imitated her wanderings in their torch- dances on the seashore. 
They too had fasted nine days, and they broke their fast with the 
same mystic " kykeon n which Demeter had drunk. The Par- 
thenian well (Callichore) where she rested, the house of the king 
of Eleusis, the temple he had built for the goddess in the time of 
her grief, were the spots where they sought to realize her divine 
presence. The symbols they handled and the " visions " in which 
the mysteries culminated brought the mother and the daughter 
very near to the worshippers. The reunion of Persephone with 
her mother, the continued life of Persephone in the realm of 
Hades, the sending out of Triptolemus — these scenes constituted 
a drama of things divine. Men shared the experiences of the 
goddess in her sorrow, in her joy, in her blessings to men ; and 
as they shared her experiences, they felt a mystic bond uniting 
them with the mother and the daughter. To be able to claim 
these gods as their personal protectors and friends, gods who 
sympathized with them in the deepest human experiences, this, 
rather than any new knowledge, was what men gained at Eleusis. 

" We alone have the sun and its gracious light, we who have 

136 

GREEK RELIGION 

been initiated in the mysteries and have lived a pious life toward 
strangers and toward our own people/' sings Aristophanes's chorus 
in the flowery meadows of the lower world. 1 Again, in the words 

of Sophocles, "Thrice 
blessed they of men 
who see these mystic 
rites before they go 
to Hades's realm. 
These alone have life 
there, for others there 
all things are evil." * 
The universal testi- 
mony of Greek litera- 
ture teaches us that 
the most important 
result of the mysteries 
was this clear hope of 
a real life after death. 
All Greeks believed in 
the continued exist- 
ence of the soul, 
though such existence 
hardly deserved the 
name w life." The in- 
itiated at Eleusis felt 
for themselves the 
favor of Persephone, 
queen of the dead ; 
if the goddess of the 
dead accepted their worship here, they might expect her favoring 
care when they came into her presence after death. Moreover 
they saw Hades in the "visions," and they found out for them- 

1 Aristophanes, Ran. 455 f.; cp. Pindar, Frag. 1x4 (102) ; Plato, Phaedo, 69 C; 
Arisleides, Or, EUus. 259. 

2 Sophocles, jFraj?. 7x9- 

Fig. 40. — Mareilr Relief from Eleusis 

Demeler (at the left) is giving the grain to Triptol- 
emus, while Persephone (at the right) places a 
crown on his head. 

THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 137 

selves that he was not the dread king of Homer but the fit con* 
sort for Demeter's daughter. 1 Nor was this hope for themselves 
alone. The worshippers shared the pangs of Demeter's sorrow 
when Hades carried off her daughter, they shared the love that 
demanded the return of Persephone, and they shared the joy of 
the goddess when that love won back its object even from death. 
Could the mother or husband or brother from some bereaved 
home have shared these experiences without feeling that his 
love too would sometime be satisfied again, that in the life after 
death he would rejoin the loved ones he had lost? Because 
they vivified the belief in a future life, while at the same time 
they met the religious needs of the individual, the EJeusinian 
mysteries were perhaps the most important form of worship in 
ancient Greece. 

1 Plutarch, £>e def. orac. 422 C 

CHAPTER III 

THE GREEK GODS 

1. The Gods in their Relation to the World. — According to 
the Hebrew conception, the material world, plants and animals, 
man himself, were the direct creation of God ; the Greeks ex- 
plained the world as the result of a process of growth or develop- 
ment, in which the higher and more complex forms of existence 
grew out of simpler forms. The gods instead of creating the 
world were a part of the world, in the same sense that men were 
a part of it. Men originally sprang from the earth, or developed 
from lower animals, or — some said — were the one thing that 
the gods did make. 1 The gods for the most part traced their 
descent back through Cronus and Rhea to that same primeval 
Heaven and Earth (Ouranos and Gaia) from which came the 
physical world. The three generations of the gods, marking 
successively the rule of force, the rule of cunning, and the rule 
of reason, and the crises which separated them, belong to that 
half-philosophical explanation of the origin of things which was 
offered by Greek mythology; Greek religion started with the 
world we know, a world in which gods and men are the active 
forces. 

That the forces at work in the world were conceived by the 
Greeks as personal beings, after the type of the human will, has 
already been explained ; s indeed, it is difficult for scientist or 
child or primitive man wholly to avoid this view. Roth in wor- 

* [Pindar], Frag. 84, Bergk, Poet. Lyr. Oraec. 3. 711; cp. Odyssey* 19. 163; 
Hesiod, Theog. 570 f . ; Aristophanes, Aves, 686. The whole subject is treated in 
PrelleT-Robert, Oriech. Myth. t. 589-105. 

a Cp. Introduction, p. 30. 

138 

THE GREEK GODS 139 

ship and in myth the Greek freely created for himself a personal 
universe; his world was made up of men and gods, many gods, 
each of them (like a man) working from some one point or within 
some definite sphere. What man can use, what helps or hinders 
him, the source of good and the source of evil, find expression in 
these Greek gods. Such a belief enables a man to handle evil 
like a human enemy, to seek blessing as from human benefactors ; 
all that affects him is part of the intelligent society to which he 
himself belongs. The fire, as useful as it is treacherous, is the 
province of Hephaestus ; all the dangers and changeableness of the 
sea are reflected in Poseidon and his followers ; an Artemis is there 
to guide the hunter, a Demeterto make the grain sprout, a Hermes 
or Apollo to watch over the herds ; Athena is the spirit of wisdom, 
Hermes of shrewdness, Ares of tumultuous war ; even the spirits 
of vengeance, the Erinyes, may be turned into powers of blessing. 
In a word the Greek gods are in the world, not above the world, 
superior beings who embody in personal form all the forces that 
enter into human life- 
Such is the truth, which becomes obscured when the attempt is 
made to identify the gods of worship with objects or processes in 
nature. Helios, Selene, and Eos belonged to the poetry of myth 
rather than to religion. But the Zeus of Olyrnpia and Dodona was 
not the sky, even though one hears the expression, " Zeus rains." 
Apollo at Delphi was not the sun, nor did the Artemis of Delos 
wear a crescent to suggest that she was the moon. Poseidon was 
not a personification of the sea nor Dionysus of the wine. In each 
instance the god was that superhuman person whose power was 
ever made manifest in the fact or process of the natural world. 

The epic was the first attempt to treat these gods as rulers of 
the whole known world. 1 The account of them is interesting in 
that it lays down the lines of later belief for worship almost as 
much as for myth. Because the epic statement furnished the 
background for the worshipper's thought, it is all important for 
our attempt to understand the Greek view of the rule of the gods. 

* Mythology of Greece and Rome, Part I , Chap, i, " The Gods in Homer." 

l4 o GREEK RELIGION 

The world was governed by a royal family in Olympus, in which 
King Zeus had far greater power than any other individual though 
his throne was endangered when the other gods combined against 
him. The court of Zeus was like that of Menelaus or Alcinous ; 
at the banquet of these divine princes Athena obtained permission 
for Odysseus to return home, and Hera vainly taunted Zeus for 
planning reverses to the Greeks. 1 Once in the poems Zeus sum- 
moned a popular assembly of all the divine spirits, like the assem- 
bly at which Agamemnon tried to test the spirit of his soldiers. 2 
It is Zeus who dispenses good and evil to men, Zeus to whom the 
epic heroes commonly pray. Poseidon, Hera, even Athena, try 
without lasting success to circumvent his purposes. So long as 
the other gods keep within their own sphere, Zeus does not inter- 
fere with them. Nature is subject to the gods; Athena sends a 
fair wind, Poseidon a tempest; the sun is hastened in his course 
at the wish of the gods. The events of history are guided by 
Zeus ; Achilles's anger and the story of the Iliad are part of his 
plan, and Troy falls as he had purposed. Whatever the individual 
is or does may be referred to the gods — the beauty of Paris, the 
might of Ajax, the breaking of the truce by Pandarus, the bad 
bargain Glaucus made in exchanging his armor. 

As an actor in the poem, however, Zeus cannot always follow 
his personal desires ; when Sarpedon is hard pressed by Patroclus, 
Zeus questions whether to let his friend die or snatch him away to 
his home in Lycia, til! Hera reminds him that it is Sarpedon's lot 
to die at this time. 8 " Neither men nor gods can ward it off", 
when the baneful lot of death overtakes a man." 4 Is this lot or 
portion a fate higher than Zeus? or is it part of the "ancient 
decrees of the gods" which Zeus is bound to obey?* The ques- 
tion is never asked in such form by the poet, who recognizes no 
power higher than that of Zeus. That which befalls man, his good 
or evil fortune, his duty, the limitations of his life — these consti- 

* Odyssey, 5. 1^42 ; Uiad, 1. 559. * /Had, 16. 431 f. 

* Iliad, 20. 1 f. * Odyssey, 3. 236. 

* For the literature see Buchholtx, £>u Aomtrischtn RcalUn, 3, x, 47 f. 

THE GREEK GOUS 141 

tute his divinely appointed lot, for man does not control his own 
destiny. The lot included an u ought M which he might disobey 
(he might act vrrkp popov f lirkp alrrav), as well as the inevitable to 
which he must bow. With all the other human characteristics 
transferred to the gods, this belief in a " lot " governing man's life 
was also transferred to them. The gods also were sometimes 
spoken of as subject to the same kind of destiny ; if Zeus saved 
Sarpedon he would be acting farkp ftopoi>, contrary to the u ought " 
which he felt binding on himself. We are not to infer that there 
was any definite conception of a fate to which the gods were sub- 
ject; the language which produces this impression is due to that 
epic tendency which makes its gods so human. 

The epic picture of the gods as a council of world-rulers with 
Zeus at their head determines the lines of later thought. All- 
powerful gods control events according to a perfect plan, says the 
pious Xenophon. Success or failure in war is referred directly to 
the gods ; the gods preserve the Athenians from the evil results of 
their poor political administration ; the basis of laws and morality 
is assigned to the gods. The good or bad fortune of individuals, 
their wisdom, their righteousness, and their sin are part of the 
divine rule. The crops are cared for by the gods, for the gods 
determine the weather. In general Homer's phrase for success, 
"with divine favor" (<rw Ocw), and the contrary (avcv 0c<ov) con- 
tinue to be used, especially in poetry. The extreme position on 
the one hand is that men are merely tools of the gods ; on the 
other hand we read that the gods hurry men on in the course they 
themselves have chosen, or again, that men succeed in doing some 
things because the gods are negligent. It is the normal belief that 
gods and men work together in all the events of human history; 
naturally the victorious in war emphasize the human side, the con- 
quered refer to the defeat as divinely sent. 1 

The guiding power in history is vaguely called "the gods" 
or u the divine" (ro dciov). 3 The phrase " divine government " is 

1 Schoemann, Griech. Alt. 2. 152 f. 

a Rohde, Die Religion der GriecJietr, xo t 

i 4 a GREEK RELIGION 

hardly appropriate, for the thought of a definite plan worked out 
in the world, or of any real goal toward which history was tending, 
was quite absent from popular belief- The power man recognized 
outside himself was called "the gods," or sometimes "god"; 
each man and each city looked for help to certain gods; it was 
left for philosophy to ask what the gods were making of the world. 
At the same time there was a strange lack of definiteness as to the 
relation of the gods to each other in the government of the world. 
The practical side of the matter amounted to this, that if a man 
prayed to the right god he might hope to get what he wanted. It 
is therefore no isolated case when Xenophon asked of the oracle 
to what god he should look if he wished to prosper on the ex- 
pedition with Cyrus. 1 As in worship one god was supreme at 
one festival, another at another, and there was no priesthood to 
make an absolute hierarchy, so in religious belief men were con- 
tent to say that the "divine " governed the world, without asking 
how it was that many gods maintained one government. 

2. The Nature of the Gods as Individuals. — If the worshipper 
ever asked himself what sort of a being the god was, his answer to 
this question would again have been determined by the epic, so 
true is it that the epic picture of the gods formed the background 
for all later thought. The Homeric account of the nature of 
the gods as individuals may be very briefly stated as follows ; fl 
While the Greek gods were always spirits akin to man, it remained 
for the epic, as it were, to clothe them with flesh and blood. The 
epic preserves a clear line of demarcation between the lesser gods 
and the greatest men in that the gods possess faculties far less 
limited than men, the gods are free from the difficulties and dis- 
tresses of human life, the gods have not to fear death. Though 
Hephaestus is used to mean " fire," and Ares to mean " war," the 
usage is purely poetic metonymy ; neither Ares nor Hephaestus 
nor any of the other gods in the poems really represent physical 
phenomena. Everything is in human moulds- The gods have their 
homes on Olympus, where they live and eat and sleep, like men ; 
1 Xenophon, Anab. 3. I. 6. * Mythology of Greece and Home ■$] £ 

THE GREEK CODS 143 

but their beauty, the rapidity of their movement, the power of 
their voices, their size, bear no comparison to man's- Most of 
the gods move from place to place and even descend to the battle 
ground before Troy in order to carry out their purposes; only 
Zeus rules from Ida, watching the course of events and controlling 
gods and men by his messages. The gods are not omniscient ; 
Zeus himself stops to plan, sometimes his attention is relaxed, and 
it is possible to deceive him. Yet the gods can see much farther 
than man in space and in time ; they are far wiser than man, and 
human wisdom comes from them. It is in their feelings that they 
axe most like men. The hatred of Poseidon for Odysseus, the 
quick anger of Zeus with Athena and with Hera, the boasts and 
threats and taunts of Zeus, Hera's pity for the Greeks, her 
quarrelsome or sulky attitude toward Zeus, the sensitiveness of 
Poseidon, the fondness of the gods for banquets, the amours of 
Zeus with goddesses and with mortal women — these are the 
qualities which mark the gods as essentially human in their na- 
ture. Only in poems which grew up as did the Greek epic, only 
in lays sung to amuse the princes and the people, could gods be 
treated with such frank license. 1 The process was aided by the fact 
that the Apollo or Poseidon of the epic was not exactly the Apollo 
or Poseidon worshipped by any one audience to which the bard 
sang. The result, this legacy of gods universally recognized and 
most human in their nature, not only determined the character of 
other Greek myths; it was also a force directly and indirectly 
modifying the god of each local shrine in the thought of his 
worshippers. 

If now the reader will change his point of view from that of the 
epic .audience to that of the worshipper, the inherent differences 

1 It is easy to account for rhe unreligious, undignified,, even unmoral character 
of these gods, when one remembers the circumstances under which the poems 
grew up. An after-dinner audience demanded amusement from the bard, nor was 
it in any mood to criticise religious conceptions. Demodocus, for example 
[Odyssey, 8. 266 f.), handled his theme to meet the wishes of his audience , other 
bards no doubt did the same ; and the gods of Homer are the result of this con- 
vivial atmosphere, only tempered by the Greek sense of beauty. 

144 GREEK RELIGION 

between the two in their conception of what a god is will prove 
quite as striking as the similarities. The differences may be found 
in the practices by which men sought to learn the will of the 
gods, 1 though they are less noticeable than in other forms of 
sacred rite- In the epic, revelation by theophanies or portents or 
prophets gives an idea not at variance with the epic doctrine of 
the gods ; for in thus guiding men's actions the gods are but 
carrying out their plans as rulers of the world. That theophanies 
and divine guidance come primarily to the individual in whom the 
god has a personal interest, as Athena is interested in Diomedes 
and in Odysseus, may be regarded as part of the economy of 
the poems ; still the kindly interest of the gods in their worshippers 
was included in the heritage which later religious belief received 
from the epic* The deceitfulness of signs and dreams was a part 
of human experience, not forgotten in the epic, but in the epic 
gods forgetfulness or deceit are no peculiar blemish. In later 
times, on the contrary, the doctrine of signs, prophets, and oracles 
assumes absolute knowledge on the part of the god, and it leaves 
no place for careless oversight by the god. The personal element 
in signs is strikingly absent ; it is not clear in every instance what 
god is supposed to give the sign, nor whether the pious man may 
lay any special claim to such guidance. The spirit of Apollo 
which overmastered the priestess on the tripod or enlightened the 
gifted seer implies, it is true, a god who could immediately touch 
the human mind with inspiring power ; the thunderbolt of Zeus 
comes from the god who rules in the heavens ; on the other hand, 
the ordinary divination from sacrifices is a peculiarly impersonal, 
mechanical method of determining whether the worship is accept- 
able or not. The fact that the gods are supposed to guide human 
action and are not supposed to show their own nature in what we 
have called revelation, is the reason why we get no more light 
from this source as to what men thought the gods to be. 

In worship proper, i.e* in the ritual of different shrines where 
men sought the blessing of the gods, two different forces were at 

* Cp. Chap, i, supra. 

THE GREEK GODS 145 

work to determine men's thought of the gods. Here the contrast 
between the epic point of view and the point of view natural to the 
worship at these shrines was very marked, although the differences 
were more or less blunted in the Athens of the fifth century B.C. 
In the first place, as was pointed out in the Introduction (p. 22 f.), 
worship was carried on at countless particular shrines, at each of 
which a peculiar phase of one god — to the exclusion of all other 
gods for the time being — was approached with sacred rites. At 
Athens, for instance, we know of some twelve centres of Artqmis 
worship, seven centres of Aphrodite worship, perhaps twelve of 
Athena worship. 1 In each cult of Artemis she has a different 
epithet, and the origin of each cult is different; in some instances 
the Artemis of one cult is extremely like that of a second, or 
again the goddess may appear in such different forms as Lysi- 
zonos (childbirth), Agrotera (hunting), and Boulaia (wise counsel). 
Nothing could better illustrate the particularism of worship than 
this series of Artemis cults. How goddesses with such different 
functions became fused into one cannot be explained in detail. 
The process began many hundreds of years before Homer ; the 
rise and fall of cities, tribes, and nations played a part in it ; 
perhaps one of the last forces tending in this direction was the 
epic. The fact remains that worship dealt with gods distinct and 
local, while all the forces of civilization and of literature were at 
work to make connections between them. The unity of the god 
found expression in the general name Artemis; the phase con- 
nected with the particular shrine was marked by the added epithet 
name, eg, Agrotera or Mounychia ; such were the two poles be- 
tween which the worshipper's thought of the god's nature must 
have played. 

So far as the rites of worship are concerned the discussion in 
the preceding chapter has shown, in the first place, that ordinarily 
the element of mysticism was not prominent. The religion of 
Dionysus distinctly presupposes the idea of a soul akin to the 
divine in its nature, which may become merged in the god or 

1 PreHer-Robert. GrUch* Myth. Index II. s.v. Athen. 
GREEK RELIGION IO 

146 GRKEK RELIGION 

possessed by the god as the result of worship. Imitative rites in 
the service of other gods produced a sympathy between the god 
and his worshippers, which was by no means free from mysticism. 
On the other hand, the enlightenment by which Apollo enabled 
his prophets to see the future was rather a gift from outside than 
" inspiration " in the strict sense of the term. In the state worship 
at Athens mysticism was reduced to a minimum ; in other words, 
the gods were conceived as definite beings, whose relations to man 
were as personal as the relations of one man to another. 

Further, it is clear that there was no worship of evil beings. 
When evil came from the gods, it was because they were angry, 
doubtless justly angry. When it did not come from the gods, it 
might be referred to evil spirits, but these spirits were to be ban- 
ished, not to be worshipped. In later Greek practice such rites 
were not yet extinct ; they have, however, so little of religion 
about them, they are so definitely magic and not worship, that 
they hardly require our consideration. Ordinarily evil is to be 
attributed to an angry god. The ritual for dealing with such a 
situation — the rites of purification, propitiatory sacrifice, etc. 1 — 
has special interest because it was not much subject to change 
under epic influence. The nature of these gods is essentially 
capricious. They have special blessings to bestow, in particular 
the blessing of rich crops, but if their favor is forfeited the loss 
and suffering to be expected are equally great. At times this fickle 
nature was attributed to one or another of the Olympian gods, but 
rarely or never to the patron deity of the city. The gods whose 
anger was specially feared were not more holy than the Olympian 
rulers, nor less accessible to man ; in fact they stood in closer 
touch with the vicissitudes of human life. The list includes gods 
of agriculture, gods of the winds and the sea, and gods like the 
Eumenides or the local heroes, who have some kinship with the 
souls of the dead. Such gods shared no festal banquet with their 
worshippers ; they received animal sacrifice either because they 
were fond of blood (the dead longed for this principle of life) or 

1 See Chap, ii, p. 105 f. 

THE GREEK GODS 147 

because they liked the gift ; then the animal was wholly consumed. 
Belief in gods of this type was as persistent as the suffering or 
calamity which their worship might alleviate. 

The normal type of state worship with its processions and prayer 
hymns, its votive gifts and festal sacrifices, 1 was associated with 
the belief in gods not unlike human rulers, who were bound to 
their worshippers by the ties of social relationship. The grounds 
on which the worshipper based his hope that his prayer would be 
answered were mentioned in the discussion of prayer: former 
worship of the god and former favors received from the god, both 
of which are tokens of the personal relation existing between the 
god and the worshipper; the greatness of man's need, and the 
god's pity ; the justice of the request. In Homer there are many 
references to the reciprocal relations between the god and the 
worshipper. The same note is found later in the Community wor- 
ship, that is, the gods enter into personal relations with a state or 
community; they find pleasure in the homage of their worshippers 
and gladly grant these men their favor and protection. It is true 
that Homer has much to say of the gods' fondness for banquets 
and their drlight in the fragrance of sacrifice. But while this 
pleasure of appetite on the part of the gods was never entirely 
forgotten by the worshipper, it would seem that the desire for 
man's homage was what made worship most acceptable. The 
pleasure of the gods in worship was thus like the keenest pleasure 
of the human ruler, the pleasure in having his power fully recog- 
nized and honored. 

The personal relation implied in worship determines the char- 
acter of every religion, and thereby the character of its gods. 
The fear of angry or capricious gods is almost wholly omitted from 
the epic, and finds a relatively Small place in the later worship of 
the state. The oriental attitude of abject servitude is as absent 
from Greek religion as from Greek society. The Greek sacrifice 
with the communion meal keeps, though somewhat vaguely, the 
idea of gods who cement social bonds of friendship by feasting 

1 See Chap, ii, $$ 5-6 ; p. 90 £. 

i4« GREEK RELIGION 

with their worshippers. On such gods the family or the state 
may depend to care for thern, so long as they keep up the wor- 
ship in due form. These got Is are not too far off, or too holy, or 
too selfish to watch over the community which worships them. 
They are not far enough off or holy enough to make religion so 
potent a factor as it might be in Greek life. In a word, the ordi- 
nary worship of the state presupposes gods to have the power and 
the wish to prosper the state because they are gratified by its 
homage, gods who stand for human ideals that are high but by no 
means absolute. 

The later tendency was strong toward the epic conception of 
the gods as divine rulers with power to grant particular blessings. 
When this conception was emphasized and denned by a great 
temple statue, like the gold and ivory statue of Zeus at Olympia, 
its hold on religious belief was assured. The Greek gods lost all 
that was vague in their nature. They lent themselves to the pur- 
poses of art and poetry, because even in worship they were beings 
as clear-cut and definite as the men who paid thern homage. 

3. Zeus, Hera, Athena, Apollo, Artemis. — For practical pur- 
poses it is convenient to treat the Olympian gods in three groups : 
(i) the five greater gods, (2) the gods associated with some 
phase of nature, and {3) the gods who stand for human emotions 
and activities. 1 The five gods treated in the present section are 
so varied in their functions and at the same time so important that 
they may best be treated together as the greater Olympian gods. 

(a) Zeus. The important seats of Zeus worship, Olympia ex- 
cepted, were on mountain tops, as though men would get as near 
as they could to the sky which was the home of Zeus. The 
mariner prayed to the god of the weather for a prosperous voyage ; 
the thunderbolt was his sign to deter or to encourage; when 

1 Preller-Rohert, Griech* Afyfhclogie, discusses the gods of worship as well as 
the gods of myth ; references to the Greek and Statin sources are given quite fully 
in the notes of that book so that it is unnecessary to repeat them here. See also 
the chapters on worship in Farnell. Cults of the Greek States, and the references 
there given. A list of the more important festivals at Athens is given in Ap- 
pendix II. 

THE GREEK GODS 149 

Zeus sent rain, the Athenian assembly adjourned; the god of the 
sky was one of the special gods of agriculture. One of the most 
interesting cults of Zeus was on Mt. Lycaeus; in this shrine of the 
god of light it was believed that nothing cast a shadow, nor could 
any man enter the presence of the god and live- When the crops 
were parched, the priests of Zeus stirred a sacred spring on the 
mountain top with an oak bough till a 
mist arose, the mist spread into a cloud, 
and from the cloud fell the needed rain. 
On the acropolis of Athens, Zeus Polieus 
was worshipped with cakes and wineless 
libations; in the summer rites of purifi- 
cation were performed that he might send 
rain. Zeus Maimaktes was worshipped 

in the early winter, and Zeus "Meilichios 

_ * _ * Fig. 41. — Coin of Elis 

at the Diasia in the early spring to pro- (Hadrian) 

tect the fields from dangerOUS Storms. The Zeus of Pheidias. 

The festival of the Diasia was peculiar 

in that individuals brought only burnt offerings to appease the 
god of storms ; he who could not afford an animal brought a 
cake in the form of a pig or a sheep. The legend of the birth 
of Zeus in Crete was based on the worship there by which the life 
of vegetation was evoked in the spring. His mother Rhea was 
" mother-earth " j his father was no doubt the stormy heavens ; 
the din made by the Couretes to drown the cries of the infant 
god was suggested by the orgiastic worship of the priests. The 
many myths of Zeus's amours had historic basis in the fact that 
the heaven god was worshipped with one wife in one place, with 
another in another place ; these gods became one Zeus with 
many wives. As the " father of men and gods," Zeus became 
the god of the family and of all social institutions. The stranger 
and the suppliant were under his protection, for there was no 
god greater or more universal to whom they could appeal. Just 
because he was so universal, his special cults were often less im- 
portant than those of other divinities. 

«5<> 

GREEK RELIGION 

(#) Hera is the wife and queen among the gods. She, too, was 
worshipped on mountain tops and the phenomena of the heavens 
were sometimes referred to her- Men worshipped her, e.g. at the 
Argive Heraeum and in Elis, with games of war, a side of her 

nature which found expression in the 
myth that she was the mother of 
Ares. As goddess of marriage she 
was worshipped by women with imi- 
tative rites. At Argos once a year 
her image was decked as a bride with 
wreaths and garlands, the bridal bed 
was woven of osier twigs, and the 
whole ceremony of marriage per- 
formed. At Athens the bride's 
parents sacrificed to Hera Teleia 
for blessing on their daughter's mar- 
riage. The island of Sarnos was the 
most important centre of the worship 
of Hera. 

(e) Athena. As might be expected 
from the position she occupies in the 
ffiaa\ Athena was worshipped all 
through northern Greece as the god- 
dess of war. The most widespread 
cult was that of Athena Itonia, which 
centred in Thessaly. At Athens 
this aspect of the goddess appears not only in the worship of 
Athena Itonia, but in the characteristic Athenian cult of Athena 
Nike whose worship formed a part of the Panathenaea. The 
war-dance (pyrrich) at the Panathenaea indicated that Athena 
Polias, goddess of the city, was also a goddess of war. Why 
Athena was " Triton-born " (water-bom) and was worshipped in 
many parts of Greece as the goddess of rivers and springs, it is 
not easy to explain. Possibly the local worship of a I«arisaia, a 
Nedousia, and other river goddesses was merged with the worship 

Fig. 42. — Hera Ludovisi 

(Terme Museum, Rome) 

THE GREEK GODS 

151 

of the daughter of Zeus, because the most important local goddess 
was felt to be identical with the most important goddess of the 
Greeks generally- The goddess born 
from the brain of Zeus was worshipped 
with Hephaestus as the patron of the handi- 
crafts : under the name Athena Ergane 
she granted women skill in weaving and 
embroidery ; the art of healing also be- 
longed to Athena as Hygieia and Paionia. 
The olive was her best gift to the Athenian 
people and other forms of agriculture 
awaited her blessing ; her servants gave 
the signal for sowing the grain by ritual 
ploughings at the foot of the Acropolis. 
At the Panathenaic festival (cp. p. 114) 
she appeared as the patron of Athens, of 
its glory in war, its technical skill in manu- 
facture, and its political wisdom ; for in 

the Athena of the city, 
Athena Polias, all these 
different aspects of her 
being were united. 

(jT) Apollo was wor- 
shipped at Athens mainly 
as the protector of the 

crops. At the Thargelia in May the first fruits 
were offered to him, musical contests were held 
in his honor, and the city was purified with 
special rites in order that the ripening corn 

the Delphic tripod might not suffer from his anger. The Smin- 
siantis in front of thian Apollo in Asia Minor (Iliad, 1. 39) kept 

^Le°nTre ,alOS "" the m ' Ce fr ° m the • Mlta - A P 0,, ° Pa™OP'OS 

kept off the locusts. In the Peloponnesus and 
more especially in Thessaly shepherds looked to him to protect 
and prosper their flocks. Apollo, the perfect embodiment of 

Fig. 43, — Bronze. Stat- 
uette of "ATHENA 
PromachoS" (Boston) 

Fig. 44. — Coin of 

Croton 

Apollo is represented 
in the act of shoot- 
ing the Python ; 

152 GREEK RELIGION 

youth, was worshipped by boys as they arrived at maturity ; gym- 
nasiums, like the Lykeion (Lyceum) at Athens, were situated in 
his sacred precincls. The best-known form of Apollo was the 
god of Delphi, patron of prophecy, music, and the healing art. 
In the Pythian games alone athletic contests were second to 
contests in singing and playing and rhythmic dancing. 

(e) Artemis is in many ways the feminine counterpart of her 
brother Apollo. Maidens offered to her before marriage their 
girlhood dress and toys, for she was the ideal of chaste maiden- 
hood. Mothers also looked to her for protection in childbirth. 
In strange contrast with the goddess who was sister of Apollo, 
Artemis was worshipped both in Greece and in Asia Minor as 
the embodiment of the untamed life of the forest. To Artemis 
alone of the gods wild beasts were sometimes sacrificed instead of 
cows or sheep. Hunters sought her blessing, for the beasts of the 
chase were thought to be under her protection and she herself 
claimed preeminence as a huntress. Oftentimes Hecate, goddess 
of magic arts, was identified with Artemis. Images of Hecate, 
now carrying a torch, now in triple form, were set up by gates 
and doors. Her special worship was carried on at night with 
secret ritual ; food was set out for her at the cross roads, often to 
be eaten by passing beggars. This night worship may have made 
it easy to identify Artemis with the moon as Apollo was at length 
identified with the sun. 

4. Gods associated with the Earth, the Waters, and the 
Heavens. — (a) Though the earth (Ge or Gaia) was the mother 
of the whole family of the gods in myth, she was rarely worshipped. 
At Athens men sacrificed to her as the abode of the dead, at 
Delphi and Olympia the earth was honored because gases from it 
were a source of inspiration. But generally the mother-goddess 
had grown away from this direct connection with the earth; it 
was all but forgotten in the case of the grain goddess Deiueter, 
and received little emphasis in the case of Rhea and of Cybele. 
But though the connection with the earth is not clear for the other 
wives of the heaven-god, no one can doubt that the mother of 

THE GREEK GODS 153 

vegetation, Rhea in Crete, Cybele in Asia Minor, was originally 
the earth-mother. The worship of Cybele has many points of 
interest. In the fertile plains of Asia Minor she took the place of 
Demeter as goddess of the grain ; the great goddess of the coun- 
try, she was worshipped as the protecting spirit of cities; but her 
proper home was in the mountain forests- All the wildness of the 
region was introduced into her orgiastic worship. On Mount 
Dindymon was the holy shrine of the mother who brought forth 
vegetable life in the spring and mourned its loss in the fall; here 
too was the grave of Attis, beloved of Cybele, whose death was 
one type of the tragedy of winter. Firs wreathed with violets were 
the cult symbols of Attis. The worship consisted in sharing the 
gladness of spring and love, the gloom of the dying life of the 
world. Corybantes and " Metagyrtes" stirred the worshippers 
with flute and cymbals and wild cries to a high pitch of frenzy, 
till they felt themselves one with the great 
mother-earth in her experiences of joy and 
of sorrow. 1 

(/») The spirits of risers and springs 
found no place among the Olympian gods 
except in the rare instances where they 
were identified with one of these gods- 
The importance of the rivers in local wor- 
ship was often considerable. The Asopus Fio. 45. — CoinofGela 
in Boeotia, the Achelous in Aetolia, the (about 485 k.c.) 

Spercheius in Thessaly, 2 the Alpheius in A river-god is represented 
Elis were gods of fertility in the soil, of ^ a human-headed 
growth in man and animals, and in some 

instances of healing. The spirits of springs were nymphs bless- 
ing the region with fertility. Water from certain springs was 
important for purification ; before marriage both bride and 
groom bathed in water fetched from a sacred spring, in Athens 
the spring CalHrhoe, for by such purification the favor of the gods 
was secured and children might be expected. The account of the 

1 Cp. Frazer,. Adonis, Attis, and Osiris, a Cp. Iliad, 16. 174; 33. 14a. 

'54 

GREEK RELIGION 

shrine of the nymphs at Ithaca (Odyssey, 13. 349 f.) illustrates the 
simple worship of this beautiful embodiment of nature life. 

(<r) Poseidon alone among the sea gods was one of the 
Olympian council. Glaucus (the shimmering sea) was wor- 
shipped on the straits of Euboea, Palaemon at Corinth, Ino- 
Leucothea at Megara, but their cults were limited to a few spots. 

Poseidon, on the other hand, was the 
brother of Zeus himself. In his ancient 
shrines on the south coast of the Corinth- 
ian gulf, as in the epic story, he was the 
r god of shipping, of fishing, and of trade 
f V if*}ff by sea. At Mycale in Asia Minor his 

worship was the political centre of a group 

of Ionian cities; the great games at the 

Fig. 46.— Coin of Seli- Isthmus, that centre of trade and ship- 

nus (about 460 B .c) ping? were celebrated at his shrine ; the 

The river-god Seiinus is is]and ofCalauria was the centre ofworship 

pouring a libation ; be- - . , , , ... . - , 

fore the altar stands a for a considerable group of cities, includ- 
cock; behind the god is ing Athens. His favorite sacrifice was a 

a selinon leaf above the bull, often a black bull, for his_nature was 

statue of a bull, ■ 1 % n -? • . «-* - 

violent ana easily stirred to anger. Posei- 
don was also the " father of waters" away from the sea ; especially 
in the Peloponnesus he was honored as the god of fertility of the 
soil. The shepherds prayed to him to bless their flocks, but the 
rearing of horses was his special care. At Mantinea in Arcadia, 
at Athens, particularly in Thessaly, he was worshipped as the patron 
of horse-raising, of skill in horsemanship, and of cavalry as used 
in war. 

(d) The heavenly bodies were not generally worshipped in 
Greece. On the island of Rhodes, however, the sun, Heiios, was 
the chief deity ; horses were sacrificed to him by being plunged 
into the sea, and the Halieia was a splendid festival in his honor. 
At Corinth and at various points in the Peloponnesus he was 
an important god who watched over flocks. The maintenance 
of holy flocks and herds tended by priests was a part of his wor- 

THE KREEK GODS 155 

ship. The moon determined the seasons of worship but was 
not herself worshipped. Nor were the stars worshipped. The 
dog-days, however, marked by the early rising of Sirius, who was 
known as the dog of the hunter Orion {Iliad, 22. 29), were the 
season of peculiar rites. To ward off the evil effects of the 
dog-day heat sacrifices were offered to Aristaeus, a god of shep- 
herds, wine culture, and bee culture in northern Greece. The 
Linus song {Iliad, 18. 570 f.) is a ritual of this same season, 
which seems to have been introduced into Greece through Asia 
Minor from a Semitic source (a'Atvov = ai lenu, " woe to us"). 
At Argos Linus was worshipped as the son of Apollo and the 
nymph Psamathe ("sand -spring"); according to the story this child 
was exposed and grew up with the lambs of the flock, till the dogs 
tore him in pieces. At his tomb in Argos each summer women 
and children performed a ritual of mourning and supplication. 
The festival was called Arneides ("Lamb-days") and on one day 
(Kynophontis, "dog-killing ") all dogs found on the streets were 
put to death. The purpose of this worship was to ward off the 
evil effects of the dog-days from men and flocks. Similar rites 
of mourning combined with the use of the Linus song were to be 
found in other parts of Greece. 

(c) The winds, source of heat or of rain, source of storms on 
the sea, were not generally worshipped, on the ground that they 
were subject to the greater gods. Sometimes magic rites («7ro»8at) 
were used to ward off their evil effects. Boreas, the wild north 
wind, had an altar at Athens and in a few other cities. Asses 
were offered to the winds at Tarentum, horses on Mt. Taygetus, 
libations without wine at Athens; even human sacrifice is said to 
have been performed in their worship. These were propitiatory 
sacrifices to check the violence of the winds. It was Athena, or 
Poseidon, or Zeus who sent fair winds to bring the sailor on his way. 

5. Gods of Human Activities and Emotions. — The gods 
discussed in this section include those who preside over agricul- 
ture and flocks, gods of trade and manufacture, the goddess of love, 
and the god of war. 

i 5 6 GREEK RELIGION 

(<z) Detneter was no doubt originally the "mother-earth," but 
in worship she has become primarily a goddess of the grain. In 
the rich valleys of the Peloponnese, in Crete and Asia Minor, in 
Sicily, her worship was widespread, although Eleusis in Attica 
claimed to be the centre from which agriculture and the cult of 
Demeter were given to the world- A sacred ploughing at Eleusis 
corresponded to the ploughing below the Athenian acropolis as 
a signal for the farmer to begin the preparation of his ground. 
Demeter Chloe {" green "), who was worshipped on the slope of 
the Acropolis, cared for the fresh green of the sprouting grain ; 
Demeter Erisybe kept off the mil lew, Demeter Olympia guarded 
it from drought ; harvest festivals (e.g. the Thalysia of Cos, the 
Haloia of Eleusis) were celebrated in honor of the goddess; 
Demeter Himalis was worshipped by millers, and Demeter 
Megalomazos by bakers. The most widespread festival of 
Demeter was the Thesmophoria, in the first instance a festival of 
seed-sowing, the ritual of which was intended to secure good crops 
to farmers and children to the family. It was Demeter Thesmo- 
phoros, the goddess of sowing, who taught men the principles of 
family life and agricultural life. At Athens only married women of 
citizen descent and blameless life could share the festival, and that 
after a nine days* fast. On the next to the last day of the festival, 
called the *'Fast-day f " living pigs were left to die in underground 
chambers ; the half-decayed flesh was later removed, and supersti- 
tious people mingled fragments of it with the seed they sowed. On 
the last day, Kalligeneia (" Fair offspring "), dances and contests were 
followed by a rich banquet which the wealthier women furnished. 

In the Eleusinian worship (see p. 128 f.), Demeter and Per- 
sephone were goddesses of souls as well as goddesses of the grain. 
At the time when seed was sown Persephone departed to her 
husband in the lower world ; when the grain sprouted she returned 
to her mother. At Megara and at many points in the Peloponnese 
(for example at Hermione) the mother and daughter were pri- 
marily goddesses of souls, worshipped at points where some cavern 
seemed to furnish an entrance to the lower world. 

THE GREEK GODS 157 

{£) Dionysus. — In Attica and on many of the fertile Aegean 
islands Dionysus was worshipped as the god of wine. In Decem- 
ber at the " country Dionysia " of Attica he was worshipped with 
dance and song and rustic jollity ; the emblem of fertility was car- 
ried about in processions ; and dolls or masks were hung on the 
trees- This last custom was explained by the myth of Erigone, 
who hung herself in grief for her father 1 at the time when wine 

Fig. 47. — Athenian Red-figured Vase Painting (St Petersburg) 

Apollo and Dionysus stand wilh clasped hands above the £)elphic omphalus; 
on either side are Bacchantes and Satyrs. 

was first introduced into the country. An inflated wine skin cov- 
ered with grease played a large part in the amusements at this 
festival. The Lenaea were celebrated at the time of the winter 
solstice with sacrifices and later with dramatic representations. 
The city Dionysia came in March, An old cult image had been 
brought from Eleutherae to Athens; each year this was taken to 
the Academy the night before the feast and then escorted to its 
temple in the city the next day with a great procession. Sacri- 
fices, choral dances, and finally the representation of new tragedies 
and comedies, made this the most magnificent festival of the 

* See p. 043, infra. Part II, Chap. iii. 

<58 

GREEK RELIGION 

Athenian calendar. Meantime the Anthesteria (flower festival) 
had been celebrated in February. On the first day, called *' Cask- 
opening M (7ri6otyia) the new wine was opened and shared by mas- 
ters and slaves together. At the 
public banquet on the next day 

J (named " Pitchers," x°**) tnere was 

a contest in drinking wine with a 
prize for the man who first emptied 
his pitcher. Every one wore 
crowns of flowers which afterwards 
were dedicated in the temple of 
Dionysus- At this time Persephone 
was supposed to return from the 
underworld and her husband 
(Hades) with the return of vege- 
tation. Further, the wife of the 
king archon was formally married 
to the image of Dionysus, as a token 
of the bond uniting this god to 
the Attic state, while the people 
dressed as followers of Dionysus in- 
dulged in wild gayety. On the 
third day ("Pots," x^f**) P ots 
filled with cooked fruits were 
brought to Hermes, conductor of 
souls. Meantime the temples of 
other gods than Dionysus had been 
closed, for the souls of the dead 
were free to walk the earth on 
these " unclean " days. The feast 
of" all-souls M ended with the cry " Away, ye souls, the Anthesteria 
is past ; " then men might safely take up their ordinary tasks 
once more. In this festival Dionysus was the god of souls, the 
wine god who showed men that souls were of the same substance 
as the god by filling them with Bacchic inspiration ; and he was 

Fig. 48. — Athenian White 
LKKYTHOS (Jena) 

Hermes with his wand stands be- 
fore a pithas from which issue 
small winged " souls." 

THE GREEK GODS 159 

the god of returning vegetation as well as the god of the wine. 
The orgiastic worship of the god of vegetable life was found in 
many parts of Greece. It centered at Delphi, where the summer 
belonged to Apollo, the winter to Dionysus. At Delphi men told 
of the " sufferings " of this god of plant life ; they showed his grave 
in the shrine of Apollo ; after the winter solstice women from all 
about, even from Athens, clothed themselves as Maenads and 
braved the dangers of snow-clad Parnassus to waken the divine 
babe with their wild cries. Though this worship was probably 
introduced into Greece at no early date, it became from one 
standpoint the very centre of Greek religion. 

(<r) Hermes^ even more than Apollo, was the god of flocks and 
herds, himself a shepherd in dress and manners. His worship was 
especially prominent in the land of his birth, Arcadia, and in Thrace. 
In Athens the fourth of every month was observed as his birthday. 
It was the god of flocks who once saved Tanagra from pestilence 
by carrying a ram all around the walls and then sacrificing it, a 
rite of purification which was imitated in worship each year. 
In general it was Hermes who prospered the flocks and cared for 
the young. The cairns erected by wandering shepherds came to 
represent their god. Often the landmark was a square pillar, in 
later days surmounted by a head or mask of Hermes, a ** herm " 
as it was called from the name of the god. The god who pro- 
tected roads was worshipped as the protector of heralds and the 
chief of their guilds ; he was also the god of trade and gain, wor- 
shipped as Hermes Agoraios in the market-place ; and he was 
the guide of souls on their last journey, worshipped (e.g. at Argos) 
on the third day after death, honored at Eleusis, the god by whose 
aid souls were evoked. Like Apollo, Hermes was a god of perfect 
youth, honored as Hermes Agonios in gymnasiums. The Hermaia 
at Athens consisted mainly of athletic contests by youths and boys. 

Pan, the son of Hermes, was another Arcadian god of shepherds 
and goatherds. With his goat's legs and beard he was the very 
spirit of that wild life of the goatherd and his goats. He too 
loved rocky peaks and wooded dells, springs and nymphs of 

6o 

GREEK RELIGION 

springs, the dances and music of the goatherd. Caves, moun- 
tain tops, and high oaks were sacred to Pan ; music and choral 
dance belonged to his worship ; torch festivals also were held in his 
honor- After the " panic " terror, by which Pan helped the Athe- 
nians win the battles at Marathon 
and Sal a m is, he was worshipped 
in a grotto near the entrance 
to the Acropolis. Such caves 
and grottoes were commonly the 
centres of his rustic worship. 

(//) Aphrodite.- — The ready 
sympathy with which the Greeks 
adopted the worship of the gods 
of animal and vegetable life has 
been seen in the case of Rhea- 
Cybele and Dionysus. Aphro- 
dite was perhaps of Semitic 
origin, the oriental goddess of 
creative life in plants and ani- 
mals. From Cyprus and Asia 

Minor her worship was carried 
Fig. 49. — Hanx>le of a Greek * 

Bronze Mirror (Fourth Century *> *c Aegean islands and nor- 
b.c, Boston) them Greece; from Cythera it 

Aphrodite with *n Eros on each worked northward through the 
shoulder. Peloponnese to Corinth* At 

Paphos in Cyprus (IcpoKynia) as at Athens her fane was sur- 
rounded by gardens which were filled with springing life when 
she was worshipped. 1 One form of her worship at Athens consisted 
in planting seeds in potsherds with a little earth ; the plants 
sprouted quickly, quickly faded, and then were thrown into water. 
These so-called "gardens of Adonis" symbolized the beautiful 
youth who was born each spring for Aphrodite to love, and was 
killed a little later by the summer's heat. 4 Theocritus (Idyl, 15) 

1 Strabo, 14, p, 683 ; Paiisanias, 1. 19. a. 

a Thcophrastus, Hist, plant. 6. 7. 3; Hesychius, s.v- 'ASJjvtSot kjjitol 

THE GREEK GODS 161 

describes a scene from the mourning for Adonis at Alexandria, 
another of those festivals in which men were united with a god- 
dess by sharing her deepest emotions of love and grief. At 
Corinth as in Semitic countries licentious rites were prominent in 
Aphrodite's worship. More commonly in Greece she was honored 
as the goddess of human love, of marriage and the family. The 
apple placed in the hand of her statues symbolized human love ; 
Pheidias represented her with her foot on a tortoise, which symbol- 
ized the retired life of the woman in the home. Aphrodite Hera 
was the goddess of marriage at Sparta ; in Attica Aphrodite Kolias 
presided over childbirth ; to Aphrodite women prayed for all 
feminine charms. In Paphos no blood stained her altars and at 
Athens no wine was mixed in her libations. Greek shipping 
entirely ceased in winter to begin again in the spring. So sailors 
worshipped Aphrodite the goddess of spring as the power which 
quieted the winter storms. In this aspect she was often known as 
Aphrodite Aineias, and her temples stood at many points where 
later legend made the hero Aeneas stop on his way to Italy. 
Finally, Aphrodite was worshipped with Ares at Thebes and 
Athens and Argos. An Aphrodite Areia in armor was also to be 
found at Corinth and at many points in the Peloponnese. 

(*) Ares. — As Aphrodite became essentially the goddess of 
love, so Ares was the god of war, embodying in his nature al] the 
wild forces of the battlefield. Thrace was the home of the god 
and the centre of his worship was among its wild tribes. At Athens 
the court for cases of murder, the Areopagus, originally met on 
the rocky " Mars' hill " before the entrance to the Acropolis. The 
temple of Ares here was said to be the outgrowth of the worship 
established by the Amazons when they besieged the Acropolis. In 
the Peloponnese the cult of Ares was established at many points ; 
at Sparta young dogs were offered to him, and cases of human 
sacrifice were reported ; in Elis Ares Hippios, god of horses, 
was honored as father of the cruel Oenomaus who slew his com- 
petitors in the chariot race. The patron god of the state, however, 
was worshipped more often than Ares to secure success in war. 

GREEK RELIGION — XX 

162 

GREEK RELIGION 

(/) Goth of Fire. — In the Homeric pantheon the lame He- 
phaestus was the god of fire and the smith's art, with his home on 
the island of Lemnos. This volcanic island remained an impor- 
tant centre of the worship of Hephaestus and Dionysus. Each 
year all the fires on the island were extinguished, the country was 
purified, and fire was brought in a sacred vessel from Delos in 

Fig. 50. — Athenian Red figured Vase Painting 
Contestants in the torch race. 

commemoration of the fact that fire was a gift of the gods to men. 1 
Hephaestus was closely associated with Athena at Athens, the 
patron of the smith's art with the patron of woman's handicraft. 
In October the Chalkeia was celebrated in honor of both gods; 
it was primarily a festival of workers in metal, while at the same 
time the women appointed to make the new garment for Athena 
Polias began their work with appropriate ceremonies. At the 
Apatouria Hephaestus was honored as a god of the hearth fire and 
the home by means of torch-light processions. The Hephaesteia 

1 Philostratus, Hcroica, 19. 14. 

THE GREEK GODS 163 

was also an important festival at Athens. On this occasion as at 
the Panathenaea and the Prometheia the Athenians instituted 
a torch-race from the Academy to the Ceramicus. 1 Torches 
fitted with shields to protect the flame were carried by youths or 
relays of youths, with a prize to the first one who brought in his 
torch burning. In the west Hephaestus was honored in the 
region of Aetna and of Vesuvius. To one of the islands near 
Puteoli, which was sacred to him, it was customary for men to 
bring a piece of iron and a gold coin ; the next day a sword, pre- 
sumably forged by the god, was ready for them. 2 

Prometheus was honored in Attica with Hephaestus as the giver 
of fire and of that civilization which fire made possible. The best- 
known feature of his worship was the torch race from his temple 
in the Academy to the city. 

Hestia, the hearth fire, was honored as the goddess of the home 
and of family life. 3 Other cults might be absent, but in every 
household she was honored. The community also and the state 
had a common hearth as the symbol of unity. Officials of the 
state conducted the worship of Hestia in the Prytaneum at Athens, 
and in this home of the state public banquets were given to dis- 
tinguished citizens and strangers. All Arcadia had its common 
hearth and common worship of the goddess of the hearth at Tegea. 
Finally, at Olympia and at Delphi all the Greeks united in her wor- 
ship. At Delphi the holy fire of Hestia was the source of fire for 
many other shrines ; all who came to consult the oracle worshipped 
at her hearth ; no doubt others beside Orestes came there for puri- 
fication ; while those who sang in honor of the Pythian god paid 
special tribute to this Hestia. Because she was so closely con- 
nected with the hearth fire Hestia was not a subject for myth, but 
was prominent in worship. 

(g) Gods of Healing. — The power to heal sickness was one of 

* Herodotus. 8. 08; Harpocratium (from Polemon). sx>. \afiirds. 

a CaltiTnnchus, Hymn to Artemis. 46, and schol. ; ApoUonius Rhod, 4. 761. and 
schol. 

• Cp. rufra, p. iao. 

164 GREEK RELIGION 

the functions of Apollo, but more commonly it was exercised by 
Asclepius^ Apollo's son. The Asclepiads of Tricca in Thessaly 
were mentioned in the epic. From this early shrine his worship 
was brought to Epidaurus, and from there to Pergamon in the 
east, to Rome and Cyrene in the west. Of the splendor of Epi- 
daurus traces still remain in the beautiful ruins of the theatre, and 
in the foundation walls of temples, spring houses, and buildings for 
the care of the sick. The worship which was introduced into 
Athens by the poet Sophocles was developed somewhat rapidly 
because Asclepius was taken under the protection of the Eleusin- 
ian goddesses and of Dionysus, On the first day of the greater 
Dionysia sacrifices were offered to Asclepius and there was a lyric 
contest in his honor. And on one of the earlier days of the Eleu- 
sinian mysteries there were targe sacrifices of cattle to the god of 
Epidaurus ; as Asclepius had been initiated into the mysteries at 
this time, soother newcomers might be initiated ; furthermore the 
presence of the healing god was then specially manifest to the sick 
who slept at his shrine (in the Traw\x^i<t). The manner in which 
his healing powers were exercised has been described under the 
section on private worship (p. 124). 

The other important god of healing was Eileithyia, who presided 
over childbirth. On the islan I of Delos, where Leto gave birth 
to Apollo and Artemis, Eileithyia had a special cult. In her 
shrine at Athens there was an image which had been brought 
from Delos, with two others that had come from Crete. The 
Geuetyllides, attendants of Aphrodite in her temple at Cape 
Colias, also granted help to Athenian women in the time of their 
need. At Tegea, Sparta, Argos, etc., were important shrines of 
Eileithyia. 

6. Heroes. — The heroes are a class of beings peculiar to Greek 
religion, greater than men, less than gods, worshipped by the peo- 
ple who dwelt near their shrines as the source of special blessings. 
The warriors of the Iliad, the princes of the Odyssey, are called 
"heroes"; and in one locality or another many of these heroes 
were worshipped in later time. From the Greek standpoint a 

THE CREEK GODS 165 

hero is the soul of some powerful man which gains added power 
after his death. The people found adequate proof that such was 
the case in the relics of a hero's lifetime ; they could see 
the sceptre of Agamemnon at Chaeroneia, 1 the skin of the Caly- 
donian boar whose ravages had summoned so many heroes to the 
hunt, 2 the spring of Glauce at Corinth, 3 the rock at Troezen 4 under 
which Theseus had found the sword and shield destined for his 
use, the house of Cadmus at Thebes or of Menelaus at Sparta. 
These men had sprung directly or indirectly from the union of a 
god and a mortal woman or nymph ; their tombs became centres 
of worship, for the divine part of their nature did not die; from 
time to time they appeared as superhuman warriors or hunters to 
bless their worshippers. The myths of these heroes helped to 
make them real and to extend their worship. 

The facts of hero worship are fairly plain to the student of 
Greek religion, but the problem of their interpretation is more, 
far more, complicated than it appeared to the Greeks themselves. 
The worship of the hero was carried on at what purported to be 
his grave, and his help was sought in the belief that his powerful 
spirit resided not in Hades but in and about the grave. The 
grave was separated from the profane land about it by an enclos- 
ure, a building (fieroon) was often erected over it or a grove 
planted near it, while the snakes that chanced to find a home near 
by were regarded as appearances of the hero himself. In trenches 
by the grave or on a low mound {io\dpa) near by, sacrifices were 
offered, ordinarily whole burnt offerings (ivayar/xaTa) such as were 
offered to gods of souls and of agriculture, though at some hero 
shrines men shared a communion meal with the hero as with a 
god.* This worship involved the belief that the hero was a being 
powerful to send unusual good or unusual evil within the somewhat 
limited sphere of his activity. He cruelly avenged neglect Or 
sacrilege ; if properly worshipped he would help defend the land 

* Pausanias, 9. 40. 11. * Pausanias, 2. 3. 6. 

a Pausanias, 8. 47. a, * Pausanias, 2. 32. 7. 

5 Cp. supra, p. 108; and. ^. Pausanias, a. 10. 1 ; 10. 4. 10. 

i66 GREEK RELIGION 

against enemies, stop pestilence, heal the sick, foretell the future. 
To obtain such aid the bones of Orestes were brought to Sparta, 
the bones of Theseus to Athens, and shrines were erected in their 
honor. 1 Indeed, it was a regular practice for the Delphic oracle 
to introduce the worship of a local hero as the remedy for any 
form of pestilence, with the result that this type of worship was 
widely extended during the fifth century b,c 

The worship of men as heroes after their death is not attested 
before the fifth century h.c, and it was not common till consider- 
ably later. There is no reason to believe that the older cults of 
heroes were the outgrowth of funeral rites for the kings and 
princes whose names they bore. The most important fact to be 
considered in the examination of hero worship is that many of 
the heroes were connected with some god, and often their names 
occurred as local epithets of this god. Erechtheus and Poseidon 
Erechtheus, Agamemnon and Zeus Agamemnon, Amphiaraus and 
Zeus Amphiaraus, Iphigeneia and Artemis Iphigeneia, Callisto 
and Artemis Callisto, Chthonia and Demeter Chthonia, cannot be 
regarded as in each case absolutely distinct beings. Amphiaraus 
is Zeus Amphiaraus, t\e m he is a local deity often identified with 
Zeus ; Erechtheus is a local Poseidon, Iphigeneia and Callisto 
and Dictynna and Britomartis are local forms of Artemis, Har- 
monia is a Theban Aphrodite, — the list might be extended to 
include more than half the names of cult-heroes which have come 
down to us. Students are not agreed as to the exact nature of 
the process by which the heroes came to be worshipped as such. 
In some instances we seem to be dealing with the worship of an 
ancient god, for example a Dictynna in Crete, who was later iden- 
tified with Artemis in myth while she continued to be worshipped 
in the original locality asa" hero." In other instances we seem 
to find the same process as in the worship of Nike, namely first 
the worship of the god with an epithet added to the name 
(Athena Nike), then the treatment of the epithet as the name 
for an independent local deity. In either case a hero was a local 

J Pausanias, 3. 3. 7; 3. XX. 10. 

THE GREEK GODS 167 

deity, often associated with some greater god, who was wor- 
shipped in much the same manner as the dead and the gods of 
the dead. 

Founders of colonies commonly were buried in the market- 
place, we are told, and worshipped as local heroes. It is a well- 
attested fact that Miltiades began to be worshipped in the 
Chersonese, and Brasidas in Amphipolis, immediately after their 
death. Gelo was worshipped as the second founder of Syracuse, 
Aeschylus as the benefactor of Gela, soon after death. The wor- 
ship of the heroes of Marathon, Thermopylae, and Plataea was 
simply the continuation of funeral rites in their honor. The fol- 
lowers of Plato, Theophrastus f and other philosophers paid tribute 
to their masters, which came to be a sort of hero worship. The 
wills of Epicteta (Thera) and of Epicurus (Athens) illustrate how 
a man might provide for semi-divine honors to be paid to him 
after his death. 1 In some parts of Greece the dead were regu- 
larly spoken of as heroes, but in Athens this seems never to have 
been the case. It was this worship of the dead as heroes which 
paved the way for the deification of kings in the Alexandrian age, 
and eventually led to the practice of worshipping the Roman 
emperors even during their lifetime. 

1 /. <?. Ins. 3. 330; Diog. Laer. to. 18. 

CHAPTER IV 
THE SOUL AND THE FUTURE LIFE 

1. The Epic Conception of the Soul. — The contrast already 
noted between the poetic gods of Homer and the gods of actual 
worship, is repeated in the contrast between the epic conception 
of the future life and the conception which underlies the prac- 
tices of burial and soul worship. If we pass over the twenty- 
third book of the Iliad and the eleventh book of the Odyssey 9 
with a few scattered allusions, the view of death and the soul in 
the epic is consistent. It is my purpose to state this distinctly 
epic view before examining the traces of another conception and 
attempting to explain the presence of two all but contradictory 
views. 1 

With all its emphasis on the joyful side of life, a pessimistic 
vein runs through the epic, and this vein controls the allusions to 
death. Death is hateful, evil, man's worst enemy. For Achilles 
the gates of Hades are the symbol of what is most to be dreaded ; 
the soul of Achilles in Hades esteems a menial position on earth 
better than that of a king in the world below. 3 

Whenever the word u soul " (faxv) **• "sed in the epic, a refer- 
ence to death is intended; in other words the "soul" has no 
place in the psychology of the living man, it is simply what goes 
to Hades when the man dies. It is said to fly out of the mouth, 
the wound, or the limbs. 3 On the one hand the soul is described 
as an CL&oAor, an image of the living man ; on the other hand it 

* " The Conception of the Future Life in Homer." Atner. four. TkeoL \ (1897) 
741 f. 

2 Odyssey, 12. 341 ; Iliad. 3. 173 : 3. 454 ; 9, 159. 
« Iliad , 2a. 467 ; 14.518; 16. 856. 

168 

THE SOUL AND THE FUTURE LIFE 169 

is a shadow, a form without substance, for all the substance of the 
body has been burned at the funeral. 1 With the exception of the 
passages to be discussed below, there is no clear and definite 
statement as to what this shadowy image, the soul, really is. In 
one instance it is poetically described as mourning its departure 
from manhood and youthful vigor. 2 The definite tendency of the 
poems, however, is to regard souls as unconscious. Real life with 
its activities and joys is ended ; u to go to Hades " means " to 
die " and nothing more. Speculation as to the future finds no 
place in these poems of the market-place and the banquet hall. 
2. Traces of an Early Worship of tbe Dead. — In later Greek 
belief the soul is often regarded as divinely immortal ; almost 
universally the souls of the dead are worshipped on the ground 
that they have superhuman power to bless and to curse. So 
general in early religion is the dread of souls and the effort to 
appease their wrath that something of the kind is to be expected 
in early Greece ; and in fact the one thing we certainly know 
about religion in the Mycenaean age (see p. 199) is that the 
dead were buried with scrupulous care. Erwin Rohde has 
demonstrated that certain passages in the epic can only be under- 
stood as surviving rudiments of the earlier practice. 3 The soul 
of Patroclus, which appears in a dream to his friend Achilles, is 
the image of the dead man with none of his substantial being. 
At the same time it differs from the normal epic idea of the soul 
in that it not only has consciousness, but also a knowledge of the 
future. It chides Achilles for his neglect, prophesies the death 
of Achilles, and prescribes the manner of the burial of Patroclus's 
body. Such appearance in dreams is only possible, we are given 
to understand, because the body of Patroclus is not yet burned; 
the fact remains that here the soul has a reality and conscious- 
ness and superhuman knowledge. Just before death the soul 
may foretell the future through the man's dying lips, as in the 
case of Patroclus and of Hector. 4 The power of souls to appear 

1 Iliad, 33. 66; Odyssey, 10. 495. * Psyche, 14 f. 

3 Iliad, 16. 857 ; 32. 363. * Mad. 16. 85X; aa. 358. 

i 7 o GREEK RELIGION 

in dreams and their power to foretell the future, are survivals of 
the earlier conception of the soul as a semi-divine being. It is 
due to this same belief that the bodies of the dead were burned 
with careful ritual. If the soul be divine, it may be worshipped 
to secure favor and blessing for its surviving relatives. Primitive 
man also devised a very different method of dealing with the 
situation ; fearing the supernatural power of the soul for evil, he 
burned the body of the dead in order to cut off any point of 
contact with this world which it might have. The epic treats 
the souls of the dead as unreal images, but souls must be care- 
fully laid to rest else man may expect harm from them. The 
special rites at the burial of Patroclus (Iliad, 23) — the sacrifice 
of cattle and of dogs that used to eat beneath the dead man's 
table, in particular the sacrifice of twelve Trojan youths to be 
burned with the dead man's body, finally the funeral games in his 
honor — are not creations of the poetic imagination. They sur- 
vive from a time when men offered sacrifice and other worship to 
souls, and when souls were thought to take some real satisfaction 
in the offerings. 

In books eleven and twenty-four of the Odyssey there is an 
interesting blending of the old and the new, the survival of early 
belief and the epic freedom in making the soul an unsubstantial 
shadow- The rites of incantation for evoking the soul of Teiresias 
must be derived from actual practice at some point where souls 
were evoked (as Saul caused the soul of Samuel to be evoked *) to 
ascertain the future. The trench a cubit each way, the libation 
first of honey mixture, then of wine and of water, to all the dead, 
the vow to sacrifice in Ithaca a barren cow to all the dead and 
a black ram to Teiresias, the blood flowing from the throats of the 
sheep into the trench, and the gathering troops of souls, — these 
are no mere poetic imagery. In the account of the interview of 
Odysseus with Teiresias and with his mother, which follows these 
rites, the souls are mere shades. They come and go in troops, 
they fly and cheep like bats ; they differ from the souls described 

1 I Samuel 28. 7 t 

THE SOUL AND THE FUTURE LIFE 

*7* 

elsewhere in the poems only in their longing for blood, *>. for the 
life principle, and in that they regain consciousness for a brief 
period by drinking blood. Teiresias alone retains his conscious- 
ness and his prophetic powers in Hades, apparently because the 
very power of prophecy removes him froni the ranks of men one 

Fig. 5*. — Athenian Reivfigured Vase Painting (Krater, Paris) 
Odysseus consulting the soul of Teiresias. 

step nearer to the gods. The poet who wrote the account of 
Oclysseus's interview with the heroes of the Trojan war 1 went a 
step further and endowed the souls of these heroes with some 
degree of consciousness and some knowledge of the future. From 
them Odysseus learned of what was going on in Ithaca and of 
what would happen there later, though they did not know the fate 

l Odyssey, II. 385-567- 

1 72 GREEK RELIGION 

of their own sons. Ajax in Hades was still under the mastery of 
that hatred for Achilles which had caused his death ; Agamemnon 
was attended by those with whom he used to fight ; Achilles was 
still a king, little pleasure though it brought him. It is much this 
same view which appears again in the earlier part of Look twenty- 
four. 

The explanation of the epic treatment of the future life is to 
be found partly in the migrations from the mainland of Greece to 
Ionia, partly in the social influences under which the epic poems 
developed. The early Greeks, so far as we know, ordinarily 
buried their dead and continued to bring foo-l and other gifts to 
their tombs, though cremation was also practised. The colonists 
in Ionia (where the epic probably took its present form) found 
these ties weakened by migration, and cremation proved more 
convenient than burial. By this means the souls of the dead were 
" sent to Hades," and the worship at the tomb had no longer any 
reason for existence. The practices in Ionia, however, did not 
prevent the inhabitants of Greece proper from keeping up the 
old beliefs and the old worship. If we may assume that the 
pantheon of Olympian divinities was taking more definite shape in 
this age and winning more general recognition, the influence of 
these universal gods would in itself have some tendency to put all 
local worships, including the worship of the dead, somewhat into 
the background. Thus the very development of religion would 
temporarily tend to make the belief in a future life less real. And 
the epic in its songs of battle and of travel consistently turned 
from worship to story ; the gloom of death was simply the back- 
ground to the account of active life; the gods became actors in 
the story, souls became mere shades* In the same ratio as the 
gods were greater and happier than men, so life in this world was 
more joyful and more real than life in Hades. It is only as an 
incident of distant travel that we get the picture of the realm of 
Hades, a realm almost as shadowy and unreal as the shades who 
dwelt there. 

The significance of this view of the future life is not limited to 

THE SOUL AND THE FUTURE LIFE 

*73 

Ionia, where it seems to have arisen. The Greek lyric with its 
roots also in Ionia continues the epic strain in regard to death. 
Attic poets of tragedy and comedy varied between the epic view 
and thoughts derived from actual worship of the dead. It is 
characteristic of the Athenian point of view when Plato makes 
Socrates assume that death is either a dreamless sleep (the epic 
view), or the introduction of the soul to a higher form of life (the 
view based on worship of the dead). 1 One great service of the 
epic for Greek religion was that it tended to free the minds of all 
who came under its influence from superstitious fear. So the 
banishment of souls from the tomb to a distant shadowy realm 
tended to bring to an end all fear of ghosts. And with the belief 
in universal gods, the way was opened for the introduction of 

Fio. 52. — Athenian White Lekytixos (Vienna) 
Proihesis scene ; mourners about the couch on which rests the body of the dead. 

Dionysus worship and the development of the mysteries of Deme- 
ter, in which the belief in a real future life found religious basis." 

3. Funeral Rites. — Funeral rites at Athens included the" lying 
in state " in the home (rrpofecne), the funeral procession (liefapa) , 
the burial or, cremation of the body, and the banquet in honor of 
the dead. The eyes and mouth of the dead were closed, the face was 

1 Apol., 40 C-E. fl Supra, p. 136. 

i 7 4 GREEK RELIGION 

covered, and the body washed or anointed with perfumes, offices 
performed by the nearest female relatives rather than by hired 
attendants. 1 On a high couch spread with sprays of pungent herbs 
was laid the body, clad in white garments and wreathed with 
flowers, while about it stood funeral vases (A^ku&k.) manufactured 
specially to hold the perfumes on such occasions- 2 By ancient 
custom the feet were toward the door where the corpse was to be 
borne out. 8 The day during which the body was thus exposed 
was spent in lamentation. Members of the family, the slaves, 
near relatives and friends, and often some hired singers conducted 
the ritual of mourning; until it was prohibited by law, the women 
were accustomed to tear their garments, to beat their breasts, and 
to scratch their faces till the blood ran down. 4 The lamentation 
often took the form of a responsive chant to flute music, with a 
refrain in which all joined. 5 In any case there seems to have 
been an element of worship in the mourning. The Athenians, 
who often carried money in the mouth, placed in the mouth of 
the dead a two-oboi piece for Charon, the ferryman of the Styx ; 
sometimes the dead was also provided with a honey-cake for Cer- 
berus. 6 Meantime a vessel containing water fetched from a neigh- 
boring house had been placed at the door, that those who left 
the house might purify themselves by sprinkling. 7 

Early the next morning came the funeral procession. The 
couch on which the body had lain served as the bier ; before it 
went the male relatives, behind near female relatives, with hair 
cut short and dressed in black (or gray). 8 The law of C-eos 
prescribed silence ; at Athens hired singers might accompany the 
procession with their sad lays. In many places libations were 

1 Iliad, 18. 350; Plato, Phtudo, 115 A; Lucian. De luctu, 11, p. 927. 

2 Aristophanes, Becks. 1030 f. * Iliad. io. 212. 

* Plutarch. Solon, 12, p. 84; 21, p. 90; cp. Plato, L*g m 7. p. 8<x> E; Lucian, De 
luctu, 12, p. 927- 

* Iliad, 18. 315 ; 24- 719 f. 

tt I.ucian, Dt luctu. io, p. 926; Wachsrnuth, Das altc Griechcnland if* ncuen, 
118; cp. Aristophanes, Lys. 601 and schol. ; Nud. 507. 

7 Euripides, Ale. 98 f.; Pollux, 8. 65. 

8 Euripides, Ale. 427 ; Demosthenes, 43- 62, 

p 

V) 

to 
W 

o 

c" 

i 

> 

H 

a 

I/) 

o 

re 

| 

S 

»75 

i 7 6 GREEK RELIGION 

poured out and whole burnt offerings sacrificed at the grave ; in 
Ceos, for instance, the law limited the amount of wine to three 
measures and of oil to one, while it enjoined the sacrifice of an 
animal "after the custom of the fathers." 1 At Athens the sacri- 
fice of cattle was expressly forbidden in a law attributed to Solon. 8 
For those killed in battle the Athenians made a public funeral, 
at which a Pericles or a Demosthenes s|K>ke in praise of the pa- 
triotic virtues of the dead. 3 Athletic games in honor of the dead 
man were held in early times, but they dropped out of use until 
at a late period they were occasionally revived. 

It was a fundamental principle of Greek religion that the body 
must not be neglected. The unburied body is said to be a cause 
of anger to the underworld gods, for its burial is their due, a 
source of impurity bringing a curse on the region, a blot to spoil 
any worship of the gods. 4 In war there were truces for the burial 
of the dead, and the victors buried their enemies as well as their 
friends. The traveller who found a corpse unburied must place 
at least two handfuls of earth on it as a ceremonial burial. 5 The 
tragic significance of Sophocles's Antigone lies in the fact that the 
human king forbids what divine law absolutely requires, namely, 
the burial of Antigone's brother. This deep-rooted requirement 
dates back to the fear of ghosts in the early stages of Greek 
religion. 

Both burial in the earth and cremation seem to have been 
practised from early times. 6 Burial was the simpler and more 
natural, cremation more imposing after a battle, moTe convenient 
when it was proposed to carry home the bones of one who died 
in a foreign land. The souls of those who were buried were 
thought to dwell in or about the tomb where offerings could be 
brought to them. That the tombs were placed near the gates or 
occasionally inside the city, and again that they were often formed 

1 Dittenberg-er, Syllo^'e^, 877. 8 C. a Thucydides, 2. 34. 

2 PJutarch. Solan, 21, p. 90. * Iliad, 22. 358 ; Odyssey, 11. 72. 
* Sophocles, Ant, 255, and schol. ; Pausanias. 1. 32. 5. 

e See Hermann-BHimner, Lehrbuch der grUchischen Antiquitaten \ 4. 373, for the 
literature ; cp. Ath. Mitth. 18 {1893) 104 t. 

THE SOUL AND THE FUTURE LIFE 

177 

like the front of a temple (aedicula), suggest the same range of 
ideas. Cremation, on the other hand, cut off souls from this 
world more or less completely and encouraged the idea of a 
realm of Hades from which none could return. The two con- 
ceptions were so blended, however, that no difference between 
souls of the buried and souls of the cremated was ordinarily recog- 

Fig. 54. — Terra Cotta Figurines from Tombs at Tanacra (Boston) 

nized. In places like Athens, where both were practised, it is 
natural that the difference in the outcome should be obliterated. 
In either case, objects used by the dead man were placed be- 
side the corpse. Jewelry, toilet articles, armor, pottery, and vessels 
of metal were placed in graves of the Mycenaean period, as 
though the deaxl man would still need them as during his life- 
time ; only much of the jewelry was of gold leaf, for it was to be 
used by shades- 1 The same principle held good later, but pottery 
predominated- At Athens the leltythoi manufactured for use at 
the funeral are found in the tombs in large numbers. From early 

* Hermann-Blumner, Jbid. t 4. 379 f. ; cp. Jakr. Inst. 7 (1892) A. A- ao; Ath. 
Mitth. 18 (1893) 155 f. 

GREEK RELIGION 12 

i-jS GREEK RELIGION 

times figures of divine beings were placed in the grave, as though 
to bring the soul of the dead under the protection of these gods. 
The beautiful Tanagra figurines were a survival of this interesting 
practice. 

After the body had been buried or burned and a last " farewell " 
had been uttered, the mourners returned to the house for a memo- 
rial banquet in honor of the deceased (7rcpioei7r*w). Both the 
persons and the house were first purified, and wreaths, discarded 
since the death had occurred, were resumed for this occasion. 
Women relatives as well as men were present at this banquet, 
The purpose of it was to recall and praise the merits of the de- 
ceased ; for this occasion the principle de rnortuis nil nisi bene 
was enforced by law. The soul of the dead was thought to be 
present as the host at this last banquet in his honor. 1 

4. The Worship of Souls. Though many of the funeral customs 
probably originated in a worship of souls, it is not always easy to 
prove the point. There is no question that the grave monument 
originally marked a sacred spot where worship was carried on. 
Plants and trees were placed about tombs as about temples to 
please the divinity there present- 2 From the standpoint of the 
Olympian gods death was a source of impurity ; on this ground 
graves were ordinarily outside the city gates, the dying were 
carried away from the shrines of Asclepius, and Delos was purified 
by removing all graves that it might be an island sacred to Apollo.* 
But for the family the tombs of its dead were important shrines. 
There are some indications that in early days the Greeks buried 
their dead within the house, as in many Dorian cities they con- 
tinued to bury them inside the city walls ; then the cult of ances- 
tors would be the central element in the worship of the family. 4 
In Athens members of the family brought food to the tomb on 
the third day and the ninth day after the funeral,* a custom still 

1 Cicero, de leg. a. 35/63. 3 Eustathius on Odyssey, 11. 538. 

* Pausanias, s. 27. 6; Herodotus, I. 64.; Thucydid-es, 3. 104, 
■* Plutarch, Zycvrgus, 27. p. 56; Pausanias, 1. 43. 3.; Polybius, 8. 30. 
6 Aristophanes, Lys. 6ia, and schoL; Isaeus, 8.39; Acschines, 3. 235. 

THE SOUL AND THE FUTURE LIFE 179 

observed on some of the Greek islands. The mourning seems to 
have continued for thirty days, when it was ended with an offer- 
ing or memorial meal. 1 At Argos this offering was in honor of 
Hermes, Conductor of souls ; in Sparta a -similar offering at the 
end of the mourning was made to Derneter; perhaps the god of 
souls was worshipped with the thought that after the mourning 
the soul went to Hades and returned to the tomb only on occa- 
sions of worship. The birthday of the dead was one such occa- 
sion when worship was offered at the tomb (ycveVta), as though 
the life after death was a continuation of the life which began with 
the birthday. 2 At a festival in early autumn (the city Genesia or 
birthday celebration), and on the thirtieth of every month (at the 
vocwttt) the Athenians brought offerings to the tombs of their 
respective families. 3 Finally, at the Anthesteria, a festival of Diony- 
sus already described (p. 158), the souls of the dead were free to 
revisit the upper world. The temples of the gods were closed, 
pitch on the doorposts kept the souls from entering private houses, 
business was suspended, while libations were offered to the dead 
and pots of cooked fruits were brought to Hermes, Conductor of 
souls. 

The worship at the grave was of two kinds (1) sacrifices and 
libations such as were offered to heroes and to gods of the under- 
world, and (2) tokens of honor and affection. The sacrifice of 
animals at the tomb was not a necessary part of soul worship, 
though in many places the sacrifice of a sheep was customary, 4 A 
black animal was chosen, its blood allowed to flow into a trench 
by the grave, and the carcass cut in pieces and burned (ivayL&odai). 5 
Apparently, it was simply the blood which the soul of the dead 
man wanted. 6 On the ninth day after burial cooked food, spe- 

1 Plutarch , Lycur&us, 07, p. 56 ; Quaest. grate. 24, p. 396 E ; Pollux 1. 66, Bekker, 
Artec. Graec. 268. 19. 

* Petersen, Gtburtstagsfeitr m 301 f. 

8 Mommsen, Feste der Stadt Athtn, 172; Rohde, Psyche, 215 1 

* Cp. Ath. Mitth. 18 (1893) 151, 155, etc 
5 Apollonius Rhod. 1. 587, and sctiol. 

* Pindar, Ofym. 1. 94; Euripides, Hec. 536; Plutarch, Arist. 31, p. 333. 

180 GREEK RELIGION 

cially prepared for the occasion, was placed on the grave. 1 When 
Lucian speaks of banquets, burned at the grave with libations for 
the dead, he may be referring to this practice. 2 The commonest 
offering was the libation (called x 01 ?* not <nrov$rjy? The libations, 
consisting of honey mixed with water, of unmixed wine, and of 
olive oil, were poured into a trench dug beside the grave. The 
honey mixture was perhaps an old drink, in use before the general 
introduction of wine. Oil was brought to the dead not to drink, 
but probably that he might not lack what the living man regularly 
used after gymnastic exercises to anoint his body. So in some 
places baths of water were set in large basins by the tomb for the 
use of souls.* AH these forms of worship assume that the soul 
desired food, drink, water for bathing, etc., just as the living man 
needed them. 5 If they were provided at the grave, the soul was 
graciously inclined toward the dead man's kindred and descend- 
ants. 6 It is suggested that in some way the continued existence 
and power of the soul depended on such occasional offerings. 

On most of the small funeral vases (lekythoi) found in Attic 
tombs are represented scenes at the grave. 7 No animal sacrifice 
is depicted, but not infrequently men are pouring libations to 
the dead, or bringing to the tomb flat baskets containing cakes 
and fruits, or offering phials of perfume and oil. These phials 
(alabastra) are often set on the steps of the tomb or tied to its 
shaft. In the same way a sword, a helmet, a mirror, a fan, are 
brought to the tomb, as for the use of the dead. The seated man 
playing a harp is in some instances probably one of the family 
making music for the soul, as he had made music to gratify the 

1 Cp. Plautus, Pseud. 3. a. 6 (795) ; Aul. a. 4. 45 (334). 
a Lucian. De tuetu, 19, p. 931. 

3 Iliad \ 23.. 170 and 318; Aeschylus, Choeph. 15 f.; Sophocles, Elec, 434 ff. ; Eu- 
ripides, Ores/. 113 tf. ; Iph. Taur. 633; Dittenberger. SyUogc t 877. 8. 

4 Jahr. Inst. 13 (1898) 13 f. ; 14 (1899) 103 f. 

« Philol. 39 (1880) 378 f.; Jahr. PAiloL 135 (1887) 653 £; Aeschylus, Choeph. 
483 f. ; Lucian, De luctu, 9, p. 926. 

• Aeschylus, Choeph. 93; Euripides, Crest, 118. 

f Benndorf, Griech. Sicii, Vasenbitdcr Tat xiv, f.; Fairbanks, Athenian Whit* 
lekythoi, 346 f. 

THE SOUL AND THE FUTURE LIFE 

idi 

man while he lived- Dolls are brought to the graves of children ; 
ducks or finches and rabbits, pets of the living, are brought to the 
tomb to amuse the dead. Most commonly of all the mourners 
hang wreaths on the monument, or fasten ribbons (taeniae) about 
the shaft- These practices 
all grow out of the belief 
that the soul of the dead 
is present to enjoy what 
the man had enjoyed be- 
fore he died- At Athens, 
however, they tend to be- 
come a form of pious re- 
membrance of the dead, 
instead of forms of wor- 
ship. 

The worship of souls 
was probably one of the 
oldest elements of Greek 
religion, the foundation of 
the worship of chthonic 
gods, an all-important 
factor in the rise of hero 
worship and the worship 
of agricultural gods. It 
was perhaps the strongest 
force in giving a perma- 
nent unity to the family, 
such that the family could 

serve as the basis for an enduring organized state. A man felt that 
he must have children, his own or adopted, to keep up the worship 
of his soul after death. It is not easy to state exactly what advan- 
tage men expected from this worship, or with what feelings they 
looked forward to a future state. That the soul was an invisible 
being with some degree of consciousness, hovering about the grave 
and gratified by the offerings brought there, powerful to harm and 

Fig. 55. —Athenian White Lbkythoi 

(Athens) 

Offerings at the grave; a bird in a cage, a 
dish with fruit, a duck, and a flat basket (for 
vases, wreaths, etc.) are presented before the 
stele. 

1 82 GREEK RELIGION 

• 

to help so that its blessing was sought by its survivors, is plain. It 
seems plain, also, that men did not look forward to any moral 
retribution after death, and that the thought of future blessedness 
was not part of the old soul worship. An unquestioning faith 
that sometning, however shadowy, persisted after death, was the 
foundation of the later developments of belief in the worship of 
Derneter and of Dionysus. 

5. The Gods of the Underworld- — Along with the popular 
thought of the souls as little winged beings fluttering about the 
tomb, there existed from early days the thought of a realm where 
the souls were gathered. Whether it was placed beneath the 
earth, as the body was buried beneath the earth's surface, or 
whether men located it in the extreme west, as in the Odyssey, 
the conception of it was much the same- It was the " house of 
Hades," whose name means invisible; it was dark and gloomy, 
so that men at death bade farewell to the sun ; Hades was called 
Polydegmon and Fankoinos, for he received all who came, Isodai- 
tes, for he assigned them equal lots. 1 That the lot of the good 
man should be better than the lot of the bad, is a thought that 
developed very slowly. In the Odyssey we read of the islands 
of the blessed, a future abode for Menelaus the son-in-law of 
Zeus, not for the good and the brave ; % the stories of Tityos, 
Tantalus, Sisyphus, etc., punished for crimes against the gods, are 
not a part of early belief; even the judgments, of Rhadamanthus and 
Aeacus and Minos contain the thought of retribution only in germ. 8 

This " house of Hades " was the more real because streams 
swallowed up in limestone rock, wild caves and fissures, spots 
where mephitic gases were emitted, seemed to furnish an actual 
connection between this world and the world below. The chasm 
under the Areopagus rock at Athens was the seat of underworld 
beings. 4 In the precinct of Pluto at Hermione * there was a chasm 

1 See PreUer-Robert, Index \\\ l sst. Aides. 

3 Odyssey. 4. 566 £ ■ Oefyssey, II- 576 f. 

* Thucydides, 1. xa6; Euripides, Elect. 1270 f.; Pausanias. 1. 38. 6; C.I. A, II, 
£48-950. & Pausanias, a. 35. io. 

THE SOUL AND THE FUTURE LIFE 

183 

* S 

i84 GREEK RELIGION 

through which Heracles is said to have brought up Cerberus from 
Hades, and near by was an " Acherousian lake." Strabo 1 says 
that the people of Hermione thought it unnecessary to give the 
dead any money for Charon, because Acheron lay in their own 
land, instead of separating the land of the living from the place 
of souls. At Eleusis, at Pheneos in Arcadia, at Lcrna^ and in 
Sicily, caves were pointed out as the spot where Hades carried off 
Persephone to be his bride. 3 At Hierapolis in Phrygia 8 there was 
an oracular cave under the temple of Apollo, filled with gases from 
below which only the initiated could breathe. Other " Charo- 
neia M or ** Plutonia " in Asia Minor are mentioned by Strabo.* 
Herodotus 5 tells of a soul-oracle (venpofxavTcTov) on the river 
Acheron in Thesprotia. At Taenaron also was an entrance to the 
lower world where souls could be evoked and consulted. The 
worship of the underworld gods was pretty closely limited to these 
spots where physical conditions suggested that the world below 
was directly accessible. 

In the epic M mighty Hades and dread Persephone" were rulers 
of this gloomy world, as Zeus and Hera were rulers of the world 
above. The picture of Hades's realm was consciously made the 
counterpart to that of the realm of Zeus, a dim shadowy copy of 
life on the earth. All the awfulness of death gathered about the 
king and queen of the shades ; they alone of the gods were un- 
touched by human prayers ; men sought their help only in wreak- 
ing vengeance on an enemy. "Persephone" like "Tisiphone" 
suggested pursuing punishment, anything but the Daughter who 
was worshipped with the Grain Mother at Eleusis. The trans- 
formation of this Persephone into the daughter of Demeter, and 
of Hades into Pluto, the god of wealth, is a problem not yet 
fully solved. There is reason to think that the god of riches in 
the earth, riches of mineral wealth and riches gained from the 

1 Strabo. 8, p. 373. 

a Pausanias, 1. 38- 5; a. 36. 7; Diodorus, Sic 5. 3; Plutarch. Quaesf. phys, 3.3, 
p. 917 F. 

* Strabo. 13. p. 629. * Strabo, la. 579; 13. 629; 14. 64.9. 

* Herodotus. 5. oa. 7. 

THE SOUL AND THE FUTURE LIFE 185 

earth by means of agriculture, was worshipped from early times 
in certain localities* He would be, for example, the agricultural 
Zeus worshipped with Ge (earth) in the island of Myconos, 1 and 
the Pluto of Eleusis. This god may then have been identified 
with the Hades of Homer and of later myth for the very simple 
reason that both were gods who ruled beneath the earth's surface. 
And as for Persephone, the story of her rape furnishes a kind 
of explanation as to how Demeter's daughter became Hades's 
queen. Demeter is not, like Pluto, an underworld god j it is 
through her daughter that Greek belief must make the con- 
nection between the queen of souls and the growing corn. Per- 
haps the sowing of the seed and the sprouting of the grain itself 
made the daughter of Demeter the underworld goddess for part 
of the year, a goddess who then was identified with the queen of 
souls. The epic conceptions, however,, kept their hold on litera- 
ture and in some measure on religious belief. Hades continued 
to mean death ; Pluto remained a local divinity 5 it was only the 
initiated in the Eleusinian mysteries who could confidently look to 
the queen of the dead as the kindly daughter of the earth-mother. 
The only other divinities of souls who found wide recognition in 
religion were the Erinyes- In the Homeric poems they enforced 
the rights of strangers, and in particular they guarded the rights 
of the firstborn. 3 Later they were the special avengers of crime 
against the family ; they pursued Orestes for the murder of his 
mother Clytemnestra, even though this was vengeance prescribed 
by the Delphic Apollo. 3 The " Erinyes of Clytemnestra" who 
avenged the mother's blood, however rightly shed, were the spirits 
of the family, perhaps the souls of ancestors. 4 When the Erinyes 
(or Furies) were worshipped they were called Eumenides (Kindly), 
Semnai (Revered), Potniai (Queenly), as though men would flatter 
them by such names. They did, however, have another side to 
their nature in that, like Hades and Persephone, they were god- 
desses of agriculture. 

1 Dittenberger, Sylloge, 615. 35. » Aeschylus, Rum. passim. 

3 Odyssey, 14. 57 j Iliad, 15. 204. * Rohde, Psyche, 247- 

186 GREEK RELIGION 

6. Transfiguration, of the Future Life in the Worship of Dionysus 
and of Demeter. — We have seen that in the Homeric poems 
themselves there is a transition from the belief that souls are 
nothing but shades to the belief that these shades retain con- 
sciousness. This consciousness is a bane rather than a blessing, 
for it brings with it no joy. So the worship of souls lends to them 
certain powers for and against human welfare; it brings them 
nearer to men and makes them dependent on the gifts brought to 
them in worship ; yet men do not look forward to any joy in the 
worship of their souls after death. The contrast is most striking 
between these views and that expressed by Pindar : " Blessed he 
who goes beneath the earth after seeing these mystic rites ; he 
knows the goal of life, he knows its Zeus-given beginning.' 1 ■ It is 
in connection with the religious revival of the seventh and sixth 
centuries B.C. that the new thought of the future life obtains a 
place in Greek religious belief. 

The nature of Dionysus worship and its introduction into Greece 
are considered in Part II (Chap. iii). In Thrace the wor- 
shippers of this god believed in the continued existence of the 
soul after death and the return of the soul to this world again. In 
the actual experiences of a religious frenzy in which men were 
** possessed " by the god, called by the divine name, gifted with 
divine foresight, the Thracians realized their belief that the soul 
was made of divine stuff. The revival which brought this re- 
ligion into Greece, came with convincing force, for the northern 
god made his presence felt by his worshippers. The Greeks too 
yielded to his maddening touch and found proof in personal ex- 
perience that the soul of the worshipper was of the same nature 
as the god who possessed it. From the epic on, immortality and 
divinity were almost interchangeable terms. It was good logic 
for the Greek to hold that if the soul of the living man is of divine 
nature, the soul of the dead continues to be divine and immortal. 

This new phase of religion with its wild orgiastic ritual was 
diametrically opposed to the Homeric standards. Its rapid prog- 

* Pindar, Frag. (10a) 114. 

THE SOUL AND THE FUTURE LIFE 187 

ress was in some measure due to its uncompromising claims ; its 
decline was inevitable except as its practices were modified to 
correspond with the habits of Greek thought. But though the 
" revival " lost much of its vitality, though the worship of Dionysus 
was reduced to a state cult in which religious experience gave way 
to splendid forms, its power did not completely die. The longing 
for a real future life which it stimulated in individuals, led to 
private " initiations " and religious associations in order to secure 
the favor of underworld gods; its aspirations reappeared in the 
poetry of Sophocles and the philosophy of Plato ; in the worship 
of Demeter at Eleusis the new conceptions found a congenial soil 
in which they sprang up and bore abundant fruit. 1 

The mysteries of Eleusis and similar rites elsewhere in Greece 
were based on an old peasant worship of agricultural deities. The 
gods of the dead who were buried in the earth, and of the grain 
which sprang from the earth, were not sharply distinguished, but 
at Eleusis the earlier purpose of the rites was to secure abundant 
crops. We may believe that Eleusis first developed as a priest- 
state devoted to the worship of the grain goddesses, and sought 
to make good its claim to be the centre and source of their 
worship. 2 

It was the introduction of Iacchus (a form of Dionysus) into 
these mysteries which gave them their distinctive character in the 
great days of Greece. That same assimilating power which later 
brought Asclepius and his healing rites into this worship, some two 
centuries earlier enabled the Eleusinian goddesses to appropriate 
the essence of the Dionysus revival by making a place in their 
worship for Iacchus. In the fifth century B.C. all the emphasis in 
the mysteries was on the hope for a life of blessedness after death 
for those who had been initiated. The source of this hope was no 
new dogma* The universal belief that souls persisted after death 
was now a belief that they persisted with some degree of con- 
sciousness; at Eleusis this belief was enriched by the experience 
of initiation, the experience that Hades was not implacable and 

* Cp. supra, p. 15*8, and notes. 2 Supra t p. iag f. 

1 88 GREEK RELIGION 

cruel to those who seek him rightly, the experience of the blessed- 
ness which his queen Persephone granted to the initiated. Iac- 
chus, the reborn Dionysus, was only the symbol for that religion 
of experience which found a truly Greek form in these mysteries. 
The Eleusinian rites were but one of many forms of initiation, 
the aim of which was to set one's self right with the gods of the 
lower world. Their widespread influence was due to the policy 
of Peisistratus ; by including Eleusis among the cults of the Athe- 
nian state he gave political sanction to a worship hitherto purely 
local, and at the same time enabled the state religion to meet 
the new demand for a " soul-saving " worship- Nevertheless, 
the Dionysus- belief that the soul was divine and immortal re- 
mained the possession of a few. For the Athenian in the days 
of Pericles death was (i) departure from this world of reality and 
joy, and (2) the entrance on a future life not uncomfortable so 
long as his descendants continued to bring him offerings; but if 
he were initiated at Eleusis it meant also (3) a life of real blessed- 
ness in the presence of Persephone and Hades- Thus Socrates 
could anticipate meeting just judges and the great men of past 
days in that future world ; the Antigone of Sophocles could look 
forward to an affectionate welcome from the father and mother 
and brothers whom * l Persephone had received among the dead n ; 
and Isocrates could say ** those who share this initiation, have 
sweet hopes both for the end of life and for all future time." 1 

1 Plato, ApoL 41 A-C; Sophocles, Ant. 897 f.; Isocrates, 4. 28; cp. Aristopha- 
nes, Ran. 380 f. ; Pausanias, 10. 31. 9. 

PART II 

HISTORICAL SKETCH OF RELIGION IN 

GREECE 

CHAPTER I 

THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK RELIGION 

1. Periods; Methods of Investigation. — The early history of 
Greek religion, and even the periods in which this history has to 
be considered, have been profoundly modified by recent investi- 
gations- During the last thirty years the remarkable discoveries 
in Greece and Crete have added new and striking chapters to our 
knowledge of Greek history. Incomplete as are the data in regard 
to the religion of Greece before 1000 B.C., it is now possible to 
speak tentatively of its form during the Mycenaean age, and even 
in the period which preceded the Mycenaean age. Coming down 
to the Homeric poems, we find that they raise one of the most 
difficult questions in the history of Greek religion ; to interpret 
the epic picture of religion and explain its relation to religious 
belief and practice in the age when the poems arose, are problems 
which have received most contradictory solutions. In the later 
history of this religion the attention of the student is focussed on 
that important movement connected with the religion of Dionysus 
and of Demeter, of which the Orphic sect was but one expression. 
Accordingly the main, topics to be considered in a sketch of the 
history of Greek religion will be the following : — 

I. The Beginnings of Greek Religion. 
II. Religion in the Greek Middle Ages {1100-700): The epic 
picture of religion. 

189 

ioo GREEK RELIGION 

III. Religion in the Seventh and Sixth Centuries, b.c. : The rise 

of Deraeter and Dionysus worship. 

IV. Religion in the Fifth and Fourth Centuries, b.c. : Hellenism 

at its height. 
V. The Outcome: Religion in the Hellenistic agej The influ- 
ence of Greek religion on Roman civilization and on 
Christianity. 

Before discussing the lines of investigation by which knowledge 
of the earlier epochs may be obtained, it is necessary to point out 
two principles which have often been overlooked in dealing with 
this general topic. In the first place Greek religion cannot be 
studied by itself. It is so intimately connected with other phases 
of civilization and culture, not to say with political development, 
that its history must be studied step by step with the broader 
history of the people. The epochs of the history of Greek religion 
are not different from the epochs of the history of the Greek people. 
The forces which directed politics and scientific investigation, the 
social and moral ideals, even the forms of commerce and industry, 
are determining facts for the development of this religion. Per- 
haps the study of religious phenomena has as much to contribute 
to Greek history in general as the study of industry, or the study 
of social institutions; conversely the study of Greek religion with- 
out taking into account other phases of life can never produce 
trustworthy results. A few examples will illustrate the importance 
of this principle. We have pointed out that the Zeus worshipped 
in each hamlet differed in greater or less degree from any other 
form of Zeus. The question whether one "sky god" has been 
split up into these countless forms, or whether the similar gods 
worshipped by different groups of people gradually tended to be 
merged into one god, father of gods and men, is fundamental. 
The long-accepted belief that the unity of Zeus is original, the 
variety of the local forms of Zeus a development more or less acci- 
dental, neglects the historic fact that the conscious unity of the 
Greek people was the outcome of a long process of development. 

THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK RELIGION 191 

Again, it is not reasonable to regard Crete as the one main source 
of Greek religion, 1 unless it is also the source of other forms of 
Greek civilization. If it should seem to be proved that the cults 
of Crete were a determining factor for religion as it is found on 
the Balkan peninsula, it would still be necessary to look for Cretan 
influence along other lines before the proof would be complete. 
Once more, the two main types of sacrifice in Greece — the com- 
munion meal and the piacular sacrifice — cannot stand for two 
periods in the history of religion, until each form has been defi- 
nitely connected with one epoch in the history of the Greek people. 
The principle under discussion does not rest on any mere theoreti- 
cal basis. Such historical facts as that hunting is more primitive 
than the keeping of domestic animals, that a nomad life precedes 
agriculture, that seafaring and commerce belong to a higher stage 
of society still, are facts reflected in the history of each god as 
well as in the history of worship, 

A second principle, now somewhat generally recognized, is that 
localities of worship and local forms of worship tend to persist 
through the greatest changes in outward belief. The discussion 
of ancient Greek cults in Christian Greece (ep. p. 285 f.) illustrates 
the wide reach of this principle- The tenacity of old forms always 
characterizes religion more than any other department of human 
life. The interpretation of a worship may change and imposing 
ceremonies may be added ; still the forms are likely to continue as 
they have been handed down, means by which the divine power 
may be propitiated. The flexibility of myth stands in striking 
contrast with the relatively fixed character of worship. Even when 
myth stood in much closer relation to belief than in the days 
when it furnished the theme of lyric or tragic poet, yet its ready 
response to any change in environment must be admitted. Con- 
sequently the investigation of myth yields relatively little for the 
history of religion. On the other hand worship is something so 
intensely practical, so tenacious of old forms though their meaning 

* As does O. Gruppe, GrUckische Mytholagir und Religionsgcschickte. 

i 9 2 GREEK RELIGION 

be forgotten, so slow to yield even when the religious conscious- 
ness demands some new type of religion, that in the study of cult- 
practices is to be found material for the entire religious history of 
such a people as the Greeks. 

In the effort to reconstruct the early history of Greelc religion 
before the rise of any literature, several lines of investigation are 
to be pursued, (i) The first definite effort to deal with this 
problem used the method of Indo-European parallels. The 
wonderful advance in the knowledge of Indo-European languages 
which followed the discovery and critical study of Sanskrit gave 
rise to the belief that a similar method would yield equally impor- 
tant results in the history of other phases of culture. The com- 
parative method was applied to the study of social, industrial, 
political, and religious institutions with varying success. Although 
the belief in one Indo-European race has been somewhat shaken, 
yet the fact that all the European languages go back to one source 
justifies the student in seeking some likeness in the early religious 
development of the peoples who spoke these languages ; indeed, 
the historic relation between different phases of culture demands 
that such a course be followed. At the same time the fact that 
religious belief and practice do not follow exactly the same lines 
of development as do social or political institutions, is a warning 
to caution. When one people subdues another and occupies its 
land, sometimes the institutions and the language of the conquerors 
prevail in the territory they have won, or on the other hand the 
language and the civilization of the country may survive the politi- 
cal changes, as was the case in Greece under Roman domination. 
In the first instance the conquerors may not dare to neglect the 
gods and the worship they find in the land, though they bring 
their own gods with them ; in the second instance the conquerors 
may introduce their gods that brought them victory, even though 
their language tends to die out. Moreover, it is evident that the 
spirit of a people dominates and shapes religious belief more than 
it can affect language on the one hand, or the forms of religious 
practice on the other hand. It is just this tenacity of religious 

THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK RELIGION 193 

forms along with the flexibility of the content in these forms which 
makes it difficult, to apply the comparative method to the historical 
study of religion. 

(2) A second method of investigation uses the archaeological 
remains which have recently been discovered in such abundance 
in Greece, in the Aegean islands, and in Crete. By means of the 
relations existing between early Greece and E^ypt it is possible to 
get, with some assurance, an approximate date for these remains. 
The difficulty which confronts the student here is to determine 
what objects really have religious significance, and then to ascer- 
tain just what this significance is. The only safe principle is to 
reject for the time being all monuments the religious meaning of 
which cannot be proved by the circumstances of their discovery, 
by comparison with remains from a later date, or by their relation 
to religious objects among related peoples. Even then, it may be 
impossible to determine the significance of definitely religious monu- 
ments for early Greek religion. 

(3) Thirdly, some inferences may be drawn from the practices 
of later worship. Many of the local forms of worship in later 
time conform to the type suggested by the Homeric poems. 
Other practices, in themselves older, were profoundly modified by 
the religious movements of the seventh and sixth centuries, B.C. ; 
there still remain some rites so out of line with the development 
of religion during these epochs that they may fairly be referred to 
an earlier period. With all the obstacles to the successful use of 
this method, some results obtained by it may be accepted, espe- 
cially when they are in harmony with the results of other lines of 
investigation, 

(4) Again some historical data throw indirect but important 
light on the special history of religion. A study of the cults in 
colonies, the founding of which may be approximately dated, 
furnishes evidence as to the cults in the mother cities. Similarly 
the stage of religious development in Greece at the time of the 
great migrations, in particular the migrations across the Aegean to 
Asia Minor, is indicated by a comparison of the later conditions 

GREEK RELIGION 13 

i 9 4 GREEK RELIGION 

in the regions affected. There can be no doubt that the people 
of Ionia worshipped Olympian deities, such as Zeus and Athena, 
Apollo and Poseidon, because they brought this worship with them 
from Greece- It is fairly well established that Heracles was not 
originally a Dorian god, yet it must be admitted that he was 
adopted as a national hero at the time of the " Dorian migration.' 1 
Similarly the presence of many Thessalian cults in southern Greece 
points to the development of these cults in the north before a 
migration southward. 

(5) Another line of historical argument is concerned with the 
names of places and the names of persons. There is no question 
that many names were ** theophoric," derived from the name of 
the god himself, or sometimes from practices that obtained in his 
worship. The study of language throws some tight on the epoch 
when these names were formed, and historical data occasionally 
indicate when they came into general use. For example, the use 
of the names of the Olympian gods without change as names for 
persons is known to be late ; the formation of adjectives from these 
Olympian names to be used as names for persons or places 
was not common in early times ; on the other hand such forms 
as Athenai, Thebai, Alalkomenai f belong to a far earlier epoch. 
The special advantages of this method, wherever it is available, 
are that it is entirely independent of the others mentioned and 
that the results thus obtained may be approximately dated. 

2. The Type of Early Religion in Greece. — The common 
belief of kindred races in later times and in particular the later 
Greek belief has led to the following inferences as to this period in 
Greece. The objects and processes of nature, in so far as they 
attracted man's attention, were endowed with a life not unlike his 
own (animism), a life which we may describe by saying that nature 
was full of spirits. What these spirits were is hard to define; 
sometimes it would seem that they were the souls of the dead, not 
properly laid to rest, again it is not so much souls in objects as a 
sentient life peculiar to the objects themselves with which we have 
to deal. If we may say that nature was full of spirits, it is neces- 

! 

THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK RELIGION 195 

sary to add that relatively few of these spirits were important to 
man. Only such as represented the objects which he used and 
the processes in nature which affected him for good or evil, 
together with the souls of his ancestors, demanded his attention. 
These he sought, either to win Over by his worship, or to banish 
out of this sphere of life by his arts; his gods were the powerful 
spirits whose continuous favor he sought to gain. Among the 
gods we may assume a heaven god, the source of light and warmth 
and rain ; an earth goddess, mother of vegetation when fertilized 
by the rain ; perhaps also a goddess of the hearth and the family, 
a Hestia. Spirits which protected the flocks from harm, or pro- 
duced young of the flocks, or blessed the hunter in his search for 
game were also worshipped. In a word, it seems that some nature 
gods were generally worshipped, and some " departmental " gods* 
The contrast between these communities based on the family as 
the primary unit and the Semitic blood-clans, between these 
departmental gods (quite generally of the same type, though 
differing in detail) and the Semitic gods who are of one blood 
with their worshipping clans, is very striking. 

We are justified further in the belief that worship and in partic- 
ular the greater festivals were determined by the annual changes 
of nature. The equinoxes and the solstices, the date of sowing 
and of reaping, etc., were the times of worship. The forms of 
worship, no doubt, were shaped by that sympathy with the life and 
death of vegetation which gave rise to the belief in gods that were 
born and died each year. More than this, men thought by half- 
magical rites to induce germination of the seed, generation in 
animals, growth in plants and animals. The presence of these 
ideas and practices both in later Greece and among other Indo- 
European races indicates that they date back to a very early 
period. 

Particular cases of cult survival cannot be traced back with any 
confidence to this epoch. Cults located on mountain tops, no 
doubt, date back to some early worship of the heaven god, cults 
in caves, to an early worship of the earth goddess who both 

196 GREEK RELIGION 

receives the dead and gives birth to vegetation. The reason for 
assigning to these cults an early date is that the developed 
Mycenaean civilization, like later civilization which centred in 
towns, was probably unfavorable to the creation of such localities 
of worship. In some particular cases the libation without wine, 
the sacrifices without blood, and even without fire, may be sur- 
vivals of very early practice. 1 That springs, particular trees, cer- 
tain kinds of animals, were held sacred by some communities, is 
altogether probable- The central feature of " totemism," the sac- 
rificial meal of a clan on its kindred animal, is nowhere attested 
for Greece- On the other hand, the animal " symbols " of the 
Olympian deities, the eagle of Zeus, the owl of Athena, hardly 
originated as mere symbols; and it is also pointed out that the 
worship of a bear goddess (Artemis) by girls imitating bears by 
their movements and their brown clothing, and called "bears" 
(apKTot), may be the relic of a very early worship of animals. 2 

If the views presented in the preceding paragraph are correct, we 
must assume that a worship of " tendance," which aimed to secure 
the favor of real gods, always existed in Greece along with the 
worship of " aversion" by which men sought to drive away evil 
spirits and to distract the attention of beings which might harm 
them. This attempt to drive away evil, or in later language to 
" purify " one's self from evil, was unquestionably far more wide- 
spread before the rise of the definitely fixed Olympian deities 
which Homer pictures, than it was later ; in fact these rites belong 
to the lowest stratum of Greek religion, although the attempt to treat 
them as exclusively the worship of any one period seems to me unhis- 
torical, and unjustified by any arguments yet adduced in its favor. 
To this earliest period we are to assign none of the gods of later 
religion, not Zeus on the one hand, nor the chthonic gods on the 
other ; rather we find here the germs out of which the later gods 
were developed ; a sky god worshipped in many forms in different 

1 Polemon in scholion to Sophocles, Ocd. CoL ioo; Pausanias, i. 26. 6; Plato, 
*<r-6 f p. 782C- 

a Cp. supra, p. laa. 

THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK RELIGION 197 

places who became Zeus, an earth goddess who appears later 
under several names, gods who preside over different human 
activities — no two just alike, and countless spirits many of which 
must be avoided and even averted by special rites. 

3. Early Religion in the light of Archaeological Remains. — 
The excavations of Schliemann at Mycenae shed the first light 
on a period in Greek history, which till then was but dimly known 
through inferences from myth and from the epic. Later discoveries 
revealed similar remains all along the east coast of Greece, among 
the Aegean islands, on the coast of Asia Minor, and in Crete. 
The remains marked a distinct type of civilization, often called 
Mycenaean because Mycenae was one of its most important 
centres of influence. The pottery and utensils were of a type so 
marked that they were readily recognized whether they appeared 
along the Aegean sea, in Egypt, or in more distant regions. The 
situation of the cities, and the decorative designs on the remains, 
indicate that this was the civilization of a seafaring people. That 
it was at its height about 1500— 1200 B.C. is shown by dated 
Egyptian objects in Mycenaean tombs and by Mycenaean objects 
found with dated remains in Egypt. Although the impulse to 
progress in art, in religion, as well as in commerce came from the 
east and south, there is little doubt that this civilization belonged 
to an essentially Greek people. 

In Crete alone do we learn much of the earlier periods and the 
civilization out of which the Mycenaean civilization probably 
developed. The excavations of the last ten years in Crete seem 
to indicate three main periods of development, only the third of 
which is connected with what has been called Mycenaean. These 
periods are, for convenience* called by the names assigned by 
Mr. Arthur Evans, " Early Minoan," u Middle Minoan," and " Late 
Minoan," while subdivisions in the periods are indicated by the 
Roman numerals I— III. 1 The third main period was marked by 
the irruption into Crete of an Hellenic race from the north ; of the 

1 The dates which may be assigned to these periods are discussed in Burrows, 
T/te £Hs£overUs in Crete, and in Hawes, Gournia, p. at 

198 

GREEK RELIGION 

earlier periods we can only say that the people were of a different 
race, not necessarily an Aryan race, of which traces have been 
found in Asia Minor, if not in Greece itself. It is clear that the 
first important civilization of the Aegean belonged to this race ; 
that it centred in Crete ; and that it developed into a sea-power. 

:^> 

■ immjiuf nm mini Milium iHMinilllUiHimiin miHlliilllliilHHU 

llllllllll HM I . il II I I I 111 I H I HIH I UM II I U IIIIIITII IM I D I I I M I M 

Fig. 57. — Section and Plan of domed Tomb (Tholos) at Mycenae 

which left its mark in the legends of Minos. The name " Myce- 
naean " must be limited to that phase of early civilization which 
developed in a Greek race through its contact with this earlier 
race in Crete, and which had its main centres in the Aegean 
islands and in Greece proper. At the same time it adopted so 
much from the earlier periods in Crete that it is almost impos- 
sible for us to treat it by itself. 

So far as religion is concerned, it is clear, in the first place, that 
in all these earlier ages there was a real belief in the future life. 

THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK RELIGION 

T99 

if not an actual worship of the dead. The utensils found in early 
Cretan tombs — vessels of stone or pottery or bronze, rings and 
jewelry, weapons, etc. — can only mean that the dead had the 
same wants as the living. The later domed tombs of " bee-hive '* 
shape were elaborate 

structures erected as /W^\ 

homes for the dead. 
Over an earlier " shaft w 
grave at Mycenae was 
found an altar with ashes 
and charred remains of 
domestic animals ; here 
and elsewhere both the 
bones of sacrificed ani- 
mals and the objects 
found with the dead are 
evidence of a real wor- 
ship of the dead, a worship 
of tendance, so far as we 
can learn, not of aversion. 
The objects of thin gold 
plate found in such abun- 
dance at Mycenae sug- 
gest, perhaps, that the 
dead were shades who 
did not need such sub- 
stantial ornaments and 
utensils as living men ; yet 

the bronze vessels, the pottery, and the armor are such as living 
men used. The question whether worship continued to be offered 
at the tomb after the ceremony of burial was finished, cannot be 
answered absolutely. Dr. Wolters infers from the fragments of 
pottery found in the entrance of a bee-hive tomb near Menidi in 
Attica, that here water for bathing was regularly brought to the 
dead in a high basin, until the practice was stopped by the Pelo- 

Fig. 58. — Attic Bi.ack- figured Vase 
Painting 

Bath vessel reconstructed from fragments be- 
fore the tomb at Menidi, 

200 

GREEK RELIGION 

ponnesian war ; 1 if the inference is accepted, it means continued 
tendance of the dead. Again, the question whether rites in honor 
of the dead should be considered the worship of gods, 2 whether 
they imply a belief in beings themselves potent to send good and 
evil to the worshippers, may receive different answers. If the 
spirits of the dead were not banished from this world, but tended 

with kindly offices, we 
can but infer a real 
belief in their power 
to send divine bless- 
ings. 

Other places besides 
the tomb where actual 
traces of worship have 
been found are the 
mountain cave and the 
palace shrine. The 
cave on the Cretan 
Mt. Dicte was an im- 
portant centre of wor- 
ship in the u Minoan " 
age. A large stone 
altar, small libation 
tables, layers of ashes 
with incinerated bones, fragments of pottery vases and figures, 
small double axes and figurines of bronze, all attest its impor- 
tance as a shrine in the Middle and Late Minoan periods. There 
is no definite evidence as to the god or goddess here worshipped. 
Tradition and myth connect the birth of Zeus with Mt. Dicte as 
well as with Mt. Ida; we only know that with the advent of the 
Dorians in Crete the Idaean shrine rapidly gained the pre- 

Fig. 59. — Plan of thk Dictaean Cave 

1 Jakr. Arch. fnst. 13 (1898) 13 f.; 14 (1899) 103 f. 

fl On the interesting sarcophagus from Hagia Triada one scene is interpreted 
as representing worship offered to the dead man in front of the tomb ; Lagrange, 
£*a Crtte anciennc, 65, fig. 35. 

THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK RELIGION 201 

MALE 

STEATrTE 

DOUBLE 

DOUBLE fc ^ out 

IvotaW* 8 ? 1 ** 1 ' 

HOLDING fTffcM 
DOVE V ■-,(■-,; 

OOU BLE GOOOCSS 
■ft.— VWTH co>t 
RESTORED oHMtAD 

~* 

a 

A j ,^"H L 

TRIPOD 

CLMEMTEUUUWN 

"LOWER 
__V. STEP 

SHRINE_OF 
DOUBLE AX 

SECTION 

a 

JSBBEP &MAIE FIGURE 

/"small 

double ak 
gf steatite 

RAISETD BASE 
WITH PEBBLED FLOOR 
AND PLASTER TACING 

CLAY vessels — 

i /small 
■'DOUBLE AK 
OF STEATITE *y- 

SOCKET FOR 

FEMALE GODDESS 
_ * WITH DDVE ON HEAD 
fX ©FEMALE 
VOTARY FIGURE 
I CYLINDRICAL! 
4- BELOW 4 

s 

■* DDVE 

°Cvo c C&~\ SOCKET 0fi QHi- 
^— 'FOP AX SHAFT,go< 

iJv 7 — 7* 5SS-W5F- 

gHORNSOF CONSECRATION 

PLASTER TRIPDD 

PLAN 

100 

Cen/trr/elrval 

so 

1 ■ i I 

J Metre. 

Fig. 60. — The " Shrine of tjhe Double Axes" at Cnossos 

202 GREEK RELIGION 

eminence, and that this was a shrine of Zeus, the Greek god of 
the heavens. 

In the Cretan palaces which have been excavated at Cnossos, 
Phaestos, Hagia Triada, and Gournia, small rooms have been found 
which clearly were used for worship in the Middle Minoan (III) 
and Late Minoan periods- The most complete of these is the 
M shrine of the Double Axes" in the palace at Cnossos (Late 
Minoan III). 1 It is a small room about 1.50 m. square, divided 
into three parts by a difference of level. In the first section as 
one enters were found several amphorae and other vases ; in the 
second section, which is slightly higher, a low tripod basin of 
plaster stood in the centre and about it were small cups and bowls 
of pottery ; the third section, which was narrower and consider- 
ably higher, may be described as a shelf, on which stood five terra 
cotta figurines, a small double axe of steatite, a Maltese cross, and 
two ** horns of consecration " of plaster, each with a socket in 
which perhaps a double axe once stood. These objects will 
demand consideration later. 

On the mainland of Greece no such shrines have been found 
in Mycenaean palaces. A pit in the court of the palace at Tiryns 
has been interpreted as a pit altar. In any case we are probably 
right in assuming that in these palaces (and perhaps in the Cretan 
palaces) sacrifices were offered to the gods in the court or in the 
megaron opening off the court. 

Among the objects used in worship the types of vases are not 
peculiar, except for the high, slender, funnel-shaped vase with 
handle at the top. 2 The conch-shell perhaps was used to summon 
either the gods or their worshippers- Liquid offerings were pre- 
sented in the hollowed top of a stone or in some other flat basin. 
The altar itself was a square structure, sometimes represented as 
having one part higher than the other ; or again, it takes the form 
of a pedestal with the sides cut back between the top and bottom. 

' Brit. School Annual, 8 (1901) 95-K05. 

3 Wide in Ath. Mitth. 26 (1901) 247 f. ; Lagrange, ZLa Crite anciermt, frontis- 
piece. 

THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK RELIGION 203 

It is not clear whether the altar was actually used for burnt offer- 
ings or whether they were burned (if they were burned at all) on 
the ground in the open air. In any case, the term altar has often 
been applied to what is essentially a pedestal or support 

Two monuments representing worship actually in progress 
deserve careful study. The first, a sarcophagus from Hagia 
Triada, is described and partially illustrated by Lagrange. 1 On 
one side is a scene 
of sacrifice : two 
women and a man 
blowing the flute stand 
behind a table on 
which lies a bull with 
blood flowing from 
his throat into a vessel 
below; then follows a 
priestess holding a 
basket of fruits or 
cakes above a low 
base, upright double 

axes with a black bird perched on them, and a building on 
which a plant is growing. On the other side offerings are brought 
and placed in a jar between double axes at the left ; at the right 
small calves and a bowl (or boat) are brought by persons in a 
peculiar dress toward a tree and a stiff figure (the dead ?) stand- 
ing before a high structure (the tomb?). The second monument 
is the upper half of a small stone vase (Fig. 62). The scene 
apparently represents a procession of harvesters carrying long 
three-pronged forks, and headed by a man in a richly ornamented 
cloak or cape. 2 It is difficult to explain the procession other than 
as a religious act. 

There is no evidence that idols in the proper sense of the term, 
anthropomorphic images which exemplified a god to his wor- 

1 Lagrange, La Crtte ancicnne, 61 f. 

■ Fowler and Wheeler, Greek Archaeology, 68. 

Fig. 6i. — Libation Tables ant> Dishrs 

2C>4 

CREEK RELIGION 

shippers, were in general use ; in fact none of the figurines found 
in these shrines are unmistakably gods, and, if they are to be in- 
terpreted as gods, it is quite unlikely that such small figures were 
themselves objects of worship. "Various religious symbols, how- 
ever, may be pointed out ; representations of the gods appear in 

Fig. 6a. — Steatite Vase from Hagia Triada 

scenes of worship depicted on seals, etc. ; and the question as to 
the figurines needs further consideration. 

Among the commonest symbols are the so-called "horns of 
consecration," two horns or prongs connected by a depressed 
line. In scenes of worship on gems, these horns stand on a sort 
of altar, and they are found on a miniature terra cotta altar from 
the Cnossos "Temple Repositories." 1 In the shrine described 
above they stand on the upper level with the figurines. A steatite 

1 Lagrange, ibid., 83, fig. 62; Brit, ScAool Ann, 9 (190a), Cp- the Hebrew 
•• horns of the altar." Exodus 27. 3. 

THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK RELIGION 205 

fragment shows two men holding out bowls before a wall with 
several pairs of horns. 1 The motive is repeated several times 
on representations of an architectural facade which suggests a 
temple, in remains both from Crete and Mycenae.* With it are 
often associated a pillar, a double axe, or, at Mycenae, a dove. 
The only interpreta- 
tion yet suggested is 
that these horns are 
conventionalized from 
" boukrania," the 

skulls of sacrificed 
oxen with the horns 
attached, which are 
found in scenes of 
worship in this period 
as well as in later 
times. There are 

many indications that 
the bull was very im- 
portant for religion in 
Crete. 

One of the com- 
monest symbols in 
this period was the 
symbol of power, the 
double axe. That this 
was often used with 
religious significance 
no one can question. It occurs in the " Shrine of the Double 
Axes " at Cnossos ; many small bronze axes were found with 
some miniature shields in the later Minoan deposits of the 
Dictaean caves; a double axe is represented in scenes of worship 
en gems j it is associated both with u horns of consecration " and 

1 Brit. School Ann.. 9 (1902) 129. 

a Ibid. 7 (1900) fig. 9 ; p. 307, infra, fig, 65. 

Fig. 63. — Steatite Offertory Scene 

Two figures stand holding oul bowls before a wall 
on which are " horns of consecration." 

206 

GREEK RELIGION 

with the representation of a bull's head with horns. The use 
of the double axe on the sarcophagus from Hagia Triada has 
already been mentioned. 1 No trace has been found in Crete of a 
double axe which was suited for actual use as a weapon ; it is 
simply a symbol of the power which such a weapon once gave. 
It is most naturally understood as the symbol of a god of the 
heavens, who was at the same time a war-god. 

On the architectural facades mentioned above (p. 205) a pillar 
stands between the horns of consecration j usually it rests on a 
sort of altar base. While it is possible that this pillar is purely 
structural, it is more probable that it had some meaning for reli- 
gion ; in this case, the pillar in some rooms of the Cnossos palace 

may also have had some religious signifi- 
cance. The evidence for sacred pillars 
or stones elsewhere in Crete is slight. 

That sacred trees had a place in the 
early Cretan religion cannot be disputed. 
A fragment of a steatite vase found at 
Cnossos* shows a fig tree in an enclosure 
with horns of consecration and wor- 
shippers. On gems a tree or branches 
from trees are found with worshippers 
before an altar with horns. Again, on 
the " heraldic gems " we often see be- 
tween the two creatures a tree instead 
of a human figure ; in one interesting 
case the creatures are watering the tree. 
It is possible that the Gournia shrine was once occupied by a 
sacred tree. 3 

The question of animal "symbols" is complicated by the 
occurrence on the gems, just mentioned, of creatures half animal, 
half man, and in several instances combining parts of several ani- 
mals. These creatures seem to indicate worshippers, or rather 

Fig. 64. — Gem from 
Vaphio 

In the centre sprays of a 
tfee rise from *' horns of 
consecration " on a stand ; 
on either side a com- 
posite creature is holding 
up a pitcher. 

1 Cp. sup-a, p. 203. 

2 Evans /tf*r. H*U* Stud, 14 (1901) 103. 
s Hawes, Gournia, 47 (B.E.W.). 

THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK RELIGION 207 

attendants in worship, who might be either human beings or minor 
divine beings. The last explanation seems to be the more prob- 
able ; in that case we should regard these curious creatures as the 
embodiment of lesser spirits whose function it is to keep up the 
worship of the gods. That spirits should be conceived in animal 
forms may be due to a "totemistic " range of ideas, but there is 
no clear evidence of totemism and no great probability that it 
existed in Crete or in Greece 
at this time. Except for the 
serpent, the one clear instance 
of a " sacred animal " is the 
dove, which is found with the 
horns on a complicated shrine 
fagade, again on a female 
figure which the Greeks would 
have called Aphrodite, and in 
other connections. 

While no real idols have 
been found, there are various 
representations of the gods on 
gems and in painting, and 
some small figures which may 
be divinities- The small 
pottery figures found in such 
abundance on Mycenaean sites 
have no doubt some religious 

significance* They represent a woman, either with raised hands 
or with her hands clasped to her breast, and sometimes holding a 
child. A few figures of a woman in thin gold have also been 
found. What use was made of these figures is not clear. In a 
shrine of the palace at Cnossos, however, there were found three 
pottery figures of a type somewhat similar to the pottery figures of 
Tiryns and Mycenae ; in this instance the " horns," the double axe, 
and the vessels found with them indicate that they played a part 
in actual worship. A dove stands on the head of one of the figures. 

[Ai 1 14 

Fig. 65. — Thin Gold Plaque from 
Mycenae 

Several pairs of horns and three double 
columns are seen in the facade, above 
which are two doves. 

2 08 

GREEK RELIGIOM 

At Cnossos, in the shrine at Gournia, and elsewhere in Crete, 
have been found figures of pottery or faience, dressed in tight 
bodice and full flounced skirt, often with a serpent twined about 
the body- It has been customary to treat at least the figures with 

dove or serpent as god- 
desses, while others 
have more often been 
regarded as worship- 
pers. Probably all are 
votive offerings, for 
there is no reason why 
figures of the god as 
well as of the wor- 
shipper should not be 
so presented - 

The scenes on gems 
and seal impressions 
include both divine 
and human beings. 
We can but call it a 
goddess who stands on 
a mountain flanked by 
lions, with a shrine 
at the left, and a wor- 
shipper at the right. 1 
Probably it is a god- 
dess with a lion, and a god with a lioness on two impressions 
found a little later. 2 On the often published gem from Mycenae 
(Fig. 67), there is little question that the figure seated under a 
tree is a goddess ; her attendants may be nymphs or human 
beings. The figure on this same gem with double shield and 
spear, which also occurs in a wall painting at Mycenae, I can only 
regard as a god, possibly the god of the heavens as a war-god- 
Finally, the figure of a woman with an animal in each hand, 

1 Brit. School Ann. 7 (1900) 39. a lbid. 9 9 (190a) 59. 

Fig, 66. — Faience Figure from Cnossos 

THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK RELIGION 209 

which occurs both on gems and in other forms of representa- 
tion, is doubtless a goddess, the predecessor of the so-called 
" Persian Artemis." 

It is very noticeable that the evidence for a male god is slight. 
The important divinity of the Minoans was a goddess, a goddess 
connected with the earth by her snake, with the heavens by her 
dove. So soon as we begin to deal with a Hellenic race it is fair 
to compare her with the Cretan Rhea (the Mother, perhaps 
Mother Earth). The dove, even at 
this early day, may suggest Aphrodite. 
The goddess of wild animals would, 
for such a race, be a form of Artemis, 
the queen of wild beasts and the 
patron of hunters. Finally the war- 
god (perhaps the god of the double 

axe) would of course be the god of 
. , r, j_ Lt _ Fig. 67.— Cold Ring from 

the heavens, Zeus, the consort or the MvCENAE (.035 ra . IO n fi > 

son of the earth goddess. The ar- 
chaeological evidence is such as to justify the belief that these old 
Cretan deities would be received by invading Greeks and wor- 
shipped under their Greek names. 

4. Early Religion as inferred from, the Following Period. — A 
second main line of argument with reference to early Greek reli- 
gion would proceed backward from the known to the unknown, 
from cult survivals back to earlier types of worship, and from later 
religious conceptions back to their probable sources. In the 
present state of our knowledge it is absolutely impossible to assign 
survivals of early worship definitely to a Mycenaean age, to an 
earlier Minoan age, or to wandering Greek tribes. Rites which 
have to do with the care of flocks may go back to nomad tribes ; 
unquestionably with the development of civilization increasing 
stress was laid on agriculture and agricultural worship ; the devel- 
opment of city life with its stimulus to manufactures and commerce 
must have been reflected in the forms of religion. In particular, 
the spirits of plant life and the ritual of sowing and reaping, which 

GREEK RELIGION-* 14 

2io GREER RELIGION 

Homer absolutely neglects, can be no new creation of the period 
following Homer ; they are the background for the religious re- 
vival of the period which followed Homer- This line of argument, 
however, becomes really fruitful for the epoch under consideration 
only when we take into account the Homeric poems. 

If we assume as the generally accepted position that our Iliad 
was for the most part a product of the ninth century B.C. in Asia 
Minor, that the epic gives us older " Aeolic " material in an Ionic 
form, and finally that the Olympian deities are a Thessalian prod- 
uct brought from the mainland of Greece in a migration across 
the Aegean, the epic world of the gods in approximately the epic 
form is thrown back of iooo b.c. But this epic picture marks a 
definite stage at the end of a long period of development, a period 
which ends rather later than the close of the Mycenaean epoch. 
The influence of epic poetry both on the general conception of 
religion and man's attitude toward the gods and on his ideas of 
particular deities can hardly be overestimated. Yet it seems clear 
that the epic lays did not themselves create Zeus and Athena and 
Poseidon ; rather they presuppose fairly well defined ideas of these 
Olympian gods and their functions. So we must assume for the 
Mycenaean epoch — at least in northern Greece — such a process 
of evolution in religious belief as will end in the Olympian gods, 
such forms of worship as are not out of harmony with this belief. 

We shall assume, then, that in Thessaly the god of the heavens, 
worshipped on Olympus and other mountains, was not so much a 
war-god as a divine ruler, whose nature came to reflect the ideal 
of the human king* Each community had worshipped its heaven- 
god, source of light and rain ; now as the communities of Thessaly 
or Boeotia or the Argolid were united into larger units, these 
heaven-gods were fused into one ; as the ruler and his court 
gained in splendor, both ruler and people would think of their 
greatest god as the ruler among the gods. 

Even apart from archaeological remains, the Greek calendar, 
with its emphasis on the birth and death of vegetable life, would 
lead us to assume a mother goddess, the mother earth, who is the 

THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK RELIGION 211 

ultimate source of all life. Granted that each community had such 
a goddess, the consort (and sometimes the mother) of the heaven- 
god, we need not be surprised that she develops differently in dif- 
ferent localities. As the communities of one region are brought 
into closer touch with each other, and as their civilization is en- 
riched by elements which each contributes as well as by elements 
from outside, the form of Rhea appears in Crete, the form of Hera 
the queen in the Argive plain, while other forms of the goddess 
(Leto t Dione, Themis, Cybele, Europa?, Demeter, etc.) are shaped 
in other regions. From goddesses as numerous as the communi- 
ties which worshipped them, but of one general type, there de- 
veloped a relatively small number of goddesses, each a definite 
many-sided personality. 

Sometimes closely related to the mother of vegetable life, no 
doubt sometimes distinct, the early communities of Greece wor- 
shipped a queen of wild beasts, the patron of the chase; the 
goddesses of this type gave rise to the Olympian Artemis, later the 
exemplification of chastity and the companion of Apollo. And 
Apollo was one outgrowth of the shepherd-god existing in each 
community, himself once a shepherd, protecting the sheep from 
wolves (Apollo Lykeios), patron of the music and the games that 
shepherds loved. Each community recognized a god of fire, the 
patron of smiths, though here again some regions contributed 
much more than others to the making of Hephaestus. The 
Aphrodite of later religion sometimes included elements that 
came from the old mother goddess ; doubtless many of the early 
communities recognized in addition now a spirit who presided 
over human love, now a goddess of family life, both of which were 
taken up into Aphrodite. Every seafaring people worshipped 
spirits of the sea ; some of these remained in local worship and in 
myth as distinct beings, more were fused in Poseidon, the god 
whose resistless might and capricious nature expressed the general 
Greek thought of the sea. 

Of the process here described the epic contains scarcely a 
trace ; on the other hand, there is hardly one centre of worship 

21 2 

GREEK RELIGION 

where the marks of it are not to be discerned. The nature of the 
process is suggested by the history of the people. Families and 
tribes in much the same stage of culture, and with much the same 
range of ideas, make their way down into Greece. In the My- 
cenaean age larger politi- 

cal and social commer- 
cial groups are gradually 
formed, with a civilization 
richer and more varied 
as it embraces elements 
from different sources 
within and without the 
country. Similarly we 
must assume that the 
conception of nature- 
spirits, of souk, of "de- 
partmental gods " (gods 
of the chase, of the 
flocks, of seafaring, etc.), 
was originally much the 
same for different com- 
munities, but nowhere 
quite the same, and 
that in the larger civili- 
zation which developed 
the gods of each type 
grew richer and more 
varied with elements 
drawn from different com- 
munities, different regions in the Greek world, and different sources 
outside of Greece. In this sense the Zeus or the Poseidon of the 
epic was a " composite photograph " of earlier Zeuses and Posei- 
dons. The process was one of synthesis or of " condensation," to 
use the word of Eduard Meyer. 1 But if the Zeus of Homer was a 

* Geschichte 4<i Altertums % 2. 96. 

Fig, 68, — Marble Relief from the 
PEIRAEUS (in Berlin) 

"Worshippers approaching a serpent (Zeus 
Meilichios). 

THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK RELIGION 213 

composite photograph of earlier forms of the god, this is only 
half the story. Each cult of Zeus continued to emphasize those 
peculiar characteristics of the god which it had always emphasized, 
in addition to the characteristics generally adopted, with the result 
that the Zeus of each cult remained individual and was known in 
worship by an added individual name. Zeus Lykaios worshipped 
with human sacrifice in Arcadia, Zeus Trophonios worshipped in a 
Boeotian cave, Zeus Meilichios conceived now in human form, now 
in the form of a serpent, are extreme examples of this individual- 
ization preserved in worship. Each local cult modified the con- 
ception of Zeus for a narrower or wider region according to the 
extent of its influence ; the god of each local cult was more or less 
modified by the general Greek conception of Zeus. Finally, it 
should be noted that there were some local gods which were never 
brought under any of the general Greek gods, and others, like the 
Zeus Amphiaraus of Oropus, who were thought of as distinct be- 
ings more often than as forms of Zeus. The " heroes " were often 
local gods whose cult was of such a character that it was more 
natural to bring them under the category of chthonic gods and 
souls than to connect thern with any of the Olympian rulers. 1 

It has been pointed out that almost every god in worship has 
two names, of which the first is ordinarily one of the epic series, 
the second a more individual name. 2 So far as the history of 
geographical names and names of persons in Greece has been 
carried, it appears that a large percentage of these names had once 
some religious significance. It is clear that names derived from 
the divine names in use in the epic (Apollonios, Athenaios, 
Dionysios) are relatively late, usually far later in their formation 
than the epic itself. On the other hand, names of persons and 
places whose formation points to an earlier epoch are many of 
them connected with the u epithet names " of the gods, the second 
of the two names used in worship, e.g. Alalkomenai, Chryse, Delos, 
Kolias, Orthosia, Potniai, Sosandra (but compare Athenai, Her- 
mione). The inference is, not that epithet names are necessarily 

1 Cp. supra, p. 165 £ a Cp. rupra t p. €45. 

214 GREEK RELIGION 

older than the names used in the epic, but that many epithet 
names do go back to the earliest period in Greek religion of which 
we have any trace, and that at this time they were the personal 
names of the local gods- That epithet names were always so 
important in prayer, points in the same direction. 

Although the processes which I have described were always 
going on in Greece, they have been discussed here because they 
are important only for the earlier epochs and in particular for the 
Mycenaean age. Such was the influence of the epic that its stand- 
ards tended to fix the conceptions of the gods and in large degree 
to put an end to that phase of religious development which has 
been under discussion. So far as forms of worship are concerned, 
the same influences were at work. However, the possible range 
of original variation was less, and the final unification was never so 
marked as in the case of the gods, while the effect of the epic in 
checking the process of development was less important. In dis- 
cussing the following period, it will appear that the epic helped 
the spread of the communion-meal sacrifice, especially in the great 
city festivals. Still I find no satisfactory evidence that the period 
preceding the epic was characterized by the other main type of 
Greek worship (whole burnt offerings of animals ordinarily black, 
sacrificed at night to chthonic gods) ; nor is it clear that the 
worship of this period was primarily a worship of "aversion." 1 
The subject may be dismissed with the statements (i) that local 
forms of worship were so tenacious that they yielded only slowly 
to any universalizing influence, and (2) that probably the com- 
munion-meal sacrifice had already become in some measure a 
general form of worship by the time of the migrations which car- 
ried the Olympian gods to Asia Minor, so that it could be adopted 
by the epic as a form universally applicable. 

1 Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, 9; Gruppe, Gruch. 
Afytholqgie und Religionsgcschicftft, 758 £ 

CHAPTER II 

RELIGION IN THE GREEK "MIDDLE AGES" 

1. Changes in the Period UOO-700 B.C. — The name " middle 
ages " is applied to that period of European history between the 
decay of an older civilization and the rise of new intellectual and 
spiritual life in the Renaissance. In this same sense it fairly de- 
scribes the period between the decay of the Mycenaean civilization 
and the rise of that new life which we may call Hellenic. The 
downfall of these early kingdoms and their culture was hastened, 
as in the case of the later European parallel, by a shifting of races 
which brought rude, vigorous peoples into contact with the worn- 
out remnants of the earlier civilization ; yet in each case decay 
within, rather than attack from without, was the real cause of 
change. In Greece we have reason to think that mountain 
tribes from Epirus made their way into the Thessalian plains, with 
a resulting shift of the population southward into the Peloponnese 
and eastward into Asia Minor, The evidence for this change 
varies greatly in different localities. In Laconia the control of the 
country by a relatively small band of " Dorians M left its mark till 
long after Greece lost its independence ; while in Attica the 
people claimed to be autochthonous. The connection of the 
Aeolians in Asia Minor with Thessaly, of Ionians with Euboea and 
Attica, of the southern Greek cities in Asia Minor with the 
Peloponnese, can readily be traced. 

The first result of these changes was a breaking down of the old 

kingdoms, a decay of the old cities, and a loss of many of the 

earlier arts. But on the whole these four centuries must have 

been a period of reconstruction. Except in a few instances the 

215 

2i6 GREEK RELIGION 

old and the new elements in the population were fused into one, 
to the advantage of both parties. Out of political confusion there 
came first a sort of feudalism attached to the soil ; " princes " rich 
in flocks and fields, holding rough court in farmyard palaces, were 
the knights of the epic. The development of trade, and that in 
Greek hands, brought with it the rise of such cities as Chalcis 
and Corinth. According to the Homeric picture of Ithaca the 
" princes " gathered frequently in the capital city. In Attica, as 
in other regions, the control of the country was gradually centred 
in one city. In this period also we find trading cities sending out 
colonies along the lines of commerce as far as the Black Sea in the 
northeast and Cyrene and Sicily and Marseilles in the west. With 
one splendid exception the age is barren of literature and art; 
the Greek epic is a product of the Greek middle ages. 

The history of religion reflects these social changes. The 
shifting of population tended on the whole to increase the number 
of cult centres, for the intruders brought with them their own gods 
and quite generally they also adopted the worship which they 
found. A cursory glance at a map of Greek cult centres would 
reveal the shifting southward of many forms of worship belonging 
in the north. This process in itself would help the spread of the 
u Olympian " gods, the gods of epic, for the elements of this phase 
of religion no doubt belonged with the name Olympus in Thessaly ; 
and in general, names brought from the north would be commonly 
recognized names which the wandering epic bards would find 
adapted to their purposes. At the same time many less important 
names would be cut oflf from worship by this very shifting, cele- 
brated names that remained in myth at the disposal of the poet. 
The gods of agriculture, on the other hand, remained as gods of the 
land, worshipped that they might bless the crops of that locality, 
but not readily adapted to the purposes of myth or poetry. With 
the development of trade and convnerce by sea, Poseidon gained 
rapidly in importance ; Apollo, god of flocks in central Greece, 
was adopted as their patron by many of the Dorian communities, 
though perhaps his earlier connections were rather with Ionians ; 

RELIGION IN THE GREEK "MIDDLE AGES" 217 

Zeus of Olympus made good his position as king of gods and father 
of men. 

Two points in the religious changes deserve special notice, the 
form of religion in the new city life, and the religious " Amphlc- 
tyones." The older cult centres, especially those which persisted 
through this period, were not generally in centres of population ; 
they were not chosen for the convenience of men, but where men 
could find the gods — by some spring with luxuriant vegetation 
about it, in caves or on mountain tops, in spots where men for 
whatever reason had felt some manifestation of the presence of 
the gods. With the new development of city life, the old cults of 
that locality persisted, the worship of the families who came to the 
city was established, and very commonly branches of the impor- 
tant cults in all the region were located in the city. The purpose 
of the branches was in a measure to obtain the blessing of such 
gods for the city, but even more in order that the customary wor- 
shippers of these gods might still worship them conveniently and 
without repeated pilgrimages to the old shrines. So we find in the 
city of Athens temples to the Dionysus of Eleutherae, to the Arte- 
mis of Brauron, to the Demeter of Eleusis, not to mention less 
important instances of the process in question. 

Again, we find so-called Amphictyones, groups of communities 
who unite in worship at some important centre. The Tetrapolis 
of the plain of Marathon was a small group essentially religious. 
Along the east coast of Greece from Prasiae in Laconia north to 
Athens and Orchomenos, the cities joined in the worship of 
Poseidon on the island of Calauria ; in Boeotla another group 
of towns worshipped Poseidon at Onchestos ; and the temple of 
Poseidon at Mycale was the centre of a similar group of twelve 
cities in Asia Minor. Delos was the centre of Apollo worship, 
first for the near-by islands, then for all the Ionic world ; thus a 
hexapolis in Asia Minor shared the worship of Apollo Triopios 
near Cnidos. A sacred alliance bound together cities of Elis and 
Messene in the worship of Zeus at Olympia. Most important of 
all in this period was the Amphictyony of north and central 

2i8 GREEK RELIGION 

Greece which centred about the worship of Derneter at Anthela 
in the Pass of Thermopylae. Some of these religious groups lost 
their significance later; others, like the Amphictyony which met 
at Thermopylae, and the Delian worship of Apollo, became vital 
factors in the history of Greece. 

The influence of social changes on forms of worship is evident 
in at least one direction. From the custom in Sparta, where alone 
it persisted during later centuries, we are led to infer that it was 
the practice of the Dorian tribes to eat the principal meal of the 
day together rather than separately by families- Naturally the 
meal was the centre of any worship which involved animal sacrifice 
for food. The Dorian practice would necessarily help to extend 
this type of sacrifice, which involved a common meal. It was, 
moreover, a type of sacrifice suited to the descriptions of the epic 
poet ; nor was any form of worship better adapted to the needs 
of the rising cities than the procession and the communion meal. 
Thus, although the local forms of worship ordinarily persisted at 
each cult centre, the common meal, which became for religion the 
communion meal, was from this time on regarded as the normal 
type of Greek worship. 

2. Religion in the Homeric Poems. — The one monument of 
this period, the source of our knowledge of its civilization, is found 
in the Homeric poems. The Iliad is ordinarily assigned to the 
ninth century B.C., the Odyssey to the eighth ; yet every student of 
the poems recognizes that the language and the verse, if not the 
picture of social and political life, are the outcome of a long pro- 
cess of development. If the poems were for the most part com- 
pleted in somewhat their present form by 700 B.C., the beginning 
of epic poetry must be sought in the later days of Mycenaean 
culture, or early in the " middle ages," while the influence of 
that culture was still felt in many localities. 

The account of religion and other phases of culture in the epic 
is not wholly different from the nature of the language. The epic 
language was never spoken, yet it includes no " manufactured " 
forms or grammatical usages ; it is so consistent that it is difficult 

RELIGION IN THE! GREEK "MIDDLE AGES" 219 

to trace any evolution in assumed strata of the poem ; it came to 
be understood all over Greece where it was difficult for those who 
spoke one dialect to understand those who spoke dialects not 
closely related- We are justified in assuming that the picture of 
religion, in like manner, does not give the religion of any one 
place or one period, though it includes no absolutely new crea- 
tions of the poet ; that its consistency is due to the poet's un- 
conscious art ; that it was accepted and understood all over 
Greece, where the worship of one cult centre would ordinarily be 
foreign to that of another cult centre. 

On this assumption it might fairly be claimed that the account 
of religion presented in the epic has no place itself in a history 
of Greek religion, for it is not a real phase of that history- Just 
as epic language is not the language of conversation at any par- 
ticular time or place, but is in one sense an artiflcal product, so 
epic religion is in that same sense artificial. But it is historic in 
the same sense that the language is historic. In the first place, 
the elements which it selects and combines (we may add, uncon- 
sciously) are every one of them drawn from actual worship and 
belief. Secondly, it is the product of a long period in which the 
epic was in actual touch with real religion, modifying that religion 
and being modified by it. Nor should it ever be forgotten that 
the epic, after it was completed, was one of the most important 
factors in making the later religious history of Greece. 

The influence of the epic will be considered later as occasion 
offers. The other two points mentioned in the preceding para- 
graph demand a word more before we proceed. The elements 
with which the epic picture of religion began, the main lines in 
its account of the gods and of worship, date back at least to the 
end of the Mycenaean epoch. We have already pointed out that 
Zeus and Poseidon, Apollo and Athena were gods of Thessaly, 
Olympian gods, before the migrations to Asia Minor. The com- 
munion-meal sacrifice and the libation to the gods undoubtedly 
existed as forms of worship from very early times, though their 
universality may be questioned. Divination by omens, especially 

«o GREEK RELIGION 

omens from birds, was adopted, not invented, by bards. On the 
other hand, it is clear that there were countless forms of divination 
and worship, not to speak of magic rites, which the poets passed 
by without mention. 

And the very fact that the epic is the product of a long period 
during which its forms were gradually fixed, a period also in which 
political changes had brought strong solvents to bear on social 
and religious life, leads us to look for constant reciprocal influ- 
ences between actual religion and epic religion. The migrations 
to Asia Minor had deprived religious practices of the strong sup- 
port which their proper locality always lends; to this extent 
religious practice in Asia Minor was much more amenable to epic 
influence than language. It lay in the very nature of the epic to 
draw a picture of life which would be universally understood ; 
whatever the elements with which it started, all that was not 
understood necessarily tended to give way to what men would 
understand, and that up to the time when the epic product was 
finally fixed. In particular, the epic was sung at the banquets of 
" princes," feudal knights of the soil. The banquet occasion 
undoubtedly tended to make it less serious, more picturesque, 
more free in its treatment of religion ; and its conception of 
human life was profoundly influenced by the life and standards of 
those whose tastes the bards sought to satisfy. It was this poetry 
of the feudal banquet hall which was shaping and universalizing 
religious belief, ^not to say religious practice, all through the Greek 
middle ages. 

Some account of the Homeric conceptions of the gods and of 
religious practice has already been given for the very reason that 
these poetic conceptions were real forces determining later reli- 
gious history. 1 In referring to them again it is my purpose to point 
more in detail the influence of epic poetry in the process by 
which these conceptions were shaped. 

(i) The gods of Homer, those superhuman persons whose 
agency men constantly feel, are conceived in human moulds. In 

1 Cp. s$ipra, p. 139 f. 

RELIGION IN THE GREEK "MIDDLE AGES" 221 

form, in thought and feeling, in the modes of their activity, they 
are simply greater men ; even trie limitations of space and time 
are felt by the gods only less than by men. Men do not live in a 
world of mechanical cause and effect, a world under natural law ; 
rather, what they do not themselves cause, is caused by the gods, 
and what the gods cause is accomplished in a manner all but 
human. Such a belief involves a multiplicity of gods, yet the 
important gods of the epic are very few \ Zeus, Apollo, and Athena 
take the first rank, then come Poseidon and Hera ; Hephaestus, 
Ares, Aphrodite, and many others, are in the background. 

In contrast with such gods, the gods of worship had been and 
continued to be more or less vague powers, limited to the region 
where they were worshipped and without a sharply defined func- 
tion to which their activity was confined. The poets who made 
the greater gods actors in the story limited their functions at the 
same time that they entirely removed them from any definite local 
sphere. It has been said that in depicting the character of the 
gods the epic poets performed a greater task than in depicting 
the character of men. It was a double task, to emphasize the 
human nature of the gods, as it were to bring them down from 
heaven to earth, and to give them individual character and per- 
sonality. In the action of the poems, in the development of the 
relation of the gods to each other and to particular men, this 
character and personality found expression. The nature of the 
audience and the aims of the poet determined the character of 
the gods. 1 The bickerings of the gods, their intrigues among 
themselves, their care for their favorite heroes — the lameness of 
Hephaestus, the efforts of Hera and Poseidon to deceive Zeus, 
the wounding of Aphrodite by Diomedes, the overthrow of the 
impetuous Ares on the battlefield — would amuse an after-dinner 
audience. Yet though such gods inspired far less awe, though 
their regime was on the whole made rather comfortable for man, 
there were elements of progress along with elements of decline. 
Under the influence of the epic, the gods of worship came to be 

* Cp. supra, p. 140 f, 

222 GREEK RELIGION 

regarded as more universal in their reach and far more human in 
their nature ; that the gods could sympathize with men, is a belief 
due in large measure to the epic. 

In a word, the early bards found some gods, more widely 
recognized than others, about whom simple stories or myths had 
long been gathering; these they detached entirely from worship 
to make them dramatis personae. The character of the epic 
god-heroes was shaped to gratify and amuse the banquet audi- 
ences of feudal "princes," on the principle that gods are made in 
the image of man. Both the wonderful charm of the poetry and 
the humanity of these divine beings made the epic a determining 
factor for later belief in the gods. 

(2) Worship. — If the principle of survival deserves any cre- 
dence, the variety of local worship in later times indicates that 
the Homeric picture of the banquet sacrifice, libation, and prayer 
is anything but a complete picture of worship at any one period 
or locality. The most important feature of local worship, the re- 
curring festival, is mentioned two or three times, but plays no part 
in the poems. Instead of numerous forms of sacrifice with differ- 
ent intent, never twice exactly alike at different shrines, epic sac- 
rifice is reduced to one simple pattern. The knights of the Iliad 
sacrifice cattle, the suitors of the Odyssey cattle or sheep, the 
swineherd pigs, whenever flesh is wanted for eating : the animal 
is consecrated to the gods and thigh pieces are burned on the altar 
with libation and prayers ; the very language of the description 
is stereotyped as though the whole matter had been fixed early 
in the history of epic poetry. The libation of wine as a form 
of worship, both at the banquet and at other times in connection 
with prayer, is the simplest possible material recognition of the 
gods. Its meaning for the epic is as simple as its form ; the gods 
get a share of man's delight in the wine ; the revenue tax thus 
paid, man may drink without fear. Ordinary sacrifice may simi- 
larly be regarded as a tax 1 which insures to man his enjoyment 
of the remainder, for epic gods have much in common with human 

1 Cp. Introduction, p. 36 f.; Keller, Homeric Society, 124 t. 

RELIGION IN THE GREEK "MIDDLE AGES" 223 

rulers. Extra sacrifices might serve to pacify an angry god, or 
to insure the favor of the gods for some undertaking in the future. 
Yet even in the epic the gods are somewhat more than human 
rulers ; the sense of awe and the desire for communion are not 
wholly absent ,- and in so far as Zeus or Apollo or Athena is a god, 
sacrifice is more than the payment of a tax. Moreover the other 
forms of worship, which may be traced back, some of them to the 
seventh century B.C., have little or nothing to do with this idea 
of a divine tax on human possessions and pleasures. We may 
conclude that the Homeric banquet-sacrifice and libation are 
selected from various forms of worship and brought into line with 
the other religious conceptions of the epic. 

Turning to prayer, with related vows and oaths, we find the 
conception of the divine ruler very frankly recognized. At the 
same time we may fairly ask whether the connection of the indi- 
vidual with the god to whom he prays is not represented as some- 
thing more intimate than that between subject and king. There 
is no question that the intimacy of this relation is emphasized in 
many forms of actual worship. 

Granted that the epic drew its material from existing religious 
practice, along what lines was this material modified? In the 
first place, anything like magic or mysticism was omitted from 
the clear rational atmosphere of the poet's world- That Athena 
coulfi make Odysseus now old, now young in appearance by a 
touch of her wand is not magic, but divine power. The changes 
of Proteus and the magic power of Circe belong to semidivine 
beings outside the proper home of epic heroes. Either the audi- 
ence or the bards, or both, tended to hold a rationalistic view of 
the lower religious practices of the people ; the Olympian gods 
were exalted at the expense of any worship which they could not 
absorb. Secondly, the bards chose simple forms of worship which 
would be universally intelligible to the neglect of all that was local 
and peculiar. In fact, the more religious side of local worship 
would often be passed over in the interest of that more simple, 
more splendid Olympian world. The motive which led to this 

224 GREEK RELIGION 

principle of selection was the necessity that poems sung from place 
to place should appeal to many different audiences. Thirdly, the 
choice of the banquet-sacrifice was most natural in the case of 
poems sung to gratify those who had gathered for a banquet. 
In this way religious worship was brought into closest harmony 
with the mood of the hearers. Finally, it should be noted that 
the meaning of worship is interpreted in connection with the 
meaning assigned to the Olympian gods. Sacrifice and prayer 
are offered in most instances to Zeus, who is supreme. The gods 
are universal and worship is of a universal type, though wherever 
the gods have favorite haunts there are local centres of worship. 
The gods are divine rulers meeting to feast with Zeus, as human 
princes met to feast with Menelaus at Sparta or with Agamemnon 
before Troy; worship is conceived as homage paid to divine 
rulers. The happy life of the gods is reflected in the joyousness 
of worship. The rites of riddance, practised to drive away evil 
or dangerous spirits, could find no recognition in a world wholly 
under the rule of these beneficent gods. 

(3) The same principle may be more briefly stated in the case 
of divination. In a world where all that occurs is the direct act 
of the gods, peculiar occurrences will be regarded as having pecu- 
liar significance, while the ordinary course of events will reveal the 
purposes of the gods. Dreams all come from the gods, false 
dreams through the ivory gate, true dreams through the gate of 
horn. 1 Chance words or the casting of lots are determined by the 
gods. Special emphasis is laid on the phenomena of the heavens, 
thunder, lightning, etc., and on the flight of birds, for these belong 
to the sphere of the gods, out of human reach. In a world where 
gods care especially for individuals, the interpretation of signs 
depends on men to whom the gods have granted this peculiar 
gift. There is abundant evidence that in these matters the epic 
poets invented nothing, although they selected material adapted to 
their purposes, and interpreted it in connection with their scheme 
of the universe. 

1 Cp. supra , p. 51. 

RELIGION IN THE GREEK "MIDDLE AGES" 225 

(4) The conception of death, burial, and the world of souls in the 
epic has received most divergent interpretations. 1 Why was cre- 
mation practised more than burial? Why were souls mere shades, 
safe in Hades, when before and after Homer the spirits of the dead 
were worshipped ? The traces of an earlier worship of the dead 
are found in some of the rites of burial and in a few scattered 
allusions. The practice of cremation undoubtedly favored the 
idea that the souls were finally laid to rest in a world cut off from 
living man. Perhaps the feudal princes of the poet's audience had 
lost a vivid belief in the power of souls to bless or curse. In any 
case the tendency of the epic to neglect every form of worship 
which did not assimilate with the rational worship of Olympian 
rulers came into play at this point. Over against ghost-gods of 
the people were set Olympian gods fit for princes to worship, and 
the whole influence of epic poetry was exerted in favor of the latter- 2 
As to the general character of this epic picture of religion, very 
different views have been expressed. Considering the large num- 
ber of animals offered in sacrifice, a recent writer 8 finds the 
Homeric Greeks "an intensely religious people, by their whole 
philosophy of life committed to the constant service of the super- 
natural powers." At first sight the light manner of treating the 
gods and the emphasis on their foibles would lead to a view directly 
opposite to this- The two standpoints are in a manner recon- 
ciled by assuming that the early Greeks were sincerely devoted 
to the worship of their gods, but that the gods of the epic, detached 
entirely from local centres of worship, were handled by the poets 
with the utmost freedom. The conception of worship is exceed- 
ingly simple and direct. Men are in the hands of the gods; the 
gods, like greater human rulers, love the festal meal and delight in 
the gifts men bring. The effort of men to adapt themselves to 
the rule of such gods is on the whole successful. With all the sad- 

* Cp. supra, p. 168 f. 

a Cp. "The Homeric View of the Future Life " in Am. Jour. Tkeol. i (1897) 
74* f- 

8 Keller, Homeric Society, 138 ; Scboernann, Griech. AIL a. 134. 

GREEK RELIGION — IJ 

aa6 GREEK RELIGION 

ness inevitable to human life, religion is no added burden ; the 
religion of the epic shares the epic atmosphere of social pleasure, 
and successful human activity ; it belongs with the banquet hall in 
which the epic was sung. 

During the Greek " middle ages" the influence of the epic con- 
ception of religion produced very different results according to the 
nature of each local worship. Wherever the epic came in contact 
with a worship at all in harmony with its own views, that worship 
was brought within the sphere of its positive influence. Heaven- 
gods were identified with Zeus more widely than before, sea-gods 
with Poseidon, flock-gods with Apollo. The communion meal 
tended to be more like the banquets of Menelaus and Alcinous. 
Seers of the Calchas type found their power increased, and more 
weight was attached to omens in the sky. We must believe that 
everywhere the epic helped to make religion more beautiful and 
more reasonable; particularly in the developing worship of the 
new Greek cities the epic religion found an opportunity to mould 
religious belief and practice in harmony with these ideals. 

In the case of worship which was out of line with these con- 
ceptions, the effect of the epic was more various. Miss Harrison l 
has pointed out specific instances, such as the worship of Zeus in 
the Diasia, where some earlier, cruder worship has been connected 
with the Olympian gods or overlaid with a new type of worship 
which is in harmony with the nature of these gods. It would be 
idle to deny the influence of the epic in producing this result. 
Again, we find from later sources that various forms of magic were 
practised by the Greeks. These cannot all be explained as impor- 
tations ; rather they belong to this people as to every people. I*y 
omitting references to lower magic, the epic tended to check the 
practice of magic ; by bringing the world completely under the 
sway of its human gods, it tended to destroy that whole philoso- 
phy of life which is presupposed by magic rites. Its religion was 
a rational one, tending in the direction of an " Aufklarung " for 
poet and hearer. 

1 j^rolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, p. r-a f. 

RELIGION IN THE GREEK u MIDDLE AGES" 227 

There remained, however, many rites and practices which it 
could not harmonize with its ideals, or check by its ban. It is 
to this fact that I would refer the twofold nature of later Greek 
worship. The distinction between the communion meal and the 
various rites known as purificatory or piacular has already been 
emphasized as a fundamental principle for the student of Greek 
religion. But while the first form is one comparatively uniform 
type, the second varies somewhat with the locality, the god or hero 
to whom it is offered, and the purpose in view. The epic tended 
to reduce the worship of its gods to the type of sacrifice which it 
had selected ; at the same time it emphasized the antithesis between 
these gods and the local gods (including heroes), and helped to 
make the distinction between the communion meal sacrifice to 
Olympian rulers and all other worship. Piacular sacrifice to gods 
easily angered, purificatory rites, the worship of heroes, the worship 
of the dead, the " mysteries," were bound to persist, but they per- 
sisted as a ritual over against the regular worship of the national 
gods ; only in exceptional instances did they hold a place in the 
worship of Zeus or Apollo. The effect of the epic was to empha- 
size this contrast. 

3. The Theogony of Hesiod. — An examination of the poetry 
which has come down under the name of Hesiod only confirms 
the above account of religion in this period. 1 From the poems we 
learn that the father of Hesiod had moved from Cyme in Asia 
Minor to Ascra in Eoeotia, where his son tended the flocks till he 
received the bard's laurel branch from the Muses themselves. 
The connection with Asia Minor explains the epic form of the 
poems, while the new environment accounts for the different 
world which they reveal. Peasants take the place of princes, the 
poems move on the plane of fact rather than fancy, homely adage 
and moral tale replace dramatic narrative. The crossing of reli- 
gious influences in Boeotia perhaps explains reflections on such 
a theme as the families of the gods. 

How much does Hesiod find, and how much does he invent? 

* The poems of Kesiod are ordinarily assigned to the eighth century R.C* 

22$ GREEK RELIGION 

It is probable that the idea of a theogony is a primitive factor in 
Greek religion, as in early religion elsewhere. The superstition 
as to lucky days belongs to the common life of the Boeotian peas- 
ant; no doubt practical rules and moral adages come from the 
same source ; it has been shown l that the account of the five ages 
rests on an ancestor worship still practised in Boeotia in a much 
later period ; the place assigned to Eros in the cosmogony cannot 
be wholly independent of the worship of Eros in Thespiae, not far 
from Ascra. Whether such "episodes" as the account of five 
ages, of Pandora, of Typhoeus, can be traced back to earlier 
hymns, is not an all-important question for religious history. 
These sections, loosely joined to the poem, are not invented by 
the poet ; they contain old material which had not yet passed out 
of the sphere of popular belief. 

The work of Hesiod {or of the Hesiodic school) is seen in the 
effort to harmonize the account of the gods in a consistent sys- 
tem. For the first time myth was treated in a critical spirit ; what 
did not fit the system was rejected, and abstract ideas were intro- 
duced to fill out the system. Old tradition furnished the scheme 
of the family as the basis. The progressive organization of the 
physical world, broken by physical ** catastrophes " such as earth- 
quakes, is a principle which finds expression in the successive 
generations of the gods and in the conflicts of the gods (Cronus- 
TJranus, Zeus-Cronus, gods-giants). The other main principle is 
moral, in that the order which gradually prevails is a moral order; 
the Erinyes punish crime, countless u watchers " are on the look- 
out to detect evil, Wisdom and Justice (Metis and Themis) are 
the first wives of Zeus. In spite of the moral degeneration of 
mankind as the ages advance, the reign of law and reason has 
been making progress in the person of the gods. 

The gods of Hesiod are of much the same type as those of 
Homer, gods detached from worship and assigned some definite 
function in a universal divine world. Perhaps the sacred days 
should be regarded as a part of local worship, though in general 

i Rohde, Psych* \ 8$ f. 

RELIGION IN THE GREEK "MIDDLE AGES" 229 

what is purely local in story or ritual is passed by in silence. Dem- 
eter and Dionysus of the peasant faith are beginning to claim 
recognition in the Olympian world. Yet these same Olympian 
divinities are simpler here, and more abstract in their nature. 
The brief myth-scenes give no such scope for developing the per- 
sonality of the divine actors as does the dramatic story of the epic. 
Genuine myth finds a much larger place than in Homer; as the 
epic helped to make the gods genuine persons, so the Theogony of 
Hesiod became a sort of code of Greek myths. The relation of 
the gods as defined by Hesiod was the norm of local story and 
the basis on which later theogonies were constructed. The testi- 
mony of Hesiodic poetry indicates (1) that Boeotian cults were 
quite generally "Olympian," (2) that the worship of heroes or 
ancestors was important, and (3) that other forms of worship, the 
existence of which we must assume, might safely be neglected by 
the poets. 

CHAPTER III 

RELIGION IN THE SEVENTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES B.C. 

1- Social and Political Changes; Literature. — Though the 
political and the social development of Greece continue without 
marked change through the eighth and the seventh centuries, and 
the epoch now to be considered shows only the fruition of influ- 
ences already at work, a striking change in religion makes this 
from our standpoint a distinct epoch. The seventh century was 
characterized by a great religious revival; Dionysus won a place 
among the Olympian deities ; rites of popular worship were imbued 
with spiritual meaning and gained new importance ; the Orphic 
movement arose in the effort to satisfy a new sense of religious 
need. 

The connection of Greece with the Mediterranean world along 
trade routes became still more important than during the pre- 
ceding centuries- The introduction of coined money about 
700 B.C. greatly facilitated the development of commerce, bring- 
ing in its tmin results good and evil. Manufacture and export 
were no longer limited to a few centres ; slave labor proved the 
most economical method of production, and slaves the most valu- 
able objects imported into Greece; a trade aristocracy with ideals 
formed in trade arose to compete with the aristocracy of birth. 
To a poet of the old order like Theognis the love of money 
seemed the root of all the evils about him, the insolence of "up- 
starts/' the absence of the sense of honor, the disregard of all that 
made life beautiful. Moreover, social barriers were giving way to 
an individual opportunity to rise or fall ; as the gifted man might 
rise to unaccustomed power, so the masses might fall into debt 
and a poverty never known before. 

230 

SEVENTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 231 

It was in this epoch that the city became the centre 6f Greek 
life, and the power controlling a large surrounding territory. These 
city-states have armies of heavy-armed soldiers instead of bands 
of retainers led by knights ; they are developing navies to pro- 
tect their commerce. The aristocracy which had quite generally 
thrown the king into the background is brought into conflict with 
the new leaders of commerce and with the masses. One of the 
first results of the new conditions was the demand for a uniform 
administration of justice which led to codified laws. When the 
conflict of classes became acute, some individual, often one of 
the aristocracy, might make himself a leader of the people and 
rule as a tyrant. The word " tyrant " means simply that his power 
was unconstitutional. It might be used to beautify the city with 
temples and sculpture, to advance its commerce by improving 
the roads and developing a merchant marine, to introduce such 
public improvements as a good water-supply, to furnish the people 
with festivals and games for their amusement, to establish order 
and justice in the state- Or, along with the material splendor he 
introduced, the tyrant might rule with iron rod for the gain of none 
but himself- Wherever it appeared, the tyranny left its mark on 
religion. 

The establishment of colonies in the east and in the west con- 
tinued in the seventh century. Wherever trade routes opened the 
way to some inviting region, whenever there were bold leaders 
(perhaps nobles disappointed in their schemes at home) and 
adventurous spirits to follow, a colony was established. At this 
time the oracle at Delphi had become the power that suggested 
the foundation of colonies and directed their leaders. The cessa- 
tion of this movement in the sixth century is more difficult to 
explain than its origin, though no doubt the development of 
larger states at home, and the crystallization of society along more 
definite lines, tended to check it 

The most important result of these political and economic 
changes for the history of religion was the new importance of 
the individual citizen. The sense of personality was beginning 

232 GREEK RELIGION 

to develop; with it came the sense of a personal religious need 
which did not appear in the epic, and which the epic type of wor- 
ship did not satisfy. The rise of lyric poetry and of philosophy was 
also conditioned by the recognition of a personality over against 
society and not absolutely bound by social tradition. That the 
recital of the epic was transferred from the homes of a feudal 
aristocracy to the market-place and an audience of the people, 
was a direct result of the changed conditions. A state made up 
of many citizens had replaced the group of a few knights led by a 
king and attended by their retainers, and all the splendor which 
might have attended a court was lavished on the city, its temples, 
and its public service of the gods. 

It is in the literature of the period that these influences are 
most clearly seen. The so-called Homeric hymns are probably 
prooemiums with which the rhapsode began his recital of the epic 
at public festivals of the gods. The occasion explains both the 
choice of some local story, such as the birth of Apollo, and the 
pan-Hellenic form in which that story is cast. It explains, too, 
the tone of serene joy which marks the hymns ; they reflect both 
the calm dignity of the gods and the cheerfulness of the festival 
scene of which they form a part. These gods are still the gods of 
Homer, human, universal, " of easy life," but in the environment 
of worship a very different side to their character ts brought to the 
front. The picture of local worship — for example, the worship 
of Derneter at Eleusis — makes these hymns most important to 
students of Greek religion. 

In lyric poetry the Greek genius first began to break free from 
a religious theme. The stern elegies of Callinus and Tyrtaeus 
praise the soldier's valor and the soldier's death. But elegy was 
better adapted to moral and political subjects than to war. Tyrtaeus 
sought by his poetry to introduce order into turbulent Sparta, on 
the ground that the gods who founded the city should be honored 
there ; faith in gods who protected the righteous and punished 
sin, especially the faith in Athena who watched over Athens, 
inspired Solon to introduce into the city a new social order; 

SEVENTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 233 

with all his sense of injustice among men, Theognis did not lose 
belief in the righteous rule of Zeus, nor was religious ritual out- 
side the pale of his moral teaching. The light raillery and satire 
of iambic poetry does not dwell on religious themes, though it was 
intimately connected with carnival practices in the peasant worship 
of Demeter. In the melic poetry of Ionia only the gods of wine 
and of love are celebrated ; but occasionally, as in the perfect 
hymn of Sappho to Aphrodite, the poet touches deep springs of 
religious feeling- Yet even for lyric poetry religion offered the 
highest themes. The passion of Archilochus found its lasting 
expression in hymns to Demeter and Heracles and Dionysus; 
the story of Apollo was the worthiest theme for the muse of 
Alcaeus; while the later Dorian lyric became the handmaid of 
religion- Its choral hymns, paeans to Apollo, cyclic dithyrambs to 
Dionysus, parthenia to the gods of youth, prosodia (processionals) 
for the temple ritual, all but supplanted the cruder forms of 
liturgy in the worship at many temples. As epic poetry had given 
the gods human passions and human sympathies, as the sculptor 
and the architect were consecrating their skill to beautify the 
environment of worship, so the choral lyric gave rich poetic form 
to the very ritual itself. 

The one discordant note in the lyric poetry of the sixth century 
is found not in the light touch of Hipponax, but in the elegies of 
that bold religious critic Xenojphanes. It was true religious feeling 
which prompted him to sing, " God is one, supreme among gods 
and men, not like mortals in body or in mind "; " but if cattle or 
lions had hands, so as to paint with their hands and produce works 
of art as men do, they would paint their gods and give them bodies 
in form like their own, horses like horses, cattle like cattle." Just 
at the end of the sixth century the mythical account of the gods 
began to be criticised in a less radical way by Stesichorus- This 
u arranger of choruses" rewrote the old stories of the gods in his 
hymns. The introduction of moral motives into the story of 
Agamemnon and Orestes was due to him ; he made Heracles a 
moral hero, the much-enduring opponent of evil ; he held that 

234 GREEK RELIGION 

Artemis threw a stagskin over Actaeon instead of transforming him 
into a stag. From the same standpoint he criticised the conduct 
of Helen in going to Troy with Paris, but when he was stricken 
with blindness, he wrote a palinode retracting his statements. 
While Homer had made the gods actors in the epic drama, and 
Hesiod had felt free to fit them into his system of origins, now for 
the first time in literature the gods are tested by religious and 
moral standards, only to be found wanting. 

First on the coast of Asia Minor, then in southern Italy, the 
sixth century saw the beginning of Greek philosophy- The phrase 
u all things are full of gods " is attributed to Thales, but these gods 
are not the Apollo or Aphrodite of popular belief. The question 
" what is reality? " does not lead to a religious answer until it has 
been asked for two centuries. Reality is water, or air, or fire; 
natural causes are found for the phenomena of earth and sky ; as 
compared with this reality and these causes, the gods of Olympus 
are reduced to a subordinate position. Heracleitus {frag* 67, 97, 
98) accepts the epic kinship of gods and men in its larger sig- 
nificance. The people do not know what gods or heroes are 
i/ ra S- x 3°) j divine images can no more hear prayer than can the 
walls of a house ; bacchanalian rites {frag. 124, 127), mourning for 
the death of gods {frag. 130 a), purifications with blood {frag. 
130), — these he boldly attacks as examples of human stupidity ; 
yet he would find in religion "cures" for the soul {frag. 129) ; 
in a word he recognizes something divine in the order of the 
universe, and he believes that there are divinities who watch over 
men. Of Pythagoras I shall speak in connection with the Orphic 
movement. The successors of these early thinkers in the fifth 
century preserved the same attitude toward religion, either neglect- 
ing it or criticising its errors in the effort to reach its truth. For 
the period now under consideration, that sixth century which was 
most prolific in new ideas, philosophy obtained so little influence 
that it provoked no real opposition from priest or statesman. 

2. Changes in Belief and Worship. — The influence of the epic, 
tending to reduce the gods of local worship to its universal, super- 

SEVENTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 

235 

human type, continued down through the seventh and sixth cen- 
turies ; during this epoch its quiet power became dominant, 
especially in the worship of the growing cities, and its work was 
in a sense completed. The rude symbols which often had 
marked the presence of a divinity began to be replaced with 
carved images in human form, or the sacred pillar was draped 

Fig. 69. — Athenian Reivfigured Vase Painting (Kylix by Hieron, 

Berlin) 

Maenads are dancing before an altar and a draped pillar with Dionysus mask 

(herm). 

with garments and hung with a mask representing the human face ; 
for only the human form adequately symbolized these gods* 
Shrines and groves no longer sufficed as houses for the gods, but 
temples must be built in their honor. Even in the votive offer- 
ings it is perhaps possible to detect evidences of more definite 
anthropomorphism. The epic names which stood for the uni- 
versal factor in the nature of each local god in some measure 
supplanted the old "epithet" names of worship. Even the 

236 GREEK RELIGION 

chthonic deities and the heroes of local worship %vere endowed 
with at least a nominal universality. 

It is not enough to say that the gods were more generally con- 
ceived in definite human form ; their character became a more 
perfect expression of human ideals. All that was beautiful and 
passionate in human love was embodied in Aphrodite. Zeus the 
ruler was endowed with all wisdom and justice. Moral as well 
as ritual purity belonged to Apollo and guided the responses 
of his Delphic oracle, till at length the sunlight was the best 
expression of his nature- The new devotion to the state, the 
virtue of patriotism, was freely attributed to the patron deity of 
each state. Indeed, the conception of divinity as the ideal of 
justice and morality began already in this epoch to destroy the 
distinct personality which made each god a separate being. 

The rising spirit of reflection could not avoid the question of a 
theodicy- In the earlier lyric poetry political and social confusion 
led to many pessimistic expressions ; Mimnermus had felt that the 
evils of life more than balanced the good, and Theognis had said 
much of the prevalent injustice ; yet the same Theognis kept a 
firm faith in the ultimate righteousness of the divine rule- This 
faith was based on the general run of events, while apparent 
exceptions were explained as due to a delay of punishment. In 
an age of expansion and change the moralist preached the Greek 
virtue of moderation ; the cardinal sin was the effort to overstep 
the limits of human life which the gods had prescribed ; overbear- 
ing conduct (v/3pts) was punished, contentment with what the gods 
sent was the source of happiness. The identification of the world- 
order with the rule of the gods had begun in the epic. But while 
in the epic events are referred to the personal will of the gods, in 
lyric poetry they are referred to that moral order which is called 
by Solon {e.g. frag. 4. 9) and Archilochus " the gods" {/rag. 
55- 55 29; 33), by Semonides "god " (frag. 1. 5). by Callinus 
"fate" {frag. 1. 9 and 12). Where it is assigned to any one 
god, naturally that god is Zeus (Terpander, frag. 1 ; Mimnermus, 
frag. 2 and 5 ; Archilochus, frag. 6). From this standpoint 

SEVENTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 237 

Athena is an agent fulfilling the will of Zeus (Solon, frag. 13. 1—4), 
Apollo is the mouthpiece of Zeus ; in a word, the conception of a 
world-order inevitably tends to undermine the individual person- 
ality of the gods. The criticism of popular belief by Xenophanes 
and Stesichorus has already been mentioned. From this time on 
the discrepancy between moral and religious ideals on the one 
hand, ritual and popular belief on the other, cuts at the very root 
of Greek religion- 

But while criticism of the gods from the standpoint of religion 
and morals as yet affected only the few, a more widespread 
sense of lack in the religion of the old Olympian gods was 
due to their increasing separation from everyday life. As ideal 
beings who belonged in the heavens, gods untouched by the 
sorrows and sins of humanity, they were praised by the poets 
and pictured by the artist; the splendid ritual of their worship 
served admirably as a state religion ; but the very perfection 
of such gods made it impossible for them to meet the actual 
needs of the individual- Even though Athena gave her people 
the olive and blessed the crafts of potter and weaver, she did 
not fully meet their needs. The increasing worship of local 
heroes was, like the worship of the Christian saints, an appeal 
to gods on whose sympathy the worshipper could reckon. The 
same demand for gods not too far off from men was one reason, 
along with others to be considered later, for the rapid growth 
of Demeter and Dionysus worship. The gods of corn and wine, 
even when they were included among the Olympian deities, did 
not lose their hold on human life. 

If now we turn from the gods to the consideration of worship, 
the increasing control of worship by the state, and the adaptation 
of worship to the needs of the state, is significant. For the 
early tribes who penetrated southward into Greece, the religious 
group and the political group were practically identical. But 
the crossing of religious influences, together with the mingling 
of races in the (< middle ages," tended to make the group of those 
who worshipped at any one shrine independent of the state. 

2 j8 GREEK RELIGION 

Only the rise of the cities and of larger states centring in 
cities made possible a union of " church and state " again. 
The controlling power in each city brought one cult after another 
under the supervision of the city, as much to secure the stability 
of the city by divine blessing, as much to gratify the people 
by splendid festivals, as from any direct interest in the cults 
themselves. The adoption by the city of cults hitherto private 
was the first step toward the nationalization of worship. 

The second step was the erection of temples and of statues 
in the temples. Even in the sixth century, the substitution of 
statues in human form for t€ fetiches" and sacred pillars was 
not unusual. But perhaps the use of decorative painting and 
relief to represent the gods was more common, in that it 
depicted the gods in visible form without interfering with old 
symbols. Certainly the temple was older than the temple statue ; 
in other words elaborate structures as dwelling places for the 
gods supplanted the shrines in which a fetich symbol might be 
kept, even before human art had the courage to make a statue 
of the god in his dwelling. The wealth of the city, which in 
Mycenaean days had been lavished on the palace and its fortified 
surroundings, was now devoted to splendid edifices for the city's 
divine lords. A tyrant like Peisistratus gave the people both 
occupation and a pride in what he had done for their city, by 
erecting stone temples to Athena and Dionysus and other gods. 
The importance of religion as a state institution is indicated by 
the fact that temples were the first public buildings to be built 
in enduring form. 

With the erection of temples by the city-state there came 
the adoption and transformation of religious festivals. 1 Up to 
this time ritual had been comparatively simple, and local shrines 
too poor to make the worship rich or impressive. It remained 
for a Peisistratus to use the wealth of Athens in enriching the 
festivals which came under the direction of the state. Splendid 
processions and elaborate sacrifices at the expense of the state 

» Cp. supra* p. sxa. 

SEVENTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 239 

made the worship of the gods a -worthy expression of the state's 
devotion to them ; trained choruses of singers performed the 
liturgy of worship ; at the Panathenaea athletic contests and 
the recital of poetry provided entertainment for all the people. 
The final triumph of the Olympian gods came now when they 
were worshipped by the state to secure their blessings for the 
state. 

At this same time a pan-Hellenic worship rose to prominence, 
for Apollo and Zeus were universal Greek gods. Athletic contests, 
which once had been celebrated at funerals of kings and nobles, 
now became a possession of the people. In local festivals, but 
especially in the great festivals at Delphi (to Apollo), at the Isth- 
mus of Corinth (to Poseidon), at Nemea and Olympia (to Zeus), 
these contests were a real form of worship to gods of all Greece. 
It was the oracle at Delphi, however, which proved its right to be 
called the religious centre of Greece. Its guidance for colonies 
was held to be essential ; changes in ritual or worship, as well 
as changes in government, were ratified by it ; in particular the 
development of local worship and the new demand for purification 
were directed by Apollo. 1 With the victory of Apollo over that 
old nature god, later identified with Dionysus, whose tomb was 
marked by a mound (the omphalos) in the temple precinct, the 
triumph of those ideals for which Apollo stood was assured for 
Greek religion. 

One of the most patent influences of the Delphic oracle had to 
do with rites of purification- The Homeric poems have nothing 
to say about the taint of sin or the need of purification from evil ; 
according to the later epics, however, Achilles who slew Thersites, 
the daughters of Danaus, Heracles, all who have shed blood, 
need to be purified. It may be that the social confusion and 
consequent misery of the period under discussion helped to 
develop the sense of divine displeasure with evil, along with the 
belief that the gods demanded purity. Certainly we "find a deep- 
rooted belief that the soul of the dead man pursued his murderer 

1 Cp. supra, p. 60 f. 

240 GREEK RELIGION 

in relentless anger until it had been appeased. Further, the reign 
of divine justice was seen in the fact that the taint of blood brought 
upon a community the anger of the gods. The laws by which 
Greek states at this period controlled vengeance by relatives of 
the murdered man ate based on the double belief in the anger 
of the murdered man's soul and in the anger of gods. Even in 
case the relatives were satisfied, it was necessary for the murderer 
to appease the soul of the dead, and for the community to purify 
itself from evil. It was through the Delphic Apollo that the 
demand for purification was developed and directed. In his wor- 
ship men imitated the rites of purification which, they believed, 
the god himself had originally performed after killing even such 
an evil monster as the Python ; for the purity of the god must be 
unsullied, the standard for the purity he demanded of men. The 
character of the rites, the shedding of blood to appease the angry 
soul and the piacular sacrifices to the gods, have been discussed 
above. 1 

Perhaps the purifications in the worship of agricultural deities 
are the same in principle, rites to remove any possible taint of 
evil which might lead these gods to destroy the crops. With the 
rise of other forms of peasant worship these rites come into promi- 
nence : at Athens the Diasia of Zeus, the Thargelia of Apollo, the 
Skirophoria of Athena include worship to ward off the possible 
anger of the gods by means of purificatory rites. 

3. The Rise of Dionysus Worship. — The most striking feature 
of religious history in this epoch finds its explanation in the new 
prominence of peasant worship, to which reference has just been 
made. The worship of the state, however rich and beautiful, did 
not satisfy the needs of the individual j he turned to foreign forms 
of worship and to the cruder, simpler worship of the peasant. The 
gods who live and work in nature, who suffer as man suffers and 
give him joy in their joy, whose worship is concerned with the 
plough and the sickle, Demeter and Dionysus, tend to supplant 
the serene spirits of Olympus in the real religion of the seventh 

1 Cp. supra, p. 105 fc 

SEVENTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 241 

and sixth centuries. Demeter, the grain, goddess, made good her 
right to be classed with the other Olympian gods, while her wor- 
ship retained the same mystic forms which made it potent in 
causing the grain to sprout. Dionysus, however, was the god 
about whom the great religious revival centred, Dionysus the 
twice-born, for in a Thracian god the Greeks Tecognized that 
same spirit of plant-life and of the vine which was worshipped in 
winter and spring by their own farming class. 

The evidence that Dionysus was a foreign god is found in the 
myths of his coming to Greece, in the fact that from Homer on 
he was associated with Thrace, and in the fundamental difference 
between his worship and that of the other Olympian gods. 1 In 
Thrace the prototype of the Greek Dionysus was the chief divinity ; 
Sabazius was one of his names, perhaps Dionysus was another. 
His worship was of a distinctly orgiastic character. Groups of his 
worshippers, mainly women, found their way at night with torches 
into wild glens on the mountains; the music of drums and cym- 
bals and flutes stirred sensitive spirits till their whirling dances 
and wild summons to the god induced a religious frenzy ; serpents 
were fondled, the young of wild animals were now suckled by 
human mothers, now torn in pieces and eaten raw. The fawn- 
skin garment, the wand tipped with a fir cone and wreathed in 
ivy, sometimes horns attached to the head, recalled the god to 
whose service they were devoted. What was the purpose of these 
wild practices, ending in dizziness and exhaustion? The habit of 
calling the worshippers by the name of the god, Saboi (Sabazius), 
Bissaroi (Bassareus), Bakchoi (Bakchos), indicates the primary 
purpose, namely, the identification of the worshippers and the 
god. The wilder the frenzy, the more the worshipper felt him- 
self free from the restraints of the body and the restraints of the 
material world. The goal of religion, the oneness of the man 
himself (the soul) with the divine being, was here realized in its 
crudest form. Under the " inspiration '* of frenzy men saw what 

1 Cp. Rapp, Die Besichttnffen des f>ionysoskulfus su ThraMicn und KZcinasien, 
188-2; and the article by Voigt in Roscher's LtxiAon, 
GREEK RELIGION l6 

2 4 « GREEK RELIGION 

the god saw and prophesied the words of the god. The man who 
had experienced a union with the god could not but believe that 
his soul was of divine stuff and therefore immortal. The ultimate 
purpose of the worship, however, is perhaps to be found in the 
nature of the god. By wild rites of similar character the peoples 
of northern Europe wakened the dormant spirits and made the 
seeds sprout ; their frenzied dances quickened the life of vegeta- 
tion by " sympathetic magic/' 1 Dionysus also was a god of life in 
plants and animals, a god akin to the spirits of vegetable life. The 
wild worship resulted in an epiphany of the god, either a return to 
heTald the spring, or a new birth of the god, who was himself the 
spirit of life- 
All this orgiastic worship was most foreign to the Olympian 
religion of the Greek state, and to all the ideals of life which we 
associate with Greece, Yet there are traces enough in Greek 
religion of the influence of the processes in nature, traces enough 
that the spirit of life in vegetation and animals was recognized 
by the Greek as divine. Thracian tribes who had gained a foot- 
ing on Olympus and Helicon and Parnassus had long since made 
the inhabitants of central Greece familiar with their god. It has 
been suggested that the Delphic oracle first belonged to the 
spirit of vegetation who was wakened to birth in the spring by 
orgiastic rites on the mountain peak above, and whose grave was 
in the sanctuary itself. The coming of the Thracian god was 
not the introduction of a religion wholly new; his worship 
appealed to a range of ideas belonging to all the European races, 
Greeks included, however much Olympian ideals had thrown 
these conceptions into the background ; and the god himself was 
not unknown in central Greece. 

The stories of Dionysus, almost all of them, have to do with 
the coming of the god to Greece. Sometimes he was graciously 
received, as by Icarus in Attica ; more often his strange nature 
and strange companions provoked opposition. In both cases 
there occurred some evidence of the god's dread power in an 

* Mannhardt, Wold und Feldkultt, 1875, Part I. 

SEVENTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 243 

outbreak of madness; Icarus who welcomed him was slain by his 
people, his daughter hung herself in grief, and an epidemic of 
suicide followed among the women ; Pentheus who opposed him 
fell a victim to the women who joined in this worship, women 
led by his own mother. The opposition was due to the wildness 
of his worship ; the welcome, to his gift of the vine. In both in- 
stances, however, the coming is described as the home-coming 
of a god not unknown to the Greeks. 

The facts of the rapidly increasing worship and the myths of 
his coming to Greece can only be interpreted as due to a great 
revival of religion in which a wave of influence from the north 
swept down over Greece. The vase-paintings of the sixth cen- 
tury and the poetry in praise of wine confirm this interpretation* 
The Dionysus of the revival was the old spirit of vegetable life, 
incarnate in the bull, incarnate in the wine. No doubt intoxi- 
cants helped the frenzy of his Thracian worshippers ; for the 
Greeks wine was the very essence of the god, the immediate 
occasion of a divine frenzy in men. 

The later religious history of Europe presents more than one 
parallel to the Dionysus revival, which spread from village to vil- 
lage as divine madness seized the people, which broke all the 
bonds of social convention, and overcame the bitterest opposition, 
until the new god had made good his place on Olympus. The 
inspired madness of his worshippers gave to Greek as to Thracian 
divine "visions," and for a time sibyls and similar prophets were 
common in Greece. Greek, as well as Thracian, learned the 
divinity and consequent immortality of the soul by his experience 
of union with Dionysus. Above all, the fact that religion was 
proved a genuine experience, something more than myth or 
liturgy, made this movement significant both for Greek religion 
and for Greek culture. One of its lasting results was the intro- 
duction of Iacchus (the youthful Dionysus) into the Eleusinian 
mysteries. 

The first wave of impulse from the north at length spent its 
force ; under the guidance of the Delphic Apollo, prophets like 

244 GREEK RELIGION 

Epimenides and Melaropus modified the wilder practices ; yet 
the essence of the movement remained to bear fruit in the Attic 
drama and in the philosophy of Plato- 

4. The Orphic Movement. — Among the results of the revival of 
religion in a mystic form, one was so permanent and influential 
that it cannot be passed over ; I refer to the Orphic sect. The 
Orphic writings have come down to us in an extremely late form, 
yet their influence on literature and philosophy can be traced back 
well into the sixth century B.C. From this influence we infer an 
Orphic sect consisting of communities which practised secret rites, 
an Orphic theology which early attracted the attention of philoso- 
phers, and Orphic apostles who sought to spread the new form of 
religion. Most of the great religions of the world have passed 
through a theological stage in which doctrine was fixed by the 
priests : the Orphic movement in Greece was a start in this direc- 
tion, a start soon checked by political, social, and religious forces ; 
yet the Orphic sect remained a power in Athens from the sixth 
century on. 

While the Orphic communities or "churches" were at times 
definite groups of separatists who stood apart from the practices 
of the state religion, and the Orphic theology is known in a well- 
defined form, it is difficult to ascertain how much of mystic 
practice should be regarded as strictly Orphic. Apparently rites 
from Thrace, Phrygia, and Crete were adopted by the sect. The 
ideas which had been stimulated in the worship of Pemeter and 
of Dionysus sought some adequate expression, and fuund it only 
in strange rites from outside- The source of these ideas also was 
referred to a foreigner, that sweet singer of the north, the Thracian 
Orpheus. Through this child of divine parentage they came as a 
revelation of divine truth. Yet the Orphic belief is clearly the 
product of an epoch, not of a man ; and however much it was 
stimulated by foreign beliefs and modified by foreign practices, 
the great religious teachings of Orphism are a characteristic Greek 
product. 

Although the Orphic theology was based on the work of Hesiod 

SEVENTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 245 

and his successors, it transformed what it accepted from this 
source in accordance with two fundamental ideas : (1) the essential 
unity of the gods and the world in one divine being, and (2) the 
presence of this divine nature in the human soul. The form of 
the Orphic cosmogony was determined partly by the Hesiodic 
literature, partly by religious practice- The origin of the world 
is found in Chaos (space), Chronos (time), and Aether (fiery 
matter). Froin Chaos and Aether Chronos formed the world- 
egg, from which was born Protogonos or Phanes, the father and 
creator of the universe, a being identified with Dionysus (the life 
in the world) and with Metis (wisdom). Phanes was the father of 
Night and Heaven and Earth and the Gods, the creator of sun and 
moon, of men and animals. By the help of Night Zeus swallowed 
Phanes (as in Hesiod he swallowed Metis) ; thus he became the 
father of Athena, and thus also the nature of Phanes filled his 
entire being til! he was the complete godhead. From Zeus and 
Persephone was born Dionysus-Zagreus, who as a child was made 
king of the world. But incited by the jealous Hera, the Titans 
beguiled the boy from his nurse with toys, tore him in pieces, and 
ate all but the heart, which was conveyed by Athena to Zeus. 
This heart Zeus brought to life again as Dionysus, the son of 
Semele, a god identical in nature with his father. The Titans who 
had eaten Dionysus-Zagreus were destroyed by the thunderbolt of 
Zeus and their ashes scattered over the world. These ashes were 
the source of the double nature of man, who was divine, for the 
life-power of Zagreus was in them ; evil, for the Titans had de- 
stroyed Zagreus. Such was the fantastic form in which the Orphic 
literature expressed the thought that the world and man found 
their fundamental unity in the nature of god. "Zeus is head, 
Zeus the middle, of Zeus all things are fashioned ;" but this Zeus 
was identical with Phanes and known to his worshippers as 
Dionysus- 
Religious practice was determined by the nature of the soul. 
Through the ashes of the Titans man had in himself both the 
principle of evil and the divine nature ; the divine and immortal 

246 

CREEK RELIGION 

soul was bound in a body which was called now its prison, now its 
grave. It was the sad lot of man to suffer retribution after death 
for sins in this world, then to be reborn into this same world of 
sin and evil. But by the gTace of Dionysus and Persephone, 
Orpheus, who himself saw the lower world, had taught men initia- 
tions by which the chain of rebirths might be broken and the 
soul might reach its true freedom with the gods. This goal de- 
manded both the initiations and a life ritually pure ; " many are 
wandbeaTers, few Bakchoi," for not many of the initiates succeeded 
in living up to the rules of purity. 

The initiations, so far as we can learn, were rites adopted from 

Fir. 70. — Terra Cotta Relief from Campania 

Scene of initiation in Dionysiac mysteries; the figure at the left carries the 

liknon or winnowing basket. 

Crete, Asia Minor, in particular Phrygia, — rites savage in their 
origin but here filled with high spiritual meaning. 1 By eating the 
raw flesh of a bull the Cretans possessed themselves of the divine 
life which they believed was in the bull ; so in Orphic initiations 

1 Harrison, Prolegomena, to the Study of Greek Religion, 479 f. 

SEVENTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 247 

the revolting rite was revived to symbolize most vividly the union 
of the worshipper's soul with the goi of all life. Clay and pitch 
were used to absorb the taint of evil from the body ; the winnow- 
ing basket symbolized the winnowing of man's immortal nature 
from its physical husk; all contact with death was forbidden, even 
so that anima! food was strictly abjured; for some ritual reason 
beans were tabooed, and woollen garments were not worn ; more- 
over, there were special piacular rites to cover special dangers or 
difficulties. The pure life which should follow initiation was not 
so much the avoidance of moral evil, though this was included, as 
the avoidance of any ritual error ; but the rules of avoidance never 
developed into a real asceticism in Greece. 

Such a religion, preached by apostles and fostered in " churches," 
might on more favorable ground have developed into a power con- 
trolling social life by its priests and absorbing within itself every 
expression of religious instinct. But in Greece it remained a 
protestant religion. In the inner circle of its votaries at Athens 
and in southern Italy the doctrines and practices were kept up 
until the religion of Greece yielded to Christianity. Like every 
esoteric religion, it was profaned before the world by men who 
used its supernatural claims for their own gain ; miracle-workers 
appealed to the imagination of the people, begging priests to their 
sympathy, self-styled officials to the desire for occult initiations. 
Such superstition found little sympathy from thinking men. 1 Yet 
we must believe that the permanence of Orphism was due to its 
truths, — (r) the belief that all existence finds its ground in one 
ypd, Dionysus-Zagreus, Zeus, or whatever name be used ; (2) the 
belief in the divine nature of the soul, and (3) the practical prin- 
ciple that in the possibility of restoring the soul to union with the 
godhead is found the standard and goal of human life. 

The relation of Pythagoras to the Orphic movement is not 
entirely clear. The second and third of the points just mentioned, 
the divine nature of the soul and the duty of developing in the soul 
its own divine nature, were part of the teaching of Pythagoras. 

* Cp. infra, p. 371. 

248 GREEK RELIGION 

For Orphic pantheism it would seem that he substituted a philo- 
sophic conception of the world as controlled by number and har- 
mony. In Croton he founded a community resembling the Orphic 
" churches," except that it sought to realize its ethicoreligious 
ideals through an oligarchic state. 

The doctrines of Pythagoras — the antithesis of the soul and 
body, the rebirth of the soul in a life determined by its past deeds, 
and the return of the soul to the gods as its ultimate goal — be- 
came the basis of a political constitution. Along with ethical 
demands (mainly negative in character), the avoidance of animal 
food, of beans, of woollen garments, etc., was imposed as the 
means of salvation. Although the personality of Pythagoras 
brought temporary success to this " rule of the saints," the politi- 
cal power of Pythagoreanism soon came to a disastrous end. The 
very appearance of such a movement, however, bears witness to 
the mystic spirit of the age. 

CHAPTER IV 

RELIGION IN THE FIFTH AND FOURTH CENTURIES, B.C. ; 

HELLENISM AT ITS HEIGHT 

1. The Persian Wars and the Exaltation of the Athenian 
State. — The same forces which had been at work in society dur- 
ing the sixth century were manifest with increasing clearness 
during the centuries that followed- The old aristocracy, except 
where it had been supplanted by an aristocracy of wealth, main- 
tained itself as one party in each state. In Athens it was losing 
ground until in the overthrow of the thirty tyrants it met its death- 
blow ; and in the fourth century Athens represents what a real 
democracy could accomplish on Greek soil. Long before the 
people had obtained undisputed control in the state, they had 
secured the just administration of law and full freedom of individ- 
ual initiative. Meantime, commerce continued to gain in impor- 
tance. With the growth of the Athenian empire the commercial 
supremacy of Athens was placed on such a firm basis that it was 
not broken by the Peloponnesian War j and for Athens commercial 
supremacy was the concomitant of intellectual supremacy. 

At the end of the sixth century in Athens the state worship of 
the Olympian gods had been made rich and imposing by the 
Peisistratid rulers. These Athenian gods were closely united 
with the political power of the Athenian state ; yet up to this time 
the cults of each locality had not been overpowered by the 
greater festivals of the city ; and in the city of Athens, quite 
as much as in the surrounding country, the Orphic movement ex- 
ercised a potent sway over the religious nature- For the period 
now to be considered Greek religion developed along three 

249 

2 5 o GREEK RELIGION 

lines ; first one current of development, then another, came to the 
front as it was favored by social and intellectual conditions. With 
the growth of the first Athenian confederacy it was the state ideal 
of religion, the Olympian worship as expressing the religious ideal 
of the Greek state, which reached its highest development. Later 
the mystic religion, the religion of sentiment, was revived to meet 
a need which the state religion failed to satisfy. And thirdly, the 
philosophical phase of religion was developed among thinkers who 
first attempted to give a complete rational account of the universe. 
While these three currents are to be found in Athens all through 
this period, each one successively is the controlling element. 

It has already been assumed that during this period the atten- 
tion of the student will be focussed on Athens- The position of 
Athens as the central factor in Greek life is due, more than to any 
other one cause, to the fact that the resistance to the attack of 
Persia centred in Athens. It was Athens which had undertaken 
to help the Ionian colonies in Asia Minor against the great king, 
and, if we may trust our historians, the force of the Persian attack 
on Greece proper was levelled primarily at Athens. In the effort 
to meet this attack and repulse it, Athens became conscious of her 
position as the leading city in Greece. The very devastation of 
the city by Persia, followed as it was by political and material suc- 
cesses in the pan-Hellenic world, gave an opportunity for the best 
talents of the best Greek artists to rebuild this capital of Greece. 

At the beginning of the fifth century poetry, music, sculpture 
and painting, philosophy, medicine, not to say religion, had reached 
a considerable degree of development, one in one local centre, 
another in another. But in the new capital of Greece first the 
arts and then the sciences were gradually absorbed. A poetry, a 
sculpture, an architecture that were truly Athenian were developed 
out of the best in each local centre, and in each of these lines 
Athens became the exponent of Greek progress. What was true 
of politics, of the arts, and of philosophy, was true also of religion, 
though in a somewhat less degree. Certainly it is safe to say that 
any progress which Greece made in the fifth century along re- 

FIFTH AND FOURTH CENTURIES" 251 

ligious lines was made at Athens, for here all the arts were devoted 
to the honor of the state through the state religion. 

A second effect of the Persian wars was to increase wonderfully 
the importance of the Athenian state in the eyes of its citizens. 
Commerce for the time being was checked by the war ; the con- 
flicts of different parries and of different interests within the state 
were set aside by larger demands; among all the ideals which 
appealed to men the ideal of the free state was given a command- 
ing position. The Athena and the Dionysus whose worship had 
been developed by the tyrants, now became exponents of the new 
conception of the state; while at the same time the organization 
of religion was once for all made subject to the political organi- 
zation of the state. 

One particular phase of this exaltation of the state and its 
interests deserves special mention. The most interesting devel- 
opment of religion at Athens during the preceding epoch had been 
the growth of Grphism. At the beginning of the fifth century b.c. 
a careful observer might have predicted that the growing power 
of Persia would absorb the Balkan peninsula as it had absorbed 
the Greek cities on the coast of Asia Minor, and that under the 
overlordship of Persia the Orphic sect, supported by an alliance 
with Delphi, would bring Greek religion under priest control. 
That a church of mystics with their interest in a spiritual world 
should work in conjunction with an outside controlling political 
power is a phenomenon by no means unknown in the history of 
religion. But in Greece that same struggle which freed the Greek 
states from Persian menace furnished the antidote to the spread 
of organized mysticism. Thereafter no church ever threatened 
the supremacy of the state. 

2. The First Athenian Empire. — During the fifty years which 
followed the battle of Salamis the political, social, and religious 
development of Athens was largely the evolution of those forces 
which had been set in motion by the Persian wars. The two im- 
portant facts for the history of religion were (1) the supremacy 
of Athens, and (2) the ideal of the state which came to control 

25 2 GREEK RELIGION 

the Athenian conception of life. The first point may be dismissed 
with the remark that Athenian supremacy was fundamentally 
different from the hegemony of other states in the following cen- 
tury, for the reason that in Athens every phase of Hellenism found 
its highest and most characteristic expression. Moreover, when 
Greek sculpture became Athenian sculpture, it was an art dedicated 
to worship, to the creation of plastic ideals of the gods, and the 
ornamentation of buildings erected for these gods. The suprem- 
acy of Athens in literature, also, did not lie along secular lines. 
The great literary product of the period was the drama, and the 
drama was religious in its origin, in its themes, and in its per- 
formance. Nor is it enough to say that Athenian supremacy in 
literature and art was attained along religious lines. The political 
power and the military glory of the city were embodied in the 
goddess Athena ; her temple was the treasury of the confederacy, 
and its greatness was best seen in her worship. 

The second point, the development of the ideal of the state 
as such, was even more important in its influence on Greek re- 
ligion. It is an interesting fact that on more than one Greek 
acropolis the palace of the Mycenaean ruler with its altar for the 
state worship had given place to the temple erected for its gods 
by the later state. In earlier times the king was the state ; later 
the ruling power might be, now a group of nobles who owed their 
power to birth or wealth, now some tyrant who had succeeded in 
wresting control from the nobles. The conception that the state 
was the people, that devotion to the state was something more 
than loyalty to a man or to a ruling class, that political power was 
to be given by the people to the man of their choice — the con- 
ception of democracy — was the problem which at this time the 
Athenians were trying to solve. Though the leaders whom the 
people chose to follow were generally men from old families, 
the people constantly claimed more power for themselves. And 
with power there came responsibility ; with the successful exercise 
of power the demands of the state on the individual were more 
widely recognized. The older devotion to a ruling person or 

FIFTH AND FOURTH CENTURIES 253 

class, together with attachment to the locality where one lived, 
was merged at length in that loyalty to the state which we call 
patriotism. During this period the ideal of the state obtained 
such a hold on the Athenians that its influence outlived the over- 
throw of political power, the attacks of the Sophistic philosophy, 
and the spread of private luxury. 

The successes of the Athenian state in this period did more 
than give the state ideal a lasting hold ; they modified for the time 
being the general conception of life. Such an epoch with its 
large demands on men and its ready response to human effort, 
made life seem to be splendidly worth living. There was no 
opening for pessimism or mysticism or a philosophy which empha- 
sized any other ideal than that of action. The life of to-day with 
its brightness, its wonderful opportunities, its quick rewards, left 
little time for thought of the past or meditation on the future. In 
the religion of the day we look to see the effect of optimistic 
activity in every line of social effort. 

It has already been pointed out that the victories over Persia 
brought to an end the possibility that the Orphic phase of religion 
might become controlling in Greece. To sympathetic individuals 
its doctrines still appealed. But the development of literature 
and art and science was on the whole antagonistic to any form of 
mysticism. The state ideal found no answering harmony in the 
Orphic conception of life. More than anything else, the success- 
ful activity of the age made men insusceptible to such a phase of 
religion ; something more tangible and more virile was demanded 
by these men of action. It is true that old forms of worship, 
some of them decidedly mystic in tone, were retained ; but ordi- 
narily they were brought into at least a formal connection with the 
Olympian religion of the state. Thus the worship of Demeter at 
Eleusis was made a state cult, and the usual forms of state worship 
were in some degree welded on to the older rites. Dionysus 
worship also was adopted by the state, when the Athenian drama 
had developed out of the earlier choruses in honor of the wine god. 
Moreover, it seems that the syncretism of the Orphic theology 

254 GREEK RELIGION 

left its mark on the Olympian divinities of the state. Though 
the personality of each god was distinct enough to his worshippers, 
the thinker and the poet could not escape the belief that the unity 
of divine rule demanded some real unity of the divine nature. 
Yet after all allowance has been made for the influence of Orphic 
theology and for the continuance of worship which had originally 
been of a mystic nature, the fact remains that this current of 
religious development met with little favor under the first Athenian 
confederacy. 

The emphasis on the state and on successful human activity 
through the state found its natural expression in a state religion 
along lines suggested by the epic. The epic was a poetry of 
strenuous activity, on the whole happy and successful, under 
divine rulers. It was the great monument to the tendency of the 
Greeks to make their gods universal beings whose will was mani- 
fested in the government of the world. The Olympian ruling 
state corresponded at many points to the state ideal which was 
being developed at Athens. Naturally enough, the Athenians 
found here that phase of religion which was best suited to their 
new conception of life. The fact that the youth of the city were 
brought up on the Homeric poems as the central element in their 
education, made it inevitable that the state religion should develop 
along these lines. 

In the first place the conception of the gods as anthropo- 
morphic rulers of the world, and of the world as an expression 
of their divine will, obtained a new and different hold. The doc- 
trine which Theognis and Solon had uttered in their poems be- 
came the general philosophy of life, accepted alike by the thinker, 
the politician, the military man. Through the epic much the 
same doctrine had made the gods more definitely persons and 
thus more human. That now it tended to remove the gods further 
away from human reach and human sympathy, that it made of 
worship a splendid tribute to such august powers, that religion 
became a matter for the state rather than for the individual, were 
the normal results of the changed conditions. 

FIFTH AND FOURTH CENTURIES 255 

And the same conditions which made the gods Olympian 
rulers developed a belief in the uprightness of their rule. On 
the whole the gods of Homer governed justly, though the moral 
code of simple men did not bind their divine rulers any more 
than their human rulers. But the Athenians of the fifth century 
breathed a different atmosphere. Nominally, their own rule was 
based on ideals of justice and liberty for all ; so of the gods they 
demanded inflexible justice. And religion had become so bound 
up with ethics that the moral law could only be interpreted as the 
holy expression of the divine nature. Earlier ages had usually 
been able to accept tales of divine immorality, and later ages 
could neglect them • this period alone must either purify myth or 
set it aside as "untrue." It was only of the gods conceived pri- 
marily as anthropomorphic rulers that the ideals of human moral- 
ity must be predicated in a literal manner. 

Again this type of state religion demanded that the validity of 
the gods rest on the same basis as the validity of the state itself. 
Not that the opinion of the individual made any special difference 
with reference either to the state or to its gods, so long as the 
processes of politics and of worship went on undisturbed. To 
insist on doubts as to the nature of the gods, however, would be 
talking treason; to interfere with worship would be an act of 
treason. The excitement about the mutilation of the hermae, and 
the prosecutions on the charge of impiety can only be understood 
from this standpoint. 

The particular development of religious institutions in this 
period is the best illustration of the influence of the state ideal on 
religion. Just as Peisistratus had attempted to unify the people 
under his rule by uniting them in magnificent festivals to the gods 
of his state, so democratic Athens, now that it had become con- 
scious of itself as a great state, sought to express its greatness by 
enriching the forms of its worship. The wealth which flowed in 
to the centre of the confederacy was used in part for the army 
and navy, in part it was devoted to the service of the gods ; and 
both uses were justified on the ground that they strengthened the 

256 GREEK RELIGION 

state. The Parthenon was erected and a gold and ivory statue of 
Athena Parthenos placed within it, for it was Athena who was 
bringing the ideals of the Athenian state into the realm of fact. 
Other temples were erected, images were dedicated, and votive 
offerings brought to the gods, for the successes of the state were 
the direct manifestation of divine favor. The processions and 
sacrifices in honor of the gods were made more splendid ; athletic 
contests and musical contests were added to the ancient ritual 
of the festivals; Apollo and Zeus, Demeter and Athena, simply 
received what was their proper due when the state they had made 
strong and wealthy returned this tribute to its divine rulers. 
And when the drama became the highest tribute of the Athenians 
to their gods, Dionysus took his place as one of these divine 
rulers. In fact it is difficult to discover any change in Greek reli- 
gion during this epoch which was not due to this state ideal and 
its state gods. 

During the fifth century more than in any other period the 
dominant religious conceptions were reflected in literature, for 
literature at this time, like painting and sculpture and architecture, 
was largely devoted to the honor of the state gods. 

Early in the century Pindar and Aeschylus, the former for 
Greece, the latter primarily for Athens, sought to interpret the 
religious meaning of the Olympian worship and to harmonize 
it with the highest standards of ethical and religious thought. 
The extant odes of Pindar were written to honor individuals 
victorious in the games. They breathe a spirit of reverence for 
all that is noble and pure in the gods. Pindar rejects the story 
of Tantalus and Pelops as a slander, nor does he admit strife into 
the divine world. Zeus is exalted above the gods as himself the 
fate which allots to each man his destiny ; his mighty mind guides 
the fortunes of the men he loves ; success he sends to those who 
approach him reverently. Or again it is god who u accomplish- 
ed all things according to his wish — god who overtaketh even 
the winged eagle, and outstrippeth the dolphin of the sea, who 
layeth low many a mortal in his haughtiness, while to others he 

FIFrH AND FOURTH CENTURIES 257 

giveth glory imperishable." 1 In particular Pindar loved to dwell 
on Apollo, god of light and truth, giver of healing and musical 
harmony, u the most righteous partner" of father Zeus. 2 Along 
with these lofty conceptions of the gods, the poet retained myth, 
*>. sacred story, as the subject-matter of his poetry. But h*s 
religious standards he set above the authority of tradition. Irre- 
ligious myths he freely rejected, consciously or not he rested the 
authority of myths on their moral and religious value for his age. 
Polydeuces, who laid aside every other day his right to immortality 
that he might enjoy the society of his mortal brother Castor in the 
lower world, Jason's endurance in pursuit of the task imposed on 
him, the sufferings of Ino and Semele crowned by entrance on a 
divine life, the punishment of Ixion for base ingratitude and of 
Tantalus for arrogance and presumption — such are the themes 
which are presented in Pindar's myths. And through them all 
runs the thought that men are descended from the gods, a kinship 
not forgotten by the gods. With all his clear vision for the gods 
of Olympus, Pindar is not deaf to the doctrines of Orphism. The 
life after death is fraught with good or evil according to man's 
life here ; the soul returns after death to another body ; yet its 
true destiny is a final return to the gods to which it is alcin. 

As Pindar honored individuals to whom Zeus had granted 
success, so Aeschylus honored the state in which men realized 
true freedom. In the city of Athena he makes the goddess say, 
*' Reverence and Fear, akin to the citizens, shall check injustice 
day and night . . . not to be without ruler nor to be ruled by 
tyrant is my counsel." 3 Behind the state, guarding it, working 
through it, is God "the cause of all, the power that fashions all." 4 

" May God good issue give ! 
And yet the will of Zeus is hard to scan : 
Through all it brightly gleams. 

E'en though in darkness and the gloom of chance 
For us poor mortals wrapt. . . * 

1 Pyth. 2. 49. 8 Aeschylus* Bumen. 693 1 

8 Pytk. 3. a8. * Agam. 1485. 

GREEK RELIGION— 17 

258 GREEK RELIGION 

All that Gods work is effortless and calm : 
Seated on holiest throne, 
Thence, though we know not how, 
He works his perfect wilL" * 

Apollo is the mouthpiece of this Zeus, Athena his embodied 
wisdom; in all the conflict of life the divine plan works itself 
out. For Aeschylus, as for Pindar, myth is a sacred history which 
the poet uses as a vehicle for great spiritual truths. lie freely 
modifies myth with this end in view ; the nature of sin, its far- 
reaching taint f its inevitable punishment, 2 the purifying effect of 
toil and suffering are the essential doctrines in that view of life 
which the poet presents by means of myth. 

Much the same stern thoughts are presented more graciously 
by that favorite of the gods, Sophocles. He is said to have been 
a man devoted to their worship, guided by omens they sent, 
receiving the new god Asclepius in his house and so himself 
worshipped after death as the " Receiver " (Dexion). For 
Sophocles also Zeus is "all powerful, controlling all things," 3 whose 
divine rule nothing escaped; "great Zeus is yet in heaven, he who 
watches over and directs all things." 4 All ethical law has its 
source and sanction in the gods : u May it be my lot to keep 
reverent purity in every word and deed ! of which the laws are 
prescribed on high, begotten in the heavenly aether : Olympus 
alone is their father . . . God is great in them nor yet does he 
wax old and feeble." 5 And in the government of the world the 
holiness and purity of the gods is revealed though an Oedipus or 
an Antigone be crushed in the process. The sin of Clytaemnestra, 
of Laius, of Creon, brings a long train of evil in its wake. But in 
the case of Philoctetes and of Oedipus suffering at length works 
out the purification of man that he may serve as an instrument of 
the gods for good. But with all that is said about the purity of 
the gods, Sophocles does not attempt to remodel myth on an 

1 Aeschylus, SvfipL 85 f. trans. Plumptre. * Sophocles, Otd. 7yr. 903. 

a Agatn. 67 f. 4 Ei.-i . 174 f. 

6 Oed. 7)>r. 864 t 

FIFTH AND FOURTH CENTURIES 259 

ethical basis; he simply passes over what does not suit his pur- 
pose. And while he holds fast to certain fundamental ethical 
principles, he is far from reducing religion to any rationalistic 
basis. The mysterious both in worship and in the nature of the 
gods is very attractive to this poet; to pry into the mysteries of 
religion seems to him an example of that presumption which is the 
essence of sin. Inspiration and revelation from the divine powers 
he is very ready to accept. In particular there is an evident 
purpose in his extant dramas to exalt the function of Apollo at 
Delphi as the mouthpiece of the gods. The oracles of the god 
always prove true ; once when they seem to have failed, the chorus 
utters the sentiment that the worship of the gods at Athens should 
cease at once, unless the revelation of the divine will by Apollo is 
promptly proved to be true — and the apparent failure leads to an 
awful justification of the god's foresight. 1 

In the honor paid to the Delphic god, as at many other points, 
Herodotus is intimately associated with Sophocles. Herodotus 
accepts the oracles and the presence of the gods in human life, 
while he freely criticises myth ; for in religion as in geography and 
in history he is guided by a somewhat naive sense for the reality 
which comes within the range of experience. Judging by the facts 
of human life, he is impressed by the limitations of man and by 
the power of the gods; and the facts suggest to him gods jealous 
of their prerogatives rather than gods primarily just. As the rela- 
tions of Greece and Persia seem to him to be determined by the 
unreasonable greatness of the eastern power which provokes jealous 
retribution from the gods, so each stage in the history, the account 
of Croesus, of Polycrates, of Candaules, of Miltiades, illustrates the 
same principle. " You see how divine lightning strikes very great 
animals and God does not permit them to exhibit themselves 
proudly, while small ones do not excite his wrath ; and thunder- 
bolts always strike large buildings and tall trees ; for God loves to 
bring to naught anything that is excessive . . . nor does he permit 
any but himself to think proud thoughts." 2 In his treatment 

l Oed. 7yr* 895 C * Herodotus, 7. 10. 5, 

z6o GREEK RELIGION 

of religious phenomena Herodotus shows his critical instinct by 
analyzing them and referring some to a Pelasgic source, others to 
an Egyptian source- And with all his curiosity and credulity he 
does not hesitate to reject what does not seem to him natural 
or to explain away some marvels. The existence of griffins, for 
instance, he refuses to believe ; and the prophesying doves of 
Dodona he explains as priestesses who had come from Egypt, 
and who were called doves because their words were at first unin- 
telligible. 1 Herodotus felt the deepest interest in the great shrines 
of Greece and the mysterious doctrines of their priests, but he was 
often deterred by awe from imparting what he learned. At Delphi 
it seems that he obtained much material for his history, and in the 
earlier part of his work he appears as the frank defender of the 
claims of the oracle. 2 

3. The Peloponnesian "War. — The latter part of the fifth cen- 
tury at Athens constitutes a period quite as distinct in its social 
and religious tendencies as in its political developments. The 
Peloponnesian war was the great struggle which Athenian states- 
men had long foreseen, and which ended after nearly thirty years 
in the temporary overthrow of Athens. Democracy in the city 
had become impatient of wise leadership ; now some scheme for 
world-power, such as the Sicilian expedition, now some sudden 
impulse of resentment, as in the condemnation of the generals 
at Arginusae, proved the essential weakness of Athens. Wild 
schemes for social betterment of the masses were in the air. 
Moreover, science and philosophy were beginning to make a wide 
impression on the Athenian view of life. The conception of nature 
as a reality independent of and including both gods and men, the 
idea of natural law as distinct from any personal will, the thought 
of moral and legal requirements as conventions, the validity of 
which might well be questioned — such were some of the main prob- 
lems which gradually attracted the attention of thinking people. 
As mysticism earlier had been driven into the background by 

1 Herodotus, 2. 55. 

*" Herodotus and the Oracle at Delphi." Classical Journal. 1 (1906) 37 1 

FIFTH AND FOURTH CENTURIES 261 

the state ideal and the Olympian religion, so now the state phase 
of religion was threatened by the rising current of intellectualism. 

What may be termed rationalism, or better intellectualism, in 
religious matters was not a new development at the end of the 
fifth century ; it was only its reach and its grasp that were new. 1 
Up to this time it had appeared in two forms, in a rationalism 
which neglected or undermined belief in the gods, and in a reflec- 
tion which modified religious conceptions to accord with ethical 
and philosophical principles. The religious type of intellectualism 
appeared as early as Hesiod and reached its height in Pindar and 
Aeschylus. It amounted to an assertion that religion is not merely 
a matter of tradition, but rather a subject to be tested by critical 
standards in order to determine its truth. Among the historians, 
the credulous Herodotus applied the same standards to religion as 
to other matters, and rejected many myths on the ground of im- 
probability. Among the earlier philosophers, Empedocles made 
a real place for the gods in his system ; he followed Xenophanes 
in rejecting all traces of anthropomorphism, but he spoke with 
reverence of God (Apollo?) as the intelligence of the universe; 
his purpose to purify belief and to reform worship appeared in 
much of his work. This line of effort accomplished a little in 
raising religious belief to a higher plane, but until a much later 
age its influence was limited to a relatively small circle. 

The negative criticism of religion had played a larger part in 
the work of the early philosophers. The absurdities of supersti- 
tion made it an easy mark for Xenophanes and Heracleitus, while 
some of their successors were rather inclined to omit all reference 
to religion. The conception of the physical world as an ultimate 
fact, and of law as a fixed natural process, seemed to leave little 
place for religion. It was possible, however, to admit the exist- 
ence in nature of beings superior to man who influenced him for 
good or for evil. In some such way Dernocritus admitted a place 
for religion, even while he explained away many myths as illusions 
caused by phenomena of the heavens. 

* Decharme. La critique des traditions religieuses chess Us Grecs, iii-vi. 

262 GREEK RELIGION 

At Athens, soon after the middle of the fifth century, it was 
rather the negative phase of philosophy which attracted the atten- 
tion of the people. Visiting sophists were beginning to show them 
how easy it was to refute not only so-called philosophical systems, 
but also the demands of custom, of morals, and of law. As law 
and morals were useful to weak members of society, so, they 
taught, a belief in gods is useful in making the strong afraid to 
injure the weak. 1 The strongest proof that religion, morality, and 
law belonged to social convention rather than to the realities of 
nature they found in the fact that among different peoples belief 
and custom and law were so radically different. Man, the individ- 
ual man, is the measure of all things, declared Protagoras, These 
doctrines tended to develop individualism as over against all social 
authority; in particular the authority of religious belief and reli- 
gious practice was often questioned. 

Yet while religion remained so closely connected with the state 
as in Athens during the fifth century B.C., public attacks on reli- 
gion could not pass unheeded- The avowed "atheist" was con- 
demned by public opinion, and even the courts took cognizance 
of charges of impiety. Diagoras, who mocked at the mysteries 
and divulged their secrets, had a price set on his head ; the names 
of Cinesias and of Hippon who wrote the epitaph, "Death has 
made me like the gods," were handed down as objects of con- 
tempt. For one and only one period in Greek history thinking 
men were brought into court on the charge of impiety. Anax- 
agoras was driven from Athens for teaching that the sun was (not 
a god but) an incandescent stone, Aspasia was brought into 
court on the charge of impiety. Pheidias was forced to meet the 
same charge because he had placed his own likeness and that of 
Pericles on the shield of his Athena Parthenos. Socrates was 
condemned to death " because he did not recognize the gods of 
the state, but introduced new divinities, and moreover, because 
he corrupted the youth."* Others still were charged with intro- 
ducing the worship of foreign gods without permission of the 

* Plato, L*g. 10. p. 889 E. * Plato, ^ol. 19 B* 

FIFTH AND FOURTH CENTURIES 263 

state. The charge of impiety brought against Alcibiades, the 
profanation of the mysteries, itself illustrates the weakened ties of 
religion, in that such an act seemed to be possible. Overt acts of 
this sort against public worship would always subject a man to 
punishment, while trials for impious teaching were limited to a 
brief period. 

In a word, the intellectual movement which culminated in the 
study of science, in the development of education, and in the 
spread of popular philosophy at Athens toward the end of the fifth 
century, assumed a form directly hostile to organized religion. Its 
whole influence tended to weaken traditional faith in the gods, 
nor was any reconciliation of faith and philosophy as yet in sight. 

Had not the state ideal in society and the state phase of religion 
obtained so strong a foothold in the half century preceding the 
Peloponnesian war, they would hardly have survived the forces 
now at work. The new education, thoroughly individualistic in 
its first results, was a menace to patriotism and the demands of 
the state; a crude democracy resented the limitations of the 
constitution ; and from outside the very existence of the state was 
threatened by the war. Yet the state ideal had developed strength 
enough to weather the attacks from without and from within. And 
with the state ideal the state religion remained in control of the 
masses of the people. Men listened with interested curiosity to 
the speculations of a Euripides j but when he went too far, his bold- 
ness was promptly checked. The splendid ritual of worship went 
on as before, the worship of the Athenian people to gods which, it 
publicly recognized as supreme. 

So far as the mystic side of religion was concerned, the condi- 
tions for its development were much more favorable. Successful 
activity did not draw men's thoughts away from spiritual things 
or satisfy their aspirations in a more immediate manner. The 
gods of the state no longer showed their favor to every undertak- 
ing, but oftentimes they were tried and found wanting. When 
siege and defeat and pestilence made this world look dark, the 
demand for "redemption," for religious "cures," came to be 

264 GREEK RELIGION 

generally felt. 1 The wandering oracle-vender found a ready sale 
for his wares ; the priest, who promised blessings by means of his 
initiations, was welcomed among those who felt the woes of life ; 
again unusual and private forms of worship were introduced to 
meet demands which ordinary sacrifices and festivals did not 
satisfy- Yet the public organization of religion in the worship of 
the state gods was so strongly intrenched that It was modified but 
little by such innovations. 

Among the writers of this period Euripides deserves first men- 
tion, not because his work begins with the Peloponnesian war, but 
because he anticipated the spirit which then prevailed. He re- 
jected some of the old myths, e.g. the story of Leda and the swan 
and of Erichthonius's birth from the soil, not on moral and reli- 
gious grounds like Aeschylus, but because they seemed to him im- 
probable. And when he did condemn the gods for immorality, 
his tone was critical rather than religious. It is peculiarly difficult 
to estimate correctly the religious views of Euripides. Writing 
under the influence of the new movement of thought at Athens, 
yet himself a poet and no philosopher, keenly alive to human 
weaknesses and human ills, yet honoring that ideal which made 
Athens great, he presents problems rather than principles in his 
tragedies. Retribution to the sinner is a fact of experience, but 
who knows if it comes from the gods worshipped at Athens? 
And who knows of the soul and its destiny, beyond the fact that 
insight, energy, virtue, ordinarily bring their reward in this present 
life? " The gods, whatever the gods are " * sounds like the critical 
scepticism of a sophist. To interpret Zeus now as Intelligence, now 
as Necessity, or to make the Erinyes the hallucinations of a disor- 
dered brain, suggests an attempt to rationalize the gods. Such sug- 
gestions and problems proved intensely interesting to the audience 
when the poet did not go too far, even though the questionings did 
not meet with general assent. Certainly the attacks on Euripides 
prove his influence. Even in the Bacchantes the poet, now an 
old man, does not entirely change his view. The outcome of his 

J Plato, Politia, a, p. 364 R « Ores/. 4x8. 

FIFTH AND FOURTH CENTURIES 265 

experience as developed in this tragedy is simply, " Whatever the 
gods are, let us bow to them." 

The old comedy as represented by Aristophanes was much 
closer to the thought of the people than was tragedy. Religious 
parody, which was so striking a feature of Aristophanes's work, was 
not inconsistent with religious belief and practice in Greece from 
Homer on. Not simply Heracles and Hermes and Dionysus were 
the objects of Aristophanes's buffoonery ; Zeus himself must furnish 
fun for his audience. Not simply the quack diviner and the 
vender of oracles, but the priest of the state religion also was held 
up to ridicule. Nor was the worship of Asclepius or Dionysus or 
Demeter free from the poet's gibes. Yet in Aristophanes there 
was no denial of the gods, nothing that was felt by his audience to 
be a religious profanation. On the contrary the tone of his work 
was on the whole conservative in religion as in other matters. In 
the Clouds he appears as the direct defender of the old ideals of 
life and the old religion. A sincere religious spirit seems to per- 
vade his hymns to the gods. He is first of all a comedian, but 
just for this reason he reflects the views of his hearers. In fact 
his fun always presupposes (1) an elaborate state ritual universally 
accepted, and (2) a general belief in the actual power and pres- 
ence of the gods. Whatever his own views may have been, the 
faithfulness of Aristophanes to his art made his comedies a wit- 
ness to the essential religiousness of Athens at the end of the fifth 
century. 

Much the same conclusion as to the hold of religion on the 
people may be drawn from the history of Thucydides and from 
the orations of Antiphon. Thucydides contrasts sharply the 
prophecies of the oracle-mongers and the genuine words of the 
Delphic Apollo 1 ; while condemning the superstitions of a Nicias, 
he notes the enfeebled fear of the gods and of divine justice as 
one of the evils produced by the Pcloponnesian war 2 ; he refers 
to the epic and some particular myths with no note of criticism. 
Although he gives no indications of devoutness on his own part, 

1 Thucydides. 2. 54 ; cp. 5. 103. a; 5. 26. 3. * Ibid., 3. 8a. 6; cp. a. S3- 

266 GREEK RELIGION 

he clearly recognizes the importance of religion as it existed at 
Athens. So Antiphon continually bases his argument on popular 
belief in a divine justice which punishes the guilty, and in a divine 
purity which turns away from a man or a city polluted with evil. 
These statements might be mere rhetoric, but they would lose 
their value as rhetoric unless they were addressed to a people 
religiously inclined. 

4. The Fourth Century. — With the close of the fifth century 
we may almost say that the religious development of Greece was 
ended ; none of the later changes can be regarded as new move- 
ments of primary importance, and on the whole the later history 
of religion in Greece is concerned with the degeneration and dis- 
appearance of the forces which at this time were in operation. 
Only philosophy had not said its last word on matters of religion, 
but the teaching of philosophy was confined to a very limited 
range. For the people the old religion was to become little more 
than a form, a form which could offer small resistance to the 
cruder but more vital cults of Asia Minor, Syria, and Egypt. 

The fourth century at Athens in the first place was marked by 
a further development of the individualistic spirit. The teaching 
of the Sophists had been accepted by relatively few persons, 
but the centrifugal forces set in motion at the time of the 
Peloponnesian war had a far wider influence than direct teaching. 
In politics individualism showed itself in a loss of public spirit. 
When men began to ask whether they existed for the good of the 
state, or the state for their welfare and protection, it was difficult 
to enforce the demands of patriotism. Moreover the loss of 
political power had for Athens a surprisingly small effect on her 
commerce, or on her intellectual and artistic prestige. Naturally 
the thought of the state as such gave way before the thought of 
the larger Hellenic world ; a cosmopolitan spirit began to prevail, 
which made the claims of society rest lightly as compared with 
the claims of individual welfare. 

The spread of education worked in the same direction. The 
self-development which it proposed as an end was diametrically 

FIFTH AND FOURTH CENTURIES 267 

opposed to self-devotion for the community, for the more a man's 
attention was focussed on the training of his own powers as an end 
in itself, the less he was inclined to regard himself merely as one 
fraction of the state. 

The spread of private luxury was a cause as well as a symptom 
of individualism. In a striking passage Demosthenes points out 
that the magnificence which the fifth century had devoted to 
temples and public buildings, was now lavished on the houses of 
the rich. 1 The productions of great painters and sculptors, 
because so often they were used for mere adornment and private 
pleasure, were often created with no higher end in view. The 
great works in literature were not poetry but prose, not dramas for 
public performance but essays for the drawing-room or the study ; 
they were not grand and imposing but rather were finished with 
delicate grace. The effect of private luxury in Greece was all the 
more baneful for higher ideals of life because it was not satisfied 
in a barbaric or oriental manner. 

It is but looking at this individualism from another point of 
view to say that the fourth century differed from the fifth in the 
relative absence of great controlling ideals. Not simply patriotism, 
political honor also, and military honor had a weaker hold ; prizes, 
crowns, honorary decrees, were needed as rewards for public ser- 
vice. The objective activity which had given to life its tone, now 
yielded to self-conscious reflection, to musing introspection, often 
to a note of ennui and melancholy. In other phases of life as 
well as in religion the age of faith had gone by. 

The change in the spirit of the age is strikingly reflected in the 
modified conception of the gods. The gods on the Parthenon 
frieze, like the statue of Athena inside the temple, are divine 
counterparts of the statesmen who were making Athens great; for 
these gods, too, stood for hiyh ideals and for the energy which 
made those ideals effective. In contrast with these types of the 
gods in the fifth century, the statue of Peace carrying her child 
Wealth has rightly been regarded as a symbol of the spirit of the 

1 Demosthenes, 3. 35. 

268 GREEK RELIGION 

following century. The Aphrodite unrobing for the bath, which 
Praxiteles made for her Cnidian temple, was the goddess of a 
people devoted to the love of beauty and grace. And the Her- 
mes found at Olympia still repeats its message that the Greek 
youth of Praxiteles's time found in self-conscious musing the 
natural sequence to a gymnastics and an education which aimed 
to give the body and the mind their perfect development- 
Such changes in the conception of the gods seem to have 
brought no corresponding change in the forms of worship. The 
gods were still part of the conception of the state and their wor- 
ship was one phase of the state's activity. The orators of the 
fourth century not only use the gods to swear by and to conjure 
by, they refer again and again to the proverbial care of the gods 
for Athens, and in the blessing of the gods they find hope for the 
city in the future. Devotion to the state was an underlying motive 
to keep up the ancient forms of worship at the shrines of the city, 
while on the other hand the influence of the public festivals still 
tended to keep up the consciousness of common political bonds 
among the people. In his first Philippic ! Demosthenes complains 
that the military officials remain at home to take charge of religious 
processions instead of engaging in service at the front, and that 
the organizing genius of the city as well as its funds are devoted 
to religious festivals rather than to the war against Macedon. It 
would not be fair to say that the enjoyment of the Dionysia or the 
Panathenaea was the reason why such pains were taken in their 
celebration, though certainly popular pleasure was one end in 
view. The festivals were maintained partly for pleasure, partly for 
genuine religious motives, but largely because they were institu- 
tions hallowed by long observance on the part of the state. So 
far as Demosthenes is concerned, it is hard to doubt the genuine- 
ness of his appeals to the gods, yet there is no evidence of deep 
religious feeling on the part of either audience or speaker. If 
Demosthenes is contrasted with Antiphon, we might well believe 
that the former was the more religious individual ; we can hardly 

1 Demosthenes, 4. 36 and 35. 

FIFTH AND FOURTH CENTURIES 269 

believe that his hearers found the same meaning in. religion as did 
those who listened to Antiphon. 

In the fine passage on the beginning of the sacred war 
Aeschines almost persuades his readers now, as he claims to have 
persuaded his hearers then, that the oath and its consequences 
were a dread reality. 1 The religious emotions of these delegates 
were strong enough to be used with effect by the political speaker, 
but even under the shadow of the Delphic oracle the most solemn 
form of devotion had not checked the cultivation of the sacred 
plain. The Greek gods were made for man, not man for the 
gods. 

Difficult as it is to use the pleas of a lawyer, the speeches of a 
statesman, the pamphlets of a teacher of rhetoric, in getting at 
the religious ideas of the people, the testimony of the orators is 
fairly simple. There is abundant evidence that the state kept up 
the forms of religious worship in all their magnificence. That 
faith in the gods was at all a ruling principle in human life, or 
that genuine religious emotions were stirred and satisfied by this 
worship, we find no proof in the extant works of the orators. 
But Athenian gods had made Athens great, and in the struggles 
to revive that greatness the observances of worship were loyally 
maintained. 

The changes in worship during this period were largely due to 
a practical (not to say a superstitious) impulse on the part of 
individuals. The presence of this practical vein in religious 
matters at the beginning of the fourth century is seen in the 
attitude of Xenophon* His writings teem with references to the 
forms of religion- In the retreat of the ten thousand he himself 
depended constantly on dreams and omens to ascertain the will 
of the gods ; his fear of divine anger was a governing principle ; 
his ideal cavalry officer would act according to the will of the 
gods, and his hunting dogs were to be loosed with a prayer to 
Apollo and Artemis. 2 Such devotion to the forms of religion on 
the part of a typical Athenian soldier testifies to the hold of reti- 

1 Aeschines, 3. 107 f. a Xenophon, Hipp'trch. 1. x; Cynegef. 1. 1 t 

a 7 o GREEK RELIGION 

gious practice among the people. Even though a man of shallow 
nature had no sense for the deeper meaning of religion, he saw 
its practical possibilities in controlling what was otherwise outside 
his power ; just because religion had a practical value, the soldier 
and the merchant could not afford to neglect it. 

The same practical impulse largely accounts for the fact that at 
the beginning of the fourth century the worship of Asclepius was 
established as one of the state cults. Heroes had received the 
prayer of the sick for healing in Attica, but no hero had ever 
gained such a reputation as the god Asclepius for power to over- 
come disease* His reputation had brought invalids in great num- 
bers to Epidaurus ; the shrine had assumed the form of a great 
hospital for the care of the sick under divine direction ; its success 
is still attested by the offerings of men who there had found heal- 
ing. Now the journey to Epidaurus might be saved and the gifts 
of the god made more accessible by introducing a branch of this 
religious hospital at Athens. First in private houses Asclepius 
worship was begun at Athens, and soon priests with their sacred 
serpents and other paraphernalia of worship were brought to the 
city that the cult might be established in due form. The south 
side of the Acropolis proved a spot admirably adapted to the 
medical purpose of this worship. The ruins of its temples, its 
sacred spring, and its buildings for the care of the sick stitl attest 
the importance that a new worship could gain when it offered 
such practical blessings to its worshippers. 

This practical impulse showed itself also in the effort to ascer- 
tain and control the future by some stronger means than the 
routine sacrifices of the state religion. The revival of the Orphic 
movement, to which Plato if not Demosthenes bears witness, was 
due quite as much to the desire for higher potencies to control 
one's destiny as to any real effort for spiritual ends. The Orphic 
conception of life was no doubt gratifying to some because it 
placed the standard of genuine happiness and the goal of human 
life in another phase of existence- And there was much about 
the Orphic theology which appealed to thinkers like Plato; his 

FIFTH AND FOURTH CENTURIES 271 

myths adopt Orphic imagery ; his whole account of the soul, its 
origin, and its destiny is based on Orphic conceptions. But 
Plato's allusions to Orphic "initiations' 1 and the condemnation 
of such religious exercises by Demosthenes ' indicate that they 
were what more than anything else appealed to the people in 
mystic religion. Because the priests promised blessedness here 
and hereafter to their adherents, and because the ritual seemed 
so effective in reaching the unseen powers that control life, this 
type of religion had a wider influence than at any time during the 
fifth century. 

Much the same influences were at work in the introduction of 
foreign worships into Attica. 2 These were brought in the first 
instance by foreigners themselves who had obtained permission 
to establish the worship of their native gods at the point where 
they had settled, i>. mainly in the Peiraeus. That Athenian 
citizens should seek admission to the inner circle of the wor- 
shippers of Bendis or Kottyto seems strange at first sight. No 
doubt the intensity of these rites produced a refreshing sense of 
genuineness which attracted many. Still it was rather the practi- 
cal impulse, the impulse to control the mysterious forces in the 
world for the benefit of the individual, which accounts for this 
tendency. Because the state religion had become stereotyped 
form, great as was the respect in which this form was held, it did 
not stand in the way of any new worship which met a practical 
need. 

Over against the old forms of worship and the new more super- 
stitious phase of religion, the philosophical criticism of religious 
conceptions went on unhindered. The relation of philosophy 
and religion is to be considered in a later chapter, but the result 
for this period may be briefly stated here. The sharp antagonism 
between philosophy and established religion came to an abrupt 
end, first because people having become accustomed to the criti- 
cism of the gods realized that its immediate effect was harmless, 
and secondly because philosophy began to take a broader view 

1 Plato, Politia, 2. p. 364 B ; Demosthenes. iB. 259 f. * Cp. supra, p. 127. 

27a GREEK RELIGION 

of what religion meant. In his Repud&c Plato did not discuss 
religious institutions but referred them to the Delphic oracle 1 ; a 
city without gods was to him inconceivable. The name "God," 
which Plato and Aristotle both apply to the hypothetical being 
in which their systems culminated, would be meaningless except 
as these thinkers recognized some deep reality in the religious 
sentiment of their day. While religion as such had little directly 
to hope from philosophical investigation, the indirect result was 
by no means small. In contrast with the materialistic scepticism 
which occupied popular attention at the end of the fifth century, 
philosophy was now both positive and idealistic. Just in so far 
as the successors of Socrates recognized thought as the great 
fact in the world, and found in the ideals cherished by individuals 
and by society the most important realities of life, the path was 
open for philosophy to become the handmaid of religion. The 
immediate results of a deeper philosophy were never very large 
for Greek religion, for it had no vitality to assimilate the fruits of 
thought ; it is only in the history of Christianity that the meaning 
of Greek philosophy for religion came to be realized. 

* Plato. PolUia, 4, p. 437 B. 

CHAPTER V 
THE OUTCOME OF GREEK RELIGION 

1. Religion la the Hellenistic Age. — With the conquests of 
Alexander the internal development of Hellenism all but ceased, 
and history is concerned with its external development. The 
scene is shifted from the Balkan peninsula to a world which 
extended from India to Spain, from Scythiato Egypt; and for this 
world the centre of culture was no longer Athens, but successively 
Alexandria, Pergamon, Antioch, Rhodes, That the Greek lan- 
guage followed the army and became a common medium of com- 
munication in Egypt, Syria, and the fax East seems strange enough ; 
it is almost incredible that there should be truth in Plutarch's state- 
ment 1 that Homer was commonly read in Asia, that '* children of 
the Persians, of the inhabitants of Susa, and of the Gedrosians 
played the tragedies of Euripides and Sophocles," that inhabitants 
of India, Bactria, and the Caucasus worshipped the Greek gods ; 
yet as to the spread of Greek civilization there can be no doubt. 
" Greek culture alone had the capacity to embrace and interpret 
all the rest of the world ; its spirit made a universal appeal 
through poetry, art, and philosophy;" 2 and in the hands of 
Alexander this influence became operative. The history of reli- 
gion in this epoch is concerned mainly with the part which religion 
played in the spread of Hellenism. 

So far as Greece itself is concerned, the student's interest is 
primarily in such religious changes as prepare the way for the 
wider influence of Greek religion. The decay of sectional patriot- 

* Plutarch, De Alexandra fortutra, 5, p. 328 C, D. 
a Burckhaxdt, Oriechische F£ulturgcschichie t 4. 423. 

CREEK RKLIUION 1 8 273 

a 7 4 GREER RELIGION 

ft 

ism, patriotism to one's own particular city-state, inevitably meant 
for Greece the end of patriotism as. a determining ideal in human 
life ; for cosmopolitanism was merely devotion to no state. The 
result was twofold. On the one hand the career of the statesman 
could no longer appeal to men of real capacity and high ideals; 
unless their ambition were satisfied in the amassing of wealth or in 
the business of war, they must turn to science or to philosophy. 
On the other hand a religion which was intimately bound up with 
the state lost much of its hold on men who no longer cared for 
the state ; they might observe its forms from tradition, or in order 
to keep up the old pomp and splendor, but the ritual had lost its 
power to meet a genuine religious need- The first of these results 
helped the new spirit of research which had been kindled by Aris- 
totle. For religion, the only important effect of philological and 
scientific investigation was that it increased the tendency of the 
Greeks to sec in their own gods other forms of the gods wor- 
shipped in Egypt and in the East — a "theocrasy" which had no 
mean importance as a factor in the spread of Greek culture, for 
it gave a cosmopolitan aspect to an essentially sectional religion. 
But on philosophy both of these results had an effect which was 
deep and far reaching for the history of Greek religion. 

Already in the fourth century the need of a religion more real 
than the pageantry of state worship had lent a strong impulse to 
philosophy. From Plato on, the leaders of thought had recog- 
nized this need, and their followers had been inspired quite as 
much by the desire for a really religious explanation of the world as 
for one that was only metaphysical. Wow with the downfall of the 
city-state and the consequent weakening of the religion connected 
with it, men could only turn to foreign superstition or to philoso- 
phy to satisfy this need* Moreover there was little to satisfy men 
of higher nature except in science and in philosophy. That under 
these circumstances ethical philosophy should in some measure 
take the place of religion, that the philosopher should dispense 
spiritual warning and comfort, that his moral ideals should be a 
somewhat effective antidote to materialism, superstition, and self- 

THE OUTCOME OF GREEK RELIGION 275 

ish greed, is a striking tribute to the higher element in the Greek 
nature- The search for relief from the evils of life, which the 
Greeks called the effort for salvation ((royrtjpta), has at many peri- 
ods in human history driven men to luxury and selfish pleasure or 
again to asceticism or to superstitious rites ; in later Greece, as in 
these days, it produced " Ethical Culture " societies. 

The attitude of these later philosophers to the old Greek gods 
is a relatively unimportant matter, except as it illustrates the strong 
hold of traditional religion on the people generally. Only the 
Sceptics, who introduced the universal principle of doubt, ex- 
pressed doubt as to the existence of the Olympian deities ; phi- 
losophers who had a system of thought included the gods in this 
system. The Epicureans followed the founder of that school in 
admitting their existence as superior beings even while they denied 
them any potent influence in human affairs. The attitude of the 
Stoics varied at different times. An allegorical explanation was 
frequently given, or the gods were classed as intermediate beings 
between men and ultimate (divine) being- Stoics of religious 
nature like Chrysippus expressed their attitude toward the funda- 
mental unity of the world in purely religious language. So far, 
then, as the wider spread of Greek religion is concerned, phi- 
losophy helped to break the local ties of the Greek gods without 
destroying the gods themselves, and further it made men even 
more ready to identify Greek gods with gods from other nations. 

Besides the internal changes in religion due to cosmopolitanism 
and to an ethical idealism, the introduction of foreign cults into 
Greece itself made some further changes Greece had never been 
hospitable to foreign worships, but it had always been susceptible, 
at times strangely susceptible, to their influence. An examination 
of the evidence fails to show any marked and widespread intro- 
duction of foreign worship in this period, except in the case of the 
worship of Isis. The "Mother of the Gods" from Asia Minor 
had found worshippers in Greece even during the fifth century; 
foreign residents in the Peiraeus continued to make much of this 
worship; and in the Peloponnese foreign rites were frequently 

276 

GREEK RELIGION 

introduced into the local worship of a similar goddess. Attis, 
who was so intimately connected with the Phrygian Mother, was 

also worshipped at the Pei- 
raeus 1 and at Patras ; but Attis 
was never adopted into Greek 
religion as into religion at 
Rome. The worship of 
Adonis was known at Athens 
in the fifth century B.C.. but 
it made little progress later. 2 
It was not till about 100 A.D. 
that the worship of Mithras 
was brought to Greece as to 
Rome. The worship of Isis, 
however, seems to have won 
considerable influence in 
Greece in the Hellenistic 
epoch. 

The ancient Egyptian Isis, 
the rain-giving heaven which 
was the mother of all things 
and in particular of the sun, 
was not wholly unknown in 
the Greek islands (*<g* $ Cyprus 
and Rhodes) in early times. 
When Alexander the Great 
founded Alexandria in Egypt, 
he made the worship of Isis 
prominent in the new city; 
and later this worship was en- 
riched by the rites of Serapis. Foreigners had been permitted to 
establish the worship of Isis at the Peiraeus as early as $3$ B.C. ; s 

1 C.f,A. II. 622; Pausanias, 7. 20. 3, cf. 7. 17. 9. 

3 Aristophanes, Lys. 389; Plutarch, Alcibiadtx, 18, p. 200. 

* Dittenberger, Syllcge, 551. 

Fig. 71. — Fcoure of Isis with 

SlSTRON 

THE OUTCOME OF GREEK RELIGION 277 

under the Ptolemies Athenian citizens welcomed the new worship 
and there remains abundant evidence of the hold it obtained. A 
shrine of Serapis near the Prytaneurn, an altar in the precinct of 
Asclepius, a shrine of Isis on the south slope of the Acropolis, votive 
offerings to these gods and inscriptions mentioning their priests, 
coins, and reliefs, especially reliefs representing Athenian women 
with the attributes of Isis, all testify to the importance of this re- 
ligion from the third century on. 1 In the Aegean islands the in- 
fluence of the Ptolemies and of the Isis religion was even more 
marked. At Tithorea there was an important centre of the Isis 
mysteries where only those were received to whom the goddess 
had revealed herself in a dream. 9 In the rest of Eoeotia, in the 
vicinity of Corinth, and at many points in the Peloponnese, the 
worship of Isis found a ready reception — the more ready because 
the Greeks recognized in her a form of one of their own gods. 

Occasionally Isis as a goddess of the heavens was identified with 
Selene or with Io; sometimes she was recognized as Hera, the 
queen of the gods, or as Hygieia, the goddess of health; among 
her functions was the protection of women in childbirth and the 
power to stir the heart with love, functions which to the Greek 
meant Aphrodite ; but more commonly she was a goddess of the 
mysteries, an Egyptian form of Demeter. The reception of Isis as 
a form of Demeter was the more natural because the two goddesses 
touched at many points. Isis, like Demeter, had become a goddess 
of the fertile earth and of the grain which it produced ; Isis and 
Serapis were gods of the world of souls ; and the symbols of De- 
meter, cista and basket and torches and serpents, early had found 
a place in the worship of Isis. Near Hermione, an old centre of 
Demeter worship, it is said that the mysteries of Demeter were 
celebrated in the precinct of an Isis temple. 8 Apuleius 4 describes 
as much as he deems right of the initiation into the mysteries of 

iMilchhoefer, Sehriftguellen zvr Topographic von Atken, xxxv, xxxix ; Jour* 
HeU. Stud. (1889), Plate 77, EE, 9-xo ; Von Sybel, Ath. Mitth. 8 (1883) 26. 
s Pausanias, 10. 3a. 13. * Pausanias, a. 34. xo. 

* Afe/amorpAoses, ix. 16 f. 

278 GREEK RELIGION 

Isis. The bath by the priests with prayers to the goddess, the in- 
struction in sacred rules of life, with the abstinence from meat and 
wine during the period of initiation, the investing of the candidate 
with a mystic robe and crown of palm leaves, the vision of the 
image of Isis which only the initiated might see, and the " birth- 
day feast" with which the ceremonies ended — all were imposing 
rites calculated to impress an age which demanded some new and 
more effective means of coming into connection with the divine. 
The higher mysteries of Isis were the more esteemed because they 
were not, like the Eleusinian mysteries, open to every class in 
society ; they were designed to appeal to men of culture and edu- 
cation, and they were too expensive for the lower classes. The 
hold which they rapidly gained was no doubt due mainly to the 
nature of this personal appeal. The universal character of the 
Isis religion, which seemed to sum up in itself the contents of 
other forms of worship and the other gods, was a second factor in 
its success. But perhaps the most important factor was the organ- 
ized priesthood which carried forward the new religion. These 
were the same factors which had been present at the end of the 
sixth century in the Orphic movement. But the Greece" of the 
third and second centuries b.c. quite lacked the nascent life of 
Greece in the sixth century and the religion of Isis never attained 
either the direct or the indirect influence which must be assigned 
to Orphism. 1 Still it was an important element in religion through 
all the Greek world for several centuries ; it was the most im- 
portant competitor of Christianity in Egypt and in Rome; and 
through the Gnostic sect it made its power felt by Christianity. 

The internal changes in Greek religion at this time, as we have 
pointed out, were (i) the increased importance assigned to ethical 
ideals, until philosophy might take the place of religion for many 
minds, (2) the readiness to see new interpretations of the old 
gods or to identify them with gods worshipped elsewhere, and (3) 

1 On the religion of Isis see further the articles by E. Meyer and Drexler in 
Rose her 's Lexikon, and Schoemann, GrUch. Alt. a. 416 and 554. 

THE OUTCOME OF GREEK RELIGION 279 

the introduction of at least one foreign type of religion to meet 
needs which traditional rites did not satisfy. At the same time 
the old forms of worship were scrupulously observed as part of 
that heritage which Greece learned to prize the more as men saw 
how it was prized by other peoples- The spread of Greek religion 
throughout the eastern world was largely an outcome of the same 
causes which produced these changes, while at the same time the 
new, cosmopolitan character of Teligion was a condition of its 
extension. To the character of Alexander, however, and to the 
avowed policy of many of his successors, the continued importance 
of the old religion may be attributed. 

The accounts of Alexander represent him as devoted to all the 
forms of Greek religion no less than Xenophon himself. 1 His 
marvellous escapes in battle he assigned to special divine protec- 
tion (to 0«?ov). The regular sacrifices (kolto. v6fuw) f divination before 
a battle and thank-offerings after special successes, are repeatedly 
mentioned byArrian. Alexander's realistic belief in the world of 
myth is evinced by his conduct at Ilium and at Nysa. At Ilium 
he worshipped before the tombs of Achilles and Protesilaus, while 
in the temple of Athena he exchanged his armor for ancient 
weapons that had been consecrated to the goddess and thereafter 
caused these weapons to be borne before him in battle. 2 Mt. 
Meros near Nysa, the supposed scene of Dionysus's birth, he as- 
cended with his companions to engage in Bacchic rites on this 
holy soil. 3 In every foreign country he engaged in the local wor- 
ship and caused the temples to be preserved or rebuilt. When he 
founded Alexandria in Egypt, he paid special attention to the gods 
and the establishment of their worship. One of the striking 
scenes in his career was the great banquet at Opis/ where Mace- 
donians, Persians, and representatives of other nations, nine thou- 
sand in all, joined in one great libation under the guidance of 
Greek seers, while Alexander prayed for every good and harmony 
and a peaceful rule by Greeks and Persians together. The reli- 

1 Cf . p. 269, supra. * Arrian, 5. a. 5 f. 

»Arrian, 1. xx.yL * Arrian, 7. 11. 8. 

280 GREEK RELIGION 

gious nature of Alexander is seen in his request that his mother 
send him a cook skilled in sacrifices, to which Olympias responded 
as follows : M Receive Pelignas, the cook, from your mother ; for 
he understands all the hereditary sacrifices of our family, and all 
the orgiastic and Bacchic rites which Olympias is wont to perform, 
these too he understands." ' 

It is hardly necessary to add that a man who kept with him in 
his campaigns the manuscript of the Iliad worshipped the Olym- 
pian gods and shared foreign rites only because he regarded foreign 
divinities as forms of the Olympian gods (OtoKpao-ia) * As Philip 
had protected Delphi, and recognized the place of the Greek re- 
ligion in the common inheritance of Greece, so it was this same 
religion which Alexander carried with him and planted wherever 
he went. 

The policy of Alexander was continued by his successors, though 
with varying interest. The Ptolemies in Egypt kept up most 
friendly relations with the ancient temples and their priests, but 
without committing themselves to any reactionary movement. On 
the other hand, the international worship of Adonis at Alexandria, 
a worship for Egyptians, Semites, and Greeks alike, was established 
with great pomp. To this epoch also belongs the worship of Ser- 
apis "(Sarapis) 3 . A dream of Ptolemy Lagi was interpreted by 
Timotheus, a Greek priest from Lteusis, to demand the introduc- 
tion of this cult. The image of a god of the underworld (Pluto, 
accompanied by Cerberus and a serpent) was fetched from Sinope 
on the Pontus, only to be identified with Serapis (a form of Osiris) 
and worshipped with Isis. The earlier temple of Isis and Serapis 
was torn down to make way for a splendid Serapeum, and Serapis 
became the most important god of Alexandria. 

The attitude of the Seleucidae toward local forms of religion 
was less consistent, but they pursued the definite policy of intro- 
ducing Greek worship as such. Along with the Greek drama, 

1 Athenaeus, 14. 78. p. 659 F. 

2 Cp. Plutarch, /V Alextwdri Jortuna, 5, p. 328. 

*Cp. p. 276- The name has been interpreted as Osiris-apis m 

THE OUTCOME OF GREEK RELIGION 281 

Greek philosophy, and Greek rhetoric, an Olympian festival was 
introduced into Antioch 1 and the worship of the Greek gods was 
enforced, e.g. by Antiochus Epiphanes. The Greek myth of 
Daphne and Apollo was localized at Antioch and a large, well- 
watered grove became the centre of the most important worship 
in all this region.* But the great work of the Seleucidae was to 
continue Alexander's policy of hellenizing the East ; and where- 
ever they carried Greek civilization, they introduced the Greek 
gods or grafted their worship on to rites already existing. 

Thus it came about that Greek religion, which was essentially 
local by nature, came to be almost a " world -religion." The uni- 
versalizing influence of myth was a necessary prerequisite ; Delphi 
and Olympia had helped toward this end ; the old local and 
national ties had been weakened ; and when a power that was 
only half Greek became the mediator between Hellenism and the 
eastern world, religious forms were so much a part of Greek culture 
that they too were widely distributed through that world. It is 
true that the worship of the gods kept much of that sectional form 
which had always been its characteristic. Whenever an old cult 
was hellenized or a Greek cult newly established, it stood inde- 
pendent of any outside organization, like the earlier shrines in 
Greece. The fact remains that for a rather brief period the reli- 
gion of the eastern world was (at least nominally) Greek religion. 

It was the power of Rome and soon the power of early Christian- 
ity which completely ended the forces that had produced this state 
of affairs. Yet no great factor in civilization, least of all the reli- 
gious belief and worship of ancient Greece, has passed away and 
left no mark on the later world. Through its effect on the dif- 
ferent phases of Hellenism, particularly through its influence on 
Roman religion and through its more subtle influence on Chris- 
tianity, Greek religion had set in motion forces which are still 

operative. 

2. The Influence of Greek Religion on Roman Religion. — 
In the preceding section the outcome of Greek religion has been 

1 Libanius. p. 364. a Strabo, 16. p. 750. 

282 GREEK RELIGION 

traced, as it spread with other phases of Greek civilization east- 
ward through all the regions that had been included in Alexan- 
der's empire. The influence of Greek religion in the west was 
felt at a much earlier period, but it was not until the third century 
B.c. that it began to dominate religious belief and practice in 
Rome itself. The religion of the Roman empire was quite as 
much Greek as Roman, and through Rome the Greek gods be- 
came an integral factor of later European civilization. Again, the 
influence of Greek religion directly and indirectly on Christianity 
was very great. Of the various factors which determined the 
early development of Christianity in matters of ritual, of the- 
ology, and of organization, probably no one was more important 
than Greek religion, nor can any return to primitive Christianity, 
so-called pure Christianity, entirely cut out elements from this 
source. The concluding sections of this historical sketch of 
Greek religion will treat these two streams of influence, eventually 
uniting in one, through which the religion of Greece has continued 
to make its power felt even up to the present day. 

The first wave of Greek influence in Rome dates back to the 
period of the later kings and the earlier years of the Republic. 1 
At a still earlier date some of the Greek gods had come to be 
worshipped by the Etruscans ; and when the worship of Hercules 
in Rome by people from Tibur, or the worship of the Dioscuri by 
people from Tusculum, won recognition as part of the worship of 
the Roman state, these cults were not felt to be Greek, nor even 
foreign. On the other hand, the series of Greek cults introduced 
early in the fifth century at the instance of the Sibylline hooks 
were felt to be foreign. With the new duties assigned to the 
plebs came some new privileges, and over against the old worship 
of the patricians the state assigned a place to forms of worship 
in which all members of the state had a larger part. The story 
of the Cumaean Sibyl who offered Tarquin nine books of oracles, 
then six, and finally sold him three books for the price originally 

* Cp. Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Khmer, in I. Mailer's Handbuck ; and 
A ust. Die Religion der Romer, 1899. 

THE OUTCOME OF GREEK RELIGION 283 

asked for the whole collection, is familiar to all. Apparently the 
worship of Apollo was introduced from Cumae at the end of the 
sixth century, though his first temple in the prala Flaminia was 
not erected till 433 b.c. The worship of Demeter, Dionysus, and 
Persephone, under the Latin names of Ceres, Liber, and Libera, 
was established at about the same time ; and their temple in the 
Campus Martius was erected in 493 B.C. To the same set of 
influences was due the worship of Hermes as Mercury (from 
mercari), the god of trade, to whom a temple was erected in 
495 B.C., and the Greek cults of Hercules and of Neptune. None 
of these cults were admitted within the pomerium, and the forms 
of worship were felt to be foreign ; although the names (except 
Apollo) were Latin, the nature of the gods was not Latin but 
Greek. In the case of Ceres, Liber, and Libera, the connection 
with the plebs is clearly marked, nor is it unnatural that outside 
influences should be felt through other elements of the population 
than the old aristocracy. 

During the fifth and fourth centuries B.C. we hear of no more 
Greek cults established in Rome ; yet again and again, in time of 
calamity, the state had recourse to the Greek ritual of the leeti- 
siernium under the direction of the Sibylline books. 1 Processions 
went about the city crowned with the laurel of Apollo, great sac- 
rifices were offered, the temples, ordinarily accessible only to 
priests, were thrown open to the public, and a banquet was spread 
to three pairs of gods (Apollo-Latona, Hercules-Diana, Mercury- 
Neptune). The gods themselves were represented by draped 
wooden figures, reclining on couch and pillow at the banquet pre- 
pared for them. During this period, also, many temples were 
erected to the older and the newer gods, while games, dances, 
and even the drama came to have an important place in worship. 
But while Greek influence, no doubt, affected the worship of the 
old Roman gods, a sharp line was drawn between the native gods 
and those introduced from Greek cities ; the locality of the 
worship was different, the personnel in charge of the worship 

* Cp. Diels, SibylUnisch* Bl&tter. 1890. 

284 GREEK RELIGION 

was quite distinct, and the ritual of the two types of worship 
was by no means the same. 

In the third century other Greek cults were introduced into 
Rome, the cult of Aesculapius (Asclepius) on the island in the 
Tiber, the cult of Hades and Persephone, at the Am Diiis et 
J^roserpinae in Tarenio (in the Campus Martius), and still later 
the cult of Venus Erycina on the Esquiline. These cults, like the 
lectisternium, were introduced to secure relief in time of dire 
calamity, and the immediate reason for recourse to such means of 
relief was supposedly found in the Sibylline books. 

During the last two centuries of the Republic the pressure of 
Greek influence became so strong that in religion, as in literature, 
in art, and in philosophy, Roman traditions gave way before it. 
Neither tirade nor the example of men like Cato, nor the use of 
force, as in banishing philosophers, was sufficient to stem the 
tide. During the second Punic war, the direct demand for divine 
help broke down all barriers; Greek rites of propitiation were 
performed on a large scale ; to the old Roman gods, as to gods 
more recently introduced, worship was offered in the Greek man- 
ner, in the hope that efficient aid might be secured from them in 
one way if not in another. Such a change was possible only be- 
cause the hold of the ancient religion was gone ; the fact remains 
that, to a considerable degree, Greek forms of worship had sup- 
planted Roman forms of worship to Roman gods and in Rome 
itself. At the same time, the result of the change was in a 
measure nullified, for Roman worship could not have been 
changed if religion had continued to be a strong factor in the life 
of the people. 

The demand of the times for more potent means of securing 
divine aid would not, in itself, have caused the introduction of 
Greek ritual rather than other eastern ritual, however great the 
authority of the Sibylline books, had not other influences been at 
work in the same direction. Greek art and Greek literature had 
found their way to Rome. "The poets, who were admired and 
imitated, based their work on belief in the Greek gods; the 

THE OUTCOME OF GREEK RELIGION 2S5 

works of art, with which temples, palaces, and public places were 
adorned, represented Greek ideals, ordinarily ideals of the Greek 
gods. It was impossible to speak Greek without exchanging 
Greek and I.aiin names for the gods, without confusing old 
Roman gods with the gods of Homer. Greek poetry could not 
be transplanted to Rome without bringing in its train Greek 
mythology. It was impossible to think of the gods in the form 
in which Pheidias and Praxiteles had represented them for their 
countrymen, without involuntarily replacing the old Roman idea 
of their nature with the Greek idea." 1 From Livius Andronicus 
on, the Roman gods were endowed with Greek myths in Latin 
poetry, and the drama made these conceptions familiar to the 
people. At the same time Roman temples were furnished with 
Greek images of the gods. Naturally, the old line of division 
between Greek ritual and Roman ritual could no longer be 
kept up. 

Consequently when Julius Caesar encouraged the worship of the 
goddess of the Julian gcns 9 it was not the Venus of Ardea, but a 
Greek Venus to whom he erected a temple. The patron of the 
empire of Augustus, the Palatine Apollo, was the Greek god who 
for nearly five centuries had been worshipped at Rome outside the 
pomerium. And when Augustus undertook to revive the old 
Roman religion, its texture was so shot through with Greek threads 
that it was quite as much a Greek as a Roman religion which he 
encouraged. 

3. Greek Religion and Christianity. — The influence of Greek 
religion on Christianity is more complex and many sided than its 
influence on the religion of Rome. In this sketch one can only 
suggest (1) the persistence of Greek gods and Greek rites in 
Eastern Christianity, (2) the direct influence of Greek theological 
thought on Christian belief, and (3) the indirect but none the less 
permeating influence of Greek ritual on the very plastic ritual of 
the early church. 

That in Greece itself ancient rites should persist under cover of 

1 Zetler. Vortroge urtd Abhandlungen, a. 105. 

286 GREEK RELIGION 

the new religion, and that ancient deities or heroes should reappear 
as Christian saints, is hardly surprising to one who considers the 
summary method by which Christianity became the established 
religion. It was not so difficult to make the Parthenon a Christian 
church when the virgin goddess of wisdom was supplanted first by 
a St. Sophia (Wisdom), then by the Virgin Mary. Similarly Apollo 
was more than once supplanted by St. George, Poseidon by St. 
Nicholas the patron of sailors, Asclepius by St. Michael and St. 
Damian, and in grottoes where nymphs had been worshipped 
female saints received similar worship from the same people. 1 It 
is suggested that the smaller metropolitan church at Athens, a 
church dedicated to St. Eleutherius, has replaced an ancient wor- 
ship of Eileithyia ; in any case women seek the aid of this saint in 
childbirth. 2 Where the ancient Greeks said, " Zeus rains," and re- 
garded the thunderbolt as the weapon of Zeus, to-day men say, 
" God rains," and speak of the thunderbolt as his weapon. 8 That 
Dionysus should reappear as St. Dionysius, giver of the vine to 
Naxos, that Paul should take the place of Heracles as the person 
who freed Crete from noxious beasts, that Cretan legend even tells 
of a Christian Bellerophon, St. Niketas, who rides through the air 
on a horse with white wings, is perhaps more interesting than 
significant. 

But to one who has been present when some old Greek rite has 
been celebrated by Christian priests, the persistence of the old 
religion is most vividly presented. Along with the bread and wine 
of the communion service, there may be found at times a KoKvf3a f 
a cake specially prepared from different kinds of grain, which is 
brought to the church and eaten with greetings from each man to 
his neighbor after some crumbs have been scattered inside the 
altar rail. 4 The irav^ir€pp.ia is made of different grains and seeds 
and eaten at the sowing time, apparently as at the ancient Athenian 

* B. Schmidt. Das Vol&rfeben. der NeugrUchtn* 46; Rouse, Greek Votive Offer' 

"W*. 37-38- 

* Rouse, ibid. 237. n. 1. • B. Schmidt, ibid. 33. 
4 B. Schmidt, ibid. 56. 

THE OUTCOME OF GREEK RELIGION 

287 

Proerosia. 1 Votive offerings in Greek churches to-day beara strik- 
ing resemblance to those "once offered in Greek temples.* It is 
said that in some parts of the Cyclades a coin for Charon is still 

Fig. 72. — Athenian Black-fioureo Vase Paintinu (Loutrophoros from 

Cape Col i as) 

The loutrophoros is pictured as a grave monument on top of a tumulus with 

a mourner on either side. 

placed in the mouth of the dead, and that a century ago the prac- 
tice was widespread. Oftentimes an apple or some food is buried 

1 B. Schmidt, ibid. 61. 

*B. Schmidt, ibid.jo\ Rouse, Creek Votive Offerings, passim. 

288 GREEK RELIGION 

with the dead, or a vase is broken at the grave, and the corpse 
of an unmarried girl receives the wedding crown to-day, just as in 
ancient Athens the marriage to Hades was symbolized by the 
loutrophoros (the vase in which the wedding bath was fetched). 
How far the modern processions and festivals (jrtxvyrfupux) are the 
outcome of Greek festivals it is not easy to say, though when the 
TTtLvijyvftt takes place annually at some small chapel in the country, 
there is occasionally evidence that an old hero-worship is being 
perpetuated. Certainly the Greek Easter festival seems to pre- 
serve the spirit if not the forms of the old Eleusinian worship. 1 In 
the spring, those who had shared Demeter's grief for the loss of 
her daughter welcomed the return of Persephone with all the joy 
that the returning Life of vegetation might kindle. And to-day the 
Greeks mourn over the dead Christ, represented most realistically 
by a wax image borne through the streets on a bier; then at mid- 
night before Easter Sunday the Metropolitan at Athens, the priest 
in smaller towns, comes out of the church announcing that Christ 
is risen ; the light from his candle is passed to the candles of his 
companions and on to candles throughout the crowd, guns and 
firecrackers are discharged, and as they prepare to break their 
Lenten fast the multitude drop all restraint in the expression of 
wild joy. 

A far more important effect of Greek religion on Christianity, 
in that it was by no means limited to Greece or to the Eastern 
Church, was due to the direct influence of Greek philosophy on 
Christian belief.* This matter deserves to be considered from 
the standpoint of Greek religion, not merely from the standpoint 
of Greek philosophy, for the philosophical ideas which come into 
play were based on the practices and beliefs of Greek religion; 
yet the present discussion will be very brief, for it is my purpose 
to point out the feet that Greek religions ideas bore new fruit in 
Christianity rather than to follow the process in any detail 

* B. Schmidt, ibid. 54 f.; Wachsmutb, Das alle Griechenland im neuen, 36 £ 

* Cp. Hatch, Hibbert Ltctures (1888). Lectures I. V, VII f. 

THE OUTCOME OF GREEK RELIGION 2S9 

It is perhaps necessary to note first that Greek philosophy pro- 
duced a remarkable and far-reaching change in the concept of 
what Christianity was. For Christianity came into the world not 
as a new theology, but as a new principle of conduct. The 
demand for "salvation," salvation from the emptiness of life as 
well as from its wickedness, was answered in Christianity by refer- 
ence to a person. In the words of Paul to the frightened jailer at 
Philippi, it said, " Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt 
be saved, and thy house." 1 But as Christianity was extended into 
the Greek world, it came into an environment totally different 
from that in Palestine. For centuries the Greeks had been 
developing the habit of speculating, of making definitions and 
laying down general principles, of testing a man's belief and prac- 
tice by the dogma of the philosophic schools. It will be shown 
later* that the doctrine of God had been no less carefully elaborated 
in the schools than the conception of the physical world and of the 
world of human conduct. Now in such an atmosphere it was 
inevitable, if Christianity was to meet the demand of the Greek 
world, that it should be recast in a new mould. The first effect 
of Greek philosophy on Christianity was the rise of the habit of 
speculating about the fundamentals of the new religion, and the 
consequent habit of regarding speculative creeds as the real test 
to determine the genuine adherents of Christianity. This most 
momentous change in all the history of Christianity might have 
taken place if Greek philosophy had never busied itself at all with 
matters of religion ; but inasmuch as philosophy had dealt for so 
long a time with Greek religion, the result was inevitable. 

There is no question that the manner in which this change took 
place was determined by the speculation which for centuries had 
been devoted to the concepts of Greek religion. In a word, the 
idea of God in Christian theology was developed in large measure 
from the idea of God formed by Greek thought as to the Greek 
gods. The Greek conception of the nature of God at this time 
laid emphasis on the unity of God, his personality, and his good- 

l Acts 26. 31. a Part III, Chap. iii. 

GKfcKK RELIGION 1 9 

290 GREEK RELIGION 

ness. The human, or superhuman, personality of the gods was 
nowhere more clearly grasped than in Greece, nor could any 
abstract philosophy entirely free itself from the prevalent belief 
of the people. But the unity of the world demanded a corre- 
sponding unity in God, as the poets first saw and the philosophers 
taught. The kindly nature of Father Zeus appeared clearly in 
Homer ; it was perhaps the logical outcome of this poetic feeling 
to identify God with the good and the perfect, when philosophy 
undertook to unify the moral ground of the universe with the 
source of all real existence. Such was the range of ideas which 
went to make up the definition of God in Christian theology. 

Again, the relation of God to the physical universe and to mind 
had long occupied Greek thought. Two fundamental facts, fate 
or destiny on the one hand, the providence of gods on the other, 
had always been recognized. The philosophical conception of 
one God raised questions as to the nature of matter and of evil, 
as to the immanence and transcendence of God, as to the relation 
of God to that process by which the world had come to be what 
it is. In order to bridge the connection between the supreme 
being and the world of sense, lesser spiritual beings, active divine 
ideas or a mediating Logos, were introduced between the two 
extremes. To explain the presence of evil under the government 
of a good God, it was assumed now that the good power was not 
all-controlling, now that evil was only a disguised form of good, or, 
again, it was accredited to human freedom. Thus a whole series 
of definitions and theories, developed out of Greek religion, were 
at hand ready to be applied to the Christian conception of God 
in his relation to the whole. The inner history of Christianity 
from the second to the fourth centuries was in the main a devel- 
opment of theology, in which the Greek idea of God that had 
been worked out by philosophy became fruitful for actual religion. 

Thirdly, an elaborate ritual was at the same time being developed 
in the new religion. And here again the forces at work were 
mainly Greek ; only that here there was no such intermediary as 

THE OUTCOME OF GREEK RELIGION 291 

philosophy, and the practices of religion could but gradually make 
their way across a hairier of intense hostility. 1 At the end of the 
first century the only ritual of Christianity was to be found in an 
extremely simple observance of the sacraments : the baptismal 
bath as the seal of entrance into the new kingdom, following a 
brief instruction as to the meaning of the new religion, and that 
common meal with special prayers foi blessing on the wine and 
the bread by which men commemorated the last meal of Jesus 
with his disciples- By the fifth century all this simplicity had 
given way to a long and richly developed ritual. Baptism took 
place once a year, just before Easter, on "that mystic night," 
apart from any profane eye. The candidates had undergone a 
long novitiate of fasting, during which evil had been exorcised by 
half-magical means, and preparation had been made for the gift 
of new life- They came to the baptistry ungirded, without adorn- 
ment, with bare feet, the women with their hair loosed — in Jerusa- 
lem, if not elsewhere, with veiled countenance and covered eyes. 
The water baptism, which symbolized purification from evil, was 
followed by an anointing with oil to symbolize the gift of the 
Holy Spirit. Then they came to the church which was ablaze 
with light, wearing garments of pure white linen, crowns on their 
heads, and candles or torches in their hands, and here at their first 
mass they received a mixture of honey and milk to drink instead 
of wine. Baptism was called the " dress of immortality," a in that 
it was supposed to confer on men the eternal life ; consequently it 
was often postponed until late in life when death and the next 
world seemed near at hand. Naturally these rites were more 
developed in some places than in others, but the general practice 
is covered by this statement. 

Thus it appears the purpose of baptism, as of the Greek mys- 
teries, was to assure blessedness in another world. Its direct 
result was not the forgiveness of sins, but rather the removal of 

1 Cp. Hatch, HMcrt Lectures (1888), Lecture X; and particularly Anrichs, 
Dos antike MysUricmvesen in seittem Einfluss an f das Chrtstentum % 1894. 

* Basil, Ep. 39a, ad Pallad. (33, 1033), quoted by Anrichs, 181. 

292 GREEK RELIGION 

evil and the introduction of a better nature. The preparation for 
baptism had been made like the preparation for the mysteries, in 
that a considerable period was set aside as a novitiate in which 
purification, in particular purification from evil spirits, played an 
important part. And the rite itself had much in common with 
the initiation into the mysteries — its secrecy, the absence of any- 
thing like ornament, the veiled face, then the white linen garments 
and crowns and torches with the drink of honey and milk — the 
rite had become for the Greek an initiation, and it was frequently 
referred to by this name. 1 

The Lord's Supper also came to be called a mystery {<fx>f3cp&v 
pwTTiqpiov) as the result of the same set of influences. At a rela- 
tively early date a sharp line was drawn between the baptized and 
the unbaptized catechumens, for " eternal guilt " attached to those 
who partook of the Lord's Supper without due initiation ; later 
there came to be degrees among the initiated themselves, as in 
the Greek mysteries. Next, the table on which the elements 
were placed was called an altar (Ovmao-rqptov) and the elements 
themselves were called ^.wrTjJpwt. Finally such words as "hierarch" 
{leptxpxv?) ^ or tne Christian priests, and *' enlightened vision " 
(i7ro*pujL) of sacred things, are taken over from the mysteries, and 
the transformation of the sacrament into a Greek mystery is all but 
complete. 2 

Thus the I-ord's Supper, like baptism, assured one of blessed- 
ness in a future life ; indeed, it came to be called an "antidote for 
death," 3 a ** viaticum mortis," Its magical power to impart the 
resurrection life was explained by the real presence of the Lord in 
the wine and in the bread ; just as the divine life was shared by 
those who took part in such mysteries as those at Eleusis. Both 
the purpose of the rite and the means for securing this purpose 
had come to be very much the same as in the mysteries of Greek 
religion. 

1 Cp. Hatch. Hibbert Lectures (1888), 396. 

a Cp. Dionysius Areop. Eccles, eVier. 3. r, i f p. 187 f., quoted by Hatch, Hibbert 
Lectures (1888), p. 304. * Ignatius. Ad Ephes. ao. 2. 

THE OUTCOME Ol GREER RELIGION 293 

How such a change could take place when all the time a life- 
and-death struggle was going on between the old and the new 
religion is a question that does not concern us here. It is suffi- 
cient to point out that the change was very gradual, and that it 
could only have taken place on the unconscious assumption that 
" religion " meant the rites and conceptions which had been 
familiar to the Greek mind for centuries, while " Christian 
religion" meant a new content in the old form. The important 
fact for the student of Greek religion is that this religion was not 
blotted out by Christianity. On the contrary, whatever real life it 
had was perpetuated in Christianity, since the conquering religion 
had adopted many of its forms and some of the old content in these 
forms. In the centuries which followed much of this Greek ele- 
ment in Christianity was forgotten or forcibly removed ; yet much 
still remains, a permanent contribution to what claimed to be a 
world religion, " where there is neither Jew nor Greek. . . .* " 

lj£p. Colossians^. 1 1. 

PART III 

RELIGION AND OTHER PHASES OF LIFE 

IN GREECE 

CHAPTER I 
RELIGION IN RELATION TO ART AND LITERATURE 

1. The General Connection of Art and Religion. — In the earlier 
parts of this work the forms of Greek worship and belief have 
been studied, and the attempt has been made to sketch the lines 
of development for Greek religion. It still remains to consider 
its relation to other social forces ; one must know its relation 
to art and literature in Greece, to morals and government, to phi- 
losophy ; and in conclusion one may ask again how far Greek 
religion deserves really to be regarded as a form of religion. From 
this point of view the facts already presented require some further 
discussion even at the risk of occasional repetition. 

Neither in the early days of Puritan New England at the one 
extreme, nor in ancient Greece at the other, can religion and art 
be regarded as wholly independent of each other. They are in 
truth two of the ways by which man seeks to adjust himself to the 
world in which he lives. As by science he interprets it in terms 
of physical law, so rn art he is interpreting it in terms of his sense 
for beauty ; and it is this same world which becomes intelligible, 
sympathetic, practicable, through his relation to the gods and 
through their worship. Among other peoples religious develop- 
ment has been largely determined, now by ethical demands, now 
by its relation to science and philosophy, rather than by the sense 
for beauty. In Greece art and literature were the means by which 

294 

RELATION TO ART AND LITERATURE 295 

men best laid hold of universal principles of truth and stated them 
for the eye to see or for the ear to hear. In music and poetry, in 
the dance, in the drama, as in sculpture and painting, it was some 
great fact of human life, often a fact understood to be religious, 
which gave to art its meaning. The effort of the artist for creative 
expression in form to be grasped by the senses is in contrast with 
the attempt of religion to deal directly with the spiritual and the 
ideal. But where, as in Greece, art was the one fullest expression 
for man's sense of the ideal, it necessarily was potent to shape 
religious thought and practice. 

In a Christian service, held in some cathedral which centuries 
of art have labored to make beautiful, carried on with all the 
splendor of color and form, of tone and harmony, which Christian 
tradition has received at the hands of art, it is not easy to distin- 
guish between the appreciation of beauty and the feeling of reli- 
gious devotion. It was not at all easier to distinguish between the 
two emotions at a religious festival in the time of Pericles. The 
festival held the people because its forms and associations were 
supremely beautiful. Religious lyric and the drama, like music 
and the dance, were an actual part of worship. The house in 
which the spirit of the god found a home, its painted and sculp- 
tured ornaments, the votive offerings, the image of the god, 
formed the contribution of plastic art to religious worship. At 
every point sensitiveness to beauty of line and form and move- 
ment made its imperative demand on the worshipper. Little won- 
der, then, that enjoyment of the beautiful was so blended with 
pious devotion that no line can be drawn to separate them. If 
this is what is meant by a " worship of beauty/* that somewhat 
ambiguous phrase might be applied to Greek religion. 1 

The fact remains that the Greeks did not directly worship any 
abstract conception of beauty, although their religion in the whole 
history of its development was determined by aesthetic influences. 
It was inevitable that the forms of worship should be modified in 
accordance with the nature of the worshippers to satisfy the spirit- 

* In the same sense Hebrew religion might be termed a "worship of holiness." 

296 GREEK RELIGION 

ual need which they felt. Objects of worship, also, were brought 
within the sphere of art ; images of the gods became the highest 
expression of the sculptor's power, and in time their divine beauty 
filled religion with a deeper meaning for the worshipper. Because 
the Athenian of the fifth century B.C. felt the power of invisible 
forces mainly through art, the gods assumed visible forms, gracious 
wisdom was seen in an Athena of Pheidias„ and the modest charm 
of love in an Aphrodite by Alcamenes. The fifth century in 
Athens was a unique point in the history of religion, in that truly 
spiritual ideals, which were active in worship and belief, had not 
passed beyond the stage when they could be adequately expressed 
in concrete artistic form. Up to this time the gods had been too 
vague and indefinite, later the highest thought of the gods became 
too spiritual for such expressions; for a brief period high spirit- 
ual forces were conceived as gods who could be represented for 
human vision and with whom men could hold social converse. It 
was a passing moment, for such gods must yield to the analyzing 
touch of reason. 

2. The Influence of Religion on Art and Literature. — In the 
preceding section on the history of religion in Greece the evi- 
dence of contemporary literature was considered at each step, on 
the ground that the reflection of religious ideals in literature was 
the most important record of that history. The testimony of 
painting and the plastic arts is hardly less important, though it 
bears rather on the nature of the religion than on the question of 
its historical development. The influence of religion on literature 
and on art may be considered from three points of view. 

i. In the first place religion furnished the theme, not to say 
the content, for art and for literature. The conception of the 
particular god, already outlined in worship and in story, was the 
greatest conceivable theme for the sculptor; he could modify 
details, he could put more meaning into the conception as it 
reached him, but it was his task to represent for the worshippers a 
Zeus or, it might be, an Apollo. Fot temple decoration the stories 
of gods and giants, Lapiths and centaurs, Greeks and Amazons, 

RELATION TO ART AND LITERATURE 297 

or some such local myth as that of the contest of Athena, invaria- 
bly furnished the artist's theme. For literature from Homer on, 
this principle is true in only less degree. The divine world is as 
real for the epic as is the battlefield before Troy or the court 
of Odysseus at Ithaca. In the Theogony of Hesiod, in the reli- 
gious lyric or the epinician ode, more than all in the drama, the 
real theme is religious and the content is in large measure derived 
from the stories which had grown up around gods and heroes. 

2. Again, religious worship furnished the occasion which de- 
manded the aid of art and literature. It was the religious festival 
which called for dance and music and lyric poetry to make its 
appeal truly effective for a people like the Greeks. Though not 
very much is known of the religious lyric proper, the choral odes 
still extant bear clear evidence of the religious gatherings for which 
they were written. In the case of the drama the religious origin 
and the persisting religious meaning are self-evident- Performed 
at a festival of Dionysus, beside his temple, in the presence of his 
altar and his priest, tragedy and comedy are the natural response 
to that Greek demand for the enrichment of worship by art. Nor 
should it be forgotten that the Athenians pressed the epic into 
this same service, making it enrich the festivals of Athena, as con- 
tests of lyric poetry enriched the festivals of Apollo, and the drama 
those of Dionysus, This demand on the part of religion was even 
more a directing force for the visual arts. Architecture was essen- 
tially the art of building temples, for here first was felt the need 
of noble buildings. Earlier Greek sculpture in the round was 
concerned for the most part with athletic types and other statues 
of human beings, made, to be sure, for dedication to the gods. 
IJut when, after some mastery of material had been gained, social 
and political changes created the demand for temple statues that 
should express with untrammelled freedom the highest conception 
of the gods, sculpture speedily attained its highest point of excel- 
lence. The demand ceased at length, statues of the gods were 
made primarily for decorative purposes, and art lagged without the 
religious impulse. 

298 GREEK RELIGION 

3- Thirdly, the influence of religion on art and literature was 
important in that it furnished a different point of view for the 
treatment of any theme which might be undertaken. It was char- 
acteristic of the Greek artist that he sought to express the great 
truths of human life in his achievements. This ageless, timeless 
quality in painting or sculpture or poetry finds a double method 
of expression, directly in its treatment of men, their experiences 
and relations, indirectly in its treatment of the gods. Sometimes it 
appears almost that the gods are the abstract ideals themselves, 
that Zeus is justice, Athena wisdom, and Aphrodite love. In 
decorative sculpture on temples and public buildings, in the great 
paintings which include the gods, on gems and painted vases with 
religious scenes, the subject is rightly termed " religious ; " yet the 
underlying meaning of the artist's work is some principle of human 
life which in these instances he has expressed through the person 
of the gods. Similarly Greek myths, especially when they were 
taken up into poetry, became a vehicle for the expression of human 
truth in a divine world. The personal character of the gods, their 
relations to each other and to men constitute this divine world. 
In such a world or society on a higher than human plane the 
problems of human life are presented in another light ; the aims, 
the struggles, and the laws of human existence are treated from 
a different standpoint. Oftentimes the divine world serves as a 
sort of background which gives man's daily life its proper setting, 
a background which throws out in higher relief both its evanes- 
cence and its real greatness. Elsewhere than in Greece the 
supreme reality of religion has often been emphasized at the cost 
of reality in man's daily life, or again the life of to-day has over- 
shadowed the divine world ; in Greece gods and men were won- 
derfully blended in one social universe. It is natural then that in 
Greece the same fundamental truths of life should be presented by 
the artist now from the standpoint of men, now from the stand- 
point of the gods- It is natural that here religion should furnish 
not only the theme and the occasion for the artist, but also a world 
in which human truth should find new and effective expression. 

RELATION TO ART AND LITERATURE 299 

3. The Influence of Art and Literature on Religion. — If now we 
turn to the other side of the question and consider the influence 
of art and literature on religion, the connection is no less apparent. 1 
In the outline of the history of religion in Greece the universalizing 
influences of poetry and in particular of the epic have been consid- 
ered. Because the epic bard selected for his song those ideas 
and practices which had universal meaning, whatever influence he 
had was exerted to mould singular or local types of religion in the 
direction of one general type. In less degree lyric poetry and the 
drama and prose literature neglected the particular for the general 
in their treatment of religious themes. Even what was written for 
one city like Athens, or for one shrine like Delphi, because it 
adopted in a measure this general standpoint, helped to spread the 
conceptions of religion in a form that was universally understood. 
The effect of art in this direction was more limited. Yet since 
it was the mission of Greek art to grasp what was universal in its 
theme, even in a statue or a painting made for the shrine of local 
worship, the particular local features of the subject were forced 
into the background. Products of the lesser arts, like gems, seal- 
rings, coins, metal utensils, embossed metal decoration, or painted 
pottery, were not made for any one locality ; inevitably religious 
subjects were given a general treatment, in which form they were 
circulated. The Athena head on coins of Corinth or of Athens, 
the head of Hera on coins of Argos, the temple of Apollo or the 
figure of Apollo on coins of Delphi, carried with them all over Greece 
these types of the gods until they became a national possession. 

In connection with this universalizing influence of art and 
literature the tendency to omit or modify what is unpleasing 
in religion goes with the tendency to set aside what is purely 
local in its meaning. As for myth, it is not difficult to trace 
the process by which the ugly and the revolting yield to the 
demands of the aesthetic sense. Conservative as is religious 
practice, yet the demand that beauty and propriety be present 

1 Cp. M Literary Influence in the Development of Greek Religion/" Biblical 
World (1896). 094 £ 

3 oo GREEK RELIGION 

exerts a constant pressure on the traditional forms of worship. 
The development of the drama is the one most striking example 
of the requirement that religious practice conform to an aesthetic 
ideal. In all forms of worship, however, what offends a trained 
taste gradually disappears before the orderly, dignified, more 
beautiful practices of a cultivated people. And in the concep- 
tions which go with worship the negative effect of the aesthetic 
sense, throwing into the background or cutting out elements of 
barbarism, ever pursues the natural conservatism of religious 
thought. The result is that old, unbeautiful forms of religion 
remain in a city like Athens only when some peculiar potency 
is attached to them. 

Apart from the somewhat general points thus far considered, 
the effect of art and literature on religion in the case of a 
people sensitive to their influence was inevitably so to modify 
religion that it should make a strong aesthetic appeal. This 
tendency may be traced along several different lines. In the 
first place the one most striking characteristic of Greek religion, 
its human gods and humanized worship, is both the result of 
aesthetic influences and a means through which religion appealed 
to the sense of the beautiful. The transformation of the vague 
powers once worshipped into actual gods, followed different lines 
among different nations. In Greece art and literature combined 
to define the gods as human in their nature ; their greatness 
was limited to what the poetic imagination could grasp, their 
vagueness yielded to the demand for concrete form, and the 
form was inevitably human. The humanizing of the gods repre- 
sents that same victory of human intelligence over natural forces 
which was so emphasized in myth. The poet and the artist 
saw in man something of the universal, the spiritual, the divine ; 
in striving to express this side of humanity they found no other 
medium than the gods. When the highest aim of the sculptor 
was to make some image of a god, every success he achieved 
must have served to make the human nature of the gods more 
real. At times in the history of humanity religious thought 

RELATION TO ART AND LITERATURE 

301 

has denied the existence of physical nature or regarded it as 
unworthy of attention ; under the influence of art the forces in the 
world became for the Greek gods of human type, and the aesthetic 
appeal of nature was utilized for religion in the person of the gods. 1 
And because the relation of god and man was so human, the forms 
of worship also were moulded by man's sense of the beautiful. 

Working along these lines over against religious conservatism, it 
was the province of art, in the second place, to define and visualize 
religious conceptions.* However sharply myth be separated 
from religion, the nature of the gods as defined in myth and 
in poetry could never be without effect on the worshipper's 
thought of his gods. This definition of religious conceptions 
by an influence primarily aesthetic rather than ethical, was fully 
recognized by Plato when he proposed to exclude the poets 
from his ideal state. Much as it might be deprecated by 
philosophy, the fact re- 
mained as a most strik- 
ing characteristic of 
Greek religion. Nor 
were painters and sculp- 
tors behind the poets 
in this work. Painting 
brought before men's 
eyes the story and the 
actors, myth and the gods 
connected with myth. 

True as it is that gods of myth rather than of worship were 
thus represented, the worshipper could not but feel the influence of 
these pictures. That Dionysus in the sixth century was pictured 
as a bearded man, in the fourth century as an almost effeminate 
youth ; that Athena was rarely represented without some piece 
of armor ; that the artist emphasized the mother in Demeter, 

FIG. 73. — COIN OF NAXOS (about 460 B.C.) 
Head of the bearded Dionysus; Satyr with 

VIM CUp. 

* " In Greece, we may truly say, man pressed on through the dawn-gate of 
Beauty into Ihe Lmd of Knowledge." Gruppe, Gruchische Afythologie, 972. 

* Welcker, GotterUhrc, 2. in and xao. 

joa 

GREEK RELIGION 

the wife in his treatment of Hera, 
must mean that the pictorial imagi- 
nation of the worshipper followed 
along the same lines. When sculp- 
ture made the gods visible to 
worshippers in their temples, the in- 
fluence of art on religion was at its 
height. That the Athenian habit- 
ually thought of his goddess in the 
form of the gold and ivory image 
which stood in the Parthenon is 
clearly proved by the minor prod- 
ucts of art So closely was the 
god identified with the image that 
the image of the god was bathed, 
anointed, clothed, crowned with gar- 
lands, etc., as part of the worship 
of the god. In Pharae the question 
of those who consulted Hermes was 
whispered in the ear of the image ; * 
the Athenians were told at Delphi 
that the gods in their threatened 
temples were sweating in fear of 
the Persians; 2 the image of Athena 
in Siris 8 is said to have closed its 
eyes when suppliants were taken 
from her shrine by the victorious enemy. How far the god and 
the image were actually identified by the worshipper it is diffi- 
cult to say; there can be no question, however, that the sculptor 
furnished the visual form in which alone men could picture their 
gods as they worshipped them. 4 

Fie 74. — Makkle Statue of 
Dionysus from Tivoli 
(Terme Museum, Rome) 

1 Pausanias. 7. 22. 2-3. a Herodotus, 7. 140. • Strabo, 6, p. 264. 

* The representations of Alhena on Athenian reliefs furnish an excellent example 
of the manner in which a temple statue (the Athena Parthenos of Pheidias} deter- 
mined the visible form of a goddess for her worshippers. 

RELATION TO ART AND LITERATURE 303 

From the facts thus far considered, the fact that art and litera- 
ture were the strongest forces to give the gods a divinely human 
personality, and the fact that they defined and visualized religious 
conceptions, we are in a position to understand something of the 
power which aesthetic ideals exerted to enforce and uplift reli- 
gion. On the one hand a people sensitive to beauty were mould- 
ing religion and organizing its conceptions from the standpoint 
of the beautiful, on the other hand the religion thus moulded and 
organized gained in power because it satisfied the sense for beauty. 
All the power that epic poetry had to move its hearers was exerted 
to enforce its picture of the Olympian world j all the power of 
tragedy over an Athenian audience was bringing home to the 
people the religious conceptions of an Aeschylus or a Sophocles; 
whatever emotions were stirred by the choral hymn and rhythmic 
dance were utilized by religion to secure a hold on the worshipper. 
The splendid homes built for the gods in the sixth century and 
the fifth century, the tribute of architecture to religion, made the 
rule of the gods more real by preparing the mind of the visitor for 
worship. Because rhythmic harmony of line and a sense of restful 
unity were so satisfying to his eye, his mind was the more ready 
to accept whatever truth religion had to teach- His mind thus 
open to religious influence, the visitor might stand in the door- 
way of the later temple of Dionysus at Athens, and see before him 
the gold and ivory statue o£ the god by Alcamenes. Inevitably 
the ability of the artist to express the god's nature produced an 
impression quite as important for religion as it was for art itself. 
The temple and the statue at Athens were but part of a larger 
movement which aimed directly to utilize art in making religion 
more splendid. The aim of Peisistratus, or later of Pericles, was 
not primarily religious. The worship of Athena and of Dionysus 
was enriched by all the powers at the command of the statesman 
in order to satisfy the people by splendid pageant, to create a 
sense of civic unity, to break the power of political discontent by 
appealing to the aesthetic sense. The outcome of this movement, 
however, could but be the binding of art and religion in a closer 

304 GREEK RELIGION 

union. The content of religion was given a beautiful form which 
men could see and feel ; the result was that the gods were inter- 
preted to their worshippers, the practices of worship were made 
the vehicle of the artist's power, the ideals of religion were reen- 
fbrced by every device at the command of the artist. 

It is not quite enough to say that art, which had re-created the 
gods and moulded the forms of worship to express its ideals, was 
the strongest prop of religion in the great days of Athens. The 
artist, just because he was an artist, became for a people like 
the Greeks a prophet of religious progress. The Iliad and the 
Odyssey exhibit a strange power on the part of the poet to idealize 
the common life of man* This idealizing touch of Greek poetry, 
from Homer on, was a continuous influence on religion to give it 
a deeper meaning as well as a stronger hold on men. The painter 
brought to his pictures of religious themes his advancing ideals of 
beauty in line and composition and color. The sculptor learned 
the divineness of beautiful form in his efforts to portray the gods, 
and what he learned he taught to the public. Just because the 
artist in each different line was true to the principles of art, he was 
interpreting life in terms of the beautiful. The larger facts and 
ideals of human life, which are essentially religious, he was stating 
for an aesthetic people in an aesthetic form. In a word, it was 
not the philosopher, not the preacher of moral lessons, but rather 
the artist, who in the capacity of prophet ever directed popular 
thought to higher and truer religious conceptions- 
Granted that the artist was seeking such a statement of reli- 
gious problems, a statement which had far more influence in 
Greece than any other form of statement ; granted further that art 
had a wonderfully direct and sane development in Greece up to 
the end of the Feloponnesian War, it is not difficult to understand 
his work as a prophet of religion. Each step of artistic progress 
was thereby a step of religious progress. The true and the good 
were more and more clearly stated in terms of beauty. The artist 
was the first, again and again, to obtain deeper insight into reli- 
gion and to teach men what he had learned. Even to-day men 

RELATION TO ART AND LITERATURE 305 

find this religious message to the world in the writings of VindarK^fM 
and Aeschylus and Sophocles. Polygnotus's painting of the u nder^**^<^ 
world at Delphi, w e may well believe, presented a more profound 
view of the future life than had been attained before. As for the 
great temple statues of the later fifth century, we have abundant 
testimony that they showed an insight into the nature of the gods 
not previously gained, while at the same time they put their reli- 
gious message in an aesthetic form which every one might feel. 
Thus we may accept the statement of Dio Chrysostom ' that the 
revelation of the gods came to the Greeks not only through man's 
own nature and through the state, but also, though less directly, 
through the poet and the sculptor. 

The change which began to come over religion in Athens dur- 
ing the latter part of the fifth century is not difficult to understand 
from this standpoint of art. Just because art represented infinite 
ideas in purely finite, human forms, art could be a power to inter- 
pret religious truth up to a certain point and no further. 1 he 
change came along two lines. A rationalistic philosophy pointed 
out the inconsistency of human gods. Far more important in its 
effect than any philosophy was the tendency of art to use divine 
beings as mere forms to express conceptions human and not divine. 
So soon as art and religion were blended for an end purely aes- 
thetic, so soon as images of the gods were made not for real wor- 
ship, but as the traditional manner for the interpretation of human 
life, the artist was helping to break, down religion rather than to 
build it up. The Hermes of Praxiteles is the type of this new 
spirit, a Hermes only because this god had represented an ideal 
type of youth, ill reality the embodiment of Athenian young man- 
hood as Praxiteles saw it. 

1 Orat. 12, p. 395. 

GREEK RELKilOK — «5 

CHAPTER II 
RELIGION AND THE ORGANIZATION OF SOCIETY 

1. Religion and Ethics. — If it be the function of religion to 
create a living harmony between the human spirit and the essen- 
tial reality of the universe in which man lives, there can be no 
absolute division between religion on the one hand and the 
organization of social life on the other. The organization of social 
life includes the state as a whole, minor groups within the state, 
and the principles of conduct which receive social sanction. In 
Greece, as elsewhere, neither ethics, nor social activities, nor the 
state are in any sense out of touch with religion. 

The connection between religion and ethics in Greece is a little 
difficult to grasp because the meaning of both terms has shifted 
somewhat. For us ethics means the ideals of right conduct and 
the judgment of conduct by this standard ; conscience is not a 
Greek idea, and the realization of u the good " received more 
emphasis than the avoidance of what is not " right." Even the 
Greek conception of justice (or righteousness) had far more of 
positive content than ours. It is not unnatural that for us " do no 
wrong " as a law of conduct should attract more attention and 
seem far more strenuous than "do what counts toward filling your 
place in society." So far as the conception of religion among 
the Greeks is concerned, the absence of dogma works with this 
different ethical standpoint to make it seem more foreign to our 
view. 

If we follow the common practice and treat Greek mythology 
as religious dogma, the contradictions between morals and religion 
are glaring. There is good reason for excluding the poets from 

306 

THE ORGANIZATION OF SOCIETY 307 

an ideal Greek state with Plato, and for branding the teller of 
myth as grossly impious with Isocrates.* No effort of Pindar or 
Aeschylus could bring ideal harmony between myth and religious 
ideals ; in the Homeric poems the difference between the reli- 
gious rule of the gods and their mythological character is as really 
recognized as it is unobtrusively handled. 

And if we turn from myth to religious practice, similar contra- 
dictions are found between ethics and worship. Human sacrifice 
seems to have been but slowly eradicated from certain rituals; 
licentious practices in worship were unusual and perhaps of foreign 
origin, yet in Athens the strict etiquette for woman was somewhat 
relaxed to meet the demands of worship ; it cannot be disputed 
that temperateness gave way to license at some religious festivals. 
Evidently any attempt to identify moral and religious demands 
in our thought of the Greeks is doomed to failure. 

In fact the connection of morals and religion can only be under- 
stood when first their essential independence has been frankly 
recognized. To put the matter bluntly, religion is concerned with 
a man's relation to his god, morals with his relation to his neigh- 
bor, or rather to the social group of which he is a member. The 
patriotic devotion of Hector, the straightforward energy of Achilles, 
the courage of Diomedes or Ajax, the shrewdness of Odysseus, 
were Greek virtues because they exemplified the demand of the 
community on the individual. Whatever strengthened the state and 
helped to make it lasting was crystallized into an ethical require- 
ment- The murderer was killed or put outside the pale of society. 
The right to expose children perhaps dated from a time when it 
was demanded occasionally as a measure of self-preservation. On 
the other hand the care of orphans and the protection of weaker 
members of society were the outgrowth of that sympathy which 
binds together the community. Temperance, purity, truth, are 
the expression of social demands, not the outgrowth of any reli- 
gion. One great interest of Greek ethics is that it developed ir 
such freedom from the modifying influences of religion. 

1 Orat. XI. 38-40. 

30& 

GREEK RELIGION 

Religion, on the other hand, had no cause to express moral 
sentiments, for it aimed to secure the cooperation of beings quite 
other than men. Until these higher powers were humanized, ideals 
of morality did not apply to them. And when the Homeric poems 
gave the gods an almost human personality, they still remained as 
much outside the control of a moral code as were human kings. 

FIG. 75. — Athenian Red-figured Vase Paintiimg 

Orestes pursued by two Erinyes. * 

Kings ought to rule justly ; in so far as they were on a different 
plane from their subjects, they could throw off the demands of 
personal morality. Naturally, a just rule was attributed to the gods 
long before any thought that a Zeus or a Hermes should exemplify 
the moral ideals of men, 1 It was true of Greek religion, if not of 
ethnic religions generally, that the earlier stages were quite inde- 
pendent of morality, except in so far as the self-preservation of 
society developed a moral obligation to worship the gods. 

Not enough is known of the early history of Greek religion to 
trace in detail the development of a connection between morals 

1 Cp. Plaio, Euthyphro, 5 E f.; Politia, 9, p. 378 B. 

THE ORGANIZATION OF SOCIETY 309 

and religion. In the epic account of religion this connection is 
well under way, in that the rule of the gods on the whole makes 
for justice, and the caprices of the gods are modified by a sense of 
right, so far as men are concerned. 1 It is rather a striking fact, 
however, that the earlier religious expression of moral demands 
should not be in the gods of civic worship, but in beings quite 
apart from the Olympian world. Granted that Dike and Themis 
are purely allegorical figures embodying man's sense of justice, 
allegory would hardly be called on to express this ideal if it had 
already found adequate expression in Zeus and Athena and 
Apollo. The Erinyes were anything but allegorical figures. 
Rooted in the older stratum of religious thought, fearful beings 
that pursued those who transgressed certain laws, they represent 
perhaps the earliest supernatural punishment of wrong-doing in 
Greece. It is not improbable that the Erinyes developed from 
the idea that the souls of the dead pursued in vengeance those 
who had wronged them, and in particular that when a child killed 
its parent, the soul of the murdered person was relentless in its 
pursuit of the murderer. In the Homeric poems the Erinyes 
avenge crimes against the family and the social order generally. 
Telemachus dares not drive his mother from the house for fear 
of them 2 ; they protect the rights of the elder brother 3 ; the just 
curse of a father or mother they bring to fulfilment 4 ; they protect 
the suppliant beggar, 5 they punish perjury and rash self-confidence, 6 
they uphold the order of the universe/ In Homer, 8 as in later 
writers, their work of vengeance is not limited to this world, but 
continues in the underworld. In a word, the Erinyes are like 
personified curses, mighty to punish sin against the moral order 
of the universe. If the gods of ordinary worship regularly pun- 
ished wrong-doing, this function would hardly be assigned to 

1 Zeller, Vortrage und Abh€tndlungen t i. 3 £, ; 2. 55. 

a Oefyssey, 2. 135. * Jit ad, 15. 304. 

* Iliad, 9. 454, 571 ; Odyssey, 2. 135 ; 11.380; cp. Sophocles, Oed\ Col. 1380. 
6 Odyssey, 17. 475. e Iliad, 19, 259 ; Hesiod, Brga, 803; Iliad, 19. 87. 

r Iliad, 19. 418 ; cp. Heracteitus, Frexg- 29 ; Sophocles, TracJu 808 ; Ajax t 1389. 
8 Iliad, 19. 2:59. 

3 io GREER RELIGION 

avenging spirits; at the same time, the existence of such spirits 
indicated the demands of ethics for a supernatural sanction. 

In the preceding chapter the work of literature and art in hu- 
manizing the Greek gods was discussed. One of the most strik- 
ing cases of a human standard for divine beings is found in the 
Homeric account of the gods in relation to the order of the uni- 
verse. Moira (often translated fate) is not any power higher than 
the gods, and therefore the ultimate background of the universe j 
it would be truer to call it the conscience of the gods. As men 
ought to uphold the moral order, ought not to act virip popov, so 
the gods feel under obligation to uphold the moral order of the 
universe. Because the epic makes its gods human, it endows 
them with moral sense, and thereby makes them uphold righteous- 
ness. From the epic point of view, then, the rule of the gods 
inevitably takes something of a moral character, 1 though nothing 
of the sort seems to have been intended by the bards themselves. 
That the same process should go on, that the gods should come 
to be conceived, not simply as righteous rulers, but also as right- 
eous persons, would be the natural outcome of this process for a 
people which laid more emphasis than the Greeks on the ethical 
standpoint. In Greece, since religion was dominated by art 
rather than by ethics, only a few earnest thinkers demanded that 
their gods be moral persons. 

Belief in the righteous rule of the gods was the natural outcome 
of another line of thought The existence of natural law in the 
physical world and of eternal principles in the moral world early 
made a deep impression on the Greek mind. Even among savage 
races natural law and moral law are generally recognized, far as 
the content of these conceptions may be from the content which 
we assign to them to-day. The precepts in the Works and Days 
of Hesiod, or in the poetry of Theognis and Solon, embody the 
thought of generations on law and order in the physical world 
and in the moral world. At what point in the history of Greek 
thought the idea of a unified divine rule of the world arose it is 

1 Cp. Iliad, 3. 379 ; 16. 386 ; Odyssey, 17. 475. 

THE ORGANIZATION OF SOCIETV 311 

difficult to say ; in the Homeric poems there are traces of it in the 
use of the words fleas and ©1 Acot; in the tragedians it is quite 
consistently recognized, though perhaps it never controlled popu- 
lar thought. It was inevitable, however, that, wherever the divine 
rule of the universe was recognized, the belief in physical law and 
in moral law should be referred to the gods. If the universe rests 
on certain well-defined principles, while at the same time the uni- 
verse is the expression of divine rule, those principles can but be- 
come the "unwritten, not-to-be-shaken laws of the gods, which 
no commands of human origin can supersede." 1 

Perhaps the strongest force in bringing religion and morals 
together was not the aesthetic humanization of the gods, or the 
philosophic demand for unity in the world, but rather the effort 
of the moral consciousness to secure the highest possible sanction • 
for its standards. Where the simple promise was not sufficiently 
Tespected, the witness of the gods was invoked in the form of an 
oath ; oaths were indeed evaded or directly broken at times, but 
the respect which was shown to the oath grew out of a belief in 
the religious sanction it afforded, for the state did not punish per- 
jury. The Homeric poems refer not infrequently to hospitality as 
sanctioned by the gods. A man's legal rights were always confined 
to the limits of his own city or state. When he went abroad, he 
must appeal to the gods who protected strangers in order to secure 
entertainment or even safety ; with hosts who honored the gods 
he enjoyed a cordial hospitality. The right of the suppliant was 
also an extra-legal right, based solely on respect for the gods. 
Pursued by the mob, a man could find temporary refuge in any 
temple, though certain shrines had a special right of sanctuary. 
This right, so far as we can learn, was administered to secure jus- 
tice rather than to defeat it. Moreover, the murderer might ask 
for purification from blood as one of the rights of a suppliant in a 
foreign state. In a word there were rights not protected by the 
state, but generally recognized, for which the sanction of religion 
was specially invoked, 

* Sophocles, Ant. 454 f. 

312 GREEK RELIGION 

The conception that all wrong-doing was rooted in a state of 
mind known as i»/3pts, *>. a reckless self-assertion with no respect 
for the demands of propriety and decency, was perhaps the focus 
far the religious sanction of morality. This did not ordinarily 
involve the breaking of law, though it might lead to that in the 
end. It was rather the failure to recognize any social or religious 
requirements as binding on conduct. It might even be united 
with broad sympathy and noble purpose as in the case of Oedipus ; 
none the less it led to rash violence, and under the rule of the 
gods it could but bring suffering and overthrow to the man who 
yielded to it. For a morality which judged action by the standard 
of fitness and propriety, this conception naturally summed up all 
man's tendencies to wrong. It could not be punished directly by 
the state j it was condemned as the root of evil by the social con- 
sciousness ; its real force as a moral idea, however, was based on 
the religious belief that under the divine providence it worked out 
its own retribution. 

The question has often been asked whether religion in Athens 
tended to make a man more pure, more true and genuine, more 
courageous, more just. 1 Probably its influence in this direction 
was neither strong nor consistent. Morality and religion, perhaps 
starting quite independently, came into contact at many points ; 
in the minds of some great thinkers the lines between the two 
were all but removed ; for the people the conception of right never 
blended with the conception of religion. It is evident that myth 
remained quite outside the pale of morality, and that worship was 
never necessarily moral. The fact remains that the rule of the 
gods came to be regarded as making for righteousness in that 
under their rule the sinner brought on himself the punishment of 
his own sin. 

2. Religion and the Social Group. — The importance of Greek 
religion in connection with the structure of society was as far- 
reaching as the direct bond of religion and ethics was fluctuating. 

1 Cp. the " Prooeniium to the Laws of Taleucus," as given by a late writer. 
Stobacus, FforiL 44. 20, p. 279. 

THE ORGANIZATION OF SOCIETY 313 

The typical social unit was a group of persons who believed in 
descent from a common ancestor (a god or hero), and who shared 
the same distinctive religious rites. Whether the unit were a small 
gens or the state at large, whether it were really based on blood 
relationship or rather on life in the same locality or on similarity 
of occupations, it was fitted into the same framework ; i.e. a com- 
mon, distinctive worship was developed, and some god or hero 
became the patron of the group if not the supposed ancestor of 
the members of the group. In the earlier Athenian organization 
there was doubtless some foundation in fact for the belief that 
blood relationship was a factor in uniting members of the gens, in 
connecting gentes into phratries, and phratries into tribes (<f*vka£) ; 
it remains true that the common worship of each unit was as 
important a bond of union as the supposed blood relationship. 
With the reorganization of the state in the fifth century, not only 
the gentes, not only the new phratries and tribes of Cleisthenes, 
but also the local denies had each its divine patron and each its dis- 
tinctive worship. In a word, each element in the political and social 
structure had the same framework, and that of a religious nature. 
It was a natural result that other social groups adopted much 
the same framework, whatever their origin. The discussion of 
private worship 1 has shown how true this was of the family. The 
husband and wife were not united, as it were, by act of God. The 
blessing of the gods for this union, however, was devoutly sought 
and the family group had its own worship. The sanction of re- 
ligion was even more important for the relation between children 
and parents than for the relation of husband and wife. Injustice 
or unkindness to one's parents was in itself an act of impiety, for 
which divine punishment might be expected. It was an essential 
duty of the pious man to offer respect and worship to his ancestors. 
Similarly the blessing of the gods was sought for the new-born 
child, and it was at length recognized as a member of the family, 
of the phratry, and of the state with religious rites. So much did 
religion contribute to the solidarity of the family. 

1 Part I, Chap. ii. p. 120 f. 

314 GREEK RELIGION 

Other forms of association were constituted in the same way. 
The "club" of young men at the palaestra were united in the 
worship of some Hermes or Apollo; the association at the Pei- 
raeus of residents from some foreign city was a religious associa- 
tion, worshipping the god of their fathers; merchants uniting for 
trade, artisans joining in a " trade union," groups of actors or 
artists or philosophers, constituted their associations on a religious 
basis, since this was the one recognized type of social organization. 1 

The reaction of these facts on religion was twofold : inasmuch 
as each social group had its own worship and ordinarily its own 
patron deity, the sepaTateness of different worships was empha- 
sized ; on the other hand the unification of the Greek world in its 
commercial, intellectual, and artistic interests tended to make the 
general conceptions of religion more alike and more widely intel- 
ligible. The great force in bringing the Greek world together 
was no doubt commerce. The sailor and the merchant, as they 
travelled from place to place with their wares, carried ideas as 
well as material wares from place to place. The fact that religious 
festivals were centres of trade is but the converse of the fact that 
ideas as to religion and right and beauty followed in the steps of 
trade. Greeks all over the world from the sixth century on were 
learning to understand each other. The result for religion was 
perhaps to place an undue emphasis on whatever was peculiar; 
rites which were somewhat alike, however, were merged into com- 
mon types, separated only by place and by tradition as to the circle 
of worshippers. There is no doubt, further, that the emphasis on 
the individual in religion, which has been discussed in previous 
chapters,* was in large measure due to the emphasis on the indi- 
vidual in the commercial world. 

It remained true that the circle of worshippers in any cult was 
strictly and definitely limited* It might be a wide circle, as in 
the worship of Zeus at Olympia ; the cult might be hospitable to 
all Greeks, as in the worship of Demeter at Eleusis ; or again it 
might be strictly limited to the few who lived in the same locality 
l Cp. supra, p. 127 f. * Cp. supra, pp. 231 1, s6& 

THE ORGANIZATION OF SOCIETV 315 

or to those in whose veins ran the same blood. The principle 
remains that particularism in religion, the limitation of worshippers 
to a sharply defined group, was intimately bound up with the fact 
that each element in the social structure was conceived as having 
a religious basis. 

3. Religion and the State. — Whatever was true of lesser social 
units was even more true of the state as a whole, in the same 
measure that the state was more important than the tribe or the 
family. As the family or the phratry claimed common blood 
from one divine ancestor, so the Athenians traced their descent 
from Ion or from an earth-born king; so, in fact, the whole Greek 
people claimed common descent from Hellen, the father of Dorus 
and Aeolus and the grandfather of Ion. Nor was this mere 
poetic fancy ; it was regarded as a fact to this extent, that the 
naturalization of foreigners took the form of a (religious) adoption 
into the state-family, which was based on ties of common blood 
and common worship. 

More than once it has been pointed out that Greek worship 
was a matter of local cults, each one theoretically independent. 
The common bond of unity is found, not in the mythology which 
brings the gods into one family, but rather in the state which 
controls these separate cults. Aside from the few cults which were 
in the hands of some section of the state rather than of the state 
as a whole, each shrine was a sacred spot where the state con- 
ducted worship in order to secure for itself the blessing of the 
god who could best be approached at that spot. The Greek 
state seems ordinarily to have developed through a union of many 
small communities (awoutitrpAs) ; as this process went on, the cults 
of each community normally were adopted by the nascent state, 
and if they were situated at a distance from the capital, a branch- 
worship was often established there. 1 In either case the worship 
was offered in the name of the state. Individuals shared the wor- 
ship, and of course the benefits of the worship, for the reason t hat 
they were the citizens who constituted the state. 

1 Cp. supra, pp. 237 f., 238. 

3i6 GREEK RELIGION 

It is evident that the modern conception of freedom of worship 
protected by the state, like the conception of a state-church, must 
be set aside as inapplicable. The state was itself the worshipper 
of the gods. The state attended to the administration of justice 
within its borders; the state maintained relations with other 
states; in the same way it was the business of the state to main- 
tain relations with the divine powers- There was no "state- 
church," for the reason that religious worship was itself a function 
of the state from the time when the palace was the central sanc- 
tuary, the king the only priest, down through all the history of 
Greece. 

As the representative of mankind before the gods, the state 
directed and controlled religion. When the worship of Dionysus 
was brought to Athens from Eleutherae, it was undoubtedly done 
by act of the state ; when Pan claimed the homage of the Atheni- 
ans at the time of the battle of Marathon, 1 it was an appeal to the 
state; when the worship of Athena Nike on the Acropolis was 
revived and her temple built, it was done by a state decree which 
is still extant 2 ; when foreigners desired to institute the worship 
of their native gods, a special decree gave the necessary permis- 
sion, 8 The appointment of priests, their duties, and their privi- 
leges, were determined in general by religious traditions ; the 
state, however, might exercise its power to make any changes 
that were deemed best, for the priests were but agents of the 
state, to perform its worship at the different shrines. Similarly 
the forms of worship were handed down from the past as forms 
which had proved pleasing to the gods. Funds to build a temple 
or carry on a worship were voted by the state when necessary, 
and temple accounts might be audited like other accounts of the 
state.* Even the administration of religious law was in the hands 
of state courts. Sacrilege, such as the mutilation of the hermae 
or the profanation of the Eleusinian mysteries, was essentially a 

i Herodotus, 6. 105 ; cp. 7. 189, s Dittenbcrger, Sylloge t 911. 

8 C.I.A. II. 168 ; but cp. Schoemann, Grieck. Alt. 2. 170 L 
*E#.CJ.A. I.354. 

THE ORGANIZATION OF SOCIETY 317 

matter for the state to deal with. 1 The Athenian assembly was 
free to relieve Alcibiades from the charges of sacrilege, and to 
revive them again at will- The contrast between established 
religion and private " mysteries " outside this pale only serves to 
emphasize the fact that public religion was a function of the 
state. Such being the case, the direction and control of reli- 
gion was of course in the hands of the state authorities; in 
religious matters as in civil matters the state was only limited 
by that body of custom and tradition which may be called the 
constitution. 

The connection between religion and government went one step 
further in the case of shrines the influence of which was not confined 
to one particular section of the country. The control and protection 
of these shrines was in the hands of groups of states which united 
for that purpose. Whether such groups were vague and all-inclu- 
sive, merely an agreement not to interfere with worship at such a 
shrine as that of Zeus at Olympia, or whether they were definite 
political bodies like the Aetolian league, the principle remains the 
same- Where the religious unit is larger than the political unit, 
a political unit is formed to carry on the interstate worship, for 
there is no such thing as a "church" apart from the family, the 
tribe, the nation, or the amphictyony. 

For the state this connection with religion meant the blessing 
of the gods on its undertakings and the sanction of the gods for 
its requirements. Tradition assigned the origin of the laws of 
Solon and of Lycurgus to the Delphic god 2 • in other words a divine 
origin was claimed for state institutions. The oath, c& the oath 
on taking office, was an appeal for divine sanction. Treaties 
rested on the same basis, since the curse of the gods was invoked 
on the state which broke the treaty, and the records were set up 
in some important shrine. In Athens the temple of Athena on 
the Acropolis was the state treasury ; nothing could better illus- 
trate the identity of church and state, or the bond which united 

1 Cp. supra, p. ^63 ; Demosthenes, 33, 27. 

3 Plutarch, Solon, 14, p. 85; Herodotus, »• 65. 

3*8 

GREEK RELIGION 

Athena with the fortunes of Athens, than this practice by which 
the goddess, as it were, assumed the care of the state funds. On 
the Greek coins it was long customary to place the symbol of the 
god who was patron of the issuing city : Athena on coins of Athens 

Fig. 76. — Marble Relief in Athens 

Athena representing Athens, and Hera representing Samoa, clasp hands above 

a tablet on which the treaty is inscribed* 

and Corinth, Hera on coins of Argos, Zeus on coins of Arcadia 
and Elis. The representation of the god or of his symbol was 
practically intended to mean that the god, and the state that wor- 
shipped this god, guaranteed the money standard. Nor was it 
only on coins that the god stood for the state. On the top of the 
tablet recording a treaty between Athens and Samos we may see 

THE ORGANIZATION OF SOCIETY 319 

Athena and Hera clasping hands, a union of the two goddesses to 
symbolize the union of their respective states. 

When the god actually stood for the state, it is no wonder that 
an attack on belief and worship should occasion the charge of 
political treason ;' no wonder, on the other hand, that Athenian 
orators should appeal to a blind confidence in the care of the 
gods for their city. To go into battle without first obtaining 
favorable omens was thought sacrilegious, even though men like 
Demosthenes were said to neglect this precaution. 1 Important 
matters, such as relief from pestilence or the means of meeting 
the Persian invasion, were referred to the oracle at Delphi. The 
state which honored its gods could but expect their guiding and 
protective favor. 

In later Greek thought much stress was laid on religion as a 
device for upholding the authority of the state. 2 Fear of the gods 
and of punishments they inflicted before and after death was held 
up as an essential motive for obedience to law. Religion thus 
was treated merely as a useful superstition (SetatBaLfiovia) 9 insti- 
tuted by clever law-makers to keep unruly men in subjection to 
the state. This view never met with universal acceptance. It was 
simply an imperfect statement of the truth that religion was a 
tremendous force acting in favor of the existing order. Tradition, 
prescribing methods of divine worship, involved the belief that 
this worship was efficacious to secure divine blessing on the com- 
munity. The whole conception of the moral order and the polit- 
ical order was bound up with this tradition. Though religion was 
no clever device of ancient law-makers, all the power of religious 
conservatism was exerted to uphold the state which was in har- 
mony with its dictates. 

One indirect result for the state from this view of religion can- 
not be entirely passed over. Inasmuch as worship was the concern 
of the state, all the splendor and magnificence lavished on worship 

1 Acschines.3. 131. 

fl See Scxtus Empiricus, 9. 2. 17 £ ; Cicero, De nat m tUcr. x.42/ 118 f. ; Welcker, 
Griecfuscke GBtterlehre, a. 45 f. 

320 GREEK RELIGION 

redounded to the honor of the state itself. The temples erected 
at Athens in the fifth century were splendid monuments for the 
gods, monuments which must have evoked the pride of Athenians 
in their city- The reorganization of worship, which enriched it 
with processions and contests, with feasts and spectacles, united 
the city in other emotions than such as were distinctly religious. 
Common worship was a natural bond for the Greek state. Beauty 
and magnificence in the forms of worship, wholly apart from their 
religious influence, were effective means to develop in the state 
a consciousness of unity and an honorable pride, if not real 
patriotism. 

For religion this connection with the state was no less important 
than it was for the state. This magnificence of outward form 
begot no spirit of earnest belief as an antidote to the new factors 
which were intruded into the older worship. It is not difficult to 
trace the process by which the sense of beauty began to raise 
religion to a higher plane, until the same sense for beauty aided 
by wealth and civic pride checked the nascent spiritual forces to 
which it had given birth, Athenian religion could not serve God 
and mammon ; it could not attain true spiritual meaning and at 
the same time express the glory of Athens to the Greek world. 

The fact that worship was primarily an act of the state (or of 
some social unit within the state) of course tended to check 
individualism in religion. The sinner brings divine wrath on the 
state, and his punishment is due from the state rather than from 
the god himself. Thus piety becomes a part of civic duty instead 
of an individual relation with the gods. The sense of personal sin, 
faith in a god who cares for the individual, love for a god which 
serves as the impulse to personal service, could hardly develop. 
Where this individual relation was sought, for example, as an act 
of mystic communion with the divine, it must be sought outside 
the regular channels of established religion. Accordingly the 
development of individualism worked in two ways: it encouraged 
those forms of worship which did not have the sanction of the 
state, and in the end it tended to deprive the state worship of any 

THE ORGANIZATION OF SOCIETY 321 

genuine religious feeling. When the civic consciousness was at its 
height, however, as in the period following the Persian wars at 
Athens, religious emotion could flow unhindered in the channel 
which was marked out for it by the natural lines of social develop- 
ment in Greece, 

At its best the Greek conception of religion as a function of the 
state produced noble results. It meant that religion could not be 
any selfish matter, for it benefited primarily the state and not the 
individual. It meant that religion did not occupy any small sec- 
tion of a man's life, like a religion that is only valid on Sunday, 
for it had no separate place in his life. Moreover, it served to 
combine and express all that was ideal in human nature ; patriot- 
ism and sympathy, love of the beautiful in art and literature and 
music, the sense for right and reverence for what is noble — in so 
far as these things were known to the Greek they found natural 
expression in the religion of the state at its best. The relation 
between the individual and the state, which was needed for such 
a development of Greek religion, was anything but stable ; the 
development of individualism in Athens ultimately undermined 
both the state and the meaning of the state religion. 

GREEK RELIGION — 21 

CHAPTER III 
RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

1. Early Greek Philosophy; Criticism of Religion. — Where 
religion is so definitely a function of the state as in Greece, one 
might expect to find the priests exercising the ultimate power in 
government and demanding conformity to the statement of belief 
which they formulated. Nothing could be further from the truth. 
The priests were but citizens who might be called on for public 
duty, one at one religious shrine, another at another. As for a 
creed, the notable absence of anything of the sort was pointed out in 
the Introduction (p. 23 f.). The only norm of worship or of belief 
was the tradition or custom (to vdftc/ior) which had proved its 
rightfulness by the test of long experience. 

The absence of creed or dogma certainly does not mean the 
absence of the element of belief in Greek religion, even if such a 
thing were conceivable- Worship would have been quite mean- 
ingless unless it fitted in with a philosophy of life which stamped it 
as efficacious. It is evident at once that mythology was not the 
statement of this belief. In a religion without formulated creed, 
actual belief can only be ascertained by a study of the worship to 
which it is the counterpart. 1 In the chapter on the Greek gods, 
an attempt was made to state this belief. It now remains to con- 
sider the connection between the practical belief or "working 
creed" and the general conception of the universe which in the 
course of time was formulated and defined by the great philoso- 

'51 has sometimes been held that in the epic worship is described as out of 
touch with belief. Such a state of affairs is hardly conceivable. The truth is that 
the epic stories of the gods are somewhat out of touch with the belief implied in the 
account of worship. 

322 

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 323 

phers of Greece. One of the most important phases of Greek 
philosophy was its attempt to state the conceptions which underlie 
and justify religion; perhaps the strongest influence of Greek 
religion in later civilization has been through the vehicle of philoso- 
phy. It does not fall within the scope of the present volume to 
consider this philosophy of religion. The two questions which 
must be considered are : (1) the debt of philosophy to religion, 
and (2) the reaction of philosophic thought on popular belief and 
worship. 

In the Homeric poems there is little or no trace of philosophy 
proper, little or no conscious reflection on human life and on the 
universe at large. At the same time the attitude of man toward 
the world, as pictured by the poet, is full of promise for the future 
development of philosophy. 1 The world, including man, is treated 
as a harmonious whole under the rule of the gods ; the account of 
this world is marked by reasonableness and sanity and simplicity; 
a genuinely Greek sense of proportion has left its stamp on the 
whole picture. The world and human life are explained in terms 
of divine beings- The unity of the world is clearly reflected in the 
unity of the divine rule, and " natural law " is dimly suggested by 
the conception of Moira.* These gods of Homer are not objects 
of fancy nor mere physical powers ; they represent rather the idea 
that the controlling forces in the world are akin to man in their 
essential nature. Aristotle 8 quotes other thinkers as holding that 
the early poets (including Homer) anticipated the philosophy of 
Thales in the statement that Oceanus and Tethys were the parents 
of the gods. With reference to the point here under discussion 
the testimony of the Homeric poems is far more important in 
another direction, viz. as showing how myth paved the way for 
philosophy in its relation to religion. The fundamental concep- 
tions of unity in the world, of laws of nature, and of an ideal back- 
ground for nature and human life, are outlined in the epic picture 
of the gods. 

* Cp. ZeJIcr, Philosophic der Griechtm, i. 41 f. fl Cp. supra, p. 310. 

• Aristolle, Metaph. 1. a, p. 983 b. 30; Iliad, 14. aoi. 346. 

324 GREEK RELIGION 

In the TTie&gonyoi Hesiod totally different subjects are handled 
from much the same standpoint. The poet's acknowledged pur- 
pose is to explain the origin of the universe; since the world is 
regarded as the expression of divine beings, the explanation takes 
the form of a theogony. It is clear that the desire for explanation 
is a philosophical motive and that the questions proposed are much 
the same as those which will engage the attention of the later phi- 
losopher; the method of treatment remains, as for Homer, primarily 
mythological- That the beginning of things is " Chaos," that the 
active principle in development is Eros, that the development of 
the world is an orderly progress broken by significant crises, that 
moral forces intervene and moral beings {e.g. Nemesis, Themis, 
Dike) appear in the list of divinities 1 — would seem to indicate 
that the poem includes some results of serious reflection. These 
results are not directly in line with religious belief, while at the 
same time they are in no way opposed to it, and indeed the terms 
in which they are stated are terms of religious thought. Almost 
the same thing may be said of the later theogonies, for they too 
use religious terms for ideas that are on the verge of philosophy, 
and they do not conflict with established religion. That reflection 
as to the world and man should move thus freely within the sphere 
of religion and mythology, is as significant for religion as it is for 
the future development of philosophy. 

With the beginning of philosophy proper in Ionia the problems 
remain much the same ; while the attitude toward established reli- 
gion varies, these problems are answered not in terms of divine 
beings, but in a much more abstract manner. There is the same 
effort to discover the fundamental unity of the world, but the 
result is attained by positing some " first principle '* — water, or 
fire, or some more fundamental substance still — out of which is 
developed the world as we know it. The same interest in the 
process of development continues, only it is now treated as a 
development from this one fundamental being to the complex 

* Supra, p. a28 1 ; Decharme, La critique des traditions religieuses chex Us 
Grecs t pp. 14, 19. 

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 325 

world of phenomena. And the idea of an intelligent law govern- 
ing this process, which has been more or less clearly outlined in 
earlier poetry, is emphasized, for example, in the Necessi ty of Anaxi- 
mander, the Measure of Heracleitus, the Nous of Anaxagoras. 

This nature-philosophy did not necessarily involve any direct 
attack either on myths or on the ideas of the gods in connection 
with worship. The advent of this new type of thought meant sim- 
ply that the search for causes, which had been satisfied by an 
answer from religion, was now turned in a different direction, or 
at least formulated its thought in different terms. Thales is re- 
ported as saying that the world is full of gods/ but he explains 
the phenomena of nature — earthquakes, the movements of the 
heavenly bodies, vegetable and animal growth — in terms of a 
"first principle" which has nothing to do with the gods. If 
Anaximander accepted the gods as beings who lived far longer 
than men, or Anaximenes said that his first principle (air) was a 
god, 2 these statements were quite apart from their explanation of 
the world, for which gods were not needed. Although Heracleitus 
and Empedocles made much of religion, the gods of public wor- 
ship were not the ultimate principles that underlie the universe ; for 
Parmenides the gods apparently belonged in the realm of opinion, 
not in the realm of pure being ; Anaxagoras perhaps did not di- 
rectly attack religion, but his philosophy had little or no place for 
the gods. Even Democritus, the contemporary of Socrates and 
in his far-reaching studies the precursor of Aristotle, has no differ- 
ent standpoint in his treatment of religion. For him, as for Em- 
pedocles, the gods were celestial spirits (not immortal) who woik 
for the good or evil of man, spirits who have hardly a more impor- 
tant place in cosmic development than has man himself. Popular 
belief was allowed to remain as a tiling apart from philosophy, 
while its foundations were completely undermined. 

Three of these early thinkers took a positive attitude toward 
mythology and popular religion. Xenophanes with unsparing irony 
attacked the anthropomorphic gods, gods that a red-haired or 

1 Aristotle, £>e ant ma, i. 5, p. 411 a. 7. 2 Cict-ro, De not. deor. 1. 10/36. 

326 GREEK RELIGION 

snub-nosed race would picture in their own image, gods that were 
born and could weep, gods that the poets described as immoral. 
Heracleitus with equal vehemence makes fun of popular super- 
stition both in belief and in worship. Yet neither Xenophanes 
nor Heracleitus were ready to discard religion from their scheme 
of thought. It was reserved for Empedocles to give the gods a 
definite place in his system as beings far greater than men, though 
not immortal, and to undertake an actual reform of public worship. 
Here Empedocles was following in the steps of that great religious 
thinker Pythagoras. Just how much of the so-called Pythagorean 
philosophy dates back to Pythagoras it is not easy to sayj 1 it is 
clear, however, that he was a great religious and ethical leader 
who entirely reorganized religious practice for his followers in 
accordance with a system of belief which had nothing to do 
with the epic account of the gods. That there was one divine 
being of purity and holiness ; that the soul of man came from God 
and was destined to return to its source only by strenuous, long- 
continued effort to escape from evil; that all human life should be 
dominated by this high endeavor, — such were the principles of 
his system. By its adoption of certain early Greek practices as 
well as by its high ideals Pythagoreanism gained a place in the 
Greek world, and in the course of time some ideas which it had in- 
cluded became fundamental for the philosophical account of religion. 
In Athens itself philosophic discussion found small lodgement 
before the middle of the fifth century B.C. Earlier in this century, 
as has been shown, 2 there was a tendency on the part of poets in 
Athens (as elsewhere) to criticise religious conceptions from the 
standpoint of ethics. Although this movement was inspired by 
conscious reflection on human conduct, it was hardly systematic 
enough to be termed philosophical. It is only to be noted that 
the first criticism of religion came as it were from within, from 
poets inspired by religion itself. Moreover, such criticism was 
not connected with any popular interest in the study of philo- 
sophical problems, 

* Cp. supra, p. 347. * Supra, p. 356 £. 

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 327 

It was Anaxagoras who " first established philosophy in Athens " 
about the middle of the fifth century. Frankly pursuing the early 
Ionian method of neglecting religion, he might well have given a 
physical explanation of the heavenly bodies (known as gods in 
myth) without serious challenge, had it not been fo* his connec- 
tion with Pericles. That he was impugned as an atheist and 
obliged to leave Athens is merely a hint of the sharp conflict 
between religion and philosophy soon to follow. 

Up to the middle of the fifth century B.C. philosophy had treated 
religion with utmost freedom, not causing any scandal because it 
gained little or no hold on the community. But about this time 
conditions changed in Athens. The so-called Sophists found a 
cordial welcome ; in the relatively small community a considerable 
party of intellectual men were deeply affected by a philosophy 
that for the time being was a disintegrating force in politics, 
morals, and religion, yet over against this party of the new thought 
the old religion was still vital enough to rally a strong body of 
supporters ; moreover, the political ferment was such that any 
question affecting the tradition of the state was easily made a 
matter for state action. 

In his treatise on the gods Protagoras is quoted as saying that 
it was impossible to know the gods, whether they exist or whether 
they do not exist ; * Thrasymachus went so far as to declare that 
if the gods existed, they were as useless for man as if they did not 
exist. Explanations of religion were offered, — that gods were 
suggested by beneficent forces of nature (Prodicus),* that stories 
of the gods were allegories (Antisthenes the Cynic), that gods 
were deified ancestors (Euhemerus, about 300 B.C.). A more 
radical explanation is credited to followers of the early Sophists in 
Athens, namely, that the gods were an invention of clever states- 
men to make men fear hidden crime — a "useful lie." Such an 
opinion is outlined in a fragment from the Sisyphus of Critias, 3 a 
tragedy in which impiety is set forth with skill and detail only to 

l Cp. supra, p. 26a f. Diog. Laer. 9. $r ; Plaio Theaet. 162 D. 

» Cp. Sext. Empir. Math. 9. 18. 51. 8 Nauck. Trag. grasc.frag. p. 771. 

328 GREEK RELIGION 

find a most conventional overthrow at the end. The contrast 
between life according to nature (0i«m) and life according to 
humanly imposed principles (vo/xw) was fundamental with the 
Sophists ; it only remained to class religion with conventions 
devised and imposed by man, to bring it under condemnation. 
This last step was taken covertly by Critias, 1 more openly by the 
" atheists," such as Diagoras and Hippo. 

When philosophic thinkers explained away the reality of religion 
and won credence for a non-religious theory of the world, com- 
plete tolerance by a state that called itself religious was absolutely 
impossible. In the series of cases where men were charged 
with impiety, 2 it is clear that the Athenians found it necessary to 
protect from attack the practices of public worship, and that pub- 
lic denial of the gods was not permitted. So long as philosophy 
neglected religion, it had aroused little or no opposition ; when 
its followers arrayed themselves against religion, they met the 
penalty of arraying themselves against the state. 

2. Plato and his Successors ; the Philosophic Statement of Reli- 
gion. — Socrates, a devout man put to death on the charge of im- 
piety by a people that saw only the negative side of his work, laid 
the foundation for a philosophy which gave full place to the funda- 
mental principles of religion. In his confident search for the 
knowledge he claimed not to possess, he professed to act in obe- 
dience to a divine call and with a definitely religious aim. As for 
this faith that there is an absolute truth behind the visible universe, 
and that it is identical with goodness, are not these the ideals 
which Greek religion had stated, however dimly, for the people? 
The faith of Socrates, interpreted and developed by his successors, 
reestablished on a philosophic basis not only science and ethics 
and politics, but also religion. To recognize the existence and 
validity of general ideas meant the end of that philosophy which 
found no truth outside the consciousness of the individual. It 

* Reputed an " alheist," cp. Andocides, De myst. 47 ; Philostratus, Vita soph. 
1. 16. 1. 

2 Cp. st#ra, p. 26a, 

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 329 

involved the recognition of ultimate ideals which could only be 
understood in the light of religion. However great the gulf be- 
. tween these ideals and the actual religion of the Athenian state, 
such a philosophy was on a totally different plane from the philoso- 
phy which had neglected or attacked existing religion. 

It need therefore be no surprise that Plato so frankly accepted 
traditional worship, and even religious teaching from many sources, 
however sharply he criticised the mythology of the poets. The 
picture of Cephalus in his home, sacrificing to Zeus,* stands in 
sharp contrast with the attacks on religion by the later Sophists 
and their followers. In the Republic* questions of worship are 
respectfully referred to the oracle at Delphi ; the same respect for 
the oracle, and for seers generally, is found in the Laws? though 
here Plato takes up quite in detail the religious institutions of the 
city. Hestia, Zeus, and Athena are to be worshipped in the cen- 
tre of the city ; each tribe and each class of citizens is to have its 
god ; temples and divine images and priests are to be established ; 
in the religious calendar no day will be without sacrifices to the 
gods.* Much or little as this may mean, it evidently means that 
Plato recognized the importance of the popular worship and gave 
it full place in an ideal state. 5 He was an out-and-out opponent 
of the " atheism " which had had a certain vogue in the Athens of 
his earlier years. 6 

Perhaps it is fair to say that Plato's interest in worship is quite 
as much theological and even sociological, as it is distinctly 
religious- He is unsparing in his criticism of the mythology of 
the poets, but his standard for testing myth is his theological 
conception of divinity, a conception based on earlier thought, 
on the imagination of the poets, most of all on ideas connected 
with actual worship. In the second and third books of the Re- 
public Plato develops this conception of God, as over against the 

1 fip/ifia, i, p. 328 C : cp. Lysis. 207 A. *Poliiia, 4. p. 427 B. 

*ieg. 8, p. 828 A ; 5, p. 738 B, C. 

4 ***ff- 5. P- 745 B ; 8, p. 8=8 C ; 8, p. 828 D, E and 6, p. 758 E. 

6 Cp. Leg. 2, p. 653 D and 5, p. 738 D. 

fl Cp- Leg. 10, pp. 891 B, 888 A. 908 B. L 

33o GREEK RELIGION 

representation of the poets: (a) God is absolutely good, and 
therefore the cause only of good, not of evil; evil is sometimes 
concealed good, as in punishment, or else it does not come from 
God ; (6) God is absolutely simple and true ; He does not change 
His form, uor does He deceive men. That the gods dispute and 
fight with each other, that they are capricious in dealing with men, 
that they are immoderate in appetite or passion is contrary to the 
very idea of God as conceived by Plato, Gods who can be bribed 
by gifts or moved by incense and petition are no more gods than 
if, on the other hand, they are to be conceived as absolutely indif- 
ferent to human needs. 1 In this theology he is simply carrying 
out in a consistent way what poets like Pindar and Aeschylus had 
attempted before ; yet Plato's method is not quite the same, for he 
develops his conception of God systematically before applying it 
to poetic myths. It is definitely a theology, worked out on the 
basis of popular belief and used as a standard to judge popular 
story. 

The theology thus far considered has served primarily a nega- 
tive purpose, viz., to be a standard for the criticism of popular 
errors. In so far as we can speak of a Platonic system of thought, 
this conception of God is identified with the Idea of the Good which 
is pure Being, the ultimate source of the world of thought and the 
world of things. Whatever reality may be assigned to gods of 
popular faith, a question which is not clearly treated, they are sub- 
ordinate to this ethico-logical Being. While Plato's theology is 
based on Greek religion, it had little or no power to affect popular 
belief. Philosophy, the effort to reach truth and reality and 
goodness along the path of knowledge, became itself the religion 
of his followers. The connections which Plato established between 
philosophy and religion often reappeared in Greek thought, and 
exerted a profound influence in shaping the theology of the Chris- 
tian church. 

The religion of the people found little place in the systematic 
philosophy of Aristotle. Even as a sociological phenomenon it 
* Politia. 2. p. 364 B ff. ; Ltg. 4, p. 717 A; 10, p. 909 B. 

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 331 

attracted much less attention than might have been expected- At 
the same time Aristotle freely uses the name of God for the intel- 
ligent Being which is fundamental in the universe, at once the 
First Cause and the Final Cause in the world of things. Like 
Plato, Aristotle finds it necessary to assume a first principle, 
eternal, good, intelligent, and in this principle he discovers the 
truth which popular religion had dimly grasped in its imperfect 
conceptions of the Divine. The " cosmological argument" for 
God's existence, viz., that the chain of causes in the world de- 
mands a first cause, and the " teleological argument," viz., that 
the evidence of purpose in the world is only to be explained 
by assuming that the first cause acts with intelligent purpose, 
have been passed on to Christian theology in much the form that 
Aristotle gave them* 

The later philosophy of Greece presents little that is new on 
the point now under discussion. Belief in the gods is rarely 
attacked, even by the so-called sceptics, 1 who attack the philo- 
sophic arguments for the divine existence. The atomistic philoso- 
phy of the Epicureans leaves no opportunity for gods to interfere 
with the course of events in the world. None the less, Epicurus 
and his followers assumed the existence of gods, spirits of finest 
matter who are untroubled by thought of man or any other care. 
That men should fear them or bring petitions to them involves a 
wrong idea of the gods ; the wise man's worship consists in 
admiration for their ideal beauty and in contemplation of their 
perfectness. 8 Although the Epicureans were far from denying the 
importance of religion, this worship of the "wise man " stood in 
such sharp contrast with the old worship practised by the people, 
that some antagonism necessarily developed. 

The Stoics alone among these later schools of thought made a 
serious effort to deal with philosophy in its relation to religion. 
The gods of popular worship were accepted by the Stoics, as by 
the Epicureans, and explained as beings higher than man, which 

* E& Carneades ; Sextus Emp. Adv. math. o_ 137 L 
a Lucretius, 3. 18 f. ; 5. 147 f.; Diog. Laer. to. 123 f. 

332 GREEK RELIGION 

had no great importance in the theory of the universe- Myths 
of the gods were assigned more importance as allegories that 
taught moral lessons or truths about processes in nature. 1 
The religion of the philosopher, however, was on a different 
plane. 

The fundamental principle of the Stoic thought was a pan- 
theistic materialism which made physics the basis of philosophy, 
and theology a branch of physics. The world process was a 
cycle, from the original divine fire to air and water and earth 
and the universe we know, and again from this universe back to 
fire. The divinity was none other than material fire ; but the 
presence of consciousness in man proved that the divine was also 
conscious, while the perfect beauty of the world and the perfect 
adaptation of means to ends proved that the governing power 
was intelligent This God, the ultimate source of all things, 
and the intelligent force present in all, it was the business of 
the philosopher to know and to worship. Evil was explained 
away or denied, for the immanent God was perfectly good. 
The reality of religious sentiment among the Stoics is evinced by 
the Hymn to Zeus (for this pantheistic God is called Zeus) of 
Cleanthes. 2 

Later developments of Greek philosophy, in particular the 
effort of the Neoplatonists to revive philosophical religion as over 
against Christianity, may be passed over here. Though the forms 
of Greek worship possessed a wonderful tenacity, their hold on 
the thinking public rapidly grew weaker after the Peloponnesian 
war until the philosopher felt that he had fully satisfied their de- 
mands by assigning to the older gods some minor place in his 
system. The importance of the movement here under discussion, 
as has already been pointed out, is to be found not in Greece 
itself but rather in the history of Christian theology. Greek re- 
ligion of the fifth century had enough reality and vitality to persist 
in forms of worship and superstition even to the present day; 

1 Cp. Cornutus, Tkeol. grate, compendium. 

2 Quoted in Stobaeus, /'Ays. i . 2. p. 30. 

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 333 

and furthermore it furnished content to a philosophy of religion 
which was passed on to the Christian church and which still in- 
fluences Christian thought. It was the truth in Greek religion 
combined with the fearless freedom of Greek thought which 
produced this heritage for a later civilization. 

CHAPTER IV 
THE DISTINCTIVE NATURE OF GREEK RELIGION 

1. " Monotheism " in Greece. — Until recently writers who have 
discussed Greek religion as distinct from Greek mythology have 
ordinarily sought for evidence of Christian ideas in Greek litera- 
ture instead of studying Greek religion for itself. In the present 
volume this course has been avoided ; the effort has been rather 
to treat Greek worship and belief from the Greek point of view. 
In conclusion perhaps we may fairly ask again whether the word 
" religion " has been rightly used, whether the phenomena under 
discussion do satisfy our idea of religion. Many of them do. not ; 
these, having been frankly stated, may for the moment be neg- 
lected- The religious practices and ideas of the people at large 
are for the most part crude enough ; here again we are justified 
in turning away for the moment from the majority to the few in 
whom religion found its higher expression. Though these few 
persons are not a fair test by which to judge the meaning of 
Greek religion, nevertheless it is most unfair in art or literature, 
in politics or ethics or religion, not to consider the highest results 
attained. In this section I shall attempt to state these higher 
religious conceptions which occasionally appeared in Greece, 
both in their relation to later religious thought and in their rela- 
tion to those general views of the Greek people out of which they 
developed - 

In the first place it may be pointed out that the fundamental 
idea in Greek religion is that man's ability and activity are limited 
by a superior power akin to himself in its nature, and inter- 
ested in his welfare. This controlling power in the world is not 

334 

DISTINCTIVE NATURE OF GREEK RELIGION 335 

fully represented by any particular god ; rather it is a divine pres- 
ence which is manifested now in one god, now in the community 
of the gods. No doubt this divine being was suggested by 
nature, for the physical universe was a limitation to man's activity, 
one complex power enveloping him. From Homer on, the gods 
in general (or some particular god) are represented as freely in- 
terfering to change the course of events in nature ; ' nor does this 
impress men as so very wonderful, since nature is part of that 
human environment in which the divine is manifested. And the 
divine had the same unity which was attributed to nature. At the 
same time this divine being was no doubt suggested also by the con- 
sideration of human experience and conduct. Again beginning 
with Homer we find that the poet's conception of society is frankly 
based on the idea of one governing power which sanctions right 
and law. The action of the Homeric poems rests on the belief 
that Troy must fall because Paris had abused the hospitality of 
Menelaus, and in the Odyssey that the insolence of Penelope's 
suitors is to bring destruction on their heads. The same belief 
in the moral government of the world is the keynote of much of 
the later literature. 8 Man's social environment is conceived as a 
(moral) divine government, just as his natural environment is the 
manifestation of a divine power about him and above him. 

It appears then that the background of Greek philosophy of life 
is a divine power which makes for righteousness, a power not 
fully expressed in any of the gods of myth or the gods of wor- 
ship, though it is not infrequently called by the name "Zeus." 8 
From this point of view alone can be explained the general use 
of the words 0eos and dcot from Homer on. Affairs prosper when 
"god" or " the gods" favor 4 ; "god" or "the gods" give men 
prowess in battle, beauty, or eloquence, and again it is " god " or 

1 The evidence for Homer is collected by Naegelsbach, Hcmeriscke Theologie, 
49 f. 

»Cp. supra, p. 256: Naegelsbach, Homerische Theologie, 317 £.; L. Schmidt, 
Ethik tUr alten Gricchen, r. 47 U ; Tyler, Theology of the Greek Poets, 236 f. 

8 L. Schmidt, ibid. 1. 48-50. 

4 Iliad, 9. 49; 24. 430; cp. Sophocles, Ajax, 765. 

336 GREEK RELIGION 

Zeus to whom a particular event is referred. 1 The phrases to Beiov 
and 8eia rvxn do not occur in Homer; in Aeschylus and Herodo- 
tus and later writers they are used as an alternative to the word 
#«os, to refer to much the same thing. 2 In a word, all through 
Greek literature the divine power back of human life and the 
physical universe is recognized, whether it is called Zeus or God 
or the Divine. 

Perhaps it is not strange that this state of the case has given 
rise to the theory of Welcker (and others before him) that Greek 
religion started with monotheism. The exclusive recognition of 
one god at a time in worshiphas tended to strengthen the theory. 
At the same time it is quite clear that the belief in one divine 
power is by no means primitive in Greece ; rather, the conscious- 
ness of it gradually developed along with the social consciousness 
(or sense of social uiiity) among the people. Philosophic thought 
pursued the same course in the direction of a theology that was 
monotheistic; 8 but for the public at large this divine power 
found its expression in and through the particular gods of wor- 
ship. 

From a modern point of view there is some truth in Schmidt's 
statement that the Greeks made no such antithesis as we make 
between the One and the Many in the divine worltl.* As it was 
the group of worshippers rather than the individual who sought 
communion with a god in worship, so it was easy to think of the 
divine now as manifested in a group of gods, now in a particular 
god. The unity of the divine became finally a necessity of human 
thought, but it was far more natural for the Greeks than it would 
be for us to conceive the divine unity as manifested in a series of 
gods. After these gods and their worship have been studied, it is 
fair to note how clearly the Greeks recognized that the " horizon 
of human consciousness" was one divine power. 

i Iliad, 13. 730; 3. 66; Odyssey* 14. 444 and 183; 8. 176; 3. 228 and 231. 
2 Herodotus, i. 3a: 3. 108: 4. 8; Aeschylus, Choepk, 958; Sophocles, PhiL 
1326; etc. 

» ZeNer. Vbrtrage und Abftandltmgen, 1. 1 f. 

* 1-. Schmidt, Ethik dcr alien Griecken, I. 60. 

DISTINCTIVE NATURE OF GREEK RELIGION 357 

2. The Nature of a God in Greece. — The fact that this " divine," 
the ruling power in the world, is centred or focussed in individual 
gods — personal gods recognized as such before the consciousness 
of any unity was clear — has led to those characteristics of Greek 
religion which are at first sight most striking. Because the per- 
sonality of the gods was so like the personality of man, the gods 
could only be conceived as in the world, not apart from it. That 
same power over his environment which man might exercise was 
present to far larger degree in the gods; and while nothing in the 
world was outside the divine, the gods were necessarily limited by 
the very fact that they were many and were persons. As persons 
in the world they possessed that reality for man and that sympathy 
with him which were so distinctly felt in Greece. 

It has already been pointed out that the Greek gods reflect 
every phase of human life. Not only the forms of worship, but 
also the conceptions of the gods themselves vary with prosperity 
and with adversity. With each considerable change in the com- 
munity the nature of the gods is modified- And in particular 
whatever is human is for that reason represented in one or an- 
other of these superhuman members of human society. That the 
gods so constantly are acting with reference to man seems at first 
a childish conception ; childish or not, this view is inevitable for 
gods which owe their existence to the social demands of their 
worshippers. 

The most notable result of this process is the moral character 
assigned to the gods. Their position in society is that of rulers, 
rulers who should be wise, just, and merciful in dealing with their 
subjects, whatever license be granted to individual faults or vices- 
It appears that the idea of divine justice arose both in connection 
with the abstract conception of one divine power at work in the 
world, and also in connection with the separate personality of gods 
who were rulers. The thought of gods who watched over the wel- 
fare of their worshippers, on the other hand, belongs primarily 
with the conception of the gods as personal rulers. In the case 
of Zeus, father of gods and men, one may almost speak of divine 

GREEK RELIGION 22 

3^8 GREEK RELIGION 

s 

love for men , ; perhaps, also, a patron deity of the state may be 
described as having a sort of affection for that state and its citizens. 
Divine wisdom and justice, mercy and beneficence, were not for- 
eign to Greek thought ; the other attribute which we assign to the 
Deity, the attribute of holiness, was not generally recognized, 
though later Greek thought did not hesitate to find its moral 
ideals impersonated in the gods. The essential fact about these 
gods, however, is that they were very near to man, gods that arose 
in response to human need and that met man's sense of need so 
completely. 

The account of the forms of worship (Part I, Chap, ii) has, I 
believe, confirmed the statement in the introduction (p. 32 f/) that 
Greek worship is primarily a social matter, the effort of the wor- 
shipper to establish social relations with his god. The homage 
paid to divine rulers may be in the form of tribute, of processions 
and pageants, of banquets shared by gods and worshippers ; what- 
ever its form it is essentially homage, intended to express the 
grateful submission of the subject to his ruler, and more especially 
the desire of the subject for such blessings as come from a sym- 
pathetic and beneficent ruler. The general object of worship 
was to secure this social connection between the community of 
worshippers and their patron god. 

The above statement leaves out rites of riddance or aversion, 
mystic rites, and perhaps rites to pacify angry deities. This last 
type of worship is not inconsistent with the idea of kindly rulers, 
for any ruler may be stirred to anger by bis subjects and some 
special effort may be necessary to restore his spirit of friendliness. 
It has further been pointed out that some gods, notably agri- 
cultural deities, are by nature fickle, so that special rites are 
practised from time to time to remove possible causes of anger. 
The purpose of these rites is not essentially different from that of 
other rites to cultivate the social connection of god and wor- 
shipper. 

Inasmuch as the gods are essentially good, it is necessary to 

1 Schoeroann p GrUch. Alt. a. 148 f. 

DISTINCTIVE NATURE OF GREEK RELIGION 339 

seek elsewhere the causes of mischief and evil, except when they 
can be interpreted as due to just auger of the gods. Such spirits 
of evil occupy a remarkably small place in Greek religion, but 
their presence is attested by rites of aversion. The rather sharp 
line between these rites and worship proper reduces this phase of 
belief almost to the level of pure superstition. Men sought social 
relations with the greater gods as the true source of blessing and 
of escape from evil ; in disaster they sought to mollify the anger 
of the gods and to remove the causes of that anger - f that they 
also tried to drive away spirits of evil means that they had not 
escaped entirely from this more primitive conception of life. 

The conception of the gods as personal rulers, far-reaching as 
it is, does not cover the whole matter, for an undercurrent of 
mysticism here and there comes to the surface with a strikingly 
different account of them. Nor is religious worship entirely con- 
fined to rites that can be explained as social. The sharp limits 
of personality which define a god may be broken down ; some 
divine influence may be felt as existing in the blood of a sacrificial 
victim or in the juice of the grape ; man himself may be pos- 
sessed by the divine presence, till he loses himself in the larger 
nature of the god. This merging of god and nature or of god and 
man belongs to the sphere of mysticism. 

The mystic element has already been pointed out in the study 
of oracles and divination. Knowledge of the future may be gained 
through signs and dreams • it may also be gained through seers 
who have such intimate connection with the god that they speak 
for the god, not for themselves — seers like the Pythian priestess 
or the Sibyl. Imitative worship, such as the drama of the slaying 
of the Python at Delphi, probably had some mystic meaning 
originally, however it was understood later. The ecstatic wor- 
ship of Dionysus was frankly accepted as irrational and mystical. 
The purpose of music and dance and wild rites in the forest was 
to create in actual human experience the sense of union with the 
divine. Religion thus became the means of breaking the bonds 
which held the soul of man apart from God, in order that it might 

340 GREEK RELIGION 

find its true home in the divine being. Such a belief is in sharp 
contrast to the ordinary Greek view of life. It was never wide- 
spread or controlling; that it existed at all along with the. pre- 
eminently rational account of human life in relation to the world 
and to the gods is noteworthy proof of the Greek breadth of view 
in religious matters. 

3. Sin and tire Remedy for Sin. — Much of Christian theology 
has centred about the two related conceptions of sin and its 
remedy ; Semitic religion, also, laid stress on rites of expiation 
and atonement; while these ideas and the rites associated with 
them necessarily formed a part of Greek religion, they remained 
ordinarily in the background. The clearness of moral vision which 
could not overlook punishment as the result of trangression is in 
part responsible for this result in Greece. Perhaps the almost 
rationalistic interpretation of the gods as like human rulers checked 
the moral demand for gods that were pure and holy, together with 
the requirement that man should aim at a similar ideal. From the 
Greek point of view the facts are distinct enough ; trangression of 
moral law calls for punishment by divine rulers, and consequently 
it may be regarded as "sin**; what is most evidently sin against 
the gods is that neglect or presumption which develops out of 
undue self-reliance ; finally the thought of sin as pollution which 
must be purified in order to restore a right relation between god 
and worshipper is common in ritual. These three points of view 
are not clearly distinguished, nor is the religious conception of sin 
(and its remedy) ever sharply defined. 

The Greek " theodicy" is absolutely simple. Sin is known by 
the suffering and misfortune which follows in its train. A man 
may suffer for his own sins; quite as often the community suffers 
because some member of it has provoked the anger of the gods, 
or the family suffers because it is under the curse of an ancestral 
sin. Of this last point the family of Oedipus or of Atreus may 
serve as a mythical type. The army of the Greeks, as a com- 
munity, suffers from a plague when Agamemnon has reviled the 
priest Chryses, and Troy at length must fall because Paris has 

DISTINCTIVE NATURE OF GREEK RELIGION 341 

violated the hospitality of Menelaus. 1 The presumption of an 
individual like Creon or Pentheus brings swift punishment. 2 In 
these matters myth is but the prototype for the Greek interpretation 
of daily experience. 

The causes of sin are not infrequently mentioned in Greek 
literature. 3 Humanity is frail and ever liable to err. 4 Though 
error and sin, like all else in human life, is not infrequently re- 
ferred to the gods, a the real cause of sin is found in the nature of 
man. Ate, the blind folly which leads man on from sin to sin and 
to ultimate disaster, is one of the most striking moral conceptions 
in the Homeric poems. 4 Although this word shifts its meaning 
later, the conception that sin begets sin, that sin is the cause of 
intellectual blindness and perversion of the will which end in dis- 
aster, is still fundamental in Greek thought. 7 Laius disregarded 
Apollo's warning not to marry; his son Oedipus, with all his high 
and pure ideals, in anger killed a man who proved to be his father, 
and unwittingly married his mother; to the sons and daughters 
of this marriage came sin and suffering till the race was extinct. 
Such was one typical example of sin as the cause of sin. 

The original sin of Laius was the disregard of Apollo, caused 
by his desire for marriage. Not only passion, but also other im- 
pulses of human nature, like envy and the love of gain, lead men 
astray. 8 The Greeks summed up the whole matter in the concep- 
tion of vfSpcs, or presumption, which may be stated as follows : 
Prosperity leads to an undue self-confidence which forgets modera- 
tion or even divine warning in carrying out its own plans. 9 Blind 

1 Herodotus. 2. 120. a Odyssey. 4. 50a; Sophocles, Ant. passim. 

■ Schmidt, Etkik der altert GrUehen, 1. 230. 

« Sophocles. Ant. 1023; Thucydides. 3. 45. 3; Pindar, Ofym. 7- 24-25. 

« Iliad, 4. 86 f.; Odyssey, 4. 361 ; Plato, Politui. 2, p. 380 A, and quotation from 
Aeschvlus. 

« /Had, 19. 91 f.; Odyssey, 1. 33. 7 Cp. Sophocles, Ant. 134a. 

8 Schmidt. Ethik der a/ten Griechen. I. 355: cp. Plato, Po/itia, 4. P- 439 A. t; 
Pindar. Pyth. 3. 54. 

* E#. Odyssey \ 16. 86, cf passim; Aeschylus. Agam. 750 f. ; Sophocles, Oed. Tyr. 
872 f.; Pindar, Olym. 13. 10 f.; fsthnu 4- 13-15; cp. Deuteronopny 6. 10 f. 

34a GREEK RELIGION 

folly (At£) is the result of presumption ; sin leads to sin because 
it makes man presumptuous ; any wrong-doing is really sin against 
the gods because it means a presumptuous disregard of divine law. 

The remedy for sin, in so far as any remedy is possible, depends 
on the nature of sin. When it is transgression of law, law which 
is divinely appointed, 1 nothing can be done to avert the inevitable 
penalty. That Aegisthus can atone for his sin in marrying Cly- 
taemnestra by means of sacrifice and votive offerings, or that the 
followers of Odysseus can allay Helios's anger by similar means 
when they have disregarded the warning not to slay his cattle, 
are suggestions condemned by Homer as clearly as by Plato. 2 
Ultimate escape is hardly won by Orestes, even though it was 
Apollo himself who bade him slay the guilty Clytaemnestra* All 
that can be done by way of remedy is concerned, not with avoid- 
ance of the direct penalty for transgression, but with the spirit 
of presumption which is so intimately associated with the act of 
wrong-doing. 

Again, in so far as sin is the expression of a wrong spirit on the 
part of the sinner, it may be remedied (a) by making amends, if 
possible, and (3) by seeking to gain anew the favor of the gods in 
worship. The religious side of the matter is the disregard of the 
gods, which the Greeks also traced to presumption (vfipt?) and 
which of course provoked the anger of the gods ; the remedy, 
therefore, consists in giving evidence of a desire to honor the rule 
of the gods and in a direct effort to allay their anger. In the 
language of Herodotus and Sophocles the sin is "healed."* 

The Homeric poems give examples of sins that can be ** healed," 
and of sins too grave for healing : the affront of Ajax to Poseidon 
and that of the Greek hosts to Athena are beyond cure ; the anger 
of gods for failure to make sacrifice may be appeased ; even 
Agamemnon's harsh treatment of Apollo's priest may be set right 

* Sophocles, Ant. 604 f.; Ocd. Tyr. 863 f-; "The doer suffers" Aeschylus, 
Choeph. 306; Xenophon, Mem. 4. 4. 19. 

■ Odyssey, 3. 373 f. : la. 343 f. : Plato, Politia, 2, p. 364 B. £ 

* Aeschylus, Qrestcta* 

* Herodotus, I. 167; Sophocles, Ant. 1027 ; -cp. Pindar, Olyrn. 7. 43. 

DISTINCTIVE NATURE OF GREEK RELIGION 343 

by making amends and by sacrifice. 1 It was an insult to Apollo 
when Croesus tested the truthfulness of the Delphic oracle, but 
the gifts of Croesus were accepted by the god as an atonement. 8 
More than once a plague was regarded as evidence of divine 
anger at neglected worship, anger which was allayed by reviving 
the worship. 3 It has been noted that such an affront to the gods 
as the mutilation of the hermae at Athens, although it was an act 
of individuals, brought the anger of the gods on the state ; ac- 
cordingly it was the function of the state to punish the individuals 
concerned and to seek to propitiate the gods. Any form of 
worship might serve this purpose in that it was proof of man's 
desire to restore normal relations with the gods. 

A slightly different side of the matter appears especially in the 
tragedians, namely, the doctrine that suffering itself may some- 
times serve as a sort of expiation for sin. Anything like self- 
imposed penance is absolutely foreign to Greelc religion. But 
that suffering may teach a better spirit, 4 and that the natural 
punishment may "loose" the power of sin, are ideas familiar to 
Greek thought As the death of a murderer " looses " the influ- 
ence of his deed for evil/ so suffering may in the end overcome 
the effect of a lesser crime. Perhaps the Oedipus of Sophocles 
may be regarded as an illustration of this form of expiation — in 
the Oedipus Tyrannus a king self-willed, quick to anger, and 
relying on his own powers; in the Oedipus Ccloncus, after years 
of suffering for his unwitting sin, a man chastened and brought 
into harmony with the will of the gods. 

From a third point of view sin is a form of pollution, and its 
remedy is found in rites of purification. Pollution and purifica- 
tion do not necessarily have anything to do with sin ;• probably 
the conception of a dangerous substance which must be purged 

1 Odyssey, 4. 503; 3. 143 *"- ; 4- 47»: Niad m 9. 533 f.: X. 94 f-l cp. 9. 497 L 

a Xenophon, Cyrop. 7. 2. 19. 8 Pausanias, 8. 4a. 5 f. 

* nd&et v&ffos, Aeschylus, Agam. 177 ; cp. Herodotus, 1. 207 ; Plato, Symp. 333 B. 

* Sophocles, Oed* Tyr. ioo; Aeschylus, C*<vpA. 803 U 
a Cp. suftra, p. not 

344 GREEK RELIGION 

away belongs originally to quite a different range of ideas; but 
moral evil also conies to be regarded as pollution, and purifica- 
tion is thought to give relief from an evil which separates god and 
worshipper. In the first book of the Iliad (r. 313 f.) the plague, 
which manifested the divine anger at Agamemnon's sin, made puri- 
fication necessary; similarly, the house of Odysseus was purified 
after the crime and punishment of the suitors. 1 Any death caused 
an impurity, but murder caused an impurity and a consequent 
anger which were not easily removed. 2 When the followers of 
Cylon were slain in violation of the rights of sanctuary, those who 
committed the outrage were banished, and then elaborate rites of 
purification were necessary before the city could expect again the 
favor of its gods. 3 Certain cults laid more emphasis than others 
on the need of purification. There is some evidence that the 
ritual purity demanded, e.g. in the Eleusinian mysteries, was at 
times carried over into the ethical field*; in other words that in 
these rites men sought relief from the feeling of guilt for sin. In 
any case it is clear (a) that pollution was not primarily a moral 
matter that could be called sin, but (/-) that at least some kinds 
of sin came to be regarded as a pollution demanding rites of 
purification. 

In general the Greek conception of sin differs radically from 
the Christian conception, because Greek religion laid compara- 
tively little stress on holiness and on the idea of divine love. 
Wrongdoing is sin against the divine power which governs the 
world righteously ; it is not a rejection of the loving care of the 
gods, nor a lapse from that ideal of life which the gods exemplify. 
The three points of view considered are more marked, one at one 
time, one at another. It is noticeable that, while each concep- 
tion is worked out logically, the three are not brought together 
with any definiteness or unity. 

1 Odyssey, 22. 48r, 494. * Sophocles, Oea\ Tyr. 96, 236, 1519. 

8 Thucydides, 1. 126; Herodotus, 6. 91. 

4 E&. Tertullian, t>e praescripi. 40; IModorus Siculus, 5. 49. 6; cp. schol. on 
Aristophanes, Pax, 378 ; Plato, Potitra, a, p. 364 E. 

DISTINCTIVE NATURE OF GREEK RELIGION 345 

4. The Conception of the Religious Life. — In Christianity the 
ideals of the religious life and the conception of its nature have 
assumed various forms during nineteen centuries. The faith in a 
controlling divine presence has not failed, nor has the sense of 
divine love ever been lacking ; on the other hand the goal to be 
attained, " salvation " in Christian terminology, has received inter- 
pretations as various as the means by which this goal has been 
sought. At one time salvation has been interpreted as the holiness 
to be acquired through escape from sin ; the means have been 
penance and avoidance of contact with the world ; the motive 
has often seemed to be selfish, though the effort to become good 
had little meaning except as this goodness was thought to be 
pleasing to God. At other times the motive has seemed to be a 
social one in that religious men have aimed to do good rather 
than to be good ; the means has been the service of others in the 
community; "salvation" has been recognized in the freedom 
from selfish purpose or desire thus attained. Between these two 
poles has oscillated the conception of the religious life. 

Probably the ancient Greek would have understood the impulse 
to do good as little as the impulse to be good, yet we find in 
Greece the germs of both points of view. The general ideal of 
social service appears in a very concrete form as the demand that 
the citizen perform his part in the state and the community, while 
the requirements of morality, as has been pointed out above, 1 
were never wholly divorced from religion. Negatively in Greece 
the religious life meant to avoid impiety (ao-c/fata). Acts of 
impiety were of course punished by the state through the special 
court where such cases were tried. Still the requirement was 
purely external, for public worship was never compulsory and a 
man was never questioned as to his belief. For the individual 
to avoid impiety meant simply to avoid acting in defiance of the 
practices of established religion. 

The external mark of piety was regularity and punctiliousness 
in the performance of religious rites. In the Homeric poems 

346 GREEK RELIGION 

every meal was marked by sacrifice and libation ; in later days at 
Athens the same principle probably obtained, though there was 
room for very great difference between what custom required and 
what a pious man might do if he chose. In the spirit of piety 
portrayed, the account of Cephalus in Plato corresponds closely 
to that of Peleus in the lliad~ x As for the public festivals, the 
religious man doubtless felt it his duty to join the community in 
worship, while many must have come from other than religious 
motives. Moreover, there were extra religious rites outside the 
state worship which appealed to a considerable number- It was 
no more fair then than it is now to define the pious man as one 
who was scrupulous about sacrificing regularly to the gods, 2 but 
then as now it was the outward mark of piety. 

Plato makes Euthyphro 3 give as one definition of piety that it 
is "doing what pleases the gods," a definition that proves unsat- 
isfactory because what pleases the gods has in turn to be defined 
as piety. In fact experience was the test which led the Greeks 
to think that religious observances pleased the gods and therefore 
were the true expression of piety. The conception of piety which 
is involved in the requirement to join the community in worship 
is perhaps broader than appears at first sight. The state worship 
was maintained on the ground that the gods cared for the honor 
and success of the state ; whatever contributed to this end would 
therefore be gratifying to the gods and an element in piety. In 
other words all that society demanded of a man, all that was right 
and good in life, would receive indirectly the sanction of religion 
because the welfare of the state was an object of concern to the 
gods. 

Although one finds in Greece no conscious demand that the 
pious man be lilce the gods, nevertheless as the gods were de- 
veloped into harmony with the higher ideals of human life, these 
ideals at length were reenforced by the influence of the gods. We 

* Plato, Politia, i. p. 328 C; Iliad. 11. 773 f. 

3 Plato, Euthyfihro, 14 B; cp. Xenophon, Mem. 4. 6. 3 £. 

* Euihyphro, 7 A. 

DISTINCTIVE NATURE OF GREEK RELIGION 347 

have seen that art and literature did much to shape the thought 
of the gods in this direction - the very recognition, that in a paint- 
ing or a tragedy the gods did represent true human ideals could 
but lead, even though unconsciously, to an effort to become like 
the gods. To Plato this point was very clear. The demand that 
in his ideal state the gods be pictured as true, unchanging, not 
subject to weak emotion, etc., was based on the fact that the reli- 
gious man could not avoid the effort to be like the gods. For the 
same reason the statue of Apollo, type of perfect young man- 
hood, belonged in the palaestra, the statue of Hephaestus in the 
workshop, the statue of Hermes in the market-place. So Pindar 
describes the peaceful serenity of Apollo r which those who wor- 
ship Apollo may acquire. 1 The poetic picture of the gods, as 
Plato points out, is so non-religious that its influence in this direc- 
tion was quite different from that of art. 

The sense of need which underlies the religious life had in 
Greece less to do with freedom from evil than with positive bene- 
fits that were desired- Homer's phrase "all men need the gods" 8 
seems to mean that men need those blessings which come from 
beneficent divine rulers. Other nations might be oppressed with 
the evils of life ; religion for them might be a grievous task to 
secure freedom from this burden ; kindly gods and a joyous wor- 
ship were the birthright of the Greeks. To sin against these gods 
brought terrible penalties indeed ; on the other hand sin and evil 
were not ever present facts, nor was self-imposed penance the 
method of securing relief when they were present. There were 
rites to deal with circumstances where special help was needed — 
help in sickness, knowledge of the future, help in time of drought 
or mildew for the crops. At the same time the point of view was 
that the gods were by nature ready to bless ; not gods who yielded 
grudgingly to the pressure of powerful rites such as Rome used in 
time of great trouble. Not until the Hellenistic age did religion 
become the effort to obtain salvation from evil. 

The sense of human dependence on the gods was in no degree 

1 Pindar, Pyth. 5. tt Odyssey, 3. 48. 

348 GREEK RELIGION 

weakened because sin and evil did not continually drive men to 
seek divine help. This dependence appears first in the form of 
obedience — Achilles obeys the gods, eager as he is to maintain his 
honor against Agamemnon, or to gratify his vengeance by keeping 
Hector's body from his parents; and the spirit of Achilles pre- 
vailed among the later Greeks. 1 To be sure the motive was 
frankly fear of divine punishment to him who disobeyed. 5 Yet 
fear of the gods often took the form of reverence when the justice 
of the divine rule was so clearly recognized. 3 

Again the sense of dependence appeared as trustful confidence 
in the gods. When Agamemnon or Menelaus or Achilles prayed 
to the gods,* it was with confidence in their favor and blessing, for 
the Greeks had come to Troy with divine favor (orv 0e£). The 
Greek general waited for favorable omens that his army might 
obtain this confidence. Whoever was convinced that his cause 
was right, believed that the power of the gods was with him, for 
no one doubted the justice of the gods. 5 In fact this attitude of 
trustful confidence was the only natural outcome of the concep- 
tion that the gods were bound up with the state in one social 
group. That it must have often met with disappointment was 
easily explained on the ground that men had in some way failed 
to do their part. 

And when evil did come, the sense of dependence on the gods 
appeared as resignation. Though it is the will of Zeus that 
many Greeks perish, they still go to the sacrificial meal and pre- 
pare for the battle. 6 The counsels of the gods were often inexpli- 
cable ; none the less what the gods sent must be accepted, for 
man had no choice in the matter. Resignation was the easier 
because good was to be expected after evil. Pessimistic as the 
Greek poets often arc, little as they often think of the value of 

1 Iliad* i. 216; 24. 130; Sophocles, Oed. T^r m 881; Xenophon. Mem. 4. 3. 17. 

* Iliad. 16. 388 : Odyssey, 14. 8a; Thucydides. 2. 53. 4. 

n Xcnaphon, Anab. 2. 3, as; AUm. I. 4. 19 ; Antiphon, Tetrat. 2. 2. 12; Aescliines* 
I. 50; I so crates. 5. 116 f. 

« Iliad, a. 413; 17. 561 ; 16. 233; 9. 49. 

* Sophocles, Rlec. 173 t Iliad, 19. 274. 

DISTINCTIVE NATURE OF GREEK RELIGION 349 

human life, the faith in gods who care for the community and 
bless their righteous followers does not fail them. 

Finally the sense of dependence on the gods appears as man's 
desire for companionship with them. The conception of a father's 
love for his children does not find very frequent mention in litera- 
ture, nor does it come out clearly in the relation of the gods to 
men. It is potentially present but undeveloped even in the case 
of Zeus. On the other hand the social bond uniting the god with 
his worshippers lies at the very root of the Greek religious instinct. 
Again and again we have had occasion to point out that worship 
and belief grew naturally out of this conception. If the word 
"companionship" suggests too much the relation of equals, yet it 
is hard to find a better name for a social connection so enduring, 
so intimate, so clearly conceived in terms of human personality. 

When human ideals, and not simply the facts and forces of 
man's environment, found expression in the gods, it is not difficult 
to trace the results of this conception of the religious life. It was 
with the thought of Athena, protecting goddess of the city, that the 
general went into battle ; Artemis, the goddess of good counsel 
(Boulaia), had her shrine where the Athenian assembly met ; 
Athena Ergane guided the woman in her weaving ; Hermes was 
with the trader in the market, Poseidon with the sailor in his 
voyage, Artemis of the wilds (Agrotera) with the hunter in his 
pursuit of game. The Greeks reverenced their gods, feared their 
anger, trusted their protection; but it was this sense of divine 
companionship in every task of daily life which made religion a 
vital matter. 

It is easy to imagine that in the middle of the fifth century b*c. 
religion was hardly more than a superstition for many of the 
Athenians ; we know too that this superstition found its counter- 
part in a rationalism almost as unintelligent ; yet we can hardly 
believe that for the audiences of Sophocles religion was an out- 
worn garment or the religious life a mere name. 

APPENDIX I 

THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF A GREEK GOD — 

ARTEMIS 

I. In the Introduction the difference between the gods in wor- 
ship and the picture of the gods in myth was discussed, and in 
Part II the stages in the development of Greek religion were 
briefly treated. Perhaps both phases of the subject may be made 
clearer, if one concrete example is considered more in detail, 
even at the risk of introducing more or less that is hypothetical in 
the effort to connect the historical data. For this purpose I have 
chosen the goddess Artemis as a striking and interesting example. 
Both in myth and in worship the facts about the goddess are as 
definite as they are abundant. And while much remains to be 
desired in explaining the facts, the general course of development 
is fairly well established. 

The Artemis of myth is a definite personality in story and in art 
from the Homeric poems on. The ideal of young womanhood in 
all its purity and vigor, the leader of the nymphs in the chase as 
well as in the dance, the sister of Apollo god of light, and herself 
sometimes goddess of the moon as Apollo is god of the sun — 
such is the goddess of myth. Particular myths, the stories of Cal- 
listo and Arethusa and Actaeon and Hippolytus, have to do with 
a goddess of hunting who stands for virginal purity. The connec- 
tion with Apollo (even the story of her birth on the island of 
Delos) seems to be secondary to the idea of the chaste huntress. 
The Artemis of Versailles in the Louvre is the plastic representa- 
tion of this idea, an idea that has left its mark on all our European 
literature. But if we turn to worship, the goddess is neither so 
definite a person nor quite the same person. Granted that prac- 

35o 

APPENDIX I 351 

tice is ordinarily older than story, the problem is first to coordinate 
the accounts of the worship of Artemis and then to trace, so far 
as is possible, the influences that shaped the story and later 
belief. 

2. We may begin with the cults of Artemis in the vicinity of 
Athens- At Agrae, south from the Acropolis, was the shrine of 
Artemis Agrotera, that goddess of the hunt to whom before the 
battle of Marathon the Athenian general vowed a sacrifice of goats. 
On the Acropolis itself was a branch of the worship of Artemis 
Brauronia, a goddess of wild nature-life who had some mystic con- 
nection with the bear. This connection with wild animals again 
appears in the worship of Artemis Mounychia at the seaport of 
Athens, and in other cults on the east coast of Attica (for example, 
that of Artemis Amarysia). The Brauronian Artemis received the 
names Chitone and Lysizonos, for young women dedicated to her 
garments and girdles before marriage. Again, Artemis was iden- 
tified in worship with Hecate, the goddess of uncanny rites per- 
formed at night ; Artemis Hecate presided over the entrance to 
the Athenian acropolis. Near the market place of Athens was 
a shrine of Artemis Orthia, perhaps a goddess of vegetation ; 
while in the market place Artemis was worshipped as Boulaia, 
goddess of political wisdom, and as Eukleia, goddess of fair fame; 
another shrine of the goddess of political wisdom, Artemis Aristo- 
boule, was situated in the deme of Melite to the southwest of the 
Acropolis. In the Academy just out of the city was a shrine of 
Artemis with statues of Ariste and Kalliste ("Best" and " Fairest"), 
apparently forms of the goddess. The name of Artemis was also 
applied to some foreign goddesses whose worship was introduced 
into Athens, to the goddess of Pherae in Thessaly, whose proper 
name seems to have been Brimo (called Artemis Pheraea), and to 
the Thracian Bendis (Artemis Bendis). In a word, we know 
something of ten or fifteen separate centres of Artemis worship in 
and about Athens. The many-sided nature of the goddess is, 
from the point of view of worship, quite as evident as any under- 
lying unify. 

352 GREEK RELIGION 

3- If this survey is extended over the Greek world, the result is 
much the same, except that the wider view makes it possible to 
group the cults of the goddess under certain general headings. 
By far the most widespread phase of Artemis worship connects her 
with hunting and wild animals. At Athens one of the months was 
named Elaphebolion ("Stag-hunt") ; and there are some refer- 
ences to a festival (Elaphebolia) at which cakes in the form of 
a stag were offered to Artemis, though it does not appear that this 
worship was recognized by the state. Among some Dorian peoples 
the same month was known as Artamisios (Artemisios), while in 
Phocis it was called Laphrios from the widespread worship of 
Artemis Laphria. The month-name is an indication that this is an 
early type of Artemis, and a goddess of hunting goes with a rela- 
tively early type of social life. The goddess herself receives some 
names that refer to hunting, such as Elaphia, Kynagia, Toxia. Ar- 
temis Diktynna, worshipped in Crete and Sparta and Phocis, was 
interpreted by the Athenians as the goddess of the hunting net. 
Artemis Kolainis in Euboea was connected in story with the hunter 
Amarynthus; and Atalante, the huntress of Mt. Parthenopaeus, 
seems to have been a form of Artemis. Other great hunters, 
Saron, Hippolytus, Anticleia, Scardandrius, looked to Artemis as 
their patron. When Xenophon brought the worship of Artemis 
from Ephesus to Scillus, he instituted the worship of a hunting 
goddess. Artemis Tauropolos ("Tender of bulls") can hardly 
be dissociated from the bull fights and bull hunts of early Greece, 
and perhaps the torches which she carried had primary reference 
to the use of torches in hunting at night. In a word, the normal 
Greek conception of Artemis as a huntress seems to be based on 
the primitive worship of a goddess of hunting. 

Closely associated with the g;oddess of hunting is the " Queen of 
wild beasts." Reliefs and paintings of early date represent her 
holding up an animal in each hand (the so-called Persian Artemis). 
In different localities the stag, the bear, the wild boar, the wild 
goat, the wolf, the quail (Ortygia),are connected with her worship. 
As Callisto in story was changed into a bear for unchastity, so 

APPENDIX I 353 

Taygete was changed into a slag; each is the mother of a people, 
and each is apparently a form of the goddess herself. Artemis 
Laphria, worshipped by hunters, was essentially a goddess of wild 
animal life who received wild animals in sacrifice. Artemis Lyaia 
was connected with th^stag ; the nymph Cyrene was an Artemis- 
like goddess associated with the lion, like the Artemis of Syracuse ; 
on the island of Aegina Aphata was a goddess of wild animals who 
became Artemis Aphaia. For us the goddess of hunters is perhaps 
hardly consistent with the goddess who protects wild animals and 
cares for their young j 1 the Greeks felt no such inconsistency. This 
goddess of wild animals was most at home in Aetolia, whence the 
worship of Laphria was carried to Patrae. In Asia Minor also a 
" Mother of Life " not dissimilar was very widely worshipped and 
often identified with Artemis by the Greeks. 

4. A second widespread series of cults recognized Artemis as 
a goddess of the moisture which fertilizes vegetation, and conse- 
quently as the goddess of fertility not only in plants but also in 
animals and men. This is the goddess of springtime, worshipped 
with dances (often obscene) to promote fertility, who held so im- 
portant a place in the religion of the Peloponnese. In Laconia 
the branch of olive hung before the door gave its name to 'Artemis 
Korythalia, a goddess of plant life as of child life. The curious 
worship of Artemis Lygodesma, in which the Spartan youths were 
lashed to the limit of their endurance, and in which a sickle or 
pruning knife was the prize for victory in the games, belongs under 
this heading. This form of Artemis was associated with trees, the 
walnut, the cedar, the laurel, and the cypress. All these cults 
included dances, probably intended to increase the crpps and the 
productiveness of flocks. Artemis Apanchomene, the goddess " who 
was hung," was apparently connected with a sacred tree, from which 
sacrifices for fertility were suspended. Artemis Lyaia of Syracuse 
received sacks of all fruits and skins of wine ; from choral songs 
in her honor the bucolic hymns are said to have developed. 

*Xenophon, Qrneget. 5. 14; Aeschylus, Agam. 135 f. ; and cp. Alexandra. Pau- 
sanias, 3. 19. 6, Preller-Robert, Griech. Myth. 307, A- a. 
Greek religion — 23 

354 GREEK RELIGION 

Especially in the Peloponnese Artemis was associated with swamps 
and springs and rivers ; such forms of the goddess were Limnatis, 
worshipped in Patrae and in Laconiawith orgiastic dance, Issoria, 
Thermaia, Alpheiaia, perhaps Eurynome and Stymphalia. Are- 
thusa, also, is a nymph who seems once to have been a form of 
the goddess herself. 

In the case of Artemis Korythalia the festival in her nonor was 
called Tithenidia (" Nurse festival ") , for a part was played by small 
boys with their nurses living in harvest huts. The blows given to 
ephebi in the worship of Artemis Lygodesma may be interpreted 
as a means of driving away evil, or as blows from a " rod of life." 
And quite generally the dances of Artemis were anything but dances 
of chaste nymphs in their origin ; on the contrary, they were sup- 
posed directly to stimulate the forces making for fertility in nature. 
From such a goddess there might easily have arisen a goddess of 
the grain, had not Demeter won this position among the later 
Greeks; indeed, it is more than possible that goddesses of this 
type, such as the Despoina of Arcadia, were identified with the 
later Demeter quite as often as with the later Artemis. 

It seems not unnatural that the goddess of nascent life should 
also appear as the goddess of human childbirth, and that the pro- 
tector of young animals should also protect young children. In 
this function Artemis appears as Locheia and Lysizonos ; Eileithyia 
is now a form of the goddess, now an independent being ; girls 
were " initiated " in the service of Artemis Brauronia and dedicated 
tokens of their childhood to her before marriage ; to Artemis 
Chitone were dedicated garments after childbirth ; Iphigeneia and 
Kalligeneia #are names referring to this function of the goddess. 
Clearly the protection of mothers and children is primary, the virgin 
character of the goddess secondary, in the nature of Artemis. 

Of the connection of Artemis with Apollo and Hecate and the 
moon, as of her place in city life, we shall speak later, the two 
general types already described seem to be the basis out of which 
the later goddess developed. This division, however, does not 
necessarily mean that the cults already mentioned are primitive, 

APPENDIX I 355 

but only of a primitive type ; nor does it mean that the cults dis- 
cussed later are inevitably late in origin, but rather that they exhibit 
later conceptions which doubtless were often superimposed on an 
early worship. 

5. The interesting fact as to the cults discussed above is 
that they all have points of connection, but no two of them are 
quite alilte. Clearly we might assume one goddess whose nature 
and worship had become different in different localities, or we 
might assume different goddesses who were gradually merged into 
the one Artemis of belief and myth while certain peculiarities were 
retained at local shrines. To the first assumption there are serious 
objections. What is the nature of the original one goddess ? Surely 
not the moon, as the Stoics assumed, or the night y as Claus sug- 
gested ; we have no evidence of a connection with the moon until 
well on in the fifth century. Again, this theory leaves out of ac- 
count the late identifications of Artemis with Hecate, and Eendis, 
and the Mother goddess of Asia Minor. Finally, it starts with the 
unified conception of the goddess in literature and art, and treats 
the older and more vital conceptions of worship as wholly secondary. 

Nor is it wholly satisfactory to start with the second assumption, 
namely, that different, disconnected goddesses were merged into 
one because a certain likeness between them was detected. 1 The 
forces at work in the late identifications such as that of Artemis 
with Brimo, could hardly have existed in the same form in early 
days. With Curtius 2 and Wernicke 3 we may begin by setting aside 
these fairly late examples and consider by itself the question of 
cults that may be regarded as distinctly early. 

Wernicke (1. c), in writing the history of Artemis, starts with 
a " great female divinity of nature widely worshipped in Greece 
from early days," and from this one goddess he explains most 
of the later forms of Artemis by a process of differentiation from 
the general to the specific. Perhaps it is simply a difference of 

* Cp. Cicero, Oe not, dear. 3. 33/58 ; Welclter, Griech. GtitterteAre, x, 560 t 

* ■ Studien zur Geschichte der Artemis," Gef. AdAantL 3. it 

* In Pauly-Wissowa, KcalettcyclofxudU, a. 1339*- 

35* GREEK RELIGION 

phraseology, though the difference seems to me to lie deeper, to 
say that the starting-point of Artemis is to be found in a type 
rather than in any real unity of person. The type is fairly definite : 
a goddess of the life principle in nature, more closely connected 
with vegetation in the Peloponnese and with animals in Boeotia 
and Aetolia, but never quite limited to either sphere. At the same 
time the type is fairly broad, and no one would deny a tendency to 
define it gradually (and differently) at each centre of worship. 
This tendency to definition has perhaps been overemphasized by 
such scholars as Wernicke, to the neglect of a widespread tendency 
in all phases of social development, the tendency toward larger and 
more complex unities. 

This last tendency or process is seen in the development of the 
state. Smaller villages unite in the city, and the city absorbs other 
communities till it becomes a city-state like Athens or Sparta, and 
on this basis develops the Athenian confederacy or the Spartan 
hegemony- It is seen in commerce, first in the increasing trade 
of one city, Chalcis or Aegina or Athens, later in the increasing 
commercial unity of the Mediterranean world. It is seen in 
ethical ideals and social institutions, till in the fifth century the 
two different standards of Athens and Sparta are dominant all 
through the Greek world. It is seen in language, where one finds 
a great variety of dialects to be classified under certain types, then 
a few types tending to absorb lesser varieties, and at length a general 
K(n\n). This same tendency or process I assume to have been at 
work in religion, a process of synthesis, of " condensation " {see 
supra % p. 212), of organization. And for a particular goddess like 
Artemis, it means that in popular belief (as well as in myth) 
goddesses of the same type tended to merge in one personality. 
A double name like Artemis Laphria bears the stamp of this process 
in that the first part stands for the original type and the acquired 
unity, the second part or epithet for the original (and acquired) 
differences as seen in worship. 

More concretely in the case of Artemis this process might be 
stated as follows : Very many of the small groups or communities 

APPENDIX I 357 

of Greek race which made their way down into the land which 
was to become Greece, and whose independence was guaranteed 
for long periods by the character of the region to which they came, 
worshipped each some goddess of wild nature- life. As Queen of 
the Wild her home would be in moist dells where vegetation 
nourished and animals found their favorite haunts- Hunters 
worshipped her that she might favor them in the pursuit of game ; 
with the return of vegetable life after the drought of summer or 
the cold of winter, men sought to help the process by " sympa- 
thetic worship"; in some places women sought the blessing of 
this divine mother that they might bear strong children. From 
one point of view these goddesses were as separate as the com- 
munities which worshipped them. Even when one name came to 
be used for the same idea in different communities, this name did 
not mean quite the same in any two. These forms of the goddess 
were all different, yet the conditions which gave rise to the worship 
were so similar that the type was the same. This statement is 
hypothesis, but it is difficult to imagine any other hypothesis if we 
recognize (i) the multiplicity and variety of the later cults of 
Artemis, and (2) the fact that social development is from many 
small simple units to a few larger and more complex units. 

Only one other possibility need be considered, viz. that the 
personality of the goddess, like her name, spread from some one 
centre. We can hardly question that the differences of worship, 
quite as much as the likenesses, at each cult-centre are original. 
On this basis it becomes relatively unimportant whether we believe 
that the goddess Artemis absorbed the goddesses of these different 
worships, or that the name Artemis prevailed over other names 
as these goddesses were fused into one homogeneous being. I 
cannot but feel that the first alternative lays undue stress on the 
connection between the name and the complex personality of the 
goddess, real as this is, and that the second alternative is truer 
to the facts of religious history in Greece. The early history of 
Artemis, then, may be described as a synthesis of goddesses similar 
but not identical in nature. That it was gradual, perhaps lagging 

358 GREEK RELIGION 

behind the development of a social unity along other lines, that it 
was ordinarily unconscious and never the result of state decrees 
or priestly craft, that the unity of the goddess came to be clearly 
felt even before myth and poetry did much to make her person- 
ality more real, we can hardly doubt. But with the general accep- 
tance of the name Artemis, one stage in the process was finally 
completed and the embellishment of myth then served to make 
the name and the person of the goddess familiar throughout 
Greece. 1 

6- It remains to examine the different lines of influence which 
were at work in forming the later personality of the goddess- And 
first are the influences which may be described as social. The 
process just outlined makes the creation of one Artemis dependent 
on the forces which in general make for social and intellectual unifi- 
cation; we may therefore expect that particular social changes, 
with their new activities and new needs, would leave their mark on 
the goddess. We have seen that the early Artemis was intimately 
associated with a period when hunting was a real method of liveli- 
hood. As the early communities came to depend more on flocks 
and herds, less on game, for food, it would not be unnatural that 
the protector of wild animals should be worshipped as protector 
of the flocks. This conception appears in Artemis Knakalesia, 
Hemerasia (the " Tamer "), Polyboia, and perhaps in Artemis 
Tauropolos, as well as in the name of the Artemis-nymph Poly- 
mele. Ordinarily the fact that Apollo was already recognized as 
the god of flocks prevented such a change in the conception of 
Artemis. Again, the increased development of agriculture might 

* Various " heroines ** and nymphs in the train of Artemis may be regarded as 
a by-product of this process, either because an old goddess-name was too strongly 
rooted to permit its disappearance in an epithet of Artemis, ot because it had 
already found a place for itself in story. Iphigenia was such an Artemis *' heroine," 
worshipped at Megara in her own name (Pausanius, i. 43. 3) and prominent in myth, 
while at Hermkme there was a worship of Artemis Iphigenia. Atalante was appar- 
ently a form of Artemis, who later became a heroine of myth. And the nymphs 
Callisto, Taygete. Ortygia, Arethusa, Diktynna, have already been mentioned as 
forms of the goddess hersell 

APPENDIX I 359 

easily have transformed Artemis the goddess of fertility into a 
goddess of the grain, had not Demeter and Persephone been the 
first to receive this function. In the Peloponnesus, however, we 
find the old rites in honor of the goddess of fertility still widely 
celebrated in later times in order that crops may be prospered ; 
in other words, the worship is adapted in many places to the needs 
of an agricultural people. With the development of city life the 
earlier phases of Artemis worship (connected with hunting and 
with vegetable life) might naturally fall into disuse, while her func- 
tion as protector of women in childbirth and of young children 
would remain. In spite of influences tending to emphasize the 
virgin goddess, the phase of her nature just mentioned found rec- 
ognition in Attiqa, Boeotia, and elsewhere. 

The tendency in Greece to regard a community as under the 
protection of some one god, the god of the city, is seen even in 
the case of Artemis. At Patrae, Artemis Triklaria seems to have 
been the divinity in whose name and worship different communi- 
ties combined to establish the city. In Euboea, the pan-Ionic 
league met at the temple of Artemis Amarysia under the sanction- 
ing protection of the goddess. The goddess of good counsel, 
Artemis Boulaia, or Boulephoros, had some political significance ; 
the same may probably be said of Artemis Peitho, the goddess 
of (rhetorical?) persuasion at Argos. In various cities Artemis 
worship was carried on at the market place (Aegium, Athens, 
Sicyon, Sparta, Troezen), and perhaps the name Artemis Agoraia at 
Olympia refers to a connection with trade. It involved no great 
change to transform the hunting goddess into a war goddess. 
The epithets Aristoboule, Eukleia, and Soteira are doubtless to be 
explained by the counsel, fair fame, and safety which Artemis 
granted in war. It is not unnatural, then, that goats were offered 
to Artemis Agrotera after Marathon, or that the victory at Salamis 
was celebrated in connection with the festival of Artemis Mou- 
nichia. The relation of Artemis to the early " Mother of Life " in 
Asia Minor, also, gave her name and character to the city goddess 
in some important places. 

360 GREEK RELIGION 

7. Another important line of influence in the history of Artemis 
was religious in its nature, in that other forms of worship and belief 
tended to modify the idea of Artemis in belief and in worship. 
I refer particularly to the relation with Apollo which was fixed 
before the time of the Homeric poems, and to the relation with 
Hecate which was fully recognized in the fifth century, though 
religious influence may be detected at various other points. In 
all Greek literature, and at many centres of worship, Artemis was 
the daughter of Leto and the sister of Apollo. In consequence 
of this relation Leto received the attribution of motherhood which 
might properly have gone to Artemis, protector of mothers ; 
Artemis became the ideal of young womanhood, as Apollo was 
the ideal of young manhood ; the orgiastic dances of the goddess 
of fertility were in some places transformed to beautiful dances of 
chaste nymphs led by a goddess of music ; the goddess of mois- 
ture and springs was recognized as the goddess of healing at 
springs (for example, Artemis Thermaia); it was easier to asso- 
ciate Artemis with the moon inasmuch as Apollo was associated 
with the sun ; Artemis gained a place in such centres of Apollo 
worship as Delphi and received various epithets which belonged 
first to Apollo- 1 One might almost say that Artemis received the 
lyre from Apollo, and Apollo the bow from Artemis. The origin 
of this connection with Apollo is involved in obscurity. It is more 
than probable, as Farnell points out,* that u the place where the 
deities were first closely associated, and whence the belief in their 
twinship spread, was . . . Delos " and the neighboring Rheneia. 
The important fact remains that the Artemis of worship, like the 
Artemis of myth, was profoundly modified by this relation with 
Apollo. 

The connection with Hecate is even more intimate, though 
not effective at so many points* The name Hecate seems to 
mean " Far-worker," a conception which appears also in the name 
Hekaerge at Delos and in poetic epithets of Apollo and Artemis: 

1 See Pauly-WSssowa, Realencyctopaedie, a. 1361. 
3 Fameil. Cults of tk* Greek States, 2. 465- 

APPENDIX I 361 

the connection of this conception with the Hecate of myth and 
of worship is not to be discovered. We learn of Hecate as god- 
dess of the night and of weird and uncanny rites connected with 
darkness ; she is the goddess of entrances and of divided roads 
where a new road is entered ; she is goddess of the moon and 
the special protector of women; dogs are her favorite animal. 
Famell argues with force J that this is a Thracian- Phrygian earth 
goddess who found her way into Greece, where she came into con- 
nection with the Greek goddess of fertility and of hunting. We 
may point out, however, that the early Artemis (the goddess of 
fertility and Queen of the Wild) was far more like Hecate than 
like Artemis the sister of Apollo. It is probable that the older 
conception of Artemis divided when the goddess was brought into 
relation with Apollo, that on the one hand the Olympian Artemis 
became the ideal of maidenhood in all its purity, that on the other 
hand weird and half magical rites gathered about an Artemis 
Hecate who came to be more and more a goddess of the night, 
of souls wandering at night, of all that was uncanny. Certainly 
Hecate stands in relation with the more primitive type of Artemis, 
and if she be a foreign goddess, her influence on Artemis was to 
preserve and develop this more primitive type. 

Relations with other gods, Aphrodite, Demeter, Dionysus, Her- 
mes, etc., played their part in the history of Artemis, but no such 
important part as the relations with Apollo and Hecate. More- 
over, the general influence of the Olympian worship (v. supra, 
p. 227) must have affected profoundly the peculiar rites in honor 
of a goddess of fertility, though in many places they persisted all 
through the history of ancient Greece, Rhythmic dance and 
hymn, the stately procession, and the sacrificial meal come into 
the worship of Artemis largely through the influence of worship in 
other Olympian cults. 

8. The third important line of influence in shaping the concep- 
tion of Artemis is found in myth and literature and plastic art. 
In the myths of Artemis she acquires some real personality — a 

* Famell, Cults 0/ the Greek States, a. 509. 

362 GREEK RELIGION 

person easily vexed by neglect in Calydon f by the presumption of 
Actaeon, by the unchastity of Caltisto ; a person delighting in the 
dance and in hunting. The myths of Apollo, making a place for 
her, help to develop this personality. Yet it remains for the epic 
to give individual character to Artemis as to the other gods by mak- 
ing them real persons and actors in its drama. The personality 
of the goddess as developed in myth and poetry could but exercise 
a constant shaping influence on the belief of the worshipper. The 
poet's work was supplemented by that of the painter and the 
sculptor. Early vases depict the Queen of the Wild ; * later she 
is pictured as sister of Apollo, or in some scene from an Artemis 
myth. On the frieze of Apollo's temple at Phigaleia she is seen 
riding with her brother in a chariot drawn by stags. The great 
temple statues, however, statues like the Dionysus of Alcamenes 
and the Brauronian Artemis of Praxiteles, were the means by which 
art profoundly modified religion. If it was the work of poetry to 
make the gods real persons, with a character that was individual 
yet not devoid of universal meaning, it was the work of plastic art 
so to represent these divine persons as to interpret to men their 
own religious experience. 

9. To resume : The history of Artemis was written in two chap- 
ters, Artemis before the epic and Artemis from the rise of the 
epic on. After the rise of the epic the influences of creative 
imagination (which early had been active in myth) gave life to 
the personality of the goddess ; they even deepened the religious 
meaning of the goddess for her worshipper. Before the rise of 
the epic, and in a measure later, religious influences were pro- 
foundly modifying the conception of Artemis and the forms of her 
worship. But in the earlier chapter of her history the influences 
which really shaped the conception of the goddess were the same 
forces which were at work in all phases of social development. 
Starting with this assumption, we find it to be the only reasonable 
hypothesis that the later complex Artemis was the result of a par- 
tial fusion of simpler and more vague nature- goddesses similar in 

* Cp. 'Ktf.. "Apx. (1893), 319 i. and pi. 10. 

APPENDIX I 363 

type, which were worshipped more or less widely by the early small 
communities of Greece. While the possibility remains that the 
unifying power that made one Artemis was due to some foTeign im- 
pulse, Cretan or Asiatic or Celtic, it would require strong evidence 
to prove that the goddess was not essentially Greek in origin and 
in development. 

APPENDIX II 

TABLE OF THE WORE IMPORTANT RELIGIOUS FESTIVALS 

AT ATHENS 

Month 

Day 

Namb ok Festival 

God ok Gods Honoked 

Hekatorabaion 

12 

Kronia 

Cronus and Rhea 

16 

Synoikia 

Athena ( ?) ; Eirene 

27-28 

Panathenala 

Athena 

Metageitnion 

Herakleia 

Heracles 

Eleutheria 

Zeus 

Boedromion 

5 

Genesia (Nemesia, 
Nekysia) 

Gaia 

6 

(Marathon celebra- 
tion) 

Artemis 

7(?) 

Boedromia 

Apollo 

12 

Charisteria 

Athena (?) 

16-25 

Eleusinia 

Demeter and Per- 
sephone 

18 

Asklepieia 

Asclepius 

Pyanopsion 

7 

Pyanopsia 

Apollo 

Oschophoiia 

Apollo 

8 

Theseia 

io-i4(?) 

Thesmophoria 

Demeter and Per- 
sephone 

Apatouria 

Zeus Phratrios ; 
Athena 

30 

Chalkeia 

Athena ; Hephaes- 
tus 

Poseideon 

Country Dionysia 
Haloia 

Dionysus 

364 

APPENDIX II 

3*5 

TABLE OF RELIGIOUS FESTIVALS - 

- (Continual) 

MOKTH 

Pay 

Name op Festival 

God or Gods Honored 

Gam eli on 

I2(?) 

Epilenaia 

Dionysus 

Theogamia 

(Zeus and Hera) 

Anthesterion 

II-I3 

Anthesteria 

Dionysus 

Lesser Mysteries 

De meter, P erseph- 
one, Dionysus 

23 

Diasia 

Zeus Meilichios 

ESaphebolion 

9~»3 

City Dionysia 

Dionysus 

14 

Pandia 

Zeus 

Mounichion 

6(?) 

Delphi nia 

Apollo 

16 

Mounichia 

Artemis 

*9 

Olympieia 

Zeus 

Thargelion 

6-7 

Thargelia 

Apollo 

19-20 

Bendideia 

Artemis Bendis 

20 

Kallynteria 

Athena 

25(?) 

Plynteria 

Athena 

Skirophorion 

12 

Skira, Skirophoria 

Athena 

14 

Dipolia ; Disoteria 

Zeus Polieus 

APPENDIX III 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

General works. 

Petersen, Chr., Religion oder Mythologies Theologie und Goltesver- 
ehrung der Griechen, in Ersch und Gruber, EncyclopaeeUe*, 1864. 

Part I gives ihe best available account of ancient and modern literature 
on the subject up to Petersen's time. Special literature is cited at the 
beginning of each section. The later chapters are important for the history 
of religion in Greece. 

Gruppe, O., Die griechischen Ctdte und My then, I. 1887. 

The criticism of mythological theories in the nineteenth century and of 
early literary sources is very valuable. 

— — Griechische Afythologie und ficligionsgeschichtc in I. v. Miiller's 
Handbuch. 1897-1906. 

The literature is fully cited at the beginning of each section. This is the 
most comprehensive work on the subject and the references in the foot- 
notes are quite exhaustive ; it may perhaps be criticised because of the 
emphasis it lays on the author's individual views of early Greek history. 

Preluer-Robert, Griechische Afythologie, I. 1894. 

Many of the data for a study of Greek religion are given conveniently in 
this classic work on Greek mythology. 

Roscher, W. H., Aits fz'thr Itches Lexikon der griechischen und rdm- 
ischen Afythologie* 1884- 

Particularly the later articles, which are more exhaustive, give many data 
for the study of religion, 

Foucher, l'Abbe, JZeckerchcs sur torigine et 2a nature de thellenisnie* 
OH de la religion de la Grece. 1762-1770. 

A scries of essays criticising the system of Euhemerus and studying the 
historical forces at work in Greek religion. 

366 

APPENDIX ill 367 

Le Clerc des Sept-Chenes, Essai sur la religion des anciens Grccs. 

17S7- 

Four chapters discuss the gode, the mysteries, other religious institutions, 
and the influence of religion in Greece. In the appendix is a Criticism of 
contemporary works on the subject* 

Herrmann, M. G., Die Fesie von Hellas. 1803.. 

An elaborate study of the religious festivals, for the most part out of date. 

Crecjzer. Fr., Symbotik und Mytkologic der alien l^olkerj bcsonders 
der Griechen. Second edition, 1819-1823. 

The most complete presentation of the allegorical point of view in the 
study of Greek religion; in its day a very influential book, but strictly 
limited by the author's desire to hnd the inner meaning of the phenomena 
studied, 

Lobeck, Chr. A., Aglaofikamns sii>e de iheologiac mysticae Graeco- 
rum causis. 1 829. 

This critical examination of the sources for a knowledge of the Greek 
mysteries marked a new epoch in the study of Greek religion, and is the 
basis of all later work in that direction, 

VAN Limburg Brouwer, P., Histoire de la civilisation morale et reli- 
gieuse des Grecs. 1 833-1 841. 

Lack of the critical faculty and outgrown views of early Greek history 
interfere somewhat with the usefulness of this interesting work. 

Stuhr, P. F-, Die Religions-systeme der Hellenen in ikrer geschicfU- 
lichen Entwukelung bis auf die makedonische Zeit. 1838. 

The attempted interpretation of the Greek gods in their philosophical 
meaning no longer receives the same importance which the author of this 
work attached lo it. 

von Naegelsbach, C. Fr., Hotneriscke Theologie, 1840. Third 

edition by Autenrieth, 1884. 

The data from the Homeric poems are fully cited under headings de- 
veloped in the dogmatic theology of the Christian church. As a collection 
of material with some suggestive criticism the book is still useful. 

Die nachkomerisclie Tfuologie des grieritischen Vdlksglaubens bis 

auf Alexander. 1857. 

A continuation of the previous work with reference to Greek literature 
after Homer. The combination of material from very different sources, as 
well as the theological lines along which it is examined, interfere with its 
usefulness. 

368 GREEK RELIGION 

Wachsmuth, W., Hellenische Altertkumskunde aus dem Gesichts- 
punkte des Staats. Second edition, 1844. 

In book VIII ihe gods and their worship are considered from the point 
of view of the state. 

RlNCK, W. Fr., Die Religion der //elleneu, aus den Mythen> den 
Lehren der Philosophen und dem Kulius entnvickelt und dargesiellt. 

1853-S4. 
VON LASAULX, E., Studien des klassischen Alterthums. 1854. 

Contains several important essays on topics pertaining to Greek religion. 

Gerhard, E. ? Griechische Mytkolqgie. 1854. 

Under the different gods are given many data as to local cults, 

Schoemann, G. F. T Griechische Alterthumer. 1855. Fourth edition 
by J. H. Lipsius. 1897, 1902. 

Part V, " Religionswesen," is an extremely valuable account of Greek 
religion. 

Maury, L. F. A., Histotre des religions de la Gr?ce antique. 1857. 

An interesting comprehensive account of the subject, with much that is 
still suggestive. 

Mommsen, A., Heortologie. 1864. Second edition, Fesfe der Stadi 
Athen int Alter turn, geordnet nach attischem Kalendar. 1898. 

A careful study of the religious festivals of Athens, sometimes marred 
by hypotheses which are not generally accepted. 

Girarjd, J., JLe sentiment religieux en Grice fPHomere h Eschyle* 

1869. 

An interesting essay, mainly on the expression of religion in earlier 
Greek literature. 

L.EHRS, K-, Ropulare Aufsatze aus dem Alterthums i/orzugstveise zur 
Ethik utui Religion der Griechen. 1875. 

The author's natural sympathy with the Greek point of view lends spe- 
cial value to these papers* 

Bi'RSlAN, C-, Ueber den religiosen Charakter des griechischen Mythos. 

1875. 
Mannhardt, W-, Antike IVald- und FeldkuHe aus ttordeuropdiscJter 
Ueber liefer img erlattfert. 1877. 

A stimulating and thorough discussion from the anthropological point 
of view. 

APPENDIX III 369 

Dyer, L., Studies of the Gods in Greece at certain Sanctuaries re- 
cently excavated. 1 89 1 . 

Usener, H., Goiter namen : Versuck einer Lehre z/on der rcligidsen 
Begriffsbitdung* 1 896. 

A brilliant, perhaps sometimes erratic, study of the development of the 
Greek gods from the point of view of language. 

Farnell, L. R., The Cults of the Greek States. 1896, 1907. 

For each god there Is a discussion of the nature of the god as shown in 
different cults, of the cult monuments, and of the ideal types in art. An- 
thropological material is used with much discrimination and the older 
physical explanations of the gods are criticised. The discussion aims to 
explain the nature of the gods rather than to treat the cults exhaustively. 

VON Prott-Ziehen, Leges Graecorum sacrae e tit a Us collect ae. I. 

von Pkott, Fasti sacri. 1896. II. Ziehen, Leges Graeciae et 

insular um. 1 906- 
Frazer, J. G-, Pausanias^s Description of Greece. Translated ivith 

commentary. x 898 . 

The commentary contains much material, mainly of an anthropological 
character, to illustrate the cults mentioned by Pausanias. 

Gilbert, O., Griechische Gotterte/ire in ihren Grundziigcn dargeslcllt. 
1898. 

The different gods are discussed as expressing natural phenomena; the 
work is rather philosophical than historical, a critical elaboration of the 
point of view which appears in later Greek philosophy when it deals with 
the gods. 

Harrison, J. K., Prolegomena to tlte Study of Greek Religion. 1903. 
Second edition, 1908- 

Through study of ritual the author attempts to explain the development 
of greater gods, with kindly nature, from lesser spirits by nature evil. 
References in the text are to the first edition. 

The Religion of Ancient Greece^ 1 906. 

Frazer, J. G. 9 Adonisj Allis, and Osiris. I903. 

Nilsson, M. P., Griechische Feste von religioser Bedeutung tnit Aus- 
sckluss der attischen. 1 906, 

An able and thorough work, especially valuable for the sanity of its 
critical discussions. 

GREEK REIJUION — 24 

370 GREEK RELIGION 

The account of religion in Greek literature. 

Girard, J-, Le sentiment religieux en Grece d^Homere a Eschyle. 

1869. 
Packard, L. R-, Studies in Greek Thought. 1886. 
Campbell, L., Religion in Greek UtereUure. 1898. 

As over against the anthropological method, the author has " sought 
to emphasize the element of religious feeling and reflection which per- 
vades Greek literature and is a possession which forms part of the inalien- 
able heritage of mankind," 

E. E. G-, The Makers of Hellas : A Critical Inquiry into the Philoso- 
phy and Religion of Ancient Greece. 1 903. 

A discussion of ethical and religious principles as they appear in Greek 
authors from Homer Co Aristotle. 

Adam, J ., The Religious Teachers of Greece. 1 908. 

Lectures on Greek religion as a factor in Greek literature from Homer 
to Plato ; the best available treatment of the subject. 

Buchholz, E. ? Die HomeriscJien Realien, I II. i, 4I Die homerische Got- 

terlehre." 1884. 
Bruns, I ., Die griechischen Trag&diett als religiottsgeschichtliche Quelle. 

1894. 
Miller, K. O., Aeschylos Eumenzden mit erlduternden Abhand- 

lunger*. 1833. 
Ullrich, F. W., l/eber die religiose und sitiliche Bedeutung der 

Antigone des Sopltokles. 1853. 
LObker, F-, Die sophokleische Theologie und Eihik. 1851, 1855. 
Verrall, A. W., Euripides the Rationalist. 
HoffmeisteR, Sittlich religiose Eebensansicht des Herodotos. 1832. 

Religious antiquities. 

Fasoldus, J-, Graecorum -veterum hierologia, hoc esi f de plurimis 
Graecorum gent ilium aniiquitatibus ritibusque sacris. l $7&- 

SaubeRTUS, J., De sacrzficiis •veierutn. 1659. 

Brouerius, M-, De populorum wterutn ac recentiorum adorationibus 
dissert at io. 1 7 1 3. 

LakemaCKER, J. G-, Antiquitates Graecorutn sacrae. 1734- 

Steinhofer, M. J. U., Graecia sacra, hoc est, ritus atque cottsuetu- 
dines 'veterurn Graecorum circa sacra. 1734- 

APPENDIX III 371 

Hermann, K. F., Lekrbuck der griechischen Antiquitaten, II- "Got- 

tesdienstiiche Alterthumer." 1846. 
Seem ANN, O., Die gottesdienstlichen Gebrauche der Grieehen und 

Rbmer. 1888. 

A brief and convenient popular account. 

Stengel, P_, Die griechischen Kuliusaitertiimer in I. v- Mliller*s 
Handbuch. Second edition, 1898. 

A critical treatise with full references; the author has discussed many 
special points connected with the subject in Hermts and other periodicals. 

Local cults and religious festivals. 

Meursius, J., Graeciaferiata sive de festr's Graecorum, in Gronovius, 

Thesaurus* VII. 
Herrmann, M. G-, Vie Feste von Hellas. 1803. 
Farnell, L. R-, The Cults of the Greek States. 1896, 1907- 

References to accounts of local worship are given at the end of the dis- 
cussion of each god. 

Preller-Robert, Griechische Afyt/wtogic. I. 1894. 
See Index II, " Register der Cultorte." 

Mom m sen, A., Heortologie, 1864. Second edition, F'este der Stadt 

Athen im Altertum. 1898. 
Pfuhl, E.> De Athenitttsium pompis sacris* 1900. 
Milchhofer, A., (Jcbcr den attischen Apollon* 1873. 
Colin, G., Le cttUe a" A potion pythien & Atltines. 1905. 
Suchier, H. F., De Diana brauronia- 1847, 
Dettmer, H_, De Hercule aitico. 1869. 
Ribbeck, O., Attfatige und Entiuicketung des Dionysoscultus in 

Attika. 1869. 
Gilbert, O., Die Festzeit der attischen Dionysien. 1872. 
Nilsson, M. P., Sttuiia de Dionysus afticis. 1900. 
Foucart, P., Le culte de Dionysos en Attiqne. 1904. 

The attempt is made to trace back to Egyptian influence the early Dio- 
nysus worship of Attica. 

Gerhard, E., Ueber die Anthesterien und das Verhdltniss des atti- 
schen Dionysos sum JCoradicnst. 1858. 
Band, O., De Diipoliorum sacro Athemensiutn. 1873. 

Die attischen Diasien. 1883. 

Das altische Demeter-Kore Fest der Epikleidia- 1887. 

37* GREEK RELIGION 

Botticher, C-, Ueber Stifiung und Jnhalt des Eleusinion su Athen. 
Nitzsch, G. G., De Eleusxnioru?n ratione. 1842, 

De EUusiniorum actione et argumento. 1 846. 

Strube, C*> Sludiett 'titer den Bilderkreis 7nm Eieusis. 1870. 

Curtius, E., At '/ten und Eieusis. 1884. 

Rubcnsokn, 0. 9 Die Mysterienheilrgtiimer in Eieusis und •Samo- 

t brake* 1892. 
Dummler, F., Einige eleusinische Denkmaler. 1894. 
Kern, O., ''Das Kultbild dor Gottinnen von Eieusis" in At/ten. 

Mitth. 17 (1892). 
Phtlios, D-, Eieusis, ses mysttres, ses rnines et son mitsee. 1896. 
Foucart, P.* Recherches sur Forigine et la nature des my stores 

d^Eleusis. 1 895 . 
Les grands my stores d* Eieusis, personnel, ceremonies. 1900. 

The Eleusinian mysteries are traced back to the mysteries of Osiris and 
I sis in Egypt. 

Mueller, H. A-, Panathenatca, 1837- 

Wellauer, At De TVtesmophoriis. 1820. 

NiLSSON, M. P., Griec?tische Feste von religioser Bedeutung mil Aus- 

scfduss der aitischen. 1906. 
H ar Dion, L? oracle de Delphes. 1712. 
GOTTE, W-, Das delphische Orakel in seine m poliliscken* religxosen 

und sittlichen Einfluss anf die aite Welt. 1839- 
Petersen, C 7 Der delphische Festcyclns des Apolion und des Diony- 

sos. r 859. 
Weniger, L m Quaestionum delphicarum specimen . 1865. 

Die religiose Seite der grossen Pytkien. 1870. 

Ueber das Coliegiufn der Thyiaden z>on Delphi • 1876. 

Hahne, L.., Defano Apollinis delphico. 1872. 

Mommsen, A.. Delphika. 1878- 

Eouilles de Delphes cxtcutees aux frais du goirvernement francais 

sous la direction de M- Th. Homolle. 1902 f. 
CuRTrus* E-, Die Altare von Olympia. 1881. 

BoetticheR, A., Olympia, das Eest und seine Statte. 1883, 1886. 
Weniger, L.., Der Gottesdrenst in Olympia. 1884. 

Das Hochfest des Zens in Olysnpia. 1904. 1905. 

Heffter, M- W-, Die Gotterdienste auf Rltodus im Altcrthume* 

1827. 

APPENDIX III 373 

DiTTENBEKGER, G. f De saeris Rhodiorum. 1886, 1887. 
Wide, S., De sacris Troesenionum, Hermionensium^ Epidauriorum. 
1888. 

Lakotusche Knife. 1893. 

Immerwahr, W m Die Kulte und Mythen Arkadiens y 1891. 
Oueliierg, P., Sacra CoretUhia, Sicyonia y Phliasia. 1896. 

Part I, Chap. I. (In addition to sections in the general works cited 
above, and to works on the cult at Delphi noted under "local 
cults " above.) 
van Dale, A., De oracuUs veterum ethnicorum dissertatioues duae. 

, 700 . o^oi^j 52k 4&-JS . 7V— *a«-^ * 

* fat 9 . I 1 vi Jm 

A learned discussion ana criticism of the literary sources. 

Christmann, Versuch einer Geschichte der *uomehtn$fen Qrakel. 

"775- 
Hillman, K. D., IViirdigung des delphischen Orakels. 1837- 

1 I inzpeter, G., De v£ ac ttatura graecorum oraculorum. 1850. 

Ehlinger, De Apolline et oraculo ejus deiphico. 1870. 

Doehlhr, E., Die Orakel. 1872. 

Hendess, R., Oracula graeca. 1877. 

An edition of the oracles quoted by Greek writers. 

Bouche-Leclercq, Histoire de la divination dans PatdiquitS. 1878- 

1882. 
POMTOW, J. R., Qieaestiottum de Oracuhs caput select urn. 1 88 1. 
Stutzxe, Das griechische Orakelwesen und besonders die Orakelstatte 

Dodona und Delphi. 1 887, 1 89 1 . 

Part I. Chap. ii. (See references to current literature cited in Stengel, 
Kultusalter turner.) 
Nissen, H-, Das Templum. 1869. 

Kohts, R., De reditibus templorutn graecorum. 1869. 
Martha, J. f Les sacerdoces atheniens. 1882. 
Herbrecht, H-, De sacerdotii apud Graecos etnptiotte venditume- 

1885. 
Lehmann, B-, De titulis ad sacerdotiorum apud Graecos venditiottem 

pert r tie nttbus. 1 887. 
VON Lasaulx, E-, Die Gebete der Griechen und RSttter* 1842. 
— — Der JFluck bei Griechen und Isomer n. 1843. 

374 GREEK RELIGION 

VON Lasaulx, E., Der Kid bei den Griechen. 1844. 
Die Siihnopfer der Griechen und Homer, 1841. 
Voullieme, E., Quomodo vetercs adoraverint, 1887. 
Ausfelo, C, De Graecorum precationibus quaestiones. I 9°.3- 
DE Molin, A., De ara apud Graecos. 1884. 
Reisch, E., " Altar " in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopaedie. 
Studniczka, F. r Altdre mit Grubenkanwiem. 1903. 
Bernhardt K-, Das Trankopfcr bei Homer. 18S5. 
von Fritze, H., De libatione. 1893- 

Die Rauchop/er bei den Griechen. 1894. 

Petersen, C.» Der Hausgottesdienst der alten Griechen. 1851". 
Ueber die Gebttrtstagsfeier bei den Griechen. 1857. 

VON WlLAMOWITZ-MOELLRNDORF, U.» fsylios VOH Eptdauros. 1 886. 

Samter, E-, Familienfeste der Griechen nnd Romer* 1901. 
Deubner, L-, De incubatione. 1900. 

Hopf, L-, Die Heilgofter und Heilstatten des Altertums. 1904. 
Hamilton, M., Jncubation or the Cure of Disease in Pagan Temples 

and Christian Churches. 1906. 
Sainte-Croix, Recherches historiques et critiques sur les mysth*es drt 

paganisnte. Second edition by de Sacy. 1817. 
Lobeck, C. A., Aglaophamus sive de theologiae mysticae Graecorum 

causis. 1829. 
Anrichs, G-, Das antike Mysterienwesen in seinem Einfluss auf das 

Christ entum. 1 894. 

(See also books noted above under M local culls : Eleusis/*) 

Part I, Chap- iii. Boetticher, C, Der BannikuUus der Hellenen. 

1856. 
Overbeck, J-, Das Cultusobject bei den Griechen in seinen attesten 

Gestaltungen . 1 864. 
DE Visser, M- W., Die nicht menschengestaltigen Goiter der Griechen. 

1903. 
Hild, J. A., Etude sur les dtmons. 1 881. 
Wassner, J. t De heroum apud Graecos cultu, 1883. 
Grasse, Der Geister- und Gespensterglauben im klassischen Alter- 

thum. 1856. 

Part I, Chap. iv. Pervanoglu, P., Die Grabsteine der alten Griechen. 

1863. 
LEHRS, K. f u Vorstellungen der Griechen uber <%as Fortleben nach 
deiu Tode," in Poptddre Aufsdtse aus dem Alttrtkum. 1875. 

APPENDIX III 375 

Diet erich, A., Nekyia: Beit rage zur Erktarung der neuentdeckten 

Petrusapokatypsc. 1393. 
Dorsch, J., Ein Beitrag sur Kenntniss der grt'echischen Septdcrai- 

altert timer. 1&93. 
Rohde, E.. Psyche : Seelencult und l/nsterblichkeitsgianbe der Grie- 

chen. 1894. Second edition, 1898. 
Kaufmann, C. M. f Vie Jenseitshqff'nungen der Griechen und Romer 

nach deft Sepulcralinschriften. 1897. 
Milchhoefer. A-, (Jeter die Graberkunst der Hellenen. 1899. 
de K 1 dder, A ., De r id&e de la mart en Gr&ce & npoque ctassiqne. r 897. 
Wheeler, B. I., Dionysus and Dnmortaiity. 1899. 
Helbig, W., Zu den hotnerischen Bestattungsgebrauchen. 1900- 
Weil, H., Etudes sitr rantiquiti grecque. 1900. 
Weicker, L>er Seeten'vogeL 1902. 
Zkhetmaier, Leichenverbrennung und Leickenbestattung im alien 

JiellaSy 1907. 

Part II, Chap. i. Ridgeway,W., The Early Age of Greece. Vol. I, 190 1. 
Usener, H., Gotternamenz Versuch eincr Lehre wn der religibsen 

Begriffsbildung. 1 896. 
Harrison, J- E., Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion. 1903. 
Kern, O., Ueber die Atifiingc der hellenischen Religion. 1902. 
Burrows, R. M-, The Discoveries in Crete. 1907, 
Lagrange, M. J., La Crite ancienne. 1908. 

(See also the reports of Cretan excavations in the Annual of the British 
School at Athens and in Monument* antichi, 12-14, Rcndiconte delta reale 

Accademia dr- /.inzei, 9-X9, and ftfemorie tiUlreale Institute Lamdardo,. ax.) 

Part II, Chap- ii- Buchholz, E., ''Die homerische GotterJehre " in 
Die hotnerischen Realien, III. i, 1 884. 
Seymour, T. D., Life in the Homeric Age. 1907. (Chap, xiv.) 

Part II, Chap. iii. Rapp, A., Die Beziehungcn des Dionysoskuttus zu 
Thrakien und Kletnasien. 1882. 

Rohde, E-, Psyche: Seelencult und Unsterblichkeitsglaube der Grie- 
chen. 1894, 2 ed. 1898. 

Sittl, K., Dionysisches Treiben und Dichten im 7. und 6. Jahrhun- 
dertv. Chr. 1898. 

Dieterich, A., De hymnis orphicis. 1891. 

Ma as, E., Orpheus t Untersuchungen sur grt'echischen, rSmischen y 
altchristtichen Jenseitsduhtung und Religion . 1 895 . 

376 GREEK RELIGION 

Part II, Chap. v. Diels, H., Sibyllinische Blatter. 1890. 

Aust, E-i Die Religion der R tuer. 1899. 

Wissowa, G., Religion unit Kuttus der RCmer in I. v. Muller, Hand- 
buch. 

Hatch, E., 77/1? Influence of Greek Ideas and Usages upon the Chris- 
tian Church. 1890. 

Anrichs, G., Das antike Mysterienwesen in seinem Einflt4ss attf das 
Christ etttnm . 1 894. 

VVOBBERMIN, G- Religionsgeschichtliche Studien zur Erage der Beein- 
flnssutig das Urchristentums durch das antike Mysterienwesen. 
1896. 

Part III, Chap. i. Charterius, V., Imagines deornm qui ab antiquis 

colebantur. 1581. 
Doeiiler, Entstehung und Ent'U'ickelung der religiosen ICunst be: den 

Griechen. 1 874. 
KiJvULi', R., Ueber die Enstehuug der Gotterideale der griechischen 

Kunst. 1877. 
Overbeck, J-, Ueber die Grundlagen des idealen griechischen Gbtter- 

bildes. 1875. 

Griechische Kunstmythologie. 1871-1S89. 

Brunn, H., Griechische Gotterideale in ihren For men erlautert* 1893. 
Ruhland, M., Die eleusinischen Gcttinuen, 1901. 

(See also (he chapters on cu'i monuments and ideal types of the gods in 
Farnell. Cults of the Greek States, 1896 f.) 

Part III. Chap. ii. Schmidt, L., Die Eihik der alien Griechen. 1882. 
Curtivs, K-, Ueber den religiosen Charakter der griechischen Miinzen. 

1869. 
Sciioll, R., Athenische Eestconinnssionen. 1887. 

Part III, Chap. iii. Gir.ow, H., Ueber das Verhaltniss der griechischen 
Philmophen im Allgemeinen und der Vorsokratiker ini besondern 
zur griechischen Volksreligion. 1876. 

E. E. G., The Makers of Hellas : A critical inquiry into the philoso- 
phy and religion of Ancient Greece. 1903. 

Caird, E-, The Evolution of Theology in the Greek Philosophers. 1904. 

INDEX 

«>9. 

Achelous, 153. 

Acheron, 184. 

Adonis, 160; worship of, 376, 380. 

Aeacus, r8a. 

Aegean Islands, worship of I sis in, 377. 

Aegma, 353. 

Aegospotami, 43, 

Aeolian s f the, 3x5. 

Aeschinca, 369, 

Aeschylus, 356, 307, 336; worshipped at Gela, 

167. 
Aesculapius, v. AscUpius. 
Aetna, cull of Hephaestus at, 163. 
Ac loli an League, the, 317. 
Aeamenuion, 46, 340. 
Agathodacmon, iai. 
ARrae, 131, 351. 
agricultural deities, 107 f rf 146, 150, 185, 3-16, 

*$o *-. 338, 353- 
agricultural festivals, 76, 156, 195. 
agricultural worship, 85,93. io 3» I,[ » ,, 3 X < 

340, 350. 
Alcamcnes, 36a. 
Alcibiades, 89, 363, 317. 
Alexander, conquests of, 373 fl : devoutness of, 

s*7Q f.. religious policy, ■380. 
Alexandria, 379, 380. 
all souls, feast of, 158. 
Alpheius, 153. 
altar, forms of, 69 f. , 303; earth altar, 106; 

hearth altar, 70; mound altar, 165; pic altar, 

aoa: trench altar, 165,170. 
Amarynthus, 35a. 
Amazons, the, 161. 
Ammon, oracle of, 58. 
Amphiaraus, 166, 313. 
amphictyonics, 317, 317. 
Amphidromia, the sac. 
Amphilytus, 57. 

Anaxagora*, 43, a&a, 3*5, 337* 

Anaxinaiiitcr, 335. 

Anaximcncs, 375. 

ancestors, worship of, xra, 181 . 195, aa8 f , 313; 

as Erinyes, 185. 

animals sacrifice oi black, 106, 111, >54> 170, 
■79' dying on the way to altar, 45: early 
worship of, 196, 306: for sacrifice, 48, too; 
pet, brought to grave, 181 sacred to indi- 
vidual tods, 1 ij, 196; substituted for men, 
105: wild, used tor sacrifice, 15a, associated 
with Anemic. 35a 1 f. 

animism, 194. 

Aothela, worship of Dcmetcr at, a 18. 

Anthcslcria, the, 156, 179. 

anthropomorphism, 335, 35,4; v gods 9 human- 

ftrss of. 

Antioch, Greek worship at, 381. 

Antiochus Rpiphanes, a8r, 
Antiphon, 765 I , a68. 
Antisthcnes (the Cynic), 337. 
Apatouria, the, 11a, 163. 

Aphrodite, cults of, 160 f. ; nature of, 30, 160; 
origin, 160, 3ii; Oinan a, 104; symbols 

of, 161. 

Apollo: — Agyietis, iax; associated with 
Artemis, 360 f. ; cults of, 151 f.» 217: feast 
of, at Ithaca, 75; god of flocks, 15x.au god; 
of lira ing, 164; Locust Apollo, the, 93; — 
Lykcios, an, nature of, 30, 151 t . . 311, 
936,95?; oracle at Delphi, 159,359: purifi- 
cation. 340: the Averter, 93; the Guardian, 
■so; spread of worship, ai6; worship of, 
108: at Rome, 381, 385. 

apple, symbol of Aphrodite, 161. 

Apulcius, 377, 

Arcadia, cults in, 159, 163. 

archaeological discoveries, 193. 197 f. 

Archilochus, 333, 3)36. 

Areopagus, the, 161, 189. 

Ares, worship of, i6jl. 

Arethusa, 354. 

Argos, cults of, 150, 155, 164. 

Aristaeus, 1 55. 

Aristophanes, 365. 

Aristotle, 53, 53, 37a, 374, 333, 330 f. 

A man, 379.^ 

art. and religion, r.48, 367 f., 394 f-, 347. 36a; 
development of, 350 f.; at Rome, 284 f. 

A [ tci iiis, as goddess of hunting, 353 f. ; as 
moon goddess, 159. 360; associated with 
Apollo, 360 f. ; associated with Hecate, 360; 
— Bcndis, 137,351: cult*of,68, 14*, 166,349. 
351 f. ; myths of. 361 f. : nature of, 33, 15a: 
origin of, an, 350 f. ; " Persian," the, 309, 
35a: protector of maidens, isa; worship of, 
105, 108, 153, 35"- . 

Asclepiads of Tricca the, 164. 

Asctepius, associated with the mysteries at 
Eleusis, i$j, 164; oracles of, 58; worshii 
of, 134 ■*"» l6 4> at Athens, 134, 370; at 
Rome. 384. 

Asia Minor, migrations to, 320; effect on 
poetry of Hesiod. 997; rise of philosophy 
in, 334: rites adopted from, 346. 

A sop us-, 153- 
Aspasia, a6a. 

asses, used for sacrifice, 47, «55- 
associations, religious, v. thiaso*. 
astrology, 43- 
Atalante, 35?, 
Ate. 341. 

" atheists, the/' 337, sa8 

Athena, birth of, ao; birthday, 76; contest 
with Poseidon, 90; culu of, 9t f., 93 note. 

377 

37» 

INDEX 

68, 150,16a, 351; nature of, 150; — Kike, 
150, t66, 316: worship at Athens, 951 t, 349. 

Athens, supremacy of, 950 f. 

athletic contests, oof, X14, X17 t, 159^ 339, 
356; in honor of dead, 176. 

Atossa, 45. 

Attis, 153, 976. 

Augustus, Caesar, 385. 

authority, religious, »; absence of, 35. 

aversion, rites of, v. riddance, rites cf> 

Babrius, 86. 
Bakchoi, 941 . 

banquets, occasion of the epic, wo, 344. 
baptism, a Christian " initiation," 391. 
barley-corns, used at sacrifice, xoo. 

Bassaroi, 241. 

bear-goddess, 196, and v. Artrttis, 

Bendis, 127, 071, and v. Artemis, cults cf. 
benefit clubs, religious side of, 107. 

Bible, the, as oracle, 47. 

birds, divination by, 42, 44, 220, 034 ; of prey. 

Black Sea, the, 916. 

blood, desire of souls for, 171, 179: use of in 

sacrifice, 98, 101, 103, 109, lis, 146. 
blood vengeance, 340. 
Boeotia, religion in , 337 t, 377. 
bones, divination by, 49. 

boys, worship by, 159, and v. corning of age . 
Branchidac, oracle at, $8. 
Brasidas* worship of, 167. 
Brimo, 35 c - 
bucolic hymns, 353. 
bull, as sacred animal, 305, 943, 946; bull 

bunts, 35a. 

Cadmus, 165. 

cairns, 159. 

cakes, nsed in worship) 103. 107, 110, 111, 

386, 352, 
Calauna, worship of Poseidon at, 154, 317. 
Callias, 5°. 
Callinus, 939, 936. 
Callirhoe, 153. 
Callisto, ( 353. 

Calydoman boar, the, ca, 16%. 
Cape Coliaa, cult of Aphrodite at, 164. 
Cassandra, 57. 
Cassotis, 59- 
Castalian spring, 50. 
Cato, 384. 
caves, as entrances to lower world, 183; as 

places of worship, 156, x6o„ 195, aoo, S17. 
Cecrops, 11 a. 
Ceres, 383. 
Chalchas, 44, 54. 
Chalkeia, the, 163. 
Charon, 174. 184, 387. 
childbirth, rites connected with, rog, 113, rax, 

x6x* 164, 354. _ _ _ m 

children, exposure of, 307; initiated in FJeu- 

sinian mysteries, 193. 
Christianity, and an, 995: and Greek religion, 

39, a8s f. B 385!. ; and Greek philosophy, 

4R8 f., 339: and Isis worship, 378. 
Christian saints, supplanting Greek gods, 

3B6t 

Chryses, 66, 77. 340. 

t hrysippus, 975. 

chthoaic gods, libations to, X04: worship of, 

„7°» &»* xo 7» lSl - 
Cimon, 53. 

Cincsias, 36a. 

Circe, 333. 

cities, development of, 3x6 f., 9a6, 331 f. 

Claus, theory of, 355. 

Clay, used in purification, no, 347. 

Cleanthes, hymn of, 339. 

Cteisthenea, 313. 

Clytaemnestra, 358, 349. 

Clytiadae, 56. 

Cnidos, 317. 

Cnossos, 203, ao6 f. 

Codrus, SO5. 

coins, introduction of, 330; representation of 

JodSOn, 399, 318. 
mics, cults in, 193; spread of, 316, 331. 
Colophon, oracle at, 58. 
Colossus of Khodes, the, 04. 
coming of age, 333, 153. 
commerce, development of. 930, 249, 314. 
communion meal, 97 f., xoa, 147, 914, 3x8 f , 

336 f., 383- 
Corinth. worshipof Aphrodite at, x6x; of Isis 

at, 377 
Cotybantcs, 153. 
Cos, worship at, 134, 156. 
cosmogony, 138 f. (v. creation of world) \ of 

Hestod, 338, 324; of the Orphic sect, 345; 

of philosophers, 394 f. 
cosmopolitan spirit, 266; effect on religion, 

374. 
Coureics, the, 149. 

creation of world, 34, 338. 

cremation, 171, 1761"., 235, 

Creon, X05, 258, 34X. 

Crete, Christian legends in, a86; cult of 
Dictynna, x_66, 352; cult of Eileithyia, 164; 
discoveries in, 189, 193, 197 f.: influence on 
Greece, 191, 344, 346; religion of early in- 
habitants, 198 f. 

Crisaean plain, the, 67. 

Crittas, 337. 

Croesus, 6o, 343. 

Cronus, 138; — Uranus, 938. 

Cry ton, 948. 

crow, 45. 

curse 89. 

Cybele, 153. 

CycJades, the, 387. 

Cylocidae, the, n 1. 

Cyprus, cult of Aphrodite at, 160: cult of Isis 
at, 276. 

Cyrene, 3x6, 353; cult of Asclcpius at, 164. 

Cyrus, 46. 

van Dale, 63. 

Danaus, daughters of, 339- 

dance, the, as form of worship, 160, 383, 353, 

360. 
Daphne, myth of, 981. 
day*, lucky, 928. 
dead, the, burial of, 169 and v. funeral rites* 

one rings to, 177 f., X99, (modern) 387 f.; 

prophetic powers of, 169; sacrifice to, 170, 

INDEX 

379 

roo; worship of, 107, 146, 165, 167, 169. «99t 

M5, 337. 
deification of emperors, 167. 
Oelos, 96,163, 360; Apollo worship at, 317; 

cult of t ileithyta at, 164. 
Delphi, congress of states at, 115; festivals, 

J6; games, 97, 115, 153, 339: worship of 
>ionysus, 159; worship of Hestia, 16 3. ■ 

Delphic oracle, the, corruption of, 64 ; genu- 
ineness of, 60, 63, 259 ; influence for prog- 
ress, 63, 64, 331; origin of, 343; quoted by 
Herodotus, 60; subjects of, 62, 339. 

Demeter, — Chthonia, 166; cults of, 156: 
Homeric hymn to, 134: - Isis, 377: myth .i, 
135; nature of, 33, 156: patron of bakers 
and millers, 256; worship of, 108, iaof., 
X56, 3-39, -337,34a, 353; worship at Rome, 383. 

democracy, the Athenian, 349, 353 f. 

Democritus, aor, 335. 

Demosthenes, 85. 307 f, 3x9). 

departmental gode, 195, 

Uespotria, 354- 

Diagoras, 362, 328. 

Diasia, the, X03, 111, T4Q. 336, ■240, 

Dickinson, G. Howes, 38. 

Dicte, Mt, 300. 

Dictynna, 166, 353. 

Hike, 309, 3?+- 

Ihndymon, Mt., 153. 

Dio Chrysostom, 305. 

IJiomedes, 33Z. 

Dionysia, the, 157. i$4j 208. 

Dionysus, associated with Demeter at Eleusis, 
132 f., 243; cults of, 157 f.. too; god of souls, 
X58; myths oL 343 f.: second^ birth, 3e: 
spirit of growth, 30: types of in art, 301; 
worship of. 105, 107,133,337,3401., 351, 316, 
339; worship at Rome, 383: worship intro- 
duced in Greece, x&6 f., 229, 330, 34.1 f. ; 
— Zagreus, 345. 

Dioscuri, worshipped at Tusculum, 282 

divination, before batde, 50: by sacrificial 
vie rims, 47. 

" divine government," 34, 141,336,335: and 
natural law, 311. 

Dodona, Oracle of, 58, 87; priestesses of, 57,360 

dog days, 155- 

dogma, absence of, 25, 39, 333; and myth, 17, 
3i ; Christian, 389. 

dugs, sacred to Hecate, xia, 36s: used in 
sacrifice, xx3, 161, 170. 

d'-'lls, offered at graves, 181; use of at the 
Dionysia, 157. 

Dorians* the, 104, 200, 215. 218. 

double axes, shrine of, 302, 305; a sacred 
symbol, 305. 

doves, 44, iia, 205, 207. 

drama as worship, the, 97, 157 f , 352, 356, 
383, 395- "97- 

dreams, 51, 54,. '44* 334, 269; "gates of," 5s: 
gods appear in, 53; interpretation of, 5a f. ; 
treatises on, 53: dream oracles, 58- 
drinking contests, 158, 

eagle, 44, 45, 52, 196. 

earth goddess, 195. B 97» 36*; and v. M&thrr- 

gvdaeis . 
Easter,, the Greek, s88. 

education, development of, 963, 366 f. 

Egypt, i 93f «97- 

Eileithyia, 104, 354; and St. Eleutherius. «86 

Elaphebolia, 35a. 

Eleusis, 93; the mysteries at, ia8 f., 156; 
mysteries, officials of, 131; origin of, 187. 

Eleuthcrac, 157. 

Empedocles, 361, 335 f. 

Eos, 104. 

epic, the, and Greek philosophy, 333; con- 
trasted with actual belief, 144, aax; dare of, 
310, 3x6, 218 f. ; influence of, 4a, 139, 310, 
3E4, aao f., 334 f., 354, 363; joy fulness of, 
335: language of, at8 f. : pessimism of, 168; 
rationalistic tendency of, aao; sacrifice in, 
98, 333 

Epicteta, honors after death, 167. 

Epicureans, the, 375, 33X. 

Epicurus, honors after death, r.67. 

Epidaurus, 124 I. , 164, 370. 

Epi men ides, six, 344. 

epithet names of gods, origin of, 68, 145, «66, 

»35. 356; representing hero-cults, 166,2x3, 

358 n. 
■equinox, 195. 
Erechtheus, 1 xa. 
Erigone, 157. 
Erinyes (Eumenides), 104, 107, 146, 185, 338, 

364; origin of, 107,309. 
Eros, 338, 334. 

ethical philosophy and religion, 374 f, 
Etruscans, Greek cults among the, 262. 
Eubouleus, in. 
Euhcmerus, 397. 
Eumaeus, 98. 
Eumenides, v. Erirtytr, 
Eumolpidae, the, 79, 89, 131, 
Euripides, 263 f. 
Evans, Arthur, 1 97. 
evil spirits, 146, 196. 
expiation tor sin, 343. 

family, worship by, 3x3, and ¥. Acme, wr* 

ship of. 
fasting, 132, f 56. 
fate, 54. M<V3?o. 
festivals, religious, 96, ir* f., J57 f., 395, and 

v. especially Pt. I, chap.iuandApp.il; 

agricultural, 76, 156; in early times, 75, 

195: political importance of, 114, 33a, 338, 

268; torch, 160. 
feudalism, 216, 3.30, 

fire, for sacrifice, 100; Rods of, xoa f., sax. 
first fruits, offering of, 85, 93. 
flocks, gods of, 36, ssi, X54, 159. 353- 3S8. 
flowers used in worship, 60, 103, 158. 
food, offered to the dead, 179* 
foreign gods, brought by immigration, 216: 

worship of, X37, 138, xoa, 366, 371,375 f., 

3x6, 35s. 
fruits, u*ed in worship, 69, 103, rsi, 158. 353. 
funeral rites, 166, K73 I*., banquet, 178; laws 

controlling, 176. 
future life, 186 f. : early belief in, 198; epic 

view of, 17*: Socratcss view of, 173, 

Gaifi (fie), 1381 152, 184; nature of* 33; wor- 

3 8o 

INDEX 

gr in 
Gree 

Galen, 194. 

gall bladder, divination by, 49. 

earmcnls us-rd by worshippers, «oo. 

Gelo, worship of, 167. 

Gencsia, the, X79. 

GenctylUdes, 164. 

Glance, 165. 

Glaucus, 63, 154. 

Gnostic sect, the, 378. 

goats, used in sacrifice, 99, 105. 

god*, ihe, as ideals of beauty, 33; as indi- 
viduals, 149 f.S as righteous rulers. 34. 337, 
310, 34B; assembly of, 140; blood kinship 
with men, 41, 357, 313; fickleness of, I46; 
held up to ridicule, 42, mi, 265; human- 
Bess of, 19. 3a, W. «47» M» ■".• *35 '» 30°» 
337; limitations of, 143; moral nature ol, 
*Q» a 55. 264, 3°8 f-, 337: not the forces ol 
nature, 139, 333 ; of myth and of worship, 
18, sit {.- philosophical interpretation of, 
33$ : providence of, 140 f« ; relations to one 
another, 34, 143; social relations with men, 

341*-. 9*. 349- 

goo&e, 44 

Gournia, soa, 306, aoB. 

in goddess (v. Dentfter), 156, 187, 354. 
Greeks, the, a religious people, 14 ; as ideal- 
"<*t 3 a ».3°4: religious needs of, 37, 347 f 

Greek religion, a matter of daily life, 30, 35, 
337; and Christianity, 39, aBi, 285 f , 345; 
at Rome. a8a f. ; attitude toward nature. 3a, 
138 f.; influence on later thought, is: nvniy 
sided, 35; methods of investigation, 192: 
origin of, 39, flttt periods of, i£8 f. ; sprctd 
of in the East, 381. 

Hides, 107, 335. 136 (and v. Pluius): cult M 
Rome, 984; " marriage to," a83; realm of, 
X73, 189. 

Hagia Triada, aoa, 303, 306. 

hair, an offering, xaa, 133. 

Halicia, the, X54. 

Hahtherses, 44. 

Haloia, the, 156. 

Halyattes, 60. 

Harrison, J ^ E., 336. 

harvest festivals, 156; ▼, cypriculturai fc sft- 

T'O/s. 

hawk, 44. 45- , . 

healing, gods of. 163 f.; rites of, 134. 

heaven-god, 195, 196, 309 f , and v. Zeus. 

heavenly bodies, the worship of, 154 f. 

Hebrew religion, 97; meat offering, xco. 

Hecabe, 9a. 

Hecate, 107, na, 35a, 360 f. ; worship of, 153. 

hecatomb, too. 

Hegesistratus, 46. 

Helenas, 54. 

Helios, anger of v 34a ; cults of, 1 54 : daily 

worship of. 85 ; offerings to, 104 ; temple of, 

6C. 
Hcllcnj 315. 
Hellenism, spread of in East, 373 f., 381 f. ; in 

Rome, 384 f. 
hennthei&tic worship, 04. 
Hephaesteia, the, 16a. 
Hephaestus, 139, 351, 16a, azz ', patron of 

smiths, 16a. 

Hera, marriage of, at: nature of, 33, ij« 
identined wiLh Isiis, 377. 

Heratleitlls, 334, a6i, 335 f. 

Heracles, 137, 194, 330. 

Hercules, worship at Rome, 383 f. 

Hermaia, the, 159 

Hermes, lit, tat, 15a: as chthonic god, sot; 
as Mercury, 21*3; conductor of souls, 158 f., 
179; functions of, 159, 349; of Praxiteles, 

305-. 
Herraione, worship at, 156, 377; precinct of 

Pluto at, 184 
herras, 159; mutilation of, 355, 343* 
Herodotus, 359 f , 336. 
heroes, relics of, 165. 
heron, 44. 

Herophilus, on dreams, 53. 
hero-worship, 107, 146, 164 f., i8x, 313, 327, 

339; origin of, 107, 165 f.; perpetuation of # 

=88. 
Hcsiod, writings of, 337 f., 334, 344, arii, 3x0, 

Hestia, 7 ., 1^5.: worship of, tao, 163. 

Hierapohs, 184. 

Hippo, 338. 

Hippocrates, 134, 

Hippodameia, shrine of, 07 note* 

Hippon, ar-'-v 

Hipponax, 333 

home, ti c, worship of, 103, iao f ., 313; deitiei 

ol, 163, 163. 
Homeric hymns, 332; to Demeter, ao. 
Homeric poems, the, v. epic. 
honey-take. Used in burial, X74. 
honey, in Christian ritual, 391 ; in libations, 

X04, 170, 180; in the Greek mysteries, 391. 
horns of consecration, aoa, 304 f. 
horses, used fur sacrifice, X54, 155. 
horsemanship, gods of, 154, i6x. 
human sacrifice, S05, 109, no, 155, i6x, 170, 

3x3. 307. . 

Mygicia, 151: as Ims, 377. 
Hymen, X23 

hymns in worship, 84, X33, 333. 
hypnotism, 60. 
\ lypsenor, 76. 

Tacdhus. X33, 187, 343. 

lamidae. 56. 

Xaso, i2&. 

Icarus, 243- 

Ida, Mi., shrine on, 66, 200. 

idealism in Greece, 3a. 

Iliad, date of. aio; and v. epic. 

Ilium, Alexander at, 379. 

images of the god*, 70, iao, 13s, X34, X50, is8, 

164. 383; and the development of art, 396; 

cult images, 73 f., 157; identified with the 

gods themselves, 30a; in the Mycenaean 

age. 307 
imitative rites, 146, 150. i-,^ 196, 339. 
immortality-, S3, 139, 136, 169, 186F. ; early 

belief in. 182. 198 
impiety, charges of, a6a f., and v. sttcrilege. 
incantation. 170. 
incense, 103. 
individualism, 363, 366 f_, 314, 3*0! rise of. 

330 f. 

INDEX 

38i 

initiations, Eleusinian, 139: Orphic, 946; to 

mysteries of Isis, 378. 
InO. 257. 

Ino-Leucothea, 154. 
inspiration, to, 51, 144, 146; frenzied, 56, 

341 f. ; varieties of, 51. 
intellcctualism at Athens, a6i f. 
interpretation of religious rites, a8; of signs, 

_ 47. 54- 
jo, 277 

Inbakchoi, 128. 

Ion, 315. 

Ionia, burial in, 173; philosophy in, 334-' 

poetry of, 433; religion of, 154. 
Ionian s, a 15. 
Iphigeneia, 105, 354. 
Isis, worship of r 375 f. 
1 so- rates, 188, 307. 

Isthmus, games at the, 07, 115, 154, 839. 
Italy, 054; Greek cults in, 383. 
Ixion, punishment of, a$7. 

Ta*on, moral qualities of, 2-57. 
Julius Caesar, 385. 

Kabeirion, 70. 
Kalligeneia, 354. 
Kerykes, 79. 
Kottylo, 271. 
kykeon, 133, 135. 
Ky nop bonus, 155. 

Laconia, 353. 

Lai us, 341. 

Larnpon, 43. 

laurel of Apollo, 59, 383. 

Lebadeia t oracle at, 58. 

lectistemium, the, 383. 

lekythoi, s8o. 

lesser spirits, worship of, 18. 

Lernnos, 10a. 

Lcnaea, the, 157. * 

Lc*o, 33. 360- , 

Leucas, worship at, 105. 

Libanius, io$_ 

libation, 103 ff., no, lao, 319; at a sacrifice, 
101: atOpis, 270; in the epic, 393; of milk, 
104; to the dead, 180; wineless, 161, 196. 

Liber, 383 

libera, 383. 

lightning, v. thunderbolt. 

I.indos, shrine On, 81. 

Linus song, the, 155. 

lions, 208. 

literature, decay of, 367. 

liver, divination by the, 49 

T-iviiis Audronicus, 385 

local cults.aaf., 145, 16A, toi.aiof., 315,351 f. : 
affected by migration, 316, 357: "conden- 
sation" of, 212, 336. 356 f.; established at 
Athens, 317 : mutually exclusive, 34. 

local shrines, the, a2, 65; independence of, 
33; influence of Delphi on, 63 

logos the, 390. 

Lord s Suopcr. the, a " mystery," aoa. 

lots, casting of, 324. 

Loxias. parchments of, 57. 

Lycaeus, Ml, 149. 

Lycurgus, 317. 

lyric contests, 164. 

lyric poetry, pessimism of, S36; rise of, S33, 

=97. 
Lysimachus, 53. 

Machaon, i34> 

maenads, 159, 

magic, 35, 89, 134, 146, 155, 195, 023,. 226. 

manumission of slaves, 8a. 

Marathon, 99, 359. 

Maron, 66, 76- 

marriage, gods of, 35, xax, 133, 150, 161 ; rites 

connected with, tog, no, 1x3, iao, xaa f., 

■53. ,35a. 354- 
Marscilles, 336. 
meat offering of Hebrews, 100. 
Megara, worship at, "56. 
Mehuppus, 56, 244. 
Meros, Mi., Alexander at, 279. 
Metagyrtes, 1*3. 
meteorological phenomena, 4a. 
Metis, 228. 

middle ages, the Greek, 2x5 f. 
migrations, the great. 193, axa, 9*5, 357. 
Miltiadcs, worship of, 167. 
Mimnermus, 236. 
Mmoan civilization, 197, aoofl 
Minoan female divinity, 209. 
Minps, 182, 198. 
Mithras, worship of, 271?. 
Mnemosyne, 104. 
Moira, 141, 323; v. fat*. 
monotheism, 254, 256, 390, 396, 334 f. 
moon-goddess, 360, 361. 

moral ideals, Greek conception of, 306 f., 31a; 
growth of, 236 f., 255 f. ; personincation of, 

337**. 

moral order of world, 308 f. 

mother-goddess, the, 152,909, 355, 359; vari- 
ous forms, of, ail. 

mother of the gods, the, 103, 127, 275 f. 

mountain tops, as scats of worship, 195, 317. 

mourning customs, 174. >79- 

murder, penalty for, 307: purification for, 
*09. no, 239, 3*1, 344- 

muses, the, 87, 07. 

music at sacrifice, 101. 

musical contests, at religious festivals., 20, 

"4r «5f *5° 
Mycale, 46, 154, 317- 

Myccnaean agr, the; burial in, X77; civiliza- 
tion of, 106 f : definition of, 108; religion 
in, 109. 

Myconos, 185. 

mysteries, tLe, 307; name, meaning of, 131. 

mysteries at F.leusis, 122, xa8f. : initiation for, 
1321 origin of, 187: preparation for, 13a; 
significance of, 135 f.; the "lesser mys- 
teries," 131 f. 

mysteries of I sis, 378. 

mysteries perpetuated in Christianity, ■joof. 

raysticism, 145 f., 223, 344 f. F 250, 263, 

mythology and religion, 13 f., 16, 143, 185, 
iqi, 301; and the poets, 265 f., 298: and 
the spread of Gnek religion, 281; at Rome, 
385. 

38* 

INDEX 

myths, and dogma, 17. ai B 306, 373 ; and 
philosophy. 17; at religious festivals, i 9 f . ; 
contrasted with worship, aat, 307, 399, 351: 
criticism of, aa8- 933 f., 956 f. t 959, 336; defi- 
nition of, 17! derived from ritual, 18, at, 
M-yf. *57* <6i : explaining local rites so: 
flexibility of, 191: modifying belief, ai f 143* 
3 6a. 

names, historical study of, 104, 313, 35a. 

natural phenomena, deification of, 39; wor- 
ship Of, 30. 

nature, altitude of Greeks toward, 3a, 138! ; 
spiritual forces- in, 30, 195, 943 ; under 
direction of gods, 47, 140, 310. 

Nemea. games at, 97, 1x5, 939. 

Nemesis, 334. 

neoplatonists, the, 33a, 

Neptune, 383. 

Nicias, 43. 

Nike, v. Athena Nike. 

nymphs, associated with Artemis, 358; wor- 
ship of, 66, 104, 153,. 

oath. 90, 31 1, 317. 

Oceanus, 393. 

Oedipus, 3^8, 31a, 341. 

Oenomaus, 161. 

Olympiad named for victor, 118. 

Olympias, 380. 

Olympic games, 97, 1S5, 117!., 339. 

omens 39» 54p i°»i «9f-» a* 6 ! »*9» 3*9 C*nd 

v. signs) . 
omphalos, the, 939, 

Onchestos, 317. 

Onetor, 66, 76. 

Opis, banquet at, 979. 

oracles, 51, 58 f. ; collections of ancient, 57; 
dream oracles, 58; false (or counterfeit). 
57; ofBacis P 57t of Cla.nis.57: of Mu&acus, 
57; of the Sibyl, 57; s-.ul oracles, 184; ven- 
ders Of, 36 A f. 

orators, of 4th century, 268 f. 

ordeal, the, 9i._ 

Orestes, worshipped as a hero, x66. 

organization of religion, 45. 

orgiastic worship, 153, 159, 186, 341 f. 

origin of man. 138, 345. 

Oropus, 913.: oracle at, 58. 

Orpheus, 944. 

Orphic sect, the, i8j 330, 944 f., 349, 951: f.; 

revival of, 970 f. 
Orphic writings, the, -944. 
Ouranos, 138. 
owl, 196. 

Paicon, 134. 

Paiorua, the, 151. 

palace shrine, 66, aoo, aoa f. 

Pilacnion, 154. 

Pan, worship of, 159, 316. 

Panaceia, 136. 

Panatheoaca,the, 34 (fig-), 96,100, 114 f, 150, 

439, 968. 
Pandion, na. 
Pandora, 938 
Parmenides, 335. 
par.sluy, use of, 47* 

Parthenon, 7a, 256; a Christian chnrch, 286. 
Patrae, 359. 

gitriotisra, 936, 953: decay of, 966 f., 374. 
atroclus, the soul of, 169. 

patron deities, of clubs, 197! of the cities, 359. 

pea&ant worship, 340, and v. agricMilttraZ 
ivvrsJi ip. 

Peinaeus, the, foreign cults at, 371, 375, 

Peisistratus, 188, 338, 355, 303. 

Pelppidas, ^3. 

Pcloponnesian War, the, aoo f. 

Penelope, 5a. 

Pentheus, 343. 

Pergamon, altar at, 70; worship of Asclepiu* 
at, 164. 

Pericles, piety of, 86, 303. 

perjury, 91. 

Persephone, 107, 111, 131, 156, 184; associ- 
ated with Demeter,. v. rnysUr-iet ,- myth of, 
135; nature of, 184; worshipped at Rome, 
383. 

Persian wars, the. 349 f. 

Phacacians., the, temple of, 66. 

Phaestos. aoa. 

Phanes, 345. 

Pheidias, 363; gods of, 33. 

Phigaleia, temple at, 93, 36a. 

Philip, religious policy of, 380. 

Philoctctcs, 358- 

philosaphy, Greek, antagonism with religion, 
37 if.; at Athens, 950 f, 363, 306 f . : denn- 
ing the nature of Cod, 389 f., 326; influence 
on Christianity, 388 f., 330; of religion, 149;, 
250, 338 f ; rise of, 932, 934 f. 

Phocis, 353. 

Phrygja, 244, 346. 

Phrygian Mother, the, 976. 

physical olqects, worship of, 30. 

pigS used in sacrifice, 98, 1 io ( in, 119, 133, 
156. 

pillars, sacred, 73, 005, 306, 335 (and V. /terms) , 

Pindar, 3i, 53, 186, 356, 307, 347: 2-4.1 

plague, the, 10$, 1244 34.3; purification from, 
111. 

Plataca, battle of, 50. 

Plato, and the poets, 307, 347: belief in 
dreams, 53: belief in immortality, 187; doc- 
trine of the Supreme Being, 373, 330; influ- 
enced by Orphic doctrines 971; philosophy 
of, 3381; worshipped, 167. 

f toughing, sacred, rs6. 
Imp-Hades "84 t ; Pluto-Serapu, 980, 

PlutUS, 131, 136, I3O. 

Polcmacnctus, 5$ note. 
Polycrates, 53, 109. 
Polydruces, 257. 
Polyguotu&, 305. 
Polyxena, 105. 

portents, stories of, 43. 

Poseidon, cults of, 1541 317: — Erechtheus, 
166; nature of, 30, 21:; patron of horse- 
manship, 154; worship of, xoo, 108. 

prayer, 83 f.; at meals, 84; in literature, 85; 
instances of. 86, no, 369,379, 348; in the 
epic, 333. 

rrayer hymn; 84, 88. 
"raxiteles, 268, 3(12. 
prc-Mycenacan age, x8o B 198. 

INDEX 

383 

priesthood, no! organized, 78, 339: of Ists, 

?7 8 - 
priests, 76 f., no; appointment of, 79, 316; 

attendants of, 76: duties of, 67,82; families 

of, 79 ; payment of, 79 ; qualifications of, 

78, 8x; titles of, 81. 

f recessions, 96, E14, 157, 3s8, 383. 
rodicu&j 397. 

Proerosia, ihe, 287. 

Promcihcta, the, 163. 

Prometheus, 44, 52, 163. 

prophecy, a trade, 5.5, 57; epic conception 
of, ss. 

prophets, 54. i 

propitiatory rites, 50, 105T., 2*7; not men- 
tioned in the epic, 106 ; occasion of, 106, 
146, 339; origin of, 109; ritual of, r.o6f 

Protagoras, 337. 

Proteus, 733 • 

Proiogonos, 345. 

Psamathe. 155. 

Ptolemies, the, 3*77, 380. 

Ptolemy Lagi, 380. 

Punic war, the, 384. 

purification, 105, toe,*., 146, 339 (and v. pro- 
pitiatory rites)', after childbirth, iai; cere- 
113011yol.no; of public places, no; Orphic, 
347; significance of, in, 343* 

Pythagoras, 247 f, 306 

Pythian games, V, Delphi, 

Pythian priestess, the, 46, 57, 59, 339. 

Tain-god, v. Zeus, the sky-god. 
ram, used in purification, xto, 159. 
rationalistic tendencies, 41, 333, 335 f. B a6x, 

3*4. 305- 
religion, ■*"* beauty, 33, 395, 304, 330; and 
ethics, 306 I.: and morality, 33, 307 f. ; and 
philosophy, 371 f. 9 374, aaa f . ; and poetry. 
333, 356 f. , 304: and ihe stale, 35, 338, 350 f„, 
315 I ; -comparative, 16; is there a Creek? 
"3. 349*- of gladoc-s, 14, 35, 315; personal 
irf. state, ia8; relation to other phases of 

civilization, 190, 338, 350 f., 367, 394 f., 

356 f.; study of, 37: ultimate factors to- 
day, 13; what it meant to the Greek, 39, 
333, 394, 33S. 345 f. 

religious r tual, purpose of, 35. 

retribution after death, a&a, 357. 

revelation, Greek conception of, 39, 144. 

revival of religion in seventh century, 186, 
330 f. 

Rhadamanthus, 18a. 

Rhea, 138, 149, 153,300; Rhca-Cybelc, 153. 

Rhcneia, 360. 

Rhodes, worship at, 10s, 154, 376. 

riddance, riles of, too, 170, 196, 334, 338. 

ritual, persistence of, 191, 337, s86 1. 

river gods, 107, 108, 150, 153, 354. 

roads, god of, 159, 361. 

Roman gods, worshipped with Greek rites, 
384 

Roman religion, influenced by Greek, 281 f. 

Rome, power of, a8x ; Greek gods at, 383. 

Rumor, 46. 

Sabazius, 128, 341. 

Saboi, 341. 

sacred graves, 66, 165. 

sacred pillars, v. pillars. 

sacred places, 65. 

sacred times, 74 f. and v . seasons cf 'worship. 

sacrifice, animals used for, xoo; at Rome, 
383; banquet sacrifice (sacrificial mea|), v, 
communion meal ; before baule, 98; Greek 
theory of. 10a; household, 98; in rime of 
danger, 49 ; occasions of, 08; purificatory, 
v. propitiatory rites; religious motive of, 
103; ritual of, 100 f.; to heroes, x6s; types 
of, 98, 391: victims, rites of slaughter, 98, 
iox; without blood, 196; wood used (or, xoo. 

sacrilege, cases of, six, 355, 3x6. 

sailors, god of, 161, 349. 

Salamis, battle of, 105, ajx; worship of 
Artemis at victory, 359. 

salvation, 345. 

Same*. 150, 

Samot brace, shrine on, 70. 

sanctuary, right of, 71, 311. 

Sappho, 333. 

Sarpedon, 140. 

Sceptics, the, 375, 33X,- their view of religion, 

319. 
science, at Athens, 363. 
Scrillus, worship of Artemis at, 35a. 
sculpture. 35a, 396 f. (v. art). 
sea-gods, 107, 146, 15*, 311. 
seasons of worship, 113, 157 f , 195, and v. 

festivals. 
sects, 50, aao, 339; families of, 56; of the 

army, 55. 
Selene f 104, 977. 

Scleucidac, the, religious policy of, 380. 
Scrnele, 345, 357- . . 

Semitic gods, 195: Semitic religion, 340. 
Scrapis, 376 f., 380. 

Sibyl, the, 57, 339; the Cumaean, 383. 
Sibylline books, the, 38a f- 
sibyls, 343. 
Sicily, si 6. 
signs, classification of, 30 f.; divination by, 

40 1., 54, 334, 339; in the course of nature, 

43, 44 f. : in the epic, 144: science of, 40. 
Simonidcs, 336. 

sin, conception of, 340 f. : taint of, 339, 343 ■"- 
Sinope, Pluto cult from, a8o. 
SiriuK, 155. 
Skirophoria, the, 940. 
slave labor, 330. 
sleep, ihe soul in, 53,^ 

snakes, sacred, 309; a* aavo-worship, 165. 
sneeze, as omen. 47. 
social relation of goda ausd xaen, 34. 37* ani * v - 

gods. 

Socrates, 86, 173, 1*8. *6s, 33*. 

Solon, 333, 3j6, aj4. 3*«s 3«7- 

solstice, worship at tha, 157, 139, «95" 

soothsayers, wandcriag, 35. 

Sophists, the. philosophy of, 353, 363 f., 366, 
337 f . : rise oi\ 360. 

Sophocles, 358 f ; introduced worship of As- 
clepciis, 164 : view of future life, 187 f. 

soul, the, Greek conception of, i8i ( 186. 333; 
immortality of, 53, 139, 136, SC9 f., a4«; Or- 
phic doctrine of, 345, 347; transmigration 
of, 346, 348. 

3«4 

INDEX 

soul oracles, 284. 

souls, epic conception of, 168, 225: gods of, 
X S°» *s8# *7y» s8a; power for evil, 170; re- 
turn of, 158; worship of, 107, 146,165, 169 f., 
178 f . ; and v. drad t -ujowskif* of. 

sparrow/, 44. 

bparta, 218,333,352; cult of Etlcitbyiaai, 1&4. 

Spercheiux, 66, 153. 

springs, worship ai, 153, 196, 354, 360. 

stale control of religion, 85, 82, 238, 250, 2154 ff., 

a63. 3*5 '•, 

stale, warship by the, itaf., 147 f., 349, 346, 

Stcsichorus, 333. 

Stoics, ihe, 40, 375, 331 f. r 355. 

strangers, the gods of, 149, X85, 3XX. 

Styx, Ihe, 91 - 

suicide, epidemic of, 243. 

sulphur, used* in purification, no, 

superstition, 269, 339, 349; absence of, 43, 

173: in Bocotta, 928. 
surgical operations, 124. 
symbols of the gods, animals as, xofi- 
synthesis of cults, 313 f., 966^ 356; v. 
cults, ** condensation " of* 

local 

taboo, on food, 8x, 047. 
Tacnaron, 184, 
taint of evil, 1x0. 

Tanagia, 93, »«» «S9- 

Tantalus, 257. 

Tarcntum, 155. 

Taygcte, 353 

Tnygetus, Mt., 15s. 

Tegea, cults at, 78, 163, 164. 

Tcircsias, 45, 54, 5 6. 170. 
Ieisamenus, 56, 60. 

Telcmachus, 99, 309. 

Tckmus, 54, 

tclestcrion, the, 130. 

temples, 70 f. , 238, 252; and the development 
of architecture, 397: as treasuries, 71, 317 f . ; 
at Rome, 083; income of, 67: officials of, 
82: property of, 67,96, 310; statue in, 238. 

Tethys,3a 3 - 

Tctrapohs, the, 217. 

Thales, 23*. 333, 325. 

Thalysia, the, at Cos, 156. 

thank offering, 87, 93, 99. 

Thargelia, the, lit, 151., 340, 

'i'heano, 76. 

Themis, 228, 309, 324. 

Theognis, 230, 333, 336, 354, 3x0, _ _ 

theology, and philosophy, ae: Christian, 989 f., 

340; in Greek religion, (7; of Plato, 339 f. ; 

of the Orphic sect, 244; of the poets, 36; 

contrasted with myths, x8. 
theophany, in the Homeric poems. 40 f. , 144; 

types of, 42. 
Thermopylae, Demeter cult. biB. 
Theseus, 165, x&6. 
Thesmophoria, the, xrx, 156 
Tncspizc, 78 ; cult of Eros, at, 228, 
Thcssalian cults, 194, 210, 2x6. 
thiasoi, 136 f ., 187, 314. 
Thrace, 159, i6x, 244; IHonysus worship in, 

*86, 341- 
Thrasyllus, 55 note. 

Thrasymachus, 327. 

'Dim y »l»dcs, 26c;. 

thunderbolt, of Zeus, 42, 46, 52, 148- 

Tiryns, a©3, 207. 

Titans, the, 345- 

Tithcnidia, the, 354. 

tithes, v3 

Tithorca, Wis cult at, 377. 

torch festivals, 1 to, 163, 352* 

totemism, 196, 207. 

trade, gods of, 150, 383, 349, 359. 

tradition, power of, 26, 39 

treaties, sacredness of, 317- 

trees, sacred, 160, 106, ao6, 353. 

Tncc a, worship of Asclcpius at, 124, 164. 

Triptolemus, 134. 

Troezen^ X65. 

Trophonius, 23; a form of Zeus, 213; oracle 

ol7s8. 
lyphocus, ;A8. 

¥ rants, the, 23X. 
y rtaeus, 232. 

unity of belief and practice, tendency toward, 

28, 355. 

ventriloquism, 57. 

Venus, culls at Rome, 285: — Erycina, 

384. 
Vesuvius, cult of Hephaestus near, 163. 
" visions," 134, 243. 
votive offerings, 36,87, 93 f., 136,008; modern, 

387 f. 
vow, 93, 99. 
vulture, 45. 

Welcker, theory of, 336, 

Wernicke, theory of, 355. 

winds, the, X07, xoS, 146, S55. 

Wolters, on tholos at Mcnidi, 199 

women, worship by, X22» xa6, 150, 152, 155, 
156, 341, 277, 307. 

words, as omens, 46, 734. 

wcrship, attitudes of, 88 f. I early forms of. 
■93; Greek conception of, 36; of tendance, 
E96, X99 f. ; regarded as tax, or barter, 35, 36, 

88, 332. 

Xcnophancs, 333, 361, 325 f. 
Xcnophon, 43, 5a, 369, 35a. 

Zagreus, v. JDiffnystts Zti^reus. 

Zeus, afiar of, at Oiympia, 56: altar of, M 
Pet-gamon, 70: an agricultural deity. 185; 
birth of, 149. 200: court of^ X40; " Father 
Zeus,'* 15, 30,149; head of, from Mylasa, 
15; in the Orphic myth, 345; local culls 
of, 149, x66, xoo, 3x3: nalure of, 33, 148 f . ; 
oak of, 58; origin of, axo: temple at Oiym- 
pia, 93, 117, 307; the *ky £od, 3°. 43. >4 8 » 
196; the supreme deity, 140, 234,245, 256 f. 

Zeus, special forms of: — Amphiaraos, too, 
3x3; — Astrapaios, 43: — Boulakts, 86; 
— Cronus, 228: — Herkeios, 121: - Hor- 
Icios, X17: — Hypatos, 104: — Ktesios, 86, 
X3X ; — Lykaios, 105, 313; — MciUchios, 
110, xxx, 212 f.; — Phratrios, xia. 

s. 

THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Phases qflts Progression in Religion 9 
Polity, Philosophy and Art 

BY 

KATE STEPHENS 

Author of "American Thumb-Prints: Mettle of our 

Men and Women," "A Woman's 

Heart," etc., etc. 

■ttew JffOtft 
-STURGIS & WALTON 
COMPANY 
1914 

64 60 Fifth .Avjcndic, Njw Vork 

Copyright 1914 
B* STURGIS & WALTON COMPANY 

Set up and electrotypcd. Published March, 1914 

\ 

FOREWOKD 

A brief account of Hellenic thought, Hel- 
lenic feeling and Hellenic will before their 
subversion by the rude genius of Macedonia, 
is within these covers. The book essays to 
make the old Greek spirit speak to the gen- 
eral reader who has never studied Greek, and, 
if he will, to the Greek student — it is an en- 
deavor to tell somewhat of the message of 
Greek thought and action, of the lifting and 
broadening of the vision of human life as- 
sociated with the social mind and will of the 
old-day Hellenes. Just as Greek ideas, for- 
gotten except by the eremite student, brought 
a new world of light to the wondering peoples 
of the west, more than four hundred and fifty 
years ago, so now, a reconsideration of Greek 
ideals might well seize the often poorly held 
or wholly unoccupied imagination of to-day 
and give to our life profounder and wider 
meaning. 

My object, I said, has been to bring out the 
spiritual perspective of that ever wonderful 

■a 

ii FOREWORD 

Greek life, to give various aspects of the life's 
evolution, to present its tendencies as a 
simple thing (as they must be in the great 
whole of human history), to point to early 
forms of many present-day ideas and usages 
which express the inward consciousness of 
man, to endeavor to turn away certain false 
conceptions of the Greeks and by holding at- 
tention to their accomplishment to show that 
they were a people whose heads were clear 
and hearts exceedingly human. 

The subject is old, much spoken about- 
Still ever new in its surpassing significance 
to all time. I hope ray essay may reflect 
somewhat of the old Greek directness and 
Greek penetration of life. But any setting 
forth of the unfolding of the Hellenes' spirit 
is apt to suggest some such cry as "Inade- 
quate," and the inevitable comparison of 
"Man's nothing-perfect to God's All-Com- 
plete." 

In mentally reviewing those to whom I am 
in this writing debtor, I am weighted with a 
sense of obligation to so many who have 
thought and taught that I am not able to call 
by name one half. The list would begin with 
the Greeks themselves and their high utter- 

FOREWORD iii 

ance. It would pass to many a worker of the 
far-away Renaissance, who with the zeal of a 
lover of his kind searched a wonderful, for- 
gotten world 

"with the throttling hands of Death at strife, 

Ground he at grammar ; 
Still, thro* the rattle, parts of speech were rife. 

While he could stammer 
He settled Hoti's business — let it be — 

Properly based Oun — 
Gave us the doctrine of the enclitic De, 

Dead from the waist down." 

A glorious roll of scholars would carry the 
list on through centuries, and end only in the 
great delvers in Greek thought and Greek 
earth in this day of ours, and the learned 
conclusions of those men and women. Such 
consciousness of indebtedness forbids my in- 
cluding in these covers what is in such a work 
often deemed an essential, a bibliographical 
list 

Psychologists tell about a law they have 
formulated — that in operations of the mind 
unconscious phenomena play a preponderat- 
ing part. For years it has been my habit to 
reread matter of special appeal. Some ex- 
pression I have gained memoriter may have 

iv FOREWORD 

crept into this essay. If this should prove a 
fact, I should regret it. To all that I know 
as quoted words I have put rigorous quota- 
tion marks, to statements indefinitely remem- 
bered such phrases as "it is said/' and I most 
sincerely hope I have in no instance omitted 
that justice — poor return, it would be, for the 
delight of reading thoughtful books. 

New York, 1914. 

CONTENTS 

PAGE 

GIFTS OF THE SPIRIT TO OUR EVOLUTION 3 

AEGEAN PEOPLES FORERUNNING THE 

GREEKS 23 

THEIR ART GIFT; 

THEIR RELIGION OP MOTHER EARTH; 

THEIR GOVERNMENT; 

INROADS OF PEOPLES PROM THE NORTH. 

HEROIC AGE OF THE GREEKS .... 47 

ITS RELIGION OP THE PHENOMENA OP NA- 
TURE AND THE SOCIAL GROUP; 

ITS KINGSHIP OP HEROES; 

ITS MORAL IDEAS, REVERENT FEAR, ETC.; 

THE EPIC ITS ART. 

BURGEONING DEMOCRACY; ITS PURITAN- 
ISM; ITS ART 83 

PASSING OP THE MONARCHY, OLIGARCHY, 
TYRANNUS ; THE CONSTRUCTIVE INDI- 
VIDUALISM OP CITIES; 

ORPHISM, ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES, RECRU- 
DESCENCE OP SUPERSTITION; 

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY: PHYSICS FORE- 
CASTING MODERN SCIENCE; 

DEVELOPMENT OP LYRIC POETRY: NATIONAL 
GAMES OP THE HELLENES. 

CONTENTS 

PAGE 

FIFTY YEARS OF DISTINGUISHED WORKS 203 

A DEFENSIVE, UNIFYING WAR: DEMOCRACY 
IN ATHENS ; 

RACE SPIRIT IN ARCHITECTURE ADORNING 
ATHENS, IN SCULPTURE AND ALLIED 
ARTS; 

THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR; ITS RESULTS; 

IMPERISHABLE HISTORIES OF HERODOTUS 
AND TtLUCYDIDES : WHY THEY WERE 
WRITTEN; 

RISE OF THE DRAMA; SUCH MASTERS AS 
iESCHYLUS, SOPHOCLES, EURIPIDES, 

ARISTOPHANES ; 

COMING OP THE SOPHISTS AND THE NEW 
EDUCATION ; 

SOCRATES, PLATO; PINNACLE OP THE GREEK 
ASCENT ; 

DECADENCE OF THE GREEK SPIRIT . . 301 

WHAT WERE THE CAUSES OF THE DETERIORA- 
TION ? EXHAUSTION OP THE GREEKS ? 

MALARIA? ECONOMIC CONDITIONS? 

— LOSS OP RACE CONSCIOUSNESS AND 
SUBVERSION OF IDEALS? 

DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF THE GREEKS ; 
CERTAIN LIKENESSES OF GREEK AND 
AMERICAN ; 

THE COSMIC VISION THE GREEKS WORKED 
OUT. 

GIFTS OF THE GREEK SPIRIT 
TO OUR EVOLUTION 

History is the development o£ Spirit la Time. — Hegel, 
in The Philosophy of History. 

Mankind is not a mere collection of detached indi- 
viduals, or man could possess no knowledge of any 
unity of scientific truth. ... Human experience is not 
merely a collection of detached observations, but forms 
an actual spiritual unity, whose type is not that of a 
mechanism, whose connections are ideally significant, 
whose constitution is essentially that which the ideal of 
unified truth requires. — Josiah Royce, in Loyalty and 
Insight. 

That society is not a mere aggregate hut an organic 
growth, that it forms a whole the laws of whose growth 
can be studied apart from those of the individual alone, 
supplies the most characteristic postulate of modern 
speculation. 

Vast social organization is the work of a vast series 
of generations unconsciously fashioning the order which 
they transmit to their descendants. — Sir Leslie 
Stephen, in The Science of Ethics* 

GIFTS OF THE GREEK SPIRIT 
TO OUR EVOLUTION 

Uniformity and necessity of natural law is 
the first great maxim of our twentieth century 
science. It leads investigators to search for 
origins, the cause behind the fact. Through 
its light phenomena themselves bear witness 
how they are and why they are. It is the 
principle upon which the sciences have reared 
their structure. In the sixth century before 
Christ this law established itself among the 
Ionians of Asia Minor. 

The second great formula of science, an- 
nounced by early Greek physicists, by 
thinkers through many ages, and finally after 
long suppression becoming a radical dictator 
of the sciences of our nineteenth century, is 
that nature is not only subject to the law of 
uniformity but that ever alongside of uni- 
formity is infinite and consistent gradation, 
that the world is a result of a process of 
growth, that more complex life grows out of 

simpler forms. This second maxim, over- 

3 

4 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

whelming many a misbelief, advances the 
study of nature toward the standard and re- 
quirement of reason whose first postulate is 
the unity of all being. 

These two maxims have gained undeniable 
results in illuminating the world of physical 
nature. But in that other world of psychical 
nature, of which we know no settled form and 
which we call the world of spirit, these prin- 
ciples have no less force and application. In 
that also is the uniformity and necessity of 
law. This, Ileraclitus, a philosopher of the 
early Ionians, bespoke in part, "The sun will 
not go beyond his bounds: if he does the 
avenging deities, handmaids of justice, will 
find him out." And later Anaxagoras told 
of it, and Sophocles, with unfailing pene- 
tration and art, set forth the law in his 
dramas. 

Spirit is mysterious in its workings. We 
are ignorant of its laws. Yet in its world is 
traceable an unbroken development of con- 
sciousness from the first faint dawning in 
brute sense upon our planet and millions of 
years ago, traceable with many an off-wander- 
ing and aside but still ever clear, and rising 
through works and their aspirations — through 

GIFTS OF THE GREEKS TO OURSELVES 5 

instinct, habit, sentiment, languages, religions 
and other institutions of human amalgama- 
tion, art, literature, science, — to where the 
glorified spirit of man comprehends itself 
one with absolute reason and absolute love. 
Throughout this upward trend, this urging, 
an invisible, spiritual energy has borne on — 
by evidence with a cosmic meaning and cos- 
mic end- 
In this conception we are not far from a 
faith of the old Hellenes in a divine and uni- 
versal order in human affairs, what we to-day 
call a principle of progress, enduring through 
many phases of the Greek spirit, and evi- 
dencing itself in their state, their literature 
and their art. 

Strata of our earth make clear records of 
foregoing and material forms of life. In the 
records of the spirit are also shining ages 
and epochs, more full and more intelligible 
than the history mere matter has written — 
records preserved in the inspiration the hu- 
man race has voiced in its poetry and prose, 
in the metals and marbles the race has 
brought from the earth's recesses and 
wrought in arts, in the laws and politics its 
peoples have founded and conducted for the 

.' 

6 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

common weal — all golden fossils of uplifting 
and outspreading life. 

Spirit, the expansive force of the world, 
grows towards ideas. Ideas are the eternal 
forms which spirit ever tends to assume. 
We measure the growth of spirit by the ideas 
which inform it. Enormous and mixed popu- 
lations with a* composite and inharmonious 
and often misleading culture, make history an 
apparent confusion. Still universal history is 
but a record of the growth of spirit, an or- 
derly process, a legitimate, gesetzmassig de- 
velopment, an evolution from factors we 
seek to find. To this process of growth many 
races have brought an appreciable contribu- 
tion. 

Between all nations and communities of 
men there is an importing of thought, a carry- 
ing from one to another. Even in remote 
times this was true. For instance, the an- 
cient .ZEgean peoples which foreran the Greek 
seized upon certain forms in the more an- 
cient Asiatic and Egyptian civilizations, sav- 
ing and continuing in the godlike and compre- 
hensive art of a later day the early evolving 
beauty. More purely in the realm of ideas is 
the bearing upon, and gift of Orphic mysti- 

GIFTS OF THE GREEKS TO OURSELVES 7 

cism to budding Christianity. No people ever 
takes up a problem where another has laid it 
down, nor ever takes it up with the same 
grasp and disposition — race character and 
race traits forbid. 

Some peoples thrive by whatever might in- 
heres in them, and then perish according to 
the law of their organic growth, leaving to 
later dwellers on this earth little record of 
their work — no more perhaps than some 
ruined house of a god or of a warrioT, or 
buried shards of folk pottery, or merely the 
form and inner savings of a serpent-mound. 
Such nations seemingly have no heirs. The 
strength and vitality of other peoples, again, 
pass on and flourish through many times and 
among alien nations, vast, resurgent factors 
in evolution. 

It is the fortune of ancient Greece to have 
thought and wrought for the world- Com- 
pared with the life of this earth which scien- 
tists of these days say is not below fifty-five 
millions of years, and may run into several 
hundreds of millions, the centuries the spirit 
of Greece dured in splendid triumph are as 
the flight of a bird through a summer garden. 
In that brief moment, however, Greece not 

8 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

only wrought for generations that have lived 
their life upon this earth and died since her 
strong spirit shone forth, but for whatever 
generations may continue to think and upon 
this planet work out their gift to the uni- 
versal life. She received and rationalized 
the better part of the content of more ancient 
civilizations and preserved to us whatever of 
their substance was true, and she clearly and 
gloriously inaugurated the new era of the do- 
minion of mind over nature. 

Much of the most delicate spirit of Hellas, 
the perfect bloom of her spirit, perished with 
her ancient free people. Much of what is 
finest of her gTowth yields only to patient 
and arduous study. Yet how vast has been 
her impetus to us younger peoples, and how 
greatly have Greek thought and Greek art 
and Greek polities affected our own ! 

The Hellene was the first of western races 
to think, and to know that what he was doing 
was thinking. Custom petrified into mean- 
ingless form, auguries, incantations delivered 
in cataleptic trance, fantastic outgrowths of 
the human mind and denying the very facts 
of life, negating human sympathy, human 
equality and human interest — these were the 

GIFTS OF THE GREEKS TO OURSELVES 9 

forms of intellectual life. The Greek was tlie 
first to proclaim the sovereign power of ra- 
tional reflection. Therefore he created sci- 
ence, scientific method of patient analysis 
and unbiased research, and philosophy. 

The Greek was the first to feel that the * 
beautiful has its own laws, that its cult is the 
most ennobling pleasure — nay, more than a 
pleasure, an ideal to be worshiped through all 
sorrows and toils. The Hellene therefore 
created art. Before him was only ostentation 
and ornamentation. 

The Hellene, again, recognized that the 
good is an end in itself, that the laws of con- ** 
duct are the laws of reason. Before the noon- 
tide of his great day other peoples attempted 
etliical systems. In Egypt they had a stereo- 
typed ritual controlled by a priesthood, the 
people from the king up barren from arid 
omens, their mental power so weakened by 
an affluent material civilization that they 
bartered themselves — slavery and intellectual 
abnegation in this world for good luck in the 
world to come; blessedness in the everlast- 
ing mansions of an eternal life the priests 
promised, if the people would here yield to 
their guidance and follow their counsel. 

10 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

In the countries of the orient Chinese seers 
wrought a colossal, iron-grooved ceremonial 
for the numberless relations of human life — 
a servile worship of form, reason without 
sense of human freedom, laws of living suited 
to a so-called Superior Man. 

Nations of India, struggling for ages to 
loose the sense of brooding mystery, the 
mental cramp in which her exuberant, over- 
awing nature held their spirit, filled with 
formless yearning after the sublime immen- 
sity without and rules of human action within, 
had sunk paralyzed into inactivity, into a 
comfortless religion fettered with caste, fatal- 
ism and gods of monstrous form, into silent 
servility to tradition, prescribed formula and 
fear to offend the gods by enquiry into causes- 
Science, literature — knowledge by which they 
could be free — was to the people of India a 
theological secret kept in the gloom of a 
temple and subjected to temple inspiration. 
Impiety alone would prompt the unveiling. 
Priests, a segregated caste who lived by the 
altar, received any new gain in human wis- 
dom and reserved it to themselves. 

The story of the Hebrews, told in our Bible, 
is often saturated with a feeling towards mo- 

GIFTS OF THE GREEKS TO OURSELVES 11 

rality. Its tale testifies that the Hebrews suf- 
fered frightful lapses in promulgation of 
human duties- For instance, in the nine- 
teenth chapter of Leviticus, where the laws of 
neither dealing falsely, neither lying one to 
another, nor defrauding thy neighbor, and 
payment before another day of him that is 
hired, are followed by the injunction "thou 
shalt not respect the person of the poor." 
Both Leviticus and Deuteronomy are rich in 
promises of material blessings to those walk- 
ing in the way of the Lord and of disaster to 
those who forsake that path. Job's friends 
had at hand such formulas of moral govern- 
ment. In the old patriarchal theory of life 
the righteous would be prosperous, the wicked 
"poor." Desperate sight of the reverse con- 
dition led later to outcries in certain of the 
Psalms, All through its course portrayed in 
the Bible, Israel stood awed before the moral 
government of the world, and only in a com- 
paratively late day worked out an ethical 
cult. 1 

1 "The Israelites were slow in attaining conceptions 
of sin and at no time prior to the publication of the 
Gospel were they able to combine their conceptions 
into coherent doctrines." — Dr. Francis J. Hall, in 
Evolution and the Fall. 

12 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Before the Greeks, throughout the ancient 
world there was in ethics little save hieratic 
authority. The Hellenes, unhampered by 
worship of sacred writings, or by dogmatism 
of a priest caste, gifted with the instinct 
which allowed the harmonious unfolding of 
human powers and capacities, had iti their in- 
born self-limitation guides to morality. Life 
to them was penetrated with an ethical in- 
stinct. Their power of analysis — asking in 
the moral world what they asked in the phys- 
ical, why should there be human duty, what 
are the principles of conduct, the law of hu- 
man action — united to their sense of propor- 
tion, their sentiment of and feeling for hu- 
manity, their sensibility to man's function in 
the social organism, created their dialectic 
in ethics, their science of morality. 

The Hellene, gifted, we say, with the in- 
stinct which organized political life and obe- 
dience to the public spirit of the laws, discov- 
ered that the state is rational, that its form 
should correspond to its function, that gov- 
ernment is, as has been phrased to-day, the 
corporate reason of the community. Thus he 
was the first to announce political liberty. 
Before him society had swerved between des- 

GIFTS OF THE CREEKS TO OUKSELVES 13 

potisin and anarchy, or, as at times with the 
Jews, to theocracy. There had been no at- 
tempt to reconcile the freedom and good of 
the state and the freedom and good of the in- 
dividual- The Hellene's practical morality 
went hand in hand with his civic freedom, and 
was in fact united to and disciplined by it. 

This, in part, is what Greece gave to the 
evolution of the spirit of man. These were 
her factors. And even in the law which pre- 
vails to-day, the fundamental expansion of 
which is the real glory of Rome, and in the 
religion which prevails to-day, the founda- 
tion of which is an illumination and glory of 
ancient Judsea, the share of the Greek is 
great. "Without Greece we should never have 
had the law of Rome. Nor should we have 
had that religion from Judaea which to-day 
practices and perpetuates phases of a glowing 
Greek mysticism and Greek rites and Greek 
ritual — a religion passing from precepts of 
ethical conduct, the Sermon on the Mount, to 
the emphasis of belief in a dogmatic Nicene 
creed, from the mighty moral enthusiasm of 
its Teacher to the ethics of the Eoman law. 

Greece was master of the intellect of man 
in the world then known from the spread of 

14 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

her ideas in the fourth century before Christ 
to the time of Justinian, when Plato's acad- 
emy, the first school of philosophy opened at 
Athens, was also the last to be closed (529 A. 
D.)* The spirit of Hellas had a complete 
historic continuity, not by ideas alone but 
by many definite institutions and works. 
Fathers of the Church were often trained in 
old Greek ideas and in the rhetorical methods 
of itinerant teachers called sophists. Their 
homily, a fusion of exhortation and teaching, 
was made after the manner of sophists' public 
addresses, and as about the sophists disciples 
and other auditors crowded and acclaimed, so 
about the great preachers. Greek rhetoric, 
that is, created the form of the Christian 
sermon, just as Greek philosophy projected 
the Christian dogmatic creed. Amid the 
cloisters and gloom of the Middle Ages a pet- 
rifaction of Aristotelianism, known as Scho- 
lasticism, buttressed the doctrines of the 
Church. "Without Greece we should not have 
had the science which then served stably. 
Nor in the ninth century a mystic Neo- 
Platonism finding life's end in ecstasy and 
rapt contemplation of the divine. Nor 
should we have had the Renaissance after 

GIFTS OF THE GREEKS TO OURSELVES 15 

long imprisonment of the spirit of man. 
Even till to-day Greece is the master of the 
intellect of man. 

Thus closely are the Greeks our spiritual *• 
ancestors. The Greek mind and its products 
are the first flowering of the European peo- 
ples. Constructive Greeks set forth the first 
science, the first art, the first_jreedom, the 
first devotion to self-imposed_laws, the first 
impulse of man to independen testable growth. 
They were the first people to he fre e in. in- 
tellect, fre e in a rt and fre e in p olitics. The 
saying of Pericles of Athens to his fellow 
Athenians regarding their colonies may meet 
hroadest application : — "We shall not he with- 
out witnesses assuredly: mighty documents 
of our power these are, which shall make us 
the wonder of ages to come." 

But Greece was not always the land of the 
spirit. In the rude works of her infancy the 
vision of a seer would hardly foresee the 
height and glory of the Hellenes 7 prime. 
The way was to be long, and hundreds of 
generations were to build with no glimmer of 
the coming race's glory. Great outpourings 
of the spirit of life, and any expressive ra- 
diance to the eyes of men, must for matur- 

16 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

ing have not only time for factor, but also 
environment. That they, the Greeks, so 
mightily surpassed all civilizations of their 
day is, perhaps, in one measure due to their 
country and the plenitude of life and joy ac- 
corded them in that land now consecrated 
from their having evolved and wrought their 
miracle there. Spiritual energy, "root of be- 
ing, " seems to have found in their life less 
obstacle to evolution of its reflective reason 
than elsewhere, and more plastic conditions 
for expressing itself in beauty through the 
hand of man. 

The home of this people, of all lands at that 
point in the evolution of the human race best 
calculated to further its indwellers' harmo- 
nious development, included the eastern main- 
land of Mediterranean Europe, the most 
western coast of Asia Minor, and the beauti- 
ful islands that he between — mountains half- 
submerged, cutting their way out of the wine- 
bright sea and seeming to rest like birds upon 
its waters. In the Greeks' years this sea was 
the great highway of the world's travel. 

European Greece, the mainland of theirs, 
projecting far into the ^Egean and turning a 
waiting front towards Asia, was cleft by har- 

GIFTS OF THE GREEKS TO OURSELVES 17 

bor-seeking waters. That is, a thousand 
bays and gulfs cut into its coasts. Within, 
the land lay in countless vales and mountain 
sides. In some parts a fertile glebe blessed 
it. In others the scant soil that educates its 
people for mastership; "not always,*' said 
Herodotus at the end of his history, "does the 
same earth bear wonderful crops and most 
valiant men." 

Cereals grew in sunlit tillage, the grape 
sacred through its use in the religions of 
many peoples, the gray-green olive, other 
esculent fruits, and horned cattle grazed in 
meadows dotted by benefactive forest trees- 
Here and there healthful and sparkling 
waters sprang from hillsides and ran in 
streams to the sea. Above spread a clear 
and lambent air — it is claimed that the Greek 
love of precise form resulted from clear-cut 
outline in their lucid atmosphere. Over all 
temperateness in climate — at Colonus near 
Athens the golden eye of the crocus shone 
through its cup in that month we know as 
February, and in springtime in green valleys, 
says Sophocles, the clear-voiced nightingale 
sang her sweet lament under the dark ivy 
sacred to Bacchus. 

18 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Response to environment is a potent factor 
in evolution. From this face of nature and 
its conditions, there was not only the possi- 
bility, there was a foreordained necessity that 
bere an unparalleled civilization should 
evolve — unless some subtle form of human 
decay, possibly by endemic parasitic fevers, 
of which in the earlier days we find no sign, 
or some disastrous earthquake should cut 
evolution short. Nature's very chiseling of 
the main home in hill and bosky hollow, thus 
making difficult inter-communication by land, 
proved in early times a furtherer_o^level- 
opruent, even if later a fault. It worked 
against .formation of a central government 
strong enough to control the segregated peo- 
ples. Each hill was a natural wall to bar out 
a neighbor wishing to raid for pastime or 
gain, and led, in a race of such potentialities 
as the Greeks', to quietude needed for self -de- 
veloping labor. And it help ed m ake the 
Gre eks seaf arers. Each snug valley with its 
water way had in itself a possible walled mar- 
ket. The sea's power of easy roadway cut- 
ting into this compactness threw together the 
shepherd of the hills, the husbandman of the 
plain and trading sailor. Here began the 

GIFTS OF THE GREEKS TO OURSELVES 19 

many-si ded cu ltivation of the Greek. A 
mother-la nd ffi slende rness as well as poverty 
trained her workers to labor and kept out 
cupidious inraiders. 

When Greek colonies settled in Sicily and 
neighboring lands of the Mediterranean 
basin, not unlike conditions prevailed, and 
with the nascent Greek mind for their plastic 
material evoked not unlike development. 
Even the name of one of those clusters of 
Greek life, an old cradle of vigorous broods, 
Arcadia in the Peloponnesus, albeit the 
country may now have harsh climate and un- 
grateful soil, signifies to our day teeming 
pastures and well-wooded mountain-sides 
watered by cascades and streams, crowned 
with a temperate and energizing climate and 
peopled by hardy, clean-limbed, quick-witted 
dwellers of the soil. 

One of the marvels of this people, one of 
the miracles of the world's development, is 
that in the broad, outlying, widely separated 
lands of Hellas with appalling stretches of 
water between, a race could keep to its dis- 
tinction and purity of race spirit, could pre- 
serve itself even in remote colonies where in- 
termarriage with neighbor of alien blood 

20 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

must have been common. The Greeks were 
of many tribes and differing dialects, and of 
the various life-experiences of the rich and 
the poor. But whatever else they may have 
been, they were always and invariably Greek 
— beings- endued with a many-sided harmony 
and growth. 

. 

.EGEAN PEOPLES FORERUN- 
NING THE GREEKS 

All beginnings are obscure. . . . The sources of his- 
tory, too, can only be tracked at a footpace. They 
must be followed to their fount, like the current of a 
stream which springs in a mountain fastness. — Theo- 
DOR Gomperz, in Greek Thinkers. 

The continuity of human development has been such 
that most, if not all, of the great institutions which still 
form the framework of civilized society have their roots 
in savagery, and have been handed down to us in these 
later days through countless generations, assuming new 
outward forms in the process of transmission, but re- 
maining in their inmost core substantially unchanged. — 
James George Frazer, in Lectures on the Early History 
of the Kingship. 

"We may take it then . - . that the JEgean civilization 
was indigenous, firmly rooted and strong enough to 
persist essentially unchanged and dominant in its own 
geographical area throughout the Neolithic and Bronze 
Ages. — David George Hogarth, in "JEgean Civiliza- 
tion," Encyclopcedia Britannica, Eleventh Edition. 

22 

iEGEAN PEOPLES FORERUN- 
NING THE GREEKS 

Who the Hellenes were, what was their 
origin, we can not with present-day lenses see. 
They are plainly a people apart in their pos- 
sibilities of development, and running back to 
millennia cut off from our peering and mysti- 
fied vision by an opaque veil — back to that 
past in which we see but in conjecture various 
race divergences. Science calls paleolithic 
and neolithic their centuries without record 
save that studiously exhumed. 

Perhaps their main stock had originally 
come from the south, from Africa, had settled 
over inviting peninsulas and gone to the 
northeast, Troad and Phrygia, and westward 
along the sea's water ways even to Sicily and 
Spain. It is possible, an archaeologist has 
suggested, that the western-most settlers had 
migrated so far back in the years that they 
journeyed by land from Africa to Italy. In 
exhumed fragments portrayals of these peo- 
ples show that they were a dark-haired, dark- 

23 

24 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

eyed race; that they had a completely devel- 
oped, long, well-balanced head and slender, 
alert body of medium height- 
There may have been more than one pre- 
Hellenic stratum in the population. Greeks 
of historic days called the mysterious, early 
peoples of the land Pelasgians, " people of 
the sea." A historian of theirs, Herodotus, 
who had an ear for folk tradition and the ad- 
vantage of us by more than twenty-three hun- 
dred years, declared the Pelasgians and 
Greeks were one. The blood of the early peo- 
ples was doubtless a chief element in the his- 
toric Greeks'. 

Our first record of these evolving peoples, 
^]gean let us call them, is in remains un- 
earthed by learned and earnest delvers — in 
works when these forerunners of the Greeks 
were still primitive, during the stage of evolu- 
tion that made axes and arrowheads, saws, 
combs and beads of stone. In predatory ex- 
cursions and fights between clans, bronze 
came gradually into use for weapons of war. 
Bronze came to serve also for personal adorn- 
ment, and with clay utensils for household 
use. Iron was not yet introduced. But the 
soil-dweller in that land of a radiant future 

jEGEANS forerunning the greeks 25 

had in his bronze a medium which fired his 
imagination by* the possible wonders it put 
before him. The career of Greek art had in 
rude way begun, 

A distinctive mark of the spirit of these 
early dwellers was the power of forming an 
ideal and working material towards its reali- 
zation — a sense of beauty drawing them to- 
ward material, an instinct to express in their 
works the ideal form they felt. Also a re- 
ceptivity of the excellence of others ' work, 
but the subduing the foreign element to their 
own character. Here may have been the 
origin of that disposition, aptitude, tempera- 
ment, which grew as the people evolved, until 
it became a feeling and mental capacity for 
measure and loveliness, a productive genius 
which, when its race was fused with another, 
worked out universal types surpassing all 
others — a unique sense of beauty which has 
never filled the soul of any other people. 

In rude and archaic decoration of lines 
scratched in plastic clay we have the testi- 
mony of the childlike early workers' hand. 
Again in vases not unlike in ornament but 
made upon the rotating wheel. Then, the 
evolution of the art being unbroken and the 

26 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

triumph of metal working affecting their 
ceramics, the adorning more graciously de- 
veloped by paint upon the buff surface, or by 
covering the surface with black pigment and 
drawing on it designs in white and red, and 
sometimes orange. 

At first in their bronze metal this people 
made instruments for cutting, such as axes 
and swords. Also, rudely, statuettes or idols. 
As the centuries passed and the craft became 
a part of themselves, that is, when complete 
knowledge of what they could do with their 
material gave them the spirit of freedom, 
their work became more shapely and truer, 
till at last they wrought of bronze, rings, dag- 
gers, fibula*, swords of excelling workman- 
ship and distinction, vessels for ceremonial 
use; and of gold, buttons, masks, headtire, 
necklaces and cups before the artistry of 
which metal workers to-day stand astonished. 
Their product is not in character ornamental 
or illustrative : it is ripe art having as its end 
beauty and truth. Engraved gems also with 
device of lion, dolphin, ox, goose, chariot, and 
horse were common in iEgean or pre-Greek 
centuries as amulets and signets. 

In their masonry and later architecture of 

JEGEANS FORERUNNING THE GREEKS 27 

vast palaces and tombs these swarming peo- 
ples, laboring and building for Greece, show 
to our eyes how they developed the construc- 
tion of walls — first building with rough lime- 
stone blocks lifted one upon the other with- 
out regularity or order, set in clay and 
strengthened with plaster; then with stones 
carefully hewn and laid in horizontal courses, 
the medium being mortar; and third, with 
polygonal masonry. 

The form and perfection of architecture of 
later Greece is the perfect blossom of an evo- 
lution begun in this early age. The grace- 
ful strength of the Doric column may fairly 
be supposed a development of an earlier col- 
umn; and the distinctive cella of the Greek 
temple with its forestanding portico, as well 
as the gable roof above, is doubtless the ves- 
tibulum and hall within, and covering of, ruins 
deemed ancient by the Hellenes. The en- 
trance of the palace found at Tiryns is the 
plan of the foregate or Propylaea at Athens. 

The art of these early Mediterranean peo- 
ples was racial and independent, we said. It 
was not a thing taken on or assumed in cul- 
tural affectation or imitation. It was genu- 
inely a product of the gray matter of their 

28 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

long heads, of their blood warming towards 
the beauty of the world about them, of their 
imagination and their sense of form inter- 
preting their religion and their life. It was 
their overruling endeavor for expressing 
their adoration and their social feeling — a 
product of the thought and feeling of their 
race, however they may have adopted some 
technical method from contemporaries com- 
ing to them across the sea. 

Waterfarers brought works from Crete, an 
island whose folk were doubtless leaders 
among these jEgeans. Also from Tigris- 
Euphrates states. They brought crafts out 
of the south, Egypt. Methods of various 
workers seafarers brought to the childlike 
forerunners of the Greeks, and the early peo- 
ples took them into their life, — the technic of 
the eastern and southern artisan, ways of 
fashioning in clay and metal, carving and en- 
graving stones, the Egyptians' spirals and 
rosettes and masques, and the Assyrian four- 
spoked wheel of solar light and eternity — that 
equilateral cross which we moderns call the 
Greek cross. 

So the JEgean child grew and waxed 
strong in spirit and the grace of God was 

^GEANS FORERUNNING THE GREEKS 29 

upon him. But he always remained master 
of his dedication to art. From the grossly 
rich civilization of the Syrian coast sea- 
farers, smitten with a strangely un-Semitic 
love of the sea, might enter his settlement, in 
the pellucid water that washed his land might 
gather shells for their Phoenician purple dye, 
might cut timber for shipbuilding in his 
forest, and mine silver and copper in his 
earth. They might scatter engraved gems 
and bring in wares to exchange for raw prod- 
uce of his land. Still the child was lord and 
used the activities of his civilization for his 
own development. His works were funda- 
mental, racial, and not in the spirit of a bor- 
rower. They were common to his own 
world. 

The culture and craft embodied in and set 
forth by the works of this people went vari- 
ously through Europe — 16 rugged natives of 
northern forests, and of the then dark and 
mysterious region beyond — to the Baltic 
itself, from which the traders brought south 
the sea's amber, tears, it was later current, 
of the sister Heliades after they became 
graceful poplars, tears wept lamenting their 
brother Phaethon. The traders penetrated 

30 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

even beyond the Baltic of transparent waters 
to what is now Sweden, 

In these earlier centuries, we say, before the 
god-coinrading, heroic age of the Hellenes, the 
JEgean sea was alive with keen sailors from 
Crete, blood-allies of the Greek mainland 
dwellers, and alive, also, with Phoenicians 
coming and going to various lands, carrying 
their activities as far as Britain and its mines, 
coasting outside the straits joining the Medi- 
terranean to the Atlantic, perhaps round 
Africa, and possibly adventuring to the very 
continent of America. In its homecoming 
from the west the sea-borne trade may have 
brought tin for bronze castings — bronze good 
for weapons of the warrior and for adorning 
himself and his house. From the east these 
sailors, whether JEgean or Semitic wealth- 
seekers, fetched not alone works of older civi- 
lizations looking to westward outlet — gem-en- 
graving, gold-working, purple-dyeing, textile 
fabrics, embroideries. From those latitudes 
they brought also tale and idol of god and 
goddess, cults of the world's order and dis- 
order which those dwellers in what was to be 
Hellas took to themselves, and in the unroll- 
ing centuries naturalized and humanized and 

JEGEAKS FORERUNNING THE GREEKS 31 

so suffused with their feeling that the foreign 
distortion was at last difficult to trace. Thus 
was the young race tutoring itself and seiz- 
ing upon all the world of its time could offer. 

In some such eager and industrious life as 
this the vast content of Hellenic art had slow 
centuries of earth-bora life. At these times u fi^ f 
were the art's germination and cotyledonous^ 
outshoot. There was an upspringing vigor, 
and then for centuries a falling away, but the 
art had always the later Greek independence 
and grace in its incipient spirit. Fragments 
of its beginnings form to-day the sole, surviv- 
ing material of swarming generations and 
their handiwork through the hundreds of 
years those generations lived. 

From its modeling in terra cotta and metal 
work, and also porcelain, this upreaching r 
pre-Greek civilization is estimated to have had 
an early splendor in Crete by the middle of 
the third millennium, and also a renewal 
about one thousand years later, a renewal, 
that is, about 1500 before Christ. But dates 
are uncertain. 

In later centuries of this progress the over- 
lord housed his power in walls of gigantic 
build, and upon a height or perhaps command- 

32 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

ing a pass for the purpose of levying taxes. 
Approach to the palace might so lead that an 
assailant presented his right, unshielded side. 
Heavy doors admitted to the house. Within, 
especially of the great hall where noble and 
retinue met at the seat of public counsel, the 
walls shone with bronze plates, colored stones 
and paintings, and possibly with alabaster 
and glass. "When in richest form, the build- 
ing had upper stories and light-wells, water 
pipes, bathrooms and drains* All details 
witness that it was a spontaneous product 
suited to joint life of fighter and vassal and 
household, and that its dwellers wished to give 
to the daily exercise of life elegance and 
charm. 

Then as now the best work of the day 
wrought warfare weapons — they with un- 
erring art, we with the infinite resources of 
our science. Then as now women of rich 
families lived a life often parasitic and 
guarded. They dwelt in the best-fortified 
part of the house. Fostered in plenty they 
clad themselves in garments of gleaming 
linen and soft woolens stained purple by the 
famous sea shell. Perhaps they passed their 
days in embroidering their wear and in weav- 

^GEANS FORERUNNING THE GREEKS 33 

ing tapestries. To enhance their natural 
looks they adorned themselves with the 
golden headtire, armbands, rings and ear- 
rings at the craftsmanship of which we 
marvel. 

Their estimate of life and of the beautiful 
this folk signified in the care of their dead. 
As a part of the universal life, they must per- 
sist after death. Their future life prolonged 
their present, and those who lived in the 
splendor of the great hall craved like abode in 
the life to come. Clothing the bodies for 
eternity, they laid their dead in massive 
vaults in a hillside. To the burial they 
brought astonishing treasure. The soul and 
its felicity survivors must support and pre- 
serve. Within the tomb, when it served for 
a cult to ancestral dead, an altar or some con- 
duit offered the blood of sacrifices, honey, oil 
or other food by which the shades might 
strengthen. 1 Because of these tenders the 

1 Tbis old pre-Greek faith in food-offering to invig- 
orate the dead was maintained far through Greek cen- 
turies. In classic Athens, at the feast of the Anthes- 
teria, was the "offering- of pots" when the people set 
forth all kinds of seeds to souls of ancestors, invoking 
fertility through their spirits called hack from the other 
world by the seeming; upward trend of life in spring. 

34 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

dead remained stable friends of the living 
and gave them counsel. 

Presumably" the people dwelling near the 
palace were in some sort of feudal pledge to 
the family of the great house and the tomb. 
Countless thousands of workers must have 
labored at bridge, roadway and drainage 
building, in grain-field, in olive culture, in 
vineyard, in cattle-shed, at the loom, at pot- 
ters ' wheel, at bronze smelting vessel and 
mold, at the spit, at the mill and bread oven 
of the great house, for their sustenance. Of 
these myriads upon myriads of toilers 
throughout untold generations supporting the 

Graves at Athens, down to their third century before 
Christ, show the dead were provided with food and wine. 
Unquestionably the practice went on later. 

To-day the significant custom of such offering is 
broadly practiced. In Greece food and wine are now 
buried with those who, as Homer sang, "sleep the brazen 
sleep," and for three years "the unsleeping lamp" is 
kept burning by the grave. Among other peoples, in 
parts of Lithuania for instance, peasants to this day 
set viands beside the graves of their kin. Lately, in the 
city of New York, a housemaid daily put aside a plate 
of food to strengthen the spirit of her brother, who 
some weeks before had died at her family home in Ire- 
land. The Chinese of Chicago, keeping their "Feast 
of the Dead," set baskets of roast pig, chicken, duck, 

JSGEANS forerunning the greeks 35 

palace family and retinue, and of their liv- 
ing, we have remains in bronze hairpins, 
knives, ring's, brooches, double-headed axes, 
spearheads, figures of men, women and 
chariots — offered and dedicated at shrines, 
for they had no temples — in figurines of 
stone, ivory, faience and other material from 
their burying grounds. But the people en- 
dure chiefly in the altruism of their works 
made in obedience to the power of the nobles. 
"They maintained the fabric of their world. 
And in the handiwork of their craft was their 
prayer." Their Mother Earth of which they 
claimed to be the children absorbed their 

salted meats and fish, -watermelon seeds, cakes and other 
food by the graves of their countrymen buried there. 
And faith in the abiding of souls of the dead in 
places of burial of the body has appreciably affected 
life in our own country. Belief that the soul waited 
the Resurrection Morning in its body's resting place (a 
belief migrating from England -with generations in man- 
hood with Shakespeare) — such folk- feeling kept many a 
New England family from "moving west" as a whole. 
A conviction, feeling rather than any reasoned-out state- 
ment, was broad-spread — that of the duty of some mem- 
ber of the family to stay by the relatives' graves in the 
old farm, or village burying-ground, to keep dutiful 
companionship with parents, sister, child, and finally to 
join them in the same consecrated soil. This sentiment 

36 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

bodies, and mayhap the immortality of them 
rested in their Underworld. 

That consciousness of a mysterious, vitaliz- 
ing force in nature which was, for centuries 
uniting with another people's faith, to pro- 
duce the exquisite religious personifications 
of the heroic age, that religious instinct to 
draw the divine to one's self and explain 
motion of life in bodies of sky or earth by 
conceiving an unseen spirit dwelling in the 
object, informed the soul of this people. A 
matriarchal religion had sway. The Prin- 

seems to imply the faith that an invisible soul, gifted 
with consciousness, abode near the grave and was grati- 
fied by the association. 

The sentiment of the .ZEgean folk of the bronze age 
that the soul dwelt in the grave and in the remains of 
the living form, had a logical outcome we are apt to 
overlook: that therefore from the bones might be gained 
a grace of spirit that had originally dwelt in the living 
person. Here doubtless arose the ascription of power 
to the bones of a notable person, a faith surviving to 
later Greek centuries. Bones of Orestes, for instance, 
were removed to Sparta in historic times in order to 
attract the soul of the hero and help the state to victori- 
ous arms. With such faith was united belief in an 
actual physical effluence, a healing virtue passing to per- 
sons and things by contact, the worship of "relics," a 
sentiment entertained among us to-day. 

^EGEANS FORERUNNING THE GREEKS 37 

ciple ruling in their smiling land, the mystery 
of fecund nature, they personified as a 
woman. To her unwed was subordinated a 
son of whom she became the mother by im- 
maculate conception. The earth in divers 
forms and phases expressed their Great God- 
dess — Reproductive Fertility, mother of all 
living things, a Maiden, but with the seed and 
bearing harvests she became Mother. Other 
emblems of fertility and generation, such as 
the bull-man, and snake goddess, doubtless 
represented minor gods. Symbolic objects, 
such as horns, trees, axes, crosses and pillars 
were common in Crete. It is believed no 
sacerdotalism prevailed. The lord of the 
stronghold may have been high-priest. From 
women as ministrants probably descended 
legends of the Amazons. Every settlement 
of that JEgean folk had its rites in which its 
dutiful people praised and worshiped "Our 
Lady" — Mother Earth and their land's meed 
of corn and fruitfulness. The goddess lived 
into Greek centuries. In Athens she became 
tutelary in the form of the maiden Pallas 
Athene, and in other places in forms of 
Artemis, Aphrodite, Here. At Eleusis she 
remained Dometer, Earth Mother. Under 

38 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

other names faith in her and usage of her 
fertility figure, as of her of the many breasts 
at Ephesus, persisted to Christian centuries, 
and still to-day persist in Mediterranean 
countries. 

United with this matriarchal religion there 
is supposed to have been, at least in the 
earlier centuries of the period, a domestic 
life in which house property belonged to the 
women of the family, and descended from 
mother to daughter ; in relationship the 
father not being reckoned; sons and brothers 
going off to serve and marry women who had 
land in other communities. 

Thus many fertile, diligent hundreds of 
years, — JEgean, pre-Greek — seem to have 
unrolled. The people 's early civilization 
pressed onward. Remains of their life would 
testify that they were a peace-loving folk. 
But those who first fought with knife of 
stone, and bow and arrow, had come to use 
lance and dagger and sword in taking life of 
human opponent, or in leading him to the en- 
slavement of the subdued. The evolution of 
such an armory needs many generations. 

But with that feeling upward or outward, 
perhaps a forerunner of that sense of race 

iEGEANS FORERUNNING THE GREEKS 39 

vocation of which the oncoming Greeks were 
to be conscious, a new and definite order was 
slowly prevailing. During centuries some 
power had been disturbing the ant-like set- 
tlements over those broadly separated lands. 
Their poise was gradually changing. The 
life-habits of the old people, a people of dis- 
tinct and rational customs whose influence 
would long outlast their overthrow and react 
against their conquerors, were passing. A 
new folk was coming uppermost, a ruling peo- 
ple doubtless dominant by right of conquest. 
They possessed a metal through which they 
forged forward. The age of the use of iron 
was beginning. 

In endless iteration and through thou- 
sands of years a tale has told itself — of peo- 
ples of the north, obedient to the never-dying 
longing of northerners for the south, send- 
ing toward the sun wave after wave of their 
children, and conquering. They hold the 
strength of conquest for a brief day, and then 
their domination melts in the warmth for 
whose gifts they left their rugged seats. 
Those subdued, often of more material ideas 
than the conquerors, reassert themselves by 
absorbing their victors' blood. The lords 

40 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

overcome with the luxury of conquest, forget- 
ful of the idealism or quest of power that 
made them conquerors, far outnumbered and 
outweighed by their subjects, die out like 
all aristocracies, or are lost in amalgama- 
tion. 

Undoubtedly golden-haired Teutons, whom 
the ancients called Celts, a mobile, surging, 
energetic folk, loving dominion and the order- 
ing of dominion, sought .^Egean lands and 
seized upon and in part energized, in part 
wiped out, the old civilization, the old peace- 
lovers. The northerners bore their arts with 
them. Such equipage of life as the heroic 
kings of Homer's song have in our time been 
unearthed in Bosnia, in Styria, in Carniola 
and other countries — armor, weapons and 
adornment and sepulture indicating the faith 
of Homer's Aelueans. 

In other words, during many centuries 
these -ZEgean peoples were evolving their 
characteristic art and life, bands of fair- 
haired folk clustering perhaps even to the 
shores of the northern ocean had turned 
obedient to the call of the south, and again 
and again had pressed into the regions 
lighted and warmed by the sun and -ZEgean 

AEGEAN'S FORERUNNING THE GREEKS 41 

waters. These tribes of the northern and 
central regions of Europe, primitive, political 
communities, subject to no law but loyalty to 
the community and obedience to the com- 
munity's power, were organized for collective 
and almost perpetual pugnacity. Among 
them chronic warfare, by a process of selec- 
tion, weeded out the less energetic and pro- 
duced the most war-loving and terrible 
fighters the world has ever seen. A naming 
of certain spiritual qualities of theirs is worth 
impress upon our memory for we shall meet 
their Germanic characteristics directing 
Greek life in succeeding times — fundamental 
con side rations o f con scientious conduct, a 
puritan rigor, and a genius for social organi- 
zation. 

Those were the days of the uprootings of 
peoples. The mountains which practically 
cap the southlands the adventurers of fortune 
swept over, bearing oftentimes with them 
the broad-skulled, brown-complexioned men 
dwelling on the mountains. Becoming mas- 
ters of a part of the vine-country of the 
-*Egean, and of its richness, they asserted 
their lordship. At the end of the slaughter 
of defending men, the invaders took the 

42 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

'women and children of the settlements they 
had disrupted and formed a new home, 
leaders of the freebooters marrying the 
daughters, or wives, of the native lords. 

The northerners had "brought with them 
their patriarchal rule subversive of the old 
matrilineal system, and their traditions of 
marriage. Also their northern energy, their 
spirit of order and of government, and so 
virile and ingratiating an Aryan speech that 
they implanted it in their chosen abodes and 
within the use of the conquered people. They 
brought also love of the lay, and the bard 
to make and sing the saga. These people we 
call Achaeans. Their consciousness was des- 
tined to form one wing of that uranic spirit 
we call Greek. Zeus, sky-father, god of the 
heavens was theirs, and also shining Apollo, 
the sun. Such divinities succeeded as dom- 
inating gods the old j^gean deity, Pro- 
ductive Nature, the embodying of the su- 
preme soul in Mother Earth and in minor 
gods and symbols, 

These events happened when the culture of 
the pre-Hellenic ^Egeans, the hypothetic 
evolution of which we have bespoken, was at 
its height. In the great epic age to which 

^EGEANS FORERUNNING THE GREEKS 43 

we are corning, we hear of the yellow-haired 
rulers called Achseans, of their tall stature, 
of their round shields and bronze greaves 
and hauberks, of their brooches and other 
body ornaments, of their use of iron, of the 
burning of their dead — all evidencing a cul- 
ture different from and independent of the 
-^Egean. 

A people other than the early tribes of the 
Greek lands had made their way into that 
country set aside for a splendid development 
of the human spirit, and themselves master 
of its population. In this way doubtless 
came into being the age of the dominant 
Achseans, feudal lords dwelling, as lords 
dwelt at the end of the pre-Greek age, their 
citadel a palace set on a windy height, or in 
a mountain pass, their vassals and the people 
they had conquered, the people who swelled 
their following, dwelling in outlying plain 
and meadow. 

With the new race established in Greece 
came the use of iron. Doubtless with iron 
fully developed came more contention, strife, 
the warlike mood which weapons of the metal 
support and which was doubtless still in the 
hearts of the migrators. 

I 

HEROIC AGE OF THE GREEKS 

"Warum waren die aufgeklarten Griechen in der Welti 
Weil sie da waren und unter solchen Umstanden nicht 
anders als aufgeklarte Griechen seyn konuten. — Herder, 
in Ideen zur Philosophic der Geschichte der Menschheit. 

There is wisdom and depth in the philosophy which 
always considers the origin and the germ, and glories in 
history as one constant epic. . . . 

The demonstration of the advance of knowledge and 
the development of ideas . . . are the charter of prog- 
ress and the vital spark of history. — Lord Acton, in 
A Lecture on the Study of History. 

The study of classical literature is probably on the 
decline; but whatever may be the fate of this study in 
general, it is certain that . . - attention will be more 
and more directed to the poetry of Homer . . . 

Homer should be approached ... in the simplest 
frame of mind possible. Modern sentiment tries to 
make the ancient not less than the modern world its 
own; but against modern sentiment in its applications 
to Homer the translator, if he would feel Homer truly 
. . . cannot be too much on his guard. — Matthew 
Arnold, in On Translating Homer. 

46 

HEROIC AGE OF THE GREEKS 

We are already within the heroic age of 
Hellas, an age sung and written of as no other 
single period in the world's history — an age 
that stood to later Hellas somewhat as the 
age of old Germanic epics stands to modern 
Germanic peoples. From now on we have 
the people we may refer to as Greek, or Hel- 
lenes- They were already, even in this 
earlier time, so far racially characterized as 
to show a specific difference between them- 
selves and any other stock. 

To comprehend them we must set aside our 
daily habits of feeling, orienting our minds 
to their point of view. We must readjust 
whatever world-weary emotional and intel- 
lectual phases we may have. We can ap- 
proach them only by saturating our con- 
sciousness with their early and elemental 
vigor and their imaginative curiosity and joy. 

At the very beginning of their recorded 
history we find the old Greek what for us 
he has always remained — a rational creature * 
and the representative of a rational civiliza- •* 

47 

48 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

tion. He already loved the splendor of the 
world, its brilliance, its beauty. He had an 
exalted joy in living. He revered the hu- 
man form and the indi vidual b eing- of whom 
that form was a part. He already had a 
sense of symmetry, moderation. His art he 
had already planted in the laws of the beauti- 
ful, as his life in the laws of reason. His 
qualities and his circumstances agreed and 
he had the inevitable offspring, joyous, opti- 
mistic harmony. 

Within Hellas, then, and with, conditions 
already set forth, was inaugurated the age 
we call the Greek epic. In the pages of 
Homer we view its magnificent panorama. 
The genuineness of the old poet's record as 
to events and sources is of least importance. 
His realism vouches for his absolute delinea- 
tion of life and manners. His tales of Troy 
and the heroes and heroines about the town 
had been handed down among his fellow 
Ionians, by legend of mouth and by song, 
long before his genius composed the match- 
less epic singing the ways of gods to men, 
and his immortal voice first chanted his lays. 
Homer came at the end of a period, at the 
twilight of a long day. 

RELIGION OK KATURE AND THE GROUP 49 

To characterize an age we must consider 
it under the heads of religion, polity, moral 
ideas and art. These are the peculiar prod- 
ucts of the spirit of a race — like flora and 
fauna they are determined by soil and 
climate. They can not be borrowed, as may 
industry and applied science, without loss of 
character. 

Through thousands of years of the stone 
and bronze ages progenitors of the Hellenes 
had been evoking the pantheon of Greece 
from the phenomena of nature — from the 
fruitful energy of the soil, the processions of 
the seasons, the shining expanse of the all- 
encompassing sky, the virgin splendor of the 
air, the "all-seeing 1 cyclic sun, M the cavern- 
ous darkness of the underworld, the ever- 
sleepless stream of ocean. Early peoples had 
stood mystified, revering these appearances 
before they personified them. 1 All was God 
to this young humanity passing from the 
race's childhood. 

1 The imaginative and poetic mind of the American 
Indian had this quality. "The red man prefers to "be- 
lieve that the Spirit of God is not breathed into man 
alone, but that the whole created universe is a sharer in 
the immortal perfection of its maker." — Dr. Charles 
Alexander Eastman in The Soul of the Indian. 

50 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

As to a child to-day inert things had per- 
sonal attributes. A spirit indwelling under 
the surface came to £he sight of men — in per- 
sonal forms and as separate and varied as 
the phenomena of nature. To their loving 
awe all manifested God — green forests, 
laughing valleys. Every mountain peak, 
cave, wind-swept plain and ridge was quick 
with the divine. An oak might be the home 
of a god, as at Dodona, and his hallowed 
voice heard from its leaves and trunk. Dry- 
ads haunted woods, and nymphs half-divine 
yet not deathless animated poplar, pine, 
laurel, olive, fig-tree, the plane, from their 
birth in the forest — not only trees but reeds, 
hyacinths and other growths. And when the 
day came for the growth to perish, its soul 
fled from the light of the sun. Water itself 
had a divinity, the fertility borne by a bub- 
bling spring or a leaping brook, a spirit or 
naiad. Looking with the imaginative eye, 
the Hellenes saw gods in swelling and bene- 
factive rivers, and in the stream that sinks 
below the surface and reappears after flow- 
ing underground. Their conceptions they 
humanized till the grace and beauty and 
frolic of the beings became real, not an ab- 

RELIGION OF NATURE AND THE GROUP 51 

straction. Nereids and Tritons coining from 
the sea blew wreathed horns. The pan-psy- 
chisin of certain philosophers of to-day, a 
vitalizing of nature, claim of the existence 
of a world-soul in even lowest forms of 
nature, a theory of the non-human nature en- 
joying an interior life — such a faith was the 
basis of the Hellene's anthropomorphizing 
tendency. 

This primitive god-maker amazed, in won- 
der before natural causes and gifted with 
keen senses and lively imagination, feeling in *■ 
his heart that man is the highest expression 
of nature, fancied creatures like himself, but 
larger and more powerful than he, must be 
behind those appearances. He bad not yet 
become enough of a metaphysician to inquire ** 
into the grounds of the sacred awe with 
which the living forces of a mysterious world 
inspired him. When his lucid intelligence 
clothed these forces and the whole body of 
nature in human form, he gave evidence that 
he found in them his own spirit, that he 
was not alien to the all-life, and he recog- 
nized his kinship with the world. He 
showed that in his day and country, man no 
longer cowered before the powers of nature 

52 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

as things incomprehensible and strange, a 
mystery apart from himself. 

Even the discriminating reason of man the 
Hellene came to view as a natural phenom- 
enon, and as a militant and aggressive prin- 
ciple personified it in the gray-eyed daugh- 
ter of Zens, Pallas Athene; in its loftier 
prophetic and aesthetic functions in shining 
Apollo. And the social unity which formed 
the hearth by which he sat in homely com- 
fort he enshrined as a goddess. Zeus him- 
self, the god of the bright aether, son of the 
Ancient of Days — not the Eternal, the Abid- 
ing God — was also god of man's upward-striv- 
ing spirit. 2 

Seers and prophets of the race, "medicine- 
men" some writers of to-day delight to name 
them, had shaped certain gods in dim out- 
line in far-back ages, in the Urzeit of the Hel- 
lenes and their kindred peoples. Outlines of 

2 A present-day evangel speaking of "the ideal power 
with which we feel ourselves in connection, the 'God' of 
ordinary men" curiously re-echoes Greek conceptions. 
<r We can experience union with something larger than 
ourselves and in that union find our greatest peace," 
wrote Mr. James in "The "Varieties of Religious Experi- 
ence." "This something need not be infinite, it need not 
be solitary. It might conceivably be only a larger and 

RELIGION OF NATURE AND THE GROUP 53 

sundry Greek gods existed in the pantheon 
of races akin to the Greeks. Apollo, the 
sun-god, Zeus-pater, sky-father and some- 
times spirit of fertility, were common to 
many. 3 But the divinities were amorphous; 
they had no definite lines or ethical qualities. 
The peculiar product of the imagination of 
the early day of the Greeks was the definite, 
vigorous, vivid, human-like, living forms of 
their gods — their bringing the divine element 
within the comprehension of their folk-mind, 
their ensouling mysteries of nature and of 
man's spirit in human form. 

As their civilization advanced the early 
personifications of the race, as would happen 

more godlike self . . . and the universe might conceiv- 
ably be a collection of such selves. ... Thus would a 
sort of polytheism return upon us. ... I think, in fact, 
that a final philosophy of religion will have to recon- 
sider the pluralistic hypothesis more seriously than it 
has hitherto been willing to consider it." The eminent 
naturalist, Alfred Russel Wallace, has set forth a not 
unsimilar conception as "in harmony with the universal 
teaching of Nature" 

3 "First there is the earth, and the sun, and the stars, 
and the whole universe, and the goodly order of the sea- 
sons, and the divisions into years and months; and that 
all Hellenes and barbarians alike consider them to be 
gods," wrote Plato in his "Laws." 

54 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

froin the associative laws of mind, grew 
^ more and more in definite human attributes — 
in the veins of the exalted physical beings 
ichor, not blood, would flow, and rather than 
the pleasures of mortals' offerings, they 
would enjoy their own peculiar food of nec- 
tar and ambrosia. And in the process of 
making the conception personal and genial — 
in the humanizing metamorphosis, the form- 
ing an ideal of humanity — divinities would 
gain a history, which is to say the popular 
mind would endow them, with action and 
passion. If we recall that the Greeks' gods 
had natural appetites, we must also remem- 
ber that natural appetites were regarded by 
that people whose life was moderated with 
awe for limit and horror at exaggeration and 
impiety, whose axioms of moral and physical 
self -limitation became laws of conduct quoted 
for centuries and to this day — natural appe- 
tites were regarded more noble by those an- 
cient children of out-of-doors and out-door 
phenomena than by peoples to-day. Hand 
in hand with their anthropomorphism com- 
monly went ethical promptings against ex- 
cess. 

The dim, great might of nature shines 

RELIGION Or NATURE AND THE GROUP 55 

through the radiant forms of Homer's gods. 
But in his heroes, too, we feel the pulsing of 
those very powers. Both gods and men are 
the children of one unsearchable source of 
life. Mysticism, enthusiasm, penance, have 
no place in this world. Man adores his 
radiant ideals as naturally as he gladdens in 
the light of the sun. There is no sense of 
sin — haunting- consciousness of moral imper- 
fection and apartness from God. Eyes are 
fixed on this world and the heroic Hellenes 
are face to face with the invisible. 

In their joyous sense of life, psyche, jS^jpy 
or soul, receded. The active and actual ab- 
sorbed them. Peoples of the north in cli- 
matic pressure of frost and fog, and forced to 
long periods of inaction, found vent of energy 
in introspection which brought immortal- 
ity near. Not so the early Hellene. Ionia 
which produced his epie song had the softest 
and mildest climate of all Greece, said 
Herodotus. The sun stirring the Hellene's 
purple sea, and impelling his broad-bosomed 
earth to her bounty, lifted him out of imagin- 
ings about another life, and made his after 
world a shadowy thing. His soul would cross 
Qceanus or Styx in its passage to the "cold" 

56 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

and * 'mouldering' ' kingdom of the dead, Ere- 
bus, ruled over by Hades and Persephone. 
There among the " people of the earth" his 
life would be a spectral copy of what he found 
here. 

These people often burned their dead, in 
this custom perhaps preserving the needs of 
the early northern migrators, who, passing 
through densely wooded countries, must burn 
in order to preserve the body from outrage 
and dishonoring mutilation. For because of 
the possessions the marauders had seized, the 
resident folk would be fiercely vindictive. 
Then too there were the devouring creatures 
of the wild. 

The burning of the body shows the idea 
prevailed of a separate abode for the spirit. 
The soul will never return to its earthly sub- 
stance. But until the burning it flits between 
its late dwelling and the invisible world be- 
low. Fire, the purifier, immaterial matter, 
detaches the soul from its corporeal cover and 
bears it to yonder world, "Thou dost 
sleep, O Achilles, and hast forgotten me," 
cries the soul of the beloved Patroclus; "not 
in my life but in my death hast thou been 
pomindful of roe. Bury me that I may pass 

i 

RELIGION OF NATURE AND THE GROUP 57 

the gates of Hades, when thou hast given me 
my due of fire." The slaying of twelve Tro- 
jan youths at the funeral rites of Patroclus 
may have been a survival of the faith, to 
which we have already referred, of strength- 
ening with blood a soul that had passed to 
the infernal deities. 

To the Elysian fields and ends of the earth 
the gods translated a favored few, "where 
golden-haired Ehadamanthus dwells, where 
life is easiest for mortals; no falling snows 
there, nor lingering winter, nor storm, but 
ever the airs of the western wind breathing 1 
softly to lift the souls of men." 

The soul as well as the body of the Greeks 
is in their myths of the gods. To the plastic 
genius of those Hellenes more than to any 
other people the world was alive. To them, 
because of their active minds, their creative 
energy, the vigor of their imagination, it was 
given more than others to stamp their race 
spirit and genius upon early products. Al- 
ready in Homer the Greeks were idealists. 

Approach to the great gods was open to 
all by sacrifice and prayer — that is, by gift 
and petition. Each human child might come 
direct to his divinities, calling by name upon 

58 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

that god whose help he felt he needed. The 
offering was a bribe, not so much in thanks 
for favors past, but as even now among the 
more primitive-minded of us, a gift to change 
the holy one's hostility to the petitioner's 
desires. Prayer was to him an asking. Lift- 
ing cleansed hands and arms frankly to 
heaven in manner of a petitioner, the Greeks 
prayed standing. No servile genuflexion, no 
oriental salaam prostrated his body. His 
sense of human worth permitted no abnega- 
tion nor concealing himself with a veil in the 
presence of his divinity- The Hellenes found 
no opposition to a supreme power in their 
fresh, god-given life, and needed no mediator 
between themselves and the infinite. 

No sacerdotal caste flourished. There were 
indeed servants of the gods who declared the 
gods' will to men. Probably their service 
had evolved from the magic-efforts of the 
earlier wonder-worker or medicine-man. But 
now the servants spoke through the gift of a 
God-consciousness clearer than that of other 
men's — that was the ground of the reverence 
borne him — not by the privilege of a caste. 
Certain families possessed the exclusive exer- 
cise of certain rites, and occasional priests 

RELIGION OF NATURE AND THE GROUP 59 

and priestesses had the keepers' charge of 
temples and chanted liturgies. The office of 
these men and women was sacred, but their 
persons only when engaged in the service of 
the shrine. Association between shrines was 
not organized, and the priests never came 
to the strength of a corporate union. They 
were not given an esoteric training that set 
them mentally apart from their people. It 
is evident that they were not ordained to their 
function by any elaboration. They had small 
compelling influence. They had no entrance 
to the private life of the family. They were 
not guiders of women or teachers of youth. 
They were not necessary in war. They were 
not theologians — the poet or rhapsodist was 
that. Even in this epic age the Greek guarded 
his intellectual independence. 

Thus the Greek of the heroic age lived in 
a world of mysterious origin made beautiful 
and near to him by the companionship of 
splendid, immortal gods. They gave him all 
fair things — wisdom, righteousness, courage, 
beauty, food, well-being. Unrestrained re- 
ligious feeling saturated his every task, every 
joy, every institution of life. The immortal 
wps ever near to "start upon the soul in 

60 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

sweet surprises," * 'All men need the gods," 
said Homer. Their power was a shield be- 
tween the Hellene and the inscrutable forces 
from which he and they had sprung. They 
were a defense from ill. They fought in 
men's battles and guided men's voyagings. 
Without their help nothing could prosper. 
Men and gods belonged to a common society. 
All wrought for a common end. Their powers 
differed. The immortals, like the people's 
group life, were deathless. 

Gods found it sweet and no loss of honor 
or dignity to accept human reverence and 
homage, and to share men's feasts and men's 
sports. In return for their bounty mortals 
venerated the gods and offered them gifts and 
food. Immortals in a presence shared every 
meal. This might have been, doubtless was, 
a survival of a usage from primitive times 
when, since food is the main support of life, 
sacraments took the form of a meal. 

Every slaughter was an offering and every 
meal a feast with a god. The ways of 
human kind were good for the gods' associ- 
ation and the earth for them to go about upon. 
They loved the community. Without the 
gods' membership the group is not thinkable. 

RELIGION OF NATURE AND THE GROUP 61 

Nor were the gods without the group's 
loyalty. 

Lordly ancestors the gods were often es- 
teemed — broadly, in evolutionary view, that 
in fact they were, a product of the com- 
munity's spirit and in reaction the commu- 
nity of the gods' — and their interest in the 
lives of men might lie in their character of 
progenitors. * i Father Zeus ! ' ' often cries 
Homer, "Father of men and immortals!" 
And centuries after this heroic epic, Pindar 
sang of the race of gods and men, "from one 
mother we both, draw breath of life." Plato 
later still embodied these conceptions when 
he wrote, " Wise men say that one community 
embraces heaven and earth and gods and men 
and friendship and order and temperance 
and righteousness, and for that reason they 
call this whole a universe." 

What a luster it cast upon the race to be 
the children — not the creatures— of their di- 
vinities! The mysterious tie of nature and 
of the community, older even than the gods, 
bound gods and men together. Gods and 
men formed an organized social unit. Duties 
to, and rights of, men factored as well as 
duties to and rig-ht ways toward gods. We 

62 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

must enter into the sentiment deeply if we 
would realize the loftiest elements of the 
heroic consciousness. 

Such was the heroic Greeks* religion — a 
nexus of imagination and feeling and thought, 
rudimentary, wrought out by race wonder- 
workers, race thinkers and race poets; a 
growth, we must remember, before recorded 
history, one of those instances in evolution 
when sound conclusions come from false 
premises, a more perfect form unexpectedly 
develops from the imperfect. It was old and 
taking on decay even at Homer's singing. 
In its substance we have the race's sense of 
beauty, their feeling of the closeness of na- 
ture — its very parenthood to them — the 
effervescing imagination of the one who sees 
the world anew, and the foreshadowing grop- 
ing for the moral solution of life with which 
the Hellenes' later works were so completely 
saturated. Studying this early religion 
sympathetically, we see how in the radiant, 
dissolving forms of immortals the very emo- 
tions and ideas of our religious feeling of to- 
day — feeling which we are now apt to chain 
under the hardened crust of dogma — then 
played generously and freely. A spirit sin- 

THE STATE 63 

gle, omniscient, omnipotent, inaccessible, too 
remote for his intimacies and communion was 
afar from the Greek's conception. 

The heroic Greek's state was nothing dis- 
tinct from his religion. It was the rule of a 
king, or feudal lord or chief of clan. Per- 
haps he was a son of a god, or of a strange, 
strong man from the north. Socially he may- 
have been descended from a primitive prac- 
ticer of magic or other religious office for the 
benefit of the group. If his evolution were 
such, in making it he had needed to be able, 
acute, acquisitive of authority and riches, re- 
alizing the force he had acquired through 
prestige of knowledge of the divine and ca- 
pable of carrying that prestige to politics. 
Whatever his growth, he was esteemed more 
nearly descended from Poseidon or Zeus than 
his people. The subject mass could not have 
such legends of descent. Therefore tradi- 
tions in later times would conflict; voicing 
the old iEgean people they would speak of 
"earth-born men," again of men as sons of 
the chief god or as creatures of Prometheus. 
The genuine Greek creed is doubtless that 
which makes the ancestor of the race a son 
of Zens. 

64 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Thus it came that the divine chief, or king, 
was an oracle of justice — Homer said he had 
a Z<*us-given scepter — and the source of 
authority in preserving the principles and 
laws custom had established. But among the 
Hellenes this prestige could not degenerate 
into an absolutism. Gods themselves were 
not infallible ; much less their sons. The tra- 
ditions of the race, and precedent of the law, 
the utterance of their prophets, and will of 
the council of elders and of the whole people 
were forces not to be set aside by the royal 
word. We behold the heroic Greek even in 
war deliberating upon their common interest, 
the people present and expressing their ap- 
proval or disapproval — the germ of their 
democracy to come. Even then it was Greek 
to be master of one's situation, of one's self; 
nothing must be withdrawn altogether from 
the determination of common reason. The 
Greeks' religious consciousness posits as a 
necessity for all time political independence. 
Zeus took away half of a man's virtue when 
days of slavery laid hold of him, said Homer. 

Every government is founded upon an 
original democracy. That later analyst of 
Greek polities, Aristotle, conceived the origin 

THE STATE 65 

of the Greek monarchy in a reward to some 
well-worker of the people, out of loyalty con- 
tinued to his offspring- In Homeric song 
the king was king by the free consent of the 
governed, whether he was lord of a city of 
rural habits, or chief of a more open valley 
clan. His functions were not arbitrary. 
Rather his strength was indefinite — uncon- 
fined by limits. His constitutional rights, his 
headship founded on social sentiment, phys- 
ical as well as mental prowess must support. 
He represented the collective action and emo- 
tion of his people before the gods and offered 
prayer at a large sacrifice — a tribal meal 
with some god. He was leader in war. For 
such services he received tributes of cattle, 
the honor part of the booty, a portion of 
land, and other rich gifts. His council of 
elders was of men reputable and experienced, 
already past the age of the flourishing war- 
rior. They sat at meat with the king, ad- 
vised with him upon the common weal and 
with hira determined disputes about property 
— mainly property because thievery caught 
in the act met punishment by death without 
trial, and the revenge of murder lay with the 
family. 

66 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

The state in this stage of the national life 
had not been the subject of reflection and had 
no formulated object. It was doubtless a 
growth from primitive groupings for pro- 
tection, a loosely united clan, a free union of 
the people, rather than a working, ordered, 
corporate thing, — an order justified by the 
majesty of itself and the economic needs of 
the day. The rule of heroes was a necessity, 
if not for those governed, at least for the 
full manifestation of the heroic character. 

But most important for determining the 
true index of an age, namely, its conception 
of the worth of life, what things are desir- 
able, and what are their conditions: The 
Homeric Greek seldom reflected on life, but 
lived with a sense peculiar to himself. He 
could not comprehend his existence as in- 
volving any moral aim, any tragical nodus 
or complication. There was a retribution, a 
nemesis, which followed the violation of an 
ordered world, but it was external and a not 
unavoidable evil if the trespasser had but 
heroic might. Eesponsibility for wrong-do- 
ing was often laid at the door of Ate — blind, 
deluding, ruinous Folly who abode among 
men and glided with light feet over the heads 

MORAL IDEAS OP THE HOMERIC GREEKS 67 

of mortals. Wrong-doing was infatuation of 
mind — of the intellect and appealing to tlie 
intellect. The doer of wrong was not respon- 
sible for bis deed/nis mind had become dark- 
ened/he was the victim of circumstances, or 
of Ate, or other of the gods. Right, order, 
precedent, custom, dike, £«ny; she who ap- 
portions things to mortals and of whom men 
expect justice, is strong beyond hybris, fyfy«c» 
wanton violence, brute strength, lawlessness, 
disregard of the rights of others, a companion 
of surfeit- Cowardice and the want of nat- 
ural affection are shameful, and that because 
they have no force and confuse the order of 
life. 

To our view of those times, there is now 
and then uttered a melancholy upon which 
we moderns have turned glasses of analysis. 
Such lines as Homer's "The gods spun the 
thread of destiny for unhappy men to live 
grieved at heart," and "There is nothing 
more miserable than man of all that breathes 
and creeps upon the earth," sympathetically 
crystallize a sentiment alive even in early 
Hellenic faith. Such enunciations are, how- 
ever, in the proportion of one to thousands 
of adolescent delight- They are a natural 

68 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

reaction, the undertone, tlie low note show- 
ing how the heroic Hellenes knew the pain 
of mortal life, its baffling complexities, the 
mystery of its discords and distress. 
Homer sang the truth of his day, and sad- 
ness the truth must know. The striatums 
only make the sunlight of joy that floods the 
whole heroic time all the clearer. Youth 
does not concern itself with sorrow, and mel- 
ancholy in youth is morbidity. The heroic 
Hellenes were youths. 

Again that epic "envy of the gods" of 
which the old poet sang, for instance when 
Penelope after the return of Odysseus says, 
"The gods gave us trouble, the gods jealous 
that we should abide together and joy in our 
youth and come to the threshold of old age;" 
and the gods' deception of men by false ap- 
pearances and by lies, are sentiments paral- 
leled in the primitive beliefs of other races — 
for instance in the race of Israel. The 
"envy" contains within its fable endeavors of 
youth to explain daemonic force shaping hu- 
man life, the complexity of the moral law 
which he feels and sees at work in the world 
about him, and to find his limitations and 
place within those laws — rudimentary fore- 

MORAL IDEAS OF THE HOMERIC GREEKS 69 

runners of the endeavor phrased in our Old 
Testament "walking humbly with God." 

The world to the heroic Hellene was full 
of wonders to employ the curiosity, and of 
prizes to engage the ambition of all who had 
the strength of mind to seek them. To be 
rich and strong and beautiful and wise, a 
friend of the gods, to have seen the wonders 
of distant lands and the ways of foreign men, 
were the aims of life. But this was all. 
There was no suspicion or feeling of the un- 
satisfactory character of these things. A 
simple recognition of one's talents or power 
was sufficient. Morbid self-love requiring the 
refinements of flattery and advertisement was 
to develop in a later day. There was no 
desire for self -culture nor for the convic- 
tion and consciousness of rectitude. It was 
enough if one realized one's aim in the world* 
A man was considered a force, not a soul, a 
beautiful, heroic energy accomplishing a pas- 
sage through the world in bold and graceful 
ways. A prosperous life, well-rounded and 
crowned with years and honor, was a spectacle 
not different from the sinking of the sun and 
its majestic light to the western horizon. 
The event of a young life checked in its heroic 

70 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

course had deepest pathos hecause it meant 
the defeat of strength and beauty. 

Keverent fear, aidos, a!8w^ 9 was the very 
flower of the moral consciousness of this age. 
It is a feeling lost in Christian centuries, and 
difficult to revive even sufficiently to compre- 
hend its nature. It was the instinct of pro- 
portion, of self -limitation, which preserved 
the Greek from all excess. Through it he 
shrank from any unlimited utterance of him- 
self, not only toward his fellow men but also 
toward the divine who punish excess. This 
one sentiment was his modesty — it kept him 
to well-considered action and saved him from 
self-assertion; his piety; his awe; his loyalty 
— it saved him from desecration and boast- 
ing; his filial and family feeling; his honor — 
it moved him to reverence and sympathy for 
the helpless and to estimating wrong to them 
unpardonable. It was a shrinking self- 
repression evading a violation of eternal jus- 
tice, moral indignation at presumptuous deed, 
the Hellene *s recognition of the universal con- 
science and awe for those eternal guardians 
of the law of righteousness comprehended in 
the goddesses sovereign of the very gods, the 
omnipotent Mceaxe, Fates. Springing from 

EPIC POETRY THE AGE'S PECULIAR ART 71 

the depths of Hellenic consciousness of life 
and contemplation of life's order, aidos, rev- 
erent fear, was to the epic Greek what faith 
in the Eternal was to the Jew. It was the 
core of the Greeks' religious feeling and as 
a holy energy infused his life, his art. Aidos 
is the antithesis of hybris.. 

What the art of such an age must have 
been is clear. It could not in large phases 
manifest itself in plastic ideals because it 
conceived life as significant only in its activ- 
ity* Moving impression was everything, mi- 
nute attention to the elements of tilings, noth- 
ing. Painting therefore could not flourish. 
Architecture subserves either the ostentation 
of despotism, the ritual of mysticism, luxury 
and opulence, or, as later in Greece, gives ex- 
pression to a sense of the beautiful so culti- 
vated by reflection that it delights in the har- 
monies of geometrical forms. Music is the 
child of meditation, the voice of the spirit con- 
sidering within itself the wonders, the joys 
and sorrows of life. Than music nothing 
could be further from the genius of heroic 
Greece. Lyric poetry is a later birth by 
reason of its subjectivity. 

Such an age as the heroic age of Greece, 

72 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

gifted with the race's mold of spirit, with 
the race's feeling for art in the power of 
words, and with a graceful, flexible speech 
approaching perfection in its form, a lan- 
guage of wonderful resource in shading its 
meaning, — an age like this, conscious of the 
gift of words yet centering on the doer of 
deeds, must delight in the narrative of events, 
sung in fluent and stately meter, clothed in all 
the color of life. Epic poetry is the product 
of this age; no other age has ever produced 
the genuine epic song. Broad, bright, mov- 
ing pictures finished to the last degree but 
not encumbered by inanimate detail — such 
are the rhapsodies of Homer. The shining 
of spears and waving of plumes fill the Iliad 
with life, and the keen, salt air of the sea 
blows through the romantic pages of the 
Odyssey. Nothing in nature was trivial or 
mean in the eyes of the old poet. Everything 
enjoys its ornamental epithet. 

And the days they broadly lived, those typ- 
ical men and women — their social and man- 
nerly human life, their piety, their natural 
dignity, their restraint, their courage and 
bravery, their warfare, their travel and their 
open politics, their dwellings, the magic tri- 

KPIC POETRY THE AGE'S PECULIAR ART 73 

pods hammered by a god's hands, their 
youth's delight in exquisite work of woven 
peplum and in precious material, their shin- 
ing, high-wrought armor — frankly stand be- 
fore us to-day and tell the measure of their 
adolescent joys. "Ewig jung allein 1st Phan- 
tasies 7 Their imagination seized beauty in 
tectonic crafts inherited from the old iEgean 
days, and feasted as that of a child. 

The epos was the reality of the spirit of 
the time. In Homer's poems the Hellenic 
race was itself reflected and became conscious 
of its ideals. In Homer the Hellenes first 
came to know themselves. The poet took 
their early race conceptions, their beliefs and 
traditions, their modes of looking at life, and 
made them the fountain and stream of his 
song. He summarized the race's past — the 
Iliad is the tale of the battle of the Achseans 
fighting their way to adventurous wealth. 

But that which he created reacted power- 
fully upon the national mind. The human 
life the verses mirrored led the Hellenes to 
train their youth upon its conduct, upon its 
embodied keywords for life conduct. The 
Iliad's pan-Hellenism taught race-conscious- 
ness ; for instance, when Greeks advanced to 

74 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

battle "longing in their soul to support one 
another," "so the clan shall succor clan, and 
tribe, tribe." It held a moral as well as a 
literary education. Through centuries com- 
ing later, and far into the imperial times of 
Rome, Homer's poems stood as a Bible — that 
is, the songs were to the Greeks as the Bible 
and its word of God-in- the-world have been to 
the modern Christian community. It compre- 
hended as well an encyclopedia of science and 
arts and genealogy. Homer's Iliad denoted 
their race and fatherland in youngest man- 
hood* 

The blind poet, to repeat, invented no 
story. He took race sagas, time-honored 
tales of Troy, and lays embodying traditions 
of the old civilization, and wrought them into 
rhapsodies, casting them in perfect form and 
stamping them with the process of a great 
creative mind. He sang to such assemblies 
as filled the houses of chief, king and lord, to 
their wives, daughters and retainers. Per- 
haps also he sang to frequenters of popular 
festivals whither throngs had journeyed to 
honor some god of the race. And long after 
his day, at great festivals of Athens, relays 
of bards chanted the Iliad and Odyssey. 

EPIC POETRY THE AGE'S PECULIAR ART 75 

He sang of the eternal powers, of human 
deeds and men's and women's lives. His in- 
troduction of their earth's places, sea-coasts 
and currents, and land and sea winds, must 
needs fit themselves to fact and be true not 
only to the event he would narrate, but also 
to his hearers' taste and life and knowledge. 
He sang to bring his listeners the delight of 
larger vision of men and of the world, and 
the delight also of a perfect art. He sang 
with the warmth and intensity of a mighty 
seer. To this day the ear of man has never 
become weary of listening to his silver tones. 
Nor has the mind of man lost amaze at his 
poetic fire and splendid diction. He was the 
first Hellene who, it has been said, voiced his 
race's courage and unconquerable will to pen- 
etrate life and set it forth as an intelligent 
order. He is, at least, the first of whom wq 
know. 

Joy is the keynote of Homer, joy in a bril- 
liant, beautiful world. His people, especially 
his men, idealized self-reliant beings, choose a 
brief and active life In the world to droning, 
unlaborious days in the quietude of home. 
Here on this earth is man's theater of action. 
After this the unseen world, Hades, and it 

76 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

were better, the wraith of Achilles declared 
from the midst of the shades, here on earth to 
serve some man of mean estate than to dwell 
with all who have gone down to death. 

Homer exalted nobles and kings and their 
business, war. The people, toilers and up- 
builders who supported the destroyers and 
idlers, could labor and listen and yield to the 
overlord's decision. But it is, in fairness, 
worth noting in the measure we have taken 
of these epic Hellenes, and of their innate 
humanity, that nowhere in the Iliad and 
Odyssey are such pictures of narrowness, 
hardness and inhumanity as are painted in 
the Hebrew epos of patriarchal life and the 
Law — and in times supposed to synchronize 
with the times the Greek poems portray. 

Mutations in those old centuries we can 
with no sureness visualize. Between the old 
civilization of Homer's song and the new 
about to be born was a shifting of races — 
of that at least we may be certain- Experi- 
ences must have been manifold and prolonged, 
the pain of the world-spirit caustic, to change 
the social consciousness of the Hellenes from 
the life portrayed by this earliest epic of 
theirs we know. 

ANOTHER EPIC SINGER 77 

After the close of the age of Homer's story, 
uniting that age with the age to come, another 
epic singer and an -^Eolian Greek, belong- 
ing perhaps to another prehistoric minstrel 
school, ttuied his lyre to a wholly different 
key. He himself and his hearers, all with the 
staid, sad heart of earth-workers, had lost 
heroic enthusiasms. Some great impelling 
force, a force we find in the democracy of the 
coming age, was beginning to make its way 
and direct the thoughts of men. 

Hesiod told of the inherent dignity of labor 
— of planting, sowing, reaping, of winter 
storms and the hearing on corn-planting of 
the spring rainfall, of the cry of crane and 
sparrow, of the cutting of vines, of the leafing 
of trees, the threshing of corn, of the vintage, 
of thrift and diligence — an early Greek 
Thomas Tusser in his plain, shrewd, cautious, 
homely saws, not forgetting the crusty fling at 
women such natures commonly nurture, a 
"Poor Richard " it has been said, a singer 
who learned by his own experience in a law- 
suit to declare how much more the half is 
than the whole, and how blessed a man might 
be upon a diet of mallows and leeks — "That 
man is best who is most laborious" ; who has 

78 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

judgment about the birds (their song, their 
coming and going habits explaining increase 
and decline of the seasons), and who shuns 
overstepping of the (moral) laws; "In front 
of virtue the gods set work and the sweat of 
the forehead.' ' Practice virtue, not neces- 
sarily for virtue itself but for the sake of the 
results of the practice. In this teaching the 
poet's evolution is similar to that of Leviticus 
and Deuteronomy, and rises at times to the 
standard of the Proverbs and the Wisdom of 
Solomon. 

Hesiod was a true child of his tribe which 
obtained the sovereignty of Bceotia after that 
subversion we call the Trojan war — a vigor- 
ous, hardy people whose minds rarely soared 
beyond the body's needs, a people, neverthe- 
less, who brought from northern Pieria to 
Mount Helicon the ancient worship of the 
Muses and centuries later produced Corinna 
and Pindar. Instead of Homer's abandon to 
the shining, shifting, broad epic world dis- 
solving and disappearing about him, Hesiod 
struggles with reality, with the set bounds of 
the small farmer in the iron age in which he 
lives, when wrong is rampant and the great 
devour bribes and give crooked judgment. 

ANOTHER EPIC SINGER 79 

The golden age and the gentle bronze age for 
mortals have passed. In Elysian Fields and 
Islands of the Blessed may he some relief for 
the ills of earth. 

Not a brilliant, imaginative, objective, but a 
subjective world, the thoughts of himself, this 
Boeotian shepherd chiefly sings. Nowhere is 
poetry: his sole aim. Didactics, practical 
wisdom embedding proverbs of possibly ear- 
lier singers on every-day affairs of life, 
ethical precepts, and teachings about the gods 
are his work. The Olympians of Hesiod are 
further away from human habitations than 
in Homer's song. " No prophet among men," 
he sang, "shall know the mind of segis-bear- 
ing Zeus," son of Time. His Theogony tell- 
ing of the genesis of the world and the origin 
of the gods embodies passages of elevation 
and dignity. "First of all was Chaos: then 
came the broad-bosomed Earth, the stable 
resting plac« of all things; and gloomy Tar- 
tarus in the depths of the Earth; and Eros, 
fairest of the immortals.' ' 

The poems foreshadow ideas of the new, 
opening age, and it seems impossible that 
Hesiod was ignorant of the coming cult of 
Orphism. But in the Theogony he so sang 

80 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

the old legends of the gods that the poem 
came in later Greece to be esteemed a code 
of the race's early religious conceptions. It 
formed a dogma — but under Greek conditions 
was without the seclusion and exclusive in- 
terpretation of priests. 

BURGEONING DEMOCRACY; ITS 
PURITANISM ; ITS ART 

In Greece the universality of human life and thought, 
of human civilization, let me say the true idea of man, 
first came into appearance J the full development of 
individualism, and with it the true freedom of man, 
in all the relations which we comprise under this 
word, morally, politically, intellectually, artistically, were 
created spontaneously at first in Greece and only in 
Greece. — Edtjard Meyer, in The Development of Indi- 
viduality in Ancient History. 

(GREECE SPEAKS) 

O Earth . . . 
I am she that made thee lovely with my beauty 

From north to south: 
Mine, the fairest lips, took first the fire of duty 

From thine own mouth- 
Mine, the fairest eyes, sought first thy laws, and knew 

them 
Truths undefiled; 
Mine, the fairest hands, took freedom first into them, 
A weanling child. 
— Swinburne, in The Litany of Nations. 

To the Ancients however the aim of the agonistic edu- 
cation was the welfare of the whole, of the civic society. 
Every Athenian for instance was to cultivate his Ego 
in contest, so far that it should be of tbe highest service 
to Athens. . . . The youth thought of the welfare of 
his native town when he vied with others in running, 
throwing or singing j it was her glory that he wanted to 
increase with his own. . . - Every Greek from childhood 
felt within himself the burning wish to be ... an in- 
strument for the welfare of his own town- — Friedrich 

Nietzsche, in Homer's Contest. 

82 

BURGEONING DEMOCRACY; ITS 
PURITANISM; ITS ART 

PASSING OF THE MONARCHY: CONSTRUCTIVE 

INDIVIDUALISM 

The beautiful youth of Hellas, the Greek 
heroic age, faded in the gloom of an indefin- 
able period of which we know nothing, not 
even its durance — in immense political con- 
vulsions which accompanied the emergence 
upon the forescene of the great Greek division 
that the Hellenes called Dorian. That other 
general division, the versatile, imaginative, 
fluid, seafaring lonians — Javan of "the Isles 
afar off" says the Hebrew Isaiah writing 
about the beginning of this new age of Greece 
— that lively, impassioned, sunlit folk suscep- 
tible of most delicate impressions, isolated, 
disunited and broken with feuds, the ^Egean 
lonians had their complementary character in 
Dorians so-called, perhaps the most persist- 
ently warlike of all the hardy northern in- 
comers, who, in the darkness of the indefin- 

83 

84 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

able centuries, sallied from their highlands 
and made themselves masters — masters who 
reverenced a severe spirit, who had the strik- 
ing constancy of character and solemnity of 
thought of country dwellers, who scorned the 
effeminacies of art and the democratization of 
trade, who subjected all that came within their 
reach to their notions of right and of civil 
government, who knew but two passions — war 
and a religion identified with pride of and 
loyalty to race. 

The Dorians roused in Greece a spirit far 
more rugged, less extended but far deeper 
than that which mirrored Homer's picture- 
loving song. With them a re-formation of 
spiritual poise established itself. Greek Pur- 
itans were invigorating the national spirit. 
The age of the emancipation of the individual 
is now coming on. Much of the old mediation 
of the king, that primitive consciousness that 
found group-feeling and group-thinking nec- 
essary, is now passing away. Each man 
would enter into direct relations with the 
world. The lord of men, the old royalty, is 
in some cities overthrown. Even the very 
limited power of the king came to seem to 
the people, now fully Hellenic, an immoral 

CONSTRUCTIVE INDIVIDUALISM OF CITIES 85 

form of government inasmuch as it failed in 
moderation, self-limitation, forced itself upon 
separate, individual "beings, opened the way 
for visitation of retribution — from power and 
wealth spring satiety, from satiety foolish-* 
ness, offense, crime. 

The politics of the time undergo a striMng 
evolution, varying in form and even in method 
of development. Cities are springing for- 
ward and their growth marks the individu- 
ality of men. It is worth noting here that 
in the little land of Palestine during the 
eighth and seventh centuries before Christ, as 
Amos and Hosea and Isaiah make clear, a 
struggle went on for the recognition of the 
conscience of a single individual. 

In many Greek city-states, as time passes 
oligarchs establish themselves. They super- 
sede the king and absorb his function of ad- 
ministration to themselves. They are chiefs 
who served as councilors to the dispossessed 
king, or nobles claiming descent from the 
mighty men of old, the interpretation of the 
law and the exercise of some religious rite. 
They embody the first political expression of 
the new order in its change from the old. 
The people are free, but still without active 

86 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

political rights. Their evolving conscious- 
ness of separateness or individualism the 
aristocracies doubtless appeased by occasion- 
ally calling together their general assembly. 
But the assumption of the oligarchs bore 
home to farmer and artisan, and to the new 
order created by development of commerce, 
the lesson that the functions of administering 
government were not sole prerogatives of a 
heaven-descended king, but rather a power 
that could be granted by law and directed to 
certain ends. 

The state had become a more complicated 
thing than in Homeric song. Sense of apart- 
ness, rudimentary individualism, growing ca- 
pacity for self-control or law-abidingness, was 
able to reason that if nobles could supersede 
the king of the heroic age, should not also the 
assembly of citizens in which rested the ulti- 
mate source of authority of the state? Here 
was not only the democratic idea in strong 
force, but feeling of membership of the state, 
fellowship in a common government and 
the duties it involves — the state is a rational 
order which men must have for a tolerable 
and complete life. 

Constructive, progressive, promotive, gifted 

CONSTRUCTIVE INDIVIDUALISM OF CITIES 87 

■with imagination and reason, the mind and 
will of the Hellene worked out in some such 
development its consciousness of political 
right. In its process the struggle between 
nobles, rich in inherited prerogatives and 
material belongings, and the emerging peo- 
ples was fairly before the world. 

During this progress, however, there in- 
tervened the setting up and brilliant rule 
of those liberals known as tyrants or des- 
pots — men who posed as defenders of simpler 
men against the rapacity of the oligarchs. 
There was now in the growing towns a sturdy 
commons, and, in the country, farmers of 
free mind who had faith in inborn rights. 
In various ways, by force of seizing the 
city's acropolis through hired troops, by wile 
of proclaiming himself champion of the people 
in injustices they had suffered at the hands 
of exploiters, the new overlord, oftenest from 
the oligarchs whom he endeavored to dis- 
possess, held his absolute power and asserted 
the civic unity of the elements of the state. 
He tranquillized factional feelings by meet- 
ing their divisions. Commonly his govern- 
ment was an excess of paternalism; his court 
a center of all his time's splendor in art and 

88 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

literature; his benefactions and public gifts 
most lavish, and magnificent. The Peisistra- 
tidae, for example, tyrants in Athens even 
after Solon's time, set up the flowing recital, 
by minstrel at the pan-Athenaic festival, of 
the Iliad and Odyssey in their completeness. 
In architecture they began to the honor of 
Zeus Olympius a temple whose fragments, 
though belonging to a much later century, 
beautify Athens to-day. 

Only extreme conditions of the old feudal- 
ism during under ideas evolved by new orders 
coming to the fore, by fresh blood and a new 
point of view of life spreading through Greek 
lands, permitted the tyrants* hold during the 
generations they continued. Mouthing inter- 
est in the people, yet seeking to gain the 
strength of the executive power which the 
oligarchs by their robberies had weakened, 
the tyrants eased civil strife, kept Greek 
social foundations from severest shock and 
bridged the break between the old ideas and 
oncoming democracy. Now as at all times 
the people formed history — the body of the 
people ever ready for self-sacrifice, to give 
life and property to their country. A few 
with the instinct, or avarice, or corruption, 

CONSTRUCTIVE INDIVIDUALISM OF CITIES 89 

of leaders suggested and endeavored to guide. 
At times the Greek despot proved what his 
name signified in centuries then to come. 

"All Hellas in early times,' ' says Thucyd- 
ides, "was in a state of migration." The 
Ionians were especially mobile; inroads of 
peoples from the north may have kept them 
unstable. In the great human flux of these 
centuries many Ionic Greeks settled the coast 
of Asia Minor and developed rich cities which 
later focused civilizations far surpassing in 
luxury the motherland's. They also evolved 
a great citizen class which enjoyed unheard- 
of felicity; "The middle classes are best off 
in many ways,'' said Phocylides, a gnomic 
poet of Miletus, 

Hellas was not in exactness a geographical 
expanse. It bespoke spiritual possessions. 
It had meant in religious worship certain 
traditions and rites projected by race con- 
sciousness, in art an excellence, in character 
a moderation and independence. It was com- 
ing to mean in political life a constitution. 

In these centuries of political inorganity 
discontent ruled everywhere. Old homes be- 
came narrow. As the leaves of the forest, 
so are the generations of men, sings Homer; 

90 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

leaves that be, the winds scatter upon the 
ground, but blooming woods, when spring- 
time comes, put forth other anew. Greek 
peoples had waxed. Legends of fair, favored 
lands beyond the seas tickled willing ears and 
ardent imaginations. Those more curious in- 
tellectually, and more adventurous and phys- 
ically energetic, stirred for broader spaces. 
Greece swarmed with colonies that carried 
her children and her burgeoning heritage 
over the Mediterranean, dotting the shores 
of the Euxine, to the neighborhood of that 
now called Crimea, and the Propontis as well 
as ^Egean, with settlements. They fared 
along the sea's water ways founding Cumas, 
Tarentum, Sybaris and Croton, Cyrene, Mar- 
seilles, and entered upon the luxuriant fertil- 
ity of Sicily, then as now a home of nature's 
lethal forces which sometimes wake and turn 
and shudder — forces which the immigrants 
to Gela and Syracuse and other Hellenic 
towns, with penetrating imagination person- 
ified as a discomfited giant, "cliffs press 
down his hairy breast and a pillar of heaven 
holds him fast, even hoary JEtna, nurse of 
sharp snows through all the year." Wher- 
ever they settled they bore in, in sign of 

CONSTRUCTIVE INDIVIDUALISM OF CITIES 91 

spiritual unity, sacred fire from the hearth 
of their mother city, and the worship of 
Apollo, keeper of the civic life of their old 
home and kindler of illuminating thought in 
the darkness of neighboring barbarians. 

The colonists ' life of essaying the mighty 
task of home and settlement building gave 
those Greeks of ancient days, as it has in these 
late centuries of ours given modern colonists, 
a buoyancy, an openness and receptivity of 
mind, a susceptibility to the influence of new 
ideas, and a readiness for opportunity and 
zeal in experimentation, which led the people 
often to outstrip those they had left behind. 
The first elegiac and lyric poets of whom we 
know were in the eastern settlements. Phi- 
losophy found an early home at Miletus and 
among the Hellenes of Italy and Sicily. The 
first excellent dramatists were western Sicil- 
ians. 

Between these daughter colonies and their 
mother cities Hellenes journeyed continually, 
thus adding to the keen wit of their nativity 
the eye-opener of travel. Because of a com- 
mon alliance of blood, or for civic needs, they 
visited the oracle of Apollo at Delphi or other 
religious uses, they fared to the national 

92 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

games, tlieir festivals in poetry, music and 
disciplined skill of body. Tlieir travel by 
water way meant the need of larger and more 
seaworthy boats. Thus colonization stimu- 
lated mechanics of boat-building. And with 
navigation must go better knowledge of as- 
tronomy and mathematics. Allied arts and 
crafts advanced. Stamped coins as stand- 
ards of value came to displace old estimates, 
such as the Homeric measure by armor. 

Through this progress of commerce de- 
mocracy gained much. Language also, that 
marvelous speech of theirs, was developing 
its fitness for public discussion of interests 
of state. Speakers felt the need of argument, 
and in effort to explain and persuade, power 
of expression was growing among the people. 
The ethical and philosophic thinker, the gno- 
mic speaker, at this time also increased the 
language by whittling out those life-conduct 
maxims with which the Hellene was so splen- 
didly equipped. 

But on nearly every side, in the west in 
Sicily, as in Agrigentum, in cities of the Asia 
Minor coast, in Miletus, among the Ionian 
islands, as Samos, was the despot, the benevo- 
lent organizer, the force all social elements 

CONSTRUCTIVE INDIVIDUALISM OF CITIES 93 

recognized or submitted to in gaining a new 
recasting, in bringing social order to inde- 
pendence. Not in Sparta 7 however, the com- 
pletest political embodiment of the Dorian 
character. In the compact aristocracy of that 
city-camp, the accredited founder of which 
■was the legislator Lycurgus, two kings 
reigned together in not distinctly lined func- 
tions. There the government was an oli- 
garchy in which the power of the ephors was 
little modified by the council of elders and the 
agora of citizens. All free men were sol- 
diers. Spartan law forbade the Spartan 
proper learning a mechanical trade or ar- 
tistry. The productive class and the crafts- 
men, those laboring and supplying necessi- 
ties, a race of serfs, had no political rights. 

In the Athens of these days the king dis- 
appeared by the shearing of the priest part 
of his office of basileus, and naming him 
archon for life. To name him chief archon 
for ten years and then divide Ms power 
among nine archons appointed each year 
marked other steps in evolution. The legis- 
lation of the serene and humane spirit of 
Solon (594r-3 B. C.) went still further. In its 
relief, for instance, to small farmers liable, 

94 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

in the economic distress of the time, to en- 
slavement for the debt of mortgages, and in 
endeavor to set order between established 
classes, "I gave," he said, "as much strength 
as is enough, without taking away from their 
honor, or adding to it. To those who had 
power and the splendor of riches I gave 
counsel that they should not uphold violence. 
I stood with my strong shield spread over 
both and suffered neither to prevail by 
■wrong." But Solon, governor of Athens, 
found his generous ardor incommunicable. 

We know already that to the Greeks cast- 
ing away the old and endeavoring to evolve 
a new sense of the state, two principles of 
government, a loose and close-knit, were at 
hand. Among the fluent peoples to the north 
they saw a tribal life where conflict was per- 
ennial and power lay with one man only so 
long as he had force to hold the headship. 
To the east there lay the sluggish, military 
leviathan whose head was a weak, lust- 
ful czar, whose body, millions of subjects, 
heterogeneous, possessed of no spirit of in- 
dividuality nor of organization, still in the 
bounds of the primitive group, cohering 
through fear qnd slavish acquiescence. In 

CONSTRUCTIVE INDIVIDUALISM OF CITIES 95 

neither political form could the Hellenes see 
the service of freedom for which they were 
outreaching, and reason they sought as a foot- 
hold. Neither offered to their aspiring- polit- 
ical genius a union of independent wills for 
which the law they were learning to make, 
and agree to, was master. Knowledge of 
oriental absolutism, and tribal anarchy, 
strengthened their love of a free state and 
quickened their race consciousness. 

Hatred of the Greeks at these times for 
kings and the difficult rule of the oligarchs, 
was doubtless often founded upon reflection 
induced by economic distresses, and the de- 
generation of the aristocrat to a plutocrat. 
Their states were small and the people came 
into close contact with their princelings. 
Upon their early notion of just balance, of 
equity, and their growing sense of ordered 
justice, a prevalence of law, a political prin- 
ciple doubtless strengthened by Dorian in- 
fluences — that every individual of the state, 
without any exception whatever, should bring 
his individual desires and passions within 
the control and regulation of the rule agreed 
to in the state — they founded their common- 
wealths. Most of all should those do this in 

96 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

whom power was vested. * ' A well-constituted 
state is made, ' ' said Solon, ' c when the people 
obey the rulers, and the rulers obey the 
laws," "when good laws and good govern- 
ment set the state in order, subdue insolence, 
chain the hands of evil doers, set straight the 
crooked ways of perverted law," even when 
"citizens seek to overthrow the state by love 
of money and by running after self-seeking 
demagogues/' The shifty uncertainty and 
restlessness of his times deeply impressed 
Solon and may have led to his panegyric ex- 
pression for stability. 

In law men set a rule, they endeavor to 
conserve the eternal, the unchangeable, what 
they deem best. Law is "reason without 
passion. ' ' Law, "born in heaven, ' ' should be 
the expression of the judgment of the people. 
"The people ought to fight in defence of the 
law as they do of their city walls," said Her- 
aclitus. "Lawless disregard of the rights of 
others, they should be more careful to quench 
than a conflagration. " "Law is to them ar- 
bitrary master," said Demaratus of his fel- 
low Spartans. And the old-time law of sacri- 
fice begetting love worked here. For that to 
which they had given their energy awoke in 

CONSTRUCTIVE INDIVIDUALISM OF CITIES 97 

the Greeks a new devotion. Loyalty to their 
city became and remained a passion. Their 
state was their larger, nobler, enduring, self- 
less selves. Duties to the state "were to these 
Greeks paramount to all else. 

Thus the Greek cities, in their upbuilding 
and through generations of turbulence, 
learned to apply reason to politics. Many 
cities in various ways essayed forms of their 
idea of liberty — a state balanced, in harmony 
with the people it governed, the work of their 
spirit, embodying their character and indi- 
viduality. The end of the state was to them, 
as Aristotle said in a later time, "a good 
life," the life that brings out the best in the 
individual, that guides and teaches the spirit 
of man, a city whose form and government 
connects itself with the best works. So the 
city-state becomes the individual's end; in 
that he realizes himself. The Hellene be- 
lieved himself to have gained independence 
when he gained the independence of his state. 

The Hellene's city-state aimed at an ideal 
society. It connoted a perfect organization, 
all its parts intertwined and uniting in en- 
deavor to form a flawless whole. Side by 
side with this age's individualism, as in other 

98 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

epochs marked by healthy individualistic 
spirit, went the ideal of devotion that prompts 
the individual to bring his own peculiar gifts 
to the welfare of the whole and to suffer a 
snuffing out of the individual factor — that is, 
the individualism developing among the 
Greeks of this day must combine with others 
similar to its own in order to gain its end. 
The best individual was the best citizen. 

ORPHISMj ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES: RECRUDES- 
CENCE OF SUPERSTITION 

But the greatest mark of this second dis- 
tinctive phase of the Greek spirit is not its 
nascent democracy — except as its nascent 
democracy is a result of the reflection with 
which the Hellenes with their ever-present 
religious consciousness, begin to consider life 
and the world and their problems. 1 The hu- 
man spirit turns from scenes shining with 
gods and heroes to consider itself. In this 
action it unites with its attitude in the social 
crisis and is part of the whole movement of 

1 "The first of human concerns is religion" — a sentence 
which the English Lord Aeton wrote — voices the feeling 
of the Hellenes. 

DIONYSUS: ORPHISM 99 

ilie era. A free state is parent of a free de- 
velopment of the religious consciousness of 
man. The rise of cities broke up the old di- 
visions of tribes and created others anew, re- 
cast new loyalties. The old gods no longer 
satisfy, nor the old maxims and ideals of man- 
hood. Life must have a more profound, more 
self-satisfying aim. 

Onward from the eighth century before 
Christ, we have seen, men's thoughts moved 
from the heroic glory that colored the age 
foredone to will, thought, feeling that the hu- 
man being was of consideration. In the 
struggle at hand the individual was now the 
factor of weight. In politics he was forc- 
ing new forms. He sought explanation for 
his awakened longings. Time was ripe for 
a new religion. With exacting democracy, a 
practical sense of democracy's value in af- 
fairs of life, has always gone a distinguished 
other-worldliness, a puritanism — the intense 
practicality of democracy, its emphatic appeal 
to the individual thought and emotion, seems 
to be at one with the individualism of puri- 
tanism and its all-controlling homesickness 
for heaven. 

The north from time immemorial has been 

100 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

the home of spiritual impulses. -33gean 
peoples of the pre-Greek age had been ' ' earth- 
born,' ' and their Mother Earth, Earth the 
Life-giver, tpuoigooc; ala, barely spiritualized. 
The first Greek, he of the heroic centuries, had 
laid stress upon the importance, the dominion, 
the divinity of the body. To him the soul was 
a vapor akin to a strengthless underworld, a 
pitiful phantasm. In the age now beginning 
a new religion, Orphism, emphasized the very 
antithesis of this — that the soul must be of 
celestial essence, and the body no more than 
a dungeon in which the heavenly being was 
chained. Northern folk shut off from the al- 
luring joy in nature's face of the south, and 
in their colder, more somber climate, devel- 
oped introspection. 

Worship of Dionysus came directly from 
Thracians, perhaps indirectly from cognate 
peoples in Phrygia„ It may have been a re- 
surgence of old, pre-Greek religious faiths. 
Doubtless it was allied to seasonal and fer- 
tility rites of the religion of the ^Egeans. 
Among certain communities of Hellas the god, 
with his band of attendant satyrs and women 
devotees, invaded the hold of the definite 
divinities of Homer's song — divinities them- 

DIONYSUS: ORPHISM 101 

selves we have seen often originating in and 
evolved out of physical elements and physical 
impulses of the world. That also was Diony- 
sus, the mighty spirit-workman of the sap and 
of the warming" soil, a son of Earth Mother, 
of the Mother of Corn, in his northern home 
the grantor of fertility, the god who quick- 
ened vegetation of tree and thicket. Also 
god, perhaps, of a cereal intoxicant; at last at 
home and in Greece becoming the god of 
grapes and wine. 

To the religious, humanizing mind of the 
Hellene, who felt with primal vividness the 
charm of the mysterious workings of nature 
and revered the products of that magic, all 
grain and nourishing fruits were possessed of 
a god. The feeling is still in our hearts when 
we stand in amaze before the demiurgic force 
of spring; when we watch the growths of a 
corn field, turn from picking a wind-flower, or 
mourn in the fall of an elm the passing of a 
fellow. 

The spirit of fertility, Dionysus, is spoken 
of in Homer. But the poet treats him mea- 
gerly, possibly because the god had lately 
made his way and then held no recognition as 
a master, "Whether his cult was borne to the 

102 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Greeks by Thracian or Hellene convert and 
standard- bearer, or whether some human 
wave leaping southward carried the god's ti- 
dings, is lost in the long silence between first 
Greek records and that far-away day. With 
Dionysus went also Eros, Love, the world- 
building, primal life, 2 the Ancient One who 
set the stars a-dancing. Eros gave the mys- 
tic teachings. Both were gods of the fertili- 

a In Love's name, "wrote the Greek Sophocles, are hid- 
den many names, force, desire, energy, and tranquillity. 

No modern has better expressed the Greek conception 
of Eros in his influence upon human kind than Cole- 
ridge in this verse: 

"All thoughts, all passions, all delights, 
Whatever stirs this mortal frame, 
All are but ministers of Love, 
And feed his sacred flame." 

Robert Bridges, poet laureate of England, has put an 
essentially Hellenic thought in the first five of the fol- 
lowing 1 lines: 

"Love, from whom the world bes^un 
Hath the secret of the sun- 
Love can tell, and love alone, 
Whence the million stars were strewn, 
Why each atom knows its own, 
How, in spite of woe and death, 
Gay is life and sweet is breath." 

DIONYSUS: ORPHISM 103 

zation of the earth and of life. In this way, 
again, the Hellenes' consciousness of an all- 
controlling spirit, and their instinct for seek- 
ing its visibility, manifested itself. 

Amid its northlands faith in soul-wander- 
ings was clearly united with the Dionysus re- 
ligion. That in man a god lived who would 
be free when he could break the chains of the 
body, was deeply grounded in the Dionysus 
cult and its purificatory ecstasies and rituals. 
In the amplitude of the night — and in the 
night perhaps because Dionysus was of the 
earth, a chthonian god, and dwelt in the dark, 
or again perhaps because of the faith, com- 
mon even among later Greeks, of a secret and 
mysterious fullness of life amid the powers of 
the earth at night — in the amplitude of the 
night, clad in skins, decked with the wanton 
ivy and that other vine, the grape, mother of 
strange power, their hair bound with some 
fertility charm or emblem, a lissome snake or 
a plant, waving torches to purge the air of 
evil, in unconstrained nearness to nature, joy- 
ing in union with the universal life, the ritual- 
ists of the religion carried on their mysteries 
and reveled through wildwood, vale of thicket 
and over mountain, far from restraint of the 

104 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

abode of men. Their great nature god had 
put an unaccountable magic in the vine and 
its clusters, some holy animate thing. Di- 
onysus, the way of life, was through this 
magic in wine. Wine itself was divine. 
The very god vitalized the fermented drink, 
and he most fully seized those who drank 
deepest. Also in the kid of their sacrifice the 
devotees partook of communion. Crying 
"Evoe!" they ate the flesh raw for the sake 
of vital power; to absorb the sacred blood 
while it was warm was to absorb life. 

Flutes shrilled and increased their emotion. 
In the dance sacred to the root-heing, world- 
builder, Eros, their Bacchic ecstasy was com- 
pleted. The god incarnated the emotion of 
the dance, the personification. Their frenzy 
was believed to evoke the fructifying powers 
of the earth, and, in the hushed exhaustion 
that follows over-exaltation, the spirit to have 
its profoundest communion with and absorp- 
tion in the infinite. The goal of the rite was 
the god's dwelling within the devout and for 
the time granting his character and power. 

The communion may have been a survival of 
early totemic rites in which devotees sought 
to gain the life-force of a slain beast by 

DIONYSUS: ORPHISM 105 

assimilating Lis flesh and by getting inside 
the skin of the sacrifice- In their eating of 
his flesh they felt that they fortified and sanc- 
tified themselves — through assimilation of the 
divine substance. In those days rituals of 
human sacrifice were reported in Thrace — 
and also among contemporary Hebrews and 
other tribes. 

This new cult, it has been noted, made one 
appeal to the Greeks which in all centuries 
beckons every child of the human race — the 
call to ecstatic submergence in the pulsing 
wild of the world, a return to primitive ideas 
and simple ancestral ways of many thousands 
of years before, a hurling aside of conventions 
stultifying or nullifying the true being. If 
they had this conception in their rites, the 
Hellenes would, in short, return for the time 
to stimulating kinship with the fawn and fox 
and other beasts whose skins they wore when 
they worshiped. In the centuries this re- 
ligion took on the strong anthropomorphism 
of the Greek spirit, the Hellenes were develop- 
ing their town life. 

The enthusiasm of Dionysus may have been 
a phase of that spiritual experience called, in 
the phrase of certain psychologists, "autom- 

106 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

atisrn, " or M uprushing of the subliminal 
consciousness' ' of each individual spirit — 
that is, it may have been psychically akin to 
the supernormal mood called "conversion." 
The cult emphasized the precept that only 
through a soul's experience of spiritual 
ecstasy, an inner catastrophe, a second birth, 
could the human pass to the divine, and it 
used hypnotizing 1 methods for bringing on the 
trance. 

In the old Greek cult faith in the enthusiasm 
was widespread. It seized upon the energies 
of its converts, and as a whole exalted them, 
even if the common sanity and every-day 
measure of the moral code stood aside for the 
time and the excesses of the enthusiasm were 
subject to interpretation by symbol alone. 

Freeing the god by breaking the chains of 
the body identified the early night feasts of 
the north, and even, especially at first, in 
some parts of Greece. But when Orphic mys- 
tics took over and adapted the faith to the 
life of towns struggling with the evolving and 
practical democracy of Hellas, nocturnal 
wanderings and excesses of devotees could be 
followed only in symbolic copy. The Diony- 
sus worship was in Hellas subject to the Hel- 

DIONYSUS: ORPHISM 107 

lene's rationalizing- and stood for the most 
part for consistent and energetic morality. 
Still, while sobered by the Greek spirit a 
fervor, an inebriety of mind, persisted in 
hymns and other celebrations of the god, and 
differentiated his ritual from that of the older 
gods. Not only in their choral dithyramb, 
or spring song and the imitative dance, but 
even later in their sculpture and painting the 
Greeks showed this enthusiasm. 

The antipathy of an ancient, racial, ordered 
sobriety, we s$y, met the whirling reel of the 
Dionysus worship. For generations the 
Greeks' instinct had maintained a deep- 
grounded aversion to extravagant mental agi- 
tation, to losing oneself in the boundlessness 
of feeling. Their love of temperance forbade 
it and the reaction that must follow. The 
Greeks were masters of themselves. Excess 
among them was rare. Always with them 
was the sense of proportion. But profound 
disturbances of home and state in the midst 
of the ideas of a brilliant age now inutile, 
moribund, fo redone, may have heart-sickened 
a finely balanced people, at a loss in the ob- 
jective world and conscious of its empty an- 
swer to their new inner questions. 

108 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

If this were true, resurgence of an ances- 
tral faith may have come easily. Could the 
"wants of those old Hellenes, miseries induced 
by continued disaster, by lust for power of 
old aristocracies, by avarice of the new des- 
pots, have opened their souls to desire for a 
life antipathetic to the immediate past and its 
faiths ? — to the reception of gods of the great 
magic Life of the earth, the embodiment not 
only of the mysteries from wine but from 
mental self -intoxication and immoderate 
night-revels, the spirit of enthusiasm that uni- 
fies the solitary with the general and through 
the mystery of emotion envisages to the sub- 
ject the living, pulsing whole and promise of 
ever-lasting possession? In any era of his- 
tory the emergence of a previously restricted 
and uneducated multitude to civic freedom 
means a refreshing and rehahilitation of re- 
ligious enthusiasm. 

A religion is the product of a single people 
and their needs- From its very inception it 
moves cautiously towards universalizing it- 
self. It adapts itself and modifies foreign or 
distasteful elements to suit its surroundings. 
It takes here rites and there rituals and faiths 
from those it meets and would draw within its 

DIONYSUS: ORPHISM 109 

final crystallization. The character of a cult 
and of a divinity depend really upon the char- 
acter of the sectarian; according to a mem- 
ber's environment and innerself he pictures 
his divinity, conceives him with grossness or 
with spirituality in the wise of his own sur- 
roundings and his own nature. 

Worship of Dionysus was, we have seen, a 
religion antagonistic to many old conceptions 
and traditions. Until some apostle with 
racial feeling for the Hellenes' needs should 
recast and stamp the enthusiastic fervor and 
self-abandonment with their race's instinct 
and thought, and their race's piety, the cult 
could bear no general meaning to Greek life. 

The religion, we said, became Greek under 
the name of Orphism. Possibly the shadowy 
Orpheus, whose legend as a magical singer 
has penetrated all centuries and inspired song 
(even to our Shakespeare when he did sing), 
and whose fame as a prophet interpreted the 
imported rougher rites of Dionysus, taught 
that the enthusiasm, the Bacchic ecstasy, was 
a spiritual joy found in a pure and ascetic 
life. 

At the time Orphism was beginning to de- 
velop, intercourse between Egypt and Greece 

110 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

was again growing. An Egyptian puritan 
code preached 1 ethical ideals similar to the 
Orphic. This puritanism and the old Thra- 
cian cult bringing Dionysus and mighty 
Eros, lords of life and death, before all other 
gods, Orpheus possibly united — united so that 
to separate the one from the other became im- 
possible. 

Orphism was an ancient system of mystic 
puritanism, and to say puritanism is to say in- 
dividualism, whose strength lay in an ascetic 
ordering of life, a denial of the body. It had 
a view of our later mediaeval times — that life 
was a mere probation. The religion's con- 
trolling idea was a freeing from earthly, tran- 
sitory tilings. The human who adopted it 
was no longer at one with, he was hostile to, 
nature. Orphism was also a half-philo- 
sophical speculation, a mysticism. Poetical 
imagery, as in most religions, played a con- 
siderable part. The worshiper through en- 
thusiasm strove to remove isolation, apart- 
ness, cleavage, and to complete identification 
with God. Such ideas, we said, were the 
first principles of the religion of Dionysus. 
Possession by the god meant becoming the 
god. The alien now was comrade and the 

DIONYSUS: ORPHISM 111 

soul united with the absolute. A visualizing 
of the object of worship, epiphany, happened. 
The entering of a god or spirit into the hu- 
man body was a not uncommon idea among 
the Greeks. State religion recognized it in 
the oracular possession of the Pythian priest- 
ess, who was clearly affected by the Diony- 
siac ecstasy. 

The gods were no more gods of the old 
Greek type, clear as the air, sensuous, simple, 
embodying the old group feeling and patri- 
archal. Newly created by Orphic fancies 
they held inseparable from their godhead a 
symbolic meaning, and also an ethical. They 
became shifting, mystical. The Orphic Zeus 
at times dwarfed all other gods — whom he in- 
cluded; — "Zeus is the beginning; Zeus is the 
middle; in Zeus is all complete." While ad- 
mitting the multiplicity of higher powers, 
Orphism laid stress upon the solidarity of the 
universe, the identity of the individual soul 
with the universal soul. With the individual 
religion was at present concerned. But the 
dualism which divided soul and body would 
naturally evolve to a real dualism between the 
world and deity- 
Man must free himself from evil and re- 

112 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

turn to God of wliom lie — the immortal soul — 
is a living part. Psyche, the soul, of heavenly 
birth and substance, through sin and to do 
penance for sin, became incarnate. She can 
not loose her bonds. Natural death grants 
her liberty — but for flitting to a purgatory be- 
low where, the soul's " education and nutri- 
ment,' ' every good act in life, gains her re- 
ward. There she rests for a space and then 
returns to the upper air. She must be em- 
bodied anew. As the mote floats in the sun- 
beam so she floats, one of swarming soul-cells, 
and enters the human body, perhaps when 
breathing begins. She is matter, but matter 
so delicate as to be quite invisible, to be just 
on or beyond the border-line of visibility. 

The soul wanders the wide circle of neces- 
sity, changing habitations, entering bodies of 
man and beast. The way is long to her lib- 
erty. In new embodyings, to accomplish her 
circle of births, she comes to light again and 
again through a long series of palingeneses — 
perhaps for ten thousand years. One single 
earthly existence does not suffice to cleanse 
her from original sin. She fares upon a 
weary pilgrimage. Thus runs the wheel of 
births. 

DIONYSUS: ORPHISM 113 

By choice of good in lif o the circle may be 
shortened. Pindar sings that those who 
thrice on either side of death (on earth, or in 
the intervening period in the other world) 
have withheld their souls from wickedness, go 
where winds of ocean blow round the Islands 
of the Blessed. The soul's deeds in the one 
life will avail her allotment in the next. 
What a man did to others he must exactly 
suffer himself, his soul is degTaded by its 
guilt to penitential punishment, to atonement. 
Thus he pays full penance for his sins. 
Orphisin emphasized the ethical conscious- 
ness- Upon the ground of her purity the soul 
based her claims to everlasting bliss. In 
Orphism consideration of sin is subjective. 
In the Homeric centuries it had been object- 
ive. 

Still, escape from her imprisonment is open 
to the soul, the psyche, of man. She may be- 
come free from another birth and separate 
herself from becoming and decay. She may 
buoy herself by the hope of leaving the wheel 
of necessity and misery. There is a freeing 
from the clay in which the soul lies coffined, a 
prisoner in a prison, a shellfish in its shell. 
Blind men can not help themselves even if the 

114 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

healing is at Land. Orpheus brings hale. 
Demiurgic Eros, and Dionysus and his 
Bacchic train, will free. By the grace of the 
freeing gods a man shall be free, not by his 
own strength but by the enthusiasm of the 
god. 

The soul may become pure, free from all 
spot by Orphic consecration and Orphic life. 
" Purity 7 ' was the ringing cry of Orphism. 
Even the postulant, the initiate, robed in a 
linen tunic, symbolic white, must purify him- 
self by baths, by forbearance from certain 
foods, by charms against malevolent spirits 
and by that humility of spirit that finds exer- 
cise in self-examination. Such purification 
was necessary for deliverance. Purity of life 
was a condition of membership. When pure 
the soul is free and will no more suffer in- 
carnation. She will live in the sempiternal 
joys of paradise, she who sprang from God 
and is godlike. - 

In the blissful life of the blessed, the soul, 
in conscious union with God, dwells in a land 
where is no freezing cold nor heat but gentle 
airs, where bounteous seasons bring in every 
fruit, and fountains water flower-starred 
meadows. "Upon the righteous," sang the 

DIONYSUS: ORPHISM 115 

^ Orphic Pindar, "the glorious sun sliineth, 
while here below it is night, and in meadows 
red with roses round their city gates and hazy 
with frankincense and laden with golden 
fruits. . . . and among them fair-flowered 
happiness blooms, and over that lovely land 
move sweet scents and mingle with the far- 
shining fire on the altar of the gods." In un- 
mixed delight the soul gladdens in services to 
the gods and in pursuit of wisdom, in the 
music of choruses, the drama of the poets and 
in banquets, according to the dialogue 
"Axioclius," at one time ascribed to Plato. 
Through the "Ptuedo" we see the eye of 
Socrates in his last moments dwelling on a 
like paradise. These traditional hopes, famil- 
iar to us in their material, were sung to and 
by Orphic Hellenes, and were the natural and 
spontaneous beliefs of their faith acting upon 
an imaginative people. 3 

3 Many retellings of this old Orphic inspiration are 
stiU current and in many tongues. Essentially poetic, 
its subject caught the mediaeval fancy when "a good 
dose of materialism" kept the people's health. An 
Italian bishop, Damiani, and a monk of Brittany, Ber- 
nard of Clugny, fox instance, embodied it in the noble 
Latin hymns, "De Gloria et Gaudiis Patadisi," "LauS 
Patriae Cselestis." One greater,. Dante, treated it with 

116 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Faith in the immortal life-strength, of the 
soul is the keynote of the Orphic religion. 
The soul's union with the body and its exer- 
cises are a punishment of which she is ever 
striving to be free. "I am a child of earth 
and starry heaven j" "Out of the pure I 
came;" "I have flown out of the sorrowful 
weary circle;" "I have paid the penalty for 
deeds of iniquity," sing various gold tablets 
found in ancient tombs and undeniably voic- 
ing the Orphic cult even of this earlier period. 

Transmigration of souls, in its simplest ex- 
pression, has been a belief common to many 
peoples. It is a carrying to extreme logic the 
faith of submergence of the individual in 
tribal life, the progression of the group emo- 
tion to its furthest limit. The moral factor 
of palingenesis, that of purifying heart and 
ennobling soul and all desires and instincts, 

imaginative and speculative enthusiasm. English poets 
of inspiration have voiced it, for instance the sixteen tli 
century author of the beautiful "Oh, Mother dear, Jeru- 
salem," and the nineteenth century Keats in his sensu- 
ous ode, "Bards of Passion and of Mirth." In German 
we have it in such poems as Kiickert's 

"Das Paradies muss schoner sein 
Als jeder Ort auf Erden." 

DIOXYSUS: ORPHISM 117 

rising on dead selves to higher things, strug- 
gles in the long evolution of the doctrine of 
metempsychosis. 

Thus the Dionysus cult those evolving 
Greeks took and hellenized — and to hellenize 
was to humanize- In Bceotia and Argolis, and 
at Delphi, traditions of the north prevailed, 
and at Thebes 4 women kept to Dionysus a 
three-yearly festival, the ecstatic ritual and 
orgiastic tumult held at night on Mount Ci- 
thseron. But of the old Thracian enthusiasm 
the feast at Athens came hardly to show a 
vestige — although enthusiasm, the expression 
of a loftier and more gifted spirit than a 
human's own common mood, possession by a 
higher power apparent through words or 
actions, was attributed to the inspiration of a 
god by later Athenians and especially in the 
writings of Plato. 

Originally worshipers of Dionysus held 
him, with Eros, as source of moving life in 

4 "O Bacchus, dweller in Thebes, mother-city of Bac- 
chants." "Of all cities, Thebes, thou boldest first in 
honor." "O leader of the stars whose breath is fire, 
master of sounds of the night, son begotten of Zeus, 
appear, lord, with thy encircling Bacchantes who, in 
night-long frenzy dance to thee, the dispenser, Iacchus." 
1121-22; 1137-38 j 1146-55 Antigone. 

118 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

nature, the magic workman of all growing 
things, the prosperer of the "whole content 
of life, even of the exuberant pleasure that 
expresses itself in dancing and in every joy. 
His abundance of vitality made him a pro- 
tector from daemons. Inevitably his cult 
tended to the matriarchal — a religion finding 
root in the worship of Mother Earth and her 
Son, the fruit thereof- With legends at those 
times still in popular survival and also in ac- 
cord with the breadth and inclusiveness of a 
matriarchal cult, it recognized women's natu- 
ral piety and susceptibility to extreme emo- 
tion. Women were ministrants — the mae- 
nads, distinguished votaries of Dionysus, pos- 
sibly survivals of the then far-ancient minis- 
trants called Amazons and their rites in the 
service of Earth Mother- 
Adoption of the Dionysus religion and its 
development as a public cult proved in the end 
a mighty impulse to Hellas. Art opened a 
perfect form in the worship. That very all- 
inclusive beauty of Greek poetry, tragedy, 
grew, perhaps, out of a masque of the seasons 
in which the god was slain and lamented by 
mummers clad in goat-skins. And Attic 
comedy, it has been suggested, evolved pos- 

DIONYSUS: ORPHISM 119 

sibly from a purificatory rite when bearers of 
symbols of fertility came through the central 
door of the theater at the festival of Lensea 
and reviled certain of the audience. 

Orphism had substantial foundation in 
Greece before the sixth century before Christ 
— a century curiously fertile in religious 
manifestations in lands far east of Greece. 
But when Onomacritus, a singer of Bacchic 
initiation songs and with Pherecydes of Syros 
founder of the Orphic brotherhood at Athens, 
dwelt as a guest at the court of Peisistratus — 
from this association the faith gained the sup- 
port of the state. The Peisistratid family 
personified the tyrannus idea at Athens. 
Orphism and the tyrannus went hand in hand, 
not only at Athens hut at Corinth, Sicyon and 
elsewhere. The religion was a reflex as well 
as a cause of the condition into which society 
had come. Both religion and social condi- 
tion were antagonistic to the old traditions. 
Both voiced the same social consciousness and 
the same social divisions and both recognized 
the people of towns and tillers of the soil. 
The nether orders, called "lower" because 
others rear their structure upon their 
strength, were asserting themselves and ris- 

120 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

ing to power in the affairs of life. Old gods 
had not redressed long-time inequalities or 
softened the hardness of the oligarchs. New, 
or renewed, gods might. 

Orphism cheered men by saying that each 
[and every one! could attain to divine life, to 
immortality. In an age when there survived 
the old teaching that it was heaven-storming 
insolence to seek to be a god, the individual- 
ism of Orphism gave courage to seek to be 
united to God those who were already God. 
Orphism taught in another way than the old 
epic the divinity of humanity. 

But Orphic puritanism, and the solidarity 
of the conventicle to which converts pledged 
themselves, did not wholly take the place of 
the old aristocrats ' Olympian religion. The 
old faith consecrated all ceremonial civic func- 
tions. Orphics still worshiped at the solemn 
old festivals of the gods which the state or- 
dained. 

In the older religion a tribe divinity had 
still the magnet of a tribe's devotion, and the 
religious influence that adheres to such ideas. 
An instance most potent was a splendid festi- 
val held periodically at the island of Delos, all 
Ionic cities uniting in its imposing celebra- 

DIONYSUS: ORPHISM 121 

tion; when, says an old hymn, one seeing the 
grace of all and rejoicing in their spirit, 
would call the assembled Ionians ageless and 
deathless, the men and the lovely belted 
woman. Dionysus came too late to become a 
communal forbear, to represent the projected 
consciousness of the old group. Orphics ob- 
served still, we say, old tribal and local loyal- 
ties and oblations. But Eros, passion-stir- 
ring, and Bacchus, vital principle, were their 
real gods. 

The old nobles' religion had little expansive 
concern for immortality. Realities on this 
earth prevailed. Content with their life as it 
was and for genei'ations had been naturally 
filled the breasts of the ruling orders. 
Homeric ideas show traces of a doctrine of 
retribution. But the Orphic faith brought 
confidence in punishment of evil deeds and 
the rewards of righteousness- For the ills 
and inequalities of earth converts declared the 
glories of an everlasting bliss should be theirs. 
If a soul could not realize itself here — if on 
this earth vice had not its meed and virtue 
were its slave or dupe, if "Captive Good at- 
tending Captain HI" were ever true — the soul 
may turn its vision to another world for the 

122 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

balance of justice, the world after death. 
The gods would grant redress, would strike a 
balance, for the sufferings of the oppressed. 

Here is a distinct step in human evolution 
and mental refinement — since the ethical esti- 
mate of the heroic age, when gods were non- 
moral, to this phase of the Greek spirit when 
gods became guardians of righteousness. 
Justice and evolving conceptions of law stood 
among the great gods of the Orphic pantheon. 
Teachings of an implacable justice, the Hel- 
lenes' setting out of the Hebraic conception 
of the sins of father upon children, the early 
Solon sang in his elegies, ** Fruits of insolence 
and wrong bring vengeance, sure even if 
slow. . . . Perhaps the guilt escapes, but his 
blameless children, or distant posterity pay 
the penalty." 

Orphic cosmogony pictured the becoming 
and growth of the world out of a dark, driving 
power into the clear, definite manifoldness of 
the cosmos — a long train of godlike forces 
winding and overwinding one another in the 
world's orderly formation. This teaching of 
the generation of the universe was like that 
of old religions, for instance, the Persian, to 
which Orphism was doubtless related. 

ELELISINIAN MYSTERIES 123 

Such a faith had its historic mission. It 
succored the growth of men's conscience and 
deepened their inner life. It inculcated dis- 
dain for the goods and successes of the world 
which had been controlling — for renown, for 
war and its grossnesses. Another result was 
a gloom, an asceticism at odds with the old, 
commonly prevalent view of life as a buoyant 
beauty, a harmony. Ideas such as these are 
engendered and enunciated, it has been said, 
by a people who disavow power and force or; 
are without such factors. 

But the central and finally most popular 
worship of the Dionysus idea, that which 
probably more completely set forth the doc- 
trine and was not so much a mass of loosely 
united beliefs, a worship clearly allied to 
Orphism in secrecy, in revocation of the crea- 
tive impulse, in expiatory rites and purifica- 
tions, were the great Eleusinian Mysteries, a 
passion play sacred to divinities of the earth 
— a setting forth of the holy history of Hades' 
theft of Core, as she among meadow grasses 
gathered the strange flower of the narcissus; 
the maid's translation to the god's realms be- 
low; the wandering quest of her mother, De- 
meter, up and down the earth; the poignant 

124 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

sorrows of Mater Dolorosa; and tie final re- 
union of Mother and Child. ' i And, ' f sang an 
old hymn, "Zeus decreed that Persephone 
should remain two parts of the year with her 
mother, and one third part only with her hus- 
band in the kingdom of the dead." 

The secret worship centering about this 
beautiful story fell near the end of our Sep- 
tember amid the agricultural people of the 
fertile plain of Eleusis, a little town hugging 
the sea-coast across from Salamis, some four- 
teen miles from Athens. There, legend told, 
Persephone had returned to her mother after 
she had come with Hermes from Hades' king- 
dom below. The rites, fabled to have been es- 
tablished by the Thracian Eumolpus, doubt- 
less dated to those pre-Greek days when 
Mother Earth was Great Goddess and every 
settlement of ^gean folk had its Lady of the 
Corn, or of abundance of crops and fertility 
of flocks. 5 Demeter, sender-up of gifts, signi- 

Persistence of local cults among Mediterranean peo- 
ples has been through millennia and down to our own 
time. Demeter, not a personified principle but a real 
personal power, "the mistress of the world," a living, 
benevolent divinity dwelling in the heart of a mountain, 
is worshiped to this day in Greece. Tn the last cen- 
tury tillers of the soil, natives of this very plain of 

ELEUSTNTAK MYSTERIES 125 

fied the earth,, not the mere material of the 
earth-body — Gala was that — but the lady-pro- 
ducer, the lady-nourislier of what grows out 
of the earth. Persephone, her daughter, was 
the seed corn and the fruit of the fields. The 
robbery of Core symbolized the sinking of 
seed corn in the earth; her return the coming 
of the seed plant from the soil — the yearly 
going under and the renewing of vegetation. 
In their origin the rites were probably a 
celebration of a harvest festival, and magic 
ceremonies to further food supply. Such 
practices might also celebrate invigorating of 
life-force and the process of plowing and 
sowing. Profounder spiritual significance 
they might have gained in later times in 
elaboration of the cult of Dionysus. Iacchus, 
giver of wealth," "dispenser of men's fate," 
as the vegetation god would be in the world, 
"daemon of Demeter, founder of the Mys- 

Eleusis, cherished a statue of Demeter after a Chris- 
tianized ritual naming it St. Demetra, a saint not in 
ecclesiastical canon and entirely unknown elsewhere. In 
his "Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek Reli- 
gion," Mr. J. C Lawson tells that the statue "in spite of 
a riot among- the peasants of Eleusis" was removed and 
"is now a little-regarded object catalogued as 'No. XIV, 
Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge (much mutilated)- 5 " 

< •> 

126 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

teries," was an Eleusinian name of Dionysus, 
perhaps derived from his worshipers' cry of 

307. 

The religious pantomime of the Eleusinian 
Mysteries was not the sole sacred drama in 
Hellas. Representations of phases of the life 
of the gods, feasts to Zeus, to Here, to Apollo 
were part of a widely distributed cult prac- 
tice, and mystery cults were potent, for in- 
stance, that of Hecate at JEgina and of Ge at 
Phyle. The Eleusinian was distinctive 
through the outlook it gave its attendants. 
During the centuries of its most marked 
growth individuality in all relations was 
evolving. Contemplation of the fate of the 
seed corn personified in Persephone — the dis- 
appearance of the corn from the earth and its 
return — afforded insight into the destiny of 
the individual human soul, of man's birth and 
rebirth. In this we have the unity of the old 
Greek faith, that human life is not a segre- 
gated thing, but a part of the whole vegeta- 
tive and animal world. The soul disappears 
in order to live, just as the seed. That was 

e This meditation the zeal of Paul Bet down centuries 
later in a letter to Christian converts at Corinth, in sen- 
tences of remarkable beauty and the same analogical 

ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES 127 

the sum of the sacred secret — the soul disap- 
pears in order to live. "The Athenians of 
old," said Plutarch, "called the dead Deme- 
ter's people" — people of Earth Mother. 

By the mystic, purificatory ceremony at 
Eleusis the worshiper of the solemn god- 
desses, the Mother and the Daughter, and 
their associated gods, for instance Triptole- 
mus, plower and distributer of grain for 
sowing, the initiate might hold privileged re- 
lations with the divinities, a communion, and 
hope for success in life and better fortune 
after death. " Of men who go about upon the 
earth, he is happy who has seen these things," 
sang an old hymn of the worship, "He who 
has not shared in them lias by no means an 
equal fate in the gloom of the nether world." 
Not only that the soul freed from the body 
lives — brighter and more comforting thoughts 
of how she will live these Mysteries taught 
men. That is, the initiate won at Eleusis a 
lively setting forth of the existence of the de- 
parted soul "being god-beloved and dwelling 
with the gods." 

Originally a tribal privilege, probably an 

reasoning:; "That which thou sowest is not quickened ex- 
cept it die/' etc. 

128 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

occasion when each member of the group so- 
cialized his soul by pledging it to the soul of 
the congregation, the Mysteries in the fifth 
century before Christ invited the whole Hel- 
lenic world to share their spiritual life. 
Their membership became widespread, and 
they had long-continued reverence. Initia- 
tion was only by the individual *s free act and 
election. The candidates, who had had in- 
struction from the leader of the Mysteries and 
introduction to the Lesser Mysteries months 
before, must confess themselves to be pure in 
hand, that is, with no blood guiltiness, and 
they should have followed rules of abstinence 
and fasting. "Let no one enter,' 9 read a 
solemn proclamation used at one time, 
4 * whose hands are not clean and whose tongue 
is not prudent." 

Upon assembling the candidates must go 
to the seashore to purify themselves with salt 
water, a baptism or laver of regeneration. A 
cathartic ritual, sprinkling with the blood of a 
pig — and possibly a pig because the sow had 
been a symbol of fertility — may then have 
followed. After a sacrifice, perhaps, and an 
interval of two days, the great procession 
started from Athens to Eleusis bearing a 

ELELSINIAN MYSTERIES 129 

■ 

representation of the god Iacchus. With 
shrines to visit on the way, and with sacri- 
fices, their march must have been slow. They 
would reach Eleusis on the same night, or on 
the following, fatigued, in that state of body 
when through fasting and ritual the mind 
would be given to hallucination. Under the 
stars with Iacchus there followed a midnight 
meeting, and, in the Mystery hall (Ictinus, 
architect of the Parthenon, built later the 
splendid temple of Demeter) two or more 
days of sacred drama. 

The eight priests and priestesses of the 
ceremonies may at this time have given an ap- 
pealing play of the taking away of Core, the 
sorrow of the Mother, the reunion of the two, 
the mission of Triptolemus. That is, the play 
may have symbolized the poetry of nature, 
the drama each year enacts during spring, 
summer and winter. And thus it may have 
taught of human life, and poetized the hope of 
a world where death gives place to life. 
The very character of mystery — reserve for 
the initiate — keeps us from exact knowledge 
of what was done. 

Perhaps the drama pictured, through the 
loss of the Daughter, separation by death, the 

130 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

sorrow of the living, the consoling faith of an 
ultimate reunion. In this way the soul, feel- 
ing a personal communion with the divine 
would be purified and lifted to a new life. It 
is difficult to believe any part of the solemni- 
ties to liave been obscene, as early Christian 
writers averred. When the Hellenes said 
they were " unspeakable'' they meant not un- 
namably impure, but unnamably and mys- 
teriously holy. They appealed to and com- 
forted most refined minds. If they repre- 
sented a union of the human and divine, a 
pledge of intimate association with immortals 
in another world, the fasting and reduction 
of the body's normal strength at their rites 
may have led to reaction, excess, afterwards — 
just as at fbe fast of Eamazan the Moham- 
medan's self-restraint of the day gives way 
to indulgence in nightly feasts, or as our 
present-day Lenten denials generate ab- 
normal feasts at Easter, 

"Demeter . . . gave our ancestors twofold 
gifts," said Isocrates in his Panegyricus, 
"those fruits of the earth which saved us 
from living the life of wild beasts, and the 
rites which make happier the sharers of it, 
both concerning the end of life and existence 

ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES 131 

forever.' ' "When we die," wrote Plutarch 
much later, yet bearing the faith of a believer, 
"we are like those being initiated into the 
Mystery. . . . Our whole life is but a succes- 
sion of wanderings, of painful goings aboutj 
of journeys by devious ways with no outlet. 
At the moment of quitting it, fears, horrors, 
palpitations, deathly sweats and stupor come 
upon and overwhelm us. But as soon as we 
are past it, pure places and meadows open 
to us, with voices arid dances and sacred 
words and holy sights. There a man having 
become initiate and perfect, free and lord of 
self, celebrates, crowned with myrtle, most 
solemn mysteries, converses with righteous 
and pure souls, looking down upon the im- 
pure numbers of the uninitiate sinking in the 
mire and fog beneath — by fear of death and 
by lack of faith in a life to come abiding in 
their miseries." 

In the mystic celebration the Eumolpictee 
preserved rights of apostolic succession 
from the founder. From that family was 
chosen an official who, clad in rich rai- 
ment, acted as Hierophantes, the word mean- 
ing one who shows forth sacred things. 
Consecrated to his function for life, and in 

132 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

later generations vowed to celibacy and con- 
tinual chastity, he alone could enter inmost 
penetralia of the hall of the Mysteries. Any 
candidate his holiness thought unfit for the 
communion he might refuse. 

With the assurance of fixed, religious or- 
ganizations, the sentiment doubtless dating 
back to early group-feeling, the Eleusinian 
community came to divide mankind into two 
classes — the pure, those initiate of the 
Eleusinian rites, and the mass not initiate. 
Mankind was not divided into the good and 
wicked, another has pointed out. Not as hu- 
man beings, and not as virtuous and pious 
human beings should men and women expect 
a happy life in the world to come — rather 
only as members of the Eleusinian company 
of worshipers and participators in the Eleu- 
sinian services. Ethical merit, the merit of a 
citizen of ideal type, had in that estimate lit- 
tie accounting. Obedience to ritualistic form- 
ulae, the visionary merit of union with the 
body, alone determined — a recrudescence, 
again we say, or survival of the old, dominat- 
ing soul of the group. Happiness, an initiate 
declares in the quotation above, was in pros- 
pect for members of the sacred mystery only. 

> 

E1XUSINIAN MYSTERIES 133 

They alone dared entertain pious expecta- 
tions of a real life hereafter. They alone 
might have the serenity of true expectancy, a 
privilege gained in no other way than through 
sharing the celebration and partaking of the 
blessed feast of fellowship, wheat cakes or 
bread sacred to Demeter and wine dedicated 
to Dionysus- Eeligion, so far as this popu- 
lar sense went, was merely an otiose assent 
to prevailing forms and symbols. Purifica- 
tion by ritual doubtless had its origin in 
magic, — in an elaboration in approaching the 
unseen superhuman power and then a substi- 
tution of the form of approach for the power 
itself. But such purification may have led to 
some degree of purification by ethical ideals. 
"There is sure and joyous light to us alone,' ' 
sang the song which Dionysus heard in the 
meadows of the Blessed, "to us who have 
been initiated and have lived reverently to- 
wards strangers and private folk." 

The practical irreasons of the faith were a 
reaction from the old heroic independence 
and the sanity of the Hellenic mind. Homer 
was far from vaunting expiatory ceremonies, 
mystic rites and religious brotherhoods. He 
refers to few superstitions. Perchance their 

134 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

magic had little ascendence among the folk 
for whom he sang. 

If the simple, primal consciousness of the 
old Greeks of the epic age was broken, the in- 
dividual, isolated soul certainly counted for 
more than when the king of sacrifices stood 
before the more physical gods of Olympus and 
voiced his community's consciousness of the 
human and divine. Now a pious man must 
look for soul-help in the ritual and observ- 
ance of an externalized order. He had need 
of a larger revelation and the mediation of a 
greater master, of some mystery, some magic, 
outside his group's, to show the way to the 
soul's hale. The Mysteries brought the 
proclamation to the world, said a decree of 
the second century before Christ, "that the 
greatest good among men is fellowship and 
faith." 

In the spiritual development of a people 
supernatural therapeutics, wonder-working 
and exorcism, long forerun the philosophers. 
Practices of magic and witchcraft and purifi- 
catory superstitions are of earlier ages; or 
of a substratum of the people of later times — 
long practiced in secret and at some favor- 
ing juncture taking oil vigor in open air. 

PRACTICES OF MAGIC: SUPERSTITION'S 135 

Now, in Hellas, sorceries were not a sudden 
growth or arbitrary invention. They were 
doubtless deep rooted in long anterior centu- 
ries and had been men's resort to the superhu- 
man for the guidance of life. Possibly in 
these times they suffered a renewal of 
strength through crises in the people's life, 
and in that ineradicable human feeling that 
would pry into and divine the future and en- 
deavor to avert its possible evil. Dionysus, 
the earth-sap god, the granter of ecstasy, was 
also a healer, an inpourer of the power of 
soothsaying. 

During the waxing of Hellenic society in 
these individualizing centuries — from scat- 
tered dwellers over the face of a country and 
in the bonds of patriarchal kingdoms to the 
unity of vigorous, sizable cities and sanitary 
care necessary where people are grouped to- 
gether, cleansing and purifica tion became 
needful in the same ratio that human life 
grew in esteem and preciousness. Disease, 
unseen, lurking endemic pests engendered by 
the crowding together of men, denser popula- 
tion in our present-day phrase, must have 
struck the Greeks with a bold hand in their 
town building and then unknowledge of sani- 

136 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

tation. As in the Iliad the plague witnessing 
divine anger at Agamemnon's sin made puri- 
fication necessary, so now in many places 
some malefic god was at hand, some ckernon 
of the earth or underworld, whose works 
were turned hy ceremonialism and magic 
of fumigation and fire, who also de- 
parted after ablution. Beating of bronze 
clappers, cymbals, freed from hostile, inter- 
ruptivc daemons the spirit that makes crops 
grow, just as, it has been said, the gong in the 
grove at Dodona preserved by its continuous 
clang the sacred ground from malignant in- 
fluences. 7 Thus these folk imaginatively 
traced origin with a glimmer of light, and 
science gleams in the midst of ancient charla- 
tanry. In considering their practices we 
must not forget that between magic, depend- 
ence upon a supernatural power for guid- 
ance, and religion, there is only the distinc- 
tion of growth, both being phases of reliance 
on or union with a supreme power. 

7 By the same token bells were a prophylactic for they 
inspired terror in evil spirits. Therefore, in later cen- 
turies, the Christian church hung them in their towers, 
where they pealed at the passing of a soul and in their 
call defended the congregation from ill. 

PRACTICES OF MAGIC: SUPERSTITIONS 137 

From Crete, an ancient liome of tkau- 
maturgy for jiEgean peoples, Thaletas came 
to Lacedsenion to rid the Spartans of a 
plague through his music and hymns to the 
gods, 8 and at Athens the Cretan Epimenides, 
an ally of Solon, healed the people of a pesti- 
lence and despondency and salutarily lifted 
their hearts. Many a small stream of ex- 
purgatory rites and demonology flowed into 
and colored the larger stream of Greek re- 
ligion. 

When, we say, with grouping of humans in 
cities need of cleansing from defilement cried 
aloud, mental confusion as to cause of pollu- 
tion led doubtless to a reinvigoration of the 
exorcist and to practices of magic in cleans- 
ing from imaginary defilement — to cere- 
monies of cursing to avert evil luck and bring 
good; freeing the habitation, the doorpost, the 
field, from vague, malevolent bogeys and 
ghosts ; to ridding from pollution the person 
of the newborn child and the mother after 
the birth of the child; to magnetizing the 
weather to drive away disease. Ker was a 
generic name of this corrupting thing, this 

8 To-day peoples of Calabria free themselves from 
earthquake by like processes. 

138 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

fate of death, this bacillus of disease. The 
word also meant ancestral ghost- Fantastic 
expiation freed the murderer from blood- 
guiltiness, and afflicted men might purify 
themselves from daemons. 

From the eighth to the sixth century men 
and women prophets, exorcists and purifiers, 
often degraders of Orphic precepts, seizing 
upon the mental nervousness and supersti- 
tions of the weaker, wandered through 
Greece. Their very being evidences the 
spread of a mysticism, the endeavor of a 
people burdened with the ills of their un- 
settled life, pulsing with the effort to pass 
the narrow horizon of every-day conscious- 
ness to the heights of unbounded vision and 
communion with the divine. 

Religious doctrines we have considered sub- 
jected their initiate to rule and symbol- 
Like all symbolic religions they promoted the 
idea that observance of forms and ceremonies 
would wipe away moral consciousness of sin— 
nay, even sin itself. Consequently, but still 
later than this age, for Plato tells of it, a 
sorcery so un-Hellenic, gross and grotesque 
gained way that certain mystagogues, mendi- 
cant friars and soothsayers peddled to the 

PRACTICES OF MAGIC* SUPERSTITIONS 139 

doors of the rich, and even to Greek cities, 
power to lieal in agreeable way of sacrifice 
and rite whatever sin burdened the soul — ■ 
promising absolution, effective both in this 
world and the next, a patent spiritual nos- 
trum to protect the soul from a wrath which 
their Hellenic sense of justice meted should 
come. "They redeem us from the pains of 
hell ; if we neglect them, no one knows what is 
waiting for us. " 

Among the confused and bizarre and non- 
Hellenic powers in this current of imposture 
was Hecate of the three-fold form, daughter 
of the sky of night, mother of midnight ter- 
rors, dwelling in the underworld, who found 
her way to the abode of the living more lightly 
than other nether-abode dwellers. She was 
by when a soul bound itself to a body, and 
even at the birth of wild animals. When 
a soul parted from its body she was also there. 
She was goddess of souls bound to another 
world. Her haunts were gravestones, and 
the solemn honors of the cult of the dead. 
The half-light of the moon, with which lumi- 
nary she had some occult connection, showed 
her course by night. She flitted over cross- 
roads. There stood her image; and also be- 

140 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

fore thresholds of houses to ward off evil 
spirits. At the forking of three ways, likely 
spot for ghosts, was also her worship. In 
haunted places she was invoked for her 
power to send from the earth horrid forms. 
Souls whose burial had heen unattended by 
holy rites were her servitors, or those # who 
used violence in life or died before their 
time — souls that find no peace after death 
but whirl in the wind with this magical, spell- 
binding goddess and her troop of dsernon 
dogs, bringing epilepsy, madness, disease, to 
whomsoever they meet. 

This and kindred legends — the i 'under- 
world' ' of the intellect of that time, the 
nether side of the beauty and brightness that 
was distinguishing its progress — doubtless 
voiced a people and their magic at the time 
of their inception. They voice fear. In the 
religion of monarchies of Babylon and As- 
syria in the time of the magic's seeming re- 
vival, a potent factor was fear of swarming, 
malignant beings of grotesque shape, delete- 
rious and destructive to human life, always 
on the watch to undo unguarded mortals. In 
the Hellenes ' use the legends bear also an- 
other witness — the conception of the interde- 

BEGINNINGS OF PHILOSOPHY 141 

pendence of all being and growth — a convic- 
tion often allowing itself expression in terms 
of the night-side of nature. 

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY, AND PHYSICS 
FORECASTING MODERN SCIENCE 

Another mark of this second phase of the 
Greek spirit — of the reflection with which the 
Greek began to consider life and the world 
and their problems — is found in the begin- 
nings of philosophy. The human spirit, in 
other than social and religious phases, joys 
in new regions and a growing consciousness 
of self. It essays another form akin to re- 
ligion in conception, aim and comprehensive- 
ness. To the thinker the universe must be 
fresh-born, as to colonists of active life ex- 
ploring untried seas and penetrating prime- 
val forests. New perceptions must combine 
and set out experiences afresh. The world 
must have a simple, rational explanation ; life, 
a profound and self-satisfying aim. 

Search for truth and that noble wisdom 
whose fruits are reverence and calm seized 
upon men's souls as a great enthusiasm. 
The world is wide and wonderful, and those 

142 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

early thinkers of Hellas could little see how 
long would be their search — and* forsooth, 
the search of man for many centuries to fol- 
low. It was the hope of every wisdom-lover 
to solve the great evanishing mystery. What 
the primordial source from which all camef 
How reduce endless variety — change, change 
— to unity? And man's relations to this va- 
riety — what are the laws and what transcend- 
ent truth? What is the spiritual light for 
things as we see them — for the world of 
nature? 

Earnestness made the Greeks seekers- We 
know attempted answers of theirs. The 
more we ponder, the profounder is our as- 
tonishment at their magnificently prophetic 
outlines. Modern science seems in many 
ways but the larger reading of those old 
philosophies. With the sympathy and per- 
ception with which in the long past their race 
had from the mysterious beauties of the 
earth 7 and its ensphering universe, evolved 
their objective religion and bred their epic 
art, so now the Hellenes incarnated scientific 
analysis of nature. That is, that energy of 
the imagination which had wrought lasting 
work in epic song, and in a poetic, synthetic 

BEGINNINGS OF PHILOSOPHY 143 

religion, now turned its insight to analytic, 
scientific enquiry and bore fruitful forecasts 
in more formal divisions. Science is a 
younger-born sister of poetry. The history 
of the Hellenes' science affords authoritative 
data in tracing their evolution. Tliat which 
we call their philosophy is an imagination, a 
vision of life of certain of their seers — in 
which vision reason, thought, imagination, 
dominate rather than the emotion. 

The imaginative reasoning of those Greek 
penetrators led them to their belief in the 
indestructibility of matter, and in the ex- 
istence of elements — they went so far in con- 
ception as to seek to reduce all diverse things 
they saw to some fundamental element. 
They felt the unity under multiplicity that 
modern science proclaims, the common sub- 
stance and the aspiring law that draws chaos 
to cosmos. We can not generalize their en- 
deavors, their individuality forbids. Let us 
glance at a few of their efforts seriatim. 

The first cradle of this new reflection of the 
Greeks was the coast of Asia Minor. Round 
the name of Thales of Miletus (said to have 
been born 640 B.C.) group reports of dis- 
coveries. In putting Ids efforts in the field 

144 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

of sensible phenomena he showed the racial 
character of his fellow Ionians. In his at- 
tempts to explain the world, the Hellenes ' 
abiding love of science. 

Matter was to Thales a living thing. It 
was endowed with energy, and motion was a 
result of life. There is an indwelling soul — 
4 'all things are full of gods," he said. This 
suggests the modern "prepotency," "inter- 
nal, perfecting principle/' A divine power 
pervades the elementary moisture and gives 
it motion. All things are therefore water 
variously transformed and capable of trans- 
formation. Thales came to this fundamental 
dogma, suggests Aristotle, by observation of 
the part warm, damp, organic matter plays 
in the production and keeping of life. 

This philosopher of Miletus is said to have 
introduced geometry into Greece, to have 
determined that the angles at the base of 
an isosceles triangle are equal and that the 
circle is bisected by its diameter. Before 
his time the Egyptians had gained the ele- 
ments of geometry in measuring lands made 
fertile by the floods of the Nile, Again 
Thales had such wisdom of the stars that he 
could and did predict a total eclipse — which 

BEGINNINGS OF PHILOSOPHY 145 

occurred in the war between Lydia and Media 
on the 28th of May, 585 B. C. But already 
the Chaldeans, thinking the stars in their 
clear sky above were in harmony with human 
affairs below, and that it were possible to 
solve enigmata of the earth by motions in the 
heavens, had blazed a trail in stellar myster- 
ies and in quest of pseudo-astrology had 
found laws of astronomy. 

Anaximander, coming a generation after 
Thales, holding to the doctrine that matter is 
by nature endowed with life, reasoned that 
the first principle is the infinite, without he- 
ginning and without end, at once material and 
divine, his Sszupop. Each separate exist- 
ence, an upstart, must in equity decline in a 
world in which antagonism and mutual ex- 
termination prevail. The independent, pri- 
mary substance again and again absorbs such 
existences, and another process of individuali- 
zation follows. This echoes of the Orphics 
and betrays a moral and religious suggestion. 
From Sjrecpov^ without beginning and with- 
out end, warm and cold, moist and dry, pro- 
gressively differentiate. 

Anaximander declared, although with much 
that was crudest in cosmogony, that the 

146 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

earth had in cosmic periods been in a fluid 
state, that under the beneficence of warmth, 
living beings gradually developed in the sea- 
slime, that land animals in the beginning had 
the form of fishes and upon the drying of the 
surface of the earth — at many places he had 
seen the retreating of the Mediterranean — 
they took on their land form. At the begin- 
ning man was generated from all kinds of 
animals ; all the rest can quickly get food for 
their nourishment, but man alone for a long 
time needs careful feeding, and could not at 
the beginning have preserved his life. 

Such startling forecasts of our science had 
Anaximander (said to have been born in the 
year 611 B. C), in Miletus, at his time the 
greatest of Greek cities, a vast market of the 
seafaring Ionians, where the rich valley of 
the Menander ends at the sea. 

But the tenure of such a dogma as that of 
Thales concerning primary matter must be 
slight. Why not some other pervasive ele- 
ment? "With Thales and Anaximander mat- 
ter held within itself the cause of its own 
motion. Anaximenes, again of Miletus and 
after Anaximander and reported his pupil, 
held air, infinite in extent, nearest to an im- 

BEGINNINGS OF PHILOSOPHY 147 

material thing, before all bodies as their 
first, animating principle. By a certain con- 
densation and rarefaction of it arise the 
things that have come and are coming into 
existence, and the things that will be. This 
introduction of spatial relations in particles 
is said to have forecast our modern atomic 
theory. As our soul which is air holds us to- 
gether, so breath and air encompass the 
whole world, he declared. Like Anaximan- 
der, peering into the dark, penetrated with 
yearning to see the reasons for phenomena 
about him, Anaximenes essayed guesses the 
significance of which astonishes moderns. 

Then came Heraclitus, the wide-eyed, whose 
proud and solitary mind — "to me one man is 
ten thousand, if he be the best" — fertilizes 
to this day* "This world-order, the same for 
all things, no god nor man made; but it al- 
ways was, and is, and ever shall be, an ever- 
living fire lighted according to measure and 
quenched according to measure." Thought- 
endowed, primordial fire is the conscious 
principle of the world, the eternal reason 
whose harmony constitutes the universal law. 
From primary substance of purest light or 
fire — an engendering, and consuming energy 

148 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

— in up-building and down-tearing, individ- 
uals come forth. "All things flow"; "all ob- 
jects are at all times moving" — modern sci- 
ence tells of constant, molecular action, and 
also of " transmutation of elements." Alter- 
ation in things as they are, fashioning by 
slow development, and adaptation to new con- 
ditions is the law. 

Opposition unites; "all things have their 
birth in. strife, and out of discord arises fair- 
est harmony." Finite things resolve them- 
selves into the first principle. Human law is 
nurtured by one fundamental, divine law 
which is for all time. "God does all things 
with a view to the harmony of the whole." 

Because of his use of the word logos, ^07-oc, 
word, which meant to the Greeks power of 
speech and so persuasion, reason, an inter- 
posing, intermediate agent between man and 
man, and so between man and God, a medi- 
ator, an active spiritual (possibly also mate- 
rial) being to intervene and connect the Eter- 
nal and the sense-world of man — because 
of Heraclitus' use of logos in describing 
the world-order, the cosmos — the philosopher 
has through Christian centuries enjoyed 
orthodox approval. "They who have lived 

BEGINNINGS OF PHILOSOPHY 149 

in company with tlie Logos are Christians/* 
says Justin Martyr, "even if they were ac- 
counted atheists. And such among the 
Greeks were Socrates and Heraclitus.' ' 

Here and now Heraclitus, and the other 
natural philosophers, restated for their age 
what the heroic Greek in his religion had 
centuries before stated for his own — the iden- 
tity of the universe, faith in its uniformity 
and in its laws. Religious awe and sense of 
moral order was with these Greeks in their 
speculation. 

The plasticity of the early Greek concep- 
tions had passed. Days when poetry alone 
should rule were fast passing. Philosophers 
began as physicists and cosmologists. It was 
not long before they set out an ethical bear- 
ing. They gave attributes and functions to 
the first element they sought which before and 
afterwards men ascribed to Deity. Orphism 
was in their midst; their enunciations now 
and then show Orphic influence- 
By the gifts of many minds a moral code 
was gradually forming. To meet the growth 
of his time Heraclitus declared virtue to lie 
in "following the universal," the subjection 
of the individual to the law. In the universal 

150 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

reason is true freedom, "Not from me, but 
from truth, it is wise for you to agree that 
all things are one." Character, ethos, ffloc;, 
says Heraclitus, is a guardian divinity to a 
man. 

Thus those early philosophers of the Hel- 
lenes were teachers. They set out ideas 
which groped forward and foreran modern 
theories as to the derivation of the world 
from primeval nebulae, and also moral con- 
ceptions still further to evolve and to mature. 

Another of their number, drawn to Crotona 
perhaps by popular characteristics of a city 
distinguished for the number of its citizens 
who had won victory at the Olympic games, 
and for the excellence of its physicians, 
Pythagoras settled in southern Italy in the 
year circum 529 B. C. A colony of Achseans 
had founded the town, and the whole amal- 
gamated into one body in which the sternness 
and severity of the Dorian character super- 
vened. The Dorian conception that there 
was no health of the people nor of the state 
without the lordship of ethics, offered ready 
opportunity for a brotherhood which should 
aim at "release," Mate, the purification of 
the community, the moral salvation of the 

BEGINNINGS OF PHILOSOPHY 151 

people and the establishment of civic order. 
Such an ethical association Pythagoras 
founded. With its practical puritan force, 
its abstinence, its intrepidity, its religious ex- 
altation, Its matriarchal conceptions spring- 
ing from Orphism and including women in its 
workers, the union met immediate success. 
Proselytes took up work for the city's needs 
— man is born into a world of order and is 
made for, and a part of, order. 

To enter the association the disciple must 
undergo examination and bind himself to un- 
conditional submission and obedience. He 
must subject himself daily to rigorous self- 
examination as to his temperance, his rever- 
ence, justice, purity of life, and prayer. Sim- 
plicity must mark his dress, and of animal 
food he may partake only in obedience to 
certain injunctions. His soul dwells in his 
body as in a prison. Like the stars it is sub- 
ject to eternal motion and cyclic succession. 

The teaching of Pythagoras that the body 
is the house or tomb of the soul, his idea of 
the soul's purification and wandering may 
have their origin in Orphism. Contrast be- 
tween earthly suffering and imperfection, and 
heavenly bliss and consummation, are th§ 

152 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

core of Orphism and Pythagoreanisni. In 
the Greek cities of lower Italy and Sicily 
Orphic religion united with, or was a part of 
the blossoming Pythagoreanism in the last 
of the sixtk and first of the fifth century be- 
fore Christ. But whether Pythagoras found 
Orphism in Crotona when he reached Italy, 
and united his teachings with their ways of 
thinking, or whether the Orphies are indebted 
to Pythagoras and his followers is not known. 
With the practicality of the townspeople's 
blood he applied philosophy to men's lives 
and adjusted it to men's relation to the state- 
He did for the community what Orphism had 
done for the individual and with the direct- 
ness and confidence of ethical conviction. 

Pythagoras, Heraclitus said in his own 
time, was famed for his studies. He may 
have obtained ideas first hand from Egypt 
and the East. In the intellectual ferment of 
that day of the Panjab Luther, Buddha, and 
other religionists, the old oriental teachings 
of metempsychosis, the circle of births, may 
have made its way to his west. It was the 
age of Cyrus the Great when Indian nations 
as well as Greek fell under the Persian sway. 

In after centuries the asceticism and mys- 

BEGINNINGS OF PHILOSOPHY 153 

ticism of the Pythagoreans went far. Habit 
of self-examination among them led to each 
asking himself at the fall of every night, 
"How have I sinned ?" "What duty have I 
left undone? 7 ' Lacedaemonians of the time of 
Plato were adepts in Pythagoreanisrn, and 
the moral loftiness of the Essenes brother- 
hood, in times and peoples immediately pre- 
ceding Christ, possibly refer to Pythagorean- 
ism absorbed by the Jew when he came in 
contact with Greek thought. In the Essenes 
community the Jew carried out the idea with 
his race's practical, intensive and dramatic 
fervor. 

Pythagoreanisrn again in its principle of 
number and of music, was pronouncedly Do- 
rian. Number and proportion Pythagoras 
found in everything that is known. Dis- 
covery of the principle, in acoustics, of the 
dependence of the pitch of sound on the 
length of the vibrating chord led him to such 
fanciful excesses that he pronounced the prin- 
ciple of numbers, themselves, the very essence 
of things, not predicates. The rule of uni- 
versal law in number he averred is the prin- 
ciple under which a world subsists in order. 

Still other inroads showed the working of 

154 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

the penetrating Greek spirit. The critical 
thinking of Xenophanes born (about 580 
B. C-) at Colophon near Ephesus had its ori- 
gin in bis becoming conscious of this following 
law. But first let us recall that his brother 
Greeks, "taught vain luxury by the Lydians," 
he said, "go to the market place with haughty 
looks, wearing purple robes, proud of their 
comely hair anointed with curious unguents' ' 
— the Asiatic Greeks were never so marked 
with steadfast courage as their cousins of the 
European Greek countries. The poignant 
sorrow of Xenophanes when be witnessed the 
wiping out of the freedom of his brother 
Ionians, and what he deemed their cringing 
before their victor, Cyrus the Conqueror, led 
to his conclusion that his people's thinking 
must be wrong, if they could endure loss of 
freedom. That is the law: — If they can en- 
dure loss of freedom, a people's thinking 
must be wrong. He must instruct. 

Thus at last he came, an aged minstrel, 
after wide wandering finally to dwell in the 
Greek city of Elea in southern Italy, affirm- 
ing against the gods of Olympus of common 
report, M There is one God, among gods and 
men greatest, neither in form like mortals, 

BEGINNINGS OF PHILOSOPHY 155 

nor in mind"; "The Whole sees, the "Whole 
thinks, the Whole hears. . . . Without labor 
he rules all things by the purpose of his 
mind." Xenophanes taught worship of na- 
ture, an everlasting World God. He would 
free men's imagination in religion, would re- 
cast their ideas. 

Among the people was working doubt of 
the genuineness of the myths. Those gener- 
ations had out-grown the gods who had satis- 
fied the world-conceptions of their forebears. 
"Men imagine gods are born," further said 
Xenophanes, "to have clothing and voice and 
body like our own." "The Ethiopians make 
their gods flat-nosed and black, the Thracians 
red-haired and blue-eyed. M u Oxen, lions and 
horses, if they had hands to write and do the 
work of men, would make the semblance of 
the gods and their bodies, each after his 
own body. ' * But Xenophanes still used poly- 
theistic language. "In the beginning the 
gods did not show all things to mortals : by 
searching men find out a better way." With 
other Greek philosophers he may have re- 
garded the popular gods as but one point of 
view of the World God. 

Originally the making of gods in their own 

156 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

image was a gain. It softened the early 
Greeks "who saw the god, one spirit with him- 
self, in bush and fountain and sky. But 
crystallization of the idea, led sometimes to 
petty formalizing of the imagination, and 
ultimately to loss of mystery and dignity. 

Of the daily conduct of life Xenophanes 
said, "If one won a victory by swiftness of 
feet, or in the contest of the five exercises, 
where the grove of Zeus lies by Pisa's stream 
in Olympia, or as a wrestler, or in sharp box- 
ing, or in that severe contest combining 
both wrestling and boxing, he would be more 
glorious in the eyes of citizens, and would 
win a front seat at assemblies and have his 
food from the public store, and a gift which 
would be a treasure to him from the city. If 
he won with horses, he would get all these 
things, although not deserving them as I de- 
serve them. Our wisdom is better than the 
strength of men or of horses. It is not just 
to prefer strength of body to goodly wisdom. 
For if among the people were one good at 
boxing, or in the five exercises, or in wres- 
tling, or in swiftness . . - not on account of 
that would the city have good laws obeyed/' 

From the imprint of sea-animals and shells 

BEGINNINGS OF PHILOSOPHY 157 

found in Paros, and fish in the quarries of 
Syracuse, this geologist, one of the first, 
reasoned that the sea had covered the land at 
one time, when the imprint was made on 
mud, and had receded through geologic ages. 

To the theological speculations of Xenoph- 
anes, Parmenides of Elea, his younger con- 
temporary, succeeded in his theory of the 
One, Being, knowledge of which, that is truth 
of which, we can find by thought. "There 
remains but one word of the way," said Par- 
menides, "that Being is. And on this way 
are many evidences that Being is without 
birth and without death, that it is universal 
and alone — existent, without motion and in- 
finite. Neither ever was it, nor will it be, 
since it now is all together, one, continuous. 
For what generation of it wilt thou seek out? 
How and whence did it increase? That it 
came from not-being I will not permit thee to 
say or to think* ... So it is necessary that 
Being either absolutely is or is not." Plu- 
rality is an empty show and does not exist, 
but by deception of the senses seems to be 
true. 

Parmenides, with Xenophanes and the 
younger Zeno, induced a spirit of criticism 

158 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

upon all thought that had preceded them. 
In his cosmogonic speculation Parmenides 
taught the earth to be a globe, and he elabo- 
rated the theory of the earth's zones. In 
that part of his teachings which were phys- 
ical he voiced the Pythagoreans of whose 
brotherhood he was an associate. 

In this period the large and rational curios- 
ity of the Hellene, his vivid, intellectual vigor, 
his quick perception and agile, imaginative, 
awe-inspired mind embraced the universe. 
In asking the question of himself and of the 
world about him that all enquiring and sift- 
ing and analytic systems of regarding life 
ask, he essayed to find his own answer. His 
philosophers started out with the conception 
that life is inseparable from matter. They 
went on from the region of the senses to the * 
region of abstraction till, as we see, in Elea 
they came to the most abstruse conception of 
Being. 

The Zeno of Elea referred to, a pupil of 
Parmenides and called double-tongued, de- 
veloped in his disputation for the discovery 
of truth that negative force of the dialectic 
method, that probing, questioning, mental at- 
titude, unmasking the pretentious and false, 

BEGINNINGS OF PHILOSOPHY 159 

that was to reach its perfection later in 
Socrates and to mark Greek thought for all 
time. 

To the Ionian Anaxagoras and his majestic 
hypothesis in science remained the determin- 
ing 1 , regnant, world-ordering Mind or nous, 
m>3c, subtlest and finest of things, that which 
arranges and is the cause of all things, bound- 
less and self -governed, unmixed with mate- 
rial nature and subject only to itself — all 
knowledge, all power, all reason, all order, 
all simplicity. Our senses are too weak to 
know the truth. The external world we know 
by the mind; all things the divine reason 
knows. The nous of Anaxagoras was dis- 
tinctively what in later times men called God. 
"All things were together; then Keason came 
and set them in order," said Anaxagoras. 
The Hebrews told the tale in other words, 
"And the earth was without form, and void; 
and darkness was upon the face of the deep : 
and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of 
the waters." 

The rigidity and assumed infallibility of 
the theories of Anaxagoras contrasted 
sharply with the mental suppleness and plia- 
bility of others in the Athens of his day. Still 

160 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

he typed the investigator, and of him Euripi- 
des is supposed to have sung when he wrote, 
" Happy the man who is zealous for knowl- 
edge gained by enquiry, who hastens himself 
neither about the woes of citizens, nor toward 
unjust deeds, hut views the order that waxes 
not old, the order of deathless nature— 
whence it arose, the how and the why. Near 
such a man the practice of shameful deeds 
never sits." 

But speculation upon how and why this 
world came, its law, its beauty, its woe, had 
not stopped here. The picturesque Empedo- 
cles, traveling through Sicily in such milli- 
nery as purple vestments bound to his form 
by a golden girdle, his head laureled, his feet 
sandaled in brazen gear, wonder-working in 
magic feasts and in awakening a woman from 
seeming death, acclaimed in religious emotion 
by the thousands who besought his help, Em- 
pedocles taught men wineless rites that they 
might avert old age, and also to fast from 
evil. "An immortal god unto you, no longer 
a mortal, I go about honored by all, as is 
fitting, and crowned with fillets and fresh 
garlands." And because he led the over- 
throw of an aristocracy and refused the power 

BEGINNINGS OF PHILOSOPHY 161 

of king", lie was in the fifth century "before 
Christ acclaimed, and in Lis native city of 
Agrigentum lie is to this day worshiped, as 
an ideal champion of free institutions. 

This advocate of popular rights was also 
a mystic, teaching the existence of a psychic 
force, into which discord entering gave forth 
love and strife, an attractive and repulsive 
power, the solidarity and repulsion which we 
see working all about lis. There is identity 
of elements, and one law pervades all nature. 
"They have no deep-thinking thoughts who 
think that what was not before comes into 
being, or that anything dies and perishes 
utterly." " Everything has the power of 
thought and a share in understanding." 
Such deductions as these from kinship with 
other orders of life led Empedocles to non- 
flesh-eating and other ascetic practices. 
"See ye not that ye devour one another in 
heedlessness of mind!" 

The mightiest and most majestic systems 
of thought are in progress as is a single 
human life — the goal of all knowledge, and 
of all theories of science, and of all specula- 
tion and wisdom, is only reached stumblingly, 
by gropings, by false doctrines critically con- 

162 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

sidered and improved and perhaps finally 
gaining the truth. While the warmth of the 
spirit of the Hellenes increased in individu- 
ality, their knowledge of a reason for the 
order that waxes not old, both of deathless 
nature and the soul of man, their knowledge 
of an ethical law was growing onward to 
clearness. Then too they said, as our scien- 
tists to-day have said, nature by its very 
uniformity teaches and guides to right action. 
They sought to find the law of the order and 
of the right. 

DEVELOPMENT OF LYRIC POETRY: NATIONAL 
GAMES OF THE HELLENES 

In spirit, as in outward form, the art which 
the Hellenes developed in this age of indi- 
vidualism must be the antithesis of the art of 
the heroic time foregone, the simple yet 
majestic lay. Diligently rounded hexameters 
of the old art, solemnly intoned by a rhapso- 
dist, seized upon and swayed the mind of 
listener into forgetfulness of self. Those 
older times were not unlike later days of 
European feudalism when the strength and 
possessions and even the lordship of the 

NEW IMPULSES IN POETRY 163 

baron lay in his conserving* the old religious 
and political consciousness of the people; he 
nurtured minstrels who sang the days of the 
Nibelungen, or of Arthur's knights and court. 

Homer's great epic gave no consciousness 
of the growth of the every-day man, no note 
of the every-day man's sorrow, joy, or tri- 
umph, no expression of that emotion at large 
among the people. Its soul was aristocratic. 
Neither in theme nor in art did it recognize 
the quickening of the Greek imagination to- 
ward democratic needs and equalities in life. 
It was what Dion Chrysostom leads Alexan- 
der to say centuries later; — "The poetry of 
Homer is the only poetry I see to be truly 
noble and splendid and regal, and fit for one 
who will some day rule men/ 1 It was a seda- 
tive. By its mere weight of the past, by the 
grandeur of its flowing stream and its perfect 
art, it hypnotized the Hellene who came to its 
recital with sentiments of revolt against the 
old order in his breast. 

Framed in the resplendent and dramatic 
setting of a court, or of a festival's recital, 
the fluent lays pushed to a dwindling distance 
the Greek's quickening towards his own time 
and emphasis of his own wants; they wiped 

164 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

memories of near-by griefs away, and lulled 
and soothed a mind overwrought with burdens 
at hand into a placidity which, in mirroring 
the poet's ideas, must lose consciousness of 
its own self-will. As the Hellene listened his 
sense of a social life approved by his fore- 
fathers, a life which the gods had loved even 
to walking and dwelling with men, his inter- 
est and pride in deeds of the Hellenic spirit, 
his sympathy and faith, would rise upper- 
most. 

The dignity and correctness of the moving 
story appealed to his race imagination. The 
broad and brilliant pictures it brought be- 
fore his eyes, grouped and word-painted and 
harmonized with unsurpassed taste, the hum- 
ming cadences of the dactyl, the beat of arsis 
and thesis suggesting steadiness and repose, 
held him apart from his time. They led him 
to forget himself, his seething discontents, 
his growing self-consciousness and urgent 
self-expression, the literalists who were lead- 
ing his rebellion. In its art and ritual the 
overawing, hypnotizing old epic order crushed 
the growing sentiment of the new man and his 
beginning of definite thinking. Its lien upon 
the evolving Greek was not unlike the reten- 

NEW IMPULSES IN" POETRY 165 

tion the Hebrew scriptures, recited in their 
synagogues, made later upon the Jews — ex- 
cept that with, the Hebrews the books were 
kept "holy," apart. It was not unlike what 
ecclesiastical ritual and hierarchic display 
make upon democracy to-day. 

An over-hearing conservatism creates an 
artificial type of life, which can rarely ap- 
preciate its own artificiality. Greek epos had 
formalized, had put into permanence, the 
simple humanizing of nature by the people 
of its eld and the groupings of men in polity. 
The ardor of a long line of poets had formed 
a supreme art and through its medium an ob- 
jective religion. Poets had for generations 
elevated the race's taste. In the old reli- 
gious forms, even without a priest, the Hellene 
had come to have dogmatic utterance. No 
longer did the dogma satisfy. Its utterance 
became more and more mediocre. Poets re- 
fused to smother emotion in the old-time 
heroics. In art the new impulses of the Hel- 
lenic spirit must breathe. Poetry that re- 
flected the feeling of the day, the emotion of 
their world, was coming to recognition and 
within the life of the people, and in its on- 
ward surging was evolving new forms for its 

166 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

expression. Now that old political forces 
were disappearing and the individual was 
substituted for the group, each individual life 
was acquiring fresh impulse and spontaneous 
movement, and there was growing individual 
obligation. And, as we have seen, the new 
order brought belief of the possibility of in- 
dividual inspiration in religion itself. 

Urged on by the changes and vicissitudes 
of the commonweal in its attempted conquest 
of the present, urged by the bolder spirits 
and the tenets of his new religion, the less 
radical Hellene was learning that he too, his 
lot, his hopes, his fears, were accountable 
units. He was beginning the frankest liberty 
of speech when circumstances moved his 
mind. His unreserved personal experiences 
met sympathy. His sentiments interested his 
fellows whether he spoke of the pleasure he 
enjoyed, or the injustice and ills he suffered. 
Songs were now picturing the people, what 
they felt, what they thought. Hymns of 
thanksgiving, hymeneals, funeral dirges and 
rustic carols of simplest form had been 
chanted in Greece from time without record. 
Now they were essaying to interpret the con- 
tent of the people's vision more completely, 

EVOLUTION OF THE LYRIC 167 

their world, their labor and their love. Po- 
etry was becoming popular in another sense. 
Before it had been popular in the meaning 
that it was beloved by the people and voiced 
their race sentiment. Now through the evo- 
lution of lyrics it was becoming popular in the 
sense that it told individual sentiment and 
life. The epos was monumental. A folk is 
not known, however, "by the mighty monu- 
ments of its spirit alone. Its art is found also 
in minuter and universal products cut by the 
folk hand and loved by and expressing the 
folk heart. 

An intense community life, ardent loyalty 
to the evolving state, now led the inspired 
singer to political and warlike hymns. His 
state, that is his city and its adjoining terri- 
tory, was foremost in the mind of every 
Greek. It was to him a union which called 
into being and brought to practice the best 
powers of even the flimsiest characters. In 
the painful struggles of the new time the 
elegy was born, in meter almost twin-sister 
of the epos. The epic's swing and stateli- 
ness lay in the elegy's first verse. By reduc- 
ing the second line to five feet the singer 
made the surge of the thought turn about 

168 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

upon itself, thus breaking the impulse and 
giving a pause and suggesting reflection — all 
fair signs of need in the new individualism. 
The reflection the verse suggested also intro- 
duced a skepticism which "was allied to a dis- 
integration of the old religious order. De- 
parture from the established h exameter 
meant that centuries of the lyric age would 
soon be speeding. 

The couplet of the elegy flitted, for the 
word it is claimed first meant a reed flute. 
Its clear and individual note gave voice to in- 
terests as varied and broad as prose, then 
undeveloped, might have done. Bravery and 
devotion to the state breathed in the war- 
campaign verse of Tyrtasus, earliest of the 
Ionian elegists, so-called the lame school- 
master from Athens, who sang for the Spar- 
tans with Doric religiosity and veneration 
for the past, the most famous of his elegies, 
"Good and Lawful Order." His marching 
songs, which were not elegies, expressed the 
primal instinct of the people for whom lie 
sang, and their feeling of race, of military 
domination, and, sounding a patriotic clarion 
to sinking hearts, incited the Spartans by 
bold advance to regain their old-time lands. 

EVOLUTION OF THE LYRIC 169 

Spartan soldiery when campaigning, after the 
evening meal and their singing in popular 
chorus a paean to the gods, vied -with one 
another for a repetition best befitting the 
force and beauty of these military chants. 
This may have been between the years (ii5 
and 628 before Christ. 

Reflections upon the condition of life, its 
politics, its philosophy, appear in the vigor- 
ous elegies of Solon which mirror his noble 
life, and in the sententious maxims, replete 
with human spirit, of other elegists. These, 
called gnomic because of their detachable 
sentences reflecting on moral ideas, had en- 
during force through generations of Hellenes. 
In later centuries, in the Greek youths 7 edu- 
cation they stood side by side with the sem- 
inal poems of Homer and Hesiod in inbreed- 
ing seeds of virtue and the conduct of life. 
1 i From the noble you will learn what is noble; 
if you mix with the base, you will lose what 
wits you have," wrote Theognis, who taught 
piety, respect and the moderation of the old 
reverent fear, aidos. Through these centu- 
ries the later moral tradition of the race was 
slowly formed, embodied in verse and handed 
down from generation to generation — a form 

170 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

of growth of all civilized society. In the old 
Greek education such ethical precepts, born 
of the reflective spirit, of the elegy, were of 
inestimable value. 

The elegy expressed also, possibly from 
poets affected by contact with the oriental 
luxury of the Lydians but intellectually of 
Greek impress, the light jest and mediocrities 
of after-dinner clubs, the fleeting joys of 
youth and hatred of old age, when recital in 
lighter manner than the epic filled the hour. 
Singing at banquets was a race-old custom, 
the banquet itself was of a religious character, 
and the elegy may have served as a kind of 
grace. But its reflective break determined 
the verse more especially for proverb and 
ultimately for sadness and lament. 

During these changing generations, when 
appreciation of the new had not fully realized 
itself, that is, in the passage from the old 
epic simplicity to subtler conditions, the 
elegy sang profoundly the cry of the Greek 
spirit at the instability and uncertainty of 
human affairs. "Small is the strength of 
man," lamented Simonides, a later poet, "un- 
conquerable his sorrows. Through his brief 
life grief treads on grief, and death hangs 

EVOLUTION OF THE LYRIC 171 

over him at last." And with true Dorian in- 
stinct decrying the degrading effects of 
money, — believing with the Greeks at large 
wealth a good and desirable thing, but with 
property must go education, a regard for its 
use in a wise effective to all — an elegy of 
Theognis sings, "We use care in choosing the 
best race of horses, but a noble man marries 
a mean-born woman straightway, if she 
brings with her money, and a woman does not 
reject a man if he is rich." Thus the elegy 
came to be one articulation, one outgrowth, in 
the Hellene 's divinely energic genius for ex- 
pressing the varying moods of the human 
soul. 

Self-reliance in the affairs of life and of 
state grew apace. Activity in all the Greek's 
interests increased. His metrical way had 
already come to the independent iambic, the 
darting, shooting meter of raillery and in- 
vective, mythed as the invention of the maid 
Iambe when she would draw a smile from the 
sad-hearted mother of Persephone, and de- 
veloped in the feasts of Demeter at Eleusis 
on days licensed for keen and unrestrained 
jocosity. 

Here again we have the differentiating, 

172 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

that adaptation of form to substance, that 
harmony rooted in the Greek temperament, 
in which the vigorous, creative taste of the 
Hellene invariably showed itself. Each new 
out-springing of their genius was profound 
and rational. It was also ethical and aes- 
thetic. Behind it some race need, some dis- 
tinct cause, had vitalized it into form and 
distinguished it from its brothers- And each 
separate expression in his literature, each spe- 
cial substance of thought and feeling having 
crystallized its technical form, never outgrew 
artistic and well-defined limits. The swift 
beat of the iambic, impetuosity, strength and 
pungency, marked it for sallies of ridicule 
and scorn. It was fitted for recitative. 

The poet whose hate-poisoned passion and 
unbridled invective seized the lilt for festival- 
day rites and used it with consummate art, 
was Archilochus, who is said to have written 
so early as the year 688 before Christ. Con- 
temporaries of his, and the after world of 
Hellas, marveled at his fierce personal sa- 
tire and exuberant caricature. He united the 
new genius of democracy from Ms mother, a 
slave woman, to the old In his father, an 
Ionian noble, and thus seems to have been 

EVOLUTION OF THE LYRIC 173 

an essential need of his time. His forceful 
and original spirit marks the complete break 
with the old traditions of poetry. He proved, 
even by foul-mouthed charges against the girl 
he had wanted to marry and her family, that 
now there was a popular sentiment in the re- 
laxation of Ionian life to which the singer 
could appeal. When he wrote of throwing 
away his shield in battle and fleeing for 
safety, he showed there were people who 
would justify his deed. In the brisk retort 
of iambics, also, Solon of Athens defended his 
failing statesmanship. 

Elegiac and iambic reached toward the pure 
lyric. Lyric expression is more impetuous, 
more profound — quite apart from its music 
and the poise of its dance. Lyric inspiration, 
we should note, and the so-called lyric mad- 
ness, were of the ecstasy of the spreading 
Orphism, at one with the divine enthusiasm of 
Dionysus. Indeed the Bacchic hymn in its 
early time expressed the Hellene's amaze and 
worship, his pious joy in stimulating gener- 
ative processes and glorifying the god in the 
springing of the year, his thanksgiving and 
his lament at the divinity's mysterious decay 
after the reaping. 

174 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

The spirit of the Hellene could not have 
become independent in its lyric expression, 
could not have stood hy its own strength, 
without the development of writing and the 
diffusion of the art. Communication no 
longer depended almost wholly on word of 
mouth transmission. By bringing in the 
papyrus that grew in the shallows of Egyp- 
tian waters, Greek trade supplied a ready ma- 
terial to poetry's support. This aid began 
about the year 660 before Christ. Upon the 
papyrus ' slender slips a form of poetry, short 
and easily handed about, might circulate, 
might enter the intimacies of life and par- 
take of their spirit. Enjoyment of the lyric, 
then, would depend no longer on the chanter's 
word of mouth. Solitary reading would be- 
come possible and its sequent independent 
reflection. Knowledge would increase. The 
scenic epic recital of the rhapsodist would be 
still more infrequent — even if, in the growth 
of democracy, courts for its pageantry were 
becoming fewer. 

In a manner, but, we must remember, 
under far different social conditions, just as 
we moderns through the evolution of mov- 
able type developed the novel to universalize 

EVOLUTION OF THE LYRIC 175 

and formalize current phases of life in place 
of the drama which, when the imagination of 
man was freed, burst on the world in the 
days of Elizabeth, so in those old Greek cen- 
turies, through the coming in of the Egyptian 
writing-slips, the Hellene might take to him- 
self a secluded and individual entertainment- 
Like our novel the lyric was an abettor of 
democracy. Indeed, from its flexibility and 
inclusiveness, one might say that it had also 
kinship with that most catholic servant of 
the written word, journalism. In ruder sur- 
roundings than a noble's court, with the 
simple comradeship of simple friends, or in 
choral worship of some god, or in solitude, 
the Hellene might now enjoy his day's com- 
positions — verses on delicate papyrus tell- 
ing* of his fellows' sentiments and interests. 
Still the lyric was memorized also. 

And poetry to those old Hellenes was not 
an affair of the closet, an enjoyment to con- 
fess with a blush, as with us to-day. Nor 
were they so distraught by diversity and 
multiplicity that they had not intension of 
mind to listen and enjoy. The art in multiple 
forms was one expression of their energy, 
and a significant voice of their race. It en- 

176 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

tered their life just as the beauty of nature 
entered. It was original in the instinct and 
natural gift of the people. It was largely 
and intimately theirs. It was their educa- 
tion and a part of their religion. Through 
his inspiration the poet stood apart and had 
a closer communion with divine powers than 
other men. Poetiy was a possession of every 
Hellene, and had been from those times 
whose mists conceal their early morning, 
when doubtless, minstrel or rhapsodist was a 
scripless tramp. It was continued in the 
long cultivation of the epos. "When thq 
muse turned to the people and sang in forms 
of the melos, it was not wholly to please but 
to induct to facts of life, to teacli in agree- 
able way the action and feeling and charac- 
ter of men and women, to give a body to phi- 
losophy. The poet sang so racial and so hu- 
man a song, whether for marching soldiers, 
their victory in battles, their patriotic fervor, 
or a hymn to a god, a dirge, a wedding- joy 
or other convivial meeting, that he might 
celebrate heroes and their commensal gods, 
or so simple a social member as a grinder 
of corn or an itinerant vine-trimmer and his 
fellow-wayfaring swallow of the spring. 

EVOLUTION OF THE LYRIC 177 

The flowering of Greek lyric poetry into 
perfect self-expression followed, by old-time 
legend, the stringing of the lyre of foui; 
strings, "which had served for the chanting of 
the epic lay, to the compass of an octave. 
This evolution is ascribed to the hand of 
Terpander of Lesbos and the year CG9 be- 
fore Christ. Terpander not only expanded 
the lyre, his work incited others to improve 
the shrill flute, and he also composed music 
for the religious chant called a nome. "Zeus, 
first cause of all, leader of all; Zeus, to 
thee I send this beginning of hymns," is as- 
cribed to him as the beginning of such a 
lyric. Music with the Greeks was simple, and 
used to " sweeten," as they said, the words. 

The outbranching of music evidences the 
growth of reflective brooding in the Greek 
spirit. 

Verses breathing individual emotion will 
not suffer the metes and bounds of inva- 
riability. Impassioned poetry fall s into 
rhythm, metrical form. It hastens ; it rests 
in the irregular and capricious movement we 
call tempo rubato. It sings itself ; that is, it 
demands a voice, a singer. Thus it unites 
with the music of the lyre. Moreover, the 

178 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

singer sympathizing with the song's meter 
can not help his body's falling into animated 
gesture and beating responsive to the rneas- 
ure» lie would aid language in the ex- 
pression of thought. So dance took men's 
form from every-day walk or slouch to regu- 
lated and studied movement. Thus elabo- 
rated, mimetic singing and dancing, which 
enlist and train ear and voice and eye and 
foot, grow from the poem of emotion. For 
the interweaving and exchange of the dance 
there was to the Hellene religious exaltation 
— their demiurgus, Eros, in the primeval 
motion of the choric passages of stars and 
constellations had set their great prototype. 9 
Of the theme and emotion of Greek lyrics 
the more elastic and individual belonged to 
the JEolians. But in Lesbos, home of JEoli- 
ans, the lyric genius of perfect monodic song 
appeared and dured only so long in that 
Greek day as the sunlit sparkle and strong 
discharge of a shower lasts in summer. A 
surpassing natural beauty crowned their is- 

9 In other religions lhan the Greek, dances had, and 
still have no small part. Christian churches were once 
built to accommodate dancing, of which, it is claimed, 
bishops were leaders. 

• 

EVOLUTION OF THE LYRIC 17f> 

land. Vine and shrub and tree of hill and 
vale, bright blue skies, and warm, circumam- 
bient seas urged the spirit's intensity and 
passion- Vehemence and concentration of 
feeling characterized its folk, especially its 
oligarchy. They were sensuous, rich from 
a maritime commerce, luxury-loving from 
Asiatic influence — here in these times of Les- 
bos must have been an early conflict between 
oriental and Greek ideas. Perhaps they 
were familiar with the fancies and abandon 
of Lydian and Phrygian song and mode. 
They were generously filled with Greek ardor 
for beauty. Men and women alike were edu- 
cated and free. 

Such conditions, their land hemmed in, 
their evolution not expressing itself in the in- 
terests of their larger group, the Ionians, 
political unrest and an irresponsible tyran- 
nus throwing the human soul back upon it- 
self and penning its impulses — all conditions 
filled their art and their atmosphere with a 
special electric force. In brilliant summer 
skies lightnings sometimes leap from cloud 
of light to cloud of light. So passionate lyric 
outburst charged with its genius the human 
spirit of the island. A new message fulgur- 

180 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

a ted from the soul of its children — its de- 
livery intense and extreme from the singer's 
bursting of old bonds and the drenching of 
the island with beauty. 

In Lesbos the individual found supreme ex- 
pression; harmonies of sound and form 
exquisite blending. Sappho 's ' ' utte ranee 
mingled with fire," her lucidity and simple 
melody, her sensibility to the loveliness of 
nature, her flame-like emotion, declare that 
man had reached his full stature of love. No 
writer ever wrote down so magically the in- 
most feeling of the human heart, never so 
mysteriously crystallized that fire of the soul 
in human speech. 10 

10 Near the middle of our last century Swinburne 
wrote of her in her own Sapphic meter: 
Ah the singing, ah the delight, the passion ! 
All the Loves wept r listening; sick with anguish. 
Stood the crowned nine Muses about Apollo; 

Fear was upon them, 

While the tenth sang wonderful things they knew not. 
All the tenth, the Lesbian ! the nine were silent, 
None endured the sound of her song for weeping; 
Laurel by laurel, 

Faded all their crowns; but about her forehead, 
Round her woven tresses and ashen temples 

EVOLUTION OF THE LYRIC 181 

Sappho's translucent verse has never 
palled upon the taste of any succeeding cen- 
tury, although in succeeding centuries a 
monkish zeal, distorting in short and narrow 
vision the meaning of an exquisite product, 
may have destroyed it in part. Certain in 
Greece, and later, have blackened the name 
of this great genius* — certain whose prejudice 
heats and smolders at a woman's overstep- 
ping the reticence prescribed by social con- 
vention, others who merely pruriently scan- 
dalmonger and ail for a name as target for 
buffooning wit. Sappho was a gentlewoman 
of Mytilene, married and blessed with a 
daughter. She received into her house girls 
to instruct in music and poetry. The best 
learning of to-day makes clear her true char- 
acter, and is inclined to echo the awe-struck 
sentence of Strabo, "Sappho is something 
marvelous ( Qaufiaotbv re xptjfxa ) ; in all his- 
tory you find no woman to compare with her 
in any degree." 

Man's full stature of pride burns in odes 
of Alcams — the fiery, high-spirited, restless 

White as dead snow, paler than grass in summer, 

Ravaged with kisses, 
Shone a light of fire as a crown forever. 

182 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

tory, hating popular government, rating high 
his order, resolute even in exile, and finally 
coining back to Lesbos to accept the clem- 
ency of Pittacus whom he had vituperated 
and whom the people had, in despair at civil 
discord and seeking relief, made tyrannus. 

A place was sanctified the Greeks thought 
when once visited by the shaft of Zeus. But 
the shaft, lightning, sterilizes where it 
strikes. Sterility abode in Lesbos. Poetic 
brilliance burned to final corruption. Not 
again did the JEolians give greatly to the 
spirit of Hellas until in the decline of Greek 
art and Greek polity. 

.^olian songs were made for a single voice 
to chant to a flute — to listen to for personal 
pleasure, to bring grace and charm to the 
feast: Dorian songs for choruses rhyth- 
mically dancing as they chanted. Dorian 
mode and melody, said Aristotle, are ethical; 
4i Dorian music is the gravest and manliest." 
Objectivity strongly affected it. This may 
have come because the Dorians, those aristo- 
crats of war, in their sternness and severity 
of the military camp, conscious perhaps that 
their rigidity and decorum frustrated the 
working of the muse through the individual 

EVOLUTION OF THE LYRIC 183 

artist, and also possibly Laving a subtle sense 
that art of the first order unfolds only in 
long-established and less politically weighted 
civilizations, rather patronized than them- 
selves composed or wrote verse. They had 
resort to the Ionians to interpret themselves 
to themselves. 

During those earlier generations gifted 
singers from, the old home of song came 
among the haughty Dorians, and in their 
sweet, broad, rustic speech, and uttering their 
tribal simplicity and strength sang for them, 
and for pay, the notes of the new time — 
singers who should add glory to their solem- 
nities and in soaring sweep celebrate their 
Dorian government, the splendor of Apollo 
and other gods the Dorians tribally wor- 
shiped, and the glorious deeds of their 
heroes. Alcman, so-called a slave from 
Lydian Sardis, was among the singers. At 
Sparta, then a renowned city of Hellas, he 
found a religious people celebrating festivals 
to Apollo, to Artemis. Also he found men 
and women taught in gymnastics and music. 
Maidens he delighted in training in harmony 
of voice and motion. The new growth music 
had lately made lie joined with the choric 

184 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

dance and called upon himself to "sing to the 
young girls a melodious song in the new 
fashion." A fragment from one of his 
graceful parthenia touclringly refers to the 
old age that now kept him from his wonted 
drill:— 

No longer, maids of honey voice and yearning tones, 
Can my limbs bear me. O that I were the eerylus ! 
Who skims o'er blossoms of the wave together on the 

wing 
With kingfishers, a dauntless heart, sea-purple bird of 

spring. 11 

11 A second fragment of the genius of Alcman is one 
of the evidences, to which we have referred on pages 
56 and 77 foregoing, of the appeal to the Hellenes of 
night and its mysterious solemnity. The fragment tells 
in exquisite completeness how the sleep of nature roused 
the Hellene's sentiment. 

Alcman may have composed his verse as he stood 
under midnight stars in the vale of Laeeda?mon, his 
imagination passing from the peaks of neighboring 
Taygetus, down through the peopled forests of the 
mountain sides to the Mediterranean which washes the 
base: 
The range's peaks, and their gullied sides, lie wrapt in 

sleep; 
The jutting headlands and swoln mountain torrents; 
Things that creep, all whatsoever the black earth doth 

nourish ; 
Beasts that haunt the heights; the swarms of bees; 

EVOLUTION OF THE LYRIC 185 

A cadence of harmonized voices united 
with the stately and semi-dramatic dance, 
was an essential to the chorus. Such solemn 
and rhythmic music was at one with the 
race's prepossessions. It held together the 
spirit of the people in their all-important re- 
lation to the state, and it kept their health. 
It kindled the gods to kindness. Its very 
being and practice were virtuous recognition 
of the gods * powers. 

The G-reeks, now congregated in cities, 
would preserve the old epic religious unity, 
Knowing the impossibility for the poor or 
average citizen to give festivals, to have a 
sanctuary, to sacrifice to the gods, they 
shared such religious ritual in common. De- 
light in a common possession led tribe, guild, 
trades-union, club and even cities to support 
choruses. Men and women of a community, 
picked singers and dancers, clad in canonical 
robes and crowned with the velvet-leafed 
daphne or other green garland, singing hymns 

Flocks of swift-winged birds; 

And in the deeps of the purple sea huge monsters; 

— All wrapt in sleep. 

Doubtless the Greek poet's lines suggested our mod- 
ern Goethe's "Ueber alien Gipfeln ist Ruh. ,w 

186 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

to the flute's accompaniment, wound march- 
ing through their pellucid air — such a pro- 
cession the Parthenon's graceful frieze has 
saved to us. They danced themes, subjects, 
somewhat as our modern ballet, but then in 
statelier liturgy of church and city. The end 
of their pilgrimage was the shrine of some 
god whom the singers sought to glorify by 
strophe and antistrophe of choric song and 
the solemn rhythmic paces of choric dance. 

In this lyric activity every city had its com- 
poser, the chorodidascalus, who trained the 
chorus. Contests for excellence were com- 
mon, and certain families handed down the 
art, as craftsmen handed their artistry, from 
father to son. Many types of songs resulted 
from this race-interest and race-hymn, such 
as the grave and graceful psean to Apollo 
danced in parallel files. Also the dithyramb 
to Dionysus often tumultuously circling, mi- 
metic of the mysterious god of inebriety at 
the vintage festivals. To all festivals, said 
Plato, "the gods pitying the race of mortals 
born for sorrow and toil gave the Muses, and 
Apollo, and Dionysus for comrades.' ' But 
whatever the nature of the song, whether of 
sumptuous revelry, of pure nobility, or of 

EVOLUTION OF THE LYRIC 187 

mere elegance, the race's aesthetic instinct 
ever fitted form and spirit, and developed a 
complete art product. 

Evolution of the Greek lyric continued 
when Stesichorus of Sicily whose very name 
"marshal, of the chorus" tells his life, secu- 
larized the choral lyric and with an almost 
epic weight sang of heroes. Then also the 
distinguished genius of Simonides of Ceos 
composed encomia in more human, more 
graceful and less intense way upon winners 
of Olympian victories, and upon others illus- 
trious for their deed or public life. His ex- 
quisitely simple and solemn threnody on 
Leonidas and his band dead at Therinopylse 
bears out his mellow, human note, and other 
monumental epigrams show the perfection 
with which an Ionian expressed Dorian feel- 
ing and for the first time, or if we count 
Homer's Iliad, for the second time, uttered 
the pan-Hellenic victory over the barbarian. 
Simonides was the first pan-Hellenic lyricist. 

Strophe and antistrophe of the choral 
lyric, and the rhythmic movement of the 
choric dance, celebrated also some victor of 
the Hellenic games at the singing of Pindar. 
For such winning "the Theban eagle" wound 

188 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Lis song through many a labyrinthine myth. 
"Let us not think," said he, "to praise a 
place of festival more glorious than Olyrn- 
pia. ' ' 

Olympic games had their origin, perhaps, 
in a religious rite, and a seasonal rite pro- 
motive of fertility, to the great goddess of 
the early ^Egean peoples; with Achiean in- 
fluence transferring their honors to Zeus, 
and finally circling the tomb of the tradi- 
tional Pelops for whom Hercules, son of 
Zeus, "having fenced about the Altis," said 
Pindar, "marked off the bounds of it. 
Therein he set apart the Spoils of war for an 
offering, and made sacrifices and instituted 
the fifth year feast." The contest, it is 
claimed, originally determined the victor of a 
band of young men. He should embody the 
vigorous spirit and fortune of the folk for 
the new year coming and drive out the old 
spent year. 

The highway to Oiyrnpia the Hellenes es- 
teemed a via sacra, and violation of the terri- 
tory in which the games were held, a sin 
against the majesty of Zeus. From the 
slopes neighboring the stadium, forty thou- 
sand onlookers, it has been computed, might 

PAN-HELLENIC GAMES: THEIR STIMULUS 189 

have watched contestants, who, as they en- 
tered the stadium, had met in the altar to the 
athlete god, vital, momentous opportunity, 
"the chance central of circumstance,' ' xacpoz, 
promptings triumphantly to energize the de- 
cisive moment of action, to bring to one su- 
preme effort all forces of body and will. 

The contest fell at the full of the moon in 
August or September, in the riant atmos- 
phere, on the fat plains, and amid the olive 
groves of Elis. After their full evolution 
during these centuries of the Hellenes' 
growth, the Greek world esteemed a victory, 
when, sang Pindar, "all the warrior company 
thundered great applause, ' ' beyond all 
other possessions. A wreath of leaves cut 
with a golden sickle from "the wild olive 
of the beautiful crown," and given within the 
temple of Zeus, 12 a branch of palm, a canoniz- 
ing in the Altis were the prize of the victor. 
There was also a soul-animating celebration 
of himself in choral chants of triumph and 
prayer and libation to the god. Poets of ex- 

12 Perhaps in later years the olive crown was given 
before the Pbeidian gold and ivory statue of Zeus, the 
sublimity of which antiquity extolled as the highest 
creation of art. 

190 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

alted muse sang Ms achievement and dwelt 
upon his reincarnating the virtues and 
prowess of old heroes. Triumphant choric 
chanting of the encomiastic ode at his home- 
coming followed, and was perhaps the vic- 
tor's chief est glory, for he had seemingly 
brought undying fame and honor to his 
city- 
Other games, the Pythian, honoring Phce- 
bus Apollo, god of the golden lyre as well 
as golden how, spiritualized beyond the phys- 
ical rigor of the Olympic by their musical 
contests, that is, by singing to the accom- 
paniment of flute and cithara, or independent 
playing of the eithara or flute. At the "seat 
of the voice of God," Delphi, the Greeks cele- 
brated these fine arts once in eight years, 
and long before they added gymnic struggles 
and the chariot race. A chaplet of bay 
leaves picked in the Vale of Tempe was the 
prize. The Isthmian games in honor of 
Poseidon at Corinth may have had a regatta 
in addition to musical competition and ath- 
letics. Their award was a wreath of dried 
celery or pine leaves. The game to Nemean 
Zeus, in the cypress grove of Nemea, like the 
Isthmian held in the second and fourth year 

PAN-HELLENIC GAMES: THEIR STIMULUS 191 

of each Olympiad, had for its victor a crown 
of fresh celery. 13 

Such national, pan-Hellenic games, a form 
we must remember of the Greeks' humaniz- 
ing religion, a witness of the spiritual unity 
of the body-social, evolved especially during 
these agitated centuries of Greek life, and 
were in the height of their development in the 
glorious days immediately to follow. They 
united the old Hellenic naturalism, physical 
fitness — a necessity to their life in their fre- 
quent wars — to the idea of the new, closely 
knit life and state, that the gods delighted 
in the spectacle of well-balanced, vigorous 
bodies developed in the perfection of health 
and strength. The vitality of Greek athletic 
festivals lay in this. Virtue and beauty to 
the Greeks, early and late were the same 
flower of human life. "There can be no 
fairer sight," wrote Plato, "than that of a 
man who unites moral beauty in his soul with 

18 '^Heavens! Mardonius, against what sort of men have 
you led us to fight, men who make games not for the 
sake of money, but for honor!" the pusillanimous 
Xerxes is reported by Herodotus to have said to a chief 
instigator of his expedition, one day between the Per- 
sian army's action at Thermopylae and the disaster at 
Salainis. 

192 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

an outward beauty of form, the body corre- 
sponding and harmonizing with the soul be- 
cause the same great pattern is in both.'' 
And Socrates hoped that for Charrnides, a 
youth of beautiful figure, a certain some- 
thing was not lacking — "a soul as well de- 
veloped as his body." 

The national game and race worship 
fraught with rites of joy and gladness 
focused consciousness growing in art and 
state, and served as a check to forces decen- 
tralizing Greek life. They had a strength 
and an importance we can not with our times* 
outlook readily conceive. Unlike modern na- 
tional and international atbletics they were 
neither "professional," fads for the inept or 
rudimentary brain nor for the unco rich, nor 
booms for money-mad speculators. They 
were rooted, while the Hellene preserved his 
Hellenism, in race evolution, in ancestral re- 
ligion, in his character-loving autonomy and 
its equilibrium. In the days of free Hellas 
their spirit was fundamental and sound. 

Meeting places of the great games, es- 
pecially Olympia and Delphi, grew to be 
museums of art, holy cities, treasure-stores 
of splendid statues, marble and gold and 

PAN-HELLENIC GAMES; THEIR STIMULUS 193 

ivory, and of temples of the gods, deposi- 
tories of the race's history and of human 
knowledge. 

Within the sacred confines of the games 
quick-witted Greek met nimble-witted Greek. 
Whether he went as a private citizen or one 
of an official embassy representing some 
western city in Greek Sicily or a community 
of Hellenes in Asia, he went not as a sight- 
seer merely, nor even as a revisitor to an an- 
cient home of his race, but as a pilgrim pene- 
trated with reverence for his race's legends of 
Zeus, with religious awe of the Far-Darter, 
with devotion to Hercules of the Unconquer- 
able Hands. He came to know other opinions 
than his own locality's, his tribe's, and to 
realize anew the unity of his race. Friction 
with his kind kindled afresh fires of common 
brotherhood* He exchanged with another 
usage and ways. He gathered ideas for later 
thought. 

It is not possible to sketch what his vivid 
and intellectual life won from these meeting 
centers for his race. On his way to the 
games, and homeward again, he companioned 
hardy Greek seamen and traders as their 
swift, black ship cut the waters of the Mid- 

194 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

land Sea toward Olympia or Delphi, or Cor- 
inth. He fell in association not only with 
brother Hellene, but with foreign folk. Cun- 
ning Asiatic vendors, and, doubtless, ad- 
venturous Egyptians, he traveled cheek by 
jowl with and met in public houses where he 
sought rest and cheer. At selling booth he 
saw foreign handiwork. The stimulus his 
sane and sympathetic travel brought the 
Greek — the Hellene never laying aside his 
race-consciousness and race-legend — the gain 
by fraternizing with another from an op- 
posite quarter, some remote city of the Greek 
world, or from another race, were of unac- 
countable importance. 

Thus the games developed the Greeks' gen- 
eral knowledge and conserved their religious 
and political tradition. They stimulated the 
poet in preparing an aroused and sympa- 
thetic audience for his ode. They impelled 
the architect and sculptor to perfecting 
statue and pillar and altar and temple. 
They incited the craftsman of golden ewers, 
censers, chariots. They urged the breeding 
of horses. On all sides they promoted sense 
of beauty and art. In the opportunity they 
gave rich men to pay for the equipping of 

PAN-HELLENIC GAMES; THEIR STIMULUS 195 

legations and training of choruses, they 
opened the purse of those possibly without 
any other merit for civic distinction, and 
warmed the occasion to their praise. By no 
way could wealth gain influence and popular- 
ity among the Hellenes so genuinely as 
by augmenting their national festivals and 
training chorus and actors for religious rites. 
The odes which the glory of these national 
games inspired in the singer were not merely 
setting out the victory of the citizen. The 
splendor of the contest and the far-reaching 
renown of the winner stimulated the poet to 
review the religious cult, to retell old race 
myths, to retrace their political bearing, and 
to show them in a new brilliance. lie might 
parallel the living victor with an old race 
hero, might trace likeness between the doer 
of far-off days and the competitor of that 
present day and thus idealize the living man, 
Pindar's odes of victory which the Greeks 
esteemed the best form of their national 
song, are the still sonorous voices of those 
pulsing centers of Hellenic life, the national 
games. The odes tell the religious awe of 
the poet to which the choric singers and 
dancers gave interpretation. 

196 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Tho Doric choral seems to liave been the 
organ note of the old Hellenes. Apart from 
its association with our religious rites our 
modern organ has a generic quality, imper- 
sonality, a voicing in its pulsing notes of 
united souls rather than the aspiration 01; 
desolation or joy of a single being. Its rotund 
sonority and massive harmonies ; its reflective 
expression of joy, its seriousness, its gravity, 
its aching melancholy, its triumphant energy 
and victory and religious peace, may pos- 
sibly litter the human soul for us of to-day 
as the choral of the Dorian genius voiced 
emotions of the Hellenes- 
Greek lyric poetry was no less a great ex- 
pression of the genius of the Greek people 
than the epic, we have said. In this age of 
evolving individualism in which we have 
glimpsed the lyric's evolution, the poet, as in 
the epic age, was priest and prophet to his 
people, a giver of religious and ethical 
maxims. With the gnomic poet this holds 
true, and also wifh those later. "The hopes 
of men are tossed up and down. Let a man 
remember that his raiment is worn on mortal 
limbs," wrote the majestic Pindar. "Things 
of a day! What are we? What are we not? 

PAN-HELLENIC GAMES: THEIR STIMULUS 197 

Man is a shadow and a dream." The imagi- 
native force and sustained utterance of this 
great lyricist emphasized Doric religious 
consciousness and Orphic teachings, Pindar 
alone of the lyric poets seems to have sung 
that the soul is immortal, divine, and finally 
through pui'gation receives endless felicity. 

The lyric was at its height when Sparta, 
preeminently the city of choric singing was 
leader in Greece. When the choral song was 
transplanted to Athens varying religious con- 
ceptions and a different tribal and social 
life diminished its popularity. Among the 
Dorians centuries of athletic drill and mil- 
itary tactics had given them delight in 
rhythmic movement. Women, we have seen 
in Alcman's verse, as well as men were 
trained in the art. At Athens, although girls 
hymned to Pallas as they marched through 
the roadway and climbed the marble stairs of 
the Acropolis, yet they were more cut off 
from free and active life, and their grace 
and charm could not inspire such poetic ardor 
as Alcman's at Sparta. Then also at Athens 
the choral hymn to Dionysus was ripening 
into the drama. 

Older forms of Greek music were stately 

198 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

and simple. The poet composed Ms owd 
music, which reflected his art, and he trained 
the chorus sympathetically to sing and dance 
his composition. He was the mouthpiece of 
ethical and racial feeling. But later than 
this time, as generations passed, the early 
choral sublimity, its pure melody united with 
definite ethical thought became too difficult 
for disciples of the new education. Degener- 
ation in imagination led to florid and affected 
and flaccid styles. Music gained supremacy 
over words, and the lyricist became a verse- 
writer who took orders for his composition 
from the musician. Earlier lyrics were con- 
temned. Neglected, they, were forgotten. 
Pride of race and of family would save such 
poems as Pindar's victory odes. Others 
would be subject to the caprice of minstrels 
and only preserved for some passages of 
special appeal. Lyric composition from its 
nature abides less easily in the memory than 
epic lays. With the loss or abandonment of 
ethical character and simplicity in the music 
went disregard for the verse. And thus the 
world lost noble poems. 

Modes of fashion in music never change, 
said Plato, without the greatest laws of the 

PAN-HELLENIC GAMES: THEIR STIMULUS 199 

state changing. The later divisions of Hellas 
affected the Hellenes ' national festivals. As- 
semblies degenerated. Great odes of victory 
died out. And finally the elegiac current of 
time, flowing through the stretches of plain, 
or barren sand, or dark forest of later cen- 
turies, brought down few petals of the 
splendid roses of Lesbos that Sappho sang, 
and only broken stems of the barbed nettles 
of Archiloclms — these and a few other re- 
mains; and these mainly because teachers of 
rhetoric for ends of illustration encased ex- 
cerpts in treatises — writings whose dry im- 
perviousness to flood and color neutral to re- 
ligious zeal saved the genuine utterance of 
the human spirit embedded in them. 

FIFTY YEARS OF DISTIN 
GUI SHED WORKS 

Progress is, in fact, the same thing as the continued 
production of new ideas, and we can only discover the 
law of this production by examining sequences of ideas 
when they are frequent and of considerable length. — 
Sir Henry James Sumner Maine, in Early History 
of Institutions. 

Whatever be the nature and value of that bundle of 
influences which we calL Progress, nothing can be more 
certain than that, when a society is once touched by it, 
it spreads like a contagion. Yet, so far as our knowl- 
edge extends, there was only one society in which it 
was endemic, - . . To one small people ... it was 
given to create the principle of Progress. . . . That 
people was the Greek. Except the blind forces of 
Nature, nothing moves in this world which is not Greek 
in its origin, A ferment spreading from that source 
has vitalized all the great progressive races of mankind. 
— Sir Henry James Sumner Maine, in The Effects 
of Observation of India on Modern European Thought. 

Dear city of men without master or lord, 
Pair fortress and fostress of sons born free, 
"Who stand in her sight and in thine, O sun, 
Slaves of no man, subjects of none; 
A wonder enthroned on the hills and sea, 
A maiden crowned with a fourfold glory 
That none from the pride of her head may rend, 
"Violet and olive-leaf purple and hoary, 
Song-wreath and story the fairest of fame, 
Plowers that the winter can blast not or bend ; 
A light upon earth as the sun's own flame, 
A name as his name, 
Athens, a praise without end. 

Swinbubne, in Erecktheus. 
202 

FIFTY YEARS OF DISTIN- 
GUISHED WORKS 

A DEFENSIVE WAR: DEMOCRACY IN ATHENS 

"With the Hellenes the inevitable law, grad- 
ual transformation through minute, continual 
change, had been working for centuries. 
Still no satisfactory solution of the ethical 
questions of life had they found at any point 
within the individualistic period of their de- 
velopment. The selfish energy of the age 
was too great. A sense of the worth of our 
moral nature had not been wanting. But 
there was needed a purifying of spirit, an 
ordeal, an enthusiasm or a woe, to clarify the 
people's ideas before the supreme blossom of 
the Greek spirit could unfold its unrivaled 
splendor to the world. An evolution doubt- 
less more rapid than at any other time among 
any other people was pending. 

Unity the Greeks had — in their language 
and its treasured poems, in common religious 
faiths, in festivals of clan and city, and in 

203 

204 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

national games. "Greece is of one blood, and 
of one speech,' ' Herodotus reports the Athe^ 
nians reminding Spartan envoys, "and has 
dwelling places of the gods in common, and 
sacrifices and habits and kindred customs.' * 
The Hellenes' diversity lay in their political 
life, in an intense individualistic segregation 
of the various polities of cities and small 
states. Their diversity had been disuniting, 
for instance, the Ionians of the Asiatic coast. 
Years before these people had revolted 
against the Persian ruler and his satraps 
whose conquering empire already extended, 
wrote Herodotus, from regions of insupport- 
able heat to insupportable cold. 

Among these Asiatic Ionians, with their in- 
stinct for autonomy there went a suspicious 
fidelity, distrust of one another's good faith, 
and sequent lukewarm spirit of cooperation 
against the Persian; an incapacity to submit 
themselves to discipline, which was an ill-form 
of their Greek individualism; and an impa- 
tience of steady and persevering toil, which 
companioned their semi-orientalization. 
Add to this havoc-working condition the 
personal jealousies of expelled and pervert 
Hellenes, the fact that no one of the Asiatic 

A UNIFYING ENTHUSIASM 205 

Greek states possessed the material power, 
united with energy and ability, to constitute 
itself uncontroverted leader, and we see how 
the Persians' lust for empire subjected those 
islanders. Then, too, terror-stricken at the 
horrors the Persians visited upon conquered 
peoples and lands, the Greeks of Asia pur- 
posely lessened resistance. Their Hellenic 
kin on the European mainland, especially the 
young democrats of Athens, were not blind to 
the miseries of the Ionian cities and islands 
of Asia, and the cruelties put upon them by 
the subjugating and exterminating powers of 
Persia. The fellow-feeling of the Athenians 
with their colony and allies, Miletus, for in- 
stance, was profound, and when the poet 
Phrynichus made that city's conquest the 
subject of a tragedy, their sensibilities, al- 
though moved to tears at the theater, meas- 
ured a thousand drachmas as the right fine 
for his temerity in " representing to them 
their own misfortunes- " 

The enthusiasm which was to unite and 
definitely to establish the civic life of Euro- 
pean Hellas was not long delayed. Hosts 
collected in Persian Asia and poured down 
upon the devoted Hellenes. Xerxes, the Per- 

206 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

sian autocrat, had inherited the idea of 
the invasion of European Greece. But he 
lacked the intense wrath against Athens that 
had stimulated his father Darius, and his ex- 
pedition he might never have undertaken had 
not courtiers unceasingly urged liira to the 
conquest — not only Persian courtiers hut also 
treacherous Greeks banished from their 
home-city for some cause, haunting the pal- 
ace at Susa, and looking to a restoration of 
their power under a Persian satrapy. 

Probahly never before or since, in any re- 
corded history, for one end, under one com- 
mand, has there assembled a body so great 
and so diverse and alien as the Persian now 
led by his personal and despotic will across 
the Hellespont bridge of boats — seven days 
and nights it is reported the host was cross- 
ing — and towards the slender land of Hellas 
and its children of light. 

Athens and Sparta sought to organize 
against the barbarian hordes. They united 
in convening at the Isthmus of Corinth a con- 
gress representative of every city-state of 
Hellenic race and speech. They entreated 
the broadly scattered Hellenes to come to- 
gether in trust and brotherhood for the one 

A UNIFYING ENTHUSIASM 207 

purpose needed by the whole Hellenic family 
— defense of Hellas, preservation of their 
race-blood as well as of race-spirit. 

This general federation, with Sparta as 
presiding power, sent defenders to stem the 
Persian onflow. Their stand was at Thermop- 
ylae. How those men discharged their duty 
in that narrow pass has been for every cen- 
tury since a sublime ensarnple of patriotic 
devotion. Not alone the band of Spartans 
and Thespians, every Hellene not in exile or 
medizing suffered an equal pitch of resolu- 
tion. The famed victories of Salamis and 
Plataia and Mycale followed. 

Those contests were fateful days and the 
sole hope of not only the then Hellenes, but 
of the heirs of Hellas in the ages to come of a 
nobly human civilization. To the victors of 
that day, forcing back orientalism and its in- 
vasion of Europe, our civilization owes op- 
portunities to-day. The Asian autocrat had 
found the Hellenes equal to the reputation 
.Artabanua had given them, "They are a peo- 
ple,' ' he had warned his nephew, "said to be 
the best both by land and sea." 

When we realize the development of Greece 
in the one hundred years following these 

208 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

events, and the mighty gift of her spirit to 
all later times, we stand appalled at what 
the destinies of mankind would doubtless 
have been had the Persian hordes precipi- 
tated themselves on the Hellenes before their 
unity was accomplished. It might have hap- 
pened. Twenty years before a sultana of 
Darius and the mother of Xerxes, Atossa, at 
the instigation of a homesick Greek surgeon 
captive at the court of Susa, had urged such 
an attack. 

Of products of Greek liberty the Persians 
themselves must for more than a generation, 
have been conscious- In the expedition of 
Darius against the Scythians many years be- 
fore (that is, about 515 before Christ), the 
Hellenes had effected all operations calling 
for intelligence. For instance, the Greek 
architect, Mandrocles of Samos, bridged with 
boats the Hellespont, and the Ionians of the 
islands and the Asiatic coast had united to 
put a span over the Danube, then esteemed, 
says Herodotus, the greatest of rivers. 

So necessary to give complete realization 
to the national spirit was this struggle the 
people now undertook, that its issuance at 
this juncture seems providential. To the 

A UNIFYING ENTHUSIASM 209 

Greek generations that followed it was a re- 
ligious drama setting out tlie profoundest 
sentiments of the Hellenes. It expressed an 
ethical sense attributed also to the Persians: 
"God permits no one to have high thoughts 
but himself," an old uncle had cautioned 
Xerxes. 1 In his drama of "The Persians" 
jEschylus leads the ghost of Darius to utter a 
kindred sentiment, "When anyone, himself t 
hastens to ruin, God abets him." 

In resistance to the Persian the Greek be- 
came conscious of his own superiority — con- 
scious of his freedom and his thought which 
were the ground of his superiority. Persia 
was in externals more civilized than Greece. 
Luxury was better understood at Susa than 
at Athens, and industries were more diversi- 
fied in the enormous cities of old Assyria and 
of Egypt than in Hellas. But the mind of 
Persia was stationary: the spirit of Hellas 
progressive. Nowhere save in Greece had 
men learned to think, and to depend upon 
their own spirit for guidance. TMs lesson 
the Hellenes had been getting by heart 

1 In this, and also in other speeches o£ Persians 
quoted from Herodotus, the sentiment is, probably, 
Greek. 

210 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

through the foregoing centuries of struggling 
individualism. The great war in which their 
skill in military combination and orderly 
courage triumphed over unorganized, inef- 
ficient force and the imbecile self-acclamation 
and fatuous confidence of Persia, wrote it be- 
fore their eyes in sun-clear truth. 

When her people had pushed back the bar- 
barians' chaotic force Greece came out 
brighter and stronger than before. The iron 
of her spirit had been heated. She had been 
in the furnace and forge of a defensive war. 
She had needed to be molded by such blows 
as only the formidable empire of the Persians 
could give before she could stand to later 
peoples the invincible, self-conscious em- 
bodiment of her Pallas Athene. She had 
come to the highest plane of national life. 
She was conscious of carrying and sustain- 
ing the spirit of her race. She had made 
evident that the difference between Hellene 
and barbarian was the difference between 
free culture and routine, liberty and slavery, 
progress and stagnation, humanity with its 
instrument of reason and dfemonism. 

A successful carrying through of a great 
military movement actively stimulates the 

DEMOCRATIC SENTIMENT 211 

political sentiment and the consciousness of 
citizenship, and leads to demand for fuller 
and completer political dignity- Athens had 
been the life and soul of the Greeks' resist- 
ance to Persian invasion headed by Datis ten 
years before the inroad of Xerxes. At that 
time the combat and victory at Marathon of 
her "embattled farmers,' ' citizen-democrats, 
single-handed save for their brethren from 
Platasa, had given surpassing example of the 
stoutness of heart and the clarity of head her 
institutions engendered. 

Thus during these wars and so at their 
end, Athens came forth with startling bril- 
liance. She had made evident that she had 
the vigor, self-confidence and aggressive ac- 
tivity to execute what her spirit had thought 
out, that she was filled with ardor and pa- 
tient of labor. "We ourselves know the 
power of the Persian is many times greater 
than ours," said the Athenians before the 
battle of Platoa to a medizing Thessalian 
king, an envoy of the Persians; "It is not 
necessary to insult us with that. Neverthe- 
less we so cling to freedom that we shall use 
what strength we have. Do not try to per- 
suade us to come to terrns with the barba- 

212 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

rian. We never shall. Tell him the Athe- 
nians say that as long as the sun goes in the 
path in which it now moves, they will never 
come to terms with Xerxes. Bring us no 
such proposition again. Think not to succor 
us by persuading us to unrighteousness." 
Like all Greek states Athens was small, 
and each citizen fulfilled his duties directly 
in person, not by deputy. For a quarter of 
a century before Thermopylae constitutional 
democracy had prevailed. Under it the 
Athenian character had developed marvel- 
ously. Self-government had become habit- 
ual. The people had learned to determine 
for themselves, and to accept the decision of 
the majority. They were active. They were 
daring. They had patient endurance. They 
had energy to work — that high energy that 
comes from consciousness of real greatness. 
They had the matchless discipline that works 
give. Their organizing energy had increased 
their power of resistance. The spirit of even 
the poorest had caught the glow of political 
equality, the pride of the service of public 
life, the ideal of the city-state that shone be- 
fore the Hellenes for generations, long be- 
fore Plato constructed his perfect state — the 

DEMOCRATIC SENTIMENT 213 

faith that he, the man of simple life, also was 
a contributing part to the beauty and sym- 
metry. Attica was now one and indivisible. 

But how were affairs moving in that 
cluster of villages that formed the heart of 
Laconia in the middle valley of the Eurotas? 
— in "lovely Lacedaemon?" Sparta's long- 
settled constitution, her rigid Dorian life and 
discipline, and her organized " war-men' * had 
in the past given her an ascendency and the 
presidency of the pan-Hellenic union. More 
than ten years before the Persian snuffing- 
out at Plafaea and Mycale, when the people 
of iEgina gave earth and water to heralds of 
Darius in token of their submission, the 
Athenians preferred complaint at Sparta that 
the JEginetans had been guilty of treason to 
Hellas* "For the general benefit of Hellas," 
therefore, Sparta dealt with the ^ginetans. 
These deeds first manifested Hellas as an ag- 
gregate body. 

But now flagrant misconduct of Spartan 
power brought into clear light Athens' ef- 
ficient command and preeminence. A power- 
ful and voluntary movement proclaimed her 
leader at sea. This had its spring in a sense 
of justice. Still it meant that a schism had 

214 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

cleft the national polity, but little before 
shining with great evidence to the eyes of 
all men. The divided spirit Athens and 
Sparta embodied now divided the Greek 
world. In every city-state political divisions 
between the oligarchic and democratic fao 
tion lay, that is, in sympathies with the 
energetic democracy of Athens, whose as- 
cendency was awakening the jealousy of the 
conservative allies of Sparta, or in support 
of conservative, home-keeping traditions of 
Sparta allied with the Peloponnesian states 
and landsmen and with native oligarchs in- 
imical to organized union of states. The 
struggle was between oligarchic and demo- 
cratic faction within the town, we said- 
Whatever their affiliation, there remained 
the belief, instinctive in the mind of Heilenes,- 
that in every city-state autonomy was neces- 
sary to free citizens. 

Maritime states freely and spontaneously 
gravitated toward radical Athens, aggressive, 
energetic, keeping to steady effort, organiz- 
ing the navy supplied for expelling the bar- 
barians from the ^Jgean, collecting taxes 
levied for their common security, enforcing 
loyalty to a great pan-Hellenic purpose, mak- 

DEMOCRATIC SENTIMENT 215 

ing confederacy against the Persians an ef- 
ficient working* reality. For the new Hellas 
Athens was virtually leader. Her very geog- 
raphy had destined her for the most perfect 
of the city-states. In gifts of the spirit she 
had focused the many-sidedness of Greek 
life ( and embodied its unity. 

Athens was now become the citadel, "the 
asty of Hellas," as Isocrates later called her. 
Her name meant Hellas. "Within herself her 
children were illustrating the economic law 
of the most vigorous social systems — of the 
individual, he having the highest possible de- 
velopment of his own personality, subordinat- 
ing himself to the interest of the social 
whole. 

Athens found her headship complete when, 
attracted by her success, new allies sought 
her leadership, and the common funds of the 
League of Delos were transferred from the 
island of Delos to the acropolis of Athens. 
The form of her dominion was a protectorate, 
the preservation of which seemed to be one 
with her own life. By force of circumstances 
she had become head of a compact which 
bound each individual state and, by their 
good-will and agreement, mistress of an irre- 

216 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

sistible navy. An empire through gradual 
and unforeseen stages was thrust upon 
her. 

With security and peace the idea of de- 
velopment burgeoned in Attica. Its fruits 
should be political right and order which 
their Solon of earlier centuries had sought. 
In spite of political control by landed 
families, the idea, we have said, had been in 
Athens, the idea of a democracy, self-govern- 
ing and responsible to itself — a democracy in- 
creased by wealth from growth of industry 
and commerce and the wants of a prospering 
middle class; also by a large body of navy 
coming to the fore, for "wooden walls," 
ships manned chiefly by marines of lower 
orders, had saved Athens at the "battle of 
Salamis. 

Free male Athenians who had reached the 
age of manhood formed the Assembly meet- 
ing, three or four times a month, in the open 
air, on a hillside, the Pnyx, and with charac- 
teristic Athenian religiosity opening its sit- 
tings with prayer. The prerogative of the 
body was supreme power in all most impor- 
tant matters of state. A council of Five Hun- 
dred managed details of the business, and es- 

DEMOCRATIC SENTIMENT 217 

pecially they considered and sanctioned every 
law proposed to the Assembly. 2 

New life and new sense of responsibility 
and power also developed among the poorer 
people by the establishment of a jury, which 
judged of law as well as of fact 3 — paid 
courts often panels of five hundred men each. 
The Council of the Areopagus before this had 
been a court of special importance and bril- 
liance, its members elected for life. It was 
doubtless a continuation of the old Homeric 
council of elders, and had a semi-religious 
weight, carrying in itself admonitory and 
censorial powers over the whole people, and 
possessed of a moral influence that outweighs 
the opinion of a mere court of justice. The 
prestige of this senate of the Areopagus, 
Pericles and his associates, in the radical 
movement now going on in 463—2 before 

2 This rule preserves a relic of Solon's check to the 
democracy he expanded against the oligarchs, namely, 
that selected men should first approve every proposal 
brought before the yearly meeting of citizens- Pay for 
attendance at the sovereign Athenian Assembly did not 
begin till later, when an allotment of three ohols a day 
attracted the poor and unemployed. 

8 Sometimes, in eminent modern opinion, confound- 
ing law and fact. 

218 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Christ, distinctly lessened. The new juries 
almost stripped the court of judicial power. t 
Such an act alone nieant a minimizing of the 
conservative and aristocratic influence. In 
these times also choice by lot was established 
for archonsliip and election to the Council of 
Five Hundred, and every citizen had the 
chance of holding political office. 

Heretofore the active life of the Athenian 
men had been mainly in military affairs. 
Now it was in civic functions. The jury 
courts of perpetual session were a consum- 
mation of the democratic sentiment. The 
number of the jury, the impossibility of fore- 
knowing who would sit in a cause, and the 
secret vote defended its members from cor- 
ruption and fear. Each citizen member must 
have become thirty years old ; therefore they 
were mature in judgment. # 

These courts were solemn from sheer 
numerical force. They stimulated to, and 
also gained from, the just, measured balan- 
cing to which the Hellenic mind was especially 
sensitive. They roused thought and con- 
sciousness of the dignity of citizenship. 
Their weakening effect was that, absorbing 
his time in discussion and judging, they neces- 

DEMOCRATIC SENTIMENT 219 

sitated the giving over by the qualified 
Athenian of business duties to the excluded 
slaves, freemen and foreigners. In these 
higher aims for the elect, there must have 
grown a contempt for trade or wealth-getting, 
and for whatever occupation might so ab- 
sorb a man that he had not ample leisure for 
the corporate activities of the state — a con-. 
tempt, finally, after several decades, elabo- 
rating into the dilettant spirit we find in 
Hellas — when Hellas was no longer Hellas* 

These juries had in their hands the super- 
intendence and competence of affairs of the 
Athenian empire. Cities that paid tribute to 
the confederacy — one thousand, Aristophanes 
says, but the tribute lists give fewer — looked 
to Athens for arbitration between members, 
for regulation of state with state, for trial 
of grave causes and for enforcement of 
justice and obligations of the confederacy. 
From Athens' presidency of the union and 
the empowering of her to enforce her de- 
cisions, there gradually grew in her a judicial 
authority which contributed greatly to the 
prestige of the Athenian empire. 

Two hundred years and more before these 
times, in the first outburst of the age called 

220 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

lyric, we liave noted bow rising emotion of 
the individual and bis self-expression went 
with the introduction of papyrus, a record 
easily got for personal utterance. Again 
popular media developed power of self-ex- 
pression. In these jury courts procedure J 
was by word of mouth. The simplest citizen 
should he able to plead his own cause, to 
carry the thread of discourse, to reason with 
brevity, to color his advocacy with ethical 
sentiment. Oratory, that strange magic art 
of persuasion, of directing by argument the 
convictions and wills of one's fellow citizens, 
always in its uses an associate of free govern* 
ment — oratory sprang forward. Rhetoric 
became a preparation for real life. 

With the Hellenes' quickness to fit means to 
ends these juries led to professional speech 
writers, that is, to writers of speeches for 
litigants, and uniting with the dialectic de- 
velopment in philosophy, to rhetors and 
sophists. With such popular courts were not 
only associated Greek oratory and its allied 
didactic rhetoric and grammar, but from 
them ethical philosophy and political bad 
great stimulus, Moreover, they served to in- 

DEMOCRATIC SENTIMENT 221 

crease the respect embedded in the Athenian 
character for judicial formalities. 

Law the Greeks had venerated from the 
early time of a Lycurgus in Sparta and a So- 
lon in Athens, when its creator Was believed 
to be inspired. This sentiment of theirs had 
increased in the foregoing centuries of evolv- 
ing individualism, 4 In the time of Pericles, 
when the state was a brotherhood of equal 
men, spontaneously the Athenians looked for 
protection to constitutional forms. Laws 
had life, individuality, speaking personality. 
During the prevalence of the old education 
they were not abstractions, not barren prin- 
ciples so remote from every-day life as to be 
written down and forgotten. In one phase 
they were even intimacies of the social life, 
set to music and chanted after dinner. In 
another, they were the voice of impartial 
reason, august, moral existences dwelling in 
the midst of the people, united with whom 
was good life, freedom. They were per- 
suasive associates, familiars, who attempted 
to bring and keep among men an ideal justice, 
as the embodied laws that speak in awe- 

4 This we have seen on foregoing page 96. 

222 T-HE GREEK SPIRIT 

inspiring sentence to Socrates in Plato's 
"Grito-" Laws created the institutions of 
his state most sacred to the Hellene. Their 
collective voice was what fellow citizens com- 
manded. *' Service to the law is service to 
the gods," said Plato. 

When faith in the laws' relationship with 
an ideal, divine justice failed, when the indi- 
vidual no longer circumscribed his will to the 
clarified and systematized will of his fellow- 
citizens, the institutions they had protected 
tottered. But still, even at the end of Greek 
freedom, Demosthenes vigorously taught the 
Athenians that the law was a part of them- 
selves and representative of the character of 
all who belong to the state, and they "belong- 
ing to themselves" ought to live in accord 
with it. To do this was freedom. 

But now, at this time, Pericles, President 
of the evolving Athenian democracy, met op- 
position in a body of conservatives. The re- 
served nature of the radical leader prompted 
him to look not to extension of empire, but 
rather to the ordering and beautifying of that 
already given. Against his effort to direct 
democratic zeal, the "honorable and respect- 

DEMOCRATIC SENTIMENT 223 

■ 

able" body of conservatives, the anti-demo- 
cratic body, contended that upbuilding and 
beautifying of Athens by money of the 
confederacy was malversation, that the fund 
should be spent in active war against the 
barbarians- 
Sensitive to the genius of his day, Pericles 
answered that the city had already, by the 
year 466, cleared Europe and the JEgean of 
the Persian, the end for which the tax was 
given, that now Athens might rightfully 
spend a part of the fund in enlarging and 
strengthening her walls, magazines and 
docks, in clothing herself in a majesty fitting 
her as the center of Hellenic feeling, the 
leader of Hellenic intellect and will, and in 
delighting her own people and strangers 
flocking to behold the surpassing beauty of 
her musical and poetic festivals and the 
matchless art of her temples. Such work as 
Athens had undertaken was properly pan- 
Hellenic, the statesman claimed with irresist- 
ible eloquence. A population engaged in 
Athens' adornment — miners, marble-cutters, 
masons, carpenters, ivory cutters, goldsmiths, 
painters, road-makers, tool-makers and mend- 

224 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

ers, carters, sailors, the body supplying daily 
needs of these, — all must have upheld this 
most regal argument. 

"We ourselves assembled here to-day," 
spoke Pericles in his speech upon those fallen 
in the first year of the Peloponnesian war 
(431), "we assembled here to-day, who are 
still most of us in the vigor of life, have ear* 
ried the work of improvement further, and 
have richly endowed our city with all things, 
so that she is sufficient for herself both in 
peace and war. Of the military exploits by 
which our various possessions were acquired, 
or of the energy with which we or our fathers 
drove back the tide of war, Hellenic or Bar- 
barian, I will not speak; for the tale would be 
long and is familiar to you. . . . 

"Our form of government does not enter 
into rivalry with the institutions of others. 
We do not copy our neighbors, but are an ex- 
ample to them. It is true that we are called 
a democracy, for the administration is in the 
hands of the many and not of the few. But 
while the law secures equal justice to all 
alike in their private disputes, the claim of 
excellence is also recognised; and when a 
citizen is in any way distinguished, he is pre- 

PERICLES' ESTIMATE OF ATHENIANS 225 

ferred to the public service, not as a matter 
of privilege, but as the reward of merit. 
Neither is poverty a bar, but a man may bene- 
fit his country whatever be the obscurity of 
his condition. There is no exclusiveness in 
our public life, and in our private intercourse 
we are not suspicious of one another, nor 
angry with our neighbor if he does what he 
likes; we do not put on sour looks at him 
which, though harmless, are not pleasant. 
While we are thus unconstrained in our 
private intercourse, a spirit of reverence per- 
vades our public acts; we are prevented from 
doing wrong by respect for the authorities 
and for the laws, having an especial regard 
to those which are ordained for the protec- 
tion of the injured as well as to those un- 
written laws which bring upon the trans- 
gressor of them the reprobation of the gen- 
eral sentiment. 

"And we have not forgotten to provide for 
our weary spirits many relaxations from 
toil; we have regular games and sacrifices 
throughout the year; our homes are beauti- 
ful and elegant; and the delight which we 
daily feel in all these things helps to banish 
melancholy. Because of the greatness of our 

226 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

city the fruits of the whole earth flow in 
upon us; so that we enjoy the goods of other 
countries as freely as of our own. . . . 

* ' We are lovers of the beautiful, yet simple 
in our tastes, and we cultivate the mind with- 
out loss of manliness. Wealth we employ, 
not for talk and ostentation, but when there 
is a real use for it. To avow poverty with us 
is no disgrace; the true disgrace is in doing 
nothing to avoid it. An Athenian citizen 
does not neglect the state because he takes 
care of his own household; and even those 
of us who are engaged in business have a 
very fair idea of politics. We alone regard 
a man who takes no interest in public affairs, 
not as a harmless, but as a useless character; 
and if few of us are originators, we are all 
sound judges of a policy. The great impedi- 
ment to action is, in our opinion, not discus- 
sion, but the want of that knowledge which 
is gained by discussion preparatory to action. 
For we have a peculiar power of thinking be- 
fore we act and of acting too, whereas other 
men are courageous from ignorance but hesi- 
tate upon reflection. And they are surely to 
be esteemed the bravest spirits who, having 
the clearest sense both of the pains and 

RACE SPIRIT IN TECTONIC ARTS 227 

pleasures of life, do not on that account 
shrink from danger. In doing good, again, 
we are unlike others ; we make our friends by- 
conferring, not by receiving favors. . . . To 
sum up; I say that Athens is the school of 
Hellas, and that the individual Athenian in 
his own person seems to have the power of 
adapting himself to the most varied forms 
of action with the utmost versatility and 
grace. This is no passing and idle word, hut 
truth and fact; and the assertion is verified 
by the position to which these qualities have 
raised the state." 5 

ARCHITECTURE ADORNING ATHENS: SCULP- 
TURE AND ALLIED ARTS 

Arts never equaled in any other fifty years 
of human liistory marked the half of a cen- 
tury between two fateful wars. A noble 
grace, long evolving, matured in the compar- 
ative quietude Greece enjoyed, and impelled 
a most rich and wonderful architectural cre- 
ation. Now through the unity, energy and 
excelling strength of the people and times, 

5 The passage is quoted from Jowett's translation of 
Thucydides by permission of the Delegates of the Ox- 
ford University Press. 

228 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Athens came to embody in concrete expres- 
sion, for many centuries and even to this day, 
great, formative ideas. 

The independent conceptions resting on a 
common race basis had already given to the 
Hellenic system of building the styles called 
Doric and Ionic. Relevancy of means to 
ends, severe logic, marked the Doric order. 
In the Doric column, austere, simple, un- 
adorned and "with no separate foot, repress- 
ive of expression of self, supporting a boldly* 
projecting capital, is traced the Doric idea 
of the merging of the individual in the mass. 
It was the form which evolving from the 
Doric nature, showed how each should con- 
tribute to the support of the community. 
"Wholly and entirely each belonged to and 
must be judged in relation to his value to the 
state. Standing by itself the column tells 
the onlooker to expect more than in itself it 
presents. That is, the spirit of the column - 
is for the whole — its own inner sternly self- 
centered force expressing security, repress- 
ing individual wishes and aspiration, stunts 
its height which is only five and one-half 
times its diameter — all to support the great 
and glorious unit of its architrave, frieze and 

RACE SPIRIT IN TECTONIC ARTS 229 

the rhythmic adornment completed in the 
pediment or gable. 

The graceful Ionic column, on the other 
hand, animated, free in play of fancy, de- 
manding and standing on its own base, whose 
beauty is complete within itself, spending its 
strength in slender shoots upwards and in 
airy decoration, is eight and one-half to nine 
and one-half times its greatest diameter. 
Its spirit of individual expression inserts a 
cushion of carved stone between the column 
and the weight it supports, molds the 
cushion which must soften the weight, and 
seizes upon the flower of the honeysuckle, 
upon leaves of the forest and other lines of 
grace and delight to the eye to deck its indi- 
viduality in rich variety. 

These two systems, the Doric and Ionic, 
the age of Pericles blended in the perfect 
form of the Attic. Subject to Doric influ- 
ences the Ionic column became less slender- 
Its capital took on energy in its swelling 
volutes, and the mass resting on the column 
more simplicity and emphasis. These modi- 
fications conveyed the feeling of strength in 
the column and sense of the superenrinent 
mass. Exquisite proportion, chaste ele- 

230 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

gance, richness of decoration yet reserved 
before luxury, piquancy and mere attractive- 
ness, mark it. 

Under tlie influence of Athenian political 
freedom art bad become pan-Hellenic, and 
artists might unite tlie esthetic genius of the 
JEgean Ionian, rich, florid, complex, sensi- 
tive, and the disciplined order and zeal of 
the Achsean Dorian. This development in 
the world of art is one of many evidences 
that the Greek race was in its perfectness 
an amalgamation of northern and southern 
elements — that it possessed the artistic 
genius of the southern JEgeans, and the in- 
stinct and genius filled with a passion for 
religion and government of northern, Ger- 
manic peoples. 

It is the age of Pheidias, the matchless 
sculptor and foreman of public art works at 
Athens, of the master architects, Ictinus, Cal- 
licrates and their fellow workers, all con- 
sciously glorifying the unity of Greece in the 
grace and splendor of temples, and embody- 
ing in statues the Hellene's idea of the di- 
vine. In Athens rose the Theseum, standing 
in purity of line to-day and reported built 
in that day to the mythical champion of 

RACE SPIRIT IN TECTONIC ARTS 231 

Athenian democracy, Theseus, an entomb- 
ment for his bones and vesting within itself 
the privilege of sanctuary to those who were 
poor and oppressed by cruel usage. The 
colonnaded Propylasa or Fo legate of the 
Acropolis also arose; the stately Erectheum 
to protect venerated insignia of an antique, 
religious legend which connected the snake 
with underworld power and fertility charm; 
and the elegant temple of the Wingless Vic- 
tory. The main body of these temples 
gleamed with the rich luster of marble, but 
painting and gilding adorned the upper 
parts. 

The form of the Parthenon, to the cult of 
Athene Parthenos, tejls that the religious 
base of the spirit that built it was Doric 
puritanism — throughout Hellas, in fact, 
Doric forms prevailed as the religious man- 
ner. Entrance to the Parthenon's full per- 
fection led through that Foregate, or Propy- 
lcea, which united in its fortress-like court 
Ionic ornament and cheer for festivals with 
Doric seriousness and strength for defense. 
In choosing the Doric form for the Par- 
thenon, the subtle sense of the Hellenes for the 
perfect expression of a spirit merely em- 

232 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

bodied a law set forth by all later history, 
namely, that the puritan, spirit of a nation is 
that upon which the nation is upbuilt and 
round which it centers: in whatever degree 
that spirit is minimized or nihilized, in so 
far the national life suffers — perhaps be- 
cause that spirit demands for itself simplic- 
ity, devotion, setting aside of self and trivial- 
ities for the commonwealth, and keeping 
down pride and hollow, deadening ritual that 
vaunt themselves. 

The beauty of these temples of the Acrop- 
olis of Athens, it should be noted, was built 
upon a thoroughly scientific foundation and 
knowledge of stone construction. Even 
more: — In their analysis and differentiation 
of parts, the builders used various devices 
to heighten their art that our duller sense 
of to-day only knows through study of their 
works. The neighboring Mount Pentelicus, 
pushing its peaked summit into Attic clouds, 
offered quarries of marble and afforded 
architect and sculptor abundant supply of 
raw material for re-creation into perfect 
form. 

What titanic strides the Athenians were 
taking! In these years of labor they built 

RACE SPIRIT IN TECTONIC ARTS 233 

the Parthenon, beginning the work in 447 be- 
fore Christ, and carrying it structurally so 
far that by the year 438 they dedicated the 
gold and ivory statue of The Virgin, that is, 
Athene. What manifestation of their so- 
cial life the building gives ! Upon what con- 
ceptions of civic distinction they reared it, 
that marble hymn to victorious Wisdom, 
and at last carried on their worship within 
its walls! To realize it consider again the 
state of the world about this handful of 
Aryan folk embodying for the first time ideas 
of an organized, law-governed, democratic 
state, and the lucid intelligence of man as 
its tutelary goddess. Nomadic, unorganized 
peoples over the mountain cap to the north, 
groups not unlike westward beyond the coast 
of the Ionian sea, and gross orientalism 
among the hordes within the Persian empire 
to the east, and south in the Egyptian sa- 
trapy. But in the center of the then known 
world these Hellenes, people of light, them- 
selves evolving and advancing the idea of 
distinction, a state formed of free individuals 
and governed by those who formed it, desir- 
ing beauty expressed in perfect proportions 
as they desired the perfection of the people's 

234 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

civic life. This is the story the building of 
the Parthenon tells. Religion and demo- 
cratic zeal have rarely so united to warm the 
heart of a people. 

Heights of devotion chiseled the Par- 
thenon's perfection. And in return, in the 
great and indefinable action and reaction of 
race and race-work and the individual, to 
what inspiration did it hold its people ! To 
the service of the whole body of citizens — 
not in the individual's dwelling and his os- 
tentatious luxury, but in temple and other 
public buildings. Their directing divinity, 
the spirit of clear-eyed Thought, Reason, Re- 
flection, Athene, foster-mother of heroes 
after the old matrilineal fashion, giver of 
arts of war and of peace, fertility blesser of 
the Athenian in granting the nourishing olive 
and their praiseworthy climate, genetrix of 
their beloved city, Pheidias had visualized by 
a statue standing forty-seven feet high in the 
sanctuary of the Parthenon. The flesh parts 
of this most noble presentation were Pheid- 
ian-carved ivory and the draperies of Pheid- 
ian-carved gold. A golden sphinx-mounted 
helmet covered the erected and stately head 
of the statue, lance and shield stood on the 

RACE SPIRIT IN TECTONIC ARTS 235 

ground near by in sign of peace, and from 
her hand a statue of Victory six feet in 
height, her wings outstretched, held forward 
a golden wreath — for in this sanctuary vic- 
tors in the pan-Athenian games received 
their prizes. The image featured the peo- 
ple's piety and consciousness that their 
own intelligence and religious emotion had 
evolved the idea it represented, and had 
prompted the great sculptor's ideal. 

The Hellenes * clear and fertile imagi- 
nation humanized, as we have seen^ their con- 
ceptions of the divine force underlying all 
phenomena. God took on human form in 
early times. Sculpture with the Hellenes 
began its life far back in p re-Greek days, in 
the images it made to suggest or feature con- 
ceptions of the gods. The art was doubtless 
a chief medium for expressing race feeling 
and race solution of the passage of man — the 
never-dying questioning, whence came he? — 
how wrought he here? — whither went he? 
Its outworking grew gradually. It reflected 
mental distortion at times doubtless, and 
monstrous creations penetrating its centuries 
of growth. The sculptor was struggling for 
mastery of the idea and of his material. He 

236 THE CREEK SPIRIT 

was also failing in his teehnic. Images at- 
tributed to a traditional sculptor, Dsedalus, 
have rigid and conventional forms. From 
such budding the art flowered in these years 
of The Great Peace. 

In their desire for beauty of form, their 
flexible, free development of and reverence 
for the body, the Hellenes apotheosized the 
body's merits. Greek dress of the classic 
age, its simplicity, its clinging to the body 
and portraying shape and movement, in- 
creased their sense of beauty of expression. 
The body's movements and attitudes deline- 
ated its spiritual life. This ancient folk not 
only had not found necessary a depicting 
perturbing emotion, the soul's shame of the 
body and poignant writings of the soul upon 
the face; to their aesthetics such excess was 
distasteful, false to art canon. Thus their 
art kept equilibrium. Mind and body, soul 
and material, worked together in union for 
the product. 

Through this proportion, this balance be- 
tween soul and body, this check of self-limi- 
tation so that neither exuberance of senti- 
ment nor pressure of reason should break 
poise, the Hellene's genius most naturally 

RACE SPIRIT IN TECTONIC ARTS 237 

conceived art in plastic expression. And in 
types. Distinct, unvarying, traditional ideals 
which possessed the imagination, impelled 
the great Greek art. The unchanging, an as- 
similation of the generic forms of life, gave 
these Hellenes' sculpture stability and raised 
it above ephemeral fancy and caprice to 
noble ideals. This "was true not only of their 
sculpture but of all Greek art. Not the ac- 
cidental, such as the artist might meet in 
every-day life — not such individualizations; 
but rather the united consent and cooper- 
ation of Greek souls of the group, the truly 
Hellenic, the universalized and majestic gods 
and heroes of an earlier day, each having a 
compacted power of his own, each identified 
with his own ethical function, each a com- 
ponent of emotions and thoughts and char- 
acter, each portraying a composite type — 
"the image,' 9 as Dion Chrysostom said, 
"agreeing with all the epithets of the god." 6 

8 A face suffused with such thought and emotion as 
we assign to an ideally cultivated woman or man we 
gain in a composition-photograph of two or three hun- 
dred educated men or women. Not wholly unlike this 
photograph Greek sculpture made visible a universalized 
image of the greater gods. 

238 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Just as their sculpture doubtless had birth 
in their religion, that is, the first subjects 
modeled by primitive artists symbolized a 
god, so in ideal images of the immortals the 
religion of the Greeks found solemn and 
sublime expression. The people's gratitude 
for the victory over the Persians and their 
warring glory Pheidias expressed in another 
significant work. His bronze statue of 
Athene Foremost in Battle, made of booty 
from the battle of Marathon, rose seventy 
feet in the " dazzling aether" of the city 
* * violet-crowned, glorious. ' ' The Pheidian 
Athene embodied the type of the goddess 
of the old, matrilineal age, we have said, 
when, Plato declares, "the business of war 
had been the common concern of men and 
women," a goddess who demanded that the 
hero she had chosen to protect and inspire 
should do great deeds. Statues of these 
years alone set out that high companion- 
ship. Types of later workers than the Pheid- 
ian school, such as the Aphrodite of Praxite- 
les, are apt to embody ideas of the goddesses 
when, says a writer of to-day, they bad be- 
come abject and amorous and sequestered 
to domestic servility. 

RACE SPIRIT IN TECTONIC ARTS 239 

A masterpiece of the preeminent Pheidias, 
the majesty and splendor of the seated Zeus 
at the common sanctuary of Hellas, Olympia, 
a statue embodying ethical conceptions of 
Power, Omniscience, Benevolence, many wit- 
nesses declared perfect. "The majesty of 
the work/' said Qnintilian, "was equal to 
the god." While Pheidias was fixing for- 
ever the type of Athene and Zeus, in Argos 
Polyclitus made a gold and ivory statue of 
Here, spouse of Zeus, "treading in golden 
sandals, " typifying grace and beauty of 
women of the matrilineal system, reflecting 
that life and a most perfect physical form- 
All productions of this age have upon them 
the unmistakable impress of its spirit. 

Before these times of the elevation of 
Athens, of the art reflective of its political 
life and exigencies, before these peoples' de- 
light in the ideal representation of their 
great divinities and great deeds, families and 
schools of brass-founders and workers in 
gold and ivory had carried on their crafts 
in Argos, in Sparta and elsewhere. Now, 
Athens led to the complete development of 
facility and mastership in such arts. 

The city also attracted painters who com- 

240 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

panioned sculptors in interpreting race life. 
To glorify the works of her democracy she 
called Polygnotus, in 462, from Delphi, where 
he had painted the walls of a hall illustrating 
large scenes from Homer, such for instance 
as the descent of Odysseus into Hades. In 
Athens, and agreeably to current veneration, 
he and his fellow-workers pictured the bat- 
tle of Marathon within a compartment of the 
public portico called the Pcecile Stoa, a 
cloistered walk adorned besides with paint- 
ings such as scenes from the fall of Troy, 
and with statues, a haunt, in that sociable 
out-door life, of philosophers, nimble-witted 
rhetoricians and loungers eager for discus- 
sion, eager, too, for the last and best thing 
said. 

In vases of the Ilellenes, thousands of 
which remain to us to-day, and in the com- 
monest utensils for the household, we have 
the Greek sense of form, in simple, dignified 
painting recalling, with ever-present, ever- 
significant motive, some god or hero* 

THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR: ITS RESULTS 

Mutations in the progression of the Greek 
spirit were of unexampled rapidity. Horror 

PARTY SPIRIT AND FRATRICIDAL WAR 241 

at the threatened defeat of their spirit by 
Persia originally united the Hellenes, and 
bore out the law that peoples capable of 
hearty consolidation emerge to power and 
dominion. The ultrarational clinging to 
race feeling, that spirit of loyalty to race in- 
stinct which had started back in those cen- 
turies when personality had not become iso- 
lated and the individual felt and thought 
through the group, that profound social senti- 
ment transcending local patriotism which 
subordinates all self-interest to the progress 
of the whole, led these Greeks to unite in 
their individualism. 

The dualism we have spoken of in fore- 
going pages — Athens at the head of mari- 
time powers, Sparta leading the Pelopon- 
nesian confederacy welded into one against 
Persia — had elements of friendliness. But 
when the conqueror was conquered, when 
fear of extinction by Asian inroad had died 
out, civil dissension followed- That per- 
sistent germ of disunion, the inability to 
unite except when threatened with extinc- 
tion, a Greek characteristic due in part to 
the geography of small island and tiny 
valley, was now multiform. * ' Hellas is one, ' 9 

242 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

said a Greek poet, "but its city-states many." 
6 * Fifty years passed between the retreat 
of Xerxes and the beginning of the war/' 
testifies the eye-witness Thucydides, who 
called the Peloponnesian conflict the great- 
est event that had happened within the mem- 
ory of man. Jealousy, fear of the power of 
democratic Athens, continues Thucydides, 
seeing most of Hellas already subject to her, 
impelled to the hostilities. The Spartans 
felt that the Athenians were growing too 
strong to be ignored- Their determination 
to curb the strength of their compeer was not 
long looking for an excuse. They found it 
in a disturbance of the balance of power. 

"War is great folly," Pericles told the 
Athenians, "for those who are in prosperity 
and free to choose. But if they must either 
yield straightway to their neighbor, or ven- 
ture and win, then he who shuns the danger 
is more blameworthy than he who stands 
his ground." The Athenians stood their 
ground, and intertribal feuds stained Greek 
lands. "Civil war is as much worse than a 
foreign war," wrote Herodotus, himself far 
from the conflict, "as war itself is worse 
than peace." 

PARTY SPIRIT AND FRATRICIDAL WAR 243 

War prevailed, and when Attic soil-dwell- 
ers, driven by* their enemies ' invasion, 
crowded the city for protection, a material 
plague clasped hands with spiritual defeat. 
Pericles, the man of supreme character, died. 
Corrupt leaders succeeded him. Years 
passed and war went on. The Athenians, 
distraught, restlessly endeavoring after re- 
lief through constitutional changes and polit- 
ical experiment, were coming to attach them- 
selves to men — men looking to personal ad- 
vantage — more than to principles. 

Even in the face of freedom in Athens 
social inequality had persisted. Democratic 
institutions had not effaced sentiment at- 
tached to families in the line of old popu- 
lar heroes, for instance that of Alcibiades of 
the family of Ajas — never wholly discredited 
sentiment toward the old, supporting, influ- 
ential life of inheritance and its wealth ac- 
cumulating under the traditions of an acquis- 
itive, conservative stewardship. Anti-popu- 
lar combination and conspiracy had dwelt 
underworld throughout the democratic life 
of Athens, and now through breaking of 
hopes and through corruption gained ascend- 
ency. 

244 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

"The whole Hellenic world was in com- 
motion," say ^ Thucydides in Ms history; "in 
every city the chiefs of the democracy and of 
the oligarchy were struggling, the one to 
bring in the Athenians, the other the Lace- 
daemonians. Now in time of peace, men 
would have had no excuse for introducing 
either, and no desire to do so; but, when 
they were at war, the introduction of a 
foreign alliance on one side or the other to 
the hurt of their enemies and the advantage 
of themselves was easily effected by the dis- 
satisfied party. And revolution brought 
upon the cities of Hellas many terrible ca- 
lamities, such as have been and always will 
be while human nature remains the same, 
but which are more or less aggravated and 
differ in character with every new combi- 
nation of circumstances. In peace and pros- 
perity both states and individuals are actu- 
ated by higher motives, because they do not 
fall under the dominion of imperious neces- 
sities ; but war, which takes away the com- 
fortable provision of daily life, is a hard 
master and tends to assimilate men's char- 
acters to their conditions. 

"When troubles had once begun in the 

PARTY SPIRIT AND FRATRICIDAL WAR 245 

cities, those who followed carried the revo- 
lutionary spirit further and further, and de- 
termined to outdo the report of all who had 
preceded them by the ingenuity of their en- 
terprises and the atrocity of their revenges. 
The meaning of words had no longer the 
same relation to things, but was changed by 
them as they thought proper. Reckless dar- 
ing was held to be loyal courage; prudent 
delay was the excuse of a coward; moder- 
ation was the disguise of unmanly weakness; 
to know everything was to do nothing. 
Frantic energy was the true quality of a 
man. . . . The lover of violence was always 
trusted, and his opponent suspected. He 
who succeeded in a plot was deemed know- 
ing, but a still greater master in craft was he 
who detected one. On the other hand, he 
who plotted from the first to have nothing 
to do with plots was a breaker up of parties 
&nd a poltroon who was afraid of the 
enemy. . . . The tie of party was stronger 
than the tie of blood, because a partisan was 
more ready to dare without asking why. 
(For party associations are not based upon 
any established law, nor do they seek the 
public good j they are formed in defiance of 

246 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

the laws and from self-interest.) The seal 
of good-faith was not divine law, hut fellow- 
ship in crime. . . . 

"The cause of all these evils was the love of 
power, originating in avarice and ambition, 
and the party-spirit which is engendered hy 
them when men are fairly embarked in a 
contest. For the leaders on either side used 
specious names, the one party professing to 
uphold the constitutional equality of the 
many, the other the wisdom of an aristoc- 
racy, while they made the public interests, 
to which in name they were devoted, in real- 
ity their prize. Striving in every way to 
overcome each other, they committed the 
most monstrous crimes. . . . Either by the 
help of an unrighteous sentence, or grasping 
power with the strong hand, they were eager 
to satiate the impatience of party-spirit. 
Neither faction cared for religion, but any 
fair pretence which succeeded in effecting 
some odious purpose was greatly lauded. 
And the citizens who were of neither party 
fell a prey to both ; either they were disliked 
because they held aloof, or men were jealous 
of their surviving. . . . 

"The simplicity which is so large an ele- 

PARTY SPIRIT AND FRATRICIDAL WAR 247 

ment in a noble nature was laughed to scorn 
and disappeared- An attitude of perfidious 
antagonism everywhere prevailed. . . . Each 
man was strong only in the conviction that 
nothing was secure; he must look to his own 
safety, and could not afford to trust others. 
Inferior intellects generally succeeded best. 
For, aware of their own deficiencies, and 
fearing the capacity of their opponents, for 
whom they were no match in powers of 
speech, and whose subtle wits were likely to 
anticipate them in contriving evil, they 
struck boldly and at once." 7 

In the war each contestant over-estimated 
chance of success when success befell his 
state. Each lost measure between means 
and ends. Headlong desire for reprisal 
drove each destructively. After Athens met 
terrible reverses in Sicily, reverses so red- 
dened with excesses that like the massacre of 
St. Bartholomew, like the religious persecu- 
tions of the Thirty Years' War in Germany, 
they have become one of the horrors of his- 
tory, insinuating suggestions from Susa en- 

7 The passag-e is quoted from Jowett's translation of 
Thucydides by permission of the Delegates of the Ox- 
ford University Press, 

248 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

deavored, by detaching Greek towns from 
their support, to break the Athenian empire. 
"In the civil wars Persian intrigue was 
busy," says Thucydides. Intrigue won, and 
Spartans allied themselves with Persia to 
carry joint war against Athens and her allies. 

Athenian heroism persisted in endeavor to 
retain some fragment of her empire. This 
forlorn hope failed, and at last every city in 
alliance with, or dependent upon Athens sub- 
mitted to the supremacy of Sparta. Yet not 
Sparta, but rather union of Sparta with 
Persia had destroyed the political leadership 
of Athens, and borne out another law; — that 
races too little sympathetic to form powerful 
unions fall to subservience — the very op- 
posite of that law exemplified when the Hel- 
lenes ninety years before united against 
Persia. 

The repose of exhaustion followed the 
Peloponnesian war. Whether the city of 
Athens was to dominate all Hellas in a Greek 
empire which had formed for her on the rise 
of the Athenian navy, or whether she were to 
be a mere republic of rank kindred to other 
Hellenic states had been tried out- An asser- 
tion of Herodotus ? who died in the sixth year 

HISTORIANS 249 

of the war, suggests reflection upon its prog- 
ress and result. The Athenians, says the old 
historian, were of Pelasgic origin, that is, they 
were predominantly of the early, industrious, 
art-loving, peace-loving peoples; the Lace- 
daemonians, Doric, that is northern, war and 
dominion-loving. 

IMPERISHABLE HISTORIES OF HERODOTUS 
AND THUCYDIDES 

But before and during these eventful dec- 
ades, in this capital 

" Athens, the eye of Greece, mother of arts, 
And eloquence, native to famous wits,' 

w 

inspiration to flower and fructify stopped 
neither in architecture and its support- 
ing arts, nor in its imperial democracy- 
Need of the records of its mighty deeds 
rested on the human spirit — record of 
all the stirring and curious world before 
men's eyes — to amaze and edify future gen- 
erations. These Hellenes had the sense of 
race vocation, trusteeship, we have seen. 
Their gifts were not for themselves alone. 
They felt themselves charged with legacies to 

250 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

future generations. A Homer must appear, 
a first real seer of Hellenic history. The 
genius at hand was Herodotus, horn in Asian 
Halicarnassus in 484 before Christ, himself 
an amalgam — of Dorian blood, he expressed 
the facile Ionian spirit. In his writing Greek 
prose literature became fairly developed. 

Oracular legends of an ancient enmity be- 
tween the Hellenes and Asiatic peoples had 
long been current, we have seen. Homer had 
told it in his battle of the Achseans with the 
Asiatics, Tales of the actual present antag- 
onism and contest between these peoples had 
filled minds of at least two generations of 
Hellenes before Herodotus saw the light. 
Nothing could be more natural than for him 
to take the profaning war of Persian invasion 
for his subject, the conflict between the social 
will of Hellas and its challenging race, and 
interpret it with the religious imaginative- 
ness that characterized his times, making his 
groundwork an explication of the way of God 
to man. 

He wrote, he said, "to save from decay the 
remembrance of what men have done, and 
to prevent the mighty and marvelous actions 
of the Greeks apd barbarians failing of their 

HISTORIANS 251 

meed of glory." He made an organic epic. 
A divine forethought, an envy of the gods, a 
mighty moral order, the finger of deity in all 
human affairs, the will of social progress, 
allots ruin even to the third and fourth gen- 
eration to the immoderateness of men, to 
their excess, arrogance and crime. That is 
the idea underlying the history of Herodotus. 
It colors the narrative, and the speeches 
which are lyric outbursts. The historian was 
saturated with the faith in human affairs of 
an ever-present retributive justice, Nemesis, 
which begetting in the godhead jealousy and 
enmity that man should aspire to power and 
nurse overwhelming ambition, humiliates hu- 
man pride: upon all men of foremost condi- 
tion disaster must come. A poet filled with 
a religious enthusiasm, he set out in his work 
action of the law of righteousness. Just as 
to the Jews in the Old Testament, so to this 
Greek historian, his race's history was the 
tribunal of the justice of God. 

The narrative of this ethnic story of He- 
rodotus, its candor and simplicity and persua- 
sion, its pathos, its human quality and the 
garrulous delight of its telling, fitted it for 
such recitation as epic lays enjoyed at festi- 

252 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

vals. Accounts say that the author gave a 
public reading and had pay therefor at the 
great pan-Athenzea of 446 before Christ. 

This detailed, dramatic recounting of the 
father of history sprang from the peace and 
fertility of the Hellenic spirit at the end of 
the Persian wars, and reflected conditions 
that inspired the early singers. Thucydides, 
born but thirteen years after Herodotus, also 
wrote a drama of which he was a painstak- 
ing, accurate, trustworthy eye-witness and 
cloer-of deeds, — one may say drama because 
the form of the history of Thucydides shows 
permeation of the tragic spirit- His psychol- 
ogy is that of the drama, and his construction 
somewhat resembles the drama of ^schylus. 
In this story the parties are warring states 
and the end sought the leadership of Athens. 

But Thucydides is austere. He loves no 
detailed description, no old-fashioned, legend- 
ary tales as did his elder brother-historian. 
He analyzes character with keen penetration 
— what motives impelled the actors in affairs, 
what social forces produced the results. 
M Those who wish," he said, "to see clearly 
what has happened and what like events may 
hereafter happen, in the order of human af- 

GROUNDING OF THE DRAMA 253 

fairs, will find what I have written useful 
aids." His compact thought, his love of 
truth and dispassionate effort to justify the 
opposing parties as they would, and even 
then did, justify themselves, his distinct, 
precise, significant diction, his long vision, 
his close-knit reasoning with its quality of 
lasting validity, mark him as the first writer 
of vigorous, philosophical history, and one 
who vivified and enriched the writing of his- 
tory for all time. 

How the Greeks of their day saw the worth 
of life, their interpreting of life with ethical 
meaning, what to their religious sense was 
the divine will, the histories of Herodotus 
and Thucydides in one way show. But with 
Thucydides expression of religious emotion 
is translated into philosophic phrase. The 
inexplicable element in history he calls 
chance, tyche, ruffl- 

RISE OF THE DRAMA: SUCH MASTERS AS 

JESCHVLUS, SOPHOCLES, EURIPIDES, 

ARISTOPHANES 

Through poetry, however, the Hellenic 
genius must again find expression fitted to 
its time. That welling of the spirit for ut- 

254 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

teraxice of the laws of human life, that cere- 
bral excitement that heats and molds ideas 
about it to the emotional pitch of rhythm, 
must again he a faithful voice of the age. 
Poetry has always thriven in great crises of 
history. That is, a literature can ground it- 
self only on the ethos, the faith and ethical 
concepts of a people. Its roots must be in 
their life. The sap that feeds it and gives 
It expansive strength and detailed beauty 
must come from the religious and ethical 
ardor of its people. 

A literature interpretative of race-con- 
sciousness we have seen the virid growth of 
since Homer. Of what the Greek muse ear- 
liest sang, when, in the full noontide of 
Homer's epic day, minstrel and rhapsodist 
journeyed through Ionian state and island, 
we have caught echoes in the great objective 
epos. The day's twilight brought the 
master's perfect song. Then, we know, a 
darkness of shifting shapes settled over 
Hellas till the lyric, a product many-tongued, 
born centuries before but slowly maturing, 
difficult to measure because its miniature 
qualities ever helped to its loss, but as com- 
plete and genuine a racenote as the epic, came 

GROUNDING OF THE DRAMA 255 

in with the new dawn. Voices of the Lesbian 
and other singers sounded throughout the 
Hellenic world Stirling 1 anew with art. We 
have seen in the autonomous feeling leaping 
to life out of groups of monarchic mold, that 
in subjective expression the elegy evolved, 
the iambus, the lyric of single thought and 
feeling, and even the song of blended senti- 
ment of the Dorian chorus. 

We have seen in the years following the 
Persian wars that race and religious ardor 
of the Hellenes had intensive stimulation. 
Now great events had spiritualized the old 
faiths in divine power, the practices of the 
people reinvigorated belief in its providence 
towards the race. Then again, before the de- 
light of the people at the repulsion of Asia 
had declined, the inclusion at the beginning of 
Pericles' persuasive career of Athenians in 
the jury systems had told upon Athenian 
character profoundly. The law history testi- 
fies to among other peoples, that a broaden- 
ing of suffrage rights brings a deepening of 
the religious sense to those enfranchised, had 
proved itself in Hellas. 

Every generation craves sensitive re- 
flectors to mirror its own peculiar spirit. 

256 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

The spiritual life of every generation, we say, 
must sink into decadence unless it renews it- 
self in intimate union with cosmic conscious- 
ness and creates afresh expression of its life. 
When preeminence and political liberty had 
come to Athens, the Hellenes stamped their 
genius upon another racial form. Architec- 
ture we have seen combining the two spirit- 
ual phases of the Hellene, the southern and 
northern, blending the two to form a third. 
This synthesis of mind fired also the creative 
impulse of literary art. The serene, joyous 
impulse of the Ionian Greeks, the spirit that 
had luxuriated in recounting the epic, in the 
setting forth the philosopher and physicist 
and historian, and had penetrated the recesses 
of the human heart in elegiac and iambic 
poetry — Tonic grace and mobility, now in 
unity with the stern, ethic god-call and abid- 
ing sense of god-presence of the Doric chorus, 
was giving the world Greek drama. To per- 
fect the evolution had needed many genera- 
tions, Greek tragedy "advanced by slow de- 
grees/' said Aristotle long after. In this age 
of Athens it took perfect form. Man in the 
energy of free action calls for action repre- 
sented. 

GROUNDING OF THE DRAMA 257 

Winter and springtime, then as now, were 
seasons of many worshipful festivals — fes- 
tivals in many instances connected with ob- 
lations and rites to Earth for bountiful 
fruits, and to Sun, maker of seasons. They 
refer back to primitive peoples, and in many 
instances, as in Greece, were connected with 
the invoking, stimulating, strengthening of 
the spirit of fertility. 

From about the 19th to the 21st of our De- 
cember, song and dance, probably pantomime 
and buffoonery, and also improvised plays by 
wandering j)layers added zest to country 
sports in Attica. These distinguished the 
Country Dionysia. Merry-makings of the 
feast, somewhat like the materiality with 
which we every year celebrate our Christmas, 
may have distorted the initial object of the 
celebration, which was, as we said, to give 
magic potency to the exuberant forces of 
nature then buried, to stimulate growth, to 
strengthen by wanton excess the god of vege- 
tation whose powers were in that season sus- 
pended. Tumultuous processions of mum- 
mers noisily singing, inebriately dancing, 
bearing a symbol of the quickening force of 
nature, called for the god of life. Then the 

258 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

new wine was first tasted, and sustenance in 
cakes and fruit offered. 

To awaken or to strengthen the sleeping 
god, masnads sought still further in the lesser 
feast of the Lencea, during the last days of 
our January, when, according to an old scho- 
liast, a bearer of a flaming torch held the 
brand aloft and cried to the assembled people, 
"Invoke the god"; and all those present 
shouted "Iacchus, son of Semele, thou giver 
of wealth I" 

About the first of our March, at the Anthes- 
teria, the feast that causes tilings to bloom, 
when the wine of the last year was ready to 
drink, each household opened its casks, re- 
ligiously made libations to the god, and 
decked their rooms with early spring flowers. 
Again was the feast of the bringing up of 
creative impulse and growth. Earth, source 
and mother of all, held below its surface dur- 
ing four months of winter a latent, slumber- 
ing divinity, to whom rain-clouds were sacred, 
and fertilizing rain and dew. The people 
must resurrect and stimulate the god that he 
may pour life into the soil "in the holy season 
of spring." 8 

8 Peoples not Greek celebrated similar processes of 

GROUNDING OF THE DRAMA 259 

The folk massed at a temple in solemn and 
secret services. In other ways emotion 
socialized itself. Choruses competed honor- 
ing the merry young god in song and dance. 
The whole folk reveled and masqueraded, 
parading after a statue of the god, as myth- 
ical followers of Dionysus, as Bacchse, as 
nymphs, and finally retired for banquets. 
Barren winter was dead and teeming life 
abroad in the land. 

This rebirth festival, this joy at the re- 
newal of life, was also one of revocation of 
souls, when in the upward motion of the tide 
of life spirits of the dead significantly rose 
and went about. Their households set out 
pots of food and feasted the souls and poured 
on tombs libations of placation. And be- 
cause it was also a feast of purification they 

nature — for instance, believing- the god of fertility slept 
in winter, the Lydians, when the sun brought back the 
spring, danced with enthusiasm ; and tribes in the north 
of Europe held the feast of Ostara (Easter), the 
Anglo-Saxon goddess of springing, fertilizing time. To 
our day Christians of the Greek Church in Thrace ob- 
serve fertility rites in their Lenten carnival — men of a 
village masquerading in goatskins, and finally, after 
various doings symbolic, putting on a yoke and praying 
for a good harvest as they drag the plow. 

260 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

put pitch on their doors and practiced other 
rites of aversion of malign influences. At 
this Anthesteria fell the ceremony of the 
mystic marriage of Dionysus with the wife 
of the king archon, a symbolic union of the 
refreshment of the blood of the people and 
the life of the soil, and thus reverently es- 
teemed an assistance to the growth of crops. 

About the first of our April, in the Greater 
Dionysia, the people celebrated the preva- 
lence of summer, and their joy that Dionysus 
had wholly delivered his folk from decay of 
vegetation and the needs and cares of winter. 
Again the earth was putting forth her yield, 
and with the impelling aid of the god of life 
should bear fruitful harvest. 

The idealizing ritual of Dionysus, the great 
vegetative god, had, we have seen, become in 
sentiment and ideas the property of the state, 
and had gradually superimposed itself upon 
the rites of the Olympian gods, especially 
upon the worship of the season-god Apollo, 
and also of the pre-Greek liturgy of Mother 
Earth. It had crystallized after its own na- 
ture the worship of the spirit of fertility in 
other cults. Here again is evident that im- 
pelling genius of the Hellenes to put in poetic 

GROUNDING OF THE DRAMA 261 

and plastic form their spiritual life's intima- 
cies and unities with the world, with the bar- 
renness of winter, the jocund spring, the 
fruition of summer and gifts of the fall of 
the year. 

In Dorian cities so far back as in the time 
of Alcman, we have seen that singers taught 
by a chorus master and dancers trained to 
military precision offered, in behalf of the 
people, thanks to the gods by chanting and 
dancing poems. So malleable, so pliable a 
form was the Dorian choral, whether it were 
a joyous paean to the sun-god Apollo, or a 
dithyranibic ode of enthusiasm to Dionysus, 
that the song and its expressive dance might 
run from gladness and gayety to grave so- 
lemnity. In a member of the chorus imper- 
sonating the god, or telling his perils, and 
the chorus expressing the sympathies of a 
pious mind with the sorrows of Dionysus, 
tragedy may have had its birth. Exactly 
how we know not, perhaps in a dithyrambic 
song of spring when a cyclic chorus dressed 
as satyrs sang and danced goat-songs to the 
god of generation. Or tragedy may have 
grown as is lately claimed, from the Dorian 
usage of honoring heroes with solemn hymns 

262 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

sung round their graves, all referring back to 
a primitive worship of the dead. Whatever 
its origin, it was unmistakably religious and 
embodied racial consciousness. So to unite 
the lyric action of the Doric chorus with the 
Ionic recitative, with the dramatic dialogue 
of the wandering rhapsode, and to bring forth 
tragedy complete, fell to the inspiration of 
these times. The seizure of the Hellenes' 
spirit with the content and form of tragedy 
became so intense that its evolution affected 
forms of literary composition outside poetry. 
It directed the historians, as we have seen. 
It impelled even oratory when the speech- 
writer prepared his client's address to the 
court, and persisted even to the time when 
Plato cast his speculations in dramatic dia- 
logue. 

This stirring and striving age of Hellas 
brought the drama to perfection, we say, and 
gave dramatic writers a dignity never paral- 
leled before or since. The Hellenes were now 

Turning from the Greek a moment, it is curious to 
note that tbe East Indian drama had its origin in the 
blending of epic and lyric forms, and in religious emo- 
tion, and the Chinese in the union of the arts of dancing 
and singing. 

^SCHYLUS 263 

producing an exalted poetry alive with an 
ethico-philosophic religion, a mental and emo- 
tional education never possessed by any other 
people. In Athens great tragedies appealed 
so thoroughly to the heart of the mass, and 
were so popular a religious service that, since 
the gods delight in the joy of their folk to 
see and hear worshipful functions, an obol 
from the public funds was finally made ready 
for each citizen to buy an entrance ticket. A 
public capable of appreciating and delight- 
ing in the perfection of such plays does not 
now exist, and never has existed except in 
the Athens of the age of their production. 
Spectacles of unendurable misfortune in the 
lives of race heroes effected, in Hellenic esti- 
mation, what Aristotle called catharsis, an 
emotional purification, — and made the citizen 
content to bear his easier mishaps and esteem 
his narrower life felicitous. Through all its 
growth and ripening the tragic play never 
lost its identification with the Hellenes' idea 
of deity, and their faith in the essential unity 
of mankind. 

A man who witnessed the fateful crises of 
the battles of Marathon and Salamis, and 
that a man of profound insight, who had seen 

264 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

his race breaking the omnipotence of the 
ruler of rulers, humbling the world-compel- 
ling army of the great king to the dust — such 
a man would feel in human affairs the venge- 
ance that pursues crime, and his work would 
reflect nemesis — the Nemesis Herodotus set 
forth. ^schylus embodied qualities of this 
generation of the Athenians, their conscious- 
ness of right, of honor and the public virtue 
that was the foundation, after the Persian 
wars, of Athens' glory. Whatever of his 
mighty plays are preserved to us are vivid 
with vast, enlarging and ennobling emotion. 
They declare the boldness of soul nurtured 
by great thoughts. They have the old se- 
verity of devotion to law that Solon taught, 
and regard for race habits and breeding, a 
Dorian, deeply brooding conception of life. 

Uniting with the purified spirit of the times 
they spiritualized the old religion of Zeus and 
gross myths. Dramatic and majestic forms, 
types, abstractions, traditional ideals possess- 
ing the imagination, gleaming in the half- 
light of an elder world, express in super- 
human language wonder, exalted resignation 
and faitji in the immanence and direction in 

.AESCHYLUS 265 

human life of supreme wisdom and power. 
They partake of the character of the sculp- 
ture — the stable, universal, traditional ideals 
spoken of on foregoing page 237. They em- 
body the primal note of tragedy — mutability 
and reversal of fortune, fate, inscrutable 
power striking at titan and man, at pride, at 
well-calculated plans and bringing all to dust 
— he who pursues power wars with the un- 
conquerable which masters all humans alike. 
In the " Prometheus," a drama which takes 
up with the loftiness of ancient Hebrew 
thought, and intensity of emotion of the old 
Hebrew lyric, the condition and relation of the 
human race, Prometheus helps on the mind 
of man aspiring with ardor to higher planes, 
seeking to gain such perfect knowledge and 
art as the immortals have set aside for them- 
selves. This is defiance of Zeus, a Divine 
Will and harsh, avenging god of justice, and 
the titan, hero-savior, who "loved mortals 
overmuch," himself perishes amid rolling 
thunder and the lightnings which the high 
god hurls. The sinner's own presumption in 
over-stepping moral order, and his excess 
fling him to ruin. 

266 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

"The blow that fells the sinner is of God, 
And as he wills, the rod 
Of vengeance srniteth sore." 

Like every other Greek tragedy of these 
years, the "Prometheus" action is inner, 
spiritual, effecting the catharsis of Aristotle. 
It makes way for an elevating and assuaging 
tranquillity. It demands man's faith, awe 
and devotion in a divine government and its 
righteousness. Profound ideas inform such 
plays. Truth, loftiness and sublimity inhere 
in them in simple strength and never degen- 
erate- 
Still Sophocles, in fact, centers the poetic 
consciousness of this age. Born thirty years 
after JEschylus and therefore maturing out- 
side those national woes the heart of iEschy- 
lus knew, Sophocles most completely stamped 
his work with that quality of the Hellenes 
called harmony, wise moderation, composure 
and noble resignation. His plays have about 
them the serenity and balance of the Par- 
thenon which grew to its perfection before 
his eyes. 

The vague, shadowy titans of JEschylus 
give way in Sophocles' poems to Hellenic 
perspicuity; the characters, less godlike, 

SOPHOCLES 267 

are more human and of Greek precision of 
form. In their ethical ideas, in their concep- 
tion of a supreme sustainer of the moral law 
and order, in setting out the favorite Greek 
theory of the human in relation to the di- 
vine — instability of good fortune and the 
limitation to the will of man; but greater still 
in the message of the unfathomable meaning* 
of human life, his plays are of surpass- 
ing splendor. Their Greek atmosphere per- 
sists with amazing potency. To-day we sit 
amazed at their penetrating simplicity, at 
their enlightened piety and the ideal nobility 
of their characters. We seem to see, as an- 
other has said, and to have present in living 
motion before us, the souls of those Athe- 
nians sculptured by Pheidias round the frieze 
of the Parthenon. Like the sculptor, the 
poet declared he "made humans as they 
should be." Sophocles was a master in the 
analysis of the great elemental emotions of 
men, in the working of passion and power in 
the spirit of man. He "saw life steadily and 
saw it whole." 

His inimitable art developed at a period 
when masses of Athenians especially, in 
shaded portico and theater, in jury court and 

268 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

the great public assembly, were reflecting 
and speculating and completing mastery of 
their thoughts and their fluid, subtle 
speech. 

From this broad, massive understanding of 
and sympathy with human life grew the 
poet's keen and exquisite power of words and 
his flowing narrative and choral song. The 
universal interest in the human everywhere 
rife in the time of Sophocles, is doubtless the 
source of the grace and sweetness, the ster- 
ling gentleness that distinguish his plays. 
His art was supremely Greek in presenting 
the lasting, the divine characteristics of the 
human being — which should not be marred or 
distorted by lawlessness or suffering. In re- 
ligious lore he picked the spiritual and left 
the grosser. His piety was peculiarly apt in 
presenting the universal significance that lay 
under the outward form of the popular re- 
ligion. "In things that touch upon the 
gods," he said, "it is best to shun unholy 
pride." "Nothing is base to which the gods 
lead us." In the emotional, creative power 
of genius and the intellectual, critical facul- 
ties, Sophocles stood midway between the fel- 
low-citizens of ^Eschylus whose beacon was a 

EURIPIDES 269 

race-embedded morality and the lighter age 
that applauded Euripides. 

Sophocles, said Aristotle, represents men 
as they ought to bej Euripides men as they 
are. The noble beauty of Sophocles 7 heroes 
and the Hellenic simplicity, harmony and 
delicate adjustment to end of the poet's 
work changes in the drama of the third great 
tragic poet of Hellas, born when JEschylus 
was forty-five and Sophocles fifteen. Bace 
myth is still the poet's subject, but his heroes 
are particularized into unique individuals, 
and the atmosphere is saturated with man's 
waywardness and the discord and confusion 
of human life. This means a dying-out of the 
ideal of tragedy. 

Euripides, most speculative poet and 
prophet of free thought, is repelled by popu- 
lar forms in portraying the Hellenes' divini- 
ties. To this critical attitude of mind he 
gives varied expression. "These legends of 
spousals and god lording it over another god 
are the minstrels' sorry tales," he sings. 
And again, "If the gods do anything base, 
they are not gods." Yet a profound re- 
ligious feeling he expressed in this prayer of 
Hecuba's; 

270 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

"0 prop of earth, thou -who hast thy seat upon the 

earth, 
"Whoever thou mayst be, Zeus, past finding out — whether 

law of nature or mind of man, 
To thee I pray; for through noiseless path dost thou 

with justice lead mortal things." 

And in another form he cries to the 
world-pervading mind; "Thee, self -begotten, 
who in the whirl of the heavens dost 
interweave the nature of all things, about 
whom is light, round whom dusky, spangled- 
bodied night and unnumbered hosts of stars 
continually do dance!" 

The poet no longer held one transported 
to another world, however. Abiding in this 
lie turned to humanity for his ideals, and with 
liquid and flexible periods, and the poetizing 
of every-day speech, he would present the 
naked thought and action of humans. Lo- 
quacity and temper for argument that settled 
on the Athenians especially during the second 
half of the Peloponnesian war, one outcome 
of the sophist, Euripides doubtless mirrors in 
his plays. But they also have another as- 
sociate of those years — a democratic sym- 
pathy with subjects of evil economic condi- 
tions, the poor and oppressed, and every- 

COMEDY AND ARISTOPHANES 271 

where and always the Athenian clarity of in- 
tellect. Euripides 7 tragedies were a com- 
ponent part of the age of rhetoric and dialec- 
tics now developing, and its mordant ques- 
tionings at large through the people concern- 
ing the old religion and individual and social 
rights. 

Thus "building their tragedy ^Eschylus, 
Sophocles and Euripides became organs of 
the Greek consciousness. In the dramatic 
competitions at the two great festivals of 
Dionysus every year, other poets contested 
whose works we do not know, and often those 
to us unknown gained the prize, aided possi- 
bly by a better training and equipment of the 
chorus, over masters we esteem unrivaled. 
According to "The Frogs" of Aristophanes 
popular taste for tragic poetry was so great 
that "striplings composed more than ten 
thousand tragedies and chattered more by a 
stadium than Euripides. . . . paltry little 
grapes, praters, twittering places of spar- 
rows, disgracers of art." 

Greatness of mind that acts in unity with 
ultimate law and beauty tragedy sets out. 
To make the noble more notable art intro- 
duces the mind that perverts order and acts 

272 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

out its own humor, or folly, or deformity, or 
shallowness, or abnormal view of life. 

In its essence comedy is the child of democ- 
racy, the equality of men who flay one an- 
other in jovial merriment. It could not be a 
product of the court of tyrannus or noble, the 
very life of which is preserved by security 
of freedom from ridicule and jest* The 
grounding of its spirit must be a later per- 
fection than tragedy. 

Greek comedy belongs to a country life 
where acquaintance was sure and equality un- 
suspended. A rumor gives its origin to the 
Dorians — because that folk were possessed of 
a rude, individual joviality. Amid such it 
may have evolved, from the license of a har- 
vest feast, some festival of the vintage god 
when revelers indulged in ribald witticism 
and gross ridicule of persons and conditions. 
Swift after the end of a chorus to Bacchus, 
that exuberant god who himself reveling in 
mocking gibe had vouchsafed the choric com- 
pany song and dance, the folk may have 
taken for granted the plain-spoken, unre- 
strained joke. The joke's near kin, ludicrous 
imitation and mock dignity, would soon be 
knocking for entrance as master of the revels. 

COMEDY AND ARISTOPHANES 273 

However, since writers of comedy should 
possess a vantage of deep conception and real 
refinement, and also penetrating vision into 
the abnormalities and basenesses and follies 
of men, the holder of the mocking masque 
might have a hitter seriousness. 

Even when the comic muse of Hellas had 
come to full brilliance in Athens, much of its 
original spirit abode, and arbitrary quizzing 
of the individual still went on. But Attic 
comedy did not confine its activities to reality 
and probability and their laws. Imagination 
of soaring height distinguished it, indulged 
in political as well as trenchant personal sat., 
ire, and personified whatever it pleased and 
how it pleased. 

Aristophanes, chiefest of Athenian comedy 
writers, a poet of rich and felicitous phrase, 
a consummate artist, a conservative antipa- 
thetic to new ideas, hating Socrates' cease- 
less test and scrutiny, a violent factionary 
against the Athenian democracy and its 
changeful temper, attacked in airy, high- 
wrought fantasies contentions of his age, 
placing them for instance in "Cloud-cuckoo- 
town," and with poignant, grotesque ridicule 
the more popular and conspicuous men, even 

274 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Socrates and his "thinking-shop," and also 
the gods and the women of Athens. His 
plays gained an undoubted chief end — they 
entertained and amused coteries of young 
men of Athens. 

If an ideal of the comic muse may be an 
all-in-all drunken distortion of real life, then 
the juggling and license of Aristophanes are 
peaks of perfection. 

The political equality of Athens and the 
ragged, hungry, poor, landless, unemployed 
because of the competition of slave labor, cit- 
izens to whom the equality permitted hope of 
food and lif e, are his especial butt. Fraud, in 
a democracy open to the light of day, uniting 
with ignorant pretense fought for political 
control. Aristophanes bitterly condemned 
the freedom and equality that gave men 
chance for good as well as for ill. 

In the stress of events comedy was impo- 
tent. Ridicule of rulers, bitter and libelous 
attacks, scornful laughter, became not so 
palatable to the people. The ending of the 
Peloponnesian war in the reduction of Athens 
broke the energy of public life and damped the 
ardor of the comic muse. 

THE SOPHISTS 275 

COMING OF THE SOPHISTS AND THE NEW 

EDUCATION 

Through the centuries marked by a 
burgeoning individualism we have seen the 
speculative mind of Greece employed mainly 
in the order of nature, and looking to man as 
a part of nature. That mind was still youth- 
ful. From the inefficacies and conflicts of the 
philosophers* conclusions, from hasty gener- 
alizations, doubt arose among men as to 
the righteousness of probing the universe's 
secret. They pronounced in broadspread 
murmurs the old physico-metaphysical in- 
quiries impious, knowledge the gods reserved 
for themselves. 

A new field was, however, opening. Al- 
ready for hundreds of years the Hellenes had 
peered into the conduct of life and had made 
for its government naive, elemental rules. 
The early gnomic poets afforded such laws in 
especial form. Precepts of theirs and prov- 
erbs we have seen long settled into a part 
of the education of Greek youth. Moral 
conceptions of the early philosophers had 
also become a part of the possessions of 
the race. Evolution in ethical thought, the 

276 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

elevating of the social mind and will, goes 
slowly. 

But emotions of an individualizing age, 
poetically feeling and affirming of physical 
appearances and of human rights, were now 
giving way to a virile capacity, to inductive, 
analytic discourse, to profounder thinking, 
weighing, judging, to effort at logical classi- 
fication. The impulses of the time in the 
poetry of the time, the Athenian drama, wit- 
ness the Greek mind engaged in major prob- 
lems of human existence and the inhering and 
ever-present democratic sentiment — in the re- 
lations of the individual as a member of an 
organized society. 

These subjects not only poets and his- 
torians treated — assemblies, gymnasia, the- 
aters, public walks, were alive with dis- 
cussions of human conduct; what was honor- 
able; what justice; what piety; what base; 
what expedient; what not; all growths rooted 
in anterior centuries, now nurtured by de- 
mocracy and fertilized by the sophists and 
other discussers of civic relations. With un- 
precedented development of the genius of 
social order went evolution in reason and re- 
flection, and presented a new conception of 

THE SOPHISTS 277 

the science of human conduct — the old educa- 
tion, old sanctions for conduct, having lost 
force. 

At Athens the progressive, speculative 
spirit had attracted men of new, radical 
ideas. Hand in hand with the city's out- 
blossoming in art and literature, within a few 
years after the battle of Salamis, a class of 
men not before known flourished within her 
public places, itinerant teachers, private pro- 
fessors, "sophists" they called themselves, 
who undertook to teach by facile theory, not 
by slow, hard-bought practice as heretofore, 
wisdom and virtue. In other cities than 
Athens, gathering youth about them, they 
spoke in public street and portico, and also at 
the Olympic and other national festivals. In 
their very origin and progress race feeling 
and race pride abounded. They were a by- 
product of the spirit of their age, npon which 
in turn they acted largely. 

Just as minstrels had recited in public 
place the old epic lays, so now sophists clad 
in purple delivered, for a good round price, 
speeches often polished with consummate 
art. They instructed and swayed the under- 
standing of the crowds by their persuasive 

278 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

dialectical conversation. 10 In Athens their 
appeal and influence was often among a newly 
emancipated populace inclined to treat with 
contempt the difficult, ethically ruled educa- 
tion of the past. Magnificent promises and 
flattery to those who paid high fees, preten- 
sions to pass upon all institutions and all 
peoples, marked the ministrations of the 
more superficial of their number. They 
sensed their countrymen's pace and their 
teachings accelerated it. They foreran the 
popular and forensic oratory and the gram- 
marians' science. 

The old, conservative ideal of education, 
god-fearing, law-abiding, national, a puri- 
tanic circumscribing self to every faculty's 
performance of its function, exalting duty to 
the state and its religion, socialistic in 
quality, aristocratic in practice, tending if 
carried to furthest logic to recede from plia- 
bility, — this old ideal in education was now 

10 These itinerant dialecticians, it is interesting to 
note, theologues have claimed to be direct ancestors in 
method of those early church fathers and doctors who 
went about announcing their evangel and using dialectic 
for conversion. They were therefore prototype of the 
sermonizer of to-day. 

THE OLD AND NEW EDUCATION 279 

giving way to a new form, liberal, individual- 
istic in quality, forgetful of the potence of 
righteousness and moral discipline, departing 
from vigorous, systematic exercise, freely ex- 
pending and enjoying self in luxuries, teach- 
ing no real thing existed, contemptuously* les- 
sening the influence of old-fashioned prin- 
ciples and of law, discrediting religious rever- 
ence and the gods of the people and bring- 
ing forward a showy reasoning, a flippant, 
shallow cleverness and a puffball acuteness. 
According to new standards the old ideal did 
not produce free and cultivated men. And 
these standards witness that the health, unity 
and glory of their country were coming to be 
no longer the chief wish of its citizens. Aris- 
tophanes, in the year 423, humorously and 
vigorously set the old education against the 
new in his comedy "The Clouds' ' — in part as 
follows : — 

"Let me tell of the old-fashioned educa- 
tion/ ' said Right Discourse, "as it prevailed 
when I was flourishing and self-control was 
respected. In the first place a child was not 
allowed to grumble. At that time, in orderly 
fashion, together, through the streets, all the 
boys of the ward had to march, scantily 

280 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

dressed too, even if the snow did come down 
like barley groats, to the master of music. 
Then they learned to rehearse a song without 
compressing their sides — either * Pallas, 
great stormer of cities, 7 or 'Afar a shout 
resounding, 7 putting vim into the melody 
their fathers had handed down. If any one 
of them played the buffoon, or tried any sud- 
den changes such as these now-a-days difficult 
trills of Phrynis, he got a beating for having 
discredited the Muses. . . . Nor at dinner was 
it permitted youth to take the head of the 
radish, nor to snatch anise and parsley from 
their elders, nor to live on fish and thrushes, 
nor to sit with legs crossed. . . . Take cour- 
age, youngster, and choose me as the Better 
Discourse, and you shall learn to hate the 
market-place, and keep away from the bath- 
houses and be ashamed of shameful deeds, 
and blaze up if anyone jeers at you, and rise 
from your seat when your elders approach, 
and never do any rudeness to your parents, 
or any shameful thing whatever which shall 
mar the image of Modest Reverence. . . . 
Then healthy and blooming you will spend 
your time in the gymnasia, not chattering in 

SOCRATES 281 

the market-place, dealing in coarse jokes like 
the young men of this day." 

The ferment of spirit which had given free - ^ 
political institutions in Athens had of neces- 
sity, we have said, produced instruction for 
fitting electors to perforin citizens ' duties. 
An eloquence, sonorous and melodic effect, 
the value of the persuasive word, the salient 
phrase, had been dear to the Greek heart 
since Homer sang of Achilles trained to be 
"a speaker of words and a doer of deeds. M 
It had now come to have highest significance 
— Euripides voiced the Greek feeling, " Per- 
suasion save in speech hath no temple" — for 
to an elector of a democracy it held within 
its possibilities mastership in politics- This 
wish the sophists of the fifth century met and 
embodied in their instructions. 

Man, it is clear, was the root of the Athe- 
nian philosophy — the reality of human rela- 
tions, human duties, the action of men to- 
wards one another and as units in the state. 
Protagoras of Abdera, a most eminent 
sophist, had said "man is the measure of all 
things'' ; that is, the fruit of philosophy is 
the good of the individual. Attention wag tQ 

282 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

become reflex and lead to self -under stand- 
ing. Socrates turned this into tlie seeking of 
human well-being founded upon general laws. 
"Learn to know thyself" — what thou art and 
what thy abilities for human use; to study 
man apart from the physical world referring 
in the main to man's relations to his fellows. 

The age of the profoundest of sophists, 
Socrates, was now come, the first age to con- 
ceive of an ethical science distinct and apart, 
its end the art of righteousness and social 
living. Those who knew these matters Soc- 
rates accounted good and honorable. Genu- 
ine knowledge, he thought, constrained to 
practice: the ignorant he assimilated to 
slaves. Real knowledge is thus a power, an 
impulsive principle, character. Virtue is 
wisdom; vice ignorance. No one errs of his 
own free will. "Every one wishes for his 
own good and would gain it if he could." 

A testing, scrutinizing, refutative, negative 
force in speculation, unmasking the plausible, 
the pretentious, the one-sided, the false, had 
already shone forth in the Greek spirit. The 
philosopher Zeno had uttered it. This the 
dialectic u process of Socrates now expanded, 

11 Dialectic, as has been said, was but the argumenta- 

SOCRATES 283 

asking frankly in ignorance and doubt as to 
the appositeness of definitions from the cur- 
rent sophists, until the minds of his hearers 
fermented under his subtle irony and warm, 
sunny rationalism. He would enter upon 
men's souls, clear their understanding, and 
convince them that most of their stock defini- 
tions were fallacious, mere names, that lack- 
ing clearness of conception they conceitedly 
thought they had knowledge while in reality 
they had none. 

The total self-reliance and independence of 
Socrates, his conviction of an apostolic 
mission from God, his intellectual power and 
stimulating originality, his critical, subtle 
and humane spirit, made him the colossus of 
all awakeners of dormant mentality. He was 
both magnetic prophet and cool rationalist. 
He sought to define men and things — ideas- 
He would, feeling the danger in Athens of the 
rule of ignorance and of those perverted by 

live, systematized conversation — a logomachy or "word- 
fight" — of a sharp-witted people, conducted with com- 
plaisance, with persuasion, under reeognized rules. 
"Whithersoever the argument bears us, just as a wind 
drives the ship, there must we go," said Socrates. The 
method was a ladder in the later Plato's hands for 
ascent towards truth. 

284 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

false standards, make men good through the 
gymnastic of moral effort. He had toward 
knowledge the enthusiasm, and toward edu- 
cation the optimism, of the true democrat. 

His aim to correct vicious tendencies and 
to strengthen mental infirmities hy series of 
questions which brought out common opin- 
ions, impelled thought and led to wholes and 
principles of conduct. "He often made me 
feel," said Alcibiades according to Plato *s 
report, "as if the life I am living I could not 
endure to live.'' Plato called him "the gad- 
fly" of the Athenians. "Of all men I have 
ever known," said the great idealist, "he was 
the wisest and justest and best." No illus- 
tration was too obvious or homely for his 
talk on practical conduct and for educing 
force within his listeners. With whomsoever 
he fell in, he was a fellow-enquirer. 

Socrates ' ministrations met the fate as- 
signed those shocking contemporaries with 
new ideas — the death loftiest and indomitable 
altruism is apt to meet when it puts forth 
a claim against the old habit. At his trial he 
reviewed his career before the court. The 
counts against him were of corrupting the 
youth by his teachings and introducing false 

SOCRATES 285 

gods — in obedience he confessed to an inner 
voice, a divine sign, that since childhood had 
commanded him. "To act thus was laid 
upon me by God, by prophecies, by dreams, 
and in every way by which divine will lays it 
upon man to act," Plato reports him saying. 12 
He had been called to teaching by the god at 
Delphi. His mission was sane and religious. 
"For I go about in order to persuade you 
both young and old, not to care for your 
bodies, nor for money, but especially for the 
soul — how it shall become the best possible; 
saying that virtue does not spring from 

12 Many Hellenes, and especially Socrates and Plato, 
foreran Christianity in teaching the individualism that 
places our best efforts upon our spiritual life and sets 
aside worldly estimate to approach more nearly a divine 
wisdom and worth. In Socrates' prayer, for instance, 
given at the end of Plato's "Phiedrus" — 

Pan beloved, and other gods 
Who now may be near me, 
Grant that within — in inner life — 

1 beautiful may be; 

Let outward things — whatever I have 

My inner life set free. 

The wise alone may I deem rich; 

And grant, O Pan, to me, 

No more of gold than a moderate man 

May use most easily. 

286 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

possessions but possessions from virtue, and 
so also every other good among men both in 
private and in public life. 18 "I should be a 
doer of guilty deeds, men of Athens, if . . . 
my post at which God stationed rae to seek 
wisdom and examine myself and others, I 
should desert through fear of death, or any- 
thing whatever. 7 ' "Now, therefore, men of 
Athens, I am far from pleading my own 
cause, as one might think, but I plead for 
your sake, lest in condemning me you sin 
in the matter of God's gift to you. For if 
you slay me, you will not easily find another 
such. . . . Persuaded by Anytus you may 
lightly put me to death ; then pass the rest of 
your lives lying in sleep, if God does not, in 
love to you, send another evangelist." 

Socrates was one of a class of men (like 
the Hebrew prophets) who give themselves to 
the moral reformation of mankind — moral 
reformation meaning a cleansing, a purify- 

18 Centuries later Jesus, as reported by Matthew (vi, 
33) was to say, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and 
his righteousness, and all these things shall be added 
unto you." AIL through its centuries of illumination 
the Hellenic spirit was a prophet bespeaking its historic 
sequel, the ideas of Christianity — ideas which it in scat- 
tered parts enunciated and sent forth into the world. 

PLATO 287 

ing. Such puritanism government, and es- 
pecially democracy, has ever found neces- 
sary. He was, then, a puritan prophet of 
righteousness, whose conviction and earnest- 
ness, says another, brushed aside levitat- 
ing, equivocating artificialities, whose lips 
preached and whose life practiced realities, 
who spoke in words of calm content and con- 
solation when at the approach of death he 
turned eyes to another world, but found his 
chiefest joys in the bonds of human fellow- 
ship in this. 

Onward from the time of Socrates ethics 
was a distinct branch of philosophy. 

Socrates, driving earnestly for whole, uni- 
versal principles, had, seeking what virtue is, 
fixed his thoughts on defining moral sanc- 
tion — what is true. Before him had been 
Parmenides' doctrine of static calm, a birth- 
less, deathless, formless, impalpable Being, 
One. Before him also the fertile mind of 
Heraclitus had, as we have seen, put forth 
the doctrine that all things in the world of 
sense are ever in "flux and there is no know- 
ing about them. ' ' 

Under the especial influences of these three 
minds, and also of the Spirit, pneuma, 

288 THE GREEK: SPIRIT 

irvtufza, of Xenophanes, Plato, Socrates 9 
disciple, constructed what commentators have 
called his theory of universals, of ideas — that 
realities corresponding to the definitions are 
other than the objects given in sense, that 
realities are whole thoughts, things-in-them- 
selves, splendid archetypes of the objects of 
sense, eternal and immutable entities, the 
same yesterday, to-day and forever. They 
are the objects of all real knowledge- Just 
as they lend themselves to the individual 
when he thinks, so they are the creators of 
our reason. Knowledge anterior to all ex- 
perience had its source in this world of ideas. 
Plato was horn near the beginning of the 
Peloponnesian war and grew to manhood dur- 
ing its conflict. His theory is a knitting to- 
gether by a sovereign intellect of the idealism, 
the old, unconscious and ineradicable tendency 
to poetry, and its sensuous apprehensions, of 
his race— an evolution of his inheritance — 
qualities which his fellow Hellenes had 
worked out in their religion, their civic polity 
and their art. Plato's abstract notions of 
Wisdom, Fortitude, Temperance, Justice, 
were another form the Greek mind took of 
poetically endowing every object with a soul, 

PLATO 289 

a personality, of forming gods as it had 
formed them in its childhood before Homer's 
day. 

His theory is also pervasively human, it 
has been remarked, inasmuch as it expresses 
a tendency of the human mind to bunch to- 
gether qualities of similarity and refer them 
to a type or model. ' The universe of Ideas 
which the mystic Plato set forth became the 
Logos, the indwelling life and truth of Philo 
and of the Fourth Gospel. 

A soul animates the world, and this world- 
soul is the only begotten, ^ovojrewyc, imma- 
nent. Supreme Deity is maker of the world- 
soul. After the same model deity fashioned 
the world-body. The cosmos or well-ordered 
universe, becomes thus an organism, " Di- 
vine Child." 

In creating tliis world "God was good," 
says Plato, and "in one who is good there 
never is envy: so being far from envy he 
wished that all things become as like himself 
as possible." "ITe set the soul in the midst 
of the body . . . and set forth a sphere 14 re- 

14 Because the sphere is the most perfect of forms, 
the universe, most perfect of existences, must be 
spherical. 

290 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

volving in a sphere, by reason of its own vir- 
tue powerful over itself, and needing no other, 
but being sufficient to itself for acquaintance 
and friend. ' ' 

The world-soul was the vice-gerent of the 
Creator, like the Logos of Heraclitus spoken 
of on foregoing page 148. The creator was 
the "Father," " Generator/ ' the Highest 
God. i i To discover the Maker and Father of 
the Whole is a task, and if once he were dis- 
covered, he could not be spoken to men." 
That is, All-Good and Primordial Principle 
is too remote from the common mind to be ex- 
plained* 

The created gods, receiving from their 
great demiurge the immortal part, fashioned 
man and the perishable part of his soul. In 
every human soul, said Plato, is a divine ele- 
ment of the Supreme God, "the eye of the 
soul." It is the highest and most divine part 
of man, a sovereign daemon who "lifts us 
from earth to our kinship with heaven, since 
we are not of earth but of heaven by birth." 
Greatest honor is borne the soul by making 
it better, and love of truth, of all excellences 
of character, is first, and love of justice. 
Virtue in and for itself is the highest human 

PLATO 291 

good. *' Every soul of man, by its very na- 
ture, has seen the tilings that really are, other- 
wise it would not have come into this form of 
life. To rise from things here to the recol- 
lection of those is not easy for every soul." 
"Even in life that which makes each one of 
us to be what we are is the soul; and when 
we are dead, the deathless being of us, which 
is called the soul, goes on her way to other 
gods, that to them she may give account-" 

As in the old Orphic speculation, bodily 
desires are weights and hindrances to the im- 
prisoned soul of man eager for release. 
Man's life is all a preparation for death. 
Of its future life with the gods the soul has 
had visions in the archetypes. There are 
two other places of the future world — Ach- 
eron, the place of impure souls and Tartarus, 
or Hell. 

The beautiful is that which pertains to ex- 
cellence of soul or body; the ugly that which 
pertains to defects and vices. This identifies 
aesthetics with ethics, and puts art as a sub- 
server to morality. Because of the suscep- 
tibility of humans to that about them — to the 
influence of environment — from his perfect 
state Plato would banish all art not edifying, 

292 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

not mastering the subject to political pur- 
poses. In common with other disciples of 
Socrates lie inherited a puritan asceticism 
and taught a Dorian depreciation of lighter, 
seductive externals. 

The state is but the individual writ large 
— and here we have Plato expressing the 
sympathies of the Pythagorean brotherhood. 
The disorganization of the state from mal- 
formed individualism — the disintegration of 
a state's life which Plato was witnessing at 
Athens — he would heal by subjecting the in- 
dividual to the best interest of all, to corpo- 
rate sentiment- For his perfect state Sparta 
or Lacedsemon, where had persisted a mili- 
tary organization associated with the victory 
of northern invaders, gave Plato the outline 
— here again in the ideal state, as in the archi- 
tecture of the Acropolis and in the religious 
drama, the northern Dorian genius of the 
Hellenes dominating the southern Ionian 
character. Rulers should be filled with "the 
divine love" of ''just and judicious action." 
War-men or military are the armed con- 
science and will of the state, and handicrafts- 
men and husbandmen who produce the great, 
supporting base. For this pattern state "an 

PLATO 293 

imitation of the best and most beautiful life," 
Plato laid down rules concerning the "divi- 
sion of powers," the independence of the 
superior political functions, which descended 
to and influenced the work of our forefather- 
makers of the Constitution of the United 
States- 
Conceptions of a state which prevailed at 
Athens in its marvelous fifty years, that of 
Pericles reported by Thucydides, that of 
^Eschylus and Sophocles, and of Pheidias and 
Ictinus as shown by their works, regard the 
city not only as a dwelling place of safety 
from enemies, but also as a medium through 
which may be practiced refined ideals of life 
— not for the sake of life, but for the sake, 
said a pupil of Plato, of the noble life. This 
pupil, Aristotle, who at a time when the Greek 
city-state was perishing compactly organized 
the scattered material of existing constitu- 
tions of one hundred and fifty-eight Greek 
cities, became the founder of comparative po- 
litical science. "Man is by nature a citizen," 
said this theorizer of the realities the Greek 
cities had lived. A citizen he defined by the 
right to make laws and administer justice. 
The state is a natural institution necessary 

294 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

first from the needs of man, and second that 
he may live his best, complete life. It is an 
organism, each part of which is fitted for its 
function. It seeks the common good of all 
by building 1 character and intellect, by the 
exercise of human personality. Formed to 
make life secure, said Aristotle, the state 
continues that men may live the highest ac- 
tivities, both civic and super-civic or divine. 
All education is but preparation for some 
worthy activity. The ideal state educates its 
people for its institutions. Only in this way 
can its institutions be preserved. 

Upon what is Plato's greatness grounded? 
Answers have been many, not including, in 
summaries, a literary art that is an unvarying 
marvel. Upon his all-illuminative sugges- 
tiveness ; upon his vitality that meets with an 
interpretation the spiritual phase of gener- 
ations since his day — even of to-day; upon 
the fact that his mysticism, his ilium inism has 
not been at war with the scientific spirit, but, 
says a disciple, has rather saved it from 
aridity and worship of word and form. In 
warming, softening and lighting Plato has the 
all-inclusiveness of the Teacher of Christian- 
ity. 

PINNACLES OF THE GREEK ASCENT 295 

The Socratic solution of life is that life 
should be an energizing, an ardent enquiry, an 
unswerving seeking for the eternal Good 
and Beautiful and True — ever a seeking and 
a beholding, never a satisfied possession. 
The solution celebrates the maturity of man. 
The deeper we see the more conscious we 
are of a great deficiency. We must nurse no 
illusion. Only seek and fear not. "It is 
wrong to do injustice in return for injustice, 
or to inflict ill on any man, whatever we may 
suffer at his hands," said Socrates a month 
before he drank the poison to which he was 
sentenced at his trial. In time we shall have 
forgotten self in the presence of the blazing 
universe of God. When self is forgotten the 
end is attained. 

In Socrates and Plato we have come to the 
pinnacle of the Greek ascent. The energy of 
the genius of Hellas is great enough to over- 
come the hostility of nature and fate. Its 
pronunciamento is: — Mediation between the 
soul and its external world is in a wise and 
strong self-limitation. Aidos, alBwz^ reverent 
fear had now become sophrosyne, oaxppoauvTj^ 
temperate self-restraint based on reverence, 
health of soul, soundness of intellect, 

296 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

sense of one's own worth. Like aidos, re- 
plete with religious feeling, dominating 
earlier peoples, sophrosyne subjugated ex- 
uberance, guarded against excess and made 
for moderation, self-control. 

To measure the height attained by the 
genius of this third great epoch of the Hel- 
lenes is impossible. The same marvelous 
perfection we see everywhere in its works. 
It was mother of the completed idea of civil 
liberty, bearing witness in its output that 
democracy need not welter in commonness 
but may in its polity do the mightiest of 
deeds and with its thought set out the might- 
iest of works — this age of Pheidias in sculp- 
ture, of .^Eschylus and Sophocles and Eurip- 
ides and Aristophanes in poetry, and of Soc- 
rates in ethics, in the conduct of life. The 
depth of its thought and art are unfathomable, 
living with the waters of the eternal spirit. 
We ma} r exhaust all clear, calm and luminous 
images and not overpraise its majesty and 
splendor. 

A consciousness of the meaning and po- 
tence of their work to later nations, and for 
generations to come, must have been alive 
among those Hellenes and urging them to ac- 

PINNACLE OF THE GREEK ASCENT 297 

complish the impossible. The lucid and per- 
suasive speech of Pericles quoted on forego- 
ing page 15, the reasons Herodotus gave 
for his writing, on foregoing pages 250 and 
251, Thucydides in his history, bring us evi- 
dence of their feeling for the future and their 
heirs. They were infused with a conquering 
activity. They had the penetrative percep- 
tion and power, the energy they said was di- 
vine — that not only engenders the idea that 
leads to action, but makes the thought itself 
all-conquering, — that quality called damon- 

isch: 

"Je mehr du fiihlst ein Mensch zu sein 
Desto ahulicher bist du den Gottern ." 

DECADENCE OF THE GREEK 

SPIRIT 

Die Gesundheit und Daur eines Staats beruhet nieht 
auf dem Punkt seiner hodisten Cultur sondern auf 
einem weisen oder gliicklichen Gleichgewicht seiner 
lebendig-wirkenden Kriifte. . . . 

Aber das baben alle Gattungen menschlicher Auf- 
klarung gemein, dass jede zu einem Punkt der Vollkom- 
menheit strebet, der, wenn er durch einen Zusammenhang 
gliicklicher Umstande hier oder dort erreicbt ist, sicb 
weder ewig erbalten noch auf der Stelle wiederkommen 
kann, sondern eine abnehmende Reihe anfangt. — Heb- 
der, in Ideen zur Philosophie der GeschicMe der Mensch- 
heit. 

As societies consolidate tbey pass through a pro- 
found intellectual change. Energy ceases to find vent 
through the imagination, and takes the form of capital; 
hence as civilizations advance the imaginative tempera- 
ment tends to disappear, while the economic instinct is 
fostered, and tbus substantially new varieties of men 
come to possess the world. — Brooks Adams, in The Law 
of Civilisation and Decay. 

300 

DECADENCE OF THE GREEK 

SPIRIT 

CAUSES OF DETERIORATION 

Measured in the great processes of time 
the age of perfect ideals in Hellas, and the 
concrete embodying of its ideals, is as mo- 
mentary as it is sublime. Still beautiful and 
affluent the spirit of Greece declined. Equilib- 
rium of powers, the golden mean of avoid- 
ance of extremes, the harmony of aptitudes 
which rests upon the predominance of the 
highest and subordination of the lower — 
delicacy of the senses and susceptibility to 
impression that had led to the Hellene's sense 
of limitation, to his abhorrence of excess; 
feeling of the balanced use of all he perceived 
whether in his art or in his life, his lucid, 
vivid singleness in working means to ends — 
fell away. After the depleting war between 
Athens and Sparta there was little balance 
between the soul and body of Hellas. The 
fundamental relations upon which her spirit 

301 

302 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Lad advanced for perhaps a thousand years, 
she had lost. A cleavage between the thinker 
and people had come; thought was now be- 
coming the possession of the solitary, holding 
little active relation to social and political 
life. The constructive vigor of Hellas seemed 
near its end. 

What led to the decadence? 

Mere reaction, suggests one: The ideal 
was too high for the average citizen to make 
a reality. No life could maintain such a 
height. Its competition, its very intensity, 
must in time react, in politics to division and 
disintegration from factional strife; in art to 
softness and enervation. The decay of Greek 
civilization was due to a weakening of the 
moral fiber of the Greek people. 

Exhausting the blood of the nation by ex- 
tinction of the strongest in spirit and body, 
the best, in interminable, intercity strife, 
especially in the Peloponnesian war, says a 
second, — just as the progressive energy of 
nations' blood has been depleted in many an- 
other time in later history; as in the death of 
strong men of imperial Rome in her extensive 
wars, in the sweeping away of strong men of 
England in Marston Moor and Naseby, when 

WHY THE SPIRIT DECLINED 303 

men of Scotland, "the Flowers of the Forest, 
were a'wede away" at Flodden, in the death 
of strong men of America at Bunker Hill and 
Saratoga. 

Physical forces of the Hellenes may have 
been insidiously sapped, a third avers : Ma- 
laria becoming endemic about four hundred 
years before Christ, destroyed initiative force 
and disintegrated the energy of the people, 
in such ways as the disease has devitalized 
races to-day. There is proof that during the 
Peloponnesian war, after the plague, Athens 
suffered a considerable languor and indeter- 
mination and unwillingness to make effort to 
gain back her losses. Exuberant strength 
she showed at times later, but it was inter- 
mittent. Malaria, slowly inrooting, might 
have led to modifications, to invisible changes 
of the ideas of the people that occurred in the 
last quarter of the fifth century. 

Again, says another, simplest economics 
may have affected conditions — deficiency of 
the home food supply. The population of 
Athens had expanded, and imports must have 
grown increasingly difficult during the Pelo- 
ponnesian war and afterwards. Abnormal 
economic conditions doubtless had had much 

304 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

to do with the political unrest. Able-bodied 
slaves competed in manufacture with the 
landless, poorer citizen. Property and its 
possession underlay a notable part of the 
political antagonism of Hellas. 

Weight of numbers had at last a victory in 
the decay of Hellas. Compared with the 
hordes about them the Hellenes, we have said, 
were a handful. They had always been fight- 
ing against odds. Their wonderful work in 
politics, in ethics, in physical science and 
philosophy, in poetry and prose, in architec- 
ture and tectonic arts they had done with 
subversion as a possibility ever threatening. 
They had swept the disintegrator back when 
he came in military floods. They had unified, 
assimilated, absorbed, foreign elements and 
influences to an amazing degree. The name 
of Hellas had gone afar. Hellas was the 
light, the glory of beauty and freedom, to 
which the oppressed and maimed of other 
lands, and also the adventurers and traders 
of other lands, had turned. Foreign men 
poured in. Foreign ideas, foreign habits, 
overrode the earnest, poised life of the earlier 
generations. The incomers lessened the peo- 
ple's regard for ancestral custom, for race 

WHY THE SPIRIT DECLINED 305 

law and race legend, and, strongest sanction 
to race stability, race religion and fertility. 
Race persistence declined. 

Hellenism fell at last before numbers, an 
inert and superstition-fed mind, and before 
individualism developing itself awry, inca- 
pable of unity and of its trusteeship Pericles 
had bespoken. The Greeks' frugal, modest 
self-reliance, their power of doing without, 
gave way to a form of individualism that de- 
feated itself in profligate luxury and windy 
education. In place of an ardent public 
spirit there grew indifference and stagnation. 
The social mind had ceased to idealize liberty, 
and to worship it and strive for its perpetu- 
ation. It had become estranged from itself. 
Loyalty to and reverence for the historic past 
fell away, and also devotion to state which 
had made their heritage sacred, a gift worth 
passing on. 

Patriotism, especially among the prosper- 
ous and corrupt, gave place to a cosmopolitan- 
ism and an economic existence so poor as to 
proclaim devotion to self its sole end. Per- 
sonal ambition, narrow aims, culture, sup- 
planted the ardor of heroic deeds, great 
causes, and made preferable life in personal 

306 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

ease and luxury. The individual settled into 
pursuit of what his short-sightedness deemed 
his own separate interests. It was a day of 
the ascendency of the self-seeking type of 
man. The high altruism that distinguished 
Greece in the Persian wars had reacted to 
egotism. False individualism had developed 
to a loss of puhlic spirit. The far-sighted 
sense of the unity of individual and state 
that had glorified the citizen in the earlier 
city-state was now darkened by a supposed 
antagonism between the interests of the indi- 
vidual and of the state. Certain Hellenes 
seized opportunity for wealth and power and 
destroyed the balance of a democracy — at 
Athens was "contention to role/' said Plato, 
competition for offices and honors. The 
weaker could not withstand the force of the 
interested strong. In larger laws of biology 
even states suffer senile decay. 

A saying of Plato that a change of mode 
of music indicates change in the laws is quoted 
on foregoing page 198. The rule fits other 
arts also. Into the drama Euripides had in- 
troduced dean, sharp individualization. And 
in sculpture the worker was, in these years, 
not embodying national or state ideals, char^ 

WHY THE SPIRIT DECLINED 307 

acter, moral sentiment, the ethos of Aristotle. 
Rather, as Praxiteles in carving the sensuous 
beauty of Aphrodite, he was portraying, and 
with more individuality in technic and more 
human feeling and character, divinities whose 
gifts were for the enjoyment of the individual 
citizen. 

Even the unifying religious cults, which 
socialized the individual soul repledging it 
to the soul of the people — these lost their 
hold. Supernatural intervention of supreme 
powers in the affairs of men was a part of the 
creed of every Hellene. After the disasters 
of the Peloponnesian war, gods who had per. 
mitted destruction of the political leadership 
of Athens received scantier courtesies. Re> 
ligion, as we now intimated, had in many 
functions been devotion to the city-state cm 
bodying or projecting the united conscious- 
ness of the people. Private forms of wor- 
ship, finding in the happiness of another life 
consolations for sufferings in this, in these 
times grew apace- That toleration, that 
liberality of the democratic sentiment at 
Athens which permitted all discourse and in- 
tellectual disquisition, that respect for the 
individual's dissent in opinion and manner to 

308 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

which Pericles refers in his speech on fore- 
going page 225 — which had allowed the blame- 
less quest of Socrates and his dwelling on 
special promptings from his divine voice — 
right of free speech, love of fullest liberty, the 
freedom from restraint that had permitted 
the spirit to go unnumbered ways in the wan- 
derings of thought, in political aspiration, in 
religious fathomings, in philosophical spec- 
ulation, in analyses of the moral aspects of 
man — lent unchallenged opportunity to de- 
moralizing incomers- 

Thucydides and Euripides and others of 
the day had voiced a blighting skepticism in 
respect to the gods, and miracles, and "proph- 
ecies and oracles and the like which ruin 
men by the hopes they inspire in them." 
They had carried disbelief further than it had 
gone in the sayings of credulous Herodotus 
and his generation. The funeral oration of 
Pericles, pronounced in the year 431 and re- 
ported by Thucydides, has, it is noted, no al- 
lusion to popular religious myths, although 
it glows with the amethystine light of a 
people's grief. Their religion, originally a 
living thing, had hardened to a mass of for- 
mulas and ceremonies made impressive by 

WHY THE SPIRIT DECLINED 309 

riches of the state and by association with 
the race's art. A ritual expressing feeling of 
foregone generations deadened warming and 
buoyant intimacy with emotions of their day. 
The people turned elsewhere, to other associ- 
ations, for exercise of their religious con- 
sciousness. 

Emotion defeated reason. Their old-time 
faith — that a lucid, strong intelligence, self- 
reliant, sustained by energy and directness 
of vision is master of all circumstances — had 
gone. Their rationalism had fallen, and at 
times before insidious, infiltering currents of 
faiths that nullified the basal principles and 
facts of Greek life, and before miasmatic 
superstitions which masses of slaves and trad- 
ing foreigners seized as they poured into Hel- 
las, or perchance brought with them. Greece 
had labored to educate a corrupt world and 
was herself led to corrupt the ideals she 
sought to universalize. 

Worship of the gods, we have seen, had 
been an ancestral usage. The gods incar- 
nated race feeling and race thinking. Men 
and women who united in worship showed 
their loyalty to their race and to their state 
which sanctioned and set forth the liturgy. 

310 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Not to join in the ritual meant disloyalty to 
state and race. Their worship asserted their 
common inheritance and oneness. When the 
worship lost hold on the people their sense of 
oneness in blood lessened. But long after 
faith in their religious values died, festivals 
instituted by the state held the attention of 
the populace by the splendor of their cere- 
monies, their poetical imagery, the beauty of 
their ritual in form and color, and by associ- 
ation with the Hellenic race-traditions and 
the music of the Hellenic speech. The Athe- 
nians, we have said, were ever markedly given 
to religious cults. Even when Paul spoke on 
the Areopagus centuries after their national- 
ism had gone, he told the generation of his 
day that he saw they were a very god-fearing 
folk, cl»c decacSaefAOpearepouG bfia^ Oetopai** 

1 More than a hundred years after Paul, Pausanias 
wrote of an altar to Mercy in the market place of 
Athens — "to whom, although of all gods he is the most 
helpful in human life and in the mutations of fortune, 
the Athenians are the only Hellenes who pay honor." 
"They are more pious than other folks," the old Greek 
traveler continues, "for they have an altar to Reverent 
Fear, and to Rumor, and to Impulse- It is clear that 
to those who are more pious than others there will be a 
proportionate share of good fortune." 

WHY THE SPIRIT DECLINED 311 

Attendance at and glorying in the national 
games and, at Delphi and Olympia, devotion 
to the divinities of the shrines, had been, we 
have seen, a general expression of the Hel- 
lenes' national unity. But even the pan- 
Hellenic festivals which had had so great a 
share of the Greeks' spontaneity in thought 
and joy in action, and had once fairly voiced 
the profounder spirit of Greek religion and 
Greek politics, passed from the ideal of phys- 
ical strength united with grace in friendly 
competition. No longer did balanced bodily 
excellence and vigor, refined by love of beauty 
of form and religious feeling, bespeak na- 
tional life. Now athletes were classmen, mon- 
strously developed by exercise, set apart, 
over-specialized. The games were coming to 
be commercialized athletic shows, where hu- 
man beings, over-developed to the degree of 
a mechanical instrument, made sport an end 
in itself and trafficked for victory — where, as 
popular heroes, they exhibited their tempo- 
rary strength to under-developed, unath- 
letic applauders filling the seats of an amphi- 
theater, spectators themselves indisposed to 
effort. 

With the Greeks, as with a sometime later 

312 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

nation, the very core of its formative energy 
was a religiosity, that exalted power of the 
puritan in an other-worldliness which expands 
his democracy in this life — the strength of 
the worshiper who is a priest as well as 
child of his divinity. Sacerdotalism eats out 
the heart of a democracy. "WTien a priest 
caste grew, even in so indefinite lines as in 
later Hellas, when authority sought to sup- 
port itself and credulous practices flourished 
among the people, a weakening of the indi- 
vidual set in. That in his old age, writing 
his "Laws," Plato inveighs with all his elo- 
quence against infidelities, the heresy of dis- 
belief in the Greek gods, in their providence 
and care, in their incorruptibility, doubtless 
brings us light upon actual conditions before 
his eyes. The foundations of the later Hel- 
lenes ' religion were the ideas and sensibilities 
of their ancestors. Race associations had 
built upon them, and when they were broken 
or displaced nothing of inherent religious 
value took their place. 

The last stages of the Greek spirit are now 
clear, and also the pathos of its fall. Sub- 
version of the power of Athens at the end 
of the Peloponnesian war left the world of 

WHY THE SPIRIT DECLINED 313 

Hellas incapable of thrusting back inr aiders. 
Disintegration of her spiritual and self-re- 
liant strength opened the way for any well- 
knit, crafty and ambitious foreigner to pos- 
sess himself of her people. "The man of 
Macedon," Philip, answered the call and 
fitted the occasion. Among the Hellenes, 
sycophants, that is manufacturers of false 
and frivolous indictments, demagogues pre- 
tending to represent the people but in reality 
self-seekers, and foreign adventurers, out- 
balanced the patriots. The people armed for 
their country's defense and met death in bat- 
tle, says their epitaph composed by Demos- 
thenes, that the Hellenes might not bear the 
hateful yoke of slavery. 

The progression of the Greek spirit ends 
wholly with the establishment of Macedonian 
supremacy in 338 before Christ. Liberty 
fled in the last mutterings of Demosthenes' 
thunder against the barter with Philip of 
Macedon. The Greek mind stifled under dic- 
tation from Pella. Its creative activity 
ceased. " Far-seeing Zens," said the peo- 
ple's ancient Homer, "takes away half the 
virtue of a man the day when slavery closes 
down upon him." 

314 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

There succeeded a nation of slaves in. civic 
life and savans. To lavish money upon per- 
sonal enjoyment Greeks of the great ages had 
esteemed vulgar, inhuman, un-Hellenic. To 
see in the luxury of private life a compensa- 
tion for the loss of political freedom they had 
judged the choice of slaves. But in Hellas 
this now happened. Demosthenes, and other 
orators, tell of the show and extravagance of 
the self-seeking men of their day compared 
with the simple living of the Athenians who 
had built Athens with a magnificence and 
splendor no future time could surpass. Tho 
moral basis of the national greatness had 
fallen away. More than half a century after 
the victory at Charonsea various of the cities 
of Hellas recovered independence and formed 
a loose federation — each city exercising the 
old Greek autonomy in its social and peculiar 
affairs, but a federated or common govern- 
ment for purposes touching their nationalism. 
The life of the league was brief. 

A virile, unconquerable people enlightened 
with a social quality, a world-loyalty, never 
before embodied, prepossessed with the quest 
of the ethical values of life, aflame with the 
invisible spiritual energy of a religious en- 

WHY THE SPIRIT DECLINED 315 

thusiasrn, zealous with an ardor to system- 
atize knowledge, gifted "with a mental supple- 
ness and penetration into all problems, of 
unparalleled art impulse, idealists, doers of 
deeds and thinkers of great thoughts fell be- 
fore irrationalisni even to destructive eco- 
nomics in their state, and an unnaturalism 
that forgot essential race conceptions in their 
church, before mere subtleties and a sophis- 
tical making the worse the better reason. 
There came a man who did "plough with a 
silver ploughshare." Abroad in the land 
was the siren-song of self-indulgence and the 
luxury lightness yearns for. 

Doric puritanism and its race traditions 
and resolute bravery no longer cleaned Hel- 
lenic air. In place of spiritual height deeply 
rooted in race ethics, instead of an ancient 
simplicity and solidity there was an ever-in- 
creasing frivolity, reacting egotism and pleas- 
ures- Possibly we may say the Hellenes 
were victims of their own versatility. That 
is, their progressive energy, the strength of 
their creative and inventive faculties may so 
far have overpowered force of tradition that 
they no longer preserved this second conserv- 
ative force in active civilization. Their culti- 

316 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

vation and its vast creative power Lad lost 
balance. 

Their disintegration, as we have said, was 
helped by tendencies of disparate and unre- 
lated stocks of the population, and perhaps 
by tlie old, fluid, solvent, ^gean people's 
blood that could have little intellectual com- 
prehension of and emotional sympathy with 
the organization and administration with 
which their old-time, conquering, no rt hern 
Ach^eans, energetic idealists, men of action, 
were instinct, — by means of which organi- 
zation alone the Hellenic states could have 
strength to endure. 

Those peoples coming from the north, 
whom Homer had sung as Achseans, whose 
greatest inroad we know as Dorian, had pos- 
sibly spent themselves. Amalgamated with 
the multitudes of the milder _ZEgean folk 
whom they had originally subdued, to whose 
civilization they had given order and force 
and breadth, whoso art impulse the stimulus 
of their energy in other fields of human action 
had impelled to output, — these may have 
been finally overcome by the larger stream of 
blood. Indolence, fondness for pleasure, ac- 
quiescence in whatever power constituted it- 

WHY THE SPIRIT DECLINED 317 

self master, may have been evidence of a 
subjugated race's complete conquest of Its 
old-time victor. 

That the spirit of a people is moral, vigor- 
ous, virtuous, while it is absorbed in realizing* 
itself, in giving" to its purposes objective ex- 
istence, is almost a truism. When it accom- 
plishes the end of its generic, spiritual life, 
it ceases its activities and passes from ma- 
turity to age, unless it originates or takes on 
a new purpose and so a new spirit. The Hel- 
lenes had ceased to win their own spiritual 
life and carry it further. "The gods bring 
to pass much that is beyond all hope," sings 
Euripides, "and the expected does not hap- 
pen. But God has discovered a way for 
the unexpected. So did this matter turn 
out." 

For events in history seemingly more un- 
fortunate for our human kind than the over- 
whelming of the Greek life and the spirit 
impelling it, we must turn to the quenching, 
amid the chaos of peoples that marked the 
patristic age, of the moral impulses of early 
Christianity — when, says a late writer, the 
ethical enthusiasm, the insight into human 
needs of its Teacher were subordinated to a 

318 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

system of doctrines generated in decadent 
Greek dialectics, misty oriental symbolism, 
metaphysical myths and Jewish dogmas. 

But even now, after her subversion, through 
what she had already accomplished, Greece 
entered upon another work of human con- 
sciousness. Dying she lived for the world; 
it "is not quickened except it die." In giving 
up her exclusiveness and nationality she en- 
tered more immediately upon a broader in- 
fluence — the evangelizing all sequent cen- 
turies. Her radiant spirit had put forth a 
perfect blossom. Asiatic and Italian myr- 
iads were now, and in centuries to come, to 
bear its seed to all lands. Great fusion of 
peoples resulted from the leadership of Philip 
and Alexander of Macedon, and soon after 
Alexander's troublous day it was hard to 
draw the line between Greek and barbarian. 
Greek art was now become fit for art's small 
talk; Greek literature widespread, but im- 
itative, precise, learned; Greek philosophy at 
times morosely factional and distorted, but 
still seminal. 

Isocrates had said that the Hellenes ' lan- 
guage was a matter no longer of race but 
intelligence. Already the speech bearing its 

AN EVANGEL TO SEQUENT CENTURIES 319 

precious treasure had so made its way that 
the stranger, aping the child of light, might 
gain or externally assume an Hellenic intel- 
lectual view-point. The oriental translated 
his name into Greek — just as at a later day 
he translated it into Greco-Latin, and as he 
often translates it into English to-day. Dur- 
ing the next centuries, upon each new con- 
queror, the spirit of Greece seized hold till 
the whole Roman world became Hellenized; 
until in Constantinople Roman imperialism 
itself sought to gain its strength in a Greek 
foundation. 

The free-playing life of the people out of 
which Greek oratory and Greek dialectics and 
love of discussion had grown, had passed 
away. But power of speech and of culti- 
vated expression still abode. Studies of, and 
acquaintance with, the ideas and literature 
of earlier Greek times now came to fulfill the 
ideal of education — that from which our ideal 
of education to-day has by direct event and 
tradition descended. Socrates, Plato and 
Aristotle had developed a complete philos- 
ophy of education, which passed from Greece 
south to Africa, and westward where the 
Romans adopted it and fitted it to their needs. 

320 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

From them the philosophy spread to Teutonic 
and Celtic populations of the north. The 
Renaissance revived and expanded the ideal 
and passed it on, till we find in treatises of our 
English Milton and Locke and other writers 
principles set forth by the works of Xeno- 
phon, Plato and Aristotle. 

CHARACTERISTICS COMMON TO HELLENES 
AND AMERICANS 

The spirit that animated the Hellenes is 
unique. We do not find its repetition. All 
parallels are imperfect- Of late years Japan 
has at times faintly suggested the Hellenic 
feeling towards race "unity, and in its rapidity 
of development the all-assimilative, eager, 
adaption of ideas of the Greeks. Also in the 
ethics of Bnshido the Hellenic sense of self- 
limitation; and in art a plasticity of concep- 
tion and expression. In Japan, too, we have 
modern likeness to the old Greek solidarity 
of the group. But in its repression of indi- 
vidualism Japan is distinctly non-Hellenic. 
The world is grown large. What moderns 
strive to achieve is unwieldy. Our outwork- 
ings have not proportion and grace. Nor 

CERTAIN LIKENESSES 321 

have they, save rarely, the consciousness of 
God-given mission, as with the old Hellenes. 

i i Eternal Youths of History" the Greeks 
have variously been called. In one of his 
latest works, "Tirnaeus," Plato makes an 
Egyptian priest say to Solon, "You Hellenes 
are never anything but children . - - you are 
all young; there is no opinion handed down 
among you by ancient tradition, nor any sci- 
ence hoary with age. ' ' " Children ! ' ' ex- 
claims Europe at the naive individualism of 
our fellow country-men and women, and 
their unproclaimed lack of background and 
race-tradition. 

To those old Hellenes Americans have a 
certain likeness. They are not wholly for- 
eign, wholly strange. Similarities of each 
people the Dean of Greek Letters in Amer- 
ica has named along lines similar to these : — 
Buoyancy and elasticity of spirits, quick per- 
ception, straightness and keenness of vision, 
directness of action, energy, audacity, inven- 
tiveness, a versatile many sidedness, mobility, 
universality. Another quality of the Hellenic 
temperament an English scholar has dwelt 
upon — a natural expansiveness, a wish to 
enter into kindly relations with those one 

322 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

meets, to exchange, one might say, a pleasant 
word with the stranger in a forest roadway, 
to utter a fleeting emotion or thought to 
chance passers-by. That human touch also 
is like the Americans' — doubtless in each 
people founded on the colonists' environ- 
ment, a singleness of purpose and sim- 
plicity of life that must be with the pioneer, 
a subordination of the complex and organized 
which Americans have to this time success- 
fully kept. 

The Hellenes lived their life, somebody has 
said, much as we Americans should have 
lived it. A puritan-blooded American from 
Kansas City or Minneapolis, walking through 
the Pirseus of the fourth century before 
Christ, and onward to and in Athens, would, 
if the high-pitched idealism of the man could 
speak from his tailored body, doubtless be 
hailed as a possible Hellene from the shadows 
of .ZEtna, or from some northern town. In 
the instincts of his soul, whether American 
or Hellene, the world is fresh. AH is new, 
all is plastic. There is no exhaustion, no 
world-weariness. No sentimental melan- 
cholia, no hazy inanities and faded sestheti- 
eism. He joys in a mental dexterity, a gift 

CERTAIN LIKENESSES 323 

of bringing to one supreme effort all energies 
of body and will, putting heart and soul into 
whatever task he may for the time essay, 
ready appliance of the Opportunity that the 
altar in the Olympia stadium prompted. A 
characteristic of his is what Thucydides said 
belonged to the Athenians — to get through 
the matters they have undertaken is their 
holiday, and nothing to do is as disagreeable 
as wearisome occupation. 

The old Hellenes had not only the pe- 
culiar endowments of their race, but an added 
characteristic distinguished them — namely, a 
more nervous energy. So Americans, to-day. 
They had the predilection of youth for ad- 
venture, for change associated with risk, that 
derring-do, that courage and endurance that 
lights the countenance of eternal youth. 
Then, too, the love of being first, an appetite 
for success, "always to be best and excel- 
ling others,' ' said Homer, was a fertile Hel- 
lenic characteristic. " Contention (competi- 
tion) stirs a man to work even though he be 
inactive," sang Hesiod. "For any one in 
lack of work, when he sees another, a rich 
man, he speeds himself to plough, and to plant 
and manage well his house; neighbor vies 

324 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

with neighbor who is hastening to wealth- 
Good is this contention. Potter grudges pot- 
ter, and craftsman, craftsman; and beggar is 
jealous of beggar and poet of poet." This 
quality grows with what it feeds upon, but 
remains insatiable. To it we may ascribe 
somewhat of the excelling greatness of the 
Hellenes, and in some measure their unhappy 
fall. 

In all democracies, it has been noted, open, 
noisy applause expressing public gratitude 
for service to fellow-citizens is generally es- 
teemed the desirable of honors. No other 
manifestation of deference and admiration 
seems so highly prized. The more impres- 
sible the people of the democracy, the in- 
tenser the sentiment, the louder the applause. 
The greater also the liability of the acclaimed 
to a demoralized self-estimation, to subver- 
sion of judgment and to ultimate corruption. 

To their political leaders the Hellenic de- 
mocracies gave profuse rewards of material 
substance. The Greek character was quick, 
frank, sympathetic, impressible. Accept- 
ance of the gift witnessed consciousness in 
the men that they, too, rated at a price their 
patriotism. But when a leader as poised as 

CERTAIN LIKENESSES 325 

Pericles had gained firm hold on the people, 
or as later, Demosthenes, suck men used their 
power honorably. 

Another present-day psychological inter- 
est also pertained among this sensitive peo- 
ple. The Greeks were given to see the im- 
portance in action, and in public affairs, of 
what they called pheme, <pyi*q r Rumor, a god- 
dess of mysterious origin who impels men, 
they imaginatively said, a subtle force for 
which our English has no name, or at best 
a misrepresenting one — the force that makes 
the collective mind, the primitive habit of 
thinking in group unity, the gregarious sym- 
pathy, which, contagious, quick to act on sug- 
gestion, forgetful of self, forgetful also of 
calm reason, sometimes lacking higher moral 
qualities, by the crude collective mentation 
or emotion of group life submerges individ- 
ual will and forms at a crisis the common, 
spontaneous impulse of a multitude, an all 
dominating social will. They recognized the 
mysterious unit in the days of Homer. In 
greatly enlarged phases this vox dei became 
the vox populi of the inspiration after Ther- 
mopylae, and drove to the upbuilding of 
Athens. In that city stood an altar to 

326 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Kumor. The city's juiy courts, accustom- 
ing the people to seek and balance opposing 
views, the habit of public speaking and teach- 
ing of rhetor and sophist, led to the weight 
of different judgments neutralizing con- 
tagion- To this emotional mind of the crowd 
the Hellenes were exceedingly susceptible. 
So also are Americans. 

There is no alchemy by which we can trans- 
mute the rich and vivid life of that elder peo- 
ple to our view. And we can not objectively 
see ourselves. It is only when we and our 
social accomplishments for human life have 
at last receded into past history that we can 
be viewed in large perspective, without any 
megalomaniac estimate of our own, or any 
micrifying judgment of others setting us 
where they declare we belong. The im- 
agination, the imaginative warmth and en- 
orgy that plays so lively and so profound a 
part in the spiritual life of the Germanic 
races when compared with other peoples, is 
in Hellene and American alike, and a basis 
of their likeness. 

The Greeks had the inestimable gift of a 
noble curiosity, which drives human beings to 
look further, and still further, and question 

CERTAIN LIKENESSES 327 

if there is not more beyond. They brought 
a clear, fearless intellect to every question, 
a daring through which they irresistibly rose. 
They had, that is, a mind that molded its 
thought to action and, accepting no attitude 
as permanent and final consciously avoided 
a fixed mode, rigidity, crystallization. They 
yearned for and placed themselves in the 
flux of things. They loved the struggle of 
opposing forces, the combat of contraries — * 
even to putting antithesis in their philosophy, 
their drama, and into the form, of the sen- 
tence in which they expressed their thought. 
Their civilization was essentially modern. 
They exampled the dynamic theory of life — 
constant moving. They were dynamic, not 
static. This makes their qualities, their 
spirit, so difficult of molding to formal defini- 
tion. Life to them was desire for freedom, 
for expression. They fulfilled the law that 
so long as a race is plastic and capable of 
change it is vigorous, and that when that race 
takes on fixity, persistence in form, it is ef- 
fete and prepared for extinction. Their 
passage through their centuries exemplified 
the definition of life by Herbert Spencer, 
"the continuous adjustment of internal rela- 

328 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

tions to external relations,'' and their death 
came in "the non-correspondence of the or- 
ganism with its environment." 

THE COSMIC VISION THE GREEKS WORKED OUT 

The Hellenes are thousands of years in the 
silent land. Disintegrators of theirs and 
opponents, someone has suggested, live 
mainly in the penumbra of their cutting-off. 
They left a splendid legacy and spoke in 
a voice of surpassing wisdom and beauty to 
all races succeeding them. Always young, 
never gray with time, their life-products eter- 
nize the greatness of ideas and force man- 
kind to acknowledge their priceless value. 
Ideas were to them immortal. The signifi- 
cance of life to their view lay in the idea it 
embodied. In their fortunate days prosper- 
ity was their means to the idea, at no time the 
end. The old Christian simile that poets and 
preachers are but flutes through which the 
Breath of God flows in divine music, is most 
applicable to this people and their demiur- 
gic accomplishment. 

Hellas spiritualized the world, we have 
said. That was the gift of her peoples' 

THE GREEK VIEW OF LIFE 329 

single-hearted desire to know, of their severe 
and disciplined earnestness, genuineness, 
tho roughness. Hellenism, says an eminent 
critic, is "the habit of fixing our minds upon 
the intelligible law of things," "the letting 
of our consciousness play freely and simply 
upon the facts before us." The Hellenes' 
singleness of spirit, says another, is shown 
in the crystalline lucidity of their speech — 
their directness of phrase (that would be 
called baldness even in the terseness of our 
English) indicating directness of thought, 
freshness of conception. A simplicity, prim- 
itive, going straight to the definite, concrete 
thing, gave them this directness in their en- 
deavor to realize the world. 

The primary conception their vision of life, 
their incisive critical faculty, their unsearch- 
able imagination evolved — that the world is 
a general order — marches persistently. It 
was the basis of their progress. It has been 
the basis of others' Drang nach Wahrheit. 

Order their susceptible, reasoning spirit 
learned from generations about them, from 
the springing and seeding of things, from 
their azure heavens and the stately progress 
of its stars, from their sea and its many- 

330 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

lisping tides, from the motion of the earth 
of which they sometimes retold the legend 
that they were the children. Infinitude they 
felt in the all-nature life of which their sanity 
declared themselves a part. Eternity, also, 
the elements taught them. Their minds 
were fixed on, and their reason endeavoring 
to picture the real world of which they felt 
the physical to be a shadow. Energy, in ac- 
cord with their struggling endeavor, was 
divine, and in their conception of their per- 
manence in it, they made an unconscious 
statement of the principle of its conservation. 
In nature's unconquerable processes they 
saw life, a self-conscious reason acting 
through laws and manifesting itself in the 
natural world. Reason, said Anaxagoras, 
arranges and is the cause of all things. The 
cosmos a universal and eternal whole, obe- 
dient to law, at one with it, so to their con- 
structive imagination — always, in modern 
phrase, in touch with "the fire that burns at 
the heart of things'' — "an ever-living fire," 
old Heraclitus said, "lighted according to 
measure and quenched according to meas- 
ure" — the cosmos must imply a vitalizing 
life, a divine intelligence, an eternal, per- 

THE GREEK VIEW OF LIFE 331 

fecting mind manifesting itself. Tims they 
proceeded to work out their conception of 
divine dominion, to trace the action and 
method of divine government. They gave 
reasons for the God the Hebrews were de- 
claring. This was the inevitable end of the 
awe of personified nature, seeing God in 
every living bush, which especially bore upon 
and made their epic age beautiful. Es- 
sentially the Hellenes' religion was reverence 
for powers of the universe, physical as well 
as spiritual. 

But why should not the everlasting reason 
that manifests itself in the order of the world 
of nature make evident its intention in the 
world of active spirit? As they conceived 
the material universe a mysterious whole, 
under the reign of law, never losing its 
majesty and might, so the thought and action 
of man, intelligence and morals, they deter- 
mined, with "that afflatus of religious feeling 
with which the world of Hellenic existence is 
saturated," could not be in league with or the 
creatures of chance. The soul of man must 
rest upon eternal laws. "All is divine and 
all is human. " Reason, self-active, whose 
masterpiece is law, organized men's lives. 

332 THE GREEK SPIRIT 

Human society is itself neither anarchy nor 
chaos, but subject to law. Within that law 
is evolution of spirit. Men must unite in an 
ordered society. This to the Hellenes meant 
their city-state and the unfolding of human 
life within it. To "live according to na- 
ture, 1 ' one of their favorite maxims, meant to 
the Greeks to live according to order, away 
from excess, to live according to laws of self- 
command and self-denial. 

Hellas followed the fate of the incompa- 
rable and precious as of the most worthless 
civilizations. But the passion of her people 
for the True, Beautiful, Just, and their 
eternal meaning, still burns in broken marbles 
and in scattered fragments of her poets and 
other workers for her advance. Their re- 
mains are to-day the chiefest witness of the 
power of thought that our race-life has thus 
far known. For those searching for light 
they are an illumination, and to those seek- 
ing the heroic and beautiful and rational, a 
possession for all time.