Digitized by 

fiyoj iL id 

t 

THE 

DESCRIPTION 

OFANEW 

WORLD, 

CALLED 

The Blazing-World. 

WRITTEN 

By the Thrice Noble, IHuftrious, and Excellent 

PRINCESSE 

THE 

, % 

Duchefs of Newcaftle. 

LONDON , 

Printed by A.Maxtvelljn the Year M. DC. LX. VIII. 

TO THE 

DUC HESSE 

NEWCASTLE, 

ON H.ER. 

New Blazing- World. 

A^vUr Elder World, with all their Skill and Arts, 
^-^Could but divide the World into three Parts : 
Columbus , then for Navigation fam’d. 

Found a new World, America ’tis nam’d ; 

Now this new W orld was found, it was not made, 
Onely di (covered, lying in Time’s (hade. 

Then what are Tou, having no Chaos found 
To make a World , or any fuch lead ground? 

But gour Creating Fancy, thought it fit 
To make your World of Nothing, but pure Wit. 
Y omddla^ing-World^beyond the Stars mounts higher. 
Enlightens all with a Coeleftial Fier.. 

William 3\(m>cajlle. 

• *a«. 

or 

T r'v 

; 

1 

■ . ' / r •; 

5 r ^ 

+* V , 

1 > . * r 

« 

■' !>v .. -I vr;M 

t ' • . * ■ K r . 

,L wcl riohf>»m?i lol nsrij ,*H'V.u«Vjs) 

11 <pr 

w 

• « * • ~ 

J 

k 1 ft M » yffl W3/3 2uh V/ C 

"' ' • im vi< vljri' ) • • J 

•’* vy» • ■ v; it;!'. i 

• - t>- , . ‘ <* 

‘i ,:i ; . : • n AAttT'W '£ • T '.r;j oT 

Jrr • 

0 

i-> -jtso\ -j/iftm oX 

rl^'rfv^f * »**■; ’ r*TY >•' i* »**-- r 

i ^ 

» 

• r r. 

£ 

n * '■ ’ •• !-Hi 3;T , .1 . i U'!j ' t^SKC' 

;»J3H iri/blsii 

igilfurJLi 

■' -y- n 

Digitized by^Cioi 

, rJy 

To all Noble and Worthy 

LADIES 

T HIS prefent Defcription of a New World, 
was made as an Appendix to my Obfervations 
upon Experimental Philofophy ; and, having 
fome Sympathy and Coherence with each other , were joyn - 
ed together as Two fever al Worlds , at their Two Volet. 
But, by reafon mo^ Ladies tafy no delight in Philofophi- 
cal Arguments , I feparated fome from the mentioned 
Obfervations , and caufed them to go out by themfelves , 
that I might exprefs my RefpeUs , in preferring to Them 
fuch Fancies as my Contemplations did afford. TheFirfl 
Part is Romancical ; the Second, Philofbphical ; and 
the Third is meerly Fancy ; or, (as I may call it') Fanta- 
ftical. nAnd if (Noble Ladies ) you ftould chance to 
tafy pleafure in reading thefe Fancies , I j hall account my 
Jelf a Happy Creatorefs : If not, I rnujl be content to 
live a Melanchody Life in my own JForld; which I can- 
not call a Poor World, if Poverty be only want of 

Gold, 

t 

Gold, and Jewels: for, there if more G old in it ,t ban all 
^eChy mills ever made, or, (as I verily believe ) nail 
ever be able to maty. As for tbe R ocks of Diamonds, / 
n>ifh , with all my Soul , they might be jhared amongfl my 
Noble Female Friends; upon which condition , I would 
willingly quit my Part: And of the Gold,/ jhould defire only 
fo much as might fujpce to repair my Noble Lord and Huf 
hand’s Lojfes : for, I am not Covetous, hut as Ambitious as 
ever any of my Sex was, is, or can be ; which is the caufc j 
That though l cannot be Henry the Fifth, or Charles 
Second ; yet , I will endeavour to he, Margaret the Fir ft : 
and, though I have neither Power, 7 ime, nor Occafion, to 
be# great Conqueror, lity Alexander, or Ccfar ^yet, rather 
than not be Mijlrefs of a World , fince Fortune and the 
Fates would give me none , I have made One of my own. 
And thus , believing , or, at leaf, hoping , that no Crea~ 
ture can, or will, Envy me for this World of mine, I 
remain, \ v \ 

V .w- 
; from' ; 
-slnf/J 

ca smita \Ah(vI\ t. 

tsumott Vvv.e\\ 1 
o\ Uttiuw vA Amu 

\ At.vVh ;V’> 
Ad UCi'i'. A\Ui 7 

Noble Ladies , 

Your Humble Servant, 
k M. NEWCASTLE. 

• \ \ X 

<A . 

\ 1 1 

i'37o‘j \\ , bJlo 7 V lor/i ! 

Wil V)\\ 

THE 

DESCRIPTION 

OF A NEW 

WORLD, 

CALLED 

The Blazing- World. 

Merchant travelling into a foreign 
Country /ell extreamly in Love 
with a young Lady ; but being 
a ftranger in that Nation, and 
beneath her, both in Birth and 
Wealth, he could have but little 
is defire ; however his Love grow- 
ing more and more vehement upon him, even to the 
flighting of all difficulties, he refblved at laft to Steal 
her away ; which he had the better opportunity to do, 
becaufe her Father’s houfe was not far from the Sea, 

B and 

* 

2 

The Defcrrption of a New World. 

and fhe often ufing to gather fhells upon the fhore, ac- 
companied not with above two or three of her fervants, 
it encouraged him the more to execute his deftgn. 
Thus coming one time with a little Ieight Veflel, not 
unlike a Packet-boat, man n’d with lome few Sea-men, 
and well vi&ualled, for fear of fome accidents, which 
might perhaps retard their journey, to the place where 
fhe uled to repair ;he forced her away : But when he fan- 
cied himfelf the happieft man of the W orld,he proved 
to be the mod unfortunate ; for Heaven frowning at his 
Theft, raifed fuch aTempeft, as they knew not what 
to do,or whither to fteer their courfe > fo that the Vcf- 
fel, both by its own leightnefs, and the violent motion 
of the Wind, was carried as fwift as an Arrow out of 
a Bow, towards the North-pole, and in a fhort time 
reached the Icy Sea, where the wind forced it amongft 
huge pieces of Ice ; but being little, and Ieight, it did 
by the affiftance and favour of the gods to this virtuous 
Lady, fo turn and wind through thole precipices, as if 
it had been guided by lome experienced Pilot, and 
skilful Mariner : But alas ! Thole few men which 
were in it, not knowing whither they went, nor what 
was to be done in lo ftrange an Adventure, and not 
being provided for lo cold a Voyage,were all frozen to 
death ; the young Lady onely, by the light of her 
Beauty, the heat of her Youth, and Prote&ion of the 
Gods, remaining alive : Neither was it a wonder that 
the men did freeze to death ; for they were not onely 

driven 

The Vefcription cf a New World. 

driven to the very end or point of the Pole of that 
World, but even to another Pole of another World, 
*\vhich joined dole to it ; lo that the cold having a dou- 
ble ftrength at the conjundion of thole two Poles, was 
inluppor table : At laft, the Boat Hill palling on, was 
forced into another World; for it is impolfible to 
round this W orlds Globe from Pole to Pole, fo as we 
do from Eaft to W eft ; becaufe the Poles of the other 
World, joining to the Poles of this, do notallowany 
further paflageto furround the W orld that way ; but 
if any one arrives to either of the fe Poles, he is either 
forced to return, or to enter into another World : and 
left you Ihould Icruple at it, and think, if it were thus, 
thole that live at the Poles would either lee two Suns at 
one time, or elle they would never want the Sun’s light 
for fix months together, as it is commonly believed : 
You mull know, that each of thele Worlds having 
its own Sun to enlighten it, they move each one in 
their peculiar Circles ; which motion is lo juft and ex- 
ad, that neither can hinder or obftrud the other; for 
they do not exceed their Tropicks : and although they 
fliould meet, yet we in this World cannot lo well per- 
ceive them, by realon of the brightnels of our Sun, 
which being nearer to us, obftruds the fplendor of the 
Su n of the other W orld , they being too far off to be 
dilcerned by our optick perception, except we ufe very 
good Telelcopes; by which, skilful Aftronomers have 
often obftf ved two or three Suns at once. 

B 2 

But 

4 

The Defection of a New World. 

But to return to the wandering Boat, and thediftref- 
ed Lady ; (he feeing all the Men dead, found fmall 
comfort in life ; their Bodies which were prelerved all 
that while from putrqfadion and ftench, by the extre- 
mity of cold , began now to thaw, and corrupt ; 
whereupon fhe having not ftrength enough to fling 
them over- board, w’as forced to remove out of her 
fmall Cabine, upon the deck, to avoid that nauleous 
fmell ; and finding the Boat fwim between two plains 
of Ice, as a ftream that runs betwixt two fhores, at laft 
perceived land , but covered all with Snow : from 
which came, walking upon the Ice, ftrange Creatures, 
in lhape like Bears, only they went upright as men ; 
thole Creatures coming near the Boat, catched hold of 
it with their Paws, that lerved them inftead of hands; 
Ibrne two or three of them entred firft ; and when they 
came out , the reft went in one after another ; at laft 
having viewed and oblerved all that W’as in the Boat, 
they Ipake to each other in a language which the Lady 
did not underftand ; and having carried her out of the 
Boat, funk it, together with the dead men. 

The Lady now finding her lelf in fo ftrange a place, 
and amongft fuch wonderful kind of Creatures, was 
extreamly ftrucken with fear, and could entertain no 
other Thoughts, but that every moment her life was to 
be a lacrifice to their cruelty ; but thole Bear dike 
Creatures, how terrible loever they appear'd to her 
fight, yet were they lo far from exercifing any cruelty 

upon 

The Defcription of a New World. 

upon her, that rather they (hewed her all civility and 
kindnefs imaginable ; for (he'being not able to go up- 
*’on the Ice, by reafon of its flipperinefs, they took her 
up in their rough arms , and carried her into their 
City, where inftead of Houfes, they had Caves under 
ground; and as fbon as they enter’d the City, both 
Males and Females, young and old, flockt together 
to fee this Lady, holding up their Paws in admiration ; 
at Iaft having brought her into a certain large and fpa- 
cious Cave, which they intended for her reception, 
they left her to the cuflody of the Females, who en- 
tertained her with all kindnefs and refpeft, and gave 
her fuch vi&uals as they ufed to eat ; but feeing 
herConftitution neither agreed with the temper of that 
Climate, nor their Diet, they were refblved to carry 
her into another Ifland of a warmer temper ; in which 
were men like Foxes , onely walking in an upright 
fhape, who received their neighbours the Bear-men 
with great civility and Courtfliip, very much admi- 
ring this beauteous Lady; and having difcourfed fome 
while together, agreed at lafi to make her a Prefent 
to the Emperor of their World; to which end, after 
fhe had madefome fhort flay in the fame place, they 
brought hercrofs that Ifland to a large River, whole 
ftream run fmooth and clear, like Chryftal ; in which 
were numerous Boats, much like our Fox-traps ; in 
one whereof fhe was carried , forne of the Bear- 
and Fox-men waiting on her ; and as fbon as they had 

B 3 crofled 

6 

The Defer if non of a New World. 

croflcd the River, they came into an Ifiand where 
there were Men which had heads, beaks, and feathers, 
, like wild-Geefe, onely they went in an upright fliape, 
like the Bear-men and Fox- men : their rumps they 
carried between their legs, their wings Were of the lame 
length with their Bodies, and their tails of an indiffe- 
rent lize, trailing after them like a Ladie’s Garment ; 
and after the Bear- and Fox-men had declared 
their intention and defign to their Neighbours , the 
Geele- or Bird-men, lome of them joined to the 
reft, and attended the Lady through that Ifiand, till 
they came to another great and large River, where 
there was a preparation made of many Boats,much like 
Birds nefts, onely of a bigger lize ; and having croft 
that River, they arrived into another Illand, which 
was of a plealantand mild temper, full of Woods and 
the Inhabitants thereof .were Satyr s , who received 
both- the Bear- Fox- and Bird men, with all relped 
and civility ; and after lome conferences (for they all 
underftood each others language) lome chief of the 
Satyrs joining to them, accompanied the Lady out 
of that Illand to another River, wherein were many 
handlbmeandcommodious Barges,- and having croft 
that River, they entered into a large and Ipacious 
Kingdom, the men whereof were of a Grals-Green 
Complexion, who entertained them very kindly, and 
provided all conveniences for their further voyage : 
hitherto they had onely croft Rivers, but now they 

could 

The ‘Defcrrption of a New World. 

7 

J 

could not avoid the open Seas any longer ; wherefore 
they made their Ships and tacklings ready to fail over 
into the Ifland, where the Emperor of the Blazing- 
world (for fo it was call'd) kept his refidence. Very 
good Navigators they were; and 'though they had 
no knowledg of theLoad-ftone,orNeedle,cr pendulous 
Watches, yet (which was as (erviceable to them) they 
had fubtile ob(ervations,and great pra&ice ; in fo much 
that they could not onely tell the depth of the Sea in 
every place , but u'here there were (helves of Sand, 
Rocks, and other obftru&ions to be avoided by skilful 
and experienced Sea -men : Befides, they were excel- 
lent Augurers, W'hich skill they counted more necef 
(ary and beneficial then the ufe of Com pa fifes, Cards, 
Watches, and the like; but, above the reft, they had 
an extraordinary Art, much to be taken notice of by 
Experimental Philo(ophers,and that was a certain En- 
gin, which w'ould draw in a great quantity of Air, and 
(hoot forth Wind with a great force ; this Engine in a 
calm, they placed behind their Ships, and in a ftorm, 
before ; for it (erved againft the raging waves, like 
Cannons againft an hoftile Army,or befieged Town; 
it would batter and beat the waves in pieces, were they 
as high as Steeples; and as (bon as a breach was made, 
they forced their paflage through, in fpight even of the 
moft furious w'ind, ufing two of thofeEngins at every 
Shijd, one before, to beat off the waves, and another 
behind to drive it on ; fo that the artificial wind had the 

better 

8 

The Defcription of a New World. 

better of the natural; for,it had a greater advantage of 
the waveSjthen the natural of the Ships : the natural be- 
ing above the face of the W ater, could not without a 
down right motion enter or prefs into the Ships;where- 
asthe artificial with a fideward-motion, did pierce into 
the bowels of the W aves : Moreover, it is to be obier- 
ved,thatin a great Tcmpefl they would join their Ships 
in battel-aray: and when they feared Wind and Waves 
would be too ftrong for them, if they divided their 
Ships; they joined as many together as the com pals or 
advantage of the places of the Liquid Element would 
give them leave. For, their Ships were fo ingenioufly 
contrived,that they could fallen them together as dole 
as a Honey- comb, without wafte of place ; and being 
thus united,no W ind nor W aves were able to feparate 
them. The Emperor’s Ships,wereall of Gold; but the 
Merchants and Skippers,of Leather; the Golden Ships 
were not much heavier then ours of Wood, by reafon 
they were neatly made,and required not foch thicknels, 
neither were they troubled with Pitch, Tar, Pumps, 
Guns, and the like, which make our Woodden-Ships 
very heavy; for though they were not all of a piece, 
yet they were fo well fodder’d, that there was no fear of 
Leaks, Chinks, or Clefts; and as for Guns, there was 
no ufe of them, becaule they had no other enemies but 
the W inds : But the Leather Ships were not altogether 
fo fure, although much leighter ; befides, they were 
pitched to keep out Water. 

Having 

The Defer ipt ion of a New World. 

9 

Having thus prepar’d, and order’d their Navy, they 
went on in- defpight of Calm or Storm: And though 
the Lady at firft fancied herfelf in a very fad condition, 
and her mind was much tormented with doubts and 
fears, not knowing whether thisftrange Adventure 
would tend to her fafety or deftru&ion ; yet fhe being 
withal of a generous fpirit, and ready wir, confidering 
what dangers fhe had paft, and finding thole forts of 
men civil and diligent attendants to her, took courage, 
and endeavoured to learn their language ; which after 
fhe had obtained fo far, that partly by fbme words and 
figns fhe was able to apprehend their meaning, fhe was 
fo far from being afraid of them, that fhe thought her 
felf not onely fafe, but very happy in their company : 
By which we may fee, that Novelty difeompofes the 
mind,but acquaintance fettles it in peace and tranquil- 
lity. At laft, having pafied by feveral rich Iflands and 
Kingdoms, they went towards Paradifc , which was 
the feat of the Emperor ; and coming in fight of it, re- 
joiced very much ; the Lady at firft could perceive no- 
thing but high Rocks, which feemed to touch the 
Skies and although they appear’d not of an equal 
heigth, yet they feemed to be all one piece, without 
partitions : but at laft drawing nearer, fhe perceived a 
clift, which was a part of thole Rocks, out of which 
fhe fpied coming forth a great number of Boats, which 
afar off fhewed like a company of Ants, marching one 
after another ; the Boats appeared like the holes or 
/ C partitions 

io The Defection of a New World. 

partitions in a Honey-comb,and when joined together, 
ftood as dole ; the men were of leveral Complexions, 
but none like any of our World ; and when both the 
Boats and Ships met, they laluted and Ipake to each o- 
ther very courteoufly ; for there was but one language 
in all that World: nor no more but one Emperor, to 
whom they all fubmitted with the greateft duty and o- 
bedience, which made them live in a continued Peace 
and Happinefs ; not acquainted with Foreign 
Wars, or Home-bred Infurre&ions. The Lady now 
being arrived at this place, was carried out of her Ship 
into one of thole Boats, and conveighed through the 
fame paflage (for there was no other) into that part of 
the World where the Emperor did refide; which pare 
was: very plcalant,and of a mild temper Within it lelf 
it Was divided by a great number of vaft and large Ri- 
vers, all ebbing and flowing, into leveral Iflands of un- 
equal diftance from each other, which in molt parts 
were as plealant, healthful, rich, and fruitful, as Na- 
ture could make them ; and, as I mentioned before, 
fecure from all Foreign Invafions, by realon there was 
but one way to enter, and that like a Labyrinth, lo 
winding and turning among the Rocks, that no other 
V eflels but (mail Boats, could pals, carrying not above 
three palfengers at a time : On each fide all along this 
narrow and winding River, there were leveral Cities, 
'fome of Marble, lomeof Alabafter , fome of Agar, 
(bme of Amber, lome of Coral, and fome of other 

precious 

The Defer ipt ion of a Ufeip World. 

precious materials not known in our world ; all which 
after the Lady had parted, fhe came to the Imperial 
City, named Paradife, which appeared in form like 
feveral Iflands ; for 3 R ivers did run betwixt every ftreet, 
which together with the Bridges, whereof there was 
a great number, were all paved. The City it felf was 
built of Cold ; and their Architectures were noble, 
(lately, and magnificent, not like our Modern, but like 
thole in the Romans time ; for, our Modern Buildings 
are like thole Houles which Children ule to make of 
Cards, one llory above another, fitter for Birds, then 
Men; but theirs were more Large, and Broad, then 
high; the higheft of them did not exceed two (lories, 
befides thole rooms that were under-ground, as Cel- 
lars, and other Offices. The Emperor’s Palace flood 
upon an indifferent alcent from the Imperial City ; at 
the top of which alcent was a broad Arch, (upported 
by feveral Pillars, which went round the Palace,and 
contained four of our Englifti milesin compafs: with- 
in the Arch flood the Emperor’s Guard, which con- 
fided of leveral forts of Men ; at every half mile, was 
a Gate to enter, and every Gate was of a different 
fafhion ; the firft, which allowed a paflage from the 
Imperial City into the Palace, had on either hand a 
Cloyfter, the outward part whereof flood upon Ar- 
ches fuftained by Pillars, but the inner part was dole ; 
Being entred through the Gate, the Palace it felf ap- 
pear’d in its middle like the Ifle of a Church, a mile and 

C 2 a 

12 

The Defcriftion of a New iVorld. 

a half long, and half a mile broad ; the roof of it was all 
Arched, and refled upon Pillars, fo artificially placed 
that a flranger would lofe himfelf therein without a 
Guide; at the extream fides,that is, between theoutward 
and inward part of the Cloyfter, were Lodgings for 
Attendants; and in the midfl of the Palace, the Em- 
peror’s own Rooms ; whofe Lights were placed at the 
top of every one, becaufe of the heat of the Sun: the 
Emperor’s appartment for State was no more inclofed 
then the reft ; onely an Imperial Throne was in every 
appartment, of wliich the feveral adornments could 
not be perceived until one entered, becaufe the Pillars 
were fo juft oppofite to one anothcr,that all "the adorn- 
ments could not be feen at one. The firft part of the 
Palace was, as the Imperial City, all of Gold ; and 
when it came to the Emperors appartment,it was fo rich 
with Diamonds, Pearls, Rubies, and the like precious 
Stones, that it furpaffesmy skill to enumerate them all. 
Amongft the reft, the Imperial Room of State ap- 
pear’d moft magnificent ; it was paved with green Dia- 
monds (for there are in that World Diamonds of all 
Colours) fo artificially,asit feemed butofone piece; the 
Pillars were let with Diamonds fo dole/ and in fuch a 
manner, that they appear’d moft Glorious to the fight ; 
between every Pillar was a Bow or Arch of a detain 
fort of Diamonds, the like whereof our World does 
not afford ; which being placed in every one of rhe Ar- 
ches in feveral rows, feemed juft like fo many Rain- 
bows 

The ‘Defection of a Nen> World. 13 

bows of feveral different colours. The roof of the 
Arches was of blew Diamonds, and in themidft there- 
of was a Carbuncle, which reprefented the Sun; and the 
Rifingand Setting-Sun at the Eaft and Weft- fide of 
the Room were made of Rubies. Out of this Room 
there was a paflage into the Emperor's Bed-Chamber, 
the Walls whereof were of Jet, and the Floor of 
black Marble; the Roof was of Mother of Pearl, 
where the Moon and Blazing-Stars were reprefented 
by white Diamonds, and his Bed was made of Dia- 
monds andCarbun cles. 

No fooner was the Lady brought before the Em- 
peror, but he conceived her to be fbme Goddefs, and 
offered to worfhip her ; which fhe refufed, telling him, 

(for by that time fhe had pretty well learned their Lan- 
guage) that although fhe came out of another world, 
yet was fhe but a mortal. At which the Emperor re- 
joycing, made her his Wife, and gave her an abfolute 
power to rule and govern all that World as fhe plea- 
fed. But her fubje&s, who could hardly be perfwa- 
ded to believe her mortal, tender’d her all the Vene- 
ration and Worfhip due to a Deity. 

Her Accouftrement after fhe was made Emprefs, 
was as followeth : On her head fhe wore a Cap of 
Pearly and a Half-moon of Diamonds juft before it; 
on the top of her Crown came fpreading over a broad 
Carbuncle, cut in the form of the Sun ; her Coat 
was of Pearl,mixt with blew Diamonds, and frindged 

C 3 with 

H 

The Defection of a New World. 

with red ones; her Buskins and Sandals were of green 
Diamonds : In her left hand fhe held a Buckler, to fig- 
nifie the Defence of her Dominions; which Buckler was 
made of that fort of Diamond as has feveral different 
Colours; and being cut and made in the form of an 
Arch, (hewed like a Rain-bow; In her right hand fhe 
carried a'Spear made of a white Diamond, cut like the 
tail of a Blazing- Star,which fignified that fhe was ready 
to aflault thofe that proved her Enemies. 

None was allowed to ufe or wear Gold but thofe 
of the Imperial Race, which were the onely Nobles of 
the State ; nor durft any one wear Jewels but the Em- 
peror, the Emrpefs, and their Eldefl Son ; notwith- 
ftanding that they had an infinite quantity both of 
Gold and precious Stones in that World ; for they 
had larger extents of Gold, then our Arabian Sands ; 
their precious Stones were Rocks,and their Diamonds 
of feveral Colours; theyufednoCoyn, but all their 
Traffickwas by exchange of feveral Commodities. 

Their Priefts and Governors were Princes of the 
Imperial Blood, and made Eunuches for that pur- 
pofe ; and as for the ordinary fort of men in that part 
of the W orld where the Emperor refided, they were 
of feveral Complexions; not white,black,tawny,olive- 
or afh-coloured ; but fome appear’d of an Azure, fome 
of a deep Purple, fome of a Grafs-green, fome of a 
Scarlet, fome of an Orange-colour, &c. Which Co- 
lours and Complexions, whether they were made by 

the 

The Defcription of a New World. 

the bare refledion of light, without the affiftance of 
(mall particles; or by the h elp of well-ranged and order’d 
Atoms, or by a continual agitation of little GlobuIes;or 
by fome preffing and re-ading motion,I am not able to 
determine. The reft of the Inhabitants of that World, 
were men of feveral different forts, fhapes, figures, dif- 
pofitions, and humors, asl have already made mention, 
heretofore; fome were Bear-men, fome Worm-men, 
fome Fifh- or Mear-men, otherwife called Syrens ; 
fome Bird-men, fome Fly-men, fome Ant men, fome 
Geefe-men, fome Spider-men, fome L ice-men, fome 
Fox-men, fome Ape- men, fome Jack daw-men, fome 
Magpie-men, fome Parrot-men, fome Satyrs, fome 
Gyants, andmany more,which I cannot all remember ; 
and of thefe feveral forts of men, each followed fuch a 
profeffion as was moft proper for the nature of their 
Species, which the Emprefs encouraged them in, efpe- 
cially thofe that had applied themfelves to the ftudy of 
feveral Arts and Sciences ; for they were as ingenious 
and witty in the invention of profitable and ufeful Arts, 
as we are in our world, nay, more; and to that end 
flie ereded Schools , and founded feveral Societies. 
The Bear- men were to be her Experimental Philo- 
fophers, the Bird-men her Aftronomers, the Fly- 
W orm- and Fifh-men her Natural Philofophers, the 
Ape-men herChymifts, the Satyrs her Galenick Phy- 
ficians, the Fox-men her Politicians, the Spider- and 
Lice-men her Mathematicians, the Jackdaw- Magpie- 

and 

1 6 

The Defection of a Nerv IV or Id. 

and Parrot-men her Orators and Logicians, the Gy- 
ants her Architects, &c. But before all things, fhe 
having got a Soveraign power from the Emperor over 
all the W orldjdefired to be informed both of the man- 
ner of their Religion and Government jand to that end, 
(he called the Prieds and States- men, to give her an 
account of either. Of the States men (lie enquired, 
firft. Why they had fo few Laws? To which they 
anfwered. That many Laws made many Divifions, 
which mod commonly did breed Fa&ions, and at lad 
brake out into open Wars. Next, (he asked. Why 
they preferred the Monarchical form of Government 
before any other ? They anfwered. That as it was 
natural for one Body to have but one Head,fo it was 
allb natural for a Politick body to have but one Gover- 
nor ; and that a Common -wealth, which had many 
Governors was like a Monder with many Heads. Be- 
(ides, faid they, a Monarchy is a divine form of Go- 
vernment, and agrees mod with our Religion : For as 
there is but one God, whom we all unanimoudy wor- 
fliip and adore with one Faith;fo we are relblved to have 
but one Emperor, to whom we all fubmit with one 
obedience. 

Then the Emprels feeing that the feveral forts of her 
Subjedfs had each their Churches apart, asked the 
Prieds, whether they were of feveral Religions? They 
anfwered her Majedy, That there was no more but 
one Religion in all that World, nor no diverfity of 

opinions 

1 7 

The Defcription of a Zhfetp World. 

opinions in that fame Religion ; for though there were 
feveral forts of men, yet had they all but one opinion 
concerning the Worfliip and Adoration of God. The 
Emprels asked them, Whether they were Jews, Turks, 
or Chrifiians ? We do not know, laid they, what R e- 
Jigions thole are ; but we do all unanimoully acknow- 
ledg, worfliip and adore theOnely, Omnipotenr, and 
Eternal God, with all reverence, fubmiflion, and du- 
ty. Again, the Emprels enquired , Whether they 
had leveral Forms of Worfliip ? They anfwered, 
No : For our Devotion and Worfhip confilts onely 
in Prayers, which we frame according to our leveral 
Necefliries, in Petitions, Humiliations, Thanklgi- 
ving, &c. Truly, replied the Emprels, I thought 
you had been either Jews, or Turks, becaule I never 
perceived any Women in your Congregations : But 
tvhatis thereafon, you bar them from your religious 
Affemblies ? It is not fit, faid they, that Men and 
Women fliould be promifcuoufly together in time of 
Religious Worfliip; for their company hinders De- 
votion, and makes many, inflead of praying to God, 
dired their Devotion to their Miftrefles. But, asked 
the Emprels, Have they no Congregation of their 
own, to perform the duties of Divine Worfliip, as 
well as Men ? No, anfwered they : but they flay at 
home, and lay their Prayers by themlelves in their 
Clolets. Then the Emprels defir’d to know the rea- 
fon why the Priefts and Governors of their World 

D wei^ 

i8 

The Defer ip tion of a New IV or Id. 

were made Eunuchs ? They anfwer’d, To keep them 
from Marriage : For Women and Children mod 
commonly make didurbance both in Church and 
State. But, faid Hie, Women and Children have no 
Employment in Church or State. Tis true, anfwer’d 
they ; but, although they are not admitted to publick 
Employments, yet are they fo prevalent with their 
Husbands and Parents, that many times by their im- 
portunate perfwafions, they caufe as much, nay, more 
mifchief fecretly , then if they had the management 
of publick Affairs. 

The Emprefs having received an information of 
what concerned both Church and State, palled fome 
time in viewing the Imperial Palace, where die admi- 
red much theskil and ingenuity of the Architeds, and 
enquired of them,firft, Why they built their Houfe 
no higher then two dories from the Ground ? They 
anfwered her Majedy, That the lower their Buildings 
were, the lefs were they fub/ed either to the heat of the 
Sun, or Wind,Temped,Decay,e^c. Then fliedefired 
to know the reafbn, why they made them fb thick? 
They anfwered, That, the thicker the Walls were, the 
warmer were they in Winter, and cooler in Summer; 
for their thicknefs kept out both Cold and Heat.Laftly, 
Che asked, Why they Arched their Roofs, and made lb 
many Pillars ? They replied, That Arches and Pillars, 
did not onely grace a Building very much, andcaufed 
it to appear Magnificent, but made it alfo firm and 
lading. The 

l 9 

The Defeription of a 3fm> World. 

The Emprefs was very well (atisfied with their an- 
fwers ; and after fbme rime, when (he thought that 
her new founded focieties of the Vertuolo’s had made 
a good progrefs in the feveral Employments (he had 
put them upon, fhecaufed a Convocation firft of the 
Bird-men, and commanded them to give her a true 
relation of the two Coeleftial Bodies, vis^. the Sun and 
Moon,which they did with all the obedience and faith* 
fulnefs befitting their duty. 

The Sun, as much as they could obferve , 
they related to be a firm or folid Stone, of a vaft 
bignefs ; of colour yellowifh , and of an extraordi- 
nary fplendor : But the Moon, they (aid, was of a 
whitifh colour ; and although Ihe looked dim m rite 
prefence of the Sun, yet had (he her own light, and 
was a (hining body of her (elf, as might be perceived 
by her v igorous appearance in Moon-fhiny-nights;the 
difference onely betwixt her own and the Sun’s light 
was, that the Sun did (hike his beams in a diredline;but 
the Moon never refpe&ed the Centre of their World 
in a right line, but her Centre was always excentrical. 
The Spots both in the Sun and Moon, as far as they 
were able to perceive, they affirmed to be nothing elfe 
but flaws and ftainsof their (tony Bodies. Concerning 
the heat of the Sun, they were not of one opinion;fome 
would have the Sun hot in it (elf, alledging an old 
Tradition, that it (houldat (bmetime break afunder, 
and burn the Heavens, and confume this world into 

D 2 hot 

The Defection f a New World. 

hot Embers, which, faid they, could nor be done, if 
the Sun were not fiery of it fclf.Others again faid, This 
opinion could not ftand with reafon ; for Fire being a . 
deftroyerof all things, the Sun-ftone after this manner 
would burn up all the near adjoining Bodies: Befides, 
faid they, Fire cannot fubfift without fuel ; and the Sun- 
ftone having nothing to feed on, would ih a Abort 
time confume it felf ; wherefore they thought it more 
probable that the Sun was not adlually hot, but onely 
by the reflettion of its light ; fo that its heat was an ef- 
feft of its light, both being im material. But this opi- 
nion again waslaught at by others, and rejected as ri- 
diculous, who thought it impoflible that one immate- 
rial fhould produce another ; and believed that both 
the light and heat of the Sun proceeded from a fwift 
Circular motion of the ^Ethereal Globules, which by 
their ftriking upon the Optick nerve, caufed light, and 
their motion produced heat : But neither would this 
opinion hold ; for, faid fome, then it would follow, 
that the fight of Animals is the caufe of light ; and 
that, were there no eyes, there would be no light ; 
which was againft all fenfeand reafon. Thus they ar- 
gued concerning the heat and light of the Sun ; but, 
which is remarkable, none did fay, that the Sun was 
a Globous fluid body , and had a fwift Circular 
motion ; but all agreed. It was fixt and firm like a 
Center, and therefore they generally called it the 
Sun-ftone. 

Then 

The ‘Defcription of a New World. 

21 

Then the Emprefs asked them the reafon, Why the 
Sun and Moon did often appear in different poftures 
or fhapes, as fbmetimes magnified, fbmetimes dimi- 
nifhed; fbmetimes elevated, otherwhiles deprefled; now 
thrown to the right, and then to the left ? To which 
fome of the Bird-men anfwered, That it proceeded 
from the Various degrees of heat and cold, which are 
found in the Air, from whence did follow a differing 
denfity and rarity; and likewife from the vapours that 
are interpofed, whereof thofe that afcend are higher 
and lefs denfe then the ambient air,but thofe which de- 
fcend are heavier and more denfe. But others did with 
more probability afHrm,that it was nothing elfebutthe 
various patterns of the Air ; for like as Painters do not 
copy out one and the fame original juft alike at all times- 
fo, laid they, do feveral parts of the Air make diffe- 
rent patterns of the luminous Bodies of the Sun and 
Moon: which patterns, as feveral copies, thefenfitive 
motions do figure out in the fubftance of our eyes. 

This anfwer the Emprefs liked much better then the 
former, and enquired further. What opinion they had 
of thofe Creatures that are called the motes of the Sun? 
To which they anfwered. That they were nothing 
elfe butftreams of very fmall,rare and tranfpa rent par- 
ticles, through which the Sun was reprefented as 
through a glafs : for if they were not transparent, laid 
they, they would eclipfc the light of the Sun ; and if 
not rare and of an airy fubftance, they would hinder 

D 3 Flyes 

The Defcriftion of a New World. 

Flics from flying in the Air, at leaft retard their flying 
motion : Neverthekls, although they were thinner 
then the thinneft vapour, yet were they not Co thin as 
the body of air, or elfe they would not be perceptible 
by animal light. Then the Emprels asked. Whether 
they were living Creatures? They anfwered. Yes: 
Becaufe they did encreafe and decreafe, and were nou- 
rished by the prefence, and ftarved by the abfence of 
the Sun. 

Having thus finilhed their difcourle of the Sun and 
Moon, the Emprefs defired to know what Stars there 
were befides ? But they anfwer’d,that they could per- 
ceive in that W orld none other bu t Blazing Stars, and 
from thence it had the name that it was called die Bla- 
zing-World; andthele Blazing- Stars, laid they, were 
fuch folid , firm and Ihining bodies as the Sun and 
Moon , not of a Globular, but of leveral forts of 
figures : fome had tails ; and fome, other kinds of 
lhapes. 

After this, The Emprels asked {hem, What kind of 
fobftanceor creature the Air was? The Bird-men an- 
fwered, That they could have no other perception of 
the Air, but by their own Relpiration : For, faid they, 
fome bodies are onely fubjeft to touch, others onely to 
fight, and others onely to Imell ; but fome are fubjedi 
to none of our exterior Senles : For Nature is fo full of 
variety, that our weak Senles cannot perceive all the 
various forts of her Creatures ; neither is there any one 

objeft 

The Defer ip t ion of a New IVorldi 

objeft perceptible by all our Senfes, no more then fe- 
ver a\ obje&s are by one (enle. I believe you, replied 
the Emprefs ; but if you can give no account of the Air, 
(aid (he, you will hardly be able to inform me how 
Wind is made; for they (ay, that Wind is nothing but 
motion of the Air. The Bird-men anfvver’d. That 
they obferved Wind to be more denfe then Air, and 
therefore fubjed to the (enfe of Touch ; but what pro- 
perly Wind was, and the manner how it wasmade j 
they could not exadly tell,* (ome (aid, it was cau- 
(ed by the Clouds falling on each other ; and others, 
that it was produced of a hot and dry exhalatiomwhich 
amending, was driven down again by the coldnefs of 
the Air that is in the middle Region, and by reafon of 
its leightnefs, could not go diredly to the bottom,but 
was carried by the Air up and down : Some would 
have it a flowing Water of the Air; and others again, 
a flowing Air moved by the blaz of the Stars. 

But the Emprefs, feeing they could not agree con- 
cerning the cauleof Wind,asked, Whether they could 
tell how Snow was made ? To which they anlwered^ 
That according to their oblervation. Snow was made 
by a commixture of Water, and (ome certain extradf 
of the Element of Fire that is under the Moon ; a (mall 
portion of which extra&,being mixed with Water,and 
beaten by Air or Wind, made a white Froth called 
Snow; which being after fome while diflolved by the 
heat of the (ame (pirit, turned to V V ater again. This 
virJi obfervation 

2 4 

The Definition of a New World. 

obfervation amazed the Emperefe very much; for (lie 
had hitherto believed. That Snow was made by cold 
motions, and not by fuch an agitation or beating of a 
fiery extra# upon water : Nor could (he be perfwaded 
to believe it until the Fifh- or Mear-men had delivered 
their obfervation upon the making of Ice, which, they 
(aid, was not produced, as (ome had hitherto con- 
ceived, by the motion of the Air, raking the Super- 
ficies of the Earth, but by (ome ftrong faline vapour 
arifingout of the Seas, which condenfed Water into 
Ice ; and the more quantity there was of that vapour, 
the greater were the Mountains or Precipices of Ice ; 
butthereafonthat it did not (b much freeze in the Tor- 
rid Zone, or under the Ecliptick, as near or under the 
Poles, was, that this vapour in thole places being drawn 
up by the Sun- beams into the middle Region of the 
Air, was onely condenfed into Water, and fell down 
in fliowres of Rain ; when as, under the Poles, the 
heat of the Sun being not fe> vehement, the feme va- 
pour had no force or power to rife fo high, and there- 
fore caufed fe> much Ice, by afcendingandading onely 
upon the (urface of water. 

This Relation confirmed partly the obfervation.of 
the Bird-men concerning the caufe of Snow ; but fince 
they had made mention that that fame extra#, which by 
its commixture with Water made Snow, proceeded 
from the Element of Fire, that is under the Moon : 
The Emperefe asked them,of what nature that Elemen- 
tary 

2 5 

The Defcrrption of a Jfen? World. 

tary Fire was; whether it was like ordinary Fire here 
upon Earth, or fochaFire as is within the bowels of the 
Earth, and as the famous Mountains Vefuvius and 
JEtna do burn withal ; or whether it was luch a fort of 
fire, as is found in flints, &c. They anfwered. That 
the Elementary Fire , which is underneath the Sun, 

■» was not fo folid as any of thole mentioned fires ; be- 
caule it had no folid fuel to feed on ; but yet it was 
much like the flame of ordinary fire , onely fome- 
what more thin and fluid ; for Flame, faid they, is no- 
thing elle but the airy part of a fired Body. 

Laftly, the Emprels arked*the Bird-men of the na- 
ture of Thunder and Lightning ? and whether it was 
jiot caufed by roves of Icc falling upon each other ? To 
which they anfwered. That it was not made that way, 
but by an encounter of cold and heat ; fo that an ex- 
halation being kindled in the Clouds, did dafh forth 
Lightning, and that there were fo many rentings of 
Clouds as there were Sounds and Cracking noiles: 
But this opinion was contradi&ed by others, who af- 
firmed that Thunder was a ludden and monftrous 
Blaz, ftirred up in the Air, and did not always re- 
quire a Cloud ; but the Emprels not knowing what 
they meant by Blaz(for even they themfelves were not 
able to explain the leule of this word) liked the for- 
mer better ; and,to avoid hereafter tedious dilputes,and 
have the truth of the Phenomena’s of Coeleftial Bo- 
dies more exa&ly known, commanded the Bear-men, 

E which 

26 

The Defcripion of a New IT oriel. 

which were her Experimental Philofophcrs, to obferve 
them through fuch Inflruments as are called Tele- 
fcopes, which they did according to her Majefties Com- 
mand; butthefe Telefcopes caufed more differences 
and divifions among!! them, then ever they had before; 
for fome faid,they perceived that the Sun flood flill,and 
the Earth did move about it;others wereofopinion,that 
they both did move ; and others laid again, that the 
Earth flood flill, and the Sun did move; fome count- 
ed more Stars then others; fome difeovered new Stars 
never feen before ; fome fell into a great difpute with 
others concerning the bignefs of the Stars ; fome laid. 
The Moon was another World like their Terreflrial 
Globe, and the fpots therein were Hills and Vallies ; 
but others would have the fpots to be the Terreflrial 
parts, and the fmooth and gloflie parts, the Sea : At 
lafl, the Emprefs commanded them to go with their 
Telefcopes to the very end of the Pole that was joined 
to the W orld (he came from,and try whether they could 
perceive any Stars in it : which they did ; and, being 
returned to her Majefly, reported that they had feen 
three Blazing-Stars appear there, one after another in 
afhort time, whereof two were bright, and one dim; 
but they could not agree neither in this obfervationrfor 
fome laid. It was but one Star which appeared at three 
feveral times, in feveral places; and others would have 
them to be three feveral Stars ; for they thought it 
impoffible, that thole three feveral appearances fhould 

have 

The Defcr/ption of a Dfexv World. 

27 

have been but one Star, becaufe every Star did rife at a 
certain time, and appear’d in a certain place, and did 
difappear in the feme place: Next, It is altogether im- 
probable, feid they. That one Star Ihould fly from 
place to place,efpecially at fuch a vaft diftance,without 
a vifible motion, in fe> fhort a time, and appear in fuch 
different places, whereof two were quite oppofite,and 
the third fide- ways : LafHy, If it had been hut one 
Star, feid they, it would always have kept the fame 
fplendor, which it did not ; for, as above mentioned, 
two were bright, and one was dim. After they had 
thus argued , the Emprefs began to grow angry at 
their Telefcopes, that they could give no better Intel- 
ligence ; for, feid fhe, now I do plainly perceive, that 
your Glaffes are falfe Informers, and inftead of difeo- 
vering the Truth, delude your Senfes ; Wherefore I 
Command you to break them, and let the Bird-men 
tr u ft onely to their natural eyes, and examine Coeleftial 
Obje&s by the motions of their own Scnfe and R eafon. 
The Bear-men replied,That it was not the fault of their 
Glafles, which caufed fuch differences in their Opi- 
nions, but the fenfitive motions in their Optick organs 
did not move alike, nor were their rational judgments 
always regular : To which the Emprefs anfwered. 
That if their Glafles were true Informers, they would 
redifie their irregular Senfe and R eafon ; But, feid fhe. 
Nature has made your Senfe and R eafon more regular 
then Art has your Glafles; for they aremeer deluders, 

E 2 and 

28 

. 

The Defection of a New World. 

and will never lead you to the knowledg of Truth ; 
Wherefore I command you again to break them ; for 
you may oblerve the progreflive motions of Coeleftial 
Bodies with your natural eyes better then through Ar- 
tificial Glafles. The Bear-men being exceedingly 
troubled at her Majefties difplealure concerning their 
Telelcopes, kneel’d down, and in the humbleft man- 
ner petitioned, that they might not be broken ; for/aid 
they, we take more delight in Artificial delufions, then 
in Natural truths. Belides, we lhall wantlmployments 
for our Senles, andSubje&sfor Arguments ; for, were 
there nothing but truth, and no falfhood, there would 
be no occafion to difpute, and by this means we 
(hould want the aim and pleafure of our endeavours in 
confuting and contradi&ing each other ,- neither would 
one man be thought wiler then another, but all would 
either be alike knowing and wile, or all would be fools ; 
wherefore we mod humbly befeech your Imperial Ma- 
jefty to Ipare our Glafles, which are our onely delight, 
and as dear to us as our lives. The Emprels at laft 
conlented to their requeft, but upon condition, that 
their dilputesand quarrels fhould remain within their 
Schools, and caufe no fa&ions or difturbances in State, 
or Government. The Bear-men, full of ;oy, re- 
turned their mod humble thanks to the Emprels ; and 
to make her amends for the dilpleafure which their Te- 
lelcopes had occafioned, told her Majefty, that they 
had leveral other artificial Optick-Glafles, which they 

were 

The Description of a New World. 

29 

were fare would give her Majefty a great deal more 
fiitisfadion. Amongft the reft, they brought forth 
faveral Microfaopes, by the means of which they 
could enlarge the ftiapes of little bodies , and make a 
Lowfa appear as big as an Elephant, and a Mite as 
big as a Whale. Fir ft of all they (hewed the Emperels a 
gray Drone-flyc, wherein theyobfarved that the great- 
eft part of her face, nay, of her head, confifted of two 
large bunches all cover’d over with a multitude offinall 
Pearls or Hemilpheres in a Trigonal order : Which 
Pearls were of two degrees , fmaller and bigger ; the 
fmaller degree was lowermoft , and looked towards 
the ground ; the other was upward, and booked fide- 
ward , forward and backward : They were all fa> 
finooth and poliftied, that they were able to reprefant 
the image of any objed, the number of them was in 
all 1 4000. After the view of this ftrange and miracu- 
lous Creature, and their faveral obfarvations upon it, 
the Emprels asked them, What they judged thofa little 
Hemifpheres might be? They anlwered. That each 
of them was a perfed Eye, by reafon they perceived 
that each was covered with a Tranlparent Cornea, 
containing a liquor within them, which refambled the 
watery or glafiie humor oftheEye. To which the Em- 
perels replied, That they might be glaflie Pearls, and 
yet not Eyes; and that perhaps their Microfaopes did 
not truly inform them. But they fmilingly anfwered 
her Majefty, That (he did not know the vertueof 

E 3 thofa 

3° 

The Defcriftion of a New World. 

thofc Microfcopes ; for they never delude , but re- 
difie and inform the Senles ; nay, the World, laid 
they , would be but blind without them, as it has 
been in former ages before thole Microfcopes were 
invented. 

After this, they took a Charcoal, and viewing it 
with one of their beft Microfcopes, difeovered in it an 
infinite multitude of pores, Ibme bigger, fome lefs ; lo 
dole and thick, that they left but very little fpace be- 
twixt them to be filled with a folid body ; and to give 
her Imperial Majefty a better aflurance thereof^ they 
counted in a line of them an inch long, no left then 
2700 pores ; from which Obfervation they drew this 
following Conclufion, to wit. That this multitude of 
pores was the caufe of the blackneft of the Coal ; for, 
faid they, a body that has fo many pores, from each 
of which no light is refle&ed, muft neceflarily look 
black, fince black is nothing elfe but a privation of light, 
or a want of reflexion. But the Empreft replied, 
That if all Colours were made by refle&ion of light,and 
that Black was as much a colour as any other colour • 
then certainly they contradided themfelves in faying 
that black was made by want of refle&ion. However, 
not to interrupt your Microfcopical Infpedions, faid 
fhe, let us fee how Vegetables appear through your 
Glafles; whereupon they took a Nettle, and by the 
vertueof theMicrofcope, difeovered that underneath 
the points of the Nettle there were certain little bags or 

bladders. 

The Dcfcription of a Nen> World. 3 1 

bladders, containing a poyfonous liquor, and when 
the points had made way into the interior parts of the 
skin, they like Syringe-pipes ferved to conveigh that 
fame liquor into them. To which Obfervation the 
Emprefs replied. That if there were fuch poyfbn in 
Nettles, then certainly in eating of them, they 
would hurt.us inwardly,as much as they do outwardly? 

But they anfwered. That it belonged to Phyficians 
more then to Experimental Philolbphers, to give Rea- 
fons hereoffor they only made Microfcopical infpe&i- 
ons, and related the Figures of the Natural parts of 
Creatures acording to the reprefen tation of their glaffes. 

Laftly, They Ihewed the Emprefs a Flea, and a 
Lowfe ; which Creatures through the Microfcope 
appear’d fo terrible to her fight, that they had almofl 
put her into a fwoon ; the defcription of all their parts 
would be very tedious to relate, and therefore I’le for- 
bear it at this prefent. The Emprefs, after the view 
of thofe ftrangely-fhaped Creatures, pitied much thole 
that are molefted with them, efperially poor Beggars, 
which although rhey have nothing to live on them- 
felves, are yet necessitated to maintain and feed of their 
own flefh and blood, a company of fuch terrible Crea- 
tures called Lice; who, infteadof thanks, do reward 
them with pains, and torment them for giving them 
nourilhment and food. But after the Emprels had 
feen the (hapes of thefe monftrous Creatures , fhe 
defir’d to know. Whether their Microfcopes could 

hinder 

The Defection of a New World. 

hinder their biting, or at lead fhew fome means how to 
avoid them? To which they anfwered, That fuch 
Arts were mechanical and below that noble dudy of 
Microfcopical obfervations. Then the Emprefs asked 
them, Whether they had not fuch forts of Glades that 
could enlarge and magnifie the fliapes of great Bodies 
as well as they had done of little ones? Whereupon 
they took one of their bed and larged Microfoopes, 
and endeavou red to view a W hale thoro w it ; but alas ! 
the diape of the Whale was Co big, that its Circumfe- 
rence went beyond the magnifying quality of the Glafs; 
whether the error proceeded from the Glafs, or from a 
wrong pofitionof the Whale againd the refledion of 
.light, I cannot certainly tell. The Emprefs feeing 
the infufficiency of thofe Magnifying-Glades, that they 
were not able to enlarge all forts of Objeds, asked the 
Bear-men, whether they could not make Glades of a 
contrary nature to thofe they had fhewed her, to wit, 
fuch as indead of enlarging or magnifying the fhape or 
figure of an Objed, could contrad it beneath its natu- 
ral proportion : Which,in obedience to»her Majedies 
Commands, they did ; and viewing through one 
of the bed of them, a huge and mighty Whale ap- 
pear’d no bigger then a Sprat,- nay, through fome no 
bigger then a Vinegar-Eele; and through their ordi- 
nary ones,an Elephant feemed no bigger then a Flea ; a 
Camel no bigger then a Lowfe ; and an Odrich no 
bigger then a Mite. To relate all their Optick obfer- 
vations 

T he Defer 7 ft ion of a Jfetp World. 

33 

vations through the leveral forts of their Glafles, would 
be a tedious work, and tire even the molt patient R ea- 
der, wherefore I’Je pals them by ; onely this was very 
remakable and worthy to be taken notice of, that not- 
withftanding their great skil,induftry and ingenuity in 
Exp erimental Philofophy , they could yet by no means 
contrive foch Glafles, by the help of which they could 
fpy out a V aernm , with all its dimenfions, nor Imma- 
terial fubftances, Non- beings, and Mixt-beings, or 
foch as are between fomething and nothing ; which 
they were very much troubled at, hoping that yet, in 
time, by long ftudy and pradice, they might perhaps 
attain to it. 

The Bird- and Bear-men being difmifled, the Em- 
prels called both the Syrens- or Filh-men, and the 
Worm-men, to deliver their Oblervations which they 
had made, both within the Seas, and the Earth. Firft, 
fhe enquired of the Filh-men whence the laltnels of the 
Sea did proceed ? To which they anfwered. That 
there was a volatile laic in thole parts of the Earth, 
which as a bofom contain the Waters of the Sea, 
which Salt being imbibed by the Sea,became fixt ; and 
this imbibing motion was that they call’d the Ebbing 
and Flowing of the Sea;for,laid they, the riling and fwel- 
ling of the W ater,is cauled by thole parts of the volatile 
Salt as are not lb eafily imbibed,which driving to alcend 
above the Water, bear it up with foch a motion, as 
Man, or fome other Animal Creature, in a violent 

F exercile 

34 

The Defcrtption of a New World. 

exercife ules to take breath. This they affirmed to be 
the true eaule both of the laltnels, and the ebbing and 
flowing-motion of the Sea, and not the jogging of the 
Earth, or the lecret influence of the Moon, as lome o- 
thers had made the World believe. 

After this, the Emprels enquired. Whether they 
had obferved, that all Animal Creatures within the Seas 
and other waters, had blood ? They anfwered, That 
fome had blood, more or lefs, but fome had none. In 
Crea-fi(bes and Lobftcrs, laid they, we perceive but 
little blood ; but in Crabs, Oyfters,Cockles, &c. none 
at all. Then the Emprels asked them,in what part of 
their Bodies that little blood did relide ? They an- 
lwered,in a fmall vein,which in Lobfters went through 
the middle of their tails, but in Crea-fifhes was found 
in their backs: as for other forts of Fillies, lome, faid 
they, had onely blood about their Gills, and others in 
lome other places of their Bodies ; but they had not as 
yet oblerved any whole veins did fpread all over their 
Bodies. The Emprels wondring that there could be 
living Animals without Blood, to be better latisfied, 
delired the Worm-men to inform her, whether they 
had oblerved Blood in all forts of Worms ? They 
anfwered. That, as much as they could perceive, fome 
had Blood, and lome not ; a Moth, laid they, had no 
Blood at all, and a Lowle had,but like a Lobfter,a little 
Vein along her back: Alio Nits, Snails, 'and Mag- 
gots, as well as thole that are generated out of Cheele 

and 

The Defcription of a World. 

and F ruirs, as thofe that are produced out ofFIelh,had 
no blood: But, replied the Emprefs, If thofe men- 
tioned creatures have no blood, howisitpoflible they 
can live ? for it is commonly /aid, That the life of an 
Animal confiftsin the blood, which is the feat of the 
Animal fpirits. They anfwered, That blood was not 
a neceflary propriety to the life of an Animal,- and that 
that which was commonly called Animal fpirits, was 
nothing elfe but corporeal motions proper to the na- 
ture and figure of an Animal. Then fhe asked both the 
Fifh- and Worm-men, whether all thofe Creatures 
that have blood, had a circulation of blood in their 
veins and arteries? But they anfwered. That it was 
impolfible to give her Ma;efly an exaft account there- 
of, byreafonthe circulation of blood was an interior 
motion, which their fenfes, neither of themlelves, nor 
by the help of any Optick Inftrument could perceive; 
but as loon as they haddilfeded an Animal Creature to 
find out the truth thereof, the interior corporeal motions 
proper to that particular figure or creature, were altered. 
Then faid the Emprefs, If all Animal Creatures have 
not blood, it is certain, they all have neither Mufcles, 
tendons, nerves, &c. But, laid fhe, Flave you ever 
obferved Animal Creatures that are neither flefh, nor 
Fifli, but of an intermediate degree between both ? 
Truly, anfwered both the Filh- and Worm-men, We 
have obferved feveral Animal Creatures that live both 
in Water, and on the Earth, indifferently, and if any, 

F 2 certainly 

The Defer ipt ion of a New World. 

3 ^ 

certainly thole may be laid to be of fuch a mixt nature, 
that is, partly Flefh, and partly Fifii : But how is it 
pollible, replied the Emprels, that they Ihould live 
both in W ater, and on the Earth, fince thole Animals 
that live by the refpiration of Air, cannot live within 
W ater jand thole that live in Water, cannot live by the 
refpiration of Air,as Experience doth fufficiently wit- 
nels. They anfwered her Majefty, That as there were 
different forts of Creatures, lo they had alio different 
ways of Refpirations ; for Refpiration, faid they, is 
nothing elle but a compofftion and divifion of parts, 
and the motions of nature being infinitely various, it is 
impolfible that all Creatures fliould have the like mo- 
tions ; wherefore it was not neceffary, that all Animal 
Creatures ffiould be bound to live either by the Air, or 
by Water onely, but according as Nature had ordered 
it convenient to their Species.The Emprels feem’d very 
well farisfied with their anfwer,and defired to be further 
informed. Whether all Animal Creatures did con- 
tinue their Species by a fuccclfive propagation of parti- 
culars, and whether in every Species theoff-fprings did 
alwaysrefemble their Generator or Producer, both in 
their interior and exterior Figures ? They anfwered 
her Majefty, That lome Species or Cons of Creatures* 
were kept up by a fuccelfive propagation of an off- 
spring that was like the producer, but lome were nor. 
Ofthefirfi: rank, laid they, are all thole Animals that 
arc of different lexes, befides leveral others ; but of the 

lecond 

The Defcription of a. New World. 

97 

fecond rank are for the moft part thofe we call Infeds, 
whole produdion proceds from fuch caufosas have no 
conformity or likenefs with their produced Effeds ; as 
for example. Maggots bred our of Cheele, and fe- 
veral others generated out of Earth, Water, and the 
like. But faid the Emprels, there is lome likenefs 
between Maggots and Cheele, for Cheele has no 
blood, nor Maggots neither ; belides } they have 
almofl the lame tafte which Cheele has. This 
proves nothing, anfwered they ; for Maggots have a 
vilible, local, progrellive motion, which Cheele hath 
not. The Emprels replied , That when all the 
Cheele was turned into Maggots, it might be faid to 
have local, progrellive motion. They anfwered. That 
when the Cheele by its own figurative motions was 
changed into Maggots, it was no more Cheele. The 
Emprels confefled that Ihe oblerved Nature was in- 
finitely various in her works, and that though the fpe- 
cies of Creatures did continue, yet their particulars 
were fubjed to infinite changes. But lince you have 
informed me, laid Ihe, of the various forts and pro- 
ductions of Animal Creatures, I delire you to tell me 
what you have oblerved of their lenlitive perceptions? 
Truly, anfwered they, Your Majefty puts a very 
hard queftion to us/md we fhall hardly be able to give 
a latisfactory anfwer to it ; for there are many different 
forts of Creatures, which as they have all different 
perceptions, fo they have alfo different organs, which 

F 5 our 

3 8 The Defcription of a New World . 

our fcnfcs arenot able to difcover, onely in an Oyfter- 
(hell we have with admiration obfcrved, that the com- 
mon fenforium of the Oyfter lies juft at the clofing of the 
fliells^where the preflure and reaction may be perceived 
by the opening and (hutting of the (hells every tide. 

After all this, the Emprels defired the Worm men 
to give her a true Relation how froft was made upon 
the Earth ? To which they anfwered, That it was 
made much after the manner and defcription of the 
Fi(h- and Bird-men, concerning the Congelation of 
Water into Ice and Snow, by a commixture of (aline 
and acid particles ; which relation added a great light to 
the Ape-men,\vho were the Chymifts, concerning their 
Chymical principles, Salt,Sulphur and Mercury. But, 
(aid the Emprefc, if it befo, it will require an infinite 
multitude of (aline particles to produce (uch a great 
quantity of Ice, Froft and Snow: befides,(aid (he, 
when Snow, Ice and Froft, turn again into their former 
principle, I would fain know what becomes of thofc 
(aline particles ? But neither the W orm-men, nor the 
Fifh- and Bird-men, could give her an anfwer to it. 

Then the Emprels enquired of them the reafon, 
W hy Springs were not as (alt as the Sea is ? alio, why 
(ome did ebb and flow ? To which it was anfwered. 
That the ebbing and flowing of (ome Springs, was cau- 
fcd by hollow Caverns within the Ear th, where the Sea- 
water crowding thorow, did thru ft forward, and drew 
backward theSpring-water,according to its own way of 

ebbing 

39 

The Defcrrption of a Jferp World. 

ebbing and flowing; but others laid, That it procee- 
ded from a fmall proportion of falineand acid particles, 
which the Spring-water imbibed from the Earth ; and 
although it was not fo much as to be perceived by 
the fenfe of Tafte ; yet was it enough to caufe an eb- 
bing and flowing-motion. And as for the Spring- 
water being frefli, they gave, according to their Obfer- 
vation, this following reafonrThere is, laid they, a cer- 
tain heat within the Bowels of the Earth, proceeding 
from its fwift circular motion,u pon its own axe, which 
heatdiftills therareft parts of the Earth into a frefli and 
infipid water,which water being through the pores of 
the Earth, conveighed into a place where it may break 
forth without refiftance or obflru&ion, caufes Springs 
and Fountains ; and thefe diftilled Waters within the 
Earth,do nourifli and refrelh the grofler and drier parts 
thereof. This Relation confirmed the Emprefs in the 
opinion concerning the motion of the Earth, and the 
fixednefs of the Sun, as the Bird-men had informed 
her; and then flie asked the Worm-men , whether 
Minerals and Vegetables were generated by the fame 
heat that is within the Bowels of the Earth ? To 
which they could give her no pofitive anfwer ; onely 
this they affirmed. That heat and cold were not the 
primary producing caufes of either Vegetables or Mi- 
nerals, or other forts of Creatures, but onely effeds ; 
and to prove this our aflertion, laid they, we have ob- 
ferved,that by change of fbme forts of Corporeal mo- 
i ■ tions. 

The Defcription of a New World. 

tions, that which is now hot, will become cold; and 
what is now cold, will grow hot ; but the hottell place 
of all, wc find to be the Center of the Earth : Nei- 
ther do we obferve, that the Torrid Zone does contain 
fo much Gold and Silver as the Temperate;nor is there 
great flore of Iron and Lead wherefoever there is Gold; 
for thefe Metals are moll found in colder Climates 
towards either of the Poles. This Oblervation, the 
Emprefs commanded them to confer with her Chy- 
mifts, the Ape-men; to let them know that Gold was 
not produced by a violent, but a temperate degree of 
heat. She asked further. Whether Gold could not 
be made by Art ? They anfwered. That they could 
not certainly tell her Majefty, but if it was pofiible to 
be done, they thought Tin, Lead, Brafs, Iron and 
Silver , to be the fitted Metals for fuch an Artificial 
Tranfmutation. Then (he asked them, Whether Art 
could produce Iron, Tin, Lead, or Silver ? They 
anfwered. Not, in their opinion. Then I perceive, re- 
plyed the Emprefs, that your judgments are very irre- 
gular, fince you believe that Gold, which is fo fixt a 
Metal, that nothing has been found as yet which could 
occafion a diffblution of its interior figure, may be made 
by Art, and not Tin, Lead, Iron, Copper or Silver, 
which yet are fo far weaker , and meaner Metals 
then Gold is. But the Worm-men excufed them- 
felves , that they were ignorant in that Art, 
and that fuch queftions belonged more properly to 

the 

The Dejcription of a New World. 

4 * 

the Ape-men , which were Her Majefties Chy- 
mifts. 

Then the Emprefs asked them, Whether by their 
Senfitive perceptions they could obferve the interior 
corporeal, figurative Motions both of Vegetables and 
Minerals ? They anfwer’d. That their Senfes could 
perceive them after they were produced, but not be- 
fore ; Neverthelefs, laid they, although the interior, 
figurative motions of Natural Creatures are not fubjed 
to the exterior, animal, fenfitive perceptions, yet by 
their Rational perception they may judg of them, and 
of their productions if they be regular : Whereupon 
the Emprefs commanded the Bear-men to lend them 
fome of their belt Microfoopes. At which the Bear- 
men fmilingly anfwered her Majefty, that their Glafi 
les would do them but little forvice in the bowels of the 
Earth, becaufe there was no light; for, faid they, our 
Glafles do onely reprefent exterior objedts, according 
to the various refledions and pofitions of light ; and 
wherefocver light is wan ting, the glafles wil do no good. 
To which the Worm-men replied, that although 
they could not fay much of refradions, refledions, in- 
fledions,and the like ; yet were they not blind, even in 
the bowels of the Earth : for they could fee the feveral 
forts of Minerals, as alfb minute Animals, that lived 
there; which minute Animal Creatures were not blind 
neither, but had fome kind of fenfitive perception that 
was as ferviceable to them, as fight, tafte, fmell, touch, 

G hear- 

4 2 

7 be Defer ipt ion of a New fVorld. 

hearing^c-was to other Animal Creatures:By which 
it is evident,That Nature has been as bountiful to thole 
Creatures that live underground, or in the bowels of 
the Earth, as to thole that live upon the furface of the 
Earth, or in the Air, or in \¥ater. But howloever, 
proceeded the Worm-men, although there is light in 
the bowels of the Earth, yet your Microlcopes will do 
but little good there, by realbn thole Creatures that 
live under ground have not fuch an optick lenfe as thole 
that live on the lurface of the Earth : wherefore,unlels 
you had luch Glaflesas are proper for their perception, 
your Microlcopes will not be any ways advantagious 
to them. The Emprels leem’d well pleafed with this 
anfwerof the Worm-men ; and asked them further. 
Whether Minerals and all other Creatures within the 
Earth w ere colourlels ? At which queftion they could 
not forbear laughing ; and when the Emprels asked 
the realbn why they laught ? We moll humbly 
beg your Majellies pardon , replied they ; for we 
could not chule but laugh, when we heard of a colour- 
lels Body. Why, laid the Emprels, Colour is onely 
an accident, which is an immaterial thing, and has no 
being of it lelf, but in another body. Thole, re- 
plied they, that informed your Majelty thus, lurely 
their rational motions were very irregular ; For how 
is it poflible,that a Natural nothing can have a being in 
Nature ? If it be no fubllance, it cannot have a being, 
and if no being, it is nothing ; Wherefore the diftin- 

dion 

The Defcriftion of a Jfctv World. 4 

flion between fubfifting of it lelf, and fubfifting in a- 
nother body, is a meer nicety, and iion-fenle ; for there 
is nothing in Nature that can fubfift of, or by it fclf, (I 
mean fingly) by reafbn all parts of Nature arc corn- 
poled in one body, and though they may be infinitely 
divided, commixed, and changed in their particulars, 
yet in general, parrs cannot be feparated from parts as 
long as Nature lafts ; nay, we might as probably af- 
firm, that Infinite Nature would be as loon deftroyed, 
as that one Atom could perifii ; and therefore your 
Majefty may firmly believe , that there is no Body 
without colour, nor no Colour without body ; for 
colour, figure, place, magnitude, and body, are all 
but one thing, without any feparation or abftra&ion 
from each other. 

The Emprels was lo wonderfully taken with this 
Difcourleof the Worm-men, that Ihe not only par- 
doned the rudenels they committed in laughing at firft 
atherqueftion, but yielded a full aflent to their opi- 
nion, which Ihe thought the molt rational that ever (he 
had heard yet, -and then proceeding in her queftions,en- 
quired further, whether they had oblerved any leminal 
principles within the Earth free from all dimenfions 
and qualities, which produced Vegetables, Minerals, 
and the like ? To w'hich they anlwered, That con- 
cerning the feeds of Minerals, their fenfitive percepti- 
ons had never oblerved any ; but Vegetables had cer- 
tain feeds out of which they were produced. Then 

G 2 fhe 

W 

44 

X be Defcription of a Nen> World. 

(lie asked, whether thofe feeds of Vegetables loft their 
Species, that is, were annihilated in the production of 
their ofF-lpring? To which they anfwered. That by 
an Annihilation, nothing could be produced, and that 
the feeds of Vegetables were fe> far from being annihi- 
lated in their produ&ions, that they did rather nume- 
roufly increafe and multiply ; for the divifion of one 
feed, laid they, does produce numbers ol feeds out of it 
felf.Butrepli’d theEmprefe,A particular part cannot in- 
creafe of it felf.’Tis true,anlwer’d they :but they increafe 
not barely of themfelves, but by joining and commix- 
ing with other parts, which doaftift them in their pro- 
ductions, and by way of imitation form or figure 
their own parts into fuch or fitch particulars. Then, I 
pray inform me, faid the Emprels, what dilguife thofe 
feeds put on, and how they do conceal themfelves in 
their Tranfmutations ? They anfwered. That feeds 
did no ways di/guife or conceal, but rather divulge 
themfelves in the multiplication of their off-lpring ; 
onely they did hide and conceal themfelves from their 
ftnfitive perceptions lb, that their figurative and pro- 
ductive motions were not perceptible by Animal Crea- 
tures. Again, the Emprels asked them, whether there 
were any Non- beings within the Earth ? To which 
they anfwered. That they never heard of any fitch 
thing j and that, if herMajefty would know the truth 
thereofjlhe muft ask thofe Creatures that are called Im- 
material Spirits, which had a great affinity with Non- 
beings, 

The Defer ipt ion of a New World. 

beings,and perhaps could give her a (atisfa&ory anfwer 
to this queftion. Then (he defired to be informed. 
What opinion they had of the beginning of Forms? 
They told her Majefty,That they did notunderftand 
what (he meant by this expreffion ; For, (aid they, there 
is no beginning in Nature, no not of Particulars; by 
reafbn Nature is Eternal and Infinite, and her parti- 
culars are fubjed to infinite changes and tranfmutations 
by vertue of their own Corporeal, figurative (elf-mo- 
tions; (o that there’s nothing new in Nature, nor pro- 
perly a beginning of any thing. The Emprefs (eem’d 
well (atisfied with all thofe anfwers, and enquired fur- 
ther, Whether there was no Art u(ed by thofe Crea- 
rures that live within the Earth ? Y es, anfwered they : 
for the (everal parts of the Earth do join and allift each 
other in compofition or framing of l'uch or fuch parti- 
culars ; and many times, there are factions and divi- 
fions, -which caufe productions of mixt Species ; as,for 
example, weeds, inftead of fweet flowres and uleful 
fruits ; but Gardeners and Husbandmen ufe often to 
decide their quarrels, and caule them to agree; which 
though it (hews a kindnefs to the differing parties , yet 
*tis a great prejudice to the Worms, and other Animal- 
Creatures that live under ground ; for it mod com- 
monly caufcs their diffolution and ruine, at beft they 
are driven out of their habitations. W hat, (aid the 
Emprefs, arc not W orms produced out of the Earth ? 
Their production in general , anfwered they, is like 

G 3 the ' 

4 6 

The Defection of a New World. 

the produdion of all other Natural Creatures, pro- 
ceeding from the corporeal figurative motions ot Na- 
ture ; but as for their particular produdions , they 
are according to the nature of their Species ; fomc are 
produced out of flowers, fome out of roots, (ome out 
of fruits, fome out of ordinary Earth. Then they are 
very ungrateful Children, replied the Emprels, that 
they feed on their own Parents which gave them life. 
Their life, anfwered they, is their own, and not their 
Parents ; for no part or creature of Nature can either 
give or take away life ; but parts do onely alfift and 
join with parts, either in the diflolution or produdion 
of other Parts and Creatures. 

After this, and feveral other Conferences, which 
the Emprefs held with the Worm-men, flie difmifled 
them j and having taken much fatisfadion in (everal 
of their Anfwers,encouraged them in their Studies and 
Oblervations. Then fhe made a Convocation of her 
Chy mills, the Ape-men ;and commanded them to give 
her an account of the foveral Tranfinutations which 
their Art was able to produce. They begun firft with 
a long and tedious Difoourfo concerning the Primitive 
Ingredients of Natural bodies, and how, by their Art, 
they had found out the principles out of which they 
confift. But they did not all agree in their opinioits ; 
for fome faid,That the Principles of all Natural Bodies 
were the four Elements, Fire, Air, Water, Earth, 
out of which they were compofed : Others rejeded 

this 

The Dejcription of a New World. 

47 

this Elementary commixture, and faid, There were 
many Bodies out of which none of the four Elements 
could be extra&ed by any degree of Fire whatfoever ; 
and that, on the other fide, there were divers Bo- 
dies, whole relblution by Fire reduced them into more 
then four different Ingredients ; and theft affirmed 
That the only principles of Natural Bodies were Salt, 
Sulphur, and Mercury : Others again declared, That 
none of the forementioned could be called the True 
►Principles of Natural Bodies^but that by their induftry 
and pains which they had taken in the Art of Chymi- 
ftry, they had di(covered,that all Natural Bodies were 
produced but from one Principle, which was Water ; 
for all Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals, faid they, 

» are nothing elft, but fimple Water diftinguifiied into 
various figures by the vertue of their Seeds. But after 
a great many debates and contentions about this Sub- 
ject, the Emprefs being fo much tired that fhe was not 
able to hear them any longer, impoftd a general filence 
upon them, and then declared her ftlf in this following 
Dilcourle. 

I am too ftnfible of the pains you have taken in 
the Art of Chymiftry, to difcover the Principles of 
Natural Bodies, and wifh they had been more profita- 
bly bellowed upon fomc other, then fuch experi- 
ments ; for both by my own Contemplation, and the 
Obftrvations which I have made by my rational 5c fen- 
fitive perception upon Nature, and her works, I find, 

that 

4 8 

The Defer if t ion of a. New World. 

that Nature is but one Infinite Self- moving Body, 
which by the vertue of its (elf-motion, is divided into 
Infinite parts, which parts being reftlels, undergo 
perpetual changes and rranfinutationsby their infinite 
compositions and divifions. Now, if this be (o, as 
furely, according to regular Senle and Realbn, it ap- 
pears no otherwife ; it is in vain to look for primary 
Ingredients, or conftitutive principles of Natural Bo- 
dies, fince there is no more but one Universal Prin- 
ciple of Nature, to wit, (elf-moving Matter, which 
is the onely caufe of all natural effeds. Next, I dc- 
fire you to confider, that Fire is but a particular Crea- 
ture, or effed of Nature, and occafions not onely 
different effeds in (everal Bodies, but on (ome Bodies 
has no power at all ; witnels Gold, which never 
could be brought yet to change its interior figure by 
the art of Fire ; and if this be (o, W hy (hould you be 
fo (impleas to believe that Fire can (hew you the Prin- 
ciples of Nature ? and that either the Four Elements, 
or W ater onely , or Salt Sulphur and Mercury, 
all which are no more but particular effeds and Crea- 
tures of Nature, fliould be the Primitive Ingredients 
or Principles of all Natural Bodies ? Wherefore, I 
will not have you to take more pains, and wafte your 
time in fuch fruitlels attempts, but be wi(er hereafter, 
and bufie your (elves with fuch Experiments as may be 
beneficial to the publick. 

I 

The 

The Defeription of a 3fen> World. 

The Emprefs having thus declared her mind to 
the Ape-men , and given them better Inftrudions 
then perhaps they expeded, not knowing that her 
Majefty hadfuch great and able judgment in Natural 
Philofophy, had feveral conferences with them con- 
cerning Chymical Preperations, which for brevities 
fake, Pie forbear to reherfe: Amongft the reft, Oie asked, 
how it came that thelmperial Race appear’d fo young' 
and yet was reported to have lived fo long; Come of 
them two, fome three, and fome four hundred years? 
and whether it was by Nature, or a fpecial Divine 
blefting ? To which they anfwered. That there was 
a certain Rock in theparts of that World, which con- 
tained the Golden Sands, which Rock was hallow 
within, and did produce a Gum that was a hundred 
years before it came to its full ftrength and perfedion ; 
this Gum, faid they, if it be held in a warm hand, will 
diflolve into an Oyl, the effeds whereof are follow- 
ing: It beinggiven every day for fome certain rime, to 
an old decayed man, in the bignefs of a little Pea, will 
firft make himTpitfor a week, or more; after this, it will 
caufe Vomits of FIegm;and after that it will bring forth 
by vomits, humors of feveral colours; firft of a pale 
yellow, then of a deep yellow, then of a green , and 
lafily of a black colour; and each of thefe humors have 
a feveral rafte, fome are frelh, fome fait, fome fower, 
fome bitter, and fo forth; neither do all thefe Vomits 
make them iick, but they come out on a fudden, and 

H unawares. 

5 ° 

The Defcfiftion of a New World. 

unawares, without any pain or trouble to the patient : 
And after it hath done all thele mentioned effefts, and 
clear’d both the Stomack and feveral other parts of the 
body, then it works upon the Brain, and brings forth 
of the Nolefuch kinds of humors as it did out of the 
Mouth, and much alter the fame manner ; then it will 
purge by ftool, then by urine, then by fweat, and 
laftly by bleeding at the Nole, and the Emeroids ; all 
which effe&s it will perform within the (pace of fix 
weeks, or a little more; for it does not work very ftrong- 
ly, but gently, and by degrees : Laftly, when it has 
done all this, it will make the body break out into a 
thick Scab, and caule both Hair, Teeth, and Nails to 
come off i which fcab being arrived to its full maturity, 
opens firft along the back, and comes off all in a piece 
like an armour, and all this is done within the (pace of 
four months. After this the Patient is wrapt into a Cere- 
cloth, prepared of certain Gums and Juices, wherein 
he continues until the time of nine Months be expired 
from the firft beginning of the cure, which is the time 
of a Childs formation in the Womb.* In the mean 
while, his diet is nothing elfe but Eagles-eggs, and 
Hinds-milk ; and after the Cere-cloth is taken away, he 
will appear of the age of Twenty, bothirtfhipe, and 
ftrength. The weaker fort of this Gum is foveraign 
in healing of wounds, and curing of flight diftempers. 
Butthisisalforo be obferved, that none of the Impe- 
rial race does ufe any other drink but Lime-W'ater, or 

water 

The Defcription of a 3fen> World. 

water in which Lime-ftone is immerged ,• their meat is 
nothing elfe but Fowl of leveral forts,their recreations 
are many, but chiefly Hunting. 

This Relation amazed the Emprels very much ; for 
though in the World (he came from, fhe had heard 
great reports of the Philolophers-ftone, yet had (he 
not heard of any that had ever found it our, which 
made her believe that it was but a Chymera ; (he cal- 
led alio to mind,that there had been in the lame World 
a Man who had a little Stone which cured all kinds of 
Dileales outward and inward, according as it was ap- 
plied ; and that a famous Chymift had found out a 
certain Liquor called Alfyabe(l } which by the vertue of 
its own fire, conlumed all Dileales ; but Ihe had never 
heard of a Medicine that could renew old Age, and 
render it beautiful, vigorous and ftrong: Nor would 
Ihe have lo ealily believed it, had it been a medicine 
prepared by Artj for Ihe knew that Art, being Na- 
tures Changeling, was notable to produce fuch a pow- 
erful effed; but being that the Gum did grow natu- 
rally, Ihedidnotlbmuchlcrupleatit; for Hie knew 
that Nature’s Works are lo various and wonderful, 
that noparticular Creature is able to trace her ways. 

The Conferences of the Chymifts being finilhed, 
the Emprels made an Aflembly of her Galenical Phy- 
ficians, her Herbalifts and Anatomifts; and firftlhe 
enquired of her Herbalifts the particular effeds of feve- 
ral Herbs and Drugs, and whence they proceeded ? 

H 2 To 

5 2 

Tbe Defer iption of a New World. 

To which they anfwered, that they could, for the moft 
part, tell her Majefty the vertues and operations of 
them, but the particular caufes of their effe&s were un- 
known ; oaely thus much they could lay, that their o- 
perattons and vertues were generally cauled by their 
proper inherent, corporeal, figurative motions, which 
being infinitely various in Infinite Nature, did produce 
infinite fe ver a 1 effc&s. And it is obferved , faid they, 
that Herbs and Drugs are as wile in their operations, as 
Men in their words and aftions; nay,wifer ; and their 
effects are more certain then Men in their opinions ; for 
though they cannot difeourfe like Men, yet have they 
Senfcand Reafon,as well as Men; for the difeurfive fa- 
culty is but a particular effect of Senfe and Reafon in 
fome particular Creatures, to wit,Men, and not a prin- 
ciple of Nature, and argues often more folly than wifi- 
dom. The Emprels asked. Whether they could 
not by a compofition and commixture of other Drugs 
make them work other effects then they did , ufcd 
by themfelves ? They anfwered, Ttat they could 
make them produce artificial effects, but not alter their 
inherent, proper and particular natures. 

Then the Emprels commanded her Anatomiffs to 
diffect fuch kinds of Creatures as are called Monfters. 
But they anfwered her Majefty, That it would be but 
an unprofitable and ufelels work, and hinder their bet- 
ter imployments; for when we diffect dead Animals, 
laid they, it is for no other end, but to obferve what 

defects 

Tbc Defcrrption of a New World. 

defects or diftempers they had, that we may cure the 
like in living ones, lb that all our care and induftry 
concerns onely the prelervation of Mankind ; but we 
hope your Majefty will not preferve Mongers, which 
are moft commonly deftroyed , except it be for no- 
velty : Neither will the diflection of Monfters prevent 
the errors of Nature’s irregular actions ; for by diflect- 
ing fbme, we cannot prevent the production of o- 
thers ; lb that our pains and labour will be to no pur- 
pole, unlels to latisfie the vain curiofities of inquilitive 
men. The Emprcls replied. That fach diflections 
would be very beneficial to Experimental Philolo- 
phers. If Experimental Philolbphers, anfwer’d they, 
do Ipend their time in fuch ufelels Inlpections, they 
wafle it in vain, and have nothing but their labour for 
their pains. 

Laftly, her Majefty had lome Conferences with 
the Galenic Phyficians about feveral Dileales, and 
among!! the reft, defired to know the caufe and nature 
of Apoplexies y and the Ipotted Plague. They an- 
fwered. That a deadly Apoplexy was a dead palfieof 
the Brain; and the Ipotted Plague was a Gangrene of 
the Vital parts: and as the Gangrene of outward parts 
did ftrike inwardly ; lb the Gangrene of inward parts, 
did break forth outwardly : which is the caule, laid 
they, that as loon as the Ipots appear, death follows; 
for then it is an infallible fign,that the body is through- 
out infected with a Gangrene, which is a fpreading 

H 3 CV^i 

The Defcription of a New World. 

54 

evil i but lome Gangrenes do fpread more fuddenly 
than others, and of all forts of Gangrenes, the Plaguy - 
Gangrene is the molt infe&ious ; for other Gangrenes 
infeft but the next adjoining parts of one particular bo- 
dy,and having killed that lame Creature, go no further, 
but ceafe ; when as, the Gangrene of the Plague, in- 
fers not onely the adjoining parts of one particular 
Creature, but allb thole that are diftant ; that is, one 
particular body infe&s another, and lo breeds a Uni- 
verlal Contagion. But the Emprels being very de- 
firoustoknow in what manner the Plague was propa- 
gated, and became lo contagious, asked. Whether it 
went a&ually out of one body into another ? To 
which they anfwered. That it was a great dilpute a- 
mongft the Learned of their Profellion, Whether it 
came by a divilion and compolition of parts ; that is, 
by expiration and infpiration ; or whether it was cau- 
led by imitation : Some Experimental Philolbphers, 
laid they, will make us believe, that by the help of their 
Microlcopes, they have oblerved the Plague to be a 
body of little Flies like Atoms, which go out of one 
body into another, through the lenlitive paflages ; but 
the moll experienced and wileft of our lociety, have 
rejedcd this opinion as a ridiculous fancy, and do, for 
the moll: part, believe, that it is cauled by an imitation 
of Parts j Co that the motions of lome parts which are 
lou nd,do imitate themotions of thole that are infe&ed 
and that by this means, the Plague becomes contagions, 
and Ipreading. The 

The Vefcription of a New World. 

The Emprefs having hitherto fpent her time in the 
Examination of the Bird- Fifh - Worm- and Ape- 
men, &c. and received feveral Intelligences from their 
feveral imployments ; at laft had a mind to divert her 
jfelf after her ferious Difoourfes, and therefore fhe lent 
for the Spider- men, which were her Mathematicians, 
the Lice- men which were here Geometricians, and the 
Magpie- Parrot- and Jackdaw-men, which were her 
Orators and Logicians. The Spider-men came firft, 
and prefented her Ma jefty with a table full of Mathe- 
matical points,lines, and figures of all forts, of fquares, 
circles, triangles, and the like ; which the Emprefs, 
notwithftanding that (lie had a very ready wit, and 
quick apprehenfion, could not underftand ; but the 
more fhe endeavoured to learn, the more was fhe con- 
founded : Whether they did ever fquare the Circle, I 
cannot exadly tell , nor whether they could make 
imaginary points and lines; but this I dare fay. That 
their points and lines were fo flender, fmall and thin, 
that they feem’d next to Imaginary. The Mathema- 
ticians were in great efleem with the Emprefs, as beiug 
not onely the chief Tutors and Inftrudors in many 
Arts, but fome of them excellent Magicians and In- 
formers of Spirits, which was the reafon their Cha- 
raders werefoabftrufe and intricate, that the Empe- 
refs knew not what to make of them. There is fo 
much to learn in your Aft, faid fhe, that I can neither 
fpare time from other affairs to bufic my felf in your 

profeffion. 

5 * 

The Defcription of a New World. 

profelfion ; nor, if I could, do I think I fliould ever be 
able to underftand your Imaginary points, lines and fi- 
gures, becaufe they are Non-beings. 

Then came the Lice-men, and endeavoured to 
meafure all things to a hairs-breadth, and weigh them 
to an Atom ; but their weights would feldom agree, 
elpecially in the weighing of Air, which they found 
a task impofiible to be done; at which the Fmprels be- 
gan to be dilplealed, and told them, that there was 
neither Truth nor Jufticein their Profelfion; and lo 
difiolved their fociety. 

After this, the Emprels was relblved to hear the 
Magpie-Parrot-and Jackdaw-men, which were her 
profefled Ora tors and Logicians; whereupon one of 
the Parrot-men role with great formality, and endea- 
voured to make an Eloquent Speech before her Ma- 
jefty; but before hehadhalf ended, his arguments and 
divifions being lo many, that they cauled a great con- 
fufionin his brain, he could not go forward, but was 
forced to retire backward, with great dilgrace 
both to himlelf, and the whole Society; and although 
one of his brethren endeavoured to lecond him by ano- 
ther Ipeech, yet was he as far to leek, as the former. At 
which the Emprels appear’d not a little troubled, and 
told them, That they followed too much the Rules of 
Art, and confounded themlelves with too nice forma- 
lities and diftindions; but fincel know, laid Ihe, that 
you are a people who have naturally voluble tongues^ 

and 

The ‘Defcription of a New World. 

and good memories; I defire you to confider more the 
fubjed you (peak ofjthen your artificial periods, con- 
nexions and parts of fpeech, and leave the reft to your 
natural Eloquence ; which they did, and fb became very 
eminent Orators. 

Laftly,her Imperial Majefty being defirous to know 
what progrels her Logicians had made in the Art of 
difputing, Commanded them to argue upon feveral 
Themes or Sub;e<fts;which they did ; and having made a 
very nicedilcourfeofLogiftical terms and propofitions, 
entred into a difpute by way of Syllogiftical Argu- 
ments, through all the Figures and Modes : One be- 
gan with an Argument of the firft Mode of the firft 
Figure, thus : 

Every Politician is wife : ‘ 

Every Knave is a Politician , 

Therefore every Knave is wife. 

Another contradi&ed him with a Syllogifin of the 
fecond Mode of the fame Figure, thus: 

No Politician is wife : 

Every Kgave is a Politician , 

Therefore no Knave is wife. 

The third made an Argument in the third Mode 
of the fame Figure, after this manner: 

Every Politician is wife : * 

Some Knaves are Politicians , ‘.u <..uo\ 

Therefore fome Knaves are wife. 

58 

The Defer if tion of a New W rrld. 

The Fourth concluded with a Syllogifm in the 
fourth Mode of the fame Figure, thus ; 

No Tolitican is wife : 

Some Knaves are Politicians , 

Therefore fome Knaves are not wife. 

After this they took another fubjeft, and one pro- 
pounded this Syllogifin : 

Every Philofopher is wife : 

.Every Beast is wife. 

Therefore every Beaf is a Thilofopher. , 

But another laid that this Argument was falfc^ 
therefore he contradi&ed him with a Syllogifin of the 
lecond Figure of the fourth Mode, thus : 

Every Thilojopher is wife : 

Some Beajls are not wife. 

Therefore fome Beajls are not Pbilofopbers. 

* < / ‘ ' 1 ' f 

Thus they argued, and intended to go on, but the 
Emprels interrupted them : I have enough, laid fbe, 
of your chopt Logick, and will hear no more of your 
Syllogifms ; for it dilbrders my Realbn, and puts my 
Brain on the rack ; y our formal argumentations are able 
tolpoil all natural wit; and i’le have you to confider, 
that Art does not make Realbn, but Reafon makes 
Art; and therefore as much as Realbn is above Art, 
lb much is a natural rational dilcourle to be preferred be- 
fore an artificial : for Artis/or the mod part irregular, 
and dilbrders Men’s underltandings more then it revi- 
se! ‘ lies 

The Defer ft ion of a Vferv World. 

59 

fies them , and leads them into a Labyrinth whence 
they’l never get our, and makes them dull and unfit 
for ufeful employments ; elpecially your Art of Lo- 
gick, which confifts onely in contradiding each other, 
in making Sophifmes,and obfeuring Truth, inftead of 
clearing it. 

But they replied to her Ma;efty,That the knowledg 
of Nature, that is, Natural Philofophy, would beimper- 
fed without the Art of Logick; and that there was an 
improbable Truth which could no otherwile be found 
out then by the Art of dilputing. Truly, laid the 
Emprels, I do believe that it is with Natural Philo- 
fophy, as it is with all other effeds of Nature ; for no 
particular knowledg can be perfed, by realbn know- 
ledg is dividable, as well as compofable ; nay, to (peak 
properly, Nature her felf cannot boaft of any perfe- 
ction, but Cod himlelf j becaule there are lo many irre- 
gular motions in Nature,and ’tis but a folly to think that 
Art fliould be able to regulate them, fince Art it felf is, ^ 
for the mod part,irregular.But as for Improbable Truth 
I know not what your meaning is ; for Truth is more 
then Improbability : nay, there is lo much difference 
between Truth and Improbability, that I cannot 
conceive it polTible how they can be joined together. 

In fhort, faid Hie, I do no ways approve of your 
Profeffion;and though I will not dilfolve your Society, 
yet I fhall never take delight in hearing you any more; 
wherefore confine your dilputations to your Schools, 

I 2 left 

6o 

The Defer if t ion of a New World. 

left befides the Commonwealth of Learning, they di- 
fturb alfo Divinity and Policy, Religion and Laws, 
and by that means draw an utter mine and deftrudion 
both upon Church and State. 

After the Emprefs had thus finifh’d the Difcourfes 
and Conferences with the mentioned Societies of her 
Vertuofo's, (lie confidered by her felf the manner of 
their Religion, and finding it very defedive, was 
troubled, that fo wife and knowing a people fhould 
have no more knowlcdgof the Divine Truth ; Where- ' 
fore (he confulted with her own thoughts, whether it 
was poflible to convert them all to her own Religion, 
and to that end fhe refolved to build Churches, and 
make alfo up a Congregation of Women, whereof (lie 
intended to be the head her felf, and to inftrud them in 
the leveral points of her Religion.This (he had no looner 
begun, but the Women, which generally had quick 
wits, fubtile conceptions, clear underftandings, and 
folid judgments, became, in a ftiort time, very devout 
and zealous Sifters; for the Emprefs had an excellent 
gift of Preaching, and inftruding them in the Articles 
of Faith ; and by that means, fhe converted them not 
onely foon,but gained an extraordinary love of all her 
Subjeds throughout that World. But at laft, pon- 
dering with her felf the inconftant nature of Mankind, 
and fearing that in time they would grow weary, and 
defert the divine Truth, following their own fancies, 
and living according to their own defires; fhe began to 

The Defer if t ion ef a Jfen? World. 

be troubled that her labours and pains fhould prove 
of lo little efteS, and therefore ftudied all manner of 
ways to prevent it. Amongft the reft, (lie call’d to 
mind a Relation which the Bird-men made her once,, of 
a Mountain that did burn in flames of fire; and there- 
upon did immediately lend for the wileft and fubtileft 
of her Worm-men, commanding them to difcover the 
caule of the Eruption of that lame fire ; which they 
did ; and having dived to the very bottom of the 
Mountain, informed her Majefty, That there was a 
certain fort of Stone, whole nature was fuch, that be- 
ing wetted, it would grow exceflively hot, and break 
forth into a flaming-fire, until it became dry, and then 
it cealed from burning. The Emprels was glad to 
hear this news, and forthwith defired the Worm men 
to bring her fome of that Stone, but be fure to keep it 
fecret : She lent alio for the Bird-men, and asked them 
whether they could not get her a piece of the Sun- 
ftone ? They anfwercd. That it was impolfible, unlels 
they did Ipoil orleflenthe light of the W orld : but, 
faid they, if it pleale your Majefty , we can demo- 
lifh one of the numerous Stars of the Sky, which the 
World will never mils. 

The Emprels was very well latisfied with this pro- 
polal,and having thus imployed thele two forts of men, 
in the mean while builded two Chappels one a- 
bove another ; the one Ihe lined throughout with Di- 
amonds, both R oof, W alls and Pillars ; but the other 

I 3 Ihe 

6 2 

The Defcription of a New World. 

{he refolved to line with the Star-ftone ; the Fire- 
ftone (he placed upon the Diamond-lining, by rea- 
(bn Fire has no power on Diamonds and when {he 
would have that Chappel where the Fire-ftone was, 
appear all in a flame, {he had by the means of Artifi- 
cial pipes, water conveighed into it, which by turning 
the Cock, did, as out of a Fountain, Ipring over all 
the room, and as long as the Fire-ftone was wet, the 
Chappel feemed to be all in a flaming-fire. 

The other Chappel, which was lined with the Star- 
ftone, did onely caft a {plendorous and comfortable 
light ; both the Chappels ftood upon Pillars, juft in 
the middle of around Cloyfter, which was dark as 
night ; neither was there any other light within them, 
but what came from the Fire-and Star-ftone ; and be- 
ing every where open, allowed to all that were within 
the compafs of the Cloyfter, a free prolpeft into them ; 
befides, they were fo artificially contrived , that they 
did both move in a Circle about their own Centres, 
without intermiflion, contrary ways. In the Chappel 
. which was lined with the Fire-ftone , the EmpreQ 
preached Sermons of Terror to the wicked, and told 
them of the punifliments for their fins, to wit. That 
after this life they fliould be tormented in an everlafting 
Fire. But in the other Chappel lined with the Star- 
ftone, {he preached Sermons of Comfort to tho/e that 
repented of their fins, and were troubled at their own 
wickednels : Neither did the heat of the flame in the 

leaft 

The Description of a New World. 

6 3 

lead hinder her ; for the Fire-done did not cad fb 
great a heat but the Emprefs was able to endure it, <fcy 
realbn the water which was poured on the Stone, by its 
own felf-motion turned into a flaming-fire, occafioned 
by the natural motions of the Stone, which made the 
flame weaker then if it had been fed by lome other kind 
of fuel; the other Chappel where the Star-Stone was, 
although it did cad a great light, yet was it without all 
heat, and the Emprels appear’d like an Angel in it > 
and as that Chappel was an embleme of Hell, fo 
this was an embleme of Heaven. And thus the Em- 
prels, by Art, and her own Ingenuity, didnotonely 
convert the Blasting-World to her own Religion, but 
kept them in a condant belief, without inforcement or 
blood* died; for die knew well, that belief was a thing 
not to be forced or prefled upon the people, but to be 
indilled into their minds by gentle perfwafions ; and 
after this manner (he encouraged them allb in all 
other duties and employments:for Fear,though it makes 
people obey, yet does it not lad fo long, nor is it lo fure 
a means to keep them to their duties, as Love. 

Lad of all,when die law that both Church and State 
was now in a well-ordered and letled condition , her 
thoughts refle&ed upon the World Ihe came from ; and 
though Ihe had a great delire to know the condition 
of the lame,yet could Ihe advile no manner of way how 
• to gain any knowledg thereof; at lad, ader many lerious 
confiderations, Ihe concaved that it was impoflible to 

be 

64 

The Defection of a New World. 

r 

K * 

be done by any other means, then by the help of Im- 
material Spirits ; wherefore fhe made a Convoca- 
tion of the mod learned,witty and ingenious of all the 
forementioned forts of Men, and defired to know of 
them, whether there were any Immaterial Spirits in their 
World. Firft, fhe enquired of the Worm-men, whe- 
ther they had perceived fome within the Earth ? They 
anfwered her Majefty, That they never knew of any 
fuch Creatures ; for whatfbever did dwell within the 
Earth, laid they, was imbodied and material. Then 
fhe asked the Fly-men , whether they had obferved 
any in the Air ? for you having numerous Eyes, faid 
fhe, will be more able to perceive them, than any other 
Creatures. To which they anfwered her Majefty, 
That although Spirits, being immaterial, could not be 
perceived by the Worm-men in the Earth, yet they 
perceived that fuch Creatures did lodg in the Vehicles 
of the Air. Then the Emprefs asked, Whether they 
could fpeak to them, and whether they did underftand 
each other? The Fly-men anfwered. That thofe Spi- 
rits were always cloth’d in fome fort or other of Mate- 
rial Garments ; which Garments were their Bodies, 
made, for the moft part, of Air ; and when occafion 
ferved,they could put on any other fort of fubftances • 
but yet they could not put thefe fubftances into any 
form or fhape, as they pleafed. The Emprefs asked 
the Fly-men, whether it was pofliblc that fhe could be • 
acquainted, and have fome conferences with them ? 

They 

* 

V 

The Defer iption of a Vfew World. 

They anfwered, They did verily believe (he might. 
Hereupon the Emprefs commanded the Fly-men to 
ask Tome of the Spirits, W hether they would be pleafed 
to give her a Vifit > This they did; and after the 
Spirits had prefented themfelves to the Emprefs, (in 
what fliapes or forms, I cannot exadly tell) after fome 
few Complements that pafled between them, the Em- 
prefs told the Spirits that ftie queftioned not, but they 
did know how (he was a ftranger in that World, and 
by what miraculous means (be wasarrived there ; and 
fince (he had a great defire to know the condition of the 
World (he came from, her requeft to the Spirits was. 
To give her fome Information thereof, elpecially of 
thofe parts of the World where (he was born,bred,and 
educated; as alfo of her particular friends and acquain- 
tance: all which, the Spirits did according to her de- 
fire. At laft, after a great many conferences and parti- 
cular intelligences, which the Spirits gave the Em- 
prefs, to her great fatisfa&ion and content; (he enqui- 
red after the mod famous Students, Writers, and Ex- 
perimental Philofophers in that World, which they 
gave her a full relation ofiamongft the reft (he enquired. 
Whether there were none that had found out yet the 
Jews Cabbala ? Several have endeavoured it, anfwered 
the Spirits, but thole that came neareft (although thenv 
felves denied it) were one Dr. Dee, and one Edward 
Kelly, the one reprefen ting Mofes, and the other Aa- 
ron ; for Kelly was to Dr. Dee, as Aaron to Moles : 

K • but 

66 

The Defcription of a New World. 

but yet they proved at laft but meer Cheats; and were 
delcribed by one of their own Country- men, a famous 
Poet, named Ben. Johnfon , in a Play call’d, The Ale by ^ 
mijl , where he exprefled Kelly by Capt. Face, and 
Dee by Dr. Subtle, and their two Wives by Doll Com- 
mon, and the Widow ; by the Spaniard in the Play, 
he meant the Spanijb Ambafiador, and by Sir Epicure 
Mammon, a Tohjb Lord. The Emprefs remembred 
that fhe had leen the Play, and asked the Spirits, whom 
he meant by the name of Ananias ? Some Zealous 
Brethren, anfwered they, in Holland, Germany , and 
feveral other places. Then (lie asked them. Who 
was meant by the Druggijl ? Truly, anfwered the 
Spirits, We have forgot, it being lo long fnceitwas 
made and ailed. What, replied the Emprefs, Can 
Spirits forget ? Y cs, faid the Spirits ; for what is paft, 
isonely kept in memory, if it be not recorded. I did 
believe, faid the Emprefs, That Spirits had no need 
of Memory, or Remembrance, and could not be lub- 
jed to Forgetfulnefs. How can we, anfwered they, 
give an account of things prelent, if we had no Me- 
mory, but elpecially of things paft, unrecorded, if we 
had no Remembrance ? Said the Emprefs, By pre- 
fent Knowledg and Underftanding. The Spirits an- 
fwered, That prefent Knowledg and Underftanding 
was pf adions or things prefent, not of paft. But, laid the 
Emprels, you know what is to come, without Me- 
mory or Remembrance; and therefore you may know 
ju'i A • w hat 

The Defcription of a World. 

what is pad without memory and remembrance. They 
anlwered, That their foreknoudedg was oneiy a pru- 
dent and lubtile Oblervation made by comparing of 
things or a&ions pad, with thofe that are prelent; and 
that Remembrance was nothing elfe but a Repetition 
of things or adions pad. 

Then the Emprcfs asked the Spirits, Whether there 
was a threefold Cabbala ? They anlwered, Dee and 
Kelly made but a two-fold Cabbala , to wit, of the Old 
and NewTedament, but others might not oneiy make 
two or three, but threelcore Cabbala's , if they plea- 
led. The Emprels asked, Whether it was a Tradi- 
tional, or meerly a Scriptural, or whether it was a Li- 
teral, Philofophical, or Moral Cabbala ? Some, an- 
fwered they, did believe it meerly Traditional, others 
Scriptural, fome Literal, and lome Metaphorical: but 
the truth is, faid they, ’twas partly one, and partly the 
other ; as partly a Traditional, partly a Scriptu- 
ral, partly Literal, partly Metaphorical. The Em- 
prels asked further. Whether the Cabbala was a work 
oneiy of Natural Realbn, or of Divine Inlpiration ? 
Many, faid the Spirits, that write Cabbala's pretend to 
Divine Infpirations ; but whether it be lo, or not, it 
does not belong to us to judg ; oneiy this we mud needs 
confels, that it is a work which requires a good wit,and 
a drong Faith, but not Natural Realbn ; for though 
Natural R eafon is mod perfwafive,yet Faith is the chief 
that is required in Cabbalttts . But, faid the Emprels, 

K 2 Is 

68 

The Defcription of a New World. 

Is there not Divine Reafbn, as well as there is Natu- 
ral ? No, anfwered they : for there is but a Divine 
Faith, and as for Reafbn it is onely Natural ; but you 
Mortalsarefopuzled about this Divine Faith, and Na- 
tural Reafbn, that you do not know well how to di- 
ftinguifh them, but confound them both, which is 
the caufe you have fb many divine Philofbphers who 
make a Gallimafry both of Reafbn and Faith. Then 
fhe asked. Whether pure Natural Philofbphers were 
Cabbalifts ? They anfwered. No ; but onely your 
Myftical or Divine Philofbphers, fuch as ftudy be- 
yond Scnfe and Reafbn. She enquired further. Whe- 
ther there was any Cabbala in God, or whether God 
was full of Idea’s? They anfwered. There could be 
nothing in God, nor could God be full of any thing, 
either forms or figures, but of himfelf ; for God is the 
Perfe&ion of all things, and an Unexpreffible Being, 
beyond the conception of any Creature,either Natural 
or Supernatural. Then I pray inform me, fa id the 
Emprefs, Whether the Jews Cabbala or any other, 
confifl in Numbers? The Spirits anfwered, No : for 
Numbers are odd, and different, and would make a 
difagreement in the Cabbala. But, laid fhe again, Is 
it a fin then not to know or underftand the Cabbala ? 
God is fb merciful, anfwered they, and fb juft, that 
he will never damn the ignorant, and fave onely thofe 
that pretend to know him and his fecret Gounfels by 
their Cabbalas, - but he loves thofe that adore and 

worfhip 

The ‘Defcription of a New World. 

worfhip him with fear and reverence, and with a pure 
heart. She asked further, which of thele two Cab- 
bala’s was mod approved, the Natural, or Theologi- 
cal ? The Theological, anfwered they, is myftical, 
and belongs onely to Faith ; but the Natural belongs 
to Realon. Then Hie asked them,. Whether Divine 
Faith was made out of Realon ? No anfwered they, 
for Faith proceeds onely from a Divine laving Grace, 
which isa peculiar Gift of God. How comes it then, 
replied fhe, that Men, even thole that are of leveral 
opinions, have Faith more or lels ? A Natural Be- 
lief, anfwered they, is not a Divine Faith. But, pro- 
ceeded the Empreft, How are you fure that God can- 
not be known ? The leveral Opinions you Mortals 
have of God, anlwered they, are fufficient witnefles 
thereof. Well then, replied the Empreft, leaving 
this inquilitive knowledg of God, I pray inform me, 
whether you Spirits give motion to Natural Bodies ? 
No, anfwered they; but, on the contrary. Natural 
material bodies give Spirits motion ; for we Spirits, 
being incorporeal, have no motion but from our 
Corporeal Vehicles,lo that we move by the help of our 
Bodies, and not the Bodies by our help ; for pure 
Spirits are immovable. If this be lo, replied the Em- 
preft, How comes it then that you can move lo fud- 
denly at a vail diftance > They anfwered. That lome 
forts of matter were more pure, rare, and confequently 
more light and agil then others ; and this was the rea- 

K 3 fon 

The Defcription of a New W or Id. 

fon of their quick and iudden motions. Then the Em- 
prefs asked them. Whether they could fpeak without 
a body, or bodily organs? No,faidthey; nor could 
we have any bodily (en(e, but onely knowledg. She 
asked. Whether they could have Knowledg without 
Body ? Not a Natural, anfwered they, but a Superna- 
tural Knowledg, which is a far better Knowledg then a 
Natural. Then (he asked them, Whether they had a 
General or Univerfal Knowledg ? They anfwered, 
Single or particular created Spirits, have not ; for not 
any Creature, but God Himfelf, can have an abfolute 
and perfed knowledg of all things. The Emprefs asked 
them further, Whether Spirits had inward and out- 
ward parts? No, anfwered they; for parts onely be- 
long to bodies, not to Spirits. Again, (he asked them. 
Whether their Vehicles were living Bodies? They are 
Self-moving Bodies, anfwered they , and therefore 
they muft needs be living ; for nothing can move it 
felf, without it hath life. Then, faid (he, it muft necef- 
(arily follow, that this living, Self-moving Body gives 
motion to the Spirit, and not the Spirit motion to the 
Body, as its Vehicle. You (ay very true, anfwered they, 
and we told you this before. Then the Emprefs asked 
them, Of what forms of Matter thofe Vehicles were ? 
They (aid they were of (everal different forms ; (ome 
grofe and denfe, and others more pure, rare, and (ubtil. 
If you be not Material, (aid the Emprefs, how can 
you be Generators of all Creatures ? W e are no 

more. 

The Defcriftim of a New World. 

more, anfwered they, the Generators of material Crea- 
rures,then they are the Generators of us Spirits. Then 
fhe asked, Whether they did leave their Vehicles? No, 
anfvvered they ; for we being incorporeal, cannot leave 
or quit them : but our Vehicles do change into feveral 
forms and figures, according as occafion requires. Then 
the Emprels defired the Spirits to tell her. Whether 
Man was a little World ? They anfwered, That if a 
Fly or Worm was a little World, then Man was lo 
roo. She asked again, Whether our Fore-fathers had 
been as wile, as Men were at prelent, and had under- 
flood fenfe and reafon, as well as they did now ? They 
anfwered, That in former Ages they had been as wile 
as they are in this prelent, nay, wifer ; for, laid they, 
many in this age do think their*Fore-fathers have been 
Fools, by which they prove themfelves to be fuch. 
The Emprels asked further. Whether there was any 
Phftick power in Nature ? Truly,laid the Spirits, Pla*- 
flick, power is a hard word,& fignifies no more then the 
power of the corporeal, figurative motions of Nature. 
After this, the Emprels defired the Spirits to inform 
her where the Paradife was. Whether it was in the 
midll of the World as a Centre of pleafure ? or. Whe- 
ther it was the whole W orld; or a peculiar World by it 
felf,as a World of Life, and not of Matter;or whether 
it wasmixt,asa world of living animal Creatures?They 
anfwered. That Paradife was notin the world lihecame 
from, but in that world Ihe lived in at prefent ; and 

that 

7 2 

The Defer if lion of a New World. 

that it was the very fame place where fhe kept her 
Court, and where her Palace flood, in the midfl of 
the Imperial City .The Emprefs asked further, W hether 
in the beginning and Creation of the World, all Beads 
could fpeak ? They anfwered. That no Beads could 
(peak, but onely thole forts of Creatures which were 
Tifli-men, Bear men, Worm-men, and the like, 
which could fpeak in the fird Age, as well as they do 
now. She asked again. W hether they were none of 
thole Spirits that frighted Adam out of the Paradile, 
at lead cauled him not to return thither again?They an- 
fweredthey were not. Then die defired to be informed, 
whither Adam fled when he was driven out of the Pa- 
radife ? Out of this World, laid they, you are now 
Emprefs of, into the World you came from. If this 
be fo, replied the Emprefs, then furely thofe Cabbalids 
are much out of their dory, who believe the Paradile 
to be a world of Life onely, without Matter ; for this 
world, though it be mod pleafant and fruitful, yet it 
is not a world of meer Immaterial life, but a world of 
living, Material Creatures. Without quedion, they 
are, anfwered the Spirits ; for not all Cabbala's are true. 
Then the Emprefs asked , That fince it is mentioned 
in the dory of the Creation of the World, that Eve 
was tempted by the Serpent, Whether the Devil was 
within the Serpent, or, Whether the Serpent tempted 
her without the Devil ? They anfwered. That the 
Devil was within the Serpent. But how came it then, 

replied 

73 

The Definition of a dN^exe World. 

replied Hie, that the Serpent was curled ? ThcyarT 
fwered, becaufe the Devil was in him ; for are not thofe 
men in danger of damnation which have the Devil 
within them, who pcrfwades them to believe and ad 

wickedly? The Emprefs asked further. Whether 
Light and the Heavens were all one ? They anfwertd. 
That that Region which contains the Lucid natural 
Orbs, was by Mortals named Heaven ; but the Beati- 
fical Heaven, which is the Habitation of the BJefled 
Angels and Souls, was fo far beyond it, that it could 
not be compared to any Natural Creature. Then th e 
Emprefs asked them. Whether all Matter was fluid at 
firft ? They anfwered. That Matter was al ways as it is > 
and that fome parts of Matterwererare,fomedenfe,fome 

fluid, fome (o\\d,&c. Neither was God bound to make 
all Matter fluid at firft. She asked further, Whether 
Matter was immovable in it felf ? We have an- 
fwered you before, faid they. That there is no 
motion but in Matter ; and were it not for the motion 
of Matter, we Spirits, could not move,nor give you 
any anfwer to your feveral queftions. After this, the 
Emprefs asked the Spirits, Whether the Univerft was 
made within the fpace of fix days,or. Whether by thofe 
fix days,were meant fo many Decrees or Commands of 
God ? They anfwered her. That the World was 
made by the All-powerful Decree and Command of 
God j but whether there were fix Decrees or Com- 
mands, or fewer, or more, no Creature was able to tell. 

L Then 

74 

The Defer ip ion of a New World. 

Then fhe inquired. Whether there was no myflery in 
Numbers? No other myftery, anfwered the Spirits, 
but reckoning or counting; for Numbers are onely 
marks of remembrance. But what do you think of the 
Number of Four, (aid Hie, which Cabbalifls make fuch 
ado withal, and of the Number of Ten, when they fay 
thatTen is all,and that all Numbers arevirtually com- ' 
prehended in Four? We think, anfwered they, that 
Cabbalifls have nothing elfeto do but to trouble their 
heads with fuch ufelefs Fancies ; for naturally there is 
no fuch thing as prime or all in Numbers ; nor is there 
any other my fiery in Numbers, but what Man's fancy 
makes ; but what Men call Prime, or All, we do not 
know, becaufe they do not agree in the number of their 
opinion. Then the Emprefs asked. Whether the 
number of fix was a ly mbole of Matrimony, as being 
made up of Male and F^mal, for two into three is fix. 
If any number can be a fymbole of Matrimony, an- 
fwered the Spirits, it is not Six, but Two ; if two may 
be allowed to be a Number : for the ad of Matri- 
mony is made up of two joined in one. She asked a- 
gain. What they faid to the number of Seven ? whe- 
ther it was not an Embleme of God, becaufe Cabbalifls 
lay. That it is neither begotten, nor begets any other 
Number ?There can be no Embleme of God, anfwered 
the Spirits; for if we do not know what God is, how 
can we make an Embleme of him ? Nor is there any 
Number in God,for God is the perfedion Himfelf;but 

numbers 

The Defcriptioti of a New World. 

Numbers are imperfeft ; and as for the begetting of 
numbers, it is done by Multiplication and Addition ; 
but Subftra&ion is as a kind of deaxh to Numbers. If 
there be no my fiery in Numbers, replied the Emprefs, 
then it is in vain to refer the Creation of the World to 
certain Numbers, as Cabbalijls do. The onely my- 
ftery of Numbers,anfwered they, concerning the Cre- 
ation of the W orld,is,that as Numbers do multiply 3 fb 
does the World. The Emprefs asked, how far Num- 
bers did multiply ? The Spirits anfwered, to Infinite. 
Why, faid (lie. Infinite cannot be reckoned, nor num- 
bred. No more, anfwered they, can the parts of the 
Univerfe ;for God’s Creation, being an Infinite a&ion, 
as proceeding from an Infinite Power, could not reft 
upon a finite Number of Creatures , were it never 
fb great. But leaving the myftery of Numbers, pro- 
ceeded the Emprefs, Let me now defire you to in- 
form me, Whether the Suns and Planets were generated 
by the Heavens, or /Ethereal Matter ? The Spirits 
anfwered, That the Stars and Planers were of the 
fame matter which the Heavens, the /Ether, and all 
other Natural Creatures did confiftof; but whether 
they were generated by the Heavens or ./Ether, they 
could not tell : if they be, faid they, they are not like 
their Parents ; for the Sun, Stars, and Planets, are 
more fplendorous then the /Ether, as alfo more folid 
and conftant in their motions : But put the cafe, the 
Stars and Planets were' generated by the Heavens, and 

L 2 the 

The De/crtption of a Neap IV or Id. 

ll 

the Ethereal Matter ; the queftion then would be. 
Out of what thefe are generated or produced ) If thefe 
be created out of nothing, and not generated out of 
fomething, then it is probable the Sun, Stars and Pla- 
nets are fo too ; nay, it is more probable of the Stars 
and Planets, then of the Heavens, or the fluid jEther, 
by realbn the Stars and Planets feem to be further off 
from Mortality,then the particular parts of the .Ether; 
for no doubt but the parts of the Ethereal Matter, 
alter into feveral forms, which we do not perceive of 
the Stars and Planets. The Emprels asked further, 
Whether they could give her information of the three 
principles of Man, according to the dodrine of the 
Platonifts; asfirft of the Intelled, Spirit, or Divine 
Light. 2. Of the Soul of Man her (elf: and 5. Of 
the Image of the Soul, that is, her vital operation on 
the body ? The Spirits anfwered. That they did not 
underfland thefe three diftindions , but that they 
teem’d to corporeal fenfe and rea(bn,asif they were three 
feveral bodies, or three feveral corporeal adions; 
however, (aid they, they are intricate concep- 
tions of irregular Fancies. If you do not under- 
(land them , replied the Emprels , how (hall hu- 
man Creatures do then ? Many, both of your mo- 
dern and ancient Philofophers , anfwered the Spirits, 
endeavour to go beyond Senfeand Reafon, which 
makes them commit abfurdities ,• for no corporeal 
Creature can go beyond Senfe and Realbn ; no not we 

Spirits, 

r 

ft 

k 

The Defcription of a New World. 

Spirits, as long as we are in our corporeal Vehicles. 
Then the Emprefs asked them, Whether there were 
any Atheifts in the World ? The Spirits anfwered. 
That there were no more Atheifts then what Cabba* 
lifts make. She asked them further, Whether Spi- 
rits were of a globous or round Figure ? They an- 
fwered. That Figure belonged to body, but they 
being immaterial, had no Figure. She asked again. 
Whether Spirits were not like W arer or Fire ? They 
anfwered, that Water and Fire was material, were it 
the pureft and moft refined that ever could be ; nay, 
were it above the Heavens: But we are no morelik e 
Water or Fire, faid they, then we are like Earth ; but 
our Vehicles are of feveral forms, figures and degrees 
of fubftances.Then fhe defired to know. Whether their 
Vehicles were made of Air ? Yes, anfwered the 
Spirits, fome of our Vehicles are of thin Air. Then 
I fuppofe, replied the Emprefs, That thofe airy Ve- 
hicles, are your corporeal Summer-fuits. She asked 
further,Whether the Spirits had not af ending and de- 
fending- motions, as well as other Creatures ? They 
anfwered, That properly there was no afenfion or 
defc enlion in Infinite Nature, but onely in relation to 
particular parts ; and as for us Spirits, faid they, We 
can neither afeend nor defend without corporeal Ve- 
hicles ; nor can our Vehicles afeend or defend, but ac- 
cording to their feveral ftiapcs and figures, for there 
can be no morion without body. The Emprefs asked 

L 3 them 

* 

7 8 

The Defection of a Nen> iVorld. 

them further, Whether there was not a World of Spi- 
rits, as well as there is of Material Creatures ? No, 
anfwered they ; for the word World implies a quan- 
tity or multitude of corporeal Creatures, but we being 
Immaterial, can make no W orld of Spirits. Then fhe 
defired to be informed when Spirits were made ? We 
do not know, anfwered they, how and when we were 
made, nor are we much inquifitive after it ; nay, if 
we did, it would be no benefit, neither for us, nor for 
you Mortals to know it. The Emprefs replied. That 
Cabbalijls and Divine Philofophers faid. Mens ra- 
tional Souls were Immaterial, and flood as much in 
need of corporeal V chicles, as Spirits did. If this be fo, 
anfwered the Spirits, then you are Hermaphrodites of 
Nature ; but your Cabbalijls are miftaken, for they 
take the pureft and fubtileft parts of Matter, for Imma- 
terial Spirits. Then the Emprefs asked, When the 
Souls of Mortals went out of their Bodies, whether 
they went to Heaven or Hell; or whether they re- 
mained in airy Vehicles ? God’s Juftice and Mercy, 
anfwered they, is perfefl, and not imperfcft ; but if 
you Mortals will have Vehicles for your Souls, and a 
place that is between Heaven and Hell, it muft be Pur- 
gatory,which is a place of Purification, for which a<fli : 
on Fire is more proper then Air ; and fb the Vehicles of 
thofeSouls that are in Purgatory, can not be airy, but fie- 
ry ; and after this rate there can be but four places for 
human Souls to be in, vi%. Heaven, Hell, Purgatory, 
tty.. and 

79 

The Dcjcription of a Jfnv World. 

and this W orld ; but as for V ehicles,they are but fan- • 
cies, not real truths. Then the Emprels asked them. 
Where Heaven and Hell was ? Your Saviour Chrift, 
anfwered the Spirits, has informed you, that there is 
Heaven and Hell, but he did not tell you what, nor 
where they are ; wherefore it is too great a preemption 
for you Mortals to inquire after it: If you do but drive 
to get into Heaven, it is enough, though you do not 
know where or what it is ; for it is beyond your know- 
ledg and underftanding. I am fatisfied , replied the 
Emprels ; and asked further, Whether there were any 
Figures or Chara&ers in the Soul ? They anfwered, 

W here there was no Body, there could be no Figure. 
Then (he asked them. Whether Spirits could be naked ? 
and whether they were of a dark, or a light colour ? 

As for our Nakednels, it is a very odd queftion, an- 
fwered the Spirits ; and we do not know what you 
mean by a Naked Spirit ; for you judg of us as of cor- • 
poreal Creatures ; and as for Colour, faid they, it is 
according to our Vehicles ; for Colour belongs to 
Body, and as there is no Body that is colourlels, fb 
there is no Colour that is bodilefs. Then the Em- 
prels defired to be informed. Whether all Souls were 
made at the fir ft Creation of the World? We know no 
more, anfwered the Spirits, of the origin of humane j 

Souls, then we know of our Selves. She asked fur- 
ther, Whether humane bodies were not burthenlome 
to humane Souls ? They anfwered , That Bodies 

made 

go I be Defcription of a New World. 

made Souls a&ive, as giving them motion ,’ and if 
adion was troublefome to Souls, then Bodies were lo 
too. She^sked again. Whether Souls did chule Bo- 
dies ? They anfwered, That Platonicfs believed, the 
Souls of Lovers lived in the Bodies of their Beloved ; 
but furely, laid they, if there be a multitude of Souls . 
in a World of Matter, they cannot mils Bodies , for as 
loon as a Soul is parted from oneBody, it enters into 
another ; and Souls having no motion of themfelves, 
muft of neceflity be clothed or imbodied with the 
next parts of Matter. If this be fb, replied the Em- 
prefs, then I pray inform me. Whether all matter be 
foulified ? The Spirits anfwered, They could not 
exadly tell that ; but if it was truc,that Matter had no 
other motion but what came from a fpiritual power, 
and that all matter was moving, then no foul could quit 
a Body, but fhe muft of neceflity enter into another 
. fbulified Body, and then there would be two im- 
material fubftances in one Body. The Emprefs 
asked, W Tether it was not poflible that there could be 
two Souls in one Body ? As for Immaterial Souls,an- 
fwered the Spirits, it is impoflible ; for there cannot 
be two Immaterial in one Inanimate Body, by reafon 
they want parts, and place, being bodilefs ; but there 
maybe numerous materialSouls in one compofedBody^ 
by reafon every material part has a material natural 
Soul i for Nature is but one Infinite felf-moving, li- 
ving and felf-knowing body,confifting of the three de - 

grees 

The Defcription of a Neu> World. 

81 

grccs of inanimate, lenfitive and rational Matter, fo 
intermixt together, that no part of Nature, were it an 
Atom, can be without any of thele three Degrees ; the 
lenfitive is the Life, the rational the Soul, and the ina- 
nimate part, the Body of Infinite Nature. The Em - 
prels was very well fatisfied with this anfwer , and 
asked further, Whether fouls did not give life to bo- • 
dies ? No, anfwered they ; but Spirits and Divine 
Souls have a life of their own,which is not to be divided, 
being purer then a natural life ; for Spirits are incor- 
poreal, and confequently indivifible. But when the 
Soul is in its Vehicle, faid the Emprefs, then me- 
thinks (he is like the Sun, and the Vehicle like the 
Moon. No, anfwered they; but the Vehicle is lik e 
the Sun, and the Soul like the Moon ; for the Soul 
hath motion from the Body, as the Moon has light 
from the Sun. Then the Emprefs asked the Spirits, 
Whether it was an evil Spirit that tempted Eve , and 
brought all the mifchiefs upon Mankind: or, Whether 
it was the Serpent ? They anfwered. That Spirits 
could not commit a&ual evils. The Emprels laid, 
they might do it by perlwalions. They anlwered,That 
Perfwafions were a&ions; But the Emprels not being 
contented with this anlwer, asked, W hether there was 
not a fopernatural Evil ? The Spirits anfwered, That 
there was a Supernatural Good, which was God; but 
they knew of no Supernatural Evil that was equal to 
God. Then Ihe delired to know,Whether Evil Spi- 

M tits 

82 

The Defcriplion of a New World. 

rits were reckoned amongft the Beafts of the Field ? 
They anfwer’d, That many Beafts of the field were 
harmlefs Creatures,and very fcrviccable for Man’s ule; 
ind though fome were accounted fierce and cruel, yet 
did they exercife their cruelty upon other Creatures, 
for the moft part,to no other end, but to get themlelves 
• food, and to fatisfie rheir natural appetite ; but cer- 
tainly, laid they, you Men are more cruel to one an- 
other, then evil Spirits are to you ; and as for their ha- 
bitations in delolate places, we having no communion 
with them, can give you no certain account thereof. 
But what do you think, laid the Emprels, of good 
Spirits ? may not they be compared to the Fowlsof the 
Air ? They anfwered. There were many cruel and 
ravenous Fowls as well in the Air, as there were fierce 
and cruel Beafts on Earth ; • lo that the good are al- 
ways mixt with the bad. She asked further. Whether 
the fiery V chicles were a Fleaven, or a Hell, or at leaft 
a Purgatory to the Souls ? They anfwered. That if 
the Souls were immaterial, they could not burn, and 
then fire would do them no harm ; and though Hell 
was believed to be an undecaying and unquenchable 
fire, yet Heaven was no fire. The Emprels replied. 
That Heaven was a Light. Y es, laid they, but not a 
fiery Light. Then fhe asked, . Whether the different 
lhapesand forts of Vehicles, made the Souls and other 
Immaterial Spirits, milerable, or blefled ? The Ve- 
hicles, anfwered they, make them neither better, nor 

Id worle i 

t 

The Defer ip tion of a New World. 

83 

worle ; for though fome Vehicles fometimes may have 
power over others, yet thefe by turns may get fome 
power again over them, according to the leveral ad- 
vantages and dilad vantages of particular Natural parts. 
The Emprels asked further,WhetherAnimal life came 
out of the Ipiritual W orld,anddid return thither again? 
The Spirits anfwered,They could not exa&ly tell; but 
if it were lo, then certainly Animal lives mud leave 
their bodies behind them, otherwile the bodies would 
make thefpiritual Worldamixt World, that is, part- 
ly material,and partly immaterial; but the Truth is,faid 
they. Spirits being immaterial, cannot properly make a 
World ; for a World belongs to material, not to im- 
material Creatures. If this be lo, replied the Em- 
prefs, then certainly there can be no world of Lives 
and Forms without Matter ? No, anfwered the Spi- 
rits; nor a world of Matter without Lives and Forms; 
for Natural Lives and Forms cannot be immaterial, no 
more then Matter can be immovable. And therefore 
natural lives, forms and matter, are infeparable. Then 
the Emprels asked. Whether the fird Man did feed 
on the bell forts of the Fruits of the Earth, and the 
Beads on the word ? The Spirits anfwered. That 
unlefsthe Beads of the field were barred out of manu- 
red fields and gardens, they would pick and chule the 
bed Fruits as well as Men ; and you may plainly ob- 
lerve it, laid they, in Squirrels and Monkies, how they 
are the bedChufers of Nuts and Apples; and how 

M 2 Birds 

8 4 

Tbe Defcriftion of a New World. 

Birds do pick and feed on the moft delicious fruits,and 
Worms on the beft roots, and moft lavoury herbs ; by 
which you may lee, that thole Creatures live and feed 
better then men do, except you will lay, that arti- 
ficial Cookery is better and more whollbme then the 
natural. Again, the Emprefs asked, Whether the 
firft Man gave Names to all the leveral forts of Filhes 
in the Sea,and frefh Waters ? No, anfwered the Spi- 
rits, for he was an Earthly, and not a Watery Crea- 
ture; and therefore could not know the leveral forts of 
Filhes. Why, replied the Emprels, he was no more 
an Airy Creature then he was a Watery one,and yet he 
gave Names to the leveral forts of Fowls and Birds of 
the Air. Fowls, anfwered they, are partly Airy, and 
partly Earthly Creatures, not onely becaule they re- 
femble Beafts and Men in their flelh, but becaule their 
reft and dwelling places are on Earth ; for they 
build tbeir Nefts,lay their Eggs,and hatch their Young, 
not in the Air, but on the Earth. Then Ihe asked. 
Whether the firft Man did give Names to all the vari- 
' ous forts of Creatures that live on the Earth ? Yes, 
anfwered they, to all thofe that were prefented to him, 
or he had knowledg of, that is, to all the prime forts ; 
but not to every particular : for of Mankind, faid they, 
there were but two at firft;and as they did encreale, fo 
did their Names. But, faid the Emprels, who gave 
the Names to the leveral forts of Fifti ? The pofterity 
of Mankind, anlwered they. Then Ihe enquired, 

Whe- 

The T>efcription of a New World. 

85 

Whether there were no more kinds of Creatures now, 
then at the firft Creation ? They anfwered, That 
there were no more nor fewer kinds of Creatures then 
there are now ; but there are, without queftion, more 
particular forts of Creatures now, then there were then. 
She asked again. Whether all thole Creatures that 
were in Paradile, were alfo in Noah's Ark ? They 
anfwered, That the principal kinds had been there, but 
not all the particulars. Then (he would fain know, 
how it came, that both Spirits and Men did fall from a 
blefled into fo milerable a ftate and condition as they 
are now in. The Spirits anfwered. By difobedience. 
The Emprels asked, W hence this difobedient fin did 
proceed ? But the Spirits defired the Emprefs not to 
ask them any fuch queftions, becaule they went be- 
yond their knowledg. Then (he begg’d the Spirits 
to pardon her prefomption ; for, laid (he. It is the na- 
ture of Mankind to be inquifitive. Natural delire of 
knowledg, anfwered the Spirits, is not blanaeable, fo 
you do not go beyond what your Natural Reafon can 
comprehend. Then I le ask no more, laid the Em- * 
prefs, for fear I (hould commit fome error; but one 
thing I cannot but acquaint you withal : What is that, 
faid the Spirits > I have a great defire, anfwered the 
Emprefs, to make a Cabbala. What kind of Cab- 
bala, asked the Spirits? The Emprefs anfwered. The 
Jews Cabbala. No fooner had the Emprefs decla- 
red her Mind , but the Spirits immediately difap- 
M 3 peared 

The Defer ip ton of a New World. 

peared out of her fight ; which ftartled the Emprels 
lo much, that Ihe fell into a Trance, wherein Ihe lay 
for lome while ; at lalt being come to her lelf again, (lie 
grew very ftudious,andconfidering with her lelf what 
might be the caule of this firange dylafter, conceived at 
firlf, that perhaps the Spirits were tired with hearing 
and giving anfwers to her Queftions ; but thinking by 
her lelf,That Spirits could not be tired, fhe imagined that 
this was not the true caule of their dilappearing, till, af- 
ter divers debates with her own thoughts , Ihe did 
verily believe that the Spirits had committed lome fault 
in their anfwers, and that for their punifhment they 
Jvere condemned to the loweft and darkeft Vehicles. 
This belief was lo fixt in her mind, that it put her into a 
very Melancholick humor ; and then Ihe lent both for 
her Fly- and Worm-men, and declared to them the 
caule of her ladnels. ’Tis not Co much, laid Ihe, the 
vanifhing of thofe Spirits that makes me Melancholick, 
butthatlfhould be the caule of their milerable condi- 
tion, and that thole harmlels Spirits Ihould, for my 
fake, fink down into the black and dark abyls of the 
Earth.The Worm-men comforted the Emprels,telling 
her, That the Earth was not lo horrid a Dwelling, as 
Ihe did imagine ; for, laid they, not onely all Mine- 
rals and Vegetables, but leveral Ibrts of Animals can 
witnels,that the Earth is a warm,fruitful,quiet, fafe,and 
happy habitation ; and though they want the light of 
the Sun,yetare they not in the dark, but there is light 

even 

The Defcription of a 3fen?. World. 

even within the Earth, by which thole Creatures do 
fee that dwell therein. This relation fetled her Ma- 
jefties mind a little ; but yet fhe being delirous to know 
the Truth, where, and in what condition thole Spi- 
rits were, commanded both the Fly- and W orm- men 
to uleall labour and induftry tojfind them out; where- 
upon the Worm-men ftraight defcended into the 
Earth, and the Fly-men alcended into the Air. After 
fome Ihort time, the W orm- men returned,and told the 
Emprels, that when they went into the Earth, they 
inquired of all theCreatures they met withal, Whether 
none of them had perceived fuchor fuch Spirits; until 
at laft coming to the very Center of the Earth, they 
were truly informed, that thole Spirits had flayed lome 
time there, but at laft were gone to the Antipodes on 
the other fide of the Terreftrial Globe, diametrically 
oppofite to theirs. The Fly-men leconded the Worm- 
men, afluring her Majefty, that their relation was ve- 
ry true; for, laid they. We have rounded the Earth, 
and juft when we came to the Antipodes, we met thole 
Spirits in a very good condition, and acquainted them 
that your Majefty was very much troubled at their 
fudden departure, and fear’d they Ihould be buried in 
the darknels of the Earth : whereupon the Spirits'an- 
fwered us. That they were lorry for having occali- 
oned fuch fadnels and trouble in your Majefty ; and 
defired us to tell your Majefty , that they feared no 
darknefs ; for their Vehicles were of fuch a fort of 

fubftance 

88 

The Defer if tion of a New World. 

fubftance as Cats eyes. Glow-worms tails, and rotten 
Wood,carrying their light along with them ; and that 
they were ready to do your Majefty what fervice they 
could, in making your Cabbala. At which Relation 
the Emprels was exceedingly glad, and rewarded both 
her Fly- and Worm-men bountifully. 

After fome time, when the Spirits had refrelhed 
themfelves in their own Vehicles, they fent one of 
their nimbleft Spirits, to ask the Emprels, Whether 
flie would have a Scribe, or, whether Ihe would write 
the Cabbala her felf? The Emprefs received the 
proffer which they made her, with all civility ; and 
told them, that (he defired a Spiritual Scribe. The 
Spirits anfwer’d,That they could didate, but not write, 
except they put on a hand or arm,or elfe the whole body 
of Man. The Emprels replied. How can Spirits 
arm themlelves with gantlets of Flelh ? As well, an- 
fwered they, as Man can arm himfelf with a gantlet of 
fteel. If it be lo, laid the Emprels, then I will have 
a Scribe. Then the Spirits asked her. Whether Ihe 
would have the Soul of a living or a dead Man? Why, 
laid the Emprels, can the Soul quit a living Body, and 
wander or travel abroad? Yes, anfwered they, for 
according to Plato’s Do&rine, there is a Conversion 
of Souls, and the Souls of Lovers live in the Bodies of 
their Beloved. Then I will have, anfwered Ihe, the 
Soul of lome ancient famous Writer, either of Ari- 
ilotle , Pythagoras , Plato , Ef kurus, or the like. The 

Spirits 

Tbe Definition of a Jferv World. 

Spirits (aid. That thofe famous Men were very learned, 
fubtile, and ingenious Writers ; but they were fo 
wedded to their own opinions, that they would ne- 
ver have the patience to be Scribes. Then, (aid (he, 
I*le have the Soul of one of the mod famous modern 
Writers, as either of Galileo, Gaffendus , Dcs Carter, 
Helmont , Hobber , H. More , &c. The Spirits an- 
fwered. That they were fine ingenious Writers, but 
yet (o felf-conceited,that they would (corn to be Scribes 
to a Woman. But, (aid they, there’s a Lady, the 
D\fcbefi of Newcastle ; which although (he is not 
one of the mod learned, eloquent, witty and ingeni- 
ous, yet (he is a plain and rational Writer for the 
principle Qf her Writings, is Senle and Rea(bn, and 
(he will without queftion,be ready to do you all the (er- 
vicefhecan. That Lady then, faid the Emprels, will 
I chufe for my Scribe, neither will the Emperor have 
realbn to be jealous, (he being one of my own (ex. In 
truth, faid the Spirit, Husbands have reafon to be jea- 
lous of Platonic^ Lovers, for they are very dangerous, as 
being not onely very intimate and clofe, but fubtil and 
infinuating. Y ou (ay well,replied the Emprels jwhere- 
fore I pray fend me the Ducbefi of Newcastle's Soul; 
which the Spirit did ; and after (he came to wait on the 
Emprefs, at her firfi: arrival the Emprefs imbraced 
and faluted her with a Spiritual ki(s ; then (he asked her 
whether (he could write ? Yes, anfwered the Du- 
cbefi's Soul, but not fo intelligibly that any Reader 

N what- 

9 ° 

The Defer i^tion of a New W or Id. 

whatfoever may underftand it, unlefs he be taught to 
know my Characters ; for my Letters are rather like 
Charaders, then well formed Letters. Said the Em- 
prefs, you were recommended to me by an honeft and 
ingenious Spirit. Surely, anfwered the Duchefs, the 
Spirit is ignorant of my hand- writing. The truth is, faid 
the Emprefs, he did not mention your hand-writing ; 
but he informed me, that you writSenfe and Reafbn, 
and if you can but write fb, that any of my Secretaries 
may learn your hand,they (ball write ieout fair and in- 
telligible. The Duchefs anfwered,That fhe queftioned 
not but it might eafily be learned in a fhort time. But, 
faid (he to the Emprefs, What is it that your Maje- 
fty would have written ? She anfwered , The Jews 
Cabbala. Then your onely way for that is, faid the 
Duchefs, to have the Soul of fome famous Jew ; nay, 
if your Majefty pleafe, I fcruple not, but you may 
as eafily have the Soul of Mofer, as of any other. That 
cannot be, replied the Emprefs, for no Mortal knows 
where Mofes is. But, laid the Duchefs, humane 
Souls are immortal ; however,if this be too difficult to 
be obtained, you may have the Soul of one of the chief 
RabbiesorSagesof the Tribe of Im, who will truly 
inftruft you inthatmyftery; when as, otherwife, your 
Maiefty will be apt to miftake, and a thoufand to one, 
will commit grofs errors. No, laid the Emprefs, fori 
fhall be inflru&ed by Spirits. Alas ! laid the Duchefs^ 
Spirits are as ignorant as Mortals in many cafes ; for 

9 1 

The Defer iption of a Nett World. 

no created Spirits have a general or abfolute knowledg, 
nor can they know the Thoughts of Men , much left 
the My fteries of the great Creator, unlefs he be pica- 
fed to infpire into them the gift of Divine Knowledg- 
Then, I pray, Bid the Empreft, let me have your 
counfel in this cafe. The Duchefs anfwered. If your 
Majefty will be pleafed to hearken to my advice, I 
would defire you to let that work alone ; for it will be 
of no advantage either to you, or your people, un- 
lels you were of the Jews Religion ; nay, if you were, 
the vulgar interpretation of the holyScripture would be 
more inftruftive, and more eafily believed, then your 
my ftical way of interpreting it ; for had it been better 
and more advantagious for the Salvation of the Jews, 
furely Mofes would have faved after- Ages that labour 
by his own Explanation, he being not onely a wile, 
but a very honeft,zealous and religious Man: Where- 
fore the belt way, faid Ihe, is to believe with the ge- 
nerality the literal fenfe of the Scripture, and not to 
make interpretations every one according to his own 
fancy, but to leave that work for the Learned, or thole 
that have nothing elfe to do ; Neither do I think, faid 
fiie, that God will damn thofethat are ignorant there- 
in, or fuffer them to be loft for want of a Myftical in- 
terpretation of the Scripture. Then, faid the Em- 
preft, Tie leave the Scripture, and make a Philolbphi- 
cal Cabbala. The Ducheft told her, That,Sen(e and 
Reafon would inftruft her of Nature as much as 

N 2 could 

Qtgitiz 

9 2 

The Dcfcrrption of a New W orlJ. 

could be known ; and as for Numbers, they were infi - 
nite; but to add non-fenfe to infinite, would breed 
a confufion, efpecially in Humane Undemanding. 
Then, replied the Emprefs, l’le make a Moral Cab- 
bala. The onely thing, anfwered the Duchefs, in 
Morality, is but. To fear God, and to love his Neigh- 
bour, and this needs no further interpretation. But 
then Tie make a Political (aid the Emprefs. 

The Duchefs anfwered , That the chief and onely 
ground in Government, was but Reward and Punifii- 
menr, and required no further Cabbala ; But, laid (lie, 
- If your Majefty were refolved to make a Cabbala , I 
would advife you, rather to make a Poetical or Ro- 
mancical Cabbala , wherein you may ufe Metaphors, 
Allegories, Similitudes, &c. and interpret them as 
you pleale. With that the Emprefs thank’d the 
Duchefs, and embracing her Soul, told her file would 
take her Counfel : file made her alfb her Favourite, and 
kept her fometime in that World, and by this means 
the Duchefs came to know and give this Relation of all 
that palled in that rich, populous, and happy World ; 
and after fome time the Emprefs gave her leave to re- 
turn to her Husband and Kindred into her Native 
W orld,but upon condition, that her Soul ftiould vifit 
her now and then ; which file did: and truly their meet- 
ing did produce fuch an intimate friendfliip between 
them, that they became Platonic Lovers, although 
they were both Femals. 

One 

The Defer if ti on of a Jfetp World. 

One time, when the Duchefs her Soul was with 
the Emprefs, (he feem’d to be very fad and melan- 
choly ,• at which the Emprefs was very much trou- 
bled, and asked her the reafbn of her Melancholick 
humour? Truly, (aid the Duchefs to the Emprefs, 
(for between dear friends there’s no concealment, they 
being like feveral parrs of one united body) my Me- 
lancholy proceeds from an extream Ambition. The 
Emprefs asked, What the height of her ambition was? 
The Duchefs anfwered, That neither fhe her felf, nor 
no Creature in the World was able, to know either 
the height, depth, or breadth of her Ambition ; but 
faid fhe, my prefent defire is, that I would be a. great 
Princefs. The Emprefs replied, So you are ; for you 
are a Princefs of the fourth or fifth Degree ; for a Duke 
or Duchefs is the higheft title or honour that a fubjed 
can arrive to, as being the next to a King’s’Title ; and 
as for the name of a Prince or Princefs, it belongs to all 
that are adopted to the Crown ; fo that thole that can 
add a Crown to their Arms, are Princes, and therefore 
a Dw% is a Title above a Trince ; for example, the 
Dx/jeof Savoy, the D*% of Florence, the DmJ^o( Lor - 
rain , as alio Kings Brothers, are not called by the name 
of Princes, but Dukes, this being the higher Title. 
’Tis true, anfwered the Duchefs, unlefs it be Kings 
Eldeft Sons, and they are created Princes. Yes, re- 
plied the Emprefs,but no Soveraign does make a fubjeft 
equal to himfelf, fuch as Kings eldeft fons partly are : 

N 3 And 

The Defer if tton of a New IV or Id. 

Ami although fome Dukes be Soveraigns, yet I never 
heard that a Prince by his Title is Soveraign, by reafon 
the T itle of a Prince is more a Title of Honour,then of 
Soveraignty ; for, as I laid before,it belongs to all that 
are adopted to the Crown. Well, (aid the Duchels, 
letting afide this di(pute,my Ambition is, That I would 
fain be as you are, that is, an Emprels of a World, 
and I (hall never be at quiet until I be one. I love you 
fo well, replied theEmprels, that I wifh with all my 
(oul,you had the fruition of your ambitious defire,and 
I (hall not fail to give you my bed advice how to ac- 
complifh it ; the bed informers are the Immaterial Spi- 
rits, and they’l Toon tell you,W hether it be poflible to 
obtain your wifli. But, (aid the Duchels, I have little 
acquaintance with them, for I never knew any before 
the time you lent for me. They know you, replied the 
Emprefs ; *for they told me of you, and were the 
means and indrument of your coming hither : Where- 
fore Pie conferr with them, and enquire whether there 
be not another World, whereof you may be Emprels 
as well as I am of this ? No (ooner had the Emprels 
(aid this, but fome Immaterial Spirits came to vifit her, 
of whom (he inquired. Whether there were but three 
W orlds in all, to wit, the Blasting World where (he 
was in, the World which (he came from , and the 
W orld where the Duchels lived?The Spirits anfwered. 
That there were more numerous Worlds then the Stars 
which appeared in thefo three mentioned Worlds, 
hi: Then 

The ‘Defcription of a New World. 

95 

Then the Emprels asked. Whether it was not poflible, 
that her deareft friend the Duchefs of Newcastle, might 
be Emprels of one of them? Although there be nu- 
merous, nay, infinite Worlds, anfwered the Spirits, 
yet none is without Government. But is none of 
thele Worlds lo weak, faidlhe, that it may be furpri- 
zed or conquered ? The Spirits anfwered, That Lu- 
cians World of Lights, had been for lome time in a 
fnuff, but of late years one Helmont had got it, who 
fince he was Emperour of it, had lo ftrengthened the 
Immortal parts thereof with mortal out- works, as it was 
for the prelent impregnable. Said the Emprels, If 
there be filch an Infinite number of Worlds^ I am 
fure, not onely my friend, the Duchels, but any 
other might obtain one. Yes, anfwered the Spirits, 
if thole W orlds were uninhabited ; but they are as po- 
pulous as this your Majefty governs. t Why, laid 
the Emprels, it is not poflible to conquer a World. 
No, anfwered the Spirits, but, for the moll part, 
Conquerers leldom enjoy their conqueft, for they be- 
ing more feared then loved, moft commonly come to 
an untimely end. If you will but dired me, laid the 
Duchels to the Spirits, which World is eafieft to be 
conquered, her Majefty willaflift me with Means, and 
I will truft to Fate and Fortune; for I had rather die 
in the adventure of noble achievements, then live in 
oblcureand fluggifh fecurity ; fince the by one, I may 
live in a glorious Fame ; and by the other I am buried 

in 

/ 

9 6 

The Description of a New World. 

in oblivion. The Spirits anfwered, That the lives of 
Fame were like other lives ; for Ibme lafted long, and 
{ome died foon. ’Tis true, laid the Duchels ; but yet 
the Ihortell-liv’d Fame lafts longer then the longeft 
life of Man. But, replied the Spirits , if occafion 
does not lerve you, you mult content your lelf to live 
without fuch atchievements that may gain you a 
Fame: But we wonder, proceeded the Spirits, that 
you delire to be Emprels of a Terreftrial World ? 
when as you can create your lelf a Coeleftial World if 
you pleale. What, laid the Emprels, can any Mor- 
tal be a Creator ? Y es, anfwered the Spirits ; for 
every human Creature can create an Immaterial 
World fully inhabited by Immaterial Creatures, and 
populous of Immaterial fubjedfs, luchas we are, and all 
this within the compafs of the head or Icull ; nay, not 
onely lo, bi^t he may create a World of what falhion 
and Government he will, and give the Creatures 
thereof luch morions , figures, forms, colours, per- 
ceptions, & c. as he pleales, and make Whirl-pools, 
Lights, PrelTu res and Readions,t^c. as he thinks belt; 
nay, he may make a World full of Veins, Mufcles, 
and Nerves,and all thele to move by one jolt or ftroke : 
alfo he may alter that World as often as he pleales, or 
change it from a Natural W orld,to anArtificialjhe may 
make a World of Ideas, a World of Atoms,a World 
of Lights,or whatloever his Fancy leads him to. And 
fi«ce it is in your power to create fuch a World, What 

need 

The Defer ip ion of a Vfcrv World. 

need you to venture life, reputation and tranquility, to 
conquer agrofs material World ? For you can enjoy 
nomoreof a material world then a particular Creature 
is able to enjoy, which is but a finall part, confidering 
the compals of fuch a world ; and you may plainly ob- 
ferve it by your friend the Emprefs here , which al- 
though Ihe poflefles a whole W orld, yet enjoys Ihe but 
a part thereof ; neither is fhe fo much acquainted with 
it, that Ihe knows all the places. Countries, and Do- 
minions (he Governs. The truth is, a Soveraigu Mo- 
narch has the general trouble ; but the Subjeds enjoy 
all the delights and pleafures in parts ; for it is impof 
fible,that a Kingdom, nay, a Country, fhould be in- 
joyed by one perlon at once, except he take the pains 
to travel into every part, and endure the inconvenien- 
cies of going from one place to another ? wherefore, 
fince glory, delight and pleafure lives but in other mens 
opinions,and can neither add tranquility to your mind 
nor give ea(e to your body. Why fliould you defire to 
be Emprels of a Material World, and be troubled 
with the cares that attend Government ? when as 
by creating a World within yourfelf, you may en- 
joy all both in whole and in parts, without controle 
or oppofitionjand may make what World you pleale, 
and alter it when you pleafe , and enjoy as much 
pleafure and delight as a World can afford you ? You 
have converted me,(aid the Duchefs to the Spirits,from 
my ambitious defire ; wherefore, I’Ie take your advice, 

O rejeft 

9 » 

The Dcfcription of a New World. 

rejeft and defpife all the Worlds without me, and cre- 
ate a World of my own. The Empreft laid. If I do 
make fuch a world, then I fhall be Miftrefs of two 
Worlds, one within, and the other without me. That 
your Majefty may, (aid the Spirits ; and fb left thefe 
two Ladies to create two Worlds within themlelves ; 
who did al(o part from each other, until fuch time as 
they had brought their Worlds to perfection. The 
Duchefs of Newcastle was moft earned and induftrious 
to make her World, becaufe (lie had none at pre- 
: ,• (ent i and firft (he relblved to frame it according to the 
opinion of Thaler } but (he found her (elf (o much trou- 
bled with Daemons, that they would not fuffer her to 
• * t take her own will, but forced her to obey their orders 

and commands^which (he being unwilling todo,lefto(F 
from making a world that way, and began to frame one 
according to Tythagoraf sY^oQtnnti but in the Creati- 
on thereof (he was (o puzled with numbers, how to 
order and compole the (everal parts, that (he having 
no skill in Arithmetick, was forced al(o to defift from 
the making of that World. Then (he intended to cre- 
ate a W orld according to the opinion of Plato ; but (he 
found more trouble and difficulty in that, then in the 
two former ; for the numerous Idea’s having no other 
motion but what was derived from her mind, whence 
they did flow and iflue out, made it a far harder bufinels , 
to her, to impart motion to them, then Puppit-play- 
ers have in giving motion to every (everal Puppit ; in 
*- fo 

r 

B • - . 

The ‘Defcription of a New World. 

— 

fb much, that her patience was not able to endure the 
trouble which thole Ideas cauled her ; wherefore Ihe 
annihilated allb that World, and was relolved to make 
one according to the Opinion of Epicurus ; which Ihe 
had no looner begun, but the infinite Atoms made fuch 
a mill, that it quite blinded the perception of her mind ; 
neither was file able to make a V acuum as a receptacle 
for thole Atoms, or a place which they might retire 
into; lo that partly for the want of it, and of a good 
order and method, the confufion of thole Atoms pro- 
duced fuch ftrange and monftrous figures, as did more 
affright then delight her, and caufcd fuch a Chaos in 
her mind, as had almoft dilfolved it. At laft, having 
with much ado cleanled and cleared her mind of thele 
dufty and mifty particles, Ihe endeavoured to create a 
World according to Aristotle's Opinion ; but re- 
membring that her mind, as mod of the Learned hold 
it, was Immaterial, and that, according to Ariflotle’s 
Principle, out of Nothing, Nothing could be made ; 
(he was forced allb to defift from that work, and then 
Ihe fullv relolved, not to take any more patterns from 
theAncientPhilolbphers,but to follow the Opinions of 
the Moderns ; and to that end, Ihe endeavoured to 
make a World according to Des Cartes Opinion ; but 
when Ihe had made the Ethereal Globules, and let 
them a moving by a ftrong and lively imagination, 
her mind became lo dizzie with their extraordinary 
fwift turning round,that it almoft put her into a fwoon; 

O 2 for 

r 

• / 

. 

ioo The Defcripion of a New World. 

for her thoughts, by their conftant tottering, did (b 
(tagger, as if they had all been drunk : wherefore (lie 
didolved that World, and began to make another, 
according to Hobbr’s Opinion ; but when all the parts 
of this Imaginary World came to prels and drive each 
other, they leemed like a company of Wolves that 
worry Sheep, or like fo many Dogs that hunt after 
Hares; and when Ihe found a re-ad ion equal tothofe 
prelTures, her mind was fo fqueezed together, that her 
thoughts could neither move forward nor backward, 
which cauled fuch an horrible pain in her head, that 
although (he had diffolved that World, yetlhecould 
not, without much difficulty, fettle her mind, and 
free it from that pain which thole preffuresand rea&ions 
had cauled in it. 

At laft, when the Duchefs (aw that no patterns 
would do her any good in the framing of her World; 
(lie was refolved to make a World of her own 
Invention, and this World was compofed of (end- 
tive and rational (elf-moving Matter ; indeed, it was 
compofed onely of the Rational, which is the fubtilefi: 
and pureft degree of Matter ; for as the Senfitive did 
move and ad both to the perceptions and confiftency of 
the body, fo this degree of Matter at the lame point of 
time (for though the degrees are mixt, yet the (everal 
parts may move (everal ways at one time) did move to 
the Creation of the Imaginary World; which World 
after it was made, appear’d fo curious and full of vari- 
ety. 

The Defcripion of a New World. 

ioi 

ety, fo well order’d and wifely govern'd, that it can- 
not poflibly be expreffed by words, nor the delight 
and pleafure which the Duchefs took in making this 
World-of-her-own. 

In the mean time the Emprefs was alfb making and 
diflolving feveral Worlds in her own mind,and was fb 
puzled,that (lie could not fettle in any of them ; where- 
fore (he lent for the Duchefs, who being ready to wait 
on the Emprefs, carried her beloved World along with 
her, and invited the Emprefs s Soul to obferve the 
Frame, Order and Government of it. HerMa;efty 
was fb ravifhed with the perception of it, that her Soul 
defired to live in the Duchefs’s World: But the 
Duchefs advifed her to make fuch another World in 
her own mind ; for, faid fhe, your Majefty’s mind is 
foil of rational corporeal motions ; and the rational 
motions of my mind fhall affift you by the help of 
fenfitive expreflions, with the beft Inftru&ions they 
are able to give you. 

The Emprefs being thus perfwaded by the 
Duchefs to make an imaginary World of her own ,foh 
lowed her advice ; and after fhe had quite finifhed it, 
and framed all kinds of Creatures proper and ufeful for 
it, ftrengthened it with good Laws, and beautified it 
with Arts and Sciences ; having nothing elfe to do,un- 
lefs fhe did diffolve her Imaginary World, or made 
fbme alterations in the Bla^ing'WorldJiht lived in -which 
yet fhe could hardly do, by reafbn it was fo well order- 

O 3 ed 

J be Defection of a New IV or Id. 

ed that it could not be mended ; for it was governed 
without fecret and deceiving Policy ; neither was there 
any ambitious, fa&ions, malicious detra&ions, civil 
dilTentions, or home-bred quarrels, divifions in Reli- 
gion, Foreign Wars,d>c. but all the people lived in a 
peaceful Society, united Tranquillity, and Religious 
Conformity. She was defirous to lee the World the 
Duchelscame from, and obferve therein the leveral So- 
vereign Governments, Laws and Cuftoms of leveral 
Nations. The Duchelsufed all the means Ihe could, 
to divert her from that Journey, telling her, that the 
W orld Ihe came from, was very much difturbed with 
Fa&ionSjDivilions and Wars; but the Emprels would 
not be perfwaded from her delign ; and left the Em- 
peror, or any of his fubje&s Ihould know of her travel, 
and obftruft her delign, Ihe lent for lome of the Spirits 
Ihe had formerly converted withal, and inquired whe- 
ther none of them could fupply the place of her foul in 
her body at fuch a time, when Ihe was gone to travel 
into another World? They anfwered. Yes, they 
could ; for not onely one, laid they, but many Spi- 
rits may enter into your body, if you pleate. The 
Emprels replied, Ihe dclired but one Spirit to be Vice- 
R oy of her body in the abtence of her Soul,bu t it muft 
be an honeft and ingenious Spirit ; and if it was polfi- 
ble, a female Spirit. The Spirits told her, that there 
was no difference of Sexes amongft them ; but, laid 
. they, we will chule an honeft and ingenious Spirit, 

and 

The Defcripion of a Ufexv World. 105 

and fuch a one as lhall fo relemble your foul, that nei- 
ther the Emperor, nor any of his Subjeds, although 
the mod Divine, fliall know whether it be your own 
foul, or not : which the Empreft was very glad at; 
and after the Spirits were gone, asked the Ducheft, 
how her body wasfupplied in the ablence of her foul ? 
who anfwert d Her Majefty, That her body, in the ab- 
lence of her foul, was governed by her lenfitive and 
rational corporeal motions. Thus thole two Female 
Souls travelled together as lightly as two thoughts into 
the Ducheft her native World ; and, which is remark- 
able, in a moment viewed all the parts of it, and all the 
adions of all the Creatures therein, elpecially did the 
Empreft’s Soul take much notice of the leveral adions 
of humane Creatures in all the leveral Nations and 
parts of that World, and wonder’d that for all there 
were fo many leveral Nations, Governments, Laws, 
Religions, Opinions, &c. they Ibould all yet fo ge- 
nerally agree in being Ambitious, Proud, Self-con- 
ceited, Vain, Prodigal, Deceitful, Envious, Mali- 
cious, Unjuft, Revengeful, Irreligious, Fadious, &c. 

She did alfo admire , that not any particular State, 
Kingdom or Common- wealth, was contented with 
their own lhares, but endeavoured to encroach upon 
their Neighbours, and that their greateft glory was in 
Plunder and Slaughtered yet their vidory’s lels then 
their expences, and their Ioffes more than their gains- 
but their being overcome, in a manner their utter ruine.* 

But 

^ The Defcription of. a New W or Id. 

But that (lie wonder’d molt at, was, that they (Tiould 
prize or value dirt more then mens lives, and vanity 
more then tranquility;for the Emperor of a world, laid 
(he, in joys but a part, not the whole ; fo that his plea- 
fure confifts in the Opinions of others. It is ftrange 
to me, anfwered the Duchefs, that you fliould fay 
thus, being your felf,anEmprefsof a World ; and not 
f# onely of a world, but of a peaceable, quiet, and obedient 

world.’Tis true,replied the Emprefs : but although it is 
a peaceable and obedient world, yet the Government 
thereof is rather a trouble, then a pleafure ; for order 
cannot be without induftry , contrivance, and diredion: 
befides, the Magnificent ftate, that great Princes keep 
or ought to keep, is troublelomc. Then by your Ma- 
jeftie’s difcourle, faid the Duchels, I perceive that the 
greatefi: happinels in all Worlds confift in Modera- 
tion: No doubt of it, replied the Emprels; and af- 
ter thefe two fouls had vifited all the leveral places, Con- 
gregations and AHemblies both in Religion and State, 
the leveral Courts of Judicature, and the like, in leveral 
Nations, the Emprels laid, That of all the Mo- 
narchsof the leveral parts of that World, fhe hadob- 
lerved the Grand-Seignior was the greateft ; for his 
word was a Law, and his power abfolute. But the 
Duchels pray’d the Emprels to pardon her that fhe was 
of another mind ; for, laid Ihe, he cannot alter Ma» 
hornet s Laws and Religion ; fo that the Law and 
.Church do govern the Emperor, and not the Empe- 
ror 

The VefcriftioH of a New World. 

ror them. But, replied the Emprels, he has power 
in fome particulars; as for example. To place and dif- 
placeJSub;e<2s in their particular Governments of 
Church and State; and having that, he has the Com- 
mand both over Church and State, and none dares 
oppofe him. Tis true , (aid the Duchels ; but if it 
pleafes your Majefty, we will go into that part of the 
World whence I came to wait on your Majefty, and 
there you (hall fee as powerful a Monarch as the 
Grand Signior; for though his Dominions are not of 
fo large extent , yet they are much Wronger , his Laws 
are eafieand fafe , and he governs (o juftly and wifely, 
that hisSubjedtoare the happieft people of all the Na- 
tions or parts of that World. This Monarch, (aid the 
Emprels, I have a great mind to fee. Then they both 
went , and in a (liort time arrived into his Dominions; 
but coming into the Metropolitan City, the Emprels’s 
Soulobferved many Gallants go into an Houfe;and 
enquiring of the Duchefs’sSoul, what Houfe that was? 
She told her. It was one of the Theatres where Come- 
dies and Tragedies were a&ed. The Emprels asked. 
Whether they were real > No , (aid the Duchels, 
they are feigned* Then the Emprels defired to en- 
ter into the Theatre; and when (he had fecn the Play 
that was asked, the Duchels asked her howlhe liked 
that Recreation ? I like it very well , (aid the Em- 
prels ; but I obferve that the A&ors make a better 
(how than the Spe&ators; and the Scenes a better than 

P the 

io 6 

The Defection of a New W Jrld. 

the A&ors, and the Mufick and Dancing is more plea- * 
fant and acceptable than the Play it felf ; for I fee , the 
Scenes (land for Wit, the Dancing for Humour , and 
the Mufick is the Chorus. I am forry , replied the 
Duchefs, to hear your Majefty fay fo ; for if the Wits 
of this part of the World fliould hear you, they would 
condemn you. What, laid theEmprefs, would 
they condemn me for preferring a natural Face before 
a Sign-poft; or a natural Humour before an artificial 
Dance; or Mufick before a true and profitable Rela- 
tion ? As for Relation , replied the Duchefe , our Po- 
ets defie and condemn it into a Chimney-corner, fitter 
for old Womens Tales, than Theatres. Why, laid 
the Emprefe, do not your Poets Adions comply with 
their Judgments? For their Plays are compofed of old 
Stories, either of Greef ^ or Ttyman, or Ibme new-found 
World. The Duchefsanfwered Her Majefty, That it 
was true, that all or mod of their Plays were taken out 
of old Stories; but yet they had new Adions, which 
being joined to old Stories, together with the addition 
of new Prologues, Scenes, Mufick and Dancing, made 
new Plays. 

- After this, both the Souls went to the Court, where 
all the Royal Family was together, attended by the 
chief of the Nobles of their Dominions, which made 
a very magnificent Show ; and when the Soul of the 
Emprds viewed the King and Queen, (he leemed to 
bein a maze;which theDu chef's Soul perceiving,asked 

- J the 

The Description of a World. 

the Emprefs how (he liked the King, the Queen, and 
all the Royal Race? She anfwered, that in all the 
Monarchs (lie had feen in that World j fhe had not 
found (b much Majefty and Affability mixt fo exactly 
together,that none did overfhadow or eclipfe the other; 
and as for the Queen, fhe faid, that Vertuefate Tri- 
umphant in her face, and Piety was dwelling in her 
heart; and that all the Royal Family feem’d to be en- 
dued with a Divine fplendor : but when fhe had heard 
theKing difcourfe,(hebeliev’d that Mercury and dfollo 
had been his CadeftialInftru&ors;and,my dear Lord 
and Husband, added the Duchefs, has been his Earthly 
Governor. But after fome fliort flay in the Courr, 
the Duchefs’s foul grew very Melancholy ; the Em- 
prefs asking the caufe of her fadnefs ? She told her. That 
fhe had an extreme defire to converfe with the foul of 
her Noble Lord and dear Husband, and that fhe was 
impatient of a longer flay. The Emprefs defired 
the Duchefs to have but patience fo long, until the 
King, the Queen, and the R oy al Family were retired , 
and then fhe would bear her Company to her Lord 
and Husband’s Soul, who at that time lived in the 
Country fbme 1 12 miles off; which fhe did: and thus 
thefe two fouls went towards thofe parts of the King- 
dom where the Duke of Newcattle was. 

But one thing I forgot all this while, which is, That 
although thoughts are the natural language of Souls; 
yet by reafon Souls cannot travel without Vehicles, 

P 2 they 

1 0 g The Description of a New World. 

they ufefuch language as the nature and propriety of 
their Vehicles require , and the Vehicles of thole two 
fouls being made of the pureft and finelHort of airland 
of a human lhape: This purity and finenels was the 
caufe that they could neither be feen nor heard by any 
human Creature ; when as , had they been of Ibme 
grofler fort of Air, the found of that Air’s language 
would have been as perceptible as the blowing of Ze* 
phyrtts. 

And now to return to my former Story ; when the 
Emprefs’s and Duchefs’s Soul were travelling into 
Nottmghamfhire, (for that was the place where the 
Duke did refide) palling through the Forrell of Shere- 
rvood , the Emprels’s Soul was very much delighted 
with it, as being a dry , plain and woody place, very 
plealant to travel in, both in Winter and Summer; for 
it is neither much dirty nor dully at no time : At laft 
they arrived at Welbecl a Houle where the Duke 
dwell’d, furrounded all with Wood, lo dole and full, 
that the Emprels took great pleafure and delight there- 
in, and told the Duchels flie never had oblervedmore 
W ood in lo little compals in any part of the Kingdom 
Ihe had palfed through. The truth is, laid Ihe, there 
leems to be more W ood on the Seas ( Ihe meaning the 
Ships J than on the Land. The Duchels told her. The 
realbn was, that there had been a long Civil Warr in 
that Kingdom, in which moll of the bell Timber-trees 
and Principal Palaces were ruined and deltroyed ; and 

my 

The Defcription of a Jfexp World. 

my dear Lord and Husband, laid Ihe, has loft by it 
half his Woods , befides many Houles, Land , and 
movable Goods ; lo that all the lols out of his particu- 
lar Eftate, did amount to above Half a Million of 
Pounds. Iwift), laid the Emprels, he had lome of 
the Gold that is in the Blazing- world, to repair his Iof- 
fes. The Duchefs moft humbly thank’d her Imperial 
Majefty for her kind wilhes; but, laid Ihe, Wilhes will 
not repair his ruins: however,God has given my Noble 
Lord and Husband great Patience, by which he bears 
all his Ioffes and misfortunes. At laft they enter’d into 
the Duke’sHoufe, an Habitation not lo magnificent as 
ufeful ; and when the Emprels law it , Has the Duke, 
faid Ihe, no other Houle but this ? Yes, anfweredthe 
Duchefs, lome five miles from this place he has a very 
fineCaftle called Bolefover. That place then, faid 
the Emprels , I delire to lee. Alas , replied the 
Duchefs, it is but a naked Houfe, and uncloath’d of all 
Furniture. However, faid the Emprels, I may fee 
the manner ofits ftrudure and building.That you may, 
replied the Duchefs; and as they were thus difcourfing, 
the Duke came out of the Houle into the Court, to lee 
his Horfes of Manage ; whom when the Duchefs’s Soul 
perceived, Ihe was fo overjoyed, that her Aereal Ve* 
hide became fo fplendorous, as if it had been enlightned 
by the Sun;by which we may perceive, that the paflions 
of Souls or Spirits can alter their bodily Vehicles. 
Then thefetwo Ladies Spirits went clofe to him, but he 

P 5 could 

o 

The Defer iption of a New World. 

could not perceive them ; and after the Emprels had 
obferVed that Art of Mannage, (he was much pleafed 
with it, and commended it as a noble paftime, and an 
exercife fit and proper for noble and heroick Pcrfons. 
But when the Duke was gone into the houfe again, 
thole two Souls followed him ; where the Emprefs 
obferving, that he went to the exercife of the Sword, 
and was fuch an excellent and unparallel’d Matter 
thereof. Hie was as much pleafed with that exercife, as 
the was with the former: But theDuchefs’s foul being 
troubled, that her dear Lord and Husband uted fuch 
a violent exercife before meat, for fear of overheating 
himfelf, without any confideration of the Emprefs s 
Soul, left her iEreal Vehicle, and entred into 
her Lord. The Emprefs’s Soul perceiving this, did 
the like : And then the Duke had three Souls in one 
Body ; and had there been but tome fuch Souls more, 
the Duke would have been like the Grand-Signior in 
his Seraglio , onely it would have been a Platonic 
Seraglio. But the Duke s Soul being wife,honeft,witty, 
complaifantand noble, afforded fuch delight and plea- 
fure to the Emprefs’s Soul by his convention, that 
thefe two fouls became enamoured of each other;v\ hich 
the Duchcfs’s foul perceiving, grew jealous at firft, but 
then confidering that no Adultery could be committed 
amongft TLitonicI^ Lovers, and that Platonifm was 
Divine, as being derived from Divine Plato, caft: forth 
of her mind that Idea of Jealoufie. Then the Con- 
bluoa i verfation 

The Vefcriftion of a New World \ 

in 

verfation of the(e three fouls was (o plea(ant,that it cari- 
not be exprefled ; for the Duke’s Soul entertained the 
Emprels’s Soul with Scenes, Songs, Mufick , witty Di- 
lcour(es,plealant Recreations, and all kinds of harm- 
lels (ports, fothat the time parted away farter than they 
cxpeded. At laft a Spirit came and told the Emprefi, 
That although neither the Emperor nor any of his 
Subje&s knew that her Soul was abfent; yet the Em- 
peror’s Soul was (b (ad and melancholy for want of His 
own beloved Soul, that all the Imperial Court took no- 
tice of it. Wherefore he adviled the Emprels’s Soul 
to return into the Blazing- world, into her own Body 
(he left there; which both the Duke’s and Duchert’s 
Soul was very lorry for, and wifhed that, if it had been 
poflible, the Emprels s Soul might have ftay ed a longer 
time with them; but feeing it could not be otherwife, 
they pacified themfelves. But before the Emprels re- 
turned into the Blazing- world, the Duche(s defired a 
Favour of her, to wit. That (he would be pleafed to 
make an Agreement between her Noble Lord, and 
Fortune. Why, (aid the Emprels, are they Ene- 
mies? Yes, anfwered the Duchefs, and they have 
been (o ever fince I have been his Wife: nay, I have 
heard my Lord lay. That (he hath eroded him in ail 
things, ever fince he could remember. I am lorry for 
that, replied the Emprels ; but I cannot difeourfe with 
Fortune, without thehelp of anlmmaterial Spirit, and 
that cannot be done m this World; for I have no 

Fly 

112 

The Defcripion of a New W orld. 

Fly nor Bird- men here, to fend into the Region of the 
Ait, where, for the mod parr, their Habitations are. 
The Duchefs (aid, (he would entreat her Lord to (end 
an Attorney or Lawyer to plead his Caufe. For- 
tune will bribe them, replied the Emprefs, and (o the 
Duke may chance to be cad : W herefore the bed way 
will be, for the Duke to chufe a Friend on his fide, and 
letFortunechufe another,and try whether by this means 
it be poffible to compofe the Difference. The Duchefs 
(aid. They will never come to an agreement, unlefs 
there be a Judg or Umpire to decide the Cafe. A 
Judg, replied the Eriiprefi, iseafieto be had; but to 
get an Impartial Judg, is «1 thing (b difficult, that I 
doubt we (hall hardly find one; for there is none to 
be had j neither in Nature, nor in Hell, but onely 
from Heavch ; and how to get fuch a Divine and Cele- 
dial J udg, I cannot tell : Neverthelefs, if you will go 
along with me into the Blazing- world , Fie try what 
may be done. ’Tis my duty, faid the Duchefs , to 
wait on your Majedy , and I (hall mod willingly do 
it, for I have no other intered toconfider. Then the 
Duchefs fpaketo the Duke concerning the difference 
between him and Fortune, and how it was her defire 
that they might be friends. The Duke anfwered. That 
for his part he had always with great indudry fought 
her friendfhip, but as yet he could never obtain it, 
for (he had always been his Enemy. However, faid 
he, I’le try and fend my two Friends, Trudence and 

Honejly } 

4 

The Defcription of a New World. 1 13 

Honesty , to plead my Caufe. Then the(e two Friends 
went with the Duchefs and the Empre(s into the ‘Bid- 
yng'lVorld j (for it is to be obferved, that they are 
(omewhat like Spirits, becaufe they are Immaterial,al- 
though their adions are corporeal : ) and after their ar- 
rival there, when the Emprefs had refrefhed her (elf, 
and rejoiced with the Emperor , (he (ent her Fly-men 
for (ome of the Spirits, and defired their aflidance, td 
compofe the difference between Fortune , and the Dufy 
of Nemaftle. But they told her Majedy, That For- 
tune was fo incondant, that although (he would per- 
haps promife to hear their Caufe pleaded , yet it 
was a thoufand to one,whether (he would ever have the 
patience to do it: Neverthelefs, upon Her Majedie’s 
requed, they tried their utmod, and at lad prevailed 
with Fortune (b far, that (he chofe Folly and Rajhnefi , 
for her Friends, but they could not agree in chufing a 
Judg ; until at lad, with much ado, they concluded^ 
that Truth diould hear, and decide the caufe. Thus 
all being prepared, and the time appointed, both the 
Emprefs and Duchefs’sSoul went to hear them plead ; 
and when all the Immaterial Company was met, For - 
tune danding upon a Golden-Globe, made this follow- 
ing Speech : 

Noble Friends, We are met here to hear a Caufe plead- 
ed concerning the difference between the DufyofNevfcsL- 
dle, and my felf ; and though I am willing upon the perfwa* 
font of the Ambaffadors of the Emprefs the Immaterial 

Q_ Spirits , 

Tbe Defection of a New IV orld. 

Spirits, to yield to it, yet it bad been ft, the Duke’s Soul 
fbould be prefent alfo, to Jpeai ^ for ber felf ; but fince 
Jhe is not here, I jball declare my felf to bis Wife, and bis 
Friends , as alfo to my Friends, ejpecially the Emprefs, to 
whom I jball chiefly dir eft my Speech. Firft, I defire your 
Imperial Majefty may tyiow, that this Duty: who complains 
or exclaims fo much againft me , bath been always my ene - 
my ; for be bos preferred Honefty and Prudence before 
me , and flighted all my favours ; nay , not onely thus s but 
he did fight againft me, andpreferred bis Innocence before 
my Tower. His Friends Honefty and Prudence, be 
mofl fcornfully, are more to be regarded, than Inconstant 
Fortune, who is onely a friend to Fools and. Knaves • for 
which negleft and [corn, whether I have not jujl reafon to 
be his enemy, your MajeHy may judgyour felf. 

After Fortune had thus ended her Speech, the 
Duchefs’s Soul role from her feat, and Ipake to the Im- 
material Aflembly in this manner : 

Noble Friends, I thinly it fit , by your leave , to an - 
fwer Lady* Fortune in the behalf of my Noble Lord and 
Husband , fince he is not here himfelf ; and fince you have 
heard ber complaint concerning the choice my Lord made 
of bis Friends, and the negleft and difrefpeft be feemed to 
call upon ber ; give me leave to anfwer, that, firft concerning 
the Choice of bis Friends , He has proved himfelf a wife 
man in it', and as for the difrefpeft and rudenefs her La~ 
dijbip accufes him of, I dare fay be is fo much a Gentleman , 
that I am confident he would never flight, [com or difrefpeft 

any 

" 5 . 

The Defer ipt ion of a Jfew World. 

ary of the Female Sex in all his Ife time ; but tv as fuch a 
fervanl and Champion for them , that he ’ventured Life 
and Efiate in their fervice ; but being of an bonefl , as well 
as an honourable Nature , he could not trujl Fortune with 
that which be preferred above bis life, which Was his Re~ 
putation, by reafon Fortune did not fide with tbofe that wire 
bonefl and honourable, but renounced them ; and fince be 
could not be of both fides, he chofe to be of that which was 
agreeable both to his Conference , Nature and Education ; 
fir which choice Fortune did not onely declare her fe If his 
open Enemy, but fought with him in fever al ‘Battels ; nay, 
many times, hand to hand ; at lafl, jhe being a Powerful 
‘Princefs, and as fome believe , a Deity, overcame him , 
and cafl him into a Banijhment, where (he fypt him in 
great mifery , ruined bis £jlate, and tool ^ away from hint 
mojl of bis Friends ; nay, even when jhe favoured many 
that were againjl her, jhe fill frowned on him; all which 
he endured with the greatef patience , and with that 
refpetf to Lady Fortune, that he did never in the leall 
endeavour to difoblige any of her Favourites, but was one - 
■» ly forry that be, an honef man, could find no favour in 
her Court ; and fince he did never injure any f thofe jhe 
favoured, be neither was an enemy to her Ladijhip, but gave 
her always that refpetl and worjhip which belonged to her 
power and dignity , and is fill ready at any time honefily 
and prudently to ferve her ; he onely begs , her Ladijhip 
would be bis friend for the future, as jhe hath been bis enemy 
in times paf. 

a* 

Ai 

The Defcrtption of a New IVorld. 

ii 6 

As foon as the Duchefs's Speech was en ded,Folly and 
Rafmefs ftarted up, and both (pake (b thick and faft at 
once, that not onely the Aflembly, but themfelves 
were not able to underftand each other : At which. 
Fortune was fomewhat out of countenance; aud com- 
manded them either to fpcak fingly, or be filent: But 
Trudence told her Ladilhip, Ihe fliould command them 
to (peak wifely, as well as fingly ; orherwife,(aid (he, it 
were bed for them not to fpeak at all : Which Fortune 
refented very ill, and told Prudence , (he was too bold ; 
and then commanded Folly to declare what (lie would 
have made known : but her Speech was (o foolifh, 
mixt with fuch Non-fenfe, that none knew what to 
make of it ; befides, it was (o tedious, that Fortune 
bid her to be filent ; and commanded Rajhncfs to (peak 
for her, who began after this manner : 

Great Fortune ; T be Duchefs of Newcaftle bar pro - 
ved her f elf, according to report , a very Proud and Am- 
bitions Lady , in prefuming to anfwer you her own felf in 
this noble AJjembly without your Command , in a Speech 
wherein Jhe did not onely contraditf you, but preferred Ho- 
nefty aud Prudence before you ; faying, That her Lord 
was ready to feme you bone fly and prudently ; which pre- 
emption is beyond all pardon ; and if you allow Honefty 
and Prudence to be above you, none will admire, worfirp 
or feme you ; but you l be forced to feme your felf and 
will be defpifed , negle&ed and fcorned by all ; and from 
a Deity , become a ntiferable , dirty , begging mortal in a 

Church - 

The ‘Definition of a New World. 

Church-yard-Porch , or Noble -mans Gate : Wherefore 
to prevent fuch d fritters , fling as many misfortunes and 
neglctis on the Duty and Duchefs of Newc.iftle, and 
their two friends, as your power is able to do ; other wifi 
Prudence and Honefty will be the chief and onely Moral 
Deities of Mortals. 

Rajhnefs having thus ended her Speech , Prudence 
role and declared her ielfin this manner : 

Beautiful Truth, GreatFortune, and you the reft 
of my noble Friends; I am come a great and long jour-’ 
neyin the behalf of my dear Friend the Duke of Nevv- 
caftle; not to maty more wounds, but, if it be pojflble, to 
heal thofi that are made already. Neither do I prefume to 
be a Deity ; but my onely requefl is, that you would be plea- 
fid to accept of my Offering, 1 being an bumble and devout 
fupplicant ; and fince no offering is more acceptable to the 
Gods, then the offering of Peace ; in order to that, I defire 
to maty an agreement between Fortune, and the Duke of 
Newcaftle. 

Thus (lie fpake, and as (be was going on, up ftar- 
ted Hone fly (for ftie has not always lb much difcretion 
as ftie ought to have) and interrupted Prudence. 

I came not here,faid jhe , to bear Fortune flattered, but 
to hear the Caufi decided between Fortune and the Duke; 
neither came I hither to fpeal^Rhetorically and Eloquently, 
but to propound the cafe plainly and truly ; and Pie have 
you tyiow, that the Duke, whofe Caufi we argue , was 
and is my F otter -fin; For I Honefty bred him from his 

Q_ 3 Child- 

The Defer ip tion of a New World. 

Childhood, and made a perpetual friendjhip betwixt him 
and Gratitude, Charity and Generofity ; and put him to 
School to Prudence, who taught him Wifdom, and inform 
med him in the Rules o/Temperance, Patience, Juftice, 
and the /%; then I put him into the Vniverfity o/Honour, 
where he learned all Honourable Qualities, Arts, and 
Sciences ; afterward 1 fent him to travel through the W or Id 
of A&ions, and made Obfervation his Governor ; and in 
thofe bis travels Joe controlled a friendjhip with Experience ; 
all which, made him fit for Heavens Blejfings , and For- 
tunes Favours : Rut fhe hating all thofe that have merit 
and defert, became bis inveterate Enemy, doing him all 
the mifebief fhe could, until the GodofJufliceoppofedF or* 
tune's Malice, and putt d him out of thofe ruines fhe had cadi 
upon him : For this God's Favourites mere the Dufies 
Champions; wherefore to he an Enemy to him, were to be 
an Enemy to the God offuflice: In floor t, the true caufe 
of Fortunes Malice to this Duke, wy that he would never 
flatter her ; for I Honefty ,did command him not to do it, or 
elfe be would he forced to follow all her inconflant ways, and 
obey all her unjufl commands , which would caufe a great 
reproach to him : hut , on the other fide. Prudence ad~ 
vifed him not to defpife Fortun t's favours, for that would be 
an obflrutfton and hinder once to his worth and merit ; and 
He to obey both our advice and counfels, did neither flatter 
nor defpife Her; but was always humble andrefpettful to her 
fo far as Honour , Honefly and Confcience would permit : 
all which I refer to Truth’s Judgment, and expeU her final 
Sentence. Fortune 

The Defer iption of a New World 

Fortune hearing thus Honefy's plain Speech,thought 
it very rude, and would not hearken to Truth's Judg- 
ment, but went away in a Palfion : At which, both the 
Emprefs and Duchels were extreamly troubled, that 
their endeavours fliould have no better efleft : but Ho - 
nelly chid the Duchels, and laid, Ihe was to be pu- 
niflied for defiring lo much Fortune's favours ; for it 
appears, laid Ihe, that you miftruft the gods blelfings : 
At which the Duchels wept, anfwering Honefly, That 
Ihe did neither miftruft the gods blelfings, nor relye 
upon Fortune's favours^but defired onely that her Lord 
might have no potent Enemies. The Emprels being 
much troubled to lee her weep, told Honefty in anger, 
Ihe wanted the dilcretion of Prudence ; 'for though 
you are commended, laid Ihe, yet you are apt to 
commit many indilcreet a&ions, unlels Prudence be 
your guide. At which reproof Prudence Imiled, and 
Honefly was lomewhat out of countenance ; but they 
loon became very good friends : and after the Duchels* 
Soul had ftayed fome time with the Emprels in the 
Blazing-World , Ihe begg’d leave of her to return to 
her Lord and Husband ; which the Emprels granted 
her, upon condition Ihe Ihould come and vifit her as 
often as conveniently Ihe could , promifing that Ihe 
would do the lame to the Duchels. 

Thus the Ducbefi's foul, after Ihe had taken her 
leave of the Emprefr , as alfo of the Spirit r, who 
with great civility, promifed her, that they would en- 
deavour 

The Defection of a New World. 

deavour in time to make a Peace and Agreement be - 
tweeri Fortune and the Dufy, returned with Prudence 
and Honejly , ihto her own World: But when fhe was 
juft upon her departure, the Emprefs lent to Her, and 
defired that (he might yet have lome little conference 
with her before ftie went; which the Ducbefs moft 
willingly granted her Majefty; and when fhe came 
to wait on her, the Emprefs told the Ducbefs , That 
the being her dear Platonick Friend , of whole juft 
and Impartial Judgment, (he had alwayes a very 
great efteem; could not forbear, before fhe went 
from her , to ask her Advice concerning the Govern- 
ment of the ‘Blazing-world: For, laid fhe, although 
this W orld was very well and wifely ordered and go- 
verned at firft, when I came to be Emprels thereof; 
yet the nature of Women being much delighted with 
Change and Variety, after I had received an ablolute 
Power from the Emperor , did lomewhat alter the 
Form of Government from what I found it; but now 
perceiving that the World is not lo quiet as it was at 
firft, I am much troubled at it ; elpecially there are luch 
continual Contentions and Divifions between the 
Worm- Bear- and Fly- men, the Ape-men, the Satyrs , the 
Spider-men,andall others of luch forts, that I fear they’l 
break out into an open Rebellion , and caufe a great 
dilbrder, and the ruin of the Government; and there- 
fore I defire your advice and alfiftance, howl may or- 
der it to the beft advantage, that this World may be 

ren- 

1 

The Defcription of a 3fe)v World. 

I 21 

rend red peaceable, quiet and happy, as it was before. 
Whereupon the Duchels anfwered. That fince (lie 
heard by her Imperial Majefty, how well and happily 
the World had been governed when fhefirft came to 
beEmprefs thereof, fhe would advile her Majefty to 
introduce the fame form of Government again, which 
had been before ; that is, to have but one Soveraign, 
one Religion, one Law, and one Language, lo that all 
the World might be but as one united Family, without 
divifions; nay, like God, and his Blelfed Saints and 
Angels: Otherwile, laid fhe, it may in time prove 
as unhappy, nay, as milerable a W orld as that is from 
which I came, wherein are more Soveraigns then 
Worlds, and more pretended Governours then Go - 
vernment, more Religions then Gods, and more O. 
pinions in thole Religions then Truths ; more Laws 
then Rights, and more Bribes then Juftices; mor* 
Policies then Necelhties,and more Fears then Dangers ; t 
moreCovetoufnels then Riches, more Ambitions then 
Merits, more Services then R ewards, more Languages 
then Wit, more Controverfie then Knowledg, more 
R eports then noble Adions, and more Gifts by par- 
tiality, then according to Merit ; all which, faid fhe, is 
a great milery, nay, a curie, which your blelfed *B/a- 
r*»g- World never knew, nor ’tis probable, will never 
know of, unlels your Imperial Majefty alter the Go- 
vernment thereof from what it was when you began to 
govern it : And fince your Majefty complains much of 

R ' the 

The Dc fen ft ion of a New World. 

the factions of the Tear- Fifh- Fly- Ape- and Worm- 
men, the Satyrs, Spider-men, and the like, and of their 
perpetual difputes and quarrels, I would advife your 
Majefty to diffolve all their Societies ; for ’tis better to 
be without their intelligences, then to have an un- 
quiet and diforderly Government. The truth is,faid fhe, 
wherefoever Learning is, there is mofi: commonly alfo 
Controverfie and quarelling ; for there be always 
fome that will know more, and be wifer then others ; 
Some think their Arguments come nearer to Truth, 
and are more rational then others ; fome are fo wedded 
to their own opinions,that they ’1 never yield to R eafon; 
and others, though they find their Opinions not firmly 
grounded upon R eafon, yet, for fear of receiving fome 
difgrace by altering them , will neverthelcfs maintain 
them againft all fenfe and reafon,which mufi: needs breed 
faSions in their Schools , which at laft break out into 
&pen W ars, and draw fometimes an utter ruin upon a 
State or Government. The Emprefs told the Duchels, 
that fhe would willingly follow her advice ; but (he 
thought it would be an eternal difgrace to her, to alter 
her own Decrees , A&s, and Laws. To which the 
Duchefs anfwered. That it was fo far from a difgrace, 
as it would rather be for her Majefties eternal honour, 
to return from a worfe to a better, and would exprefs 
and declare Her to be more then ordinary wife and 
good; fowife, as to perceive her own errors, and fo 
good, as not to perfift in them, which few did : for 

which 

The Defcriftion of a 3\Qnv World. 

which, (aid (he, you will get a glorious fame in this 
World , and an Eternal Glory hereafter; and I (hall 
pray for itfolongasl live. Upon which Advice, the 
Emprefs’s Soul embrac’d and kifs’dtheDuchefs’s Soul 
with an Immaterial Kifs , # and (hed Immaterial Tears, 
that (he was forced to part from her, finding her not a 
flattering Parafite, but a true Friend; and in truth, 
fuch was their Platonick Friendfliip, as thefe two lo- 
ving Souls did often meet and rejoice in each others 
Convention. 

f 

f c i 

/<, ul, > 'V 

; >1 

. 

T> 

^ * ’ * \ 

• • ’ • \ r 

■ ,,■>'[ 4 

i , ■ 

\ v '. r # ■ ’j 

■ 

t • V • - 

1 .orlfli.-i . a<XJ ■ . 

/ 

o- ;<•<}•. c» o- <»o -oo <* «> ..,<»o§io»4yi ! 9<*«»§«»e • §c*o6§0'*i§ 

*>**m*m **/**• 

T H E 

SECOND PART 

O F T H E 

DESCRIPTION 

OF THE 

New Blazing-World. 

He Emprefs having now ordered 
and fetled her Government to the 
beft advantage and quiet of her 
Blaming. World, lived and reigned 
mod happily and blefledly,and re- 
ceived oftentimes Vifits from the 
Immaterial Spirits, who gave her Intelligence of all 
fuch things as Hie defired to know, and they were able 
to inform her of: One time they told her, how the 
' World fhe came from,was imbroiled in a great War, 
and that mod parts or Nations thereof made War a- 
gainft that Kingdom which was her Native Country, 

R 3 where 

The Defer ip tion of a New W or Id. 

where all her Friends and Relations did live j at which 
the Emprcfs was extreamly troubled ; inlomuch that 
the Emperor perceived her grief by her tears, and ex- 
amining the caufe thereof, flie told him that (be had re- 
ceived Intelligence from the Spirits,that that part of the 
World fhe came from, which was her native Coun- 
try, was like to be deftroyed by numerous Enemies 
that made War againft it. The Emperor being very 
fenfible of this ill news, efpecially of the Trouble it 
caufed to the Emprefs , endeavoured to comfort 
her as much as poflibly he could ; and told her,that (he 
might have all the aftiftance which the Blazing-World 
was able to afford. She anfwered, That if there were 
any poflibility of tranfporting Forces out of the Bla- 
Z}ng-World 3 into the World fhe came from, fhe would 
not fear fo much the ruin thereof: but,faid fhe, there be- 
ing no probabilityofeffeding anyfuch thing, I know not 
how to fhew my readinefs to ferve my NativeCountry. 
The Emperor asked. Whether thofe Spirits that gave 
her Intelligence of this War, could not with all their 
Power and Forces,aftift her againft thofe Enemies ? She 
anfwered. That Spirits could not arm themfelves, nor 
make any ufe of Artificial Arms or W eapons; for their 
Vehicles were Natural Bodies, not Artificial : Befides, 
(aid fhe,the violent and ftronga&ions of war, will never 
agree with Immaterial Spirits ; for Immaterial Spirits 
cannot fight, nor make Trenches, Fortifications, and 
the like. But, laid the Emperor, their Vehicles can ; 

efpecially 

The Defcription of a New World. 

efpccially if thofc Vehicles be mens Bod ies,rhey may be 
ferviceable in all the adions of War. Alas, replied the 
Emprefs, that will never do ; for firft, faid Hie, it will 
be difficult to get l o many dead Bodies for their V ehi- 
cles, as to make up a whole Army, much more to make 
many Armies to fight with lo many leveral Nations ; 
nay, if this could be,yet it is not poffible to get lo many 
dead and undiflolved Bodies in one Nation; and for 
tranlporting them out of other Nations,it would be a 
thing of great difficulty and improbability : But put 
the cafe, laid (he, all thele difficulties could be over- 
come; yet there is one obftrudion or hindrance which 
can no ways be avoided : For although thole dead and 
undiflolved Bodies did all die in one minute of time; 
yet before they could Rendezvouze, and be put into 
a polture of War , to make a great and formidable 
Army , they would ftink and diflolve ; and when 
they came to a fight, they would moulder into dull 
and afhes, and fo leave the purer Immaterial Spirits 
naked: nay, were it allb poffible, that thofedcad bo- 
dies could be preferved from (linking and diflolving, yet 
the Souls of fuch Bodies would not fuffer Immaterial 
Spirits to rule and order them,but they would enter and 
govern them themlelves , as being the right owners 
thereof, which would produce a War between thole 
Immaterial Souls, and the Immaterial Spirits in Materi- 
al Bodies;all which would hinder them from doing any 
fervice in the actions of War, againft the Enemies 

of 

8 

The Defection of a New World. 

of my Native Countrey. You fpeak Reafbn, (aid 
the Emperor , and I wifh with all my Soul I could 
advife any manner or way, that you might be able 
to aflifl it ; but you having told me of your dear- 
Platonick Friend the Duchefs of Newcaflle , and of 
her good and profitable Counfels, I would defire 
you to fend for her Soul, and conferr with her about 
this bufinefs. 

The Emprefs was very glad of this motion of 
the Emperor, and immediately lent for the Soul of 
the faid Duchefs , which in a minute waited on her 
Majefty. Then the Emprefs declared to her the 
grievance and fadnefs of her mind, and how much 
flic was troubled and affli&ed at the News brought 
her by the Immaterial Spirits , defiring the Duchefs, 
if poffible, to aflift her with the befi Counfels flie 
could, that fhe might fliew the greatnefs of her love 
and affe&ion which flie bore to her Native Coun- 
trey. Whereupon the Duchefs promifed her Maje- 
fty to do what lay in her power,- and fince it was a 
bufinefs of great Importance, flie defired lorne time to 
confider of it; for, faid flie, Great Affairs require 
deep Confiderations ; which the Emprefs willingly 
allowed her. And after the Duchefs had confidered 
fome little time, fhe defired the Emprefs to fend 
fome of her Syrens or Mear men, to fee what pafla- 
ges they could find out of the BlafuigWorld , into 
the W orld fhe came from ; for, laid fhe, if there be 

129 

The Defcription of a J\(ciP World. 

a paflage for a Ship to come out of that World 
into this ; then certainly there may alio a Ship 
pals thorow the lame palfage out of this World in- 
to that. Hereupon the Mear- or Fifh-men were fent 
out ; who being many in number, employ’d all their 
induftry, and did fwim feveral ways ; at laft having 
found out the palfage, they returned to the Em- 
prels, and told her, That as their ‘Blaming World 
had but one Emperor, one Government, one Reli- 
gion, and one Language, lo there was but one Paflage 
into that World, which was lo little, that no Vefl 
lei bigger than a Packet-Boat could go thorow ; nei- 
ther was that Paflage always open , but lometimes 
quite frozen up. At which Relation both the Em- 
prefs and Duchels leemed lomewhat troubled, fearing 
that this would perhaps be an hindrance or obftru- 
dion to their Deflgn. 

At laft the Duchels defired the Emprels to lend for 
her Ship-wrights, and all her Archite&s, which were 
Giants ; who being called, the Duchels told them 
how lorne in her own World had been lo ingenious, 
as to contrive Ships that* could fwim under Water, 
and asked. Whether they could do the like ? The 
Giants anfwered. They had never heard of that 
Invention ; neverthelels, they would try what might 
be done by Art, and Ipare no labour or induftry 
to find it out. In the mean time, while both the 
Emprels and Duchels were in a lerious Counlel, 

S after 

The Defcripion of a New World. 

after many debates , the Duchefs defired but a few 
Ships to tranfport fome of the Bird- W orm- and Bear- 
men : Alas ! faid the Emprefs, What can fuch forts 
of Men do in the other World ? efpecially fb few > 
They will be (bon deftroyed , for a Musket will 
deftroy numbers of Birds at one (hot. The Duchefs 
faid, I defire your Majefty will have but a little pati- 
ence, and relie upon my advice, and you (hall not fail 
to fave your own Native Country, and in a manner 
become Miftrefs of all that W orld you came from.The 
Emprefs, who loved the Duchefs as her own Soul, did 
{q • the Giants returned (oon after, and told her Ma- 
jefty, that they had found out the Art which the Du- 
chefs had mentioned, to make fuch Ships as could fwim 
under water ; which the Emprefs and Duchefs were 
both very glad at, and when the Ships were made rea- 
dy, the Duchefs told the Emprefs, that it was requifite 
that her Majefty fiiould go her felf in body, as well as in 
Soul ; but I, faid fhe, can onely wait on your Ma- 
jefty after a Spiritual manner, that is, with my Soul. 
Your Soul, (aid the Emprefs, (hall live with my Soul, 
in my Body ; for I fiiall onaly defire your Counfel and 
Advice. Then faid the Duchefs, Your Majefty muft 
command a great number of your Fifh-men to wait 
on your Ships; for you know that your Ships are not 
made for Cannons, and therefore are no ways fervice- 
able in W ar ; for though by the help of your Engines, 
they can drive on, and your Fifh-men may by the 

help 

The Definition of a Nen> World. 

help of Chains or Ropes , draw them which way 
they will, to make them go on, or flye back, yet 
not lb as to fight : And though your Ships be of 
Gold, and cannot be (hot thorow, but onely brui- 
ted and battered; yet the Enemy will aflault and en- 
ter them, and take them as Prizes ; wherefore your Fifh- 
men rauft do you Service inftead of Cannons. 
But how, faid the Emprels, can the Fifh-men do 
me fervice againft an Enemy, without Cannons and 
all forts of Arms ? That is the reafon, anfwered the 
Duchefs, that I would have numbers of Fifh-men, 
for they (hall deftroy all your Enemies Ships, be- 
fore they can come near you. The Emprefs ask- 
ed in what manner that could be > Thus, anfwered 
the Duchefs: Your Majefty muft tend a number 
of Worm-men to the Burning-Mountains (for you 
have good ftore of them in the Blazing-World J 
which muft get a great quantity of the Fire-ftone, 
whote property, you know, is, that it burns Co long 
as it is wet ; and the Ships in the other W/ orld be- 
ing all made of Wood , they may by that means 
fet them all on fire ; and if you can but deftroy their 
Ships, and hinder their Navigation, you will be 
Miftrefs of all that World, by reafon moft parts 
thereof cannot live without Navigation. Befides, 
faid (he, the Fire-ftone will ferve you inftead of Light 
or Torches ; for you know, that the World you are 
going into, is dark at nights (efpecially if there be no 
5 6 So Moon- 

I}2 

The Defer ip ion of a New iVorld. 

Moon-fhine , or if the Moon be overlhadowed by 
Clouds) and not fo full of Blazing-Stars as this 
World is, which make as great a light in the ab- 
fence of the Sun, as the Sun doth when it is prelent ; 
for that World hath but little blinking Stars, 
which make more lhadows then light, and are one- 
ly able to draw up Vapours from the Earth, but 
not to rarifie or clarifie them , or to convert them 
into ferene air. 

This Advice of the Duchels was very much ap- 
proved, and joyfully embraced by the Emprels, 
who forthwith lent her Worm-men to get a good 
quantity of the mentioned Fire- (lone. She alio com- 
manded numbers of Fifti-men to wait on her under 
Water, and Bird-men to wait on her in the Air ; and 
Bear- and Worm-men to wait on her in Ships, ac- 
cording to the Duchels s advice ; and indeed the 
Bear-men were as lerviceable to her, as the North- 
Star ; but the Bird-men would often reft: themlelves 
upon the Decks of the Ships ; neither would the Em- 
prels, being of a fweet and noble Nature, lufter that 
they fhould tire or weary themlelves by long flightsjfor 
though by Land they did often fly out of one Coun- 
trey into another, yet they did reft: in fome Woods, or 
on lome Grounds, eipecially at night, when it was 
their fleeping time : And therefore the Emprels was 
forced to take a great many Ships along with her, 
both for tranlporting thole leveral lorts of her loyal 
i ' z 'd and 

» 

The Defcriptm of a New World. 

and ferviceable Subje&s, and to carry provifions for 
them : Befides, we was fo wearied with the Petiti- 
ons of (everal others of her Subje&s who defired to 
wait on her Majefty, that fhe could not poffibly de- 
ny them all ; for lome would rather chufe to be drow- 
ned, then not tender their duty to her. 

Thus after all things were made fit and ready, the 
Emprefs began her Journey ; I cannot properly fay, 
flic let Sail, by reafou in fbme Part, as in the paffage 
between the two Worlds(which yet was but fliort) 
the Ships were drawn under water by the Fifh-men 
with Golden Chains , fo that they had no need of 
Sails there, nor of any other Arts, but onely to keep 
out water from entering into the Ships, and to give 
or make fo much Air as would ferve, for breath or 
refpiration , thofe Land-Animals that were in the 
Ships $ which the Giants had fo Artificially contri- 
ved, that they which were therein, found no inconve- 
niency at all : And after they had pafled the Icy 
Sea, the Golden Ships appeared above Water, and 
fo went on until they came near the Kingdom that was 
the Emprefs’s Native Countrey ; where the Bear-men 
through their Telefcopes difeovered a great number of 
Ships which had befet all that Kingdom, well rigg’d 
and mann’d. 

The Emprefs before fhe came in fight of the E- 
nemy, fent fome of her Fifli- and Bird-men to bring 

her intelligence of their Fleet ; and hearing of their 

S 3 number. 

X 

« 

The Description of a New World. 

number, their flation and pofture, (he gave order that 
when it was Night, her Bird-men fhould carry in their 
becks fome of the mentioned Fire-flones, with the 
tops thereof wetted ; and the Fifh-men fhould carry 
them likewife, and hold them out of the Water ; for 
they were cut in the form of Torches or Candles, and 
being many thoufands, made a terrible fbew ; for it 
appear’d as if all the Air and Sea had been of a Fla- 
ming-Fire ; and all that were upon the Sea, or near it, 
did verily believe, the time of Judgment, or the Laft 
Day was come, which made them all fall down, and 
Pray. 

At the break of Day, theEmprefs command- 
ed thofe Lights to be put out, and then the Naval 
Forces of the Enemy perceived nothing but a Num- 
ber of Ships without Sails, Guns, Arms, and other 
Inflruments of W ar ; which Ships feemed to fwim of 
themfelves, without any help or afli fiance : w hich fight 
put them into a great amaze ; neither could they per- 
ceive that thofe Ships were of Gold, by realon the 
Emprels had cauled them all to be coloured black, or 
with a dark colour ; fo that the natural colour of 
the Gold could not be perceived through the arti- 
ficial colour of the paint, no not by the bell Tele- 
fcopes. All which put the Enemies Fleet intofuch a 
fright at night, and to fuch wonder in the morning, 
or at day-time, that they knew not what to judg 
or make of them ; for they knew neither what 

Ships 

The Definition of a New World. 

Ships they were , nor what Party they belonged to, 
infomuch that they had no power to ftir. 

In the mean while, the Emprefs knowing the Co- 
lours of her own Country, lent a Letter to their Ge- 
neral, and the reft of the chief Commanders, to let them 
know, that (he was a great and powerful Princefs, 
and came to aftift them again ft their Enemies ; where- 
fore ftie defired they fhould declare themfelves, when 

the bufinefs 

debated ; but there were fo many crofs and different 
Opinions, that they could not fuddenly refolve what 
anfwer to fend the Emprefs ; at which (he grew angry, 
infomuch that (he refolved to return into her Blaming- 
World, without giving any afliftance to her Country- 
men: but the Duchefs of Newcaflle intreated her 
Majefty to abate her paflion ; for, faid (he, Great 
Councels are moft commonly (low, becaufe many 
men have many feveral Opinions : befides, every 
Councellor driving to be the wifeft, makes long 
fpeeches, and raife many doubts, which caufe retard- 
ments. If I had long-fpeeched Councilors, replied 
the Emprefs, I would hang them, by reafon they give 
more Words, then Advice. The Duchefs anfwered j 
That her Majefty (liould not beangry,but confider the 
differences of that and her Blafing-W orld ; for, faid (he, 
they are not both alike ; but there are groffer and duller 
underftandings in this,than in the Blazing-World. 

they would have her help and afliftance. 
Hereupon a Councel was called, a 

At 

The Defcription of a New World. 

At laft a Meflenger came out , who returned the 
Emprefs thanks for her kind proffer, but defired with- 
al, to know from whence (he came, and how, and in 
what manner her afliftance could be ferviceable to 
them? The Emprefs anfwered, That fhe was not 
bound to tell them whence fhe camejbut as for the man- 
ner of her afliftance, I will appear, faidfhe, to your 
Navy in a fplendorous Light , furrounded with 
Fire. The Meflenger asked at what time they fhould 
exped her coming? I’le be with you, anfwered the 
Emprefs, about one of the Clock at night. With 
this report the Meflenger returned ■ which made both 
the poor Councilors and Sea-men much afraid ,- but 
yet they longed for the time to behold this ftrange 

fight. • . \ 

The appointed hour being come, the Emprefs ap- 
pear’d with Garments made of the Star - ftone, and was 
born or fupported above the Water, upon the Fifh- 
mens heads and backs, fo that fhe feemed to walk upon 
the face of the Water, and the Bird- and Fifh-men 
carried the Fire-ftone, lighted both in the Air, and 
above the Waters. 

Which fight, when her Country-men perceived at 
a diftance, their hearts began to tremble ; but coming 
fomething nearer, fhe left her Torches, and appeared 
onely in her Garments of Light, like an Angel, or 
fbme Deity, and all kneeled down before her, and 
worfhipped her with all fubmiflion and reverence : But 

the 

The Defer iptioti of a World. 

'37 

the Emprefs would not come nearer than at fuch a 
* diftance where her voice might be generally heard , by 
reafbn die would not have that any of her Accou- 
ftrements fhould be perceived, but the fplendor 
- thereof; and when Hie was comefo near that her voice 
could be heard and underftood by all , die made this 
following Speech : 

Dear Country- men , for foyou are,althougbyou bptow 
me not', 1 being a Native of this Kingdom, and hear- 
ing that mofl part jof thin World had refolved to mafy 
Warr againfl it , and fought to defray it , at leaf to weaken 
its Naval Force and Power , have made a V oyage out of 
another World , to lend yon my affifance again# your Ene * 
mies. 1 come not to maty: bargains with you , or to re- 
gard my own Interefl more than your Safety ; but I intend 
to mafy you the mo# powerful Nation of this World, and 
therefore I have chofen rather to quit my own Tranquility, 
Riches and Pleafure , than fuffer you to be ruined and de- 
frayed. All the Return I defire , is but your grateful ac- 
knowledgment, and to declare my Power , Love and Loy- 
alty to my Native Country : for , although I am now a 
Great and Abjolute Princefs , and Emprefs of a whole 
World, yet I actyiowledg, that once I was a Subject of this 
Kingdom, which is but a fmallpart of this World; and 
therefore I will have you undoubtedly believe, that I jhall 
defroy all your Enemies before this following Night , I 
mean tbofe which trouble you by Sea ; and if you have any 

T 

38 

The Defer ip ion of a New World. 

by Land, ajfure your felf l jhall alfo give you my affi 'fiance 
againjl them, and maty you triumph over all that fee l^ your 
Ruine and Defruclion. 

Up on this Declaration of the Emprcfs, when both 
the General , and all the Commanders in their leve- 
ral Ships, had return’d their humble and hearty Thanks 
to Her Majefty for fo great a favour to them, fhe took 
her leave, and departed to her own Ships. But , good 
Lord! what fcveral Opinions and Judgments did this 
produce in the minds of her Country-men! fbme laid 
Ihe was an Angel ; others, (lie was a Sorcerels; fbme be- 
lieved her a Goddels ; others laid the Devil deluded 
them in the lhape of a fine Lady. 

The morning after, when the Navies were to fight, 
the Emprefs appear’d upon the face of the Waters* 
drefs’d in her Imperial Robes, which were all of Dia- 
monds and Carbuncles; in one hand fhe held a Buck- 
ler , made of one intire Carbuncle ; and in the other 
hand a Spear of one intire Diamond ; on her head (he 
hada Cap of Diamonds, and Juft upon the top of the 
Crown, was a Starr made of the Starr-ftone, mention- 
ed heretofore ; and a Half-Moon made of the lame 
Stone , was placed on her forehead ; all her other Gar- 
ments were of leveral lorts of precious J ewels ; and 
having given her Fifh-men diredions how to deftroy 
the Enemiesof her Native Country, fhe proceeded to 
effed her defign. The Fifh-men were to carry the 
\ T Fire. 

The Dcfcripion of a Nen> IV orld. jjp 

T ■ ■ 

Fire-ftones in cafes of Diamonds ( for the Dia- 
monds in the 1 Blazing-World, are in fplendor fo far be- 
yond the Diamonds of this World, as Peble- (tones 
are to the beft fort of this Worlds Diamonds} and 
to uncafe or uncover thofe Fire-ftones no fboner but 
when they were juft under the Enemis Ships, or clofe 
at their fides, and then to wet them, and fet their Ships 
on fire; which was no fooner done, but all the Ene- 
mie’s Fleet was of a Flaming fire ; and coming to the 
place where the Powder was, it ftreight blew them up ; 
fo that all the feveral Navies of the Enemies, were de- 
ftroyed in a fhort time : which when her Country- 
men did fee, they all cried out with one voice. That fhe 
was an Angel lent from God to deliver them out of 
the hands of their Enemies : Neither would fhe return 
into the *B lading* Wor Id , until fhe had forced all the 
reft of that World to fubmit to that fame Nation. 

In the mean time,the General of all their Naval For- 
ces, lent to their Soveraign to acquaint him with their 
miraculous Delivery and Conqueft , and with the 
Emprefs’s defign of making him the moft powerful 
Monarch of all that World. After a fhort time, the 
Emprefs lent her felf, to the Soveraign of that Na- 
tion to know in what fhe could beferviceableto him ; 
who returning her many thanks, both for her afliftance 
againft his Enemies, and her kind proffer to do him fur- 
ther fervice for the good and benefit of his Nations (for 
he was King over feveral Kingdoms) fent her word, 

T 2 that 

140 

T he Defcrrption of a New World. 

that although flic did partly deftroy his Enemies by 
Sea, yet, they were (o powerful, that they did hinder 
the Trade and Traffick of his Dominions. To which 
the Emprefs returned this anfwcr , That (he would 
burn and (ink all thole Ships that would not pay him 
Tribute ; and forthwith fent to all the Neighbouring 
Nations, who had any Traffick by Sea, defiling them 
to pay Tribute to the King and Soveraign of that Na- 
tion where (he was born ; But they denied it with 
great (corn. Whereupon, (he immediately command- 
ed her Fi(h- men, to deftroy all ftrangers Ships that 
traffick’d on the Seas ; which they did according to 
the Emprels’s Command ; and when the Neighbour- 
ing Nations and Kingdoms perceived her power, they 
were (o di(compo(«f in their affairs and defigns, that 
they knew not what to do : At laft they lent to the 
Emprefs, and defired to treat with her , but could 
get no other conditions then to (ubmit and pay Tri- 
bute to the laid King and Soveraign of her Native 
Country, otherwife, (he was refolved to ruin all their 
Trade and Traffick by burning their Ships. Long 
was this Treaty, but in fine, they could obtain no- 
thing, (o that at laft they wereinforced tofubmit; by 
which the King of the mentioned Nations became ab- 
fblute Mafter of the Seas, and confequently of that 
World; by reafbn, as I mentioned heretofore, the 
(everal Nations of that World could not well live 
without Traffick and Commerce, by Sea, as well as by 
Land. - . But 

Tbe Defcrrpion of a Neap World. 

I 4 I 

But after a fhort rime, thole Neighbouring Na- 
tions finding themfelves lo much inflaved, that they 
were hardly able to peep out of their own Domi- 
nions without a chargeable Tribute, they all agreed 
to join again their Forces againft the King and So- 
veraignofthefaid Dominions; which when the Em- 
prels receiv’d notice of, fhe lent out her Filh-men 
to deftroy, as they had done before, the remainder 
of all their Naval Power, by which they were loon 
forced again to fubmit, except Ibme Nations which 
could live without Foreign Traffick, and fome whole 
Trade and Traffick was meerly by Land ; thele would 
no ways be Tributary to the mentioned King. The 
Emprefe fent them word , That in c ale they did 
not fubmit to him , Ihe intended to fire all their 
Towns and Cities , and reduce them by force, to 
what they would not yield with a good will. 
But they reje&ed and Icorned her M a jellies MeC 
fage, which provoked her anger lb much, that Ihe 
refolved to lend her Bird- and Worm men thi- 
ther, with order to begin firft with their fmaller Towns, 
and let them on fire (for fhe was loath to make more 
fpoil then Ihe was forced to do) and if they remain’d 
(hill obftinate in their relblutions, to deftroy alio their 
greater Cities. The onely difficulty was, how to 
convey the Worm-men conveniently to thole pla- 
ces ; but they defired that her Majefty would but let 
them upon any part of the Earth of thole Nations, 

T 3 and 

1 42 

The Defcrrption of a New World. 

and they could travel within the Earth as eafily, and 
and as nimbly as men upon the face of the Earth ; which 
the Emprefs did according to their defire. 

But before both the Bird- and Worm-men began 
their journey, the Emprels commanded the Bear- 
men to view through their Telefcopes what Towns 
and Cities thole were that would not fubmit ; and 
having a full information thereof, fhe inftru&ed the 
Bird- and Bear-men what Towns they ftiould begin 
w’ithal ; in the mean while fhe lent to all the Prin- 
ces and Soveraigns of thole Nations, to let them 
know that flie would give them a proof of her 
Power, and check their Obftinacies by burning 
lome of their fmaller Towns ; and if they continued 
(till in their Obftinate Relolutions, that fhe would 
convert their Imaller Lois into a Total Ruin. She 
alio commanded her Bird- men to make their flight 
at night, left they be perceived. At laft when both 
the Bird- and Worm-men came to the defigned places, 
the W orm- men laid lome Fire-ftoncs under the Foun- 
dation of every Houle, and the Bird-men placed 
lome at the tops of them, fo that both by rain, and 
by lome other moifture within the Earth, the ftones 
could not fail of burning. The Bird-men in the 
mean time having learned lome few words of their 
Language, told them. That the next time it did 
rain, their Towns would be all on fire ; at which 
they were amaz’d to hear Men fpeak in. the air ; but 

with- 

The Defcription of a Jfctz> World. 

withal! they laughed when they hearcfrhem fay~tta 
rain (houldfire their Towns ; knowing, that theef- 
feft of Water was to quench, not produce Fire. 

At laftarain came, and upon a fudden all their 
Houfes appeared of a flaming Fire ; and the more 
Water there was poured on them, the more they 
did flame and burn,- which (truck fuch a Fright and 
Terror into all the Neighbouring Cities, Nations 
and Kingdoms , that for fear the like fliould happen 
to them , they and all the reft of the parrs of that 
World , granted the Emprefs’s deflre, and fubmitted 
to the Monarch and Sovereign of her Native Coun- 
trey, the King of ESFI,- faveone, which having 
feldom or never any rain, but oncly dews, which 
would foon be fpent in a great fire, flighted her Pow- 
er : The Emprefs being defirous to make it (loop 
as well as the reft, knew that every year it was wa- 
tered by a flowing Tide, which Iafted fome Weeks; 
and although their Houfesftood high from the ground, 
yet they were built upon Supporters which werefixt 
into the ground. Wherefore (he commanded 
both her Bird- and Worm-men to lay fome of 
the Fire-ftones at the bottom of thofe Supporters 
and when the Tide came in , all their Houfes were 
of a Fire, which did (orarifie the Water, that the 
Tide was foon turn'd into Vapour , and this Vapour 
again into Air; which caufed not ondy a deftru- 
ftion of their Houfes, but alio a general barrennefs 

. * 

over 

i 4 4 

The Defer ipion of a New World. 

over all their Counrrey that year , and forced them 
to fubmit,as well as the reft of the World had done. 

Thus the Emprefs did not onely lave her Native 
Country, but made it the Abfolute Monarchy of 
all that W orld ; and both theeffe&s of her Power and 
her Beauty , did kindle a great defire in all the great- 
eft Princes to fee her; who hearing that (he was re- 
fblvedto return into her own Blazing- World , they 
all entreated the favour , that they might wait on 
her Majefty before fhe went. The Emprefs lent 
word. That (be fhould be glad to grant their Re- 
quefts; but having no other place of Reception 
for them, fhe defired thatthey would be pleafed tocome 
into the open Seas with their Ships , and make a Cir- 
cle of a pretty large compafs, and then her own Ships 
fhould meet them , and clofe up the Circle , and fhe 
would prefent her felf to the view of all thole that 
came to fee her : Which Anfwer was joyfully re- 
ceived by all the mentioned Princes, who came, 
fome fboner , and fome later , each according to the 
diftance of his Countrey, and the length of the voy- 
age. And being all met in the form and manner a- 
forefaid , the Emprefs appeared upon the face of the 
Water in her Imperial Robes; in fome part of her 
hair, near her face, fhe had placed fome of the Starr- 
Stone , which added fuch a lufter and glory to it , that 
it caufed a great admiration in all that were prefent, 
who believed her to be fome Celeftial Creature , or 

rather 

The Defer i^tion of a Ufew World. 

145 

rather an uncreated Goddefs, and they all had a defire 
to worfhip her ; for furely,faid they, no mortal crea- 
ture can have fuch a fplendid and tranfeendent beau- 
ty, nor can any have fo great a power as flie has , to 
walk upon the Waters, and todeftroy whatever (he 
pleafes, not oncly whole Nations, but a whole 
World. 

The Emprels exprefled to her own Country- 
men , who were a Ifo her Interpreters to the reft of 
the Princes that were prefent, That Ihe would give 
them an Entertainment at the darkeft time of 
Night : W hich being come, the Fire-Stones were light- 
ed, which made both Air and Seas appear of a bright 
fhining flame, infomuch that they put all Spectators 
into- an extream fright, who verily believed they 
Ihould all be deftroyed ; which the Emprels percei- 
ving, caufed all the Lights of the Fire-Stones to be 
put out, and onely Ihewed her felf in her Garments 
of Light. The Bird-men carried her upon their 
backs into the Air, and there Ihe appear’d as glori- 
ous as the Sun. Then Ihe was let down upon the Seas 
again , and prefently there was heard the molt melo- 
dious and fweeteft Conlort of Voices , as ever was 
heard out of the Seas, which was made by the Fifh- 
mcn j this Contort was anfwered by another, made 
by the Bird-men in the Air , fo that it feem’d as 
if Sea and Air had /poke, and anfwered each other 
by way of Singing-Dialogues, or after the manner 

V of 

14 6 

The Defection of a New World. 

of thofe Playes that are a&ed by finging- Voices. 

But when it was upon break of day , the Emprels 
ended her Entertainment , and at full day-light all the 
Princes perceived that fhe went into the Ship wherein 
the Prince and Monarch of her Native Country was, 
the King of E S F I , with whom (he had (everal 
Conferences ; and having alfured Him of the readi- 
nelsof her Adi (lance whenfoeverhe required it, telling 
Him withal. That (he wanted no Intelligence, fhe went 
forth again upon the Waters , and being in the midft 
of the Circle made by thole Ships that were pre(ent, 
(he defired them to draw (omewhat nearer, that they 
might hear her (peak ; which being done, (he declared 
her (elf in this following manner : 

Great , Heroick , and Famous Monarchs , I come 
bitber to ajfijl the King of ESF I againjl bis Enemies , 
He being mjujlly affaulted by many fever al Nations jrvbich 
would fain tahg away His Hereditary Rights and Prero- 
gatives of the Narrow Seas i at which Vnjufiice , Hea- 
ven was ranch dijp leafed , and for the Injuries He received 
from His Enemies , rewarded Him with an Abfolute Pow- 
er , fo that new be is become the Head-Monarch of aH 
this World; which Power , though you may envy y yet you 
can no wayes hinder Him; for all thofe that endeavour to 
refijl His Power ,fhall onely get Lofs for their Labour, and 
no V i&ory for their Profit. Wherefore my advice to you 
all is , To pay him Tribute jujlly and truly , that you may 

live 

The Defcription of a New World 

147 

live Peaceably and Happily, and be rewarded with 
the Blefjingr of Heaven : which I wijh you from my 
Soul. 

After the Emprefs had thus finifhed her Speech to 
the Princes of the feveral Nations of that World, fhe 
defired that their Ships might fall back ; which being 
done, her own Fleet came into the Circle, without 
any vifible afliftanceof Sails or Tide ; and her felf be- 
ing entred into her own Ship, the whole Fleet fonk im- 
mediately into the bottom of the Seas, and left all the 
Spe&ators in a deep amazement; neither would Are 
luffer any of her Ships to come above the Waters, 
until ftie arrived into the Blazing-World. 

In time of the Voyage, both the Emprefs’s and 
Duchefs’sSoul, were very gay dnd merry; andfbme-4 
times they would converle very ferioufly with each 
other. Amongftthe reft of their difcourles, the Duchels 
laid, (he wondred much at one thing, which was. That 
finceher Majeftyhad found out a paflage out of the 
Blaming- World, into the W orld fhe came from, file did 
not enrich that part of the World where fhe was born, 
at leaft her own Family, though (lie had enough 
to enrich the whole World. The Emprefs’s Soul 
anfwered , That fhe loved her Native Countrey, and 
her own Family, aswell as any Cteature could do; and 
that this was the reafbn why fhe would not enrich them:' 
for, faidfhe, not only particular Families or Nati- 

V 2 ons,^ 

148 

Tbe Defer if t ion of a New World. 

ons, but all the World, their Natures are fuch, that 
much Gold, and great (tore of Riches , makes them 
mad; inlbmuch as they endeavour to deftroy each 
other for Gold or Riches lake. The realon thereof is, 
faid the Duchels, that they have too little Gold and 
Riches, which makes them fo eager to have it. No, 
replied the Emprels's Soul, their particular Covetoufi 
nels, is beyond all the wealth of the richeft W orld; and 
the more Riches they have, the more Covetous they 
are; for their Covetoufnels is Infinite. But, faid 
flie, I would there could a Paflage be found out of the 
‘Blazjng-World , into the World whence you came % 
andl would willingly give you as much Riches as you 
defir'd. The Duchefs's Soul gave her Ma/efty humble 
thanks for her great Favour ; and told her, that Ihe was 
not covetous, nor defir’d any more wealth than what 
her Lord and Husband had before the Civil- Warrs. 
Neither, laid Ihe, Ihould I defire it for my own, but 
my Lord's Pofterities fake. Well, laid the Emprefs, 
Fie command my Filli-men to ufe all their Skill and 
Induftry,to find outa Paflage into that World which 
your Lord and Husband is in. I do verily believe, 
anfwered the Duchels, that there will be no Paflage 
found into that World; but if there were any, I fhould 
not Petition your Majefty for Gold and Jewels , but 
only for the Elixir that grows in the midft of the 
Golden Sands , for to preferve Life and Health ; but 
without a Paflage , it is impolfible to carry away any 

of 

The Description of a New World. 

H9 

of it : for, whatlbever is Material , cannot travel like 
Immaterial Beings, fuch as Souls and Spirits are. Nei- 
ther do Souls require any fuch thing that might revive 
them, or prolong their Lives, by realbn they are unal- 
terable: for, were Souls like Bodies, then my Soul 
might have had the benefit of that Natural Elixir that 
grows in your Blazing-World. I wilh earneftly , faid 
the Emprefs, that a Pafiage might be found, and then 
both your Lord and your lelf , fhould neither want 
Wealth, nor Long-life: nay, I love you lo well, that 
I would make you as Great and Powerful a Monar- 
ches , as I am of the Blazing-World. The Duchefs’s 
Soul humbly thank’d her Majefty, and told her, That 
fhe acknowledged and efteemed her Love beyond all 
things that are in Nature. 

After this Dilcourfe , they had many other Confer- 
ences, which for brevity’s fake I’Ie forbear to rehearfe. 
At laft , after leveral Queftions which the Emprefs’s 
Soul asked the Duchefs, Ihedefired to know the realbn 
why Ihe did take fuch delight, when fhe was joyned to 
her Body, in being Angular both in Accouflrements, 
Behaviour, and Difcourle ? The Duchels’s Soul an- 
fwered. She confefled that it was extravagant, and be- 
yond what wasufual and ordinary : but yet her am- 
bition being fuch, that fhe would not be .like others in 
any thing , if it were poflible, I endeavour, faid (he, to 
be as lingular as I can : for, it argues but a mean Na- 
ture, to imitate others : and though I do not love to be 

V 3 imita- 

The Defer if t ion of a New World 

imitated, if I can polfibly avoid it; yet, rather than imi- 
tate others, I fhould chufe to be imitated by others : 
for my Nature is fuch, that I had rather appear worle 
in Singularity, than better in the Mode. If you were 
not a great Lady, replied the Emprefs, you would 
never pafs in the World for a wife Lady : for , the 
World would fay, your Singularities are Vanities. The 
Duchefs’s Soul anlwered , She did not at all regard the 
Cenfure of this, or any other Age , concerning V anl- 
ties : but, faid fhe, neither this prefent, nor any of the 
future Ages,canorwill truly lay,thatIamnot Vertu- 
ous and Chart : for I am confident, all that were, or are 
acquainted with me, and all the Servants which ever I 
had,willor can upon their oaths declare my a&ions no 
other wile than Vertuous: and certainly , there’s none 
even of the meaneft Degree, which have not their Spies 
and Witnefles, much mpre thole of the Nobler Sort, 
which leldom or never are without Attendants;fothat 
their Faults ( if they have any ) will eafiiy be known, 
and as eafiiy divulged. Wherefore, happy are thole 
Natures that areHoneft, Vertuous, and Noble; not 
only happy to themlelves , but happy to their Fami- 
lies. But, laid theEmprels, if you glory lo much 
in your Honefty and Vertue , how comes it that you 
plead for Difhoneft and Wicked perlons, in your 
Writings? The Duchels anfwered, It was only to 
fhew her Wit , not her Nature. ■» 

Tbe 

Defcripion of a New World. 

Atlaft the Emprels arrived into the Blazing- world, 
and coming to her Imperial Palace , you may looner 
imagine than expeft that I Ihould exprels the joy 
which the Emperor had at her fafe return ; for he lo- 
ved her beyond his Soul ; and there was no love 
loft , for the Emprefs equal’d his Affe&ion with no 
left love to him. After the time of rejoicing with 
each other, the Duchels s Soul begg’d leave to return 
to her Noble Lord : But the Emperor delired, that 
before (be departed, fhe would lee how he had em- 
ployed his time in the Emprefs’s ablence ■ for he had 
built Stables and Riding-Houles, and delired to 
have Horles of Manage, luch as, according to the 
Emprefs’s Relation , the Duke of Newcajile had : 
The Emperor enquired of the Duchels, the Form and 
Strudure of her Lordand Husband’s Stables and Ri- 
ding-Houfe. The Duchels anfwer’d his Majefty,That 
they were but plain and ordinary ; but, faid Ihe, had 
my Lord Wealth , I am fure he would not lpare it, 
in rendring his Buildings as Noble as could be made. 
Hereupon the Emperor Ihewed the Duchels the Sta- 
bles he had built, which were molt ftately and mag- 
nificent ; among the reft, there was one double Sta- 
ble that held a Hundred Horles on a fide, the main 
Building was of Gold, lined with leveral Ibrts of 
precious Materials; the Roof was Arched with A- 
gats, the fides of the Walls were lined with Cor- 
nelian, the Floor was paved with Amber, the Man- 
gers 

2 

The Defcription of a New World. 

gers were Mother of Pearl; the Pillars, as alio the mid- 
dlelfieor Walk of the Stables, were of Cryftal; the 
Front and Gate was of Turquois, moft neatly cut 
and carved. The Riding-Houle was lined with Sa- 
phirs, Topales, and the like ; the Floor was all of 
Golden- Sand lo finely lifted, that it was extreamly 
loft , and not in the leaft hurtful to the Horfes feet, and 
the Door and Frontilpiece was of Emeralds curioufly 
carved. 

After the view of thefe Glorious and Magnificent 
Buildings, which the Duchels’s Soul was much delight- 
ed withall, fhe relolvedrotakeher leave ; but the Em- 
peror defired her to ftay yet lome ftiort time more , for 
they both loved her company lo well , that they were 
unwilling to have her depart lo loon : Several Confer- 
ences and Dilcourles pals’d between them ; amongft 
the reft, the Emperor defir’d her advice how to let up a 
Theatre for Plays. The Duchels confelfed her Igno- 
rance in this Art, telling his Majefty that file knew no- 
thing of ere&ing Theatres or Scenes, but what fhe had 
by an Immaterial Oblervation, when fhe was with the 
Emprels’s Soul in the chief City of E. Entring into 
one of their Theatres, whereof the Emprels could 
give as much account to his Majefty, as her lelf. But 
both the Emperor and Emprels told the Duchels, 
That (he could give direftions how to make Plays. The 
Duchels anlwered,That file had as little skill to form a 
Play after the Mode, as file had to paint or make a 

Scene 

r The Dejcription of a New World. 

Scene for Ihew. But you have made Plays, re- 
plied the Emprels: Yes, anfwered the Duchels, I 
intended them for Plays; but the Wits of thele 
prelent times condemned them as uncapable of being 
reprclented or a&ed , becaule they were not made up 
according to the Rules of Art; though I dare lay. 
That the E)clcriptions are as good as any they have 
writ. The Emperor asked , Whether the Property 
of Plays were not to delcribe the feveral Humours, 
A&ions and Fortunes of Mankind ? ’Tis fo, anfwered 
the Duchels. Why then , replied the Emperor, the 
natural Humours , «A&ions and Fortunes of Man- 
kind, are not done by the Rules of Art : But, faid 
the Duchefs, it is the Art and Method of our Wits 
todelpile all Defcriptions of Wit, Humour, Adi- 
ons and Fortunes that are without fuch Artificial 
Rules. The Emperor asked, Are thofe good Plays 
that are made fo Methodically and Artificially ? The 
Duchels anlwer’d , They were Good according to 
the Judgment of the Age, or Mode of the Nation, 
but not according to her Judgment: for truly, faid 
Ihe, in my Opinion, their Plays will prove a Nur- 
lery of whining Lovers , and not an Academy or 
School for Wife, Witty, Noble and well-beha- 
ved men. But I, replied the Emperor , defire fuch 
a Theatre as may make wile Men ; and will have 
fuch Defcriptions as are Natural, not Artificial. If 
your Majefty be of that Opinion, faid the Duchefs’s 

X Soul, 

1 54 The ‘Defcription of a New World. 

Soul , then my Playes may be a&ed in your Blazing- 
World , when they cannot be a&ed in the Blink- 
ing-World of Wit; and the next time I come to 
vifit your Majefty , I Ihall endeavour to order your 
Majefty’s Theatre, to prelent luch Playes as my 
Wit is capable to make. Then the Emprels told 
the Duchcls, That (lie loved a foolilTi fork added 
to a wile Play. The Duchels anfwered. That no 
W orld in Nature had fitter Creatures for it than 
the Blazing- World: for, laid Die, the Lowle- 
men , the Bird-men , the Spider- and Fox-men , the 
Ape-men and Satyrs appear in a '/irle extraordinary 
pleafant. 

Hereupon both the Emperor and Emprels in- 
treated the Duchefs’s Soul to ftay lo long with them, 
till Ihe had ordered her Theatre , and made Playes 
and Varies fit for them ; for they onely wanted that 
fort of Recreation: but the Duchels’s Soul begg’d 
their Majefties to give her leave to go into her Na- 
tive World; for Ihe long’d to be with her dear 
Lord and Husband , promifing , that after a Ihort 
rime Ihe would return again. Which being grant- 
ed , though with much difficulty , Ihe took her leave 
with all Civility and Relpedt, and lo departed from 
their Majefties. 

After the Duchefs’s return into her own body, 
Ihe entertained her Lord ( when he was pleafed to 
hear fuch kind of Dilcourlcs ) with Foreign Rela- 
tions; 

7 he Description of a New IVorld. 

*55 

tions; buthe was never difpleafed to hear of the Em- 
prefs’s kind Commendations, and of the Chara- 
cters fhe was pleated to give of him to the Empe- 
ror. Amongft other Relations, fhe told him all what 
had pad between the Emprefs , and the feveral Mo- 
narchs of that World whither fhe went with the Em- 
prefs; and how fhe had fubdued them to pay Tri- 
bute and Homage to the Monarch of that Nation 
or Kingdom to which fhe owed both her Birth 
and Education. She alfb related to her Lord what 
Magnificent Stables and Riding-Houfes the Empe- 
ror had built, and what fine Horfes were in the Bla- 
zing-world , of feveral fhapes and fizes , and how . 
exaft their fhapes were in each fort, and of many 
various Colours, and fine Marks, as if they had 
been painted by Art, with fuch Coats or Skins , that , 
they had a far greater glofs and fmoothnefs than Sat- 
tin; and were there but a paffage out of the Blazing- 
world into this, laid fhe, you fhould not one- 
ly have fbme of thofe Horfes , but fuch Mate- 
rials as the Emperor has, to build your Stables 
and Riding-Houfes withall ; and fo much Gold, that 
I fhould never repine at your Noble and Generous 
Gifts. The Duke fmilingly anfwered her. That he 
was forty there was no Paflage between thofe two 
. Worlds; but, faid he, I have always found an Ob- 
ftrudion to my Good Fortunes. 

X a 

One 

! 

156 

The Defer iption of a New VV or Id. 

One time the Duchels chanced to difeourfe with 
foine of her acquaintance, of the Emprels of the Bla- 
zing-world, who asked her what Paftimes and Recrea- 
tions her Ma/efty did moft delight in? The Du- 
chels anfwered , That (he (pent moft of her time in the 
ftudy of Natural Caules and Effeds, which was. her 
chief delight and paftime ; and that fhe loved to dif- 
courle lometimes with the moft Learned perlons of that 
World : And topleale the Emperor and his Nobles, 
who were all of the Royal Race, flie went often a - 
broad to take the air, but leldom in the day-time, al- 
ways at night, if it might be called Night ; for, laid 
Ihe, the Nights there, areas light as Days, byrealbn 
of the numerous Blazing-Starrs, which are very Iplen- 
dorous, onely their Light is whiter than the Sun’s 
Light ; and as the Sun’s Light is hot, lo their Light is 
cool t not lo cool as our twinkling Starr- light, nor 
is their Sun-light lo hot as ours, but more tempe- 
rate: And that part of the Blazing- world where the 
Emprels refides , is always clear, and never fubjed to 
any Storms , Tempefts , Fogs or Mills, but has onely 
refrelhing- Dews that nourilh the Earth: The air of it 
is fweet and temperate , and, as I laid before, as much 
light in the Sun’s ablence, as in its prelence, which 
makes that time we call Night , more plealant there 
than the Day : And fometimes the Emprels goes . 
abroad by Water in Barges, fometimes by Land in 
Chariots, and fometimes on Horle-backj her Royal 

Cha- 

The Description of a New IV or Id. 1 57 

Chariots are very Glorious , the Body is one intire 
green Diamond ; the four (mail Pillars that beai; up 
the Top-cover, are four white Diamonds , cut in the 
form thereof; the top or roof of the Chariot, isonein- 
tire blew Diamond , and at the four corners are greac 
/priags of Rubies; the Seat is made of Cloth of Gold, 
fluffed with Ambergreece beaten (mall : the Chariot 
b drawn by Twelve Unicorns, whole Trappings arc 
all Chains of Pearl ; and as for her Barges , they are 
onely of Gold. Her Guard of State ( for fhe needs 
none for fecurity , there being no Rebels or Ene- 
mies ) confifts of Giants , but they feldom wait on 
their Majefties abroad, becaufe their extraordinary 
height and bignefs does hinder their profped. Her En- 
tertainment when fhe is upon the Water , is the Mu- 
fick of the Fifh- and Bird-men;and by Land are Horfe 
and Foot-matches ; for the Emprefs takes much de- 
light in making Race-matches with the Emperor, and 
the Nobility; fome Races are between the Fox- and 
Ape-men, which fometimes the Satyrs ftrive to out- 
run; andfomeare between the Spider- men andLice- 
men. Alfb there are feveral Flight- matches, between 
the feveral forts of Bird-men , and the feveral forts of 
Fly-men; and Swimming-matches, between the fe- 
veral forts of Fifh -men. The Emperor, Emprefs, 
and their Nobles, take alfb great delight to have Colla- 
tions; for in the Blazing-world-, there are molt deli- 
cious Fruits of all forts , and fome filch as in this 

X 3 World 

7 he Dcfcription of a New VV or Id. 

World were never leen nor tailed ; for there are moll 
tempting forts of Fruit: After their Collations are 
ended , they Dance ; and if they be upon the Wa- 
ter , they dance upon the Water, there lying fo ma- 
ny Filh-menfo clofe and thick together, as they can 
dance very evenly and ealily upon their backs, and 
need not fear drowning. Their Mufick , both Vocal 
and Inftrumental, is according to their feveral places: 
Upon the Water, it is of Water-Inllruments,as fhells 
filled with Water, and fo moved by Art , which is a 
very fweet and delightful harmony ; and thole Dan- 
ces which they dance upon the Water, are, for the 
moll part , fuch as we in this World call Swimming- 
Dances , where they do not lift up their feet high: In 
Lawns, or upon Plains, they have Wind-Inllruments, 
but much better than thole in our W orld : And when 
they dance in the Woods, they have Horn-Inllru- 
ments, which although they are of a fort of Wind-In- 
flruments , yet they are of another Fafhion than the 
former : In their Houles they have fuch Inllruments 
as are fomewhat like our Viols , Violins , Theorboes, 
Lutes, Citherins,Gittars,Harpfichords, and the like; 
but yet fo far beyond them , that the difference cannot 
well be exprelt ; and as their places of Dancing, and 
their Mufick is different , fo is their manner or way of 
Dancing. In thefe and the like Recreations, the 
Emperor,» Emprels, and the Nobility pals their 

time. 23 JY 68 

THE 

THE 

EPILOGUE 

TO THE 

READER 

B T this Poetical Defection , you may perceive , that 
my ambition is not onely to be Emprefs, but Autbo - . 
refs of a whole World; and that the Worlds J have made , 
both the Blazing- and the other Philofophical World, men- 
tioned in the firjl Part of this Delcription , are framed 
and compofed of the mof pure , that is, the Rationalparts of 
Matter , which are the parts of my Mind ; which Crea- 
tion was more eafly and fnddenly ejfected , than the Con - 
quefls of the two famous Monarcbs of the W or Id, Alexan- 
der and Celar. Neither have I made fucb difurbances, 
and caufed fo many dijfolutions of particulars, other wife na- 
med deaths, as they did ; for I have dejlroyed but fome few 
. men in a little Boat , which dyed through the extremity of 
cold, and that by the band of JuJlice, which was neceftated 
topunijh their crime of Jiealing away a young and beaute- 
ous Lady. And in the formation of tbofe Worlds , I tabg 
more delight and glory , than ever Alexander pr Celar did 
in conquering this terreflrial world; and though 1 have made 
my Blazing- world a Peaceable World, allowingit but one 

Religi - 

‘Religion , one Language, and one Government ; yet could 
I mabg another World , as full of Factions, Divifions and 
VV arrs,as this is of Peace and L ranquility ; and the Ratio - 
nal fgures of my Mind might exprefs as much courage to 
fight, as He&or and Achilles badland he as wife as Neilor, 
as Eloquent as Ulyfles, and as beautiful as Hellen. Rut I 
esteeming Peace before VFarr, PP it before Policy, Hone- 
fly before Beauty ; infiead of the figures of Alexander, Ce-. 
lar, He&or, Achilles, Neftor,Ulyfles,Hellen,e>c. cbofe 
rather the figure of Honcfl Margaret Newcaftle, which 
now I would not change for all this 7 errcfirial World • and 
if any jhould lify the World I have made , and be willing to 
be my Subjects , they may imagine themfelves fitch , and 
they are fitch, I mean in their Minds, Fancies or Imagina- 
tions-, but if they cannot endure to be Subjells, they may 
create Worlds of their own, and Govern themfelves as they 
pleafe. Rut yet let them have a care, not to prove unjust V- 
fiurpers , and to rob me of mine : for, concerning the Philo - 
fophical- world, lam Einprefs of itmyfelf, and as for 
the Blazing- world, // having an Emprefs already , who rules 
it with great Wifidom and Conduit , which Emprefs is my 
dear Platonicl^Friend ; I Jhall never prove Jo unjuft , trea- 
cherous and unworthy to her, as to difturb her Government, 
much lefts to depofe her from her Imperial Throne, for the 
fahg of any other, but rather cbufe to create another World 
for another Friend.